
THE S’RIMAD DEVI 
BHAGAWATAM 


SWAMIVUNANANANDA 


GlubaL Gitiy obooks 





THE 

S'RiMAD DEVi BHAGAWATAM 

TRANSLATED 

BY 

SWAMIVIJNANANANDA 


1921-22 



The S'nmad Devi Bhagawatam By Swami Vijhanananda. 
This edition was created and published by Global Grey 
©GlobalGrey 2018 



q lobal qre yebooks.com 




Contents 

Foreword 

THE FIRST BOOK 

Chapter 1. On The Questions Bv S’aunaka And Others 

Chapter 2. On Questions Put Bv S’aunaka And Other Rsis 

Chapter 3. On Praisin g The Puranas And On Each Vvasa Of Ever y 
Dvapara Yu oa 

Chapter 4. On The Excellency Of The DevT 

Chapter 5. On The Narrative Of Ha vao rTva 

Chapter 6. On The Preparation For War Bv Madhu Kaitabha 

Chapter 7. On The Praise Of The DevT 

Chapter 8. On Decidin g Who Is To Be Worshi pped 

Chapter 9. On The Killin g Of Madhu Kaitabha 

Chapter 10. On S’iva’s Grantin g Boons 

Chapter 11. On The Birth Of Budha 

Chapter 12. On The Birth Of Pururava 

Chapter 13. On Urvas’T And Pururava 

Chapter 14. On The Birth Of S’uka Deva And On The Duties Of 

Householders 

Chapter 15. On The Disoassion Of S’uka And The Instructions Of 
Bha a avatT To Hari 

Chapter 16. On S’uka’s Desirin g To Go To Mithila To See Janaka 

Chapter 17. On S’uka’s Dis playing His Self-Control Amidst The 
Women Of The Palace Of Mithila 

Chapter 18. On Janaka’s Givin g Instructions On Truth To S’uka 
Deva 

Chapter 19. On The Description Of The Marria g e Of S’uka 
Chapter 20. On Vvasa Doin g His Duties 






































































THE SECOND BOOK 


Chapter 1. On The Birth Of Mats vaa andha 
Chapter 2. On The Birth Of Vvasa Deva 

Chapter 3. On The Description Of The Curse On Gan aa, 
Mahabhisa And Vasus 

Chapter 4. On The Birth Of The Vasus 

Chapter 5. On The Marria g e Of SatvavatT 

Chapter 6. On The Birth Of The Pandavas 

Chapter 7. On Shewin g The Departed Ones 

Chapter 8. On The Extinction Of The Family Of Yadu And On The 
Anecdote Of ParTksit 

Chapter 9. On The Account Of Ruru 
Chapter 10. On The Death Of Kin o ParTksit 
Chapter 11. On The Sarpa Ya iha 
Chapter 12. On The Birth Of Astika 
THE THIRD BOOK 

Chapter 1. On The Questions Put Bv Janame iava 

Chapter 2. On Rudras Goin g Towards The Heavens On The 
Celestial Car 

Chapter 3. On Seein g The DevT 
Chapter 4. On The Hymns To The Great DevT Bv Visnu 
Chapter 5. On The Chantin g Of Hvmns Bv Hara And Brahma 
Chapter 6. On The Description Of The DevT’s Vibhutis ( Powers ^ 

Chapter 7. On The Creation And The Tattvas And Their Presidin g 

Deities 

Chapter 8. On The Gunas And Their Forms 
Chapter 9. On The Characteristics Of The Gunas 

Chapter 10. On The Story Of Satvavrata 

Chapter 11. On The Merits Of The DevT In The Storv Of Satvavrata 














































































Chapter 12. On The Amba Ya i na Rules 

Chapter 13. On The DevT Ya j ha Bv S’rT Visnu 

Chapter 14. On The Narration Of The Glories Of The DevT 

Chapter 15. On The Battle Between Yudha i it And VTrasena 

Chapter 16. On The Glory Of The DevT 

Chapter 17. On The Storv Of VisVamitra 

Chapter 18. The Svavambara Of S’as’ikala 

Chapter 19. On The Goin g To The Svavamvara Assembly Of 
Sudars’ana 

Chapter 20. On The Svavamvara Hall And The Kin gs’ 
Conversation There 

Chapter 21. On The Kin a Of Benares Fulfillin g The Advice Of His 
Dau g hter 

Chapter 22. On Sudars’ana’s Marria ge 

Chapter 23. On The Killin g Of The Enemy Of Sudars’ana In The 
Great War 

Chapter 24. On The Installation Of Dur g a DevT In The City Of 
Benares 

Chapter 25. On The Installation Of The DevT In Avodhva And 
Benares 

Chapter 26. On The Narration Of What Are To Be Done In The 

Navaratri 

Chapter 27. On The Vir g ins Fit To Be Worshi p ped And The Glor y 
Of The DevT 

Chapter 28. On The Incidents Connected With Navaratri 

Chapter 29. On The Stealin g Of STta And The Sorrows Of Rama 

Chapter 30. On The Narration Of The Navaratra Ceremon y Bv 
Narada And The Performance Of That Bv Rama Chandra 


THE FOURTH BOOK 









































































Chapter 1. On The Questions Put Bv Janame ia va Re g ardin g 
Krisna’s Incarnation 

Chapter 2. On The Supremacy Of The Effects Of Karma 
Chapter 3. On The Former Curse Of Vasudeva And DevakT 

Chapter 4. On Adharma 

Chapter 5. On The Dialo g ues Of Nara Naravana 

Chapter 6. On The Ori g in Of Urvas’T 

Chapter 7. On Ahamkara 

Chapter 8. On Goin g To The TTrthas 

Chapter 9. On The Fi g ht Between The Risis And Prahlada 

Chapter 10. On The Curse On Visnu Bv Bhri au 

Chapter 11. On S’ukra’s Goin g To Mahadeva To Get The Mantra 

Chapter 12. On Bhri a u’s Curse And The Dialo g ue Between 
S’ukracharva And The Daitvas 

Chapter 13. On Cheatin g The Daitvas 

Chapter 14. On The Daitvas Gettin g Back Their S’ukrachar va 

Chapter 15. On The Truce Between The Daitvas And The Devas 

Chapter 16. On The Birth Of The Several Avataras Of Visnu And 

Their Deeds 

Chapter 17. On The Questions Asked Bv Janame iava 
Chapter 18. On The DevT Earth’s Goin g To The Heavens 
Chapter 19. On Chantin g The Hvmns To The DevT 
Chapter 20. On DevakT’s Marria ge 
Chapter 21. On The Killin g Of The Sons Of DevakT 
Chapter 22. On The Part Incarnations Of The Several Devas 

Chapter 23. On The Birth Of S’rT Krisna 
Chapter 24. On The Stealin g Awav Of Pradvumna 
Chapter 25. On The DevT’s Hi g hest Supremac y 


THE FIFTH BOOK 





















































































Chapter 1. On The Superiority Of Rudra Over Visnu 
Chapter 2. On The Birth Of Danava Mahisa 
Chapter 3. On The Daitva Armies Gettin g Read y 
Chapter 4. On The War Counsels Given Bv Indra 
Chapter 5. On The Defeat Of The Danava Forces Of Mahisa 

Chapter 6. On The Deva Danava Fi aht 

Chapter 7. On The Goin g Of The Devas To Kailasa 

Chapter 8. On The Description Of The Ori g in And The Form Of 
The DevT 

Chapter 9. On The Worship Bv The Gods To The DevT 

Chapter 10. On The Messen g er’s News To Mahisa 

Chapter 11. On The A p pearin g Of The Danava Tamra Before The 
DevT 

Chapter 12. On The Holdin g Of Counsel Bv Mahisasura 
Chapter 13. On The Killin g Of Vaskala And Durmukha 
Chapter 14. On The Killin g Of Tamra And Chiksura 
Chapter 15. On The Sla ving Of Vidalaksa And Asiloma 

Chapter 16. On The Conversation Between The DevT And 

Mahisasura 

Chapter 17. On MandodarT’s Accounts 
Chapter 18. On The Killin g Of The Danava Mahisasura 
Chapter 19. On The Praver And Hvmns To The DevT 
Chapter 20. On The Peace Of The World 

Chapter 21. On The Conquest Of The Heavens Bv S’umbha And 
Nis’umbha 

Chapter 22. On The Eulo g isin g Of The DevT Bv The Devas 

Chapter 23. On The Prowess Of Kaus’ikT 

Chapter 24. On The Description And Dhumralochana Givin g The 
News 

















































































Chapter 25. On The Killin g Of Dhumralochana 
Chapter 26. On The Killin g Of Chanda And Munda 
Chapter 27. On The Description Of The War Of RaktabT ia 

Chapter 28. On The Description Of The Fi g htin g Of The 
Goddesses 

Chapter 29. On The Killin g Of RaktabT ia 

Chapter 30. On The Killin g Of Nis’umbha 

Chapter 31. On The Death Of S’umbha 

Chapter 32. On The Kin a Suratha’s Goin g To The Forest 

Chapter 33. On The Description Of The Greatness Of The DevT 

Chapter 34. On The Methods Of The Worship Of The DevT 

Chapter 35. On The Receivin g Of The Boons Bv The Kin o Suratha 
And The VaisVa Samadhi 

THE SIXTH BOOK 
Chapter 1. On Tris’ira’s Austerities 
Chapter 2. On The Birth Of Vritrasura 
Chapter 3. On The Deva Defeat And On Vritra’s Tapas va 
Chapter 4. On The Defeat Of The Devas Bv Vritra 
Chapter 5. On Praisin g The DevT 
Chapter 6. On The Sla ving Of Vritrasura 

Chapter 7. On Indra’s Livin g Under Dis g uise In The Manas Lake 
Chapter 8. On S’achT’s Praisin g The DevT 

Chapter 9. On Indra’s Gettin g The Fruits Of Brahmahattva And On 
The Downfall Of Kin a Nahusa 

Chapter 10. On The Phase Of Karma 

Chapter 11. On The Ascertainment Of Pharma 

Chapter 12. On The Cause Of The War Between Adi And Baka 

Chapter 13. On The Description Of The Battle Between Adi And 
Baka After The Discourse On S’unahs’eoha 

















































































Chapter 14. On The Birth Of Vas’istha From Mitra Varuna 

Chapter 15. On The Nimi’s Gettin g Of Another Body And The 
Beg innin g Of The Storv Of Haihavas 

Chapter 16. On The Incidents Preliminary To The Haihava And 
Bhar g ava Affairs 

Chapter 17. On The Continuance Of The Family Of Bhri gu 
Chapter 18. On The Ori g in Of The Haihava Dynast y 
Chapter 19. On The Ori g in Of Haihavas From A Mare 
Chapter 20. On The Son Born Of Mare Bv Hah 

Chapter 21. On The Installation Of EkavTra And The Birth Of 

EkavalT 

Chapter 22. On The Narration To Haihava The Stealin g Awav Of 
EkavalT 

Chapter 23. On The Battle Of Haihava And Kalaketu 

Chapter 24. On The Description Of Viksepa S’akti 

Chapter 25. On The Cause Of Moha Of Vvasa Deva Asked Before 
Narada 

Chapter 26. On The Description Bv Narada Of His Own Moha 

Chapter 27. On The Marria g e Of Narada And His Face Gettin g 
Transformed Into That Of A Monke y 

Chapter 28. On Narada’s Gettin g The Feminine Form 

Chapter 29. On The Narada’s Gettin g Ag ain His Male Form 

Chapter 30. On The Glory Of Maha Ma va 

Chapter 31. On The Glory Of Ma va 

THE SEVENTH BOOK 

Chapter 1. On The Solar And Lunar Kin gs 

Chapter 2. On The Piercin g Of The Eves Of Chvavana Muni 

Chapter 3. On The Bestowin g Of The Dau g hter Of The Kin g 
S’arvati To Chvavana Muni 























































































Chapter 4. On The Conversation Between The Two AsVins And 

The Princess Sukan va 

Chapter 5. On The Gettin g Of Youth Bv Chvavana Muni 

Chapter 6. On Grantin g The AsVins The Ri g ht To Drink The Soma 
Juice 

Chapter 7. On The Twin AsVins Drinkin g The Soma Cu p 

Chapter 8. On The Kin a Revata And The Solar Dynast y 

Chapter 9. On The Storv Of Kakutstha And The Ori g in Of 
Mandhata 

Chapter 10. On The Storv Of Satvavrata 
Chapter 11. On The Storv Of Tris’anku 

Chapter 12. On The Description Of Vas’istha’s Curse On Tris’anku 

Chapter 13. On The Comin g Of VisVamitra To Tris’anku 

Chapter 14. On The Goin g To Heavens Of Tris’anku And The 
Commencennent Of Haris’chandra’s Narrative 

Chapter 15. On The Storv Of The Kin a Haris’chandra 

Chapter 16. On The Storv Of S’unahs’epha 

Chapter 17. On The Freein g Of S’unahs’epha And The Curin g Of 
Haris’chandra 

Chapter 18. On The Ori g in Of The Quarrel Between Haris’chandra 
And Vis’vamitra 

Chapter 19. On The Takin g Awav Of Haris’chandra’s Kin g dom 

Chapter 20. On The Earnestness Of Haris’chandra To Pav Off The 
Daksina 

Chapter 21. On The Description Of The Sorrows Of Haris’chandra 

Chapter 22. On The Sellin g Of Haris’chandra’s Wife 

Chapter 23. On The Kin a Haris’chandra’s Acknowled ging Of The 
Slavery Of The Chandala 

Chapter 24. On The Stay Of Haris’chandra In The Burnin g Ground 






















































































Chapter 25. On The Quarrels Between Haris’chandra 

And VisVamitra 

Chapter 26. On The Narration Of The Sorrows Of Haris’chandra 

Chapter 27. On The Goin g Of Haris’chandra To The Heavens 

Chapter 28. On The Glory Of The S'ataksi DevT 

Chapter 29. On The Birth Of The Bha a avatT In The House Of 
Daksa 

Chapter 30. On The Birth Of GaurT . The Seats Of The Deit v. And 
The Distraction Of S’iva 

Chapter 31. On The Birth Of ParvatT In The House Of Himalayas 

Chapter 32. On Self-Realization . S poken Bv The World Mother 

Chapter 33. On The DevT’s Virat Ru pa 

Chapter 34. On The Knowled g e And Final Emancipation 

Chapter 35. On The Yo g a And Mantra Siddhi 

Chapter 36. On The Hi g hest Knowled g e Of Brahma 

Chapter 37. On Bhakti Yo ga 

Chapter 38. The Vows And The Sacred Places Of The Devi 

Chapter 39. The Worship Of The World Mother 
Chapter 40. The External Worship Of The DevT 
THE EIGHTH BOOK 

Chapter 1. On The Description Of The Worlds 
Chapter 2. On The Upliftin g Of The Earth Bv The Sacrificial Boar 
Chapter 3. On The Description Of The Family Of Manu 
Chapter 4. On The Narration Of The Family Of Privavrata 

Chapter 5. On The Description Of The Receptacle Of Bein g s And 
On The Mountains And On The Ori g in Of Rivers 

Chapter 6. On The Rivers And The Mountains Sumeru And Others 

Chapter 7. On The Gan g es And The Varsas 
Chapter 8. On The Description Of llavrita 



















































































Chapter 9. On The Narration Of The Division Of The Continents 

Chapter 10. On The Description Of Bhuvanakosa 

Chapter 11. On The Description Of The Continents And Of 
Bharatavarsa 

Chapter 12. On The Narration Of Plaksa . S’almala And Kus’a 
DvTpas 

Chapter 13. On The Description Of The Remainin g DvTpas 

Chapter 14. On The Description Of The Lokaloka Space 

Chapter 15. On The Motion Of The Sun 

Chapter 16. On The Motion Of The Planets 

Chapter 17. On The Dhruva Mandalam 

Chapter 18. On The Narrative Of Rahu Mandalam 

Chapter 19. On The Narrative Of The Atala , Etc. 

Chapter 20. On The Narrative Of The Talatala 
Chapter 21. On The Narrative Of Hells 
Chapter 22. On The Narrative Of The Sins Leadin g To Hells 
Chapter 23. On The Description Of The Remainin g Hells 
Chapter 24. On The Worship Of The DevT 
THE NINTH BOOK 

Chapter 1. On The Description Of Prakriti 

Chapter 2. On The Ori g in Of Prakriti And Purusa 

Chapter 3. On The Ori g in Of Brahma , Visnu . Mahes’a And Others 

Chapter 4. On The Hvmn , Worship And Kavacha Of SarasvatT 
DevT 

Chapter 5. On SarasvatT Stotra Bv Ya i havalk va 

Chapter 6. On The Comin g In This World Of LaksmT , Gan a a And 
SarasvatT 

Chapter 7. On The Curses Of Gan aa. SarasvatT And LaksmT 
Chapter 8. On The Greatness Of Kali 

















































































Chapter 9. On The Ori g in Of The S’akti Of The Earth 

Chapter 10. On The Offences Caused To The Earth And 

Punishments Thereof 

Chapter 11. On The Ori g in Of The Gan ges 

Chapter 12. On The Ori g in Of Gan aa 

Chapter 13. On The Anecdote Of Gan aa 

Chapter 14. On The Storv Of Gan a a Becomin g The Wife Of 
Naravana 

Chapter 15. On The Anecdote Of TulasT 

Chapter 16. On The Incarnation Of Maha LaksmT In The House Of 

Kus’adhva ja 

Chapter 17. On The Anecdote Of TulasT 

Chapter 18. On The Union Of S’ankhachuda With TulasT 

Chapter 19. On The Goin g Of The Devas To Vaikuntha After 
TulasT’s Marria g e With S’ankhachuda 

Chapter 20. On The War Preparations Of S’ankhachuda With The 
Devas 

Chapter 21. On The Meetin g Of Mahadeva And S’ankhachuda For 
An Encounter In Conflict 

Chapter 22. On The Fi a ht Between The Devas And S’ankhachuda 

Chapter 23. On The Killin g Of S’ankhachuda 

Chapter 24. On The Glory Of TulasT 

Chapter 25. On The Method Of Worship Of TulasT DevT 

Chapter 26. On The Narration Of SavitrT 

Chapter 27. On The Birth . Etc. . Of SavitrT 

Chapter 28. On The Storv Of SavitrT 

Chapter 29. On The Anecdote Of SavitrT , On Gifts And On The 
Effects Of Karmas 

Chapter 30. On The Conversation Between SavitrT And Yama And 

On The Fruition Of Karmas 









































































Chapter 31. On The Yama's Givin g S’akti Mantra To SavitrT 

Chapter 32. On The Enumeration Of Various Hells For Sinners 

Chapter 33. On The Description Of The Destinies Of Different 
Sinners In Different Hells 

Chapter 34. On The Description Of The Various Hells 

Chapter 35. On The Description Of The Various Hells For The 
Various Sinners 

Chapter 36. On The Destruction Of The Fear Of The Yama Of 

Those Who Are The Worshi p pers Of The Five Devatas 

Chapter 37. On The Ei aht v-Six Kundas And Their Characteristics 

Chapter 38. On The Glories Of The DevT And On The Nature Of 

Bhakti 

Chapter 39. On The Story Of Maha LaksmT 

Chapter 40. On The Birth Of LaksmT In The Discourse Of Narada 

And Naravana 

Chapter 41. On The Churnin g Of The Ocean And On The 
Ap pearin g Of LaksmT 

Chapter 42. On The Dhvanam And Stotra Of Maha LaksmT 

Chapter 43. On The History Of Svaha 

Chapter 44. On The Storv Of Svadha DevT In The Discourse 
Between Narada And Naravana 

Chapter 45. On The Anecdote Of Daksina 
Chapter 46. On The Anecdote Of SasthT DevT 
Chapter 47. On Manasa’s Stor v 
Chapter 48. On The Anecdote Of Manasa 
Chapter 49. On The Anecdote Of Surabhi 
Chapter 50. On The Glory Of S’akti 
THE TENTH BOOK 

Chapter 1. On The Storv Of Svavambhuva Manu 





































































Chapter 2. On The Conversation Between Narada And The 

Bindhva Mountain 

Chapter 3. On The Obstruction Of The Sun’s Course Bv The 
Bindhva Mountain 

Chapter 4. On The Devas Goin g To Maha Deva 

Chapter 5. On The Devas Goin g To Visnu 

Chapter 6. On The Devas Pra ying To The Muni A a ast va 

Chapter 7. On The Checkin g Of The Rise Of The Bindhva Ran ge 

Chapter 8. On The Ch a in Of Manu 

Chapter 9. On The Narrative Of Chaksusa Manu 

Chapter 10. On The Anecdote Of The Kin a Suratha 

Chapter 11. On The Killin g Of Madhu Kaitabha 

Chapter 12. On The Anecdote Of Savarni Manu 

Chapter 13. On The Account Of BhramarT DevT 
THE ELEVENTH BOOK 

Chapter 1. On What Is To Be Thou g ht Of In The Mornin g 
Chapter 2. On Cleansin g The Several Parts Of The Bod y 
Chapter 3. On The Glories Of The Rudraksa Beads 

Chapter 4. On The Greatness Of The Rudraksam 

Chapter 5. On The Rudraksam Rosaries 

Chapter 6. On The Greatness Of Rudraksams 

Chapter 7. On The Greatness Of One Faced . Etc. . Rudraksam 

Chapter 8. On Bhuta S'uddhi 

Chapter 9. On The Rules Of S’irovrata 

Chapter 10. On The Sub j ect Of Gauna Bhasma 

Chapter 11. On The Description Of The Greatness Of The Three 
Kinds Of Bhasmas 

Chapter 12. On The Greatness In Holdin g The Tripundra And 
Bhasma 










































































Chapter 13. On The Greatness Of Bhasma 

Chapter 14. On The Greatness In Holdin g The Bibhuti 

Chapter 15. On The Rules Of Usin g The Tripundra And 
Urdhapundra Marks 

Chapter 16. On The Description Of Sandhva Upasana 

Chapter 17. On The Description Of Sandhva And Other Dail y 
Practices 

Chapter 18. On The Greatness Of The DevT Pu ia 
Chapter 19. On The Midday Sandh va 

Chapter 20. On The Description Of Brahma Ya jha. Sandhvas . Etc. 
Chapter 21. On GavatrT Puras’charanam 
Chapter 22. On The Rules Of VaisVadeva 
Chapter 23. On The Tapta Krichchhra Vrata And Others 
Chapter 24. On Sadachara 
THE TWELFTH BOOK 
Chapter 1. On The Description Of GavatrT 

Chapter 2. On The Description Of The S’aktis . Etc. . Of The 
S yllables Of GavatrT 

Chapter 3. On The Description Of The Kavacha Of S’rT GavatrT 
DevT 

Chapter 4. On GavatrT Hrida va 
Chapter 5. On The GavatrT Stotra 

Chapter 6. On The One Thousand And Ei g ht Names Of The 
GavatrT 

Chapter 7. On The DTksa Vidhi Or On The Rules Of Initiation 

Chapter 8. On The A p pearance Of The Hi g hest S’akti 

Chapter 9. On The Cause Of S’raddha In Other Devas Than The 

DevT GavatrT 

Chapter 10. On The Description Of Mani DvT pa 


















































































Chapter 11. On The Description Of The Enclosure Walls Built Of 
Padmara a a Mani . Etc. . Of The Mani DvT pa 

Chapter 12. On The Description Of Mani DvT pa 

Chapter 13. On The Description Of Janame ia va’s DevT Ya iha 

Chapter 14. On The Recitation Of The Fruits Of This Puranam 


















Foreword 


What is S’rimad Bhagavat is to the Vaisnavas, the Devi Bhagavatam 
is to the S’aktas. The question of the priority of the two Bhagavatas 
has been often discussed more in the spirit of partisans rather than 
that of sober scholars. We reserve our opinion on the subject till the 
publication of the complete translation of this work. 

This translation has been inscribed to the sacred memory of my 
friend the late Rai Bahadur S’ris’ Chandra Vidyarnava who induced 
me to undertake the translation of this work. He had thoroughly read 
the two Bhagavatas and it was his opinion that the priority of 
composition belonged to the Devi Bhagavatam. The other Bhagavat, 
according to him, is a modern compilation attributed to Bopadeva - 
the author of Mugdhabodha Vyakaranam. 



THE FIRST BOOK 



Chapter 1. On The Questions By S’aunaka And 
Others 


1. I meditate on the beginningless Brahmavidya who is 
Sarvachaitanyarupa, of the nature of all-consciousness; May She 
stimulate our buddhi to the realisation of That (or who stimulates our 
buddhi in different directions). 


2. S’aunaka said “O highly fortunate Suta! O noble Suta! You are 
the best of persons; you are blessed inasmuch as you have 
thoroughly studied all the auspicious Puranas. 


3. O sinless one! you have gone through all the eighteen Puranas 
composed by Krisna Dvaipayana; these are endowed with five 
excellent characteristics and full of esoteric meanings. 


Note The characteristics are to make the mantras reveal to one's 
own self, to realise, to transfer to others the S’akti, force thereof, to 
prove the various manifestations of the several effects thereof, etc. 


4-5. O Sinless one! It is not that you have read them like a parrot, but 
you have thoroughly grasped the meaning of them all as you have 
learnt them from Vyasa himself, the son of Satyavati. Now it is our 
good merits that you have come at this divine holy excellent 
Vis'vasan Ksettra (place), free from any defects of the Kali age. 


6-10. O Suta! These Munis assembled here are desirous to hear the 
holy Purana Samhita, that yields religious merits. So describe this to 



ns with your mind concentrated. O all-knowing Suta! Live long and 
be free from the threefold sorrows of existence. O highly fortunate 
one! Narrate to us the Purana equivalent to the Vedas. O Suta! 
Those persons that do not hear the Puranas, are certainly deprived 
by the Creator, though they have apparently the organ of hearing, of 
the power of tasting the sweet essence of words; because, the organ 
of hearing is gratified then and then only when it hears the words of 
the wise men, just as the organ of taste is satisfied then and then 
only when it tastes the six kinds of rasas (flavour, taste) (sweet, sour, 
pungent, bitter, salty, and astringent). This is known to all. The 
serpents that are void of the organ of hearing are enchanted by 
sweet music; then why should not those persons that have the 
organs of hearing and are averse to hear the Puranas, be thrown 
under the category of the deaf? 


11-18. O Saumya! Hence all these Brahmins, being distressed with 
the fear of this Kali, have come here to this Naimisaranya, eager to 
hear attentively the Puranas, and are staying here with this one 
object. Time must be spent away anyhow or other; those that are 
fools while away their times in sports and other evil practices and 
those that are learned pass away their times in meditating on the 
S’astras; but these S’astras are too vast and very varied; they 
contain Jalpas (debates or wrangling discussions to win over the 
opposite party), Vadas (sound doctrines to arrive at just 
conclusions), and various Arthavadas (explanations and assertions, 
recommending Vidhis or precepts by stating the good arising from its 
proper observance and evils arising from its omission and also by 
adducing historical instances for its support; praises and eulogies) 
and filled with many argumentations. And, amongst these S’astras 
again, the Vedanta is the Sattvik, the Mimamsas are the Rajasik and 
the Nyaya S’astras with Hetuvadas, are the Tamasik; so the S’astras 
are varied. Similarly, the Puranas are of three kinds (1) S’attvik, 

(2) Rajasik and (3) Tamasik. O Saumya! (one of gentle appearance) 
you have recited those Puranas endowed with five characteristics 



and full of many narratives; of these, the fifth Purana, equivalent to 
the Vedas and with all the good qualities, the Bhagavata yields 
Dharma and Kama (religion and desires), gives liberation to those 
who desire for emancipation and is very wonderful; you mentioned 
this before but ordinarily; you did not dwell on this specially. Now 
these Brahmanas are eager to hear gladly this divine auspicious 
Bhagavata, the best of the Puranas; so kindly describe this in detail. 

19-25. O knower of Dharma! By your faith and devotion to your 
Guru, you have become Sattvik and thus have thoroughly known the 
Purana Samhitas spoken by Veda Vyas. O Omniscient one! 
Therefore it is that we have heard many Puranas from your mouth; 
but we are not satisfied as the Devas are not satisfied with the 
drinking of the nectar. O Suta! Fie to the nectar even as the drinking 
of nectar is quite useless in giving Mukti. But hearing the Bhagavata 
gives instantaneous Mukti from this Samsara or round of birth and 
death. O Suta! we performed thousands and thousands of Yajhas for 
the drinking of the nectar (Amrita), but never we got the full peace. 
The reason being that Yajhas lead to heaven only; on the expiry of 
the period of punya (good merits, the heavenly life ceases and one is 
expelled, as it were from the Heavens. Thus incessant sojourns in 
this wheel of Samsara, the constant rounds of births and deaths 
never end. O Knower of every thing! Thus, without Jhana 
(knowledge, wisdom) Mukti never comes to men, wandering in this 
wheel of Time (Kalachakra) composed of the three Gunas. So 
describe this holy Bhagavata, always beloved of the Mumuksas 
(those that desire Mukti), this secret work yielding liberation, holy 
and full of all sentiments (rasas). 


Thus ends the first chapter of the first Skandha on the questioning 
about the Purana by Saunaka and other Rishis in the Mahapurana 
S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 

Here ends the First Chapter of the First Skandha of S’rimad Devi 
Bhagavatam on the questions by S’aunaka and other Risis. 




Chapter 2. On Questions Put By S’aunaka And 
Other Rsis 


1-5. S'ri Suta said “I am highly fortunate; I consider myself 
blessed and I am purified by the Mahatmas (high souled persons); 
inasmuch as I am questioned by them about the highly meritorious 
Purana, famous in the Vedas. I will now speak in detail about this 
Purana, the best of the Agamas, approved of by all the Vedas and 
the secret of all the S’astras. O Brahmins! I bow down to the gentle 
lotus feet, known in the three Lokas, of the Devi Bhagavati, praised 
by Brahma and the other devas Visnu, Mahes’a and others, 
meditated always by the Munindras and which the Yogis 
contemplate as their source of liberation. Today I will devotedly 
describe, in detail and in plain language, that Purana which is the 
best of all the Puranas, which gives prosperity and contains all the 
sentiments (Rasas) that a human being can conceive, the S’rimad 
Devi Bhagavatam. May that Highest Primal S’akti who is known as 
Vidya in the Vedas; who is omniscient, who controls the innermost of 
all and who is skilled in cutting off the knot of the world, who cannot 
be realised by the wicked and the vicious, but who is visible to the 
Munis in their meditation, may that Bhagavati Devi give me always 
the buddhi fit to describe the Purana! I call to my mind the Mother of 
all the worlds who creates this universe, whose nature is both real 
(taking gross, practical point of view) and and unreal (taking a real 
point of view), preserves and destroys by Her Rajasik, Sattvik and 
Tamasik qualities and in the end resolves all these into Herself and 
plays alone in the period of Dissolution - at this lime, I remember my 
that Mother of all the worlds. 


6-10. It is commonly known that Brahma is the creator of this 
universe; and the knowers of the Vedas and the Puranas say so; but 
they also say that Brahma is born of the navel-lotus of Visnu. Thus it 
appears that Brahma cannot create independently. Again Visnu, 



from whose navel lotus Brahma is born, lies in Yoga sleep on the 
bed of Ananta (the thousand headed serpent) in the time of Pralaya; 
so how can we call Bhagavan Visnu who rests on the thousand 
headed serpent Ananta as the creator of the universe? Again the 
refuge of Ananta is the water of the ocean Ekarnava; a liquid cannot 
rest without a vessel; so I take refuge of the Mother of all beings, 
who resides as the S’akti of all and thus is the supporter of all; I fly 
for refuge unto that Devi who was praised by Brahma while resting 
on the navel lotus of Visnu who was lying fast asleep in Yoga nidra. 

O Munis! meditating on that Maya Devi who creates, preserves and 
destroys the universe who is kuown as composed of the three gunas 
and who grants mukti, I now describe the whole of the Puranas; now 
you all better hear. 


11-16. The Purana S’rimad Bhagavat (Devi Bhagavat) is excellent 
and holy; eighteen thousand pure S’lokas are contained in it. 
Bhagavan Krisna Dvaipayan has divided this Purana into twelve 
auspicious Skandhas (Books) and three hundred and eighteen 
chapters. Twenty chapters compose the first Skandha; twelve 
chapters in the second Skandha; thirty chapters in the the third 
Skandha; twenty-five chapters in the fourth Skandha, thirty-five, in 
the fifth; thirty-one, in the sixth; forty, in the seventh; twenty-four, in 
the eighth; fifty chapters in the ninth; thirteen, iu the tenth; twenty- 
four in the eleventh and fourteen chapters are contained in the 
twelfth Skandha, O Munis! Thus the Dvaipayan Muni has arranged 
his chapters in each Skandha. 


17-20. Thus the Mahatma Veda Vyas has divided this Bhagavata 
Purana. into so many Skandhas and into so many chapters; and that 
the number of verses is eighteen thousand is already stated. That is 
denominated as Purana which contains the following five 
characteristics (1) Creation of the universe, (2) Secondary 
creation, (3) Dynasties (4) Manvantaras and (5) The description of 



Manus and other kings. S’iva is beyond Prakritic attributes, eternal 
and ever omnipresent; She is without any change, immutable, 
unattainable but by yoga; She is the refuge of the universe and Her 
nature is Turiya Chaitanya. Maha Lakshmi is Her Sattviki S’akti; 
Sarasvati is Her Rajasik S’akti and Maha Kali is Her Tamasik S’akti; 
these are all of feminine forms. 


21-25. The assuming of bodies by these three S’aktis for the creation 
of this universe is denominated as "Sarga" (creation) by the high 
souled persona (Maharpurusa), skilled in S’astras. And the further 
resolution of these three S’aktis into Brahma, Visnu and Mahes'a for 
the creation, preservation, and destruction of this universe is 
denominated (in this Purana) as Pratisarga (secondary creation.) 

The description of the kings of the solar and lunar dynasties and the 
families of Hiranya Kasipu and others is known as the description of 
the lineages of kings and their dynasties. The description of 
Svayambhuva and, other Manus and their ruling periods is known as 
Manvantaras. And the description of their descendants is known as 
the description of their families. (Thus these are the five 
characteristics in the Puranas.) O best of Munis! all the Puranas are 
endowed with these five characteristics. 


26-32. So is Mahabharata writen by Vedavyasa, characterised by 
these five things. This is known as the fifth Veda and Itihasa 
(history.) In this are something more than one lakh slokas. S’aunaka 
said “O Suta! What are those Puranas and how many verses are 
contained in each? Speak all those in detail in this holy Ksettra; we, 
the residents of Naimisaranya are all very eager to hear this. (Why 
we call ourselves as the residents of Naimisaranya, hear; you will 
realise then that no other place exists in this Kali age for hearing the 
holy discourses on religion) When we were afraid of the Kali age, 
Brahma gave us a Manomaya Chakra (wheel) and I said to all of us 
Follow this wheel, go after it and the spot where the felly of the 



wheel will become thin (so as to break) and will not roll further, that 
country is the holy place; Kali will never be able to enter there; you 
all better remain there until the Satya age comes back. Thus, 
acording to the saying of Brahma, we have got orders to stay here. 
On hearing the words of Brahma, wo went out quickly keeping the 
wheel go on, our object being to determine which place is best and 
holiest. When we came here, the felly of the wheel become thin and 
shorn before my eyes; hence this Ksettra is called Naimis; it is the 
most sanctifying place. Kali cannot enter here; hence the Mahatmas, 
Munis and Siddhas, terrified by the Kali age, have followed me and 
resorted to this place. We have performed yajhas with Purodasa 
(clarified butter as is offered in oblations to fire) where no animals 
are sacrificed; now we have no other important work to do except to 
pass our time here until the arrival of Satyayuga. O S’uta! we are 
extremely fortunate in all respects that you have come here; purify 
us to-day by narrating to us the names of the Puranas equivalent to 
the Vedas. O S’uta! you are also a learned orator; we, too, are 
ardent listeners, with no other works to bother our heads; narrate to 
us to-day the auspicious holy Bhagavata Purana. O S’uta! Long live 
you; and no ailings, internal, external, or from the Devas torment 
you. (this is our blessing to you). We have heard that in the most 
sanctifying Purana, narrated by Maharsi Dvaipayan, all about 
Dharma (religion), Artha (Wealth) and Kama (desires) are duly 
described as well the acquiring of Tattvajhan and liberation are also 
spoken of. O S’uta! our desires are not satisfied the more we hear of 
those beautiful holy words. Now describe to us the highly pure 
S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam where all the Lilas (the dramatic acts) of 
the Mother of the three worlds purifying the sins, adorned with all the 
qualifications are described as yielding all the desires like the Kalpa 
Vriksa (the celestial tree yielding all desires). 


Thus ends the second chapter of the first Skandha on the description 
of the Purana (the text) in Maha Purana S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyas. 



Here ends the Second Chapter of S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam on 
questions put by Saunaka and other Risis. 



Chapter 3. On Praising The Puranas And On 
Each Vyasa Of Every Dvapara Yuga 


1-11. Suta said “O best of the Munis! I am now telling you the 
names of the Puranas, etc., exactly as 1 have heard from Veda 
Vyasa, the son of Satyavati; listen. The Purana beginning with "ma" 
are two in number; those beginning with “bha” are two; those 
beginning with “bra" are three; those beginning with "va” are four; 
those beginning respectively with “A”, “na”, “pa”, “Ling”, “ga”, “ku” 
and “Ska” are one each and “ma” means Matsya Purana, 
Markandeya Purana; “Bha” signifies Bhavisya, Bhagavat Puranas; 
“Bra” signifies Brahma, Brahmanda and Brahmavaivarta Puranas; 
“va” signifies Vaman, Vayu, Visnu and Varaha Puranas; “A” signifies 
Agni Purana; “Na” signifies Narada Purana; “Pa” signifies Padma 
Purana; “Ling” signifies Linga Puranam; “Ga” signifies Govinda 
Puranam; Ku signifies Kurma Purana and “Ska” signifies Skanda 
Puranam. These are the eighteen Puranas. O Saunaka! In the 
Matsya Purana there are fourteen thousand slokas; in the 
wonderfully varied Markandeya Puranam there are nine thousand 
slokas. In the Bhavisya Purana fourteen thousand and five hundred 
slokas are counted by the Munis, the seers of truth. In the holy 
Bhagavata there are eighteen thousand S’lokas; in the Brahma 
Purana there are Ajuta (ten thousand) S’lokas. In the Brahmanda 
Purana there are twelve thousand one hundred S’lokas; in the 
Brahma Vaivarta Puranam there are eighteen thousand S’lokas. In 
the Vaman Purana there are Ajuta (ten thousand) S’lokas; in the 
Vayu Puranam there are twenty-four thousand and six hundred 
S’lokas; in the greatly wonderful Visnu Purana there are twenty-three 
thousand S’lokas; in the Agni Puranam there are sixteen thousand 
S’lokas; in the Brihat Narada Puranam, there are twenty-five 
thousand S’lokas, in the big Padma Purana there are fifty-five 
thousand s'lokas; in the voluminous Linga Purana eleven thousand 
s’lokas exist; in the Garuda Puranam spoken by Hah nineteen 
thousand s'lokas exist; iu the Kurma Purana, seventeen thousand 



s'lokas exist and in the greatly wonderful Skanda Purana there are 
eighty-one thousand s'lokas, O sinless Risis! Thus I have described 
to you the names of all the Puranas and the number of verses 
contained in them. Now hear about the Upa Puranas. 


12-17. The first is the Upapurana narrated by Sanat Kumara; next 
comes Narasimha Purana; then Naradiya Purana, S’iva Purana, 
Purana narrated by Durvasa, Kapila Purana, Manava Purana, 
Aus’anasa Purana, Varuna Purana. Kalika Purana, Samva Purana, 
Nandi Kes’wara Purana, Saura Purana, Purana spoken by 
Paras’ara, Aditya Purana, Mahesvara Purana, Bhagavata and 
Vasistha Purana. These Upa Puranas are described by the 
Mahatmas. After compiling the eighteen Puranas, Veda Vyasa, the 
son of Satyavati composed Mahabharata, that has no rival, out of 
these Puranas. 


18-24. At every Manvantara, in each Dvapara Yuga, Veda Vyasa 
expounds the Puranas duly to preserve the religion. Veda Vyasa is 
no other person than Visnu Himself; He, in the form of Veda Vyasa, 
divides the (one) Veda into four parts, in every Dvapara Yuga, for the 
good of the world. The Brahmanas of the Kali age are shortlived and 
their intellect (Buddhi) is not sharp; they cannot realise the meaning 
after studying the Vedas; knowing this in every Dvapara Yuga 
Bhagavan expounds the holy Purana Samhitas. The more so 
because women, S’udras, and the lower Dvijas are not entitled to 
hear the Vedas; for their good, the Puranas have been composed. 
Tne present auspicious Manvantara is Vaivasvata; it is the seventh 
in due order; and the son of Satyavati, the best of the knowers of 
Dharma, is the Veda Vyasa of the 28th Dvapara Yuga of this seventh 
Manvantara. He is my Guru; in the next Dvapara, Yuga Asvatthama, 
the son of Drona will be the Veda Vyasa. Twenty-seven Veda Vyasas 
had expired and they duly compiled each their own Purana Samhitas 
in their own Dvapara Yugas. 



25-35. The Risis said “O highly fortunate Suta! kindly describe to 
us the nannes of the previous Veda Vyasas, the reciters of the 
Puranas in the Dvapara Yugas. Suta said In the first Dvapara, 
Brahma Himself divided the Vedas; in the second Dvapara, the first 
Prajapati Vyasa did the same; so S’akra, in the third, Brihaspati, in 
the fourth, Surya in the fifth; Yama, in the sixth, Indra, in the seventh, 
Vasistha, in the eighth; Sarasvata Risi in the ninth, Tridhama, in the 
tenth; Trivrisa, in the eleventh, Bharadvaja, in the twelfth; Antariksa, 
in the thirteenth; Dharma, in the fourteenth; Evaruni in the fifteenth; 
Dhananjaya, in the sixteenth; Medhatithi in tba seventeenth; Vrati, in 
the eighteenth; Atri, in the nineteenth; Gautama in the twentieth, 
Uttama, whose soul was fixed on Hari, in the twenty-first, Vajasrava 
Vena, in the twenty second; his family descendant Soma iu the 
twenty-third; Trinavindu, in the twenty-fourth; Bhargava, in the 
twenty-fifth; Sakti, in the twenty-sixth, Jatukarnya in the twenty- 
seventh and Krisna Dvaipayana became the twenty-eighth Veda 
Vyas in the Dvapara Yugas. Thus I have spoken of the 28 Veda 
Vyasas, as I heard. 1 have heard the holy S’rimad Bhagavat from 
the month of Krisna Dvaipayana. This removes all troubles, yields all 
desires, and gives Moksa and is full of the meanings of the Vedas. 
This treatise contains the essence of all the S’astras and is dear 
always to the Mamuksas (those who want Moksa or liberation). 


36-43. O best Munis! Thus, compiling the Puranas Veda Vyasa 
thought this Purana to be the best; so (without teaching it to other 
persons) he settled that his own son the high-sould S’uka Deva born 
of the dry woods used for kindling fire (excited by attrition), having no 
passion for the worldly things, would be the fit student to be taught 
this Purana and therefore taught him; at that time I was a fellow 
student along with S’aka Deva and I heard every thing from the 
mouth of Vyasa Deva and realised the secret meanings thereof. This 
has happened through the grace of the merciful Guru Veda Vyasa. 



Here ends the Third Chapter of S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam on 
praising the Puranas and on each Vyasa of every Dvapara Yuga. 



Chapter 4. On The Excellency Of The Dev! 


1-3. The Risis said O Saumya! How was S’uka Deva born? Who 
studied these Purana Samhitas; by which wife of Vyasa Deva? And 
How? O highly intelligent one! You have just spoken that S’uka Deva 
was not born from womb, in the natural way; he was born of the dry 
pieces of wood for Homa sacrifice. But we heard before that the 
great ascetic was Yogi even in his mother's womb, so a great doubt 
comes to our minds. You better remove that to-day; how he studied 
also these Puranas, as vast in their nature; say this. 


4-5. Suta said In long-past days, Satyavati's son Vedas Vyas, 
while in his own hermitage on the banks of the river Sarasvati, was 
greatly wondered to see a pair of Chatakas (Sparrows). He saw the 
pair putting the beak of their young one, just born of the egg, of 
beautiful body, red mouth, and greasy body. They do not care at all 
for their own hunger and toil; all they are caring for is to nurture their 
young one. He said also that the pair are rubbing their bodies over 
the body and kissing lovingly the mouth of the young one and feeling 
the highest pleasure. Seeing this wonderful affection of the two 
sparrows towards their young, Veda Vyas became very anxious and 
thought over the following in his mind. 


9-14. Oh! What wonder is there, when the birds have so much filial 
affection towards their child, that men, who want services from their 
sons, would show their affection towards their sons! This pair of 
sparrows will not perform the happy marriage of their young one and 
will not see the face of their son’s wife; nor when they will grow old, 
that their child would become very religious and serve them to attain 
great merits in Heaven. Nor do they expect that their child would 
earn money and satisfy them nor the child would perform when they 
die, their funeral obsequies duly and help them in their sojourn in the 



next world; nothing of all these. Nor will the child perform the S’radh 
ceremony at Gaya; nor will the child offer the oblation of a blue bull 
on the day of offering the sacrifice to its ancestor (the bull is then let 
loose and held sacred); yet the pair of sparrows have so much 
affection towards their young one! Oh! in this world to touch the body 
of the son, especially to nurture the sons, is the highest happiness in 
life. 


15-27. There is no prospect in the after birth of the sonless; never, 
never will Heaven be his. Without son, there is none other who can 
be of help in the next world. Thus in the Dharma S’astras, Manu and 
other Munis declare that the man who has sons goes to Heaven and 
the sonless one can never go to Heaven. The man possessing a son 
is entitled to the Heavenly pleasures can be vividly seen, rather than 
imagined. The man with son is freed from sins; this is the word of the 
Vedas. The sonless man becomes very much distressed even at the 
time of death and while lying on bed that is ground at that time, 
mournfully thinks. “This all my vast wealth, various things, this my 
beautiful house, who will enjoy all these?” When the sonless man is 
thus perplexed in his mind at the time of his death and becomes 
restless, then it is sure that his future career is full misfortunes; 
unless one’s mind is calm and serene at the time of death, can never 
attain a good goal. Thus thinking variously, the Satyavati's son Veda 
Vyas sighed heavily and became unmindful. He thought of various 
plans and at last, coming to a definite conclusion, went to the 
Sumeru mountain to perform Tapasya. On reaching there, he 
thought which Deva he will worship! Visnu, S’iva, Indra, Brahma, 
Surya, Ganes’a, Kartikeya, Agni, or Varuna? Who will grant him 
boon quickly and thus satisfy his desires. While thus cogitating in his 
mind, came there the Muni Narada, of one mind with lute in hamd, 
accidentally in his course of travels. Seeing Narada, the Satyavati’s 
son Veda Vyasa gave him a hearty welcome, with great gladness, 
offering him Arghya and Asan (seat) and asked about his welfare. 
Hearing this question of welfare, Narada Muni spoke “O 



Dvaipayan! Why do you look so care worn! First speak this out to 
me . 


28-30. Veda Vyasa said “ The sonless man has no goal; therefore 
there is no happiness in my mind; I am always anxious to get a son 
and therefore I am very sorry. To-day my mind is sorely troubled with 
the one idea, which Deva I may satisfy by my tapasya, who will grant 
me my desires; now I take your refuge. O merciful Maharsi! You are 
omniscient; say this quickly; which Deva I will take for my refuge, 
who will grant me a son”. 


31-37. Suta said Thus questioned by Krisna Dvaipayan Veda 
Vyasa, the high souled Narada Muni, well versed in the Vedas, 
became very glad and spoke thus O highly fortunate Paras'ara’s 
son. The question that you have asked me to-day was formerly 
asked by my father to Narayana. At this, Narayana Vasudeva, the 
Deva of the Devas, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the 
Universe, the husband of Laksmi, the four armed, wearing yellow 
garment, holding conchshell, discus, club and with the mark 
S’rivatsa (a mark or curl of hair on the heart of Visnu) adorning His 
breast and decorated with Kaustuvagem, the Divinity Himself, 
became merged in great Yoga; at this my Father became greatly 
surprised and said “O Janardana! Thou art the Deva of the Devas; 
the Lord of the Present, the Past and the Future, the Lord of this 
Universe; why art thou meditating in Yoga? And what is it that Thou 
art meditating? O best of the Devas! Thou art the Lord of the entire 
Universe and yet Thou art now merged in deep meditation. At this I 
am greatly surprised (my surprise is not without foundation; Thou 
canst Thyself see). What more wonderful than this can happen? 


38-43. O Lord of Rama! I am sprung from the lotus from thy navel 
and have become the Lord of this whole universe; who is there in 



this universe that is superior to Thee; kindly say this to me. O Lord of 
the world? Thou art the Origin of all, the Cause of all causes, the 
Creator, Preserver and Destroyer and the capable Doer of all 
actions. O Maharaja! at Thy will, I create this whole universe and 
Rudra destroys iu due time this world. He is always under Thy 
command. O Lord! By Thy command the Sun roams in the sky; the 
wind blows in various auspicious or inauspicious ways and the fire is 
giving heat and the cloud showers rain. I don’t see in the three Lokas 
any one superior to Thee. Then whom art Thou meditating while 
being questioned by his very intelligent son S’uka Deva! not born in 
the usual way from womb, Dvaipayana expounded all the secret 
excellent meanings of the Purana and thereby I also came to know 
them also. O saintly persons! Thus S’uka Deva, sincerely earnest to 
cross this endless bottomless ocean of S’amsara, tasted of the 
wonderful traits of the Veda, the Kalpa tree, this S’rimad Bhagavata 
with its numerous stories and anecdotes with great eagerness and 
intense pleasure. 


38-43. Oh! Who is there in this world that is not freed from this terror 
of Kali, after he has heard this Bhagavata. Even if the greatest 
sinner, void of the right ways of living and Achara as ordained in the 
Vedas, hears on a pretence this excellent Devi Bhagavata, the chief 
of the Puranas, he enjoys all the great enjoyments of this world and 
in the end attains the eternal place occupied by the Yogis. She who 
is rare, in Her Nirguna aspect, to even Hah and Hara, who is very 
dear as Tattva Vidya to the Jhanins whose real nature can be 
realised only in Samadhi, She resides always in the cavity of the 
heart of the hearers of the Bhagavata Purana. He who getting the all 
qualified human birth and getting the reciter of this Purana, the boat 
to cross, as it were, this world, does not hear this blissful Purana, he 
is certainly deprived by the Creator. How is it that the way-ward dull¬ 
headed persons, getting the vicious ears, can hear always the faults 
and calumnies of others, that are entirely useless, and cannot hear 
this pure Purana that contains the four Vargas Dharma, Artha, 



Kama, and Mokhsa? This is my main point of doubt. O One of good 
vows! I am Thy devotee; be merciful to me and speak this to me. 
There is almost nothing that is secret to Mahapurusas; this is a well- 
known fact”. 


44-50. Thus hearing Brahma's words, Bhagavan Narayana spoke 
“O Brahman! I now speak out my mind to you; listen carefully. 
Though the Devas, Danavas and men and all the Lokas know that 
You are the Creator, I am the Preserver and Rudra is the Destroyer, 
yet it is to be known that the saints, versed in the Vedas, have come 
to this conclusion by inference from the Vedas that the creation, 
preservation, and destruction are performed by the creative force, 
preservative force and destructive force. The Rajasik creative force 
residing in you, the Sattvik preservative force residing in me, and 
the Tamasik destructive force residing in Rudra are the all-in-all. 
When these Saktis become absent, you become inert and incapable 
to create, I to preserve and Rudra to destroy. O intelligent Suvrata! 
We all are always under that Force directly or indirectly; hear 
instances that you can see and infer. At the time of Pralaya, I lie 
down on the bed of Ananta, subservient to that Force; again I wake 
up in the time of creation duly under the influence of Time. 


51-54. I am always subservient to that Maha S’akti; (under Her 
command) I am engaged in Tapasya for a long time; (By Her 
command) some time I enjoy with Lakshmi; some time I fight battles, 
terrible to all the Lokas, with the Danavas, involving great bodily 
troubles. O Know of Dharma! It was before Your presence that I 
fought hand to hand fight for five thousand years before Your sight 
on that one great ocean in long-past days with the two demons 
Madhu and Kaitabha, sprung from the wax of my ear, maddened 
with pride; and by the grace of the Devi, successfully killed the two 
Danavas. 



55-61. O highly fortunate one! you realised then the great S’akti, 
higher than the highest and the cause of all causes; then why are 
you asking again and again that question. By the will of that S’akti, I 
have got this idea of man and roam on the great ocean; in yuga after 
yuga, I assume by Her will, the Tortoise, Boar, Man-Lion, and Dwarf 
incarnations. No one likes to take birth in the womb of inferior 
animals (especially birds). Do you think that I willingly take 
unpleasant births as in the womb of boars, tortoise, i.e., certainly not. 
What independent man is there who abandons the pleasurable 
enjoyment with Laksmi and takes birth in inferior animals as fish, etc. 
or leaves his seat on the seat of Gaduda and becomes engaged in 
great war-conflicts. O Svayambhu! In ancient days you saw before 
your eyes that my head was cut off when the bowstring suddenly 
gave way; and then you, brought a horse's head and by that help, 
the divine artist Visvakarma, stuck that on to my headless body. O 
Brahma! Since then I am known amongst men by the name of 
“Hayagriva”. This is well-known to you. Now say, were I 
independent, would such an ignominy have happened to me? Never. 
Therefore I am not independent; I am in every way under that S’akti. 
O Lotus-born! I always meditate on that S’akti; and I do not know any 
other than this S’akti”. 


62-66. Narada said :-- Thus spoke Visnu to Brahma. O Muni 
Vedavyas! Brahma spoke these to me. So you, too, better meditate 
the lotus feet of Bhagavati calmly in the lotus of your heart for the 
success of your idea. That Devi will give you all that you wish. Suta 
said At these words of Narada, Satyavati's son Veda Vyasa went 
out to the hills for Tapasya, trusting the lotus feet of the Devi as the 
all-in-all in this world. 


Thus ends the fourth chapter of the first Skandha on the excellency 
of the Devi in the Mahapurana S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses. 




Chapter 5. On The Narrative Of HAVAGRivA 


1-4. The Risis said “O Suta! Our minds are merged in the sea of 
doubt, hearing your this most wonderful saying, surprising to the 
whole world. The head of Janardan Madhava, the Lord of all, was 
severed out of His body! And He was afterwards known as 
Hayagriva, the horse-faced! Oh! what more wonder can there be 
than this? Whom the Vedas even praise, all the Devas rest on 
Whom, Who is the Cause of all causes, the Adi Deva Jagannath (the 
Lord of the universe). Oh! how is it that His head came to be 
severed! O highly intelligent one! Describe all this to me in detail”. 


5-9. Suta said O Munis! Hear all attentively the glorious deeds of 
the supremely energetic Visnu, the Deva of the Devas. Once on a 
time the eternal Deva Janardana became tired after the terrible 
continuous battle for ten thousand years. After this the Lord 
Narayana seated Himself on Padmasan (a kind of posture) in some 
lovely place on a level plot of ground and placing his head on the 
front of his bow with the bow strung and placed erect on the ground 
fell fast asleep. Visnu, the Lord of Rama, was exceedingly tired and 
thus he fell soon into deep sleep. At this time Indra and the other 
Devas, with Brahma and Mahesa began a sacrifice. 


10-13. Then they, for the sake of success in Deva's well, went to the 
region of Vaikuntha to meet with the Deva Janardana, the Lord of 
sacrifices. There the Devas, not finding Visnu, came to know by their 
Dhyan (meditation) where Bhagavan Visnu was staying and thither 
they went. They saw that the Lord Visnu, the Deva of the Devas was 
lying unconscious, being under the arms of Yoganidra (the yogic 
sleep). Therefore they took their seats there. Seeing the Lord of the 
universe asleep, Brahma, Rudra and the other Devas became 
anxious. 



14-18. Indra then addressed the Devas :-“0 best of the Suras! Now 
what is to be done! How shall we rouse Bhagavan from His sleep? 
Now think of the means by which this can be effected”. Hearing 
Indra's words S’ambhu said “O good Devas! Now we must finish 
our sacrificial work. But if the sleep of Bhagavan be disturbed, He 
would get angry.” Hearing S’ankara's words, Paramesthi Brahma 
created Vamri insects (a sort of white ants) so that they might eat up 
the forepart of the bow that was lying on the ground causing the 
other end rise up and thus break His sleep. Thus the Deva's purpose 
will, no doubt, be fulfilled. Thus settling his mind, the eternal Deva 
Brahma ordered the white ants Vamris to cut the bow string. 


19-22. Hearing this order of Brahma, Vamri spoke to Brahma, thus :- 
- “O Brahman! How can I disturb the sleep of the Devadeva, Lord of 
Laksmi, the World Guru? To rouse one from one's deep sleep, to 
interrupt one in one's speech, to sever the love between a couple 
husband and wife, to separate a child from one's mother, all these 
are equivalent to Brahmahatya (murdering a Brahman). Therefore, O 
Deva! how can I interrupt the happiuess of sleep of the Devadeva? 
And what benefit shall I derive by eating the bowstring, so that I may 
incur this vicious act? But a man can commit a sin if there be any 
interest of his; I am ready to eat this, if I get a personal interest”. 


23-24. Brahma said We will give you, too, share in this our Yajha 
(sacrifice); so hear me; do our work and rouse Visnu from His sleep. 
During the time of performing Homa whatever ghee will fall outside 
the Homa-Kund (the sacrificial pit) will fall to your share; so be quick 
and do this. 


25-30. Suta said Thus ordered by Brahma, the Vamri insect soon 
ate away the fore end of the bow that rested on the ground. 



Immediately the string gave way and the bow went up; the other end 
became free and a terrible sound took place. The Devas bcame 
afraid; the whole universe got agitated; the earth trembled. The sea 
became swollen; the aquatic animals became startled; violent wind 
blew; the mountains shook; ominous meteors fell. The quarters 
assumed a terrific aspect; the Sun went down the horizon. In that 
time of distress the Devas became anxious what evil might come 
down. O ascetics! while the Devas were thus cogitating, the head 
with crown on it of the Devadeva Visnu vanished away ; no body 
knew where it fell. 


31-36. When the awful darkness disappeared, Brahma and 
Mahadeva saw the disfigured body of Visnu with its head off. Seeing 
that headless figure of Visnu they were greatly surprised; they were 
drowned in the ocean of cares and, overwhelmed with grief, began 
to weep aloud. O Lord! O Master! O Devadeva! O Eternal one! what 
unforeseen extraordinary mishap occurred to us to-day! O Deva! 
Thou canst not be pierced nor cut asunder, nor capable of being 
burnt; how is it then that Thy head has been taken away! Is this the 
Maya (majic) of some. Deva? O all pervading one! The Devas 
cannot live when Thy condition is thus; we do not know what 
affection dost Thou have towards us. We are crying because of our 
selfish ends; perhaps this therefore has occurred. The Daityas, 
Yaksas, or Rakhsasas have not done this; O Lord of Laksmi! Whose 
fault will we ascribe this to? The Devas themselves have committed 
this loss to themselves? 


37-41. O Lord of the Devas! The Devas are. now dependent! They 
are under Thee. Now where are we to go? What are we to do? 
There is none to save the dull stupid Devas! At this juncture, seeing 
S’iva and the other Devas crying, Brihaspati, supremely versed in 
the Vedas, consoled them thus “O highly fortunate one! what use 
there will be in thus crying and repenting? it ought you now to 



consider the means that you should adopt to redress your calamities. 
O Lord of the Devas! Fate and one's own exertion and intelligence 
are equal; if the success comes not through Fate (Luck or chance) 
one is certainly to show one's prowess and merit”. 


42-46. Indra said Fie to your exertion when, before our eyes, the 
head of Bhagavan Visnu Himself has been carried off! Fie, Fie to 
your prowess and intelligence! Fate is in my opinion, the supreme. 


Brahma said Whatever, auspicious or inauspicious, is ordained 
Daiva (Fate), every one must bear that; no one can go beyond the 
Daiva. When one has taken up a body, one must experience 
pleasure and pain; there is no manner of doubt in this. See, in long- 
past days, by the irony of Fate, S’ambhu severed my head; His 
generative organ, too, dropped down through curse. Similarly Hari's 
head has, to-day, fallen into the salt ocean. By the influence of time, 
Indra, the Lord of Sachi, had thousand genital marks over his body, 
was expelled from Heaven and had to live in the Manas sarovar in 
the lotuses and had to suffer many other miseries. 


47-50. O Glorious ones! When such personages have suffered 
pains, then who else is there in the world, that dues not suffer! so 
you all cease sorrows and meditate on the Eternal Mahamaya; who 
is the Mother of all, who is supporter of all, who is of the nature of 
Brahmavidya (the Supreme Knowledge) and who is beyond the 
Gunas, who is the Prime Prakriti, and who pervades the three Lokas, 
the whole universe, moving and unmoving; She will dispense our 
welfare. Suta said Thus saying to the Devas, Brahma ordered all 
the Vedas, that were incarnate there in their forms, for the successful 
issue of the Deva's work. 



51-54. Brahma said “OVedas! Now go on and chant hymns to the 
Sacred Highest Devi Mahamaya, who is Brahmavidya, who brings 
all issues to their successful issues, who is hidden in all forms.” 
Hearing His words, the all-beautiful Vedas began to chant hymns to 
Mahamaya who can be comprehended by Jhan, and who pervades 
the world. The Vedas said Obeisance to the Devi! to the 
Mahamaya! to the Auspicious One! to the Creatrix of the Universe! 
We bow down to Thee, who is beyond the Gunas, the Ruler of all the 
Beings! O Mother! Thou givest to S’ankara even His desires. Thou 
art the receptacle of all the things; Thou art the Prana of all the living 
beings; Thou art Buddhi, Laksmi (wealth), S’obha, Ks'hama 
(forgiveness), S’anti (peace), Sraddha (faith), Medha (intellect), Dhriti 
(fortitude), and Smriti (recollection). 


55. Thou art the vindu (m) over the Pranava (om) and thou art of the 
nature of semi-moon; Thou art Gayattri, Thou art Vyarhiti; Thou art 
Jaya, Vijaya, Dhatri (the supportress). Lap (modesty), Kirti (fame), 
Ichcha (will) and Daya (mercy) in all beings. 


56-57. O Mother! Thou art the merciful Mother of the three worlds; 
Thou art the adorable auspicious Vidya (knowledge) benefitting all 
the Lokas; Thou destroyest the Universe and Thou skilfully residest 
(hidden) in the Vija mantras. Therefore we are praising Thee. O 
Mother! Brahma, Visnu, MahesVara, Indra, Surya, Fire, Sarasvati 
and other Regents of the Universe are all Thy creation; so none of 
them is superior to Thee. Thou art the Mother of all the things, 
moving and non-moving. 


58-61. O Mother! When Thou dost will to create this visible 
Universe, Thou createst first Brahma, Visnu and MahesVara and 
makest them create, preserve and destroy this universe; but Thou 



remainest quite unattached to the world. Ever Thou remainest 
constant in Thy one form. No one in this Universe is able to know 
Thy nature; nor there is any body who can enumerate Thy names. 
How can he promise to jump across the illimitable ocean, who 
cannot jump across an ordinary well. O Bhagavati! No one amongst 
the Devas even knows particularly Thy endless power and glory. 
Thou art alone the Lady of the Universe and the Mother of the world. 


62-68. The Vedas all bear testimony how thou alone hast created all 
this unreal and fleeting universe. O Devi! Thou without any effort and 
having no desires hast become the cause of this visible world, 
thyself remaining unchanged. This is a great wonder. We cannot 
conceive this combination of contrary varieties in one. O Mother! 

How can we understand thy power, unknown to all the Vedas even, 
when thou thyself dost not know thy nature! We are bewildered at 
this. O Mother! It is that thou dost know nothing about the falling off 
of the Visnu's head! Or knowingly thou wanted to examine Visnu's 
prowess. Is it that Hah incurred any heinous sin. How can that be! 
Where is sin to thy followers who serve Thee! O Mother! Why art 
Thou so much indifferent to the Devas! It is a great wonder that the 
head of Visnu is severed! Really, we are merged in great 
misfortunes. Thou art clever in removing the sorrows of Thy 
devotees. Why art Thou delaying in fixing again the head on Visnu's 
body. O Devi! Is it that Thou taking offence on the gods hast cast 
that on Visnu! or was it that Visnu became proud and to curb that. 
Thou hast played thus! or is it that the Daityas, having suffered 
defeat from Visnu went and practised severe tapasya in some 
beautiful holy place, and have got some boons; and so Visnu's head 
has thus fallen off! Or is it, O Bhagavati! that Thou wert very eagerly 
interested to see Visnu's headless body and therefore Thou hast 
seen thus! O Prime Force! Is it that Thou art angry on the daughter 
of the Sindhu (ocean); Laksmi Devi! Else, why hast Thou deprived 
Her of Her husband? Laksmi is born as a part of Thine; So Thou 
oughtest to forgive Her offence. Therefore dost Thou gladden Her by 



giving back Her husband's life. The principal Devas, engaged in Thy 
service, always make their Pranams (bow down) to Thee; O Devi! 
Beest Thou kind enough and make alive the Deva Visnu, the Lord of 
all and crossest us across this ocean of sorrows. O Mother! We 
cannot make out anything whatsoever where Hari's head has gone. 
We have no other protectress than Thee who canst give back His 
life? O Devi! Dost Thou give life to the whole world as the nectar 
gives life to all the Devas. 


69-73. Suta said Thus praised by the Vedas with their Angas, with 
Samaganas (the songs from the Sama Veda), the Nirguna 
Mahes'vari Devi Mahamaya became pleased. Then the auspicious 
voice came to them from the Heavens, gladdening all, and pleasing 
to the ears though no form was seen: “O Suras! Do not care 
anything about it; you are immortal (what fear can you have?) Come 
to your senses. I am very much pleased by the praise sung by the 
Vedas. There is no doubt in this. Amongst men, whoever will read 
this My stotra with devotion, will get all what he desires. Whoever will 
hear this devotedly, during the three Sandhyas, will lie freed from 
troubles and become happy. When this stotra has been sung by the 
Vedas, it is equivalent to the Vedas. 


74-75. Does anything take place in this world without any cause? 
Now hear why Hari's head was cut off. Once on a time, seeing the 
beautiful face of His dear wife Laksmi Devi, Hari laughed in 
presence of Her. 


76-82. At this Laksmi Devi came to understand that “He has seen 
surely something ugly in my face and therefore He laughed; 
otherwise why my Husband would laugh at seeing me. But what 
reason can there be as to see ugliness in my face after so long a 
time. And why shall He laugh without seeing something ugly, without 



any cause. Or it may be, He has made some other beautiful woman 
as my co-wife”. Thus arguing variously in her mind, Maha Laksmi 
gradually got angry and Tamo guna slowly possessed Her. Then, by 
turn of Fate, in order that god’s work might be completed, very fierce 
Tamas Sakti entered into Her body. She got very angry and slowly 
said “Let Thy head fall off”. Thus, owing to feminine nature and 
the destiny of Bhagvan, Laksmi cursed without any thought of good 
or bad, causing Her own suffering. By the Tamasi S’akti possessing 
Her, she thought that a co-wife would be more painful than Her 
widowhood and thus She cursed Him. 


83-86. Falsehood, vain boldness, craftiness, stupidity, impatience, 
over-greediness, impurity, and harshness are the natural qualities of 
women. Owing to that curse, the head of Vasudeva has fallen into 
the salt ocean. Now I will fix the head on His body as before. O Sura 
Sattamas! There is another cause, also, regarding this affair. That 
will bring you great success. In ancient days a famous Daitya, 
named Hayagriva practised severe tapasya on the bank of the 
Sarasvati river. 


87-92. Abandoning all sorts of enjoyments, with control over his 
senses and without any food, the Daitya did Japam of the (repeated) 
one syllabled Maya-Vija-mantra and, meditating the form of the 
Utmost Sakti of Mine, adorned with all ornaments, practised very 
terrible austerities for one thousand years. I, too, went to the place of 
austerities in My Tamasi form, meditated by the Daitya and 
appeared before him. There, seated on the lion's back, feeling 
compassion for his tapasya I spoke to him “O glorious One! O one 
of good vows! I have come to grant boon to Thee!” Hearing the 
words of the Devi, the Daitya instantly got up and falling down with 
devotion at Her feet, circumambulated Her. Looking at My form, his 
large eyes became cheerful with feelings of love and filled with tears; 
shedding tears, then, he began to chant hymns to Me. 



93-95. Hayagriva said “Obeisance to the Devi Mahamaye! I bow 
down to Thee, the Creatrix, the Preserver, and the Destructrix of the 
universe! Skilled in shewing favour to Thy devotees! Giver of the 
devotee's desires! Obeisance to Thee! O Thou, the giver of 
liberation! O Thou! The auspicious one! I bow down to Thee. Thou 
art the cause of the five elements - earth, water, fire, air, and Akasa! 
Thou art the cause of form, taste, smell, sound and touch. O 
MahesVari! the five jhanendriyas (organs of perception) eyes, ears, 
nose, tongue, and skin and the five organs of action Karmendriyas 
- hands, feet, speech, arms, and the organ of generation are all 
created by Thee. 


96-100. The Devi said “O child! I am very much satisfied with your 
wonderful tapasya and devotion. Now say what boon do you want. I 
will give you the boon that you desire”. Hayagriva said “O Mother! 
grant me that boon by which death will not come to me, and I be 
invincible by the Suras and Asuras, I may be a Yogi and immortal”. 
The Devi said “ Death brings in birth and birth brings in death; this 
is inevitable.” This order of things is extant in this world; never its 
violation takes place. O best of the Raksasas! Thus knowing death 
sure, think in your mind and ask another boon. Hayagriva said: - “O 
Mother of the universe! If it be that Thou art not willing at all to grant 
me immortality, then grant me this boon that my death may not occur 
from any other than from one who is horse-faced. Be merciful and 
grant me this boon that I desire.” 


101-105. O highly fortunate one! “Go home and govern your 
kingdom at your ease; death won't occur to you from any other 
beings then from one who is horse-faced.” Thus granting the boon, 
the Devi vanished. Becoming very glad on getting this boon, 
Hayagriva went to his residence. Since then the wicked Daitya is 
troubling very much all the Devas and Munis. There is none in the 



three worlds to kill him. So let Visvakarma take a horse's head and 
fix it on the headless body of Visnu. Then Bhagavan Hayagriva will 
slay the vicious wicked Asura, for the good of the Devas”. 


106-112. Suta said Thus speaking to the Devas, Bhagavati 
S’arvani remained silent. The Devas became very glad and spoke 
this to Visvakarma “Kindly do this Deva work and fix Visnu's 
head. He will become Hayagriva and kill the indomitable Danava.” 
Suta said Hearing these words, Visvakarma quickly cut off with his 
axe, the head of a horse, brought it before the Devas and fixed it on 
the headless body of Visnu. By the grace of Mahamaya, Bhagavan 
became horse-faced or Hayagriva. Then, a few days after, 

Bhagavan. Hayagriva killed that proud Danava, the Deva's enemy, 
by sheer force. Any man, hearing this excellent anecdote, becomes 
freed, certainly of all sorts of difficulties. Hearing or reading 
Mahamaya's glorious deeds, pure and sin destroying, gives all sorts 
of wealth. 


Thus ends the fifth chapter of the first Skandha on the description of 
the narrative of Hayagriva in the Maha Purana S’rimad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses. 



Chapter 6. On The Preparation For War By 
Madhu Kaitabha 


1-44. The Risis said “O Saumya! Just now you have spoken of the 
fight for five thousand years, in that great ocean, between Bhagavan 
S’auri and Madhu Kaitabha. How was it that the two greatly powerful 
Danavas, invincible of the Devas came to be born there? And why 
did Bhagavan Hah kill them? O highly intelligent one! Kindly describe 
that greatly wonderful event. We all are extremely eager to hear it, 
and you are the great Pundit and speaker, present before us. It is our 
good luck that we have come across you here. As the contact with 
the illiterate is very painful, so the contact with the literate is very 
happy like nectar. The animals in this world live like illiterates; they 
eat, call for their nature, void urines and faeces, and know 
wonderfully well the sexual intercourse. Only they want 
discriminative knowledge of right and wrong, of the real and unreal, 
and a knowledge of discrimination, leading to Moksa or final 
liberation; this is the only point of difference. Therefore the persons 
that have no liking to hear of Bhagavata and books like it, are like 
beasts; there is no doubt in this. Behold! Deer and some other 
animals can enjoy well the sense of hearing like men; and the 
serpents, though wanting in the organ of hearing, become charmed 
quite like men, as if tasting the pleasure of hearing sweet sounds. 
Verily out of the five organs of perception the organ of hearing and 
the organ of sight are benefitting, for the knowledge of things arises 
from hearing and the heart is pleased by seeing. Therefore the 
Pundits divide in three classes, the objects of hearing, as (1) 
Sattvik, (2) Rajasik and (3) Tamasik. The Vedas and other S’astras 
are Sattvik; the literature Sahitya is the Rajasik and war news and 
finding fault with others is Tamasik. The wise persons again sub¬ 
divide the Sattvik in three sub-classes good, middling and worst. 
That which gives Moksa is good or excellent; that which gives 
Heavens is middling and that which gives this worldly pleasure is 
worst. In the same way, the literature Sahitya is of three kinds 



That which describes the people to live with their legitimate wives is 
the best; which describes about prostitutes is the middling; and that 
which makes people live with other's wives is the worst. 


The seers of Sastras, the learned men divide the subjects of the 
Tamasik hearing into three classes That in which fight with the 
enemies is described is best; where the fight, as of the Pandavas, 
with the enemies out of hatred, ill-feeling, is described is middling; 
and that where fighting is described without any cause is worst. 
Therefore, O highly intelligent one! Hearing the Puranas is far 
superior to hearing other S’astras, for thereby sins are destroyed, 
intellect is increased and Punyam (good merits) is stored. So, O 
intelligent one! Kindly describe to us, the Puranas, fulfilling all the 
requirements of life, that you heard before from the mouth of Krisna 
Dvaipayana”. Hearing these words of the Risis, Suta said “O 
highly fortunate ones! When you all are desirous to hear the Puranas 
and I am ready to tell them, then both of us are blessed on the 
surface of the earth”. In days of yore, in the time of Pralaya 
(universal dissolution) when the three lokas and the entire universe 
dissolved in water, when the Devadeva Janardana was lying asleep 
on the bed of Ananta, the thousand headed serpent, arose from the 
was of the ear of Bhagavan Visnu, the two very powerful Daityas 
Madhu and Kaitabha; they grew in the waters of the ocean and 
played around in the waters and thus passed some of their time. 
Once, on a time, when the two huge bodied Danavas were playing 
with each other like two brothers, they thought that the general rule 
of the universe is that no effect takes place without a cause and 
nothing can rest without the receptacle thereof. But we cannot 
understand what is our receptacle or who is resting on us. Whereon 
rests this pleasant expanse of wide ocean? Who was it that created 
this? How was this created? Why are we living here merged within 
the water? Who created us? and who are our father and mother. 
Nothing of a these we know. Thus thinking, when they could not 
come to any conclusion, Kaitabha spoke to Madhu, beside him. 



within the waters “O Brother! It seems to me the great 
immoveable force that makes us rest in this water is the cause of all. 
This whole mass of water, too, pervaded by that force, rests on that; 
that Highest Devi must be the Cause of us”. 

When the two Asuras, merged in this thought, understood this, they 
heard in the air the beautiful Vagvija (the seed mantra of Vak, the 
speech, the Devi Sarasvati). They then began to pronounce 
repeated the Vagvija mantra and practised it with the great 
steadfastness. Next they saw, risen high up in the air, the auspicious 
lightning and thought that certainly our mantra that we are repeating 
has made Herself visible in this form of light and thus we have seen 
certainly in the air, the saguna form (form with attributes) of 
Sarasvati, the goddess of Speech. Thus thinking in their minds they, 
without any food, with their minds controlled, constantly thought of 
that, with their whole mind collected on that, and repeating and 
meditating the mantra became one with that. Thus they passed one 
thousand years in practising that great tapas; when the Highest Adya 
S’akti became pleased with them and seeing the two Danavas, 
steadfast in the practice of Tapas, tired, address them, invisibly in the 
way of celestial voice thus “O two Danavas! I am exceedingly 
pleased with your tapasya; so ask boon whatever you desire; I will 
grant it.” Hearing, then, the celestial voice, thus the two Danavas 
said “O Devi! O Suvrate! Grant us that we will die wheni/i/e will.” 
Hearing this, VagdevT said “O two Danavas! Certain by My grace, 
you two will die when you will and you two brothers will be invincible 
of all the Suras and Asuras. There is no doubt in this”. 

Suta said When the Devi granted them this boon, the two 
Danavas, puffed up with pride, began to play with the aquatic 
animals in the ocean. O Brahmins! Some days thus passed away 
when the two powerful Danavas saw the Brahma, the Prajapati, 
seated on the lotus of navel of Hah. Doubt came on their minds and 
they told him with a view to fight“O Suvrata! Either fight with us, 
or leave off this lotus seat and go any where you like. If you be so 
weak, this auspicious lotus seat not fit for you. For this should be 



enjoyed by the heroes. So if you be a coward, leave it quickly”. 
Hearing these words of the Danavas, Prajapati, engaged in the 
practice of Tapasya, saw the two great powerful heroes and began to 
think anxiously “What should be done now” and waited there. 


Thus ends the sixth chapter of the first Skandha on the preparation 
for war by Madhu Kaitabha in the Mahapurana S’rimad Devi 
Bhagavatam by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 7. On The Praise Of The Dev! 


1-26. Suta said Seeing the two Danavas very powerful, Brahma, 
the knower of all the S’astras, thought of the means Sama, Dana, 
Bheda, Danda (conciliation, gifts, bribe, or sowing dissensions and 
war or punishment); which of these four he should apply. He thought 
thus “I do not know their strength and it is not advisable to enter 
into war without knowing their strength. Again if I offer praises to 
them puffed up with pride, it will be simply displaying my own 
weakness; and when they will come to know this, only one of them 
will be sufficient to kill me and this they will do certainly. To offer 
bribes is not also advisable; and how can I sow dissensions. 
Therefore it is best that I should rouse the four armed Janardana 
Visnu, who is very powerful, from his sleep on the thousand headed 
Ananta serpent. He will remove my difficulties”. 

Thus thinking in his mind, Bhagavan Brahma, the lotus-born 
remained in the tubular stalk of the lotus from Visnu's navel and 
thence took refuge mentally of Visnu, the remover of difficulties and 
began to chant auspicious hymns composed of various metres to 
Jagannath Narayana, involved in deep Yoganidra (meditative sleep). 
He said “O Refuge of the poor! O Hah! O Visnu! O Vamana! O 
Madhava, Thou art the Lord of the universe and omnipresent. O 
Hrisikes'a! Thou removest all the difficulties of Thy devotees; 
therefore leave your Yoganidra and get up. O Vasudeva! O Lord of 
the Universe! Thou residest within the hearts of all and knowest their 
desires. 

O Thou, holder of the disc and club! Thou always destroyest the 
enemies of Thy devotees; O Omniscient One! Thou art the Lord of 
all the Lokas and all-powerful; no one can know what is Thy form; O 
Lord of the Devas! Thou art the destroyer of all pains and sufferings! 
So get up and protect me. O Protector of the Universe! nothing is 
concealed from Thy eyes! Every one becomes pure by hearing and 
chanting Thy name. Thou art Nirakara (without any form); yet Thou 



Greatest, preservest and destroyest the Universe. O Cause of the 
world! O Supporter of all! Thou art shining as king of kings over all 
and yet Thou dost not understand that the two Danavas, puffed up 
with pride have become ready to kill me. If thou dost neglect me, 
seeing me very much distressed and under your protection then Thy 
name as Preserver will become quite useless. Thus praised, when 
Visnu did not get up, Brahma thought that "Bhagavan Visnu is now 
surely under the influence of sleep of the Primal Force Adya S’akti 
and is not therefore getting up; what am I to do now, thus distressed! 
These two Danavas, elated with pride are ready to kill me; now what 
am I to do and where shall I go? I don't find any body who can 
protect me any where.” Thus thinking, Brahma came to the 
conclusion and decided to chant hymns to Yoga Nidra Herself with 
one pointed heart. Discussing in his mind. He thought that that Adya 
S’akti (the Prime Force) which kept Bhagavan Visnu, senseless and 
motionless would alone be able to save him. As a dead man cannot 
hear any sound so Hah, merged in deep sleep, knows not anything. 
When I have praised Him so much and when He has not awakened, 
then it is certain that sleep is not under Hah, but Hah is under sleep, 
and he who is under another becomes his slave; so this Yoga Nidra 
is now exercising Her control over Hari. Again she, too, who brought 
Hah under control, that daughter of the Krsira (milk) ocean is now 
under the control of Yoga Nidra; so it seems that that Bhagavati 
Mahamaya has brought the whole Universe under Her control. 

Whether it be Myself, or Visnu or S’ambhu, or Savitri or Rama or 
Uma, all are under Her control; there is nothing to be doubted here? 
What to speak of other high souled persons! Now I will chant hymns 
to Yoga Nidra, under whose influence Bhagavan Hari even is lying, 
under deep sleep, inert like an ordinary man. When the eternal 
Vasudeva Janardana will be dispossessed by Her, He will no doubt 
fight with the Danavas. Thus deciding, Bhagavan Brahma, seated on 
the tubular stalk of the lotus, began to chant hymns to Yoga Nidra, 
residing on the body of Visnu, thus 



27-32. Brahma said “O Devi! I have come to understand on the 
authority of all the words of the Vedas, that Thou art the only One 
Cause of this Universal Brahmanda. The more so when Thou hast 
brought the best Purusa Visnu, endowed with discrimination above 
all beings, under the control of sleep, then the above remark is self- 
evident. 


O Thou, the Player in the minds of all beings! O Mother! I am 
extremely ignorant of the knowledge of Thy nature; when Bhagavan 
Hari is sleeping inert by Thy power, then who is there amongst Kotis 
and Kotis of wise men, who can understand completely the Pastime, 
Leela, full of Maya of Thine, who art beyond the Gunas. The 
Sankhya philosophers say (that the Purusa (the male aspect of 
S’akti) is the pure, conscious being and that Thou art the Prakriti, 
without any consciousness, material inert, Creatrix of the universe; 
but, O Mother! art Thou really inert like that? Never like that; had it 
been like that, how is it that Thou hast made Bhagavan Hari, the 
receptable of the world quite unconscious like this? O Bhavani! 
Thou, being beyond the Gunas art displaying like a dramatic 
performance these various dramatic plays by the conjunction with 
the three Gunas. It is Thy three qualities, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas 
that the Munis meditate every day in the morning mid-day, and 
evening, the three Sandhyas; but no one is aware of Thy ways of 
doings. O Devi! Thou art of the nature of the judgment and 
understanding giving rise to knowledge of all the beings in the 
Universe; Thou art always the S’ri (wealth and prosperity) giving 
pleasures to the Devas. O Mother! Thou art reigning in all as Kirti 
(fame), mati (intellect), Dhriti (fortitude). Kanti (beauty) S’raddha 
(faith) and Rati (enjoyment). O Mother! Now I am put to great 
difficulties and therefore I have got eye witness of Thy nature; no 
need of further reasoning and discussing about it. 



27-50. I have now known that verily, verily Thou art the only Mother 
of all the worlds as Thou hast brought Hah under the influence of 
sleep. O Devi! Now when it is evident that all the worlds, etc., have 
come from Thee, then the Vedas have also come from Thee; what 
doubt is there? So the Vedas, too, do not know fully Thy nature; for 
the effect can never know its cause. So, it is very true that Thou art 
incomprehensible of the Vedas, O Mother! When I, Hah, Hara and 
the other Devas and my son Narada and other Munis have not able 
to realise Thy nature fully, then who else can be so intelligent in this 
world that will realise all Thy nature? So Thy glory is beyond the 
speech of all beings. O Devi! If, in the place of sacrifice, the ritualists, 
the knowers of the Vedas, do not utter Thy name Svaha, then the 
Devas, participators of the offerings in Yajha, do not get their share, 
however hundreds of oblations be offered; so Thou art also the giver 
of sustenance allowances to the Devas. O Bhagavati! In previous 
Kalpas, Thou hadst saved me terrified from the fear of the Danavas. 
O Devi Varade! now, too, I am terrified at the sight of the terrible 
forms of Madhu and Kaitabha and take Thy refuge. O high-minded 
one! Now I thoroughly see that by Thee, by Thy power Yoganidra the 
whole body of Bhagavan Visnu is senseless; but how is it that Thou 
dost not realise my sufferings. So, either dost Thou leave possession 
of this Adi-Deva, or destroy Thyself these two Danavendras - lost do 
either of the two as Thou likest. O Devi! Those that do not know Thy 
extraordinary powers, those stupid ones meditate Hari, Hara, etc. 

But, O Mother! By Thy grace, I realise to-day, as eye-witness, that 
Visnu even is to-day lying unconscious in deep sleep, totally 
senseless of anything outside by Thy force. O Bhagavati! Now, when 
Kamala, the daughter of Sindhu is unable to rouse Her husband 
Hari, by her effort, or rather Thou hast made Her, too, perforce, sleep 
unconsciously, it seems she is without any effort and does not know 
anything of what is going on outside. O Devi! Verily those are 
blessed who worship Thy lotus feet with their whole heart full of 
devotion and without any hope of getting rewards, abandoning the 
worship of other Devas and knowing Thee as the Creatrix of the 
whole world and the giver of all desires. Alas! now the intelligence, 
beauty, fame, and all good qualities have forsaken Hari and fled 



away to some unknown quarters. O Bhagavati! Thou art really 
adorable in the three worlds for, by Thy power of Yoganidra, Hari has 
been kept in prison, as it were, in this way. O Mother! Thou art the 
S’akti of all this universe and endowed with all prowess and energy; 
all other things are Thy creation. As a dramatic player, though one, 
plays in the theatre, assuming many forms, so Thou, too, being one, 
playest always in this charming theatre of world, created by Thy 
Gunas, in various forms. 

O Mother! Thou, in the beginning of the Yugas, dost manifest first the 
Visnu form and givest him the pure Sattrik Sakti, free from any 
obscuration and thereby madest Him preserve the Universe; and 
now it is Thyself that hast kept Him thus unconscious; therefore, it is 
an undoubted fact that Thou art doing whatever Thou wiliest, O 
Bhagavati! I am now in danger; if it be Thy desire not to kill me, then 
dost break the silence, look on me and show Thy mercy. O Bhavani! 
If it be not Thy desire to kill me, then why hast Thou created these 
two Danavas, my death incarnate; or is it that Thou wantedest to put 
me to ridicule. I have come to know of Thy wonderful acts; Thou 
createst this whole Universe, and Thyself remaining aloof, playest 
always and in the time of Pralaya resolvest everything again into 
Thee. Therefore, O Bhavani, what wonder is there, that Thou 
wouldst want to kill me in this way? But, O Mother! I won't feel any 
pain if Thou willingly killest me but this is to my great dishonour that 
being given power over these beings, I would then be made an 
object to be killed by the Daityas; this, indeed, is hard to me. So, O 
Thou Leelamayi like a sportive girl! get up! O Devi! assumest the 
wonderful form Thyself and killest me or the two Daityas, as Thou 
wiliest; or rouse Hari who will then kill the Daityas. All these are in 
Thy hands.” 

Suta said Thus praised by Brahma, the Nidra Devi (the goddess 
of sleep), of the nature of Tamo Gunas, quitted the body of 
Bhagavan Hari and stood by him. When thus left completely by the 
Devi Yoga Nidra, of unequalled brilliance and splendour, for the 



destruction of Madhu Kaitabha, Visnu began to move his body and 
at this Brahma became very glad. 


Thus ends the seventh chapter of the First Skandha on the praise of 
the Devi in the Maha Puranam S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses, by Maharsi Vedavyas. 



Chapter 8. On Deciding Who Is To Be 
Worshipped 


1-7. The Risis said “O highly fortunate one! A great doubt has 
arisen on your statement. This is ascertained by all the wise men as 
written in the Vedas, Puranas and other Sastras that Brahma, Visnu 
and MahesVar, these three Devas are eternal. None is superior to 
them in this Brahmanda. Brahma creates all the beings, Visnu 
preserves and MahesVar destroys all in due time. These are the 
causes of creation, preservation and destruction. The Trinity 
Brahma, Visnu and Mahes'a are really one form, indeed. Trinity in 
Unity and Unity in Trinity. 

Being endowed respectively with Sattva, Raja and Tamo Gunas they 
do their respective works. Amongst these, again, Purushottam 
Adideva Jagannath Hah, the husband of Kamala is the best; for he is 
capable of doing all the actions; no other than the Visnu, of 
unrivalled prowess is so capable. How is it, then that Yogamaya has 
overpowered Hari with sleep and made him altogether senseless? O 
highly fortunate one! whither did, then, go that extraordinary self 
knowledge and power, etc., of Hari while alive? This is our greatest 
doubt; so kindly advise us that our this doubt be removed and our 
well-being be thus ensured. 


8-30. What is that S’akti? Which you mentioned to us before; as well 
by whom Visnu is conquered? Whence is She born? What is the 
power of that S’akti and what is Her nature? O Suvrata! explain to us 
these fully. 

How was it that Yogamaya overpowered with sleep the Highest Deity 
Bhagavan Visnu who is everlasting-intelligence bliss! who is the God 
of all, the Guru of the whole world, the Creator, Preserver and 
Destroyer, who is omni-present, an incarnate of purity and holiness 



and beyond Rajoguna; how was such a personage brought under 
the control of sleep? O Suta! You are very intelligent and the pupil of 
Vyasa Deva; destroy our this doubt by the sword of wisdom. 

Hearing this, Suta said :--“0 highly fortunate Munis! There is none in 
the three Lokas who can clear your this doubt; the mind-born sons of 
Brahma, Narada, Kapila and other eternal sons get bewildered by 
these questions; what can I, then, say on this very difficult point! 

See, some persons call Bhagavan Visnu omnipresent, the preserver 
of all and the best of all the Devas; according to them all this 
universe moving and non-moving, is created by Visnu; they bow 
down before the Highest Narayan Hrisikes'a Janardana Vasudeva 
and worship Him, whereas others worship Mahadeva S’ankara, 
having Gauri for the other half of his body, endowed with all powers, 
residing in Kailas'a, surrounded by hosts of bhutas, that destroyed 
the Daksha's sacrifice, who is mentioned in the Vedas as 
S’as'is'ekhara (having moon on his forehead), with three eyes and 
five faces and holding trident in his hand and known as Vrisadhaja 
and Kaparddi. O highly intelligent ones! There are some other 
persons, that know the Vedas and worship the Sun everyday in the 
morning, mid-day and in the evening with various hymns. 

In all the Vedas, it is stated that the worship of the sun is excellent 
and they have named the high-souled sun as Paramatma (the 
Highest Deity). Whereas there are other Vedavits (the knowers of the 
Vedas) who worship the Devas, Fire, Indra, and Varuna. But the 
Maharsis say, that as Ganga Devi (the river Ganges), though one, is 
expressing Herself by many channels, so the one Visnu is 
expressing in all the Deva forms. Those who are big Pundits, declare 
perception, inference, and verbal testimony as the three modes of 
proofs. The Naiyayik Pundits add to the above three, a fourth proof 
which they call upama, resemblance, similitude and some other 
intelligent Pundits add another fifth proof called Arthapatti, an. 
inference from circumstances, presumption, implication. It is 
deduction of a matter from that which could not else be; it is 
assumption of a thing, not itself perceived but necessarily implied by 



another which is seen, heard or proved; whereas the authors of the 
Puranas add two other, called SaksT and Aitijhya, thus advocating, 
seven modes of proofs. Now the Vedanta S’astra says that the 
supreme being (Param Brahma), the Prime cause of the Universe, 
cannot be comprehended by the above-mentioned seven proofs. 
Therefore, first of all, adopt the reason leading to sure belief, the 
Buddhi, according to the words of the Vedas and discriminate and 
discuss again and again and draw your inference about Brahma. 

And the intelligent person should adopt what is seen by perception 
as self-evident and what is inferred by the observance of good 
conduct. The wise persons say, and it is also stated in the Puranas, 
that the Prime Force is present in Brahma as the Creative Force; is 
present in Hari as the Preservative Force; is present in Hara as the 
Destructive Force; is present in Kurma (tortoise) and in Ananta (the 
thousand headed Snake) as the earth supporting Force; is present in 
fire as the Burning Force, is present in air as the moving Force, and 
so is present everywhere in various manifestations of forces. 


31-51. In this whole Universe, whoever he may be, all are incapable 
of any action if he be deprived of his force; what more than this, if 
S’iva be deprived of Kula Kundalini S’akti, He becomes a lifeless 
corpse; O great ascetic Risis! She is present everywere thus in every 
thing in this universe from the highest Brahma to the lowermost 
blade of grass, all moving and non-moving things. Verily everything 
becomes quite inert, if deprived of force; whether in conquering 
one's enemies, or in going from one place to another or in eating - 
one finds oneself quite incapable, if deprived of force. Thus the 
omnipresent S’akti, the wise call by the name of Brahma. Those who 
are verily intelligent should always worship Her in various ways and 
determine thoroughly the reality of Her by every means. In Visnu 
there is the Sattviki S’akti; then He can preserve; otherwise He is 
quite useless; so in Brahma there is Rajasi S’akti and He creates; 
otherwise He is quite useless; in S’iva, there is Tamasi S’akti and He 
destroys; else He is quite useless. Thus, arguing again and again in 



one's mind, everyone should come to know that the Highest Adya 
S’akti by Her mere will creates and preserves this Universe and She 
it is who destroys again in time the whole Brahmanda, moving and 
non-moving; no one is capable to do his respective work be he 
Brahma, Visnu, Mahes'var, Indra, Fire, Sun, Varuna or any other 
person whatsoever; verily all the Devas perform the respective 
actions by the use of this Adya S’akti. That She alone is present in 
cause and effect and is doing every action, an be witnessed vividly. 
The intelligent ones call that S’akti twofold; one is Saguna and the 
other is Nirguna. The people, attached to the senses and the 
objects, worship the Saguna aspect, and those who are not so 
attached worship the Nirguna aspect. That conscious S’akti is the 
Lady of the fourfold aims of life, religion, wealth, desires, and 
liberation. When She is worshipped according to due rules. She 
awards all sorts of desires. The worldly persons, charmed by the 
Maya of this world, do not know Her at all; some persons know a 
little and charm others; whereas some stupid and dull-deaded 
Pundits, impelled by Kali, start sects of heretics, Pasandas for the 
sustenance of their own bellies. O highly fortunate Munis! In no other 
Yugas were found acts as prevalent in this Kali Yuga, based on 
various different opinions and altogether beyond the pale of the 
Vedic injunctions. Behold again, if Brahma, Visnu and Mahes’a be 
the supreme Deities, then why do these three Devas meditate on 
another One beyond speech, beyond mind and practise, for years, 
hard austerities; and why do they perform Yajhas (sacrifices) for their 
success in creation, preservation, and destruction? They know, 
verily, the Highest Supreme Being, Brahmani Devi S’akti eternal, 
constant and therefore they meditate Her always in their minds. 
Therefore the wise man, knowing this firmly, should serve in every 
way the Highest S’akti. O Munis! This is the settled conclusion of all 
the Sastras. I have heard of this great hidden secret from Bhagavan 
Krisna Dvaipayan. He heard it from Narada, and Narada heard it 
from his own father Brahma. Brahma heard this from Visnu. O Munis 
it is well that the wise even should not hear or think anything to the 
contrary from other sources; they should with their concentrated 
heart serve the Brahma Sanatani S’akti. It is clearly witnessed in this 



world that if there be any substance wherein this conscious S’akti 
does not exist, that becomes inert, quite useless for any purpose. So 
know this fully that it is the Highest Divine Mother of the Universe 
that is playing here, residing in every being. 


Thus ends the eighth chapter of the first Skandha on deciding who is 
to be worshipped in the Mahapurana Sri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Vedavyasa. 



Chapter 9. On The Killing Of Madhu Kaitabha 


1-49. Suta said:-0 Munis! When the excellent Tannasi S’akti, the 
Goddess presiding over sleep came out from the eyes, mouth, nose, 
heart, etc., of the body of the World-Guru Visnu and rested in the 
celestial space, then the powerful Lord Visnu began to yawn and got 
up. He saw the Prajapati Brahma, terrified and spoke to him in 
words, deep like rumbling in the clouds “O Bhagavan Padmayone! 
What makes you come here, and leave your tapasya? Why do you 
look so terrified and anxious?” Hearing this, Brahma said: “O Deva! 
The two very powerful and very terrible Daityas, Madhu Kaitabha 
sprung from the wax of Thy ears approached to kill me; terrified thus, 
I have come to Thee. So, O Lord of the Universe! O Vasudeva! now I 
am quite out of senses and terrified; save me.” Visnu, then, said 
“Now go and rest in peace, without any fear; let those two stupids, 
whose life has been well nigh exhausted, come to me for battle; I will 
certainly kill them.” 

Suta said While Bhagavan Visnu, the Lord of all the Devas, was 
thus saying, those two very powerful Danavas, elated with pride, 
came up there, in their search for Brahma. O Munis! The two proud 
Daityas stood there in the midst of the Pralaya water without 
anything to stand on and with calm attitude. They then spoke to 
Brahma as follows O You have fled and come here? You cannot 
escape. Go on and fight. I will kill You before this one. 

Then I will kill him also who sleeps on this bed of serpent. Either give 
us battle or acknowledge yourself as our servant. Hearing their 
words, Janardan Visnu addressed them as follows:- “O two 
Danavas, mad for war! Come and fight with me as you like; I will 
surely curb your pride. O two powerful ones! If you trust me, come 
and fight”. Hearing this, the two Danavas in the midst of that mass of 
water resting without any support, came up there to fight, with their 
eyes rolling with anger. The Daitya, named Madhu, became very 
angry, came up quickly to fight while Kaitabha remained where he 



stood. Then the hand-to-hand fight ensued between the two mad 
athletes; Bhagavan Hah and Madhu became tired; Kaitabha came 
up and began to fight. After that Madhu and Kaitabha joined and, 
blind with rage, began to fight again and again hand to hand with the 
very powerful Visnu. And Bhagavan Brahma and the Prime Force 
Adya S’akti witnessed this from the celestial Heavens. So the fight 
lasted for a long, long, time; yet the two Danavas did not feel a bit 
tired: rather Bhagavan Visnu became tired. Thus five thousand years 
passed away; Hari then began to ponder over their mode of death. 
He thought:-- “I fought for five thousands of years but the two 
formidable Danavas have not been tired anything, rather I am tired; it 
is a matter of great surprise. Where has gone my prowess? and 
what for the two Danavas were not tired; What is the cause? This is 
a matter, now, seriously to be thought over”. Seeing Bhagavan Hari 
thus sunk in cares, the two haughty Danavas spoke to him with great 
glee and with a voice like that of the rumbling of cloud “O Visnu ! If 
you feel tired, if you have no sufficient strength to fight with us, then 
raise your folded palms on your head and acknowledge that you are 
our servant; or if you can, go on fighting. O intelligent one! 

We will take away your life first; and then slay this four-faced 
Brahma”. Hearing the words of the two Danavas, resting there 
without any support in the vast ocean, the high-minded Visnu spoke 
to them in sweet consoling words “See, O heroes! no one ever 
fights with one who is tired, afraid, who is weaponless, who is fallen 
and who is a child; this is the Dharma of the heroes. Both of you 
fought with me for five thousands of years. But I am single handed; 
you are two, and both equally powerful and both of you took rest at 
intervals. I will therefore take rest for a while, and then fight with 
certainty. Both of you are very powerful and very much elated in 
vanity. Therefore rest a while. After taking rest for a while I will fight 
with you according to the just rules of warfare.” Hearing these words 
of Hari, the two chief Danavas trusted and remained far aloof, ready 
to fight again. 



Now the four-armed Vasudeva, seeing them at a sufficient distance, 
began to ponder in his mind thus “How their death can be 
effected? Thinking for a time, he came to know that they have been 
granted, by the Supreme S’akti Devi, death at their will 
(Ichchamrityu); and therefore they are not getting tired. I fought so 
long with them uselessly; my labour went in vain. How then can I 
now fight, with this certain knowledge. Again if I do not fight, how 
these two Danavas, elated with their boon and giving troubles to all, 
be destroyed? When the boon is granted by the Devi their death is 
also well nigh impracticable. Who wants his own death, even placed 
in very great distressed circumstances. Attacked by terrible 
diseases, reduced to indigent poverty no one wants to die; so how 
can it be expected that these two haughty Danavas would want their 
death themselves? Therefore it is advisable me to take refuge of that 
Adya S’akti, the giver of the fruits of all desires. No desires can ever 
be fructified unless She is thoroughly pleased. Thus thinking, 
Bhagavan Visnu saw the beautiful Devi Yoga Nidra S’iva, shining in 
the air. Then the supreme Yogi, Bhagavan Visnu, of immeasurable 
spirit began to praise with folded palms that great BhuvanesVari 
Maha Kali, the giver of boons for the destruction of the Danavas. “O 
Devi! I bow down to Thee O Mahamaya, the Creatrix and 
Destructrix! Thou beginningless and deathless! O auspicious 
Chandike! The Bestower of enjoyment and liberation I do not know 
Thy Saguna or Nirguna forms; how then can I know Thy glorious 
deeds, innumerable as they are. To-day Thy undescribable prowess 
has been experienced by me, I being made senseless and 
unconscious by Thy power of sleep. Being tried again and again by 
Brahma with great care to bring me back to my consciousness, I 
could not become conscious, so much my senses were contracted 
down. O Mother! By Thy power. Thou didst keep me unconscious 
and Thou again hast freed me from sleep, and I also fought so many 
times. O giver of one's honour! Now I am tired; but Thou hast 
granted boon to the two Danavas and therefore they are not getting 
tired. These two Danavas, puffed up with pride, were ready to kill 
Brahma; and therefore I challenged them to fight with me and they 
too are fighting fiercely with me in this vast ocean. But Thou hast 



granted them the wonderful boon that they will die whenever they 
will; and therefore I have now come to Thy refuge, as Thou 
protectest those that come under Thy shelter. Therefore, O Mother, 
the remover of the Devas' troubles! These two Danavas are become 
exceedingly elated by Thy boon and I, too, am tired. Therefore dost 
Thou help me now. Seel those two sinners are ready to kill me; 
without Thy grace, what can I do now? and where to go?” 


50-59. Thus praised by the eternal Vasudeva Jagannatha Hah, with 
humility and pranams, the Devi Maha Kali, resting in the air, said 
smiling “O Deva deva Hah! Fight again; O Visnu! These two 
heroes, when deluded by My Maya, would be slain by you; I will 
delude them certainly, by My side long glance; O Narayana! then 
slay quickly the two Danavas, when conjured by My maya”. 


Suta said Hearing these loving words of Bhagavati, Bhagavan 
Visnu went to the scene of battle in the middle of that ocean, when 
the two powerful Danavas of serene tempers and eager to light, 
became very glad on seeing Visnu in the battle and said “O four¬ 
armed one! we see your desire is very lofty indeed; well stand! 
Stand! now be ready for battle, knowing that victory or defeat is 
surely dependent on Destiny. You should think now thus Though it 
is generally true that the more powerful one wins victory; but it also 
happens sometimes that the weak gets the victory by queer turn of 
Fate; so the high souled persons should not be glad at their victories, 
nor should express their sorrows at their defeat; so don’t be glad, 
thinking, that you on many former occasions fought with many 
Danavas who were your enemies, and got the victory; nor be sorry 
that now you are defeated by the two Danavas”. Thus saying, the 
powerful Madhu Kaitabha came up to fight. Seeing this, Bhagavan 
Visnu struck them immediately by fist with great violence; the two 
Danavas, elated with their strength, struck Hah in return with their 
fists. Thus fighting went on vigorously. 



60-87. Now seeing the two Danavas of great powers, fighting on 
incessantly, Narayana Hari cast a glance expressive of great 
distress, towards the face of the Devi Mahakali. Seeing Visnu thus 
distressed, the Devi laughed loudly and began to look constantly 
with eyes somewhat reddish and shot towards the two Asuras side¬ 
long glances, of love and amorous feelings which were like arrows 
from the Cupid. The two vicious Daityas became fascinated by the 
side-long glances of the Devi and took great pleasures in them; 
being extremely agitated by these amorous darts, looked with one 
steady gaze towards the Devi, of spotless lustre. Bhagavan Hari, 
too, saw the wonderful enchanting pastime of the Devi. Then Hari, 
perfectly expert in adopting means to secure ends, began to speak 
smiling and in voice like that of the rambling cloud, knowing the two 
Danavas enchanted by Mahamaya, thus 

O two heroes! I am very glad at the mode of your fighting. So ask 
from me boons. I will grant that to you. I saw many Danavas before, 
fighting; but never I saw them expert like you, nor I heard like this. I 
am therefore, very much satisfied by your such unrivalled powers. 
Therefore, O greatly powerful pair of Danavas! I wish to grant both of 
you any boon that you want. Seeing the Devi Mahamaya, the 
gladdener, of the Universe, the two Danavas felt themselves 
amorous; and therefore they became proud on hearing Visnu's those 
words and told Visnu, with their lotus-like eyes wide open, thus :-- 

O Hari! what do you like to give us? We are not beggars; we do not 
want anything from you. O Lord of the Devas! Rather we will give 
you whatever you desire; we are donors; not receivers. So O 
Vasudeva! Hrisi Kesa! We are glad to see your- wonderful fight; so 
ask from us any boon that you desire. Hearing their words, 

Bhagavan Janardan said “ If you both are so much pleased with 
me, then I want this that both of you be killed by me.” Hearing these 
words of Visnu, Madhu Kaitabha became very much wondered and 
thinking “we are now cheated” remained for some time merged in 



sorrow. Then reflecting that there is water everywhere and solid 
earth nowhere, they said 

“O Janardana Hari! We know that you are truthful; therefore now we 
want this desired boon from you that you wanted to grant us before 
now grant us this desired boon of ours. O Madhusudana! We will be 
slain by you; but kill us, O Madhava! on a solid earth, free from any 
water; and thus keep your word. 

S’ri Bhagavan Hari laughed and remembering His Sudarsan disc 
said “O two highly fortunate ones! Verily, I will kill both of you on 
the vast solid spot without any trace of water. Thus saying, the 
Devadeva Hari expanded His own thighs and showed to those 
Danavas the vast solid earth on the surface of water and said 

“O two Danavas! See, here is no water. Place your two heads here; 
thus I will keep my word and you would keep your word.” Hearing 
this, Madhu Kaitabha thought over in their minds and expanded their 
bodies to ten thousand Yojanas. Bhagavan Visnu Hari also extended 
his thighs to twice that amount. Seeing this, they were greatly, 
suprised and laid their heads on the thighs of Visnu. Visnu of 
wonderful prowess, then cut off quickly with His Sudarsan disc the 
two very big heads over His thighs. Thus the two Danavas Madhu 
Kaitabha passed away; and the marrow (meda) of them filled the 
ocean. O Munis! For this reason, this earth is named Medini and the 
earth is unfit for eatable purpose. 


Thus I have described to you all that you asked. The sum and 
substance is this that the wise persons should serve Mahamaya with 
all thei hearts. The Supreme S’akti is worshipped by all the Devas. 
Verily verily, I say unto you that this is decided, in all the Vedas and 
other S’astras that there is nothing higher than this Adya S’akti. 
Therefore this Supreme S’akti should be worshipped anyhow; either 
in Her Saguna form or in Her Nirguna state. 



Thus ends the ninth Chapter of the first Skandha on the killing of 
Madhu Kaitabha in the Mahapurana S’rimad Devi Bhagavatann of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyas. 



Chapter 10. On S’iva’s Granting Boons 


1-37. The Risis said “O Suta! You told before, that Vyasa Deva, 
unrivalled spirit, composed all the Puranas and taught them to his 
own S’uka Deva; but how did Vyasadeva, who was incessantly 
engaged in tapasya, procreate S’uka? Describe to us in detail what 
you heard direct from Krisna Dvaipayana Vyasa”. Suta said “O 
Risis! Hear how S’uka Deva, the best of the Munis and the foremost 
of the Yogis, was born of Vyasa Deva, the Satyavati's son. 

On the very beautiful summit of Mount Meru, Vyasa, the son of 
Satyavati, firmly determined, practised very severe austerities for the 
attainment of a son. Having heard from Narada, he, the great 
ascetic, repeated the one syllabled mantra of Vak and worshipped 
the Highest Mahamaya with the object of getting a son. He asked. 
Let a son be born to me as pure and as spirited and powerful as fire, 
air, earth, and Akas’a. He thought over in his mind that the man 
possessed of S’akti is worshipped in this world and the man devoid 
of S’akti is censured here, and thus came to the conclusion that 
S’akti is therefore worshipped every where; and, 
therefore,worshipped Bhagavan MahesVara coupled with the 
auspicious Adya S’akti and spent away one hundred years without 
any food. He began his tapasya on that mountain summit which was 
ornamented with the garden of Karnikar, where all the Devas play, 
and where live the Munis highly ascetic, the Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, 
Marut, the two As'vins, and the other mindful Risis, the knowers of 
Brahma and where the Kinnaras always resound the air with their 
songs of music, etc.; such a place Vyasa Deva preferred for his 
tapasya.” 

The whole universe was pervaded with the spirit of asceticism of the 
intelligent Parasara's son Vyasa Deva; and the hairs of his head 
were clotted and looked tawny, of the colour of flames. Seeing the 
fire of his asceticism, Indra, the lord of S’achi became exceedingly 
terrified. Bhagavan Rudra, seeing Indra thus afraid, fatigued and 



morose, asked him “O Indra, why do you look so fear-stricken to¬ 
day? O Lord of the Devas! What is the cause of your grief? Never 
show your jealousy and anger to the ascetics; for the mindful 
ascetics always practise severe asceticism with a noble object and 
worship Me, knowing Me to be possessed of the all powerful S’akti; 
they never want ill of any body”. When Bhagavan Rudra said this, 
Indra asked him “What is his object?” At this S’ankara said For 
the attainment of a son, Prasara's son is practising so severe 
austerities; now one-hundred years is being completed; I will go to 
him, and give him to-day the auspicious boon of a son. Thus 
speaking to Indra, Bhagavan Rudra, the Guru of the world, went to 
Vyasa Deva and, with merciful eyes, said “O sinless Vasavi's son! 
Get up; I grant to you the boon, that you will get a son very fiery, 
luminous and spirited like the five elements fire, air, earth, water and 
Akas'a, the supreme Jhani, the store of all auspicious qualities, of 
great renown, beloved to all, ornamented with all Sattvik qualities, 
truthful and valorous. 

Hearing these sweet words of Bhagavan S’ulapani Maharsi Krisna 
Dvaipayana bowed down to Him and went back to his own 
hermitage. Tired with the labour of penance for many years, he 
wanted to kindle fire by rubbing two fuels (Arani) with each other. 
While doing this the high souled man suddenly began to think 
strongly in his mind about procreating a son. He thought“Will it be 
that my son will be born as this fire is produced by the friction of the 
two churning sticks? I have not got the wife, which the Pundits 
designate a “Putrarani”, the youthful wife endowed with beauty, born 
of a noble family, the chaste one I have not got with me. But the wife, 
though chaste and fit to beget a son, is undoubtedly a chain to both 
the legs so how can I get such a one for my wife? This is known to 
all that a chaste wife, though clever in doing all household duties, 
beautiful and giving happiness to one's desires, is yet always a sort 
of bondage. What more than this, that the ever Bhagavan 
Mahes'vara is always under the bondage of woman. How, then, 
knowing and hearing all these I can accept this difficult 
householder's life? While he was thinking thus, the extraordinarily 



beautiful Apsara Ghritachi fell to his sight close to him in the celestial 
air. 

Though Vyasa Deva was a Brahmachari (holding in control the 
secret power of generation) of a very high order, yet seeing suddenly 
the agile Apsara (a celestial nymph) coming close to him and looking 
askance at him, he became soon smitten with the arrows of cupid 
and feeling himself distressed, began to think what shall I do in this 
critical moment. 


Unbearable amorous feelings now have come over me; now if I take 
this celestial nymph, knowing that Dharma is everywhere looking, 
and woman has come to take away my precious fire of spirit 
acquired by my tapasya, then I will be laughed at by the high souled 
ascetic Munis who will think that I have lost my senses altogether. 
Alas! Why I who have practised for one hundred years the most 
terrible ascetism, have become so powerless by the mere sight of 
this Apsara! The Pundits declare the household life as the source of 
getting son, one's heart’s desire and the source of all happiness; so 
much so that it leads all the virtuous souls to the pleasures of 
Heaven, and ordains Moksa (liberation) to those who are Jhanins; 
and if I get such unrivalled happiness from this householder's life, I 
can have this Deva Kanya (the celestial nymph) though blameable. 
But again that happiness will not occur to me through her; there is no 
doubt in this. So how can I take her. I heard from Narada how, in 
ancient days, a king name Pururava fell under the clutches of Urvas'i 
and ultimately felt great pain, being defeated by her. 


Thus ends the tenth chapter on S’iva's granting boon in the 
Mahapurana S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi 
Veda Vyas. 



Chapter 11. On The Birth Of Budha 


1-86. The Risis said “O Suta! Who is that King Pururava? and 
who is the Deva girl Urvas'i? And how did that high-souled King 
Pururava conne into trouble? O son of Lomaharsana! Kindly describe 
now all these to me. We are now desirous to hear sweet words from 
the lotus of your mouth. O Suta! Your words are sweeter and more 
full of juice than nectar even; so we are not satiated by hearing them 
as gods are not satiated with the drink of nectar.” 

Hearing this Suta said O Munis! I am now telling you, as far as my 
intelligence goes, what I heard from the mouth of S'ri Vyasa. Now 
hear that beautiful divine incident. 

Once on a time the exceedingly beautiful dear wife of Brihaspati, 
named Tara, full of youth and beauty, of the most beautiful limbs and 
intoxicated with pride went to the house of Chandra Deva (the 
Moon), the yajaman (Employer of priest Brihaspati at any sacrifice) 
of Brihaspati. Seeing Tara of beautiful face like Moon, the Moon 
became very passionate; Tara also fell amorous at the sight of 
Moon. Thus both of them became very much passionately attached 
to each other. Then they, the Moon and Tara, being smitten by the 
arrows of Cupid and intoxicated with amorous passions began their 
sexual intercourse with reciprocal feelings of passionate love. Some 
days passed in this state. Brihaspati, then, being distressed with the 
pang of separation from his wife, sent his pupil to bring back Tara; 
but Tara was then submissive of Chandra and therefore refused to 
come. Brihaspati sent over and over again his pupil and when 
Chandra Deva returned the messenger, Brihaspati became very 
angry and went personally to Chandra's house and spoke angrily to 
the Moon who was puffed up with arrogance and somewhat smiling 
“O Moon! Why are you committing this vicious act, contrary to 
Dharma? Why are you keeping my beautiful wife in your house? I 
am your Guru; you are my client; O stupid! why are you enjoying 
your Guru's wife and keeping her in custody in your house? Do you 



not know that he who kills a Brahman, who steals gold, who drinks, 
who goes to wife of one's Guru are Mahapatakis (great sinners) and 
those who keep company of these are the fifth Mahapatakis? 
Therefore if you had enjoyed my wife, you are exceedingly vicious, 
blameable and a Mahapataki (great sinner); you are not fit to live 
amongst the Devas. O wicked one! Now I say that even now you 
better forsake Tara, who is of a blue colour and whose look is 
askance; I won't go from here without having Tara. And if you do not 
give back Tara, then you are certainly with her and undoubtedly I will 
curse you. When Brihaspati said so, Chandra, the husband of 
Rohini, spoke to his Guru Deva, who was very angry, sorry and 
afflicted at the separation from his beloved wife, thus In this world, 
the Brahmins that know the Dharma S'astras, that are devoid of 
anger, are fit to be worshipped; and those that are not so, they are 
objects of disrespect and not to be worshipped by all for their anger. 
O sinless one! The beautiful one will surely go to your house; what 
harm is there to you, if she waits here for a few days? 

She is staying here of her own accord to enjoy pleasures and will go 
back of her own will. One word more You gave out before this 
opinion of the Dharma S'astras that as a Brahman though guilty of 
committing vicious deeds, becomes pure again by the practice of 
Karmas as enjoined in the Vedas, so a woman, too, though guilty of 
adultery, becomes pure again when she is again in the period of her 
menstruation. At these words of Chandra Deva, Brihaspati, the Guru 
of the Devas, became exceedingly sorry and anxious and went back 
immediately to his own house, with a grievous heart, full of amorous 
feelings. After staying in his own house for some days Brihaspati, 
worn out with anxiety, came again quickly to the house of Chandra; 
but, no sooner he was to enter the gate, he was stopped by the 
door-keepers; he became very angry and stopped at the gate way. 
And when he saw that Chandra did not make his appearance, he 
became exceedingly angry and thought“Oh! What a wonder is 
this? this irreligious Chandra, being my disciple, has done this 
vicious act and took by violence the wife of his Guru, who is 
reckoned as the mother; and I will now teach him a good lesson.” 



standing on the entrance gate way Brihaspati began to speak aloud 
“O stupid, vicious, vilest of the Devas! Why do you now sleep in 
your inner room? Do return quickly my wife; else I will curse you at 
once. In case you do not bring me back my wife at once, I will now 
reduce you to ashes.” Hearing these foul words of Brihaspati, 
Chandra Deva the king of the Dvijas, quickly came out of the house 
and said smiling “O Brahmin! Why are you spending your stock of 
words for nothing? That all-auspicious lady, of a blue colour and 
looking askance, is not fit for you; therefore take another 
comparatively uglier woman for your use. Exceedingly youthful and 
lovely woman like her is not fit for a beggar's house. O stupid one! I 
see, you don't know anything about the Kama S'astra (the book that 
dwells on amorous passion); those wise men who are skilled in this 
S'astra assign for the women, their lovers equivalent to their beauty 
in matters of amorous dealings. So, O stupid man! go away 
wherever you like. I won't give you back your wife. Do whatever lies 
in your power. I won't return your wife. When you have become 
passionate, your curse won't affect me in any way. This I say finally 
unto you “O Guru! I will not give you back your wife; do what you 
wish.” Thus spoken by Chandra, Brihaspati became vary anxious 
and angry; he then went away quickly to the Indra's house. 

Seeing Guru Deva morose and sorry, the very liberal minded Indra 
Deva worshipped him duly with padya, arghya, and Achamaniya and 
asked “O highly fortunate one! Why do you look so anxious? O 
great Muni! Why are you grievous and sorry? You are my Guru; is it 
that you are insulted by any one in my kingdom; say freely. All the 
Regents of the several quarters (the Lokapalas) and all the Deva 
armies are under your command. Brahma, Visnu, and Mahes'var 
and other Devas are ready to lend you every assistance, no doubt. 
So say what is the cause of your anxiety?” Hearing these words of 
Indra, Brihaspati said “Chandra has stolen my beautiful-eyed wife. 
I asked for her, again and again, but that wicked soul is not returning 
me my wife at all. O Lord of the Devas! What am I to do now? You 
are my help and guide. O S'atakratu! You are the lord of the Devas; 
therefore I pray to you with a very grievous heart, help me in this 



matter.” Hearing this, Indra said “O knower of Dharma! Do not be 
sorry. O Suvrata! I am your servant. O highly intelligent one! Surely I 
will bring you back your wife. I will send a messenger and even then 
if Chandra, mad with pride, do not return your wife, I will wage war 
with him and fight against him, with all our Deva armies.” Thus 
consoling Brihaspati, Indra sent a very clever man, who was a good 
speaker and wonderful in his capabilities, to Chandra. The clever 
and wise messenger went to the Chandra Loka (the region of the 
Moon) and spoke to Chandra, the husband of Rohini, thus “O 
Mahabhaga! Indra has sent me to you to communicate his message 
to you. So O intelligent one! I will tell you what he has ordered me; 
hear.” He said “O highly fortunate one! You know well Dharma and 
Niti S'astra (the science of morals); the more so, because the 
virtuous Maharsi Atri is your father. Therefore, O Suvrata! You ought 
not to commit such blameable act. See, all beings should protect 
their own wives always without remaining idle to the best of their 
powers; therefore, no doubt, quarrels would ensue necessarily on 
that point. O Sudhanidhi! as far as this point of protecting one's wife 
is concerned, your Guru Deva ought also to do his best. You ought 
to consider all persons like your own self. 

O Sudhakara! You have got twenty-eight exceedingly beautiful 
wives, who are the daughters of Daksa; why then do you desire to 
enjoy the wife of your Guru? The beautiful Apsaras (celestial 
nymphs) Menaka and others are always residing in the Heavens; 
you can enjoy them to your heart's content; leave off the wife of your 
Guru. In case any powerful man commits an unworthy act out of 
egoism, the illiterate ones would follow them; so the Dharma will 
decline. Therefore, O highly lucky one! Do such as does not lead, for 
nothing, quarrels amongst the gods and leave your Guru's wife, even 
beautiful.” Hearing these words from the messenger, the Moon 
(Chandra Deva) became somewhat angry and, making gestures, 
replied to the messenger, as if to Indra, thus 

O mighty armed one! As you yourself are the lord of the Devas and 
the knower of Dharma, so your priest, too, has become like you; the 



head of both of you are the same. You will find many that can show 
their learning and give advice to others, but you will find always very 
rare such persons as will act themselves to their own advices when 
occasion arises and wants them to fulfil their own words. O Lord of 
the Devas! All the persons take the opinion of the S'astras framed by 
Brihaspati then why the quarrel would ensue with me and the Devas 
when I an enjoying, according to his dictates, a woman who is 
herself willing? See also, that the rule in this world is might is right; 
all things go to the powerful man who can take by force; nothing falls 
to the lot of the weak; moreover this woman is mine and that woman 
is of another, this false notion comes to those whose brains are 
weak. When Tara, is so much attached to me and is not at all 
attached to Brihaspati, the above rule applicable to me all the more; 
how then can I quit the lady so much attached to me, according to 
the laws of Dharma and the morals? You can see also, that 
happiness reigns in that family where the wife is according to the will 
of the husband; how, then, can the household happiness exist when 
the lady of the house is always dissatisfied? Therefore the 
household happiness of the Guru is impossible as Tara is dissatified 
with Brihaspati since he enjoyed the wife of his younger brother 
Samvarta. Then the result comes to this, O thousand eyed one! How 
have you come to be thousand eyed! However that may be, you are 
the lord of the Devas; you can do whatever you like. O messenger! 
go and tell your lord of the Devas all that I have spoken; I will not 
return by any means that beautiful Tara. 

When Chandra spoke thus, the messenger went back to Indra and 
communicated to him all that Chandra Deva had spoken. Hearing 
this, Indra became angry and ordered all the Deva forces to be ready 
at once. Hearing this news of war, S'ukracharya, out of enmity to 
Brihaspati, went to Chandra and spoke thus “O highly intelligent 
one! never return Tara; in case if war ensues between you and 
Indra, I will help you by my Mantra-S'akti.” On the other hand, 
Bhagavan S'ankara, hearing of the vicious act of Chandra's, taking 
his Guru's wife, and knowing that S'ukracharya was the enemy of 
Brihaspati, came to the assistance of the Devas. The great war. 



then, ensued between the Devas like the terrific war of Tarakasura; it 
continued for many years. Then the grandfather Brahma, seeing the 
great havoc in the lives of the Devas and Asuras, came there on his 
vahan Hamsa, to secure peace and talked to Chandra “Quit the 
Guru's wife; if not, I will call Visnu and destroy all of you party.” He 
also desisted the son of Bhrigu, S'ukracharya, saying “O highly 
intelligent one! why has this wicked idea possessed your mind? Is it 
due to the bad association?” Then S'ukracharya also told Chandra, 
the lord of the medicinal plants, not to wage war and said “Better 
quit you now the Guru's wife. Your father Maharsi Atri has sent me to 
you for this purpose.” Chandra, then, hearing the strange words of 
S'ukracharya, returned to Brihaspati his wife Tara, though she was 
not satisfied with him and became herself pregnant. 

Brihaspati returned with joy to his house, accompanied by his wife; 
the Devas and Danavas went away to their respective places. 
Brahma went to Brahmaloka and S'ankara went to Kailas'a. 

Brihaspati began to pass his time happily with his beautiful wife; 
Some days went away when the wife of Brihaspati, Tara, gave birth 
to an all-auspicious son, having all the qualities of Chandra, on an 
auspicious day and under the influence of an auspicious star; seeing 
this new-born child, Brihaspati gladly performed the natal 
ceremonies of the child. Hearing that a son is born to him, Chandra 
sent a messenger to Brihaspati saying that “That the child is not his; 
but it is born out of the semen of mine; why, then, have you 
performed the natal ceremonies out of your own will?” Hearing these 
words of Chandra's messenger, Brihaspati said “No, this child is 
mine, no doubt, as he resembles quite like me.” When Brihaspati 
said this, war again ensued. The Devas and Danavas met each 
other again in battle field; and councils of war were held. Then, for 
the preservation of peace, Prajapati Brahma went there; and before 
all desisted the Devas; and Danavas, mad for war, and ready to fight 
against each other. Brahma, then, asked Tara “O auspicious one! 
say truly whose child is this? O beautiful one! if you say truly, then 
this war resulting in the loss of so many lives, will cease.” The 



handsome Tara, looking askance, lowered her head with shame and 
gently spoke to Brahma “This is the Chandra's child” and went 
inside. Chandra Deva, then, became very glad and took the child, 
put down its name as Budha and carried it, to his own house. 
Bhagavan Brahma, Indra and the other Devas went back to their 
respective places. All the spectators went also to their own places 
whence they came. O Munis! I have now described the birth of 
Budha, as the son of Chandra and in the womb of Brihaspati's wife, 
as I heard it from the mouth of Vyasa Deva, the son of Satyavati. 


Thus ends the eleventh chapter of the 1st Skandha on the birth of 
Budha in the Mahapurana S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyas. 



Chapter 12. On The Birth Of Pururava 


1-53. Suta said O Maharsis! The son of the above mentioned 
Budha is the greatly religious Pururava, of a very charitable 
disposition, and always ready to perform sacrificial acts; he was born 
of a kshattriya woman named lla; and I will now describe how this 
Pururava was born of lla and Budha, kindly listen. 

In days of yore there was a king named Sudyumna, very truthful and 
highly capable in keeping his senses under control. Once on a time, 
wearing beautiful ear-rings, with extraordinary bow named Ajagab 
and holding the arrow-case full of arrows on his back, he went out on 
hunt to a forest, riding on a horse, born of the country Sindhu, 
surrounded by a few of his ministers. Going about in the regions of 
forest, the king got for his shikar, buck, hare, boar, rhinoceros, bison, 
buffalo, young elephant, Srimar deer, wild fowl and various other 
animals fit for sacrificial purposes; thus he went on deep into the 
interior of the forest. This divine forest was adorned with rows of 
Mandara trees and situated at the bottom of the mount Sumeru. 
Various trees and flowers were spreading the beauty of the forest all 
around; at places were Asoka creepers, Vakula, Sal, Tal, Tamal, 
Champak, Panasa, mangoe, Nip, Madhuka, pomegranate, cocoanut, 
Yuthika, plantain, kunda creeper, and various other trees and 
flowers; at some other places the bowers formed of Madhavi 
creepers enhanced the beauty and shed the lustre all around. There 
were tanks and reservoirs of water in the forest filled with swans, 
karandavas, and other aquatic birds. The bamboo trees on their 
banks becoming filled with air were emitting sweet musical sounds; 
and at many places of that all blissgiving forest, there were bees 
humming sweetly and delighting the minds of people there. Now the 
Rajarsi Pradyumna became highly gladdened in his heart to see this 
interior of the forest, resonated with the cooing of the cuckoos and 
beautified by various lovely flowers; and no sooner he entered there 
than he was turned into a female and his horse, also, turned into a 



mare; the king, then, became seriously anxious. He began to think 
over and over again “What is this? How has this come to pass?” and 
became very ashamed and sorry and pondered over thus :--“What 
am I to do now? How can I in this woman condition go back to my 
house and how shall I govern my kingdom? Alas! Who has deceived 
me thus!” Hearing these astounding words of Suta, the Risis said 
“O Suta! You have mentioned that the king Sudyumna equal to god 
has been turned into a woman; this is very strange indeed! 

Therefore, O Suvrata! What is the reason of his being turned into a 
mare? Kindly describe fully what that beautiful king did in the forest?” 

Suta, said Once on a time, Sanaka and other Risis went to this 
forest to pay a visit to S'ankara, illuminating the ten quarters by their 
holy aura. But then Bhagavan S'ankara was in amorous dealings 
with S'ankari. The beautiful Devi Ambika was then naked and sitting 
on the lap of S'ankara and therefore became very much ashamed at 
their sight; She got up hurriedly, and putting on her cloth, remained 
there shuddering, with great shame and sensitiveness. The Risis, 
also, seeing them engaged in amorous dealings, went away quickly 
to the hermitage of Nara Narayana. 

Then Bhagavan S'ankara, seeing S'ankari too much sensitive, said 
- “Why are you so much bashful and shy? I am doing just now what 
will give you pleasure. O Beautiful one! Whoever male will enter from 
to-day and hereafter, within the precincts of this forest, will be 
instantly converted into a woman.” O Munis! Though the forest gave 
all delights to all, yet, having this defect, all the persons that know of 
this curse, carefully avoid the forest. No sooner did the King 
Sudyumna enter into the forest, out of ignorance, than he, as well as 
his attendants, were instantly turned into women; there could be no 
doubt in this. The king became overpowered with great care and 
anxiety and did not go back, out of shame, to his palace; but he 
began to wander to and fro on the outer skirts of that forest. He 
became known afterwards as the woman lla. Now, once on an 
occasion, Budh, while he was wandering at his will, came up there 
and seeing the beautiful lla with gestures and pastures and 



surrounded by women, became passionately attached towards her; 
and lla, too, seeing the beautiful Budh, the son of Chandra deva, 
became desirous to have him as her husband. They became so very 
much tied in love towards each other, that intercourse took place 
there. Thus Bhagavan Budh generated, in the womb of lla, Pururava; 
and lla gave birth, in due time, the son Pururava in that forest. She 
then, with an anxious heart, recollected, while in the forest, her 
(rather his), family priest Vasistha Deva. Now then Vasistha Deva, 
seeing the distressed condition of the king Sudyumna became 
affected with pity and pleased Mahadeva, S’ankara, the most 
auspicious Deva of all, by hymns and praises. When Bhagavan 
S’ankara wanted to grant him the boon that he desired, Vasistha 
Deva wanted that the king would be turned again into man as before. 
At this Bhagavan S’ankara said, in recognition of His promise, that 
the king Sudyumna would be alternately one month a man and the 
second month a woman and so on. Thus, by the favour of Vasistha 
Deva, the king Sudyumna got this boon and returned to his kingdom 
and began to govern it. When he used to be turned into a woman, he 
used to remain in the interior, and when he used to become a man, 
he governed his kingdom. At this the subjects became very anxious 
and did not welcome the king as they used to do before. Some days 
passed away in this way when the prince Pururava grew up into 
manhood. Then the king Sudyumna gave over to him the kingdom 
and made him the king of the new capital named Pratisthan; and 
started out to an hermitage to perform tapasya. He went to a 
beautiful forest, variegated with all sorts of trees, and got from the 
Devarsi Narada the excellent mantra of the Bhagavati Devi, 
consisting of nine letters. He began to repeat it incessantly, with an 
heart filled with love. Thus some days passed away when the all- 
auspicious Devi Bhagavati, the Saviour of the whole Universe, 
became pleased with the king and appeared before the king, 
assuming the divine beautiful form, composed of attributes, 
intoxicated with the drink, and with eyes rolling with pride, and riding 
on vahana, the lion. Seeing this divine form of the Mother of the 
Universe, the king lla (in this form) bowed down before Her with eyes 
filled with love and gladly praised Her with hymns thus “O 



Bhagavati! What a fortunate being I am! That I have seen today the 
extraordinary world renowned benignant form of Thine granting 
grace and benefit to all the Lokas, I, therefore, bow down to Thy 
lotus-feet, granting desires and liberation, and served by the whole 
host of the Devas. O Mother! What mortal is there on this earth, who 
can fully comprehend Thy glories when all the Devas and Munis get 
bewildered in trying to know of them. 

O Devi! I am thoroughly astonished to see Thy glories and Thy 
compassion towards the distressed and poor and helpless people. 
How can a human being, who is devoid of attributes comprehend 
Thy attributes when Brahma, Visnu, MahesVara, Indra, Chandra 
(moon), Havana (wind), Surya, Kuvera, and the eight Vasus know 
not Thy powers. O Mother! Bhagavan Visnu, of unrivalled brilliancy, 
knows Thee as a part of Thine only, as Kamala of Sattva Gunas and 
giving one all one's desires; Bhagavan Brahma knows Thy part only 
as the form made of Rajo guna and Bhagavan S’ankara knows Thee 
as Lima only made of Tamo Guna; but, O Mother! none of them 
knows Thy turiya form, transcending all the Gunas. 

O Mother! where is my humble self, that is of very dull intellect and 
powerless, and where is Thy extremely propitious serenity and 
graciousness! Indeed such a gracious favour on me is certainly 
beyond expectation. Therefore, O Bhavani! I have come to realise, in 
particular, that Thy heart is full of unbounded mercy; for Thou dost 
certainly feel compassion for these Bhaktas that are full of Bhakti 
towards Thee. O Mother! what more shall I say than this, that 
Bhagavan Madhusudan Visnu, though married to Kamala, born from 
only a part of Thine, considers Himself unfit of Her and is therefore 
not happy; then the fact that He, the Adi Purusa gets his feet 
shampooed by Kamala merely corroborates the fact that He wants 
His feet to become pure and all auspicious to the world by the holy 
touch of Kamala's hands. O Mother! It seems to me that the ancient 
Purusa Bhagavan Visnu wants gladly to be kicked by Thee like 
As'oka tree, for his own improvement and pleasure; and therefore it 
is that Thou dost want, as if Thou hast become angry to kick (beat 



with one's legs) Thy husband, stricken by Smara (cupid, love) and 
worshipped by all the Devas, who lies prostrate below Thy feet. 

O Devi; when Thou always residest on the calm broad chest, as if on 
a great cot, adorned beautifully of Bhagavan Visnu, as lightning in 
deep dense blue clouds, then it is without doubt that He, becoming 
the Lord of the Universe, has surely become Thy vahan (vehicle) (on 
account of carrying Thee on His breast), O Mother! If Thou forsakest 
Madhusudana, out of wrath. He becomes at once powerless and is 
not worshipped by any body; for it is seen everywhere that persons, 
though calm and serene, if devoid of S’ri (wealth and power) are 
forsaken by their relatives as reduced to a state having no qualities. 
O Mother! I am not to be ignored by Thee, on account of my being a 
woman, for was it not the fact, that Brahma and the other Devas who 
always take shelter of Thy lotus feet, had not all to assume once 
youthful feminine forms, while in Manidvipa, and I know this surely 
that Thou again didst make them of male forms. Therefore, O Thou 
of unbounded power! What shall I describe about Thy power? 

Indeed, there is great doubt in my mind whether Thou art masculine 
or feminine? O Devi! Whoever Thou mayst be, whether with 
attributes on transcending the attributes, whether male or female, I 
always bow down to Thee, with heart full of devotion towards Thee. 

O Mother! I want that I may have one unflinching devotion, towards 
Thee in my final state.” 

Suta said Thus praising the Devi, the king Sudyumna, in the form 
of the feminine lla, took refuge of the World Mother; and the Devi, 
becoming greatly pleased, gave to the king, then and there, union 
with Her own Self. Thus the king got the highest steady place, so 
very rare even to the Munis, by the grace of the Prime Force, the 
Devi Brahmamayi. 


Thus ends the Twelfth Chapter of the first Skandha on the birth of 
Pururava, in the Mahapuranam S'rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyas. 




Chapter 13. On Urvas’I And Pururava 


1-34. Suta said O Maharsis! When the king Sudyumna had gone 
up to heavens, the religious king Pururava, endowed with great 
beauty and many qualities, and able to please the minds of his 
subjects began to govern his kingdom well, according to Dharma, 
with his heart intent on governing his people. No body knew what his 
counsel was, but he was very clever in knowing others' counsels. He 
was always highly energetic and his lordly power was great. The four 
methods of warfare, (1) con-ciliation, (2) giving gifts, (3) sowing 
dissensions and (4) war, were fully under his control. He saw that his 
subjects practised religion according to Varnas'ram (Colours and 
stages of life), and thus he began to govern his kingdom. Pururava, 
the lord of men, performed various sacrifices with abundance of 
Daksinas (sacrificial fees) and also gave away much in various 
charities, causing great wonder and astonishment. His extra-ordinary 
beauty and qualities, liberality and good nature, his unbounded 
wealth and prowess made the Apsara Urvas’i (celestial nymph) think 
of him often and she wanted him to satisfy her. Some time passed 
when that procud Urvas'T had to descend on this earth, due to a 
curse pronounced on her by a Brahmin; and she chose the king 
Pururava as her husband, thinking him to be endowed with all the 
qualities. She then addressed the king and made the following 
contract“O king, giving honour due to every body! I keep these 
two young sheep in trust and deposit with you; kindly look after these 
and, then, my honour will be preserved by you. O king! I will take 
ghee daily and nothing else for my food; and there is one word more; 
O king! Let me not see you naked, except when you hold sexual 
intercourse. O king I say this truly, that, in case there be any breach 
in this contract I will instantly leave you and go away.” The king 
accepted this contract of Urvas’T. Urvas’T, too, remained there 
according to the above contract and also with a view to pass away 
the period of her curse. During this time the king was fascinated with 
the love of Urvas’T and became so very much attached to her, that he 



left all his duties and dharma and remained long for many, many 
years in enjoying Urvas’T. The king's mind was so deeply absorbed 
in her, that he could not remain alone without her, even for a 
moment. Thus many years passed away, when, once on a time, 
Indra, the lord of the Devas, not seeing Urvas'i, asked the 
Gandarbhas and said “O Gandarbhas! Better go and steal away 
the two young sheep in a proper time from the palace of Pururava, 
and then bring Urvas'i here. My Nandana garden is now void of all 
beauty without Urvas’T; so bring the lady here any how or other.” 
Thus spoken by Indra, Vis'vavasu and other Devas went to 
Pururava's palace; and when it was dark in the night, and when 
Pururava was holding sexual intercourse with Urvas’T, stole away the 
two young sheep. They, when being carried away in the sky, cried 
out so piteously that Urvas’T came to hear that as if of her two sons, 
and angrily spoke to the king “O king! Now the contract that I 
made with you is verily fulfilled! It is that I placed my implicit 
confidence on you that this my misfortune has befallen on me; See! 
the thieves are stealing away the two sheep, my sons as they were! 
How then are you sleeping here like a woman? Alas! I am ruined in 
having an impotent husband who vainly boasts of his prowess! 

Where are my two young sheep to-day that are dearer to me than 
my life?” Thus seeing Urvas’T wailing, the king Pururava, the lord of 
the Universe, ran after the Gandharvas instantly without any sense 
as it were, left in him, naked. The Gandharvas, then, cast rays of 
lightning in that room, and Urvas’T, willing to leave, saw the king 
naked when the Gandharvas left the two young sheep there and 
went away. The tired king brought the two sheep back to his house 
in that naked state. Then Urvas’T, too, seeing the husband naked, 
went away immediately to the DevT loka. Seeing Urvas’T going away, 
the king wailed very much with a very grievous heart. Then, being 
very much bewildered by the bereavement of Urvas’T, with his 
senses beyond control, and deluded by passion, wandered about in 
various countries, crying and giving vent to sorrow. Thus, wandering 
all over the globe, he came once to Kuruksettra and saw Urvas’T; 
then with a gladdened face said “O beloved! Wait, wait for a 



moment; my mind is all absorbed in you; it is quite innocent and 
submissive to you. So you ought not to forsake me in such a dire 
difficult time. O Devi! For the sake of you, I have travelled very far. O 
Beautiful one! The body that you embraced before, will now, 
forsaken by you, fall here and will be devoured by crows and wolves, 
and other carnivorous animals.” Seeing the king, tired and passion 
stricken, greatly distressed and with a very sorrowful heart and 
wailing, Urvas’i spoke out“O king! You are certainly a quite 
senseless man; whither has gone your extraordinary knowledge 
now? O king! Do you not know that the pure unalloyed love of 
women cannot take place with any other as the love of a wolf cannot 
fall on any man. Therefore the earthly men ought never to trust a bit 
to women and thieves. So go back to your palace and enjoy the 
pleasures of the kingdom; do not drown your mind further in 
sorrows.” The king Pururava, though thus brought to senses by 
Urvas’i, was so much fascinated by her love that his heart did not 
feel any consolation; rather he felt indescribable pain, being held up 
in bondage by the love of Urvas’i. O Munis! Thus I have described to 
you the character of Urvas’i; it is described, in detail, in the Vedas; I 
have stated this in brief. 


Thus ends the thirteenth chapter of the 1st Skandha of the 
characters Urvas’i and Pururava; in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 14. On The Birth Of S’uka Deva And On 
The Duties Of Householders 


1-70. Suta said O Maharsis! (Now hear the main topic). Seeing 
the dark-blue lady looking askance at him, Vyasa Deva thought 
“Indeed! What is to be done now? This Devakanya Apsara Ghritachi 
is not fit for my household.” Then, seeing Vyasa Deva thus 
thoughtful, the Apsara thought that the Muni might curse her and got 
terrified. Confounded by terror, she assumed the form of a S’uka bird 
and fled away; Vyasa, too, became greatly surprised to see her in 
the form of a bird. The moment Vyasa saw the extraordinary 
beautiful form of Ghritachi, the Cupid entered then, into his body, 
and his mind was filled with the thought of sweet feminine form and 
was gladdened and all his body was thrilled with pleasure so that the 
hairs of the body stood on their ends. The Muni Vyasa Deva tried his 
best and exerted his power of patience to its utmost, but failed to 
control his restless mind to enjoy the woman. Though he was very 
energetic, and he tried repeatedly to control his heart, enchanted 
with the beautiful form of Ghritachi, yet he could not, as due to a 
state of things pre-ordained by God, control his mind. At this state, 
when he was rubbing the fire sticks to get the sacred fire, the two 
pieces of wood used in kindling the fire, his seed (semen) fell upon 
the Arani (the two pieces of wood used in kindling the sacred fire). 
But he did not take any notice of that, and he went on rubbing the 
firesticks when arose from that Arani the wonderfully beautiful form 
of S’uka deva, looking like a second Vyasa. This boy, born of Arani 
fuel, looked there brilliant like the blazing fire of the sacrificial place, 
whereon oblations of ghee are poured. Seeing that son,Vyasa Deva 
was struck with great wonder and thought thus “What is this? How 
is it that my son is born without any woman.” Thinking for a while, he 
came to the conclusion, that this had certainly come to pass as the 
result of boon granted to him by S'iva. No sooner the fiery S’uka 
Deva, was born of Arani, he looked brilliant, like fire, by his own 
tejas (spirit). At that time Vyasa Deva began to look with one steady 



gaze the blissful form of his son as a second Garhapatya Fire, 
brilliant with the Divine fire. O hermits! The river Ganges came there 
from the Himalayas and washed all the inner nerves of the child 
S’uka Deva, by her holy waters and showers of flowers were poured 
on his head. 


Vyasa Deva next performed all the natal ceremonies of the high- 
souled child; the celestial drums were sounded and the celestial 
nymphs began to dance and the lords of the Gandharvas Visvavasu, 
Narada, Tumburu and others began to sing with great joy for the 
sight of the son. All the Devas and Vidya Dharas began to chant 
hymns with gladdened hearts at the sight of the Divine form, the son 
of Vyasa, born of arani. O twice born ones! Then were dropped 
down from the sky the divine rod (Danda), Kamandalu, and the 
antelope skin. No sooner the extraordinarily brilliant S’uka Deva was 
born than he grew up, and Vyasadeva, who is master of endless 
learning and how to impart them to others, performed the son's 
Upanayana ceremony. No sooner the child was born than all the 
Vedas with all their secrets and epitomes began to flash in the mind 
of S’uka Deva, as it reigned in Vyasa Deva. O Munis! Bhagavan 
Vyasa Deva gave the name of the child as S’uka as during the 
moment of his birth he saw the form of Ghritachi in the form of the 
S’uka bird. S’uka then accepted Brihaspati as his guru and began 
devotedly, with his whole head and heart to perform duly the 
Brahmacharya vow (the life of studentship and celebacy). The Muni 
S’uka remained in the house of his Guru and studied the four Vedas 
with their secrets and epitomes and all the other Dharma S'astras 
and gave Daksina to the Guru duly according to proper rules, and 
returned home to his father Krisna Dvaipayan. Seeing his son S’uka, 
Vyasadeva got up and received him with great love and honour and 
embraced him and took the smell of his head. The holy Vyasa asked 
about his welfare and about his studies and requested him to stay in 
that auspicious As'rama. Vyasa then thought of S’uka's marriage and 
he became anxious and began to enquire where a beautiful girl of a 



Muni can be found. And he spoke to his son “O highly intelligent 
one! You have now studied all the Vedas and Dharma S'astras. 
Therefore, O sinless one! better marry now. O son! Take a beautiful 
wife, and leading a householder's life, worship the Devas and Piths, 
and free me from debt. There is no other way of issueless persons; 
he can never go to heaven; so O highly fortunate son of mine! Now 
enter into the life of a householder and make me happy. O highly 
intelligent one! I have big expectations from you; now try to fulfill 
them. O greatly wise S’uka! After a very severe asceticism, I have 
got you who are verily a Deva born without any womb. I am, 
therefore, your father; save me.” When Vyasa spoke thus to S’uka, 
making him sit close by, the highly dispassionate Suka at once made 
out that his father was terribly attached to the world and replied “O 
knower of Dharma! you have, by the power of your great intelligence, 
divided Veda into four parts; why are you therefore advising me so 
now? I am your disciple; so give me true advice. Certainly I will obey 
your order.” At this Vyasa deva said “O son! I have got you after I 
had performed very severe tapasya, for one hundred years, and 
worshipped Bhagavan S'ankara in the sole object of having you. O 
highly wise one! I will ask some king and will give you sufficient 
wealth for your family expenses. So that you, having attained this 
much desired youth, enjoy the householder's life.” Hearing these 
words of the father, S’uka Deva said “O father! Kindly say this to 
me what pleasure is there in this earth that is not mixed with pain. 
The happiness, that is mixed with pain, is not called happiness by 
the wise. O highly fortunate one! when I will marry, I will become 
certainly submissive to that woman; see then how happiness can be 
possible to one who is dependent; especially to one, dependent on 
one's wife. Rather freedom can be obtained one day when one is 
tied to an iron or wooden pillar; but never freedom will come to that 
man who is tied by his wife and children. As the body of man is full of 
urine and faeces, so is the body of the woman. The more so, when I 
am born of no womb, how can I find happiness there; not only in this 
birth, but in my previous birth, too, I had no desire to be born of any 
womb. How can I desire now to enjoy the pleasure of urine and 
faeces in the face of the bliss of self that has got no other bliss equal 



to it? The high-souled persons, that find pleasure in their selves, 
never go after the sensual pleasures of the objects of enjoyments? 
When I studied first, the Veda in detail, it struck me that the Vedas 
dealt with the S'astra of Karma marga (the way of action); and it is all 
full of Himsa (injury to others). Then I took Brihaspati as my Guru to 
shew me the way to true wisdom; but soon I found that he, too, was 
attacked with the dreadful disease Avidya (ignorance) and plunged 
in the terrible ocean of world, full of Maya. So it became quite clear 
to my mind, how could he save me? If the physician be diseased 
himself, how can he effect cures to other diseases? When I am 
desirous of liberation, how can I get it from a Guru who is himself 
deeply attached to the world; how can such a one treat my case to 
free me, from the disease of attachment to this world? It would be 
merely a farce. I bowed down to the Guru and now I am come to you 
to save me, frightened by this terrible serpent of Samsara. Day and 
night the JTvas travel in this awful wheel of Samsara, this 
constellation of Zodiac; they are moving like the Sun and never get 
any rest. O father! If we discuss about the truth of Atman, we will at 
once find that there is no trace of happiness in this Samsara. As the 
worms enjoy pleasures in the midst of faeces, so the ignorant 
persons find pleasures in this Samsara. Those who have studied the 
Vedas and other S’astras and yet are attached to the world, are 
certainly deluded and blind like horses, pigs and dogs; no one is 
more stupid and ignorant than those persons. Getting this extremely 
rare human birth and studying the Vedanta and other S’astras, if they 
be attached to this world, then who are the men that will attain 
freedom? What more wonder can you find in this world than the fact 
that persons, attached to wives, sons and houses; are denominated 
as Pundits? That man who is not bound by this Samsara, composed 
of the three Gunas of Maya, is Pundit; that man is intelligent and he 
has understood the real import of the S’astras. What use can there 
be in studying the S’astras, in vain, that teach how to bind men more 
firmly in this Samsara, full of Maya. 

That S’astra ought to be studied, which tells how a man would be 
liberated. The house is called "Griha" because it catches hold of a 



man firmly. So what happiness can you expect from the house which 
is like a prison? O father! I am therefore afraid. Those Pundits are 
certainly stupid and they are certainly deceived by the Creator, who 
having the birth even of men, become again imprisoned.” Hearing 
these words of S’uka, Vyasa spoke as follows “O Son! The house 
is never a prison, nor is it the cause of any bondage; the 
householder whose mind is unattached, can get Moksa, in spite of 
his being such. Truthful, holy, earning wealth by just means and 
performing, according to rules the rites and ceremonies, as stated in 
the Vedas and doing S'raddhas duly, a householder can certainly get 
Moksa. See a man who is a Brahmachari, who is an ascetic, who is 
a Vanaprasthi or follows any other method or vow, all have got to 
worship the householder after mid-day. The religious householder, 
too; welcomes them all, with sweet words, and gives them food, with 
great love and respect, and thus does them an amount of good. For 
this reason the householder's stage is the most excellent of all; and I 
have not seen or heard of any other As'rama superior to it. For this 
reason Vas'istha and other Acharyas resorted to householder's life, 
in spite of their being endowed with great wisdom O highly fortunate 
one! If one performs duly the rites and ceremonies of the Vedas, 
there is nothing that is impracticable to him. Be it the birth in a good 
family, or the enjoyment of heavens say, or be it Moksa, whatever 
desires, it is fructified to success. Also there is no such rule that one 
will have to remain in one and in the same As'rama throughout his 
life. The Pundits who know Dharma say that pupils can go from one 
Asrama to another. Therefore, O child! accept Agni (the 
householder's fire) and try your best to do unremittingly your duties. 
O Son! Enter into a householder's life and appease the Devas, Piths 
and men; procreate sons and enjoy the pleasures of household life. 
When old age will come, quit the house and take up the 
Vanaprasthashram (the third stage) and go to a forest and perform 
the excellent vows and then take up the dharma of the Sannyasa 
(renunciation of everything). 

O Fortunate one! He who does not take a wife, is certainly 
maddened by these indomitable five organs of action, five organs of 



senses and mind. Therefore, the makers of the S’astras say, that to 
save one self from the pernicious influences of these vicious senses, 
one is to take wife during his youth time and then be engaged in 
performing tapasya during his old age. 

O fortunate one! In days of yore, the fiery Rajarsi VisVamitra 
practised very severe tapasya without any food for three thousand 
years, and thought he was very strong and shining like fire, he was 
fascinated by the charm of the celestial nymph Menaka. And an 
auspicious daughter was born from the womb of Menaka by 
VisVamitra. My father Paras'ara, though a great ascetic, was struck 
with Cupid's arrows at the sight of the daughter of a fisherman, 
named Kali and accepted her in the boat. What more than this, that 
Brahma seeing his own daughter Sandhya was struck by passion 
and ran after her, when Bhagavan Rudra Deva made him 
unconscious by his Humkar sound and made Brahma desist from 
the attempt. 

So, O fortunate one! Take my word pregnant of good issues and 
marry a lady, born of a good family, and follow the path presented in 
the Vedas.” 


Thus ends the fourteenth Chapter of the 1st Skandha, on the birth of 
S’uka Deva and the duties of householders in the Maha Purana 
S'rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Vedavyas. 



Chapter 15. On The Dispassion Of S’uka And The 
Instructions Of BnAGAVATi To Hari 


1-67. Hearing these words of Vyasa Deva S’uka Deva said O 
Father! I do not like at all to take to a householder's life; as I see 
clearly that it fastens men, as a cord fastens animals, and is a 
source of incessant pain. O Father! Where can you expect 
happiness from a householder who is always loaded with anxiety 
how and whence to get wealth? Those, who have greed for wealth, 
oppress their poor relatives, even; and extort money. Even one who 
is the lord of the three worlds, who is their Indra, he also is not so 
happy as a beggar, that has no desires. See, then, who else can be 
happy in this world? Whenever an ascetic is seen to practise severe 
asceticism, Indra, the lord of the Devas becomes anxious and sorry, 
and raises various obstacles in his way. See also that Brahma is not 
happy with his big samsara (his creation which is his house). 
Bhagavan Visnu, though He has got His beautiful Kamala, the 
presiding Deity of all wealth and prosperity, is always suffering, since 
He is incessantly engaged in fighting with the Asuras; and though He 
is the husband of Laksmi and full of prosperity. He practises, almost, 
every now and then, terrible asceticism with great care and 
earnestness. So who else is there, who is possessed of constant 
happiness? I know also Bhagavan S'ankara, too, suffers incessant 
troubles and has to fight against the Daityas. So, then, O Father: 
how can a poor householder be happy when the rich householder 
cannot sleep happily, with his constant care for wealth. O highly 
fortunate one! Knowing full well this truth of the world, why are you 
plunging me, your son, in this terrible Samsara, full of pains and 
agonies. 

O Father! What shall I say to you about the miseries of the world! 
There is pain in birth, pain in old age, pain in death, and pain in the 
life in the womb full of urines and faeces; but the pain, arising from 
desire and greed, is more terrible than all the pains mentioned 



above; and then, the pains experienced while asking for them are 
greater than the pangs of death. Alas! There is no other way for the 
Brahmans to earn their livelihood than to accept gifts from others. 
Therefore the Brahmans have to suffer daily death-like pangs in 
having to wait in expectation from others; can there be anything 
more regrettable than this? The Brahmanas, studying all the Vedas 
and Dharma S'astras and acquiring wisdom, have got at last to go to 
the rich and praise them (in expectation of some money) carefully. O 
Father! if one does not become a householder, then what care is 
there to feed one's own belly? If there be contentment in the mind, 
any how the belly can be filled with leaves, roots and fruits; but if 
there be wife, sons and grandsons and many dependent relatives, 
then to feed them all, much trouble and anxiety are experienced. So 
how can you expect, O Father! perfect happiness in the world? So 
teach me, O Father! the S’astras on Yoga and eternal truth that will 
give perfect happiness; no advice in karma kanda (the series of 
actions) will bring me pleasure. Now advise me how the karmas can 
be exhausted; how the root of the three sorts of karmas, Sanchita, 
Prarabdha, and Vartamana, giving torments of birth, death, etc., the 
Avidya, the great ignorance, can be destroyed? The fools do not 
understand how the women suck the blood out of persons like 
leeches, for they get themselves deluded by their gestures and 
postures! The lady of the house, whom the people call kanta, the 
beautiful one, steal away the semen virile, the strength and energy in 
the way of giving them happiness as sexual intercourse, and their 
minds and wealth and everything by their crooked love 
conversations; so see what greater thief can there be than a 
woman? In my opinion, those that are ignorant are certainly deluded 
by the Creator; they accept wife to destroy their own pleasure of 
happiness. They can never understand that the women can never be 
the source of pleasure; they are the source of all miseries. Hearing 
these words of S’uka, Vyasa became merged in the deep sea of 
cares and anxieties, thinking what to do then. The incessant tears of 
pain flowed from his eyes; his whole body began to shiver and his 
mind became too much worried. 



Seeing this distressed and sorrowful state of his father, S'ukdeva, 
with eyes full of wonder, said Oh! What a power has Maya got? 

Oh! He, whose words are accepted by all, with great love and care 
as equivalent to the Vedas, who is the author of the Vedanta 
Dars'ana, and before whom nothing is veiled in ignorance. Oh! that 
greatest Pundit, the knower of all the Tattvas, is now deluded by 
Maya? Oh! what is that Maya who has been able to delude Vyasa 
Deva, the son of Satyavati, so skilled in the knowledge of Brahma 
Vidya; I also do not know how, with what great care, one is to 
practise Sadhana towards Her. 


Alas! He who has composed eighteen Maha Puranas and the great 
Maha Bharata, who has divided the Vedas in four parts, the same 
Veda Vyas has today been deluded by the power of Maya! What to 
speak of other persons! Oh! Maya has deluded Brahma, Visnu, 
MahesVara and others and the whole universe; then who is there in 
the three worlds that is not fascinated by Her influence! I therefore, 
take refuge unto the Internal Governess, the Devi Maha Maya. Oh! 
what wonderful power She wields? By her own Mayic power. She 
has kept God even under Her control, who is omniscient and the 
Controller of all. The Pundits, who know the Puranas say, that Vyasa 
Deva is born of the part of Visnu; but, see the wonder, that he is 
today plunged in the sea of delusion like a merchant whose ship has 
been wrecked. Alas! How great is the wonderful power of Maya! The 
all-knowing Vyasa is today under the control of Maya and is weeping 
like an ordinary man! So I have come to the firm conclusion that the 
wise Pundits are incapable to surpass the strength of Maya. What a 
great error arises through the power of Maya! See! indeed!! who is 
he and who am I? What for we have come here? There is no 
certainty, nothing whatsoever, about that. And, see, also, how he has 
got the nice idea of “father” on his body and the idea of “his son” in 
my body, that are composed of five elements. 



This is now quite evident to me that, when the Brahmin Maharsi 
Krisna Dvaipayan is weeping under the influence of Maya, She is the 
strongest of all; even those who are skilled in the great Maya fall 
under Her prey. 

Then S’uka Deva bowed down mentally to the Devi, Maha Maya, 
who is the Creatrix of Brahma and the other Devas and who is the 
Controller of them all; and then began to speak the following 
auspicious words pregnant with reason, to his father Vyasa Deva, 
greatly distressed and plunged in the sea of sorrows “O Father! 
you are exceedingly fortunate, for you are the son of the high souled 
Paras'ara and you yourself are the instructor of real truth, the tattva 
jnana, to all persons; so, O Lord! why are you giving vent to sorrows, 
like an ordinary bewildered man? O Mahabhaga! why are you 
plunging yourself in this great error, though you are a high souled 
personage! See, it is quite true that now I am born as your son; but 
this I don't know what relation existed between you and me in my 
previous birth? So, O highly intelligent one! Open your eyes of 
wisdom, and be patient; do not throw yourself, in vain, in the sea of 
sorrows. All this universe is like a net of delusion; knowing this, 
abandon all your grief; why are you feeling yourself so much weak 
and distressed, for your attachment towards your son? Hunger is 
satisfied by eating something, and thirst is satisfied by the drinking of 
water; hunger is not satisfied by seeing the son. So the organ of 
scent is satisfied by smelling sweet scents; and the organ of hearing 
is satisfied by hearing sweet music; and when thirst arises to enjoy 
women, that is satisfied only by sexual intercourse; but what 
satisfaction can a son give? So what shall I do to you by remaining 
as your son? The son, in fact, is not the cause of any satisfaction to 
one's self. For this reason, in ancient days, the poor Brahmin 
Ajigarta gave his son to the king Harischandra, for necessary 
equivalent price in money, who wanted a man for his sacrifice where 
human beings are to be sacrificed as victims. In fact, those things 
that are urgently required as necessities give happiness; and all 
these articles can be obtained by wealth; so if you want to enjoy 
happiness, then earn money; of what use shall I be to you as your 



son? O Muni! you can see subtle things and you are greatly 
intelligent; so I pray to you, to look upon me as your son and open 
my eyes of wisdom, that I can be free for ever from this womb of 
birth. O Sinless one! To get a human birth in this land of Karma (in 
India) is very difficult; again to get a Brahmin birth is extremely rare; 
so when I have got this so very rare birth, why shall I spend my time 
in vain? O Father! Though I have served many spiritual teachers, 
fraught with wisdom, for many years, yet the firm idea “I am, as it 
were, bound up in this net of Samsara” the notion covered with dark 
darkness of ignorance, caused by desires, this net of Samsara does 
not leave me. 

When the son S’uka Deva of extraordinary power and intelligence 
spoke thus, Vyasa saw that his son was strongly inclined to take to 
the four As'ram, that of Sannyasa and spoke thus O Son! If your 
mind has become so, then read Bhagavat Purana, composed by me, 
highly auspicious, voluminous, and the second Vedas. 

In this you have the chapters on Creation (Sarga) and secondary 
creation (upa sarga), etc., the five characteristics as in other Puranas 
and it is sub-divided into twelve Skandhas. Hearing of this 
Bhagavata brings up to the mind that Brahma alone is real and all 
the universe is unreal and knowledge both intuitive and indirect 
springs up. For this very reason, the Bhagavata treatise is 
considered as the ornament of the Puranas. Therefore, O highly 
intelligent one! you better study the Purana. O Child! In days of yore, 
at the end of a Kalpa, Bhagavan Hah was lying, as a small child on a 
floating leaf of a banyan tree, and was thinking thus “Who is the 
Intelligent One that has created me a small child? What is His 
object? Of what stuff am I made of? and how am I created? whence 
can I know all this?” At this moment the Devi Bhagavati Who is all 
chaitanya, seeing the high-souled Bhagavan Hah musing thus, 
spoke out in the form of a celestial voice in the following half-stanza:- 
- “All this that is seen is I Myself; there is existent nothing other that 
is eternal.” Bhagavan Visnu, then, began to think deeply the above 
celestial voice “Who has uttered this word, pregnant of truth, to 



me? How shall I come to know the speaker, whether that is female, 
male or a hermaphrodite?” Pondering over this for a long time, when 
he could not come to a definite conclusion, he began to repeat 
(make japam) frequently that word of Bhagavati with a whole heart. 
When Hari, lying on a banyan tree leaf, became very anxious to 
know what the above words implied, then the all-auspicious Devi 
Bhagavati with a beautiful face, calm and quiet appearance, 
appeared before Bhagavan Visnu, of unrivalled splendour, in the 
form of Maha Laksmi, who is all of Sattva Guna, surrounded by Her 
Vibhutis, Her manifestations of attendents. Her smiling companions 
of the same age, decked with ornaments, and wearing divine 
clothings, and holding each in their four divine hands, conch shell, 
disc, club, and lotus. 

The lotus eyed Visnu was very much surprised to see that beautiful 
Devi, standing without anything to rest on that water; He saw that on 
four sides of the Devi, were staying Rati, Bhuti, Buddhi, Mati, Kirti, 
Smriti, Dhriti, S'raddha, Medha, Svadha, Svaha, Kshudha, Nidra, 
Daya, Gati, Tusti, Pusti, Ksama, Lajja, Jrimbha Tandra and other 
personified forces, each possessing a clear distinct form, and 
endowed with a clear distinct feeling. In the hands of them all were 
divine weapons; on their necks, necklaces and garlands of Mandara 
flowers; and all the limbs of their bodies were decorated with divine 
ornaments. Seeing in that one mass of ocean the Devi Laksmi and 
Her S'aktis, Bhagavan Janardan, the soul of all, became greatly 
astonished and thought within Himself thus “What is this? Is this 
Maya that I am witnessing? Whence have appeared these women? 
and whence have I come here, lying on this banyan leaf? How has 
the banyan tree come to existence in this one mass of ocean? And 
who is it, that has placed me here in the form of a child? Is this my 
Mother? Or is this some Maya that can create impossible things? 

Why has She made Herself manifest before me now? Or is there 
some hidden motive that She has appeared thus? What ought I to do 
now? Or shall I go to some other place? or shall I continue remaining 
here in this form of the child, silent and with vigilance. 



Thus ends the fifteenth chapter of the 1st Skandha on the dispassion 
of S'uka and the instructions of Bhagavati to Hah in the Mahapurana 
S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 16. On S’uka’s Desiring To Go To 
Mithila To See Janaka 


Vyasa spoke Then the Devi Maha Laksmi, seeing the Deva 
Janardana lying on a banyan leaf and surprised, spoke to him, 
smiling O Visnu! Why are you becoming so much astonished? 
Before this, since times immemorial (without any beginning) there 
had been many dissolutions (Pralayas); and many Sristis (creations); 
and at the beginning of every creation You came first into existence 
and every time I was united with You; but now You have forgotten 
me under the spell of that Maha S'akti. 

That Highest Maha S'akti is transcendent of all the Gunas; but you 
and I are with Gunas. Know me as the S’akti, all of Sattva Guna who 
is widely known as Maha Laksmi. After this the Prajapati Brahma, 
full of Rajo Gunas, the creator of all the Lokas, will come into 
existence from your navel lotus and will create the three worlds. 

Then he will perform severe tapasya and acquire the excellent power 
to create, and will create the three worlds by his Rajo Guna. That 
highly intelligent Prajapati will create first, the five Maha bhutas 
(great elements), all endowed with Gunas and then create mind with 
sensory organs and the presiding deities of the senses, and thus 
with all the ingredients, fit for creation, will create all the worlds. 
Therefore He is denominated by all as the Creator of Brahmanda. O 
highly fortunate one! You will be the Preserver of this Universe. 

When the Prajapati Brahma will be angry at the beginning of the 
creation on his four mind-born sons, Rudra Deva will appear. 

He will appear then from the centre of his eye brows. On being born 
this Rudra Deva will practise very severe tapasya and will get the 
Samhara S’akti, who is all of Tamo Guna and at the end of the Kalpa 
will destroy all this universe of five elements. O highly intelligent one! 
So I have come to you for this work of creation, etc. So take me to 
you as your VaisnavT S’akti full of Sattva Guna. O Madhusudana! I 
will take refuge at your breast and will remain always with you. 



Hearing all this, Bhagavan Visnu spoke “O beautiful Devi! The 
half stanza was ere long heard by me, in clear words; by whom was 
that spoken? Kindly speak to me on this great auspicious secret first. 
For a great doubt has come and possessed my mind. What more 
shall I say than this that as a poor man always thinks of wealth, so I 
am thinking of that again and again.” Hearing these words of Visnu, 
the Devi Maha Laksmi smilingly said, with great affection “O 
Strong and Energetic one! I am now speaking in detail on this; listen. 
O Four-armed one! It is because I have come to you with form and 
endowed with Gunas that you have come to know me; but you have 
not known that Adya S’akti, the Prime force, transcending all the 
Gunas, though She is the substratum of all the Gunas. O highly 
fortunate one! That Devi Bhagavati, transcendent of all the Gunas, 
uttered that all auspicious, highly sanctifying semistanza, the 
essence of all the Vedas. O destroyer of the enemies! I think that 
there is the highest grace of that Highest S’akti on you, that She 
spoke the greatest secret to you for your benefit. O one performing 
good vows! know those words uttered by Mahavidya, as the essence 
of all the S’astra. So firmly retain them within your heart; never forget 
them. There is no other thing, save that, worth being known in 
earnest. Because you are most beloved by the Devi! that She has 
spoken this to you.” Hearing the words of the Devi Maha Laksmi, the 
four-armed Bhagavan took that semi stanza as a Mantra to be 
repeated in right earnest within his mind and cherished that for ever 
within his heart. After some time, Brahma born of the lotus of the 
navel of Visnu, became afraid of the two Daityas Madhu and 
Kaitabha, took refuge of Bhagavan Visnu; Visnu killed the two 
demons and began to do distinctly the japam of the semi-stanza. 
Brahma, born of the lotus, then asked Visnu with a gladdened heart 
“O Lord of the Devas! what japam are you doing? Lotus eyed! Is 
there any other body more powerful than you? O Lord of the 
Universe! whom do you think and thus feel yourself so happy?” 
Hearing Brahma, Bhagavan Hah said “O highly fortunate one! 
Think out yourself once of the Primordial Force, the auspicious 
Bhagavati Adya S’akti who is reigning everywhere as the cause and 
effect and you will be able to understand everything. My presiding 



Deity is that immeasurable eternal Maha S’akti Brahmamyi; on 
whose S’akti, as a receptacle with form on this ocean rests the whole 
Universe; I am thinking of that, by which is created (often and often) 
this entire Universe, moving and non-moving. When the Devi 
Bhagavati, the giver of boons, become graciously pleased, the 
human beings become freed of this bondage of Samsara; and again 
that highest Eternal Wisdom, the cause of Mukti, becomes the 
source of bondage to this world, of those who are deluded by Her. 

She is the Is'vari of the Is'varas of this universe. O Brahma! You, I 
and all other things of the entire Universe are born of the Chit S’akti 
(the power of consciousness) of Her and Her alone; there is no 
manner of doubt in this. The semi-stanza by which She has sown 
within me the seed of Bhagavata will get expanded by the beginning 
of the Dvapara Yuga. While Bhagavan Brahma was resting on the 
navel lotus of Visnu, He got the seed of Bhagavata. Then He gave it 
to His own son Narada, the best of the Munis. Narada gave it to me 
and I have expanded that into twelve Skandhas. Therefore, O 
Mahabhaga! You now study this Bhagavata Purana, equal to the 
Vedas and endowed with five characteristics. In this the wonderful 
glorious deeds and life of the Devi Bhagavati, the hidden meanings 
of the Vedas and the wisdom, the truth are all described; hence this 
is the best of all the Puranas and sanctifying like the Dharma S’astra. 
It is the substratum of Brahma Vidya; therefore if men study this, 
they will easily cross this sea of world; and those that are stupid and 
deluded get pleasure in hearing the death of Vritrasura and many 
other narrations that are interspersed in this book. Therefore, O 
Mahabhaga! hear this sanctifying Bhagavata Puranam and retain it 
firmly within your heart. O best of persons! You are the foremost of 
those that are intelligent; so you are worthy to read this Purana. 
Eighteen thousand S'lokas are in that Purana and you better get 
them by heart; for if anybody reads or bears this Purana, fit to be 
praised in every way, all-auspicious, capable to increase posterity by 
the addition of sons and grandsons, giving long life, happiness and 
peace, he sees the Sun of Wisdom, resting in his breast and 
dispelling all darkness of ignorance. Thus speaking to his son S’uka 



Deva, Krisna Dvaipayan, my Guru, studied us the Purana and 
thought it was voluminous. I got the whole of it by heart. S'uka 
studied the Purana and stayed in Vyasa's As'rama. But he was 
naturally dispassionate like Sanat Kumara, etc., the mind-born sons 
of Brahma; therefore he could not get peace in studying the contents 
of the Purana which deal with Karma-Kanda (actions) fit for the 
house-holders. He remained in a solitary place, his heart being 
troubled very much. He appeared, as if, with his heart void. He did 
not mind much for his food and he did not fast also. Once Vyasa 
Deva seeing his son S'ukdeva so thoughtful, said “O Son! What 
do you think constantly? And why are you troubling yourself so 
much? Like an impoverished man, entangled in debt, you are always 
disturbed by your thoughts. O child! When I your father is living, what 
for do you care? Leave aside your inmost sorrows and be happy. 
Cast off all other thoughts and think of the wisdom contained in the 
S’astras and try your best to acquire Vijhana, the essence of 
wisdom. O Suvrata! If you do not get peace by my words then go, at 
my word to Mithila, the city of the King Janaka. O Mahabhaga! That 
king Janaka, who is liberated while living, whose soul is religious and 
who is the ocean of truth will cut asunder the net of your delusion. O 
Son! Go to the king and question him on Varnas'ram Dharma 
(Dharma relating to caste and stages of life) and remove your 
doubts. 

That royal sage Janaka, the greatest Yogi, the knower of Brahma 
and liberated while living, is of pure soul, truthspeaking, of a calm 
and quiet heart and always fond of Yoga.” Hearing these words of 
Vyasa Deva, the highly spirited S’uka deva of unrivalled energy 
replied “O virtuous one! Your word can never turn out false; but 
when I hear that the king Janaka is gladly governing his kingdom still 
he is liberated while living, and disembodied while he has body -- 
this your word appears to me quite contradictory like light and 
darkness at one and the same place and time, and seems that these 
two epithets simply indicate vanity and nothing else. O Father! This 
is my greatest doubt how can the royal sage Janaka govern his 
kingdom, being disembodied. It appears that your word about 



Janaka is quite false as the son of a barren woman. O Father! I have 
now got a desire to see the disembodied king Janaka; for my mind is 
plunged in great doubt how can he remain in samsara unattached 
like a lotus leaf in water? O Greatest Orator! Is the liberation of 
Janaka according to Buddhistic doctrines or like the opinions of the 
materialistic Charvakas! O highly intelligent one! How can the royal 
sage Janaka, in spite of his being a householder, quit the usages of 
his senses? I cannot comprehend this. How can the things enjoyed 
by him appear to him, as if, unenjoyed and and how can his doings 
be his non-doings? How can the ideas of mother, wife, son, sister, 
prostitutes and various persons having different relations, arising 
within him vanish again altogether? And if that be not the case, how 
can his Jivanmuktahood be possible? If his taste be present of 
pungent, sour, astringent, bitter, and sweet things, then it is clear that 
he is enjoying all the most excellent things, O Father! This is my 
greatest wonder and doubt, that if he has got the sense of heat and 
cold, pleasure and pain, how can he be a Jivanmukta? That king is 
thoroughly expert in reigning his kingdom; how then the ideas of 
enemy, friend, taste and distaste, remaining absent in him, he can 
govern his state? How can he look with the same eyes a thief and an 
ascetic? And if he makes any distinction, how then is his liberation 
effected? I have never seen such a man, that is liberated while living 
and at the same time an expert king in governing his subjects. For 
these reasons, great doubt has arisen in me. I cannot understand 
how can the king Janaka be liberated, while he is remaining in his 
house? Whatever it be, I desire now greatly to see him after his 
Jivanmuktahood; so I desire to go to Mithila to solve my doubts.” 


Thus ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the first Skandha on S’uka's 
desiring to go to Mithila to see Janaka, in the Mahapurana S’rimad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses. 



Chapter 17. On S’uka’s Displaying His Self- 
Control Amidst The Women Of The Palace Of 
Mithila 


Suta said Thus speaking to his father about his intention to go to 
Mithila, the high-souled S’uka Deva fell prostrate at his feet and with 
folded painns said O highly fortunate one! Your word must be 
obeyed by me; now I desire to see, as you say, the kingdom of 
Janaka; kindly give me permission. O father! Again the doubt is 
coming within me how the king Janaka is governing his kingdom 
without sentencing any body? And if there be no punishment within 
his kingdom, no one will remain in the path of virtue. It is for the sake 
of preserving religion that Manu and the other sages have always 
prescribed for punishment; how, then, religion can be preserved 
without inflicting punishment. O Mahabhaga! What you have spoken 
to me appears to me true like the sentence “My mother is barren.” 
So, O destroyer of foes! Permit and I will start for Mithila. Seeing the 
greatly wise son S’uka, void of any desires, earnestly anxious to go 
to Mithila, gave him a cordial embrace and said “O highly 
intelligent son S’uka! Peace be on you! Have a long life. O child! 
Speak truly before me and go. O son! Say that after going to Mithila 
you will come back again to this As'rama; never that you will go 
anywhere else. O son! Seeing the lotus face of yours, I am passing 
my days happily; if I do not see you, I will suffer extreme pain. What 
more than this, that you are my life and soul. I am saying, therefore, 
after seeing Janaka and clearing your doubts come here again and 
remain at peace, and study on the Vedas.” 

Vyasa having spoken thus, S’uka bowed down and 
circumambulated his most worshipful father, and went out; he began 
to walk very fast like an arrow, leaving the bow, and when it has left 
the bow. On his journey he saw various countries, various classes of 
persons, earning money, various gardens and forests, various trees; 
in some places he saw fields with green grains and grains standing 



on them; at others he saw ascetics practising asceticism, and 
initiated Yajniks (performing yajhas, or sacrifices); in some places he 
saw yogis practising yoga, the high-souled Vanaprasthis (in the third 
stage of life) residing in the forest, and at others he saw devotees of 
S'iva, S’akti, Ganes'a, Surya and Visnu and many others. Thus he 
went on in his journey, in great wonder, towards his destination. In 
his passage he crossed Meru in two years and the Mount Himalayas 
in one year and then reached the city Mithila. Going there he found 
the place, full of wealth, corn, grains, etc., and all prosperities and 
the people were all very happy and they observed the rule of 
conduct as in the S'astras. When he was about to enter into the city 
the guard in front of the gate stopped him, asking “Who are you? Sir. 
What for are you come here?” When the guard asked him thus, he 
replied nothing and went away to a distance and with great wonder 
could not help laughing in his mind and remained motionless like a 
statue. At this the guard said “O Brahman! Why have you 
remained silent? Kindly say what for you have come here? I know 
this well that no body goes anywhere without having something to 
do? The king has forbidden strangers whose parentage and 
character are unknown. Therefore O Brahmin! Every one has to take 
the king's permission before he goes into the city. 

It seems that you are a very energetic Brahman and that you know 
the Vedas; so O giver of honour! speak out to me your object-in-view 
and go into the city as you like.” Hearing these words of the guard, 
S’uka Deva began to say “I have come to see the city of Videha 
Janaka; but now I see that persons like me find great difficulty to 
enter here; so O Gatekeeper! I have got the answer from you. I was 
a great fool that I was so much deluded that to see the king I crossed 
many countries and over topped the two mountains and have come 
here. O Mahabhaga! What blame can I put on others? It is my father 
that has deluded me; or my karma done in my previous birth is now 
making me wander about. Alas! In this world greed for money is the 
sole cause to make a man knock about; but I have not got that even; 
my erroneous idea has brought me so far. I now realise that a man, 
having no desires, gets constant happiness if he be not plunged in 



the net of delusion; else he cannot have any such. O Mahabhaga! 
Though I have no desire of anything, yet I am plunged in the sea of 
Moha. Alas! Where is Meru? and where is Mithila (a great distance 
intervenes) I have walked so great a distance on foot; alas! this is 
this the result of my so long a journey! Therefore I am thoroughly 
convinced that the Creator has deceived me. One must have to 
suffer for his Prarabdha karma, be it auspicious or inauspicious. One 
must make one’s effort, being always under the control of this Law of 
Karma. Though there be no apparent desire or cause, yet this 
Prarabdha Karma always puts a man into different actions. 

This place is not a Tirath (holy place) nor there are the Vedas 
personified here, that I have taken so much pains and trouble to 
come here -- only there is one thing here and that is the king Janaka; 
but there is no chance to see him even; for I have not been able to 
enter even within his kingdom.” Thus saying, S’uka remained silent 
and began to stay as one who has taken the vow to remain silent. 
The guard then took him to be a very wise Brahman and spoke in 
sweet words “O Brahman! Go to the place, as you like, where you 
have got your work. O Brahman! I stopped you; so please excuse 
me for any offence incurred by me. Free persons like you have 
mercy alone as their greatest strength.” Hearing this S’uka Deva said 
:--What is your fault? you are dependent on another; the servant 
ought to obey the words of his master and serve him by all means; 
and there is no fault of the king, too, in your not allowing me to enter; 
for the wise persons ought to ascertain by all means, whether the 
new comers are enemies or thieves? Hence when I am quite a 
stranger suddenly come to this place, that the fault is wholly mine. 
Every person knows that it is lowering oneself to go to another's 
house. The guard then said “O great Brahman! what is 
happiness? and what is pain? what ought to be done to by your well 
wisher? who is your enemy? and who is your benefactor? Now 
advise me on all these points.” Hearing this S’uka Deva said 
Everywhere men are divided, as far as their internal natures are 
concerned, into two classes; they are called attached or unattached. 
And the minds of these two classes are again of two kinds. The 



“attached” man is stupid and cunning and the “unattached” is sub¬ 
divided into three classes knowing, unknowing and middling. The 
cunning man is divided again into two classes Whether his 
cunningness is according to the dictates of S’astras or arising from 
his intellect. Again intellect is sub-divided into two whether it is Yukta 
(one-pointed) or Ayukta (Diverted) The guard spoke “O Learned 
one! I cannot understand what you say; so explain them to me what 
they mean.” S’uka Deva said Those who are attached to this 
world are said to be “attached” persons. These attached persons feel 
frequently various pleasures and pains. When they get wives, sons, 
wealth, honour, rise, etc., they get pleasures; and if they do not get 
any of these they feel at every moment intense pain. Now the 
attached person sought to take such means as will secure them the 
pleasures of this world; so whoever acts against those means are 
denominated as breakers of their happiness and so they are 
enemies; and whoever aids in their acquiring pleasures are 
denominated as their friends. Of these the attached but at the same 
time cunning man does not get confounded and bewildered by them; 
whereas stupid attached man gets always bewildered everywhere. 
The man that is dispassionate and engaged in determining the “self” 
dwells in a solitary place, meditates on “self”, finds pleasure in 
studying the Vedanta S’astras and feels pain in all the topics on 
worldly affairs. The wise man that wants his real welfare and is 
averse to the worldly enjoyments finds that he has many enemies; 
lust, anger, palaces, etc., are his so many enemies. Contentment is 
his only friend in the three lokas and no one is his real self. 

Hearing these words of S’uka Deva, the watchman considered S’uka 
Deva a very wise man and soon led him to a very beautiful 
compartment. S’uka Deva then began to see that the town was full of 
three sorts of men, good, middling, and bad; and the shops were 
filled with various articles of merchandise. The many things were 
being incessantly purchased and sold there. Within that town, filled 
with many men, money and all sorts wealth and prosperities, almost 
everywhere were seen instances of attachment, hatred, lust, anger, 
greed, vanity and delusion; at some parts there were seen persons 



quarrelling with each other. Seeing thus the three sorts of persons, 
the highly energetic S’uka, blazing like a second Sun went to the 
royal palace when the gateman stopped him. He stood there like a 
log of wood and began to meditate on “Moksa” (Liberation). He 
began to think the light and darkness as same; the greatly ascetic 
S’uka became merged in Dhyana (meditation) and remained at one 
place motionless. In an instant, a royal minister came out and 
saluting him with folded hands, took him to a second compartment. 
Here the minister showed him beautiful divine gardens adorned 
nicely with rows of divine trees bearing fruits and gave him a good 
reception and took him to a very beautiful palace. The minister next 
ordered the public women in royal service, expert in music and 
playing with instruments, and skilled in Kama-S’astra (the science of 
amorous dealings) to attend on S’uka Deva and went out of the 
palace. S’uka, the son of Vyasa, remained there. Those prostitutes 
then prepared various dishes, suited to the time and place, and 
sought the satisfaction of S’uka and then worshipped him duly with 
greatest devotion. Those ladies, then, residing within the four walls 
became enamoured to see the beauty of S’uka Deva and showed 
him the gardens that existed in the inner compound. S’uka was 
young and beautiful; over this he was extremely lovely, of nice limbs; 
his speech was soft and gentle; so he looked like a second Cupid 
(the god of love); all the ladies, struck with Cupid’s arrows, lost their 
consciousness. Then recovering, they considered S’uka Deva to be 
the great controller of passions and began to serve him with great 
care. The pure minded S’uka, born of Arani, looked on them like his 
mother. S’uka, finding pleasure in self and the controller of anger 
was not pleased or displeased with anything; so though be saw that 
the ladies were disturbed with amorous feelings, he remained quite 
undisturbed, calm and quiet. The ladies, then prepared a very nice 
bed whereon S’uka Deva would sleep; it was spread over with nice 
clean bed sheet; many nice pillows were placed. He, then, washed 
his feet and with vigilance, put on his finger the ring prepared of 
Kus'a grass, and completing his evening Sandhya, became merged 
in Dhyana. Meditating on Supreme Brahma for three hours (one 
Prahara), slept for 6 hours and getting up, again became merged in 



Brahma Dhyana for the last three hours of the night. Then at the 
Brahma muhurta (one hour preceding the sunrise) he took his bath 
and completing his morning duties, became immersed in Samadhi 
(inner enlightenment) and sat at ease. 


Thus ends the 17th chapter of the 1st Skandha on S’uka's displaying 
his self-control amidst the women of the palace of Mithila in the 
Mahapurana S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam. 



Chapter 18. On Janaka’s Giving Instructions On 
Truth To S’uka Deva 


1-22. Suta said Maharsis! When the king Janaka heard of the 
arrival of S’uka Deva, the son of his Guru, he took his priest before 
him and attended by his ministers came before him in pure spirit. 
Then he duly worshipped S’uka, offering him Padya, Arghya and an 
excellent seat, and a cow, yielding milk and then enquired about his 
welfare. S’uka Deva accepted duly all the things offered by the king; 
and informed him of his well-being and asked the king in return, of 
his welfare and took his seat at ease on the Asana. The king Janaka 
asked the son of Vyasa, full of peace “O Mahabhaga Muni 
Sattama! You are devoid of any attachment and you have no 
desires. May I enquire why such a person as your honoured self has 
come to me.” S’uka Deva said O great king! my father told me 
thus O child; take a wife; for the house-holder's life is the best of 
all the as'ramas but I thought that will be the source of my bondage 
to this world and therefore did not obey his word, though he was my 
highest Guru. He then again said to me If one takes a household 
life, it does not at once follow that he will be held in bondage; yet I 
did not agree to that. Then the Muni, thinking me still to be in some 
doubt, spoke this word of advice to me “O Son! Do not be sorry; 
go to Mithila and have your doubts solved. There my disciple the 
king Janaka, is governing his kingdom without any source of danger. 
He is Jivanamukta (liberated while living) and is free from the ideas 
of body, etc., so everybody knows. When that royal sage, Janaka, 
though governing his kingdom, is not seen tied up by Maya, then O 
Son! why are you afraid of this Samsara, when you are living this 
forest life. 

Therefore, O Mahabhaga! Trust me and marry; and in case you 
doubt very much, then go and see the king Janaka; ask him and 
remove your doubts. He will certainly solve your doubts. But, O Son! 
After hearing him, come again quickly to me.” O king! When my 



father spoke thus, by his permission I have come now to your 
capital. O king! I don't want any thing, save Moksa (liberation); 
therefore O Sinless one! Kindly advise what am I to do, so that I 
attain Moksa. O Lord of kings! Practising asceticism, going to the 
holy places of pilgrimage, holding vratas (vows), performing 
sacrifices, studying the Vedas, or earning wisdom, whatever is the 
cause of Moksa, kindly say that. Hearing this, Janaka said “O son 
of my Guru! I am telling what ought to be done by the Brahmanas, 
following the path of Moksa; listen. After having the holy thread, a 
Brahmin should live in the house of his Guru to study the Vedas, the 
Vedantas and pay the Dakshina (the fee) to the Guru according to 
rules; he will then return home and marry and enter into the 
householder's life; he should lead a life of contentment, be free from 
desires, sinless and truthful and earn his livelihood with a pure heart 
and according to the sanction of justice and conscience. He is to 
perform the Agnihotra and other sacrifices; and after getting sons 
and grandsons, he is to leave his wife under the care of his son and 
then to take the life of a Vanaprastha (3rd stage of life). That 
Brahman, the knower of Dharma, must practise tapasya and become 
master of his six passions (enemies); and when he gets disgusted 
with the world and when the Vairagyam (dispassion) will arise within 
him, he would enter into the fourth As'rama. For, the man is first to 
enter into the householder's life and when he will be quite 
dispassionate towards the world, he will then have a right to take the 
As’rama of Sannyasa (Renunciation). A course contrary to this can 
never entitle one to the As’rama of Sanyasa. 

This is the beneficial word of the Vedas and it must hold true; it 
cannot be false; this is my firm belief. O S’uka! In the Vedas are 
mentioned forty-eight Samskaras (consecrations; purificatory rites); 
out of which the learned Mahatmas have reserved forty Samskaras 
for the householders and the last eight Samskaras (S'ama, Dama, 
etc.,) for the Sannyasins. And this good usage is heard to come 
down from very ancient times. A Brahmana ought to complete his 
previous As’ramas successively and then enter into the succeeding 
As’rama. 



23-30. S’uka said If the pure Vairagyam (dispassion) arising out of 
knowledge and wisdom (jhan and Vijhan) already arises (before 
taking to the grihasth As'ram), is it still necessary to pass through 
house holder’s life, Vanaprastha life, etc., or is one entitled then to 
take up at once the Sannyasa As'rama, quit everything and reside in 
the forest? Janaka said O! One giving honour to the S’astras and 
Gurus! Though the powerful passions seem to be under control in 
the period of unripened Yoga (the imperfect yogic state), yet one 
ought not to trust them; for, it is generally seen, many imperfect 
Yogins find themselves disturbed by one or other of the senses. If 
the mind of one who has already entered into the Sannyasa As’ram 
gets perturbed in his course, then, how can he, you can see this for 
yourself, satisfy desires of eating good things, sleeping nicely, seeing 
his son, or wishing any other desires, knowing them to lead to his 
degradation? He is then in a very serious state. The net of desires is 
very difficult to be conquered by men; that can never die out. 
Therefore, to put an end to them, the advise is to cut them slowly 
and slowly. He who sleeps on an elevated place has the danger of 
tumbling down; but one who sleeps in a low place has no such 
danger. So any man who has once taken the highest dharma 
Sannyasa, and if he be fallen, then he never gets hold of the real 
track. As an ant begins to get from the root of tree, and, by and by, 
gets to the topmost part of the branches, so human beings go by 
degrees from one As'rama to another till they go to the highest; then 
and then only they are able to get easily their desired truth. The birds 
without anticipating any danger, get up to the skies very quickly and 
soon they get tired and cannot go to their desired place but the ant 
goes with rest to its desired place. This mind is very difficult to be 
controlled; for this reason the men of unripened minds, cannot 
conquer it all at once; and are advised to conquer it, by and by, 
observing the laws of one As’rama after another. 



31-37. See also if anybody, remaining in his household life be of a 
quiet temper and of good intellect, and if he takes success and 
failure in the same light, and be not elated in times of pleasure and 
not depressed in times of pains and does his duty for duty’s sake 
without troubling his mind with cares, and anxieties, then that 
householder acquires pure happiness by the realisation of his self 
and acquires Moksha. There is no manner of doubt in this. O Sinless 
One! See, I am liberated while living, though I am engaged in 
preserving kingdom; if any source of pain or pleasure arises, I am 
not in any way affected by them. As I will attain in the end Videha 
Mukti (liberation from bodies) though I am always wandering at my 
free will, enjoying various things as I like and do various things as it 
pleases me, so you can do your duties and then be liberated in the 
end. 

O Son of my Guru! When this material world, the cause of all error 
according to the Vedanta S’astras, is simply an object of sight then 
how can this material substance, an object of sight, be the source of 
bondage to the Atman, the Self? O Brahman! Though the five 
material elements can be seen, their qualities or Gunas can be 
known only by inference, so the self is to be inferred; it can never be 
an object of sight; and also this self, known by inference, changeless 
and without any impurity or stain can never be bound by the visible 
changeful material thing. O Brahman! This impure heart is the 
source of all pleasure and pains; so when the heart becomes pure 
and quiet, all the things then become fully pure, O Brahmana! 


38-41. If going often and often to all Tiraths and bathing there, do not 
make one's heart pure and holy, then all one's troubles are taken in 
vain. O Destroyer of enemies! It is the mind that is the cause of 
bondage or freedom; and not the body, nor the Jivatma (the 
embodied soul), nor the senses. The Self or Atman is always pure 
consciousness and is ever free so, truly speaking, it can never be 
bound. Bondage and freedom reside on in the mind; so when the 
Mind gets peace, the bondage of Samsara is also at an end. He is 



an enemy, he is a friend, he is neither an enemy nor friend, all these 
different thoughts reside in the mind and arise out of duality; how can 
the ideas of differences exist, when everything has become all one 
pervading self? 


42-47. Jiva is Brahma; I am that Brahma and nothing else; there is 
nothing to be discussed here. It is owing to the dualities that monism 
appears not clear and differences between Jiva and Brahma arise. O 
Mahabhaga! This difference is due to Avidya and by which this 
difference vanishes, that is termed Vidya. 

This difference between Vidya and Avidya ought to be always kept in 
view, by those that are clever. 

How can the pleasure from the cooling effect of the shadow, be felt, 
if the heating effect of the rays of the Sun be not previously 
experienced? So how Vidya is to be experienced if Avidya be not felt 
before? Sattva, Rajas and Tamo Gunas reside naturally in things, 
made of Gunas; and the five principal elements reside naturally in 
substances made up of elements; so the senses reside naturally in 
their own forms, etc.; so how can there be any stain to the Atman 
which is unattached? Yet to teach humanity, the high souled persons 
preserve always with greatest care the respect of the Vedas. If they 
do not do this, then, O Sinless One! the ignorant persons would act 
lawlessly according to their wishes, like the Charvakas; and Dharma 
will become extinct. When Dharma will become extinct, the 
Varnas’rama will gradually die out; so the well-wishers should always 
follow the path of the Vedas. 


48-56. S’uka said “O King! I have now heard all that you have 
said; still my doubt remains; it is not solved. O King! In the Dharma 
of the Vedas, there is Himsa (act of killing and injuring); and we hear 
that there is much of Adharma (sin) in the above Himsa. 



So how can the Dharma of the Vedas give Moksha? O King! One 
can see before one's eyes that the drinking of Soma rasa, the killing 
of animals, the eating of fish and flesh and so are advised in the 
Vedas; so much so that in the sacrificial ceremony named 
Sautramana the rule of drinking wine and many other vratas are 
clearly mentioned; even gambling is advised in the Vedas. So how 
can Mukti be obtained by following the Veda Dharma? It is heard 
that, in ancient times, there was a great king, named S'as'avindu, 
very religious, truthful, and performing sacrifices, very liberal; he 
protected the virtuous, and chastised those that were wicked and 
going astray. He performed many Yajhas, where many cows and 
sheep were sacrificed according to the rules of the Vedas and 
abundant Dakshinas (sacrificial fees) were presented to every one 
that performed their parts in the sacrifices. In these sacrifices, the 
hides of the cows that were sacrificed as victims, were heaped to 
such an enormous extent that they looked liked a second 
Bindhyachal mountain. Then the rains fell and the dirty water coming 
out of that enormous heap of skins flowed down and gave rise to a 
river which was thence called the Charmanvati river. And what a 
wonder? That cruel king left behind him an ineffaceable fame and 
went to Heavens. Whatever it may be, it can never come to my head 
that I should perform the Veda Dharma, filled with so many acts of 
killing and cruelties. Again, when the man find pleasure in sexual 
intercourses and when they do not have that intercourse, they 
experience pain, how can you expect such persons to attain 
liberation.” 


57-61. Janaka said “The killing of animals in a sacrificial 
ceremony is not killing; it is known as Ahimsa; for that himsa is not 
from any selfish attachment; therefore when there is no such 
sacrifice and the animals are killed out of selfish attachment, then 
that is real himsa; there is no other opinion in this. Smoke arises 
from a fire when fuels are placed in it; and smoke is not seen when 
no fuel is added. So, O Munisattama! The himsa, as prescribed in 



the Vedas, is free from all blemishes, selfish attachment, etc., and 
therefore it is unblameable. So it follows the himsa committed by 
persons attached to objects, is the real himsa; that can be blamed, 
but the himsa of those persons who have no desires is not that sort 
of himsa. Therefore the learned men that know the Vedas declare 
that the himsa done by the dispassionate persons, with their hearts 
free from egoism, is no himsa done at all. O Dvija! Really speaking, 
the killing of animals done by the house-holder attached to senses 
and their objects, and done under their impulses can be taken into 
account as a real act of killing; but, O Mahabhaga of those whose 
hearts are not attached to anything of those self controlled persons, 
desirous of moksa, if they do an act of Himsa out of a sense of duty, 
with no desires of fruits and with their hearts free from egoism that 
can never be reckoned as a real act of killing.” 


Thus ends the 18th Chapter of the 1st Skandha on Janaka's giving 
instructions on truth to S’uka Deva in the Mahapuranam S’rimad 
Devi Bhagavatam. 



Chapter 19. On The Description Of The 
Marriage Of S’uka 


1-4. S’n S’uka said O king! This great doubt arises in my mind 
how a man can be free from desires and the rewards of their actions, 
when he lives in the midst of this Samsara, that is all full of Maya? 
When even by the acquiring of wisdom of the S’astras and the 
capability to judge which is real and which is unreal, the delusion of 
the mind is not dispelled until one resorts to the practice of Yoga, 
how then can freedom from desires and liberation come to a 
householder? The darkness of a room is not destroyed by the mere 
mention of lamp, light; so the wisdom acquired by reading the 
S’astras can never dispel the darkness of delusion that reigns in the 
inside of a man. O lion of kings! If one wants Moksa, one ought not 
to commit any act of revenge or injury or killing any being; how can 
this be possible to a householder? 


5-17. Your desires to acquire wealth, to enjoy royal pleasures and to 
get victory in battle have not yet subsided; how then can you be a 
Jivan mukta? O king! You consider yet a thief, thief and a saint, 
saint; you consider a man as your relative or other than that; these 
ideas have not vanished from you; how then can you be called 
Videha? O king! You feel the pungent, bitter, astringent, sour tastes 
and the like; you feel good and bad rasas respectively; you become 
glad when success comes to you and you feel sorrow when you 
happen to fail; and you experience the three states, waking, 
dreaming, and deep sleep as an ordinary man does, how then can 
you be called to attain the Turiya (fourth) state? May I ask 
Whether you cherish this idea that all these infantries, cavalries, 
chariots, and that all these elephants are mine; I am the lord of all 
the wealth and things? Or whether you do not cherish this idea? O 
king! I think you eat sweet and good things, and, at times, feel 
pleasure and, at other times, feel pain! So, O king! How can you look 



on the garland of flowers and the snake as one and the same? O 
king! He who is a Muktapurusa considers a lump of earth, a piece of 
stone, and gold as of one and the same value; he considers 
everything to be the same Atman and does good to all the beings. 
Whatever that may be, I do not find any pleasure at present with 
houses, wife, etc., or with anything, in fact. What my heart’s desire is 
that I roam alone always without any desires in my heart. Therefore I 
like not to have any companion; to be free from any attachment and 
to be peaceful, and calm; I do not wish to accept anything from 
anybody; I will forego all pleasures and pains from cold, warmth, 
etc., and I will sustain my life on roots, fruits, and leaves, obtained 
without any effort and will roam, as I like, like a deer. When I have 
not got the least attachment to the household life and when I am 
beyond all the attributes, what necessity have I then of house, wealth 
or a suitable wife? And when you think of various things with loving 
heart, and yet say that you are a Jivan mukta, that is nothing but a 
mere vanity of yours! O king! When you think and become anxious 
about your enemies, about your wealth or sometimes about your 
army, how then can you be said to be free from cares? What more 
can be said than the fact that many Munis, eating moderately and 
controlling their senses, and leading an anchorite's life, and knowing 
the unreality of the world, fall victims to the Maya! 


18-27. Then what need there is to talk of you? O king! know that the 
hereditary title “Videha” to your line of kings indicates downright 
insincerity; nothing can be other than this as the name “Vidya Dhara” 
(holder of knowledge) is applied to an illiterate man; as the name 
“Divakara” (sun) is given to a born-blind man, as the name 
“Laksmidhara” (holder of wealth) is given to even a poor man, as 
these names are quite useless to me. I have heard that the kings of 
your family who were your predecessors were called “Videha” in 
name only and not in deed. O king! In your family there reigned a 
king named “Nimi.” Once on a time that royal sage invited his Guru 
Vas’istha to perform a sacrifice, when Vas'istha said “I am already 



invited by Indra, the lord of the Devas, to perform his sacrifice; so O 
king! let me first finish his work; I will then take up your work. Better 
go on collecting the sacrificial materials till my that work is complete.” 
Thus saying, Vas'istha went away to perform Indra's sacrifice; on the 
other hand, the royal sage Nimi selected another priest and made 
him his Guru and began his sacrifice. Hearing all this, Maharsi 
Vas’istha became angry and cursed him thus “O forsaker of your 
Guru! For the crime of forsaking your Guru, let thy body be 
destroyed today!” At this, the royal sage, too, cursed Vas'istha in his 
turn “Let your body fall off also.” Then the bodies of both the persons 
fell. But, O king! this curiousity came to my mind, how the royal sage, 
whose body fell before, cursed his own Guru afterwards. 


28-35. Janaka said O Lord of Brahmins! what you have said is, in 
my opinion, all quite true; nothing is false. Still hear. Know what my 
most worshipful Guru Deva has spoken to me is, in fact, true (and 
nothing else). You are now intending to quit the company of your 
father and go to the forest; well and good! but even then you will 
undoubtedly have the company of deer, etc.; see, also, that when the 
five elements, earth, water, air, etc., are present, encompassing 
everywhere, how, then, can you expect to be free from all 
companions? So, O Muni! when you will have to think always of your 
food, how, then, can you be said to be free from all cares? Again, 
even if you go to the forest, you will have to think there also for your 
staff, deer skin, etc.; so you can take my case, too, of thinking of my 
kingdom, whether I think or not, as your thinking of staff, deer skin, 
etc., your heart is tainted with Vikalpa Jhan (knowledge of doubt, 
duality, etc.); and therefore you have come here from a far-off 
country. But my heart is free from any such doubt and I am 
remaining quite cheerful here. O best of Brahmins! I have got no 
doubt whatsoever on any point, and therefore I take my food and go 
to sleep with great pleasure. “I am not bound up by this world” this 
idea gives me constant happiness of the highest degree. But you 
consider that you are bound and therefore you feel always constant 



pain. So leave off your idea that you are bound, and be happy. “This 
body is mine” this knowledge leads to my bondage; and “This body 
is not mine” this knowledge leads to freedom so know this verily that 
all this wealth, kingdom, etc., are not mine. 


36-45. Suta said Hearing these words of the royal sage, S’uka 
Deva became exceedingly glad and pronounced “Sadhu” “Sadhu” 
(true saint, indeed a true saint, well said) and went away without any 
delay to the pleasant As’rama of Vyasa. Vyasa, too, seeing his son 
come back, became very glad and embraced him and took the smell 
of his head and asked about his welfare again and again. Then 
S’uka Deva, well conversant with the S’astras and ever ready in 
studying the Vedas, sat by the side of his father, with an enlightened 
mind, in his lovely As’rama and thinking of the state of the 
highsouled Janaka in his kingdom, began to feel the highest peace. 
Though S’uka adopted the path of Yoga, yet he married the daughter 
of a Muni, named Pivari, very beautiful, fortunate, enhancing the 
glory of her father's family. Then were born first the four sons named 
Krishna, Gauraprabha, Bhuri, and Devas'ruta out of the sperm of 
S’uka and the ovum of Pivari; and next a daughter was born named 
Kirti of them. Vyasa's son S’uka, endowed with the fire of asceticism 
gave the daughter Kirti in marriage in due time with the high-souled 
Anuha, the son of Vibhraja. As time passed on, a son was born of 
the womb of Kirti and the sperm of Anuha, a son who became the 
powerful king Brahmadatta, the knower of Brahma and endowed 
with wealth and prosperity. Some time elapsed when Anuha, the 
son-in-law of S’uka Deva, getting from Narada the Mayavija and 
highest knowledge of Yoga handed over his kingdom to his son and 
went to the hermitage of Vadarika and became liberated. 

The Devarsi Narada gave him the mantra, the vija of Maya; and by 
the influence of that mantra and by the grace of the Devi, the 
knowledge of the Supreme Brahma, arose in him without any 
obstacle and gave him liberation. 



46-51. On the other hand S’uka Deva, always averse to any 
company, left his father and went to the beautiful mountain Kailas'a. 
He began to meditate on the unmoving Brahma and thus remained 
there. After some time the highly energetic S’uka Deva attained 
Siddhi (supernatural powers) Anima, Laghima, etc., rose up high in 
the air from the top of the mountain and began to roam there, and 
then he appeared like a second Sun. When S’uka arose from the 
peak, it severed into two and various ominous signs became visible. 
When S’uka Deva, appearing like a second Sun by the dazzling 
brilliancy of his body, suddenly vanished away like air and became 
diluted in the Paramatman, entering into everything and became 
invisible, then the Devarsis began to chant hymns to him. On the 
other hand, Vyasa Deva became very much distressed with the 
separation from his son and cried out frequently “Oh, my son! Alas! 
my son Where are you gone?” and went to the summit of the 
mountain where S’uka did go and wept bitterly. Then S’uka Deva, 
who was then residing as the Paramatman, the Internal controller of 
all the beings and with all the beings, knowing Vyasa Deva as very 
much fatigued, distressed, and crying, spoke out as an echo from 
the mountains and trees thus “O Father! There is no difference 
between you and me, considered in the light of Atman; then why are 
you weeping for me?” 


52-59. Even today the above echo is clearly heard (almost daily). 
Seeing Vyasa Deva grieved very much for the separation from his 
son and always crying “Oh! my son! Oh! my son!” Bhagavan 
MahesVara came there and consoled him saying “O Vyasa Deva! 
your son is the foremost of the Yogis; he has attained the highest 
state, so very rare to the ordinary persons that are not self 
controlled. So do not be sorry any more. O Sinless One! when you 
have realised the Brahma-tattva, then you ought not to express any 
sorrow for your S’uka who is now stationed in that Brahman. Your 
fame is now unrivalled, only on account of your having got a son like 



him.” Vyasa Deva said “O Lord of the Devas! O Lord of the world! 
What am I to do now? My grief does not quit my heart anyhow or 
other. My eyes are as yet satisfied in seeing my son; they like still to 
see the son.” Hearing these sorrowful words of Vyasa, Bhagavan 
Mahadeva said “O Muni Sardula! I grant this boon to you that you 
will see the form of your son abiding in shadow, very beautiful, by the 
side of you. O Destroyer of enemies! Now abandon your grief by 
seeing that shadow form of your son.” When Bhagavan MahesVara 
said so, Vyasa began to see the bright shade form of his son. 
Granting thus the boon, Bhagavan Mahadeva vanished then and 
there. When He vanished away, Vyasa became very much 
distressed with sorrow for the bereavement of his son and returned 
with heavy heart to his own hermitage. 


Thus ends the nineteenth chapter of the first Skandha on the 
description of the marriage of S’uka in the Mahapurana S'ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses. 



Chapter 20. On Vyasa Doing His Duties 


1-8. The Risis said “O Suta! What did Veda Vyasa do, when the 
highest Yogi S’uka, Deva-like, acquired all the excellent supernatural 
powers? Kindly describe all these in detail.” 

Hearing this question, Suta spoke O Rishis! Vyasa already had 
with him many disciples Asita, Devala, Vais'ampayana, Jaimini, 
Sumantu and others, all engaged in the study of the Vedas. After 
their studies were over, they all went out to propagate Dharma on 
the earth. Then Vyasa , seeing that the disciples went to the earth 
and his son S’uka Deva had got to the next world, became very 
much distressed with sorrow and wanted to go to some other place. 
He then decided to go to his birth place and went to the banks of the 
Ganges and there remembered his auspicious mother Satyavati, 
forsaken by him before, very sorrowful, and the daughter of a 
fisherman. He then quitted that heaven-like mountain, the source of 
all happiness and came to his own birth place. Reaching the island 
where he was born, he enquired the whereabouts of the beautiful 
faced, the fisherman's daughter as well the wife of a king. The 
fishermen replied that their king had given her in marriage to the king 
S'antanu. Then the king of fishermen, seeing Vyasa there, gladly 
worshipped him and gave him a cordial welcome and spoke with 
folded palms, thus 


9-16. O Muni! When I have become so fortunate as to see you, rare 
even to the Devas, then my birth has been sanctified today and you 
have purified my family. O Brahmin! Kindly say what for have you 
come? 

My wife, son and all my riches and every other thing that I have are 
at your disposal. Thus hearing the history of his mother Satyavati, 
Vyasa erected an As’rama on the beautiful banks of the river 
Sarasvati and remained there in tapasya with an enlightened mind. 



Some time elapsed when the highly energetic S’antanu got through 
his wife Satyavati two sons. Vyasa Deva considered them as his 
two brothers and became very glad, though he himself used to live in 
the forest. The first son of the king S’antanu was Chitrangada, 
endowed with all auspicious qualities, exceedingly beautiful, and 
tormenting his foes; the second son was Vichitra-virya; he was 
endowed with all qualities. The king S’antanu became very happy to 
get these children. S’antanu had one son before through his wife 
Ganga; he was a great hero and very powerful; and the two sons of 
Satyavati were equally powerful. The high souled S’antanu now 
seeing the three sons, all endowed with all auspicious qualities, 
began to think that the Devas were incapable to defeat him. 


17-34. After some time, the religious S’antanu quitted his worn-out 
body as a man quits his clothes worn out in due time. After the king 
S’antanu had ascended the Heavens, the energetic Bhis'ma 
performed duly his funeral obsequies and gave various things in 
charity to the Brahmanas. He did not accept the kingdom himself; 
but placed Chitrangada on the throne and became known by the 
name of Devavrata (truthful in vow like the Devas). The pure souled 
Chitrangada, born of Satyavati became so much powerful by sheer 
force of his arms, and became so great a hero that the enemies felt 
endless troubles. Now once on an occasion, the greatly powerful 
Chitrangada, surrounded by a great army, went on an hunting 
excursion to the forest in quest of ruru deer, etc., when the 
Gandarbha Chitrangada, seeing the king on the way, alighted from 
his chariot. 

O ascetics! A fierce battle then ensued for three years on that sacred 
and wide expanse Kuruksettra between the two heroes, both equally 
powerful. In the battle, the king Chitrangada, the son of S’antanu 
was slain by the Gandarbha Chitrangada and went up to Heavens. 
Bhis’ma, born of the womb of Ganga, hearing the above news, 
expressed his sorrows and, being surrounded by the ministers 
completed all the funeral obsequies and installed Vichitravirya on the 



throne. The beautiful Satyavati became very much agitated by the 
death of her son; but when the ministers and the highsouled spiritual 
teachers consoled her, she became glad when she saw that her 
youngest son became king. Vyasa Deva, too, felt himself glad to 
hear that his youngest brother had been made king. After some time 
when the all auspicious, Satyavati's son Vichitravirya attained his 
youth, 

Bhis’ma began to think of his marriage. At this time the king of Kasi 
(Kas'iraj) called an assembly Svayamvara (where the kings are 
invited and the bride selects the bridegroom) for the marriage of her 
three daughters, endowed with all auspicious qualities, at one and 
the same time. Thousands and thousands of kings and princes from 
various countries were invited there in the assembly; and, 
worshipped duly, they went and decorated the hall. At that time the 
highly energetic fiery Bhis’ma alone, mounting on his chariot, 
attacked the infantry and cavalry, and defeated all the kings 
assembled there, and perforce carried away the three daughters of 
Kas'iraj and took them to Hastinapur. Bhis’ma behaved towards 
those three daughters as if they were mothers, sisters or daughters 
and informed Satyavati without any delay of everything that had 
happened. 


35-39. Then he called for the astrologers and Brahmins, versed in 
the Vedas and enquired about the auspicious day for their marriage. 
When the day was fixed and when every preparation was made, the 
religious Bhis’ma wanted Vichitravirya to marry them. At this time, 
the eldest daughter, beautiful-eyed spoke out modestly to the 
Ganga's son Bhis’ma “O Ganga's son, the illustrious son of your 
family and the best of the Kurus! You are the best knower of 
Dharma; therefore what more shall I say to you. In the Svayamvara 
assembly I mentally selected S'alva and it struck me that he, too, 
looked on me with a very loving heart towards me. So, O tormentor 
of foes! Now do what is fit for that sacred family; O Ganga's son! Not 
only you are extraordinarily powerful but you are also the foremost of 



the religious. Salva mentally wanted to marry me; now do as you 
like.” 


40-44. When the eldest daughter spoke thus, Bhis’ma asked the 
aged Brahmanas, ministers and his mother “What ought to be done 
now” and, taking the opinions of all, spoke to that daughter“O 
beautiful one! You can go wherever you like.” Thus saying, Bhis’ma 
released her. Then the beautiful daughter of Kasiraj went to the 
house of Salvaraj and expressed to him her heart's desire “O 
great king! Knowing me attached to yourself, Bhis’ma has quitted me 
according to the laws of Dharma; I have therefore come to you now; 
marry me. O best of the kings! I will be your legal wife, for already I 
used to think you as my husband and you, too, must have thought 
me your wife.” 


45-47. S'alva replied as follows “O beautiful one! When Bhis’ma 
caught hold of your arm before me and took you to his chariot, then I 
won't marry you. You can say yourself what intelligent man can 
marry a woman touched by another? Therefore I won't marry you, 
though Bhis’ma has quitted you, in the light of another.” Hearing 
these words of S’alva, the daughter of Kasiraj wept bitterly; yet 
S’alva quitted her. Therefore, finding no other way, she went back to 
Bhis’ma weeping, and said as follows 


48-50. O great warrior! S’alva did not consent to marry me, as you 
first took me to the chariot and afterwards left me. So, O 
Mahabhaga! You better look to Dharma and marry me, as you know 
best what is Dharma. If you do not marry me, I will certainly quit my 
life. Hearing her words Bhis’ma said O beautiful one! How can I 
accept you, when your mind has become attached towards another. 
So, O fair one! You better go back soon to your own father with a 
calm, clear mind. When Bhis’ma said thus, that daughter of Kasiraj 



did not go back, out of sheer shame, to her father's house, but went 
to a forest and in a greatly solitary place of pilgrimage began to 
practise asceticism. 


51-56. Now the other two daughters of Kasiraj, beautiful and all 
auspicious Ambalika and Ambika became the wives of the king 
Vichitravirya. Thus the powerful king Vichitravirya began to enjoy 
various pleasures in the palace and in the gardens and thus passed 
his time. For full nine years the king Vichitravirya enjoyed the sexual 
pleasures and became attacked with consumption and fell into the 
jaws of death. Hearing the death news of her son Vichitravirya, 
Satyavati became very sorry and surrounded by her ministers, 
performed his funeral obsequies. Then she spoke privately to 
Bhis’ma with a grievous heart“O highly fortunately son! now you 
better govern your father's kingdom and see that the family of Yayati 
does not become extinct. So better take your brother's wife and try 
your best to continue your family line. 


57-74. Bhis’ma then said :-- "O Mother! Did you not hear of the 
promise that I already made before my father? So I cannot ever 
marry and govern the kingdom.” Hearing these words of Bhis’ma, 
Satyavati became anxious. She began to think as follows “How 
now the continuity of the family be kept! And it is not advisable to 
remain idle when the kingdom has become kingless; no happiness 
can be derived in this state.” Thus thinking, she became exceedingly 
distressed; then the Ganga's son, Bhis’ma spoke to her“O 
respected one! Do not worry your mind with cares; now take steps 
so as to secure a son from Vichitravirya's wife. Call some best 
Brahmin, born of a good family and unite him with Vichitravirya's 
wife. There is no fault, as far as I know, in doing thus to keep up the 
family line. O sweet smiling one! Thus having begotten the 
grandson, give him this kingdom; I will also obey his commands.” 
Hearing these reasonable words of Bhis’ma, Satyavati remembered 



her own son, the sinless Vyasa Deva, who was born to her during 
her virginity. As soon as Vyasa was remembered, he, the great 
ascetic and effulgent like the sun, came there and bowed down to 
his mother. The highly energetic Vyasa was then worshipped duly by 
Bhis’ma and welcome by Satyavati and began to rest there like a 
smokeless fire. The mother Satyavati then spoke to the chief Muni 
“O son! Now procreate a beautiful son from your sperm and the 
ovum of Vichitravirya's wife.” Hearing the mother's words, Vyasa 
considered them as Veda's injunction and thought they must be 
obeyed and promised before her that he must obey and and fulfil her 
orders. He remained there, waiting for the menstruation period. 

When the due period of menstruation arrived, Ambika bathed and 
had a sexual intercourse with Vyasa and begot a very powerful son, 
but a blind one (since she closed her eyes at the sight of Vyasa 
during her intercourse). Seeing the son born blind Satyavati became 
exceedingly sorry; she, then, asked her other son's wife “Go soon 
and get a son born of you in the aforesaid manner.” When the 
menstruation period arrived, Ambalika during the night time went to 
Vyasa and mixed and became pregnant. In due time a son was 
born; that child became of a very pale colour; so Satyavati thought 
the new child, too, unfit for the kingdom; therefore at the end of the 
year again asked her son's wife Ambalika to go to Vyasa . She 
asked Vyasa also for the same purpose and sent Ambalika to his 
bed room. But Ambalika became afraid, and could not go herself but 
sent her maid servant for the purpose. Thus from the womb of the 
maid servant the high souled Vidura was born, having Dharma's 
parts and the most auspicious towards all. Thus Vyasa begot three 
very powerful sons Dhritarastra, Pandu and Vidura for the continuity 
of the family line. O sinless Maharsis! Thus I have described to you 
how my Guru Vyasa Deva, who knows well all the Dharmas, kept up 
the continuity of his family and how he begot sons in the womb of his 
brother Vichitravirya's wives, according to the laws of Dharma, to 
keep up a family. 



Thus ends the twentieth chapter of the 1st Skandha as well as the 
first Skandha on Vyasa doing his duties in the Mahapuranam S'ri 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa . 



THE SECOND BOOK 



Chapter 1. On The Birth Of Matsyagandha 


1-5. The Risis said “O Suta! Your words sound wonderful to us 
indeed! but you have not as yet definitely spoken to us the original 
events in detail; so a great doubt has arisen in our minds. We know 
that the king S’antanu married Vyasa's mother, Satyavati. Now say, 
in detail in how Vyasa became her son? How such a chaste woman 
Satyavati, remaining in her own house, came to be married again by 
S’antanu? and how the two sons came to be born of S’antanu's 
sperm and Satyavati's' ovum? Now O highly fortunate Suvrata? 
Kindly describe in detail this highly sanctifying historical fact. These 
Risis, who are observing vows, are desirous to hear of the birth of 
Veda Vyasa and Satyavati.” 


6-23. Suta said I bow down with devotion to the Highest 
Primordial Force, the bestower of the four fold aims of existence of 
human life, who grants to all, their desires when so prayed by the 
help of the Vagbhava Vijamantra with their heart and soul, for the 
success of all their desires. The above vija is so potent in its effect 
that even pronounced very lightly, even under a pretext, it grants all 
siddhis. So the Devi should be remembered by all means; and now 
saluting Her, I begin my narration of the auspicious Puranic events. 

In days gone by there reigned a king, named Uparichara; he ruled 
over the Chedi country and respected the Brahmins; he was truthful 
and very religious. Indra, the lord of the Devas, became very pleased 
by his asceticism and presented him an auspicious celestial car 
(going in the air) made of pearls, and crystals, helping him in doing 
what he liked best. Mounting on that divine chariot, that religious king 
used to go everywhere; he never remained on earth; he used to 
remain always in the atmosphere and therefore be had his name as 
“Uparichara Vasu” (moving in the upper regions). He had a very 
beautiful wife, named Girika; and five powerful sons, of indomitable 
vigour, were born to him. 



The king give separate kingdoms to each of his sons and made them 
kings. Once on an occasion, Girika, the wife of the Uparichara Vasu, 
after her bath after the menstruation and becoming pure came to the 
king and informed him of her desire to get a son; but that very day 
his Pitris (ancestors) requested him also to kill deer, etc., for their 
Sraddha (solemn obsequies performed in honour of the manes of 
deceased ancestors). Hearing the Pitris, the king of Chedi became 
somewhat anxious for his menstruous wife; but thinking his Pitris 
words more powerful and more worthy to be obeyed, went out on an 
hunting expedition to kill deer and other animals, with the thought of 
his wife Girika in his breast. Then while he was in the forest, he 
remembered his Girika, who was equal in her beauty and loveliness 
to Kamala, and the emission of semen virile took place. He kept this 
semen on the leaf of a banyan tree and thought “How the above 
semen be not futile; my semen cannot remain unfruitful; my wife has 
just now passed her menstruous condition; I will send this semen to 
my dear wife.” Thus thinking the time ripe, he closed the semen 
under the leaves of the banyan tree and charging it with the mantra 
power (some power) addressed a falcon close by thus “O highly 
fortunate one! Take this my semen virile and go to my palace. O 
Beautiful one! Do this my work: take this semen virile and go quick to 
my palace and hand it over to my wife Girika for to-day is her 
menstruation period.” 


24. Suta said “O Risis! Thus saying, the king gave that leaf with 
the virile therein to the falcon, who is capable of going quick in the 
air, took it and immediately rose high up in the air. 


25-26. Another falcon, seeing this one flying in the air with leaf in his 
beak, considered it to be some piece of flesh and fell upon him. 
Immediately a gallant fighting ensued between the two birds with 
their beaks. 



27. While the fighting was going on, that leaf with semen virile fell 
down from their beaks on the waters of the Jumna river. Then the 
two falcons flew away as they liked. 


28-39. O Risis! While the two falcons were fighting with each other, 
one Apsara (celestial nymph) named Adrika came to a Brahmin, who 
was performing his Sandhya Bandanam on the banks of the Jumna. 
That beautiful woman began to bathe in the waters and took a 
plunge for playing sports and caught hold of the feet of the 
Brahmana. The Dvija, engaged in Pranayama (deep breathing 
exercise), saw that the woman had amorous intentions, and cursed 
her, saying “As you have interrupted me in my meditation, so be a 
fish.” 

Adrika, one of the best Apsaras, thus cursed, assumed the form of a 
fish Safari and spent her days in the Jumna waters. When the 
semen virile of Uparichara Vasu fell from the beak of the falcon, that 
fish Adrika came quickly and ate that and became pregnant. When 
ten months passed, a fisherman came there and caught in a net that 
fish Adrika. When the fish's belly was torn asunder, two human 
beings instantly came out the the womb. One was a lovely boy and 
the other a beautiful girl. The fisherman was greatly astonished to 
see this. He went and informed the king of that place who was 
Uparichara Vasu that the boy and the girl were born of the womb of a 
fish. The king also was greatly surprised and accepted the boy who 
seemed auspicious. This Vasu's son was highly energetic and 
powerful, truthful and religious like his father and became famous by 
the name of the king Matsyaraj. Uparichara Vasu gave away the girl 
to the fisherman. This girl was named Kali and she became famous 
by the name of Matsyodari. The smell of the fish came out of her 
body and she was named also Matsyagandha. Thus the auspicious 
Vasu's daughter remained and grew in that fisherman's house. 

The Risis said The beautiful Apsara, cursed by the Muni, turned 
into fish; she was afterwards cut asunder and eaten up by the 



fisherman. Very well! What happened afterwards to that Apsara? 
How was she freed of that curse? and how did she go back to the 
Heavens? 

Thus questioned by the Risis, Suta spoke as follows When the 
Apsara was first cursed by the Muni, she was greatly astonished; 
she began to weep and cry like one greatly distressed and 
afterwards began to praise him. The Brahmin, seeing her weeping, 
took pity on her and said “O good one! Don't weep; I am telling 
you how your curse will expire. As an effect of having incurred my 
wrath, you will be born as a fish and when you will give birth to two 
human children, you will be freed of your curse.” 

The Brahmin having spoken thus, Adrika got a fish-body in the 
waters of the Jumna. Afterwards she gave birth to two human 
children and became freed of the curse when she, quitting the fish 
form assumed the divine form and went up to the Heavens. O Risis! 
The beautiful girl Matsyagandha thus took her birth and was 
nourished in the fisherman's house and grew up there. When the 
extraordinarily lovely girl of Vasu, Matsyagandha attained her youth, 
she continued to do all the household duties of the fisherman and 
remained there. 


Thus ends the first chapter of the Second Skandha on the birth of 
Matsyagandha in the Mahapurana S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 2. On The Birth Of Vyasa Deva 


1-10. Once on an occasion, the highly energetic Muni Paras'ara 
went out on pilgrimage and arrived on the banks of the Yamuna, and 
spoke to the religious fisherman who was taking his food then thus 
- “O fisherman! Take me on your boat and carry me to the other side 
of the river.” Hearing this, the fisherman spoke to the beautiful girl 
Matsyagandha “O beautiful smiling one! This religious ascetic 
intends to cross the river; so take the boat and carry him to the other 
bank.” Thus ordered by her father, the exceedingly beautiful Vasu girl 
Matsyagandha began to steer the boat whereon sat the Muni. Thus 
while the boat was sliding on the waters of the Yamuna; the Muni 
Paras'ara saw the beautiful-eyed damsel Matsyagandha and 
became as if under the command of the great destiny, greatly 
enamoured of her. He desired to enjoy Matsyagandha, full of youth 
and beauty and with his right hand caught hold of her left hand; the 
blue coloured Matsya looking askance spoke out smilingly in the 
following words :-- O knower of Dharma! What are you going to do, 
pierced by the arrows of Cupid? What you desire now, is it worthy of 
your family or your study of the S’astras or worthy of your Tapasya; 
see, you are born in the line of Vas'istha and you are well known as 
of good character. O best of Brahmins! You are quite aware that the 
attaining of a man-birth in this world is very rare; and over and above 
this the attainment of Brahminhood is, as far as my knowledge goes, 
particularly difficult. 


11-14. O Prince of Brahmins! You are the foremost and best as far 
as your family, goodness, and learning in the Vedas and other 
S’astras are concerned; you are well versed in Dharma; how is it, 
then, that you are going to do this act, not worthy of an Arya, though 
you see me possessed of this bad smell of fish throughout my body. 
O one of unbaffled understanding! O best of twice-born! What 
auspicious sign do you see in my body that you are stricken with 



passion on my account that you have caught hold of my hand to 
enjoy me? Why have you gotten your own Dharma? Thus saying, 
Matsyagandha thought within herself“Alas! This Brahmin has 
certainly lost his brains in order to enjoy me; certainly he will be 
drowned just now in his attempt to enjoy me in this boat; his mind is 
so much agitated with the arrows of Cupid that no body, it seems, 
can act against his will.” Thus thinking Matsyagandha spoke again to 
the Muni “O highly fortunate one! Hold patience! let me first take 
you to the other side of the river; then you may do as you please.” 


15-19. Hearing these reasonable words, the Muni let loose of her 
hand and took his seat on the boat and gradually got down on the 
other bank of the river. But the Muni, becoming again extremely 
passionate caught hold of Matsyagandha; when the young woman 
spoke to Paras’ara, in front of her, shuddering “O best of Munis! 
My body is emitting very bad smell; do you not feel this? You know 
very well that the sexual intercourse between male and female of 
similar types brings in happiness and comfort.” Thus spoken to, 
Paras’ara made Matsyagandha emit sweet scent like that of musk to 
a distance of one Yojana (8 miles) and her body exceedingly lovely 
and beautiful and, becoming extremely passionate, again caught 
hold of her right hand. 


20-34. Then the auspicious Satyavati addressed Paras’ara Muni, 
resolved to enjoy her, thus :-- “O Muni! Behold! all are looking at us; 
my father too, is there on the bank of the Yamuna; so, O Muni! wait 
till night this beastly act before all is highly unsatisfactory to me. The 
wise persons declare it a great sin to commit sexual intercourse 
during day they have ordained night time as the best time of 
intercourse for men not the day time; the more so that many 
person's eyes are in this direction. So, O intelligent one! hold on your 
passion for a while; for the blame pronounced by the public is 
horrible.” Hearing these reasonable words, the liberal minded 



Paras'ara created, by his influence of Tapasya, a dense fog so that 
both the banks of the Yamuna became covered with darkness. Then 
Matsyagandha gently spoke to the Muni “O best of Dvijas! I am 
not as yet married; I am now a girl; you will go away after enjoying 
me; your semen virile is not fruitless; so Brahman! What will be my 
fate? If I be pregnant today, what shall I say to my father? and what 
will be my future state? There is no doubt that, after enjoying me, 
you will go away; what will I do afterwards; kindly say.” Hearing these 
words of Matsyagandha, Paras'ara said “O beloved! after you 
have done my pleasant duty, you will remain a girl as you are now; 
yet, O timid one! ask from me any boon you like; I will grant it to 
you.” Satyavati then said “O best Brahman, O giver of one's 
honour! grant me these things That my father and mother do not 
know anything of this affair and that my virginity be again as ever the 
same. Also let an extraordinarily powerful energetic son be born to 
me like you; let this nice smell continue to remain always in my body 
and let my youth and beauty remain afresh and increase ever more. 
Hearing this, Paras'ara said “O beautiful one! a son, very pure 
and holy, will be born to you, from Narayana's part! his name will be 
famous in the three worlds. O beautiful one! never before my heart 
was agitated with such passion. I do not know why I have become so 
much passionate for you. I saw the unrivalled beauties of Apsaras 
but I never lost my patience; but seeing you, I have become 
attracted to you; it must be under the direction of Providence; know it 
certain that there must be some mysterious cause in this. However 
Fate is unavoidable to all; otherwise you are full of so bad smell; why 
shall I be fascinated by your sight? O beautiful one! your son will be 
famed in the three worlds; will compose the Puranas and will sub¬ 
divide the Vedas. 

Thus saying, the Muni Paras'ara enjoyed Matsyagandha, who 
became quite submissive; and after bathing in the Yamuna, quickly 
went away. On the other hand, the chaste Satyavati, too, became 
pregnant and immediately gave birth on the island of Yamuna to a 
son beautiful, as if the Second Kamadeva, the god of Love, 
Kamadeva. No sooner that son, very fiery and highly potent, was 



born than he devoted his mind to tapasya and spoke to his own 
mother Satyavati thus :--“0 Mother! now go wherever you like; I will 
also go to perform tapasya. O highly fortunate one; No sooner you 
remember me, I will come to you. O Mother! where you will have any 
onerous duty, remember me and I will instantly come to you. Let all 
good be unto you; now I go. Avoid all cares and live happily. Thus 
saying, Vyasadeva went out. Matsyagandha, too, went back to his 
father. Vyasa was named also Dvaipayan (born in an island, a 
Dvipa) in as much as Satyavati gave birth to him in a Dvipa island); 
and as he was born of Visnu's parts, he grew up no sooner he was 
born. 

The Muni Dvaipayana bathed in every Tirtha and performed the 
highest asceticism. Thus Dvaipayan Vyasa was born of Paras'ara in 
Satyavati’s womb. Seeing the advent of Kali Yuga, he adorned the 
tree of the Vedas with many S’akhas (branches). It is because he 
expanded the Vedas many S’akhas, that he is denominated also as 
VedaVyas; he composed eighteen Puranas, Samhitas, the excellent 
Mahabharat, subdivided the Vedas and made his disciples Sumantu, 
Jaimini, Paila, Vaisampayan, Asita, Devala and his son S’uka to 
study them. 

Suta said “O Munis! Thus I have described to you the birth of the 
holy Vyasa, the son of Satyavati and all the causes. O Munis! Do not 
allow any doubt enter your mind as regards his birth; for it is always 
advisable to take up only the good things as far as the lives of great 
persons and Munis are concerned. There must be some 
extraordinary mysterious cause owing to which Satyavati was born 
of a fish, and she was first united to Paras'ara and then to Santanu. 
Otherwise how can one account for the fact of the Muni Paras’ara 
being so much agitated by passion and why he would behave like a 
mean low person in the committal of a a grossly blameable act? Now 
has been spoken the wonderful birth story of Vyasa Deva together 
with all incidents, and enveloped under the great mystery. If any man 
hears this holy narrative, he will be freed from sins and will never fall 
into difficulties and will always be happy. 



Thus ends the Second Chapter of the Second Skandha on the birth 
of Vyasa Deva in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses. 



Chapter 3. On The Description Of The Curse On 
Ganga, Mahabhisa And Vasus 


1-8. The Risis said “O Sinless Suta! You have described to us in 
detail the birth of Vyasa, of unrivalled fire, and of Satyavati; but we 
have one great doubt in our minds though, O Knower of Dharma! 
which is not being removed by your words. O Sinless one! First, as 
regards the mother of Vyasa, the all auspicious Satyavati, we have 
this doubt how she came to be united to the virtuous S’antanu? The 
king S’antanu, of the family of Puru is a greatly religious man; how 
could he have married Satyavati knowing her to be a fisherman's 
daughter and born of a low family? Now say who was the first wife of 
S’antanu and how Bhisma, the intelligent son of S’antanu came to 
be born of the parts of Vasu? O Suta! You have told before that 
Bhisma, of indomitable valour, made the Satyavati's son, the brave 
Chitrangada, king; and subsequent to his death made his younger 
brother Vichitravirya king. But when the elder brother Bhisma, the 
greatly religious and beautiful was present, how was it that 
Chitrangada and Vichitravirya having been installed by Bhisma 
himself could have reigned.” 


9-12. Again on the demise of Vichitravirya, Satyavati became 
very much grieved and got two sons born of her two son's wives by 
Vedavyasa? How can we explain this fact? Why did she do this? 
Why did she not give to Bhisma the kingdom? Why did Bhisma not 
marry? And how was it that the elder brother Vyasa Deva, of 
indomitable valour, did such an irreligious act as to beget two 
(Goloka) sons from the wives of the brothers? Vyasa composed the 
Puranas and knew everything of religion; how then did he go to 
other's wives, especially, of his brother's wives? 



13-14. O Suta! Why did Vyasa Deva do such a hateful act, in spite of 
his being a Muni? The actions of Vedas are inferred from their 
subsequent good conducts; how can this act of Vyasa be calculated 
as one amongst them? O Intelligent one! You are the disciple of 
Vyasa; therefore you are the best man to solve our doubts. We all of 
this Dharmakshettra Naimisaranya are very eager to hear this. 


15-39. At this Suta said In ancient days there reigned a king 
named Mahabhisa, in the family of Iksaku endowed with all the 
qualities of a great king; he was the foremost of all the kings, truthful 
and religious. That highly intelligent king performed thousand horse- 
sacrifices (Asva medhas) one hundred Vajapeya sacrifices and 
thereby satisfied Indra, the king of the Devas and went to Heavens. 
Once, on an occasion, that king went to the abode of Brahma; the 
other gods also went there to serve Prajapati. The great river, Ganga 
Devi, too, assuming the feminine form, went to Brahma to serve him. 
Now, in the interval, violent winds arose and the clothing of Ganga 
Devi went off; at this the Devas did not look at her; rather kept their 
faces downwards; but the king Mahabhisa continued gazing at her. 
Ganga also came to know the king and that he had become attached 
to her. Brahma, seeing that both of them are love-stricken and are 
shameless, became angry and cursed them immediately O king! 
you better take your birth again in the human world and practise 
great meritorious deeds and come again to this Heaven. Thus 
saying, Brahma looked at Ganga, who was attached to the king, and 
addressed her“You too better go to the human world and become 
his wife.” Both of them, the king as well as Ganga, came out of 
Brahma's abode, very much grieved in their hearts. The king 
Mahabhisa thought of coming to this world and reflected on the kings 
thereof and settled to make the king Pratipa of Puru's family his 
father. At this time the eight Vasus with their wives wandering in 
various places and enjoying as they liked came to the hermitage of 
Vas'istha. Amongst the aforesaid eight Vasus Prithu and others, one 
Vasu Dyau's wife seeing Nandini, the sacrificial cow (Kamadhenu) of 



Vas'istha asked her husband “Whose is this excellent cow that I 
see? Vasu then replied as follows “ O Beautiful one! This is 
Vas'istha's cow. Whoever, be he a man or woman drinks her milk 
gets his longevity extended to ten thousand years and his youth 
never ends.” Hearing this, the Vasu's wife said “There is a 
very beautiful comrade (Sakhi) of mine, the daughter of the Rajarsi- 
Us'ina in the world, of auspicious qualities. O Mahabhaga! Kindly 
bring to me from Vas'istha's hermitage that auspicious sacrificial 
milch cow Nandini together with her calf that yields all desires; my 
Sakhi will then drink her milk and be thereby free from disease, old 
age and become the chief amongst all mankind. Hearing thus, his 
wife's word, the Vasu Dyau, though sinless, stole away together with 
Prithu and the other Vasus the cow Nandini in utter defiance to the 
self-controlled Muni Vas'istha. When the cow Nandini had been 
stolen, the great ascetic Vas'istha came quickly to the hermitage 
with abundance of fruits. 

The ascetic Muni Vas'istha, not finding, in his hermitage, his cow with 
her calf, searched for her in many forests and caves; but he, the son 
of Varuna, could not find out his cow even after prolonged searches; 
he, then, took recourse to meditation and came to know that the 
Vasus had stolen the cow and became angry. He expressed 
“When the Vasus have stolen this my cow in utter defiance to my 
self, they must be born amongst men.” When the religious Varuna's 
son Vas'istha thus cursed the Vasus, they became very sorry and 
absent-minded; all of them went to Vas'istha's hermitage and saw 
him there; they began to supplicate him as much as they could; and 
took refuge under him. Seeing the Vasus standing before him in an 
extremely distressed condition, the virtuous Muni Vas'istha said 
“You all will be free from the curse within one year; but the Vasu 
Dyau will dwell amongst men for a long, long period as he had stolen 
direct my Nandini with her calf.” 


40-60. While the Vasus, thus cursed, were returning, they saw on the 
way the chief river Ganga Devi also cursed and therefore distressed; 



all of them bowed down to her simultaneously and said: “O Devi! A 
serious thought is troubling our minds, how can we, who live on 
nectar, take our birth in human wombs; so, O best river! You better 
be a woman and give birth to us. O Sinless one! You better be the 
wife of the sage King S’antanu and no sooner we be born of your 
womb, kindly throw us in the river Ganga (your water). If you do thus, 
O Ganga we will certainly be freed of our curse.” Ganga Devi replied 
“Well; that will be.” Thus spoken, the Vasus went to their respective 
places; and Ganga Devi, too, thinking on the subject again and 
again, went out of that place. At this time Mahabhisa became born 
as a son of the king Pratipa and became known as S’antanu. He 
was exceedingly religious and true to his promise. One day while the 
King Pratipa was praising the Surya Devi (the sun) of unequalled 
energy, Ganga Devi assumed an extraordinarily beautiful feminine 
form and came out of the waters and sat on the right thigh, 
resembling like a sal tree, of the king Pratipa. The sage king Pratip 
spoke out to the lady sitting on his right thigh, thus “O beautiful 
faced one! Why, unasked, have you sat on my auspicious right 
thigh?” The lovely Ganga then replied “Hear why I have sat here. 
O best of Kurus! O king! Becoming attached to you, I have sat on 
your thigh; so please accept me.” At this the king Pratipa spoke to 
the beautiful lady, full of youth and beauty, “I never go, simply out of 
passion to another's wife. There is another point; you have sat on my 
right thigh; that is the seat of sons and son's wives; so, when my 
desired son will be born, you will then, be my son's wife. And 
certainly, by your good will, my son will be born.” The lady, of divine 
form, said. Well; that will be done! and went away. The king returned 
to his palace, thinking of the lady. After some time, he had a son 
born to him and when the son attained his teens, the king desired to 
lead a forest life and communicated this matter to his son. He said 
also, if the aforesaid beautifully smiling girl comes to you to marry, 
then marry her. And I am also ordering you not to question her 
anything “who are you” and so forth. If you take her as your legal 
wife, you will certainly be happy. Thus saying to his son, the king 
Pratipa handed over all his kingdom to his son and gladly retired into 
the forest. The king practised tapasya in the forest and worshipped 



Ambika; on quitting his mortal coil, he went by his sheer merit to the 
Heavens. The highly energetic king S’antanu, on getting his 
kingdom, began to administer justice according to the laws of 
Dharma and governed his subjects. 


Thus ends the third Chapter of the Second Skandha on the 
description of the curse on Ganga, Mahabhisa and Vasus in 
the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses. 



Chapter 4. On The Birth Of The Vasus 


1-8. Suta said On the king Pratipa, ascending to the Heavens, the 
truly hero-king S’antanu went out a hunting tigers and other forest 
animals. Once, while he was roaming in a wild wilderness, on the 
banks of the Ganges, he saw a fawn-eyed well decorated beautiful 
woman. No sooner the king S’antanu saw her than he became 
addicted to her and thought within himself thus “Certainly my 
father spoke of this beautiful faced woman who is looking like a 
second Laksmi, endowed with beauty and youth.” The king could not 
rest satisfied simply with seeing the lotus-like face. The hairs on his 
body stood on their ends and his heart was very much attracted to 
her. Ganga Devi, too, knew him to be the king Mahabhisa and 
became, in her turn, very much attached to him. She then went 
smiling towards the king. Seeing the blue-coloured lady looking 
askance at him, the king became very happy and consoled her in 
sweet words and said “O, one of beautiful thighs! Are you Devi; 
ManusT (human kind) Gandharvi; Yakshi, the daughter of Nagas 
(serpents), or a celestial nymph? Whoever you may be, O beautiful 
one! be my wife; your sweet smiles, it seems, are brimful of love; so 
be my legal wife to-day.” 


9-26. Suta said The king S’antanu could not recognise the lady to 
be Ganga; but Ganga knew that he is the king Mahabhisa and is 
born as S’antanu. Hearing the above words of the king, Ganga, out 
of her previous affections, spoke out to the king, smiling “O king! I 
know that you are the son of the king Pratipa. Behold! Though it is 
inevitable that woman will get their husbands, yet who is that 
beautiful lady that does not husband according to her liking and 
qualifications? But I can take you as my husband, if you make a 
certain promise to me. Hear my resolve afterwards I will marry you. 

O king! Whatever I will do, be it good or bad, auspicious or 
inauspicious, you must not hinder or interrupt me nor ever say that is 



not to your liking and satisfaction. Whenever you will break this my 
resolve, I will instantly quit you and go to another place wherever I 
like. The king S’antanu, then, said “Well! That will be” and 
promised to the above effect; then Ganga Devi recollected within 
herself Vasus' words and thought of the attachment of the king 
Mahabhisa and accepted S’antanu as her husband. Thus married to 
the king S’antanu, the beautiful Ganga in human form went to his 
abode. The king, on having got possession of her, began to enjoy in 
pleasant gardens. The lady, too, appreciated his mental feelings and 
began to serve him to his satisfaction. Thus many years elapsed in 
lovely enjoyments and intercourses between the couple who looked 
like Indra and his pair Sachi; and they did not feel at all how the time 
passed. The lady endowed with all qualities and the clever king, well- 
versed in the art of loving, began to enjoy incessantly like Laksmi 
and Narayana, in their divine palace. 

Thus many years passed when the lovely eyed lady became 
pregnant of the king S’antanu's sperm and, in due time, gave birth to 
a son who was a Vasu. No sooner the son was born than Ganga 
Devi threw it in the waters of the Ganges. Thus the second, third, 
fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh sons were threwn successively on the 
waters. Then the king became very anxious and thought within 
himself“What am I to do now? How my family be preserved? This 
my wife, incarnate of sin, has killed my seven sons; if I now desist 
her, she will instantly leave me and go away. Now this is the eighth 
pregnancy as desired by me. Now if I do not interrupt her, she will 
certainly throw my son in the Ganges. Whether a son will be born 
again or not is doubtful; and even if that be born, it is doubtful 
whether she will preserve that child; now what am I to do in this 
doubtful point? However I will try my best to continue the thread of 
my family line.” 


27-46. Now, in due time, the Vasu who, having been influenced by 
his wife had stolen Vas’istha's cow Nandini, became born as the 
eighth son of Ganga Devi; the king S’antanu, seeing this son fell 



unto Ganga's feet and said “O thin-bodied woman! I pray to you to 
give my life to-day; better nourish this my one son. O beautiful one! 
You killed in succession my seven exceedingly beautiful sons. O one 
of beautiful hips! I now fall at your feet. O beautiful one! save the life 
of this child of mine. If you ask from me any other thing to day, even 
that be very rare, I will give it to you; but you better now keep the 
thread of my family line. The Pundits, versed in the Vedas, say that 
he who has no issues cannot go to Heaven; so, O Beautiful one! To¬ 
day I pray to you to keep the life of this my eighth son.” Though thus 
spoken by S’antanu, Ganga Devi was eager to take away the son to 
throw in the waters; the king became very sorrowful and angrily 
spoke out “O vile and vicious woman! What are you going to do? Do 
you not fear hell! of what villain are you the daughter, that you are 
always doing this vicious deed? O Sinner! go away wherever you will 
or remain here as yon like, it matters little; but my son will remain 
here. When you attempt to bring my family to extinction, what use is 
there in living with you?” When the king thus spoke to the woman 
who was ready to take away the son she angrily spoke as follows 
O King! When you have acted against my promise, my word is 
broken and my connection with you has stopped from to-day. 
Therefore I will take this son to the forest, where I will nourish him. I 
am Ganga; to fulfil God's work I have come here. The high-souled 
Vas'istha cursed before the eight Vasus “Better be born as men”; 
they became very anxious; and seeing me they prayed “O Sinless 
one! let you be mother of us all.” O best of kings! I granted them 
what they desired; and then for the purpose of serving god's ends, I 
became your wife. Know this my history. The seven Vasus already 
were born and were freed; now this is the last Vasu and he will 
remain here for sometime as your son. O S’antanu! now take this 
son offered by Ganga. Know this to be the Deva Vasu and enjoy the 
pleasure of having a son. O highly fortunate one! This son will be 
famous by the name of Gangeya (Ganga's son) and will be the most 
powerful of all. O King! To-day I will take this son to the place where I 
chose you as my husband; I will nourish him and when he attains his 
youth, I will return him to you. For, this son, if deprived of mother, will 
not be happy nor will he live.” Thus saying, Ganga vanished with the 



son; the King S’antanu became very sorrowful and passed away his 
time in his palace. The king thought always of the separation from 
his wife and son and thus painfully governed his kingdom. 


47-69. Thus some time passed on, when, once on an occasion, the 
king S’antanu went out a hunting and killed, with arrows, buffaloes, 
boar, and other wild animals and came to the banks of the Ganges. 
Here he saw with great wonder that a boy was playing with a great 
bow and was shooting arrows after arrows. The king's attention was 
more attracted towards the boy, but whether that boy was his or not, 
did not at all come to his mind. Looking at his extraordinary feats, his 
agility in shooting arrows with ease and quickness, his learning that 
can have no equal and his beautiful form, as if of Cupid, he became 
greatly surprised and asked him “O Sinless one! whose son are 
you?” The hero boy did not reply anything but went away shooting 
his arrows. The king thought within himself “Who is this boy? Whose 
son is he? What to do now? To whom shall I go now?” Thus 
pondering, he recollected within himself and began to recite verses 
in praise of Ganga; Ganga, assuming her beautiful form as before, 
became visible to the king. Seeing her, the king said “O Ganga! 
Who is this boy that has just gone? Will you show him once more to 
me now?” Hearing these words of S’antanu, Ganga said “O king 
of kings! He is your son, he is that eighth Vasu. So long I have 
nourished him and now I hand him over to you. O Suvrata! This is 
the great ascetic Gangeya. He is the illustrious scion of your family. 
The glory of your line will be enhanced. I have taught him the whole 
science of archery. This pure son of yours dwelt in the hermitage of 
Vas'istha and has become versed in all the Vidyas and skilled in all 
the actions. Your this son knows everything that Jamadgni 
Paras'uram knew. So, O king of kings! Take now your son and be 
happy. Thus saying, Ganga gave him his son and vanished; the king 
also became very glad and embraced his son; he smelled his head 
and took him to his chariot and drove towards his own city. On 
returning to Hastinapur, the king held a great festival (utsab) in honor 



of the arrival of his son; he called all his astrologers and enquired 
what day was auspicious. He then called all his subjects and 
ministers and installed Gangeya as the Crown Prince. The religious 
S’antanu became very happy on making Gangeya, the Crown 
Prince; he forgot the pains due to Ganga's bereavement. Suta said 
- “Thus I have described to you the cause of the curse on Vasus, the 
birth of Bhisma from the womb of Ganga, the union of Ganga and 
S’antanu, etc.. He who hears in this world this holy story of Ganga's 
birth and the birth of the Vasu, is freed of all sins and gets mukti. O 
Munis! I have described these meritorious holy accounts, as I heard 
from the mouth of Vyasa. Any body who hears this holy S’rimad 
Bhagavatam, endowed with five characteristics and filled with 
various anecdotes, that came out of the mouth of Vyasa, finds all his 
sins destroyed and attains peace and blessedness. O Munis! Thus 
has been described completely to you this holy history. 


Thus ends the fourth Chapter on the birth of the Vasus in the 
Mahapurana S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses. 



Chapter 5. On The Marriage Of SAXYAVAxi 


1-20. The Risis said “O son of Lomaharsana, O Suta; you have 
described to us how the eight Vasus, cursed by Vas'istha, took their 
birth and how Bhisma was born. O knower of Dharma! Now describe 
to us in detail how the greatly religious king S’antanu married the 
auspicious Yojanagandha, the chaste Satyavati, the mother of 
Vyasa, knowing full well that she was a fisherman's daughter? O 
Suvrata! Remove our this doubt. Suta then said The sage king 
S’antanu always used to go to forests on hunting expeditions, with 
his heart addicted to hunting buffaloes, deer and various other wild 
animals. 

Thus, for four years that king went out a hunting, with his son 
Bhisma, deer and other wild animals and got the highest happiness 
as Mahadeva finds in company with Kartikeya. Once, on an 
occasion, while he was shooting arrows at rhinoceros and boar, etc., 
he went so far as to reach a forest on the banks of the Yamuna, the 
chief of the rivers. There he began to smell an excellent nice smell 
that could not be described in words; he tried to find out the source 
and wandered here and there, and on all sides of the forest; and 
thought that this enchanting smell was not that of Mandara flowers, 
musk, champaka nor that of Malati nor that of Ketaki flower; the air 
was blowing saturated with peculiar fragrant smell that he never 
experienced before. Thus thinking of that smell, the king S’antanu, 
being enchanted with that, followed to its source in that forest. At last 
he came to a spot on the banks of the Yamuna the chief of the rivers, 
where a very beautiful girl, calm and quiet and with feminine 
gestures and posture amorous, lovely but ill-clad, was sitting; and he 
found out that the above beautiful smell was coming out of her body. 
The form of the lady was extremely beautiful; the smell was very 
wonderful, and captivating the hearts of all; her age then entered to 
youth and she was very auspicious. The king was greatly surprised 
and was eager to know who the lady was; whence she had come; 



whether she was a Deva girl, or a human or a Gandarbha daughter 
or a Naga daughter? But, being unable to come to a definite 
conclusion and becoming passionate, he remembered Ganga and 
asked that lady sitting on the bank of the Yumna, thus “O dear! 
Who are you? Whose daughter are you? Why are you alone in this 
lovely forest? O beautiful eyed! Are you married? Or are you as yet 
unmarried? So answer to all these. O lovely eyed one! Seeing your 
lovely enchanting form I am become extremely passionate. So, O 
dear! Describe in detail to me, who are you? and what do you intend 
to do?” When the king spoke thus the lotus eyed nice-teethed lady 
replied as follows “O king! Know me as a fisherman's daughter 
and I am completely under my father's command. O king of kings! 
For Dharma's sake I carry ferry across this Yumna river. My father 
has gone to-day to our house. O Master of wealth! Thus I have 
spoken truth to you.” Thus saying the lady desisted; the passionate 
king then spoke to her“I am the foremost hero of the Kuru family; 
so choose me as your husband; then your this youth will not go in 
vain. 


21-32. O fawn-eyed one! I have no other wife existing; so you will be 
my legal wife. O Dear! Passion is giving much pains to me; therefore 
I am now become your obedient servant for ever. O Beloved! My 
former dear wife has abandoned me and gone away; but I have not 
married since then. Now seeing you beautiful, in all respects, I 
cannot bring my mind under control.” 

Hearing these nectar-like beautiful words of the king, the sweet 
scented fisherman's daughter, though also turned extremely 
passionate, held patience and exclaimed “O king! I also desire 
that which you have expressed; I am of opinion to act according to 
your wishes. But, what am I to do? I am not dependent. You are to 
know this. My father alone can give me in marriage to you. So better 
ask my father for me. Though I am a fisherman's daughter, still I am 
not wanton and wilful. I am always obedient to my father; if my father 
wills, you can marry me. And I will be obedient to you. O king! The 



god of love is tormenting me, who is endowed with youth; he does 
not torment you so much. Still I must regard my family manners and 
customs coming down from ancient times. I must hold my patience.” 
Suta said Thus passionately pleased with these fascinating words 
of the lady, the king went to the fisherman's house for the lady. 
Seeing the king coming, the fisherman was greatly bewildered and 
astonished and bowed down with great devotion and said “O 
King! I am Thy servant. I am blessed by Thy presence. O great King! 
Now be graciously pleased to order me the cause of Thy arrival.” 
Hearing the fisherman's words, the King said “O sinless one! This 
I tell you truly that if you give me your daughter in marriage I will 
certainly make her my legal wife.” The fisherman replied “O king! 
What must be given ever, how can I say that is not to be given. 
Therefore if Thou askest for my daughter, I will certainly give her to 
Thee. But, O great King! Thou wilt have to make her son, the king of 
Thy kingdom; no other son of Thine could be king, after Thy 
absence.” 


33-40. Hearing these words of the fisherman, the king S’antanu 
became very anxious. He remembered Gangeya and could not 
speak anything. He, being sick with love anxiously returned home; 
but he abandoned bathing, feeding, sleeping, etc. At this, the son 
Gangeya Bhisma whose vow was equal to that of the gods, marking 
that the king was being troubled with some thought, went to him and 
asked why he was anxious “O king! Say truly what is your anxiety; 
who is your enemy that is not conquered; whom do you went to bring 
under your control? O king! What use is there of having a son who 
does not understand the difficulties of his father, or does not try to 
remove these difficulties. A son can be called really the son, who is 
born to repay the debts incurred by him in previous births; there is no 
manner of discussion in this. See, Raghu's son Dasarathi Ram 
abandoned his kingdom under the orders of his father and repaired 
to Chitrakuta forest with his brother Laksman and wife Sita. The son 
of king Haris Chandra, Rohita, ready to repay the debt of his father 



and sold by his father, worked as a servant at a Brahmana's house. 
So the famous S’unahs'ephah, sold by his high souled father Ajigarta 
was tied for sacrifice in a sacrificial post; but he was afterwards freed 
by the Gadhi's son VisVamitra. 


41-59. It is well known that, in ancient days, the Jamadagni's son 
Paras'uram cut off his mother's head under the orders of his father. 
He considered the father's words more important, and hence could 
do such an unjust act. O king! This my body is at your disposal; I can 
certainly do what you order me to do. So say what am I to do? as 
long as I am living, you need not express any sorrow; if you permit, I 
will do what is even hardly practicable to do. O king! Say why you 
are anxious; I will remove that at once with this bow in my hand. If 
my body goes in carrying your mandate know that your desire will be 
fructified. Fie to that son, who, being capable, is averse to do what 
his father desires! What use is there in having a son who does not 
remove the cause of his father's anxiety? Hearing the words of the 
son, the king S’antanu felt much ashamed in his heart and said “O 
son! This is now my gravest care that you are my only son; besides 
you are a hero very powerful, honoured and never showing your 
back in battles; therefore, if, out of ill-luck you become dead in some 
battlefield, I will become issueless; under such circumstances what 
am I to do? So, O son! My life is fruitless when I have got only one 
son; this is my gravest care; therefore I am sorry. O son! I have no 
other cares that I can mention to you.” Hearing these words of the 
father, Gangeya called the old ministers and said that the king was 
too ashamed to speak out to me the real matter; so I ask you all to 
know exactly the king's cares and communicate them to me as they 
are; I can carry them out, without any hitch, then. At these Bhisma's 
words, the ministers went to the king, and learned the true cause, 
and spoke to Bhisma; learning this, he began to think what ought to 
be done. 


The Ganga's son Bhisma, then, accompanied by the ministers, 
quickly went to the house of the fisherman, and with words of 



humility and affection, spoke “O tormentor of foes! I pray to you to 
give your beautiful daughter in marriage to my father. Your daughter 
will be my mother and I will be her servant.” The fisherman, then, 
said “O highly lucky prince! Then the king's son will not be able to 
become king, in your presence; so kindly marry yourself my 
daughter.” At this Bhisma again said Let your daughter be my 
mother; I will never accept the kingdom. The son of your daughter 
will, no doubt, become king. The fisherman said “I know your 
words are true; but if your son be powerful, he can take forcibly the 
kingdom for himself.” At this Bhisma again said “O Sire! Know my 
words as true; I will never marry; from to-day I have accepted this 
difficult vow.” Suta said Hearing this firm resolve of Bhisma; the 
fisherman gave over his beautiful daughter to the king S’antanu. 

Thus S’antanu married the dear Satyavati; but he was quite unaware 
of the wonderful birth of Vyasa Deva. 

Thus ends the fifth Chapter of the second Skandha on the marriage 
of Satyavati in the Mahapurana S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses. 



Chapter 6. On The Birth Of The Pandavas 


1-12. Suta said Thus S’antanu married Satyavati; two sons were 
born to her and they died in course of time. Out of Vyasa Deva's 
semen, Dhritarastra was born. Ambika Devi, the mother of 
Dhritarastra closed her eyes on seeing Veda Vyasa; hence 
Dhritarastra was born blind. Seeing Dhritarastra blind Satyavati 
asked Vyasa to go to Ambalika (Pandu's mother); the princess 
Ambalika, mother of Pandu turned pale at the sight of Vyasa; hence 
her son became of a pale colour out of Vyasa's wrath. Hence the 
name of the son was Pandu. Next the maid servant, expert in the 
science of amorous pleasures, satisfied Vyasa; hence her son 
Vidura was born of Dharma's part and became truthful and holy. 
Though Pandu was younger, the ministers installed him on the 
throne. Dhritarastra could not become king, as he was blind. By the 
permission of Bhisma the powerful Pandu obtained the sovereignty; 
and the intelligent Vidura became his minister. Dhritarastra had two 
wives Gandhari and Sauvali; this Sauvali was Vaishya; she was 
engaged in the household affairs. The king Pandu had two wives, 
too; the first was Kunti, the daughter of Surasena; and the other was 
Madri, the daughter of the Madra king. Gandhari gave birth to one 
hundred beautiful sons; Vais'ya Sauvali gave birth to one beautiful 
son named Yuyutsu. While Kunti was a virgin, she gave birth, 
through the medium of the Sun, the lovely Kama; next he became 
the wife of Pandu. Hearing this, the Risis said “O Muni Suta! What 
are you saying ? First Kunti brought forth a child and afterwards she 
was married to Pandu; this is wonderful, indeed! How was Kama, 
born of Kunti, unmarried? and how came Kunti to be married 
afterwards? describe all these in detail.” 


13-35. Suta then said “O Dvija! While Surasena's daughter Kunti 
was a virgin girl, the king Kuntibhoja asked for Kunti that she might 
become her girl and Surasena gave her to the king Kuntibhoja who 



brought up this beautifully smiling girl. He put to her the service of 
Agni of Agnihotra. Once, on an occassion, Durvasa Muni, engaged 
in the vow, lasting for four months, came there; Kunti served him 
during that period; the Muni became greatly pleased and gave her a 
very auspicious, mantra, by virtue of which any Deva, when called 
upon by that mantra will come to Kunti and satisfy her desires. When 
the Muni went away, Kunti, remaining in her house, wanted to test 
the accuracy of the mantra and asked within herself “What Devata 
to call upon.” Seeing the God Surya had arisen in the sky, Kunti 
uttered the Mantra and invoked him. The Sun, then, assuming an 
excellent human form, came down from the Heavens and appeared 
before Kunti in the same room. Seeing the Deva Sun, Kunti became 
greatly surprised and began to shudder and instantly became 
endowed with the inherent natural quality of passion (had 
menstruation). The beautiful-eyed Kunti, with folded palm; spoke to 
Surya Deva standing before “I am highly pleased to-day seeing 
Thy form; now go back to Thy sphere.” 

Surya Deva said “O Kunti! What for you called me, by virtue of the 
Mantra? Calling me, why do you not worship me, standing before 
you? O beautiful blue one! Seeing you, I have become passionate; 
so come to me. By means of the mantra, you have made me your 
subservient so take me for intercourse.” Hearing this, Kunti said 
“O Witness of all! O knower of Dharma! You know that I am a virgin 
girl. O Suvrata! I bow down to you; I am a family daughter; so do not 
speak ill to me.” Surya then said “If I go away in vain, I will be an 
object of great shame, and, no doubt, will be laughed amongst the 
gods; So, O Kunti! If you do not satisfy me, I will immediately curse 
you and the Brahmin who has given you this mantra. O Beautiful 
one! If you satisfy me, your virginity will remain; no body will come to 
know and there will be born a son to you, exactly like me.” Thus 
saying Surya Deva enjoyed the bashful Kunti, with her mind 
attracted towards him; He granted her the desired boons and went 
away. The beautiful Kunti became pregnant and began to remain in 
a house, under great secrecy. Only the dear nurse knew that; her 
mother or any other person was quite unaware of the fact. In time, a 



very beautiful son like the second Sun and Kartikeya, decked with a 
lovely Kavacha coat of mail and two ear-rings, was born there. Then 
the nurse caught hold of the hand of the bashful Kunti and said “O 
Charming one! What care can you possibly have as long as I 
am living.” Kunti then, placed the son in a box and said “O son! 
What shall I do? Being afraid of shame, I am leaving you, though you 
are dear to me as my life itself! I am exceedingly fortunate that I am 
casting aside this all auspicious son. May the attributeless Bhagavati 
Ambika, the World Mother and the Lady of all, endowed with 
attributes, protect Thee! May Katyayani, the giver of all desires, feed 
you with Her milk! Alas! I am quitting you, born of Surya’s semen in 
this solitary forest like a vitiated wanton woman. I do not know, when 
shall I see your lotus like beautiful face, dearest to me like my self. 
Alas! I never worshipped in my former birth S’ivani, the mother of the 
three worlds; I never meditated Her lotus like feet, the Giver of all 
happiness; hence I am so very unfortunate. O Dear son! I must 
perform great tapasya to expiate for this terrible sin, that I knowingly 
commit in relinquishing you in the forest.” 


36-48. Suta said :-- Thus saying to the son within the casket, Kunti 
gave over that to the hands of her nurse, terrified, lest some one 
might see her. Kunti then bathed and remained with a fearful heart in 
her father's house. A carpenter (charioteer?) named Adhiratha got 
accidentally that casket floating in the Ganges. The carpenter's wife 
Radha, prayed for the son and nourished him under her care. Thus 
nourished in the carpenter's house, the famous Kunti's son Kama 
became a very powerful warrior. The king Pandu then married Kunti 
in a Svayamvara, a marriage in which the girl chooses her husband 
from among a number of suitors, assembled together. And the all 
auspicious daughter of the king of Madra became also the second 
wife of Pandu. Once, on an occasion, the powerful Pandu, while 
hunting in the forest killed a Muni, in the form of a deer, engaged in 
the act of co-habitation, thinking it to be a deer. The dying Muni 
became inflated with wrath, cursed Pandu “If you co-habit. 



certainly you will die.” Thus cursed by the Muni, Pandu became very 
sorrowful and abandoned his kingdom and began to live in the 
forest. O Munis! His two wives Kunti and Madri, followed their 
husband as chaste women do, to serve him in the forest. Dwelling in 
the hermitage of the Munis, Pandu listened to the Dharma S’astras 
and practised severe penance. Once while he was listening to the 
religious discourses of the Munis, he heard unmistakeably the Munis 
telling that the man who is sonless can never go to the Heavens; so 
he must get a son somehow or other. The Pundits declare that the 
sons born of the father's semen, the sons born of their daughters, 
the Ksettraja, the Goloka, the Kunda, the Sahoda, the Kanina, the 
Krita, one obtained in the forest, or one offered by another father, 
unable to nourish his son, all are entitled to inherit the wealth of the 
father; but the sons, enumerated successively are more and more 
inferior. 


N.B.: Ksettraja - of a son, the off spring of the wife by a kinsman 
appointed to procreate issue to the husband. 

Goloka - Bastard child of a widow. 

Kunda - a child born in adultery. 

Sahoda - the son of a woman pregnant at the time of marriage. 
Kanina - the son born of a young and unmarried woman. 

Krita - purchased 


49-52. Hearing this, Pandu spoke to the lotus-eyed Kunti to 
procreate sons for him soon by a great ascetic Muni “By my order, 
you will not incur any sin in doing this. I heard that in ancient times 
the high souled kin Saudasa got son from Vas'istha.” Kunti, then 
spoke to the king “O Lord! I know one Siddha mantra; it was given 
to me before by the Muni Durvasa. Whichever Devata I will invoke by 



that Mantra, he will instantly come to my side, controlled by that 
Mantra.” 


53-71. At the request of the husband, Kunti invoked Dharma, the 
best of the Devas; and after being impregnated by him, gave birth to 
Yudhisthira. Then she got through Pavana Deva, the son Vrikodara; 
and through Indra the Lord of the Devas, Arjuna. Thus, in every year, 
Kunti gave birth to one son and so in three years she gave birth to 
three very powerful and mighty sons. At this Madri spoke to her 
husband “O king, the best of the Kurus! What shall I do now? 
Kindly suggest to me the means of procreating sons; O Lord, remove 
my pain.” Pandu asked Kunti for this; Kunti, moved with pity, gave 
her the mantra, so that she might get one son. Then the beautiful 
Madri, invoked the twin AsVin under the advice of her husband and 
got a pair of twins Nakula and Sahadeva through them. O Munis! 
Thus five Pandavas were born successively in every following year 
to the wives of Pandu by the seed of the Devas. Once on a time 
Pandu, whose end was drawing nigh became very passionate at the 
sight of Madri in that solitary hermitage. He, though forbidden 
repeatedly by Madri, warmly embraced her, as if dictated by the 
great destroyer, and fell to the ground. As the creeper falls down 
when the tree is felled, so Madri dropped on the ground and began 
to cry violently. Having heard the wailings of Madri, Kunti and the five 
sons of Pandu came there weeping and crying; a tumult then ensued 
and the great Munis also appeared on the scene. Then those Munis, 
practising great vows, knew that Pandu was dead and performed 
duly, on the banks of the Ganges, the ceremony of burning the dead. 

At that time Madri gave over to Kunti the charge of her two sons and 
followed the Sati practice along with her husband to go to Satyaloka. 

The Munis, then, performed Tarpana ceremonies in honour of Pandu 
and Madri and took Kunti and the five sons to Hastinapur. Knowing 
that Kunti has come, Bhisma, Vidura and the relatives of Dhritarastra 
within the city, all came to Kunti. They all asked Kunti “O beautiful 



one! Whose are these five sons?” Kunti, then, remembered the 
curse on Pandu and sorrowfully expressed “ These are the Deva's 
sons born in Kuru family.” In order to convince the people assembled 
there, Kunti invoked the Devas who came in the celestial space 
above and said “Yes, these are the sons born of our seeds.” 
Bhisma, then, paid respect to the words of the Devas and honoured 
duly the boys. Bhisma then took the five sons and Pandu's wife to 
Hastina and gladly nourished them. O Munis! The sons of Pritha 
were thus born and nourished by Bhisma. 


Thus ends the sixth chapter of the second Adhyaya on the birth of 
the Pandavas in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam. 



Chapter 7. On Shewing The Departed Ones 


Suta said The chaste Draupadi was the common wife of all the 
five very beautiful sons of Kunti; and she bore five sons, one to every 
husband. Arjuna had one wife more; she was Subhadra, the sister of 
S’ri Krisna. By the order of S’ri Krisna, Arjuna stole her away (took 
her by force). The great hero Abhimanyu was born of Subhadra. This 
Abhimanyu and the five sons of Draupadi were killed in battle. 
Abhimanyu's wife Uttara was the charming daughter of the king 
Virat. She gave birth to one dead child, after all the boys, the 
descendants of the family were extinct. The above child died out of 
the arrows of AsVatthama. The extraordinarily powerful S’ri Krisna 
Himself made alive again this his sister's dead grandson. As this son 
was born after the family had become extinct, he became known in 
the world by the name of Pariksit. When the sons were all destroyed, 
Dhritarastra became very sorry, and, tormented by the arrow-like 
words of Bhima, remained in the kingdom of the Pandavas. 

Gandhari, too, exceedingly distressed on the bereavement of the 
sons, remained there also. Yudhisthira, day and night, served 
Dhritarastra and Gandhari. The greatly religious Vidura always used 
to console, by the advice of Yudhisthira, his brother Dhritarastra, who 
possessed the eye of wisdom and he remained by his brother's side. 
Dharma's son Yudhisthira used to serve his uncle Dhritarastra in 
such a way as he might forget the pain of the death of his sons. But 
Bhima used to pierce his heart by his arrow-like words that he 
pronounced so loud as to reach the ears of the old king Dhritarastra. 
Bhima used to-say “In the battle field I killed all the sons, of the 
wicked blind king (Dhritarastra) and it was I that sucked well and 
drunk, full to the brim, the blood of the heart of Duhs'asana. Now this 
blind king eats shamelessly like a crow and a dog, the mass of food 
(Pinda) given by me, and thus is bearing uselessly the burden of life. 
Daily Bhima used to tell, thus, harsh words to him; whereas the 
religious Yudhisthira used to console him, saying “Bhima is a quite 
illiterate brute” and so forth. The king Dhritarastra remained there 



with a grieved heart for eighteen years; the one day he proposed to 
the Dharma's son Yudhisthira about his intention to dwell in forest 
thus “To-day I wish to perform Tarpanas in the names my sons. 
True it is, that Bhima performed the funeral obsequies of them all; 
but, having in view of the former enmity, he did not do anything for 
my sons. If you give me some money, I will, then, perform the funeral 
obsequies of my sons and then retire to the forest to perform 
tapasya that I can go to Heaven.” Vidura also asked Yudhisthira 
privately pay to Dhritarashtra the sum that he wanted; Yudhisthira 
also intended to pay the required money. Then Yudhisthira, the lord 
of the world call his younger brothers and addressed them as follows 
“O highly fortunate ones! Our revered uncle is desirous to perform 
the funeral obsequies of his sons; so we will have to give him some 
money for the purpose.” Hearing these words of his elder brother of 
indomitable valour, Havana's son, the mighty armed Bhima became 
very angry and spoke out follows “O highly lucky one! Is it that we 
will have to give wealth for the spiritual benefit of Duryodhana and 
others? What a great stupidity can there be than the fact that such a 
malevolent blind king is deriving so great happiness at your hands? 
O Arya! It is by your bad counsel that we suffered endless troubles in 
the forest and the extremely good Draupadi was brought before the 
public in the hall by Duhs'asana. O one of good vows! It is for your 
satisfaction alone that we, though we were very mighty, had to 
remain in the house of Matsya Raj Virat as servants. Had you not 
been our elder brother and not been addicted to the gambling, would 
it have been possible I, who killed Jarasandha, would have been a 
cook to Virat Raj! Never we had been put to so great a trouble! 

Never would the mighty armed Arjuna, the Vasava's son, have acted 
the part of an actress (a dancer), dressing himself in a female garb, 
under the name Vrihannala. Alas! What more painful could there be 
by assuming a human birth that the hands of Arjuna, that wielded 
always the Gandiva bow, would have worn bracelets befitting a 
woman? I would have been happy then had I, seeing the braid of 
hair on Arjuna's head and the collyrium in his eyes, cut off the head 
of Dhritarastra! 



O Lord of the earth! Without asking you, I set fire on the house, 
named Jatugriha (a lac-house, as built by Duryodhana in order to 
burn up the Pandavas) and therefore the vicious Virochana, who 
wanted to burn us, was himself burnt up. Again, O Lord of men! 
similarly, without asking you, I slew Kichaka; this is now the one 
thing I regret that I could not have killed in the same way the sons of 
Dhritarastra before the public hall. O king of kings! It was simply your 
stupidity that you liberated Duryodhana and other sons, the great 
enemies of the Gandarbhas, when they had been imprisoned by 
them. Again to-day you are willing to give wealth for the spiritual 
benefit of those Duryodhana and others! But, O Lord of the earth, I 
would never give wealth, even if you request me specially to do this. 

Thus saying, Bhima went away. Dharma's son Yudhisthira then 
consulted with the other three brothers and gave abundance of 
wealth to Dhritarastra. With this sum, the Ambika's son Dhritarastra 
duly performed the Sradh ceremony of his sons and gave away lots 
of things to the Brahmanas. The king Dhritarastra, thus performing 
all the funeral obsequies, became ready to go early to the forest with 
Gandhari, Kunti and Vidura. By the help of Sanjaya, the highly 
intelligent Dhritarastra became informed of the roads of the forest, 
and then went out of the house. Surasena's daughter Kunti, though 
stopped by her sons, followed them. Bhima and other Kauravas 
went along with them weeping up to the banks of the Ganges and 
thence returned to Hastinapura. 

The ascetics went to the auspicious S’atayupa hermitage on the 
banks of the Ganges and building a hut practised tapasya with their 
hearts concentrated. Thus six years elapsed when Yudhisthira, 
troubled by their bereavements, said to his younger brothers “ I 
dreamt that our mother Kunti got very lean and thin. Now my mind 
wants bitterly to see mother, uncle, aunt, the high souled Vidura and 
the highly intelligent Sanjaya. If you approve, I want to go to there.” 
Then the five brothers, Pandu's sons, became desirous to see Kunti, 
and taking with them Draupadi, Subhadra, Uttara, and other persons 
went to the Satayupa hermitage and saw the persons there; but not 



seeing Vidura, Yudhisthira asked “Where is Vidura?” Hearing this 
Dhritarastra said “Vidura has taken up Vairagyam (dispassion) 
and has gone alone to a solitary place and is meditating in his heart 
the eternal Brahma.” Next day while the king Yudhisthira was 
walking along the banks of the Ganges, he saw in the forest Vidura, 
engaged in his vow and become lean and thin by his tapasya; he 
then exclaimed “I am the king Yudhisthira; I am saluting you.” The 
holy Vidura heard and remained motionless like a log of wood. 

Within an instant a wonderful halo came out of Vidura's face and 
entered the mouth of Yudhisthira, both of them being Dharma's 
parts. Vidura then died; Yudhisthira expressed great sorrow. When 
the Vidura's body was going to be set on fire, a celestial voice was 
heard :--“0 king! He was very wise; so he ought not to be burnt; you 
can go away as you like.” Hearing this, Yudhisthira bathed in the 
pure Ganges and returned to the As'rama and informed everything in 
detail to Dhritarastra. While the Pandavas were staying in the 
hermitage with the other inhabitants of the city, Vedavyasa, Narada, 
and other high-souled Munis came there to Yudhisthira. Kunti then 
spoke to the auspicious Vyasa “O Krisna! I saw my son Kama, 
only just when he was born; my mind is being very much tormented 
for him; so, O great ascetic! Show him once to me. O highly 
fortunate One! You alone can do this; so O Lord! Satisfy my heart’s 
desire.” Gandhari said “O Muni! I did not see while Duryodhan 
went to battle; so, O Muni! Show me Duryodhana with his younger 
brothers.” Subhadra said “O Omniscient one! I want very much to 
see the great hero Abhimanyu, dearer to me than my life even; O 
great ascetic! Show him once to me.” (33-57.) 

Suta said Satyavati's son Vyasa Deva, hearing their words, held 
Pranayama (deep breathing exercise) and meditated on the eternal 
Devi, the force of Brahma. When the evening time came, the Muni 
invited Yudhisthira and all others to the banks of the Ganges. He 
then bathed in the Ganges and began to chant hymns in praise of 
the Devi Brahmamayi Prakriti, resting on the Purusa, the Dweller in 
the Mani DvTpa, with attributes, at the same time transcending them, 
thus “O Devi! When Brahma was not, Visnu was not, Mahes'vara 



was not, nor when existing Indra, Varuna, Kuvera, Yama, and Agni, 
Thou alone existed then; my salutation to Thee. 

When there existed not water, Vayu, ether, earth and their Gunas, 
taste, smell, etc., when there were no senses, mind, Buddhi, 
Ahamkara; when there existed no Sun, Moon nor anything. Thou 
alone existed then; so, O Devi! I bow down again and again to Thee. 
O Mother! Thou boldest all these visible Jiva lokas in the cosmic 
Hiranyagarbha; again Thou bringest this Hiranyagarbha, the sum- 
total of Linga Sariras (the subtle bodies), with the Gunas Sattva, 
Rajas and Tamas to a state of equilibrium named Samyavastha and 
remainest quite independent and apart for a Kalpa period. At that 
time even those that are possessed of the power of great 
discrimination and dispassion cannot fathom Thy nature. O Mother! 
These persons are praying to me to see their dead ones; but I am 
quite incapable to do that. So kindly shew them their departed ones 
early.” While Vyasa praised thus the Devi, the Devi Mahamaya, the 
Lady of the Universe, of the nature of Universal Consciousness 
called all the departed ones from the Heavens and showed them to 
their relatives. Then Kunti, Gandhari, Subhadra, Uttara, and the 
Pandavas became very glad to see their relatives come to them 
again. Vyasa, of indomitable valour, again remembering Mahamaya, 
bade good bye to the departed ones; it seemed then, a great magic 
had occurred. The Pandavas and the Munis bade good bye to each 
other and went to their respective places. The king Yudhisthira talked 
on the way about Vyasa and ultimately came to Hastina. (58-68.) 


Thus ends the seventh chapter of the Second Skandha on shewing 
the departed ones in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses. 



Chapter 8. On The Extinction Of The Family Of 
Yadu And On The Anecdote Of PARiKSiT 


1-23. Suta said On the third day after the Pandavas had returned 
to Hastinapur, the king Dhritarastra was burnt up together with 
Gandhari and Kunti, by the conflagration of fire in the forest. Sanjaya 
went away at that time, leaving Dhritarastra in the forest, on a tour 
on pilgrimage. The king Yudhisthira heard all this from Narada and 
was very sorry. Now after thirty six years after the Kuru family had 
become extinct, all the descendants of Yadu in the Prabhas tirtha 
were destroyed by the Brahmana's curse. The high-souled 
descendants of Yadu, intoxicated by drinking wine, fought against 
each other and were extirpated in the presence of Krisna and 
Balaram. Balaram then quitted his mortal coil; the lotus-eyed 
Bhagavan Krisna quitted his life, struck by the arrows of a hunter, to 
pay respect to a Brahmin's curse. Vasudeva heard of Hari's quitting 
his mortal coil, and meditated the Goddess of the Universe within his 
heart and left his holy life. Arjuna became very sorry; he went to 
Prabhasa and performed the funeral obsequies of all duly. Seeing 
the dead body of Hah, Arjuna collected fuel and burnt his body 
together with his eight principal wives; he burnt also Balaram's body 
with that of his wife Revati. Arjuna, then, went to the Dvaraka city 
and removed all the inhabitants of the city when the whole Dwarka 
city of Vasudeva was drowned in the waters of the ocean. While 
Arjuna was taking all the persons with him after getting out of 
Dwarka, he felt himself very weak on the way; and therefore a band 
of robbers, known by the name of Abhiras plundered all the wealth 
and all the wives of Krisna. Arjuna, of indomitable valour, after his 
arrival at Indraprastha made Vajra, Aniruddha's son, the king of the 
place. 

Then the highly powerful Arjuna informed Vyasa of his 
powerlessness when Vyasa said :-“0 highly intelligent one! When 
Hah and you will reincarnate in another Yuga, then your heroic 



strength will again be manifested. Hearing all these words, Pritha's 
son Arjuna returned to Hastina with a sorrowful heart and informed 
everything to Yudhisthira, the Dharmaraja. Hearing the extinction of 
the Yadavas and Hari's quitting His mortal coil, Yudhisthira wanted to 
go to the Himalayas. He installed Pariksit, Uttara's son who was then 
thirty six years old on the throne and went out of his palace in 
company of his brothers, and Draupadi to the forests of the 
Himalayas. Thus the Pandavas, Pritha's son, reigned for thirty six 
years in Hastina and quitted their mortal coils in the Himalayas. Here 
the greatly religious sage-king Pariksit governed with vigilance all his 
subjects for sixty years. After this, Pariksit went once on an hunting 
expedition to a dense forest and shot a deer. He then searched for 
the deer and it became noon and he felt very thirsty, hungry, quite 
fatigued with his body, perspiring, when he saw a Muni merged in 
meditation; he asked the Muni “Where can water be had?” But the 
Muni held at that time the vow of silence; so he did not answer 
anything. Seeing this, the thirsty king, influenced by Kali, became 
angry and raised a dead serpent by the fore-end of his bow and 
coiled it round the Muni's neck. Even thus coiled with a snake round 
his neck the Muni remained as before motionless in his state of 
enlightenment and spoke nothing. The king also returned home. 


24-49. Then the Muni's son, born from the cow's womb, S’ringi, a 
great ascetic, a fiery devotee of Mahas'akti, heard of the above 
event, while he was playing in the forest. His friends spoke to him 
“O Muni! Some body has now enclosed a dead serpent around the 
neck of your father.” Hearing their words, S’ringi became very angry 
and taking water in his hands, cursed thus :-- “He who has coiled to¬ 
day a dead serpent around my father's neck, let that villain be bitten 
by the serpent Taksak within one week from this day”. One disciple 
of the Muni then went to the king in his house and informed him of 
the Muni's curse. Abhimanyu's son Pariksit heard of the curse 
pronounced by a Brahmin, and knowing infallible, spoke to the aged 
councillors 



"O Ministers! Certainly it is through my fault that I have been cursed 
by a Brahmin's son. Now find out and settle what is to be done 
though the persons versed in the Vedas say that death is inevitable 
under these circumstances; yet the wise ones should try their best to 
thwart this according to the S’astras. Many sages who are the 
advocates of taking steps to redress any act, say that all the actions 
of wise persons are fructified by proper means; their solution does 
not remain unsolved. 


Therefore I am saying that the powers of manis, mantrams and 
herbs (osadhis) are indescribable; if applied duly, do you think that 
they will bear no fruit in this case? I heard that when a Muni's wife 
died out of snake-bite, the Muni gave away the half of his life to his 
wife Apsara and made her alive again. It is not proper for the learned 
to depend on the maxim that what is inevitable must come to pass; 
one must try one's best to act for the living present. 

O Ministers! Have you seen any person in the Heavens or in the 
world who remains idle, depending on fate alone? The Sannyasins 
have renounced the world; but they must have to go to the houses of 
the house-holders, whether they be invited or not invited. See again, 
supposing that the food of a person is brought to him unasked and 
suppose it is thrown into the mouth by some one, can you conceive 
that food would go down into the belly, from the mouth without one's 
effort? Therefore one should exert one's own prowess from the very 
outset; though the intelligent ones should be satisfied with the 
thought “What can be done? It is not ordained in my fate.” When 
Pariksit said thus, the ministers asked “Which Muni made his 
dead wife alive again, by giving her half his own life? And how did 
his wife die? Kindly describe all these in detail to me.” 

The king said Bhrigu Muni had a very beautiful wife Puloma. In 
her womb the world renowned Chyavana Muni was born. Sukanya, 
the daughter of S’aryati was the wife of Chyavana. In her womb was 
born a beautiful son named Pramati; he was very famous. Pramati 



had his famous beautiful wife Pratapi. In her womb was born the 
great ascetic son Ruru. At this time a person named Sthulakes'a, a 
religious truthful man of great name, was practising tapasya. O 
Ministers! In the meanwhile, the chief Apsara Menaka held sexual 
intercourse with Visvavasu Gandharva on the banks of a river and 
became pregnant. She went out from that place to the hermitage of 
Sthulakes'a on the river bank and gave birth to a very beautiful 
daughter. Seeing this girl quite an orphan and very beautiful, the 
Muni Sthulakes'a began to rear up her and named her Pramadvara. 
This all-auspicious girl Pramadvara attained youth in due course 
when the Muni Ruru saw her and became smitten with passion. 


Thus ends the eighth chapter of the Second Skandha on the 
extinction of the family of Yadu and on the anecdote of Pariksit in the 
Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses. 



Chapter 9. On The Account Of Ruru 


1-17. Pariksit said When the Muni Ruru went to his room to sleep, 
his mind having become perturbed with passion, his father Pramati 
seeing him sorrowful, asked him “O Ruru! Why do you look so 
absent minded?” Ruru was passionate then; so he said to his father 
“I saw a girl named Pramadvara in the hermitage of Sthulakes'a; I 
wish that she might become my wife.” Hearing this, Pramati went 
immediately to the hermitage of Sthulakes'a, and pleased him by 
various conversations and asked for her beautiful daughter when 
Sthulakes'a promised that he would give her daughter in marriage 
on an auspicious day. Then both the high-souled persons Pramati 
and Sthulakes'a began to work in co-operation and make 
arrangements for marriage ceremony and collected various articles 
in that hermitage when the fair eyed girl Pramadvara, while playing 
in the courtyard in the house, trod on a serpent and was bitten by it 
and consequently died. Seeing then Pramadvara dead, all the Munis 
of the place assembled and cried and wept with sorrowful hearts, 
when a great tumultuous uproar ensued. Though the life departed 
from Pramadvara’s body, yet seeing the brilliant lustre of her lifeless 
body lying on the ground, her nourisher and father Sthulakes'a 
became very sorry and wept aloud. Hearing this cry of his, Ruru 
came there to see what had happened and perceived the girl, though 
lifeless, yet seeming alive and lying on the ground. 

Seeing Sthulakes'a and other Risis weeping, Ruru went out from that 
place and with a grievous heart, began to cry aloud. “Alas! Fate has 
certainly sent this serpent as the cause of all my miseries and to mar 
all my happiness. Alas! What am I to do now? Where to go? When 
my beloved has fallen unto the jaws of death, I do not want to live 
any longer, bereft of my wife. Oh! What an unfortunate creature I 
am? I have not been able to embrace this beautiful darling of mine. I 
am deprived of kissing her face and marrying her. Alas! Fie to my 
human birth! Let my life get out just now in as much as I could not. 



out of mere shame, throw myself on the burning pyre along with my 
beloved! Oh! When death comes not to the sorrowful person, even 
when prayed for, how then can I expect divine happiness in this 
world? So let me now drop myself down in a lake or enter in to a 
burning fire or drink venom or strangle myself by tieing rope round 
my neck!” 


18-31. Thus Ruru wailed much on the bank of the river and long 
reflecting in his mind found out a way and thought what would be the 
advantage in death? “Rather an irretrievable sin would be incurred in 
committing suicide; and my father and mother would be sorry. 

Seeing me commit suicide, my bad luck and enemies will be 
gladdened; there is no manner of doubt; in this. What benefit will my 
beloved gain if I commit suicide or if I be distressed for her 
bereavement. Suppose I die, even then my beloved will not become 
mine in the next world; so there are many faults in my committing 
suicide but there is no fault if I preserve my life.” Thus coming to a 
conclusion Ruru bathed, performed Achaman and became pure. He 
then took water in his hand and said “Whatever good works, 
worshipping the gods, etc., that I have done and if I have performed, 
with devotion, the service to my preceptors and teachers and 
superiors, homa ceremonies, Japam, tapasya, if I have studied all 
the Vedas and if I have recited Gayatri and worshipped the Sun then 
let my beloved have life and get up as an outcome of my Punyam. If 
my beloved does not get back her life, I will certainly quit my life.” 
Thus saying, he worshipped the Devas mentally and threw that 
water of his hands on the ground. Thus Ruru, with a sorrowful heart, 
was weeping. The Deva's messenger came down and said “O 
Brahman! Don't make this bold attempt; how can your beloved get 
back her life? The life-period of this beautiful girl, born of 
Gandharva's sperm and Apsara's ovum is now exhausted; now look 
for another beautiful woman. O one of very dull understanding! Why 
are you crying in vain? Where is the affection between you and this 
girl; she died in an unmarried state (without marrying you).” At this 



Ruru said “O Deva messenger! I won't marry any other lady, 
whether my beloved gets back her life or does not get back her life; 
in case she does not regain this life, I will also forego my life at this 
instant.” At this greatest importunity of Ruru, the Deva messenger 
became glad and spoke the following truthful beneficent yet beautiful 
words 


32-51. “O Brahmana! I will suggest one way to you; kindly hear. The 
Devas ordained this long, long ago. You can give up your half life 
period, and with that you can make this girl alive soon.” 

Ruru said “O Deva messenger! I give half my life-period to this 
girl; there is no doubt in this. Let my beloved get back her life soon 
and get up.” 

The king said O Ministers! At this time Visvavasu, knowing that 
his daughter Pramadvara is dead, descended from the Heavens in a 
celestial car and came to the place; then the Gandharva king and the 
Deva messenger both went to Yama, the Dharmaraj, and spoke thus 
“O Dharmaraj! This Visvavasu's daughter Pramadvara, the wife of 
Ruru, the Risis' son was bitten by a snake and has now come to 
your place. The Dvija Ruru is now desirous to quit his life; so, O 
Sun's son! Now let the girl again get her life through the influence of 
Ruru's brahmacharya (purity) as a consequence of his giving away 
half his life period for the girl.” 

Dharma said “O Deva messenger! if you want to make the girl 
alive again, let her get life as a consequence of half the life-period of 
Ruru being subtracted. Go immediately and give the girl to Ruru.” 

The king said “O Ministers! Yama having said thus to the Deva 
messenger, he went away immediately and made Pramadvara alive 
and handed her over to Ruru. 

Thus, on an auspicious day, Ruru married her. Thus the Risis' 
daughter Pramadvara though fallen dead, got again her life by 
proper means. So, O Councillors! to save life, one should resort 



one's best duty according to the S’astras, by the use of gems, 
mantras, and herbs and plants.” 

Thus speaking to the ministers, the king Pariksit had a fine building 
of seven floors in height erected, placed the principal guards around 
it and stationed also the most powerful men well versed in the 
knowledge of mani (gems), mantrams, and plants for protection and 
immediately ascended to this building. To appease the wrath of the 
Muni S’ringi, the king sent the Muni named Gaurmukha to him and 
requested him repeatedly “Let the crime of the humble devotee be 
forgiven.” Then, for self preservation, the king brought from all sides 
the Brahmanas, who are perfect in their knowledge and application 
of the mantras. The minister's son placed the elephants in proper 
places so that no body can ascend to the top of the building; what 
more can be said than the fact that even air could not find entrance 
there when once ordered “no admission” what to speak of others! 

The king Pariksit remained there and counted the number of days of 
the serpent Taksaka's coming there; he performed his bath, Sandhya 
Bandanams and feeding; even he consulted with his ministers and 
governed his kingdom from there. O Risis! At this time a 
Brahman named Kas'yapa, versed in the mantras, heard of the 
curse of the king and thought that he would get abundant wealth if 
he could free the king from Taksaka's poison and proposed to 
himself that he would go to the place where the cursed king Pariksit 
was staying with the Brahmanas. Pondering thus, the Brahmana 
went out of his house, on the expectation of wealth from the king. 


Thus ends the ninth chapter of the second Skandha on the account 
of Ruru in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses. 



Chapter 10. On The Death Of King ParIksit 


1-3. Suta said “O Risis! On that very day when the 
Brahmin Kas'yapa went out of his house, Taksak, knowing the king 
ParTksit cursed, assumed an aged Brahmin's form and went out of 
his abode. 

The serpent Taksak met the Brahmin Kas'yapa on the way. Seeing 
the Brahmana, versed in the Mantras, Taksak asked him “Where are 
you going so in haste, and what for are you taking this trouble?” 


4-17. Thus questioned, Kas'yapa replied I heard that the serpent 
Taksak will bite the king ParTksit; therefore I am going in haste to the 
king ParTksit to cure him of the serpent's poison. I know the mantra 
(mystic verse) that can destroy the effect of poison. If his life-period 
is not exhausted, I will certainly give him back his life. Taksak then. 
Said “O Brahmana! I am that Taksak; I will bite him and take away 
his life. So you better desist. Will you be able to treat him whom I 
bite; certainly you will not.” Kas'yapa said “O chief of snakes! 
When you will bite the king who has been cursed by the Brahman, I 
will no doubt make him alive by the power of my mantra.” Taksak 
said “O chief of Brahmanas! If you have so thought that you will 
make the king alive after I bite him, then shew me your strength 
before hand. O sinless one! I will bite this Nyagrodha tree (the Indian 
fig-tree); just now make it alive.” 

Kas'yapa said “Certainly I will make this tree alive, that will be 
burnt away by the venom of your teeth.” Suta said “The snake 
Taksak then bit the tree, which was reduced to ashes; and asked 
Kas'yapa to bring back that tree to life.” Seeing the tree reduced to 
ashes by the fire of venom of the snake, he collected all the ashes 
and said “O highly venomous serpent. See to-day the power of 
my mantra. Behold! While you are witnessing, I will enliven this tree. 
Thus the great mantra-knower Kas'yapa took water in his hand, and 



impregnating it with his mantra power, sprinkled the water on the 
ashes. Immediately, on the sprinkling of the mantra saturated water, 
the Nyagrodha tree got back its life as before. Taksak became 
greatly astonished to see the tree enlivened again and said to 
Kas'yapa >- “O chief of Brahmans! What is your object in taking so 
much pains? Speak out what you want and I will fulfil your desires.” 
Kas'yapa said “O chief of serpents! Knowing the king cursed, I am 
going to do good to him by my knowledge and to get in return 
abundant wealth.” Hearing this, Taksak said “I will give you the 
amount of wealth that you desire; take that and go back to your 
house, and let my desire be also fulfilled.” 


18-26. Kas'yapa, the knower of the highest state, heard Taksaka's 
words and pondered in his mind again and again. “What is to be 
done now? If I take this wealth and go back to my house, my name 
and fame will not be known in this world, simply for my greed; but if 
the king be made alive again, my undying fame, abundant wealth, 
and greater Punyam will accrue to me. Again fie to that wealth with 
which there is no fame; so one must try one's best to preserve one's 
fame. The king Raghu, in ancient days, gave away everything of his 
to the Brahmanas for fame; the king Harischandra and Kama did not 
hesitate a bit to give away endless property. There is one point again 
to take into account, how can I trifle away the matter, seeing the king 
burnt up by the venomous fire? 

If I can bring back the king's life, everyone will become happy. If the 
kingdom be without its king, the subjects will, no doubt, be ruined. 

So, following the king's death, sin will also incur on me due to the 
ruin of the subjects; and infamy will come on my head that I am a 
very greedy man.” Thus meditating in his mind, the highly intelligent 
Kas'yapa began to meditate, and plunged himself in Dhyan; he 
thereby came to know that the king's life period was spent up. Thus 
knowing the king's death imminent, the virtuous Kas'yapa took the 
desired wealth from Taksak and returned home. 



27-48. Thus making Kas'yapa to retire to his house on the seventh 
day Taksak went on to Hastinapur to bring death and destruction on 
to Pariksit. When he went close to the city, he heard that the king 
Pariksit was staying on the upper story of the palace; and the palace 
had been preserved by various gems, mantras, herbs and plant. 
Taksak became very anxious; and fearing, lest the curse of the 
Brahmanas, will fall on his head, became very much agitated and 
thought. “How shall I now enter the palace? How can I cheat this 
stupid hypocrite vicious king, cursed by the Brahmana, who causes 
troubles to the Brahmanas. Not a single man has taken birth in the 
Pandava family ever since that he coiled a dead serpent round the 
neck of an ascetic Brahmin. The king has committed a very heinous 
crime and knowing the course of time to be in fallible, has placed 
sentries on all sides of the palace and has ascended to the top-most 
story of the building, thinking thereby to deceive Death and is staying 
in a peaceful mind. How can then he be smitten, in accordance with 
the Brahmana's word? The king, of dull intellect, knows not that 
death cannot be prevented; for that reason he has placed guards 
and sentinels round the building, and himself has got up the house 
and is happily whiling away his time; but he is quite ignorant that 
when Fate who can never be violated, ordains the death, how can it 
be prevented though thousands of attempts are made to thwart it? 
This scion of Pandu family knows that his death is at hand and yet 
wants to live and therefore is staying in his own place with a tranquil 
mind. The king ought now to make charities and other meritorious 
works; it is only by acts of Dharma that disease is destroyed and life 
is prolonged. 

And if that be not the object then a dying man ought to take bath, to 
make charities and to await his time of death; he thereby attains 
heaven; otherwise hell is inevitable. The king committed great sin in 
the act of causing pains and trouble to the Brahmin or other similar 
acts and therefore death is so close that the Brahmin curse has 
fallen thus on his head. Is there no such Brahmin who can make him 



understand this; or the Creator has ordained his death now as 
inevitable.” Thus meditating, the chief serpent made other serpents 
following him assume then form of ascetic Brahmanas and gave 
them roots and fruits to be taken to the king. The serpent Taksak 
himself entered within the fruits in the form of an insect. Then the 
ascetic serpents took the fruits and quickly went out of the place. 
They came to the palace where Pariksit was resting. Seeing them, 
the guards asked “What for have you come here?” Hearing this, 
“We are coming from the hermitage to prolong the life of the hero 
king, the son of Abhimanyu and the son of the Pandava family, by 
chanting the mantras of the Atharvavedas, and we want to have an 
interview with the king; now you better go and inform the king that 
some Munis have come to see you. We will sprinkle water on him 
and give him some sweet fruits and then depart. We have never 
come across such gatekeepers in the family of Bharat as disallow 
the ascetic Muni visitors to go and see the king. We will ascend to 
the place where the Pariksit is staying and we will bless him, and 
wish him long life; we will communicate to him our orders and then 
depart to our own places.” 


49-68. Suta said Hearing these words, the sentinels spoke as 
previously ordered by the king, as follows “O Brahmanas! We 
think verily you won't be able to have an interview with the king to¬ 
day; you, all ascetics can come to-morrow to this palace. O Munis! 
Owing to the Brahmana's curse, the king has built this place; then it 
follows, as a matter of course, that the Brahmanas are not allowed to 
get up to the palace.” Then the serpents, in the form of the 
Brahmanas, spoke “O good sentinels! Then take these roots and 
fruits and offer them to the king and communicate to him our 
blessings.” 

The sentinels went to the king, and informed him of the arrival of the 
ascetic Brahmanas. The king replied “Bring here the roots and 
fruits offered by them and ask what for they have come. Give them 
my pranams; to-day I cannot meet with them; let them come to- 



morrow morning.” The sentinels went to the ascetics and got from 
them their roots and fruits and offered them with great respect to the 
king. When the serpents in the guise of the hypocrite Brahmins went 
away, the king took those fruits and spoke to his ministers 

“Take these fruits and let all my friends eat them. I will take only this 
one fruit given by the Brahmanas and will eat it.” Saying this, the 
Uttara's son Pariksit gave away fruits to the friends and took one ripe 
fruit for himself, broke it and saw within it a very fine copper-coloured 
black eyed insect. At this the ministers were astonished; the King 
spoke to them “The sun has set; so there is no further chance of 
any fear from any poison to-day. I speak then to-day, fearing the 
Brahman's curse, let this insect bite me.” Thus saying the king took 
that insect and placed it on his neck. That Taksak in the form of an 
insect, when placed, during the sun-set, on the neck by the king, 
immediately assumed the form of the terrible Kala (Death), coiled 
round the king and beat him. The Ministers were greatly surprised 
and began to weep and cry with great pain and sorrow. Seeing that 
terrible serpent, the ministers, overwhelmed with terror, fled away on 
all sides. The guards cried out loudly. The terrible out-cry was raised 
on all sides. Then Uttara's son, the king Pariksit, coiled by the 
serpent, saw that all his efforts were rendered fruitless, and 
remained silent and held fast to his patience. From the mouth of the 
serpent Taksak the terrible venomous flames came out burning all 
and immediately killed the king. Thus taking away the life of the king, 
Taksak went up in the celestial atmosphere; the people then saw that 
the serpent was ready as if to burn the world. The king fell down 
lifeless like a burnt tree; and all the persons cried out seeing the king 
dead. 


Thus ends the tenth Chapter of the Second Skandha on the death of 
the king Pariksit in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses. 




Chapter 11. On The Sarpa Yajna 


1-4. Suta said “O Munis! seeing now the king lifeless, and his son 
a mere boy, the ministers themselves performed all his funeral 
ceremonies. First they burned the king on the banks of the Ganges 
without uttering any Mantra, as his death was an accidental one due 
to snake bite, afterwards they had an effigy of the king made of kus’a 
grass and placed it on a funeral pyre and burned it, with sandal and 
scented wood. The priest then performed and completed his funeral 
obsequies, repeating duly the Vedic mantras, and distributed various 
things in charities to the Brahmins, together with sufficient quantity of 
gold, and varieties of food and clothings so that the king may attain 
heaven. 


5-7. Next, on an auspicious moment, the ministers installed the boy 
prince on the throne that gladdened the hearts of the subjects and all 
the populace of the city, towns, and villages acknowledged the boy 
prince Janamejaya, endowed with all royal qualities as their king. 

The Dhatreyi gave all instructions to the king about his duties. The 
boy prince gradually grew in years and became endowed with great 
intellect. 


8-15. When Janamejaya became eleven years old, the family priest 
initiated him duly with the Gayatri mantra and he also studied it duly. 
Then Kripa charya taught him perfectly the science of archery 
(Dhanurveda) as Dronacharya taught Arjuna and Paras'urama 
taught Kama. Janamejaya learnt by and by all the sciences and 
became very powerful and indomitable to his enemies as he was 
skilled in the science of archery, he was similarly in the other 
branches of the Vedas. Truthful, self-controlled, religious, the king 
Janamejaya acquired full knowledge in the Dharmas'astras 



(philosophies and law books) and Arthas'astras (economics) and 
governed his kingdom like the Dharma's son Yudhisthira. 

The king of Kas'i gave his all-auspicious daughter Vapustama in 
marriage to the king Janamejaya wearing golden coat of armour. The 
king Janamejaya, with the beautiful Vapus'ama casting side-long 
looks, looked very happy as was the king Vichitravirya, when he got 
for his wife the daughter of Kashira] and also when Arjuna got his 
Subhadra. Then the king began to enjoy his lotus-eyed Vapustama 
in forest, and gardens like S’atakratu and S’achi. The able ministers 
conducted satisfactorily the reins of government; and the subjects, 
well governed passed away their time with cheerful hearts. 


16-32. In the meanwhile, a Muni, named Uttanka, being much 
troubled by Taksaka, thought who could help him in his taking 
revenge on Taksak and, seeing the king Pariksit's son the king 
Janamejaya a proper person came to Hastina to the king and spoke 
out thus “O good king! Thou dost not know when to do a thing that 
ought to be done; Thou art doing at present what ought not to be 
done; and thou art not doing what should be done now. There is 
nothing of anger or energy within Thee; Thou dost things as a child 
does; so Thou dost not know the meaning of the S’astras nor dost 
Thou know Thy former enemy; so what shall I pray before Thee?” 
Hearing this Janamejaya said “O highly fortunate one! I do not 
know who is my enemy; what wrong is there to be redressed? 
please speak out what I am to do.” Uttanka said “O king! the 
wicked Taksak killed Thy father; ask about the death of Thy father 
from Thy councillors.” Hearing these words, the king Janamejaya 
asked his ministers; they replied “Thy father died out of the snake 
Taksaka's bite.” Then the king spoke “The cause of my father's 
death is the Brahmin's curse; what is the fault of Taksaka in this 
matter; please say.” Uttanka said It was Taksaka that gave 
abundance of wealth to Kas'yapa who was coming to cure Thy father 
of Taksaka's poison and made him desist from his purpose; so O 



king! Is not that Taksaka, then, Thy father's great enemy and his 
slayer? 

O King! In former days, when Pramadvara, the dearest wife of the 
Muni Ruru, died of snake bite in her unmarried state, Ruru made her 
alive again. But Ruru made then the promise “whichever serpent will 
see, I will take away its life by striking it with a club.” O King! Thus 
making the resolve, he began to kill snakes wherever he found with 
his club, and thus, in his course of travel all round the earth, he saw 
within a forest an aged terrible water-snake (Dhonda serpent) and 
immediately lifted his club to kill it and angrily struck a blow on it, 
when the snake replied 

“O Brahmana! Why are you striking me thus? I have not caused any 
offence to you.” Ruru said “O serpent! My dearest wife died of 
snake bite; since then I have made this resolve, under great 
provocation and sorrow, to kill snakes.” Hearing thus, the water- 
snake Dundubha replied “I do not bite; those who bite are a 
different class of snakes; simply on account of my bearing a body 
similar to them that you will strike me is not quite proper.” Hearing 
these beautiful humane words from the mouth of a serpent, Ruru 
asked :-- “Who are you? Why have you become this Dundubha 
snake?” 


33-45. The snake replied “O Brahmana! I was formerly a 
Brahman; there was a friend of mine named Khyas, very religious, 
truthful and self-controlled. Once he was staying in his Agnihotra 
room and I foolishly terrified him much by placing before him an 
artificial snake created by me of the leaves of trees. He became so 
much bewildered with fear and shuddered so terribly that he at 
length cursed me saying “O one of blunt intellect! As you have 
terrified me by this snake, having no poison, so you better be a 
snake of that type.” Immediately I turned into a snake and when I 
much entreated that Brahmana, his anger abated a little and he said 
again “O snake! Pramati's son Ruru will no doubt free you of this 



curse.” I am that snake; and you are also that Ruru; now hear my 
words in conformity with Dharma. The highest Dharma of the 
Brahmana, is non-killing. There is no doubt in this. The wise 
Brahmanas ought to show mercy to all. No harm or killing is to he 
committed anywhere except in Yajha (sacrifice); killing is only 
allowed in a Yajha; for at the sacrifice, the animal killed attains the 
highest goal; hence killing in sacrifice is not reckoned as an act of 
killing. Uttanka said That Brahmana was then freed of the serpent 
body; and Ruru, too, desisted from killing since then. O King! Ruru 
gave life back to that girl and married her but even then, 
remembering the former enmity he killed the snakes. But, O chief of 
Bharata's family! Thou art staying without any care, without any 
anger to the snakes and without any revenge to the previous wrong. 
O king of kings! Thy father died high up in the air without any bath or 
charity due to be done at the time of death. So rescue thy father by 
killing his enemies, the snakes. That son is dead, though living, who 
does not consider the act of his father's enemy as inimical. Until 
Thou dost kill the snakes. Thy father's enemies. Thy father's hell life 
will not be freed. O king! Now remember the wrong done to Thy 
father and perform the sacrifice to the Great Mother, denominated as 
the Sarpa Yajha (the sacrifice of snakes). 


46-55. Suta said Hearing the words of Uttanka, the king 
Janamejaya sadly wept and shed tears, and thought within himself :- 
- “Alas! Fie to me! I am a great stupid; hence I feel myself proud but 
in vain. Where can his honour be whose father, bitten by a snake, 
has gone down to hell. Now I will, no doubt, commence the Sarpa 
Yajha and ensure the destruction of all the snakes in the blazing 
sacrificial fire and thus deliver my father from hell.” Thus coming to a 
conclusion, he called all his ministers and said “O ministers! 

Better make arrangements duly for a great sacrifice. Have a suitable 
holy site on the banks of the Ganges, selected and measured by the 
Brahmanas and have a beautiful sacrificial hall built up on one 
hundred pillars and prepare a sacrificial altar within this. O Ministers! 



When all these preliminaries will be completed, I will commence with 
great eclat the great Sarpa Yajha (sacrifice of snakes). In that Yajha, 
the snake Taksak will be the animal victim; and Uttanka, the great 
Muni, will be the sacrificial priest; so invite early the all-knowing 
Brahmanas, versed in the Vedas. Thus at the command of the king, 
the able ministers collected all the materials of the sacrifice and 
prepared a big sacrificial altar. When the oblations were offered on 
the sacrificial fire, calling on the snakes, Taksak became greatly 
distressed with fear and took refuge of Indra saying “Save my life”. 
Indra, then, gave hopes to Taksaka, trembling with fear, and made 
him sit on his Asana, encouraged him with words “No fear”. O! snake 
do not fear any more. 


56-65. The Muni Uttanka, seeing that Taksak had taken Indra's 
protection and that Indra had given him hopes of “no fear”, called on 
Taksaka with Indra to come to fire with an anxious heart; Taksak, 
then, seeing no other way, took refuge of the greatly religious Astik, 
the son of the Muni Jarat Karu, born of the family of Yayavara. The 
Muni's son Astik came to the sacrificial hall and chanted hymns in 
praise of Janamejaya; the king, too, seeing the Muni boy greatly 
learned worshipped him and said “What for have you come? I will 
give you what you desire.” Hearing this, Astika prayed :-- “O highly 
enlightened one! Let you desist from this sacrifice.” 

The truthful king, prayed thus again and again, stopped the Sarpa 
Yajha to keep the Muni's word. Vais'ampayana then recited the 
whole Mahabharata to the king to cheer up his heart. But the king, 
hearing the whole Mahabharata could not find peace and asked 
Veda Vyasa “how can I get peace; my mind is constantly being 
burned with sorrow; say what am I to do? I am very miserable; hence 
my father Pariksit the son of Abhimanyu has died an unnatural 
death. O lucky one! See that a Ksattriya's death in a deadly 
battlefield or in an ordinary battle is praiseworthy; even his death in 
his own house, if followed up according to natural laws and Vidhis 
(rules) is commendable; but my father did not die such a death; 



under the Brahmana's curse why did he, quite senseless, quit his life 
high up in the air? O son of Satyavati! Now advise me so that my 
father who is now in hell can again go up to the heavens, and that 
my heart may find its way to peace.” 


Thus ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Second Skandha on the 
“Sarpa Yajha” in the Mahapurana S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses. 



Chapter 12. On The Birth Of Astika 


1-4. Suta said Hearing these words of the king, Vyasa Deva, the 
son Satyavati addressed to him before the assembly, thus “O 
king! I am now reciting to you a Bhagavata Purana, holy, wonderful, 
filled with many anecdotes, and leading to auspicious results; listen. 
Before I made my son S'uka study this Purana; O king! I will now 
recite before you that highest Purana, with all the secrets contained 
therein. I have extracted this from all the Agamas; it brings in 
Dharma (religion), Artha (wealth), Kama (fructification of desires) and 
Moksa (liberation); hearing this gives always happiness and good 
results. 


5-6. At this Janamejaya said “O Lord! Whose son is this Muni 
Astika? Why did he come as an obstacle in my Sarpa Yajha 
(sacrifice of snakes)? And what object had he in preserving the 
snakes? O highly fortunate one! Kindly describe all this in detail; 
after this recite the Purana, also, in detail to me.” 


7-18. Vyasa Deva said “O king! In former days there lived a Muni 
named Jaratkaru. He always remained in the path of peace; and did 
not marry. Once he saw, in a cave in a forest, his fathers and 
forefathers pendant. They spoke to Jaratkaru thus “O son! Marry; 
we will thereby be greatly pleased; if there be a son of good 
character born to you, we all will be freed from all troubles and we 
would then able to go to Heavens.” Hearing this Jaratkaru said “O 
Forefathers! If I get a girl of my name, without begging and asking 
and if she be entirely obedient to me, I will marry and lead a 
householder's life; thus I have spoken truly to you.” Thus saying to 
his forefathers, Jaratkaru went on tour to the holy places. Now it 
happened so, that at that very time Kadru, the mother of snakes 
cursed her sons, saying “May you be burnt by fire.” The matters of 



this incident run as follows “At that monnent Kadru and Vinata, the 
two co-wives of Kas'yapa saw the horses yoked in the chariot of the 
sun and thus argued with each otherKadru, seeing the sun's 
horse, first asked Vinata “O good one! Tell me soon, what is the 
colour of this horse?” Vinata said “O auspicious one! What do you 
think?” I said, the colour of the horse is white; you also better say 
before hand what is its colour? We will then lay a wager (and 
challenge). Kadru said “O Smiling one! I think the the horse is 
black. Now come; let us challenge; whoever will be defeated will 
become the slave of the other.” Thus saying, Kadru told her sons 
that were obedient“Cover by your bodies all the pores of the body 
of the horse of the chariot of the Sun, so it may look black; go and do 
it.” At this some snakes replied “That cannot be.” Kadru then cursed 
them saying “Let you fall on the sacrificial fire of Janamejaya.” 
Then the other snakes tried to please their mother and coiled round 
the back of that horse so that the horse began to look black. Kadru 
and Vinata, the two co-wives went together and saw the horse. 
Vinata saw it black and became very sorry. 


19-21. Now, Garuda, Vinata's son, very powerful and devourer of 
snakes was passing that way and seeing his mother very distressed 
asked her“O Mother! Why do you look so very sorry? It seems as 
if you are weeping. Aruna, the charioteer of the Sun and I myself are 
your two sons living. Fie to us that, while we are living, you will have 
to suffer pains. O beautiful one! If mother suffers while the son is 
living, then what use is there in having such a son? So, O Mother, 
give out the cause of your grief and I will remove it at once.” 


22-31. Hearing this Vinata said “O son! What shall I say to you of 
my misery; I am now become the slave of my rival wife. By some 
pretext she defeated me and is now telling me to carry her on my 
back. O son! For this reason I am sorry.” Hearing these words of the 
mother, Garuda said “Very well I will carry her on my shoulders 



wherever she wishes to go. O auspicious one! You need not be 
sorry; I will remove all your cares.” Vyasa Deva said Thus spoken 
to by Garuda, Vinata went to Kadru. At that time the highly powerful 
Garuda went there also to free his mother of her slavery and carried 
Kadru with all her sons on his back to the other side of the ocean. 
When Garuda went across the ocean, Garuda spoke to Kadru “O 
mother! I bow down to thee; kindly say how my mother can be freed 
of your slavery. Hearing this Kadru said “O son! If you can bring 
to-day by your sheer force nectar from the Deva loka and give it to 
my sons then you will be able to free your helpless mother. When 
Kadru said so, the highly powerful Vinata's son, Garuda immediately 
went to the abode of Indra and, fighting hard, stole away the jar of 
nectar and brought and gave it to Kadru and freed his mother Vinata 
from the slavery of Kadru. In the meantime, the snakes went for their 
bath, after which they would drink the nectar. Indra stole away that 
jar which contained nectar. O king! Thus, by the sheer strength of 
arms of Garuda Vinata was freed of her slavery. On the other hand, 
when the snakes returned from their bath and found that there was 
no jar of nectar, they began to lick the Kusa grass over which the jar 
of nectar was kept, thinking that they would thereby get some drops 
of nectar which might have trickled over; and the result was that by 
the sharp edges of kusa grasses, the tongues of all the snakes were 
cut asunder into two; hence the snakes are called Dvijihva. 


32-36. The snake Vasuki and others, whom Kadru, the mother of 
snakes, cursed, went to Brahma and took his refuge and informed all 
of the cause of their terror, the curse from their mother; when 
Brahma spoke to them “Go and give the sister of Vasuki, named 
Jaratkaru, in marriage to the great Muni Jarat Karu, (both of the 
same name). In her womb, a son named Astika will be born; and he 
will certainly deliver you from your difficulties. Hearing those 
beneficial words of Brahma, Vasuki went to the forest and requested 
humbly the great Muni Jarat Karu to accept in marriage her own 
sister when the Muni, knowing the girl to be of his name, spoke out 



thus “But when your sister will act against my wishes, I will 
forsake her at once.” 


37-46. Under these conditions, the Muni married her. And Vasuki, 
after giving her sister in marriage according to her own wishes to the 
Muni, returned to her own abode. O Tormentor of foes! Then the 
Muni Jaratkaru built a white hut of leaves in that great forest and 
began to pass his days happily in enjoyment with his wife. Once, on 
an occasion, after he had taken his dinner he slept and told his wife 
not to awaken him under any circumstances and fell fast asleep. The 
beautiful sister of Vasuki sat by his side. When the evening time 
came and the sun began to set, the Vasuki's sister Jaratkaru 
became afraid at the thought that the evening Sandhya might not be 
performed by the Muni and thought thus “What am I to do now? 
My heart finds not rest if I do not awaken him; and if I awaken him, 
he will forsake me at once. Now if I do not awaken him, the evening 
will pass away to no purpose. Whatever it be, if he quits me or if my 
death ensues, that is better than the non-observance of Dharma; for 
when Dharma is destroyed, hell ensues. 

Thus thinking, the girl awakened him saying “O One of good 
vows! It is evening time; so get up; etc.” The Muni got up in great 
anger and addressed his wife “When you have disturbed my 
sleep, I now go away from you; you also better go to your brother's 
house.” When the Muni said so, Vasuki's sister spoke out, trembling 
“O One of indomitable lustre! How will the object be served for 
which my brother has given me in marriage with you.” 


47-50. The Muni then spoke firmly to his wife Jaratkaru “That is 
within your womb.” Jaratkaru then, forsaken by the Muni, went to the 
abode of Vasuki. When her brother Vasuki asked her about her son, 
she said :-- “The Muni has forsaken me, saying that the son is within 
your womb.” At this Vasuki trusted; and said “The Muni won't ever 



tell lies” and gave shelter to his sister. O Kurusattama! After some 
time, a famous boy named the Muni Astika was born. 


51-56. O king! That Muni boy, the knower of truth, had desisted 
you from your sacrifice of snakes for the preservation of his mother's 
family. It is well and good, befitting you, that you respected the words 
of the Muni Astika, born of Yayavara family and the cousin of Vasuki. 
O Mighty-armed! Let all auspiciousness come to you; you have 
heard the whole Mahabharata and gave away lots of things in 
charities. You have worshipped innumerable Munis. But, O king! 
Though you have done so many good things, yet your father has not 
attained heaven and you have not been able to sanctify your family. 
So, O king Janamejaya! Now install a capacious temple of the Devi 
with the highest devotion; then all your desires will be fulfilled. The all 
auspicious Devi, the Giver of all desires, makes the kingdoms more 
stable and increases the family, if She be always worshipped with 
the highest devotion. 

57-64. O king! You better perform duly the Devimakha Yajha 
Yotistoma and others, pleasing to the Devi, and hear the great 
Purana S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam, filled with accounts of the 
glorious deeds of the Devi. I will make you hear now that Divine 
Purana, filled with various sentiments, highly sanctifying and capable 
to carry one across this ocean of world. O king! There is no other 
subject in this world worthy to be heard than the above Purana and 
there is no other thing to be worshipped then the lotus feet of the 
Devi. O king! Those are certainly fortunate, those are intelligent and 
blessed, in whose hearts of love and devotion reign always the Devi 
Bhagavati. O illustrious scion of Bharata's family! Know them to the 
always afflicted with troubles who do not worship in this world the 
great Mother Mahamaya. O king! Who is there that will not worship 
Her when Brahma and all the Devas are always engaged in Her 
devotional service. O king! He who hears always this Purana gets all 
his desires fulfilled; in former days Bhagavati Herself spoke this 
excellent Purana to Visnu. O king! Your heart will be appeased and 



become peaceful when you hear this; and, as a result of your 
hearing this Puranam, all your ancestors will attain endless Heavenly 
life. 


Thus ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Second Skandha on the birth 
of Astika in the Mahapuranam S'rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. Here ends as well the Second Book 



THE THIRD BOOK 



Chapter 1. On The Questions Put By Janamejaya 


1-10. Janamejaya said “O Bhagavan! What is that great Yajha 
(sacrifice) named Amba Yajha about which you referred just now? 
Who is the Amba? Where was She born? From whom and what for 
did Her birth take place? What are Her qualities? What is Her form 
and nature? O Ocean of mercy! You are all-knowing; kindly describe 
everything duly. Along with this, describe in detail the origin of 
Brahmanda. O Brahmana! You know every thing of this whole 
Universe. I heard that Brahma, Visnu and Rudra are the three 
Devatas, who are successively originated to create, preserve, and 
destroy this Universe. Are these three highsouled entities 
independent? or Do they do their respective duties, being 
subservient to another Person? Now I am very eager to know all 
these. So Paras'ara's son! Describe all these to me. Are these highly 
powerful Brahma, Visnu and Mahes'vara subject to Death like 
ordinary beings? Or are they of the nature of everlasting Existence, 
Intelligence and Bliss? Are they subject to the three fold pains arising 
from their own selves from elements and from those arising from 
gods? Are they subject Time? How and wherefrom were they 
originated? Do they feel the influence of pleasure, pain, sleep or 
laziness? O Muni! Do their bodies consist of seven Dhatus? (blood, 
etc.) or are they of some other kinds? A great doubt has arisen in me 
on all these points. If these bodies be not made up of five elements, 
then of what substance are they built of? And of what gunas are their 
senses built also? How do they enjoy objects of enjoyments? How 
long is their longevity? O Brahmana! where do they, Brahma, Visnu, 
and Mahes'vara, the best of the gods live? And of what nature are 
their powers and prosperities? I like very much to hear all these. So 
describe all these in detail to me.” 


11-24. Vyasa said “O highly intelligent king! The questions that 
you have asked me today whence and how Brahma, etc., were born 



? etc., are very difficult. In ancient days, once, on an occasion, I 
asked many questions like you to the Muni Narada. At first he was 
greatly suprised to hear my queries, afterwards he gave due replies 
to them. O king! I will answer to you in the same way; listen. Once I 
saw that the all-knowing, peaceful Narada, the knower of the Vedas 
was sitting on the banks of the Ganges. I became very glad and fell 
at his feet. By his order I took one excellent seat. Hearing, then, of 
his welfare and seeing him sitting on the sands I asked him “O 
highly intelligent One! Who is the Supreme Architect of this widely 
extended Universe? Whence is this Brahmanda born? Is it eternal or 
temporary? When it is an effect, then it is natural that it cannot be 
created without a cause. Now when the cause, the creator, is certain, 
is he one or many? O sage! as regards this wide Samsara, I have 
expressed my doubt; now answer me what is the Real and True, and 
thus remove my doubts. Many believe Maha Deva, the Lord of all the 
other Devas as the Supreme God, the Cause of all. He is the source 
of deliverance to all the Jivas; devoid of birth and death; always 
auspicious; peaceful in Himself and the controller of the three 
gunas. He is the one and only cause of creation, preservation and 
destruction. Some Pundits believe Visnu as the God of all and praise 
Him as such. It is Visnu that is the powerful Supreme Self, the Lord 
of all and the First Person Adipurusa. It is He that has no birth nor 
death, the Deliverer of the whole Jivas, Omnipresent; His faces are 
everywhere; He is the Granter of enjoyments and liberation to the 
devotees. Some others call again Brahma, the Cause of all. It is He 
that is omniscient and the Stimulator of all beings. 

The four-faced Brahma, the best of all the Devas is born from the 
navel lotus of some One of endless force. He resides in Satyaloka; 
He is the Creator of all and the Lord of all the Devas. Again some 
other Pundits call the Sun, Surya as God. In the morning and in the 
evening they chant His hymns, without any lack of slackness and 
laziness. Again there are some others, who say that Indra is the lord 
of all the Jivas; He is thousand-eyed; it is Indra, the husband of 
S’achi, that is the God of all. Those who perform Yajhas (sacrifices) 
worship Vasava, the king of the Devas. He drinks Soma juice 



Himself and those who drink Soma are his beloved. He is the one 
and only Lord of Sacrifices. Thus all men worship, according to their 
respective wishes, Varuna, Soma, Agni, Pavana (wind), Yama (the 
god of Death), Kuvera, the lord of wealth; there are some again who 
worship the elephant-faced Ganapati, the Fructifier of all actions, the 
Granter of desires of all the devotees, and the Giver of success to all 
in all enterprises, no sooner He is remembered. Some Acharyas 
(professors) say again that the All auspicious the Adi Maya, the 
Great S’akti Bhavani, the Giver of everything. Who is the nature of 
with and without attributes Who is not different from Brahma, who is 
both Purusa and Prakriti, the Creatrix, the Preservatrix and the 
Destructrix of all, the Mother of all the gods, beings and lokas, is the 
Great Goddess of this Brahmanda. She is without beginning and 
end, full, present in all the beings and everywhere. It is this Bhavani 
that assumes the various endless forms such as Vaisnavi S’ankari, 
Brahmi, Vasavi, Varuni, Varahi, Nara Simhi, Maha Laksmi the one 
and secondless Vedamata, and others. It is this Vidya nature that is 
the One and the only Root of this tree of Samsara (universe). 

The mere act of remembering Her destroys heaps of afflictions of the 
devotees and fulfills all their desires. She gives Moksa to those who 
are desirous of liberation and gives rewards to those who want such. 
She is beyond the three Gunas and still She emanates them. 
Therefore the Yogis that want rewards meditate Her, Who is of the 
nature of Vidya and Who is devoid of attributes. The best Munis, the 
knowers of the truths of Vedanta meditate on Her as formless, 
immutable, stainless, omnipresent Brahma devoid of all Dharma. 

She is described in some Vedas and Upanishads as full of Light 
(Tejas). Some intelligent persons describe God as of infinite hands, 
infinite ears, infinite legs, infinite faces, peaceful, Virat Purusa and 
describe sky as the Pada (place) of Visnu. Other knowers of the 
Puranas describe Him as Purusottama. There are some others again 
who declare that this creation cannot be done by a single individual. 
Some atheists say that this inconceivable infinite Universe can never 
be created by one God. So there is no such definite God that can be 
called its Creator. Though without any creator, this Brahmanda is 



sprung from the Nature and conducted by Her. The followers of the 
Samkhya system say that Purusa is not the creator of this Universe; 
they declare that Prakrit! is the Mistress of this Universe O Muni! 
Thus I have expressed to you what the Muni Kapila, the Acharya of 
the Sankhyas and the other philosophers declare as their opinions; 
various doubts, thus, reign always in my breast. Owing to these 
doubts my mind is so confused that I cannot arrive at any definite 
conclusion. My mind is very much unsettled as to what is Dharma 
and what is Adharma. What are the characteristics of Dharma? I 
cannot make out them. For the Devas are all sprung from the Sattva 
Guna and are always attached to the true Dharma; yet they are 
frequently troubled by the sinful Danavas. How, then, can I place my 
confidence on the permanence of the Dharma? My forefathers, the 
Pandavas were always endowed with good behaviours and good 
actions and they remained always in the path of the Dharma; yet 
they suffered a good deal of troubles and sufferings. In these cases 
it is very difficult understand the greatness of Dharma. So, O Father! 
Seeing all these, my mind is thrown into a sea of doubts and 
troubles. O Great Muni! 

There is nothing impracticable with you; so remove my doubts. O 
Muni! I am always plunged and raised and plunged again in this sea 
of delusion. So save me by lifting me on a boat of wisdom and carry 
me across this ocean of samsara (this world). 


Thus ends the first chapter on the third Skandha on the questions 
put by Janamejaya in the Mahapurana S'rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyas. 



Chapter 2. On Rudras Going Towards The 
Heavens On The Celestial Car 


1-19. Vyasa said O mighty armed Kuru! What you have asked me 
just now, I also asked the same thing to Narada, the lord of the 
Munis and he gave me the following reply O Vyasa! What shall I 
say to you on this point more than this that a doubt occurred to me 
also in my former days. The question that you have put to me today 
rose in my mind before; and I went to my father Brahma, of endless 
energy and asked to him thus O Lord! O Father! Whence is this 
whole Brahmanda born? Have You created it? Or is it Visnu or 
MahesVara? O all pervading soul! Who is there in this Brahmanda fit 
to be worshipped? O Lord of the world! Who is the top-most Lord 
ruling over everything? Kindly say. O Brahman! I am plunged in this 
sea of Maya and perils; my heart is agitated with doubts; hence it is 
not appeased in any place of pilgrimage ; or in thinking any Deva or 
in practising any Sadhan or in any other object. O Sinless one! Give 
me the answers duly and thus remove my doubts. O Tormentor of 
foes! Unless the highest truth is not known, peace is not found. This 
heart, distracted in various ways, cannot rest fixed on one subject. 
Whom am I to remember? Whom to worship? Where to go? Whom 
to praise? Who is the Supreme God this Universe? I do not 
understand these things. O Satyavati's son! Hearing these my 
serious queries, Brahma, the grand-Sire of beings, replied to me as 
follows O highly illustrious son! What more shall I say to you than 
this that even Visnu is unable to answer your questions; so difficult 
are they indeed! O great intelligent one! Nobody that is attached to 
the world knows anything about this. Those who are unattached to 
this world, who are free from any envy, these who are without 
desires and calm, those highsouled ones know the secret of all this. 
In former days when all was water, water everywhere and all things, 
moving and non-moving were destroyed, when five elements were 
sprung, then I was also born from the lotus navel of Visnu. Then not 
seeing Moon, Sun, trees, or mountains or anything and sitting on the 



centre (Karnika) of the lotus thought thus When I am born in this 
great ocean of waters? Who has created me? Who is now my 
protector? 


And Who will be my Destroyer when this cycle ends? There is no 
earth distinctly visible anywhere here; on what, then, this mass of 
water rests? Lotus is termed Pankaja because it springs from mud 
and dirt; so unless there exists the earth underneath with mud and 
dirt, how this lotus will come out here! Now let me try and find out 
where is the root of this lotus, where is the mud and dirt? If this be 
found, then the earth will be also certainly there. Thus thinking, I 
dived underneath the water and searched for one thousand years 
but could not find earth anywhere, when the celestial voice entered 
my ears “Practise tapasya (austerities).” Hearing this celestial voice, 
I sat on the lotus, my birth place, and practised tapasya for one 
thousand years. 


20-30. Next, the celestial voice came again “Create.” Hearing this, I 
became quite confounded and began to think within myself “now 
what am I to create? What to do?” After this, the two terrible Daityas 
Madhu and Kaitabha came to me and affrighted me saying “Fight 
with us.” I became quite terrified and holding the stem of the lotus, I 
got down within the water. There I saw a wonderful person, sleeping 
on the Ananta serpent. He was of a deep blue colour like a rain- 
cloud, wearing yellow clothes, four-armed, garlanded with forest 
flowers, and the Lord of this whole Universe. On the four arms of this 
Maha Visnu there were conch-shells, disc, club, and lotus and other 
weapons. I saw this Achyuta Purusa, sleeping on the Ananta serpent 
bed, motionless and under the influence of Yoga Nidra. I then 
thought within myself “What am I to do?” Not being able to find out 
any other way, I recollected the Devi who was then of the nature of 
sleep and began to praise Her. The auspicious Devi Yoga Nidra, 
whose form could not be determined, immediately left the body of 



Visnu and decorated with divine ornaments, began to shine in the 
air. After She left the body of Visnu, Visnu immediately got up. And 
He fought terribly for five thousand years with the Danavas Madhu 
Kaitabha; then by the grace of the Bhagavati, He extended His own 
thighs and then, on those thighs. He slew the two demons. Where 
Visnu and myself were standing, Rudra Deva came also and joined 
with us. Then we three saw the beautiful Devi in the celestial space. 


31-40. We three, then, commenced to chant hymns to Her and She 
gladdened our hearts by Her gracious look and said “O Brahma! 

O Visnu! O Rudra! The two great Daityas are slain. Now forsake 
your laziness and do your respective works of creating, preserving, 
and destroying the Universe; create your own abodes, and live in 
happiness; create by your respective lordly powers, the fourfold 
beings.” Hearing the Devi's gentle sweet words, we spoke “O 
Mother! There is no wide earth here; all is one mass of infinite 
ocean. No five elements, no five tanmatras, no sensual organs, no 
Gunas, nothing exist here; how can we then execute the works of 
creation, etc. Hearing our words, the Devi smiled. Immediately there 
came from the sky overhead a beautiful aerial car. The Devi said 
“O Brahma! O Visnu! O Rudra! Get in this car without any fear. To¬ 
day I will show you one wonderful thing.” At Her word, we got into 
the beautiful car without any fear. It was decorated with various 
gems and jewels, bedecked with pearls, emitting sweet tinkling 
sounds of bells and looking as the abode of the celestials. Seeing us 
seated without any fear. She made the car get high up in the sky by 
Her force. 


Thus ends the second chapter of the third skandha on Brahma, 
Visnu and Rudra's going towards the heavens on the celestial car, 
given by the Devi in the Mahapurana S'rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyas. 




Chapter 3. On Seeing The Dev! 


1-5. Brahma said “We were very much astonished not to find 
water where our beautiful aeroplane landed us. We saw earth 
resonated with the sweet cooings of the cuckoos, filled with beautiful 
fruit-laden trees, forests and gardens. Big rivers, wells, tanks, ponds, 
water-springs, small pools, women, men all are there. Next we saw, 
in front of us, a nice city enclosed by a divine wall, containing many 
sacrificial halls and various palatial buildings and magnificent 
edifices. Oh! We thoughtIt is Heaven! What a great wonder! Who 
built this? 


6-11. Next we saw a king looking like a Deva is going out on a 
hunting excursion in the forest. The Devi Ambika, Whom we saw 
before, is staying on the chariot. In an instant, our aeroplane, 
propelled by air got high up above the sky and reached in the 
twinkling of an eye at a lovely place. We saw there a divine Nandana 
garden. There Surabhi, the cow of plenty, was staying under the 
shade of the Parijata tree. Close by her, there was an elephant 
having four tusks; and Menaka and other hosts of Apsaras were 
there with their various gestures and postures, playing, dancing and 
singing. There were hundred of Yaksas, Gandharbhas, Vidyadharas 
within that Mandara garden playing and singing. Within this there 
was the Lord Satakratu with S'achi, the daughter of Puloma. 


12-34. Next we saw with great wonder, Varuna, the lord of the 
aquatic animals, Kuvera, Yama, Surya (sun), fire and the other 
Devas; then we saw that in our front, Indra the Lord of the Devas, 
was coming out from a well decorated city. He was there situated in 
his palanquin, calm and quiet and carried by men. Then the car, 
where we were situated, began to get up high in the sky, and in the 
twinkling of an eye, we reached Brahma loka, that is saluted by all 



the Devas. There S'ambhu and Kes'ava were greatly bewildered to 
see Brahma of that place. In the council hall of Brahma, the Vedas 
with their Angas, the serpents, hills, oceans and rivers were seen. 
Seeing all these, Visnu and MahesVara asked me “O Four-faced 
one! Who is this eternal Brahma? I replied I do not know who is 
this Brahma? Who am I? and who is He? why has this error come 
over me? You, too, also are gods so you can better ponder over it.” 
Next our car, going with the swiftness of mind went, in the twinkling 
of an eye, to the beautiful all auspicious Kailas'a mountain 
surrounded by bliss-giving Yaksas. It was beautified by the Mandara 
garden, resonated by the sweet cooings of S'ukas and cuckoos and 
the sweet sounds of lutes and small drums and tabors. When we 
reached there we saw the five faced, three-eyed Bhagavan S'ashi 
S'ekhara, with ten hands, wearing tiger skin, and the upper garment 
of the elephant skin. He was then, getting out of his abode, riding on 
a bull. His two sons, the great heroes, Ganes'a and Kartikeya, 
beautifully adorned, were attending Him as His body guards. Nandi 
and all other hosts were following Him, chanting victories to Him. O 
Muni Narada! we were greatly wondered to see another S'ankara, 
surrounded by the Matrikas. So much so, that perplexed with doubts, 
I sat down there. Next our aeroplane went on with the force of wind; 
and in an instant reached the abode of Vaikuntha, the amusement 
court of Laksmi. O Suta! There at Vaikuntha, we saw a wonderful 
manifestation of power. Our companion Visnu was greatly surprised 
to see that excellent city. We saw there four-armed Visnu, of the 
colour of Atasi flower, wearing yellow garments, adorned with divine 
ornaments sitting on Garuda. Laksmi Devi is fanning wonderful 
chowry to Him. Struck with wonder at the sight of the eternal Visnu, 
we took our seat on the car and looked at one another's face. 

Next the balloon ascended with the swiftness of wind; and, in the 
twinkling of an eye, reached to the ocean of nectar, the Sudha- 
Sagar, with waves playing sweetly on it. This ocean Sudha Sagara is 
filled with aquatic animals and agitated with ripples. We saw and 
went along and came to a very wonderful place called the Mani 
DvTpa (the island of gems) in the midst of the Ocean. It was adorned 



with Mandara and Parijata an other heavenly flower trees (plants?), 
with various beautiful carpets, with variegated trees As'oka, Vakula, 
Ketaki, Champaka, Kuravaka, etc., adorned with lustrous gems and 
pearls. It was resonated with the sweet cooings of the cuckoos and 
the humming sounds of bees; and it presented the sight of a sweet 
harmonious music playing there. 


35-67. Sitting on our aeroplane, we saw, from a distance, within that 
Dvipa, a beautiful cot known as S'ivakara (i.e. whose four legs 
represent Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, etc., and whose top portion 
represents Sada S’iva looking like a rainbow, with exquisitely 
beautiful carpet spread over it and decked with various gems and 
jewels and inlaid with pearls. We saw a Divine Lady, sitting on the 
cot, wearing a red garment and a garland of red cloth and bedewed 
with red sandal paste. Her eyes were dark-red; that beautiful faced 
red-lipped lady looked more beautiful than ten millions of lightnings 
and ten millions of Laksmis and lustrous like the Sun. The Bhagavati 
BhuvanesVari was sitting with a sweet smile on Her lips and holding 
in Her four hands noose, goad, and signs indicating as if She was 
ready to grant boons and asking Her devotees discard all fear. We 
never saw before such a form. Even the birds of that place repeat 
the mystic incantation Hrim and serve that Lady, Who is of the colour 
of the rising Sun, all merciful, and in the full bloom of youth. That 
lotus-faced smiling lady was adorned with all the beauties of Nature. 
Her high breasts defied the lotus bud. She was holding various 
jewelled ornaments, e.g., armplates, bracelets, diadems, etc. 

Her lotus-face looked exceedingly beautiful with jewelled ear-rings of 
the shape of the S’ri Yantra (yantra of Tripura Sundari). Hrillekha and 
other Deva girls were surrounding Her. There were Sakhis on the 
four sides - always chanting hymns to MahesVari, the Lady of the 
world. She was surrounded on Her all sides by Ananga kusuma and 
other Devis. She was sitting in the middle of the Satkona (six angled) 
Yantra. We were all wondered at the sight of this Wonderful Form 
never seen before and we thought“Who is this Lady? What is Her 



name? we know nothing of Her, from such a distance.” Thus while 
we were gazing at Her, that four armed Lady became gradually 
thousand eyed, with thousand hands and thousand feet; so it 
seemed to us. O Narada! We became very much embarrassed with 
doubts and thought within ourselves “Is She Apsara (nymph) or a 
Gandharva daughter or any other Deva Girl? who is She ?” At this 
juncture Bhagavan Visnu saw closely the sweet smiling Devi and by 
his intelligence came to a definite conclusion and spoke to us 
“This is the Devi Bhagavati Mahavidya Maha Maya, undecaying and 
eternal; She is the Full, the Prakriti; She is the Cause of us all. This 
Devi is inconceivable to those who are of dull intellects; only the 
Yogis can see Her by their Yoga-powers. She is eternal (Brahma) 
and also non-eternal (Maya). She is the Will-force of the Supreme 
Self. She is the First Creatrix of this world. 

This Devi with wide eyes, the Lady of the Universe, has produced 
the Vedas. The less-fortunate persons cannot worship Her. During 
the time of Pralaya, She destroys all the Universe, draws within Her 
body all the subtle bodies (Linga-Sariras), and plays. O two Devas! 
At present She is residing in the form of the Seed of the Universe. 
Behold! On Her sides are seen duly all the Vibhutis (manifestations 
of powers). They are all adorned with divine ornaments and anointed 
with divine scents and are serving Her. O Brahman! O S'ankara! To¬ 
day we are blessed and highly fortunate that we have got the sight of 
this Devi. The tapasya (asceticisms) that we practised of yore have 
yielded to us this fruit. Else why Bhagavati has shown so carefully 
Her own form? Those who are highly meritorious by tapasyas and 
gifts of abundant wealth, those high souled persons are able to see 
this all-auspicious Bhagavati. The person attached to sensual 
objects can never see Her. It is She that is the Mula Prakriti, united 
with the Chidananda Person. It is She that creates this Brahmanda 
and exhibits it to the Paramatma (the Supreme Self). O two Devas! 
This whole Universe and all the Seers and Seen and other things 
contained therein owe to Her as their sole cause. She is the Maya 
assuming all forms; She is the Goddess of all. Where is I myself! 
Where are the Devas! Where are Laksmi and the other Devis! We 



cannot compare to one-hundred thousandth part of Her. It is this all- 
excellent Lady, Whom I saw in the great Ocean when She reckoned 
Me who was baby then with greatest gladness. In former days, when 
I was sleeping on the cot made of immoveable fixed leaves of a 
banyan tree and licking my toe, making it enter within my mouth and 
playing like an ordinary baby, this Lady rocked my gentle body to 
and fro on the banyan leaves singing songs like a Mother. Now I 
recollect all what I felt before at Her sight and recognise that She is 
the Bhagavati. These very things I now communicate to you. Hear 
attentively that She is this Lady and She is our Mother.” 


Thus ends the third chapter of the Third Skandha on seeing the Devi 
in the Maha Puranam S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyas. 



Chapter 4. On The Hymns To The Great Dev! By 
V iSNU 


1-20. Brahma said Thus speaking, Bhagavan Janardana Visnu 
spoke to me again “Come, let us bow down to Her again and 
again and let us go to Her. We shall reach at Her feet fearlessly and 
we will chant hymns to Her; Maha Maya will be pleased with us and 
will grant us boons. If the guards at the entrance prevent us from 
going, we would stand at the gateway and we will chant hymns to 
the Devi with one mind.” 

Brahma said When Hari addressed us in the above way, we two 
became choked by intense feelings of joy; our voice became 
tremulous and we waited there for some time; our hearts were elated 
with joy to go to Her. We then accepted Hari's word said “Om” and 
got down from our car and went with hastened steps and with fear to 
the gate. Seeing us standing at the gateway, the Devi Bhagavati 
smiled and within an instant transformed us three into females. We 
looked beautiful and youthful women, adorned with nice ornaments; 
thus we greatly wondered and went to Her. Seeing us standing at 
Her feet in feminine forms, the beautiful Devi Bhagavati, looked on 
us with eyes of affection. We then bowed to the great Devi, looked at 
one another and stood before Her in that feminine dress. We three, 
then, began to see the pedestal of the great Devi, shining with the 
lustre of ten million Suns and decorated with various gems and 
jewels. We next discerned that thousands and thousands of 
attendants are waiting on Her. Some of them are wearing red dress; 
some blue dress, some yellow dress; thus the Deva girls, variously 
dressed were serving Her and standing by Her side. They were 
dancing, singing on and playing with musical instruments and were 
gladly chanting hymns in praise of the Devi. O NaradalWe saw there 
another wonderful thing. Listen. We saw the whole universe, moving 
and non-moving within the nails of the lotus feet of the Devi. We saw 
there myself, Visnu, Rudra, Vayu, Agni, Yama, Moon, Sun, Varuna, 



Tvasta, Indra, Kuvera and other Devas, Apsaras, Gandarbhas, 
rivers, oceans, mountains, Visvavasus Chitraketu, Sveta, 
Chitrangada, Narada, Tumburu, Ha Ha Hu Hu and other 
Gandarbhas, the twin As'vins, the eight Vasus, Sadhyas, Siddhas, 
the Piths, Ananta and other Nagas, Kinnaras, Uragas, Raksasas, the 
abode of Vaikuntha, the abode of Brahma, Kailas'a mountain, the 
best of all mountains; all were existing there. Within that nail of the 
toe were, reflected all the things of the Universe. The lotus whence I 
was born, the four faced Brahma like myself on that lotus, Bhagavan 
Jagannath lying on that bed of Ananta, the two Demons Madhu 
Kaitabha, all I saw there. 


21-31. Seeing all these wonderful things within the nails of Her lotus 
feet, I became greatly surprised and thought timidly “What are all 
these!” My companions Visnu and S'ankara were struck with wonder. 
We three, then, made out that She was our Mother of the universe. 

Thus full one hundred years passed away in seeing the various 
glories of the Devi in the auspicious nectar-like Mani Dvipa; as long 
we were there. Her attendants, the Deva girls adorned with various 
ornaments gladly considered us as Sakhis. We, too, were greatly 
fascinated by their enchanting gestures and postures. For that 
reason, we saw always their beautiful movements with great 
gladness. Once, on an occasion, Bhagavan Visnu, while He was in 
that feminine form, chanted hymns in praise of the great Devi S’ri 
Bhuvanes'vari. 

S’ri Bhagavan said Salutation to the Devi Prakriti, the Creatrix; I 
bow down again and again to Thee. Thou art all-auspicious and 
grantest the desires of Thy devotees; Thou art of the nature of Siddhi 
(success) and Vriddhi (increase). I bow down again and again to 
Thee. I bow down to the World Mother, Who is of the nature of 
Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss. O Devi! Thou createst, 
preservest and destroyest this Universe; Thou dost the Pralaya (the 
great Dissolution) and showest favour to the created beings. Thus 



Thou art the Authoress of the above five fold things that are done; 
so, O BhuvanesVari, I bow down to Thee! Thou art the great efficient 
and material cause of the changeful. Thou art the Unchangeable, 
Immoveable Consciousness; Thou art the half letter (Ardhamatra), 
Hrillekha (the consciousness that ever pervades both inside and 
outside the Universe); Thou art the Supreme Soul and the individual 
soul. Salutation again and again to Thee. 

O Mother! I now realise fully well that this whole Universe rests on 
Thee; it rises from Thee and again melts away in Thee. The creation 
of this Universe shews Thy infinite force. Verily, Thou art become 
Thyself all these Lokas (regions). During the time of creation Thou 
createst the two formless elements akasa and Vayu and the three 
elements with form, fire, water, and earth; then with these Thou 
createst the whole Universe and shewest this to the Enjoyer Purusa, 
who is of the nature of consciousness, for His satisfaction. Thou 
again dost become the material cause of the twentythree (23) 

Tattvas, Mahat, etc., as enumerated in the Sankhya system and 
appearest to us like a mirage. 


32. O Mother! Were it not for Thee, no object would be visible. Thou 
pervadest the whole Universe. It is for this reason that those persons 
that are wise declare that even the Highest Purusa can do no work 
without Thy aid. 


33-34. O Devi! Thou createst and art giving satisfaction to the whole 
Universe by Thy power; again at the time of Pralaya Thou 
swallowest forcibly all these that are seen. So, O Devi! Who can 
fathom Thy powers? O Mother! Thou didst save us from the hands of 
Madhu and Kaitabha. Then Thou hast brought us to this Mani Dvipa 
and shewed us Thy own form, all the extended regions and immense 
powers and given us exquisite delight and joy. This is the highest 
place of happiness. 



35-37. O Mother! When I Myself, S'ankara and Brahma or any one of 
us is unable to fathom Thy inconceivable glory, who else can then 
ascertain? O Bhavani! Who knows, how many more than the several 
regions that we saw reflected in thy nails of Thy feet, exist in Thy 
creation. O One endowed with infinitely great powers! O Devi! we 
saw another Visnu, another Hara, another Brahma, all of great 
celebrity in the Universe exhibited by Thee; who knows how many 
other such Brahmas, etc., exist in Thy other Universes! Thy glory is 
infinite. O Mother! I bow down again and again to Thy lotus feet and 
pray to Thee that may Thy this form exist always in my mind. May 
my mouth always utter Thy name and may my two eyes see always 
Thy lotus feet. 


38-43. O Revered One! May I remember Thee as my Goddess and 
may'st Thou constantly look on myself as Thy humble servant. O 
Mother! What more shall I say than this May this relation as 
mother and son always exist between Thee and me. O World- 
Mother! There is nothing in this world that is not known to Thee for 
Thou art omniscient. So O Bhavani! What more shall my humble self 
declare to Thee! Now dost Thou do whatever Thou desirest. O Devi! 
The rumour goes that Brahma is the Creator, Visnu is the Preserver, 
and MahesVara is the Destroyer! Is this true? O Eternal One! It is 
through Thy Will power, through Thy force, that we create, preserve 
and destroy. O Daughter of the Himalaya mountain! The earth is 
supporting this Universe; it is Thy endless might that is holding all 
this made of five elements. O Grantress of boons! It is through Thy 
power and lustre that the Sun is lustrous and becomes visible. 
Though Thou art the attributeless Self, yet by Thy Mayic power Thou 
appearest in the form of this Prapancha Universe. When Brahma, 
Mahes'a, and I myself take birth by Thy power and are not eternal, 
what more can be said of Indra and other Devas than this that they 
are mere temporary things and created. It is only Thou that art 
Eternal, Ancient Prakriti and the Mother of this Universe. O Bhavani! 



Now I realise from my remaining with Thee, that it is Thou that dost 
impart, out of mercy, the Brahma vidya to the ancient Purusa; and 
thus He can realise His eternal nature. Otherwise He will remain 
always under delusion that He is the Lord, He is the Purusa without 
beginning, that He is good and the Universal Soul, and thus suffers 
under various forms of egoism (Ahamkara). 

Thou art the Vidya of the intelligent persons and the S’akti of the 
beings endowed with force; Thou art Kirti (fame), Kanti (lustre), 
Kamala (wealth) and the spotless Tusti (peace, happiness). Amongst 
men. Thou art the dispassion, leading to Mukti (complete freedom 
from bondage). Thou art the Gayatri, the mother of the Vedas; and 
Thou art Svaha, Svadha, etc. Thou art the Bhagavati, of the nature 
of the three Gunas; Thou art the half matra (half the upper stroke of 
a letter), the fourth state, transcending the Gunas. It is Thou that 
givest always the S’astras for the preservation of the Devas and the 
Brahmanas. It is Thou that hast expanded and manifested this whole 
phenomenon of the visible Universe for the liberation of the 
embodied souls (JTvas), the parts of the pure holy Brahman, the Full, 
the Beginningless, the Deathless, forming the waves of the Infinite 
expanse of ocean. When the JTva comes to know internally and 
becomes thoroughly conscious that all this is Thy work. Thou 
createst and destroyest, that all this is Thy Mayic pastime, false, like 
the parts of an actor in a theatrical play, then and then only he 
desists for ever from his part in this Theatre of world. O Mother! O 
Destroyer of the greatest difficulties! I always take refuge unto Thee. 
Thou dost save me from this ocean of Samsara, full of Moha 
(delusion). Let Thou be my Saviour when my end will come, from 
these infinitely troublesome and unreal pains arising from love and 
hatred. Obeisance to Thee! O Devi! O Maha vidya! I fall prostrate at 
Thy feet. O Thou, the Giver of all desires! O Auspicious One! Dost 
Thou give the knowledge that is All-Light to Me. 


Thus ends the fourth chapter of the Third Skandha on the hymns to 
the Great Devi by Visnu in the Mahapurana S'rimad Devi 



Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyas. 



Chapter 5. On The Chanting Of Hymns By Hara 
And Brahma 


1. Brahma said O Narada! Thus speaking, Visnu stopped; 
Sankara, the Destroyer, then stepped in and, bowing down to the 
Devi said 


2. S’iva said O Devi! If Hari be born by Thy power and the lotus- 
born Brahma have come into existence from Thee, why, then, I who 
of Tamo Guna be not born of Thee! O Auspicious One! Thou art 
clever in creating all the Lokas! What wonder is there in My being 
created by Thee. 


3. O Mother! Thou art the earth, water, air, akasa and fire. Thou art, 
again, the organs of senses and the organs of perception; Thou art 
Buddhi, mind and Ahankara (egoism). 


4. Those who say that Hari, Hara, and Brahma are respectively the 
Preserver, the Destroyer and the Creator of this whole Universe do 
know anything. All the three, above mentioned, are created by Thee; 
then they perform always their respective functions; their sole refuge 
being Thyself. 


5. O Mother! If the Universe be created of the five elements, earth, 
air, ether, fire, and water, having the properties of touch, taste, etc., 
then how these five elements possessing attributes and of the nature 
of effects, can come into manifestation, without their being born from 
Thy Chit portion (Intelligence)? 



6. O Auspicious Mother! It is Thou in the shape of Brahma, Visnu 
and S’iva, That art creating this Universe and it is Thou that hast 
assumed the form of this whole Universe, moving and non-moving. 
Thus Thou playest, as it wills Thee, under various forms, again and 
again. Thou dost cease from play (during pralaya) as it likes Thee. 


7. O Mother! When Brahma, Visnu and I become desirous to create 
the world, we execute our duties by taking the dust (earth, etc.) of 
Thy lotus feet. 


8. O Mother! It it were not Thy mercy, then how Brahma could have 
become endowed with Rajoguna, Visnu with Sattvaguna and I with 
Tamoguna? 


9. O Mother! If there were no differences observed in Thy mind, then 
why hast Thou created in this world rich and poor, king and 
councillors, servants, etc., various classes of beings? Why hast Thou 
not created all alike happy or all alike miserable? 


10. So Thou wilt have to show Thy mercy towards me. Thy three 
gunas are capable at all times to create, preserve and destroy the 
world; then Hah, Hara and Brahma, whom Thou hast created as the 
cause of the three worlds, is simply Thy will. 


11-12. O Bhavani! If Thy Gunas had no power in the acts of creation, 
etc., then how can the fact that while we three Hah, Brahma and I 
were coming in the aeroplane, we saw on our way new worlds 
created by Thee, become possible? Kindly dost Thou say on this. O 
World-Mother! It is Thou that desirest to create, preserve, and 
destroy this world by Thy part Mayik power. Thou art always enjoying 



with Purusa, Thy husband. O S’iva! We cannot fathom Thy 
inscrutable ways. 


13-15. O auspicious one! How can we understand Thy sport? O 
Mother! We are transformed into young women before Thee; let us 
serve Thy lotus feet. If we get our manhood, we will be deprived from 
serving Thy feet and thus of the greatest happiness. O Mother! O 
Sire! I do not like to leave Thy lotus feet and get my man-body again 
and reign in the three worlds. O Beautiful faced one! Now that I have 
got this youthful feminine form before Thee, there is not a trace of 
desire within me to get again my masculine form. What use is there 
in getting manhood, what happiness is there if I do not get sight of 
Thy lotus-feet! 


16-18. O Mother! Let this unsullied fame of mine be spread over in 
the three worlds that I have got, in this young womanly form, the 
chance of serving Thy lotus feet that has got this effect that the idea 
of world goes away. Who is there that will leave Thy service and 
desire to enjoy the foeless kingdom in the world? Oh! even a 
moment appears a Yuga to him who has not got Thy lotus feet with 
him! O Mother! Those that leave the worship of Thy lotus feet and 
become engaged in performing tapasya are certainly deprived of the 
best thing by the Creator, though their minds be pure and holy. Their 
power from their Tapasya may be acquired and they be entitled for 
Mukti; yet they get dire defeat from not having Thee. 


19. O Unborn One! Austerities, control of passions, enlightenment or 
performance of sacrifices, as ordained in the Vedas, nothing can 
save, from this ocean of Samsara. It is the devotional worship only of 
Thy lotus feet that can make one attain the Beatitude. O Devi! If 
Thou be extremely merciful towards me, then initiate me in that 



wonderful holy mantra of Thine; I will repeat that omnipotent par- 
excellent nine-lettered mantra of the Chandika Devi and be happy. 


20-26. O Mother! In my former birth I got the nine-lettered mantra but 
now I have forgotten it O Tarini! O Saviour! Give me today that 
mantra and save me from this ocean of world. Brahma said When 
S’iva of wonderful fire and energy, said this, the Devi Ambika clearly 
uttered the nine lettered mantra. Mahadeva accepted the mantra and 
became very glad. He fell down at the feet of the Devi, and then and 
there began to repeat the nine-lettered mantra together with Vija 
(seed) that yields desires and liberation and can be easily 
pronounced. When I saw S'ankara, the Auspicious One to all the 
Lokas, in that state, I fell down also at the feet of the Devi and spoke 
to Maha Maya O Mother! It is not that the Vedas are unable to 
ascertain Thy nature; for, in the performances of sacrifices and other 
minor actions, they do not mention Thy full Nature, the Ordainer of 
all but mention simply Indra and minor deities and Svaha Devi, a 
portion of Thy essence as the presiding deities of the sacrificial 
offerings and oblations. So, O Devi! It is Thou that hast been extolled 
in this Universe as the Universal Consciousness, all knowing and 
transcending all the Devas and all the Lokas. 


Note :-- The nine lettered mantra is “Om Hrim S'rim Chandikayai 
namah.” 


27. I have created this greatly wondrous Universe; I am the Lord of 
this Brahmanda. Who is there more powerful than me in these three 
worlds? When I am Brahma, transcending all the Lokas, then I am 
blessed; there is no doubt in this. By reason of this vanity I am 
plunged in this widely extended ocean of Samsara. 



28-31. That now I have been able to get the dust of Thy lotus feet, 
has now made me really proud; and truly I am blessed today and by 
Thy grace this manifestation of pride on my part has become quite 
justified. Thou destroyest the fear of this Samsara and givest Mukti. 
So, O Goddess! pray unto Thee that Thou dost cut asunder this iron 
chain of my delusion, full of great troubles and make me devoted to 
Thee. O Auspicious One! I am born from the lotus discovered by 
Thee; now I am extremely anxious how I can get Mukti. I am Thy 
obedient servant; I am merged in the delusion of this ocean of world. 
Save me O S’iva! from this Samsara. Those who do not know Thy 
character, think that I am the Creator and Lord of this Universe; 
those, who do not worship Thee and worship Indra and other Devas 
and perform sacrifices to attain Heaven are certainly ignorant of Thy 
glory. O Prime Maya! Thou art the Eternal Maha Maya! It is Thou 
that dost want to play this worldplay, and for that purpose hast 
created me as Brahma. Then I created these four sorts of beings, 
engendered by heat and moisture (said of insects and worms), those 
that are oviparous, those that are sprung from germs or shoots, and 
those that are born from womb, viviparous and exhibit my pride “That 
I am omniscient” So forgive this sin of mine, this my pride. 


32-37. O Mother! Those ignorant persons blinded by passion, who 
take recourse to the eight-fold Yoga and Samadhi and labour under 
it, do not know for certain, they would get Moksa, if they utter Thy 
name, even under a pretext. O Bhavani! are they not deluded by 
error and blinded by passion for this world, who discriminate only the 
Tattvas (essences) and forget Thy name? For it is Thou that dost 
give Mukti from this world. O Thou Unborn! Can Hah, Hara, etc., and 
other ancient persons who have realised the highest Truth, forget, 
even for a second Thy holy character and Thy names S’iva, Ambika, 
S'akti, Isvari and others? Canst Thou not create, by Thy glance 
merely, this fourfold creation? In fact, for mere recreation and will, it 
is Thou that hast made me as a Creator from the earliest times. Is it 
not that Thou didst save Hah in the ocean from the two Daityas 



Madhu and Kaitabha? Is it not again the fact that Thou destroyest 
Hara even who is the great destroyer, when Thou dissolvest the 
creation? Otherwise why is it that Hara becomes born from my eye¬ 
brows at the time of fresh creation? So Hah is not the Preserver of 
all. Hara is not the Destroyer of all. Had they been such, why would 
they be preserved and destroyed respectively by Thee? So Thou 
alone art the Creatrix and Preservatrix of all. O Bhavani; no one has 
heard of or seen Thee taking birth; nobody knows whence Thou art 
born. Thou art, indeed, the One and only S'akti! Only the four Vedas 
can make one understand Thy Nature. O Mother! It is only by Thy 
help that I am able to create this creation; Hari, to preserve; and 
Hara, to destroy. 

Without Thy aid, we are able to do nothing. There is nobody, in this 
world, born or that was born or that will be born, who does not 
become doubtful as we are. This Thine wondrously variegated 
Universe, full of Thy Lila, consisting in variety, is the common ground 
of dispute of the imperfect intellects; who are not deluded here! In 
this Samsara, full of things, visible and invisible, there is another one 
who is more ancient than Thee; there is another Highest Person who 
is Thy substratum. If it be argued nicely, it will be seen that there is 
no other third Person that can be proved as far as evidences or 
proofs go to measure it. The wise persons, knowing all the laws, 
declare that there is the One God attributeless, inactive, without any 
object in view, without any upadhis or adjunct without any parts, who 
is the witness of Thy widely extended Leela “One alone exists; and 
that is Brahman, and there is nothing else.” This is the saying of the 
Vedas. Now I feel in my mind a doubt as to the discrepancy with this 
Veda saying. I cannot say that the Veda is false. So I ask Thee Art 
Thou the Brahman, the one and the secondless that is mentioned in 
the Vedas? or Is the other Person Brahma? Kindly solve this doubt 
of mine. My mind is not completely free from doubts; this little mind is 
still discussing whether the Reality is dual or one; I cannot solve 
myself. So dost Thou say from Thy mouth and cut my doubts 
asunder. Whether Thou art male or female, describe in detail to me. 



So that, knowing the Highest S'akti, I be freed from this ocean 
Samsara. 


Thus ends the fifth chapter of the Third Skandha on the chanting of 
hymns by Hara and Brahma in the Maha Puranam S'rimad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 6. On The Description Of The DevI’s 
V iBHUTis (Powers) 


1-10. Brahma said When I thus asked with great humility, the Devi 
Bhagavati, the Prime S'akti, She addressed me thus in the following 
sweet words There is oneness always between me and the 
Purusa; there is difference whatsoever at any time between me and 
the Purusa (Male, the Supreme Self). Who is I, that is Purusa; who is 
Purusa, that is I. The difference between force and the receptacle of 
force is due to error. He who knows the subtle difference between us 
two, is certainly intelligent; he is freed from this bondage of Samsara; 
there is no manner of doubt in this. The One Secondless Eternal 
ever-lasting Brahma substance becomes dual at the time of creation. 
As a lamp, though one, becomes two by virtue of adjuncts; as a face, 
though one, becomes two, as reflected in a mirror; as one man 
becomes double by his shadow, we become reflected into many, by 
virtue of different Antah Karanas (mind, buddhi, and ahankara) 
created by Maya. The necessity of creation, again and again, after 
the Prakriti Pralayas is due to the fructification of those Karmas of 
the JTvas, whose fruits were not enjoyed before the Pralayas ; so 
when creation again commences, the above said differences are 
found to appear; Brahma is the material cause of these changes; 
without Brahma as the basis, the existence of Maya is simply 
impossible. It is therefore that in Maya and Maya's action, Brahma is 
interwoven. For this reason as many differences are found in Maya, 
so many differences exist in Brahma. 

The Maya and Brahma appear as two and hence all the differences, 
visible and invisible, have come forth. Only during creation are these 
differences conceived. When everything melts away, i.e., there 
comes the Pralaya or general dissolution, then, I am not female, I am 
not male, nor I am hermaphrodite. I then remain as Brahma with 
Maya latent in it. During the time of creation I am S’ri (wealth), 

Buddhi (intellect), Dhriti, (fortitude). Smriti (recollection), Sraddha 



(faith), Medha (intelligence), Daya (mercy), Lajja (modesty), 

Kshudha (hunger), Trishna (thirst), Kshama (forgiveness), Akshama 
(non-forgiving), Kanti (lustre), Santi (peace), Pipasa (thirst), Nidra 
(sleep) Tandra (drowsiness), Jara (old age), Ajara (non old-age), 
Vidya (knowledge), Avidya (non-knowledge), Spriha (desires), 
Vanchha (desires), S'akti (force), As'akti (non-force), Vasa (fat), 

Majja (marrow), Tvak (skin), Dristi (sight), Satyasatya Vakya (true 
and untrue words) and it is I that become Para, Madhyama, 
Pas'yanti, etc., the innumerable Nadis (tubular organs of the body, e. 
g., arteries, veins, intestines, blood vessels, pulses, etc.); there are 
three koti and a half Nadis (35 millions of Nadis). 


11-13. O Brahma! See what substance is there in this Samsara, that 
is separate from Me? And what can you imagine with which I am not 
connected? So know this as certain that I am these all forms. O 
Creator! Say, is there any such thing, where you will not see my 
above mentioned positive form? So, in this creation, I am one, and I 
am many as well, in various forms. Know this as certain that it is I, 
that assuming the names of all the various Devas, exist in so many 
forms of S'aktis. It is I that manifest power and wield strength. 


14-27. O Brahma! I am Gauri, Brahmi, Raudri, Varahi, Vaisnavi, 
S’iva, Varuni, Kauveri, Nara Sinhi, and VasavT S'aktis. I enter in 
every substance, in everything of the nature of effect. Making that 
Purusa the instrument, I do all the actions (rather Purusa is the 
efficient cause, the immediate agent). I am the coolness in water, the 
heat in fire, the lustre in the Sun, the cooling rays in the Moon; and 
thus I manifest my my strength. O Brahma! Verily, I tell you this as 
certain that this universe becomes motionless, if it be abandoned by 
Me. If I leave S'ankara, he will not be able to kill the Daityas. A very 
weak man is declared to be as without any strength; he is not said to 
be without Rudra, or without Visnu, nobody says like this; everyone 
says, he is without strength, without S'akti. Those who get fallen. 



tumbled, afraid, quiet, or under one's enemies are called powerless; 
no one says that this man is Rudraless and so forth. So the creation 
that you perform, know S’akti, power to be the cause thereof. When 
you will be endowed with that S’akti, you will be able to create this 
whole Universe. Hah, Rudra, Indra, Agni, Chandra, Surya, Yama, 
Vis'vakarma, Varuna Havana, and other Devas all are able to do 
their karmas, when they are united respectively with their S'aktis. 

This Earth, when united with S’akti, remains fixed and becomes 
capable to hold all the Jivas and beings. And if this Earth be devoid 
of force. She cannot hold an atom even. 

Thus Ananta, Kurma and all the other elephants of the eight points of 
the compass, become able to do their respective works, only by My 
help (when united with Me, the Force). O Lotus born! If I wish I can 
drink all the fire and waters today and I can hold wind in check. I do 
whatever I wish. If I say that I am creating this world then the 
inconsistency arises thus “When I am everything, then I am being 
eternal, all this universe, made up of Prapancha, becomes eternal.” 
(Whereas this universe is not eternal in the sense that it is 
changing.) If it were said that this universe is different from Me, then 
My saying that I am everything becomes inconsistent. Thinking thus, 
do not plunge yourself in the doubt as to the reality and origin and 
separateness of the non-eternal universe. For what is unreal, how 
can that come into existence? The unreal substances can never 
come into existence; as the child of a barren woman, the flowers in 
the sky are simply absurd. What is real can only be born. In 
discussing about origin, birth, etc., the appearance and 
disappearance of real things is called their birth and dissolution. In 
the cold of earth there exists the previous existence of the jar and 
this is the cause of the appearance of the jar; the disappearance of 
the jar exists in the jar; hence this disappearance is the cause of the 
destruction of the jar. Thus the appearance and disappearance of 
the causal eternal things are called the Origin and Pralaya. Similarly 
in discussing on the causal nature, there does not arise an 
inconsistency in My being everything. 



28-48. So there is nothing to fear. In discussing about the reality of 
effects, this is to be conceived, that today there does not exist here 
the earth in the form of jar, if it is destroyed, where it has gone? The 
conclusion is that the earth in the form of jar exists in atoms. O 
Brahma! All substances eternal, existing for a moment only, the void, 
and the substances of the nature, real and unreal both, all are due to 
a cause. 

Ahankara is born first among them. Thus substances are of seven 
kinds: Mahat, etc. O Unborn One! Mahattattva first arises from 
Prakriti; from Mahattattva springs Ahamkara; and from Ahamkara 
arises other substances. Thus, in this order, you go on creating this 
Universe. O Brahma! Now you better go to your respective places, 
and after creating the Universe, remain there and perform your 
respective functions ordained by Prarabdha. Take this beautiful great 
S’akti Maha Sarasvati, full of Rajoguna, and of a smiling nature. This 
S'akti, wearing white clothes, adorned with divine ornaments and 
sitting on Varasana, will always be your playmate. This beautiful 
woman will always be your boon companion; consider Her as My 
bibhuti (manifestation of power), and so most worshipful. Never 
show any sort of disrespect towards Her. Take Her and go 
immediately to Satyaloka; and from the seed of Mahattattva, create 
the fourfold beings from these. The subtle bodies (Linga sarira) and 
Karmas are remaining mixed up with each other. Separate them, as 
before, duly, in due time. 

Now go on as before and according to Kala (time). Karma, and 
Svabhava (nature), join them with their respective attributes (sounds 
and other qualities); in other words bestow fruits according to their 
gunas and Karmas (Prarabdhas), and to the time when these fruits 
are due. 

Visnu is prominent in Sattvaguna and hence superior to You. So You 
should always respect and worship Him. Whenever any difficulty will 
come to you, Visnu will come down on earth to fulfil your ends. 



Janardan Visnu will sometimes be born in the wombs of birds and 
animals, be sometimes in the wombs of men and destroy the 
Danavas. The highly powerful Maha Deva, too, will help you. Now 
create the Devas and enjoy as you like. The Brahmanas, 

Kshattriyas, and Vaisyas will worship you, with devotion, in various 
sacrifices, endowed with due sacrificial fees. All the Devas will be 
always satisfied when my name “Svaha” will be uttered in the 
sacrificial oblations and ceremonies. 

S’iva, the incarnate of Tamo guna will be revered and worshipped by 
all persons in every sacrifice. When the Devas will be frightened by 
the Daityas, then Varahi, Vaisnavi, Gauri, Nara Simhi, S’achi, S'iva 
and My other S’aktis will take excellent bodies and destroy your fear. 
So, O Lotus-born! Be at your ease and do work. You utter and repeat 
my nine-lettered mantra with Vija and Dhyan and do your work. 

O highly intelligent one! This nine-lettered mantra is the best of all 
the mantras. You are to keep this mantra, within your heart, for the 
accomplishment of all your ends. 

Thus saying to me, Bhagavati smiled and began to say to Visnu 
O Visnu! Take this beautiful Maha Laks'mi and go. She will always 
reside within your breast; there is no doubt in this. This all auspicious 
giving S’akti I give to you for your enjoyment. 

You should always shew respect to Her; never show hatred or 
contempt. For the good of the world, I unite thus Laks'mi and 
Narayan. For your sustenance I create Yajha. You three will act 
together in harmony unanimously. 

You, Brahma and S’iva are my three Devas, born of my Gunas. You 
three will undoubtedly be respected and worshipped by the world. 

The stupid man who will find any difference between you three, will 
go to hell; there is no doubt in this. He who is Hah, is S’iva; He who 
S’iva is Hah; to make difference between these will lead one to hell. 
So Brahma is one and the same with S’iva and Visnu; there no 
manner of doubt in this. O Visnu! But there are other differences in 



their Gunas; I will tell this; listen, as far as meditation of the Supreme 
Self is concerned you will have Sattva Guna predominant within you; 
and Rajo Guna and Tamo Guna will be secondary. In various other 
pursuits and Vikaras (changes) better have Rajo Guna with Laks'mi 
and always enjoy Her. 


49-85. O Lord of Rama! I give you Vakvija, Kamavija, and Mayavija 
that will lead you to the highest end. Take this Mantra and repeat it 
and enjoy as you like. O Visnu! By this, the danger of death, caused 
Kala, will never come to you. When the creation of this Universe will 
be completely done I will then destroy this whole thing, moving and 
non-moving. You all will then be dissolved in Me. You should add 
pranava this mantra with Kamavija leading to Moksa and repeat it 
always with auspicious motives. O Purusottama! Build your 
Vaikunthapuri; live there and think of this My Eternal Form and enjoy 
as you like. 

Brahma said Saying thus to Vasudeva, that Higher Prakriti Devi 
who is all of the three Gunas and yet transcending them, began to 
address Maha Deva, the Deva of the Devas, in sweet words, thus 
O Sankara! Accept this beautiful Maha Kali Gauri, build a new 
Kailas'a city and live there happily. Your primary Gunas will be 
Tamas; Sattva and Rajas will be your secondary Gunas. Have 
recourse to Rajo and Tamo Gunas while you slay the Asuras and 
thus wander. 

O sinless S’ankara! Have recourse to peaceful Satto Guna, when 
you reflect on the Supreme Self and practise austerities. You all are 
for creating, preserving and destroying the Universe and you are all 
of the three Gunas. There is no such thing in this world as are devoid 
of these three Gunas. Everything, that is visible, is endowed with the 
three Gunas, and whatever will be or was before cannot exist without 
them. Only the Supreme Self is without these Gunas; but He is not 
visible. O Sankara! I am the Para Prakriti; at times I appear with 
Gunas; and at others I remain without any Gunas. O S’ambhu! I am 



always of the causal nature; never I am of the nature of effect. When 
I am causal, I am with Gunas; and when I am before the Highest 
Purusa, I am, then, without any Gunas on account of my remaining 
in the state of equilibrium (Samya vastha). Mahattattva, Ahamkara, 
and sound, touch, etc., all the Gunas perform the work of Samsara, 
day and night, each preceding one being the cause and each 
subsequent one being the effect; never do they cease in their 
activities. 

From the Reality (Sat vastu) springs Ahamkara (Avyakta); therefore I 
am of the nature of causality; again Ahamkara is embodied with the 
three Gunas, and so the Pundits call it as an effect of mine. From 
Ahamkara arises Mahattattva; this is denominated as Buddhi. So 
Mahattattva is the effect and Ahamkara is its cause. From 
Mahattattva arises again another Ahamkara; from this second 
Ahamkara arise the five Tanmatras or the subtle elements. From 
these five Tanmatras, the five gross elements arise after a process 
called Panchikarana. From the Sattvika part of the five Tanmatras, 
arise the five organs of perception; from their Rajasik part, the five 
organs of action come; from their Panchikarana, came the five gross 
elements; from the Sattvika portion of all the five elements comes 
mind. Thus sixteen things come into existence. These organs of 
perception, etc., and other effects together with the Maha bhutas 
form one Gana, composed of the sixteen categories. The original 
Purusa is the Supreme Self; He is neither cause nor is He any effect. 
O S’ambhu! At the beginning of the creation, all the above things are 
born in the way already indicated. Thus I have described to you, in 
brief; about the creation. O Devas! Now get up in your aeroplane and 
go to your respective places and fulfil your respective duties. 
Whenever you get into any dire distress, then remember Me; I will 
appear before you. O Devas! You should remember always the 
Eternal Supreme Self and Me. When you will remember us both, all 
your actions, will, no doubt, be crowned with success. 

Brahma said Bhagavati Durga gave us S’aktis, full of Divine 
beauty and lustre; She gave Maha Laksmi to Visnu, Maha Kali to 



S’iva, and Maha Sarasvati to me and bade good bye to us. Thus 
given farewell to by the Devi, we three went to another place and 
were born as males. We thought of the very wonderful nature and 
influence of the Devi and we got upon our divine aeroplane. When 
we ascended, we saw there was no ManidvTpa, there was no Devi, 
there was no ocean of nectar, nothing whatsoever. Save our 
aeroplane, we did not see anything. We then got into our wide 
aeroplane and reached there where Visnu killed the two indomitable 
Daityas, in the great ocean, where I was born from the lotus. 


Thus ends the Sixth Chapter of the Third Skandha on the description 
of the Devi's Vibhutis (powers) in the Mahapuranam S’rimad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyas. 



Chapter 7. On The Creation And The Tattvas 
And Their Presiding Deities 


1.0 Brahma said Narada! Thus we three I, Visnu, and Mahadeva 
saw that highly effulgent Goddess: we also saw separately Her 
attendant goddesses, one after another, that form, as it were, a veil 
to her? Who were also preeminently grand. 


2-3. Vyasa said O king! Narada, the foremost of the Munis, 
hearing thus his father's words, was exceedingly pleased and asked 
O Grandsire of all the Lokas! Now describe in detail that ancient 
and indestructible undecaying, unchangeable, eternal Purusa, that is 
Nirguna (free from Prakritic qualities) that you have seen and 
realised. 


4. Father! You have seen the S’akti (the Prime Energy) personified 
the Saguna energy, the Supreme Goddess, having hands and feet; 
but cannot understand of what kind is that Nirguna S’akti which 
cannot be seen and which is devoid of all Prakritic qualities. 

O Lotus-born! Be good enough to describe to me the real nature of 
that Prakrit! and Purusa and thus satisfy me. 


5-6. O Lord of Creation! I practised severe austerities in the 
Svetadvipa (white island), so that I might realise and see the Nirguna 
Highest Self and the Nirguna S’akti, the Supreme Goddess; I saw 
there many other Mahatmas (high class spiritual persons) who 
attained siddhis (supernatural powers) practise Tapasya with their 
passions and anger conquered. But I did not realise nor did I see 
anything about that Nirguna Highest Self. Father, I was not 



despaired; again and again I continued with nny ascetic practices; but 
still I failed. 


7. Father, you have been so successful as to see that beautiful S’akti 
with qualities; I have heard about Her from you, but how and of what 
sort, is that invisible attributeless energy as well as that Nirguna 
Purusa. Please narrate and explain all these and satisfy my desires 
that always reign in my breast. 


8. Vyasa said O King! Thus asked by Narada, the Lord of 
creation, the grandsire of the Lokas, smiled, and began to speak the 
truth in the following words 


9. O best of Munis! The form of the Nirguna Purusa (the Supreme 
Spirit beyond the Prakritic qualities) cannot exist or be visible; for 
everything that comes within the range of sight is transitory. How 
can, then, that Eternal Spirit have form and how can He become 
visible! 


10. O Narada! The Nirguna Energy or Nirguna Purusa comes not 
easily within the range of knowledge; but both of them can be 
realised by the Munis in their meditation in their consciousness. 


11. Prakriti and Purusa have no beginning nor end; they can be 
realised only through faith; those that have no faith can never realise 
them. 


12. Narada! The universal consciousness, that is felt in all the 
beings, know that as the Highest Self; the Energy that is universal 



and is seen always in all the beings, know that as the Highest Self. 


13. O blessed one! That Purusa and Prakrit! pervade everywhere 
and exist in all the things; in this Universe nothing can exist without 
the presence of both of them. 


14. Both of them are the highest intelligent self, nirguna (free from all 
material qualities), without any tinge of impurity, and undecaying. 

The one form that is a combination of these two is always to be 
meditated in the heart. 


15. What is S’akti (energy) is the Highest Self; what is the Highest 
Self is the Highest S’akti. O Narada! Nobody can ascertain the subtle 
difference between these two. 


16. O Narada! Merely the study of all the S’astras and the Vedas 
with their Amgas without renunciation does not enable one to 
ascertain the difference between these two. 


17. O Child! This whole universe, moving and non-moving, comes 
out of Ahamkara (egoism). How can one ascertain the above 
difference even if he tries for one hundred kalpas, unless one frees 
oneself from Ahamkara. 


18. The Jivas are Saguna (with qualities), how can the Sagunas see 
the Nirguna One with their physical eyes? Therefore O Intelligent 
one! try to see the Saguna (Brahma) only within your heart (until you 
free yourself from the material qualities and thus be fit to realise the 
Nirguna Brahma). 



19-20. O best of Munis! If the tongue (organ of taste) and eyes 
(organ of sight) be affected with over biliousness, the pungent taste 
and the yellow colour do not appear what it appeared before; so the 
hearts of Jivas, overpowered with nnaterial qualities, are quite unfit 
for realisation of the Nirguna Brahman. O Narada! That heart again 
has come out of Ahamkara; how can then that heart be free from 
Ahamkara? 


21. Until one becomes able to cut asunder all connections with 
qualities, the seeing of that Nirguna Brahma is impossible. No 
sooner one is totally free from Ahamkara, than the Nirguna Brahma 
is at once seen by him within his heart. 


22-24. Narada said O best of the Devas! Ahamkara is three-fold, 
Satvik, Rajasik and Tamasik; describe in detail the differences 
between these three sub-divisions as well the real nature of the 
Gunas. Also describe to me about that knowledge, knowing which 
will lead to my salvation. Also describe, in detail, the characteristics 
of the several Gunas, in due order. 


25-26. Brahma said O Sinless one! The energy of Ahamkara is of 
three kinds Jnana S’akti, Kriya S’akti, and Artha or Dravya S’akti. 
The power by which knowledge is produced or obtained is the 
Sattvic Ahamkara; the power by which action or activity or motion is 
produced is the Rajasic Ahamkara; and that by which the material 
things or objects of have senses are generated is called the Tamasic 
Ahamkara. O Narada! thus I described to you, in due order, the 
threefold Ahamkara. 



27-30. Now I describe to you their merits and workings in detail; 
hear. Out of the Dravya S’akti of the Tamasic Ahamkara come 
sound, touch, form, taste and smell. From these five qualities, the 
five Tanmatras or the five subtle-elements (primary atoms) are 
produced. 

Sound is the quality of Aka'sa (ether); touch is the quality of Vayu 
(Air); the form is the quality of Agni (fire); the taste is the quality of 
Jala (water); and the smell is the quality of earth. 

O Narada, these ten gross and subtle materials can, when 
combined, become endowed with power to work out results in the 
shape of earth, water, fire, etc., and when the Panchikarana process 
is combined, the building of the whole cosmos takes place as a 
natural consequence of the Tamasa Ahamkara, endowed with the 
energy of generating material substances. 


31-34. Now hear what are produced by the Rajasic energy. The five 
organs of hearing, touch, taste, sight, and smell (ears, skin, tongue, 
eyes and nose) called the five Jhanendriyas (organs of senses); 
mouth, hands, feet, anus and the organs of generation called the five 
Karmendriyas (organs of action); and Prana, Apana, Vyana, 

Samana, and Udana, the five Vayus. The creation out of these 
fifteen substances is called the Rajasic energy. Narada! All these 
organs of senses and actions endowed with the Kriya S’akti, called 
the Karanas and the materials fashioned out of them are called the 
chidanuvritti or Maya. 


35-38. O Narada! From the S'attvik Ahamkara are produced the five 
presiding rulers of the five internal organs named Dik (quarters), 
Vayu, Sun, Varuna, and the twins Asvini Kumaras and the four 
presiding rulers of the four fold divisions of Antahkarana (Buddhis, 
manas, Ahamkara and chitta) named Moon, Brahma, Rudra, and 
Ksetrajha. Thus the above five organs of senses, the five organs of 



action, the five Vayus and mind, these sixteen substances are 
reckoned as the Sattvic creation. 


39-40. O Child! The Highest Self has two forms; one gross and the 
other subtle. The formless Self; the Consciousness incarnate, as it 
were, is the first form. The Seers consider this formless self to be the 
primary cause (the ultimatum) of all this phenomenal cosmos. (This 
is only for the best qualified Jhanis, not for others). 

The Second Form is the Gross Form for the meditation of the second 
class qualified persons; thus the sages say. This second form of the 
Supreme Goddess is conditioned by inherent Maya (time, space and 
causation); this is also divided into gross and subtle, according as it 
is the outer or inner body of the second form (and the form suited for 
the meditation of the third class and the second class devotees). 


41. My body is called Sutratma; I will now tell you the gross body of 
Brahman, the Highest Self. 


O Narada! This my body and soul having the nature of a string or 
thread is called Hiranyagarbha; this is also the gross body of the 
Paramatman; therefore the Paramatman together with the Sutratma, 
should also be worshipped. O Narada! I will now describe to you the 
outer gross body of Brahman, the Highest Self; hear it attentively; if 
one hears it with faith and devotion, one is sure to get salvation. 


42-43. I have mentioned to you before the five subtle elements, 
called the five Tanmatras; these, now, when the Panchi Karana 
process is done, are converted into the five gross elements. Now 
hear what the Panchi Karana process means 



44-46. Suppose you are to create the gross element of water. Divide 
into two equal parts the subtle element of water; divide also the other 
4 elements into two equal parts respectively. Now set apart the first 
half of each of the five elements; divide the second half of each of 
the elements into four equal parts. Mix the first half of each of the 
elements with each of the fourth part of the other four elements; and 
you get one gross element. Similarly you get the other four gross 
elements. For example You want to get the gross element of 
waterWith the half of the subtle element (V 2 ) of water mix the 
fourth part, of the halves of the other elements of ether, fire, air and 
earth; you get the gross element of water and so on. 


The Panchikarana process is clearly illustrated in the following table. 

TABLE 



Ether 

Air 

Fire 

Water 

Earth 

Ether 

1/2 

1/8 

1/8 

1/8 

1/8 

Air 

1/8 

1/2 

1/8 

1/8 

1/8 

Fire 

1/8 

1/8 

1/2 

1/8 

1/8 

Water 

1/8 

1/8 

1/8 

1/2 

1/8 

Earth 

1/8 

1/8 

1/8 

1/8 

1/2 

Gross element 1 

1 

1 

1 

1 


When the five gross elements are thus produced, consciousness 
then enters into these elements as their presiding deities; next 



comes the feeling of egoism (I ness) identifying itself with the body 
thus created out of the five elements. (I am this body and so forth). 


47. This great “I”, the great consciousness, creating and considering 
the Cosmos as its body is called the Bhagavan, Adideva, Narayana 
or Vaisvanara. 


48. When, by the Panchikarana process, the five gross elements, 
earth, ether, air, etc., are solidified and get their clear definite forms, 
one, two, three, four, five, qualities are seen to exist in ether, air, fire, 
water, and earth, respectively. 


49-51. Thus ether has one quality only - that is sound: the air has got 
two qualities - sound and touch; the fire possesses three qualities - 
sound, touch, and form; the water has got four qualities - sound, 
touch, form and taste; the earth has got five qualities - sound, touch, 
form, taste and smell, and by the various combinations of these five 
gross elements, is produced this grand Cosmos, the great body of 
Brahman. 


52. Similarly the sum-total of Jivas is produced from the several 
parts of the whole Brahmanda; these Jivas are eighty four lakhs; so 
the sages say. 


Thus ends the Seventh Chapter of the Third Skandha of S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses, on the 
creation and the Tattvas and their presiding Deities. 



Note :Of these Jivas, those who are the best qualified, the 
Uttamadhikaris, are known as the Brahmanas, Janaghana Turiyas, 
as denoted by Om Hrim; the middlings have their gross, subtle and 
causal bodies and are called as Brahma VaisVanara, Sutra, 
Hiranyagarbhas; and the third class is known as VisVa, Taijasa. and 
Prajhas and forms the body, as it were, of the Brahman. There are 
others also, animals, etc., in the lowest class. 



Chapter 8. On The Gunas And Their Forms 


1. Brahma said :--0 Narada! I have described to you what you asked 
me just now about the creation of this universe, etc. Now hear with 
attention the colour of the three qualities, as well their configuration 
and how they are seen to exist. 


2-3. The Sattva Guna is the source of pleasure and happiness; and 
when happiness comes, everything seems delightening. When 
integrity, truthfulness, cleanliness, faith, forgiveness, fortitude, mercy, 
bashfulness, peace and contentment arise in one's heart, know 
certainly that there has arisen firmly the Sattva Guna in that man. 


4. The colour of the Sattva quality is white; it makes one always like 
religion, and have faith towards good purposes and discard one's 
tendencies towards bad objects. 


5. The Risis, the seers of truth classify Sraddha (faith) under the 
three headings: Sattvik, Rajasik and Tamasik. 


6. The quality Rajas is of red colour, wonderful and is not pleasant; it 
is the source of all troubles; there is no doubt in this. 


7-8. The intelligent should understand that Rajas has certainly arisen 
in him, when his mind is filled with hatred, enmity, quarrelsome 
feeling, pride, stupification, uneasiness, sleeplessness, want of faith, 
egoism, vanity and arrogance. 



9-11. The quality Tamas is of black colour. From Tamas arises 
laziness, ignorance, sleep, poverty, fear, quarrels, miserliness, 
insincerity, anger, aberration of intellect, violent atheism, and finding 
fault with others. The wise should think that Tamas has overpowered 
him when the above qualities are found to possess him. When this 
Tamas quality is attended with the Tamasi faith, then it becomes the 
source of pain to others. 


12. The well wishers should manifest in themselves the Sattva 
qualities, control the Rajasic qualities, and destroy the Tamasic 
qualities. 


13. These three qualities are always found to remain intermingled 
with another, and each of them has always an inherent tendency to 
overcome the others; and therefore they are always, as it were, at 
war with another. They never have a separate existence from one 
another. 


14. Never is found anywhere only one Sattva quality to the exclusion 
of others, the Rajas and Tamas; similar is the case with the Rajas or 
Tamas. They remain intermingled and depend on one another. 


15. O Narada! Now hear, in detail, which two qualities remain in 
twins, knowing which, one is freed from this ocean of the 
transmigration of existence. 


16. I have realised these; therefore you ought not to have any 
uncertainties on these points. The reality of these is especially felt, 
when it is really understood and when its effects begin to manifest 
themselves. 



17. O high-minded! No one is able to realise these at once; it 
requires be heard, and then meditated upon. It also depends on 
one's natural capability and merits, due to the past actions. 


18-21. Suppose one hears of the sacred places of pilgrimages and is 
filled with the Rajasic devotion. He goes out to those places and 
sees what he had heard before. There he performs his ablutions, 
makes offerings and the Rajasic gifts, stays there for some time; but 
all this he does under the influence of the Rajasic quality. And when 
he returns home, he finds himself not free from lust, anger, love and 
hatred; he remains the same that he was before. Therefore, in this 
case, O Narada! man hears but he does not realise the purifying 
effects of those holy places. O best of Munis! And when he does not 
find any benefit from the holy place of pilgrimage, it is equivalent to 
his not at all hearing of the place. 


22. O best of Munis! The effect of visiting the sacred places of 
pilgrimages is then said to accrue to any individual, when he 
becomes freed from his sins, just as the fruit of cultivating fields is 
then said to occur, when the cultivator gets the ripened harvest out of 
his labour and enjoys the produce of his fields. 


23. O Narada! Lust, anger, covetousness, delusion, thirst, hatred, 
love, vanity, malice, jealousy, non-forgiveness, unrest all these 
indicate that there is sin; and until these are purged out of one's 
body and mind, man lives in sin. If the visiting of the sacred places of 
pilgrimages does not enable one to overcome the above passions, 
then the labours in going to those places are in vain, i.e., those 
labours merely are the results just as the toil only undergone by the 
cultivator is his only result, and is not met with any reward when 
there is no harvest at all. 



24-28. Lo! The cultivator takes hard labour to clear his fields and 
cultivate the hard soil; he then sows the valuable seeds, because 
this is considered as doing good. Next, in expectation of the harvest, 
he undergoes a good deal of pains, day and night, to protect his 
fields and goes down to sleep, in the cold season, in the forest 
surrounded by tigers and other dangerous animals; but alas! locusts 
coming eat away and destroy all the crops, to the utter 
disappointment of the cultivator. All his labours are spent in vain. So, 
O Narada! The labour taken by one in going to the holy places yields 
pains, and pains only, instead of success and happiness. 


29-32. When the Sattva quality grows in abundance, as a 
consequence of reading the Vedanta and the other S'astras, 
dispassion comes towards the Rajasic and the Tamasic qualities and 
things, and the Sattva quality overpowers the Rajas and Tamas. 
Similarly when the Rajasic quality grows in abundance, as a natural 
consequence of greed and avarice, then it overpowers Sattva and 
Tamas; so, by delusion, when the Tamasic quality grows in 
abundance, it overpowers the Sattva and the Rajasic qualities. O 
Narada! I will now speak to you, in detail, about the overpowering of 
these qualities by one another. 


33-35. When the Sattva quality grows in preponderance, the mind 
rests in religious ideas and things; it no more thinks of those external 
things, the products of the Rajas and Tamas qualities. Rather it 
wants to enjoy the Sattvic things; wealth, religious affairs, sacrifices 
that can be acquired or performed without any trouble. Then that 
individual yearns after salvation and renounces his pursuits after the 
Rajasic and Tamasic objects. 



36. Thus, O Narada! first try to conquer the Rajas and then the 
Tamas; then the Sattva becomes pure. 


37. When the Rajasic quality grows in preponderance, the individual 
imbibes the Rajasic faith, abandons his own Sanatan Dharma 
(settled eternal religion) and practises against his religious 
instructions. 


38. Under the Rajasic propensities, one is eager to amass wealth 
and enjoy the Rajasic things. The Rajas drives away the Sattva and 
curbs the Tamas. 


39-41. Narada! So when the Tamasic quality grows in 
preponderance, the faith in the Vedas and in the religious S'astras 
entirely disappears. Imbibing the Tamasic faith, the individual 
squanders away his wealth and is always engaged in quarrels, and 
party feelings, envy, violence and never enjoys peace. The individual 
with the Tamasic quality in excess overpowers the Rajasic and 
Sattvic qualities and becomes angry, wicked, and a great cheat and 
does everything as he likes, without any regard to his superiors. 


42. Narada! Thus you see that, of these three qualities, no one can 
remain entirely alone, free from the other qualities. These remain 
always in twos or threes. 


43-44. The Sattva can never exist without the Rajas; the Rajas can 
never exist without the Tamas; and these two qualities can never 
exist without Tamas. Again Tamas cannot exist without Rajas and 
Sattva. These qualities act and react always in twos or threes. 



45-47. They never exist separately; they live in pairs or threes and 
are the originators of each other; these qualities are of the nature of 
procreating things; in other words, Sattva originates the Rajas or 
Tamas; again the Rajas originates sometimes Sattva and Tamas. 
Again the Tamas sometimes originates Sattva and Rajas. Thus they 
generate each other as the earthen pots and earth are their mutual 
causes. 


48-49. Deva Datta, Visnu Mitra, and Yajha Datta these three united 
perform any action, so these three qualities united reside in the 
buddhi (intellect) of the Jivas and generate their sense perceptions. 

Just as the husband and wife get into a couple, the qualities get into 
couples. 


50. The Sattva with Rajas forms the couple Rajas Sattva; so Sattva 
Rajas forms another couple, where the Sattva predominates. So 
Sattva end Rajas forms each with Tamas the other couples. 


51. Narada said! O Dvaipayana! Hearing thus about these three 
qualities from my father, I asked him again these questions. 


Thus ends the eighth chapter of the Maha Puranam S'rimad Devi 
Bhagavatam containing the description of the Gunas, of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 9. On The Characteristics Of The 
Gunas 


1-2. Narada said Father! You have described to me the 
characteristic of the three qualities; though I have drunk the sweet 
juice from your lotus like mouth, still I am not quite satisfied. Kindly 
describe to me, in detail, in due order, how I can recognise clearly 
the three qualities so that I can get the highest peace of mind. 


3. Vyasa said O King! The Creator of the world, Brahma, 
originated from the Rajo Guna, asked by his high minded son 
Narada, began to speak in the following terms. 


4. O Narada! I myself do not possess fully the complete knowledge 
of the three qualities; but, as far as I know, I am telling that to you. 


5. The pure Sattva quality is not found alone to exist anywhere; it 
manifests itself always, in mixed condition, in combination with the 
other qualities. 


6-9. As a beautiful woman, well decorated with ornaments and 
endowed with amorous gestures, gives delight, on the one hand, to 
her husband, father, mother and friends; and, on the other hand, 
becomes a source of pain and delusion to her rival wives, so the 
Sattva quality, personified as a beautiful woman, engenders the 
Sattvic happiness of the mind to some individual, at one time, and at 
another time becomes a source of pain to the same individual (or at 
one and the same time becomes a source of happiness to one and a 
source of pain to another.) Thus the Rajas or the Tamas quality. 



personified respectively as a beautiful woman becomes a source of 
pain or delusion to an individual at one time, and at another time, a 
source of happiness to the same man. So it is easily seen that one 
quality cannot remain single; it remains in union with the other 
qualities. 


Note It is very possible that a man, possessing the Sattvic quality 
at any time, can be said not to possess only the Sattvic quality but 
also the Rajas and the Tamas to a certain degree. At any 
subsequent time the Rajas might get preponderance, and that man 
may be in circumstances requiring money or so forth; but, due to his 
Sattva quality before hand he did not collect money and therefore he 
feels pain afterwards. So with the Rajas. Or it may be thus 
Suppose an earning member is Sattvic. He earns just sufficient to 
meet his wants. But his family members require more money, for 
they are Rajasic. Therefore the earning member is happy for his 
Sattvic quality; but the other members are unhappy for his Sattvic 
quality. A man is, as it were, wedded to the three wives, Sattva, 
Rajas, and Tamas. 


10. O Narada! When the three qualities remain each in their own real 
natures, then the effects produced by them also remain always the 
same; no changes are perceived owing to the difference of time or 
person. But when they get combined, then each of them produces 
effects sometimes counter to their natures. 


11-13. A young beautiful woman, shy, modest and of sweet qualities, 
well versed in her religious learning, and full of good behaviour, 
skilled in love practices and full of sweet sentiments becomes a 
source of loving delight to her beloved and also a source of pain to 
her rival wives so each of the three qualities assume no doubt. 



different aspects according to differences in time and in the nature of 
the person. 

O Narada! As one woman gives pain and delusion to her rival wives 
and gives pleasure to her husband and friends, so the Sattva quality, 
when perverted, gives pain and delusion to the persons. 


14-19. As the police sepoys and constables are, on the one hand, 
delight to the saints, troubled by thieves, and, on the other hand, 
sources of pain and confusion to the thieves and robbers; again as 
the heavy shower of rain in a pitch dark night, in the rainy season, 
when the sky over clouded, and when there are flashes of lightning 
and thunder, is on the one hand, a source of highest delight to a 
farmer, who has all seeds and necessary things and implements, 
and, on the other hand is a source of pain to the unfortunate 
householder, whose house is not yet completely thatched with grass 
or who has not been able to collect his beams and grass for 
necessary roofing, and a source of utter bewildering confusion to the 
young woman, whose husband is abroad expected back at that time, 
so the three Gunas produce contrary results when perverted by 
contact with the remaining Gunas, instead what they would have 
produced, had they not been perverted so. 


20-25. O Child! Again I speak to you of the characteristics of the the 
Gunas. The Sattva guna is pure, clear, illumining, light (not heavy) 
white. When the senses, eyes, etc., and the limbs are felt very light 
(without any heaviness) and the heart and brain clear, when there is 
dispassion towards the Rajasic and the Tamasic enjoyments, know 
then that the Sattva quality has grown in preponderance in a body. 
When there is a tendency to yawn, when there is rigidity and 
suppression of the functions of faculties and when one feels 
drowsiness, consider that the Rajasic quality has gone to excess. 
Again, when one seeks after quarrels and goes to another village, 
one is always restless and ready to fight, when one feels heaviness 



in body, as if wrapped by a very heavy darkness, when one's limbs 
and senses are heavy and obscure, when one's mind is vacant, and 
when one does not like to go to sleep, know that the Tamas has 
increased too much, Narada! 


26. Narada said O Father! You have described the different 
characteristics of the three Gunas; but I cannot understand how they 
act all in conjunction? 


27. As those who are enemies to one another do not work united, so 
these Gunas, of opposite characteristics, are enemies, as it were, to 
one another; how can, then, they act in unison? Kindly explain this to 
me. 


28-30. Brahma said O Narada! The three Gunas may be likened 
to a lamp. As a lamp manifests a certain object, so these three 
qualities united do manifest or reveal a certain thing. See the wick, 
oil, and flame are all of different characteristics; though the oil goes 
against fire, still it unites with the fire. The oil, wick and fire though 
running against each other, all these united, serve the one common 
purpose of illumining, revealing a certain object. 


31. So, O Narada! All the three qualities, though of contrary natures, 
go to prove the same thing. 

Narada said O Son of Satyavati! The lotus born Brahma thus 
described the three qualities, as born of Prakriti; and they are the 
causes of this Universe. What I heard of you about the nature of 
Prakriti, I have now described before you. 



32. Vyasa said O King! What you asked me, I asked before the 
same to Narada and he described thus (as I told you above) to me 
about the characteristics and the effects of the three Gunas in 
regular order and in detail. 


33. O King! Wherever in the S’astras whatever is said, the essence 
of all that is this -- that the Highest Energy, the Supreme Force, the 
Great Goddess who is pervading the Universe, is always with 
qualities and without qualities, according to the differences in the 
manifestation. This Supreme Force is to be worshipped with the 
highest devotion. 


34. The Brahman, the Purusa (the Supporter, the Ultimate 
Substratum) the Highest Energy considered as the Male Principle 
though It is Undecaying, Supreme and Full, is still without any 
desires or emotions. It is not able to accomplish any action (without 
the help of its inherent force); this Mahamaya, the Supreme Force is 
doing all the functions, real and unreal, of the universe. 


35-37. Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, the Sun, Moon, Indra, the twin Asvins, 
the Vasus, Visvakarma, Kuvera, Varuna, Fire, Air, Pusa, the 
Sadanan, and Ganesa all are united with S’akti and can do their 
respective functions; else they are unable to move themselves. 
Therefore O king! Know that Supreme Goddess Mahamaya as the 
cause of this Universe. 


38. O Lord of men! You worship this Goddess, perform sacrifices in 
honour of Her and worship Her with the highest devotion. 



39. O king! That Mahamaya is Maha Laksmi, She is Maha Kali, She 
is Maha Sarasvati; She is the Goddess of all the bhutas and She is 
the Cause of all causes. 


40. That all peaceful, easily worshipped and the ocean of mercy, 
when worshipped, fulfills all the desires of Her devotees; what to say, 
the mere utterance of Her name is sufficient for the granting of the 
desires. 


41. In days of yore Brahma, Visnu, MahesVara and all the Devas 
and many other self controlled ascetics worshipped Her to attain 
liberation. 


42. O king! What shall I speak now about Her more than this If 
one takes Her name even with indistinctness. She grants the desired 
purposes, even if they are quite unattainable. 


43. In the midst of forest, on the sight of tigers and other ferocious 
animals, if one becoming afraid, cries aloud Her seed mantra (twice) 
“Ai, Ai” without the Vindu (incorrectly) instead of “Aim, Aim” She 
grants immediately his desires. 


44-45. O best of kings! There is an example of Satyavrata on this 
point. That the mere utterance of the name of Bhagavati gives 
unforeseen results, has been witnessed by us and other high minded 
Munis. Also in the assembly of the Bramanas I have heard fully 
many sages quoting in detail many instances on the above point. 



46-47. O king! There was a Brahman, named Satyavrata, quite 
illiterate, a thorough block-head. Once he heard the letter “Ai, Ai” 
being uttered by a pig; and in course of a talk he himself uttered 
incidentally that letter and thereby became the one of the best 
Pundits. 


N. B. - “Aim” is the seed mantra of Sarasvati, the Goddess of 
learning. 


48. The Goddess Devi, the Ocean of mercy, hearing the letter “Ai” 
being pronounced by that Brahmin, became very glad and made him 
the best of the poets. 


Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the 3rd Skandha on the 
characteristics of the Gunas in S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha 
Puranam 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 10. On The Story Of Satyavrata 


1. Janamejaya said O Maharsi! Who was Satyavrata, the 
Brahmin whose name you have just taken? In what country was he 
born? Of what nature was he? Please describe all these to me and 
satisfy my curiosity? 


2. How did he hear that sound “Ai”; how did he repeat that word? 
How came out the success to him, that illiterate Brahman, at that 
very instant? 


3. And how is it that that Great Goddess, who is omniscient and 
omnipresent, was pleased with him, kindly describe this interesting 
incident in detail. 


4. Suta said Vyasa, the son of Satyavati, thus asked by the king, 
addressed in the following pure, sweet, and highly liberal words. 


5. Vyasa said Hear, O king! You are the best and foremost in the 
Kuru clan; what I before heard in the assembly of the Munis, I am 
now relating that ancient story, highly beneficial to you. 


6. O best of the Kurus! Once in my peregrinations in the holy places 
of pilgrimages, I came to the Naimisaranya forest, that highly sacred 
place frequented by the Munis. 



7-8. That time there were staying Sanaka, Sanatana and the other 
sons of Brahma who were liberated while living. I went there and 
bowed down to the Munis and took my seat. Then the religious 
conversations ensued there in the assembly, when the great sage 
Maharsi Jamadagni began to question the Munis in the following 
terms 


9. O high-minded excellent ascetics and Munis! There has arisen a 
great doubt in my mind; I am desirous to have that doubt solved in 
this assembly of the Maharsis. 


10-12. O all-knowing Maharsis that have fulfilled your vows! O 
Givers of one's honour! Now my question is this :-- Of the following 
Devas Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Indra, Varuna, Fire, Kuvera, Wind, 
Visvakarma, Kartikeya, Ganesa, the Sun, the two As'vins, Bhaga, 
Pusa, Moon, and the other planets, who is the first and best to be 
worshipped, that can easily be served; who is very quickly satisfied 
and grants the desired boons; kindly tell me this as early as possible. 


13. Thus questioned by the Muni Jamadagni, Maharsi Lomas'a, one 
in the assembly, spoke O Jamadagni! Hear in reply to your 
question. 


14-15. The Goddess of Energy is the best of the Devas, most 
excellent and highest to be worshipped. Those who want welfare, 
they ought to worship this Supreme Force. She is the Para Prakriti, 
the Highest Nature, the Brahma, conditioned by Maya (Time, space, 
and causation). She grants all the desires, does good to all, 
pervades everywhere, and is the Mother of Brahma and the other 
high souled Devas. She is the First Prakriti, and is the Root of this 
gigantic Tree of Universe. 



16. If any one calls the Devi in remembrance or distinctly utters Her 
Name, She fulfills all the desires of the human beings. If anybody 
worships Her, She is at once filled with mercy and becomes ready to 
grant boons. 


17. O Munis! How, once on a time, at Brahmin, uttering one letter of 
Her mystical mantra, obtained Her Grace, I am now describing that 
most auspicious history before you. Be pleased to hear. 


18. Once on a time, there lived in the country of Kosala, a famous 
Brahmin, named Deva Datta. He had no issues and therefore started 
duly according to the prescribed rules a sacrifice called Puttresti for 
the sake of obtaining children. 


19-20. On the banks of the Tamasa river, the Brahmin erected a 
temporary building (or an open shade) for performing the ceremony, 
and there built an altar and invited the Brahmins, versed in the 
Vedas, and clever in performing sacrificial rites. There he placed the 
fire and began to perform according to the strict rules, the Puttresti 
sacrifice. 


21-22. In that sacrifice, Suhotra, the best of the Munis acted the part 
of Brahma (1); Yajhyavalkya acted the part of Adhvaryu (2); 
Brihaspati, that of Hota (3); Paila, that of Prastota (4); Govila, that of 
Udgata (6); and the other Munis acted as assistants. These all were 
duly paid their remunerations. 

(1) One of the four priests employed at a Soma sacrifice as a 
superintendent. 


(2) Any officiating priest technically distinguished from Hotri, Udgatri 
and Brahman. His duty was to measure the ground, build the altar, 
prepare sacrificial vessels, to fetch wood and water, light the fire, 
bring the animal and immolate it and while doing this to repeat the 
Yajurveda. 

(3) A sacrificing priest who offers the oblations. Or one who recites 
the prayers of the Rigveda at a sacrifice. 

(5) One of the four principal priests at a sacrifice, one who chants the 
hymns of the Samaveda. 


23-24. The Hota Govila, the excellent reciter of the Sama hymns, 
began to sing in accented tones called svarita (the accents are three 
Udatta, Anudatta and Svarita) and the Rathantara Sama in 7 tunes. 

Then he began to draw breath frequently; and consequently there 
was a break in time in the accent of Govila. Seeing this, Deva Datta 
was angry and immediately said to Govila. 


25. Well, Govila, you are the foremost of the Munis and still you are 
doing your work like a quite illiterate man. I fear obstacles may arise 
in the getting of my son in this my sacrifice of Puttresti. 


26. Govila then became much enraged and told Deva Datta “your 
son will be illiterate, hypocrite, and dumb.” 


27. Behold! Every being is subject to breathing and respiring; it is 
very hard to control them; there is no fault of mine in the accents of 
my songs being thus broken; it is strange that you, being intelligent, 
cannot understand this. 



28. Being afraid to hear the curse from Govila, Deva Datta became 
very sorry and said “O Muni! I have done no serious offence; why 
are you so offended without any cause. Seel The Munis are void of 
anger and they always give delight to others.” 


29-30. O best of Brahmans! My offence is very trifling; why have you 
inflicted on me so severe a curse? I was already under the mental 
agony, since I had no issues; and now you have made me suffer 
move pain. 


31. For the Vedic Pundits declare that it is better not to have any son 
than to have an illiterate stupid son; the more so, when a Brahmin's 
son is illiterate, he is blamed by one and all. 


32. An illiterate son is like a S’udra or a beast; he is unfit for any 
action. O Brahmin! What shall I do with an illiterate son? 


33. An illiterate Brahmin is like a S’udra; consequently not an object 
to be engaged in any act of worship or of gifts, he is not deserving to 
do any action. 


34. A Brahman, bereft of the knowledge of the Vedas, living in a 
country is treated as a S’udra by the king of the place and is liable to 
pay taxes. 


35. Whoever wants to have any fruit in any action will never invite an 
illiterate Brahmin to take his seat in the ceremony relating to the 
Pitris or the Devas. 



36. The king will consider an illiterate Brahmin as if a S’udra and will 
never engage him in any religious ceremony but will order him to do 
the work of a farmer in cultivating fields. 


37. Rather to perform the funeral ceremonies by erecting a 
Kus'abata than to engage an illiterate Brahmin for the purpose. 


38. One should give food to an illiterate Brahmin just sufficient to fill 
his belly and no more. If he does not do that, the giver and especially 
the receiver are subject to go down to hell. 


39. Fie to a kingdom where honour is shown to the illiterate stupid 
Brahmanas. 


40. Where no difference is observed when seats, worship and gift 
are given to various persons, sages should draw their inference how 
the literate and illiterate persons are treated there. 


41. When the illiterate fools become haughty, when they are paid 
honours and gifts, the literary persons should never dwell there. 


42. The wealth of the wicked goes to the enjoyments of the bad 
persons; for the Nim trees, though abounding richly in fruits, are 
enjoyed only by crows. 



43. Again, on the other hand, if the Brahmins, versed in the Vedas, 
study the Vedas even after they have taken their food, still his father 
and forefathers are happy and play cheerfully in their heavens. 


44. Therefore O Govila! You being the foremost of the Brahmin who 
are versed in the Vedas, what have you said just now? See in this 
world, death is rather to be preferred then to have an illiterate son. 
How is it, then, that you have cursed me that I would get an illiterate 
son, when you are the best one, highly qualified with knowledge. 


45. O high minded one! You are capable to relieve the distressed; I 
am bowing down to your feet; shew your mercy and re-consider your 
curse. 


46. Lomas'a said O Munis! Devadatta, saying these words, fell 
prostrate at his feet and began to eulogise him in very pitiful words, 
being very much grieved and with tears in his eyes. 


47. Seeing him thus distressed, Govila was moved with pity. The 
persons that are noble have their anger satiated after a short while; 
the anger of the ignoble lasts for a long time. 


48. The water is naturally cool; but it gets hot in contact with fire 
heat; and no sooner the heat is drawn away, water gets again cooled 
quickly. 


49. The merciful Govila then addressed the distressed Devadatta 
“your son though at first illiterate, will afterwards be very learned.” 



50. The Brahmin Devadatta was very glad on getting this boon; then 
completing the sacrifice, rewarded the Brahmins with their due 
dakshinas and dismissed them. 


51. In due course of time, his fair chaste wife Rohini, like the 
asterism Rohini became pregnant. 


52. Devadatta performed the Garbhadhan (1) and Pumsavan (2) 
ceremonies and other purificatory rites duly. 


53. He performed the Simantonnayana ceremony according to rules 
and considered his Puttrvesti sacrifice successful and made various 
offerings to the Brahmins. 


N. B. -- (1) One of the Samskaras, purificatory ceremonies, 
performed after menstruation to ensure or facilitate conception (this 
ceremony legalises in a religious sense the consummation of 
marriage). 

(2) It is a ceremony performed on a woman's perceiving the first 
signs of a living conception, with a view to the birth of a son. 

(3) “Parting of the hair” one of the twelve Samskaras or purificatory 
rites observed by women in the fourth, sixth, or eighth month of their 
pregnancy. 


54-55. In the auspicious lagna when Rohini asterism was present 
and in the auspicious day, his wife Rohini gave birth to a male child. 
Devadatta performed the nativities of the new born child and saw its 



face. Next that knower of the Puranas, Devadatta kept the name of 
the child as Utathya. 


56. When the son was eight years old, Devadatta performed the 
Upanayana (thread) ceremony duly. 


57-58. Next the child was made to accept the vow of Brahmachari; 
and Devadatta made him study the Vedas; but the child could not 
pronounce a single word and used to sit simply like a stupid boy. 
Though tried in various ways to read and write, that wicked boy 
never paid the slightest attention, simply sat idly. Seeing this, his 
father was very sorry and much grieved. 


59. Thus twelve years passed. Yet the boy could not learn how to 
perform his Sandhya Bandana duly. 


60. The rumour went abroad that Utathya, the son of Devadatta 
turned out very illiterate. All the Brahmanas, ascetics, and other 
persons came to learn this fact. 


61. Wherever Utathya used to go in any forest on hermitage, the 
people used to laugh at him, ridiculed his father and mother and 
began to chide that illiterate son. 


62. Thus blamed by father, mother and all other persons, dispassion 
occupied the heart of Utathya. 



63. Once when rebuked by his father and nnother that it was better to 
have a blind and lame son instead of an illiterate brute, Utathya took 
recourse to renunciation and went to a dense forest. 


64-65. On the banks of the Ganges in a beautiful spot free from 
obstacles, he built a beautiful hut and began to subsist on the roots 
and fruits of the forest and with collected mind. Having made the 
excellent vow “I will never speak untruth” and holding the vow of 
celibacy, he lived in that beautiful hermitage. 


Thus ends the 10th chapter in the 3rd Skandha of S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa relating to the 
story of Satyavrata. 



Chapter 11. On The Merits Oe The Dev! In The 
Story Of Satyavrata 


1-5. Lomas’a said O Munis! Utatthya, the son of Devadatta, was 
quite ignorant of anything of the Vedas, Japann (muttering of mantra) 
meditation of the deity, worship of the Devas, Asana (Posture), 
Pranayama (withholding the breath by way of religious austerity), 
Pratyahara (restraint of mind), Bhutas’uddhi (purification of the 
elements of the body by respiratory attraction and replacement), 
mantra (a mystical formula regarding some deity), Kilaka (chanting 
of a mantra to serve as a pin of protection), Gayattri (the famous 
mantra of the Brahmins), Saucha (cleanliness, external and internal) 
rules how to bathe, Achamana (sipping of water and reciting 
mantrams before worship), Pranagnihotra (offering of oblations to 
the fire of Prana or to the fire of life), the offering of a sacrifice, 
hospitality, Sandhya (the morning, mid-day or evening prayer), 
collecting fuels for oblations, and offering of oblations. Daily he rose 
in the morning and somehow rinsed his mouth and washed his teeth 
and bathed in the Ganges river without any mantrams (like a Sudra). 


6. That stupid fellow ate indiscriminately, did not know what to eat 
and what not to eat. During the mid-day he collected the fruits from 
the forest and used to eat them. 


7. But he always spoke truth while he stayed there; never did he say 
any untruth. The people of that place, seeing this, named him 
Satyatapa. 


8-9. That Utatthya did no good or bad to anybody; he slept 
peacefully and blissfully; but be used to think when he would die; 



thus his troubles would be ended; he felt that the life of an illiterate 
Brahman is a curse; his death would be a better alternative. 


10. He used to think thus Fate has made me a fool; I do not find 
any other cause for it. Oh! I got the exceedingly good birth amongst 
men; but all this has been rendered in vain by Fate. 


11. Oh! As a fair woman, if barren, a cow if giving no milk, and a tree 
without any fruits are all useless, so Fate has rendered my life, too, 
quite useless. 


12. Why am I cursing Fate? This is all the fruits of my past Karma. In 
my previous life I never wrote a book and presented to a good 
Brahmin; hence I am illiterate in this birth. 


13. In my former birth I did not impart any knowledge to my favourite 
pupils; hence I am wicked and a cursed Brahmin in this birth. 


14. I never performed any religious asceticism in any holy place, I 
did not serve the saints, I never worshipped the Brahmins with any 
offerings. For all these reasons I am now born of perverted intellect 
in the present birth. 


15. Many a son of the Munis have learnt the meanings of the Vedas 
and the S’astras; and I am whiling away my time thus in a quite 
illiterate condition by some wretched combinations of incidents. 



16. I do not know how to perform Tapasya; what is the use, then, of 
my attempting to do so? I am of very bad luck, and thus my good 
resolve will not be crowned with success. 


17. I consider Fate to be the strongest of all; Fie on one’s own 
prowess! For actions done with effort and hard labour are frustrated 
entirely by Fate. 


18. Time can never be overstepped; Seel Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, 
Indra, and others are all under the influence of the Great Time. 


19. O Risis! Thus arguing in his mind, that Brahmin son Utatthya 
stayed there in that hermitage on the bank of the holy Ganges. 


20. And gradually he became thoroughly unattached to all the things 
and, being peaceful, passed away his time in that forest without any 
habitations and men, with great difficulty. 


21. Thus passed away fourteen years in that forest where the 
Ganges was flowing. Still he did not learn how to worship the 
Supreme Deity, how to make Japam, nor did he learn any mantrams. 
Simply he lived there and whiled away his time. 


22. People surrounding that place knew this much only of him that 
this Muni spoke truth only and hence his name was Satyavrata. This 
one name made him celebrated that he is Satyavrata; never did he 
say any untruth. 



23. Once on a time, a hunter named Nisada, exceedingly clever in 
hunting, came accidentally with bows and arms in his hands, while 
hunting a deer in that wide forest. He looked like a second God of 
Death (Yama) and seemed to be very cruel. 


24. That savage mountaineer, drawing his bow so as to touch the 
ear, pierced a boar with his sharp arrows. The boar, being very much 
terrified, fled with enormous rapidity to the Muni Satyavrata. 


25. On seeing the distressed condition of the boar trembling with fear 
and his body besmeared with blood, the Muni was moved with 
mercy. 


26. While the boar, pierced with arrows and besmeared with blood, 
was running away in front of him, mercy took possession of the 
Muni, therefore the Muni began to tremble and agreeably to the 
human nature exclaimed “Ai” “Ai” (go to that direction), the seed 
mantram of the Goddess of learning with “m” left out (Aim, Aim). 


27. That illiterate Brahmin son never heard before that “Ai” was the 
seed mantram of the Sarasvati Devi; nor did he come to know of it 
by any other means. Accidentally it came out of his mouth, and he 
uttered. And afterwards that Mahatma seeing the boar's distressed 
condition was merged in deep sorrow. 


28. The boar entered trembling into the Muni's hermitage very much 
distracted and being very much pained with arrows. Being unable to 
find any other way the boar hid himself in the dense bushes. 



29. Instantly there appeared then, before the Muni, the terrible 
savage hunter, like a second God of Death, with string stretched to 
his ear, in pursuit of that boar. 


30-33. On seeing the Muni Satyavrata sitting there alone and silent 
on the Kus’a grass seat, the hunter bowed down to him and asked 
“O Brahmin! Whither has that boar gone. I know very well everything 
about you that you never speak untruth; therefore I am enquiring 
about the boar pierced by my arrows. My family members are all 
very hungry; and to feed them, I am come out in this hunting. This is 
the living, ordained by the Fate; I have got no other means of 
maintaining the livelihood of my family. This I speak truly to you; 
whether it is bad or good, I will have to maintain my family with it. O 
Brahman! You are famous as Satyavrata; my family members are 
starving; kindly reply quickly where that boar has gone?” 


34. Thus asked by the hunter, the Mahatma Satyavrata was merged 
in an ocean of doubt; he began to argue “If I say I have not seen the 
boar then my vow to speak the truth will certainly be broken. 


35. The boar struck with arrows has gone this way, it is true. How 
can I tell a lie? Again this man is hungry and is therefore asking, he 
will instantly kill the boar no sooner he finds him. How then can I 
speak truth? 


36. Where speaking out the truth causes injury and the loss of lives, 
that truth is no truth at all; moreover, even untruth, when tempered 
with mercy for the welfare of others, is recognised as truth. Really 
speaking, whatever leads to the welfare of all the beings in this 
world, that is truth; and every thing else is not truth. 



37. O Jamadagni! Thus placed between the horns of a religious 
dilennnna what shall I do now so as to meet both the ends -- to save 
the life of the boar, to do the welfare, as well as not to speak 
untruth.” 


38. When Satyavrata saw the boar wounded by the arrow of the 
hunter, he, moved with pity, uttered the seed mantra of the Goddess 
of Learning; and now that most auspicious Goddess, on account of 
his uttering Her seed mantram, was very pleased and gave him the 
knowledge, difficult to be attained otherwise. 


39. The door of all his knowledge opened out at once, and he 
became at once instantly the seer, the poet like the ancient Muni 
Valmiki. 


40. Then that religiously disposed, merciful Brahman, aiming at 
Truth, addressed that hunter before him with bows in his arms, thus 


41. That force which sees (as witness) never speaks; and that force 
which speaks, never sees. O hunter! Why are you asking me 
repeatedly, impelled by your own selfish desire? 


42. The hunter, the killer of the animals, on hearing this was 
disappointed in the matter of finding out the boar and went back to 
his home. 


43. That Brahmin turned out a poet like Varuna and he became 
celebrated as Satyavrata, the speaker of truth, in all the worlds. 



44. He began to recite the Satyavrata mantram duly, and, by its 
influence, became a Pundit, rivalled by none in this world. 


45. During every festival the Brahmans chanted his praise and the 
Munis used to narrate his story in detail. 


46. On hearing his fame spreading all around, his father Devadatta 
who forsook him before, recalled him to his hermitage and took him 
again in his family with great honour and affection. 


47. Therefore O King! You should always worship and serve that 
Great Goddess, the Prime Energy, the Cause of all this Universe. 


48. O King! With due Vedic rites you perform that sacrifice to that 
Goddess which will surely yield results at all times and all desires. I 
already spoke to you about this. 


49. That Great Goddess is known as Kamada (the giver of all 
desires); for She grants all desires when men with devotion 
remember Her, worship Her, take Her name, meditate Her and 
eulogise Her. 


50-56. O King! The wise sages ought to see the persons diseased, 
distressed, hungry, those without any wealth, the hypocrite, the 
cheat, the afflicted, the sensual, the covetous, the incapable, always 
suffering from mental troubles; again those who are wealthy with 
their children and grand-children, prosperous, healthy, with 



enjoyments, versed in the Vedas, literary, kings, heroes, those who 
command over many, those attended with relations and kinsmen and 
endowed with all good qualities; and then judge for themselves that 
those people did not worship the Goddess and therefore they were 
sufferers and these people worshipped the Goddess and hence they 
were happy in this world. 


57. Vyasa said Thus I heard from the mouth of Lomas'a Muni, in 
assembly of the sages, the good merits of the Great Goddess. 


58. O King! Consider all these and you will find that the Highest 
Goddess, the Bhagavati is to be worshipped always with devotion 
and unselfish love. 


Here ends the Eleventh Chapter on the merits of the Devi in the 
story of Satyavrata in the Third Skandha of the Maha Puranam S'ri 
mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 12. On The Amba Yajna Rules 


1. The king spoke O Lord! Kindly describe the rules and 
regulations as to how the Devi Yajna (sacrifice) is performed with its 
duly prescribed rites and ceremonies. Hearing it I will unwearied 
perform it, as far as it lies in my power, with as little delay as 
possible. 


2. How the worship is done, what are the mantras, what are the 
articles required for oblations, how many Brahmins are required and 
what Daksinas are to be paid to them, describe in detail all these. 


3-5. Vyasa said O king! I am telling you duly how the Yajna is 
performed, hear. The actions are always threefold according as the 
preparations are made and according as they are practised with 
regard to the observed rules. The threefold divisions are Sattvik, 
Rajasik and Tamasic. The Munis do the Sattvik Puja, the kings 
celebrate Rajasic and the Rakshasas do the Tamasik Pujas. There 
is another Puja which is devoid of qualities and which is performed 
by the liberated ones. I will describe to you all these in detail. 


6-7. O king! The Yajna is then called Sattvik, when it is performed in 
a Sattvik country, like Benares, etc., in Sattvik time, e.g., in 
Uttarayana, when the materials collected are earned rightly, when 
the mantras are those of the Vedas, when the Brahmin is Srotriya, 
where there is Sattvik faith, void of any attachment towards the 
sensual objects, when all these happen to coincide. O king! When all 
the above takes place and there is purification of materials, actions, 
and mantras, i.e., when the materials are all right, when the actions 
are done as they ought to be, and where there is no error or 
omission, etc., in the mantras, etc., then and then only the Yajna 



becomes perfect and no doubt yield full results; there would be 
nothing contrary to this. 


8-9. If the Yajha is performed with articles not rightly earned, then 
there is no fame either in this world nor there is any reward in the 
next world. Therefore it is necessary that the Yajha should be 
performed with rightly earned materials; then there is fame in this 
world and better state in the next world; and happiness is also 
acquired; there is no doubt in this. 


10. O king! It is before your eyes, as it were, that the Pandavas 
performed the Rajasuya Yajha, the king of sacrifices, and, on the 
completion whereof, the excellent Daksinas were paid to the 
Brahmins and others. 


11. In that Yajha the highly intelligent S’ri Krisna Himself, the Lord of 
the Yadavas was present, as well as many other Brahmanas, like 
Bharadvaja and other fully enightened souls. 


12. But within three months after completing the sacrifice, the 
Pandavas suffered extreme hardships and had to live, with extreme 
difficulty, as exiles in the forest. 


13. Consider the insult shown towards Draupadi, the Pandava's 
defeat in the play of gambling, their going away to dwell in the forest; 
these hardships were borne by the Pandavas. What rewards did 
then the Pandavas derive from the Rajasuya Yajha? 



14-15. All the high-souled Pandavas had to work as slaves of Virata; 
and Draupadi, the best of women, was very much troubled and 
insulted by Kichaka. When all these occurred, any one can easily 
ask where were the ashirvadas of the pure souled Brahmanas? Also 
what result did they derive from their unflinching devotion towards 
S’ri Krisna when they were involved in the above critical state? 


16. No one protected Draupadi, the chaste and the best, the 
daughter of Drupada, when she was drawn by her hair on her head 
into the hall of assembly where gambling was being played? 


17. O king! How could all these happen in a place where S’ri 
Bhagavan Kesava Himself and the high souled Yudhisthira were 
present? If one argues, one would conclude “there must have been 
something wrong in that Yajha.” 


18. If you say that nothing wrong happened in the Yajha, all these 
were caused by Fate; then it comes to this that the Vedic mantras, 
Agamas and the other Vedic rites are all fruitless. 


19. If it be argued that though the Vedic mantras are powerful 
enough to bear fruits, yet whatever is predestined to come to pass, 
will surely pass, then the proposition resolves into this that all the 
means, expedients, and appliances lead to meaningless 
conclusions. 


20. Then the Agamas, the Vedas merely recommend a vidhi or 
precept by stating the good arising from its proper observance and 
the evils arising from its omission and also by adducing historical 
instances as its support; in other words, they are powerless as far as 



bearing fruits is concerned; all the acts are meaningless, asceticism 
to attain Heaven comes as useless and the peculiar duties of caste 
are fruitless. O king! This view is exceedingly culpable; it is never fit 
for acceptance by the highsouled persons. 


21. O King! If what is laid by God in the womb of futurity (a state of 
things preordained by God in which it is sure to take place in the 
fullness of time), be taken as the first-hand proof, then all the other 
proofs are rendered null and void. Therefore Fate and human 
exertion both are to be undoubtedly taken into account to ensure 
success. 


22. Human exertions being applied, if the results come otherwise, 
the wise Pundits would infer that some defects, omissions or 
imperfections crept into the work. 


23. All the Pundits, very learned and instituters of sacrifices have 
classed Karmas under different headings according as the agents, 
mantras, and articles employed in the worship vary. 


24. Once on an occasion VisVarupa, ordained as a Guru by Indra (in 
a Yajha) (intentionally) did things contrary so as to benefit the 
Daityas, who belonged to his mother's side. 


25. VisVarupa uttered repeatedly the mantrams beneficial to the 
gods, while they were present; and, during their absence, prayed 
heartily for the welfare of the Daityas; and, in the long run, protected 
the Daityas. 



26. On seeing the Asuras gaining strength, Indra, the Lord of the 
Devas, became very much enraged and instantly cut off VisVarupa's 
head by his thunderbolt. 


27. O King! This is then the instance where the contrary fruits were 
borne out by the agent employed in performing the Yajha; there is no 
doubt in this. This is not possible in the other cases. 


28. See, again, the king of Panchala performed his sacrifice to get a 
son to kill Drona, the son of Bharadvaja; and though he did this out 
of angry motives, still Dhristadyumna was born out of fire; and 
Draupadi sprang out of the altar. 


29. Again, in days of yore, Das’aratha, the king of Kosala, was 
sonless; and he instituted a sacrifice to get one son; and lo! be got 
four sons. 


30. Therefore O King! If the Yajha be performed according to proper 
rules and regulations, it yields fruits in all respects; again if it be done 
unrighteously, without any regard for the rules, etc., it yields results 
just the contrary; there is no doubt in this. 


31-32. Therefore, there must have been some defects in the Yajha of 
the Pandavas; hence contrary effects ensued, and therefore the 
truthful king Yudhisthira and his powerful brothers and the chaste 
Draupadi were all defeated in the play at dice. 


33. It might be that the materials were not of a good stamp; they 
were all earned by killing the kings, good many in number, and 



earned thus unrighteously; or it might happen that the Pandavas did 
their Yajha with too much egoism. However, this is certain that there 
had crept in some defects in their actions. 


34. O King! The Sattvik Yajha is rare; it can be done only by the 
Sattvik Munis who live in the 3rd order of the household life or who 
live as hermits. 


35-36. The ascetics that eat daily the Sattvik food, the roots and 
fruits, collected from forests and obtained rightly, that is good to the 
Munis and that is well cleaned and purified, are the only ones that 
can perform with full devotions the Sattvik Yajhas, where no animals 
are sacrificed (where there are no sacrificial posts to which the victim 
is fastened at the time of immolation) and where offerings of cakes of 
ground rice in vessels are given. These are the best of all the Sattvik 
Yajhas. 


37. The Ksattriyas and the Vaisyas perform the Yajhas with Abhiman 
(self-conceit and egoism) where many presents are given, animals 
are sacrificed, and all things are well cleansed, purified and 
elaborately decorated. This Yajha is called Rajasic. 


38. That Yajha is according to the sages, Tamasik, where the 
Danavas, puffed up with arrogance, infatuated with anger, jealousy 
and wickedness perform their acts with the sole object of killing their 
enemies. 


39. That Yajha is called Manas Yag or manasic (mental) where the 
high-souled Munis, void of worldly desires, collect mentally all the 



necessary articles and perfornn the Yajha with the sole object of 
liberation from the bondages of the world. 


40. In all the other Yajhas (than the Manas Yag) some imperfections 
or other naturally arise, due to some defects in the materials, or want 
of faith, or in the performance or in the Brahmins. 


41. No other Yajhas can be so complete as the Manasa Yajha; the 
reason being that in the other Yajhas some, imperfections come out 
due to time, place, and separate ingredients to be collected. 


42-43. Now hear who are the persons fit to undertake this mental 
Yajha in honour of the Great Goddess. First this mind is to be 
purified, by making it void of the Gunas; the mind being pure, the 
body becomes also pure, there is no doubt. When the mind becomes 
completely pure, after it has abandoned all sensual objects, fit for 
enjoyment, then that man is entitled to perform the Mother's Yajha. 


44-45. There he should build mentally the big hall for sacrifice, many 
Yojanas wide, decorated with high polished pillars out of the 
materials brought for the purpose (e. g., fortitude, etc.). Within the 
hall he will imagine a wide and spacious altar and place the Holy Fire 
on it mentally according to due rules and regulations. 


46-47. He is to select mentally the Brahmin priests and consecrate 
them as Brahma, Adharyu, Hota, Prastota, Udgata, Pratihatra and 
other assistants. He is to worship mentally all these priests. 



48. Then he will have to imagine the five Vayus, Prana, Apana, 
Vyana, Samana, and Udana, as the five fires and locate them duly 
on the altar. 


49-50. Prana Vayu stands for Garhapatya; Apana, for Ahavaniya; 
Vyana for Daksina; Samana for Avasathya; and Udana for Sabhya 
Agni. These fires are all very terrible; then one should place these 
carefully on the altar with great concentration of mind. He is to collect 
then all the other necessary materials and think that all are very pure 
and free from any defects. 


51-57. In the Manasic Yajha, mind is the offerer of oblations and 
mind the Yajamana, the performer of the Sacrifice; and the Presiding 
Deity of the Sacrifice is the Nirguna Brahma. The Great Goddess, 
the Nirguna Energy, who is always auspicious and gives the feeling 
of dispassion and indifference to worldly objects is the awarder of 
fruits in this Yajha. She is the Brahma Vidya, She is the substratum 
of all and She is all pervading. The Brahmin is to take the Devi's 
name and offer oblations in the fire of Prana, the necessary articles 
for the Devi's satisfaction. Then he is to make his Chitta and Prana 
void of any worldly thought, or any worldly support and to offer 
oblations to the Eternal Brahma through the mouth of Kundalini (the 
Serpent Fire.) Next, within his Nirvikalpa mind, by means of 
Samadhi, be should meditate own Self, the Mahes'vari Herself by his 
consciousness. Thus, when he will see his own self in all the beings 
and all the beings in his own self, then the Jiva will get the vision of 
the Goddess Mahavidya, giving auspicious liberation (Moksa). O 
King! After the high souled Munis have seen the Goddess, of 
everlasting intelligence and bliss, then he becomes the knower of 
Brahman. All the Maya, the cause of this Universe becomes burnt 
up; only, as long as the body remains, the Prarabdha Karma 
remains. 



58. Then the Jivas become liberated, while living; and when the 
body dissolves, he attains to final liberation. Therefore, O Child! 
Whoever worships the Mother becomes crowned with success; there 
is no doubt in this. 


59. Therefore follow the advice of the Guru, the Spiritual Teacher; 
and with all attention, hear, think and meditate on the Great Goddess 
of the World. 


60. O King! Liberation is sure to ensue of this Manasa Yajha. All the 
other Yajhas are Sakama (with some object in view) and therefore 
their effects are temporary. 


61-62. He who wants enjoyments in Heaven, should perform the 
Agnistoma Yajha, with due rites and ceremonies; such is the Vedic 
injunction. But when the acquired merit expires, the sacrificer will 
have to come again into this world of mortals. Therefore the Manasa 
Yajha is eternal and best. 


63-65. This Manasa Yajha is not fit to be performed by kings intent 
on getting victory. The Yajha that you performed, the serpent Yajha, 
is Tamasic, for you wanted to take vengeance on your enemy, the 
serpent Taksaka; and millions of serpents were made to be burnt in 
that sacrifice. 


O King! Hear now about the Devi Yajha, that was performed by 
Visnu in the beginning of the creation. You better now do that Devi 
Yajha with due rules. 



66-67. I will tell you all about the rules; there are Brahmins that know 
the rules and know best also the Vedas; they know also the seed 
mantrams of the Devi, as well as the rules of their application; they 
are clever in all the mantrams. These will be your priests and you 
yourself will be the sacrificer. 


68. O King! Do this sacrifice duly and deliver your father from hell by 
the merits that you will acquire thereby. 


69. O Sinless One! The sin incurred on account of insulting a 
Brahmin is serious and leads the sinner to hell. Your father 
committed that sin and incurred the curse from a Brahmin. Therefore 
he has gone to the hell. 


70. Your father died also out of a snake bite which is not a 
meritorious one. The death occurred also in a palace built high up in 
the air (on a pillar), instead of taking place on the ground on a bed of 
Kus'a grass. 


71. O best of the Kurus! The death did not occur in any battle nor on 
the banks of the Ganges. Void of proper bathing and charities, etc., 
he died in a palace. 


72. O best of Kings! All the ugly causes, leading to hell, were present 
in the case of your father. See, again, there is also one thing which 
done will lead to one’s liberation; but that was absent too with your 
father. 



73-76. That is this Let a man remain, wherever he may, whenever 
he comes to learn that his end is approaching, even if he had not 
practised before any good practices or meritorious deeds, and even 
if he becomes senseless in the trial time of death, when dispassion 
comes to an individual whose mind gets, for the time being, clear 
and free from any worldly thoughts, then he should think thus 
“This my body, composed of five elements, will soon be destroyed; 
there is no cause whatsoever in having any remorse for it; let 
whatever come, that it may; I am free, void of qualities; and I am the 
Eternal Purusa; death is not capable to do any harm to me. All the 
elements are liable to decay and destruction; what remorse can 
overtake me? I am not a man of the world, I am always free. Eternal 
Brahma; I have got no connection with this body that is merely the 
outcome of actions. 


77. Before I did meritorious or unmeritorious acts, leading to 
happiness and pain; therefore I have got this mortal coil and am 
enjoying the fruits of my past auspicious or inauspicious Karma.” 


78. Whoever thinks thus and dies, even if he does not take proper 
purificatory bath or make any charity, he gets himself freed from the 
awful Samsara and never comes to see himself again born in this 
world. 


79. O King! This method of parting from one’s body is rarely attained 
even by the Yogins; this is the acme, the highest height of all the 
human efforts towards liberation. 


80. But your father, hearing even the curse from a Brahmin, retained 
his attachment towards his body; therefore he did not attain 
dispassion. 



81. He thought thus “My body is now free from any disease; my 
kingdom is free from enemies or any other source of danger; how 
can I now get myself saved from this untimely death.” Thinking thus, 
he ordered to call the Brahmans, who know the mantrams. 


82. Then that king ascended to the palace, with medicines, many 
mantras and many other instruments. 


83-84. He considered his fate to be the strongest and therefore did 
not take his bath in any holy place; he did not perform any charities, 
did not sleep on the ground or remember any mantram of the Devi. 
Due to Kali entering into his body, he committed the sin of insulting 
an ascetic and plunged himself in the ocean of delusion and died 
bitten by the Taksaka snake on the top of a palace. 


85. The King has now fallen undoubtedly to the hell, on account of 
those vicious deeds. Therefore, O King! dost Thou deliver your 
father from the sin. 


86. Suta said, O Risis! Hearing these words from the fiery Vyasa, the 
king Janamejaya became very sad and tears came from his eyes 
and flowed down his cheeks and throat. 


He then exclaimed in a suffocating voice “Fie on me! my father is still 
in the hell. I will now do at once whatever leads my father to 
heaven.” 



Thus ends the twelfth chapter on the Amba Yajha rules in the 3rd 
Adhyaya of S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam of 
18,000 verses composed by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 13. On The Dev! Yajna By S’r! Visnu 


1-3. The King spoke O Grandfather! How did Visnu, the Powerful, 
the Cause of the world, perform the Devi Yajna? Whose help did he 
receive and what priests with their knowledge of the Vedas did he 
engage, kindly tell all these to me in special details. I will very 
attentively hear first this Devi Yajna, performed by Visnu; and then I 
will make arrangements to do that myself accordingly. 


4. Vyasa said O noble one! Hear in detail that very wonderful 
thing, how Visnu celebrated the Devi Yajna comformably to the rules 
laid down in the S’astras. 


5. When Brahma, Visnu, and Mahes’a were each given powers by 
the Devi, the Goddess of the Universe, and when they parted, these 
three Devas became free from their womanhood, while they were 
coming back in their aerial cars and turned out men, as they were 
before. 


6. These three Devas, found the great ocean before them. They 
brought out world from it; and built, in that world, dwelling abodes; 
and they themselves began to live in some of them. 


7. That world became fixed, steady and the supporter of all beings 
when the Goddess imparted the power of fixture, steadiness, and the 
power of supporting to the world. The earth, filled with marrow, then, 
became fixed and the great supporter by Her power. 



8-10. O King! The name of this earth is Medini, since it was made 
out of the marrow of the two Asuras Madhu and Kaitabha. This earth 
is termed Dhara because it supports all; is termed Prithvi because it 
is very capacious; and it is called Mahi because it is great, since it 
supports so many beings. O King! the Ananta serpent is holding it on 
her thousand-hoods. To make the earth remain solid and compact, 
Brahma built at places mountains. As iron nails in a log of wood, so 
these hills and mountains within this earth made it fixed. Therefore 
the Pundits call these mountains “Mahidhara,” holder of the earth. 


11.0 King! Thus the golden Meru, the great mountain, many 
Yojanas wide, adorned with many golden mountain peaks was 
created. 


12. Next Marichi, Narada, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Daksa, and 
Vas’istha were created by Brahma; these are the Brahma’s mental 
sons (sons created by the sheer power of mind). 


13. The son Kas’yapa was born to Marichi and thirteen daughters 
were born of Daksa. From these daughters and out of the seed of 
Kas’yapa, various Devas and Daityas were born. 


14. Then human beings, animals, serpents and many other classes 
were created. This is called the KasyapT S’risti or the Kas’yapa’s 
creation. 


15. Next Svayambhava Manu sprang from the lower half of Brahma; 
and the daughter named S'atarupa came out of the left hand side of 
the Brahma’s body. 



16. The two sons Priyavrata and Uttanapada were born of Manu in 
the womb of S’atarupa and the three daughters, very beautiful and 
fair complexioned, were also born of him. 


17. Creating then, the Bhagavan, the lotus born Brahma built the 
beautiful Brahma-loka, on the top of the Meru mountain. 


18. Then the Bhagavan Visnu built the Vaikuntha city on the top of all 
the lokas or worlds to dwell with his consort Laksmi. 


19. Mahadeva, too, built the exceedingly beautiful Kailas’a and 
stayed there with his Bhutas and played with them at his will. 


20. The third Loka termed Heaven was built on the top of Meru, 
decorated with various precious gems and jewels and stones. It was 
fixed as the abode of Indra. 


21-22. When the great ocean was churned, Parijata, the best of all 
the trees, the elephant Airavata with four tusks, the Heavenly cow 
yielding the milk of all desires, the Uchchais’rava horse and Apsaras, 
Rambha and others, arose and were taken by Indra. These became 
the ornaments of Heaven. 


23. The Moon and Dhanvantari, the great phyisician also came out 
of the churning of the ocean. These surrounded with many other 
members began to shine, being situated above the Heavens. 



24. O King! Thus the three varieties, human beings, Devas, and 
Tiryakas (birds, etc.) and their great subvarieties sprang up. 


25. The four classes of Jivas, Andaja (born from the eggs), Svedaja 
(born out of sweats), Udbhija (plants, etc.) and Jarayuja (men, etc.) 
were created, being endowed with the fruits of their past auspicious 
or inauspicious Karmas, as the case may be. 


26. Brahma, Visnu, and Mahes’a began to play and walk about at 
their leisures in their respective spheres, after they finished all their 
creations. 


27. Thus the wheel of creation being started, the Great God 
Bhagavan Visnu Achyuta remained in sport with Maha Laksmi in His 
own sphere Vaikuntha. 


28. Then Bhagavan Visnu, while sitting one day in Vaikuntha, got in 
his mind the memory of that beautiful island, called Mani Dvipa, 
adorned with precious stones, gems and jewels. 


29-33. O King! In this Mani DvTpa, the Bhagavan Visnu got the vision 
of the Maha Maya and the auspicious mantra. He now thought to 
celebrate a Yajha in honour of the Devi, when he recollected the 
highest Energy, the Great Goddess. He then went out of his abode 
and invited Brahma, MahesVara, Kuvera, Indra, Varuna, Fire, Yama, 
Vas’istha, Kas’yapa, Daksa, Vamadeva, Brihaspati and others and 
began to collect lots of materials necessary for the Devi sacrifice. 
Selecting a site Sattvik, beautiful, and possessing great spiritual 
powers, Visnu erected, with the help of the great artists and 
engineers, a wide capacious sacrificial hall, and for the due 



celebration and fulfilment of it, appointed twenty seven priests; who 
pledged a solemn vow to complete it duly. 


34. When the big altar and chiti (pile of wood for burning, stack of 
sacrificial bricks) were finished, the Brahmanas began to recite 
slowly the Devi mantrams with their root mantrams. 


Note Chiti, lit pile of wood for burning, is perhaps the Muladhara, 
the sacral plexus, where the fire called Kundalini is first kindled by 
processes of Yoga. 


35-37. Then the profuse quantities of ghee were offered as oblations 
to to the Sacred Fire. Thus when the Homa, (offering oblations of 
ghee to the fire) ceremony was finished elaborately and conforming 
to the rules of the S’astras, the sweet and melodious Heavenly voice 
was heard in the air, addressing Visnu Bhagavan, thus O Visnu! 
Let You be the supreme amongst the gods; honour and worship shall 
be Thine first; and you would be the most powerful of the Devas. 
Indra together with Brahma, and the other Devas, all will worship 
You. 


38-39. O Achyuta! (O Infallible One!) Those men on the earth that 
will be devoted to you, will certainly be endowed with power and you 
shall be the bestower of boons and all their desires. O Visnu! you will 
be the Supreme of the Devas and you will be the God of the gods; 
you will be the first and foremost in all the sacrifices and you will be 
worshipped by the sacrificers. 


40-41. People will worship you; and you will favour them with the 
boons. O best of the Purusas! When the Devas will be troubled by 



the Asuras, they will come and take refuge in Thee. You will be the 
Protector of all, there is no doubt in this. In all the Puranas and all 
this vast Vedas, You will be first worshipped. 


42. O Kes’ava! Wherever there will be decay and decline in religion. 
You will incarnate in your parts and preserve the religion. 


43-44. O Madhava! Avataras, renowned in all the worlds, will come 
down on earth as Your part incarnations in all sorts of wombs, in due 
order, and will be respected by all the high souled personages. O 
Madhusudana! Those Avataras will be the best of all the Avataras 
and will be famous all the Lokas, the worlds. 


45. In all your Avataras, you will get your attendants, the S’aktis 
(females) drawing their energies from My parts; and they will serve 
your purposes. 


46-47. Varahi, Narasimhi, etc., and various other S’aktis of 
auspicious appearances, endowed with various weapons and 
decked with all the ornaments will serve as your attendants; no 
doubt in this. O Visnu! Always with their help and under the influence 
of My favour, you will no doubt be quite competent to serve the 
purposes of the Devas. 


48. You should respect and worship all those powers by all means 
and with very great attention; never shew the slightest trace of pride 
to them; never do you thus insult them. 



49. These S’aktis, capable of bestowing all the desires, will be 
worshipped in Pratimas (images of clay, etc.) in the whole of India. 


50. O Deva of the Devas! The fame of all these S’aktis, as well as of 
You will be spread in the seven worlds and in the whole Universe. 


51. O Hah! The human beings on this earth will constantly worship 
with selfish ends these powers and you, for the fructification of their 
desires. 


52. Having various desires, men will, in your worship, present 
various offerings, recite the Veda mantrams, and repeat the names 
of you and the powers. 


53. O Visnu! You will be the God of the Immortals and your glory will 
be enhanced by the worship offered by the human beings in the 
world as well as in the heavens. 


54. Vyasa said O king! The heavenly voice, thus, bestowing 
boons on Visnu, ceased. Visnu Bhagavan became very glad to hear 
this. 


55-58. Then Hah, the God of Gods, completed duly the sacrifice and 
dismissed the Devas and the Munis, the sons of Brahma. Then 
ascending on Garuda, (His Vahana), He went up to Vaikuntha with 
his followers. The Devas also went to their own respective places. 
The Munis also retired gladly to their own hermitages, all 
thunderstruck to see these things, conversing with each other about 
this sacrifice. 



59. O king! All were filled with best devotion towards the Supreme 
Force, on hearing this clear beautiful, sonorous heavenly voice; then 
the Dvijas, the Munis, and Munindras began to worship with 
devotion, according to the Vedas, that Highest Force, the Supreme 
Goddess, giving all desired objects profusely in all the details. 


Here ends the thirteenth chapter on the Devi Yajha by S’ri Visnu in 
the third Adhyaya in S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam; the Maha Puranam 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 14. On The Narration Of The Glories 
Of The Dev! 


1-2. Janamejaya spoke O Dvija! I have heard in detail the Devi 
Yajha, performed by S’ri Visnu. Now describe Her Glory and glorious 
deeds. After hearing these, the Devi’s glorious deeds, I will also 
perform that, the best of all sacrifices. Thereby I will no doubt be 
pure through your favour. 


3. Vyasa said O king! Hear, I am describing to you the history of 
the most auspicious mighty deeds of the Devi, according to the 
Puranas. 


4-5. In days of yore, there reigned in the country of Kosala, the king 
Dhruvasandhi of the Solar Dynasty. He was the son of Puspa and 
celebrated on account of his great prowess. He was truthful, 
religious, engaged in doing good to his subjects, obeying the laws of 
the four castes and As’ramas. He being pure, performed his regal 
duties in the flourishing city of Ayodhya. 


6. The Brahmanas, Ksattriyas, Vais'yas, and S’udras and other good 
persons all lived religiously under his rule, each abiding by his own 
profession. 


7. No thieves, cheats, cunning persons, vain and arrogant persons, 
treacherous and illiterate men were allowed to remain in his 
kingdom. 



8. O host of Kurus! Thus ruling virtuously, the king had two wives, 
both of them young, fair and beautiful and well able to give delights 
and enjoyments to the king. 


9. The first and lovely wife was Manorama, and the second was 
Lilavati. Both of them were exceedingly handsome, intelligent and 
qualified. 


10. The king enjoyed much with them in palaces, gardens, romantic 
hills, lakes, and various beautiful mansions. 


11. In the auspicious moment, Manorama gave birth to a beautiful 
child, endowed with all royal qualifications. The child was named, in 
due course, Sudars’ana. 


12. Next within one month, his second wife the fair Lilavati in the 
auspicious fortnight and in the auspicious day, gave birth to an 
excellent child. 


13. The King then performed the Jata-Karma (ceremonies on the 
birth of a child) and being very glad, made lots of presents, wealth, 
etc., to the Brahmanas. 


14. The King shewed affection equally to the two children; never he 
made any distinction between them. 


15. The king, the tormenter of the foes, was very glad and performed 
duly the chuda karana ceremony according to his position and 



wealth. 


16. The sight of these two sons delighted very much the people. 
Now seeing these Kritachudas, and playing, the king was merged in 
the ocean of pleasure. 


17-18. Sudars'ana was the eldest; but Satrujit, the second beautiful 
son by Lilavati was of sweet and persuasive speech. His beautiful 
figure and sweet words gave very much delight to the king, and for 
these qualities, the child Satrujit turned out also a favourite of the 
people and ministers. 


19. The king could not show so much affection to the unfortunate 
Sudars’ana as he showed to Satrujit. 


20-21. Thus some days having passed, one day the king 
Dhruvasandhi went out on an hunting expedition to the forest. He 
killed in the forest many deer, Ruru (a kind of deer), elephants, boar, 
hare, buffaloes, rhinoceros, camels and amused himself very much 
with this hunting affair. 


22-23. While he was hunting thus, a lion got very much enraged, 
and, from a bush, suddenly jumped and came upon the king. That 
king of the beasts was already struck with arrows; now seeing the 
king in front, he loudly roared. 


24-25. He angrily lifted his long tail high up in the air and, puffing up 
his manes, jumped up high in the air to attack and to take the life of 
the king. Seeing this, instantly the king took sword in his right hand 



and shield in his left and stationed himself like another lion before 
him. 


26. The king's followers, one and all, angrily shot arrows on the lion. 


27. Then a loud uproar ensued; and all began to hurl arrows as best 
as they could. But, after all, that dangerous lion fell upon the king. 


28-29. Seeing thus, the king struck him with his sword, but the lion 
also tore asunder the king, with his sharp nails. The king thus struck 
by the lion, fell on the spot and died. The soldiers cried aloud and 
killed the lion with arrows. 


30. Thus both the king and lion lay dead on the spot; and the 
soldiers turned back to the palace and gave all the informations to 
the royal ministers. 


31. When the munis heard the demise of the king, they went to the 
forest, performed the burning of the dead body of the king. 


32. The Maharsi Vas’istha performed duly on the same spot, all the 
funeral ceremonies, thus ensuring the king the safe journey to the 
next world. 


33. All the subjects and the citizens and the Muni Vas’istha 
counselled each other to install Sudars’ana on the throne as the 
king. 



34-35. The minister-in-chief as well as the other members proposed 
that as Sudars’ana is the son of the legal wife, calm and quiet, 
beautiful and endowed with all the royal qualifications, he is fit for the 
throne. Maharsi Vas’istha said, the royal son, though not attained to 
proper age is still religious; therefore he is really fit be installed as 
king on the royal throne. 


36. When the wise aged ministers thus decided, Yudhajit, the king of 
Ujjain, on hearing the decision hastened to the spot. 


37. He was the father of Lilavati; on hearing the demise of his son- 
in-law he came there, so that his daughter’s son might get the 
kingdom. 


38. Next, Virasena, the king of the country of Kalinga and the father 
of Manorama, came there also with the object that his daughter’s 
son Sudars’ana be the Emperor. 


39. The two kings, accompanied respectively by their own army and 
soldiers, began to counsel with the aged ministers, each trying so 
that his daughter’s son may get the throne. 


40. Yudhajit made the question “Who is the eldest of the two 
sons? Is it always the case that the eldest will inherit the kingdom? 
Will not the youngest ever be able to acquire it?” 



41. Virasena said O king! He who is the son of the legal wife 
inherits the kingdom; this I have heard from the learned who are 
proficient in the knowledge of the S’astras. 


42. Hearing Virasena, Yudhajit repeated “Sudars’ana is not so 
qualified with royal qualifications and other matters as this son of the 
late king, Satrujit. How can then Sudars’ana inherit the throne?” 


43. O King! Then quarrels ensued amongst the two kings. Now, at 
this critical juncture, who is able to solve their doubts? 


44. Yudhajit then addressed the ministers “You all are prompted 
by selfish ends; you want to acquire a good deal of money by 
making Sudars’ana the king. 


45-46. I have come to know by your gestures and postures that your 
decision is to the above affect. After all, as Satrujit possesses many 
more qualifications than Sudars’ana, he has more claims to the 
throne; and therefore he is fit to occupy the throne and no other. 
Morever, let me see as long as I live who can set aside the claims of 
a qualified prince, in possession of an army, and put forward the 
claims of a prince who has no qualifications it all. 


47. I am ready to fight and I will tear the earth into two pieces by my 
sword. What more have you to say on this?” 


48. Hearing this, Virasena addressed Yudhajit “I see the two boy’s 
intelligence the same. You are intelligent; kindly mention where is the 
difference?” 



49. O king! The two kings quarrelling with each other, remained 
there; the subjects and the Risis, seeing this, were very anxious. 


50. Hundreds of tributary princes wanting that the two kings might be 
involved into quarrels with each other, came to the spot, with their 
soldiers, though they had to undergo great hardships in doing so. 


51. Many aborigines, from the inhabitants of Sringaverpur, hearing 
the demise of the late king, also appeared on the scene with the sole 
object to plunder. 


52. The two princes are minors; and hearing their parties at war with 
each other, many robbers from various adjoining countries came 
also there. 


53. Thus when the war broke out between the two kings, the great 
confusion and tumult across within the kingdoms; on the other hand, 
Yudhajit and Virasena both became ready to fight. 


Thus ends the Fourteenth Chapter on the narration of the glories of 
the Devi and the death of the Kosala king Dhruva Sandhi in the 3rd 
Adhayaya of S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam. 



Chapter 15 . On The Battle Between Yudhajit 
And ViRASENA 


1. Vyasa said O king! When the war was declared, the two kings, 
excited by greed and anger, took up arms; and a dreadful encounter 
ensued. 


2. On one side the king Yudhajit of long arms, surrounded by his own 
army, with bows and arrows came ready to fight. 


3. On the other hand, the fiery Virasena, the second God of the 
Devas appeared in the battle, following a true Ksattriya custom, on 
behalf his daughter’s son. 


4. Then that truthful king Virasena, seeing Yudhajit in battle, became 
very angry and hurled arrows on him, as a cloud rains on the 
mountain tops. 


5. On being covered, as it were, by the sharp and swift arrows, 
sharpened on a stone slab hurled at him by Virasena, Yudhajit, too, 
quickly, shot arrows at Virasena and cut off all his arrows. 


6. O King! A dreadful fight then ensued between the cavalries, the 
warriors on the elephants; and the Devas, men, and Munis began to 
witness this terrible battle with wonder and astonishment. Birds, 
vultures and crows, desirous to eat the flesh of the dead soldiers, 
flew in the air. 



7. Blood of elephants, horses and warriors, the bodies that lay dead, 
flowed in torrents awfully like rivers in that deadly battle ground. The 
torrent of blood excited fear amongst those who came to see it, as 
the river Vaitarani on the way to hell (the Lord of Death) is very 
fearful to the sinners. 


8. The human skulls were driven ashore by the current and they look 
like so many hollow shells of gourds scattered there for the play of 
the boys on the banks of the Jumna. 


9. When any warrior lay dead on the field, the vultures began to fly 
about in the air for devouring his flesh. It seemed then that the soul 
of the warrior beholding his beautiful body tried to reenter into his 
body, though he thought that it had become very inaccessible to him 


10. Some warriors on being slain in the battle instantly arose in a 
celestial car to the heavens and was seen addressing the celestial 
nymph, who came already within his embrace, thus “O one of 
beautiful thighs. Behold! how my beautiful body is lying on the earth 
below!” 


11. Another warrrior thus slain got up in the heavens on a celestial 
car, came in possession of a celestial nymph and when he was 
sitting with her in the car, his former wife in the earth made herself a 
sati and burnt herself up in the funeral pyre, thus got a celestial body, 
came up to the heavens; and that chaste virtuous woman drew away 
perforce her own husband away from that celestial nymph. 


12. Two warriors, went up, slew each other and lay down dead at the 
same time. They went up in the heavens at the same time and there 



began quarrel with each other and fight with their weapons for one 
and the same celestial nymph. 


13. Some hero got in the heavens a nymph more lovely and beautiful 
than himself and he thus became very much attached and devoted 
her. He began to describe his own heroic qualities and also to copy 
dotedly the qualities of his lover so that she might remain faithfully 
attached to him. 


14. The dust, arising from the dreadful encounter of the soldiers in 
battle field, rose up in the air and covered the sun. It appeared night. 
After a while that dust became absorbed in the blood below, and the 
sun appeared very red, reflected with the colour of the blood. 


15. Some Brahmachari fought in the battle and was slain. He went 
up to the heavens; instantly a lovely eyed Devakanya, a celestial 
nymph desired to select him as bridegroom with great devotion. But 
that clever man did not accept the offer, thinking that his vow of 
Brahmacharya would be thus broken. 


16-17. O King! Thus when the battle was deadly, the king Yudhajit 
shot a sharp, dreadful arrow at Virasena and severed his head from 
body. Virasena lay dead on the battle field and his army was routed. 
The soldiers fled away from the battle. 


18-19. Hearing that her father was slain in the battle, Manorama 
became very terrified and anxious. She then began to think that the 
vicious wicked king Yudhajit will surely slay her son, for kingdom's 
sake and to satisfy his enmity with her father. 



20. What shall I do now? My father is slain in the battle. My husband 
is no more. My child is a minor to-day. Where shall I go? 


21. Greed is very sinful; who is there that cannot be bought over by 
love of gold? and what vicious act can there be, that cannot be done 
when actuated by covetousness? 


22. A greedy man does not hesitate to kill his father, mother, spiritual 
guide, friends and others. There is no doubt in this. 


23. It is the inordinate love of worldly things that makes a man eat 
what is held unclean in society, that makes a man approach a 
woman who is unapproachable, and it is greed that makes a man 
discard his own religion and become an apostate. 


24. In this city I find none so powerful as I can remain there under his 
shelter and be able to rear up my child. 


25. What can I do if the king Yudhajit slay my son? There is none in 
this world who can save me, and, counting on whose shelter, I can 
stay here without any anxiety. 


26. And this my co-rival wife Lilavati will always practise enmity with 
me. She will never shew mercy on my son. 



27. When Yudhajit will arrive in this city, I will never be able to go out 
of it and he will to-day put my son in the prison on the pretext that he 
is a minor. 


28-29. I heard that, in days of yore, Indra entered into the womb of 
his pregnant step mother with a small thunderbolt in his hand and 
divided the foetus into seven parts with that weapon, again each of 
these seven into seven parts again, thus the forty nine Maruts were 
born in the Heavens. 


30-31. I heard also that in ancient times one queen gave poison to 
destroy the foetus in the womb of her rival wife. When the child came 
out of the womb, he was celebrated by the name of Sagara (with 
poison) in this earth. 


32. The husband was alive, and still his queen Kaikeyi banished the 
eldest son of his king, S’ri Ramchandra to the forest; and the king 
Das’aratha sacrificed his life for that very reason. 


33. The ministers no doubt wanted before to install my son as the 
king; but now they are not independent; they have now yielded 
themselves to the king Yudhajit. 


34. There is no brother of mine powerful enough to release me from 
my bondage; I see I have fallen into a great difficulty by the 
combination of unforeseen circumstances. 


35. Though the success depends on Fate, still one should make an 
earnest effort. If one does not make any effort, fate also remains 



asleep. I will therefore soon make out a plan to save my son. 


36-38. O King! Thinking thus, that woman Manorama called in 
private the best and very respectable minister Vidalla, who was 
intelligent and expert in everything, and holding the hands of her son 
and weeping, said humbly in a depressed spirit “O Minister! My 
father is slain in the battle field, this my son is a minor, and Yudhajit 
is a powerful king; consider all these and tell me what I should do 
now?” 


39-40. The venerable minister Vidalla then said to the queen 
Manorama “It is never advisable for us to stay here. Soon we will go 
into the forests of Benares. There I have got my powerful uncle 
Subahu. He is prosperous and has got a strong army. He will protect 


us. 


41. “I will make the pretext that I am become very anxious for the 
king and therefore I am going out to see the king Yudhajit and will go 
out of the city in my chariot. There is no doubt in this.” 


42-43. Hearing, thus, the Vidalla's words, the queen Manorama went 
to Lilavati and said “O faireyed! To-day I am going to see the father 
Yudhajit.” Thus saying, she went out of the city in a chariot, 
accompanied by her son, attendants and Vidalla. 


44-45. Grieved at the loss of her father, fearful, distressed, and 
fatigued, Manorama saw Yudhajit and performed the cremation of 
her father Virasena; and, trembling with fear, got to the banks of the 
Ganges after two days’ swift journey. 



46-48. There the robbers, the Nisadas plundered all their riches and 
took the chariot and went away. Manorama had only her clothings, 
that she wore, left to her. She began to weep, and, holding the hands 
of her attendant, went to the Ganges shore, and being afraid crossed 
the river on a raft and went to the Chitrakuta mountain. 


49. That terrified Devi went to the hermitage of Bharadvaja as early 
as possible. There she saw the ascetics and was relieved of her fear. 


50. Bharadvaja asked, “O lotus eyed! Who are you and whose wife 
are you? Why have you taken so much trouble to come here? 
Answer all these truly.” 


51. “O beautiful one! are you a Devi or a human being? your son is a 
very minor. Why have you come in this dense forest? It seems, as if 
you are deprived of your kingdom.” 


52. Thus asked by the best of the Munis, the beautiful Manorama 
became very much afflicted with grief and began to weep; she could 
not speak anything herself and ordered Vidalla to inform the Muni all 
what had happened. 


53-54. Vidalla then said There was a king of Kosala, named 
Dhruvasandhi. She is the legal wife of that king. Her name is 
Manorama. That powerful king of the Solar Dynasty was killed by a 
lion in a forest. This boy Sudars’ana is his son. 



55. The father of this Manorama was very religious. He died fighting 
for the cause of his daughter's son. Now the present queen has 
become much afraid and has therefore come to this wild forest. 


56. The son of this woman is now a minor; he is now taking your 
refuge. O best of the Munis! Protect them. 


57. To give protection to any distressed person is to acquire merits 
higher than performing a sacrifice. Therefore to protect one who is 
very much afflicted with fear and who is helpless will have still higher 
merits. 


58. Bharadvaja said “O beautiful one! Remain in this hermitage 
without any fear; rear up your son here. O auspicious one! There is 
no cause of fear here from your enemies. 


59. Better nourish and support your child. Your son will surely be a 
king and if you remain in this hermitage, no sorrow or grief will 
overtake you.” 


60. Vyasa said When the great Muni Bharadvaja said thus, the 
queen Manorama became peaceful. The Muni gave them a cottage 
to live in and there they dwelt without any sorrow. 


61. Thus Manorama dwelt obediently with her maid servant, liked by 
all. Vidalla also remained there and Manorama began to nourish her 
child. 



Here ends the Fifteenth chapter on the Devi Mahatmya and the 
battle between Yudhajit and Virasena and the going away of 
Manorama to the forest in the 3rd Adhyaya of S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 16. On The Glory Of The Dev! 


1. Vyasa said After gaining the victory in the battle, the king 
Yudhajit returned to the city of Ayodhya with his huge army and 
asked where are Sudars’ana and Manorama? He wanted to kill 
Sudars’ana. 


2. He repeatedly exclaimed “Where are they gone?” and sent his 
servant on their search. Then, on an auspicious day, he installed his 
daughter’s son on the throne. 


3. Maharsi Vas’istha was engaged as the priest; he and the other 
ministers began to chant the auspicious hymns of the Atharvaveda 
and with the jars, filled with water, and consecrated by these hymns, 
installed S’atrujit on the throne. 


4. O best of the Kurus! Conch shells resounded; drums, bheris and 
turiyas, resounded; and great festivals and rejoicings took place in 
the city. 


5. The reciting of the Vedic mantrams by the Brahmans, the chanting 
of hymns by the bards and the auspicious acclamation of Victory to 
the new king resounded the whole city of Ayodhya with joy. 


6. When the new king S’atrujit ascended on the throne, the subjects 
were filled with joy; everywhere hymns were sung; drums were 
resound. At this Ayodhya looked as fresh as ever. 



7-8. O King! Though there were thus great rejoicings and festivals, 
yet some good persons were found that remembered Sudars’ana 
and gave vent to this feeling of sorrow, thus “Alas! Where has that 
prince gone? Where has that chaste queen Manorama gone with her 
son? Oh! The enemies have killed his father for greed of kingdom.” 


9. The saints with their views impartial, thus rendered uneasy, sorry, 
began to pass away their time there subject to S’atrujit. 


10. After installing duly his daughter’s son on the throne and after 
having made over the charge of the kingdom to the wise councillors, 
Yudhajit turned towards his own city. 


11-12. Afterwards Yudhajit heard that Sudars’ana was staying in the 
hermitage with the Munis. He started at once for Chitrakuta and went 
quickly to Durdars’a, the chief of the city of Sringavera, being 
accompanied by Bala, the chief of the NTsadas. 


13-15. Hearing that Yudhajit was coming there with his army, 
Manorama began to think that his son was a minor and became very 
sorrowful, distressed and terrified. Then she with tears in her eyes 
addressed the Muni thus “Yudhajit is coming here; what shall I do 
and whither shall I go? He has slain my father, and has installed his 
daughter’s son on the throne. Still he is not satisfied and he is now 
coming with his army here to kill my minor child.” 


16-21. O Lord! In days of yore, I heard that the Pandavas, when they 
went to the forest, lived in the holy hermitage of the Munis with 
Draupadi. One day the five brethren went a hunting, and the 
beautiful Draupadi stayed without any fear with other maid servants 



in the hermitage where there was the chanting of the Vedas by 
Dhaumya, Attri, Galava, Paila, Javali, Gautama, Bhrigu, Chyavana, 
Kanva of the Atrigotra, Jatu, Kratu, Vitihotra, Sumantu, Yajhadatt, 
Vatsala, Ras'asana, Kahoda, Yavakri, Yajhakrit, Kratu and other holy 
high souled Risis like Bharadvaja and others. 


22-23. While the five great heroes Arjuna and others, the destroyers 
of their enemies, were roaming in the forests, Jayadratha, the king of 
Sindhu came with his army to the hermitage, hearing the reciting of 
the Vedic hymns. 


24. Hearing thus, that king quickly descended from the chariot so 
that he might have a sight of these holy maharsis. 


25-27. Accompanied by two attendants only, he approached to the 
Munis and, finding them engaged in the study of the Vedas, waited 
there with folded hands for an opportunity. O Lord! When the king 
Jayadratha on entering the hermitage took his seat, the wives of the 
Munis came there to see the king and began to enquire “Who is this 
person?” 


28. With the wives of the Munis came there also the beautiful 
Draupadi. Jayadratha looked upon Draupadi as if she were the 
second goddess Laksmi. 


29-30. Looking at that lovely royal daughter who looked like the 
Deva girls Jayadratha asked the Maharsi Dhaumya, “Who is this 
beautiful lotus eyed lady? Whose wife is she and who is her father? 
What is her name? Oh! From her beautiful appearance it seems that 
the goddess S’achi has come down on earth.” 



31. This fair woman is shining like the celestial nymph Rambha 
surrounded by the Raksasis or like the beautiful creeper 
Lavangalatika encircled by thorny trees. 


32. O good ones! Tell truly whose beloved is she? O Brahmins! It 
seems that she is the wife of some king, not the wife of a Muni. 


33. Dhaumya said “O king of Sindhu! She is the daughter of 
Panchala; her name is Draupadi; she is the wife of the Pandavas; 
they are residing in this forest, having got rid of their fears.” 


34. Jayadratha said “Where have those powerful Pandavas of great 
prowess gone now? Are they dwelling in this forest, free from fears?” 


35. Dhaumya said “The five Pandavas have gone out on hunting, 
ascended on a chariot. They will return at noon with their game.” 


36-37. Hearing the Muni's words Jayadratha got up, and going near 
to Draupadi, bowed down to her and said “O Fair One! Is there 
everything well with you? Where have your husbands gone? To-day 
it is eleven years that you are residing in the forest.” 


38. Draupadi then said “O prince! Let all be well with you, wait 
here for a short while; the Pandavas are coming quickly.” 



39. While Draupadi thus spoke, that powerful king, being 
overpowered with greed and avarice, stole her away, disregarding all 
the Munis present there. 


40-42. O Lord! The wise should never trust any body; if on any body 
he places his trust, he will surely conne to grief. For example, see the 
case of the king Bali. Bali, the son of Virochana, and the grandson of 
Prahlada, was prosperous, devoted to his religion, true to his 
promise, performer of sacrifices, generous, always giving protection 
to and liked by the saints and a great warrior. His mind never turned 
to any irreligious subject and he performed ninety nine Yajhas with 
full Daksinas (remunerations). 


43-44. But the Bhagavan Visnu, who is all full of Sattvic purity and 
who is never affected with passions and changeless, who is always 
worshipped by the Yogis, He, in the form of a dwarf in his Vamana 
incarnation as the son of Kas'yapa Risi, to serve the Devas, stole 
away his whole seagirt earth and kingdom deceitfully on hypocritical 
pretext. 


45. O Lord! I heard that the son of Virochana was a generous large 
hearted king. He truly resolved to give what was wanted; but Visnu 
behaved with him deceitfully to serve the cause of Indra. 


46. When the pure, Sattvik Visnu could assume this dwarf 
incarnation to bring about the hindrance to Bali’s Yajha, what wonder 
is that other ordinary mortals would practise things like that? 


47. Therefore never trust on any body in any way. Lord! Where there 
are greed and avarice, reigning in one’s heart, what fear can he have 



to perpetrate any evil deed? 


48-49. O Muni! It is through avarice that nnen commit sinful deeds; 
they do not care what good or bad will happen to them in the next 
world. Thoroughly overpowered by greed, they take away in mind, 
word and deed other’s things; and thus they become fallen. 


50-51. Lo! Human beings always worship the Gods for wealth; but 
the Devas do not give them wealth instantly; they give them these 
things through others by making them carry on trade, make gifts, or 
shew their strength or by making them steal. 


52. The Vais’yas worship the Gods simply because they think they 
will be highly prosperous and therefore they sell many things as 
grains, cloth and the like. 


53. O Controlled one! Is there not the desire to take away the other’s 
property in this act of merchandise? Certainly there is. Besides the 
merchants, when they find that when people are in urgent need of 
buying articles from them, expect that the price of those articles 
might run higher. 


54. O Muni! Thus every one is anxious to take away other’s 
properties. How, then, can we trust them? 


55. Those who are clouded by greed and delusion, their going to 
places of pilgrimages, their making charities, their reciting the Vedas, 
all are rendered useless. Though they go to the holy places, etc., still 



these things bear no fruits to them, as if they have not done these 
things at all. 


56. Therefore O Enlightened one! You make Yudhajit go back to his 
own place. Then I will be able to remain here, like Sita, with my son. 


57-58. On Manorama's thus speaking to the Muni, the fiery Maharsi 
went to Yudhajit and said “O King! You better go back to your own 
place or anywhere else you like. The son of Manorama is a minor; 
that queen is very much grieved; she cannot come to you now.” 


59. Yudhajit said “O peaceful ones! Kindly cease showing this 
impudence and give me Manorama. I will never go away leaving her. 
If you do not give her easily, I will take her away by force.” 


60. The Risis said “O King! If there be any strength in you, you can 
take away Manorama by force; but the result will be similar to that 
when the King Visvamitra wanted to take away the heavenly cow by 
force from the hermitage of Vas'istha.” 


Thus ends the Sixteenth Chapter on the glory of the Devi and the 
going of the King Yudhajit to the hermitage of Bharadvaja, to kill 
Sudars’ana, in the the 3rd Adhyaya of S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 17. On The Story Of Vis’vamitra 


1-3. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the words of the Maharsi 
Bharadvaja and seeing that he made a firm resolve, the King 
Yudhajit called his prime minister quickly and asked, “O intelligent 
one! What am I to do now? I want to carry away by force this boy 
with his mother sweet Manorama; no one desirous of one’s welfare 
won’t trifle away his enemy, be he even a very weak one; if he does 
so, that enemy will get stronger day by day, as the disease 
consumption becomes stronger; and will ultimately become the 
cause of death. 


4. There is no warrior, nor any soldiers here of the other party; no 
one will be able to resist me; I can take away, as I like, the enemy of 
my daughter’s son and can kill him. 


5. I will try to-day to carry him away by force, and Sudars’ana being 
killed, my daughter’s son will reign fearlessly without an enemy; 
there in no doubt in this.” 


6. The prime minister said No such hazardous courage need be 
shewn now; you have heard the Maharshi's words; he quoted you 
the example of Vis’vamitra. 


7. O King! In days of yore, Vis’vamitra, the son of the King Gadhi, 
was a celebrated monarch; one day while roaming, he accidentally 
reached the hermitage of Vas’istha. 



8. The powerful king VisVamitra bowed down before the Muni, and 
the Muni gave him a seat. The king took his seat there. 


9. Then the high souled Vas'istha invited the king to a dinner. 
VisVamitra, the king, went there with his whole army. 


10-12. There was a cow, named Nandini, of Vas’istha. The Muni 
prepared all sorts of eatables from her milk and entertained them all. 
The king with his whole army was very much pleased; and, coming 
to know of the divine power of the cow, asked Vas’istha to give his 
cow Nandini over to him and said “The udder of your cow Nandini is 
like a big jar. I will give you thousand cows like that; I pray you to let 
me have your cow Nandini.” 


13. Vas'istha said “O King! This is my sacrificial cow; I cannot give 
you this cow in any way, let your thousand cows be yours.” 


14. Vis'vamitra said “O Saint! I will give you cows lakhs or tens 
and hundreds of lakhs or any number you like. Please give me your 
cow; in case you be unwilling, I will carry her away perforce.” 


15. Vas'istha said “O King! As you like, better take it perforce; I will 
never be able to give you my cow Nandini from my house.” 


16. O King! Hearing thus the Vas'istha's words, Vis’vamitra, the King, 
ordered at once his powerful followers to carry the cow Nandini away 
by fastening a cord round her neck per sheer force. 



17-19. The followers, obeying the order at once bound the cow with 
ropes and began to carry her away by force. At this Nandini, 
trennbling and with tears in her eyes, began to say to the Muni “O 
One! whose wealth consists only in asceticism! Are you going to 
leave me? Otherwise why these fellows are binding me with a cord 
and dragging me away?” At this the Muni replied “O Nandini! I have 
never parted with you; I perform all my sacrifices through your milk. 
O auspicious one! I honoured this king, my guests, with eatables 
prepared from your food and for that reason he is carrying you away 
from me by sheer force. What can I do? O Nandini! I have not the 
least desire to part with you.” 


20. Hearing these words from the Muni, the cow became very angry 
and bellowed loudly and terribly. 


21. At once came out from her body, on that very spot, the terrible 
demons wearing coats of armour, and holding various weapons; and 
they uttered aloud, “Wait; you will soon meet with vengeance.” 


22. They then destroyed all the forces of the king. And the king alone 
was left and he went away alone, much dejected and sorrowful. 


23. Oh! That wicked king then cursed with great humility the 
Ksattriya S’akti; and thinking the Brahmanic power would be 
attained with great exertion, began to practise asceticism and 
penance. 


24. Performing penance and tapasya, very hard indeed, in the great 
forest, VisVamitra, the son of Gadhi, succeeded at last in becoming 
a Risi and then he renounced his Ksattriya Dharma. 



25. Therefore, O King! Dost Thou never quarrel with these ascetics 
and be involved in wars resulting in great enmity and causing the 
extinction of the race. 


26. Better dost thou appease the Muni and now go back to your own 
kingdom. Let Sudars'ana remain here at his pleasure. 


27. O King! This minor boy has no wealth; what harm can he do to 
you? It is useless to show your enmity towards an orphan, a weak 
minor boy. 


28. This world is under the control of Destiny; therefore one should 
shew mercy to all. O king! What use is there to shew one’s jealousy? 
What is inevitable will surely come to pass. 


29. O king! The thunderbolt comes sometimes like a blade of grass; 
a blade of grass acts sometimes like a thunderbolt. 


30. O king! You are very intelligent; consider that by, combinations of 
circumstances, a hair can kill a powerful tiger and a gnat can kill an 
elephant. Therefore dost thou forsake this rashness and hear my 
beneficent advice. 


31. Vyasa said O king! The best of kings, Yudhajit hearing the 
prime minister's advice bowed down humbly at the feet of the Muni 
and returned to his own city. 



32. Manorama, too, became free from anxiety, and, remaining 
peaceful in the hermitage, began to nourish and support her child, 
engaged in vows. 


33. The lovely son of the king began to grow daily like the phases of 
the waxing moon and sport fearlessly with the boys of the Munis, 
altogether, wherever they liked, a sight very auspicious. 


34. One day the minister Vidalla came there and the sons of the 
Munis seeing him began, in the presence of Sudars’ana, to address 
him “Klib,” “Klib.” 


35. Sudars’ana, too, hearing them pronounce “Klib,” “Klib” took up 
the one letter, “Kli” and uttered this only repeatedly, which is, in fact 
the prince of the root mantras of Kama, with anusvara omitted. 


36. Then the son of the king took that mantram and silently repeated 
this in his mind. 


37. O King! Thus that boy Sudars'ana was initiated in this root 
mantra of Kama (desire) spontaneously, out of his original Samskara 
(innate tendency) owing to the unavoidable destiny of Fate. 


38-39. The son of the king, when he was five years old, got this most 
excellent mantra, though without its Risi (seer), meditation, without 
its chhanda (metre) and without Nyasa (assignment of the various 
parts of the body to different deities, accompanied with prayers and 
corresponding gesticulations), and considered this as the 



quintessence of all, therefore meditated this always in his mind 
spontaneously and never forgot it. 


40-41. When the king's son grew eleven years old, the Muni 
performed his Upanayana (sacred thread) ceremony and made him 
begin the study of the Vedas. The son, with that mantra power, soon 
mastered all the studies about archery, all the moral and political 
sciences in conformity with proper rules, within a very short time. 


42-43. One day Sudars'ana got a vision of the form of the Supreme 
Goddess, of a red colour, wearing red apparel and decorated with 
red ornaments, mounting on Garuda and with Her wonderful 
Vaisnavi powers and Her face, fully opened like the budding of a 
lotus flower. 


44. Thus, expert in many branches of learning, Sudars’ana served 
his Mother in that forest and began to wander on the banks of the 
Ganges. 


45. One day the Mother of the Universe gave the bows, sharpened 
arrows, quiver and a mail coat of armour to that boy in that forest. 


46-47. O King! At this time the extraordinary beautiful and lovely 
princess S’as’ikala, endowed with all auspicious qualities, the 
daughter of the king of Kashi, came to hear that a beautiful prince 
named Sudars’ana, a second Kandarpa, full of heroism and 
endowed with all auspicious qualities is dwelling in a forest. 



48. The princess, hearing this from a soothsayer, mentally loved and 
desired him and wanted finally to accept him as her legal husband. 


49-50. Thus, on one occasion, at the end of a night (night-fall), the 
Goddess appeared in her dreams before her and consoled her and 
said “O fair one! ask a boon from me; Sudars’ana is my devotee; he 
will fulfill, at my word, all your desires.” 


51. Thus seeing the beautiful figure of the Goddess in her dreams 
and hearing Her sweet words, the honoured S’as’ikala was drowned 
in the ocean of bliss. 


52. When the princess awoke, her face beaming with gladness, her 
mother perceived her joy and inferred that her daughter must have 
been internally very glad, and asked her repeatedly, but S’as’ikala 
was too much abashed and did not give vent to the cause of her 
satisfaction. 


53. The princess, remembering her dreams, began to laugh 
repeatedly on account of her excessive joy. At last she spoke out in 
detail all about her dreams to one of her lady friends, or companions. 


54. On one occasion, that large eyed S’as’ikala went out for 
enjoyment to a nice garden beautified with champaka flowers, 
attended by her companion. 


55. While the King’s daughter seated under a champaka tree, was 
collecting flowers, she saw a Brahmin, coming towards her in great 
haste. 



56. After bowing down before him, that beautiful princess, endowed 
with all auspicious qualifications, addressed him in sweet words “O 
blessed one! whence are you coming?” 


57. The Brahmana said “O girl! I am coming on an errand from the 
hermitage of Bharadvaja Muni. Please mention what you are going 
to ask me?” 


58. S’as’ikala replied “O Noble one! What beautiful thing is therein 
that hermitage that is extraordinary and worth describing.” 


59. The Brahmana said “O fair one! There is staying the most lovely 
Sudars’ana, the son of the King Dhruvasandhi. He is the loveliest of 
all men. 


60. O fair one! He who has not seen him, I think, has his eyes given 
to him in vain. 


61. O auspicious one! It appears as if the Creator, with a view to see 
how it looks, has invested him with all the qualities. 


62. O beautiful one! what shall I say more to you, suffice to say that, 
that prince is fit to become your husband. I think that the Creator 
has, no doubt, settled already the union between you two, as a 
happy union of two congenial things (gold in union with Jewel).” 



Thus ends the seventeenth chapter on the story of VisVannitra and 
on the getting of the root mantra of Kama by the son of the King in 
S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 18. The Svayambara Of S’as’ikala 


1. Vyasa said The King's lovely daughter was very glad on 
hearing the words of the Brahmana, and drowned herself in ecstacy 
of love. The Brahmin also departed, thinking of the whole affair. 


2. The daughter was already attached to the prince, and now she 
became the more merged in love for him and became very anxious. 
Now, on the departure of the Brahmin, she felt herself struck by the 
arrows of love. 


3-4. Then S’as’ikala, oppressed by love, addressed her dear 
companion, who followed her inclinations thus “O my companion! 

I have not as yet had any knowledge of the king's son; still the signs 
of love have sprung up in my body and mind, from the moment that I 
heard about him from the Brahmin. The love is giving me much 
trouble; tell, my companion what am I to do now? and whither shall I 
go? 


5. O dear companion! I saw him like a second God of Love in my 
dreams; and, since then, my innocent mind is being troubled with his 
being away from me. 


6. O fair one! The sandal paste on my body appears to me like a 
poison, this garland is like a serpent and the moon's rays seem like a 
fire. 



7. O companion! My mind gets not rest anywhere, in palaces, 
gardens, in lakes, in hills, at any time, during the day or night; all the 
enjoyable things have assumed now contrary aspects and are 
paining me. 


8. The bedding, betel leaves, music, singing, and dancing, all now 
fail to give me satisfaction and peace. 


9. O companion! I would have gone to-day where is residing that 
deceiver; but I fear for my father as well for the honour of my family. 


10. My father is not yet declaring the svayamvara for my marriage. 
What shall I do? Had he given me in marriage to that Sudars’an, I 
would have allowed him embrace me and satisfy his passions to¬ 
day! 


11.0 friend! look at the strange ideas of the Creator! There are 
hundreds of kings today who are influential and I do not consider 
them beautiful; and that King's son is exiled from his kingdom and 
yet he has stolen away my heart.” 


12. Vyasa said Thus that King's son, Sudars’ana, though helpless, 
and living in a forest on roots and fruits, deprived of wealth, power, 
and army, began to reign in the heart of that princess. 


13-14. S’as’ikala, too, began to recite slowly the root mantra of 
Sarasvati and therefore her love towards this prince held out signs of 
success. 



Once engaged in meditation on that excellent root mantra on Kama, 
and, while repeatedly reciting it mentally, he got in a dream the vision 
of that Ever Full, the World Mother Ambika, that cannot be 
expressed in words, the VaisnavT S’akti and capable to bestow all 
wealth and property. 


15-16. At this time the King of Nisadas, the lord of S’rimgaverpur 
came to the hermitage and presented an excellent chariot together 
with all other necessary things. This chariot was drawn by four 
horses, decorated with nice flags and was endowed with the 
prospect of getting victory everywhere; thinking it thus a befitting 
present to be given to the King, he gave it to Sudars’ana. 


17. Sudars'ana, too, accepted the offer of a friend and worshipped 
him well in return, with roots and fruits of the forest. 


18-19. The lord of the Nisadas, thus worshipped as a guest, went 
away. The Munis and ascetics then began to address Sudars'ana, 
with fondness “O son of the king! Don't be anxious and restless; 
within a very short time, you will get your kingdom, no doubt, by your 
own good luck and prowess. 


20. O one attached to one’s vows! The Goddess that enchants the 
whole universe, the Giver of boons, S’ri Ambika, has been pleased 
with you; assistance is also rendered well to you; therefore do not 
trouble yourself with contrary thoughts any more.” 



21. The Munis, who have taken vows, addressed Manorama also 
“Your son will soon become the lord of the world; you need not care 
any more.” 


22. Then the lean and thin Manorama, hearing the Muni's words said 
“O Brahmanas! Let your asiss (words of benedictions) be justified 
with success. What wonder that a kingdom be obtained by the good 
will of the Sadhus! 


23. There is no force, no minister, no help, no property; how, under 
what combinations, can then my son get kingship? 


24. You are the best of the knowers of mantrams; due to the 
influence of your good will, my son will surely be a king; there is no 
doubt in this.” 


25. Vyasa said Wherever that intelligent Sudars'ana used to go on 
his chariot, there he seemed by his own prowess, as if he were 
surrounded by a whole army consisting of 109, 350 foot, 65,610 
horse, 21,870 chariots and 21,870 elephants. 


26. This is the influence of the seed mantra; it is not an ordinary 
acquisition. It is because Sudars’ana, with gladness and one- 
pointedness of his mind, meditated on his seed mantra, that he 
acquired the above powers; there is no doubt in this. 


27. Becoming pure and peaceful, whoever gets this wonderul seed 
mantra from a true spiritual guide and meditates on it incessantly, is 
destined certainly to attain all desires. 



28. O best of kings! There is no such thing either in the heavens 
above or in the worlds below, that a man won’t get, when the 
Supreme Goddess becomes pleased. 


29. Those are certainly very unfortunate and of dull intellect, who 
cannot place their faith on the worship of this Goddess and 
consequently suffer incessantly all sorts of troubles. 


30. O best of the Kurus! At the beginning of the creation, this Amba 
Devi was the Mother of all the Gods, and is therefore known as the 
First Mother. 


31. She is practically seen in this world in the shape of Buddhi 
(iutellgence), Kirti (fame), Dhriti (fortitude), Laksmi (Goddess of 
wealth), S’akti (the Force), S’raddha (Faith), Mati (Intellect), Smriti 
(memory), etc. 


32. It is only the deluded souls that do not realise the nature of the 
Devi; it is only those, whose hearts are destroyed by the glare of 
false argument, that do not worship this All-auspicious Goddess of 
the Universe. 


33-34. O king! Brahma, Visnu, S’ambhu, Indra, Varuna, Yama, Vayu, 
Agni, Kuvera, Vis'vakarma, Pusa, Bhaga, the two Asvins, Adityas, 
Vasus, Rudras, VisVedevas, Maruts, all worship the Supreme Deity 
of Creation, Preservation and Dissolution. 



35. Who is there amongst tho wise that does not serve this Highest 
Energy? The real nature of that Auspicious Goddess, the Bestower 
all desires, Sudars’ana came to know very well. 


36. She is the Real Essence, Brahma, very rarely realised; She is 
the Higher Vidya and the Lower Vidya (Avidya) and She is the vital 
energy, the Mukhya Prana, of the best of the Yogis, who are desirous 
of liberation. 


37. O king! What individual is there that is able to realise the nature 
of Pramatma (the Highest Universal Self) without having recourse to 
Her, Who is manifesting this universal consciousness, by bringing 
into existence these Satvik, Rajasik, and Tamasik creations. 


38. Sudars'ana, though he dwelt in the forest, realised a greater 
happiness than that in obtaining the sovereignty of a kingdom, by 
constantly meditating on that Goddess. 


39. S’as’ikala, too, being too much oppressed with the arrows of 
love, any how remained with her soul in her body, having had to be 
always cared for her health in various ways by her attendants. 


40. Then the king Subahu, on coming to know that her daughter is 
desirous of getting her husband, made arrangements for her 
Svayambara (a marriage in which the girl chooses her husband from 
among a number of suitors assembled together) without any delay. 


41-44. The Svayambara of the royal family, the Pundits say, is of 
three kinds 1st Ichchha Svayambara (optional); 2nd Panya 



Svayamvara by fulfilling a promise, e.g. Ramachandra broke in two 
the bow of S’iva and married Sita; 3rd the Svayambara, preferring 
one who will prove the strongest hero by one’s own prowess. Of 
these three kinds of Svayambaras, the king Subahu preferred Ichcha 
Svayamvara (according to the bride's free choice). 


Accordingly the king employed many artisans, had platforms covered 
with beautiful carpets and big halls decorated beautifully in various 
ways. 


45-47. Thus the assembly hall for Svayambara built and decorated 
and all the necessary articles and equipments brought thither, the 
fair eyed S’as’ikala, told her companions with sorrow “Better go to 
my mother and say her privately that I have already selected 
mentally my husband the beautiful Sudars'ana, the son of the king 
Dhruvasandhi in my mind; I won't marry any other prince than him; 
the Goddess Bhagavati has settled him for my husband.” 


48-50. Vyasa said, the companion of S’as’ikala hearing thus, went 
quickly to her mother Vaidarbhi and addressed her sweetly in private 
“O chaste one! Your daughter, with a sorrowful heart, has sent me to 
you to say the following; Please hear and do at your earliest 
convenience, what is good and beneficial.” She said “There is 
staying in the hermitage of Bharadvaja, the son of the king 
Dhruvasandhi; I have mentally selected him as my husband; I won't 
select any other prince.” 


51. Vyasa said The queen, hearing her words, told to her 
husband, when he returned to the palace, all her daughter's words 
as she had heard them. 



52-53. Hearing this, the king Subahu was astonished and then 
laughed frequently and then began to say to his wife, the daughter of 
the king of Vidarbha the following true words “O fair one! That 
king’s son Sudars’ana is a minor, he has been exiled to the forest; 
now he is helpless and is residing with his mother in a dense forest. 


54. For his sake, the king Virasena was slain in battle by the king 
Yudhajit. O fair eyed! how can that helpless exiled poor boy become 
her husband. 


55. Do say therefore to S’as’ikala that, in the assembly hall for her 
Svayamvara, many kings commanding honour and respect would be 
present. She would then choose whomever she likes. She need not 
repeat such words any more.” 


Thus ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the 3rd Skandha about the 
Svayambara of S’as’ikala, the daughter of the king Kasiraja in the 
Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 19. On The Going To The Svayamvara 
Assembly Of Sudars’ana 


1-2. Vyasa said After the king Subahu had spoken thus, the 
Queen nnade her daughter S’as’ikala, who had always sweet smiles 
on her lips sit on her lap and after consoling her with sweet words, 
began to say “O fair eyed! You always practise vows and other 
religious performances; why are you, then, speaking these 
unpleasant words? The King has heard all what you wanted to say 
and has been very sorry. 


3-5. That Sudars'ana is very unfortunate, deprived of his kingdom, 
helpless, void of wealth and army, abandoned by his friends, exiled 
with his mother in the forest, subsisting on roots and fruits, lean and 
thin. Thus he is not worthy of becoming the husband of yours. There 
are many learned, beautiful, approved of all, qualified with all royal 
marks, princes fit to become your husband. They all will come in this 
Svayamvara. 


6. There is one brother of this Sudars'ana, who is endowed with all 
kingly qualifications, beautiful, and qualified in various other ways. 
He is the king of the Kosala country. 


7. There is another point worth consideration; please hear it. The 
King Yudhajit is trying his best to kill Sudars'ana on a befitting 
opportunity. 


8. He already counselled with his ministers and killed in a desperate 
fight the king Virasena and installed his daughter’s son on the 



throne. 


9. Even he came up so far as the hermitage of Bharadvaja to kill 
Sudars'ana; afterwards he was prevented by the Munis from doing 
so then he returned home.” 


10-11. S’as’ikala replied “Mother! That prince, though staying in 
the forest, is approved of by me; under the advice S’aryati, the 
chaste Sukanya married Chyavana Muni and served her husband all 
along; so I will marry this king’s son and will always be engaged in 
serving him. The women are able to attain heaven and 
emancipation, if they serve their husbands; therefore if we be sincere 
in serving our husbands, we will no doubt be happy. 


12. I have seen in my dream that the Goddess Bhagavati has 
ordained him to be my husband; how can I now accept any other 
body as my husband than him? 


13. The Devi Bhuvanes’vari has pictured his frame firmly in my 
heart; I will never be able to leave my dearest beautiful husband and 
to contract marriage with any other person.” 


14. Vyasa said Thus the mother, the daughter of the King of 
Videha, found many signs and at last desisted. She then reported to 
the King all the words of S’as’ikala. 


15-16. When S’as’ikala, on the day before the marriage day, became 
very anxious and, sent in a great hurry, one trustworthy Brahmin, 
versed in the Vedas to the hermitage of Bharadvaja with this 



message “O Brahman, go in such a way to Sudars’ana, as my father 
be not able to know about it and tell Sudars'ana all my words. 


17-18. My father has called in for my marriage a Svayambara 
ceremony; many powerful kings will attend with their armies; O 
Deva! The Goddess Bhagavati has ordered me in dream and 
accordingly I, with full gladness of my heart, have become yours 
already in my heart. 


19. Rather I will take poison or I will jump in a blazing fire, than I can 
obey my father’s and mother’s words and marry another. 


20. By my mind, word, and deed, I have selected you my husband; 
and pleasure and happiness is sure to attend on us by the blessings 
of the Bhagavati. 


21. Please depend unto Her, at Whose command this whole 
universe, moving and unmoving is resting, unto that Great Destiny 
and come to this place without fail. 


22. What the Goddess, whose commands S’ankara all the other 
Devas obey, has ordered, can never turn out false. 


23. O Brahmin! You the foremost amongst the virtuous; do therefore 
call on that King’s son in privacy and speak out all there to him. What 
shall I say more to you. Do all that my object may be fullfilled.” 



24. Thus saying, she gave the Brahmin his Daksina and sent him to 
Sudars’ana. He went there and reported all the matter duly to him 
and quickly returned back. 


25. On coming to know all this, Sudars’ana determined to start; and 
the Maharsi Bharadvaja, with gladness, sent him. 


26. Vyasa said Seeing her son ready to start, the mother 
Manorama became very sorry and, trembling and shedding tears, 
thus spoke to her son. 


27-28. “Sudars’ana! Where are you going now? How do you dare to 
go there in the Svayamvara alone, where are present kings and all 
your terrible enemies. O Son! You are as yet a boy. The King 
Yudhajit will certainly go there with the object of killing you; there will 
then is no other body to help you. So you should never go to that 
place. 


29. You are my only son; I am very poor and helpless; I have no 
other to lean upon than you; therefore you ought not to throw me in 
despair at this moment. 


30. See Sudars’ana! The King Yudhajit who had slain my father, that 
uncontrollable king will come there; if you go there alone, he will 
certainly kill you.” 


31. Sudars'ana replied “Mother! What is inevitable will certainly come 
to pass; there is no need to discuss further on the subject. I will go at 



the command of the World Mother to that assembly hall 
Svayamvara. 


32. O Auspicious one! Do not give vent to sorrow; I do fear none by 
the grace of the Bhagavati.” 


33. Vyasa said Thus saying, Sudars’ana mounted on his chariot 
and was ready to start. Seeing this Manorama began to bless him 
and so cheer him. 


34-37. O Son! Let Ambika Devi protect your front; Padmalochana 
protect your back; Parvati, your two sides; S’iva Devi, all around you; 
Varahi, in dreadful paths; Durga, in royal forts, Kalika, in terrible 
fights; ParamesVari, in the platform hall; Matamgi, in the 
Svayamvara hall; Bhavani, the Avertress of world, amidst the kings; 
Girija, in mountain passes; Chamunda, in the sacrificial ground, and 
let the eternal Kamaga, protect you in the forests. 


38. O Descendant of Raghu family! Let the Vaisnavi force protect 
you in quarrels; let BhairavT protect you in battles and amongst your 
enemies. 


39. O Son! Let the Maha Maya Jagaddhatri BhuvanesVari protect 
you everywhere and at all times. 


40. Vyasa said Then Manorama, speaking thus to him, trembled 
with fear and again said “O Sudars’ana, I will also accompany 
you; there will not be otherwise. 



41. I will never be able to remain anywhere without you and even for 
the twinkling of an eye. O Son, carrry me thither where you are 
desiring to go.” 


42. Thus saying, his mother with her attendants was ready to start. 
The Brahmanas pronounced their blessings. All then went out. 


43. Sudars’an, the descendant of the Raghu family, mounted then 
alone on his chariot and reached Benares. There the King Subahu, 
hearing that he had come, welcomed him and worshipped him with 
various presents. 


44. He gave him, the house for his residence, and made 
arrangements for his food and drink and other necessary 
requirements and gave order to his servants to wait on the prince. 


45. Then, from various quarters, the kings assembled together; and 
Yudhajit, too, came there accompanied by his daughter’s son, 
S’atrujit. 


46-48. The King of Karusa, the King of Madra, the King of Sindhu, 
the King of Mahismati, the valiant warriors, the King of Panchala, the 
kings of the mountainous tract, the King of Karnat, the powerful King 
of Kamarupa, the King of Chola, and the very powerful King of 
Vidarbhas with 180 Aksauhini soldiers all arrived and assembled 
there. Benares was then crowded all over with soldiers and soldiers. 



49. Many other kings came there on their beautiful elephants to 
witness the Svayamvara ceremony. 


50. Then the princes began to talk amongst them “The King’s son 
Sudars’ana, too, had come there and is staying unconfused and 
calm. 


51. Is it that the high minded Sudars’ana, born of the Kakutstha 
family, had come there on a chariot, helpless, to marry? 


52. Can it be that the princess will overlook these Kings with soldiers 
and weapons, and select the long armed Sudars’ana?” 


53. Then the King Yudhajit addressed all the other kings “I will slay 
Sudars’ana for the sake of the daughter; there is no doubt in this.” 


54-55. Hearing Yudhajit's words, the king of Keral, the foremost of 
those who know morals, began to say “O king! In this Ichchha 
svayamvara, it is not proper to fight. Here there will be no marriage 
for the prowess; there is no arrangement fixed to steal away the 
bride elect by force; here the bride will select of her own free choice; 
what cause can then there crop up here for quarrels? 


56. Before, you had driven him out of his kingdom; and though you 
are the superior king, you have taken his kingdom by force and 
installed your daughter’s son on the throne. 



57. O King! This Sudars’an is born of the Kakutstha family and the 
son of the King of Kosala. Why would you kill this innocent boy? 


58. O Long lived! Better be sure that there is some God of this 
Universe; He is governing all; and if you commit anything wrongful 
know that you will get the fruit of that due to you; there is no doubt it 
this. 


59. O King! There is victory everywhere of the Truth and Dharma, 
always you find Adharma and Falsehood defeated. Therefore dost 
thou forsake your evil and mean intentions and pacify your vile mind. 


60. Your daughter's son is also present here; he is beautiful and 
prosperous and is reigning a kingdom. Why will not that bride elect 
him as bridegroom? 


61-62. Consider again that there are many other powerful princes 
and kings in this Svayamvara; the princess may select them also. 
Therefore let all the kings assembled here say that if the selection of 
the bridegroom be performed in that way, what cause of a quarrel 
can there crop up? Knowing all these, you ought not to quarrel here.” 


Thus ends the Nineteenth Chapter on the going to the Svayamvara 
assembly of Sudars’ana and the other kings in the Maha Puranam 
S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 20. On The Svayamvara Hall And The 
Kings’ Conversation There 


1. Vyasa said O Noble minded one! The king Yudhajit replied to 
the address of the king of Keral, thus 


2-3. O King! You are truthful and have restrained your passions. 
What you have told just now in this assembly of kings is all correct 
and approved by morality. O best of the kings! You are born of a high 
family; you better say how can this take place that when so many fit 
persons are present here to become the bridegroom, can an 
unworthy person take away the offer? 


4. As a jackal never becomes fit to enjoy what are the dues of a lion, 
so this Sudars’ana is also unfit to acquire this bride elect. 


5. The Brahmanas have the Vedas as their strength; the Ksattriya 
kings take bows and arrows to be their source of strength; this is 
ordained everywhere. Therefore O King! What wrong have I done in 
my statement. Kindly explain. 


6-7. The power of the kings is the befitting money given to the 
parents of a bride; according to this, the strongest man is to acquire 
the bride, a jewel. The Ksattriyas that are weak can never acquire 
that. Make this the rule in this marriage. This earth is fit to be 
enjoyed by the heroes only and not by the cowards and intriguing 
persons. Otherwise quarrels are sure to ensue amongst the kings. 



8. The dispute thus arose in that Svayamvara hall; and the king 
Subahu was called in. 


9. The kings that could see the reality of things then addressed the 
king Subahu. “O king! You are requested to establish a golden rule in 
this marriage ceremony. 


10. What is your object in calling this Svayamvara. Better give it out 
after a mature consideration. Please be explicit whom have you 
intended to give over your daughter in this marriage?” 


11-12. Subahu said “My daughter has mentally selected 
Sudars’ana; I prevented her repeatedly from doing this; but she did 
not accept my word. What shall I do now? The mind of my daughter 
now is not at her will. Sudars’ana, too, though uninvited, has come 
here singly and is residing calmly, without any signs of disturbance in 
his mind.” 


13-14. Vyasa said Then the chief kings all invited Sudars’ana 
there; Sudars’ana, too, came there quietly, and the princes, seeing 
his quiet nature, asked him, “O one, engaged in practising vows! 
Who has invited you here? Why have you come here singly, in this 
assembly of kings? 


15. You have no force, no ministers, no help, no wealth, and no 
army. O intelligent! Then explain why have you come here alone? 


16. In this assembly of kings you see that the powerful monarchs are 
ready to fight with each other for the sake of this princess. What do 



you intend to do under those circumstances? 


17. Your brother, too, is come here to have the princess; he has got 
his army and is also marked with his strength and valor. The 
powerful Yudhajit has come here also to help him. 


18. O observer of good vows! Seeing you without any army, we have 
narrated to you all the facts. Now think and do accordingly. If you 
please, remain here or go anywhere else.” 


19-20. Sudars’ana replied “True, I have no army, no help, no 
wealth, no forts, no friends or no kings to protect me. Hearing that 
Svayamvara will be held here, I have come here to witness it. But 
there is one particularity here; it is this The Devi Bhagavati has 
ordered me in my dream to come here. Under Her command I have 
come here; there is no doubt in this. 


21. I have got no other object in view; I have obeyed what the 
Bhagavati BhuvanesVari has ordered me to do. Today will happen, 
no doubt, what She has ordained. 


22-23. O kings! I am seeing everywhere the Supreme Goddess 
Bhagavati Bhavani. Therefore there is no enemy of mine in this 
world; but he who will turn out an enemy of mine, will be duly 
punished by the Maha Vidya Maha Maya. I do not know what is 
enmity? 


24. O kings! What is inevitable will surely come to pass. There will be 
nothing otherwise. I am always depending on Fate, Destiny. What is 



the use, then, in thinking what will be the result? 


25. Everywhere in the Devas, in the spirits, in men, in all the beings, 
the Devi’s power is existent; it cannot be otherwise. 


26. O kings! Whenever She wishes. She makes kings, masters of 
wealth or devoid of wealth. What is, then, the use of bothering my 
head in this? 


27. When even the Gods Brahma, Visnu, and Mahes’a without Her 
presence, become powerless enough to move their hands or feet, 
then why shall I be anxious for the result? 


28. O kings! Whether I am unable or able or an ordinary person, you 
have nothing to consider; I have come here in this assembly hall 
under the command of the Supreme Bhagavati. 


29-30. What She has willed. She will do that. I am not to care for 
that. O high minded ones! You need not be afraid at all in this. I have 
told you all truth. Victory or defeat, I feel no shame in either of them. 
For I am always under the control of Bhagavati; therefore if there be 
any shame here, it is all Hers.” 


31-33. Vyasa said Hearing thus his words, and seeing that his 
mind is firmly devoted to Bhagavati, the kings saw each other and 
said thus “O Sudars’ana! What you have said is quite true; it is 
never otherwise; still Yudhajit, the king of Ujjain is intent on killing 
you. O intelligent! O sinless! we have all come to know that there is 



no trace of evil in you. We were all overcome with pity for you; hence 
we have informed you; now think and do the needful?” 


34. Sudars’ana said, “You are all kind and large hearted; what you all 
have said is quite true. What shall I tell you, being a minor as yet! 


35. O kings! No one can cause the death of another. All this world, 
moving and unmoving, is under the control of Fate. 


36-38. No soul is independent; every one is under the effects of 
one’s own Karma. The Pundits that have realised the Truth, say that 
Karma is of three kinds. Accumulated, Present, and Prarabdha? This 
whole world is due to Kala (Time), Karma (action) and Svabhava 
(Nature); unless the proper time comes, even the Devas cannot kill 
men. The men are killed on account of some cause, immediate; but 
the Great Time is the real Destroyer. 


39. My father, though a destroyer of many others, was himself killed 
by a lion and my mother’s father was slain by Yudhajit in the battle. 


40. The Jivas, though caring hard to preserve their lives, are killed 
by Fate in spite of all their cares; and they live thousand years 
though there is none to protect them. 


41. O religious kings! I do not fear a bit from Yudhajit. I consider Fate 
as the Supreme and I therefore remain always undisturbed, calm 
and quiet. 



42. Daily and constantly I remember Bhagavati, Who is the Mother 
of all this Universe. She will look after my welfare. 


43. Behold! One will have certainly to bear the burden of one’s past 
Karma, whether it be good or it be bad; one’s own actions must bear 
their fruits. Then why shall he be sorry, who has come to know this? 


44. The less intelligent deluded persons, on getting pain from their 
own actions, turn out enemies on very trifling matters. 


45. I do not grieve nor do I fear on account of such enemies. I am 
staying here in this assembly of kings, cool-minded. 


46. Under the order of Chandika, I have come here to see this 
Svayamvara; whatever is inevitable will surely come to pass. 


47. The words of the Bhagavati are the best proof; I do not know any 
other. My mind is entirely given up to Her. There will be nothing 
otherwise than what She has ordained; whether it is good or whether 
it is bad. 


48. O kings! Let Yudhajit remain in peace. I have no enmity with him. 
He, who will deal inimically with me, will certainly reap his reward. 
There is not the least doubt in this.” 


49. Vyasa said O king! When Sudars’ana addressed them thus, 
all the kings became very glad and they all remained there for the 



Svayamvara. Sudars’ana, too, went to his camp and remained also 
calm and quiet. 


50. Next day the king Subahu invited all the kings present in his city 
to their respective seats in the Svayamvara hall. 


51. The princes and kings, decorated with best ornaments, came 
and took their seats on their respective platforms, covered with 
valuable carpets of best workmanship. 


52. The kings then looked like the celestial Devas, wearing divine 
ornaments and apparels, blazing with the lustrous light of gems, and 
remained to see the Svayamvara affair. 


53. Every one there had this foremost thought in his mind when will 
the princess, the bride elect, would come there; and who will be the 
man so fortunate as to be blessed with garlands offered by her (as a 
token of selection of the bridegroom)! 


54. If, accidentally, she offers the garland to Sudars’ana in this 
Svayamvara assembly, then will ensue, no doubt, desperate 
struggles amongst the kings. 


55. While they were thus meditating, sounds of drums were loudly 
sounded. 


56-58. Then Subahu, the king of Benares, went to her daughter and 
found that S’as’ikala had just taken her bath and put on her silken 



clothes, and adorned herself with various ornaments and sweet 
garlands. Thus, dressed in complete marriage dress, she began to 
shine like another Goddess Laksmi, the Goddess of wealth. The 
king, on seeing his daughter dressed in silken cloth, afflicted with 
anxious thoughts, just smiled and said, “Child! Rise and take the 
beautiful garlands by your hands and go to the the Svayamvara hall 
and just look at the assembly of kings. 


59. O lean bodied one! Whoever, well-qualified, beautiful, and of 
noble birth, amongst the kings is reigning in your mind, better select 
him. 


60. O graceful! The kings from various quarters are adorning their 
respective seats; better go and see and select whomever you like.” 


61. Vyasa said When Subahu had spoken thus, S’as’ikala, who 
generally talked little, replied with sweet sonorous words, 
impregnated with religious truth. 


62. “Father! I won’t go before the kings who are inspired by lust; 
women like me never go there; it is those that are dissolute that 
attend those places. 


63. Father! I have heard from the religious texts that women should 
cast their glances on their husbands only and not on any other. 


64. The woman that goes to many persons is mentally claimed by 
all; each of them contemplates strongly “Let this woman be mine.” 
Thus her chastity is destroyed. 



65-66. Desirous of selecting her husband, when the woman holding 
in her hands, the garland for her would-be-husband, goes to the 
Svayamvara hall, then she turns out like an ordinary unchaste 
woman. As a prostitute going to a public shop looks on many 
persons and judges of their merits and demerits according to her 
own power of judgment, the maid that goes in the Svayamvara hall 
does exactly the same. 


67. How can I behave myself in the hall of the assembly of kings like 
a prostitute, who does not attach her feelings firmly on a single 
individual but glances constantly at many lustful persons. 


68. Though this system of Svayamvara is approved by the elderly 
persons, I am not going to follow that now. I will take the vow of a 
chaste woman and act up to that doctrine as perfectly. 


69. I will never be able to act like an ordinary woman going in the 
Svayamvara hall, mentally determining many and finally selecting 
one. 


70. Father! From the very beginning I have given myself up to 
Sudars’ana in mind, word and deed. I have not the least inclination 
to leave him and select another in his stead. 


71. O King! If you want to have my welfare, then give your daughter 
on an auspicious day and in an auspicious lagna to Sudars’ana, 
according to the prescribed rites.” 



Thus ends the 20th Chapter on the Svayamvara hall and the kings’ 
conversation there in S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 21. On The King Of Benares Fulfilling 
The Advice Of His Daughter 


1. Vyasa said On hearing the sound words of his daughter 
S’as’ikala, pregnant with reason, Subahu the king of Benares, 
became very anxious and began to think what he would now, so 
short a space of time in this momentous occasion, thus 


2-3. “The powerful kings, all, have come here on intention that they 
would fight and therefore they are all attended with their armies and 
followers respectively; and they are now sitting on their respective 
daises in the Svayamvara hall. If I go now and tell them that my 
daughter S’as’ikala is not willing to come of her own accord in the 
hall, the evil minded kings will certainly kill me out of their wrath. 


4. I have not so much strength, whether in my army or in forts, as to 
be able to decline these kings and drive them away from my 
kingdom. 


5. Sudars’ana, too is, alone, helpless, wealthless, and a mere boy. 
What shall I do now? Alas! I am now plunged in deep sorrow.” 


6. Thinking thus, with head bowed down by humility, the king went to 
the kings, and said thus 


7. “O Kings! The girl, though requested repeatedly by me and her 
mother, is not willing to come to this hall. What can I do now? 



8-9. I am your servant and, bowing my head at the feet of you all, 
pray to you, to accept my worship and return to your own cities 
respectively. I am ready to give a sufficient quantity of gems and 
jewels, clothes, elephants, chariots. Kindly accept these and go back 
to your own homes. 


10. My daughter is as yet a girl; if I chastise her, she may commit 
suicide; and I will be exceedingly sorry; therefore I am very much 
distressed with this thought. 


11. You all are fortunate, energetic, and of a merciful disposition; 
what will it serve you to accept the daughter of mine, who is 
disobedient and unfortunate? 


12. I am your obedient servant; shew your mercy on me and it is 
your duty to consider my daughter as your own daughter.” 


13. Vyasa said Hearing Subahu's words, the kings did not utter a 
single word; but Yudhajit, with his eyes reddened out of wrath, began 
to address the king of Benares in an angry tone 


14. “O King! You are a veteran fool; what do you say now after 
committing a most blameable act? Had you any doubt as to your 
proceedings, why have you, out of sheer delusion, called this 
meeting hall of Svayamvara, without thinking the matter before-hand. 


15. You have invited the kings and princes in this marriage ceremony 
Svayamvara; and they all have assembled here; how can they now 
go back to their homes? 



16. Are you going now to insult these? and will you give your 
daughter in marriage to Sudars’ana? Nothing can be more ignoble 
than this? 


17. The welfare-seeking person ought to judge before-hand and then 
to act. But you have started your work without any previous 
judgment and decision. You will have to reap its fruit; there is no 
doubt this. 


18. Why are you now thinking of giving your daughter to this 
helpless, wealthless Sudars’ana in the presence of kings that are 
powerful and that command a great militia. 


19. O thou most sinful! Today I will certainly kill you; next I will kill 
Sudars’ana and then give your daughter to my daughter’s son; know 
that this is my firm resolve. 


20. Who is there, when I am standing, in this assembly that can 
aspire to carry away the bridegroom elect by force or theft? Nothing 
to speak of Sudars’ana who is powerless, wealthless and a mere 
boy! 


21. I spared his life before in the hermitage of Bharadvaja at the 
Muni’s request; but today I will not spare the boy under any 
circumstances whatsoever. 



22. Therefore, please go and consult with your wife and daughter 
and give your dear beautiful daughter to my daughter’s son. 


23. Be engaged in a marriage tie with me by giving your exquisitely 
beautiful daughter to my daughter’s son. You can very well judge 
that it is always proper and advisable that a great man shall come 
under the protection of another great man. 


24. What happiness can you expect from this Sudars’ana, who is 
helpless and banished from his kingdom, that you are going to give 
him your dear and auspicious daughter! 


25. Family, wealth, army, appearance, kingdoms, forts and true 
friends and other helping persons; these a man should consider 
when he is going to give away his daughter in marriage to anybody; 
else there is no surety of happiness. Think over the royal custom and 
the never failing Dharma and do what is proper. Never it is advisable 
to do any act, abandoning the path of Dharma and morals. 


26. You are my intimate friend; therefore I am telling you these good 
words. O king! Better bring your daughter, surrounded by her 
attendant maids, in this hall of Svayamvara. 


27. Let this daughter select any man other than Sudars’ana; I have 
got no cause of quarrel; and the marriage will then be celebrated 
according to your will. 


28-29. O best of kings! The other kings are all of high descent; and 
they have armies and are all in positions befitting your connection! If 



the daughter chooses any one annongst them, then no quarrels 
would arise. But if the daughter chooses Sudars’ana, then certainly I 
will carry her by force. Therefore, O king! act in such a way that no 
quarrels occur in future.” 


30-31. Vyasa said Thus addressed by Yudhajit, the king of 
Benares was very sorrowful, and, after a heavy sigh, went to his 
palace and told with a grieved heart to his wife, thus “O fair eyed 
one! Now I am completely under your control; you better explain to 
S’as’ikala that a dreadful quarrel is now to occur; what am I to do 
now?” 


32-33. Vyasa said Hearing her husband's words, the queen went 
to her daughter and spoke thus “O child! Quarrels have now 
ensued amongst the kings for your sake; your father has become 
very sorrowful; therefore, O fair one! Choose any other man your 
husband than Sudars’ana. 


34-35. O Child! If you do not judge and rashly choose Sudars’ana, 
then the powerful king Yudhajit, possessing a large army, will no 
doubt kill you, me and Sudars’ana. It might be, if quarrels ensue, you 
might be married to another husband; therefore better think now and 
act. 


36. O dear eyed! It is now your incumbent duty to choose another 
king for your husband, if you want your and my welfare and 
happiness. Leave Sudars’ana.” 


37. The mother thus advised her daughter; the king, too, afterwards 
explained and tried to convince her. The girl spoke fearlessly. 



38. “O king! What you have said is all true; but you know my firm 
resolve already. I won't ever select any other king than Sudars’ana. 


39-40. O king! If you are afraid and be in agony, then do this thing: 
better give me in marriage to Sudars’ana and then drive us away 
from your city. He will put me in his chariot and go away out of your 
city. After that what is inevitable will surely come to pass. There 
cannot be anything otherwise. 


41. O king! You need not fear anything about what is kept in the 
womb of future by Destiny. What is inevitable will happen; there is no 
doubt in this.” 


42. The king said “O child! The intelligent persons never show too 
much rashness and insolence. The learned people, versed in the 
Vedas, say it is never advisable to quarrel with many persons. 


43. How can I give my daughter in marriage to one and then banish 
them both? The kings have turned out enemies. There is no heinous 
crime, that they cannot commit now. 


44. O child! If it be your opinion, I can pledge something as a pawn 
for your marriage, as the king Janaka pledged in days of yore for her 
daughter Sita. 


45-47. I will also put forward a pawn very difficult to be carried out, 
as Janaka originally made an offer of the hands of Sita to 



whomsoever, who would break the S’iva’s strong bow. Thus the 
quarrels amongst the kings might be diminished; for he who will be 
able to fulfill the promise, will be able to accept you. Then, be he 
Sudars’ana or any other king, whoever will be strong to fulfill the 
promise will take you as his wife. 


48. Thus the quarrels will cease and I will also be able to perform 
your marriage ceremony in peace and happiness.” 


49. The daughter said “Father! On hearing from you, I am merged 
in an ocean of doubt, for it seems to me what you are saying is the 
act of a fool; already, I have chosen in my mind Sudars’ana for my 
husband; now it cannot be otherwise. 


50. O king! The mind is the source of virtue and vice. When I have 
mentally selected, how can I now forego him and choose another? 


51-52. O king! If you keep any pledge, then I will be subject to any 
and everybody; if one, two, or more fulfill the same pledge, I will be 
then subject to any or all of them. Father! in that case quarrels may 
arise. What shall I do then? I cannot give my vote on this doubtful 
point. 


53. O king! You need not fear anything. Better give me in marriage to 
Sudars’ana according to the prescribed rules; then, in that case, the 
Goddess Chandika will certainly protect us. 


54. O king! Taking Whose Name destroys a whole host of sins, take 
Her Name and think the Almighty and perform carefully our marriage 



ceremony. 


55. Better go to the king's assembly today, and, with folded hands, 
tell them come tomorrow to the hall of Svayamvara. 


56-57. Thus bidding goodbye to the kings, perform in the right spirit, 
according to the prescribed rites, our marriage ceremony. Next, after 
giving fit dowries and other articles after the marriage, better tell the 
prince Sudars’ana to depart. The son of Dhruvasandhi will take me 
away with him. 


58. If, at this, the kings get angry and be ready to quarrel with you, 
then in that case, the Goddess Bhagavati will no doubt help us. 


59. Sudars’ana then will fight against those kings; and if he loses his 
life perchance in the battle, then I will also follow him and die. 


60. O king! Let all good come unto you! Better give me in marriage to 
Sudars’ana and remain here with your army. I will go alone with him, 
the object of my love.” 


61. Vyasa said Hearing these words from her daughter, the king 
Subahu trusted her, and firmly resolved to act according to that, and 
to celebrate the marriage of S’as’ikala. 


Thus ends the 21st chapter on the king of Benares fulfilling the 
advice of his daughter in S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 22. On Sudars’ana’s Marriage 


1. Vyasa said O King! Then, on hearing his daughter’s words, that 
high souled king of Benares, Subahu, came to the spot where the 
kings were staying and said “O kings! Now you can go to your 
own camps; tomorrow I will perform my daughter’s marriage 
ceremony. 


2. Let you all be pleased with me and graciously accept the food and 
drink, given by me. Tomorrow let you all come here and perform my 
daughter’s marriage ceremony. 


3. O Kings! My daughter is not coming today to this hall of 
Svayamvara; what can I do now; I will console her and bring her 
here tomorrow. Therefore do you all go now to your own camps 
respectively. 


4. Intelligent persons should not quarrel with the members of their 
own family. But they should always shew kindness towards their own 
sons and daughters who are under their protection. However, I will 
make my daughter understand and bring her tomorrow morning. You 
may all go now to your places as you desire. 


5. Tomorrow morning we will settle about the pledge, whether by 
choice or by fulfilling a promise, that requires strength, and have the 
marriage celebrated; or better you all together would decide what 
mode of Svayamvara is to be adopted.” 



6. The kings heard Subahu and trusted him. Then seeing that the 
city is well guarded on all sides, they went to their own camps and 
performed their mid-day duties. 


7-8. The king Subahu on this side began to perform all the duties 
regarding the marriage of his daughter, after duly consulting with all 
the chief members of the family. At the appointed time of marriage 
he brought his daughter in a well concealed and guarded chamber, 
had the bathing ceremony of the bridegroom elect performed by the 
priests, versed in the Vedas, and had him well dressed and did other 
requisite things. Then he brought the bridegroom in the house, made 
him seat on a Vedi (platform) and duly worshipped him. 


9. Then the large-hearted king gave to the bridegroom seat, 
Achamaniya (water for rinsing the mouth and such articles of food as 
require rinsing one’s mouth after eating them), Arghya (articles for 
worshipping deservedly, padyam, e.g., water for washing the feet 
with an offer of green grass, rice, etc., made in worshipping a God or 
a Brahman), the two silken cloths and sheet, cows, and two ear-rings 
and then wanted to give Sudars’ana his daughter. 


10. The high minded Sudars’ana accepted all the offerings given by 
the king. Seeing this, Manorama was relieved of her anxiety. 
Manorama began to think that beautiful and well adorned daughter 
as if the daughter of Kuvera (the God of wealth); and thanked herself 
and thought as if all her duties were over. 


11. Then the royal ministers carried gladly and fearlessly the 
beautiful Sudars’ana, worshipped with ornaments and clothings, in a 
good nice carriage to the centre of the amusement court. 



12. On the other hand, the elderly female members, who knew all 
about the prescribed rules, performed the dressing of the princess in 
a befitting manner and placing her in a beautiful conveyance took 
her before the bridegroom elect, in the marriage hall, where there 
was the platform regularly built. 


13-14. The Sacred Fire was then lit, the royal priest began to 
perform the Homa ceremony duly; when the amusement ceremony 
of the bridegroom and bride united in love was duly performed, the 
priest called them there. After this the bridegroom and bride 
performed duly the Laja Homa ceremony and circumambulated the 
Sacred Fire. Thus all the ceremonies, befitting the gotra and family, 
were all fully performed according to the prescribed rules. 


15-17. Then the king Subahu, excited by feelings of love, in the 
marriage time, gave to the prince Sudars’ana the following presents: 
well adorned two hundred chariots, with horses and the arrow cases 
filled with arrows, one hundred and twenty five elephants, dressed 
with golden ornaments, looking like so many mountains, one 
hundred beautiful female elephants and one hundred maid servants, 
all dressed in golden ornaments. 


18-20. The king gave the bridegroom also one thousand servants 
well adorned, bearing the complete set of all sorts of weapons, many 
gems and jewels, clothings, nice variegated woolen clothes, beautiful 
capacious rooms to live in, and two thousand excellent horses born 
in the Sindhu country, three hundred good camels able to carry 
sufficient loads, and two hundred carriages, filled with grains, etc. 


21. Then the king bowed to the king’s daughter Manorama and with 
clasped hands, said “O royal daughter! I am now become your 



servant; now kindly say what is your desire?” 


22. Hearing these beautiful words of the king, Manorama said “O 
king! all good to you and let your family increase in sons and 
grandsons. You have increased my honour by giving in marriage 
your daughter (jewel) to my son. I have no other desire than to see 
your welfare constant and the increase in your family, posterity and 
prosperity. 


23. O king! Your are the chief amongst the kings. Your have made 
my son great and strong like the Sumeru mountain by giving him 
your daughter in marriage. You are high and my related. I am not the 
daughter of a panegyrist or a bard; how can I then praise you for this 
noble act of yours. 


24-25. O king! Your character is wonderful and pure. What more 
shall I say to you than this that you all, in the face of many other 
kings, have given your daughter to my son in marriage, who is 
banished from his kingdom, is deprived of his father and is living in 
the forest, penniless, armyless, subsisting himself on roots and fruits 
only. 


26. In these cases the kings as a rule make relations with those only, 
who are their equals in rank and position, of noble families of equal 
grade, having forces and wealth equal to each other. No other king 
would have offered his beautiful well-qualified daughter in marriage 
to my prince who is without any wealth. 


27. O king! On your this act, all the other kings, holding great 
influence and possessing armies, have turned out your enemies. I, 



being a woman am unable to describe the amount of patience in 
you.” 


28. The king Subahu of Benares, hearing the sweet words of 
Manorama was highly pleased and, with folded hands, began to say, 
“O Devi, you better take my this celebrated kingdom; I will become 
the commander of your forces and will try my best to guard this city. 


29. Or you can take half of my kingdom and remain here with your 
son. It is not my desire that you leave this Benares and go and live in 
the forest. 


30-31. The kings have become very offended; I will first try to 
appease them; if they be not satisfied, I will adopt the means of “gift” 
or sowing dissensions amongst them; and even, if, in that, I fail, I will 
ultimately take to war. O Devi! Victory or defeat is under the hands of 
the Destiny; still victory comes to those who are in the right path and 
defeat to those who are in the wrong path. How then can the victor 
arise to those sinful kings?” 


32. Hearing the king’s words, pregnant with meaning, Manorama felt 
herself highly respected; and, with a cheerful heart, said the 
following good words. 


33. “O king! let all good come on you! you better discard all fear and 
reign with your sons here; my son Sudars’ana, too, will become the 
king of Ayodhya by the Grace of S’ri Bhagavati Bhuvanes’vari, the 
Supreme Cause of the innumerable worlds, and will roam in this 
world; there is no doubt in this. 



34. May Bhagavati Bhavani bring all good unto you; now kindly 
permit us to depart to our homes, O king! I always contemplate the 
Highest Goddess Ambika; and I have no time to indulge in other 
thoughts.” 


35. Thus, on various subjects, Manorama and the king Subahu 
began to talk with each other, causing satisfaction to both like nectar, 
when the morning broke out. 


36. The kings, knowing early in the morning, that the princess had 
been given away in marriage, became very much enraged and went 
out of the city and began to discuss with one another. 


“We will kill today the king Subahu, the disgrace amongst the kings 
as well that boy Sudars’ana, totally unfit to marry the princess, and 
take away the kingdom and the princess S’as’ikala. How can we 
return to our homes, with this severe disgrace, stamped on our 
heads. 


37. Hear, O kings! the sound of the drums, mridangas, other 
instruments; the sounds of the conchshells have even been 
overpowered. Hark! The various musical sounds and the chanting of 
the Vedas. It is then certain that the King Subahu has finished the 
marriage ceremony of his daughter S’as’ikala with Sudars’ana. 


38. Oh! This king has deceived us with his words and performed the 
marriage ceremony, according to ordinary religious rules. 



39. Now O kings! decide unanimously what to do and come to a 
definite conclusion.” 

When the kings were thus discussing, the king of Benares, of 
indomitable prowess, the king Subahu, after finishing his daughter’s 
marriage, came there with his famous friends to invite them. 


40. Seeing the King of Benares present, all the other kings did not 
utter a single word, but they remained silent, beaming with anger. 


41. Subahu then approached to the kings, bowed down, and, with 
folded hands, said “Be kind enough to come to my house for 
dinner. 


42. O kings! My daughter S’as’ikala after all has selected 
Sudars’ana; I could not help in this. You are all kind and noble; 
therefore you all be peaceful and let the matter drop.” 


43. The kings hearing him were filled with rage and said, “We have 
all taken food; our desires have been fulfilled; you better now go 
back to your own home. 


44-45. Your behaviour with us is all right and proper; now do your 
other duties and let the kings go back to their homes.” Hearing these 
words of the kings, the king of Benares was very much terrified and 
returned home, thinking that the kings were all filled with rage and 
might do serious harm to him. Thus he began to pass away his time 
in dire anxiety. 



46. Then the king Subahu disappeared; the kings united made this 
resolve that they would block the passage of Sudars’ana, kill him, 
and take the girl away. 


47. Some of these kings rather said “What is the use in killing the 
king’s son. We will all go willingly to see the fun.” 


48. Thus the kings went and remained blocking the path of 
Sudars’ana; and the king Subahu, on returning home, began to 
make arrangements for the departure of the bridegroom and the 
bride. 


Thus ends the 22nd Chapter on Sudars’ana's marriage in S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 23. On The Killing Of The Enemy Of 
Sudars’ana In The Great War 


1. Vyasa said After paying due respects to his new son-in-law, the 
king Subahu cheerfully entertained him for six days with variety of 
good dishes. 


2. Thus finishing off the marriage ceremony, the king after consulting 
with his ministers, presented the bridegroom and the bride various 
jewels and ornaments and other things given naturally on marriage 
occasions. 


3. Then the king of Benares, of brilliant splendour, heard from his 
messengers that the kings had obstructed the way back of 
Sudars’ana and became very absent minded. 


4. Then Sudars’ana, of firm resolve, told his father-in-law “O king! 
better now give us order that we may depart. We will go without any 
fear. 


5. O king! First we will halt at the holy hermitage of Bharadvaja Muni; 
and next we will, after due considerations, settle where we would go. 


6. O pure one! You need not fear a bit from these kings; the Mother 
of the Universe, the Bhagavati Bhavani will surely protect us.” 



7. Vyasa said O king Janamejaya! Hearing thus his son-in-law’s 
orders, the king Subahu gave hinn a vast amount of wealth and bade 
good-bye to him. Sudars’ana, too, quickly departed. 


8. The king Subahu followed him with a long train of soldiers. Thus 
Sudars’ana went on, in his journey, fearless. 


9. The great hero Sudars’ana, the descendant of Raghu, with his 
new consort in the chariot and followed by many other chariots, saw 
the soldiers of the several kings. 


10. The king Subahu, seeing them, became anxious. But 
Sudars’ana, gladly took refuge, with his whole heart, of the all- 
auspicious Goddess S’ankari. 


11. Sudars’ana began to recite silently the excellent one word seed 
mantra of the King of Desires (Kamaraja) and, out of its power, he 
and his wife remained in the chariot without any fear and sorrow. 


12. Then all the kings came there with their soldiers to fight with 
Sudars’ana and to carry away by force the bride. Thus a loud uproar 
arose. 


13. The king of Benares seeing them wanted to kill them. But 
Sudars’ana, the descent of Raghu, desirous of victory, repeatedly 
asked him not do so. 



14. Loud arose, then, the uproar, caused by the sounds of 
conchshells, bherri, and war drums of the kings on one side and 
Subahu on the other, each of the two parties determining to extirpate 
the other. 


15. S’atrujit prepared himself for the war to destroy his enemy. 
Yudhajit came there for his help, well equipped with army, etc. 


16-17. Some warrior kings remained there as witnesses with their 
soldiers. Then Yudhajit went in front of Sudars’ana. His younger 
brother S’atrujit, too, attended Yudhajit to kill his brother in the battle 
field. Then the warriors, overpowered with anger, shot each other 
with arrows. 


18. A great encounter then ensued in the battle field with sharp 
arrows. The king of Benares hurriedly advanced there, with a great 
body of army, to relieve his son-in-law. 


19. Thus when the dreadful war began to grow more and more 
horrible, the Goddess Bhagavati suddenly appeared there, mounted 
on Her lion. 


20-21. The beauty of Her body was exceedingly lovely; She was 
adorned with various excellent ornaments and She held various 
weapons. She wore divine clothings and the beautiful Mandara 
garland suspended from Her neck up to Her knees. The kings were 
greatly astonished to see Her. They began to argue “Who in this 
Lady, mounted on a lion? Whence has She so suddenly come?” 



22-23. Beholding Her, Sudars’ana told the king of Benares “O king! 
Behold! The Divine Maha Devi has come here to favour us. She is 
very merciful. Now I am completely fearless.” 


24. Sudars’ana and Subahu were highly delighted to see the 
Beautiful Goddess and bowed down to Her feet with great devotion. 


25. Then the lion, the vehicle of the Goddess, roared, making 
tremendous noise. Hearing the roaring of the lion, all the elephants 
trembled. At that time, the winds began to blow violently and the four 
quarters assumed an awful appearance. 


26-27. Then Sudars’ana told his general to carry soon his forces 
where the kings were staying, blocking his way. “What could the 
vicious kings do now, though they had become very angry? The 
Goddess Bhagavati had come there to save us. 


28. Now you all go safely and calmly through the midst of the kings. 
See! At my remembering Her, She has come here mercifully to save 


us. 


29-30. The general, on hearing these words, became ready to march 
by that route. Then Yudhajit, very much infuriated with anger, said to 
all the kings “Why are you all so much fear stricken? Kill this 
Sudars’ana, stealing away this girl. 


31. This lad, weak and without any support, will carry away by force 
and fearlessly the girl, spiting all the kings; and won’t you be able to 
do anything? This is very strange! 



32. Are you afraid to see this one lady on a lion? O high minded 
kings! Never trifle away this boy; kill him with all attention. 


33. Killing him, we will then take away this girl. The jackal can never 
snatch away the lady under the grasp of a lion.” 


34. Thus saying, the king Yudhajit, filled with anger, came to the 
battle field with S’atrujit and all his forces. 


35-36. That wicked king, drew his bow string well nigh to his ear and 
shot arrows after arrows, sharpened under stone and by blacksmith 
at Sudars’ana, with the object of killing him. Sudars’ana cut off all 
those arrows quickly with his own quick going arrows. 


37. Thus when the fight grew intense, the Goddess Chandika 
became very mach enraged and shot arrows at Yudhajit. 


38. Assuming diverse forms, the Goddess Durga, holding various 
weapons the auspicious Mother of the Universe, began to fight 
terribly in the battle field. 


39. S’atrujit and the king Yudhajit were killed in that terrible battle. 
Both of them fell dead from their chariots; and a shout of victory 
arose from the side of Sudars’an. 



40. The uncle and cousin of the king Subahu were on the side of 
Yudhajit and were killed. The kings were very much astonished to 
see them thus lying dead. 


41. The king Subahu, seeing them dead in the battlefield became 
very glad and began to praise and sing hymns in honour of Durga 
Devi the Destroyer of all difficulties. 


42-43. I bow to the auspicious Goddess Jagaddhatri, again and 
again; I bow to the Bhagavati Durga the bestower of all desires; I 
always bow down to Her Who is auspicious, peace giving, and the 
Higher Vidya. O Mother! O Giver of salvation! O Auspicious One! 
You are pervading the whole Universe, O World Mother! and 
Upholder of the Universe! I bow down to Thee. 


44. O World-mother! O Devi! you are devoid of Prakritic qualities; 
you are full of qualities; beyond mind and speech; one cannot think 
out your prowess, etc., by one’s mind. Mother! you are the Highest 
Force; ever willing to destroy the miseries of your devoted persons. 
Your influence is manifest everywhere; what eulogy can I sing of 
Thee. 


45. O Devi! You are the Goddess of Vak (speech) of all beings; you 
are the all pervading intelligence, mind, effort, and movements; you 
are the controller of the minds of all; therefore how can I praise You? 
O Goddess; You are the Self of all; how can I sing eulogies to You, 
who are beyond speech and mind, and to the Universal Self. 


46. Brahma, Hah and Hara and other higher Devas have not been 
able to find the limits of your qualities, though they are incessantly 



chanting your praises; O Goddess! I am the small of the smallest, I 
am without qualification, and bound by Prakritic qualities; I am 
ignorant as regards Jiva and Brahma. O Mother! I will never be able 
to describe Your characteristics that are unfathomable. 


47. O Mother! why not good companionships effect the fulfilment of 
one’s desires. The purification of my heart has been effected 
incidentally. O Mother! my son-in-law is wholly devoted to you; 
accidentally there has arisen the connection between him and me 
and it is on account of his connection that I have been able to see 
You. 


48. O Mother! Today I have got without any restraint and control of 
passions, and samadhi, the rare vision of You, who is wanted to be 
seen even by Brahma, Hah and Hara, Indra and the other Devas 
and by the Munis, who have attained their realisation. Therefore who 
is there in this Triloki, that is so fortunate as I am. 


49. O Bhavani! Where am I, void of intelligence and where is the 
rare vision of You, Who is the only medicine of this disease of the 
ocean of world? Still, O Mother! Who is worshipped by the Devas, I 
have got Your vision. Now I have come to know that You always 
show mercy to Your Bhaktas, who are in their Bhavas (mental 
images of your Self). 


50. O Goddess! You have saved Sudars’an in this great war crisis 
and You have slain these two powerful enemies. How can I describe 
your prowess in this matter? This I have understood that Your Holy 
Character ever shows mercy on Your devotees. 



51. O Goddess! Again this is not a matter to be wondered at, if one 
considers; for You are protecting this whole universe, moving and 
unmoving; and accordingly You have now protected, out of Your 
mercy, your Bhakta Sudars’ana, the son of Dhruvasandhi, by killing 
his enemy. 


52. O Bhavani! It is not merely for the protection of your Bhaktas, 
engaged in Your service, that You shew this favour but also to extol 
the meritorious deeds of your Bhaktas that You do such things; 
otherwise how is it that this Bhakta saintlike Sudars’ana, by marrying 
my daughter, has got victory in this battle field? 


53. O Mother! You are fully capable to destroy the fear of birth and 
death. What wonder is there that you fulfill the desires of your 
Bhaktas? The Bhaktas extol You by characterising You as Saguna 
(full of qualities), Nirguna (devoid of any quality) and Apara, beyond 
all merits and demerits. 


54. O Goddess! O Bhuvanes’vari! I am fortunate that I have been 
able to see You, and thus all my duties have become crowned with 
success. O Mother! I have no practices in the shape of Your 
meditation, etc. nor do I know any seed mantras of Yours; today I 
have fully seen Your glory manifested. 


55. Vyasa said Thus extolled by the king Subahu, the Goddess 
Bhagavati, the Bestower of the Absolute Freedom, was pleased and 
said “O thou, practiser of good vows! Ask boon from Me.” 


Thus ends the twenty third chapter on the killing of the enemy of 
Sudars’ana in the great war, in S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 



verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 24. On The Installation Of Durga Dev! 
In The City Of Benares 


1. Vyasa said Hearing the Devi’s words, the king Subahu began 
to say with great devotion thus 


2-3. O Devi! If there be made a comparison between the kingdom of 
the Devas and the world on the one hand and the vision of Thine on 
the other hand, then it must be acknowledged that the kingdom of 
the Devas and the earth cannot stand in comparison before Thee. O 
Devi! There cannot be anything, in this Triloki, that is more exalted 
than Thy vision; therefore, O Mother! What other boon may I ask 
from Thee. I am very thankful and blessed; all my desires are 
fulfilled, when I have seen Thee. 


4-5. O Auspicious Mother! I ask from You this boon, my desire that 
my devotion may remain constant, fixed, and unflinching towards 
You. O Mother! You would remain always in this city of mine being 
celebrated under the name of S’ri Durga Devi, Your S’akti. This is my 
desire. 


6-9. O Devi! As you have cleared off all the obstacles of Sudars’ana 
and saved him from this danger, so remain here in this city of 
Benares and protect it, so long as this city stands on the face of the 
earth and make it firm and well established and renowned. O Durga, 

I pray that you may grant me these boons. O Devi! Grant me also 
various other desires of mine and destroy my enemies and extirpate 
all the irreligious and wicked people in this city. O Goddess of mercy! 
What more can I ask from you? 



10-11. Vyasa said Thus praising and praying, the king Subahu 
stood, with folded hands, before the Devi Durga, the remover of all 
calamities, when She addressed thus O king! I will remain no 
doubt, in this city of Benares, the place of salvation, as long as it 
stands on the face of the earth and protect all the people here. 


12. Then came there Sudars’ana, heartily gladdened; and he bowed 
to Her and began to praise Her with intense joy and devotion. 


13. O Mother of this Universe! Everyone in this world shows mercy 
to those that are devoted to him; but, O Mother! I see, in Your case. 
You take it as if Your bounden duty, to save those, that are void of 
any devotion towards You; for You have saved my life, though I am 
devoid of any devotion towards you. Therefore how can I describe 
the boundless ocean of mercy that reigns in You! 


14. O Goddess! I have heard that You have created all this Universe, 
with its elements, and You are preserving this Your own creations 
and again You will destroy it in due time. Therefore O Mother! What 
wonder is there that you have saved me! 


15. O Goddess! Now order me early what work of Yours shall I do 
now? Where shall I go? O Mother! Now I am unable to make out my 
duty; therefore kindly order me whether I will remain here or go 
anywhere else or remain anywhere, I like, at my leisure? 


16. Vyasa said On Sudars’ana thus petitioning before the Devi, 
She said with much kindness “O good soul! Go to Ayodhya and 
govern the country befitting your family. 



17. O king! Constantly remember Me and worship Me with great 
care. I will always look after the welfare of your kingdom. 


18. Especially in the eighth, fourteenth, and in the ninth day of the 
lunar half month, worship Me according to the prescribed rites and 
rules and offer me victims (sacrifices). 


19. O sinless one! Establish my image in this city and worship it 
three times, morning, mid-day and evening carefully and with 
devotion. 


20. It is noteworthy that My Great Puja in autumn for the nine nights 
(Navaratra) ought to be done with the greatest devotion. 


21-22. O king! In the month of Chaitra, Magh, As'vin, and Asadha, 
My grand festival should be done on the four Navaratris respectively; 
and especially on the fourteenth and on the eighth day of the black 
half, all persons ought to worship Me with their minds full of devotion 
towards Me.” 


23. Vyasa said After the Devi, the Goddess Durga, the Destroyer 
of all dangers, had finished Her sayings, Sudars’ana bowed down to 
Her and praised Her much. The Devi, giving him the above 
mentioned advices, disappeared. 


24. Seeing Her disappear, all the kings went to Sudars’ana and 
bowed to him, as the Devas go to their lord, the Indra. 



25. The king of Benares, Subahu, too, gladly bowed down and stood 
before him. Then all the kings began to address Sudars’an, the king 
of Ayodhya. 


26. “O king! You are our lord and governor; we are always your 
servants; protect us as the king of Ayodhya. 


27. O king! It is through your grace only that we have seen the 
Supreme Force, the Goddess of this Universe, the most Auspicious, 
the Eternal Bhavani, the Giver of the fourfold desires. 


28. O king! It is for your sake that the Eternal, Highest Prakriti Devi 
appeared; therefore you are very fortunate, auspicious, and most 
blessed in this world. Your have finished, as it were, all that you had 
to do. 


29. O king! We all are deluded by the Maya of that Mahamaya 
Chandika Devi; therefore none of us is able to know Her prowess. 


30. We are always engaged in thinking of wealth, sons and wives; 
there we are merged in this awful ocean of delusion, infested with 
crocodiles, etc., in the shape of lust, anger, greed, etc. 


31. O Blessed one! You are highly enlightened and you know 
everything; hence we ask you What is this Force; whence has She 
sprung? How is Her prowess? Kindly describe all these to us. 



32. O Descendant of Kakud! The saints are always nnerciful; kindly 
therefore relate to us the glory of the Excellent Goddess, that serves 
the purpose of a boat in crossing this ocean of world 
(transmigration). 


33. O king! I am intensely desirous to hear the prowess and nature 
of the Devi.” 


Note Kakud is an epithet of Puranjaya, son of S'asada, a king of 
the solar dynasty, and a descendant of Ikshvaku. The Mythology 
relates that when in their war with the demons, the gods were often 
worsted; they, headed by Indra went to the powerful king Puranjaya 
and requested him to be their friend in battle. The latter consented to 
do so, provided Indra carried him on his shoulders. Indra accordingly 
assumed the form of a bull and Puranjaya seated on its hump, 
completely vanquished the demons. Puranjaya is therefore 
Kakutstha ‘standing on a hump.’ 


34. Vyasa said When the kings had thus asked, the son of 
Dhruvasandhi, the king Sudaras'ana became very glad and, 
meditating on the Goddess, began to say thus 


35. “O kings! Indra and the other Devas, even Brahma, Visnu, and 
Mahes’a are unable to fathom the most exalted deeds of that 
Goddess; how, then, can I describe to you the great glory of the 
Mahamaya. 


36-38. O kings! The Bhagavati Bhavani is present, as it were, being 
divided into four parts. She who is the first and foremost, the 
excellent Sattvic Energy, worshipped by all, is always engaged in the 



preservation of this world. That part which is engaged in creating this 
world, is called the Rajasik Energy; and that part which is engaged in 
destroying the world is called the Tamasik Energy, and that part 
which is the cause of all, Brahma, etc., that Highest S’akti, the 
Bestower of all desires, is called the fourth S’akti, the Nirguna S’akti. 


39. O kings! Those who are not Yogis, will never be able to grasp the 
Nirguna S’akti. The Saguna Force can be easily served. All those 
middle Adhikaris (fit persons) and learned men always meditate and 
worship the Saguna Aspect of Her.” 


40-41. The kings said “O king! You got afraid and went in your 
very early age to the forest; how is it, then, that you have been able 
to know the excellent Goddess Mahamaya. How did you worship 
and pray to Her? That She, becoming so glad, has favoured you and 
so helped you?” 


42-43. Sudars’an said “O kings! Early in my childhood, I got the 
excellent root-mantra of desires, Kamavija; daily I meditated and 
silently uttered that mantram. After that I came to realise through the 
Risis That Eternal Auspicious Mother; and since that time, day and 
night, I always used to remember that Highest Deity; with the 
greatest devotion.” 


44. Vyasa said Hearing the words of Sudars’ana, the kings came 
to know that the Goddess which they saw was the Highest Force 
and filled with the greatest devotion towards Her, returned to their 
own homes. 



45. The king of Benares, Subahu, returned to his own city after 
bidding good-bye to Sudars’ana. The virtuous Sudars’ana, too, went 
towards his Kosala kingdom. 


46. The ministers were very glad to hear the death of S’atrujit and to 
see the victory of Sudars’ana. 


47-48. The inhabitants and armies of Sakata (Ayodhya) hearing that 
Sudars’ana is coming and knowing him to be the son of the king 
Dhruvasandhi, became highly delighted and approached to him with 
various offerings. 


49-50. Sudars’ana, with his new consort, arrived at Ayodhya with his 
heart highly gladdened, and shewed his due regard and respect 
towards all his subjects. Then the ministers came and sainted him; 
the women threw at him offerings of Laja (fried rice) and flowers; the 
bards began to praise loudly. Thus, honoured by various auspicious 
ceremonies, the king entered into his palace. 


Here ends the 24th chapter on the installation of Durga Devi in the 
city of Benares and the return to Ayodhya of Sudars’ana in the Maha 
Puranam S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 25. On The Installation Of The Dev! In 
Ayodhya And Benares 


1-4. Vyasa said The king Sudars’ana, surrounded by his friends, 
on conning to the palace at Ayodhya, bowed down to Lilavati, the 
mother of S’atrujit, and said “O mother! I swear by touching your 
feet, that I have not killed in battle your son S’atrujit nor your father 
Yudhajit; it is the Devi Durga that has killed them; I am not to be 
blamed a bit in this. O mother! You need not be sensitive in this; 
there is no remedy for what will inevitably come to pass; therefore 
you do not be sorry for the death of your son; you must know that the 
JTvas enjoy pleasure and pain as the results of their own Karmas. 


5. O mother! I am your servant; you are entitled to the same respect 
and worship as Manorama, my own mother; there is no difference 
whatsoever between her and you. 


6. O mother! One must bear the effects of one’s Karma, good or bad; 
therefore when pleasure or pain arises, you should not be glad or 
otherwise. 


7. When pain arises, more pain is said to be conceived and when 
pleasure arises, more pleasure is seen. But the learned say that man 
ought not to subject himself to excessive pleasure or pain. 


8. O mother! This whole world is under Fate, Destiny; nothing of it is 
yours. Therefore the intelligent persons ought not to grieve their 
hearts at any time with sorrow. 



9. As the wooden dolls dance in a stage as danced by the actor, so 
the individual souls here work as the results of their past Karmas; 
there is no doubt in this. 


10. O mother! I know that the effect of one’s own Karma, must have 
to be borne; it is, on that account, that I never felt sorrow in my exile 
in the forest. 


11. You are quite aware that my mother’s father was killed here, and 
my mother, becoming very much afraid and sorrowful, took me and 
escaped to the forest. 


12-13. The robbers robbed us of everything save our clothes on our 
bodies; I was then very young; my mother was without any shelter; 
she carried me with this minister Vidalla and my helpless nurse to 
the hermitage of Bharadvaja. 


14. There the kind hermit and his wife and the other wives of the 
hermits protected our lives in that forest, with the roots and fruits, 
that can be obtained there in that forest. Thus our time passed. 


15. Mother! I had felt no pain then; nor do I feel any pleasure at 
present, when wealth is flowing unto me. What more to say, I have 
no feeling of jealousy or envy whatsoever in my mind. 


16. O mother! Rather it is better, in my eyes, to subsist on roots and 
fruits than to enjoy kingdoms; for the kings go to hell; but the 
ascetics living on roots and fruits never meet with that result. 



17. The wise should undoubtedly practice Dharma and control their 
passions and thus save themselves from being led into hells. 


18-19. O mother! The human birth in this auspicious Bharatvarsa is 
seldom obtained. The enjoyments in eating and drinking are possible 
in every womb, but it is highly incumbent on us when we have got 
the privilege of this human birth, to earn Dharma, leading to the 
Heavens and salvation which can be very rarely attained in being 
born in other wombs.” 


20-21. Vyasa said When Sudars’ana had told thus, Lilavati 
became very abashed; she cast aside the sorrow for the death of her 
son, told him with tears in her eyes :-- “O my son Sudars’ana! I am 
very much guilty on account of my father Yudhajit killing your 
mother’s father and taking hold of the sovereignty of this kingdom. 


22. I could not then hinder my father and son; whatever unlawful evil 
and cruel deeds were then committed, all were done by my father 
Yudhajit. Therefore, my child, I am not to be made guilty in any way 
in these doings. 


23. Both my father and son were killed out of the wickedness of their 
own actions; how can you account for those wicked things? Child! I 
am not expressing sorrow at the death of my son; I have been 
pained by his doings. 


24-25. O noble souled one; You are my son; Manorama is my sister; 
Child! I am not at all offended with you nor am I the least sorry for 



your obtaining the kingdom; Child! you are very fortunate; therefore 
you have obtained, by the grace of Bhagavati, this kingdom without 
any enemies; now rule your subjects according to the prescribed 
rules of Dharma.” 


26-28. Vyasa said O king! The king Sudars’ana heard LTIavati and 
bowed down at her feet. Then he went to the beautiful palace where 
Manorama had previously gone and began to live there. Inviting the 
ministers and the astrologers, he asked them what was the 
auspicious day and the auspicious moment, that he can establish 
Durga Devi on a beautiful golden throne and he would worship Her. 


29. “O ministers! First I will install on the throne the Devi, the 
Awarder of the four main objects of human pursuits (viz. virtue, 
wealth, enjoyment and final beatitude) and then I will govern my 
kingdom like the kings S’ri Rama Chandra and others. 


30. All the people of this city of Ayodhya ought also to worship this 
Auspicious S’akti, the Highest Energy, the Giver of all desires and 
Siddhis, and that is respected and adored by all.” 


31. The ministers, on hearing his words, had a beautiful palace built 
by the engineers, artists and workmen and proclaimed in the city the 
king’s proclamation. 


32. Then the king Sudars’ana had an image of the Devi nicely built 
and got that installed with the help of the Pundits, versed in the 
Vedas, on an auspicious day and at an auspicious moment. 



33. The intelligent king performed the worship and Homa ceremony, 
according to the prescribed rules, and thus finally settled the 
ceremony of invocation of the Deity into the new image and 
established it as an idol in the temple. 


34. O Janamejaya! There the soundings of the various drums and 
other musical instruments, the chanting of the Veda mantrams by the 
Brahmanas, and sweet music were heard; and various sorts of 
festivities and rejoicings were celebrated. 


35. Vyasa said Thus completing the installation ceremony of the 
Durga Devi by the Brahmanas, versed in the Vedas, the king 
Sudars’ana duly worshipped the image in various ways, etc. 


36. Thus gaining his father’s kingdom and worshipping the Devi, he 
and the Devi became celebrated throughout the kingdom. 


37. The religious largehearted Sudars’ana, on gaining his kingdom, 
brought all the other feudatory princes under his control by the sheer 
force of his religious character. 


38. The subjects became happy and got honor in the reign of 
Sudars’ana, as they got before in the reigns of Dilip, Raghu and 
Ramachandra. 


39. The virtue of all the citizens under Varnas’rama shone complete 
with all its four padas; and there remained none in the world 
irreligious. 



40. In villages after villages, the chief townsmen began to build 
temples, worship the Goddess there with all their jolliness. Thus 
everywhere in the Kosala kingdom spread the Devi worship. 


41. On the other hand, the king Subahu established the Idol in 
Benares, had temples built and worshipped there the Devi. 


42. The inhabitants of Kas’T became then filled with devotion and 
intense love towards the Devi and duly worshipped Her, as they 
used to do to S’iva in the temple of VisVanatha. 


43. Thus the Durga Devi became very widely celebrated in this 
world. O king! Thus in different countries, the devotion began to 
increase towards the Goddess. 


44. The Devi Bhagavati Bhavani became in every way an object to 
be worshipped and adored by all people and everywhere in 
Bharatavarsa. 


45. The people began to recite slowly, meditate, and chant hymns as 
advocated by the Agamas constantly and became deeply attached 
to the S’akti worship and began to be looked upon with the highest 
honour by others. 


46. O king! From that time all the people used to worship, perform 
Homa ceremony and sacrifice duly in honour of the Devi in every 



Navaratri (for the first nine days of the bright half in the months of 
AsVin and Chaitra). 


Here ends the 25th Chapter on the installation of the Devi in 
Ayodhya and Benares in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 26. On The Narration Of What Are To 
Be Done In The Navaratri 


1. Janamejaya said “O Best of the Brahmins! What are men to do 
in the time of Navaratra? Especially in the Navaratra ceremony 
during the autumnal season how is the ceremony to be performed? 
Kindly relate all this with the prescribed rules and regulations. 


2. O intelligent one! What are the fruits therein of the Navaratra 
ceremony? and what are the rules to be observed? Kindly describe 
all these to me.” 


3-5. Vyasa said O king! Hear about the vow of auspicious 
Navaratra. This has to be performed with loving devotion in the 
vernal season; but its special season is autumn. The two seasons, 
autumn and spring, are famous as the teeth of Yama, the God of 
Death; and these are the two seasons, very hard for the persons to 
cross over. Therefore every goodfaring man should everywhere 
perform this vow very carefully. 


6-8. O king! The people are very much afflicted with various terrible 
diseases in these two seasons autumn and spring and many lose 
their lives during these portions of the year. Therefore the wise 
should unquestionably worship with great devotion the Chandika 
Devi in these auspicious months of Chaitra and AsVin. 


9-11. On the day previous to the commencement of the vow, when 
the Amavasya tithi commences, one should collect the materials that 
will be required in the worship and should eat only once in that tithi 



what is called Habisyanna (sacred food, boiled rice with ghee) and 
should on that day prepare an open shade in a temporary building, 
twenty four (24) feet in dimensions, on a level piece of ground, that is 
considered holy; it is to be equipped with a post and a flag. Next, this 
is to be heaped over with yellow earth and cow dung. Then a raised 
platform called the Vedi, six feet wide and one and a half foot high, 
level and hard, is to be erected, and provided with an excellent 
space thereon for the seat of the Devi. Provisions are to be made 
also for ornamented gate ways and an awning over the top. 


12-17. One should invite then, those Brahmins, that observe fully the 
customs and usages, who are self restrained and versed in the 
Vedas and Vedangas, especially those who are skilled in the 
ceremony of worshipping the Devi. 


Next, in the Pratipad tithi (the first day of the bright half), one should 
take one’s morning ablutions in a river, or in a lake, tank or a well or 
in one’s own residence, according to rules, and one should perform 
one’s every day practices of Sandhya Bandanam. Afterwards he 
should appoint the Brahmins and give them water for washing their 
feet and Arghya (offerings of grass, rice, etc.,) and Madhuparka (an 
oblation of honey and milk, etc.) and give then, as his means permit, 
clothings and ornaments to them. If he happens to be rich, he should 
never show his miserliness here in making these gifts; for if the 
Brahmins be satisfied, they will try their best to make the ceremony a 
complete success. O king! The Chandi paths (the reading of the 
book called Chandi) and Bhagavata paths (the reading of some 
portions of the book named Bhagavat) are done on this occasion, for 
the satisfaction of the Goddess; and either nine Brahmins or five or 
three or at least one Brahmin should be appointed for the purpose. 
Moreover one other Brahmin, of a restrained and calm nature, is to 
be appointed, who would observe the fasting on the day previous 
(parayana). All these being done, the able man is to perform the 



ceremony preparatory to the solemn Devi worship, (in which the 
priest utters the Vedic mantra Svasti-vachana, Svasti na Indro 
vriddhas’ravah, etc.). Om Hrim S’rim Dum Durgayai namah is the 
nine lettered Durga mantra. 


18-20. O king! When the ceremony has been thus commenced, one 
should place on the Vedi (a raised platform; an altar), the throne 
fitted with double silken clothes; and, on that throne, he should place 
the image of the Devi. The Devi, the Eternal World-Mother, is to be 
four-armed or eighteen armed, (4 or 18) fully provided with all the 
weapons, ornamented with garlands of pearls and jewels, decorated 
with various ornaments of gems and precious stones, wearing 
excellent heavenly clothings, all the parts of the image being 
artistically finished and endowed with all the auspicious signs, 
mounted on a lion, and holding conch shell, wheel, club, and lotus in 
Her hands. 


Note The Devi, here, is represented with four (4) or eighteen (18) 
hands. 


21-22. In the absence of the image, one should place an earthen 
water-pot, on that throne, thoroughly purified by the Vedic Mantras, 
filled with gold and jewels, and filled fully with the water, brought from 
a sacred river or a sacred place of pilgrimage and with five young 
shoots of plants, the extremities of branches bearing new leaves 
immersed in water. Beside the water-pot on the throne, there should 
be a symbol (Diagram or Yantra) with the nine lettered Mantram (Om 
Hrim S’rim Chandikayai namah) in it for the purpose of worship. 


23. One should place on one’s side all the materials of worship in 
their due places, and then have the music and other sounding drums 



played, for the good fortune and prosperity of the fannily. 


Note Look for the mantras in the book Mantramaho Dadhi. 


24. O king! If the first day be the Nanda tithi (i.e., the first day of the 
bright half with the asterism Hasta in the ascendant), then that is the 
best time for worshipping duly the Holy Goddess. There is no doubt 
that special fortunate results would arise on this. 


25. On the previous night, one should observe fasting, or on the 
previous day one should take only one meal of Habisyanna (boiled 
rice and ghee) and on the next day one should make a Sankalpa (an 
avowal of the purpose to perform a rite) and then begin worship. 


26. One should pray before the Goddess thus, “O Mother, Mother of 
the World! I will perform this excellent Navaratra vow; be pleased to 
help me in every respect.” 


27. One is to observe, as far as possible, all the rules enjoined in this 
vow and then utter the mantras and do the worship according to the 
prescribe rules. 


28-31. First of all, one should worship duly the Goddess Jagaddhatri, 
presenting Her Chandan (sandal paste), Aguru (a fragrant wood, the 
aloe wood). Camphor, the flowers Mandara (one of the five trees of 
the celestial regions), Karaja a kind of fragrant flower)! As’oka, 
Champaka, Karavir, Malati, and Brahmi and various lovely sweet 
scented flowers and good Bel leaves, Dhupa (incense, a fragrant 
gum burnt before idols) and lamps. Next one should present the 



fruits cocoanut, Matulinga, the pomegranate, bananas, oranges, the 
jack fruits, Bel and various other delicious fruit and then, offering Her 
arghya, present boiled rice and other food with a heart, full of 
devotion. 


32. Those who eat meat, they can sacrifice animals in this worship of 
the Devi; and, for this purpose, goat and wild boars are the best. 


33-34. O sinless one! The goats, etc., offered as a sacrifice before 
the Devi attain to unending heavens. Therefore persons offering the 
sacrifices of goats do not incur any sin. O king! The goats, etc., and 
other beast offered as a sacrifice before the Devas undoubtedly go 
to the heavenly regions; therefore, in all the S’astras, it has been 
decided that this killing of animals in a sacrifice is considered as non¬ 
killing. 


35. Now, for doing the Homa ceremony one should prepare, 
according to one’s requirements, a triangular pit from one to ten 
hands in dimension and a triangular level piece of ground covered 
with sand. 


36. Daily, thrice, one should worship the Devi with various lovely 
articles and finally make a great festivity with dancing, singing and 
music. 


37. Everyday he should sleep on the ground and worship the virgins 
(young girl from the age of two to the age of ten) with nectar like 
sweetmeats and beautiful clothings aud ornaments. 



38. Everyday one virgin or increased by one, two, or three every day 
or nine virgins in all the days respectively are to be worshipped. 


39. O king! One should perform worshipping this Kumari (virgin) Puja 
for the satisfaction of the Devi, as his means allow; never one is to 
shew miserliness in this. 


40. O king! Hear the rules of the virgin worship that I am going to tell 
you. The virgin, aged one year, is not to be worshipped; for they are 
quite ignorant as to smell and tasting various delicious things. 


41-43. The virgin aged two years is named the Kumari; aged three 
years is named the Trimurti four years, is called the Kalyani; five 
years, Rohini; six years, Kalika; seventh year, Chandika; eighth year, 
S’ambhavT; ninth year, Durga; and a virgin, aged ten years, is called 
Subhadra. Virgins aged more than ten years are not allowed in all 
ceremonies. 


44. One should worship these virgins, taking their names and 
observing all the rules. I am now mentioning the different results that 
arise from the worship of these nine classes of virgins. 


45. The worship of Kumari leads to the extinction of miseries and 
poverty, to the extirpation of one’s enemies and the increment of 
riches, longevity and power. 


46. The Trimurti Puja yields longevity, and the acquisition of the 
three things, Dharma, wealth, and desires, the coming in of riches, 
sons and grandsons. 



47. Those who want learning, victory, kingdonn and happiness, they 
should worship the Kalyani, the fructitier of all desires. 


48-49. Men should worship Rohini duly for the cure of diseases. For 
the destruction of enemies, the worship of the Kalika with devotion is 
the best. For prosperity and riches, Chandika is to be worshipped 
with devotion. O king! For the enchanting and overpowering of one’s 
enemies, for the removal of miseries and poverty, and for victory in 
battles, S’ambhavi worship is the best. 


50-51. For the destruction of awfully terrible enemies and for 
happiness in the next world, the worship of Durga is the safest and 
best. People worship Subhadra when they want their desires to be 
fulfilled. 


52. People should, with great devotion, worship the Kumaris (virgins) 
with the mantrams “S’rirastu” or other mantrams, beginning with 
“S’ri” or with the seed mantrams. 


53. The Goddess who can create without any difficulty all the sacred 
tattvas of the Kumar Kartikeya and who effects, as if in sport, the 
creation of all the Devas Brahma and others; I am worshiping the 
same Kumari Devi. 


54. She who is appearing under the three forms as differentiated by 
the three gunas Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, and who is appearing in 
multiple forms, owing to the differentiations of the three gunas again 



into various minor differences, I am worshipping Her the Trimurti 
Devi. 


55. She who being worshipped always fares us with auspicious 
things, I am worshipping Her, with devotion, the Kumari Kalyani, the 
awarder of all desires. 


56. I am worshipping the Rohini Devi with a heart, full of devotion 
who is germinating all the karmas in seed forms, that have 
accumulated owing to past deeds. 


57. She who, at the end of a Kalpa gathers unto Her in the form of 
Kali all this Universe, moving and unmoving, I worship that Kalika 
Devi with devotion. 


58. She, who is furious and wrathful and hence is called Chandika 
and who killed the two Demons Chanda and Munda I bow down to 
Her humbly with devotion, to that Chandika Devi, who destroys the 
terrible sins. 


59. I worship that S’ambhavT Devi, the giver of all pleasures and 
happiness, whose form is the Veda Brahma, and whose origin is 
without any cause, and whe is so recited in the Vedas. 


60. She who saves from danger her devotees and who always 
delivers from various difficulties and troubles, whom all the Devas 
are incapable to know, I worship with devotion that Durga Devi the 
destroyer of all calamities. 



61. I, with my mind devoted, offer my salutations to that Subhadra 
Devi, Who procures all auspiciousness to Her devotees and 
removes all inauspicious incidents. 


62. Thus, in the mantrams, above described, people should always 
worship the virgin girls, giving them clothings, ornaments, garlands, 
scents, and various other articles. 


Here ends the 26th Chapter on the narration of what are to be done 
in the Navaratri in the Maha Puranam in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam 
of 18000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 27 . On The Virgins Fit To Be 
Worshipped And The Glory Of The Dev! 


1. Vyasa said O king! Those Kumaris, who are defective in limbs, 
who are lepers, who are filled with sores and ulcers over their 
bodies, whose bodies emit offensive smell or whose bodies are 
polluted, or those who are of a bad family are never to be accepted 
for worship in the Navaratra ceremony festival. 


2-3. Those who are born blind, who are squint-eyed, who are blind of 
one eye, of disgraceful appearance, whose bodies are overgrown 
with hairs, or who are diseased or who are in their menstruation or in 
any other signs, indicating thus their passionate youthful tendencies, 
or those who are very lean and thin, or born of widows, or of women 
unmarried are always to be avoided in this Puja. 


4. O king! It is only the healthy, graceful, beautiful, without any 
ulcers, and who are not bastards, those virgins are to be selected for 
the Kumari Puja. 


5. In all the cases, the Kumaris, born of the Brahmin families, can be 
taken; when victory is desired, the Kumaris of the Kshattriya families 
are preferred; when profit is wanted, the Vais’ya Kumaris and, when 
general welfare is wanted, the S’udra Kumaris are to be taken. 


6-7. O king! In the Navaratri Puja, the Brahmins should select for 
worship the Brahmin Kumaris; Kshattriyas, Brahmin or Kshattriya; 
the Vais’ya worshippers can select for worship Brahmin, Kshattriya, 
or Vais’ya Kumaris. And the S’udra worshippers can select, for 



worship, any of the four classes. But artists and artisans should 
select for worship the Kumaris from their own families and tribes 
respectively. 


8. If persons become unable to worship on all the days, then it is 
advised that they should perform the special worship on the eighth 
day (Astami tithi). 


9-10. In ancient times, on the eighth day, Bhadra Kali Goddess, the 
destroyer of the sacrifice, started by Daksa, appeared on that day in 
hideous forms, surrounded by hundreds and lakhs of Yoginis (one of 
a class of sixty goddesses or female attendants on Kali). Therefore 
one should worship in particular on the eighth day with scents, 
garlands, and pastes and various offerings. 


11. On this day, Payasa (a food prepared of rice, milk and sugar), 
and fresh fish are to be specially offered to the Deity. The Homa 
ceremonies, feasting of the Brahmans, and the worship of the 
Mother Goddess are done with various offerings, the fruits and 
flowers, and in good quantities. 


12. O king! Those who are unable to observe the fasting in this 
Navaratra Puja, will reap the same fruits, if they observe fasting for 
the three days only the Saptami, the Astami, and the Navami tithis. 


13. On the seventh, eighth, and ninth days, in these three tithis 
(lunar days) if one worships with devotion, one will acquire all the 
merits. 



14. When the Devi’s worship, Homa, Kumari worship and the 
feasting of the Brahmanas, all these are done, know that the 
Navaratri Puja is completed. 


15. O Janamejaya! No worship or vow or charitable gifts extant in 
this world, can be compared, as regards their meritorious effects, 
with this Navaratra Puja. 


16. On observing this Navaratram Vrata, one gets riches, crops, 
sons and grandsons, prosperity and happiness, longevity, health and 
heaven and even the final beatitude. 


17. Those who are desirous of learning, riches, or sons will get them 
all if they perform this most auspicious Navaratra ceremony, able to 
confer fortunes on the devotees. 


18. On the performance of this sacrifice, those who want learning get 
all the learning; and he, who is deprived of his kingdom will get back 
all his kingdoms. 


19. Those who did not, in their previous births, perform this 
meritorious vow, they become diseased, poor and devoid of sons in 
their present births. 


20. Those women that are barren, or widows or devoid of sons, infer 
that they never, in their previous births, performed this sacrifice. 



21. Those who have not performed the Navaratra ceremony, how 
can they acquire riches in this world and acquire happiness and 
peace in the next? 


22. He who has worshipped the Goddess Bhagavati Bhavani Devi 
with young leaves of the Bel tree, besmeared with red sandal paste, 
it is he that will undoubtedly become the king in this world. 


23. That man who has failed to worship the Goddess of the whole 
universe. Who fructifies all the pursuits of human life. Who destroys 
all the troubles, pains and miseries. Who is all suspicious Bhagavati 
Bhavani, that fellow is sure to pass his days in this world, wretched, 
impoverished, and surrounded by his enemies on all sides. 


24. When Hah, Hara, Brahma, Indra, Fire, Varuna, Kuvera, and the 
Sun when all these possessing all the wealth and powers and filled 
with the highest felicities, when they meditate constantly the 
Goddess of the universe. Who is All Existence Intelligence, and 
Bliss, then what to speak of the human beings! How is it that persons 
do not worship that Chandika Devi, the One that leads all human 
pursuits to success! 


25-26. Why should not the people worship the Goddess Bhavani, the 
bestower of all happiness, whose other names are Svaha and 
Svadha, the mantrams under whose intrinsic energies the Devas 
and the Pitris always get satisfied, and which are recited by all the 
Munis when they chant in every sacrifice the Vedic mantrams? 

Under Whose Will power Brahma the Creator, creates all this 
Universe? Under Whose energy, the Visnu Janaradan, the Deva of 
the Devas, incarnates in this earth in various forms and preserves 



this world, and under Whose power, S’ankara destroys this whole 
Universe? 


27. No body, in this whole universe, can have his existence without 
having recourse to that Prakriti Devi, the S’akti incarnate; be he a 
Devi, a human being or a bird, or a serpent, Gandharva, Rakhsasa, 
Pis’acha, a mountain or a tree, he cannot move even of his own 
accord, without the help of this Force. 


28. Therefore, why should not anybody worship that Chandika Devi, 
the Awarder of all desires and wealth? And how is it, that a man 
desiring one of the 4 objects of human pursuits, Dharma, wealth, 
desires, and the final beatitude, observes not the vow regarding that 
Deity. 


29. So much so, that even a man who has committed a heinous 
offence, five such are enumerated, viz. (1) killing a Brahman, (2) 
drinking liquor, (3) stealing gold, (4) adultery with the wife of a 
spiritual guide (5) associating with any such person, if he performs 
the Navaratra vow, he will be absolved entirely from all such sins; 
there is no doubt in this. 


30. O king! Once on a time there lived in the country of Kosala, a 
trader, poor and miserable, having under him many relations and 
dependants in his family, whose provisions he had to provide. 


31. He had many sons and daughters; when they were very hungry 
and distressed, then they used to get a little food and that in the 
evening, only once in twenty-four hours. 



32. That trader, too, worked under another, the whole day; and when 
it was evening, he used also to take his meals. Thus, being very 
much anxious and distressed, he maintained somehow or other his 
family members (that are to be maintained). 


33-34. This trader was of a quiet temper, of a good conduct, truthful, 
always ready to act religiously, devoid of anger, steady and 
contented, void of vanity and jealousy; daily he used to worship the 
Devas, Pitris, and the guests and used to take his meals after all his 
family members had taken their meals. 


35-36. Thus many days passed away when that good trader, named 
Sus’ila, being very much perplexed with poverty and hunger, asked a 
quiet tempered Brahmin “O Bhudeva! (deva incarnate on the earth) 
kindly tell me positively how this state of poverty can be got rid off! 


37. O holy minded! Kindly advise me such as preserves my honour; I 
do not want wealth, nor do I like to be a rich man; O Brahmin! I want 
just enough to meet with the expenses, incurred in maintaining my 
family; please advise so that I may be able to earn this much only. 


38. I have many sons; I have not got any food, sufficient enough to 
give them even a handful of rice. 


39. Alas! My youngest son was crying today for food; I have driven 
him out of the house by chastising him. O Brahmin! What am I do? I 
have got no wealth; my heart is burning with grief and sorrow; my 
baby has gone out of the house, weeping and hungry. 



40. My daughter has come to a marriageable age; I have no money. 
Her age has exceeded ten years; the marriageable age limit has 
been exceeded. Alas! What am I to do? 


41-42. O Brahmin! I am expressing my sorrow for all that. You are 
merciful, and all-knowing; tell me any means, be it asceticism, gifts, 
vow, or the reciting of any mantrams by which I can maintain my 
family; I want wealth just sufficient for that purpose and nothing 
more. 


43. O high minded one! Kindly devise and tell me some means by 
which my family members become happy in this world.” 


44-46. Vyasa said The Brahmin that used to practice vows when 
thus asked by the trader told him gladly “O trader! Do now the 
Navaratri vow, the most auspicious, and worship the Bhagavati, 
perform Homa, and feast the Brahmins. Have the Vedas and 
Puranas recited and recite then slowly the S’akti mantram and try, as 
much as you can, to do other concomitant ceremonies; and your 
desires will thus be undoubtedly fulfilled. 


47. There is no other vow superior to this in this world; this vow is 
very holy and will bring unto you happiness. 


48. This vow leads to wisdom and liberation; destroys enemies and 
increases posterity and prosperity. 



49. In former days, S’ri Rama Chandra suffered very much owing to 
his being deprived of his kingdom; and, then on account of his wife 
being stolen away. Subsequently he performed this Navaratra vow in 
Kiskindhya, his heart being heavily laden with grief. 


50. Though troubled very much, on account of the bereavement of 
Sita, still Rama Chandra observed the Vow of Navaratra and 
worshipped the Goddess according to the prescribed rules and rites. 


51-52. As a fruit of this worship he was able to bridge the great 
ocean and kill the giant Kumbha Kama, Meghanada, the Ravana’s 
son, and Ravana, the king of Lanka; and subsequently he was able 
to recover his Sita. He installed Vibhisana on the throne of Lanka 
(Ceylon) and at last returned to Ayodhya and reigned there without 
any enemies. 


53. O best of the Vais’yas! Rama Chandra, of incomparable 
prowess, was able to obtain happiness in this world on account of 
the influence of this Navaratra ceremony. 


54-55. Vyasa said O king! That Vais’ya, hearing thus the 
Brahmin’s words, made him his Guru, was initiated by him in the 
seed mantra of Maya and ceaselessly, without any laziness, recited 
slowly the mantram for nine nights and worshipped the Devi, with 
great caution and with various offerings. Thus for nine consecutive 
years he devoted himself to the Japam (reciting slowly) of the seed 
mantra of Maya till, at last, when the ninth year was completed, the 
Great Goddess appeared distinctly before his eyes on the night of 
the great Astami tithi (the eighth day of the bright half) and gave him 
various boons and delivered the Vais’ya from poverty and bestowed 
on him wealth and his other desired things. 



Here ends the 27th Chapter on the virgins fit to be worshipped and 
the Glory of the Devi in the Maha Puranam S’rimad Devi 
Bhagavatam by Maharsi Veda Vyasa in the Third Adhyaya. 



Chapter 28. On The Incidents Connected With 
Navaratri 


1. Janamejaya said O Muni! How did Ramchandra celebrate the 
Devi’s Puja, that leads to happiness? Who was He! And how was 
stolen away His Sita? How was He deprived of His kingdom? Please 
satisfy me by narrating all these incidents to me. 


2. Vyasa said O king! There lived, in days of yore, in the city of 
Ayodhya, a prosperous king of the solar dynasty named Das’aratha. 
He always worshipped the Devas and Brahmanas. 


3-5. He had four celebrated sons Rama, Laksmana, Bharata and 
Satrughna. These four sons were equally learned and beautiful and 
they always did actions agreeable to the king. Of these, 
Ramachandra was the son of the Queen Kaus’alya, Bharata was the 
son of Kaikeyi, and the good looking Laksmana and Satrughna were 
the twin sons of Sumitra. While young, they learned the art of 
archery and began to play with bows and arrows in their hands. 


6-7. Thus educated and purified, the four sons began to give delight 
more and more to the king; one day the Maharsi Vis’vamitra came to 
Ayodhya and aked from the king Das’aratha the help of his son 
Ramachandra for the protection of his sacrificial ceremonies. The 
king could not cancel the Vis’vamitra's request and sent with him 
Rama, accompanied by Laksmana. 


8-11. The lovely Rama and Laksmana accompanied the Muni on his 
way back. There lived a terrible looking Rakhsasi, named Tadaka, in 



a forest on their way, who used to give great troubles to the ascetics; 
and Rama killed her with only one arrow. Next he killed Subahu and 
shot arrows at another night-wanderer Maricha and made him 
senseless, almost dead and threw him at a great distance and thus 
saved VisVamitra from all the obstacles troubling him in his 
sacrificial ceremonies. Thus fulfilling the great work, protecting the 
sacrificial ceremonies, Rama, Laksmana and the Muni Cowsick, the 
three, started for the kingdom of Mithila. On his way, Rama Chandra 
rescued Ahalya from the curse that she was suffering from. 


12-13. At last the two brothers, accompanied by the Muni, reached 
the city Videhanagar. Just at this time the king Janaka of Ayodhya 
made a vow to give in marriage Sita to anybody who will be able to 
break the bow of S’iva; Rama broke that bow into two and married 
Sita, born of Laksmi’s parts. The king Janaka gave in, marriage, to 
Laksmana his own-daughter Urmila. 


14. The good and auspicious Bharata and Satrughna married 
respectively Mandavi and S’rutakirti, the two daughters of 
Kus’adhvaja. 


15. O king! Thus, in the great city of Mithila, the four brothers 
performed their marriage ceremonies, according to the prescribed 
rules and rites. 


16. The king Das’aratha, then seeing Rama well qualified to take 
charge of the kingdom, proposed to install him on the throne of 
Ayodhya. 



17. The queen Kaikeyi, seeing that various articles were being 
collected for the installation of Rama, asked for the two boons, 
promised before, from her husband Das’aratha, who was completely 
under her control. 


18. The first request was her own son, Bharata’s becoming the king 
of Ayodhya; and the second request was the banishing of Rama to 
the forest for fourteen years. 


19. Thus Ramachandra went accompanied by Sita and Laksmana to 
the Dandaka forest, frequented by the Raksasas. 


20. The high souled king Das’aratha felt very much due to 
bereavement of his son, remembered the curse given to him by 
Andhaka Muni and left his mortal coil. 


21. Bharata, seeing that his father died solely on, account of his 
mother, refrained from becoming the king of Ayodhya, the 
prosperous city and wanted the welfare of his brother Rama. 


22. Ramachandra went to the forest Pahchavati. One day the 
youngest sister of Ravana, named Surpanakha became very 
passionate and came to Rama; whereon Ramachandra disfigured 
her by cutting off her nose and ears. 


23. Seeing her nose thus cut away, the Raksasas Khara, Dusana, 
and others fought very hard against the powerful Ramachandra. 



24. The truly powerful Rama killed Khara, Dusana and all other 
powerful Raksasas, for the welfare of the Munis. 


25. Then Surpanakha went to Lanka and informed Ravana of her 
nose having been cut and of the death of Khara, Dusana and others. 


26. The wicked and malignant Ravana, hearing of their death, 
became filled with anger and, mounting on a chariot, quickly went to 
the forest of Maricha. 


27. Ravana expressed his desire to take away Sita; so ordered that 
magician Maricha to assume the form of a golden deer and go to 
Rama and entice him away. 


28. The magician Maricha assumed the form of a golden deer and 
reached the sight of Janaki. Then that variously spotted deer began 
to move about near the Sita Devi. 


29. Looking at the beautiful golden splendour of the body of that 
golden deer, Sita Devi, prompted as it were by the great Fate, spoke 
to Ramachandra like other independent women “O Lord! Bring me 
the skin of the deer.” 


30. Rama too, not judging at all, as if it was the work of Destiny, 
asked Laksamana to remain there and protect Sita, took hold of his 
bows and arrows and went after the deer. 



31. Infinitely skilled in magic, the deer seeing Hah in the shape of 
Rama sometimes came and sometimes came not within his sight 
and travelled from one forest to another. 


32. When Rama saw that He had come very far away from His 
place, He became angry and drew his bow and shot sharp arrows at 
that deer, the transformed Maricha. 


33. The deceitful conjuror Raksasa, being thus shot very violently 
and pained intensely, cried out “O brother Laksmana! I am killed” 
and breathed his last. 


34-35. This loud awful cry reached Janaki’s ears. She took that voice 
for Rama's voice and told to Laksmana in a grieved tone “Laksmana, 
go quickly. I fear Rama is killed; hear the voice ‘O Laksmana! come 
quickly and deliver me’ is calling you to go there.” 


36. Laksmana then replied “Mother! You are alone in this forest; 
therefore I cannot leave you thus even if Ramchandra be killed. 


37. O daughter of Janaka! Rama has ordered me to remain here. 
Now if I leave you and go elsewhere, then I will be charged with 
having disobeyed his order. Fearing that, I am unable to leave this 
place. 


38. It seems to me, moreover, that some magician has carried Rama 
away from here; I am therefore unable to move a step from here and 
leave you alone. 



39. Hold patience; let me consider; I find no such man as can kill 
Rama; I am unable to leave you by any means alone here and to go 
away, disobeying Rama’s orders.” 


40. Vyasa said O king! Then the young wife of Rama, having 
handsome teeth, began to cry aloud, fearfully, as if made to do so by 
Destiny, and uttered the cruel words to the pure Laksmana. 


41. “O son of Sumitra! I know why you are so much attached 
towards me? I know very well that you have been sent here by 
Bharata to accompany us simply to obtain me. 


42. O vile Ksattriya, skilled in magic! I am not that sort of woman 
acting to my wanton will; never I will accept you of my will as my 
husband in case S’ri Ramchandra be dead. 


43. In case S’ri Rama does not return, I will certainly commit suicide; 
without him I would be very much grieved and afflicted with sorrows; 
and I would not be able to hold on my life. 


44. O Saumitri! Whether you remain here or do not remain, I won’t 
request anything more to you; for I am quite unaware of your mind; 
but this much I like to say to you, where has your intimacy towards 
your religious elder brother now gone?” 


45-46. Hearing thus the Sita Devi’s words, Laksmana became 
exceedingly sorry; and, being suffocated with heaving sighs on 



account of the internal pain told Sita “O! One born from without any 
womb! Why are you uttering so cruel and malignant words; I clearly 
see when you are speaking such unworthy words, that some great 
evil is sure to befall on you very soon.” 


47. O king! Thus saying, the spirited Laksmana left Sita and went out 
weeping very much, and, being very much afflicted with grief, traced 
the footsteps of his elder and went on in search of him. 


48. When Laksmana thus departed, Ravana entered into the 
hermitage in the guise of a deceitful beggar (Bhiksu wearing a red 
garb). 


49. Janaki took that villain Ravana to be a Yogi and respectfully gave 
him offerings of worship and forest fruits. 


50-52. That villain asked Sita humbly, in a gentle tone, “O beautiful! 
Your eyes are beautiful like Palasa lotus leaves; therefore it seems 
that you are not an ordinary woman; how is it that you are here thus 
alone in a wild forest? O fair one! Who is your father? who is your 
brother and who is your husband? Being such a beautiful one, how 
is it that you are in this forest here like an ordinary woman, 
dumbfounded? O good looking one! You are worthy to live in a 
palace filled with nectar; why are you living, in this hovel, in this wild 
forest like an ordinary Muni’s wife, when your beauty is shining in 
lustrous beams like a Deva girl?” 


53-55. Vyasa said The daughter of Janaki, hearing the words of 
Ravana, the husband of Mandodari, unfortunately took him to be a 
good Yogi and replied in the following way “Perhaps you have 



heard that a prosperous king Das’aratha is reigning in the Ayodhya 
city. He has four sons; the eldest of these, S’ri Ram Chandra, is my 
husband. The king offered two boons to Kaikeyi; due to which Ram 
Chandra has been exiled in this forest and is with his brother 
Laksmana. 


56. I am the daughter of the King Janaka; my name is Sita; Ram 
Chandra has broken the bow of S’iva and has married me. 


57. Resting under his prowess of arms, I am resting here fearlessly 
in this wild forest; seeing a golden deer, he has gone out to kill that 
for me. 


58. Laksmana, too, hearing his voice has gone just now. O Yogi! I 
am living here depending on the strength of these two brothers. 


59. Thus I have told you all about our living in this forest; shortly they 
will come and worship you duly. 


60-61. The man who has controlled his passions and has become a 
Yati is like Visnu incarnate; therefore I have worshipped you. O Yogi! 
Our As’ram is in the midst of this terrible forest, surrounded by 
Rakhsasas. Therefore I am asking you how is it that you have been 
able to come here in this dress of Tridandi (a Sannyasi Yogi); please 
speak in the name of Truth before me.” 


62. Ravana said “O askance looking one! I am the king of Lanka, 
the husband of Mandodari. O beautiful one! it is for you that I have 
put on this dress of Yati. 



63. O beautiful! My two brothers Khara and Dusana have been killed 
in this forest; and being urged by my sister I have come here. 


64-65. Now leave your this man-husband, residing in the forest as a 
pauper, devoid of fortune and wealth; and worship me as a husband. 
O fair one! I am Ravana, the king of kings; you now become my lord. 


66. O daughter of Janaka! I am the lord of the Regents of the 
quarters; and yet I bow my head down to your lotus feet; better 
accept me and fulfil my desires today. 


67-68. Formerly I asked of you from your father, the king Janaka; but 
he then said, that he had laid a pledge, ‘Whoever will break the 
S’iva’s bow will marry my daughter.’ The Bhagvan Rudra is my Guru; 
hence I feared to break his bow, and therefore I was not present in 
your Svayamvara. But from that time my mind is always thinking of 
you and is in a state of bereavement for you. 


69. O beautiful one! Hearing now that you are residing in this forest, 
I, impelled by my previous fascination for you, have now come 
hither; and you better now crown my labour with success.” 


Thus ends the 28th Chapter on the incidents connected with the 
Navaratri and the description of Ramayanam in S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa in the 3rd 
Adhyaya. 



Note: The story about the origin of Sita Devi runs thus Ravana, 
the king of Ceylon (Lanka) practised very severe austerities and got 
extraordinary powers. He brought the three worlds under his 
subjection, levied taxes from all. The Devas and all the other 
inhabitants of the several worlds paid their taxes, as imposed by 
Ravana. Ravana sent messengers to the Risis and the Munis, the 
ascetics, dwelling in forests and asked them to pay their taxes. The 
Risis replied that they had no property. But Ravana insisted. The 
Risis gave, then, blood, cutting their thighs, in a jar that was carried 
to Lanka. Ravana kept that jar under the custody of his queen 
Mandodari, and instructed her that the jar contained poison and that 
she should not eat that. Mandodari, however, ate a portion of that, 
out of curiosity, and became pregnant and gave birth to a daughter. 
Fearing Ravana, she floated the jar with the daughter, in the ocean, 
which, floating through oceans and rivers, came and touched the 
lands of the King Janaka. The peasants while tilling, found that and 
took the girl to the king, who reared her as his daughter. Thus Sita, 
born out of the blood of the Brahmanas, took away subsequently the 
kingdom, life, and all of Ravana. 


Another version is this As before, the messengers advised the 
Munis to give something; otherwise Ravana would insist and put 
them to various troubles. So the Munis cut their thighs and gave 
blood as their tax, saying that that blood in the jar would cause ruin 
and desolation to the country where it will be kept. Ravana, hearing 
this, ordered the jar to be carried to the kingdom of the king Janaka, 
thus causing ruin to him. The jar was brought and placed in the fields 
of Janaka. 


Now it happened that there was a very severe drought; rains were 
absolutely wanting; and a dire famine was imminent. The 
Brahmin Pundits informed the king that if the king and his wife 
ploughed themselves the fields, rains would fall. So the king with his 



wife did that, the king holding the plough and the queen holding the 
hand of the king. The fore end of the plough accidentally hit upon 
that jar, out of which came out Sita Devi with two women Riddhi and 
Siddhi, waving chowries on her two sides. The two ladies 
disappeared and Sita Devi looked like a girl. The king Janaka reared 
her, as if his daughter. Sita Devi used to lift daily with her left hand 
the bow of S’iva, kept in the king’s house, and daily worshipped that, 
and thus cleansed the place. Seeing this, the king Janaka pledged 
the vow that, whoever would break the S’iva’s bow, would marry 
Sita. 



Chapter 29. On The Stealing Of SIta And The 
Sorrows Of Rama 


1-2. Vyasa said Hearing these vicious words, Janaki became very 
much confounded with fear and began to tremble; somehow 
collecting herself she began to say “O descendant of the family of 
Pulastya! Why are you, prompted by lust, uttering these sinful 
words? I am born of the family of Janaka; therefore I cannot act 
wantonly according to my own inclination. 


3. O ten faced one! Better you go to Lanka quickly; else 
Ramchandra will take away your life; you will no doubt incur death 
for my sake.” 


4-5. Thus saying, Sita Devi went towards the Sacred fire called 
Garhapatya, placed in the house, with words “go away” “go away” in 
her mouth. He, whose wickedness has caused all the Lokas cry out 
“save” “save”, the same Havana, of perverted intellect, then 
assumed his real form, went towards the hut and caught hold of Sita 
Devi who was crying, bewildered with fear. 


6. Sita cried “Rama” “Rama” “Laksmana”, and the sinful Havana 
caught hold of her and quickly mounting her on the chariot, fast got 
away. 


7-9. On the way Jatayu, the son of Aruna, met Havana; and a terrible 
fight then ensued between the two, when the evil minded Havana, 
the king of the Demons, killed Jatayu. Havana carried Sita to Lanka. 
Then Sita cried like a forlorn deer and Havana kept her in the As’oka 



forest (Jaffna), surrounded and guarded by the Raksasis. The king of 
Lanka tempted Sita with comforting words, and the kingdoms, etc., 
but she never swerved from her own pure and stainless chastity. 


10-12. On the other side, Ramachandra after killing the deer and 
taking it was coming back calmly, when he saw Laksmana going to 
him and said “O Laksmana! What a great blunder you have 
committed! Hearing the voice of that villain conjurer, how is it that 
you have left my dear Sita alone and come here!” Laksmana said 
“O Lord! Being pierced sharply by Sita Devi’s words (coming like 
sharpened arrows) and being driven away by her, under the 
guidance of the Inevitable Destiny as it were, I have come here; 
there is no doubt in this.” 


13. They, then, both hurriedly went to their hut, made of leaves; and 
there not finding Sita, they were very much afflicted with sorrows and 
went in quest of Janaki. 


14. Rama and Laksmana in their search for Sita, came at last to the 
spot where Jatayu, the king of birds, was lying on the surface of the 
earth, with his life ultimately on the point of parting away from his 
body. 


15-16. Jatayu said Ravana, the king of Lanka, carried away today 
stealthily Sita Devi; I resisted that villain who then fought with me on 
that account and threw me down on this spot by weapons. Thus 
saying, the king of birds died; whereupon Ramchandra performed 
the burning of his dead body as well his funeral ceremonies. Then 
both of them went out of that place. 



17. Then the Lord Ramachandra killed Kabandha and freed him from 
his curse; and, through his advice, he made friendship with Sugriva, 
the king of the monkeys, and was thus bound under a tie. 


18. Next Rama killed the hero Bali as a duty and gave the excellent 
kingdom of Kiskindhya to his new friend Sugriva according to his 
promise. 


19. Then, he began to ceaselessly think of the stealing away of Sita 
by Ravana and passed away the four months of the rainy season 
there with his brother Laksmana. 


20. Rama, being very much shaken on account of the bereavement 
of Sita, began to address Laksmana thus “O Saumitre! The 
desires of the daughter of the king of Kekaya are now fulfilled. 


21. Janaki will no more be obtained; without Janaki I will not go back 
to Ayodhya; without Janaki I won’t be able to live any longer. 


22. Kingdom lost, dwelling in forests happened, father left his body, 
at last the dear wife is lost; the cruel hands of Destiny are tormenting 
me now thus; what more it will inflict, how can I say now? 


23. O Brother Laksmana! What is to happen is very hard to be 
known beforehand by men; I cannot say, what is written on my fate 
after this, painful or otherwise. 



24. See! Both of us, the descendants of Manu, though born in a royal 
family, are exiled in forests due to our past deeds. 


25. O Laksmana! It is by Fate, too, that you, abandoning the 
pleasures of the royal surroundings, have come out with me; and 
you, too, are now suffering heaps of dire troubles with me. 


26. No one in our family suffered so much as we are suffering; why 
we talk of our family! No human being was ever born or will ever take 
his birth that suffered or will suffer like me so many troubles, will be 
like me incapacitated and a penniless pauper. 


27. O Saumitre! I am drowned in the ocean of pains and troubles; 
What am I to do now? I have no means to cross this ocean; I am 
quite helpless, no doubt. 


28. No money, nor armies, O hero! you are my one and only one 
companion; O brother! On whom shall I be angry when I am 
suffering on account of my own deeds? 


29. Alas! The kingdom that could have been compared in prosperity 
to the Indra Sabha, was almost obtained by me when, in an instant, I 
lost it and am now in exile in forest. Laksman! Who can ascertain 
what is in the womb of Destiny? 


30. Oh! That soft bodied Sita, with her child like nature came out with 
us in this forest; but the inexorable Fate has now drowned her, that 
perfectly beautiful woman, into an ocean of sorrows, difficult to be 
crossed? 



31. That fair daughter of Janaka is extremely devoted to me; she is 
pure and holy. How will she be able to suffer troubles in the house of 
the king of Lanka! 


32. O Laksmana! Sita Devi will never come under the control of 
Havana; how can that excellent chaste woman act like an ordinary 
public woman? 


33. O Laksmana! Rest assured that in case Havana exercises, out of 
his lordly position, any violence on Sita, she will rather put an end to 
her life than come under his control. 


34. O Laksmana! And when Janaki sacrifices her life, I will assuredly 
do the same; for, of what use, then is this body to me when that fair 
Sita has gone away with her life?” 


35. While the lotus eyed Ramchandra was thus weeping and 
expressing his regrets and sorrows, the religious Laksmana 
consoled him with the following sweet, truthful, words 


36. “O Hero of the heroes! Kindly cast aside this weakness and have 
patience; I will soon kill that villain demon Havana and get you back 
your Sita Devi. 


37. The wise steady persons remain on account of their fortitude, 
unshaken in their hearts whether in joy or in sorrow; whereas men, 
of little intellect, indulge in sorrows when they are happy. 



38. Conning in union and going out in disunion, both are under the 
hands of Destiny; What, then, there is the need for expressing 
sorrows for this body, which is not soul. 


39. As we have been banished from our kingdom into this forest, as 
there has happened this bereavement of Sita, so, in proper time, we 
will again get back Sita Devi. 


40. O Darling of Janaki! There must come a time when sorrows will 
be converted into happiness and vice versa; there will be nothing 
otherwise. So avoid this sorrow now and have firmness. 


41. There are multitudes of monkeys, who are our helping hands; 
they will go to all the four quarters and bring back to us the news of 
the daughter of Janaka; there is no doubt in this. 


42. O Lord! Knowing the way to Lanka, we will go there and kill by 
our prowess the villainous Ravana and bring back Sita Devi. 


43. Or we will call Bharata with Satrughna and with all the armies we 
all united will kill our enemy; why, then, are you thus expressing 
sorrows in vain. 


44. O Lord! our ancestor Raghu, the hero of heroes, the monarch; 
won his victories over the ten quarters; and you belong to that family 
and are now plunged in grief! 



45. Alone, I can defeat all the Devas and the Demons; and if I get 
help, is there any doubt, then, in my killing, that Ravana, the 
disgrace of the family of Raksasas. 


46. O Powerful One! We may call to, our aid the king of Janaka and 
root out that wicked source of enemy to the Devas. 


47-48. O Descendant of Raghu! Like the rim of a wheel, happiness 
and pain come alternately; it is not that happiness, or pain comes 
and remains for ever. He whose mind is very much overwhelmed, 
with pain or happiness, is the man who is always plunged in an 
ocean of misery; and he can never expect to become happy. 


49. Seel In days of yore, Indra once got addicted into vicious habits. 
The Devas united put in place of Indra, the king Nahusa. 


50. Then Indra, terrified, relinquished his post and passed very many 
years into an unknown and unnoticed state within the lotus. 


51. Again, when time changed, he got his own post back; and the 
king Nahusa fell down on this earth and became transformed into a 
boa constrictor (a big serpent), through the curse of a Risi. 


52. The king Nahusa wanted the wife of Indra and insulted a 
Brahmin; therefore, he was, under the curse of Maharsi Agasti, 
transformed into a snake on the earth. 



53. Therefore, O Raghava! One ought not to plunge in grief, when a 
danger comes; rather one should be quite energetic in times of 
danger and remain firm; thus, the sages do. 


54. O Lord of the world! You are high minded, omniscient and 
omnipotent; why are you now overwhelmed with grief, like an 
ordinary mortal.” 


55. Vyasa said Oh king! Thus consoled by Laksmana, Rama 
discarded all his heavy sorrows and began to remain with his heart 
firm and at rest. 


Thus ends the 29th chapter on the stealing of Sita and the sorrows 
of Rama in the 3rd Skandha of S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 30. On The Narration Of The 
Navaratra Ceremony By Narada And The 
Performance Of That By Rama Chandra 


1-2. Vyasa said O king! Rama and Laksmana, discussing thus, 
remained silent; when the Risi Narada appeared there from the sky 
above, singing the Rathantara Sama Veda hymns in tune and 
musical gamut with his renowned lute. 


3-4. Ramachandra, of indomitable prowess, on beholding him rose 
up from his seat and gave him quickly an excellent seat and 
offerings of water for washing his feet. Then he worshipped the Muni 
and stood with folded hands. When the Muni ordered him, he took 
his seat close by Narada. 


5-8. On Ramachandra taking his seat there with Laksmana with a 
grievous heart, Narada asked him in a sweet tone “O Descendant of 
Raghu! Why are you being afflicted with sorrows like an ordinary 
mortal? I know that the evil minded Ravana has stolen Sita Devi. I 
heard while in the heavens that Ravana, the descendant of Pulastya, 
stole away Janaki, out of fascination, could not know that would be 
the cause of his death. O Descendant in the family of Kakutstha! It is 
for the killing of Ravana that your birth has taken place; and for that 
purpose Janaki has been stolen now. 


Note The real Janaki was not stolen; Her shadow form was 
stolen. 



9-12. O Raghava! The Devi Janaki, in her previous birth, was the 
daughter of a Muni and practised asceticism. While engaged in her 
austerities, in her holy hermitage, Ravana came and looking at her, 
prayed that beautiful woman to become his wife. Hearing this, she 
gave a good reproach to Ravana, when he perforce caught hold of 
her hairs. That ascetic woman got very angry, and, considering her 
body polluted by the devil’s contact, resolved to put an end to her life 
and cursed Ravana, thus “O Villain! I will be born on the surface 
of the earth, not from any womb but simply for your destruction and 
ruin.” Thus saying, she parted with her life. 


13. O Tormentor of the foes! Ravana, the king of the Raksasas, 
mistook a garland for the extremely poisonous serpent and has 
stolen away Sita Devi, the part incarnation of Laksmi, in order to root 
out his race. 


14. O Kakutstha! When the Devas prayed for the destruction of that 
wicked insolent Ravana, difficult to be subdued, you are born on this 
earth, in the family of Aja, as a part incarnate of Hah, beyond birth, 
old age and death. 


15. O mighty-armed! Have patience; Sita Devi is meditating you, day 
and night. 


16-17. Indra himself, the king of the Devas, sends the nectar and the 
Heavenly Cow’s Milk in a pot to Her daily; and She subsists on that, 
alone. 


O Lord! On drinking the Heavenly Cow’s Milk, the lotus eyed Sita 
Devi is living without any hunger or thirst! I use to see Her daily. 



18. O Descendant of Raghu! I am now telling how that Ravana can 
be killed. Perform, in this very month of AsVin, the vow with 
devotion. 


19. Fasting for nine nights, the worship of the Bhagavati, and 
repeating the Mantram silently and performing the Homa ceremony, 
observing all the rules, will certainly fulfill one’s all the desires. 


20. O the best in the race of Raghu! You should offer the sacrifice 
before the Goddess of a sacred and unblameable animal, perform 
Japam and Homa ceremony equivalent to one-tenth of Japam. If you 
do all this, you will certainly be able to release Sita. 


21. In days of yore, Visnu, S’iva and Brahma and the Devas in the 
Heavens all performed this worship of the Goddess. 


22. Therefore, O Raghava! Every person desiring happiness, 
specially those that have fallen under great difficulties, ought to do 
this auspicious ceremony, without the least hesitation. 


23-24. O Kakutstha! Vis’vamitra, Bhrigu, Vas’istha and Kas’yapa all 
of them did this worship before. When some stole away the wife of 
Brihaspati, the Guru of the Devas, he, too, by the force of this 
worship, got his wife back. Therefore O king! dost thou also 
celebrate the Puja for the destruction of Ravana. 



25-26. O high minded one! This vow was practised before by Indra 
for the destruction of Vritra, by S’iva for killing the demon Tripura, by 
Narayana for the killing of the demons Madhu and Kaitava; so you 
should also firmly resolve to perform duly this vow with your whole 
heart.” 


27. Rama replied “O Ocean of Knowledge! Who is that Devi? 
What is Her influence; whence has She sprung? What is Her Name? 
And how is that vow to be duly observed? Kindly describe all these 
to me in detail.” 


28. Narada answered “Listen, O Raghava! That Goddess is 
Eternal and Ever Constant Primordial Force. If you worship Her, all 
your difficulties will be removed and all your desires will be fulfilled. 


29. She is the source of Brahma, Visnu and others and of all these 
living beings. Without Her force, no body would be able even to 
move their limbs. 


30. That Supreme Auspicious Goddess is the preserving energy of 
Visnu, is the creative power of Brahma, and is the destroying force of 
S’iva. 


31. Whatever there exists in this infinite Universe, whether Temporal 
or Eternal, She is the Underlying Force of all; how, then, can She 
have an origin! 


32-33. Her origin is not Brahma, Visnu, Mahes’a, Sun, Indra, or the 
other Devas, not this Earth nor this Upholder of the Earth; She is 



devoid of any qualities, the Giver of Salvation of all, the Full Prakriti. 
In the time of the final dissolution of this Universe, She lives with the 
Supreme Purusa. 


34. She is also Saguna, full of qualities, and is the Creatrix of 
Brahma, Visnu and Mahes’a, and has empowered them, in every 
way, to create the three Lokas. 


35. She is the Supreme Knowledge, existing before the Vedas, and 
the Originator of the Vedas. The individual souls, knowing Her 
Nature, become able to free themselves from the bondages of the 
world. 


36. She is known by endless names. The Brahma, and the other 
Devas might choose to call Her according to their actions and 
qualities. I am unable to describe those names. 


37. O descendant in the race of Raghu! Her endless names are 
formed by the various combinations of the various vowels and 
consonants from the letter ‘A’ to the letter ‘Ksa.’” 


38. Rama said “O best of the Munis! Describe briefly all the rules 
and regulations as to how that vow and worship are to be performed. 
With my heart, full of devotion and faith, I will worship the Goddess 
today.” 


39. Narada said “O Raghava! On a level plot of ground, prepare 
an altar. Place the Goddess there and fast for nine days. 



40. O king! I will be your priest and I will, with great energy, carry out 
this yajha to fullfil the work of the Gods.” 


41-42. Vyasa said Then the powerful Bhagavan Hah, hearing all 
fronn the Muni, believed them to be true; and, on the approach of the 
month of AsVin, prepared the altar on the top of a hill and placed the 
Auspicious Goddess, the World Mother and, observing all the rules, 
performed the vow and worshipped the Goddess. 


43. Fasting for nine days, Rama celebrated the vow and duly offered 
sacrifices, performed the worship and Homa ceremonies. 


44-46. When, on the grand night of the Eighth lunar day, the two 
brothers completed the vow as told by Narada, the Supreme 
Bhagavati was pleased with the worship and appeared before them, 
mounted on a lion, and remaining there on the mountain top, 
addressed Rama and Laksmana, in a sweet grave tone, like the 
rumbling of a rain cloud, thus “Rama, I am satisfied with your 
worship; ask from me what you desire. 


47. Rama! You are sent by the gods for the destruction of Ravana 
and are born as a part incarnate of Narayana, in the pure and 
stainless family of Manu. 


48. It is You that, in ancient times, incarnated as a fish for serving the 
purpose of the Devas and preserved the Vedas by killing the terrible 
Raksasas for the welfare of the Universe. 



49. It is You that incarnated as a tortoise and held aloft the Mandara 
mountain, churned the ocean and nourished the Devas. 


50-51. O Rama! It is You that incarnated, in days of yore, as a boar 
and held aloft on your teeth this earth. It is You that assumed the 
form of a Man-Lion and preserved Prahlada, by tearing asunder the 
body of Hiranya Kas’ipu, by Your sharp nails. 


52. O Descent of Raghu! It is You that assumed, in ancient times, the 
form of a dwarf and served the purpose of the Devas, by deceitfully 
cheating Bali, the younger of Indra. 


53. O son of Kaus’alya! You incarnated as the son of Jamadagni in 
the Brahmin family, extirpated the line of Ksattriya kings and gave 
over this whole earth to Bhagavan Kas’yapa Risi. 


54. So You are now born as the son of Das’aratha, in the stainless 
race of Kakutstha, at the request of the Devas, harassed by Ravana. 


55-56. These powerful monkeys, born as Deva incarnates, all 
endowed with great power by Me, will help you. Your younger 
Laksmana is the incarnate of S’esa serpent; this indomitable man 
will kill undoubtedly Indragit, the son of Ravana. 


57. You will kill Ravana; then you would worship Me, with great 
devotion, in the vernal season and then enjoy your kingdom 
according to your liking. 



58. O best of the Raghus! For full eleven thousand years you will 
reign on this earth; and after that reenter your heavenly abode.” 


59. Vyasa said O king! Thus saying, the Devi disappeared. Rama 
Chandra became very glad and, completing that most auspicious 
ceremony, performed the Bejoya Puja on the tenth day and gave lots 
of presents to Narada and made him go towards the ocean. 


60-61. O king! Thus stimulated by the Supreme Energy, the Highest 
Goddess brought front to front, Ramachandra, the husband of 
Kamala, went to the shores of the ocean, accompanied by 
Laksmana and the monkeys. Then he erected the bridge across the 
ocean and killed Ravana, the enemy of the gods. His unparalleled 
fame spread everywhere throughout the three Lokas. 


62. He who hears with devotion this excellent account of the Devi, 
will get the greatest happiness in this world, and, in the end, will get 
the final beatitude. There is no doubt in this. 


63. O king! There are extant many other Puranas, but none is equal 
to this S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam. Know, this is my firm belief. 


Here ends the thirtieth chapter on the narration of the Navaratra 
ceremony by Narada and the performance of that by Rama Chandra 
in the 3rd Adhyaya in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. Here ends the Third Book. 


The Third Skandha completed. 




THE FOURTH BOOK 



Chapter 1. On The Questions Put By Janamejaya 
Regarding Krisna’s Incarnation 


2 

1. Janamejaya said O Vasaveya! the Chief amongst the Munis, 
the Ocean of all knowledge, O the Sinless One! the Lord and Well 
Wisher of our families, I come to you with a mind to ask you certain 
questions. 


2-3. I heard of yore, but I do not know why was that illustrious son of 
Surasena, that powerful Anakadundubhi (1), the pious and illustrious 
Vasudeva, the father of S’ri Krisna, the incarnation of the God Hari 
Himself, and who was worshipped even by the Gods, thrown into 
prison by Kamsa? 


Note (1) Anakadundubhi is the epithet of Vasudeva, father of S’ri 
Krisna, since at Vasudeva's birth, drums called Anakas and 
Dundubhis were resounded in the sky. 


4-5. What faults had he and his wife Devaki committed? Why that 
Kamsa the descendant of Yayati, killed the six infant sons of Devaki? 
And for what reason did the God S’ri Hari incarnate Himself as the 
son of Vasudeva in the prison house of Kamsa? 


6-11. How was that Lord of the Universe, S’ri Bhagavan, and the 
Ruler of the Yadava clan, taken to Gokula? Why was He, born of a 
Ksattriya family, generally recognised as of the Gopala (cow-herd) 
clan? Why were His father Vasudeva and mother Devaki thrown into 
prison? And why did not S’ri Krisna, of indomitable prowess, and 
capable to create and preserve the worlds, could release instantly. 


father and mother from their imprisoned state? I cannot conceive 
that the so-called Fate could have any influence on such high souled 
persons, the father and mother of the Supreme Being, S’ri Krisna; 
who were those sons of Vasudeva that were killed by Kamsa? And 
who was that girl child who when struck by Kamsa on a slab of stone 
instantly rose up above the sky, assuming the form of Astabhuja, the 
eight armed Goddess? O Sinless One! Kindly explain unto me how 
did S’ri Hah manage to perform the house-holder's duties, when he 
had married the several wives? and what were those glorious deeds 
that he did in His this incarnation and how did he finally pass away 
from his mortal physical coil? My mind sinks into an ocean of 
confusion, when I hear of the several things done by S’ri Hah; some 
times I find the deeds, not capable of being done by any other than 
the Supreme Being Himself and sometimes I hear of deeds that can 
be done by an ordinary man. And, therefore I cannot decide whether 
Vasudeva was the Incarnation of God or an ordinary being. Be 
pleased to remove these doubts from my mind and describe the life 
of Vasudeva in its true light. 


12-14. In days of yore, the two sons of Dharma were the two best 
amongst the Risis, and were the Devas Nara and Narayana. They 
were very high souled persons and they performed severe 
austerities for long extending years. They were born as part 
incarnations of Visnu; and, for the good of the world, did they, in the 
Vadarika'srama, perform penances, controlling their six passions, 
and free from desires. 


15. The all-knowing sages Narada and others say that the well 
known Arjuna and S’ri Krisna of indomitable prowess were the two 
part incarnations of those two ancient Munis Nara and Narayana. 



16. How came those two Devas Nara and Narayana to be born in 
the two bodies of Krisna and Arjuna, though they did not relinquish 
their previous bodies! 


17. And also when those two Munis had attained liberation, their goal 
in their Yogas, by performing severe penances, how could they 
again be born in other bodies! 


18-19. If any S'udra dies performing his own religion, he takes up a 
Vais’ya body in his next incarnation; if any Vais'ya died so, he takes 
up a Ksattriya body and a Ksattriya when adhering to his own rites 
and ceremonies, dying takes up a Brahman body in his next 
incarnation. And if a Brahmin be free from desires and resorts to the 
path of peace, when he dies, he becomes free from incarnations and 
is saved from this disease of getting into the world. 


20-21. Now the reverse seems to take place in the case of Nara and 
Narayana. In spite of withering up their bodies by hard penances, 
they took up Ksattriya bodies. Under what influence of Karma, did 
they take up up birth when they were Yogis? Or might they, the 
Brahmins, become Ksattriyas owing to some curse? Whatever it may 
be, kindly remove my doubts, explaining to me their causes. 


22. It is heard that the Yadava clan suffered destruction through the 
curse of a Brahman and in spite of S’ri Krisna being the incarnation 
of the Supreme Being, his family died of the effect of curse from 
Gandhari. 


23. How was it that Pradyumna was stolen away by S'ambara, the 
lord of the Asuras; and for what purpose when Vasudeva, the Deva 



of the Devas was present, how was it that his son was stolen away 
from the lying-in room? This seems impossible. 


24. Why did not Vasudeva see, with His inner vision, the stealing 
away of his son from the impregnable walls of His fortress-like 
mansion in Dwarka? (And could thus have prevented this!) 


25-39. O Muni! After Vasudeva had gone to Heaven, his wives were 
plundered by the dacoits on the way. I am very much in doubt on this 
point. Also I cannot understand why did this event take place just 
after His translation to Heaven? Again how was S’ri Krisna, who was 
Visnu's Full incarnation, born into this world to take off the vicious 
load of this earth, and to destroy the evil-doers, terrified and He fled 
through the fear of Jarasandha, evacuated His kingdom of Mathura 
and went with His armies and friends to Dwarka? Vasudeva came 
here to destroy the evil miscreants and to conserve the religion; how 
then did He not, as He was all knowing, previously kill those dacoits, 
who afterward stole and plundered His wives? Was it, that He, being 
Omniscient did not know those dacoits? He protected the Pandavas, 
no doubt, who were high souled, righteous and virtuous; but I cannot 
understand how did He consider the high souled virtuous persons 
like Bhisma, Drona and others as loads of earth and slay them. The 
devotees of S’ri Krisna, observing good customs, conducts and 
practices, Yudhisthira and his brothers performed the Rajasuya 
sacrifice, according to rules, giving various offerings to the Brahmins 
and depended entirely on Vasudeva; still, O Muni! they suffered 
terrible hardships; whither were their virtuous deeds by this time? 
what horrible sins did they commit that they had to suffer pains and 
troubles in the assembly. The highly merited Draupadi arose from 
the midst of sacrificial fire and is born of the part of Laksmi, pure and 
devoted to S’ri Krisna. How did such a glorious woman meet with 
incomparable terrible pains often and often; how could she be 
caught hold of by her hair on her head by Duh'sasan; and carried to 



the royal assembly, when she was in her menses and extremely 
terrified and harassed? How did she come to be a slave of Matsya 
Raj in his kingdom Virat, and though actually crying aloud like a 
female osprey (eagle) she was highly insulted by Kichaka! Alas! how 
could Draupadi be stolen away by Jayadratha, though latterly 
released by the Pandavas? What evil deeds did the Pandavas 
commit in their previous births, that they had to befall under so many 
telling difficulties? 


40. O high minded Muni! My ancestors performed the Rajasuya 
sacrifice and still they fell under so many serious difficulties. Kindly 
explain the causes of these to me. 


41-42. If it be urged, that they suffered so many serious calamities, 
due to their actions in their former lives, that seems impossible. 
Because they are born of the Devas; thus arises my doubt; be 
pleased to explain to me. 


Again how the Pandavas, the sons of Kunti, of good conduct, and 
knowing the illusory nature of the world, why did they, out of 
pretence kill Bhisma, Drona and others? 


43. This appears a riddle to me that these Pandavas were led to the 
extermination of their race, being inspired by Hah Vasudeva, to this 
horrible act. 


44. Rather to live on begging alms and to live on rice, growing wild or 
without cultivation, or to live as an artisan or artist than to kill the 
valiant warriors unlawfully in a battle, simply out of voluptuous greed. 



45. O Best of the Munis! You have preserved this extirpated race by 
producing the Goloka sons (i. e. sons born by other persons of 
women after their husbands are dead) of indomitable prowess. 


46. And why did my honoured father, born of Uttara in this respected 
family , encircle a snake round the neck of a Brahmin ascetic? 


No body, born of a Ksattriya family, shews signs of hatred and 
jealousy towards a Brahmin. Is it that my father shewed such feeling 
to that ascetic, who took the vow of silence! 


O Best of the Munis -- These things and lots of others are troubling 
my mind with many grave doubts. O merciful saint! You know every 
thing; be kind enough to quell this the disturbed state of my mind. 


Thus ends the First Adhyaya in the Fourth Book of S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavata Purana of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 2. On The Supremacy Of The Effects Of 
Karma 


1. Suta said The learned Vyasa, the son of Satyavati, and the 
knower of the Puranas, when thus asked by Janamejaya, the son of 
Pariksit, whose heart had become calm, replied in the following 
words, capable to remove all his doubts. Vyasa said 


2. O king! You would better know, that in this Universe the course of 
Karma is not easily comprehensible; even the Devas are not capable 
to comprehend the wonderful effects of actions; what to speak of 
men! 


3. When this Universe composed of the three Gunas arose, it was 
through Karma, that everything had its origin. 


4-5. It was the seed of Karma whence the Jivas (the individual 
embodied souls) arose with neither any beginning nor any end. 
Those Jivas go often and often incarnating in numberless varieties of 
wombs and then go to dissolution. When this Karma ceases, the 
Jivas then are never to have any more connection with any other 
body. 


6. The Karmas done by Jivas are of three kinds auspicious, 
inauspicious and mixed (partly auspicious and partly inauspicious); 
of which the auspicious is the Sattvik Karma, the inauspicious is the 
Tamasik Karma and the mixed, is the Rajasic Karma. Thus have 
been said by the Sages. 



7. These three again are subdivided into three. They are Sanchita 
(accumulated), Bhavisya (impending in future) and Prarabdha 
(commenced). All these Karmas are in dwelling always with the 
body. 


8-9. O king! Everybody, even Brahma, Visnu and Mahes'a all under 
the influence of this Karma! And they experience pleasure, pain, old 
age, disease and death, joy and sorrow, lust, anger, greed and other 
bodily qualities, out of the effects of this Karma, which we call 
ordinarily Fate. 


10-11. Therefore love, hatred and other bodily qualities all 
predominate equally in all bodies. Anger, jealousy, hatred, and other 
similar qualities arise in the Devas, men, and birds owing to some 
sort of dislikes on previous occasions; and love, compassion, pity, 
etc., arise out of some sort of likings, existing already. 


12-13. O king! No individual can arise without some sort of action or 
other. It is through Karma that the Sun traverses in the sky; it is 
through Karma that the Moon was attacked with consumption 
disease; and it is through Karma that the Rudra holds the disc of 
skull bone. This Karma, therefore, has no beginning nor end (till 
Moksa); now that this Karma is the sole cause in the production of 
this Universe. 


14-16. For this reason, this whole Universe, moveable and 
immoveable, is real; but Munis are deeply absorbed in meditation to 
ascertain about its reality or unreality. They cannot definitely know it 
for certain whether this world is real or unreal; for where Maya is 
prevalent, the universe is there. Where there is the cause fully 



existing in all respects, there is no effect, how can we say? The 
Maya is eternal and always acts as the Prime Cause of all. 


17. Therefore, O king! the sages declare that the seed of Karma is 
eternal. This whole universe changes incessantly, being controlled 
by this karma. 


18. O king of kings! They say, it is through the will of Visnu, of 
unbounded energy and splendour, that all this universe enters, again 
and again, into all sorts of wombs, whether good or evil. 


19. Now, if the birth of Visnu, of infinite prowess, takes place 
according to His will, then why is it that He travels through many 
impious births? Why is it that Bhagavan Visnu goes, in different 
Yugas, to take His births in low, vile origins? 


Where is that self dependent man, who, leaving his abode Vaikuntha 
and all sorts of pleasures and happiness, desires to live in this mortal 
temple, filled with urine, faeces and other filthy matters. 


20. No intelligent man will leave comfortable resting places and 
amorous sports and gathering flowers for the sake of dwelling in this 
uterus in the womb? 


21. Who likes to live with his face downwards in the womb, when he 
can enjoy fine heavenly soft downs, puffed up with cotton or silk. 



22. Who will abandon singing, dancing and music, where all sorts of 
love feelings are being manifested, and think of coming down to this 
veritable Hell? 


23. Who will abandon the wonderful ambrosial nectar and prosperity 
given by Laksmi, that cannot be easily renounced, and then like to 
taste this urine and faeces. 


24. There is no hell more aggravating in the three worlds than this 
existence in the wombs. The Munis, afraid of these, perform difficult 
asceticisms in this wondrous world. 


25. Wise, intelligent persons renounce their kingdoms and 
enjoyments and resort to forests. Who is there so stupid as to enter 
willingly in the various wombs? 


26. Worms and insects torment the Jivas in the womb; the digestive 
fire of the stomach heats it from below, whereas it is always fearfully 
tied down on all sides by the flesh, enclosing its fat or marrow. O 
King; Not a trace of happiness is visible there. 


27. It is far better to live in a prison house, fettered by hard iron 
chains. Whereas it is not desirable to live for a moment in the womb. 


28. It is very hard and painful to be in the womb for ten months. To 
come out of the hard and terrible womb is extremely troublesome. 



29. Jivas get trouble in their childhood; they cannot speak, and they 
do not know what to say, when they are hungry or thirsty; they 
depend entirely on others and they are grieved. 


30. When the child becomes hungry and cries, the mother becomes 
anxious. When the child is afflicted with diseases and cries, the 
mother then knows and administers medicines. 


31. Thus many troubles arise in childhood. Sages do not therefore 
find any happiness and do not desire, of their own accord, to come 
here. 


32. O king, no sane man, would forego incessant heavenly 
pleasures and prefer before the Devas to this toilsome and painful 
state of being born in the womb. 


33. O king of kings! All the Devas, Brahma and others have to enjoy 
full the effects of their Karmas done, whether they are pleasant or 
painful. 


34. O best of kings! The fruits of karma must have to be 
experienced, whether auspicious or inauspicious, be he a Deva, or 
human being or an animal; any one who has embodied himself in 
fine or gross bodies! 


35. Human beings, by dint of their practise of penance, religious 
austerities alms givings and sacrifices, rise to Indrahood. Indra, in his 
turn, when the effects of his good actions cease, comes down to 
inferior births! there is no doubt of it. 



36. In the Rama Incarnation, the Devas had to incarnate themselves 
a Monkeys; and in the Krisna incarnation, the Devas had to 
incarnate themselves as human beings. Cow-herds (Gopas) and 
Yadavas. 


37. Thus being urged on by Brahma, Visnu Bhagavan incarnates 
Himself many times, yugas after yugas, to preserve the religion. 


38. O king of mortals! Thus, like a carwheel, Bhagavan Hah 
incarnated Himself in various wombs successively in a wonderful 
manner. 


39. The destruction the of Daityas was done by Hari in His many 
secondary incarnations. 


40. Now I will narrate to you the auspicious facts of the birth of 
Krisna, Who incarnated Himself in the family of Yadu (Yadu Kula). 


41. O king! The illustrious Vasudeva, born of the part of the Muni 
Kas'yapa, had to take his birth again as a human being due to his 
previous curse and had to maintain his livelihood by tending cows. 


42. O best of kings! And the two wives Kas'yapa, Aditi and Surasa 
had to take their births as the two sisters, Devaki and Rohini, on 
account of the curses cast on them. O Descendant of Bharata! We 
have thus heard that they were greatly cursed at one time by 
Varuna, the water deity, who got very much angry. The king said. 



43-47. What fault was committed by Kas'yapa that he had to take his 
birth along with his wife as cowherds. And why was it that the 
Everlasting uninterrupted Atman Visnu Narayana had to take his 
birth in Gokula. He whose abode is Vaikuntha, who is the Lord of 
Rama! who is Bhagavan and the Supreme amongst the gods, who is 
the upholder of the universe and the yugas! Under Whose order can 
such a being abandon his abode and take his birth in the world like 
an ordinary mortal? There is this grave doubt, then, of mine on this 
point. 


48-51. Obtaining this depraved human coil, one is always perplexed 
with various thoughts, sometimes with lust, anger, jealousy, 
intoleration, sorrow, enmity sometimes with pleasurable feelings, 
happiness, fear, sufferings, penury, sometimes with straight¬ 
forwardness, good or bad deeds, faithfulness, treachery, 
unsteadiness, supporting others; sometimes with remorse, 
hesitation, bragging, greed, vain boasting, delusion, or hypocrisy and 
sometimes with remorse; these different feelings exist in men. 


52. How then can Visnu Bhagavan abandon His eternal pleasures 
and have recourse to this human birth, full of many perplexing 
thoughts. 


53. O best of Munis! What peculiar happiness is there in the 
pleasures of human births, that S’ri Bhagavan Hah has to undertake 
the burden of dwelling thus in the human wombs? 


54-55. O Munmdra! The sufferings that are experienced, while in the 
womb, the pain during the time of delivery, the misfortunes in the 
early childhood, the troubles of passionate lust in youth, the greater 



sorrows and difficulties in the householder's life, all these are 
existent there; how then Bhagavan Visnu incarnate Himself often in 
these various human births. 


56-57. What an amount of enormous difficulties had Brahma-born 
Hah to undertake in His Rama incarnation! That high souled One 
had to suffer for his exile in forest, for the stealing away of his wife 
Sita, for the frequent wars, for the final separation from his wife Sita. 


58-59. Likewise in the Krisna Avatara, the birth in a prison, the 
departure to Gokul, tending cows, the killing of Kamsa, departure to 
Dwarka with great difficulty and all sorts of household difficulties 
were there. Why had He to suffer all these? 


60. Who amongst the wise and the emancipated, of his own accord 
condescends to take on his shoulders so many hard sufferings? This 
is the grave doubt in my mind; be graciously pleased to remove my 
this grave doubt and make my mind tranquil. 


Here ends the Second Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of the Maha Puranam of 18000 verses by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 3. On The Former Curse Of Vasudeva 
And Devak! 


1. Vyasa said O king; The incarnation of Hah and the incarnation 
of the Amsa Avataras of all the other Devas are accountable to many 
causes. The chief cause being Karma; the minor causes being 
many. 


2. Hear, now, the cause of the incarnations of Vasudeva (Krisna's 
father), Devaki and Rohini in detail. 


3. Once, on an occasion, S’riman Kas'yapa stole away the 
Kamadhenu (the heavenly Cow, yielding all desires) of the Deva 
Varuna for his sacrificial purpose; and though he was entreated by 
Varuna often and often to return the cow, Kas'yapa did not return to 
him that, the best of all the cows. 


4. Varuna became very sorry; he went to Brahma, the Lord of the 
creation and told him humbly all that had happened and about his 
sorrows. 


5-6. “O Glorious One! Maharsi Kas'yapa is now almost infatuated 
with his sacrifice; and though I have tried all my means, he is not 
returning me my cow. I could not hear the pitiful cries and wailings of 
the calves or bereavement from their mother; and I cursed Kas'yapa 
saying ‘You would go down and take birth in the human world as a 
cow-herd; and your two wives also are to go there as human 
mortals, suffering under the greatest difficulties and dangers.”’ 



7. O Brahmana! On seeing the distressed condition of the calves I 
cursed Aditi a second time that she would be put to prison, her 
children would be still born, and she would suffer lots of troubles. 


8. O Janamejaya! Hearing this, the Lotus-born Brahma called 
Kas'yapa before him and asked. 


9. O Fortunate One! Why have you stolen away all the cows of the 
Varuna Deva, the Guardian of a quarter of the world? And why have 
you committed an offence in not returning the cows to Him? 


10. Bhagavan! You are intelligent, you know everything fully; 
knowing that it is a sin to steal other's property, why have you 
committed the unlawful act of stealing away the cows. 


11. Oh! What is the wonderful influence of covetousness! Even those 
that are great are not free from the clutches of greed. Covetousness 
is the source of all sins, is unapproved by the Sages and leads to 
hell. 


12. Lo! Maharsi Kas'yapa is not able to leave this vicious habit even 
now; what shall I do? I will hence count greed as more powerful than 
even Fate, the Ruler of all destinies. 


13. Blessed are those saints that have devoted themselves wholly to 
the attainment of peace, who are tranquil-hearted, lead a hermit life 
and don't ask themselves of any thing from any body. Verily those 
are blessed. 



14. This covetousness is a powerful enemy; it is always unholy and 
odious. See! Its influence has overpowered the Maharsi Kas'yapa 
and has tied him down to an ordinary affection and has urged him to 
commit a sinful act. 


15-16. Then the Prajapati Brahma, to preserve and keep the prestige 
in the name of Justice and Religion, cursed his own very dear 
grandson Kas'yapa, the best of the Munis, and said Go to the 
earth in your Ams'a, and take your birth in the Yadu clan, be united 
with your wives and work as a Cowherd. 


17. Vyasa said O king! Thus was cursed the Maharsi Kas'yapa by 
Brahma and Varuna to come down to the earth as Amsa Vatara to 
relieve the earth of her burden. 


18. Diti, too, becoming grieved much with sorrows, cursed Aditi that 
seven of her sons would be killed consecutively after their births. 


19. Janamejaya said O best of Munis! Why was it that Diti so 
cruelly cursed his sister Aditi, the mother of Indra? Kindly explain to 
me the cause of this and oblige. I am sorry to hear of this curse. 


20. Suta said Thus asked by the son of Pariksit, Vyasa, the son of 
Satyabati, himself replied to the king about their causes in the 
following words 



21. Vyasa said Daksa Prajapati had two daughters, Diti and Aditi; 
these two, of high rank, were married to Kas'yapa; and they were his 
favourites. 


22. Aditi gave birth to the very powerful Indra, the king of the Devas. 
Diti, too, asked for a son of the same strength, prowess, and 
splendour as those of Indra. 


23. Diti, of beautiful dark blue eyes, entreated to her husband and 
said, “Give me a son, O giver of due respects to every body! who 
shall be a hero as strong as Indra, religious and of indomitable 
energy.” 


24. The Muni said to herO Dear! Be peaceful; I advise you to take 
a vow, practise a rite, and when the period of your practice will be 
over, you will get a son like Indra. 


25. Diti promised to act according to his word and took an oath; and 
when she practised the vow, Maharsi Kas'yapa impregnated the 
seed in her womb. Diti also bore the seed in her womb according to 
the usual rite. 


26. The excellent fair complexioned Diti remained sacred, observed 
all the rules and, deeply intent on her vow, subsisted only on milk 
and slept or the ground. 


27-28. Thus when the foetus was fully developed, Diti began to look 
white and full of splendour. On seeing her thus, Aditi became 
anxious and thought if there be born of Diti a son like the powerful 



Indra, then my son will no doubt be deprived of his brilliancy and 
splendour. 


29. The proud Aditi, thinking thus, said to Indra O Son! There, in 
the womb of Diti, is your powerful enemy. 


30. O Beautiful One! Even now think out how you can kill your 
enemy. Before the child is born of the womb, try to destroy it. 


31. Since the time I have looked, on my co-wife Diti, of beautiful eyes 
and proud, this is the one and only thought that troubles the peace in 
the innermost of my hearts. 


32. The enemy, if he firmly gets hold like a fully developed 
consumption, cannot be killed; therefore the intelligent persons 
should destroy the enemies, when they are in their buds. 


33. O S’atakratu! My heart is being pierced wholly by an iron spoke 
when I see the womb of Diti; kill it by any means you can! 


34. O High minded One! If you like my welfare, then destroy the 
foetus, in the womb of Diti, by any of the existent means, Sama, 
Dana or strength and thus remove the cause of grief in my heart. 


35. Vyasa said On hearing his mother, Indra, the King of the 
Immortals, thought over all the means and went then to his step¬ 
mother Diti. 



36. That evil minded Indra bowed down at the foot of Diti with 
humility and addressed her with words, sweet but full of poison. 


37. O mother! You have become very weak, lean and thin in the 
practise your vow. I have come to serve you; order me now what I 
can do for you. 


38. O chaste one to your husband! I want to shampoo your feet. To 
serve one's Guru means to earn righteousness and immortality. 


39. O mother! I swear, on oath, I don't make any difference between 
you and my mother Aditi. Saying thus, he touched her feet and 
began to shampoo her legs. 


40. The beautiful eyed Diti, tired of the vow, lean and thin, thus being 
shampooed and having full faith in Indra's words, fell to deep sleep. 


41-42. Seeing her asleep, Indra, with thunderbolt in his hand, took 
subtle form and by the influence of his yogic power, entered carefully 
into her womb quickly and cut asunder the foetus in the womb into 
seven parts. 


43-44. The child in the womb, struck by the thunder bolt, cried out. 
Indra spoke to the child gently “Do not cry,” and in the mean while 
cut each of the seven parts into seven parts again. Thus, O king! 
The forty-nine Maruts were born. 



45. When the good natured Diti awoke, she came to know that Indra 
has treacherously cut the foetus in her womb and became very sorry 
and angry. 


46-47. Knowing that all these treacherous acts are really done under 
the advice of her sister, the truthful Diti; who was under the vow, 
cursed Aditi, and Indra, saying that as her son Indra has 
treacherously cut the foetus in her womb, Indra's kingdom over the 
three worlds would be destroyed. 


48-49. And as the sinful Aditi has secretly caused the destruction of 
my son, her sons, too, would also die after their birth consecutively 
and she would dwell in the prison house in much trouble and anxiety 
and would also bear still born sons in her next birth. 


50. Vyasa said O king! Maharsi Kas'yapa, the son of Marichi, 
hearing the curse, allayed her anger with loving words. 


51. O Blessed One! Do not be angry. Your sons would all become 
very powerful and would be called Maruts. They would be 
companions and friends to Indra. 


52. O Dear! Your curse won't be fruitless; in the 28th Manvantara, at 
the end of the Dvapara Yuga, your curse will bear fruit. Then Aditi, 
sinful for her jealousy and anger, will go down on earth to take the 
human birth through her Amsa (part) and suffer according to your 
curse. 



53. Varuna, too, had become very grieved and cursed her. And, due 
to both these curses, this Aditi will be born as a woman. 


54. O King! The fair complexioned Diti, thus consoled by her 
husband, became glad and did not utter any more unpleasant words. 


55. O king! Thus I have narrated to you the cause of the previous 
curse. O best of kings! Thus Aditi was born as Devaki out of her 
Ams'a. 


Here ends the third Chapter of the Fourth Book of the Maha 
Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses on the former 
curse of Vasudeva and Devaki by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 4. On Adharma 


1. The King spoke O highly honoured and intelligent one! I have 
heard the anecdote just related to me by you. I am very much 
bewildered. This Samsara (world) is vice incarnate. I wonder how the 
JTvas, entangled in its meshes, can again be freed! 


2. When the son of Kas'yapa, whose kingdom is the three worlds, 
can commit such an heinous act, what wonder, then, that any other 
ordinary person would do more blameable things! 


3. On the pretence of serving and on a solemn oath, when a man, 
can enter into his step-mother's womb and take away the life of the 
son, what more heinous and dreadful can take place than this! 


4. When the preserver and controller of religion, the ruler of the three 
worlds can do such acts, you cannot expect that any other person 
would desert from committing heinous, contemptible acts. 


5. O World Teacher! Indeed my grandfather did unjustifiable horrible 
mean acts in the battle field of Kuruksettra. It is really wonderful! 


6-7. Bhisma, Drona, Kripa, Kama, even Yudhisthira, who is the part 
incarnate of Dharma all these were urged by Vasudeva into this 
contrary religious act. These personages are all born of Devamsas, 
devoted to religion, and intelligent. These know the transitory nature 
of this world; how can these commit such mean blameable things! 



8. O Glory of the Brahmins! What faith or regard can we have for a 
religion, when such high souled persons commit such irreligious 
acts! Indeed, there is doubt whether religion exists at all or not! O 
Best of the Munis! My heart is agitated very much on hearing these 
incidents. 


9. If it be said that the word of the Aptas (seers) is a sufficient 
guarantee for the entity of religion, it may then be questioned where 
there is such an Apta, holding such a pure religious body? All those 
persons who are attached to worldliness are bent on all worldly 
objects with their whole head and heart; these, therefore, cannot be 
Aptas. 


10. When self interest is obstructed, jealousy and anger arise; and to 
secure one's self interest, out of jealousy, arise untruthful words. 


11. Even the pure, excellent, virtuous S’ri Krisna, with full 
consciousness, had to assume under pretence a Brahmin form for 
killing Jarasandha. 


12. Just as the holy S'ri Hari assumed a false appearance to kill 
Jarasandha, similarly Arjuna, too, did a false sacrifice to accomplish 
his ends. Where is, then, one who can claim to be an Apta? And 
what proof is there of the existence of such an Apta? 


13. What sort of sacrifice was this? Did it lead to heaven in the next 
world or did it lead to glory or did it serve the cause of any good will? 
Why was it deprived of that peace and rest? (It was performed with a 
view to kill S'isupala and others). 



14-15. The Pundits, of yore, declare that truth is the first Pada, 
cleanliness, the second; compassion, the third; and charity is the 
fourth Pada (foot) of Dharma (Religion). Thus, devoid of these, how 
can Religion stand with due regards from all? 


16. How can an act bear good fruits, which has no trace of virtue in 
it? It seems no one had any trace of faith and steadiness in one's 
religion. (The Pandavas did sacrifice out of arrogance; how can they 
be Aptas?) 


17-20. Visnu, the Lord of the Universe, assumed His Dwarf 
(Vamana) Incarnation with the express object to cheat Vali, the king 
of the Daityas. Now, O Muni! The king Bali, performed one hundred 
sacrifices; he was the protector of the Vedas, virtuous, charitable, 
truthful and self controlled; why was such a man dislodged from his 
position by Visnu, the Powerful. Who was victorious in this affair? 
Was he the Vali, who was cheated? Or was it Vamana Deva, the 
expert in making nice pretence? Who was the better of the two? I 
have got grave doubts on this point. O the best of the twiceborn! You 
are the composer of the Puranas, virtuous, and liberal hearted. 
Speak what is true (and thus tranquil my heart). 


21-23. Vyasa said O king! The victory was certainly Bali's, in as 
much as he fulfilled his promise and gave over his kingdom of earth 
to Visnu. And in as much as Visnu in his 5th or dwarf Incarnation 
deceived Bali, he had to become a dwarf (i. e. a small mean person 
indicated even by the shortness of his body). O king! There is 
nothing superior in religion to truth. See! S’ri Hah even had to 
become, for his falsehood, a gate keeper of Vali. O king! It is hardly 
possible for a human being to observe in every way the injunctions 
of truth. 



24. Powerful, indeed, is Maya, composed of the three qualities and 
of various forms. By Her is created this Universe, made manifold by 
the admixture of the three qualities (Sattwa, Rajas and Tamas). 


25. How can you expect therefore, truth to be observed wholly, 
without the least violation, by a deceiver. This world is made up of 
the mixture of Rajas; O king! Know this as the every day routine of 
things in nature. 


26-27. It is only the Munis and Hermits that can observe pure truth; 
and that is why they are without any attachment; they do not accept 
any thing from any other body; they are desireless; and they all have 
no rough wear and tear of the world. They exist as perfect examples; 
their case is quite separate. All the others are caught under the 
meshes of the three Mayic Gunas. 


28. O Best of kings! The Dharma S’astras, Puranas and the Angas 
the Vedas are full of diverse opinions on any one point under 
consideration for their composers were under the influence of the 
different Gunas. 


29. The Saguna persons (i. e. persons under Maya) do Saguna 
works (works composed of qualities) and the Nirguna persons (i. e 
persons above Maya) do not do any Saguna work. And when the 
Gunas are mixed with one another, they cannot remain pure (i. e. 
they exhibit qualities of those Gunas with which they are mixed). 



30. O king! One is influenced by Maya no sooner one takes one's 
birth in this world; so that no body can remain steady in this pure, 
steady maxim of truth, untainted by any falsehood or deceit. 


31. The sense organs, Indriyas, confound the Buddhi (reason) and 
make one follow the path of enjoying sensual things. Mind is 
attached to senses and follows diverse ways, urged on furiously by 
the three Gunas. 


32. O king! All the beings, Brahma down to the moving and non¬ 
moving things, fall under the delusion of Maya; She plays with them. 


33. This Maya is always imposing on all; and She is incessantly 
making formations and transformations in this Universe; O king of 
kings! The man under the influence of action takes recourse to this 
untruth (i.e., actions arise first from this untruth) from the very 
moment of his birth. 


34. Persons when they do not get their desired objects after they 
have pondered how to secure the sensual objects, take recourse to 
pretext, and, from that pretext do many sinful acts. 


35. Lust, anger, and avarice; these three are very powerful enemies. 
The Jivas under their influence cannot distinguish the right from the 
wrong. 


36. When wealth, might and rank come to a person, he gets deep- 
rooted Ahamkara, and becomes very egoistic; from Ahamkara, 
delusion comes and, from delusion, insensibility and death ensue. 



37-38. Here men argue mentally many plans; and thence jealousy, 
intolerance and enmity spring in the heart; next arise, out of 
delusion, hope, thirst, misery, low-spiritedness, arrogance and 
irreligiousness. 


39. It is through Ahamkara that people are led to perform sacrifices, 
charities, visit places of pilgrimages, practise vows and rules for 
religious rites and ceremonies. 


40. Hence these sacrificial acts, etc., proceeding from Ahamkara, 
are unable to remove the clouds of impurity from the mind, as 
observance of purity and cleanliness does. Especially when any 
action is done through greed or undue affection, as its motive, it 
cannot be pure in every respect. 


41. Therefore, at the commencement of any sacrifice, the wise 
persons look at the purity of sacrificial things; (Dravya Suddhi); those 
articles that are collected without injuring others, are the best in 
religious acts. 


42. O best of Kings! If the things, acquired by injuring others, be 
utilised in any auspicious act, they yield contrary results at the time 
of fruition. 


43. It is he only, whose mind is very pure and undefiled, who gets the 
results wholly auspicious from any sacrificial act. Minds defiled do 
not acquire their proper desired objects. 



44-45. When the preceptor and the priests ordained are sincere and 
pure; moreover, when the place, moment, act, sacrificial things, the 
mantras, and the sacrificer are all holy, then and there only, the full 
results accrue in their entirety to the sacrificer. 


46. If the sacrifice be intended for the destruction of one's enemy or 
for a personal motive and one's gain, it converts auspicious results 
into those that are inauspicious and lead to ruin in the end. 


47. Selfish persons are unable to ascertain, which actions are 
auspicious and which are not; they depend on the circumstances 
what they call Daiva, and the people do acts sinful instead of 
virtuous. 


48-49. The Devas and demons all are created by Brahma, the 
Prajapati, the Creator; they all are selfish; hence they are at war and 
war with each other. The Devas are born from the Sattva Guna; the 
human beings are sprung from the Rajas and the birds are sprung 
from the Tamas. 


50. O King! When the Devas, born of the Sattva Guna are always 
engaged in inimical actions, what wonder, then, is there, that the 
lower ones would be at war with one another! 


51-52. O King! When the Devas are always discontented, filled with 
jealousy and envy, at war amongst each other, and obstructors of the 
ascetics and the austere persons, then know that this Universe has 
sprung from Ahamkara (egoism). How can you expect them to be 
free from feelings of anger, jealousy; etc.! 



Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Fourth Book, the Maha 
Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses on Adharma 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 5. On The Dialogues Of Nara Narayana 


1. Vyasa said O best of kings! There is no need of dwelling at 
length on this point; suffice to say, that in this world, are found 
persons very rare that are religious, and free from egoism, jealousy, 
anger, etc. 


2. O king of kings! Even in the Satya Yuga, the Golden age, this 
world, moving and unmoving, was covered with feelings of jealousy 
and anger. What to say in this Kali Yuga (Dark Age)! (There is no 
wonder that this world would be full of these vicious things.) 


3. O best of kings! When the Devas are deceitful, jealous, and filled 
with feelings of anger, what is to be said with human beings and 
other lower creations! 


4. O Lord of the Earth! It is natural, that injury be inflicted on those 
persons that commit injury; but when peaceful persons, void of any 
enmity, are injured, that is certainly an act wicked and mischievous. 


5. Whenever, any devout ascetic, calm and quiet, is engaged in 
prayer and meditation, and silent muttering of one's mantrams, the 
king of the Immortals throws hindrance in his asceticism. (This is 
certainly a mischievous act.) 


6. (Holy, unholy and mixed persons exist in all the yugas). To those 
that are holy, all the yugas are the Satya yuga; to the unholy ones 



always it is the Kali yuga (Dark age); and to the mixed ones, always 
it is Treta and Dvapara. 


7. You will very seldom find a few persons, following really the True 
Religion; otherwise, you would have found all the persons in the 
different yugas religious, appropriate to those yugas. 


8. O king! In all cases where the conservation of religions and 
religious affairs are concerned, know that the original wish and 
desire is the cause. If this desire be impure and sullied, religion 
becomes also sullied for, verily, this impurity in one's desire is one's 
cause of ruin in every respect. (Therefore the impure desires are 
never to be cherished and indulged.) 


9. A son, named Dharma, was born of the heart of Brahma; he was 
devoted to Brahmajnana (the knowledge of Brahma), truthful, and 
always engaged in rites and ceremonies and in accordance with the 
Vedic religion. 


10. This high souled Muni Dharma was a householder and married 
duly, according to the proper procedure, to the ten daughters of 
Daksa Prajapati. 


11. This Dharma, the foremost amongst the followers of truth, 
impregnated them and had four sons, named respectively Hah, 
Krisna, Nara, and Narayana. 


12. Hah and Krisna, amongst the four, used to remain always in the 
practising of the yoga. 



13. Nara and Narayana came over to the Himalayan mountains and, 
in the hermitage of Badarika, commenced the difficult religious 
asceticism and penance. 


14. The foremost of the ascetics, those two ancient Munis, began to 
recite that highest mantra of Para Brahma, the Gayatri, on the wide 
spacious bank of the Ganges. 


15. The two Risis named Nara and Narayana, born of Hari's Ams'a, 
practised excellent tapasya for full one thousand years. 


16. The whole Universe, moving and unmoving, became hot through 
the Fire of their Tapas. Indra became also perplexed. 


17-18. The thousand-eyed Indra became anxious, thought and within 
himself thus What is to be done now? These two sons of Dharma 
are practising Tapas and are in meditation. If they succeed, they can 
occupy my excellent seat in Heaven; how can I break their Tapasya 
and what steps shall I take to hinder them. 


19-20. Lust, anger, and insurmountable avarice Indra brought into 
existence and, intent on hindering their tapasya, mounted on the 
elephant Airavata, went quickly to the hill Gandhamadan, and 
approaching the holy hermitage, saw the two ancient Risis. 


21. Their bodies were incandescent by Tapasya, as if they were the 
two rising Suns. Were they Brahma, Visnu manifested there or were 



they the two shining sources of light? These two Risis were the sons 
of Dharma. What would they do with their Tapasya? 


22-23. Thinking thus, the lord of S'achi seeing them addressed thus 
O highly fortunate ones! O two Risis the sons of Dharma! Please 
tell me what are your objects? I have come here to give thee 
excellent boons; I am very pleased with your Tapasya; therefore ask 
boons from me; and even if they be not worth giving, I will give them 
to you. 


24-25. Vyasa said The Risis were deeply immersed in meditation 
and seemed very firm and resolute; they, therefore, did not reply 
anything, though Indra, standing before them, repeatedly urged them 
to ask boons from him. Seeing this, the king of the Immortals began 
to terrify them with his supernatural enchanting fearful mayic powers. 


26. He created lions, tigers, wolves and other murderous animals 
and began to terrify the two Risis with them; Indra also produced 
rains, hurricanes and fires very frequently so that they might yield. 


27. In spite of Indra's attempt to terrify them by his wonderful Maya, 
the two Munis, Nara Narayana, the two sons of Dharma, could not 
be brought under his control. And Indra returned to his own place. 


28-31. And he became very sorry and thought thus :-- These two 
Munis could not be tempted away with boons, nor did they fly away 
from their place of worship, though terrified with fire, wind, wolves, 
tigers and lions. No one, I think, would be able to break their 
meditation. When fear and temptations have not distracted their 
meditation, they are certainly meditating on the Eternal Maha Vidya 



S'n Bhuvanes'wan, the Prime Force of Nature, the Source of all 
Mayas, and the Goddess the Creatrix of all the worlds, the wonderful 
highest Prakriti; what other expert in emitting Maya there can be? 
Who can break their meditation! 


32. Indeed! how can this whole host of Mayas that are created by 
Gods and Asuras overpower those purged of all their sins, who are 
meditating their Creator, the Supreme Maya, that Illusion by which 
one considers the unreal Universe as really existent and as distinct 
from the Supreme Spirit, whence the Gods and Asuras have derived 
all their supernatural powers. 


33. He in whose heart reign the seed mantras of Vak, Kama and 
Maya, called Vagvijam, Kamavijam, Mayavijam, no one is able to 
stand against and overpower him. 


34-35. O king! Indra, enchanted by Maya, did not desist from 
tempting the two Risis, but he went on thinking other means by 
which their asceticism could be baffled and asked Kama and 
Vasanta (the god of Lust and the season spring) to come before him 
and addressed them, thus O Kama! You now be united with your 
wife Rati and Vasanta (the God of spring) and go to the hill 
Gandhamadan, accompanied by all the Apsaras (celestial damsels) 
and with all the Rasas (love sentiments). 


NOTE The Gandhamadan is the mountain like unsurpassable 
intoxicating happiness of the senses. 


36-37. There you will find the two ancient excellent Risis Nara and 
Narayana practising asceticism in solitude, in the hermitage of 



Badarika. O Manamatha! You better go before them, and with the 
influence of your arrows, do now my work and make their hearts 
extremely lustful. 


38. O Fortunate One! Charm over them by means of your arrows, 
make them leave their asceticism by magical spells. 


39. Who is there in this world of Devas, Daityas, human beings, that, 
being whipped by your arrows, do not come under your control? 


40. When Brahma, I, Mahadeva, Moon and Fire are all fascinated by 
your arrows, then is there any doubt that these two Risis would not 
be fascinated by them! 


41. I am sending these public women as your assistants. Rambha 
and other beautiful celestial nymphs would all follow you. 


42. You alone, or Rambha or Tilottama alone can do this work. Will 
there be any doubt if you all unite in this? 


43. O Good One! Do this work for me; I will confer on you your 
desired objects. 


44. O Manmatha! I tempted them with boons but these two ascetics, 
of controlled minds, could not be displaced from their seats. My 
efforts were rendered useless. 



45. I frightened them very much with all the Mayic powers; yet they 
could not be dislocated from their deep thoughts. It seems that they 
are quite heedless in the preservation of their bodies. 


46. Vyasa said Kamadeva, on hearing the king of the Devas, 
addressed him thus O Indra! Today I will fulfill all your desires. 


47. But there is one word. If these two ascetics be meditating Visnu, 
S’iva or Brahma or the Sun, then I will be able to bring them under 
my control. 


48. And if they be meditating on the Great Seed Mantra, the root of 
all Maya, and the great Kamavijam, the king of the Kama, I will never 
be able to subdue such a devotee of the Highest Devi. 


49. If these two ascetics have devotedly taken refuge of the Great 
Power Maha Devi, then they will not come under the sight of my 
arrows. 


50. Indra said O Blessed One! Go now with your assistants, ready 
to do your work. No body but you, I find, that can fulfill my this 
beneficial, though very difficult work. 


Vyasa said Thus ordered by Indra, they all departed to where the 
Dharma's sons Nara, and Narayana were performing their hard 
Tapasyas. 



Here ends the Fifth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 6. On The Origin Of Urvas’I 


1. Vyasa said O king! First there appeared on the mountain, the 
king of the seasons, Vasanta, the Spring. All the trees flowered and 
became very beautiful; and the bees began to hum round all sides. 


2. Mangoes, Bokul trees, the beautiful Tilaka trees, the good 
Kimsukas, Sal, Tal, Tamal and Madhuka trees assumed unequalled 
beauties, ornamented with their flowers. 


3. Cuckoos began to coo coo (warble) beautifully on the tops of 
trees; the creepers flowered and began to embrace the trees. 


4. The creatures became enamoured with love and began to look on 
their paramours with amorous eyes and began to hold pleasant 
sexual intercourses. 


5. The southern breeze blew gently, full of pleasant odours and 
agreeable to touch. The sensual organs became very powerful and 
could no longer be brought under their control by the Munis. 


6. Then Kama, united with Rati, hurriedly entered into the Hermitage 
of Badarika with the five arrows in his hands. 


7. Rambha, Tilottama, and other prominent Apsaras all went to that 
beautiful hermitage and began to sing in perfect tune with gamuts, 
key notes and respective pauses. 



8. The two Maharsis awoke on hearing the sweet music, the 
warbling of the cuckoos and the nice hummings of the bees. 


9. Nara Narayana became anxious to see the untimely bursting of 
the Vasanta (vernal season) and the flowering of the trees. 


10. How can the spring season come now at such an untimely 
season. I see, all the creatures are become extremely amorous with 
each other and infatuated with passionate lust. 


11. It is very unusual that untimely things should happen. How has 
this come to pass? Struck with wonder, Narayana began to speak to 
Nara with eyes wide apart. 


12. Narayana said O Brother! See these trees look very elegant 
with flowers on them; the cuckoos are sounding sweet notes on all 
sides; the bees are humming on all sides. 


13. The spring, the lion of the seasons, has burst asunder the fierce 
elephant, the winter season, by its sharp nails, as testified by the 
budding of Palasa flowers. 


14-18. O Brahman! See how beautiful and excellent has become this 
hermitage with the presence of the Goddess Spring Laksmi? O 
DevarsT! The Raktas'oka flower is the palm of her hand; Kims’uka 
flower, her excellent feet; Nilasoka flowers, her black hairs on her 
head, the full-blown lotuses, her eyes; the bel fruits, her breast; the 



jolly Kunda flowers, her teeth; Manjari, her beautiful ears; red 
Bandhu flowers, her lips; Sindhubara, her wonderful nails; the 
peacocks, her ornaments; the sounds of Sarasa birds, the jingling of 
her feet ornaments; the wreaths of flowers, her waist ornaments; the 
mad gooses, her gait; Kadamba flower's filaments, her hairs on her 
body; O best of ascetics! With all these, the Vasanta Laksmi has 
assumed a wonderful nice appearance. 


19. Why has this occurred untimely? Think over it; O Devarsi! I am 
struck with wonder; surely this is obstructive of our penances. 


20. Hear! There the Apsaras are singing sweetly the song, tending to 
destroy our Tapasyas; it seems, these are the means, no doubt, 
adopted by Indra to pollute our Tapasya. 


21. Why is this spring season now generating our pleasures? It is 
clear that that Indra, the enemy of the Asuras, is become afraid of 
our Tapasya and is creating these obstructions to disturb our 
asceticisms. 


22. Lo! The cool, odorous, and pleasant breezes are blowing; no 
other cause can be traced than the wicked deed of Indra. 


23. When the best of the Brahmins, the Deva Narayana was 
addressing thus, the whole host of Cupid became visible before their 
sight. 


24. And the two Risis were very much surprised on seeing them. 



25-27. They saw near to them the Cupid with his attendants Menaka, 
Rambha, Tilottama, Puspagandha, Sukes'i, MahasVeta, Manorama, 
Pramodvara, Ghritachi, Charuhasini, the expert in music, Chandra 
Prabha, the cuckoo voiced Soma, the lotus eyed Vidyunmala, 
Kanchana malini, and others. 


28. Eight thousand and five hundred Apsaras and long multitudes of 
the hosts of Cupid, the Munis saw and were surprised. 


29. Then those prostitutes of the Devas, dressed with their heavenly 
ornaments and the heavenly flowers, appeared before the Munis and 
bowed down their heads on the ground. 


30. The Apsaras began their enchanting songs, exciting much 
passion and rarely heard or seen in this world. 


31-32. The two Munis Bhagavan Visnu-like Nara Narayana were 
pleased with their music and addressed them thus O thin waisted 
good looking Apsaras! You have come here as guests, I see, from 
your Heavenly world. Stay here in peace and all comfort; we will 
gladly serve you as your hosts. 


33-34. Vyasa said O king! The two Munis, thinking that Indra has 
sent these Apsaras to obstruct their Tapasya, were filled with egoism 
and determined to create, out of their strength of Tapasya a new 
Apsara, who would be very much more beautiful and possessing far 
more heavenly graces than the present ones, who are ordinary 
looking and clumsy in their behaviours. 



35. And the Munis, by clapping or striking their thighs, instantly 
created a woman, exquisitely beautiful in all respects. 


36. This good looking woman was named Urvas'i, since she was 
produced from the thighs. And all the other Apsaras present there 
were very much thunderstruck on seeing that Urvas'i. 


37. Then the Muni Narayana easily created as many women as 
there were Apsaras to serve them. 


38. The just produced Apsaras brought with them all sorts of offering 
in their hands, and, singing and smiling, came before the Munis and 
with clasped hands bowed down before them. 


39. The heavenly damsels sent by Indra, though enchanting to 
others were themselves now bewildered on beholding Urvas'i, 
beautiful in all respects and produced out of the Tapasya of the 
Munis; and their hairs over the bodies stood on their ends. Then they 
tried to make their faces as beautiful as they could and began to 
address the Munis thus 


40. O Munis! We are ignorant girls; how can we praise you and the 
greatness of your Tapasya and at your steadiness. Oh! There is no 
one in this Universe, that is not burnt with the passion by the arrows 
of our sharp eyesight? But there is no trace of mental disturbance 
and defilement in you; Oh! Wonderful is your greatness, indeed! 



41. We are convinced that both of you are the Amsas of Visnu and 
that your treasures are your incessant peace and control of mind. 
We have come here not to serve you but to hinder you in your 
penances, that we may fulfill the desires of Indra. 


42. By what good luck of ours we have got a sight of thee, we do not 
know; we do not know also what merits we did? We have committed 
great offence to you; still you have not cursed us. You have 
considered us as those of your own family and have pardoned us. 
Therefore our minds are free from sorrow and anxiety. Much praise 
be to your forgiveness! Wise saints do not squander away their 
occult powers, derived from austerities, in trivial ways like cursing 
others. 


43. Vyasa said Very pleased were those two Dharma's sons, the 
two Maharsis, self controlled and desireless, to hear these words of 
those godly behaved heavenly damsels; they then spoke to the 
damsels, blazing with the fire of their Tapas. 


44-45. Nara and Narayana said O Damsels! We are pleased with 
you; better ask from us your desired boons; we will instantly grant 
them to you. You better take with you to your Heaven this beautiful 
eyed Urvas'i, born of our thighs as a present to your Deva Raja, the 
Indra. 


46. Now peace be to all the Devas; you better go to your own places; 
do not, in future, disturb the Tapasya of others. 


47. The damsels said Where will we go now? We have reached 
your lotus feet through our devotion, and our joy knows no bounds; 



O Narayana the Supreme amongst the Gods! 


48. O Lord! O Madhusudana! O Lotus-eyed! If Thou art pleased with 
us and dost want to give us our desired boons, we disclose to you 
our wished for object. 


49. O Lord of the Devas! Thou art the Lord of the world; so beest 
Thou the Lord of us. O Destroyer of the foes! We will gladly put 
ourselves at the service of your feet. 


50. Let those sixteen hundred and fifty beautiful-eyed damsels 
including Urvas'i, that are your creation and that are now existing 
here, let them go unto Heaven by your command. 


51. And we, the sixteen hundred and fifty damsels that have come 
before, may be allowed to remain here at your service. 


52. O Madhava! You are the Lord of the Devas; be true to your word 
and give us our desires. Those seers, the Munis, who know what is 
Dharma, declare that it is sin, equivalent to murder, to destroy the 
hopes of those women that are struck with passion. 


53. We are very fortunate to come here from Heaven and we are 
filled with extreme love for you, O Deves'a! You are the Lord of the 
world; you can do all things; therefore do not leave us. 


54. Narayana said O thin bodied damsels! I am practising at this 
place the tapasya for full one thousand years, controlling my 



passions; how can I now break it by engaging myself to enjoy 
sensual things. 


55. I have no inclination to indulge in sexual pleasures, tending to 
destroy the Highest Bliss as well as the Highest Dharma. What 
intelligent person will like to indulge like a beast in sensual 
pleasures. 


56-57. The Apsaras said Of the five senses; sound, etc., the 
pleasures attained through the sensation of touch are excellent, and 
are reckoned as the source of Bliss; no other pleasures stand equal 
to it. Therefore do then fulfill our words, and enjoy incessantly this 
highest bliss and roam freely in this Gandhamadan mountain. 


58. If you like to go to Heaven, be pleased to know that there is no 
Superior Heaven to Gandhamadan (the mountain like intoxicating 
happiness of the senses). Dost thou enjoy the highest bliss, the 
pleasant sexual intercourse with us, the heavenly damsels in this 
very beautiful and lovely place. 


Thus ends the Sixth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S'rimad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa on the origin of Urvas'i. 



Chapter 7. On Ahamkara 


1. Vyasa said O king! The Dharma's son, of excellent prowess, 
hearing thus, the words of these damsels, thought within himself, 
thus what shall I do under the above circumstances. 


2. If I indulge now in sexual pleasures, I will be an object of laughter 
amongst the Munis. This present trouble has, no doubt, arisen from 
my Ahamkara (egoism). This Ahamkara is the first and foremost in 
ruining one's Dharma. 


3-5. The wise sages have declared this Ahamkara as the root of this 
tree of world. I did not observe the vow of silence on seeing those 
damsels come here; I have held much conversations with them; 
therefore I have got into this troublesome anxiety and sorrow. I have 
created these damsels at the expense of my Dharma and Tapasya. 
The beautiful and lovely damsels sent by Indra are now full of lust; 
and are bent on ruining my tapasaya. Now if through Ahamkara I 
had not created the damsels, I would not have fallen into this 
difficulty. Now I am caught firmly in the meshes of my own creation 
like a spider; what am I to do next! 


6-7. If I abandon these damsels, thinking that there is no necessity to 
reconsider the matter, then these would be broken hearted; and they 
would go away cursing me? 


Yet I would be free from this present danger at least and then be 
able to practise excellent tapasya in a lonely place. Therefore, now, I 
will get angry and tell these damsels go away from me. 



8. Vyasa said O King! The Muni Narayana thought that he would 
become thus happy; but, at the next moment, he discussed in his 
mind thus 


9. The second great enemy is anger; it is greater than causing hurt 
to others; and it is greater than lust and avarice. 


10. Out of anger people commit murder; this murder is the source of 
hell and is giving pains to all. 


11. As trees, rubbing against each other, generate fire; and are 
themselves burnt up in this fire, so fire arising from this body 
ultimately burns this body to death. 


12. Vyasa said The younger brother Nara on seeing his elder 
brother anxious and low-spirited, spoke out what is right, as follows 


13. O Narayana! You are very intelligent and very good; therefore 
reliquish this feeling of anger and betake to quietude and peace, and 
kill the dreadful anger. 


14. Do you not remember that it is through this Ahamkara and anger 
that our tapasya was destroyed on a previous occasion; and we had 
to fight severely with Prahlada, the Lord of the Asuras for one full 
divine thousand years. 



15-16. O Lord of the Devas! We were put to much difficulties then; 
therefore O Lord of the Munis! Get rid of this anger; be quiet! The 
sages declare the peace is the root cause and the only object of 
Tapasya. 


17.Vyasa said On hearing these words of his younger brother 
Nara, the Dharma's son Narayana took to peace. 


18. Janamejaya said O Lord of the Munis! The high souled 
Prahlada was a devotee of Visnu and of a peace loving heart: how it 
was that, in the ancient days, the battle took place between him and 
these Risis; how could the Risis fight? There is this great doubt in my 
mind. 


19-20. These two Dharma's sons were ascetics and peace loving; 
how the fight could come to pass between these and the 
Daityasuras? How did these two Risis fight with the high souled 
Prahlada? 


21-22. Prahlada was very religious, full of knowledge and very much 
devoted to Visnu. Nara Narayana were Sattvik and ascetics; 
therefore if there had occurred enmity between those, it appears that 
the religion and asceticism, Tapasya and Dharma were matters in 
name only; and the labour was spent in vain in the golden age even. 
What was the value of asceticism and meditation and muttering 
silently the mantras! No one can make out. 


23. Oh! Persons like them could not conquer their hearts full of anger 
and egoism! Anger and jealousy cannot spring unless there be at the 
bottom a feeling of egoism (Ahamkara). 



24. All the passions, lust, greed, anger, etc., come out of Ahamkara 
(egoism), there is no doubt of it; one hundred lakh years of severe 
asceticism are rendered quite useless by the cropping up afterwards 
of a bit of Ahamkara. 


25. As darkness is dispelled entirely on sunrise, so no trace of 
religious merit can exist on the rising of a bit of Ahamkara. 


26. When Prahlada could fight with S'ri Bhagavan Hah, then. Oh! all 
his merits in this world are rendered of no use whatsoever. 


27. Where is the religious merit and where is peace when the quiet 
souled persons Nara Narayana, the two Risis began to fight, without 
paying any heed to their highest end, the Tapasya? 


28. When Ahamkara became invincible by the two Risis, then what 
can be expected from the weak trivial persons like us in the matter of 
subjugating this Ahamkara? 


29. Who can be free from Ahamkara in these three worlds, when the 
high souled persons like the above were not free from it? I am now 
quite confident that, in this Universe, no body was ever before free 
from Ahamkara nor will there be any such in the distant future. 


30. One can be free if bound by an iron or a wooden chain; but when 
one is pierced by Ahamkara, one can never become free from it. 



31. This whole Universe, moving and unmoving, is rolling in this 
Samsara (migration and transmigration) polluted by urine and 
faeces, being covered by Ahamkara. 


32. Where is, then the Brahma Jhana? O Good One in vows! The 
Karma theory, according to the Mimamsakas, seems reasonable and 
true. 


33. O Muni! What can you expect from the weak-minded persons 
like me in this Kali yuga, when the great persons are always 
overpowered with lust, anger, etc. 


34-35. Vyasa said O Descendant of Bharata! How can the effect 
be different from its cause? Gold and golden ear-rings though 
different in form owing to upadhis, are both similar to their original 
cause, the metal gold. 


Thread is the cause of cloth; therefore as cloth cannot be different 
from its thread, so this whole universe, moving and unmoving, is 
sprung from Ahamkara; then how can it be free from Ahamkara? 


36. All this, moving and unmoving, including a blade of grass, are 
fashioned out of the three qualities of Maya; so if it be formed of 
those qualities, what repentance can come to those who are wise 
and know every phenomenon as unreal? 


37. O Best of kings! Brahma, Visnu or Mahes'a, even these are all 
rolling in this vast ocean of Samsara, being bewildered and 
fascinated by Ahamkara. 



38. The great sages like Vas'istha, Narada and the other Munis are 
frequently taking their births in this Samsara. 


39. In this Triloki, there is not even one embodied soul, who is 
entirely free from this Maya and has become quiet and immersed in 
the high bliss of the Supreme Self. 


40. O Best of kings! Lust, anger, avarice, and fascination, all, arise 
from Ahamkara. These do not leave any embodied person. 


41-42. Studying all the Vedas and Puranas, going to all the sacred 
places pilgrimages, making charities, thinking on Paramatman and 
worshipping the gods, doing all these, the people still get attached to 
sensual objects and act like a thief. 


43. O Son of Kuru! In the three yugas, the Satya, Treta, Dwapara, 
Dharma had been pierced and wounded very much; what to say of 
Dharma in this Kali Yuga! 


44. You will find quarrels, avarice, anger raging always in this Kali 
yuga. Therefore there is no wonder that you will not find any one 
thinking and doing what is worth thinking, and doing what is not 
worth doing? 


45. Free from envy, anger, and jealousy, such persons are rare now- 
a-days in this Kali yuga. Some peaceful persons exist here and there 
to keep up the ideal. 



46. The king said O Muni! They are blessed and holy who are free 
from this fascination of Maya, self controlled, who have conquered 
their passions, and who follow good conduct. They have risen above 
the Triloki. 


47. O Best of Munis! My high minded father put a dead serpent 
round the neck of an ascetic without any fault; I am very sorry to 
think of his act. 


48. Therefore, O Muni ! Kindly suggest any means by which I can 
now redress that act. O Bhagavan! I do not know what will be the 
result of this act, committed out of the bewildering of intellect. 


49. Fools in search of honey see only honey before them but not the 
falls, whence they might tumble down and die. So the stupid men do 
disgraceful acts and do not get afraid of the tortures of hell. 


50. Kindly describe, in detail, how the fight incurred between 
Prahlada and Narayana in ancient times. 


51. How was it that Prahlada went out of Patala (the nether regions) 
and went to the great holy place, the hermitage of Badarikas'rama in 
the Sarasvata country, the great place for pilgrimage. 


52. O Muni! What was it that led the best of the Munis, the two 
ascetics to fight with Prahlada? 



53. The enmity springs where there is wealth, wife, or land. The two 
Maharsis were desireless, had nothing of these; how, then, without 
any cause, they fought such a battle! 


54. Prahlada was also very religious and knew that those two Risis 
were the Devas; knowing this, why did he fight with them? 


55. So describe in detail the cause of all these. 


Here ends the Seventh Chapter in the 4th Book of S’rimad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses on Ahamkara by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 8. On Going To The TIrthas 


1. Suta said Thus asked by the son of Panksit, the king 
Janamejaya, the best of the Brahmanas, the son of Satyavati, Vyasa 
spoke, in detail, the following 


2. The virtuous Janamejaya became very much sorry and 
despondent when he heard in detail the improper acts of his own 
father Pariksit, the son of Uttara. 


3. Owing to insulting the Brahmin boy, his father had to go to hell; 
and he was constantly thinking how to release his father. 


4. The son is called “Puttra” for he releases his father from the hell, 
named “Put”. He is the true son that can do so. 


5-6. The fortunate son of Pariksit became very much tormented and 
bewildered with fear when he heard what was the fate of his father, 
who died bitten by a serpent on the top of a palace, due to the curse 
of a Brahmin, void of any bathing, charities, and the purificatory acts. 


7. When Vyasa returned home, Janamejaya asked him, the whole 
course of events of Nara Narayana. 


8. Vyasa said O King! When the terrible Hiranya Kas'ipoo was 
slain, his son Prahlada was installed on his throne. 



9. During the government of Prahlada, the chief of the Daityas, the 
worshipper of the Brahmanas and Devas, the kings on earth began 
with faith to do many sacrifices for the satisfaction of the Devas. 


10. The Brahmanas were engaged in their Tapasya, Dharma, and in 
frequenting the places of pilgrimages; the Vais'yas, in their trade; and 
the S'udras, in serving the other three classes. 


11. The incarnation of Hah, the Nri Simha (Man-Lion) made 
Prahlada, the king of the Daityas in the Patala (Nether regions); and 
Prahlada, engaged there, spent his time in the preservation and 
welfare of his subjects. 


12. Once, on a time, the great ascetics Chyavana Muni, the son of 
Bhrigu went on his way to bathing in the river Narmada, at the place 
of pilgrimage, called VyarhitisVara. 


13. There he saw the great river Reva and, while he was descending 
in the river, a dreadful snake caught hold of him and carried him to 
the Patala. The Muni was greatly terrified and began to think of the 
Deva of the Devas, Janardana Visnu. 


14-15. On remembering the lotus eyed Visnu, the serpent lost his 
poison, and Chyavana Muni did not find any trouble, though carried 
to the Patala. 


16. Then the serpent, coming to know of the power of the Muni, left 
him for fear that the Muni might curse him; the snake afterwards 
repented very much. 



17. Chyavana, the best of the Munis, worshipped by the daughters of 
the serpents, roamed there and entered once into a beautiful palace 
of the Nagas and the Danavas. 


18. While he was walking, he was seen by the religious king of the 
Daityas, the Prahlada. 


19. The lord of the Daityas on seeing him worshipped him and 
enquired of him the cause of his coming there. 


20. Are you sent here by Indra? Speak truly, O best of the 
Brahmanas. Is it to pry into my kingdom out of the enmity between 
the Devas and the Daityas? 


21. Chyavana said What have I to do with Indra? That I might be 
sent by him, as his spy, messenger, to your city! 


22. O Chief of the Daityas! Know me as Chyavana, the son of 
Bhrigu, prompt in religious duties and whose eye is illumined by 
knowledge. Do not fear that I am sent here by Indra. 


23. When I went to bathe in a place of pilgrimage, in the holy 
Narmada, and dropped into the river, a poisonous snake caught hold 
of me (and carried me here). 



24. I took the name of Visnu; and the serpent, hearing the Visnu's 
name, became void of poison, and left me here as you see. 


25. O king! Coming here, I see you. You are a devotee of Visnu; 
know me, too, a devotee of the same Visnu. 


26. Vyasa said O king! Prahlada, the son of Hiranya Kas'ipu, on 
hearing his sweet words, gladly asked him about the various places 
of pilgrimages. 


27. Prahlada said O Best of Munis! Kindly describe to me, in 
detail, which are the places of pilgrimages on the earth, Patala, and 
in the Heavens, that verily lead to holiness. 


28. Chyavana said O King! He whose body, words, and mind 
have grown pure, to him, his every footstep is a place of pilgrimage; 
he, whose heart is impure and defiled, to him the holy Ganges even 
is a thing more hated and worse than the Kikata country (the name 
of Behar). 


29. Every holy place will impart holiness to him whose mind is first 
pure and deprived of sin. 


30-31. O Best of the Daityas! On the banks of the Ganges, are 
situated good many cities, towns, villages, places to assemble, 
mines, small villages, the living places of the aborigines, the 
chandalas, and kaivartas, the Hunas, Bangas, the Khasas and the 
other MIechchas. 



32. The inhabitants of the above places drink at their will the holy 
Ganges water, equivalent to Brahma, and bathe therein and do other 
works. 


33. O King! There not even a single soul becomes pure. What use is 
a holy place to him, whose heart becomes attached to the sensual 
objects and who can therefore be called the lost souls. 


34. Know, O king! the mind as the principal factor in any religious act 
or in any holy place. He who wants purity, let him first make his own 
mind pure. 


35. The residents in any holy place deceive others and thus incur 
great sins. The sins committed in a place of pilgrimage can never be 
removed; they become unending and inexhaustible. 


36. As the fruit, Indravaruna, is never sweet though fully ripe, so 
whose heart is defiled, he can never be pure though he bathes 
hundreds and thousands of times in the Tirtha water. 


37. He who wants welfare of his own and others, he should first 
make his mind pure; when his mind becomes pure, then, the purity 
of material things and the purity of conduct can have any effect; then 
and then only resorting to places of pilgrimages becomes 
efficacious. 



38-39. Always avoid company with the lowest class of persons in the 
holy places; it is far better to shew one's good will and compassion 
to all the souls (jivas) by one's intellect and by one's acts. You have 
asked me about the holy places of pilgrimages; I will now tell you 
those that are the best. 


40. O king! The holy Naimis'aranya is the first, next Chakratirtha; 
next Puskaratirtha; there are many others besides these that cannot 
be counted. O Best of kings! There are lots of other holy places in 
this world. 


41-42. Vyasa said O king! Prahlada, the king of the Daityas, on 
hearing the Muni's words, became ready to go Naimis'ranya and, 
with very much gladness, exclaimed to his followers, the Daityas 
O Good Ones! Get up; today we will go to Naimis'aranya and we will 
see the lotus eyed, yellow robed S’ri Achyutam, the Visnu. 


43. Vyasa said O King! When thus addressed by Prahlada, the 
Demons were exceedingly glad; and they all marched out of Patala. 


44. The Daityas, and Demons all united went to Naimis'aranyam and 
filled with much pleasure, they all bathed on reaching that holy place. 


45. There, accompanied by the Daityas, Prahlada roamed about the 
sacred places and saw the holy Sarasvati river and Her pure clean 
water. 


46. The highsouled Prahlada bathed in the Sarasvati river and his 
mind was satisfied. 



47. The king of the Daityas was very much pleased and he perform 
ablutions and charities according to due rites in that most auspicious 
sacred place of pilgrimage. 


Here ends the Eighth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam of 18,000 verses by MaharsT Veda 
Vyasa on going to the Tirthas. 



Chapter 9. On The Fight Between The Risis And 
Prahlada 


1. Vyasa said After performing duly his religious rites there, the 
son of Hiranya Kas'ipu saw before him an unbrageous peepul tree. 


2-3. There he saw along with the feathers of vultures, the terrible, 
sharpened under a stone, various glittering arrows, arrayed in due 
order; and he was surprised to think who could have kept such 
arrows, well guarded in this very holy hermitage of the Risis. 


4-5. While Prahlada was thus meditating in his mind, he saw before 
him, wearing the skin of a black antelope, the two sons of Dharma, 
the two Munis Nara Narayana, loaded on their heads with high clots 
of hairs. Before them were placed the two white bows named 
S'arngam and Ajagavam, (Pinaka) the bows of Visnu and S'iva 
respectively, bearing their qualified marks, as well as their two 
inexhaustible big quivers. 


6-10. The Lord of the Daityas, then, saw those two blessed ones, the 
two Risis Nara Narayana, the two sons of Dharma, deeply absorbed 
in meditation. Seeing this, he became very much enraged, his eyes 
became red, and he began to address them thus O two Ascetics! 
Has vain arrogance possessed your mind to destroy religion? It is 
never seen nor even heard, that the practice of severe asceticism 
and the holding of the bows and arrows, were carried into effect 
simultaneously by one man in any of the Four Ages. These two are 
contradictory things. That may be worthy in the Kali Yuga? This 
asceticism is fit for the Brahmanas; why, then are the bows and 
arrows held by you? There is an irreconcilable difference between 



the holding of clotted hairs on the head and the holding in the hand 
of the bows and arrows. Therefore, do you practise religious rites, 
with feelings befitting your divine positions! 


11. Vyasa said O Descendant of Bharata! On hearing thus the 
Prahlada's words, the Nara Risi said O Lord of the Daityas! What 
matters it to you? Why do you, for nothing, trouble yourself with our 
tapasya. 


12. An able man can accomplish any thing. It is widely known in the 
three worlds, that we are able to accomplish these two things 
contemporaneously. O thou of weak understanding! 


13. In the battle field as well as in asceticism, we can shew our 
prowess. What have you got to do with us in these matters? The 
road before you is unobstructed, you can go wherever you like; why 
do you brag of your own merits? 


14. You are very dull and stupid; what can you understand of a 
Brahmanic glory that is very rare and attained with great difficulty? 
Those that want happiness need not meddle with the Brahmanas. 


15-16. Prahlada said Blunt headed and vain braggarts are you! 
When I am present in this Tirtha, I who am the upholder of Dharma, I 
won't allow you to practise any irreligious things here! O Ascetics! 
Better show me your skill in fight to-day. 


17-18. Vyasa said O king! The Risi Nara on hearing his words 
replied Give us battle if you are so desirous. O wretched amongst 



the Asuras! In to-day's battle, I will knock your head down, and then 
you shall never in future desire to fight with any body. 


19-20. Vyasa said On hearing these words, the chief of the 
Daityas was very much angry and promised to conquer these two 
self controlled Risi ascetics, Nara Narayana by any means 
whatsoever. 


21-22. Vyasa said Thus saying, the Daitya took up his bow and 
quickly stretched it with arrow and the bow string made a terrible 
noise. Then Nara, too, too up with anger his bows and began to 
shoot arrows at Prahlada lots of sharpened arrows and weapons. 


23. The lord of the Daityas quickly selected the arrows, glittering like 
gold, and with them tore asunder the arrows thrown by Nara. Nara, 
seeing his arrows, cut asunder, became infuriated with anger and 
began to hurl as quickly lots of other arrows. 


24. Prahlada then cut asunder with arrows, of quick velocity, the 
Nara's weapons and struck violently on the breast of Nara. Nara, 
too, with anger pierced the arms of Prahlada with five quick arrows. 


25. Indra and the other Devas came on their respective aeroplanes 
to see their fight and began to give cheers sometimes to Nara and 
sometime to Prahlada from above the skies. 


26. The Lord of the Daityas taking up his bow, began out of furious 
anger to hurl various weapons on Nara as incessantly as clouds give 



rain over the mountain peaks. The Nara Muni now became very 
much exhausted and weary, being struck with Prahlada's arrows. 


27. Narayana then seeing Nara exhausted, became very much 
amazed and bolding his unequalled S'arnga bow, began to quit 
arrows, shining with with golden lustre. 


28. O Lord of the earth! Then Narayana and Prahlada both were 
desirous to win the victory, and a terrible fight ensued. The Devas 
gladly poured forth flowers on their heads from the skies. 


29. The king of the Daityas got very much enraged and began to hurl 
arrows with tremendous quickness. Narayana, the son of Dharma, 
immediately cut asunder those weapons with his very sharp arrow. 


30-32. Narayana too, threw arrows sharpened under stones with 
high velocity and very much troubled the lord of the Daityas, who 
now became very much restless. 


33-34. The sky was covered over with arrows and arrows from both 
the parties and the day looked like the night. Then the Devas and the 
Daityas were very much astonished and told each other, “We never 
saw before a terrible fight like this.” 


35. Then the Devarsis, Gandarbhas, Yaksas, Kinnaras, Pannagas, 
Vidyadharas and Charanas were all very much confounded. 



36-37. The two Risis Narada and Parvata came also to witness their 
fight; the Devarsi Narada told the Parvata Risi he never saw before 
such a dreadful fight. There were awful battles with Tarakasura and 
Vritrasura and also the battle between Hari and Madhukaitava; but 
they were all inferior and cannot stand in comparison. 


38. It seemed that Prahlada was very powerful; otherwise how could 
an equal fight last so long a time with such an accomplished person, 
perfect with all the supernatural powers and of such heroic deeds as 
Narayana. 


39-42. Vyasa said O king! Day and night the Daityas and the 
ascetic Narayana went on fighting terribly with each other. Then 
Narayana cut off, with the arrow, the bow of Prahlada; Prahlada soon 
took another bow; the expert handed Narayana quickly broke into 
two that bow. Thus though Prahlada's arrows were repeatedly cut 
asunder still he began to take up fresh bows and Narayana began to 
cut them repeatedly. 


43-44. Thus, then, when all the bows of Prahlada were destroyed, 
the Daitya Raja took up Parigha (iron club), became enraged and 
threw it on Narayana's arm. The powerful Bhagavan Narayana, 
seeing the dreadful iron club, cut it asunder with nine arrows and 
pierced Prahlada with ten arrows. 


45-47. Then Prahlada, enraged, threw the iron gada on Narayana's 
thighs. The exceedingly powerful Dharma's son was not at all 
agitated and stood firm like a rock and taking up arrows quickly cut 
asunder the iron gada of the Daitya. Then the visitors were much 
startled. 



48-49. Then Prahlada, intent on killing his enemy, became very 
much angry and threw the S’akti darts, spears and missiles instantly 
on Narayana's thighs with great velocity. Narayana with one arrow 
cut that easily into seven parts and with seven arrows pierced 
Prahlada. 


50. Thus for one thousand Deva years the terrible fight lasted 
between Prahlada and Narayana in that hermitage; and the whole 
universe was struck with surprise. 


51-52. Then Gadadhara with yellow robes and four hands quickly 
came there and called Prahlada. The son of Hiranya Kas'ipoo, 
Prahlada, seeing the Lord of Laksmi, four armed, Narayana with 
lotus and disc in His hands come there, bowed low, and, with folded 
hands, began to speak to him with great devotion. 


53-54. O Deva of the Devas! You are the Lord of the universe and 
devoted to your devotees. O Madhava! I have fought for full one 
hundred Deva years; still I have not not been able to defeat these 
ascetics. I do not know why. I am surprised at it. 


55-56. Visnu said O Forgiving One! These two Risis Nara 
Narayana are, the perfect ascetics, self controlled and born of my 
Amsas. Therefore you have not been able to defeat them. What 
wonder is there! O king! Better go now to your Patala and keep your 
steadfast devotion on me. O Intelligent one! Do not quarrel any more 
with these two ascetics. 


57. Vyasa said O king! The Daitya king Prahlada then advised by 
Visnu went out of that place with his Asura followers; and the two 



Nara Narayanas began again to practise their Tapasyas. 


Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Fourth Book of S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam; of 18,000 verses, on the fight 
between the Risis and Prahlada by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 10. On The Curse On Visnu By Bhrigu 


1-4. Janamejaya said O Son of Paras'ara! There has arisen a 
great doubt in my mind on hearing just now your words. These Nara 
Narayana are the two sons of Dharma; they are ascetics, calm and 
quiet, the Ams'as of Visnu; they reside in a holy place of pilgrimage! 
They are filled with the Sattvic qualities, subsisting always on roots 
and fruits of the forest, the highsouled hermits and truthful. How 
were they addicted to such warfare? Why had they left their 
invaluable asceticism? And with what object were they fighting for 
full one thousand Deva years with Prahlada. 


5. What was the end, O Muni, of their fight with Prahlada? Kindly 
explain to me in detail the cause of this warfare. 


6. Women, wealth or any other worldly object can be the cause of 
any quarrel or fight amongst any persons; but, in this case, the two 
ascetics had none of these; how then this idea of fight sprung within 
their minds. 


7-8. And why did they practise such severe austerities? Was it that 
they had to overpower others, or enjoy pleasures themselves or to 
reach Heaven that they practised tapasya? What fruits did they 
eventually obtain from such penances? 


9. They became very lean and thin through their asceticism; still how 
could they fight full one thousand Deva years without getting 
fatigued. 



10. They were not entangled in this fight for kingdom, or wealth or for 
women or for any other worldly object; then why did they fight with 
the high souled Prahlada? 


11. Having no attachment for any worldly object nor any desire to 
gain any thing therefrom, why did they engage themselves so 
thoroughly, in such pains giving battle? 


12. Intelligent persons always do works leading to bliss; they never 
do painful works; this is the long standing rule of the world. 


13. The two sons of Dharma were the Ams'as of Hah, all knowing 
and adorned with all qualities; why did they fight, subversive of 
religion? 


14. O Maharsi! Even the dull and stupid persons in the world won't 
go to these deadly battles leaving asceticism and samadhi, leading 
to the purification of all desires. 


15. I have heard that Yayati, the Lord of the earth was dropped from 
Heaven to this world, owing to his Ahamkara, though he was a 
virtuous king devoted to charities and sacrifices. 


16-17. No sooner Yayati, said the king did As'vamedha sacrifice, 
etc., with Ahamkara, egoism, he was dropped by Indra with 
thunderbolt in his hands. So one can see that, without Ahamkara no 
fight can occur. The ascetics had no bodily strength; therefore if they 
had to fight, it is through the waste of their Tapasya that they could 
do so. 



18. Vyasa said O king! The all knowing sages that have realised 
the truth or Dharnna declare the threefold Ahamkara arising out the 
Sattvic, Rajasic and Tamasic qualities respectively to be the causes 
of this world. 


19. How, then, can these two Munis being embodied forego their 
Ahamkaras? Without any cause, no actions follow; this is quite 
certain. 


20. Tapas, charities, sacrifices all originate from the Sattvic qualities. 
And quarrels arise from the Rajasic or Tamasic qualities. 


21. All arise from Ahamkara, whether good or bad; this is quite 
certain. 


22. There is no other thing that enchains a soul than this Ahamkara. 

It is out of Ahamkara that this Universe is created: how can it be then 
free from it? 


23. O King! Brahma, Visnu, Mahes'ha, even these are with 
Ahamkaras. Then how can you expect other ordinary Munis to be 
free from it? 


24. Encased with Ahamkara, this Universe is rolling. Births and 
death occur repectively through this Karma. 



25. O Lord of the earth. The Devas, birds and men are revolving in 
this world like the wheel of a chariot. 


26. In this wide world who can count how many Avataras Visnu had 
to take in all sorts of wombs, good or low. 


27. Ordained by the Lord of the Universe, Narayana Himself had to 
take the Fish, Tortoise, Boar, Man Lion and the Dwarf incarnations. 


28. Vasudeva Janardana the Lord, had to undertake countless 
Avataras births in this world. 


29. In the Vaivasvata manvantara, the Avataras of Bhagavan Hari 
are being mentioned to you. Hear! 


30. The all pervading Lord of the world, the God of the Gods, had to 
take several incarnations in this world, owing to the curses inflicted 
by Bhrigu. 


31. The king said There has now again arisen another fresh 
doubt, why was Visnu cursed by Bhrigu Muni? 


32. O Muni! What injury did Hari commit to that Muni, and whereof 
the Muni Bhrigu cursed him. 



33-34. Vyasa said Hear, O king! the cause of the curse; I will 
narrate to you. In days of yore, the king Hiranyakasipu, the son of 
Kasyapa often quarrelled with the Devas; owing to this incessant 
warfare, the whole universe was much alarmed and perplexed. 


35. And when Hiranyakasipu was slain by the Man-Lion incarnation, 
Prahlada, the tormentor of the foes, continued his enmity towards 
the Devas and began to annoy them. 


36. Thus one hundred years dreadful battle occurred between the 
Devas and Prahlada, to the astonishment of all. 


37-38. O king! The Devas fought very hard and were victorious. 
Prahlada was defeated and was sorely grieved. Hearing that the 
Eternal Religion is the best, he handed his kingdom over to his son 
Bali and went to the Gandhamadan hill to practise tapasya. 


39-40. The prosperous Bali, too, on gaining his kingdom, began to 
quarrel with the Devas and the war thus went on. Ultimately the 
powerful Indra and the Devas defeated the Asuras. 


41-42. O king! Indra, of unequalled prowess, with the aid of Visnu, 
deprived the Daityas of their kingdom. The defeated Daityas took 
refuge of their family spiritual guide S'ukracharya and addressed him 
thus, O Brahmana! You are endowed with your fiery strength of 
Tapasya and you are now powerful; why are you not lending your 
helping hands to your Daitya followers. O foremost of the councillors. 
If you do not help us and save us, we will not be able to stay in this 
earth and will soon have to go down to Patala. 



43-44. Vyasa said Thus addressed by the Daityas, the very kind 
hearted S'ukracharya said, O Daityas! Do not be afraid; I will protect 
you by my fire of strength and vigour; and help you with sound 
counsels and medicines. Be brave and energetic and cast aside your 
mental agony and sorrow. 


45-47. Vyasa said O king! The Daityas became fearless under the 
patronage of S'ukracharya. The Devas had their spies and knew all 
about these. They held councils with Indra and settled that before 
the Daityas had time to dislodge us from our Heaven with the mantra 
of S'ukracharya, we will speedily go and attack them. Thus attacked 
all on a sudden, they will all be slain by us and we will drive them 
down to the Patala. 


48. Thus forming their resolves, with fully equipped arms and 
weapons, they went out of rage to fight with the Daityas and orderd 
by Indra and aided by Visnu, they began to kill the Demons. 


49. When the Devas were thus slaying the Demons, they got very 
much terrified and exclaimed “O Lord! Protect us! Protect us!” and 
took the refuge of Sukra. 


50. S'ukracharya, seeing the Daityas very much perplexed and 
distracted, at once cried aloud out of the influence of his Mantra “No 
fear, no fear,” Then the Devas on seeing S'ukracharya left the 
Daityas and fled away to their own places. 



Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Fourth Book of the Maha 
Puranann, S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18000 verses by MaharsT 
Veda Vyasa on the curse on Visnu by Bhrigu. 



Chapter 11. On S’ukra’s Going To Mahadeva To 
Get The Mantra 


1. Vyasa said When the Devas retired from the battlefield, 
S’ukracharya addressed the Demons thus O best of the Demons! 
Please hear, what had been told to me by Brahma in days of yore. 


2-3. Janardan Visnu is coming here to slay all the Demons, He killed 
before Hiranyaksa, the king of the Asuras, in His Boar incarnation. 

He killed Hiranyakasipu by assuming His Man-Lion appearance; now 
too, he will kill all the Daityas, no doubt, with great enthusiasm. 


4-5. Now my mantra force will not be of any avail before S’ri Hari. 
And without my help you will not be able to conquer the Devas. 
Therefore, O Demons, wait for some time for me; I will start today to 
the presence of S'iva Mahadeva to obtain from him the Mantra 
S’akti. 


6. I will return, as early as possible, getting the Mantra from S’ri 
Mahadeva; and with the help of the power of those great Mantras I 
will be able to protect you thoroughly. 


7. The Daityas said O best of the Munis! We are now defeated 
and our forces are well nigh exhausted; how will we be able to stay 
on this earth and expect your return for so long a time? 


8. Those who were of great strength amongst us, they all are slain; 
now we are left very few in number. In this crisis it is not advisable 



and auspicious for us to remain here in this battlefield. 


9. S’ukracharya said Better you all stay here until I return, getting 
the requisite Mantra; remain peaceful and engaged in asceticism. 


10. The heroes apply one or other of the following four measures 
conciliation, alliance, gifts and bribery, partitions and sowing 
dissensions and punishment or open attack according to the 
conditions of time, place strength and circumstances. 


11. Intelligent and well wishing persons do serve their enemies even 
in time of distress; but no sooner they find that their strength and 
army have increased, than they try at once to kill all their enemies. 


12. Now, therefore, pretend your meekness and allegiance and 
adopt peace and remain in your own place until my arrival. 


13. O Demons! I will come back with the Mantra from Mahadeva. I 
will fight again with the Devas, by that veritable mantra power. 


14. O king! Thus firmly making up his mind to have the Mantra, 
S’ukracharya went to Mahadeva. 


15. The Danavas sent Prahlada to the Devas for conciliation. The 
Devas regarded Prahlada truthful and they all trusted on him. 



16. Prahlada with Asuras addressed thus the Devas with gentleness 
and humility. 


17. O Immortals! We all have abandoned our weapons and armour. 
Now we desire to wear barks of trees and practise asceticism. 


18. The Devas took Prahlada's words to be true and deserted from 
further fight; were freed of anxiety and felt all delighted. 


19. On the Daitya’s leaving their weapons, the Gods desisted from 
battle, went to their respective places and freely gave themselves up 
to pleasure and amusements. 


20. The Daityas controlled themselves and practised asceticism in 
the Kas’yapa’s hermitage, expecting the return of S’ukracharya. 


21. S’ukracharya went to Kailasa and made respectful obeisance to 
the God Mahadeva. Mahadeva enquired of the cause of his coming. 


22. S’ukracharya said 1 ask for Mantras, O Deva! from you that 
are not possessed by Brihaspati, for the defeat of the Devas, and the 
victory of the Asuras. 


23. Vyasa said On hearing his words, the all-knowing S’ankara 
S’iva began to think what He would do in this matter. 



24. Certainly, this is with the revengeful object of attacking the 
Devas, for their defeat and for the victory of the Asuras that this Muni 
has come. 


25. The Devas ought to be protected by me; thus thinking, S’ankara 
MahesVara advised him an entirely difficult tapasya to practise. 


26. Full one thousand years he would practise tapasya with feet 
upwards and head downwards, he will have to inhale the smoke of 
burnt husk. Then he will get the Mantra and his desires will be 
fulfilled. 


27. That would be done; thus saying to S’ankara, S’ukracharya 
practised that excellent vow, peaceful and inhaling the smoke of 
husk to get that Mantra. 


28-29. The Devas came to know that S’ukracharya is practising his 
vow and the Daityas have become arrogant. They then counselled. 


30. And came to the conclusion, took up weapons and arms and 
went to the Daityas, ready to fight. 


31. The Daityas, seeing the Devas dressed in armour and holding 
weapons and coming from all sides, became very much afraid and 
anxious. 


32. The Daityas, seeing this all on a sudden, were attacked with fear 
and began to address the Devas, proud with their army, in words, full 



of good meanings and morals. 


33. O Devas! We have abandoned our arms; we are now armless; 
our spiritual guide is in his tapasya, you gave us words of 
fearlessness; why then you have come now dressed in full armour 
and with armies to kill us. 


34. O Devas! Where is your truth. And where is your religion 
acccording to S’ruti? It is stated in S’ruti never to kill the weaponless, 
the fear stricken, and the refugees. 


35. The Devas said You sent your good S’ukracharya, out of 
pretence to acquire the Mantras; your asceticism is veiled under a 
deceitful object. Therefore we will fight with you certainly. 


36. Be ready now and dress yourself with your arms and 
ammunitions, “Lo! Whenever you get any loop hole in your enemies, 
catch hold of it and kill your enemy.” This is the eternal religion. 


37. Vyasa said On thus hearing the reply from the Devas, the 
Daityas after consideration quitted that place and fled away with 
terror. 


38. And they took refuge under the S’ukracharya’s mother. She saw 
the Daityas very much fearstricken and at once guaranteed to them 
protection from fear. 



39. The mother of Kavya S’ukracharya said Don’t fear; don’t fear; 
cast away fear. O Danavas! In my presence, no fear can overtake 
you. 


40. The Asuras on hearing her words were free from anxiety and 
pain and remained in that hermitage, in no way now bewildered or 
agitated, though they had no arms. 


41-42. Here the Devas, seeing the Daityas flying away, pursued 
them and entering the hermitage were ready to kill the Daityas, not 
taking into account what strength they gained there. The mother of 
S’ukra warned the Devas not to kill; but, inspite of her hindrance, 
they began to slay the Daityas. 


43. Seeing the Daityas thus attacked, the mother was furiously 
irritated and told them she would make all of them overpowered by 
sleep by her tapas strength, clarified intellectual force. 


Note :-ls it by the asphyxiating gas? Or, by poisonous vapours or 
liquids? 


44. So saying she sent the Goddess of sleep who at once 
overpowered the Gods and made them all lie down on the grounds 
senseless. Indra with the other Devas lay there dumb, and 
miserable. 


45. On seeing Indra thus stupefied by sleep, the Bhagavan Visnu 
told Indra to enter into His body. He would then carry him to another 
place and he will be better. 



46-47. Indra entered into the Visnu’s body; and, under His 
protection, he became free from sleep and fear. On seeing Indra 
thus sheltered by Visnu and fearless, the mother of Kavya spoke. 


48. O Indra! I will devour you with Visnu today by my Tapas force. All 
the Devas will presently see all this and my extraordinary power. 


N.B.: Is it by making the earth go down, causing a fissure, thus 
engulfing the whole army? Or by blowing them up? Or by showering 
jets of poisonous gas or hot water or vapour from all sides. 


49. Vyasa said O king! No sooner the mother spoke thus, than 
both Indra and Visnu were both stupefied under her magical spell, 
superior thought power, and a thorough learning of the art of warfare. 


50. The Devas, seeing them very much overpowered and 
bewildered, were greatly struck with wonder; they became desperate 
and began to cry aloud. 


51. Indra, on hearing the Devas cry aloud, told Visnu, O 
Madhusudana! I am more bewildered in particular than yourself. 


52. O Madhava! No need of any further consideration. Before this 
wretch, inflated with pride by her tapasya, burns us, better cause her 
death as early as possible. 



53. When thus requested by Indra who was very much perplexed, 
Bhagavan Visnu quickly remembered his Sudars’ana disc, casting 
aside the thought that it is hateful to kill a woman. 


54-55. The disc, the ever obedient weapon of Visnu appeared 
instantly at his remembrance; and Visnu, becoming angry as 
prompted by Indra held the disc in His hand, and, hurling it off on the 
S’ukra’s mother, severed off her head quickly. The god Indra became 
very glad at this. 


56. The Devas became free from sorrow, got very much pleased and 
heartily exclaimed victory to Hari and worshipped Him and began to 
chant His praises. 


57. Indra and Visnu then became free from all troubles; but they 
began to fear that Bhrigu (S’ukra’s father) would curse them terribly 
and without fail. 


Here ends the Eleventh Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’ri mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa, on S’ukra’s going to Mahadeva to get the Mantra. 



Chapter 12. On Bhrigu’s Curse And The 
Dialogue Between S’ukracharya And The 
Daityas 


1. Vyasa said O king! On seeing Visnu killing his wife, and thus 
committing a dreadful atrocious act, the Bhagavan Bhrigu was very 
sorry and began to tremble with anger and addressed Madhusudana 
thus. 


2. Bhrigu said O Visnu! You have done an extremely sinful act. O 
intelligent one! Knowing it, you have done so; what a great wonder! 
Nobody dreams of the murder of this Brahman’s daughter; and you 
have committed it in deed, black and white. 


3. O Deva! The Maharsis declare you to be Sattvic, engaged in 
preservation; Brahma to be Rajasic (creator) and S’ambhu S’iva to 
be Tamasic (destroyer). Why then is the contrary thing visible in this 
case? 


4. Why have you become Tamasic? Why have you done this 
heinous crime? O Visnu! The females are never to be killed; this is a 
known fact; then why have you killed this woman without any fault. 


5-6. You have done a very execrable act. What shall I do to you? It is 
mete that I would curse you. O Great Sinner! You have pained me 
very much and made me very weary. I will not curse Indra. You 
always assume a deceitful appearance and behave like a black cruel 
serpent; your mind is all full of wickedness; I will curse you. 



7. O Janardana. Those Munis who call you Sattvic are fools; I have 
seen today that your ways are exceptionally vicious and Tamasic. 


8. O Visnu! I curse you now to take frequent births, suffer very 
frequently in different wombs, in the earth and thus suffer the pains 
of remaining in the wombs. 


9. O king! Therefore whenever religion subsides in the world, 
Bhagavan Visnu incarnates frequently in this human world, due to 
the curse of Bhrigu. 


10. The king said O best of the Munis! Did that Mahatma Bhrigu 
again marry and lead a householder’s life when his wife was thus 
killed by the lustrous disc Sudars’ana. 


11. Vyasa said O king! The sacrificer Bhrigu angrily cursed Hah 
and next took that severed head and quickly placed it over the body 
as before and said 


12-14. O Devi! Visnu has slain you today; I will make you regain your 
life just now. If I am acquainted with all the Dharmas and if I have 
practised these in my life and if I have spoken truth always, then dost 
thou regain your life by my religious merit. Let all the Devas witness 
my power and strength. If I know the True, if I have studied all the 
Vedas and if I have realised the Knowledge of the Vedas, then I, 
sprinkling your body with this cold water, charged with my mantras, 
will revive you. 



15. Vyasa said O king! Sprinkled by the water by Bhrigu, his wife 
regained her life and rose up at once and felt herself glad and 
smiled. 


16. All the persons and living creatures seeing her stand, as if 
awoken from her sleep, at once exclaimed from all sides “well done, 
well done!” thanked Bhrigu and his wife very much and highly 
praised them. 


17. Thus seeing the fair complexioned wife regain her life through 
Bhrigu, Indra and all the Devas were very much struck with wonder. 


NOTE Thought power and inhalation of some medicines might 
have revived her. 


18. Indra then adressed the Devas Now the mother of S’ukra has 
regained her life through Bhrigu; but when S’ukracharya will receive 
the mantra after his severe tapasya, we do not know what terrible 
harm; he would do to us! 


19. Vyasa said O king! Though the deep sleep that overtook Indra 
had now left him, yet he became very unhappy, remembering the 
severe asceticism of S’ukra’s tapasya and his receiving mantras. 


20. Thinking over deeply in his mind, Indra called his daughter 
Jayanti and spoke to her with affection. 



21-22. Go! Daughter! I have given thee over to the ascetic Kavya. 
Do this service for me, go to Kavya and help him in his asceticism 
and bring him under your control. By whatever acts the Muni be 
pleased, dost thou do at once and please him in every way and thus 
remove my fear. 


23. The large-eyed beautiful Jayanti, hearing her father’s words, 
went to the hermitage and there saw the Risi inhaling or drinking the 
smoke. 


24. On seeing the body of the ascetic, and remembering her father’s 
words she brought the leaves of the plantain trees and began to fan 
him. 


25. The intelligent Jayanti with no excitement used to bring the pure, 
clear, cool, and well scented water and place it, with great devotion, 
before the sage for his drinking. 


NOTE: Here Indra bribed by giving away his daughter. 


26. When the sun was over his head, she used to prepare some 
protection, with her clothes, from the sun and thus made the shade 
for him. Thus, in various ways, did she begin to serve the Muni, 
herself remaining steady in her religion. 


27. She brought sweet and ripe fruits proper according to the 
S’astras and used to place them before him for his repast. 



28. In the performance of his daily duties, she used to collect the 
Kus’a grass of the span of thumb and fore finger, and flowers, white 
and yellow and placed them before him. 


29. For the Muni’s bedding to lie down and sleep, she used to gather 
soft, green leaves and with them she used to keep his bed ready; 
and when the Muni laid himself down, she used to fan him gently. 


30. Never did she exhibit for fear of curse, any gesture or posture 
calculated to disturb his mind. 


31. The sweet-tongued, thin lady used to praise S’ukracharya in 
pleasing and favourable terms. 


32. When the Muni awoke, she placed water before him to wash his 
face and hands. Thus serving the Muni, did she stay in the 
hermitage. 


33. The fear stricken Indra used to send messengers to fathom the 
mind of that self controlled Muni. 


34. Thus did Jayanti serve for good many years the Muni, being void 
of anger and observing duly her celibacy. 


35. In this way one thousand years passed duly, the God Mahadeva 
was very pleased and addressed S’ukracharya that He had come to 
give him boons that he desire. 



36-37. The God Mahadeva said Whatever there exists in this 
universe, whatever you see with your eyes and whatever cannot be 
described in words, you will be the lord of all these and the 
conqueror of all. There is no doubt in this. You cannot be killed by 
any creature; you will be the ruler of all beings and will be reckoned 
as the best of the Brahmanas. 


38-39. Vyasa said The God Mahadeva disappeared then and 
there, after granting him the boons. Then S’ukracharya saw Jayanti 
and said to herO lady of beautiful hips! Who and whose daughter 
art thou? What is the desire in your mind? What for you have come 
here? O one of beautiful thighs! what is your duty? 


40. O beautiful eyed! I am very pleased with all that you have done 
for me. What do you want? O one of good vows! Ask boons from 
me; I will grant them even if they be difficult. 


41. On hearing this, Jayanti’s face became bright with joy; she said :- 
- whatever I desire, you know that already by force of your Tapasya. 


42. The Kavya said Your mental desires I know; still mention them 
yourself particularly; I will do good to you in any way you like; I am 
pleased with your services. 


43-44. Jayanti said O Brahmin! I am the daughter of Indra and I 
am the younger of my brother Jayanta. Father has given me over to 
you; I now like to live with you. Kindly fulfil my desires now. O 



blessed one! You better take me and enjoy me according to Dharma. 
This is my desire. 


45. S’ukracharya said O thou of large and handsome hips! Better 
enjoy with me for ten years, according to your liking, without being 
visible to anybody. 


46-48. Vyasa said Thus saying, S’ukracharya went to his home 
and, according to religious observances, married Jayanti and lived 
with her for ten years under the shade of Maya and unobserved by 
anybody. On the other hand, the Daityas, hearing that S’ukracharya 
returned home successful getting his desired Mantra, were very glad 
and went to his house to pay their respects to him. But S’ukra was 
then living with Jayanti; hence the Asuras could not see him. 


49. Then they got very much dejected, sorry and were drooped in 
spirits; they searched for him again and again. 


50. Not being able to see S’ukra under the shade of Maya, the 
Daityas were very sorry and got afraid and then returned to their own 
residences. 


51. On the other hand, the Devas, knowing that S’ukra was holding 
intercourses with Jayanti, Indra, the God of Devas, spoke to the 
Deva Guru Brihaspati. O Guru! Advise us what to do under the 
present circumstances and relieve us from the impending difficulties. 


52. O Brahmana. Better go today to the Danavas and do that by 
which our honour may be maintained. You better put the Danavas 



under some charm by your magical spell and think and do good to 
us. 


53. On hearing Indra’s words and knowing that S’ukra is now 
enjoying with Jayanti, Brihaspati went to the Danavas, putting on the 
appearance of S’ukracharya. 


54. Going to the Demons, he called on them very politely and 
sweetly. The Asuras said that S’ukracharya had come in presence of 
them. 


55. The Demons were very glad and bowed down before 
S’ukracharya and could not make out that he was the false 
S’ukracharya, under the mayic charm of Brihaspati. 


56. Then the false S’ukracharya asked the welfare of the Daityas 
and said 1 went so long for your good; I performed severe tapasya 
and satisfied the God S’ambhu and acquired from him the Mantra, 
the sacred knowledge, and that I will frankly explain to you. 


57. On hearing this, the Demons were very pleased and, knowing 
that the Guru had been successful, were filled with joy. 


58. They saluted him with joy and began to live quietly and freely 
and without pains, having got rid of fear from the Devas. 


Here ends the twelfth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Mahapuranam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 



Vyasa on Bhrigu’s curse and the dialogue between S’ukracharya and 
the Daityas. 



Chapter 13. On Cheating The Daityas 


1. The king said What did the intelligent Brihaspati do after he had 
assumed falsely the appearance of S’ukracharya, and lived there as 
the spiritual guide of the Demons. 


2. O Muni! Brihaspati is the Guru of the Devas; he also devotes his 
time in studying the Vedas; and is the ocean of all knowledge; he is 
the son of the Maharsi Angira and he is himself a Muni. Endorsed 
with all these good qualifications, how could he deceive the Demons 


3-4. In all the religious S’astras, Truth is declared to be the essence 
of Dharma; and the Supreme Self is attained through Truth, so the 
wise sages say. How can we expect an ordinary householder to be 
true when such a man as Brihaspati takes recourse to falsehood 
with the Demons. 


5. If one acquires, as one’s wealth, the whole Universe, still one 
does not require anything more than what is required in feeding 
one’s belly; how is it that Brihaspati could speak falsehood merely 
for the sake of his belly? 


6. O Muni! The words sung by the ancient virtuous and respectable 
sages were true and had their corresponding objects denoted by 
those words; now they employed the term S’ista meaning that there 
were virtuous, respectable persons as denoted by them. When 
Brihaspati can even commit such condemnable deceitful acts and 
speak falsehood, we can expect no virtuous respectable persons in 
the world. Where then do you find the S’ista persons, denoted by the 



word S’ista, sung by the ancient sages? The word S’ista is now 
meaningless! 


7. The Devas are sprung from the Sattvic qualities, men from Rajasic 
qualities and birds, etc. from the Tamasic qualities. 


8. When the Guru of the Immortals, the incarnate of Sattvic qualities, 
can become a liar, how can one expect those who are Rajasic or 
Tamasic to follow rigorously the truth? 


9. Oh! This Triloki is all pierced with falsehood! Where is the 
Religion! And what will be the ultimate goal of all these creatures! 


10. When Bhagavan Hari, Brahma, Indra and the best of the Devas 
when all can betake to pretext, fraud and trickery and show 
cleverness in them; what to speak of men! 


11-12. O Giver of honour! When all the Devas, Vas’istha, Vamadeva, 
VisVamitra, Brihaspati and other ascetic Munis get themselves 
overpowered by lust and anger, when their intelligence gets 
destroyed by covetousness and avarice, when they are addicted to 
vices and are expert in fraud, pre-text and trickery, then what fate, 
alas! can you expect of Dharma and what help is there of any 
religious persons! 


13. Alas! Indra, Agni, Moon, and Brahma when these get 
overpowered by the strong influence of lust, are in illicit love with 
others’ wives, where is the goodness and virtuous behaviour in this 
Triloki? 



14. O Sinless One! To whom, then, can we look upon as our spiritual 
guide and our advice and law givers when all the Devas and Munis 
are corrupt with avarice? 


15. Vyasa said O king! Be he Indra, Brihaspati, Brahma, Visnu or 
Mahes’a, whoever is embodied or will put on bodies, he will have to 
be in touch with the previously mentioned Ahamkara, and 
covetousness and other vices due to name and form. 


16. O king! Brahma, Visnu and Mahes’a are all attached to sensual 
objects; and what improper and sinful actions there can be that 
cannot be committed by persons devoted to sensual objects! 


17. It is through cleverness and fraud that any one devoted to 
sensual objects can easily make oneself as cleverly free from Maya; 
but when difficulty comes, then his trickery gets discovered and the 
respective qualities hidden in him are brought to bear their 
respective results. Know, then, the three qualities to be conjointly the 
cause of all these actions; as without any cause, no action gets 
visible. 


18. These discrepancies in the case of Brahma and others are 
caused by the three qualities; their bodies are all created from 
Pradhan Mahat and the other 25 Tattvas (essences). 


19-20. O king! Brahma and others are subject to death; then how 
can you doubt on other things? In advising others, everybody gives, 
as it were, good and virtuous advices; but the burden falls upon their 



own heads; they fall off from their advices and act according to their 
hidden natures; then they yield to lust, anger, envy, egoism and 
fascination. 


21. No one who is embodied can get rid of passions, born of the 3 
qualities. O king! Thus the Triloki goes, is the saying of the Maharsis. 


22-29. This Triloki, auspicious, inauspicious, mixed, never gets any 
serious change; its nature remains always uniform. See Bhagavan 
Visnu sometimes practises severe asceticism; Indra, the lord of the 
Devas sometimes follows the practices of religious sacrifices. Again 
you find Visnu Bhagavan, full of youth, fond of the Leela, enjoying 
the company of Rama in Vaikuntha; sometimes He is the ocean of 
mercy, is fighting dreadful battles with the Demons and being 
severely afflicted with their clusters of arrows; sometimes he gains 
victories, sometimes he gets defeat through the irony of Fate; thus 
he gets undoubtedly pleasures and pains. O king! some time 
Narayana draws all the worlds into his belly and takes his yogic 
sleep on the thousand headed serpent S’es’a and again he gets 
himself awakened by Prakriti. O king! Brahma, Visnu, Mahes’a, 
Indra, the Devas, and Munis all of them, live up to the limit of their 
ordained time and when the time of Pralaya, the Universal 
dissolution, ends, this whole Universe, moving and nonmoving, 
again comes into existence as before; there is no doubt in this. O 
king, at the expiry of the ordained time, Brahma and all others will 
die , no doubt. 


30-31. Again, in due course, Brahma, Visnu, and Mahes’a and the 
other Devas come out and assume bodies and get all the passions, 
lust, etc., as ordained. O King! You need not be astonished; this 
Triloki always goes on accompanied by lust, anger, etc. 



32-34. Persons free from lust, anger and other passions are very 
rare in this world. He who is afraid of this world does not marry, and 
thus being free from the attachments to any worldly object, becomes 
free and roams fearless. The Moon stole away the wife of Brihaspati 
and Brihaspati himself stole away the wife of his younger brother. 
Thus in this wheel of Samsara, all the creatures are ever passioned 
with attachment, avarice, etc. 


35. The householder can never expect to obtain freedom. Therefore 
those who want to be free, should carefully relinquish the idea of the 
stability of the world and worship the Eternal Mother Full and Sat, 
Chit and Anandam. 


36. This world, moving and unmoving, O Mahes’ani, rolls in 
madness, overpowered by Her Maya. 


37. Intelligent persons worshipping Her, trample down the three 
qualities and become free. O king! No other Path exists for Freedom 


38-39. Until one gets the Grace from the Mahes’ani, one never gets 
happiness. True mercy is not found anywhere else but from Her. 
Then one should worship the All merciful, being of pure heart. For 
Her worship leads to freedom, even in this body-hood. 


40. He who getting a human frame fails to worship Mahes’ani, gets 
down from the highest rung of the ladder. This is my opinion. 


41-42. This Universe, composed of the three qualities, is 
encompassed with Ahamkara and fastened to untruth; therefore 



freedom can never be expected without the worship of That Potent 
Goddess, O Muni! O king! Renounce every worldly object and serve 
the Goddess BhuvanesVari; this is the highest duty of all. 


43. The king said What did, then, the Devaguru do in the disguise 
of S’ukracharya? And when did the real S’ukracharya come there? O 
respected Muni! Speak on these points. 


44. Vyasa said Please hear what the disguised Brihaspati in the 
shape of S’ukracharya did afterwards. 


45. The demons were made to understand clearly by Brihaspati; and 
then they took him for S’ukracharya and placed implicit faith on him 
and began to think of him and him alone. 


46. The Daityas, enchanted and deceived by the magic of 
Brihaspati, took now his refuge for acquiring the knowledge from 
him, since they mistook him for S’ukracharya. Who is there that is 
not enchanted by the idea of gaining something? 


47. On the other hand, when the term of ten years was over, 
S’ukracharya, the real Guru of the Daityas, ceased enjoying Jayanti 
and began to remember his disciples, the Daityas. 


48. He now began to think that “My disciples, the Daityas, are 
expecting every instant my return; and I would now go and see them, 
bewildered with fear. 



49-51. They are my devotees and I ought to do such that they might 
not be afraid of the Devas.” And then he exclaimed to Jayanti, “O 
beautiful one! Let my sons take the shelter of the Gods; your term of 
ten years is today over; I now go therefore, to see my disciples; soon 
I will again come to you.” 


52. “Be it so”, replied Jayanti, the best of those who know religion, 
“you can go where you like; I am not to destroy your Dharma.” 


53-54. Hearing these words, S’ukracharya went hurriedly to the 
Demons and saw the Devaguru Brihaspati sitting before them in the 
guise of S’ukracharya. He was explaining to them the Jaina 
doctrines, compiled by himself and finding fault with the act of envy, 
taking revenge and killing and cursing the sacrifices, etc. 


55. He was telling them “O Enemies of Gods! Truly, I am telling you 
words that will, no doubt, prove good to you. Non-killing is the 
highest virtue; even the enemies ought never to be killed. 


56. It is the Brahmanas, addicted to enjoyments and pleasures of the 
senses, who want to satisfy their tastes and pleasures that are found 
in the Veda’s injunctions to kill animals; but there is no virtue higher 
than non-killing animals.” 


57-58. O king! S’ukracharya was perfectly astonished to hear 
Brihaspati, the Guru of the Devas, speaking against the Vedas and 
began to think that Brihaspati is certainly my enemy. My disciples 
have been duped by this cheat; there is no doubt in this. 



59. Fie to Avarice! It is the seed of sin; very strong and the veritable 
gate to hell; Brihaspati, even, the Guru of the Devas, is speaking 
lies, bound under the influence of this heinous avarice! 


60. Oh! What wonder is this that the Guru of the Devas, who is the 
promulgator of all the religious S’astras and whose word is accepted 
as the final decision, is now expounding the doctrines of atheists. 


61. When Brihaspati can become the expounder of atheistic 
doctrines, impelled by covetousness what to speak of those whose 
minds are not pure and whose intelligence is not sharp? 


62. This Deva Guru, though a Brahmin, is acting today like a rogue, 
wanting to take away all and is deceiving my disciples the Daityas, 
who have been confounded by his magic. 


Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam, the Mahapuranam of 18,000 verses on cheating 
the Daityas by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 14. On The Daityas Getting Back Their 

S’UKRACHARYA 


1. Vyasa said Thus arguing in his mind, S’ukracharya smilingly 
said to the Daityas O Daityas! what for have you all been cheated 
by Brihaspati, the Guru of the Devas, in my guise. 


2. I am S’ukracharya; you are my disciples; this man is Brihaspati, 
wanting to serve the Gods. He has cheated you, there is no doubt in 
this. 


3. This vain villainous person has assumed my form; do not put the 
least faith in his words. O Daityas! You are my disciples, follow unto 
me; leave this Brihaspati, vain and arrogant. 


4. The Daityas, on hearing his words were struck with wonder at the 
resemblance of the two personages and came to the conclusion that 
“the person just come is the real S’ukracharya.” 


5. Then Brihaspati, the false S’ukracharya explained to the Daityas 
in plain and enchanting words that “the second man just come is the 
Deva Guru Brihaspati; he has come here in my guise. His object is 
to cheat you. 


6. He has come here to cheat you and serve the purpose of the 
Devas; do not believe in his words. 



7. What knowledge I have acquired from the God S’ambhu, I am 
teaching it to you; I will make you, no doubt, victorious in the battle 
with the Devas.” 


8. Thus the Daityas, hearing the words of the false S’ukracharya, 
thought the false one to be real and placed implicit reliance in his 
words. 


9. The real S’ukracharya, then explained them as much as he could; 
but the Daityas, owing to the magic of the false S’ukracharya and to 
the wonderful effect of time, did not hear his words. 


10. The Daityas thus convinced said to the real S’ukracharya, “this 
man before us is our Guru for our welfare and enlightenment, he is 
the foremost religious S’ukracharya; for ten years continuously he is 
giving us advices. You are not our Guru; you appear fictitious and 
false; you better leave this place and go away.” 


11. The dull brained Daityas repeatedly told to S’ukracharya the 
reproachful words and bowed down to the false S’ukracharya, and, 
saluting, him, gladly welcomed him as their Guru. 


12-14. The real S’ukracharya, seeing the Daityas exceedingly 
attached to Brihaspati, the Guru of the Devas, and deceived by his 
words, cursed them out of anger and said :-“As you have not taken 
my words though I have explained everything to you, you would lose 
your knowledge and get defeat. 



15. As you have shown disrespect towards me, you will get the fruits 
of it at an early date and will then understand the deceitful 
behaviours of that Deva Guru.” 


16. Vyasa said Thus saying S’ukracharya hurriedly went away, 
infuriated with anger. Brihaspati was glad and remained there with 
his mind calm. 


17-19. Brihaspati then knowing the Daityas cursed by S’ukracharya, 
assumed his real appearance, left that place, and hurriedly returned 
to Indra. He began to say “I have undoubtedly succeeded in my 
undertaking; the Daityas have been cursed and left by me too. They 
are now helpless; so, O Good Suras! I have made them cursed, you 
would better now try to fight with them.” 


20-21. Indra heard their Guru and became very glad; all the other 
Devas were glad and worshipped him. They held another cabinet, 
secret council, how to fight with the Daityas; and, then, all uniting 
together marched out in battle against the Asuras. 


22. Seeing that the powerful Devas are marching towards them 
ready to fight and knowing their false Guru had fled, the Daityas 
became very anxious. 


23. They told each otherAlas! We were enchanted by the 
Devaguru; the highsouled S’ukracharya angrily left us; now it is our 
incumbent duty to satisfy him. 



24. That vicious, dirty inside and pure outside, hypocrite Pundit Deva 
Guru, who used to go to his brother’s wife, has really cheated and 
has quitted us. 


25. What are we to do now? where to go? How to satiate now the 
anger of S’ukra so that he might be glad and help us. 


26. Thus pondering over they all unitedly, shuddering with fear, again 
went to S’ukracharya, keeping Prahlada in front of them. 


27. They all bowed down at the feet of their Guru; S’ukra remained 
silent; then, bursting with anger and with eyes red, told them. 


28. You were all warned by me that you were being cheated by the 
Maya of Brihaspati; you did not take my word, as worth hearing, 
though unselfish, pure and leading to your welfare. 


29. Rather you were influenced by him and infatuated with vanity, 
you insulted me; now you will have to bear undoubtedly the effects of 
that Karma. 


30. You are now vitiated from the path of your welfare; go now where 
that disguised cheat resides for the welfare of the Gods; know me 
not to be a cheat like him. 


31. Vyasa said O king! When S’ukra finished saying his uncertain 
words, Prahlada clasped his feet and began to say thus 



32. Prahlada said O our Guru Bhargava! Today we have come to 
you in a very distressed condition! O Omniscient! we are your 
disciples; we are your good sons; you ought not to quit us. 


33. On your departure to get the Mantra, that hypocrite, vicious 
Brihaspati getting the opportunity, assumed your false appearance 
and cheated us. 


34. Peaceful persons do not take any offence committed with 
ignorance; you know everything; you know very well that our hearts 
are devoted to thee and to thee alone. There is no need of telling 
anything further to you. 


35. O Highly Intelligent One! By your Tapas, you know our inner 
minds and relinquish your anger. The sages say that the anger of the 
saints is not lasting. 


36. O Muni! Water is naturally cool; when in contact with fire it gets 
hot; but, when the heat is removed, it gets cold shortly after. 


37. O observer of good vows! Anger is like chandala; sages 
therefore quit it. Our prayer to you is that you leave your anger and 
be pleased with us. 


38. If you do not quit your anger and if you make us overpowered 
with grief and sorrow, O blessed one! We, being abandoned by you, 
will go down to the Patala. 



39. Vyasa said Bhargava heard Prahlada’s words and, with his 
intuitioned eye, came to see the proper state of affairs and was 
pleased and lovingly said. 


40. You will not have to fear nor to enter into the Patala. You are my 
Yajamanas; I will certainly protect you all by my never failing Mantra 
power. 


41. O knower of religion! What Brahma of yore told me, I am now 
telling you accordingly. Hear my truthful words, leading to your 
welfare. 


42. Whatever is inevitable, doomed to pass, must come to pass, be it 
auspicious or inauspicious. No one is able in this world to go against 
the current of Fate. 


43. Under the influence of Time you are now deprived of strength, 
therefore you will have to suffer defeat at the hands of the Devas 
and you will have to go once to the Patala. 


44-45. Brahma said When your time to enjoy the sovereignty of 
the Triloki had come, you enjoyed the kingdoms of the Triloki with all 
its wealth and power. You attacked the Devas and, helped by Time, 
had been able to trample them under your feet and held your 
sovereignty for full ten yugas and enjoyed the pleasures without any 
hitch. 



46. You will regain this kingdom in the Savarnik manvantara. Then 
Bali will come in your family as the grandson of Prahlada and will 
conquer the Triloki and will get name and fame throughout his 
kingdom. 


47-48. When the Lord of Vaikuntha had incarnated as Vamana and 
stolen away the kingdom of Vali, then the Janardan Visnu told Bali, 
the king of the Demons that “I have taken away your kingdom by 
pretext to serve the purpose of the Gods; you will become Indra, no 
doubt, in the coming Savarnika manvantara.” 


49. Bhargava said According to the sayings of S’ri Bhagavan Hari, 
your grandson Bali is now invisible to all creatures and is now 
passing away his time, very much terror stricken. 


50-51. Being afraid of Indra, he is now staying in a lonely house as 
an ass. One day Indra on seeing him enquired of him, in various 
ways, the cause of his assuming that ass-body. 


52. O Lord of the Daityas! You have always enjoyed pleasures of all 
the world; you are the ruler of the Daityas; you ruled over all the 
worlds; do you not feel shame now in thus assuming this ass body. 
The Lord of the Daityas, hearing him, spoke thus. 


53-54. O Indra, there is nothing to be sorry in these matters. When 
the most powerful Visnu can assume fish and tortoise incarnations, 
then what wonder is there that I by virtue of the force of Time, am 
now staying as an ass? When you had murdered a Brahman, you, 
too had hid yourself in the Manasa lake in the lotuses; similarly today 
distressed, I am staying here in this ass body. 



55. O Indra! What sorrow or happiness can be to a person who is 
under the control of Fate. To him everything is alike; for whatever the 
Time wishes, It can act accordingly. 


56. Bhargava said to Prahlada! Both persons Bali and Indra got 
enlightenment at the mutual conversations; and they went away to 
their places at their own will. 


57. O Lord of the Asuras! I have narrated to you this story indicating 
how powerful is the Time. Know that the Devas and Daityas and all 
the human beings and this whole universe is under that Great Fate. 


Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam of 18,000 verses on the 
Daityas getting back their S’ukracharya, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 15. On The Truce Between The Daityas 
And The Devas 


1. Vyasa said O king Janamejaya! Prahlada was glad to hear the 
above words of the high souled Bhargava. 


2. Knowing Fate to be the strongest, he addressed the Daityas 
Never, in this battle will victory be ours. 


3-5. Then the victorious Dennons, infatuated with pride, told Prahlada 
What is Fate? We do not recognise it. We ought to fight. O Lord of 
us Fate reigns over those that are idle, not energetic. Has Fate 
any shape? Who has created it? Has anybody seen Fate? However 
let us gather strength and fight. You are very intelligent and all 
knowing; It is proper that you should take our lead in the fight. 


6. O king! When the Daityas spoke thus, Prahlada, the great 
Destroyer of enemies, became the general and challenged the 
Devas to fight. 


7. On seeing the Asuras in the battle field, the Devas, dressed with 
arms and weapons, began to fight with them. 


8. For full one hundred years the dreadful battle was fought between 
Indra and Prahlada; on seeing this, the Munis were astonished. 



9. O king! In this fearful battle, the Daityas with their general 
Prahlada, the followers of S’ukracharya, got the victory. 


10. Then Indra, advised by their Guru Brihaspati, began to 
remember the Goddess of the Universe, the Most High, the Giver of 
welfare, the Destroyer of all sorrows and calamities, and the 
Bestower of freedom, worship Her, and sing hymns to Her with great 
devotion. 


11-12. Indra said Victory be to the name of the Goddess 
Mahamaya, the Eternal Mother, the Holder of the trident! Holder of 
conchshell, disc, club, and lotus, the Giver of “no fear.” Salutation to 
Thee, the Goddess of the Universe; Thou art the Supreme Heroine 
in everything that relates to force, that is described in the S’akti 
Dars’ana S’astras. Thou art the Ten Tattvas, Thou art the Mother, 
Thou art the Mahavidya (the Supreme Knowledge). 


13. There are many Tattvas; here the ten tattvas are according to the 
S’akti Dars’ana. There are many Dharma S’astras. Here S’akti 
S’astra is meant. 


The Tattvas are those ultimate substances into which these gross 
manifestations resolve. The tattvas are Mahavindu, Nada S’akti, 
Mis'ra Vindu, etc. 


O World Mother! Thou art the Maha Kundalini (the great Serpent 
Fire); thou art the Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss; Thou 
art the Deity of the vital Fire (Prana); Thou art the Deity of the 
Agnihotra (maintenance of the Sacred Fire and an oblation to It); 



Thou art the Holy Flame, burning always in the ethereal space in the 
Heart; Salutation to Thee! 


14. Thou dwellest within the five Sheaths (the Annamaya, the 
Pranamaya, the Manomaya, the Vijhanamaya and the Anandamaya 
sheaths are the five sheaths here referred to). Thou art the Indweller 
of the Ananda maya kosa, Thou art of the nature of Puchchha 
Brahma, the end of Brahma. Thou art the Deity of all, the Ananda 
(bliss) unblown, O Mother! Thou art the Deity of all the Upanisadas. 


15. O Mother! Be pleased unto us; we have become powerless; 
protect us, O Mother! we are defeated by the Daityas; O Goddess! 
Thou art endowed with all the powers. Thou art our Sole Refuge in 
this Universe, in times of distress, and Thou art the Only One, strong 
and capable to remove all our dangers. 


16. O Goddess! Those who incessantly meditate on Thee are really 
happy and those that do not meditate Thee, their fear, and sorrows 
are never removed; those that want ultimate freedom from bondage 
and who meditate on Thee always; those pure souls, being free from 
Ahamkara, and free from attachment go, no doubt, beyond this 
ocean of world. 


17. O World Mother! Thy prowess is ever manifested whenever 
protection is demanded; You always come forward and relieve the 
distressed; You are the great destroyer! Thou art the Time Incarnate 
of all these worlds; O Mother! We are fools; how can we appreciate 
your qualities. 



18. Brahma, Visnu, Mahes’a, I myself, Sun, Yama, Varuna, Fire, Air, 
the high minded munis, Agama, Nigama, the Tantras and the Vedas, 
are quite unable to realise Your unequalled prowess; Salutation to 
Thy Feet. 


19. Those are blessed that are devoted to Thee; They are the great 
souls; they always dive in the Ocean of Bliss, being always free from 
the fangs of this Samsara. Those that are not Your devotees, cannot 
cross this Ocean of Samsara, where the Birth and Death are the 
billows. 


20. O Goddess! Those that are always fanned by the white 
chamaras and those that travel always in cars, they in their previous 
births worshipped Thee with various things; therefore they have 
acquired the effects of their meritorious deeds; this is my opinion. 


21. Those that are always worshipped amongst the human beings, 
those that go on nice elephants, those that are surrounded by 
pleasures and enjoy the lovely companions of beautiful coquettish 
women, those that go surrounded by soldiers, O Goddess! I consider 
they worshipped Thee in their previous births, and they are now 
enjoying fruits of their past deeds. 


22-23. Vyasa said Thus praised by Indra, the Goddess of the 
Universe with four arms hurriedly appeared there mounted on a lion 
Conchshell, disc, club, and lotuses were held by the beautiful eyed 
Goddess in Her four hands respectively, wearing a red apparel and 
ornamented with divine garlands. 



24. The Goddess being pleased addressed the Devas with sweet 
words, “Cast off your fear. O Devas! I will see presently all about 
your welfare.” 


25. Addressing the Devas thus, the Divine Mother nnounted on a lion, 
went hurriedly to the place where the demons were waiting, 
infatuated with pride. 


26. All the Daityas with their general Prahlada saw the Goddess 
before them and were terrified and began to address each other 
“What are we to do now?” 


27-28. This Chandika Goddess has come here to protect the Devas. 
She destroyed Mahisasura and Chanda Munda; it was She that 
killed, in days of yore, Madhukaitava with evil look. 


29-30. Seeing the demons thus full of sorrowful thoughts, Prahlada 
addressed the Daityas “It is better not to fight but let us fly away 
all together.” Then the Daitya Namuchi told the Daityas ready to fly 
away “If you fly away, this World Mother will instantly kill you all with 
weapons in Her hands. 


31. Do that by which we can protect us. Let us worship the Goddess 
of the Universe, and, getting Her permission, we will go this very day 
to the Patala.” 


32. Prahlada said “I will worship the Goddess Mahamaya, the 
Creatrix, Preservrix and Destructrix of the Universe, the World 
Mother, and the Assurer of safety to Her devotees.” 



33. Vyasa said Thus saying, the knower of the highest knowledge, 
Prahlada, the devotee of Visnu, began to sing hymns with folded 
hands in praise of the Goddess, the Upholdress of the Universe. 


34. I bow down to Thee, the incarnate of the mantra “Hrim” the 
Refuge of all, and within Whom this whole Universe, moving and 
unmoving, is appearing untruly as a snake is mistaken for a garland 
of flowers. 


35. O Goddess! All these Universes, moving and unmoving, have 
sprung from Thee; Brahma, Visnu and others are Creators, 
Preservers in name only; Thou hast created them all. 


36. O Mahamaya! You are the Divine Mother of all! When You have 
created the Asuras and the Suras, how can you then see any 
difference between the Devas and the Daityas? 


37. As a Mother makes no distinction between her good sons and 
bad sons, so You are not to make any difference between us and the 
Devas; this is our prayer to you. 


38. O Goddess! You have been sung in all the Puranas as the World 
Mother; therefore, O Mother! We are your sons just as the Devas 
are. 


39. O Mother! As they have got their interests, so we too have got 
our interests; therefore there is no difference between he Daityas 



and the Devas. Therefore if anyone nnakes any difference, it is due 
to the subtle error. 


40. O Goddess! As we are attached to wealth, wives, and other 
pleasures of the senses, so the gods are; O Goddess! How then can 
any difference exist between them and us. 


41. O Mother! They are the sons of Maharsi Kas’yapa; we also are 
his sons; Therefore you cannot have partiality for them before us. 


42. O World Mother! In You no such difference is visible anywhere. 
Therefore do You here preserve equality amongst us both. 


43. The Suras and Asuras all have sprung from the permutations 
and combinations of the 3 qualities! Then how the Devas being 
embodied can possess more qualities than us. 


44. Every embodied soul possesses always cupidity, anger, 
covetousness; how then can one expect to remain without any 
quarrels with others. 


45. We think that it is all sport with You to see our opinions different, 
rather contradictory, and it is You who got us involved in quarrels 
with each other and it is Your pleasure to witness how we fight 
against each other. 


46. Sinless one! O Chamunde! Were You not so fond to see our 
fight, how then, we being brothers are at war against each other. 



Certainly it is Your Divine Sport. 


47. O Goddess! I know what is religion, I know who is Indra. It is the 
very idea to enjoy these sensual pleasures that is the only cause of 
our incessant quarrels. 


48. O Mother! You are the Sole Ruler of this Samsara; no sensible 
man can carry out the words of a man who yearns for something, 
(i.e., O Mother, You are the only one that is desireless; so we can 
obey your words). 


49. O Mother! Once the Devas and the Asuras conjointly churned 
the ocean. At that time Visnu, on the plea of distributing the jewel, 
and the ambrosial nectar, incurred quarrels amongst them. 


50. O Mother! You have made him the Preserver and Controller of 
the Universe and the Spiritual Guide of the world. And it was He who 
took away the Goddess Laksmi, the beautiful lady amongst the Deva 
women. 


51. Indra, the Lord of the Gods, took the elephant named Airavat, the 
flower Parijat, the Heavenly Cow yielding all desires, and the horse 
Uchchais’rava. Thus, through the desires and devices of Visnu, they 
got the excellent things. 


52. O! What a wonder is this that the Devas were considered holy 
persons, after they had committed such unholy acts; no doubt the 
Devas had done a very heinous crime. O Goddess! You can judge 
Yourself what is the just and unjust thing in this case. 



53. What is Religion? And where is Religion? And what are the acts 
done by a religious man? What is uprightness, justice, and purity? 
You better examine which party has observed virtue? Who has 
shown uprightness, justice and parity? To whom victory and defeat 
are due? You are the only one capable to judge all these things. 


54-55. Alas! Whom to tell all the conclusions arrived at in the 
Mimamsakas. If any one considers, one will find the world is the field 
of dissensions and quarrels; the argumentators look to the logical 
reasoning only; followers of the Vedas look to the rules and 
regulations only; these so called men of gross ideas they 
acknowledge that this world is created and preserved by the One 
only, and yet they quarrel amongst each other. 


56-57. If there be One and only One Lord of this wide infinite 
Samsara, then why would there be differences and quarrels amongst 
each other? Why is there not seen any agreement in opinion and 
why do the S’astras differ and why are there so many differences in 
the opinions held by the knowers of the Vedas. 


58. O Goddess! This whole Universe, moving and unmoving is 
selfish; hence arise so many differences between several opinions. 
There was no one unselfish in this world and there would be no 
unselfish persons born hereafter. 


59-64. Look! The Moon stole away perforce knowingly the wife of 
Brihaspati; Indra, knowing what is religion stole away the wife of 
Gautama; Brihaspati enjoyed forcibly the wife of his younger; and 
also he outraged his elder brother’s wife in her pregnant state and 
cursed the boy in the womb and made him blind. What more to say 



than Visnu, all full of Sattvic qualities, severed perforce the head of 
Rahu. O Mother! Look to the case of my grandson Bali who used to 
pay due respects to all, who was the foremost amongst the virtuous, 
observer of rigorous truth, performer of sacrifices, liberal, peaceful, 
all-knowing. The pretender Hah, taking the form of a dwarf in his 
Vamana incarnation, deceived Bali and took away all his kingdoms. 
Alas! Still the intelligent good persons reckon the Deva Visnu as the 
preserver of Religion. What a wonder! Those who are flatterers 
become victorious in this world; and defeat come to those that speak 
of Dharma. 


65. O Goddess! You are the Mother of all the worlds; do whatever 
You like. But You should know that the Demons are all under Your 
protection; kill or save them as You like. 


66. The Devi said O Demons! Leave you all the anger arising 
from this warfare and go without any fear to Patala and live there at 
your ease and happiness. 


67. Better now wait on Time; whether you will get auspicious or 
inauspicious fruits for your deeds. Know whoever is desireless and 
unattached, to him happiness is always and everywhere. 


68. Whose mind is avaricious. He does not get peace and 
happiness, even if he acquires the Triloki. Even, in the golden age, 
avaricious persons did not get happiness, though they acquired the 
fruits of their actions. 


69. Therefore you get yourselves freed of your sins and obey My 
order and leave the earth and go down to the Patala. 



70. Vyasa said On hearing the Devi’s words, the Demons obeyed 
and bowing at Her feet and preserved by Her, went to Patala. 


71. Then the Devi disappeared; and the Devas went away to their 
own homes. Thus the Devas and the Daityas, abandoning their 
feelings of enmity towards each other, lived in peace. 


O King! He who hears this fact, gets himself freed from all sorts of 
calamities and reaches the Highest Peace. 


Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam of 18,000 verses, on the truce 
between the Daityas and Devas and on their departures with peace, 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 16. On The Birth Of The Several 
Avataras Of Visnu And Their Deeds 


1-2. Janamejaya spoke O best of Munis! How did Visnu, of 
wonderful deeds, get his incarnation owing to the curse, cast on Him 
by Bhrigu? what were His different incarnations in different 
Manvantaras respectively? O Thou, well versed in religion! O 
Brahmana! Kindly narrate those sin-destroying deeds of Hah in His 
several incarnations, that are the source of happiness, peace and 
welfare to all humanity. 


3. Vyasa said O king! Hear, I am narrating to you the incarnations 
of S’ri Bhagavan Hah which He had in the several Manvantaras and 
in the several Yugas respectively. 


4. I will tell you now, in brief, what forms He took and what deeds He 
did in the various incarnations. 


5. In the Chaksusa Manvantara, the Bhagavan Hah took the 
incarnation of Dharma; and the two sons of Dharma, Nara Narayana, 
were widely celebrated in this world. 


6. Then, in the present Vaivasvata Manvantara, under the reign of 
Vaivasvata Manu in the second Yuga, Bhagavan Hari incarnated as 
Dattatreya, in the shape of the son of Atri Risi. 


7. Anasuya the wife of Atri, was desirous to have, as her sons, the 
three Devas Brahma, Visnu and Rudra; and in fulfilment of her 



desires, the Devas took their births in her womb. 


8. Anasuya, was foremost amongst the chaste and virtuous women 
and on her praying, Brahma, Visnu and Rudra the Trinity at once 
agreed to become her sons. 


9. Brahma was born as Soma, Hari was born as Dattatreya and 
Rudra was born as Durvasa. 


10. In the fourth Yuga, the Bhagavan assumed the beautiful double 
form in one, the upper part resembling a lion and the lower part a 
human being to accomplish the noble purpose of the Devas. 


11. It was to kill Hiranyakas’ipu that the Bhagavan Hari assumed this 
appearance, wonderful even to the Devas. 


12. In the Treta Yuga, the superior and the best of all the Yugas, the 
Bhagavan incarnated as Vamana (the Dwarf), the son of Maharsi 
Kas’yapa, to curb the power of Bali. 


13. The Dwarf Hari took away by pretext, the kingdom of Bali, while 
he was performing a sacrifice and sent him down into the Patala (the 
lower regions). 


14. Afterwards, in the nineteenth Yuga, known as the Treta Yuga, 
S’ri Bhagavan Hari incarnated as Paras’urama, very powerful and 
the son of Jamadagni Risi. 



15. He was very beautiful and graceful in his body, truthful and the 
conqueror of his senses. He extirpated the Ksattriya race and gave 
the whole world over to the high minded Risi Kas’yapa- 


16. O king! He is the Paras’urama, the sin-destroyer, the incarnation 
of Hah, and the doer of wonderful deeds. 


17-20. After that the Bhagavan Hari incarnated as Rama, the son of 
Das’aratha. Next in the twenty-eighth Dvapara Yuga, He incarnated 
as the very powerful Arjuna and S’ri Krisna, the Ams’as of Nara 
Narayana. To remove the load of the earth, these two were born; and 
they fought deadly battles in the battlefield of Kuruksettra. O king! 
Thus the several incarnations of Hari arose, according to the 
requirements of Prakriti. O King! These three worlds are under the 
control of Prakriti. 


21. Whatever the Prakriti wishes at any time. She can fashion the 
world in that way. And She does this incessantly in accordance with 
the Word Divine, the Highest S’akti, to please the Purusa, without 
any cessation. 


22-23. In days of yore, the most ancient Bhagavan, the Highest, 
above all the qualities of Maya, formless, all pervading, difficult to be 
conceived, without any decay, self-supporting, without any want, 
created these worlds, moving and unmoving and He manifested 
Himself as the Trinity, Brahma, Visnu, Mahes’a in the shape of the 
three qualities Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, and which is called the 
Highest Prakriti. 



24. This all auspicious Prakriti shines differently according to the 
differences in time and circumstances. This threefold Prakriti, the 
Great Enchantress of the world is creating, preserving the worlds 
and is destroying them at the end of the Kalpas. 


25. O King! Whenever there takes place the union with this Prakriti, 
Brahma creates, Visnu preserves, and the all-auspicious God 
S’ankara destroys the worlds. 


26. It was She That gave birth to Kakutstha, the best of the kings; 
and to conquer the Danavas, She placed him at a certain place. 


27. O king! Thus all men controlled by the Great Law in this world, 
enjoy sometimes the pleasures, enjoy sometimes pains and thus 
exist in the world. 


Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Mahapuranam of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa, on the Birth of the several Avataras of Visnu and their deeds. 



Chapter 17. On The Questions Asked By 
Janamejaya 


1. Janamejaya said O Muni! You told before that the heavenly 
prostitutes sent by Indra in the hermitage of Nara Narayana became 
lustful and desired to live with Narayana only, whose heart was calm 
and quiet. 


2. At that moment when Narayana was about to curse them, his 
brother Nara desisted him from taking that step. 


3-4. Now I ask you what did that triumphant Narayana Muni do, in 
the critical juncture, when he was repeatedly asked by those 
prostitutes, sent by Indra, to satisfy their lust? 


5. O Grand Sire! I am very eager to know the deeds of Narayana, 
leading to one’s freedom. Kindly describe in detail and fulfill my 
wishes. 


6. Vyasa said Hear, O king! I am describing to you in detail, what 
that high souled son of Dharma did. 


7. When Narayana Hah was ready to curse them, the Risi Nara, 
seeing this, consoled him and desisted him. 


8. Then the great sage, the ascetic son of Dharma, Narayana, 
leaving aside his anger, began to address them in sweet words with 



countenance smiling. 


9-10. O Fair women! We have determined to practise asceticism in 
this life; it does not therefore behove us to accept any wife; therefore 
shew your kindness unto us and go back to your Heaven. You would 
better think that those who know what is religion, they never desire 
to break the vow of another. 


11.0 beautiful eyed ones! In the sexual pleasure, it is the delightful 
feeling of passionate joy that is requisite; and we are wanting in 
those feelings; then how can we effect that union? 


12. No action can come out of no cause; this is all clear. The poets 
say that the sexual power and pleasure, is the feeling, the mental 
attitude that corresponds; and that is the only thing, that lasts. And 
we have no desire for that. 


13. However my limbs are all very graceful, I am very fortunate and 
blessed in this world, otherwise how can I be the object of your 
sincere love towards me. 


14. You all are very fortunate; therefore do now show this mercy unto 
me “do not break my vow.” I pray now that, in a subsequent birth, I 
may become your husband. 


15-16. O large eyed fair women! In the twenty-eighth Dvapara Yuga, 
I will certainly incarnate on earth to effect the purpose of the Devas; 
then you all also would respectively incarnate as the daughters of 
kings and would also become my wives. 



17. Narayana thus consented to marry them in some other next birth; 
and consoling them, made them go back to their Heavens. They also 
abandoned their mental disquietude and, on reaching back to 
Heavens, they explained everything to Indra. 


18-19. Indra heard (from these heavenly women) what the two two 
Risis did and saw before him Urvas’i and other women created by 
Narayana from his thighs, etc., and began to extol the merits of the 
high souled Narayana. 


20. Indra said O! How wonderful is the patience of the Muni? 

What is the wonderful influence of his Tapas! Oh! He has created, by 
the sheer force of his Tapas, Urvas’i and these fair women, 
unrivalled for their beauties, from his thighs. 


21. The Lord of the Devas thus extolled his merits and became freed 
from his anxieties. The virtuous Narayana, too, devoted himself to 
the practice of his Tapasya. 


23. O king! Thus I have described to you, in detail, all the wonderful 
accounts regarding Nara Narayana. 


O Superior in the descendants of Bharata! These two Nara and 
Narayana afterwards incarnated themselves, due to Bhrigu’s curse 
as the two great heroes Arjuna and Krisna, to relieve the burden of 
the earth. 



24. The king said O respect giving Muni! Now describe in detail 
the life of the Avatar Krisna and dispel my mental doubt. 


25-26. O best of the Munis! Why were Vasudeva and Devaki, who 
were chosen by the very powerful Hah and Ananta as their parents, 
doomed to so many miseries and afflictions. Why had these parents 
to remain for good many years in the prison of Kamsa, who pleased 
directly by their Tapasya that Bhagavan Janardana. 


27. Why did Krisna taking his birth at Mathura, go to Gokula? Also 
what was his object to go to Dvarka, situated in the ocean, when he 
killed the enemy Kamsa? 


28. Also why did his father, mother and relatives, leave their old holy 
places of residences and go abroad to live in a wretched old 
country? 


29-31. Why was the Yadu race destroyed by the curse from a 
Brahmana! How did S’ri Krisna Vasudeva leave finally His body after 
He had relieved the burden of the earth and was about to enter into 
His Heaven? The evildoers of the earth were slain by Krisna and 
Arjuna, of unequalled prowess; but how was it, that those who 
plundered the wives of S’ri Hah, were not at all punished by Him? 


32-33. The great personages Bhisma, Drona, Kama, the king 
Valhika, Virata, Vikarna, Dhristadyumna, the king Somadatta were 
destroyed for relieving the burden of the earth; and the plunderers 
were acquitted! Kindly explain the cause of this. 



34. How was it that those chaste and virtuous wives of S’ri Krisna go 
into troubles at the latter end of their lives? There has arisen a doubt 
in my mind on this point. 


35. Why did the virtuous Vasudeva leave his mortal coil owing to the 
death of his sons and why did he die an unusual death? 


36. O best of Munis! The Pandavas were devoted to Krisna and they 
were religious; they had to suffer so many troubles! 


37. Why was Draupadi so very unfortunate and she had to suffer so 
much miseries, and pains, who was born of Laksmi from amidst the 
sacrificial place and from the altar. 


38-39. Why did Duhs’asan drag Her by Her hairs while She was in 
Her menstruation period, in the hall of audience and why was it that 
Sindhu Raj Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, gave Her exceedingly 
mental troubles? 


40. Why was it that Her five sons residing in Her house were killed 
by AsVaththama? What was the cause that the son of Subhadra had 
to die in the battlefield? 


41. Why did the king Kamsa kill the six sons of Devaki; and why was 
it that S’ri Hah who was capable of averting the Fate did not at all 
prevent that? 



42. What a wonder is this that in the matters of Brahmana’s curse 
toward the Jadavas, their being killed in the Prabhasa, the total 
extermination the Jadu race and the plundering of His wives, why did 
He allow Fate to do these great momentous things? 


43. If He was the all-powerful God and He Himself Narayana, that 
why did He incessantly act like a slave towards Ugrasena. 


N.B. - Ugrasena was the king of Mathura and father of Kamsa. He 
was deposed by his son; but Krisna after having slain Kamsa 
restored him to the throne. 


44-45. All these bring doubt in our minds regarding Narayana Muni 
that His deeds are always like those of ordinary persons; why did his 
pleasures and pains resemble those of ordinary human beings? 
Were he God, why his actions were not Godly? (i.e., superhuman) 


46. Therefore dost Thou describe in detail all the Divine Leelas 
(playful sports) done by Hah of superhuman powers in this world. 


47. O Best of Munis! When one’s longevity expires, one dies; then I 
cannot understand what glory was manifested by Hah in killing the 
Daityas? For Fate Killed them; not Hah. 


48. Was not the doing of Hari like a thief when he stole away the 
Lady Rukmini and fled quickly to his own place. 



49. What did it mean when he fled to Dvarka city, and quitted his 
own highly prosperous town Mathura simply out of the fear of 
Jarasandha? 


50. Did not anybody at that time recognise that he was S’ri 
Bhagavan Hah? O Respected One! Were he Bhagavan, why did He 
hide himself in Vraja? Please explain the cause to me. 


51. O Muni! These and many other doubts always exist in my mind; 
you are the best of the Dvijas and blessed; I pray, dost thou remove 
these doubts. 


52-53. O best of Munis! Another doubt exists and is not dispelled 
and that is secret. Was not the taking of the five husbands by 
Panchali for herself shameful and despised by the society? The 
good manners and doings are always considered by the learned as 
the proofs of virtue. Why did those Pandavas, then, capable in every 
respect, do this thing like brutes? 


54. And what did Bhisma do living like a Deva in this world? May I 
ask, was his act of producing two sons by a widow and thus 
preserving his line of ancestors worthy of his name? 


55. The religious sanction advocated by the Munis “Procreate sons 
in any way whatsoever” is simply shameful. Fie to this religious 
sanction. 


Here ends the 17th Chapter in the 4th Book of S’ri mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa on the 



questions asked by Janamejaya. 



Chapter 18. On The Dev! Earth’s Going To The 
Heavens 


1. Vyasa said O king! Hear in detail the complete life and the 
deeds in the incarnation of S’ri Krisna and also the various wonderful 
achievements by the Goddess of this universe. 


2. Once on a time, the Earth was very much overburdened by the 
load of wicked kings and She was therefore very much afraid. 


3. She then assumed the appearance of a cow and went to the 
Devaloka crying and very much dejected. 


Indra, the lord of the Devas, asked her, O Vasundhare! What is the 
cause of your fear now? Who has troubled you? What afflictions are 
you merged in? Please tell me all these. 


4. On hearing Indra’s words, the Earth exclaimed O Respect 
giver! When You have asked me, I am explaining to you the cause of 
all my afflictions and sorrows; at present I am overburdened with too 
much load. 


5-8. Now is reigning in the earth Jarasandha, the king of Magadha, a 
very very vicious person. Thus the other S’is’upal, the lord of the 
Chedis, the uncontrollable Kas’iraj, Rukmi, the powerful Kamsa, the 
strong Naraka, the Sauvapati S’alva, the wicked Kes’i, Dhenuka, and 
Batsaka all these are now in royal positions. O Lord of the Devas! 
These kings are all devoid of the least trace of virtue, quarrelsome 



against each other, infatuated with vanity, and addicted to vicious 
deeds. These have become kings as if they were personified Yamas, 
the Lords of Death, and are constantly troubling me. I am now 
unable to carry their loads; where shall I go now? This great thought 
is constantly ailing me. 


9-11.0 Vasava! What to tell! The Bhagavan in His Boar Incarnation 
is the cause of all these my afflictions; O Indra! These present 
troubles I am fallen into only through Him; for when the cruel Daitya 
Hiranyaksa; the son of Ka’syapa stole me away and drowned me in 
the great ocean, then it was Visnu in his Boar incarnation that killed 
him and rescued me from the ocean and then kept me in this my 
stable position. 


12. Had he not then lifted me up, I would have rested safe in the 
depths of Rasatala; O Lord of the Devas! Now I am quite unable to 
bear the load of these vicious persons. 


13. O Surendra! The vicious twenty eight Kali is coming quickly in 
front. Thinking of His influence, it seems to me that I will be very 
troubled then and will have to go down to Rasatala. 


14. Therefore, O Lord of the Devas! I am bowing down before Your 
feet, kindly relieve me of my burden and save me from these endless 
troubles. 


15. Indra said O Earth! I cannot do anything for you. You better go 
and take refuge of Brahma. I am also going to Him. He will remove 
all your troubles. 



16. Hearing Indra’s words the Earth hurriedly went to the realm of 
Brahma and Indra and all the other Devas followed Her; and all 
reached the Brahmaloka. 


17-18. O King! The Grand Father Brahma saw the Earth coming to 
him and through the power of meditation, found out the cause of Her 
coming and said O Auspicious One! why are You crying? What 
troubles You have now? What wicked person has given You 
troubles. 


19. The Earth said O Lord of the Earth! The vicious Kali is coming 
before; under Its influence the subjects will be horribly vicious; 
therefore I am very much afraid of this Kali. 


20. In the beginning of this Kali Yuga, the ancient enemies, the 
Asuras have now incarnated on this earth as kings. They will be 
extremely wicked, quarreling against each other, and will be clever in 
stealing others’ things. There is no doubt in these. 


21. O Grand Father! Now kill these vicious kings and relieve my 
burden. O Lord! I am very much troubled by the armies of these 
kings. 


22. Brahma said O Goddess! I, too, am unable like Indra to 
remove your load. Let us go to that Visnu, the Holder of the disc. 



23. That Janardana will remove your burden. I thought of this well 
before and settled what to do. 


24-25. Vyasa said Thus saying, the four faced Brahma, the Author 
of the Vedas, rode on His Hamsa Vehicle taking in front the Goddess 
Earth; and the Devas went to Visnu and began to praise Visnu 
Janardana, the Deva of the Devas, with the words of the Vedas with 
full devotion. 


26. Brahma said Thou hast thousand heads, thousand faces, 
thousand feet. Thou art the Purusa of the Vedas, Thou art the Deva 
of the Devas, and Thou art Eternal. 


27. O Omnipresent! Thou art the Past, Present, and Future! O Lord 
of Laksmi! Thou hast awarded immortality unto us. 


28. Thou art the Creator of universe, the Preserver and the 
Destroyer; Thou art the One and the Only goal and thou art the God. 
Everybody knows that all these glories belong to Thee. 


29. Vyasa said O king! When Brahma praised thus, Visnu whose 
sign was Garuda, was highly pleased and appeared before Brahma 
and the other Devas. 


30. The Bhagavan asked them about their welfare and enquired in 
detail into the cause of their arrival there. 



31. Brahma them bowed down to Him and, remembering the cause 
of the sorrows of the Goddess Earth, said O Lord! Thou art now to 
relieve the burden of the Earth. 


32. O Thou, Ocean of mercy! When the end of the Dvapara yuga will 
come Thou art to incarnate in the world and kill the wicked kings and 
thus to relieve the burden of the Earth. 


33-34. Visnu said I am not independent in these matters; why I? 
Brahma Mahes’a, Indra, Agni, Yama, Visvakarma, the Sun and 
Varuna and other Devas, nobody is independent. This whole 
universe, moving and unmoving is existing under the control of the 
Yoga Maya; and from Brahma up to the clot of grass, all are strung 
into the thread of Her Three qualities. 


35. O One of good vows! Whatever that Yoga Maya, the Supreme 
Goddess, Who is All will. Whose mouth is inward. Who does good at 
all times, what She wills She does that at any time. You should all 
know that we are entirely under Her control. 


36-41. You better think that were I independent, what for would I 
have stayed in the great ocean, incarnating in the Fish and Tortoise 
Bodies! O Brahmin! What name or pleasure is there in enjoyment in 
the body of lower animals! What holy merit or any other reward may I 
expect from being born in the wombs of lower animals? What is the 
reason that I assume the body of a Boar? or of a Man-Lion? or of a 
Dwarf? Why was I born as the son of Jamadagni. Especially why did 
I, being born of that highsouled Brahman Jamadagni, and being the 
best of the Brahmins, do the most atrocious act like that of a 
heartless brute and fill up the lakes with their blood. Alas! I killed the 
Ksatriyas mercilessly; to say nothing more than that I killed the sons 



that were then in the wombs. Were I independent, what for I would 
have done these horrible and cruel deeds! O Lord of the Devas! See 
again. In my Rama incarnation I roamed on foot, helpless and 
without any provision, in the fearful Dandaka forest unfrequented by 
anybody, wearing clotted hair, bark, rags, like a man who feels no 
shame, and behaved like a hunter and killed many animals. 


42-44. Being under the delusion of Maya, I could not make out the 
real nature of the golden deer; consequently leaving Janaki in the 
thatched cottage, I went out pursuing the deer. Though repeatedly 
warned by me not to leave the place, Laksmana was moved by the 
qualities of Prakriti, forsook her and went out on my search. 


45. Then the hypocrite Ravana, the king of the Raksasas, under the 
garb of a beggar; stole away by force the daughter of Janaka, who 
had become very lean on account of sorrows. 


46. I was very much distressed owing to the separation from my dear 
wife and roamed about weeping sorely in forest and formed 
friendship with Sugriva, under the influence of the circumstances. 


47. It was an act of gross injustice on my part to kill Bali, the king of 
the monkeys. I freed him from his curse; afterwards, aided by the 
monkeys, I had to go to Lanka. 


48. When my younger Laksmana and myself were both enchained 
under the chain of the serpents, Nagapas’a, and were senseless, the 
monkeys all were astonished. 



49. Then Garuda came and freed us the two brothers, from those 
Nagapas’as! I considered then what adverse inauspicious 
circumstances Fate sometimes ordains on our lot. 


50. I lost my kingdom, lived in the forest, my father died, Janaki was 
stolen and I had to suffer extreme troubles in very deadly battles; I 
could not know what worse fate still awaited for us? 


51. O Suras! What more calamity can you expect to befall any 
person than that I was from the very first deprived of my kingdoms 
and wealth, and had to go to the forest with the princess Sita 
dwelling in and taking shelter in a dense forest! 


52. At the time of my going to the forest my father did not give a 
single penny; penniless and helpless I had to get out of Ayodhya on 
foot. 


53. I was compelled to leave my Ksattriya Dharma and take up the 
avocation of a hunter and thus to spend fourteen years in forest. 


54. After that, under the benign influence of Fate, I was able to kill 
that Asura Ravana and got the victory in the battle and was able to 
bring back dear Sita to Ayodhya. 


55. There I succeeded in becoming the ruler of the kingdom Kos’ala 
with its subjects and got the full kingdom and enjoyed for a few years 
the pleasures of the world. 



56-57. The stealing away of Sita took place at the first outset; next I 
got my kingdom; then the subjects began to circulate the bad name 
regarding Janaki; and I being afraid of that, deported her into exile in 
the forest. At that time I had to suffer again extreme pain and agony 
due to the separation from my wife. Then the daughter of the 
Goddess Earth penetrated into the Earth and got down to the Patala. 


58. O Devas! When I had to depend on Fate and to suffer so many 
troubles incessantly, where else can you dare to say that an 
independent man exists. 


59. Afterwards under the influence of Time, I had to go to Heaven 
with my brothers. Let all this point to what it may, the intelligent 
learned people can say what an amount of mishaps takes place to 
one who is dependent! 


60. O One born from the Lotus! You hear my word; I am in every way 
dependent; why I? Rudra, You and all those Suras are fully 
dependent. 


Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Fourth Book of the Maha 
Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa on the Devi Earth’s going to the Heavens. 



Chapter 19. On Chanting The Hymns To The 
Dev! 


1. Vyasa said The Bhagavan Visnu spoke again unto Prajapati 
Brahman! All these beings fascinated by Maya, cannot know the 
Real Essence, the Highest Truth. 


2. We, too, are fascinated by that Maya; and hence we also, being 
blinded by that, do not at all remember That Highest Eternal Purusa, 
calm and quiet, the World Teacher, the Highest Self, of the nature of 
Pure Existence, Intelligence and Bliss. 


3. O Brahma! I am Visnu, I am Brahma, I am Rudra, thus our l-ness 
ahamkara has blinded our eyesight; and we are made unable to 
recognise That Eternal Highest Self. 


4. As the wooden dolls dance according to the will of the player, the 
magician, I also am similarly fascinated by the Maya and am thus 
incessantly rolling about like a dependent man. 


5-6. O Brahma In the beginning of the Kalpa, MahesVara, You 
and I saw the wonderful unspeakable form and glory of that Highest 
Self at the time of Rasamandala in the Mani Dvipa where there was 
the Mandara Tree and the Devas assembled. Then I also saw that 
wonderful thing a second time in the Sudharnava ocean of nectar, 
and the most wonderful of it is this, that until we were able to See 
that Form, we did not hear anything of Her before! 



7. Therefore, O Devas! Today do you all remember that Prime Force, 
the Highest Self, that all beneficent Force that yields all good and 
auspicious things; That Very Force will fulfill now all your desires. 


8. Vyasa said O king! No sooner the Bhagavan Hari addressed 
thus, Brahma and the other Devas at once mentally began to 
meditate on that Eternal Yoga Maya, the Goddess of the Universe. 


9. Being thus meditated, at once appeared before their eyesight the 
Devi, the Goddess of the Universe, whose colours were like the 
blood red Java flower, holding in two of Her hands noose, hook, or 
goad, while the third hand indicated favour and the fourth hand bade 
all discard every sort of fear. 


10. As the web comes out of a spider and sparks come out of fire, so 
this whole Universe comes out of that Goddess. We all bow down 
before Her with our humble hearts, full of devotion. 


11. We all salute to that Goddess of the Universe, BhuvanesVari, 
under Whose Mayic force this whole Universe, moving and 
unmoving, is created; Who is All-Intelligence and the Ocean of 
Mercy. 


12. This world appears real to him who is unable to realise Her Real 
Essence; and the world drops off as unreal no sooner he realises 
Her Presence. We all meditate on that All Intelligent Goddess and 
we all pray to Her that She may grant unto us more strength to 
meditate Her and Her alone so. 



13. We all want to know Maha Laksmi, we all meditate on the 
Omnipotent; May the Goddess grant unto us strength to meditate on 
Her so. 


14. O Thou, the Remover of the world’s afflictions! Best Thou 
pleased unto us; O Thou, kind hearted! Do this work for us and 
promote our good. O Thou, Lord of the Earth! Dost Thou relieve the 
burden of the earth by killing these Asuras and bring on our welfare. 


15. O Thou, Lotus-Eyed! If Thou dost not show Thy mercy towards 
the gods, they will never be able to strike their enemies with their 
weapons in the battlefield. O Goddess! Thou didst verify the truth of 
this before, when Thou didst assume the appearance of a Yaksa and 
utter the following sentences “O Fire! You burn this blade of grass,” 
etc. (in the Kena Talavakara Upanisada.) 


16. O Mother! Kamsa, Bhauma, Kalayavana, Kes’i, Jarasandha, the 
son of Brihadratha, Vaka, Putana, Khara, S’alva and other vicious 
kings respectively are dwelling on the earth. Dost Thou better kill 
them and relieve the burden of the Earth. 


17. O Lotus-Eyed! Thou hadst killed those Asuras without any effort 
that were not slain by Visnu or Mahes’vara and they ended their 
lives, while they were beholding Thy pleasing countenance. 


18. O Goddess! Holding Moon on Her forehead! These Hah, Hara, 
Brahma and the other gods are unable to move a step without the 
help of Force; nothing to speak any further, the thousand headed 
King of Serpents is unable to hold this earth even for a moment, 
were he not provided with the S’akti of upholding this world. 



19. Indra said O Bhagavati! Would Brahma be ever able to create 
this world without the aid of Sarasvati! Would Visnu, the Deva of the 
Devas, be ever able to preserve it without the aid of Laksmi or would 
MahesVara be ever able, to destroy this world without the help of His 
Lima; no, never! These Devas, the Trinity, are able to take their 
respective parts in the keeping up of the world simply because they 
are united with the forces, incarnate in Sarasvati, etc., who are again 
parts of Thee. 


20. Visnu said O Vimale! Were we deprived of Thy Force, the 
Creator would never have been able to create the world, I would 
never have been able to preserve it and MahesVara would never 
have been able to destroy. Therefore O Devi! Thou alone art 
reigning as the Supreme Goddess amidst all the glories in the 
creation, preservation, and destruction of this Universe. 


21-22. Vyasa said O king! Thus praised by the Gods, the 
Goddess then addressed them O Devas! Let all anxieties leave 
you all; I will do what the Devas have desired, even if it be very 
difficult to do in this world; now explain what is troubling the Goddess 
Earth. 


23. The Devas replied The wicked kings are troubling very much 
this Earth. She cannot any longer bear their burden; therefore She 
came crying unto us. 


24. O BhuvanesVari! Now it is Your duty to remove this load of earth. 
O Auspicious One! Know this, the desire of the gods. 



25-28. O Mother! In days of yore, You have killed the most powerful 
Danava named Mahisa, attended by lakhs and lakhs of Danavas and 
Daityas; What to speak! You have slain S’umbha, Nis’umbha, 
Raktavija, the very powerful Chanda Munda, Dhumralochana, 
Durmukha, Duhsana, the strong Karala and many other cruel 
Danavas. 


Now, similarly kill the wicked kings, the enemies of the Gods and 
save the Earth from their heavy loads. 


29. Vyasa said Thus addressed by the Devas, the Most 
Auspicious One, the Devi, whose colour was black and who looked 
askance, said smiling in a tone, grave and deep, like that of the 
rumbling of a raincloud. 


30. O Suras! I have already thought over how the burden of those 
wicked kings, the parts incarnate of Asuras, can be removed. 


31. I will, by My own power, rob them of their powers, of that highly 
prosperous and affluent Jarasandha, the king of Magadha, and 
others, the parts incarnate of the wicked Asuras, that are now 
shining on the Earth. 


32. O Devas! You would all better go down and incarnate yourselves 
as part incarnations, impregnated with My power, and help thus in 
the removal of the load of this earth. 


33. The Deva Prajapati Maharsi Kas’yapa would first of all go with 
his his wife and incarnate as Anaka Dundubhi Vasudeva, in the race 



of Yadu. 


34. The Imperishable Bhagavan Visnu will also incarnate as part, 
owing to the curse of Bhrigu, as the son of Vasudeva. 


35. O Devas! I will be born, then, in the womb of Yas’oda, in Gokula 
and will accomplish all the ends of the Gods. 


36. I will send Visnu from the prison to the Gokula; also I will transfer 
Ananta Deva from the womb of Devaki to the womb of Rohini. 


37. They two will grow, day by day, by My Force and at the end of 
the Dvapara Yuga, will no doubt kill the wicked kings. 


38-39. Arjuna too, the part incarnate of Indra, will destroy the armies 
of those kings. Yudhisthira, the part incarnate of Dharma, Bhimsena, 
that of of Vayu, Nakula and Sahadeva the incarnate of the two 
Asvins, and Bhisma, the incarnate of Vasu as the son of the Ganga, 
will take their respective births and exhaust their armies. 


40. O Devas! Now be calm and quiet and go. Let the Earth be also 
calm and quiet; be confident that I will certainly remove the load of 
this earth. 


41. I will make the above mentioned Gods as my instruments merely 
and I will destroy, by My own force, the Ksatriyas in the battlefield of 
Kuruksettra. 



42. Malice, jealousy, foul intention, desire, attachment, vanity, 
covetousness, desire for victory, lust, and fascination are the vices 
that will destroy the Yadavas. 


43. The race of Yadu will end owing to the curse of a Brahmana. The 
Bhagavan also will leave His mortal coil due to a curse. 


44. Now go and incarnate in your respective parts, with your wives, 
in Gokula and Mathura, and be helpers in the work of the Lord. 


45-46. Vyasa said Saying thus, the Devi the Goddess of the 
Universe, the Maya Incarnate of the Highest Self disappeared. The 
Devas and the Earth went to their respective places. O king 
Janamejaya! the Goddess Earth was pleased with the Devi’s words, 
and being quiet, remained surrounded with various medicinal plants 
and creepers. 


47. Then the subjects felt peace and pleasure, the Brahmans also 
grew stronger in happiness and prosperity, and the Munis became 
glad and began to perform their religious acts with fresh zeal and 
alacrity. 


Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses, the Maha Puranam, on chanting 
the hymns to the Devi by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 20. On DevakI’s Marriage 


1-2. Vyasa said O Bharata! I now narrate to you about the relief of 
the burden of the Earth, the destruction by the Yoga Maya of the 
armies Kuruksettra and Prabhasa, the two sacred places, and about 
the birth, due to the curse of Bhrigu, of the Bhagavan Hah, of 
unparalleled prowess, under the influence of Mahamaya, in the race 
of Yadu. Now hear. 


3. Visnu’s taking birth in the world was effected under the 
circumstances caused by Yoga Maya, to relieve the burden of the 
Earth; this is my opinion. 


N. B. Prabhasa is a well-known place of pilgrimage near Dvarka, 
in Gujerat. 


4. O king! When the Goddess Mahamaya, the Incarnate of the three 
qualities can make Brahma, Visnu and the other Devas dance 
incessantly as their Internal Controller, then what wonder, that She 
would appear charming to the other Jivas and make them dance 
incessantly, as wooden dolls. 


5. All the troubles incurred in remaining in the womb, amidst the 
urine, excreta and tissues. She had brought to bear finally on Visnu 
by Her ever famous Leela (Divine Sport). 


6. In days of yore, in Rama incarnation. She, That Supreme 
Goddess made the Gods become monkeys and you know very well 



already, what amount of trouble Bhagavan Visnu had to undergo by 
the hard iron chain of bondage, “This is mine, this is I,” etc., imposed 
by Maya. 


7. The Yogis who want final liberation and who have abandoned all 
their attachments and who want devotion, they worship the Supreme 
Goddess of the Universe, the Incarnate of Auspiciousness. 


8. O king! Who will not serve Her? A trace of devotion towards 
Whom effects at once the salvation of the JTvas. 


9. If any human being utters simply the name “BhuvanesVari” (the 
Goddess of Universe) She gives him the three worlds; and if any one 
cries and utters for help “Save me,” then the Goddess of the 
Universe, being unable to find anything that She can repay him as a 
fit recompense for his utterance, becomes Herself indebted to that 
man. 


10. O King! Know Vidya (knowledge) and Avidya (non-knowledge, 
spiritual ignorance, lower knowledge) Her two forms; Vidya gives 
liberation; Avidya causes bondage. 


11. Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, all these and their Avataras are Her 
instruments and are under Her subjection, as if they are all fastened 
by a cord. 


12-14. The Bhagavan Hari sometimes resides in Vaikuntha, 
sometimes resides in the sea of milk and enjoys pleasures, 
sometimes fights the powerful Danavas, sometimes performs 



extensive sacrificial ceremonies sometimes performs severe 
asceticism and sometimes takes to deep sleep under the guidance 
of Yoga Maya. Thus He never becomes free and independent. 


15-16. O King! And like Visnu, Brahma, Rudra, the other Gods Indra, 
Varuna, Yama, Kuvera, Agni, the Sun, Moon and other celestial 
gods, the Sanaka and other Munis, Vas’istha and other Risis, all are 
incessantly controlled by the Supreme Goddess, as if they are the 
dolls in the hands of a playing magician. 


17. All the Devas are controlled by the noose of Time, just as oxen 
are brought under control by men, by strings passed within their 
noses. 


18. O King! Pleasure, pain, sleep, lassitude, idleness, and other 
passions and feelings are always found inherent in every embodied 
being. 


19-23. The Devas are written down by authors in their books as not 
subject to death or decay; this statement is merely nominal and not 
real; for whoever is always subject to birth, growth, decay and death 
how can we call him immortal or beyond old age and death? Why do 
the Devas get into sorrows, and troubles? How can they be called 
gods? How can one enjoy when one is involved in a trouble? In this 
world, it is seen mosquitoes and other insects born from water die 
after a very short time; so, like these, the Devas at the expiry of their 
ordained life-period, die too. Then why not the Devas be treated like 
those insects? Why not shall we term them, “Mortal”? 



24-25. Some human beings live one year; some others live upto one 
hundred years, the Devas live longer than men; the life of the 
Prajapati Brahma exceeds those of the Devas; Rudra lives longer 
than Brahma; and Visnu lives longer than Rudra. All these are thus 
subject by turns to birth, growth, and decay. 


26. Those who are born, they die; those that die are again born. 
Thus O King! In this world all the JTvas, no doubt, move round and 
round like a wheel. 


27. The JTvas are deluded by the network of Moha (charms) and 
thus deluded. They can never gain final release. So long as Maya 
exists in them, their delusion is not destroyed. 


28. O King! At the time of creation Brahma and all other things came 
into existence, in due order, and these will duly dissolve at the time 
of the Great Dissolution (the Pralaya)? 


29. Whatever is the cause of destruction to anybody here, that 
destroys the body in question. According to the Will Power of the 
Supreme Goddess, whatever is created by Brahma, no none can 
undo that. Know this as perfectly certain. 


30. Know this the predestined law that the birth, death, old age, 
diseases, pain or pleasure overtake all the JTvas according to the 
prescribed order of Nature; never these laws fail to operate in their 
actions. 



31. See! The Devas that we see with our physical eyes, the Sun and 
Moon yield pleasure to all; still they suffer always troubles at the 
hands of their enemies (i.e., Rahu and Ketu, i.e., there always take 
place regularly solar and lunar eclipses, when they are in the 
ascending and descending modes.) This suffering is never removed. 


32. The son of the Sun (Saturn) is always injurious to people; hence 
it is termed “Manda” (bad); the Moon was attacked with consumption 
and bears stain on his body (spots in the Moon disc). What to speak 
of ordinary men? The great men even are subject to the prescribed 
laws of Fate and Nature. 


33. The Creator of the world, the four faced Brahma is the author of 
the Vedas and awarder of Intelligence. He, too, on seeing Sarasvati, 
his own daughter, was afflicted with passion. 


34. When Sati, the wife of S’iva, left off Her mortal coil, Mahadeva, 
though He could remove the sorrows of all, was very much moved 
with passion and greatly afflicted. 


35. Then, being burnt very much as it were by the fire of passion, he 
threw himself down into the water of the river Kalindi; and the water 
of that river became black-coloured, as if burnt by the burning fire of 
the sorrows of S’iva. 


36-37. O King! When Mahadeva, being infatuated with Kama, went 
into the forest of Bhrigu and becoming naked, began to copulate, the 
ascetic Bhrigu, seeing him in that state, exclaimed “O You are very 
shameless” and cursed Him thus Let your penis drop off just now. 



Mahadeva, then to satisfy his thirst for passion, began to drink the 
water of the lake Amrita Vapi, dug by the Danavas. 


38-39. Indra, too, the Lord of the Devas, turned into a bull and 
carried Visnu on his back on the face of the earth. What to speak 
where the omniscience and omnipotence disappeared of Bhagavan 
Visnu, Who is the First of all created beings and possessed of 
reason, and discrimination? Oh! What a great wonder, that He could 
not know about the golden deer? 


40-41. Judge, O King! for yourself, the great power of Maya, that 
even Rama Chandra was deluded by passion, and very much 
grieved for the separation from his dear wife Sita, and wept much for 
Her. Greatly deluded, he began to cry aloud and ask the trees 
“Where has gone My Sita, the daughter of Janaka? Is she devoured 
by the rapacious animals? or whether is she stolen by some 
mischievous person? 


42-44. O Brother Laksmana! I am being consumed by the fire of 
separation from my beloved; I will commit suicide now; and you too 
will die due to the separation from me; our mother, too, would die 
when they will hear of our deaths; Satrughna, too, will be very much 
afflicted at our death and will not hold his life. The mother Sumitra, 
too, will destroy her life, being afflicted with her son’s demise; and 
then Bharata’s and his mother’s desires will certainly be fulfilled. 


45. O Sita! I am very much moved by your separation; where have 
you gone, leaving me here! O deer-eyed, O one of thin waist! come; 
give life unto me! 



46. What shall I do? Where shall I go? My life is entirely dependent 
on you, O daughter of Janaka! I am your darling! Now I am very 
much depressed owing to your separation. Please come and speak 
to me words of hope and courage. 


47. Though Rama, of unequalled prowess, roamed about weeping 
from forest to forest, yet he could not find out Sita. 


48-49. He, who is the Refuge of all the worlds, the lotus-eyed Rama, 
got entangled into the delusion of Maya and had to take refuge 
Himself under the monkeys, and with their help, constructed the 
bridge across the ocean, crossed the ocean and was thus able to kill 
the valiant warriors Kumbhakarna and Havana. 


50. Then Rama got back His Sita before him but suspecting, since 
she had been stolen by the vicious Havana, made her take an oath, 
though it is to, be remembered that Rama was all-knowing. 


51. O King! The power of Yoga Maya is very great; what shall I 
speak of Her great power? This whole cosmos is always urged into 
activity by Her and thus goes rolling on and on incessantly. 


52. Thus, in various incarnations, Bhagavan Visnu was always under 
the influence of previous curse and also under the control of Destiny 
and had to do various functions incessantly. 


53. O King! Now I will speak to you about the birth of S’ri Krisna in 
the world for serving the purposes of gods, and will narrate His 
Leela. 



54. In days of yore, on the delightful banks of the river Kalindi, there 
was a place, called Madhuban, where lived a powerful Daitya named 
Lavana, the son of Madhu. 


55-56. That wicked Demon was exceedingly arrogant, on getting a 
boon, and he used to give an enormous amount of trouble to the 
Dvijas. Satrughna the younger of Laksman, killed that uncontrollable 
Daitya and built a very beautiful city there and named it Mathura. 


57. The intelligent Satrughna, the destroyer of enemies, installed his 
two lotus-eyed sons in that kingdom and, when his end came, went 
to Heaven. 


58. Afterwards on the decline of the Solar race, the Yadavas, born of 
the race of Yayati, occupied that Mathura city, giving salvation to all. 


59. O King! There reigned in Mathura city one Yadava king, valiant 
warrior, named S’urasena; and he enjoyed all the pleasures 
Mathura. 


60. Under the curse of Varuna, Vasudeva took his birth as the son of 
the renowned S’urasena, as the part incarnate of Kas’yapa. 


61. He took up the profession of a Vais’ya and engaged himself in 
agriculture. And on the death of his father, the prosperous and 
wealthy Ugrasena became the King of Mathura. The powerful 
Kamsa was the son Ugrasena. 



62. On the other hand, the King Devaka had a daughter born to hinn 
named Devaki, the part incarnate of Aditi. She under the curse of 
Varuna, followed Kas’yapa- 


63. The high souled King Devaka performed the marriage ceremony 
of his daughter Devaki with Vasudeva. 


64. When this marriage ceremony was over, a voice was heard from 
Heaven, saying O fortunate Kamsa! The eighth son of this Devaki 
will take away your life. 


65. The powerful Kamsa, hearing that voice from Heaven, was 
surprised and took it to be true and became very anxious. 


66-67. Kamsa began to argue in his mind. Once he thought “I would 
today destroy her; then my death won’t take place; for I can’t see any 
other way of escape from this difficulty,” again he thought, “She is my 
sister, daughter of my paternal uncle and therefore fit to be 
worshipped; how can I kill her!” 


68. Lastly, he came to the final conclusion, thus “She is the cause of 
my death, though she is my sister, fit to be worshipped; to kill her will 
not lead me to sin; for it is enjoined by the wise Do even a sin to 
avert one’s own death.” 


69. The sins can be remedied always by penances. Therefore to 
save one’s life, by committing even a sinful act, ought to be done by 



the wise. 


70-71. The vicious Kamsa thus arguing, holding the scabbard in his 
hand, drew from it the sword and dragged and caught hold of the 
newly married handsome woman by her hair to kill her before the 
presence of the public. 


72. A cry of universal consternation and distress arose on all sides, 
seeing Kamsa thus ready to kill Devaki; then the warriors, under 
Vasudeva, at once raised their bows and arrows, ready to fight. 


73. These wonderfully valorous warriors loudly exclaimed to Kamsa, 
“Leave Devaki at once” “Leave Devaki at once” and then they were 
finally able out of their mercy to release the Devamata Devaki, from 
the hold of the vicious Kamsa. 


74. Deadly battles ensued then between the powerful Kamsa and 
those valorous warriors on Vasudeva’s side. 


75-76. Seeing the exceedingly terrible battle, the old Yadavas asked 
Kamsa to desist from such a battle and advised him thus. This 
Devaki is your sister; you ought to pay her respects. Did you not 
consider even for a moment that she is as yet a girl. O Hero! You 
ought not to kill her at the time of this joyous marriage ceremony. 


77. O Valiant Warrior! The murder of a woman is intolerable! 
Destroyer of fame, and most heinous crime! You should also 
consider that learned persons ought not to commit such dastardly 



acts as the murdering of females, depending simply on a voice from 
heaven, a very ordinary thing! 


78. It may be that some of your Vasudeva’s enemy has uttered that 
harmful word, hiding himself from your sight. No reason can be 
shewn contrary to this. 


79. We are of opinion that to ruin your name and to destroy the 
house of Vasudeva, some magician, expert in black magic, your 
enemy has framed this voice from Heaven. 


80. O king! You are a hero; why do you fear the words of a devil. We 
firmly believe, there is no doubt, that this is done by your malicious 
enemy to ruin your name. 


81. O king! What is destined to take place, will take place; no one 
can stand against it otherwise. Therefore, at this marriage festivity, 
you ought never to kill this your respected sister. 


82-83. O King Janamejaya! Though made to understand thus by the 
old wise Yadavas, the king Kamsa did not desist from his purpose; 
S’ri Vasudeva, versed in morals, told him “Kamsa! These three 
worlds are established on Truth. I say on Truth that I will hand over 
to you all my sons, born of the womb of Devaki, no sooner they are 
born. 


84. And if I do not deliver to you all those sons, no sooner they are 
born then all my forefathers will fall down into the hell called 
Kumbihpaka.” 



85-86. The descendants of Puru, that were present there, hearing 
his truthful words, praised him repeatedly and told Kamsa “Vasudeva 
is a high minded personage; he is surely not to tell a lie. Therefore, 

O Thou, blessed one! Now leave Devaki and be free from 
committing the murder of woman.” 


87. O king! Thus made to understand by the aged high minded 
Yadavas the king Kamsa accepted the truthful words of Vasudeva 
and abandoned his anger. 


88. Then the Dunduvis and other sounding instruments were 
sounded; and their sounds filled the place; and all repeatedly uttered 
jai, jai. 


89. Then the famous Vasudeva, the son of S’urasena, thus pleased 
the king Kamsa and freed Devaki; and, surrounded by his relatives, 
he went quickly without any fear to his own house, accompanied by 
Devaki. 


Here ends the 20th chapter in the 4th Adhyaya of S’rimad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa, on Devaki’s marriage. 



Chapter 21. On The Killing Of The Sons Of 
Devak! 


1. Vyasa said O King! Thus, in due course, Devaki, the goddess 
incarnate, being united according to rules with Vasudeva, became 
pregnant. 


2-4. When full ten months were over, a good-looking and beautiful 
child (male) was first born to Devaki. Then the good-natured 
Vasudeva remembered his promise, and also what is ordained by 
Heaven; and he spoke to Devaki, the part incarnate of Aditi “O fair- 
looking! You know that I saved your life at your marriage by swearing 
on oath to deliver all your fresh-born children to Kamsa. Now has 
come the time to hand over your child to Kamsa.” 


5. O good-haired woman! Now I will hand your this son to Kamsa. 
Know Kamsa is very cruel and wicked. I cannot say what step he will 
take, urged on by Fate, to kill your child. O Sweet One! We have no 
hands in the matter. The effects of Karma are exceedingly puzzling. 
Ordinary persons cannot know them. 


6. All persons are subject to Time, the Destroyer, and enjoy the 
merits or demerits of their past deeds. The effects of past Karma are 
fashioned by the Creator; knowing this, allow me to take away your 
child. 


7. Devaki said O Lord! Certainly men have to suffer fully the 
effects of their past Karmas. But can that not be upset by residing in 



holy places, practising penances and asceticism or by making 
generous gifts? 


8-9. The high minded Maharsis have fixed rules and penances for 
destroying the sins of past deeds; twelve years’ vow to observe 
penances can purify one from sins, e.g., Brahminicide, stealing gold, 
drinking or stealing the wife of one’s preceptor and many others. 


10-11.0 Sinless one! Will not any one be freed from their sinful 
effects, if they observe practices and penances as are ordained by 
Manu or other Munis? If you don’t accept penances to be sufficiently 
purificatory, do you mean to say, then, that what the Maharsis, seers, 
Yajhavalkya and other promulgators of religious doctrines have 
uttered, they did so, as an act of dire falsehood and villainy? 


12. O My husband! “What is in the womb of Fate will surely come to 
pass,” if this be taken as granted, then the whole Ayurveda 
(medicinal books) and Mantra vadas, the science and recitation of 
mantras or sacred formulae turn out utterly fruitless and false! 


13-16. If all the actions are under the control of Fate, then no effect 
can come out of any effort; so all efforts are reduced to no effect. If 
what is ordained by Heaven is to come to pass then what is the use 
of taking recourse to any action and Agnistoma sacrifices, etc., that 
are declared to lead to Heavens. Judge! If Heaven or Fate you 
consider all-in-all, then the whole Vedas, the revelations from God’s 
mouth turn out false; if the Vedas be false, then there is no reason 
why the whole Dharma will not be destroyed. 


N.B. Fate is here denounced. 



17. Now when it is seen that effects do come out whenever any 
exertion is made, then you ought to think out carefully and find out 
some means to avert danger. Therefore do you judge and find out a 
good way of preserving the life of this new born baby. 


The learned people say that to tell a lie is not a sin, if you can 
thereby save a life, and have an honest motive for the welfare of all. 


Note Here is a diplomatic statement! 


18. Vasudeva said O blessed one! I now tell you what is truth and 
the matters connected with truth. 


19-20. Effort, application and manifestation of energy are certainly 
the duties of man; but their effects are all under the Great Destiny or 
Fate. 


The Pundits knowing the ancient lore say that there are three kinds 
of Karma mentioned in the Puranas and Agamas First, the 
Sanchita Karma (done in past births); the Prarabdha Karma, the 
Karma already done; and the Vartaman Karma (Karma in hand). 


21. The Karma, auspicious and inauspicious, done in many previous 
lives and preserved in seed forms, remains always inherent in a 
human soul. Urged on by this Karma, the Jivas quitting their 
previous bodies, enjoy Heaven or Hell as effects of these, their own 
acts. 



22-23. According to their good or bad works, the Jivas acquire the 
higher happy body and enjoy various pleasures in the Heavens, or 
they take up very painful vicious bodies and suffer various pains in 
hell. 


24-25. At the expiry of the above period in Heaven or Hell, when 
there comes the time of his assuming another body, the Jiva 
becomes conscious of the subtle body (Linga Deha) and takes his 
birth again. When the Linga Deha comes into existence, the part of 
the Karma done in various previous births that are ripe and ready to 
yield their fruits, gets attached to the Jiva by God (or Destiny). 


26. Therefore the collective effect of Karma done in previous births 
always exists in a Jiva’s body. O Fair-eyed One! The effects of 
Prarabdha Karma, ripened and ready to yield their fruits must have 
to be experienced by a Jiva, whether happy or unhappy. 


27. O beautiful young woman! Penances, performed according to 
rules, destroy the effect of Karmas that are in hand and are weak 
(i.e., not yet accumulated strongly as to remain in seed forms). 


28. The Prarabdha Karma, those acts out of all the previous acts 
done in previous births that are fully mature and ready to yield their 
fruits, cannot be averted; their effects must have to be experienced 
and then they can die away; they cannot be expiated by penances or 
any other remedial measures. Therefore you must hand over 
unconditionally your new born babe unto the hands of Kamsa. 



29-30. O Goddess! I have never done any blameable action, nor 
have I told any lie. Therefore do you fulfill your truth and hand over 
your baby. O Devaki! Dharma is the only thing permanent and real in 
this fleeting world. Even the births and deaths of high souled persons 
are subject to the great Destiny. Therefore the Jivas ought not to be 
sorry when there is no help for it. 


31. O dear one! What shall I say to you! Know this much that his life 
is spent in vain who is lost to Truth. O beautiful one! Whose this life 
is destroyed, what can he expect in the life to come! 


32. Therefore, O Goddess! Give me your baby and I will hand it over 
to Kamsa. If we can observe this truth, we will meet with ample 
rewards afterwards; there is no doubt in it. 


33. Where there are pains and pleasures for the Jivas, there it is 
highly incumbent on us to do good and meritorious deeds. If we can 
act according to Truth, we will certainly get good fruits. 


34. Vyasa said Thus addressed by Vasudeva, the husband of 
Devaki, who was very much grieved and intelligent, gave over the 
newly born baby, her whole body trembling, to the hands of 
Vasudeva. 


35. The virtuous Vasudeva took that baby and went out to the 
Kamsa’s palace. On the way, the people, seeing him thus, were very 
much astonished and began to praise him. 



36-37. The people said “O people! See how Vasudeva is sensible 
to keep his words! He is taking his son to hand over to Kamsa. This 
truthful and highsouled man, free from malice, is going to give up his 
son to the hands of Kamsa who is the Death Personified. See his 
wonderful patience; this man’s life is really high, noble and true.” 


38. Vyasa said O King! Vasudeva, thus praised, reached at last 
the Kamsa’s palace and handed over his newly-born son to Kamsa. 


39-41. The King Kamsa, too, was very much astonished to see this 
wonderful patience of Vasudeva. Then he held aloft the child and 
laughed and said “O son of S’urasena, you have been blessed 
today by giving me your son just now. But the voice from Heaven 
said that your eighth son will be the cause of my death; this your first 
son is not my cause of death. Therefore I will not kill this baby; you 
can take your baby back to your home. 


O High-minded One! Let me have your eighth son brought here, 
when he will be born; I hope you will positively do it.” 


42. The cruel and wicked Kamsa returned the child and said “Let 
this child go back safely to his home.” 


43-44. When the king Kamsa said thus, Vasudeva, the son of 
S’urasena gladly took his child back and came home. Then the King 
Kamsa told his ministers that the Heavenly voice told that the eighth 
son would he the cause of his death; and so there was no necessity 
to kill that child. There was no need to incur sin by killing the first 
child. 



45. The ministers, hearing the king Kamsa’s those words, began to 
praise him very much and exclaimed repeatedly “Well done” “Well 
done.” They went away to their respective homes, when ordered to 
do so by Kamsa. 


46-49. Now Narada, the best of the Munis, arrived to Kamsa. The 
king Kamsa, the son of Ugrasena, stood up at once and offered him 
water to wash his mouth and with green grass and rice worshipped 
him devotedly and enquired of his welfare. He then asked the Muni 
about the cause of his untimely arrival there. The Maharsi Narada 
then smilingly and with sweet words repeatedly uttered “Kamsa,” 
“Kamsa” and then said, O blessed one! I went perchance to Sumeru 
Mountain. There Brahma and other gods formed an assembly and 
were thus thinking out plans that Visnu, the Supreme God, would 
take His birth in the womb of Devaki, the wife of Vasudeva to kill 
Kamsa. 


50. Now I ask you, you are very expert as a politician; then why have 
you not killed the son of Vasudeva? Kamsa said “I will kill the 
eighth son according to the Heavenly Voice.” 


51. Narada said O King! Now I understand that you do not 
understand anything of politics, leading to auspicious or inauspicious 
results; especially when you are quite ignorant of the Maya of the 
Devas, then what shall I say to you! 


52-53. The truth is this The warriors, looking after their own 
welfare, never overlook the weakest of their foes. What have you 
understood when the Heavenly Voice uttered “the eighth son.” It 
means the children counted from the first and then finished upto 



eighth; it may mean first, second, third or upto eighth. Never forego 
your enemies; then why have you desisted in killing your enemy 
when you got that enemy in your possession. Nothing is shewn of 
you in this act save dire foolishness, and ignorance. 


54. Thus saying, the Maharsi Narada vanished quickly. Kamsa, of 
little understanding brought back the son of Vasudeva and killed him 
by dashing him against a stone and was relieved. 


Note This human body is a microcosm; the universe is the 
macrocosm. God resides in the centre and controls the two. In this 
human body also live the Devas and the Danavas. The left half of 
the body, the Ida side, is the seat of the Devas. The right half, the 
Pingala side, is the seat of the Danavas. In this body war is always 
going on between the Devas and Danavas. Sometimes the Devas 
get victory; sometimes the Danavas win. God is in the centre, the 
heart and controls the two. 


Here ends the 21st Chapter of S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha 
Puranam of 18,000 verses composed by Veda Vyasa, on the killing 
of the sons of Devaki. 



Chapter 22. On The Part Incarnations Of The 
Several Devas 


1. Janamejaya asked O grandfather! What bad act did that child 
commit, that no sooner he was born than he was killed by Kamsa? 


2. Especially, Maharsi Narada is the the best amongst the Munis and 
foremost amongst the Brahma-vids (Knowers of Brahma), always 
doing virtuous acts, and learned; why did he become the agent in 
this very sinful act? 


3. Pundits declare that the doers and stimulators of any evil deed 
both are equally responsible; then how is it that Narada, being the 
best of the Munis, instigated the wicked Kamsa to do this evil act! 


4. I am very much in doubt on this point. Kindly describe, in detail, 
the act that the child did as the result of which be had to meet with 
this fate of being killed. 


5. Vyasa said The Devarsi Narada is always fond of seeing 
quarrels brought about amongst parties; he always likes thus to see 
the fun. Here specially to serve the gods’ purpose he went to Kamsa 
and incited him to such an act. 


6. Really he never intends to speak a lie; he is always truth 
speaking; pure hearted, and always ready to serve the gods. 



7. Thus the six sons were born to Devaki; and Kamsa, too, killed 
those six sons consecutively as they were born. These six sons 
named Sadgarbha, were killed just after their births, owing to their 
having been previously cursed. 


8. O King! Hear why they were cursed before. In the reign of 
Svayambhuva Manu, were born to Urna; the wife of Maharsi Marichi, 
the six powerful sons, all of a virtuous disposition. 


9-11. Once, on an occasion, the Prajapati Brahma, on seeing his 
daughter, became passionate, and was ready to hold sexual 
intercourse with her. At this, those six sons laughed at him. Brahma 
cursed them saying “You all go quickly and take your birth in the 
wombs of the asuras.” Therefore those six sons became the sons of 
Kalanemi in their first birth. At their second birth, they became the 
sons of Hiranyakas’ipu. This second time they had the fear of curse 
in their minds and therefore were born endowed with knowledge. 


12. In this birth they became peaceful and, collecting all their 
energies, they began to practise austerities. Brahma was pleased at 
this and asked the Sadgarbha to take boons. 


13. Brahma said O my sons! I was very angry to you before and 
cursed you; now I am very much pleased with you; ask boons from 
me that you all desire. 


14-15. Vyasa said Hearing Brahma’s words, they were very glad 
and becoming very anxious to secure their objects of desire, said 
O our grand sire! Today thou art pleased unto us; now favour us with 
our desired boons. That we may be invulnerable to all the Devas, 



human beings, the big serpents the Gandarbhas, and the Lord of 
Siddhas, (semi-divine beings supposed to be of great purity and 
holiness and said to be particularly characterised by eight 
supernatural faculties called Siddhis). 


16. Vyasa said Brahma told them “What you have asked, you 
would certainly get; O blessed ones! better go now; my words will be 
found to be literally true. No doubt in this.” 


17-19. Granting them boons, Brahma went away; they then became 
very glad. O best of Kurus! Hiranyakas’ipu began to think “My sons 
now have pleased the Grandsire Brahma and are now regardless of 
me” and got very angry and said You all are become very proud 
on account of receiving boons; and since you have ceased your 
good feelings towards me I also henceforth cut off my connection 
with you. Now better go to Patala; you will be known in this world 
as Sadgarbha. 


20-21. At present you would be always involved in deep sleep and 
remain in Patala for many years; and when you will be born one after 
another in the womb of Devaki, then your father Kalanemi of 
previous birth will be born as Kamsa; and he would be cruel hearted 
and surely kill you all, no sooner you be born. 


22. Vyasa said Thus because they were cursed, they took their 
births repeatedly and Kamsa, too, being urged on by the same 
curse, killed those sons of Devaki, the Sadgarbha, no sooner they 
were born. 



23-24. In the seventh wonnb of Devaki, Ananta made his 
appearance. The foetus in the womb was attracted by Yoga maya 
and placed in the womb of Rohini. But there was the rumour that 
there was miscarriage in the womb of Devaki in the fifth month; and 
this became known to the public. 


25. Kamsa came to know that there had been miscarriage. That 
wicked soul became exceedingly glad to hear this gladdening news. 


26. And at about this time the Bhagavan, the Protector of the 
devotee appeared in the eighth womb of Devaki to serve the 
purpose of the gods and to relieve the load of the Earth. 


27-28. The King said :-- O best of Munis! “You have described the 
part incarnations of (1) Kas’yapa as Vasudeva and (2) of Bhagavan 
Hari to relieve the burden of the Goddess Earth as prayed by Her; 
and (3) of Ananta Deva; but you have not described the part 
incarnations of the other Devas. How the other Devas incarnated as 
their parts on this earth, kindly describe them now.” 


29. Vyasa said The part incarnations of Suras and Asuras on this 
earth, and their names I am now saying to you in brief; hear. 


30-32. Vasudeva was the part incarnation of Kas’yapa, Devaki was 
of Aditi, Baladeva, of Ananta; Vasudeva S’ri Krisna, of S’riman 
Narayana; the son of Dharma existing even at that time in his 
physical body; Arjuna, of Nara, the younger brother of Narayana. 



33. Yuidhisthira was part incarnate of Dharma, Bhimasena, of Vayu, 
the powerful twins of Madri, Nakul and Sahadeva, of AsVini- 
kumaras? 


34. The valiant hero Kama, born of Kunti, was part incarnate of the 
Sun, and the high minded Vidura, the knower of the Supreme 
Essence, was incarnate of Yama, the king Dharmaraj. Drona, the 
Acharya of the Kurus and the Pandavas was the part incarnate of 
Brihaspati; and his son AsVatthama was part incarnate of Rudra 
Deva. 


35. S’antanu was the part incarnate of the Ocean; his wife, of the 
river Ganges in human farm. It is stated in the Puranas that the king 
Devaka was part incarnate of the Lord of Gandarvas. 


36-41. The Grand-father of the Kauravas, the foremost of the 
heroes, Bhisma Deva was the incarnate of Vasu; Virata, the Lord of 
Matsya was the part incarnate of Maruts; Dhritarastra, of the Daitya 
Hamsa, the son of Arista Nemi; Kripa and Krita Varma, of Maruts; 
Duryodhana, of Kali and S’akuni, of Dvapara; Suvarchakhya 
Somapraru, of the son of the Moon; Dhristadyumna was part 
incarnate of Fire and S’ikhandi of Raksasa; Pradyumna was part 
incarnate of Sanatkumara; the king Drupada was part incarnate of 
Varuna; Draupadi, of Laksmi; Draupadi’s five sons, of Visve-devas; 
Kunti was incarnate of Siddhi; Madri, of Dhriti; Gandhari, of Mati; the 
wives of S’ri Krisna were the heavenly public women; thus all the 
Devas came as their part incarnations, urged on by Indra. 


42-43. Amongst the Asuras, S’is’upala was the incarnate of 
Hiranyakas’ipu; Jarasandha, of Biprachitti, S’alya, of Prahlada; 
Kamsa, of Kalanemi and Kes’i, of Haya S’ira. The Asura named 



Arista of the form of a cow that was killed by Krisna was the son of 
Bali. 


44. Dhristaketu was part incarnate of Anuhradha, Bhagadatta, of 
Vaskala; Pralamba, of Lamba; Dhenuka, of Khara. 


45. Chanura and Mus’tika, the two athletes, were part incarnates of 
Varaha, and Kis’ora, the two dreadful Daityas. 


46-47. Kubalaya, the elephant of Kamsa, was part incarnate of 
Arista, the sun of Diti. Vaki was the daughter of Bali, Vaka was her 
younger. 


The powerful son of Drona, AsVatthama, though known as the part 
incarnate of Rudra, was really born of the four parts of Yama, Rudra, 
Cupidity and Anger. 


48-49. The Daityas and Raksasas that were born to relieve the 
heavy burden of the Earth were all incarnates of Asuras. O king! I 
have thus narrated to you in order the incarnations of the Suras and 
Asuras, as they are stated duly in the Puranas. 


50-51. When Brahma and the other Devas went to Visnu and prayed 
to Him then Hah gave to Brahma one hair of a black colour and one 
hair of a white colour. The Bhagavan S’ri Krisna was born of that 
black hair and S’ankarsana Baladeva was born of the white hair. 
They were both the incarnations of Visnu. 



Note here the black is the younger and the stronger; and they also 
represent the polarities. The Jivas are points of those hairs. 


52. He who hears with devotion the story of these part incarnations 
becomes freed of all sins and passes away his time merrily, 
surrounded by his circle of friends; there is no doubt in this. 


Thus ends the 22nd chapter in 4th book of S’rimad Devi 
Bhagavatam the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa on the part incarnations of the several Devas. 



Chapter 23. On The Birth Of S’rI Krisna 


1-2. Vyasa said The six sons of Devaki being thus killed by 
Kannsa and the seventh womb being miscarried, Kamsa began, 
when Devaki was pregnant for the eighth time, to think of the cause 
of his own death as advised by Narada and watched carefully, day 
and night, so that this time there would be born a son and there be 
no miscarriage. 


3. On the other hand the Bhagavan Hari came down and rested on 
the body of Vasudeva as part incarnate and then entered into the 
womb of Devaki, in due order. 


4. That very time the Goddess Yogamaya, of Her own accord, enters 
into the womb of Yasoda in order to help the workings of the gods. 


5. Rohini, the wife of Vasudeva was anxiously dwelling at that time 
through the fear of Kamsa in the Nanda Gokula; Balarama, the part 
incarnate of Ananta, took his birth there as Her son. 


6. Kamsa then imprisoned Devaki, who was being worshipped by 
gods, and engaged servants to take care of her. 


7. Vasudeva, too, entered into the prison with his wife Devaki, 
thinking of his issue and also being attracted by his attachment 
towards his wife. 



8. Visnu, here, the Deva of the Devas, to accomplish the purpose of 
the gods began to grow regularly in the womb of Devaki, being 
incessantly adored and praised by the gods. 


9-10. When the tenth month was complete, on the eighth day of the 
dark fortnight, under the star Rohini, Kamsa became much 
bewildered with fear and called on his Danava followers and said 
“You must all carefully protect Devaki in the prison. 


11-12. The son born from this eighth womb of Devaki will turn out my 
dire enemy; therefore do you all very carefully protect that child, my 
death incarnate (so that the child may not be transferred anywhere 
else). O Daityas! I will be able to sleep without any anxiety then, 
when I will be successful. Kill this eighth son of Devaki who has 
become the source of my constant worries and endless troubles. 


13. Equipped with swords, shafts and bow and darts do you all 
incessantly watch with eyes open on all sides, leaving off your sleep 
and drowsiness.” 


14. Vyasa said Thus ordering the Demons, the king Kamsa who 
had become worn out with this anxiety and was bewildered with fear, 
went quickly to his own palace room; but he could not find any trace 
of happiness. 


15-18. On the other hand, Devaki, at dead of night, in that prison, 
told Vasudeva “O king! My birth pain has come; I see here many 
guards, terrific, who are watching and protecting us; what shall I do 
now? Yasoda, the wife of Nanda, promised me before this. O 
respected one! Your heart is almost burnt up with the fire of grief; 



therefore do you send to my house your son; I will protect it with 
utmost care; and especially to incur Kamsa’s faith and belief, I will 
give you another son. O Lord! This is now a very hard moment; what 
are we to do now? 


19. And again how are you to exchange the two sons? However let 
what may come, come to pass; now the moment of child birth has 
come; I am possessed by a feeling of shame not liable to be 
overcome. You better turn away your face; there is no other remedy 
here.” 


20. Thus saying to that blessed Vasudeva, worshipped by the gods, 
Devaki, at dead of night, delivered a wonderful child. 


21. The blessed Devaki looking on that exceedingly beautiful child, 
was struck with wonder and told her husband, her whole body being 
filled with joy. 


22. O Lord! Look at the face of your new born child, a very rare thing 
to see such a face as this. Alas! The son of my paternal uncle, 
Kamsa, will kill my this new born child. 


23. “Kamsa will do so.” Saying this, Vasudeva took up that child in 
his arms and began to look amorously at the face of that child of 
wonderful deeds. 


24. Thus looking, Vasudeva thought “What can I do now so as to 
relieve me from my sorrows owing to the future destruction of this 
child.” 



25-27. While Vasudeva was thus anxiously pondering over, the 
Heaven Voice clearly said thus “O Vasudeva! Quickly go to 
Gokula with the child. The keepers and guards I have made dead 
asleep by My Maya. The eight very strong doors are now lying wide 
open. You better free yourself from your chains and take this child, 
keep it in the house of Nanda and bring Yoga Maya from there and 
come back here.” 


28-29. Thus hearing the Heavenly Voice, he cast his glance at the 
doors and found them all wide open. O King! Very quickly then he 
took the child and stepped out of the prison, quite unnoticed by the 
guards and watchmen. Going to the banks of the Jumna he found 
there the daughter of Kalindi, flowing with great force and became 
anxious. 


30-31. But the river Jumna instantaneously turned out to be easily 
fordable just knee deep; then Vasudeva, guided by Yoga Maya, 
crossed the Jumna and betaking to an unfrequented road arrived at 
Gokul at dead of night. There, at the doorway of the house of Nanda, 
he began to see the cows, buffaloes, the wealth and property of 
Nanda. 


32. At that very moment, there was born of Yos’oda, the Maha Devi, 
the part of the Divine Yoga Maya, the Incarnate of the three qualities. 


33. Then the Mahadevi Yoga Maya, assuming the appearance of a 
female artisan, taking that divine female child in her arms came there 
and handed her over to Vasudeva. 



34. Vasudeva, too, delivered his child over to the lotus like hands of 
the Devi and, taking the female child instead, quickly returned with 
his heart full of joy. 


35. He went unto the prison and kept that female child in the bed of 
Devaki and remained aside, fearful and anxious. 


36-37. But that child, the moment she was lulled to sleep, began to 
cry in a sonorous voice; the royal guards at once woke up on that 
cry, and being bewildered with fear, hurriedly went to their king and 
said “O King! Come quickly. Devaki has brought forth a child.” 


38-39. The King of the Bhojas, hearing their words, went there 
quickly and saw the doors open, called on Vasudeva “O blessed 
one! Let me have the eighth son of Devaki, my death incarnate; I will 
at once kill that enemy of mine, born as part incarnate of Hah.” 


40. Vyasa said O King! Hearing Kamsa’s words, Vasudeva 
handed over to him the female child crying and very much 
bewildered with fear. 


41. At the sight of the female child, the king was very much 
astonished and began to think that the Heavenly Voice and the Seer 
Narada’s words turned out false. 


42. How can Vasudeva be able to bring about, in this dreadful place, 
the unnatural act of turning male into a female. Especially my guards 
are carefully watching the place. There is no doubt in this. 



43. How has this female child come here? Where has that eighth 
born child gone? I ought not to doubt in this matter. For the ways of 
Time are mysterious! 


44-46. Thinking thus, the cruel King Kamsa caught hold of that 
female child by her legs and, raising her high up in the air, was going 
to strike her against a stone, when the female child slipped out of his 
hands and flying into the air assumed a divine appearance and 
gently spoke to Kamsa, thus “What will you get by killing me? 

Your powerful enemy is already born on the earth. O vilest of men! 
Disgrace to your family! He, the Excellent Human being Who is very 
difficult to be worshiped will certainly kill you.” 


47-49. Saying thus, the auspicious female child, able to go anywhere 
according to her will, disappeared. Kamsa astonished returned to his 
own home and, becoming impatient with fear and anger, called all 
the Danavas Baka, Dhenuka, Vatsa and others, and addressed them 
thus “O Danavas. Go all of you to serve my purpose. Kill 
anywhere the child whom you see just born. 


50. Let Putana, expert in killing children go today to Nanda’s Gokula. 
My order is this Any child recently born they must kill. 


51. Dhenuka, Vatsaka, Kes’i, Pralamba, and Vaka, etc., all should 
remain in Gokula to carry out my order.” 


52. The cruel king Kamsa, thus ordering the Demons, went away to 
his own palace, and, thinking on this matter over and over again 



became, very much afflicted with fear and his mind got immensely 
depressed. 


Thus ends the 23rd Chapter in the 4th Skandha of S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa, on the birth of S’ri Krisna. 



Chapter 24. On The Stealing Away Of 
Pradyumna 


1-2. Vyasa said On the other hand, there, at the house of Nanda, 
early in the next morning, commenced the grand birth day festivity. 
Kamsa came to know, afterwards, by his spies as will as by general 
rumour, that at Gokula, in the house of Nanda, a very joyous festival 
on a grand scale was being performed; he also knew before that the 
other wives of Vasudeva, his animals and his servants were all 
staying at Nanda’s residence in Gokula. 


3-4. O Bharata! Thus all these gave reasons to Kamsa to suspect 
the place Gokula. Especially Narada told him before that the 
residents, the cowherds at Gokula, Nanda and others, their wives, 
Devaki and Vasudeva were all Devas incarnates; and consequently 
they were his enemies. 


5-7. Thus being brought to more confidence by Narada’s words, that 
vicious Kamsa, the disgrace to his family, was very angry and sent 
there his demons Putana, Baka, Vatsa, the great Asura, the powerful 
Dhenuka, Pralamba. They were all killed by Krisna, of unsurpassable 
prowess. S’ri Krisna held aloft also the hillock Gobardhana (to 
protect the cow herds and cows, etc.) Hearing all these, Kamsa 
became certain also of his own death. 


8. Lastly when the evil minded Kamsa heard that the Daitya Kes’i 
was also slain, then he made arrangements for a sacrifice, known as 
Dhanuryajha; and under this pretext wanted to bring over there at 
Mathura the two brothers Krisna and Balarama. 



9. The evil minded Kamsa to effect the death of those two, Rama 
and Krisna, of unsurpassable prowess, sent Akrura to Gokula to 
bring them over to Mathura. 


10. Akrura, the son of Gandini, under the orders of Kamsa, went to 
Gokula and brought the two boys on a chariot to Mathura. 


11-12. On arriving at Mathura, Rama and Krisna first broke the bow; 
killed Rajaka, the elephant Kubalaya, Chanur, Mustika, S’ala, Tos’ala 
and other athletes and warriors. Last of all, Hari, the Lord of the 
Devas, holding Kamsa by his hair, killed him with utmost ease. 


13. The enemy-destroyer Krisna removed the sorrows of his father 
and mother and released them from their prisons and gave over the 
kingdom of Mathura to Ugrasena (the father of Kamsa). 


14-15. The high minded Vasudeva, then, with the triple girdle made 
of Munja grass, performed the Upanayana ceremonies (wearing the 
sacred thread round the body) of Rama and Krisna and made them 
accept the vow of Brahmacharya. They then departed to the 
hermitage of the holy Muni S’andipana to acquire knowledge. 
Learning all the vidyas (knowledges) there, they returned quickly to 
Mathura. 


16 . The two sons of Anakadundubhi stayed there and on attaining 
their twelfth year, became proficient in all the branches of learning 
and became very powerful. 



17. That time Jarasandha, being grieved at the killing of his son-in- 
law Kamsa, collected a strong and numerous army and marched to 
Mathura. 


18. Seventeen times Jarasandha, the king of Magadha, attacked 
Mathura and seventeen times he was defeated by the ingenuity of 
that highly intelligent S’ri Krisna, who was of firm resolve and was 
then residing in Mathura. 


19. Lastly, Jarasandha sent the Kalayavana (Black Yavana) to 
invade Mathura. These Yavanas were brave and the lords of all 
MIechchas (untouchables) and extremely terrific to the Yadavas. 


Note: Kalayavana - A king of Yavanas and enemy of Krisna and an 
invincible foe of the Yadavas. Krisna finding it impossible to vanquish 
him in the field of battle, cunningly decoyed him to the cave where 
Muchukunda was sleeping who burnt him down. 


Yavana means a Greek, an Ionian; then any foreigner, or barbarian 
(the word is applied at present to a Mahomedan or a European also). 


20-21. Hearing that Kala Yavana was coming to attack the Yadavas, 
Krisna the destroyer of Madhu, called all the Yadavas and Baladeva 
and addressed them thus “O blessed ones! Now a cause of great 
terror has appeared amongst us; Kala Yavana is being sent by our 
powerful enemy Jarasandha to attack Mathura. Now what to do? It is 
better to save one’s life by leaving aside all our homes, wealth and 
army. 



22. You should all know that is the place of our fathers and 
forefathers where we can safely and happily dwell; where there is a 
constant source of anxiety and uneasiness that, though the place of 
our fathers and forefathers, ought to be avoided; never ought anyone 
to dwell there. 


23. If you want to dwell at ease and comfort, you ought to dwell in 
that country or place which is adjacent to a sea or a mountain; where 
there is no fear from an enemy, the sages will always remain there. 


24. See! The Bhagavan Hah, being afraid, as it were, of his enemy 
has taken refuge on the body of the thousand headed S’esa serpent 
as his sleeping place and is sleeping at ease and comfort on the 
ocean. It seems likely that the enemy of Tripura, the great S’iva is 
also dwelling on the Kailas’a mountain. 


25. We, too, are being constantly worried by our enemies here; 
therefore we ought not to live here any longer. We should all go to 
Dwarka city with our friends, relatives and wealth. 


26. Garuda, the king of the birds, has given us the detailed 
information of the city Dwarka. That beautiful city is situated on the 
sea shore in the vicinity of the Raivataka mountain.” 


27. Vyasa said The Yadava chiefs, hearing S’ri Krisna’s 
utterances fraught with their welfare, were ready to depart to that 
place Dwarka, attended by their friends, relatives, and 
appurtenances. 



28. They then collected their camels, mares, and buffaloes and filled 
their conveyances with wealth, gems and precious stones and 
marched out of their place. 


29. Rama and Krisna went in front; the Yadavas and other subjects 
then marched in groups (several parties). 


30. Marching some days, they all reached Dvaravati. Then the 
portions of the city that were dilapidated or destroyed, S’ri Krisna 
had them repaired by engineers, artisans and craftsmen. 


31. Placing the Yadavas there, Kes’ava and Baladeva quickly 
returned to Mathura and began to stay in that desolated city. 


32. The extremely powerful king of the Yavanas arrived then at 
Mathura. Krisna knowing that the Yavana chief had come there, went 
out of the city. 


33. The Bhagavan Madhusudana, the destroyer of the boastings of 
Asuras and other people, dressed in yellow robes, appeared on foot 
before the Kalayavan with smile on his lips. 


34. Seeing the lotus-eyed Krisna before him, the treacherous Lord of 
the Yavanas, pursued him on foot to catch hold of him. 


35. Where the powerful Rajarsi Muchukunda was sleeping soundly, 
the Bhagavan Hari led Kalayavana there. 



36. There S’ri Krisna, saw Muchukunda and vanished away at once; 
the king of the Yavanas on arriving there found the Rajarsi (the royal 
sage) there in deep sleep. 


37. The wicked Yavana mistaking Muchukunda for S’ri Krisna, gave 
him a good kick. The powerful king Muchukunda got up and was 
very angry; his eyes became red and reduced that vicious Yavana 
instantly into ashes. 


38. When Muchukunda burnt the Yavana, he saw the lotus-eyed 
Krisna; he bowed down to that Supreme Deva, Vasudeva, and went 
to forest. 


39. S’ri Krisna then went back to the city Dwarka with Rama and 
made Ugrasena there the king and began to enjoy at his will. 


40. At the marriage ceremony of S’is’upala, at the palace of the king 
of Vidarbha, Janardan Visnu carried away by force Rukmini, the 
bride elect from the Svayambara assembly (where the husband is 
self elected by the bride herself) and afterwards married her 
according to the rule called Rakhsasa Vidhi (one of the eight forms 
of marriage in Hindu Law in which a girl is forcibly seized and carried 
away after the defeat or destruction of her relatives in battle). 


41-42. Afterwards He brought also Jambavati, Satyabhama, 
Mitravinda, Kalindi, Laksmana, Bhadra, and auspicious Nagnajiti 
(the daughter of the king Nagnajit) on various occasions and married 



them. O Lord of the earth! These eight women were the best and 
most beautiful of S’ri Krisna’s wives. 


43. Rukmini first gave birth to the beautiful child Pradyumna and S’ri 
Krisna performed the religious ceremony at the birth of his child. 


44. Then the powerful Danava named S’amvara stole away the little 
baby from the lying-in-chamber and carried him to his own city and 
made him over under the charge of Mayavati. 


45. Coming to know that His son had been stolen away, S’ri Krisna 
became very much overpowered with sorrow and took the shelter of 
the Supreme Goddess, the Devi, with a heart full of devotion. 


46-47. S’ri Krisna then began, to chant, in sweet auspicious tone, 
hymns in alphabets, conveying the highest meanings, in adoration of 
the Yoga Maya, Who slew Vritrasura and other Daityas with ease 
and alacrity. 


48. O Mother! I, in my former birth as the son of Dharma, appeased 
You by my ascetic practices in the hermitage of Badari and 
worshipped You with various offerings; O Mother! Have you now 
forgotten all my devotion to You? 


49. O Mother! Has any evil minded enemy stolen away my son from 
the lying-in chamber? Or have You Yourself done this to make a fun 
and see the amusement? It seems that some one of my enemies 
has done so to insult me; however. You, O Mother! ought not to put 
your devotee under this shameful condition. 



50. O Mother! This Dwaraka city is well guarded; a very strong fort is 
built in its middle and my place is in the midst of that again; and the 
lying in-chamber is again in the middle; I therefore must say that it is 
due to my bad luck that the child is stolen away! 


51. O Mother! I did not go to the house of my enemy; the Yadavas 
also did not go there; this city is guarded by valiant soldiers; then 
how is it, under what charm, the baby has been stolen? O Mother! 
Now I come to know that it is due to Your Maya; such things are 
common due to Your Maya in the three worlds. 


52. O Mother! When I am ignorant of your deepest mysteries, how 
can there exist anyone among the little minded Jivas that can know 
your doings? My watchmen could not see anything, where my child 
was taken away and who has stolen it. O Mother! I come to the 
conclusion that it is hidden behind the screen of Your Maya. 


53. O Mother! It is not strange with You; to the chaste woman, Rohini 
Devi, though situated at a great distance and not connected with any 
male persons. You, in the fifth month, moved away the son to my 
knowledge from the womb of my mother; and thus Baladeva was 
born to Rohini. This is now known to all. 


54. Mother! You are incessantly creating, preserving, and destroying 
this whole universe by the mixture of the three qualities. Who can 
know Your sin-destroying doings? Mother! There is no need of 
dwelling at length. Suffice it to say that You, no doubt, are doing all 
that are being done in this whole universe. 



55. You first create the joy at the birth of a child; again You load us 
with heavy burdens of sorrows due to the separation from that child; 
thus you are always sporting; otherwise how my joy at the birth of my 
child would thus be rendered quite useless? 


56. The mother of that child is always weeping like an ewe, straying 
from a flock; she is giving vent to her sorrows always to me; O Kind- 
hearted! Being thus endowed with illimitable prowess and 
understanding, do You not know my troubles! O Mother! You are the 
only source of consolation to one, suffering from the sorrows of this 
world. There is no doubt in this. 


57. O Goddess! The wise seers say that the birth of a child in any 
house is the highest bliss there, and the death of a child is the 
greatest sorrow that can befall to any house. Therefore, O Mother! 
What shall I do in this? What shall I say more than that my heart is 
going to burst, due to the disappearance of my child. 


58. O Mother! I will perform all the necessary sacrifices, take up 
vows, perform all sorts of worship to the entire satisfaction of the 
Great Fate (Ordainer of things); You be pleased to remove my 
sorrow. O Mother! If my son be alive, kindly shew him once to me. 
Mother! There is no other than You Who is fully capable to destroy 
this my pain and sorrow, raging in my heart. 


59. Vyasa said He who brings into practice, things that are 
considered impracticable for the Devas and removes the load of the 
Goddess Earth with ease and alacrity, the same Saviour of world, 
S’ri Krisna thus chanted hymns in adoration of the Great Goddess. 
The Devi then became visible to him and said. 



60. O Lord of the Devas! Do not any longer be sorrowful and 
miserable; there had been a curse on you before; and, for that 
reason, the Daitya S’ambara has stolen away your son by his 
demonic magic. 


61. Therefore, when your son will grow sixteen years old, then he 
will, by My Grace, kill the Daitya perforce and will return to you. 
There is no doubt in this. 


62. O king! Thus saying these words full of hope and confidence, the 
Great Goddess Chandika, of formidable prowess, disappeared. 
Krisna too, quitted his sorrows, due to the bereavement of his child, 
and began to spend his time in happiness and peace. 


Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Fourth Book of S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa on the stealing away of Pradyumna. 



Chapter 25. On The DevI’s Highest Supremacy 


1. The King said O Best of Munis! Hearing these sorrows of S’ri 
Krisna, the part incarnate of Visnu Bhagavan, I am in doubt on your 
utterances. 


2. Behold! Bhagavan Vasudeva is the part incarnate of Narayana; 
how could the Asura S’ambara steal away His son from the lying-in- 
chamber! 


3. The beautiful Dvaraka city is specially well-guarded; the lying-in- 
chamber is again within the centre of that; under these 
circumstances, how was it that the Daitya could enter there and steal 
away the child! 


4. O Son of Satyavati! How was it that Vasudeva could not know 
that! This appears very strange to me! 


5. O Brahmana! Please explain to me why was that child stolen 
away from the lying-in-chamber, though S’ri Krisna was staying there 
at the city; and how was it that he was not able to know this 
beforehand! 


6. Vyasa said O King! The Maya called S’ambhavi (Parvati's) is 
the cause; it fascinates and deludes the minds of human beings. 
Thus it is known to us. Who is there in this world that is not deluded 
by this Maya? 



7. The Jivas, no sooner they are born as human beings, are 
immediately overcome with human qualities; the Deva or Asura 
qualities or their natures do not then visibly exist. 


8-9. O King! Hunger, thirst, sleep, fear, lassitude, delusion, sorrow, 
doubt, pleasure, egoism, old age, disease, death, non-knowledge, 
knowledge, displeasure, envy, jealousy, pride and weariness; all 
these human qualities are seen to exist in human embodiments. 


10-11. Behold! The night wanderer Raksasa Maricha assumed, by 
his Maya, the form of a golden deer and came before S’ri 
Ramchandra; and Ramchandra was not the least aware of it. Then 
the stealing away of Sita, the death of Jatayu, Rama’s going to the 
forest on the very day of his installation to the throne of Ayodhya; the 
death of his father due to his bereavement, all these S’ri 
Ramchandra did not know a bit beforehand. 


12. When Ravana stole away Janaki and carried her by force Rama 
did not know this before or after that event had happened. He 
wandered from forest to forest in search of Her, like a quite ignorant 
man. 


13. Afterwards He killed Bali, the son of Indra and with the help of 
the monkeys, erected a bridge across the ocean, and, crossing it, 
went to Lanka. 


14. He sent the chief monkeys to all the quarters in search of Sita 
and had to undergo all the troubles of deadly battles in the great 
battlefield. 



15. The most powerful Raghunandana was tied down by Nagapas’a 
(snakes) and was afterwards freed from it by Garuda. 


16. Then, being furiously enraged, the great Raghava slew 
Kumbhakarna, Nikumbha, Megha Nada and Ravana. 


17. The Janardan Ramchandra was not aware of the innocence of 
Sita; and therefore He made her take an oath about the purity of Her 
character and even made Her undergo an ordeal of fire. 


18. Afterwards Ramachandra, the son of Das’aratha, had to banish 
his dear blameless Sita on the mere ground of bad name, imputed to 
her by some ignorant person and that he would be thus blamed by 
the public. 


19. He did not know that Kus’i and Lava were His two sons, born in 
the forest. Afterwards when the Muni Valmiki told him. He came to 
know of them. 


20. Behold also Ramachandra could not know about the departure of 
Sita to Patala; getting angry once He was about to kill his brother 
Laksmana even. 


21. Rama, the slayer of the Raks’asa Khara did not know that Kala 
Purusa was coming to him. He, incarnating in the human body, did 
acts all becoming to a man. Similarly S’ri Krisna, the descendant of 



Yadu, taking human birth did acts all like a man. What more 
discussion can there be in this? 


22. Lo! From the very outset He fled, out of fear of Kamsa, to 
Gokula; afterwards he fled out of fear of Jarasandha to the Dwarka 
city. 


23. Knowing all the rites and ceremonies of the Sanatan Dharma 
(the Eternal Religion) He stole away Rukmini who was chosen as 
bride elect by S’is’upala. This act was very unreligious of Him. 


24. S’ambara Daitya stole away his newly born child and Krisna 
lamented for this. Afterwards on coming to know of the real state of 
things from the Goddess Bhagavati, He was very glad. Therefore it 
can be easily seen from all these circumstances that He had to yield 
to pleasures and to undergo remorse like ordinary human beings. 


25. Again, under the orders of his wife Satyabhama, He had to go to 
Heaven to bring the Parijata tree and He had to fight with Indra. This 
shows clearly that He was under the subjection of His wife. 


26. In that battle Hari with disc in hand defeated Indra; the Lord of 
the Devas, took away the Kalpa tree and retained the prestige of His 
respected wife (whom He had offended). 


27. Again Satyabhama tied down Hari against a tree and presented 
Him as a gift to Narada; afterwards she, the passionate woman, 
freed Krisna on paying an equivalent of gold coins. 



28-29. On seeing Rukmini’s many sons, Pradyumna and others, all 
qualified with diverse qualifications. His wife Jambavati prayed to S’ri 
Krisna with humility, so that she may have also many beautiful sons. 
For her sake, Krisna firmly resolved to practise tapasya and went to 
the place where the great devotee of S’iva, Upamanyu, was staying. 


30. Hah desiring to have sons engaged Upamanyu as His spiritual 
guide and obtained from him the Mantram called Pas’upata Mantra 
and became a Dundee (holder of a staff) and shaved His head. 


31-32. In the first month He subsisted on fruits only and meditated 
on S’iva and repeated silently the S’iva mantra. Thus He practised 
very severe austerities. In the second month He subsisted on water 
only and stood on only one leg. In the third month he lived on air only 
and stood on the end of His great toe. 


33-36. Thus time passed away. In the sixth month the God Rudra, 
holding Moon on His forehead, was pleased with His asceticism and 
devotion and appeared before Him on that spot. The God Maha 
Deva came on a bull; He was attended by Brahma and Visnu, Indra 
and the other Devas, Yakshas and Gandarbhas and addressed thus 
“O high minded Krisna of Yadu’s descent; I am pleased with Your 
severe asceticism; now ask Your desired boon; I will grant it just now. 
I fulfil all the desires of all my devotees; what desire, then, there can 
be that is not fulfilled, when I am seen by the devotees!” 


37-38. Vyasa said The son of Devaki was very glad to see the 
God S’amkara and fell prostrate at His feet. Then that eternal 
supreme God of the Devas began to recite hymns in praise of Him in 
a tone as deep as the rumbling of a cloud. 



39. Krisna said O Deva of the Devas! O Lord of the world! You 
alone destroy the misfortunes and sorrows of all the beings. O 
Destroyer of Asuras! You are the Cause and Creator of this universe. 
I salute Thee. 


40. O One having a blue throat! I bow down to Thee! O Holder of 
trident! I again and again salute Thee! O Lord of Parvati! You 
destroyed Daksa’s sacrifice. I salute Thee. 


41. I am blessed by Thy sight and think myself as having discharged 
all my duties and satisfied. O Virtuous One! My human birth is 
crowned with success by saluting Thy feet. 


42. O Lord of everything! O three-eyed! I am tied down to this world 
by my attachment towards my wives; now I take refuge unto Thee to 
free me from these bonds. 


43. O Destroyer of sorrows! I am very much troubled on attaining this 
human birth; O Bhava! I am afraid of this world; and hence I take 
refuge unto Thee; now save me. 


44-45. O Destroyer of cupidity! I experienced a good deal of troubles 
in the womb; next out of fear to Kamsa I had to go to Gokula where I 
suffered much pains; there I had to obey the orders of cow-herds; 
there I had to attend as Nanda’s cow-herd, the pasturing of his cows 
and was constantly suffocated with the awful dust thrown up by the 
cows; I had to wander constantly in the wild forests of Brindaban. 



46. O Omnipresent One! I had to leave my dear ancestral place, the 
city of Mathura, a rare place to be found anywhere else, out of the 
great fear of Kala Yavana, the king of the MIechchas and had to go 
to Dwaraka city. 


47-48. O Lord! In order to preserve the cause of religion, I had to 
hand over the best prosperous kingdom to Ugrasena, due to the 
curse of Yayati. My elders made him the king of the Yadavas; 
following their examples, I gave him the kingdom and am now 
serving him always like his servant. 


49. O S’ambhu! The householder’s life is exceedingly troublesome; 
it makes one subject to one’s wife and go against his religion. There 
we are always dependent on others; and no word is heard or dreamt 
even, how to free oneself from those bondages of the world. Oh! 
What an irony of Fate. 


50. O Destroyer of cupid! My wife Jambavati, on seeing the sons of 
my wife Rukmini has urged me to practise this Tapasya so that she 
might get excellent sons born to her also. 


51. O Lord of the Devas! O Lord of the world! I am engaged in this 
asceticism with the desire to get sons; O Deva! I feel shame in 
asking you for the sons! 


52. You are the lover of your devotees; You give eternal freedom; 

You are the Lord of all the Devas. By worshipping and satisfying You, 
who is so fool as to ask for this trivial and transient thing! 



53. O Omnipresent One! O S’ambhu! O Lord of the world! Knowing 
You as the giver of salvation, I, still deluded by Maya, ask from You, 
being requested by my wife, this happiness that sons be born to me 
of my wife. 


54-55. O S’amkara! This world and its concerns are the abode of all 
sorrows; it is the cause that brings in all sorts of pains and troubles, 
and it is transient and will go to destruction. I know all these; still my 
mind does not desist from it. 


56. Vyasa said O great and powerful king! The God of Gods, 
Maha Deva, thus praised and adored by Govinda, the Destroyer of 
enemies, replied You will get many sons. 


57. You will get sixteen thousand one hundred wives and no doubt 
you will get ten sons of each of them. These sons will be very 
powerful and valorous. 


58-60. The good-looking S’amkara saying these words remained 
silent; then S’ri Krisna bowed down at the feet of Girija, the wife of 
S’amkara. Then the Goddess Parvati addressed repeatedly to 
Vasudeva and said O mighty armed! O Krisna! O best of human 
beings! You will be the typical exemplary householder; (all people 
will try to follow you). When one hundred years will pass away, your 
race will be extinct, due to the curse of the Brahmana and Gandhari. 


61. Your sons and the other Yadavas will lose their senses on 
drinking liquor; they will kill each other in the battle field and thus will 
be extirpated. 



Note: Here Visnis and Andhkas are meant. 


62. Then you and your elder brother Balabhadra (Balarama) will give 
up your bodies and will ascend to the Heavens; O Mighty Person! Do 
not grieve in matters that cannot be avoided. 


63. You should know that there can be no remedy to what will 
inevitably come to pass; therefore no one is to grieve for them; this is 
all along my view. 


64. O Madhusudana! After Your death, due to the curse of Astavakra 
Muni, your wives will be forcibly stolen away by indomitable robbers. 
There is no doubt in this. 


65. Vyasa said When Devi Parvati thus spoke, S’ambhu, with the 
other gods disappeared; Krisna too, bowed down to Upamanyu and 
went back to the city Dvarka. 


66-67. Therefore, O King! Though Brahma and the other Devas are 
heard to be the lords of the world, still they are all being tossed hither 
an thither by the waves of the ocean of Maya. They are all like 
wooden dolls subject to Maya. 


68. As their previous karmas, so their several manifestations in the 
field of action, by the Great Maya, the incarnate of Para Brahma. 



69. She has no differences nor any want of mercy; That Goddess of 
the universe is always leading the Jivas towards the Eternal 
Freedom (freedom from Maya). 


70. Had She not created this world, moving and unmoving and if She 
had not remained there as the Controller of the Jivas in the shape of 
unshakeable consciousness the Kutasthya Chaitanya, this whole 
world would have become devoid of any consciousness, like an 
insentient substance and would have dissolved in the TamasT Maya 
(sheer darkness). There is no doubt in this. 


71. Therefore that Goddess of the Universe has, through Her mercy, 
created all these worlds and Jivas, and resting incarnate in each 
JTva, is directing each and every of them according to his karmic 
merits and demerits. 


72. Therefore it is a matter not to be doubted that Brahma and the 
other gods are all under this Maya; the Suras and Asuras are subject 
to Her. 


73. Therefore, O king! Know this as certain that the Great Goddess 
moves and enjoys freely according to Her will; She is not dependent 
on anybody. Therefore it is the duty of everyone to serve and 
worship, with whole head and heart, that Devi. 


74. In these three worlds there is nothing higher or more excellent 
than Her. Therefore this birth cannot be crowned with success in any 
other way than remembering that Highest Force, the Para S’akti and 
Her place. 



lb-11. One should always think, without any difference, that Eternal 
World Mother, thus “Let me not be born in that family which has not 
that Supreme Goddess for its presiding Deity; I am that Goddess 
Bhagavati and no other; I am Brahma, untouched by sorrows.” One 
should hear first from the mouth of one’s Spiritual Guide; next by 
hearing Vedanta and other religious scriptures, one should first form 
an idea of that Bhagavati; and then if one daily meditates on That 
Goddess, the Highest Self incarnate with one minded devotion, one 
will get, within a short period, the Eternal Freedom; else there is not 
the least chance, even if one performs lots of innumerable good 
works of becoming free. 


78. S’vetas’vatara and other pure hearted Risis obtained this 
freedom from the bondages of Maya by meditating, in their hearts, 
this Highest Self and nothing else. 


79. Brahma, Visnu and the other Devas, Gauri, Laksmi and other 
goddesses, all worship This Supreme Goddess, of Sachchidananda 
Para Brahmani. 


80. O pure-hearted king! I answered all that you asked me, terrified 
with the fears of this world; what more do you want to hear? 


81-82. O king! I have described this wonderful Purana narrative, 
destructive of sins, productive of virtue. He who daily listens to this 
Bhagavatam equal alike to Veda, becomes freed from all sorts of 
sins and goes to the region of the Highest Goddess and passes his 
time in the midst of the Highest Glory. There is no doubt in this. 



83. Suta said “O Risis! This Sri Mad Bhagavatam, called 
otherwise the Fifth Puranam was recited, in detail, in days of yore by 
Vyasa. Whatsoever I heard from him, I have now told exactly the 
same to you.” 


Here ends the 25th Chapter in the Fourth Skandha of Sri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa on the Devi’s Highest Supremacy. 


Note The best mantra is the whole hearted devotion to one’s 
Guru, and devotion and surrender of one’s Self to the Supreme 
Mother, doing works without attachment to the fruits thereof. This will 
lead to dispassion and Renunciation. To one who is faithful in this, all 
the other mantras will be duly revealed and all his desires will be 
found to be true and fulfilled. 


Here ends as well as the Fourth Skandha. 



THE FIFTH BOOK 



Chapter 1. On The Superiority Of Rudra Over 
V iSNU 


1-5. The Risis said “The great legendary story, the life of S’ri 
Krisna, supremely divine, destructive of all sins, has been narrated 
by you, O Suta! But, O Blessed One! You, though highly intelligent, 
have dwelt on it not at a great length; hence many doubts are 
cropping up in our minds. A very difficult tapasya was performed by 
Vasudeva the part incarnate of Visnu, who had to go to forest to 
worship S’iva. Next, it has been known that the Devi Parvati, the part 
incarnate of the Great Mother, the Mother of the universe, the 
Supreme, and Perfect offered boons to S’ri Krisna. How did it then 
come to pass that S’ri Krisna, being himself the God, had to worship 
Parvati and Mahadeva? Is it that S’ri Krisna was inferior to 
Mahadeva and Parvati? This is our doubt.” 


6-7. Suta spoke “Hear then, the reasons, O noble Risis! that I 
heard from Vyasa; I will now sing before you those meritorious deeds 
S’ri Krisna.” The son of Pariksit, the intelligent Janamejaya had also 
the same doubts that you now have, when he heard the story before 
from Vyasa; and he asked the same questions that you now ask.” 


8-11. Janamejaya said “O son of Bhagavati! I have heard from 
you much about the Supreme Goddess, the Highest Cause; still the 
doubts are not leaving me. O Fortunate One! Krisna the Deva of the 
Devas, the Visnu incarnate, worshipped Sambhu and had to perform 
dire penances; this is my great wonder! He is the soul of all the 
JTvas, the One Ruler and Lord of this world and He is able to confer 
all the Siddhis; how is it, then, that the Lord Hah had to perform very 
difficult asceticism like an ordinary mortal. He who is able to create 



this universe, moving and non-moving, He who is able to preserve 
and destroy it, why did He practise such a terrible penance.” 


12-54. Vyasa said “True it has been said by you that Vasudeva 
the Janardana, is the destroyer of the Daityas and He is able to 
create and preserve the Devas and do all other acts for them. But 
the Great Lord assumed a human body; therefore he had to perform 
his duties like a man and observe the Varna and As'rama Dharmas 
pertaining to human beings. Respecting the elderly persons, 
worshipping the spiritual teachers, doing service to the Brahmanas, 
adoring and propitiating the Devas, feeling sorrow at times of sorrow, 
feeling pleasure at times of happiness, feeling dejection or 
expressing censure or scandal, or having sexual intercourse with 
women, in other words, to feel lust, anger, greediness and other 
passions when their proper time arises. All these are natural to all 
human beings; how can, then, S’ri Krisna though intrinsically of pure 
qualities, become Nirguna (devoid of human qualities) when he 
assumed a human body which is Saguna, i.e., with qualities. O Ruler 
of men! The extinction of the Yadava race by the curse of Gandhari, 
the daughter of Subala, and the curse of a Brahmin, Krisna's leaving 
his human coil, the stealing away of his wives, the robbing of their 
wealth on the way by the dacoits of the Avira tribe, Arjuna's 
becoming powerless to hurl any weapons on those dacoits, Krisna's 
not knowing anything about the stealing away of Pradyumna and 
Aniruddha from his Dvarka palace, these all correspond verily to 
exertions and failings appropriate to human bodies. Again the Risi 
Narayana is the part incarnate of Visnu, and Vasudeva is the part 
incarnate of the Risi Narayana; hence what wonder is there, if 
Vasudeva be seen to adore and propitiate S’iva? S’iva is the God of 
gods; and He is the Lord of all the causal bodies that exist; in the 
state of Susupti (deep sleep). In this respect, S’iva is the creator of 
Visnu and Visnu worships Him in this light. Rama, Krisna and others 
are all part incarnations of Visnu; so there is no wonder if they 
worship S’iva. The letter A is Bhagvan Brahma ; the letter “U” is 



Bhagvan Hari; the letter “M” is Bhagvan Rudra and the half 
letter m is MahesVari, the Supreme Mother of the universe. The 
sages, therefore, consider Visnu superior to Brahma; they again 
consider Rudra superior to Visnu and MahesVari (Turiya State) 
again superior to Rudra. The speciality of the half letter is that it can 
never be uttered; it is the symbol of the Eternal Devi. In all the 
S'astras, therefore, the superiority of the Devi is established. Visnu is 
superior to Brahma; Rudra is superior to Visnu. Therefore no doubt 
can arise in Krisna's worshipping S’iva. It is through the will of S’iva 
that a second Rudra originated from the forehead of Brahma to offer 
boons to him (i. e., to Brahma). This second Rudra is venerable and 
entitled to all worship; what to speak of the First Rudra? O King! It is 
through the proximity of the Devi that the importance and superiority 
of S’iva is thus established. Thus the incarnations of Hari arise in 
yugas after yugas through the intervention of the Yoga Maya; so 
there is no need to discuss on this point. Why to Achyuta alone, to 
Brahma and S’iva also She gives troubles for getting involved into 
incarnations. She the Yoga Maya who is indirectly, with the twinklings 
of Her eyes, creating, preserving and destroying this universe. It is 
the Yoga Maya that caused Krisna to be transferred from his lying-in 
chamber to the village Vraja and then protected him in the house of 
the cowherd Nanda; afterwards took him to Mathura for the 
destruction of Kamsa, whence he was led again out of Jarasandha's 
fear to the city Dvarka. It is She that created from Her Ownself the 
eight Naikas (the leading mistresses) and also sixteen thousand and 
fifty women for the pleasure and enjoyment of Krisna Bhagwan, the 
incarnation of Ananta (Visnu Bhagavan); thus Krisna Bhagavan was 
made completely subservient to them just like a perfect slave. When 
a young woman, though she is alone, can bind a man down by the 
network of Maya, like strong iron chain, what wonder is there that the 
sixteen thousand and fifty women would make Krisna play in their 
hands like a S’uka bird and make him an instrument to serve any 
purpose that they liked. S’ri Krisna got himself so much under the 
control of Satyabhama that He went gladly under her commands to 
Indra's heavens to get the Parijata flowers. There he had to fight with 
Indra and subsequently stole away the Parijata tree and gave it to 



Satyabhama as a very valuable ornament to be kept in her room. 
Behold! The same Krisna, by His own prowess, defeated S’is'upala 
and others for the preservation of religion and then stole away 
Rukmini, the daughter of Bhima and afterwards married her as his 
legal wife; where is the rule, then observed that it is a sin to take 
away another's wife? Thus all embodied beings get themselves 
subdued by Ahamkara and do acts, good or bad, confounded and 
deluded by the network of Moha that always drags one down below. 
From the Mula Prakrit! are born Brahma, Visnu, and Hara and from 
the Tamasic Ahamkara of Prakrit! is created this whole cosmos, 
moving and non-moving. The lotus-born Brahma becomes free when 
he is free from Ahamkara; otherwise He becomes engaged in this 
world affairs. When freed from this Ahamkara, all the Jivas become 
free; and their houses, wealth, wives, sons and brothers are quite 
powerless to tie them down; but when bound by Ahamkara, the Jivas 
come under their control. O king! This Ahamkara is the cause 
bondage to all the beings; “I am the doer, this work is done by my 
power; or this I will do myself” thinking thus, the embodied beings fall 
themselves under this bondage. An earthen pot cannot be made 
without earth; no effects can be visible without a cause; 
consequently Visnu is preserving this universe, because of this 
Ahamkara (imposed on him by Prakrit!). The human beings are 
always drowned in their cares and anxieties simply because they are 
bound by this Ahamkara; when they become free from this 
Ahamkara, their cares and anxieties at once vanish. Moha (delusion) 
comes out of Ahamkara; world and the enjoyments thereof come out 
of Moha; otherwise how can it be accounted for, that Hari and others, 
the mine of all good and auspiciousness, take their several 
incarnations in various wombs? Neither Moha nor this world comes 
to those that are bereft of Ahamkara. Men are of three kinds, Sattvic, 
Rajasic, and Tamasic; O king! Brahma, Visnu and S'iva are sprung 
respectively from the Rajasic, Sattvic, and Tamasic Ahamkaras. In 
these three, the three Ahamkaras are always to be found, so the 
Munis, that have realised the Real Essence, declare. They are all 
bound by this Ahamkara; there is no doubt in this. The Pundits of dull 
intellect, and deluded by Maya declare that Visnu takes various 



incarnations out of his own free will; for when it is seen that men of 
even inferior intellects do not entertain any desire to enter into the 
wombs, painful and terrible; how will Visnu, then, the Holder of the 
discus, like to come into this womb! The slayer of Madhu, the 
Vaisnavas say, entered all at once into the wombs of Kaus'alya and 
Devaki, full of faeces and other dirty things, of His own free will. But 
you must think out what happiness can Madhusudana, quitting his 
Vaikuntha Heavens, attain in this womb, full of so many troubles, and 
where arise, like poisons, hundreds of cares and thoughts to torment 
an individual! Especially when it is seen that human beings perform 
asceticism, sacrifice Yajhas and do various charities, that they would 
avoid thus entering in wombs, which is very painful and terrible. How 
can Bhagavan Visnu be called independent? If so. He would never 
have yielded to enter into various wombs. Therefore, O king! Know 
this that this whole universe is under the control of Yoga Maya; the 
Devas, men, birds, what more everything from Brahma down to a 
blade of grass are all under the control of Yoga Maya. Brahma, Visnu 
and Hara all are bound by the rope of Her Maya. So they roam easily 
by Her Maya from womb to womb like a spider. 


Here ends the First Chapter of the Fifth Book on the superiority of 
Rudra over Visnu in the Maha Puranam of S'rimad Devi 
Bhagavatam by Maharsi Veda Vyasa, consisting of eighteen 
thousand verses. 



Chapter 2. On The Birth Of Danava Mahisa 


1-2. The king said “Lord! You have described fully the glory of the 
Maha Maya YogesVari; now describe Her Life and Character; I am 
very eager to hear them. This whole universe, moving and 
nonmoving, has been created by Mahes'vari; who is there that 
desires not to hear Her Glory!” 


3-7. Vyasa spoke O king! You are very intelligent; I will describe in 
detail all this to you; whoever does not describe Her Glory to the 
peaceful and faithful, is certainly low-minded? In days of yore, a 
terrible battle ensued between the Devas and Danava forces on this 
earth when Mahisasura was the Ruler of this world. O king! 
Mahisasura went to the mountain of Sumeru and performed a very 
severe and excellent tapasya, wonderful even to the gods. O king! 
Meditating on his Ista Devata (the deity for his worship) in his heart, 
elapsed full ten thousand years, when Brahma the Grandfather of all 
the Lokas, was pleased with him. The fourfaced Brahma, arrived 
there on his vehicle the swan, asked Mahisasura “O One of virtuous 
soul! Ask from me what is your desired object; I will grant thee boon.” 


8. Mahisa said “O Lord, Lotus-eyed! I want to become immortal! 
therefore O Thou, the Grandfather of the Devas! Dost thou do for me 
so that I have no fear of death.” 


9-11. Brahma said “O Mahisa! Birth must be followed by death, 
and death must be followed by birth; this is the eternal law of nature. 
Then know this as certain that when one is born, one must die; and 
when one dies, one will be born. O Lord of the Danavas! What more 
to say than this, that high mountains, vast oceans, and all the beings 
will die when time will come. O Ruler of the earth! You are virtuous; 



therefore ask any other boon than this immortality; I will grant that to 
you.” 


12-13. Mahisa said “O Grand Sire! Grant, then, that no Deva, 
Danava, nor human being of the male sex can cause my death. 
There is none among women who can cause my death. Therefore, O 
Lotus-eyed! Let woman be the cause of my death; how can women 
slay me! The are too weak to kill me!” 


14. Brahma said “O Lord of the Danavas! Your death will certainly 
occur, at any time, through a woman; O Highly Fortunate One! No 
man will be able to cause your death.” 


15. Vyasa said Thus granting him the boon, Brahma went to his 
own abode; the lord of the Danavas, too, returned to his place, very 
glad. 


16. The king said “O Bhagavan! Whose son was this powerful 
Mahisasura; how his birth took place? and why, too, did he get a 
body of a buffalo?” 


17-26. Vyasa said O king! Rambha and Karambha were the two 
sons of Danu; these two Danavas were far famed in this world for 
their pre-eminence. O king! They had no issues; hence, desirous of 
issues, they went to the sacred banks of the Indus (Pahcha Nada) 
and there performed severe asceticism for long years. Karambha got 
himself submerged in water and thus began his severe tapasya; 
while the other, Rambha, had recourse to a juicy peepul tree 
(haunted by Yakshinis) and there began to worship Fire. Rambha 
remained, engaged in worshipping the Five Fires; knowing this. 



Indra, the Lord of S'achi, was pained and hurried thither, being very 
anxious. Going to Pahcha Nada, Indra assumed the form of a 
crocodile and caught hold of the legs of the wicked Karambha and 
killed him. Hearing of the death of his brother, Rambha got very 
much enraged and wishing to offer his own head as an oblation to 
the Fire, he wanted to cut off his own head; he, being infuriated, held 
the hairs of his head by his left hand, and, catching hold of a good 
axe, by his right hand, was on the point of cutting it, when the Fire 
gave him knowledge, desisted him from this act and spoke thus 
You are stupid; why have you desired to cut off your own head; 
killing one's ownself is a great sin; and there is no means of 
deliverance from this sin. Why are you then ready to execute it? Do 
not seek your death now; what end will that serve you? Rather ask 
boons from me; thus you will get your welfare. 


27-31. Vyasa said O king! Hearing thus the sweet words of Fire, 
Rambha quitted the hold of his hairs and said O Lord of the 
Devas! If thou art pleased, grant my desired boon that a son be born 
unto me, who will destroy the forces of my enemy and who will 
conquer the three worlds. And that son be invincible in every way by 
the Devas, Danavas and men, very powerful, assuming forms at will, 
and respected by all. The Fire said O highly Fortunate! You will 
get your son, as you desire; therefore desist now from your 
attempting suicide. O highly fortunate Rambha! With any female of 
whichever species, you will co-habit, you will get a son, more 
powerful than you; there is no doubt in this. 


32-50. Vyasa said O king! Hearing thus the sweet words of the 
Fire as desired, Rambha, the chief of the Danavas, went, 
surrounded by Yaksas, to a beautiful place, adorned with 
picturesque sceneries; when one lovely she-buffalo, who was very 
maddened with passion, fell to the sight of Rambha. And he desired 
to have sexual intercourse with her, in preference to other women. 



The she-buffallo, too, gladly yielded to his purpose and Rambha had 
sexual intercourse with her, impelled as it were by the destiny. The 
she-buffalo became pregnant with his semen virile. The Danava, too, 
carried the she-buffalo, his dear wife, to Patala (the lower regions) 
for her protection. On one occasion, another buffalo got excited and 
wanted to fall upon the she-buffalo. The Danava was also ready to 
kill him. The Danava came hurriedly and struck the buffalo for the 
safety of his wife; whereon the excited buffalo attacked him with his 
horns. The buffalo struck him so violently with his sharp horns that 
Rambha fell down senseless all on a sudden and finally died. Seeing 
her husband dead, the she-buffalo quickly fled away in distress and, 
with terror, she quickly went to the peepul tree and took refuge under 
the Yaksas. But that buffalo, excited very much and maddened with 
vigour, ran in pursuit of her, desiring intercourse with her. On seeing 
the miserable plight of the weeping she-buffalo, distressed with fear, 
and seeing the buffalo in pursuit of her, the Yaksas assembled to 
protect her. A terrible fight ensued between the buffalo and the 
Yaksas, when the buffalo, shot with arrows by them, fell down and 
died. Rambha was very much liked by the Yaksas; so they cremated 
his dead body for its purification. The she-buffalo, seeing her 
husband laid in the funeral pyre, expressed her desire to enter also 
into that fire. The Yaksas resisted; but that chaste wife quickly 
entered into the burning fire along with her husband. When the she- 
buffalo died, the powerful Mahisa rose from his mother's womb from 
the midst of the funeral pyre; Rambha, too, emerged from the fire in 
another form out of his affection towards his son. Rambha was 
known as Raktavija after he had changed his form. His son was thus 
born as a very powerful Danava and became famous by the name of 
Mahisa. The chief Danavas installed Mahisa on the throne. O king! 
The very powerful Raktavija and the Danava Mahisa, thus took their 
births and became invincible of the Devas, Danavas and human 
beings. O king! I have now described to you the birth of the 
highsouled Danava Mahisa and his getting the boon, all in detail. 



Here ends the Second Chapter of the Fifth Book on the birth of 
Mahisa Danava in the Devi Bhagavatam, the Mahapuranam 
composed of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 3. On The Daitya Armies Getting Ready 

1-14. Vyasa said The very powerful Asura Mahisa, puffed up with 
vanity on his getting the boon, obtained sovereignty and brought the 
whole world under his control! He, being the paramount power, 
began to protect the sea-girt earth acquired by the power of his own 
arms, over which he had the sole sovereignty, there being no other 
rival king nor any cause of the slightest fear. His Commander-in- 
Chief was then the very powerful Chiksura, maddened with pride; 
and Tamra was in charge of the Royal Treasury, guarded by many 
soldiers. There were, then, many generals Asiloma, Vidala, Udarka, 
Vaskala, Trinetra, Kala, Bandhaka and others, very proud, and each 
in charge of his own corps respectively and occupying this sea-girt 
earth. O king! The powerful kings that reigned before were made 
subservient and tributary; and those, that fought valiantly befitting the 
Ksattriya line, were slain by Mahisa. The Brahmanas over the earth 
became subservient to Mahisa and gave their Yajha offerings to him. 
When that Mahisasura got the sole sovereign sway of this world, he, 
proud of his boons, desired to conquer the Heavens. Then Mahisa, 
the Lord of the Daityas, desirous to send an envoy to Indra, the Lord 
of S'achi, instantly called for the messenger and spoke to him thus :- 
- Go, O hero! O valiant one! to Heaven. Act as my messenger and 
tell Indra fearlessly thus “O thousand-eyed one! Quit the Heavens; 
go anywhere you like, or offer your service to the high-souled 
Mahisa! He is the lord; and if you take refuge unto him, he will 
certainly protect you. Therefore, O Lord of S'achi, better seek the 
protection of Mahisa. If, O Balasudana! Not willing, wield your Vajra 
at once; we know your powers; you were, in days of yore, conquered 
by our ancestors. O chief of the Suras! You are the paramour of 
Ahalya; your strength is well known, give battle or go anywhere you 
like.” 



15-21. Vyasa said Hearing the messenger's words, Indra became 
very indignant and laughed and said I did not know, O you stupid, 
that you were maddened with vanity; I will shortly give medicines for 
your master's disease. Now I will extirpate him by the roots; wise 
persons do not slay messengers; I therefore let you go. Better go 
and tell him what I say “Son of a buffalo! If you are willing to fight, 
better come and do not delay. O Enemy of horse! (Buffaloes and 
horses are always at war with each other) Your strength is well 
known to me; you are a grass eater and your appearance is stupid, 
idiotic; out of your horns I will make a good bow. You depend on your 
horns for your strength; that I well know. You are clever in striking 
with your horns; you don't know anything about warfare; therefore I 
will out off your both the weapons and render you powerless. You 
are very much puffed up with vanity due to that.” 


22. Vyasa said Indra having spoken thus, the messenger quickly 
returned to his haughty master Mahisa and saluting, spoke 


23-28. The messenger said Indra counts you not even a fig, as he 
is surrounded by his Deva forces and considers himself quite 
sufficient. It ought one's servant to speak true and pleasant before 
one's master; how can I utter the words before my master, that are 
spoken by that brute Indra. Whereas the well known maxim reigns in 
my mind withal that I am your well-wishing servant and I ought to 
speak truth before you, my master, and that truth is to be pleasant to 
hear also. If pleasant words I speak only, then I fail in my duty; at the 
same time, harsh words ought not to be spoken by me, your sincere 
well-wisher. My Lord! The cruel poison-like words that come from the 
mouth of an enemy, how can I, a servant of yours, utter those harsh 
sayings! O Lord of the Earth! I will never be able to utter those rude 
sayings that Indra has spoken. 



29-53. Vyasa said Hearing the messenger's words full of meaning 
the grass-eater Mahisa Danava got very angry and, waggling his tail 
behind his back, passed urine; then his eyes reddened with anger, 
he called the Danavas before him and said :-0 Danavas! The Lord 
of the Devas is firmly resolved on battle; therefore collect your 
forces; we will have to conquer that devil, the chief of the Suras. 

Who can stand for him a my rival here! If hundreds and thousands of 
warriors like Indra come I do not fear any of them at all; O Danavas, 
we will thoroughly put a end to him. His heroism is before those only 
that are peaceful and quiet before the ascetics that have become 
lean and thin by the penances; he is licentious and can only seduce 
other's wives by craftiness and arts. He is a thorough rogue and 
hypocrite, vicious and faultfinding; otherwise why does he put 
obstacles before others, depending for his strength only on the 
beauties of the Apsaras or heavenly prostitutes. He is treacherous to 
his very core; therefore he, being afraid at the very outset, took 
oaths, and entered into agreement with the high-souled Namuchi; 
afterwards, when his time turned favourable, that villain broke his 
treaty and treacherously killed him. Again the powerful Visnu is a 
thorough master of treachery and hypocrisy, the mine in taking oaths 
and can only show his vanity and is expert in that. He can assume 
many forms at will by his Magic power. For these very reasons Visnu 
had to take the form of a boar and kill Hiranyaksa; and again he had 
to take up a man-lion form to kill Hiranya Kas'Tpu. O Danavas! Never 
shall I surrender myself to Visnu, for I never place my trust in the 
words or deeds of Visnu and his Devas. What can Indra or Visnu do 
against me, when the most powerful Rudra is not able to fight 
against me in the battle-field! I will instantly defeat Indra, Varuna, 
Yama, Kuvera, Fire, Sun and Moon and get possession of their 
Heavens. On our conquering the Devas, we all shall get our share of 
Yajhas and we along with other Danavas drink the Soma juice and 
enjoy ourselves in Heaven. O Danavas! I have got the boon; what do 
I now care for the Devas. My death is not from men too. What can a 
woman do to me? O my emissaries! Call without any delay the chief 
Danavas from the nether regions and the mountains and make them 
my generals? O Danavas! I can alone conquer all the Devas; only to 



make the war arrangements look nice, that I am taking you to defeat 
them. There is no fear of mine from the Devas, consequent on the 
boon conferred on me. I will kill them by my hoofs and horns. I am 
not to be killed by Suras, Asuras, as men; therefore get yourselves 
ready to conquer the Devas. O Danavas! After conquering the 
Heavens we will be garlanded with Parijata wreaths and we will 
enjoy the Deva women in the Nandana Garden. We will drink the 
milk of the heavenly milching cow (the cow that yields all desires) 
and, intoxicated with the heavenly drinks, we will hear and see the 
music and singing the dancing of the Gandarbhas there. You will all 
be served there with various bottles of wine by Urvasi, Menaka, 
Rambha, Ghritachi, Tillottama, Pramadvara Mahasena, Mira Kesi, 
Madotkata, Viprachitti and others. Then be all ready at once for this 
auspicious occasion to march to Heavens and fight there with the 
Suras. And be pleased to call that pure-souled Muni S'ukracharya, 
the son of Bhrigu and the Guru of the Daityas and worship him and 
tell him to perform sacrificial ceremonies for the safety and victory of 
the Danavas. O king! Thus, ordering the chief Danavas, the wicked 
Mahisa went to his abode, with gladness. 


Here ends the Third Chapter of the Fifth Book on the Daitya armies 
getting ready in S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Mahapuranam by 
Maharsi Vedavyasa of 18,000 verses. 



Chapter 4. On The War Counsels Given By 
Indra 


1-17. Vyasa said O King! The messenger of the Danavas having 
departed, Indra, the lord of the Devas, Yama, Vayu, Varuna, and 
Kuvera and other Devas, called an assembly and addressed thus 
O Devas! the most powerful Mahisa, the son of Rambha, is now the 
king of the Danavas; he is particularly expert in hundreds of Mayas 
(magic) and has become haughty on the strength of his boon. O 
Devas! Mahisa has sent his messenger; he wants to take 
possession of the heaven; he came down to me and spoke thus 
“O Indra! Quit your this heaven and go any where you like, or be 
ready to pay your homage to the highsouled Mahisasura, the Lord of 
the Danavas. The Danava Chief never becomes angry with his 
opponent who becomes submissive like a servant; if you surrender 
and serve him, he will, out of mercy, grant an allowance to you. O 
Lord of the Devas! If this does not like you, then collect your forces 
and be ready for fight; no sooner I return, the Lord of the Danavas 
will come here at once ready to give battle to you.” Thus saying, the 
messenger of that wicked Danava departed. Now what are we to 
do? O Devas! Think on that. O Devas! Even a weak enemy is not to 
be overlooked by a powerful opponent, especially when the enemy is 
powerful by his own powers and is ever energetic, never is he to be 
overlooked. It is always incumbent on us to make our efforts, as best 
as we can, both by our body and mind as far as lies in our power; the 
result, victory or defeat depends entirely on Fate. It is useless to 
make treaty with a deceitful and dishonest person; we therefore 
never should make treaty with this person; you are all honest; that 
Danava is dishonest; therefore ponder and ponder deeply and 
ponder again; do you that which is proper. It is not advisable to go 
out at once for fight when we are unaware of our enemy's strength; 
let us therefore send spies truthful, honest, motiveless, quick, to 
ascertain their strength, those who can easily enter amongst our 
enemies and yet who have no relation, nor any interest with them. 



The arrangements of their forces, their movements, their numbers, 
they will ascertain correctly who are their generals, what is their 
number and what is their strength, they will thoroughly examine and 
return here quickly. First, we will ascertain the strength of the forces 
of our opposite party and then we will decide at once whether we will 
start for battle or seek protection within forts. Wise persons always 
consider before they act; any act done rashly leads in all respects to 
many troubles, and anything done after mature prejudgments leads 
to happiness; so the wise do. The Danavas are all one in their heart 
and mind; therefore it is not advisable, in any way to apply the 
principle of Bheda (sowing principles of discord). Let our spies go 
there, ascertain their strength, return and inform us; we will then 
judge what principle is proper and apply to the expert Danavas. Any 
act done contrary to policy and expediency will undoubtedly produce 
effects contrary in every way just like a medicine which we have not 
tried already. 


18-22. Vyasa said O King! Thus counselling with the Devas; Indra 
sent expert spies to ascertain the true state of affairs. The spies, too, 
went into the abode of the Daityas, with no delay and made their 
searches thoroughly into every nook and corner and returned and 
told Indra all the strength of the Danava forces. Indra was very much 
startled to know, then, of their arrangements. He immediately bade 
all the Devas be ready for battle and called for his High priest 
Brihaspati, expert in giving advices and began to consult with him 
how to carry on the warfare with that indomitable enemy, the Lord of 
the Asuras. On Bhihaspati, the best and famous of the Angira family, 
taking his excellent seat. 


23-25. Indra thus said “O Guru of the Devas! O Learned! Please 
say what are we to do now in this critical juncture? You are 
omniscient; to-day you are our guide. The Demon Mahisa has 
become very powerful, very haughty; surrounded by Danavas he is 



now conning to fight with us. You are expert in nnantras; find out the 
remedy for us. S'ukracharya is the remover of all obstacles on their 
side; and that you are our safe guard is well known to us.” 


26. Vyasa said Hearing these words of Indra, Brihaspati, who is 
always ready to effect the Deva's purposes, thought intently on the 
subject, said very shortly thus 


27-51. Brihaspati spoke O Lord of the Devas! O Venerable One! 
Be peaceful; have patience; when a difficulty comes, one should not, 
all on a sudden, lose one's patience. O Chief of the Immortals! 
Victory or defeat is completely under the control of destiny: therefore 
intelligent ones should always be patient. O S'atakratu! What will 
unavoidably be done must come to pass; knowing this as certain, 
one would always be an enthusiast and exert one's powers. 
Everything is guided by Fate. Knowing this, the Munis devote 
themselves at all times solely filled with energy in their meditation 
and Yoga practices for their final liberation. Therefore, to show one's 
energy, according to the rules of the daily practices, ought to be 
indispensably done; and one should not repel or feel pleasure on 
failure or success; for that is under Fate. Success sometimes comes 
without the exercise of one's own powers, as seen in cases of the 
lame and the blind; and that is not the reason why one should be 
very glad. The embodied beings are all under Daiva (Fate); therefore 
even if success be not attained, though one's own powers are 
exercised thoroughly, no one is to blame for that. O Lord of the 
Suras! What to say of forces. Mantras, or advices, what of chariots 
or weapons, nothing to lead to success; It is Daiva, and only Daiva 
that makes one successful. This whole universe is under Daiva; it is, 
therefore, that we see powerful persons suffering pains, and weak 
ones getting happiness; the intelligent ones sleeping without any 
food and fools enjoying merrily; distressed persons getting victory 
and powerful ones suffering defeats; what cares, then ought one to 



entertain in this. O Lord of the Suras! Whatever is inevitable to come 
to pass, be it success or failure, one will lead one's energies to that 
end; therefore one needs to consider beforehand whether one's 
energies will be successful or not. In times of distress, one sees 
distress too much and in times of pleasure, one seeks pleasure too 
much; one's self, therefore one should not surrender to one's 
enemies, pleasure and pain. Pain and suffering is not felt so much in 
patience as is felt when impatient; therefore one must practise 
patience when pain or pleasure comes. Indeed it is very difficult to 
bear oneself up in distress or happiness; therefore wise persons try 
not to let these feelings crop up at all from the very beginning. “I am 
always full, undiminishable, I am beyond these Prakritic qualities. 
Who is there to suffer? What is suffering?” Thus one ought to think at 
that moment. I am beyond the twenty-four Tattvas; what pleasure or 
pain can, then, arise to me? Hunger and thirst are the Dharma of 
Prana; pain and insensibility is the Dharma of mind, age and death 
belong to this physical body. I am free from these six diseases; I am 
S’iva. Grief and delusion are the qualities of this body what then do I 
care for them? “I” am not the qualities of the body nor “I” am the soul 
pertaining to that. I am beyond the seven transfigurations, changes, 
e. g., Mahat, etc., I am beyond this Prakriti, Nature, and beyond the 
sixteen changes wrought out by Prakriti; I am therefore eternally 
happy, I am beyond Prakriti and its transformation, then why am I to 
suffer pain always? O Lord of the Suras! Think on these and be 
without any passion. O S'atakratu! This attachment is the root of all 
miseries and non-attachment is the source of all happiness; non¬ 
attachment therefore, is the chief means of the extirpation of all your 
troubles. Lord of S'achi! Nothing can be happier than contentment. 

In case you find it difficult to practise dispassion, apply, then, 
discrimination and think of Fate, that what comes inevitably to pass. 
O Lord of the Suras! Actions already done cannot die out without 
their effects being enjoyed. O Best of the Suras! Let all your 
intelligence be brought to action, let all the Devas lend their helping 
hands to you; what is inevitable must come to pass; what then can 
you care for your happiness or pain? O King! Happiness is felt for 
the expiation of good deeds and pain is felt for the expiation of bad 



deeds; therefore wise persons get thoroughly delighted when their 
punya ends. O King! Judge and hold a council to-day; then try your 
best. But what is unavoidable will come to pass, even if you try your 
best. 


Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the counsels 
given by Indra in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 5. On The Defeat Of The Danava Forces 
Of Mahisa 


1-6. Vyasa said The thousand eyed Indra, hearing this, again 
asked to Brihaspati that he would make preparations for war against 
Mahisasura. Without effort kingdoms are not attained; no - nor 
happiness, nor fame, nor anything; those who are weak, they extol 
effortlessness; but the powerful never praise that. Knowledge is the 
ornament of the ascetics and contentment is the ornament of the 
Brahmanas; but those who desire lordship over powers, effort and 
prowess to destroy one's enemies are their excellent ornaments. O 
Muni! I will kill this Mahisasura by my heroism as I had, of old, 
destroyed Vritra, Namuchi and Balasura. You are the Deva Guru; 
therefore you and my thunderbolt are my strength. The immortal Hah 
and Hara also will help me in this. O Guru! Preserver of my honour 
and prestige! Now recite the mantras calculated to remove all the 
obstacles towards my victory. I, too, am making preparations and 
raising up my own forces to wage up war against that Danava 
Mahisa. 


7-13. Vyasa said On hearing Indra's words, Brihaspati smiled and 
said “O Lord of the Devas! I see you are bent on fight. I will neither 
stimulate you to fight nor shall I make you desist from the purpose. 
The issue is doubtful. There may be defeat or there may be victory. 

O Lord of S'achi! You are not to blame at all in this matter; what is 
written in the Book of Fate will come to pass, be it victory or defeat. I 
am not aware of the future in this respect. O Child! You know already 
what an amount of suffering I had to endure in times gone by when 
my wife had been stolen. O Destroyer of the enemies! My wife had 
been stolen by Moon who turned out my enemy; living in my stage of 
an householder I was put to all sort of miseries, deprived of all my 
happiness. O Lord of the Suras! I am renowned in all the worlds as a 
man of much wisdom and intelligence. Where then was my 



intelligence, when Moon carried away, perforce, nny wife. O Lord of 
the Suras! To my mind, the success or failure depends entirely on 
destiny; yet intelligent ones should always resort to efforts and be 
energetic. 


14-17. Vyasa said O King! On hearing the words of Brihaspati, 
pregnant with truth, Indra went with him to Brahma, took his refuge 
and saluting him said O Grand Sire! The Danava is collecting a 
big army, and wants to conquer and take possession of the 
Heavens. All the other Danavas have enrolled themselves in the list 
of his army; they are eager to fight and they are all very powerful and 
skilled in arts of warfare. I am therefore very afraid and have come to 
you. You know everything; please help me in this matter. 


18-20. Brahma said We all will go today to the Mount Kailas’a and 
take S'ankara with us and go to Visnu. There all the Devas, 
assembled, will hold a council and consider the time and place, 
when it will be settled whether it is proper or not to fight. For one who 
dares to do any act without considering one's strength and without 
any judgment, certainly courts his own downfall. 


21-35. Vyasa said O King! Hearing this, Indra with the other 
Lokapalas and Devas, headed by Brahma, went to Kailas'a. Then 
they came to S'ankara and sang vedic hymns to him. Mahes'vara 
became very much pleased and they taking Him went to Vaikuntha, 
the abode of Visnu. Indra saluted Visnu and sang hymns to him, and 
told him about his errand thus “Mahisa has become very haughty 
on account of the favour bestowed on him and therefore we are very 
afraid (and therefore ask your help to relieve us from this danger).” 
Visnu, then, hearing the cause of fear, told them “We all will fight 
and kill that Demon.” Vyasa said :-0 king! Thus settling the 
question, Brahma, Visnu, and Hah and Indra and the other Devas 



riding on their own Vahanas (means of conveyance) respectively 
dispersed. While Brahma on his vehicle Swan, Visnu on his Garuda, 
S'ankara on his Bull, Indra on his elephant Airavata, Kartika on his 
peacock, and Yama, the god of death on his Vahana, the Buffalo, 
were on the point of going with the other Deva forces, the army of 
the Danava Mahisa met them on their way, all fully equipped with 
arms and weapons. A dreadful fight then ensued between the Devas 
and the Danavas. 


Arrows, axes, Prasas, Musalas (clubs), Paras'us (pick axes), Gadas 
(clubs), Pattis'as, S'ulas (tridents), chakras (discus) S'akti (weapons), 
Tomaras, Mudgaras, Bhindipalas, Langalas, and various other 
deadly weapons appeared on the scenes with which they fought 
against one another. The Commander-in-Chief of Mahisa, the very 
powerful Chiksura, shot five sharp arrows at Indra. The ever-ready 
and light-handed Indra too, with his arrows cut off all of them and 
struck at his heart heavily with his Ardhachandra (half moon) arrow. 
The Commander-in-Chief, struck by this arrow fell senseless on the 
back of his elephant. Indra, then struck the trunk of the elephant with 
his Vajra (thunderbolt); the elephant then severely struck with the 
Vajra fled away into the Danava's forces. The Lord of the Danavas 
seeing this, got very angry and addressed the general Vidala “O 
Hero! You are very powerful; go then and kill first that haughty Indra; 
then kill Varuna and other Devas and come back to me.” 


36-57. Vyasa said :-- The very powerful Asura Vidala, on receiving 
the order came up at once to Indra, mounted on a very furious 
elephant. Seeing him coming, Vasava shot at him angrily with very 
terrible and most powerful arrows that looked like deadly snakes. But 
the Demon, too, out off those arrows at once with his excellent 
arrows and quickly shot at Vasava fifty arrows, sharpened on stones. 
Indra cut off all those and, being infuriated, shot again sharp deadly 
serpent-like arrows at him, and cutting off again all his enemies' 



arrows by arrows discharged from his bow, struck the elephant's 
trunk with his Gada (club). The elephant, being thus struck on his 
head, cried aloud in a distressed tone and being afraid turned back, 
thus killing the Danava forces as he fled away. The general Vidala, 
seeing the elephant fleeing away from the battle-field, mounted on a 
beautiful chariot and instantly appeared before the Devas to fight 
with them. Seeing the Danava coming again on a chariot, Indra shot 
at him sharp arrows after arrows like venomous snakes. The 
powerful Danava, too, infuriated hurled at him terrible arrows; then a 
sharp conflict ensued between Vasava and the Danava. Finding the 
Danava powerful, Vasava's senses were confounded with anger; he 
then took his son Jayanta before him and began to fight. Jayanta 
stretched his bow tight and shot at the breast of the Danava swelled 
with pride, five sharp arrows with his full strength. Thus shot at by 
the network of arrows, the Danava fell unconscious on the chariot; 
the charioteer then fled away with his chariot from the battle-field. 
Thus on the Danava Vidala becoming unconscious and being taken 
away from the field, the Dunduvis (drums) of the Devas were 
resounded and great acclamations of “Victory to the Devas” were 
heard. The Devas were very glad and sounded hymns before Indra; 
the Gandarbhas began to sing and the Apsaras began to dance. O 
king! Hearing the loud acclamations of victory to the Devas, Mahisa 
became very angry and ordered the Danava Tamra, the destroyer of 
enemy's pride, to go to the battle-field. Tamra appeared in the battle, 
and, coming face to face with many Deva warriors, hurled on them 
showers of arrows. Varuna appeared with his Pas'a weapon and 
Yama, mounted on his buffalo, appeared with his Danda (staff). A 
terrible fight then ensued between the Devas and Danavas and the 
weapons, arrows, axes, Musalas, S'aktis and Paras'us glittered in 
the fields. Yama raising his Danda with his hands struck at Tamra; 
but the powerful Tamra, though severely struck, was not at all moved 
and remained firm in his place in the field. On the other hand Tamra, 
violently drawing his bow, hurled a mass of sharp arrows at Indra 
and the other Devas. The Devas got angry and shot at the Danava 
multitudes of divine arrows sharpened on stone, and frequently 
called aloud “Wait, wait.” The Danava Tamra thus shot at by the 



arrows of the Devas, fell unconscious in the battle-field; the Danava 
forces got afraid and a cry of universal consternation and distress 
arose. 


Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on the defeat of the 
Danava forces of Mahisa in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses. 



Chapter 6. On The Deva Danava Fight 


1-8. Vyasa said O King! On the Daitya Tannra becoming 
unconscious Mahisa became very angry and, raising his Gada 
(club), came up before the Devas and said “Devas! O Ye 
powerless like crows; wait; with one stroke of Gada, I will kill you.” 
Thus saying, the powerful Mahisa swelled with pride, seeing Indra 
before him mounted on his elephant instantly struck him on his arms. 
Indra, again lost no time, and struck violently with his thunderbolt 
and cut the Danava's Gada into pieces, and came up very close, 
wanting to strike at him. Mahisa, too, becoming very angry took up 
his lustrous sword and came to Indra to attack him with this weapon. 
A fight then occurred between the two, terrible to all the Lokas and 
wonderful to the Munis, where various weapons were showered from 
both the sides. The Demon Mahisa spread then his S'amvari Maya, 
destructive to all the worlds and fascinating to the Munis. 

Hundreds and hundreds of powerful buffalo-like appearances 
resembling Mahisa became, then, visible on the battle-field; they all 
began to kill the Deva forces with weapons in their hands. 


9-14. Seeing this magic of the Danava, Indra became thunderstruck 
and very much confounded with terror. Varuna, Kuvera, the Lord of 
wealth, Yama, Fire, Moon, Sun, and other Devas all fled with terror. 
Indra then, being surrounded by the network of magic, began to call 
Brahma, Visnu and Mahes'a in his mind. At the instant when they 
were called in mind, Brahma, Visnu and Mahes’a riding on 
respective conveyances Swan, Garuda, and Bull, came up there with 
best weapons in their hands for Indra's protection. Visnu seeing the 
play of that fascinating magic hurled his bright discus, Sudars'an; 
and caused the magic to vanish at once. Seeing the three, the 
Creator, the Preserver, and the Destroyer, the Danava Mahisa came 



up there with his Parigha (a club tipped with iron) weapon, desirous 
to fight with them. 


15-16. Then the general Chiksura, Ugrasya, Ugravirya, Asiloma, 
Trinetra, Vaskala, Andhaka and other warriors came up to fight. 


17-23. Those Proud Danavas, clad in armour and mounted on 
chariots with bows in their hands besieged the Devas, like a tiger 
attacking an heifer. Then those Danavas swelled with pride began to 
shower on arrows after arrows; the Devas, too, began to do the 
same, desiring to extirpate them.The General Andhaka, coming up 
to Hah, drew his bow with great force up to his ear and shot at him 
five sharp arrows tipped with poison. Vasudeva, the Destroyer of the 
enemies, cut off those arrows no sooner they came up before him; 
and He shot at the Danavas five arrows. Then Hari and the Danava 
struck each other with various weapons and arrows, swords, discus, 
Musala, clubs, S’akti, and Paras'u. Here, on the other hand, the fight 
lasted for fifty days between Mahes'a versus Andhaka; and it was a 
very close conflict, causing horripilation. Thus severe fights ensued 
between Vaskala and Indra, Mahisa and Rudra, Trinetra and Yama, 
Maha Hanu and Kuvera, Asiloma and Varuna. 


24-39. The Danava Mahisa struck Garuda, the conveyance of Hari, 
with his club; Garuda, being very much distressed with the blow, sat 
down, gasping. Visnu then comforted the powerful Garuda, the son 
of Vinata and made him calm and quiet. Wanting to kill Andhaka, 
Janardana became infuriated, and, drawing his bow made of horn, 
call S'arnga, shot at him arrows after arrows. The Danava cut off all 
those arrows to pieces with his own mass of arrows. Then, becoming 
very angry, he shot fifty sharp arrows at Hari. Vasudeva quickly 
made all those arrows useless and hurled Sudars'ana Chakra with 
thousand spokes on the Danava with great violence. Andhaka 



thwarted this with his own discus and shouted aloud with such a 
great force that all the Devas became confused and confounded. 
Visnu's Chakra being baffled, the Devas became distressed with 
grief and the Danavas got elated. Seeing the Devas thus grieved, 
Visnu held aloft his Kaumodaki Gada (club) and came hurriedly 
before the Danava. Hari struck then with his Gada on the Danava's 
head whereon he fell senseless on the ground. The hot-tempered 
Mahisa, seeing Andhaka senseless, bellowed aloud and, terrifying 
Hari, came up there. Seeing him there, Vasudeva made such a 
thundering noise with his bow string that the Devas became highly 
glad. Then the Bhagavan shot showers of arrows on Mahisa; and 
Mahisa, too, cut those arrows while they were seen in the air. O king! 
Then a very close fight ensued between the two, Kes'ava struck on 
the head of the Danava with his club. Thus struck, he fell in a swoon 
on the ground and a general cry of distress arose amongst the 
Danavas. In a moment the Danava got up again, free from trouble; 
he then struck again on Visnu's head with his Parigha (a club 
mounted with iron, a mace). Struck by that mace, Janardan lay 
senseless; Garuda, seeing him thus unconscious, immediately took 
him away from the battle field. 


40-55. When Visnu thus fled, Indra and the Devas were much 
distressed with fear and began to cry aloud. Hearing the Devas cry, 
S'ankara became wrathful and, quickly coming before Mahisa, struck 
him with his trident (S'ula). The wicked Mahisa made his weapon 
ineffectual and bellowed aloud and struck on the breast of S'ankara 
with his S’akti (a kind of missile). Thus wounded in his breast 
S'ankara did not feel any pain; rather, with his eyes red with anger. 
He struck him again with Trisula. Seeing S'ankara engaged with 
Mahisa, Hari becoming conscious came again on the battle-field. 
Seeing the two powerful Deva-chiefs, Hari and Hara, in the battle¬ 
field Mahisa became very much angry: he then assumed a buffalo 
body and wagging his tail to and fro came in front of them with a 
desire to fight. That terrible Mahisa of a huge body shook his horns 



and bellowed so deep like a thunder cloud that even the Devas got 
frightened. He began to hurl the huge mountain peaks with his two 
horns. The two powerful Devas Hari and Hara, began to shoot at the 
Danava deadly arrows after arrows. Seeing these two gods shower 
arrows upon him, Mahisa began to hurl mountains on them by his 
tail. Visnu cut off those mountains into hundred pieces by his arrow; 
and struck at him instantly with his Chakra. Struck thus by Chakra, 
the Lord of the Danavas fainted, but he instantly rose up with a 
human body. The mountain-like terrible Danava with a club in his 
hand frightened the Devas and uttered grave sounds like those of 
rumbling rain clouds. Hearing that, the Bhagavan Visnu sounded a 
more terrible sound with his Pahchajanya S'ankha (conchshell). 
Hearing the sound of that conchshell, the Danavas were struck with 
terror and the ascetic Risis and Devas became exalted with joy. 


Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on the Deva 
Danava fight in S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam, of 
18,000 versus by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 7. On The Going Of The Devas To 
Kailasa 


1-3. Vyasa said O King! Mahisa seeing the Danavas afflicted with 
grief, quitted his buffalo appearance, assumed a lion form and 
spreading this long manes began to roar aloud and fell amidst the 
Deva forces; then the Devas were terrified on seeing his sharp nails. 
That lion-form Mahisa first attacked so severely the Garuda with his 
nails, that his whole body was besmeared with blood; then he 
attacked Visnu's arms with his nails. 


4-11. Seeing the Danava, Vasudeva Hah raised his discus in anger 
and attacked him with great force to kill him. Just when Hari struck 
the Danava violently with his Chakra, the powerful Danava quitted 
immediately his lion-form, assumed the buffalo form and struck Hari 
with his two horns. Vasudeva, thus pierced in his breast with the 
horns, became confounded and fled away as best as he could till he 
reached his own abode, Vaikuntha. Seeing Hari thus fleeing away, 
S'ankara, too, thought him invulnerable and fled to his Kailas'a 
mountain with fear. Brahma, too, fled to his own abode with terror; 
but the powerful Vasava took patience and remained steady in the 
battle. Varuna taking his S'akti waited patiently for battle. Yama, too, 
with his staff remained there ready to fight. Kuvera, the Lord of the 
Yaksas, remained very busy in close fighting with the Danavas; Fire, 
taking S’akti, also waited. The Sun and Moon, the Lord of the stars, 
both remained in firm resolve to fight with Mahisa, the lord of the 
Danavas. 


12-22. O King! In the meanwhile, the Danava forces got angry and 
attacked them on all sides, shooting at the enemies a mass of 
dangerous serpent-like arrows. The Lord of the Danavas, Mahisa, 



too, assuming the buffalo appearance, reigned supreme in the 
middle. At this moment fierce sounds of the warriors on both the 
sides were heard. During the sharp contest of the Devas and 
Danavas, the sounds from the bowstrings and the clappings of the 
hands were heard like the roarings of thunder. The powerful Danava, 
then, swelled with pride, began to hurl the mountain tops with his 
horns, thus killing the Deva forces. Some by hoofs and some by the 
lashing of the tail, that angry Mahisa, very wonderful to behold, sent 
to the region of Death. Then the Devas and Gandarbhas became 
very much frightened; so much so, that Indra fled away at once on 
the sight of Mahisa. Indra thus retreating from the field, Yama, 
Kuvera, and Varuna all quitted the battle-ground with fear. Indra fled 
away quitting his Airavata elephant and Uchchais'rava horse; so 
Mahisa got the possession of the elephant and the horse, as well the 
heavenly cow of the Sun. So the Danavas considered themselves 
pre-eminently victorious and returned to their abodes. Next they 
wanted to go, as early as possible, to the Heavens, with all their 
forces. In no time Mahisa went to the abode of Indra, deserted by all 
the terror-stricken Devas and got the possession thereof. Then 
taking his seat on the beautiful throne of Indra, he made the other 
Danavas occupy the several seats of the other Devas. 


23-27. Thus fighting full one hundred years, the Danava Mahisa, 
puffed up with pride, acquired the seat of Indra, his desired object. 

He banished the Devas from the Heavens; the Devas, thus 
tormented began to wander in the caves of hills and dales for a 
period of good many years. O King! The Devas, at last, were quite 
tired and took the four-faced Brahma, the Creator's refuge. At that 
instant, the Lord of the world, the Rajas incarnate, the Originator of 
the Vedas, was seated on His lotus seat; surrounding Him were 
standing his mortal sons Marichi, etc., with their passions subdued, 
mind calm and beyond the sphere of the Vedas and Vedangas; there 
were there also Siddhas, Gandarbhas, Kinnaras, Charanas, Uragas, 



and Pannagas. The terrified Devas then began to praise and chant 
hymns to Brahma, the Lord of the world. 


28-33. The Devas said “O Creator! O Lotus-born! O Thou, the 
Remover of the pains and afflictions of all this world! How is it that 
you are not moved with pity towards the Devas, seeing that we are 
defeated by the lord of the Danavas and have been banished from 
our abode; what more shall we say, our troubles are now 
indescribable, as we are living in the caves of hills and dales. O 
Creator! A son may be a hundred times guilty of offence; is it, then, 
that the father, devoid of any feeling of covetousness, deserts his 
sons and gives them trouble! We are oppressed by the Danavas, we 
who are wholly devoted to your lotus-feet, why are you today 
showing signs of indifference towards us! That wicked Danava is 
thoroughly enjoying to-day the Heavens of the Devas, is forcibly 
taking their share of the oblations of clarified butter in the Yajhas 
(sacrifices) from the Brahmanas; is enjoying the Parijata tree and 
also the heavenly milching cow, the jewel of the ocean. What more 
shall we describe to you the strange doings of the Asuras; O Lord of 
the Devas! You are perfectly aware of all that they strive and 
execute; for, by your knowledge, you know everything of this world; 
therefore, O Lord! We lie prostrate at your feet. That vicious Danava, 
of wicked character and full of mischievous actions, gives us troubles 
in various ways wherever we go; O Lord of the Devas! Thou art our 
only Protector; therefore, O Lord! Do what is good to us. Thou art the 
Awarder of the desires of the Devas. Thou art the First Creator of the 
world, and Preserver; therefore if Thou dost not do us our good, to 
whom else shall we take refuge, when we are so severely oppressed 
as if we are burnt in a forest conflagration! Who else is more 
lustrous, more beneficent and more peace-giving Governor? 


34-35. Vyasa said O king! All the Devas, praising Him thus, 
bowed down to the Lord of creation with folded hands and saluted 



him, with their faces very heavy, overladen with deep sorrow. The 
Grand Sire of all the Lokas, seeing the plight of the Devas, consoled 
them with sweet words and made them happy. 


36-43. O Suras! What shall I do? The Danava has become 
exceedingly haughty on account of his getting boons; he can be 
killed by females only; He is invulnerable by any male. What remedy 
is there now? Therefore, O Suras! Let us all go to Kailasa, the best 
of all the mountains; thence we will take S'ankara, the expert in 
doing the works of Gods, and go to Vaikuntha, where Visnu, the 
Deva of the Devas resides. There we all will unite and hold a counsel 
and decide what is best to do, to serve the purpose of the gods. 

Thus making out the programme, Brahma riding on his Hamsa went 
to Kailasa, accompanied by all the Devas. At the same time S'iva 
came to know out of his introspection about the coming of Brahma 
and the other Devas and soon came out of his dwelling abode. 

When they met each other, they saluted each other and felt very 
glad. The Devas then bowed down to them. Seats were given to the 
Devas; and when they sat respectively on their Asanas, the Lord of 
Parvati also took his own seat. S'iva asked the welfare of Brahma 
and the Devas and asked the reasons of their coming to Kailasa. 


44. O Brahma! What has caused you to come here along with Indra 
and the other Devas? O highly fortunate one! Please mention it. 


45-47. Brahma said O Deva of the Devas! The Danava Mahisa is 
oppressing all the Devas in the Heavens; they therefore terrified are 
wandering hither and thither in the caves and hills with Indra. Mahisa 
and the other Danavas are now accepting their share of Yajhas; the 
Lokopalas, being oppressed, have come to-day and are now taking 
shelter of Thee. O S'ambhu! Considering the situation serious, I 
have taken them with me here; therefore, O Deva, do that which is 



reasonable and by which the purpose of the Devas can be carried 
out. O Bhuta Bhavana! (The creator of the world) The whole charge 
and responsibility of all the Devas devolves on Thee. 


48. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus, S'ankara smiled a little and 
spoke charming words to the Lotus-born in the following manner 


49-55. O Bibhu! It is You that gave before this boon to Mahisa; and 
therefore it is you that have wrought this mischief. The Danava has 
become so strong a hero that he has caused terror to all the Devas 
even. Now where can we get such a noble woman who becomes 
able to kill that Danava, elated with pride. My wife nor your wife 
ought to go to battle; even if they, the good ladies go, how will they 
be able to fight? The fortunate wife of Indra, too, is not expert in the 
art of warfare; where else there is another lady who can kill this 
demon, blinded with pride. I, therefore, propose this; let us all go 
today to Visnu and, praising him with hymns, engage him quickly to 
this cause of the gods. Visnu is foremost amongst the intelligent; 
therefore it is highly advisable to execute all actions after duly 
consulting with him. He, by dint of his high intelligence, will find out 
means and effect our purpose. 


Vyasa said O King! Brahma and the other Devas heard Rudra and 
approved heartily and saying, “Be it so” instantly rose up. At the time, 
seeing all the auspicious signs concerning the success of the gods, 
they all became glad; and, riding on their respective vehicles, drove 
towards the abode of Visnu. Favourable fragrant winds, pleasant to 
touch, began to blow gently, birds began to chant hymns of praise 
and signs of success were seen all along their way. The sky was 
clear and the quarters became free; in short, everything showed 
favourable all along their way. 



Here ends the Seventh Chapter on the going of the Devas to Kailasa 
in the Fifth Skandha of S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha 
Puranam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 8. On The Description Of The Origin 
And The Form Of The Dev! 


1-4. Vyasa said Soon the Devas reached Vaikuntha, protected by 
Visnu; they at once began to look at the exquisite indescribable 
beauty of the place. At intervals they saw nice lovely divine houses, 
shining and appearing very splendid; pools and lakes were seen in 
front of them beautified with Kalhara lotus flowers. They began to 
see, at other places, rivers flowing; swans, cranes, Chakravakas and 
other aquatic birds were swimming there easily and warbling lovely 
sounds. At other places again, beautiful gardens came to their sight 
adorned exquisitely by Champaka, As'oka Mandara, Bakula, 
Amrataka, Tilaka, Kuruvaka and Mallika and various other flower 
trees, the cuckoos were seen there cooing melodiously, bees 
humming gently and peacocks dancing beautifully. 


5-6. In the centre was situated the golden palace of Hari, towering to 
heavens, the rooms and quadrangles were all charming; at places, 
they were bedecked with gems and jewels and adorned with various 
paintings. There was the Divine Seat in the centre, composed wholly 
of gems and jewels; and Visnu was occupying this place. There were 
Visnu's Parisadas or attendants, Sunanda, Nandana, and others; 
they were so much devoted to their master that their hearts never 
become attached to any other thing; so they were devotedly singing 
His praises and chanting His hymns with undivided attention. 


7-10. There were dancing the Apsaras (celestial nymphs) and the 
Devas, Gandarbhas, and Kinnaras were singing in melodious tunes. 
Those who love the chanting of the Vedas, such calm-tempered 
Munis were reciting the Vedic Suktas and thus highly extolled Him. 
The two lovely gate-keepers Jaya and Vijaya were waiting at the 



entrance gate with golden sticks in their hands; the Devas conning 
nigh the city of Visnu caught sight of them and said “Any of you 
may go and inform Visnu that Brahma, Rudra, and the whole host of 
gods are waiting at His door to see Him.” 


11. Vyasa said O king! Hearing their words, Vijaya went away at 
once to Visnu; and, saluting Him, informed Him of the arrival of the 
Devas. 


12-13. Vijaya said O Lord! Thou destroyest the enemies of the 
gods; hence Thou art the most worshipped of them. O Lord of Rama! 
The whole hosts of gods have come and are waiting at Thy door, O 
Bibhu! 

Brahma, Rudra, Indra, Varuna, Fire and Yama and other gods, 
anxious to see Thee, are all praising Thee by proper hymns. 


14-32. Vyasa said Hearing Vijaya's words, Visnu, the Lord of 
Rama became very anxious and soon went out of his room to see 
the Devas. Hari came up to them and seeing the Devas waiting at 
the doors very morose and tired, cheered them up by casting a 
favourable glance full affection and love. The gods bowed down and 
praised hymns to Jagannatha the Deva of the Devas, the enemy of 
the Daityas and revealed in the Vedas. O Deva of the Devas! Thou 
art the Creator, Preserver and the Destroyer of the worlds; Thou art 
the ocean of mercy and the sole refuge of this Universe; O Lord! We 
have come to Thee as our Great Refuge; therefore dost Thou save 
us from the present difficulty. Thus praised by the gods, Visnu said :- 
- O Immortals! Take your respective seats and speak how are you 
all? Why have you all in a body come here? Why are you so much 
depressed and worn out with cares? Why do you look so 
melancholy? Say soon for what purpose you with Brahma and Rudra 
have come here. The Devas said “O Lord! The Asura Mahisa is 



very cruel and wicked; always addicted to vicious acts; now that 
most sinful Danava has become very much puffed up with pride and 
is tormenting us always. What more shall we say than this, he is 
appropriating to himself the share of the Yajhas performed by the 
Brahmins; we are therefore, terror-stricken and are wandering in 
mountains and fastnesses. O Destroyer of Madhu! He has become 
unconquerable due to his being granted the boon; considering, 
therefore, the gravity of our situation we have taken refuge unto 
Thee. O Krisna! Thou art acquainted with all the tricks and Maya of 
the Daityas; therefore Thou art capable to kill them. Therefore Thou 
alone art able to deliver us from the present difficulty; be pleased, 
therefore; to Devise means for that purpose. The Creator Brahma 
has granted him this boon that the demon could not killed by any 
man; therefore we are asking you where can we get a female who 
will be able to kill that hypocrite in battle. Mahisa has turned out very 
wicked on the strength of that boon; say, therefore, who amongst 
Lima, Laksmi, S'achi, or Vidya or any other woman will be able to kill 
him. Therefore, O Gracious One to faithful worshippers and 
attendants! Thou art the Preserver of this world; now Devise 
specially the cause of his death and carry out the purpose of the 
gods.” Vyasa said O king! Visnu on hearing their words, spoke 
smiling “We fought before; but this Asura could not at that time be 
killed. Hence if some beautiful female Deity be now created out of 
the collective energy and form of the S'aktis of each of the Devas, 
then that Lady would be able easily to destroy that Demon by sheer 
force. The Lady Deity then sprung from the collective energy of ours, 
would at once be able to destroy that Mahisa, elated on his getting 
the power, though he is skilled in hundreds of Mayas (magics). 
Therefore ask ye now all, with your wives respectively, boons from 
that portion which resides in you all in the form of Fiery Energy, that 
the collected energy thus manifested may assume the form of a 
Lady. We will then offer unto Her, all the Divine weapons, the trident, 
etc., that belong to us. That Deity, then, full of energy and with all the 
weapons in Her hands would kill that wicked Demon, vicious and 
swelled with vanity.” 



33-46. Vyasa said On Visnu, the Lord of the Devas, saying thus, 
came out spontaneously, at once, of the face of Brahma, the brilliant 
fiery energy, very difficult to conceive. That energy looked red like 
gems and pearls, hot, at the same time, a little cool, having a 
beautiful form, and encircled by a halo of light. O King! The high- 
souled Hari and Hara, of mighty valor, were astonished to see this 
Fire, emitted from Brahma. Next came out of the body of S'ankara, 
His fiery spirit, quite in abundance and very wonderful to behold; it 
was silvery white, terrible, unbearable, and incapable of being seen 
even with difficulty. It extended like a mountain and looked horrible 
as if the incarnation of the Tamo Guna like another Tamo Guna 
(S'iva is the incarnation of Tamo Guna that destroys everything). It 
was very surprising to the Devas and very fearful to the Daityas. 

Next a dazzling light of blue colour emanated from the body of Visnu. 
The light that came out of the body of Indra was hardly bearable, of a 
beautiful variegated colour, and comprised in itself the three 
qualities. Thus masses of lights came out respectively from Kuvera, 
Yama, Fire and Varuna. The other Devas, too, gave their shares of 
fiery lights, very lustrous and splendid. Then these all united into a 
great Mass of Fire and Light. Like another Himalayan mountain 
shone full their lustrous Divine light; Visnu and the other Devas were 
all extremely surprised to see this. While the Devas were thus 
looking steadfastly on that Fire, an exquisitely handsome Lady was 
born out of it, causing excitement and wonder to all. This Lady was 
Maha Laksmi; composed of the three qualities of the three colours, 
beautiful, and fascinating to the universe. Her face was white, eyes 
were black, her lips were red and the palms of her hands were 
copper-red. She was adorned with divine ornaments. The Goddess 
was now manifest with eighteen hands, though She had a thousand 
hands (in Her unmanifested state). Now She became manifest out of 
the mass of fire, for the destruction of the Asuras. 



47-52. Janamejaya said O Best of the Munis! O Krisna! You are 
highly fortunate and you are all-knowing. Kindly describe, in detail 
the birth of Her body. O Deva! Please say whether the energies of all 
the gods united into one or remained separate? Whether Her body 
and Her limbs were all luminous. Was it that Her face, nose, eyes, 
etc., and all other parts of Her body were created out of the different 
fires respectively or whether was it that those limbs were fashioned 
when the different fires blended into one huge mass? Describe, in 
detail, the origin of the body and the several limbs thereof; also 
inform me the limbs that were produced out of the corresponding 
Deva's fiery part; as well tell me the several ornaments and several 
weapons given by the several Devas respectively. I am very desirous 
to hear all these from your lotus-like mouth. O Brahman! Hearing 
from your lotus-like mouth the life and doings of Maha Laksmi, the 
sweet juice as they are, I am as yet not satiated (and am desirous to 
hear more). 


53. Suta said Veda Vyasa, the son of Satyavati, hearing his words 
addressed him in the following sweet words 


54. “O Best of Kuras! Very fortunate you are. I will describe in detail, 
to the best of my understanding, the origin of Her body. 


55. Even Brahma, Visnu, Mahes'a and Indra are never competent 
enough to describe Her form properly. 


56. As I already told you that She sprung at the instant the word was 
spoken, how then can I ascertain the form or likeness of the Devi. 



57. She is constant, She is always existent; though She is one, yet 
She assumes different forms for the fulfilment of the Deva's ends, 
whenever their positions become serious. 


58-59. Though the actor is one, yet for the entertainment of the 
spectators, he assumes different forms in the stage, so the Nirguna 
Devi, though formless, assumes in Her pastime, many different 
forms of Sattvic, Rajasic or Tamasic qualities, to fulfill the Deva's 
purposes. 


60. There are various names given to Her, according as the works 
done by Her vary immensely in their natures, just as the meanings of 
one root vary, some being principal and some secondary, according 
to the meanings and objects they convey. 


61. O King! I will now describe to you as far as my knowledge goes, 
the Excellent Form that came out of that mass of Celestial Light. 


62. Her grand beautiful white lotus-like face was created out of the 
fiery energy of S'ankara. 


63. Her glossy black beautiful hairs of the head, overhanging to the 
knees, were formed out of the light of Yama; these all came to a fine 
pointed end. 


64. Her three eyes came out of the energy of Fire; the pupils of those 
eyes were of a black colour; the middle parts were of a white colour 
and the ends were red. 



65. The two eyebrows of the Devi were black and came out of the 
spirit of Sandhya (twilights); they were nicely curved and were 
looking spirited, like the bow of the Cupid and they were shedding, 
as it were, cooling rays. 


66. From the light of Vayu (air). Her two ears were created; they 
were not very long, nor very short, beautiful like the swinging seat 
(rocking chair) of the God of Love. 


67. Her nose was fashioned out of the fire of Kuvera, the Lord of 
wealth; it looked like the til flower, glassy and exquisitely charming. 


68. O King! Her pointed rows of glossy and brilliant teeth, looking like 
gems, came out of the energy of Daksa; they looked like the Kunda 
flowers. 


69. Her lower lip was deep red and it came out of the fire of Aruna 
(the charioteer of the Sun); Her beautiful upper lip came out of the 
energy of Kartika. 


70. Her eighteen hands came out of the Tejas of Visnu and Her red 
fingers came out of the Tejas of the Vasus. 


71. Her breasts came out of the energy of Soma and Her middle 
(navel) with three folds was created out of the spirit of Indra. 



72. Her thighs and legs were from Varuna and Her spacious loins 
came out from Earth. 


73-74. O King! Thus from the various Tejas, contributed by the 
Devas, that Heavenly Lady came out. Her body and the several 
parts thereof were beautiful; Her form was incomparably graceful 
and the voice was exquisitely sonorous and lovely. The Devas, 
oppressed by Mahisasura, became overpowered with joy seeing this 
well decorated Devi, having beautiful eyes and teeth, and charming 
in all respects.” 


75. Visnu then addressed all the Devas to give all their auspicious 
ornaments and weapons. He said “O Devas! Better give, all you 
the various arms and weapons, endowed with strength, created out 
of your own weapons and give them all today to the Devi.” 


Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on the 
description of the origin and the form of the Devi in S'rimad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 9. On The Worship By The Gods To The 
Dev! 


1-22. Vyasa said On hearing Visnu's words, the Devas became 
very glad and presented immediately their own weapons, ornaments 
and clothings. The Ksiroda (Milk) Ocean presented to Her gladly, the 
well fitted necklace, clear as crystal, and a pair of divine cloths, of a 
red colour, never becoming old and very fine. Vis'vakarma was very 
much gratified in his heart and presented a divine jewel to be worn in 
Her diadem or crest blazing like hundreds of suns; white earrings; 
bracelets for Her wrist, bracelets for Her upper arm, and other 
bracelets decked with various gems and jewels and anklets brilliant 
like gems, of a clear Sun-like lustre, decked with jewels, and tinkling 
nicely. The architect of the gods, the ocean of intellect, Vis’vakarma 
gave Her as offerings beautiful ornaments also for the neck, all very 
beautiful, as well as for the fingers decked with gems and jewels, all 
shining splendidly. Varuna gave for Her head garland of lotuses, 
never fading away, of such a sweet fragrance as bees constantly 
hover round them and the Vaijayanti garland for Her breast. The 
mountain Himalya gladly offered Her various gems and a beautiful 
lion, of a golden colour for Her conveyance. Then that beautiful Lady, 
having all the auspicious signs, wishing welfare to all, and decorated 
with the divine ornaments began to look grand and splendid, 
mounted on Her conveyance, the Lion. Visnu then created another 
thousand spoked discus (Chakram) from His own Chakra, capable to 
take off the head of any Asura, and offered it to Her. S’ankara 
created another excellent Tris'ula from his own Trident, terrible and 
demon-killing, and offered it to the Devi. Varuna created another 
bright conch from his own conch and offered it gladly to the Devi. 

Fire offered Her a weapon named S'ataghni which kills violently the 
demons, as if that is another god of death. Maruta (wind), the chief of 
the gods, offered Her a wonderful bow and arrow case filled with 
arrows. The bow can be drawn with great difficulty and emits a very 
harsh sound. Indra created another dreadful thunderbolt from his 



own thunderbolt and gave it at once to the Devi; as well the beautiful 
sonorous bell that used to hang from the elephant Airavata. Yama, 
the God of Death, created another beautiful staff from his own 
sceptre which takes away when time comes, the life of all beings. 
Brahma gladly gave Her a divine Kamandalu, filled with the Ganges 
water; and Varuna offered Her a weapon called Pas'a. O King! Time 
gave Her an axe and a shield and VisVakarma gave Her a sharp 
Paras'u. Kuvera, the Lord of wealth, gave her a golden drinking cup, 
filled with wine; and Varuna offered Her a divine beautiful lotus. 
VisVakarma became very glad and gave Her the Kaumodaki gada, 
capable to kill the enemy of the gods and whence hundreds of bells 
are hanging, an impenetrable armour and various other weapons. 
The Sun gave to the Divine Mother his own rays. The Devas, seeing 
Her adorned with ornaments and weapons, began to praise and 
chant hymns to that most Auspicious Goddess, the Great 
Enchantress of the three worlds. 


23-29. The Deva said “Salutation to S'iva, Salutation to the Most 
Auspicious; Thou art peace and nourishment; we salute again and 
again to Thee. Salutation to Thee, the Bhagavati Devi; Thou art the 
Goddess Rudrani (the terrible), we always salute again and again to 
Thee. Thou art the Kalaratri (the night of destruction at the end of the 
world); Thou art the Indrani. Thou art the Mother, we salute again 
and again to Thee; Thou art the success. Thou art the intelligence. 
Thou art the growth. Thou art the Vaisnavi; salutation again and 
again to Thee. Thou art within the earth; yet the earth does know 
know Thee. Thou art again the inmost of the earth and controllest 
the things within this earth; we offer our salutations to that Supreme 
Cause, the Highest Goddess. Thou art within this Maya (the unborn) 
yet the Maya does not know Thee. Thou residest again within the 
innermost of the Maya and directest that Unborn One, the Maya, we 
salute again and again to that Supreme Cause, the Great Directress, 
the S'iva (the most auspicious). O Mother! Do what is good to us; we 
are oppressed by our enemy, dost then protect us; by Thy own 



power dost Thou overpower and kill that Mahisa. That demon is 
vulnerable by woman only, he is deceitful, cunning, dreadful, and 
swollen with pride on his having got the blessing; he assumes many 
forms and torments the Devas. O One, devoted to the Bhaktas! Thou 
art the only refuge of all the gods; O Thou art the supreme goddess, 
we are very much harassed and oppressed by the Danava; therefore 
dost Thou now protect us; we bow down to Thee.” 


30. Vyasa said When the Devas had praised thus, the Highest 
Goddess, the Giver of all happiness, then smilingly said in the 
following auspicious terms 


31. “O Devas! Today in the battle ground I will overpower that wicked 
Mahisa, of cruel disposition and take away his life.” 


32-40. Vyasa said Speaking thus in a melodious voice, the 
Supreme One smiled and again said “This world is all full of error 
and delusion. Really, it is very wonderful that Brahma, Visnu, Indra 
and other gods are all shuddering out of fear from Mahisa Danava. 
The power of Destiny is exceedingly great and terrible; its influence 
cannot be overcome even by the best of the Devas. O king! The 
Time is the Lord of happiness and pain; Time is, therefore, the God. 
The wonder is this that even those who can create, preserve and 
destroy this world, they are being overpowered and tormented by 
Mahisa. The Devi, thinking thus, smiled; then laughed and laughed 
very hoarsely; it seemed that a roar of laughter then arose. And the 
Danavas were struck with terror at that very dreadful sound. The 
earth trembled at that extraordinary sound; the mountains began to 
move and the vast oceans that remained calm began to be agitated 
with billows. The uproar filled all the quarters and the mountain Meru 
trembled. Then the Danavas, hearing the tumultuous uproar, were all 
filled with tremendous fear. The Devas became very glad and said 



thus “O Devi! Let victory be Yours; save us.” The intoxicated 
Mahisa, too, hearing those words, became very angry. Mahisa, 
struck with terror at those words, asked the Daityas “O Messengers! 
Go and ascertain how has originated this sound. 


41-48. Who has made this harsh sound? Bring that devil who has 
made this hoarse noise, be he a Deva, Danava, or anyone else unto 
me and I will kill that roaring villain, who, it seems, has been puffed 
with egoism and vanity. The Devas are not making this noise, for 
they are vanquished and terror-stricken; The Asuras are not doing 
so, for they are my subjects; then, who is the stupid fellow that has 
done so? Surely he is of very little understanding; his days are 
numbered; and I will carry him to the home of Death. Go you, 
ascertain the cause of sound and come back to me; then I will go 
there and destroy that wretch who made this noise to no purpose.” 
Vyasa said No sooner the messengers heard these words of 
Mahisa, than they at once went to the Devi and saw that Her body 
and the several parts thereof were all very beautiful; She had 
eighteen hands. She was decorated completely with various 
ornaments all over Her body, all the auspicious signs were being 
seen in Her body and that She was holding excellent divine 
weapons. That auspicious Goddess beautiful, was holding in Her 
hands, the cup and drinking wine again and again. Beholding Her 
this form, they were afraid and fled at once to the Mahisa and 
informed him the cause of that sound. 


49-54. The Daityas said “O Lord! We have seen one grown up 
woman; whose whereabouts we are quite ignorant. The Devi is 
decorated with jewels and ornaments all over Her body; She is not 
human nor Asuri but Her form is extraordinary and beautiful. That 
noble Lady is mounted on a lion, holding weapons on all Her 
eighteen hands and is roaring loudly; She is drinking wine; so it 
seems that She is puffed up with liquor. It is quite certain that She 



has no husband. The Devas are gladly chanting praises from the 
celestial space that Let Victory be to Her side and that She save the 
Devas, O Lord! We don't know at all who is that handsome woman? 
or whose wife is she; why has she come there? and what is Her 
motive? Sentiments of love, heroism, laughter, terror and wonder are 
all fully shining in Her; therefore we are very much overpowered by 
the halo emitted from Her; and we could not even see Her well. 


Note Rasas means sentiments. The rasas are usually eight. 
Sringara, Hasya, Karuna, Raudra, Vira, Bhayanakah, Bibhatsadbhu 
tasangau, Chetyastau, Natyan, Rasah smritah but sometimes 
Santarasah, is added thus making the total number nine; sometimes 
a tenth, Vatsalyarasa is also added. 


55. O King! In compliance with your order, we have come back to 
you no sooner we had seen the Lady, without even addressing Her 
in any way. Now order us what we are to do.” 


56-58. Mahisa said “O Best of ministers! O Hero! Under my 
command, go there with all the forces and use the means, 
conciliation, etc., and bring that woman, having a beautiful face (like 
the Moon), to me. If that Lady do not come even when the three 
policies, Sama (conciliation), Dana (making gifts), and Bheda 
(sowing dissensions in an enemy's party and thus winning him over 
to one's side, one of the four Upayas or means of success against 
an enemy) are adopted by you, then apply the last resort Danda, (or 
war) in such a way that Her life be not destroyed and bring that 
beautiful woman to me. I will gladly make Her, of black curling hairs, 
my queen-consort. In case that deer-eyed one comes gladly, then do 
my desires without causing any unpleasant feeling; (a cessation of 
sentiment). I am enchanted on hearing about Her beauties and 
wealth.” 



59-67. Vyasa said The prime minister, on hearing the words of 
Mahisa, took with him elephants, horses, and chariots and hurriedly 
went to the desired place. On coming near to the Devi, the minister 
began to address Her in sweet words from a sufficient distance in a 
very humble and courteous way. O Sweet speaking! Who art Thou? 
What has caused Thee to come here? O Highly fortunate! My master 
has asked through me these questions. My master cannot be killed 
by all the Devas and men; he has conquered all the Lokas (worlds). 

O Beautiful-eyed! On account of getting his boon from Brahma, the 
Lord of the Daityas has become very powerful and consequently 
being very proud, assumes different forms at will. He, our King- 
Emperor Mahisa, the lord of the earth, hearing about Thy beauty and 
dress, has expressed a desire to see Thee. O Beautiful one! 

Whether he will appear before Thee in a human form? He will do 
whatever Thou likest. O Deer-eyed One! Be pleased now to go to 
that intelligent King. In case Thou dost not go, we will bring the King, 
Thy devotee, to Thee. O Lord of the Devas! Our King has heard of 
Thy beauty and grandeur and has become very much submissive to 
Thee. We will therefore do exactly what Thou desirest. Therefore, 
Thou having thighs thick and round like those of a young of an 
elephant! Be pleased to express what Thou likest and we will do 
quickly as Thou desirest. 


Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the worship offered 
by the gods to the Devi and the weapons offered by them in the 
Maha Puranam, S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 10. On The Messenger’s News To 
Mahisa 


1-16. Vyasa said The Maha Maya, that Excellent Lady, hearing 
thus the words of the prime minister of Mahisa, laughed and spoke 
with a voice, deep like that of a cloud, thus O Minister-in-chief! 
Know Me as the Mother of the gods; my name is Maha Laksmi. It is I 
that destroy all the Daityas. I am requested by all the Devas to kill 
Danava Mahisa; they have been oppressed and deprived of their 
share of Yajha offerings. Therefore I have come here today alone, 
without any army to take away his life. O Good One! I am pleased 
with your sweet words of welcome, in showing me marks of respect. 
Had you not behaved thus, I would have certainly burnt you to ashes 
by my fiery sight, which is the universal conflagration at the break up 
of the world. O Minister! Who is there that gets not pleased with 
sweet words! Go you to Mahisa and speak to him the following 
words of mine “O Villain! Go down to Patala (the nether regions) at 
once if you have any desire to live. Otherwise, I will slay you, the 
wicked one, in the battle-field; you will have to go to the house of 
Death, pierced by my mass of arrows. O Stupid One! Know that this 
is merely kindness shown unto you, that I have told you to go soon 
to Patala and that the Devas get possession of their Heaven, with no 
delay. O One of weak intellect! Therefore dost Thou leave 
possession of this sea-girt earth and go alone without any delay to 
Patala, before my arrows are shot at you. O Asura! Or if you desire 
to fight, then come at once with your powerful warriors; I will destroy 
all of them. O One of dull intellect! I will kill you in battle, just as I 
killed before in yugas after yugas countless Asuras like you. O 
Passionate creature! Better shew that your efforts in holding 
weapons have been crowned with success by your being engaged in 
battle against Me; otherwise they will all be useless. O Stupid! You 
thought that you would be vulnerable alone to women hence you 
oppressed the Devas entitled to worship; O wicked one! No longer 
show your pride on the strength of your getting the boon from 



Brahma, that you would be vulnerable only to the females. Thinking 
it advisable to observe the words of the Creator, I have assumed this 
incomparable Eternal Female appearance and I have come here to 
slay you, O wicked one! O stupid one! If you have any desire for your 
life, then quit this Heaven and go to Patala, infested with snakes, or 
anywhere else you like.” 


17-28. Vyasa said Hearing these words of the Devi, that minister, 
surrounded by forces, replied in reasonable words thus “O Devi! 
You are speaking in words befitting a woman and puffed up with 
pride. You are a woman; the lord of the Daityas is a hero; how can a 
battle be engaged between you two. It seems to me impossible. Your 
body is delicate, a girl in full youth; especially you are alone and 
Mahisa is of huge body and powerful; so the fight comes next to 
impossibility. He has elephants, horses, chariots, infantry, etc., and 
countless soldiers all armed with weapons. Therefore, O Beautiful 
One! He will find no difficulty in killing you in battle as an elephant 
finds no difficulty in treading over the Malati flowers. Rather, if I utter 
anything harsh to you, that would go against the sentiment of love, 
with you; therefore I cannot speak rudely to you out of my fear not to 
interrupt the above feeling. True, that our king is an enemy of the 
gods; but be has become extremely devoted to you. Therefore it is 
wise to speak words full of conciliation or generosity. Were it 
otherwise, I would have shot arrows at you and would have killed 
you in as much as you have thus boasted in vain and spoken so dire 
a falsehood, resting merely on the strength of your youthful pride and 
cleverness. My master has become fascinated on hearing your 
extraordinary beauty hardly to be seen in this world; it therefore 
behoves me to speak sweet words to you for the sake of pleasing 
my master. O Large-eyed! This kingdom and the wealth thereof are 
all yours; in fact, Mahisa will be your obedient servant; therefore, 
better forsake your anger, leading to your death; and cultivate 
friendship with him. O Sweet Smiling One! I am falling at your feet; 
you better go to him and become at once queen-consort. O 



Handsome Woman! No sooner you become the queen of Mahisa 
than you will get at once all the pure wealth of the three worlds and 
the unbounding happiness of this world.” 


29-45. The Devi said “Minister! I now speak what is pregnant with 
goodness and wisdom to you, according to the rules of the S'astras, 
keeping in view also the cleverness that you have shown in using 
your words. Now I come to understand from your talk, that you are 
the chief secretary of Mahisa; and therefore your nature and 
intelligence are like those of a beast. And how can he be intelligent, 
whose ministership is occupied by a man of your nature! Nature has 
ordained connection between two persons of like nature. O Stupid 
One! Did you think a little beforehand the meaning of your words 
when you told me of my feminine nature? Though I am not 
apparently a man, yet my nature is that of the Highest Purusa (Man); 

I shew myself simply in a feminine form. Your master asked before 
from Brahma that he would prefer death, if possible, at the hands of 
a woman ; therefore, I consider him quite illiterate and ignorant of the 
sentiment, worthy of a hero. Because to die at the hands of a woman 
is very painful to one who is a hero; and this is gladly welcome to 
one who is a hermaphrodite. Now see that your master Mahisa has 
shown his intelligence, when he courted his death from the hands of 
a woman. For that very reason, I have come here in the shape of a 
woman to effect my purpose; why shall I fear, then, to hear your 
words, contradictory to those of the S'astras. When Fate goes 
against any one, a grass comes like a thunderbolt; and when fate 
goes in favour of anyone, a thunderbolt becomes as soft as a bundle 
of cotton. What does it avail even when one possesses an extensive 
army or various weapons in abundance, taking shelter in a wide 
extending fort? What will his soldiers do to him, whose death has 
come close at hand? Whenever, in due time, the connection of the 
JTva (the human soul) with this body is brought about, then his 
pleasures, pains and death are written. Know this as certain, very 
certain, that death will come to him in the manner as written by the 



hands of Fate; it will never be otherwise. As the birth and death of 
Brahma and other gods are ordained, your death has been similarly 
ordained; no, there is no need of taking the example further than 
this. Those who are tied up by the hands of death are surely fools 
and of extremely blunt intellect, if they think simply on the strength of 
their getting some boons “that they would never die.” Therefore go 
quickly to your king and speak to him what I have said; you will then 
surely obey what he commands you to do. If he wants his life, he, 
with his retinue, would at once go down to Patala; let Indra and the 
other Devas get possession of the Heavens and their share of 
Yajhas. If he holds a contrary opinion, let him be eager to go to the 
house of Death and come and fight with Me. If he thinks that Visnu 
and the other Devas have fled from the battle-fields, he has nothing 
to boast of; for he has not shewn his manliness at all even then; for 
his victory is solely due to his having got the boon from Brahma.” 


46-52. Vyasa said Hearing these words of the Devi, the Danava 
began to think whether I ought to fight or to go to Mahisa? The King 
has become very enamoured and has sent me hither to negotiate for 
marriage; how then will I be able to go to him if I make this affair 
unpleasant and interrupted in the middle in its course of harmony. 
Now it is wise for me to go to the King without fighting; let me then 
go as early as possible in this way and inform him about this whole 
affair. The King is exceptionally intelligent and experienced; he will 
consult with his other experienced ministers and do what is best. 
Therefore I ought not to fight here rashly; for victory or defeat would 
alike be distasteful to my monarch. Whether this Lady kills me, or I 
kill this Lady, the king will be angry in either case. I will therefore go 
now to the king and tell him what the Devi has said; he will do 
whatever he likes. 


53-66. Vyasa said Thus that intelligent son of the minister argued 
and went to the king. Then, bowing down before him, he began to 



say thus O King! That excellent woman, fascinating to the world, 
the beautiful Devi is sitting on a lion with weapons in all her eighteen 
hands. O King! I told her “O Beautiful Lady! Be attached to 
Mahisasura; you will become, then, the queen-consort of the king, 
the lord of the three worlds. You will certainly then be his queen- 
consort; he will pass his life, ever obedient to you like an obedient 
servant. O Beautiful One! If you choose to make Mahisa your 
husband, you will become fortunate amongst women and will enjoy 
ever all the wealth of the three worlds.” Hearing my these words, that 
large-eyed woman, puffed up with egoism, laughed a little and said 
thus “Your king is born of a buffalo and is the worst of brutes; I will 
sacrifice him before the Devi for the benefit of the gods. Is there any 
woman in this world so stupid as to select Mahisa as her husband? 

O You stupid! Can a woman like me ever indulge in bestial 
sentiments! A female buffalo has got horns; she, being excited with 
passion, may select your Mahisa with horns as her husband and 
come to him bellowing. I am not stupid nor like her so as to make 
him my husband. O Villain! I will fight and destroy the enemies of the 
gods in the battle-field. Or if he desires to live, let him flee to Patala. 
O King! Hearing those rough words uttered by Her in a moment of 
madness, I have come to you, thinking also how to redress this 
wrong. O King! Only I feared not to interrupt in your love sentiment; 
and therefore I did not fight with Her; especially, without Your 
command, how can I engage myself in useless excitement? O Lord 
of the Earth! That handsome woman rests maddened on Her own 
strength; I do not know what is in the womb of future or whatever is 
destined to happen, will surely come to pass. You are the sole 
master in this matter; I will do whatever you order me. The matter is 
very difficult to be reflected upon; whether it is better to fight or it is 
better to fly away, I cannot say definitely.” 


Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on the 
messenger's news to Mahisa, in S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam the 
Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 11. On The Appearing Of The Danava 
Tamra Before The Dev! 


1-3. Vyasa said The King Mahisasura, maddened with pride, 
heard the messenger’s words and called the aged and experienced 
ministers and said thus O Ministers! What am I to do now? Better 
judge you all well, and speak out definitely to me. Is it that this Devi 
has been created by the Devas like the Maya of Sambarasura and 
thus has appeared before us? You are all dexterous and know where 
to apply the four means of success, viz., conciliation, gift or bribery, 
sowing dissensions, and war; and therefore you would better tell me 
which one of the above four, I am to adopt now. 


4-7. The ministers said O King! One should always speak true 
and at the same time pleasant; the wise ones should then select only 
those which are beneficial and apply them. O King! As a medicine, 
though bitter, cures diseases, so true words, though appearing 
unpleasant, lead to beneficial results. Those that are simply 
pleasant, are generally injurious as to their effects. O Lord of the 
Earth! The bearers and approvers of truth both are very rare; truth 
speakers also are very difficult to be seen; laudatory sycophancy is 
found in a great measure in this world. O King! Nobody in the three 
worlds knows what will be good or what will lead to inauspicious 
results? How can we then definitely pronounce our judgment in this 
difficult matter? 


8-9. The King said Let each of you say separately, according to 
his own intellect, what is his opinion; I will hear them all and consider 
for myself. Clever persons should hear the opinions of several 



persons, then judge for himself what is the best and then adopt that 
as what is to be done. 


10. Vyasa said Hearing his words, the powerful Virupaksa came 
out foremost of all and began to say pleasant words to the King. 


11-16. O King! Please take for certain, what has been spoken by that 
ordinary woman, swelled with vanity, as words simply to scare you. 
The efforts and courage of a woman are known to all; who will be 
afraid therefore, to hear abusive language from a woman, praising 
her ownself in matters of warfare? O King! You have conquered the 
three worlds by your own heroic valour; now if you acknowledge your 
inferiority, out of fear to a woman, you would be subject to very much 
disgrace in this world. Therefore, O King! I will go alone to fight with 
Chandika and I will kill Her. You can stay here now without any fear. 

O King! See my prowess now; I am just now going with my army and 
I will kill that violent Chandika, maddened with pride, or I will tie Her 
down by a coil of snakes and bring Her before you; then that Lady, 
seeing Herself helpless, will become quite submissive to you; there 
is no doubt in this. 


17-30. Vyasa said Hearing these words of Virupaksa, Durdhara 
said O King! Virupaksa is very intelligent; what he has said just 
now is all reasonable and true. O King! You are intelligent; hear my 
words full of truth also. As far as I think, I consider that woman with 
beautiful teeth as passionate. For that woman of broad hips has 
expressed a desire to bring you under control by making you fearful; 
the mistresses, proud of their beauty generally use such words when 
they become passionate. When they behave in this way, people call 
these amorous gestures. These crooked words of mistresses are the 
chief causes in attracting dear persons unto them. Those who are 
skilled in the art of love affair, some of them can know these things 



thoroughly well. O King! That woman has said, “I will pierce and kill 
you by arrows, face to face, in the battlefield.” The sense of this is 
different. The wise persons that are clever and experienced in the art 
of finding out the cause, declare that the above sentence is pregnant 
with deep and esoteric meaning. You can easily see that the 
handsome women have no other arrows with them; their side- 
glances are their arrows. And their words carry their hidden 
meanings, and, expressing their desires, are their flowers. O King! 
Brahma, Visnu and Mahes’a even have no powers to shoot arrows 
at you; how can, then, that helpless woman, who appears so 
passionate, dart real arrows at you? O King! That lady said “O 
Stupid! I will kill your King by my arrow-like eye-sight.” But the 
messenger was wanting in that power to appreciate; so he, no doubt, 
understood her words in their contrary sense. The saying of that 
lady, “I will lay your lord in the death-bed in the battle-field” is to be 
taken in the light of inverted sexual intercourse, where woman is 
above the man. Her utterance, “I will take away the vitality (life) of 
your lord” is also significant. The semen virile is known as the vitality 
(life). Therefore the above expression means that she will make you 
devoid of your virility. There can be no other meaning. O King! Those 
women that are excellent shew by too much of their covert 
expressions (innuendos) that they select and like very much their 
beloved. The experts only in these amorous affairs will be able to 
appreciate these things. Knowing thus, dealings ought to be made 
with Her so that the harmony in amorous sentiments be not broken. 

O King! Sama (conciliation) and Dana (gifts) are the two means to be 
adopted; there is no other way. By these two, that Lady, whether she 
be proud or angry, is sure to have brought under control; I will go 
now and bring Her before you by such sweet words. O King! What is 
the use of my talking too much? I will make Her submissive to you 
like a slave girl. 


31-44. Vyasa said Hearing those words of Durdhara, the Danava 
Tamra, who was very experienced in finding out the real nature, said 



“I am telling you what is sanctioned by virtue and is at the same 
time full of sweet amorous feelings, pregnant with deep meanings. 
Kindly hear; O Giver of honour! This intelligent woman is not at all 
passionate nor devoted to you; nor has that woman used any covert 
expressions to you. O Great Hero! This is strange indeed that a 
Lady, beautiful, handsome, and of strange features, at the same time 
alone and helpless, has come here to fight. A good-looking woman, 
powerful, and having eighteen hands is never heard of, nor ever 
seen by me in these three worlds. She is holding in each of Her 
hands powerful weapons. O king! All these seem to be the contrary 
actions of Time. O King! I saw ominous dreams during the night; and 
I conclude, therefore, that great dangers are over our heads. Early in 
the morning twilight, I saw in my dream that a woman, wearing a 
black raiment, was weeping in the inner courtyard; that some 
inauspicious events are forthcoming can be easily judged from the 
above. O King! The birds were screaming hoarsely in every house 
and various calamitous events were seen in various houses; at this 
time that woman, firmly resolved, was challenging you to fight; it, 
therefore seems to me that there is something very serious in this 
matter. O Lord! This woman is neither human, nor a GandharvT, nor 
the wife of any Asura. Only to cause delusion to us, she, this 
wondrous Maya has been created by the gods. O King! In no case, 
weakness is to be resorted; it is wise by all means to fight as best as 
possible; what is inevitable will come to pass; this is my opinion. No 
one is able to unriddle the doings of the Devas, whether they would 
be auspicious or inauspicious. Therefore intelligent ones should 
weigh pros and cons carefully and remain patient and steady. O 
King! Life or death is at the hands of Destiny; Nobody, therefore, can 
do it otherwise.” 


45-51. Hearing this, Mahisasura said “O Highly fortunate Tamra! 
Better, then, stand for fight, fully resolved and go to that Lady, 
beautiful, and conquer Her according to rules of justice and bring Her 
before me. In case She does not come under your control in fight, kill 



Her; but if She comes round, then show Her honour; do not kill Her. 
O All-knowing! You are a great hero and at the same thoroughly 
conversant with Kama S’astra (science of love); therefore conquer 
that Fair One by any means you can. O valiant Tamra, of mighty 
prowess! Go then with a mighty force and ponder over again and 
again and find out Her intention. Is She prompted by passion or by 
real inimical feeling or by any other motive? Try to find out whose 
Maya is this? Know all these beforehand; then find out the remedy; 
next fight with Her according to your strength and prowess. 
Weakness should not be shown nor merciless behaviour is to be 
resorted; you should behave with Her according to the bent of Her 
mind.” 


52. Vyasa said O king! Thus hearing the King’s words, Tamra 
coming as if under the sway of Death, saluted the king Mahisa and 
marched away with his army. 


53-66. That wicked Danava, who, on his way, began to see all the 
fearful inauspicious signs, indicative of Death, became surprised and 
was caught with fear. When he arrived at the spot, he saw the Devi 
standing on a lion, while She was decorated with all the weapons 
and instruments, and all the Devas were chanting hymns to Her. 
Tamra, then bowed down before Her with humility and modesty and 
addressed Her with sweet words, according to the rules of the policy 
of conciliation. “O Devi! Mahisa, the lord of the Daityas, has become 
enchanted on hearing Your beauty and qualifications and has 
become desirous to marry You. O Beautiful One! You would better 
be graciously pleased with that conqueror of the Immortals, the 
Mahisasura; O Thou of delicate limbs! Make him your husband and 
enjoy all the exquisite pleasures of the Nandana garden as best as 
you can. The end and aim of attaining this human form, beautiful in 
every respect and the abode of all bliss, is to enjoy, in every way, all 



the pleasures of human existence and to avoid the sources of all 
troubles. This is the rule. 


“O Thou of beautiful thighs like those of the young of an elephant! 
Your soft and delicate lotus-like hands are fit to play only with nice 
balls of flowers; why then are You holding in Your hands all the 
weapons and arrows? What is the use of holding ordinary arrows, 
when those two eye-brows like bows, are existing with You? What 
need have you to take ordinary arrows when you are graced with 
those piercing eye sights, your arrows. The war is exceedingly 
painful in this world; those who know thus ought never to fight. It is 
only those human beings that are prompted by greed that fight with 
each other. What to speak of those sharpened arrows, one ought not 
to fight with flowers even; O Devi! You can well say who is it that 
feels pleasure, when one’s own body is pierced? Therefore, O 
Delicate One! Gladly you can worship Mahisa, the lord of the world 
and the object of worship of the Devas and Danavas. Then he will 
satisfy all your desires. What more to say, you will no doubt be his 
queen-consort. O Devi! If one tries one’s best, it is doubtful whether 
one would be crowned with success; therefore keep my this request; 
you will surely get all the best pleasures. O Beautiful! You are well 
acquainted with all the politics; therefore you better enjoy thoroughly 
the pleasures of the kingdom for full many years. And if you marry 
Mahisa you will have beautiful sons and those sons again will be 
kings; and enjoying the pleasures of your full grown womanhood, 
you will no doubt, be happy in your old age.” 


Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Fifth Book on the appearing 
of the Danava Tamra before the Devi in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, 
the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 12. On The Holding Of Counsel By 
Mahisasura 


1. Vyasa said The World-Mother, hearing Tamra’s words, spoke 
laughing a little and with a deep voice like that of a rumbling thunder 
cloud. 


2-13. The Devi spoke “O Tamra! Go and say to your Lord Mahisa 
who, it seems, is stupid, whose end is nigh, who has become very 
passionate, and who is void of knowledge what is proper and what is 
improper. I am not like your grown up mother, the she-buffalo, having 
horns, eating grass, with a long tail and a big-belly. I do not like to 
have Visnu, the god S’ankara, Brahma, Kuvera, Varuna, or Fire. How 
then can I select a beast? If I do so, I will be an object of much 
censure amongst the several worlds. I am not desirous of any more 
husband; my Husband is existing; though He is the Lord of all. 
Witness of All, yet He is not the Actor; He is without any desires and 
He is calm and tranquil. He, the S’iva, is devoid of any Prakritic 
qualities, without any attachment, the Great Infinite, without anyone 
to rely on, without any refuge, omniscient, omnipresent, the Great 
Witness, the Full, and the seat of the Full, the Auspicious. He is the 
abode of all, capable to do all, the peaceful, capable to create 
everything and He is seeing everywhere. How can I then leave Him 
and try to serve the dull, stupid Mahisa? Let him come and fight with 
this understanding that he will be defeated and be made the 
conveyance of Yama, the God of Death or the carrier of water of the 
human beings. And if that impious heretic desire to live, let him fly at 
once to Patala with all his demon comrades; else I will slay him in 
battle. See! The combination of similar substances leads to 
happiness; and if out of ignorance, the connection takes place 
between things entirely different in their natures, it becomes at once 
the source of all pains and troubles. You are a thorough illiterate 
when you ask me to worship your lord; do you not see me endowed 



with exquisite beauty? and what is your Mahisa? A buffalo with 
horns; how can then creation become possible between us? Better 
fly away or fight if you like; I will kill you and your friends, and if you 
leave the region of Heavens and the share of Yajha, then you will 
become happy.” 


14-30. Vyasa said O King! Thus saying, the Devi howled and 
roared so loudly that it appeared strange and it caused a great terror 
to the Danavas who took it as the great dissolution of the universe at 
the end of a Kalpa. The earth and the mountains trembled; the wives 
of the Danavas, had miscarriages at that terrific noise. Tamra 
hearing that sound was terrified; his mind became unsteady and he 
at once fled to Mahisa. O King! The Danavas present in the city 
became deaf; thy fled and became very anxious and were absorbed 
in the thought whence and how that sound came. The lion, too, 
enraged and, raising up its manes, roared so loud that the Daityas 
became very much terrified. Mahisa, too, became confounded to see 
Tamra returning; he then held a council with his ministers what ought 
to be done next? Mahisasura said “O best of the Danavas! Shall 
we now take our shelter within the forts? Or shall we go out and 
fight? Or will it be favourable to us if we fly away? You all are 
intelligent and versed in all the S’astras and unconquerable by your 
foes; therefore ought you all to consult over the the matter in utmost 
privacy for our success at the present moment. The root of Kingdom 
lies in the council in the secret place (cabinet) and Statesmanship; if 
this counsel be kept well preserved in secrecy, then that Kingdom is 
also kept entire; therefore it is highly incumbent that the plan be kept 
in strictest confidence amongst the good and virtuous ministers. If 
the plan be out, then destruction comes both to the King and his 
Kingdom; hence the plan must be kept secret by those wanting glory, 
lest it be taken advantage of and rendered ineffective by other 
persons. O Ministers! Now declare, taking due consideration of time 
and place, after duly discussing and ascertaining what is the best 
course to adopt, what would be beneficial and full of reason and 



intelligence. First find out the cause why this powerful woman, 
created by the Devas has come here alone and helpless? That 
woman is challenging us to fight. What more wonder can there be 
than this? Who can say in the three worlds what the result will be, 
whether it will be good or otherwise? Victory comes not to many 
persons nor defeat comes to a single individual; therefore victory or 
defeat lies at the hands of the Luck and Destiny. Those who plead 
for place, policy, statesmanship, they say what is Fate? Is there 
anyone who has seen Fate? (Adrista) No one has seen His 
appearance. It may be argued that there may exist such a thing as 
Fate; to which it might be replied, what proofs are there for such an 
existence? Thus the weak persons alone hold it out as their only 
hope; nowhere are seen energetic persons who can fulfil their ends 
by their own efforts, by those who enrol themselves under Fate. 
Therefore “effort,” “energy” are the words of the heroes and “Fate” is 
the word of the cowards. You should all consider today these 
subjects fully and intelligently and then decide what are we to do?” 


31-39. Vyasa said Thus hearing the King, the famous Vidalaksa 
with folded hands spoke thus O King! First it should be definitely 
ascertained whose wife is she, this woman possessing large eyes? 
Whence and for what purpose has she come here; next what ought 
to be done should be decided. It seems to me that the Devas, 
knowing that your death will ensue from the hands of a woman, have 
created very carefully this lotus-eyed woman out of their own 
essences. And they are lying in wait, unknown to anybody in the 
celestial space with a desire to see the battle but really to fight with 
you. In due time, they will undoubtedly help this woman. When the 
war will ensue, Visnu and the other Devas will put this woman in 
front and slay us all. Whereas this Devi will slay you. This is their 
earnest desire. O King! I have come to know this beforehand; but 
what will be the actual result I cannot say. I cannot say also whether 
it is advisable for You to fight now; therefore it would be better if you 
consider yourself well on this matter of the gods and do accordingly. 



Our duty, the duty of your servants lies in this That we should 
sacrifice at any moment our lives for the preservation of your 
prestige and to enjoy with you whenever you are enjoying. But, O 
King! It is extremely advisable to ponder over this very carefully 
when we see that this woman, though alone, is challenging us to 
fight who are armed with powerful soldiers. 


40-44. Durmukha said O King! I know for certain, that we will not 
get victory in this battle; still we ought not to show our backs; for that 
would lead us to sheer disgrace. Even in our encounter with Indra 
and other Devas, we did nothing hateful and blameable; then how 
can any of us fly away when we come face to face with a helpless 
woman? Therefore fight we must; that is certain; let whatever 
happen. What is inevitable, must come to pass. Thus considered, 
what need we care for the result? If we die in the battle, we will get 
name and fame; if we be victorious, we will get happiness. Thus 
thinking both the cases, we must fight today. Death is inevitable 
when our longevity expires; our prestige will suffer if we fly away; 
therefore we ought not to spend uselessly our time in thus 
expressing our vain regret for life or for death. 


45-51. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the Durmukha’s words, 
Vaskala, the eloquent speaker, thus spoke to the king, with clasped 
hands and his head bowed down. O King! You need not think thus in 
agony with this unpleasant affair; alone I will kill that Chandika, of 
unsteady eyes. O Best of kings! To be always prompt and energetic 
indicates that one is steady in one’s heroic valour; to consider one’s 
enemy as dreadful is contrary to above; so we ought now to take 
recourse to heroic valour. O King! Therefore I will discard fear 
altogether and fight out valiantly; I will no doubt, send Chandika in 
the battlefield to the abode of Death. I fear not Yama, nor Indra, nor 
Kuvera, nor Vayu nor Agni, nor Visnu, nor S’ankara, nor Moon nor 
Sun; I do not fear any of them; what fear can I, then, entertain of that 



vain arrogant woman, who has got none to support her. I will kill Her 
with these arrows, sharpened on stones. You can see today the 
prowess of my arms and enjoy peace; you will not have to go to 
battle anymore to fight with Her. 


52-65. Vyasa said O King! Vaskala having said thus to the lord 
Mahisa in a haughty spirit, Durdhara bowed down and said thus O 
Lord of the earth! Let the purpose be whatsoever, with which the 
beautiful Devi with eighteen hands, the creation of the gods, may 
come hither, I will vanquish Her. O King! I think, it is simply to terrify 
you, as the Suras have thus created this Maya woman; therefore, do 
you forsake your delusion by knowing this merely as a scare. O 
King! Such is the statesmanship; now hear about the workings of the 
ministers. Ministers in this world are of three kinds (1) Sattvik; (2) 
Rajasik and (3) Tamasik. Those ministers in whom the Sattva quality 
is predominant, they perform their Master’s duties according to their 
own strength. The Sattvik Mantris (ministers) are well versed in their 
Mantra S’astras (the policies and statesmanship), virtuous and one- 
pointed in their thoughts, they never do any injury to their king and 
they fulfil their own purposes. The Rajasik Mantris are of different 
sorts; they are always after their own interests; at times, whenever 
they like, they do the State duties. The Tamasik Mantris always look 
of their own interests out of their greedy nature; they serve their ends 
even by ruining the regal interests. It is the Tamasik Mantris that are 
influenced by the bribes from the enemies, become separated at 
their hearts from their own masters and give out the secrets to the 
enemies, while staying in their homes. They always advise alienation 
policy like the sword ensheathed in a scabbard; and when the time 
of war comes, they always frighten their masters. Therefore, O King! 
Never put your trust on ministers; if you do so, they will always 
hinder you in your actions and counsels; what harm cannot be done 
by those ministers that are treacherous, greedy, deceitful and void of 
any intelligence and always addicted to vicious acts, when they are 
trusted! Therefore, O King! I will go myself to the battle and serve 



your purpose; you need not be at all anxious in this matter. I will 
soon bring before you that vicious woman; I will do your actions by 
my own strength and powers. Let you be calm; and look at my 
strength, fortitude and valour. 


Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the holding of 
counsel by Mahisasura in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam the Maha 
Puranam, of 18,000 Slokas by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 13. On The Killing Of Vaskala And 
Durmukha 


1-6. Vyasa said O King! The two powerful Danavas Vaskala and 
Durmukha, well-versed in arts of warfare, went out for battle, 
maddened with their prowess. The two Danavas, elated with vanity, 
went to the battle-field and began to address the Devi in voice deep 
as the rumbling of a cloud. O Beautiful Devi! You better choose and 
worship the Lord of the Daityas, that high-souled Mahisasura who 
has conquered all the Devas. He will come before you in privacy in a 
human shape, with all auspicious signs and adorned with beautiful 
ornaments. O Sweet smiling One! better place your highest feelings 
of love on the lovely Mahisa as your husband, and you will get all the 
pleasures of the three worlds as you desire. O Sweet speaking! In 
short, if you select him as your husband, you will be the mistress of 
those incomparable worldly happinesses that women always aspire. 


7-13. Hearing thus the words of Vaskala and Durmukha, the Devi 
said “O Stupid! Do you think Me as deluded by passion? Do I not 
possess strength and intelligence that I will worship that hypocrite 
Mahisa as husband? See! The ladies of a high family select those 
persons that are equal in rank as far as family and distinctions, 
qualifications and propriety of conduct are concerned or those who 
are superior in beauty, cleverness, intelligence and other 
qualifications. Then how can a Devi, becoming passionate, worship 
the worst of all beasts, the beast Mahisa? O two Asuras! Go you 
immediately to your King Mahisa resembling in his body like an 
elephant and having a pair of horns and tell him. Go either to Patala 
(the nether regions) or come and fight with Me; the Lord of the 
Devas will no doubt be happy if the war ensues. O Stupid! My 
advent here cannot go in vain; I will easily slay you and then depart; 
knowing this do as you like. O Beast! Without conquering Me, you 



would get no shelter either in the heavens, or in this earth, or in the 
caves of mountains?” 


14-25. Vyasa said Hearing thus, the two powerful Daityas, with 
eyes reddened with anger, firmly resolved to fight and took bows and 
arrows in their hands. O Descent of Kuru! The Devi then made a 
terrible noise and fearlessly stood there. The two Danavas then 
began to shoot dreadful arrows at Her. For the victory of the Devas, 
the Devi also begin to hurl arrows after arrows on the two Danavas, 
emitting a sweet sound. Vaskala first came forward with no delay; 
and Durmukha stood aloof there simply as a witness. The terrible 
fight then ensued between the Devi and Vaskala; arrows, swords 
and weapons were seen shining in the air and raised terror to those 
that were dull in intellect. Then the Mother of the Universe seeing 
Vaskala growing turbulent shot at him five arrows sharpened on 
stone. The Danava, too, cut off the arrows of the Devi and hurled 
seven arrows at Her, seated on a lion. The Devi cut off the Danava’s 
arrows and shot at that hypocrite, sharpened arrows and began to 
laugh frequently. She again cut off his arrows with Ardhachandra 
arrow; Vaskala then pursued the Devi with a club in his hands to slay 
Her. Seeing the arrogant Danava with club in his hands, Chandika 
Devi struck him down on the ground with Her own club. The very 
powerful Vaskala fell down on the ground but rose up within a very 
short time and hurled again on the Devi his club. Seeing him again 
attacking Her, the Devi got angry and pierced him with Her trident; 
Vaskala fell down, thus pierced, and died. 


26-38. Vaskala falling thus dead on the field, the soldiers of the 
wicked demon routed; whereas the Devas became glad and 
repeatedly shouted aloud, “Victory to the Devi.” On this Daitya being 
slain, Durmukha came forward on the battle-field, filled with anger 
and accompanied by a stronger army. Mounted on a chariot, 
shielded all over his body with a coat of armour, Durmukha came 



before the Devi, shouting all along, “Wait, wait, O You weak woman!” 
and with bows and arrows in his hands. The Devi blew Her 
conchshell and made sounds by stretching Her bow in order to make 
the Danava infuriated with anger. The Asura then began to shoot 
sharp arrows after arrows like poisonous snakes. The Mahamaya, by 
Her own arrows, cut off those of Her enemy and began to shout 
loudly. The fight then raged furiously, when both parties began to use 
arrows, S’aktis, clubs, Musalas, and Tomaras. Blood began to flow in 
the battle-field in torrents like rivers and on the banks of that river of 
blood, were seen the severed heads of the dead bodies which 
looked like so many hollow shells of gourds, as if kept there by the 
attendant of the god of Death, for their swimming purposes. The 
battle-field, then, became very dreadful and impassable; at some 
places dead bodies are lying; wolves are feeding on their flesh; at 
other places are seen jackals, dogs, herons, crows, vultures, eagles, 
and other voracious birds and beasts and iron-tipped arrows, eating 
the dead bodies of those wicked demons. Air began to emit an 
offensive smell, because of its contact with these corpses; and there 
were heard the heart-rending sounds of various carnivorous birds 
and animals. Then the wicked Durmukha began, as if inspired by the 
god of Death, to address the Devi angrily and arrogantly with his 
right hand raised up before Her. “Your brain has become perverted; 
fly away just now or I will send you unto death, or you better accept 
the proud Mahisa, the lord of the Daityas, as your husband.” 


39-50. The Devi said :-- “O Villain! I see your death at hand this very 
day; therefore you are deluded and therefore raving like a mad man. 
I will kill you today like Vaskala. O Stupid! Better fly away; or if you 
prefer death, then wait; I will slay you first; then the dull Mahisa, the 
son of a she-buffalo.” Hearing thus, Durmukha, as if prompted by 
Death, hurled dreadful arrows on the Devi. Instantly the Devi, too, 
cut off all his arrows and, infuriated with anger, pierced the Danava 
by sharpened arrows as Indra had pierced Vritrasura before. The 
fight then turned out very dreadful. O King! Weak persons become 



very afraid and strong ones become very excited. Instantly the Devi 
cut off the Asura’s bow and broke his chariot by five arrows. On 
seeing his chariot broken, the powerful Durmukha attacked on foot 
the Devi with his club, very hard to overcome. He knocked at the 
head of the lion with that club with great force; but the powerful lion 
did not become unsteady, though so very hard hit. Seeing the demon 
thus standing before Her, the goddess Ambika cut down his head by 
her sharpened axe. On his head being thus severed, Durmukha fell 
down dead on the field. The band of Immortals, then, loudly shouted, 
“Victory to the Devi.” When Durmukha was slain, the Immortals from 
the celestial space began to chant praises and hymns to the Devi, 
showered down flowers on Her head and gave shouts of “Victory to 
the Devi.” The Risis, Siddhas, Gandarbhas, Vidyadharas, and 
Kinnaras all became very glad to see the Demon dead on the field. 


Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of 
Vaskala and Durmukha in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the 
Mahapuranam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 14. On The Killing Of Tamra And 
Chiksura 


1-4. Vyasa said Hearing the death news of Durmukha, 
Mahisasura became blind with anger and began to utter repeatedly 
to the Danavas, “O! What is this? What is this? Alas! That delicate 
woman has slain in battle the two heroes Durmukha and Vaskala! 
Lo! Now look at the wonderful workings of the Daiva (Fate). It is the 
acts virtuous, or otherwise that make men dependent; and the 
powerful Time awards pleasure or pain accordingly. The two 
powerful Demons are killed; what are we to do hereafter? You all 
judge and say what is reasonable at this critical juncture.” 


5-23. Vyasa said When the powerful Mahisa said thus, his general 
Chiksura, the great warrior spoke as follows “O King! Why are you 
so anxious as to take away the life of a delicate woman? I will kill 
Her;” thus saying he departed for battle, mounted on his chariot and 
accompanied by his own army. The powerful Tamra accompanied 
him as his attendant; the sky and all the quarters became filled with 
the clamour of their vast army. The auspicious Devi Bhagavati saw 
them before Her and She made an extraordinary wonderful sound 
with Her conchshell, with Her bow string and with Her great bell. The 
Asuras heard that and trembled and fled, speaking amongst each 
other, “What is this?” The Chiksuraksa seeing them turning their 
backs, told them very angrily, “O Danavas! What fear has now 
overcome you? I will slay today this vain woman in the battle with 
arrows; so you should quit your fear and remain steady in battle.” 
Thus saying, the Danava Chieftain Chiksura came fearlessly before 
the Devi with bows and arrows in his hands and, accompanied by 
his army, angrily spoke thus “O Thou of large and broad eyes! 
Why are you roaring to terrify the weak persons! O the Soft limbed 
One! I have heard all about your deeds but I am not a bit afraid of 
You. O One of beautiful eyes! It is a matter of disgrace, rather sin, to 



kill a woman; knowing this my heart wants to pass over this act 
(does not like to do it, if my purpose be served without it). 


O Beautiful One! The women fight with their side glances and 
amorous gestures; but I have never heard a woman like you coming 
to fight with arms and weapons. Even the delicate flowers, Malati, 
etc., cause pain on the bodies of beautiful women like you; so it is 
not advisable to fight against you with flowers even; what to speak of 
sharpened arrows! Fie on those who spend their lives according to 
the Ksatriya Dharma! Oh! Who can praise that Dharma which allows 
this dear body of ours to be pierced by sharpened arrows? This dear 
body is nourished by sweet food, by being smeared with oil, and by 
smelling the scents of beautiful flowers. Ought, then, one to destroy 
it by arrows from an enemy? Men get their bodies pierced by arrows 
and then become rich. Now is it possible for the riches to give 
pleasure afterwards when they caused such pains in the beginning? 
Even if this be so, fie on those riches! O Beautiful One! It seems you 
are not intelligent; why have you desired to fight instead of to enjoy 
sexual pleasures. O beautiful! What merits have you found in the 
battle that you have chosen this. Where you see the action of the 
axes and spears, striking each other with clubs, and hurling of 
sharpened arrows and weapons and where, when death comes, 
jackals come and feed upon the dead bodies, what merits have you 
been able to trace out in these things! It is only those cunning poets 
that praise these; they say that those who die in battle go to heaven! 
O Beautiful! Those sayings are, no doubt, mere flatteries. Therefore, 
O Excellent One! Go away anywhere else you like; or accept this 
king Mahisa, the tormentor of the Devas, as your husband.” 


24-30. Vyasa said O King! The Danava Chiksura speaking thus, 
the Divine Mother addressed him thus O Stupid! Why are you 
speaking false words, having no significance, like a literary man 
giving out mere words only? You do not know anything of politics. 



ethics, metaphysics; you serve the illiterate and stupid; therefore, 
you are also a first class illiterate; you do not know what are the royal 
duties; then what are you speaking before me? I will kill that 
Mahisasura in battle make the soil muddy with his blood, thus 
establish firmly My pillar of Fame and then go happily to My abode. 
Surely will I slay that vain vicious demon, the tormentor of the Devas. 
Better fight steadily. O Stupid! Better go to Patala with all the 
Danavas, if you and Mahisa desire to live any longer. And if you like 
to go unto death, then be ready and fight without any delay; I will 
slay you all; this is My firm resolve. 


31-39. Vyasa said O King! Hearing the Devi’s words, the Danava, 
proud of his own strength, began to hurl instantly on Her showers of 
arrows, as if another shower of rain burst upon Her. The Devi cut off 
those arrows into pieces by Her sharp arrows and shot at him 
dreadful arrows like poisonous snakes. Then their fight became 
astounding to the public; the Divine Mother, then, struck him with Her 
club so much that he fell down from his chariot. That vicious demon, 
thus struck by the club, remained senseless near to his chariot for 
two muhurtas, fixed like a mountain. Tamra, the tormentor of the 
foes, seeing him thus, could not remain steady and came forward to 
fight with Chandika. The Devi seeing him laughed and said, “O 
Danava! Come, Come, I will instantly send you unto death. Or, what 
is the use of your coming? You are so weak that you can be called 
lifeless. What is that stupid Mahisa doing now? Is he thinking out the 
way to save his life? You all are too weak; no use in killing you, all 
my labours will go in vain, if that wicked Mahisa, the enemy of the 
gods, be not slain. Therefore, do you go to your home and send here 
your king Mahisa. I am staying here in that form in which that wicked 
one likes very much to see Me.” 


40-56. Hearing Her words, Tamra became very angry and drawing 
his bow up to his ear, began to hurl arrows after arrows on Chandika 



Devi. The Bhagavati, too, had her eyes reddened with anger and 
drawing Her bow began to shoot arrows quickly at the demon, 
wishing to kill, as early as possible, the enemy of the gods. In the 
meanwhile, Chiksura regained his senses, and taking up again his 
bow in an instant, came before the Devi. Then Chiksura and Tamra, 
the two valiant warriors, began to fight dreadfully with the Devi. 

Maha Maya then, became very angry and began to hurl arrows after 
arrows so incessantly that all the armours of all the Danavas became 
pierced and were cut down to pieces. The Asuras, thus pierced by 
arrows, became infuriated with anger and hurled angrily a network of 
arrows upon the Devi. The Danavas, thus struck with sharp arrows 
and filled with cuts and wounds looked like the red Kims’uka flowers 
in the spring. The fight then grew so severe between Tamra and 
Bhagavati that the seers, the Devas, were all struck with wonder. 
Tamra struck on the head of the lion with his dreadful hard Musala 
(club), made of iron, and laughed and shouted aloud. Seeing him 
thus vociferating, the Devi became angry and cut off his head by her 
sharp axes in no time. The head being thus severed from the body, 
Tamra, though headless, for a moment turned round his Musala and 
then fell down on the ground. The powerful Chiksura, seeing Tamra 
thus falling down, instantly took up his axe and ran after Chandika. 
Seeing Chiksura with axe in his hand, the Bhagavati quickly shot at 
him five arrows. With one arrow, his axe was cut down, with the 
second arrow his hands were cut and with the remaining ones his 
head was severed from his body. Thus when the two cruel warriors 
were slain, their soldiers soon fled away in terror in all directions. 

The Devas were exceedingly glad at their downfall and showered 
gladly flowers from the sky and uttered shouts of Victory to the Devi. 
The Risis, Gandarbhas, the Vetalas, the Siddhas and Charanas 
were all very glad and began to utter repeated, “O Goddess! Victory, 
victory be Yours.” 


Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on the killing 
of Tamra and Chiksura in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha 



Puranam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 15. On The Slaying Of Vidalaksa And 
Asiloma 


1-3. Vyasa said O King! Hearing the two Demons slain by the 
Devi, Mahisasura became very much amazed and sent the powerful 
Asiloma and Vidalaksa and the other Danavas to the battle to kill the 
Devi. The Danavas, all very skilled in the art of warfare, marched on 
for battle, fully equipped with weapons and clad in armour, and we 
attended by a vast army. They arrived there and saw the Divine 
Mother with eighteen hands taking Her stand on a lion, with axes 
and shield in Her hands. 


4-5. The calm-tempered Asiloma appeared before the Devi ready to 
kill the Daityas, saluted Her and smilingly said O Devi! Why have 
You come here? and what for You are killing these faultless Daityas? 
O Beautiful One! Tell all these to me truly. We will make treaty with 
you. 


6-17. Take gold, jewels, pearls and any other excellent things the 
you like and retire from the field as early as passible. Why do you 
like this warfare tending to increase misery; the wise persons say 
that it leads to the destruction of all happiness. Your body is very 
delicate; it cannot bear the stroke of flowers even; then why are you 
suffering the stroke of weapons on your bodies; I am very much 
puzzled to think these things. See! The cleverness is judged when 
peace is the result thereof; for it leads always to happiness. Then 
why are you liking to fight which will lead only to pain and suffering. 
Happiness is only to be had and pain is to be avoided; this is the 
rule. O Devi! That happiness is again of two kinds Permanent and 
transitory. The pleasure that comes out of the knowledge of 
Atmajhan is permanent and that which is derived from enjoyments is 



transitory; these who know truly the Veda S’astra, they avoid this 
transitory pleasure of enjoyments. If you follow the opinion of the 
Mimamsakas and do not believe in the existence of future births, 
even then you ought not to fight; when you have got this youthful 
age, you ought to enjoy the excellent pleasures in this world. O One 
of lean stomach! And if you doubt in the existence of the other 
worlds after death, even then you ought to desert from fighting and 
perform, in this life, such actions as will lead you to the attainment of 
Heavens. This fully developed womanhood is transient; knowing this 
do virtuous actions always; the wise ones always avoid tormenting 
others; thus one ought to perform things not contradictory to 
Dharma, Artha and Kama. Therefore, O Auspicious One! Do You 
also things virtuous always. O Mother! Why are you killing these 
Daityas without any cause? There is, again, the feeling of mercy; the 
lives again of all are dependent on Truth. Therefore the sages 
always preserve piety, mercy and Truth. O Beautiful One! Then what 
is the use in Your killing these Demons? Please say explicitly on this 
point. 


18-27. The Devi said O Powerful one! Hear why I have come here 
and why I am killing the Daityas? I answer your question on the 
above points. O Demon! I, though merely a spectator, always go 
about all over the worlds, seeing the justices and injustices done by 
the several souls there. Never I possess any desire of enjoyment, 
nor have I greed for anything, nor have I enmity with any creature. 
Only to preserve the virtue and religion and to keep up the righteous, 
I roam over the worlds. This is My vow and I always adhere to it. To 
preserve the good and to put down the evil doers is My duty. Many 
Avataras are to take their incarnations, cycles after cycles, to 
preserve the Vedas; therefore I incarnate Myself in yugas after 
yugas. Now the wicked Mahisa is ready to destroy the Devas; seeing 
this, I have come here to kill him. I tell you verily that I will slay that 
vicious powerful Mahisasura, the enemy of the gods. Knowing this, 
you remain or depart, as you desire. Or you can go to Mahisa, that 



impious son of a she-buffalo, and say what is the use in sending 
other Asuras to the battle; he can come himself and fight. If your king 
likes to make a treaty, then let him avoid his enmity with the Devas 
and go down to the Patala. Let him return to the Devas whatever he 
has taken perforce from them and go to the Patala, where Prahlada 
is residing. 


28-29. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the Devi’s words, Asiloma 
asked gladly, before the Devi, the powerful Asura Vidalaksa Well, 
Vidalaksa! You have heard just now all what the Devi has said; now 
are we to observe treaty or declare war. What are we to do under the 
circumstances? 


30-34. Vidalaksa said Our king knows full well that his death will 
certainly take place in the battle; knowing this, he is not willing to 
make peace, out of his egoism and vanity. He is seeing before him 
daily the deaths of the Danavas and still he has sent us to battle. 
Who can overcome the destiny? The duty of a servant is a very 
difficult one; he will have to be always submissive and obedient, 
without caring the least for his own self-respect; just as the dancing 
dolls are completely under the hands of the actors and their 
movements vary according to the pulling of the wires employed in 
making them dance. How can we then go to our master and say 
such hard words as he would give away to the Devas all the gems 
and jewels and go down to Patala with other Danavas. One 
considers it one’s duty to speak pleasant words though untrue; true 
words cannot be beneficial; true and at the same time beneficial 
words are very rare in this world; at such critical cases, one ought to 
remain silent. Especially heroes ought never to excite their kings by 
useless words; this is the essence of politics. We should never go 
and advise our king with eagerness what is best or to ask advice 
from him about such things; the king would then certainly be very 
angry. Therefore we ought to do our duties to the king, even if our 



lives be at stake. To consider our lives as nothing and to fight for our 
king are what is best for us. 


35-57. Vyasa said O King! Thus thinking, the two heroes then 
wore their coats of armour, mounted on their chariots and, with bows 
and arrows in their hands, became ready for fight. First Vidalaksa 
shot seven arrows; the great warrior Asiloma stood aloof at a 
distance as a mere witness. The Divine Mother cut off those arrows 
to pieces with Her arrows, no sooner they reached Her, and then 
shot at Vidalaksa three arrows sharpened on stone. 

The demon Vidalaksa fell senseiss by these arrows on the battle¬ 
field and after a short while died, as if ordained by Fate. Seeing 
Vidalaksa thus dead, Asiloma took up his bows and arrows and 
came up, for fight. The hero, then, raising his left hand, said briefly, 
thus “O Devi! I know that death is inevitable to the Danavas; still I 
am ready to fight; for I am dependent and Mahisa is of very dull 
intellect; he cannot make any distinction between what is really good 
and what is merely pleasant. I will never speak before him 
unpleasant words, though beneficial. Rather I will sacrifice my life in 
the battle-field than advise him anything, be that auspicious or 
inauspicious. The Danavas are being killed no sooner they are shot 
at by your arrows; seeing this I consider Fate superior to all. 

Prowess does not lead to any success; Fie on one’s prowess! Thus 
saying, the Demon began to shower arrows after arrows on the Devi; 
the Devi, too, cut them to pieces with Her own arrows before they 
came to Her; and, becoming angry, soon pierced him with arrows. 
The Devas witnessed this sight from above. The body of the Demon 
was then covered with cuts and wounds; blood began to flow from 
them; the Demon consequently began to shine like the jovial 
Kimsuka tree. Asiloma then lifted aloft his heavy iron club and ran 
after Chandika and hurt the lion on his head with anger. Not caring at 
all this severe stroke of the club inflicted by that powerful Demon, the 
lion tore asunder his arms with his claws. Then that dreadful Demon 



leapt with club in his hand and got up the shoulder of the lion and hit 
the Devi very hard. O King! 

The Devi, then, baffled the hit and cut off the Demon’s head with Her 
sharp axe. The head being thus severed, the Demon was thrown on 
the ground with great force; seeing this, a general cry of distress 
arose among his soldiers. The Devas shouted aloud “Victory to the 
Devi” and chanted hymns to Her. The drums of the Devas 
resounded and the Gandarbhas began to dance in great joy. Seeing 
the two Demons thus lying dead on the battlefield, the lion killed 
some of the remaining forces by his sheer strength and ate up 
others, and made the battlefield void of any persons. Some fled 
away in great distress to Mahisasura. The fugitives began to cry 
aloud, “Save us, save us” and said, “O King! Asiloma and Vidalaksa 
are both slain; and those soldiers that remained were eaten up by 
the lion.” Thus they told and plunged the King in an ocean of dire 
distress. Hearing their words, Mahisa became absent minded 
through pain and grief and began to think over the matter with great 
anxiety. 


Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the slaying of 
Vidalaksa and Asiloma in S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha 
Puranam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 16. On The Conversation Between The 
Dev! And Mahisasura 


1-7. Vyasa said O King! Hearing those words, the King Mahisa in 
anger addressed the charioteer Daruka “Bring over my chariot 
quickly. That chariot is drawn by one thousand excellent horses, is 
bedecked with banners, flags, and ensigns, is furnished with various 
arms and weapons, and is endowed with good wheels of a white 
colour, and beautiful poles in which the yoke is fixed.” The charioteer 
brought the chariot instantly and duly informed the king, “O King! I 
have got the chariot ready at your door, your beautiful chariot, 
bedecked with beautiful carpets and various arms and weapons.” 
Hearing that the chariot had been brought, Mahisa thought, the Devi 
might not care him, seeing him ugly faced with a pair of horns and 
therefore decided to assume a human shape and then go to the 
battle. The beauty and cleverness are the delights of women; 
therefore I will go before Her, with a beautiful body and with all the 
cleverness and dexterities. For I will never be delighted with anything 
but that woman looking at me with fondness and becoming 
passionately attached to me. 


8-33. Thus thinking, the powerful King of the Demons quitted the 
buffalo appearance and assumed a beautiful human shape. He put 
on beautiful ornaments, armplates, etc., and wore divine cloths and 
had garlands on his neck and thus shone like a second Kandarpa, 
the god of Love. Taking, then, all the arrows and weapons, he 
mounted on the chariot, and attended by his army, went to the Devi, 
elated with power and vanity. The Devi blew Her conchshell when 
She saw Mahisasura, the lord of the Danavas, come before Her with 
a handsome appearance, tending to captivate the minds of 
mistresses and surrounded by many powerful and valiant warriors. 
The King of the Demons heard the blow of the conchshell, wondrous 
to all, came up before the Devi and smilingly spoke to Her thus O 



Devi! Whatever person there exists in this world, this wheel of 
Samsara (the eternal round of births and deaths), be he or she a 
man or a woman, everyone always hankers after pleasure or 
happiness. And that pleasure is derived in this world by the 
combination of persons with each other; never is it seen where this 
combination is absent. Again this combination is of various kinds; I 
will mention them; Hear. Union is of various kinds according as it 
arises out of affection or out of natural consequences. Of these, I will 
now speak of unions coming out of affection, as far as my 
understanding goes. The union that comes between father, mother 
and their sons arises out of affection; it is therefore good. The union 
between brother and brother is middling, for mutual interests of give 
and take are there between the two. In fact, that union is considered 
as excellent which leads to happiness of the best sort and that union 
which leads to lesser happiness is known as mediocre. The union 
amongst the sailors, coming from distant lands, is known as natural. 
They come on various errands concerning their varied interests. This 
combination, because it offers the least amount of happiness, is 
considered as worst. The best union leads in this world to best 
happiness. O Beloved! The constant union of men and women of the 
same age is considered as par excellence; for it gives happiness of 
the very best sort. Both the parties, men and women, are elevated 
when they want to excel each other in their family connections, 
qualities, beauty; cleverness, dress, humility and propriety of 
conduct. Therefore, O Dear! If you establish with me that conjugal 
relation, you will get, no doubt, all the excellent happiness. Specially 
I will assume different forms at my mere will. All the Divine jewels 
and precious things that I have acquired after defeating Indra and 
the other Devas in battle, and others are lying in my palace; you can 
enjoy all of them as my queen consort or you can make a charity of 
them as you like. O Beautiful One! I am your servant; consequently, 
at your word, I will no doubt quit my enmity with the Devas. In short, I 
will do anything that leads to your pleasure and happiness. O Sweet 
speaking One! O Large-eyed One! My heart is enchanted very much 
with your beauty; I will do, therefore, as you order me. O One having 
a broad hip! I am very much distressed; I now take refuge unto You. 



O One having beautiful thighs! I am very much struck with the arrows 
of Cupid, and I am very much discomforted; therefore, save me. To 
protect one who has come under one’s refuge is the best of all 
virtues. O One of a somewhat whitish body! O One having a slender 
waist! I will spend the remaining portion of my life in serving you as 
your obedient servant. Never will I act contrary to your orders to the 
risk even of my life. Take this as literally true and do accordingly. I 
now throw aside all my weapons before Your feet; O Large eyed! I 
am very much distressed by the arrows of Cupid; dost Thou 
therefore show Thy mercy on me. O Beautiful One! Never I showed 
my weakness to Brahma and the other Devas; but today I 
acknowledge that before You. I have defeated Brahma and others; 
they are fully acquainted with my prowess in the battlefield. But, O 
Honoured Woman! Though I am so powerful, I now acknowledge 
myself as your servant. Better look at me and grant your mercy. 


34. Vyasa said O King! Mahisa, the lord of the Daityas, having 
said so, that beautiful Bhagavati laughed loudly and spoke smiling 


35-45. The Devi said I do not desire any other body than the 
Supreme One! O Demon! I am His Will-power; I therefore create all 
these worlds. I am His S’iva (auspicious) Prakriti (Nature); That 
Universal Soul is seeing Me. It is owing to His proximity that I am 
appearing as the Eternal Consciousness, manifesting Itself as this 
Cosmos. As irons move owing to the proximity of magnets, I, too, 
though inert, owing to His proximity, work consciously. I do not desire 
to enjoy the ordinary pleasures; you are very dull and stupid; there is 
no doubt in this, when you desire sexual union. For women are 
considered as chains to hold men in bondage. Men bound up by iron 
chains can obtain freedom at any time, but when they are fastened 
by women, they can never obtain freedom. O Stupid! You now want 
to serve the source of urine, etc. Take refuge under Peace; peace 
will lead you to happiness. Great pain arises from connection with 



women; you know this; then why are you deluded? Better avoid your 
enmity with the Devas and roam over the world anywhere you like. 
Or, if you desire to live, go to Patala; or fight with Me. Know this for 
certain that I am stronger than you. O Danava! The Devas collected 
have sent Me here; I tell you this very truly; I am satisfied with you by 
your words of friendship; therefore dost thou fly away while you are 
living. See! When words are uttered seven times amongst each 
other, friendship is established between saints. That has been done 
so amongst us; so there is friendship now between you and me; I 
won’t take away your life. O hero! If you desire to die, fight gladly; O 
powerful one! I will, no doubt, kill you. 


46-65. Vyasa said O King! Hearing the Bhagavati’s words, the 
Danava, deluded by passion, began to speak in beautiful sweet 
words O Beautiful One! Your body and the several parts thereof 
are very delicate and beautiful. A mere sight of such a lady makes 
one enchanted. Therefore, O Beautiful faced one! I fear very much to 
strike against your body. O Lotus-eyed One! I have subjugated Hah, 
Hara, the Lokapalas and the several other Devatas; I therefore ask 
whether it is proper for me to fight with you! O Fair one! If you like, 
you marry and worship me, or you can return to your desired place 
whence you have come. You have declared friendship with me; I 
therefore do not like to strike any weapons on you. I have now 
spoken for your good and welfare. You can gladly go away. O 
beautiful one! You are a fair woman with beautiful eyes; what fame 
shall I earn by killing you! O One of slender waist! Murdering a 
woman, a child, and a Brahmin certainly makes the murderer liable 
to suffer the consequences thereof. I will certainly carry you today to 
my place without killing you. If I use force to you, I will not get 
happiness; for, in such cases, the application of force leads to no 
happiness. O One having good hairs! I salute before you and speak 
that a man cannot be happy without the lotus face of a woman; 
similarly a woman cannot be happy without a man’s lotus face. 
Where comes off the good combination between these two, then the 



highest pitch of happiness is conceived and pain arises on the 
disjunction thereof. True that you are well decked with ornaments all 
over your body but you seem wanting in cleverness; for you are not 
worshipping me. Who has advised you to renounce enjoyments? O 
Sweet speaking One! If this be true; then surely he is your enemy; 
he has deceived you. O Dear! Leave your this stubbornness and 
marry me; both of us shall then be happy. Visnu shines well with 
Kamala, Brahma looks splendid with Savitri, Rudra is well 
associated with Parvati and Indra with S’achi, so I will shine well with 
you; there is no doubt in this. No woman can ever be happy without 
any good husband. And why are you not then, acknowledging me 
your husband even when you have got him. O Beloved! Where is 
now that Cupid of dull intellect? Why is he not troubling you with his 
maddening delicate five arrows? O Fair one! I think that Madana (the 
god of Love) out of his pity to you, seeing that you are very weak is 
not striking his arrows on you as he has done to me. O One looking 
askance! Or it may be that I have got some enmity with that Cupid; 
else why is he not shooting arrows at you? Or my enemies the 
Devas have advised the God of Love not to dart his arrows on you. 

O One of slender body! As Mandodari had to marry afterwards, 
when she became passionate, a hypocrite, and so she had to repent 
thinking that she had not married before a beautiful auspicious king, 
so I think, O One, having eyes like the young of a deer! You, too, will 
have to repent like her if you decline to marry me now. 


Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the 
conversation between the Devi and Mahisasura in S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Mahapuranam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 17. On MANDODARi’s Accounts 


1-2. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus, the Devi asked the Danava, 
“Who is that Mandodari? Who is that king who was not first taken by 
her? And who is that king whom she married afterwards? And how 
did she repent afterwards? Describe all these in detail to me.” 


3-26. Thus asked by the Devi, Mahisa began to say “O Devi! 
There is a place, named Simhala, noted in this earth and decorated 
with various trees and prosperous with wealth and grains. A virtuous 
king, named Chandrasena, used to reign there; he was calm, 
peaceful, truthful, heroic, charitable, steady, forbearing, well versed 
in polities, ethics and morals vast as a wide ocean, learned in 
S’astras, knowing all forms of religions and much skilled in archery. 
He was mindful in governing his subjects and he used to punish 
according to the laws of Justice. The king had a beautiful well- 
qualified wife, very handsome and broad-hipped. She was very 
much devoted to her husband and always engaged in religious acts 
and of good conduct. This wife, endowed with all auspicious signs, 
gave birth to a beautiful daughter in her first delivery. The King 
Chandrasena, the father, was very pleased to have this beautiful 
daughter and gladly called her by the name of Mandodari. This 
daughter began to grow daily like the phases of the Moon. When she 
grew ten years old, she became very handsome. The King now 
became anxious to have a suitable bridegroom and used to think of it 
everyday. The Brahmins then told the king that there was a prince 
named Kambugriva, the intelligent son of the powerful king 
Sudhanva of Madra; this prince was endowed, with all kingly 
qualifications and versed in all knowledge and was therefore a fit 
match for your daughter. The king then asked his dear qualified wife 
that he would like to marry his daughter to Kambugriva. The queen, 
hearing this, asked her daughter Mandodari that her father was 
desiring to marry her to Kambugriva, the son of the king of Madra. 



Hearing her mother’s words, Mandodari spoke thus “O Mother! I 
have got no desire to marry; I will not accept any husband; I will take 
the vow of leading a chaste virgin life and thus pass the rest of my 
life. O Mother! There is nothing more miserable in this ocean of 
world than dependence; I therefore prefer to lead incessantly a life of 
severe asceticism. The Pundits versed in the S’astras say that taking 
up the vow of separateness and independence leads to salvation; I 
will thus be liberated; I have no need for a husband. At the time of 
marriage ceremony, one has to say before the consecrated Fire that 
one will remain always a dependent to one’s husband in every way; 
besides in a father-in-law’s house, one has to pass one’s time as a 
slave, as it were, to one’s mother-in-law and to husband’s (younger) 
brothers; again one will have to think oneself as happy when one’s 
husband is happy and as unhappy when one’s husband is unhappy; 
this is the worst of all miseries. Again if the husband marries again 
another woman, then this misery of having a co-wife is extreme. O 
Mother! Jealousy arises then towards even one’s own husband and 
therefore suffering is endless. Therefore what happiness can there 
be in this dream-like worlds; especially with women who are made 
dependent by Nature? O Mother! I heard that in days of yore the 
religious son of Uttanapada, Uttama was younger than Dhruva; and 
yet he became King. And the King Uttanapada banished his dear 
wife, solely devoted to her husband, without any cause, to the forest. 
Therefore women have to suffer such diverse pains while their 
husbands are living; and if by chance the husband dies, then women 
get interminable pains; the widowhood becomes the only source of 
grief and sorrow. Again if the husband be in foreign lands, women 
become subjected to the fire of Cupid, and then the house becomes 
an object of more agony. Thus whether the husband lives or dies, 
there is no happiness at any time. Thus, according to my opinion, I 
ought never to accept any husband.” 


27-31. The Mother then told her husband all about what the daughter 
had said. Mandodari would accept the vow of a life-long virgin; she 



had no desire to marry. She had brought forward many faults in a 
worldly life and thus would perform vows and Japams and pass her 
time alone. 


She did not yearn after a husband. The King, hearing thus, came to 
know, that his daughter had no intention to marry and so began to 
pass his time without giving away his daughter in marriage. Thus the 
daughter lived in family protected by her father and mother; by that 
time signs of puberty were seen in the body of the daughter. Her 
comrades requested her repeatedly to select a bridegroom; but she 
spoke many words of wisdom and did not show any inclination for 
marriage. 


32-44. Once, on an occasion, that beautiful faced woman went out 
with her female attendants on a pleasure trip to a garden, beautified 
with various trees. There the slender bodied one began to play and 
enjoy with her comrades in picking up various flowers and beautiful 
flowering creepers. Just at that time, the famous King of Kosala, the 
powerful Virasena came there accidentally. Alone he was on his 
chariot, attended by a few soldiers; his large army and retinue were 
coming slowly behind him at some distance. Her comrades, then, 
looking at that King from a distance, told Mandodari, “O friend! Seel 
Somebody, strong and beautiful, like a second God of Love is 
coming towards us, mounted on a chariot. I think some King he will 
be and we are very lucky that he has come here.” While thus talking, 
the King arrived there. The King, looking on that blue coloured 
woman with beautiful eyes became surprised and getting down from 
the chariot, asked the maidservant, “O Gentle one! Who is this 
woman with large eyes! Who is her father? Tell me this without any 
delay.” The attendant smiling, told him thus O Beautiful-eyed One! 
Pray speak first who are you? What for have you come here? What 
do you want to do here? The female attendant thus asking him, the 
King replied There is a very beautiful country named Kosala, in 



this earth; I am the King of that place; my name is Virasena. My 
fourfold army is coming at my will at my back. I have lost my way 
and have come here. Know me as the King of the country Kosala. 


45-49. The female attendant said “O King! This lotus-eyed one is 
the daughter of the King Chandrasena; her name is Mandodari. She 
has come here in this garden for sporting.” Hearing thus the 
attendant’s words, the King replied “O Sairandhri! You appear to 
be smart; therefore make the King’s daughter understand my 
following words clearly! O Sweet-eyed one! I am the King descended 
from the Kakutstha line; O fair woman! Marry me according to the 
rules of Gandarbha marriage.” 


Note :-- Gandharva marriage: one of the eight forms of marriage; this 
form of marriage proceeds entirely from love or the mutual inclination 
of a youth and maiden without ceremonies and without consulting 
relatives. 


“O broad hipped One! I have no other wife; you are a beautiful 
woman, of a good family and of a marriageable age; I therefore like 
to marry you? Or your father may marry you to me according to rules 
and ceremonies; if so, I will no doubt be your husband as you 
desire.” 


50-55. Mahisa said O Devi! The female attendant, expert in the 
science of love, hearing the King’s words, spoke to the daughter 
smilingly and in sweet words. “O Mandodari! A very good-looking 
beautiful King of the solar dynasty has come here; he is very pretty, 
powerful, and of your age; O Beautiful! The King is entirely devoted 
to you and loves you very much. O Large-eyed One! Your time of 
marriage has come and yet you have not married; rather you are 



against it. Your father is, therefore, always very sorry and remorseful. 
See! How many a time your father sighed and told us, ‘O attendants! 
Always serve my daughter and awaken her to this.’ But you are 
engaged in penances and austerities, in Hatha Dharma; therefore 
we cannot request you on this matter. The Munis have said To 
serve the husband is the highest virtue of a woman. O Large-eyed! 
Women get Heaven if they serve their husband; therefore you better 
marry according to rules and ceremonies.” 


56. Mandodari said I am not going to marry; better that I should 
perform an extraordinary tapasya (asceticism); O Girls! You go and 
ask the King desist in his request; why is he shamelessly looking at 
me. 


57-59. The female attendant then said, “O Devi! Passion is very hard 
to conquer; time is also surmountable with difficulty; so know my 
advice as the medicinal diet and keep my request. And if you do not 
keep it, surely danger will befall you.” Hearing this, Mandodari 
replied, “O attendant! I know whatever is ordained by Fate will 
inevitably come to pass; for the present, I am not going to marry at 
all.” 


60-61. Mahisa said The female attendant, knowing this her 
obstinate view, told the King “O King! This woman likes not a good 
husband; you would better go wherever you like.” The King heard 
and did not want to marry that woman any more; and, being sad and 
broken-hearted, went back with his army to Kosala. 


Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on 
Mandodari’s accounts in the Mahapuranam, S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 18. On The Killing Of The Danava 
Mahisasura 


1-4. Mahisa said O Devi! Mandodan had a sister Indumati; 
unmarried and endowed with all auspicious signs. She grew up in 
time to a marriageable age. The Svayambara assembly (a marriage 
in which the girl chooses her husband from among a number of 
visitors assembled together) was then called for the marriage of the 
maiden Indumati. The Kings from various parts came there and the 
maiden Indumati selected from among them a beautiful strong king, 
of noble lineage and endowed with all auspicious signs. At that time, 
by the undescribeable power of Destiny, Mandodari seeing the 
deceitful, cunning, and hypocrite King of Madra, became passionate 
and desired to marry him. 


5-17. That slender woman Mandodari then addressed her father 
thus “O Father! Seeing the King of Madra in this assembly, I am 
desirous to marry him; so perform also my marriage ceremony now.” 
When the king heard this request from her own daughter privately, 
he became very glad and began with promptness, to make 
preparations for the marriage. He invited the King of Madra to his 
own palace and gave him in marriage his own daughter Mandodari, 
according to due rites and ceremonies with an abundance of dowry 
and wealth. The King of Madra Charudesna became very glad to 
marry the beautiful Mandodari and went back with her to his own 
abode. The King Charudesna then enjoyed her for good many days; 
when one day a maid-servant found the king in sexual intercourse 
with another maid-servant in a lonely place and divulged this to 
Mandodari; she finding the king in that state became angry and 
rebuked him with a slight smiling countenance. Again, on another 
occasion, Mandodari saw the king willingly engaged in amusements 
and sports with an ordinary beautiful woman and became very sorry 
and thought thus When I saw him in the Svayamvara, I could not 



recognise him as a cheat; I am deceived by this King; Oh! What a 
wrong act have I done through delusion. This King is a rogue and he 
is totally shameless and has no dislike for contemptible things; it is 
now too late to repent for him. How can I have any affection for this 
husband; fie on my living now! I forsake from this very day all the 
pleasures with my husband and all other worldly pleasures, and I 
take recourse now to contentment alone. I have committed a very 
wrong act that I ought never to have done; therefore it causes 
intense pain to me now. If I now commit suicide, then that sin will 
never forsake me, and I must have to enjoy the consequences 
thereof. And if I return to my father’s house, I will not be happy there, 
for my companions seeing me thus will, no doubt, ridicule me. 
Therefore, it is now advisable for me to avoid all the sensuous 
pleasures, become dispassionate and remain here patiently and 
abide by the strange combinations of Time. 


18-20. Mahisa said Thus that women lamented and remorsed and 
began to remain there, very much sorrowful and distressed, 
renouncing thoroughly all the pleasures of the world. O Auspicious 
One! I am the king, yet you are showing your dislike for me; know, 
eventually, you, too, will be passionate and entertain afterwards an 
illiterate coward. Keep my word even now, it will be of great benefit 
and it will serve as a medicinal diet to you as to all women. In case 
you do not follow my advice, you will have to meet with extreme pain 
and misery, certainly. 


21-25. Hearing the words of Mahisasura, the Devi said O you fool! 
Go to the lower worlds or stand up for fight; I will send you and the 
other Danavas unto death and then go away at my pleasure. O 
Demon! I take up form to preserve the righteous, whenever they 
suffer pain in this earth. O Lord of the Daityas! Formless, birthless I 
am; yet, at times, I take up form and be born to save the Devas. 
Know this firmly. O wicked Mahisa! The Devas prayed to Me for your 



destruction. Therefore I will not rest until I kill you. I speak all these 
truly to you. Therefore fight or go to Patala, the abode of the Asuras; 
I speak truly to you again that I will destroy you wholly. 


26-51. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the Devi’s words, the 
Danava took up his bow and came to the battle, fully stretching the 
string of his bow up to his ears, and began to shoot sharpened 
arrows with great force at the Devi. The Devi, too, hurled with anger, 
arrows tipped with iron and cut off the Asura’s arrows to pieces. The 
fight between them rose to such a terrible pitch that it caused terror 
to both the Devas and the Danavas, trying hard to be victorious over 
each other. In the midst of the terrible encounter, the demon 
Durdhara came up to fight and made the Devi angry and shot 
arrows, all terribly poisonous and sharpened on stones, at Her. The 
Bhagavati, then, got very angry and hit him hard with sharp arrows. 
Durdhara, struck thus, fell down dead on the battlefield like a 
mountain top. The demon Trinetra, well skilled in the uses of arrows 
and weapons, seeing him killed, came up to fight and shot at the 
Great Goddess with seven arrows. Before these arrows came on 
Her, She cut them to pieces with Her sharp arrows and by Her trident 
killed Trinetra. Trinetra thus killed, Andhaka quickly came in the 
battlefield and struck violently on the head of the lion with his iron 
club. The lion killed that powerful Andhaka by striking the demon 
with his nails and, out of anger, began to eat his flesh. Mahisasura 
became greatly astonished at the death of these Asuras and began 
to shoot pointed arrows, sharpened on stone, at Her. The Devi 
Ambika cut his arrows into two before they came on Her and struck 
the Demon on his breast by Her club. That vile Mahisasura, the 
tormentor of the Devas, fell in a swoon under the stoke of the club 
but patiently bore it and, at the next moment, came again and struck 
the lion on his head by his club. The lion, too, by his nails rent that 
great Asura to pieces. Mahisasura, then, quitting the man-form took 
up the lion-form and by his claws cut the Devi’s lion and wounded 
him very much by his nails. On Mahisasura taking up this lion-form. 



the Devi became very angry and began to shoot arrows after arrows 
at him all very terrible, sharp and like poisonous snakes. Then the 
Asura quitting the lion form assumed the appearance of a male 
elephant, oozing out juice from his temples and began to hurl the 
mountain tops by his trunk. Seeing the mountain peaks thus hurled 
on Her, She cut them off to pieces by Her sharp arrows and began to 
laugh. The Devi’s lion on the other hand, sprang on the head of the 
elephant Mahisa and by his claws rent him to pieces. To kill the 
Devi’s lion, then, Mahisa quitted his elephant-form and assumed the 
appearance of a Sarabha, more powerful and terrible than lion. The 
Devi seeing that Sarabha became angry and struck on the head of 
that Sarabha with Her axe; the Sarabha, too, attacked the Devi. 

Their fight became horrible; Mahisasura, then, assumed the 
appearance of a buffalo and struck the Bhagavati by his horns. That 
horrible Asura, of hideous appearance, swinging his tail, began to 
attack the thin bodied Devi. That violent Asura caught hold of the 
mountain peaks by his tail and, whirling them round and round, 
hurled them on the Devi. That vicious soul, then, maddened with his 
strength, laughed incessantly and addressed thus “O Devi! Be 
steady in the battlefield. I will send you today unto death, and your 
youth and beauty too. You are an illiterate fellow as you have come 
maddened to fight with me. Really you are deluded in your 
pretensions that you are very strong; this idea of yours is absolutely 
false. I will kill you first and the hypocrite Devas after who want to 
vanquish me by standing up a woman in their front.” 


52-53. The Devi said “O Villain! Do not boast; keep yourself firm 
in the fight. Today I will kill you and make the Devas discard their 
fear. O Wretch! You are a Sinner; you torment the Devas and terrify 
the Munis. Let me have my drink of sweet decoction of grapes. And 
then I will slay you undoubtedly.” 



54-70. Vyasa said O King! Saying thus, the Devi, wrathful and 
eager to kill Mahisasura, took up the golden cup filled with wine and 
drank again and again. When the Devi finished Her drink of the 
sweet grape juice. She pursued him with trident in Her hands, to the 
great joy of gladdening all the Devas. The Devas began to rain 
showers of flowers on the Devi and praised Her and shouted 
victories to Her with Dundubhi (a Divine drum) Jai, Jiva; victory, live. 
The Risis, Siddhas, Gandarbhas, Pis’achas, Uragas, and Kinnaras 
witnessed the battle from the celestial space and became very much 
delighted. On the other hand, Mahisasura, the hypocrite Pundit, 
began to assume various magic forms and struck the Devi 
repeatedly. The Devi Chandika, then, infuriated and with eyes 
reddened, pierced violently the breast of that vicious Mahisa with Her 
sharp trident. The Demon, then, struck by this trident, fell senseless 
on the ground; but got up in the next moment and kicked the Devi 
forcibly. That Great Asura, thus kicking the Devi, laughed repeatedly 
and bellowed so loudly that the Devas were all terrified with that 
noise. Then the Devi held aloft the brilliant discus of good axle and 
of thousand spokes and loudly spoke to the Asura in frontO 
Stupid! Look! This Chakra will sever your throat today; wait a 
moment, I am sending you instantly unto death. Saying this, the 
Divine Mother hurled the Chakra. Instantly that weapon severed the 
Danava’s head from his body. The hot streams of blood gushed out 
from his neck as the violent streams of water get out from 
mountains, coloured red with red sandstones. The headless body of 
that Asura moved, to and fro, for a moment and then dropped on the 
ground. The loud acclamations of “Victory” were sounded to the 
great joy of the Devas. The very powerful lion began to devour the 
soldiers that were flying away, as if he was very hungry. O King! The 
wicked Mahisasura thus slain, the Demons that remained alive were 
terrified and fled away, very much frightened, to Patala. The Devas, 
Risis, human beings and the other saints on this earth were all 
extremely glad at the death of this wicked Demon. The Bhagavati 
Chandika quitted the battlefield and waited in a holy place. Then the 
Devas came there with a desire to praise and chant hymns to the 
Devi, the Bestower of their happiness. 



Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of 
the Danava Mahisasura in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha 
Puranam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 19. On The Prayer And Hymns To The 
Dev! 


1. Vyasa said O King! Then Indra and all the Devas became very 
glad to see the great Mahisasura slain; they all began to praise and 
chant hymns to the World-Mother. 


2-33. The Devas said It is by thy Power that Brahma becomes 
able to create this world, Visnu, to preserve, and MahesVara to 
destroy during the Pralaya time (the Great Dissolution) of this 
universe. But when they are bereft of Thy Power, they are quite 
unable to do such. Therefore, O Devi! Thou art undoubtedly the 
Prime Cause in the preservation and destruction of this whole 
Universe. O Devi; Thou art, in this world. Fame, idea and ideal, 
memory; Thou art the goal, mercy, compassion, faith, constancy, 
earth; Thou art Kamala, the Mantra Ajapa, respiration and 
perspiration, nourishment, Jaya, Vijaya (the destroyer of obstacles; a 
name of Durga); Thou art contentment, correct notion, measure, 
intellect, Rama (Laksmi), (wealth), knowledge, forgiveness, beauty, 
intelligence; Thou art the S’akti (power) of Rudra, Thou art Girija and 
the Energy of God Uma and all other forces in this universe; this is 
known to everyone in the three worlds. Without any or all of these 
forces, no one is able to perform any action. Thou art the Supreme 
Cause of all this world. Therefore everything rests on Thee. If Thou 
wert not the upholding Power, how could Kurma (in the Tortoise 
Incarnation) and Ananta have upheld this world? O Mother! Wert 
Thou not this Earth, could all these world-load of things have rested 
on the sky? O Mother! Those human beings that worship Brahma, 
Visnu, Rudra, Moon, Fire, Yama, the God of Death, Vayu, Ganes’a, 
and the other Devas, they are certainly deluded by Thy Maya. Could 
all those Devas do any action or any favour without Thy Energy? O 
Mother! Those that offer in any Sacrifice, a profuse quantity of ghee 
(clarified butter) as oblations to the several Devas, they are certainly 



conceived to be of very narrow views; Wert Thou not the Svaha, 
could it have been possible for those Devas to get the offered 
oblations at that very instant? Certainly, therefore, they are fools and 
ignorant persons. There is no doubt in this. O Mother! Thou givest 
the several objects of nourishment and enjoyment to all the beings in 
this universe by Thy parts (the several transformations of these 
material things); it is Thou that nourishest the Devas, Thy devotees, 
as well as the others (the Danavas, according to their Karma). O 
Mother! As the owner of any garden plants, with pleasure, the 
beautiful trees in his garden for his delight and, finding some of them 
not to bear any fruits or leaves or of a bitter taste, does not cut them 
off by their roots, so, O Devi! Thou hast brought into existence these 
Daityas out of their inferior Karmas and Thou art supporting them. 
Knowing that the Daityas like to enjoy the celestial nymphs. Thou 
hast, out of compassion, killed them by their arrows in the battlefield, 
to afford them facilities in their re-birth in Heavens and thus to enjoy 
the Deva women which they could not have got in any other possible 
way. Therefore this Thy dealings with them are to fulfil their 
intentions and not to kill them. O Mother! It is a great wonder that to 
kill these Asuras Thou hadst to assume this Divine Body; Thou 
couldst have done so by Thy mere will. It seems that this act of 
Thine is but a mere Pastime. There is no other cause for this. O 
Devi! Those human beings that do not worship Thee in this dreadful 
age of Kali, they are certainly deceived by the cunning Purana 
makers who have deluded them to worship Hari and Hara, who are 
Thy creations. Oh! What an amount of evil has befallen to those poor 
souls! O Devi! Those men know that the Devas, tormented by the 
Asuras, are Thy devotees, and yet they worship them; certainly such 
fellows, holding the lighted torches in their hands, plunge deep into 
the darkest waterless wells. O Mother! Thou art the Vidya (Blissful 
Intelligence) and Thou grantest pleasure and liberation; Thou art the 
Avidya, (Great Delusion) and thus Thou causest bondage and pain 
in this world. O Mother! Thou only destroyest the affliction of the 
human beings; those that want liberation worship Thee, and those 
that are ignorant and attached to worldly enjoyments do not worship 
Thee. What more can be said than this, that Brahma, Visnu, Mahesa 



and the other Devas incessantly worship Thy adorable lotus-feet; but 
those men that are of dull intellect and are mistaken, they do not 
meditate Thy feet and, therefore, they come again and again into this 
ocean of world. O Chandika! It is through the grace of the dust of 
Thy lotus-feet that Brahma, Visnu, and MahesVara are creating, 
preserving and destroying this universe. Therefore, O Goddess! 
Those men that do not serve Thee, are certainly very unfortunate. O 
Mother of the Universe! Thou art the Goddess of speech of the 
Suras and the Asuras; thus if Thou didst not dwell in their mouths, 
they would not have been able to utter a single word; therefore, O 
Goddess! How can men speak, when they are thus deprived of 
Thee! O Mother! It is due to the curse of Bhrigu Muni that Hah takes 
several incarnations as Fish, Tortoise, Boar, Man-Lion, and deceitful 
Dwarf Incarnations; all these show clearly the dependence of Hah, 


*N.B. - The Devas and the Daityas are the opposite polarities of the 
same creation. 


How, then, can they avoid the fear of death when they serve these 
dependent incarnations! O Mother! It is well known that the male 
generative organ of S’ambhu, the Mahadeva fell unto the ground, 
owing to the curse of Bhrigu Muni, when he went to the hermitage of 
the Risis. How can, then, happiness come in this world or in the next, 
to those who worship such a S’ambhu who wears human skulls on 
His body! O Devi! Those that worship Ganes’a, born of the above 
qualified Maha Deva are awfully mistaken; they are especially quite 
ignorant of Thee, the Goddess of the Universe, that can be easily 
worshipped and that can give the fourfold aims of human existence. 
O Devi! It is out of Thy kindness that Thou hast slain with Thy arrows 
the enemies and thus hast translated them into Heavens; otherwise 
they would have certainly gone down to Hell owing to their own 
Karmic effects. Brahma, Hari, Hara and the other Devas cannot 
realise Thy greatness; how can, then, ordinary men know Thee, 



when they are deluded by immeasureably strong Sattva, Rajas and 
Tannas qualities. O Mother! Those who do not worship Thy lotus-feet 
as very hard to be brought within this mind and therefore worship 
this visible Sun and Fire, they cannot grasp the Essence of the 
Vedas, demonstrated by hundreds of passages of S’ruti; they are 
deluded and simply suffer pains. O Mother! I think that the influences 
of Thy Sattva, Rajas and Tamas qualities are widely known in this 
world; those qualities as taught in various deluding schools of 
Tantras by various persons, stimulate people to the worship of Visnu, 
MahesVara, Sun and Ganes’a and thus detract them from 
worshipping Thee. O Mother! Those that detract thus the Brahmanas 
from worshiping Thy lotus-feet and advise them through the 
Agamas, to worship Hari, Hara and others. Thou dost not get angry 
with them, rather Thou dost shew Thy kindness to them and make 
them widely celebrated as possessing the occult powers of 
enchanting, bringing others under their control, or attracting towards 
them various other persons. In the Satya Yuga, Sattva Guna was 
more powerful and therefore the untrue S’astras could not rear their 
heads; but in this Kali Age, owing to the Sattva Guna being not so 
powerful, the lower qualities have got preponderance; so these so- 
called clever Pundits instead of worshipping Thee, worship Hari, 

Hara and the other Devas, the products of their fancy and hide Thee. 
O Mother! Thou art the Brahma Vidya, the knowledge of the 
Supreme Consciousness, Thou givest liberation to Thy devotees 
when they succeed in their Yogas. Therefore the pure Sattvik Muni 
meditate on Thee and Thee alone. Those that get themselves diluted 
in Thee, they are very blessed; what more to speak of them in their 
praise, they will no longer have to suffer any pains in their mother’s 
wombs! O Mother! Thou art inherent as Chit S’akti (the power of 
consciousness) in the Supreme Spirit and therefore He is become 
manifest specially as this Great Cosmos and becomes known as the 
Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer of this world, fashioned out of five 
elements. O Devi! What male can by his own power work out this 
Jagat Prapancha, enjoy it and move in this, without the aid of Thy 
power. O Bhagavati! This universe has been created by Thee; Thou 
art, therefore, its Mother. The twenty-four Essences or Tattvas are 



inert; how can they without Thy Chits’akti, create this universe? O 
Devi! Never can these senses and organs, endowed with Guna and 
Karma, do any work or bestow any fruits without Thy energy. 


O Mother! Wert thou not Svaha, the instrumental cause in the 
sacrifice, how could the Devas have got their shares of the ghee 
offered in the Yajhas by the Munis! Therefore, O Devi! Thou art, no 
doubt, preserving this universe. O Bhagavati! It is Thou that hast 
created this world in the beginning; it is Thou that art preserving the 
gods Hah, Hara and others; it is Thou that art destroying this 
universe. Therefore, O Brahman! The Devas cannot know Thy 
deeds; how can, then, the men who are of dull intellect, know Thee. 
O Mother! Thou hast now saved the Devas by killing this terrible 
Mahisasura. O Mother! All the Vedas have not been able to know 
exactly all Thy movements; how can we, of dull intellect, praise 
Thee! O Mother! Thou has served our cause by killing our enemy, 
the wicked Danava, the inconceivable source of pain to all the world 
by this act of Thine, Thy fame has spread far and wide in this 
universe; therefore, O Thou of renowned prowess! Thou art the 
Mother of this world; save us, and maintain us by Thy mercy. 


34-35. Vyasa said O King! The Devas having praised the Devi 
thus, the Devi addressed them gently “O Devas! Say if you have 
any other difficult thing for Me to do; remember Me whenever any 
difficult crisis occurs to you; I will destroy that evil.” 


36-42. The Devas said “O Devi! All our purposes have been 
served when Thou hast killed lately our enemy Mahisasura. Now 
dost Thou do for us so that we can always recollect Thy lotus feet, 
and our Bhakti be firm and steadfast towards Thee. It is only the 
Mother the bears the thousand offences of the son; we, therefore, 
cannot say why men, knowing this, do not worship the Mother of the 



Universe. There are two birds always dwelling in this body, Jivatma 
(human soul) and the Paramatma (the Supreme Soul). They are so 
very intimate friends toward each other that they never separate. But 
there is no other third friend that can bear the faults of these two. 
Therefore the embodied soul that forsakes Thee, his friend, can 
never attain any welfare; what more to say on this! That vicious soul 
is very unlucky amidst the Devas and men, no doubt. He who on 
attaining this excellent human body, attained with much difficulty, 
does not remember Thee frequently by words and deeds, is certainly 
the vilest of men. O Devi! Whether in times of distress or happiness. 
Thou art our Saviour; therefore dost Thou protect us with Thy best 
weapons. O Devi! There is no other means of our security than the 
Grace of the dust of Thy Feet.” 


43. Vyasa said O King! The Devas having prayed to the Devi 
thus, the Devi vanished then and there. The Devas, seeing the 
disappearance of the Devi, were sufficiently struck with surprise. 


Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the prayer 
and hymns to the Devi in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha 
Puranam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 20. On The Peace Of The World 


1-11. Janamejaya said O best of Risis! I have now seen the 
wonderful excellent deeds of the Devi for the enhancement of peace 
in this world. Though I have heard from thy lotus face these nectar¬ 
like words, still I am not satisfied. O best of Munis! What did the chief 
Devas do when the Goddess disappeared, kindly say to me. O 
Bhagavan! I think those Jivas cannot fully comprehend these 
excellent sacred deeds of the Devi, that are less fortunate and have 
done not many meritorious deeds in this world. O Muni! What to 
speak of the less fortunate souls, even the Mahatmas who are well 
versed in hearing such things, can hardly be satiated on hearing the 
Devi’s deeds. O! Fie to those, that do not hear of these things, the 
essence of essences, on hearing which men become Immortals. The 
Mother’s Lila is to preserve the Devas as well as the great Munis 
and to serve as a boat for the human beings to cross this ocean of 
world. How can, then, the grateful souls forsake Her? The Pundits 
versed in the Vedas declare, that the Devi’s life is able to fulfil all the 
desires. Therefore the liberated souls that want liberation, the worldly 
souls, the diseased all ought to drink incessantly the nectar-like 
nectar of Devi’s doings. Especially the kings that are engaged in 
Dharma, in earning wealth and in enjoyments, ought to hear Her life. 
O Muni! When the liberated souls drink the nectar-like doings of the 
Devi, what doubt can there be with the ordinary human beings, to 
listen with rapt devotion those wondrous things! O Best of Munis! It is 
those that worshipped the Goddess Bhavani in their previous births 
with beautiful Kunda flowers, Champaka flowers and Bel leaves, 
they have, it is inferred, in their present births become possessed of 
rich enjoyments. And those devoid of any devotion, that obtained this 
human body in the land of Bharata and did not worship the Mother 
Goddess, they are, in the present births, without grains and riches, 
diseased, and void of any issues. Wander they always as servants, 
carrying out orders, and bearing on the burden loads; day and night, 
they seek for their own selfish ends, yet they cannot get their belly 



full meals. The blind, deaf and dumb; lame and lepers suffer pain 
and misery in this earth; seeing them, it should be inferred that they 
never worshipped the Goddess Bhavani. And those that are wealthy, 
prosperous, attended by numerous attendants and are always 
enjoying, like kings, it is to be inferred that they certainly worshipped 
the lotus feet of the Mother Goddess in their past lives. 


12-15. Therefore O Son of Satyavati! As you are kind-hearted, kindly 
narrate before me the excellent deeds of the Devi. O best of Munis! 
Where did the Goddess, Maha Laksmi, created out of the energies 
of all the gods, depart after She had slain the Mahisasura and had 
been worshipped and praised by the Devas? O highly Fortunate one! 
You told me that She vanished from the sight of the Devas; now I like 
to know where is She staying now, whether in the Heavens or in the 
Land of Mortals? Did She melt away then and there or did She 
descend to Vaikuntha or did She go to the mountain Sumeru? O 
Muni! Narrate all these duly before me. 


16-50. Vyasa said O King! I told you before about the beautiful 
Mani Dvipa; that island is the place of sport to the Devi and very 
dear to Her. In that place Brahma, Visnu, Mahadeva were 
transformed into females; they afterwards became males and were 
engaged in their respective duties. That place is grand and splendid 
and is in the centre of the ocean of Nectar; the Devi Ambika 
assumes various forms there as She likes; and She sports there. To 
that Mani Dvipa the auspicious Devi departed after She had been 
praised by the Gods, to that place where sports always the eternal 
Bhagavati BhuvanesVari, the incarnate of Para Brahma. When the 
Highest Goddess vanished, the Devas installed, on the throne of 
Mahisasura, the powerful King S’atrughna, endowed with all 
auspicious qualities, the Lord of Ajodhya and descended from the 
Solar line. After making him thus the King, Indra and the other Devas 
went to their respective abodes on their own conveyances. O King! 



The Devas having gone to their places, the subjects were governed 
on this earth according to Dharma; and they passed their times in 
ease and comfort. It used to rain, then, timely and the earth was 
covered with plenty of grains and wealth; the trees were all filled with 
fruits and leaves and gave enjoyment to people. The cows with their 
udders full like earthen pots gave such a profuse quantity of milk that 
men began to milk them whenever they liked. The rivers’ waters 
were all clear and cooling; and they flowed full in regular channels; 
the birds grouped round them. The Brahmanas, versed in the Vedas, 
were engaged in performing sacrifices; the Ksattriyas observed their 
virtues and were engaged in doing charities and in their education; 
the kings held their rods of justice and were engaged in governing 
their subjects; though the several kings were busy with various arms 
and weapons, they all became fond of peace. Thus no wars nor 
quarrels were seen amongst the subjects; and the mines yielded 
plenty of wealth to the people. O best of Kings! There were the 
Brahmans, Ksattriyas, Vais’yas and S’udras who became the 
devotees of the Goddess. The Brahmanas and Ksattriyas used, 
then, to perform so many sacrifices that, at every nook and corner in 
this globe, the sacrificial altars and the sacrificial posts became 
visible. The female sex became gentle and of good behaviour, 
truthful and chaste towards their husbands respectively. Atheism and 
unrighteous acts vanished entirely from the face of the earth; the 
people left all dry discussions; they argued only about the S’astras 
that did not go in contra-distinction to the Vedas. Nobody liked to 
quarrel with each other; poverty, and evil inclinations were checked; 
the people everywhere lived in happiness. Untimely death was not 
there; so the people had no bereavements with their friends; no 
distress was seen. Famine, want of rains, and deadly plagues were 
out of sight. The people had no illness even; and jealousies and 
quarrels vanished. O King! all men and women began to sport 
merrily everywhere like the Gods in Heaven. Theft, atheism, deceit, 
vanity, hypocrisy, lustfulness, stupidity, and the anti-Vedic feelings 
were not to be seen. O Lord of the Earth! All the men were then 
extremely devoted to their Dharma and engaged in serving the 
Brahmanas. The Brahmins were also, according to the three-fold 



plan of the creation, Sattvik, Rajasik and Tamasik. The Sattvik 
Brahmins were all versed in the Vedas, clever and truthful; they were 
kind, they controlled their passions and they did not accept any 
presents from others. Filled with their ideas of Dharma, they used to 
perform their Purodasa and other such sacrifices with Sattvik rice, 
etc., but never, never did they immolate any animals.* O King! The 
Sattvik Brahmanas gave charities, studied the Vedas and offered 
sacrifices for themselves. These were their three ordained actions. 
They were busy in these. O King! The Rajasik Brahmanas were 
versed in the Vedas and acted as priests to the Ksattriyas 


*N.B. - Where the victim is fastened during the time of immolation, 
and ate flesh as sanctioned by recognised rules. They were busy 
with their six duties. They offered sacrifices on their own behalf, 
assisted others in sacrifices, took gifts, made charities, studied and 
taught others the Vedas. The Tamasik Brahmanas were angry, 
attached to worldly objects, and jealous. They studied very little of 
the Vedas and spent most of their time in serving the kings. O King! 
Mahisasura was killed, all the Brahmanas were glad and began to 
practise Dharma according to the Vedas, observed vows and made 
charities. The Ksattriyas began to govern the subjects, the Vaisya 
carried on their trading business and the other tribes went on with 
their agriculture, preservation of the cows, and lending money on 
interest. Thus all men became vary glad on the death of Mahisa. 
Devoid of cares and anxieties, the subjects got much wealth! The 
cows were endowed with suspicious signs and gave plenty of milk 
and the rivers flowed full of waters. The trees looked splendid with 
abundance of fruits; men were without diseases: in short, people had 
no mental agony and too much or too little of rains were not there; 
S’alavas, mice, birds, and seditions we not extant. O King! The 
beings died not prematurely; rather enjoyed incessantly, their full 
health and possessed lots of riches; especially beings, engaged in 
the Vedic Dharma, served the lotus feet of Chandika and thus spent 
their lives. 



Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the peace of 
the world in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 21. On The Conquest Of The Heavens 
By S’umbha And Nis’umbha 


1-6. Vyasa said O King! I am describing to you that excellent pure 
life and doings of the Devi that destroy all the sins of all the beings 
and make them happy. In days of yore, there were two very powerful 
demons S’umbha and Nis’umbha; they were two brothers, strong 
heroes and invulnerable by the male persons. Those two wicked 
Asuras were surrounded with numerable Danavas; they tormented 
always the Devas. Then the Goddess Ambika, for the good of the 
Devas, killed S’umbha and Nis’umbha with all their attendants in a 
very dreadful battle. In the battlefield the Devi killed their main 
assistants Chanda Munda and the exceedingly terrible Rakta Vija 
and Dhumralochana. When the Devi destroyed those Danavas, the 
Devas became fearless; the Devas then went to the beautiful 
Sumeru mountain and praised Her and chanted hymns to Her. 


7-8. Hearing about the names of S’umbha and Nis’umbha, 
Janamejaya asked O best of Munis! Who were those two Asuras? 
How came they to be most powerful? Who put them here? Why were 
they vulnerable to women only? Under whose tapasya and under 
whose boon did they become so strong? And why did that great Devi 
kill them? Describe all these to me in detail. 


9-20. Vyasa said O King, I am describing to you that beautiful 
anecdote where the Devi’s holy deeds are involved. Hear. This 
incident full of all that is good, destroys the hearer’s all sins and 
grants them all their desired ends. In days of yore, S’umbha and 
Nis’umbha, the two fair and good looking brothers came out of 
Patala to this earth. These two Asuras, when they grew to their 
manhood, performed severe asceticism in Puskara, the holy place of 



pilgrimage, the most purifying place in this world and they refused to 
eat rice and water. They became so very skilled in their Yoga 
practices that they passed away in their one posture and seat one 
Ajuta (10,000) years. Thus they performed very difficult Tapasya. 
Then the God Brahma, the Grandsire of all, became pleased with 
their asceticism and appeared before them, riding on His vehicle, the 
Swan. The Creator, seeing them thus deeply merged in meditation, 
asked them to get up from that state and told them thus “I have 
become pleased with your asceticism. I fulfil the desires of all the 
Lokas; I have now come to you, pleased to see you so very strong in 
your ascetic practices; better ask your desired boons from me; I will 
grant them to you.” Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the 
Grandsire’s wards, S’umbha and Nis’umbha got up from their 
meditation; concentrating their attention towards Him, 
circumambulated Him and bowed down to Him with their hearts full 
of reverence. The two Asuras were very weak, lean and thin by their 
hard tapasya and they looked very humble. They fell down before 
Him like a piece of wood and began to speak in a sweet voice, 
choked by intense feelings. O Brahman! O Deva of the Devas! O 
Thou, the Ocean of Mercy! O Destroyer of fear of the devotees! O 
Lord! If Thou art pleased then dost Thou grant us immortality. There 
is nothing in this world more fearful than death; we two have taken 
refuge unto Thee, being afraid of this death. O Thou, Ocean of 
mercy! O Creator of the world! O Lord of the Devas! O Universal 
Soul! Protect us from this fear due to the terrible Death. 


21-23. Brahma said Is this the boon that you ask? This is in every 
way, against the Law of Nature; for no one, in these three Lokas, can 
grant this boon to anybody. When one becomes born, one must die; 
and when one dies, one must be born again. This Law is ordained in 
this world by the Supreme Creator of this Universe, from time 
immemorial. Therefore all the beings must die; there is no doubt in 
this. Better ask any other boon that you desire; I will grant that to 
you. 



24-27. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the words of Brahma, the 
two Danavas pondered over the matter and bowed down to the 
Prajapati, the Lord of the Creation and said O Merciful One! Grant 
us then so that we shall be invulnerable to any of the male of the 
Immortal Devas down to human beings and birds and deers; this is 
the boon that we ask. Where exists the woman so powerful as to kill 
us? We never fear any woman in all the three Lokas. O Lotus-born! 
We, the two brothers, want not to be killed by any male; the females 
are naturally weak therefore we need not fear them. 


28-58. Vyasa said O King! Hearing their words, the Grandsire 
Brahma gladly granted them their desired boon and returned to His 
own abode. On Brahma going away, the two Danavas, too, returned 
to their own places. They then appointed the Muni Bhrigu as their 
priest and began to worship him. Bhrigu, the best of the Munis, then, 
on an auspicious day and when the star was benign, got a beautiful 
golden throne built and gave it to the king. S’umbha, being the 
eldest, was then installed on the auspicious throne as the king; the 
other brave and excellent demons began to assemble there quickly 
for serving him. The two great warriors Chanda and Munda, proud 
on account of their great strength came there with their large armies, 
chariots, horses, and elephants. Similarly the valiant warriors 
Dhumralochana, hearing that S’umbha had become their King, came 
there with his own army. There came up also at that time the great 
warrior Rakta Vija, more powerful on account of his getting a boon, 
attended by his army of two Aksauhini soldiers. O King! Hear why 
this Rakta Vija became so very unconquerable; whenever this Asura 
was wounded by any weapon, if one drop of blood fell on the ground, 
at once would be created so many innumerable Asuras, resembling 
his wicked nature and with similar weapons in their hands. The 
Asuras born of this blood would have similar appearances and would 
be similar in strength and ready to fight at once when they were 
born. That great warrior, the great Demon Rakta Vija was 



unconquerable in battle for this very reason and no being could now 
kill him. The other Asuras, when they heard that S’umbha had 
become their king, came up there with their armies consisting of four 
divisions of elephants, chariots, cavalry and infantry and began to 
serve him. The army of S’umbha and Nis’umbha thus became 
countless; and they forcibly conquered and got possession of all the 
kingdoms that existed then on the surface of the earth. Then 
Nis’umbha, the destroyer of enemies, collected his army and 
marched up to the Heavens without any delay to conquer Indra, the 
Lord of S’achi. He fought very hard with all the Lokapalas on all 
sides when Indra struck him on his breast with His thunderbolt. 
Nis’umbha fell unconscious on the ground with that blow when his 
soldiers, defeated in the battle, fled away on all sides. S’umbha, the 
destroyer of the enemies’ forces, hearing the unconscious state of 
the younger brother, came up at once on the field and shot at the 
Devas with multitudes of arrows. The untiring S’umbha fought so 
violently that Indra and the other Devas and Lokapalas were 
defeated. S’umbha then took away, perforce, the position of Indra 
and he occupied the Celestial Tree and Heavenly milching cow that 
yielded all desires and other excellent things over which Indra used 
to reign. In fact, that high-souled Asura got the dominion of the three 
Lokas and took away all those that were offered at the sacrifices. He 
became highly glad on getting the Nandana Garden and was 
extremely delighted when he drank the celestial nectar. He then 
defeated in battle Kuvera, the god of wealth and occupied his 
kingdom. He defeated the Moon, Sun, and Yama, the God of Death 
and occupied their positions. Surrounded by his army, Nis’umbha 
dispossessed Varuna, Fire, and Air of their kingdoms and began to 
reign in their stead. Thus deprived of their kingdoms, prosperity and 
wealth, the Devas left the Nandana Garden and fled, out of terror, to 
the caves of hills and mountains. Thus deprived of all their rights, the 
Devas without any weapons, without any lustre, without any home, 
and without anywhere to go, began to wander in lonely forests. O 
King! All the Immortals began to knock about in lonely gardens, 
mountain caves and rivers; and nowhere they found happiness; for 
happiness depends entirely unto the hands of Fate. O Lord of men! 



Even those fortunate souls, who are powerful, and wealthy and wise, 
meet at times with distress and poverty. O King! How marvellous are 
the ways and manners of Time! It makes kings and donors beggars; 
it renders the powerful, weak; literates, illiterates; and it makes great 
warriors into terrible cowards. O King! Vasava performed one 
hundred horse-sacrifices and got the excellent Indra’s position; but 
again be fell into extreme difficulties; thus runs the wheel of Time. 


59. It is Time that bestows the gem of knowledge to a person and it 
is Time again that deprives that very same man of his wisdom and 
makes him a great sinner. 


60-61. The Bhagavan Visnu takes incarnations, under the control of 
Time, in several lower wombs as boar, etc., and Maha Deva carries 
on His body the human skulls, that are not even fit to be touched. 
When Brahma, Visnu, Mahes’a and others suffer such painful things, 
then one need not wonder at the workings of the Great inscrutable 
Time. 


Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter of the Fifth Book on the conquest 
of the Heavens by S’umbha and Nis’umbha in S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 22. On The Eulogising Of The Dev! By 
The Devas 


1-7. Vyasa said O King! When the Devas were all defeated, 
S’umbha began to govern all their kingdoms; thus one thousand 
years passed away. The Devas, on the other hand, deprived of their 
kingdoms, were all drowned in an ocean of cares and anxieties; at 
last they began to feel very much and were greatly afflicted. They 
asked with reverence their own Guru Brihaspati, “O Guru! What are 
we to do now? O All knowing! You are the Great Muni; kindly say 
unto us if there be any means by which we can get rid of this our 
present crisis. There are thousands of Vedic Mantrams which yield 
the desired results, if they are worshipped with due rites and 
ceremonies and if all the rules be observed thereof. O best of Munis! 
Many Yajhas are mentioned in the Vedas that yield all the desired 
results; you know them all; so kindly perform those Yajhas. Do all 
those ceremonies duly that are ordained in the Vedas for the killing 
of enemies; O Descendant of Angirasa! You ought to perform as 
early as possible those sacrifices for magical purposes to destroy the 
Danavas so that all our miseries come to an end.” 


8-22. Brihaspati said “O Lord of the Suras! All the mantras 
mentioned in the Vedas yield the desired results, but subservient to 
the Great Destiny only; they do not give results of themselves but do 
so in obedience to to the laws ordained by Nature. You all are the 
presiding Deities of the Vedic Mantras; but, now, by the strange irony 
of Time, you are put to difficulties and troubles; what can I do now in 
this case? See! Indra, Agni, Varuna, and other gods are invoked in 
sacrifices; how, then, can sacrificial ceremonies do good when you 
are put to so great difficulties. Therefore there is no remedy to those 
which will take place unavoidably; but those who are wise declare 
that in such cases means are to be adopted. Some sages say that 
Fate is strong but those who advocate the cause of taking remedial 



means say that Fate is powerless; remedies or manly exertions lead 
to all success. But, O King of the Devas! The embodied souls ought 
to resort to both Fate and Remedies; it is never advisable to depend 
solely on Fate. Therefore, it is advisable to think out again and again 
as far as one’s own Intellect goes, the best remedies. O Devas! I 
have thought over again and again on this subject and say to you my 
opinion. Hear. In days of yore, the Bhagavati, being appeased, killed 
Mahisasura; and when you all praised and chanted hymns to Her, 
She gave you this boon that She will remove all your sorrows and 
troubles no sooner you remember Her, and She told that you all 
must remember Her whenever any difficulty would arise to you out of 
this Great Destiny. She would, then, free you all of your ocean of 
great difficulties. Therefore do you all now go to the highly sacred 
and exquisitely beautiful Himalayan mountains and worship the most 
worshipful Chandika Devi with your love and devotion. Know all the 
rules of the Seed mantra of Maya and be engaged in taking Her 
name accompanied with burnt offerings. I have come to know, by 
Yogic power, that She will be pleased with You. I see that today your 
difficulties will come to an end; there is not the least doubt in this. I 
have heard that the Devi resides always in the Himachal; if you 
worship and praise and chant hymns to Her, She will certainly grant 
you your desired boons. Therefore fully decide on this thing and go 
to the Himalayas. O Devas! She will fulfil all your desires and carry 
out all your intentions.” 


23-24. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus his words, the Devas 
departed to the Himalayas and they became all merged in the 
devotional worship of the Supreme Goddess and began to meditate 
constantly in their hearts the Seed mantra of Maya (Hrim). They 
bowed down to the Goddess Maha Maya, the Discarder of all the 
fears of Her Bhaktas and began to chant hymns to Her with perfect 
devotion. 



25-42. O Goddess! Salutation to Thee! O Thou, the Lord of the 
Universe! the Lord of our hearts! Thou art the Everlasting Bliss and 
the Giver of bliss to the Devas! Salutation to Thee! Thou art the 
Destroyer of the Danavas and Thou art the Giver of all desires of 
human beings. Thou canst be approached with devotion. Salutation 
to Thee! O Thou, the Incarnate of all the Devas! Thy names are 
endless; Thy forms are endless; none can count them. Thou residest 
always as the Force Incarnate in all the actions, in the Creation, 
Preservation and Dissolution of Beings. O Goddess! Thou art the 
Memory, Constancy, Intelligence, Old Age. Thou art the nourishment, 
contentment; Thou upholdest all; Thou art the beauty, peace, good 
knowledge, prosperity and happiness. Thou art the Goal, fame, and 
intellect and Thou art the Eternal Seed unmanifested. We now bow 
down to those forms of Thine through which Thou dost serve the 
purpose of the Devas in this world as we are now in need of peace. 
Thou art forgiveness and mercy; Thou art the Yoga Nidra (a state 
between sleep and wakefulness); Thou art the kindness and Thou 
residest in all the beings in so many forms, great and grand, and so 
very celebrated; O Goddess! Thou hadst already served the cause 
of the gods in killing our great enemy Mahisasura, puffed up with 
vanity. Therefore Thy mercy is well known amongst the gods; what 
more. Thy mercy is known, since very ancient times and it is 
narrated in the Vedas. What wonder is there that a mother nourishes 
gladly her own sons and preserves them carefully! For Thou art the 
Mother of the Devas; Thou art the great source of help to them; 
therefore dost Thou fulfill all their desires with Thine whole heart. O 
Devi! We do not know the limit of Thy qualities nor of Thy forms; O 
Goddess! Thou art worshipped by the whole Universe. Thou art fully 
competent to save all from dangers; we are objects of Thy pity; dost 
Thou save us from our present troubles! Thou art capable to kill 
enemies without shooting any arrrows, without striking any blows, 
without hurling any trident, axes, S’aktis, clubs, or any other 
weapons; merely by Thy mere will Thou canst kill; still for sports and 
for the good of all beings Thou incarnatest and fightest for the sake 
of Lila. The ignorant persons know such things as birth, death, etc., 
that this world is not eternal; that no actions can be without any 



cause; we, therefore, ascertain by reasoning and inference that Thou 
art the Supreme Cause of this whole Universe. Brahma is the 
Creator, Visnu is the Preserver, and Mahes’a is the Destroyer; so it is 
related in the Puranas. Thou again hast given birth to these three 
Gods in the respective cycles; therefore Thou art the Mother of all; 
there is no doubt in this. O Devi! In days of yore, these three Devas 
worshipped Thee; Thou Wert pleased and gavest them all the best 
powers. Being thus endowed with Thy powers, they have been able 
to create, preserve and destroy this Universe beautifully. Art they not 
foolish, though they be Yatis (persons of self-controlled nature), who 
do not worship the Universal Mother, the Consciousness Incarnate, 
the Giver of liberation, on Whose feet are worshipped by the Devas, 
and worshipping Whom, one gets the fruits of all one’s desires? 
Certainly those Vaisnavas, Sauras (worshippers of the Sun) and 
Pas’upatas (worshippers of S’iva) are foolish braggarts who do not 
meditate Thee as the embodiment of Kamala (prosperity), modesty, 
beauty, continuancy. Fame, nourishment. O Mother! The Asuras, 
Hah, Hara and other great Devas worship Thee in this world; 
therefore those mortals are certainly deceived by their Creator that 
do not worship Thee on the surface of this earth. O Devi! Hari 
himself serves the lotus feet of Laksmi by colouring them (toes and 
other fingers of the feet) red with lac juice; Hara is very anxious to 
serve the lotus feet and take the dust thereof of Parvati; Laksmi and 
Parvati are but Thy part manifestations; therefore to serve them is, in 
other words to serve Thee. What to speak of other persons, even 
those who can discriminate between real and unreal and those who 
have left their worldly homes and have become dispassionate 
towards worldly objects, even those Munis worship forgiveness and 
mercy, that are but Thy parts; therefore who is there in this world that 
does not serve Thy lotus-feet! O Devi! Those human beings plunge 
into the dreadful wells of this Samsara, the round of birth and death, 
and are deprived of all pleasures, who do not serve Thy lotus feet. 
What more can be said than the fact that those fallen beings suffer 
terribly from poverty, humility, leprosy, headache, and the chronic 
enlargement of spleen. O Mother! Those persons are void of any 
wealth and wife; they are the carriers of loads of wood and collect 



grass and leaves and show their skill in such acts; they are of little 
understanding and never they served in their previous births Thy 
lotus-feet. This we have come to know very well within our heart of 
hearts. 


43-47. Vyasa said O King! When all the Devas thus eulogised, 
instantly the Devi Ambika, full of youth and beauty appeared there 
out of mercy. That extraordinary beautiful Bhagavati, endowed with 
all auspicious signs, and adorned with the Divine clothings, 
ornaments, and garlands and sandal paste, etc., appeared before 
the Devas. Before Whom, even the world enchanter Cupid bows 
down; with such beautiful. Divine appearance, the Devi emerged 
from the mountain cave in order to take Her ablutions in the Ganges. 
That Devi, sweet voiced like a cuckoo, gladly smiling began to say to 
the Devas, singing hymns to Her, in a voice deep like that of a 
rumbling cloud. 


48. The Devi said O Best of Suras! Whom are you praising 
constantly in this place? What do you want! Why are you so anxious 
and seem to be so much care-worn? Do please tell all this to Me in 
detail. 


49. Vyasa said O King! The Devas were first enchanted by Her 
beauty and softness; then, being encouraged by Her sweet words, 
began to speak with great joy. 


50-57. O Devi! We pray toThee, O Lord of his Universe! We bow 
down to Thee. O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! Protect us from all the 
troubles; we are very much care-worn and tormented by the Daityas. 
O Great Goddess! In ancient times Thou didst kill Mahisasura, the 



source of troubles to all and then told us to remember Thee 
whenever any difficulty would arise. 

Then Thou wouldst undoubtedly remove all the troubles arising from 
the Daityas no sooner we remember Thee. O Devi! We have now 
remembered Thee for that very reason. At present the two dreadful 
Asuras, S’umbha and Nis’umbha have sprang up and are creating 
great disturbances; and they cannot be killed by any male beings. 
The powerful Raktavija and Chanda Munda and other Asuras united 
have dispossessed the Devas of their Heavens. Thou alone art our 
goal and refuge; without Thee there is none other to save us. 
Therefore, O Beautiful One! 

Thou dost do this work for the Devas who are extremely troubled 
and distressed. O Powerful Devi! The Devas are always at the 
services of Thy lotus feet; still the very powerful Danavas are 
throwing them into dangers; O Mother! Thou art the Preserver of the 
distressed; therefore dost Thou preserve the Devas, devoted to 
Thee. O Mother! The Danavas, being very much emboldened by 
their powers, are creating many havocs on the surface of the Earth; 
now remembering that, in the beginning of the Yugas, Thou didst 
create all this Universe, Thou dost now ought to protect all this 
Universe. 


Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter of the Fifth Book on the 
eulogising of the Devi by the Devas in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 23. On The Prowess Of Kaus^ik! 


1-7. Vyasa said O King! When the tormented Devas praised thus, 
the Devi created from Her body another supremely beautiful form. 
This created form, the Ambika Devi, became known in all the worlds 
as Kaus’iki, as She came out of the physical sheath of the Devi 
Parvati. When Kaus’iki was created out of the body of Parvati, the 
Parvati’s body became transformed and turned out into a black 
colour and became known as Kalika. Her terrible black appearance, 
when beheld, increases the terror even of the Daityas. O King! This 
Devi is now become known in this world as Kalaratri, the night of 
destruction, at the end of the world, identified with Durga, the Fulfiller 
of all the desires. The Ambika Devi, then, began to look splendid, 
decked with various ornaments; Her beautiful form began to look 
very lovely. The Devi Ambika then smiled a little and said, “Better be 
fearless; I will slay just now your enemies. It is My incumbent duty to 
carry out your purposes; I will therefore slay in battle Nis’umbha and 
others for the sake of your happiness.” 


8-30. Thus saying, the Devi Bhagavati, elated with pride, mounted 
on lion and, taking Kalika with Her, entered into the city of S’umbha, 
the enemy of the gods. Ambika went to a garden adjoining the city 
accompanied by Kalika, and began to sing in such a sweet 
melodious tune that enchants even the God of Love, who fascinates 
the whole world. What more can be said than the fact that, hearing 
that sweet melodious song, the birds and beasts became enchanted; 
the Devas then began to feel much pleasure from the Sky. In the 
meanwhile Chanda, Munda the two dreadful Asuras, and attendants 
of S’umbha, came out accidentally there on their sportive excursions 
and saw the beautiful Ambika Devi singing and Kalika Devi sitting 
before Her. O best of Kings! No sooner Chanda, Munda saw the 
extraordinary beauty of the Goddess Bhagavati, than they went at 
once to S’umbha. On approaching towards the lord of the Daityas 



sitting in his room, they bowed down and told thus in a sweet voice 
- "O King! Here has come from the Himalayas a woman accidentally, 
mounted on a lion; Her limbs are shining with all good signs so much 
so that even the God of love would be enchanted by Her sight. 
Nowhere, in the Devalokas, the Gandarbha Lokas or in this earth 
can be found such a beautiful lady; we never saw nor heard about 
such a lady before. O King! That lady is singing so beautifully and 
pleasingly to all that even the deer are standing motionless by Her 
side enchanted, as it were, by Her melodious voice. O King! That 
Lady is fit for you; therefore determine first whose daughter is this 
lady, what for she has come there and then marry Her. Know this as 
certain that such a beautiful lady is not to be found anywhere in this 
world. Therefore do you bring Her to your house and marry Her. O 
Lord of men! You have acquired all the gems and jewels of the 
Devas; why not, then, accept this Gem in the form of a lady? O King! 
You have taken by force the exquisitely beautiful Airavata elephant 
of Indra, the Parijata Tree, the seven faced horse Uchchais’rava, and 
many other jewels. You have acquired by your might the Prince of 
Jewels, the celestial car of the Creator Brahma, ensigned by the 
emblematic Swan. You have dispossessed Kuvera of his treasure of 
the value of a Padma (one thousand billion) and Varuna, the God of 
oceans, of his white umbrella. O King! When Varuna was defeated, 
your brother Nis’umbha took perforce his Pas’a weapon. O King! The 
Great Ocean gave you, out of terror, various jewels and honoured 
you by presenting a garland of lotuses which never fade away. What 
more can be said than the fact that you have conquered the Death 
and took away His force and that you have easily conquered Yama, 
the God of Death and have taken from Him His horrible staff. O King! 
You have brought that Heavenly cow which came out when the 
ocean was churned; that cow is still with you; what more to say than 
that Menaka and other Apsaras are under your control. Thus you 
have got by your strength all the jewels. Why, then, are you not 
taking this exquisitely beautiful lady, the Prince of Jewels, amongst 
women. O King! All the jewels in your house, will serve their real 
purpose, no doubt, then and then only when they will shine with this 
queen of jewels, this Lady. O Lord of the Daityas! There cannot be 



seen in all the Trilokas such a Beautiful Lady as this that I have now 
described before you. Therefore bring this Beautiful Lady quickly and 
accept Her as your wife. 


31-35. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the sweet words of 
Chanda and Munda, S’umbha spoke gladly to Sugriva who was 
close by “Go, Sugriva, do my messenger’s work; you are well 
skilled in these things. Speak so that the Beautiful Lady of thin waist 
may come over to me. Those who are well versed in the science of 
amorous love declare that only two methods are to be adopted by 
the clever persons towards the female sex (1) conciliation and 
gentle words and (2) gifts and presents. For if the policy of division or 
sowing dissensions be applied, then hypocrisy is shewn and that 
means the improper manifestation of love sentiment; whereas if 
chastisement be applied then the love sentiment becomes 
interrupted. Therefore, the wise have condemned these as corrupt 
means. O Messenger! Where is that woman who does not come 
round excited with passion when good and sweet words are spoken 
to her in accordance with the S’ama and Dana methods?” 


36-37. Vyasa said Sugriva, hearing the nice skilled words of 
S’umbha went hurriedly to the spot where existed the Mother of the 
Universe. He saw the Fair Lady mounted on a lion, saluted Her and 
spoke gently and sweetly as follows 


38-49. The messenger said “O Beautiful One! S’umbha, the 
enemy of the Gods and the King of all, is beautiful in all respects, the 
ruler of the three Lokas, a great hero and conqueror of all. Hearing 
your beauty and loveliness, that high-souled monarch is so much 
attached to you and has become so very passionate that he has sent 
me to you to express his views. O One of delicate limbs! Please hear 
what that Lord of the Daityas has spoken to Thee, after duly saluting 



Thee, words full of love and affection towards Thee O Beloved! I 
have defeated all the Devas and have thus become the Lord of the 
three worlds; specially I partake of all the offerings made in sacrificial 
acts and ceremonies, without moving away from my house. I have 
taken away all the gems, jewels and wealth that belonged to the 
Devas; consequently the abode of the Gods has become now 
worthless, on account of all its jewels being carried sway. O Fair 
One! I am now enjoying all the jewels that exist in the Trilokas; so 
much so that all the Devas, Asuras, and human beings are passing 
away their times, subservient to Me. But no sooner Thy qualifications 
reached my ears Thou hast penetrated into my heart and has made 
me completely subservient to Thee; O Fair One! What am I to do 
now? Whatever Thou commandest, I am ready to do that; verily I am 
now Thy servant; so Thou oughtest to save me from the darts of 
passion. O One having swan-like eyes! I am verily made your 
captive. Specially I am extremely agitated by the arrows of Cupid; 
therefore dost Thou serve me when Thou wilt be made the Lord of 
the three worlds and thus enjoy the incomparably excellent things. O 
Beloved! I will remain ever Thy obedient servant up to the last 
moment of death. O Excellent One! I cannot ever be killed by the 
Devas, Asuras and human beings. O Fair faced One! Thou wilt be 
always prosperous and fortunate. Thou wilt be able to sport 
anywhere Thou likest. O Devi! Please ponder over the above words 
of the Lord of the Daityas in Thy heart and speak out Thy views 
gladly and with the same sweetness in reply; O Brisk One! I will go 
immediately to S’umbha and inform him about Thy mind.” 


50. Vyasa said O King! The Devi, ready to serve the cause of the 
Gods, heard the messenger’s gentle words and replied smiling and 
sweetly. 


51-66. S’ri Devi spoke I know fully well S’umbha and Nis’umbha; 
the King S’umbha is very powerful, the conqueror of all the Devas, 



and the destroyer of enemies. He is the repository of all good 
qualities, the enjoyer of all pleasures, very valorous, charitable and is 
beautiful, in fact a second Cupid. He is adorned with thirty-two 
auspicious signs; particularly he is a hero and cannot be killed by the 
Devas or human beings. O Messenger! Knowing this I have come 
here to have a look of that great warrior S’umbha. The jewel comes 
in contact with gold to increase its lustre; so I have come here from 
afar to see my husband. On seeing all the Devas, Gandharbhas, 
Raksasas and the eminent beautiful persons on the earth I have 
come to know that they are all terror stricken and almost 
unconscious and shudder at the name of S’umbha. So, on hearing 
about his abilities, I have now come here to see him. O Messenger! 

O Fortunate One! Better now go back to the great hero S’umbha and 
speak to him in private the following sweet words of Mine “That 
you are foremost amongst the powerful; beautiful of the beautifuls, 
skilled in all the branches of learning, well qualified, charitable, 
clever, born of a high noble family, energetic, and conqueror of the 
Devas; especially, by the sheer force of your arms, you are so much 
exalted and you now enjoy all the gems and jewels. Therefore, O 
King! Knowing your qualifications, I have come truly of my own 
accord to your city with the desire of getting for Me a husband. O 
High-souled One! I am fit for your consort. O Lord of the Daityas! 
There is a slight hitch in My marriage. It is this: In my early days 
while I was playing with My comrades, I promised before them 
privately partly out of childishness and partly out of vanity for bodily 
strength that I will certainly marry that hero who is powerful like Me 
and who will defeat Me in battle, thus testing his powers and 
weaknesses. My comrades laughed at my words and spoke with 
wonder, ‘Why has this girl made such an extraordinarily difficult 
promise?’ Therefore, O Monarch! Better marry Me and fulfil My 
desires after knowing My strength and defeating Me in a battle. O 
Beautiful One in all respects! Better come yourself or your younger 
Nis’umbha and perform the marriage ceremony after defeating Me in 
the battlefield.” 



Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter in the Fifth Book on the prowess 
of Kaus’iki in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Mahapuranam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 24. On The Description And 
Dhumralochana Giving The News 


1-12. Vyasa said O King! The messenger was thunderstruck with 
Devi’s words and said “O Beautiful Lady! What art Thou 
speaking? It seems that Thou dost not think on this matter, owing to 
Thy feminine nature. O Devi! Thou art boasting in vain; how canst 
Thou expect to conquer S’umbha in a battle when he has conquered 
Indra and other Devas and many other Danavas? Lotus-eyed One! 
There is no hero in the three worlds that can conquer S’umbha in 
battle; Thou seemest to be a mere trifle before that King of Demons 
in a face-to-face fight. O Fair One! Nowhere ought to be said any 
words without being thought over; one must weigh one’s own and 
other’s might and then speak accordingly. The King S’umbha, the 
Lord of the three worlds, enchanted by Thy fascinating beauty, is 
desirous of Thee; therefore dost Thou fulfill his desires and become 
his beloved wife. Thou better now abandonest Thy illiterate nature 
and worhippest S’umbha or Nis’umbha; I am speaking for Thy good; 
so keep my words. The amorous love sentiment is the best of nine 
prevailing sentiments. Therefore every intelligent being ought to 
cherish with gladness this amorous feeling. And if Thou, O Weak girl! 
dost not go to S’umbha, then that Lord of the Earth will become very 
angry and will order his servants to take Thee perforce before him. O 
Fair One! Those proud Demons will carry Thee by holding Thy hair 
before S’umbha; there is no doubt in this. O thin bodied One! Better 
forego Thy boldness in every way and keep Thy self-respect. Thou 
art the object of respect and admiration and so should go before him. 
What difference is there between the fight which makes one’s body 
liable to cuts and wounds by sharp arrows and pleasures that arise 
out of sexual intercourse! These are like the two opposite poles; 
therefore judge what is useless and what is useful and keep my 
good advice. Thou shalt be exceedingly happy if Thou servest 
S’umbha or Nis’umbha.” 



13-19. The Devi spoke “O Messenger! You are fortunate; you are 
well trained to speak out truth; I know full well that S’umbha and 
Nis’umbha are strong. Still out of My childish nature, the promise that 
I made before I cannot undo it. Therefore speak to the powerful 
S’umbha or Nis’umbha that none can be my husband simply from his 
beauty without defeating Me in battle no one can marry Me. So 
conquer Me soon and marry Me as you like. Though of a weaker 
sex, I have come here to fight; know this as certain. Therefore if you 
be capable, fight and do the duty of a warrior. And if you be terrified 
by seeing my trident or if you want your life, quit the Heavens and 
this earth and go down to Patala without any delay. O Messenger! 

Go just now to your master and tell him sweetly these words. Then 
that powerful Lord of the Danavas will judge what ought to be done. 

O Knower of Dharma! To speak out truth before an enemy, before 
one’s own master is certainly the duty of a messenger in this world; 
therefore go quickly and tell him what are verily true.” 


20-21. Vyasa said O King! The messenger was quite surprised to 
hear the bold words, though full of reason and morals, of the Devi, 
puffed up by the vanity of Her strength and departed. Coming to the 
Lord of the Daityas, the messenger bowed down before his feet and 
told him sweet words, full of morals, in a very humble way after 
pondering over and over again what he would say. 


22-29. The messenger said O King! Words, true and the same 
time sweet, ought to be spoken before one’s master; but these are 
very rare in this world. On the other hand, if unpleasant words be 
spoken, the King gets very angry. So I am very anxious now. O King! 
Whether that lady is weak or strong, whence has She come, whose 
wife is She, I have not been able to ascertain all these. How then 
can I say about Her conduct? But, on seeing that harsh speaking 
woman, I have come to understand this much that She is 



exceedingly haughty and has come to fight. O King! You are very 
intelligent; therefore judge what ought to be done after hearing only 
what that lady has told me to speak to you. That Lady said “In 
days of childhood, while I was playing, out of my childish nature, I 
promised before my comrades that I would marry that valiant warrior 
who would defeat me thoroughly in a battle and thus curb My pride. 
O best of kings! You are religious; so you ought to make My word 
turn out false. Bring Me under your control by defeating Me in a 
battle.” O King! Hearing these words I have returned; now do 
whatever you like. That Lady is determined to fight and is waiting 
there, firmly mounted on a lion, and with various weapons in Her 
hands. Now judge and do what is best. 


30. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the words of Sugriva, the 
king S'umbha asked his hero brother Nis’umbha who was close by. 


31-32. O Brother! You are intelligent; speak out truly what ought to 
be done now? The lovely woman is challenging us to fight. Shall I go 
to fight or you would go with forces? I will do whatever you say. 


33-34. Nis’umbha said O King! It is not proper that you or I would 
go to the battlefield. Better send Dhumralochana to the field quickly. 
Let that hero go there and defeat that beautiful Lady and bring Her 
here. You can then marry Her. 


35. Vyasa said Hearing thus his younger brother’s words, 
S’umbha filled with anger, instantly sent Dhumralochana who was 
close by to battle. 



36-40. S’umbha said “O Dhumralochana! Take a vast army and 
go at once to the battlefield and bring that stupid Lady, vainly 
boasting of Her strength. If any Deva, Danava or any other powerful 
human being take Her side, kill him instantly. Slay Her companion 
the Goddess Kali and bring Her too. Do all these responsible duties 
and return quickly. That Chaste Lady is to be protected by all means. 
The body of that thin Lady is very delicate; so shoot arrows at Her 
very carefully and see that they are not sharp. But kill those that will 
help Her with weapons in their hands. Try your best to protect Her, 
never to kill Her. 


41-60. Vyasa said O King! No sooner ordered thus by the king, 
Dhumralochana bowed down to the king, and, accompanied by sixty 
thousand Danava forces, quickly went to the battlefield and saw 
there that the Lady was sitting in a beautiful garden. Seeing that 
deer-eyed Lady, Dhumralochana began to address Her with great 
humility and in sweet words full of reason and goodness. O Devi! O 
highly Fortunate One! Hear! S’umbha is very much distressed owing 
to Thy absence. Lest there be any break in the love sentiments, that 
King, a wise statesman, sent a messenger with instructions to speak 
Thee in sweet and suitable terms; but, O fair One! That messenger, 
on arriving before the King had told all the contrary words. O Knower 
of love sentiments! Hearing thus the messenger’s words, my lord 
S’umbha, sick with love, has become immersed in cares and 
anxieties. That messenger had not been able to realise the true 
meaning of Thy words. O honourable Lady! The sentence uttered by 
Thee, “He who will conquer me in battle” is full of deep meanings; he 
was stupid; hence he could not realise the meaning of the word 
“battle” intended by Thee. O Beautiful One! “Battle” means two 
different things according to persons for whom it is intended; it is of 
two kinds One out of excitement and another out of sexual 
intercourse. With Thee, the sexual intercourse is intended; and with 
any other enemy, excitement in a real fight is meant. Out of these, 
the fight of sexual intercourse is full of sweetness and the fight with 



enemies is painful. O Beautiful One! I know Thy intentions fully. In 
Thy heart reigns that fight of sexual intercourse. Knowing me as 
expert in these affairs, the king S’umbha has sent me today to Thee 
with a vast army. O highly Fortunate Lady! Thou art clever and 
shrewd; hear my gentle words; serve S’umbha, the lord of the three 
worlds, the destroyer of the Deva’s pride. Thou wilt be the dearest 
queen-consort and enjoy the best pleasures. The powerful S’umbha 
knows the real meaning of the fight of sexual intercourse; so he will 
easily conquer Thee. When Thou wilt shew various amorous 
gestures, he will also show his feelings. And the Kalika Devi, your 
companion will remain with Thee as a helping mate in your vital 
pleasures. The lord of the Daityas, expert in the science of love, will 
certainly conquer Thee engaged in amorous fight and will lay Thee 
stretched on a soft bedding and will make Thee tired; he will make 
Thy body covered with blood by striking with nails and he will bite 
Thy lips to pieces; then Thou wilt perspire profusely and wilt cease 
fighting. Thus Thy mental desire for fight - sexual intercourse - will be 
satisfied. O Beloved! At Thy mere sight S’umbha will be completely 
subject to Thee. Therefore dost Thou keep my sweet and beneficial 
words. Thou art an honourable Lady; and Thou wilt be highly 
honoured by all if Thou marryest S’umbha. Those are certainly very 
unfortunate who like fighting with weapons. O Beloved! The sexual 
intercourse is always favourite to Thee; therefore it is not worthy of 
Thee to fight with weapons. Therefore dost Thou make the king free 
of sorrows by pouring on him Thy mouth nectar and by making his 
heart bud forth by Thy kicking, as Bakula and Kurubaka trees 
blossom forth when drenched with mouth nectar and Asoka tree gets 
blossomed by the kicking of women. 


Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the 
description and Dhumralochana giving the news in S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 




Chapter 25. On The Killing Of Dhumralochana 


1-7. Vyasa said O Janamejaya! When Dhumralochana ceased 
speaking, the Devi Kalika made a wild laughter and began to speak 
sweetly thus O Stupid! Skilled in flattery, you know only how to 
use jugglery of words like an actor; do you think that your ends will 
be served if you speak only sweet words; this can never be. O 
Stupid! Fight now; there is no need of useless words. You are strong 
and have been sent by that wicked Demon with a great army. This 
Devi, out of wrath, will kill you, S’umbha, and Nis’umbha and other 
commanders by Her arrows and will then return to Her abode. 
Where is that stupid S’umbha? And where is this Devi, the Great 
Enchantress of the Universe! 


Their marriage in this world is entirely out of question and can never 
take place. O Stupid! What do you think that a lioness becoming very 
passionate, would make an ordinary jackal her husband? or would a 
she-elephant prefer an ass? or would a heavenly Cow like a bison? 
Go to S’umbha and Nis’umbha and tell truly to them “Fight or go 
instantly to Patala.” 


8-10. Vyasa said O Fortunate One! The Demon Dhumralochana, 
hearing thus the Kalika’s words, became very angry and spoke with 
reddened eyes “O Ugly One! I will slay Thee and this lion 
infatuated with pride in battle and take this Fair One to the king. O 
Kali! I have not been able to do this, simply it would break our 
amorous love sentiments. O Quarrelsome One! Otherwise I would 
have undoubtedly slain Thee just now with my sharpened arrows 
tipped with irons.” 



11. Hearing thus, Kalika said O Fool! Why do you boast vainly? 
this is not the religion of a hero with bows and arrows in their hands. 
Shoot your arrows with all your might; I will send you to the realm of 
Death. 


12-31. Vyasa said O King! Hearing the Devi’s words, 
Dhumralochana caught hold of his very strong bow and began to 
shoot arrows after arrows at Kalika. Indra and the other Devas came 
out to see the fight on their best cars in the celestial space and 
shouted “Victory to the Devi” and thus eulogised Her. Then a deadly 
fight ensued between them with arrows, axes, clubs, S’aktis, and 
Musalas and various other weapons. Kalika cut off at the very outset 
all the asses that carried the chariot by Her arrows and next broke 
his chariot and began to laugh repeatedly. O Bharata! Then 
Dhumralochana becoming angry mounted on another chariot and 
began to shoot deadly arrows at Kalika. Kalika Devi, too, out off 
those arrows into pieces before they reached Her and shot arrows 
after arrows on the Danava in quick succession. Thousands of his 
soldiers near to him were killed; the asses and the charioteer were 
killed and the chariot was broken. She cut off his arrows by Her swift 
serpent-like arrows and blew Her conchshell. The Devas seeing this 
became very glad. Dhumralochana, seeing himself displaced from 
his chariot, took up with anger his very strong Parigha weapon and 
came near to the chariot of the Devi. Then the Danava, terrific like 
death, began to abuse the Devi and said “O Ugly tawny-eyed 
Kali! I will kill Thee just now.” Thus saying, he suddenly went near to 
Her and when he was about to throw his Parigha weapon on Her, the 
Ambika Devi burnt him to ashes simply by Her loud shout (of 
defiance). Seeing Dhumralochana burnt to ashes, his soldiers 
became panic-stricken, and fled away immediately, crying aloud “O 
Father! O Father!” The Devas saw this and and gladly showered 
from high heaps of flowers on the Devi. O King! The battle ground 
then assumed a dreadful appearance; at some places the slain 
Danavas; at others, the horses; at other places elephants and at 



some other places the asses lay scattered on the field. The herons, 
crows, vultures, the Pis’achas of the class Batabaraphas and jackals 
and other carnivorous animals, began to dance wildly and clamour 
hideously at the sight of the dead bodies, lying on the field. The 
Ambika Devi then quitting the field, went to a distant place and blew 
Her conchshell so furiously and terribly that S’umbha heard that 
terrific noise, while he was sitting in his own residence. At the next 
moment, he saw that the Danava forces had retreated, and they 
were coming there crying. Some of them were besmeared with blood 
all over the bodies; some had got their feet, some their arms, cut 
asunder, some were devoid of eyes, some had got their backs 
broken; some had their waists broken; some got their necks broken 
and some were going on bedsteads. Seeing them thus, S’umbha 
and Nis’umbha asked them “Where is Dhumralochana? Why have 
you all retreated? And why have you not brought that Lady? Where 
are the other forces? Who has blown this horrible conch-shell? O 
Fools! Inform me quickly and truly all these things.” 


32-33. The soldiers said “O King! Dhumralochana has been slain 
by Kalika; She has destroyed all the soldiers and has done 
extraordinary deeds.” O King! Know the blowing of the conchshell 
that has caused terror in the hearts of the Danavas and has 
enhanced the joy of the Devas and is being resounded in the 
celestial space, is that done by the Ambika Devi. (Note: In the 
Markandeya Purana, Ambika killed Dhumra.) 


34-45. O Lord! When the Devi broke the chariot of Dhumralochana 
by the multitude of Her arrows and killed the horses and at last slew 
Dhumralochana himself, when all the forces were slain by Her who 
appeared like a lion and when the rest of the army retreated, the 
Devas seeing all these were very much gladdened and showered 
flowers from the celestial sky. O King! We have come to a perfect 
conclusion that we will not get the victory; now consult with your 



expert ministers and do what is needful. O King! The Supreme 
Goddess of the Universe is waiting there alone to fight with you 
without any help of any other forces; this is a great wonder to us. O 
King! Intoxicated with Her power, that Girl, fearless, is reigning there 
taking Her stand on the lion. All these seem wonderful to us. O King! 
Consult with your councillors and out of the four policies peace, fight, 
retreat or remaining neutral, accept what is best. O Tormentor of the 
foes! True! There are no forces with the Devi, but the whole host of 
the Devas will take up Her cause in crisis, there is no doubt. In due 
time, Hari and Hara both will come and assist Her; now the 
guardians of the several quarters, the Lokapalas are waiting by Her 
side in the celestial space. O Tormentor of the Gods! Know that the 
Gandarbhas, Kinnaras, and human beings all will come timely and 
help Her. O King! We guess all these. But that Lady does not want 
the assistance of anyone nor does She expect that any other body 
would do the work for Her. You must know this certainly, that She 
alone can destroy this whole Universe. What to speak of the 
Danavas only! O Highly Fortunate One! Knowing all these, do as you 
like. It is the duty of the servants to speak beneficial and at the same 
time true words with moderation. 


46-51. Vyasa said O King! S’umbha, the tormentor of others, 
hearing their words asked his younger brother in private “O 
Brother! This Kalika has slain today Dhumralochana with his forces; 
the few retreated and came over to me. Now the Ambika Devi, 
puffed up with pride is blowing Her conchshell. Brother! The ways of 
Time are knowable even to the wise. The grass becomes a 
thunderbolt and the thunderbolt becomes like a grass and 
powerless. Know thus the course of Destiny. O Fortunate One! Now I 
ask you, what are we to do now? Are we to entertain yet the desire 
of enjoying Ambika, or are we to fly away from here or are we to fight 
on? Say quickly. Though younger, in times of difficulty, I consider you 
as my elder.” 



52-54. Hearing thus the S’umbha’s words, Nis’umbha said “O 
Sinless One! Flight or taking refuge in a fort is not reasonable. To 
fight with this Lady is the best course. I will take the best generals 
and soldiers with me and will slay that Lady and quickly return. And if 
Fate be strong and prove it otherwise, then, after my death, think out 
again and again and do what is best.” 


55-60. Hearing thus the younger brother’s words, S’umbha said, 

“You better wait; let Chanda and Munda go to the battle, surrounded 
with forces. To kill a hare it is not necessary to send an elephant. 
This is a very trifling matter; the two great warriors Chanda and 
Munda will be freely able to slay Her.” Thus saying his younger 
brother, the King S’umbha addressed Chanda Munda, who were 
waiting before him, thus O Chanda! O Munda! Take your forces 
and go quickly to kill that shameless Lady, puffed up with pride. O 
Pair of Warriors! Kill that tawny-eyed Kalika in the battle and bring 
that Ambika Devi here quickly. Do this Great Service. And if that 
haughty Ambika be unwilling to come here, though taken as a 
captive, then kill that Durga, the ornament of the battle, too, by sharp 
arrows. 


Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of 
Dhumralochana in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam, 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 26. On The Killing Of Chanda And 
Munda 


1-17. Vyasa said O King! Thus ordered, the two strong warriors 
Chanda and Munda hurriedly went to the battle, accompanied by a 
vast army. There they saw the Devi, intent on doing good to the 
Gods. Then they began to address Her in conciliatory words. O 
Lady! Dost Thou not know that the extraordinarily strong S’umbha 
and Nis’umhha, the Lords of the Daityas have crushed down the 
Devas and vanquished Indra and have become intoxicated with their 
victory? O Fair One! Thou art alone! Only Kalika and Thy Lion are 
with Thee! It is Thy foolishness that Thou art desirous to conquer 
S’umbha, who is endowed with all power. I think there is no adviser 
to Thee, man nor woman; the Devas have sent Thee here simply for 
Thy destruction. Think, O Delicate One! over the powers of Thine as 
well as those of Thy enemy. Vainly dost Thou boast of Thy having 
eighteen hands. Before the great warrior S’umbha, the conqueror of 
the Devas, many hands and many weapons will be useless; they will 
prove mere burdens. So dost Thou fulfil what reigns in the heart of 
S’umbha, the destroyer of the legs and the uprooter of the teeth of 
Airavata elephant. Vain is Thy boast, O Beloved! Follow my sweet 
words; they will do good to Thee, O Large-eyed One! They will 
destroy Thy pains and give Thee bliss. Those actions that lead to 
pain are to be avoided by the wise; and those that bring in happiness 
are to be served by the Pundits, versed in the S’astras. O Sweet 
speaking one! Thou art clever. Look at the great strength of S’umbha 
with Thy eyes. He has enhanced his glory by crushing down the 
Devas. And if Thou thinkest the gods superior, that is false, for the 
wise men do not rely on the mere guess, full of doubts; they believe 
what they actually see. S’umbha, hard to be conquered in battles, is 
the great enemy of the Gods; they have been crushed down by him, 
and have therefore sent Thee here. O Sweet smiling One! Thou hast 
been deceived by their sweet words; they, prompted by their selfish 
ends, have sent Thee here simply to give Thee trouble. The friends 



that come with certain business and selfish ends are to be rejected. 
Friends out of religious motives are only to be sought for refuge. 
Verily I tell Thee that the gods are terribly selfish. Therefore dost 
Thou serve S’umbha, the conqueror of Indra and the lord of the three 
worlds; he is a hero, beautiful, lovely, cunning and thoroughly expert 
in the science of amorous love. Thou wilt get the prosperity of all the 
worlds by the mere command of S’umbha; therefore make a firm 
resolve and serve that splendid husband S’umbha. 


18-30. Vyasa said O King! The Universal Mother, hearing the 
words of Chanda spoke with a voice deep as thunder. O Boor! Why 
do you use false deceitful words? Fly away just now. Why shall I 
make S’umbha my husband, disregarding Hah, Hara and the other 
Devas? O You, a veritable Fool! I have no necessity for My lord; I 
have got nothing to do with my lord. I Myself am the Lord of all the 
beings; and I preserve this whole Universe with all the lords and 
beings therein. Note this. In ancient times I saw thousands and 
thousands of S’umbha and Nis’umbha and I slew them all. I sent 
hundreds and hundreds of Daityas and Demons to the realm of 
Death. Before Me the hosts of Devas were destroyed in yugas after 
yugas. Today the Daityas again will go unto destruction. The Time 
has come to destroy the Daityas; why, then, are you struggling in 
vain with your followers for your lives? Fight now and keep the 
Dharma of the warriors; death is inevitable; thinking thus, the high- 
souled ones should keep their name, fame, and respect. What 
business have you to do with S’umbha and Nis’umbha? Follow the 
warrior’s Dharma and go to Heavens, the abode of the gods. 
S’umbha, Nis’umbha and your other friends and followers, all will 
follow you and will come here no doubt. O Stupid One! I will put an 
end to all the Danavas today. Therefore cast aside your weakness 
and go on, fight. I will slay you and your brother just now; next I will 
kill the proud Rakta Vija, Nis’umbha and S’umbha and the other 
Danavas in the battle field and will then go to My desired place. Now 
remain here if you like or fly away quickly. You have been fed in vain 



because you fear to fight. What use is there now in using sweet 
words like a weak and distressed man. Well! Take up your arms now 
and fight. 


31-61. Vyasa said O King! Chanda and Munda, elated with pride 
got excited at the Devi’s words, became angry and made a violent 
noise with their bow strings. The Devi, too, blew Her conchshell so 
loudly that the ten quarters of the sky reverberated; in the 
meanwhile, the powerful lion became very angry and roared loudly. 
Hearing that sound Indra and other Devas, the Munis, Yaksas, 
Siddhas, and Kinnaras became all very glad. A dreadful fight than 
ensued between Chandika and Chanda with arrows, axes and other 
weapons, causing terror to the weak. Then Chandika Devi became 
very wrathful and cut off to pieces all the arrows shot by Chanda and 
then hurled arrows serpent-like on him. Then the sky over the battle 
ground seemed to be overcast with arrows just as the clouds get 
covered over with locusts, dreadful to the cultivators. In the 
meanwhile Munda, exceedingly terrible, came up to the field, taking 
with him his army and becoming impatient with anger began to shoot 
arrows. Seeing that multitude of arrows, Ambika got very angry; out 
of Her frowny look. Her eyebrows became crooked. Her face 
became black, and Her eyes turned red like Kadali flowers; at this 
time suddenly came out of Her forehead Kali. Wearing the tiger’s 
skin, cruel, covering Her body with elephant’s skin, wearing a 
garland of skulls, terrible, with a belly like a well dried up, mouth wide 
open, with a wide waist, lip hanging loosely, with axe, noose, S’iva’s 
weapon, in Her hands. She looked very terrible like the Night of 
Dissolution. She began to lick frequently and forcibly dashed into the 
Danava army and began to destroy it. She angrily began to take the 
powerful Danavas by Her arms and pouring them into Her mouth 
crushed them with Her teeth. Taking the elephants with bells by Her 
own power in Her hands She put them all into Her mouth and 
swallowed them all with their riders and began to laugh hoarsely. 
Thus camels, horses and charioteers with chariots all She put into 



Her mouth and began to chew them all grimly. O King! Seeing that 
the forces were being thus destroyed, the two great warriors Chanda 
and Munda began to shoot arrows after arrows without intermission 
and covered the Devi with them. Chanda hurled the Sudarsan-like 
disc, lustrous like the Sun, with great force against the Devi, and 
frequently shouted thundering cries. Seeing him roaring and the 
lustrous disc coming towards Her like another sun. She shot at him 
arrows sharpened on stones so that the warrior Chanda became 
overpowered by them and lay down senseless on the ground. The 
powerful Munda seeing his brother unconscious became very much 
distressed with grief; but he got angry and began to shoot arrows 
immediately on the Devi. Chandika Devi hurled the weapon named 
Isika and thus cut off to pieces all the dreadful arrows of Munda in a 
moment and shot Ardha Chandra (semi-circular) arrow at him. With 
this arrow the powerful Asura was deprived of his pride and made to 
lie down unconscious on the earth. Munda thus lying on the ground, 
a great uproar arose amidst the army of the Danavas; and the Devas 
became delighted in the sky. In the meanwhile Chanda became 
conscious and taking a very heavy club hurled it violently on the right 
hand of Kalika. Kalika rendered that blow useless and instantly tied 
down that Asura by Her Pasa weapon, purified by Mantras. Munda 
again rose up, and, seeing his brother in that fastened condition, 
came to the front well armoured and with an exceedingly strong 
weapon called S’akti. Seeing the Asura coming. She instantly 
fastened him down like his brother. Taking the powerful Chanda and 
Munda like hares and laughing wildly. Kali went to Ambika, and said 
“I have brought the two beasts very auspicious as offerings in this 
sacrificial war. Kindly accept these.” Seeing the two Danavas 
brought, as if they were the two wolves, Ambika told her sweetly 
O Thou, fond of war! Thou art very wise; so dost not commit the act 
of envy nor dost leave them; think over the purport of my words and 
know that it is Thy duty to bring the Devi’s work to a successful 
issue. 



62-65. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the words of Ambika, 
Kalika spoke to Her again “In this war-sacrifice there is this axe 
which is like a sacrificial post; I will offer these two as victims to Thy 
sacrifice. Thus no act of envy will be committed (i.e., killing in a 
sacrifice is not considered as envy).” Thus saying, the Kalika Devi 
cut off their heads with great force and gladly drank their blood. Thus 
seeing the two Asuras killed, Ambika said gladly Thou hast done 
the service to the gods; so I will give Thee an excellent boon. O 
Kalika! As Thou hast killed Chanda and Munda, henceforth Thou wilt 
be renowned in this world as Chamunda. 


Here ends the Twenty-sixth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of 
Chanda and Munda in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha 
Puranam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 27. On The Description Of The War Of 
Raktabua 


1-14. Vyasa said O King! Seeing the two Danavas killed in the 
battle, the remnant soldiers all fled away back to S’umbha. Some of 
them were cut and wounded in many places by arrows, some had 
their arms severed, some were bleeding; thus they entered crying 
into the sky. On reaching the lord of the Daityas, they began to make 
frequently the noise indicative of danger and exclaimed, “O King! 
Save us. Save us; Kalika is devouring everything today. The two 
great warriors Chanda and Munda, the tormentors of the Devas, 
were slain by Her; all the soldiers were devoured by Her; we have 
fled away panic-stricken. O Lord! Kalika has rendered the battlefield 
horrible by the dead bodies of elephants, horses, camels, warriors, 
and foot soldiers. A river of blood is flowing there of which the flesh 
of the soldiers is sufficient mud, their hairs are like aquatic plants, the 
broken chariot wheels are like whirlpools, the severed arms and feet 
are like fishes and their heads look like Tumbi fruits (long gourds). O 
King! Save your line; go quickly to Patala. The Devi has become 
angry and will, no doubt, destroy our race. Even the lion is eating 
away the Danavas; and the Kalika Devi is killing innumerable 
Danavas by Her arrows. Therefore, O King! What intentions are you 
cherishing in your mind? Is it that you have desired to be merely 
slain with your younger brother Nis’umbha! And what good purpose 
will this cruel woman, destroying your race, serve, for Whose sake, 
you have desired to kill all your friends? O King! Victory or defeat in 
this world are under the Daiva. The wise never risk to meet with 
great difficulties for the gratification of an ordinary whim. O Lord! 

Look at the wonderful deeds of that Great Creator! What more 
wonder can there be than this that a woman alone killed all the 
Danavas. O King! You have conquered by the help of your army all 
the Lokapalas (guardians of the quarters of the sky); but now that 
Lady, though alone and unsupported by anybody, is challenging you 
to fight. 



15-24. O King! In ancient times, in the holy pilgrimage of Puskara, 
the sacred place of the Devas, you performed austerities when 
Brahma, the Grandsire of all the worlds, came to you to grant a 
boon. Then you asked the boon and wanted to become to be 
immortal. But when Brahma refused to grant it you wanted from him 
and were granted that you would not be killed by any male being, be 
he a Deva, Danava, a man, Naga, Kinnara, Yaksa, or any other 
person. O Lord! For that very reason we think now that this Lady has 
timely come to kill you. Think over it seriously and cease fighting. O 
King! This Devi is the great Maha-Maya, the Highest Prakriti; It is 
She that devours everything at the end of a Kalpa . This auspicious 
Devi is the Creatrix of all the worlds and the Devas. She is the 
embodiment of the three qualities, endowed with all the powers. She 
is Tamasi, i.e., is the Destructrix of the whole world. This Devi can 
never be conquered. Imperishable, Eternal, She is the Sandhya and 
the Refuge of the Devas. She is Gayatri, the Mother of the Vedas. 
She is All-knowing and always manifested. This Undecaying Lady is 
void of any Prakritic attributes, though She at times possesses 
attributes. She is Success Incarnate and bestows success to all; She 
is Bliss Herself and gives bliss to all. This Gauri bids all the Devas 
discard all their fears. She is S’uddha Sattva. Thus knowing, O King! 
Quit thy inimical feelings to Her; seek refuge unto Her; the Devi 
would then certainly protect you. Be obedient to Her and save your 
race. Then the remnant Danavas will be able to live for a very long 
time.” 


25. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus, S’umbha, the conqueror of 
the Devas, told them truly in words becoming of a hero. 


26-42. S’umbha said “O Fools! Hold your tongue.You have fled 
because your desire to live is very strong. So you better go to Patala 
without any delay. This world is under the control of Fate; so I need 



not think about Victory. I am under this Fate just as Brahma and 
other Devas are under it. Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Yama, Agni, 

Varuna, Surya, Chandra, and Indra are all under the sway of this 
Destiny. O Fools! Whatever is inevitable will certainly come to pass. 
What need I think over it then? The effort also comes to be of such a 
nature as will lead to that ordained by Fate. Thus thinking, the wise 
never grieve; especially the wise ones never leave their own Dharma 
for fear of death. The happiness, pain, longevity, birth and death of 
all the embodied souls are all determined by Fate when their proper 
time arrives. Seel When the time is over, Brahma, Visnu and 
Mahadeva, the lord of Parvati die away; on the expiration of their 
terms of lives, Indra and other Devas go to destruction. Similarly I 
am also completely under the sway of time; so what doubt is there 
that I, too, will go to destruction when I have observed my own 
Dharma! This Lady is challenging me to fight of Her own will; how 
can I fly away and live hundreds of years. I will fight today. Let the 
result come whatever it may. I will gladly take the victory or defeat 
whatever the case may be. The learned approving of the cause of 
effort declare Fate as fictitious; those who realise their sayings know 
that they are full of reason. Without exertion no end can be achieved; 
weak persons depend on the destiny. Foolish persons say that Fate 
is strong; but the wise do not say so. There is no proof whether Fate 
exists or not; in fact what is called Fate is invisible; how can it then 
be seen? Has anybody seen Fate? It is simply a scare for the 
illiterate; remedy only to console one’s mind in times of distress. 
Simply proximity to a grindmill without any man’s effort cannot grind 
a material. Therefore if exertion be made in proportion to the gravity 
of the work, success is sure to ensue; if exertion be made less in 
proportion, the work does not come to a successful issue. If time, 
place and one’s enemies’ forces be correctly taken into account and 
then if the proper attempts be made, success follows; thus 
Brihaspati has said.” 



43-44. Vyasa said O King! Thus making a firm resolve to send the 
powerful Raktabija to the battle with a vast army; S’umbha said “O 
Raktabija! You are a very powerful hero; therefore do you go to the 
battle. O Fortunate One! Fight as you are the strength of your 
forces.” 


45-46. Raktabija said “O King! You need not be a bit anxious for 
this work.Certainly I will either slay Her or I will bring Her under your 
control. Please see my skill in this warfare; that Lady, favourite of 
the gods, is worth nothing; I will just now conquer Her and make Her 
your slave.” 


47-50. Vyasa said O Best of Kurus! Thus saying, the powerful 
Raktabija mounted on his chariot and went to the battle 
accompanied by his forces. The battalion consisted of cavalry, 
infantry, chariots and elephants. Thus surrounded he departed from 
the city for that Devi, seated on a mountain top. Then the Devi, 
seeing him coming, blew Her conchshell; the Danavas were terrified 
at that sound and the joy of the Devas increased. Hearing that sound 
Raktabija came very hurriedly to Chamunda and began to speak to 
Her sweetly. 


51-62. O Girl! Do you think me weak and thus want to terrify me with 
the sound of a conchshell? O Lean One! Have you taken me to be a 
Dhumralochana? O Sweet speaking one! My name is Raktabija; I 
have come here for Thy sake. If Thou desirest to fight, be prepared; I 
am not a bit afraid of that. O Dear! You saw those who were weak; I 
do not belong to that class. Therefore dost Thou fight as Thou likest 
and then Thou wilt be able to ascertain my strength. O Beautiful! If 
Thou didst serve the old persons before, if Thou hadst heard the 
science of politics and morals, if Thou hadst studied the political 
economy, joined the assemblage of the Pundits or if Thou hast been 



well versed in literature and Tantras, then hear this my good counsel 
which will serve as a medicinal diet to Thee. Out of the nine 
sentiments, the S’ringara (Amorous love sentiments) and S’anti 
(Peace) are considered as the chief by the assemblage of the 
Pundits. Again out of these two, the love sentiment is the king. 
Drenched with this sentiment, Visnu lives with Kamala; Brahma, the 
four-faced, lives with Savitri; Indra with S’achi and S’ankara resides 
with his wife Lima. The tree stands with creepers surrounding it, the 
deer lives with his female deer, the pigeon lives with the female 
pigeon; thus all the beings are very attached to this sentiment of 
remaining in couples. Those who cannot enjoy owing to certain 
disease or illness, they are deprived by Fate of such enjoyments. 
Those who are ignorant of this love sentiment in couples, they are 
deprived of it by the sweet jugglery of words of the cheat and yet 
attached to the Peace sentiment. When delusion, the destroyer of 
Buddhi, the common sense, occurs, when the violent indomitable 
anger, greed, and lust arise, where, then, is the place for knowledge 
and dispassion? Therefore, O Auspicious One! Dost Thou marry the 
beautiful S’umbha or the powerful Nis’umbha. 


63. Vyasa said O King! When Raktabija spoke all these words, 
standing before the Devi Kalika, Ambika and Chamunda began to 
laugh. 


Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Fifth Book on the 
description of the war of Raktabija in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the 
Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 28. On The Description Of The Fighting 
Of The Goddesses 


1-5. Vyasa said O King! The Devi, hearing thus, laughed and 
spoke the following reasonable words, in a voice deep as a rumbling 
cloud O Dull brained one! Already I told to that messenger before 
in reply to you; why then do you boast in vain? If there be any such 
in the three worlds who can stand equal to Me in appearance, 
strength, and prosperity, I will marry him. Go to S’umbha and 
Nis’umbha and inform them that thus I promised before; therefore let 
any of them conquer Me in battle and then marry Me according to 
the prescribed rules. You have come here to execute the order of 
S’umbha; so either stand up and fight or fly to Patala with your King. 


6-11. Vyasa said O King! Hearing the Devi’s words, the Danava 
was filled with anger and began to shoot dreadful arrows at once on 
the Lion. Ambika, then, ready-handed, seeing the multitude of 
arrows coming in the sky like serpents, cut them off in a moment to 
pieces by Her sharp arrows. The Devi, then, drawing Her bow, shot 
arrows sharpened on stone at the great Asura Raktabija. Then that 
wicked Demon, thus shot at by the arrows, fell unconscious on the 
chariot. When he lay thus senseless, a great uproar arose amidst his 
army and the soldiers began to cry aloud saying, “Alas! We all are 
killed.” Then S’umbha, the king of the Asuras, hearing the sound of 
Boomba (a danger cry by hands and mouth) ordered all the Danavas 
to be ready for the battle. 


12. Then S’umbha said :-- Let all Kambojas go to the battle with all 
their forces; let other powerful heroes, especially the Kalakeyas, too, 
who are very strong heroes, go up for the battle. (Note: Kamboja, 
name of a people and their country. They inhabited the Hindoo 



Koosh mountain which separates the Giljit valley from Baikh and 
probably extended up to little Tibet and Ladak. The Kalakeyas may 
be the Afridis.) 


13-33. Vyasa said O King! Thus ordered, all the fourfold army of 
S’umbha, viz., cavalry, infantry, elephants and chariots went out, 
intoxicated for war, to the battle ground where the Devi existed. The 
Devi Chandika, seeing the Danava forces coming near, made at 
once terrible sounds frequently. The Ambika Devi also made the 
sound with Her bowstring and blew Her conchshell. Kali, then, 
shouted aloud opening Her mouth widely. The powerful Lion, the 
Devi’s Vahana, hearing the terrible sounds, roared so loudly that the 
Danavas were struck with strange terror. The powerful Danavas, 
then, hearing that sound became impatient with anger and shot 
arrows after arrows on the Devi. The wonderful horrible battle, then, 
ensued, causing horripilation and the S’aktis of Brahma and the 
other Devas began to come to Chandika Devi. The DevTs, the wives 
of the several Devas, then went, to the battlefield in their respective 
forms with ornaments and Vahanas as generally on such occasions. 
The S’akti (wife) of Brahma named Brahmani, mounting on the back 
of Her Swan came there with a string of beads and Kamandalu (an 
wooden waterpot used by ascetics). The VaisnavT with Her yellow 
robes came there mounted on Garuda (the sacred bird of Visnu, the 
carrier of Him) with conch, discus, club, and lotus in Her hands. The 
Devi S’ankari, the wife of S’iva, the Auspicious One, arrived on the 
back of Her Bull. The emblem of half-moon was on Her forehead 
while in Her hands She held snake, bracelet, and trident (Trisula) 
and the sign of fearlessness for Her devotees. The beautiful wife of 
Kartika, Kaumari Devi, looking like Kartika, came to fight there 
mounted on a peacock. The fairfaced Indrani, decked with 
ornaments on Her several limbs, came there to fight, with thunder¬ 
bolt in Her hand, mounted on the elephant Airavata. The Varahi Devi 
looking like a female boar, came also, seated on an elevated seat of 
departed souls (Preta). The Narasimhi, resembling Nrisimha (the 



Man Lion Incarnation) came there. The wife of Yama, looking fearful 
like Yama arrived there on the battlefield smiling and with staff in Her 
hand and mounted on the back of a buffalo. Thus the wives of 
Kuvera, Varuna, and other Devas came there with proper forms, 
Vahanas, ornaments, accompanied by their forces and all excited. 
Seeing them all, the Devi Ambika became glad; the Devas, too, 
became peaceful and expressed their great joy; the Danavas were 
afraid at the sight of them. S’ankara, auspicious to all the beings, 
came there to the battlefield, surrounded by these goddesses and 
thus said to Chandika Slay quickly all these Asuras, S’umbha, 
Nis’umbha and all other Danavas to serve the cause of the Devas. 
Let all the goddesses destroy the Danava race and thus free the 
world from dangers; they may, then, return to their own abodes. Let 
the Devas get their shares of sacrifices, let the Brahmanas perform 
the sacrificial acts, and let all the creatures, moving or not moving, 
be happy. Let all calamities such as proceed from drought, excessive 
rain, rats, foreign invasion, locusts and birds, bats, etc., come to an 
end. Let the clouds bestow rains regularly and let the cultivation yield 
ample harvests. Note here that rats bring in plague. 


34-40. Vyasa said O King! When S’ankara, the Lord of the gods 
and Auspicious to all, said thus, a wonderful female ensued out of 
the body of Chandika, very furious, horrible, with hundreds of jackals 
surrounding and yelling; then that S’akti, of dreadful appearance, 
said to the five-faced S’iva, smiling O Deva of the Devas! Go 
quickly to the lord of the Daityas; do the duty of a messenger for us, 
O Destroyer of lust! O S’ankara! Tell that haughty lustful S’umbha 
and Nis’umbha leave the Heavens and go to Patala. Let the Devas 
reign in the Heavens; Indra go to his own beautiful throne; let all the 
Devas go to their appropriate places in Heaven and receive their 
sacrificial offerings duly. And if the Demons desire to live, let them go 
quickly to the city of Patala where other Danavas are dwelling. Else, 
if they like to die, let them go quickly to the battlefield and let their 
flesh be eaten up by Her jackals. 



41. Vyasa said O King! Hearing Her words, S’ulapani went quickly 
to S’umbha, the lord of the Danavas, seated in the assennbly, and 
said thus 


42-44. O King! I am Hara, the Destroyer of the Asura Tripura; now I 
have come to you for your good as a messenger of Ambika Devi. 
Quit the Heavens and Earth and go quickly to Patala where reside 
the powerful Bali and Prahlada, or if you like to court Death, come to 
fight; I will slay you all in a moment. O King! The Great Queen 
Ambika Devi has sent me with these instructions for your welfare 
and information. 


45-63. Vyasa said Q King! Thus conveying the nectarlike, 
beneficial words of the Devi to the chief Daityas, S’iva, the Holder of 
the trident, returned to his own place. The S’akti that sent S’ambhu 
as a messenger to the Danavas is known in three worlds as S’iva 
Duti. The Daityas, thus hearing the rigorous words of the Devi, put 
on their coats of armour and taking their bows and arrows quickly 
went out to fight. They came with great force to the battlefield, 
stretched their bows to their ears and shot piercing arrows, 
sharpened on stone and tipped with iron, at the Chandika Devi. The 
Kalika Devi, too began to strike some with the trident, some with 
S’akti weapon, and some with clubs and rent them asunder and 
devoured them all, and began to roam in the field. Brahmani began 
to pour water from Her Kamandalu on the powerful Danavas in the 
battlefield and thus destroyed them. Mahes’vari, mounting on Her 
Bull gave violent blows by Her trident and thus lay them dead on the 
ground. Vaisnavi, with the blow of Her club, took away the lives of 
many Daityas and striking them with Her Discus out off the heads of 
several others. Indrani hurled Her thunderbolt on the chief Danavas, 
already struck by the feet of the elephant and lay them dead on the 
field. Narasimhi tore the strongest Danavas with the sharp nails and. 



devouring them, walked to and fro and made dreadful sounds. S’iva 
Duti began to laugh hoarsely and laid the Danavas flat on the field, 
when they were at once devoured by Kalika and Chandika. Kaumari, 
seated on a peacock, by drawing the bowstring to Her ears hurled 
arrows sharpened on stone on the enemies and killed them to serve 
the cause of the gods. Varuni tied down the Danavas by Her Pasa 
weapons in a face to face fighting; thus they lay down senseless on 
the ground. O King! Thus the Matrikas, the goddesses, crushed the 
forces. Then the other powerful soldiers fled away terrified. The 
“Boomba” danger cry rose then loudly; on the other hand, the Devas 
began to shower flowers on the Devis. Hearing the distressful 
agonies of the Asuras and the shouts of victory of the Devas, 
Raktabija, the chief of the Danavas became very angry. Seeing 
specially the Danavas flying away and the Devas shouting, that 
powerful Demon came hurriedly to the battlefield with anger. Then 
with eyes reddened with anger, and with various weapons came 
before the Devi, Raktabija mounting on a chariot, and making 
sounds unusual with his bowstring. 


Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the 
description of the fighting of the goddesses in S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 29. On The Killing Of Raktabua 


1-21. Vyasa said O King! Please hear attentively about the 
extraordinary boon that was given by Mahadeva, the God of gods, to 
the great warrior, Raktabija. Whenever a drop of blood from the body 
of that great warrior will drop on the surface of the earth, immediately 
will arise innumerable Danavas, equal in form and power to him; 
thus the Deva Rudra granted the Demon the wonderful boon. Thus 
elated with the boon, he entered into the battlefield with great force 
in order to kill Kalika with Ambika Devi. Seeing the Vaisnavi S’akti, 
lotus-eyed, seated on the bird Garuda, the Demon struck Her with a 
violent weapon (named S’akti). She then baffled the weapon by Her 
club and hurled Sudars’ana disc on the great Asura Raktabija. Thus 
struck by the disc, blood began to ooze out from his body as the red 
stream of soft red sandstone comes out of a mountain-top. Wherever 
on the surface of the earth drops of blood fell from his body, then and 
there sprang out thousands and thousands of demons like him. 
Indrani, the wife of Indra, became very angry and struck the terrible 
Raktabija with his thunderbolt. Streams of blood then began to ooze 
out from his body. No sooner the drops of blood fell from the 
Demon’s body, than were instantaneously born from the blood many 
powerful Asuras, of similar forms, having similar weapons and hard 
to be conquered in battle. Brahmani then becoming enraged struck 
at him with the staff of Brahma with greater force. Mahes’vari rent 
the Danava asunder by striking him with Her trident. Nara Simhi 
pierced the Asura with Her nails; Varahi struck at him with Her teeth. 
Then the Danava becoming angry shot at them all with sharpened 
arrows and pierced them all. Thus when the Matrika DevTs were 
pierced by the club and other various weapons of that great Asura, 
they got very angry and pierced the Danavas in return with shots of 
arrows. Kaumari, too, struck at his breast with Her weapon, named 
S’akti. The Danavas then got angry and hurled on them multitude of 
arrows and began to pierce them. O King! The Chandika Devi, 
getting angry, cut off his weapons into pieces and shot violently at 



him other arrows. O King! Thus struck by severe blows, when blood 
began to flow in profuse quantities from his body, thousands and 
thousands of Danavas resembling Raktabija sprang out instantly 
from it. So much so, that the heavens were all covered over with 
Raktabijas that sprang up from the blood. They all covered all over 
their bodies with coats of armour, began to fight terribly with 
weapons in their hands. Then the Devas, seeing that the 
innumerable Raktavijas were striking the Devi, became very much 
frightened and were distressed with sorrow. They began to talk with 
each other with sorrowful countenances that thousands and 
thousands of huge bodied warriors were springing from the blood. 
These were all very powerful; so how could they be destroyed! In 
this battlefield there were now left only the Matrikas, Kalika, and 
Chandika. It would be certainly extremely difficult for them to 
conquer all these Danavas. And if at that moment, S’umbha and 
Nis’umbha were to join them with his army, certainly a great 
catastrophe would occur. 


22-28. Vyasa said O King! When the Devas were thus extremely 
anxious, out of terror, Ambika Devi said to the lotus-eyed Kali “O 
Chamunda! Open out your mouth quickly, and no sooner I strike 
Raktabija with weapons, you would drink off the blood as fast as it 
runs out of his body. Instantly I will kill those Danavas sprung from 
the blood with sharpened arrows, clubs, swords and Musalas; and 
you would then be able to devour them all at your will, and, then, 
roam in this field as you like. O Large-eyed One! You would drink off 
all the jets of blood in such a way that not a drop of it escapes and 
falls on the ground. And then when they will all be devoured, no 
more Danavas would be able to spring. Thus they will surely be 
extirpated; otherwise they will never be destroyed. Let me begin to 
strike blows after blows on Raktabija and you better drink off quickly 
all the blood, being intent on destroying the forces. O Chamunde! 
Thus, the Danavas being all exterminated, we will hand over to the 



Indra, the lord of the Devas, his Heavens without any enemy; and, 
thus, we can go peacefully and happily to our own places.” 


29-47. Vyasa said O King! The Chamunda Devi, of furious 
strength, hearing thus the Devi’s words began to drink the jets of 
blood coming out of the body of Raktabija. The Devi Ambika began 
to cut the Demon’s body into pieces and Chamunda, of thin belly, 
went on devouring them. Then Raktabija, becoming angry, struck 
Chamunda with his club. But though She was thus hurt severely. 

She drank off the blood and then devoured all the limbs thereof. O 
King! Thus Kalika Devi drank off the blood of all other powerful 
wicked Danava Raktabijas that sprang out of the blood. Ambika thus 
destroyed them. Thus, all the Danavas, created out of the blood 
were devoured; then, there was left, lastly, the real Raktabija. 

Ambika Devi then cut him asunder into pieces by Her axe and thus 
killed him. Thus, when the dreadful Raktabija was slain in the battle, 
the Danavas fled away trembling with fear. Without any weapons, 
covered all over their bodies with blood, and void of consciousness 
they uttered, dumb confounded “Alas! Alas! What has happened, 
what has happened.” Thus crying, they told their King S’umbha thus 
“O King of Kings! Ambika Devi has killed Raktabija and 
Chamunda has drunk off all their blood. The carrier (Vahana) of 
Devi, the powerful ferocious Lion killed other powerful warriors and 
Kali devoured the remaining soldiers. O Lord of the Danavas! We 
have fled and come to you to give the news of the battle and to 
describe the wonderful doings of that Chandika Devi in the 
battlefield. O King! In our opinion, no one will be able to conquer that 
Lady, be he a Daitya, Danava, Gandarbha, Asura, Yaksa, Pannaga, 
Charana, Raksasa, or an Uraga. O King of Kings! The other 
Goddesses, Indrani and others, have come to the battle, on their 
own carriers respectively and are fighting with various weapons. O 
Lord of the Danavas! The Danava forces are all slain by them with 
the excellent weapons in their hands. Even Raktabija has been slain 
in no time. That Lion, of indomitable prowess, killed the Raksasas in 



the battle; The Devi alone is hard to conquer; how much more would 
it be impossible to conquer Her, when She has been joined with 
other goddesses. So consult with the ministers and do what is 
reasonable. In our opinion it is better to make treaty with Her and 
quit your enmity. O King! Think over the fact that that Lady destroyed 
all the Danavas and at last drank off the blood of Raktabija and at 
last killed him. What on earth can be more wonderful than this? O 
King! The Devi Ambika killed all the other Daityas and Chamunda 
devoured their blood, flesh, and all. Considering all this, it is now 
better for us to serve the Devi Ambika or fly away to Patala. No more 
fighting is desirable. She is not an ordinary woman; She is Maha 
Maya, there is not the least doubt in this. Only to serve the cause of 
the Gods, She has manifested Herself and is now destroying the 
Raksasas’ race.” 


48. Vyasa said Hearing thus, S’umbha got confounded by Kala 
(Death), as his end was coming nigh, and said the following words, 
his lips quivering with anger. 


49-54. You are struck with fear; so you all take the refuge of 
Chandika or fly down to Patala; but I will kill Her with all my exertion 
and effort. I conquered all the hosts of Devas and I have enjoyed 
their kingdom; shall I now, out of the fear of one Lady, fly and enter 
into the Patala. All my attendants, Raktabija and other heroes, are 
now slain in the battle and is it possible that I will now fly away out of 
the sake of preserving my life only. See! The death of all the beings 
is ordained by Kala and it is unavoidable. No sooner a being is born, 
he is liable to the fear of death. How can a man, then, out of fear of 
death, quit all his name and fame? O Nis’umbha! I will now go 
immediately to the battle, mounting on my chariot and will return 
after slaying Her in battle. And if I cannot kill Her, I will not then 
return any more. O Best of warriors! Better stand on my side with all 
your forces and kill that Lady in no time, with sharp arrows. 



55-58. Nis’umbha said Today I will go to the battle and slaying that 
Kalika, will shortly return here with Ambika. O King! Do not think at 
all for that Lady; see my world-conquering strength and look at that 
weak woman; there is a vast difference. Cast aside your this great 
mental anxiety and trouble. Enjoy, O Brother, excellent things. I will 
bring that dignified Lady with all honours before you. O King! You 
ought not to go to the battle when I am alive. I will presently go to the 
fight and bring for you that Lady as a sign of our victory. 


59-60. Vyasa said O King! Thus saying, the younger brother, 
proud of his own strength, went hurriedly to the battlefield, mounting 
on his big chariot. He was protected all over his body by his coat of 
armour and he was well provided with various weapons and all other 
accoutrements of war. The bards began to sing hymns to him and 
various other propitious ceremonies were being performed. 


Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing 
of Raktabija in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam, of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 30. On The Killing Of Nis’umbha 


1-10. Vyasa said O King! Thus making a firm resolve that there 
would be either victory or death, the great warrior Nis’umbha went to 
fight with the Devi, with great excitement and with all his forces. 
S’umbha, too the Lord of the Daityas, accompanied by his forces, 
went after Nis’umbha; S’umbha knew full well the rules of warfare; 
therefore he remained a witness there. Indra and the other Devas 
and Yaksas, all stationed themselves in the celestial space, eager to 
see that fight, covered with clouds. Nis’umbha came to the field, and, 
taking the strong bow made of horns, began to shoot arrows after 
arrows at the Divine Mother with the object of frightening Her. Seeing 
Nis’umbha with his excellent bow, shooting arrows, Chandika began 
to laugh frequently. With a soft slow voice She spoke to Kalika “O 
Kali! See their foolishness! They have come before me, courting 
death. They are so much deluded by My Maya, that they yet expect 
victory when they have already witnessed the death of Raktabija and 
many Danavas. Hope is so very strong that it never quits a man. 

How wonderful is this that some of their armies are destroyed, some 
are wounded, some are rendered senseless, some made powerless, 
some have fled; seeing all these, yet, they have come to fight, as it 
were, fastened by the cord of hope of victory. O Kali! Today I will 
certainly slay Nis’umbha and S’umbha. Their death is nigh; deluded 
by the Daivi Maya, they have come to Me. Therefore, in the face of 
all the Devas, I will kill them today.” 


11-24. Vyasa said O King! Thus saying, and suddenly drawing 
Her bow, Chandi covered Nis’umbha, in front, all over with a 
multitude of arrows. Nis’umbha, too, cut off those arrows into pieces 
by his sharp arrows; thus the fight became more and more dreadful 
between them. At this time, the lion of Bhagavati, came down upon 
the forces, quivering his manes, like a powerful elephant going down 
into a lake. By his nails and teeth, he tore asunder the bodies of the 



Danavas that fell before him and devoured them, as if they were 
infatuated elephants. That lion thus crushing down the soldiers, 
Nis’umbha came forward hurriedly, drawing his excellent bow. 
Hundreds of other generals of the Danavas came up there to kill the 
Devi, biting their lips and with their eyes reddened with anger. In the 
meantime S’umbha killed Kalika and came very hurriedly there with 
his forces to capture the Divine Mother. Coming to the battlefield 
S’umbha saw that the Divine Mother was standing before him; 
though She was looking very beautiful, fit for love sentiment, yet She 
was filled also with the sentiment of fiery wrath. At that time the large 
eyes of Bhagavati, the Beautiful in the three worlds, though naturally 
red, looked more red due to wrath. When S’umbha saw Her lovely 
features, the desire to marry Her and the hope of victory all vanished 
away from his mind; and he stood there with bow in his hand, firmly 
holding in his mind that he would die. Seeing the Danava in that 
state. She smiled and began to say, so that all the Danavas could 
hear. O Wretched Fools! If you all want to live, quit all your weapons 
here, go to the Patala or to the middle of the ocean. Or be slain in 
the battle by My arrows and go to heavens and enjoy there without 
any fear all the enjoyments and sports there. Weakness and 
heroism, both cannot be expected at one and the same time and at 
the same individual; therefore I am ordering you to dispel your fears. 
Now go wherever you find your ease and happiness. 


25-35. Vyasa said O King! Hearing these words of the Devi, that 
haughty Nis’umbha ran forward, holding in his hand the sharpened 
axe and shield adorned with eight Chandras (embossed) and firstly 
struck with sword violently on the proud lion; then, whirling with great 
force that sword, hurled it upon the Divine Mother. The Devi, then, 
thwarted off the blow of the sword by Her club and struck at his arm 
by Paras’u. The warrior Nis’umbha, thus struck at his arm, patiently 
bore that hurt and struck at Chandika by his axe. The Devi then 
made such a terrible noise of bells that all the Daityas were struck 
with terror. Then She, desiring to kill Nis’umbha, began to drink 



nectar frequently. O King! Thus the terrible fight went on between the 
Devas and Danavas both trying to defeat the other party. Then 
began to dance in the battlefield, the cruel voracious dogs, jackals, 
vultures, herons, crows and other birds, very much gladdened. The 
battlefield was drenched with blood and the dead carcasses of 
innumerable Danavas, elephants, and horses. Nis’umbha, then, 
seeing the Danavas dead on the field, became very angry and ran 
forward with his terrible club before the Devi. That proud Asura 
struck first at the head of the lion with that club and laughed again 
and again and struck the Devi with that same club. The Devi, too, 
got very angry seeing Nis’umbha before Her and striking at Her. She 
then spoke thus 


36. O You Stupid! Wait till I sever your head from your body by this 
axe. Soon you will be sent unto death with your head severed off 
your body. 


37-64. Vyasa said O King! Thus saying the Chandika Devi 
instantly cut off the head of Nis’umbha by Her axe with great caution. 


The head thus severed from the body by the blow of the Devi, the 
headless Demon began to roam there with great force with club in 
his hand. The Devas then got very much frightened; The Devi, then, 
cut off the hands and feet of that headless Demon with sharpened 
arrows. That vicious wretch fell down lifeless, on the ground like a 
mountain. The powerful Daitya Nis’umbha being thus killed, a great 
uproar arose amidst his panic stricken forces. The soldiers, covered 
all over their bodies with blood, left all their weapons in the field, 
began to make Boomba sound (a piteous cry with mouth and hands 
as sign of danger) and fled away to the King S’umbha. He, the 
tormentor of the foes, then asked them coming “Where is 
Nis’umbha now? Why have you fled away from the field?” Thus 



hearing the King’s words, they bowed down and said O King! 

Your brother Nis’umbha is lying dead on the battlefield. O King! The 
Devi killed all the Danava warriors that attended your brother; only 
we are left and have come here to give you the information. O King! 
Nis’umbha has been killed by the weapons of the Devi. So we think 
you ought not to go to the battle. Know this as certain that the Lady, 
the Highest Cause of this Universe has come here to destroy the 
Danavas, the object being to serve the cause of the Gods. This Lady 
is not an ordinary woman; She is the Supreme Force; Her doings are 
inconceivable; what more can be said than the fact that the Devas 
never can know Her! This Devi can assume various forms; She is 
the origin of Maya; She is very clever; She is adorned with various 
ornaments and is holding various weapons in Her hands. Her doings 
are incomprehensible; She is like a Second Night of Dissolution (at 
the end of the world); She is Perfect, endowed with all auspicious 
signs, capable to go beyond the insurmountable. This wonderful 
Devi is serving the cause of the gods and the Devas from the sky 
are singing hymns to Her. O King! It is now your paramount duty to 
fly away and save your life; if you live, you may have the chance for 
gaining the victory when time will turn out favourable; there is no 
doubt in this. It is Time that makes a strong man weak; and it is that 
very Time that makes that weak man strong again and stimulates 
him for victory. Time makes a generous donor a beggar and it is 
Time that makes the same beggar again a generous donor. Brahma, 
Visnu, Mahes’a, Indra and other Devas are all under the sway of this 
Time; so Time is the Sovereign of all. Therefore, O King! Wait for this 
Time. Now Time is favourable to the Gods and inimical to you. 
Therefore Time is destroying now the Daityas. But the course of 
Time is not the same throughout. O King! The actions of Time are 
various no doubt. Time creates men and Time destroys them. The 
time of creation is different from the time of destruction, this is 
evident to you before your eyes. See! When Time was favourable to 
you, you subject Indra and all other Devas and made them pay taxes 
to you; and now Time is unfavourable to you; so an ordinary weak 
woman is killing the powerful Danavas; Time, therefore, is doing 
favourable things and also unfavourable things. The host of Devas or 



the woman Kali is not the cause thereof. O King! The present Time is 
not favourable to you and the Daityas; knowing this, do as you like. 
Seel Indra, Visnu, Varuna, Yama and other prominent Devas all fled 
before in battle, quitting the weapons. So, knowing this world as 
subject to the control of Time, you can now fly away and go quickly 
to the Patala. For if you live, you will get in future all the pleasures; 
and if you be killed, your enemies will all be very glad and roam 
everywhere fearlessly, singing propitious songs. 


Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of 
Nis’umbha in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam, of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 31. On The Death Of S’umbha 


1. Vyasa said O King! S’umbha, the Lord of the Daityas, hearing 
the words of the soldiers, began to say, then, with eyes rolling with 
anger. 


2-15. S’umbha said “O Fools! What are you saying all this? How 
can I do this unspeakably mean act and then hope to live? How shall 
I be able to roam in this world when I have become the cause the 
slaying of my brothers and ministers? Time is the more powerful 
cause of all that takes place, good or bad; so when this formless 
Time is the Supreme Ruler, what use is there in my brooding over 
the result? Let whatever come that is inevitable, let whatever be 
done that is destined to take place; death or life, I do not think of 
either. The more so when Time is never able, even when 
worshipped, to thwart off death or life when their proper moment 
arrives. See! The God of rain gives us rain in the rainy season; but, it 
is seen that sometimes it does not rain in the month of S’ravan (the 
rainy season); whereas it rains sometimes in the month Agrahayana, 
Pausa, Magha, or Phalguna (not the rainy season). Therefore it is 
evident that Time is not the chief factor. Fate is stronger than Time; 
Time is merely the instrumental cause. It is this Fate that has created 
all this universe; it cannot be rendered otherwise. I consider Fate 
Supreme; Fie on this one’s own exertion! For, Lo! Nis’umbha, who 
had before conquered all the Devas, is slain today by an ordinary 
woman! Alas! 


When Raktabija, too, had been slain, how can I desire to hold on to 
my life, foregoing all my name and fame! Even Brahma, who has 
created all this universe, will not sooner come to an end than his 
longevity expires. Four thousand Yugas constitute one day of 
Brahma; and in that one day fourteen Indras perished; so twice the 



life of Brahma constitute the life of Visnu; similarly twice the life 
period of Visnu constitute the life period of Mahes’a; and when their 
longevities expire, they come to an end. This visible earth, 
mountains, sun and moon all will perish; so it has been specially 
ordained by the Destiny; therefore, O Fools! I do not care a bit for the 
death. When a being is born, he must die; and when anyone dies, he 
will be born again, there is no doubt in this. So one ought to preserve 
one’s name and fame which is more permanent in this transitory 
body. Prepare my chariot; I will go today to the battlefield; let victory 
or defeat come what it may, as Fate has ordained. I will soon go to 
fight.” 


16-33. Thus saying, S’umbha mounted on the chariot quickly and 
went where the Devi Ambika was staying. Then the four-fold army, 
cavalry, infantry, chariots, horses and elephants and innumerable 
soldiers, followed him with weapons in their hands. Going there to 
the Himalaya mountain, he saw the Divine Mother sitting on Her 
Lion. She appeared so very lovely as to enchant the three worlds. 
Her body was decorated with various ornaments, all the auspicious 
gems were manifest; the Devas, Gandarbhas, Yaksas and Kinnaras 
in the heavens were all worshipping Her with hymns and Parijata 
flowers; and the Devi was making beautiful sounds with bells and 
conches, indicative of Her victory. Seeing Her S’umbha was very 
much enchanted with passionate love and struck with, the five 
arrows of cupid, thought thus How wonderful is Her lovely 
countenance! See! How wonderful and amazing is Her skilfulness! 
Delicacy and capability to endure the hardships of war, though quite 
contrary to each other, are both in Her. What a wonder is this! Her 
bodies are extremely delicate and limbs are lean and thin; besides 
She is lately blooming into womanhood; still She does not feel any 
passion; this is undoubtedly very wonderful! She is exquisitely 
beautiful that can be desired of in one’s mind; and though She is 
endowed with all the auspicious signs, yet She has no inclinations 
for all the pleasures and allurements of the world and is now slaying 



the powerful Asuras; this is wonderful indeed! Now what steps are to 
be taken so that this Lady comes under my control? All the 
Mantrams also are not with me now to bring over this Swan-eyed 
Lady unto me. This proud lovely Lady is the incarnate of all 
Mantrams; how will She come under my control? This heroic Lady 
cannot be controlled by conciliatory words, allurements, dissensions; 
it is not advisable, too, to fly away from the battlefield and to go to 
Patala. What am I to do? Where shall I go in this critical moment? 
And if I die at the hands of this Lady, that death is not a glorious one; 
it will take away my fame. The death in a battlefield is conducive to 
one’s well being, so the sages say, when both the parties are equally 
strong. The Devas have created this Lady stronger than even 
hundred strong men; She is a woman merely in name. This Lady is 
very powerful and has come here to destroy the Danavas; there is 
no doubt in this. What effect will conciliatory words now produce on 
Her; She has come to slay us; Will She be appeased with good 
words? Neither will allurements of precious things be of any avail, for 
She is decked with various arms and weapons; nor will it be of any 
use to sow dissensions between the Devas and Her. Further all the 
Devas are under Her control. Therefore it is far better to die than to 
fly; victory or death would come unto me today as Fate has 
ordained. 


34-46. Vyasa said O King! Thus thinking in his mind, S’umbha 
became ready to shew his strength; and firmly resolved to fight, he 
said to the Devi before him Devi! Fight. But, O One of delicate 
limbs! Thy so much toil is in vain. Thou hast no sense at all; for Thou 
art doing contrary to the doings of woman-kind. The pair of eyes of 
women are their arrows; the eyebrows are their bows; their gestures 
and postures are their weapons and their hits are those persons who 
are skilled in amorous love sentiments. The dyes used in painting 
the bodies are their armours, their mental desires are their chariots, 
so sweet soft words and conversations are their trumpet sounds; 
women have no other things for their war preparations. Therefore, O 



Beloved! Any other weapons are mere mockeries and ridiculous; 
their modesty is their ornament; impudence can never grace them. 
An exquisitely beautiful woman, if engaged in a fight will look harsh; 
especially when Thou wilt draw Thy bow, how wilt Thou be able to 
hide Thy breasts? When Thou wilt run with Thy club, where will Thy 
gentle treadings go? O Beautiful! Thy councillors are this Kalika and 
the stupid Chamunda. Chandika is Thy adviser; her voice is very 
hoarse; how can then she be able to nurse Thee? Again this Lion, 
the terror of all the beings, is Thy carrier. Therefore, O Dear! Leave 
aside all these and come over unto me. O Beautiful One! That Thou 
art ringing Thy bells and dost not sound. Thy lute goes quite against 
Thy beauty and youth. O Sensitive One! If Thou likest to fight, better 
assume an ugly appearance, let Thy nature be ferocious and cruel; 
let Thy colour be black like a crow; lips elongated, legs long, nails 
ugly, teeth horrible, and let Thy eyes be ugly or yellow like those of a 
cat. O Devi! Assume such an ugly appearance and stand firmly for 
the fight. O Deer-eyed One! Speak first harsh words unto me; then I 
will fight with Thee; my hand does not get up to strike Thee with 
handsome teeth, in the battlefield. Who art like a second Rati. 


47. Vyasa said O Best of the descendants of Bharata! When 
S’umbha said thus, the Divine Mother, seeing him passionate, smiled 
and said 


48-50. O Stupid One! Why are you so much distressed with 
passion? O Fool! If your hand does not come forward to strike 
weapons at Me, then fight with this ugly Kalika or Chamunda; they 
are your best compeers in the battlefield; they will fight with you; I will 
stand as a mere Witness. Thus saying, the Devi Bhagavati said to 
Kalika, in sweet words “O Kalika! Your nature is fierce; this 
S’umbha likes also the fierce; so kill him.” 



51-69. Vyasa said O King! That Kalika, the incarnate of Death, 
thus ordered, took up Her club immediately and became ready to 
fight, as if sent there direct by the God of Death. A dreadful fight then 
ensued between the two; and the highsouled Munis and the Devas 
were present there and witnessed the great event. S’umbha first 
struck at Kalika, raising his club. Kalika, then, struck S’umbha in 
return with her club violently. Instantly she made a dreadful sound, 
broke down his chariot, glittering like gold, into pieces, killed the 
horses of the chariot and slew the charioteer. Walking, then, on foot 
with a very heavy club in his hand, S’umbha struck with great anger 
on the breast of Kalika and began to laugh. Kalika, in the meanwhile, 
rendering his stroke useless, soon took up Her axe and cut off his 
left hand, pasted with sandal and decked with arms and weapons. 
His left hand thus out off, his whole body was drenched with torrents 
of blood; yet he came up with club in his hand and struck Kalika with 
it. Kalika, too, laughed and with Her scimitar cut off his right arm 
holding the club and ornamented with armlet. S’umbha became 
angry and came up violently to kick Her when Kalika quickly cut off 
his two legs. His arms and legs thus severed from his body, the 
Demon frightened Kalika and told Her, “Wait, wait.” And soon he 
came up before Her. Seeing the Demon coming, Kalika severed his 
neck from his body like a lotus; blood began to gush out in 
continuous streams. O King! The head of S’umbha, thus severed 
from his body, fell on the ground like a mountain. Immediately the life 
left the body. Seeing the Danava fall down lifeless, Indra and the 
other hosts of Devas began to worship the Devi Bhagavati, 
Chamunda, and Kalika and chanted lovely hymns to them. The 
winds then began to blow pleasantly; all the quarters looked very 
clear and Fire in sacrificial altars, being circumambulated, became 
very propitious. On the other hand, those Daityas that remained alive 
quitted their arms and weapons, bowed down to the Divine Mother, 
and fled away one and all to the Patala. O King! I have now 
described in regular order to you how the Devi protected the Devas 
and destroyed S’umbha and other Asuras. Those human beings on 
the surface of the earth that read this anecdote from the beginning to 
the very end or hear it constantly, get all their desires fulfilled; there 



is no doubt in this. O King! Verily he gets a son who has not got any 
son; he gets abundance of wealth who is without any wealth; the 
diseased become cured of their diseases; what more can be said 
than the fact that he who hears this glorious deed of the Devi in its 
entirety, gets all that he desires. O King! That man who reads daily 
this holy anecdote or hears it, has never to fear from his enemies; in 
addition be gets liberation after leaving his this body. 


Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter of the Fifth Book on the death of 
S’umbha in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 32. On The King Suratha’s Going To 
The Forest 


1-4. Janamejaya said O Best of Munis! The glory of Chandika has 
been fully described by you. By whom was She worshipped in the 
ancient times after the reading and hearing of Her three glorious 
deeds (the killing of Madhu Kaitava, etc.)? Who was it that derived 
the best effects by worshipping the Devi, the Bestower of all 
desires? When and with whom was She pleased and then offered 
boons? O Ocean of mercy! Kindly narrate fully all these things to me. 
O Brahmana! Describe to me also the rules how the meditation, 
worship and Homa of the Great Devi are conducted. Suta said “O 
Risis! Krisna Dvaipayana, the son of Satyavati, was very glad to 
hear these questions of Janamejaya and began to describe how the 
worship, etc., of the Maha Maya, the Devi Bhagavati are to be 
done.” 


5-21. Vyasa said O King! In days of yore in Svarochisa 
Manvantara there was a king, named Suratha, very liberal-minded 
and devoted to govern well his subjects. He was truthful, active and 
energetic, and devoted to his Guru; he always served the twice-born 
and he never used to hold any sexual intercourse except with his 
legal wife. He was generous, not liking to quarrel with anybody, and 
expert in the science of archery. While he was thus governing his 
kingdom, the MIechchas, the hill tribes, turned out his enemies. They 
destroyed the city of Kola, became very haughty and turbulent and 
desired to conquer the whole earth by their sheer force. Thus 
accompanied by the great four-fold army elephants, chariots, cavalry 
and infantry they came to conquer the dominion of the King Suratha. 
A dreadful fight then ensued between the King and the dreadful 
MIechchas. O King! The MIechcha forces were not at all numerous 
whereas the armies of the king were large; still the MIechchas were 
lucky to win the battle. The King, defeated, fled to his own city which 



was a strongly fortified place. The good King, wise in statesmanship 
when he saw that his ministers had gone over to the enemies’ party, 
became very anxious and thought whether it was advisable for him 
to wait for a better opportunity, remaining within his own extensive 
city, well guarded by a strong wall and ditch or it would be better to 
fight on. The King thought also that it would not at all be advisable to 
consult with his ministers who were, then, under the control of his 
enemies; what then would he do under the circumstances? Those 
vicious ministers could at any time deliver him to the hands of his 
enemies; what would then happen to him! Those men, that are 
avaricious, can do anything in this world; therefore it would never be 
advisable to trust them. The people under the sway of greed commit 
injury to their fathers, brothers, friends, acquaintances, their Gurus 
and the adored Brahmanas. When the ministers had joined with his 
enemies, they could well be classed with the vicious; no doubt in 
this. Never could they be trusted under the above circumstances. 
Thus pondering over the matter, the King became absent-minded, 
and, finding no remedy, went out of the city alone, mounted on a 
horse. The intelligent King, helpless, entered into a dense forest and 
thought where would he go now? Knowing, then, that there was, at a 
distance of three Yojanas from that place, a hermitage of the great 
ascetic the Sumedha Risi, the King went there. (N.B. A Yojana is 
a distance measuring four Krosas or eight or nine miles.) 


22-33. O King! That hermitage was more beautiful than even the 
Heavens; it was on the bank of a river; various kinds of trees were 
there; it was frequented with wild animals having no enmity with 
each other; the whole place was echoed with the sounds of cuckoos. 
The students were studying and reverberating the atmosphere with 
their Vedic chants; hundreds of herds of deers were running there; 
rice trees had grown there wildly at places and their harvests were 
collected at places; good flowery trees and others with delicious 
fruits were seen there; at places fragrant smells of oblations of ghee, 
etc., were coming; all these were delighting to any man who went or 



stayed there. The King Suratha was very glad to see that As’rama; 
he became fearless and wanted to stay there in the hermitage of the 
Brahmin. Fastening his horse at the root of a tree, the King 
approached humbly to the Risi, and saw that the Muni was seated 
on a deer skin under the shade of dense Sal trees. He was peaceful, 
lean and thin by tapasya. His stature was straight; and he was 
teaching his disciples and explaining to them the meaning of the 
Veda S’astras. 


He was void of anger, greed, etc., beyond all the dualities, without 
any jealousy, always devoted to the contemplation of his Self, truthful 
and full of peace. Seeing him the King was filled with tears and 
prostrated before him and fell like a stick before him. The Muni, 
seeing him thus asked him to get up and enquired about his welfare. 
A disciple then at the sign of the Guru, gave him a Kus’asan, to take 
his seat. The King got up and at his permission took his seat on that 
kus’asan; the the Muni worshipped the King duly by offering to him 
water to wash his feet, and Arghya (an offer of green grass, rice, 
etc). Then the Muni asked him, “Who are you? What for are you 
come here? Why are you so anxious? Tell frankly all these that are 
not yet known to me. What do you want? Speak out your mind. Even 
if that be impracticable, I will no doubt try my best to accomplish your 
desired ends.” 


34-36. The King said “O Muni! I am the King Suratha; defeated by 
my enemy, I have left my kingdom, palace, and wife and have come 
to your refuge. O Brahmana! I am ready to do whatever you order 
me; on this surface of the earth there is no one but you who can 
protect me. Now I am very much terrified by my enemy; therefore I 
have come to you. O Muni! You protect those who come to seek your 
refuge; I have now come here to seek your shelter; so save me from 
this danger.” 



37-38. The Maharsi said “O King! Stay here without any fear; 
none of your enemies would be able to enter this hermitage by my 
power of Tapasya, even if they be very powerful. O Best of Kings! 
You will not be allowed to kill any animals here; you will have to 
sustain yourself on this wild rice, roots and fruits, etc., as the rules of 
the forest living permit.” 


39-48. Vyasa said Thus hearing his words, the King began to live 
there, with all purity and without any fear, on roots and fruits. Once 
the King, while taking rest under the shade of a tree, while thinking of 
various things, thought of his own house thus “My enemies have, 
no doubt acquired my kingdom, but they are vicious and wicked, 
shameless MIechchas and always addicted to sinful deeds; certainly 
they are tormenting my subjects. My elephants and horses are not 
regularly getting their food and have all become powerless; certainly 
they are suffering very much from my enemies. All the servants that 
were nourished by me before are now all suffering from troubles, 
having been subjected by my enemies. The wicked enemies are 
certainly squandering away my hoarded wealth to bad immoral 
purposes, in gambling, drinking and in revelling with prostitutes. 
Those MIechchas and my ministers are always intent on vicious 
acts; they do not know who are the proper persons to be given 
charities; so they will no doubt exhaust away my coffers in doing 
sinful acts.” While the King was thus meditating, seated at the root of 
a tree, there came one man of the Vais’ya caste looking very 
distressed. The King saw and instantly bade him take his seat 
beside him; then the King asked the Vais’ya >- “O Noble One! Of 
what caste are you? Whence are you coming to this forest? What is 
your name? What for you look so pale and distressed? What 
calamity has befallen to you? O Good One! Two persons become 
friends whenever they speak seven words amongst them; according 
to this rule I am your friend; tell me, therefore, truly all these things.” 



49. Vyasa said The Vais’ya, hearing these words from the King, 
took his seat and felt himself much relieved and thinking that he has 
met with a saint, began to speak thus 


50-52. O my Friend! I belong to the Vais’ya caste; my name is 
Samadhi; I was rich, never I had any jealousy towards anybody; 
always I used to speak truth and was devoted to religious acts. My 
wife and sons are very greedy of money and are irreligious; so they 
cut off all their affections and connections with me, very difficult to 
cut though, and have driven me out of the house on the pretext that I 
am very miserly. Thus forsaken by my relatives, I have now come to 
this forest. You look to be a fortunate man; therefore kindly, O Dear 
One! give me now your introduction and oblige. 


53-55. The King said I am the King Suratha; lately I had a defeat 
from the dacoits; moreover my ministers deceived me; consequently 
I am deprived of my kingdom and have now come here. O Best of 
Vais’yas! Fortunately you have come to me today as my friend. We 
two will repose here gladly in this beautiful forest covered with trees. 
O Intelligent One! Now quit your sorrow; be calm and quiet and rest 
with me, at your leisure, here happily. 


56-58. The Vais’ya said O King! My friends and relatives must 
have been helpless, very sorrowful and they are distressed at my 
absence; they must have been troubled very much by diseases and 
misfortunes no doubt and have become very anxious. O King! I 
cannot remain quiet; my mind is being troubled with the thought how 
my wife and sons are spending their times now in pain or 
happiness? I am always thinking when I would see again my sons, 
wife, relatives, friends, acquaintances and my house? I cannot make 
me calm and quiet. 



59-60. The King said O Intelligent One! What pleasure can you 
expect to see your wicked sons and treacherous relatives who have 
driven you out of your house? Even the enemies are far better, 
provided they do good to us; what sorts of friends are they who 
impose on us afflictions and sorrows. Do you, therefore, make your 
mind calm and quiet and remain here in greatest peace and 
happiness. 


61. The Vais’ya said O King! Even those that are wicked and cruel 
cannot quit their relatives. Today my mind is greatly agitated with the 
thought of my relatives; I cannot remain quiet. 


62. The King said My mind too, is incessantly troubled with the 
thought of my kingdom. Come; let both of us go to the Muni and ask 
him what is the medicine for the cure of these our mental agonies. 


63-64. Vyasa said O King! Thus making their determinations, they 
went humbly to the Muni to ask him what were the causes of their 
sorrows? The King then went close to him and bowing down before 
him, took his seat and began to ask calmly and quietly the Muni who 
was sitting calm and serene. 


Here ends the Thirty-second Chapter of the Fifth Book on the King 
Suratha’s going to the forest in the Mahapuranam, S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 33. On The Description Of The 
Greatness Of The Dev! 


1-8. The king Suratha said “O Muni! This Vais’ya is now become a 
friend of mine in this forest; he has been expelled from his home by 
his sons and wife and he has come lately here in this forest. He is 
now suffering very much from the bereavement of his family and has 
become very much troubled in his mind. He is not getting any peace 
whatsoever. I am also become like him and have become very 
distressed owing to my kingdom being robbed away. This thought, 
though really devoid of any substantial cause, is not leaving my heart 
now. Oh! My elephants and horses, now under my enemies, have 
become weak; My servants are suffering very much owing to my 
absence! My enemies will, within no time squander away forcibly all 
my hoarded riches. This thought is not giving me any happiness; 
nay, I cannot get any sleep owing to this care and anxiety. O Lord! I 
know that this world is false as a dream; yet my mind is so deluded 
that I cannot make me quiet. Who am I? What are those horses and 
elephants to me? They are not my brothers, sons, nor friends; yet I 
feel very much for them and am troubled with their troubles. O Muni! 

I know these all are delusions; still I am not able to make my mind 
free from them. This is very wonderful indeed! What is the cause of 
all this? O Lord! Nothing is veiled from your sight, you are fully able 
to solve all these doubts. Therefore, O Ocean of mercy! Kindly 
explain to me and this Vais’ya the cause of all this delusion.” 


9. Vyasa said O King! When the King Suratha asked thus, the 
Muni in reply said to him the following words, full of wisdom, so that 
his delusion and sorrow might vanish. 



10-25. The Muni said “O King! I ann telling you the cause of 
bondage as well the cause of release of all the beings in this 
Universe. She is known as Maha Maya. She is the Mula Prakriti, the 
state of equilibrium of the three Gunas, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. 
Even Brahma, Visnu, MahesVara, Indra, Varuna, Vayu, and the 
other Devas, Gandarbhas, Nagas, Raksasas, men, deer, animals, 
birds, trees and various kinds of creepers all are under Maya; thus 
they are all bound; again they all get release when they are released 
by that Maya. By Her is created all this world, moving and not 
moving, all the beings are caught in Her net and all are under the 
control of Her. You are a Ksattriya; so Rajoguna preponderates in 
you and your heart is thus rendered impure. She, by Her Maya, 
deludes even the minds of those who are Jhanins or wise; you are 
but an ordinary man compared to them. Even Brahma, Visnu and 
Mahes’a, though possessed of vast wisdom, still roam, under the 
sway of Maya, in the three worlds completely deluded by their 
attachments to the sensual objects. O King! In the Satya Yuga, in 
ancient times Visnu Narayana himself performed a very hard 
tapasya in SVetadvipa. He passed away full ten thousand years in 
meditation, with the object of attaining the unbroken everlasting Bliss 
and becoming steadfastly attached to Brahma Vidya. O King! 
Brahma, too, became engaged in performing a tapasya, meditating 
the Primordial Force, Adya S’akti, in a very wonderful solitary place 
for the cessation of delusion. Once on a time Vasudeva Hah wanted 
to go to another place; he got up and started to see other places. 
Brahma, also, left his place and started for another destination. 

When they met each other in their way, each one asked the other, 
“Who are you?” The Prajapati answered “I am the Creator 
Brahma.” Hearing thus the Brahma’s words, Visnu said “O You 
Stupid! I am Achyuta Visnu; therefore I am the Creator of this world. 
You are inferior to Me as there is so much of Rajoguna in 
preponderance in you. Know Me as the eternal Vasudeva, 
preponderating in Sattva Guna. Do you not remember that I fought a 
dreadful battle for you and thus saved your life a short while ago, I 
slew the two Danavas Madhu and Kaitava when you were much 
distressed by them and took My refuge. How then do you boast now! 



O Fool! Quit your this vain boasting now. In this wide world, there is 
none superior to Me.” 


26-31. The Risi said Thus engaged in disputing with each other, 
their lips were quivering with anger and their eyes got red. When, 
Behold! there appeared suddenly between those two disputants, a 
nectar-like white phallic emblem (Lingam), wonderfully long and 
extensive. Then a voice, from without anybody, broke out in the 
Heavens and addressed Brahma and Visnu who were quarrelling 
thus! Whoever amongst you will be able to go to the other end of this 
Lingam whether beyond its top or below its bottom, he is certainly 
the superior of you two; let one of you therefore go down to Patala 
and let the other go up to the Heavens. Leave off your useless 
disputations and take my word as proof. It is always advisable to 
select an umpire to decide such a quarrel as this that has sprung up 
between you two. 


32-39. The Risi said O King! Hearing thus the divine word, both of 
them became ready and began energetically to measure the length 
of the wonderful Lingam that stood in front of them. Visnu went down 
to Patala and Brahma went up to Akas’a to measure the Lingam and 
thus to ascertain their superiority. Going down some distance Visnu 
got tired and doing his best, when he could not find out the end of 
the Lingam, he returned and remained at the desired meeting place. 
On the other hand, Brahma was ascending to the skies when he got 
one Ketaki flower dropping from the head of the Lingam. He became 
over glad and returned also to the desired meeting place. Brahma 
became very much elated with vanity and when he returned, he at 
once showed that flower to Visnu and spoke thus the false words :-- 
“O Visnu! This Ketaki flower has been obtained from the head of the 
Lingam. I have brought this to you simply that you would recognise it 
and be convinced in your heart.” Hearing these words of Brahma, 
Visnu saw the Ketaki flower and said “O Brahma! Who is your 



witness in this nnatter? He whose words are true, who is equal to all, 
who is intelligent, pure, and always of good conduct, he can be the 
witness in such matters of dispute.” 


40-44. Brahma said “Who will come now as witness from that far 
off place? This Ketaki flower is the witness; this will give evidence.” 
Thus saying, Brahma requested Ketaki to give evidence; Ketaki 
soon replied thus to convince Visnu. O Visnu! I was on the head of 
Mahadeva; Brahma has brought me from there down to this place; 
you ought not therefore to have any doubt on this point. My word is 
the evidence; Brahma has gone to the other end of the Lingam. 
Some devotee of S’iva put me on His head and Brahma has got me 
down from there. Hearing thus the words of Ketaki, Visnu was very 
much astonished and said this “I cannot trust your word; if Maha 
Deva comes and speaks this Himself, then I can trust and take it as 
a proof.” 


45-53. The Risi said O King! The eternal Maha Deva, hearing the 
words of Visnu, spoke thus to Ketaki with great anger, “O Liar! Do 
not utter such false words; You dropped down from My head and 
Brahma while ascending up, picked you up on the way. Now as you 
have told a lie, I will never take you; you are henceforth forsaken by 
Me.” Brahma was then very much put to shame; he bowed down to 
Visnu; Maha Deva, forsook the Ketaki flower from that date. O King! 
Such is the power of Maya; when Brahma, Visnu and other wise 
persons are so self-deluded by Her, what need to speak of other 
ordinary mortals! See! Visnu, the Lord of Laksmi, is self-deluded and 
is always deceiving the Daityas for the welfare of the Devas, without 
any fear whatsoever of the sin that he is thereby incurring. Though 
He is the Lord of all yet He has to take several incarnations in 
several wombs, forsaking the pleasures of the Heavens and fighting 
with the Daityas. O King! Visnu is omniscient and He is the Lord of 
this world; specially He is the only One, Supreme in the creation of 



the Gods. Now when Maya exercises such a powerful influence on 
Visnu, what wonder is there that the other ordinary beings would be 
deluded by Her? O King! That Highest Prakriti draws away violently 
the hearts of the wise and drags thenn down into the ocean of world. 
That Omnipresent Bhagavati is ever the cause of bondage of all 
when She casts Her net of delusion and She is again ever the cause 
of liberation when She imparts Her knowledge to them. 


54. The King said O Brahman! What is the nature of Her? and 
what is the Supreme Force? What is the Cause of this creation? And 
where is Her highest place? Kindly narrate all these to me. 


55-66. The Risi said O King! She is beginningless; therefore She 
had no origin at any time; that Highest Devi is Eternal and She is 
always the Cause of all Causes. (How then can any other be 
powerful like Her). O King! She resides in all the beings as the 
essential vital Force; deprived of that Force, every being is reduced 
to a dead carcass. She is pervading as the Universal Force of 
Consciousness in all the beings. The form of this S’akti (Force) is the 
form made up of consciousness itself, the Brahma. (For the force of 
Fire is Fire itself; it is not seen in any other form). Her appearances 
and disappearances at times are simply for serving the purposes of 
the Gods. O King! Whenever the Devas and men worship Her, 
Ambika makes Her appearance visible to destroy their pains and 
sufferings. She assumes various forms and possesses various 
powers. That Highest IsVari comes down of Her free will to serve 
Her some purpose or other. She is not like the Devas, under the 
control of Daiva or Fate; She is not under the influence of Time (as 
both Fate and Time are created by Her). She puts always every 
being to action according to his capacity. Purusa is not the Doer; He 
is simply the Witness. This whole Universe is the object seen. That 
Devi is the Mother of all this that is witnessed. She is the Manifested 
and She is the Unmanifested and She is the Effect also. She alone is 



the Actress and manifests thus the world and thus gives the 
colouring to the Purusa. When the Purusa is coloured thus, She 
destroys quickly these worlds. It is said that Brahma, Visnu and 
Mahes’a are respectively the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the 
world; but this is merely a statement; really they are merely 
instruments in Her hands. Bhagavati has created them in reality for 
Her Pastime and stationed them in their respective posts. She has 
bestowed to them Her part manifestations, i.e., Sarasvati to Brahma, 
Laksmi to Visnu, and Girija to Mahes’a and has thus rendered them 
more powerful. They, the lords of the Devas, always meditate and 
worship Her as the Creatrix, Preservrix and Destructrix of this 
Universe. O King! I have thus described to you, as far as my 
intelligence and knowledge go, the holy greatness and the excellent 
glory of Her (in reality, I have not been able to come to the end of it). 

“Aim Hrim Klim Chamundayai bichche” is the (9) nine lettered 
mantra. 


Here ends the Thirty-third Chapter of the Fifth Book on the 
description of the greatness of the Devi in S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 34. On The Methods Of The Worship 
Of The Dev! 


1. The King said O Bhagavan! Kindly narrate to me in detail now 
the methods how to serve and worship the Goddess and the 
Mantrams that are used on such occasions. 


2-12. The Risi said O King! I am now describing the method how 
to worship the Goddess. Hear. This leads to the fulfilment of all 
desires, to the liberation from one’s bondage, to self-realisation and 
to the destruction of all miseries. The worshipper has to perform his 
bath; then putting on a white cloth, he will have to perform his Vaidik 
and Tantrik Sandhya; then he should, with his heart controlled, 
perform his Achamana ceremony and select a good auspicious site 
for his own Pooja purposes. Next he should plaster the site with cow- 
dung and spread his sacred carpet (Asana) whereon he is to take his 
seat with a cheerful mind and sip water for Achamana three times. 
Then he is to collect the articles for worship according to his best 
capacity and place them duly in their respective positions. He is to 
perform Pranayama (regulate his breath); and then follows the 
Bhuta-S’uddhi, the purification of the old and the formation of the 
celestial body and Jiva-S’uddhi by which the Sadhaka becomes the 
Devata-maya; he then proceeds to Matrika Nyasa (i.e., setting 
mentally in their several places in the six Chakras and then 
externally by physical action the letters of the alphabet which form 
the different parts of the body of the Devata. He then places his hand 
on different parts of his body, uttering distinctly at the same time the 
appropriate Matrika for that part). 


Bhuta-S’uddhi Dissolve earth into water, water into fire, fire into 
air, air into ether; ether into Ahamkara, Ahamkara into Mahat and 



Mahat into Prakriti, the final Cause. This process is called Bhuta- 
S’uddhi. 


He is to mention then the time, date, tithi, and month of the year and 
make his Sankalpa; then he will have to assign to the different parts 
of his body the Matrika Mantrams duly as well as his own Mantram; 
next he is to meditate in his own body the seat of the different 
Devatas and do the internal worship. He is to breathe life into the 
Deity outside to be worshipped as well as within himself to be 
meditated and worshipped; then he is to do the same with the 
articles for worship and purify them by sprinkling with water and 
Astra or Phat Mantram, thus removing all sources of obstacles that 
are likely to interfere with the act. Next, on an auspicious copper 
plate, he is to draw inside a six-angled (hexagonal) figure (two 
triangles crossing each other with their vertices one upward and the 
other below) with white sandal paste or with eight perfumed things 
and outside this figure, an octagonal figure of eight petals; outside 
this he is to draw the boundary lines that is called the Bhupura. On 
each of the eight petals he is to write each letter of the nine-lettered 
Vija (Seed) Mantram and the ninth letter in the central ovum. Next by 
the Mantram by which breath is infused or by the Vedic Mantram he 
will have to place the Yantra in the proper position and then worship 
the Adhara S’akti (the vital Force) in the central ovum and the holy 
seat with the Pitha Mantrams. He will have to invoke the Devi, 
uttering the Seed Mantram over a golden plate or figure and carefully 
worship Her by offering seats and other articles duly as enunciated 
in the Yamala Tantras, etc. Then he will have to perform the six-fold 
worship of the Ganas in the six angles and worship Indra, etc., and 
Vajra and others in the Bhupura (the boundary) and thus finish the 
Pooja of the Yantra. (For the Pooja see the Prapancha Sara.) Note :- 
- Bhupura is what is thought over outside front or in the beginning. 
Here the Gana Devatas are first thought over and worshipped. 
Worship outside, worship inside and See the Deity in and out, 
everywhere and be free is the motto of the worship. In the absence 



of the Yantra, one will have to make a metalled image of Bhagavati 
and worship Her with the greatest caution with the Mantras as 
expounded by S’iva in the Tantrams (of Jamala and others). Note 
Yantra is that which restrains. This human body is the Yantra. And its 
imitation is placed outside in various shapes and figures. The Yantra 
is the mystical diagram used by the devotees for worship. Or one 
may use the Vaidik Mantrams in worshipping the Deity in accordance 
with the prescribed rules and with his mind controlled; then, merged 
in meditation, one is to mutter silently (perform the Japam of) the 
nine-lettered Mantram. (The Mantram is Krim Daksine Kalike 
Svaha). Japam (muttering or repeating silently the Mantram) is of 
two kinds Nitya (daily) and Pauras’charanik (repetition of the 
name of the deity accompanied with burnt offerings). In the Nitya 
Japam, Nitya Homas are performed and in the occasional 
Pauras’charanik Japam, one tenth of this is offerred; Abhiseka, too, 
is one-tenth of this Homa; Tarpanam is one-tenth of Abhiseka and 
the feeding of the Brahmanas is one-tenth of what is done in the 
Tarpanam. O King! Thus completing the Japam one is to read daily 
the Chandi (do the Chandipatha) where the three glorious deeds of 
the Devi are narrated; next he will have to allow the Deity invoked to 
depart to Her own place. The Navaratra Vrata (nine night vow) is 
next to be observed according to the proper rites and ceremonies. 
Hrim Mahisa Mardinyai Svaha is the Mantra. 


13-31. In the bright fortnight of the month of Asvin or Chaitra, is to be 
observed the fasting of the Navaratra by those who desire for their 
own welfare. Homas are to be offered, many in number, and 
Mantrams are to be recited, the same as in one’s own Mantram, 
good Payasam with sugar, ghee, and honey mixed is to be offered in 
this ceremony. Goat meat, or holy leaves of the Bel tree, or red 
Karavir flowers or til (sesamum seed) mixed with honey can be used 
instead in the Homa ceremony. The special days for the worship of 
the Devi are the eighth, ninth, or fourteenth day (tithi) of the half 
month. The feeding of the Brahmins must be done on each 



occasion. O King! Thus the poor become wealthy, the diseased get 
cured, and the persons that have no issue get obedient and well 
qualified sons. The King, expelled from his kingdom, gets back by 
the grace of Maha Maya, dominion over the whole earth and 
becomes able to destroy all those enemies of his, by whom he was 
before vanquished, when he worships the Devi. The persons, 
desirous of learning, get undoubtedly the learning honourable and 
auspicious, provided he worships the Devi with his senses 
restrained. Persons of all castes. Brahmins, Ksatriyas, Vais’yas or 
S’udras can become masters of all pleasures and happiness 
provided they worship with devotion the Devi, the Preserver of the 
World (the Jagaddhatri). A man or woman whoever performs the 
Navaratra vow always full of devotion, gets all the desired fruits. 
Whoever celebrates the holy Navaratra ceremony in the bright 
fortnight of the month of AsVin with his heart full of the thought of the 
Devi, gets all his desired fruits. O King! Now I am describing the rites 
and ceremonies; here a square raised platform or altar is to be made 
according to the prescribed rules; a water-jar is then to be placed on 
it with the Vedic mantrams and due rites and ceremonies. One will 
have to make a beautiful Yantra according to the previously laid rules 
and the water-jar is to be placed on it; then spread the beautiful Yava 
grains all around the jar. An awning or pandal is to be erected over 
the altar and the place of worship, and the site is to be decorated 
with flowers. Lights and Dhupas, incense and perfumes are then to 
be used in the hall of the Chandika Devi. O King! The Devi is to be 
worshipped thrice; morning, midday and evening; no miserliness is 
to be shown in spending wealth for this purpose. Light, dhup, good 
presents of rice and other edibles, flowers, and fruits of various kinds 
are to be offered in this worship of the Devi; the chanting of the 
hymns of the Vedas, songs, and music with the various instruments 
are to be done and a grand festivity is to be made. Moreover, note 
this carefully that virgins are to be worshipped duly with sandal, 
ornaments, clothings, various edibles, sweet scented oil, and 
beautiful garlands. (This worship of the virgins is one of the 
essentials.) Thus completing the worship of the Devi, Homa is to be 
done duly with Mantrams and other necessary articles on the eighth 



or the ninth tithi. Lastly the Brahmins are to be fed duly; then the 
worshipper is to take his first meal after fasting (i.e., make paranam) 
on the tenth day; then presents and various articles are to be offered 
to the Brahmin, according to one’s might and with devotion. 


32-44. O King! Any man, or any chaste married woman or a chaste 
widow whoever performs thus the Navaratra Vrata gets in this world 
all the desired fruits and enjoys all sorts of enjoyments and gets 
unbounded happiness and after death goes to the highest place. 

And if, owing to some cause or other, he has to take his birth again 
in this world, he would be born in an excellent family and would 
become endowed with good conduct and qualifications and get the 
unflinching devotion towards the Ambika Devi. O King! I have thus 
described to you the rules of the Navaratra ceremony; this vow is the 
best of all; highest and greatest pleasures and happinesses are 
obtained in worshipping thus the auspicious Maha Maya. O King! 
Better worship Chandika duly according to the prescribed rules; then 
you would be able, by Her grace, to conquer all your enemies and 
you will regain your excellent dominion, unshaken by any, and you 
will get again the highest pleasure and happiness when you will be 
reunited with your wife and sons in your own palace; there is no 
doubt in this. O Vais’ya! You, too, better worship the same Maha 
Maya, the Goddess of the Universe, worshipping Whom leads to the 
fructification of all desires. You will then be able to regain all your 
worldly pleasures in your own home and be respected by your 
relatives and acquaintances and finally, after your death, you will go 
to the holy abode of the Devi. There is no doubt in this. Those that 
do not worship the Devi, go to Naraka or hell; moreover they suffer 
much from various diseases in this world. Those that do not worship 
the Devi are always defeated by their enemies, are void of wife and 
sons, become stupid and suffer pains from their unsatisfied desires. 
And those that worship the Preservrix of this world with the Bel 
leaves, Karavira flowers, S’atapatra and Champaka flowers, that 
blessed man, devoted to the Devi, gets filled with all sorts of 



enjoyments. O King! What more can I say than this, that those who 
have worshipped the Devi Bhavani with the Mantrams approved by 
the Nigama S’astras, those very persons get honour in this world 
and are filled with all sorts of power and wealth. Verily, they stand 
foremost in the rank of best men, becoming the only repositories of 
all the best qualities in this world. 


Here ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the methods 
of the worship of the Devi in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha 
Puranam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 35. On The Receiving Of The Boons By 
The King Suratha And The Vais’ya Samadhi 


1-12. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the Risi’s words, the king 
Suratha and Vais’ya, who were very distressed in their minds, 
became very much comforted and bowed down to the Muni with 
great humility and modesty. Their eyes expressed their gladness and 
their hearts were filled with loving devotion. Both of them, then, 
clever in speaking and of calm and quiet temper, began to address 
him with their folded hands. O Bhagavan! We were passing our days 
in a very humble and distressed spot; we are today purified by your 
good words, just as the country was rendered pure by Bhagiratha 
when he brought down the river Ganges here. The saints, adorned 
with purely good qualities, are incessantly engaged in doing good to 
others and how the people can be made happy. O Intelligent One! 
Surely we have come to this auspicious As’rama owing to our past 
good deeds (in previous births) and all our miseries are therefore 
brought to their ends today. There are good many persons that roam 
in this world for their selfish ends; very few there exist like you who 
are always ready to do good to others. O Muni! True that I am very 
much distressed but this Vais’ya is more distressed than me. Both of 
us, very much afflicted by the miseries of the world, have come 
gladly to your As’rama and are relieved of our bodily sufferings by 
your sight; and now, hearing your words, we are relieved also of our 
mental pain and sufferings. O Brahmana! We are very much blessed 
and our objects have been gained by your nectar-like words; O 
Thou, the Ocean of mercy! You have purified us, out of your 
unbounded mercy. We are quite tired of this world; knowing this, do 
you lead us beyond this world by holding our hands and by initiating 
us with Mantrams. O Best of Munis! We will first of all practise a very 
hard Tapasya (asceticism) and worship Bhagavati, the Awarder of 
happiness; then, seeing Her, we will go to our respective abodes. 
Now we expect the nine-lettered Mantram of the Devi from your 



mouth and practising the Navaratra varam we will fast and meditate 
on the Mantram. 


[Note The nine-lettered Mantram is “Om Mahisamardinyai Svaha.” 
Instead of Om, any of the following may be used Hrim, Klim, Aim, 
Strim, or Hum mentioned in Sarada Tilaka, Narayani Tantra, or in 
VisVasara Tantra (see page 125 of Tantra Sara ).] 


13-30. Vyasa said O King! When the king and Vais’ya prayed thus 
to the Muni Sumedha, the best of the Munis, gave them the 
auspicious Mantram with its seed (Vija) and as well what is to be 
meditated (Dhyan). On getting the Mantram (with Risi, Chhanda, 
seed S’akti, and Devata) duly, they welcomed the Muni and with his 
permission went to the holy bank of a river. Both of them were of 
delicate frames and both of them were fully determined; they went to 
a very solitary place and selected their place and took their seats 
there. There they spent one month in repeating silently the Mantram 
and in chanting the three glorious deeds of Chandi. In this short 
period of one month, they became very much attached to the lotus- 
feet of Bhavani and their minds were also much pacified. They 
attended to no other business; only they used to go to the Muni once 
a day and bowing down before him they returned to their own seats 
of Kus’a grass and gave themselves up to the meditation of the Devi 
and always repeated silently their Mantrams. O King! One year thus 
passed away; they then abstained from taking fruits and subsisted 
on the leaves of trees. Thus engaged in meditation and asceticism 
they passed away another year sustaining themselves with dry 
leaves only. O King! When the two years thus passed, they got in 
their dreams the beautiful vision of the Goddess Bhagavati. They 
were very much delighted to see in their dreams the Ambika Devi in 
red robes and decorated with various ornaments. They practised 
tapasya in the third year with water as their only food. Thus when 
they found that, after practising the tapas for three years, they could 



not see face to face the Devi they became very anxious to see the 
Devi and thought thus “When we have not been so fortunate as to 
see the Devi, Who art the Bestower of peace and happiness to the 
human beings, we will then leave our bodies, in deep distress and 
sorrow!” Thus thinking, the King prepared a beautiful triangular 
Kunda (pit), firm and of one hand measure. Lighting a fire in that pit, 
the King began to cut off slices of flesh from his own body and 
offered them as oblations to the fire. The Vais’ya, too, then did the 
same. O King! Both of them were very much excited and began to 
offer their blood as oblation to the Devi. The Devi Bhagavati, then, 
seeing them thus grieved, and that their hearts were over flown with 
devotion towards Her, appeared direct before them and said thus 


31-32. O King! You are my favourite devotees; I am pleased with 
your Tapasya; now ask whatever you desire; I will grant you that 
boon. Then She spoke to the Vais’ya >- “O Highly Fortunate One! I 
am pleased; ask without any delay any boon; I will grant that just 
now.” 


33-52. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the words of the Devi, the 
king Suratha was very much delighted and said thus “O Devi! 
Grant me this boon that I be able today to conquer my enemies with 
my own power and that I may regain my kingdom.” The Devi then 
spoke to him thus “O King! Go to your own abode; your enemies 
are now enfeebled and will certainly be defeated. 


(Note The Devi has now withdrawn Her own power from the 
enemies with which they were filled before. This is the result of the 
real sacrifice to the Devi.) 



O Fortunate One! Your ministers will all come and prostrate 
themselves before your feet and will be obedient to you; you can 
now go back to your city and govern your subjects happily. O King! 
Thus reign for Ajuta years (10,000 years) over your widely extended 
dominion; then, when you quit your body, you will again be born from 
Surya, and be known widely as Savarni Manu.” Vyasa said O 
King! The pure-natured Vais’ya said with folded hands “O Devi! I 
have nothing to do with house, sons, nor wealth. O Mother! The 
house, wealth and sons, all these are so many sources of bondage 
to this world and are very transitory like dreams. Therefore give me 
knowledge so that my ties to this world be cut asunder. Persons who 
are devoid of knowledge, those fools are merged in this ocean of 
world. The wise never prefer this Samsara; therefore they can cross 
this world. Vyasa said O King! Hearing this, the Mahamaya said 
to the Vais’ya, that stood in front of Her thus “O Vais’ya! No doubt 
you will acquire knowledge.” Thus granting boons to them, the Devi 
then and there disappeared. After the Devi had disappeared, the 
King bowed down to the Muni, mounted on his horse and expressed 
a desire to go back to his kingdom. Just at that time all his ministers 
and subjects came humbly before him, bowed down to him and 
standing before him with folded hands, said “O King! Your 
enemies all had acted very sinfully; hence they were all slain in 
battle; you be pleased now to remain in your city, free from any 
enemy and govern your subjects.” The King, hearing thus, bowed 
down to the Muni and with his permission, started towards his 
kingdom, surrounded by his ministers. On regaining his own 
kingdom, wife, relatives and kinsmen he began to enjoy the sea-girt 
earth. On the other hand, the Vais’ya became illumined with the 
Spiritual Knowledge and all his connections and attachments being 
completely severed, became free from all bondages. He became 
liberated in his lifetime and travelled always from one place of 
pilgrimage to another and passed away his time in singing the 
glorious deeds of the Devi. O King! Thus I have described to you the 
most wonderful character of the Devi, what fruits were obtained by 
the King and the Vais’ya on their worshipping Her, how the Daityas 
were killed by Her and about Her auspicious appearances on this 



earth. Oh! Such is the glory of the Devi, leading to fearlessness 
amongst Her devotees. The mortal who hears constantly this 
excellent pure narrative of the Devi Bhagavati, gets truly all the best 
and wonderful pleasures of this world. No doubt anybody who hears 
this wonderful incident, will obtain knowledge, liberation, fame, 
happiness and purity. The essence of all religions lies in this 
narration; therefore it leads, above all, to Dharma, Artha, Kama, and 
Moksa (religion, wealth, desire and liberation). It grants all desires to 
human beings. 


53-54. Suta said O Risis! The Maharsi Vyasa, the son of 
Satyavati, versed in all the departments of knowledge, asked by the 
King Janamejaya, narrated to him this divine Samhita. The character 
of Chandika, the killing of the Daitya S’umbha, were thus narrated by 
the merciful Muni Veda Vyasa. O Munis! I, too, have described to 
you the main points of this Purana. Here ends the Fifth Book. 


Here ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the receiving 
of the boons by the King Suratha and the Vais’ya Samadhi in the 
Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 


The Fifth Book Completed. 



THE SIXTH BOOK 



Chapter 1. On Tris’ira’s Austerities 


1-12. The Risis (of the Naimisa forest) addressed Suta (fondly) O 
highly Fortunate One! Your nectar-like words are very sweet. We are 
not satiated with what you have described to us as the auspicious 
sayings of Dvaipayana Vyasa. O Suta! We desire to ask you again to 
narrate to us the auspicious sayings of this Purana, beautiful, 
famous, and sin-destroying and authorised by the holy Vedas. 
VisVakarma had a son, named Vritrasura, who was very well known, 
and very powerful. How was it that he had been slain by the high- 
souled Indra? VisVakarma was a powerful Brahmin and belonged to 
the gods' party; his son was stronger. How was it that he had been 
killed by Indra! The Devas are born of the Sattva qualities; men are 
born from the Rajasic qualities; and all the birds, etc., are born of the 
Tamasic qualities. This is the opinion of the Pundits, versed in the 
Puranas and Agamas. But in this act of slaying Vritrasura, a great 
contradiction arises; for the powerful Vritra was killed merely under a 
pretext by Indra, the performer of the hundred sacrifices, and 
endowed with Sattva qualities. And Indra was prompted to do so by 
Visnu, the head of those who possess Sattva qualities; while Visnu 
himself entered in disguise into the thunderbolt so that he could kill 
Vritra. The powerful Vritra entered into a treaty and kept himself 
peaceful when Indra and Visnu violated truth and treacherously killed 
him by Jalaphena (the watery foams). O Suta! The great wonder is 
this That Indra and Visnu turned out so bold as to forsake the 
truth. This, then, is therefore very clear that the high souled persons 
become deluded and act sinfully. The Heads of the Devas act very 
wrongly; they are reckoned as polite simply because they observe 
the mere outward forms of good conduct as approved by the 
S'astras. How can the mere observance of outward forms constitute 
politeness? Had Indra, who killed in disguise Vritra relying on his 
words, to suffer any punishment for the sin that he incurred in killing 
a Brahmana? It was told by you before that Vritra had been slain by 
the Devi Bhagavati; but the general belief is that Indra killed him. 



Our minds are puzzled on this point. (So clear our doubts on this 
point.) 


13-14. Suta said O Munis! Hear the incident of the killing of 
Vritrasura and the punishment that Indra had to suffer due to his sin 
of Brahmahatya (killing a Brahmin). This question was asked by the 
King Pariksit and replied by Vyasa, the son of Satyavati. I will tell you 
what Vyasa had told before. 


15-18. Janamejaya asked O Best of Munis! How was it that in 
former days Indra, endowed with the Sattva qualities, killed 
Vritrasura, with the aid of Visnu? And how and why was it that he 
was killed again by the Goddess Bhagavati? O Lord of Munis! How 
could one body be killed by the two; our curiosity has been excited to 
hear the truth. What man is there that does not like to hear any more 
of the glorious deeds of the high-souled persons! Kindly narrate to us 
the slaying of Vritra by the Devi Bhagavati. 


19-26. Vyasa said O King! You are blessed, since your taste to 
hear the events of Purana has grown so much; the Devas even get 
their thirst for drinking nectar; but when quenched, they do not like to 
drink any more. O King! Your name and fame are widely spread. 

Your Bhakti (devotion) to the Puranas is growing more and more 
daily. A speaker gets very much delighted when his audience hears 
him with undivided attention. O Lord of the earth! The fight between 
Vritra and Vasava that occurred in days of yore is famous in the 
passages of the Vedas and the Puranas; as well as the suffering that 
Indra had to encounter as his punishment when he had killed the 
innocent son of Visvakarma. O King! The Munis, who fear sin very 
much, commit yet blameable acts under Maya; then what wonder is 
there that Visnu, and Indra would kill Tris'ira and Vritra merely under 
a plea. When Visnu, the incarnate of Sattva qualities, gets deluded 



by Maya and kills deceitfully the Daityas always, then how can you 
expect any other man to conquer mentally even the Maha Maya 
Bhavani, Who deludes all the beings! O King! It is under the 
compulsion of this Maya that the Bhagavan, the Infinite, the friend of 
Nara, Narayana, takes incarnations in thousands and thousands of 
Yugas in this Samsara as Fish, etc., and does deeds sometimes 
lawful and sometimes unlawful. The Devas and men, being 
confounded by his Maya, become upset and disordered and say 
“that this body, wealth, house, sons, wife and relatives are all mine” 
and being thus deluded sometimes do virtuous and sometimes sinful 
deeds. O King! There is not even one, on the surface of this earth, 
though he may be well versed in finding out cause and effect, the 
knowledge of the high and low, that can be free from this Great 
Delusion; he is from the very beginning tied up by the three Gunas of 
this Maya and that remains under Her control. 


27-35. This explains that Visnu and Indra both were deluded by 
Maya and engaged in fulfilling their own selfish ends. They killed 
Vritras'ura under a pretext. O King! Hear! I am now describing to you 
the cause of enmity between Indra and Vritra. Vis'vakarma, the 
Prajapati, was great architect of the Gods, he was skilled, he was 
superior amongst the gods, a great ascetic and endeared by the 
Brahmins. He had enmity with Indra; and out of this enmity he 
created a son, very beautiful named him Tris'iraska Visvarupa. That 
son had three faces very beautiful and lovely. Visvarupa performed 
three different functions with his three different faces; with one, he 
used to study the Vedas, with the second he used to drink nectar 
(wine), and with the third he used to see simultaneously all the 
directions. Tris'ira renounced the pleasures of the world and began 
to practise a hard tapasya; he became a great ascetic, gentle, 
restrained in his passions and entirely devoted to his religion. He 
practised Panchagni-Sadhan in the summer season, tying his feet 
upwards on the branch of a tree with his head downwards; he 
remained in dew in the cold season, under water in the winter 



season. Thus he abstained from food and conquered his self and, 
forsaking all the worldly connections, practised a very hard tapasya; 
very difficult, indeed, for those who are of dull intellects. 


36-49. Indra became very sad and dispirited to see him practise 
such a Tapasya and thought of the means so that he might not 
acquire his Indraship. The Pakasas'ana Indra remained always very 
anxious see the energetic penance practised by that ascetic of 
unbounded glory and his steady attachment towards it. He thought 
thus “This Tris'ira is becoming stronger day by day by his 
penance, so he will kill me. The wise never look an enemy with 
indifference whose strength daily becomes greater and greater.” It is 
now my urgent duty to invent means how to baffle his Tapasya and 
he at last settled that lust is the great enemy of asceticism; the 
practice of devout austerities is destroyed complete by lust; so I must 
try this very day how the Muni becomes attached to worldly lust and 
enjoyments. The intelligent Indra, thinking thus, called the Apsaras 
Urvas'i, Menaka, Rambha, Ghritachi, and Tilottama and others 
proud of their beauties so that they might seduce Tri'sira, the son of 
Vi'svakarma. O Apsaras! I have now got a very grave task to fulfil; all 
of you help me in this respect. A great enemy of mine, difficult to 
conquer, is practising penance with his self-controlled. Start at once 
and with your dress suited to various amorous gestures and try hard 
to seduce him. Be all well with you; seduce him and remove the 
fever of my heart. O Apsaras! What more shall I say, I am restless 
since I have heard of his strength performing such hard austerities. 

O Weak Ones ! That powerful ascetic may acquire my place and 
thus dispossess me; this fear has possessed me. Therefore destroy 
my fear as quickly as possible. This is the task now given to you; get 
united and do this good to me. The Apsaras, hearing him, bowed 
down and said “O Lord of the Devas! Do not be afraid! We will try 
our best to seduce him. O highly Lustrous One! For the enticing 
away of the Muni, we will do all the things, dancing, music and other 
amorous gestures and practices, that will discard your fear. O King of 



the Gods! We will unsettle the mind of the Muni by our side glances 
and passionate gestures and postures, delude and tie him and then 
bring him under our control.” 


50-60. Vyasa said O King! Thus saying, the Apsaras went to 
Tris'ira and began to exhibit various amorous gestures and postures 
as stated in the Kama Sastra. They began to sing sometimes, 
sometimes to dance in tune with musical measures before the Muni. 
In short, they practised various amorous gestures to entice him 
away. But that ascetic, blazing with the fire of Tapas, did not notice 
even the Apsaras' various attempts; rather he kept all his senses 
under the control and remained like a deaf, dumb, and blind man. In 
that lovely hermitage of the Muni, the Apsaras sang and danced 
ravishingly and remained a few days there. But when they saw that 
the Muni Tris'ira did not swerve a bit from his meditative posture they 
returned tired, distressed to Indra and all, very fearful, began to 
address Indra with folded hands “O King! We tried our best and 
we could not in any way make the Muni unsteady, very hard to 
surmount. O Pakas'asana! Please invent other means; we could not 
make the self-controlled Muni move away an inch from his position; it 
is our good luck that that high-souled Muni, an incarnate of blazing 
fire have not cursed us!” Then dismissing the Apsaras, the evil- 
minded and dull Indra began to devise means, though totally 
unlawful, how to kill that good Muni. O King! That Indra abandoned 
all shame, and fear of sin and ultimately came to a highly blameable 
and sinful conclusion how to kill him. 


Here ends the First Chapter of the Sixth Book on Tris'ira's austerities 
in S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 2. On The Birth Of Vritrasura 


1-11. Vyasa said The extremely covetous Indra, then, mounted on 
his Airavata elephant and determined to kill the Muni. He went to him 
and saw him immersed in deep Samadhi, firmly seated in his posture 
and with his speech controlled. At that time, a halo of light emanated 
from his body and he looked like a second Sun and a blazing fire. 
Indra became very sad and dejected when he saw that. Indra then 
thought within himself thus “Oh! Can I slay this Muni, free from 
any vicious inclinations, and endowed with the power of Tapas, 
blazing like a fire! This is quite against the Dharma. But, Alas! He 
wants to usurp my position; how can I, then, neglect such an 
enemy?” Thus cogitating, Indra hurled at the Muni his swift going, 
infallible thunderbolt, the Muni remaining engaged in his penance 
and shining like the Sun and Moon. The ascetic, struck thus, fell on 
the ground and died, like a mountain peak struck by thunder falling 
on the ground and presenting a wondrous sight. Indra became very 
glad when he killed the Muni; but the other Munis then cried aloud 
“Oh! We are killed! Alas! What a crime has Indra committed today! 
Oh! The vicious Indra has killed today this jewel amongst the Munis 
without any offence! Let, then, this sinner reap the fruits of his sinful 
act without any delay.” Indra, then, went back soon to his own 
abode; on the other hand, the high-souled Muni, though killed, 
looked as it were, living by the lustre of his own body. Indra, then, 
seeing him lying like a living man thought that the Muni might get 
alive and so became very sad. While he was thus arguing in his 
mind, he saw before him a wood cutter named Taksa and began to 
speak to him for his own selfish ends thus “O Artisan! Cut all the 
heads of this Muni and keep my word; this highly lustrous Muni is 
looking as it were alive; therefore, if you sever his heads, he cannot 
be alive.” Taksa then cursed him and spoke thus. 



12-14. “O King of the Devas! The neck of this Muni is very big and 
therefore cannot be severed; my axe is not at all fit for this work . 
Specially I cannot do such a blameable act. You have done a very 
heinous crime, quite against the law of the good persons; I fear sin; I 
will not be able to cut the heads of a dead man. This Muni is lying 
dead; what use is there in severing his head again? O Pakas'asana! 
The killer of the demon Paka! Why do you fear in this?” 


15. Indra said “O Artisan! This Muni is my dire enemy. Life seems 
to be still lingering in his body; his body is still lustrous, I fear if the 
Muni be alive again!” 


16. Taksa told “Do you not feel shame in doing this heinous crime, 
when you know everything? Do you not fear God for the crime of 
killing a Brahmin?” 


17. Indra said I will make Prayas'chitta (penance) afterwards for 
the washing away of my sins; but my duty at present is to kill my 
enemy. 


O Fortunate One! The wise men, clever in polity, say that enemies 
must be killed by any excuse whatsoever. 


18. Taksa then replied “O Maghavan! You are doing this sinful 
deed out of your avarice; but, O Lord! I have no cause whatsoever; 
how then without any cause, can I engage myself in such a vicious 
act?” 



19-20. Indra said “O Taksan! I will allot a share to you wherever 
there will be a sacrifice. The human beings will invariably offer to you 
the head of the animal killed at any sacrifice. Now cut his head 
according to this rule.” 


21-42. Vyasa said O King! That Taksa became very glad when he 
heard thus from Indra and struck off the heads of the Muni with his 
very strong axe. O powerful King! When the three heads, thus 
severed, fell to the ground, thousands and thousands of birds came 
out of those heads in quick succession. The three groups of birds 
Kalavinkas, Tittiris and Kapinjalas came out very rapidly from the 
three heads in due succession. The Kapinjala birds came out of that 
mouth that used to chant the Vedas and used to drink Soma; the 
Tittiri birds came out of that mouth that used to see all the quarters 
as if it drank them; and the Kalavinka birds came out of that face that 
used to drink wine. Indra became very glad to see the birds thus 
coming out of his mouths and went back at once to his Heavens. O 
King! No sooner Indra went back, than Taksa came back to his own 
house and felt himself very pleased to receive his share of sacrificial 
things. On returning to his home, Indra thought that he had done his 
duty in slaying his powerful enemy. It did not pass in his mind that he 
had committed the Brahmahattya sin (i. e., that he had killed a 
Brahmin). When VisVakarma heard that his virtuous son had been 
killed, he became very angry (in his mind) and said that as Indra had 
killed his qualified son engaged in asceticism without any offence, he 
would create another son to kill Indra. Let the Devas see his strength 
and power of Tapasya and let Indra, too, reap the far-reaching 
effects of his own Karma. Thus saying, VisVakarma distressed with 
anger, offered oblations in the sacrificial Fire, reciting Mantram from 
the Atharvan Vedas, with the object of producing a son. When Homa 
was performed for eight nights consecutively, a man quickly came 
out of that burning fire, as if he was the Incarnate of Fire itself. 

Seeing the lustrous son before him, come out of the fire and 
endowed with power and energy, VisVakarma said “O Indra's 



enemy! Grow by my power of asceticism.” When VisVakarma spoke 
these words, burning with anger, that brilliant fiery son began to 
grow, towering high above the Heavens. Within a moment that man 
looked a second God of Death and appeared like a mountain and 
shone like the God Himself. Then he spoke to his own father 
VisVakarma, who was very distressed “O Father! Put my name. 

Pray, what use can I be to you? Why do you look so aggrieved and 
anxious; please explain to me all the causes. I make a firm vow 
today that will remove the cause of your sorrow. Father! Of what 
avail is that to his father when he is not able to remove his sorrows!” 
O Father! Shall I drink the ocean or crumble the mountains to dust or 
shall I obstruct the passage of the rising Sun or shall I kill Indra, 
Yama, or the other host of Devas or shall I root out the earth and 
throw it with all beings into the ocean?” 


43-53. O King! Hearing thus the sweet words of his son, VisVakarma 
gladly told his mountain-like son “O my Son! You are capable to save 
me from troubles (Vrijina) hence you are named Vritra. O highly 
Fortunate One! Your brother, named Tris'ira, was a great ascetic; his 
three faces were all very strong. He was thoroughly conversant with 
the Vedas and the Vedangas and well versed in all the other 
knowledges. He remained always engaged in practising asceticism, 
surprising to the three worlds. Indra killed my qualified son with his 
thunderbolt; that wicked soul severed the three heads without any 
offence. Therefore, O Best of beings! Kill that vicious, shameless, 
deceitful, wicked Indra guilty of the sin of Brahmahattya.” O King! 
Thus saying, VisVakarma very much confounded with the 
breavement of his son, created various divine weapons. He prepared 
weapons specially suited to kill Indra, the best axes, tridents, clubs, 
S'aktis, Tomaras and bows made of horns and arrows, Parighas, 
Pattis'as, divine discus like the Sudars'an Chakra, divine 
inexhaustible arrow cases with arrows, nice Kavacha, very 
substantial air-like swift-going chariot looking like a cloud and 
capable to carry great loads; all these he created and gave over to 



his son. O King! VisVakarma, the best of architects, excited by 
anger, made ready all the equipments necessary for war and gave 
them to his son Vritrasura and sent him to kill Indra. 


Here ends the Second Chapter of the Sixth Book on the birth of 
Vritrasura in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 3. On The Deva Defeat And On Vritra’s 
Tapasya 


1-3. Vyasa said O King! Having the Svastyayana ceremony (a 
performance of rite to secure welfare or avert calamity) performed by 
the Brahmanas versed in the Vedas, the powerful Vritra mounted on 
his chariot and started to kill Indra, the King of the Gods. The 
Danavas that were previously defeated by the Devas now knowing 
Vritrasura to be powerful, came up to him to serve his cause. The 
messengers of Indra, when they saw him ready for battle, hurriedly 
came to Indra and informed him all about his doings and other 
matters connected with it. 


4-7. The messengers said O Lord! VisVakarma, having been very 
much grieved his son being slain, got very angry and by Abhichara 
process (an incantation with a design to injure or magic spells or 
charms used for a malevolent purpose) has created a son in order to 
kill you. That indomitable Vritrasura is now your powerful enemy; 
mounting on his chariot he is coming here to fight with you, 
surrounded by other Asuras. O highly Fortunate One! This enemy of 
yours is as high as the mountain Meru; he is now coming hurriedly to 
you, making a terrible noise; guard yourself carefully. O King! While 
Indra was hearing the messengers, the Devas came there panic- 
stricken and terrified and said :-- 


8-16. The Ganas said O Lord of the Suras! Ominous signs are 
being seen in the houses of the Gods; the birds are making sounds, 
very inauspicious and foreboding a great calamity. Crows, vultures, 
herons, falcons, and other ugly inauspicious birds are crying and 
making hoarse sounds on the tops of houses. Other birds are 
making incessantly harsh sounds like chichi koochy. The carriers of 



the several Devas are weeping and shedding tears always. O highly 
Fortunate One! On the tops of houses are heard very loud and very 
dreadful sounds of the crying Raksasis at dead of night. O Giver of 
honour! The flags on the chariots are falling to the ground without 
any trace of wind. Thus ominous signs are being visible on earth and 
in the air. O King of the Devas! The ugly faced women, wearing 
black clothes, are roaming from house to house and always 
repeating “Leave the house, and go away at once.” The Deva 
women while sleeping in their own temples are seeing in their 
dreams that terrible Raksasis, coming to them are cutting away their 
hairs on their heads and are frightening them. O Indra of the Devas! 
The inauspicious signs like these and earthquakes and the falling of 
the meteors are taking place. The jackals come in the courtyard of 
houses at night and yell horrible heartrending sounds. Lizards are 
moving always in the rooms and the several limbs of our bodies are 
shaking and thus making very inauspicious signs. 


17. Vyasa said O King! Hearing their words, Indra became very 
anxious and called Brihaspati, the Deva Guru, and asked him 


18-20. Indra spoke O Brahmana! Very inauspicious signs are 
being visible; dreadful winds are blowing and stars are falling from 
the skies what are all these? O Intelligent One! You are very wise 
and versed in the S'astras and the Guru of the Devas; you are 
omniscient and know very well how to remedy the evils. Therefore 
perform the rites by which enemies can be killed; do such as our 
miseries be all averted. 


21-31. Brihaspati said “O Thousand-eyed! What shall I do? You 
have committed shortly a heinous crime; you killed that innocent 
Muni and so you have earned a very bad Karmic effect. Very violent 
sins and good deeds produce their effects very quickly. It is. 



therefore, highly incumbent on those that desire for their own 
welfare, to take up any work with great discretion. It is never 
advisible to do any action that leads to the tormenting of others. 
Never do they find happiness who give pains to others. O Indra! You 
have committed Brahmahattya under the influence of greed and 
delusion; now suddenly has appeared the fruit of that act. O King of 
the Suras! This Vritra Asura is born invulnerable to all the Devas. 
That powerful indomitable Asura chief is now coming, mounted on a 
chariot, to kill you, surrounded by the other Danavas and taking with 
him the VisVakarma-made divine arms and weapons equal to 
thunderbolt. He is coming like a second Kala, as it were, to destroy 
the whole Universe. There is none in this Triloka, capable kill him; 
and his death will not also take place. While Brihaspati was thus 
speaking, a great tumultuous uproar rose at once. The Gandharbas, 
Kinnaras, Yaksas, Munis and other Immortals began to fly away from 
their quarters. Indra seeing the Devas flying away became very 
anxious and gave orders at once that all subservient to him must be 
ready at once for battle; they must go and call the Vasus, the 
Rudras, the twin AsVins, the Adityas, Pusa, Bhaga, Vayu, Kuvera, 
Varuna, Yama and the other Devas to come there at once. The 
enemy is well nigh; so let all the Devas come on their Vimanas 
quickly there.” 


32-44. Thus ordering, Indra mounted on the Airavata elephant and 
taking the Sura Guru in front started from his own temple. The other 
Devas mounted on their respective carriers and, firmly resolved to 
fight, started with all their arms and weapons. On the other hand, 
Vritrasura surrounded by the Demons, came up to the beautiful 
mountain, adorned with trees, on the north side of the Manasarovara 
Lake. Indra, too, came there with Brihaspati in front and attended by 
all the other Devas to that mountain, north of the Manasa Lake and 
began to fight. A dreadful fight, then, ensued between Vritra and 
Indra with clubs, swords, Parighas, Pas'as, arrows, S'aktis, Parsus 
and other weapons. The terrible fight lasted for full one hundred 



human years, terrifying to the self-controlled Risis and all the human 
beings. Varuna first turned his back; then Vayu, then Yama, the Sun 
and Moon and then Indra fled from the battle-field. Seeing Indra and 
the other Devas flying away, Vritrasura came to the hermitage and 
there bowed down to his father who looked very glad; and he said 
O Father! I have carried out your orders; Indra and all the other 
Devas are defeated in the battle; as elephants and deer fly away 
seeing a lion, so the Devas all fled away to their respective abodes. I 
have taken the Airavata, the best of elephants, away from Indra who 
fled away on foot. O Bhagavan! I have brought the elephant here. 
Kindly accept it. O Father! It is not advisable to kill a man who is 
terrified, therefore I did not kill them. Now kindly order anything else 
that I may fulfil your desires. All the Devas fled away from the battle¬ 
field, very much tired and terrified; and what more to say than this 
that Indra, too, fled, leaving his elephant on the field. 


45-54. Vyasa said O King! VisVakarma became very glad to hear 
his son's words and said “Today I can rightly say that I have got 
my son and that my life is successful. O son! To-day you have 
sanctified me; my cares and worries are abated; my mind is also 
calm to see your wonderful prowess. O Child! Now hear attentively 
what I say. O highly intelligent One! Now carefully sit in your steady 
posture (Sthirasan) and practise Tapasya. Never trust anybody; 

Indra is now your enemy, ever ready to find your faults, and clever in 
sowing dissensions between you and your well-wishers. O Son! 
Tapasya is not an ordinary thing; Laksmi (prosperity) is obtained 
thereby; excellent kingdoms, increase of vigour, and victories in 
battles are obtained. Therefore worship Hiranyagarbha and get 
excellent boons from him; then kill this vicious Indra, guilty of the sin 
Brahmahattya. Worship the auspicious Creator calmly and carefully. 
The four-faced Brahma then will be pleased and grant you your 
desired boon. First please the Creator of indomitable prowess, from 
Whose womb has sprung all this Universe, and get, then, immortality 
from Him. Then kill that guilty Indra, my enemy. O Son! My feeling of 



enmity due to the killing of my son reigns always in my mind; I 
cannot go to sleep peacefully nor do I get peace in any way. The 
vicious Indra killed my son; O Vritra! What more shall I say to you; I 
am merged in the ocean of sorrows; save me.” 


55-60. Vyasa said O King! Thus hearing his father's words, 
Vritrasura became inflamed with anger and, getting his permission, 
set out gladly to practise Tapasya. He then went to the 
Gandhamadan mountain and performed his bath in the holy and 
auspicious river Manda Kini, and, preparing a Sthirasan, took his 
seat in the Kus'a grass, to practise the tapasya. He left off gradually 
taking his food, then subsisted on water only and remained engaged 
in Yoga; and, seated in Sthirasan meditated incessantly on Prajapati, 
the Creator of this Universe. Indra, on the other hand, knowing 
Vritrasura engaged in tapasya became very anxious and sent to him 
Gandharvas, Yaksas, Pannagas, Kinnaras, Vidyadharas, Apsaras 
and other Deva messengers, all of unbounded vigour to create 
obstacles in his austerities. These Gandharvas and other Deva 
Yonies, expert in exercising magical spells, tried many ways and 
means and various gestures and postures to create disturbances in 
his penance; but that great ascetic Vritra, the son of Vis'vakarma did 
not swerve a bit from his meditative state. 


Here ends the Third Chapter of the Sixth Book on the defeat of the 
Deva army and on Vritra's tapasya in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 4. On The Defeat Of The Devas By 
Vritra 


1-17. Vyasa said O King! The Suras that wanted to create 
hindrance in Vritra's tapasya, seeing him firmly resolved, became 
disappointed in the fulfilment of their objects and returned to their 
own abodes. Thus full one hundred years passed away. The four¬ 
faced Brahma, the Grandsire of the Lokas, came there mounted on 
his carrier the Swan, and said “O Vritra! Be happy; now quit your 
meditation and ask boon; I will grant you the boon that you choose. 

O Child! Your body has become very lean and thin through your 
penance. I am now very pleased to see your this very hard tapasya. 
Welfare be to you. Now ask the boon that you desire.” Vyasa said 
O King! Hearing thus the clearly distinct nectar-like sweet words of 
the Creator Brahma, Vritra shed tears of joy and suddenly stood up. 
And going to him, bowed down gladly before His feet, and, with 
folded hands, spoke to Him, Who is desirous to grant him boons, in a 
tremulous voice. O Lord! Today I have been fortunate to see Thee 
who art generally seen with great difficulty; and I have acquired thus 
the posts of all the Devas; O Lotus-seated One! I have got an 
insatiable desire burning within me. Thou art omniscient. Thou 
knowest everything; still I am speaking out my mind. O Lord! Grant 
that my death does not occur with iron, wood, dry or wet substances 
or with bamboos or any other weapons and let my strength and 
valour be increased very much in the battle; for, then, I will be 
unconquerable by all the Devas with all their armies. Vyasa said O 
King! Thus prayed for, Brahma said to him smiling “O Child! get 
up; I grant that your desired boon will always be fulfilled; now go to 
your own place. Your death won't occur with dry or wet substances 
or with stones or wood. I say this truly unto you.” Thus granting the 
boon, Brahma went to His Brahmaloka. Vritra, too, became very glad 
on receiving his desired object, and returned to his own abode. The 
highly intelligent Vritra informed the father about the boon granted to 
him; Vis'vakarma became very glad to hear it. O highly fortunate 



One! Let all bliss and good fortune come unto you; kill Indra, my 
greatest enemy. Go and kill the murderer of my son Tris'ira, the 
vicious Indra and return to me. Be victorious in the battle and 
become the Lord of all the Devas and remove my mental agony due 
to the killing of my son. A son becomes then really a son when he 
obeys the commands of his father and when he feeds plentifully 
good many people on the Sraddha day (after his father's death) and 
when he offers Pinda at Gaya. Therefore, O Son! Keep my words 
and try to remove my sorrows. Know this as certain that Tris'ira 
never vanishes from my mind. Tris'ira was very truthful, amiable and 
good-natured; he was an ascetic and foremost amongst the Vedic 
scholars. The wicked Indra killed my dear son without any offence. 


18-33. Vyasa said O King! Hearing the father's words, that 
extremely indomitable Vritrasura mounted on his chariot and quickly 
got out of his father's house. The proud Asura, then, marched to the 
battle, accompanied with his vast army, to the sounding of the 
conch-shells and war drums. Vritra, versed in politics and morals, 
exhorted his soldiers before marching and said “To-day we will kill 
Indra and possess the kingdom of the Immortals, freed of all 
enemies.” O King! Thus, accompanied by his soldiers, and raising a 
tremendous war-cry terrifying to the Devas, the Asura set out for 
battle. O Bharata! The King of the Devas, knowing that the Asura is 
quite at hand, became overwhelmed with terror and ordered at once 
the soldiers to be ready for the battle and called quickly all the 
Lokapalas and sent them all for the battle. The highly lustrous Indra, 
the tormentor of the foes, arrayed his troops in order according to 
Gridhra Vyuha (the method in which the vultures arrange themselves 
while flying) and stayed there. On the other hand Vritra, the slayer of 
enemies, dashed unto that place with all swiftness. A dreadful fight 
then ensued between the Devas and Danavas; the two parties, 
desirous to get victory over the other, fought awfully hard. When the 
blaze of the battle fire shone to a very high pitch, the Devas dropped 
with sorrow while the Asuras became excited with joy. The Devas 



and Danavas struck each other with Tomaras, Bhindipalas, axes, 
Paras'us, Pattis'as, and various other weapons. When the dreadful 
battle rose to a high pitch causing horripilation, Vritra became very 
angry and suddenly caught hold of Indra and denuding him of all 
clothes and armours swallowed him; he, then, remembering his 
former enmity, became very glad and stayed there. When Indra was 
thus devoured by Vritra, the Devas were overwhelmed with terror 
and cried out frequently, with great distress “O Indra! O Indra!” All 
the Devas became very dejected and grieved in their hearts to see 
Indra denuded of his armour and clothes in the belly of Vritra and 
bowed down to Brihaspati and said “O Indra of the Brahmans! 
You are our best Guru what are we to do now? Though the gods 
tried their best to save Indra still Vritra has devoured him. We are all 
powerless, what can we do without Indra? O Lord! Perform quickly 
magic spells (Abhichara process) which will lead to our Indra's 
liberation.” 


34. Brihaspati said “O Suras! The king of the gods is swallowed 
by Vritra, he has been quite disabled; but Indra is living in his 
bowels; attempt therefore must be made that he comes out while 
living.” 


35-54. Vyasa said O King! The Devas became very anxious to 
see Indra in that plight and took all the ways and means carefully 
how he might be freed. Then they created a state tending to cause 
yawning, very powerful and irresistible and calculated to destroy 
one's enemy. Vritrasura then yawned and his mouth got widely 
opened and extended. In the meanwhile Indra, the destroyer of one's 
enemies' strength, contracted all his limbs and came out of the 
expanded mouth of the Asura and fell down. Since that time, this 
state of yawning has become prevalent amongst the beings. The 
Devas were all glad to see Indra thus come out. When Indra thus got 
out, he fought again with Vritra for 10,000 years (Ajuta years). The 



fight was very dreadful, causing horripilation. On one side all the 
Devas joined in the battle; on the other side, the pre-eminently 
powerful Vritra, the son of VisVakarma fought. When Vritrasura got 
more and more energy in the battle, Indra became gradually 
dwindled and was at last defeated. Indra became very much grieved 
when he found himself defeated; the Devas also were very dejected 
to see this. Indra and the other Devas quitted the battle-field and fled 
away. Vritrasura too, quickly arrived and occupied the Heavens. 
Vritra began to enjoy by force the Heavenly gardens and took the 
Airavata elephant. O King! The Asura, the son of Tvasta, took away 
all Vimanas (the self-moving chariots of gods), Uchchais'rava, the 
best of horses, the heavenly cow, the giver of desires, the Parijata 
tree, the Apsaras, and all other jewels of the Heavens. The Devas, 
on the other hand, deprived of their shares in sacrifices and driven 
away from their Heavens, suffered very much. Vritrasura became 
puffed up with vanity, when he got possession of the Heavens. 
VisVakarma, too, became very happy at that time and began to 
enjoy pleasures along with his son. O Bharata! The Devas, then, 
united with the Munis and they began to consult about their own 
welfare. When the Devas took Indra with them and went to Maha 
Deva in the Mount Kailas'a and bowed down to His feet very humbly 
and, with folded hands, spoke thus :-- O Deva of the Devas! O Maha 
Deva! Thou art the MahesVara and the unbounded Ocean of Mercy! 
We are defeated by Vritrasura and we are very much terrified. Save 
us, O S'ambhu! Thou dost good to all the beings; dost thou tell us, 
therefore, truly what are we to do now, when that powerful Danava 
has dispossessed us of our Heavens. O Mahes'a! Now dislodged, 
where are we to go? We are not finding any remedy by which our 
miseries can be destroyed. O Bhuta Bhavana! We are very much 
pained; help us; O merciful One! That Vritrasura has become 
intoxicated with vanity due to his being granted the boon. Therefore 
destroy him. 



55-57. S'ankara said “O Devas! We will keep Brahma in the front 
and let all of us go to the residence of Hari and there consult with 
Him how to destroy this unruly Vritra. The Janardana Vasudeva is 
fully capable to do all actions. He is powerful, knower of pretexts, 
highly intelligent, ocean of mercy, and fit to be asked by all for 
protection. Without Him, the Deva of the Devas, no success is 
possible in any action. Therefore all of us ought to go there for the 
success in our undertaking.” 


58-62. Vyasa said O King! Thus settling their plan of action, Indra 
and other Devas took S'ankara and Brahma with them and went to 
the abode of Hari, who protects all and is gracious to His devotees. 
They, then, began to chant Purusasukta hymns to Him and thus they 
praised the God Hari, the Guru of this Universe. The Janardan Hari, 
the Lord of Kamala, then, appeared before them and, after showing 
his respect, addressed them thus O Lord of the several Lokas! 
What have brought you all together with Brahma and S'ankara 
hither? O best of Suras! Please tell me the reason of your coming 
here. Vyasa said O King! Thus hearing Hari's words, the Devas 
could not reply anything; rather almost all of them remained with an 
anxious look with their hands folded, overwhelmed with cares. 


Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the defeat of the 
Devas by Vritra in the Maha Puranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 5. On Praising The Dev! 


1-5. Vyasa said O King! Narayana, the Lord of Laksmi, and 
Knower of the essences of all subjects, seeing the Devas extremely 
attached to him and anxious, spoke to them thus O Suras! Why 
have you kept silent? Tell me why you have all come, let it be good 
or bad, tell me; I will try to remove your miseries. The Devas said 
O Lord! Is there anything unknown to you in this Triloki; You know 
everything; why then art Thou asking us again and again? In ancient 
times You in your Dwarf incarnation overspread the three worlds by 
Your three feet and thus bound the King Vali in his own premises and 
gave over the sovereignty over the Devas to Indra. O All Pervading 
One! It is You who deluded the Daityas and procured nectar for the 
Devas, and it is You who sent them to the house of Death. 

Therefore, O Lord! You are the one and only one that is capable in 
warding off all the evils that befall on the Devas. 


6-31. Thus hearing the Devas' words, Visnu said “O Suras! You 
need not fear; I know one remedy, approved by all, by which that 
Daitya might be killed so that you would be happy. I am now giving 
out to you. Your welfare, your benefit must be looked at by me 
whether by the exercise of my intelligence or by using my prowess, 
by wealth pretext or by any other means whatsoever. Four means, 
viz., conciliation, gifts, sowing discord, or punishment are mentioned 
by the wise statesmen to be applied to friends and specially to the 
enemies. Brahma was worshipped by Vritra with severe austerities 
and He granted boons and it is due to the influence of that favour 
that this Asura has become indomitable. The more so that 
Vis'vakarma created him from the sacrificial fire; it is through all 
these causes that the Demon Vritrasura, conqueror of the enemies' 
stronghold, has grown up so very powerful that he can hardly be 
conquered by any being. O Suras! First peace must be negotiated 
with him; then deceive him, otherwise the enemy will be very difficult 



to conquer. First entice hinn and bring hinn under control; then kill 
hinn. Now take the Risis and Gandharbas with you and go where the 
powerful enemy Vritrasura is residing and make a treaty with him; 
thus he will be conquered. Swear on oath and accede to the terms 
he proposes and thus create faith in him; then cultivate friendship 
with him; lastly, when time will come, kill that powerful enemy. O 
Suras! I will also enter, unseen by anybody, into the excellent 
weapon of Indra, his thunderbolt and will help him in due time. Wait 
till the period of his longevity expires; otherwise his death will never 
take place. Now go to that Asura, with Gandharbas and Risis and 
cunningly cultivate friendship between him and Indra, by conciliatory 
words; when he begins thus to put his confidence, then deceive him. 

I will enter hiddenly into the strong well covered thunderbolt. When 
Indra will come to know that the Demon has put complete faith in 
him, he will hurl his thunderbolt against him and thus the enemy will 
be killed and not otherwise. O Lord of the Devas! Do not consider for 
the present the act of treachery that you will commit: take my help 
and kill that wicked Demon with thunderbolt. To practise hypocrisy 
with an hypocrite is not considered a sin; specially no powerful 
enemy can be killed only by the well known rules applicable to 
warriors, without any deceit. I also deceived, before, Vali, with my 
dwarf body and again I deceived all the Demons by showing myself 
as a beautiful woman; therefore to practise deceit with a strong 
deceitful enemy is never considered a sin. Know this. O Devas! Now 
you all conjointly worship the Devi Bhagavati with Mantras and 
prayers and take Her shelter; the Yoga Maya, then, will help you. 

We, too, worship that Devi, the Highest Prakriti, the Incarnate of pure 
Sattva Guna, Who grants success, bestows us all our desires. Who 
is Herself the object of desires, and Who is never realised by any 
except by those Yogis, self-controlled pure men. Indra, too, will 
certainly be able to kill his enemy in battle if he worships Her; for the 
Maha Maya, the Creatrix of Delusion, will, when worshipped, delude 
that Demon. Thus deluded by Her Maya, Vritrasura will easily be 
killed by him; there is no doubt in this, what more do you want than 
this that everything will be successfully accomplished when the Devi 
Ambika is propitiated and gets well pleased. She regulates the 



hearts of all and is the Cause of all causes. Without Her worship no 
one's desires can be expected to be accomplished. Therefore, O 
Best of Suras! Worship the Universal Mother, the Prakrit! Devi with 
greatest devotion and with greatest purity for the destruction of your 
enemy. Seel In days of yore, I fought for five thousand years, 
dreadfully with the two Demons Madhu and Kaitabha and then killed 
them. I worshipped, then, the Maha Maya, the Highest Prakrit!; She 
was thus pleased and deluded the two Asuras; thus the two powerful 
Asuras puffed up with vanity were deluded and thus I could kill those 
terrible Daityas under a pretext. Therefore, O Suras! You, too, 
worship that Highest Prakrit! with the greatest devotion; She will then 
surely fulfill your desires. 


32-49. O King! When the intelligent Visnu enlightened thus the 
Devas, they went to the top of the Mount Sumeru, adorned with the 
Mandara trees, and, remaining at a secluded place, recited slowly 
Her Mantrams and thus engaged in asceticism and meditation, 
began to chant hymns and praise that Universal Mother, the Holder 
of the world, the Remover of all world ailings, and the Creatrix, 
Preservatrix and Destructrix of the world and the Bestower of all 
desires to Her devotees. The Devas said “O Devi! Be graciously 
pleased unto us! O Thou, the Destructrix of the afflictions of the 
distressed! We have taken refuge unto Thy lotus-feet. We have been 
defeated by Vritrasura in the battle, we are very much oppressed 
and afflicted. O Thou, the Highest Reality! O Thou, the Mother of the 
whole Universe! Protect us as a Mother protects her child; we are 
fallen into this difficulty arising from our enemies. O Mother! Nothing 
is hidden from Thy knowledge in the three worlds. Why art Thou 
taking no notice of us, that are being tormented by the Asuras! O 
Mother! Thou createst, preservest, and destroyest the three worlds; 
Brahma, Visnu and Mahes’a are created by Thy mere will and are 
doing all Thy works. Mother! They are not independent; by the 
contraction of Thy eye-brows, they are directed and enjoy all the 
pleasures. The Mother protects her sons afflicted with various 



difficulties and dangers, even when they are found guilty of various 
offences. It is Thou that hast made this rule; then why, O Merciful! Art 
Thou not protecting us who are quite innocent and whom Thou dost 
know as having taken refuge unto Thy lotus-feet. O Devi! If Thou 
thinkest that we forget Thee, being too much attracted by the 
enjoyments that Thou hast been pleased to confer unto us and 
therefore we are proper not to be looked upon with Thy merciful 
eyes, we would say that this is quite true; but, O Mother! Nowhere is 
seen a feeling of a Mother to Her child; we are no doubt, objects of 
Thy mercy and favour always. Besides there is no fault of us in this 
matter, O Mother! that we do not worship Thee and become 
immersed in sensual enjoyments; for Thy creation, the Moha 
(delusion) is very powerful and deludes us. O Mother! Thou art 
naturally Merciful! Knowing these, why art Thou not showing mercy 
unto us. O Devi! Thou hadst killed before in battle, for our sake, the 
powerful Daitya Chief Mahis'asura, very terrible to all the beings. 
Then why art not Thou, O Mother! killing this dreadful Vritrasura? O 
Mother! Thou hadst killed the two brother Daityas, S'umbha and 
Nis'umbha, extraordinarily powerful, and the other Daityas that 
followed them; O Thou, the embodiment of mercy! Similarly destroy 
now this deceitful strong Vritrasura. O Mother! Delude this proud 
Asura so that he could not manifest, in the least, his power. We are 
very much troubled by the Asuras and overwhelmed with terror from 
them; Thou savest us; for there is no other in the three worlds that 
can by his own force remove the sorrows and sufferings of the 
Devas. O Mother! Though Thou hast shown favour towards Vritra, 
now dost kill him soon, whose nature is cruel and tormenting to 
others. O Bhavani! Better dost Thou save him from sin by Thy holy 
arrows. Otherwise that vicious Asura will surely enter into the 
hideous Hell. It is for his welfare that Thou oughtest to kill him. Those 
that had been before enemies of the Gods, Thou didst purify them by 
weapons in the battle-field and hadst sent them to the Nandana 
Garden in the Heavens. O Thou, the Mercy personified! Was it not 
that Thou didst not save them from hell? Then why art not Thou 
killing this Vritrasura! We know this for certain that the Asura is Thy 
enemy, not Thy servant; for that mischievous soul is giving us 



trouble. O Mother! How can he be Thy servant and devotee who 
torments the Devas that are always engaged in worshipping Thy 
lotus feet. O Mother! How can we perform Thy worship? The flowers 
and other articles used in worship all are created by Thee; especially 
we and the Mantras, in fact, everything is the manifestation of Thy 
power. Therefore, O Bhavani! We worship Thee by laying ourselves 
prostrate on Thy feet. Be'st Thou pleased. Those men are blessed 
that worship with devotion Thy lotus feet for crossing this ocean of 
world. O Devi! Those Yogins that want final liberation and forsake 
therefore all attachments, vikaras and delusions, even they attain 
success then only when they meditate Thy lotus feet. Those that are 
great Sacrificers and know best the essence of the Vedas, even they 
when they offer oblations to the sacrifice, utter “Svaha” that is 
cheering to the Devas and “Svadha” very consoling to the Pitris; thus 
they always think of Thee (for Svaha and Svadha are Thy names 
only). O Mother! Thou art the retentive power and memory. Thou art 
the beauty. Thou art the peace. Thou art the Buddhi (intellect) well 
known to clarify men's minds; and Thou art the prosperity and wealth 
of all these three worlds. O Devi! Those that worship Thee, Thou 
givest them, out of mercy, those wealth in some way or other. 


50-57. Vyasa said O King! Thus worshipped by the Devas, the 
Devi Bhagavati appeared before them in a very beautiful form, thin, 
adorned with all ornaments. Her two hands holding a noose, and 
goad, and the other two hands making signs to discard all fear and 
ready to grant boons; Her loins very beautiful, girdled with a gold 
band with small bells pending and making sweet tinkling sounds; Her 
feet with anklets (ornaments) making sweet sonorous sounds with 
tiny tinkling bells. Her voice was exceedingly sweet and lovely. Her 
forehead was adorned with the crescent of the Moon and on Her 
head was glittering a diadem of jewels. Her lotus-face adorned with 
sweet soft smiles and with Her three beauteous lotus-eyes looking 
like Indibaras. Her body was of a red colour like the Parijata flowers 
and Her limbs were marked with red sandal-paste. She was dressed 



in a red attire. The Devi looked well pleased, like an ocean of infinite 
mercy, wearing complete dress suited to happy interviews, the 
Creatrix of all this Cosmos, the Highest, the Knower of all, the 
Directrix of all, and the Great Upholder of all. She looked like an 
embodiment of the Truth of all Vedantas and the Incarnate of ever 
Existence, Intelligence, Bliss, the Maha Devi Bhagavati 
BhuvanesVari. The Devas all bowed down before Her standing in 
front of them. The Mother then spoke “What business have you 
got here? Speak to Me.” 


58-59. The Devas said “O Bhagavati! Vritrasura is tormenting 
much the Devas; Bewitch him. O Devi! Do such as he can trust the 
Devas; and impart then strength on our weapons such as he can be 
killed.” Vyasa said “O King! That will be done.” Saying thus, the 
Devi departed then and there. The Devas became very glad and 
returned respectively to their abodes. 


Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the praising of the 
Devi by the Devas in S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 6. On The Slaying Of Vritrasura 


1-3. Vyasa said O King! Thus getting the boons from the Devi, the 
Devas and the Risis blazing with their asceticism, all united and 
consulted with each other; then they went to the excellent As'rama of 
Vritra. There they saw Vritra in a sitting posture and with his own 
Tejas (fiery spirit in him) as if ready to burn the three worlds and to 
devour all the Devas. The Risis, then, spoke to Vritra the sweet 
words full of sentiments for the serving of the Devas' ends, according 
to the principle of conciliation. 


4-23. “O highly fortunate Vritra! Terrific to all the Lokas! Yo have now 
established your dominion in all the places over this whole Universe; 
but your enmity with Indra is the only cause to interrupt you in your 
happiness; there is no doubt in this. This enmity has increased much 
the anxiety of you both and therefore has grown very painful. Neither 
you nor Indra can go to sleep peacefully, there is always that fear 
hanging on you both, on account of that enmity. And, see! A long 
long while has passed away since the last battle was fought between 
you two; yet all the Devas, Asuras, men and other subjects, are 
feeling a sense of oppression and pain. In this world happiness is the 
only thing to be sought for and pain is to be avoided; this is the 
eternal state of things. Never does that man who practises enmity 
with another, get happiness; this has been ascertained by the wise. It 
is only those brave warriors, that found taste in warfare, that approve 
of battles; but the wise that are expert in amorous enjoyments do not 
like battle as destroying the sensual enjoyments; they do not like 
fighting with flowers even; what to say with sharpened arrows! In a 
battle, the victory is doubtful but the shooting of arrows is certain. 
This world is dependent on Fate (Daiva, i.e., dependent on the 
cosmic rulers or deities or Devas of the Universe), so is victory or 
defeat. So knowing this, one ought never to fight. Bathing in proper 
time, taking food and sleeping in fixed times and having a chaste 



serving wife, these are the means towards happiness in this world. 
While in warfares, shooting terrible arrows and striking with fierce 
axes take place; what happiness can there possibly exist? Rather 
the enemy finds pleasure there. There is a saying that death in 
battles leads one to Heaven, but this is merely an enticing statement, 
inciting one to war! Really it is fruitless. Supposing that happiness 
comes ultimately to those who pain their bodies by being shot with 
arrows and who allow their carcasses being devoured by the crows 
and jackals, then no man, even of dull understanding, will like this, 
what to speak of intelligent persons! Therefore, O Vritra! Let 
everlasting peace and friendship be established between you and 
Indra; both of you in that case will derive everlasting peace and 
happiness. Moreover if the enmity between you terminates from this 
instant, then we, the ascetics and Gandharbas will, no doubt, be able 
to remain in our own respective As'rams with great comfort. O 
Powerful Hero! Owing to incessant wars between you and Indra, the 
Munis, Gandharbas, Kinnaras and beings are day and night, 
suffering very much. For the happiness of all peace-loving persons, 
we, the Munis, the residents of the forest, earnestly desire that there 
be formed friendship between you two. We desire that you, Indra 
and all the Jivas get happiness. O Vritra! We stand as mediators in 
this treaty between you and Indra; we will make each party swear on 
oath and thus make it conducive to the happiness of both. Indra will 
now swear on oath before you on the terms that you will dictate and 
thus will make your heart cheerful. Know this verily that this earth 
stands on Truth, the sun rises for the sake of Truth, the winds blow 
all along for Truth and the boundless ocean never oversteps its limit 
for Truth. Therefore let your friendship, be established on Truth. 

Thus tied together by bonds of friendship let you two sleep, play, 
make sports in water and sit together happily.” 


24-28. Vyasa said :-- O King! Hearing the Maharsi's words, the 
highly intelligent Vritra began to say “Risis! You are possessed 
with knowledge and many other qualifications and you are ascetics; 



you are therefore to be respected by me. You are the Munis and 
therefore you never speak anywhere falsehood; your conduct is 
good and you practise rite and ceremonies; you are calm; therefore 
you do not know the causes of pretexts. The intelligent should never 
cultivate friendship with a knave, licentious person who is void of 
understanding, an infamous, and a shameless person, specially if he 
be an enemy. This vicious Indra is shameless, deceitful, licentious, 
and the killer of a Brahmana; therefore no faith can ever be placed 
on such persons. You are saints and added with all good 
qualifications; therefore your minds never play in the mischievous 
thoughts of others; it is because your heart is calm and quiet that you 
cannot understand the minds of the deceitful and treacherous; 
therefore you ought never to stand as mediators between any two 
persons.” 


29-32. The Munis said “O King! All the creatures certainly enjoy 
the fruits of their Karmas, whether good or bad; how then, can 
persons, of perverted intellect, obtain peace when they do mischief 
to others. The treacherous persons certainly go to hell and suffer 
miseries always. The slayers of Brahmanas and the drunkards may 
get liberation; but never the faithless and those who go against their 
friends get off free; these will have to suffer undoubtedly in the hells. 
Therefore, O Knower of all things! Give out clearly what is going on 
exactly in your mind and the exact terms that you want; and the 
treaty will be made between you and Indra exactly according to 
those terms.” 


33-34. Vritra said “O highly fortunate Munis! I can enter into a 
treaty of peace with Indra only on the condition that Indra with all the 
other Devas will not kill me in day or in night with any dry or liquid 
substance or with wood, stone, or thunderbolt and on no other 
terms.” 



35-68. Vyasa said O King! The Risis then gladly accepted his 
word and brought Indra there and recited to him the terms of the 
treaty of peace. Indra, then, swore, an oath, before the Munis with 
Fire as the Witness that he would comply with the terms of the treaty, 
and was thus freed from his heavy thoughts and felt that he had 
been rid of a fever. Vritra, then, relied on Indra's words; became his 
friend, and began live, play and enjoy with him. They felt pleasure by 
their union and began to roam sometimes in the Nandana Garden, 
sometimes in the Gandha Madana, sometimes on the shores of 
oceans, Vritra was very much delighted when they were thus united 
in friendship; but Indra watched him to find his faults; thus sometime 
passed. A few years passed away after the treaty had been 
concluded. And the straight-forward Vritra began to place very much 
confidence on Indra; but Indra meditated on the means how to kill 
him. One day Visvakarma, knowing that his son Vritrasura placed 
implicit confidence on Indra, called his son and said “O my son 
Vritra! Hear my good words. See, it is never advisable to trust 
anybody with whom there has arisen once the enmity. Indra is your 
greatest enemy; he always intends evil to you; therefore do not trust 
him any more. Indra is never to be trusted, who is always covetous, 
inimical, rejoicing at others sufferings, licentious and addicted to 
others' wives; vicious, deceitful, finding faults with others, always 
jealous, a juggler, and puffed up with vanity. O Child! What more 
shall I say than this fact that that villain, without fearing sin, easily 
entered into the womb of his mother and cut the crying child in the 
womb into seven pieces and then each seventh part again into 
seven parts, thus altogether into forty-nine parts. Therefore O my 
son! He is never to be trusted on any account. He who is always 
addicted to vicious deeds never feels shame in perpetrating again 
another crime.” Vyasa said :-- O King! Vritra's death time drew nigh; 
hence he could not take his father's words as auspicious, though he 
was warned by his father in words full of meaning. One day, in the 
evening time, at a very inauspicious dreadful moment, Indra saw 
Vritra on the shore of an ocean and began to think of the boon 
granted by Brahma to the Asura thus “Now this is the terrible 
evening time; this cannot be called day nor can it be called night. 



and this demon is also here alone in this solitary place; it is advisable 
therefore to effect his death by force, there is no doubt in this.” Thus 
arguing in his mind, Indra remembered the Undecaying Soul Hah. 
Bhagavan, the Best of Purusas came there, unseen by anybody, and 
entered into the thunderbolt; Indra quickly collected himself to kill 
Vritrasura; but he thought how he could slay this Demon, 
unconquerable in the battle; and if he did not slay his enemy then by 
deceit, then his enemy would continue to live, and it would be 
impossible for him to get his own welfare. While he was thus 
thinking, he saw the foam of the waters of the ocean as big as a 
mountain; thinking that foam not to be dry nor wet and considering 
that foam not to be any weapon, he easily took that foam and 
instantly remembered with a heartful devotion the Highest Force 
BhuvanesVari. On Her remembrance, the Bhagavati infused Her 
part into that foam and the thunderbolt, instilled with the force of 
Narayana, was covered, too, by that foam. Indra, then, hurled the 
thunderbolt covered with foam on Vritra; and the Demon, thus struck, 
instantly fell down like a mountain. When Vritrasura was thus killed, 
Indra became very glad; the Risis began to praise him with various 
hymns. Indra, then, with all the other Devas worshipped the Devi, 
through Whose Grace the enemy had been killed and they praised 
Her with various hymns. The image of the Bhagavati the Supreme 
S'akti was built of ruby and installed in the Nandana Garden. O King! 
Since then all the Devas used to worship the Devi thrice a day, 
morning, midday and evening and since then the S'ri Devi 
became the tutelary deity of the Gods. Indra worshipped then Visnu 
also, the Highest of the Gods. When the terrible powerful Vritrasura 
was killed, the auspicious wind began to blow gently; the Devas, 
Gandharbas, Rakhsasas, and Kinnaras began to roam about with 
great joy. Vritrasura was deluded by the Maya of Bhagavati, and Her 
force entered into the foam; hence Indra was capable to kill him 
suddenly and it is, for this reason, that the Devi, the Goddess of the 
world, is known in the three worlds as “Vritranihantri,” the slayer of 
Vritra. But at the first sight Indra killed him by means of the foam; 
hence the people say that Vritra was killed by Indra. 



Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the slaying of 
Vritrasura in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 7. On Indra’s Living Under Disguise In 
The Manas Lake 


1-16. Vyasa said O King! Now seeing Vritra slain, Visnu, the Deva 
of the Devas, went to Vaikuntha; but, with this fear reigning supreme 
in his mind that it was He that virtually slew him. Indra, too, then 
became afraid of the sin committed by him and returned to his 
Heavens. The Munis, too, became very anxious and thought what 
great sin they have committed in cheating Vritrasura. It is the 
company of Indra that now made their name “Munis” as 
meaningless. The Munis thought thus “Oh! Vritra on our words 
trusted Indra and we have thus turned out today traitors in company 
with that traitor Indra. Attachment and affection is the cause of all 
mischief. Fie on that attachment! It is, as it were, tied by the cord of 
affection that we had sworn falsely on oath and thus deceived Vritra. 
Those that deliberately guide others to vicious acts or those that 
advise or incite others to do sinful acts or those that side with the 
sinners certainly partake of the fruits of the sin committed. Visnu, 
too, committed the sin, though he had Sattva Guna preponderance, 
when he entered into the thunderbolt and thus helped Indra in killing 
Vritra. It seems that henceforth the people, when selfish, won't 
hesitate to commit afterwards any sinful act when they will see that 
Bhagavan Visnu could have done, in concert with Indra, such a 
vicious thing. Of the four virtues Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksa, 
Dharma and Moksa are very rare in the three worlds. Artha (wealth) 
and Kama (desires) are everywhere recommended as excellent and 
therefore held very dear; Dharma is now merely in name and is the 
cause of the vanity of the Pundits (no one now really practises 
Dharma with devotion). Thus arguing, the Munis became very much 
afflicted in their minds and went back to their own hermitages 
respectively, broken-hearted and absent-minded. O Bharata! 

Hearing of the death of his son by Indra, VisVakarma wept very 
much and he become disgusted very much with the affairs of the 
world. He went to the place where lay his son Vritra and became 



pained very much to see him in that state; and he performed his 
cremation and other funeral obsequies according to the prescribed 
rules. He then bathed, performed his Tarpanam (peace-offering) and 
funeral ceremonies due to a person in the first year of his death. 
Then his heart became afflicted with sorrow and he cursed the 
vicious Indra saying that as Indra had killed his son, enticing him by 
falsely swearing on oath, so Indra, in his turn would suffer a heavier 
suffering, to be inflicted by Vidhi (the Great Creator of Universe). O 
King! Thus cursing Indra, VisVakarma, very much afflicted due to the 
loss of his son, went to the top of the Mountain Meru and began to 
practise a hard tapasya. 


17. Janamejaya said “O Grandsire! First tell me what happiness 
or pain did Indra derive by killing Vritra, the son of Tvasta.” 


18-40. Vyasa said O fortunate One! What are you asking? and 
what is the nature of your doubt? The fruit of one's Karma is 
certainly to be enjoyed, whether it be auspicious or inauspicious. Be 
he weak or strong. Be he a Deva, an Asura or a human being, 
everyone in fact, will have to suffer for one's Karma, good or bad, to 
its full extent, whether it be done a little or too much. See! It was 
Visnu that gave advice to Indra and entered into his thunderbolt and 
helped him when Indra was ready to kill Vritra; but when there had 
been Indra's difficult time, Visnu did not help Indra in any way. 
Therefore, O King! It is clear that when one's time is favourable, 
everybody turns out friends; but when Fate turns adverse, nobody is 
seen to come forward to help. When Fate is against anybody, one's 
father, mother, wife, or brother, servant, friend or one's own son 
becomes quite incapable to help anybody. The man, who does good 
or bad acts, suffers for his deeds. When Vritra was killed, everyone 
went back to their respective homes; but Indra, the Lord of S’achi, 
became very much deprived of his energy and brilliancy due to the 
sin of his killing a Brahmin; all the Devas, then, blamed him as a 



Brahmaghataka (the killer of a Brahmin). They talked further that no 
other body would have been able to even indulge the idea of killing a 
Muni who was an intimate friend and who placed full confidence on 
him when Indra had sworn on oath that he would be a friend to 
Vritra. O King! Everywhere then there was this gossip in the 
assemblages of the gods, in their gardens, at the meetings of the 
Gandharbas that Indra had deceived Vritra who had relied on him, 
on the words of the Munis and then killed him by pretext, and so had 
done, indeed, a horrible crime. Indra had now forsaken the eternal 
proofs of the Vedas; and he had become a Bauddha; therefore he 
could have easily killed Vritra. No other body, save Visnu and Indra, 
could have acted contrary to their words, as clearly evidenced by the 
manner in which Vritra had been killed. These remarks, similar to 
those mentioned above, became everywhere current and Indra 
heard all of them, tending to his own disgrace. O King! Fie on that 
man's life that is blamed everywhere! Fie on that man whose fame 
has been marred amongst the people. Such a person becomes 
laughed at by his enemies, when seen by them on the way. The 
royal saint Indradyumna (Rajarsi) was made to get down, though 
sinless, from Heavens when his good deeds expired. Why, then, 
would not vicious persons be made to descend? The king Yayati had 
to get down from Heavens for his very little fault and had to pass 
eighteen Yugas in the form of a crab. What more can be said than 
the fact that even the Bhagavan Achyut Hah had to take several 
incarnations in the wombs of boar, crocodile, etc., out of the curse 
from a Brahmin, due to his cutting off the bead of the wife of Bhrigu. 
Though omnipresent, yet he had to take the appearance of a dwarf 
and had to beg from the King Vali's palace. What more troubles and 
miseries than this can be inflicted on those that had sinned viciously. 
O Ornament of Bharata! Ramchandra, too, had to experience, due to 
the curse of Bhrigu, terrible miseries on the bereavement of Sita 
Devi. Similarly Indra, too, for his sin of killing a Brahmin, was so 
much terrified that he could not get his healthy condition though he 
remained in his own house, endowed with all sorts of prosperity and 
wealth. Seeing, then, Indra lustreless, knowledge-less, almost void 
of consciousness, and overwhelmed with fear, his wife S’achi, the 



daughter of Puloma, spoke to him thus “O Lord! Your dreadful 
enemy has been killed; why are you, then, sighing so much, being 
afflicted with so much terror? O Lord! You have destroyed your 
enemy; then why are you so much anxious? why are you then so 
much remorseful and drawing such deep heavy sighs like an 
ordinary man? I am not seeing any other powerful enemy of yours; 
then, why do you look so anxious and bowed down with cares, as if 
you look quite unconscious.” 


41-44. Indra said “O Devi! True that I have no other powerful 
enemy, yet I do not find peace nor any happiness. I fear for the sin 
Brahmahattya in my house. O Devi! This Nandana Garden, the city 
of Kuvera, the lord of riches, this nectar forest, the sweet music of 
the Gandbarbas, the beautiful dance of the Apsaras, all these now 
do not give the least pleasure to me. What more can I say than this 
that the beautiful Lady like you, most beautiful amidst the three 
worlds, and other beautiful ladies, the Heavenly cow, the Mandara 
tree (one of the five trees of the celestial region), the Parijata tree 
(the flower tree), the Santana tree, the Kalpa tree (yielding all 
desires) and the Harichandan (saffron tree) and others cannot give 
pleasure to me. What to do, where to go, so that I get happiness, O 
Beloved! This thought makes me uneasy. And so I am not able to get 
happiness in my own thought.” 


45-60. Vyasa said Thus speaking to his most distressed wife, 
Indra got out of his house and went to the exceedingly beautiful lake, 
named Manasarovara. Indra there entered into the tubular stalk of 
the lotus, his body becoming very lean and thin out of the fear and 
sorrow. Nobody could recognise him as he was overpowered by his 
terrible sin. He then began to behave himself, as regards feeding 
and enjoying, like a snake; and he became ovewhelmed with 
thought, helpless, and his organs were out of order. He remained 
hidden in the water. When Indra, the king of the Devas, thus fled 



away out of the fear of his Brahmahattya sin, the other Devas 
became very anxious; everywhere various evil signs manifested 
themselves. The Risis, Siddhas and Gandharbas were very much 
panic-stricken, as various disturbances and violent symptoms 
covered all over the world without any king. Grains began to grow 
very scanty, due to want of rains; the streams were almost dry and 
very little water was there in the tanks. In such a state of anarchism, 
all the inhabitants of the celestial regions, the Devas and Risis 
consulted and installed the king Nahusa in the place of Indra. O 
King! Nahusa, though virtuous, became, under the sway of 
Rajoguna, influenced by lust and thus he got very much addicted to 
worldly enjoyments. He began to amuse himself in the Garden of 
Paradise, surrounded by the Apsaras or celestial nymphs. One day 
he heard of the excellent qualifications of S'achi Devi, the wife of 
Indra, and desired to acquire her. Then he spoke to the Risis The 
Devas and you, united, have installed me in the office of Indra; but 
why does not the Indrani (the wife of Indra), come to me so long? If 
you want to do what I like, then quickly bring S'achi here before me 
for my gratification. I am now Indra and therefore the god of the 
Devas and all the worlds; therefore bring today quickly Indrani to my 
house. Hearing thus the words of the king Nahusa, the Devas and 
DevarsTs became anxious and went to S'achi, and, with their heads 
bowed down, spoke thus “O Wife of Indra! The wicked Nahusa is 
now desiring you; he became angry and told as to send you to him 
quickly; O Devi! We have made him Indra and are therefore under 
him; what shall we do now under these circumstances?” S'achi, the 
wife of Indra, hearing their words, became absent-minded and spoke 
to Brihaspati, thus “O Brahmana! I now take refuge unto you.” 


61-62. Brihaspati said “O Devi! Do not be afraid of Nahusa; he 
has been deluded by Moha. O Child! I won't forsake the eternal 
religion and thus I won't give you over to the hands of Nahusa. No 
doubt that wretch suffers the severest torments in Hell to the end of 
Pralaya (the Great Dissolution) who quits and hands over the 



distressed person under one's refuge to another. O Good One! Be 
comfortable; I will never forsake you.” 


Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Sixth Book on Indra's living 
under disguise in the Manas Lake in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 8. On S’ACHi’s Praising The Dev! 


1-11. Vyasa said O King! Hearing that the wife of Indra had taken 
refuge under Brihaspati, the King Nahusa became very angry 
towards Brihaspati and spoke to the Devas “ O Devas! I hear that 
the stupid son of Angirasa has given protection to Indra and has kept 
her in his house; I will therefore kill him quickly.” Seeing the terrible 
Nahusa thus angry, the Devas and Risis consoled him and said O 
King of kings! Do not be angry; quit this vicious motive yours. See, 
the Risis in all the Dharma S'astras, have declared the holding of 
illicit connection with other's wives as a very heinous crime and 
have blamed it very much. You can consider that the daughter of 
Puloma is always chaste, devoted to her husband and very good- 
natured. How can she, when her husband is alive, take another 
husband? O Lord! You are now the Lord of the three worlds and 
hence the Defender of Faith and Religion; and if a person like you 
act irreligiously, all the subjects will then go to annihilation. One who 
is a Lord should always observe the rules of good conduct. Besides 
there are many other celestial women in this Heaven as beautiful as 
S'achi; you can satisfy your thirst with them. Mutual love is 
recognised by the wise as the true originator of amorous dealings; 
ravishing a woman by force destroys all amorous sentiments. O 
King! And if the mutual love be similar and equal in all respects, then 
comes the true happiness; you have now got the post of Indra; 
therefore quit this idea of holding illicit connection with other's wives 
and indulge in other good thoughts. Demerits destroy prosperity and 
merits increase it. Therefore, O King! Leave all these bad thoughts 
and make your heart take a good turn and be happy. 


12-15. Nahusa said “O Devas! Where were you all when Indra 
stole away the wife of Gautama and when the Moon stole away the 
wife of Brihaspati? It is easy to give advice to others but to act 
according to that is very rare in this world. O Devas! Let the qualified 



Devi come to me you will derive much benefit from it and the Devi, 
too, will get Her highest happiness; there is no doubt in this. I tell you 
truly that in no other way I will be satisfied; bring Indrani here quickly, 
whether by good words or by force.” 


16-17. The Devas and Munis heard the words of the king Nahusa, 
smitten by the Cupid's arrows, got terrified and said “We will bring 
Indrani to you by gentle words.” Saying thus, they went to the house 
of Brihaspati. 


18-21. Vyasa said O King! The Devas, going to the house of 
Brihaspati, spoke thus with folded hands O Guru! We know that 
Indrani has taken shelter in your house; we will have to hand her 
over today to the king Nahusa for we all united have made over the 
post of Indra to Nahusa. Let this beautiful Lady now choose and 
worship him. Hearing these awful words of the Devas, Brihaspati 
said to them “O Devas! This chaste woman, devoted to her 
husband, has now taken my shelter; therefore I can never part with 
her.” The Devas said “O Guru! Kindly advise then - if you do not 
part with S'achi Devi - how the king Nahusa be pleased; if he 
becomes angry, it will then be very difficult to please him.” 


22-31. Brihaspati said “O Devas! Let S'achi now go to Nahusa, 
and tempt him with enticing words and make this condition that when 
her husband's death will be known to her, she will then accept 
Nahusa as her husband. How could she accept another husband 
when her husband was alive. Therefore let her now go in quest of 
her high-souled husband. Let S'achi thus make condition with him 
and, thus deceiving him, let her try her best to bring back her 
husband. O King! Then, after coming to this conclusion, Brihaspati 
and other Devas went with Indrani to the king Nahusa. Seeing them 
come, especially looking at Indrani the artificial king Nahusa became 



very glad and said to Indrani “O Beloved! Today I am become the 
real Indra. O beautiful-eyed One! Worship me as your husband; see 
the Devas now have made me to be worshipped by all the gods.” 
When Nahusa spoke thus, the Devi S'achi became filled with great 
shame; she began to tremble and said to the king “O Lord of the 
Devas! I desire to ask a boon from you. Better wait till I ascertain 
whether Indra is dead or alive, there is this doubt in my heart 
whether he lives or whether he is dead. O King of kings! Let me, first 
of all, clear my doubts. Kindly excuse me and wait till then. I tell this 
truly that after I ascertain the fact, I will worship you. I do not know 
anything whether Indra is dead or whether he has gone any where 
else.” When S'achi Devi spoke thus, Nahusa became very glad and 
saying “let it be so” dismissed her. 


32-47. Thus having received permission from the King to depart, 
S'achi hurriedly went to the Devas and spoke to them to try their 
best to bring Indra back as soon as possible. O King! Hearing these 
sweet and holy words of Indrani the Devas intently consulted with 
each other how they could get back Indra. They then went to 
Vaikuntha and began to praise with hymns the original Deva, the 
God Visnu, the Lord of the Universe, kind to those that seek His 
refuge. The Devas, skilled in speaking, spoke to Visnu with a very 
troubled heart“O Lord! Indra, the Lord of the Devas, is very much 
troubled with his sin Brahmahattya. Where is he staying now, 
invisible to all the beings? O Lord! He is now overcome with the sin 
Brahmahattya by killing Vritra, the best of the Brahmins. We ask your 
skilful and intelligent advice. O Lord! You are the sole refuge of him 
as well as of us. We are now involved in a great difficulty. Kindly 
show us the way how we, as well as Indra, can get out of this difficult 
crisis.” Hearing the pitiful words of the Devas, Visnu said Let Indra 
perform the As'vamedha sacrifice (Horse sacrifice) for the 
purification of his sins. By this Yajha, that can destroy all sins, Indra 
will be purified and he will regain his Indraship; there is no doubt in 
this. The more so because the Devi, the Universal Mother, will be 



pleased with his Horse sacrifice and will destroy all his sins, 
Brahmahattya and others. Lo! Merely remembering Her destroys 
heaps of sins; and, if by this Horse sacrifice. She be pleased, what 
wonder is there that sins of a more grave nature would be destroyed! 
And let Indrani worship Bhagavati daily; happiness will undoubtedly 
be gained by worshipping that most Auspicious One! By this the King 
Nahusa will be particularly deluded by the World Mother and will 
then be quickly destroyed by the sin committed by himself. And 
Indra, purified by AsVamedha, will soon regain his position and all 
his wealth. O king! Thus hearing the sweet beneficial words of Visnu 
of indomitable prowess, the Devas went to the spot, where resided 
Indra. Brihaspati and the other Devas consoled the distressed Indra 
and made him celebrate duly in right order, the Horse sacrifice the 
greatest of all sacrifices. Indra then distributed his sin Brahmahattya 
amongst the trees, rivers, mountains, women, and the earth. 


48-51. Thus casting aside his sin on all the above things, Indra 
became again free from his sin, and, getting rid of his fever and 
uneasiness, abided by the time and remained there invisible in the 
tubular stem of the lotus. Doing that wonderful act, the Devas started 
from there and reached their own abodes. The daughter of Puloma, 
suffering from her bereavements from Indra, spoke then to 
Brihaspati with great sorrow “O Lord! Why is my husband still 
invisible to me, when he has performed the AsVamedha sacrifice? 
Kindly show me the way how I can get a sight of him.” 


52-62. Brihaspati said “O Devi! Worship the most Auspicious 
Bhagavati; surely She will make your husband sinless and you will 
see him. The Devi Ambika, the Upholdress of the Universe, will 
desist the King Nahusa from doing the wrongful act and it is She that 
will delude him by Her Maya and get his downfall from the Heavens. 
O King! When Brihaspati spoke thus, S'achi Devi got initiated by him 
in the Devi Mantram, capable to secure success in any undertaking. 



Thus getting the Mantram from her Guru, She began to worship the 
Devi Bhuvane'svari duly with flowers, sacrificial victims and other 
necessary articles for worship. Thus Indrani, with a view to see her 
husband, performed the worship of the Devi; she quitted all the 
articles of enjoyment and luxury and assumed the garb of an ascetic; 
thus some time passed away, when the Devi was pleased and 
appeared before her on the back of a Swan, in Her peaceful form, 
ready to grant boons to Indrani. She looked, then, fiery like 
thousands of Moons; Her lovely beauty appeared in rays like 
thousands and thousands of fixed lightnings. The four Vedas 
personified began to praise Her in hymns from the four sides. Her 
two hands were adorned with a noose and a goad, and Her two 
other hands made signs to grant boons and to discard all fear. The 
Vaijayanti garland of clear crystal-like gems suspended from Her 
neck up to Her feet. Her face was adorned with smiles and signs as 
if she would grant favours. She had three eyes and was the ocean of 
mercy and the Mother of all the Jivas from a worm up to Brahma. 

Her two heavy breasts were filled with unbounded ocean of nectar¬ 
like juice of Peace and Mukti. She was the Goddess of innumerable 
worlds, the Goddess of all and the Highest, endowed with all the 
knowledges and the Incarnate of the Undecaying and Immoveable 
Brahma. The Devi, then, began to address S'achi, the wife of Indra, 
in pleasant words and in voice deep like a rolling thunder. 


63-69. The Devi said O Darling to Indra! Better now ask your 
desired boon. I am much pleased with your worship. O Beautiful 
One! I have come here to grant you boon. To see Me is not an easy 
task; by the collected merits, acquired in thousands and thousands 
of births one is able to See Me. Hearing the words of the Devi, 

S'achi Devi, the wife of Indra, fell prostrate before Her feet and 
began to speak to the Highest Goddess, the Bhagavati, Who 
seemed graciously pleased “O Mother! I now desire from Thee, 
that I may see my husband whom I attained after great difficulty, that 
I be freed from the fear arising out of King Nahusa and I want that 



Indra be reinstated as Indra as he was before.” The Devi said “O 
Lady of the Devas! Better go with this My messenger (Duti) to 
Manasarovara; there is installed My fixed form, named VisVakama. 
You will see your Indra staying there very sorrowful and 
overwhelmed with terror. I will delude the King Nahusa within a very 
short period. O large-eyed One! Be calm and quiet; I will fulfil your 
desires; soon I will delude that king and deprive him of the seat of 
Indra.” 


70-71. Vyasa said The wife of Indra accompanied the messenger 
of the Devi and quickly reached the presence of her husband Indra. 
She was very pleased to see her long-wished for husband, in the 
state disguise. 


Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the praising of 
the Bhagavati by the wife of Indra and on getting the sight of Indra in 
the Mahapuranam, S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 9. On Indra’s Getting The Fruits Of 
Brahmahattya And On The Downfall Of King 
Nahusa 


1-2. Vyasa said Indra was quite surprised to see in this state of 
solitude his dear wife S'achi, large-eyed and overwheinned with 
much sorrow and spoke thus “O Beloved! I am remaining here 
alone this desolate place unnoticed by all the Jivas; O Auspicious 
faced One! How have you come to know this! And how is it that you 
have come here!” 


3-5. S'achi said O Lord of the Devas! I have been able to know 
this place where you are staying by the grace of Bhagavati's Feet 
and I will get you back by Her grace. The Devas and Munis all united 
have installed the King Nahusa in your throne. That fellow says “O 
fair One! I am now made the King Indra; therefore you worship me 
as your husband.” And thus oppresses me always. O Destroyer of 
other's strength! That vicious one speaks to me thus; I am weak; 
What can I do to him? 


6. Indra said “O Beautiful One! I am now here waiting for the 
proper opportunity; O auspicious One! You should also make your 
mind calm and remain there, and wait for the proper time.” 


7-12. Vyasa said : - O King! After Indra had spoken thus, S'achi 
Devi became sorrowful, drew a deep sigh and, trembling, said “O 
Fortunate One! How can I stay there? That vicious man, puffed up 
with vanity and proud of his position will forcibly bring me under his 
control. The Devas and Munis say this to me out of his fearO 
Beautiful One! The Lord of the Devas is now very much distressed 



with the arrows of the Cupid; therefore go and worship him. O 
Tormentor of foes! How can the Brahmin Brihaspati protect me, 
being himself powerless and under the control of the Devas. O Lord! 
This is now my grave anxiety; I am a weak woman, having none to 
protect me and therefore always under the guidance of a man. Fate 
is now against me; how can I keep myself religious? I am a chaste 
woman, devoted to my husband; I have got no shelter there; who will 
protect me when I fall into misery! 


13-21. Indra said “O Beautiful One! I will now tell you one means 
which, if you adopt, will no doubt preserve your character in times of 
crisis. Women cannot preserve their chastity when they are 
protected by others by thousand and one means; for lust penetrates 
into their restless minds and carries them to impure ways. It is the 
good and pure character that preserves a woman from a vicious 
course; therefore O Smiling One! You adopt this good conduct and 
character and remain steady in your place. In case that deceitful 
wicked King Nahusa shows his violence upon you, then take time 
and secretly cheat him, O Madalase! Go to him when there will be no 
other body present and say :"“0 Lord of the world! Please come to 
me on a conveyance carried by the Risis (great ascetics), I will then 
be very delighted and gladly yield myself to you; this is certainly my 
vow.” O Beautiful One! When you will say thus, that King, blinded by 
passion, will engage the Munis for the carriers of his conveyance. 
The ascetics, then, will be angry and curse him; the Munis will 
certainly burn him by the fire of their wrath; and the Divine Mother 
will no doubt help you. He who remembers the lotus-feet of the 
Ambika Devi never meets with any difficulties; and if there arises any 
difficulty, know certainly that it is for his immeasurable benefit. 
Therefore worship, with your whole heart, the Mother of the 
Universe, Who resides in the jewelled island (Mani Dvipa) according 
to the words of the Guru Brihaspati. 



22-25. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the Indra's words, S'achi 
Devi said “Let it be so” and went to Nahusa, filled with confidence 
and inspiration to carry on the future work. Nahusa was very glad to 
see S'achi Devi and spoke thus “O Sweet-speaking One! Are you 
all right? I am now completely yours; you have fulfilled my word; 
therefore I say truly that I am your servant. O Gentle-speaking One! 
When you have come to me, know that I am very glad. O Smiling 
One! Do not feel any shame before me. I am now your devotee; 
worship me. O large eyed One! Speak out what is that dear thing 
that I can do for you? I will carry that out at once.” 


26-27. S'achi said “O Lord Vasava! You have done all the works; 
now I have got one desire to ask from you, kindly fulfil this and then I 
will be yours. O One full of auspiciousness! Now fulfil my desire; I am 
speaking this to you.” 


28. Nahusa said “O Thou, having a face sweet like the Moon! 
Speak out your desire; I will carry it out. O Beautiful One with nice 
eye-brows! Even if that be unattainable, I will give that to you.” 


29-31. S'achi said “O King of Kings! I cannot trust you; Swear on 
oath that you will fulfill my desire. O King! A truthful King very rare on 
this earth; I will speak out my desire when I will be convinced that 
you are bound by truth. O King! When you will fulfil my desire, I will 
always remain under your control; this I speak truly to you.” 


32. Nahusa said “O Beautiful One! On all the sacrifices and gifts 
that I have ever made, I swear, on all my merits, that I will certainly 
carry out your word.” 



33-37. S'achi said “Indra has got for his vehicles the horse 
Uchchais'rava, the Airavata elephant and the chariot; Vasudeva has 
got vehicle Garuda; Yama has got his buffalo; S'ankara his Bull; 
Brahma his Swan; Kartika has got his peacock and Ganes'a has got 
his mouse. But now, O Lord of the Devas! I want to see your vehicle, 
never witnessed before: I want to see the Munis and the great 
ascetics, observing vows, to be your vehicle; this is not Visnu's, 
Rudra's nor of the Devas, and Raks'asas. O King! Let the Munis 
carry your conveyance, this is my ever burning desire. O King of this 
earth! I know you the highest of all Devas; let your glory and 
splendour increase ever and ever; this is the intense desire reigning 
in my heart.” 


38-56. Vyasa said O King! Hearing S'achi's words, Nahusa, weak 
in intellect, laughed and beguiled by the Maya of Bhagavati began to 
praise her and said at once “O Beautiful One! Truly you have 
made a nice suggestion of my vehicle. O One having luxuriant hairs! 

I will soon carry out your words. O Sweet-smiling One! Whoever is 
effeminate and of weak virility, he is never able to engage the Munis 
as his carriers; no doubt, my unbounded strength will be rendered 
manifest when I come to you on a vehicle carried by the Munis. What 
wonder is there that the seven Risis (the seven stars of the 
constellation Great Bear) and all the Devarsis would carry me, 
knowing me as the most capable and superior in all the three worlds 
by virtue of my sheer asceticism?” Vyasa said O King! The King 
Nahusa became very pleased and dismissed S'achi Devi. He, then, 
with a heart flamed with passion, called the Munis and said: -“0 
Munis! I am now become Indra and endowed with all powers thereof; 
therefore you all do my work without being at all surprised. I have got 
the seat of Indra but Indrani is not coming to me. I called her to my 
presence and when I informed her of my desire. She had spoken to 
me with affection the following words:- O Indra of the Devas! O 
Giver of one's honour! Better come to me on a vehicle carried by the 
Munis and do thus the one thing for me that I like. O Maharsis! To 



carry out this task is, indeed, difficult for me; therefore do you all 
unite and, out of mercy, do this for me in all its completeness. My 
heart is being always burnt, as I am very much attached to the wife 
of Indra; so I take refuge unto you to do this wonderful work for me.” 
Though this request was very indecent and greatly humiliating yet 
the Munis agreed to it, out of pity, and also impelled, as it were, by 
the great Fate. When the Great Seers, the Munis consented to this 
proposal, the King, whose heart was very much attached to the 
daughter of Puloma, became very glad and getting on the beautiful 
vehicle carried by the Munis, told them, move on quickly (Sarpa, 
Sarpa). Then the King Nahusa, getting very much impassioned, 
touched with his feet the heads of the Munis, and, being as it were 
smitten by the arrows of cupid, began to whip frequently the Risi 
Agastya, the best of the ascetics, who devoured the Raksasa Vatapi, 
who was the husband of Lopamudra and who drank out the ocean, 
saying move on, move on (Sarpa, Sarpa another meaning of which 
is Snake). The Muni, then, became very angry, on being thus 
whipped, and cursed him saying “'O Wicked One! As you are 
whipping me, saying Sarpa, Sarpa, so go and remain in the dense 
forest as a huge snake. When many years will elapse and when you 
will crawl on your own limb and suffer intense troubles, after that you 
will again come to heaven. You will be free from the curse when you 
will see the King Yudhisthira and hear from him the answers to 
several questions.” 


57-67. Vyasa said O King! Thus cursed, the King Nahusa began 
to chant hymns to that best of the Munis, and, while praising, fell 
from the Heavens and instantly turned into a snake. Brihaspati, then, 
quickly went to the Manasarovara Lake and informed Indra 
everything in detail. Indra became very glad on hearing in detail of 
the downfall of the King Nahusa from Heaven and remained there 
gladly. When the Devas and Munis saw this downfall into the earth of 
Nahusa, they all went to the Lake Manasarovara where Indra was 
staying. They then all encouraged Indra and honoured him by 



bringing hinn back to the Heavens. All the Devas and Risis installed 
Indra on the throne and then performed the Inauguration ceremony 
of the all auspicious Devi. On getting back his own throne. Indra, too, 
began to sport in the beautiful Nandana Garden with his dear 
consort S'achi, in the home of the Devas. Vyasa said O King! 

Indra had to suffer such severe hardships on account of his slaying 
the Maharsi VisVarupa, the Lord of the Asuras. Subsequently 
through the grace of the Devi, he got back his own seat. O King! 
Thus I have narrated before you to my best, this excellent story of 
the killing of Vritrasura and thus have answered your question. O 
Ornament of the Kuru family! The fruits will be exactly according to 
the Karma done. The effects of the Karma done must be borne 
whether they be auspicious or inauspicious. (So Indra had to suffer 
for his Karma, the killing of a Brahmana.) 


Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Sixth Book on Indra's getting the 
fruits of his killing a Brahmana and on the downfall of the King 
Nahusa from the Heavens in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 10. On The Phase Of Karma 


1-5. Janamejaya said “O Brahmana! You have described in detail 
the wonderful character of Indra, his displacement from his Heavens, 
and his suffering many hardships and at the same time, you have 
described very widely the greatness of the Highest Goddess of the 
world. But one doubt has arisen in my mind that Indra was very 
powerful and when he got the lordship over the Devas, which means 
in other words that no trouble would pain him, how was it that he had 
to feel pain and agony? He got the Lordship of the Devas and his 
highest position by performing one hundred Horse Sacrifices; how 
was it, then that he was again displaced from that position? O Ocean 
of mercy! Kindly explain to me the causes of all these. You know 
everything; you are the best of the Munis and the maker of the 
Puranas; I am your devoted disciple; therefore nothing there can be 
that cannot be mentioned to me. So, O highly fortunate One! Kindly 
remove my doubts.” Suta said Thus asked by Janamejaya, Vyasa 
the son of Satyavati gladly spoke, in due order, the following words 


6-29. Vyasa said O King! Hear, then the causes that are certainly 
very wonderful. The seers say that Karma is of three kinds 
Sahchita (accumulated), Vartamana (present) and Prarabdha 
(commenced). Each of these is again subdivided into three, Sattvik, 
Rajasik, and Tamasik. The accumulated effects of Karmas done in 
many past lives is called Sahchita, O King! The effects of this 
Sanchita Karma, be it auspicious or inauspicious, be it for a long or 
for a short time, must have to be enjoyed by the beings whether they 
be good or bad. This Sahchita Karma done by the embodied beings 
in several previous births, can never be totally exhausted even in 
hundred Koti Kalpas without their being enjoyed. The Karma that is 
being done by a JTva and that has not as yet been completed, that is 
called Vartamana Karma. The Jivas do this Vartamana Karma, 



auspicious or inauspicious, in their present embodiments. At the time 
of birth, a part of the Sahchita Karma, the soul takes up for 
fructification. This part of Sahchita Karma is called Prarabdha 
Karma. This exhausts only when its effects have been fully borne out 
by the embodied soul. The beings cannot but bear the effects of this 
Prarabdha Karma. O King! Know this for certain that the effects of 
merits or demerits done previously must be borne by anybody, be he 
a Deva, or a man, or an Asura, or a Yaksa or a Gandharba. The acts 
done previously go to form the new births of all beings. When the 
Karma gets exhausted, then no more birth takes place. There is no 
doubt in this. Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Indra and the other Devas, the 
Danavas, Yaksas, Gandharbas, all are under the control of this 
Karma. O King! Were it not so, how could they get bodies that are 
the causes of the enjoyments of pains and pleasures of all the 
beings. Therefore, O King! Out of the Sahchita Karmas done in 
many previous births, some Karmas get ripe in due time and they 
manifest themselves; those manifested Sahchita Karmas are called 
Prarabdha Karmas (those that are being enjoyed by an individual in 
the present birth). Impelled by this Prarabdha Karma, the Devas and 
the human beings, all do meritorious acts as well as sinful acts. Thus 
Indra out of his past meritorious acts attained his Indraship, and, out 
of his past sinful acts, committed the sin Brahmahattya and so he 
was dislodged from his Indraship. What doubt can exist here? O 
King! So Nara and Narayana, the sons of Dharma, had to take births 
out of their previous Karmas; again Arjuna and Krisna were born out 
of their Karmic effects as part incarnations of this Nara and 
Narayana. The Munis describe this Karma as the basis of the 
Puranas. Know that he is born of a Deva who is very wealthy and 
prosperous; he who is not born of the part of a Muni, never writes 
any spiritual treatise on Jhana or Knowledge; he who is not born of 
Rudra, never worships Rudra; who is not born of a Deva never 
distributes rice in charity; he who is not born of S'ri Visnu, never 
becomes the king and lord of the earth. O King! The embodied souls 
derive their bodies certainly from Indra, Agni, Yama, Visnu, and 
Kuvera. Indra presides over lordship, Agni presides over energy, 
Yama presides over anger, and Visnu presides over strength. He 



who is powerful, fortunate, enjoying many enjoyments, learned, 
charitable, is said to be born of a Devams'a. O Lord of the earth! 
Similarly the Pandavas and Vasudeva who was as glorious as 
Narayana were born of Devams'as. O King! Know this as quite 
certain that the bodies of the Jivas are the receptacles of pains and 
pleasures; and the embodied souls (Jivas) experience alternately 
pleasure and pain. No Jiva is independent; he is always under the 
Great Fate. He experiences birth, death, pleasure and pain, not out 
of his self will, but compelled and guided, as it were, by the unseen 
Fate. 


30-41. O King! How very strong is that Fate can easily be judged by 
the following. The Pandavas were born in forest; then they went their 
own homes. They performed the Great Rajasuya Sacrifice by virtue 
of their own strength. After this they had to suffer their exiles in forest 
a much greater and more terrible hardship indeed! Next Arjuna 
performed a very hard asceticism when the Devas, not self- 
controlled, became pleased and granted him an auspicious boon. 

Still he could not extricate himself from the hands of the terrible 
hardship; nowhere could be found the fruits of the merits acquired in 
the past when he was afterwards remaining in exile in his human 
body in the forest! The severe tapasya that he did in the 
Vadarikasrama in his past incarnation as Nara, the son of Dharma, 
did not bear any fruit in his Arjuna birth. Mysterious and inexplicable 
are the ways and means of Karma with which the bodies of the 
several beings are concerned. How could men get an idea of it when 
the Devas themselves are at a loss to solve it. Bhagavan Vasudeva 
had to take birth in the prison, a very critical and dangerous place; 
he was then carried by Vasudeva to the milkman Nanda's abode at 
Gokula; he remained there eleven years and thence came back to 
Mathura where he killed by force Kamsa, the son of Ugrasena. Then 
he released his sorrowful father and mother from the bonds of prison 
and made Ugrasena, the King of Mathura. Afterwards he went to 
Dvarka city, out of the fear of Kala Yavana, the King of the 



MIechchas; thus Janardana Krisna performed many great and heroic 
deeds, being impelled by Fate. Then he left his mortal coil at 
Prabhasa, a place of pilgrimage, along with his relatives and 
acquaintances and then ascended to his Vaikuntha abode. All the 
Yadavas, sons, grandsons, friends, brothers, sisters and ladies of 
the houses all died under the curse of a Brahmin. O King! I have 
thus described to you the inexplicable ways of Karma. 


What more shall I say than the fact that Vasudeva was killed by the 
arrows of a hunter! 


Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the phase of 
Karma in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 11. On The Ascertainment Of Dharma 


1-10. Janamejaya said “O King of the Brahmanas! You said that 
Rama and Krisna took their incarnations to relieve the burden of 
earth. One great doubt arises in my mind on this point. At the end of 
the Dvapara Yuga, the Earth, burdened and oppressed very much, 
assumed, in anguish, the form of a cow and took refuge under 
Brahma. Brahma, then, went with the Earth to Visnu, the Lord of 
Laksmi, and thus prayed, “O Bibhu! Let You, with all the other gods, 
incarnate soon on earth at the house of Vasudeva to relieve the 
Earth of Her load, as well as to protect the righteous.” When Brahma 
thus prayed, the Bhagavan Visnu incarnated as the son of Devaki, 
along with Balarama to lessen the burden of the Earth. And, in fact, 
he relieved, to a certain extent, the Earth by killing many vicious 
persons and many wicked and irreligious Kings. But, along with that, 
Bhisma, Drona, Virata, Drupada, Somadatta, and Kama, the son of 
the Sun were killed. But, See! that those who plundered afterwards 
His riches, and stole away the wives of Hari, those crores of Abhiras, 
S’akas, MIechchas, and Nisadas and other vicious people remained 
alive; and how could it, then, be said that the Earth was relieved 
when Krisna did not kill those people! O Fortunate One! When I see 
all the people in this Kali Yuga addicted to sinful acts, this great 
doubt is not going out of my mind (how the Earth had been relieved 
of Her load). 


11-14. Vyasa said O King! As the Yuga changes, so the people 
changes in course of time. Nothing can alter its course, for this is 
caused by the Yuga Dharma (the Dharma peculiar to each Yuga). 
Therefore if all the subjects that are considered wicked and vicious 
according to the law of the Yuga Dharma, then this creation would be 
destroyed; hence Krisna killed only those Danavas and vicious 
Ksattriyas that were really the burden of Earth. O King! The persons 
that are devoted to religion take their births in the Satya Yuga; those 



that are fond of religion and wealth they become manifest in the 
Treta Yuga; those that like Dharma (religion), Artha (wealth) and 
Kama (desires), they are born in the Dvapara Yuga, and those that 
dote on wealth and lust, they are seen in the Kali Yuga. O King! 
Know this as certain that these characteristics, peculiar to each 
Yuga, never vary; and know this too, that Time, the Lord of Dharma 
and Adharma, is always present. 


15-18. The King said “O Intelligent One! Where are those pious 
persons now that were born as high-souled religious persons in the 
Satya Yuga; where are those Munis now who were devoted to 
charity in the Treta or Dvapara Yuga? Again where will go these 
shameless and merciless persons, that are being seen now in this 
Kali Yuga, these vicious creatures that revile their own Gurus? O 
Highly Intelligent One! I am very eager to know how these religious 
matters are brought to a decision and settlement; kindly describe to 
me in detail all these secret truths.” 


19-30. Vyasa said :-- O King! Persons, born in the Satya Yuga, that 
perform acts of merit, go to the Deva Loka. O King! The Brahmins, 
Ksattriyas, Vais’yas and S’udras, if they remain in their own spheres 
and if they be devoted to religious acts, go to their respective 
spheres, earned by their meritorious deeds. By virtue of truth, mercy, 
charity, going to one’s own wives, not injuring animals, and having 
no jealousy and showing mercy equally towards all, by practising 
these universal forms of religion, even the lowest castes, e.g., 
washermen and others all go to the Paradise. So in the Treta and 
Dvapara Yugas men go to Heaven by virtue of their merits, earned in 
practising their own Dharma; but in this Kali Yuga persons addicted 
to vicious acts go to terrible hells and remain there till the end of the 
Kali Yuga when they will be again born in this earth. O King! When 
the Satya Yuga begins and the Kali Yuga ends, at this junction time, 
the virtuous highsouled persons descend from Heaven and are born 



on this earth; and when the Kali begins and the Dvapara ends, the 
vicious souls come on the earth again from their hells. O King! Know 
this as the course of Time; it never becomes otherwise. See, then, 
that the Kali Yuga tends to do vicious things and the people, 
therefore, become vicious. At times, the birth of beings takes place 
otherwise than the laws of Yugas, out of the strange combinations of 
Fate (i.e., good persons are seen in the Kali and vicious persons are 
seen in the Satya). For this reason those that do meritorious acts in 
the Kali Yuga are born as men in the Dvapara; so the Dvapara good 
persons take their births as men in the Treta; and the Treta good 
persons are born as men in the Satya Yuga. Again those who are 
vicious in the Satya Yuga become persons of the Kali Yuga. The 
JTvas suffer miseries on account of their own bad Karmas; they 
again suffer more miseries by doing over and over again those bad 
Karmas by virtue of the Yuga Dharma. 


31. Janamejaya said “O Bhagavan! Describe particularly the 
details of the Yuga Dharma. I am now very desirous to hear which 
Dharma is for which Yuga?” 


32-54. Vyasa said O King! I will now show to you by example the 
influence of the religion peculiar to each Yuga; hear it attentively. O 
King! The hearts even of saints are quite disturbed by the Yuga 
Dharma. See! Your father was a religious and high-souled monarch; 
still the wicked Kali defiled his mind and prompted him to do an act 
very insulting to a Brahmana. Otherwise why would he, being a 
renowned prince amongst the Ksattriyas and a descendant of Yayati, 
thus go and encircle a snake round the throat of an ascetic Brahmin? 
Therefore, O King! All actions are being influenced by the Yuga 
Dharma. The Pundits, also recognise this. If you try your best to 
perform any religious act, even then the Yuga Dharma would prevail, 
yet you would be able to perform to a certain extent, a part of your 
intention. O King! In the Satya Yuga, the Brahmins were versed in 



the Vedas, always devoted to worship the Highest Force, with an 
ardent desire to see the Devi; they were devoted to Gayatri with 
Pranava, devoted to the meditation of Gayatri, always reciting 
silently Gayatri, and the Mayavija Mantram, the chief mantram. In 
every village, the Brahmins were very eager to erect temples of the 
Devi Maha Maya Ambika and were truthful, merciful and pure and 
devoted to their own respective works. The Ksattriyas, skilled in the 
science of the highest knowledge, were ever engaged in doing 
things ordained by the Vedas and were always intent in protecting 
well their subjects. The Vais’yas did their cultivation and trade and 
the S’udras always served the other three castes. Thus, in the Satya 
Yuga, all the Varnas (castes) were devoted to the worship of the 
Devi Ambika, the Highest S’akti; but in the Treta Yuga, the 
observance of the religion declined a little and in the Dvapara, it 
declined very much. O Ornament of Indra! Those who were 
Raksasas before, they become the Brahmins of the Kali Yuga; they 
are the flowers of atheists, deceptors of men, untruthful, without any 
Vedas, devoid of the Vedic practices, arrogant, cunning, egoistic, 
and capable only to serve the S’udras. Some of them try to find fault 
with the Sanatan Dharma and are the promulgators of various other 
creeds, wicked, fallen from their religion and given to much talking. O 
King! As Kali gets stronger, so the true religion declines and 
ultimately dies; and, in that proportion, the Ksattriyas, Vais’yas and 
S’udras are also devoid of their religion. When Kali will be in full 
swing, the Ksattriyas, Vais’yas and S’udras will all be untruthful, 
vicious; the Brahmins will act like S’udras and will accept other’s 
gifts. O King! The women in the Kali Yuga would be very passionate, 
avaricious and ignorant. They would be very powerful and insolent, 
wilful, vicious and untruthful and so would be a source of pain to the 
society. They would think themselves vainly religious and learned 
and would be always ready to impart religious instructions and 
deceive their own husbands and be exceedingly vicious. O King! Our 
minds are purified by the food that we take; when our minds are 
pure, the Light of Dharma shines clearly. The customs and practices 
of Varna and As’rama Dharmas get intermixed with each other and 
so arises the fault of Dharma S’amkara (i.e., mixture of the several 



parts of religion with each other). When the Dharma S’amkara 
creeps in, the Varna S’ankara is seen (i.e., purity in blood and other 
matters of birth are lost). Thus, in the Kali Yuga, all the Dharmas will 
gradually die out and ultimately nothing will be heard about one’s 
own religion. O King! In this Yuga even the religious high-souled 
persons will be found to do irreligious acts! The nature of Kali is so; 
nobody will be able to quit it. O King! Thus, in this age, men naturally 
commit vicious things; with ordinary means, therefore, no one 
becomes able to extricate from the worst vicious habits. 


55-56. Janamejaya said “O Bhagavan! You know all and you are 
versed in all the S’astras; what will be the fate of so many persons in 
this Kali Yuga? If there be any path, kindly describe it to me.” 


57-65. Vyasa said O King! There is only one path and none other 
which can save a man from the sin of this Kali; and that is this 
The Jivas must meditate on the lotus-feet of the Highest Devi for the 
purification of all their faults and sins. O King! There is so much 
strength in Her sin-destroying Name, that the amount of sin in this 
world falls much less in proportion to that. Where, then, is the cause 
of fear? Her Name, uttered at random, even in an unconscious state, 
bestows so much unspeakable results that even Hari, Hara and 
others have not the capacity to know that. O King! The mere 
remembrance of the name of S’ri Devi is an atonement for a 
multitude of sins; then it behoves that every man, afraid of the Kali 
Yuga, residing in a place of pilgrimage, ought to remember 
incessantly the Name of the Highest Deity. Even if anybody cuts, 
pierces, and kills all the beings in this whole world, he won’t be 
touched with the sins, if he bows down, with devotion, before the 
Devi. O King! I have narrated to you all the secret truths of all the 
S’astras. Consider all these fully and always worship the lotus-feet of 
the Devi. All men are reciting silently the Japam called the Ajapa 
Gayatri; still they do not know the glory of it; such is the powerful 



influence of Maya. All the Brahmanas are reciting in the depth of 
their hearts the Gayatri Mantram, yet they do not know the glory of it 
(otherwise they would have been liberated); such is the great 
influence of Maya. O King! I have described to you all that you asked 
me about the Yuga Dharmas; what more do you want to hear? 


Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Sixth Book on the 
ascertainment of Dharma in the Maha Puranam, S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 12. On The Cause Of The War Between 
Adi And Baka 


1-2. The King said “O Best of Munis! Tell me the names of the 
holy places of pilgrimage on the surface of this earth, the holy 
Ksetras and the holy rivers; what are the fruits acquired in bathing 
there and in making charitable gifts as well; also what are the rules 
of the journeys and acts there are to be conducted?” 


3-34. Vyasa said Hear; I am describing to you various Tirthas or 
places of pilgrimage as well as those that are highly extolled as the 
best places favourite to the Devi. Amongst the rivers the following 
are reckoned as chief and holy The Ganges, Jumna, Sarasvati, 
Narmadda, Gandaki, Sindhu, Gomati, Tamasa, Cavery, 
Chandrahaga, Vetravati, Charmanvati, Saraju, Tapi, and Savramati. 
Besides these, there are hundreds of rivers on the surface of this 
earth; of them, those that fall into the ocean, they are holier and 
those that have not reached the ocean are less holy. Of those rivers 
that fall into the ocean, those that always flow with great current, 
they are comparatively holier; but in the two months S’ravan and 
Bhadra (15th July - 15th September) all the rivers are considered as 
if they are during their menstruation periods; at this time also some 
rivers carry water of the rains just sufficient to supply the villagers 
with water. O King! The following are the famous places of 
pilgrimages calculated to bestow merits:- Puskara, Kuruksettra, the 
holy Dharmaranya, Pravasa, Prayaga, Naimisaranya, and 
Arbudaranya. O King! Of the mountains, the following are considered 
as sacred S’ris’aila, Sumeru, Gandhamadana; of the lakes, the 
following are very holy and very famous Manasarovara, 
Vindusarovara and Aksoda; these are the chief lakes. To those 
Munis that meditate on their Atman, all the hermitages are sacred; 
still the hermitage of Badri is always considered very sacred and the 
most celebrated; here Nara and Narayana, the two famous Munis, 



practised their asceticism. The Vamanas’rama and S’atayupas’rama 
are also well known; thus every hermitage is named after the Muni 
that practised asceticism there. Thus innumerable holy places on the 
surface of the earth are mentioned by the Munis as tending to 
sanctify the hearts of the persons. At all these holy places, the Devi 
is worshipped in special sites consecrated to Her. All the sins are 
destroyed by their mere sight. The devotees of the Devi stay there, 
with rules obeyed. I will mention afterwards some of these places in 
the course of my narrations. O Best of kings! Going to these holy 
places, charity, vow, sacrifices, asceticism and good acts all depend 
on one another. The holy places of pilgrimages, asceticism, and 
observance of vows depend on the purity of the articles (Dravya 
S’uddhi), on the purity and one pointedness of actions (Kriya 
S’uddhi) and on the purity of the mind and heart (Chitta S’uddhi). 
Some may attain, at times, the Dravya S’uddhi and Kriya S’uddhi; 
but every one finds it very difficult and, indeed, rarely get the Chitta 
S’uddhi. O King! This mind always tries to seek shelter with various 
objects and is, therefore, always restless. How, then, can the purity 
of mind be effected, with ease, when it is occupied with all sorts of 
thoughts on various objects. Cupidity, anger, greed, pride, and 
egoism, these bring about all sorts of obstacles in the holy places of 
pilgrimages, in practising tapasya and in observing vows. O King! 
Non-injury, truthfulness, non-stealing, chastity and purity, controlling 
of senses, and observing one’s own religion, all these bring about 
the fruits of the labour in visiting all tirthas. They bestow fruits that 
can be obtained by visiting all the tirthas. During one’s pilgrimage, 
one forsakes one’s Nitya Karma (daily duties) and one has to come 
in contact with various persons. Hence one’s journey becomes 
fruitless; rather it becomes a source of sin. The waters of the sacred 
places can only wash the outside dirts and the impurities of the 
physical bodies; they can never wash the impurities of their inner 
minds. Were it the fact that the waters of the tirthas could purify their 
minds, why was it, then, that the Munis, residing on the banks of the 
Ganges, and devoted to God, ever indulged themselves with feelings 
of jealousy and enmity against each other. The humble Munis like 
Vas’istha, and the Risis like Vis’vamitra were always entangled in 



love and hatred and they were ever impatient with anger. Therefore it 
is evident that the internal purification, the purification of heart, the 
bathing in the Ghan Ganga flowing within, no doubt removes more 
the dirt than the Ganges and other places of pilgrimages. O King! No 
doubt this fact must be admitted on all hands that one’s impurity of 
mind is washed away if by the strange combination of Fate, one 
comes in intimate contact with a man possessed of the Divine 
Knowledge. O King! The Vedas or S’astras, vows or austerities, 
sacrifices or gifts none can purify the heart. See! Vas’istha, the son 
of Brahma, though versed in the Vedas and residing on the banks of 
the Ganges, was under the control of love, hatred and other 
infirmities. Out of the enmity of Vis’vamitra and Vas’istha, arose the 
great battle named Adi Baka, astonishing even to the Gods. In this, 
the ascetic Vis’vamitra was cursed by Vas’istha, on account of some 
curse in connection with the king Haris’chandra and had to take his 
birth as a crane (Baka). The Risi Vas’istha was cursed also by 
Vis’vamitra and was born as a bird named S’arari. Thus the two 
powerful Risis were born as Adi Baka and lived on the banks of the 
Manasarovara and they fought for full ten thousand years (ajuta) 
terribly, out of anger, with their nails and beaks like two maddened 
lions. 


35-36. The King asked “O Muni! Why were the two Maharsis, the 
two great ascetics and devoted to religion, involved in enmity with 
each other? Both of them were intelligent; how was it that they 
knowing the act of cursing to be a source of pain to men, cursed 
each other so painfully?” 


37-48. Vyasa said :-- O King! In former times, there was born in the 
solar dynasty a king Haris’chandra, the son of Tris’anku; he was the 
best of the kings and reigned before Ramchandra. That King had no 
issue and therefore promised to Varuna, “O Lord of water and ocean! 
If I get a son born to me, I will perform a sacrifice, called Naramedha, 



where I will sacrifice my son for your propitiation.” Varuna was very 
pleased with the king when he made such a vow; and the exquisitely 
beautiful queen held the foetus in the womb. Seeing his wife in the 
family way, the king was very pleased and performed all the 
purificatory ceremonies pertaining to the foetus in the womb. O King! 
When the queen was delivered of a son endowed with all auspicious 
signs, the king Haris’chandra was very glad and performed duly all 
the data Karma (natal) ceremonies and distributed as charity big 
sums of gold and many cows giving good quantities of milk. When 
the festivities on the birth of the child were celebrated in the palace 
on a grand scale, Varuna, the Lord of Waters, assuming the form of 
a Brahmin, came up there. The King, too, honoured him duly with 
seat and worshipped him regularly and asked him about his purpose, 
when Varuna spoke to him “O King! I am Varuna, the Lord of 
Waters; you promised before that you would perform Naramedha 
sacrifice where you would sacrifice your son; now do those things 
and keep your words true.” The King became very much confused 
and was very much pained at heart. He then checked his mental 
feelings of pain and spoke to the Deva Varuna, with folded hands 
“O Lord! I will do the sacrifice duly and fulfil the promise that I made 
before you and keep my word. But, O Best of the Devas! My legal 
wife will be pure from her Sutika-S’auchak after one month, when I 
will perform the Naramedha sacrifice.” 


49-53. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the words of the king 
Haris’chandra, Varuna returned to his own abode; the King also 
became glad, but he was somewhat anxious for fear of the 
destruction of the child. When one month was complete, the sweet¬ 
speaking Varuna, the holder of the noose, assuming the form of a 
very pure Brahmin, again came there to the palace of the king to 
examine him. The King worshipped him duly and gave him the seat 
to sit and spoke, with humility, the following reasonable words :-- “O 
Lord! My son is not yet purified; how can he be tied to the sacrificial 
post for being immolated? Therefore I will perform that sacrifice 



when the boy becomes cleansed after a purificatory rite and 
becomes a Ksattriya. O Deva! If you know me as your humble 
servant, have mercy on me; I will then consider myself as blessed. 
See! The children, not passed through purificatory rites, are not 
entitled to any act; therefore wait for some time longer.” 


54-56. Varuna said “O King! You are deceiving me and putting off 
the time longer and longer; I now see that you were issueless before 
and now that you have got a son, you are bound up in an 
indissoluble tie of affection for a son. Whatever it be, I now go back 
to my home at your pitiful request; I will wait for some time longer 
and I will come again. O child! Let you then be true to your words; if 
it be otherwise, I will surely curse you and thus give vent to my angry 
feelings.” 


57. The King said O Lord of the Waters! After the completion of 
the Samavartan ceremony (a pupil’s return home after finishing his 
holy study), I will duly sacrifice my son at the great Naramedha 
sacrifice; there is no doubt. 


58-71. Vyasa said Varuna was very pleased at the King’s words 
and quickly went back saying “Let it be so.” The king also became 
comforted. On the one hand, the king Haris’chandra’s son became 
widely known by the name of Rohita; and as he got older, he 
became gradually versed in all the sciences and became very clever 
and intelligent. That boy then came to know by degrees the cause of 
the sacrifice in full detail; and knowing that his death is quite certain, 
became very afraid and quickly fled away from the King and went 
and stayed in caves of mountains with a fearful heart. Then, when 
the proper time came, Varuna came up there to the royal palace, 
desirous to have the sacrifice and spoke to the King thus “O King! 
Now the prescribed time has come; therefore perform the sacrifice 



that you have resolved to celebrate.” The King was very much 
pained to hear this and spoke with a very sad appearance “O Best 
of the Devas! What can I do now? 


My son has fled away out of the fear of his life; I do not know his 
whereabouts.” Varuna became very angry at these words and 
cursed him thus “O Liar! You are an hypocrite pundit; therefore 
you deceived me frequently. Let therefore the disease dropsy come 
and attack your body.” Varuna, the Holder of the noose, cursing thus, 
went back to his own abode. The King was attacked with that 
disease, remained in his own residence, afflicted with cares and 
anxieties. Rohita, the son of the king Haris’chandra, heard about the 
severe illness of his father when he was very much tormented with 
that disease, as the curse of Varuna. One day a traveller told him 
“O son of the King! Your father is very ill with dropsy, due to the 
curse, and is very sorry. Certainly your brain has turned wrong; vain 
is your coming in this world; you have passed your life to no 
purpose, for you are staying still in this mountain cave, abandoning 
your sorrowful father. Certainly you are a bad disobedient son; what 
use is there in your keeping up this body? What purpose will be 
served by your birth? When you have got this body, you have 
abandoned that father and are staying in this solitary cave. Know this 
as certain that to sacrifice one’s life is the duty of a good and 
obedient son; therefore what more shall I say now than this that your 
father the king Haris’chandra ailing from a severe illness is very sorry 
for you and is always weeping.” 


72-74. Vyasa said O King! Hearing from the passerby these good 
words, the prince Rohita wanted to go to his sorrowful father 
attacked with disease when Indra assuming a Brahmin form came 
up to him and began to speak to him when he was alone like one 
who was filled with mercy. O Son of a King! You are a fool; are you 



not positively acquainted with the fact that your father is in trouble; 
why then do you intend in vain to go there? 


Here ends the Twelfth Chapter on the cause of the war between Adi 
and Baka in the Sixth Book of the Mahapuranam of S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 13. On The Description Of The Battle 
^ _ 

Between Adi And Baka After The Discourse On 
S’unahs’epha 


1-6. Indra said “O Prince! The King Haris’chandra promised 
before to Varuna that he would celebrate for his propitiation the great 
Naramedha sacrifice when he would offer his own son as a victim to 
be immolated. O Prince! You are very intelligent; can’t you grasp this 
idea that your father has become merciless due to his suffering in 
this illness and no sooner you go there than he will make you the 
victim and tie you to the sacrificial post when you will be 
slaughtered.” The indomitable Indra thus prohibiting the son, he 
began to stay there deluded by the Maya of the great Maha Maya. O 
King! Thus whenever the prince heard of his father’s severe illness, 
he wanted to go to his father, Indra repeatedly used to go to him and 
prevent him from doing so. On the other hand, the King 
Haris’chandra became very much afflicted, and, seeing his family 
Guru all-knowing well-wisher Vas’istha close by, asked him, “O 
Bhagavan! what am I to do now? I am now very impatient with the 
agonies of this disease and am very weak; besides I am very much 
afraid of it. Kindly give me a good advice and save me.” 


7-9. Vas’istha said “O King! There is a good remedy for the cure 
of your disease. It is stated in the S’astras that the sons are of 
thirteen kinds; Aurasa, Ksattraja, Datrima, Kritrima; etc. Therefore 
pay the reasonable price and buy one good Brahmin boy and 
perform your sacrifice with that boy. O King! Thus Varuna will be 
pleased and you will be cured of your disease.” 


10-24. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the words of Vas’istha, 
the King Haris’chandra addressed to his minister“O Minister-in- 



Chief! You are very sharp and intelligent, therefore you better try 
your best and seek in my kingdom a Brahmin boy. In case a poor 
Brahmin be willing, out of his love for money, to give over his son, 
then give him any amount he wants and bring his son. O Minister! By 
all means, bring a Brahmin boy for this sacrifice; in other words, do 
not be miserly or act lazily to perform my business. You should pray 
to any Brahmin thus Take this money and give your son, who will 
be sacrificed in a sacrificial ceremony as a victim.” Thus ordered, the 
minister sought for a Brahmin boy in towns after towns, villages after 
villages, and houses after houses. Till, at last, he came to know that 
in his kingdom there was a poor distressed Brahmin named Ajigarta, 
who had three sons. Then the minister gave to the Brahmin that he 
wanted and purchased his second son named S’unahs’epha and 
brought him before the King. And handed him over to the King, 
saying that this Brahmin boy is fit for the sacrificial victim. The King 
then gladly brought the best Brahmins versed in the Vedas for the 
performance of the sacrifice, and collected all the articles requisite 
for the purpose. When the sacrifice was commenced, the great Muni 
VisVamitra, seeing S’unahs’epha tied, prohibited the King and said 
- “O King! Do not be so bold as to sacrifice this boy; let this boy be 
free. O long-lived One! I am asking this thing from you today and if 
you obey it, certainly it will do good to you. O King! This boy 
S’unahs’epha is crying; his cries are paining my heart and I am 
feeling pity for him. Hear my word and free this boy out of mercy. 

See! The purehearted Ksattriyas, in ancient days, used to sacrifice 
their own bodies and thus preserve others’ bodies, so that they might 
attain the Heavens. And now you are killing this Brahmin boy forcibly 
so that you may preserve your own body; judge how vicious is this 
your act! Be merciful to this boy. O King! Everyone likes his own 
body to the same extent; you are feeling this yourself; therefore if 
you take my word, then quit this boy.” 


25-36. Vyasa said O King! The King Haris’chandra was ailing very 
much; hence be did not pay any heed to the Muni’s words and did 



not quit the boy. Thereupon the very fiery spirited VisVamitra 
became very angry with the King. Then VisVamitra, the son of 
Kus’ika, the foremost of the knowers of the Vedas, shewed mercy on 
S’unahs’epha and gave him the “Varuna Mantram.” S’unahs’epha, 
very much afraid to lose his life, earnestly repeatedly remembered 
Varuna and uttered that mantram in pluta tone (lengthened or 
prolonged). Varuna, too, the ocean of mercy, knowing that the 
Brahmin boy was praising him with hymns came up to that spot and 
freed S’unahs’epha from his bondage and freed the King also from 
his disease and went back to his own abode. Thus the Maharsi 
Vis’vamitra became very glad to rescue the Muni’s son from the jaws 
of death. The King Haris’chandra did not observe the words of 
Vis’vamitra; hence the son of Gadhi harboured within his heart anger 
towards the King. One day while the King Haris’chandra was riding 
in a forest and there, at midday, on the banks of the river Kaus’ik, 
when he desired to kill a boar, Vis’vamitra in the garb of an old 
Brahmin asked from him everything that he had, including his 
dominion and thus cunningly took away everything from the King. 
The Maharsi Vas’istha, seeing his Yajamana Haris’chandra suffering 
much, became wounded and felt pain in his mind. One day when he 
met casually with Vis’vamitra in a forest, he said “O wicked 
Ksattriya! A disgrace to your family! You have in vain put on the garb 
of a Brahmin; your religion is like a crane; you ate full of vanity; you 
boast for nothing. The best of kings, Haris’chandra is my client; be is 
faultless; still, O Fool! Why are you giving him so much trouble. As 
you are religious as a crane is religious, so take your birth as a 
crane.” Vis’vamitra, thus cursed by Vas’istha, cursed Vas’istha in 
return, and said “O Vas’istha! As long as I will remain a crane, so 
long you also remain as S’arali or Adi bird.” 


37-42. Vyasa said O King! The two angry Munis thus cursed each 
other and the two were born as Crane and S’arali or Adi bird. The 
crane Vis’vamitra built its nest on the top of a tree on the 
Manasarovara lake and began to live there. Vas’istha, too, assumed 



the form of an Adi bird, and built his nest on the top of another tree 
and lived there. Thus the two Risis spent their days in full enmity 
towards each other. These two birds used to shriek so terribly loud 
that they became a nuisance to all; they fought daily with each other. 
They used to strike each other with beaks and wings and nails and 
thus they were covered all over their bodies with cuts and wounds 
and they were smeared with blood. They began to look like Kims’uka 
trees. Thus the two Risis, in the shape of birds, in their states of 
bondage, due to each other’s curse, passed many years there. 


43. Janamejaya said “O Brahmana! Kindly tell me how Vas’istha 
and Kaus’ika, the two Risis, became free from their curses; I am very 
curious to hear this.” 


44-54. Vyasa said Brahma, the Grandsire of his subjects, came 
there with all the Devas, filled with mercy, on seeing those two Risis 
at war against each other. Brahma, the Lotus-seated, made them 
desist from such a fight, consoled them and freed both of them from 
each other’s curses. Then the Devas went back to their own abodes 
and the illustrious lotus-seated Brahma went to the Satyaloka, 
seated on his Swan. Maharsi Vas’istha and Vis’vamitra became then 
friends and were tied with bonds of affection at the advice of 
Brahma; they went back to their own As’ramas. O King! Now see, 
that the Maharsi Vas’istha, the son of Mitra-Varuna, fought for 
nothing with Vis’vamitra, so painful to both the parties. Who, then, 
amongst the human beings, the Danavas or the Devas can conquer 
his Ahamkara (egoism) and be always happy? Therefore the Chitta- 
S’uddhi, the purity of the heart (that purity which imparts to man the 
blessedness of God-vision) is very difficult even for the high-souled 
persons; with the greatest caution and utmost effort one has to 
practise for that. To those persons, that are void of this Chitta 
S’uddhi, it is all vain to go to places of pilgrimage, to make charities, 
to practise tapasya, to be truthful; in fact, anything, which is the 



means to attain Dharma, becomes useless. O King! S’raddha (Faith) 
is of three kinds (1) Sattviki, (2) Rajasiki and (3) Tamasiki to all 
persons in all their religious matters. The Sattvik faith is the only one 
of the three that yields entire results; and it is very rare in this world. 
The Rajasik faith, done according to due rules, yields half the results 
thereof and the Tamasik faith is fruitless and inglorious; the Tamasik 
faith arises with those persons that are overwhelmed with lust, 
anger, greed, etc. Therefore, O King! Keep to the company of the 
good and hear the S’astras, Vedanta, etc., and free the heart of 
worldly desires and then concentrate it to the worship of the Devi 
and live in a sacred place of pilgrimage. Men afraid and troubled with 
the defects of the Kaliyuga, should always take the name of the 
Devi, sing praises, and meditate on Her lotus feet. Thus the JTvas 
will not have any fear of Kali and the fallen vicious persons will easily 
be able to cross this ocean of the world and be free. There is no 
doubt in this. 


Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the 
description of the battle between Adi and Baka after the discourse on 
S’unahs’epha in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Mahapuranam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 14. On The Birth Of Vas’istha From 
Mitra V arena 


1-2. Janamejaya said “O Bhagavan! Maharsi Vas’istha was the 
mind-born son of Brahma; how is it then that you have named him as 
Maitra-Varuni. Is it that he got this name by some action or by some 
Gunas? Kindly tell me the origin of this name, O Best of speakers!” 


3-4. Vyasa said O King! It is quite true that the illustrious Vas’istha 
was the noble son of Brahma but he had to quit that body due to the 
curse of the King Nimi and he had to take a second body from Mitra 
Varuna; hence he is named in this world as Maitra-Varuni. 


5-6. The King said “O Bhagavan! How was it that the religious 
Vas’istha, the best of the Munis, the son of Brahma was cursed by 
the King? Oh! The Munis have to suffer the dreadful curse of 
Ksattriya kings! This seems very wonderful to me. O Knower of 
Dharma! Why did that king curse the innocent Muni? I am very 
curious to hear the cause of this; kindly tell me the cause of the 
curse.” 


7-30. Vyasa said O King! I told you already in particular all the 
causes of these. This Samsara is pervaded by the three Gunas of 
Maya, Sattva, Raja and Tama. Whether the kings practise their 
Dharma or the ascetics practise their tapas, all their actions are 
interpenetrated with these Gunas; therefore they cannot shine so 
brightly. The Kings, Munis performed very severe penances and 
austerities under the influence of lust, anger, greed and Ahamkara. 
O King! All, whether they be the Ksattriyas or the Brahmanas, who 
perform their sacrifices overpowered with this Rajo Guna, really. 



none of thenn performs these actions guided by Sattva Guna. The 
King Nimi was cursed by the Risi and the Risi was cursed again by 
the King Nimi; thus they met with greater calamities and painful 
sufferings, the fruits from the hands of the powerful Fate. O King! In 
this world of the three Gunas, it is very difficult for the beings to get 
the Dravya S’uddhi, Kriya S’uddhi, and the pure effulgent Chitta 
S’uddhi, O King! Know this as the influence wielded by the Highest 
S’akti, the Mother of this Universe. Nobody is able to overstep it; but 
he, whom She favours, can cross in a moment this world, bounded 
by the three Gunas. What more can be said than the fact that Hah, 
Hara, and Brahma and the other Gods cannot free themselves 
without Her grace. Moreover, the sinners like Satyavrata and others 
become free when Her Grace comes upon them. Nobody in these 
three worlds can know what reigns in Her mind; again, this is also a 
certain fact that She gets Herself bound by Her own will to Her 
devotees. Therefore it is extremely desirable that one should have 
recourse to Sattviki devotion for the complete removal of faults and 
sins. And as the devotion with attachment and vanity is always 
injurious to men, therefore it is highly beneficial to quit it; there is no 
doubt in this. O King! There was a king named Nimi, born of the 
family of Iksaku. He was beautiful, well qualified, virtuous, truthful, 
charitable, endearing to his people, a sacrificer, of pure conduct and 
manners, ready to govern his subjects, intelligent and endowed with 
knowledge. For the benefit of the Brahmanas, that high-souled king 
established a city named Jayantupur in close vicinity to the 
hermitage of Gautama. Thus some time passed when this Rajasik 
idea arose in his mind that “I will perform a sacrifice extending for a 
good many years when I will give exhorbitant Daksinas 
(remunerations to the priests and Brahmins).” Getting permission 
from his own father Iksaku, he began to collect all the ingredients 
necessary for the sacrifice, as advised by the high-souled persons. 
He invited the all-knowing Munis and ascetics, versed in the Vedas 
and in conducting sacrifices, e.g., Bhrigu, Angira, Vamadeva, 
Gautama, Vas’istha, Pulastya, Richika, Pulaha, Kratu and others, all 
well-versed in the Vedas. Then that religious King Nimi, collecting all 
the materials necessary for sacrifice worshipped his own Guru 



Vas’istha and then spoke to him (the Guru) with great humility. O 
Best of Munis! I will perform a sacrifice; kindly perform this my 
sacrificial act; you are my Guru and therefore you know everything; 
so do this sacrifice for me. All the articles for this purpose are 
brought and cleansed. O Guru! Know that for five thousand years I 
mean to be engaged in this sacrifice, this is my Sankalpa (will). I will 
worship the Goddess Ambika in this sacrifice and for Her satisfaction 
I am arranging for it according to the prescribed rules. Hearing the 
King Nimi’s words, Vas’istha said “O best of Kings! Indra, the King 
of the Devas, has already selected me for his sacrificial ceremony. 
Now Indra is ready to do the sacrifice for the propitiation of the 
Highest S’akti and I have initiated him for five hundred years. 
Therefore, O King! You will have to wait till I complete the Indra’s 
Yajha. After fully completing all his works, I will come here. 

Therefore, O King! Wait till then.” 


31-42. The King said “O Best of Munis! I have already invited 
other Munis for this sacrifice and have collected all the materials; 
how, then, can I wait for you? O Brahmana! You are the foremost of 
those versed in the Vedas and you are the family Guru of the noble 
Iksaku. How is it, then, avoiding my work you are ready to go 
elsewhere O Best of Brahmins! Under the uncontrollable greed of 
wealth you have lost all senses and you are ready to go away 
without doing my work. This does not behove you.” O King! Though 
thus tempted by the King Nimi, the Risi Vas’istha went to the Indra’s 
sacrifice. The King, too, became absent-minded and selected for the 
sacrifice the Risi Gautama. He then commenced his sacrificial 
ceremony close to the ocean by the side of the Himalayan range and 
gave profusely the Daksinas. The King Nimi was engaged in this 
sacrificial act for five thousand years. In this the Rittviks (priests) 
were worshipped with sufficient wealth and cows; they were 
extremely glad. Then, when the five hundred years extending 
sacrifice of Indra was completed, the Risi Vas’istha came to see the 
King Nimi’s sacrifice and waited there to see the King. The king was 



then asleep; so the servants did not awake him from his sleep; and 
the King did not come to the Risi. Feeling insult at this, the Maharsi 
Vas’istha became infuriated with rage. Not seeing the King, he 
became very angry; and, subject to this, he cursed the King, When I 
am your lifelong Guru, especially when I prohibited you and you 
have forsaken me and selected another Guru and by your sheer 
force you are initiated, then be devoid of your body. Let your body 
fall off today. 


43-50. Vyasa said The King’s attendants, hearing thus the curse 
given by Vas’istha to the King, instantly awoke him from his sleep 
and informed him that the Risi Vas’istha not seeing you, became 
very angry. The King Nimi, quite sinless, went then to the angry 
Vas’istha and humbly spoke to him the following reasonable words, 
pregnant with meaning. O Knower of Dharma! I am your Yajamana; 
though I repeatedly requested you to perform my sacrifice, yet you 
quitted me out of the covetousness and went somewhere else. I 
cannot be charged with any fault. You are the foremost of Brahmins; 
and knowing that contentment is the substance of your Dharma, you 
did not feel ashamed to do this blameable act. You are the son of 
Brahma; and, being versed in the Vedas and Vedangas, you are yet 
unaware of the subtle and very difficult nature of the Brahminic 
religion. Now you want to cast your own fault on my shoulders and 
you are trying in vain to curse me. Anger is more to be blamed than 
Chandala! The wise men should overcome it by all means. When 
you, infuriated with rage, have been able to curse me for nothing, 
then I now curse you, “Let your this body, inflamed with anger, drop 
off.” O King! Thus the King cursed the Muni and the Muni cursed the 
King; and both of them were, therefore, very sorry. 


51-52. Vas’istha then became troubled with cares and took shelter 
with Brahma and informing him about the great curse given by the 
King Nimi said :-- Father! The King has cursed me saying, “Let your 



body fall off today. Now the great trouble due to the falling off of the 
body has arisen. What am to do now? 


53-69. O Father! Kindly tell me from whom shall I take my birth and 
take such means as I can get a body like what I have now. Also by 
Your unbounded power, do so that I can retain the knowledge in that 
body as I have at present; You are fully competent to do this.” O 
King! Hearing thus the words of Vas’istha, Brahma spoke thus to his 
dear son Go and enter into the Tejas (essence) of Mitra Varuna 
and remain contented; then you will get, in due time, a body not born 
of any womb and you will be again religious, truthful, knower of the 
Vedas, all-knowing and worshipped by all; there is no doubt in this. 
When Brahma said this, the Maharsi Vas’istha bowed down to the 
Grand Sire, and circumambulating him, went to the abode of Varuna. 
Then he quitted his excellent body; and, with his subtle body, the 
part of his Jiva, entered into the body of Mitra Varuna. Then once on 
a time Urvas’i, exquisitely beautiful and lovely, surrounded by her 
comrades, went wilfully into the abode of Varuna. Mitra-Varuna, the 
two Devas became very passionate to see that Apsara (the celestial 
nymph) endowed with youth and beauty and being enchanted with 
the arrows of cupid, and, being senseless, addressed to the Deva 
Kanya Urvas’T, beautiful in all her parts, thus :-- “O Lovely One! 
Seeing you, we are very much troubled with the arrows of cupid; O 
Beautiful One! Select us and remain and enjoy here at your 
pleasure.” When they said thus, Urvas’T became attached to them; 
and, under their control, began to stay in the house of Mitra Varuna. 
When Urvas’T began to remain there, strongly attached to them, the 
semen of Mitra Varuna dropped in an uncovered jar. And the two 
beautiful sons of the Risis were born out of that; Agasti was the first 
child and Vas’istha the second. Thus, out of the semen of Mitra 
Varuna, the two ascetics were born. The first Agasti turned out a 
great ascetic in his childhood and resorted to forest; Iksaku the best 
of Kings, selected Vas’istha as his family priest. O King! Iksaku, the 
best of Kings, nursed him for the welfare of his own line; the more 



so, because to know that he was the Muni Vas’istha; and thus he 
was very pleased with him. Janamejaya! Thus I have described to 
you about the getting of another body by Vas’istha, due to the curse 
of Nimi, and have also described his re-birth in Mitra-Varuna’s family. 


Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the birth of 
Vas’istha from Mitra Varuna in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha 
Puranam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 15. On The Nimi’s Getting Of Another 
Body And The Beginning Of The Story Of 
Haihayas 


1. Janamejaya said “The getting back of another similar body by 
Vas’istha is certainly described by you. Now tell me how the King 
Nimi got another body.” 


2-31. Vyasa said O King! The Risi Vas’istha only got back his 
body; but the King Nimi did not get back his body what had been 
cursed by Vas’istha. The priests engaged at the sacrifice by Nimi 
began to consider, when the Risi Vas’istha cursed him, in the 
following way Oh! What a wonderful thing is this? Before the 
sacrifice is complete, the King Nimi has been cursed; this is against 
what we had expected; What can we do? What is inevitable must 
come to pass; how can we thwart it? By various Mantrams, they kept 
alive the body of the King in which breathing was still going on a 
little; and they prevented the body from decaying by worshipping the 
body with various Mantra S’aktis and kept it in a stationary state. 
When the sacrificial ceremony was completed, the Risis began to 
praise the gods with hymns whereon the Devas became pleased 
and came to that spot. When the Munis informed the Devas fully of 
the condition of the King’s body, the Devas spoke to the sorrowful 
King thus “O Performer of good vows! We are all pleased with 
your sacrifice; now ask boons from us. O King! You ought to get an 
excellent birth as the fruit of performing this sacrifice. So ask what 
body, the body of a Deva or of a man, you desire? Or you can ask, if 
you like, for another similar body, that your priest Brihaspati has got 
quitting his first body whereby he has become proud and is now 
staying in the Loka of Yama.” O King! At these words the King Nimi 
was very glad and spoke to them thus O Devas! I have no 
aspiration for the body that is always liable to destruction; I therefore 



want to reside on the top of the eyelids of all the beings. Therefore I 
ask this boon that I be able to move in the shape of Vayu (air) on the 
top of the eyes of all the beings. Thus said, the Devas spoke to the 
soul of Nimi “O King! Pray to the most auspicious Deity, the Devi, 
the Highest Goddess. She has been pleased with this sacrifice; 
therefore your prayer will certainly be granted.” Hearing thus, the 
King began to pray with various hymns with intense devotion, in 
tremulous voice, the Devi. The Devi became pleased and appeared 
before him. Seeing Her shining like a crore of suns and looking 
exceedingly lovely and beautiful, all the persons there became very 
happy. They began to think themselves as very blessed and as 
having done all what they had to do. Knowing the Devi Bhagavati 
pleased, the King asked this boon from her“O Devi! Give me that 
knowledge, pure and simple, whereby final liberation is obtained. 
Also, I may be able to reside on the top of the eyes of all the beings.” 
The Devi, the Lord of the Devas, the Mother of the World being 
highly pleased, said thus “O King! At the expiry of this your 
Prarabdha Karma, you will acquire pure knowledge and you will 
reside on the tops of the eyes in the shape of Vayu, and through 
your residing there the beings will twinkle, i.e., open and close their 
eyes. The men, beasts, and birds will twinkle due to your residing 
there; but the Immortals will always remain with a steadfast gaze; 
they will not twinkle.” Thus granting him the boon, and addressing all 
the Munis the Bhagavati, the Highest Deity, disappeared. When the 
Devi disappeared from their sight, the Munis then thought much and 
they took the body of the King Nimi to burn it duly. For the sake of 
getting a son from Nimi, the high-souled Munis performed Homa 
ceremony (oblations to the fire) and placing the piece of wood Arani 
on his body began to utter Mantrams and burned his body. When the 
woods were thus burned, a son, endowed with all auspicious signs, 
looking like a second Nimi, was born to them. As this son was born 
due to the burning of the Aranis, the boy was named Mithi, and as it 
came out of the body of Janaka, the boy was named Janaka. O 
King! As the King Nimi lost his body, i.e., became Videha through the 
curse of Vas’istha, all his descendants were known as Videha. Thus 
the son of Nimi was well known as the King Janaka. He built a 



beautiful city on the banks of the Ganges; the city became famous 
also by his name (Janakapuri). The King Janaka beautified this city 
with many forts, arcades, markets and many nice buildings and 
palaces; and his city was full of wealth and grains. O King! All the 
Kings of this line became famous by the name of Janaka and all 
were endowed with the Supreme knowledge and known as Videha. 
O King! I have now described to you the story of the King Nimi who 
got disembodiedness (Videhatva) out of the curse. 


32-35. The King said “O Bhagavan! You have described the 
cause why the King Nimi was cursed; my mind has grown very 
doubtful and restless on hearing it. The Risi Vas’istha was the son of 
Brahma and the best of the Brahmins; especially he was the royal 
priest; how was it, then, that he was cursed by the King! Why did not 
the King Nimi forgive him as he was the Guru and a Brahmin? Why 
he became angry, when he performed such a great, auspicious 
sacrifice? He was born of the family of Iksaku and he knew well the 
truths of the religion; then how was it that he became subject to 
anger and cursed his own Guru Brahmin.” 


36-46. Vyasa said O King! It is very hard and rare for the persons 
not possessed of self-restraint to forgive; especially when one is fully 
capable, it is very rare to find one in the three worlds, who can 
forgive. He who has forsaken all attachments and has conquered 
hunger and sleep and is always engaged in the Yoga practices, even 
that ascetic Muni is not capable to conquer completely lust, anger 
and greed and Ahamkara, etc., the passions raging in the mortal coil. 
None existed before in this whole world who conquered his 
passions! None exists now and none will be born ever-after. Hardly 
will be seen any in this earth, or the Heavens, or the Loka of Brahma 
or in Vaikuntha, even in Kailasa, that has conquered completely his 
passions! What can be said in regard to the ordinary mortals of this 
earth when the sons of Brahma, the Maharsis, ascetics, Risis are all 



pierced by the Sattva, Rajas, or Tamo Gunas. Behold! The Kapila 
was the Knower of S’ankhya and always engaged in his Yoga 
practices and he was a pure and holy soul; yet, by strange 
combinations of Fate, he became angry and burnt to ashes the sons 
of the King Sagara. O King! Out of Ahamkara, these three worlds are 
created; therefore this world and Ahamkara are related to each other 
as effect and cause; how then the Jivas that are born of this 
Samsara can extricate themselves from this Ahamkara? Brahma, 
Visnu and Mahes’a are also pierced by those three Gunas; different 
feelings are seen in their different bodies. Therefore it need hardly 
be said that the manifestation of the pure Sattva Guna alone is not to 
be seen in any of the human beings; for the three Gunas reside in a 
mixed way in all persons. Sometimes the Sattva preponderates; 
sometimes the Rajas and sometimes the Tamas preponderates. 
Sometimes they reside together, the three balancing one other. 


47-63. O King! Only that Eternal Highest Purusa is undecaying and 
untainted and can hardly be measured or seen by all the beings. 
That Highest Soul, the Highest of the High, is Nirguna (void of the 
three Gunas); and She who resides in all the beings and is hardly 
knowable by the small intellectual persons, that Highest S’akti, the 
Incarnate of Brahma, is also Nirguna (void of attributes). Paramatma 
(the Highest Soul) and the Highest Force are also One; their Forms 
are not different. When such a knowledge arises, then the Jivas can 
be free from all sins and faults and blemishes. From that knowledge 
comes the liberation, this is sounded in the Vedanta S’astra 
like Dindima S’abda (thousands of small drums). He, who comes to 
know That, is freed from the endless cycle of birth and death 
composed of the three Gunas; there is no doubt in this. 


O King! Knowledge is of two kinds The first is considered as 
coming from sound; this comes out of the knowledge of the meaning 
of the Vedas by the help of intellect. But this is full of fancies. 



agreements and doubts some of which are bad and some are good. 
The beings are led into errors by these discussions; errors cause 
destruction of intellect; and when the intellect is gone, the knowledge 
also goes away with it. Whereas the second kind of knowledge 
comes from intention or feeling within the depths of heart and brain 
and it is called Aparoksa Jhana. This knowledge is very rare to the 
beings. When one comes in contact with a Sad-Guru (a good 
teacher), then one gets this Aparoksa Jhana. From the sound 
knowledge, no successful results can issue; and, therefore it cannot 
give Aparoksa Jhana. Hence great effort is to be made for getting 
this Aparoksa Jhana. O King! As darkness cannot be destroyed 
merely by talking of light, without lighting any lamp, so the 
knowledge of sound merely cannot destroy the darkness of the 
inside. That Karma (action) is called True Karma which does not lead 
to bondage, and that Knowledge is the True Knowledge which leads 
to liberation. Other actions are only meant for one’s own selfish 
enjoyments and other knowledges are merely the skill in arts. Good 
behaviour, doing good to others, having no anger, forgiveness, 
patience, and contentment are the best brilliant fruits of True 
Knowledge. O King! Without knowledge, without asceticism, and 
without the Yoga practices, the lust and other passions can never be 
destroyed. The minds of the JTvas are naturally restless and without 
control; all the beings are completely under the sway of their minds; 
thus they roam on the surface of the earth as good, middling and 
bad. Lust, anger, etc., orginate from this mind; and when mind is 
conquered, then those feelings can no more arise. O King! Therefore 
it was that Yayati forgave when S’ukracharya did wrong before. The 
King Nimi could not forgive Vas’istha in the same way. Yayati; the 
best of kings, though cursed by S’ukracharya, the son of Bhrigu, did 
not curse in return but he took upon himself the old age. O King! 
Some kings are naturally peaceful, whereas some other kings are 
wicked by their nature. Therefore, in this matter, whose fault is this, 
how can we ascertain? See! In ancient times the Haihayas, out of 
their greed of wealth, and being thus insensible destroyed 
completely, out of anger, the Brahmin priests of the family of Bhrigu. 
What more than this that those Ksattriyas did not consider the sin 



Brahmahattya; rather out of their dire anger, they cut to pieces the 
sons of those Brahmanas, that were in embryos in their mother’s 
wombs. 


Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the Nimi’s 
getting of another body and the beginning of the story of Haihayas, 
in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 16. On The Incidents Preliminary To 
The Haihaya And Bhargava Affairs 


1-5. Janamejaya said In whose family were born those Ksattriya 
Haihayas that killed in ancient times the Bhargavas, disregardless of 
the sin incurred in killing a Brahmin? O Grandsire! Never do the 
good persons become angry without a serious cause; therefore 
kindly state why they got angry. How was the enmity caused 
between them and the priests? As far as I can think, the cause is not 
so simple a one as led to this enmity between the Ksattriyas and the 
priests. Otherwise why then would they slay the offenseless 
Brahmins, fit to be worshipped; and how was it that the Ksattriyas, 
though they were so very powerful, did not fear to commit a sin. O 
Muni! Can any Ksattriya Chief kill a Brahmin, worthy of the highest 
respect, merely on a trifling cause! Describe to me, then, how this 
happened. A great doubt has thus arisen in my mind. 


6. Suta said O Risis! Vyasa, the son of Satyavati, became very 
pleased when he was asked this question by Janamejaya, and, 
recollecting the whole course of events regarding the Haihayas, 
began to narrate it. 


7-22. Vyasa said O son of Pariksit! I will now narrate that 
wonderful story of old that I know fully; now hear this very attentively. 
In ancient times there was a King named Kartaviryarjuna of the 
family of Haihaya. He was of thousand hands, powerful, and always 
ready to observe religious duties. He was the incarnation of Hah, 
and the disciple of Maharsi Dattatreya and the worshipper of the 
Supreme Force (Adya S’akti). He was well known as a perfect adept 
in the Yoga practices and of a very charitable disposition. But this 
King was the client of the Brahmins of the Bhargava clan. He was 



always devoted to performing sacrifices, exceedingly religious, and 
always engaged in making gifts. So many a time did he perform the 
great sacrifices and gave a profuse quantity of wealth to the 
Bhargavas. Due to the gifts and presents of Karta Virya, the 
Bhargava priests became possessed of many horses, and gems and 
jewels and so became wealthy and prosperous on the surface of this 
earth. O King! When Kartaviryarjuna, the best of Kings, left the 
mortal coil and got up to Heavens, his descendants became entirely 
void of any wealth by the indomitable influence of Time. Now, on a 
certain occasion, the Haihayas had to perform certain actions which 
necessitated a vast sum of money; they came to the Bhargavas and 
humbly prayed for a very large amount of wealth. But the Brahmins, 
out of their greed of money, replied they had no money and thus they 
did not give any money whatsoever. Rather the Bhargavas thought 
that the Haihayas would perforce take their wealth, and, fearing thus, 
some of them buried all their valuables underneath the ground; and 
others gave as charities to the Brahmanas. The greedy Bhargavas, 
bewildered with fear, thus transferred all their properties elsewhere, 
quitted their homes and fled away to mountains and other places. 
The greedy Brahmins did not give any wealth to their Yajamanas 
(their clients) though they saw them very much distressed; but they 
fled away out of fear to mountains and fastnesses where they found 
shelter. At last the Haihayas, the best of the Ksattriyas, became very 
sorry till, at last, for the sake of their good actions, they went to the 
Bhargavas’ houses for the sake of money and found they had quitted 
their homes and fled away; their homes were all vacant. Then they 
began to dig underneath their houses for money and some got the 
money thus. Then the Ksattriyas began to labour hard and got 
hordes of money from underneath the ground. Next they raided upon 
other Brahmanas’ houses and dug and excavated and searched for 
more money. The Brahmins were helpless and, crying, all took their 
refuge, out of fear, under the Bhargavas. 



23-42. The Ksattriyas made an exhaustive search of the Brahmanas’ 
houses and got lots of money. They then charged the Brahmanas as 
having had spoken falsehood and they became very angry, and 
killed the Brahmanas with arrows who took their refuge. O King! The 
Haihayas were so very angry at that time that they went wherever 
the Bhargavas took their shelter and cut asunder the foetus in the 
wombs of their Bhargavas’ wives and thus they roamed all over on 
the surface of the earth. Wherever they saw any Bhargava, be he a 
minor, or a youth or a old man, at once they killed him with sharp 
arrows, disregarding the sin Brahmahattya. When the Bhargavas 
were thus all killed, then they caught hold of their wives that were 
pregnant and destroyed their wombs. When the vicious Ksattriyas 
thus destroyed the lives in their wombs, the helpless women began 
to cry like the awe-stricken ewe. Then the other Munis, the 
inhabitants of the sacred places of pilgrimages, seeing the Haihaya 
Ksattriyas inflamed with anger, said “O Ksattriyas! Quit your 
terrible anger towards the Brahmins. Being the best of the Ksattriyas, 
you are killing the foetus in the wombs of the pregnant Brahmana 
ladies! You are doing, no doubt, a very vicious and unjustifiable act! 
You should know that an act, very bad or very good, bears fruit in 
this life; therefore those that seek their welfare should entirely omit 
this exceedingly hateful and vicious act.” Then the exceedingly angry 
Haihayas told the merciful ascetics You all are saints; therefore 
you do not know the real import of what are called vicious acts. 

Those Bhargavas, thoroughly dexterous in cunning pursuits, 
deceived our largehearted forefathers and stole away all their gold 
and jewels, as thieves do with a passerby on a road. These 
Bhargavas are cheats, vain persons and their persuasions are like 
herons. A great act had to be done by us and we wanted money at 
25 per cent interest with all the becoming humility; yet they did not 
give us the money; rather seeing on their face their clients distressed 
and sorrowful they spoke that they had no money, no money and 
then they remained silent. True, they got all their money from 
Kartavirya; but it may be questioned why they stored it? Why did not 
they perform sacrifices with that? Why did not they give sufficient 
money to the other priests (Yayakas) that did the sacrifices. Never 



should any Brahmin hoard his money; he should give that in charity 
and enjoy at his pleasure. O Twice-born! In amassing wealth, there 
exist three fears Fear from the thieves and robbers, fear from the 
King, fear from dreadful fire accidents, and especially great terrible 
fear from the cheats. This is the nature of wealth; it leaves its 
preserver. See, moreover, when a hoarder of money dies, he 
certainly has to quit it. If a wealthy man, before dying, performs 
sacrifices and other good pious acts by his earned money, then he 
gets certainly good states in future; otherwise, he quits his wealth, to 
no purpose and earns a bad state in his future life; there is no doubt 
in this. We humbly wanted to pay a quarter interest and asked 
money for the performance of a great act; yet they, the greedy ones, 
were doubtful about our promise; and though our priests, they did 
not give us the money. O Maharsis! Gift, enjoyment and destruction, 
these are the three courses which any wealth has to pass through; 
those persons that have done good deeds, enjoy their wealth and 
give as charities and thus they make a good and real use of their 
money; and of those that are vicious, their wealth goes away in ruin 
and to no purpose. He who does not enjoy nor give in charities but is 
only clever in hoarding and who is a miser, the Kings punish him by 
all means, that man who cheats himself and who suffers only pains 
and miseries. For that reason, we are now ready to kill those 
Brahmins, the vilest of men, the cheats, though they are our Gurus. 
O Maharsis! You are great persons; therefore you do not be angry 
after you have come to know all these. 


43-51. Vyasa said Thus consoling the Munis, with reasonable 
words, the Haihayas began to roam about, in search of the wives of 
the Bhargavas. The Bhargava wives were very much distressed with 
fear and became very lean and thin. They fled away to the 
Himalayan Mountain weeping, and crying, and trembling with fear. 
Thus the Bhargavas were being killed by those vicious greedy 
Haihayas, infuriated with anger, and as they liked. O King! This 
greed is the greatest enemy of a man, residing in his own body; this 



greed is the root of all evils, of all sins. Life is in danger due to this 
covetousness. It is due to this greed that quarrels ensue amongst 
the several castes, the Brahmins, etc., and that the human beings 
are very much troubled with thirst after worldly enjoyments. This 
greed makes a man forsake all his religious rites and long existing 
customs and observances of his family; and it is due to this avarice 
of gold that men kill their fathers, mothers, brothers, friends. Gurus, 
sons, acquaintances, sisters, and sisters-in-law and others. Really 
when a man is bent on avarice, nothing heinous remains to him that 
cannot be done by him. This greed is a more powerful enemy than 
anger, lust and egoism. O King! Men abandon their lives for their 
greed; what more can be said than this? So one should be always 
alert on this. O King! Your forefathers, the Pandavas and Kauravas, 
were all religious and they followed the path of virtue and goodness. 
Yet they all were ruined simply for this greed. See! The dreadful fight 
and separation amongst the relatives took place where there were 
the high-souled persons like Bhisma, Drona, Kripacharya, Kama, 
Vahlika, Bhimasena, Yudhisthira, Arjuna, and Kes’ava, only through 
the avaricious feelings. In this battle Bhisma, Drona and the sons of 
Pandavas were all slain; the brothers and fathers were all slain in 
battle. Thus what improper acts and mischiefs can there be that 
cannot be committed when the human minds are overpowered by 
this greed? O King! The vicious Haihayas slew the Bhargavas all 
through this avarice. 


Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the incidents 
preliminary to the Haihaya and Bhargava affairs in the 
Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 17. On The Continuance Of The Family 
Of Bhrigu 


1-3. Janamejaya said “Munis! How did the Bhargava wives cross 
this endless sea of troubles and how was the family of Bhrigu re¬ 
established on the surface of this earth? And what did the greedy 
Haihayas, the vilest of the Ksattriyas, do after they killed the 
Bhargavas? Describe all these in detail and satisfy my curiosity. O 
Thou, Ocean of austerities! I am not satisfied with the drink of your 
nectar like words, very holy and leading to happiness in this world 
and to good merits in the next.” 


4-28. Vyasa said O King! I will now narrate to you the sin 
destroying virtuous story how the Bhargava wives crossed their great 
hardships and the ocean of troubles, very difficult to cross. The 
Bhargava wives, when they were very much harassed by the 
Haihayas, went to the Himalayas, overwhelmed with terror and 
disappointment. There on that mountain they erected an earthen 
image of S’ri Gauri Devi by the banks of the Ganges and 
worshipped Her and, firmly resolved to die, began to fast. The Devi 
Jagadambika appeared to those religious women in their dreams 
and said “A son will be born of My essence to one of you from one 
of her thighs; that son will redress all your wants.” Thus speaking, 
the Devi Bhagavati disappeared. Those women when they woke up 
were very glad; one of them that appeared very clever, becoming 
very much anxious out of the fear of the Ksattriyas; preserved the 
foetus in one of her thighs for the propagation of the family. Her body 
became luminous; she then fled, overwhelmed with terror. The 
Ksattriyas, seeing that Brahmani, came quickly upon her and said 
“See! This pregnant Bhargava wife is flying away hastily; seize her 
and take away her life.” Thus saying, all of them raised their axes, 
and pursued her. Then that woman seeing them coming, wept out of 
fear. She cried, out of terror, for the preservation of the child in her 



womb; and the child seeing her mother helpless and distressed, 
trembling with fear and with tears in her eyes having no one to 
protect her and awfully oppressed by the Ksattriyas as if a pregnant 
deer has been attacked by a lion and is crying about, angrily burst 
out of the thigh of his mother, and quickly came out like a second 
Sun. That good looking boy took away the power of sight of those 
Ksattriyas by his brilliant lustrous light; no sooner the Haihayas saw 
that boy than they got blind. Like those that are born blind; they then 
began to roam in the caves of mountains and thought within 
themselves, what an evil turn of Fate had overtaken them! They 
thought thus “Oh! The mere sight of that boy has turned us blind; 
what a great wonder is this! Certainly this is due to the influence of 
the Brahmini wife; this is, no doubt, the great effect of her virtue of 
chastity. We have greatly oppressed the Bhargava women. They 
have become very sorry and distressed; now we cannot tell what 
more evils do these women, of true resolve, inflict on us!” Thus 
pondering, those Ksattriyas deprived of their eyes, helpless, and 
their minds bewildered, took refuge of those Brahmin ladies. The 
ladies, seeing them again come, were the more terrified; but those 
Ksattriyas bowed down before them with folded hands for the 
restoration of their sights and said “O Mother! We are your 
servants. Be gracious unto us. O Auspicious Ones! We are vicious 
Ksattriyas; O Mothers! What an amount of offence we have 
committed to you. O Beautiful Ones! We have become blind, no 
sooner we have seen you. O Angry Ones! No more we can see your 
lotus-like faces, as if we are born blind; O Mother! The spirit of your 
asceticism is so very wonderful! We are sinners; therefore by no 
means we can get our sight; therefore we have taken refuge unto 
you all; better give us back our eyesight and preserve our honour. O 
Mother! Blindness is more dreadful than death; therefore do you 
show your mercy on us. Be pleased unto us and restore our 
eyesights and make us your slaves; no sooner we get back our 
sights, we will cease from these vicious acts and go to our homes. In 
future, we will never commit such heinous acts; from today we all 
become servants of the Bhargavas and we will serve them. Forgive 
all our sins that we committed unconsciously; we promise that, in 



future, there will no more be any enmity between the Bhargavas and 
Ksattriyas. O good-looking Ones! You pass your days happily with 
your sons; we ever bow down before you. O Auspicious Ones! Be 
graciously pleased unto us; no more we will cherish any inimical 
feelings towards you.” 


29-44. Vyasa said O King! The Bhargava lady heard their words 
and was thunderstruck and seeing those Ksattriyas bowing down 
before her, blind and distressed, consoled them and said, “O 
Ksattriyas! I have not taken away your sights nor am I displeased in 
any way with you. Now hear what is the real cause. This child of 
Bhargava, born of my thigh, is exceedingly angry towards you and 
has therefore made your eyesight still and to no purpose. For the 
greed of wealth, you have slain the close relatives of this boy, those 
that were quite innocent and virtuous ascetics and you have slain 
their children that were in their mothers’ wombs; this boy has come 
to know all those things. O children! When you were slaying the 
children of the Bhargavas in their mothers’ wombs, I then bore within 
my thighs this child for one hundred years. This son of mine though 
as yet in the womb, has mastered all the Vedas within so very short 
a time for the propagation of the Bhargava clan. Now this Bhargava 
son is infuriated with anger for your slaying his father and is now 
ready to kill you all. My son! Whose divine effulgence has destroyed 
your eyesights, is born of grace of the Highest Goddess, the 
Bhagavati Bhuvanes’vari; therefore do not consider this boy as an 
ordinary being. Now bow down with humility before this my son 
Aurvya (born from the thighs); this son may be pleased by your 
bowing down and may restore you your eyesights. 


Vyasa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the words of the Brahmin lady, 
the Haihayas began to praise the boy with hymns. With great 
humility, they bowed down to the best of the Munis, born of the 
thighs. The Risi Aurvya, then, became pleased and spoke thus to the 



Haihayas who were deprived of their eyesights “Better go back to 
your own homes. O Kings! And read these following words derived 
from my this story. Whatever is inevitable and created by the hands 
of gods must come to pass. Knowing this, no one ought to be 
sorrowful on any such matters. Let you all regain your eyesights as 
before and forego your anger and go to your own homes 
respectively at your own will. Let the Risis, too, get peace and 
happiness as before.” When the Maharsi Aurvya ordered thus, the 
Haihayas got back their eyesights and went at their leisure to their 
own homes; on the other hand the Brahmin lady went to her own 
hermitage, with her Divine-spirited child and began to nourish him. O 
King! Thus I have described to you the story of the killing of the 
Bhargavas and how the Ksattriyas, actuated by greed, did so very 
vicious acts. 


45-48. Janamejaya said “O Ascetic! Hearing this exceedingly 
heart-rending act of the Ksattriyas, I come to know, that greed is the 
sole cause of it and both the parties had suffered so much, simply 
out of this insatiable greed. O King of Munis! I want to ask you one 
more question in regard to this point. How the sons of the Kings 
came to be known Haihayas in this world? Amongst the Ksattriyas, 
some are called Yadavas for they ware descended from the family of 
Yadu; some were known as Bharata, for they were descended from 
Bharata. But was some king named Haihaya born before in their 
family or were they known as such on account of other actions? I 
desire to hear of it. Kindly describe this to me and oblige.” 


49-56. Vyasa said O King! I am describing in detail to you of the 
origin of the Haihayas. Hear. The sins are destroyed and the merits 
accrue on hearing this story. O King! Once on a time Revanta, the 
son of the Sun, very beautiful and of boundless lustre, was going to 
Visnu in Vaikuntha, mounted on the beautiful Uchchais’rava, the 
jewel of the horses. When he was going on horseback with a desire 



to see the God Visnu, the Goddess Laksmi saw that child of the Sun. 
The Goddess Laksmi, born out of the churning of the ocean, on 
looking at the beautiful appearance of her brother Horse, also born 
out of the churning of the ocean, became very much astonished and 
steadily gazed on him. The Bhagavan Visnu, capable to show both 
favour and disfavour, saw the beautiful Revanta, of good figure, 
coming on horseback; and lovingly asked Laksmi “O Beautiful 
One! Who is coming here on horseback, as it were, enchanting to 
the three worlds!” At that time, the Goddess Laksmi was accidentally 
looking intently on the horse; so she did not reply, though repeatedly 
asked by the Bhagavan. 


57-68. The Laksmi Devi, always restless, was very much intent on 
the horse and was enchanted and She was looking steadily with 
great affection on the horse. Seeing this, the Bhagavan became 
angry and said “O Beautiful-eyed One! What you are looking at so 
intently? Are you so much enchanted with the sight of the horse that 
you are not speaking to me a single word, though I am repeatedly 
asking you so often! You lovingly dwell on all the objects; hence your 
name is Rama; your mind is also very restless, therefore you would 
be known as Chanchala Devi (the restless Devi). O Auspicious One! 
You are restless like ordinary women; you can never stay steadily for 
a certain time at any one place. While sitting before Me, you are 
enchanted with the sight of a horse; then you be born as a mare in 
that world of men, full of dreadful troubles, on the surface of the 
earth. The Goddess Laksmi became very much affrightened at the 
sudden curse given by Hari, a matter as it were ordained by the 
Devas, and began to cry aloud, shuddering with pain and sorrows. 
Laksmi Devi, then of sweet smiles, frightened, bowed down with 
great humility to her own lord Narayana and said thus O Deva of 
the Devas! O Govinda! You are the Lord of this world and the Ocean 
of mercy. O Kes’ava! Why have you inflicted on me so dreadful a 
curse for such a minor fault of mine! O Lord! I never saw you before 
so very angry; Alas! Where has now gone that affection, so natural 



and undying, that you showed towards me! O Lord! It is not proper to 
hurl a thunderbolt on one’s own relations; but it is advisable to cast it 
on the enemies. I am always fit for receiving boons from you. Why 
have you made me now an object, fit for curse. O Govinda! I will quit 
this life in Your presence. I will never be able to live, separated from 
You. O Lord! Be graciously pleased and say when shall I be free 
from this dreadful curse and regain Your happy companion? 


69. The Bhagavan said “O Devi! When you will get a son in the 
world like me, you will no doubt come again to be my companion.” 


Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter on the continuance of the family 
of Bhrigu in the Sixth Book in the Mahapuranam, S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 18. On The Origin Of The Haihaya 
Dynasty 


1-5. Janamejaya said How did the Goddess Laksmi, the daughter 
of the ocean, come to be born as a mare, when cursed by the 
Bhagavan in His moment of anger, and what did Revanta do at that 
time? In what country was the Devi born as a mare and how did She 
pass Her time alone like one whose husband had gone abroad. O 
Muni! How long and in what forest unfrequented by persons did she 
pass her time, thus deprived of the companion of her husband and 
what did she do at that time? When was she reconciled with her 
husband Vasudeva? and how did she get a son, when she lived in a 
state of separation from her husband. O best of Aryas! I am very 
curious to hear this excellent story. So describe this in full details to 
me. 


6. Suta said O Risis! Thus questioned by Janamejaya, the 
Dvaipayan Muni began to recite the story in its full details. 


7-24. Vyasa said :-0 King! I will now describe to you the pleasing 
story of the Puranas in a clear distinct language; hear. Revanta, the 
son of the Sun, became terrified to see Vasudeva, the Deva of the 
Devas cursing the Laksmi Devi and, after bowing down to Janardan, 
the Lord of the world, went off. Seeing the anger of Visnu, the Lord 
of the world, he went quickly to his father and informed him of the 
curse delivered by Narayana to the Goddess Laksmi. And the 
Laksmi Devi, the lotus-eyed, thus cursed, got the permission of 
Narayana and with a grieved heart bowed down to him and came 
down to the world of mortals. She took the form of a mare and went 
to the spot where the wife of the Sun (named Chchaya) practised her 
asceticism in ancient times. The place was the confluence of the 



river Kalindi and the Tamasa, and decorated with lovely forests and 
trees situated north of the mountain named Suparnaksa, yielding all 
desires. There she meditated with her whole heart the auspicious 
Mahadeva S’ankara, the Giver of all desires, thus That Mahadeva 
is holding the Tris’ula (the trident) on his arms; His forehead is 
adorned with beautiful cooling semi-Moon; He has five faces, each 
face having three eyes; His throat is coloured blue; He has ten arms; 
His body is white like camphor; He wears a tiger’s skin; His upper 
garment is of elephant’s skin; and snakes are his holy thread; He is 
holding the one-half of the body of Gauri and his neck is adorned 
with garlands of human skulls. The Goddess Laksmi, the daughter of 
the ocean, assuming the form of a mare, thus practised severe 
asceticism in that place of pilgrimage. O King! With a feeling of 
intense dispassion (Vairagyam) towards the worldly things. She 
spent the divine one thousand years in the meditation of Mahadeva, 
the God of the Gods. After that period, the Highest Lord Mahadeva, 
mounting on His bull, came there with His consort Parvati and 
appeared before the Laksmi Devi, perceptible by his eyes. 

Appearing thus with His host of His own persons. He then spoke to 
Laksmi, dear to Hari, now practising ascetism in the form of a mare, 
“O Auspicious One! You are the Mother of this whole Universe and 
your Husband is the Creator of these worlds and is capable to give 
all desires. Why are You, then, practising asceticism, when He is 
present? What is the cause of this? O Devi! Why are You praising 
hymns to me, instead of to Vasudeva S’ri Hari, Who is capable to 
yield enjoyments and final liberation, and Who is the Preserver and 
the Lord of this world. O Devi! Work should be done according to the 
authority of the Vedas; it is stated in the Vedas that the husband is 
the lord of a woman; therefore it is never advisable to fix one’s mind 
entirely on another person. The eternal Dharma of women is to serve 
their husbands; whether the husband be a saint or a sinner, the 
woman, desirous of her welfare, should serve her husband in every 
way. O Daughter of the Ocean! Your husband Narayana is fit to be 
served by all and He is capable to yield all desires. Why are you then 
worshipping Me, and leaving the Lord of the Goloka, the Deva of the 
Devas.” 



25-32. Laksmi said O Deva of the Devas! O Seat of 
Auspiciousness! I know that You are soon pleased with Your servant. 
My husband has cursed me. O Ocean of mercy! Kindly save me 
from this curse. O S’ambhu! When I informed my husband of my 
mental agonies, graciously and mercifully He then pointed out how I 
might be freed of this curse thus “O Kamale! When Your son will 
be born, then You will be freed of this curse and will, no doubt, come 
back and live in this Heaven of Vaikuntha.” Thus spoken, I have 
come in this hermitage to make tapas and to worship Thee, knowing 
that Thou art the Bhagavan, the Lord of Bhavani, the Lord of all and 
the Giver of all desires. O Lord of the Devas! How can I get a son 
without the intercourse of My husband? Though I am guiltless, my 
husband has forsaken me and is living in Vaikuntha. O MahesVara! 
Thou art doing good to all persons; and if Thou art pleased with me, 
then grant me a boon. O Lord! I know full well that there is no 
distinction between Him and Thee. O Lord of Girija! This truth I have 
come to learn from my husband. O Hara! You are the same thing 
that He is and what is He is the same as You; there is not the least 
doubt in this. O Thou, full of auspiciousness! Recognising the 
Sameness without any distinction between Him and Thee, I am 
meditating on Thee. Had it been otherwise, then I would certainly 
have been guilty when I take Thy refuge and meditate on Thee. 


33-36. S’ankara said “O Devi, the daughter of the Ocean! Tell truly 
before me how you have been able to realise the identity between 
Him and Me. The Devas, Munis and the Maharsis, versed in the 
Vedas, get their understandings baffled by wrong argumentations 
and never realise the identity without any difference between us. 
Almost everywhere you will perceive that many of my devotees 
blame me. Specially in this Kali Yuga due to the influence of Time, 
this happens to a very great extent in many cases. O Auspicious 
One! Let that go! How have you come to know this matter, which is 



difficult even for the liberal-minded persons to comprehend. Know 
that this perception of the identity between me and Hari is very rare.” 


37-38. Vyasa said O King! When Mahadeva asked thus with great 
pleasure, the Devi Kamala, the darling of Hari, gladly replied the 
essence of the matter to Mahadeva. 


39-43. Laksmi said “O Deva of the Devas! One day Bhagavan 
Visnu, seated in the Padmasana posture, was immersed in deep 
meditation. I was very much astonished at this. When His meditation 
was over and when He was in a pleasant mood, I asked Him with 
great humility, O Deva of the Devas! I know that You are the Lord of 
the world and Master of this whole Universe; when Brahma and the 
other Devas were united and churned the great ocean, I came out of 
the waters and looked all around to know who is the superior one 
whom I can select as my husband and then, thinking You as the 
superior to all the Devas, I accepted You as my husband. Now 
whose meditation You are doing again? A great doubt has thus 
occurred in my mind. O Lord! You are my most Beloved; now 
disclose to me your innermost desire and thought.” 


44-49. Visnu said :-- “O Beloved! Hear now, whom I am meditating. I 
am meditating in the lotus of My heart that Mahadeva MahesVara, 
the Highest of all the Devas. Mahadeva, the Deva of the Devas, of 
indomitable prowess, sometimes meditates on Me and sometimes I 
meditate on the Lord of the Deva, S’ankara, the Destroyer of Tripura 
I am dear to S’iva as his life is dear to him and S’ankara is similarly 
dear to me. The hearts of us both are attached to each other in the 
most secret way possible; therefore there is not the least difference 
betwixt us both. O large-eyed One! Those men who being my 
devotees hate S’ankara, certainly go to hell. I speak this very truly 
unto you.” O Mahes’vara! When I asked him this question when he 



was all alone, that Deva of the Devas, the Highest Visnu thus said to 
me. Therefore I am meditating on You, knowing that You are His 
beloved. O Mahes’a! Now find out means by which I can mix with My 
husband. 


50-59. Vyasa said O King! Mahadeva, skilled in speech, hearing 
thus the words of Laksmi, consoled Her with sweet words and said 
- “O Beautiful! Be peaceful; I am pleased with Your tapasya; soon 
You will come in contact with Your husband. There is not the least 
doubt in this. When I will send the Bhagavan, the Lord of the world. 
He will come before you in the shape of a horse, to satisfy your 
desires. I will send the Madhusudana, the Deva of the Devas, in 
such a manner, as he will come in the form of a horse, passionately 
attached to you. O One of good eye brows! Thus you will get a son 
equivalent to Narayana; and the son will be the King on this earth 
and will be undoubtedly worshipped by all. O fortunate One! After 
you get your son, you will go to Vaikuntha with Narayana and will 
reside there as His Beloved. Your son will be famed by the name of 
Ekavira; and from him will propagate the Haihaya dynasty on the 
earth. O Kamale! You were blind by prosperity, and, becoming 
passionate, you forgot the Devi ParamesVari, residing in your heart. 
Therefore you have experienced such a result. Therefore, to expiate 
that sin, take Her refuge by all means. O Devi! If your heart 
remained attached to the Highest Devi the blissful Bhagavati, your 
heart would never have got attached to the Uchchais’rava horse. 
Vyasa said O King! Thus granting boons to Laksmi Devi, He with 
his consort Lima vanished away in her presence. 


60-62. Kamala Devi, lovely in all respects, whose toe nails are 
always rubbed by the gems on the coronets of the Devas, began to 
meditate on the lotus-feet of Ambika and in expectation of his 
beloved Hah, in the shape of a horse, praised and chanted hymns 



frequently to the Highest Goddess, in words choked with feelings of 
intense love. 


Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the origin of 
the Haihaya Dynasty in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 19. On The Origin Of Haihayas From A 
Mare 


1-3. Vyasa said O King! Thus granting the boon to the Goddess 
Laksmi, S’ambhu quickly returned to the lovely Kailas’a, adorned 
with Apsaras (celestial nymphs) and frequented and served by the 
Gods. He then despatched his expert attendant Chitrarupa to 
Vaikuntha to bring the purpose of Laksmi to a successful issue. He 
said to him thus “O Chitrarupa! Go to Hah and speak to him on 
my behalf that He would go and remove the sorrows of His 
distressed and bereaved wife and thus make Her comfortable.” 


4-9. Thus ordered, Chitrarupa started immediately and reached at 
once Vaikuntha, the highest place, covered all over by the 
Vaisnavas. The place was diversified with lots of various trees, with 
hundreds of lovely lakes, and echoed with sweet lovely sounds of 
swans, Karandavas, peacocks, parrots, cuckoos and various other 
birds and adorned with beautiful places, decked with flags and 
banners. It was filled with charming dancings, music and other 
artistic things. There were the lovely Bakula, As’oka, Tilaka, 
Champaka and other trees; and the beautiful tree Mandara looked 
beautiful and shed all around the sweet fragrance of its sweet 
flowers for a long distance. Thus seeing the lovely nice palace of 
Visnu and the two doorkeepers Jaya and Vijaya standing with canes 
in their hands, Chitraratha bowed down to them and said Well! 
You go quickly and inform the Supreme Soul Hah that a messenger 
has come under the orders of the Bhagavan S’ulapani and is now 
waiting at His doors. 


10-18. Hearing his words, the intelligent Jaya went to Hah and, with 
folded hands, said “O Thou Ocean of Mercy! O Kes’ava! O Lord of 



Rama! O Deva of the Devas! A messenger has come from the Lord 
of Bhavani and is waiting at the doors. I do not not know on what 
important business he has come. Please order whether I will bring 
him before You or not. On hearing the Jaya’s words, Hari, aware of 
the inner feelings, knew at once the cause and said O Jaya! Bring 
before me the messenger come from Rudra. Thus hearing, Jaya 
called the S’iva’s servant, of a graceful form, and brought him to the 
presence of Janardana. Chitrarupa, of variegated appearance, 
prostrated himself flat before Him in the form of a stick and stood up 
and remained with folded hands. The Bhagavan Narayana, Whose 
carrier is Garuda, saw that servant of S’iva, of variegated 
appearance and full of all humility, and became very much 
astonished. The Lord of Kamala then smiled and asked Chitrarupa 
- “O Pure One! Is it all well with Mahadeva, the Lord of the Devas 
and his other families and attendants? On what business has He 
sent you here? What does He want me to do? Or tell me if I have to 
do any other business of the gods.” 


19-34. The messenger said “O Thou, the Knower of all that is 
within one’s heart! There is nothing in this world hidden from Your 
knowledge; when is that which I will say unknown to you! O Thou, 
the Knower of present, past and future! I am now saying to you what 
S’ambhu has told me to inform You. He has said O Lord! The 
Goddess Laksmi is Your dear consort. She, the daughter of the 
Ocean, and the Bestower of all success, though an object fit to be 
meditated by Yaksas, Kinnaras, Naras and Immortals, is now 
undergoing severe penance at the confluence of Kalindi (the Jumna, 
the daughter of Kalinda) and the Tamasa. What is there in the three 
worlds that can be happy without that Mother of the worlds and the 
Giver of all desires? O Lotus-eyed One! What pleasure do You feel 
in abandoning Her? O All-pervading One! Even he who has no 
riches or who is very weak maintains his wife; then why have You, 
being the Lord of the worlds, forsaken your wife, without any offence. 
Who is worshipped by the whole universe. O Lord of the world! What 



advice shall I give to You? He whose wife suffers in the world, is 
blamed by his enemies. O Omnipresent One! Fie on his such a life! 

O Lord of the worlds! Your enemies’ desires are satisfied when they 
see Her very miserable. They are laughing and mocking and saying 
O Devi, Kes’ava has now forsaken you; you can spend happily 
your time with us now. Therefore, O Lord of the Devas! Bring that 
Lady back unto your palace and place Her unto your lap. Who is of 
good demeanour, beautiful, par excellence and endowed with all 
auspicious signs. O Deva! Accept, please, your sweet-smiling wife 
and be happy. Though I am at present not in bereavement of my 
dear wife, yet when I remember my former state of bereavement, I 
feel very much trouble. O Lotus-eyed One! When Sati Devi, my 
beloved Wife, quitted Her life, in Daksa’s house, I felt unbearable 
pain, O Kes’ava! Let no other body in this world suffer such pain, I 
now remember only the suffering and mental agonies that I felt on 
Her bereavement; I do not give it out to others. After a long time, 
practising severe Tapasya (asceticism) I got Her back in the form of 
Girija, who felt herself burnt up as it were by the anger She felt on 
account of censure cast on Me in the Daksa’s house and thus 
quitted Her life. O Murari! What happiness you have felt in forsaking 
your dear wife and in remaining thus alone for one thousand years. 
Console your fortunate young wife with good teeth and bring her 
back to your place. O Bhagavan! Lastly, the Lord Bhavani, the 
Originatrix of these worlds, told me to speak thus to you O 
Destroyer of Kamsa! Let nobody remain even, for a moment, without 
Laksmi, the Highest Goddess. O Long-lived One! You better assume 
the form of a horse and go and worship her. Then have a child of 
yours in the womb of your sweet-smiling wife and bring her back to 
your house.” 


35-42. Vyasa said O Ornament of Bharata’s race! Hearing thus 
the words of Chitrarupa, Bhagavan Hari told that he would do what 
S’ankara had told him to do and thus sent the messenger back to 
S’ankara. The messenger departing, Hari assumed the form of a 



beautiful horse and immediately left Vaikuntha with a passionate 
intent for the place where Laksmi was staying in the form of a mare 
and practising her austerities. Coming there, he saw that the Devi 
Bimala was staying in the form of a mare. The mare, too, seeing the 
horse form of her husband Govinda, recognised him and, chaste as 
she was, remained there with astonishment and tears in her eyes. 
Then those two copulated on the famous confluence. The wife of 
Hah, in the shape of a mare, became pregnant and, in due time, 
gave birth to a beautiful well qualified child. The Bhagavan then 
graciously smiled on her and spoke in words suited to the time, “O 
Dear! Now quit this mare form and assume your former appearance. 
O Lovely-eyed One! Let both of us assume our own forms and go to 
Vaikuntha; and let your child remain in this place.” 


43-48. Laksmi said “O Lord! How can I go leaving here this child, 
born of my womb. It is very difficult to quit the attachments for one’s 
own child. Know this, O Lord! O High-souled One! This child is 
young and of small body; therefore it is quite incapable to protect 
itself. If I forsake it on the bank of this river, it will be an orphan, what 
will happen to it then? O Lotus-eyed One! My mind is now in full 
attachment towards it. How can I quit this helpless child and go?” 
When Laksmi and Narayana resumed their divine bodies and 
mounted on the excellent Vimanas, the Devas began to praise them 
with hymns. When Narayana expressed his desire to go, Kamala 
said “O Lord! You better take this child; I am unable to forsake it. 
O Lord! O Slayer of Madhu! This child is dearer to me than my life; 
see its body resembles exactly like you. Therefore we would take 
this child with us to Vaikuntha.” 


49-54. Hari spoke “O Dear! You need not be sorry; let this child 
remain here happily; I have arranged for its preservation and safety. 
O Beautiful One! There is a great act to do in this world. That will be 
executed by your child. For this reason I am leaving it here. I am now 



describing to you the above story. The famous King Yayati had a son 
named Turvasu; his father kept his name as Hah Varma; he is known 
by this name. That king is now practising asceticism for getting a son 
for one hundred years in a place of pilgrimage. O Laksmi! I have 
begot this son for him. I will go there and send the King here. O 
Beautiful-faced One! I will give this son to that King, desirous of an 
issue. He will take this son and go back to his house.” 


55. Vyasa said O King! Thus consoling his beloved, whose abode 
is in the Lotus and placing the child there in that position. He 
mounted on an excellent car with Laksmi and went to Vaikuntha. 


Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the origin of 
Haihayas from a mare in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 20. On The Son Born Of Mare By Hari 


1-2. Janamejaya said “O Bhagavan! A great doubt has arisen in 
my mind on this subject. Who was it that took away that son, when 
both Laksmi and Narayana left it, in that forlorn state, in a forest 
without any person there to look after?” 


3-11. Vyasa said O King! No sooner Laksmi and Narayana 
departed from that place, one Vidyadhara, named Champaka, 
mounting on a beautiful celestial car came there at his free will, 
sporting with a woman named Madanalasa. There they saw that one 
lovely child, exquisitely beautiful like a Deva’s son, was playing alone 
as it liked. They then, quickly descended from their chariot and 
picked it up. Vidyadhara became very glad as a beggar becomes 
glad, when he gets a hoard of jewels. On taking that newly born 
beautiful child like a Cupid, Champaka gave it to the Devi 
Madanalasa. Madanalasa took it and became very much astonished; 
and her hairs stood at their ends. She clasped it to her bosom and 
kissed it frequently. O Bharata! Taking that child on her lap as if her 
own child, Madanalasa embraced it and kissed it and got the highest 
happiness. Then both of them took that child and mounted on the 
car. The lean Madanalasa then laughingly queried “O Lord! 

Whose child is this? Who has left it in this forest? It seems to me 
Maha Deva, desirous to give me a son, has given it unto me.” 


12-18. Champaka said I will just now go and ask the all-knowing 
Indra whose child is this, whether it is of a Deva, Danava or 
Gandharva. If he orders, I will purify this child found thus in this 
forest by the Veda Mantrams and then accept it as my own. It is not 
advisable to do a thing suddenly without knowing all the details. 
Thus saying to his wife Madanalasa, Champaka went with a 
gladdened heart hurriedly to the city of Indra with that child in his 



arms. Champaka gladly bowed down at the feet of Indra and gave 
him all the information he knew about the child and stood at one side 
with folded hands and spoke, “O Lord of the Devas! I have got this 
child, beautiful as Cupid, in the sacred place of pilgrimage at the 
confluence of the Jumna and the Tamasa. O Lord of S’achi! Whose 
child is this? and why did they forsake it there? If you kindly permit, I 
will take this child as my own son. This child is very beautiful and 
liked very much by my wife; it is also the rule laid down in the 
S’astras that one can accept any child as the Kritrima son. Therefore 
it is my earnest desire that I purify this child by the Veda Mantrams 
and take it legally as my own son.” 


19-24. Indra said O Highly Fortunate One! Bhagavan Vasudeva, 
assuming the form of a horse, has produced this child out of the 
womb of Kamala in the form of a mare. He intends to give over the 
child, capable to destroy enemies to Turvasu, the son of Yayati, and 
thus will get a great purpose achieved by the child. That King, very 
religious, will be sent by Hah today and he will come for the child in 
that beautiful sacred place of pilgrimage. You better go back as early 
as possible and keep the child there as it was before till that king 
comes to that spot at the instance of the Devadeva Visnu. Do not 
waste a minute more. The King will be very sorry if he does not find 
the child there. Therefore O Champaka! Quit the attachment that you 
have for this child. You should know that this child will be famous in 
this earth as Ekavira (only one hero). 


25-30. Vyasa said O King! Thus hearing the Indra’s words, 
Champaka took the child and went back immediately to the spot 
whence he picked it up and keeping the child there as it laid, 
mounted on his car and went to his abode. At that instant, the 
husband of Laksmi, the Lord of the three worlds, went to the King, 
mounted on His car, beaming with effulgent rays. When the 
Bhagavan was descending from His aerial car, the King Turvasu was 



very glad to see Him and bowed down and laid himself prostrate on 
the ground. The Bhagavan, then, comforted the King, his own 
devotee, and said, “Get up, my child! Do away with your mental 
distress.” The King also eagerly and full of devotion, began to utter 
verses in praise of the Bhagavan. O Lord of Rama! You are the 
presiding Deity of the Devas; Lord of the whole worlds. Ocean of 
Mercy and Giver of advice to all men. O Lord! Your sight is very rare 
even to the Yogis; being myself of a very slow dull intellect; I have 
been fortunate enough to see you. O Lord! This shews Your mercy. 


31-54. Vyasa said O Bhagavan! O Infinite One! Those who are 
free from any desires and free from any attachment to worldly things, 
they alone are entitled to see Thee. O Deva of the Devas! I am 
bound in thousand and one desires. I am quite unfit to see Thee. 
There is no doubt in this. When Turvasu, the best of the kings, 
praised thus, Bhagavan Visnu became pleased and began to speak 
in the following pleasant words “O King! I am pleased with your 
asceticism; now ask your desired boon; I will grant it immediately.” 
The King bowed down again to the feet of Visnu and said “O 
Murari! For the sake of a son, I have practised this tapasya; grant me 
a son like my Self.” Narayana, the First-born of the Devas, hearing 
this King’s request spoke to him in infallible words “O son of 
Yayati! Go to the confluence of the Yamuna and Tamasa. For you I 
have kept there today a son as you like and of indomitable prowess. 
O King! That child is begotten by me in the womb of Laksmi.” The 
King became very glad to hear the sweet pure words of the 
Bhagavan. Thus granting him the boon, Visnu went with Rama to 
Vaikuntha. The King Turvasu, the son of Yayati, hearing these 
words, became exceedingly gladdened in his heart and mounting on 
a chariot, whose speed cannot be checked, went to the spot where 
lay the child. The king, of extraordinary genius, went there and saw 
that the exceedingly beautiful child, catching hold of his toe by one of 
his soft hands was sucking it by his mouth and was playing on the 
ground. The child was born of Narayana out of the womb of Kamala. 



Therefore it resembled like Him. On looking at that beautiful lovely 
child, the famous King Harivarma’s face got cheered up with the 
intensest delight. The King took it up with both of his hands and got 
merged in the Ocean of Bliss and taking gladly the scent of its head 
embraced it happily. On looking at the beautiful lotus-face of the 
child, the King, choked with tears from his eyes and with feelings of 
joy said “O Child! Narayana has given me, the child jewel in you; 
so save me from the terrors of the hell named Put. O Child! For full 
one hundred years I have practised a very hard tapasya for the sake 
of you. Pleased with that, the Lord of Kamala has given you to me 
for the happiness of my worldly career. Your Mother Rama Devi has 
forsaken Her own child for the sake of me and has gone away with 
Hah. O Child! That Mother is blessed whose face beams with joy by 
seeing the smiles in your lotus-face. O Delighter of my heart! The 
Lord of Rama, the Deva of the Devas, has made you, as it were, to 
serve as a boat for me for crossing to the other side of this Ocean of 
World.” Thus saying, the King took the child and gladly went home. 
Knowing that the King had come very close to his city, the King’s 
Minister and the city people, the subjects came forward with the 
priest and many other presents and offerings. The bards, singers 
and Sutas came in front of the King. The King as he entered into his 
city looked affectionately on his subjects and gladdened their spirits 
by enquiries of welfare. Then worshipped by the citizens, the King 
entered into the city with his child. As the King went along the royal 
road, the subjects showered on his head the flowers and fried rice. 
Then taking the child by his two arms, the King entered into his 
prosperous palace with his ministers. 


The king next handed over the newly-born lovely child, as beautiful 
as Cupid, to the hands of his queen. The good queen took the child 
and asked the king “O King! Whence have you got this new born 
child as fascinating as the God of Love? Who has given this child to 
you? O Lord! Speak quickly. This child has stolen away my mind.” 
The King gladly replied :-- “O Beloved! The Lord of Kamala, the 



Ocean of Mercy has given me this child; O Quick-eyed One! This 
child is born of Narayana’s part and out of the womb of Kamala. O 
Devi! This child has strength, energy, patience, gravity and all other 
good qualities.” Then the queen took the child in her arms and got 
the unbounded bliss. Great festivities began to be performed in the 
palace of the King Turvasu. Charities were given to those that 
wanted; music and singing of various sorts were performed. In this 
ceremony for the sake of his child, the king Turvasu put the name of 
the child as “Ekavira.” Getting thus the child equivalent in form and 
qualities to Hah, the powerful Indra-like king became happy and 
freed from his debt due to his family line, became very cheerful and 
glad. O King! The king, powerful like his enemies, began to enjoy in 
his own palace with his all-qualified child, that was given to him by 
Narayana, the Lord of all the Devas. He was always served by his 
dear wife and all sorts of pleasures and he felt himself enjoying as a 
King would do. 


Here ends the Twentieth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the son born 
of mare by Hari, in the Mahapuranam in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 21. On The Installation Of EkavIra And 
The Birth Of EKAVALi 


1-10. Vyasa said O King! In the meanwhile the King Turvasu 
performed the Jatakarma (a religious ceremony performed at the 
birth of a child) and other ceremonies of the child. The boy was 
nurtured duly and began to grow older day by day. The King began 
to enjoy his worldly life on getting this son and thought within himself 
that the boy had freed him from the three debts due to the Fathers, 
the Risis and the Devas. Next, in the sixth month, the King 
performed the Annaprasana ceremony (putting the boiled rice in the 
mouth of the child) and in the third year performed regularly his 
Chuda Karana (the ceremony of the first tonsure) ceremony. He 
distributed on those occasions various articles, wealth and cows to 
the Brahmanas and other articles to various other mendicants and 
made them glad. In the eleventh year, he performed the boy’s holy 
thread (Upanayana) ceremony and tying the girdle made of a triple 
string of Munja grass and put the boy to learn archery. Next when 
the boy passed off proficiently in the study of the Vedas and in 
learning the kingly duties, the King desired to install him on the 
throne. The King Turvasu then collected with great care all the 
necessary articles for installation in an auspicious day, the 
combination of Pusya asterism and Arka Yoga. He called then the 
Brahmins, well versed in the Vedas and in the S’astras, and became 
ready, in accordance with due rites, to perform the installation 
ceremony of the prince. Waters were brought from various sacred 
places of pilgrimage and from the several oceans and on an 
auspicious day the King performed himself the installation of his son. 
When the ceremony was over the King gave away hoards of wealth 
to the Brahmins and giving the charge of his kingdom to his son, he 
went to the forest with a desire to ascend to the Heavens. 



11-22. Thus placing Ekavira on the throne, the King Turvasu shewed 
respects to his ministers, and, controlling his senses went to the 
forest accompanied by his wife. On the top of the Mainaka mountain 
he took up the vow of Vanaprastha and sustaining his life on leaves 
and fruits began to meditate Parvati. Thus when his Prarabdha 
Karma ended, he left his mortal coil with his wife and went by virtue 
of his good deeds to the Indraloka. Hearing that the King had 
ascended to Heavens, his son Ekavira Haihaya performed his 
funeral ceremonies according to the rules laid down by the Vedas. 
The King’s son, the intelligent Haihaya, performed, one after another, 
all the ceremonies due and began to govern the kingdom which was 
free from enemies. The virtuous King Ekavira remained duly 
obedient to his ministers after he got possession of his kingdom and 
began to enjoy all the best things. The powerful King one day went 
on horseback to the banks of the Ganges with the minister’s son. 
Roaming about, he found there the boughs of trees had assumed a 
very graceful appearance, with loads of fruits, echoed with the sweet 
voice of the cuckoos and with the humming of the bees. Close by 
were the hermitages of the Munis, where the bucks were skipping 
about and at other places the Vedas were being chanted. The smoke 
was seen rising from the altars, where oblations were being offered 
and appeared to form like a black canopy in the Heavens. Full ripe 
grains were enhancing the beauty of the fields and the 
cowherdesses were merrily watching the fields. Places of recreations 
adorned with full blown lotuses and beautiful groves were attracting 
the attention of the visitors. The various trees, Piyala, Champaka, 
Panasa, Bakula, Tilaka, Kadamba and Mandara, and others were 
adorned with fruits, stealing away the minds of the people. At other 
places, other trees Sal, Tamala, Jack, Mango, Kali Kadamba, etc., 
stood gracefully. Next when the King went to the Ganges water, he 
saw the gay beautiful full blown lotuses were spreading their fragrant 
scents all around. 



23-31. On the right side of these lotuses, he saw a lotus-eyed girl. 
She was shining like the gold, her beautiful hairs were long and 
curling; her throat was like a Kambu, belly thin, lips like the Bimba 
fruits, several other limbs well built and graceful, breasts risen a little, 
nose beautiful and all her body was exquisitely lovely; that lady just 
blooming into youth was suffering bereavements from her comrades 
and was very distressed and seemed bewildered. She was crying 
like an ewe in a dense lonely forest. Seeing her, the King asked her 
what was the reason of her sorrows? O Cuckoo-voiced One! You are 
as yet a girl; who has left you alone in this state? O Sweet One! Tell 
me where is your husband now or where is your father? O One 
looking askance! What is your trouble; explain it to me. O thin-bellied 
One! I will, no doubt, remove all your sorrows and troubles. O fair- 
limbed One! In my dominion nobody ever gives trouble to any other 
body. O lovely One! There is no fear in my kingdom from thieves or 
Raksasas; or any fear from any serious dangerous calamities on this 
earth, fear from lions, tigers or any other dangers while my sway is 
predominant. 


32-41. O One of beautiful thighs! Why are you crying on this lonely 
bank of the Ganges? Tell me what is your pain? O Pure One! I can 
remove the pains and miseries, even of a serious nature, of men, 
whether they come from the Deva or human sources; and this is my 
principal vow. O Large-eyed One! Speak what is your inmost desire; 

I will carry it out instantaneously. When the king thus spoke, that 
beautiful woman spoke in gentle words :-- O King! Hear the cause of 
my sorrows. O King! Why will the people cry, to no purpose, unless 
calamities come before them? O Mighty-armed One! I now tell you 
why I am weeping. O King! There was a very religious King named 
Rabhya in another province that is not yours. At first he had no 
issue. He had a very beautiful wife named Rukmarekha. She was 
clever, chaste and endowed with all auspicious qualities. But 
issueless as she was, she remained very sorry and, in a remorseful 
tone, she spoke to her husband Raibbya O Lord! I am barren; I 



have no sons; I am therefore a very unhappy creature. My life is in 
vain; what use is there in my living? When the queen thus spoke 
very distressedly, the king called the Brahmanas, versed in the 
Vedas, and began to perform an excellent sacrificial ceremony, in 
due accordance with the Vedic rules. With a desire to get a son, he 
made many presents in profuse quantities. When copious quantities 
of ghee were offered as oblations, there arose, from the fire, a girl 
beautiful in all respects and endowed with all auspicious signs. 


42-53. Her teeth were very nice, eyebrows very lovely, face 
enchanting like a Full Moon, the lustre of the body lovely and of a 
golden colour; her hairs were fine and curling; her lips like the Bimba 
flowers; her hands and face were of a red colour; her eyes were red 
like lotus and her limbs were soft and gentle. When the girl arose 
from the fire, the priest (Hota) took that lean and thin lady of a nice 
waist by her arms and presented her to the King and said O King! 
Accept this daughter, endowed with all auspicious signs. When 
Homa was being performed, the daughter came up like the garland 
Ekavali; therefore this girl became famous in this world by the name 
EkavalT. O Ruler of the earth! Take this girl, resembling a son and be 
happy. 


O King! Visnu, the Deva of the Devas, has given you this Jewel, this 
daughter; so be contented. Hearing thus the words of the priest, the 
King saw this good-looking girl and with gladdened heart took the 
beautiful daughter from his hands. Thus with that lovely daughter he 
went to his wife Rukmarekha and said O Beautiful One! Take this 
daughter. The queen Rukmarekha felt the pleasure of having a son 
when she got in her arms that lotus eyed beautiful daughter. The 
King next performed the natal and other ceremonies of the daughter 
and did all other acts as if she had been a son to him duly in 
accordance with the rules. The King performed his own sacrificial 
ceremonies and gave away lots of Daksinas to the Brahmins and 



dismissed them and became very glad. That beautiful girl was 
nursed and cared after like a son and she grew older day by day. 
The Queen Rukmarekha was very gladdened to get her. On that 
very day the birthday festival was performed as on the occasion of 
the birth of a son. And that daughter grew older, very affectionate 
and dear to all. 


54-61. O Lovely One! You are a king and intelligent too; I will 
describe to you all the details; Hear. I am the daughter of the minister 
to that King. My name is Yas’ovati. That daughter and I look alike 
and of the same age. Therefore the king has made me her comrade. 

I spend my time day and night always with her as her constant dear 
companion. Ekavali likes very much to remain and sport wherever 
she finds sweet-scented lotuses; at other places she does not find 
happiness. At the distant banks of the Ganges many lotuses grow; 
therefore Ekavali goes there with great pleasure to that place with 
me and her other fellow mates. One day I told the King that Ekavali 
used to go daily to a distant solitary forest to see the lotus-lake. Then 
the King addressed her not to go and he got a lake built within the 
compounds of his palace and planted many lotus seeds therein. 
Gradually the lotuses began to blossom and the bees came there to 
drink honey. Still she used to go outside in search of lotuses. Then 
the King sent armed guards to accompany her. Thus that thin-bodied 
daughter of the King used to go daily to the banks of the Ganges for 
play, guarded by armed soldiers, accompanied by myself and other 
companions. Again when the sporting was over, she used to return 
to the palace. 


Here ends the Twenty-First Chapter on the Sixth Book on the 
installation of Ekavira and the birth of Ekavali in the Mahapuranam 
S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 22. On The Narration To Haihaya The 
Stealing Away Of EKAVALi 


1-10. Yas’ovati spoke O King! One day Ekavali got up early in the 
morning and went to the banks of the Ganges, accompanied by her 
companions; they began to fan her with a chowrie. The armed 
guards accompanied her. Slowly she went where there were the 
lotuses in order to sport with them. I, too, went with her playing with 
the lotuses to the banks of the Ganges and both of us began to play 
with lotuses with the Apsaras. When both of us were deeply 
engaged in the play, then one powerful Danava, named Kalaketu, 
came up there suddenly with many Raksasas armed with parighas, 
swords, clubs, bows, arrows and tomaras and many other weapons. 
Ekavali was playing with the best lotuses when Kalaketu saw her in 
that state, blooming with beauty and youth as if like Rati, the 
Goddess of Love. O King! I then spoke to Ekavali “Look! Who is 
this Daitya that has come here unexpectedly; O Lotus-eyed One! Let 
us go into the central part of our armed guards.” O King! My 
companion and myself consulting thus, went out of fear immediately 
into the centre of the armed guards. Kalaketu was seized with the 
arrows of Cupid, and no sooner he looked at that beautiful young 
lady than he, with a very big club in his hand, hurriedly came to us, 
drove away the guards, and took away my lotus eyed companion, of 
thin waist. Then the young lady, helpless, began to tremble and cried 
aloud. 


11-22. Seeing this, I spoke to the Danava Leave her and take me. 
The passionate Danava did not take me but he went away, taking my 
companion. The guards exclaimed “Wait, wait; don’t fly away with 
the girl; we are giving you a good lesson.” Thus saying, they made 
the powerful Danavas stop and both the parties engaged in a very 
terrible conflict, astounding to all. The followers of the Danavas, 
more cruel and all fully armed began at once to fight with great 



enthusiasm for their Master’s cause. Kalaketu himself began to fight 
afterwards terribly and killed the guards. He, then, with his followers, 
carried away my companion towards his own city. I, too, followed my 
companion, when I saw her thus carried away by the Danava and 
crying out of fear. I also walked crying aloud by those tracks as 
would enable my Sakhi to see me. She, too, seeing me, became 
somewhat consoled. Crying out repeatedly I approached her. She 
was already very distressed and when she saw me, she clasped me 
closely around my neck, perspiring and stunned and, becoming 
more distressed, cried aloud. Kalaketu then showed his liking for me 
and told that my quick-eyed companion was very afraid and that I 
might comfort her. He told me thus “O Dear! My city is like the 
Deva’s abodes; you will soon be able to go there. From today I 
become your slave, bound by love. Do not cry thus distressedly; be 
comforted.” In these words he told me to comfort my dear 
companion. Thus speaking, that villain made both of us mount on the 
beautiful chariot and making us sit by his sides went gladly and 
quickly to his own beautiful palace, followed by his army. 


23-30. That Demon placed both of us in a beautiful house white 
washed and mirror-like and kept hundreds and thousands of 
Raksasas to watch and protect us. On the second day he called me 
in private “Your companion is very much distressed on the 
bereavement from her father and mother and is lamenting; make her 
understand and console her.” He told me to speak the following 
words to my companion “O One of beautiful hips! Be my wife and 
enjoy as you like. O One with a face beautiful like the Moon! This 
kingdom is yours; ever I am your obedient slave.” Hearing his 
unbearable harsh words I said “O Lord! I will not be able to speak 
her these words, disagreeable to her. You better speak this yourself.” 
When I spoke thus, that wicked Danava struck by the arrows of 
Cupid began to speak gently to my dear companion of thin belly, 
thus “O Dear One! Today you have successfully cast on me the 
Vasikarana Mantra (one of the Tantrik processes by which a lover is 



made to come under subjection); O Beloved! Therefore it is that my 
heart is stolen and so much brought under your subjection; this has 
converted me into a veritable slave of yours; then know this as 
certain that I am your slave; O Sweet One! 


I am very much troubled by the Cupid’s arrows and I am semi¬ 
unconscious; therefore O Lean-bellied One! Worship me. O One of 
beautiful thighs! This youth is a very rare and transient thing; O 
Auspicious One! Now embrace me as your husband and make your 
youth a veritable success.” 


31-36. Ekavali said “O Fortunate One! My father wanted to hand 
me over to a prince named Haihaya; I also mentally adopted him as 
my husband. You are certainly aware of the S’astras; how can I now 
abandon the eternal religion and the virtue of a woman and take up 
another husband. The girl must accept him to whom the father 
betrothes. The girl is under every circumstances dependent. Never 
do they get any independence.” Though Ekavali said thus, the 
vicious Daitya struck by Cupid’s arrows, did not desist and did not 
leave me and that larged-eyed companion. His city lies in Patala and 
is a very dangerous place; always it is guarded by Raksasas and 
surrounded by a moat; inside is built a beautiful and strong fort. Now 
my dear companion, the queen of my heart, is staying there with a 
grievous heart and I am here wandering hither and thither very much 
troubled on account of her bereavements. 


37-46. Ekavira said “O Beautiful-faced One! How have you been 
able to get away from the city of that wicked demon and how have 
you been able to come here? I am perfectly at my wit’s end. Say 
quickly all these. O Proud One! I doubt your words; the father of your 
dear companion resolved to give his daughter to Haihaya in 
marriage; now I am that Haihaya. I am the King by that name, on this 



earth; there is no other King by the name of Haihaya. Is it that your 
dear companion is meant for me? O Bhamini (passionate woman)! 
Remove my doubts; I will kill that villain Raksasa and bring just now 
your dear companion; there is no doubt in this. O One of good vows! 
Shew me that place, if it be known to you. Has anybody informed her 
father that She is suffering from so many troubles? Has her father 
come to know that her daughter has been stolen and carried away? 
And has he made any effort to rescue her from the hands of that 
villain Raksasa? Is it that the King is calm and quiet, knowing that his 
daughter has been kept in prison? Or is it that he is unable to free 
her from bondage? Say quickly all these things before me. O Lotus¬ 
eyed One! You have captivated my mind by describing the 
extraordinary qualities of your dear companion and have made me 
passionate too. Alas! When will it be that I will free my beautiful 
beloved from the greatest perilous situation and shall see her face 
and her eyes, beaming with joy. O Sweet-speaking One! Say, by 
what means I can go to that impassable city. How have you been 
able to come from there?” 


47-63. Yas’ovati said O King! In my early age I got the Mantram of 
the Devi Bhagavati with its seed Mantram (mystic syllable involving 
in it the power connoted by the Devi) and how to meditate it. While I 
was in the Danava’s place I thought out that at that juncture I would 
worship the powerful Chandika who gives instantaneously one’s own 
desires. If I worship that S’akti, That fructifies all desires. That is all 
mercy to Her Bhaktas, certainly She will free my dear companion 
from this her bondage. Though She is really without form, yet She, 
without anybody’s help, by Her own force. She is creating, 
preserving, and at the end of the Kalpa, destroying this Universe. 

Oh! She is very wonderful indeed! Thus thinking I began to meditate 
that auspicious red-robed and red-eyed Devi, the Lady of the 
Universe, and recollected mentally Her form and repeated silently 
Her Vija Mantram. When I meditated thus for merely one month, 
Chandika Devi became, through my devotion, manifest to me in my 



dreams and began to speak in sweet nectar-like words “You are 
now asleep; go quickly to the beautiful banks of the Ganges. The 
enemy destroyer, the powerful Ekavira, the greatest of all the kings, 
will come there. Dattatreya, the Great Lord of the Munis, has given 
him my Mantra named Mahavidya; the King also constantly worships 
me devotedly with that. His mind is constantly attached to Me and he 
constantly worships Me. What more to say than this fact that the 
king, extremely devoted to Me, meditates on Me as the internal 
controller of all beings. That intelligent son of Laksmi will come for 
sport to the banks of the Ganges and will remove all your sorrows. 
That king Ekavira, versed in all the S’astras will kill the Raksasas in 
a dreadful battle and will rescue EkavalT. So now you pay heed to my 
word.” Lastly, She told me that my companion should marry that 
beautiful King, endowed with all auspicious qualifications. Thus 
saying. She disappeared and I instantly woke up. Then I informed 
my lotus-eyed dear Sakhi all the details of my dream as well my 
worshipping the Devi; hearing this, her lotus-face beamed with joy 
and gladness. That sweet-smiling EkavalT very gladly told me, “O 
dear Companion! Go at once for our success. That truth-speaking 
BhagavatT Ambika DevT will release us from our bondage.” O King! 
When my dear companion ordered me thus, I thought it proper, as 
also dictated to me in my dream, to go out and soon I did it. O King! 
Due to the grace of the Great DevT, I came to know the way and I 
also got the quick motion. Thus I have described to you the cause of 
my sorrow. O Hero! Who are you, whose son are you? Speak truly to 
me. 


Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter in the Sixth Book on the 
narration to Haihaya the stealing away of EkavalT in S’rT Mad DevT 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 23. On The Battle Oe Haihaya And 
Kalaketu 


1. Vyasa said O King! That powerful son of Laksmi, Haihaya, 
became very glad to hear these words of Yas’ovati and said 


2-14. O One of beautiful thighs! Hear in reply to your query I am 
Haihaya, the son of Laksmi, and I am known in this world by the 
name of Ekavira. Now you have made my mind dependent. What 
am I to do now? where to go? Thus distressed with bereavement 
from your dear companion, my mind is struck with Cupid’s arrows 
and is confounded with her extraordinary beauty that you just now 
described. Next you described her qualifications and my mind is 
ravished. Again when you described before me what she uttered in 
the presence of the Raksasa, I am struck with great wonder. Your 
dear companion Ekavali said before the vicious Danava Kalaketu, “I 
have already selected the King Haihaya. I will not select any other 
than him, this is my firm resolve.” These words have converted me 
into her slave. O sweet-haired One! Say now what service can I do 
to you both? I am not acquainted with that wicked demon’s palace; 
never I went to his city. O Fair-eyed One! Say how I can go there; for 
you are the only one that can lead me there. Therefore take me 
quickly to that place where your beautiful clear companion is staying. 
Your dear companion, the daughter of the King is very much afflicted 
with sorrow; soon I will free her, by destroying that cruel Raksasa. 
There is no doubt in this. O Auspicious One! I will rescue your dear 
companion and bring her to the city of yours and hand her over to 
the hands of her father. Then that King, the enemy destroyer, will 
perform the marriage ceremony of his daugther. I think this is the 
desire of your heart. O Sweet-speaking One! Know that that is also 
my desire. O Beautiful One! Now that desire will be fulfilled by your 
efforts. Show me quickly that place and see my prowess. O One with 
a face beautiful like the Moon! It seems that you will be able to do my 



work. Soon do such as I can kill that wicked demon, who steals 
others’ wives. Now show me the way to the impassable city of that 
Raksasa. 


15-26. Vyasa said :-0 King! Hearing the sweet words of the prince, 
Yas’ovati became very glad and gently began to speak out how he 
could go to the demon’s city. O King! Take the success-giving Mantra 
of Bhagavati and I would then be able to show you today the city 
guarded by the Raksasas. O King! Better arrange to take your vast 
army with you; for you will have to fight no sooner you go there. 
Kalaketu is personally a great warrior surrounded by Raksasas of 
great power and strength. Therefore be initiated in the Mantram of 
S’ri Bhagavati and accompany me. So you will surely be successful. 

I will show you the way to the city of that Demon. Slay that vicious 
and vilest of the Raksasas and rescue my dear companion. Hearing 
thus, Haihaya was duly initiated into the great Mantram of 
Yoges’vari, named Trilokitilaka Mantra (Hrim Gauri Rudradayite 
Yoge S’vari Hum Phat Svaha is the Yoges’vari Mantra), by Maharsi 
Dattatreya, accidentally come there (as if ordained by Fate), the 
chief of Jhanins (the Gnostics), that is conducive to the welfare of the 
beings. Thus by the influence of the Mantram the King got the power 
of knowing all things and going everywhere with unobstructed speed. 
Then the King Haihaya quickly went with Yas’ovati to the impassable 
city of the Raksasas, accompanied by a vast army. The city was 
surrounded by snakes and guarded by the terrible Raksasas like the 
city of Patala. The messengers of the Raksasa, seeing the King 
coming, were struck with terror and crying aloud quickly went to 
Kalaketu. Kalaketu, struck with Cupid’s arrows, was sitting beside 
Ekavali and was speaking many modest words when the messenger 
went there suddenly and said “O King! The attendant of this lady 
Yas’ovati is coming here with a prince and an army. 



27-29. O King! We cannot tell exactly whether the prince is the son 
of Indra, named Jayanta or Kartikeya. After all, puffed up with the 
strength of his army, he is coming here. O King! The battle is 
imminent; now make your arrangements fully and carefully; fight with 
the son of a Deva or abandon this lotus-eyed Lady. O King! At a 
distance of three Yojanas from this place, be is staying with his army. 
Now equip yourself and quickly declare the war by blowing the war 
trumpets.” 


30-36. Vyasa said O King! Hearing the messenger’s words, 
Kalaketu, the King of the Demons, became overwhelmed with anger 
and at once sent many powerful Raksasas, holding all sorts of 
weapons and spoke out to them “O Raksasas! With weapons in 
your hands, go before them quickly.” Ordering them thus, Kalaketu 
asked in sweet words Ekavali who was in front and very distressed. 
O Thin-bellied One! Who is coming here? Is he your father or any 
other man coming with his army to release you. Speak this to me 
truly. If your father comes here to take you back, being very much 
distressed with your bereavement, I will never fight with him, if I 
come to know this truly; rather I will bring him to my house and 
worship him with the excellent horses, gems and jewels and 
clothings. Really I will show my full hospitality duly to him when he 
comes here. And if any other person comes, then I will take his life 
by the sharpened arrows; there is no doubt in this. Know this as 
certain whoever comes here for your rescue is brought by the hand 
of Death to me. Therefore, O Large-eyed One! Say who is this fool 
that is coming, not knowing me as the powerful and unconquerable 
Kala (Death). 


37-38. Ekavali said “O Highly Fortunate One! I do not know who is 
this body coming to this side with a violent speed. O King! How can I 
know that when I am in this state of confinement in your house. This 



man is not my father nor my brother. Some other powerful man is 
coming here. I do not know exactly what for he is coming.” 


39-40. The Demon said My messengers say that your comrade 
Yas’ovati has taken with her that warrior and is coming to this side 
with great energy. Where has your clever companion gone now? O 
Lotus-eyed! There is no enemy in the three worlds strong enough to 
fight against me. 


41-66. Vyasa said O King! Just then other messengers hurriedly 
came there terrified and spoke to Kalaketu who had been staying in 
the house, thus “O King! The army has come quite close to the 
city and how are you staying in the house, calm and quiet? Better 
march out of the city with your vast army as early as possible.” The 
powerful Kalaketu, then, hearing their words, mounted on the chariot 
and quickly went out of his city. The King Haihaya, on the other 
hand, suffering from the bereavements of his dear lady, suddenly 
came there mounted on horseback. The terrible fight ensued then 
and there between the two and each one struck the other with 
sharpened weapons and the quarters all around blazed with their 
glitterings and slashings. When the terrible fight was going on, 
Haihaya, the son of Laksmi, struck Kalaketu, the King of the Daityas 
with a very powerful club (Gada). Thus struck by the Gada, the Lord 
of the Daityas fell on the ground like a mountain, struck by lightning, 
and died. All the Raksasas fled away on all sides, struck with terror. 
Yas’ovati went then very hurriedly with a gladdened heart to EkavalT 
and began to speak to her in terms of surprise and in sweet words 
O Dear! O Dear! Come, Come; the great warrior, the prince Ekavira 
has killed the Lord of the Daityas in a dreadful battle. That King is 
now waiting, tired in the midst of his soldiers. He has already heard 
from me about your beauty and qualities; and now he is expecting to 
see you. O One Looking askance! Now satisfy your eyes and mind 
by seeing that King who is like the Cupid. When I described to him 



before on the banks of the Ganges your beauty and qualifications, 
he got enamoured of you and now he is suffering from 
bereavements and wants to see you. Thus, hearing, EkavalT 
determined to go to him and as she was yet unmarried, she became 
abashed and afraid. She thought how could she see the prince as 
she was unmarried. It might be that he being passionate would catch 
her by her arms. Thus, troubled with thought, that daughter of the 
King, with a sad look, and wearing poor clothes, EkavalT went with 
Yas’ovatT on a palanquin, carried on men’s shoulders. Seeing that 
large-eyed daughter of the King coming there, the prince said “O 
Beautiful One! My two eyes are very thirsty to see you. Satisfy my 
eyes and mind by showing yourself to me.” Seeing the prince 
passionate and the King’s daughter very much abashed, Yas’ovatT, 
who knew the rules of modesty, thus spoke to the prince “ O 
Prince! The father of my dear companion expressed a desire to 
betroth her to your hands. She is also obedient to you. Therefore 
your meeting will certainly take place. O King! Wait; take her to her 
father; and he will perform duly the marriage ceremony and betroth 
her to your hands. Know this to be quite certain.” The King took her 
words to be quite just and true and taking those two ladies went with 
his army to the house of the father of EkavalT. EkavalT’s father 
became very glad and cheerful to learn that his daughter was 
coming and, accompanied by his ministers, went hurriedly to her. 
After a long time the King saw his daughter in poor clothings and 
became highly pleased. Yas’ovatT then described in detail all what 
happened before the King. The King then with his minister brought 
with great love, courtesy and gentleness EkavTra to his house and on 
an auspicious day performed the marriage ceremony of him with 
EkavalT, in accordance with due ceremonies and rites. Then the King 
gave away many clothings, ornaments, jewels, and articles for fitting 
a house and many other things and worshipped duly and sent his 
daughter together with Yas’ovatT away with the King Haihaya. Thus 
the marriage ceremony was performed and the son of LaksmT gladly 
returned to his house and began to enjoy many pleasures with his 
wife. Then, in course of time, in the womb of EkavalT the King 
Haihaya got a son named KritavTrya. The son of this KritavTrya is 



known as Kartavirya. O King! Thus I have narrated to you the origin 
of the Haihaya dynasty. 


Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter in the Sixth Book on the battle of 
Haihaya and Kalaketu in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 24. On The Description Of Viksepa 
S’akti 


1-5. The King Janamejaya said “O Bhagavan! I am not satiated 
with the drink of the divine sweet nectar-like words coming out of 
your lotus mouth. You have described to me in detail the wonderful 
and variegated story of the origin of the Haihaya dynasty; but, O 
Muni! There has arisen in my mind a curiosity to know something 
more on this subject. See the Bhagavan Visnu, the Lord of Laksmi, 
the Deva of the Devas, the Ruler of this whole Universe and the 
Cause of the Creation, Preservation and Destruction; yet that Best of 
Purusas S’ri Bhagavan had to assume a horse form. He is 
undecaying and independent, how then He came to be dependent? 
Clear this doubt of mine. O Best of Munis! You are omniscient; 
therefore satisfy my curiosity by describing this wonderful event.” 


6-16. Vyasa said O King! Hear what I heard of yore from Narada 
how this doubt was removed. The mind-born son of Brahma, 
Maharsi Narada got powers to go everywhere by virtue of his Tapas, 
could know everything, was of a calm and quiet nature, dear to all 
and he was a poet. On one occasion he went out on tour round the 
world, playing with his lute in time with Svar and Tan. One day he 
came to my As’rama, singing many things concerning Brihat 
Rathantara Sama Veda and the sweet nectar-like Gayatri, the Giver 
of Liberation. O King! There was a very sacred place of hermitage, 
beaming as it were with happiness and self-knowledge, named 
S’amyaprasa, on the banks of the river Sarasvati. There was 
situated my hermitage. Seeing the lustrous Narada the son of the 
Grand Sire Brahma, coming, I got up and offered him duly Padya 
(water to wash his feet) and Argha (offerings of worship), etc., and 
worshipped him. When that Muni of indomitable lustre took his seat 
on the Asana, I sat beside him. When I found Narada, the Giver of 
Knowledge, at rest and quiet, I duly asked him the very same 



question that you have asked me just now. O Best of Munis! What 
happiness is there on the beings taking their birth in this world. I 
never found it in any place or in any concern, this I can say 
positively. Still why do the high minded persons do Karma, 
fascinated by the enchantments of the world. Look! I was born in an 
island. Just after my birth, my mother forsook me. Helpless, I grew in 
the forest as my Karma allowed. Next I performed a very severe 
tapasya before Mahadeva, the Deva of the Devas, on the mountain 
with a desire to have a son. 


17-38. As a fruit of that I got S’uka as my son, the foremost of the 
Gnostics, and taught him completely the essence of the Vedas from 
the beginning to the end. O Devarsi! When my son got wisdom from 
you, he left this world even when I became very distressed on his 
bereavement and wept aloud and he went away to the next world. 
Very much afflicted for the parting of my son, I abandoned the great 
Mountain Meru. I got very lean due to the absence of my dear son 
whom I loved very much; and becoming very distressed and knowing 
this whole world to be an illusion, I remembered my mother and went 
to the Kuru Jangala district, as if bound up and controlled by the 
snares of Maya. When I heard that the King S’antanu had married 
my mother, I built my hermitage on the holy banks of the Sarasvati 
and remained there. When the King S’antanu went to the next world, 
my chaste mother remained with two sons. At that time Bhisma 
looked after their sustenance and maintained them. The intelligent 
Ganga’s son Bhisma Deva installed Chitrangada on the throne. A 
short while after this, Chitrangada, too, looking like a second Cupid 
and extremely lovely, went to the jaws of death. The mother 
Satyavati was drowned in the sorrows for his son Chitrangada and 
began to weep for him. O King! Knowing my mother in that sorrowful 
condition, I went to her. Bhisma and I then consoled her with hopeful 
words. Bhisma Deva was averse to marrying and then becoming a 
King; and, therefore, he installed again the younger brother, the 
powerful Vichitravirya on the throne. O King! Bhisma defeated by his 



own prowess the kings and brought the two daughters of the King 
Kas’iraj and handed them over to Satyavati, so that she might give 
them over to Vichitravirya. Then, on an auspicious day, and in an 
auspicious Lagna (moment) when the marriage ceremony of my 
brother Vichitravirya was performed, I became glad. My brother, a 
good archer, was shortly afterwards attacked with consumption and 
thus he died without any issue. At this my mother became very sad 
and dejected. Seeing the husband dead, the two daughters of 
Kas’iraja became ready to preserve their religion of chastity and said 
to their mother-in-law, sorrowful and weeping We two shall 
accompany our husbands and become Sati (i.e., be burnt up with 
our husbands). O Devi! We will go to the Heavens with your son. 

We, the two sisters united, will enjoy with him in the Nandana 
Garden. The mother was very much attached to them and with the 
permission of Bhisma Deva, very affectionately made them desist 
from this great attempt. When all the funeral obsequies of 
Vichitravirya were over, my mother consulted with Bhisma and 
remembered me in Hastinanagara. As soon as she remembered me, 
immediately I knew her mental feelings and hurriedly came to 
Hastinanagara and, with my head bowed, fell prostrate before her 
feet, and with folded hands addressed my mother who was very 
much inflamed with the fire of sorrow for the death of her son, thus :- 
- O Mother! Why have you called me here mentally? I see you are 
very much dejected; I am your servant; order me what I can do for 
you. O Mother! You are my greatest place of pilgrimage and you are 
my highest deity; I am very anxious since I have come here; say 
what you desire. 


39-44. Vyasa said O Best of Munis! When I said thus and waited 
before her, then she looked at Bhisma standing close by and said 
“O Child! Your brother died of consumption; therefore I am very 
sorrowful, lest the family becomes extinct. O Intelligent One! For the 
continuance of the line, then, with the permission of the Ganga’s 
son, I have called you here today by the Samadhi Yoga. O son of 



Paras’ara! You re-establish the name of S’antanu that is going now 
to be well nigh extinct. O Vyasa Deva! Relieve me soon from this 
sorrow of mine, lest this line be extinct. There are the two daughters 
of Kas’iraja, honest and good and endowed with youth and beauty. 

O Highly Intelligent One! Better you cohabit with them and save the 
family of Bharata by begetting sons. You will not be touched with any 
sin.” 


45-55. Vyasa said O DevarsTI Hearing the mother’s words, I 
became very anxious and humbly told her with great shame :-- “O 
Mother! To touch another’s wife is a very sinful act; knowing well the 
path of Dharma, how can I willingly and intentionally violate that? So 
also, the Maharsis say That the wife of a younger brother is like a 
daughter. Studying all the Vedas, how can I do this blame-worthy 
and adulterous act? To preserve a line of family by illegal ways is 
never to be done; for then the fathers of the sinners can never cross 
this ocean of world. How can he, who is the spiritual preceptor of all, 
and the writer of all the Puranas, do this act knowingly which is 
awfully strange and very bad and nasty in its nature.” My mother was 
very much plunged into the sea of sorrows for the bereavement of 
her son; so to preserve the family. She came again to me, weeping 
and said “O son of Paras’ara! If you follow my word, you won’t 
incur any sin. O Child! If the reasonable words of the Gurus be even 
faulty, one should obey them according to the tradition of the S’istas. 
Therefore, O Child! Keep my word and preserve my honour; no sin 
will touch you. O Child! Think very well. Your mother is very sorry 
and is immersed in the ocean of afflictions; therefore it is your 
paramount duty to make her happy by begetting child for the 
continuance of the family.” Hearing my mother speaking to me thus, 
Bhisma, the Ganga’s son, the expert in finding out truth in fine points 
with regard to Dharma, said to me O Dvaipayana! You are wholly 
sinless; you ought not therefore to argue on this point; obey your 
mother as she says and be happy. 



56-61. Vyasa said O King! Hearing his words and nny mother’s 
request, I decided to do this very hateful act with a fearless heart 
without any suspicion. When Ambika finished her ablutions after 
menstruation, I gladly cohabited with her in the night; but that young 
lady seeing my ugly ascetic form, was not attached to me; I then 
cursed that beautiful woman thus 

As you closed your eyes at the first cohabitation with me, your son 
will be born blind. O Muni! On the second day my mother enquired 
me when I was alone O Dvaipayana! Will there be born a son of 
the daughter of Kas’iraj? I then bowed my head with shame, and 
told, “Mother! The son will be born blind, through my curse.” O Muni! 
The mother then rebuked me harshly, “O Child! Why did you curse 
that the son of Ambika would be born blind?” 


Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the 
description of Viksepa S’akti in the discourse between Vyasa and 
Narada in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 25. On The Cause Of Moha Of Vyasa 
Deva Asked Before Narada 


1-10. Vyasa said OKing! The mother became astonished to hear 
me. Becoming very anxious for a son, she began to speak to me. O 
Child! The wife of your brother, the daughter Ambalika of Kas’iraj, is 
a widow; she is very sorrowful; she is endowed with all auspicious 
signs and endowed with all good qualities; better cohabit with that 
beautiful young wife and get a child according to the tradition of the 
S’istas. Persons born blind are not entitled to kingdoms. Therefore 
take my word and procreate a beautiful son and thus keep my 
honour. O Muni! Hearing the mother’s words, I began to wait in 
Hastinapura till Ambalika, the daughter of Kas’iraj, finished her 
ablutions after menstruation. That King’s daughter, of curling hairs, 
came to me alone at her mother-in-law’s order, and became very 
much abashed. Seeing me an ascetic with matted hairs on my head 
and void of every love sentiment, perspiration came on her face; her 
body turned pale and her mind void of any love towards me. When I 
saw that lady trembling and pale beside me, I angrily spoke “O 
One of beautiful waist! When you have turned out pale, considering 
your own beauty, let your son be of a pale colour.” Thus saying I 
spent there that night with Ambalika. After enjoying her I took 
farewell from my mother and went to my place. 


11-21. In due course, the two daughters of the King gave birth to two 
sons respectively, one blind and the other pale. The son of Ambika 
was named Dhritarastra; and the son of Ambalika was named 
Pandu, as his colour was pandu (pale). Mother became absent- 
minded when she saw the two sons in those states. After one year 
she again called me and said “O Dvaipayana! These two persons 
are not so fit to become kings; therefore beget one more son 
beautiful and according to my liking.” When I consented, she 
became very glad and, in due course, asked Ambika to embrace me 



and give birth to a son, endowed with extraordinary qualities, and fit 
to preserve the line worthy of the Kuru dynasty. The bride did not 
then say anything on account of her bashfulness. But when I went in 
the night tinne according to my mother’s order, to the sleeping room, 
Ambika sent to me a maid-servant of Vichitravirya, full of youth and 
beauty, and adorned with various ornaments and clothings. That 
maid-servant of beautiful hairs and of a swan-like gait adorned with 
garlands and red sandal-paste, came to me with many enchanting 
gestures and making me take my seat on the cot, became herself 
merged in love sentiments. O Muni! I became pleased with her 
gestures and amorous sports and passed the night, full of love 
towards her and played and cohabited with her. At last I gladly gave 
her the boon, “O Fortunate One! Your child, begotten by me, will be 
endowed with all good qualities, will be of good form, will be 
conversant with all the essences of Dharma, calm and quiet and 
truthful.” 


22-34. In due course, a child named Vidura was born to her. Thus I 
had three sons; and in my mind grew up Maya and affection that 
these were my sons. When I saw again those three sons, heroic and 
full of manliness, the only cause of my sorrow due to the 
bereavement of my son S’uka vanished away from my mind. O Lord 
of Dvijas! Maya is very powerful and extremely hard to be 
abandoned by those who are not masters of their senses; She 
enchants even the wise, though She does not possess any form nor 
any substratum nor any support. I could not find any peace, even in 
the forest, as my mind was attached to my mother and children. O 
Muni! My mind then began to oscillate like a pendulum and I 
remained sometime in Hastinapura and sometime on the banks of 
the Sarasvati. I could not stay in a certain fixed place. By 
discrimination, the knowledge sometimes flashed in my mind 
Whose sons are these? The attachment is nothing but merely a 
delusion. On my death they would not be entitled to perform my 
S’raddha ceremony. These sons are begotten by ways and manners 



not sanctioned by Dharnna; what happiness can they bring to me? O 
Muni! The powerful Maya has caused this delusion in me. What! 
Knowing this Samsara to be unreal, Alas! I have fallen into this well 
of the Darkness of delusion. Thus I repented when I thought over the 
matter deeply and when I was alone in a solitary place. When, 
subsequently, through the mediation of Bhisma, the powerful Pandu 
got the kingdom, I became pleased to see the prosperity of my son. 
O Muni! This is also the creation of Maya. The daughter of the King 
S’urasena, named Kunti, and the daughter of the King of Madra, 
named Madri became the two beautiful wives of Pandu. Pandu was 
cursed by a Brahmana that he would die if he cohabited with any 
woman; he therefore became dispassionate and quitting his 
kingdom, went to the forest with his two wives. Hearing Pandu gone 
to the forest I felt pain and went to my son who was staying with his 
wives and consoling him, came to Hastinapura, where I held a 
conversation with Dhritarastra and then came back to the banks of 
the river Sarasvati. 


35-50. Pandu in his forest life, got five sons out of his wives by the 
Devas Dharma, Vayu, Indra, and the twin AsVins. Dharma, Vayu, 
and Indra begat respectively of Kunti the three sons Yudhisthira, 
Bhimasena and Arjuna; and the two AsVins begat of Madri the two 
sons Nakulu and Sahadeva. Once Madri, full of youth and beauty, 
was staying alone in a solitary place and Pandu seeing her 
embraced her and due to the curse, died. When the funeral pyre was 
ablaze, the chaste Madri entered into the fire and died a Sati. Kunti 
was prevented from doing so, as she was to nurse and look after her 
young children. The Munis then took the sorrowful Kunti, the 
daughter of S’urasena, bereft of her husband to Hastinapur and 
handed her over to the high-souled Bhisma and Vidura. When I 
came to hear this, my mind was greatly agitated to see the pain and 
pleasure that other people suffered. Bhisma, Vidura, and 
Dhritarastra began to nourish and support Yudhisthira and others as 
they considered them the sons of their dearest Pandu. The cruel and 



wicked sons of Dhritarastra, Duryodhana and others united with 
each other and began to quarrel horribly with the sons of Pandu. 
Dronacharya came there accidentally and Bhisma treated him with 
great respect and requested him to stay in Hastinapura and educate 
the sons of Kuru. Kama was the the son of Kunti, when she was 
young and unmarried; and he was quitted by her no sooner he was 
born. The charioteer Suta (or carpenter) Adhiratha found him in a 
river and nourished him. Kama was the foremost of the heroes and 
therefore the great favourite of Duryodhana. The enmity between 
Bhima and Duryodhana, etc., began to grow greater day by day. 
Dhritarastra, thinking the difficult situation of his children, fixed the 
residence of the sons of Pandu at the Varanavata city so that the 
quarrels might die away. Out of enmity, Duryodhana ordered his dear 
friend Purochana to build there a house of lac for the Pandavas. O 
Muni! When I heard that Kunti and her five sons were burnt in the 
lac-house, I became merged in the ocean of sorrows and thought 
that they were my grandsons. I was overwhelmed with sorrow and 
began to search after them in deep forests day and night till at last I 
found them in Ekachakra city, lean and thin and very much 
distressed with sorrow. 


51-63. I became very glad to see them and sent them soon to the 
city of the King Drupada. Wearing the deer’s skin, they went there 
dejected with sorrow in the Brahmin’s dress and stayed in the royal 
court. The victorious Arjuna shewed prowess and pierced the mark 
(the eye of the fish) and obtained Krisna, the daughter of the King 
Drupada. By the order of the mother Kunti, the five brothers married 
her. O Muni! I became very glad to see that they were all married. 
The Pandavas , then, accompanied by PanchalT, soon went to 
Hastinapura. Dhritarastra then fixed Khandavaprastha as the 
residence of the Pandavas. Visnu, the son of Vasudeva, then 
performed the Yajha with the victorious Arjuna and satisfied the 
Great Fire. The Pandavas next performed the Rajasuya sacrifice and 
that made me very glad. Seeing the affluence and prosperity of the 



Pandavas and the great assembly hall beautiful and exquisitely 
artistic, Duryodhana was burnt up, as it were, with malice and made 
arrangements for play in dice, very injurious in its consequences. 
S’akuni was expert in playing deceitfully and Yudhisthira the son of 
Dharma, was not expert in this play. So Duryodhana made S’akuni 
play for him and stole away all that Yudhisthira had and insulted, at 
last, in the royal assembly, the daughter of Drupada, Yajhaseni and 
gave her much trouble. The Pandavas then went with PanchalT in an 
exile in the forest for twelve years. And I was very much grieved to 
hear this O Muni! Though I know all about the Sanatan Dharma, yet I 
was deluded and merged in these worlds of pains and pleasures. 
Who am I? To whom do these sons belong? My mind roams day and 
night on the thought of all these. O Muni! What shall I do? And 
whither shall I go? I don’t find happiness anywhere; my mind is, as it 
were, floating in a rocking machine and it is never being fixed. O 
Best of Munis! You are all-knowing; solve my doubts so that my 
mental fever may be quietened and I may be happy. 


Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter on the cause of Moha of Vyasa 
Deva asked before Narada in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 26. On The Description By Narada Of 
His Own Moha 


1-13. Vyasa said O King! When I asked him why this delusion 
overtook me, Maharsi Narada smiled and said “O son of 
Paras’ara! You are thoroughly acquainted with all the Puranas. Why 
then are you making this question about the cause of my Moha 
(delusion). No embodied soul can exist in this Samsara without this 
Moha. Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, and the other Devas, S’anaka, Kapila 
and the other Risis, all these are surrounded by Maya and are thus 
travelling in this path of Samsara. The people know me as a Jhanin; 
but I, too, am deluded like an ordinary man. I am now speaking to 
you as certain as anything my of previous history now. I was deluded 
by Maya; hear it attentively. O Son of VasavTI Great troubles and 
pains were felt by me before, due to this Moha, for my wife. One day 
Parvata and I, the two Devarsis, went out together from the 
Devaloka to see the excellent portion of the earth named Bharata 
and came to the Martyaloka or the land of the mortals. We then 
began to travel over various places and saw the places of 
pilgrimages and the holy places and the beautiful hermitages of the 
Munis. Before we went out from the Devaloka, we consulted with 
each other and entered into this agreement that we would not hide 
our feelings from each other, whether they be good or bad, while we 
would travel over the face of the earth. Whether it be our desire to 
get food, or wealth or women for enjoyment, whatever arises in the 
mind of any of us, we would express that freely amongst ourselves. 
Thus making an agreement, we went out in right earnest as Munis to 
travel over the face of this earth. Thus roaming all over the face of 
the earth, at the end of the summer season, when the rainy season 
commenced we came to the beautiful city of the King named 
S’anjaya. The King showed us great respect and worshipped us with 
devotion. Since then we remained for four months at his house. 



14-33. During the four months of the rainy season, the roads are 
always almost impassable; it is, therefore, wise to stay at one place. 
For eight months, the Dvijas should always remain abroad on some 
work or other. Thinking all these, we two began to stay in the house 
of the King S’anjaya. That liberal minded King gladly and with 
respect kept us as his guests and tendered to us all our 
requirements. The King had a very beautiful daughter named 
Damayanti, with good teeth. The King ordered her to take care of us. 
That large-eyed princess, of great discrimination, was very energetic, 
day and night. She began to serve both of us. In due time she gave 
us water for our bath, excellent meat, food, towels for cleaning and 
rubbing our faces, in fact, everything what we desired. She kept 
ready for us whatever we desired, fans, seats, beds, whatever were 
necessary for us. Thus she began to serve. We were also engaged 
in the study of our Vedas and in those practises that were approved 
by the Vedas. O Dvaipayana! I used to sing, then, with lute in my 
hands, the sweet lovely Sama Gayatri songs in tunes and good 
Svaras. The princess herself appreciated the songs and when she 
heard these Sama songs ravishing to one’s mind, she became 
attached to me and showed signs of affection. Day by day the 
attachment towards me grew stronger. Seeing her attached to me, 
my mind also became attached to her. Thus that princess indulged in 
amorous sentiments towards me and began to make slight 
distinctions between the food and other things offered to me and 
Parvata. I got warm water for my bath and Parvata used to get cold 
water; I got nice curds when food was served to me whereas 
Parvata got only whey. I got nice white bedding for myself to sleep 
on whereas Parvata had merely a dirty sheet to lie down. Thus the 
princess began to serve me with great love and devotion but not so 
she served Parvata. The fair lady began to look at me with eyes of 
love; not so towards Parvata. Parvata was very much surprised to 
see all this and thought within himself, “What is this?” Parvata, then, 
asked me in private “O Narada! Speak out to me truly in detail. 
The princess shews with much gladness and affection her deep love 
towards you; she serves you with dainty dishes but she behaves not 
so with me. I therefore suspect when I see all these distinctions 



made between you and me, that the daughter of the King S’anjaya 
wants with her heart and soul to make you her husband. And you 
also want to make her your wife. 1 have come to know this by signs 
and symptoms; for affection and love reigning inside can be made 
out by outward expressions of eyes and face. Whatever this be, O 
Muni! Now speak truly to me; do never tell a lie. When we went out 
from the Heavens, we made out that agreement; now remember 
that.” 


34-42. Narada said Thus questioned suddenly by Parvata, I 
became very much abashed and said “O Parvata! This large-eyes 
princess is ready to marry me and I am also very much attracted 
towards her.” When Parvata heard all these, he became very much 
angry and uttered repeatedly, “Fie! O Narada! Fie! O Narada! First 
you swore on oath and then you deceived me afterwards. Therefore, 
O Deceiver of friends! I curse you and let your face become that of a 
monkey.” When the high-souled Parvata cursed thus, the face turned 
immediately into that of a monkey, elongated and distorted. I did not 
excuse him, though he was my sister’s son. I also got angry and 
cursed him, “Certainly, your journey to the Heavens will be stopped. 
You will not be able to go to Heaven. O Parvata! When you cursed 
me so heavily for so trivial a fault of mine, I see you are very mean. 
Whatever it be, you will have to remain on earth so long.” At this 
Parvata became very sad and went out of the city. My face became 
immediately like that of a monkey. The daughter of the King became 
very sorry to see my face thus distorted into that of a monkey. I did 
not see her glad as she was before; but her desire to hear my 
playing with my lute remained the same as before. 


43-52. Vyasa said O Muni! What happened next? How did you get 
yourself rid of your curse and how did you get your man-like face? 
Whither did Parvata Risi go! When and how did you again re-unite 
with each other? Kindly describe all these to me in detail. Narada 



said “O Highly Intelligent One! What shall I say about the nature of 
Maya? When Parvata went away angrily, the daughter of the King 
began to serve me with greater care than before. I remained there, 
though Parvata went away, and seeing my face monkey-like, I 
became very dejected and sorry and was specially troubled with the 
care and anxiety what would happen to me hereafter? The King 
S’anjaya saw that his daughter Damayanti was slipping into her 
youth and asked the prime minister about her marriage. He said 
“The time of marriage of my dear daughter has now come; I will now 
marry her in accordance with due rites and ceremonies. Now tell me 
particularly about a prince worthy of her, as we like, in beauty, 
qualifications, largeheartedness, calmness, patience and heroism 
and who is of a good family.” The minister said “O King! There are 
many princes on the face of this earth, worthy in all respects, of your 
daughter. Whomever you like, you can call on him and give him your 
daughter with elephants, horses, chariots, wealth, gems and jewels.” 


53-57. Damayanti, knowing the intention of his father informed the 
King of her own desire by her nurse and attendant. The nurse went 
to the King and said “When my father will sit at his ease and 
comfort you would go and speak to him in private that I am 
enchanted with the enchanting Nada sound of the great lute played 
by the Maharsi Narada and have selected him as my bridegroom. No 
other person will be dear to me. O Father! Marry me with Narada 
and thus fulfil my desire; O Knower of Dharma! I won’t marry 
anybody but Narada. O Father! I am now merged in the Nada-ocean 
(sound ocean) of bliss, sweet and joyful, void of anything destructive 
of happiness, void of Nakra, alligators, and fishes, Timingala, etc. 
(injurious animals) and without any salty taste; my mind won’t be 
satisfied with any other thing.” 


Here ends the Twenty sixth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the 
description by Narada of his own Moha in the Mahapuranam S’ri 



Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa 



Chapter 27. On The Marriage Of Narada And 
His Face Getting Transformed Into That Of A 
Monkey 


1-13. Narada said On hearing these words of her daughter from 
her nurse, the King addressed the queen Kaikeyi, of lovely eyes, 
standing close by, thus “Have you heard what the nurse has said? 
Damayanti has mentally chosen the monkey-faced Narada as her 
husband. What has she thought? Whatever it be, it is no doubt, an 
act of great foolishness. His face is monkey-like; how can I betroth 
my daughter to him? Where is an ugly beggar Narada? And where is 
my daughter Damayanti? The marriage between them is quite 
unjust; never it should take place. O Beautiful One of good hairs! 
Better call her before you in private and show her reasons approved 
of the S’astras and of the aged persons and make her desist from 
such a rash course.” On hearing her husband’s words, the mother of 
Damayanti called her in private and said “O Child! Where is your 
this beautiful face? And where is the monkey-like face of Narada? 
You are smart and quick; how have you been, then, deluded by such 
a Moha? O Child! You are the daughter of a king! Your body is gentle 
like a creeper. And Narada always besmears his body with ashes; so 
his body is very rough. O Spotless One! How will you change your 
words with him? Why do you shew your attachment to an ugly 
person? What pleasure do you feel thereby? You would be married 
to a beautiful prince; never follow this rash course; your father is very 
sorry to hear these from your nurse. O One of soft body! Judge this 
yourself, what intelligent man is there that is not sorry at the soft 
Malati creeper entwining a thorny tree? Even a stupid silly man 
would never feed a camel, that likes thorns, with soft betel-leaves. 
When your marriage time arrives, say yourself, who will not be sorry 
to see you going to Narada and embracing him by his arms! Nobody 
likes to speak with an ugly faced one; how will you be able to spend 
your time with him till your death!” 



14-29. Narada said On hearing the mother’s words, the gentle 
Damayanti, with her mind intently fixed on me, spoke to her mother, 
very much depressed in her spirits. “O Mother! What good face and 
beautiful form will avail, who is not in the path of love and who is 
quite ignorant of amorous feelings and sentiments! And what will the 
wealth and kingdoms of that unskilled illiterate person avail! The 
deer, that roam in the forest, getting enchanted by the Nada (sound) 
Rasa, give up their lives even to the singers. So they are fortunate. 
But fie to the persons who are illiterate and void of feelings of love! O 
Mother! Narada Risi is well conversant with the science of music with 
seven Svaras. No other man save Maha Deva knows this. Living 
with an illiterate person is courting death at every moment. One 
devoid of qualifications should be always avoided, by all means, 
though he be wealthy and of a beautiful form. Fie on the friendship 
with kings that are illiterate and puffed up with vain arrogance! A 
well-qualified man, be he even a beggar, is far better to be cultivated 
friendship with. Leaving other circumstances out of account, even to 
change words with such a well qualified man, makes one highly 
delighted. The man is very rare in this world, though he be weak, if 
he be well versed in the science of music and if he knows Svara, 
Grama, Murchchana and be skilled in eight sentiments of love. [Note 
Svara - Sadaja, Risabha, Gandhara, Madhyama, Panchama, 
Dhaivata and Nisada. Grama - the gradual increase and decrease in 
Svaras. Murchchana - the rising of sounds, an intonation; a duly 
regulated rise and fall of sound conducting the air and the harmony 
through the keys in a pleasing manner; changing the key or passing 
from one key to another; modulation; melody]. The man versed in 
the knowledge of Svara leads one to the Heaven of Kailas’a as the 
rivers Ganges and Sarasvati by their own merits lead one to 
Kailas’a. There is not the least doubt in this. He is a Deva in his 
human body who knows the Svara measure; and he who does not 
know the Svara and its seven grades is a beast though he has a 
human form - he who finds no delight when he hears the tune 
regulated by Murchchana and the seven Svaras. Do not consider the 



deer as beasts for they get enchanted when they hear the musical 
notes. The venomous snakes, though they have no ears, get 
delighted to hear the enchanting Svara Nada by their eyes. They 
even are to be praised; but fie on those human beings who have 
ears but who do not find any delight when they hear the Nada! The 
little children feel intense pleasure to hear the music, but fie, fie on 
those elders who are void of this musical sentiments! Does not my 
father know that Narada is ornamented with many qualifications? 
Who is there in the three worlds like him in singing the Sama songs! 
For this very reason, indeed! I have already selected him as my 
husband; afterwards, due to a curse, the Muni, the ocean of 
qualifications, got his face changed into that of a monkey. The 
Kinnaras, skilled in the science of music, have their faces horse-like; 
but are they not dear to all? What business have they to get good 
faces? They enchant the Devas even by their sweet ravishing songs. 
O Mother! Kindly tell my father that I have already chosen Narada as 
my husband. Therefore let him deliver me to his hands, without 
making any further requests in this matter.” 


30-40. Narada said On hearing the words of her daughter 
Damayanti, that unblameable pure queen knowing her attachment 
deep towards me, spoke to the King thus “O King! Now celebrate 
in an auspicious day and on an auspicious moment the auspicious 
marriage of Damayanti; the daughter has said that she has already 
selected Narada as her bridegroom and it cannot be other-wise.” 
Thus prompted by the queen, the King S’anjaya performed the 
marriage ceremony of her daughter in accordance with due rites and 
customs and in an exceedingly becoming manner. O Risi! Thus I 
entered into the married life and remained there though my heart 
constantly burned with the thought of my monkey-face. Whenever 
the princess used to come to me for my service, I used to get 
tormented with the remembrance of my monkey-face; but her face 
beamed with gladness whenever she saw me; never she became 
sorry nor dejected, even for a moment, to see my face monkey-like. 



Thus time passed on. One day the Muni Parvata suddenly came 
there, after making his sojourn to many places of pilgrimages. I 
showed him a great respect and gladly loved him and greeted him 
duly; he got himself seated in an excellent Asana and became very 
sorry to see me. I am his uncle and have entered into a married life; 
my face has become monkey-like. Therefore I am very much 
depressed in spirits and worried with the sad thought and has 
become lean and thin. Seeing this he was overwhelmed with pity. He 
then said “O Muni! The curse that I cast on you before out of my 
anger, I now withdraw. Hear. O Maharsi! Let your face be by my 
merits, again as good as it was before; I now feel pity for the 
daughter of the King.” 


41-52. Hearing thus, my heart also became gentle and instantly with 
a view to free him of my curse, I said “Let your journey to the 
Heavens be re-established. I now make this special favour on you as 
regards my curse on you before.” O Dvaipayana! At his word, before 
our sight, my face became exceedingly handsome as it was before. 
The princess Damayanti became very glad and instantly she went to 
the mother and said “O Mother! At the word of Parvata, the great 
Muni, the curse of your son-in-law has been removed and his face 
has become handsome as before and the lustre of his body has also 
increased.” The queen was very much filled with ecstasy and joy at 
Damayanti’s words and went hurriedly and informed the King. The 
King S’anjaya gladly went at once to see the Muni. The great King 
became very glad and gave lots of wealth, gems and jewels to me 
and my nephew Parvata as a dowry. O Dvaipayana! Thus I have 
described to you my old story how I felt the strong influence of Maya. 
O Fortunate One! Owing to the illusory nature of the Gunas, like a 
magic, no embodied being in this world could have been happy 
before, or he is happy now or he will be happy hereafter. Lust, anger, 
greed, jealousy, attachment, egoism, and vanity, each one of these 
is very powerful; nobody is able to conquer these. O Muni! The three 
Gunas Sattva, Rajas and Tamas are the entire causes of the coming 



into this bodily existence of every being. O Dvaipayana! Once I was 
passing with Bhagavan Visnu, laughing and joking, making 
merriments through a forest, when suddenly I was transformed into a 
woman. Next I became the wife of a king enchanted by Maya, I 
remained in his house and gave birth to many children. 


53-56. Vyasa said O Devarsi! A great doubt has now arisen in my 
mind at your word. O Muni! You are very wise; how then did you get 
womanhood; how again did you regain your manhood? Who was the 
king at whose house you stayed and how did you give birth to 
children; describe fully and satisfy my curiosity. Describe to me, now, 
the nature of Maya, extremely wonderful, by which this entire 
universe, moving and non-moving, all are enchanted. O Muni! 
Though I have heard your nectar-like words, capable to remove all 
the doubts, embodying the essence of all the S’astras, yet I am not 
fully satiated. 


Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Sixth Book on the 
marriage of Narada and his face getting transformed into that of a 
monkey in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 28. On Narada’s Getting The Feminine 
Form 


1-11. Narada said O Thou whose only wealth consists in 
asceticism! I am now describing to you all those good stories; hear 
attentively. O Muni! This Maya and Her Power are incomprehensible 
even by those who are the foremost amongst the Yogins. This whole 
Universe, moving and non-moving, from Brahma to the blade of 
grass, is enchanted by that Unborn and Incomprehensible Maya; 
therefore no one can escape from the hands of that Maya. One day I 
wanted to see Hari, of wonderful deeds, and went out with lute in my 
hand from Satyaloka, to the lovely SVeta Dvipa (the residence of 
Visnu) singing the beautiful Sama hymns in tune with the seven 
Svaras. I saw there Gadadhara, the Deva of the Devas, with four 
arms holding disc in one of his hands. He resembled a newly-formed 
rain-cloud of S’yanna colour. He was illumined with the lustre of the 
Kaustubha jewel in his breast. He was wearing an yellow apparel. 

His head was beautified with a lustrous crown. Thus the Bhagavan 
Narayana was playing in amorous movements with the daughter of 
the ocean, fully capable to give one delight and enjoyment. Seeing 
me, the lovely Devi Kamala, dear to Vasudeva, full of youth and 
beauty, decorated with ornaments, endowed with all auspicious 
signs, superior to all the women, went away at once (to another 
room) from the presence of Janardana. The breast of Laksmi Devi 
was becoming visible even through the cloth thrown over it; therefore 
she went hurriedly to the inner compartment. Seeing this I asked 
Janardana, the Deva of the Devas, the Lord of the worlds, and 
holding a garland of forest grown flowers thus :-- “O Bhagavan! O 
Slayer of Mura! O Padmanabha! Why has Kamala Devi, the Mother 
of all the Lokas, on seeing me coming here, gone out of Your 
presence. O Lord of the worlds! I am not a rogue nor a cheat; I have 
conquered my passions and am become an ascetic; I have 
conquered even Maya. Therefore O Deva! What is the cause of the 
departure of the Kamala Devi from here? Kindly explain this to me.” 



12-20. Narada said O Dvaipayana! Hearing my words, expressive 
of my pride, Janardana smiled and spoke to me in words sweet like 
the sound of a lute “O Narada! The rule in such cases is this 
The wife of any man whatsoever ought not to stay before any other 
male outsider than her husband. O Narada! It is very hard to conquer 
Maya; even those, who by Pranayama have conquered their Prana 
Vayu, their organs of senses and their food, even those Samkhya 
Yogins and the Devas are not able to conquer Maya. The words that 
you have just now uttered that you have conquered Maya are not fit 
to come out of your mouth; for by your knowledge of music, it seems 
that you are enchanted with the sounds of the music. Brahma, I, 
S’iva, and the other Munis, none of us has been able as yet to 
conquer that Unborn Maya; how, then, can it be possible that you or 
any other man can conquer that Maya! Any embodied being, be he a 
Deva, a human being, or a bird, no one is able to conquer that Maya 
Unborn. Whoever is endowed with the three Gunas, be he a knower 
of the Vedas, or a Yogin, or conqueror of his passions, or all 
knowing, is not able to conquer Maya. The Great Time (Kala) though 
formless, is one form of Maya and fashions this universe. All the 
JTvas are subservient to this Kala, be he a good literary person, or of 
a mediocre nature, or an illiterate brute. This Kala sometimes makes 
even a religious man that knows Dharma confounded and deluded; 
so you know the nature of Maya is very incomprehensible and Her 
ways mysterious.” (Note: This Kala is of the fourth dimension, time 
and space.) 


21-23. O Dvaipayana! Thus saying, Visnu stopped. I was greatly 
astonished and asked that Eternal Vasudeva, the Deva of the 
Devas, the Lord of the World, “O Lord of Rama! What is the form of 
Maya? How is She? What is the measure of Her strength? Where 
She resides? Whose substratum is She? Kindly tell these to me. O 
Preserver of the Universe! I am greatly desirous to see Maya; Shew 



Her to me quickly. O Lord of Rama! I am very eager to know Maya. 
Be graciously pleased to describe tome the glory of Maya.” 


24-36. Visnu said Maya resides everywhere throughout this whole 
Universe; Her nature consists of the three Gunas; She is the 
substratum of all; She is omniscient, and acknowledged by all; 
invisible, and of diverse forms. O Narada! If you want to see Maya, 
then come quickly and mount with me on Garuda; we both will go 
elsewhere and I will shew you that Maya, invincible by those who 
have not conquered themselves. O Son of Brahma! Don’t be 
depressed when you see Maya. Thus saying, Janardana Hah 
remembered Garuda and instantly he came to Hah. Janardana 
mounted on him and gladly made me also get up on his back and 
took me with Him. In a moment Garuda, went, at his command, with 
the speed of wind to the forest where the Bhagavan desired to go. 
Mounting on Garuda we passed and saw on our way beautiful 
forests, nice lakes, rivers, towns, villages, huts of cultivators, towns 
close to the mountains, huts for cow-keepers in cowsheds, the 
beautiful hermitages of the Munis, lovely Jhils, tanks and lakes 
beautified with big lotuses, flocks of ewes, packs of wild boars, etc., 
till, at last, we came to a place close to Kanauj. I saw there a 
beautiful divine tank; nice lotuses blossomed there, spreading their 
sweet fragrance all around; the bees were making lovely humming 
noise and ravishing away the minds of men; various flowers, lilies, 
etc., were beautifying the place; Geese, Karandavas, and 
Chakravakas and other acquatic fowls were playing with their 
cackling noise, the water was very sweet like milk; the tank was 
defying, as it were the ocean. Seeing such a wonderful tank, the 
Bhagavan told me “O Narada! See, how beautiful is this deep tank 
with its clear waters, and adorned all over with lotuses! The sweet 
voiced flamingoes are roaming on the lake making lovely sounds! 



37-54. We will bathe in this tank and then go to the city Kanauj. Thus 
saying, He made me descend quickly from Garuda and He himself 
also got down. Then the Bhagavan smilingly caught hold of my fore¬ 
finger and repeatedly praising the glory of the tank took me to its 
bank. We rested a while on the cool umbrageous beautiful bank 
when S’ri Bhagavan said “O Muni! Better bathe you first in this 
tank; next I will bathe in this very holy pool of water. O Narada! Look! 
Look! How clear crystal-like is the water of this pool like the heart of 
a saint; see how it smells also fragrantly in contact with the lotuses 
on it.” When the Bhagavan spoke thus to me; I kept my lute and deer 
skin aside and gladly went to the edge of the tank. Washing then my 
hands and feet I tied my hair lock and, taking Kus’a grass, I 
performed my Achaman and, purifying myself, began to bathe myself 
in that tank. While I was bathing. Hah was looking at me; by the time 
I took a dip, I saw that I quitted my male form and got a beautiful 
female form. Hah took away, then, my deer skin and lute and 
mounting on Garuda went away in a moment to His own residence. 
Getting the female form and decorated with excellent ornaments, my 
memory of my previous male form vanished at once; I forgot all 
about my famous lute and forgot also Jagannatha, the Deva of the 
Devas. I then came out of the tank in that enchanting woman form, 
saw the pool of water filled with clear limpid water and adorned with 
lotuses. Seeing that, I began to think “What is this?” and I became 
very much astonished. While I was thus meditating in my woman 
form, a king, named Taladhvaja, came there, all on a sudden, on a 
chariot, accompanied by numerous elephants and horses. The King 
looked like a second Cupid; he was decorated with various 
ornaments on his various limbs; he was just entering into his youth 
and he looked very enchanting. The King saw me at once and 
looking at me decked with divine ornaments and my moon-like face, 
was greatly astonished and asked me “O Kalyani! Who are you? 
Are you the daughter of a man or of a Naga (serpent) or of a 
Gandharva or of a Deva? I see you are now in your youth; why are 
you alone here? O Lovely-eyed! 



Has any fortunate person married you? Or are you still unmarried? 
Speak all these truly to me. O Fair-haired One! What are you looking 
at in this tank? O One enchanting, as it were, like the Cupid! What is 
your desire? Say, O Slanting-eyed! My mind is ravished to hear your 
cuckoo-like voice. O One of thin waist! Choose me as your husband 
and enjoy various excellent things as you like.” 


Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Sixth Book on Narada’s 
getting the feminine form in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 29. On The Narada’s Getting Again His 
Male Form 


1-11. Narada said O Dvaipayana! When the King Taladhvaja 
asked me thus, I thought over earnestly and said thus “I do not 
know whose daughter I am; nor do I know quite certainly where are 
my father and mother; one man placed me here on this tank and has 
gone away, whither I do not know. O King! I am now an helpless 
orphan; what shall I do now? Where to go? What to do by which I 
can have my welfare? I am all the while thinking on these. O King! 
The Destiny is powerful; I have not the least control over it; you know 
Dharma and you are a King. Do now as you like. O King! Do nourish 
me; I have no father, no mother, nor any acquaintances and friends; 
there is no place for me also to stand on; therefore I am now your 
dependent.” When I spoke thus, the King looked at my face and 
became love-stricken for me; he then told his attendants to bring an 
excellent rectangular and spacious palanquin to be carried on four 
men’s shoulders, gilt and adorned with jewels and pearls, where soft 
sheets were spread inside and covered all over with silken cloths. 
Instantly the servants went away and brought for me a beautiful 
palanquin. I got on it to serve the best wishes of the King. The King 
also gladly took me home. In an auspicious day and in an auspicious 
moment he married me in accordance with due rites and ceremonies 
in the presence of the Holy Fire. 


12. I became dearer to him than even his own life and the King, with 
great fondness, kept my name as Saubhagya Sundari. 


13-20. The King then began to sport with me amorously according to 
the rules of the Kama S’astra in various ways and with great 
enjoyments and pleasures. He then left all his kingly duties and state 



affairs and he began to remain day and night with me deeply 
immersed in amorous sports; so much his mind was merged in me in 
these plays that he could not notice the long time that passed away 
in the interval. He used to drink the Varuni wine and, forsaking all the 
state affairs, began to enjoy me in nice gardens, beautiful lakes, 
lovely palaces, beautified houses, excellent mountains and enviable 
forests and became completely subservient to me. O Dvaipayana! 
Being incessantly engaged with the King in amorous sports and 
remaining obedient to him, my previous body, male ideas, or the 
birth of Muni, nothing whatsoever came in my memory. I remained 
always attached to him, being obedient to him with a view to be 
happy and I constantly thought over “that this King is very much 
attached to me, I am his dearest wife to all others; always he thinks 
of me, I am his chief consort, capable to give him enjoyment.” My 
mind became entirely his and I completely forgot the eternal 
Brahmajhan and the knowledge of the Dharma S’astras. 


21-31. O Muni! Thus engaged in various amorous sports, twelve 
years passed away as if a moment and I could not perceive that. 
Then I became pregnant; and the King became very glad and 
performed all the ceremonies pertaining to my impregnation and 
holding of the child in my womb. In order to satisfy me, the King used 
to ask me always what things I liked; I used to be very much 
abashed; seeing this, the King used to be still more glad. Ten months 
thus passed away and in an auspicious Lagna and when the 
asterism was favourably strong, I gave birth to a son; the King 
became very glad and great festivities were held on the birth 
ceremony of the child. O Dvaipayana! When the period of the birth- 
impurity was over, the King saw the face of the child and was greatly 
delighted; I then became the dearest wife of the King. Two years 
after again I became impregnated; the second auspicious son was 
born. The King gave the name Sudhanva to the second son and on 
the authority of the Brahmins, kept the name of the eldest son as 
Viravarma. Thus I gave birth to twelve sons, in due course of time, to 



the King’s great liking; and I was engaged in rearing up those 
children and thus I remained enchanted. Again in due course, I gave 
birth to eight sons; thus my household was filled with happiness. The 
King performed the marriage ceremonies of all those children duly 
and befittingly; and our family became very large with sons and their 
wives. 


32-52. Then I had some grandsons and they increased my 
attachment and the consequent delusion with their all sorts of playful 
sports. Sometimes I felt happy and prosperous and sometimes I felt 
pain and sorrow when my sons fell ill. Then my body and mind 
became very much troubled with sorrows. Again the quarrels 
amongst my sons and my daughters-in- law, brought terrible pain 
and remorse in my mind. O Best of Munis! Thus I was greatly 
immersed in the terrible ocean of these imaginary thoughts, 
sometimes happy and sometimes painful, and I forgot my previous 
knowledge and the knowledge of the S’astras. I was merged in the 
thought of myself being a woman and lost myself entirely in doing 
the household affairs. I began to think “that I have so many 
daughters-in-law; so many powerful sons of mine are playing 
together in my house; Oh! I am fortunate and full of merits amongst 
women” and thus my egoistic pride increased. Not for a moment 
even occurred the thought that I had been Narada; the Bhagavan 
had deceived me by His Maya. O Krisna Dvaipayana! I was deluded 
by Maya and passed away my time in the thought “that I am the 
king’s wife, chaste and of good conduct following good Achara; I 
have so many sons and grandsons; I am blessed in this Samsara 
and that I am so happy and prosperous.” One powerful king of a 
distant country turned out an inveterate enemy of my husband and 
came to the city of Kanauj to fight with my husband, accompanied by 
chariots, and elephants and the fourfold army. That enemy besieged 
the city with his army; my sons and grandsons went out and fought 
valiantly with him but owing to the great Destiny, the enemies killed 
all my sons. The King retreated and returned to his palace. Next I 



heard that powerful King killed all my sons and grandsons and had 
gone back to his country with his army. I then hurriedly went to the 
battlefield, crying loudly. O Long-lived One! Seeing my sons and 
grandsons lying on the ground, in that horrible and distressed state, I 
became merged in the ocean of sorrows and lamented and wept 
loudly and wildly, “O my Sons! Where have you gone leaving me 
thus? Alas! The pernicious Fate is very dominant, and very 
painsgiving and indomitable. It has killed me today.” By this time, the 
Bhagavan Madhusudana came to me there in the garb of a beautiful 
aged Brahmin. His dress was sacred and lovely; it seemed he was 
versed in the Vedas. Seeing me weeping distressedly in the 
battlefield he said “O Devi! O cuckoo-voiced One! It seems you 
are the mistress of a prosperous house and you have got husband 
and sons! O thin-bodied One! Why are you thus lamenting and 
feeling yourself distressed! All this is simply illusion caused by Moha; 
think; who are you? whose sons are these? Now think of your best 
hereafter; Don’t weep, get up and be comfortable, O Good-eyed one! 


53-54. O Devi! To shew respect to your sons, etc., gone to the other 
worlds, offer them water and Til. The friends of the deceased ought 
to take their bath in a place of pilgrimage; never they should bathe in 
their houses. Know this as ordained by Dharma. 


55-66. Narada said O Dvaipayan! When the old Brahmin thus 
addressed me, I and the King and other friends got up. The 
Bhagavan Madhusudana causing this creation, in the form of a 
Brahmana, led the way and I followed him quickly to that sacred 
place of pilgrimage. The Visnu Bhagavan, the Lord Janardana Hah, 
in the form of a Brahmin, kindly took me to the tank named Pumtirtha 
(male tirtha) and said “O One going like an elephant! Better take 
your bath in this tank; forego your sorrows that are of no use; now 
the time has arrived to offer water to your sons. Better think that you 
had millions of sons born to you in your previous births and for that 



your millions of sons and daughters lost their lives; you had millions 
of fathers, husbands, and brothers and you lost them again; O Devi! 
Now tell me for whom you will now grieve? All these, then, are 
merely mental phenomena; this world is full of delusion, false like a 
mirage and dream-like; the embodied souls, simply get pains and 
sorrows and nothing else.” Narada said On hearing his words, I 
went to bathe in that Pumtirtha, as ordered by him. Taking a dip, I 
found that, in an instant, I became a man; the Bhagavan Hah, in his 
own proper form, was standing on the edge with a lute in his hand. O 
Brahmin! When getting out of the water, I came to the bank and saw 
the lotus-eyed Krisna, pure consciousness then flashed in my heart. 
Then I thought “that I am Narada; I have come to this place and 
being deluded by the Maya of Hah, I got the female form.” When I 
was thinking thus. Hah exclaimed, “O Narada! Get up; what are you 
doing, standing in the water?” I was astonished; and, recollecting my 
feminine nature, very severe indeed, began to think why I was again 
transformed into a male form. 


Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the 
Narada’s getting again his male form in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 30. On The Glory Of Maha Maya 


1-14. Narada said O Best of Munis! The King was greatly 
astonished to see me dip in the tank in a female figure and get up 
from the tank in a male figure and thought, “Where is my dearest 
wife? And how is this Narada Muni suddenly come here!” The King, 
not seeing his wife, lamented very much and cried frequently, “O my 
dear Wife! Where have you gone, leaving me here thus. Without 
you, O One of spacious hips! My life, palace and kingdom, all, are 
quite useless. O Lotus-eyed one! What shall I do? O Smiling One! 
Why is not my life getting out of my body, suffering thus from thy 
separation? Without you, my sentiment of love has left me for ever. 

O Large-eyed One! Now I am lamenting for you. O Dear! Better give 
me your sweet reply; the love that you expressed at our first union, 
where has it gone now? O One with good eyebrows! Are you sunk in 
the water and have you given up your life? Or are you devoured by 
fishes or crocodiles? Or are you carried away by Varuna, the Deva of 
the waters, to my great misfortune? O One of beautiful limbs! You 
are blessed, as you have gone away with your sons; O sweet¬ 
speaking One! Your affection for them was not artificial. Is it right for 
you to go up to the Heavens, attached by affection for your sons, 
leaving me your distressed husband alone, thus weeping for your 
separation? O Dear! I have lost both, you and my sons; yet death is 
not carrying me away; O! How hard is my lot! What to do? Where to 
go? Rama is not now in this world. He knew what was the pain 
caused by the separation from one’s dearest wife. Oh! The cruel 
Fate has ordained very unwisely with great inconsistency the periods 
of parting from one another at different periods; when their minds 
and all other things are exactly the same in all circumstances of 
pleasure and pain. The practice of Sati (burning with one’s deceased 
husband), as ordained by the Munis, is certainly for the good of the 
chaste women; but it would have been good no doubt, were there 
such practices allowed for the men to burn themselves with their 
deceased wives.” Bhagavan Hari then spoke to the lamenting King in 



reasonable words and consoled him thus “O King! Why are you 
thus troubling yourself with pain and sorrow? Where has gone your 
dearest wife? Have you not heard anything of S’astras? or Have you 
not taken any shelter of any wise man! 


15-27. Who was your wife? Who are you? Of what nature was your 
union and disunion and where did it take place? The union of wives 
and sons in this S’amsara is momentary like the meetings of persons 
on boats, while crossing a river. O King! Now go home, there is no 
use in your weeping thus in vain; the union and disunion of men are 
always under the control of Fate, the Daiva; therefore the wise 
should not lament for them. O King! Your union with the woman took 
place here; and now you have lost that beautiful, thin-bodied, large¬ 
eyed woman here also. Her father and mother you have not seen; 
you have got her like what is heard in the story of the crow and the 
Tal fruit; as you got her wonderfully, so you have lost her wonderfully. 
O King! Do not grieve; Time cannot be ruled over; go home and 
enjoy yourself subservient to Time. That beautiful woman has gone 
away in the manner she came to you; you ought to do your stately 
affairs in the way as you used to do before as the ruler of all. O King! 
Consider that if you weep day and night, that women will never 
return; why then are you giving vent to your sorrows in vain? Go now 
and have recourse to the path of the Yoga and thus while away your 
time. The enjoyable things come in course of time and they go away 
again in due course; therefore in this world of no gain whatsoever, 
the wise should never lament. Continuous pleasure or continuous 
pain does not always take place; pleasure and pain are never 
steady; they rotate always like a rotary instrument. Therefore, O 
King! Make your mind calm and quiet and rule happily your kingdom; 
or make over the charge of the kingdom to your sons and retire to 
the forest. This human body is seldom obtained; it is frail; therefore 
getting that body it is advisable to practise the realisation of the 
Supreme. O King! This organ of generation and this tongue reside 
also with the beasts, the peculiarity of human body is that knowledge 



can be realised in it; not in any other inferior births. Therefore leave 
your home, leave your sorrows for your wife; all this is the Maya of 
Bhagavan; by Her the world is deluded.” 


28-37. Narada said Bhagavan Hah speaking thus, the King bowed 
down to Him, the Deva of the Devas and finishing the bathing duties 
returned to his home. He then became possessed of dispassion and 
discrimination and making over the charge of his kingdom to his 
grandsons retired to the forest and realised the Supreme 
Knowledge. When the King went away, the Bhagavan began to 
laugh and laugh, seeing me again and again. I then told him, “O 
Deva! You have deceived me. I now come to know how great is the 
power of Maya. O Janardana! Now I remember all that I did in my 
feminine form. Tell me, O Hah! O Deva of the Devas! How I lost my 
previous consciousness, when I got down into the tank and bathed in 
it. O Lord of the world! Why was I enchanted, when I got the female 
form and when I got the King as my husband like S’achi’s getting 
Indra. The same mind I had; the old Jivatma was there and the 
previous subtle body was there; how, then, I lost their memories? O 
Lord! Give out the cause of it and clear my doubts; a great doubt has 
arisen in my mind. Many enjoyments I had in my female form, 
drinking liquor and other prohibited things I tasted; O Slayer of 
Madhu! What is the cause of all these? I could not know then that I 
was Narada, as I now recognise clearly what I was in and what I did 
in my female form. Say the Why of all these things.” 


38-53. Visnu said :-- “Know, O Intelligent Narada! That all this is 
merely the Pastime of Maya. There are many states going on in the 
bodies of all the living beings. The embodied beings have got their 
waking, dream, deep sleep and Turiya (beyond all the three above- 
mentioned) states; then why you doubt that when there is another 
body, there would be also the change in the states? When a man 
sleeps, he knows not anything, he does not hear anything; but when 



he gets awake, he again comes to know everything completely. The 
Chitta gets itself moved by sleep; then mind gets different states by 
dreams and there arises a variety of feelings. A mad elephant is 
coming to kill me, and I am not able to fly away. What to do? Where 
to go? There is no place where I can quickly go; thus, in dreams, 
there arise different mental states. Sometimes we see in dreams that 
our departed grandfathers are come in our houses. I am seeing 
them, talking with them and I am dining with them. Whatever pain 
and pleasure are felt in dreams, when they awake, they know of 
what happened in their dreams and can also describe in details, 
recollecting what had then happened. O Narada! Know the power of 
Maya incomprehensible as the things seen in dreams cannot be 
certainly known that all those are false. O Muni! Neither I, nor 
S’ambhu, nor Brahma can measure the power wielded by Maya and 
Her three Gunas, very hard to fathom. How, then, can any ordinary 
mortal know them! Therefore, O Narada! None is able to fathom the 
Maya. This world, moving and non-moving, is fashioned out of the 
triple Gunas of the Maya; nothing whatsoever can exist without 
them. The predominant Guna in Me is Sattva; but Rajas and Tamas 
exist in me; being the Lord of this world, I cannot override the three 
Gunas. So your father, Brahma, is predominant in Rajo Guna; but 
Sattva and Tamas never leave Him, Our Maha Deva is predominant 
in Tamo Guna, but Sattva and Rajo are always with him. Therefore, 
no being can exist as separate from the three Gunas; this point I 
have settled in S’ruti. Therefore, O Lord of the Munis! Quit this 
endless Moha for the world, caused by Maya, and very hard to get 
over and worship Bhagavati, Who is of the nature of Brahman. O 
Intelligent One! Now you have seen the power of Maya; and you 
have enjoyed many things produced by Maya and you have realised 
the extremely wonderful nature of Her. Then why do you ask me 
further on this point?” 


Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the glory of 
Maha Maya in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 



18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 31. On The Glory Of Maya 


18-22. O Muni! When my Father learnt the cause of my cares, he 
smiled and spoke to me in sweet words “O Child! The Devas, the 
high-souled Munis, the wise ascetics and the Yogis subsisting on air 
only are not able to conquer this Maya. O Narada! The power of 
Maya is so very great that I, Visnu and S’ambhu, the Lord of Lima, 
none are able to know Her power. 


That Mahamaya is creating, preserving and dissolving this world by 
Time, Karma, and Nature and other efficient causes. O Child! Know 
Her to be inconceivable and unapproachable. O Intelligent One! Do 
not be sorry nor should you be surprised about Maya’s great 
strength, for we all are deluded by Her. 


23-25. O Dvaipayan! Thus advised by my Father, my wonder 
disappeared. I then asked permission of my Father Padma Yoni 
(Lotus-born) and went out on tour round the sacred places of 
pilgrimages and on my way, seeing by and by the chief Tirthas, I 
have now come here. Therefore, O Muni! Dost thou relinquish your 
sorrows for the extinction of the Kuru’s family and remain here and 
pass your time in great joy and happiness. One must bear the fruits 
of one’s Karma, good or bad; knowing this fully roam at your will 
wherever you like. 


26-40. Vyasa said O King! Maharsi Narada thus kindling 
knowledge in me, went away; I also thought over his words. On the 
banks of the river Sarasvati, I composed this Devi Bhagavat to pass 
away my time during the excellent period of Sarasvata Kalpa. This 
Puranam is excellent; it is composed on the authority of the the 
Vedas; all doubts are removed by it; many nice events are narrated 



here. Therefore, O King! Not the least doubt should be entertained. 
As a magician makes the wooden dolls dance in his hands at his will, 
so this world-enchanting Maya is making this world, moving and non¬ 
moving, dance from Brahma down to the blades of grass and all 
human beings. O King! Know Maya’s triple Gunas to be the cause of 
this mind consisting of five organs of senses, that follows the Chitta 
(mind, buddhi and Ahamkara). Actions arise from the causes thereof; 
there is no doubt in this; what doubt, then, there can arise that all 
these creatures of different temperaments will come out of the 
different Gunas of Maya. Peaceful, terrible and stupid become the 
persons in contact with the Mayic Gunas. How, then, can they exist, 
bereft of them? As the cloth cannot exist without threads, so the 
embodied beings cannot exist in the world without the triple Gunas of 
Maya. There is no doubt in this. As a pot cannot be made without 
clay, so these bodies, Devas, human or birds, cannot be created 
without the Gunas. Brahma, Visnu and S’iva, too, are possessed of 
those three Gunas and therefore they become sometimes happy and 
satisfied, sometimes unhappy and dissatisfied and sometimes they 
become sad and remorseful as they are then under the influence of 
one Guna or the other. Brahma happens at times to be full of wisdom 
and knowledge, his temper peaceful, sweet and pleasant and his 
soul rapt in Samadhi, when he becomes possessed of Sattva Guna; 
again when he is void of Sattva and filled with Rajo Guna, His 
temper becomes unpleasant and his appearance gets dark and 
awful everywhere; and when he becomes grossly Tamasic, He 
becomes sorrowful and bereft entirely of intelligence. 


41-51. Visnu, when resting in Sattva, becomes peaceful, sweet- 
tempered, and full of knowledge; when Rajo Guna preponderates in 
Him, He becomes void of sweetness and becomes awful to all the 
beings. Rudra becomes, too, peaceful and pleasant under the Sattva 
Guna, awful and void of sweetness under the Rajo Guna, and 
becomes sad and stupid under the Tamo Guna. O King! When 
Brahma, Visnu, Mahes’vara and the solar and lunar Kings, the 



fourteen lords of Manvantaras, Manu and others are under the 
control of the nnayic Gunas, what to speak of other ordinary mortals, 
men and the other Jivas. The whole world is under the control of 
Maya; the Devas, men and all other beings. None should doubt on 
this point. All the embodied beings labour under the directions of 
Maya; never can they work independently. This Maya is again 
always residing in the Highest Essence, the Samvit or the Universal 
Pure Consciousness. Thus Maya is dependent on the Highest 
Goddess, Who is of the nature of Samvit, and, stimulated by Her, 
resides in the hearts of all the Jivas. Therefore one ought to 
meditate, worship and bow down before the Bhagavati, the Creatrix 
of Maya and Who is of the nature of Samvit, Pure Existence, 
Intelligence and Bliss. Thus She becomes gracious and merciful and 
liberates the Jivas, giving them Her realisation and drawing together 
Her own Maya away from them. This whole cosmos is nothing but 
Maya and the Consciousness (Samvit) of the nature of Brahman is 
the Lord of Maya. For this reason that Beautiful One in the triple 
worlds, the Devi Bhagavati is known by the name BhuvanesVari, the 
Great Lady of the worlds. 


52-60. O King! If the Jivas can fix their hearts on that Samvit, then 
Maya, born of the real and unreal, is quite unable to do any harm to 
them. No other Deva than the BhuvanesVari, of the nature of pure 
existence, intelligence and bliss is able to remove this Maya. O King! 
Darkness cannot destroy darkness; the Sun, Moon, Lightning or Fire 
can destroy it. Therefore it is highly incumbent on us to worship the 
Lady of Maya, the Samvit, the Mother with a cheerful heart to 
remove the Maya and Her Gunas. O King! Now I have narrated to 
you all the events concerning the killing of Vritrasura that you asked. 
What more do you want to hear now. O One devoted to vows! I have 
now described the first half of that Purana, which describes in detail 
the glory of S’ri Devi Bhagavati. This Purana, the secret of this 
Mother of the whole Universe, is not to be disclosed indiscriminately 
to anybody. Those that are peaceful, self-restrained, devoted, and 



possessed of Bhakti to the Devi, the disciples that are devoted to 
their Gurus and the eldest son, those are the fit recipients thereof. 
Whoever reads or hears with greatest devotion this Mahapuranam, 
equivalent to the Vedas, fraught with sound proofs and the essence 
of all talks, becomes, in this world, possessed of great wealth, 
becomes wise and passes his time in the greatest happiness. There 
is no doubt in this. 


Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter on the Sixth Book on the glory of 
Maya in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


[The Sixth Book Finished.] 



THE SEVENTH BOOK 



Chapter 1. On The Solar And Lunar Kings 


1-5. Suta said Glad to hear the excellent divine stories of the 
Solar and Lunar races, the virtuous King Janamejaya, the son of 
ParTksit, again asked “O Lord! I am now very eager to hear the 
increase of the two lines of Kings. O Sinless One! You know 
everything. So kindly describe, in detail, the pure histories, capable 
to destroy sins, of the kings and their characters. The kings of the 
Lunar and the Solar races were great Bhaktas of the Highest S'akti, 
S'ri Bhagavati Devi; this I have heard. O Muni! Who wants not to 
hear further on the glorious anecdotes of the Bhaktas of the S'ri 
Devi?” When the Rajarsi asked thus, the Muni Krisna Dvaipayan, the 
son of Satyavati began to narrate gladly the several deeds of the 
Kings. 


6-13. O King! I am now narrating to you in detail the origin, etc., of 
the Lunar and the Solar dynasties as well as of other kings in their 
connection. Hear attentively. The four-faced Brahma sprang from the 
navel of Visnu; engaged in practising Tapasya, he began to worship 
the Maha Devi Durga, extremely hard to conceive. Maha Devi, 
pleased at his worship, granted boon to Brahma; Brahma, the 
Grandsire of all the Lokas on thus getting the boon, became ready to 
create the world; but he could not create all on a sudden the human 
beings. Though the creation was eternally fashioned by the 
Pramatma Bhagavati, the four-faced Brahma thinking over in his 
mind variously, could not quickly spread it out and accomplish it as a 
veritable fact. Therefore He, the Prajapati, first created mentally the 
seven mind-born sons. These were known by the names of Marichi, 
Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vais'istha. Next sprang 
Rudra from the anger of Prajapati, Narada from his lap; Daksa from 
his right thumb. Thus Sanaka and the other Risis were also his mind- 
born sons. O King! The wife of Daksa was born from the left thumb 
of Prajapati; this all-beautiful daughter is well known in all the 



Puranas by the name of Virini and Asikni. Narada, the chief of the 
Devarsis, was born, on some other occasion in her womb. 


14-17. Janamejaya said “O Brahman! A great doubt arises in me 
to hear that the great ascetic Narada was born of Daksa in the womb 
of Virini. The Muni Narada indeed, was the son of Brahma; 
moreover be was the foremost of the ascetics and especially 
endowed with the knowledge of Dharma; how, then, can he be born 
of the womb of the Daksha's wife Virini. Well, if that be so, then 
describe, in detail, that wonderful story of the birth of Narada in the 
womb of Virini. 


18-31. O Muni! Under whose curse, the high-souled Narada though 
very wise, had to leave his first body and be born again.” Vyasa said 
O King, Brahma, the Self-born, with a view to create offspring, 
ordered first Daksa “Go and multiply innumerable children for the 
increase of the world.” Thus ordered by his father the Prajapati 
Daksa produced five thousand powerful and heroic sons in the 
womb of Virini. Seeing all the sons of Daksa, desirous to multiply, 
the Devarsi Narada urged on, as it were, by Fate, began to laugh at 
them. How do you desire to multiply when you know not the 
dimensions and capacity of earth; so you will, no doubt, be put to 
ridicule and laughter. Rather, if you proceed on work, knowing 
beforehand the earth's capacity, your efforts will be fruitful. 
Otherwise, your attempt will no doubt, end in failures. Alas! You are 
awfully illiterate! Not knowing the dimensions of the world, you are 
ready to multiply your progeny; how, then, can you meet with 
success! Vyasa said O King! Hearing, all on a sudden, these 
words, Haryas'va and other sons began to speak with each other, 
“What this Muni has told, is very true. Let us then ascertain the 
earth's dimensions; we can easily multiply afterwards.” Thus saying, 
they all went out to reconnoitre the earth. Thus excited at Narada's 
words, some went eastward, some southwards, some towards the 



north and some went to west all simultaneously and, as they liked, to 
make a survey of the earth. When the sons went away, Daksa 
became exceedingly sorry on their absence. Bent again on 
multiplying, he begat other sons; those sons again wanted to 
procreate. Seeing them, Narada again laughed and said :--Alas! 
What fools are you! Not knowing the dimensions of the earth, why 
are you ready to procreate? They were deluded by Narada's words, 
took them as true, and went out as their elder brothers did. Not being 
able to see those sons, Prajapati Daksa became very sorrowful for 
them and cursed Narada in rage. 


32-38. Daksa said “O Evil-minded One! You have destroyed my 
sons; so be yourself destroyed; you will have to be born in the womb 
for your sin in causing the death of my sons; you have caused my 
sons to go abroad; so you must be born as my son.” Thus cursed by 
Daksa, Narada had to take his birth in the womb of Virini. I heard 
also that the Prajapati Daksa begat afterwards sixty daughters in her 
womb. O King! Daksa, the great knower of Dharma, then gave up 
the sorrows for his sons and married his thirteen daughters to the 
high-souled Kas'yapa, ten daughters to Dharma, twenty-seven 
daughters to the Moon, two to Bhrigu, four to Aristanemi, two to 
Kris'as'va and the remaining two to Angira. Their sons and 
grandsons, the Devas and Danavas, became powerful but 
antagonistic towards each other. All of them were heroes and very 
Mayavis; so, deluded by their greed and jealousy, they quarrelled 
amongst each other. 


Here ends the First Chapter in the Seventh Book on the beginning of 
the narrative of the Solar and the Lunar lines of kings in the Maha 
Puranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 2. On The Piercing Of The Eyes Of 
Chyavana Muni 


1. Janamejaya said “O Highly Fortunate One! Kindly narrate in 
detail the spread of the families of those kings in the Solar line who 
were born and who were especially endowed with the knowledge of 
Dharma.” 


2-8. Vyasa said O Bharata! I now speak to you exactly what I 
heard of yore, from Narada, the best of the Risis, how the Solar race 
spread. Once, on an occasion, the Muni S'riman Narada, on his tour, 
came at his will to my holy hermitage on the beautiful banks of the 
Sarasvati river. On seeing him I bowed down at his feet and then 
remained standing before him. I then gave him a seat and 
worshipped him with great esteem. I then said to him “O Best of 
Munis! You are worshipped by the whole universe; my retreat is 
sanctified by your coming. O All-knowing One! Kindly narrate the 
histories of the Kings that were famous in the family of the seventh 
Manu; they were unequalled as far as their origin was concerned 
and their diameters as well were wonderful. Therefore I am very 
eager to know, in detail, the history of the Solar race. O Muni! 
Describe shortly or in detail as the circumstances may require.” O 
King! When I made this question, Narada, the knower of the Highest 
Reality, gladly smiled, and, addressing me, began to describe the 
history of the Solar race. 


9-26. Narada said O son of Satyavati! The history of the royal 
families is very holy and pleasant to hear; the more so when they are 
heard, one acquires Dharma and wisdom; therefore do you hear. In 
ancient times, Brahma sprang from the navel-lotus of Visnu and 
created the world. This is well known in every Purana. That self born. 



all-powerful, all-knowing, the Doer of all, the Universal Soul practised 
Tapas in ancient times for Ajuta (ten thousand) years. By virtue of 
that Tapas, He got special powers to create the world. He meditated 
on the Auspicious Mother, and getting from Her the excellent 
powers. He created first the mind-born sons, all endowed with 
auspicious signs. Of them, Marichi became well known in this act of 
creation. His son Kas'yapa was respected by all and he was of great 
celebrity. He had thirteen wives, all daughters of Daksa Prajapati. 
The Devas, Daityas, Yaksas, Pannagas, beasts and birds all sprang 
from him. Therefore this creation is called the Kas'yapT creation. 
Amongst the Devas, the Sun is specially famous; his other name is 
Vivasvan. His son was named Vaivasvat Manu; he was a famous 
king. Besides, Manu had nine more sons. Iksvaku was the eldest. 
Their names are: (1) Nabhaga, (2) Dhrista, (3) S'aryati, 

(4)Narisyanta, (5) Prans'u, (6) Nriga, (7) Dista, (8) Karusa, and 
(9) Risadhra. Iksvaku, the son of Manu was born first. He had one 
hundred sons, and Vikuksi was the wise and the eldest of these. I 
am now narrating how the nine sons, born afterwards of Manu, 
spread their families. Ambarisa was the son of Nabhaga; he was 
very truthful, powerful, and religious. He always governed his 
subjects justly. Dharstaka was the son of Dhrista; though he was a 
Ksattriya, he attained to Brahmanhood. He was naturally weak in 
fighting; always be was engaged in the works relating to the 
Brahmanas. Anarta was the well known son and Sukanya was the 
beautiful daughter of S'aryati. The King S'aryati gave his beautiful 
daughter in marriage to the blind Chyavana Risi; but the Risi, though 
blind, got his beautiful eyes again by the good character of the 
daughter. We heard that the As'vins, the Twins, the sons of the Sun, 
gave him back his eyesight. 


27-29. Janamejaya said “O Brahmans! How is it that the King 
S'aryati married his lovely-eyed daughter Sukanya to the blind 
Chyavana Muni? I have got a great doubt on this point. The King 
gives his daughter in marriage to a blind person, if she be deformed. 



ill-qualified or void of female signs. But the daughter, in this case, 
was beautiful. How then S'aryati, the Chief of Kings, gave over his 
daughter, knowing that the Risi was blind? O Brahmana! I am always 
an object of favour to you; so explain to me the cause of it.” 


30. Suta said Glad to hear these words of Janamejaya, the Muni 
Dvaipayana smilingly said 


31-50. S'aryati, the son of Vaivasvata, had four thousand married 
wives. All of them were endowed with auspicious signs and beautiful 
all of them were daughters of kings. They all were very obliging and 
dear to their husbands. But, out of all of these, the King had only one 
daughter exceptionally lovely and beautiful. The father and all the 
mothers loved exceedingly that sweet-smiling daughter. Not very far 
off the city, there was a beautiful lake of clear waters, like the 
Manasarovara lake. A Ghat way (steps) made of stones descended 
into the lake. Swans Karandavas, Chakravakas, Datyu'has, Sarasas 
and other birds used to play on its waters. Five varieties of lotuses 
were there in full bloom, bees were humming there all around. 
Various trees, S'al, Tamala, Sarala, Punnagas, As'okas, Banyans, 
Peepuls, Kadambas, rows of banana trees, Jambirs, Dates, 

Panasas, Betelnut trees, cocoanut trees, Ketakas, Kanchanas, and 
other various beautiful trees encircled round the lake. Within these, 
the white Yuthikas, Mallikas, and other creepers and shrubs were 
seen beautifying the scenery. Especially there were, amongst them. 
Jack trees. Mango trees, tamarind trees, Karanjas, Kutakas, 

Palas'as, Neem trees, Khadiras, Bel trees, and Amalaki trees; and 
peacocks were sounding their notes, cuckoos were cooing their 
beautiful voices. Close to that place, there was, in a sacred grove 
covered over by trees, staying Chyavana Muni, the Bhrigu's son, of a 
tranquilled mind, and the chief of the ascetics. Thinking the place 
lovely and free from any obstacles, the Muni took his firm seat there 
and, collecting all his thoughts within himself, took the vow of non- 



speaking and controlling his breath became engaged in practising 
tapasya. Restraining his senses and foregoing eating and drinking, 
that Muni constantly meditated on Bhagavati of the nature of Sat, 
Chit and Ananda, O King! While he was thus meditating, the anthill 
grew up round and covered his body and nice creepers covered that 
also all round. O King! Long intervals passed away and it was 
covered over with ants; so much so that that intelligent Muni was 
covered entirely and looked like a heap of earth. O King! Once the 
King S'aryati wanted to play in an artificial wilderness and came 
there to the lake with his wives. S'aryati became at once deeply 
engaged in playing on the clear waters of the lake, surrounded by 
the beautiful females. On the other hand, the quick beautiful 
daughter Sukanya, picking up flowers here and there with her 
companions also began to play. Dressed in ornaments, Sukanya, 
walked to and fro; her anklets making a beautiful tinkling sound, till 
she came to the ant-hill of Chyavana Risi. She sportingly sat close to 
that anthill and instantly saw a shining substance inside through that, 
like fireflies. “What is this?” She thought and wishing to take it, took a 
thorn and became very eager to prick it up. 


51-59. Slowly she went close to it and no sooner she got ready to 
prick it, than the Muni saw the beautiful, good-haired daughter as if 
to one's liking. The ascetic Bhargava, seeing that auspicious nice 
lady with nice teeth, spoke out in a feeble voice “What are you 
doing? O thin-bellied One! I am an ascetic; better go away from 
here. You have got such big-eyes, yet you do not see me. I therefore 
forbid you in your this attempt; do not pierce the anthill with thorn.” 
Though prevented, the daughter could not hear his words and asking 
“What was that?” pierced his two-eyes with thorns. Thus impelled by 
Fate, the princess sportingly pierced his eyes; but she suspected 
and thought “What have I done?” Thus becoming afraid she returned 
from that spot. His two eyes being pricked, the great Muni 
exceedingly pained, became very wrathful he incessantly gave vent 
to sorrows and remorse, being restless with pain. At that instant it 



happened that the king, nninisters, soldiers, elephants, horses, 
camels, so much so that all the beings that were there, had all their 
evacuations (passing their urines and faeces) stopped. Seeing thus 
happened all on a sudden, the King S'aryati was very much pained 
and became very anxious. All the soldiers came to the King and 
informed him of the stoppage of their evacuations. The King thought 
over the cause why this had happened. 


60-65. Cogitating thus, the King returned home. Becoming very 
much troubled with cares and anxieties. He asked his soldiers and 
kinsmen “Who amongst you has done such an heinous act? On the 
west side of the lake the Maharsi Chyavana is practising the great 
tapasya in the midst of the forest; I think someone has done mischief 
to that king of ascetics, blazing like a fire; and therefore we are 
overcome with this disease. The highsouled aged son of Bhrigu has 
become specially proficient in his asceticism and has become 
supreme; I think someone must have injured him. Though I do not 
know who is that mischievous person that has shown him contempt 
or like that, this our state at present clearly shews that this is the fit 
punishment of that.” Hearing this, the soldiers said None of us has 
committed any mischief by word, mind or body; we know this very 
well. 


Here ends the Second Chapter of the Seventh Book on the piercing 
of the eyes of Chyavana Muni in S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam the 
Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses, Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 3. On The Bestowing Of The Daughter 
Of The King S’aryati To Chyavana Muni 


1-11. Vyasa said O King! Thus the King, troubled with cares asked 
his soldiers, in an angry mood. Next he asked his friends in sweet 
words. The princess, seeing his father and his soldiers sorrowful, 
thought of her piercing the two eyes of the Muni with a thorn and 
thus spoke to the King O Father! While sporting in that forest, I 
came to see a very hard anthill covered with creepers and shrubs 
wherein I found two holes, O King! Through those small openings, I 
saw the two shining things as if they were fireflies and thinking them 
so I pierced them with thorns. At this time a faint voice I heard 
coming from that anthill. “Oh! I am killed!” I then took out my thorns 
and found them wet with water. “What is this!” I asked myself and 
was thunderstruck with fear; but I could not know what I pierced in 
that anthill. Hearing these gentle words of her daughter, the King 
S'aryati thought that that act had no doubt insulted the Muni and 
went at once to the anthill. He broke the anthill that covered the Muni 
and saw the suffering Chyavana aged in practising Tapasya, very 
much in pain. The King prostrated flat before the Muni and then with 
folded hands, praised him with hymns and humbly said to him “O 
Intelligent One! My daughter has done this wrong act while sporting; 
Therefore O high-souled One! What she had done unknowingly, do 
you forgive out of your own high-hearted-ness and liberality. I have 
heard that the ascetics are always void of anger; therefore now you 
have to forgive this daughter of the offence and thus shew your 
kindness.” 


12-16. Vyasa said The Maharsi Chyavana, hearing thus the King's 
words and specially seeing his humble and distressed nature, said :- 
- O King! I never was angry a bit; your daughter had pained me; yet I 
am not angry and have not cast on her any curse; you better see, 
that I am innocent; much pain is felt by me due to my eyes being 



pricked. O King! It seems that you are sorry and troubled for that sin. 
Who can acquire happiness in this world who has committed a great 
offence to a Bhakta of the Devi, in spite he gets even S'iva as his 
Protector. O King! On the one hand, I am now worn out by old age, 
and then, on the other hand, I am deprived of my eyes; what shall be 
now my means? Please say, who will take care of the blind man? 


17. The King said O Muni! The anger of the ascetics is transient; 
you are in practice of your tapasya; so your anger is a thing of 
impossibility. So kindly forgive the offence of the daughter. I have got 
many persons who will incessantly take care of you. 


18-22. Chyavana said “O King! There is none of my relations with 
me; then I am now made blind; how shall I go on with my tapasya? I 
do not think that your servants will take care of me. O King! If you 
think it your duty to please me, then do my word, give me your lotus¬ 
eyed daughter to serve me and take care of me. O King! I will be 
very glad if I acquire your daughter; she will serve me when I will be 
engaged in my tapasya. O King! This, if observed, will satisfy me and 
all the troubles that are now with you and your army will no doubt 
disappear. O King! Think and grant me your daughter; I am an 
ascetic observing vows and if you give over your daughter to me, 
you will not incur any sin nor any fault.” 


23-31. Vyasa said O Bharata! Hearing thus the Muni's words, the 
King S'aryati was immersed in cares and could not say anything 
whether he would or would not give over his daughter to him. The 
King thought, “My daughter is very fair like a Devakanya and this 
Muni is aged, ugly and specially he is blind; how then can I be happy 
if I give over my daughter to him. Who is there so stupid and vicious 
that knowing his good and bad, he for his own selfish happiness 
wants to deprive his beautiful daughter of the enjoyments of her 



married life. How will that fair eyebrowed daughter of mine pass her 
days happily in the company of this aged Muni when she will be 
overpowered by passion. The more so when the young beautiful 
ladies are not able to conquer their passions though possessed of 
husbands of their own standard and liking, how then can my 
daughter conquer her passion on getting this old blind husband! The 
exquisitely beautiful Ahalya married Gautama; but, seeing the 
youthful beauty of that lovely lady, Indra deceived her and took away 
her chastity. Till at last, her husband Gautama finding that action 
contrary to Dharma, cursed him. Now through the severe curse of 
that Brahmana many troubles may arise; so I cannot in any case 
give my daughter Sukanya over to him.” Thus thinking and absent- 
minded the King went back to his home and, being very distressed, 
called his ministers to form a council. O Ministers! What am I to do 
now? Is it advisable to give over my daughter to the Muni? Or is it 
better to suffer these pains? Judge and say what is the best course 
for me. 


32. The Ministers said “O King! What shall we say in this critical 
juncture? How can you bestow your exceedingly beautiful daughter 
to that ugly unfortunate ascetic?” 


33-45. Dvaipayana said At this moment, seeing her father and 
ministers troubled very much with cares, Sukanya understood at 
once everything by signs and hints; she then smilingly said to her 
dear father“O Father! Why are you looking so sad with cares? 
Perhaps you are very much troubled and sad for me. O Father! I 
have pained that Muni; so I will go and console him; what more than 
this that I will give up myself at his feet and please him.” Hearing 
these words of Sukanya, the King spoke to her very gladly before all 
the ministers. O Daughter! The Chyavana Muni is blind, aged and of 
a worn figure, especially of a very irritable temper; and you are a 
mere girl; how will you be able to serve him in that dreadful forest? 



You are like Rati in beauty and loveliness; how can I bestow my 
daughter to that aged worn out, blind Muni for my own pleasure! The 
father marries the daughter to him who has got relations, who is of a 
proper age, strong, who has got unequalled grains and wealth, gems 
and jewels; never to a man void of wealth. O broad-eyed One! You 
are exquisitely handsome; and that ascetic is very old; see what an 
amount of difference lies between you two. The Muni, moreover, has 
past his marriageable age; so how can I give over my daughter. O 
Lotus-eyed! You always dwell in beautiful places; how can I now 
make you dwell for ever in thatched huts? O Cuckoo avoiced one! 
Rather will I and my soldiers die than to bestow you to that blind 
husband. Let whatever come it may, I will never lose patience; 
therefore, O One of good hips! Be quiet. I will never give you to that 
blind man. O my Daughter! I don’t care a straw whether my kingdom 
and my body live or die, but I will never be able to give you over to 
the ascetic. Hearing thus the father's words, Sukanya began to 
speak with a glad face the following sweet and gentle words 


46-48. O Father! Do not trouble yourself for nothing with cares on my 
account. Give me over now to that best of Munis; then all the 
persons will be happy, no doubt. I will derive my intense pleasure 
there in that dense forest by serving with intense devotion my old 
husband, who is very holy. I have got not the least inclination 
towards these worldly enjoyments which are the sources of all 
troubles for nothing. My heart is now quiet. Therefore, O Father! I will 
become a chaste wife to him and act according to his liking. 


49-54. Vyasa said O King! The Ministers were greatly amazed on 
hearing these words and the King also became greatly pleased and 
took her to the presence of the Muni. Going before him, he bowed 
down to the Muni and said “O Lord! Please accept duly this 
daughter for your Seva.” Thus saying, the King betrothed his 
daughter to him according to rules. Chyavana Muni also became 



very glad to receive her. The Muni took the daughter willingly for his 
Seva but refused other dowries that the King presented. Thus the 
Muni became pleased; immediately the soldiers began to evacuate 
and were very glad. Seeing this, the King's heart became filled with 
joy. When the King, thus finishing the betrothal ceremony of his 
daughter wanted to return home, the thin bodied princess then told 
her father 


55-64. Sukanya said “O Father! Take away all my ornaments and 
clothings and give me for my use an excellent deer skin and one 
bark. O Father! I will dress myself like the wives of Munis and serve 
my husband in such a way as will bring to you the unparallelled 
undying fame in Heaven, Earth and the Nether regions; also I will 
serve my husband's feet so that I can derive the highest happiness 
in the next world. I am now full of youth, especially beautiful; do not 
think a bit that as I am wedded to an aged ascetic, that my character 
will be spoilt. As Vas'istha's wife Arundhati has attained celebrity in 
this world, so I will also attain success; there is no doubt in this. As 
the chaste wife Anasuya of Maharsi Artri has become widely known 
in this world so will I be known also and establish your fame.” The 
exceedingly religious King hearing all these words of Sukanya gave 
her deer skin and all other articles wanted. The King could not help 
weeping, when he saw that his daughter had dressed herself like the 
daughter of a Muni. He stood fixed, very sad, on that very spot. All 
the queens were exceedingly filled with sorrow to see the daughter 
dressed in bark and deer-skin. Their hearts quivered and they began 
to weep. O King! Then the King S'aryati bade good bye to the Muni, 
leaving there his daughter. He went with a grievous heart and 
returned to his own city, accompanied by the ministers. 


Here ends the Third Chapter of the Seventh Book on the bestowing 
of the daughter of the King S'aryati to the Chyavana Muni in S'ri Mad 



Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 4. On The Conversation Between The 
Two As’vins And The Princess Sukanya 


1-38. Vyasa said O King! When the King S'aryati departed, that 
virtuous lady devoted her tinne in serving her husband, and the Fire. 
She gave to the Muni for his food various delicious roots and fruits. 
She made him bathe with warm water; then making him put on the 
deer skin, she made him sit on the Kus'asan. (Seat made of the 
Kus'a grass.) Next she used to place in his front Kus'a, Til and 
Kamandalu and speak to him “O best of Munis! You are now to 
perform your daily rites (Nitya Karma).” When the Nitya Karma was 
finished, the lady used to catch him by his hand and make him sit on 
another seat. Next the princess brought fresh ripe fruits and cooked 
rice, grown without cultivation and gave to the Muni for his food. 
When the husband finished his meals, she gave him devotedly water 
for cleansing his mouth; then washing his hands and feet gave him 
the betelnuts and pan leaves. Next she made him sit on an excellent 
seat, and with his permission, performed her own bodily 
purifications. She then, used to eat the remnants, fruits and roots of 
the dishes of her husband; and coming next to her husband 
addressed him affectionately “O Lord! Order me what can I do now 
for you? If you like, I may shampoo your legs and feet.” Thus every 
day that princess devotedly spent her time in serving her husband. 

At evening when the Homa ceremony was finished, she collecting 
delicious and soft fruits presented to him to eat. With his permission 
she, then, ate that were left of the fruits; next she prepared bedding 
soft to the touch and gladly made him sleep on it. When his dear 
husband thus laid himself on the bed, she shampooed his feet and 
legs and in the interval, asked him about the religious duties of the 
chaste wives of the family. When the Muni fell asleep in the night, 
she devotedly laid herself close to his feet and slept. During the 
summer season when her husband was perspiring, the lady used to 
fan him with cool breeze. She took off his troubles and thus served 
her husband. In the cold season, she collected firewood and lit them 



before him and used to ask him frequently “O Muni! Are you feeling 
pleasure in this?” That lady, dear to her husband, used to get up 
from her bed in the Brahma Muhurta before Sunrise, next made her 
husband get up and took him some short way off and there made 
him sit for calling on nature. She kept ready water and earth and 
stood in readiness at a suitable distance apart. Knowing that he had 
finished his calls for nature, she took him back to the As'ram, and 
washed his hands and feet with water duly making him sit on a 
convenient Asana. She then gave to him the pot for Achamana and 
then began to collect fuel. She used to bring pure clear water and 
made it hot; then she asked her husband fondly “O Husband! Have 
you finished cleaning your teeth? Warm water is ready; may I bring it 
to you? You better bathe with that, uttering your Mantrams. The time 
is now for performing the morning Sandhya and for performing 
Homa. Do the Homa regularly and worship the Devas.” The 
princess, whose nature was pure and clean as anything, kept herself 
engaged daily in serving her husband, Chyavana Muni, with perfect 
gladness, austerity, and observing all the rules duly. Thus that 
beautiful-faced princess worshipped gladly Chyavana Muni, serving 
Fire and the guests daily. Then, once, on an occasion, the AsVin 
twins, the sons of Surya came sporting and at their pleasure, close 
to the hermitage of the Chyavana Muni. At that time the princess, 
beautiful in all respects, was returning home after her bath in a pure 
clear stream and came to the sight of the two AsVins. Being 
enchanted by her extraordinary lovely beauty, they thought she 
might be a Deva Kavya, quickly went to her and fondly questioned 
her“O slow moving One like an elephant! Look! We are the sons 
of Devas; we have come to you to ask some questions. O Excellent 
One! Wait for a moment; we request thus to you. O Sweet-smiling 
One! Please answer our questions truly and properly. O Lovely-eyed! 
Whose daughter are you? Who is your husband Why have you 
come here alone to bathe in this tank? O Lotus-eyed! You seem to 
be a second Laksmi; O Beautiful One! We want to know something; 
please reply exactly. O Beloved! Your feet are exceedingly gentle; 
why have you not put on any shoes; why are you walking 
barefooted? Our hearts are being troubled to see you walking thus 



barefooted? O Thin bodied One! Your body is very soft that you 
ought to have gone in a car; why are you thus walking on foot and in 
such an ordinary dress in this forest? Why have not hundreds of 
maid-servants accompanied you? O lovely faced One! Speak truly 
whether you are a princess or Apsara. O Sinless One! Blessed is 
your mother from whom you are born, blessed is your father. 
Specially the person with whom you are married, we are unable to 
describe his fortune. O Lovely eyed! This earth is being sanctified by 
the movements of your feet; consequently this garden is now purer 
today than the Devaloka. Boundless is the fortune of these deer and 
birds who can see you whenever they like; what more can we say 
than this that this forest is rendered very pure. O Fair One with fair 
eyes! It is needless to praise your beauty; speak truly who is your 
father and who is your husband; we like very much to see them.” 


39-56. Vyasa said O King! On hearing their words, the exquisitely 
beautiful princess bespoke to the twin Devas with much bashfulness 
I am the daughter of S'aryati; father has given me over, under the 
directions of the Daiva, to the Maharsi Chyavana. I am his chaste 
dear wife; the Maharsi is staying in this very place. O Twin Devas! 

My husband is a blind ascetic and he is very aged. I gladly serve him 
day and night according to the rules of chastity amongst women. 
Who are you? And why have you come here? My husband is staying 
in the As'rama; kindly come and sanctify the As'rama. O King! The 
two AsVins heard her and said “O Auspicious One! Why has your 
father betrothed you, such a gem, to an old ascetic? It is very 
strange. Indeed! In this solitary forest you are shining like a steady 
lightning; what more can we say than this that we hardly find a 
beautiful lady like you, even in the Devaloka! Alas! The Deva dress 
and a full set of ornaments and blue dyes look well on you; this deer¬ 
skin and barks of trees in no way fit you. O Beautiful One! Your eyes 
are very large; yet the Creator has given you a blind husband; 
specially a very aged one; and you are wearing away by constantly 
dwelling with your blind husband in this forest. What more can be 



wrong for the Creator than this? O deer-eyed One! In vain you have 
selected him for your husband. At this period of your youth and 
beauty it does not look at all well to see you with your blind husband. 
You are versed in dancing and music; but your husband is blind and 
aged; when in dancing you will shoot your darts of love, on whom 
then, will those arrows fall? O large-eyed One! Oh! The Creator is 
certainly of a very little understanding! Else why would he have 
made you, so full of youthful vitality, the wife of a blind man? O 
lovely-eyed One! You are never fit for him; select another husband. 

O Lotus-eyed One! Your husband is not only blind but an ascetic; so 
your life is quite useless; we do not consider it fit that you reside in 
this forest and put on this bark and deer-skin. O dark-eyed One! Your 
body and every limb thereof is very beautiful; judge well and make 
one amongst us your husband. O Proud One! Why are you being so 
very beautiful, spending your youth in vain in serving this Muni? No 
good signs are visible in this Muni; he cannot maintain nor protect 
you even ; why are you, then, serving him in vain? O spotless One! 
Leave at once this Muni, quite incapable in giving any sort of 
pleasure, and marry one of us. O Beloved! Then you will enjoy in the 
Nandana Kanana or in the forest of Chaitratarha. O Proud One! How 
will you spend your time with the aged husband, being brought to so 
much humiliation and without any dignity and self-respect. You are 
endowed with all auspicious signs; moreover you are a princess; you 
are not ignorant of all enjoyments in this world; why then you like to 
live such an unfortunate life in vain in this forest? O Princess! Your 
face is exceedingly beautiful; your eyes are wide and your waist is 
thin. Your voice is sweet like a cuckoo. Who is more beautiful than 
you? Quit now your aged ascetic husband and marry one of us for 
your happiness; then you will be able to enjoy excellent celestial 
things in the heavens. O good-haired one! What pleasure can you 
derive by your staying in this forest with your blind husband! O deer¬ 
eyed One. It is very painful for you to serve at this young age of 
yours, to remain in this forest and serve this aged man. O Princess! 

Is it that you like troubles and nothing else. O One with a face lovely 
like the Moon! We see that you are of a very soft body; so to collect 
water and fruits is never a duty fit for you. 



Here ends the Fourth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the 
conversation between the two AsVins and the Princess Sukanya in 
S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses, 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 5. On The Getting Of Youth By 
Chyavana Muni 


1-6. Vyasa said O King! Hearing their words, the princess began 
to tremble; but holding on patience she spoke to them in reserved 
terms thus You are the sons of Surya and you are the 
acknowledged deities amongst the gods; specially you know 
everything, I am a chaste virtuous woman. You ought not to speak to 
me in the above mannner. O Twin Devas! Father has betrothed me 
to the Muni practising the Yoga Dharma; besides I am chaste; how 
can I behave like a prostitute! This Sun is the Witness of the actions 
good or bad of all people; He is therefore looking on our actions also. 
Besides you both are born in the family of the high-souled Kas'yapa- 
Thus it is utterly wrong for you to utter such (irreligious and 
infamous) words. You know well the course of Dharma, what is 
religious and what is irreligious in this world which has got nothing 
substantial; how can a family woman leave her husband and serve 
another? Go wherever you like, O Sinless Devas! I am the daughter 
Sukanya of the King S'aryati, devoted to my husband. Otherwise I 
will curse you. 


7-11. Vyasa said :-- O Bharata! Hearing these words, the As'vins 
were greatly surprised, and, afraid of the Muni, spoke again “O 
Princess! We are very much pleased to see your chastity; therefore, 
O Beautiful Woman! Ask boon from us; we will grant it for your 
welfare. O honoured Woman! We, the physicians of the gods, will 
certainly make your husband exceedingly beautiful and young, O 
Smart and Intelligent One! When we three will be exactly the same in 
figure, age and lustre! you better can make one of us your husband.” 
Hearing their words Sukanya became greatly amazed and went to 
her own husband and spoke everything what they, the God's 
physicians, said. 



12-17. Sukanya said “O Husband! The AsVins, the Surya's sons, 
have come close to our As'rama. I have seen the two Devas and 
their bright bodies. Seeing me beautiful they were overpowered with 
passion and told me, “We will, be sure, make your blind husband, 
young, bright and give him his two eyes again; but you will have to 
make one condition. Hear it :-Your husband will be exactly like us 
and you will have to select your husband amongst three of us.” O 
Holy One! Hearing this as strange, I now come to inform you. Now 
judge and say what I am to do now. The Deva's Maya is very difficult 
to comprehend; the more so, when I do not know their intentions! O 
Omniscient One! I will act as you desire.” 


18-19. Chyavana said “O Beloved! Go just now, at my word, to the 
AsVins and bring them, O auspicious One! before me. What more 
shall I say than this Go and observe, what they say, as early as 
possible. There is no need to think over this matter.” 


20-25. Vyasa said O King! Thus getting the permission from her 
husband, Sukanya went immediately to them and said “O AsVins! 
You are the chief gods; now do as you say. I agree to observe what 
you desire.” Hearing her words, the two Devas then went to the 
Muni's As'rama and told the princess “Let your husband enter in 
the midst of the water.” The aged Chyavana Muni went down quickly 
in the midst of waters to attain a good form. Next the two As'vins 
entered into the water of that tank. A few minutes after, the three 
persons came out of the tank. All were equally bright, equally 
beautiful, equally young and their limbs were decorated equally with 
earrings and various other ornaments. They all spoke simultaneously 
:-“0 Auspicious One! There is no other woman beautiful like you, 
especially your face is very clean and fair; therefore select any one 
of us three as your husband. O Fair One! Whomever you love most, 
choose him.” 



26-30. Vyasa said O King! Sukanya then saw their bodies are 
equally bright and beautiful; not the least difference is to be found in 
beauty, age, voice and dress. She became doubtful on seeing their 
equal appearances. The princess, not being able to distinguish her 
husband, became very anxious and thought“What am I to do 
now? Whom to choose? They are exactly the same. I cannot 
distinguish who is my real husband? This may be the magic set up 
by the two AsVins. However, I am put to a great crisis. I won't ever 
select another who is not my husband. Therefore my death is well 
nigh; what to do now? The third form seen now may be also a 
Deva's son.” Thus cogitating, she resolved to meditate on the 
Highest Prakriti, the Lady of the Universe, the most Auspicious One. 
Then the thin-bellied princess began to sing the hymns of the 
Bhagavati. 


31-38. Sukanya said “O World-Mother! Under most painful 
circumstances I take refuge unto Thee; preserve my chastity; I bow 
down to Thy feet. O Devi! Salutations to Thee, born of lotus. O Thou, 
the dear consort of S'ankara! Salutations to Thee. O Thou favourite 
to Visnu, O Mother of the Vedas! O Sarasvati! Salutations to Thee, 
Thou hast created the world, moving and unmoving; Thou art 
preserving it without being least excited; again Thou art swallowing it 
for the peace and well-being of all. What more. Thou art the Most 
Worshipful Mother of Brahma, Visnu, and Mahes'a. Thou always 
illuminest the understanding of the illiterate and Thou always 
grantest liberation to the Jhanins. Thou art the Prime Prakriti in 
fullness and the Beloved of the Prime Purusa. Thou grantest Bhukti 
(enjoyment) and Mukti (freedom) to the souls that are cleansed and 
pure; Thou givest pain to those that are entirely void of knowledge 
and Thou grantest happiness to those that are endowed with Sattva 
Guna. O Mother! Thou bestowest Siddhi (the success, the eight 
supernatural powers), fame, and victory to the Yogis! Being merged 
in an ocean of bewilderment, I come now to take refuge unto Thee. 



O Mother! The two Devas are playing hypocrisy with me; thus 
puzzled I can’t fix my mind whom to select; therefore I am merged in 
an ocean of sorrow. Save me by showing my real husband. O 
Omniscient One! Knowing my vow of chastity dost Thou enlighten 
me so that I can know my husband.” 


39-58. Vyasa said O King! Thus pleased by the Sukanya's 
prayers, the Devi Tripura Sundari then imparted to her the pleasant 
Sattva Jhan (knowledge pertaining to Sattva Guna). She then looked 
again at the three personages, and though they were similar in 
appearance and beauty, instantly she recognised mentally her 
husband and chose him. When Sukanya selected the Muni 
Chyavana, the two Devas became greatly pleased to see that. The 
two Devas were pleased by the grace of Bhagavati; they were 
further pleased to see the Dharma of chastity and granted her the 
boon. They then bade good-bye to Chyavana and were ready to 
start to their own place when Chyavana being very much pleased to 
get through their grace, his beauty, youth and wife, interrupted them, 
saying “O high-minded Devas! You have done much good to me. I 
used to feel pain every day, in spite of my having this wife having 
good hairs! But owing to your mercy, I cannot describe how happy I 
am now in this world of woes and troubles. I was very aged and blind 
and was without any enjoyment but it is you that coming to this forest 
have brought to me eyes, youth and exquisite beauty. Therefore, O 
twin Devas! I desire to do something good to you in return. Fie on 
him, who does not return anything for the good that he has received 
from a beneficent friend. That man remains indebted for ever in this 
world; therefore I am desirous to give you two now whatever you 
want. O twin Devas! Even if the Devas or the Asuras find it difficult to 
attain, I will give that to you to free myself of the debt I owe to you. I 
am greatly pleased at your good deed; therefore be kind enough to 
speak out whatever you desire.” They began to consult with each 
other, and spoke to the Muni Chyavana who was seated with 
Sukanya beside him “O Maharsi! We have got all our desires by 



the grace of Father! Still it is difficult for us to drink some libation 
along with the other Devas and we thirst after that very strongly. At 
the great sacrifice of Brahma in the Golden Mountain (Kanakachala), 
Indra, the King of the Devas, ordered us not to drink Soma, as we 
were physicians. Therefore, O Knower of Dharma! O Ascetic! You 
will certainly do us a great favour if you can make us drink the Soma 
juice; we would be very glad and have our desires satisfied.” Thus 
hearing the words of the As'vins, Maharsi Chyavana gladly spoke to 
them the following gentle words, O Twin Devas! I was blind and 
aged; but now I am become a young and beautiful man, and it is by 
your grace that I have got back my wife. Therefore I speak this truly 
before you that at the great sacrifice of the lustrous King S'aryati, I 
will gladly make you drink the Soma in the presence of Indra, the 
King of the Devas. Hearing these words of the Muni, the twin As'vins 
were greatly pleased and went back to the world of the Devas. And 
the Muni Chyavana, too, returned to his own As'rama with his wife 
Sukanya. 


Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the getting of 
youth by Chyavana Muni in S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam the Maha 
Puranam of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 6. On Granting The As’vins The Right 
T o Drink The Soma Juice 


1-3. Janamejaya said “O Muni! How did Maharsi Chyavana make 
these twin Devas drink Soma and how his words came out to be 
true. Human strength is insignificant compared to Indra's strength. 
Indra forbade the physicians, the AsVins, to drink the Soma juice. 
How then could the Muni give the right thereof. This is very 
wonderful. Therefore, O Thou, devoted to Dharma! O Lord! Describe 
in detail the doings of this Maharsi Chyavana. I am very anxious to 
hear it.” 


4-10. Vyasa said O King! In that famous sacrifice of the King 
S’aryati, Chyavana Risi did wonderful feats. O Bharata! I am now 
narrating to you his entirely wonderful character. Hear it attentively. 
Maharsi Chyavana, illustrious like the Devas, began to enjoy with a 
cheerful mind and gladdened heart, with his beautiful wife Sukanya 
who was like a Deva Kanya. Now, once on an occasion, the wife of 
S'aryati became very anxious and trembling said to her husband 
weeping “O King! You have betrothed your daughter to the blind 
Muni Chyavana; now it is your duty to go and enquire whether the 
daughter is living or is dead. O Lord! What is my beautiful daughter 
doing with that husband. Please go just now to the Muni's As'rama 
and see about it. O Rajarsi! I always burn in pain and agony when I 
think of her. She must have become very lean and thin due to the 
troubles of Tapasya; please bring her quickly here to my presence. 
She is suffering an everlasting pain from having an aged blind 
husband; and it is quite likely she has become very lean and thin, I 
am anxious, therefore, to see my daughter lean and thin who is 
wearing barks of trees as her dress.” 



11. S'aryati said “O broad-eyed One! I am going gladly just now to 
see my dear daughter and that Muni of severe vows.” 


12-25. Vyasa said O King! Thus saying to his wife, distressed with 
sorrow, the King S'aryati mounted on his chariot and quickly went 
towards the As’rama of the Chyavana Muni. On reaching there, he 
saw the Maharsi Chyavana like a Deva's son. Seeing his body like 
that of Deva, the King became bewildered and began to think thus 
“What! Has my daughter done such an ugly act, blameable in the 
society! That Muni was very calm and quiet, penniless and very old; 
my daughter, perhaps, being overpowered with passion, killed him 
and has taken, no doubt, another husband. It is indeed difficult to 
control the God of Love, armed with his flowery bow: the period of 
youth is moreover very hard to conquer. So this daughter impelled by 
lust has thrown a dreadful stigma on the clear name of the family of 
the great Manu. Fie on him whose daughter in this world is of a 
vicious character! It seems that daughters are born for the expiation 
of all the sins committed by their fathers. But what an unjust act have 
I committed for my own selfish ends? It is highly incumbent on every 
father to betroth his daughter with every care possible to a 
bridegroom suitable in every respect; but I did not do it and now 
have got the fruits equivalent to my doing. If I kill my daughter, 
vicious and unchaste, I will incur sin due to killing a woman and 
moreover my daughter. I am the cause of this stain on Muni's line of 
descent. On the one hand, the scandal on one is very powerful; and 
the affection for a daughter is strong on the other. What am I to do 
now?” The King became merged in deep thoughts. At this time 
Sukanya accidentally saw her father thus drowned in anxious 
thoughts. Seeing him, Sukanya instantly came to her father's side 
and asked the King in sweet affectionate words. O King! How is it 
that your face has become so pale with anxious thoughts, seeing the 
Muni sitting in front of you, a young man with lotus-eyes. O Father! 
What are you thinking? You belong to the famous Manu's family; 
besides, you are a high-minded man; you ought not to be sad so 



suddenly; come quickly and bow your head down before my 
husband. 


26. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the daughter's words, the 
King became impatient with anger and began to speak to her 


27-36. O Daughter! Where is that aged blind ascetic Muni Chyavana 
and who is this youth intoxicated with lust? A great doubt has arisen 
in my mind. O Vicious Soul! Have you slain that Chyavana Muni and 
engaged yourself in such a sinful act? O You, a Disgrace to your 
family! Have you accepted another husband out of your desire of 
lust? My mind has became very much troubled on not seeing that 
Muni in this As'rama. O vicious One! Now I don't see the Muni; but 
instead of him, I see this bright person. And thus it is on account of 
your sinful behaviour that my mind is drowned in the ocean of cares. 
Then hearing her father's words, Sukanya smiled and gladly took 
him at once to her husband and said “O Father! He is your son-in- 
law; He is the same Chyavana Muni; there is no doubt here. The 
twin As'vins have given him this beautiful lustre and lotus-like eyes. 
The two As'vini Kumaras came accidentally to my Asrama and out of 
mercy no doubt they have made Chyavana such a nice young man. 
O King! I am not your that daughter that will do a vicious act as you 
think, beguiled by this beautiful form of the Muni. Father! Bow down 
before the Chyavana Muni. Ask him and he will tell you everything.” 
Hearing thus the daughter's words, the King went instantly to the 
Muni and bowed down before him and asked him affectionately thus 


37-38. The King said “O Son of Bhrigu! How have you got your 
eyes back? Where has your old age gone? Kindly narrate all your 
details as early as possible. O Brahmana! Seeing your exquisitely 



beautiful form, a great doubt has arisen in me; so tell me everything 
in detail; I will be very glad, no doubt.” 


39-45. Chyavana said “O King! The two As'vins, the physicians of 
the Gods, came here on their own account and have done me this 
good out of their mercy. Owing to the benefit thus received, I have 
granted them the boon that I will make them drink the Soma juice in 
the Agnistoma Yajha of the King S'aryati. Thus I have got these 
beautiful eyes and the new youth; therefore, O King! Collect yourself 
and sit in the holy sacrificial seat.” When the Brahmin Chyavana 
Muni spoke thus, the King S'aryati and his dear wife sat with greatest 
pleasure and began to talk on auspicious topics with the high-souled 
Muni. Then the Bhargava consoled the King and said I will perform 
your sacrifice; please collect all the necessary materials. I have 
promised to the As'vins that certainly I will make them drink the 
Soma juice. Therefore, O King! I will have to carry that out in your 
sacrifice. O King! If Indra be angry, I will stop him by my Tapas force 
and in the Agnistoma Yajha I will make the As'vins drink Soma. 


46-58. Vyasa said O King! S'aryati, the lord of the earth, then 
gladly approved the proposals of Chyavana Muni. The King then 
shewed respects to the Muni and, with a pleasant attitude of mind, 
returned to his city with his wife, all the while talking of the Muni on 
the way. On a good auspicious day he, possessed of enormous 
wealth and prosperity prepared an excellent place for the 
performance of the sacrifice. The Muni Chyavana then invited 
Vas'istha and other respectable Munis and initiated the King S'aryati 
for the performance of the sacrifice. At the commencement of the 
sacrifice, Indra and the other Devas and the two As'vins all came to 
the sacrifice to drink Soma. Seeing the As'vins, Indra became afraid 
and asked the other Devas, “Why have the As'vins come here?” 
They are the physicians and, therefore, never fit to drink Soma. Who 
has brought them hither at this great Agnistoma Sacrifice? The 



Devas remained all silent. Chyavana Muni then became ready to 
offer Soma to the AsVins and Indra immediately stopped him saying 
They are already prohibited to drink Soma as a sacrificial share; 
so do not accept the vessel of Soma for them. Chyavana then said 
- “O Lord of S'achi! These are the Surya's sons; tell, then, truly why 
these are rendered unfit to drink Soma. They are not of mixed blood; 
they are born of the legal wife of Surya Deva. O Lord of the Devas! 
What is the fault then, of the AsVins, the physicians, that they be 
prohibited to drink Soma juice. Please reply. O Indra! This point must 
be settled by all the Devas here. I have promised to make them drink 
the Soma juice in this sacrifice. To keep my word I have initiated the 
King in this sacrifice. I will have my word fulfilled; there is no doubt in 
this. O Indra! They have given me my youth and bestowed my eyes 
and have done me great good. I will also do good to them to my 
best.” 


59. Indra said “The Devas have appointed these Devas their 
Physicians; therefore they are looked down upon in the society; so 
they are unfit to drink Soma. You need not make them drink Soma.” 


60-61. Chyavana spoke “O Indra! You have adulterated yourself 
with Ahalya; why are you, then, giving vent to your anger thus in 
vain. You have treacherously murdered Vritrasura; it is quite 
inappropriate for a vicious person like you to say that the AsVins 
cannot have the right to drink Soma. This is quite impossible.” O 
King! On the springing of this dispute, no body spoke to Indra. The 
illustrious Bhargava, then, made them accept the Soma juice. 


Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Seventh Book on granting the 
AsVins the right to drink the Soma juice in S'ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 







Chapter 7. On The Twin As’vins Drinking The 
Soma Cup 


1-2. Vyasa said O King! When the vessel filled with the Soma 
juice was given to the two AsVins, Indra became very angry and 
showing his strength, spoke thus to the Muni Chyavana. O 
Brahmana! Never will you be able to endow him with such a high 
honour. When you have shewn towards me your enmity, I will kill 
you, no doubt, exactly like VisVarupa. 


3-4. Chyavana said “O Indra! Do not insult the two highsouled 
AsVins. They have given me beauty, youth and lustre and made me 
look like a second Deva. O Lord of the Devas! Just as the other 
Devas can take the vessel of Soma excluding you, so the two 
powerful AsVins can do the same towards you.” 


5. Indra said “They are the physicians; so they cannot in any way 
have the right to accept the Soma cup. I will just now sever your 
head.” 


6-29. Vyasa said O Ornament to the race of Bharata! At these 
words of Indra, the Muni made the AsVins accept the Soma cup, 
thus highly insulting, as it were, Indra and not taking any notice of his 
words. When the two AsVins accepted the cup with a desire to drink 
the Soma thereof, the powerful Indra saw it and said “If you make 
them drink Soma out of your own necessity, I will hurl thunderbolt on 
your head exactly in the same way as I did towards VisVarupa.” 



The Muni became violently angry at this and made the AsVins drink 
the Soma according to due rites and ceremonies. Indra, too, angrily 
hurled thunderbolt on him in the presence of all the Devas. The 
weapon shed lustre like million Suns. Seeing the thunderbolt hurled 
on him, the powerful Muni made the Indra's thunderbolt stand stock 
still by virtue of his Tapas. The powerful Muni then adopted black 
magic to kill Indra and offered oblations of clarified butter and grains, 
purified by Mantrams, in the Fire. By the Tapas of Chyavana, of 
unbounded lustre, there sprang from the sacrificial hearth Kritya (A 
female deity to whom sacrifices are offered for destructive and 
magical purposes). And out of Kritya originated a very strong person, 
very cruel and of huge body, a great Demon. The horrible Demon, 
named Mada, was terrifying to all the beings. His body was huge like 
a mountain, teeth very sharp and terrible. Four teeth were hundred 
Yojanas long each, and his other teeth were ten Yojanas long. His 
arms were like mountains, very long and fierce; tongue, horrible, 
rough and so very long that it reached up to the heavens. His throat 
was like a mountain peak hard and of a furious appearance; nails 
resembled tiger's, hairs horrible. His body was jet black like lamp 
black; face very terrible, eyes bright like the conflagration fire and 
awful. One of his jaws touched the ground and the other touched the 
heaven. Thus was born the Demon, named Mada, of huge form. 
Looking at him, the Devas became suddenly frightened; Indra, too, 
got very much terrified at the sight of him and did not want to have 
any more fight. The Demon swallowed Indra's thunderbolt, looked at 
the sky, and stood up as if to swallow at once the whole Universe. 

He became infuriated with rage and pursued Indra to devour him. 
Seeing this, the Devas cried aloud “Alas! We are slain.” Indra had 
his arms disabled by Mantrams and so he could not hurl his 
thunderbolt though he wanted to do so. The Lord of the Devas, then, 
with thunderbolt in his hand, looked on the Demon as Death 
personified and remembered his Guru, skilled in the knowledge 
which is the proper time to perform a certain thing. The liberal- 
minded Brihaspati knowing the time of imminent danger, and that he 
is remembered by Indra, at once came to the spot. He then judged 
what to do in the present crisis and told Indra “O Indra! This 



cannot be averted even by Mantranns; what to speak of thunderbolt! 
This powerful Asura Mada has arisen from the sacrificial hearth by 
virtue of the Tapas of the Chyavana Muni. The Muni's power is 
especially felt here. O Lord of the Devas! Nobody, You, I, nor any 
other Deva will be able to resist him. Know this. Even Brahma 
cannot thwart the anger of one who is devoted to the S'akti, the 
Highest Force; Chyavana is the Bhakta of the Highest S'akti. So no 
other body is able to defeat him. He is the man himself to take back 
the Kritya that he has originated. There is no doubt in this. So it is 
better for you now to take the shelter of the Muni.” 


30-52. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus from his Guru, Indra went 
to the Muni and bowed down shuddering, before him. “O Muni! 
Forgive me and stop the Asura from his intention to slay the Devas. 

O All knowing One! Be pleased, I will keep your words. O Bhargava! 
The two As'vins will, from this day, have the right to drink the Some 
juice. This I speak out to you in truth. O Brahmana! Be graciously 
pleased unto me. O Ascetic! Your intention will never be baffled. 
Especially I know you to be a knower of Dharma; so, you will never 
be able to make your word swerve from truth. The two As'vins will, 
by your grace, be able to drink always the Soma cup; and the King 
S'aryati's fame will also know no bounds. O Muni! Know that what I 
have done is simply to test your prowess in Tapas. O Brahmana! 

Now do this favour to me and take back your, this Demon Mada, 
sprung from your sacrificial hearth and thus do good to all the Devas. 
There is no doubt in this.” Thus spoken piteously by Indra, 

Chyavana, who knew the Highest Reality, drew back within himself 
the anger arising from the enmity with Indra. Then the Maharsi 
Chyavana consoled the Devas that were very much perplexed and 
anxious out of terror of the Demon named Mada and divided the 
Asura into four parts (1) female sex, (2) drinking, (3) gambling and 
(4) hunting animals. When Mada was thus divided into four parts, the 
terror stricken Devas felt themselves relieved and saved and got 
consoled. Chyavana then placed the Devas in their respective 



stations and connpleted the sacrifice. As last, the religious Bhargava 
made first Indra and then the two AsVins drink the Soma Cups. O 
King! Thus Chyavana had the AsVins their Soma Cups by virtue of 
his power of Tapas. Thence the tank with the sacrificial post Yupa 
became famous and the Muni's As'rama also was renowned and 
honoured in all respects. The King S'aryati, too, became very glad at 
this sacrifice and completing the sacrifice returned with his ministers 
to his city. The Menu's son, the powerful religious King S'aryati 
governed his kingdom, free from any obstacles or other enemies. He 
had one son named Anarta; and Anarta had a son named Revata 
born to him. 


Revata built the city of Kus'asthali in the midst of the ocean and 
began to live there. He enjoyed all the things in the countries named 
Anarta and others. Revata had one hundred sons of whom Kakudmi 
was the eldest and of pure character. He had one daughter very 
beautiful named Revati, endowed with all auspicious qualities. When 
the daughter reached a marriageable age, the King began to think 
where he could get a prince of a good noble family. That powerful 
King began to govern his people Anartas, with his headquarters at 
the Raivata hill. “Whom to betroth this daughter,” the King thought 
and settled that he would go to Brahma and ask him, the venerable 
omniscient Prajapati, worshipped by the Devas. Thus the King went 
with his daughter Revati to the Brahmaloka. There the Devas, 
Yajhas, Vedas, mountains, oceans and rivers all were shining with 
luminous bodies. There the eternal Risis, Siddhas, Gandharbas, 
Pannagas and Charanas were singing hymns to Brahma, standing 
with folded hands. 


Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Seventh Book on the twin 
As'vins drinking the Soma Cup in S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the 
Maha Puranam of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 8. On The King Revata And The Solar 
Dynasty 


1-5. Janamejaya said “O Brahmana! The King was a Ksattriya; 
how could he go himself with his daughter Revati to the Brahmaloka 
(the abode of Brahma)? I entertain a great doubt on this point. I 
heard of yore while conversing about matters connected with the 
Brahmins, that the Brahmin only who was self-restrained and the 
knower of Brahman could alone go to the Brahmaloka. The 
Satyaloka is very hard for the worldly people to go; so I doubt how 
the king could have gone with Revati from the Bhurloka to the 
Satyaloka. Man, when he discards his body, can go to the Heavens. 
So is recited in all the S'astras. How then, people, while, in their 
human bodies can go to the Brahmaloka. So cut asunder my doubts 
how the King Revata could go to the Brahmaloka to ask the Prajapati 
on certain matters.” 


6-16. Vyasa said “O King! On the top of the mountain Sumeru, are 
located the Indra's heavens called Amaravati (the abode of the 
Immortals) the Samyamani city of Yama, the Satyaloka, the 
Vahniloka, the Kailasa, Vaikuntha the abode of Visnu, and others. 
The great archer Arjuna, the son of Pritha, went to the Indraloka and 
spent five years there. In ancient times, the Kings Kakutstha and 
others went to Indraloka, in their human bodies. Even the powerful 
Daityas used to conquer the Indraloka and resided there at their will 
and pleasure. In ancient times, when the sovereign of the earth, the 
King Mahabhisa went to the Brahmaloka, the most beautiful Ganga 
also was coming to the Brahmaloka. On the way the King saw Her. 

O King! Accidentally at that time her clothings were cast aside by the 
wind; the King saw her partly in her naked state, and, overpowered 
with lust, smiled; Ganga also smiled. Seeing the states of them, 
Brahma instantly cursed them; and they had to come in this world 
and take their births. All the Devas, when oppressed by the 



Danavas, went to Vaikuntha and sang hymns to Hah, the Lord of 
Kamala. O King! Men can go to all the Lokas; in fact those high- 
souled men that perform Yajhas or severe asceticism and thus have 
acquired great merits, those performers of Sacrifices and ascetics 
surely go to the Heavens. O King! It is only the abundance of good 
merits that is the only cause of going to Heavens. So you ought not 
to entertain any doubts on this.” 


17-18. Janamejaya said “O Muni! The King Revata went with his 
daughter Revati to the Brahmaloka; but what did he do when he 
went there? What did Brahma order him? And to whom did the King 
betroth his daughter, when ordered by Brahma? O Brahmana! Speak 
out all these in details to me now.” 


19-21. Vyasa said “O King! Hear. When the King went to 
Brahmaloka to ask about the proper bridegroom of his daughter, 
there was going on singing and music; so he waited a while to find 
an opportunity when the assembly would have a leisure; but he was 
so very pleased with music that he could not desist from hearing it till 
the end. When the music was finished, the King bowed down to 
Brahma and shewed him his daughter and informed Him of his 
intention.” 


22-26. The King said “O Deva! This good daughter is mine; now 
kindly say who will be her bridegroom. O Brahma! To whom shall I 
betroth this daughter? I have come to you to ask on this point I have 
searched for many princes and seen also a good many of them and 
none of them is to my liking and so my mind is not at rest. O Lord of 
the Devas! Therefore I have come to you. Kindly select one 
bridegroom for her. He is to be a Kulm (of good family), powerful, 
religious, liberal, and a prince endowed with all auspicious qualities. 
This is my prayer.” Vyasa said O King! Brahma, the lotus-born, the 



Creator of the world, hearing these words, laughed, thinking that a 
very long interval had passed away. He then said 


27-43. O King! The princes that you thought would become the 
bridegroom of your daughter, all died; their sons and grandsons and 
their friends even have all passed away. The twenty-seventh 
Manvantara of the Dvapara Yuga is now going on; so none of the 
princes of your family are now existing. The Daityas sacked your city. 
Now Ugrasena, the King of Mathura, is reigning in that place. He 
belongs to the illustrious lunar family of Yayati. His son, the powerful 
Kansa, born of a Danava, began to do injuries always to the Devas; 
he threw his own father to the prison. Becoming very haughty, he 
began to govern himself the countries of other kings and began to 
tyrranise over the subjects. O King. The Earth became so much 
troubled by the armies of the wicked Demon Kings, that She became 
quite unable to bear further loads. So She went to seek refuge to 
Brahma. Brahma and the other Devas then began to say “O 
Earth! To remove your burden the lotus-eyed Narayana will incarnate 
Himself as part incarnation in the form of S'ri Krisna. He who is 
Narayana practised in ancient times, as the son of Dharma, a very 
severe asceticism, in company with his brother Nara in the sacred 
hermitage of Badari. Now this very Deva is born in the great family of 
Yadu in the womb of Devaki by Vasudeva and is now celebrated by 
the name of Vasudeva. O King! He has slain that vicious wicked 
Kansa and has installed Ugrasena in his place. The very powerful 
Jarasandha, the vicious King of Magadha, is the father-in-law of 
Kansa. On hearing the death of his son-in-law, he became infuriated 
with rage, came to Mathura, and raged a terrible war. Vasudeva 
defeated in a battle that Jarasandha, proud of his mighty valour. 
Though defeated, Jarasandha sent Kalayavana with his host of army 
to fight again with Krisna. Bhagavan Vasudeva, when he heard that 
the King of Yavanas arrived, sent away all the members of his family 
and the Yadavas to Dvarka and began to wait with his brother 
Balarama for the Yavana King. Then he went alone to the camp of 



Yavana and led him away to a mountain cave where was sleeping 
the King Muchu Kunda and had then the Yavana King slain by 
Muchukunda. Krisna then went to Dvarka. The city of Dvarka was 
then a dilapidated condition. Krisna brought together the artists and 
got built exquisitely the beautiful palaces, forts, and markets and 
stalls, etc., and so added to the beauty of the place. That Vasudeva, 
of mighty prowess, thus improving the city, made Ugrasena the King 
of that place; and Krisna is now waiting there with his friends. His 
elder brother Baladeva, the carrier of the plough, is celebrated. Thus 
he with Musala in his hands is a great warrior and the part 
incarnation of Ananta Deva. He is the fit bridegroom of your 
daughter. So give your daughter in marriage, without any delay, 
according to the rules of the marriage ceremony to Sankarsana 
Balabhadra. After giving your daughter marriage, go to the hermitage 
of Badari and practise tapasya. That sacred retreat is the (park) 
recreation ground of the Devas, holy and yielding to human beings 
the objects of their desires. 


44-46. Vyasa said “O King! Thus ordered by the lotus-born 
Brahma, the King went to Dvarka with his daughter. Reaching there 
he gave over his all auspicious daughter in marriage to Bala Deva 
duly according to the rules and regulations. At last, according to 
Brahma's injunction, he became engaged in severe austerities in the 
Badarikas'ram and, when the time of death arrived, left off his mortal 
coil on the banks of the river and went to the world of Gods.” 


47-48. Janamejaya said “O Bhagavan! You have uttered one 
wonderful thing. One hundred and eight Yugas passed away when 
the King of Revata with his daughter was deeply absorbed in hearing 
music in the Brahmaloka yet neither the good King nor the daughter 
did get sufficiently old. How could this be! How could they have lived 
so long! Were their longevities ordained to be such a long period!” 



49-56. Vyasa said “O King! The Brahmaloka is not touched by any 
vice nor sin; old age, hunger, thirst or fear of death nothing exists 
there; nor is there any other cause by which weariness comes. So 
what doubt there can be that the people there will be long-lived, free 
from old age and death! When the King S'aryati went up to the 
Heavens, his sons were all destroyed by the Raksasas; those that 
remained, they, terrified left Kus'asthali and fled on all sides. 
Vaivasvata Manu sneezed; owing to that, came out of his nose one 
powerful son; his name was Iksaku. He spread the Solar dynasty 
and became celebrated. Getting excellent initiation from the Maharsi 
Narada, he began to meditate the Devi constantly and practised 
severe tapasya for the spread of his race. O King! Iksaku had one 
hundred sons; Vikuksi was the eldest; he was powerful and endowed 
with great strength. Iksaku became king and lived in Ayodhya. He 
sent his fifty sons, the powerful S'akuni and others to Uttarapatha 
(Eastern) provinces for governing those countries. That high-souled 
monarch sent also other eight sons to govern the countries in the 
South. (Western). O King! He kept the remaining two sons by his 
side for his own service.” 


Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the story of 
the King Revata and the spread of the Solar dynasty in the 
Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 9. On The Story Of Kakutstha And The 
Origin Of Mandhata 


1-11. Vyasa said O King! Once on a time, the time for Astaka 
S'raddha (the funeral ceremony in honour of the departed) arrived. 
Seeing this, the King Iksaku ordered his son Vikuksi “O Child! Go 
immediately to the forest and bring carefully pure sanctified meat for 
the S'raddha purposes; see, that there be no neglect of duty.” Thus 
ordered, Vikuksi instantly went to the forest equipped with arms. He 
hunted in the forest lots of boars, pigs, deer, and hare. But he was so 
very tired with his journey in the forest and got so hungry that he 
forgot everything about the Astaka S'raddha and ate one hare there 
in the forest. The remaining excellent meat he brought and handed 
over to his father. When that meat was brought to be sprinkled for 
purification, the family priest Vas'istha, on seeing it, at once came to 
know that some portion had already been eaten and it was the 
remaining part. The leavings of food are not fit for the sprinkling 
purposes; this is the S'astric rule. Vas'istha informed the King of this 
defect in the food. In accordance with the Guru's advice, the King 
coming to know thus the violation of the rule by his son, became very 
angry and banished his son from his kingdom. The prince became 
known from that time as Sa'sada; he did not become the least sorry 
for his father's anger; he went to the forest and gladly remained 
there. He gladly passed his time absorbed in religion and sustained 
his life on forest fruits and roots. After sometime when his father 
died, he inherited his kingdom. On becoming the King of Ayodhya, 
S'as'ada had only one son; he became famous in the three lokas by 
the name of Kakutstha. He was known also by other names 
Indravaha and Puranjaya. 


12. Janamejaya said “O Holy One! How and why was the prince 
named Kakutstha. Why was he known by the two other names? 
Speak all this to me.” 



13-14. Vyasa said O King! When S'as'ada went to the Heavens 
Kakutstha became king. That religious king then began to govern the 
country of his father and grandfather with an authority supported by 
a powerful arm. At this time the Devas suffered a defeat from the 
Danavas and took refuge to Visnu, the Infallible and the Lord of the 
three worlds. The eternal great Visnu full of intelligence and bliss 
then addressed the Devas 


15-16. Visnu said “O Devas! Go and pray to the King S'as'ada. He 
will be your ally and kill all the Demons. That King is religious; 
especially he is a worshipper of the Highest S'akti. He is a good 
archer and will come to help you. His strength is immense.” 


17-18. Vyasa said O King! Indra and the other Devas hearing the 
nectar like words of Hari went to Ayodhya, to Kakutstha, the son of 
S'as'ada. Seeing the Devas at his palace, the king worshipped them 
duly and with great care and he asked them why they had come 
there. 


19-20. The King said “O Devas! When you have favoured me by 
your presence here, I am blessed and sanctified; my life is crowned 
with success. Say what I can do for you; I will carry it out even if it be 
very hard for me to perform.” 


21-22. The Devas said “O Prince! Please help and back us and 
defeat the Daityas, invincible by the Devas and form an alliance with 
Indra. O King! By the grace of the Highest S'akti, you have nothing 
unattained anywhere; so we have come to you by the order of 
Visnu.” 



23-41. The King said “O Devas! I can back you and become your 
ally if Indra carries me on his back in the time of war. I will fight now 
with the Daityas for the Devas; but I will go to the battle-field on 
Indra's back; this I speak to you truly.” Vyasa said O King! The 
Devas then spoke to Indra “O Lord of S'achi! It is now your 
bounden duty to do this; so quitting shame, be a carrier to this King.” 
Indra got ashamed very much, but being requested frequently by 
Hah, at last assumed the appearance of a bull like the great Bull of 
S'iva. The King mounted on that bull to go to the war; he fought while 
taking his seat on the hump on the shoulders of the bull (Kakud); 
therefore he was named Kakutstha. The King was carried by Indra 
on his back hence he was named Indravaha; he conquered the 
Danavas in battle; hence he was called Puranjaya. The powerful 
King defeated the Danavas and gave away all their wealth to the 
Devas. He bade farewell to the Devas and returned to his own 
kingdom. Thus the alliance was formed with Indra. O King! 

Kakutstha became very celebrated on this earth; his descendants 
became kings and were known as Kakutsthas and were all very 
famous here on this Earth. Kakutstha had one powerful son, named 
Kakutstha by his legal wife; Kakutstha had the son Prithu, of mighty 
prowess. Prithu was the part incarnation personified of Visnu, and 
worshipper of the feet of the Supreme S'akti. His son was 
Visvarandhi; he became king and governed the kingdom. His son 
was Chandra; he came to be king, governed his subjects and 
multiplied very much his issues. Yuvanas'va was one of his sons; he 
was very powerful and spirited. S'avanta was the son of Yuvanas'va; 
he was very religious. He built a nice city named S'avanti like the 
Paradise of Indra. Brihadas'va was the son of the high-souled 
S'avanta; he had a son Kuvalayas'va. He became the Lord of the 
earth by the power of his arms. He killed Dhundu Danava; so he was 
very much celebrated by the name of Dhundumara. His son was 
Dridhas'va; he governed the earth; His son was S'riman Haryas'va. 
His son was Nikumbha; he became the King. Nikumbha had his son 
Varhanas'va. Kris'as'va was his son. His son was the powerful 



Parasenajit; his son's prowess knew no bounds. Parasenajit had the 
fortunate son Yauvanas'va. O fortunate One! The son of 
Yauvanas'va was S'riman Mandhata; he became the Lord of the 
Earth and for the satisfaction of the Devi Bhagavati had one 
thousand and eight palaces built in Benares and in the other chief 
places of pilgrimages. Maudhata was not born of his mother's womb 
but was born in the belly of his father. Then the ministers tore 
asunder the belly of his father and got him out. 


42-43. Janamejaya said O fortunate One! What you said was 
never seen nor heard ever before since. This sort of birth is highly 
improbable. How was that beautiful son born in the belly of his 
father? Describe this in detail and satisfy my curiosity. 


44-49. Vyasa said O King! The King Yauvanas'va had one 
hundred queens; yet he had no issues. The King always thought 
much about his son. Once the King, sorry and desirous of a son, 
went to the holy retreats of the Risis. On arriving there, he began 
frequently to respire heavily before the ascetics. The Risis became 
filled with pity on seeing his sorrowful condition. O King! The 
Brahmins that said to him O King! Why are you thus sorrowful and 
distressed? What is your sorrow that is troubling your heart? Speak 
truly. We will surely redress your grievance. 


50-54. Yauvanas'va said “O Munis! I have got the kingdom wealth, 
excellent horses, one hundred illustrious chaste wives. I have no 
enemies in the three worlds; no one is stronger than me. All the 
Kings and ministers are obedient to my call. But O Ascetics! I have 
no son; this my sonless state is the only cause of my pain and 
sorrow. It has marred all my happiness. See! The persons that have 
no son cannot in any way go to Heavens. Therefore I am always 
being pained for this. You all are ascetics; you have taken great 



pains to learn the essence of the Veda S'astras. So kindly order me 
what sacrifice is fit for me to have a son. O Ascetics! If you feel any 
pity for me, kindly perform this good work for me.” 


55-65. Vyasa said O King! Hearing the words of the King they 
were all filled with pity; and, with fulness of mind, made him to 
perform the sacrifice whose presiding deity was Indra. For the sake 
of the King, that he may get a son born to him, they had a jar filled 
with water by the Brahmins and purified and charged that jar with the 
Vedic Mantrams. The King got thirsty in the night and entered in the 
sacrificial ground; seeing the Brahmins asleep, the King himself 
drank that water, surcharged with the Mantram. The Brahmins 
consecrated and kept that water apart, according to due rules, 
surcharging with Mantrams, for the wife of the King; but the King, 
getting thirsty, himself drank that water unconsciously. Next morning 
the Brahmins seeing the jar of water empty, were startled very much 
with fear; the Brahmins then asked the King Who drank the 
water? When they came to know that the King himself drank the 
water, the Munis thought this to he an act of Daiva (Fate) and 
completing the sacrifice returned to their abodes. Then the King 
became pregnant by the power of the sacrificial Mantrams. After 
some time, the son became fully developed. Then the King's 
ministers, cutting his right bowel, got the son out. Out of the God's 
favour, the King did not die. When the ministers were troubled with 
the thought whose milk the child will suck, then Indra spoke out the 
child would drink (Man-Dhata) my forefinger and gave his finger into 
the child's mouth. For that reason his name was Mandhata. Thus I 
have described in detail the origin of Mandhata. 


Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the story of 
Kakutstha and the origin of Mandhata in S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam 
the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 10. On The Story Of Satyavrata 


1-11. Vyasa said O King! That King Mandhata, true to his 
promise, conquered one after another the whole world and became 
the paramount sovereign of all the other emperors and got the title 
“Sarvabhauma” (Sovereign of all the earth). O King! What more to 
speak of Mandhata's influence at that time than this that all the 
robbers, struck with his terror, all fled to the mountain caves. For this 
reason, Indra gave him the title “Trasadasyu.” He married Bindumati, 
the daughter of S'as'avindu. Her limbs were proportioned and perfect 
and so she was very beautiful. Mandhata had by that wife two sons 
(1) the famous Purukutstha and (2) Muchukunda. Purukutstha 
had his son Anaranya; this prince was celebrated by the name of 
BrihadasVa. He was very religious and deeply devoted to his father. 
His son was HaryasVa; he was religious and knew the Highest 
Reality. His son was Tridhanva; his son was Aruna. Aruna's son was 
Satyavrata; he was very avaricious, lustful, wicked and wilful. Once 
on an occasion that vicious prince, overpowered by lust, stole away 
the wife of one Brahmin and so created an hindrance in his 
marriage. O King! The Brahmins, united in a body, came to the King 
Aruna, bewailing and lamenting and uttered repeatedly Alas! We 
are ruined! The King addressed to the grieved subjects, the 
Brahmins “O Brahmins! What harm has been done to you by my 
son.” 


Hearing thus the good words of the King, the Dvijas, versed in the 
Vedas, repeatedly blessed him and said :-0 King! You are the 
foremost of the powerful. So your son is like you. Today he has 
forcibly stolen away during the marriage ceremony a 
Brahmin daughter already given over in marriage. 



12-36. Vyasa said O King! The highly religious King hearing the 
words of the Brahmins, took them to be true and said to his son 
“O One of evil understanding! You have rendered to-day your name 
useless by perpetrating this evil act. O Vicious One! Get away from 
my house! O Sinner! You will never be able to live in my territory!” 
Seeing his father angry, Satyavrata repeatedly said Father! Where 
shall I go? He said “Live with the Chandalas. You have stolen a 
Brahmin's wife and so has acted like a Chandala. Go and live with 
them happily. O Disgrace to your family! I don't like to get issues 
through you: you have obliterated this family's name. So, O Sinner! 
go wherever you like.” Hearing the the words from his angry father, 
Satyavrata instantly quitted the house and went to the Chandalas. 
The prince, wearing his coat of armour and holding bows and 
arrows, began to spend away his time with the Chandalas; but he 
could not get out of his breast his feeling of sympathy and mercy. 
When he was banished by his liberal minded angry father the Guru 
Vas'istha instigated the King to the above purpose. Satyavrata was 
therefore angry with Vas'istha, inasmuch as he, versed the Dharma 
S'astras, did not dissuade the father from banishing his son. His 
father, then, owing to some inexplicable cause, quitted the city and, 
for the sake of his son, went to the forest to practise austerities. O 
King! Owing to that sinful act, Indra did not rain at all in his kingdom 
for twelve years. O King! Just then Vis'vamitra, too, keeping his wife 
and children in that kingdom, began to practise severe austerities on 
the banks of the river Kaus'iki. The beautiful wife of Kus'ika then fell 
into great trouble how she could maintain the family. All the children, 
pained with hunger, began to cry, begging for Nibar rice food. The 
chaste wife of Kaus'ika became very much troubled seeing all this. 
She thought, seeing the children hungry, “Where am I to go now and 
from whom to beg, and what to do, inasmuch as the King was not 
then staying in the Kingdom. The husband is not also near; so who 
would protect my children? The boys are incessantly crying. Fie 
therefore to my life!” She thought also thus “My husband left me in 
this penniless state; we are suffering for want of money. He does not 
know these, though he is quite able. Save my husband, who else will 
support my sons? They will all die now of starvation. I might sell one 



of my sons, whatever I get out of that, I can support the others; this 
is now my highest duty. I ought not to do otherwise and kill all my 
children; so I will now sell one of my sons to support the others.” 
Thus hardening her mind, she went out, tying the child by a rope 
round his neck. The Muni's wife, for the sake of the other children, 
fastened the middle son by a cord and got out of her house. The 
prince Satyavrata saw her distressed with pain and sorrow and 
asked “O Beautiful One! What are you now going to do? Who are 
you? This boy is crying; Why have you tied him by a rope round his 
neck? O Fair One! Speak out truly to me the cause of all this.” 


37-38. The wife said “O Prince! I am the wife of Vis'vamitra. These 
are my sons. I am now going, for want of food, to sell one of these 
out of my own accord. O King! My husband has gone away to 
practise tapasya; I do not know where he has gone. There is no food 
in the house; so I will sell one to support the other sons.” 


39-56. Satyavrata said “O Chaste One! Save your children. I will 
bring to you your articles of food from the forest till your husband 
does not come here. Daily I will fasten some food on a tree close by 
your As'rama. This I speak truly.” The wife of Vis'vamitra, hearing 
these words of the prince, freed the child of the fastening and took 
him to her As'rama. The child was named afterwards as Galaba, due 
to his being fastened by the neck. He became a great Risi 
afterwards. The Vis'vamitra's wife then felt great pleasure in her 
home, surrounded by her children. Filled with regard, and mercy, 
Satyavrata duly performed his task and provided daily the family of 
Vis'vamitra with their food. He used to hunt wild boars, deer, 
buffaloes, etc., and used to take their flesh to the place where used 
to dwell the wife of Vis'vamitra and the children and tie that up to an 
adjoining tree. The Risi's wife used to give those to her children. 
Thus getting excellent food, she felt very happy. Now when the King 
Aruna went for tapasya to the forest, the Muni Vas'istha carefully 



guarded the Ayodhya city, and the palace and the household. 
Satyavrata, too, used to sustain his livelihood daily by hunting, 
accordig to his father's order; and abiding by Dharma, lived in the 
forest outside the city. Satyavrata cherished always in his heart, for 
some cause, a feeling of anger towards Vas'istha. When his father 
banished his religious son, Vas'istha did not prevent his father. This 
is the cause of Satyavrata's anger. Marriage does not become valid 
until seven footsteps are trodden (a ceremony); so the stealing away 
of a girl within that period is not equivalent to stealing away a 
Brahmin's wife. The virtuous Vas'istha knew that; yet he did not 
prevent the King. One day the prince did not find anything for 
hunting; he saw in the forest the cow of Vas'istha giving milk. Very 
much distressed by hunger, the King killed the cow like a dacoit, 
partly out of anger and partly out of delusion. He fastened part of the 
flesh to that tree for the wife of Vis'vamitra and the remainder he ate 
himself. O One of good vows! The Vis'vamitra's wife did not know 
that to be beef and thought it to be deer's and so fed her sons with 
that. Now when Vas'istha came to know that his cow had been killed, 
he was inflamed with anger and spoke to Satyavrata “O Vicious One! 
What a heinous crime have you committed, like a Pis'acha, by killing 
the cow? For the killing of the cow, the stealing of a Brahmin's wife 
and the fiery anger of your father, for these three crimes, let there 
come out on your head three S'ankus or three marks of leprosy as 
the signs for your crimes. From this day you will be widely known by 
the name of Tris'anku and you will show your Pis'acha form to all the 
beings.” 


57. Vyasa said : -- O King! The prince Satyavrata thus cursed by 
Vais'istha remained in that retreat and practised severe tapasya. 


58. But he got from a Muni's son the excellent Mantram of the 
Highest auspicious Devi Bhagavati and became merged in the 
contemplation of that. 



Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the story of 
Satyavrata in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 11. On The Story Of Tris’anku 


1. Janamejaya said “O Intelligent One! Did the prince Tris’anku 
free himself afterwards of the curse inflicted on him by the Muni 
Vas’istha.” 


2-8. Vyasa said O King! Satyavrata, cursed by Vas’istha, was 
transformed into a demoniacal state (Pis’achatva); but he became a 
great devotee of the Devi and passed away his time in that As’rama. 
One day he repeating slowly the nine-lettered Mantram of the 
Bhagavati, wished to perform the Puras’charana ceremony 
(repeating the name of a deity attended with burnt offerings, 
oblations, etc.) of the said Mantra, came to the Brahmins, bowed 
down to them with great devotion and purity and said “O 
venerable gods of the earth! Kindly hear me; I with my head bowed 
down pray to you, that you all be my priests (Ritt-vigs). You are all 
versed in the Vedas; so kindly do for me duly the Homa ceremony 
equal to one-tenth part of Japam, for my success. O Brahmanas! My 
name is Satyavrata; I am a prince; you ought to do this work for me 
for my welfare.” Thus hearing the prince’s words the Brahmanas said 
“O Prince! You are cursed by your Guru and you are now turned 
into a demoniacal state. You have now no right to the Vedas; 
especially you are now in the Pis’acha state; it is blamed by all the 
persons; so now you are not fit to be initiated into the ceremony.” 


9-14. Vyasa said O King! Hearing them, the prince got very sad 
and dejected and thought “Fie on my life! What shall I do now in 
living even in the forest. My father has forsaken me; I am banished 
from the kingdom; again, by the Guru’s curse, I have got this 
Pis’acha state; I therefore can’t decide what to do.” The prince, then, 
collecting fuel, prepared the funeral pile for himself, remembered the 
Chandika Devi and repeating Her Mantram, resolved to jump into the 



fire. Lighting the pyre in front, the prince bathed and standing, with 
clasped palms, began to chant the hymns to Maha Maya before 
entering into the fire. At this moment, the Devi Bhagavati, knowing 
that the prince was ready to burn himself, came instantly to the spot 
on the back of the lion, by the aerial route. She manifested Henself 
before him and spoke in a voice deep like a rain-cloud. 


15-17. “O Virtuous One What is all this? What have you settled all 
these? Never throw yourself in fire; be patient. O Fortunate One! 

Your father is now aged; he will give you his kingdom and will go to 
the forest for tapasya; therefore, O Hero! Do leave your depression 
of spirits. O King! Tomorrow the ministers of your father will came to 
you to take you there. By My Grace, your father will install you on the 
throne and, in due time, he will conquer his desires and will go 
undoubtedly to the Brahma loka.” 


18-32. Vyasa said O Fortunate One! Thus saying, the Devi 
vanished at that spot; the prince, too, desisted from his purpose of 
entering into the fire. In the meanwhile, the highsouled Narada went 
to Ayodhya and at once informed everything to the King. The King 
became very sad and began to repent very much, hearing the son’s 
resolve to burn himself. The virtuous King, grieved at heart, for his 
son, said to his ministers “You all are aware of the turning out of 
my son. I have forsaken my intelligent son Satyavrata; though he 
was very spiritual and worthy to get the kingdom; yet, at my 
command, he instantaneously went away to the forest. Void of 
wealth, he, practising forgiveness, passed his time in study, 
particularly in spiritual knowledge; but Vas’istha Deva, cursed him 
and made him like a Pis’acha. Very much distressed by pain and 
sorow, he was ready to burn himself but the Maha Devi preventing 
him, he desisted from this purpose. So go hurriedly and, consoling 
my powerful eldest son, bring him at once to me. I am now calm and 
quiet and of a retiring disposition; so I am determined to practise 



tapasya. My son is now capable to govern the subjects; I will now 
install nny son on the throne and retire to the forest.” So he gladly 
sent his ministers to his son. The ministers, too, gladly went there 
and consoled the prince and, with respect, brought him to the 
Ayodhya city. Seeing Satyavrata with matted hair on his head, with 
dirty clothes, and thin and worn out with cares, the King began to 
think within himself “Oh! What a cruel act have I done, though I know 
everything about religion, in banishing my intelligent son, quite fit to 
govern my kingdom.” Thus thinking, he embraced his son by his 
arms and consoling him, made him sit by his throne. The King, 
versed in politics, then began to speak gladly with suffocated 
feelings of love to his son sitting by the side of him. 


33-53. O Son! Your highest duty is to keep your mind always on 
religion and to respect the Brahmins. Never speak falsely anywhere 
nor follow any bad course in any way. Rather the words of the 
spiritual good persons ought to be fully observed; the ascetics ought 
to be worshipped. Senses must be controlled and the wicked cruel 
robbers are certainly to be slain. O Son! For one’s success, one 
should consult with one’s ministers and keep that as secret by all 
means. Any enemy howsoever insignificant he may be, a clever King 
should never overlook him. The ministers, if they be attached to 
other masters and if they come round afterwards, don’t trust them. 
Spies should be kept to watch friends and foes alike. Show your 
living regards to the religion always, and make charitable gifts. One 
ought not to argue in vain and always avoid the company of the 
wicked. O Son! You should worship the Maharsis and perform 
various sacrifices. Never trust women, those who are inordinately 
addicted to women, and the gamblers. Never is it advisable to be 
addicted too much to hunting. Always shew your back to gambling, 
drinking, music and to the prostitutes and try to make your subjects 
follow the same. Early in the morning at the Brahma Muhurta 
everyday you should get up from your bed and bathe and perform 
other analogous duties. O Son! Be initiated by the Guru in the Devi 



Mantra, and worship with devotion the Suprenne Force, the 
Bhagavati. Human birth is crowned with success by worshipping Her 
Lotus Feet, O Son! 


He who performs once the great Puja of the Maha Devi and drinks 
the Charanamrita water (water with which Her feet are worshipped) 
has never to enter again in the womb of his mother; know this as 
certain. That Maha Devi is all that is seen and She Herself is again 
the Seer and Witness, of the nature of Intelligence. Filled with these 
ideas, rest fearless like the Universal Soul. Do your daily Naimittik 
(occasional) duties, go to the Brahmin’s assembly and calling on 
them ask the conclusions of the Dharma S’astras. The Brahmins, 
versed in the Vedas and Vedantas, are objects of venerations and 
must be worshipped. Give, then, them always according to merits, 
cows, lands, gold, etc. Don’t worship any Brahmin who is illiterate. 
Don’t give to illiterates more than their belliful wants. O Child! Never 
trespass Dharma, out of covetousness, and remember always not to 
insult ever afterwards any Brahmanas. The Brahmins are the cause 
of the Ksattriyas, the more so they are the terrestrial gods; honour 
them with all your care! In this never flinch from your duties. Fire 
comes out of water; the Ksattriyas come out of the Brahmanas; iron 
comes out of stones. The powers of these flow everywhere. But if 
there be any clash between one thing and its source, then that clash 
dies away in the source. Know this as quite certain. The King who 
wants his own welfare and improvement must by gift and humility 
shew his respect especially to the Brahmins. Follow the maxims of 
morality as dictated in the Dharma S’astras. Amass wealth according 
to rules of justice and fill the treasury. 


Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Seventh Book about the story 
of Tris’anku in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 12. On The Description Of Vas’istha’s 
Curse On Tris’anku 


1-6. Vyasa said O King! Thus giving the advice to his son, the 
King Tris’anku was excited with feelings of love and, in a choked 
voice, said to his father that he would fulfil what he had been 
ordered. The King then called the Brahmins, versed in the Vedas 
and Mantrams, and had all the materials for installation collected 
quickly. He brought the waters from all the sacred places of 
prigrimages; he then called together with great respect all the kings. 
On a sacred day, the father installed his son on the throne and gave 
him, in accordance with due rites and ceremonies, the royal throne. 
The King then adopted with his wife the third Vanaprastha stage of 
life and practised a severe tapasya on the banks of the Ganges. 
Then in due course of time the King went to the Heavens. There he 
began to shine like a second Sun by the side of Indra, respected by 
all the gods. 


7-10. Janamejaya said “O Bhagavan! You spoke before in course 
of conversation that Satyavrata was cursed by Vas’istha on the 
killing of his cow to become a Pis’acha; how then he got himself 
freed of this curse. There is a doubt on this point. Kindly clear it and 
oblige. Satyavrata was cursed; hence pronounced unfit to succeed 
to the throne. How was the Muni, by what actions, was he freed of 
the curse? How could the father bring back to his home his son of 
the form of a Pis’acha? O Viprarsi! Kindly narrate to me how the 
Muni was freed of his curse.” 


11-18. Vyasa said Cursed by Vas’istha, Satyavrata became then 
and there transformed into a Pis’acha, very ugly, violent and terrible 
to all; but when he worshipped the Devi with devotion, immediately 



the Devi gave him a beautiful divine body. By the grace of the Devi, 
his sins were all washed away and his Pis’acha form vanished. 
Satyavrata, then, freed from his sins became very much vigorous 
and energetic. Vas’istha also became pleased with him, blessed thus 
by the Supreme Force and so was his father, too. When his father 
died, the virtuous Satyavrata became King, governed his subjects 
and performed various sacrifices and worshipped, too, the Eternal 
Mother of the Gods. O King! Tris’anku had a very beautiful son born 
to him, named Haris’chandra, endowed in all his limbs with 
auspicious signs. The King Tris’anku wanted to make his son 
Yuvaraja (the Crown prince) and then in his that very body while 
living, enjoy the Heavens. The King went to the As’rama of Vas’istha 
and gladly asked him, with folded palms, bowing down before him 
duly. 


19-23. O Ascetic! You are the son of Brahma , versed in all the 
Vaidik Mantrams; so you are exceedingly fortunate; now I beg to 
inform you one thing; hear it gladly. I now desire to enjoy the 
happiness of the Heavens and all the enjoyments of the Devas, 
while I am in this body. To enjoy in the Nandana Garden, to live with 
the Apsaras and to hear the sweet music of the Devas and the 
Gandharbas, these ideas now have taken a strong hold of my heart. 
Therefore, O Great Muni! Engage me in such a sacrifice as will 
enable me, in this very body to live in the Svarloka. O Muni! You are 
fully competent to do this; therefore be ready for this. Have the 
sacrifice done and let me have quickly the Devaloka, so difficult to be 
obtained! 


24-26. Vas’istha said “O King! It is exceedingly hard to live in the 
Heavens while in this mortal body. The departed only live in the 
Heavens by their merits, this is a known fact. Therefore, O 
Omniscient One! Your desire is hard to be attained. I am afraid of 
this. O King! The living men can hardly enjoy the Apsaras. 



Therefore, O Blessed One! Do the sacrifice first. Then, when you 
leave this body, you will go to the Heavens.” 


27-31. Vyasa said O King! The Maharsi Vas’istha was already 
angry with the King; therefore when he spoke these words, the King 
heard and became absent-minded. He again spoke to the Maharsi :- 
- O Brahmana! If you do not allow me to do the sacrifice, on account 
of your haughtiness, I will have the sacrifice performed now by 
another priest. Vas’istha became very angry at the words of the King 
and cursed him “O evilminded One! Be as soon as possible a 
Chandala in this body. You have committed acts by which your path 
to the Heaven is obstructed. You have stolen a Brahmini’s wife, and 
defiled the path of religion; you have killed the Surabhi Cow and you 
are a libertine. Therefore, O Sinner! Never you will go to the 
Heavens, even after your death.” 


32-56. Vyasa said O King! Hearing these harsh words from the 
Guru, Tris’anku became immediately Chandala in that very body. His 
golden earrings became turned into iron; the sweet sandal smell 
over his body smelled like faeces; his beautiful yellow clothings 
became blue, the colour of his body became like that of an elephant, 
due to his curse. O King! Those who are the worshippers of the 
Supreme Force can produce such things when they are angry; there 
is not the slightest doubt in this. Therefore one ought never to insult 
any devotee of the Supreme Force. The Muni Vas’istha is always 
engaged in repeating silently the Gayatri of the Devi. So what 
wonder is there that the body of the King will be reduced to such a 
wretched state by his rage. The King Tris’anku became very sorry to 
see his ugly body; he did not go home; rather he remained in the 
forest in that form and poor dress. He began to think, distressed with 
sorrow and over-powered with misery “My body is now blameable 
to the extreme, so what to do and where to go in this wretched state! 
I find no remedy to exhaust all my sufferings. If I go home, my son 



will be, no doubt, very much pained with sorrow. My wife, when she 
will see my Chandala appearance, she won’t accept me; my 
ministers will not regard me as they used to do before. My friends 
and relations, when they will come to me, will not serve me with the 
former care. So it is far better to die than to live, thus despised. I will 
drink poison or drown myself in waters or hang myself. Or I will burn 
myself in the funeral pyre duly or I will quit this blameable life by 
starvation. But, Alas! I will be guilty of suicide; so again due to this 
sin I will be born a Chandala and I will be again cursed.” Thus 
thinking, the King again thought that at present he ought not to 
commit suicide by any means. “I will have to suffer for my Karma; 
and, after due suffering, this Karma will be exhausted. So I will suffer 
in this forest for my Karma in this my body. Without the enjoyment of 
the fruits, the past actions can never die out; therefore all actions 
done by me, auspicious or inauspicious, I will enjoy or suffer in this 
place. Always to remain close to a holy As’rama, to wander in holy 
places of pilgrimage, to remember the Devi Ambika, and to serve the 
saints will now be my duties. Thus I will no doubt exhaust all my 
actions, residing in this forest; then, if chance permits, and if I meet 
with a saintly person, all my intentions will be crowned with success.” 
Thus thinking, the King quitting his city went to the banks of the 
Ganges and repenting very much, remained there on the Ganges. 
The King Haris’chandra came to know the cause of his father’s curse 
and with a sorrowful heart sent ministers to him. Like a Chandala, 
the King was respiring frequently; at this time the ministers went to 
him and bowing humbly, said : -- O King! Your son has ordered us to 
come here; we have come at his command; we are the ministers of 
the King Haris’chandra. Know this verily, O King! Kindly hear what 
the Crown Prince has said “Go and bring my Father here without 
any delay.” Therefore, O King! Cast aside your mental agonies and 
come to the city. The ministers, the subjects all will be always at your 
service. We will all try our best to please Vas’istha, so that he may 
favour you. And that greatly illustrious Muni being pleased will 
certainly remove your sorrows quickly. O King! Thus your son has 
spoken to us many words; so now be pleased to go to your own 
abode. 



57-64. Vyasa said O King! That Chandala-like King, hearing even 
their words thus, did not consent to go back to his house. Rather he 
told them “Ministers, go back, all of you to the city; and at my 
word, tell my son that I won’t go back to my house. Better leaving off 
all idleness, you better govern the Kingdom carefully. Shew your 
respect specially to the Brahmins and perform various sacrifices and 
worship the Devas. I do not like in this blameable Chandala form to 
go to the city of Ayodhya with the high-souled ones; so you all go 
back to Ayodhya without any further delay. Install, at my order, my 
powerful son Haris’chandra on the throne and do all these stately 
duties.” When the ministers heard thus the King ordering them, they 
began to cry very much, and, bowing down, they went away early 
out of the hermitage. On coming back to Ayodhya they regularly 
installed on a sacred day the King Haris’chandra with Abhiseka 
water, purified with Mantrams. Thus the powerful virtuous 
Haris’chandra, on being installed on the royal throne by the 
command of the King, remembered always his father and began to 
govern his Kingdom with his ministers according to the dictates of 
Dharma. 


Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the 
description of Vas’istha’s curse on Tris’anku in the Maha Puranam 
S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 13. On The Coming Of Vis’vamitra To 
Tris’anku 


1-3. Janamejaya said “O Muni! I see that at the command of the 
King, the ministers installed Haris’chandra on the royal throne; but 
how Tris’anku got rid of his Chandala body, kindly say. Was it that he 
bathed in the holy waters of the Ganges and lived in the forest and 
when he died he was freed of the curse; or was it that the Guru 
Vas’istha favoured him by his grace and freed him of the curse? O 
best of Risis! I am extremely eager to hear the life of the King; 
therefore kindly describe to me in detail his wonderful career.” 


4-16. Vyasa said O King! The King became gladdened in his heart 
to install his son on the throne and began to pass his days in that 
forest in the meditation of Bhagavati Bhavani. Thus some time 
passed when VisVamitra, the son of Kaus’ika, completing his course 
of Tapasya with an intent mind returned to his home to see his wife 
and sons. On coming back to his house, the intelligent Muni found 
his sons and other members of the family happy and well 
conditioned, became very glad and when his wife came to him for his 
service, asked herO Fair-eyed One! How did you spend your time 
in days of famine? There was nothing whatsoever of the stock of 
rice, etc., in the house; how then did you nourish these boys? Please 
speak to me. O Fair One! I was very busy with my austerities, I could 
not therefore come to you and see my boys; how then, O Beloved, 
and what measures did you resort to for their maintenance? O good 
and auspicious One! When I heard of the dire famine, I thought then 
“I have no wealth; so what shall I do if I go there?” Thus thinking I did 
not come then. O Beautiful One! At that time, one day I was very 
hungry and being very much tired I entered into the house of a 
Chandala, with the object of stealing. On entering the house I found 
the Chandala sleeping; then being extremely distressed with hunger, 

I entered into his kitchen if I could find anything there. When the 



dishes were sought and turned, and when I was going to take 
cooked dog’s flesh I immediately fell into the sight of that Chandala. 
He asked me very affectionately “Who are you? Why have you 
entered here at this hour of night? Why are your looking after the 
dishes? Speak what you want.” O Beautiful One! When the 
Chandala asked me these questions, I was very much pressed by 
hunger and I spoke out my wants in a tremulous voice O 
Fortunate One! I am an ascetic Brahmin very much pained by 
hunger; I have entered your house stealthily and am looking out for 
some eatables from your cooking pots. O Intelligent One! I am now 
your guest in the form of a thief; I am now specially very hungry; so I 
will now eat your cooked meat; kindly permit me. Hearing these 
words, the Chandala spoke to me in words authorised by the 
S’astras O One of the Superior Varna! Know this to be the house 
of a Chandala; so never eat that flesh. 


17-28. The human birth is very rare in this world; then again to be 
born a Dvija is more difficult; and to get Brahmanhood again in the 
Dvijas is exceedingly difficult. Are you not aware of this? They ought 
never to eat the defiled food who desire to attain to the Heavens; 
owing to Karma, the Maharsi Manu has denominated the seventh 
caste as Antyaja and has discarded them altogether. So, O Brahmin! 
I am now by my actions turned into a Chandala and so forsaken by 
all; there is no doubt in this. I am forbidding you so that this fault of 
Varna S’ankara may not suddenly attack you. Vis’vamitra said “O 
Knower of Dharma! What you are speaking is quite true; though a 
Chandala, your intelligence is very clear; hear, I will now speak to 
you the subtleties of the Dharma in times of danger. O Giver of 
respect! Always and by all means it is advisable to keep up the body 
if sin be thereby incurred, one ought to perform Prayas’chitta 
(penance) for its purification when the time of danger is over. But if 
one commits sin when the time is not one of danger, one gets 
degraded; not so in the time of danger. The man that dies out of 
hunger, goes to hell, no doubt. Therefore every man seeking for his 



welfare must satisfy his hunger. Therefore I intend to steal for 
preserving my body. O Chandala See! The sin, incurred in stealing 
during famine, which the Pundits have declared, goes to the God of 
rains until he does not pour forth rain.” O Beloved! Just when I spoke 
these words, the God of Rains began to pour forth rain. O Beloved! 
Just when I spoke these words, the God of Rains began to pour forth 
rain so desired by all, like that coming out of the elephant’s trunk. 
When the clouds thus poured forth rains with the glitterings of the 
lightnings, I felt very glad and left the house of the Chandala. O 
Beautiful One! Now speak out to me, how did you behave in that 
famine time, so terrible to all the beings. 


29-48. Vyasa said O King! Hearing the above words of the 
husband, the sweet speaking lady spoke Hear, how I passed my 
time in times of famine. O Muni! After you had gone to practise 
Tapasya, the dire famine raged; and my sons, exhausted of hunger, 
became very anxious for food. I became very anxious to see the 
sons hungry; I then went out to the forest in quest of wild rice; and I 
got some fruits. Thus I spent some months by collecting the rice 
growing wildly in the forest; then in times these also could not be got 
and I became again anxious. The Nibara rice, too, is now not 
available and nothing is obtained also by begging; there are no fruits 
on the trees and no roots are found under the earth. The sons are 
crying in agony of hunger. What to do? And where to go? What am I 
to say now to the hungry boys? Oh God! Thus thinking on various 
ways, I at last came to this conclusion that I would sell one of my 
sons to a rich man and whatever price I can fetch, with that I will 
preserve the lives of the other sons. O Dear! Thus thinking, I became 
ready and went out. O Fortunate One! Then this boy began to cry 
aloud and became very distressed; yet I was so shameless that I 
took the crying boy and got out of my As’rama. At this time one 
Rajarsi Satyavrata seeing me very distressed, asked me “O One of 
good vows! Why is this boy weeping?” O Muni! I spoke to him “Today 
I am going to sell this boy.” The King’s heart became overfilled with 



pity, and spoke to me “Take back to your As’rama this boy. Daily I 
will supply you with meat for the food of your boys until the Muni 
returns home.” O Muni! The King from that time used to bring, with 
great pity, daily the flesh of deer and boar killed by him in the forest 
and he used to tie that on this tree. O Beloved! Thus I could protect 
my sons in that fearful ocean of crisis; but that King was cursed by 
Vas’istha only for my sake. One day that King did not get any meat in 
the forest; so he slaughtered the Kama Dhenu (the cow giving all 
desires) of Vas’istha and the Muni became therefore very angry with 
him. The high-souled Muni, angry on account of the killing of his cow, 
called the King by the name of Tris’anku and made him a Chandala. 
O Kaus’ika! The prince turned into a Chandala because he came 
forward to do good to me, so I am very sorry for his sake. So it is 
your urgent duty to save the King from his terrible position by any 
means or by the influence of your powerful Tapasya. 


49. Vyasa said O King! Hearing these words from his wife the 
Muni Kaus’ika consoled her and said 


50-55. O Lotus-eyed One! I will free the King of his curse, who saved 
you at that critical moment; what more than this that I promise to you 
that I will remove his sufferings whether it be by my learning or it be 
by my Tapas. Thus consoling his wife at that moment, Kaus’ika, the 
Knower of the Highest Reality, began to think how he could destroy 
the pains and miseries of the King. Thus thinking, the Muni went to 
the King Tris’anku, who was staying at that time very humbly in a 
village of the Chandalas, in the garb of a Chandala. Seeing the Muni 
coming, the King was greatly astonished and instantly threw himself 
before his feet like a piece of stick. Kaus’ika raised the fallen King 
and consoling him said O King! You are cursed, on my account, 
by the Muni Vas’istha. I will, therefore, fulfil your desires. Now speak 
what I am to do. 



56-62. The King said With a view to perform a sacrifice I prayed to 
Vas’istha that I would perform a sacrifice, kindly do this for me. O 
Muni! Do that sacrifice, by which I can go to the Heavens in this my 
present body.” Vas’istha became angry and said “O Villain! How 
can you go and live in the Heavens in this your human body?” I was 
very anxious to go to the Svarga (Heaven) so I again spoke to him 
“O Sinless One! I will then have the excellent sacrifice done by 
another priest.” Hearing this, Vas’istha Deva cursed me, saying “Be 
a Chandala.” O Muni! Thus I have described to you all about my 
curse. You are the one quite able to remove now my grievances. 
Distressed in pain and agony, the King informed him and became 
quiet. Vis’vamitra, too, thought how he could free him of his curse. 


Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the 
coming of Vis’vamitra to Tris’anku in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 14. On The Going To Heavens Of 
Tris’anku And The Commencement Of 
Haris’chandra’s Narrative 


1-8. Vyasa said O King! Settling in his mind what to do, the great 
ascetic VisVamitra collected all the materials necessary for the 
sacrifice and invited all the Munis. Thus invited by VisVamitra, the 
Munis became informed all about the Sacrifice; but, owing to the fact 
that the Muni Vas’istha prevented them, none of them went to the 
sacrifice. When VisVamitra, the son of Gadhi, came to know this, he 
became very anxious and very sad and came to the King Tris’anku 
and sat. The Maharsi Kaus’ika then became angry and said “O 
King! Vas’istha preventing the Brahmins have all refused to come to 
the sacrifice. But, O King! See my power of tapasya; I will 
immediately fulfil your desires; I will instantly send you to the 
Heavens, the abode of the Gods.” Thus saying, that Muni took water 
in his hand and repeated the Gayatri Mantram. He gave to the King 
all the Punyams (merits) that he collected for himself up to then. 
Giving him thus all the Punyams, he spoke to the King “O King! 
Throw away all idleness and go to the abode of the Gods you 
wanted to go. O King of Kings! Gladly go to the Heavens by the 
power of all the merits collected by me for a long time and let you 
fare well there.” 


9-20. Vyasa spoke O King! When the King of the Vipras, 
Vis’vamitra, spoke thus, the King Tris’anku, by virtue of the Muni’s 
Tapas, got high up in the air without any delay like a quick flying bird. 
Thus getting up and up, when the King reached the abode of Indra, 
the Devas, seeing the terrible Chandala-like appearance of 
Tris’anku, spoke out to Indra :-- “Who is this person coming like a 
Deva with a violent speed in the air? Why does he look like a 
Chandala and is so fierce-looking?” Hearing thus, Indra got up at 



once and saw that one, the meanest of the human beings and 
knowing him to be Tris’anku, reproachingly said to him You are a 
Chandala, quite unfit for the Devaloka; so where are you going? You 
ought not to remain here; so go immediately back to the earth. O 
Destroyer of the enemies! Indra speaking thus, the King dropped 
from the Heavens and, like a Deva whose merits had been 
exhausted, fell down immediately. Tris’anku then cried out frequently 
“O Vis’vamitra! O Vis’vamitra! Being displaced from the Heavens I 
am now falling very violently; so save me from this trouble.” O King! 
Hearing his cry and seeing him getting down, Vis’vamitra said 
“Wait, wait.” Though displaced from Heaven, the King by virtue of the 
Muni’s Tapas, remained stationed at that place in the middle of the 
air. Vis’vamitra then began to do Achaman (sip water) and 
commenced his great Sacrifice to create another new creation and a 
second Svargaloka (Heaven). Seeing his resolve, the Lord of S’achi 
became very anxious and eagerly came to the son of Gadhi without 
the least delay and said “O Brahmana! What are you going to do? 
O Saint! Why are you so very angry? O Muni! 

There is no necessity to create another new creation. Order now 
what I am to do.” 


21. Vis’vamitra said “O Lord of the Devas! The King Tris’anku has 
become very miserable to have a fall from the Heavens. Therefore 
this is now my intention that you gladly take him to your own abode.” 


22-31. Vyasa said O King! Indra was thoroughly aware of his 
determined resolve and very powerful asceticism; so he accepted to 
do according to his word, out of terror. The Lord Indra then gave the 
King a bright and divine body and made him take his seat in an 
excellent car and taking leave of Kaus’ika went with the King to his 
own abode. Vis’vamitra became glad to see Tris’anku go to the 
Heavens with Indra and remained happy in his own As’rama. The 
King Haris’chandra now hearing that his father has gone to Heaven 



by virtue of his Tapes, began to govern his kingdom with a 
gladdened heart. The King of Ayodhya began then to live constantly 
with his clever wife full of youth and beauty. Thus time passed away; 
but the beautiful wife did not become pregnant. The King became 
very sorry and thoughtful. He then went to the holy hermitage of 
Vas’istha and bowing down informed him of his mental agony due to 
his getting no son. O Knower of Dharma! You are skilled in the 
Science of Mantrams. Especially you know everything of Daiva 
(Fate). So, O Giver of honour! Do for me so that I get a son. O Best 
of Brahmins! There is no salvation for one who has not got any son; 
you are well aware of this. Then why do you overlook my case when 
you can remove my sorrow. Even these sparrows are blessed who 
nourish their offsprings. And I am so very unfortunate that, day and 
night, I am immersed in cares and anxieties, due to my not having 
any son. 


32. Vyasa said O King! Hearing these pitiful utterances of the 
King, Vas’istha thought over in his mind and spoke to him everything 
in particular. 


33-41. Vas’istha said “O King! True you have spoken that in this 
world there is no other sorrow more painsgiving than the state of not 
having any issue. Therefore, O King! you worship with great care the 
water-god Varuna. He will crown your efforts with success. There is 
no other god than Varuna to grant sons. So, O Virtuous One! 

Worship Him and you will get success. Both Fate and Self-exertion 
are to be respected by men; how can success come unless efforts 
are made. O King! Men who realise the Highest Truth should make 
efforts, guided by just rules; success comes to those who work; else 
never one is to expect success.” Hearing these words of the Guru, of 
unbounded energy, the King made a fixed resolve and bowing 
himself down, went away to practise tapasya. On the banks of the 
Ganges, in a sacred place, seated on Padmasan, the King became 



merged in the meditation of the God Varuna with noose in his hand 
and thus practised severe asceticism. O King! When he was doing 
this, the god Varuna took pity on him and gladly came before his 
sight. Varuna, then, spoke to the King Haris’chandra “O Knower of 
Dharma! I am glad at your tapasya. So ask boons from me.” 


42-43. The King said “O God! I am without any son; give me a 
son, who will give me happiness and will free me from the three 
debts that I owe to the Devas, the Pitris and the Risis. Know that with 
that object I am doing this Tapasya.” Then the God Varuna, hearing 
these humble words of the sorrowful King, smiled and said. 


44-45. O King! If you get your desired well-qualified son, what will 
you do for me to my satisfaction? O King! If you perform a sacrifice 
in honour of me and fearlessly sacrifice your son there like an 
animal, I will then grant you your desired boon. 


46-47. The King “O Deva! Free me from this state of sonless- 
ness; O Water God! When my son will be born, I will do your 
sacrifice with my son as an animal in that. This I speak truly to you. 
O Giver of honour! There is no suffering more unbearable than this 
one, not to have any son; so grant me a good son so that all my 
sorrows be vanished.” 


48. Varuna said “O King! You will get a son as you desire; go 
home; but see what you have spoken before be fulfilled and turned 
true.” 


49-55. Vyasa said Hearing these words from Varuna, 
Haris’chandra went back and told everything about his getting the 



boon to his wife. The King had one hundred exquisitely beautiful 
wives of whom, S’aivya was the lawful wife and queen and was very 
chaste. After some time, that wife became pregnant and the King 
became very glad to hear this and her longings in that state. The 
King performed all her purificatory ceremonies, and when ten 
months were completed, and on an auspicious Naksatra and on an 
auspicious day, she gave birth to a son, like that of a Deva son. On 
the birth of his son, the King, surrounded by the Brahmins, 
performed his ablutions and first of all performed the natal 
ceremonies and distributed innumerable jewels and much wealth; 
and the King’s joy knew no bounds at that time. The liberal King 
gave away, in special charities, wealth, grains, and various jewels 
and lands and had the performance of music, dancing and other 
things. 


Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the going 
to Heavens of Tris’anku and the commencement of Haris’chandra’s 
narrative in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 15. On The Story Of The King 
Haris’chandra 


1-7. Vyasa said O King! When there was going on in the King’s 
palace, the grand festivities for the son’s birth ceremonies, Varuna 
Deva came there in the holy Brahmin form. “Let welfare be on you.” 
Saying this, Varuna began to say “O King! Know me to he Varuna. 
Now hear what I say. O King! Your son is now born; therefore 
perform sacrifices in honor to me with your son. O King! Your defect 
of not having a son is now removed; so fulfil what you promised 
before.” Hearing these words, the King began to think “Oh! Only one 
lotus-faced son is born to me; how can I kill it. On the other hand, the 
powerful Regent (Lokapala) of one quarter is present in Brahmana 
form; and it never behoves one to show disrespect to a Deva or to a 
man who wishes welfare to us. Again it is very difficult to root out the 
affection for a son; so what am I to do now? How shall I preserve my 
happiness due to the birth of my son.” The King, then, with patience 
bowed down to him and worshipped him duly and humbly spoke to 
him in beautiful words, pregnant with reason. 


8-10. O Deva of the Devas! I will obey your order no doubt and I will 
perform your sacrifice according to the Vedic rites and with profuse 
Daksinas (remuneration to priests, etc.) But, when in a sacrifice 
human beings are immolated as victims, both the husband and wife 
are entitled to the ceremony. Father becomes purified on the tenth 
day and mother on the expiration of one month after the son’s birth; 
so how can I perform the sacrifice until one month expires! You are 
omniscient and the master of all the beings; and you know what is 
Nitya Dharma. So, O Varuna Deva! I want one month time; and show 
mercy thus on me. 



11-19. Vyasa said O King! The King Haris’chandra saying thus, 
Varuna Deva spoke to the King “O King! Welfare be unto you! Do 
your duties; I am now going back to my place. O King! I will come 
again after one month. Better finish the natal ceremonies and the 
Namakarana ceremony regularly and then perform my sacrifice.” O 
King! When Varuna Deva turned his back, the King began to feel 
happiness. Then the King gave as gifts millions of cows, yielding 
plenty of milk and ornamented with gold, and mountains of Til, 
sesamums to the Brahmins versed in the Vedas and kept his name, 
with formal ceremonies as RohitasVa. When one month became 
complete, Varuna Deva came again in a Brahmin form and 
frequently said “O King! Start the sacrifice just now!” The King, on 
seeing the God of Waters, at once fell into an ocean of anxieties and 
sorrows; he then bowed down and worshipping him as a guest, 
spoke to him with folded palms “O Deva! It is to my great fortune 
that you have landed your feet at my place; O Lord! My house has 
been sanctified to day. O Deva! I will do, no doubt, your desired 
sacrifice according to the rites and ceremonies. But see, the victims 
that have not their teeth come as yet are not fit for a sacrifice; so the 
versed Pundits say; so I have settled I would perform your great 
sacrifice, as desired by you, when the teeth will come out of my son.” 


20-41. Vyasa said O Lord of men! Hearing thus, Varuna spoke 
“Let it be so” and went away. The King Haris’chandra became glad 
and passed his days in enjoyments in his household. When the teeth 
of the child got out, Varuna knew it and came again in a 
Brahmin garb in the palace and spoke “O King! Now commence my 
sacrifice.” Seeing the Brahmin Varuna there, the King, too, bowed 
down and gave him a seat and shewing all respects to him, 
worshipped him. He sang hymns to him and very humbly said with 
his head bent low “O Deva! I will perform your desired sacrifice 
with plenty of Daks’inas according to rites and ceremonies. But the 
child’s Chudakarana (the ceremony of tonsure) is not yet done; so 
the hairs that were at the birth time are still there and the child 



cannot be fit for sacrifice as long as those hairs exist. So I have 
heard from the elderly persons. O Lord of Waters! You know the 
S’astric rules; kindly wait till the Chudakarana is over. When the child 
will have his head shaven, I will certainly perform your sacrifice; 
there is no doubt in this.” Hearing these words, Varuna spoke to him 
again “O King! Why are you deceiving me like this so often? O 
King! Now you have all the materials ready for the sacrifice; only for 
your filial affection you are deceiving me. However, if, after the 
ceremony of tonsure, you do not perform my sacrifice, I will be angry 
and I will curse you. O King! I am going for the present; but see do 
not tell lies, being born in the family of Iksaku.” Instantly Varuna 
disappeared; the King, too, felt himself happy in his household. 

When the ceremony of tonsure was commenced and grand 
festivities were held, on the occasion Varuna soon came again to the 
King’s palace. The queen was then sitting before the King with the 
child in her lap when Varuna came up there. The Brahmin Varuna 
then appeared like a Flaming Fire and spoke to the King in a clear 
voice “O King! Start the sacrifice.” Seeing him, the King was 
confused with terror and with folded palms, quickly bowed down to 
him. After worshipping him duly, he very humbly said “O Lord! 
Today I will perform your sacrifice. But kindly hear with attention my 
saying and then do what is advisable. O Lord! If you approve of this 
as reasonable, I then open my heart to you. The three Varnas 
Brahmanas, Ksattriyas, and Vais’yas become Dvijas (twice-born) 
only when they are duly purified according to proper rules and 
ceremonies; without any such purifications they are certainly 
S’udras. So the Pundits versed in the Vedas declare. My child is now 
an infant only; so it is like a S’udra. When his thread ceremony 
(Upanayan) will be performed, he will then be fit for the sacrifice; this 
the Veda S’astras declare. The Ksatttriyas are so purified in their 
eleventh year; the Brahmanas in their eighth year and the Vais’yas in 
their twelfth year. So, O Lord of the Devas! If you feel pity for your 
this humble servant, then wait till the Upanayana ceremony is over, 
when I will perform your grand sacrifice with my son. O Bibhu! You 
are the Lokapala; specially you are conversant with all the S’astric 



rules and have acquired the knowledge of Dharma. If you think my 
saying as true, then go to your home.” 


42-51. Vyasa said Hearing these words, Varuna’s heart was filled 
with pity and so he went away instantly, saying “Let it be so.” Varuna 
going away, the King felt very glad and the queen, knowing the 
welfare of the son became glad too. Then the King gladly performed 
his state duties. After some time, the child grew ten years old. 
Consulting with the peaceful Brahmanas as well as his ministers, he 
collected materials for the Upanayana ceremony befitting his 
position. When the eleventh year was completed by his son, the King 
arranged everything for the thread ceremony but when his thoughts 
turned to Varuna’s sacrifice, he became very sad and anxious. When 
the thread ceremony began to be performed, the Brahmin Varuna 
came there. Seeing him, the King instantly bowed down and 
standing before him with clasped palms, gladly spoke to him O 
Deva! My son’s Upanayana being over, now my son is fit for the 
victim in the sacrifice; and by your grace, my sorrow that was within 
me as not having a son, has vanished. I speak truly before you that, 
O Knower of Virtue! after some mere time I have desired to perform 
your sacrifice with plenty of Daksinas. In fact, when the Samavartan 
ceremony will be over, I will do as you like. Kindly wait till then. 


52-62. Varuna said O Intelligent One! You are very much attached 
to your son now and so by various reasonable plays of intellect, you 
are repeatedly deceiving me. However, I am going home today at 
your request but know certain that I will come again at the time of the 
Samavartan ceremony. (N. B.:- Samavartan means the return home 
especially of a pupil from his tutor’s house after finishing his course 
of study there.) O King! Thus saying, Varuna went away and the 
King became glad and began to perform duly his various duties. The 
prince was very intelligent; and as he used to see Varuna coming, 
now and then, at the time of the ceremonies, he became very 



anxious. He then made enquiries outside hither and thither and 
came to know of his own being about to be killed and he desired to 
quit the house instantly. He then consulted with the minister’s sons 
and came to a final conclusion and went out of the city to the forest. 
When the son had gone to the forest, the King became very much 
afflicted with sorrow and sent messengers in quest of him. When 
some time passed away, Varuna came to his house and spoke to the 
distressed King “O King! Now perform your desired Sacrifice.” The 
King bowed down to him and said “O Deva! What shall I do now? 
My son has become afraid and has gone away. I do not know where 
he has gone. O Deva! My messengers have searched for him in 
difficult places in mountains, in the hermitages of the Munis, in fact, 
in all the places; but they have not been able to find him out 
anywhere. My son has left his home; order now what I can do. O 
Deva! You know everything; so judge I have got no fault in this 
matter. It is certainly luck and nothing else.” 


63-66. Vyasa said O King! Hearing these words of the King, 
Varuna became very much angry and when he saw that he was 
deceived so many times by the King, he then cursed, saying “O 
King! As you have cheated me by your deceitful words, so you be 
attacked by dropsy and be severely pained by it.” Thus cursed by 
Varuna, the King was attacked with that disease and began to suffer 
much. Cursing thus, Varuna went back to his own place and the King 
was much afflicted with that terrible disease. 


Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the story of 
the King Haris’chandra in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 16. On The Story Of S’unahs’epha 


1-4. Vyasa said O King! When Varuna went away, the King was 
very much laid down with that dropsy and daily his pains began to 
increase and he began to suffer extreme pains. O King! The prince, 
on the other hand, heard, in the forest, of the illness of his father and 
filled with affection, wanted to go to his father. A year had passed 
away and the prince desired very gladly to go to his father and see 
him. Knowing this, Indra came there. He came instantly in the form 
of a Brahmin and with favourable arguments desisted the prince, 
who was about to go to his father. 


5-31. Indra said “O Prince! It seems you are silly; you know 
nothing of the difficult state policies. Therefore it is that you are ready 
to go, out of sheer ignorance, to your father. O Fortunate One! If you 
go there, your father will get his sacrifice, where a human victim is to 
be offered, performed by the Vedic Brahmanas and your flesh will be 
offered are oblations to the blazing Fire. O Child! The souls of all the 
beings are very dear; it is for that reason, for the sake of soul, that 
sons, wife, wealth and jewels are all dear. Therefore, though you are 
his dear son, like his son, yet he will certainly have you killed and get 
Homas offered, to free himself from the disease. O Prince! You ought 
not to go home now; rather when your father dies, you would 
certainly go there and inherit your Kingdom.” O King! Thus hindered 
by Vasava, the prince remained in that forest for one year more. But 
when the prince again heard of the severe illness of his father, he 
wanted again to go to his father, resolved to court the death of his 
ownself. Indra also came there in the form of a Brahman and, with 
reasonable words, repeatedly advised him not to go there. Here, on 
the other hand, the King Haris’chandra became very much 
distressed and troubled by the disease and asked his family priest 
Vas’istha Deva “O Brahmana! What is the sure remedy for the 
cure of the disease?” Vas’istha, the Brahma’s son, said “O King! 



Purchase one son by giving his value; then perfornn the sacrifice with 
that purchased son and you will be free from the curse. O King! The 
Brahmins, versed in the Vedas, say that sons are of ten kinds, of 
whom the son, purchased by paying its proper value, is one of them. 
So buy one son. There will very probably be within your kingdom a 
Brahmin who might sell out of avarice, his son. In that case Varuna 
Deva will certainly be pleased and grant your happiness.” Hearing 
these words of the high-souled Vas’istha, the King became glad and 
ordered his minister to look after such a son. There lived in that 
King’s dominion one Brahmin, named Ajigarta, very poor; he had 
three sons. The minister spoke to him to purchase his son “I will 
give you one hundred cows; give one son of yours for the sacrifice. 
You have three sons named respectively S’unahpuchcha, 
S’unahs’epha and S’unolangula. Give me out of them one son and I 
will give you one hundred cows as his value.” Ajigarta was very 
much distressed for want of food; so when he heard the proposal, he 
expressed his desire to sell his son. He thought that his eldest son 
was the rightful person to perform funeral obsequies and offer Pinda 
and he therefore did not spare him. The youngest son, too, he did 
not spare also, as he considered that his own. At last, he sold his 
second son for the price of one hundred cows. The King then bought 
him and made him the victim for the sacrifice. When that boy was 
fastened to the sacrificial post, he began to tremble and very much 
distressed with sorrow began to cry. Seeing this, the Munis cried out 
in a very pitiful tone. When the King gave permission for the 
immolation of that boy, the slaughterer did not take weapons to 
slaughter him. He told that he would never be able to kill the boy, 
since he is crying in a very pitiful tone. When he thus withdrew 
himself from his work, the King then asked his councillors O 
Devas! What ought to be done now? S’unahs’epha then began to cry 
in a very pitiful voice; the people present there began to discuss and 
there arose a great noise on the affair. Then Ajigarta stood up in the 
midst of the assembly and spoke “O King! Be patient; I will fulfil 
your desire. I am desirous of wealth and if you give me double the 
amount, I will slay immediately the victim; and you can complete 
early your sacrifice.” O King! He who is hankering after money, can 



always entertain feelings of enmity even towards his own son. There 
is no doubt in this. 


32-35. Vyasa said O King! Hearing those words of Ajigarta, 
Haris’chandra gladly spoke to him “I will immediately give you 
another hundred excellent cows.” Hearing thus, the son’s father, 
avaricious of wealth, immediately resolved and became ready to slay 
his son. All the councillors seeing the father ready to slay his son, 
were struck with sorrow and began to lament exclaiming “Alas! This 
wretch, a disgrace to his family, is now ready to kill his own son. Oh! 
We never saw before such a cruel vicious person. This 
Brahmin must be a Demon in a Brahmin body! 


36-38. Fie on you! O Chandala! What a vicious work are you now 
going to do? What happiness do you derive by slaying the son, the 
jewel of jewels, only to get some wealth? O Sinner! It is stated in the 
Vedas that the soul takes its birth from one’s body; so how are you 
going to slay your soul!” When the hue and cry arose in the 
assembly, Vis’vamitra, the son of Kaus’ika, went to the King and, out 
of pity, said 


39-56. O King! S’unahs’epha is very piteously crying; so let him be 
free; and then your sacrifice will be complete and you will be free of 
your disease. There is no virtue like mercy and there is no vice like 
killing (Himsa). What is written about killing animals in the sacrifice, 
is only meant for the persons inclined to sensual objects and to give 
them a stimulus in that direction. O King! He who wants his own 
welfare and who wants to preserve his own body ought not to cut 
another’s body. He who pities equally all the beings, gets contended 
with a trivial gain and subdues all his senses; God is soon pleased 
with him. O King! You should treat all the Jivas like yourself and thus 
always spend your life, so dear to all. You desire to preserve your 



body by taking away the life of this boy; similarly why would he not 
try to preserve his own body, the receptacle of happiness and 
pleasures. O King! You have desired to kill this innocent 
Brahminboy; but he will never overlook this enmity of yours done in 
previous lives. If anybody kills another willingly, though he has got no 
enmity with him, then the one that is killed will certainly kill 
afterwards the slayer. His father, out of greed for money, is deprived 
of intellect and so has sold away his son. The Brahmin is certainly 
very cruel and sinful. There is no doubt in this. When one goes to 
Gaya or one performs an AsVamedha sacrifice or when one offers a 
blue bull (Nila Vrisabha), one does so on the consideration that one 
would desire to have many sons. Moreover the King has to suffer for 
one-sixth of the sins committed by anyone in his Kingdom. There is 
no doubt in this. Therefore the King ought certainly to prohibit any 
man when he wants to do a sinful act. Why then did you not prevent 
this man when he desired to sell his son? O King! You are the son of 
Tris’anku; especially you are born in the Solar line of Kings. So how 
have you desired, being born an Arya, to do an act becoming an An- 
Arya (non-aryan). If you take my word and quickly free this 
Brahmin boy, you will certainly derive virtue in your body. Your father 
was converted into a Chandala by a curse but I sent him in his very 
body to the Heavens. And you are well acquainted with this fact. 
Therefore, O King! Keep my word out of your love for that. This boy 
is very pitifully crying; so free him. I pray this from you in this your 
Rajasuya sacrifice and if you do not keep my word, you will incur the 
sin of not keeping my word. Do you not realise this? O King! You will 
have to give anything that a man wants from you in this sacrifice; but 
if you do otherwise, sin will attack you, no doubt. 


57-59. Vyasa said O King! Hearing these words of Kaus’ika, the 
King Haris’chandra spoke thus O son of Gadhi! I am suffering 
very much from the dropsy; I will not be able therefore to free him. 
You can pray for some other thing. You ought not to throw obstacles 
in this my sacrifice. VisVamitra became very angry at this, and 



seeing the Brahmin boy very distressed, became sorrowful and 
mourned very much. 


Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the story of 
S’unahs’epha in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 17. On The Freeing Of S’unahs’epha 
And The Curing Of Haris’chandra 


1-6. Vyasa said O King! When VisVamitra saw that the boy was 
crying very pitifully, he went to him with a merciful heart and said 
“O Child! I am giving you the Varuna Mantra; recollect this within 
your mind and if you go on repeating that Mantra silently, you will 
certainly fare well.” The sorrowful S’unahs’epha, hearing thus from 
VisVamitra, began to repeat silently in his mind the above Mantra, 
clearly pronouncing each letter. O King! No sooner S’unahs’epha 
repeated that Mantra than the kind-hearted Varuna came suddenly 
before the boy, greatly pleased with him. Everyone in the assembly 
became thoroughly surprised to see Varuna Deva come there and 
they all became glad and chanted hymns in honour of him. The 
diseased Haris’chandra was also thoroughly surprised, fell to his 
feet, and with folded palms began to sing hymns to Varuna, standing 
before him. 


7-14. Haris’chandra said “O Deva of the Devas! I am very vicious; 
my intellect is much defiled; I am a sinner before you; O Merciful 
One! Now show your mercy and sanctify this humble self. I was very 
much troubled on not having a son; so I had disregarded your words; 
now show your mercy on me; what offence can cling to him whose 
intellect is already out of order? A beggar does not see his own 
faults; I am also in want of a son; so I could not see my defects. O 
Lord! Being afraid of the terrors of hell, I have deceived you. Those, 
who are sonless, cannot find rest anywhere. Especially he is barred 
from the Heavens. Being terrified by this dictate of S’astra, I have 
shown disregard to your words. O Lord! You are wise and I am 
ignorant; especially I am extremely afflicted by this terrible disease; I 
am also deprived of my son; so you ought not to take any notice of 
my faults. O Lord! I do not know where my son has gone; O merciful 
One! Perhaps he, being afraid of his life, has fled away to some 



forest. For your satisfaction, I have now commenced your sacrifice 
with this purchased boy; I gave an equivalent value and I have 
purchased this boy. O Deva of the Devas! Your sight only has taken 
away my infinite troubles; now if you be pleased, I can be free of my 
this disease dropsy and my troubles will all be over.” Vyasa said O 
King! Hearing thus the words of that diseased King, Varuna, the 
Deva of the Devas, took pity on him and thus spoke. 


15-22. Varuna said “O King! S’unahs’epha is uttering hymns of 
praise to me; he has become very distressed; so quit him. Your 
sacrifice, too, is now completed; now let you be free from your 
present disease.” Thus saying, Varuna freed the King of his disease 
in the presence of all his councillors; the King became possessed of 
a beautiful body and got himself completely cured and shone bright 
before the assembly. Shouts of victory arose from the midst of the 
sacrificial ground when the Brahmin boy was freed of his bonds of 
rope, by the mercy of the high-souled Deva Varuna. The King 
became very glad on his being recovered immediately from his 
disease and S’unahs’epha, too, became free from his anxiety and 
pacified when he got himself liberated from his being immolated on 
the sacrificial post. Then the King Haris’chandra completed his 
sacrifice with great modesty. Afterwards S’unahs’epha addressed 
the councillors with folded palms and said O Councillors! You 
know well the Dharma; O Speakers of truth! Kindly specify according 
to the dictates of the Vedas. O Omniscient ones! Whose son am I 
now? Who is my most respectful father? Please deliver your 
judgment and I will take his refuge. 


23-34. When S’unahs’epha spoke thus, the members of the 
assembly began to speak to each other, “The boy must be of 
Ajigarta; whose else can he be? This boy is born of the limbs of 
Ajigarta; and he has nursed him according to his might. So he must 
be his son; whose else can he be?” Varna Deva then told the people 



of the assembly, “The father of the boy sold his son for money; the 
King purchased him. So he can be said as the son of the King; or he 
may be called the son of Varuna, in as much as he freed him from 
his rope bondage. For, he who nourishes another with food, who 
saves one from one’s fear, who protects one by giving money, who 
bestows learning to anybody and he who gives birth to any of the 
above five classes of persons can be called his father.” O King! Thus 
some one turned out to be in favour of Ajigarta, some other in favour 
of the King; but nobody came to any definite conclusion. When 
matters stood in this doubtful condition, the omniscient all-respected 
Vas’istha Deva addressed the disputing members thus “O high- 
souled Ones! Kindly hear what the S’rutis say on this point. When 
the father has cut off his filial attachment and has sold his son, his 
fatherly connection has ceased then. No doubt this boy was 
purchased by the King Haris’chandra. But when the King fastened 
him to the sacrificial post, he cannot be called as the father. Again 
when this boy singing hymns in honour of Varuna, he being glad 
freed him of his bondage, so Varuna cannot be called his father. For 
whoever praises a god by the great Mantra, that Deva becomes 
pleased with him and gives him wealth, life, cattle, kingdom and 
even final emancipation. Rather Vis’vamitra saved the boy by giving 
him in his critical moment the powerful great Mantra of Varuna; 
hence the boy can be called as the son of Vis’vamitra and of none 
else.” 


35-40. Vyasa said O King! Hearing the words of Vas’istha, all the 
members of the assembly gave their unanimous consent and 
Vis’vamitra with his heart filled with love, exclaimed, “O Son! Come 
to my house.” And caught hold of his right hand. S’unahs’epha, too, 
accompanied him and went away. Varuna also went to his own 
abode with a gladdened heart. The councillors, too, departed. Freed 
from his disease, the King gladly began to govern his subjects. At 
this time his son Rohita heard all about Varuna and became very 
glad and leaving the impassable forest passes and mountains. 



returned home. The messengers informed the King of the arrival of 
the prince; the King heard and his heart overflowed with love and he 
gladly came there with no delay. 


41-48. Seeing the father coming, RohitasVa became filled with love 
and overpowered with sorrow for long separation began to shed 
tears and fell prostrate at his feet. The King raised him up and 
embraced him gladly and smelling his head enquired of his welfare. 
When the King was thus asking his son, taking him on his lap, the 
hot tears of joy flowed from his eyes and fell on the head of the 
prince. The King and the prince then began to govern together his 
kingdom. The King described in detail all the events of the sacrifice 
where human victims are immolated. He started next the Rajasuya 
sacrifice, the best of all sacrifices, and duly worshipping the Muni 
Vas’istha, made him the Hota in that sacrifice. When this grand 
sacrifice was finished, the King respected the Muni Vas’istha with 
abundant wealth. Once, on a time, the Muni Vas’istha went gladly to 
the romantic Heaven of Indra; and Vis’vamitra, too, went there also 
and both the Munis then met with each other. The two Maharsis took 
their seats in that Heaven. But Vis’vamitra was astonished to see 
Vas’istha greatly respected in Indra’s hall of assembly and asked 
him, thus 


49. “O Muni! Where have you received this great honour and 
worship? O Highly Fortunate One! Who has worshipped you thus? 
Speak out truly.” 


50-53. Vas’istha said “O Muni! There is a King named 
Haris’chandra; he is very powerful and my client; that King 
performed the great Rajasuya sacrifice with abundant Daksinas. 
There is no other King truthful like him; he is virtuous, charitable, and 
ever ready in governing his subjects. O Son of Kaus’ika! I have got 



my worship and honour in his sacrifice. O best of Dvijas! Are you 
telling me to speak truly? Again I speak truly to you that there never 
was a King truthful, heroic, charitable, and very religious like him nor 
there will be such a one.” 


54. Vyasa said O King! Hearing such words, the VisVamitra, of a 
very angry temper, spoke to him with his reddened eyes 


55-59. “O Vas’istha! Haris’chandra obtained a boon from Varuna 
when he made a certain promise; then he cheated Varuna with 
deceitful words. So he is a liar and cheat. Why are you praising then 
that King? O Intelligent One! Let us now stake all our virtues that we 
have earned since our birth by our asceticism and studies. You have 
praised exceedingly that King who is a great cheat; but if I cannot 
prove him to be a liar of the first order, I will lose all my virtues from 
my birth; but if it be otherwise, then all your virtues will be 
destroyed.” Thus the two Munis quarrelled with each other and 
making this stake, departed from the Heavens and went to their 
respective As’ramas. 


Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the 
freeing of S’unahs’epha and the curing of Haris’chandra in the 
Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 18. On The Origin Of The Quarrel 
Between Haris’chandra And Vis’vamitra 


1-6. Vyasa said O King! Once on a time Haris’chandra went out to 
the forest on an hunting excursion; and, while roaming to and fro, he 
saw that a very beautiful lady was crying. The King, seeing this, took 
pity on her and asked “O Fair One! Why are you in this forest 
crying alone? O Large eyed One! Has someone pained you? What is 
the cause of your sorrow? Express this quickly before me. Why have 
you come here in this dreadful lonely forest? What are the names of 
your husband and your father? O Beautiful One! In My kingdom, no 
demon can give any trouble to another’s lady; I will immediately kill 
him who has given you this trouble. O thin-bellied One! Be 
comfortable; do not weep; tell me why you are in this sorrowful state; 
know that no sinner can remain within my territory.” Hearing the 
words of the King, the lady wiped out her tears by her hand and 
began to say 


7-8. O King! I am Siddharupini, of the nature of success; to get me, 
Vis’vamitra is practising terrible austerities. So these troubles have 
arisen from him, the son of Kaus’ika. O King! For this reason I am 
sorry in Your kingdom. O One of good vows! I am a gentle lovely 
Lady; still that Muni is giving me so much trouble. 


9-16. The King said “O Large-eyed One! No longer you will have 
to suffer any more pains. Be patient. I will go and make the Muni 
desist from his tapasya.” Thus comforting the lady, the King went 
hurriedly to the Muni Vis’vamitra and, bowing down to him said with 
clasped palms O Maharsi! Why are you ailing your body by this 
terrible severe austerity! O Highly intelligent One! For what great 
noble cause are you practising this hard tapasya; speak truly to me. 



O Son of Gadhi! I will fulfil your desires; there is no need of your 
practising this severe penance; please get out of it immediately. O 
Maharsi! You know everything; so what shall I say anything further? 
See! It ought not anyone to practise this extremely dreadful tapasya, 
causing troubles to the people within my territory. Thus prohibited by 
the King Haris’chandra, the Muni became very angry at his heart and 
went towards his own hermitage. The King, too, went back to his 
palace. The Muni on his arrival at his hermitage, began to cogitate in 
his mind, “Why has the King unjustly desisted me from my tapasya” 
and also the discussions that took place between him and Vas’istha. 
VisVamitra became very angry at his heart and ready to take the 
vengeance of this. He thought over on many points and created a 
terrible demon of a dreadful appearance in the form of a boar and 
sent it to the territory of the King Haris’chandra. 


17-28. That terrible boar, of huge body, entered into the kingdom, 
raising a dreadful sound. The guards became afraid at his terrible 
noise. Entering into the forest, that boar began to whirl round and 
round and destroy the Malati forest, at another place the Kadamba 
forest, and at others the Yuthika forest. At other places he began to 
dig up the earth by his tusks and root out the Champaka, Ketaki, 
Mallika and various other trees. At other places again, he rooted out 
nice gentle Us’ira, Karavira, Muchukunda, As’oka, Vakula, Tilaka 
and other trees and so massacred the nice gardens and forests. The 
forest guards, then, taking their weapons, rushed forward on that 
boar. Those that were making garlands and the florists became very 
distressed and uttered uproars of consternation. That boar, as if an 
incarnate of Death, though routed out with flights of arrows, could not 
be terrified; rather when he began to harass the guards very much, 
they became very much afraid and being very distressed took the 
refuge of the King and, trembling, said “O King! Protect us. 

Protect us.” And they cried piteously. Seeing the guards terrified and 
distressed, the King asked them Whom do you fear so much and 
why you are so distressed? Speak truly before me. O Guards! I do 



not fear the Deva nor the Demons; so tell me who has created this 
panic amongst you. I, no doubt, will send that vicious cheat unto the 
door of Death by this arrow, who has come against me in this world. 
What sort of enemy is that? What is his form? What is his power and 
where is he residing now; speak this quickly to me. Be that enemy a 
Deva or a Danava, I will slay him immediately by the multitude of 
arrows. 


29-31. The Malakaras said The enemy is not a Deva, nor a 
Danava, Yaksa nor a Kinnara; it is a boar of a huge body that has 
entered into the forest. Very powerful, he is uprooting by his teeth all 
the beautiful flower trees; in fact, he is ruining all the gardens and 
forests. O King! We shot arrows on him, struck him with cudgels and 
hurled stones at him so much; yet he did not get a bit afraid; rather 
he turned back to kill us. 


32-51. Vyasa said O King! Hearing these words, the King’s fury 
knew no bounds and, immediately getting on horseback, he went 
towards the garden and forest. Then the horsemen, elephant drivers, 
charioteers and infantry, all followed him. When the King went there, 
he saw the terrible boar, of a huge body, whirling round and round 
and making the peculiar sound in the forest; and he witnessed also 
the destroyed condition of the forest and became very angry. He 
then drew his bow and arrows and fell down on him to take away his 
life. Seeing the King coming angrily towards him with bow and 
arrows in his hands, the boar began to sound more terribly and ran 
forward before him. The King saw the boar coming towards him with 
his mouth wide opened and began to shower arrows upon him to kill 
him. The boar immediately made those arrows useless, and very 
violently and quickly jumped and passed away, over the King. When 
the boar passed away, the King angrily drew his bow with great care 
and shot sharpened arrows at him. One moment the boar came in 
the King’s sight; and at another moment he vanished away; thus the 



boar began to flee, uttering all sorts of sounds. The King 
Haris’chandra then became very angry and drawing his bow pursued 
him, mounting on a horse, swift like the wind. The soldiers then 
entered the forest and scattered hither and thither; the King alone 
pursued the boar. The sun entered unto the meridian; and the King 
came to be alone in a lonely forest. His horse was fatigued, and he, 
too, was tired of hunger and thirst. The boar went away out of sight. 
The King also missed his way in that dense jungle and became 
greatly absorbed with intense cares and anxieties. He then began to 
think, “Where shall I now go? There is none to help me in this dense 
jungle. Especially I don’t know the right path.” While he was thus 
thinking, he saw, all on a sudden, a river with clear water in that 
lonely forest. He became much delighted to see the flowing river 
and, alighting from horseback, he drank that water and made the 
horse also drink it. He became much relieved by drinking; and 
though he was much bewildered not to find the right track, he wanted 
now to go to his own city. At this moment Vis’vamitra came up there 
in an old Brahmin form; the King also looking at him bowed down to 
the Brahmin garbed Vis’vamitra, who then spoke to the King “O 
King! Welfare be unto you! What for have you come here? O King! 
What object have you got in view in this lonely forest? Be calm and 
quiet and speak everything before me.” 


52-58. The King said “O Brahmin! One powerful boar of a huge 
body entered into my garden and spoilt altogether all the gentle 
flower trees there. To desist that boar, I pursued him with bow in 
hand and went out of the city. That powerful boar, very swift and, as 
it were, a magician, has escaped my sight and gone away where I 
do not know. I pursued him and have come now to this place and I 
do not know where my soldiers have gone. O Muni! Now I am 
deprived of my men, I am hungry and thirsty. I do not know which is 
the road to my city; nor do I know where my soldiers have gone. O 
Dear Lord! It is to my great fortune that you have come in this lonely 
forest. Now I want to return to my home; kindly shew me the way. I 



have completed my Rajasuya sacrifice. I always give everyone 
whatever he wants. This is known to everybody. O Dvija! If you want 
money for your sacrifice, then come with me to Ayodhya and I will 
give you abundance of wealth. I am Haris’chandra, the famous King 
of Ayodhya.” 


Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the origin 
of the quarrel between Haris’chandra and Vis’vamitra in the 
Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 19. On The Taking Away Of 
Haris’chandra’s Kingdom 


1-12. Vyasa said O King! Hearing thus the words of the King 
Haris’chandra, the Maharsi Kaus’ika smilingly said “O King! This 
Tirath is very sacred; if one bathes here, one is cleansed of one’s 
sins and virtue springs up. So, highly fortunate One! Bathe in this 
and do peace-offerings (tarpanam) to your fathers. O King! This time 
is very auspicious and highly meritorious; so take a bath in this 
sacred Punya Tirtha and make charities as far as it lies in your 
power. Svayambhuva Manu says He, who arriving at a tirtha 
capable to give high merits (Punya), does not bathe and make 
charities, deceives himself; so he is the slayer of his soul, no doubt. 
So, O King! Do meritorious acts as best as you can in this excellent 
tirtha. Then I will shew you the way and you will go to Ayodhya. O 
Kakutstha! Today I will be pleased with your gifts and I will 
accompany you to show you the way; this I have decided.” Hearing 
the deceitful words of the Maharsi, the King took off his upper 
garments and tying the horse on to a tree, went towards the river to 
bathe according to due rites. O King! The accidental combination, 
that was to have been so (sure to come), so enchanted the King by 
the Muni’s words, that he got himself entirely under the control of the 
Muni. He duly completed his bath and offered peace offerings to the 
Devas and the Piths and then spoke to Vis’vamitra. “O Lord! I am 
now making gifts to you. O Fortunate One! Cows, lands, jewels, 
elephants, horses, chariots or horses, etc., anything that you like I 
will give you just now. There is nothing that I cannot give. When I 
performed previously the Rajasuya sacrifice, I took, then, before all 
the Munis, this vow. So, O Muni! You are also present at this 
principal Tirtha (place of pilgrimage); so express what you desire; I 
will give you your desired object.” 



13-15. VisVamitra said “O King! Your glory is spread far and wide 
in this world; especially I have already heard that there is no second 
man charitable like you. The Muni Vas’istha has said The 

King of the solar dynasty, the Tris’anku’s son, Haris’chandra is 
foremost and first amongst the kings in this world and there is no one 
so liberal-minded as he is; such a king there never was nor ever 
there will be. So, O King! Now the marriage time of my son has 
arrived; so I pray before you today, that you give me wealth to 
celebrate this marriage.” 


16. The King said :-- “O Brahmin! Yes! Celebrate the marriage 
ceremony; I will give you your desired wealth. What more can be 
said than this that whatever wealth you would want, I will give that 
abundantly. There is no doubt in this.” 


17-22. Vyasa said O King! Hearing these words of the King, the 
Muni Kaus’ika became ready to deceive him and originating the 
Gandharbi Maya, created a beautiful youth and one daughter aged 
ten years and showing them to the King, said, “The marriage of 
these two is to be celebrated today. O King! To marry the boys and 
the girls in the house-hold is to earn more merits than the Rajasuya 
sacrifice. So today you will get that desired fruit if you make charities 
for the marriage of this Brahmin Youth.” The King was much 
enchanted by his Maya; so no sooner he heard those words, he 
immediately promised “That will be done,” he did not raise any 
objection whatsoever. VisVamitra then showed the way and the King 
went to his city. VisVamitra, too, thus deceiving the King, went back 
to his As’rama. When the King was staying in Agnis’ala (cook-room), 
VisVamitra Muni went to him and said “O King! The marriage rites 
have been finished; so today give me what I desire in this sacrificial 
hall.” 



23-24. The King said “O Brahmin! Speak out what you want; now I 
like to get fame. So if there be anything in the world, that is not to be 
given by me, if you want, I will give that even to you, no doubt. The 
mortal, possessing all wealth, if he does not earn good name and 
fame, capable to give happiness to him in his next world, passes his 
life in vain.” 


25. VisVamitra said “O King! Give to this bridegroom, while within 
this sacred sacrificial altar, your entire kingdom with the royal 
umbrella and Chamara for fanning the king and elephants, horses, 
chariots, infantry and all the gems and jewels.” 


26-33. Vyasa said O King! The King Haris’chandra was deluded 
by his Maya; so no sooner he heard the Muni’s words, he willingly 
said without the slightest consideration “O Muni! I give as you 
pray, my this vast dominion to you.” The very cruel Vis’vamitra then 
said :-- “O King! I have accepted your offer; but O Intelligent One! 
Give now the requisite Daksina to complete your gift. Manu says gift 
without Daksina is fruitless; so to get the fruit of your gift give 
Daksina as duly fixed.” The King was exceedingly surprised to hear 
this and said “O Lord! Kindly say what amount of wealth am I to 
give to you as Daksina. O Saint! Say the value of your Daksina. O 
Ascetic! Don’t be impatient; I will give you the Daksina to that 
amount, no doubt.” Hearing this, Vis’vamitra told to the King “At 
present give me two and a half loads of gold as Daksina.” The King 
Haris’chandra became greatly amazed and promised “I will give 
you that,” he then anxiously mounted on his horseback and became 
ready to go quickly. At this time, his soldiers who lost their road in 
quest of their king, came to him. They were very glad to see him; 
but, seeing him anxious, they began to praise him in great haste. 



34-47. Vyasa said O King! Hearing their words, the King did not 
say anything, good or bad; but thinking on his own doing entered into 
the zenana. Oh! What have I promised to give? I have made a gift of 
all that I have; I am cheated in this matter by the Muni like one 
robbed by a thief in a wilderness. My whole dominion including my 
dress I have promised to give to him. Moreover I will have to pay 
besides two and a half loads of gold. My brain seems to have been 
completely destroyed. What to do now? I did not know the 
cunningness of the Muni. Therefore I am cheated by this deceitful 
Brahmin. It is next to impossible to understand the work of Daiva. 

Oh! My Fate! What will happen to me now? Very much bewildered 
the King entered in the interior of the palace. The queen seeing her 
husband immersed in cares, enquired into the cause, thus “O 
Lord Why have you become so absent-minded? Kindly say what you 
are thinking now? O King! The son has come back from the forest 
before you completed your Rajasuya sacrifice; why then are you in 
grief now? Kindly speak out the cause of your sorrow. Nowhere is 
your enemy, strong or weak; only Varuna was angry with you; now 
he is also very satisfied. So there is nothing further for you to do to 
think. O King! Owing to cares, this body gets weaker and weaker day 
by day. So nothing is like cares to lead one to death.” When his dear 
wife said so, the King expressed to her somewhat the cause of his 
cares, good or bad. But the King was much absorbed with his cares 
so that he could not eat nor sleep though his bedding was perfectly 
white and clear. Early in the next morning, when, getting up from his 
bed, he was doing anxiously his morning duties, VisVamitra came up 
there. When the sentinel informed the King of the arrival of 
VisVamitra, he gave order for him to enter. VisVamitra, the Looter of 
his all and everything, came before him and told the King who 
repeatedly bowed down to him “O King! Now leave your kingdom 
and give me the gold that you promised as Daksina and prove that 
you are truthful.” 



48-63. Haris’chandra said “O Lord! I have given you this vast 
dominion of mine; so my Kingdom has now become yours; I am 
leaving this Kingdom and going to somewhere else. O Kaus’ika! You 
need not think a bit for this. O Brahmana! You have taken my all 
according to the technical rule; so now I am unable to give you 
Daksina. If, in time, wealth comes to me, I will at once give you your 
Daksina.” Saying him thus, the King told his wife S’aivya, and his son 
Rohita, “In this Agnihotra room I say that I have given my vast 
dominion to the Muni VisVamitra. Elephants, horses, chariots, gold 
and jewels all I have given to him along with my kingdom. What 
more than this that save us three, everything else I have given to 
him. O Maharsi! Take fully this prosperous dominion; we are going 
somewhere else to a forest or a mountain cave.” The exceedingly 
virtuous Haris’chandra spoke thus to his wife and son, and, paying 
respects to the Muni, went out from his house. Seeing the King going 
thus away, his wife and son, afflicted with cares, followed him with 
their sad faces. Seeing thus, all the inhabitants of Ayodhya cried 
aloud, and great consternation and uproar arose in the city. O King! 
What is this act that you have done? How has this suffering come to 
you! O King! The great Fate, without any consideration, has certainly 
deceived you. The Brahmanas, Ks’attriyas, Vais’yas and S’udras, all 
the four Varnas gave vent to their sorrows, when they saw the King 
going away with his wife and son. The Brahmins and the other 
inhabitants of the city, all were afflicted with sorrows and began to 
abuse the vicious Brahmana saying that “He is a cheat, etc.” O King! 
Give the gold for Daksina and then go; or say that you will not be 
able to give and I will then not take the Daksina. Or if you entertain 
within yourself any greed, then take back all your Kingdom. O King! 

If you think that you have really made this gift, then give what you 
have promised. The son of Gadhi was saying so, when the King 
Haris’chandra very humbly bowed down to him with folded palms 
and said to him. 



Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the taking 
away of Haris’chandra’s Kingdom in the Maha Puranam S'ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 20. On The Earnestness Of 
Haris’chandra To Pay Off The Daksina 


1-4. Haris’chandra said “O Muni! I will not take my food until I pay 
you your Daksina in gold; know this to be my resolve; therefore O 
One of good vows! Discard all your anxieties for Daksina. I am the 
King of the Solar dynasty; especially since the time I have completed 
my Rajasuya Sacrifice, I give to everyman whatever he desires. So, 
O Lord! How can it be possible that I will not give what I have 
voluntarily promised myself? O Best of Dvijas! I will certainly pay off 
your debt. I must give you the gold as you desire; be calm and 
patient; but you will have to wait one month; and on getting the 
money I will pay it off to you.” 


5-8. VisVamitra said “O King! Kingdom, treasury and strength are 
the three sources of income; but you are now deprived of all these. 
Whence, now, do you expect to get gold? O King! Vain are your 
hopes to get money; what am I to do now? You are now wealthless 
and how can I, out of greed, give you trouble? O King! Better say ‘I 
will not be able to give you Daksina,’ and I will then quit my strong 
expectation and go away as I like. And you, too, can think that you 
have no gold, so how can you give money and so you can go 
wherever you like with your wife and son.” 


9-20. Vyasa said O King! Hearing these words of the Muni, at his 
time of departure, the King said “O Brahmana! Be patient and I 
will certainly give you your Daksina. O Dvija! My wife, son and I 
myself are all healthy; so selling these, I will give you the money; 
there is no doubt in this. O Lord! Kindly enquire whether there is 
anyone who can purchase us and I will agree to become the slave 
with my wife and son. O Muni! You can sell all of us and the price 



you get, you can take two and a half loads of gold out of that and be 
pleased.” Thus saying, the King went to Benares where S’ankara 
was staying with his dear consort Lima. The King saw the beautiful 
city, the sight of which makes one’s heart dance with more joy and 
he said that he had become blessed. Then he went to the banks of 
the Bhagirathi and bathed in the Ganges and offered peace-offerings 
(Tarpan) to the Devas and the Pitris and completing the worship of 
his Ista Deva (his own Deity) looked around where he would go. The 
King entering into the beautiful city of Benares began to think that no 
human being is protecting this city but S’iva Himself is protecting it. 
So if he lives there, he would not be living in a city which has been 
given away by him to Vis’vamitra. The King, then, distressed much 
with pain and trouble and being very much bewildered, began to 
journey on foot with his wife and son and entered into the city and 
placed his confidence. At this moment he saw the Muni Vis’vamitra, 
wanting Daksina and humbly bowed down and spoke with folded 
palms “O Muni! My dear wife, my son and I myself are living here; 
you can take any of us and have your work done; or say what other 
work we will have to do for you.” 


21. Vis’vamitra said “You promised that you would pay Daksina at 
the end of one month; and today that one month is completed; if you 
remember, then give me the Daksina.” 


22. The King said “O Brahmana! You are wise and are endowed 
with the power of tapas (asceticism); as yet one month is not 
complete; still half a day is remaining; wait till then; and no longer.” 


23-27. Vis’vamitra said “O King! Let it be. I will come again and if 
you do not give me then, I will curse you. Thus saying Vis’vamitra 
went away. The King then thought within himself how be would pay 
him back what he had promised. There is no influential friend of mine 



in this Benares city who can help me with money; where then can I 
get the requisite money. I am a Ksattriya. Pratigraha (begging or 
accepting any gift) is forbidden to me and how can I beg or accept 
any gift! According to the code of Dharma, the offering of sacrifices 
(on one’s own behalf), studying, and giving are the three duties 
ordained to a King. And if I die not paying a Brahmin’s Daksina, I will 
be polluted with the sin of stealing a Brahmin’s property and I will 
then be born a worm or will became a Preta. So to sell myself (and 
pay off the debts) is better than this.” 


28-33. Suta said O Risis! When the King was thus thinking 
humbly with his face bent downwards, and in a distracted state of 
mind, his wife spoke to him with tears in her eyes and in a voice, 
choked with feelings “O King! Discard all cares and keep your 
own Dharma, Truth. He who is divorced from Truth is forsaken like a 
Preta. O Best of all men! To keep one’s Truth is one’s Dharma; there 
is no other Dharma superior to it; so the sages declare. He whose 
words turn out false, his Agnihotra, study, and gifts and all action, 
become fruitless. Truth is very much praised in the Dharma S’astra 
and this Truth raises up and saves the virtuous souls. Similarly 
falsehood, no doubt, drags a vicious man to hell. The King Yayati 
performed the Horse sacrifice, and the Rajasuya sacrifice and went 
to Heavens but once he spoke falsely and so he was dislodged from 
the Heavens.” 


34. The King said “O Thou, going like an elephant! I have my son 
who will multiply my line; speak out what Thou wishest to say.” 


35. The Queen said “O King! The wives are meant for sons (your 
having me has been fulfilled as there is your son). So sell me for the 
money value and give the Daksina to the Brahmin. Let you not 
deviate from the Truth.” 



36-45. Vyasa spoke Hearing this, the King fainted. Afterward 
regaining consciousness, he wept with a grievous heart. O gentle 
One! What you have uttered just now has caused me much pain; am 
I such a Sinner as to forget entirely all your conversations and your 
sweet smiles! Alas! O Sweet-smiling One! You ought not to speak 
such words. O Fair One! How have you been able to utter these 
harsh words not fit to be spoken! Speaking thus, the King became 
impatient at the idea of selling his wife and fainted and fell to the 
ground. Seeing him fainted and lying flat on the ground, the Queen 
became grievously hurt and spoke with great compassion. O King! 
Whose evil have you done that you have fallen into this calamity? 
Alas! He who is accustomed to sleep in a room adorned with carpets 
is today like a humble man, sleeping on the ground! The King who 
gave crores and crores of golden mohurs to the Brahmins, that same 
King, my husband is lying now on the ground! Alas! What a painful 
thing! O Fate! What has this King done to you that You have thrown 
this Indra and Upendra like King in this dire calamity! Thus saying, 
the beautiful queen (of good hips) very much grieved by the sight of 
her husband’s pain fell down unconscious on the ground. Then the 
boy prince, seeing father and mother both senseless, lying on the 
ground, became very much troubled, and, becoming hungry, cried, 

“O Father! O Father! I am very hungry; give me food to eat; O 
Mother! O Mother! My tongue is being parched; give me food to eat,” 
and the boy began to weep repeatedly. 


Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the 
earnestness of Haris’chandra to pay off the Daksina in the 
Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 21. On The Description Of The Sorrows 
Of Haris’chandra 


1-5. Vyasa said O King! At this moment, the Muni VisVamitra, 
endowed with his power of tapas, came up there, very angry as if the 
God of Death, to ask of his wealth. Seeing him Haris’chandra fallen 
thus senseless on the ground, VisVamitra, then, began to sprinkle 
water on his body. O King! The man who is involved in a debt his 
troubles increase day by day. So get up and pay your promised 
Daksina. The King, thus sprinkled with water, cold as snow, regained 
his consciousness; but, seeing VisVamitra, he fainted again. At this, 
the Dvija VisVamitra consoled him and angrily spoke to him thus 


6-10. O King! If you want to maintain your steadiness, give, then my 
Daksina. Look! It is Truth that makes the Sun shine; It is the Truth 
that has stationed this Earth in its position; what to speak more, even 
the Svarga is established on Truth; so the greatest Dharma lies in 
Truth. If the fruit of the thousand AsVamedhas be held in one pan 
and Truth be held on the other pan of the balance, then Truth 
outweighs the thousand horse sacrifices or what need I to speak all 
about this! O King! If you fail to give my Daksina before the Sunset, I 
will, no doubt, curse you. Saying this, VisVamitra went away. The 
King also became very terrified. The wealthless King was pained by 
the words of the Muni; but he was more troubled with the thought 
how he would pay him and keep to Truth. 


11-13. Suta said O Risis! At this time, a Brahmin, skilled in the 
Vedas, with many other Brahmins, started out of his house, at that 
very place. The queen, then seeing the Brahmin ascetic close by, 
addressed the King in words reasonable and in accordance with the 
Dharma, O Lord! A Brahmin is considered the father of the other 



three Varnas (i.e., Ksattriyas, Vais’yas, and S’udras) and a son can 
certainly take the father’s things; so it is my intention that you beg 
your wealth from this Brahmin. 


14-18. The King said “O One of thin waist! To beg suits the 
Brahmanas; it is prohibited to the Ksattriyas; I being a Ksattriya do 
not wish to take anything as gift. The Brahmins are the Gurus of all 
the Varnas. So they are always to be respected. It is not proper to 
beg from a Brahmin; especially the Ksattriyas never ask anything 
from the Brahmins; it is totally prohibited. Offering oblations, study, 
gift and the governing of subjects and protecting those that take 
refuge is the Dharma of the Ksattriyas but they would never, never, 
ask any other man ‘Give, give,’ and utter these words indicative of 
humility O Devi! The words ‘I am giving you’ are impressed within my 
heart; so I will earn money from some other source and give that to 
the Muni.” 


19-20. The Queen said “O King! Time keeps some men in one 
and the same state; again it throws others into troubles; Time it is 
that gives respect to one and again it is Time that gives disrespect to 
others. Time it is that makes one a donor and it is the same Time 
that makes another a beggar. So even the Risi Vis’vamitra, learned 
and endowed with the strength of Tapas, becoming angry has 
deprived you of your kingdom and happiness and has thus done 
quite an irreligious act in the shape of tormenting others. You can 
now judge in this the wonderful workings of Time.” 


21-22. The King said :-- “I would rather out off my tongue into two 
pieces by a sharp sword than I would quit my Ksattriya pride; and I 
would never be able to utter the words ‘Give, give.’ O Fortunate One! 
I am a Ksattriya; so I never ask anything of anyone. I always say 



that, by the strength of my arms, I will earn money and pay off my 
debt.” 


23-27. The Queen said “O King! Indra and the other Devas have 
given me over duly to your hands. So I am your religious (legal) wife; 
especially I have got education and I ought to be protected. 
Therefore O Luminous One! If you do not like to beg then you can 
sell me and pay off your Daksina.” The King Haris’chandra became 
grieved very much to hear these words and lamented, saying, “O 
What a painful thing is this! What a painful thing is this!” His wife 
again spoke “O King! Will we, afterwards, be burnt by the fire of 
curse from a Brahmin and thus lowered very much? So keep my 
word now. You are selling me, not because that you are infatuated 
with desire for gambling nor you are deprived of all knowledge by 
enjoyments in worldly things nor you are selling me owing to avert 
the danger of your kingdom. It is that you are selling me to pay off 
the debt to your Guru. So nothing sinful a fault will be incurred by 
you. So sell me and keep to Truth and the fruits thereof.” 


Here ends the Twenty-First Chapter of the Seventh Book on the 
description of the sorrows of Haris’chandra in the Maha Puranam, 
S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 22. On The Selling Of Haris’chandra’s 
Wife 


1-6. Vyasa said O King! When the Queen Madhavi requested 
repeatedly the King, He said “O Good Auspicious One! When you 
have not met with any scruple to utter clearly these harsh and cruel 
words, I will do that act now which the most ruthless persons do not 
dare to do.” Saying this, the King went with his wife, very distressed, 
to the city. Placing her on the public road, the King cried out in a 
voice choked with feelings and eyes full of tears “O Citizens! Hear 
you all. Do any one of you require any maidservant? This lady is 
dearer to me than my life. If any of you be able to offer price of her 
as I will declare, then let him give it out quickly.” The Pundits then 
said “Who are you? Why are you come here to sell your wife?” 


7. The King said “Are you asking me of my introduction? Hear 
then; I am a heartless brute and not fit to be called a man; or I am a 
Raksasa; nay, I am more than that; I am prepared to do this sinful 
act.” 


8-11. Vyasa said O King! Hearing this, Kaus’ika suddenly 
assumed the form of an old man and came out and spoke to 
Haris’chandra I am master of boundless wealth; so I am able to 
give you the money you want; I am ready to purchase the 
maidservant by giving an equivalent wealth. Better give me the 
maidservant. My wife is exceedingly delicate; she is unable to do all 
the household work; so let me have the maid. But say quickly what 
value am I to pay? When the Brahmin spoke this, Haris’chandra felt 
his heart, as it were, torn asunder; so he could not for the moment 
speak anything. 



12-15. The Brahmana said Take an equivalent annount of money 
according to the age, beauty, qualifications and capabilities of your 
wife and hand her over to me. Hear about the prices of the male and 
female servants as written in the Dharma S’astras The price of a 
female servant clever, good, well-qualified and possessing thirty-two 
auspicious qualities is one Koti gold mohurs; and the male servant 
similarly qualified fetches one Arbuda gold mohurs. Haris’chandra 
became very much pained to hear the Brahmin speaking thus; but 
he could not say anything. The Brahmin then placed in front of the 
King the money over a bark and caught hold of the hair of the Queen 
and was ready to drag Her. 


16-21. The Queen said “Q Arya! Let me see once the lotus-face of 
my son; leave me once. Q Brahmin! Please see that it will be hard 
for me again to see this boy. Q Son! Behold! Your mother is now a 
slave. So, Q Prince, do not touch me. I am not fit now to be touched 
by you.” The boy, then, seeing the mother suddenly snatched away, 
cried out, “Q Mother! Q Mother!” and followed her with tears in his 
eyes. That boy tumbled at every step still he caught hold of the 
mother’s clothing by his hand and began to accompany her. The 
Brahmin, seeing this behaviour of the boy, became impatient with 
anger and began to beat him. Still the boy wept, saying, “Mother! 
Mother!” and never quitted the hold of his mother. The Queen said 
“Q Lord! Have mercy on me and purchase this boy also. Though you 
are purchasing me, yet without this boy I will not be able to do your 
work. My fate is bad; therefore this calamity has happened. Shew 
this favour to me.” 


22-24. The Brahmin said Take this money and give me the boy 
too. For the Wise in the Dharma S’astras fix such to be the prices of 
a female and a male. The other Pundits make differences in the 
prices, e.g., one hundred, one thousand, one lakh, one crore and so 
on, according to the different qualifications. But for the female, who 



is skilled in all actions, modest, of good behaviour, and well qualified 
and, on whose body the thirty-two auspicious signs are seen, her 
price is one Koti gold mohurs and for a man qualified, one Arbuda 
gold mohurs. 


25-35. Suta said :-- O King! The Brahmin then gave over the price of 
the boy as decided, in gold mohurs in front of the King over a bark 
and then tied both the mother and son. He, then, gladly and without 
any delay, carried them to his home. At the time of departure, the 
Queen circumambulated the King and, kneeling down, bowed down 
to him and, in that state of humility, began to speak If ever I have 
done any charities, if ever I have poured oblations on the Fire, if ever 
I have satisfied the Brahmins, then, by that virtue, Haris’chandra will 
again be my husband. Seeing his wife, dearer then his life, fallen on 
his feet, the King became very distracted and lamented, crying, 

“Alas! Alas! The shadow of a tree never leaves the tree; but you 
being verily modest and endowed with all qualifications, are now 
separated from me.” Speaking thus reasonably with his wife, the 
King said to his son “O Child! Where will you go, leaving me here? 
Where shall I go now? and who will stop my miseries?” The King, 
then, spoke to the Brahmin “O Brahmin! The pain that I 
experience in the separation from my son, I did not feel on the 
occasion of quitting my kingdom or on my being exiled in a forest. 


O Auspicious One! The husband, good natured in this world, 
nourishes always his wife and keeps her always in comfort and 
happiness. But I am such a bad husband of yours, as I have left you 
and made you float in the sea of sorrows. Born in the Iksaku family, I 
inherited the kingdom and its pleasures; but, Alas! Your getting such 
a husband has now been reduced to slavery! O Devi! I am merged in 
this ocean of sorrows and troubles. Who will rescue me, by narrating 
this story of the Puranas!” 



36-40. Suta said O King! The Brahmin, then, began to take away 
the queen and the boy, whipping them, in the face of the King. 
Seeing his wife and son being dragged away in that state, the King’s 
pain knew no bounds and be frequently sighed and sighed and 
bitterly wept aloud. Alas! My dear wife, whom the Moon, the Sun, 
Wind or any other body could not see ere this, has become now 
reduced to slavery today! Oh! How beautiful and gentle are the 
fingers of my child? He has been sold off today, being born in the 
Solar Dynasty? Alas! Fie on my foolish understanding! Oh my Dear! 
Oh my child Rohitas’va! Your this wretched condition is due to my 
Anarya irrespectable bad maxims! Oh! Through the mockery of the 
Daiva, I have got this distress! Fie on Me! 


41-42 Vyasa said The King was lamenting thus when the 
Brahmin disappeared with them, in the very tall trees and walls of 
palatial buildings. At this time the cruel fiendish Muni, endowed with 
great power of asceticism came there quickly, accompanied by his 
disciples. 


43. Vis’vamitra said “O One of mighty arm! If you think it your duty 
to respect Truth, then pay me the Daksina of Rajasuya sacrifice that 
you promised before.” 


44. Haris’chandra said “O Rajarsi! I bow down to Thee. O Sinless 
One! Now take the Daksina of the Rajasuya Sacrifice that I promised 
to pay you before.” 


45. Vis’vamitra said :-- “O King! Whence have you collected these 
gold Mohurs that you are now paying me as my Daksina. How have 
you earned this? Say.” 



46. Haris’chandra said “O Dvija! O Sinless One! What use is there 
in telling this to you. It will increase agony by hearing. O One of good 
vows!” 


47. VisVamitra said “I won’t accept money earned not rightly. 


Give what you have acquired by rightful means. Say truly how you 
have acquired it.” 


48. Haris’chandra spoke “O Brahmin! I have sold my wife the Devi 
MadhavT for one Koti Gold Mohurs and my son for ten Kotis of gold 
Mohurs. So take this eleven Koti Gold Mohurs from me.” 


49. Suta said Seeing the gold collected out of the sale of wife and 
son very small, and seeing the King overpowered with pain and 
sorrow, Kaus’ika angrily spoke 


50-52. O King! The Daksina of the Rajasuya Sacrifice cannot be so 
small; so collect quickly other money to complete it. O Vilest of 
Ksattriyas! If you think this much to be proper for me, see first the 
enormous power of mine that I possess of my tapasya, practised 
duly, of my pure Brahmanyahood, of my violent power and of my 
chaste study and then you can pay my Daksina. 


53. Haris’chandra said “O Bhagavan! I have sold just now my 
wife; and so wait for some time and I will collect more gold and will 
pay that to you.” 



54. VisVamitra said “O King! The fourth part of the day is now 
remaining; I will wait till then. After this you won’t expect any other 
reply from me.” 


Here ends the Twenty second Chapter of the Seventh Book on the 
selling of Haris’chandra’s wife in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 23. On The King Haris’chandra’s 
Acknowledging Of The Slavery Of The 
Chandala 


1-5. Vyasa said O King! Speaking these harsh and cruel words to 
the King, the Muni took that money and went away. When 
VisVamitra went away, the King Haris’chandra became very much 
perplexed with sorrows and sighed frequently. He then began to say 
with his face bent downwards. “Suffering from constant pain and 
troubles, I am now turned into a Preta; if anybody finds me 
serviceable, he may purchase me with value in gold as proper; but 
he should do this quickly before the sun sets.” Dharma, then, 
assuming the form of a heartless Chandala, came there quickly to 
test Haris’chandra. The body of that low mean person was of a black 
colour, his air looking ferocious, his belly elongated, body emitting 
stench odours, teeth very long, and his face, covered with beards. 

He had one bamboo in his hand; in his neck, the bones of the dead 
were hanging and his chest was very distorted. 


6. The Chandala said “I am in urgent need of a servant; I will keep 
you as my slave; say, then, quickly what is your price?” 


7. Vyasa said O King! When the cruel, extremely ferocious and 
heartless Chandala said thus, the King Haris’chandra was surprised 
to see his appearance and said “Who are you?” 


8-12. The Chandala said “O King! I am the famous Chandala, 
Pravira; you will have to remain always subject to me and to collect 
the clothes of the dead persons.” Hearing his word, the King said, “I 
want to be purchased by a Brahmin or a Ksattriya. See! The sages 



say, that the Dharma of good people is excellent; the Dharma of the 
persons intermediate is middling; and the Dharma of the mean is 
depressing. You belong to the low and mean class. So my Dharma 
cannot be observed if I remain in your house.” The Chandala said 
“O King! This is the Dharma of yours now mentioned by you; then 
why did you mention that anybody can purchase you; without any 
previous consideration, you spoke before me. He who speaks with 
preconsideration attains his desired object; but, O Sinless One! You 
did not consider and you spoke that ordinarily. However, if I take your 
words that you spoke first to be true, then you are no doubt, 
purchased by me.” 


13. Haris’chandra said The villain that speaks untruth, goes 
downright to a terrible hell; so to become a Chandala is far better for 
me than to use an untrue word. 


14-15. Vyasa said O King! When the King was speaking thus, the 
ascetic VisVamitra arrived there out of anger and impatience; he 
rolled his eyes and said This Chandala is come to give you your 
desired money; why, then, are you not giving me the remnant of my 
Daksina! 


16. Haris’chandra said “O Kaus'ika! Nothing is unknown to you. 
My this body is born for the Solar Line; how then can I accept this 
slavery of a Chandala!” 


17-20. Vis’vamitra said If you do not sell yourself to a Chandala, 
be certain that I will just now put you under my curse. Give me 
immediately my Daksina, be it whether from a Chandala or from a 
Brahmana. There is no other purchaser at present than this 
Chandala. But know this as certain that I won’t go back until I get my 



money. O King! If you do not give me money just now, then when 
half the Ghatika of the day is remaining, I will burn you up by my fire 
of anger. 


21. Vyasa said O King! Hearing these words of VisVamitra, the 
King became almost dead; bewildered with fear, then he clasped the 
feet of the Risi and said, “Be friendly, please.” 


22-23. Haris’chandra said “O Viprarsi! I am now very humiliated 
and have become very afflicted and distressed. Especially I am your 
Bhakta, I am your servant; so be graciously pleased and free me 
from this painful companion of a Chandala. O Muni! In lieu of my 
remnant Daksina, I will be your obedient slave; I will do your work 
and follow your commands.” 


24. Visvamitra said “O King! You are then my slave, you will obey 
always my commands.” 


25-26. Vyasa said O King! When VisVamitra said so, the King, out 
of joy, thought that he regained his life and said to Kaus’ika. Always I 
will obey your words; now order me what work I will have to do. 


27-28. VisVamitra, then addressed the Chandala and said “O 
Chandala! Come to me and give me the price for this slave. I am 
now handing this slave over to you; give me the price and take him. I 
want money; I have no need for a servant.” 


29. Vyasa said O King! When VisVamitra spoke thus, the 
Chandala, overflowed with joy, came immediately to the Risi 



VisVamitra and said 


30. O Dvija! The relief that you have given me by selling this servant, 
for that I will give you the ten Yoyanas wide land of Prayaga 
Mandalam, covered over with jewels. 


31-36. Vyasa said O King! The Chandala then gave one thousand 
gems, one thousand jewels, one thousand pearls and one thousand 
gold Mohurs and VisVamitra took them. No signs of distraction nor 
unpleasantness were visible on the face of the King Haris’chandra. 
Rather he laid hold of his patience and thought within himself, 
“VisVamitra is now my master; I will do any work that he puts me in.” 
At this time, the incorporeal voice, the voice of the fourth dimensional 
space, sounded from the Heavens “O Fortunate One! You are 
freed from the Daksina, the debt before that you promised to give 
me.” A shower of flowers fell on the head of the King from the 
Heavens. At this time the powerful Indra and the other hosts of the 
Devas praised the King, saying “Sadhu! Sadhu! Well-done, Well- 
done.” The heart of the King was then filled with intense joy and the 
King then said to Kaus’ika 


37-38. O Intelligent One! You are a greater benefactor to me than my 
father, mother and friend as you have freed me in a moment from my 
debts. So, O mighty armed one! Your words are beneficial to me. 
Now order what am I to do. 


39. When the King said so, VisVamitra then said Go and observe 
from today the words of the Chandala. Let good befall on you! Thus 
saying, the Maharsi VisVamitra took the money given by the 
Chandala and went away to his own place. 



Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Seventh Book on the King 
Haris’chandra’s acknowledging of the slavery of the Chandala in the 
Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 24. On The Stay Of Haris’chandra In 
The Burning Ground 


1. S’aunaka said “O Suta! Now describe as quickly as you can in 
detail what the King Haris’chandra did afterwards in the house of the 
Chandala. 


2-14. Suta said When VisVamitra went away, the mind of the 
Chandala was filled with joy. He already gave to VisVamitra that 
amount of jewels; so he tied now the King and, telling him, “Do you 
now stand on the path of falsehood?” began to beat him with sticks. 
The King was already very much tired of the bereavements from his 
dear ones; now being beaten by the Chandala, his senses were lost. 
In this state the Chandala took him to his house and fastened him 
with a chain. Then the Chandala’s troubles were over and he fell 
asleep. The King lived in the Chandala’s house in that state fettered 
by a chain; but he did not take any food there. Incessantly he wept 
for his wife and son and others. “Alas! That thin lady, seeing the sad 
face of her son is now remembering me with a morose face. She is 
now perhaps thinking, with a grieved heart, that whenever the King 
will get the money, he will pay off the promised money to the 
Brahmin and then will free us from this yoke of slavery. Alas! When 
will that day come when will he see me and this crying child and 
speak with us. When the son will cry, saying, ‘I will go to my father; 
father!’ When will he come and speak with the child? That fawn eyed 
gentle woman does not know that I am now placed under a 
Chandala. Alas! I am deprived of my kingdom, friends; and I have 
sold away my wife and son; now I am bound in the chain of slavery 
of a Chandala. Alas! So many miseries have fallen on me all one 
after another.” Thus thinking incessantly about his dear consort and 
son, the King passed his days in the house of that Chandala. Four 
days passed; and on the fifth day the Chandala came there and 
rebuked the King with very harsh words and freed him from his 



fastenings and said, “Go to the burial ground and collect the 
clothings of the dead bodies. There is a wide S’masan (burial 
ground) on the southern part of Kas’i; go and protect that and 
whatever is due to you, justly take that; do not leave it. Take this 
Jarjara club and go there quickly. Say to all that you are the 
messenger of Viravahu and this staff is his.” 


15-33. Suta said O Risis! Thus Haris’chandra became a 
Chandala’s servant and was engaged in collecting the cloths of the 
dead persons. Thus ordered by the Chandala, whose duty was to 
collect the rags of the dead bodies, the King went to the burial 
ground. To the south of the city Kas’i, was situated the dreadful 
S’masana, scattered over with the garlands of the dead, bad odours 
were emitting on all sides and it was covered all over with smoke. 
Hundreds of jackals were yelling there and the ground was being 
reverberated by their yells. Vultures, jackals and dogs were at many 
places dragging the dead bodies. At other places were scattered 
heaps of bones; the whole ground was covered with the putrid smell 
of the dead. At some places it seemed that from within the funeral 
pyre, the half-burnt dead bodies were laughing wildly with their teeth 
wide open from their mouths. Thus the dead bodies looked terrible 
when being placed under fire. Lots of dead bodies were brought 
there and there was a great tumultuous uproar made by the cries of 
their friends and relatives. Oh! My son! My friend! My relative! My 
brother! My child! My dear wife! Oh! My cousin! Oh! My grandfather! 
Oh! My father! My grandson! My acquaintance! Where hast thou 
gone leaving me here! Come once and let me have a sight of thee! 
With such dreadful sounds as these, the burial ground was being 
echoed. Flesh, marrow, fat all were being burnt in the fire and a 
peculiar sound Son, Son was being produced there and creating 
voidness in the minds of the people. The fire was burning with a 
crackling noise. Thus the S’masana looked very terrible as if the 
universe was being destroyed at the end of a Kalpa. The King 
Haris’chandra arrived there; and, with extreme pain, he began to 



give vent to his sorrows. “My ministers, servants! Where are you all 
now? Where is kingdom that I got by a succession of inheritance! O 
my Son! O my dear wife! Where are you staying now, at what a long 
distance, leaving me here out of the Brahmin’s anger. Without 
Dharma man can never get auspicious fruits. So men should 
carefully earn Dharma.” The King, whose body was covered with 
dust and dirt, thought thus repeatedly; and at last, remembering the 
Chandala’s words, went out in quest of the dead. Out of this eventful 
cares and anxieties, his body became lean like a stick; still he ran, to 
and fro, and calculated thus “This dead body will fetch for its price 
one hundred gold mohurs; out of this, this belongs to the King; this to 
me, and this to the Chandala.” So he thought constantly and his 
state became awful. His face, arm, belly and feet and the other parts 
of body were all covered over with ashes and dust; the King wore a 
ragged cloth where hundred places were sewn over; his toes were 
all besmeared with all sorts of flesh, marrow, fat and other things. He 
began to satisfy his hunger out of the food that was prepared for all 
sorts of dead bodies; and, taking their garlands, he encircled his 
head with them. Day and night he did not sleep and always he 
sighed and sighed, crying, Alas! Alas! Thus one year passed away, 
as if it had been three hundred years. 


Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the 
stay of Haris’chandra in the burning ground in the Maha Puranam, 
S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 25. On The Quarrels Between 
Haris’chandra And Vis’vamitra 


1-12. Suta said Here, on the other hand, one day the boy 
RohitasVa went out with other boys to play at some place close to 
Kas’i. He first played with the his comrades; he then began to root 
out and collect, as far as he could, the Darbha (Kus’a) grass, with its 
ends and which had not deep roots. On being questioned why he 
was taking the Dharba grass, Rohita told his comrades that his 
master was a Brahmin and that he was collecting them for his 
satisfaction. Saying this, he began to collect carefully by his hands 
the sacrificial fuel (Samidha) and other fuel for the burning purposes. 
He collected the Palasa wood for Homa purpose and making it into a 
bundle with other articles already collected, took it on his head, but 
at every step he seemed to be fatigued. Feeling thirsty he went to a 
pool of water close by and keeping his load on the ground went 
down to drink water. Drinking water he rested a while and then as he 
had kept his load on the anthill, be began to take it back on his head, 
a very poisonous deadly serpent came out suddenly out of that 
anthill at the order of VisVamitra. The snake immediately bit the boy 
who instantly fell down and died. His comrades seeing RohitasVa 
dead went to the house of the Brahmin. With much anxiety the boys 
went soon out of fear, to his mother and said “O Brahmin’s 
maidservant! Your son went out with us to play outside; but suddenly 
a poisonous snake bit him and he is dead.” Rohita’s mother, hearing 
these cruel words like thunder and lightning at once fell down on the 
ground like a plantain tree, cut off from its roots. The Brahmin, then, 
came and sprinkled water on her face. When she regained her 
consciousness, the Brahmin then angrily spoke 


13-19. O wicked One! It is very inauspicious to cry at the evening 
time; especially the disfavour of the Goddess Laksmi; the poverty 
comes to the householder, you know this; why are you then 



weeping? Have you not a bit of shame in your heart? She made no 
reply at this. Rather very much immersed in grief for her son, she 
wept in a pitiful voice. Her body was covered with dust, hairs were 
dishevelled and her face covered all over with tears from eyes. She 
constantly wept out of sorrow. The Brahmin, then, became very 
angry and spoke to the queen “O Villain! O Wicked! Fie on you. I 
have bought you for money; yet you are hindering my luck. If you 
had this thought that you would not work under me, why did you take 
for nothing my money?” Thus repeatedly scolded by the Brahmin, 
she pitifully cried and spoke to the Brahmin in a voice choked with 
feelings “O Lord! My son has fallen into the jaws of death, being 
smitten by a serpent. O One of good vows! I will never be able to see 
him. So kindly permit me to go and see my boy.” Saying thus, that 
lady began again to weep in a pitiful voice. The Brahmin became 
very angry and spoke thus 


20-26. O Cheat! Your conduct is extremely blameable; you do not 
know how one commits a sin. The man who taking his pay from his 
master spoils his master’s work, he goes to the terrible hell Raurava 
and is being scorched there. Living in the Hell for a short while, he is 
born as a cock. Or it is useless for me to give you this instruction of 
the Dharma S’astra, for to speak to such to an illiterate, cruel, low, 
hypocrite and liar and to one addicted to sinful acts is to sow seed on 
an usar land and to see it fruitless. Now if you have any fear for the 
afterlife, come and do the household affairs. Hearing this, she said to 
the Brahmin, trembling “O Lord! Be graciously pleased and shew 
your mercy on a maidservant. Only for a moment I will go to see the 
dead son of mine; so give me order to go there for a moment.” That 
lady was deeply absorbed with sorrows for her son; then she put her 
head on the feet of the Brahmin and with a pitiful voice cried. The 
angry Brahmin with eyes reddened then began to speak. 



27-41. What purpose of mine will be served by your son? Don’t you 
know about my anger? Have you forgotten about my whipping? So 
be ready and do my household work without any delay. Hearing his 
words, the queen held her patience and began to do the household 
work. She spent half the night time, when she finished champooing 
his feet. When this was over, the Brahmin spoke to her“You can 
go now to your son; but see, finish his burning ceremonies and come 
back quickly. See that my morning works do not suffer.” Thus getting 
the permission, the Queen went at that dead of night to look for her 
son, alone and weeping. Gradually she went out of the precincts of 
the city of KasT and there she saw her son like a poor man’s son 
lying on the ground over leaves and pieces of woods. Seeing her 
son dead, the humble Queen was very troubled with sorrow like an 
antelope, straying from its herd and as a cow missing her calf. The 
Queen Madhavi then began to lament, in a very pitiful tone, thus 
“O my Son! Come once before me; say why you are angry. Qh! My 
child! You used to come frequently to me, uttering Ma! Ma! Then why 
are you not coming now?” Saying thus, she tumbling went and fell 
over his son. She, regaining her consciousness, embraced her son 
and placing her face on the face of the child began to weep pitifully. 
“Oh! My son! Oh! My child! Oh my Kumara! Oh! My Beautiful! and 
began to beat her head and her breast with her hands. O King! 
Where are you now? You used to look upon your son dearer than 
even your life. Your that son is now lying dead on the ground. Come 
and behold him once. It seems that the son has got back his life.” 
Thus thinking she looked upon his face; but when it looked dead, 
she fell immediately unconscious. Getting back soon her 
consciousness, she held his face by her hands and said “O Child! 
Rise up from your sleep; awake; now is the dreadful night time; 
hundreds of jackals are yelling into our ears. Even Pretas, Bhutas, 
Pis’achas and Dakinis are roaming in packs and making terrible 
sounds Hum, Hum. Your comrades returned to their homes just at 
sunset; Why are you alone remaining here? 

42-56. Suta said The thin-bodied queen, thus saying, began to 
lament, “Oh my Child! Oh! My son. Oh! Rohitas’va, O Kumara, why 



are you not replying to my words! Oh my Child! I am your mother; do 
you not recognise me; look at me once. O Child! I am deprived of my 
kingdom and exiled from my country; my husband has sold even his 
body and I am myself reduced to slavery. What man is there that can 
live in this state! I am living simply by seeing your lotus-face. The 
astrologer who cast your horoscope at your birth, calculated future 
events in your life; but where? none of them is fructified. They said 
that this child will be a hero, warrior, long-lived, very charitable man, 
and always ready to do the worship of the Devas, Dvijas and the 
Gurus. What more than this that the child will be one paramount 
sovereign and with his sons and grandsons will enjoy his kingdom. 
This boy will be the master of his senses and will fulfil the desires of 
his father and mother. Oh my Son! Now all those predictions have 
turned out false. O Child! You have on your palms so many 
auspicious signs, discus, fishes, umbrella, S’ri Vatsa, Svastika, flags, 
Kalas’a (earthen jar), Chamara and other signs; besides these, 
various other auspicious omens exist on your hands. Are all these 
become in vain today! O Son! You are the Lord of this whole 
dominion; but where are your that Kingdom now, those ministers, 
that royal throne, that umbrella, that axe, that vast amount of riches, 
that Ayodhya city, those palatial buildings, those elephants, horses, 
and chariots? Where have gone your subjects! O Child! Where have 
you gone now, quitting all these and even me! O beloved Husband! 
See the condition of your son who in his early childhood used to 
move on all fours (the hands and feet) and get up on your broad 
chest, anointed with Kumkum, and spoil it with dust; O King! Come 
once and witness the condition of your child who used to press, out 
of ignorance due to his young age, the Tilak on your forehead, 
prepared of Mriganabhi, (musk). Alas! Flies are now sitting on the 
lotus face today which I used to kiss over, covered with dirt; the 
insects are now stinging that. Oh! This I have got to witness now! O 
King! Come and see once your child is now sleeping on the ground 
like a poor man’s dead son. O Fate! What bad act did I commit in my 
past life, that I have got to suffer so much in this life and I do not get 
an end of them! O Child! O Son! Oh, my Kumara! Oh! My Beautiful! 
Shall I not be able to see you once any more elsewhere?” The 



Queen Madhavi thus lamented very much when the warders of the 
city, hearing her lamentations awoke and came to her without any 
delay, greatly astonished. They asked her thus 


57-77. Who are you? Whose son is this? Where is your husband? 
Why are you weeping here in this dead of night, without any fear? 
Though thus questioned, the thin Queen did not reply anything. 

Being again asked, she remained silent; and in the next moment she 
was pained with extreme agony and began again to cry. Tears 
flowed incessantly from her two eyes out of her sorrow. The guards 
then began to suspect her and were greatly afraid. So much that 
hairs stood on their ends out of terror. They at once raised their arms 
and began to talk with each other. When this lady is not giving any 
sort of reply, she is then certainly not a woman; most probably she 
will be a Raksasi, knowing magic and destroying young children. So 
she should be killed with great attention. If she be not a Raksasi, 
then why she should stay in this dead of night outside the city? No 
doubt, this Raksasi has brought someone’s child to eat here. Thus 
saying, they, without any delay, tied her hairs closely and some 
caught hold of her hand and some caught hold of her neck, saying Q 
Raksasi! where will you go now? The armed men, then dragged her 
perforce to the house of the Chandala and handed her over to him. 
All the people said “Q Chief of the Chandalas! We have caught 
today outside the city this child eating Raksasi; so you better take 
her quickly on the slaughter ground and slaughter her.” The 
Chandala looked at her body and said, “This Raksasi is widely 
celebrated in this world. I know her from before; but nobody is able 
to see her. This Mayavini has devoured many sons of many persons. 
You all will acquire great merit when she will be slaughtered and your 
good name will be known to all and will last long. You better now go 
back to your own homes. The man who kills women, children, cows 
and Brahmins, who burns another’s house with fire, who destroys 
the wayfares of others, who steals his Guru’s wife, who quarrels with 
saintly persons, and who drinks wine, if killed, will certainly yield 



merits to the man who kills him. If such a one be a female or a 
Brahmin, no sin will accrue if he or she be slaughtered. 


So it is my paramount duty to kill her.” Saying this, the Chandala tied 
her closely and drawing her by her hairs, began to beat her with a 
rope. Then he told to Haris’chandra in terse language “O Slave! 

Kill her; this woman is by her very nature wicked; so do not judge 
anything in this matter of killing her.” Hearing these harsh words, like 
the falling of a thunderbolt, the King shuddered. When he came back 
to his nature, he fearing lest a woman be killed, said to the Chandala 
“I am not at all able to carry this order out; so kindly make over 
this task to some other servant of yours. He will kill her. I will 
certainly carry out any other order that you would task me to do.” 
Thus hearing the King, the Chandala said Discard your fear and 
take the sword; this Mayavini kills always the children; so to kill her is 
meritorious; in no way whatsoever ought she to be saved. The King 
became very sorry and said Women should always be protected 
with care, never to be killed; the more so as the religious Munis have 
assigned greater sin in the killing of women. The man who kills 
consciously or unconsciously females, certainly becomes boiled in 
the Maha Raurava hell. 


78-79. The Chandala said “Don’t you say this; take this sharp 
sword, lustrous like a lightning; where killing one engenders 
happiness to many, abundance of merits are acquired in doing that. 
This wicked fellow has eaten many children of this place; so kill her 
as early as possible and bring peace and happiness to the KasT 
people.” 


80. The King said “O Chief of the Chandalas! I have taken the 
difficult vow from my childhood, not to kill any woman. Therefore I 
cannot exert myself in this matter of killing the woman as you order.” 



81-82. The Chandala said “O Wicked Fellow! No work is superior 
which is not the master’s work. Why then are you cancelling today to 
carry out my order, when you are taking pay from me. The servant 
that spoils his master’s work, taking his money, is not freed from the 
hell even if he remains for ten thousand years there.” 


83-86. The King said “O Lord of the Chandalas! Put me to some 
other task that is very difficult. I will do that easily. Or if you have an 
enemy, specify and I will kill him no doubt within an instant. I will give 
you the whole earth by killing him. Even if Indra comes against you 
with the other Devas, or Danavas, or Uragas, or Kinnaras, or 
Siddhas, or Gandharbas, I will slay him with my sharpened arrows, 
but I will never be able to kill a woman.” The Chandala, then, began 
to tremble with anger at these words and said to the King. 


87-89. You are a servant and what you have spoken is not fit for a 
servant. Working as a slave of a Chandala, you are speaking the 
words of the gods. Therefore, O slave! hear now what I say; no need 
of exchanging any further words. O Shameless One! If you fear sin a 
bit why then did you accept the slavery in a Chandala’s house. Take 
this sword and cut off her head.” Thus speaking the Chandala gave 
him the axe. 


Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the 
quarrels between Haris’chandra and Vis’vamitra in the Maha 
Puranam, S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 26. On The Narration Of The Sorrows 
Of Haris’chandra 


1-3. Suta said The King Haris’chandra with his face bent low thus 
said to the Queen “O Young One! I am a great sinner, otherwise 
why shall I be ready to do this heinous act! However now sit before 
me. If my hand be capable to kill you, then it will cut off your head.” 
Thus saying, the King took the axe and moved forward to cut her. As 
the King did not recognise her as His Queen, so the Queen did not 
recognise him as Her husband, the King. So the Queen, being very 
much strained with sorrow, began to utter with a view to court her 
death. 


4-16. Q Chandala! If you like, I say something; hear my son is dead 
and is lying close to the outer skirts of the city. Wait till I bring my 
child before you and do his burning ceremonies. Next you can cut 
me off by your axe. The King said “Very well; let that be,” and 
gave her permission to go to her dead son. Then the Queen, 
emaciated and pale, her body being covered all over with dust 
arrived at the burning ground and taking her dead son, bitten by a 
serpent, on her lap cried out loudly “Q Son! O my Child! O my young 
Son!” and referring to her husband said “Q King! See, today, the 
sad condition of your son, lying on the ground, as his bed. My son 
went to play with other boys and, bitten by a cruel poisonous 
serpent, left his life.” Hearing the pitiful cry of that helpless woman, 
the King Haris’chandra went to the dead and took off the cover of his 
face. Due to the long exile and the difficulties thereof, the Queen was 
changed altogether in her outer form, so the King could not 
recognise her weeping as his wife. On the other hand the King, too, 
had not the curled hair on his head as before; it has turned into 
matted hair and his skin especially has become like the bark of a 
dried tree; so the Queen could not make out the King also. The King 
then noticed all the King making auspicious signs on the several 



limbs of that dead boy, poisoned all over and lying on the ground and 
began to think thus The face of the child is very beautiful like the 
Full Moon, nowhere there is any scar nor anything like this; the nose 
is high; the two cheeks are clean like a mirror and spacious; the 
hairs are blue, curling, similar, long and waving, the two eyes are 
widely expanded like a full blown lotus, the two lips are red like 
Bimba fruits; the chest is wide and spacious, the eyes are stretched 
up to the ears; the arms are extending up to the knees; the 
shoulders are elevated; the legs are elongated, yet god-like like a 
lotus stem; the appearance is grave, the fingers are fine, yet strong 
enough to hold the world; the navel is deep and the region of the 
shoulders elevated. Certainly this boy was born in a royal family. 
Alas! What a pain is this! The cruel Death has reduced him to this 
state! 


17-21. Suta said Thus looking carefully that boy in the lap of his 
mother from his head to foot, the King Haris’chandra got back to his 
ancient recollections. He recognised the boy to be his and wept 
aloud repeating the words Oh! Oh! The tears flowed from his eyes 
and he said “This is my boy that has been reduced to this state! 
Oh! The cruel Fate!” Though the boy is dead, yet the King remained 
bewildered for a moment. The queen then spoke out of terrible pain 
“O Child! What sin is that which has caused this dire calamity, I 
cannot imagine! 


22-27. O my Husband! O King! I am extremely worried of pains and 
troubles; leaving me thus, how is it and where you are passing away 
your time in a calm, quiet state! O Fortune! It is You that has brought 
about the loss of the Rajarsi Haris’chandra’s dominion, the 
separation from his friends and what more, you have caused his wife 
and son to be sold! Has he done so much mischief to you!” Hearing 
her cries, the King’s patience gave way and he came to recognise 
the Devi and the son and exclaimed, “She is my wife and the dead 



boy is my son. Oh! What a series of troubles, one coming after 
another.” Being overpowered with extreme trouble and pain, the King 
fell unconscious on the ground; the Queen, too, looking at the King’s 
state, fell motionless, and, void of senses, no sooner she recognised 
him as the King Haris’chandra. Some time after, the King and Queen 
both got back at the same time their consciousness and, with great 
sorrow and agony, began to lament. 


28-49. The King said :-“Q Child! Why my heart does not rend to 
thousand pieces, seeing today your gentle face pale and lifeless, 
that was once beautiful with curls of hairs! Q Rohita! When will you 
come to me saying in a sweet voice, ‘Father! Father!’ When shall I 
address you affectionately, ‘Qh my child! Qh my child!’ embracing 
you within my breast! Whose tawny coloured dust on his knees will 
spoil my clothes, lap and my body! Q Delightful Son! I have sold you 
as if an ordinary thing, though I am your father. As yet my pleasure 
of having a son is not satisfied. Qwing to the mockery of the mean 
Fate, my unbounded kingdom, friends, and abundance of riches all 
have vanished away! Finally I had one son and that too is now in the 
jaws of death! Qh! With what an amount of terrible pain I am being 
burnt up today when I am seeing the lotus-face of my son, smitten by 
a serpent and lying dead on the ground!” Thus speaking in a voice 
choked with feelings and with tears in his eyes, as soon as he was 
going to take his boy in his lap, he fell senseless on the ground. 
Seeing the King lying on the ground, S’aivya thus thought“Such is 
His voice as makes me certain that He is the King Haris’chandra, the 
best of men and the delighter of the learned men’s hearts. His teeth 
are like those of the famous Haris’chandra just like to Mukul and his 
nose is elevated and soft like the Tila flower. But if he be 
Haris’chandra, how is it that he has come to this burning ground!” 
Thus thinking, while she looked at the King, leaving for the moment 
the sorrow for his son, joy, pain and surprise attacked her heart 
simultaneously; and she, in that state, fell down unconscious on the 
ground. Then gradually regaining consciousness, she spoke in a 



pitiful voice “O Fortune! You have caused to the King who was 
once like an Immortal, the loss of his kingdom, friends, and even the 
sale of his wife and son. And now you have transformed him into a 
Chandala! You are merciless, religionless, void of any justice as to 
what is just and what is unjust. You are shameless. So fie on you! O 
King! Where are gone today that royal umbrella, that throne, that 
Chamara, and that pair of fans on your both sides! Oh! What is this 
transformation caused by the Vidhata (the Ordainer of Fate)! When 
the high-souled King used to travel, all the kings used to remove as 
His servants the dust of the roads by their clothings! Oh! Is He the 
same King of Kings, Haris’chandra who is roaming in this unholy 
burning ground, burdened too much by his load of sufferings! Oh! 
Innumerable human skulls are lying here; the small earthen pots 
(brought for the purification of the bodies of the dead) are lying 
scattered close to each; the garlands of flowers for the dead, being 
intertwined with the hairs of the dead, are presenting a grim 
spectacle! The ashes, charcoals, half-burnt dead bodies, bones, and 
marrows all arranged one over another make the place more 
hideous. The marrows of the dead bodies have come out and are 
dried up by the sun. At places, vultures, and S’akunis are crying 
hideously and the crows and other birds, eager to eat flesh, are 
roaming to and fro. All the quarters of the sky are looking blue with 
the smoke, arising out of the burning of the dead. The Raksasas are 
constantly roaming hither and thither, gladly feasting on the human 
flesh. Is the King passing his days thus in this place? Alas! Oh! What 
a painful thing is this!” The daughter of the King, S’aivya, was 
overpowered with an awful sorrow; and clasping the neck of the 
King, began to lament again, in a pitiful voice. O King! You have 
spoken that you are a Chandala. Is this a dream? Or a Reality? O 
King! If it be true that you are a slave of the Chandala, then say to 
me; my mind is being deluded very much! (i.e., I cannot indulge this 
idea). O Knower of Dharma! You have shown your great zeal 
towards Dharma; and, for that reason, you are displaced from your 
royal throne! Now if such help comes out of worshipping the 
Brahmins and the Devas, then Dharma cannot stand and, along with 
it, the truth, simplicity and harmlessness cannot exist. 



50-55. Suta said Hearing these words from the thin S’aivya, the 
King took a heavy sigh and then described to her in detail with tears 
flowing on his neck, how he got the Chandala state. The fearful 
Queen became very much pained to hear all this and heaving a 
deep sigh, described, as it was, how her son died. On hearing this, 
the King fainted and fell unconscious on the ground. Then regaining 
gradually his consciousness, he began to kiss, with his tongue, the 
face of his dead son. S’aivya then said in a choked voice “Now 
sever off my head and obey your master’s word. O King! You will be 
saved then as having kept your truth; and your master’s order would 
be carried out.” Hearing this, the King fainted and fell down 
senseless. Getting up conscious in a moment, he began to weep 
bitterly. 


56. The King said “O Beloved! How have you uttered such cruel 
words? How can I execute that which is hard even to utter!” 


57-58. S’aivya said “O Lord! I have worshipped the Devi Gauri 
and other Devas and the Brahmins; so, with their mercy, I will get 
you as my husband in my future birth.” Hearing this, the King again 
fell down instantly on the ground; getting up immediately, he was 
overpowered with sorrow and began to kiss the face of the dead son. 


59-71. The King said “O Dear! I won’t be able to suffer an longer 
for a long time. But, O thin-bodied One! See, I am so very 
unfortunate that I have no command even over my heart. If I enter 
into the fire without the permission of the Chandala, then I will have 
to become again the slave of a Chandala in my future birth. Think it 
over. After that I will have to go to the hell and be tormented there. 
But this too I find beneficial to me. Rather I will go to the hell Maha 
Raurava and there suffer for a long time the torments of the hell, yet 



I do not like to live a little longer when my boy, the continuer of my 
family, has left his life out of the queer fancies of the Great Time and 
I be merged in the sorrows for my son. My body is now at the 
command of the Chandala. How can I in this state quit my life 
without his permission. If I leave my body, I will be indebted to him 
and I will have to suffer in hell. Let this be so; still I will leave off my 
body, the receptacle of all these pains and troubles. Nowhere, in the 
Triloki, is any pain like that felt in the demise of a son, not in crossing 
the Vaitarani nor in the Asipatravanam! So I will now throw myself on 
the burning fire along with the dead body of my son. So, O Thin¬ 
bodied One! You should now excuse me (i.e., do not prevent me). O 
Sweet-smiling One! I now permit you to go back to the house of the 
Brahmin. If ever I have given in charity riches, offered oblation to the 
fire, and given satisfaction to my superiors then, in the other world, I 
will get you and my son. But there is no such chance now in this 
world. O Sweet-smiling One! If ever I had given you offence while 
conversing or making jokes with you, now at the time of my parting, 
excuse them all. O Auspicious One! Never despise the Brahmin out 
of your pride as a Queen. Look on your master as a Deva and try all 
your best to satisfy him.” 


72-73. The Queen said “O Rajarsi! I will also throw myself on the 
burning fire. O Deva! I will not be able to carry on this burden, so I 
will accompany You. It is better for me to accompany you; so there 
will not be otherwise. O Giver of Honour! I will enjoy with You heaven 
or suffer with You in the hell.” Hearing this, the King said “O 
Chaste One! Do as you please.” 


Here ends the Twenty-sixth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the 
narration of the sorrows of Haris’chandra in the Mahapuranam S'ri 
Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 27. On The Going Of Haris’chandra To 
The Heavens 


1-7. Suta said The King Haris’chandra then prepared the funeral 
pile and placed his son on it. Next he and his wife with folded palms 
merged themselves in the meditation of the ParamesVari, the Lady 
of of the Universe. That Hundred-eyed is reigning within these five 
Kosas (or sheaths) Annamaya, etc. She resides in the sacral plexus 
of the nature of Brahman, of the Purusa composed of Anna and 
Rasa. And She is the Ocean of Mercy. Wearing the red robe, She is 
ever ready with various weapons in Her hands for the preservation of 
the Universe. When the King was engaged thus in meditating on 
Her, Indra and all the Devas with Dharma in their front came to the 
King Haris’chandra with no delay. They all coming up said to the 
King “O King! Hear. I am the Grand Sire and here are present 
Dharma Himself, the Bhagavan Visnu, the Sadhyas, Vis’vadevas, 
Maruts, the Lokapalas, the Charanas, the Nagas, the Gandharbas, 
Siddhas, Rudras, the twin As’vins, and all the other Devas and 
Vis’vamitra himself. Vis’vamitra, who going ever the three worlds 
wishes to make friendship according to the law ordained by Dharma, 
is now himself desirous to grant you your desired objects.” 


8. Dharma said “O King! Do not risk such an hazardous 
undertaking. I am Dharma; I am satisfied with your patience and 
forbearance, control of your senses, and the other Sattvic qualities 
and have therefore come to you.” 


9-10. Indra said “O Haris’chandra! I have also come to you. So 
your good fortune knows no bounds today. You with your wife and 
son have conquered the Eternal World. O King! What is hardly 
attainable by any human being, you have conquered that, by dint of 



your own merits. So get up to the Heavens (vibrations of the Fourth¬ 
dimensional Space) with your wife and son.” 


11-16. Suta said Indra then sprinkled over the dead son on the 
funeral piles, the nectar, destroying the fatal effect produced by 
unnatural death. At that time big showers of flowers were thrown on 
him and Dundubhis were sounded. In the meanwhile, the prince got 
up from the funeral pile. He got back his former beautiful body and 
he looked peaceful, healthy, and greatly satisfied. Haris’chandra 
embraced his son instantly in his bosom; the King and Queen also 
both regained their former beautiful appearance at that time and 
were decked with clothes and garlands. Their hearts were then 
deeply filled with great joy at their getting back their desired object 
and their health. Indra then said to the King “O Highly Fortunate 
One! Now ascend to the Heavens with your son and wife, by dint of 
your meritorious deeds and get the holy happy ends of your 
endeavours.” 


17. Haris’chandra said :-- “O King of the Devas! The Chandala is my 
master; so until I get freedom from his bondage, I cannot go to the 
Heavens without his permission.” 


18. Dharma said I am myself that Chandala and had assumed 
that form and shewed you the city of the Chandalas. Knowing that 
you will suffer. 


19. What more than this, that I myself am that very Chandala, I am 
that very Brahmin and I am that very poisonous serpent who had 
smitten your boy. [Note: This is all the one and the same the Fourth 
Dimensional Space.] Indra said Haris’chandra! Now get up, by 



virtue of your own meritorious deeds to that place which is highly 
covetted by all the human beings that exist on earth. 


20-24. Haris’chandra said “O King of the Devas! I bow down to 
you. Kindly consider what I say now. All the inhabitants of the city 
Kos’ala are in mourning, due to their being separated from me. How 
then, can I go to the Heavens leaving my sorrow-stricken subjects 
here. To abandon the Bhaktas, the devotees, is to incur the great sin 
due to the murder of a Brahmin, the killing of a woman, the drinking 
of liquors and the killing of a cow. O Indra! It is highly inadvisable to 
abandon a Bhakta who is always in service. How can one be happy 
when one abandons such devotees. So I will not go to the Heavens 
without them. You better go back to the Heavens. O Lord of the 
Devas! If my subjects can go with me, I am ready to go with them to 
the Heavens or to the Hell.” 


25. Indra said “O King! Some of them are more sinful, some are 
more meritorious; different grades of people exist there. So, O King! 
How can you desire all to go simultaneously to the Heavens.” 


26-29. Haris’chandra said “O Indra! It is through the power of the 
citizens that the Kings enjoy their kingdoms, perform great many 
sacrifices, and do many engineering works (in excavating tanks, etc.) 
There is no doubt in this. So I, too, have done religious acts and 
sacrifices through my citizens’ help. They gave me all the articles 
necessary for kings. So how can I now quit them so that I may get 
the Heavens. O Lord of the Devas! If my subjects have no such 
Punyams as to enable them to go up to the Heavens, then let the 
Punyams done by me in giving away charities, in the performance of 
sacrifices, and other meritorious works be divided amongst them 
equally. If I myself enjoy S’varga for a very long time; but, if by your 



favour, I can enjoy with them even one day’s residence in S’varga for 
my merits, that is also superior to me.” 


30-33. Suta said “Let that be;” saying thus Indra, the Lord of the 
three worlds, Vis’vamitra, and Dharma who were very pleased went 
immediately to Ayodhya from Kas’T by their yogic power. In an instant 
they reached Ayodhya, filled with the Brahmanas, Ksattriyas, 
Vais’yas, and S’udras; and Indra exclaimed to them all “Let all the 
citizens come before Haris’chandra, without any delay. Today they all 
will go to the Heavens by virtue of the Punyams of Haris’chandra.” 
Thus saying, they took all the men to Haris’chandra. Then that 
religious King told his subjects, “Let you all now ascend with me to 
the Heavens.” 


34-40. Suta said Hearing these words of Indra and their King, they 
all became very glad. Then those who were engaged in their worldly 
desires, they handed over the charge of their worldly concerns to 
their own sons, gladly became ready to go up to the Heavens. The 
high-minded King Haris’chandra then installed his son Rohitas’va on 
the royal throne and permitted him to go to the beautiful city 
Ayodhya, filled with jolly and healthy inhabitants. Next addressing his 
son and friends, he took leave of them. Thus, by virtue of his own 
good deeds, the King Haris’chandra attained great celebrity. He then 
got up and took his seat in the aerial car that has no equal and that 
goes at will. It was beautifully adorned, very rare even to the Devas 
and decked with bells emitting jingling Kinkini sounds. The high- 
souled S’ukracharya, versed in the S’astras and the Guru of the 
Daityas, seeing, Haris’chandra in the Vimana, spoke thus 


41. Oh! What is the glorious result of forbearance (Titiksa)! What is 
the great fruit of charity! Oh! Due to whose influence, the King 
Haris’chandra today has attained the same region with Mahendra! 



42-43. Suta said Thus I have described to you all the doings of 
Haris’chandra. Any man, oppressed with sorrows and troubles, no 
doubt, attains constant happiness, if he hears it. What more than 
this, those who want SVarga get SVarga, those who want son get 
sons, those who want wife get wife, and those who want kingdoms 
get their kingdoms by hearing this incident. 


Here ends the twenty-seventh Chapter of the Seventh Book on the 
going of Haris’chandra to the Heavens, in the Mahapuranam S'ri 
Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 28. On The Glory Of The S’ataksi Dev! 


1-3. Janamejaya said “O Risi! Wonderful is the story of the 
religious Rajarsi Haris’chandra that you have described, the great 
Bhakta of S’ataksi Devi! Why is that auspicious S’iva, the wife of 
S’iva, called S’ataksT? Explain to nne, the cause of it, O Muni! And 
thus make my birth full of use and success. Who is there amongst 
the clear-minded that gets fully satisfied, when he hears the good 
deeds of the Devi? Each sentence, describing the good deeds of the 
Devi, gives the undecaying fruits of AsVamedha Sacrifice.” 


4-45. Vyasa said O King. Hear; I am describing the story of 
S’ataksT DevT. You are the great devotee of the DevT; so I have 
nothing that I cannot say to you. In olden times, there was a great 
Danava named Durgama: he was very cruel. He, the the son of 
Ruru, was born in the family of Hiranyaksa. Once be thought within 
himself thus “The Munis offer oblations by Mantras as ordained in 
the Vedas. And the Devas, eating the clarified butter (ghee) of these 
oblations, get nurtured and strengthened. The Vedas is the strength 
of the Devas; if the Vedas be destroyed, the Devas also would be 
destroyed. Thus it is advisable to destroy the Vedas. (There is no 
other easy way.)” Thus thinking, he went to the Himalayas to perform 
tapasya. He began to meditate Brahma in the space of his heart, 
and, taking air only, passed away his time. [Mark here that all the 
Devas reside in space, a magnitude of the Fourth Dimension.] He 
practised hard tapasya for one thousand years and the Devas and 
the Asuras and all the Lokas were agitated by the power of his Tejas 
(fiery lustre). Then the Bhagavan, the four-faced Brahma, became 
pleased with him and mounting on his carrier, the Swan came up 
there to grant him the boon. Brahma told clearly the Demon, sitting 
in Samadhi with his eyes closed, “Let all be well with you; now ask 
what you desire? Satisfied with your tapasya, I have come to grant 
you the boon.” Hearing thus, the Demon got up from his Samadhi 



and worshipping Him duly, said “O Lord of the Devas! Give me all 
theVedas. O MahesVara! Let all the Vedic Mantrams, that are found 
in the three worlds, with the Brahmanas and the Devas, come to me 
and give me such strength as would enable me to conquer the 
Devas.” Hearing this, the God Brahma, the author of the four Vedas, 
replied, “Let it be as you wish,” and went away. From that time, the 
Brahmanas forgot all about the Vedas. So bathing, Sandhya, daily 
Homas, S’raddha, sacrifice, and Japam and other rites and 
performances, all became extinct. Then a cry of universal distress 
arose on the surface of this wide earth; the Brahmins began to say to 
each other“How has this happened! How has this come to pass! 
Now what are we to do? Where the Vedas have disappeared.” Thus 
when great calamities befell on the earth, the Devas became 
gradually weaker and weaker, not getting their share of the sacrificial 
Havis. At this time, that Demon invested the city of Amaravati. And 
the Devas, not being able to fight with the Asura, of a thunder-like 
body fled to various directions. They took refuge in the caves of the 
mountain Sumeru and the inaccessible passes of the mountain and 
began to meditate on the Highest Force, the Great Goddess. O King! 
When oblations of clarified butter are offered to the Fire, those get 
transferred to the Sun (Suryaloka) and get transformed as rains. So 
when the Homa ceremonies disappeared, there was the scarcity of 
rain. The earth became quite dry and not a drop of water was found 
anywhere. The wells, tanks, pools, rivers all were dried up. And this 
state of “no rains” lasted one hundred years. Countless people, 
hundreds and thou- sands of cows, buffaloes and other beasts went 
to the jaws of death. The dead bodies of persons remained in heaps 
in every house; persons would not be found to perform their burning 
ceremonies. When such calamities were seen, the calm and quiet 
body of the Brahmans, in their earnestness to worship the Supreme 
Goddess, went to the Himalayas. They with their whole heart and 
without taking any food began to worship the Devi daily with their 
Samadhi, meditation and worship. O Mahes’ani! Shew mercy on us. 
O Mother! It’s not praiseworthy to Thee to manifest Thy such anger 
on us, the low persons and guilty of all sins. So, O Deves’i! Forgive 
us. If Thou art angry on us for our faults, even then we may be 



excused, for Thou art the Internal Ruler within us all and we do 
whatever Thou impellest us to do. (The other Devas become 
pleased and give fruits when they are worshipped by Japam, and 
other Homa ceremonies; but that is not even possible due to the 
disappearance of the Vedic Mantrams from amongst us. But You are 
kind as mothers are towards their children whenever they 
remember.) So without Thee, there is no other rescue for these 
people. O MahesVari! Whatever Thou wiliest. Thou canst do that; so 
what art Thou seeing again and again? O Mahes’ari! How can we 
live without Water, what is called the Life. Now rescue us from this 
great difficulty. O Mother of the Worlds! O MahesVari! Be pleased. 
Oh the Ruler of the endless crores of Brahmandas! Obeisance to 
Thee! We bow down to Thee, the Unchangeable, of the nature of 
Intelligence. We again and again make obeisance to Thee, the Lady 
of the Universe and realisable by the Vedanta words (not this, not 
this). All the sayings of the Vedanta declare Thee, by negating (not 
this, not this) other transient objects as the Cause of all this 
Universe. We with all our hearts bow down to the Devi. When the 
body of the Brahmanas thus praised and chanted the hymns of 
MahesVari, She created innumerable eyes within Her body and 
became visible. Her colour was dark-blue (colour of the fourth 
dimension, space) like heaps of collyrium (eye-paint); eyes like the 
blue lotuses and expanded; breasts hard, regularly elevated round 
and so fleshy that they touched each other; four handed; with Her 
right hand, holding arrows; on the under hand holding lotus; on the 
upper-left hand holding a great bow and on the lower hand, carrying 
vegetables, fruits, flower and roots with abundance of juice, 
destroying hunger, thirst and fever. She was the Essence of all 
Beauty, lovely, luminous like the thousand Suns, and the ocean of 
mercy. That Upholder of the Universe, showed Her form and began 
to shed waters from Her eyes. For nine nights continuously, the 
heavy rains poured down out of the waters flowing from Her eyes. 
Seeing the misery of all the people, out of pity. She showered 
incessantly tears from Her eyes; and all the people and medicines 
were satisfied. What more than this, out of those tears, the rivers 
began to flow. The Devas that remained hidden in the mountain 



caves, now came out. Then the Brahmins, united with the Devas, 
began to praise and sing hymns to the Devi. Thou art known by the 
Vedanta Mahavakyas. We bow down to Thee. Thou ordained 
everything to all the worlds by Thy Maya; so again and again we bow 
down to Thee. Our Obeisance to Thee! Who art a Kalpa tree to the 
Bhaktas yielding all their desires! Thou assumest the body for the 
Bhaktas! Thou art always satisfied; without any equal; the Lord of the 
Universe! We bow down to Thee. As Thou, O Devi! hast 
innumerable eyes only for our welfare and peace, therefore Thou wilt 
be called henceforth by the name “S’ataksT.” O Mother! We are very 
much hungry; so we have no power to chant hymns to Thee; 
therefore, O MahesVari? Shew mercy on us and deliver to us our 
Vedas. 


46-68. Vyasa said O King! Hearing these words of the Devas and 
the Brahmins, the Auspicious One gave them the vegetables, 
delicious fruits and roots to them that were on Her Hand, for their 
eating. After She was prayed. She gave to men sufficient quantity of 
various articles of juicy food and to the beasts, grass, etc., until new 
crops came out. O King, from that day She became famous by the 
name of S’akambhari (because She nourished all by vegetables, 
etc.) Great tumult arose and the Demon Durgama heard all from the 
emissaries and started out to fight with his weapons and army. He 
took one thousand Aksauhini armies with him (one Aksauhini army 
equals large army consisting of 21,870 chariots, as many elephants, 
65,610 horses, and 109,350 foot) and, shooting arrows, he came 
quickly before the Devi and invested Her and the Deva army and the 
Brahmins. At this, a great tumultuous uproar arose and the Devas 
and the Brahmins united exclaimed “O Devi! Save us; save us.” 
The Auspicious Devi, then, for the safety of the Devas and the 
Dvijas created round them a luminous circle and She Herself 
remained outside. The terrible fight, then, ensued between the Devi 
and the Danavas. The Sun was covered with their incessant hurling 
of arrows; and the shooters could not shoot accurately on account of 



the darkness that then prevailed. Then by the collision of the arrows 
of both the parties, the arrows caught fire and the battlefield again 
became filled with light. The quarters on all aides resounded with 
harsh bow sounds and nothing could be heard. At this moment, 
came, out of the body of the Devi, the principal S’aktis (forces 
incarnate) Kalika, Tarini, Sodas’i, Tripura, Bhairabi, Kamala, Bagala, 
Matangi, Tripura Sundari, Kamaksi, Tulaja Devi, Jambhini, Mohini, 
Chchinnamasta, and ten thousand armed Guhya Kalis and others. 
Thirty-two S’aktis, sixty-four S’aktis, and then innumerable S’aktis, all 
armed, came out of the Devi successively. When the S’aktis 
destroyed one hundred Aksauhini forces, Mridangas, conch-shells, 
lutes and other musical instruments were sounded in the battle-field. 
At this time, the enemy of the Devas, Durgama, came in front and 
first fought with the S’aktis. The fight grew to such a terrible extent 
that, within ten days, all the Aksauhini troops were destroyed. So 
much so as the blood of the dead soldiers began to flow in torrents 
like rivers. When the fatal eleventh day arrive the Danava, wearing 
red clothes on his waist, red garlands on his neck and annointing his 
body all over with red sandal paste, celebrated a very grand festivity 
and mounted on his chariot and went out to fight. With the strenuous 
effort, he defeated all the S’aktis and placed his chariot before the 
Devi. Then a terrible fight ensued for two Praharas (six hours). The 
hearts of all shivered with horror. At this time, the Devi shot fifteen 
very awful arrows at the Danava. His four horses (Vahanas) were 
pierced by Her four arrows; the charioteer was pierced by one arrow; 
his two eyes were pierced by two arrows; his arms by two arrows, 
his flag by one arrow and his heart was pierced by five arrows. He 
then left his body before the Devi, vomitting blood. The vital spirit, 
the luminous counterpart, emitting from his body, merged in the 
space-like body of the Devi. The three worlds, then, assumed a 
peaceful appearance when that greatly powerful Danava was killed. 
Then Hah, Hara, Brahma and the other Devas began to praise and 
chant hymns to the World Mother with great devotion and in voices, 
choked with feelings. 



69-73. The Devas said “O Auspicious One! Thou art the only 
Cause of this Illusion of this world, presenting an unreal appearance 
(while Brahnna is the Only Reality). So Thou art the Lady of all the 
beings (otherwise why it would be that Thou hast nourished all the 
beings with vegetables, etc). So, Obeisance to Thee, the 
S’akambharT! Hundred-eyed! O Auspicious One! Thou art sung in all 
the Upanisadas; The Destroyer of the Durganna Asura! We bow 
down to Thee, the Lord of Maya, the Dweller in the five sheaths 
Anna, Rasa, etc. We meditate upon Thee, the Lady of the universe, 
as demonstrated by Pranava Aum, whom the chief Munis meditate 
with their Nirvikalpa hearts (hearts free from any Vikalpa, doubts or 
ignorance). Thou art the Mother of the endless crores of universe! 
Thou assumest the Divine Bodies at times for our welfare! Thou art 
the Mother of Brahma, Visnu and others; we bow down to Thee with 
all our heart. 


Thou art the Mother of all; so, out of mercy. Thou hast shed tears 
from the hundred eyes, to remove the miseries of the low humble 
persons. Thou art the Ruler of all!” 


74-80. Vyasa said O King! Thus when Brahma, Visnu, Hara and 
the other Devas praised and chanted various hymns to the Devi and 
worshipped Her with various excellent articles. She became instantly 
pleased. Then the Devi, graciously pleased, handed over the Vedas 
to the Brahmanas. At last. She, the Cuckoo-voiced, made a special 
address to them. “These Vedas are the excellent parts of My body. 
So preserve these with your greatest care. The more so, when you 
all have seen with your own eyes what a great calamity befell on you 
when these Vedas went away out of your hands! You should all 
worship and serve Me (the Controller of the Space) always; there is 
no other thing higher than this that I can advise you for your welfare. 
Read always these My excellent glorious deeds. I will be pleased 
thereby and will destroy all your bad calamities and misfortunes. My 



name is Durga, because I have killed this demon Durgama; so he, 
who will take My name Durga and S’ataksi, he will be able to unveil 
my Maya and walk freely. No use in telling more than this that I tell 
you now, O Devas, the Essence of all essences Both the Suras 
and the Asuras would always serve Me and Me, alone.” 


81-83. Vyasa said O King! Thus giving pleasures to the Devas by 
these words, the Devi of the nature of Existence, Intelligence and 
Bliss disappeared before them. O King! This Grand Mystery I have 
described to you in detail; but this is the source of good to all; so 
keep it secret with every care. The person that hears daily with great 
devotion this Chapter, gets all that he wants and at last gets the 
worship in the Devi Loka. 


Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the 
glory of the S'ataksi Devi in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 29. On The Birth Of The Bhagavat! In 
The House Of Daksa 


1-19. Vyasa said O King! Thus I have described the glory of the 
Devi. Now I will narrate, as far as I can, the excellent lives of the 
kings of the the Solar and the Lunar dynasties respectively. They all 
attained their excellent glories, simply because they were favoured 
by the Grace of the Highest S’akti; they were all the great devotees 
of the Supreme Deity. All their prowess, bravery, prosperity and all 
their glory, know that those all were derived from the mere parts of 
the Para S’akti. O King! Those Kings and others as well were able to 
out off the Tree of this World by the Axe of their Knowledge, simply 
because they were the devotees of the Para S’akti. So with all the 
care possible, the Lady of the Universe is to be worshipped and 
served. Men should avoid worshipping any other gods, as people 
avoid the husk to get the grain inside. O King! By churning the ocean 
of the Vedas, I have got the jewel as the lotus-feet of the Para S’akti; 
and I think that I have discharged all my duties and think myself 
satisfied and successful. Brahma, Visnu Rudra, and Is’vara are the 
four feet and Sada S’iva is the plank overhead; thus these five form 
the seat on which the Devi is seated. There is no other deity superior 
to Her. To show this (to the ordinary ignorant people) the Maha Devi 
has taken this seat composed of the five Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, 
Is’vara and Sada S’iva. Superior to these five, what is stated in the 
Vedas as Vyaktam and in which all this Universe is sewn, as it were, 
crosswise and lengthwise, lying in and through, that is 
Bhuvanes’vari, the Goddess of the Universe. 


[Note: Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Is’vara and Sada S’iva are the 
Regents or the presiding Deities of earth, water, fire, air and Akas’a] 
No man can be free unless he until the Goddess. When men will be 
able to encircle the Akas’a, of the fourth dimension, as if it were an 
antelope skin, then they will be able to root out the miseries of the 



world, without knowing the nature of the Devi (i.e., impossible). Thus 
the SVetasVataropanisada says “Those that were engaged in 
meditation, Dhyana Yoga, they saw the Devi covered by the Gunas 
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas and the forces incarnate respectively of 
the several Devas.” So to make the human birth a success, first 
avoid all companies, be it out of shame, or fear, or devotion, or out of 
love; then bring the mind and keep it steady in your heart and then 
be devoted to Her and consider Her as the Supreme. This is the 
Vedanta Dindima (the declaration of the Vedanta). Whoever takes 
the name of the Devi, either in sleeping, going or resting or in any 
other condition, he is certainly freed from the bondage of the world, 
no doubt. O King! So worship the MahesVari with all the care that 
you can. Go on step by step; first worship Her Virat Rupa (cosmic 
form); then Suksma Rupa (subtle form) and then her Antaryami 
Rupa (inner form, ruling within). Thus when your heart is purified, 
worship the Para S’akti, of the nature of Brahma, beyond this Maya, 
this Prapancha Ullasa, of the nature of Existence, Intelligence and 
Bliss. When the Chitta (heart) melts in Para S’akti, then comes the 
real Aradhana (the real worship). So dilute your heart in Her. O King! 
Thus I have described to you the sanctifying deeds of the extremely 
devoted kings of the Para S’akti, who were noble minded and 
religious. One who will hear this will acquire fame, dharma, 
intelligence, good end, and merits that have no equal. Now what else 
do you like to hear? 


20-22. Janamejaya said “O Bhagavan! In olden times, the World 
mother Para S’akti handed over Gauri to Hara, Laksmi to Hari, and 
Sarasvati to Brahma, born of the lotus from the navel of Hari. Now I 
hear that Gauri is the daughter of Himalaya as well of Daksa; and 
Maha Laksmi is the daughter of the Ksiroda ocean (ocean of milk). 
They were all originated from the Prime Devi; how, then, Gauri and 
Laksmi came to be the daughters of others? O great Muni! This is 
next to impossible; so my doubt arises. O Bhagavan! You are quite 



competent to cut off all my doubts; so by your axe of knowledge, cut 
off my present doubt.” 


23-44. Veda Vyasa said O King! Hear. I am telling you this 
wonderful secret. You are greatly devoted to the Devi; so nothing 
there can be that I cannot disclose to you. Since the time the Great 
Mother gave over to Hara, Hari and Brahma, Gauri, Laksmi and and 
Sarasvati, respectively, these three Devas, Hara, etc. were 
performing their tasks, preserving, etc. O King! Once on a time, 
certain Danavas, named Halahalas were born. In time, they became 
very powerful and in a short time conquered the three worlds. What 
more than this, that they being elated with the boon granted to them 
by Brahma, took their forces and invested the Mount Kailas’a and 
the Vaikuntha regions! 


Seeing this, Maha Deva and Visnu both made preparations for war. 
A terrible fight ensued between both the parties. For sixty thousand 
years the battle lasted incessantly but the result was stalemate. 
Gradually there was a great cry of consternation in the two parties. 
When S’iva and Visnu with great effort destroyed the Danavas. O 
King! S’iva and Visnu then returned to their own houses and began 
to brag of their powers before their own S’aktis Gauri and Laksmi; 
whereas the Demons were killed on account of the S’aktis of Gauri 
and Laksmi. Seeing them boast, Gauri and Laksmi laughed not 
sincerely whereon the two gods were very much angry. They under 
the magic spell of the Prime Maya insulted them and even used 
offensive languages. Gauri and Laksmi quitted them and 
disappeared. A great uproar then arose in the worlds. 


Both Hari and Hara became lustreless due to their insulting the two 
S’aktis. They become powerless and unconscious and turned out 
mad. Seeing this Brahma became very anxious. Hari and Hara are 



the two chief Deities; how then these two have become unable to 
perform the actions of the world! What is the cause? Why this 
calamity has sprung up out of season? Will there be a Pralaya (a 
general dissolution) of the world out of some offence, when no 
actions are being done! I know nothing about this. So how can I find 
a remedy! Being thus very distressed, he began to meditate with his 
eyes closed in the fourth dimensional space in the heart. O King! 

The Lotus born Brahma then found out by his meditation that this 
calamity was brought about by the great wrath of the Para S’akti. He 
then tried to find out the remedy until Hah and Hara did not regain 
the former natural position. Brahma began by his own S’akti to carry 
on the functions of them both, viz., that of preservation and 
destruction for some time. The religious-minded Prajapati quickly 
called his son Manu and Sanaka, etc., the Risis, for bringing peace 
on the two great Gods! When they came to him, the great ascetic 
four-faced Brahma told them “I am now busy with many more 
works; so I am unable carry on my tapasya? By the wrath of the 
Highest Force, Hari and Hara have become somewhat distracted; so 
for the satisfaction of the Para S'akti I am performing the three 
functions, i.e., those of Creation, Preservation and Destruction. So 
you both practise this hard tapasya with the greatest devotion and 
bring about Her satisfaction. O sons! Do such as Hari and Hara gain 
their former states and then be united with their own S’aktis 
respectively. Your fame will increase thereby, no doubt. Rather that 
family where the two S’aktis will take their birth, will purify the whole 
world and that man himself will be crowned with success.” 


45. Vyasa said O King! The pure-hearted Daksa and other mind- 
born sons of Brahma, hearing the words of the Grandsire expressed 
their desire to worship the Para S’akti and went to the forest. 


Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Seventh Book on birth of 
the Bhagavati in the house of Daksa in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad 



Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 30. On The Birth Of GaurI, The Seats 
Of The Deity, And The Distraction Of S’iva 


1-12. Vyasa said :-0 King! They went to the forest and fixed their 
seats on the slope of the Himalayan mountain and engaged 
themselves in repeating silently the seed Mantra of Maha Maya and 
thus practised their austerities. O King! One hundred thousand years 
passed in the meditation of the Para S’akti. The Devi, pleased, 
became visible to them. Her form was three-eyed, and of the form of 
Existence, Intelligence and Bliss (Sachhidananda); She was filled 
with mercy. In Her one hand there was the noose, in another hand, 
goad; in another hand there was the sign bidding her devotees 
discard all fear, and in the other hand She was ready to offer boons. 
The good-natured Munis, seeing this Form of the World Mother 
began to praise Her. “O Devi! Thou art existing separately in every 
gross body; we bow down to Thee. Thou art existing wholly 
(cosmically) in all the gross bodies; we bow down to Thee. O 
ParamesVari! Thou art existing separately in every subtle body; we 
bow down to Thee; Thou art existing universally in all the subtle 
bodies; we bow down to Thee, Thou art existing separately in all the 
causal bodies wherein all the Linga Dehas (subtle bodies) are 
interwoven; we bow down to Thee. Thou art existing universally in all 
the causal bodies; we bow down to Thee. Thou art of the nature of 
the unchangeable Brahma, the receptacle of all the Jivas and thus 
residest in all the bodies; so we bow down to Thee. Thou art of the 
nature of Atman, the Goal of all the beings; we bow again and spin 
to Thee.” Thus the pure-natured Daksa and the other Munis praised 
Her with voice, choked with feelings of intense devotion and bowed 
down to Her feet. Then the Devi, pleased, spoke to them in a cuckoo 
voice. “O Highly Fortunate Ones! I am ever ready to grant boons; so 
ask what you desire.” O King! Hearing thus, they asked that Hah and 
Hara both regain their former natural states and be united 
respectively with their S’aktis, Laksmi and Gauri. Daksa again asked 
“O Devi! Let your birth be in my family. O Mother! I will, no doubt. 



consider myself as having then realised the fulfilment of my life. So, 

O ParamesVari! Speak by Thy own mouth how Thy worship, Japam, 
meditation will be conducted as well the various fit places where they 
would be performed.” 


13-16. The Devi said “The insult shown towards my S’aktis has 
led to this calamitous state of Hah and Hara. So they should not 
repeat such crime. Now, by My favour, they will regain their health 
and, of the two S’aktis, one will be born in your family and the other 
will take Her birth in the Ksiroda Sagara, the ocean of milk. Hah and 
Hara will get back their S’aktis, when I will send them the chief 
Mantra. The chief Mantra of Mine is the said Mantra of Maya; this is 
always sweet to Me; so worship this Mantra and make Japam of this. 
The Form that you are seeing before you, this is My Bhuvanes’vari 
form (that of the Goddess of the Universe), or worship My 
Virat (cosmic) form; or Sachchidananda form. The whole world is my 
place of worship; so you can meditate on Me and worship Me always 
and in all places.” 


17-23. Vyasa said When the Bhuvanes’vari Devi living in the Mani 
Dvipa thus giving Her reply, went away, Daksa and other Munis all 
went to Brahma and informed him with great earnestness of 
everything that happened. O King! Thus Hah and Hara both became 
devoid of their haughtiness and got back their previous natures by 
the Grace of the Supreme Deity and were thus enabled to perform 
their functions as before. Then, on a certain time, the Devi 
Bhagavati, the Fiery Nature of the Para S’akti, took Her birth in the 
house of the Prajapati Daksa. O King! Everywhere in the Trilokas, 
great festivities were held. All the Devas became glad and showered 
flowers. The Dundubhis of the Devas were sounded by the hands 
and made very grave sounds. The pure-minded saints were 
gladdened; the Sun’s rays looked purer and cleaner; the rivers were 
elated with joy and began to flow in their channels. When the World- 



auspicious Devi, the Destroyer of the birth and death of the Jivas 
took Her birth, everything looked propitious. The wise Munis named 
Her “Sati” as She was of the nature of Para Brahma and Truth 
Herself. The Prajapati Daksa handed over the Devi, who was before 
the S’akti of Mahadeva, to that Deva of the Devas, Mahadeva. Due 
to the misfortune of Daksa, the daughter of Daksa burnt Herself in a 
blazing fire. 


24-25. Janamejaya said “O Munis! You have made me now hear a 
very inauspicious word. How can such a great thing of the nature of 
the Highest Intelligence come to be burnt up in a fire! The mere 
recollecting of Whose Name dispels the terrible danger of the 
burning up by the fire of Samsara, how can She be burnt up by fire, I 
am extremely eager to hear; kindly describe that to me in detail.” 


26-37. Vyasa said :-- O King! Hear. I am describing to you the 
ancient history of the burning of Sati. Once on a time, the famous 
Risi Durvasa went to the bank of the river Jambu and saw the Devi 
there. There he remained with his senses controlled and began to 
repeat silently the root Mantra of Maya. Then the Goddess of the 
Immortals, the Bhagavati was pleased and gave the Muni a beautiful 
garland as Her Prasada that was on Her neck, that emitted the 
sweet fragrance of Makaranda (juice of flowers; Jasamine). Whereon 
the bees were about to cluster. The Maharsi took it quickly and 
placed it on his head. He then hurriedly went to see the Mother to 
the place where Sati’s Father, the Prajapati Daksa was staying and 
bowed down to the feet of the Sati. The Prajapati then asked him 
“O Lord! Whose extraordinary garland is this? How have you got this 
enchanting garland, rare to the mortals on this earth!” The eloquent 
Maharsi Durvasa then spoke to him with tears of love flowing from 
his eyes “O Prajapati! I have got this beautiful garland that has no 
equal, as the Prasada (favour) of the Devi.” The Prajapati asked that 
garland then from him. He, too, thinking that there was nothing in the 



three worlds that cannot be given to the devotee of the S’akti, gave 
that garland to the Prajapati. He took that on his head; then placed it 
on the nice bed that was prepared in the bed-room of the couple. 
Being excited by the sweet fragrant smell of that garland in the night, 
the Prajapati engaged in a sexual intercourse! O King! Due to that 
animal action, the bitter enmity arose in his mind towards S’ankara 
and His Sati. He then began to abuse S’iva. O King! For that 
offence, the Sati resolved to quit her body that was born of Daksa, to 
preserve the prestige of the Sanatan Darma of devotion to Her 
Husband and burnt Her body by the fire arising out of Yoga. 


38. Janamejaya said “O Muni! What did Maha Deva do, thus 
pained by the bereavement from His consort dearer than His life, 
when the Sati’s body was thus consumed.” 


39-50. Vyasa said O King! I am unable to describe what 
happened afterwards. O King! Out of the fire of anger of S’iva, the 
Pralaya seemed to threaten the three worlds. Virabhadra came into 
existence with hosts of Bhadra Kalis, ready to destroy the three 
worlds. Brahma and the other Devas took refuge to S’ankara. 

Though Mahadeva lost everything on Sati’s departure. He, the 
Ocean of Mercy, destroyed the sacrifice of Daksa, cut off his head 
and instead placed the head of a goat, brought him back to life and 
thus made the Gods free from all fears. He, the Deva of the Devas, 
then became very much distressed and going to the place of 
sacrifice, began to weep in great sorrow. He saw that the body of the 
Intelligent Sati was being burnt in the fire of the Chita. He cried aloud 
Oh my Sati! Oh My Sati! And taking Her body on His neck, began 
to roam in different countries, like a mad man. Seeing that, Brahma 
and the other Devas became very anxious and Bhagavan Visnu cut 
off the body to pieces by His arrows. Wherever the parts fell, 
S’ankara remained there in so many different forms. He then said to 
the Devas Whoever will worship, with deep devotion in these 



places, the Bhagavati, will have nothing left unattained. The Highest 
Mother will remain close to them there. The persons that will make 
Puras’charana (the repetition) of the Mantrams, especially the Maya 
Vija (the root Mantra of Maya), their Mantrams will become, no 
doubt, fructified and become incarnate. O King! Thus saying, the 
Mahadeva, being very much distressed for Sati’s departure, passed 
His time in those places, making Japam, Dhyanam and taking to 
Samadhi. 


51-52. Janamejaya said Where, in what places the several parts 
of the Sati fell? What are the names of those Siddhapithas? And 
what is their number? Kindly describe these in detail, O Great Muni! 
No doubt I will highly consider myself blessed by hearing these 
words from your blessed mouth. 


53-102. Vyasa said O King! I will now describe those Pithas 
(Sacred places), the mere hearing of which destroys all the sins of 
men. Hear. I describe duly those places where the persons desiring 
to get lordly powers and to attain success ought to worship and 
meditate on the Devi. O Maharaja! The face of Gauri fell in Kas’i; 
She is well known there by the name Vis’alaksi; that which fell in 
Naimisaranya became known by the name of Linga Dharini. This 
Maha Maya is known in Prayag (Allahabad) by the name of Lalita 
Devi; in Gandha Madan, by the name of Kamuki; in the southern 
Manasa, by Kumuda; in the northern Manasa, by Visvakama, the 
Yielder of all desires; in Gomanta, by Gomati and in the mountain of 
Mandara, She became known by the name of Kamacharini. The 
Devi is known in Chaitraratha, by the name of of Madotkata; in 
Hastinapura, by Jayanti; in Kanyakubja by the name of Gauri; in the 
Malaya Mountain, by Rambha; in the Ekamrapitha, by Kirtimati, in 
VisVe, by the name of VisVesVari; in Puskara, by the name of 
Puruhuta. She is known as Sanmarga Dayini in the Kedara Pitha; as 
Manda, in the top of the Himalayas; and as Bhadrakarnika in 



Gokarna. She is known as Bhavani in SthanesVara, as Vilvapatrika 
in Vilvake; as Madhavi in S’ns’aila; as Bhadra in BhadresVara. She 
is known as Jara in Varaha S’aila; as Kamala in Kamalalaya; as 
Rudrani in Rudra Koti; as Kali in Kalanjara; She is known as Maha 
Devi in S’alagrama, as Jalapriya in S’ivalingam; as Kapila in 
Mahalingam, as MukutesVan in Makota. As Kuman in Mayapuri, as 
Lalitambika in Santana; as Mangala in Gaya Ksetra, as Vimala in 
Purusottama. As Utpalaksi in Sahasraksa; as Mahotpala in 
Hiranyaksa; as Amoghaksi in the Vipasa river; as Patala in Pundra 
Vardhana. As Narayani in SuparsVa, as Rudra Sundari in Trikuta; as 
Vipula Devi in Vipula; as Kalyani in Malayachala. As Ekavira, in 
Sahyadri; as Chandrika in Haris’chandra; as Ramana in Rama 
Tirtha; as Mrigavati in the Yamuna. As Kotivi in Kotatirtha; as 
Sugandha in Madhavavana; as Trisandhya in the Godavari; as 
Ratipriya in Gangadvara. As S’ubhananda in S’iva Kundam, as 
Nandini in Devikatata; as Rukmini in Dvaravati; as Radha in 
Brindavana. As Devaki in Mathura; as ParamesVari in Patala; as 
Sita in Chitrakuta; as Vindhyadhivasini in the Vindhya range. O King! 
As Mahalaksmi in the sacred place of Karavira, as Lima Devi in 
Vinayaka; as Arogya in Vaidyanatha; as MahesVari in Mahakala. As 
Abhaya in all the Usna tirthas, as Nitamba in the Vindhya mountain; 
as MandavT in Mandavya; as Svaha in MahesVaripura. As 
Prachanda in Chhagalanda, as Chandika in Amarakantaka; as 
Vararoha in SomesVara; as Puskaravati in Prabhasa. As Devamata 
in Sarasvati; as Paravara in Samudrtata; as Mahabhaga in 
Mahalaya, as PingalesVari in Payosni. As Simhika in Kritas’aucha; 
as Atis’ankari in Kartika; as Lola in Utpalavartaka; as Subhadra in 
S'ona Sangam. As the Mother Laksmi in Siddhavana; as Ananga in 
Bharatas’rama; as VisVamukhi in Jalandhara; as Tara in the 
Kiskindhya mountain. As Pusti in Devadaru Vana; as Medha in 
Kas’miramandalam; as Bhima in Himadri; as Tustii in VisVesVara 
Ksetra. As S’uddhi in Kapalamochana; as Mata in Kayavarohana; as 
Dhara in S’ankhoddhara; as Dhriti in Pindaraka; as Kala in 
Chandrabhaga river; as S’ivadharini in Achchoda; as Amrita in Vena; 
as Urvas’i in Vadari. As medicines in Uttara Kuru; as Kus’odaka in 
Kus’advipa; as Manmatha in Hemakuta; as Satyavadini in Kumuda. 



As Vandaniya in AsVattha; as Nidhi in the Vais’ravanalaya; as 
Gayatn in the mouth of the Vedas; as Parvati near to S’iva. As 
Indrani in the Devalokas; as Sarasvati in the face of Brahma; as 
Prabha (lustre) in the Solar disc; as VaisnavT with the Matrikas. She 
is celebrated as Arundhati amongst the Satis, the chaste women 
and as Tilottama in the midst of the Ramas. Again this MahadevT of 
the nature of the Great Intelligence (Samvid) is always existent in the 
form of S’akti named Brahmakala in the hearts of all the embodied 
beings. O Janamejaya! Thus I have mentioned to you the one 
hundred and eight pithas (sacred places or seats of the Deity) and 
as many Devis. Thus are mentioned all the seats of the Devis and 
along with that, the chief places in India (the world). He who hears 
these excellent one hundred and eight names of the Devi as well as 
Her seats, gets himself freed from all sins and goes to the Loka of 
the Devi. O Janamejaya! His heart gets purified and is rendered 
blessed, no doubt, who duly makes jatra (sojourn) to all these seats 
of the Deity, performs S’raddhas, offers peace-offerings to the Pitris 
and worships with the highest devotion the Goddess and asks 
frequently the pardon of the World Mother. O King! After worship, 
one should feed the Brahmanas, well dressed virgins (Kumaris) and 
Vatukas with good eatables. All the tribes whether they be 
Chandalas, know them all to be of the nature of the Devi and 
therefore they should be worshipped. Never one is to accept any 
donation or gifts (Pratigrahas) in these seats of the Devi. The saintly 
persons should make Purascharanas (repeat the names of their own 
deities, attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) of their own 
Mantrams with all their might in all these places and should never be 
miserly in their expenses on this account. He who starts to these 
sacred places, with devoted hearts filled with love, finds his Pitris in 
the higher and greater Brahma Loka for one thousand Kalpas and he 
gets the highest knowledge, crosses the ocean of the world and 
becomes free. Many a people have attained success by repeating 
these one hundred and eight names of the Deity. Any place wherein 
are kept those names, embodied in a book, becomes free from such 
dangers as plague, cholera or any misapprehensions from planetary 
Deities and so forth. Nothing remains to be attained by these 



persons who repeat these one hundred and eight names. That man, 
devoted to the Devi, certainly attains blessedness. That saintly 
person becomes of the nature of the Devi. The Devas bow down and 
worship him when they behold him! What then need be said that the 
saints would worship him! The Piths become pleased and get their 
good ends when these one hundred and eight names are read with 
devotion. These places are, as it were. Intelligence personified 
(Chinmaya) and places ready to yield freedom from bondage. 
Therefore, O King! Intelligent men should take their shelter in these 
places. O King! Whatever secrets and other deeper secrets about 
the Great Goddess you asked to know from me, I described to you. 
What more do you want to hear. Say. 


Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the birth of 
Gauri, the seats of the Deity, and the distraction of S’iva in the 
Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Note The number one hundred and eight is a holy number, got by 
taking the half of 216,000, the number of breaths inhaled by a child 
in the womb who promises to take the name of God at his every 
breath or by taking one-eighth of 864,000, the number of seconds in 
a day. The two zeros are then dropped. Thus the number signifies 
the one who fulfils one’s promise. 



Chapter 31. On The Birth Of PARVATi In The 
House Of Himalayas 


1-2. Janamejaya said "O Muni! You told before that "the Highest 
Light took Her birth on the top of the Himalayas." Now describe to 
me in detail about this Highest Light. What intelligent man can desist 
from hearing these nectar-like words about the S'akti? The danger of 
death may come even to the Devas that drink nectars but no such 
danger can possibly come to those that drink the nectar of the Devi's 
glorious deeds. 

3-43. Vyasa said "O King! You are blessed; you have attained 
what you are to attain in this life; you are taught by the high-souled 
men; you are fortunate since you are so sincerely devoted to the 
Devi. O King! Hear the ancient history :-Wherever the Deva of the 
Devas, the Mahes'vara rested while He was wandering all over the 
world in a distracted state, carrying the Sati's body that as burnt by 
fire. He spent his time there with his senses controlled, in Samadhi, 
forgetting all his knowledge of Samsara in deep meditation of the 
form of the Devi. At this time, the three worlds, with their objects, 
moving and immoving, with their oceans, mountains and islands 
became void of prosperity and power. The hearts of all the embodied 
beings became dried up, without any trace of joy; they were all 
burdened with anxious thoughts and remained indifferent. All were 
merged in the ocean of sorrows and became diseased. Planets 
retrograded and the Devas had their states reversed. The Kings 
were attacked with a series of ills and misfortunes. Adhibhantik and 
Adhidaivik (from material causes and from divine interference). At 
this time a great Asura, named Taraka, became unconquerable 
owing to his receiving a boon from Brahma. Being intoxicated by his 
power and heroism, he conquered the three worlds and became the 
sovereign ruler.The Brahma Prajapati, gave him boon to this effect 
that the legitimate son of S'iva would be able to kill him. And as at 
that time S'iva had no son, the great Asura, elated with joy, became 



infatuated and carried off all victories. All the Devas were banished 
from their places by his oppression; they remained always anxious 
owing to the want felt by them of a son of S'iva. "S'ankara has now 
no wife; how can He then have a son! We are very unfortunate; how 
can our work be accomplished? Thus oppressed with thoughts, all 
the Devas went to Vaikuntha and informed the Bhagavan Visnu of all 
that had happened, in privacy. The Bhagavan Visnu began to tell 
them the means, thus "O Devas! Why are you all so anxious when 
the Auspicious Goddess of the Universe, the Dweller in the Mani 
Dvipa, the Yielder of all desires like a Kalpa Vriksa is always wakeful 
for you. It is due to your faults that She is showing Her indifference; it 
is meant to teach us (not for our destruction but to show Her Infinite 
mercy). When a mother nourishes and frightens and reprimands a 
son, it is not that she has became merciless; so the World Mother, 
the Controller of the Universe, will never be merciless to you as 
regards your qualifications and defects. A son commits offence at 
every step who can bear that in these three worlds except the 
mother! So soon take refuge to the Highest Mother, the Goddess of 
the universe, with the sincerest devotion. She will certainly take 
action and help your cause. Thus ordering the Devas, Visnu with His 
consort Laksmi and the other Devas quickly went out to worship the 
Devi. Going to the Himalayas, they soon engaged themselves in 
doing the Puras'charana Karma (act of repeating the names of the 
Deity, attended with burnt oblations and offerings, etc.). O King! 
Those who were well versed with the performance of sacrifice to the 
Mother, began their sacrificial ceremonies and all began to hold 
vows, wz, Tritiyadi Vratani. Some were engaged in incessantly 
meditating on the Devi; some began to repeat Her names constantly; 
some began to repeat the Devi Sukta. Thus some devoted 
themselves to repeating names; others to repeating mantrams. 

Again some wore engaged in performing severe (painful) 
Chandrayana and other Vratas. Some were doing Antarayagas 
(inner sacrifices); some wore doing Pranagnihotra Yagas; whereas 
others engaged themselves in Nyasadi, etc. Again some began to 
worship the Highest S'akti, the Goddess of the Universe, without any 
sleep or rest, by the seed mantra of Maya. O King! Thus many years 



of the Devas passed away. When the ninth Tithi came in the month 
of Chaitra on Friday, the Highest Light of the Supreme Force 
suddenly appeared in front of them. That Light was equal to Koti 
lightnings, of a red colour, and cool like the Koti Moons. Again the 
lustre was like the Koti Suns. The four Vedas personified, were 
chanting hymns all round Her. That mass of fire was above, below, 
on all sides, in the middle; nowhere it was obstructed. It had no 
beginning, nor end. It was of the form of a female with hands and 
feet and all the limbs. The appearance was not that of a male nor 
that of an hermaphrodite. The Devas, dazzled by the brilliant lustre, 
first closed their eyes; but at the next moment, holding patience 
when they opened again their eyes, they found the Highest Light 
manifesting in the form of an exceedingly beautiful Divine Woman. 
Her youth was just blooming and Her rising breasts, plump and 
prominent, vying as it were, with a lotus bud, added to the beauty all 
around. Bracelets were on Her hands; armlets on Her four arms; 
necklace on Her neck; and the garland made of invaluable gems and 
jewels spread very bright lustre all arouud. Lovely ornaments on Her 
waist making tinkling sounds and beautiful anklets were on Her feet. 
The hairs of Her head, flowing between Her ears and cheek sparkled 
bright like the large black bees shining on the flower leaves of the 
blooming Ketaki flower. Her loins were nicely shaped and exquisitely 
lovely and the hairs on Her navel gave additional beauty. Her 
exquisitely lively lotus mouth rendered more lustrous and beautiful 
by the shining golden ear-ornaments, was filled with betel leaves 
mixed with camphor, etc.; on Her forehead there was the half 
crescaut moon; Her eye-brows were extended and Her eyes looked 
bright and beautifully splendid like the red lotus; Her nose was 
elevated and Her lips very sweet. Her teeth were very beautiful like 
the opening buds of Kunda flowers; from Her neck was suspended a 
necklace of pearls; on Her head was the brilliant crown decked with 
diamonds and jewels; on Her ears, earrings were suspended like the 
lines on the Moon; Her hairs were ornamented with Mallika and 
Malati flowers; Her forehead was pasted with Kasmira Kunkuma 
drops; and Her three eyes gave unparallelled lustre to Her face. On 
Her one hand there was the noose and on Her other hand there was 



the goad; her two other hands made signs granting boons and 
dispelling fears; Her body shed lustre like the flowers of a Darima 
tree. Her wearing is a red coloured cloth. All these added great 
beauty. Thus the Devas saw before them the Mother Goddess, the 
Incarnate of unpretended mercy, with a face ready to offer Her 
Grace, the Mother of the Whole Universe, the Enchantress of all, 
sweet-smiling, saluted by all the Devas, yielding all desires, and 
wearing a dress, indicative of all lovely feelings. The Devas bowed at 
once they saw Her; but they could not speak with their voice as it 
was choked with tears. Then holding their patience, with much 
difficulty, they began to praise and chant hymns to the World Mother 
with their eyes filled with tears of love and devotion and with their 
heads bent low. 

44-54. The Devas said We bow down to Thee, the Devi and the 
Maha Devi, always obeisance to Thee! Thou art the Prakriti, and the 
Auspicious One; we always salute to Thee. O Mother! Thou art of a 
fiery colour (residing as a Red Flame in the heart of a Yogi) and 
burning with Asceticism and Wisdom (shedding lustre all around). 
Thou art specially shining everywhere as the Pure Chaitanya; 
worshipped by the Devas and all the JTvas) for the rewards of their 
actions; We take refuge to Thee, the Durga, the Devi, we bow down 
to Thee, that can well make others cross the ocean of Samsara; so 
that Thou helpest us in crossing this terrible ocean of world. Mother! 
The Devas have created the words {i.e., the words conveying ideas 
are uttered by the five Vayus, Prana, etc., which are called the 
Devas) which are of the nature of VisVarupa, pervading everywhere, 
like the Kama Dhenu (the Heavenly Cow yielding all desires, riches, 
honor, food, etc.), and by which the brutes (the gods) become 
egotistical, O Mother! Thou art that language to us; so Thou fulfillest 
our desires when we praise and chant hymns to Thee. O Devi! Thou 
art the Night of Destruction at the end of the world; Thou art 
worshipped by Brahma; Thou art the Laksmi, the S'akti of Visnu; 
Thou art the Mother of Skanda; the S'akti of S'iva; Thou art the S'akti 
Sarasvati of Brahma. Thou art Aditi, the Mother of the gods and 
Thou art Sati, the daughter of Daksa. Thus Thou art purifying the 



worlds in various forms and giving peace to all. We bow down to 
Thee. We know Thee to be the great Maha Laksmi; we meditate on 
Thee as of the nature of all the S'aktis as Bhaghavati. O Mother! 
Illumine us so that we can meditate and know Thee. O Devi! 
Obeisance to Thee, the Virat! Obeisance to Thee, the Sutratma, the 
Hiranyagarbha; obeisance to Thee, the transformed into sixteen 
Vikritis (or transformations). Obeisance to Thee, of the nature of 
Brahma. We bow down with great devotion to Thee, the Goddess of 
the Universe, the Creatrix of Mayic Avidya (the Nescience) under 
whose influence this world is mistaken as the rope as a garland is 
mistaken for a rope and again that mistake is corrected by whose 
Vidya. 

We bow down to Thee who art indicated by both the letters Tat and 
Tvam in the sentence Tat Tvamasi (Thou art That), Tat indicating the 
Chit (Intelligence) of the nature of oneness and Tvam indicating the 
nature of Akhanda Brahma (beyond the Annamaya, Pranamaya, 
Manomaya, Vijnanamaya and the Anandamaya--the five Kos'as, the 
Witness of the three states of wakefulness, dream, and deep sleep 
states) and indicating Thee. O Mother! Thou art of the nature of 
Pranava Om; Thou art Hrim; Thou art of the nature of various 
Mantras and Thou art merciful; we bow down again and again to Thy 
lotus Feet. When the Devas thus praised the Devi, the In-dweller of 
the Mani Dvipa, the Bhagavati spoke to them in a sweet cuckoo 
voice. 

55. O Devas! What for have you come here? What do you want? I 
am always the Tree, yielding all desires to my Bhaktas; and I am 
ready to grant boons to them. 

56-57. You are my devotees; why do you care, when I am on your 
side? I will rescue you from the ocean of troubles, O Devas! Know 
this as My true resolve. O King! Hearing these words of deep love, 
the Devas became very glad and gave out all their causes of 
troubles. 



58-65. O ParamesVan! Thou art omniscient and witness of all these 
worlds. What is there in the three worlds that is not known to Thee! 

O Auspicious Mother! The Demon Taraka is giving us troubles day 
and night. Brahma has given him boon that he will be killed by the 
S'iva's son. O MahesVari! Sati, the wife of S'iva has cast aside Her 
body. It is known to Thee. What will the ignorant low people inform 
the one, Who is Omniscient? O Mother! We have described in brief 
all what we had to say. What more shall we say? Thou knowest all 
our other troubles and causes of sorrows. Bless us so that our 
devotion remains unflinched at Thy lotus feet; this is our earnest 
prayer. That Thou takest the body to have a son of S'iva is our 
fervent prayer to Thee. Hearing the Dava's words, Parames'vari, 
with a graceful countenance, spoke to them, thus "My S'akti will 
incarnate as Gauri in the house of Himalayas; She will be the wife of 
S'iva and will beget a son that will destroy Taraka Demon and will 
serve your purpose. And your devotion will remain steadfast at My 
Lotus feet. Himalayas, too, is worshipping Me with his wholehearted 
devotion; so to take birth in his house is to my greatest liking; know 
this. 

66-73. Vyasa said "O King! Hearing the kind words of the Devi, 
the King of mountains was filled with love; and, with voice choked 
with feelings and with tears in his eyes spoke to the Goddess of the 
world, the Queen, of the three worlds. Thou hast raised me much 
higher, that Thou dost me so great a favour; otherwise where am I 
inert, and unmoving and where art Thou, of the nature of Existence, 
Intelligence and Bliss! It manifests the Greatness of Thy Glory. O 
Sinless One! My becoming the father of Thee indicates nothing less 
than the merits earned by me for doing, countless As'vamedha 
sacrifices or for my endless Samadhi. Oh! What a favour hast Thou 
shewn towards me! Henceforth my unparalleled fame will be spread 
throughout the whole Universe of five original elements that "The 
Upholder of the Universe, the World Mother has become the 
daughter of this Himalayas! This man is blessed and fortunate!" Who 
can be so fortunate, virtuous and merited as he whose daughter She 
has become. Whose belly contains millions of Brahmandas! I cannot 



describe what pre-eminent heavens are intended for my Piths, my 
family predecessors, wherein virtuous persons like myself are born. 

O Mother! O ParamesVari! Now describe to me Thy Real Self as 
exemplified in all the Vedantas; and also Jhana with Bhakti approved 
by the Vedas in the same way that Thou hast shown already this 
favour to me, so that by That Knowledge I will be able to realise Thy 
Self. 

74. Vyasa said "O King! Thus hearing the praise of Himalayas, the 
Goddess of the Universe, with a graceful look, began to speak the 
very secret essences of the S'rutis. 

Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter of the Seventh Book on the birth of 
Parvati in the House of Himalayas in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 32. On Self-Realization, Spoken By The 
World Mother 

1-50. The Devi said "Hear, Ye Immortals! My words with attention, 
that I am now going to speak to you, hearing which will enable the 
JTvas to realise My Essence. Before the creation, I, only I, existed; 
nothing else was existent then. My Real Self is known by the names 
Chit, Sambit (Intelligence), Para Brahma and others. My Atman is 
beyond mind, beyond thought, beyond any name or mark, without 
any parallel, and beyond birth, death or any other change or 
transformation. My Self has one inherent power called Maya. This 
Maya is not existent, nor non-existent, nor can it be called both. This 
unspeakable substance Maya always exists (till the final 
emancipation or Moksa). 

Maya can be destroyed by Brahma Jhana; so it can not be called 
existent, again if Maya does not exist, the practical world cannot 
exist. So it cannot be called non-existent. Of course it cannot be 
called both, for it would involve contradictions. This Maya (without 
beginning but with end at the time of Moksa) naturally arises as heat 
comes out of fire, as the rays come out of the Sun and as the cooling 
rays come out of the Moon. Just as all the Karmas of the JTvas 
dissolve in deep sleep (S'usupti), so at the time of Pralaya or the 
General Dissolution, the Karmas of the JTvas, the JTvas and Time all 
become merged, in one uniform mass in this great Maya. United with 
My S'aktT, I am the Cause of this world; this S'aktT has this defect 
that it has the power of hiding Me, its Originator. 

I am Nirguna. And when I am united with my S'aktT, Maya, 1 become 
Saguna, the Great Cause of this world. This Maya is divided into 
two, Vidya and Avidya. Avidya Maya hides Me; whereas Vidya Maya 
does not. Avidya creates whereas Vidya Maya liberates. 

Maya united with Chaitanya (Intelligence), /. a, Chidabhasa is the 
efficient cause of this Universe; whereas Maya reduced to and 



united with five original elennents is the material Cause of the 
Universe. Some call this Maya tapas; some call Her inert, material; 
some call Her knowledge; some call Her Maya, Pradhana, Prakriti, 
Aja (unborn) and some others call Her S'akti. The S'aiva authors call 
Her Vimars'a and the other Vedantists call Her Avidya; in short, this 
Maya is in the heads of all the Pundits. This Maya is called various in 
the Nigamas. 

That which is seen is inert; for this reason Maya is Jada (inert) and 
as the knowledge it conveys is destroyed, it is false. Chaitanya 
(Intelligence) is not seen; if It were seen, it would have been Jada. 
Chaitanya is self-luminous; not illumined by any other source. Were 
It so. Its Enlightener would have to be illumined by some other thing 
and so the fallacy of Anavastha creeps in (an endless series of 
causes and effects). Again one thing cannot be the actor and the 
thing, acted upon (being contrary to each other); so Chaitanya 
cannot be illumined by itself. So It is Self-luminous; and it illumines 
Sun, Moon, etc., as a lamp is self-luminous and illumines other 
objects. So, O Mountain! This My Intelligence is established as 
eternal and everlasting. The waking, dreaming and deep sleep 
states do not remain constant but the sense of "I" remains the same, 
whether in waking, dreaming or deep sleep state; its anomaly is 
never felt. (The Bauddhas say that) The sense of intelligence, Jhana, 
is also not felt; there is the absence of it; so what is existent is also 
temporarily existent. But (it can then be argued that) then the 
Witness by which that absence is sensed, that Intelligence, in the 
shape of the Witness, is eternal. So the Pundits of all the reasonable 
S'astras declare that Samvit (Intelligence) is Eternal and it is Blissful 
the fountain of all love. Never the Jivas or embodied souls feel "I am 
not"; but "I am" this feeling is deeply established in the soul as Love. 
Thus it is clearly evident that I am quite separate from anything else 
which are all false. Also I am one continuous (no interval or 
separation existing within Me). Again Jhana is not the Dharma (the 
natural quality) of Atman but it is of the very nature of Atman. If 
Jhana ware the Dharma of Atman, then Jhana would have been 
material; so Jhana is immaterial. If (for argument's sake) Jhana be 



denominated as material, that cannot be. For Jhana is of the nature 
of Intelligence and Atman is of the the nature of Intelligence. 
Intelligence has not the attribute of being Dharma. Here the thing 
Chit is not different from its quality (Chit). So Atman is always of the 
nature of Jhana and happiness; Its nature is Truth; It is always Full, 
unattached and void of duality. This Atman again, united with Maya, 
composed of desires and Karmas, wants to create, due to the want 
of discrimination, the twenty-four tattvas, according to the previous 
Samskaras (tendencies), time and Karma. O Mountain! The re¬ 
awakening after Pralaya Susupti is not done with Buddhi (for then 
Buddhi is not at all manifested). So this creation is said to be 
effected without any Buddhi (proper intelligence). O Chief of the 
Immovables! The Tattva (Reality) that I have spoken to you is most 
excellent and it is my Extraordinary Form merely. In the Vedas it is 
known as Avyakrita (unmodified), Avyakta (unmanifested) Maya 
S'abala (divided into various parts) and so forth. In all the S'astras, it 
is stated to be the Cause of all causes, the Primeval Tattva and 
Sachchidananda Vigraha. Where all the Karmas are solidified and 
where Ichcha S'akti (will), Jhana S'akti (intelligence) and Kriya S'akti 
(action) all are melted in one, that is called the Mantra Hrim, that is 
the first Tattva. From this comes out Akasa, having the property of 
sound, thence Vayu (air) with "touch" property; then fire with form, 
then water having "Rasa" property; and lastly the earth having the 
quality "smell." The Pundits say that the "sound" is the only quality of 
Akasa; air has two qualities wz., sound and touch, fire has three 
qualities sound, touch, form; water has four qualities sound, touch, 
form, taste; and the earth has five qualities sound, touch, form, taste 
and smell. Out of these five original elements, the allpervading, Sutra 
(string or thread) arose. This Sutratman (soul) is called the "Linga 
Deha," comprising within itself all the Pranas; this is the subtle body 
of the Paramatman. And what is said in the previous lines as 
Avyakta or Unmanifested and in which the Seed of the World is 
involved and whence the Linga Deha has sprung, that is called the 
Causal body (Karana body) of the Paramatman. The five original 
elements (Apahchikrita called the five Tan Matras) being created, 
next by the Pahchikarana process, the gross elements are created. 



The process is now being stated O Girija! Each of the five original 
elements is divided into two parts; one part of each of which is 
subdivided into four parts. This fourth part of each is united with the 
half of four other elements different from it and thus each gross 
element is formed. By these five gross elements, the Cosmic (Virat) 
body is formed and this is called the Gross Body of the God. 
Jhanendriyas (the organs of knowledge) arise from Sattva Gunas of 
each of these five elements. Again the Sattva Gunas of each of the 
Jhanendriyas united become the Antah Karanani. This Antah karana 
is of four kinds, according as its functions vary. When it is engaged in 
forming Sankalpas, resolves, and Vikalpas (doubts) it is called 
"mind." When it is free from doubts and when it arrives at the 
decisive conclusion, it is called "Chitta"; and when it rests simply on 
itself in the shape of the feeling "I", it is called Ahamkara. From the 
Rajo Guna of each of the five elements arises Vak (speech), Pani 
(hands) Pada (feet), Payu (Anus) and Upastha (organs of 
generation). Again their Rajo parts united give rise to the five Pranas 
(Prana, Apana, Samana, Udana and Vyana) the Prana Vayu resides 
in the heart; Apana Vayu in the Arms; Samana Vayu resides in the 
Navel; Udana Vayu rasides in the Throat; and the Vyana Vayu 
resides, pervading all over the body. My subtle body (Linga Deha) 
arises from the union of the five Jhanendriyas, the five Karmendriyas 
(organs of action), the five Pranas and the mind and Buddhi, these 
seventeen elements. And the Prakrit! that resides there is divided 
into two parts; one is pure (Suddha Sattva) Maya and the other is the 
impure Maya or Avidya united with the Gunas. By Maya is meant 
She, who, without concealing Her refugees, protects them. When the 
Supreme Self is reflected on this S'uddha Sattva, Maya, He is called 
Is'vara. This Suddha Maya does not conceal Brahma, its receptacle; 
therefore She knows the All-pervading Brahma and She is 
omniscient, omnipotent, the Lady of all and confers favours and 
blessings on all. When the Supreme Self is reflected on the Impure 
Maya or Avidya, He is called Jiva. This Avidya conceals Brahma, 
Whose nature is Happiness; therefore this Jiva is the source of all 
miseries. Both Is'vara and Jiva have, by the influence of Vidya and 
Avidya three bodies and three names. When the Jiva lives in his 



causal body, he is named Prajha; when he lives in subtle body he is 
known as Taijasa; while he has the gross body, he is called VisVa. 

So when IsVara is in His causal body, he is denominated Is'a; when 
He is in His subtle body, he is known as Sutra; and when He is in His 
gross body. He is known as Virat. 

The Jiva glories in having three (as above-mentioned) kinds of 
differentiated bodies and IsVara glories in having three (as above- 
mentioned) kinds of cosmic bodies. Thus IsVara is the Lord of all 
and though He feels Himself always happy and satisfied, yet to 
favour the Jivas and to give them liberation (Moksa) He has created 
various sorts of worldly things for their Bhogas (enjoyments). This 
IsVara creates all the Universe, impelled by My Brahma S'akti. I am 
of the nature of Brahma; and IsVara is conceived in Me as a snake 
is imagined in a rope. Therefore IsVara has to remain dependent on 
My S'akti. 

Here ends the Thirty-second Chapter of the Seventh Book on Self- 
realization, spoken by the World Mother in the Mahapuranam S'ri 
Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 33. On The DevI’s Virat Rupa 


1-19. The Devi said "O Giriraja! This whole universe, moving and 
unmoving, is created by My Maya S'akti. This Maya is conceived in 
Me. It is not, in reality, different or separate from Me. So I am the 
only Chit, Intelligence. There is no other intelligence than Me. 

Viewed practically, it is known variously as Maya, Vidya; but viewed 
really from the point of Brahman, there is no such thing as Maya; 
only one Brahman exists, I am that Brahma, of the nature of 
Intelligence. 

I create this whole world on this Unchangeable Eternal (Mountain¬ 
like) Brahma, (composed of Avidya, Karma, and various Samskaras) 
and enter first as Prana (vital breath) within it in the form of 
Chidabhasa. O Mountain! Unless I enter as Breath, how can this 
birth and death and leaving and retaking bodies after bodies be 
accounted for! As one great Akas'a is denominated variously 
Ghatakas'a (Akas'a in the air), Patakas'a (Akas'a in cloth or picture), 
so I too appear variously by acknowledging this Prana in various 
places due to Avidya and various Antahkaranas. As the Sun's rays 
are never defiled when they illumine various objects on earth, so I, 
too, am not defiled in entering thus into various high and low 
Antahkaranas (hearts). The ignorant people attach Buddhi and other 
things of activity on Me and say that Atman is the Doer; the 
intelligent people do not say that. I remain as the Witness in the 
hearts of all men, not as the Doer. O Achalendra! There are many 
JTvas and many Is'varas due to the varieties in Avidya and Vidya. 
Really it is Maya that differentiates into men, beasts and various 
other JTvas; and it is Maya that differentiates into Brahma, Visnu and 
other Is'varas. As the one pervading sky (Akas'a) is called 
Mahakas'a Ghatakas'a (being enclosed by jars), so the One All 
pervading Paramatma is called Paramatma, JTvatma (being 
enclosed within JTvas). As the JTvas are conceived many by Maya, 
not in reality; so Is'varas also are conceived many by Maya; not in 
essence. O Mountain! This Avidya and nothing else, is the cause of 



the difference in JTvas, by creating differences in their bodies, 
indriyas (organs) and minds. Again, due to the varieties in the three 
Gunas and their wants (due to the differences between Sattvik, 
Rajasik and Tamasik desires), Maya also appears various. And their 
differences are the causes of different Is'varas, Brahma, Visnu and 
others. O Mountain! This whole world is interwoven in Me; It is I that 
am the Is'vara that resides in causal bodies; I am the "Sutratman, 
Hiranyagarbha that resides in subtle bodies and it is I that am the 
Virat, residing in the gross bodies. I am Brahma, Visnu, and 
MahesVara; I am the Brahma, Vaisnavi and Raudri S'aktis. I am the 
Sun, I am the Moon, I am the Stars; I am beast, birds, Chandalas 
and I am the Thief, I am the cruel hunter; I am the virtuous high- 
souled persons and I am the female, male, and hermaphrodite. 
There is no doubt in this. O Mountain! Wherever there is anything, 
seen or heard, I alway exist there, within and without. There is 
nothing moving or unmoving, that can exist without Me. If there be 
such, that is like the son of a barren woman. Just as one rope is 
mistaken for a snake or a garland, so I am the One Brahma and 
appears as Is'vara, etc. There is no doubt in this. This world cannot 
appear without a substratum. 

And That Substratum is My Existence. There can be nothing else. 

20. The Himalayas said "O Devi! If Thou art merciful on me, I 
desire, then, to see Thy Virat form in the Fourth Dimensional Space. 

This sight is developed when the mind resides in the heart centre or 
in the centre of the eye-brows. A proper teacher is necessary. 

21-41. Vyasa said "O King! Hearing the words of Giriraja, Visnu 
and all the other Devas gladly seconded him. Then the Devi, the 
Goddess of the Universe, knowing the desires of the Devas, showed 
Her Own Form that fulfils the desires of the Bhaktas, that is 
auspicious and that is like the Kalpa Vriksa towards the Bhaktas. 
They saw Her Highest Virat Form. The Satyaloka is situated on the 
topmost part and is Her head; the Sun and Moon are Her eyes; the 
quarters. Her ears; the Vedas are Her words; the Universe is Her 



heart; the earth is Her loins; the Bhuvarloka is Her navel; the 
asterisms are Her Thighs; the Maharloka is Her neck; the Janarloka 
is Her Face; the Taparloka is Her head, situated below the 
S'atyaloka; Indra and the Devas and the Svarloka is Her arms; the 
sound is the organ of Her ears; the AsVin twins, Her nose; the smell 
is the organ of smell; the fire is within Her face; day and night are like 
Her two wings. The four-faced Brahma is Her eyebrows; water is Her 
palate; the juice thereof is Her organ of taste; Yama, the God of 
Death, is Her large teeth; the affection is Her small teeth; Maya is 
Her smile; the creation of Universe is Her sidelooks; modesty is Her 
upper lip; covetousness is Her lower lip; unrighteousness is Her 
back. The Prajapati is Her organ of generation; the oceans are Her 
bowels; the mountains are Her bones; the rivers are Her veins; and 
the trees are the hairs of Her body. O King! Youth, virginity, and old 
age are Her best gaits, positions or ways (courses) paths, the clouds 
are Her handsome hairs; the two twilights are Her clothings; the 
Moon is the mind of the Mother of the Universe; Hah is Her Vijnana 
S'akti (the knowledge power); and Rudra is Her all-destroying power. 
The horses and other animals are Her loins; the lower regions Atala, 
etc., are Her lower regions from Her hip to Her feet. The Devas 
began to behold Her this Cosmic (Virata) appearance with eyes, 
wide awake, with wonder. Thousands of fiery rays emitted from Her 
form; She began to lick the whole universe with Her lips; the two 
rows of teeth began to make horrible sounds; fires came out from 
Her eyes; various weapons were seen in Her hands; and the 
Brahmanas and Ksattriyas are become the food of that Awful Deity. 
Thousands of heads, eyes and feet were seen in that form. Crores of 
Suns, crores of lightnings flashes, mingled there. Horrible, Awful, 
That appearance looked terrific to the eyes, heart and mind. The 
Devas thus beheld and began to utter cries of horror and 
consternation; their hearts trembled and they were caught with 
immoveable senselessness. "Here is the Devi, our Mother and 
Preserver." This idea vanished away at once from their minds. 

At this moment the Vedas that were on the four sides of the Devi, 
removed the swoon of the Devas and made them conscious. The 



Immortals got, then, the excellent Vedas; and, having patience, 
began to praise and chant hymns in words choked with feelings and 
with tears flowing flowing from their eyes. 

42-53. The Devas said "O Mother! Forgive our faults. Protect us, 
the miserable, that are born of Thee. O Protectress of the Devas! 
Withhold Thy anger; we are very much terrified at the sight of Thy 
this form. "O Devi! We are inferior immortals; what prayers can we 
offer to Thee! Thou Thyself canst not measure Thy powers; how 
then can we, who are born later, know of Thy greatness! Obeisance 
to Thee, the Lady of the Universe! Obeisance to Thee of the nature 
of the Pranava Om; Thou art the One that is proved in all the 
Vedantas. Obeisance to Thee, of the form of Hrim! Obeisance to 
Thee, the Self of all, whence has originated the Fire, the Sun, and 
the Moon and whence have sprung all the medicinal plants. 
Obeisance to the Devi, the Cosmic Deity, the Self in all whence have 
sprung all the Devas, Sadhyas, the beasts, birds, and men! We bow 
down again and again to the Great Form, Maha Maya, the Self of all, 
whence have sprung the vital breath Prana, Apana, grains and 
wheats, and Who is the source of asceticism, faith, truth, continence 
and the rules what to do and what not to do under the present 
circumstances. The seven Pranas, the seven Lokas, the seven 
Flames, the seven Samidhs, the seven Oblations to Fire, have 
sprung from Thee! Obeisance to Thee, the Great Self in all! 
Obeisance to the Universal form of the Deity of the Universe whence 
have sprung all the oceans, all the mountains, all the rivers, all the 
medicinal plants and all the Rasas (the tastes of all things). We bow 
down to that Virat Form, the Great Self, the Maha Maya, whence 
have originated the sacrifices, the sacrifical post (to which the victim 
about to be immolated is bound) and Daksinas (the sacrificial fees) 
and the Rik, the Yajus, and the Sama Vedas. O Mother! O Maha 
Maya! We bow down to Thy front, to Thy back, to Thy both the sides, 
to Thy top, to Thy bottom and on all sides of Thee. O Devi! Be kind 
enough to withhold this Extraordinary Terrific Form of Thine, and 
shew us Thy Beautiful Lovely Form. 



54-56. Vyasa said "O King! The World Mother, the Ocean of 
mercy, seeing the Devas terrified, withheld Her Fearful Cosmic Form 
and showed Her very beautiful appearance, pleasing to the whole 
world. Her body became soft and gentle. In one hand She held the 
noose, and in another She held the goad. The two other hands made 
signs to dispel all their fears and ready to grant the boons. Her eyes 
emitted rays of kindness; Her face was adorned with beautiful 
smiles. The Devas became glad at this and bowed down to Her in a 
peaceful mind and then spoke with great joy. 

Here ends the Thirty-third Chapter of the Seventh Book on the 
Devi's Virat Rupa in the Maha Paranam, Sri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, 
of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 34. On The Knowledge And Final 
Emancipation 

1-22. The Devi said "O Devas! You are not at all worthy to see 
this My Wonderful Cosmic Form. Where are Ye! and where is this My 
Form! But it is my affection towards the Bhaktas that I have shewn to 
you all this great form of mine. Nobody can see this form without My 
Grace; the study of the Vedas, the Yoga, the gift, the Sacrifice, the 
austerities or any other Sadhanas are quite incompetent to make this 
form visible to anybody. O King of mountains! Now hear the real 
instructions. The Great Self is the only Supreme Thing in this world 
of Maya (Illusions). He it is that under the various Upadhis of an 
actor and enjoyer performs various functions leading to the Dharma 
(righteousness) and the Adharma (unrighteouss). Then he goes into 
various wombs and enjoys pleasure or pain according to his Karma. 
Then again owing to the tendencies pertaining to these births he 
becomes engaged in various functions and gets again various 
bodies and enjoys varieties of pleasures and pains. O Best of 
Mountains! There is no cessation of these births and deaths; it is like 
a regular clockwork machine; it has no beginning and it goes on 
working to an endless period. Ignorance or Avidya is the Cause of 
this Samsara. Desire comes out of this and action flows thence. So 
men ought to try their best to get rid of this Ignorance. O King of 
Mountains! What more to say than this that the Goal of life is 
attained when this Ignorance is destroyed. The highest goal is 
attained by a Jiva, when he becomes liberated, while living . And 
Vidya is the only thing that is able and skilful in destroying this 
Ignorance. (As darkness cannot dispel darkness, so) the Karma 
done out of Ignorance is Ignorance itself; and such a work cannot 
destroy Ignorance. So it is not proper to expect that this Avidya can 
be destroyed by doing works. The works are entirely futile. The JTvas 
want again and again the sensual enjoyments out of this Karma. 
Attachment arises out of this desire; discrepancies creep in and out 
of this ignorant attachment great calamities befall when such faults 



or discrepancies are committed. So every sane man ought to make 
his best effort to get this Jhanam (knowledge). And as it is also 
enjoined in the S'rutis that one ought to do actions (and try to live 
one hundred years) so it is advisable to do works also. Again the 
S'rutis declate that the "final liberation comes from Knowledge" so 
one ought to acquire Jhanam. If both these be collectively followed, 
then works become beneficial and helping to Jhanam. (Therefore the 
JTvas should take up both of these.) Others say that this is 
impossible owing to their contradictory natures. The knots of heart 
are let loose by Jhanam and the knots are knit more by Karma. So 
how can they be reconciled? They are so very diametrically 
opposite. Darkness and light cannot be brought together, so Jhanam 
and Karma cannot be brought together. Therefore one ought to do all 
the Karmas as best as one can, as enjoined in the Vedas, until one 
gets Chittas'uddhi (the purification of one's heart and mind). Karmas 
are to be done until S'ama (the control of the inner organs of 
senses), Dama (the control of the outer organs of senses), Titiksa 
(the power to endure heat and cold and other dualities), Vairagyam 
(Dispassion), Sattva Sambhava (the birth of pure Sattva Guna in 
one's own heart) take place. After these, the Karmas cease for that 
man. Then one ought to take Sannyasa from a Guru (Spiritual 
Teacher) who has got his senses under control, who is versed in the 
S'rutis, attached to Brahma (practising the Yogic union with Brahma). 
He should approach to him with an unfeigned Bhakti. He should day 
and night, without any laziness, do S'ravanam, Mananam, and 
Nididhyasanam (hearing, thinking and deeply realising) the Vedanta 
sayings. He should constantly ponder over the meanings of the 
Mahavakyam "Tat Tyam Asi." "Tat Tyam Asi" means Thou art That; it 
asserts the identity of the Supreme Self (Brahma) and Embodied 
Self (Jivatma). When this identity is realised, fearlessness comes 
and he then gets My nature. First of all, he should try to realise (by 
reasoning) the idea conveyed by that sentence. By the word "Tat" is 
meant Myself, of the nature of Brahman; and by the word "Tvam" is 
meant "Jiva" embodied self and the word "Asi" indicates, no doubt, 
the identity of these two. The two words "Tat" and "Tvam" cannot be 
apparently identified, as they seem to convey contradictory 



meanings ("Tat" implying omniscience, omnipresence, and other 
universal qualities and "Tvam" implying non-omniscience and other 
qualities of a limited nature). So to establish the identity between the 
two, one ought to adopt Bhagalaksmana and Tyagalaksmana. [N. B. 
— Bhagalaksmana - kind of Laksmana or secondary use of a word 
by which it partly loses and partly retains its primary meaning also 
called Jahadajahallaksana. Tyaga Laksmana - a secondary use of a 
word by which it loses partly its primary meaning. 

23-40. The Supreme Self is Brahma - Consciousness, endowed 
with the omniscience, etc., and.the Embodied Self is Limited Jiva 
Consciousness, etc.) Leaving aside their both the adjuncts, we take 
the Consciousness, when both of them are indentical and we come 
to Brahma, without a second. The example is now quoted to 
illustrate what is called Bhagalaksana and Tyagalaksana. "This is 
that Devadatta" means Devadatta seen before and Devadatta seen 
now means one and the same person, if we leave aside the time 
past and the time present take the body of Devadatta only. This 
gross body arises from the Panchikrita gross elements. It is the 
receptacle of enjoying the fruits of its Karma and liable to disease 
and old age. This body is all Maya; therefore it has certainly no real 
existence. O Lord of Mountains! Know this to be the gross Upadhi 
(limitation) of My real Self. The five Jhanendriyas (organs of senses), 
five Karmendriyas (working organs), the Prana Vayus, mind and 
Buddhi (rational intellect), in all, these seventeen go to form the 
subtle body, Suksma Deha. So the Pundits say. This body of the 
Supreme Self is caused by the Apanchikrita five original elements. 
Through this body, pain and pleasure are felt in the heart. This is the 
second Upadhi of the Atman. The Ajhana or Primeval Ignoranee, 
without beginning and indescribable, is the third body of the Atman. 
Know this also to be my third Upadhi. When all these Upadhis 
subside, only the Supreme Self, the Brahman remains. Within these 
three gross and subtle bodies, the five sheaths, Annamaya, 
Pranamaya, Vijhanamaya, and Anandamaya always exist. When 
these are renounced, Brahmapuchcha is obtained. That is Brahma 
and My Nature, too. This is the Goal of "Not this. Not this" the 



Vedanta words. This Self is not born nor It dies. It does not live also, 
being born. (But it remains constant, though It is not born). This Self 
is unborn, eternal, everlasting, ancient. It is not killed, when the body 
is killed. If one wants to kill it or thinks It as slain, both of them do not 
know; this does not kill nor is it killed. This Atman, subtler than the 
subtlest, and greater than the greatest, resides within the cave (the 
Buddhi) of the Jivas. He whose heart is purified and who is free from 
Sankalpa and Vikalpa (doubt and mental phenomena), knows It and 
Its glory and is free from sorrows and troubles. Know this Atman and 
Buddhi as the charioteer, this body as the chariot, and the mind as 
the reins. The senses and their organs are the horses and the 
objects of enjoyments are their aims. The sages declare that the 
Atman united with mind and organs of senses enjoys the objects. He 
who is non-discriminating, unmindful, and always impure, does not 
realise his Atman; rather he is bound in this world. He who is 
discriminating, mindful, and always pure reaches the Goal, realises 
the Highest Self; and he is not fallen again from That. That man 
becomes able to cross the Ocean of Samsara and gets My Highest 
Abode, of the nature of everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss, 
whose charioteer is Discrimination, and who keeps his senses under 
control by keeping tight the reins of his mind. Thus one should 
always meditate intensely on Me to realise the nature of Self by 
S'ravanam (hearing), Mananam thinking and realising one's own self 
by one's Self (pure heart). 

41-44. When by the constant practice, as mentioned above, one's 
heart is fit for Samadhi (being absorbed in the Spirit), just before 
that, he should understand the meanings of the separate letters in 
the seed Mantra of Mahamaya. The letter "Ha" means gross body 
and the letter "Ra" means subtle body and the letter "I" means the 
causal body; the (dot over the semicircle) is the fourth "Turiya" state 
of Mine. Thus meditating on the separate differentiated states, the 
intelligent man should meditate on the aforesaid three Vijas in the 
Cosmic body also and he should then try to establish the identity 
between the two. Before enteriing into Samadhi, after very carefully 
thinking the above, one should close one's eyes and meditate on 



Me, the Supreme Deity of the Universe, the Luminous and Self- 
Ellulgent Brahma. 

45-50. O Chief of Mountains! Putting a stop to all worldly desires, 
free from jealousy and other evils, he should (by constant practice of 
Pranayama) make equal according to the rules of Pranayama, the 
Prana (the inhaled breath) and Apana (the exhaled breath) Vayus 
and with an unfeigned devotion get the gross body (VaisVanara) 
indicated by the letter "Ha" dissolved in the subtle body Taijasa. The 
Taijasa body, the letter "Ra" is in a cave where there is no noise (in 
the Susumna cave). After that He should dissolve the Taijasa, "Ra" 
into the Causal body "I". He should then dissolve the Causal body, 
the Prajha "I" into the Turiya state Hrim. Then he should go into a 
region where there is no speech or the thing spoken, which is 
absolutely free from dualities, that Akhanda Sachchidananda and 
meditate on that Highest Self in the midst of the Fiery Flame of 
Consciousness. O King of Mountains! Thus men by the meditation 
mentioned above, should realise the identity between the JTva and 
Brahma and see Me and get My Nature. O Lord of Mountains! Thus 
the firmly resolved intelligent man, by the practice of this Yoga sees 
and realises the nature of My Highest Self and destroys immediately 
the Ignorance and all the actions thereof. 

Here ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the 
Knowledge, Final Emancipation in the Maha Puranam, S'ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 35. On The Yoga And Mantra Siddhi 


1. Himalaya said "O MahesVan! Now tell me the Yoga with all its 
Amgas (limbs) giving the knowledge of the Supreme Consciousness 
so that, I may realise my Self, when I practise according to those 
instructions. 

2-10. S'ri Devi said "The Yoga does not exist in the Heavens; nor 
does it exist on earth or in the nether regions (Patala). Those who 
are skilled in the Yogas say that the realisation of the identity 
between the Jivatma and the Paramatma is "Yoga." O Sinless One! 
The enemies to this Yoga are six; and they are lust, anger, greed, 
ignorance, vanity and jealousy. The Yogis attain the Yoga when they 
become able to destroy these six enemies by practising the 
accompaniments to Yoga. Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, 
Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana, and Samadhi, these are the eight 
limbs of Yoga. Yama includes Ahimsa (non-injuring; non- killing); 
truthfulness; Asteyam (non-stealing by mind or deed); Brahmacharya 
(continence); Daya (mercy to all beings); Uprightness; forgiveness, 
steadiness; eating frugally, restrictedly and cleanliness (external and 
internal). These are ten in number. Niyama includes also ten 
qualities (1) Tapasya (austerities and penances); (2) contentment; 
(3) Astikya (faith in the God and the Vedas, Devas, Dharma and 
Adharma); (4) Charity (in good causes); worship of God; hearing the 
Siddhantas (established sayings) of the Vedas; Hri or modesty (not 
to do any irreligious or blameable acts); S'raddha (faith to go do 
good works that are sanctioned); (9) Japam (uttering silently the 
mantrams, Gayatris or sayings of Puranas) and (10) Homam 
(offering oblations daily to the Sacred Fire). There are five kinds of 
Asanas (Postures) that are commendable: Padmasan, Svastikasan, 
Bhadrasan, Vajrasan and Virasan. Padmasan consists in crossing 
the legs and placing the feet on the opposite thighs (the right foot on 
the left thigh and the left foot on the right thigh) and catching by the 
right hand brought round the back, the toes of the right foot and 
catching by the left hand brought round the back the toes of the left 



foot; sitting then straight and with ease. This is recomnnended by the 
Yogis (and by this one can raise oneself in the air). 

N. B. - The hands, according to some, need not be carried round 
the back; both the hands are crossed and placed similarly on the 
thighs. 

11-20. Place the soles of the feet completely under the thighs, keep 
the body straight, and sit at ease. This is called the Svastikasan. 
Bhadrasan consists in placing well the two heels on the two sides of 
the two nerves of the testicle, near the anus and catching by the two 
hands the two heels at the lower part of the testicles and then sitting 
at ease. This is very much liked by the Yogis. Vajrasan (diamond 
seat) consists in placing the feet on the two thighs respectively and 
placing the fingers below the thighs with the hands also there, and 
then sitting at ease. Virasan consists in sitting cross on the hams in 
placing the right foot under the right thigh and the left foot under the 
left thigh and sitting at ease with body straight. 

Taking in the breath by the Ida (the left nostril) so long as we count 
"Om" sixteen, retaining it in the Susumna so long as we count "Om" 
sixty-four times and then exhaling it slowly by the Pingala nadi (the 
right nostril) as long as we count "Om" thirty-two times. (The first 
process is called Puraka, the second is called Kumbhaka, and the 
third is called Rechaka). This is called one Pranayama by those 
versed in the Yogas. Thus one should go on again and again with his 
Pranayama. At the very beginning, try with the number twelve, /. e., 
as we count "Om" twelve times and then increase the number 
gradually to sixteen and so on. Pranayama is of two kinds 
Sagarbha and Vigarbha. It is called Sagarbha when Pranayama is 
performed with repeating the Ista Mantra and Japam and meditation. 
It is called Vigarbha Pranayama when "Om" is simply counted and 
no other Mantram. When this Pranayama is practised repeatedly, 
perspiration comes first when it is called of the lowest order; when 
the body begins to tremble, it is called middling; and when one rises 
up in the air, leaving the ground, it is called the best Pranayama. 



(Therefore one who practises Pranayama ought to continue it till he 
becomes able to rise in the air). 

21-30. Now comes Pratyahara. The senses travel spontaneously 
towards their objects, as if they are without anyone to check. To curb 
them perforce and to make them turn backwards from those objects 
is called "Pratyahara," To hold the Prana Vayu on toes, heels, knees, 
thighs, sacrum genital organs, navel, heart, neck, throat, the soft 
palate, nose, between the eyebrows, and on the top of the head, at 
these twelve places respectively is called the "Dharana." 

Concentrate the mind on the consciousness inside and then 
meditate the Ista Devata within the Jivatma. This is the Dhyana. 
Samadhi is identifying always the Jivatma and Paramatma. Thus the 
sages say. (Samadhi is of two kinds (1) Samprajhata, or Savikalpak 
and (2) Nirvikalpak. When the ideas the Knower, Knowledge and the 
Thing Known, remain separate in the consciousness and yet the 
mind feels the one Akhanda Sachchidananda Brahma and his heart 
remains, there, that is called Samprajhata Samadhi; and when those 
three vanish away and the one Brahma remains, it is called 
Asamprajhata Samadhi). Thus I have described to you the Yoga with 
its eight limbs. O Mountain! This body composed of the five 
elements, and with JTva endowed with the essence of the Sun, the 
Moon, and the Fire and Brahma in it as one and the same, is 
denominated by the term "VisVa." There are the 350,000 nadis in 
this body of man; of these, the principal are ten. Out of the ten again, 
the three are most prominent. The foremost and first of these three is 
Susumna, of the nature of the Moon, Sun, and Fire, situated in the 
centre of the spinal cord (it extends from the sacral plexus below to 
the Brahmaradhra in the head at the top where it looks like a blown 
Dhustura flower). On the left of this Susumna is the Ida Nadi, white 
and looking like Moon; this Nadi is of the nature of Force, nectar-like. 
On the right side of the Susumna is the Pingala Nadi of the nature of 
a male; it represents the Sun. The Susumna comprises the nature of 
the all the Tejas (fires) and it represents Fire. 



31-41. The inmost of Susumna is Vichtra or Chitrini Bhulingam nadi 
(of the form of a cobweb) in the middle of which resides the Ichcha 
(will), Jhana (knowledge) and Kriya (action) S'aktis, and resplendent 
like the Millions of Suns. Above Him is situated Hrim, the Maya Vija 
Haratma with "Ha" and Chandravindu repesenting the Sound 
(Nada). Above this is the Flame, Kula Kundalini (the Serpent Fire) of 
a red colour, and as it were, intoxicated. Outside Her is the Adhara 
Lotus of a yellow colour having a dimension of four digits and 
Comprising the four letters "va", "s'a", "sa", and "sa". The Yogis 
meditate on this. In its centre is the hexagonal space (Pitham). This 
is called the Muladhara for it is the base and it supports all the six 
lotuses. Above it is the Svadhisthana Chakra, fiery and emitting 
lustre like diamond and with six petals representing the six letters 
"ba", "bha", "ma", "ya", "ra", "la". The word "Sva" means "Param 
Lingam" (superior Male Symbol). Therefore the sages call this 
"Svadhisthan Chakram. Above it is situated the "Manipura Chakram" 
of the colour of lightning in clouds and very fiery; it comprises the ten 
Petals, comprising the 10 letters da, dha, na, ta, tha, da, dha, na, pa, 
pha. The lotus resembles a full blown pearl; hence it is 
"Manipadma." Visnu dwells here. Meditation here leads to the sight 
of Visnu, Above it is "Anahata" Padma with the twelve petals 
representing, the twelve letters Ka, Kha, Gha, m###, (cha), (chha), 
(Ja), (Jha,) lya, ta, and tha. In the middle is Banalingam, resplendent 
like the Sun. This lotus emits the sound S'abda Brabma, without 
being struck; therefore it is called the Anahata Lotus. This is the 
source of joy. Here dwells Rudra, the Highest Person." 

42-43. Above it is situated the Vis'uddha Chakra of the sixteen 
petals, comprising the sixteen letters a, a, i, T, u, u, ri, ri, li, Iri, e, ai, o, 
ar, am, ah. This is of a smoky colour, highly lustrous, and is situated 
in the throat. The Jivatma sees the Paramatma (the Highest Self) 
here and it is purified; hence it is called Vis'uddha. This wonderful 
lotus is termed Akas'a. 

44-45. Above that is situated betwixt the eyebrows the exceedingly 
beautiful Ajha Chakra with two petals comprising the two letters 



"Ha," and Ksa. The Self resides in this lotus. When persons are 
stationed here, they can see everything and know of the present, 
past and future. There one gets the commands from the Highest 
Deity (e. g. now this is for you to do and so on); therefore it is called 
the Ajha Chakra. 

46-47. Above that is the Kailas'a Chakra; over it is the Rodhini 
Chikra. O One of good vows! Thus I have described to you all about 
the Adhara Chakras. The prominent Yogis say that above that again, 
is the Vindu Sthan, the seat of the Supreme Deity with thousand 
petals. O Best of Mountains! Thus I declare the best of the paths 
leading to Yoga. 

48. Now hear what is the next thing to do. First by the "Puraka", 
Pranayama, fix the mind on the Muladhara Lotus. Then contract and 
arouse the Kula Kundalini S'akti there, between the anus and the 
genital organs, by that Vayu. 

49. Pierce, then, the Lingams (the lustrous Svayambhu Adi Lingam) 
in the several Chakras above-mentioned and transfer along with it 
the heart united with the S'akti to the Sahasrara (the Thousand 
petalled Lotus). Then meditate the S'akti united with S'ambhu there. 

50-51. There is produced in the Vindu Chakra, out of the intercourse 
of S'iva and S'akti, a kind of nectar-juice, resembling a sort of red- 
dye (lac). With that Nectar of Joy, the wise Yogis make the Maya 
S'akti, yielding successes in Yoga, drink; then pleasing all the Devas 
in the six Chakras with the offerings of that Nectar, the Yogi brings 
the S'akti down again on the Muladhara Lotus. 

52. Thus by daily practising this, all the above mantras will no doubt, 
be made to come to complete success. 

53-54. And one will be free from this Samsara, filled with old age and 
death, etc. O Lord of Mountains! I am the World Mother; My devotee 
will get all My qualities; there is no doubt in this. O Child! I have thus 
described to you the excellent Yoga, holding the Vayu (Pavana 
Dharana Yoga). 



55. Now hear from Me the Dharana Yoga. To fix thoroughly one's 
heart on the Supremely Lustrous Force of Mine, pervading all the 
quarters, countries, and all time leads soon to the union of the Jiva 
and the Brahma. 

56-58. If one does not quickly do this, owing to impurities of heart, 
then the Yogi ought to adopt what is called the "Avayava Yoga." O 
Chief of Mountains! The Sadhaka should fix his heart on my gentle 
hands, feet and other limbs one by one and try to conquer each of 
these places. Thereby his heart would be purified. Then he should fix 
that purified heart on My Whole Body. 

59-62. The practiser must practise with Japam and Homam the 
Mantram till his mind be not dissolved in Me, My Consciousness. By 
the practice of meditating on the Mantra, the thing to be known 
(Brahma) is transformed into knowledge. Know this as certain, that 
the Mantra is futile without Yoga and the Yoga is futile without the 
Mantra. The Mantra and the Yoga are the two infallible means to 
realise Brahma. As the jar in a dark room is visible by a lamp, so this 
JTvatma, surrounded by Maya is visible by means of Mantra to the 
Paramatma (the Highest Self). O Best of Mountains! Thus I have 
described to you the Yogas with their Angas (limbs). You should 
receive instructions about them from the mouth of a Guru; else 
millions of S'astras will never be able to give you a true realisation of 
the meanings of the yogas. 

Here ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the Yoga 
and the Mantra Siddhi in the Maha Puranam S'ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 36. On The Highest Knowledge Of 
Brahma 

1-4. S'ri Devi said "O Himalayas! Thus making one's own self 
attached to the Yoga by the above-mentioned process and sitting on 
a Yoga posture, one should meditate on My Brahma Nature with an 
unfeigned devotion. (How the knowledge of that Formless Existence 
and Imperishable Brahman arises, now hear.) He is manifest, near, 
yea, even moving in the hearts of all beings. He is the well-known 
Highest Goal. Know that all this whatever, waking, dreaming, or 
sleeping, which moves, breathes or blinks, is founded on Him. He is 
higher than Being and Non-being: higher than the Wisdom, He is the 
Best Object of adoration for all creatures. He is brilliant, smaller than 
the smallest and in Him the worlds are founded and the Rulers 
thereof. He is the Imperishable Brahman. He is the Creator (Life), 
the Revealer of Sacred Knowledge (speech) and Omniscient (or the 
Cosmic Mind). This is the Truth. He is immortal, O Saumya! Know 
that He is the target to be hit. 

Note. - The words "higher than wisdom" mean higher than Brahma. 
(Brahma is the highest of all JTvas, higher than Brahma means 
higher than all creatures. The word Vijhana denotes Brahma as we 
find in the following speech of Brahma in the Bhagavat Purana) "I, 
the Wisdom Energy (Vijhana-S'akti) was born from the navel of this 
Being resting on the Waters and possessed of the Infinite Powers." 

Visnu is called "Prana," because he is the leader of all (Prana-netri). 
He is called Vak, because He is the Teacher of all; Visnu is called 
Manas because He is the adviser of all (Mantri). He is the Controller 
of all the JTvas. 

The third verse lays down that Brahman is to be meditated upon or 
that the Manana should be performed; as the second verse teaches 
that Dhyana or concentration also is necessary. 



5-6. Take hold of the Mystic Name as the bow, and know that the 
Brahman is the aim to be hit. Put on this the great weapon (Om), the 
arrow (of the mind) sharpened by meditation. Withdraw thyself from 
all objects, and with the mind absorbed in the idea of Brahman, hit 
the aim; for know, O Saumya! That Imperishable alone to be the 
Mark. The Great name"Om" is the bow, the mind is the arrow, and 
the Brahman is said to be the mark. It is to be hit by a man whose 
thoughts are concentrated, for then he enters the target. 

Note. - Thus S'ravana, Manana, and Dhyana of Brahman have 
been taught. This is the method of Brahma-upasana. 

7. In Him are woven the heavens, and the interspaces, and mingle 
also with the senses. Know Him to be the one Support of all, the 
Atman. Leave off all other words (as well as the worship of other 
deities). This (Atman) is the refuge of the Immortals. 

"He is the bridge of the Immortar'-the words Amrita or Immortal 
means Mukta Jivas. In the Vedanta Sutra I, 3-2, it has been taught 
that the Lord is the refuge of the Muktas. So also that "He is the 
Highest Goal of the Muktas." 

8-9. In Him the life-webs (nadis) are fastened, as the spokes to the 
nave of a chariot; He is this (Atman) that pervades the heart, and by 
his own free will manifests Himself in diverse ways (as Visva, 
Taijasa, etc., in waking, sleeping, etc., states); and also as One as 
Prajha in the dreamless state. Meditate on the Atman as Om (full of 
all auspicious qualities and who is the chief aim of the Vedas), in 
order to acquire the knowledge of the Paramatman, Who is beyond 
the Prakriti and the S'ri Tattva. Your welfare consists in such 
knowledge. 

Note. - This shows that Brahman is the Antaryamin Purusa. He 
resides in the heart where all the 72,000 Nadis meet, as the spokes 
meet in the navel of the wheel. He moves within the organs, not for 
His own pleasure, but to give life and energy to them all. The Om 
with all its attributes must be constantly meditated upon. He 
manifests Himself in manifold ways in the waking and dreaming 



stews as VisVa and Taijasa; while He manifests as One in the state 
of Susupti or Dreamless sleep as Prajha. He is beyond darkness; He 
has no mortal body. Meditate on such Visnu in the heart in order to 
get the Supreme Brahman, with the help of the Mantra Om. The 
result of such meditation is that there is the welfare of yours--all evils 
will cease, and you will get the bliss of the manifestation of the 
Divinity--your Real Self within your Heart. 

10. He who is All-Wise, and All-Knowing, whose Greatness is thus 
manifested in the worlds, is to be meditated upon as the Atman 
residing in the Ether, in the Fourth Dimensional Space, in the shining 
city of Brahman (the Heart). He is the Controller of the mind and the 
Guide of the senses and the body. He abides in the dense body, 
controlling the heart. He, the Atman, when manifesting Himself as 
the Blissful and Immortal, is seen by the wise through the purity of 
the heart. 

11. The fetters of the Jivas are cut asunder, the ties of Linga-dehas 
and Prakriti are removed (the effects of all) his works perish, when 
He is seen who is Supremely High (or when the Supremely High 
looks at the JTva.) [A/ote.-Visnu is Paravare, because Para or High 
Beings like Rama; Brahmas, etc., are Avara or inferior in His 
comparsion.] 

[Note. - This shows the result of Divine Wisdom in the last verse. 
The Avidya covers both Is'vara and JTva. It prevents Is'vara being, 
seen by JTva, and JTva, seeing Is'vara. It is a direct bondage of JTva 
and a metaphorical fetter of Is'vara. Avidya is the name given to 
Prakriti in Her active state. When Her three qualities Sattva, Rajas 
and Tamas, are actively manifest. Destruction of Avidya means 
putting these Gunas in their latent state. There is a great difference 
between the destruction of the Avidya-fetters as taught in this verse, 
and the unloosening of them as previously described in this verse! 
There Avidya still remained, for it was merely a Paroksa or 
intellectual apprehension of Truth. Here Avidya itself is destroyed by 
Aparoksa or Intuitive Knowledge of Brahman. 



The bonds are five The lowest is the Avidya bond, then the 
Lingadeha bond, then the Pramachchadaka Prakriti bond, the Kama 
bond, and the Karma bond. When all these bonds are destroyed, 
then the Jhani goes by the Path of Light to the Santamka Loka. 
Before proceeding further all have to salute the S'is'u-mara--the 
Dweller on the threshhold--the hub of the Universe. 

The Sis'umara literally means the Infant Killer and means the 
porpoise and is the name of a constellation, in the north, near the 
Pole. It corresponds perhaps with the Draco or the Ursa Minor. For a 
fuller description of it, see Bhagam Purana Book 5, Chapter 23. Here 
it is a mystical reference to a Being of an exalted order, which every 
Jhani passes by, in his way beyond this Universe. It may correspond 
with the ring-pass-not of the 'Secret Doctrine'! It is the name of Hah, 
also, as we find the following verse "The Supreme Hah, the Support 
of infinity of worlds and who is called Sis'umara, is saluted by all 
knowers of Brahma, on their way to the Supreme God.] 

12. The Brahman (called Sis'umaram) free from all passions and 
parts (manifests in the external world) in the highest Golden Sheath 
(the Cosmic Egg). That is pure, that is the highest of Lights, it is that 
which the knowers of Atman know. [Note. - "He is in the Centre of 
the Cosmic (as Sis'umara, the Light of all Cosmic Suns). He is even 
in the centre of our Sun and illumining all planets."] 

In the first respect He is meditated upon as Sis'umara and in the 
second as Gayatri." [Note.-\n man, the Brahman manifests in the 
heart or the Auric Egg, called the city of Brahman. In the Universe, 
He manifests Himself in the Cosmic Egg, called the "Golden 
Sheath." These are the two places where Brahman may be 
meditated upon. 

This verse has been explained in two different ways: First, as 
applying to S'is'umara and secondly, as teaching how to meditate on 
Narayana in the Sun. The "Golden Sheath" would then mean the 
Solar sphere. The Supremely High Brahman resides in the excellent 
Golden Sheath. He is Pure and Without parts.] 



13. The Sun does not shine there in His Presence nor the Moon and 
the Stars (for His Light is greater than theirs, they appear as if dark 
in that Effulgence, like the candle-light in the Sun. Nor do these 
lightnings, and much less this fire shine there. When He shines, 
everything shines after Him; by His Light all this becomes manifest. 

Him the Sun does not illumine nor the moon and the stars. Nor do 
these lightnings; much less this Fire illumines Him. When He 
illumines all (the Sun, etc.,) then they shine after (Him with His light). 
This whole Universe reveals His Light (is His Light and its Light is 
His). Note.-The Sun, etc., do not illumine Him, i.e., cannot make 
Him manifest. 

14. The Eternally Free is verily this Brahman only. He is in the West, 
in the North and the South, in the Zenith and the Nadir. The 
Brahman alone is; it is He who pervades all directions. This Brahman 
alone is it who pervades. This Brahman alone is the Full (that exists 
in all time the Eternity). This Brahman is the Best:-- 

This (idam) Brahman is alone the VisVam or Infinity or Full (purnam). 
This alone is the Best, the Highest of all. As the word "idam" is used 
several times in this verse, it qualifies the word Brahman and not 
"visVam," [Note.-The Brahman was taught to be meditated upon 
fully in the Heart and the Hiranmaya Kos'a. But lest one should 
mistake that He is thus limited in those two places, one is to infer 
that they are selected as the best.] 

15-16. The man who realises thus is satisfied and has all that he 
wants to do and is considered as the best. He becomes Brahman 
and his Self is pleased and he neither wants anything nor becomes 
sorry. O King! Fear comes from the idea of a second; where there is 
no second, fear does not exist. No danger then arises for him to be 
separated from Me. Nor I also get separated from him. 

17. O Himalayas! Know that I am he and he is I. Know that I am 
seen there where My Jhani resides. 



18. Neither I dwell in any sacred place of pilgrimage, nor do I live in 
Kailasa nor in Vaikuntha nor in any other place. I dwell in the heart 
lotus of My Jhani. 

19. The blessed man who worships once My Jhani, gets Koti times 
the fruit of worshipping Me. His family is rendered pure and his 
mother becomes blessed. He whose heart is diluted in the all- 
pervading Brahma Consciousness, purifies this whole world. There 
is no doubt in this. 

20. O Best of Mountains! I have now told everything that you asked 
about Brahma Jhana. Nothing now remains to be further described. 

21. This Brahma Vidya (science of the knowledge of Brahma) is to 
be imparted to the eldest son, who is devoted and of good character 
and to him who is endowed with the good qualities as enumerated in 
the S'astras and not to be given to any other person. 

22. He who is fully devoted to his Ista Deva and who is equally 
devoted to his Guru, to him the high-minded persons should declare 
the Brahma Vidya. 

23. Verily, he is God himself, who advises this Brahma Vidya; no one 
is able to repay the debts due to him. 

24. He who gives birth to a man in Brahma, is, no doubt, superior to 
the ordinary father; for the birth that a father gives is destroyed; but 
the birth in Brahma that is given by the Guru is never destroyed. 

25. So the S'ruti says Never do harm to the Guru who imparts the 
knowledge of Brahma. 

26. In all the Siddhantas (decided conclusions) of the S'astras, it is 
stated that the Guru who imparts the knowledge of Brahman is the 
best and the most honourable. If S'iva, becomes angry, the Guru can 
save; but when the Guru becomes angry, S'ankara cannot save. So 
the Guru should be served with the utmost care. 

27. So the Guru must be served with all the cares that are possible 
by body, mind, and word one should always please Him. Otherwise 



he becomes ungrateful and he is not saved. 

28. O Best of Mountains! It is very difficult to acquire Brahma Jhana. 
Hear a story. A Muni named Dadhyam of Atharvana family went to 
Indra and prayed to him to give Brahma Jhana. Indra said: "I would 
give you Brahma-Jhana, but if you impart it to any other body, I 
would sever your head." Dadhyarna agreed to this and Indra gave 
him the Brahma-Jhana. After a few days, the two AsVins came to 
the Muni and prayed for Brahma Vidya, The Muni said "If I give 
you the Brahma-Vidyi, Indra, will cut off my head." Hearing this the 
two AsVins said "We will cut your head and keep it elsewhere and 
we will attach the head of a horse to your body. Instruct us with the 
mouth of this horse and when Indra will cut off your this mouth, we 
will replace your former head." When they said so, the Muni gave 
them the Brahma-Vidya. Indra cut off his head by his thunderbolt. 
When the horse-head of the Muni was cut off, the two physicians of 
the Devas replaced his original head. This is widely known in all the 
Vedas. 

O Chief of Mountains! He becomes blessed who gets this the 
Brahma-Vidya. 

Here ends the Thirty-sixth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the 
Highest Knowledge of Brahma in the Mahapuranam, S'ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 37. On Bhakti Yoga 


1. The Himalayas said "O Mother! Now describe your Bhaki Yoga, 
by which ordinary men who have no dispassion get the knowledge of 
Brahma easily. 

2-10. The Devi said:-"0 Chief of Mountains! There are three paths, 
widely known, leading to the final liberation (Moksa). These are 
Karma Yoga, Jhana Yoga and Bhakti Yoga. Of these three, Bhakti 
Yoga is the easiest in all respects; people can do it very well without 
incurring any suffering to the body, and bringing the mind to a perfect 
concentration. This Bhakti (devotion) again is of three kinds as the 
Gunas are three. His Bhakti is Tamasi who worships Me, to pain 
others, being filled with vanity and jealousy and anger. That Bhakti is 
Rajasic, when one worships Me for one's own welfare and does not 
intend to do harm to others. He has got some desire or end in view, 
some fame or to attain some objects of enjoyments and ignorantly, 
and thinking himself different from Me, worships Me with greatest 
devotion. Again that Bhakti is Sattviki when anybody worships Me to 
purify his sins, and offers to Me the result of all his Karmas, thinking 
that Jiva and Is'vara are separate and knowing that this action of his 
is authorized in the Vedas and therefore must be observed. This 
Sattviki Bhakti is different from the Supreme Bhakti as the 
worshippers think Me separate; but it leads to the Supreme Bhakti. 
The other two Bhaktis do not lead to Para Bhakti (the Supreme 
Bhakti or the Highest unselfish Love.) 

11-20. Now hear attentively about the Para Bhakti that I am now 
describing to you. He who hears always My Glories and recites My 
Name and whose mind dwells always, like the incessant flow of oil, 
in Me Who is the receptacle of all auspicious qualities and Gunas. 

But he has not the least trace of any desire to get the fruits of his 
Karma; yea he does not want Samipya, Sarsti, Sayujya, and Salokya 
and other forms of liberations! He becomes filled with devotion for 
Me alone, worships Me only; knows nothing higher than to serve Me 



and he does not want final liberation even. He does not like to 
forsake this idea of Sevya (to he served) and Sevaka (servant who 
serves). He always meditates on Me with constant vigilance and 
actuated by a feeling of Supreme Devotion; he does not think himself 
separate from Me but rather thinks himself "that I am the Bhagavati." 
He considers all the JTvas as Myself and loves Me as he loves 
himself. He does not make any difference between the JTvas and 
myself as he finds the same Chaitanya everywhere and mainfested 
in all. He does not quarrel with anybody as he has abandoned all 
ideas about separateness; he bows down, and worships the 
Chandalas and all the JTvas. He who becomes filled with devotion to 
Me whenever he sees My place, My devotees, and hears the 
Sastras, describing My deeds, and whenever he meditates on My 
Mantras, he becomes filled with the highest love and his hairs stand 
on their ends out of love to Me and tears of love flow incessantly 
from both his eyes; he recites My name and My deeds in a voice, 
choked with feelings of love for Me. [A/. 8.--The Para Prema Bhakti is 
like the maddening rush of a river to the Ocean; thence in the shape 
of vapour to the highest; Himalayan Mountain peaks to be congealed 
into snow where various plays of bright colours take place.] 

21-30. O Lord of the mountains! He worships Me with intense feeling 
as the Mother of this Universe and the Cause of all causes. He 
performs the daily and occasional duties and all My vows and 
sacrifices without showing any miserly feeling in his expenditure of 
money. He naturally longs to perform My festivities and to visit 
places where My Utsabs are held. He sings My name loudly and 
dances, being intoxicated with My love, and has no idea of egoism 
and is devoid of his body-idea, thinking that the body is not his. He 
thinks that whatever is Prarabdha (done in his previoas lives) must 
come to pass and therefore does not become agitated as to the 
preservation of his body and soul. This sort of Bhakti is called the 
Para Bhakti or the Highest Devotion. Here the predominent idea is 
the idea of the DevT and no other idea takes its place. O Mountain! 

He gets immediately dissolved in My Nature of Consciousness 
whose heart is really filled with such Para Bhakti or All Love. The 



sages call the limiting stage of this devotion and dispassion as Jhana 
(knowledge). When this Jhana arises, Bhakti and dispassion get 
their ends satisfied. Yea! He goes then to the Mani Dvipa, when his 
Ahamkara does not crop up by his Prarabdba Karma, though he did 
not fail to give up his life in devotion. O Mountain! That man enjoys 
there all the objects of enjoyments, though unwilling and at the end 
of the period, gets the knowledge of My Consciousness. By that he 
attains the Final Liberation for ever. Without this Jhana, the Final 
Liberation is impossible. 

31-33. He realises Para Brahma who gets in this body of his the 
above Jhana of the Pratyak Atma in his heart; when his Prana 
leaves his body, he does not get re-birth. The S'ruti says "He, who 
knows Brahma, becomes Brahma." In the logic of Kantha, 
Chamikara, (gold on the neck) the ignorance vanishes. When this 
ignorance is destroyed by knowledge, he attains all his knowledge 
the object to be attained, when he recoginises the gold on his neck. 

34-37. O Best of Mountains! This My consciousness is different from 
the perceived pots, etc., and unperceived Maya. The image of this 
Paramatma is seen in bodies other than the Atma as the image falls 
in a mirror; as the image falls in water, so this Paramatma is seen in 
the Pitrilokas. As the shadow and light are quite distinct, so in My 
ManidvTpa, the knowledge of oneness without a second arises. That 
man resides in the Brahma Loka for the period of a Kalpa who 
leaves his body without attaining Jhana, though he had his 
Vairagyam. Then he takes his birth in the family of a pure 
prosperous family and practising again his Yoga habits, gets My 
Consciousness. 

38-45. O King of Mountains! This Jhana arises after many births it 
does not come in one birth; so one should try one's best to get this 
Jhana. If, attaining this rare human birth, one does not attain this 
Jhana, know that a great calamity has befallen to him. For this 
human birth is very hard to attain; and then the birth in a 
Brahmin family is rarer; moreover amongst the Brahmins, the 
knowledge of the Veda (the Consciousness is exceedingly rare.) The 



attaining of the six qualities (which are considered as six wealth), 
restraint of passions, etc.; the success in Yoga and the acquisition of 
a pure real Guru, all these are very hard to be attained in this life. O 
Mountain! The maturity and the activities of the organs of the 
senses, and the purification of the body according to the Vedic rites 
are all very difficult to attain. Know this again that to get a desire for 
final liberation is acquired by the merits acquired in many births. That 
man's birth is entirely futile, who attaining all the above qualifications 
does not try his best to attain this Jhana, So one should try one's 
best to acquire the Jhana. Then, at every moment, he gets the fruits 
of the As'vamedha sacrifice. There is no doubt in this. 

As ghee (clarified butter) resides potentially in milk, so the Vijhana 
Brahma resides in every body. So make the mind the churning rod 
and always churn with it. Then, by slow degrees, the knowledge of 
Brahma will be attained. 

Man attains blessedness when he gets this Jhana; so the Vedanta 
says: Thus I have described to you in brief, O King of Mountains! all 
that you wanted to hear. Now what more do you want? 

Here ends the Thirty-seventh Chapter of the Seventh Book on the 
glories of Bhakti in the Maha Puranam, S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, 
of 18,000 Verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 38. The Vows And The Sacred Places 
Of The Devi 

I- 2. The Himalayas said "O Devi! Describe the places on this 
earth that are prominent, sacred, and worth visiting and which Thou 
likest best. O Mother! Also sanctify us by describing the vows and 
utsabs that are pleasing to Thee, and by performing which, men 
become blessed and get themselves satisfied. 

3-10. The Devi spoke "O Himavan! All the places that are on this 
earth are all Mine and all should be visited. And every moment is fit 
for taking vows and utsabs. For I am of the nature pervading every 
moment; so whatever actions are performed at any moment are all 
equal to taking My vows and utsabs. O King of Mountains! Still I am 
now telling something out of My affection to My Bhaktas. Hear. There 
is a great place of pilgrimage named Kolhapura in the southern 
country. Here the Devi Laksmi always dwells. The second place is 
Matripura in the Sahyadri mountain; here the Devi Renuka dwells. 
The third place is Tulajapur; next is the place Saptas'ringa, the great 
places of Hingula and Jvala Mukhi. Then the great places of 
Sakambhari, Bhramari, S'riraktadantika and Durga. The best of all 
places is that of Vindhyachala Vasini, the great places of Annapurna 
and the excellent Kanchipur (Conjiverum). Next come the places of 
Bhima Devi, Vimala Devi, S'ri Chandrala Devi of Karnat, and the 
place of Kaus'iki. Then the great place of Nilamba on the top of the 
Nilaparvata, the place of JambunadesVari, and the beautiful 
S'rinagara. 

II- 20. The great place of S'ri Guhya Kali, well established in Nepal, 
and that of S'ri Mmaksi Devi established in Chidamvaram. The great 
place named Vedaranya where the Sundari Devi is residing; then the 
place named Ekamvaram, and the place Bhuvanes'vara near 
Purusottama where I always dwell as Para S'akti Bhuvanes'vari. The 
famous place of Mahalasa, known in the south by the name Mallari; 
the place of Yoges'vari Varat, and the widely known place of Nila 



S'arasvati in China. The excellent place of Bagala in Baidyanath, the 
supreme place ManidvTpa of S'rimati BhuvanesVari where I always 
reside. The Yonimandala Kamakhya, the place of S'rimati Tripura 
BhariavT, the excellent of all the places in this earth, where the Devi 
Maha Maya always dwells. There is no other place better than this 
on the earth. Here the Devi becomes every month in Her course of 
menstruation and where the virtuous men are seen. Here all the 
Devas remain in the form of mountains and where on the mountains 
the excellent Devas inhabit. The sages say: That all the places there 
are of the nature of the Devi; there is no better place than this 
Kamakhya Yonimandala. Puskara, the sacred place, is the seat of 
Gayatri; the place of Chandika in Amares'a: and the excellent place 
of Puskareksini in Frabhasa. The place of Linga-dharini Devi in 
Naimisaranya, and the place of Purubuta in Puskaraksa; Rati dwells 
in Asad hi. 

21-30. Dandini Parames'vari dwells in Chandamundi. Bhuti dwells in 
Bharabhuti; and Nakule S'vari dwells in Nakula. Chandrika dwells in 
Haris'chandra; S'ankari in S'rigiri; Tris'ula in Japes'vara; and Suksma 
in Amrata Kes'vara. S'ankari dwells in Ujjain, S'arvani in the place 
Madhyama, and Marga Dayini dwells in the holy Ksetra Kedara. The 
celebrated Bhairavi dwells in the place named Bhairava; Mangala in 
Gaya Ksettra; Sthanupriya in Kuruksetra; and SvayambhuvT Devi 
dwells in Nakula; Ugra dwells in Kankhal; Vis'vesa dwells in 
Vimales'vara, Mahananda in Attahasa and Mahantaka in Mahendra. 
Bhimes'vari dwells in Bhima; the Bhavani S'ankari dwells in 
Vastrapadma; and Rudrani in Ardha Koti. Vis'alaksi dwells in 
Avimukta; Mahabhaga dwells in Mahalaya; Bhadrakarni in Gokarna; 
and Bhadra resides in Bhadrakarnak; UtpalaksT dwells in 
Suvarnaksa; SthanvTs'a in Sthanu; Kamala in Kamalalaya; Chanda 
in Chhagalandaka, situated in the south near the sea coast. 
Trisandhya dwells in Kurundala; Mukutes'vari in Makota; S'andaki in 
Mandales'a; Kali in Kalanjara; Dhvani in S'ankukarna; Sthula in 
Sthulakes'vara; and Parames'vari Hrillekha dwells in the heart 
lotuses of the Jhanins. 



31-34. The places mentioned above are all dearest to the Devi. First 
the merits of these places are to be heard; next the Devi is to be 
worshipped by the rites and ceremonies according to these rules. Or, 
O Mountain! All the holy places of pilgrimages exist in Kas'i. The 
Devi always dwells there. Persons, devoted to the Devi, see these 
places and if they make Japam and meditate on the lotus-feet of the 
Devi, they will certainly be freed from the bonds of Samsara; there is 
no doubt in this. If anybody, getting up in the morning, recite the 
names of these places, all his sins would instantly be burnt away. 

35-40. And if one reads, in the time of S'raddha, before the 
Brahmins, these holy names of the Devi, his Piths will be purified of 
their sins in the Mahakas'a by the Maha Prana and will get their 
highest goal. O One of good vows! I will now describe to you the 
vows that are to be carefully observed by men and women; hear. 
Ananta Tritiyakhya Vrata (vow), Rasakalyani Vrata, and 
Ardranandakara Vrata, these three Vratas are to be observed in the 
Tritiya (third) tithi. The next come the Friday vow, the Krisna 
Chaturdas'i vows, the Tuesday vow, and the evening twilight vow. In 
this twilight vow, Maha Deva placed the Devi in the evening on an 
Asana; and He, along with the other Devas, began to dance before 
Her. Fasting is enjoined in this vow; and then in the evening one 
must worship the Devi, the Giver of all auspicious things. Especially 
in every fortnight, if the Devi be worshipped. She gets extremely 
pleased. 

41. O Best of Mountains! The Monday vow is very agreeable to Me; 
the worship of the Devi should be done and then in the night one 
must take one's food. 

42-43. The two nine nights vow called Navaratra are to be observed, 
one in the autumn and the other in the spring season. These are 
very dear to Me. He is certainly My devotee and very dear who for 
My satisfaction performs these and the other Nitya Naimittik vows, 
free from any pride and jealousy. He certainly gets the Sajujya Mukti 
with Me. 



44-46. O Nagaraja! The Holy (Dol) festival in the month of Chait on 
tha third day of the white fortnight is very pleasing to Me and should 
be observed by all. My devotees perform the S'ayanotsava in the 
PaurnamasT in the month of Asadha; the Jagaranotsava in the 
PaurnamasT in the month of Kartik, the Ratha Jatra in the 3rd of the 
white fortnight in Asadha; the Damanotsava in Chaitra. And my dear 
festivals in the month of S'ravana and various other festivals. 

47-49. In all these festivals one should feast well with gladness all 
My devotees, and the Kumaris (virgins), well clothed and dressed, 
and the boys, thinking them all to be of My very nature. No 
miserliness is to be entertained and I should be worshipped with 
flowers, etc. He is blessed and attains his goal and is dear to Me 
who carefully and devotedly observes every year all these festivals. 
O Nagendra! Thus I have described to you in brief all the vows that 
are pleasing to Me. These instructions are not to be given who is not 
a disciple nor to one who is not My devotee. 

Here ends the Thirty-eighth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the 
vows and the sacred places of the Devi in the Maha Puranam S'ri 
Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 39. The Worship Of The World Mother 


1. The Himalayas said "O Devi! O MahesVari! O Thou, the Ocean 
of Mercy! O World-Mother! Now describe in detail how Thy worship 
is conducted, the rules and ceremonials thereof. 

2-20. The Devi said "O King of Mountains! I now describe to you 
the rites and ceremonies and the methods of My worship that are 
pleasing to Me. Hear it attentively and with faith. My worship is of two 
kinds External and internal. The external worship is again twofold: 
one is Vaidik, and the other is Tantrik. The Vaidik worship is also of 
two kinds according to the differences in My forms. Those who are 
initiated in the Vedic Mantrams worship according to the Vedic rites 
and ceremonies and those who are initiated in the Tantrik-Mantram 
worship according to the Tantrik rites. That stupid man is entirely 
ruined and goes to Hell who knowing the secrets of worship, act 
contrary to them. First I will describe to you the Vaidik worship; hear. 
The highest Form of Mine that you saw before, with innumerable 
heads, innumerable eyes, innumerable feet, and the llluminer of the 
intelligences of all the Jivas, endowed with all powers. Higher than 
the Highest, Very Grand, worship That, bow down to That and 
meditate on That. O Nagendra! This is the first form of worship that I 
describe to you. With your senses controlled, peaceful, with a well 
concentrated mind, void of egoism and vanity, and devoted to That, 
perform sacrifices to That,, take refuge of That, see That within the 
temple of your mind, and always recite Her name and meditate on 
that. Take hold of Me, and My ideas with one pointed loving devotion 
and please Me with the performance of sacrifices, austerities and 
gifts. By My Grace, you will no doubt be able to get the Final 
Liberation. Whoever is entirely attached to Me, thinking Me as the 
Highest, is the foremost amongst the Bhaktas. I promise that I will 
certainly deliver him from this ocean of the world. O King of 
mountains! Meditation with Karma and Jhana with Bhakti will lead 
one to Me. Only the work alone will fail to get one to Me. O Himavan! 
From Dharma arises Bhakti and from Bhakti arises the Highest 



Jnana. What are said in the S'ruti and Smriti S'astras the Maharsis 
take that as the Dharma; and what are written in other S'astras, they 
take them to be Dharmabhasa (the Shadow or reflection of Dharma). 
Out of My omniscient and omnipotent Nature, the Vedas have come. 
Owing to the want of Ignorance in Me, the Vedas can never be 
invalidated. The Smritis are formed out of the meaning of the Vedas; 
so the Smriti and Puranas, formed, by Manu and the other Risis, are 
authoritative. In some places it is hinted that there other S'astras 
than the Vedas, taking the Tantras indirectly into account. Although 
the matters relating to the Dharmas are mentioned therein, but as 
they are apparently contrary to the S'rutis, the Tantras are not 
accepted by the Vaidik Pundits. The other S'astra makers are 
marked with their ignorance; so their sayings cannot be authoritative. 
Therefore he must resort entirely to the Vedas who want the final 
liberation. As the king's order is never disobeyed amongst his 
subjects, so the S'ruti, the Command of Mine, the Lord of all, can 
never be abandoned by men. 

21-30. To preserve My Commandments, I have created the 
Brahmana and the Ksattriya castes. My secrets are all embodied in 
the S'rutis. For that reason, the words of the S'rutis are no doubt to 
be known and observed by the sages. O Mountain! When the 
Dharma (righteousness) declines and the Adharma 
(unrighteousness) reigns supreme, I then manifest Myself in the 
world as Sakambhari, Rama, Krisna and others. Therefore, the 
Devas, the preservers of the Vedas, and the Daityas, the destroyers 
of the Vedas are classified. Whoever does not practise according to 
the Vedas I have created many hells for their lessons. When the 
sinners hear of those hells, they get extremely terrified. The king 
should banish those stupid persons from his kingdom and the 
Brahmins should not talk with them nor take them in their own lines 
nor when partaking of food, those who forsake the Vaidic Dharma 
and go for shelter to another Dharma. The S'astras that are extant, 
as contrary to the S'rutis and Smritis, are all Tamasa S'astras, 
Mahadeva has framed these Varna, Kapalak, Kaulaks, Bhairava and 
such like S'astras for fascinating the people; else he has no object in 



framing them. Those Brahmans that were burnt up by the curses of 
Daksa, S'ukra, Dadhichi and were banished from the path of the 
Vedas, it is for delivering them, step by step that Mahadeva has 
framed the five Agamas, S'aiva, Vaisnava, S'aura, S'atta and 
Ganapatya S'astras. 

31-37. In those Tantra S'astras, there are some passages in 
conformity with the Vedas and there are other passages 
contradictory to the Vedas. If the Vaidik persons resort to passages 
in conformity with the Veda, then there cannot arise any fault in 
them. The Brahmins are not Adhikaris to those Tantric texts that are 
contradictory to the Vedas. Those persons that have no claim to the 
Vedas can be Adhikaris to these latter texts. Therefore the Vaidik 
Brahmanas should resort to the Vedas with all the care possible and 
make the Para Brahma ot the nature of Jhana manifest within them. 
The Sanynsins, Vanaprasthas, householders and Brahmacharis 
should give up all their desires and take refuge in Me; free from 
egoism and vanity, kind to all creatures, their hearts wholly given to 
Me and engaged in speaking out My places with enrapt devotion. 
They always worship My Virat (Cosmic) form, immersed in the Yoga 
called Ais'varya Yoga (Cosmic Yoga dealing with the glories, 
prosperity of god). Illumine the understanding with the Sun of My 
Consciousness, and I destroy the Darkness of Ignorance of those 
persons that are always engaged in practising Yoga with Me. There 
is no doubt in this. O Nagendra! Thus I have described in brief the 
methods and practices of the Vaidik Puja; now I will tell you the 
Tantriki Puja; hear attentively. 

38-47. On an image, or clean plot of ground, or on the Sun or the 
Moon, in water, in Vana Linga, in Yantra or on a cloth or in the lotus 
of heart, one is to meditate and worship the Blissful, Higher than the 
Highest, the Devi, Who creates this universe with the three Gunas 
Sattva, Raja and Tama, Who is filled with the juice of mercy. Who is 
blooming in youth. Whose colour is red like the rising Sun, Whose 
beauty overtops to the full. Whose all the limbs are exquisitely 
beautiful. Who is the sentiment of Love Incarnate, Who feels very 



much for the mental pain of Her Bhaktas on Who being pleased, 
manifests Herself before the Bhaktas on Whose forehead, the 
segment of the Moon shines incessantly, and Whose four hands hold 
goad, noose and the signs of fearlessness and to grant boons. Until 
one is entitled to the internal worship, one should worship the 
external; never he is to abandon it. Worship is internal when one’s 
heart gets diluted in Para Brahma, of the nature of the Universal 
Consciousness, O Mountain! Know My Consciousness (Samvit) to 
be My Highest Nature without any limitations. Therefore it is highly 
incumbent to attach one's hearts, free from other adjuncts, 
constantly to this Samvit. And what is more than this Samvit is this 
illusive world full of Maya. So to get rid of this world one is to 
constantly meditate on Me, the Witness of all, the Self of all, with a 
heart full of devotiou and free from any Sankalpas or desires. 

O Best of Mountains! Now I will describe to you in detail the external 
form of worship. Hear attentively. 

Here ends the Thirty-ninth Chapter of tho Seventh Book on the 
worship of the World Mother in S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha 
Puranam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 40. The External Worship Of The Dev! 


1-5. The Devi said:-Getting up from the bed early in the morning, 
one is to meditate on the thousand petalled lotus, bright, of the 
colour of camphor, in the top part his brain on the head. On this he 
should remember his S'ri Guru, very gracious looking, well 
decorated with ornaments, with His Consort S'akti and bow down to 
Him and within Him he should meditate the Kundalini Devi thus -"I 
take refuge unto that Highest S'akti Kundalini, of the nature of the 
Supreme Consciousness, Who is manifest as Chaityana while up- 
going to the Brahmarandhra (the aperture supposed to be at the 
crown of the head, through which the soul takes its flight at death) 
and Who is of the nature of nectar while returning back in the 
Susumna canal. After meditating thus, he should meditate on the 
Blissful Form of Mine within the Kundalini Fire situated in the 
Muladhara Lotus (coccygeal lotus). Then he should rise up to go for 
the calls of nature, etc., and complete Sandhya Bandanams and 
other duties. The best of the Brahmins, then, should for My 
satisfaction perform the Agnihotra Homa and sitting in his Asana 
make Sankalap (determination) to do My Puja (Worship). 

N. B.-The brain has three divisions, the lower, the middle and the 
higher, or top-most part which is very pure. 

6-10. Next he is to make Bhuta S'uddhi (purification of elements of 
the body by respiratory attraction and replacement) and then the 
Matrika Nyasa, Then he should arrange the letters of the root Mantra 
of Maya and execute the Hrillekha Matrika Nyasa. In this he is to 
place the letter "Ha" in the Muladhara, the letter "Ra" in his heart and 
the vowel "T" in the middle of his brows aud, Hrim on the top part of 
his head. Finishing then all the other Nyasas according to that 
Mantra, he should think within his body Dharma, Jhana, Vairagyam, 
and Prosperity as the four legs of the seat and Adharma, Ajhana, 
Avairagyam and non-prosperity, these four as the body of the seat 
on the four quarters East, South, West and North. Then he should 



meditate on the Great Devi in the lotus of his heart blewn by 
Pranayama, situated on the five seats of the Pretas. O Mountain! 
Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Sadas'iva and Is'vara are the five Pretas 
situated under My feet. 

11. These are of the nature of earth, water, fire, air, and ether, the 
five elements and also of the nature of Jagrat (waking), Svapna 
(dreaming) Susupti (deep sleep state) Turiya (the fourth state) and 
Atita Rupa, the (the fifth state) excluding the 4 states, corresponding 
to the five states. But I, who am of the nature of Brahma, am over 
and above the five elements and the five states; therefore My Seat is 
always on the top of these five forces. 

12. Meditating on Me thus and worshipping Me with his mind 
concentrated, he is next to make Japam (reciting My name slowly). 
After Japam he is to make over the fruits of Japam to Me. He should 
then place the Arghya for the external worship. 

13. Then the worshipper is to sprinkle with the Astra mantra 'Phat', 
all the articles of worship that are placed in front of him and purify 
them. 

14-18. He should close the ten quarters with the Chhotika Mudra and 
bow down to his Guru. Taking his permission, he should meditate on 
the outside seat, the beauiful divine form of his heart lotus and 
invoke the Deity outside and place Her on the seat by Prana 
Pratistha and perforn Avahana, and present to Her Arghya (an offer 
of green grass, rice, etc., made in worshipping a god), Padya (water 
for washing legs and feet), Achaman, water for bath, a couple of 
clothes, all sorts of ornaments, or scents, flowers and the necessary 
articles with due devotion and he should worship the attendant 
deities of the Yantra. If one be unable to worship daily the attendant 
deities, one must worship them on Friday. 

19. Of the attendant deities, one must meditate the principal deity of 
the nature of Prabha (illumination) and think that by Her rays the 
three worlds are pervaded. 



20. Next he should worship again the BhuvanesVari Devi, the Chief 
Deity along with other attendant deities with scent, good smelling 
flowers; and Naivedya and various other tasteful dishes. 

21-22. He should then recite the Sahasranama (thousand names) 
stotra and the Devi Sukta Mantra "Aham Rudrebhih, etc.," and 
"Sarve vai Deva Devi mupatasthuh, etc.," the Devi Atharva S'iro 
Mantra and the Upanisads' Mantra of BhuvanesVari, the famous 
mantras, repeatedly and thus bring My satisfaction. 

23-24. With hearts filled with love and with hairs standing on their 
ends all should satisfy Me frequently with tears of love flowing from 
their eyes and with voice choked with feelings and with dancing 
music and singing and with his whole body filled with joy. 

25. My glory is well established in the Veda Parayana and in all the 
Puranas. So for My satisfaction, one should offer daily to Me one's 
everything with one's body and recite the readings from the Vedas. 

26-27. Next, after completing the Homa offerings, he should feed the 
Brahmanas, tha young virgins well clothed, the boys and the public 
and the poor, thinking all of them to be so many forms of the Devi. 
Than he should bow before the Devi that resides in his heart and 
finally by Samhara Mudra take leave of the Deity invoked. 

28. O One of good vows! The Hrillekha Mantra (Hrim) is the chief of 
all mantrams; so My worship and all other actions ought to be 
performed with this Hrillekha Mantram. 

29. I am always reflected in this Mirror of Hrillekha form; so anything 
offered in this Hrillekha Mantra of Mine is offered as it were with all 
the Mantras. Then one should worship the Guru with ornaments, 
etc., and think oneself blessed. 

30-31. O Himavan! Nothing remains at any time unavailable to him 
who worships thus the Bhuvanes'vari Devi. After quitting his body, 
he goes to theMani Dvipa, My Place. He gets the form of the Devi; 
and the Devas constantly bow down to him. 



32-45. O Mahidhara! Thus I have described to you the rules of 
worshipping the Great Devi; consider this in all the aspects and 
worship Me according to your Adhikara (claim) and you will attain 
your Goal. There is no doubt in this. O Best of mountains! This 
S'astra Devigita you are not to tell to those who are not the 
devotees, to those who are enemies, and to those who are cunning. 

If one gives out this secret of Gita, it is like taking off the covering 
from the breast of the mother; so carefully keep it secret and think 
that this is very necessary. This Devi Gita ought to be given to a 
disciple, a Bhakta, the eldest son, and to one who is good natured, 
and well dressed and devoted to the Devi. O Mountain! In the time of 
S'raddha (solemn obsequies performed in honour of the manes of 
deceased ancestors) he gets the highest place of the Pitris who 
reads this Devi Gita before the Brahmanas. Vyasa said:- The Devi 
vanished there after describing all these. The Devas were glad and 
considered themselves blessed by the sight of the Devi. O 
Janamejaya! The Haimavati next took Her birth in the house of the 
Himalaya and was known by the name of Gauri. S'ankara, the Deva 
of the Devas, married Her. Sadanana (Kartika) was born of them. He 
killed the Tadaka Asura. O King! In ancient times, when the ocean 
was churned, many gems were obtained. At that time the Devas 
chanted hymns to the Devi with a concentrated mind to get Laksmi 
Devi. To show favour to the Devas, Rama Devi got out of the ocean. 
The Devas gave Laksmi to Visnu, the Lord of the Vaikuntha. Visnu 
was very glad at this. O King! Thus I have described to you the 
Greatness of the Devi and the birth of Gauri and Laksmi. One's 
desires are all fulfilled when one hears this. O King! This secret I 
have described to you. Take care not to divulge it to any other body. 
This is the secret of the Gita; so carefully conceal it. O One of pure 
heart! I have told to you this Divine and Sin-destroying narration, that 
you asked. What more do you want to hear? Say. 

Here ends the Fortieth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the External 
Worship of the Devi in the Mahapuranam, S'ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



[The. Seventh Book Completed.] 



THE EIGHTH BOOK 



Chapter 1. On The Description Of The Worlds 


1-4. Janamejaya asked “O Lord! I have heard all that you have 
described about the sweet nectar-like characters of the Kings of the 
Solar and the Lunar dynasties. Now kindly describe the real Tattva of 
the Virat Form of the Great Devi and how She was worshipped in 
every Manvantara by the Regent of that Manvantara and the Kings 
thereof. In what part of the year and in which place, under what 
circumstances and in what form and with what Mantras was the Devi 
worshipped? I am very anxious to hear all this. O Guru! In fact 
describe the gross forms of the Adya S'akti, the Devi Bhagavati by 
concentrating attention to Which, I can have the power to understand 
the subtle forms of the Devi and I can get the highest good in this 
world.” 


5-7. Vyasa said O King! Now hear. I am describing to you in detail 
about the worship of the Devi Bhagavati that leads to the welfare of 
the Whole World; the hearing of which or the practice of which 
enables one to get the highest good. In days of yore, the Devarsi 
Narada asked Narayana about this very point; I will now tell you what 
the Bhagavan, the Promulgator of the Yoga Tattva, advised Narada. 
Once on a time the all powerful Devarsi Narada entitled with all the 
Yogic powers, and born from the body of Brahma was travelling all 
over this earth and came to the hermitage of the Risi Narayana. 
Resting a while, and the troubles of the journey over, he bowed 
down to the Yogi Narayana and asked Him what you ask me now. 
Narada said O Deva Deva Mahadeva! O Thou, the Ancient 
Purusa, the Excellent One! 


8-9. O Omniscient! O Thou, the Holder of the Universe! O Thou 
Who art the repository of the good qualities and Who art praised by 
all! 



10-12. O Deva! Now tell me what is the ultimate cause of this 
Universe: whence has this Universe its origin? And how does it rest? 
To whom does it take refuge? Where does it dissolve in the time of 
Pralaya? Where do all the Karmas of these beings go to? And what 
Object is that whose knowledge destroys forever the Maya, the 
Cause of all this Moha (illusion)? Whose worship, what Japam, and 
Whose meditation in the lotus of heart are to he made, by which, O 
Deva! the knowledge of Paramatman rises in the heart, as the 
darkness of the night vanishes by the rising of the Sun. 


13. O Deva! Kindly reply to these my questions in such a clear 
manner as the ignorant people in this Samsara can understand and 
get themselves across this ocean of Samsara. 


14-15. Vyasa said Thus asked by the Devarsi, the ancient 
Narayana, the Best of the Munis, the great Yogi gladly spoke O 
Devarsi! Hear I will now speak to you all the Tattvas of this world, 
knowing which the mortal never falls into the illusion of this world. 


16. O Child! The original cause of this Universe is the Devi Maha 
Maya (the image of the Supreme Chaitanya Para Brahma); this is 
the opinion of the Risis, the Devas, Gandharvas, and other intelligent 
persons. 


17-23. It is written in the Vedas and other S'astras that the Devi 
Bhagavati, worshipped by all in the Universe, creates, preserves and 
destroys the Universe by the influence of Her three Gunas. I now 
describe to you the nature of the Devi, worshipped by the Siddhas, 
Gandharbas and Risis, the mere remembering of Whom destroys all 
sins, and gives final liberation Moksa (and Dharma, Artha, and Kama 



also). The powerful Svayambhuva Manu, the First, the husband of 
S'atarupa, the prosperous and the Ruler of all the Manvantaras 
worshipped the sinless Prajapati Brahma, his Father with due 
devotion and satisfied Him when the Grandsire of the Lokas, the 
Hiranyagarbha spoke to his son The excellent worship of the Devi 
should be done by you. By Her Grace, O Son, your work of creating 
worlds will be successful. Thus spoken by Brahma, the Bibhu 
Svayambhuva Manu, the Virat incarnate, worshipped the World 
Mother with great austerities. And with his concentrated devotion, he 
satisfied the Devi Deves'i and began to chant hymns to Her, the 
First-born, the Maya, the S'akti of all, and the Cause of all causes. 


24-36. Manu said Thou art Brahma, the ocean of the Vedas, 
Krisna, the abode of Laksmi, Purandara. I bow down again and 
again to Thee, the Deves'i, the Cause of Maya, the Cause of this 
Universe. Thou boldest s'ankha (the conchshell), chakra, gada, etc., 
in Thy hands and Thou residest in the heart of Narayana; Thou art 
the Vedas incarnate, the World Mother, the Auspicious One, bowed 
down by all the Devas, and the Knower of the Three Vedas. O Thou, 
endowed with all powers and glory! O Mahamaye! Mahabhage! 
Mahodaye! (the Self-manifested). Thou residest as the better half of 
Maha Deva, and Thou dost all what are dear to Him. Thou art the 
most beloved of Nanda, the Cow-herd (in the form of Maha Maya, 
the daughter who concealed Krisna and slipped from the hands of 
Kamsa and got up in the air and remained as Vindhyavasini; also in 
the form of S'ri Krisna). Thou gavest much pleasure and wert the 
cause of all the festivities; Thou takest away the fear due to plague, 
etc.; Thou art worshipped by the Devas. O Thou, the auspicious 
Bhagavati! Thou art the welfare of all incarnate; Thou fructifiest the 
desires of all to success! Thou art the One to Whom all take refuge 
and Thou removest their all the dangers; O Thou the three-eyed! 
Gauri! Narayani! Obeisance to Thee. I bow down to that ocean of all 
brightness and splendour, without beginning or end, the One 
Consciousness, wherein this endless Universe rises and remains 



interwoven therein. I bow down to the Devi, whose Gracious Glance 
enables Brahma, Visnu, and MahesVara to do their respective works 
of creating, preserving, and destroying the Universe. O Devi! Thou 
art the Only One, whom all can bow, since the lotus-born Brahma, 
terrified by the horrible Daityas, was freed by Thy prowess only. O 
Bhagavati! Thou art modesty, fame, memory, lustre; Thou art 
Laksmi, Girija, the daughter of Himalaya, Thou art Sati, the Daksa's 
daughter; Thou art the Savitri the Mother of the Vedas, Thou art the 
intelligence of all and Thou art the cause of fearlessness. So I now 
engage myself reciting Thy Japam, Thy hymns and Thy worship. I 
meditate on Thee and see Thy form within my heart and hear Thy 
praises. Be graciously pleased on me, O Devi! It is by Thy Grace 
that Brahma is the Revealer of the Four Vedas, Visnu is the Lord of 
Laksmi, Indra is the Lord of the Devas and of the three worlds; 
Varuna is the Lord of waters, Kuvera is the Lord of wealth, Yama is 
the Lord of the dead, Nairrita is the Lord of the Raksasas, and Soma 
is the Lord of the water element and praised by the three worlds. 
Therefore, O Auspicious World Mother! I bow down again and again 
to Thee. 


37-45. Narayana said O Child! When Svayambhuva Manu, the 
son of Brahma, chanted thus the hymns to the Adya S'akti Bhagavati 
Narayani, She became pleased and spoke to him thus The Devi 
said “O King, the Brahma's son! I am pleased with your devoted 
worship and hymns; so ask boon from Me that you desire.” Manu 
said “O Devi! If Thou art graciously pleased, grant that my 
creation be finished without any hitch.” The Devi said “O King of 
Kings! By My blessing, your work of creation will be completed 
without any obstruction. And by your punya (merits) they will no 
doubt multiply on and on. He who reads with devotion this hymn 
(stotra) composed by you, will get sons, fame and beauty in the 
world and, in the end, he will be entitled to get the Highest Place. 

The people will have powers unopposed by anybody, will get wealth 
and grains, will get victory everywhere and happiness; and his 



enemies will be ruined.” Narayana said “O Child! The Devi 
Bhagavati Adya S'akti granted thus the desired boon to 
Svayambhuva Manu and vanished away at once from his sight.” 
Then the powerful Manu, obtaining thus the boon, spoke to his father 
O Father! Now give me a solitary place where I can worship the 
Devi with sacrifices and do my work of creating a good number of 
people. 


46-48. Hearing thus the words of the son, the Prajapati, the Lord 
thought over the matter for a long time “How this work would be 
done? Alas! I have spent an endless time in this work of creation; but 
as yet nothing has been done. For the Earth, the receptacle of all the 
Jivas is submerged in water and has gone down to the Rasatala. 
What is to be done now? There is only one hope and that is this If 
the Bhagavan, the Primeval Person, under Whose Command I am 
engaged in this work of creation, helps me in this work of mine, no 
doubt it will be accomplished then and then only.” 


Here ends the First Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of 
the worlds in the Mahapuranam, S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 
18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 2. On The Uplifting Of The Earth By 
The Sacrificial Boar 


1-10. Narayana said O Child! When you have got your senses 
controlled and have overcome lust, anger, etc., and other enemies, 
then you are certainly entitled to hear this secret. While Brahma was 
discussing on this subject with Marichi and the other Brahmarsis and 
with Svayambhuva Manu, suddenly there came out of the nose of 
the meditative Brahma, one young boar (the child of a boar) of the 
dimension of one finger only. That little boar, that was just in the air, 
soon became, while they were looking at it, enlarged to a very big 
elephant, in an instant; a very strange sight, indeed! Seeing this, the 
Kumaras Sanaka, etc., Marichi and the other Seven Risis, and the 
Creator Brahma were struck with wonder and Brahma began to 
discuss thus Oh! This young boar has come out suddenly of My 
nose; though it is a very small one, it is certainly, come under a 
disguise and it has all made us merge in an ocean of wonder. Is this 
something Divine, of a Sattvic quality under the guise of this boar? It 
was of the size of a thumb and it is now like the Himalaya Mountain? 
Oh! Is this the Bhagavan, the Yajha Purusa? While they were thus 
discussing, the Bhagavan, in the shape of the boar, began to make 
loud sounds, like the rolling of the mountain clouds at the time of the 
Pralaya resounding all the quarters. At this Brahma and all the Risis 
assembled there became very glad. Hearing the ghurghura noise of 
the Boar, their troubles ended and the people of Janarloka, 
Taparloka, Satyaloka and all the Devas being very much gladdened 
began to chant sweet hymns with Chhandas of Rik, Yajus, Sama 
and Atharva Vedas, to that Adi Purusa, the Bhagavan, from all sides. 


11-20. Hearing their praises, the Bhagavan Hah graciously looked on 
them and immediately merged Himself in the ocean. The ocean was 
very much agitated with the fierce striking of the hairs of the Boar, 
when He entered into the waters, and spoke thus “O Deva ! O 



Thou, the destroyer of the afflictions of your refuges! Protect me.” 
Hearing the words of the ocean, the God Hah tore asunder all the 
aquatic animals and went down beneath the waters. Searching 
violently hither and thither. He knew the earth by her smell. At once 
the Bhagavan Hari, the Lord of all, went to Her and rescued the 
earth by raising Her up on his big teeth, the Earth that was the abode 
of all the beings. When the Bhagavan, the Lord of all the sacrifices, 
came up with the Earth on the top of His teeth. He looked beautiful 
like the elephant of a quarter taking out by the root and holding a 
thousand petalled lotus upon his tusks. When the Bhagavan rescued 
thus the Earth, raising Her up on His tusks, Brahma and Indra, the 
Lord of the Devas, the powerful Manu began praise to Him with 
sweet words Brahma said O Lotus-eyed! O Bhagavan! Thou 
art victorious everywhere; O Thou, the Destroyer of the sufferings of 
the Bhaktas! Thou hast, by Thy own prowess, humiliated the 
Heaven, the abode of the gods upto Satyaloka! Thou, the Giver all 
the desires! O Deva! This earth shines so beautiful on Thy teeth as 
the thousand petalled lotus, taken up by the root by a mad elephant, 
shines on his two tusks. O Bhagavan! This Form, i. e., that of Thy 
sacrificial Boar, with earth on Thee looks so very beautiful as the 
lotus looks beautiful on the tusks of an elephant. 


21-22. O Lord! We bow down to Thee, the Creator and the Destroyer 
of everything; Thou assumest many forms for the purpose of 
destroying the Danavas; Thou dost do many acts that redound to 
Thy Glory, We bow down to Thee, to Thy Front and to Thy Back. 
(Really thou hast no front nor back. Thou art everywhere.) Thou art 
the Upholder of all the Celestials and the Immortals! Thy eyes shine 
equally everywhere. 


23-25. O Deva! By Thy power I am brought up and engaged in the 
work of creation and by Thy order I create in every Kalpa this 
Universe and destroy it. O Lord of Immortals! In the ancient times the 



Devas united churned the vast ocean by Thy help and got according 
to their merits their due shares. O Hah! Indra, the Lord of the Devas 
is enjoying the vast kingdom of Heaven, the Trilokas, by Thy Will and 
appointment. All the Devas worship him. 


26-27. So the God of Fire has got his burning power and is residing 
in the bellies of the Devas, the Asuras, men and all other beings and 
penetrating their bellies, is satisfying all. Yama, the King of Dharma, 
by Thy appointment, is the Lord of the southern quarters, is presiding 
over the Pitris and being the witness of all the actions of the Jivas, is 
awarding duly to them the fruits thereof. 


28-33. Nairrita, the Lord of the Raksasas, the witness of all the 
actions of all the beings, by Thy commandment, is the destroyer of 
all the obstacles of the devotees that take refuge unto thee, though 
he is a Yaksa. The Varuna Deva, by Thy order, has become duly the 
Lord of the waters, and the Regent of the Loka (Dikpala). The Vayu, 
the Life of all, the carrier of the smell, has become by Thy order 
Lokapala and the Guru of the universe. Kuvera, obedient to Thy 
order, has become the Lord of the Yaksas and the Kinnaras and is 
holding a respectful position like other Lokapalas. Is'ana, Who is the 
destroyer of all the Jivas, has got his Lordship over a quarter by Thy 
order and is being praised by all the Rudras, the Devas, 
Gandharbas, Yaksas, Kinnaras, the men and all the beings. O 
Bhagavan! We bow down to Thee, the Lord of the Universe; the 
innumerable Devas that are seen are merely the small fractions of 
Thy powers. 


34-38. Narayana said “O Child Narada! When Brahma, the 
Creator and the Grandsire of the Lokas, praised thus the Adi Purusa 
Bhagavan, He cast a side long glance at them, offering His Grace. 
When the Bhagavan, the Sacrificial Boar, was coming up with earth. 



rescued and placed on his teeth, the awful Hiranyaksa, the chief of 
the Daityas came before Him and obstructed His passage when He 
killed him by one violent stroke of his club. He was besmeared all 
over his body with the blood of the Daitya; and thus He came up 
from the Rasatala and placed the earth on the waters. He then went 
away to His Vaikuntha abode. 


O Child Narada! He who hears or reads devotedly this glorious deed 
of the Bhagavan and the deliverance of the Earth, will certainly be 
freed of all his sins and goes to the highest holiest place of Visnu, 
the Lord of all. There is no doubt in this.” 


Here ends the Second Chapter of the Eighth Book on the uplifting of 
the Earth by the Sacrificial Boar in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 3. On The Description Of The Family 
Of Manu 


1-23. Narayana said O Narada! When the Bhagavan went away 
to Vaikuntha, establishing the Earth in due position and equilibrium, 
Brahma spoke thus to his son “O Powerful Son of mine, O 
Svayamhhuva! The best of those that are filled with Teja (energy) 
and Tapas! Now go on with your work of creation, as you think 
proper, on this earth, the Upholdress of all the Jivas. And worship 
the Purusa, the Lord of Sacrifices, according to the division of place 
and time, and with all the necessary materials of various kinds, high 
and low, and those that will be useful in performing your sacrifices. 
Do Dharma according to the S'astras, and according to the 
Varna(the different castes) and Asrama (Brahmacharya, etc.); thus 
by gradually going on step by step in the path of Yoga, your progeny 
will be multiplied. Beget lovely sons and daughters, of good fame, 
culture, modesty and ornamented with various other good 
qualifications, like yourself; then marry your daughters when they will 
come to the marriageable age, to proper persons of good 
qualifications and then fix your mind thoroughly on the Excellent 
Purusa that is the very Best. O Child! Now go and serve the 
Bhagavan with devotion as I have advised you; and you will certainly 
attain that which is difficult to be worshipped and obtained. Advising 
thus his son Svayambhuva Manu, and starting him in his work; of 
creation, the Lotus-born, the Lord of all the subjects, Brahma went 
away to His own abode. When Brahma went away, having ordered 
his son to create progeny and subjects, Manu, took that seriously in 
his heart and began to do that work. In due time, he had two 
powerful sons named Priyavrata and Uttanapada and three lovely 
beautiful daughters endowed with various good qualities. Hear the 
names of the three daughters. The first daughter, the purifier of the 
world, was named Akuti; the second was named Devahuti and the 
third was Prasuti. The first daughter Akuti was married to the 
Maharsi Ruchi; the second was married to the Prajapati Karddama; 



and the third was married to the Prajapati Daksa. And know that all 
the beings in this world had their origin from this last daughter. Now 
hear the progeny of these three daughters and the Maharsis 
respectively By Maharsi Ruchi was born one son named Yajha, in 
the womb of Akuti; he is the part of the Bhagavan Adi Purusa Visnu; 
by Maharsi Karddama, in the womb of Devahuti was born the 
Bhagavan Kapila Deva, the famous author of the S'ankhya S'astra; 
and in the womb of Prasuti, by the Prajapati Daksa were born some 
daughters only; know that the Devas, men, beasts and birds were all 
created by this Prajapati Daksa. These offsprings were the first 
promulgators in the work of creation. In the Svayambhuva 
Manvantara, the powerful Bhagavan Yajha, by the help of the Deva 
named Yama, saved his mother's Father Manu from the attacks of 
the Raksasas; and the great Lord of the Yogis, the Bhagavan Kapila, 
remained for a while in his Asrama and gave spiritual instructions to 
his mother Devahuti, by which Avidya could be at once destroyed, 
and disclosed his S'ankhya S'astra, the great work on the Spiritual 
Philosophy and the special Dhyana Yoga in all its details and finally 
went for Samadhi to the Asrama of Pulaha where the great Deva 
Samkhya charya lives up to today. Oh! I bow down to the great 
Yogacharya, the Bhagavan Kapila Deva, the Fructifier of all desires, 
the more remembrance of Whose Name makes easily the Yogi 
realise the meaning of the Samkhya Jhana. The sins are 
immediately destroyed of those that hear or read the holy anecdote 
of the progeny of the daughters of Manu. O Child! Now I describe to 
you the progeny of the sons of Svayambhuva Manu. Hear 
attentively. The hearing of which will enable one to enter into the 
highest place. Now is being described the history about the progeny 
of those who formed those Dvipas (islands) Varsas(countries) and 
oceans for the welfare and happiness of all the creation and for the 
use of them. Hear. 


Here ends the Third Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of 
the family of Manu in S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha 



Puranam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 4. On The Narration Of The Family Of 
Priyavrata 


1-28. The Risi Narayana said The eldest son of Svayambhuva, 
Priyavrata served always his father and was very truthful. He nnarried 
the daughter of the Prajapati VisVa Karma, the exceedingly lovely 
and beautiful Barhismati, resembling like him, adorned with modesty, 
good nature and various other qualifications. He begat ten sons, very 
spiritual and well qualified and one daughter named Urjasvati. This 
daughter was the youngest of all. The names of the ten sons are 
respectively (1) Agnidhra, (2) Idhmajibha, (3) Jajhabahu, (4) 
Mahavira, (5) Rukmas'ukra (Hiranyareta), (6) Ghritapristha, (7) 
Savana, (8) Medhatithi, (9) Vitihotra and (10) Kavi. The name “Agni” 
was attached to each of the above names. Out of these ten, the 
three sons named Kavi, Savana, and Mahavira were indifferent and 
dispassionate to the world. In due time, these became extremely free 
from all desires and they were proficient in Atmavidya (Self- 
Knowledge). They were all Urdhareta (of perpetual chastity; who has 
subdued all their passions) and took gladly to the Paramahamsa 
Dharma. Priyavrata had by his other wife three sons, named Uttama, 
Tamasa, and Raivata. These were all widely known; each of them in 
due time became endowed with great prowess and splendour and 
became the Lord of one Manvatara. Priyavrata, the son of 
Svayambhuva, the King-Emperor enjoyed with his sons and 
relations, this earth for eleven Arvuda years; the wonder was this, 
that he lived so long and there was seen no decay in his strength as 
regards his body or his senses. Once on an occasion, the King 
observed that when the sun appeared on the horizon and got up, 
one part of the earth was illumined and the remaining part was 
enveloped in darkness. Seeing this discrepancy, he thought over for 
a long time and exclaimed, “What! Will the Darkness be seen in my 
kingdom, while I am reigning? This can never be. I will stop this by 
my Yogic powers.” Thus thinking, the King Priyavrata mounted on a 
luminous chariot, as big as the Sun, to illumine the whole world and 



circumambulated round the earth seven times. Whatever portion of 
the earth was trodden by the wheel on each occasion, became an 
ocean. Thus the seven oceans had their origins. And the portion of 
the earth, that was included within the ruts, became the seven 
islands (Dvipas). 0 Child! Now hear about the seven Dvipas and the 
seven Oceans The first is the Jambu Dvipa; the second is Plaksa, 
the third is S'almali; the fourth is the Kus'a Dvipa; the fifth is 
Krauncha; the sixth is the S'aka Dvipa; and the seventh is the 
Puskara Dvipa. The second Dvipa Plaksa is twice the first Jambu 
Dvipa and so on; each succeeding Dvipa is twice as large as its 
previous one. Now hear the names of the oceans. The first ocean is 
named Ksaroda (the salt water ocean); the second is Iksurasa (the 
sugarcane ocean); the third is Sura (the wine ocean), the fourth is 
Ghritoda (the clarified butter ocean) the fifth is Ksiroda (the ocean of 
milk); the sixth is Dadhi Manda (the ocean of curds); and the seventh 
is that of the ordinary water. The Jambu Dvipa is surrounded by 
Ksira Samudra. The King Priyavrata made his son Agnidhra, the lord 
of this Dvipa. He gave to his Idhmajibha, the Plaksa Dvipa 
surrounded by Iksu Sagara; so he gave to Jajhabahu the S'almali 
Dvipa surrounded by Sura Sagara and he gave the lordship of Kus'a 
Dvipa to Hiranyareta. Then he gave to his powerful son Ghritapristha 
the Krauncha Dvipa surrounded by Ksira Samudra and to his son 
Medhatithi the S'aka Dvipa surrounded by Dadhimanda Sagara. 
Finally he gave to his Vitihotra, the Puskara Dvipa surrounded by the 
ordinary water. Thus distributing duly amongst his sons, the separate 
divisions of the earth, he married his daughter, the youngest 
Urjasvati to the Bhagavan Us'ana. In the womb of Urjasvati the 
Bhagavan S'ukracharya had his famous daughter Devayani. O 
Child! Thus giving the charge of each Dvipa to each of his sons and 
marrying his daughters to the worthy hands, he took to Viveka 
(discrimination) and adopted the path of Yoga. 


Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narration of 
the family of Priyavrata in the Maha Puranam, S'ri Mad Devi 



Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 5. On The Description Of The 
Receptacle Of Beings And On The Mountains 
And On The Origin Of Rivers 


1-31. S'n Narayana said O Child Narada! Now hear in detail about 
the divisions of the earth into the DvTpas and the Varsas as marked 
out by the Devas. In brief, I describe about them; no one can speak 
about this in details. First, the Jambu Dvipa is one lakh Yoyanas in 
its dimensions. This Jambu DvTpa is round like a lotus. There are 
nine Varsas in it and excepting the Bhadras'va and Ketumala, each 
is nine thousand Yoyanas in its dimensions (i.e., in its diameter or 
circumference?) and there are eight very lofty mountains, in those 
Varsas, forming their boundaries. Of the Varsas, the two Varsas that 
are situated in the North and South, are of the size of a bow 
(segmental); and the four others are elongated in their size. The 
centre of all these Varsas is named Navrita Varsa and its size is 
rectangular. In the centre of this Navarsa is situated the golden 
Sumeru Mountain, the King of all the mountains, one lakh Yoyanas 
high. It forms the pericarp of the lotus earth. The top of this mountain 
is thirty Yoyanas wide. O Child! The sixteen thousand Yoyanas of 
this mountain is under the ground and the eighty four Yoyanas are 
visible outside. In the north of this Navarsa are the three mountains 
the Nilagiri, the SVetagiri and the S'ringavau, forming the boundaries 
respectively of the three Varsas named Ramyaka, Hiranmaya and 
Kuru respectively. These run along from the east and gradually 
extend at their base and towards the salt ocean (Lavana Samudra). 


These three mountains, that form the boundaries, are each two 
thousand Yoyanas wide. The length of each from the east towards 
north is less by one-tenth (1/10) of the above dimensions. Many 
rivers take their source and flow from them. On the south of Navarsa 
three beautiful mountain ranges, named Nisadha, Hemakuta, and 



Himalayas, are situated, extending from the east. They are each one 
Ayuta Yoyanas high. These three mountains form the boundaries 
again of Kimpurusa and Bharata Varsa. 


To the west of Mvrita is situated the mountain called Malyavan and 
to the east are situated the mountains Gandhamadan, Nila, and 
Nisadha, the centres of the highest sublime grandeur and beauty. 
The length and breadth of these the boundary (limiting) mountains 
are each two thousand Yoyanas. Then the mountains Mandara, 
SuparsVak, and Kumuda and others are situated in the Ketumala 
and Bhadras'va Varsas; but these all are reckoned as the Pada 
Parvatas (mountains at the foot) of the Sumeru mountain. The height 
and breadth of each of these is one Ayuta Yoyanas. These form the 
pillars, as it were, of Meru on the four sides. On these mountains, the 
mangoe, the jack, plantain, and the fig trees and various others are 
situated, four hundred (400) Yoyanas wide and eleven hundred 
(1,100) Yoyanas high; they seem to extend to the Heavens and form, 
as it were, the flagstaffs on the top. The roots, bases of these trees 
as well as their branches are wonderfully equally thick and extend to 
enormous distances. On those mountain tops are situated again, the 
four very capacious lakes. Of these, one lake is all milk; the other 
lake is all honey; the third lake is all sugarcane juice and the fourth 
lake is all sweet water. There are, then, again the four very lovely 
gardens named Nandana, Chaitrarath, Vaibhrajaka, and 
Sarvatobhadra, very lovely, enchanting and pleasing to the delicate 
female sex and where the Devas enjoy the wealth and prosperity 
and their other Yogic powers. Here the Devas live always with 
numerous hordes of women and have their free amorous, dealings 
with them, to their heart's contents and they hear the sweet songs 
sung by the Gandharbas and Kinnaras, the Upa Devatas about their 
own glorious deeds. On the top of the Mandara mountain, there are 
the Heavenly mangoe trees eleven hundred Yoyanas high; the sweet 
delicious nectarlike mangoe fruits, very soft and each of the size as 
the summit of a mountain, fall to the ground; and out of their juices of 



a colour of the rising sun, a great river named Arunoda takes her 
origin. Here the Devas always worship the great Devi Bhagavati 
named Aruna, the Destructrix of all sins, the Grantrix of all desires, 
and the Bestower of all fearlessness with various offerings and with 
the lovely water of this Arunoda river, with great devotion. O Child! In 
ancient days, the King of the Daityas worshipped always this Maha 
Maya Aruna Devi (and obtained immense wealth and prosperity). He 
who worships Her becomes cured of all diseases, gets his health 
and other happiness by Her grace. Therefore She is named Adya, 
Maya, Atula, Ananta, Pusti, IsVaramalini, the Destroyer of the 
wicked and the Giver of lustre and beauty and thus remembered on 
this capacious earth. The river Jambunada has come out, as a result 
of Her worship, containing divine gold. 


Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of 
the receptacle of beings and on the mountains and on the origin of 
rivers in the Maha Puranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 
verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 6. On The Rivers And The Mountains 
SuMERU And Others 


1-32. Narayana said O Narada! This Arunoda river that I 
mentioned to you rises from the Mandara mountain and flows by the 
east of llavarsa. The Pavana Deva (the God of wind) takes up the 
nice smell from the bodies of the wives of the Yaksas and 
Gandharbas, etc., and the attendants of the Devi Bhavani and keeps 
the surroundings of the earth there filled with nice smell for ten 
Yoyanas around. Again the rose-apples with their nuts, of the size of 
an elephant, fall down upon the earth from the high peaks of the 
mountain Mandara and break into pieces; the sweet scented juices 
flow down as a river. This is called the Jambu river and this flows by 
the south of llavarsa. The Devi Bhagavati there is pleased with the 
Juice of that rose-apple (Jambu) and is known by the name of 
Jambadini. The Devas, Nagas, and Risis all always worship with 
great devotion, the lotus-feet of the merciful Devi, wishing the 
welfare of all the Jivas. The mere remembering of the name of the 
Devi destroys all the disease, and all the sins of the sinner. 

Therefore the Devas always worship and chant the names of the 
Devi, the Remover of all obstacles. She is installed on both the 
banks of the Jambu river. If men recite Her names Kokilaksi, Karuna, 
Kamapujita, Kathoravigraha, Devapujya, Dhanya, Gavastini and 
worship, so they get their welfare both in this world and in the next. 
With the juice of the Jambu fruit aided by the combination of the wind 
and the rays of the Sun, is created the gold. Out of this are made the 
ornaments for the wives of the Immortals and the Vidyadharas. This 
gold, created by the Daiva, is known by the name of the Jambunada 
gold. The love-stricken Devas make their crowns, waist bands and 
armlets out of this gold for their sweet-hearts. There is a big 
Kadamba tree on the mountain SuparsVa; the five streams of honey 
called Madhu Dhara get out from its cavities and running by the west 
of llavrita Varsa, flow over the land. The Devas drink its waters; and 
their mouths become filled with the sweet fragrance. The air carries 



this sweet fragrant smell to a distance of even one hundred 
Yoyanas. The Dhares'vari Maha Devi dwells there, the Fulfiller of the 
desires of the Bhaktas, highly energetic, of the nature of Kala (the 
Time, the Destroyer), and having large face (Mahanana), faces 
everywhere, worshipped by the Devas and is the presiding Deity of 
the woods and forests all around. The Devi, the Lady of the Devas, 
is to be worshipped by the names “Karala Deha,” “Kalamgi”, 
“Kamakotipravartini”. The great Banyan tree named S'atabala is 
situated on the top of the Kumud mountain. From its trunk many big 
rivers take their origin. These rivers possess such influences as to 
give to the holy persons there, the milk, curd, honey, clarified butter, 
raw sugar, rice, clothing, ornaments, seats, and beddings, etc., 
whatever they desire. Therefore these rivers are called Kamadugh. 
They come gradually down the earth and flow by the north of 
llavarsa. The Bhagavati Minaksi dwell there and is worshipped by 
the Suras and the Asuras alike. That Deity clothed blue, of fearful 
countenance, and ornamented with hairs of blue colour, always fulfil 
the desires of the Devas dwelling in the Heavens. Those that 
worship Her, remember Her or praise Her by the names Atimanya, 
Atipujya, Mattamatanga Gamini, Madanonmadini, Manapriya, 
Manapriyatara, Marabegadhara, Marapujita, Maramadini, 
Mayuravaras'obhadhya, S'ikhivahanagarbhabhu, etc., are honoured 
by the Deity Minalochana Ekangarupini and the ParamesVara and 
get all sorts of happiness. Those drink the clear waters of these 
rivers become free from old age or decay, worry, perspiration, bad 
smell, from any disease, or premature death. They do not suffer 
anything from error, from cold, heat, or rains, or from any paleness in 
their colour. They enjoy extreme happiness as long as they live and 
no dangers come to them. O Child! Now hear the names of the other 
twenty mountains that encircle the Golden Sumeru mountain at its 
base, as if they were the filaments round the pericarp of a flower. 

The first is Kuranga; they come in order Kuraga, Kus'umbha, 
Vikankata, Trikuta, S'is'ira, Patanga, Ruchaka, Nisadha, S'itivasa, 
Kapila, S'amkha, Vaidurya, Charudhi, Hamsa, Risabha, Naga, 
Kalanjara and lastly Narada. The central one is the twentieth. 



Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the rivers and the 
mountains Sumeru and others in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 7. On The Ganges And The Varsas 


1-37. Narayana said Jathara and Devakuta are the two mountains 
situated on the east of Sumeru; their dimensions towards the north 
are eighteen thousand Yoyanas wide and two thousand Yoyanas 
high. On the west of Meru, are situated the two famous lofty 
mountains Pavamana and Pariyatra; their length and height are well 
known. On the south of Meru are situated the two lofty mountains 
Kailasa and Karavira. On the north, again, of the Sumeru mountain, 
are situated the mountains S'ringagiri and Makaragiri. Thus the 
golden Sumeru mountain, shines like the Sun, surrounded by these 
eight mountains. In the centre of the Sumeru, there is a Divine city 
built of the Creator Brahma, ten thousand Yoyanas in dimensions. 
The learned sages that know everything from the highest to the 
lowest, describe that as square in dimensions and all made of gold. 
On the top of the Sumeru, are situated the world known eight golden 
cities, subservient to the Brahmapuri, for the eight Lokapalas. The 
Lords of the four directions, east, west, north and south and of the 
four corners, north-east, north-west, south-west, south-east, occupy 
these. The dimensions of each of these eight cities are two thousand 
Yoyanas and a half. In fact, there are nine cities there including the 
Brahmapuri. Now hear the names of these nine cities in due order. 
The First is Manovati, the second is Amaravati, the third is Tejovati, 
next come in order Samyamani, Krisnangana, S'raddhavati, 
Gandhavati, and Mahodaya, the ninth is Yas'ovati. The Lords of the 
Puris are Brahma, Indra, Fire and the other Dikpalas in due order. 
When Visnu Bhagavan assumed the Tri Vikrama Form in His Dwarf 
Incarnation and went at the sacrifice, to get back the Kingdom of the 
Heavens from the demon Vali, there was created one hole or cavity 
over this Brahmanda Kataha (skull) by the nails of the toes of that 
foot that went up towards his left; and through that cavity, the famous 
river Bhagavati Ganga flowed on the top of those heavenly 
Kingdoms, the clear waters of which are ever ready to destroy the 
sins of the whole people. For this reason. She is known in the three 



Lokas as the Visnupadi manifested. This took place long long ago, 
many thousand Yugas ago, a period difficult to determine. The 
Ganges fell first on the top of the Indra's Heavens, near the place 
called Visnudhama, known in the three worlds. Here the pure-souled 
Dhruva, the son of Uttanapada, observed within his heart the lotus- 
feet of Sri Visnu Bhagavan and exists still there taking refuge on that 
immoveable position. There the high-souled Seven Risis, knowing 
the highest purifying influence of the Ganges, circumambulate the 
river, wishing for the welfare of all the Lokas. This is the great place 
where one gets success, and final liberation, the success-giving 
place of the ascetics and where the Munis with clots of hairs on their 
heads daily take their dip in the Ganges with the greatest pleasure 
and admiration. The Ganges flows thence from the Dhruva Mandala, 
the abode of Visnu, in Kotis and Kotis of Divine Channels, 
interspersed with many Vimanas or carriages, deluges the Chandra 
Mandala (the Moon Sphere), comes gradually to the Brahma Loka. 
Here She is divided into the four channels, Sita, Alakananda, 

Bhadra, and Chaturbhadra and irrigating many countries, mountains, 
and forests ultimately falls in the oceans. The Sita, the famous 
Dhara, purifying all, while falling down from the Brahmaloka, passes 
round the mountains that form as it were the filaments of the flower¬ 
like Sumeru mountain, and falls on the top of the Gandhamadana 
range. Thence She, worshipped by the Devas, irrigates the 
Bhadras'vavarsa and falls eastward into the salt ocean. The second 
Dhara (stream), named Chaksu, getting out of the Malyavan range, 
gradually gains strength and assumes great force and flows by 
Ketumalavarsa to the western ocean. The third Dhara (stream), the 
very pure Alakananda, getting out of the Brahma Loka, passes 
through the Girikuta mountain and other forests, falls to Hemakuta; 
next She flows through the Bharata Varsa and meets with the 
southern ocean. No words can describe the glory and the purifying 
effect of this river; suffice it to say that those who march out to bathe 
in this river get at each of their steps, the fruits of doing the great 
sacrifices, Rajasuya and AsVamedha, etc. The fourth Dhara of the 
Trailokyapavani Ganga Devi, named Bhadra, falling from the 
mountain S'ringavan, become swift and capacious, flows by the 



Northern Kuru country and satisfying the people there flows down 
into the ocean. Many other rivers, getting out from the mountains, 
Meru, Mandara and others, flow through the various Varsas or 
continents, but of all the Varsas, continents, this Bharata Varsa is 
called the Karma Ksettra (or the field of actions). The other eight 
Varsas, though on earth, give the pleasures of the Heavens. The 
reason for this is that when the period of the persons’ enjoyments in 
the Heavens cease, they come and take their birth in the one or 
other of these eight Varsas. The people here live for ten thousand 
years; their body is hard like thunderbolt and all are endowed with 
powers of Ayuta elephants. No one is satisfied with a little of the 
pleasures of sexes; so all men live happily with their wives, etc. It is 
not that the males alone are so happy; the females also are full of 
youth throughout their lives and become pregnant, when they are 
less than one year old. In short, the inhabitants of the Varsas enjoy 
for ever as the persons of Treta Yuga do. 


Hear ends the Seventh Chapter of the Eighth Book on the story of 
the Ganges and the continents in Sri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the 
Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 8. On The Description Oe Ilavrita 


1-11. Narayana said In those Varsas, Visnu and the other Devas 
used to worship always the Great Devi with Japann and meditation 
and to chant hymns to Her. The forests there are ornamented with all 
sorts of fruits, flowers and leaves, in all the seasons. In those 
excellent forests, and on the mountains, in those Varsas and on the 
clear waters interspersed with full blewn lotuses and S'arasas 
(cranes) and in those countries where varieties of mountain trees are 
standing and where varieties of birds frequent and echo all around, 
the people play in waters and engage themselves with a great many 
pleasant occupations; and the beautiful women, as well, roam there 
with the knitting of their eyebrows. The people there enjoy as they 
like, surrounded by young women; Narayana, the Adipurusa 
Bhagavan Himself, worships the Devi there, to shew his extreme 
grace to all the inhabitants of the Navavarsa. The people also 
worship the Deity. By worshipping the Devi only, the Bhagavan 
remains there in Samadhi, surrounded with Aniruddha and his other 
Vyuhachatustaya (the four forms). But in Ilavrita Varsa, the 
Bhagavan Rudra, originated from the eye-brows of Brahma, resides 
only with women. No other person can enter there; for the Bhavani, 
the S'akti of Rudra has cursed that any male entering there would be 
transformed into a female. The Lord of Bhavani, surrounded by 
innumerable women, remains here engaged in the worship of the 
unmanifested unborn Bhagavan Samkarsana. For the good of 
humanity, with intense meditation. He worships His Own Turiya Form 
of the nature of Tamas, thus 


12-19. S'ri Bhagavana said “Obeisance to Thee! the Bhagavan, 
the Great Purusa, endowed with all the qualities (the principal six 
AisVaryas or prosperities), the Ananta (the Infinite) and to the 
Unmanifested I We worship Thee, Whose lotus feet are the refuge of 
all. Thou art the great storehouse of all the superhuman powers and 



the divine faculties of omnipotence, etc. Thou art always present to 
the Bhaktas. Thou art creating all these beings. Thou givest Moksa 
to the Bhaktas and destroyest their attachment to the world and 
Thou bindest Thy non-devotees in bondage to this world. Thou art 
the Lord. We worship Thee. We are entirely under the control of the 
passions, anger, etc., and our minds are always attached to the 
senses; but though Thou art always looking at this world for its 
creation, etc.. Thy mind is not a bit attached to it. So who will not turn 
to Thee, desirous to conquer his self. Thou art appearing by Thy 
Maya as one whose sight is ignorant; Thou lookest dreadful with Thy 
eyes reddened with the drink of Madhu (wine). By the touch of Thy 
feet, the mental faculties are very much enchanted; hence the 
women folk of the Nagas cannot in any way worship Thee, out of 
bashfulness. The Risis say that though Thou art the Only One to 
create, preserve and destroy, yet Thou art quite unconcerned with 
them. Thou art Infinite and Thou hast innumerable heads. This vast 
universe is like the mustard seed resting somewhere on one of these 
heads, which Thou canst not feel even. The Mahat Tattva is Thy 
body manifested first. It is built of Sattva, Raja and Tamo Gunas. 
Brahma has come out of this and I again have sprung from this 
Brahma and am nurtured by the Sattva and the other Gunas and 
with the help of the Teja, created these elements and the senses. 
These Mahat Tattvas and we all are controlled by Thy Extraordinary 
Form. Thou hast kept us in our respective places by Thy Kriya S'akti 
as birds are kept duly by the strings through them. Mahat Tattva, 
Ahamkara, and the Devas, elements and the senses, before 
mentioned all united create this Universe by Thy Grace. Thy creation 
is very big and grand; for this reason the gross thinkers, deluded by 
Thy power, never understand it. This Maya is the only means to get 
the Samsara Nivritti, Moksa, the real Goal of man: and this Maya, 
again involves them in the Karma entanglements, very hard to get 
through. Coming in and going out, both of these are Thy forms; so 
we bow down to Thee. 



20-23. Narayana said Thus the Bhagavan Rudra, with His Own 
persons in llavrita Varsa used to worship the Devi and the 
Sankarsana, the Controller of all the Lokas. The son of Dharma, well 
known by the name of Bhadras'rava and all the persons born of his 
family and his attendants, worship thus the Devi. This form is well 
known to all by the name of Hayagriva and worshipped thus. All the 
persons there worship Him with the intense meditation and Samadhi 
and realise Him thoroughly. Then they praise Him, according to due 
customs and get the thorough Siddhis (success in getting 
extraordinary powers). 


24-29. The Bhadras'ravas said Obeisance to Thee, the 
Bhagavan, the Incarnate of Virtue, and to Him who destroys 
completely the desires, attachments, etc., to worldly objects! Ho! 

How wonderful are the feats of the Bhagavan! Death always 
destroys all, but people, seeing this, seem not to see this. Seeing 
that the son meets with death, the father desires to live long not for a 
virtuous purpose but for sense enjoyments, what is called Vikarma. 
Those who are skilled in Jhana and Vijhana say that this Universe 
that is seen is very transient. Moreover those Pundits who are 
endowed with much Jhana, see vividly the transitoriness of this 
Universe. Still, O Unborn One! When practically they come to deal 
with this, they all become overpowered with the influence of Maya. 

So Thy Pastime (Lila) is wonderfully variegated. (Instead of spending 
our time uselessly in discussing on S'astras) we bow down to Thee, 
and Thee alone. Thou art the Self-manifest Chaitanya. Thou are not 
the object to be covered by Maya. Thou dost not do anything in the 
sort of creation, etc. Thou remainest simply as the Witness thereof. 
Sill the Vedas declare that Thou createst, preservest and destroyest 
the Universe. It is quite reasonable and nothing to be wondered at. 
Thou art the Atman of all. When the Pralaya (the time of great 
dissolution) comes, the Vedas were stolen by the Daityas and taken 
to the nether regions, the Rasatala. Thou, in the form of Hayagriva 
(Horse-faced), rescued the Vedas and gave them to the Grandsire 



Brahma who was very eager to get them back and understand their 
meanings. Thou art the true Sankalap (resolve); we bow down to 
Thee. Thus the Bhadras'ravas praise the Haiyagriva form of Hah 
and sing the glorious deeds of Him. He who reads these narratives 
of the Maha Purusa (the high-souled personage) or he who makes 
others hear these things, both of them, quitting their sinful bodies, go 
to the Devi Loka. 


Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description 
of llavrita in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 
verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 9. On The Narration Of The Division Of 
The Continents 


1-2. Narayana said In Harivarsa, the Bhagavan Hari is shining 
splendid as a Yogi in the form of Narasimha. The Maha Bhagavat 
(most devoted) Prahlada, who knows the attributes of God worships 
and chants hymns with his whole hearted devotion, seeing that 
beautiful form, gladdening to all the people. 


3-11. Prahlada spoke I bow down to Thee, the Bhagavan 
Nrisingha Deva. Thou art the Light of all Lights. Thy big teeth are like 
thunderbolts. Let Thee manifest in Thy most terrible form. Let Thee 
destroy the desires of the people to do Karma and let Thou devour 
the great Ignorance (Ajhana) the Moha (delusion) of the people. 

Thou art the receptacle of the Sattva, Raja and Tamo Gunas. Let 
myself be always free from any fear by Thy Grace. “Om Khraum!” 

Let this whole world rest completely in peace and happiness. Let the 
cheats quit their guiles and be pure and simple. Let all the people 
quit completely their animosities towards each other and think of 
their welfare. Let all the people be free from making injuries to others 
and be peaceful; and let them have their control over their passions. 
Let our mind be completely free from desires and rest entirely and 
devotedly to Thy lotus-feet. Let us not be attached to sons, wives, 
wealth, house or to any other worldly objects. If there be any 
attachment, let it be to the objects dear to the Bhagavan. He who 
barely sustains his body and soul and controls himself completely, 
success is very near to him; not so to the persons that are attached 
to the senses. The dirt of the mind, that is not washed away by 
bathing in the Ganges or by taking recourse to the Tirthas, etc., is 
removed by the company of the devotees to the God and by their 
influence, hearing, thinking, and meditating on the attributes of the 
Bhagavan. So who is there that does not serve the Bhagavan! He 
who has got Niskama Bhakti (devotion without regard to any fruits 



thereof) to the Bhagavan, to him come always the Devata, Dharma 
and Jhana and other higher qualities. But he who indulges in various 
mental phantasms, without any Bhakti to the Bhagavan, he follows 
the worldly happiness that is certainly to be hated and never he gets 
Vairagyan and other higher qualities. As water is life to the fish, so 
the Bhagavan Hah is the self of all embodied beings and so He is to 
be specially prayed for. So if a high-souled person be attached to 
household happiness, without thinking of God, then his greatness 
dwindles into a trifling insignificance like the ordinary pleasures of 
man and woman when they are full of youth. So leave, at once, the 
home that is the source of Birth and Death and leave Trisna (thirst, 
desire), clinging to life, low-spiritedness, name, and fame, egoism, 
shame, fear, poverty and loss of one's honour and worship the 
Lotus-Feet of the Bhagavan Nrisingha Deva and be entirely fearless. 
Thus Prahlada, the Lord of the Daityas, daily worships devotedly the 
Bhagavan Nrisingha, resplendent in his lotus heart, the death blow, 
the lion to all the elephant sins. In the Ketumala Varsa, the 
Bhagavan Narayana is reigning in the form of the Kama Deva, the 
God of Love. The people there always worship Him. The daughter of 
Ocean, the Indira Devi, who confers honour and glory to the 
Mahatmas, is the presiding Deity of the Varsa. She always worships 
the Kama Deva with the following verses 


12-18. The Laksmi Devi spoke “Om, Hram, Hrim, Hrum, Om 
name Bhagavate Hrisikesaya! Thou art the Bhagavan of the nature 
of Om. Thou are the Director, the Lord of the senses: Thy Atman is 
the Highest and the Receptacle of all the good things. All the Karma 
Vrittis, all the Jhana Vrittis, and effort and resolution and other 
faculties of the mind, act in their respective channels by Thy looking 
and by their being constantly practised in Thee. And the elements 
over which they get their masteries are subservient to Thy Laws. The 
mind and the other eleven Indriyas, and touch, taste and other five 
senses are but Thy parts. All the rites and ceremonies observed in 
the Vedas are found in Thee. Thou art the infinite store of all the 



foodings of the Jivas. From Thee flows the Paramananda, the 
Highest Bliss. Thou art All, Thou art the Substance, Purity incarnate; 
Thou art the Energy, the Strength manifest in all. Thou art the Finish 
of all the happiness and Thou art the Only One Substance, that can 
be desired by the people. So obeisance to Thee! This Thy Lordship 
is not dependent on any other body. The women that know Thee, the 
Lord of all and worship other bodies for their husbands, those 
husbands can never save them, their lives, their wealth, progeny or 
other dear things as those are controlled by Kala (Time) and Karma. 
So they cannot be termed husbands at all; Thou art the Real 
Husband; and no other. For Thou art naturally fearless and Thou 
protectest in every way the persons that become afraid. Thou art the 
Lord of all wealth; so no other is superior to Thee. How can then, 
they be independent whose happiness depends on others! The lady 
that desires to worship Thy lotus feet only and becomes subservient 
to no others, she attains all the desires. Again the lady who, desiring 
other desires than to get Thee, does not worship Thy lotus-feet. 

Thou fulfillest the desires of her too. But, O Bhagavan! When the 
period of enjoyment of these things ceases and when the objects of 
these enjoyments are destroyed, then she repents much due to the 
loss of those things. Brahma, Mahadeva, the Suras and the Asuras 
practise hard Tapasyas to get me, impelled by their desires to attain 
the objects of sense enjoyments; but he only really gets me who 
worships and takes refuge of Thy lotus feet only, for my heart is 
entirely attached to Thee. So, O Achyuta! Kindly shew Thy Grace 
and put, on my head. Thy lotus palm, praised by the universal 
people that Thou placest on Thy Bhaktas. O Bhagavan! That Thou 
takest me in Thy Bosom is a sign of Thy Grace. No one can fathom 
the deeds of Thee, the Only Controller of all. Thus the Prajapati and 
the Lords of that Varsa, worship the Bhagavan, the Friend of all, with 
a view to attain their respective desires and Siddhis. In Ramyak 
Varsa, the Matsya form of the Bhagavan is set up and consecrated. 
The Suras and the Asuras worship Him. The highly intelligent Manu 
always chant hymns to that Excellent Form thus “Obeisance to 
Him who is the Life of all, the Essence and Strength of all, to that 



Great Fish Form, the Body Incarnate of Sattva Guna, who is of the 
nature of Om and Bliss.” 


19-23. Thou art the Lord of all the Lokapalas and of the form of the 
Vedas. Thou art within and without all this universe, moving and non¬ 
moving; still all the beings are unable to see Thy form. As the people 
bring under their control the wooden dolls, so Thou controllest the 
universe by the rules and prohibitions under the names of the 
Brahmanas, etc. Thou art the God. The Lokapalas, being overcome 
by the fever of jealousy and pride, become quite unable, either 
individually or collectively, to quit their jealousies and to protect the 
tripeds, quadrupeds, reptiles and snakes; so Thou art the God. Thou 
hadst upheld this earth along with me and with the medicinal plants 
and creepers; and Thou shewedest the highest luminous light in the 
great ocean, at the time of Pralaya, tossed with surging waves and 
didst roam there. Thou art the Self of all the beings in the universe. 
So we bow down to Thee. Thus the Manu, the best of the mortal 
beings, used to praise the Bhagavan, who took His incarnation in the 
shape of the Fish, the Remover of all doubts. Manu, the foremost of 
the Bhagavatas (the devotees) is reigning there in the service of the 
Fish Incarnation of the Bhagavan, with intense meditation and 
expurging all sins and with great devotion. 


Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narration of 
the division of the continents in the Maha Puranam S'ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 10. On The Description Of Bhuvanakosa 


1-7. Narayana said In Hiranmaya Varsa, the Bhagavan is 
remaining in the form of Kurma, the Tortoise, as the Lord of Yoga. He 
is thus praised and worshipped by Aryama, the Ruler of the Piths. 
Aryama said Om name Bhagavate Akuparaya; (King of tortoises, 
sustaining the world) Obeisance to Thee, the Lord of all prosperities, 
in the form of Tortoise (Kurma); Thou art built of Sattva Guna 
Incarnate; no one can make out where Thou dost dwell; Thou art not 
encompassed by Time; (Thou art in the Present, Past and Future); 
so obeisance to Thee. Thou dost pervade all things; we bow down to 
Thee. All are established in Thee; so obeisance to Thee. By Thy 
extraordinary Maya (power) Thou hast made manifest this universe 
that is seen. This is Thy Form. It is by no means distinct from Thee. 
This Thy Form is seen in so many forms. So the true reality being 
not known like the mirage, these cannot be counted really speaking, 
what is Thy form, no one can definitely say. The beings generated by 
heat and moisture (said of insects and worms), those that are born of 
eggs, from wombs and the plants and other moving, non-moving 
beings, the Devas, Risis, Piths, Bhutas, and these senses; the sky, 
the heavens, earth, mountains, rivers, oceans, islands, planets, and 
stars all these art Thou and Thou alone. Thy name, form, and 
appearance, are as varied; and their numbers cannot be counted. 
Still, Kapila and others have determined their numbers, by the 
knowledge of which Thou canst become visible to the Eye of 
Knowledge. Thy form and nature are determined by these Sankhyas 
ascertained by Kapila. So we bow down to Thee. Thus Aryama, and 
the other rulers of the Varsa all united sing, praise, and worship the 
Bhagavan Kurma Deva, the Controller of all and the Generator of all. 
All Hail to Thee! The Bhagavan Yajha Purusa is manifest in Uttara 
Kuru Mandala in the form of Adi Varaha. The Earth Herself worships 
Him always. The Goddess Earth praises Hah, the Yajha Varaha, the 
Destroyer of the Daityas and worships duly that Deva, with Her heart 



lotus, naturally devoted, rendered more devoted by Her attachment 
to the Lord. 


8-13. The Goddess Earth spoke “Om Name Bhagavate 
Mantratattva Lingaya Yajha Kratave” I bow down to the Bhagavan, 
the Great Boar; Thou art Om; Thy real form and nature can be 
known by only the Mantra and Tattva. Thou art Yajha and Kratu 
(sacrifice) incarnate; therefore all the great sacrifices are Thy limbs. 
Thou art the Three Yugas (there being no Yajha in the Satya Yuga); 
Thou art that which is left as Pure, after doing Karma (so as to be fit 
for performing Yajhas). So obeisance to Thee. The sages, versed in 
Jhana and Vijhana say that Thou art hidden in the body and in the 
senses as fire is hidden in the wood. So they, ardent to see Thee, 
seek for Thee with a discriminative and dispassionate mind, judging 
Karmas and their fruits; and then Thy Nature is revealed, I bow down 
to Thee, Thy Form can be ascertained by the cause and effect of the 
Karmas and other Gunas of Maya, sense objects, senses, actions, 
Devas, body, time, Ahamkara and others. I bow down to Thee, 

Those can see thus Thy form, whose mind is firmly established in 
Thee, by their discrimination and Yama, Niyama, etc., and who have 
abandoned all sorts of fickleness and changeability of their tempers. 
So obeisance to Thee. As iron goes attracted towards the magnet, 
so Maya dances before Thee with Her Gunas and Her works in the 
way of the creation, preservation and destruction of this universe; but 
Thou art totally indifferent to it. For the sake of the Jivas (embodied 
souls), desire comes to Thee, though Thou art not quite willing! Thou 
art the Witness of the Jivas and their Adrista (the Fate). I bow down 
to Thee. The Yajha Varaha, the Cause of this universe, has lifted me 
up from the Rasatala and placing me on His big tusks, has come out 
from the Pralaya, the great ocean, after overpowering in battle His 
enemy, the powerful Daitya, like an elephant, I bow down to that 
Controller of all, to Thee. In the Kimpurusa Varsa, the Bhagavan Adi 
Purusa (the Prime Man), the Self-manifest, and the Lord of all, is 



residing in the form of Rama, the son of Das'aratha and the Joy of 
the heart of Sita Devi. 


14-18. S'ri Hanumana thus spoke:- “Om name Bhagavate Uttama 
Slokaya” I bow down to the Bhagavan, who art sung by the excellent 
verses, purifying all. I bow down to Thee, the incarnate of modesty, 
good temper, vow and good signs; Thy mind is always under control; 
Thou dost imitate, as Thy nature is good, the actions of all persons; 
obeisance to Thee. Thou art the Supreme Place to award praise. 
Obeisance to Thee. Thou art Brahmanya Deva (in the creation of the 
universe), the high souled Person Mahapurusa. Thou gettest the 
First Share, above all the persons! Thou art the One Tattva and That 
Alone, as established in the Vedanta. The holy realisation is the only 
guide to it. This Tattva dominates over all the Gunas. It can never be 
an object. Only by pure intellect. It can be realised. There is no 
name, no form of It. It is always beyond the pale of Ahamkara. I take 
refuge to this Tattva, the most Peaceful, with my body and mind. Thy 
incarnation in human shape in this world is not simply for killing 
Ravana but for giving instructions to the mortals. The contact with 
woman and the suffering thereof are very difficult to avoid; to give 
this lesson also He took this incarnation. He Who is merged in 
enjoying the Supreme Bliss of His Own Nature and He Who is the 
Lord of all, how can He suffer miseries in the bereavement of Sita. 

He is the best friend and the very Atman of those who have 
conquered their minds and senses. Especially He is the receptacle 
of all the qualities and is in enjoyment of other divine extraordinary 
powers. So He is not attached to the worldly objects. How can the 
delusion due to His wife come and darken Him? and why will He 
send Laksmana in exile? He is the Mahat Tattva and the Parama 
Purusa; so good birth, beauty, intelligence, oratory or good form, 
nothing can please Him. Bhakti (devotion) can only attract Him. If 
that be not the case, then why will He, the elder of Laksmana, the 
Bhagavan, the son of Das'aratha make friendship with us, the 
wanderers of the forest and who are by nature, not the receptacles 



of any beauty, etc. So everyone, be he a Sura or Asura, man, or not 
man, should worship the Hah manifest in Rama, in the human body 
with all his heart. He is so good that if anybody worships Him even to 
a very small extent. He always considers it to be much; what more 
can be said than this that He took all the inhabitants of Kos'ala to 
Heaven! 


19-20. Narayana said Thus Hanuman, the best of monkeys, sings 
the praises and worships duly in Kimpurusa Varsa, the lotus-eyed 
Rama, truthful, and determined in his vows. He who hears this 
wonderful description of Rama, is freed of all his sins and goes with 
his body pure to the abode of Rama. 


Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description 
of Bhuvanakosa in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 
18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 11. On The Description Of The 
Continents And Of Bharatavarsa 


1. Narayana said In this Bharatavarsa (India) I am present, as the 
First of all, in the shape of the Man, at present existing before you. 
Let you praise Me incessantly thus:-- 


2-28. Narada said Thou art the Bhagavan. Obeisance to Thee. 
Thou art completely free from attachment and envy and Thou art the 
incarnate of Dharma, Jhana and Vairagyam (Dispassion). No trace 
of Ahamkara (egoism) is in Thee. Obeisance to Thee. Thou hast 
nothing of wealth; Thou art the foremost of the family of Risis; Thou 
art Nara Narayana. Thou art the Parama Hamsa (the highest class 
of ascetics and renouncers of the world). Thou art the Highest Guru; 
Thou art happy with Thyself and the Leader of all; I bow down to 
Thee. Thou art the Lord of all, yet not mixed in the work of creation, 
etc. Though Thou residest in every embodied being, yet no hunger 
and thirst can press Thee; though Thou art the Witness, yet Thy 
sight is not at all disturbed by the proximity. Thou art not at all 
connected and no desires can come to Thee; Thou art the Witness. 
So I bow down to Thee. This path of Yoga had come out of Thee and 
it is established in Thee. The Bhagavan Hiranyagarbha has given 
instructions on the cleverness in Yoga, thus That leaving aside the 
egoism of this body, the seat of all evils, the people at last will take 
resort to the path of Bhakti and set their minds on Thee, Who art 
beyond the pale of the three Gunas. If, like the ignorant persons very 
much attached to this world as well as the next, the wise pass their 
time in the thoughts of their sons, wives, and riches and ultimately 
become very much pained on the destruction of this ugly body, 
persons, versed in Jhana and Vijhana be afraid in the end of their 
separation fron the body, then their study of the S'astras and all their 
labours become labours merely, without any effect. When such a 
thing occurs to the learned, then O Thou, the Subduer of the 



knowledge of senses! Thou Thyself givest us instructions that we 
may easily think of Thee. Then this terrible clinging to this ugly body 
that Thy Maya brings about and which it is very difficult to discard by 
other means, will leave us quickly. Narada, the seer of all, well 
qualified with the knowledge of all the Tattvas, the foremost of the 
Munis, thus worships it and praises Narayana Who is unaffected by 
any of the Upadhis and who corresponds to Nitya and Leela (both 
Permanent and the Pastime-making). O Devarsi! I now describe to 
you the rivers and mountains in Bharatvarsa. Hear attentively. 
Malaya, Mangalaprastha, Mainaka, Chitrakuta, Risabha, Kutaka, 
Kolia, Sahya, Devagiri, Risyamuka, S'ris'aila, Vyankata, Mahendra, 
Varidhara, Vindhya, S'uktiman, Riksa, Pariyatra, Drona, Chitrakuta, 
Gobardhana, Raivataka, Kakubha, Nila, Gaurmukha, Indrakila, 
Kamagiri and many other mountains, that cannot be numbered. 

Great merits accrue on seeing these mountains. Hundreds and 
thousands of rivers issue from these mountains. Drinking their 
waters, bathing in them and visiting them and singing their praises 
completely destroy the sins of mind, word and body. The names of 
the rivers are Tamraparni, Chandravas'a, Kritamala, Vatodaka, 
Vaihayasi, Kaveri, Vena, Payasvini, Tungabhadra, Krisnavena, 
S'arkara, Vartaka, Godavari, Bhimarathi, Nirbindhya, Payosnika, 
Tapi, Reva, Surasa, Narmada, Sarasvati, Charmanvati, and the 
Indus, Andha, and Sone, Risikulya, Trisama, Vedasmriti, Mahanadi, 
Kaus'iki, Yamuna, Mandakini, Drisadvati, Gomati, Sarayu, Oghavati, 
Saptavati, Susama, S'atadru, Chandrabhaga, Marudbridha, Vitasta, 
Asikni and Vis'va and many other rivers. Those persons that take 
their births in this Varsa enjoy the (Divya) Divine, human, and the 
lower enjoyments, as the effects of their Karmas, in accordance with 
their Sattvik, Rajasik, and Tamasik qualities. All the inhabitants of 
this Varsa take their Sannyasa, Vanaprasthas, etc., in accordance 
with the rules of their Varnas (castes) respectively and enjoy 
beatitudes as dictated (in their S'astras). The Vedavadis (the 
propounders of the Vedas), the Risis, and the Devas declare that this 
Varsa is superior to all the other Varsas as the Grace of God is easily 
obtained here. They say: Oh! What an amount of good works, the 
inhabitants of Bharata Varsa did in their previous lives, that by their 



influence, the Bhagavan Hah has become pleased with them without 
their having any Sadhanas (good Yogic practices). Therefore we 
also desire to have our births there, for there if we be born amidst 
the persons there, we would be able serve Hah, Mukunda in every 
way. What will severe austerities, gifts, sacrifices, and practising 
vows avail us? Even if we go to Heaven, what benefit we will derive 
there? Then we would never be able to bring our mind to the lotus- 
feet of the Bhagavan Narayana. Our tastes for sense enjoyments 
would increase and we would be wholly deprived of Bhagavan. Far 
better it is to be born in this Bharata Varsa as short-lived persons, 
than to acquire other places where one can live up to the period of 
Kalpa and then be reborn. For the intelligent people of Bharata, 
getting this mortal coil can within a short period devote themselves to 
the Bhagavan Hari and be free from rebirth. That place is never to be 
visited and served, even if that be Svarga Loka where the nectar-like 
ocean of the sayings of Vaikuntha are not heard; where there are no 
assemblages of saints who take refuge of the Lotus feet of 
Bhagavan; where the great sacrifices and festivities of the Bhagavan 
Visnu are not celebrated. Those persons, that do not try for Moksa, 
when they get human births and when they possess Jhana, Kriya 
(methods of doing sacrifices and other works for the help of Jhana) 
and Dravya (materials for those sacrifices), are certainly like beasts 
and get themselves repeatedly entanged into bondages. The people 
of Bharata Varsa offer oblations to Indra and other deities, invoking 
their names separately, with proper rules (Vidhis), mantras, and 
purodasas (a sacrificial oblation made of ground rice and offered in 
Kapalas or vessels); but the All sufficient Bhagavan Hari, the Giver 
of blessings accepts those very gladly. 


True that He grants unto the people what they ask from Him; but He 
hardly gives anybody the Paramartha, the Highest Goal. The reason 
being that the people ask again and again after receiving what they 
had asked. So He gives of Himself His own lotus-feet to those who, 
having abandoned all their desires, worship Him and Him only with 



the idea of love. (1) Thus We are living very happily in the 
Heavens as the fruit of the Istapurta that we performed fully; yet we 
want that we may also be born in Bharata Varsa with our memory all 
renewed with the thought of the Bhagavan Hah. The Bhagavan 
residing in this Bharatvarsa, awards the highest welfare to its 
inhabitants. 


29-32. Narayana said O Devarsi! Thus the Devas of the Heavens, 
the Siddhas, the Highest Risis, sing the excellent merits of this 
Bharatavarsa. There are the eight Upadvipas of this JambudvTpa 
When the sons of the King Sagara were searching for the footprints 
of the stolen horse (for AsVamedha sacrifice), they found these 
Upadvipas; so it is definitely stated. The names of out and made 
these are Svarnaprastha, Chandras'ukra, Avartana, Ramanaka, 
Mandaropakhya, Harina, Panchajanya, and Ceylon. The length and 
breadth of JambudvTpa have been described; now the other six 
DvTpas, Plaksa and others will be described. Hear. 


Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Eighth Book on the 
description of the continents and of Bharatavarsa in the 
Mahapuranam, S'rT Mad DevT Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 12. On The Narration Of Plaksa, 
S’almala And Kus’a DvIpas 


1-37. Narayana said The Jambudvipa has been described, how it 
is and what is its width. It is surrounded on all sides by the salt 
ocean. As Meru is surrounded by Jambudvipa, so the salt ocean is 
surrounded by Plaksadvipa, twice its size. As the ditch is surrounded 
by gardens, so the salt ocean is surrounded by gardens. As the 
Jambu tree exists in Jambudvipa, so the Plaksa tree exists in the 
Plaksa DvTpa and of the same size. The name Plaksa Dvipa is 
derived from the name of this Plaksa tree. This tree is of a golden 
colour. Fire exists at its bottom with form incarnate. This is, named 
Saptajihva. The Ruler of this island is Idhmajihva, the son of 
Priyavrata. He divided his island into the seven Varsas and 
distributed them, to each of his seven sons and he himself took 
refuge of the path of Yoga, so much liked by the Knowers of Self and 
he got the Bhagavan Vasudeva. The names of those seven DvTpas 
are S'iva, Yavas, Subhadra, Santi, Ksema, Amrita, and Abhaya. 
Seven rivers and seven mountains exist respectively in the seven 
islands. The rivers are Aruna, Nrimna, Angirasi, Savitri, 
Suprabhatika, Ritambhara, and Satyambhara. The names of the 
mountains are Manikuta, Vajrakuta, Indrasena, Jyotismana, 

Suparna, Hiranyasthiva, and Meghamala. The seeing and drinking 
the waters of these rivers take away all sins and all darkness due to 
ignorance. The four castes live here, Hamsa, Patanga, Urdhayana, 
and Satyanga, corresponding to the four castes Brahmana, etc. The 
inhabitants of this Plaksa DvTpa live for one thousand years and all 
are of variegated wonderful appearances. They follow the customs 
and usages dictated by the Vedas and worship the God Sun for the 
attainment of Heaven. The mantra by which the worship is done is 
this We take refuge unto that Sun, Who is the Body Manifest of 
the Ancient Person Visnu and Who is the Ordainer of Satya (Truth), 
Rita (Straight forwardness), Brahma, Amrita (Immortality) and Mrityu 
(Death); O Narada! All the persons here live long, of vigorous 



senses, energetic, powerful, intelligent, enthusiasts, and valorous; 
everyone gets extraordinary powers of themselves. Next to this 
Plaksa Dvipa is the Ikshu Ocean. This Iksu Sagara surrounds the 
Plaksa Dvipa. Next comes S'almala Dvipa. It is twice as large as 
Plaksa. This Dvipa is surrounded by Surasagara (the ocean of wine). 
There is a tree named S'almali in this island, which is as large as the 
Plaksa tree. The high-souled Garuda resides on that tree, Yajhavahu 
is the Ruler of this place. He was born of Priyavrata; he divided his 
Varsa into the seven parts and distributed each of them to his seven 
sons respectively. Now hear the names of these Varsas 
Surochana, Saumanasya, Ramana, Deva Varsa, Paribhadra, 
Apyayana, and Vijhata. Seven mountains and seven rivers exist 
there respectively. The names of the mountains are Sarasa, 
S'atas'ringa, Varna Deva, Kandaka, Kumuda, Puspavarsa, and 
Sahasra-S'ruti. Now hear the names of the rivers. Anumati, Sinibali, 
Sarasvati, Kuhu, Rajani, Nanda, and Raka; these are the seven 
rivers. The people are divided into the four castes S'rutadhara, 
Viryadhara, Vasundhara, Isundhara. These correspond to the 
Brahmanas, etc. They worship the Bhagavan Moon, the Controller of 
all and the Creator of all the Vedas. They offer food duly in the black 
and white fortnight to their Piths. The mantra for their worship is 
“Let Soma, the King of all, be pleased.” O Narada! Next to 
Surasagara is Kus'advipa, surrounded by Ghritasagara (the ocean of 
clarified butter). Its dimensions are twice as large. Here are blades of 
Kus'a grass, of a very resplendent colour. The name of the Dvipa is 
from this Kus'astamba. This bundle of Kus'a, illumines all the 
quarters with their gentle rays. The Ruler of the Dvipa is Hiranyareta, 
the son of Priyavrata. He divided the Dvipa into seven parts and 
distributed each of them to each of his seven sons respectively. The 
names of the seven sons are Vasu, Vasudana, Dhridharuchi, 
Nabhigupta, Stutyavrata, Vivikta, and Bhamadevaka. There are 
seven mountains forming the seven boundaries and so are the 
seven rivers. Hear the names of these. The names of the mountains 
are Chakra, Chatuhs'ringa, Kapila, Chitre Devanika, Kuta, 
Urdharoma and Dravina. The names of the rivers are Rasakulya, 
Madhukulya, Mitravinda, S'rutavinda, Devagarbha, Ghritachyut, and 



Mantramalika. The inhabitants of the Kus'advipa drink the waters of 
these rivers. There are the four castes here Kus'ala, Kovida, 
Abhiyukta, and Kulaka corresponding to the Brahmanas, etc. They 
are all powerful like Indra and the other chief Devas; and all of them 
are omniscient. They worship the Fire God and perform various good 
works in honour of Him. Their mantra is this O Fire! Thou earnest 
the oblations direct to Para Brahma. In the sacrifices of the Devas, 
Thou worshippest that Personal God and offerest to Him whatever 
are given in oblations, mentioning the respective limbs of His Body. 
Thus the inhabitants of that DvTpa worship the Fire God. 


Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narration of 
Plaksa, S'almala, and Kus'a Dvipas in the Mahapuranam, S'ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 13. On The Description Of The 
Remaining DvIpas 


1. Narada said Thou, the Knower of everything! Describe about 
the remaining Dvipas, knowing which we will be highly delighted. 


2-36. Narayana spoke thus The very vast Ghrita Sagara (the 
ocean of clarified butter) is encircling the Kus’a DvTpa. Next to it is 
the Krauncha DvTpa. It is twice as large as Kus’a. The KsTra Sagara 
(the ocean of milk) is surrounding this DvTpa. The Krauncha 
mountain is standing here. The name of this DvTpa is derived from 
this mountain. In days gone by, the highly intelligent Kartikeya burst 
this mountain by his own prowess. This DvTpa is washed by the 
KsTra Sagara; and Varuna is its Regent. The son of Priyavrata, 
Ghritapristha, respected by all and whose prosperity knows no end, 
is the Lord of this DvTpa. He divided this DvTpa into the seven parts 
and distributed them to his sons and named the Varsas after the 
names of his sons. He made his sons the rulers of those places and 
he himself took the refuge of the Bhagavan Narayana The names of 
the seven Varsas are respectively Ama, Madhuruha, 
Meghapristha, Sudhamaka, Bhrajistha, Lohitarna, and Vanaspati. O 
Narada! The seven mountains and the rivers there are very 
celebrated throughout the worlds. The names of the mountains are 
- S’ukla, Vardhamana, Bhojana, Upavarhana, Nanda, Nandana, and 
Sarvatobhadra. The names of the rivers are Abhaya, Amritaugha, 
Aryaka, TTrthavatT, VrittirupavatT, S’ukla, and Pavitravatika. The 
inhabitants there drink the highly pure water of these rivers. The 
people there are divided into four colours Purusa, Risabha, Dravina, 
and Vedaka and they worship the Bhagavan Varuna, of the form of 
water. Then they become very discriminative, and, with great 
devotion, and holding full within their folded palms the water, repeat 
the following mantra “O Water! Thou art the essence VTrya of the 
Person Bhagavana and Thou sanctifiest the Bhurloka, Bhuvarloka, 



and Svarloka. Thou destroyest the sins of all. We all are touching it; 
purify our bodies.” After finishing their mantrams, they sing various 
hymns to Varuna. Next to the Ksiroda Sagara, is the S’aka Dvipa, 
thirty two lakh yoyanas wide, surrounded by the Dadhi Sagara (the 
ocean of curds), of similar dimensions. Here the most excellent tree 
named the S’aka tree exists. O Narada! The DvTpa is named so after 
the tree. Medhatithi, the son of Priyavrata is the Lord of this DvTpa. 

He divided this land into the seven Varsas and distributed each to his 
seven sons respectively; and ultimately he took refuge to the path of 
Yoga. The names of the seven Varsas are Purojava, Manojava, 
Pavamanaka, DhumranTka, Chitrarepha, Bahurupa, and Vis’vadhrik. 
In these Varsas there are seven mountains, one in each Varsa, as 
forming their boundaries; and there are seven rivers also. The 
names of the mountains are Is’ana, Urus’ringa, Valabhadra, S’ata 
Kes’ara, Sahasra-srotaka, Devapala, and Mahasana; the names of 
the rivers are Anagha, Ayurda, Ubhayaspristi, Aparajita, 
PahchapadT, and Sahasras’ruti and Nijadhriti. These seven rivers are 
all very big and resplendent with lustre. The people are divided into 
four classes Varsas, Satyavrata, Kratuvrata, Danavrata, and 
Anuvrata. They all take the Pranayama exercise and thereby bring 
the Rajas, and Tamo Guna under their subjection and they worship 
Hah, of the nature of Prana Vayu, Higher than the Highest. Their 
mantra is this “He has entered into all the living beings and 
nourishes them by the Prana and other faculties; He is the Internal 
Ruler of all and the Supreme Controller; this Universe is under His 
control; let Him protect and nourish us.” O Narada! Next to this Dadhi 
Sagara is Puskara DvTpa; it is twice as large as S’aka DvTpa. It is 
surrounded by the Dudha Sagar (the ocean of milk) all twice as 
large. The leaves of Puskara tree that shines in the Puskara DvTpa, 
are fiery like golden flames; they are as clean and pure. Crores and 
crores of leaves, golden in colour ornament this Tree. Vasudeva, the 
Guru of all the Lokas, has created this Puskara DvTpa as the seat of 
ParamesthT Brahma, possessed of six extraordinary powers, for the 
purpose of creation. There is one mountain in this DvTpa; it is divided 
into two parts, named ArvachTna and ParachTna. These form the 
boundaries of the two Varsas. The mountain is one Ayuta Yoyana 



high and one Ayuta Yoyana wide. There are four cities on the four 
sides. Indra and the three other Lokapalas are the lords of these 
cities. The Sun God connes out from their top and circumambulating 
Meru, goes there again. The whole year is his Chakram, circle of 
circuit; His path is Uttrayanam and Daksinayanam. Vitihotra, the son 
of Priyavrata is the lord of this island. He distributed the two Varsas 
amongst his two sons, Ramana and Dhataki. They rule over the two 
Varsas named also after them. Like the inhabitants of the above 
Varsas, the people also get powers of themselves and worship 
devotedly the God seated on the lotus and follow such path of the 
Yoga as leads them to the Brahma Salokya, etc. The mantra runs 
thus “We bow down to that One God, without a Second, of the 
nature of Peace, Who is the Fruit of all the Karmas, Who is the seat 
of illumination of Brahma, Who is established in Unity, and Who is 
worshipped by all the Lokas.” 


Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the 
description of the remaining DvTpas in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 14. On The Description Of The 
Lokaloka Space 


1-29. Narayana said Next to the ocean of pure water, is the 
mountain, called Lokaloka. It marks the sphere between the two 
countries Loka and Aloka. O Devarsi! There is a land, all of pure gold 
(beyond this ocean of pure water) for a space equal to the distance 
between Manasottara and Meru. This land is like a mirror; there are 
no beings here; the reason is, any substance placed on it would at 
once be converted into gold and nothing can be obtained out of it. O 
Narada! No living beings can live there and therefore it is named 
Lokaloka. This is established always between the Loka and Aloka. 
The God himself has made this as the boundary of the three Lokas. 
The rays of the Sun, the Polar Star and all the planets are confined 
to this sphere; rather passing through its middle, the luminaries shed 
their lustre on the three Lokas. O Narada! This great mountain is so 
lofty and capacious that the rays of the luminaries can never go out 
of it. The learned men say, that the size, form, and indications of this 
mountain are such as this is the one-fourth of five hundred times the 
size of the earth on its summit. The self-born Brahma has placed 
very big elephants on all sides of it. Hear their names. These 
are Risabha, Puspachuda, Vamana, and Aparajita. These four 
elephants are said to hold all the Lokas in their respective positions. 
The Bhagavan Hari gives strength to these elephants and to Indra 
and others who are reckoned to be His Vibhutis (powers). He 
manifesting His S’uddha Sattva and super-extraordinary powers, and 
united with Anima, Laghima, etc., the eight Siddhis, is reigning there 
surrounded by His Paris’adas Visvaksena and others. He is the one 
God of all; He is without a second. For the welfare of all. He is 
holding Sudars’ana and His various other weapons; and the powers 
of His arms are great. He is His own Cause and at all times He 
pervades all in and through. He is Eternal. This Universe is upheld 
by His extraordinary power Maya for its preservation. He remains in 
this form till the end of a Kalpa. The inner width described above. 



determines the width of Aloka. For it is situated outside the above 
Loka. Beyond the mountain Lokaloka, is said to lie the pure path 
leading to YogesVara within the egg-shaped ellipsoid formed by the 
Heaven and Earth. The inner dimension of this ellipsoid is twenty five 
Koti Yoyanas. When this egg becomes unconscious (lifeless), the 
Sun enters within it in the form of Vairaja. Hence the Sun is called 
Martanda. He is Hiranyagarbha, when He is born from this Golden 
Egg. It is this Sun that ordains the quarters, Akas’a, Heaven and 
Earth, etc., in their proper spheres and divisions. This Sun is the 
Atma of Svarga and Moksa, hell and other lower regions, of the 
Devas, men, birds, reptiles, trees and all other living beings; and He 
is the Presiding Deity of their sight. O Narada! Its width is 
Pahchas’at Koti Yoyanas and its height or depth is twenty-five Koti 
Yoyanas. If as the two halves of a gram are of the same size, so the 
Earth and Heaven are of equal size. The space enclosed between 
them is called Antariksa; the Sun God, the foremost of the planets, 
being situated in the middle, gives light and illumines and heats the 
three Lokas. He goes by the path of Uttarayana and therefore His 
motion becomes slow (His motion becomes Mandagati). The Sun 
then getting up higher prolongs the day time. Similarly when the Sun 
follows the path of Daksinayana, He gets S’lghra-gati and not going 
up so high, shortens the day time. Again when He comes at the 
Equator, He maintains an even position and the day and night 
become equal. When the Sun is in the signs Aries (Mesa) and Libra 
(Tula), then the day and night become equal. When the Sun 
traverses the five signs Taurus, Gemini, etc., the day becomes 
longer and when the Sun traverses the five signs Scorpio and 
others, the day becomes shorter and the night becomes longer. 


Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the 
description of the Lokaloka space in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 15. On The Motion Of The Sun 


1-45. Narayana said O Narada! I will now describe the motion of 
the Sun. Hear. It is of three kinds; S’lghra (perihelionic), Manda 
(Aphelionic), and even. O Surasattama! Every planet has three 
positions. The name of the Madhyagati position is Jaradgava, the 
name of the northern position is Airavata; and the name of the 
southern position is VaisVanara. The asterisms AsVini Krittika and 
Bharani are known by the term Nagavithi. Rohini, Ardra, and 
Mrigas’ira are named Gaja Vithi; Pusya, As’lesa, and Punarvasu are 
named AiravatMthi. The three Vithis, above-mentioned are called 
Uttara Marga. Purvaphalguni, Uttara Phalguni and Magha are 
named Arsabhi Vithi. Hasta, Chitra and Svati are called Govithi; 
Jyestha, Vis’akha and Anuradha are named Jaradgavi Vithi. These 
three Vithis are named Madhyama Marga. Mula, Purbasadha, 
Uttarasadha are termed Ajavithi S’ravana, Dhanistha and S’atabhisa 
are termed Mriga Vithi. Uttara bhadrapada, Purvabhadrapada, and 
Revati are called VaisVanarivithi. These three Vithis (paths) are 
called Daksinamarga. During the Uttarayana time, as the Dhruva 
attracts the rope of air from both the sides of the Yuga, orbit (or axis), 
the chariot of the Sun ascends, (i.e., is drawn up by the rope). Thus 
when the Sun enters within the sphere, the motion of the chariot 
becomes slower and the day is lengthened and the night is 
shortened. O Sura Sattama! Know this to be the course of the path 
of the Sun. 


When the cord draws towards the south, the Chariot descends and 
as the Sun then comes out of the sphere, the motion becomes quick 
The day shortens and the night is lengthened. Again when the cord 
is neither tightened nor is it slackened, rather its motion is exactly 
mid-way, the Sun also remains in a medium position and his Chariot 
enters within a sphere of equilibrium and the day and night become 
equal. When the cord of air, in a state of equilibrium is attracted by 



the Polar Star, then it is that the Sun and the Solar system revolves; 
and when the Polar Star slackens its attraction over the cord of air, 
the Sun coming out of the middle sphere, revolves; and the Solar 
system also revolves. On the east of Meru is established the city of 
Indra and the Devas dwell there. It is called therefore Devadhanika. 
On the south of the Meru, is the famous city of Yama, the God of 
Death, named Samyamani. On the west of Meru, is the great city of 
Varuna, named Nimnochani. On the north of Meru is the city of the 
Moon, named Vibhavari. O Narada! The Brahmavadis say that the 
Sun first rises in the city of Indra. At noon the Sun goes to 
Samyamani; at evening the Sun goes to Nimnochani and He is said 
to set. In the night the Sun remains in Vibhavari. O Muni! The going 
of the Sun round Meru is the cause of all the beings getting 
themselves engaged in their respective duties. The inhabitants of the 
Meru see the Sun always in the central position. The Sun moves on, 
eastwards towards the stars, keeping the Meru to his left; but if the 
Zodiac be taken into account, it would appear that the Meru is left 
towards the south of the Sun. The rising and the setting of the Sun 
are always considered in front of Him. O Devarsi! Every point, every 
quarter, every person, seeing the Sun says that the Sun has risen 
there; again where he becomes invisible. He is considered to set 
there. The Sun always exists; so there is no rising nor setting for 
Him. It is His appearance and disappearance that make men say 
that the Sun rises or sets. When the Sun is in the Indra’s city. He 
illumines the three cities, those of Indra, Yama, and the Moon and 
illumines the north-east and east-west corners. So when He rests in 
the city of Fire, he illumines north-east, east-west, and south-west, 
the three corners, and at the same time the cities of Indra and Yama; 
and so on for the other cities and corners. O Narada! The Mont Meru 
is situated towards the north of all the Dvipas and Varsas. So 
whenever any person sees the Sun rise he calls that side “east.” But 
Meru exists towards the left of the Sun; so it is said. If the Sun 
travels in 15 (fifteen) Ghatikas, the distance from Indrapuri to 
Yamapuri, He is said to travel within that time a distance equal to 2% 
Kotis, 121/2 lakhs and 25000 Yojanas (22695000 Yojanas). The 
thousand-eyed and thousand rayed Sun God is the Manifester of 



Time. He travels in the aforesaid way the cities of Varuna, Chandra 
and Indra respectively. He is the diadem of the Svarloka; and the 
Zodiac is his Atman. He travels thus, to mark off time to all persons. 
O Narada! The Moon and the other planets and stars rise and set in 
the aforesaid manner. Thus the powerful chariot of the Sun travels in 
a Muhurta 142,00000 Yojanas. By the force of Pravaha Vayu (air), 
the Sun God, the Incarnate of the Vedas travels round the cities, the 
Zodiac, in one Samvatsara (year). The wheel of the Sun’s Chariot is 
one year; twelve months are the spokes; three Chaturmasyas are 
the nave and the six seasons are the outer ring or circumference of 
the wheel. The learned men call this chariot as the Samvatsara (one 
year). The axis or axle points to the Meru on one side and to 
Manasottara mountain on the other. The end or circumference of the 
wheel marks off other divisions of the time as Kala, Kastha, Muhurta, 
Yama, Parahara, day and night, and fortnights. The wheel is fixed on 
the nave. The Sun goes on this wheel, like an oilman’s on his oil- 
machine, round and round the Manasottara mountain. The eastern 
side of the wheel is on that axis and the other part is fixed on the 
Pole Star. The dimension of the first axis is (15750000 Yoyanas). 

The second axis measures one-fourth of the above (3937500 
Yoyanas). It resembles the axis of an oil-machine. The upper side of 
that is considered to belong to the Sun. The seat of the Sun on his 
chariot measures 36 Lakh Yoyanas wide. The Yuga measures in 
length one fourth of the above dimensions, that of his seat. The 
Chariot is is moved by seven horses, consisting of the seven 
Chhandas, Gayatri, etc., driven by Aruna. The horses carry the Sun 
for the happiness of all. Though the charioteer sits in front of the 
Sun, his face is turned towards the west. He does his work as a 
charioteer in that state. Sixty thousand Valakhilya Risis, of the size of 
a thumb, chant the sweet Vedic hymns before Him. Other Risis, 
Apsaras, Uragas, Gramanis, Raksasas, and all the Devas, each 
divided in groups of seven, worship every month that highly lustrous 
Sun-god. The earth measures 90152000 Kros’a Yuga Yoyanas (1 
Krosa - % Yoyana). The Sun passes over this distance in a moment. 
He does not take rest in his this work even for a day; no, not even for 
a moment. 



Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the motion of 
the Sun in the Mahapuranam, S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 18000 
verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 16. On The Motion Of The Planets 


S’n Narayana said O Narada! Now hear the wonderful 
movements of the planets and their positions. The auspicious and 
inauspicious events of the mankind, are due to the different 
movements of these planets. As in a potter’s wheel going round and 
round, the motion of the insects crawling on the wheel, appears in a 
contrary direction, so the motion of the Sun and other planets 
moving on the Zodiac composed of the Basis (12 constellations) 
which again always moves round the Meru as an axle, appears 
different. Their motion from one star to another and from one 
constellation to another appears so likewise. These two motions 
therefore are not contradictory but are consistent; so it is settled 
everywhere by the learned Pundits (as being subservient to the 
Zodiac). O Narada! He, Who is the Origin of all. Who is the Adi 
Purusa, from Whom all these have sprung. Who is endowed with six 
extraordinary powers, in Whom all this Prapahcha, this material 
world composed of the five elements remains, that Narayana, 
roaming about, has divided the Trayi Atma into twelve parts for the 
perfect happiness of all and for Karma S’uddhis (the purification of 
Karma, acts). The sages furnished with Jhan and Vijhana have thus 
argued on the point, following the path as laid out in the Vedas. The 
Surya Narayana, moving on in the six seasons, spring, etc., has 
established, cold, heat, etc., as the Dharma of the seasons, duly for 
the fructification of the Karmas of the individual beings. Those 
persons that worship this Adipurusa, with devotion, according to the 
knowledge of the Vedas the customs and usages of Varna (castes) 
and As’rama (Brahmacharya, etc.), and with various performances of 
Yogas, get their fruits respectively according to their desires. This 
Sun is the Atman of all the Lokas and resting on the Zodiac between 
the Heavens and the Earth, enjoys the twelve months in the twelve 
constellations, Aries, etc. These months are the limbs of the year. 
Two fortnights make one month. The 21 asterisms go to form one 
month according to the Solar measure, of the day and night. 



The period that the Sun takes to travel over the two constellations is 
called Ritu or the Season (i.e., two months). The Scientists say that 
this season is the limb of one Samvatsara. The path that the Sun 
describes within the three seasons or half the year in the Zodiac is 
called one Ayanam. The time taken by the Sun with earth and 
heavens to make a circuit of the Zodiac is called one Vatsara or year. 
This year is reckoned into five divisions as Samvatsara, 
Parivatsara, Idavatsara, Anuvatsara, and Idvatsara. These are 
functioned by the S’lghra, Manda, and uniform motions of the Sun. 
So the Munis say. Thus far the motion of the Sun has been 
described. Now hear that of the Moon. The Moon is situated one 
lakh Yoyanas higher than the Sun and shares with the motion of the 
Sun for one year; and She enjoys as well every month with the Sun 
in the shape of the dark and bright fortnights. The Moon, the Lord of 
Night and of the medicinal plants also enjoys the day and night by 
the help of one constellation or 2% Naksattras. Thus, by Her 
S’lghragati, the Moon enjoys the Naksattras. During the bright 
fortnight, the Moon becomes more and more visible and gives 
pleasure to the Immortals by Her increasing phases; and, during the 
dark fortnight by Her waning phases. She delights the Piths. She 
performs revolution in the day and night by Her both the phases of 
the bright and dark fortnights. Thus She becomes the Life and Soul 
of all the living beings. The Moon, endowed with the highest 
prosperity, travels one Naksattra in thirty Muhurtas. She is Full and 
the Soul without any beginning. She fructifies the desires 
(Sankalpas) and resolves of all; hence She is called Manomaya. She 
is the Lord of all the medicinal plants (Osadhis); hence She is called 
Annamaya. She is filled with nectar; hence She is called the Abode 
of Immortality and She gives Nirvana (the final liberation) to all. 
Hence She is called Sudhakara. She nourishes and satisfies the 
Devas, Piths, men, reptiles and trees; hence She is called 
“Sarvamaya.” By Her influence the asterisms travel over the three 
lakh Yoyanas. The God Himself has made the Naksattra Abhijit to 
revolve round the Meru, along with the other Naksattras in the 



Zodiac; so this is reckoned as the twenty-eighth Naksattra. The 
planet Venus (S’ukra) is situated above the Moon two lakh Yoyanas 
high. He sometimes goes before the Sun, sometimes behind and 
sometimes along with Him. He is very powerful. His motion is of 
three kinds (1) S’lghra, (2) Manda, and (3) uniform. He is 
generally favourable to all the persons and does for them many 
auspicious things. So it is stated in the S’astras. O Muni! S’ukra, the 
illustrious scion of Bhrigu, removes the obstacles to the rains. Next 
to S’ukra, the planet Mercury (Budha) is situated two lakh Yoyanas 
high. Like S’ukra, he, too, goes sometimes in front sometimes 
behind and sometimes along with the Sun. And his motion too, is of 
three kinds S’lghra, Manda, and uniform. When Mercury the Son 
of Moon, is away from the Sun, then Ativata (strong winds, 
hurricanes), Abhrapata (the falling of meteors from the clouds) and 
draught and other fears arise. The planet Mars, the son of the Earth 
is situated two lakh Yoyanas higher. Within three fortnights (45 days) 
he travels one Ras’i. This occurs when his motion is not retrograde. 
This Mars causes all sorts of mischief, evils, and miseries to 
mankind. The planet Jupiter is situated two lakh Yoyanas higher. He 
passes through one Ras’T in one year. When his motion is not 
retrograde, he is always in favour with the Brahma Vadis. Next to 
Brihaspati, come the planet Saturn, the son of the Sun, two lakh 
Yoyanas higher. He takes thirty months to pass over one Ras’T. This 
planet causes all sorts of unrest and miseries to all. Therefore He is 
called a Manda Graha (a malefic planet). Next to it, is situated the 
Saptarsi mandala, the Great Bear, eleven lakh Yoyanas higher up. O 
Muni! The seven planets always do special favours to all. These 
circumambulate the Visnupada, the Polar Star. 


Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Eighth Book on the motion of 
the planets in the Maha Puranam S’rT Mad DevT Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 17. On The Dhruva Mandalam 


1-29. Narayana said Beyond the Saptarsi mandalam (the Great 
Bear), thirteen lakh Yojanas higher is situated, the Visnu’s Paramam 
Padam (the highest place of Visnu). The Great Bhagavat (devotee of 
God), the most respectful, S’riman Dhruva, the son of Uttanapada, is 
established there with Indra, Agni, Kas’yapa and Dharma and the 
Naksattras. The visitors pay to him always their respects. He is the 
patron of those who live till the end of a Kalpa. He is engaged in 
serving the lotus-feet of the Bhagavan. He has been made by God 
Himself the pillar round whom all the planets, stars, and the luminary 
bodies are revolving always and with great force in the Zodiac and in 
the celestial Heavens. The Devas also worship him. He, resplendent 
in his own glory, illumines and manifests all. As beasts tied to yoke 
go on tilling, so the planets and stars, fixed on the Zodiac, go quickly 
round and round this Dhruva, the Pole Star; some nearer, some 
further distant in spheres, propelled by Vayu. As the hawks hover 
round the sky, so the above-mentioned planets, go completely round 
and round under their own Karmas and controlled by the Vayu in the 
sky. Thus all the luminaries do not fall to the ground, as they are kept 
up in their respective positions by the favour of the union of Prakriti 
and Purusa. Some say that this Jyotischakra, the celestial Heavens 
(the Zodiac) is S’is’umara. It is kept duly in its position for the 
purpose of holding things up by the power of the Bhagavan. Hence it 
does not fall. It is resting with its body coiled round and with its head 
lower down. O Muni! Dhruva, the son of Uttanapada is staying at the 
tail end. And, in addition to him, also at the tail rests Brahma, the 
Sinless Prajapati, worshipped by the Gods, Agni, Indra and Dharma. 
Thus the creation is at the tail and the Saptarsimandal is staying at 
his waist. Thus the celestial wheel (Jyotischakra) is resting with his 
coils turned in a right-hand direction. On his right side are found the 
Uttarayana Naksattras, fourteen in number from Abhijit to Punarvasu 
and on his left side are found the other fourteen Daksinayanam 
Naksattras from Pusya to Uttarasadha. O Son of Brahma! Thus the 



Naksattras form the coil-shaped body of the S’is’umara, the Zodiac; 
half the Naksattras on the one side and the other half Naksattras on 
the other. His back is on the Heavenly Ganges named Ajavithi. 
Punarvasu and Pusya form the right and left side of the loins; Ardra 
and As’les’a form the right and left feet (westward); Abhijit and 
Uttarasadha form the right and left nostrils. O Devarsi! S’ravana and 
Purvasadha form the right and left eyes respectively; so say the 
persons that form the Kalpanas (fancies). Dhanistha and Mula form 
his right and left ears; Magha, etc., the eight Daksinayanam 
Naksattras form the bones on the left side. O Muni! Mrigasirsa, the 
Uttarayana Naksattras form the bones on his right side, S’atabhisa 
and Jyestha form the right and left shoulders. Agasti (the Canopus) 
forms the upper jaw and Yama, the lower jaw. The planet Mars forms 
his face; Saturn forms his organ of generation; Brihaspati forms the 
hump on the shoulders; the Sun, the Lord of the planets, forms his 
breast; Narayana remains in the heart; and the Moon is in his mind. 
(Note S’is’umara is also the constellation Dolphinus and is 
sometimes meant for the polar star.) O Narada! The two As’vins form 
the nipples on his breast; Us’ana forms his navel; the Mercury is his 
Prana and Apana; Rahu is his neck and Ketu is all over his body and 
the stars are reigning all over the hairs of his body. This Zodiac is the 
body composed of the Devas of that All Pervading Bhagavan. So 
every intelligent person should daily meditate this S’is’umara in the 
Sandhya time, with perfect purity and keeping himself Mauna 
(silent), and with his whole heart. Then he should repeat the 
following mantras and get up and say “Thou art the Substratum of 
all the luminaries, we bow down to Thee; Thou createst and 
destroyest all. Thou art the Lord of all the celestials. Thou art the 
Adipurusa, the foremost of all the Purusas; we meditate fully on 
Thee. The planets, Naksattras, and the stars are Thy body. The 
Daiva is established in Thee alone. Thou destroyest the sins of those 
that compose the Mantras. The sins are completely destroyed for the 
time being of him who bows down or remembers Thee in the 
morning, afternoon and evening.” 



Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the 
Dhruva Mandalam in the Maha Puranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 18. On The Narrative Of Rahu 
Mandalam 


1-9. Narayana said O Devarsi! The Sphere of Rahu (the 
ascending node) is situated one Ayuta Yoyanas below the Sun. 

Rahu, the son of Simhika is moving there like a Naksattra. This Rahu 
swallows up both the Sun and the Moon and He has got immortality 
and capability to travel in the sky. The Sun’s rays go up to one Ayuta 
Yoyanas. The Asura Rahu thus covers his rays. So the sphere of the 
Moon extends upto the twelve thousand Yoyanas. Rahu covers the 
field of the thirteen thousand Yoyanas. So he covers both the Sun 
and the Moon. Desire to take the vengeance of the previous enmity, 
he covers them during the time of Parva (the festivals). This planet 
wants to cover them from a distance. Hearing this, the Bhagavan 
Visnu hurls His Sudars’an Chakra against Rahu. This Chakra (disc) 
is encircled with the fiery flames and is very terrible. When all the 
quarters were filled with its violent flames, Rahu became instantly 
alarmed and fled away from the distance. O Devarsi! This is known 
as the eclipse known amongst the mortals. Below the sphere of 
Rahu, there are the other pure Lokas situated. O Sattama! The 
Siddhas, Charanas, and Vidyadharas live in those Lokas. Their 
dimensions are one Ayuta Yoyanas. 


10. O Devarsi! Below them live the Yaksas, Raksasas, Pis’achas, 
Pretas and Bhutas with their excellent Viharas (residences). 


11-34. The learned people call this Antariksa. It extends upto where 
the wind blows violently and where the clouds appear. O Best of the 
twice-born! Below this Antariksa is this earth, measuring one 
hundred Yoyanas. All the articles and things of the earth are found 
here; birds herons, cranes and ducks all fly over the earth. The earth 



extends upto this. Now is described the configuration of the earth. O 
Devarsi! At the lower part of this earth there are seven places (caves 
or nether regions). Their diameter is one Ayuta Yoyanas. In all the 
seasons, all sorts of enjoyments can be had at these places. The 
first is Atala; the second is Vitala. Next come in orderSutala, 
Talatala, Mahatala. Rasatala, and lastly (the seventh) the Patala. O 
Vipra! Thus the seven holes or regions are reckoned. These are 
termed the Vila-Svargas and they yield the happinesses, greater 
than those of the Heavens. These are all filled with lovely amorous 
enjoyments, prosperity and happiness. They are crowded with 
gardens and Viharas (the places of enjoyments). And these Viharas 
are all decorated tastefully so as to furnish special tastes of 
enjoyments. The powerful Daityas, Danavas, and Snakes enjoy here 
great happiness incessantly, united lovingly with their sons, wives 
and friends. The householders also pass their time in ease and 
enjoyments, surrounded by their friends and attendants. They are all 
Mayavis (Magicians) and their resolves are not thwarted; they are 
more than God in this respect and they are filled with desires. They 
all live with joy and in enjoyments and they find pleasure in all the 
seasons. Maya, the Lord of Maya had built separate cities, as he 
liked, in those nether regions. Besides he has created thousands of 
dwelling-houses, palaces, and town-gates, studded with gems and 
jewels. 


The assembly halls, Chatvaras, and Chaityas are elaborately 
decorated and rare even to the Suras. The Nagas and Asuras live in 
those houses with their consorts; doves and pigeons and female 
Mayina birds are hovering there. In those places many plots marked 
out artificially and excellent rows of palatial buildings of the Lords of 
those Vivaras adorn there. Very big gardens also exist there. All 
these cheer the minds; and, to add to their beauty, many places of 
fruits and flowers are close by, fit for the comfort and enjoyments of 
the ladies. The tanks and pools of water are crowded with various 
birds; the lakes are filled with clear waters and the Pathina fishes 



abound there. The aquatic animals move in the waters, violently 
agitating them. Various kinds of lotuses, Kumud, Utpala, Kahlara, 
blue lotus, red lotus, are fully blown in these lakes or reservoirs of 
water. The gardens there are all overcrowded with the Viharas of the 
inhabitants there and echoed with the sweet melodious music, 
pleasing to the senses. For there, these places seem to vie with the 
Heavens. No fear is there, whether during the day or during the 
night. The gems on the crest of snakes constantly illumine the 
environments and there is no darkness there at any time. The food 
there is prepared with the divine medicines and they drink and bathe 
with these medicinal plants; so no disease attacks them. Old age, 
fever, indigestion, paleness, sweats, bad smells, or loss of energy or 
any other source of trouble cannot trouble them. The people are 
always happy and good. Only they fear the Teja of the Bhagavan 
and His Sudars’an disc; and they fear nothing else. When the Teja of 
the Bhagavan enters, the women’s abortions take place. 


Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the 
narrative of Rahu Mandalam in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 19. On The Narrative Of The Atala, 
Etc. 


1-32. Narayana said O Vipra! In the first beautiful region Atala, the 
exceedingly haughty son of the Danava Maya, nanned Bala, is living. 
He has created the ninety-six Mayas. All the requisites of the 
inhabitants are obtained by them. The other Mayavis know one or 
two of these. None of them are capable to know all, as they are 
exceedingly difficult to be carried out. When this powerful Bala 
yawned, the three classes of women were produced, fascinating to 
all the Lokas. They were named Pums’chali (or unchaste woman) 
Svairini, (an adultress) and Kamini (a lovely women). When any 
man, beautiful and lovely to them, enters into their Atala region, they, 
with the help of the Hataka sentiment (of love), generate in him, 
while in solitude, the power to enjoy (copulate) and with their sweet 
smiles and amorous lovely looks and with great caution embrace him 
thoroughly and begin to converse with him and with amorous 
gestures and postures, and thus please him well. When the people 
enjoy this Hatakarasa, they think often and often, that they 
themselves have become gods, they have become Siddhas and 
powerful like Ayuta elephants; being blind with vanity and finding 
them endowed with powers and prosperity, they think themselves so 
repeatedly and constantly. O Narada! Thus the position in Atala has 
been described. Now hear, the description of the second region 
Vitala. Vitala is situated below the earth. There the Bhagavan Bhava, 
worshipped by all the Devas, has assumed the name of 
HatakesVara and is staying there coupled with Bhavani, surrounded 
by His attendants specially for the increase of the creation of 
Brahma. The river Hataki flows there and has Her origin from the 
essences (Semen virile) of them both. Fire, augmented by the help 
of the wind, begins to drink it. When the Fire leaves that, making a 
Phutkara noise (i.e., blowing out air through the mouth), the gold, 
named Hataka, is created. This gold is very much liked by the 
Daityas. The Daitya women use this gold always for their ornaments. 



Below Vitala is Sutala. It is reckoned as of some special importance. 
O Muni! The highly meritorious Bali, the son of Virochana lives here. 
The Bhagavan Vasudeva, brought down this Bali into Sutala, for the 
welfare of Indra. He assumed the body of Trivikrama and gave to 
Bali all the wealth of the three Lokas, all the Laksmi went to him and 
installed him in the position of the Lord of the Daityas. What more 
can be said than this, that what prosperity, wealth and riches that 
Indra could not obtain, that S’ri Laksmi Devi Herself has followed 
Bali. Bali, as the Lord of Sutala, has become entirely fearless, 
remains here upto this day and is worshipping Vasudeva. O Narada! 
It is said by the high-minded persons that when Vasudeva Himself, 
the Controller of all, appeared as a beggar, Bali gave him land, and, 
therefore, on account of making gift to a good person, he acquired 
so much prosperity. But this cannot be reasonable. For, it is not at all 
reasonable to cast the effects of making this gift on Narayana, O 
Narada! Who is Self-manifest by His own Extraordinary Glory and 
Who is Himself filled with all AisVarya (prosperity) and Who can 
bestow the Highest Goal of life and other requirements of men. This 
Narayana is the Deva of the Devas; if anybody takes His name, 
when in the greatest distress, he gets himself immediately freed from 
the Gunas, the cause of bondage due to his Karma. All persons 
perform many Yogas and follow the paths advised by the Samkhya 
method, with their minds directed to the All-Controller Bhagavan, to 
abandon all sorts of troubles and miseries. O Narada! Know that the 
Bhagavan does not shew us His Favour when he gives us greatest 
wealth and prosperity. For the wealth and riches are the offspring of 
Maya and the source of all worries, miseries and mental troubles; 
and one is liable to forget the Bhagavan when one gets such a 
wealth. The Bhagavan is pervading all this universe and is full of 
wisdom; and He is seeing always all the ways and means; He took 
away, in the way of begging, rather cheated all that Bali had, leaving 
only his body; and at last, finding no other means, fastened him by 
the Varuna Pas’a (noose), threw him in the middle of the mountain 
cleft (cave) and then has stationed Himself at his door as a Door¬ 
keeper. Once, out of his extreme devotion, Bali did not care at all for 
his difficulties, troubles, or miseries. Rather he gave out that Indra, 



whose minister is Brihaspati had acted very foolishly. For when the 
Bhagavan becomes very graciously pleased, he wanted from Him 
ordinary wealth. But what will the wealth of the Trilokas avail? It is a 
quite insignificant thing. Surely, He is an illiterate and stupid brute 
who, for mere wealth, leaves the Bhagavan, Who is the Fountain of 
all Good Wishes to the Humanity. My grandfather Prahlada, who was 
highly fortunate, who was devoted to the God and who was always 
ready to do good to others, he did not ask for any other thing than 
the servantship of God (the Dasya Bhava). When his powerful father 
died, the Bhagavan wanted to give him unbounded wealth; but the 
Bhagavata (devoted) Prahlada did not want that. None of us, who 
are marked with so many deficiencies can know the nature of the 
Bhagavan Vasudeva, Whose omnipotence cannot be compared and 
all these manifested worlds are but His Upadhis (adjuncts, 
limitations). O Devarsi! Thus Bali, the Lord of Daityas, the highly 
respected and renowned in all the Lokas, is reigning in Sutala. Hari 
Himself is his Door-keeper. Once the King Havana, the source of 
torment to all the people, went out to conquer the whole world; and 
when he entered Sutala, that Hari, ever ready to show Grace to His 
devoted, threw him at a distance of one Ayuta Yoyanas by the toe of 
His foot. Thus by the grace of the Devadeva Vasudeva, Bali is 
reigning in Sutala, and enjoying all sorts of pleasures, without any 
equal anywhere. 

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the 
narrative of the Atala, etc., the Patalas in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, 
the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 20. On The Narrative Of The Talatala 


1-37. Narayana said O Narada! The cave lower down than Sutala 
is Talatala! The Lord of Tripura, (the three cities) the great Maya 
Danava is the Ruler of this region. MahesVara, the Doer of good to 
the three Bhuvanas, burnt his three cities; but at last, being pleased 
with his devotion. He rescued him. Thus Maya, by the favour of that 
God, has regained his own kingdom and the enjoyments thereof. 
This Maya Danava is the Teacher (Acharya) of the Mayavi sect and 
the cult thereof; and he is skilled in various Mayas or all sorts of the 
magic powers. All the fierce demons, of cruel temper, worship him 
for their prosperities in their various enterprises. Next to this Talatala 
is the most renowned Mahatala. The sons of Kadru, the very angry 
Snakes, live here. They are many headed. O Vipra! I now mention to 
you the names of the famous amongst them Kuhaka, Taksaka, 
Susena, and Kaliya. These all have very wide hoods and they all are 
very strong; they all are of cruel temper. Their kinsmen also are so. 
They are always afraid of Garuda, the King of birds. Surrounded with 
their sons, wives, friends and acquaintances, they live happily, well 
skilled in various sports and pleasures. Lower down this Mahatala is 
Rasatala. The Daityas, Danavas and Pani Asuras live here. Besides 
these, there live the Nivata Kavachas of the Hiranyapura city and the 
Asuras named Kaleyas, the enemies of the Devas. These all are 
naturally very energetic and brave; their powers are baffled by the 
Tejas of the Bhagavan and they live like snakes in this region. The 
other Asuras that were driven and were afraid of the Mantras, 
uttered by Sarama, the messenger of Indra, live here too. O Narada! 
Lower down is Patala, where live Vasuki, the Chief of the snakes, 
and others named S’ankha, Kulika, SVeta, Dhananjaya, 
Mahas’ankha, Dhritarastra, S’ankhachuda, Kamvala, AsVatara, and 
Devopadattaka, all very angry, of wide hoods, and virulently 
poisonous. Some of these have five heads, some seven hoods, 
some ten; some hundred, some others have thousand heads, while 
some others have on their crests exceedingly luminous jewels. By 



their rays, they dispel the darkness of the nether regions; but they 
are awfully prone to anger. At the bottom of this Patala, and at a 
distance of the thirty Yoyanas; the Portion of Bhagavan in the shape 
of the infinite Darkness is reigning there. O Devarsi! All the Devas 
worship this Form. The devotees call Him by the name of 
Sanakarsana, as He is the manifested emblem of “Aham” and the 
common ground where the Seer and the Seen blend into one. He is 
the thousand-headed Controller of all, moving and non-moving; He is 
of infinite forms; He is S’esa; this whole universe is being held as a 
mustard bean on His head; He is of the Nature Intelligence and Bliss 
and He is Self-manifest. When he wants to destroy all this during the 
Pralaya, the very powerful Sankarsana Rudra, well arrayed with the 
eleven Vyuhas, military (squadrons) arrangements, springs up from 
Him. From His Central Eyebrow, looking wide with His Three Eyes 
and raising His Trident, resplendent with three flames. All the 
(prominent) principal snakes, ruling over many others, come to Him 
during the nights filled with devotion and surrounded with Bhaktas 
(devotees) and bow down to Him with their heads bent low and look 
at each other’s faces, enlightened with the lights from the jewels 
shining with clear lustre, on the nails of the red toes of His Lotus- 
Feet. At that time their faces become brilliant with the rays emitting 
from the jewels on the top of their very gay encircled hoods; and 
their cheeks look beautiful and shining. The daughters of the Naga 
Raja also do like this; when very beautiful rays come out of their 
perfectly excellent bodies. Their arms are wide extended; they look 
very clear and they are beautifully white. They use always 
Sandalpaste, Aguru and Kasmiri unguents. Being overpowered by 
the amorous passion, due to their contact with those scented things, 
they look at Him with bashful glances and sweet smiles and expect 
Asiss (benedictions) from Him. And then His eyes roll maddened 
with love and express signs of kindness and mercy. The Bhagavan 
Ananta Deva is of boundless strength; His attributes are infinite; He 
is the ocean of infinite qualities. He is the Adi Deva, of a very good 
nature and His Nature is highly luminous. He has abandoned anger 
and envy and He wants the welfare of all. All the Devas worship Him 
and He is the repository of all Sattvic qualities. 



The Devas, Siddhas, Asuras, Uragas, Vidyadharas, Gandharbas, 
and Munis always meditate on Him. On account of His constant 
Mada Raga the enthusiasm and intoxication, His sight appears 
intoxicated and His eyes look perturbed with emotions. He is always 
pleasing to those who surround him and to the Devas by His sweet 
nectar-like words. 


The Vaijayanti garland hangs from His neck; it never wanes and it is 
always decorated with the fresh and clear Tulasi leaves. The 
maddened bees make their humming noises incessantly and thus 
add to the beauty. He is the Deva of the Devas and He wears a blue 
coloured cloth and He is ornamented with only one earring. He (the 
God Visnu) Undecaying and Immutable; resting His fleshy arms on 
the Halakakuda (the lofty portion of the plough), He is upholding the 
golden girdle as the elephant Airavata of Indra upholds the golden 
girdle. O Narada! The devotees describe Him as the Source of this 
Leela of the Universe and the Controller of the Devas. 


Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narrative 
of the Talatala in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, of 
18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 21. On The Narrative Of Hells 


1-9. Narayana said O Devarsi! Sanatana, the son of Brahma, 
recites thus in the assembly of the Devas, the glories of the 
Bhagavan Ananta Deva, and worships Him, thus How can one of 
ordinary sight and understanding grasp the real nature of Brahma, 
Whose mere Glance enables the Prakrit! work Her Gunas in the 
Creation, Preservation and Destruction of this Universe! Him Whose 
nature has no beginning nor end; Who though One, has created all 
this Prapahcha (the universe of five elements) as a covering to the 
Atman (the True Self). He has made the Sat and Asat, out of his 
infinite compassion, this universe, full of cause and effect, visible in 
His One and only one S’uddha Sattva nature where even the very 
powerful lion is imitating his Leela (Pastime), void of all defects, to 
bring under His control the minds of His own kinsmen. (Note This 
Ananta Deva is the Ruling Principle in the Fourth Dimensional 
Space.) To Whom else, then, the persons, desirous of Moksa, will 
take refuge, the mere hearing or reciting Whose Name, in a fallen or 
a distressed condition, or merely in jest, takes away instantly all the 
sins! He is upholding the earth with the mountains, oceans, rivers 
and all the beings as if an atom on his thousand heads. He is infinite. 
His power knows no decrease in any time. No one can describe his 
actions even if one had thousand tongues to speak. He is of an 
infinite strength, of the endless high qualities and of unlimited 
understanding. Thus staying at the bottom of the earth, the 
Bhagavan Ananta Deva is upholding with ease this earth for her 
protection, unaided and independent. O Muni! The people get the 
fruits of their actions and desires as they want and as they have 
followed the paths laid down in the S’astras and become accordingly 
kings, men, deer or birds or other creatures in other states. O 
Narada! This I have described, as you questioned me before, the 
various and dissimilar fruits of various actions, done according to the 
dictates of the Dharma and the S’astras. 



10. Narada said “O Bhagavan! Kindly describe to me now why 
has the Bhagavan created so many diversities, when the Karmas, 
done by the Jivas, are the same.” 


11-28. Narayana said O Narada! So many different states arise 
because the S’raddhas of the doers are so very different. The fruits 
differ because the S’raddhas vary, some being Sattvik, some Rajasik 
and some Tamasik. If the S’raddha be Sattvik, happiness comes 
always; if it be Rajasik, incessant pain and misery is the result; if it 
be Tamasik, misery comes and the loss of the knowledge of good or 
bad is the result. Thus the fruits differ as the S’raddha varies. O Best 
of Dvijas! Thousands and thousands of states occur to a man as the 
result of their Karmas, done under the influence of the beginningless 
Avidya (Nescience). O Dvijottama! I will now deal in detail with their 
varieties; hear. Behind this Triloki, below this earth and over the 
Atala, the Piths named Agnisvattas and other forefathers live. Those 
Pitris stay there, and, practising deep Samadhis, they offer always, 
to their best blessings to their own Gotra (families) respectively. 
There Yama, the God of the Pitris gives punishment to the dead 
brought there by His messengers according to their Karmas and 
faults. By the command of the Bhagavan, the Yama, surrounded by 
his own Ganas (persons), judges and does full justice according to 
the Karmas that they had done and the sins they had committed. He 
sends always those of his messengers who obey his order and know 
the Tattva of Dharma, and who are posted to their respective duties 
to carry out what He commands. The writers of the S’astras describe 
twenty-one Narakas or hells; others say there are twenty-eight hells. 
Now hear their names Tamisra, Andha Tamisra, Raurava, 
Maharaurava, Kumbhipaka, Kalasutra, Asipatrakanana, 
S’ukaramukha, Andhakupa, Krimibhojana, Taptamurti, Samdams’a, 
Vajrakantaka, S’almali, Vaitarani, Puyoda, Pranarodha, Vis’asana, 
Lalabhaksa, Sarameyadana, Avichi, Apahpana, Ksarakardama, 
Raksogana, Sambhoja, S’ulaprota, Dandas’uka, Avatarodha, 



Paryavartanaka, and Suchimukha. These are the twenty-eight 
Narakas or hells. (N.B. These are 29). 


These hells are very tormenting. O Son of Brahma! The embodied 
beings (jivas) suffer these according to their own Karmas 
respectively. 


Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter of the Eighth Book on the 
narrative of hells in the Maha Puranam, S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, 
of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 22. On The Narrative Of The Sins 
Leading To Hells 


1. Narada said “O Everlasting One! O Muni! Now describe the 
various actions that lead to these tormenting hells. I like to hear 
about them in detail.” 


2-52. Narayana said O Devarsi! He who steals other’s sons, 
wives, and riches, the wicked fellow is taken to Yama by His 
messengers. Tied down hard and fast by the terrible messengers of 
Yama, by the Kala rope (rope of time), he is taken to the Tamisra 
hell, the place of many torments. There the Yama’s attendants 
punish him, beat him and threaten him; and he becomes stupefied, 
and feels himself very weak, distressed and ultimately faints. He who 
deceives another’s husband and enjoys his wives; the Yama’s 
servants drag him down to Andha Tamisra hell. There he suffers any 
amount of pain and suffering. He loses instantly his eyesight and his 
brain gets upset. His state resembles that of a tree when its trunk is 
broken. For this reason the ancient sages called this Andha Tamisra. 
He who being subject to “My” and “Mine” quarrels with others and 
being very much attached, maintains his family, leaves his families 
here and goes with his bad tendencies to the Raurava hell, very 
horrible to all. The animals whom he injured and killed before in this 
world, assume the form of Ruru animal and torment him in the next. 
For this reason, the intelligent knowers of Purana, call this Raurava. 
The ancients say, that Ruru is more cruel and ferocious than snakes. 
These animals live in that hell; hence it is termed Maharaurava. He 
who torments others, goes to this hell and these Rurus, the flesh- 
eaters, spring on his body and bite and eat his flesh. He who cooks 
other animals and birds, that cruel and ferocious, thus deluded, is 
cooked in return on the hot oil in the Kumbhipaka hell by the Yama 
Dutas for thousand years. He who quarrels with his Piths and the 
Brahmanas, is taken by the Yama Dutas to the Kalasutra hell and 



there be burnt by the fire and Sun. There that hellish person, being 
troubled very nnuch, inside and outside by hunger and thirst, 
sometimes sits, sometimes sleeps, sometimes walks, and 
sometimes runs hither and thither. O Devarsi! He who transgresses 
the path of the Vedas in times other than those of calamity and 
danger and follows other paths even to a trifling distance, that sinner 
is taken by Yamadutas to Asipatra Kanana and there whipped 
severely. Not being able to bear that, he runs wildly to and fro and is 
pierced by the sharpedged Asi leaves on both his sides. His whole 
body being cut asunder, he cries “Oh! I am killed!”and faints away. 
Then feeling himself pained very much, he tumbles down at every 
step. Thus the sinner suffers for violating the path of the Vedas. The 
King or that royal personage who gives orders of punishment, not 
approved by Dharma, and hurts or punishes the body of a 
Brahmana, the Yama’s servants throw him down into the 
S’ukaramukha Hell and grind down his body with great force as a 
sugarcane is ground down. He then cries aloud bitterly, he gets 
fainted and becomes stupefied. He is crushed by them and suffers 
all sorts of pains and miseries. Again he who knows the feelings of 
others when they are tormented, pains those insects who live on 
other’s blood as bugs, etc., and who does not realise other’s pains, 
goes, as a punishment for that fault to the Andhakupa Hell. There he 
is pained by the beasts, birds, deers, reptiles, mosquitoes, bugs, 
louses, flies and Dandas’ukas and various other cruel animals. 

There he lives in his ugly body and roams like a beast. The man 
who, getting even a trifling wealth and food-stuff, does not perform 
the five Maha Yajhas and gives not a share of that to the Devas and 
feeds his own belly with that like a crow, is taken by the ferocious 
Yamadutas to the worst Krimibhojana Naraka for his sinful deeds. 
This hell is one lakh Yoyanas wide and is the reservoir of worms. It 
causes terror to the inhabitants of the hell. That sinner assumes the 
form of an insect and is eaten up on return by the insects and thus 
passes his time there. When a man does not give any share to the 
Atithis or the guests and does not offer oblations to the Fire and eats 
his food, he, too, goes to the above hell. When a man in times other 
than that of great danger and distress, follows the livelihood of a thief 



and robs gold and jewels forcibly of a Brahmin or any other person, 
he is taken to this hell and the Yama’s servants pierce and cut off his 
skin by a fiery hot iron cutter. 

When a man goes for an illicit cohabitation to one who is not fit to be 
approached and when a woman goes similarly to an unapproachable 
man, both of them are taken, being whipped, to this hell by the 
servants of Yama! Where the man is obliged to embrace a fiery hot 
iron figure of woman and vice versa. When a man goes to all sorts of 
wombs for unnatural crimes, he is taken to Vajra Kantaka Naraka 
and placed on the top of an iron S’almalT wood. When a King or any 
royal personage, subject to the Pasanda Dharma (i.e., the 
unrighteous path) breaks the boundary of a law, he for that sin goes 
to Vaitarani, the ditch round that hell. There the aquatic animals eat 
his body all around. O Narada! Yet neither his life nor his body parts 
with him. He is thrown, for his Karma, into the rivers filled with 
faeces, urine, puss, blood, hairs, bones, nails, flesh, marrow, fat, 
etc., and he becomes very much troubled. 

Those who are the husbands of Vrisalis (girls under twelve years of 
age, who have attained menstruation; or the barren women), void of 
any S’aucha (cleanliness) or shame and without any Achara 
Vyavahara (the following of one’s natural customs and rites) and 
those who follow Pas’vachara (like beasts), they meet with a very 
hard fate and are thrown into this hell filled with faeces, urine, cough, 
blood and other impurities and when they feel hungry, are forced to 
eat the above things. When those persons that are twice born, 
maintain dogs and asses, etc., and when they are addicted to 
hunting, and kill daily, for nothing, beasts, birds and deer, those 
evildoers are specially watched by the servants of Yama and when 
they retire, they tear them asunder by shooting bows at them. 

He who kills animals, engaged vainly in a sacrifice and addicted to 
haughty tempers and habits, is thrown into this hell by the Yama’s 
servants and whipped very severely. The twice-born that copulates 
blindly with a savarna wife, is taken by the Yama’s messengers into 
the hell filled with semen and he is made to drink that. Those who 



are addicted to robbery, who put fire to other’s houses, who make 
others drink poison, those that are treacherous, and who destroy the 
interest of the villagers and other persons, those kings or the royal 
personages are taken after their death by the Yamadutas to the 
Sarameyadana hell. There seven hundred and twenty dogs, very 
wonderful to behold, come furiously and with great force and energy, 
over them and feed on them. O Narada! This hell is denominated as 
Sarameyadana Naraka and it is very horrible. Now I will describe to 
you the other hells Avichi and others. 


Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter of the Eighth Book on the 
narrative of the sins leading to hells in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 23. On The Description Of The 
Remaining Hells 


1-31. Narayana said O Narada! When persons, impelled by sinful 
motives, always speak false at the time of giving evidence or at the 
time of taking or giving money, they, after their death, go to the 
terrible hell, named Avichi. There, from the summit of a mountain, 
one hundred Yojanas high they are dropped at once down below 
with their heads inverted down. Here the solid ground looks like 
water and appears like waves. Therefore it is called Avichi, 
resembling like Avichi waves. Here if the sinner’s body be cut to 
small pieces, still he does not die; rather he gets a new body when 
his body is all cut to pieces. O Son of Brahma! When a man, be he a 
Brahmin, Ksattriya, or a Vais’ya, drinks the Soma (wine) or due to 
inadvertence drinks wine, he is thrown into this hell. O Muni! The 
Yama’s servants make him drink the molten iron. When a vile person 
being maddened by the pride of his self-learning, birth, austerities or 
Varna and As’rama, does not pay his respect duly to his superiors, 
he is thrown into the Ksarakardama hell with his head downwards. 

He suffers a tremendous pain there. When a man or woman out of 
delusion, performs the human sacrifices (where men are immolated 
as victims), he or she has to eat the human flesh here. Those that 
killed before all sorts of beasts, come after their death into this abode 
of Yama, all united and like butchers, cut each other’s flesh by 
pickaxes, etc., and drink their blood and dance and sing repeatedly. 
They do, in fact, what the terrible Raksasas do. When persons meet 
with the innocent persons, wishing to live in villages or forests and 
raise their confidence by various such means and make them 
attached and finally pierce them by pointed S’ulas (trident) or pointed 
swords and kill them as if they were ordinary play things, they are 
taken after their death by the Yama dutas and thrown into S’uladi 
Naraka (pierced by S’ulas). They are pierced there by S’ulas and 
become overpowered by hunger and thirst. Herons and cranes, with 
their sharp beaks hunt after them to and fro. Thus tormented, they 



remember all their sins done in their previous lives. Those who follow 
stray paths and trouble the other beings as the serpents do, they fall 
into the Dandas’uka hell. Here worms with five faces and seven 
faces come from all sides and eat them as a fierce serpent devours 
a mouse. Those who confine persons in dark holes, a dark room or a 
dark cave they are taken by the Death servants with their arms 
uplifted and confined to similar dark caves, filled with poison, fire and 
smoke. When a Brahmin householder, seeing a guest coming to his 
house in a reasonable (proper) time, casts a furious sinful glance at 
him as if to burn him, the Death’s attendants, the herons with 
thunderbolt like beaks, the crows and the Vatas and other birds and 
very fierce vultures all come and forcibly take out the eyes of that 
person who committed the aforesaid sins. When person elated with 
vanity of his riches become too haughty and doubt over their Gurus 
and when their hearts and faces wither withal away, as it were, with 
the thoughts of their income and expenditure, and being always 
unhappy, hoard up money always like the Brahma Pis’achas, the 
Death’s officers take them for these Karmas to Suchimukha Narakas 
and pierce all over his body with pins, as a tailor does with his cloth. 
O Devarsi! True, sinful persons thus suffer hundred thousand hells. 
All these are very painful and tormenting. Out of these the 
abovenamed twenty hells give the greatest sufferings. O Devarsi! 

The sinners suffer various pains in hells and virtuous persons go to 
the several spheres where all sorts of happinesses and pleasures 
reign. O Maharsi! I have described to you many forms of practising 
one’s Sva Dharma; yet know this verily that the worship of the Devi’s 
Gross Form and of Her Virat Form is the Chief Dharma of all the 
persons. By worshipping the Devi, the persons have not to go to the 
hells. In fact, when the Devi Bhagavati is worshipped. She Herself 
arranges for crossing the person to the other shore of this ocean of 
transmigration of existence. 


Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Eighth Book on the 
description of the remaining hells in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad 



Devi Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 24. On The Worship Of The Dev! 


1-2. Narada said “O Bhagavan! Of what sort is the Dharma, i.e., 
the worship of the Devi? In what way shall we worship Her, so that 
She gives us the Highest Place? What are the methods and forms of 
Her Worship? Where and when shall we worship Her! So that the 
Durga Devi saves us from the above mentioned hells.” 


3-20. Narayana said O Devarsi! You are the foremost of the 
Knowers of Truth. I will therefore tell you how the Devi gets pleased 
and how Her worship is conducted according to the Dharma. Hear 
attentively. O Narada! I will also describe the nature of Sva Dharma. 
Hear that also. When one worships, with due rites and ceremonies, 
the Devi in this beginningless world. She Herself removes all the 
terrible dangers and difficulties. Hear the rules how the people 
worship the Devi. When the Pratipat Tithi (the first day after the Full 
or New Moon) comes, one should worship the Devi with a present of 
rice, etc., with ghee (clarified butter) and give that to the Brahmins. 
Then one becomes completely free from any disease. On the 
second day (Dvitiya Tithi), one must serve the Mother of the 
Universe with sugar and give that to the Brahmins; he then becomes 
long-lived. On the third (tithi) on commencing with the Pooja, the 
worshipper must give milk to the Devi and give that to a best 
Brahmin; he is then freed from all his troubles and ailings. On the 
fourth (tithi) the worshipper is to offer a cake of flour to the Devi and 
then give that to a Brahmin; no obstacles come to that man. On the 
fifth tithi, the worshipper is to offer plantains to the Devi and then to 
give that to the Brahmins; he thus becomes intelligent. On the sixth 
tithi, the worshipper gives honey to the Devi and then that to a 
Brahmin; he gets thus the beauty of his body. On the seventh tithi, 
the Brahmin gives to the Devi the Naivedya (an offering of rice, etc.) 
with Gur (sugarcandy) and then that to the Brahmins; he then 
becomes freed from his mental sorrows. On the eighth day, if one 



gives cocoanut, one is freed of one’s remorse, etc.; on the ninth, if 
anybody gives fried rice (Laj), he will have his happiness increased 
both in this world and in the next. O Muni! If on the tenth tithi, one 
offers to the Devi black Til (sesamum) and then to the Brahmin, he 
becomes free from the fear of death. If, on the eleventh tithi, 
(ekadas’i) one gives the curd to the Devi and then to the Brahmin, 
one becomes a great favourite of the Devi. If on the twelfth day, one 
offers to the Devi and to the Brahmin the Chipitaka rice or grain (well 
parched and flattened) one becomes a favourite of the Devi. If, on 
the thirteenth day one gives to the Bhagavati grains and then that to 
a Brahmin, one gets progeny. If, on the fourteenth day, one gives to 
the Devi the flour of fried barley or other grains (S’aktu) and then that 
to a Brahmin, one becomes a favourite of S’iva. If on the Full Moon 
day, one offers to the Devi Payasa and then that to a Brahmin, then 
one’s Piths are uplifted to the higher regions. 


21-42. O Muni! On the above tithis, if one forms daily Homas, as 
stated in the Puja Chapter, the Devi becomes very pleased. The 
articles corresponding to the tithi as mentioned above destroy all the 
evils and inauspicious omens. 


On Sunday, it is a rule to give an offering of Payasam (a food 
prepared of rice, milk, and sugar). On Monday, the milk; on Tuesday, 
the nice plantains; on Wednesday, the fresh butter; on Thursday, the 
gud or sugarcandy, Friday, the white sugar, and on Saturday, it is a 
rule to give the clarified butter of cow’s milk. Now hear what should 
be offered on the Naksattras. The following are the Naivedyas given 
to each of the Naksattras, in due order, from As’vini Clarified 
butter (ghee), sesamum (Til), sugar, curd, milk, Kilatak (Malai, milk), 
Dadhikurchi (Malai Curd), Modaka (a kind of sweetmeat, a 
confection) Phenika, Ghrita Mandaka, a sort of sweet meat of 
wheaten flour and gur, Vatapattra, Ghritapura (Ghior), Vataka, 
Kharjura juice (of the datepalm), a sort of sweet meat of Gur and 



gram, honey, S’urana, Gur Prithuka, grapes, datepalms, Charakas, 
Apupa, Navanita (fresh butter), mudga, modaka, and Matulinga. 

Now hear what are given in the Viskambha and the other Yogas. The 
World Mother becomes very much pleased when one offers to Her 
the following things Gur, honey, ghee, milk, curd, Takra, apupa, 
fresh butter, Karkati, Kusmanda, Modaka, Panasa, plantain, Jambu 
(rose-apple), mangoe, sesamum, oranges, Dadima, (pomegranate) 
Vadari (Jujube) the Dhatri (Amalaki) fruit, Payasa, Prithuka, gram, 
cocoanut, Jambira. Kaseru, and S’urana. The auspicious events 
occur when these are offered. The intelligent persons have thus 
decided to give the above on Viskambha and the other Yogas. Now 
hearI will describe the things that are offered on the respective 
Karanas Kamsara, Mandaka, Pheni, Modaka, Vatapattraka, 
Ladduka, Ghritapura, Til (Sesamun), curd, ghee, and honey. These 
are to be offered devotedly to the Devi on the respective Karanas. 
Now I will describe to you the other offerings very pleasing to the 
Devi. Hear. O Narada! Hear it with great attention and love. On the 
third tithi of the bright fortnight, in the month of Chaitra, one is to 
worship duly the Madhuka tree and offer Pahcha Khadya (the five 
sorts of food). So hear what articles are to be offered according to 
the rules that are laid down on the third day of the white fortnight of 
the other months. The Gur, in the month of Vais’akh; the honey, in 
Jyaistha; the fresh butter, in Asadha; the curd, in S’ravana; the 
S’arkara, in Bhadra; the Payas’a, in AsVin; the pure milk, in Kartik; 
the Pheni, in Agrahayana; the Dadhi Kurchika in Pausa; the clarified 
butter of cow’s milk, in Magha, and the cocoanut offerings, in the 
month of Phalguna. Thus with these twelve sorts of offerings, one is 
to worship the Devi in the twelve months respectively. 


43-69. One should worship the Devi in the Madhuka tree with these 
names Mangala, Vaisnavi, Maya, Kala-ratri, Duratyaya, 
Mahamaya, Matangi, Kali, Kamalavasini, S'iva, Sahasracharana, 
and Sarva mangalarupini (One name for each of the 12 months). 
Finally, to bring the vow to a good issue and to have one’s desires 



fulfilled with greater success, one is to sing stotras (hymns) to the 
MahesVari, the Controller of all the gods, in that Madhuka tree, thus 
Thou art lotus-eyed; obeisance to Thee! Thou art Jagaddhatri, the 
Upholdress of the Universe, I bow down to Thee; Thou art 
MahesVari, Maha Devi, and Mahamangalarupini (Thou art the great 
Devi, and Thou dost great good to all). Thou destroyest the sins. 
Thou givest Moksa or final liberation. Thou art ParamesVari, Thou 
art the World Mother and Thou art of the nature of the Highest 
Brahma. Thou art Madadatri (the giver of Mada, the Supreme 
Felicity and rapture or excessive delight). Thou art maddened with 
Mada the (Excessive Joy); Thou canst be reached when Thou art 
given proper veneration; Thou art the the Most High. Thou art 
Intelligent; Thou art meditated upon by the Munis; and Thou dwellest 
in the Sun. Thou art the Lord of the several Lokas (worlds); Thou art 
endowed with the Highest Knowledge; and Thou art of the colour of 
water at the time of Pralaya (the Universal Dissolution). Thou art 
worshipped by the Gods and the Asuras for the destruction of the 
Great Moha. So Great Victory to Thee! Thou art the Rescuer of one 
from the abode of Death; Thou art worshipped by Yama, Thou art 
the elder of Yama, Thou art the Controller of Yama and Thou art 
worshipped by all. Obeisance to Thee! Thou art impartial; Thou 
controllest all; Thou art perfectly unattached; Thou destroyest the 
people’s worldly attachments; Thou art The One to whom all look for 
the fructification of their desires; and Thou art the Compassion 
Incarnate. Thou art, worshipped by the names Kankala Krura, 
KamaksT; MmaksT Marma bhedini, Madhuryarupas’alini; and Thou 
art worshipped with the Pranava Om prefixed to all the Stotras and 
the Mantras. Thou art of the nature of the Seed Maya (mayavija); 
Thou canst be realised by repeating the mantra and Thou canst be 
pleased by the deep concentration (Nididyasana) on Thee. Thou 
canst be reached by all men through their minds and Thou dost 
things that are pleasing to the Maha Deva. Thou dwellest in the trees 
As’vattha, Vata (Peepul tree), Neem, Mangoe, Kapittha (wood apple 
tree), and the tree Kul (Jujube) trees. Thou art the Palms (Jack) tree. 
Thou art Arka, Karira and Ksira trees. Thou residest in Dugdha valli 
(the milky juice of plants); Thou art the Compassion Incarnate; and fit 



to shew mercy. Thou art sincerity and kindness and Thou art the 
Consort of the Omniscient. So Victory to Thee! O Narada! After the 
worship, if one performs the stotra above described, to the Devi, the 
worshipper derives all sorts of Punyams (merits). He who reads daily 
the Stotra, pleasing to the Devi, becomes freed of all sorts of 
diseases, pain and freed of his fear of passions, so hard to conquer! 
What more than this that he who wants money, gets money; who 
wants Dharma, gets Dharma; he who wants Kama, gets his Kama 
(objects of desires); and he who wants Moksa, gets Moksa. The 
Devi is the Awarder of the Chatur Varga fourfold fruits. 


If this Stotra be read, the Brahmin becomes Vedavit, the knower of 
the Vedas; the Ksattriya gets the victory; the Vais’ya gets wealth and 
the S’udra gets happiness. If this Stotra be read with devotion and 
attention, the Pitris get undying satisfaction, lasting till Pralaya (the 
time of universal dissolution). Thus I have described to you the 
method of worshipping the Devi. The Devas consider it with great 
attention. He gets the Devi Loka, who performs the worship of the 
Devi, as above described, with devotion. O Brahmana! When the 
Devi is thus worshipped, all the desires are fulfilled; all sins are 
destroyed; and, in the end, one’s mind becomes pure and the 
worshipper is respected and worshipped everywhere. O Son of 
Brahma! His fear of going into hell is destroyed by the Grace of the 
Devi; even in dreams, he does not fear anything. By the Grace of 
Maha Maya, his sons and his grandsons, riches and grains multiply 
and multiply. He becomes a great and steadfast devotee of the Devi; 
there is no doubt in this. Now I have described to you completely the 
rules of worship of the Devi. When one performs this, one becomes 
freed of the Narakas; and all sorts of good things come to him. O 
Muni! The Madhuka worship and the monthly worship have been 
described also. He who performs this Madhuka worship fully, never 
meets with any disease or obstacles. Now I will describe to you the 
other five aspects of the Great Devi of the nature of Prakriti. Her 
Name, Form and Origin give pleasure to all the worlds. O Muni! Now 



hear this Prakriti Pahchaka, its narrative and the greatness thereof. 
Know that this is as curious as it gives liberation. 


Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the 
worship of the Devi in the Maha Puranam, S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


[The Eighth Book completed.] 



THE NINTH BOOK 



Chapter 1. On The Description Oe Prakriti 


1. S’ri Narayana said This (Highest) Prakriti is recognised as five¬ 
fold. When She is engaged in the work of Creation, She appears as 
(1) Durga, the Mother of Ganes’a, (2) Radha, (3) Laksmi, (4) 
Sarasvati and (5) Savitri. 


2-3. Narada replied O Thou, the best of Jhanins! Who is this 
Prakriti? (Whether She is of the nature of Intelligence or of matter?) 
Why did She manifest Herself and then again why did She reveal 
Herself in these five forms? And what are Her characteristics? Now 
Thou oughtest to describe the lives of all, the different modes of their 
worship, and the fruits that are accrued thereby. Please also inform 
me which Forms of them manifested themselves in which different 
places. Dost Thou please narrate to me all these. 


4-18. Narayana said “O Child! Who is there in this world that can 
describe fully the characteristics of Prakriti! However I will describe 
to you that much which I heard from my own father, Dharma. Hear. 
The prefix “Pra” in the word Prakriti means exalted, superior, 
excellent; and the affix “Kriti” denotes creation. So the Goddess, the 
Devi Who is the most excellent in the work of creation is known as 
the Devi Prakriti. To come closer“Pra” signifies the Sattva Guna, 
the most exalted quality, “Kri” denotes the Rajo Guna and “Ti” 
denotes the Tamo Guna. (The Sattva Guna is considered as the 
Highest as it is perfectly clear and free from any impurities 
whatsoever; the Rajo Guna is considered intermediate as it has this 
defectthat it spreads a veil over the reality of things, so as not to 
allow men to understand the True Reality, while the Tamo Guna is 
considered worst as it completely hides the Real Knowledge). 



So when this Intelligence of the nature of Brahma, beyond the three 
attributes, gets tinged with the above three Gunas and becomes 
omnipotent, then She is superior (Pradhana) in the work of creation. 
Hence She is styled as Prakriti. 


O Child Narada! The state just preceding that of creation is denoted 
by “Pra”; and “Kri” signifies creation. So the Great Devi that exists 
before creation is called Prakriti after creation. The Paramatma by 
His Yoga (i.e., Maya S’akti, the Holy Ghost) divided Himself into two 
parts; the right side of which was male and the left side was the 
female Prakriti. 

(Note The Holy Ghost is the principle of Conception and 
Emanation, Creation). So the Prakriti is of the nature of Brahma. She 
is eternal. As the fire and its burning power are not different, so there 
is no separate distinction between Atman and His S’akti, between 
Purusa and Prakriti. Therefore those that are foremost and the 
highest of the Yogis do not recognise any difference between a male 
and a female. All is Brahman. He is everywhere as male and female 
forever. There is nothing in this world that can exist for a moment 
even without this Brahman consisting of male and female, (i.e. they 
are Brahman with Maya manifested). Out of the Will of S’ri Krisna, to 
create the world Whose Will is all in all, came out at once the Mula 
Prakriti, the Great Devi Is’vari, (the Lady Controller of the Universe) 
Brahma with Maya in a state of equilibrium). By Her command came 
out five Forms of Her, either for the purpose of creation or for 
bestowing Favour and Grace to the Bhaktas (devotees). Durga the 
Mother of Ganes’a, comes, as the first, the most auspicious, loved 
by S’iva. She is Narayani, Visnu Maya, and of the nature of Puma 
Brahma (the Supreme Brahma). This eternal, all auspicious Devi is 
the Presiding Deity of all the Devas and is, therefore, worshipped 
and praised by Brahma and the other Devas, Munis, and Manus. 
This Bhagavati Durga Devi, (when She gets pleased) destroys all 
the sorrows, pains and troubles of the Bhaktas that have taken Her 
refuge, and gives them Dharma, everlasting name and fame, all 



auspicious things and bliss and all the happiness, nay, the Final 
Liberation! She is the Greatest Refugeof these Bhaktas that come to 
Her wholly for protection and are in great distress, whom She saves 
from all their dangers and calamities. In fact, know this Durga Devi 
as, verily, the Presiding Deity of the heart of Krisna and as His 
Highest S’akti, of the nature of the Holy Fire and the Holy Light. She 
is Omnipotent and resides always with Krisna, the Great God. She is 
worshipped by all the Siddha Purusas (those that have attained 
success); the (eighteen) Siddhis all go to Her and when pleased She 
gives whatever Siddhis (success) that Her Bhaktas want. 


19-40. This Great Devi is the intelligence, sleep, hunger, thirst, 
shadow, drowsiness, fatigue, kindness, memory, caste, forbearance, 
errors, peace, beauty, and consciousness, contentment, 
nourishment, prosperity, and fortitude. She is sung in the Vedas and 
in other S’astras as the Maha Maya, of the nature of the Universe. In 
reality. She is the All-S’akti of the Universe and She is the S’akti of 
Krisna. All these qualities are also mentioned in the Vedas. What is 
mentioned here is a tithe merely, in comparison to that of the Vedas. 
She has infinite qualities. Now hear of other S’aktis. The second 
S’akti of the Paramatman is named Padma (Laksmi). She is of the 
nature of S’uddha Sattva (Higher than Sattva Guna) and is Krisna’s 
Presiding Deity of all wealth and prosperity. This very beautiful 
Laksmi Devi is the complete master of the senses; She is of a very 
peaceful temper, of good mood and all-auspicious. She is free from 
greed, delusion, lust, anger, vanity and egoism. She is devoted to 
Her husband and to Her Bhaktas; Her words are very sweet and She 
is very dear to Her husband, indeed, the Life and Soul of Him. This 
Devi is residing in all the grains and vegetables and so She is the 
Source of Life of all the beings. She is residing in Vaikuntha as Maha 
Laksmi, chaste and always in the service of Her husband. She is the 
Heavenly Laksmi, residing in the Heavens and the royal Laksmi in 
palaces and the Griha Laksmi in the several families of several 
householders. O Narada! All the lovely beauty that you see in all the 



living beings and all the things, it is She; She is the glory and fame of 
those that have done good and pious works and it is She that is the 
prowess of the powerful kings. She is the trade of merchants, the 
mercy of the saints, engaged in doing good to others and the seed of 
dissensions in those sinful and vicious persons as approved of in the 
Vedas. She is worshipped by all, reverenced by all. Now I will 
describe to you about the third S’akti of the Great God who is the 
Presiding Deity of knowledge, speech, intelligence, and learning. 

This third S’akti is named Sarasvati. She is all the learning of this 
endless Universe and She resides as medha (intelligence) in the 
hearts of all the human beings; She is the power in composing 
poetry; She is the memory and She is the great wit, light, splendour 
and inventive genius. She gives the power to understand the real 
meaning of the various difficult Siddhanta works; She explains and 
makes us understand the difficult passages and She is the remover 
of all doubts and difficulties. She acts when we write books, when we 
argue and judge, when we sing songs of music; She is the time or 
measure in music; She holds balance and union in vocal and 
instrumental music. She is the Goddess of speech; She is the 
Presiding Deity in the knowledge of various subjects; in 
argumentations and disputations. In fact all the beings earn their 
livelihood by taking recourse to Her. She is peaceful and holds in Her 
hands Vina (lute) and books. Her nature is purely Sattvic (S’uddha 
Sattva), modest and very loving to S’ri Hah. Her colour is white like 
ice-clad mountains, like that of the white sandal, like that of the 
Kunda flower, like that of the Moon, or white lotus. She always 
repeats the name of Paramatma S’ri Krisna while She turns Her 
bead composed of jewels. Her nature is ascetic; She is the bestower 
of the fruits of the ascetism of the ascetics; She is the Siddhi and 
Vidya of all; She grants always success to all. Were She not here, 
the whole host of Brahmins would always remain speechless like the 
dead cluster of persons. What is recited in the Vedas as the Third 
Devi is the Holy Word, The Third S’akti, Sarasvati. Thus I have 
described Her. Now hear the glories of the other Devi in accordance 
with the Vedas. She is the mother of the four colours (castes), the 
origin of the (six) Vedamgas (the limbs of the Vedas and all the 



Chhandas, the Seed of all the mantrams of Sandhya vandanam and 
the Root, the Seed of the Tantras; She Herself is versed in all the 
subjects. Herself an ascetic, She is the Tapas of the Brahmins; She 
is the Tejas (Fire) and the caste of the Brahmin caste and embodies 
in Herself all sorts of Samskaras (tendencies; inclinations); She is 
the Japam. Pure, known by the names of Savitri and Gayatri, She 
resides always in the Brahma Loka (the Sphere of Brahma) and is 
such as all the sacred places of pilgrimages want Her touch for their 
purification. 


41-47. Her colour is perfectly white like the pure crystal. She is 
purely S’uddha Sattva, of the nature of the Highest Bliss; She is 
eternal and superior to all. She is of the nature of Para Brahma and 
is the bestower of Moksa. She is the Fiery S’akti and the Presiding 
Deity of the Brahma Teja (the fiery spirit of Brahma, and the 
Brahmanas). The whole world is purified by the touch of Whose 
Feet, this Savitri Devi is the Fourth S’akti. O Child Narada! Now I will 
describe to you about the Fifth S’akti, the Devi Radhika. Hear. She is 
the Presiding Deity of the five Pranas; She Herself is the Life of all; 
dearer than life even to S’ri Krisna; and She is highly more beautiful 
and superior to all the other Prakrit! Devis. She dwells in everything; 
She is very proud of Her good fortune (Saubhagyam); Her glory is 
infinite; and She is the wife, the left body, as it were, of S’ri Krisna 
and She is not in any way inferior to Him, either in quality or in the 
Tejas (Fiery Spirit) or in any other thing. She is higher than the 
Highest; the Essence of all, infinitely superior, the First of all. Eternal, 
of the nature of the Highest Bliss, fortunate, highly respected, and 
worshipped by all. She is, the Presiding Devi of the Rasa Lila of S’ri 
Krisna. From Her has sprung the Rasa mandalam and She is the 
Grace and the Ornament of the Rasa mandalam (the dance in a 
circle in Rasa). 



[Note Extracts from a paper on Creation as explained by Hon’ble 
Justice Sir G. Woodroffe. 

The lecturer commenced by pointing out that an examination of any 
doctrine of creation reveals two fundamental concepts: Those of 
Being (Kutastha) and Becoming (Bhava); Changelessness and 
Change; the one and Many. The Brahman or Spirit in its own nature 
(Svarupa) is and never becomes. It is the evolutes derived from the 
Principle of Becoming (Mula Prakriti) which constitute what is called 
Nature. The latter principle is essentially Movement. The world is 
displayed by consciousness (chit) in association with Mula Prakriti in 
cosmic vibration (spandana). Recent Western hypotheses have 
made scientific “matter” into Maya in the sense that it is but the 
varied appearances produced in our mind by vibration of and in the 
single substance ether. The doctrine of vibration (Spandana) is 
however in India an ancient inheritance. The whole world is born 
from the varied forms of the initial movement in Mula Prakriti. The 
problem is how does such multiplicity exist without derogation to the 
essential unit of its efficient cause, the spirit? The lecturer then made 
a rapid survey of the Sankhya philosophy on this point which 
assumes two real and independent principles of Being and 
Becoming which it calls Purusa and Prakriti and passed from this the 
easiest dualistic answer to the pure monism of S’ankara which 
asserted that there was but one Principle of Being, the Sadvastu and 
Maya, whether considered as a S’akti of IsVara or as the product of 
such S’akti was Avastu or nothing. He then pointed out that the 
Tantrik doctrine with which he dealt occupied a middle position 
between those two points of view. S’iva in the Kularnava Tantra says 
“Some desire Monism” (Advaitavada), others Dualism (Dvaitavada). 
Such, however, know not My Truth which is neither Monism nor 
Dualism (Dvaitadvaita Vivarjita). Tantra is not Dvaitavada for it does 
not recognise Prakriti as an independent unconscious principle 
(Achit). It differs from S’ankara’s Advaitavada in holding that Prakriti 
as a conscious principle of Becoming, that is as S’akti, is not Avastu, 
though its displayed picture, the world is Maya. It effects a synthesis 
of the S’ankhya dualism by the conversion of the twin principles of 



Purusa and Prakriti into the unity which is the ArdhanansVara S’iva 
S’akti. 


As regards other matters it adopts the notions of the Sankhya such 
as the concepts of Mula Prakriti with the three Gunas, vibration 
(spandana), evolution (Parinama) of the Vikritis and the order of 
emanation of the Tattvas. S’akti which effects this exists and is 
Herself never unconscious (Achit) though It has the power to make 
the Jiva think It is such. If this were understood one would not hear 
such nonsense as that the S’aktas (whose religion is one of the 
oldest in the world) worship material force or gross matter (Jada). 


The lecturer then shortly explained the nature of S’akti (S’akti 
Tattva), a term which derived from the root “S’ak” meant the Divine 
Power whereby the world was created, manifested and destroyed. In 
Tantra the power and the Lord who wields it (S’aktiman) are one and 
the same, S’iva and S’akti are one and the same, S’iva is Brahman, 
S’akti is Brahman. The first is the transcendent, the second the 
immanent aspect of the one Brahman, Who is both S’iva and S’akti. 
The Mother creates (Karya-Vibhavini). The Father wills what She 
does (Karya-Vibhavaka). From their union creation comes. S’akti is 
not like the diminutive female figure which is seen on the lap of some 
Indian images, to which is assigned the subordinate position which 
some persons consider a Hindu wife should occupy. She is not a 
handmaid of the Lord but the Lord Himself in Her aspect as Mother 
of the worlds. This S’akti is both Nirguna and Saguna that is Chit 
S’akti and Maya S’akti. 


After this defining the nature of S’akti by which the world was 
created, the lecturer commenced an account of its manifestation as 
the universe, following in the main the S’arada Tilaka written in the 
eleventh century by Laksmanacharya, the guru of the celebrated 



Kashmiran Tantrik, Abhinava Gupta. The following is a very 
abbreviated summary of this, the main portion of the paper. The 
lecturer first referred to the Aghanavastha state which was that 
Niskala S’iva and touching upon the question why S’iva became 
Sakala (associated with Kala) and creative explained the term Kala 
and the theory of Adristasristi taught by the Tantra as by other 
S’astras. The former is according to Sankhya, Mula Prakriti; 
according to Vedanta, Avidya and according to the S’iva Tantra, 
S’akti. The latter is the doctrine that the impulse to creation is 
proximately caused by the Karma of the Jivas. It is the seed of 
Karma which contains the germ of cosmic will to life. When Karma 
becomes ripe, there arises the state called Iksana and other names 
indicative of creative desire and will. There then takes place a 
development which is peculiar to the Tantra called Sadris’a 
Parinama, which is a kind of Vivartta. The development is only 
apparent for there is no real change in the Anandamaya Kosa. S’akti 
which exists in Sakala S’iva in a purely potential state is said to issue 
from Him. This is the first kinetic aspect of S’akti in which Sattaguna 
is displayed. This is the Paramakasavastha. Nada (sound, word) 
then appears. S’akti becomes further kinetic through the enlivening 
of the Rajo Guna. This is the Aksaravastha. Then under the 
influence of Tamas, Isvara becomes Ghanibhuta and what is called 
the Paravindu. This is the Avyaktavastha. Thus the Supreme Vindu 
men call by different names, Maha Visnu, Brahma Purusa, or Devi. It 
is compared to a grain of gram which under its sheath contains two 
seeds in undivided union. These are S’iva S’akti and their encircling 
sheath is Maya. This Vindu unfolds and displays itself, in the 
threefold aspect of Vindu, Vija, Nada; or S’iva, S’akti, and S’iva 
S’akti; the three S’aktis of will, knowledge and action. This is the 
mysterious Kama Kala which is the root of all Mantras. These seven 
Sakala, S’iva, S’akti, Nada, Paravindu, Vindu, Vija, Nada are all 
aspects of S’akti which are the seven divisions of the Mantra Om 
and constitute what is called the creation of Para sound in the Is’vara 
creation. 



The lecturer having explained the nature of these S’aktis which 
formed part of the sound (S’abda), Sadrisa Parinama, referred to the 
form or meaning (Artha) creation in the same development by the 
appearance of the six S’ivas from S’ambu to Brahma which were 
aggregate (Samasti) sound powers. It was he said, on the 
differentiation of the Paravindu that there existed the completed 
causal S’abda which is the Hidden Word. The causal body or Para 
S’abda and Artha being complete, there then appeared the displayed 
word or S’abdartha. This is a composite like the Greek Logos. The 
S’abda Brahman or Brahman as cause of S’abda is the Chaitanya in 
all beings. The S’abdartha in the Vedantin Namarupa or world of 
name and form of this S’abdartha the subtle and gross bodies are 
constituted, the S’aktis of which are the Hiranyagarbha sound, called 
Madhyama and the Virat sound Vaikhari. By S’abda is not meant 
merely physical sound which as a quality of atomic ether is evolved 
from Tamasik Ahamkara. 


The lecturer then pointed out that there had been Adrista Sristi up to 
the appearance of S’akti and Vivartta development up to the 
completion of the “word” or causal sound. Then there takes place 
real evolution (Parinama) in which the Tattvas (or elements 
discovered as a result of psychological analysis of our worldly 
experience) are said to emanate according to the Sankhya and not 
the Vedantic scheme, though there were some peculiarities in the 
Tantrik exposition which the lecturer noted. Finally Yogika Sristi was 
accepted in so far as it was the elements which in varied 
combinations made up the gross world. 


In conclusion the lecturer pointed out that Indian S’astra was a 
mutually connected whole. Such peculiarities as existed in any 
particular S’astra were due to a variety of standpoints or purpose in 
view. The main point in this connection to be remembered was that 
the Tantra was practical S’adhana S’astra. Whilst S’ankara dealt with 



the subject from the standpoint of Jhanakanda, the Tantra treated it 
from the point of view of worship (Upasanakanda) the Tantrik 
doctrine is compounded of various elements some of which it shared 
with other S’astras, some of which are its own, the whole being set 
forth according to a method and terminology which is peculiar to 
itself.] 


48-70. She is the Lady of the Rasa Lila, the Foremost of the Jovial, 
humourous (witty) persons and dwells always in Rasa. Her abode is 
in Goloka and from Her have come out all the Gopikas. Rasa - the 
circular dance of Krisna and the cow-herdesses of Vrindavana. Her 
nature is the Highest Bliss, the Highest Contentment, and Excessive 
Joy; She transcends the three Sattva, Rajo and Tamo Gunas and is 
Nirakara (without any particular form); but She dwells everywhere 
but unconnected with any. She is the soul of all. She is without any 
effort to do anything and void of Ahamkara. She assumes forms only 
to show Her favour to Her Bhaktas. The intelligent learned men 
(Pundits) read Her Mahima (glories) in meditating on Her according 
to the Vedas. The chief of the Devas and the Munis could never see 
Her; Her clothings are fire-proof and She is decorated with many 
ornaments all over Her body. Her body looks as if the crores of 
moons have risen all at once; She is the Giver of Bhakti (devotion) 
towards Krisna, services towards Krisna; and She bestows all wealth 
and prosperity. In Varaha Kalpa, i.e., when the Varaha incarnation 
took place. She incarnated Herself as the daughter of one Gopa 
(cow-herd), named Vrisabhanu. And Earth was blessed by the touch 
of Her feet. She is such as Brahma and the other Devas could never 
perceive Her by any of their senses, yet everyone at Vrindavan saw 
Her very easily. She is the Gem amongst women. And when She is 
seen on the breast of Krisna, it seems that lightnings flash in the blue 
mass of clouds in the sky. In days gone by, Brahma practised several 
austerities for sixty thousand years to purify Himself by seeing the 
nails of Her toe; but far from seeing that. He could not have that 
even in his dreams. At last He succeeded in seeing Her at 



Vrindavana and became blessed. O Child Narada! This is the fifth 
Prakriti and She is denominated as Radha. Every female in every 
Universe is sprung from a part of S’ri Radha or part of a part. O 
Narada! Thus I have described to you the five Highest Prakritis, 
Durga and others. Now I am going to describe those that are parts of 
these Prakritis. Hear. The Ganges, Ganga has sprung from the lotus 
feet of Visnu; Her form is fluid-like; She is eternal. And She is the 
veritable burning fire to burn away the sins of the sinners. She is 
sweet to touch in taking baths and in drinking; She gives final 
liberation to the JTvas, and leads easily to the Goloka abode. She is 
the holiest amongst the places of pilgrimage and is the first of the 
running rivers. She is the rows of pearls in the clotted hairs of 
Mahadeva’s head and She is the Tapasya (asceticism) incarnate of 
the Tapasvis (ascetics) of the Bharata Varsa. This Ganges purifies 
the three worlds and is the part of Mula Prakriti; She shines like the 
Full Moon, is white like white lotus and like milk; She is pure S’uddha 
Sattva, clear, free from any Ahamkara, chaste and beloved of 
Narayana. The TulasT Devi is the consort of Visnu. She is the 
ornament of Narayana, and dwells always at the lotus feet of 
Narayana. By Her are performed all the acts of worship, all 
austerities, and all Sankalpas (resolves). She is the chief of all the 
flowers, holy and able to give merits (Punyam) to others. At Her sight 
and touch. Nirvana can be obtained; and, were it not for Her, there 
could be no other fire in this Kali Yuga to burn the sins. She Herself 
is of the nature of Fire and at the touch of Whose lotus-feet, the 
earth is purified; all the Tirthas desire to have Her sight and touch for 
purification and without Her all acts in this world become fruitless. 
She bestows Moksa (liberation) to those who want final liberation, 
grants all sorts of desires to several people. Who Herself is like a 
Kalpa Vriksa, Who is the Presiding Deity of all the trees in Bharata 
and Who has come here to grant satisfaction to the ladies of Bharata 
Varsa and She is considered very superior throughout all parts of 
India. This TulasT DevT is the chief factor of Mula Prakriti. 



71-95. Then comes the Manasa Devi, the daughter of Kas’yapa- She 
is the dear disciple of S’ankara and is therefore very learned in 
matters of S’astras. She is the daughter of Ananta Deva, the Lord of 
Snakes and is very much respected by all the Nagas. She Herself is 
very beautiful, the Lady of the Nagas, the mother of the Nagas and is 
carried by them. She is decorated with ornaments of the Snakes; 

She is respected by the Nagendras and She sleeps on the bed of 
Snakes. She is Siddha Yogini, the devotee of Visnu and always 
ready in the worship of Visnu; She is the Tapas and the bestower of 
the fruits of Tapas. Herself an ascetic. She spent three lakh years 
(according to the Deva measure) and has become the foremost of 
the ascetics in Bharatvarsa. She is the Presiding Deity of all the 
mantras; Her whole body shines with Brahmateja (the Holy Fire of 
Brahma). Herself of the nature of Brahma, She again meditates on 
Brahman. She is sprung from a part of S’ri Krisna and the chaste 
wife of Jarat Karu Muni, the mother of Astika, the great Muni; She is 
the part of Mula Prakriti. O Child Narada! Now comes the S’asthi 
Devi, the Mother of Devasena. She is the most superior amongst the 
Gauri and the sixteen Matrikas. This chaste woman is the giver of 
sons and grandsons in the three worlds and the nurse, the foster 
mother of all. She is the sixth part of Mula Prakriti and is hence 
known by the name of S’asthi. She lives near to every child as an 
aged Yogini. Her worship is everywhere prevalent in the twelve 
months Vais’akha, etc. When the child gets born, on the sixth day of 
Her worship is done in the lying-in-chamber and again on the 

21^^ day (after twenty days have passed away) the most auspicious 
worshipful ceremony of Her is performed. The Munis bow down to 
Her with reverence and want to visit Her daily. 


She protects all children always with a mother’s affectionate heart. 
This S’asthi Devi is again the part of Mula Prakriti. Then appears the 
Devi Mangala Chandika. She goes from one house to another, on 
land or through water or in air, doing great good to them; She has 
come out of the face of the Prakriti Devi and is doing always all sorts 



of good to this world. Her name is Mangala Chandi because She is 
all auspicious at the time of creation and assumes very furious angry 
appearance at the time of destruction. So the Pundits say. On every 
Tuesday in all the worlds Her worship is done; and She, when 
pleased, gives to women sons, grandsons, wealth, prosperity, fame 
and good of all sorts and grants all desires. This Mangala Chandi is 
again the part of Mula Prakriti. Now comes the lotus-eyed 
MahesVari Kali who when angry can destroy all this universe in a 
moment, who sprang from the forehead of the Mula Prakriti, Durga to 
slay the two demons S’umbha and Nis’umbha. She is the half¬ 
portion of Durga and qualified like Her, fiery and energetic. The 
beauty and splendour of whose body make one think as if the 
millions of suns have arisen simultaneously. Who is the foremost of 
all the S’aktis and is more powerful than any of them. Who grants 
success to all the persons. Who is superior to all and is of Yogic 
nature. Who is exceedingly devoted to Krisna and like Him fiery, 
well-qualified, and valorous. Whose body has become black by the 
constant meditation of S’ri Krisna, Who can destroy in one breath 
this whole Brahmanda, Who was engaged in fighting with the 
Daityas simply for sport and instruction to the people and Who, when 
pleased in worship can grant the four fruits Dharma, Artha, Kama 
and Moksa. This Kali is also the part of Prakriti. The Devi 
Basundhara (Earth) is again the part of Mula Prakriti. Brahma and 
the other Devas, all the Muni mandalams (the spheres of Munis), 
fourteen Manus and all men sing hymns to Her. She is the support of 
all and filled with all sorts of grains. She is the source of all gems and 
jewels. She bears in Her womb all the precious metals. All sorts of 
best things issue from Her. She is the Refuge of all. The subjects 
and kings worship Her always and chant hymns to Her. All the Jivas 
live through Her and She bestows all sorts of wealth and prosperity. 
Without Her, all this, moving or non-moving, become void of any 
substratum. Where to rest on! 



96-143. O Child Narada! Now hear about them who are issued again 
from the parts of Mula Prakriti as well as the names of their wives. I 
will now narrate duly. The Devi “Svaha” is the wife of Agni (Fire), and 
the whole Universe worships Her. Without her, the Devi can never 
take any oblations. Daksina and Diksa are both the wives of Yajha 
(Sacrifice). They are honoured everywhere. So much so that without 
Daksina (the fees given at the end of the Sacrifice) no sacrificial 
ceremonies can be complete and fructifying. The Devi “Svadha” is 
the wife of the Pitris. All worship this Devi “Svadha” whether they are 
Munis, Manus, or men. If this mantra “Svadha” be not uttered while 
making an offering to the Pitris, all turn out useless. The Devi 
“Svasti” is the wife of the Vayu Deva; She is honoured everywhere in 
the Universe. Without this “Svasti” Devi, no giving nor taking nor any 
action can be fructifying and useful. “Pusti” (nourishment) is the wife 
of Ganapati. All in this world worship this Pusti Devi. Without this 
“Pusti”, women or men alike all become weaker and weaker. Tusti 
(satisfaction, contentment) is the wife of Ananta Deva. She is praised 
and worshipped everywhere in this world. Without Her no one 
anywhere in the world can be happy. “Sampatti” is the wife of Isana 
Deva. The Suras, the men all alike worship Her. Were it not for Her, 
all in this world would be oppressed with dire poverty. The Devi 
“Dhriti” is the wife of Kapila Deva. She is honoured equally in all 
places. Were it not for Her, all the people in this world would have 
become impatient. The “Sati” Devi is the wife of Satya Deva (Truth). 
She is endearing to the whole world. The liberated ones worship Her 
always. Were it not for the truth loving Sati, the whole world would 
have lost the treasure in friendship. “Daya” (Mercy) endearing to the 
whole world is the chaste wife of “Moha Deva”. She is liked by all. 
Were it not for Her, all the world would have become hopeless. The 
Devi “Pratistha” (fame, celebrity) is the wife of Punya Deva 
(merit).She gives merits to persons according as they worship Her. 
Were it not for Her, all the persons would remain dead while living. 
The Devi “Kirti” (fame) is the wife of Sukarma (good works). Herself 
a Siddha (one who has acquired the result of one’s success), all the 
blessed people honour Her with great reverence. Were it not for Her, 
all the persons in this world would have been dead, devoid of any 



fame. Kriya (work-efforts, action, doing) is the wife of “Udyoga” 
(enthusiasm). All honour Her greatly. O Muni Narada! Were it not for 
Her, the whole people would be void of any rules and regulations. 
Falsehood is the wife of Adharma (unrighteousness). She is 
honoured greatly by all the cheats that are extant in this world. Were 
she not liked by them, then all the cheats would become extinct. She 
did not fall in the sight of anybody in the Satya Yuga. Her subtle form 
became visible in the Treta Yuga. When the Dvapara Yuga came. 
She became half developed. And at last when the Kali Yuga has 
come. She is fully developed and there is no second to Her whether 
in bold confidence and shamelessness or in talking much and 
pervading everywhere. With her brother Deceitfulness, She roams 
from one house to another. Peace and modesty and shame are both 
the wives of good behaviour. Were they not existent, all in this world 
would have turned out deluded and mad. Intelligence, genius and 
fortitude, these three are the wives of Jhana (knowledge). Had they 
not lived, every one would become stupid and insane. Murti is the 
wife of Dharma Devi. She is of the nature of Beauty to all and very 
charming. Were it not for Her, Paramatman would not get any resting 
place; and the whole universe would have become Niralamba 
(without anything to rest). This chaste Murti Devi is of the nature of 
splendour, loveliness and Laksmi. She is everywhere respected, 
worshipped and reverenced. “Sleep”, the Siddha Yogini, is the wife 
of Rudra Deva, who is of the nature of Kalagni (the universal 
conflagration at the break-up of the world). All the Jivas spend their 
nights with Her. The twilights, night and day are the wives of Kala 
(Time). If they were not, the Creator even would not be able to 
reckon time. Hunger and thirst are the wives of Lobha 
(covetousness). They are thanked, respected and worshipped by the 
whole world. Had they not lived, the whole world would have merged 
ever in an ocean of anxieties. Splendour and burning capacity are 
the wives of Tejas (fire). Without these, the Lord of the world could 
never have created and established order in this universe. Death 
and old age are the daughters of the Kala, and the dear wives of 
Jvara (the disease). Without these, all the creation would come to an 
end. The Tandra (drowsiness, lassitude) and Priti (satisfaction) are 



the daughters of Nidra (sleep). And they are the dear wives of Sukha 
(pleasure). They are present everywhere in this world. O Best of 
Munis! S’raddha (faith) and Bhakti (devotion) are the wives of 
Vairagyam (dispassion). For then all the persons can become 
liberated while living (Jivanmuktas). Besides these there is Aditi, the 
Mother of the Gods, Surabhi, mother of cows; Diti, the mother of the 
Daityas; Kadru, the mother of the Nagas (serpents); Vinata, the 
mother of Garuda, the prince of birds; and Danu, the mother of the 
Danavas. All are very useful for the purpose of creation. But these all 
are parts of Mula Prakriti. Now I will mention some of the other parts 
of Prakriti. Hear. Rohini, the wife of the Moon, Sanjha, the wife of the 
Sun; S’atarupa, the wife of Manu; S’achi, the wife of Indra; Tara, the 
wife of Brihaspati; Arundhati, the wife of Vas’istha; Anasuya, the wife 
of Atri; Devahuti, the wife of Kardama; Prasuti, the wife of Daksa; 
Menaka, the mind born daughter of the Piths and the mother of 
Ambika, Lopamudra, Kunti, the wife of Kuvera, the wife of Varuna, 
BindhyavalT, the wife of the King Bali; Damayanti, Yas’oda, Devaki, 
Gandhari, Draupadi, S’aivya, Satyavati, the chaste and noble wife of 
Brisabhanu and the mother of Radha; Mandidari; Kaus’alya, 

Kauravi,; Subhadra; Revati, Satyabhama, Kalindi, Laksmana; 
Jambavati; Nagnajiti, Mitrabinda, Laksana, Rukmini, Sita, the 
Laksmi incarnate; Kali, Yojana Gandha, the chaste mother of Vyasa, 
Usa, the daughter of Vana, her companion Chitralekha; Prabhavati, 
Bhanumati, the Sati Mayavati, Renuka, the mother of Paras’urama; 
Rohini, the mother of Balarama, Ekananda and the sister of S’ri 
Krisna, Sati Durga and many other ladies are the parts of Prakriti 
and all the female sex, everywhere in the Universe are all come from 
the parts of Prakriti. So to insult any woman is to insult the Prakriti. If 
one worships a chaste Brahmin woman, who has her husband and 
son living, with clothings, ornaments, and sandal paste, etc., one 
worships, as it were, Prakriti. If any Vipra worships a virgin girl, eight 
years old, with clothings, ornaments and sandal paste, know that he 
has worshipped the Prakriti Devi. The best, middling, and worst are 
all sprung from Prakriti. Those women that are sprung from Sattva 
Guna are all very good natured and chaste; those that are sprung 
from Rajo Guna are middling and very much attached to worldly 



enjoyments and do their selfish ends and those that are sprung from 
Tamo Guna are recognised as worst and belonging to the unknown 
families. They are very scurrilous, cheats, ruining their families, fond 
of their own free ways, quarrelsome and no seconds are found equal 
to them. Such women become prostitutes in this world and Apsaras 
in the Heavens. The Hermaphrodites are parts of Prakriti but they 
are of the nature of Tamo Gunas. 


144-159. Thus I have described to you the nature of Prakriti. So in 
this Punyabhumi Bharata Varsa, to worship the Devi is by all means 
desirable. In days past by, the King Suratha worshipped the Mula 
Prakriti Durga, the Destructrix of all evils. Then again S’ri Rama 
Chandra worshipped Her when he wanted to kill Havana. Since then 
Her worship is extant in the three worlds. She was first born as the 
honourable daughter of Daksa. She destroyed the whole hosts of 
Daityas and Danavas. It was She who, hearing the abusive words 
uttered against Her husband at the Yajha by Daksa, Her father, gave 
up Her body and took up again Her birth. She took Her birth in the 
womb of Menaka and got again Pas’upati as Her husband. And of 
the two sons, Kartika and Ganes’a, born to Her, Kartika was the 
Ansa (part) of Narayana and Ganapati was S’ri Krisna Himself, the 
Lord of Radha. O Devarsi! After the two sons, Laksmi Devi came out 
of Durga. Mangala Raja, the King Mars first worshipped Her. Since 
then, all in the three worlds began to worship Her, whether they are 
Devas or men. The King AsVapati first worshipped Savitri Devi; and 
since then the Devas, Munis, all began to worship Her. When the 
Devi Saravasti was born, the Bhagavan Brahma first worshipped 
Her; next the greatest Munis, Devas all began to worship Her. On the 
full moon night of the month of Kartik, it was Bhagavan S’ri Krisna, 
The Highest Spirit, that worshipped, first of all, the Devi Radha within 
the Rasa Mandalam, the enclosure, within which the Rasa Lila was 
performed (the circular dance) in the region Goloka. Then under the 
command of S’ri Krisna, all the Gopas (cow-herds), Gopis, all the 
boys, girls, Surabhi, the queen of the race of the cows, and the other 



cows worshipped Her. So since Her worship by the inhabitants of 
Goloka, by Brahma and the other Devas and the Munis, all began to 
worship ever S’ri Radha with devotion and incense, light and various 
other offerings. On earth She was first worshipped by Suyajha, in the 
sacred field of Bharatvarsa, under the direction of Bhagavan 
Mahadeva. Subsequently, under the command of the Bhagavan S’ri 
Krisna, the Highest Spirit, the inhabitants of the three worlds began 
to worship Her. The Munis with great devotion, with incense, flowers 
and various other offerings worship always the Devi Radha. O Child 
Narada! Besides these, all the other Devis that have issued from 
Prakriti Devi are all worshipped. So much so that in the villages, the 
village Deities, in the forests, the forest Deities and in the cities, the 
city Deities are worshipped. Thus I have described to you all 
according to the S’astras the glorious lives of the Devi Prakriti and 
Her parts. What more do you want to hear? 


Here ends the First Chapter on the Description of Prakriti in the Ninth 
Book of the S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 2. On The Origin Of Prakriti And 

PURUSA 


1-4. Narada said O Lord! I have heard all that you said in brief 
about the Prakriti Devi. Now describe in detail. Why the Mula Prakriti 
Adya S’akti (the Prime Force) was created at the beginning before 
the creation of this world of five elements. How did She, being of the 
nature of the three Gunas, come to be divided into five parts? I 
desire to hear all this in detail. Now kindly describe their auspicious 
births, methods of worship, their meditation, their stotras (praises), 
Kavachas (the mystic syllables considered as a preservation like 
armour), glory and power in detail. 


5-26. Narayana spoke “O Devarsi! The Mula Prakriti, of the nature 
of Maya of Para Brahman is an eternal entity (the nabho mandal); 
Time (Kala), the ten quarters, the Universe Egg, the Goloka and, 
lower than this, the Vaikuntha Dhama all are eternal things. Atman 
and Prakriti are in inseparable union with each other as Fire and its 
burning capacity, the Moon and her beauty, the lotus and its 
splendour, the Sun and his rays are inseparably united with each 
other. As the goldsmith cannot prepare golden ornaments without 
gold and as the potter cannot make earthen pots without earth, so 
the Atman cannot do any work without the help of this omnipotent 
Prakriti. The letter “Sa” indicates “AisVaryam” prosperity, the divine 
powers; and “Kti”, denotes strength; and in as much as She is the 
bestower of the above two, the Mula Prakriti is named “S’akti”. 
“Bhaga” is indicative of knowledge, prosperity, wealth, fame; and in 
as much as Mula Prakriti has all these powers. She is also called 
“Bhagavati”. And Atman “is always in union with this Bhagavati Who 
is all powers, so He is called “Bhagavan’. The Bhagavan is therefore 
sometimes with form; and sometimes He is without form. {Note 
When Prakriti becomes latent, God is without form; with Prakriti 
manifest, God is with form.) The Yogis always think of the Luminous 



Form of the Formless Bhagavan and declare Him to be all blissful 
Para Brahma, the God. Though He is invisible, the Witness of all. 
Omniscient, the Cause of all, the Giver of everything and of every 
form, yet the Vaisnavas do not say so. The Vaisnavas declare how 
can fire, strength and energy come when there is no fiery, strong, 
energetic Person behind it? Therefore He who shines in the centre of 
this fiery sphere is the Para Brahma; He is the Fiery Person; He is 
higher than the Highest. He is All Will; He is All Form, the Cause of 
all causes and His Form is Very Beautiful. He is Young; He looks 
very peaceful and loved by all. He is the Highest; and His Blue Body 
shines like new rain-clouds. His two eyes defy the beauty of the 
autumn lotuses in the mid-day; His exquisitely nice rows of teeth put 
all the series of pearls in the dark back-ground. The peacock’s 
feather is seen on His crown; the garland of Malati flowers is 
suspended from His neck.; His nose is exceedingly beautiful; the 
sweet smile is always seen on His lips. There is no second like Him 
in showing favour to the Bhaktas. He wears yellow clothings, as if 
the burning fire is emanating all round; the flute is seen on both His 
hands, reaching His knees. His body is decorated all over with 
jewels. He is the Sole Refuge of this Universe; the Lord of all, 
omnipotent and omnipresent. No trace of deficiency can be seen in 
Him; He is Himself a Siddha (perfect) Purusa; and the foremost of all 
Siddha Purusas; bestows Siddhis to all. The Vaisnavas meditate 
always That Eternal S’ri Krisna, the Deva of the Devas. He takes 
away fully all the fears of birth, death, old age, and ills and sorrows. 
The age of Brahma is the twinkling of His eye. That Highest Self, the 
Para Brahma is denominated as Krisna. The word “Kris” denotes 
Bhakti to S’ri Krisna and the letter “na” signifies devotion to His 
service. So He is the Bestower of Bhakti and devotion to His service. 
Again “Kris” denotes all; everything; and “na” signifies the root. So 
He Who is the Root and Creator of all, is S’ri Krisna. When He 
desired, in the very beginning, to create this Universe, there was 
nothing then except S’ri Krisna; and at last, impelled by Kala (His 
Own Creation), He became ready, in His part, to do the work of 
creation. 



27-61. The Lord, who is All Will, willed and divided Himself into two 
parts. His Left part becoming female and His Right part becoming 
male. Then that Eternal One, Who is greatly loving, looked at the 
female. His left part, the Sole Receptacle to hold all the contents of 
love, very lovely to the eyes, and looking like the beautiful lotus. The 
loins of this woman defy the Moon; Her thighs put the plaintain trees 
quite in the background; Her breasts are mistaken for the beautiful 
Bel fruits; flowers are scattered as Her Hairs on the head; Her middle 
part is very slender, very beautiful to behold! Exceedingly lovely; 
appearance very calm; sweet smile reigning in Her lips; side long 
glances with Her; Her clothing is purified with fire; all over Her body 
decorated with gems. Her eyes, also, like the Chakora bird (Greek 
partridge) began to drink incessantly with joy the moon beams from 
the face of S’ri Krisna, defying, as it were, the ten millions of moons. 
On Her forehead there was the dot of vermillion (red-lead); over that, 
the dot of white sandal paste and over that was placed the musk. 

The fillets or braids of hair on Her head are slightly curved; this was 
decorated with Malati garlands; on Her neck was suspended the 
necklace of gems and jewels and She is always very amorous 
towards Her husband. On looking at Her face, it seems that ten 
millions of moons have arisen at once; when She walks. Her gait 
puts (humiliates) those of ganders and elephants in the shade. O 
Muni! S’ri Krisna, the Lord of the Rasa Dance, and the Person of 
Taste in the Rasa sport, looked askance at Her for a while and then 
catching hold of Her by Her hand went to the Rasamandalam and 
began to play the Rasa sport (the amorous pastime). It seemed then 
the Lord of amorous pastimes had become incarnate there and had 
been enjoying the various pleasures of amorous passions and 
desires. So much, that Brahma’s one day passed away in that sport. 
The Father of the Universe, then becoming tired, impregnated in an 
auspicious moment in Her womb who was born of His left portion. 
The Prakriti Devi was also tired of the embraces of S’ri Krisna; so 
after the intercourse, she began to perspire and breathe frequently. 
Her perspiration turned into water and deluged the whole universe. 



with water; and Her breath turned into air and became the life of all 
beings. The female that sprung from the left side of Vayu became his 
wife and out of their contact originated Prana, Apana, Samana, 
Udana and Vyana, the five sons. These are the five vital Vayus of all 
the beings. Besides these from the womb of the Vayu’s wife came 
out Naga and the other four lower Vayus. The water that came out 
from perspiration, Varana Deva became the Presiding Deity of that; 
and the female, sprung out of the left side of Varuna Deva, became 
the wife of Varuna, called Varunani. On the other hand, the S’akti, of 
the nature of knowledge of S’ri Krisna, remained pregnant for one 
hundred manvantaras. Her body became effulgent with Brahma-teja 
(the fire of Brahma). Krisna was Her life and She again was dearer 
to Krisna than his life even. She remained always with S’ri Krisna; so 
much so that She constantly rested on His breast. When one 
hundred manvantaras passed away, that Beautiful One gave birth to 
a Golden Egg. That egg was the repository of the whole universe. 
The Beloved of Krisna became very sorry to see the egg and out of 
anger, threw that within the water collected in the centre of the 
Universe. Seeing this, S’ri Krisna raised a great cry and immediately 
cursed Her duly and said “O Angry One! O Cruel One! When you 
have forsaken out of anger this son just born of you, I say then that 
you become from today bereft of any issue. Besides, let all those 
godly women that will spring out of your parts, they also be deprived 
of having any issue or sons and they will remain ever constant in 
their youth. O Muni! While S’ri Krisna was thus cursing, suddenly 
came out from the tongue of the beloved of Krisna, a beautiful 
daughter, of a white colour. Her clothings were all white, in her hands 
there were lute and book and all Her body was decorated with 
ornaments made of gems and jewels. She was the Presiding Deity of 
all the S’astras. Some time later the Mula Prakriti, the Beloved of 
Krisna divided into two parts. Out of Her left portion came Kamala 
and out of Her right portion came Radhika. In the meantime S’ri 
Krisna divided Himself into two parts. From his right side appeared a 
form two-handed; and from the left side appeared a form four- 
handed. Then S’ri Krisna addressed the Goddess Speech, holding 
flute in Her hand, “O Devi! You follow this four-handed Person as his 



wife” and then spoke to Radha “O Radhe! You are a sensitive, 
proud lady; let you be My wife; so it will do you good”. S’ri Krisna 
also told Laksmi gladly to become the wife of the four-handed 
Narayana. Then Narayana, the Lord of the world, took both Laksmi 
and Sarasvati to the abode Vaikuntha. O Muni! Both Laksmi and 
Sarasvati became issueless, being born of Radha. From the body of 
Narayana arose his attendants, all four-handed. They were all equal 
to Him in appearance, in qualifications; in spirit and in age. On the 
other hand, from the body of Kamala arose millions of female 
attendants all equal to Her in form and qualifications. Then arose 
innumerable Gopas (cow-herds) from the pores of S’ri Krisna. They 
were all equal to the Lord of Goloka in form, Gunas, power and age; 
they were all dear to Him as if they were His life. 


62-88. From the pores of Radhika came out the Gopa Kanyas (cow- 
herdesses). They were all equal to Radha and all were Her 
attendants and were sweet-speaking. Their bodies were all 
decorated with ornaments of jewels, and their youth was constant, 
they were all issueless as S’ri Krisna had cursed them thus. O Best 
of Brahmanas! On the other hand, suddenly arose Durga, the Maya 
of Visnu (The Highest Self) eternal and whose Deity was Krisna. (A/. 
B. Durga was the Avatara of Mula Prakriti not the Avatara of Radha 
as Laksmi and Sarasvati were.) She is Narayani; She is Is’ani; She 
is the S’akti of all and She is the Presiding Deity of the intelligence of 
S’ri Krisna. From Her have come out many other Devis; She is Mula 
Prakriti and She is Is’vari; no failings or insufficiencies are seen in 
Her. She is the Tejas (of the nature of Fire) and She is of the nature 
of the three Gunas. Her colour is bright like the molten gold; Her 
lustre looks as if ten millions of Suns have simultaneously arisen. 
She looks gracious always with sweet smile on Her lips. Her hands 
are one thousand in number. Various weapons are in all Her hands. 
The clothings of the three-eyed one are bright and purified by Fire. 
She is decorated with ornaments all of jewels. All the women who 
are the jewels are sprung from Her parts and parts of parts and by 



the power of Her Maya, all the people of the world are enchanted. 
She bestows all the wealth that a householder wants; She bestows 
on Krisna’s devotees, the devotion towards Krisna; nay. She is the 
Vaisnavi S’akti of the Vaisnavas. She gives final liberation to those 
that want such and gives happiness to those that want happiness. 
She is the Laksmi of the Heavens; as well She is the Laksmi of 
every household. She is the Tapas of the ascetics, the beauty of the 
kingdoms of the kings, the burning power of fire, the brilliancy of the 
Sun, the tender beauty of the Moon, the lovely beauty of the lotus 
and the S’akti of S’ri Krisna the Highest Self. The Self, the world all 
are powerful by Her S’akti; without Her everything would be a dreary 
dead mass. O Narada! She is the seed of this Tree of World; She is 
eternal; She is the Stay, She is Intelligence, fruits, hunger, thirst, 
mercy, sleep, drowsiness, forgiveness, fortitude, peace, bashfulness, 
nourishment, contentment and lustre. The Mula Prakrit! praising S’ri 
Krisna stood before Him. The Lord of Radhika then gave Her a 
throne to sit. O Great Muni! At this moment sprang from the navel 
lotus the four-faced Brahma, with his wife Savitri, an exceedingly 
beautiful woman. No sooner the four-faced Brahma, the foremost of 
the Jhanins, fond of asceticism and holding Kamandalu in His hand 
came into being than He began to praise S’ri Krisna by His four 
mouths. On the other hand the Devi Savitri, with a beauty of one 
hundred moons, born with great ease, wearing apparel purified by 
fire and decorated with various ornaments praised Krisna, the One 
and Only Cause of the Universe and then took Her seat gladly with 
Her husband in the throne made of jewels. At that time Krisna 
divided Himself into two parts; His left side turned into the torn of 
Mahadeva; and His right side turned into the Lord of Gopikas (cow- 
herdesses). The colour and splendour of the body of Mahadeva is 
pure white like white crystal; as if one hundred suns have arisen 
simultaneously. In His hands there are the trident (Tris’ul) and sharp- 
edged spear (Pattisa); He is wearing a tiger skin; on His head is 
matted hair (data) of a tawny hue like molten gold; His body was 
besmeared all over with ashes, smile reigning in His face and on His 
forehead, the semi-moon. He has no clothing on His loins; so He is 
called Digambara (the quarters of the Sky being His clothing); His 



neck is of a blue colour; the serpent being the ornaments on His 
body and on His right hand the nice bead of jewels well purified. 

Who is always repeating with His five faces the Eternal Light of 
Brahma, and Who has conquered Death by praising S’ri Krisna, Who 
is of the nature of Truth, the Highest Self, the God Incarnate, the 
material cause of all things and the All auspicious of all that is good 
and favourable, and the Destroyer of the fear of birth, death, old age, 
and disease and Who has been named Mrityunjaya (the conqueror 
of Death). This Mahadeva took His seat on a throne made of jewels 
(diamonds, emeralds, etc.). 


Here ends the Second Chapter of the Ninth Book on the origin of 
Prakriti and Purusa in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 3. On The Origin Of Brahma, Visnu, 
Mahes’a And Others 


1-34. Narayana said:- “O Devarsi! The egg (born of Mula Prakriti) 
that was floating in the waters for a period equal to the life period of 
Brahma, now in the fullness of time separated into two parts. Within 
that egg there was a powerful Child, lustrous like one thousand 
millions of suns. This child could not suck mother’s milk, as it was 
forsaken by Her. So being tired of hunger, the child for a moment 
cried repeatedly. The child that will become the Lord of countless 
Brahmandas (universes), now an orphan having no father nor 
mother began to look upwards from the waters. This boy came to be 
denominated afterwards by the name of Maha Virat, when he 
became gross and grosser. As there is nothing finer than radium so 
there is nothing grosser than Maha Virat. The power of this Maha 
Virat is one-sixteenth of that of S’ri Krisna, the Highest Self. But this 
boy, (born of the Prakriti Radha) is the Sole Stay of all this Universe 
and he is denominated by the name “Maha-Visnu”. In his every pore 
countless universes are existing. So much so that even S’ri Krisna 
could not count them. If it were possible to count the number of dust 
particles, it is impossible to count the number of universes. So there 
are endless Brahmas, Visnus, and Mahes’varas. In every 
Brahmanda, there is Brahma, Visnu, and Mahes’a. Each Brahmanda 
extends from Patala to the Brahmaloka. The abode of Vaikuntha is 
higher than that (i. e. it is situated outside of Brahmanda), again the 
abode of Goloka is fifty koti yojanas (50 x 10 x 4 x 2 million miles) 
higher than Vaikuntha. This Goloka Dhama is eternal and real as S’ri 
Krisna is eternal and real. This world composed of the seven islands 
is surrounded by the seven oceans. Forty-nine Upa Dvipas (smaller 
islands adjacent to them) are existing here. Besides there are 
countless mountains and forests. Higher than this earth is the 
Brahmaloka with seven heavens and below this are the seven 
Patalas. This is the bounding limit of Brahmanda. Just above this 
earth there is the Bhurloka; above is Bhuvarloka; then Svarloka, then 



Janarloka, then Taparloka, then Satyaloka, and above that is 
Brahmaloka. The splendour of Brahmaloka is like that of molten 
gold. But all the substances whether outside or inside this 
Brahmaloka, are transient. When this Brahmanda (cosmos) 
dissolves, everything dissolves and is destroyed. All are temporary 
like bubbles of water. Only Goloka and Vaikuntha are eternal. In 
every pore of this Maha Virat is existing one Brahmanda (cosmos). 
What to speak of others when even Krisna cannot count the number 
of these Brahmandas. In every Brahmanda there is Brahma, Visnu 
and Mahes’a. O Child Narada! In every Brahmanda, the number of 
the gods is three kotis or 30 millions. Some of them are the Dikpatis 
(the Regents of the quarters); some are the Dikpalas (the Rulers of 
the quarters), some are asterisms, and some planets. In the 
Bhurloka, there are four Varnas (Brahmins, etc.,) and in the Patalas 
there are Nagas. Thus the Universe exists composed of moveable 
and non-moveable things (This is Brahmanda Vivriti). O Narada! 

Now the Virat Purusa began to look up to the skies again and again 
but He could not see anything within that egg except the void. Then 
distressed with hunger He cried out repeatedly and became merged 
in anxiety. Next moment getting back His consciousness. He began 
to think of Krisna, the Highest Person and saw there at once the 
eternal light of Brahma. He saw there His form as deep blue like new 
rain-cloud; with two hands, garment of a yellow colour, sweet smile 
on His face, flute in His hand and He seemed to be very anxious to 
show His Grace to Devotees. Looking at the Lord, His Father, the 
boy became glad and smiled. The Lord, the Bestower of boon 
granted him boons appropriate for that moment “O Child! Let you 
possess knowledge like Me; let your hunger and thirst vanish; let you 
be the holder of innumerable Brahmandas till the time of Pralaya (the 
universal dissolution). Be without any selfishness, be fearless and 
the bestower of boons to all. Let not old age, death, disease, sorrow 
nor any other ailings afflict thee. Thus saying He repeated thrice on 
his ear the six-lettered great Mantra “Om Krisnaya Svaha” 
worshipped by the Vedas with their Amgas, the Giver of desires and 
the destroyer of all troubles and calamities. O Brahma’s Son! Thus 
giving the mantra, S’ri Krisna arranged for his feeding thus:- In 



every universe, whatever offerings will be given to S’ri Krisna, one 
sixteenth of that will go to Narayana, the Lord of Vaikuntha and 
fifteen-sixteenth is to go to this boy, the Virat. S’ri Krisna did not allot 
any share for Himself. Himself transcending all the Gunas, and Full, 
He is always satisfied with Himself. What necessity is there for any 
further offerings? Whatever the people offer with devotion, the Lord 
of Laksmi, the Virat eats all these. Bhagavan S’ri Krisna giving thus 
to the Virat the boon and the Mantra said:-- “O Child! Say what more 
you desire; I will give you that instantly. The Virat boy, hearing thus 
the words of S’ri Krisna, spoke:- “O Thou Omnipresent! I have got 
no desires whatsoever, save this that as long as I live, whether for a 
short time or for a long time, let me have pure Bhakti towards Thy 
lotus feet. 


35-41. In this world he is Jivanmukta (liberated whilst living) who is 
your Bhakta; and that bewildered fool is dead while living who is 
devoid of any Bhakti to Thee. What needs he to perform Japam, 
asceticism, sacrifice, worship, holding fasts and observances, going 
to sacred places of pilgrimages and other virtuous acts if he be 
without any bhakti to S’ri Krisna? Vain is his life who is devoid of any 
devotion to S’ri Krisna, under Whose Grace he has obtained his life 
and Whom he does not now pay homage and worship. He is 
endowed with Sakti as long as Atma (Self) resides in his body; no 
sooner the Atma departs from his body all the Saktis accompany 
him. O Great One! And thou art the Universal Atman (soul) who 
transcends Prakriti, Who is All will, the Primeval Person and of the 
nature of the Highest Light. O Child! Thus saying, the Virat boy 
remained silent. S’ri Krisna then, spoke in sweet words:- “O Child! 
Let you remain as fresh as ever like Me. You will not have any fall 
even if innumerable Brahmas pass away. 


42-57. Let you divide yourself in parts and turn into smaller Virats in 
every universe. Brahma will spring from your navel and will create 



the cosmos. From the forehead of that Brahma will spring eleven 
Rudras for the destruction of the creation. But they will all be parts of 
S’iva. The Rudra named Kalagni, of these eleven Rudras, will be the 
destroyer of all this VisVas (cosmos). Besides, from each of your 
sub-divisions, the Vis’nu will originate and that Bhagavan Visnu will 
be the Preserver of this VisVu world. I say that under my favour you 
will always be full of Bhakti towards Me and no sooner you meditate 
on Me, you will be able to see My lovely form. There is no doubt in 
this; and your Mother, Who resides in My breast, will not be difficult 
for you to see. Let you remain here in ease and comfort. I now go to 
Goloka. Saying thus S’ri Krisna, the Lord of the world disappeared. 
Going to His own abode He spoke instantly to Brahma and S’ankara, 
skilled in the works of creation and destruction:- “O Child Brahma! 
Go quickly and be born in parts from the navels of each of the 
smaller Virats that will arise from the pores of the Great Virat. O 
Child Mahadeva! Go and be born in parts from the forehead of each 
Brahma in every universe for the destruction of the creation; (but be 
careful that you not forget) and perform austerities for a long, long 
time. O son of the Creator Brahma! Thus saying, the Lord of the 
Universe remained silent. Brahma and S’iva, the auspicious, bowing 
to the Lord, went to their own duties. On the other hand, the great 
Virat that lay floating in the waters of the Brahmanda sphere, created 
from his every pore each smaller Virat. That youth Janardan of the 
form of the Great Cosmos, wearing yellow garment of the bluish- 
green colour of the Durba grass, lay sleeping pervading everywhere. 
Brahma took his birth in His navel. He, then, after his birth, began to 
travel in that navel-lotus and in the stem of the lotus for one lakh 
yugas. But he could not find out the place whence the lotus or its 
stem had sprung up. O Narada! Then your father became very 
anxious and came back to his former place and began to meditate 
on the lotus feet of S’ri Krisna. Then, in meditation, with his 
introspective eye, he first saw the small Virat, then the endless great 
Virat lying on the watery bed, in whose pores the universes are 
existing and then he saw the God S’ri Krisna in Goloka with Gopas 
and Gopis. He then began to praise the Lord of Goloka when He 



granted boons to your father, and he began to do the work of 
creation. 


58-62. From the mind of your father, were born first S’anaka and 
other brothers and then from his forehead eleven Rudras sprang. 
Then from the left side of that small Virat lying on the bed of waters, 
the four-handed Visnu Bhagavan, the Preserver of the Universe, 
came. He went to SVetadvTpa, where he remained. Then your father 
became engaged in creating this Universe, moveable and non¬ 
moveable, composed of three worlds, heaven, earth and Patala, in 
the navel of that small Virat Purusa. O Narada! Thus from the pores 
of that great Virat each universe has sprung and in every universe 
there is one small Virat, one Brahma, one Visnu and one S’iva and 
S’anaka and others. O Best of twice born! Thus I have described the 
glories of Krisna, that give exceeding pleasure and Moksa. Now say 
what more you want to hear? 


Here ends the Third Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Origin of 
Brahma, Visnu and Mahes’a and others in the Maha Puranam S’ri 
Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 4. On The Hymn, Worship And Kavacha 
Of SARASVAxi Dev! 


1-3. Narada said By your Grace I have heard everything very 
sweet like nectar, of the origin of things. Now may I ask you which 
Devi of these five Prakritis has been worshipped by what Mantra? 
and by whom? How has each of them been praised? and by whom? 
How has the worship of their Murtis (form) become prevalent in this 
world? What are the Stotram (hymn of praise), the Dhyan 
(meditation) glory and life of these? Also what sort of boon do each 
of the Devis grant? and to whom? Kindly describe all these in detail. 


4-29. Narayana said O Child! Durga, the mother of Ganes'a, 
Radha, Laksmi, Sarasvati and Savitri, these are the five Prakritis 
sprung directly from Mula Prakriti. The methods of their worship, 
wonderful glorious acts, excellent stotrams, and their lives, 
inculcating good to all, and sweet like nectar are all widely written in 
the Vedas, Puranas, Tantras and other S'astras. So there is no need 
to describe them here again. Now I am describing in detail the 
auspicious character of these that are sprung from the parts and 
Kalas of the Prakriti. Hear attentively. Kali, Vasundhara, 

Ganga, Sasthi, Mangal Chandika, Tulasi, Manasa, Nidra, Svadha, 
Svaha, and Daksina, these are the parts of Prakriti. By and by I will 
describe, briefly, the merit-giving characters and pleasant to hear. 
Along with these I will describe the Karmas of the Jivas, and the 
great exalted lives of Durga and Radha. I am now describing 
Sarasvati's character. Hear, O Muni! S'ri Krisna introduced first in 
this Bharata, the worship of the Devi Sarasvati, the holder of Vma in 
Her hands, under whose influence, the hearts of illiterate stupid 
persons become illumined with knowledge. The amorous Devi 
Sarasvati sprang from the end of the lips of Radha and so she 
desired to marry Krisna out of amorous feelings. S'ri Krisna, the 
controller of the hearts of all, knew it instantly and addressed the 



Mother of the people in true words proper to Her and beneficial to 
Her in the end. O Chaste One! The four-armed Narayana is born 
from My parts; He is young, of good features and endowed with all 
qualifications; so much so, he is like Me. He is a Knower of amorous 
sentiments of women and He fulfils those desires; what to speak of 
His beauty, ten millions of the God of love are playing in His body. O 
Beloved! And if you desire to marry and remain with Me, that will not 
be of any good to you. For Radha is near to Me; She is more 
powerful than you. If a man be stronger than another, he can rescue 
one who takes his shelter; but if he be weaker, how can he then, 
himself weak, protect his dependant from others. Though I am the 
Lord of all, and rule all, yet I cannot control Radha. For She is equal 
to me in power, in beauty, in qualifications, equal to Me in every 
respect. Again it is impossible for Me to quit Radha for She is the 
presiding Deity of My life. Who can relinquish life? Though a son is 
very dear to his father, still it may be questioned, is he dearer than 
his father's life? So, O Auspicious One! Go to the abode Vaikuntha; 
you will get your desires fulfilled there. You will get for your husband 
the Lord of Vaikuntha and you will live ever in peace and enjoy 
happiness. Though Laksmi is residing there yet like you she is not 
under the control of lust, anger, greed, delusion and vanity. She is 
also equal to you in beauty, qualities, and power. So you will live with 
her in great delight and Hah, the Lord of Vaikuntha, will treat both of 
you equally. Moreover, I say this in particular that in every universe, 
on the fifth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Magha, every 
year, the day when the learning is commenced, a great festival will 
be held and men, Manus, Devas, and the Munis desirous of 
liberation, Vasus, Yogis, Nagas, Siddhas, Gandarbhas, Raksasas, all 
will perform your worship with devotion in every Kalpa till the time of 
Maha Pralaya comes. All are required to be Jitendriya (having their 
senses under control) and Samyami (concentrating his mind, and 
with a religious vow) and they will invoke Thee on a jar or on books 
and then meditate according to what is stated in the Kanva S'akha of 
Yajurveda and then worship and sing hymns to Thee. Thy Kavacha 
(an armour; a mystical syllable ** considered as a preservative like 
armour) is written on the bark of the Bhurja tree and then with eight 



kinds of scents mingled with it is placed within a golden nut or ring 
named Maduli and then held on the neck or on the right arm. The 
learned should recite Thy Stotras during worship. Thus saying, the 
Puran Brahma S'ri Krisna Himself worshipped the Devi Sarasvati. 
Since then, Brahma, Visnu, Mahes'a, Ananta Deva, Dharma, Sanaka 
and other Munmdras, all the Devas, Munis, all the kings and all the 
human beings are worshipping the Devi Sarasvati. O Narada! Thus 
the worship of the Eternal Devi is made extant in the three worlds. 


30-31. Narada said O Chief of the Knowers of the Vedas! Now 
describe to me the methods of worship, Dhyan, Kavacham, hymns, 
the appropriate offerings of the Puja flowers, sandalpaste and other 
good things necessary in these worships and which are so sweet to 
hear. I am ever very eager and anxious to hear these. 


32-59. Narayana said O Narada! I am now stating the method of 
worship of the Devi Sarasvati, the Mother of the Worlds, according 
to Kanva S'akha of the Yajurveda. Hear. On the day previous to the 
fifth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Magh or the day of 
commencement of education, the devotee should control his senses, 
concentrate his mind and take his bath. Then he is to perform his 
daily duties and install the jar (Ghata) with devotion and according to 
the Mantras of the Kanva S'akha or the Tantra, as the case may be. 
He is to worship first on that Ghata (jar) Ganapati (Ganes'a), then 
meditate the Devi Sarasvati as described below, invoke Her and 
again read the Dhyan and then worship with Sodas'opachara 
(sixteen good articles offered in the worship). O Good One! Now I 
am speaking, according to my knowledge, about the offerings as 
ordained in the Vedas or Tantras. Hear. Fresh butter, curd, thickened 
milk, rice freed from the husk by frying, sweetmeats (Til Laddu) 
prepared of Til, sugar cane, sugarcane juice, nice Gud (molasses), 
honey, svastik, sugar, rice (not broken) out of white Dhan, chipitak of 
table rice (Alo chal), white Modak, Harbisyanna prepared of boiled 



rice with clarified butter and salt, Pistaka of jaoa or wheaten flour, 
Paramanna with ghee, nectar like sweetmeats, cocoanut, cocoanut 
water, Svastik Pistaka, Svastik and ripe plantain Pistaka, Kaseru 
(root), Mula, ginger, ripe plantains, excellent Bel fruit, the jujube fruit, 
and other appropriate white purified fruits of the season and peculiar 
to the place are to be offered in the Pooja. O Narada! White flowers 
of good scent, white sandalpaste of good scent, new white clothes, 
nice conchshell, nice garlands of white flowers, nice white necklaces, 
and beautiful ornament are to be given to the Devi. I say now the 
Dhyanam sweet to hear, of the Devi Sarasvati according to the 
Vedas, capable to remove errors! Hear. I hereby bow down to the 
Devi Sarasvati, of a white colour, of a smiling countenance and 
exceedingly beautiful, the lustre of whose body overpowers that of 
the ten millions of Moons, whose garment is purified by fire, in whose 
hands there are Vma and books, who is decorated with new 
excellent ornaments of jewels and pearls and whom Brahma, Visnu, 
MahesVara and the other Devas, Munis, Manus and men constantly 
worship. Thus meditating the Devi, the intelligent persons should 
offer all articles, after pronouncing the root Mantra. Then he is to 
hymn and hold Kavacha and make Sastanga pranams before the 
Devi. O Muni! Those whose Devi Sarasvati is the presiding Deity, 
are not to be spoken of at all (i.e., they will naturally do all these 
things and with a greater fervour). Besides all should worship the 
Devi Sarasvati on the day of commencement of education and every 
year on the S'ukla Panchami day of the month of Magh. The eight- 
lettered Mantra, as mentioned in the Vedas is the root Mantra of 
Sarasvati. (Aim Klim Sarasvatyai namah). Or the Mantra to which 
each worshipper is initiated is his Mulmantra (not Mantra). Or 
uttering the Mantra “S'rim Hrim Sarasvatyai Svaha” one is to offer 
everything to the Devi Sarasvati. This Mantra is the Kalpa Vriksa (i. 
e., the tree which yields all desires). Narayana, the ocean of mercy, 
gave in ancient times, this very Mantra to Valmiki in the holy land 
Bharata Varsa on the banks of the Ganges; next Bhrigu gave this 
Mantra on the occasion of solar eclipse to Maharsi Sukracharya on 
the Puskara Tirtha; Maricha gave to Brihaspati on a lunar eclipse; 
Brahma gave to Bhrigu in the Vadarika As'rama; Jaratkara gave to 



Astika on the shore of the Ksiroda ocean; Bibhandaka gave this to 
the intelligent Risyasringa on the Sumeru mountain, S'iva gave this 
to Kanada and Gotama, Surya gave to Yajhavalkya and Katyayana, 
Ananta Deva gave to Panini, to the intelligent Bharadvaja and to 
S'akatayana in Bali's assembly in the Patala. If this Mantra be 
repeated four lakhs of times, all men attain success. And when they 
become Siddhas with this Mantra, they become powerful like 
Brihaspati. In past times, the Creator Brahma gave a Kavacha 
named Vis'vajaya to Bhrigu on the Gandhamadana Mountain. I now 
speak of that. Hear. 


60-61. Once on a time Bhrigu asked Brahma the Lord of all, and 
adored by all, thus “O Brahman! Thou art the foremost of those 
that know the Vedas; there is none equal to thee in matters 
regarding the knowledge of the Vedas (so much so that there is 
nothing that is not known to thee; for all these have sprung from 
thee). Now say about the Vis'vajaya Kavacha of the Devi Sarasvati, 
that is excellent, without any faults and embodying in it all the 
properties of all the Mantras.” 


62-91. Brahma said “O Child! What you have asked about the 
Kavacha of Sarasvati that is sweet to hear, ordained and worshipped 
by the Vedas, and the giver of all desired fruits, now hear of that. In 
the very beginning, the all-pervading S'ri Krisna, the Lord of the 
Rasa circle, mentioned this Kavacha to me in the holy Brindavana 
forest in the abode Goloka at the time of Rasa in Rasa Mandala. 

This is very secret; it is full of holy unheard, wonderful Mantras. 
Reading this Kavacha and holding it (on one's arm) Brihaspati has 
become foremost in matters of intelligence; by the force of this 
Kavacha S'ukracharya has got his ascendancy over the Daityas; the 
foremost Muni Valmiki has become eloquent and skilled in language 
and has become Kavmdra and Svayambhuva Manu; holding this 
Kavacha he has become honoured everywhere. Kanada, Gotama, 



Kanva, Panini, S'akatayana, Daksa, and Katyayana all have become 
great authors by virtue of this Kavacha; Krisna Dvaipayana Veda 
Vyasa made the classification of the Vedas and composed the 
eighteen Puranas. S'atatapa, Samvarta, Vas'istha, Parasara and 
Yajhavalkya had become authors by holding and reading this 
Sarasvati Kavacha. Risyas'ringa, Bharadvaja, Astika, Devala, 
Jaigisavya, and Yayati all were honoured everywhere by virtue of 
this Kavacha. O Dvija! The Prajapati Himself is the Risi of this 
Kavacha; Brihati is its Chhanda; and S'arada Ambika is its presiding 
Deity. Its application (Viniyoga) is in the acquisition of spiritual 
knowlege, in the fruition of any desires or necessities, in composing 
poems or anywhere wheresoever success is required. May S'rim 
Hrim Sarasvatyai Svaha protect fully my head; S’rim Vagdevatayai 
Svaha, my forehead; Om Hrim Sarasvatyai Svaha, my ears always; 
Om S’rim Hrim Bhagabatyai Sarasvatyai Svaha always my eyes; 

Aim Hrim Vagvadinyai Svaha, always my nose; Om Hrim 
Vidyadhisthatri Devyai Svaha, my lips always; Om S’rim Hrim 
Brahmyai Svaha my rows of teeth; Aim, this single letter protect my 
neck; Om S’rim Hrim my throat; S'rim, my shoulders, Om Hrim 
Vidyadhisthatri Devyai Svaha, always my chest; Om Hrim 
Vidyadhisvarupayai Svaha my navel; Om Hrim Klim Vanyai Svaha 
my hands; Om Svarva varnatmi Kayai Svaha my feet; and let Om 
Vagadhisthatridevyai Svaha protect all my body. Let Om 
Sarvakanthavasinyai Svaha protect my east; Let Om Svarvajibhagra 
vasinyai Svaha, the South-east; Om Aim Hrim S’rim Klim 
Sarasvatyai budhajananyai Svaha, my South; Aim Hrim S’rim, this 
three lettered Mantra my South-west; Om Aim Jhibhagravasinyai 
Svaha, my West; Om Svarvam bikayai Svaha, my North west; Om 
Aim S’rim Klim Gadyavasinyai Svaha my North; Aim Sarvas'astra 
vasinyai Svaha, my North-east; Om Hrim Sarvapujitayai Svaha, my 
top; Hrim Pustakavasinyai Svaha my below and let Om Grantha 
vijasvarupayai Svaha protect all my sides. O Narada! This Vis'vajaya 
Kavacha of the nature of Brahma and its embodied Mantra I have 
now spoken to you. I heard this before from the mouth of Dharma 
Deva in the Gandhamadana mountain. Now I speak this to you out 
of my great affection for you. But never divulge this to anybody. One 



is worship one's spiritual Teacher (Guru Deva) according to due rites 
and ceremonies with clothings, ornaments, and sandalpaste and 
then fall down prostrate to him and then hold this Kavacha. 

Repeating this five lakhs of times, one gets success and becomes a 
Siddha. The holder of this Kavacha becomes intelligent like 
Brihaspati, eloquent, Kavmdras, and the conqueror of the three 
worlds, no sooner one becomes a Siddiha in this. In fact, he can 
conquer everything by virtue of this Kavacha. O Muni! Thus I have 
described to you this Kavacha according to Kanva S'akha. Now I am 
speaking about the method of worship, Dhyana and the praise of this 
Kavacha. Hear. 


Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the hymn, 
worship and Kavacha of Sarasvati Devi in S'ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 5. On Saras vat! Stotra By Yajnavalkya 


1-5 Narayana said O Narada! I now describe the Stotra (hymn) of 
Sarasvati Devi, yielding, all desires that Yajnavalkya, the best of the 
Risis recited in days of yore to Her. The Muni Yajnavalkya forgot all 
the Vedas out of the curse of Guru and with a very sad heart went to 
the Sun, the great merit-giving place. There he practised austerities 
for a time when the Lolakhya Sun became visible to him, when, 
being overpowered by great sorrow, he began to cry repeatedly; and 
then he sang hymns to him. Then Bhagavan Surya Deva became 
pleased and taught him all the Vedas with their Amgas (limbs) and 
said “O Child! Now sing hymns to Sarasvati Devi that you get 
back your memory.” Thus saying, the Sun disappeared. The Muni 
Yajnavalkya finished his bath and with his heart full of devotion 
began to sing hymns to the Vag Devi, the Goddess of Speech. 


6-32. Yajnavalkya said “Mother! Have mercy on me. By Guru's 
curse, my memory is lost; I am now void of learning and have 
become powerless; my sorrow knows no bounds. Give me 
knowledge, learning, memory, power to impart knowledge to 
disciples, power to compose books, and also good disciples 
endowed with genius and Pratibha (ready wit). So that in the council 
of good and learned men my intelligence and power of argument and 
judgment be fully known. Whatever I lost by my bad luck, let all that 
come back to my heart and be renewed as if the sprouts come again 
out of the heaps of ashes. O Mother! Thou art of the nature of 
Brahma, superior to all; Thou art of the nature of Light, Eternal; Thou 
art the presiding Deity of all the branches of learning. So I bow down 
again and again to Thee. O Mother! The letters Anusvara, Visarga 
and Chandravindu that are affixed. Thou art those letters. So 
obeisance to Thee! O Mother! Thou art the exposition (Vyakhya) of 
the S'astras; Thou art the presiding Deity of all the expositions and 
annotations. Without Thee no mathematician can count anything. So 



Thou art the numbers to count time; Thou art the S'akti by which 
Siddhantas (definite conclusions) are arrived at; Thus Thou dost 
remove the errors of men. So again and again obeisance to Thee. O 
Mother! Thou art the S'akti, memory, knowledge, intelligence, 
Pratibha, and imagination (Kalpana). So I bow down again and again 
to Thee. Sanatkumara fell into error and asked Brahma for solution. 
He became unable to solve the difficulties and remained speechless 
like a dumb person. Then S'ri Krisna, the Highest Self arriving there, 
said O Prajapati! Better praise and sing hymns to the Goddess of 
speech; then your desires will be fulfilled. Then the four-faced 
Brahma advised by the Lord, praised the Devi Sarasvati; and, by 
Her grace, arrived at a very nice Siddhanta (conclusion). One day 
the goddess Earth questioned one doubt of Her to Ananta Deva, 
when He being unable to answer, remained silent like a dumb 
person. At last He became afraid; and advised by Kas'yapa, praised 
Thee when He resolved the doubt and came to a definite conclusion. 
Veda Vyasa once went to Valmiki and asked him about some Sutras 
of the Puranas when the Muni Valmiki got confounded and 
remembered Thee, the Mother of the world. When by Thy Grace, the 
Light flashed within him and his error vanished. Thereby he became 
able to solve the question. Then Vyasadeva, born of the parts of S'ri 
Krisna, heard about the Purana Sutras from Valmiki's mouth and 
came to know about Thy glory. He then went to Puskara Tirtha and 
became engaged in worshipping Thee, the Giver of Peace, for one 
hundred years. Then Thou didst become pleased and grant him the 
boon when he ascended to the rank of the Kavindra (Indra amongst 
the poets). He then made the classification of the Vedas and 
composed the eighteen Puranas. When Sada S'iva was questioned 
on some spiritual knowledge by Mahendra, He thought of Thee for a 
moment and then answered. Once Indra asked Brihaspati, the Guru 
of the Devas, about S'abda S'astra (Scriptures on sound). He 
became unable to give any answer. So he went to Puskara Tirtha 
and worshipped Thee for a thousand years according to the Deva 
Measure and he became afterwards able to give instructions on 
S'abda S'astra for one thousand divine years to Mahendra. O 
Sures'vari! Those Munis that give education to their disciples or 



those that commence their own studies remember Thee before they 
commence their works respectively. The Munindras, Manus, men, 
Daityendras, and Immortals, Brahma, Visnu and Mahes’a all worship 
Thee and Sing hymns to Thee. Visnu ultimately becomes inert when 
He goes on praising Thee by His thousand mouths. So Maha Deva 
becomes when he praises by His five mouths; and so Brahma by His 
four mouths. When great personages so desist, then what to speak 
of me, who is an ordinary mortal having one mouth only!” Thus 
saying, the Maharsi Yajhavalkya, who had observed fasting, bowed 
down to the Devi Sarasvati with great devotion and began to cry 
frequently. Then the Mahamaya Sarasvati, of the nature of Light 
could not hide Herself away. She became visible to him and said “O 
Child! You be good Kavmdra (Indra of the poets).” Granting him this 
boon. She went to Vaikuntha. He becomes a good poet, eloquent, 
and intelligent like Brihaspati who reads this stotra of Sarasvati by 
Yajhavalkya. Even if a great illiterate reads this Sarasvati stotra for 
one year, he becomes easily a good Pundit, intelligent, and a good 
poet. 


Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on Sarasvati stotra by 
Yajhavalkya in S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 6. On The Coming In This World Of 
LaksmI, Ganga And SARASvAxi 


1-10. Narayana said “O Narada! Sarasvati lives always in 
Vaikuntha close to Narada. One day a quarrel arose with Ganga, 
and by Her curse, Sarasvati came in parts as a river here in this 
Bharata. She is reckoned in Bharata as a great sanctifiying holy and 
merit-giving river. The good persons serve Her always, residing on 
Her banks. She is the Tapasya and the fruit thereof of the ascetics. 
She is like the burning fire to the sins of the sinners. Those that die 
in Bharata on the Sarasvati waters with their full consciousness, live 
for ever in Vaikuntha in the council of Hah. Those that bathe in the 
Sarasvati waters, after committing sins, become easily freed of them 
and live for a long, long time in Visnu-Loka. If one bathes even once 
in the Sarasvati waters, during Chaturmasya (a vow that lasts four 
months), in full moon time, in Aksyaya or when the day ends, in 
Vyatipata Yoga, in the time of eclipse or on any other holy day or 
through any other concomitant cause or even without any faith and 
out of sheer disregard, one is able to go to Vaikuntha and get the 
nature of S’ri Hari. If one repeats the Sarasvati Mantra, residing on 
the banks of the Sarasvati, for one month, a great illiterate can 
become a great poet. There is no doubt in this. Once shaving one's 
head, if one resides on the banks of the Sarasvati, daily bathes in it, 
one will have not to meet with the pain of being again born in the 
womb. O Narada! Thus I have described a little of the unbounded 
glories of Bharata that give happiness and the fruits of all desires.” 

11. Suta said “O Saunaka! The Muni Narada hearing thus, asked 
again at that very moment to solve his doubts. I am now speaking of 
that. Hear.” 


12-15. Narada said “O Lord! How did the Devi Sarasvati quarrel 
with the Devi Ganga and how did she by Her curse turn out in India, 



into a holy river in giving virtues. I am becoming more and more 
eager and impatient to hear about this critical incident. I do not find 
satiety in drinking your nectar-like words. Who finds satiety in getting 
his good weal? Why did Ganga curse Sarasvati, worshipped 
everywhere. Ganga is also full of Sattva Gunas. She always bestows 
good and virtue to all. Both of them are fiery and it is pleasant to 
hear the cause of quarrels between those two. These are very rarely 
found in the Puranas. So you ought to describe that to me.” 


16-21. Narayana said Hear, O Narada! I will now describe that 
incident, the hearing of which removes all the sins. Laksmi, 

Sarasvati and Ganga, the three wives of Hari and all equally loved, 
remain always close to Hari. One day Ganga cast side-long glances 
frequently towards Narayana and was eagerly looking at Him, with 
smile on Her lips. Seeing this, the Lord Narayana, startled and 
looked at Ganga and smiled also. Laksmi saw that, but she did not 
take any offence. But Sarasvati became very angry. Padma (Laksmi) 
who was of Sattva Guna, began to console in various ways the 
wrathful Sarasvati; but she could not be appeased by any means. 
Rather Her face became red out of anger; she began to tremble out 
of her feelings (passion); Her lips quivered; and She began to speak 
to Her husband. 


22-38. The husband that is good, religious, and well qualified looks 
on his all the wives equally; but it is just the opposite with him who is 
a cheat. O Gadadhara! You are partial to Ganga; and so is the case 
with Laksmi. I am the only one that is deprived of your love. It is, 
therefore, that Ganga and Padma are in love with each other; for you 
love Padma. So why shall not Padma bear this contrary thing! I am 
only unfortunate. What use is there in holding my life? Her life is 
useless, who is deprived of her husband's love. Those that declare 
you, of Sattva Gunas, ought not to be ever called Pundits. They are 
quite illiterate; they have not the least knowledge of the Vedas. They 



are quite impotent to understand the nature of your mind. O Narada! 
Hearing Sarasvati's words and knowing that she had become very 
angry, Narayana thought for a moment and then went away from the 
Zenana outside. When Narayana had thus gone away, Sarasvati 
became fearless and began to abuse Ganga downright out of anger 
in an abusive language, hard to hear“O Shameless One! O 
Passionate One! What pride do you feel for your husband? Do you 
like to show that your husband loves you much? I will destroy your 
pride today. I will see today, it will be seen by others also, what your 
Hari can do for you?” Saying thus Sarasvati rose up to catch hold of 
Ganga by Her hairs violently. Padma intervened to stop this. 
Sarasvati became very violent and cursed Laksmi “No doubt you 
will be turned into a tree and into a river. In as much as seeing this 
undue behaviour of Ganga, you do not step forward to speak 
anything in this assembly, as if you are a tree or a river.” Padma did 
not become at all angry, even when she heard of the above curse. 
She became sorry and, holding the hands of Sarasvati, remained 
silent. Then Ganga became very angry; Her lips began to quiver 
frequently. Seeing the mad fiery nature of the red-eyed Sarasvati, 
she told Laksmi “O Padme! Leave that wicked foul-mouthed 
woman. What will she do to me? She presides over speech and 
therefore likes always to remain with quarrels. Let Her shew Her 
force how far can she quarrel with me. She wants to test the strength 
of us. So leave Her. Let all know today our strength and prowess.” 


39-44. Thus saying, Ganga became ready to curse Sarasvati and 
addressing Laksmi, said “O Dear Padme! As that woman has 
cursed you to become a river, so I too curse her, that she, too, be 
turned into a river and she would go to the abode of men, the 
sinners, to the world and take their heaps of sins.” Hearing this curse 
of Ganga, Sarasvati gave her curse, “You, too, will have to descend 
into the Bhurloka (the world) as a river, taking all the sins of the 
sinners.” O Narada! While there was going on this quarrel, the four¬ 
armed omniscient Bhagavan Hari came up there accompanied by 



four attendants of His, all four-armed, and took Sarasvati in His 
breast and began to speak all the previous mysteries. Then they 
came to know the cause of their quarrels and why they cursed one 
another and all became very sorry. At that time Bhagavan Hah told 
them one by one 


45-67. O Laksmi! Let you be born in parts, without being born in any 
womb, in the world as the daughter in the house of the King Dharma- 
dhvaja. You will have to take the form of a tree there, out of this evil 
turn of fate. There S'ankhachuda, the Indra of the Asuras, born of my 
parts will marry you. After that you will come back here and be my 
wife as now. There is no doubt in this. You will be named TulasT, the 
purifier of the three worlds, in Bharata. O Beautiful One! Now go 
there quickly and be a river in your parts under the name Padmavati. 
O Gange! You will also have to take incarnation in Bharata as a river, 
purifying all the worlds, to destroy the sins of the inhabitants of 
Bharata. Bhagiratha will take you there after much entreating and 
worshipping you; and you will be famous by the name Bhagirathi, the 
most sanctifying river in the world. There, the Ocean born of my 
parts, and the King S'antanu also born of my parts will be your 
husbands. O Bharati! Let you go also and incarnate in part in 
Bharata under the curse of Ganga. O Good-natured One! Now go in 
full Amsas to Brahma and become His wife. Let Ganga go also in 
Her fullness to S'iva. Let Padma remain with Me. Padma is of a 
peaceful nature, void of anger, devoted to Me and of a Sattvika 
nature. Chaste, good-natured, fortunate, and religious woman like 
Padma are very rare. Those women that are born of the parts of 
Padma are all very religious and devoted to their husbands. They 
are peaceful and good-natured and worshipped in every universe. It 
is forbidden, nay, opposed to the Vedas, to keep three wives, three 
servants, three friends of different natures, at one place. They never 
conduce to any welfare. They are the fruitful sources of all jealousies 
and quarrels. Where, in any family females are powerful like men 
and males are submissive to females, the birth of the male is 



useless. At his every step, he meets with difficulties and bitter 
experiences. He ought to retire to the forest whose wife is foul- 
mouthed, of bad birth and fond of quarrels. The great forest is better 
for him than his house. That man does not get in his house any 
water for washing his feet, or any seat to sit on, or any fruit to eat, 
nothing whatsoever; but in the forest, all these are not unavailable. 
Rather to dwell amidst rapacious animals or to enter into fire than 
remain with a bad wife. O Fair One! Rather the pains of the disease 
or venom are bearable, but the words of a bad wife are hard to bear. 
Death is far better than that. Those that are under the control of their 
wives, know that they never get their peace of mind until they are 
laid on their funeral pyres. They never see the fruits of what they 
daily do. They have no fame anywhere, neither in this world nor in 
the next. Ultimately the fruit is this:- that they have to go to hell and 
remain there. His life is verily a heavy burden who is without any 
name or fame. Never it is for the least good that many co-wives 
remain at one place. When, by taking one wife only a man does not 
become happy, then imagine, how painful it becomes to have many 
wives. O Gange! Go to S'iva. O Sarasvati! Go to Brahma. Let the 
good-natured Kamala, residing on the lotus remain with Me. He gets 
in this world happiness and Dharma and in the next Mukti whose 
wife is chaste and obedient. In fact he is Mukta, pure and happy 
whose wife is chaste; and he whose wife is foul-natured, is rendered 
impure unhappy and dead whilst he is living. 


Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the coming in this 
world of Laksmi, Ganga and Sarasvati in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 7. On The Curses Of Ganga, Saras vat! 
And Laksm! 


1-2. Narayana said O Narada! Thus saying, the Lord of the World 
stopped. And Laksmi, Ganga and Sarasvati wept bitterly, embracing 
one another. All of them then looked to S'ri Krisna, and gave vent to 
their feelings one by one with tears in their eyes, and with their 
hearts throbbing with fears and sorrows. 


3-4. Sarasvati said “O Lord! What is now, the way out of this 
curse, so severe and paining since our births? How long can 
helpless women live, separated from their husbands? O Lord! I 
certainly say that I will sacrifice my body when I go to Bharata, by 
taking recourse to yoga. The Mahatmas always protect all the 
persons without fail.” 


5-6. Ganga said “O Lord of the Universe! Why have I been 
abandoned by You. What fault have I committed? I will quit my body. 
And You will have to partake of the sin due to the killing of an 
innocent woman. He is surely to go to hell even if he be the Lord of 
all, who forsakes in this world an innocent wife.” 


7-15. Padma said “O Lord! Thou art of the nature of Sattva Guna 
in fullness; what wonder, then, how Thou hast become angry! 
However let Thou be pleased now with Sarasvati and Ganga. 
Forgiveness is the best quality of a good husband. I am ready just 
now to go to Bharata when Sarasvati has cursed me. But tell me, 
how long I will have to stay there? After how many days I shall be 
able to see again Thy lotus-feet? The sinners will wash away their 
dirts of sins in my waters by their constant baths and ablutions? By 



what means shall I be freed again and get back to Thy lotus-feet. 
How long shall I have to remain in my part, the daughter of Dharma 
Dhvaja, at the expiry of which I will be able to see Thee again? How 
long shall I have to assume the form of Tulasi tree, the abode of 
Thine. O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! Say, when wilt Thou deliver 
me? And if Ganga have to go to Bharata, by the curse of Bharata, 
when shall She be freed of the curse and sin and when shall She 
see back Thy feet? Again if Sarasvati have to go to Bharata out of 
Ganga's curse, when will that period of curse expire? How many 
days after shall She be able to come back to Thy feet? Now, be 
pleased to cancel Thy order for them to go to Brahma and S'iva 
respectively.” O Narada! Thus speaking to Jagannatha, the Devi 
Kamala bowed down at His feet and embracing them by Her own 
hairs of the bead, cried frequently. 


16-37. Now the lotus-navelled Hah, always eager to shew favour to 
the devotees, smiled and with a gracious heart took up Padma on 
His breast and said “O SuresVari! I will keep my own word, also I 
will act according as you like. O Lotus-eyed! Hear. How the two ends 
can be made to meet. Let Sarasvati go in her one part to have the 
form of a river and in her one half part to Brahma and remain with 
me in Vaikuntha in Her full parts. Ganga will have to go in one part to 
Bharata - to purify the three worlds as she will be urged eagerly to do 
so by Bhagiratha. And She will remain in her one part in the matted 
hair of Chandra S'ekhara (the Mahadeva with Moon on his 
forehead), obtained with a great difficulty, and so will remain there 
purer than her natural pure state. And let her remain with me in full 
parts. O Padme! O Lovely-eyed One! You are most innocent; so part 
of your part will go to Bharata and be the Padmavati river and you 
will be the Tulasi tree. After the expiry of five thousand years of Kali 
Yuga, your curse will expire. Again you all will come to My abode. O 
Padme! Calamities are the causes of the happiness of the embodied 
beings. Without dangers no one can understand the true nature of 
happiness. The saint worshippers of My mantra who will perform 



their ablutions in your water will free you all of your curse by touch 
and sight. O Fair One! By the sight and touch (Darsan, Spars'an) of 
My bhaktas (devotees), all the sacred places of pilgrimages in the 
world will be purified. For uplifting and sanctifying the holy earth, My 
mantropasakas, i.e., S'aivas, S'aktas, Ganapatyas, etc., that are 
devoted to Brahma all are residing in Bharata. Where My Bhaktas 
reside and wash their feet, that place is undoubtedly reckoned as the 
holy places of pilgrimages. So much so that by the sight and touch of 
My devotees, the murderer of a woman, of a cow, of a Brahmin, the 
treacherous and even the stealer of the wife of one's Guru will be 
sanctified and liberated while living. Those who do not perform the 
vow of Ekadas'i, who do not perform Sandhyas, who are Nastikas 
(atheists), the murderers, all are free of their sins by the sight and 
touch of My devotees. By the sight and touch of My devotees, those 
who live on their swords, pens, and the royal officials, the beggars in 
a village and the Brahmanas who carry (deal in) bullocks are also 
freed of their sins. The traitors, the mischief makers of their friends, 
those who give false evidence, those that steal other's trust 
properties, are also freed of their sins by the sight and touch of My 
devotees. Those who are foul-mouthed, bastards, the husbands and 
sons of unchaste women are all purified by the sight and touch of My 
Bhaktas. The Brahmin cooks of S'udras, Brahmins of an inferior 
order (who subsist upon the offerings made to the images which he 
attends), the village mendicants, those who are not initiated by their 
Gurus, these all are purified by the sight and touch of My devotees. 

O Fair One! The sins of those persons who do not maintain their 
fathers, mothers, brothers, wives, sons, daughters, sisters, the blind, 
friends, the families of the Gurus, the fathers-in-law, the mothers-in- 
law are also removed by the sight and touch of My devotees. Those 
that cut the As'vattha trees, that slander My devotees, and the 
Brahmins that eat the food of S'udras, are also freed of their sins. 
Those who steal the Deva's articles, the Brahmana's articles, those 
that sell lac, iron, and daughters, those who commit Maha Patakas 
(Brahmahatya, Surapanam, Steyam, Gurbanganaganah, Mahanti 
patakanyahuh, tatsam-sargahseha Pahchamam) and those that burn 



the S'udra's dead bodies, these also are freed of their respective 
sins by the sight and touch of My devotees.” 


38-42. Maha Laksmi said “O Thou gracious to faithful attendants! 
What are the characteristics, the marks of those Bhaktas of Thine 
that Thou hast spoken of just now whose sight and touch destroy 
instantly the Mahapatakas (five great sins), that are destroyed after a 
long time by the water of the Tirthas and the earthen and stone 
images of the Gods. The sins of the vilest of men, devoid of Hah 
bhakti, vain and egoistic, cheats, hvpocrites, slanderers of saints, 
vicious souls are destroyed by your Bhaktas, whose touch and 
ablations sanctify the sacred places of pilgrimages; by the touch of 
the dust and water of whose feet, the earth is purified; whom the 
Bhaktas of Bharata always pray to see; and there is nothing higher 
than the meeting of those Bhaktas.” Suta said “O Great Risi! Thus 
hearing the words of Maha Laksmi, the Lord smiled and began to 
speak about the secret things or the marks of the Bhaktas.” 


43-54. O Laksmi! The marks of the Bhaktas are all mentioned very 
hiddenly in S'rutis and Puranas. These are very sanctifying; 
destructive of sins, giving happiness, devotion, and liberation. These 
are never to be described to deceitful persons; these are the 
essences and to be kept hidden. But you are very simple and like my 
life. I therefore speak to you. Hear. O Fair One! All the Vedas declare 
him to be holy and the best of men, in whose ears are pronounced 
from the mouth of a Guru, the Visnu mantra. At the very moment of 
his being born into this world, one hundred generations back of that 
person, whether they be at that time in heaven or hell, get 
instantaneous liberation and if any of them happen to be born then 
as Jivas, they become liberated at once while living and finally get 
Visnupadam (the place of Visnu). That mortal is My Bhakta (devotee) 
who is full of devotion to Me, who always repeats My glories and 
acts according to My directions, who hears with all his heart My 



topics, and hearing which, whose mind dances with joy, whose voice 
gets choked and tears incessantly flow out from whose eyes, who 
loses his outward consciousness. Such a man is indeed. My Bhakta. 
My Bhaktas do not long for happiness or Mukti, or the four states 
Salokya, Sayujya, Samipya and Sarsti, nor the Brahmahood, nor the 
Devahood (the state of immortality); they want only to do Seva 
(service) to Me and they are solely intent on doing this. Even in 
dreams they do not desire the Indraship, Manuship, the state of 
Brahma so very difficult to be had; nor do they want the enjoyment of 
kingdoms and heavens. My Bhaktas roam in Bharata, eager to hear 
My glories, and always very glad to recite My sweet glorious deeds. 
The birth of such Bhaktas in Bharata is very rare. They purify the 
world and go ultimately to My abode, the best of all Tirthas (sacred 
places). Thus I have spoken O Padme! all that you wanted to hear. 
Now do as you like. Then Ganga and others all went to obey the 
order of Sri Hari, Who went to His own abode. 


Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on the curses 
Ganga, Sarasvati, and Laksmi and the way to freedom thereof in the 
Mahapuranam S'rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 8. On The Greatness Of Kali 


1-110. Narayana said A part of Sarasvati descended in this 
Bharata Punya Bhumi (land of merits), owing to the curse of Ganga; 
and She remained in full in Visnu's region, the abode of Vaikuntha. 
She is named Bharati, on account of Her coming to Bharata; she is 
called Brahmi because she is dear to Brahma; and She is called 
Vani as She presides over Speech. Hari is seen everywhere, in 
tanks, in wells, in running streams (i.e., in Saras). Because He 
resides in Saras, therefore He is called Sarasvan. Vani is the S'akti 
of that Sarasvan; therefore She is denominated Sarasvati. The river 
Sarasvati is a very sacred Tirtha. She is the burning fire to the fuel of 
sins, of sinners. O Narada! Through the curse of Sarasvati, the Devi 
Ganga also assumed the form of a river in part. She was brought 
down to this earth at the request of Bhagiratha. Hence she is called 
Bhagirathi. While Ganga was rushing down to the earth S'iva 
capable to bear the great rush of Her, held Her on His head at the 
request of the Mother Earth. Laksmi also, through the curse of 
Sarasvati came in part of parts Bharata as the river Padmavati. But 
She remained in full with Hari. Laksmi appeared also in Her other 
part as the well-known daughter Tulasi of the king Dharmadhvaja in 
India. Last of all, through Bharati's curse and by the command of S'ri 
Hari, she turned into the Tulasi tree, purifying the whole world. 
Remaining for five thousand years of Kali, all them will quit their river 
appearances and go back to Hari. By the command of S’ri Hari, all 
the Tirthas save Kasi and Bindraban will go along with them to 
Vaikuntha. Next at the expiry of the ten thousand years of Kali, 
S'alagrama S'ila (the stone piece worshipped as Narayana) S'iva, 
and S'iva S'akti and Purusottama Jagannatha will leave the soil of 
Bharata and go to their respective places, (i.e. the Mahatmyas of 
those will be extinct from Bharata). There will then cease to be the 
saints of S'iva S'akta, Ganapatya and Vaisnava sects, (eighteen) 
Puranas, the blowing of conch shells (auspicious signs), S'raddhas, 
Tarpanas, and all the rites and ceremonies dictated by the Vedas. 



The worship and glorification of the Gods, the recitation of their 
praises, their names will be extinct. The Vedas with their Amgas will 
no longer be heard of. All these will disappear with them. The 
assembly of the Sadhus, the true Dharma, the four Vedas, the village 
Devas and Devis, the Vratas (vows) the practising of the austerities, 
fasting, all will disappear. All will be addicted to the Vamachara ritual 
(the left-hand ritual Tantrik form of worship; sarcastically used in the 
sense of drinking wine and eating flesh, etc.) They will speak 
falsehood and be deceitful. If anybody worships, his worship will be 
void of TulasT leaves. Almost all will be deceitful, cruel, vain, egoistic, 
thievish and mischievous. Men will be at variance with one another; 
women will be at variance with one another; no fear will exist in 
marriage ties. Properties will be only of those that will make them (i. 
e. there will cease to be any inheritance from father to son and so 
forth ). Husbands will be obedient to their wives; unchaste women 
will be in every house. Wives will rebuke their husbands by incessant 
noisings and chidings. Wives will be the sole mistresses of houses 
and husbands will stand before them as servants with folded palms. 
Fathers-in-law and mothers-in-law will be their servants. The 
brothers of wives, and their friends will be the managers of the 
household affairs. But there will be no friendship with one's own 
class fellows. The brothers and friends of the house owners (masters 
of the house) will appear quite strangers as if they are new-comers. 
Without the command of the house-wives, the masters of the houses 
will be unable to do anything. The divisions of caste (Brahmana, 
Ksattriya, Vaisya, and S'udra) will entirely disappear. Far from 
practising Sandhya Bandanam and other daily practices, the 
Brahmanas will cease to hold the holy threads even on their bodies. 
The four colour-classes will practise the doings of the MIechchas, 
read the S'astras of the MIechchas and forsake their own S'astras. 
The Brahmins, Ksattriyas, and Vais'yas will become the slaves of 
S'udras, will become their cooks, runners and carriers of buffaloes. 
Every one will be devoid of truth. Earth will not yield any grains; trees 
will not yield any fruits and women will be issueless. The cows will 
not yield milk; even if there be a little milk, ghee will not come out of 
it. The affection between husband and wife will die out and the 



families will be devoid of truth. The King will not wield any power; the 
subjects will be over burdened with taxes. The ever flowing big 
rivers, the petty streams, the caves of mountains all will gradually 
have very little water in them. The Four Varnas will be devoid of 
Dharma and Punya (merit, virtue). One in a lakh may be virtuous. 
Afterwards that too will cease. Men, women, boys, all will be ugly 
and deformed. They will utter bad words and vile sounds. Some 
villages and towns will be completely deserted by men and will look 
terrible; at some others few cottages with few inhabitants will be 
seen. Villages and towns will be jungles and jungles will become 
filled with men. The inhabitants of the forests will become heavily 
taxed and disconsolate. The beds of rivers and lakes will become dry 
owing to want of rains and will be cultivated. The Kulinas of high 
families will become very low. The whole earth will be filled with liars, 
untruthful cheats and hypocrites. The lands, though cultivated well, 
will yield grains in name. Those who are well known as the 
millionaires, they will become poor and those who are devoted to the 
Devas will be atheists. The towns folk will have no trace of mercy; 
rather they will hate and envy their neighbours and turn out 
murderers of men. In the Kali age, males and females will be 
everywhere, of a dwarfish stature, diseased, shortlived, and of very 
little youthful virility. The hairs will turn out grey no sooner the people 
reach their sixteenth year. And they will be very old when they 
become twenty years old. The girls of eight years will have 
menstruation and will become pregnant. They will deliver every year. 
Old age will attack them when they become sixteen years old. Some 
women will have their husbands and children living. Otherwise 
almost all will be barren, childless. The four Varnas will sell their 
daughters. The paramours of the mothers, wives, son's wives, 
daughters, and sisters will be the source of support to them all. No 
one will be able, without money, to collect the merits by repeating the 
name of Hah. Persons will make gifts for name and fame and 
ultimately will take back what they had made as gifts. If there be any 
gifts made by one's own self or by one's forefathers or for a Deva 
purpose or for Brahmins or for the families of the Gurus, there will 
not be found wanting attempts to take back those gifts. Some will go 



to daughters, some to mothers-in-law, some to the wives of sons, 
some to sisters, some to mothers of co-wives, some will go to the 
brother's wives. In every house, those who are unfit to be mixed will 
be mixed with, excepting one's mother. In Kali Yuga who is whose 
wife? And who is whose husband? There will be no certainty; who is 
whose subject and what village is to whom? There will be no surety 
that such a property belongs to such and such a man. All will turn out 
to be liars, licentious, thieves, envious of other's wives, and 
murderers of men. In the houses of the Brahmins, Ksattriyas, and 
Vais'yas, the three higher castes, the current of sin will flow. They will 
live by selling lac, iron, and salts prohibited by the S'astras. The 
Brahmins will drive buffaloes, burn the dead bodies of the S'udras, 
eat the food of the S'udras and go to unchaste women. There will be 
no more faith existing in the five Risi Yajhas. Almost every 
Brahmin will not observe the vows of Amavasya Nis'ipalana. The 
holy threads will be cast away and the Sandhya Bandanam and 
cleanliness and good practices will cease altogether. The unchaste 
women who deal in giving loans, etc., and live on interests and the 
procuresses during menstruation will cook in Brahmin families. There 
will be no distinction of food, no distinction of wombs, no distinction 
of As'ramas, and no distinction of persons. All will turn out 
MIechchas. O Narada! Thus, when the Kali will have its full play, the 
whole world will be filled with MIechchas, the trees will be one hand 
high and the men will be of the size of a thumb. Then the most 
powerful Bhagavan Narayana will incarnate in His part in the house 
of a Brahmin named Visnujas'a as his son. Mounted on a long horse, 
holding a long sword He will make the world free of the MIechchas in 
three nights. Then he will disappear from the face of the Earth and 
She will be without any sovereign and be filled with robbers. There 
will be incessant rain, for six nights and it will rain and rain and the 
whole earth will be deluged; no traces of men, houses, and trees. 
After this the Twelve Suns will rise simultaneously and by their rays 
the whole water will be dried up and the earth will become level. 

Thus the dreadful Kali will pass away when the Satya Yuga will come 
back, Tapasya and the true religion and Sattva Guna will prevail 
again. The Brahmins will practise Tapasya, they will be devoted to 



Dharma and the Vedas. The women will be chaste and religious in 
every house. Again the wise and intelligent Ksattriyas devoted to the 
Brahmanas will occupy the royal thrones and their might, devotion to 
Dharma and love for good deeds will increase. The Vais'yas will 
again go on with their trades and their devotion to their trade and the 
Brahmins will be reestablished. The S'udras, too, will be again 
virtuous, and serve the Brahmins. Again the Brahmins, Ksattriyas, 
and Vais'yas and their families will have Bhakti towards the Devi, be 
initiated in Devi Mantras and all will meditate on the Devi. Again 
there will be spread the knowledge of the Vedas, the Smritis, and the 
Puranas, all will go to their wives in menstruation periods. No 
Adharma (unrighteousness) will exist and the Dharma will reign in 
full, with all the parts (Kalas) complete. When the Treta Yuga comes, 
the Dharma will be three footed; when the Dvapara Yuga will come; 
the Dharma will be two-footed and when Kali will begin, the Dharma 
will be one-footed, and when Kali will reign supreme, no Dharma will 
exist, even in name. (O Narada! Now I will speak of time.) The seven 
days of the week, Sunday, &c., the sixteen tithis, Pratipada &c., the 
twelve months Vais'akha &c., the six seasons Summer, &c., the two 
fortnights (dark and bright) and the two Ayanas (Northern and 
Southern) are rendered in vogue. One day consists of four Praharas, 
one night consists of four Praharas; a day and a night constitute one 
so-called day. Thirty such days make one month. In the computation 
of time, five kinds of years (Varsas) were already mentioned (in the 
8th Skandha). As the Satya, Treta, Dvapara and Kali roll on turn by 
turn, so the days, months and years also roll on in turn. One day, 
according to the Devas, is equal to one year, according to men; three 
hundred and sixty human Yugas equal to one Deva Yuga. Seventy- 
one Deva Yugas make one Manvantara. The life period of Indra, the 
Lord of S'achi, is one Manvantara. Twenty-eight Indras' lives equal to 
one day of Hiranyagarbha (the golden wombed) Brahma. One 
hundred and eight such years equal to the life of one Brahma. When 
this Brahma dies, there is the Prakrita Pralaya. The earth is not 
visible then. (The dissolution of Prakriti takes place.) The whole 
Brahmanda is deluged by water; Brahma, Visnu, MahesVara and the 
other wise Risis get diluted in Para Brahma whose substance is all 



truth and consciousness. That time, the Prakriti Devi, too, gets 
merged in Para Brahma. The fall of Brahma and the dissolution of 
Prakriti are called the Prakrita Pralaya. The duration of this Pralaya 
is one Nimesa of the Para Brahma Mula Prakriti united with Maya. 

All the Brahmandas (universes) are destroyed at this time. When this 
Nimesa expires, the creation begins again in due order. So one 
cannot count the endless numbers of times when this creation and 
dissolution work are going on. So who can tell how many kalpas had 
past away, or how many Kalpas will come, how many Brahmandas 
were created or how many Brahmandas will be created. Who will be 
able to count how many Brahmas, how many Visnus or how many 
MahesVaras there have been. But One and Only One Para Brahma 
ParamesVara (the Great God) is The Supreme Lord of these 
countless Brahmandas. The ParamesVara of the nature of 
Existence, Consciousness and Bliss is the Highest Spirit of all. All 
others, Brahma, Visnu, MahesVara the Great Virat, the Smaller 
Virat, all are His parts. This Brahma is Mula Prakriti and from That 
has appeared S’ri Krisna, the Lord of his left half which is woman 
(Ardha NarisVara). It is She that divided Herself into two forms; in 
Her one form. She resides as the two armed Krisna in the region of 
Goloka; and as the four-armed Narayana in Vaikuntha. All the things 
from Brahma, the Highest, to the mere grass the lowest, all are 
originated from Prakriti. And all the Prakriti-born things are transient. 
Thus the True, Eternal Para Brahma, beyond the three gunas, the 
Source of all creation. Whose substance is All-Will is the Only 
Substance beyond the region of Prakriti. He is without Upadhis 
(conditions, as time, space, causation and attributes); He is without 
any form; and the forms that He assumes, they are for shewing His 
Grace to the devotees only. The Lotus-born Brahma is able by His 
Power of Knowledge to create the Brahmanda. It is by His Grace 
that S'iva, the Lord of the yogis is named Mrityumjaya (the 
Conqueror of Death), the Destoyer of all, and the Knower of all 
Tattvas. By His Tapas, S'iva has realised Para Brahma and therefore 
has become the Lord of all. All-knowing, endowed with great Vibhutis 
(lordly powers), the seer of all, omnipresent, the protector of all, the 
bestower of all prosperities. The devotion and service towards Para 



Brahma have alone made S’ri Visnu the Lord of all; and it is through 
the power of Para Brahma, that Mahamaya Prakriti Devi has 
become omnipotent and the Goddess of all. Bhagavati Durga has 
got His Grace by Her devotion and service to Him and has become 
Mula Prakriti of the nature of Being, Consciousness and Bliss. And 
so has the Devi Savitri, the Mother of the Vedas, become the 
presiding Deity of the Vedas and She is worshipped by the 
Brahmanas and the Knowers of the Vedas. That She presides over 
all the branches of knowledge, is worshipped by all the learned 
assemblies and by the whole Universe is the result only of 
worshipping the Prakriti Devi. That Laksmi has become the bestower 
of all wealth and the presiding Deity of all the villages and the 
mistress of all, worshipped by all and the bestower of sons to all is 
also the result of worshipping Her. Thus it is through the worship of 
Prakriti that Durga, the Destroyer of all calamities and troubles has 
appeared from the left side of S’ri Krisna; and Radha has become 
the presiding Deity of His Prana (vital airs), and She is worshipped 
by all and possessed of all knowledge. It is by the worship of S'akti 
that Radhika has so much excelled in love, has become the 
presiding Deity of the prana of Krisna, has got love and respect, has 
been placed on His breast and is exceedingly beautiful. With the 
object of getting Krisna for her husband. She practised severe 
austerities for one thousand Deva years on the mountain 
S'atas'ringa in Bharata to get the Mula Prakriti's Grace. And when 
the S'akti Mula Prakriti became graciously pleased towards Her, S’ri 
Krisna seeing Radhika increasing in beauty like the Crescent Moon 
took Her to His breast and out of tenderness wept and granted Her 
highest boons so very rare to others and said O Beautiful One! 

You better remain always in My breast and devoted to Me amongs 
all my wives; let you be superior to them all in good fortune, respect, 
love and glory. From today you are my greatest best wife. I will love 
you as the best amongst them all. O Dear! Always I will be 
submissive to you and fulfil what you say. Thus saying, S’ri Krisna 
selected her as his wife without any co-wives and made Her dear to 
His Heart. The other Devis besides the five Prakritis, already 
mentioned, also derived superiorities by serving Mula Prakriti. O 



Muni! What shall I say, everyone reaps the fruits as he practises 
Tapasya. Bhagavati Durga practised on the Himalyas tapasya for 
one thousand Deva years and meditated on the lotus-feet of Mula 
Prakrit! and so has come to be worshipped by all. The Devi 
Sarasvati practised Tapasya for one lakh Deva years and is come to 
be respected by all. The Devi Laksmi practised Tapasya at Puskara 
for one hundred Divine Yugas and, by the Grace of Mula Prakrit! has 
become the bestower of wealth to all. The Devi Savitri worshipped 
S’akti for sixty thousand divine years in the Malaya mountain and is 
respected and worshipped by all. O Bibhu! Brahma, Visnu, and 
MahesVara worshipped S'akti for one hundred Manvantaras and so 
have become the Preservers, etc., of this world. S’ri Krisna practised 
for ten Manvantaras terrible austerities and therefore obtained his 
position in the region of Goloka and is remaining there today in 
greatest bliss. Dharma Deva worshipped S’akti with devotion for ten 
Manvantaras and has become the lives of all, worshipped by all, and 
the receptacle of all. O Muni! Thus all, whether the Devis, Devas, 
Munis, Kings, Brahmanas, all have got their respect in this world by 
the worship of S’akti. O Devarsi! I have thus described to you all that 
I heard from the mouth of my Guru, in accordance with the rules of 
the Vedas. What more do you want to hear? 


Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Greatness of 
Kali in the Maha Puranam Srimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 9. On The Origin Of The S’akti Of The 
Earth 


1-4. S’n Narada said In the twinkling of an eye of the Devi, the 
Pralaya takes place; and in that very time also the Brahmanda 
(cosmos) is dissolved, which is called the Pralaya of Prakriti. During 
this Pralaya, the Devi Vasundhara (Earth) disappears; the whole 
world is deluged with water and all this appearance of five elements 
called Prapahcha vanishes in the body of Prakriti. Now where does 
Vasundhara (Earth), thus vanished, reside? And how does She 
again appear at the beginning of the creation! What is the cause of 
her being so much blessed, honoured and capable to hold all and 
victorious. So tell about Her birth, the source of all welfare. 


5-23. S’ri Narayana said O Narada! So it is heard that the Earth 
appears at the very outset of the creation. Her appearance and 
disappearance so occur in all the Pralayas. (This earth) the 
manifestation of the great S’akti, sometimes becomes manifest in 
Her and sometimes remains latent in Her (the S’akti). It is all the will 
of that Great S’akti. Now hear the anecdote of appearance (birth) of 
the earth, the cause of all good, the source of destruction of all 
calamities, the destroyer of sin and the cause of furtherance of one's 
religious merits. Some say that this earth has come out of the 
marrow of the Daityas, Madhu and Kaitabha; but that is not the fact. 
Hear now the real fact. Those two Daityas were greatly pleased with 
Visnu's valour and prowess in the fight between them and Visnu; and 
they said “Kill us on that part of the earth which is not under 
water.” From their words it is evident that the earth was existent 
during their lifetime but she was not visible. After their death, the 
marrow came out after their bones. Now hear how the name 
“Medini” came to be applied to the earth. She was taken out of the 
water, and the marrow came to be mixed with the earth. It is on 
account of this mixing that she is called Medini, Now I will tell you 



what I heard before in Puskara, the sacred place of pilgrimage, from 
the mouth of Dharma Deva, about the origin of earth, approved by 
the S'rutis, consistent, and good. Hear. When the mind of Maha 
Virat, merged in water, expanded all over his body, it entered into 
every pore of his body. Next the MahaprithvT or the Great Earth 
appeared at the time of Pahchi Karana (mixing of one-half of each of 
the elements with one-eighth of each of the other four elements). 

This MahaprithvT was broken into pieces and placed in every pore. It 
is this differentiated earth that appears during creation and 
disappears during Pralaya. From this mind, concentrated in every 
pore of the body of Maha Virat, is born this earth, after a long 
interval. In every pore in the skin of this Virat Purusa there is one 
earth. She gets manifested and she disappears. This occurs again 
and again. When she appears, she floats on the water; and when 
she disappears, she gets merged in the water. There is this earth 
(world) in every universe; and along with her, there are mountains, 
forests, seven oceans, seven islands, Sumeru mountain, the Moon, 
the Sun and other planets, Brahmaloka, Visnuloka (the abode of 
Visnu) S'ivaloka and the regions of the other Devas, sacred places of 
pilgrimage, the holy land of Bharatavarsa, the KanchanT Bhumi, 
seven heavens, seven Patalas or nether regions, on the above 
Brahmaloka, and Dhruvaloka. This law holds good in every world in 
every universe. So every universe is the work of Maya and thus it is 
transient. At the dissolution of Prakriti, Brahma falls. Again when 
creation takes place, the Maha Virat appears from S’rT Krisna, the 
Supreme Spirit. Eternal is this flow of creation, preservation and 
destruction; eternal is this flow of time, Kastha; eternal is this flow of 
Brahma, Visnu and Mahes'a, etc. And eternal is this flow of 
Vasundhara who is worshipped in the Varaha Kalpa by the Suras, 
Munis, Vipras, Gandarbhas, etc. The S'ruti says that the Presiding 
Deity of this eternal earth is the wife of Visnu in His boar-form. 
Mangala (Mars) is the son of that earth and Mangala's son is 
Ghates'a. 



24-26. Narada said In what form was the Earth worshipped by the 
Devas in Varaha Kalpa. The Varahi, the receptacle of all things, 
moving and non-moving, how did she appear, by what method of 
Pahchi Karana, from the Mulaprakriti? What is the method of her 
worship in this Bhurloka and in the Heavens (Svarloka). Also tell me, 
O Lord! in detail, the auspicious birth of Mangala (Mars). 


27-34. Narayana spoke In ancient days, in the Varaha Kalpa, 
Varaha Deva (the boar incarnation) when entreated and praised by 
Brahma, killed the Daitya Hiranyaksa and rescued the earth from the 
nether regions Rasatala. He then placed the earth on the waters 
where she floated as the lotus leaf floats on water. In the meantime 
Brahma began to fashion the wonderful creation on the surface of 
the earth. Bhagavan Hah, in His boar form and brilliant like ten 
million suns saw the beautiful and lovely appearance of the presiding 
deity of the earth, possessed of amorous sentiments. He then 
assumed a very beautiful form, fit for amorous embraces. They then 
held their sexual intercourse and it lasted day and night for one Deva 
year. The beautiful Earth, in the pleasant amorous plays, fainted 
away; for the intercourse of the lover with the beloved is exceedingly 
pleasant. And Visnu, too, at the same time was very much 
exhausted by the pleasant touch of the body of the Earth. He did not 
become conscious even how days and nights passed away. When 
full one year passed away, they got back their senses and the 
amorous man then left his hold of the loved. He assumed easily his 
former Boar form and worshipped Her as the incarnate of the Devi, 
with incense, lights, offerings of food, with vermilion (Sindur, red- 
powder), sandal-paste, garments, flowers and various other offerings 
of food, etc. He then said 


35-37. O Auspicious One! Let Thou beest the receptacle of all 
things. All the Munis, Manus, Devas, Siddhas, and Danavas, etc., 
will worship Thee with pleasure and willingness. On the day the 



Ambuvachi ceremony closes, on the day when the house 
construction, i.e., the foundation is laid, on the day when the first 
entry is made into the newly built houses, when the digging of the 
well or tank commences, and on the day when tilling the ground 
commences, all will worship Thee. Those stupid fools that will not 
observe this, will certainly go to hell. 


38-41 The Earth spoke “O Lord! By Thy command I will assume 
the form of Varahi (female boar) and support easily on my back this 
whole world of moving and non-moving things, but the following 
things, pearls, small shells, S'alagram, (a black stone, usually round, 
found in the river Gandaki, and worshipped as a type of Visnu), the 
phallus or emblem of S'iva, the images of the goddesses, conch- 
shells, lamps (lights), the Yantras, gems, diamonds, the sacred 
upanayana threads, flowers, books, the Tulasi leaves, the bead 
(Japa mala), the garland of flowers, gold, camphor, Gorochana 
(bright yellow pigment prepared from the urine or bile of a cow). 
Sandal, and the water after washing the S'alagrama stone, I will not 
be able to bear. I will be very much pained in case I were to bear 
these on Me.” 


42-45. S’ri Bhagavan said “O Fair One! The fools that will place 
the above articles on Thy back will go to the Kalasutra hell for one 
hundred divine years.” O Narada! Thus saying, the Bhagavan 
Narayana remained silent. Now the Earth became pregnant and the 
powerful planet Mars was born. By the command of S’ri Hah, all 
began to meditate on Earth according to what is mentioned in 
Kanvas'akha and began to praise Her. Offerings of food were given, 
uttering the root Mantra. Thus became extant all over the three 
worlds Her worship and praise. 



46. Narada said O Bhagavan! Very sacred is the meditation, hymn 
and the root Mantra of the Earth. I am very anxious to hear them. 
Kindly describe it in detail. 


47-48. Narayana said The Earth was first worshipped by Varaha 
Deva; next She was worshipped by Brahma. Next She was 
worshipped by all the Munis, Devas, Manus and men. O Narada! 
Now hear the Dhyan, praise and Mantra of the Devi Earth. 


49-51. The Earth was first worshipped by Bhagavan Visnu with this 
root Mantra (mul mantra) “On Hrim S’rim Klim Vasundharayai 
Svaha.” Next He said O Devi Earth! O Thou Smiling One! I 
worship Thee, who art worshipped by the three worlds, whose colour 
is white like white lotus, whose face is beautiful like the autumnal 
moon, who art the Store-house of all gems and jewels, and in whose 
womb all the precious stones and pearls are inbedded, and who has 
put on a raiment purified by fire. All then began to worship Her with 
this Mantra. 


52-63. S’ri Narayana said Now hear the hymn sung before Her 
according to Kanva S'akha O Thou, the Giver of Victory! Holder of 
water! Endowed with water, full of victory; Consort of the Boar 
Incarnation, Carrier of victory! Bestow victory on me. O Thou 
Auspicious One! The Store-house of all good, O Thou incarnate of 
all auspiciousness! Bestower of good. Thou, the Source of all good 
to bestow all sorts of welfare! Bestow all things that are good and 
auspicious to me in this world. 


O Thou! The Receptacle of all, the Knower of all, all powerful, the 
Bestower of all desires, O Devi Earth! Give me the fruits that I 
desire. 



O Thou! Who art all merits, Thou, the Seed of all religious merits, O 
Thou, the Eternal, the receptacle of all religious merits, the home of 
all religious persons. Thou bestowest merits to all. 


O Thou! The Store-house of all grains, enriched with all sorts of 
corns. Thou bestowest harvests to all; Thou takest away all the 
grains in this world and again. Thou producest all corns of various 
kinds here. O Earth! Thou art all-in-all to the landlords, the Best 
Source of refuge and happiness. O Bestower of lands! Give me 
lands. The above hymn yields great religious merits. He becomes 
the sovereign of the whole earth for millions and millions of births 
who rising early in the morning reads this stotra. Men who read this 
acquire merits due to giving away lands as gifts. People become 
certainly freed of their sins, if they read this stotra, who take back the 
lands after making them as gifts, who dig earth on the day of 
Ambuvachi, who dig wells without permission on another's well, who 
steal other's lands, who throw their semen on earth, who place 
lamps on the earth. Religious merits, equivalent to one hundred 
horse sacrifices accrue from reading this stotra. There is no doubt in 
this. This stotra of the great Devi is the source of all sorts of welfare 
and auspiciousness. 


Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the origin of the 
S’akti of the earth in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 10. On The Offences Caused To The 
Earth And Punishments Thereof 


1-3. Narada said I am now desirous to hear about the merits 
acquired by making gifts of land, the demerits in stealing away lands, 
digging wells in other's wells, in digging earth on the day of 
Ambuvachi, in casting semen on earth, and in placing lamps and 
lights on the surface of the earth as well the sins when one acts 
wrongly in various other ways on the surface of the earth and the 
remedies thereof. 


4-30. S’ri Narayana said If one makes a gift of land in this Bharata 
of the measure of a Vitasti (a long span measured by the extended 
thumb and little finger) to a Brahmana who performs Sandhya three 
times a day and is thus purified, one goes and remains in S’iva Loka 
(the abode of S’iva). If one gives away in charity a land full of corn to 
a Brahmin, the giver goes and lives in Visnu Loka in the end for a 
period measured by the number of dust particles in the land. If one 
presents a village, a plot of land, or grains to a Brahmin, both the 
giver and the receiver, become freed of their sins and go to the Devi 
Loka (the abode of the Devi). Even if one be present when a 
proposal for a gift of land is being made and says “This act is good,” 
one goes to Vaikuntha with one's friends and relatives. He remains in 
the Kalasutra hell as long as the Sun and Moon exist, who takes 
back or steals away the gift to a Brahmin, offered by himself or by 
any other body. Even his sons, grandsons, etc., become destitute of 
lands, prosperity, sons, and wealth and remain in a dreadful hell 
named Raurava. If one cultivates the grazing land for the cows and 
reaps therefrom a harvest of grains, one remains for one hundred 
divine years in the Kumbhipaka hell. If one cultivates any enclosure 
for cows or tanks and grows grains on them, one remains in the 
Asipatra hell for a period equivalent to fourteen Indra's falls. One 
who bathes in another's tank without taking off five handfuls of earth 



from it, goes to hell and one's bath is quite ineffectual. If anybody, 
out of his amorous passion casts his semen privately on the suface 
of the ground, he will have to suffer the torments of hell for as many 
years as are the numbers of dust particles on that area. If anyone 
digs ground on the day of Ambuvachi, one remains in hell for four 
Yugas. If, without the permission of the owner of a well or tank, a 
stupid man clears the old well or tank and digs the slushy earth from 
the bottom, his labour goes in vain. The merit goes to the real owner. 
And the man who laboured so much goes to Tapta Kunda Naraka for 
fourteen Indra's life-periods. If any one takes out five handfuls of 
earth from another's tank, when he goes to bathe in it, he dwells in 
Brahma Loka for a period of years amounting to the number of 
particles in those handfuls of earth. During one's father's or 
grandfather's S'radha ceremony, if one offers pinda without offering 
any food (pinda) to the owner of the soil, the S'radha performer goes 
certainly to hell. If one places a light (Pradipa) directly on the earth 
without any holding piece at the bottom, one becomes blind for 
seven births; and so if one places a conch-shell on the ground 
(S'ankha), one becomes attacked with leprosy in one's next birth. If 
any body places pearls, gems, diamonds, gold and jewels, the five 
precious things on the ground he becomes blind, if one places the 
phallic emblem of S’iva, the image of S'ivani, the S'alagrama stone 
on the ground, he remains for one hundred Manvantaras to be eaten 
by worms. Conchshells, Yantras (diagrams for S'akti worshippers), 
the water after washing S'ilas (stones) i. e., Charanamrita, flowers, 
Tulasi leaves, if placed on the ground, lead him who places these, 
verily to hells. The beads, garlands of flowers, Gorochana (a bright 
yellow pigment prepared from the urine or bile of a cow), and 
camphor, when placed on the ground, lead him who places so to 
suffer the torments of hell. The sandal wood, Rudraksa mala, and 
the roots of Kus'a grass also, if placed on the ground, lead the doer 
to stay for one manvantara in the hell. Books, the sacred Upanayana 
threads, when placed on the ground make the doers unfit for 
Brahmin birth; rather he is involved in a sin equivalent to the murder 
of a Brahmin. The sacred Upanayana thread when knotted and 
rendered fit for holding, is worth being worshipped by all the castes. 



One ought to sprinkle the earth with curd, nnilk, etc., after one has 
completed one's sacrifices. If one fails to do this, one will have to 
remain for seven births in a hot ground with great torment. If one 
digs the earth when there is an earth quake or when there is an 
eclipse, that sinner becomes also devoid of some of his limbs in his 
next birth. O Muni! This earth is named Bhumi since She is the 
abode of all; she is named Kas'yapi since she is the daughter of 
Kas'yapa; is named Vis'vambhara, since she supports the Universe; 
She is named Ananta, since she is endlessly wide; and She is 
named PrithivT since she is the daughter of the King Prithu, or she is 
extensively wide. 


Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the offences 
caused towards the surface of the earth and punishments thereof in 
hells - in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 11. On The Origin Of The Ganges 


1-3. The Devarsi Narada said O Thou, the foremost of the 
knowers of the Vedas! I have heard the excellent narration of Earth. 
Now I want to hear the anecdote of Ganga. I heard, ere long, that 
Ganga, of the nature of Visnu and appearing from the feet of Visnu, 
the Is'vari of the Devas, appeared, due to the curse of Bharati, on 
Bharata; why has she come to Bharata; in which Yuga and asked by 
whom did she come to Bharata? O Lord! Now describe to me this 
auspicious anecdote capable to destroy sins and yield religious 
merits. 


4-38. Narayana said O Child! In ancient days there was born a 
prosperous Emperor King of Kings, in the Solar dynasty. He had two 
beautiful wives; one was named Vaidarbhi, and the other was named 
S'aivya. S'aivya delivered a very lovely son; his name was 
Asamanja. On the other hand, the queen Vaidarbhi desirous of 
getting a son, worshipped S'ankara, the Lord of Bhutas who became 
pleased and granted her request; and Vaidarbhi became pregnant. 
After one hundred years of pregnancy she gave birth to one mass of 
flesh. Seeing this, the queen became very afflicted and taking refuge 
of Mahadeva, began to cry loudly and very often. Bhagavan 
S'ankara, then, appeared there in a Brahmin form and cut that mass 
of flesh into thousand pieces. Those thousand pieces turned out into 
thousand very powerful sons. Their bodies looked more brillant than 
the mid-day sun. But they were all burnt to ashes by the curse of 
Kapila Muni. And the King began to lament bitterly and he entered 
into the forest. Asamaja practised tapasya to bring the Ganga for 
one lakh years when he quitted his body in course of time. His son 
Ams'uman practised tapasya for one lakh years to bring Ganga unto 
Bharata and he, too, died. Then the son of Amsuman, the intelligent 
Bhagiratha, a great devotee of Visnu, free of old age and death and 
the store of many qualifications, practised tapasya for one lakh years 



to bring Ganga on earth. At last he saw S’ri Krisna brilliant like ten 
millions of summer suns. He had two hands; there was a flute in his 
hand; be was full of youth in the dress of a cow-herd. A sight of His 
Gopala Sundari form, wearing a Sakhi's dress, makes one think that 
He is ever ready to show grace on His devotees. He is Para Brahma, 
whose Substance is Will; be has no deficiencies. Brahma, Visnu and 
MahesVara and the other Devas and Munis, etc. all praise Him, who 
pervades everywhere. He is not concerned with anything; yet He is 
the Witness of all. He is beyond the three gunas, higher than Prakriti. 
A sweet smile is always in his face, which makes it the more lovely. 
There is none equal to him in showing Grace to the Bhaktas. His 
raiment is purified (uninflammable) by fire and he is decorated with 
gems, jewels and ornaments. The King Bhagiratha saw that 
unforeseen appearance, bowed down and began to praise over and 
over again. His whole body was filled with ecstasy. Then he clearly 
told what he wanted for the deliverance of his family. Bhagavan S’ri 
Krisna then, addressed Ganga and said “O SuresVari! Go quickly 
and appear in Bharata, under the curse of Bharati. By My command 
go quickly and purify the sons of Sagara. They will all be purified by 
the touch of the air in contact with the Ganges and rise up in divine 
aerial cars, assuming forms like Mine and they will come to My 
abode. They will there remain always as My attendants and they will 
not be involved in the sins that they committed in their previous 
births. O Narada! It is stated thus in the Vedas, that if the human 
souls, taking their births in Bharata, commit sins for millions and 
millions of births, the sins will be completely destroyed if they touch 
once the air in contact with and carrying the particles of the Ganges. 
The sight of the Ganges and the touch of the Ganges water give 
religious merits ten times more than the touch with the air in contact 
with the Ganges water. People become freed of their sins then and 
there especially if they bathe in the Ganges. It is heard in the S'rutis 
that the bathing in the Ganges, if done according to rules, destroys 
all the sins, e.g., the murder of a Brahmin, etc., acquired in one 
thousand millions of births done consciously or unconsciously. The 
merits that are acquired by the bathing in the Ganges on a day of 
religious merit, cannot be described even by the Vedas. Whatever is 



mentioned in the Agamas is but a mere trifle. Even Brahma, Visnu 
and Mahes'a cannot describe fully the merits of the bathing in the 
Ganges. O Brahmin! Such is the glory of ordinary bathing. Now I will 
describe the effect of the Ganges bath done with a Sankalpa 
(resolve); hear. Ten times more the result is obtained when the 
Ganges bathing is done with a resolve (Sankalpa) than ordinary bath 
and if one bathes on the day when the sun passes from one sign to 
another (in the Zodiac), thirty times more religious merits accrue. On 
the new Moon (Amavyas) day, the Ganges bath gives the merits as 
above mentioned; but when the Sun is in his Southern course 
(Daksinayana) double the merits are obtained and when the sun is in 
his Northern course, ten times more religious merits are obtained. 
The Ganges bathing in the time of Chaturmasya, full Moon day, 
Aksaya Navami or Aksaya trittiya yields merits that cannot be 
measured. And if on the above Parva (particular periods of the year 
on which certain ceremonies are commanded) days both bathing, 
and making over gifts are done, there is no limit to the religious 
merits acquired; hundred times more than ordinary bath, religious 
merits are obtained. Great religious merits accrue from the Ganges 
bath on Manvantara tithi, Yugadya, S'ukla seventh day of the month 
of Magha, Bhismastami day, As'okastami day, and S’ri Rama 
Navami day. Again double the merits than those of the above arise 
from bathing in the Ganges during the Nanda ceremony. The 
Gauges bath in the Das'ahara tenth tithi gives merits equivalent to 
Yugadya Snanam (bath). And if the bathing be done on Mahananda 
or in Mahavaruni day, four times more religious merits accrue. Ten 
million times more religious merits accrue from the Ganges bathing 
on Maha Maha Varuni day than ordinary bath. The Ganges bath in 
the Solar eclipse yields ten times more religious merits than in the 
Lunar eclipse. Again the Snanam in Ardhodaya Yoga yields hundred 
times more religious merits than that of the (solar) eclipse. Thus 
saying to Ganga before Bhagiratha, the Lord of the Devas remained 
silent. The Devi Ganga with her head bowed down with devotion, 
said 



39-42. Ganga said If I am after all, to go to Bharata as Thou 
commandest and under the curse given previously by Bharati, then 
tell me how I would be freed of the sins that the sinners will cast on 
me. How long will I have to remain there? When, O Lord! Shall I be 
able to return to the Highest place of Visnu? O Thou, the Inner Self 
of all! O All Knowing! O Lord! Whatever else I desire. Thou knowest 
them all. So be pleased to instruct me on all these points. 


43-69. Bhagavan S’ri Hari said O Sures'vari! I know all that you 
desire; when you will assume the liquid form, the Salt Ocean will be 
your husband. He is My part and you are of the nature of Laksmi; so 
the union of the lover with the love stricken in the world will turn out a 
happy and qualified one. Of all the rivers Sarasvati and others in 
Bharata, that go to mix with the ocean, you will be the best and 
highly fortunate of them all. From today you will have to remain in 
Bharata for a period of five thousand years, under the curse of 
Bharati. You will be able to enjoy daily and always the pleasures with 
the Ocean. O Devi! As you are a clever lady, so He is also apt and 
expert. The inhabitants of Bharata will praise Thee and worship Thee 
with great devotion by the stotra which Bhagiratha has composed. 

He will derive the fruit of one horse-sacrifice who will meditate on 
Thee as per Kanvas'akha and worship, praise and bow down to 
Thee daily. Even if one utter “Ganga,” “Ganga,” though one is one 
hundred Yojanas away from the Ganges, one will be freed of all sins 
and go to Visnu-loka. Whatever sins will be cast in Thee by thousand 
sinners bathing in Thee will be destroyed by the touch of the 
devotees of Prakrit! Devi. Even if thousands and thousands of 
sinners touch the dead bodies and bath in Thee, all those will be 
destroyed when the Devi Bhaktas,the worshippers of BhuvanesVari 
and Maya Vija, will come and touch Thee. O Auspicious One! Thou 
wilt wash away the sins of the sinners, by Thy stay in Bharata with 
other best rivers Sarasvati and others. That will be at once a sacred 
place of pilgrimage where Thy glories will be chanted. By the touch 
of the dust of Thine, the sinner will be at once purified and he will 



dwell in the DevMoka (Mani Dvipa) for as many years as will be the 
dust there. All Hail to the Devi BhuvanesVari! He who will leave his 
body on Thy lap with full consciousness and remembering My name, 
will certainly go to My abode and will remain, as My chief attendant 
for an infinite period. He will see countless Prakritik Layas 
(dissolutions of the Universe). Unless a man has collected hordes of 
religious merits, be cannot die in the Ganges; and if he dies on the 
Ganges he goes to Vaikuntha as long as the Sun rises in this world. I 
get many bodies for him where he can enjoy the fruits of his Karma 
and I then give him My Svarupya (Form resembling Mine) and make 
him My attendant. If any ignorant man, void of any Jhanam, quits his 
body by touching merely Thy water, I give him Salokya (place in My 
region) and make him My attendant. Even if one quits one's body in 
a far off place, uttering Thy Name, I give him place in My region for 
one life time of Brahma. And if he remembers Thee with devotion, 
and quits his mortal coil at another place, I give him Sarupya (Form 
resembling Mine) for a period of endless Prakritik Layas. He instantly 
gets on an aerial car made of jewels and goes with My attendants to 
the region of Goloka and gets form like Me. Those that worship daily 
My Mantra, that pass their day eating the remnant of the food offered 
to Me, they need not have any distinction whether they die in Tirath 
or not. They themselves can easily purify the three worlds. Getting 
on the excellent and best aerial car built of jewels, they go to the 
region of Goloka. O Chaste One! Even if the friends of My devotees, 
be born in animal births, they also will be purified by the devotion 
shown towards Me and getting on a jewelled aerial car will be able to 
go to Goloka, so diffcult of access. Wherever the Bhaktas may be, if 
they simply remember Me with devotion, they will become liberated 
while living by the power of My Bhakti. Thus saying to Ganga, 
Bhagavan S’ri Hah addressed Bhagiratha O Child! Now worship 
Ganga Devi with devotion and chant hymns to Her. The pure 
Bhagirata meditated with devotion as per Kauthuma S'akha and 
worshipped the Devi and praised Her repeatedly. Then Ganga and 
Bhagiratha bowed down to S’ri Krisna and He disappeared at once 
from their sight. 



70. The Devarsi Narada said “O Thou the foremost of the 
Knowers of the Vedas! How, by what Kuthuma S’akha, the noble 
King Bhagiratha meditated on the Devi Ganga; what stotra did he 
recite and what was the method with which he worshipped the 
Ganges. 


71-75. Narayana said O Narada! One should first take one's bath, 
and putting on a clean washed clothing should perform one's daily 
duties. Then one should control oneself and with devotion worship 
the six Devatas Ganes’a, Sun, Fire, Visnu, S’iva and S'ivani. Thus 
one becomes entitled to worship. First worship is to be given to 
Ganes'a for the destruction of obstacles; the Sun is to be next 
worshipped for health; Fire, for purification; Visnu is then worshipped 
for getting wealth and power; S’iva is worshipped for knowledge and 
S'ivani is worshipped for Mukti. When these Devatas are 
worshipped, one is entitled to worship the Deity. Otherwise contrary 
become the effects. Now I am saying what Dhyanam (meditation) did 
Bhagiratha practise towards the Devi Ganga . 


Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on the origin of 
the Ganges in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 12. On The Origin Of Ganga 


1-15. Narayana said O Narada! Now about the meditation 
(Dhyan) of the Devi Ganga as per Kanva S'akha, which destroys all 
the sins, O Gange! Of white colour like white lotuses! Thou 
destroyest all the sins of men. Thou hast appeared from the body of 
S’ri Krisna. Thou art powerful like Him. Thou art very chaste and 
pure. Thou hast worn the raiment, uninflammable and decorated all 
over with ornaments made of jewels. Thou art more brilliant than one 
hundred autumnal Moons. Thou art also well pleased with a smile on 
Thy lips. And Thou art always of steady youthful beauty (that never 
wanes). Thou art dear to Narayana, calm and of peaceful temper, 
and proud of being His with His fortune. Thou bearest the braid of 
hair, decked with garlands of Malati flowers; Thy cheeks are 
anointed with sandal dots, with Sindura bindu (dots of red powder, 
vermilion) and well adorned with various artistic lines made of musk. 
Thy garment and Thy beautiful lips are more red than the ripe Bimba 
fruit (the red fruit of a cucurbitaceous plant); Thy teeth vie as it were, 
with the rows of pearls. How lovely are Thy eyes! How delightsome 
is Thy side-long glance! How close are Thy breasts like Bel fruits! 
Thy loins are thicker and more solid then the plantain trees. How do 
Thy feet look beautiful, defying the beauty of the Sthalapadma 
(ground Lotus)! 


How do the red sandals look lovely with Kunkuma and alaktak (red 
powder)! What a red tinge Thy feet have shewn with the honey of 
Parijata flower that is seen on the head of Indra. The Devas, the 
Siddhas, the Munis, offer always Arghyas (offerings of rice with 
Durba grass) at Thy feet; the ascetics bow down at Thy feet, and it 
seems as though so many lines of bees are on Thy lotus feet. O 
Mother! Thy lotus feet give liberation to those that want Mukti and 
enjoyment to those that want Bhukti (enjoyments). O Mother! Thou 
art the boon; Thou art the chief excellent; Thou grantest boons and 



Thou showest Thy favour to Thy devotees; Thou bestowest the 
Visnupadam (the place of Visnu); but Thou hast come from the feet 
of Visnu. Thus meditating on the Devi Ganga flowing by three routes 
(in Heaven, earth and infernal regions), the bestower of good things 
one should offer to the Devi sixteen things Asana, Padya, Arghya, 
water for bathing, ointment (anulepana), Dhupa (scents), DTpa 
(lights), Naivedya (offerings of food), betel, cool water, clothings, 
ornaments garlands, sandal-paste, Achamaniya (water for sipping), 
and beautiful beddings and worship Her with these. Then, with 
folded hands, one should perform stotra to Her and bow down to Her 
with devotion. Thus the worshipper gets the fruits of A'svamedha 
sacrifice. 


16. Narada said O Lord of the Devas! At present I am desirous to 
hear the sin-destroying and virtue-bestowing stotra (hymn) of Ganga 
Devi, the Purifier of all those that are fallen from virtue, originated 
from the feet of Visnu, the Lord of world and the husband of Laksmi. 
Kindly narrate all these in detail. 


17-41. Narayana said O Narada! Now I am narrating the stotra of 
Ganga Devi, that destroys all sins and bestows all religious merit. 
Hear. I bow down to the Ganges who appeared from the body of S’ri 
Krisna, enchanted by the music of S'iva, and, who was bathed with 
the perspiration (water coming out of the body) of S’ri Radha. I bow 
down to Ganga Devi who first appeared in the circular dance (Rasa 
Mandalam) in the region of Goloka and who always remains with 
S'ankara. My obeisance to the Devi Ganga who remains in the 
auspicious grand utsab of Radha (Rasa Mandalam), crowded with 
Gopas and Gopis, in the Full Moon night of the month of Kartik. She 
is one koti yojanas wide and one lakh times one koti yojanas long in 
the region of Goloka. My Obeisance to Her! In Vaikuntha, Ganga is 
sixty lakh yojanas in width and four times that in length. My 
Obeisance to Her! In Brahma-loka, Ganga is thirty lakh yojanas wide 



and five times as long. I bow down to Her. In S'iva-loka, She is thirty 
lakh yojanas wide and four times that in length. I bow down to Her. In 
Dhruva-loka, She is one lakh yojanas wide and seven times as long. 

I bow down to Her. In Chandra-loka She is one lakh yojanas wide 
and five times as long. My obeisance to S’ri Ganga Devi. I bow down 
to the Ganges who is sixty thousand yojanas wide in the Surya loka 
and ten times that in length. I bow down to Ganga in Tapo-loka who 
is one lakh yojanas wide and five times that in length. My obeisance 
to Ganga Devi in Janar-loka, who is one thousand yojanas wide and 
ten times that as long. I bow down to Ganga in Mahar-loka who is 
ten lakh yojanas wide and five times that in length. My obeisance to 
Ganga Devi in Kailas'a who is one thousand yojanas wide and one 
hundred times as long. I bow down to Ganga Devi who is known as 
Mandakini in Indra-loka, and who is one hundred yojanas wide and 
ten times than that in length. My obeisance to Ganga Devi, known as 
Bhogavati in Patala who is ten yojanas wide and five times as long. I 
bow down to Ganga Devi, known as Alakananda in this earth, who is 
two miles wide, in some places more wide and in some places less 
wide. I bow down to Ganga Devi who was of the colour of milk in 
Satya yuga, of the colour of Moon in Treta Yuga, of the colour of 
white sandal-paste in Dvapara yuga. I bow down to S’ri Ganga Devi 
who is as water in Kali yuga in this earth and as milk in Kali yuga in 
Heaven. O Child! By the touch of one molecule of the water of the 
Ganges, all the horrible sins incurred in ten million births, the murder 
of a Brahmin and so forth, are burnt to ashes. Thus I have described 
in twenty-one verses the great stotra (human) of the sin-destroying 
and the virtue-increasing merits of Ganga. He reaps the fruit of the 
A'svamedha sacrifice (Horse sacrifice), who daily sings this praise of 
Ganga after worshipping Her with devotion. There is no doubt in this. 
The persons that are without any sons get sons hereby and those 
who have no wives get wives. The diseased get themselves free 
from their diseases, and the man who is under bondage, is liberated 
from that bondage. He who getting up early in the morning reads this 
stotra of Ganga, becomes widely known even if he be not known at 
all and he becomes illumined with wisdom even if he be quite 



ignorant. Even if he sees a bad dream, he acquires the merit of 
bathing in the Ganges and of seeing good dreams. 


42-44. S’ri Narayana spoke O Narada! With this stotra (hymn) did 
Bhagiratha praise the Ganga Devi. Who then went with him to the 
spot where the Sagara's sons were burnt to ashes by the curse of 
Kapila. By the contact of the wind in touch with the particles of water 
of the Ganges, those sons of Sagara were instantly freed of their 
curses and they all repaired to Vaikuntha. She is named Bhagirathi, 
because Bhagiratha brought Her to this earth. Thus I have described 
to you the story of the Ganges. 


This anecdote is highly meritorious and the great step to liberation. 
What more do you now want to hear? Say. 


45-46. Narada said O Lord! How did Ganga come to flow through 
the three worlds by three routes, and thus purify them? How was she 
carried and to which places? How did the people of those localities 
accord respect to Her? Kindly describe all these in detail. 


47-79. Narayana said O Narada! On the Full Moon night of the 
month of Kartik in the Rasa mandalam, at the great festivity in 
honour of Radha, S’ri Krisna worshipped Radha and remained 
there. Next Radha, worshipped by S’ri Krisna, was worshipped by 
Brahma and the other Devas, by Saunaka and the other Risis, who 
also stopped there with much gladness. At this moment the Devi 
Sarasvati, the Presiding Deity of the Science of Music began to sing 
lovely songs regarding Krisna, in tune with vocal and instrumental 
music. Brahma became glad and presented to Sarasvati a necklace 
of jewels; Maha Deva gave her gems and jewels rare in this 
universe; Krisna presented the best Kaustubha jewel; Radhika 



offered excellent invaluable necklace of jewels; Narayana presented 
to her the best and most excellent garland of jewels; Laksmi gave 
her invaluable golden earrings decked with gems; Visnu-Maya Mula 
Prakriti, Bhagvati Durga, who is Narayani, Is'vari, Is'ani, presented 
Her devotion to Brahma, so very rare; Dharma gave her devotion to 
Dharma and high fame; Agni (fire) gave her excellent raiments 
purified by fire and Vayu gave Her Nupura (toe ornaments) made of 
gems and jewels. At this time, MahesVara, the Lord of Bhutas 
(elements) began to sing, at the suggestion of Brahma, songs 
relating to S’ri Krisna's grand Rasa festival. Hearing this, the Devas 
became very much enchanted and remained motionless like statues. 
With great difficulty, they regained their consciousness. Then they 
saw that there was no Radha nor Krisna in this Rasa mandala; 
everything was deluged with water. The Gopas, Gopis, Devas and 
Brahmanas began to cry loudly. Brahma in his meditation then came 
to know that Radha and Krisna both have assumed this liquid 
appearance for the deliverance of the people of the world. Brahma 
and others, all began to praise S’ri Krisna and said “O All 
prevading One! Now be pleased to show us Thy form and grant us 
our desired boons.” At that instant a sweet incorporeal voice was 
clearly heard by all, as coming from air above, that, “I am the Self of 
all, pervading all; and this my S’akti, Radha, is also the Self of all, 
prevades all; so there is no separation of us from you all even for a 
moment. It is only to show our favour to the devotees that we 
assume special forms. For this reason only there is separation of us 
from you as regards this body! There is nothing else. Besides you 
have no necessity with our bodies. O Devas! Now if my Manus, men. 
Munis, Vaisnavas and you all, purified by Mantras desire very much 
to see My Form clearly, then I tell you to request MahesVara to carry 
out My word. O Brahma! O Creator! Better ask Mahadeva, the World 
Teacher, that He would better compose the beautiful Tantra S'astra, 
in accordance with the limbs of the Vedas. And that the above 
S'astra be full of Mantras, capable to yield desired fruits, Stotras 
(hymns) and Kavachas (protection mantras) and rules of due 
worship in proper order. And that also My Mantra, My Stotra, and My 
Kavacha be also given there in a hidden form. So that those people 



that are sinners might not understand their real meanings and thus 
turn out against Me. It may be that one in a thousand or in a hundred 
may worship My Mantra. And My Mantra worshippers, the saints, 
become purified and come to My Abode. If My S'astra be not well 
made (i. e., if everyone be able to understand its meaning) and if 
everyone be able to go from Bhurloka to Goloka, then Thy labour in 
this creation of the world will all be in vain. Therefore dost Thou 
better create different worlds according to the differences of Sattvik, 
Rajasik, and Tamo Gunas; then some will be the inhabitants of this 
Bhurloka, some will be the inhabitants of Dyuloka according to their 
Karmas. O Brahman! If Maha Deva promises earnestly in this 
assembly of the Devas, I will then exhibit My True Form.” O Narada! 
Thus speaking, the Eternal Purusa S’ri Krisna remained silent (i. e., 
the aerial incorporeal voice stopped). Hearing this, Brahma, the 
Creator of the world, gladly informed S’iva of this. When the Lord of 
Knowledge, the Foremost of the Jhanins, Bhutanatha heard the 
words of the Creator, He took the Ganges water in His hands and 
swore that “I will complete the Tantra S'astra, full of Radha mantras 
and not opposed to the Vedas. If one touches the Ganges water and 
speaks lies, one remains in the terrible Kalasutra hell for a period of 
one Brahma's life time.” O Dvija! When Bhagavan S'ankara said this 
before the assembly of the Devas in the region of Goloka, S’ri Krisna 
appeared there with Radha. The Devas became exceedingly glad to 
see Him. They praised Him, the Best Purusa and they were all filled 
with rapture and again engaged themselves in the grand Rasa 
Festival. Some time after, Maha Deva lighted the Torch of Mukti, i.e., 
the Tantra S'astra was published by Him, as promised. O Child! Thus 
I have disclosed to you this anecdote, so very secret, and hard to be 
attained. Thus S’ri Krisna Himself, is verily the liquid Ganga sprung 
in the region of Goloka. This holy Ganga, born of the bodies of 
Krisna and Radha inseparable from each other, grants enjoyment, 
lordship and liberation. S’ri Krisna, the Highest Self, has placed Her 
in various places; so Ganga is of the nature of S’ri Krisna and is 
everywhere, equally honoured everywhere in the Brahmanda 
(universe). 



Here ends the Twelfth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the origin of 
Ganga in the Mahapuranam S’rimad Devi Bhagavatann of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 13. On The Anecdote Of Ganga 


1. Narada said O Lord of the Devas! Kindly say in what Loka did 
Ganga go after 5000 (five thousand) years of the Kali Yuga? 


2-4. Narayana said The Bhagirathi Ganga came down to Bharata 
under the curse of Bharati; and when the term expired, She went 
back, by the Will of God, to the region of Vaikuntha. Also at the end 
of the period of their curses, Bharati and, Laksmi, too, left Bharata 
and repaired to Narayana. Ganga, Laksmi, and Sarasvati, these 
three and Tulasi all these four are so very dear to S’ri Hah. 


5-6. Narada said How did Ganga appear from the lotus feet of 
Visnu? Why did Brahma put Her in His Kamandalu? I have heard 
that Ganga is the wife of S’iva; how then, came She to be the wife of 
Narayana? Kindly describe all these in detail to me. 


7-8. Narayana said O Muni! In ancient times, in the region of 
Goloka, Ganga assumed the liquid appearance. She was born of the 
bodies of Radha and Krisna. So She is of the nature of both of them 
and their parts. Ganga is the presiding deity of water. She is 
unequalled in Her beauty in this world. She is full of youth and 
adorned with all ornaments. 


9-43. Her face was like the autumnal mid-day lotus and sweet smile 
was always reigning on Her lips; Her form was very beautiful; Her 
colour was as bright as melted gold and She looked brilliant like the 
Autumnal Moon. Eyes and mind get cool and become pleasant at 
Her beauty and radiance; She was of purely Suddha Sattva; Her 
loins were bulky and hard and She was covered with excellent 



clothings all over Her body. Her breasts were plump and prominent; 
they were raised, hard, and nicely round. Her eyes very fascinating, 
always casting sidelong glances. Her braids of hair situated a little 
oblique and the garland of Malati flowers over it made Her look 
extremely handsome. The saudalpaste dot and the vermillion dot 
were seen on Her forehead. On Her cheeks the leaves of musk were 
drawn and Her lips were red like Bandhuka flowers and they looked 
enchanting. Her rows of teeth looked like rows of ripe pomegranates; 
the ends of Her cloth not inflammable by fire, worn in front in a knot 
round the waist. She sat by the side of Krisna, full of amorous 
desires, and abashed. She covered Her face with the end of Her 
cloth and was seeing, with a steadfast gaze the face of the Lord and 
She was drinking the nectar of His face with great gladness. Her 
lotus face bloomed and became gladdened at the expectation of a 
first amorous embrace. She fainted on seeing the Form of Her Lord 
and a thrill of joy passed all over Her body. In the meanwhile 
Radhika came up there. Radha was attended by thirty kotis of Gopis. 
She looked brilliant like tens of millions of Moons. Seeing Ganga by 
the side of S’ri Krisna, Her face and eyes became reddened with 
anger like a red lotus. Her colour was yellow like champaka and Her 
gait was like a maddened elephant. She was adorned with various 
invaluable ornaments made of jewels. Her pair of clothings were tied 
round Her waist. They were decked with invaluable jewels and not 
inflammable by fire (fire-proof). The Arghya offered by S’ri Krisna 
was on Her lotus-feet of the colour of a flowering shrub. Hibiscus 
mutabilis, and She was going slowly step by step. The Risis began 
to fan Her with white Chamaras no sooner She, descending from the 
excellent aeroplane decked with jewels, began to walk. Below the 
point where the parting of the hairs on the head is done, there was 
the dot of Sindura on Her forehead. It looked brilliant like a bright 
lamp flame. On both sides of this Sindurabindu, the dot of musk and 
the dot of Sandal-paste were seen. When She began to quiver with 
anger. Her braid, with Parijata garland round it began to tremble 
also. Her lips adorned with beautiful colours, began to quiver also. 
She took Her seat angrily on a jewel throne by the side of S’ri Krisna. 
Her attendants took their seats in their allotted positions. Seeing 



Radha, S’n Krisna got up at once from His seat with reverence and 
addressed Her, smiling and began to converse with Her in sweet 
words. The Gopis, very much afraid and with their heads bent low, 
began to chant hymns to Her with devotion. S’ri Krisna also began to 
praise Her with stotras. At this moment Ganga Devi got up and 
praised Her with various hymns and asked Her welfare with fear and 
with humble words. Out of fear. Her throat, lips and palate were 
parched up. She took refuge humbly at S’ri Krisna's feet. S’ri Krisna 
then, took Ganga Devi on His breast when She became calm and 
quiet. At this interval SuresVari Ganga looked at Radha, seated on a 
throne, lovely and sweet, as if She was burning with Brahma Fire. 
Since the beginning of creation. She is the Sole Lady of innumerable 
Brahmas and She is Eternal. At the first sight. She looked young as 
if of twelve years old. Nowhere in any Universe can be seen a lady 
so beautiful and so qualified. She was peaceful, calm and quiet, 
lovely, infinite and having no beginning nor end. She was auspicious, 
well endowed with all auspicious signs, prosperous, and having the 
good fortune of having a best husband. She was the foremost jewel 
amongst the ladies and appeared as if all the beauties were 
concentrated in Her. Radha is the (left) half of S’ri Krisna's body; 
whether in age or in strength or in beauty she was in every way 
perfectly equal to S’ri Krisna. Laksmi and the Lord of Laksmi both 
worship Radha. The excellent brilliance of Sri Krisna was 
overpowered by the beauty of Radha. Taking Her seat on the throne 
She began to chew betels offered by Her attendants (Sakhis). She is 
the Mother of all the worlds; but no one is Her mother. She is 
fortunate, respected and proud. She is the Ruling Lady of S’ri 
Krisna's Life and Soul and ever dearer to Him than His Prana (vital 
breath). O Devarsi! Ganga, the Governess of the Devas, looked at 
Her over and over again with a steadfast gaze; but Her eyes and 
mind were not at all satiated. At this moment, Radha addressed 
smilingly to S’ri Krisna, the Lord of the world, humbly and in sweet 
words. O My Lord! Who is that Lady sitting by Thy side, looking 
askance, eager and with a smiling countenance. She is enchanted 
with Thy beauteous form and fainting away. Her whole body is 
excited with rapturous joy. Hiding Her face with cloth She is 



frequently looking at Thee. Thou also dost look on Her smilingly and 
with desires. What are all these? Even during My presence in this 
Goloka, all these bad practices are being rampant. 


44-51. It is Thou that art doing all these bad things often and often! 
We are female sex; what shall we do? We are naturally, of a very 
pleasing temper, simple. I bore and forgave all these out of our love. 
O Licentious One! Take Thy Beloved and go away quickly from this 
Goloka. Otherwise these things will not bid fair to Thee. Firstly, one 
day I saw Thee, united with Viraja Gopi, in Chandana (Sandal wood) 
forest. What to do? At the request of the S'akhis, I did forgive Thee. 
Then, hearing My footsteps Thou didst fly away. Viraja, out of 
shame, quitted Her body and assumed the form of a river. That is 
million Yojanas wide an four times as long. Even to this day that 
Viraja is existing, testifying to Thy Glory (near Puri, Jagannatha)! 
When I went back to My home Thou didst go to Viraja again and 
cried aloud “O Viraje! O Viraje!” Hearing Your cry, Viraja, the Siddha 
Yogini arose from the waters, out of Her Yogic power, and when She 
showed Thee Her divine appearance decked with ornaments. Thou 
didst draw Her to Thy side and cast Thy seed in Her. It is owing to 
the casting of that seed in the womb of Viraja that the seven oceans 
have come into existence! 


52-107. Secondly, one day I saw Thee in actual intercourse with the 
Gopi named S'obha! Hearing My footsteps. Thou fled'st away that 
day also. 


Out of shame S'obha quitted Her body and departed to the sphere of 
Moon (Chandra Mandal). The cooling effect of the Moon is due to 
this S'obha. When S’obha was thus distressed. Thou didst divide 
Her and put some parts to gems and jewels, part to gold, partly to 
excellent pearls and gems, partly on the face of women, partly to the 



bodies of Kings, partly to the leaves of trees, partly to flowers, partly 
to ripe fruits, partly to corns, partly to palaces and temples, partly to 
purified materials, partly to young and tender shoots and foliage, and 
partly to milk. Thirdly, I saw Thee united with Prabha GopT in 
Brindaban. Thou fled'st away, hearing My footsteps. Out of shame, 
Prabha quitted Her body and departed to the Solar atmosphere. This 
Prabha (lustre) is fierce luminosity of the Solar atmosphere. Out of 
the pangs of separation Thou criedest and didst divide Prabha and 
didst put some parts in Fire, partly amidst the Yaksas, partly into 
lions, among men, partly amongst the Devas, partly in Vaisnavas, 
partly in serpents, partly in Brahmanas, partly in Munis, partly in 
ascetics, and partly in fortunate and prosperous ladies. Thou hadst 
to weep then after Thou hadst thus divided Prabha, for Her 
separation and and fourthly I saw Thee in love union with the GopT 
S'anti in Rasa Mandalam. On the coming of the spring season, one 
day Thou with garlands of flowers on Thy neck and with Thy body 
besmeared with sandal paste and decked with ornaments, wast 
sleeping on a bed of flowers with S’anti GopT, decked with gems, in a 
temple made of gems and pearls and illumined by a lamp of jewels 
and Thou wast chewing the betel, given by Thy beloved. Hearing My 
sound Thou fled'st away. S’anti GopT, too, out of fear and shame 
quitted Her body and disappeared in Thee. Therefore S’anti is 
reckoned as one of the noblest qualities. Out of the pain of 
separation. Thou didst divide the body of S’anti and distributed partly 
to forests, partly to Brahma, partly to Me, partly to S'uddha Sattva 
LaksmT, partly to Thy Mantra worshippers, partly to My Mantra 
worshippers, partly to the ascetics, partly to Dharma, and partly to 
the religious persons. Fifthly, dost Thou remember that one day 
anointing all over Thy body fully with the sandal paste and good 
scent and with garlands on Thy neck, well dressed, decked with 
jewels. Thou wast sleeping with Ksama (forgiveness) GopT in ease 
and happiness, on a nice bedding interspersed with flowers and well 
scented. Thou wert so much over-powered by sleep after fresh 
intercourse that when I went and disturbed, then Thou two didst get 
up from the sweet sleep. I took away Thy yellow robes, the beautiful 
MuralT (flute), garlands made of forest flowers, Kaustubha gems, and 



invaluable earrings of pearls and gems. I gave it back to Thee at the 
earnest request of the S'akhis. Thy body turned black with sin and 
dire shame, Ksama then quitted Her body out of shame and went 
down to the earth. Therefore Ksama turned out to be the repository 
of best qualities. Out of affection to Her, Thou didst divide Her body 
and distributed them partly to Visnu, partly to the Vaisnavas, partly to 
Dharma, partly to the religious persons, partly to weak persons, 
partly to ascetics, partly to the Devas, and partly to the Pundits 
(literary persons). O Lord! Thus I have described Thy qualities as far 
as I know. What more dost thou want to hear? Thou hast many more 
qualities! But I am not aware of them. Having thus spoken, the red- 
lotus eyed Radha began to rebuke Ganga sitting by the side of S’ri 
Krisna with Her head bent low out of shame. At this time Ganga, who 
was a Siddha Yogini came to know all the mysteries, and instantly 
disappeared from the assembly in Her own water form. 


The Siddha Yogini Radha came to know also, by Her Yogic power, 
the secrets of Ganga and became ready to drink the whole water in 
one sip. Ganga, knowing this intention of Radha, by Her Yogic 
power, took refuge of Krisna and entered into His feet. Then Radha 
began to look out for Ganga everywhere First She searched in 
Goloka, then Vaikuntha, then Brahma-loka; then She searched all 
the Lokas one by one but no where did She find Ganga. All the 
places in Goloka became void of of water; all turned out dried mud 
and all the aquatic animals died and fell to the ground. And Brahma, 
Visnu, S’iva, Ananta, Dharma, Indra, Moon, Sun, Manus, Munis, 
Siddhas, ascetics all became very thirsty and their throats became 
parched. They then went to Goloka, and bowed down with devotion 
to S’ri Krisna, Who was the Lord of all, beyond Prakriti, the Supreme, 
worthy to be worshipped, the Bestower of boons, the Best, and the 
Cause of boons; Who is the Lord of Gopas and Gopis; Who is 
formless, without any desire, unattached, without refuge, 
attributeless, without any enthusiasm, changeless, and unstained; 
Who is All Will and who assumes forms to show favour to His 



devotees; Who is Sattva, the Lord of truth, the Witness and eternal 
Purusa and Who is the Highest, the Supreme Lord, the Best and 
Excellent, the Highest Self and the Supreme God. They began to 
hymn Him. All were filled with intense feelings with devotion; tears of 
love were flowing from their eyes and the bodies of all were filled 
with ecstasy, the hairs standing in ends. He was Para Brahma; His 
Substance was made of Transcendental Light, Who is the Cause of 
all Causes, who was seated in a wonderful throne, built of invaluable 
gems and jewels, who was being fanned by the Gopas with white 
chowries, who was seeing and hearing with great delight, and 
smiling countenance, the dancing and singing of the Gopis, who was 
chewing the scented betel offered by Radha and who was residing 
in. the heart of His dearest S’ri Radha, who was the Perfect, all 
pervading, and the Lord of the Rasa Circle. The Manus, Munis, and 
the ascetics all bowed down to S’ri Krisna, no sooner they beheld 
Him. Joy and wonder at once caught hold of their hearts. They then 
looked at one another and gave over to Brahma the task of 
communicating their feelings. The four faced Brahma, with Visnu on 
His right and Varna Deva on His left, gradually came in front of S’ri 
Krisna. Wherever He cast His glance in the Rasa Mandalam, He saw 
S’ri Krisna, full of the Highest Bliss, of the nature of the Highest 
Bliss, sitting. All have turned out Krisnas; their seats were all 
uniform; all were two armed and with flutes in their hands; on every 
one's neck is the forest garland; peacock's tail was on the top of 
everyone's crest and Kaustubha jewels were on all their breasts. The 
Forms of all of them were very beautiful; very lovely and very 
peaceful. No difference at all between them whether in form, or in 
qualities, or in ornaments, or in radiance, in age, in lustre, in no 
respect no one was inferior to another. No one was imperfect; no 
one was deficient in lordliness. It was indeed very difficult to make 
out who was the master and who was the servant. Sometimes He is 
seen in His Teja form as the Great Light, and there is nothing else; 
sometimes there is that Clear Divine Form; sometimes He comes 
Formless; sometimes with form; and again sometimes both with and 
without form. Sometimes there is no Radha; there is only Krisna; 

And sometimes again in every seat there is the Yugal Murti Radha 



and Krisna combined. Sometimes Radha assumes the form of 
Krisna. So the Creator Brahma could not make out whether S’ri 
Krisna was a female or a male. At last He meditated on S’ri Krisna in 
his heart-lotus and began to chant hymns to Him with devotion and 
prayed for forgiveness for his misdoings. When S’ri Krisna got 
pleased, the Creator, opening His eyes, saw S’ri Krisna on the 
breast of S’ri Radha. There were His attendants on all the sides and 
the Gopis all around. Seeing this, Brahma, Visnu, and MahesVara 
bowed down to Him and sang His praises. 


108-113. S’ri Krisna, the Lord of Laksmi, the Omnipresent, Cause of 
all, the Lord of all, and the Internal Ruler of all, knew their intentions 
and, addressing them, separately said “O Brahman! Is it all well 
with you? O Lord of Kamala! Come here. O Mahadeva! Come here; 
let all be well to you. You all have come to me for Ganga. Ganga has 
taken refuge under My feet out of fear for Radha. Seeing Ganga by 
My side, Radha wanted to drink Her up. However I will give over 
Ganga to the hands of you all; but you will have to pray to Radha, so 
that Ganga becomes fearless of Her.” The lotus born Brahma smiled 
at S’ri Krisna's words and began to sing hymns to Radha, Who is fit 
to be worshipped by all. The Creator Brahma, the Compiler of the 
Four Vedas, the Four-faced One praised Radha with His Four heads, 
bent low and addressed Her thus 


114-125. Brahma said “O Radhe! Ganga, appeared from Thee 
and the Lord S’ri Krisna. Both of you were transformed before into 
the liquid forms in the Rasa Mandalam, on hearing the music of 
S'ankara. And That Lquid Form is Ganga. So She is born of Thee 
and S’ri Krisna. Hence She is like Thy daughter and to be loved as 
such. She will be initiated in Thy Mantra and She will worship Thee 
The four armed Lord of Vaikuntha will be Her husband. And when 
She will appear in parts on earth, the Salt Ocean will be Her 
husband. O Mother! The Ganga that dwells in Goloka, is dwelling 



everywhere. O Governess of the Devas! Thou art Her mother; and 
She is always Thy Self born daughter.” Hearing thus, the words of 
Brahma, Radha gave Her assent towards the protection of Ganga. 
And then Ganga appeared from the toe-tip of S’ri Krisna. The liquid 
Ganga, then, assumed Her own form and, getting up from water, 
was received with great honour by the Devas. Bhagavan Brahma 
took a little of that Ganges water in His Kamandalu and Bhagavan 
Mahadeva kept some of it in His own head. 


The lotus born Brahma, then, initiated Ganga into the Radha Mantra 
and gave Her instructions, Radha Stotra (hymn of Radha) according 
to the Sama Veda, Radha Kavacha (protection mantras), Radha 
Dhyan (meditation on Radha), method of worship of Radha, and 
Radha's purascharana. Ganga worshipped Radha according to 
those instructions and went to Vaikuntha. O Muni! Laksmi, Sarasvati, 
Ganga, and the world purifying Tulasi, these four became the wives 
of Narayana. Krisna, then, smiled and explained to Brahma the 
history of Time, hardly to be comprehended by others. He then 
spoke “O Brahma! O Visnu! O MahesVara! Now you better take 
Ganga and I will now tell you what a change has been effected by 
this time. Hear. 


126-136. You, the three Devas, the other Devas, Munis, Manus, 
Siddhas, and other Mahatmas that are present here, are living now. 
For this region of Goloka is not affected by Kala (Time). Now the 
Kalpa is going to expire. So in the other regions than Goloka and 
Vaikuntha, the Brahmas, etc., that were existing in all other 
Universes, have all now dissolved in My Body. O Lotus-born! Save 
Goloka and Vaikuntha, all are now under water, the pre-state of 
earth. Better go and create your own Brahmandas and Ganga will go 
to that newly created Brahmanda. I will also create other worlds and 
the Brahmas thereof. Now you all better go with the Devas and do 
your own works respectively. You have waited here for a long 



interval. As many Brahmas that have fallen all appear again.” Thus 
saying S’ri Krisna, the Lord of Radha went to His Inner Chamber. 

The Devas also instantly retired from that spot and engaged 
themselves earnestly in the creation work. Ganga remained as 
before till then in the region of Goloka, Vaikuntha, S’ivaloka, Brahma- 
loka, and in other places, by the command of S’ri Krisna. She is 
named Visnupadi, because She appeared from the feet of Visnu. 
Thus I have described to you this pleasant, essential story of Ganga, 
leading to liberation. What more do you now want to hear? Say. 


Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter on the anecdote of Ganga in the 
Ninth Book in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 14. On The Story Of Ganga Becoming 
The Wife Of Narayana 


1-2. Narada said O Lord! Ganga, Laksmi, Sarasvati, and the 
world purifying Tulasi, these four, are dearest to Narayana. Out of 
these, Ganga went from the region of Goloka to Vaikuntha. So I have 
heard. But how did She come to be the wife of Narayana. I have not 
heard. Kindly describe this. 


3. Narayana said Brahma came from Goloka to the region of 
Vaikuntha accompanied by Ganga. 


4-23. Brahma said to Narayana O Lord! Ganga, born of the 
bodies of Radha and Krisna, full of youth, modest, extraordinarily 
beautiful, of pure Suddha Sattva, and void of anger and egoism, 
does not like to marry anyone save Thee as She is born of Thee. But 
Radha is of a very proud nature and very wrathful. She was even 
ready to drink up Ganga. But Ganga at once and intelligently took 
refuge into the feet of S’ri Krisna. So the whole Goloka became void 
of water. Seeing this, I have come here to know in particular the 
whole history of the case. Then S’ri Krisna, the Knower and the 
Ruler of the hearts of all, came to know my heart and instantly 
caused Ganga to issue from His toe and handed Her over to me. I 
bowed down to S’ri Krisna and now I have come with Ganga to 
Thee. Now Thou dost marry the SuresVari Ganga according to the 
Gandharva rule of marriage. As Thou art a Deva of taste and 
humorous in the assembly of the Devas, so Ganga is. As Thou art a 
gem amongst the males, so She is the gem amongst the females. 
And the union of a humorous man with a humorous woman is 
exceedingly pleasant. Now marry this Lady who has come of Her 
own accord to Thee. S’ri Maha Laksmi becomes annoyed with one 



who does not marry a woman who has come spontaneously. There 
is no doubt in this. The wise men do never insult the Prakriti. All the 
Purusas (males) are born of Prakriti and all the females are parts of 
Prakriti. So Prakriti and Purusa are both inseparable and verily one 
and the same. So these two should never insult each other. (If Thou 
sayest that Ganga is attached to Krisna; how canst Thou marry Her. 
The reply is) As S’ri Krisna is beyond the attributes and beyond 
Prakriti, so Thou art also above Prakriti. The one-half of S’ri Krisna is 
two-armed; the other half of S’ri Krisna is four-armed. Radha has 
appeared from the left side of S’ri Krisna. He Himself is the right half 
and Padma is His left-half. As there is no difference between Radha 
and Kamala so there is no difference between S’ri Krisna and Thee. 
Therefore as Ganga is born of Thy body, she wants to marry Thee. 
As Prakriti and Purusa are really one and the same without any 
difference, so the males and females are one. Thus speaking to 
Narayana, Brahma handed Ganga over to Narayana and went away. 
Narayana, then, married Ganga smeared with sandal paste and 
flowers, according to the rules of the Gandarbha marriage. The Lord 
of Laksmi then spent his time happily in enjoyment with Ganga. 
Ganga had to go to the earth (under the Bharati's curse) and 
afterwards returned to Vaikuntha. As Ganga appeared from the feet 
of Visnu, She is denominated Visnupadi. Ganga Devi was very 
much overpowered with enjoyment in Her first intercourse with 
Narayana; so much so that She remained motionless. Thus Ganga 
spent the days happily with Narayana. Sarasvati’s jealousy towards 
Ganga did not disappear, though She was advised by Laksmi Devi 
not to do so. Sarasvati cherished incessantly the feeling of jealousy 
towards Ganga. But Ganga had not the least feeling of jealousy 
towards Sarasvati. 

At last, one day, when vexed too much, Ganga became angry and 
cursed Sarasvati to take Her birth in Bharata. So Laksmi, Sarasvati 
and Ganga were the wives of Narayana. Lastly TulasT became the 
wife of Narayana. So the number of wives of Narayana amounted to 
four. 



Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the story of 
Ganga becoming the wife of Narayana in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 15. On The Anecdote Of Tulas! 


1-6. Narada said O Bhagavan! How came the pure chaste Tulasi 
to be the wife of Narayana? Where was Her birth place? And what 
was She in Her previous birth? What family did She belong to? 
Whose daughter was She? And what austerities did She practise, 
that She got Narayana for Her husband, Who is above Prakriti, not 
liable to change without any effort, the Universal Self, Para Brahma 
and the Highest God; Who is the Lord of all, omniscient, the Cause 
of all, the Receptacle of all. Omnipresent, and the Preserver of all. 
And how did Tulasi, the chief Devi of Narayana, turn out into a tree? 
Herself quite innocent, how She was attacked by the fierce Asura? O 
Remover of all doubts! My mind, plain and simple, has become 
restless. I am eager to hear all this. So kindly cut asunder all my 
doubts. 


7-40. Narayana said O Narada! The Manu Daksa Savarni was 
very religious, devoted to Visnu, of wide renown, of a great name, 
and born with Visnu's parts. Daksa Savarni’s son Brahma Savarni 
was also very religious, devoted to Visnu and of a pure S'uddha 
Sattva Guna. Brahma Savarni's son, Dharma Savarni was devoted 
to Visnu and He was the master of his senses. Dharma Savarni's 
sons Rudra Savarni was also a man of restraint and very devoted. 
Rudra Savarni's son was Deva Savarni, devoted to Visnu. Deva 
Savarni's son was Indra Savarni. He was a great Bhakta of Visnu. 
His son was Vrisadhvaja. But He was a fanatic S'aiva (devoted to 
S'iva). At his house S'iva Himself remained for three Yugas 
according to the Deva measure. So much so that Bhagavan 
Bhutanatha loved him more than His own son. Vrisadhvaja did not 
recognise Narayana, nor Laksmi nor Sarasvati nor another body. He 
discarded the worship of all the Devas. He worshipped S'ankara 
only. The greatly exciting Laksmi Puja (worship of Maha Laksmi) in 
the month of Bhadra and S’ri Pahchami Puja in the month of Magha, 



which are approved of by the Vedas, Vrisadhvaja put an entire stop 
to these and the Sarasvati Puja. At this the Sun became angry with 
the King Vrisadhvaja, the discarder of the holy thread, the hater of 
Visnu, and cursed Him thus “O King! As you are purely devoted to 
S’iva and S’iva alone, and as you do not recognise any other Devas, 

I say within no time, you will be deprived of all your wealth and 
prosperity.” S'ankara, hearing this curse, became very angry and 
taking His trident, ran after the Sun. The Sun, becoming afraid, 
accompanied His father Kas'yapa and took refuge of Brahma. 
Bhagavan S'ankara went to the Brahma Loka, with trident in His 
hands. Brahma became afraid of Mahadeva and took Sun to the 
region of Vaikuntha. Out of terror, the throats of Brahma, Kas'yapa, 
and Sun became parched and dry and they all went afraid for refuge 
to Narayana, the Lord of all. They all bowed down to Him and 
praised Him frequently and finally informed Him of the cause of their 
coming and why they were so much afraid. Narayana showed them 
mercy and granted them “Abhaya” (no fear). O You! Who are afraid, 
take rest. What cause of fear there can be to you, when I am here! 


Whoever remembers Me, wherever he may be, involved in danger or 
fear, I go there with the Sudars'an disc in My hand and save him. O 
Devas! I am always the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of this 
universe. In the form of Visnu, I am the Preserver; in the form of 
Brahma, I am the Creator; and in the form of Mahes'a, I am the 
Destroyer. I am S’iva; I am you; and I am the Surya, composed of 
the three qualities. It is I who assumes many forms and preserves 
the universe. Better go to your respective places. What fear can ye 
suspect? I say, all your fears due to S'ankara, are verily removed 
from this day. Bhagavan S'ankara, the Lord of all, is the Lord of the 
Sadhus. He always hears the words of His Bhaktas; and He is kind 
to them. He is their Self. Both the Sun and S’iva are dearer to Me 
than My life. No one is more energetic than S'ankara and the Sun. 
Mahadeva can easily create ten million Suns and ten million 
Brahmas. There is nothing impossible with S'ulapani. Having no 



consciousness of any outer thing, immersed, day and night, in 
meditating on Me with His whole heart concentrated. He is repeating 
with devotion My Mantra from His five faces and He always sings My 
glories. I am also thinking, day and night, of His welfare. Whoever 
worships Me in whichever way, I also favour him similarly. Bhagavan 
Maha Deva is of the nature of S’iva, all auspiciousness; He is the 
presiding deity of S'iva, that is, liberation. It is because liberation is 
obtained from Him, He is called S’iva. O dear Narada! While 
Narayana was thus speaking, the trident bolder Mahadeva, with his 
eyes red like reddened lotuses, mounting on His bull, came up there 
and getting down from His Bull, humbly bowed down with devotion to 
the Lord of Laksmi, peaceful and higher than the highest. Narayana 
was then seated on His throne, decked with jewel ornaments. There 
was a crown on His crest; two earrings were hanging from His ears; 
the disc was in His hand, forest flower's garlands on His neck; of the 
colour of fresh blue rain cloud; His form exceedingly beautiful. The 
four-armed attendants were fanning Him with their four hands; His 
body smeared all over with sandal-paste and He is wearing the 
yellow garment. That Bhagavan, distressed with the thought of 
welfare for His Bhaktas, the Highest Self was sitting on a jewel 
throne and chewing the betel offered by Padma and with smiling 
countenance, seeing and hearing the dancing and singing of the 
Vidyadharis. When Mahadeva bowed down to Narayana, Brahma 
also bowed down to Mahadeva. The Sun, too, surprised, bowed 
down to Mahadeva with devotion. Kas'yapa, too, bowed and with 
great bhakti, began to praise Mahadeva. On the other hand, 

S’ankara praised Narayana and took His seat on the throne. The 
attendants of Narayana began to fan Mahadeva with white chowries. 
Then Visnu addressed Him with sweet nectar like voice and said 
“O Mahes'vara! What brings Thee here? Hast Thou been angry?” 


41-45. Mahadeva said : - “O Visnu! The King Vrisadhavaja is My 
great devotee; he is dearer to Me than My life. The Sun has cursed 
him and so I am angry. Out of the affection for a son I am ready to kill 



Surya. Surya took Brahma's refuge and now he and Brahma have 
taken Thy refuge. And Those who being distressed take Thy refuge, 
either in mind or in word, become entirely safe and free from danger. 
They conquer death and old age. What to speak of them, then, of 
those who come personally to Thee and take Thy refuge. The 
remembrance of Hah takes away all dangers. All good comes to 
them. O Lord of the world! Now tell me what becomes of My stupid 
Bhakta who has become devoid of fortune and prosperity by the 
curse of Surya.” 


46-51. Visnu said “O S'ankara! Twenty-one yugas elapsed within 
this one-half Ghatika, by the coincidence of Fate (Daiva). Now go 
quickly to Thy abode. Through the unavoidable coincidence of the 
cruel Fate, Vrisadhvaja died. His son Rathadhvaja, too, died. 
Rathadhvaja had two noble sons Dharmadhvaja and Kus'adhvaja. 
Both of them are great Vaisnavas; but, through Surya's curse, they 
have become luckless. Their kingdoms are lost; they have become 
destitute of all property, prosperity and they are now engaged in 
worshipping Maha Laksmi. Maha Laksmi will be born in parts of their 
two wives. Then again, by the grace of Laksmi, Dharmadhvaja and 
Kus'adhvaja will be prosperous and become great Kings. O S'ambhu 
Your worshipper Vrisadhvaja is dead. Therefore Thou dost go back 
to Thy place. O Brahma, O Sun! O Kas'yapa! You all also better go 
to your places respectively.” O Narada! Thus saying, Bhagavan 
Visnu went with His wife to the inner rooms. The Devas also went 
gladly to their own places respectively. And Mahadeva, too. Who is 
always quite full within Himself, departed quickly to perform His 
Tapas. 


Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter on the question of anecdote of 
Tulasi in the Ninth Book in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 16. On The Incarnation Of Maha 
Laksm! In The House Of Kus’adhvaja 


1-30. S’n Narayana said O Muni! Dharmadhvaja and Kus’adhvaja 
practised severe tapasyas and worshipped Laksmi. They then got 
separately their desired boons. By the boon of Maha Laksmi, they 
became again the rulers of the earth. They acquired great religious 
merits and they also had their children. The wife of Kus’adhvaja was 
named Malavati. After a long time, the chaste wife delivered one 
daughter, born of the parts of Kamala. The daughter, on being born, 
became full of wisdom. On being born, the baby began to sing 
clearly the Vedic mantrams from the lying-in-chamber. Therefore She 
was named Vedavati by the Pundits. She bathed after her birth and 
became ready to go to the forest to practise severe tapas. Everyone 
then, tried earnestly to dissuade her, devoted to Narayana, from the 
enterprise. But she did not listen to anybody. She went to Puskara 
and practised hard tapasya for one Manvantara. Yet her body did not 
get lean a bit; rather she grew more plumpy and fatter. By degrees 
her youth began to show signs in her body; one day she heard an 
incorporeal voice from the air above, “O Fair One! In your next birth 
S’ri Hah, adored by Brahma and other gods, will be your husband.” 
Hearing this, her joy knew no bounds. She went to the solitary caves 
in the Gandhamadan mountain to practise tapas again. When a long 
time passed away in this tapasya, one day the irresistible Havana 
came there as guest. No sooner Vedavati saw the guest, then she 
gave him, out of devotion to the guest, water to wash feet, delicious 
fruits, and cool water for his drink. The villain accept the hospitality 
and sitting there, began to ask “O Auspicious One! Who are you?” 
Seeing the fair smiling lady, with beautiful teeth, her face blooming 
like the autumnal lotus, of heavy loins, and of full breast, that villain 
became passionate. He lost entirely all consciousness and became 
ready to make violence on Her. Seeing this, the chaste Vedavati, 
became angry and out of her tapas influence, astounded him and 
made him insensible to move. He remained motionless like an 



inanimate body. He could not move his hands nor feet nor could he 
speak. That wicked fellow then mentally recited praises to her. And 
the praise of the Higher S’akti can never go futile. She became 
pleased and granted him religious merits in the next world. But she 
also pronounced this curse “That when you have touch my body 
out of passion, then you will be ruined with your whole family for my 
sake. Now see my power.” O Narada! Thus saying to Havana, 
Vedavati left her body by her yogic power. Then Havana took her 
body and delivered it to the Ganges and he then returned to his own 
home. But Havana thought over the matter repeatedly and 
exclaimed, “What wonder have I seen! Oh! What a miracle this lady 
has wrought!” Havana thus lamented. This Vedavati, of pure 
character, took her birth afterwards as Sita, the daughter of Janaka. 
For the sake of this Sita, Havana was ruined with his whole family. 

By the religious merits of her previous birth, the ascetic lady got 
Bhagavan Hah S’ri Hama Chandra, the Fullest of the Full, for her 
husband and remained for a long time in great enjoyment with the 
Lord of the world; a thing very difficult to be attained! Though she 
was a Jatismara (one who knows all about her past lives), she did 
not feel any pain due to her practising severe austerities in her 
previous birth; for when the pains end in success, the pains are not 
then felt at all. Sita, in Her fresh youth enjoyed various pleasures in 
the company of her husband, handsome, peaceful, humorous and 
witty, the chief of the Devas, loved by the female sex, well-qualified, 
and just what she desired. But the all-powerful Time is irresistible; 
the truthful Hamachandra, the scion of the Haghu’s family, had to 
keep up the promise made by his father and so he had to go to the 
forest, ordained by Time. He remained with Sita and Laksmana near 
the sea. Once the God Fire appeared to Him in the form of a 
Brahmana. Fire, in a Brahmin-form, saw Hama Chandra morose and 
became himself mortified. Then the Truthful Fire addressed the 
truthful Hamachandra “O Bhagavan Hamachandra! I now speak 
to you how time is now coming to you. Now has come the time when 
your Sita will be stolen. 



31-48. The course of Destiny is irresistible; none else is more 
powerful than Time, Fate. So give over your Sita, the World Mother 
to me and keep with you this Chhaya Sita (the shadow Sita; the 
false Sita). When the time of Sita’s ordeal by fire will take place I will 
give Her back to you. The Devas united have sent me to you. I am 
not really a Brahmin; but I am Agni Deva (eater of oblations).” 
Ramachandra heard Fire and gave his assent. But his heart 
shattered. He did not speak of this to Laksmana. By the yogic power 
Agni (Fire) created a Maya Sita. This Maya Sita, O Narada, was 
perfectly equal to the real Sita. Fire, then, handed this Maya Sita to 
the hands of Ramachandra. Hutasana (fire) took the real Sita and 
said, “Never divulge this to any other body” and went away. What to 
speak of divulging the secret to any other body, Laksmana even 
could not know it. By this time Rama saw one deer, made of all gold. 
To bring that deer carefully to her, Sita sent Ramachandra with great 
eagerness. Putting Sita under Laksmana’s care, in that forest, Rama 
went himself immediately and pierced the deer by one arrow. That 
Maya mriga (the deer created by magic powers) on being pierced, 
cried out “Ha Laksmana!” and seeing Hah before him and 
remembering the name of Hah, quitted his life. The deer body then 
vanished; and a divine body made its appearance in its stead. This 
new body mounting on an aerial car made of jewels, ascended to 
Vaikuntha. That Mayik (magic) deer was in its previous birth, a 
servant, of the two gate-keepers of Vaikuntha; but, for the sake of 
some emergency, he had to take up this Rakhsasa birth. He again 
became the servant of two door-keepers of Vaikuntha. On the other 
hand Sita Devi, hearing the cry “Ha Laksmana!” became very 
distressed and sent Laksmana in search of Rama. No sooner did 
Laksmana get out of the hermitage, the irresistible Ravana took 
away Sita gladly to the city of Lanka (Ceylon). Now Ramachandra, 
seeing Laksmana on the way in the forest, became merged in the 
ocean of sorrows and without losing any time came hurriedly to the 
hermitage where he could not find Sita. Instantly he fell unconscious, 
on the ground; and, after a long time, when he regained his 
consciousness, he lamented and wandered here and there in search 
of Her. After some days on the banks of the river Godavari, getting 



the information of Sita, he built a bridge across the ocean with the 
help of His monkey armies. Then he entered with his army into 
Lanka and slew Havana with arrows with all his friends. When Sita’s 
ordeal by fire came, Agni (Fire) handed over the real Sita to 
Ramachandra. The Shadow Sita then humbly addressed Agni and 
Rama Chandra, “O Lord! What am I to do now? Settle my case.” 


49-53. Agni and Ramachandra both of them then said to Chhaya 
Sita “O Devi! Go to Puskara and practise tapasya there; that 
place is the giver of religious merits and then you will be the Svarga 
Laksmi (Laksmi of Heaven).” Hearing this, the Chhaya Sita went and 
practised tapasya for the three divine lakh years and became Maha 
Laksmi. This Svarga Laksmi appeared at one time from the 
sacrificial Kunda (pit). She was known as the daughter of Drupada 
and became the wife of the five Pandavas. She was Veda Vati, the 
daughter of Kus’adhvaja in the Satya Yuga; Sita, the wife of Rama 
and the daughter of Janaka in Treta Yuga; and Draupadi, the 
daughter of Drupada, in the Dvapara Yuga. As she existed in the 
Satya, Treta, and Dvapara Yugas, the Three Yugas, hence She is 
Trihayani. 


54. Narada said “O Chief of Munis! O Remover of doubts! Why 
had Draupadi five husbands? A great doubt has arisen in my mind 
on this point. Remove my doubt.” 


55-63. Narayana said O Devarsi! When, in the city of Lanka, the 
real Sita came before Rama, then Chhaya Sita, full of youth and 
beauty, became very anxious. Agni Deva and Ramachandra both 
told Her to go to Puskara and worship S’amkara. While this Chhaya 
Sita was practising austerities in Puskara, She became very anxious 
to get a good husband and asked from MahaDeva the boon “Grant 
me a husband” and repeated it five times. 



S’iva, the chief among the humorous, witty persons, hearing this, 
said, “O Dear! You will get five husbands” and thus granted her the 
boon. Therefore She became the dearest wife of the five Pandavas. 
Now hear other facts. When the war at Lanka was over, S’ri 
Ramachandra got his own dear wife Sita, and installing Vibhisana on 
the throne of Lanka, returned to Ayodhya. He ruled for eleven 
thousand years in Bharata and finally went to Vaikuntha with his all 
his subjects. Vedavati, the incarnation in part of Laksmi dissolved in 
the body of Kamala. Thus I have described to you the pure anecdote 
of Vedavati. Hearing this destroys sins and increases virtue. The four 
Vedas reigned incarnate, in their true forms, on the lips of Vedavati; 
hence She was named Vedavati. Thus I have told you the anecdote 
of the daughter of Kus’adhvaja. Now hear the story of Tulasi, the 
daughter of Dharmadhvaja. 


Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the 
incarnation of Maha Laksmi in the house of Kus’adhvaja in S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 17. On The Anecdote Of Tulas! 


1-19. S’n Narayana said O Narada! The wife of Dharmadhvaja 
was Madhavi. Going to the Gandhamadan mountain, She began to 
enjoy, with great gladness, the pleasures with the king 
Dharmadhvaja. The bed was prepared, strewn with flowers and 
scented with sandal-paste. She smeared all over her body with 
sandal-paste. The flowers and cool breeze in contact with the sweet 
scent of sandal-paste began to cool the bodies. Madhavi was the 
jewel amongst women. Her whole body was very elegant. Besides it 
was adorned all over with jewel ornaments. As she was humorous, 
so the king was very expert in that respect. It seemed as if the 
Creator created especially for Dharmadhvaja, the humorous lady 
Madhavi expert in amorous affairs. Both of them were skilled in 
amorous sports. So no one did like to desist from amorous 
enjoyments. One hundred divine years passed in this way, day and 
night passed unnoticed. The king then got back his consciousness 
and desisted from his amorous embraces. But the lustful woman did 
not find herself satisfied. However, by the Deva’s influence, she 
became pregnant and conceived for one hundred years. In the 
womb there was the incarnation of Laksmi; and the body’s lustre 
increased day by day. Then, on an auspicious day, on an auspicious 
moment, auspicious Yoga, auspicious Lagna, auspicious Amsa, and 
on an auspicious combination of planetary rulers and their houses, 
she delivered on the full moon night of the month of Kartik one 
beautiful daughter, the incarnation in part of Laksmi. The face of the 
baby looked like the autumnal moon; Her two eyes resembled 
autumnal lotuses and her upper and lower lips looked beautiful like 
ripe Bimba fruits. The daughter began, no sooner it was born, to look 
on all sides of the lying-in-room. The palm and lower part of feet 
were red. The navel was deep and below that there were three 
wrinkles. Her loins were circular. Her body was hot in the winter and 
cold in the summer and pleasant to touch. Her hairs on the head 
were hanging like the roots of the fig tree. Her colour was bright like 



Champaka; She was a jewel amongst women. Men and women 
cannot compare her beauty. The holy wise men named Her Tulasi. 
As soon as she was born, she looked of the female sex, full in every 
way. Though prevented repeatedly by all. She went to the forest of 
Badari for practising Tapasya. There she practised hard Tapasya for 
one lakh divine years. Her main object was to get Narayana for her 
husband. In summer she practise Panchatapa (surrounded by fire on 
four sides and on the top); in the winter she remained in water and in 
the rainy season she remained in the open air and endured the 
showers of the rain, twenty thousand years. She passed away thus 
in eating fruits and water. For thirty thousand years she subsisted 
only on the leaves of trees. When the forty thousandth year came, 
she subsisted only on air and her body became thinner and thinner 
day by day. Then for ten thousand years afterwards she left eating 
anything whatsoever and without any aim, stood on only one leg. At 
this time the lotus-born Brahma, seeing this, appeared there to grant 
her boons. On seeing Him, Tulasi immediately bowed down to 
Brahma, the Four-faced One riding on His vehicle, the Swan. [Note: - 
- The vehicle theory of the Devas came from Egypt. The Devas were 
without vehicles at first and were faced half-beasts. Then they were 
rendered men and their vehicles were fancied as beasts. The face of 
the Durga Devi was thought of as that of a tiger.] 


20. He then addressed her and said “O Tulasi! Ask a boon that 
you like. Whether it be devotion to Hari, servantship to Hari, freedom 
from old age or freedom from death, I will grant that to you.” 


21-27. Tulasi said “Father! I now say you my mind. Hear. What is 
the use of hiding away my views out of fear or shame to One who 
knows everything reigning in One’s Heart. 



I am Tulasi Gopi (cowherdess); I used to dwell before in the Goloka. 

I was a dear she-servant of Radhika, the beloved of Krisna. I was 
also born of Her in part, Her Sakhis (female attendants) used to love 
me. Once in Rasa Mandalam I was enjoyed by Govinda; but I was 
not satiated and while I was lying down in an unconscious state, 
Radha, the Governess-in-chief of the Rasa circle, came there and 
saw me in that state. She rebuked Gobinda and, out of anger, cursed 
me ‘Go at once and be born as a human being.’ At this Govinda 
spoke to me ‘If you go and practise Tapas in Bharata, Brahma will 
get pleased and He will grant you boon. When you will get 
Narayana, the Four-armed, born of Me in part as your husband.’ O 
Father! Thus speaking, S’ri Krisna disappeared out of sight. Out of 
Radha’s fear, I quitted my body and am now born in this world. Now 
grant me this boon that I get the peaceful, lovely, beautiful Nara for 
my husband.” 


28-37. Brahma said “O Child Tulasi! The Gopa (cowherd) 

Sudama was born of S’ri Krisna’s body. At the present time he is 
very energetic. He too, under the curse of Radha, has come and 
taken his birth amongst the Danavas. He is named S’ankha Chuda. 
No one is equal to him in strength. In Goloka, when he saw you 
before, he was overpowered with passion for you. Only out of 
Radha’s influence, he could not embrace you. That Sudama is 
Jatismara (knows all about his previous births); and you, too, are Jati 
Smara. There is nothing unknown to you. O Beautiful One! You will 
now be his wife. Afterwards you will get Narayana, the Beautiful and 
Lovely for your husband. Thus under the curse of Narayana, you will 
be transformed into the world purifying Tulasi tree. You will be the 
foremost amongst the flowers and will be dearer to Narayana than 
His life. No one’s worship will be complete without Thee as leaf. You 
will remain as a tree in Bindraban and you will be widely known as 
Vrindabani. The Gopas and Gopis will worship Madhava with Your 
leaves. Being the Presiding Deity of the Tulasi tree, you will always 
enjoy the company of Krisna, the best of the Gopas.” O Narada! 



Thus bearing Brahma’s words, the Devi Tulasi became very glad. 
Smile appeared in her face. She then bowed down to the Creator 
and said 


38-40. “O Father! I speak now truly to Thee that I am not as devoted 
to the four-armed Narayana as I am devoted to S’yama Sundara, the 
two-armed. For my intercourse with Govinda S’ri Krisna was 
suddenly interrupted and my desire was not gratified. It is because of 
S’ri Govinda’s words that I prayed for the four-armed. Now it appears 
certain that by Thy grace I will get again my Govinda, very hard to be 
attained. But, O Father! Do this that I be not afraid of Radha.” 


41-48. Brahma said :-- “O Child! I now give you the sixteen lettered 
Radha mantra to you. By Her Grace you will be dear to Radha as 
Her life. Radhika will not be able to know anything of your secret 
dealings. O Fortunate! You will be dear to Govinda like Radha.” Thus 
saying, Brahma, the Creator of the world, gave her the sixteen 
lettered Radha mantra, stotra, Kavacha and mode of worship and 
puras’charana and He blessed her. Tulasi, then, engaged herself in 
worshipping Radha, as directed. By the boon of Brahma, Tulasi 
attained Siddhi (success) like Laksmi. Out of the power of the 
Siddha mantra. She got her desired boon. She became fortunate in 
getting various pleasures, hard to be attained in this world. Her mind 
became quiet. All the toils of Tapasya disappeared. When one gets 
the fruit of one’s labour, all the troubles then transform to happiness. 
She then finished her food and drink and slept on a beautiful bed 
strewn with flowers and scented with sandal paste. 


Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the 
anecdote of Tulasi in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 18. On The Union Of S’ankhachuda 
With Tulas! 


1-26. Narayana said Thus highly pleased, Tulasi went to sleep 
with a gladdened-heart. She, the daughter of Vrisadhvaja, was then 
in her blooming youth and while asleep, the Cupid, the God of five 
arrows, shot at her five arrows (by which one gets enchanted and 
swooned). Though the Devi was smeared with sandal paste and She 
slept on a bed strewn with flowers, her body was felt as if being 
burnt. Out of joy, the hairs stood on their ends all over her body; her 
eyes were reddened and her body began to quiver. Sometimes She 
felt uneasiness, sometimes dryness; sometimes She got faint; 
sometimes drowsiness and sometimes again pleasantness; 
sometimes she became conscious, sometimes sorrowful. 

Sometimes she got up from her bed; sometimes she sat; and 
sometimes she fell again to sleep. The flower-bed, strewn with 
sandal-paste, appeared to her full of thorns; nice delicious fruits and 
cold water appeared to her like poison. Her house appeared to her 
like a hole in a ground and her fine garments seemed to her like fire. 
The mark of Sindura on her forehead appeared, as it were, a boil, a 
sore. She began to see in her dreams that one beautiful, well 
clothed, humorous, young man with smile in his lips, appeared to 
her. His body was besmeared with sandal-paste and decked with 
excellent jewels; garlands of forest flowers were suspending from his 
neck. Coming there, he was drinking the honey of her lotus face. He 
was speaking on love themes and on various other sweet topics. As 
if he was embracing amorously and enjoying the pleasures of 
intercourse. After the intercourse he was going away; again he was 
coming near. 


The lady was addressing him, “O Darling! O Lord of my heart! Where 
do you go. Come close.” Again when she became conscious, she 
began to lament bitterly. Thus on entering in her youth, the Devi 



Tulasi began to live in the hermitage of Badari (Plum fruit, it may 
signify womb. Those who visit Badari are not to enter again in any 
womb). On the other hand the great Yogi S’ankhachuda obtained the 
Krisna Mantra from Maharsi Jaigisavya and got siddhi (success) in 
Puskara Tirtha (sacred place of pilgrimage where one crosses the 
world). Holding on his neck the Kavacha named Sarvamangalamaya 
and obtaining the boon from Brahma as he desired, he arrived at 
Badari, by Brahma’s command. The signs of the blooming youth had 
just begun to be visible in the body of S’ankhachuda as if the God of 
Love incarnated in his body; his colour resembled that of white 
Champakas and all his body was decked with jewelled ornaments. 
His face resembled the autumnal full moon; his eyes were extended 
like the lotus leaves. The beautiful form was seen to sit in an 
excellent aerial car, made of pearls and jewels. Two jewel earrings, 
nice and elegant, suspended upto his cheek; his neck was adorned 
with Parijata flower garlands; and his body was smeared with 
Kumkum and scented sandal-paste. O Narada! Seeing 
S’ankhachuda coming near to her, Tulasi covered her face by her 
clothing and she, with a smiling countenance, cast repeatedly 
sidelong glances at him and bent her head low abashed in the 
expectation of a fresh intercourse. How beautiful was that clear face 
of her! It put down the autumnal moon in the background. The 
invaluable jewelled ornament were on her toes. Her braid of hair was 
surrounded by sweet scented Malati garlands. The invaluable 
jewelled wonderful earrings like the shape of a shark were hanging 
up to her cheek. Extraordinarily beautiful necklaces were seen being 
suspended to the middle of her breasts and added to the beauty 
thereof; on her arms and hand were jewelled bangles and conch 
ornaments; jewelled armlets and on fingers; excellent jewelled rings 
were seen. O Muni! Seeing that lovely beautiful chaste woman of 
good nature, S’ankhachuda came to her and taking his seat 
addressed her as follows 



27. “O Proud One! O Auspicious One! Who are you? Whose 
daughter are you? You look fortunate and blessed among women. I 
am your silent slave. Talk with me.” 


28-30. That beautiful eyed Tulasi, full of love, replied to 
S’ankhachuda with smiling countenance and face bent low “I am 
the daughter of the great king Vrisadhvaja. I have come to this forest 
for tapasya and am engaged in this. Who are you? What business 
have you to talk with me? You can go away wherever you like. I have 
heard in the S’astras that persons born of a noble family never speak 
with ladies of a respectable family in privacy. 


31-71. Only those that are lewd, void of any knowledge in the 
Dharma S’astras, void of the Vedic knowledge and who are not 
Kulinas, like to speak with women in privacy. And those woman, too, 
that look externally beautiful but very passionate and the Death of 
males, who are sweet tongued but filled with venom in their hearts, 
those who are sweet externally but like a sword internally, those that 
are always bent in achieving their own selfish ends and those that 
become obedient to their husbands for their own selfish ends 
otherwise behaving as they like, those that are filled inside with dirty 
things and outside looking pleasant in their faces and eyes, whose 
characters are pronounced as defiled, what intelligent, learned and 
noble-minded man can trust them? Those women do not 
discriminate who are their friends or who are their enemies; they 
want always new persons. Whenever they see a man well dressed, 
they want to satisfy their own passions. And they pretend with great 
care that they are very chaste. They are the vessels of passion; they 
always attract the minds of others and they are very enthusiastic in 
satisfying their own lust. They verbally shew that they want other 
men to go away but at hearts, feelings for intercourse remain 
preponderant; whenever they see their paramours in private, they 
laugh and become very glad but externally their shame, knows no 



bounds. When they do not have their intercourses with their 
paramours, they become self-conceited; their bodies burn with anger 
and they begin to quarrel. When their passions are satisfied fully, 
they become glad and when there is a deficiency in that, they 
become sorrowful. For the sake of good and sweet food and cold 
drinks, they want beautiful young persons, qualified and humorous. 
They consider witty young persons clever in holding intercourses, 
more dearly than their sons. And if that beloved one becomes 
incapable or aged, then he is considered as an enemy. Quarrels and 
anger then ensue. They devour these men as serpents eat rats. 

They are boldness personified and they are the source of all evils 
and vices. Even Brahma, Visnu and Mahes’a remain deluded before 
them. They cannot find out any clue of their minds. They are the 
greatest obstacle in the path of tapasya and the closed doors for 
liberation. Devotion to Hari cannot reach those women. They are the 
repositories of Maya and they hold men fast by iron chains in this 
word. They are like magicians and false like dreams. They enchant 
others by external beauty; their lower parts are very ugly and filled 
with excrements, faeces, of foul scent and very unholy and smeared 
with blood. The Creator Bhagavan has created them as such, the 
Maya to the Mayavis and the venom to those who want liberation, 
and as invisible to those that want to have them.” Thus saying Tulasi 
stopped. O Narada! S’ankhachuda, then smilingly addressed her as 
follows “O Devi! What you have spoken is not wholly false; partly 
it is true and partly it is false. Now hear. The Creator has created this 
all-enchanting female form into two parts. One is praiseworthy and 
the other is not. He has created Laksmi, Sarasvati, Durga, Savitri 
and Radha and others as the primary causes of creation; so there 
are the prime creations: Those women that are born of their parts, 
are auspicious, glorious and much praiseworthy. S’atarupa, 

Devahuti, Svadha, Svaha, Daksina Chhayavati, Rohini, Varunani, 
S’achi, the wife of Kuvera, Diti, Aditi, Lopamudra, Anasuya, Kautabhi 
(Kotari), Tulasi, Ahalya, Arundhati, Mena, Tara, Mandodari, 
Damayanti, Vedavati, Ganga, Manasa, Pusti, Tusti, Smriti, Medha, 
Kalika, Vasundhara, Sasthi, Mangalachandi, Murti, wife of Dharma. 
Svasti, S’raddha; S’anti, Kanti, Ksanti, Nidra, Tandra, Ksudha, 



Pipasa, Sandhya, Ratri, Diva, Sampatti, Dhriti, Kirti, Knya, S’obha, 
Prabha, S’iva, and other women born of the Prime Prakritis, all are 
excellent in every Yuga. The prostitutes of the heavens are also born 
of the above women in their parts and parts of parts. They are not 
praiseworthy in the universe; they are all regarded as unchaste 
women. Those women that are of Sattva Gunas are all excellent and 
endowed with influence. In the universe they are good, chaste and 
praiseworthy. This is not false. The Pandits declare them excellent. 
Those that are of Rajo Gunas, and Tamo Gunas are not so 
praiseworthy. Those women that are of Rajo Gunas are known as 
middling. They are always fond of enjoyments, yield to them, and 
always ready to achieve their own ends. These women are generally 
insincere, delusive, and outside the pale of religious duties. 

Therefore they are generally unchaste. The Pandits consider them 
as middling. Those women that are of Tamo Gunas are considered 
as worst. Those born of noble families, can never speak with other 
wives in a private place or when they are alone. By Brahma’s 
command I have come to you. O Fair One! I will marry you now 
according to the Gandharba method. My name is S’ankhachuda. 

The Devas fly away from me out of terror. Before I was the intimate 
S’akha (friend) of S’ri Hah, by the name of Sudama. Now, by 
Radhika’s curse I am born in the family of the Danavas. I was a 
Parisad (attendant) of S’ri Krisna and the chief of the eight Gopas. 
Now, by Radhika’s curse I am born as S’ankhachuda, the Indra of 
the Danavas. By S’ri Krisna’s grace and by His mantra, I am 
Jatismara (know of my past births). You, too, are Jatismara Tulasi. 
S’ri Krisna enjoyed you before. By Radhika’s anger, you are now 
born in Bharata. I was very eager to enjoy you then; out of Radhika’s 
fear I could not.” 


72-87. Thus saying, S’ankhachuda stopped. Then Tulasi gladly and 
smilingly replied “Such persons (like you) are famous in this world; 
good women desire such husbands. Really, I am now defeated by 
you in argument. The man who is conquered by woman is very 



impure and blamed by the community. The Pith Lokas, the Deva 
Lokas, and the Gandharba Loka, too, look upon men, overpowered 
by women, as mean, despicable. Even father, mother, brother, etc., 
hate them mentally. It is said in the Vedas that the impurities during 
birth and death are expiated by a ten days observances for the 
Brahmanas, by twelve days observances for the Ksattriyas, by 
fifteen days observances for the Vais’yas and by one month’s 
observances for the S’udras and other low castes. But the impurity of 
the man who is conquered by women cannot be expiated by any 
other means except (his dead body) being burned in the funeral 
pyre. The Piths never accept willingly the pindas and offerings of 
water (Tarpanas) offered by the women-conquered men. So much so 
that the Devas even hesitate to accept flowers, water, etc., offered 
by them on their names. Those whose hearts are entirely subdued 
by men, do not acquire any fruits from their knowledge, Tapasya, 
Japam, fire sacrifices, worship, learning and fame. I tested you to 
ascertain your strength in learning. It is highly advisable to choose 
one’s husband by examining his merits and defects. Sin equivalent 
to the murder of a Brahmin is committed if one gives in marriage 
one’s daughter to one void of all qualifications, to an old man, to one 
who is ignorant, to a poor, illiterate, diseased, ugly, very angry, very 
harsh, lame, devoid of limbs, deaf, dumb, inanimate like, and who is 
impotent. If one gives in marriage a daughter to a young man of 
good character, learned, well qualified and of a peaceful temper, one 
acquires the fruits of performing ten horse sacrifices. If one 
nourishes a daughter and sells her out of greed for money, one falls 
to the Kumbhipaka hell. That sinner drinks the urine and eats the 
excrements of that daughter, remaining in that hell. For a period 
equal to the fourteen Indra’s life-periods they are bitten by worms 
and crows. At the expiry of this period, they will have to be born in 
this world of men as diseased persons. In their human births they will 
have to earn their livelihood by selling flesh and carrying flesh.” 



88-100. Thus saying, when Tulasi stopped, Brahma appeared on the 
scene and addressed S’ankachuda O S’ankhachuda! Why are 
you spending uselessly your time in vain talks with Tulasi? Marry her 
soon by the Gandharba method. As you are a gem amongst males, 
so She is a gem amongst females. It is a very happy union between 
a humorous lover and a humorous beloved. O King! Who despises 
the great happiness when it is at one’s hand! He who forsakes the 
pleasure is worse than a beast in this world. O Tulasi! And what for 
are you testing the nobly qualified person who is the tormentor of the 
Devas, Asuras and Danavas. O Child! As Laksmi Devi is of 
Narayana, as Radhika is of Krisna; as is My Savitri, as Bhava’s is 
Bhavani, as Boar's is Earth, as Yajha’s is Daksina, Atri’s Anasuya, 
Gautama’s Ahalya, Moon’s Rohini, Brihaspati’s Tara, Manu’s 
S’atarupa, Kandarpa’s Rati, Kas’yapa’s Aditi, Vas’istha’s Arundhati, 
Karddama’s Devahuti, Fire’s Svaha, Indra’s S’achi, Ganes’a’s Pusti, 
Skanda’s Devasena, and Dharma’s Murti, so let you be the dear wife 
of S’ankhachuda. Let you remain with S’ankhachuda, beautiful as he 
is, for a long time, and enjoy with him in various places as you like. 
When S’ankhachuda will quit his mortal frame, you would go to 
Goloka and enjoy easily with the two-armed S’ri Krisna, and in 
Vaikuntha with the four-armed Krisna and with great gladness. 


Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the union of 
S’ankhachuda with Tulasi in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 19. On The Going Of The Devas To 
Vaikuntha After TuLAsi’s Marriage With 
S’ankhachuda 


1. Narada said “O Bhagavan! Wonderful is the story that has been 
now recited by you. My ears are not satisfied. So tell me what 
happened afterwards.” 


2-94. Narayana said O Narada! The Creator Brahma, blessing 
them, departed to His own abode. The Danava married Tulasi under 
the Gandharba method. The celestial drums sounded and the 
flowers were showered. In the beautiful lovely house the 
Danavendra, remained in perfect enjoyment. Tulasi, too, being busy 
with fresh intercourses, became almost mad after them. The chaste 
Tulasi and S’ankhachuda both became deeply immersed in the 
ocean of bliss in their sexual union and began to enjoy sixty-four 
sorts of amorous sports. In the S’astras on love affairs, all the 
connections of limbs with limbs that are described, as the lover and 
the loved desire, they both enjoyed those with perfect freedom and 
pleasure. The place was solitary; to add to it, the scenery was grand 
and lovely; so nothing remained untasted of the several tastes of 
amorous pleasures. On the banks of the river, in flower-gardens, 
they slept on the flower beds smeared with sandal-paste, and 
enjoyed the amorous pleasures. Both were adorned with jewel 
ornaments; both were skilled in amorous practices; so no one 
desisted. The chaste Tulasi out of her nimbleness due to young age, 
easily stole into the heart of her husband. S’ankhachuda, too, a great 
expert in knowing other’s amorous sentiments, attracted the heart of 
Tulasi. Tulasi obliterated the sandal marks from the breast of the 
King and the sign of tilak from his nose. The King also wiped away 
the dot of Sindur and Alaka (vermillion) marks from Tulasi’s forehead 
and put marks of nails on her round plump breasts. Tulasi also hurt 



the King’s left side by her bracelets. Then the King bit the lips of 
Tulasi. Thus each one embraced the other, kissed each other and 
each one began to champoo the thighs, legs, etc. When both of 
them thus spent their time in amorous sports, they got up and began 
to dress themselves as they desired. Tulasi smeared 
S’ankhachuda’s nose with red sandal-paste mixed with kumkum 
(saffron), smeared his body with sweet-scented sandal-paste, 
offered sweet-scented betels in his mouth, made him put on celestial 
garments (fireproof; brought from Fire) put unto his neck the 
wonderful garland of Parijata flowers, destructive of disease and old 
age, invaluable jewel rings on his hand and offering him excellent 
gems, rare in the three worlds, said “O Lord! I am your 
maidservant” and uttering this repeatedly bowed down to the feet of 
her husband with devotion. She then got up and with smiling 
countenance began to look on his face with a steadfast gaze. The 
king S’ankhachuda then attracted his dear Tulasi to his breast and 
took off the veil fully from her face and began to look on that, next 
moment he kissed on her cheek and lips and gave her a pair of 
garments brought from the Varuna’s house, a necklace of jewels, 
hard to get in the three worlds, the tinklets of Svaha, the wife of Agni, 
the Keyura (armlets) of the Sun’s wife Chhaya, the two earrings of 
Rohini, the wife of the Moon, the finger rings of Rati, the wife of 
Kamadeva, and the wonderfully beautiful conch, given by Vis’va 
Karma, excellent bedding studded with pearls and jewels and 
various ornaments; and when he gave her all these things, he 
smiled. The king then put garlands on Tulasi’s braid of hair, nicely 
variegated Alakas on her cheek, three crescent lines of sweet- 
scented sandal paste within the Alakas, dots of saffron all around 
that, the brilliant Sindura mark looking like a flame, and red Alta on 
the feet and toes; he then placed those feet on his breast and 
utterred repeatedly “I am your servant” and then held her on his 
breast. They then left the hermitage, in that state and began to travel 
in various places. In the Malaya mountain, in mountains after 
mountains, in solitary flower gardens, in the mountain caves, in 
beautiful sea-beaches, on the banks of the Puspabhadra river, cool 
with watery breeze, in various rivers and riversides, in Vispandana 



forest echoed with sweet songs of the birds of the vernal season. 
They then went from Vispandana forest to the Surasana forest, from 
the Surasana, forest to the Nandana forest, from the Nandana forest 
to the nice Chandana forests, from Chandana forest to Champaka, 
Ketaki; Madhavi Kunda, Malati, and Kumuda and lotus forests; 
thence they went to the forest of desire gratifying trees (Kalpavriksa 
forest,) and Parijata trees. They then went to the solitary place 
Kanchan, thence to the Kanchi (forest) they then went to the 
Kihjalaka forest, thence to the Kanchanakar (the gold mine), thence 
to Kanchuka and various other forests echoed with the sweet sounds 
of cuckoos. There, on beds strewn with flowers and scented with 
sandal paste they both enjoyed each other to their hearts content 
and with great pleasure. But none of them, whether S’ankhachuda or 
Tulasi, got quenched with their thirst. Rather their passions were 
inflamed like the fire on which clarified butter is poured (in sacrifices). 
The King of the Danavas, then, brought Tulasi to his own kingdom 
and, there, in his own beautiful garden house, he incessantly 
enjoyed her. Thus the powerful king of the Danavas passed away 
one Manvantara in the enjoyment of his kingdom. He spread his 
sway over the Devatas, Asuras, Danavas, Gandharbas, Kinnaras, 
and Raksasas. The Devas, dispossessed of their realms, wandered 
everywhere like beggars. At last they united in a body and went to 
the Brahma’s assembly and there they began to cry and then related 
the whole history how the Danava S’ankhachuda oppressed them. 
Hearing all this, Brahma took them to S’ankara and informed Him of 
the whole history of the case. When Mahadeva heard all this. He 
took them all to the highest place, Vaikuntha devoid of old age and 
death. Going towards the first entrance of Narayana’s abode, they 
saw the gate-keepers watching the gate, taking their seats on jewel 
thrones. They all looked brilliant, clothed with the yellow garments, 
adorned with jewel ornaments, garlanded with forest flowers, all of 
S’yama Sundara (dark blue, very beautiful) bodies. They were four¬ 
armed, holding on their hands, conch, mace, discus and lotus; sweet 
smile was on their faces and eyes beautiful like lotus leaves. On 
Brahma asking them for entrance to the assembly, they nodded their 
assent. He, then, accompanied by the Devas, passed one by one. 



sixteen gates and at last came before Narayana. On reaching there, 
He saw that the assembly was completely filled with Devarsis, and 
four-armed Narayanlike Parisadas (attendants), decked with 
Kaustubba jewels. The sight of the Sabha (assembly) makes one 
think that the Moon has just arisen, shedding effulgent rays all round. 
By the will of S’ri Hah, excellent diamonds, invaluable gems and 
necklaces of gems and jewels were placed at various places. At 
other places rows of pearls were shedding their splendour and 
brilliance like the garlands of gems and jewels. At others, the mirrors 
were placed in a circle; and at various other places, the endless 
wonderful artistic picture lines were drawn. Again at other places the 
jewels called Padmaragas were artistically arranged as if the lotuses 
were there spreading their lustrous beauty all around. At many other 
places rows of steps were made of wonderful Syamantak jewels. All 
around the assembly, there were the excellent pillars, built of 
Indranilam jewels. Over those pillars, sandal leaves strung on strings 
from to pillar to pillar, were suspended. Golden jars, all brimful with 
water were located at various places. All around, the garlands of 
Parijata flowers were seen. The hall was decorated with sweet 
scented sandal trees, red like saffron and musk. Sweet scents were 
being emitted all round. The Vidyadharis were dancing at places. 

The assembly hall measured one thousand Yojanas. Countless 
servants were engaged all over on various works. Brahma, S’ankara, 
and the other Gods saw there S’ri Hari seated in the centre on an 
invaluable jewel throne, as a Moon looks surrounded by stars. There 
were the crown on His head, the ear-rings on His ears; garlands 
made of wild flowers were on his neck and His body was smeared all 
over with sandal paste and He was holding Kelipadma (a sort of 
lotus) in His hand. He was seeing, with a smiling countenance, the 
dancing and music before Him. He was full of peace, the Lord of 
Sarasvati. Laksmi was holding gently His lotus feet and He was 
chewing the sweet scented betel offered by Her. Ganga also was 
fanning Him devotedly with a white Chamara and the others were 
singing hymns to Him with their heads bent low with devotion. 



Brahma and the other Gods all bowed down to Him; their bodies 
were all filled with Pulaka (excessive joy causing hair stand on end); 
tears flowed from their eyes and their voices were choked out of 
emotion. The creator Brahma, then, with clasped hands informed 
Him, with head bowed down, of the whole history of S’ankhachuda. 
Hearing this, the omniscient Hah, knowing the minds of all, smiled 
and spoke to Brahma all the interesting secrets O Lotus born! I 
know all about S’ankhachuda. 

He was in his previous birth My great devotee, an energetic Gopa. 
Now I speak to you the ancient history of Goloka; hear. This story 
about Goloka is sin destroying and highly meritorious. 

S’ankhachuda, in his previous birth was the Gopa Sudama, My chief 
Parisad (attendant). He has now become a Danava on account of 
the dire curse pronounced by S’ri Radha. One day when I went from 
My abode, accompanied by Viraja Gopi, to the Rasa Mandala, My 
beloved Radha, hearing this news from a maid servant, came up at 
once with Her whole host of Sakhis wrathful, to the Rasa Mandalam 
(ball dance in Goloka) and, not being able to see Me, saw Viraja 
turned into a river. She thought that I had disappeared. So She went 
back to Her own abode with Her Sakhis. But when I returned to the 
house with Sudama, Radha rebuked Me very much. I remained 
silent. But Sudama could not bear and he rebuked Radha in My 
presence, a thing quite intolerable to Her dignity! On hearing this 
rebuke, Radha’s eyes became red with anger and She immediately 
ordered Her Sakhis to drive him away. Sudama began to tremble 
with fear. Immediately on Her command lakhs and lakhs of Sakhis 
got up immediately and drove that hot irresistible Sudama away. 
Sudama repeated his chafings and roarings. On hearing these. She 
cursed him “You better be born in the womb of a Danavi.” Hearing 
the terrible curse, Sudama bowed down to Me and went away 
crying; then Radha, who was all-mercy, became melted with mercy. 
And She prevented him repeatedly, not to go away. Radha wept and 
told him, “O Child! Wait. Where are you going? No more you will 
have to go; return.” Thus saying She became very distressed. The 
Gopas and Gopis also began to weep. I then explained to them, “In 



about half a moment Sudama will come back, fulfilling the conditions 
of the curse. O Sudama! Come here when the curse expires.” 

Then he appeased Radha also. “Know that one moment (Ksan) in 
Goloka is equal to one Manvantara on earth. The Yogi 
S’ankhachuda, expert in Maya and very powerful will soon return 
from the earth. Take this My weapon S’ula and go early to Bharata. 
S’iva will slay the Danava by this S’ulastra. The Danava holds 
always on his neck My auspicious Kavacha and will therefore 
become the conqueror of the universe. No one will he able to kill him 
as long as be holds the above Kavacha. So, first of all, I will go to 
him in the form of a Brahmana and ask from him the Kavacha. O 
Creator! Thou also didst give him the boon that his death would 
occur when the chastity of of his wife would be destroyed. I will go 
and hold intercourse with his wife. Then his death will occur without 
fail. His wife after her death will come and become My dearest wife. 
Thus saying, Narayana gave over to Mahadeva the S’ulastra. Then 
He went gladly to His inner compartments. On the other hand, 
Brahma and Rudra and the other Devas incarnated themselves in 
Bharata. 


Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter on the going of the Devas to 
Vaikuntha after Tulasi’s marriage with S’ankhachuda in the 
Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 20. On The War Preparations Of 
S’ankhachuda With The Devas 


1-21. Narayana said Brahma, then putting S’iva to the task of 
killing S’ankhachuda went to His own abode. The other Devas 
returned to their homes. Here under the beautiful Bata tree, on the 
banks of the river Chandrabhaga, Mahadeva pitched His big tent and 
encamped Himself to get the victory of the Devas. He then sent 
Chitraratha, the Lord of the Gandharbhas, as a messenger to 
S’ankhachuda, the Lord of the Danavas. By the command of 
Mahadeva, Chitraratha went to the city of the king of Daityas, more 
beautiful than Indra’s place and more wealthy than the mansion of 
Kuvera. The city was five yojanas wide and twice as much in length. 

It was built of crystals of pearls and jewels. There were roadways on 
all sides. There were seven trenches, hard to be crossed, one after 
another, encircling the city. The city was built of countless rubies and 
gems, brilliant like flames. There were hundreds of roadways and 
markets and stalls, in the wonderful Vedis (raised platforms) built of 
jewels. All around were splendid palatial buildings of traders and 
merchantmen, filled with various articles. There were hundreds and 
kotis of beautiful buildings, adorned with various ornaments and built 
of variegated red stones looking like Sinduras. Thus he went on and 
saw, in the middle, the building of S’ankhachuda, circular like the 
lunar sphere. Four ditches all filled with fiery flames, encircled one 
after another, his house. So the enemies could not in any way cross 
them; but the friend could easily go there. On the top were seen 
turrets built of jewels, rising high to the heavens. The gate-keepers 
were watching the twelve gates. In the centre were situated lakhs 
and lakhs of excellent jewel built houses. In every room there were 
jewelled steps and staircases and the pillars were all built of gems 
and jewels, and pearls. Puspadanta (Chitraratha) saw all this and 
then went to the first gate and saw one terrible person, copper 
coloured, with tawny eyes, sitting with a trident in his hand and with a 
smiling countenance. He told he had come as a messenger and got 



his entrance. Thus Chitraratha went one afer another to all the 
entries, not being prohibited at all though he told that he had come 
as a messenger on war service. The Gandharbha reached one after 
another, the last door and said “O Door keeper! Go quickly and 
inform the Lord of the Danavas all about the impending war.” When 
the messenger had spoken thus, the gate-keeper allowed him to go 
inside. Going inside, the Gandarbha saw S’ankhachuda, of excellent 
form, seated in the middle of the royal assembly, on a golden throne. 
One servant was holding on the king’s head an umbrella, decked 
with divine excellent gems, the inner rod of the umbrella being made 
up of jewels, and decorated with expanded artificial flowers made of 
gems. The attendants were fanning him with beautiful white 
chamaras; he was nicely dressed, beautiful and lovely and adorned 
with jewel ornaments. He was nicely garlanded, and wore fine 
celestial garments. Three Koti Danavas were surrounding him; and 
seven Koti Danavas, all armed, were walking to and fro. 


22-53. Puspadanta was thunderstruck when he saw thus the Danava 
and he addressed him thus O King! I am a servant of S’iva; My 
name is Puspadanta; hear what S’iva has commanded me to tell 
you. You better now give back, to the Devas, the rights that they had 
before. The Devas went to S’ri Hari and had taken His refuge. S’ri 
Hari gave over to S’iva one S’ula weapon and asked the Devas to 
depart. At present, the three eyed Deva is residing under the shade 
of a Bata tree on the banks of the Puspabhadra river. He told me to 
speak this to you, “Either give over to the Devas their rights, or fight 
with me. Please reply and I will speak to Him accordingly.” 
S’ankhachuda, hearing the messenger’s words laughed and said, 
“Tomorrow morning I will start, ready for war. Better go away today.” 
The messenger went back to S’iva and replied to Him accordingly. In 
the meantime the following personages joined S’iva and remained 
seated on excellent aerial cars, built of jewels and gems. The 
following were the persons :-- Skanda, Virabhadra, Nandi, 

Mahakala, Subhadraka, Vis’alaksa, Bana, Pingalaksa, Vikampana, 



Virupa, Vikriti, Manibhadra, Vaskala, Kapilaksa, Dirgha Dangstra, 
Vikata, Tamralochana, Kalakantha, Balibhadra, Kalajihba, Kutichara, 
Balonmatta, Ranas’laghi, Durjaya, Durgama, (these eight 
Bhairavas), eleven Rudras, eight Vasus, Indra, the twelve Adityas, 
fire, moon, VisVakarma, the two AsVins, Kuvera, Yama, Jayanta, 
Nala Kubara, Vayu, Varuna, Budha, Mangala, Dharma, S’ani, Is’ana, 
the powerful Kamadeva. Ugradamstra, Ugrachanda, Kotara, 

Kaitabhi, and the eight armed terrible Devi Bhadrakali. Kali wore the 
bloody red clothings and She smeared red sandal paste all over Her 
body. 


Dancing, laughing; singing songs in tune, very jolly. She bids Her 
devotees discard all fear, and terrifies the enemies. Her lip is terrible, 
lolling, and extends to one Yojana. On Her eight arms She holds 
conch, disc, mace, lotus, axe, skin, bow and arrows. She was 
holding in Her hands, the bowl shaped human skull; that was very 
deep and one Yojana wide. Her trident reached up to the Heavens; 
Her weapon called S’akti (dart) extended to one Yojana. Besides 
there were Mudgara (mace), Musala (club), Vajra (thunderbolt), 
Kheta (club), brilliant Phalaka (shield), the Vaisnava weapon, the 
Varuna weapon, the Agneyastra (the fire weapon), Nagapas’a (the 
noose of serpents), the Narayanastra, the Gandharva’s weapons, 
the Brahma’s weapons, the Gadudastram, the Parjanayastram, the 
Pas’upatastram, the Jrimbhahastram, the Parvatastram, the 
Mahes’varastram, the Vayavyastram, and the Sanmohanam rod and 
various other infallible divine weapons. Besides hundreds of other 
divine weapons were with Her. Three Kotis of Yoginis and three 
Kotis and a half of terrible Dakinis were attending Bhadrakali. 
Bhutas, (demons) Pretas, Pis’achas, Kusmandas, Brahma 
Raksasas, Rakhsasas, Vetalas, Yaksas and Kinnaras also were 
there in countless numbers. At this time Kartikeya came there and 
bowed down to his father Mahadeva. He asked him to take his seat 
on His left side an asked him to help. Then the army remained there 
in military array. On the other hand, when S’iva’s messenger 



departed, S’ankhachuda went to the zenana and informed TulasT of 
the news of an impending war. No sooner She heard than her throat 
and lips and palate became dried. She then with a sorrowful heart 
spoke in sweet words “O my Lord! O my Friend! O the Ruler of My 
life! Wait for a moment and take your seat on My heart. Instil life in 
Me for a moment. Satisfy My desire of human birth. Let me behold 
you fully so that my eyes be satisfied. My breath is now very 
agitated. I saw by the end of the night one bad dream. Therefore I 
feel an internal burning.” Thus at the words of TulasT, the king 
S’ankhachuda finished his meals and began to address her, in good 
and true words, beneficent to her“O My Lady! It is Kala (the time 
that brings out these various combinations by which the Karmic fruit 
is enjoyed; it is Kala that awards auspicious and inauspicious things; 
the Kala is the Sole Master to impart pain, fear, and good and bad 
things. 


54-84. Trees grow up in time; their branches, etc., come out in time; 
flowers appear in time and fruits come out in time. Fruits are ripen in 
time and after giving the fruits, they die out also in time. O Fair One! 
The universe comes into existence in time and dies away in time. 

The Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer of the universe, are creating, 
preserving and destroying the worlds with the help of time. Time 
guides them in every way. But the Highest Prakriti is the God of 
Brahma, Visnu, and Mahes’a (i.e., the Creatrix of Time). This Highest 
Prakriti, the Highest God is creating, preserving and destroying this 
universe. She makes the Time dance. By Her mere Will, She has 
converted Her inseparable Prakriti into Maya and is thus creating all 
things, moving and unmoving. She is the Ruler of all; the Form of all, 
and She is the Highest God. By Her is being done this creation of 
persons by persons, this preservation of persons by persons, and 
this destruction of persons by persons. So you better now take 
refuge of the Highest Lord. Know it is by Her command the wind is 
blowing, by Her command the Sun is giving heat in due time, by Her 
command Indra is showering rains; by Her command. Death is 



striding over the beings; by Her connnnand fire is burning all things 
and by Her connnnand the cooling Moon is revolving. She is the 
Death of death, the Tinne of time, Yama of yama (the God of death), 
the Fire of fire and the Destroyer of the destroyer. So take Her 
refuge. You cannot find and fix who is whose friend in the world; so 
pray to Her, the Highest God, Who is the Friend of All. Oh! Who am 
I? And who are you either? The Creator is the combiner of us two 
and so He will dissociate us two by our Karma. When difficulty 
arises, the ignorant fools become overwhelmed with sorrow; but the 
intelligent Pundits do not get at all deluded or become distressed. By 
the Wheel of Time, the beings are led sometimes into happiness; 
sometimes into pain. You will certainly get Narayana for your 
husband; for which you practised Tapas before, in the hermitage of 
Vadari (the source of the Ganges, the feet of Visnu). I pleased 
Brahma by my Tapasya and have, by his boon, got you as my wife. 
But the object for which you did your Tapasya, that you may get Hari 
as your husband; will certainly be fulfilled. You will get Gobinda in 
Vrindabana and in the region of Goloka. I will also go there when I 
forsake this, my Demon body. Now I am talking with you here; 
afterwards we will meet again in the region of Goloka. By the curse 
of Radhika, I have come to this Bharata, hard to be attained. You, 
too, will quit this body and, assuming the divine form will go to S’ri 
Hari. So, O Beloved! You need not be sorry.” O Muni! Thus these 
conversations took them the whole day and led them to the evening 
time. The king of the demons, S’ankhachuda then slept with Tulasi 
on a nicely decorated bed, strewn with flowers, and smeared with 
sandal paste, in the Ratna Mandir (temple built of jewels.) This jewel 
temple was adorned with various wealth and riches. The jewel lamps 
were lighted. S’ankhachuda passed the night with his wife in various 
sports. The thin bellied Tulasi was weeping with a very sorrowful 
heart, without having taken any food. The king, who knew the reality 
of existence, took her to his breast and appeased her in various 
ways. What religious instructions he had received in Bhandira forest 
from S’ri Krisna, those Tattvas, capable to destroy all sorrows and 
delusions, he now spoke carefully to Tulasi. Then Tulasi’s joy knew 
no bounds. She then began to consider, everything as transient and 



began to play with a gladdened heart. Both became drowned in the 
ocean of bliss; and the bodies of both of them were filled with joy and 
the hairs stood on their ends. Both of them, then, desirous to have 
amorous sports, joined themselves and became like ArdhanarisVara 
and so one body. As Tulasi considered S’ankhachuda, to be her lord, 
so the Danava King considered Tulasi the darling of his life. They 
became senseless with pleasureable feelings arising out of their 
amorous intercourses. Next moment they regained their 
tenaciousness and both began to converse on amorous matters. 
Thus both spent their time sometimes in sweet conversations, 
sometimes laughing and joking, sometimes maddened with amorous 
sentiments. As S’ankhachuda was clever in amorous affairs, so 
Tulasi was very expert. So none felt satiated with love affairs and no 
one was defeated by the other. 


Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the war 
preparations of S’ankhachuda with the Devas in the Mahapuranam 
S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 21. On The Meeting Of Mahadeva And 
S’ankhachuda For An Encounter In Conflict 


1-33. S’n Narayana spoke Then the Danava, the devotee of S’ri 
Krisna, got up from his flower strewn bed, meditating on S’ri Krisna, 
early in the morning time, at the Brahma Muhurta. Quitting his night 
dress, he took his bath in pure water and put on a fresh washed 
clothing. He then put the bright Tilak mark on his forehead and, 
performing the daily necessary worship, he worshipped his Ista 
devata (The Deity doing good to him). He then saw the auspicious 
things such as curd, ghee, honey, fried rice, etc., and distributed as 
usual, to the Brahmanas the best jewels, pearls, clothing and gold. 
Then for his marching to turn out auspicious, he gave at the feet of 
his Guru Deva priceless gems, jewels, pearls, diamonds, etc., and 
finally he gave to the poor Brahmins with great gladness, elephants, 
horses, wealth, thousands of stores, two lakhs of cities and one 
hundred kotis of villages. He then gave over to his son, the charge of 
his kingdom and of his wife, and all the dominions, wealth, property, 
all the servants and maid servants, all the stores and conveyances. 
He dressed himself for the war and took up bows and arrows and 
arrow cases. By the command of the King, the armies began to 
gather. Three lakhs of horses, one lakh elephants, one ayuta 
chariots, three Kotis of bowmen, three Kotis armoured soldiers and 
three Kotis of trident holders got themselves ready. Then the King 
counted his forces and appointed one Commander-in-Chief, 
(Maharatha), skilled in arts of warfare, over the whole army. Thus the 
generals were apppointed over the three lakh Aksauhini forces and 
their provisions were collected by three hundred Aksauhini men. He, 
then, thinking of S’ri Hari, started for war, accompanied by his vast 
army. (Note One Aksauhini consists of a large army consisting of 
21,870 chariots, as many elephants, 65,610 horses, and 109,350 
foot). He then mounted on a chariot built of excellent jewels and, 
headed by his Guru and all his other elders, went to S’ankara. O 
Narada! Bhagavan Mahadeva was at that time, staying on the banks 



of Puspabhadra. That place was Sidhas’rama (the hermitage where 
the yogic successes had been obtained and can easily be acquired 
in future for the Siddhas as well a Siddha Ksettra.) It was the place 
where the Muni Kapila practised Tapasya, in the holy land of 
Bharata. It was bounded on the east by the western ocean, on the 
west by the Malaya mountain, on the south, by the S’ri S’aila 
mountain and on the north by the Gandha Madana Mountain. It was 
five yojanas wide and one hundred times as long. This auspicious 
river in Bharata yields great religious merits and is always full of 
clear, sparkling running water. She is the favourite wife of the Salt 
Ocean and She is very blessed. Issuing from S’aravati Himalayas, 
She drops into the ocean. Keeping the river Gomati (Goomti) by her 
left; She falls into the west ocean. S’ankhachuda, arriving there, saw 
Mahadeva under a Peepul tree near its root with a smiling 
countenance, like one Koti Suns seated in a yogic posture. His 
colour was white like a pure crystal; as if the Fire of Brahma was 
emitting from every pore of His body (burning with Brahma-Teja); He 
was wearing the tiger skin and, holding the trident and axe. He 
dispels the fear of death of His Bhaktas; His face is quite calm. He, 
the Lord of Gauri, is the Giver of the fruits of Tapasya and of all sons 
of wealth and prosperity. The smiling face of As’utosa (one who is 
pleased quickly) is always thinking of the welfare of the Bhaktas; He 
is the Lord of the Universe, the Seed of the universe, the All-form 
(all-pervading), and the Progenitor of the universe. He is 
omnipresent. All pervading, the Best in this universe, the Destroyer 
of this universe, the Cause of all causes, and the Saviour from the 
hells. He is the Awakener and Bestower of Knowledge, the Seed of 
all knowledges, and He Himself is of the nature of Knowledge and 
Bliss. Seeing that Eternal Purusa, the King of the Danavas at once 
descended from his chariot and bowed down with devotion to Him 
and to Bhadra Kali on His left and and to Kartikeya on his front. The 
other attendants did the same. S’ankara, Bhadra Kali and Skanda all 
blessed him. NandisVara and others got up from their seats on 
seeing the Danava King and began to talk with each other on that 
subject. The King addressed S’iva and sat by Him. Bhagavan 
Mahadeva, the Tranquil Self, then, spoke to him, thus O King! 



Brahma, the knower of Dharma and the Creator of the world, is the 
Father of Dharrna, The religious Marichi, a devotee of Visnu, is the 
son of Brahma. The religious Prajapati Kas’yapa is also the 
Brahma’s son. Daksa gladly gave over to Kas’yapa in marriage, his 
thirteen daughters. Danu, fortunate and chaste, is also one of them. 


34-64. Danu had forty sons, all spirited and known as Danavas. The 
powerful Viprachitti was the prominent amongst them. Viprachitti’s 
son was Dambha, self controlled and very much devoted to Visnu. 

So much so that for one lakh years he recited the Visnu mantra at 
Puskara. His Guru (spiritual teacher) was S’ukracharya; and, by his 
advice, he recited the mantra of S’ri Krisna, the Highest Self. He got 
you as his son, devoted to Krisna. In your former birth, you were the 
chief attendant Gopa (cow-herd) of Krisna. You were very religious. 
Now, by Radhika’s curse, you are born in Bharata, as the Lord of the 
Danavas, powerful, heroic, valorous, and chivalrous. All the things 
from Brahma down to a blade of grass, the Vaisnavas regard as very 
trifling; even if they get Salokya, Sarsti, Sayujya and Samipya of 
Hari, they do not care a straw for that. Without serving Hari, they do 
not accept those things, even if those are thrust on them. Even 
Brahmahood and immortality, the Vaisnavas count for nothing. They 
want to serve Hari (Seva-bhava). Indrahood, Manuhood, they do not 
care. You, too, are a real Krisna Bhakta. So what do you care for 
those things that belong to the Devas, that are something like false 
to you. Give back to the Devas their kingdoms thus and please Me. 
Let the Devas remain in their own places and let you enjoy your 
kingdom happily. No need now for further quarrels. Think that you all 
belong to the same Kas’yapa’s family. The sins that are incurred, for 
example, the murder of a Brahmin, etc., are not even one-sixteenth 
of the sins incurred by hostilities amongst the relatives. If, O King! 
You think that by giving away to the Devas their possessions, your 
property will be diminished, then think that no one’s days pass ever 
in one and the same condition. Whenever Prakriti is dissolved, 
Brahma also vanishes. Again He appears by the Will of God. This 



occurs always. True, that knowledge is increased by true Tapasya; 
but nriemory fails then. This is certain. He who is the creator of this 
world, does his work of creation gradually by the help of his 
Knowledge-power (Jhana-S’akti). In the Satya Yuga, Dharma reigns 
in full; in the Treta Yuga, one quarter is diminished; again in the 
Dvapara only one-half remains. And in the Kali Yuga, only one 
quarter remains. Thus Dharma gets increase and decrease. At the 
end of the Kali, the Dharma will be seen very feeble as the phase of 
the Moon is seen very thin on the Dark Moon night. See, again, the 
Sun is very powerful in summer; not so in winter. At midday the Sun 
is very hot; it does not remain so in the morning and evening. The 
Sun rises at one time; then he is considered as young at another 
time he becomes very powerful and at another time he goes down. 
Again in times of distress (i.e., during the cloudy days) the Sun gets 
entirely obscured. When the Moon is devoured by Rahu (in the 
Lunar Eclipse), the Moon quivers. Again when the Moon becomes 
liberated (i.e., when the eclipse passes away) She becomes bright 
again. In the Full-Moon night She becomes full but She does not 
remain so always. In the Dark fortnight She wanes every day. In the 
bright fortnight She waxes every day. In the bright fortnight, the 
Moon becomes healthy and prosperous and in the dark fortnight, the 
Moon becomes thinner and thinner as if attacked with consumption. 
In the time of eclipse She becomes pale and in the cloudy weather. 
She is obscured. Thus the Moon also becomes powerful at one time 
and weak and pale at another time. Vali now resides in Patala, 
having lost all his fortunes; but, at some other time, he will become 
Devendra (the Lord of the Devas). This earth becomes at one time 
covered with grains and the resting-place of all beings; and, at 
another time. She becomes immersed under water. This universe 
appears at one time and disappears at another. Everything, moving 
or non-moving, sometimes appears and again, at another time, 
disappears. Only Brahma, the Highest Self, remains the same. By 
His grace, I have got the name Mrityunjaya (the Conqueror of 
Death). I, too, am witnessing many Prakritik dissolutions, I witnessed 
repeatedly many dissolutions and will in future, witness many 
dissolutions. The Paramatman becomes of the nature of Prakriti. 



Again it is He that is the Purusa (male principle). He is the Self; He is 
the individual soul (Jiva). He thus assumes various forms. And, 
again, Lo! He is beyond all forms! He who always repeats His Name 
and sings His Glory, can conquer, at some occasion, death. He is not 
to come under the sway of this birth, death, disease, old age and 
fear. He has made Brahma the Creator, Visnu the Preserver and Me 
the Destroyer. By His Will, we are possessed of those influences and 
powers. O King! Having deputed Kala, Agni and Rudra, to do the 
destruction work, I Myself repeat only His name and sing His glory, 
day and night, incessantly. My name is, on that account, Mrityunjaya. 
By His Knowledge Power, I am fearless. Death flies away fast from 
Me as serpents fly away at the sight of Garuda, the Vinata;s son. O 
Narada! Thus saying, S’ambhu, the Lord of all, the Progenitor of all, 
remained silent. Hearing the above words of S’ambhu, the King 
thanked Mahadeva again and again and spoke in sweet humble 
words. 


65-74. S’ankhachuda said The words spoken by Thee are quite 
true. Still I am speaking a few words. Kindly hear. Thou hast spoken 
just now that very great sins are incurred by kindred hostilities. How 
is it, then, that He robbed Vali of his whole possessions and sent him 
down into Patala? Gadadhara Visnu could not recover Vali’s glory. 
But I have done that. Why did the Devas kill Hiranyaksa and 
Hiranyakas’ipu, S’umbha and the other Danavas? In by gone days, 
we laboured hard when the nectar was obtained out of the churning 
of the ocean; but the best fruit was reaped by the Devas only. 
However, all these point that this universe is but the mere sporting 
ground of Paramatman, Who has become of the nature of Prakriti 
(the polarities of the one and the same current to produce electric 
effects). Whomsoever He grants glory and fortune, he only gets that. 
The quarrel of the Devas and the Danavas is eternal. Victory and 
defeat come to both the parties alternately. So it is not proper for 
Thee to come here in this hostility. For Thou art the God, of the 
nature of the Highest Self. Before Thee, we both are equal. So it is a 



matter of shame, no doubt, for Thee to stand up against us in favour 
of the gods. The glory and fame that will result to Thee, if Thou art 
victorious, will not be so much as it will be if we get the victory. On 
the contrary the inglory and infamy that will result to Thee if Thou 
dost get dire defeat will be inconceivably much more than what 
would come to us if we are defeated. (For we are low and Thou art 
Great.) 


75-79. Mahadeva laughed very much when he heard the Danava’s 
words and replied O King! You are descended from the 
Brahmin family. So what shame shall I incur if I get defeat in this 
fighting against you. In former days, the fight took place between 
Madhu and Kaitabha; again between Hiranya Kas’ipu and 
Hiranyaksa and S’ri Hah. I also fought with the Asura Tripura. Again 
the serious fight took place also between S’umbha and the other 
Daityas and the Highest Prakriti Devi, the Ruler of all, and the 
Progenitrix of all and the Destructrix of all. And, then, you were the 
Parisada attendant of S’ri Krisna, the Highest Self. 


Note S’ri Krisna is the Eternal Purusa beyond the Gunas. He 
creates Prakriti. All the creation is effected by Him. He is the Master 
of all the S’aktis. These S’aktis come from Him and go into Him. S’ri 
Krisna plays with these S’aktis, these lines of Forces, very powerful 
and terrible, indeed, that go to create, preserve and destroy the 
whole universe. These Lines of Forces have their three properties 
(1) Origin; (2) direction and (3) magnitude. And finally they come 
back to their origin. This makes one Kalpa, one Life, one Moment, 
one in the Full One. The Gunas come out of these S’aktis, these 
Lines of Forces. S’ri Krisna is the Great Reservoir, the Great Centre 
of Forces, Powerful, Lovely and Terrible. All the events as described 
here, appear in the intermediate stages when the Fourth Dimension 
passes into the Third Dimension, etc. The Fourth Dimension does 
not at once turn out into the Third Dimension but it takes place by 



degrees. This explains our dreams, visions, etc., which, if seen when 
the mind is pure, turn out to be true. 


80-82. So the Daityas, that were killed before, cannot be compared 
with you. Then why shall I feel shame in fighting against you? I am 
sent here by S’ri Hah for saving the Devas. So either give back to 
the Devas their possessions, or fight with Me. No need in speaking 
thus quite useless talks. O Narada! Thus speaking, Bhagavan 
S’ankara remained silent. S’ankhachuda got up at once with his 
ministers. 


Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter in the Ninth Book on the meeting 
of Mahadeva and S’ankhachuda for an encounter in conflict in the 
Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 22. On The Fight Between The Devas 
And S’ankhachuda 


1-75. S’n Narayana spoke Then the King of the Danavas, very 
powerful, bowed down to Mahadeva and ascended on the chariot 
with his ministers. Mahadeva gave orders to His army to be ready at 
once. So S’ankhachuda did. Terrible fight then ensued between 
Mahendra and Vrisaparva, Bhaskara and Viprachitti, Nis’akara and 
Dambha, between Kala and KalesVara, between Fire and Gokarna, 
Kuvera and Kalakeya, between VisVakarma and Maya, between 
Mrityu and Bhayamkar, between Yama and Samhara, between 
Varuna and Vikamka, between Budha and Dhritapristha, between 
S’ani and Raktaksa, Jayanta and Ratnasara, between the Vasus and 
Varchasas, between the two AsVin Kumaras and Diptiman, between 
Nalakubara and Dhumra, between Dharma and Dhurandhara, 
between Mangala and Usaksa, Bhanu and S’ovakara, between 
Kandarpa and Pithara, between the eleven Adityas and 
Godhamukha, Churna and Khadgadhvaja, Kahchimukha and Pinda, 
Dhumra and Nandi, between VisVa and Palas’a, between the eleven 
Rudras and the eleven Bhayamkaras, between Ugrachanda and the 
other Mahamaris and NandisVara and the other Danavas. The 
battlefield, then, assumed a grim aspect, as if the time of Dissolution 
had come. Bhagavan Mahadeva sat under the Vata (peepul) tree 
with Kartikeya and Bhadrakali. S’ankhachuda, decked with his jewel 
ornaments, sat on the jewel throne, surrounded by kotis and kotis of 
Danavas. The S’ankara’s army got defeated at the hands of the 
Danavas. The Devas, with cuts and wounds on their bodies, fled 
from the battlefield, terrified. Kartikeya gave words “Don't fear” to the 
Devas and excited them. Only Skanda resisted the Danava forces. 

In one moment he slew one hundred Aksauhini Danava forces. The 
lotus eyed Kali also engaged in killing the Asuras. She became very 
angry and no sooner did She slay the Asura forces, than She began 
to drink their blood. She easily slew with Her one hand and at every 
time put into Her mouth ten lakhs, and hundred lakhs and Kotis and 



Kotis of elephants. Thousands and thousands of headless bodies 
(Kavandhas) came to be witnessed in the field. The bodies of the 
Danavas were all cut and wounded by the arrows of Kartikeya. They 
were all terrified and fled away. Only Vrisaparva, Viprachitti, 

Dambha, and Vikamkanah remained fighting with Skanda with an 
heroic valour. Mahamari, too, did not shew his back and he fought 
out vigorously. By and by they all became very much confused and 
distressed; but they did not turn their backs. Seeing this terrible fight 
of Skanda, the Devas began to shower flowers. The killing of the 
Danavas looked like a Prakritik Dissolution. S’ankhachuda, then, 
began to shoot arrows from his chariot. 


The shooting of arrows by the king seemed as if rains were being 
poured in by the clouds. Everything became pitch dark. Fires only 
were seen emitting their golden tongues. The Devas, NandisVara 
and others, fled away, terrified. Only Kartikeya remained in the 
battlefield. Then S’ankhachuda began to throw terribly showers and 
showers of mountains, snakes, stones, and trees. So much so, that 
Kartikeya was covered by them as the Sun becomes obscured by 
fog. The Demon King cut off the weighty quiver and the pedestal of 
Skanda and broke His chariot. By the divine weapons of the Danava, 
the peacock (the vehicle) of Kartikeya became exhausted. Kartikeya 
threw one S’akti (weapon) on the breast of the Danava; but before it 
fell, the Danava cut off that, lustrous like the Sun and, in return, 
darted his S’akti. By that stroke, Kartikeya became stunned for a 
moment; but he immediately regained his consciousness. He then 
took up the quiver that Bhagavan Visnu gave him before and many 
other weapons; and ascending on another chariot, built of jewels, 
began to fight out violently and valiantly. Getting angry, he resisted 
all those showers of snakes, mountains and trees by his divine 
weapons. He resisted fire by his watery (Paryannya) weapon. Then 
He cut off easily S’ankhachuda’s chariot, bow, armour, charioteer, 
and his bright crown and he threw on his breast one blazing S’akti of 
white colour. The Danavendra fell unconscious; but, at the next 



moment, he regained his consciousness quickly, mounted on 
another chariot and took a fresh quiver. The Danava was the 
foremost in his magic powers. He, by his power of Maya, made a 
shower of arrows so much so that Kartikeya became completely 
covered by that multitude of arrows. Then the Danava took one 
invincible S’akti, lustrous like one hundred Suns. It seemed that 
flames of fire were licking high as if the Dissolution Time had come 
aright. Inflamed by anger, the Danava threw that S’akti on Kartikeya. 
It seemed, then, that a burning mass of fire fell on him. The powerful 
Kartikeya became senseless. Bhadrakali immediately took Him on 
Her lap and carried him before S’iva. S’iva easily restored him to his 
life by his knowledge-power and gave him the indomitable strength. 
He then got up in full vigour. Bhadrakali went to the field to see the 
Kartikeya’s forces. Nandis’vara and other heroes, the Devas, 
Gandharbas, Yaksas, Raksasas and Kinnaras followed Her. 
Hundreds of war drums were sounded and hundreds of persons 
carried Madhu (wine). Going to the battle-ground. She gave a war- 
cry. The Danava forces got fainted by that cry. Bhadrakali shouted 
aloud inauspicious peals after peals of laughter. Then She drank 
Madhu and danced in the battlefield. Ugra Damstra, Ugrachanda, 
Kotavi, the Yoginis, Dakinis, and the Devas all drank Madhu (wine). 
Seeing Kali in the battlefield, S’ankhachuda came up again and 
imparted the spirit of Fearlessness to the Daityas, trembling with 
fear. Bhadrakali projected, then, the Fire weapon, flaming like the 
Great Dissolution Fire; but the king quickly put out that by the Watery 
weapon. Kali then projected the very violent and wonderful 
Varunastra. The Danava cut off that easily with Gandharbastra. Kali 
then threw the flame-like Mahes’varastra. The king made it futile by 
the Vaisnavastra. Then the Devi purifying the Narayanastra with the 
mantra, threw it on the king. At this the king instantly alighted from 
his chariot and bowed down to it. The Narayanastra rose high up like 
the Dissolution Fire. S’ankhachuda fell prostrate on the ground with 
devotion. The Devi threw, then, the Brahmastra, purifying it with 
Mantra. But it was rendered futile by the Danava’s Brahmastra. The 
Devi again shot the divine weapons purifying them with mantras; but 
they also were nullified by the divine weapons of the Danava. Then 



BhadrakalT threw one S’akti extending to one Yojana. The Daitya cut 
it to pieces by his divine weapon. The Devi, then, being very much 
enraged, became ready to throw Pas’upata Astra, when the 
Incorporeal Voice was heard from the Heavens, prohibiting Her, and 
saying, “O Devi! The high-souled Danava would not be killed by the 
Pas’upata weapon. For Brahma granted him this boon that until the 
Visnu’s Kavacha will remain on his neck and until his wife’s chastity 
be not violated, old age and death will not be able to touch him.” 
Hearing this Celestial Voice, the Devi at once desisted. But She, out 
of hunger, devoured hundreds and lakhs of Danavas. The terrible 
Devi Kali, then, went with great speed to devour S’ankhachuda but 
the Danava resisted Her by his sharp divine weapons. The Devi then 
threw on him a powerful axe, lustrous like a summer Sun; but the 
Danava cut it to pieces by his divine weapon. The Devi seeing this, 
became very angry and proceeded to devour him; but the Danava 
King, the Lord of all Siddhis, expanded his body. At this. Kali became 
violently angry and assuming a terrific appearance, went quickly and 
with the blow of one fist, broke his chariot and dropped down the 
charioteer. Then she hurled on the Asura one S’ula weapon, blazing 
like a Pralaya Fire. S’ankhachuda easily held that by his left hand. 
The Devi became angry and struck the Danava with Her fist; the 
Daitya’s head reeled, and, rolling, he fell unconscious for a moment. 
Next moment regaining his consciousness he got up. But he did not 
fight hand to hand with the Devi. Rather he bowed down to Her. The 
weapons that the Devi threw afterwards were partly cut down by the 
Danava and partly taken up by him and absorbed in him and thus 
rendered futile. Then BhadrakalT caught bold of the Danava and 
whirling him round and round threw him aloft. Then the powerful 
S’ankhachuda fell down on the ground from high with great force; he 
immediately 

got up and bowed down to Her. He then gladly ascended on his 
beautiful chariot, built of excellent jewels. He did not feel any fatigue 
with the war and went on fighting. Then the DevT BhadrakalT, feeling 
hungry began to drink the blood of the Danavas and ate the fat and 
flesh. She came before Mahadeva and described to Him the whole 



history of the warfare from beginning to end. Hearing the killing of 
the Danavas, Mahadeva began to laugh. She went on saying, “The 
Danavas that get out of my mouth while I was chewing them, are the 
only ones that are living. This number will be about one lakh. And 
when I took up the Pas’upata weapon to kill the Danava, the 
Incorporeal Celestial Voice spoke He is invulnerable by you. But 
the very powerful Danava did no more fling any weapon on Me. He 
simply cut to pieces those that I threw on him.” 


Here ends the Twenty-Second Chapter in the Ninth Book on the fight 
between the Devas and S’ankhachuda in the Mahapuranam S’ri 
Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 23. On The Killing Of S’ankhachuda 


1-6. Narayana said : - S’iva, versed in the knowledge of the Higher 
Reality, hearing all this, went hinnself with His whole host to the 
battle. Seeing Him, S’ankhachuda alighted from his chariot and fell 
prostrate before him. With great force he got up and, quickly putting 
on his armour he took up his huge and heavy bow case. Then a 
great fight ensued between S’iva and S’ankhachuda for full one 
hundred years but there was no defeat nor victory on either side. 
The result was stalemate. Both of them, Bhagavan and the Danava 
quitted their weapons. S’ankhachuda, remained on his chariot and 
Mahadeva role on His Bull. Hundreds and hundreds of Danavas 
were slain. But extraordinarily endowed with divine power, S’ambhu 
restored to life all those of His party that were slain. 


7-30. In the meanwhile, an aged Brahmana, very distressed in his 
appearance, came to the battlefield and asked S’ankhachuda, the 
King of Danavas “O King! Grant me what I beg of you; you give 
away in charity all sorts of wealth and riches; give me also what I 
desire; give me, a Brahmin, something also. I am a quiet peaceable 
aged Brahmin, very very thirsty. Make your Promise first and then I 
will speak to you what I desire.” (Note The Brahmins only are fit 
for receiving frauds and cheatings.) 


The King S’ankhachuda, with a gracious countenance and pleasing 
eyes swore before him that He would give him what he would desire. 
Then the Brahmin spoke to the King with great affection and Maya 
“I am desirous of your Kavacha (amulet).” The King, then, gave him 
the Kavacha (the amulet, mantra written on a Bhurja bark and 
located in a golden cup). Bhagavan Hah (in the form of that Brahmin) 
took that Kavacha and, assuming the form of S’ankhachuda came to 
Tulasi. Coming there. He made His Maya (magic) manifest and held 



sexual intercourse with her. At this time Mahadeva took up the Hari’s 
trident-aiming at the king of the Danavas. The trident looked like the 
Mid-day Sun of summer, flaming like a Pralaya fire. It looked 
irresistible and invincible as if quite powerful to kill the enemies. In 
brilliance it equalled the Sudars’an Chakra (disc) and it was the chief 
of all the weapons. No other body than S’iva and Kes’ava could 
wield such a weapon. And everybody feared that but S’iva and 
Kes’ava. In length it was one thousand Dhanus and in width it was 
one hundred hands. It seemed lively, of the nature of Brahma, 
eternal and not capable to be noticed, whence and how it 
proceeded. The weapon could destroy, by its own free Lila (Will) all 
the worlds. When S’iva held it aloft and aiming at S’ankhachuda, He 
hurled it on him, the King of the Demons quitted his bows and arrows 
and with mind collected in a yoga posture, began to meditate on the 
lotus-feet of S’ri Krisna with great devotion. At that moment, the 
trident, whirling round fell on S’ankhachuda and easily burnt him and 
his chariot to ashes. He, then assuming the form of a two-armed 
Gopa, full of youth, divine, ornamented with jewels, holding flute, 
mounted on a Divine Chariot, surrounded by kotis and kotis of 
Gopas who came there from the region of Goloka, whose bodies 
were built up of excellent jewels, and S’ankhachuda then went up to 
the Heavens (Goloka, where S’ri Brindabana is located in the 
middle). He went to Vrindaban, full of Rasas (sentiments) and bowed 
down at the lotus feet of Radha Krisna with devotion. Both of them 
were filled with love when they saw Sudama, and, with a gracious 
countenance and joyful eyes, they took him on their laps. On the 
other hand the S’ula weapon came with force and gladness back 
again to Krisna. The bones of S’ankhachuda, O Narada! were 
transformed into conch-shells. These conch-shells are always 
considered very sacred and auspicious in the worship of the Devas. 
The water in the conch-shell is also very holy and pleasing to the 
Devas. What more than this, that the water in the conch-shell is as 
holy as the water of any Tirtha. This water can be offered to all the 
Gods but not to S’iva. Wherever the conch-shell is blown, there 
Laksmi abides with great pleasure. If bathing be done with conch- 
shell water, it is equivalent to taking bath in all the Tirthas. Bhagavan 



Hari resides direct in the conch-shell. Where S’ankha is placed, 
there Hari resides. Laksmi also resides there and all inauspicious 
things fly away from there. Where the females and S’udras blow the 
S’ankhas, Laksmi then gets vexed and, out of terror. She goes away 
to other places. O Narada! Mahadeva, after killing the Danava, went 
to His own abode. When He gladly went away on His Vehicle, on the 
Bull’s back, with His whole host, all the other Devas went to their 
respective places with great gladness. Celestial drums were 
sounded in the Heavens. The Gandharbas and the Kinnaras began 
to sing songs. And showers of flowers were strewn on S’iva’s head. 
All the Munis and Devas and their chiefs began to chant hymns to 
Him. 


Here ends the Twenty-Third Chapter of the Ninth Book on the killing 
of S’ankhachuda in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 24. On The Glory Of Tulas! 


1. Narada said How did Narayana impregnate TulasT? Kindly 
describe all that in detail. 


2-11. Narayana said For accomplishing the ends of the Devas, 
Bhagavan Hari assumed the Vaisnavi Maya, took the Kavacha from 
S’ankhachuda and assuming his form, went to the house of TulasT. 
Dundubhis (celestial drums) were sounded at Her door, shouts of 
victory were proclaimed and TulasT was informed. The chaste TulasT, 
hearing that sound very gladly looked out on the royal road from the 
window. Then for auspicious observances. She offered riches to the 
Brahmins; then She gave wealth to the panegyrists (or bards 
attached to the courts of princes), to the beggars, and the other 
chanters of hymns. That time Bhagavan Narayana alighted from His 
chariot and went to the house of the DevT TulasT, built of invaluable 
gems, looking exceedingly artistic and beautiful. Seeing her dear 
husband before her. She became very glad and washed his feet and 
shed tears of joy and bowed down to Him. Then She, impelled by 
love, made him take his seat on the beautiful jewel throne and giving 
him sweet scented betels with camphor, began to say “Today my 
life has been crowned with success. For I am seeing again my lord 
returned from the battle.” Then she cast smiling glances askance at 
him and with her body filled with rapturous joy lovingly asked him the 
news of the war in sweet words 


12-13. O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! Now tell me of your heroic 
valour, how you have come out victorious in war with Mahadeva who 
destroys countless universes. Hearing TulasT’s word, the Lord of 
LaksmT, in the guise of S’ankhachuda, spoke these nectar-like words 
with a smiling countenance. 



14-17. O Dear! Full one Samvatsara the war lasted betwixt us. All 
the Daityas were killed. Then Brahma Himself came and mediated. 
Peace, then, was brought about and by the command of Brahma, I 
gave over to the Devas their rights. When I returned to my home, 
S’iva went back to His S’ivaloka. Thus saying. Hah, the Lord of the 
world, slept and then engaged in sexual intercourse with her. But the 
chaste TulasT, finding this time her experience quite different from 
what She used to enjoy before, argued all the time within herself and 
at last questioned him 


18-22. Who are you? O Magician! By spreading your magic, you 
have enjoyed me. As you have taken my chastity, I will curse you. 
Bhagavan Narayana, hearing Tulasi’s words and being afraid of the 
curse, assumed His real beautiful figure. The Devi then saw the 
Eternal Lord of the Devas before her. He was of a deep blue colour 
like fresh rain-clouds and with eyes like autumnal lotuses and with 
playful Lilas equivalent to tens and tens of millions of Love 
personified and adorned with jewels and ornaments. His face was 
smiling and gracious; and he wore his yellow-coloured robe. The 
love-stricken TulasT, seeing That Lovely Form of Vasudeva, 
immediately fell senseless; and at the next moment, regaining 
consciousness, she began to speak. 


23-27. O Lord! Thou art like a stone. Thou hast no mercy. By 
hypocrisy Thou hast destroyed my chastity, my virtue and for that 
reason didst kill my husband. O Lord! Thou had no mercy; Thy heart 
is like a stone. So Let Thee be turned into a stone. Those who 
declare Thee as a saint, are no doubt mistaken. Why didst Thou for 
the sake of others, kill without any fault, another Bhakta of Thine. 
Thus speaking, TulasT overpowered with grief and sorrow, cried 
aloud and repeatedly gave vent to lamentations. Seeing her thus 



very distressed, Narayana, the Ocean of Mercy, spoke to her to 
cheer her up according to the rules of Dharma. 


28-102. O Honoured One! For a long time you performed tapasya in 
this Bharata, to get Me. S’ankhachuda, too, performed tapasya for a 
long time to get you. By that tapas, S’ankhachuda got you as wife. 
Now it is highly incumbent to award you also with the fruit that you 
asked for. Therefore I have done this. Now quit your this terestrial 
body and assume a Divine Body and marry Me. O Rame! Be like 
Laksmi. This body of yours will be known by the name of Gandaki, a 
very virtuous, pure and pellucid stream in this holy land of Bharata. 
Your hairs will be turned into sacred trees and as they will be born of 
you, you will be known by the name of Tulasi. All the three worlds 
will perform their Pujas with the leaves and flowers of this Tulasi. 
Therefore, O Fair-faced One! This Tulasi will be reckoned as the 
chief amongst all flowers and leaves. In Heavens, earth, and the 
nether regions, and before Me, O Fair One, you will reign as the 
chief amongst trees and flowers. In the region of Goloka, on the 
banks of the river Viraja, in the Rasa circle (the celestial ball dance,) 
where all amorous sentiments are played in Vrindarana forest, in 
Bhandira forest, in Champaka forest, in the beautiful Chandana 
(Sandal Forests and in the groves of MadhavT, Ketaki, Kunda, 
Mallika, and Malati, in the sacred places you will live and bestow the 
highest religious merits. All the Tirthas will reside at the bottom of the 
Tulasi tree and so religious merits will accrue to all. O Fair-faced 
One! There I and all the Devas will wait in expectation of the falling 
of a Tulasi leaf. Anybody who will be initiated and installed with the 
Tulasi leaves water, will get all the fruits of being initiated in all the 
sacrifices. Whatever pleasure Hari gets when thousands and 
thousands of jars filled with water are offered to him, the same 
pleasure He will get when one Tulasi leaf will be offered to Him. 
Whatever fruits are acquired by giving Ayuta cows as presents, 
those will be also acquired by giving Tulasi leaves. Especially if one 
gives Tulasi leaves in the month of Kartik, one gets the fruits same 



as above mentioned. If one drinks or gets the Tulasi leaf water at the 
momentous Time of Death, one becomes freed of all sins and is 
worshipped in the Visnu Loka. He who drinks daily the Tulasi leaf 
water certainly gets the fruit of one lakh horse sacrifices. He who 
plucks or culls the Tulasi leaf by his own hand and holding it on his 
body, quits his life in a Tirath, goes to Visnu Loka. Whoever holds in 
his neck the garland made up of Tulasi wood, gets certainly the fruit 
of horse sacrifices at every step. He who does not keep his word, 
holding the Tulasi leaf in his hand, goes to the Kalasutra Hell as long 
as the Sun and Moon last. He who gives false evidence in the 
presence of the Tulasi leaf, goes to the Kumbhipaka Hell for the life- 
periods of fourteen Indras. He who drinks or gets a bit of the Tulasi 
leaf water at the time of death, certainly goes to Vaikuntha, 
ascending on a car made up of jewels. Those who pluck or cull the 
Tulasi leaves in the Full Moon night, on the twelfth lunar day, on the 
passing of the sun from one sign to another, the mid-day, or on the 
twilights, on the night, while applying oil on their bodies, on the 
impurity periods, and while putting on night dresses, verily eat off the 
Narayana’s head. O Chaste One! The Tulasi leaf kept in the night, is 
considered sacred. It is considered good in S’raddha, vow ceremony, 
in the making over of any gift, in the installation of any image or in 
worshipping any Deva. Again, the Tulasi leaf fallen on the ground or 
fallen in water or offered to Visnu, if washed out can be used in holy 
and other purposes. Thus, O Good One! You will remain as tree in 
this earth and will remain in Goloka as the Presiding Deity thereof 
and will enjoy daily the sport with Krisna. And also you will be the 
Presiding Deity of the river Gandaki and thus bestow religious merits 
in Bharata; you will be the wife of the Salt Ocean, which is My part. 
You are very chaste; in Vaikuntha you will enjoy me as Rama lives 
with Me. And as for Me, I will be turned into stone by your curse; I 
will remain in India close to the bank of the river Gandaki. Millions 
and millions of insects with their sharp teeth will make rings, (the 
convolutions in the S’alagrama or sacred stones), on the cavities of 
the mountains there, representing Me. Of these stones, those that 
have one door (entrance hole), four convolutions, adorned by the 
garland of wild flowers (having a mark like this) and which look like 



fresh rain-cloud, are called Laksmi Narayana Murtis (forms). And 
those that have one door, four convolutions and look like fresh rain- 
clouds but no garlands are called Laksmi Janardana Chakras 
(discus). Those that have two doors, four convolutions, and decked 
with mark like cow’s hoof and void of the garland mark are called 
Raghunatha chakras. Those that are very small in size, with two 
Chakras and look like fresh rain clouds and void of the garland 
marks are named Vamana Chakras. Those that that are very small 
in size, with two Chakras and the garland mark added, know then to 
be the S’ridhara Chakras. These always bring in prosperity to the 
household. Those that are big, circular, void of garland mark, with 
two circular Chakras, are known as Damodara forms. Those that are 
mediocre in size, with two Chakras and marked as if struck by an 
arrow, having marks of arrows and bow-cases are known as Rana- 
Ramas. Those that are middling, with seven Chakras, having marks 
of an umbrella and ornaments, are called Rajarajes’varas. They 
bestow the royal Laksmi to persons. Those that have twice seven 
chakras, and are big, looking like fresh rain-clouds are named 
Anantas. They bestow four fold fruits (Dharma, wealth, desire and 
liberation). Those that are in their forms like a ring, with two chakras, 
beautiful, looking like rain-clouds, having cow-hoof marks and of 
mediocre size are named Madhusudanas. Those that have one 
Chakra are called Sudars’anas. Those that have their Chakras 
hidden are called Gadadharas. Those that have two Chakras, 
looking horse-faced, are known as Hayagrivas. O Chaste One! 
Those that have their mouths very wide and extended, with two 
Chakras, and very terrible, are known as Narasimhas. They excite 
Vairagyas to all who serve them. Those that have two Chakras, 
mouths extended and with garland marks (elliptical marks) are called 
Laksmi Nrisinghas. They always bless the householders who 
worship them. Those that have two Chakras near their doors (faces), 
that look even and beautiful, and with marks manifested are known 
as Vasudevas. They yield all sorts of fruits. Those that have their 
Chakras fine and their forms like fresh rain-clouds and have many 
fine hole marks within their wide gaping facets are called 
Pradyumnas. They yield happiness to every householder. Those that 



have their faces of two Chakras stuck together and their backs 
capacious, are known as Sankarsanas. They always bring in 
happiness to the householders. Those that look yellow, round and 
very beautiful are Anirudhas. The sages say, they give happiness to 
the householder. Where there is the S’alagrama stone there exists 
S’ri Hah Himself; and where there is Hah, Laksmi and all the Tirthas 
dwell there. Worshipping S’alagram S’ila, destroys the Brahmahatya 
(killing a Brahmin) and any other sin whatsoever. In worshipping the 
S’alagrama stone looking like an umbrella, kingdoms are obtained; in 
worshipping circular S’ilas, great prosperity is obtained; in 
worshipping cart-shaped stones, miseries arise; and in worshipping 
stones, whose ends look like spears (S’ulas), death inevitably 
follows. Those whose facets are distorted, bring in poverty; and 
yellow stones bring in various evils and afflictions. Those whose 
Chakras look broken, bring in diseases; and those whose Chakras 
are rent asunder bring in death certainly. Observing vows, making 
gifts, installing images, doing S’raddhas, worshipping the Devas, all 
these become highly exalted, if done before the S'alagrama S’ila. 
One acquires the merits of bathing in all the Tirthas and in being 
initiated in all the sacrifices, if one worships the Salagrama S’ila. 
What more than this, that the merits acquired by all the sacrifices, all 
the Tirthas, all vows, all austerities and reading all the Vedas are all 
acquired by duly worshipping by the holy S’alagrama S’ila. He who 
performs his Abhis’eka ceremony always with S’alagrama water 
(being sprinkled with S’alagrama water at the initiation and 
Installation ceremonies), acquires the religious merits of performing 
all sorts of gifts and circumambulating the whole earth. All the Devas 
are, no doubt, pleased with him who thus worships daily the 
S’alagrama. What more than this, that all the Tirthas want to have 
his touch. He becomes a Jivanmukta (liberated while living) and 
becomes very holy; ultimately he goes to the region of S’ri Hah and 
remains in Hari’s service there and dwells with him for countless 
Prakritic dissolutions. Every sin, like Brahma Hatya, flies away from 
him as serpents do at the sight of Garuda. The Devi Vasundhara 
(the Earth) becomes purified by the touch of the dust of his feat. At 
his birth, all his predecessors (a lakh in number), are saved. He who 



gets the S’alagrama S’ila water during the time of his death, he is 
freed of all his sins and goes to the Visnu Loka and gets Nirvana; he 
becomes freed entirely from the effects of Karma and he gets, no 
doubt, dissolved and diluted for ever in (the feet of) Visnu. He who 
tells lies, holding S’alagrama in his hands, goes to the Kumbhipaka 
Hell for the life-period of Brahma. If one does not keep his word, 
uttered with the S’alagrama stone in his hand, one goes to the 
Asipatra Hell for one lakh manvantaras. He who worships the 
S’alagrama stone without offering TulasT leaves on it or separates 
the TulasT leaves from the stone, will have to suffer separation from 
his wife in his next birth. So if one does not offer the TulasT leaves in 
the conchshell, for seven births he remains without his wife and he 
becomes diseased. He who preserves the S’alagrama stone, the 
TulasT and the conchshell, in one place, becomes very learned and 
becomes dear to Narayana. Look! He who casts his semen once in 
his wife, suffers intense pain, no doubt, at each other’s separation. 

So you become dear to S’ankhachuda for one Manvantara. Now, 
what wonder! That you will suffer pain, at his bereavement. O 
Narada! Thus saying, S’rT Hah desisted. TulasT quitted her mortal coil 
and assumed a divine form, began to remain in the breast of S’rT 
Hari like S’rT LaksmT DevT. Hari also went with her to Vaikuntha. Thus 
LaksmT, SarasvatT, Ganga, and TulasT, all the four came so very dear 
to Hari and are recognised as Is’varTs. On the other hand, the mortal 
coil of TulasT, no sooner quitted by TulasT, became transformed into 
the river GandakT. Bhagavan Hari, too, became also converted into a 
holy mountain, on the banks thereof, yielding religious merits to the 
people. The insects cut and fashion many pieces out of that 
mountain. Of them, those that fall into the river, yield fruits 
undoubtedly. And those pieces that fall on the ground become yellow 
coloured; they are not at all fit for worship. O Narada! Thus I have 
spoken to you everything. What more do you want to hear now? Say. 


Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the glory 
of TulasT in the Mahapuranam S’rT Mad DevT Bhagavatam of 18,000 



verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 25. On The Method Of Worship Of 
TuLAsi Dev! 


1-2. Narada said When the Devi Tulasi has been made so dear to 
Narayana and thus an object for worship, then describe Her worship 
and Stotra (the hymn of Tulasi) now. O Muni! By whom was She first 
worshipped? By whom were Her glories first sung? And how did She 
become therefore an object of worship? Speak out all these to me. 


3. Suta said Hearing these words of Narada, Narayana, laughing, 
began to describe this very holy and sin-destroying account of 
Tulasi. 


4-15. Narayana said Bhagavan Hah duly worshipped Tulasi, and 
began to enjoy her with Laksmi; He raised Tulasi to the rank of 
Laksmi and thus made her fortunate and glorious Laksmi and Ganga 
allowed and bore this new union of Narayana and Tulasi. But 
Sarasvati could not endure this high position of Tulasi owing to Her 
anger. She became self-conceited and beat Tulasi on some quarrel 
before Hah. Tulasi became abashed and insulted and vanished off. 
Being the IsVari of all the Siddhis, the Devi, the Self-manifest and 
the Giver of the Siddhiyoga to the Jhanins, Tulasi, Oh! what a 
wonder, became angry and turned out as invisible to S’ri Hah even. 


Not seeing Tulasi, Hari appeased Sarasvati and getting Her 
permission went to the Tulasi forest. Going there and taking a bath 
in due accord, and with due rites, worshipped with His whole heart 
the chaste Tulasi and then began to meditate on Her with devotion. 

O Narada! He gets certainly all siddhis who worships Tulasi duly with 
the ten lettered mantra “S’rim Hrim Klim Aim Vrindavanyai 



Svaha,” the King of mantras, yielding fruits and all gratifications like 
the Kalpa Tree. O Narada! At the time of worship, the lamp of ghee, 
was lighted and dhup, sindura, sandal, offerings of food, flowers, 
etc., were offered to Her. Thus hymned by Hari, TulasT came out of 
the tree, pleased. And She gladly took refuge at His lotus feet. Visnu, 
then, granted her boon that, “You will be worshipped by all; I will 
keep you in My breast and in My head and the Devas also will hold 
you on their heads.” And He then took her to His own abode. 


16. Narada said “O Highly Fortunate One! What is Tulasi’s dhyan, 
stotra and method of worship? Kindly describe all these.” 


17. Narayana said When TulasT vanished, Hari became very 
much agitated at her bereavement and went to Vrindavana and 
began to praise her. 


18-44. The Bhagavan said The TulasT trees collect in 
multitudinous groups; hence the Pundits call it Vrinda. I praise that 
dear TulasT. Of old. She appeared in the Vrindavana forest and 
therefore known as VrindavanT. I worship that fortunate and glorious 
One. She is worshipped always in innumerable universes and is, 
therefore, known as VisVapujita (worshipped by all). I worship that 
VisVapujita. By whose contact, those countless universes are 
always rendered pure and holy; and therefore She is called 
VisVapavani (purifying the whole universe). I am suffering from her 
bereavement, I remember the DevT. Without TulasT, the Devas do not 
get pleased, though other flowers be heaped on them; therefore She 
is considered as the essence of all the flowers. Now I am in sorrow 
and trouble and I am very eager to see her, who is of the nature of 
purity incarnate. The whole universe gets delighted when the 
Bhaktas receive her; hence She is called NandinT; so may She be 
pleased with me. There is nothing in the universe that can be 



compared to Her; hence She is called TulasT; I take refuge of that 
clear TulasT. That chaste dear one is the life of Krisna, hence She is 
known as KrisnajTvanT. Now may She save my life. O Narada! Thus 
praising, RamapatT remained there. The chaste TulasT then came to 
His sight and bowed down to His lotus feet; when She becoming 
sensitive out of the insult, began to weep. Bhagavan Visnu, seeing 
that sensitive dear one, immediately took her to His breast. Taking, 
then, SarasvatT’s permission. He took her to His own home and 
brought about, first of all, the agreement between her and SarasvatT. 
Then He granted her the boon, “You will be worshipped by all, 
respected by all, and honoured by all; and all will carry you on their 
heads.” I will also worship, respect and honour you and keep you on 
My head. Receiving this boon from Visnu, the DevT TulasT became 
very glad. 


SarasvatT then attracted her to her side, made her sit close to her. 
LaksmT and Ganga both with smiling faces attracted her and made 
her enter into the house. O Narada! Whosoever worships her with 
her eight names Vrinda, VrindavanT, VisVapujita, VisVapavanT, 
TulasT, Puspasara, NandanT and Krisna JTvanT and their meanings 
and sings this hymn of eight verses duly, acquires the merit of 
performing AsVamedha Yajha (horse sacrifice). Specially, on the Full 
Moon night of the month of Kartik, the auspicious birth ceremony of 
TulasT is performed. Of old Visnu worshipped her at that time. 
Whoever worships with devotion on that Full Moon combination, the 
universe purifying TulasT, becomes freed of all sins and goes up to 
the Visnu Loka. Offerings of TulasT leaves to Visnu in the month of 
Kartik bring merits equal to those in giving away Ayuta Cows. 

Hearing this stotra at that period gives sons to the sonless persons, 
wives to the wifeless persons and friends to friendless persons. On 
hearing this stotra, the diseased become free of their diseases, the 
persons in bondage become free, the terrified become fearless, and 
the sinners are freed of their sins. O Narada! Thus it has been 
mentioned how to chant stotra to her. Now hear her dhyan and 



method of worship. In the Vedas, in the Kanva S’akha branch, the 
method of worship is given. You know that one is to meditate on the 
Tulasi plant, without any invocation (avahana) and then worship her 
with devotion, presenting all sorts of offerings as required to her. 

Now hear Her Dhyanam. Of all the flowers, Tulasi (the holy basil) is 
the best, very holy, and captivating the mind. It is a flame burning 
away all the fuel of sins committed by man. In the Vedas it is stated 
that this plant is called Tulasi, because there can be made no 
comparison with Her amongst all the flowers. She is the holiest of 
them all. She is placed on the heads of all and desired by all and 
gives holiness to the universe. She gives Jivanmukti, mukti and 
devotion to S’ri Hah. I worship Her. Thus meditating on Her and 
worshipping Her according to due rites, one is to bow down to Her. O 
Narada! I have described to you the full history of S’ri Tulasi Devi. 
What more do yo want to hear now, say. 


Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the method 
of worship of Tulasi Devi in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 26. On The Narration Of Savitr! 


1-2. Narada said I have heard the anecdote of TulasT. Now 
describe in detail the history of Savitri. Savitri is considered as the 
Mother of the Vedas. Why was She born, in days gone by? By whom 
was She first worshipped and subsequently also? 


3-4. Narayana said O Muni! She was first worshipped by Brahma. 
Next the Vedas worshipped her. Subsequently the learned men 
worshipped her. Next the King AsVapati worshipped Her in India. 
Next the four Varnas (castes) worshipped Her. 


5. Narada said O Brahman! Who is that AsVapati? What for did 
he worship? When the Devi Savitri became adorable by all, by which 
persons was She first worshipped and by which persons 
subsequently? 


6-14. Narayana said O Muni! The King AsVapati reigned in 
Bhadrades’a, rendering his enemies powerless and making his 
friends painless. He had a queen very religious; her name was 
Malati; She was like a second Laksmi. She was barren; and 
desirous of an issue. She under the instruction of Vas’istha, duly 
worshipped Savitri with devotion. But She did not receive any vision 
nor any command; therefore She returned home with a grievous 
heart. Seeing her sorry, the king consoled her with good words and 
himself accompanied her to Puskara with a view to perform Tapas to 
Savitri with devotion and, being self-controlled, practised tapasya for 
one hundred years. Still he could not see Savitri, but voice came to 
him. An incorporeal, celestial voice reached his ears “Perform 
Japam (repeat) ten lakhs of Gayatri Mantram.” At this moment 
Parasara came up there. The king bowed down to him. The Muni 



said O King! One japa of Gayatn, destroys the days sins. Ten 
Japams of Gayatri destroy day and night’s sins. 


15-40. One hundred Gayatri Japams destroy one month’s sins. One 
thousand Japams destroy one year’s sins. One lakh Gayatri Japams 
destroy the sins of the present birth and ten lakh Gayatri Japams 
destroy the sins of other births. One hundred lakhs of Japams 
destroy the sins of all the births. If ten times that (i.e., 1,000 lakhs) be 
done, then liberation is obtained. (Now the method, how to make 
Japam). Make the palm of the (right) hand like a snake’s hood; see 
that the fingers are all close, no holes are seen; and make the ends 
of the fingers bend downwards; then being calm and quiet and with 
one’s face eastward, practise Japam. Then count from the middle of 
the ring (name-less) finger and go on counting right-handed (with the 
hands of the watch) till you come to the bottom of the index finger. 
This is the rule of counting by the hand. O King! The rosary is to be 
of the seed of white lotus or of the crystals; it should be consecrated 
and purified. Japam is to be done then in a sacred Tirtha or in a 
temple. Becoming self-controlled one should place the rosary on a 
banyan leaf or on a lotus leaf and smear it with cowdung; wash it, 
uttering Gayatri Mantra and over it perform one hundred times 
Gayatri Japam intently in accordance with the rules. Or wash it with 
Pahchagavya, milk, curds, clarified butter, cow urine and cowdung, 
and then consecrate it well. Then wash it with the Ganges water and 
perform best the consecrations. O Rajarsi! Then perform ten lakhs of 
Japam in due order. Thus the sins of your three births will be 
destroyed and then you will see the Devi Savitri. O King! Do this 
Japam, being pure, everyday in the morning, mid-day, and in the 
evening. If one be impure and devoid of Sandhya, one has no right 
to do any action; and even if one performs an action, one does not 
get any fruit thereby. He who does not do the morning Sandhya and 
the evening Sandhya, is driven away from all the Brahminic Karmas 
and he becomes like S’udras. He who does Sandhya three times 
throughout his life, becomes like the Sun by his lustre and brilliance 



of tapas. What more than this, the earth is always purified by the 
dust of his feet. The Dvija who does his Sandhya Bandanam and 
remains pure, becomes energetic and liberated while living. By his 
contact all the Tirthas become purified. All sins vanish away from 
him as snakes fly away at the sight of Garuda. The Dvija who 
becomes void of Sandhya three times a day, the Devas do not 
accept his worship nor the Piths accept his Pindas. He who has no 
Bhakti towards the Mula Prakriti, who does not worship the specific 
seed Mantra of Maya and who does not hold festivities in honour of 
Mula Prakriti, know him verily to be an Ajagara snake without poison. 
Devoid of the Visnu mantra, devoid of the three Sandhyas and 
devoid of the fasting on the Ekadas’i Tithi (the eleventh clay of the 
fortnight), the Brahmin becomes a snake devoid of poison. The vile 
Brahmin who does not like to take the offerings dedicated to Hari 
and who does the washerman’s work and eats the food of S’udra 
and drives the buffaloes, becomes a snake devoid of poison. The 
Brahmin who burns the dead bodies of the S’udras, becomes like the 
man who is the husband of an unmarried girl. The Brahmin also who 
becomes a cook of a S’udra, becomes a snake void of poison. The 
Brahmin who accepts the gifts of a S’udra, who performs the 
sacrifice of a S’udra, who lives as clerks and warriors becomes like a 
snake void of poison. The Brahmin who sells his daughter, who sells 
the name of Hari or eats the food of a woman who is without 
husband and son, as well as of one who has just bathed after her 
menstruation period, becomes like a serpent void of poison. The 
Brahmin who takes the profession of pimps and pampers and lives 
on the interest, is also like a serpent void of poison. The 
Brahmin who sleeps even when the Sun has risen, eats fish, and 
does not worship the Devi is also like a poisonless serpent. Thus 
stating all the rules of worship in order, the best of the Munis told him 
the Dhyanam, etc., of the Devi Savitri, what he wanted. Then he 
informed the King of all the mantras and went to his own As’rama. 
The king, then worshipped accordingly and saw the Devi Savitri and 
got boons. 



41-43. Narada said What is the Savitri’s Dhyan, what are the 
modes of her worship, what is stotra, mantra, that Paras’ara gave to 
the King before he went away? And how did the King worship and 
what boon did he get? This great mystery, grand and well renowned 
in the S’rutis, about Savitri, I am desirous to hear in brief on all the 
points. 


44-78. Narayana said On the thirteenth day (the trayodas’i tithi) of 
the black fortnight in the month Jyaistha or on any other holy period, 
the fourteenth day (the chaturdas’i tithi) this vow is to be observed 
with great care and devotion. Fourteen fruits and fourteen plates with 
offerings of food on them, flowers and incense are to be offered and 
this vow is to be observed for fourteen years consecutively. 
Garments, holy threads and other articles are also offered and after 
the Vrata is over, the Brahmins are to be fed. The lucky pot (mangal 
ghat) is to be located duly according to the rules of worship with 
branches and fruits. Ganes’a, Agni, Visnu, S’iva and S’iva are to be 
worshipped duly. 


In that ghat Savitri is to be next invoked and worshipped. Now hear 
the Dhyanam of Savitri, as stated in the Madhyan Dina Sakha, as 
well the stotra, the modes of worship, and the Mantra, the giver of all 
desires. I meditate and adore that Savitri, the Mother of the Vedas, 
of the nature of Pranava (Om), whose colour is like the burnished 
gold, who is burning with Brahma teja (the fire of Brahma), effulgent 
with thousands and thousands of rays of the midday summer Sun, 
who is of a smiling countenance adorned with jewels and ornaments, 
wearing celestial garment (purified and uninflammable by fire), and 
ready to grant blessings to Her Bhaktas; who is the bestower of 
happiness and liberation, who is peaceful and the consort of the 
Creator of the world, who is all wealth and the giver of all riches and 
prosperity, who is the Presiding Deity of the Vedas and who is the 
Vedas incarnate, I meditate on Thee. Thus reciting the Dhyanam, 



mantra and meditating on Her, one is to offer Naivedyas (offerings of 
food) to Her and then place one’s fingers on one’s head; one is to 
meditate again, and then invoke the Devi within the pot. One should 
next present fourteen things, uttering proper mantras according to 
the Vedas. Then one must perform special puja and chant hymns to 
the Devi and worship Her. The fourteen articles of worship are as 
under 


(1) Seat (Asan); (2) water for washing feet (Padya), (3) offering of 
rice and Durba grass (Arghya), (4) water for bath (Snaniya), (6) 
anointment with sandalpaste and other scents (Anulepana), (7) 
incense (Dhupa), (8) Lights (Dipa), (9) offerings of food (Naivedya), 
(10) Betels (Tambul), (11) Cool water, (12) garments, (13) 
ornaments, (14) garlands, scents, offering of water to sip, and 
beautiful bedding. While offering these articles, one is to utter the 
mantras, this beautiful wooden or golden seat, giving spiritual merits 
is being offered by me to Thee. This water from the Tirthas, this holy 
water for washing Thy feet, pleasant, highly meritorious, pure, and 
as an embodiment of Puja is being offered by me to Thee. This holy 
Arghya with Durba grass and flowers and the pure water in the 
conch-shell is being offered by me to Thee (as a work of initial 
worship). This sweet scented oil and water being offered by me to 
Thee with devotion for Thy bathing purposes. Kindly accept these. O 
Mother! This sweet-scented water Divine-like, highly pure and 
prepared of Kunkuma and other scented things I offer to Thee. O 
Parames’vari! This all-auspicious, all good and highly meritorious, 
this beautiful Dhupa, kindly take, O World Mother! This is very 
pleasant and sweet scented; therefore I offer this to Thee. O Mother! 
This light, manifesting all this Universe and the seed, as it were, to 
destroy the Darkness is being offered by me to Thee. O Devi! Kindly 
accept this delicious offering of food, highly meritorious, appeasing 
hunger, pleasant, nourishing end pleasure giving. This betel is 
scented with camphor, etc., nice, nourishing, and pleasure-giving; 
this is being offered by me to Thee. This water is nice and cool. 



appeasing the thirst and the Life of the World. So kindly accept this. 
O Devi! Kindly accept this silken garment as well as the garment 
made of Karpasa Cotton, beautifying the body and enhancing the 
beauty. Kindly accept these golden ornaments decked with jewels, 
highly meritorious, joyous, beauteous and prosperous. Kindly accept 
these fruits yielding fruits of desires, obtained from various trees and 
of various kinds. Please have this garland, all auspicious and all 
good, made of various flowers, beauteous and generating 
happiness. O Devi! Kindly accept this sweet scent, highly pleasing 
and meritorious. Please take this Sindura, the best of the ornaments, 
beautifying the forehead, highly excellent and beautiful. Kindly 
accept this holy and meritorious threads an purefied by the Vedic 
mantrams and made of highly holy threads and knitted with highly 
pure knots. Uttering thus, offer the above articles that are to be 
offered to the Devi, every time the specific seed mantra being 
uttered. Then the intelligent devotee should recite the stotras and 
subsequently of the Daksinas (presents) with devotion to the 
Brahmanas. The Radical or the Specific Seed Mantra mantra is the 
eight lettered mantra Srim Hrim Klim Svaitrai Svaha; So the sages 
know. The Stotra, as stated in the Madhyandma S'akha, gives fruits 
of all desires. I am now speaking to you of that mantra, the Life of 
the Brahmanas. Listen attentively. O Narada! Savitri was given to 
Brahma, in the ancient times of old in the region of Goloka by Krisna; 
but Savitri did not come to Brahma loka with Brahma. Then by the 
command of Krisna, Brahma praised the mother of the Vedas. And 
when She got pleased. She accepted Brahma as Her husband. 


79-87. Brahma said Thou art the everlasting existence intelligence 
and bliss; Thou art Mulaprakriti; thou art Hiranya Garbha; Thou didst 
get pleased, O Fair one! Thou art of the nature of fire and Energy; 
Thou art the Highest; Thou art the Highest Bliss, and the caste of the 
twice-born. Dost thou get appeased, O Fair One! Thou art eternal, 
dear to the Eternal; thou art of the nature of the Everlasting Bliss. O 
Devi, O Thou, the all auspicious One! O Fair One! Beest thou 



satisfied. Thou art the form of all (omnipresent)! Thou art the 
essence of all mantras of the Brahmanas, higher than the highest! 
Thou art the bestower of happiness and the liberator O Devi, O Fair 
One! Beest thou appeased. Thou art like the burning flame to the 
fuel of sins of the Brahmanas! O Thou, the Bestower of Brahma teja 
(the light of Brahma) O Devi! O Fair One! Beest appeased. By Thy 
mere remembrance, all the sins to me by body, mind and speech are 
burnt to ashes. Thus saying, the Creator of the world reached the 
assembly there. Then Savitri came to the Brahmaloka with Brahma. 
The King AsVapati chanted this stotra to Savitri and saw Her and got 
from Her the desired boons. Whosoever recites this highly sacred 
king of Stotras after Sandhya Bandanam, quickly acquires the fruits 
of studying the Vedas. 


Here ends the Twenty Sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the 
narration of Savitri in S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 27. On The Birth, Etc., Of Savitr! 


1-2. Narayana said O Narada! After having chanted the above 
hymn to the Goddess Savitri and worshipped Her in accordance with 
due rites and ceremonies, the king AsVapati saw the Devi, effulgent 
like the lustre of thousand suns. She then smilingly told the king, as 
a mother to her son, whilst all the quarters were illumined with the 
lustre of Her body 


3-14. Savitri said :-- “O King! I know your desire. Certainly I will give 
what you and your wife long for. Your chaste wife is anxious for a 
daughter, while you want a son. So, one after another, the desires of 
both of you will be fulfilled.” Thus saying, the Devi went to the 
Brahma Loka. The King also returned to his house. First a daughter 
was born to him. As the daughter was born, as if a second Laksmi 
was born after worshipping Savitri, the King kept her name as 
Savitri. As time rolled on, the daughter grew, day by day, like the 
phases of bright fortnight moon, into youth and beauty. There was a 
son of Dyumat Sena, named Satyavana, always truthful, good 
natured and endowed with various other qualifications. The daughter 
chose him for her bridegroom. The King betrothed her with jewels 
and ornaments, to Satyavana, who gladly took her home. After one 
year expired, the truthful vigorous Satyavana gladly went out, by his 
father’s command, to collect fruits and fuel. The chaste Savitri, too, 
followed him. Unfortunately Satyavana fell down from a tree and 
died. Yama, the God of Death, saw his soul as a Purusa of the size 
of one’s thumb and took it and went away. The chaste Savitri began 
to follow Him. The high souled Yama, the Foremost of the Sadhus, 
seeing Savitri following Him, addressed her sweetly O Savitri! 
Whither are you going in your this mortal coil? If you like to follow 
after all, then quit your this body. 



15-25. The mortal man, with his transient coil of these five elements, 
is not able to go to My Abode. O Chaste One! The death time of your 
husband arrived; therefore Satyavana is going to My Abode to reap 
the fruits of his Karma. Every living animal is born by his Karma. He 
dies again through his life long Karma. It is his Karma alone that 
ordains pleasure, pain, fear, sorrows, etc. By Karma, this embodied 
soul here becomes Indra; by Karma he can become a Brahma’s son. 
What more than this that Jiva, by his Karma, can be in Hari’s service 
and be free from birth and death! By one’s own Karma all sorts of 
Siddhis and immortality can be obtained; the four blessed regions as 
Visnu’s Salokya, etc., also can be obtained by Karma. What more 
than this that by Karma, a being becomes divine, human, or a King, 
or S’iva or Ganes’a! The state of Munindra, asceticism, 
Ksattriyahood, Vais’yahood, MIechhahood, moving things, stones, 
Raksasahood, Kinnaras, Kingship, becoming trees, beasts, forest 
animals, inferior animals, worms, Daityas, Danavas, Asuras, all are 
fashioned and wrought by Karma and Karma alone. O Narada! Thus 
speaking, Yama remained silent. 


Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on the 
birth, etc., of Savitri in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 28. On The Story Of Savitr! 


1-4. Narayana said O Narada! Hearing the words of Yama, the 
chaste intelligent Savitri, replied with great devotion “O 
Dharmarajan! What is Karma? Why and how is its origin? What is 
the cause of Karma? Who is the embodied soul (bound by Karma)? 
What is this body? And who is it that does Karma? What is Jhana? 
What is Buddhi? What is this Prana of this embodied JTva? What are 
the Indriyas? And what are their characteristics? And what are the 
Devatas thereof? Who is it that enjoys and who is it that makes one 
enjoy? What is this enjoyment (Bhoga)? And what is the means of 
escape from it? And what is the nature of that State when one 
escapes from enjoyment? What is the nature of Jivatma? And what 
of Paramatma? O Deva! Speak all these in detail to me.” 


5-21. Dharma said Karma is of two kinds: good and bad. The 
Karma that is stated in the Vedas as leading to Dharma is good; all 
other actions are bad. The God’s service, without any selfish ends 
(Sankalpa) and without the hope of any fruits thereof (ahaituki), is of 
such a nature as to root out all the Karmas and gives rise to the 
highest devotion to God. A man who is such a Bhakta of Brahma 
becomes liberated, so the S’rutis say. Who then does the Karma and 
who is it that enjoys? (i.e., no such body). To such a Bhakta to 
Brahma, there is no birth, death, old age, disease, sorrow nor any 
fear. O Chaste One! Bhakti is two-fold. This is stated by all in the 
S’rutis. The one leads to Nirvana and the other leads to the nature of 
Hah. The Vaisnavas want the Bhakti to Hah, i.e., the Saguna Bhakti. 
The other Yogis and the best knowers of Brahma want the Nirguna 
Bhakti. He who is the Seed of Karma, and the Bestower for ever the 
fruits of Karma, Who is the Karma Incarnate and the Mula Prakriti, is 
the Bhagavan; He is the Highest Self. He is the Material Cause of 
Karma. Know this body to be by nature liable to dissolve and die. 
Earth, air, akas’a, water, and fire; these are the threads, as it were, of 



the work of creation of Brahma, Who is of the nature of Being. “Dehi” 
or The Embodied Soul is the Doer of Karma, the Karta; he is the 
enjoyer; and Atma (self) is the prompter, the stimulator within to do 
the Karma and enjoy the fruits thereof. The experiencing of 
pleasures and pains and the varieties thereof is known as Bhoga 
(enjoyment). Liberation, Mukti is the escape therefrom. 


The knowledge by which Atma (sat) and Maya (Asat) are 
discriminated is called Jhanam (Brahma Jhanam). The knowledge is 
considered as the root discriminator of various objects of enjoyments 
(i.e., by which the various objects are at once recognised as different 
from Atman). By Buddhi is meant the right seeing of things, (as 
certain) and is considered as the seed of Jhanam. By Prana is 
known as the different Vayus in the body. And this Prana is the 
strength of the embodied. Mind is the chief, the best, of the senses, it 
is a part of IsVara; its characteristic is its doubtful uncertain state. It 
impels to all actions, irresistible. It is inascertainable, invisible; it 
obstructs the Jhana. The senses are seeing, hearing, smelling, 
touching and tasting. These are the several limbs, as it were, of the 
embodied and the impellers to all actions. They are both enemies 
and friends as they give pain (when attached to worldly objects) and 
happiness (when attached to virtuous objects) both. The Sun, Vayu, 
Earth, Brahma and others are their Devatas. The Jiva is the holder, 
the sustainer of Prana, body, etc. The Paramatma, the Highest Self, 
is the Best of all. Omnipresent, transcending the the Gunas, and 
beyond Prakriti. He is the Cause of all causes and He is the Brahma 
Itself. O Chaste One! I have replied, according to the S’astras to all 
your questions. These are Jhanas of the Jhanins. O Child! Now go 
back to your house at pleasure. 


22-30. Savitri said Whither shall I go, leaving my Husband and 
Thee, the Ocean of Knowledge? Please oughtest to answer the 
queries that I now put to Thee. What wombs do the Jivas get in 



response to which Karmas? What Karmas lead to the Heavens? And 
what Karnnas lead to various hells? Which Karmas lead to Mukti? 
And which Karmas give Bhakti? What Karmas make one Yogi and 
what Karmas inflict diseases? Which Karmas make one’s life long? 
or short? Which Karmas again make one happy? And what Karmas 
make one miserable? Which Karmas make one deformed in one’s 
limbs, one-eyed, blind, deaf, lame or idiotic? Which Karmas again 
make one mad? Make one very much avaricious or of a stealing 
habit? What Karmas make one possess Siddhis? Or make one earn 
the four Lokas Salokya, etc.? What Karmas make one a Brahmin or 
an ascetic? Or make one go to Heaven or Vaikuntha? What Karmas 
enable one to go to Goloka, the par excellence and free from all 
diseases? How many are the hells? What are their names and how 
do they appear? How long will one have to remain in each hell? and 
what Karmas lead to what diseases? O Deva, now tell me about 
these that I have asked to you and oblige. 


Here ends the Twenty-Eighth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the story 
of Savitri in S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 29. On The Anecdote Of Savitr!, On 
Gifts And On The Effects Of Karmas 


1. Narayana said Yama got thunderstruck at these queries of 
Savitri. He then began to describe, with a smiling countenance, the 
fruition of the several works of the Jivas. 


2-8. He said “O Child! You are now a daughter only twelve years 
old. But you speak of wisdom like the Highest Jhanins and Yogis, 
Sanaka and others. O Child! By virtue of the boon granted by Savitri, 
you have become incarnate of Her in part. The King AsVapati got 
you before by performing severe penances. As Laksmi is dear and 
fortunate with regard to Visnu, as Mahadevi is to Mahadeva, Aditi to 
Kas’yapa, Ahalya to Gautama, so you are to Satyavana in respect of 
affection and good-luck and other best qualities. As S’achi is to 
Mahendra, as Rohini is to Moon, as Rati is to Kama, as Svaha is to 
Fire, as Svadha is to the Piths, as Sanjha is to the Sun, as Varunani 
is to Varuna, as Daksina is to Yajha, as Earth is to Varaha, as 
Devasena is to Kartika, so you are fortunate and blessed with 
respect to Satyavana. O Savitri! I myself grant you this boon of my 
own accord. Now ask other boons. O highly fortunate One! I will fulfil 
all your desires.” 


9-12. Savitri said “O Noble One! Let there be one hundred sons of 
mine by Satyavana. This is the boon that I want. Let there be one 
hundred sons of my Father as well; let my Father-in-law get back his 
(lost) eyesight and may he get back his lost kingdom. This is another 
boon that I want. Thou art the Lord of the world. So grant me this 
boon, too, that I may have this my very body for a lakh years when I 
may go to Vaikuntha with Satyavana. Now I am eager to hear the 



various fruitions of Karmas of several Jivas. Kindly narrate them and 
oblige.” 


13-70. Dharma said You are very chaste. So what you have 
thought will verily come to pass. Now I describe the fruition of 
Karmas of the JTvas. Listen. Excepting this holy land of Bharata, 
nowhere do the people enjoy wholly the fruition of their two-fold 
Karmas, good and bad. It is only the Suras, Daityas, Danavas, 
Gandharvas, Raksasas, and men that do Karmas. The beasts and 
the other JTvas do not do Karmas. The special JTvas, e.g., men, etc., 
experience the fruition of their Karmas in Heavens, hells and in all 
the other Yonis (wombs). Specially, as the JTvas roam in all the 
different Yonis, they enjoy their Karmas, good or bad, as the case 
may be, carved in their previous births. The good works get fructified 
in Heavens; and the bad works lead the JTvas to hells. This Karma 
can be got rid of by Bhakti. This Bhakti is of two kinds (1) Nirguna 
of the nature of Nirvana; and (2) towards Prakriti, of the astute of 
Brahma, and with Maya inherent. Diseases come as the result of 
bad and ignorant actions and healthiness comes from good and 
certain scientific Karmas. Similar are the remarks for short and long 
lives for happiness and pain. By bad works, one becomes blind or 
deformed in body. So by doing excellent Karmas, one acquires 
Siddhis, etc.. These are spoken generally. I will now speak in detail; 
listen. This is very secret even in Puranas and Smritis. In this 
Bharatavarsa men are the best of all the various classes of beings. 
The Brahmans are the best of men and are best in all Kinds of 
Karmas. They are responsible, too, for their actions. O Chaste One! 
Of the Brahmins, again, those that are attached to the Brahmanas 
are the best. The Brahmanas are of two kinds as they are Sakama 
(with desires) or Niskama (without desires). The NiskamT Brahmanas 
are superior to the SakamT Brahmanas. For the SakamTs are to 
enjoy the fruits of their Karmas, while the NiskamT Brahmanas are 
perfectly free from any such disturbances (they have not to come 
back to this field of Karma). The Niskama Bhakta after they quit their 



bodies, go to a place free from sickness or disease, pure and 
perfect. From there they do not come back. The Niskama Bhaktas 
assuming the divine forms go to the Goloka and worship the Highest 
God, the Highest Self, the two-armed Krisna. The Sakami Vaisnavas 
go to Vaikuntha; but they come back in Bharata and get into the 
wombs of the twice-born. By degrees they also become Niskama 
when they certainly acquire pure undefiled Bhakti. The Brahmanas 
and Vaisnavas that are Sakamis in all the births, never get that pure 
undefiled intellect and never get the devotion to Visnu. The 
Brahmanas, living in the Tirthas (sacred places of pilgrimages) and 
attached to Tapas go to Brahmaloka (the region of Brahma); they 
again come down to Bharata. Those that are devotedly attached to 
their own Dharma (religion) and reside in places other than Tirthas, 
go to Satyaloka and again come to Bharata. The Brahmanas, 
following their own Dharma and devoted to the Sun go to the world 
of the Sun and again come to Bharata. And those who are devoted 
to Mula Prakriti and devoted to Niskama Dharma go to Mani Dvipa 
and have not to come back from thither. The Bhaktas of S’iva, S’akti, 
and Gane’sa, and attached to their own Dharmas respectively go to 
the S’iva Loka and return from thence. Those Brahmanas that 
worship the other Devas and attached to their own Dharmas go to 
those regions of theirs respectively and again come to Bharata. 
Attached to their own Dharmas, the Niskami Bhaktas of Hari go by 
their Bhakti step by step to the region of S’ri Hari. Those that are not 
attached to their own Dharmas and do not worship the Devas and 
always bent on doing things as they like without any regard to their 
Acharas go certainly to hells. No doubt in this. The Brahmanas and 
the other three Varnas, attached to their own Dharmas all enjoy the 
fruits of their good works. But those who do not do their Svadharma, 
go verily down into hells. They do not came to Bharata for their 
rebirth, they enjoy their fruits of Karmas in hells! Therefore the four 
Varnas ought to follow their own Dharmas of the Brahmanas, they 
are to remain attached to their own Dharmas and give their 
daughters in marriage to the similarly qualified Brahmanas. They 
then go to the Chandraloka (the region of the Moon). There they 
remain for the life periods of the fourteen Indras. And if the girl be 



given, with ornaments, the results obtained would be twice. If the girl 
be given with a desire in view, then that world is obtained; but if the 
girl be given without any desire but to fulfil the God’s will and God’s 
satisfaction only, then one would not have to go to that world. They 
go to Visnu Loka, bereft of the fruits of all Karmas. Those that give to 
the Brahmanas pasture ground and cattle, silver, gold, garment, 
fruits and water, go to the Chandraloka and live there for one 
Manvantara. They live long in those regions by virtue of that merit. 
Again those that give gold, cows, copper, etc., to the holy 
Brahmanas, go to the Surya Loka (the region of the Sun) and live 
there for one Ayuta years (10,000 years), free from diseases, etc., 
for a long time. Those that give lands and lots of wealth to the 
Brahmins, go to the Visnu Loka and to the beautiful S’veta Dvipa 
(one of the eighteen minor divisions of the known continents). And 
there they live as long as the Sun and Moon exist. O Muni! The 
meritorious persons live long in that wide region. Note S’veta 
Dvipa may mean Vaikuntha, where Visnu resides. Those who give 
with devotion dwelling places to the Brahmanas, go to the happy 
Visnu Loka. And there, in that great Visnu Loka, they live for years 
equal to the number of molecules, in that house. He who offers a 
dwelling house in honour of any Deva, goes to the region of that 
Deva and remains there for a number of years equivalent to the 
number of particles in that house. The lotus-born Brahma said that if 
one offers a royal palace, one obtains a result four times and if one 
offers a country, one gets the result one hundred times that; again if 
one offers an excellent country, twice as much merit one acquires. 
One who dedicates a tank for the expiation of all one’s sins, one 
lives in Janar Loka (one of the pious regions) for a period equivalent 
to the number of particles therein). If any man offers a Vapi (a well) 
in preference to other gifts, one gets ten fold fruits thereby. If one 
offers seven VapTs, one acquires the fruits of offering one tank. A 
VapT is one which is four thousand Dhanus long and which is as 
much wide or less (Note Dhanu equals a measure of four hastas). 
If offered to a good bridegroom, then the giving of a daughter in 
marriage is equivalent to a dedication of ten Vapis. And if the girl be 
offered with ornaments, twice the merits accrue. The same merit 



accrues in clearing the bed of the mud of a pond as in digging it. So 
for the VapT (well). O Chaste One! He who plants an AsVattha tree 
and dedicates it to a godly purpose, lives for one Ayuta years in 
Tapar Loka. O Savitri! He who dedicates a flower garden for the 
acquirement of all sorts of good, lives for one Ayuta years in Dhruva 
Loka. 


O Chaste One! He who gives a Vimana (any sort of excellent 
carriage) in honour of Visnu, in this Hindoosthan, lives for one 
Manvantara in Visnuloka. And if one gives a Vimana of variegated 
colours and workmanship, four times the result accrues. And one 
who gives a palanquin, acquires half the fruits. Again if anybody 
gives, out of devotion, a swinging temple (the Dol Mandir) to 
Bhagavan S’ri Hah, lives for one hundred Manvantras, in the region 
of Visnu. O Chaste One! He who makes a gift of a royal road, 
decorated with palatial buildings on either side, lives with great 
honour and love in that Indraloka for one Ayuta years. Equal results 
follow whether the above things are offered to the Gods or to the 
Brahmanas. He enjoys that which he gives. No giving, no enjoying. 
After enjoying the heavenly pleasures, etc., the virtuous person 
takes birth in Bharata as a Brahmin or in other good families, in due 
order, and ultimately in the Brahmana families. The virtuous 
Brahmana, after he has enjoyed the heavenly pleasures, takes his 
birth again in Bharata in Brahmana, Ksattriya or in Vais’ya families. A 
Ksattriya or a Vais’ya can never obtain Brahmanahood, even if he 
performs asceticism for one Koti Kalpas. This is stated in the S’rutis. 
Without enjoying the fruits, no Karma can be exhausted even in one 
hundred Koti Kalpas. So the fruits of the Karmas must be enjoyed, 
whether they be auspicious or inauspicious. By the help of seeing 
the Devas and seeing the Tirthas again and again, purity is acquired. 
O Savitri! So now I have told you something. What more d o you 
want to hear? Say. 



Here ends the Twenty-Ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the 
anecdote of Savitri on the fruits of making gifts and on the effects of 
Karmas in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 30. On The Conversation Between 
SA viTRi And Yama And On The Fruition Of 
Karmas 


1. Savitn said “O Dharmarajan! Kindly tell me in detail about those 
works that lead the meritorious persons to the Heavens and various 
other spheres.” 


2-20. Dharmaraj said O Child! He who gives rice and food to the 
Brahmanas in India, goes to the S’ivaloka where he dwells with great 
respect for years equivalent to the measure of that food. This “Anna- 
dana” (the giving of boiled rice and other eatables) is a great dan 
(charity) and this can be done not only to the Brahmanas but to the 
other castes also, where similar results also follow. There is, or will 
be, no other charity superior to this charity of anna (rice, boiled it 
may be and other eatables). For here no distinction is made as to 
what caste will get it or not, nor the discrimination of time, when to 
give such a charity. O Child! Seats (Asanas) given to the Devas and 
the Brahmanas, carry the donor to the Visnu Loka, where he dwells 
for Ayuta years with great respect and love. Giving excellent cows 
yielding milk to Brahmanas take the donor to Visnuloka, where he is 
glorified and remains for years equivalent to the number of pores in 
that cow or those cows. And if cows be given on a meritorious day, 
four times the merits accrue, and if given in a sacred place of 
pilgrimage, hundred times the result occurs; and if given in a tirath, 
where Narayana is worshipped, koti times the results accrue. He 
who gives with devotion, cows to the Brahmanas in Bharata, remains 
in the Chandraloka for one Ayuta years and is glorified. He who 
gives a two-mouthed cow to a Brahmana, goes to Visnuloka and 
remains there for as many years as there exist the numbers of hairs 
on the body of that cow and is glorified. A gift of a beautiful white 
umbrella to a Brahmana makes one go to Varunaloka for Ayuta 



years where he remains with great pleasure. Giving garments to the 
diseased Brahmanas makes one fit to remain with glory in Vayuloka 
for one ayuta years. Giving to a Brahmana the S’alagrama with 
garments makes one remain with glory in Vaikuntha as long as there 
exist the Sun and Moon. Giving a beautiful bedding to a Brahmana, 
glorifies a man in the Chandraloka as long as there exist the Sun 
and Moon. To give lights to the Devas and Brahmana glorifies a man 
in Agniloka (the region of Fire) for one Manvantara. To give 
elephants to the Brahmanas in Bharata, makes one sit in the same 
throne with Indra for his life period. 


Giving horses to the Brahmanas makes one remain in Varunaloka 
for fourteen Indra’s life periods. Giving a good palanquin to a 
Brahmana makes one remain in the Varunaloka for fourteen Indra’s 
life-periods. Giving a good site or a good orchard to a Brahmana 
leads one to the Vayuloka where he remains with glory for one 
Manvantara. Giving a white chamara and fan to a Brahmana, leads 
the donor to the Vayuloka where he remains for one ayuta years. 
Giving grains and jewels make one long-lived and both the donors 
and receivers go certainly to Vaikuntha. 


21-40. He who always recites the name of S’ri Hari, lives for ever 
and Death goes far far away from him. The intelligent man that 
celebrates the Swinging Festival (Dol Jatra) in the last quarter of the 
Full Moon night in this land of Bharata, becomes liberated while 
living, enjoying pleasures in this world, goes in the end to Visnuloka, 
where he remains for one hundred Manvantaras; there is no doubt in 
this. If the Swinging Festival be performed under the influence of the 
asterism Uttara Phalguni then the fruits become doubled; this is the 
saying of Brahma Himself. The performer lives to the end of a 
Kalpa. To give til (Sesamum) to a Brahman, leads one to S’iva Loka, 
where one enjoys for a number of years equal to the number of til. 
Then one is born in a good yoni and becomes longlived and happy. 



To give a copper plate yields double the effect. To give in India a 
chaste wife with garments and ornaments to a Brahman (and then to 
purchase her with an equivalent in gold) leads one to Chandra Loka 
where one remains for fourteen Indra’s life periods and enjoys day 
and night the celestial Apsaras. Thence the donor goes to the 
Gandharba Loka for one ayuta years and day and night enjoys 
Urvas’i. Then he gets for thousand births chaste, fortunate, wealthy, 
gentle and sweet-speaking, beautiful wives. He who gives nice and 
delicious fruits to the Brahmanas, remains with glory in the Indra 
Loka for a number of years equivalent to the fruits. He gets again a 
good Yoni (birth) and gets excellent sons. To give thousand trees 
while there are fruits on them, or nice fruits only to the Brahmanas, 
makes one enjoy the Heavens for a long, long time and he then 
comes back to Bharata. To give various things and good edifices 
with grains, etc., to the Brahmanas leads one to the regions of the 
Devas where he remains for one hundred Manvantaras. Then he 
gets a very good birth and becomes the master of abundant wealth. 
He who gives with devotion to the Brahmanas lands certainly goes 
for one hundred Manvantaras and remains there in glory for one 
hundred Manvantras; and, coming again to be born in good wombs, 
they become Kings. The earth does not leave him for hundred births. 
He becomes prosperous, wealthy and possesses many sons and 
becomes the lord of his subjects. He who gives a good village with 
pasture land and cows, dwells with glory in Vaikuntha for one lakh 
manvantaras. Then he gets a good birth (becomes born in a high 
caste family) and obtains a lakh villages. The earth quits him not 
even if he be born a lakh times. (This is very bad then, to one who 
does not like to be born again). 


41-60. He who gives a village inhabited by good and obedient 
subjects with ripe excellent grains, various tanks, trees and adorned 
with fruits and leaves dwells in Kailasa with great glory for ten lakh 
Indra’s life periods. Getting again born in a high family, he becomes 
Raja Dhiraja in Bharata and obtains Niyuta towns. There is no doubt 



in this. The earth quits him not, even if he be born ayuta times. 

Really he gets the highest prosperity in this earth. He who gives to a 
Brahmana one hundred towns and countries, inhabited by good or 
mediocre subjects, with wells, tanks, and various trees, remains with 
glory in Vaikuntha for one koti manvantaras. Then he becomes born 
in this earth in a high caste family, becomes the Lord of Jambudvipa 
and attains in this earth great prosperity like Indra. The earth quits 
him not even if he comes here Koti times; in reality he is a Mahatma 
(a great soul man), RajrajesVara (the Lord of Kings) and lives upto 
the end of a Kalpa. He who gives his whole property to a Brahmin, 
gets in the end four times that; there is no doubt in this. He who 
gives Jambu Dvipa to an ascetic Brahmana, gets undoubtedly in the 
end one hundred times the fruit. If you give away Jambu DvTpa, the 
whole earth; if you travel all the Tirthas, if you perform all sorts of 
asceticisms, if you give shelter to all, if you make gifts of all sorts, 
know that you will have to come again to be reborn in this earth; but 
if you become a devotee of Mula Prakriti, then be sure that you won’t 
have to come here and be reborn. The devotees of Mula Prakriti go 
to Mani DvTpa, the highest place of S’rT Bhuvanes’arT DevT and 
remain there and they see the fall of innumerable Brahmas. The 
worshippers of the DevT Mantra when they quit their mortal coils, 
assume divine appearances endowed with Bibhutis (manifestations 
of powers) and free from birth, death and old age, assume the 
Sarupya (the same form) of the DevT and remain in Her Service. 
They reside in ManidvTpa and see the part Pralayas. The Devas die, 
the Siddhas die, the whole universe vanishes; but the DevT Bhaktas 
never die and they remain free form birth, death, and old age. He 
who offers TulasT leaf to Bhagavan Hah in the month of Kartik 
resides for three yugas in the temple of Hah. Getting again a good 
birth, he acquires the devotion to S’rT Hah and becomes the 
Foremost of those who restrain their senses. He who bathes in the 
Ganges early before the rising of the Sun remains in enjoyment in 
the temple of Hari for sixty thousand yugas. Getting again a good 
birth, he gets the Visnu Mantra, and, quitting his mortal coil, 
becomes united with the Feet of S’rT Hari. 



61-77. He has not to come back from Vaikuntha to this earth. He 
remains in Hari’s Service and gets the same form of Hah. He who 
bathes daily in the Ganges, becomes purified like the Sun and gets 
the result of performing the Horse-sacrifice at every step. The earth 
becomes purified by the dust of his feet and he enjoys in Vaikuntha 
as long as the Sun and Moon exist. Then again he becomes born in 
a good and beautiful womb, and is liberated by acquiring the 
devotion to Hari. He becomes very energetic and the foremost of the 
ascetics, pure, religious, learned, and self-restrained. When the Sun 
comes midway between Pisces and Cancer and heats intensely the 
earth, the man who in Bharata gives cool water to drink to the 
people, resides in happiness in Kailas’a for fourteen Indra’s life 
periods. Getting again a good birth here, he becomes beautiful, 
happy, devoted to S’iva, energetic and expert in the Vedas, and the 
Vedangas. He who gives to a Brahmana the S’aktu (sattu). in the 
month of Vais’akhe enjoys in the S’iva temple for as many years as 
there are number of particles in that quantity of sattu (powders in 
parched oat). He who performs the Krisna Janmastami vow in this 
Bharata, is freed from the sins incurred in his hundred births; there is 
no doubt in this. The observer of the vow remains in great enjoyment 
in Vaikuntha for fourteen Indra’s life periods, gets again a good birth 
here and acquires Hari Bhakti. He who performs the S’ivaratri vow in 
this Bharata Varsa, resides with great joy in S’iva Loka for seven 
manvantaras. He who offers the Bel leaves to S’iva in S’ivaratri time, 
resides with great joy in S’iva’s Abode for as many yugas as there 
are number of leaves. Getting again a good birth here, he acquires 
the devotion to S’iva and becomes learned, prosperous and 
possesses sons, subjects and lands. He who performs vow and 
worships S’ankara in the month of Chaitra or Magha and who, with a 
branch of a tree in hand, dances day and night for one month, or half 
a month, for ten days or for seven days, dwells in S’iva Loka for as 
many yugas as the number of days he dances. He who performs the 
vow of S’ri Rama Navami, lives in the abode of Visnu for seven 
Manvantaras in great joy. Getting again a good birth, he becomes 



devoted to S’n Rama, the foremost of those who have self restraint 
and he becomes very wealthy. 


78-87. He who performs the Saradiya Puja (the great Durga Puja in 
the month of autumn) of the Mula Prakriti with incense, lights, 
offerings of food, and animal sacrifices of buffaloes, goats, sheep, 
rhinoceros, frogs or other animals, together with dancing, music, and 
various other auspicious things, resides in the S’iva Loka for seven 
Manvantaras. Getting an excellent birth, and a pure understanding, 
he gets unbounded prosperity, sons and, no doubt, grandsons and 
he becomes a very powerful sovereign possessing many horses and 
elephants. There is no doubt in this. Again he who worships daily 
with devotion for a fortnight beginning from the eighth day of the 
bright fortnight the Maha Devi Laksmi, remains in the region of 
Goloka for fourteen Indra’s life periods. Then, obtaining an excellent 
birth, he becomes a sovereign. He who in the full moon night in the 
month of Kartik prepares a Rasa mandal with one hundred Gopas 
and Gopis and worships S’ri Krisna and Radha in S’alagrama or in 
images with sixteen varieties of offerings remains in Goloka for 
Brahma’s life-time and coming again to Bharata acquires an 
unflinching devotion to S’ri Krisna. 


88-99. And when this Bhakti becomes greatly intensified, ho gets 
initiated into S’ri Hah mantra and after quitting his mortal coil, he 
goes to the Goloka. Then he gets the Sarupya (the same form) of 
Krisna and becomes the chief Parisad (attendant of Krisna) and, 
becoming free from old age, he has no fear, to fall again down to this 
earth. He who observes the Ekadas’i day, remains fasting and 
performing penances in the bright or dark eleventh day, remains in 
Vaikuntha in great enjoyment and comfort. Then, again coming into 
this Bharata he becomes a devotee of Hari. And when that Bhakti is 
intensified he becomes solely devoted to Hari and quitting his mortal 
coil, goes again to the Goloka and gets the Sarupya of Krisna and 



becomes His Parisada (attendant). Then, freed of old age and death, 
he does not fall. He who worships Indra in the month of Bhadra in 
the twelfth day of the white fortnight is worshipped in the regions of 
Indra for sixty thousand years. He who performs in Bharata the 
worship of the Sun on Sunday Sankranti (when the Sun goes from 
one sign to another) and the bright seventh Tithi, according to due 
rules and ceremonies and eats the food called Havisyanna (rice 
boiled in ghee), dwells in the Suryaloka for fourteen Indra’s life 
periods. Then coming to Bharata, he becomes free from all diseases 
and becomes prosperous. He who worships Savitri on the fourteenth 
day of the black fortnight dwells in the region of Brahma for seven 
Manvantaras with great eclat and glory. Coming again to Bharata he 
enjoys beauty, unequalled valour, long life, knowledge and 
prosperity. He who worships on the fifth day of the bright fortnight in 
the month of Magha, with his senses controlled and full of devotion, 
the Devi Sarasvati with sixteen articles of food, resides in Mani 
DvTpa for one day and one night of Brahma. 


100-140. On getting re-birth, he becomes a poet and a learned man. 
He who daily gives with devotion for his whole life, cow and gold to a 
Brahmana dwells in Visnu Loka for twice as many years as there are 
the numbers of hairs on the bodies of these cows and plays and 
jests with Visnu and doing auspicious things he finds pleasure. In the 
end he comes again to this Bharata and becomes the King of Kings. 
He becomes fortunate, prosperous, possesses many sons, becomes 
learned, full of knowledge and happy in every way. He who feeds a 
Brahmana here with sweetmeats goes to Visnu Loka and enjoys 
there for as many years as there are hairs on the body of the 
Brahmin. In the end he comes again to Bharata and becomes happy, 
wealthy, learned, long lived, fortunate and very powerful. He who 
utters the name of Hah or gives the name (i.e., the mantra) of Hah to 
others, is worshipped in Visnu loka for as many yugas as the number 
of times, the name or mantra was uttered. Coming again to Bharata, 
he becomes happy and wealthy. And if such things be done in 



Narayana Ksettra, koti times the above results ensue. He who 
repeats the name of Hari koti times in Narayana Ksettra, becomes, 
no doubt, freed of all sins and liberated while living and he will not 
get rebirth. He lives always in Vaikuntha. He gets the Salokya (the 
same region of Visnu), is not liable to fall, becomes a Bhakta of 
Visnu. He who daily worships the earthen phallic symbol (after 
making it daily) for his whole life, goes to the S’iva Loka and dwells 
there, for as many years as there are the number of particles of 
earth. Getting rebirth he becomes the King of Kings. He who 
worships daily the S’alagrama stone and eats the water (after 
bathing it) is glorified in Vaikuntha for one hundred Brahma’s lives 
and becomes born again. When he acquires the rare Hari Bhakti and 
quiting his mortal coil goes to Visnu Loka, whence he is not to return. 
He who performs all the Tapasyas (asceticims) and observes all the 
vratas (vows), dwells in Vaikuntha for fourteen Indra’s life peroids. 
Getting rebirth in Bharata he becomes the King of Kings and then he 
becomes liberated. He is not to return any more. He who bathes in 
all the Tirthas and makes a journey round the whole world, gets 
Nirvana. He is not reborn. He who performs the Horse-Sacrifice in 
this holy land Bharata enjoys half the Indraship for as many years as 
there are hairs on the body of the horse. He who performs a 
Rajasuya Sacrifice, gets four times the above result. Of all the 
sacrifices, the Devi Yajha, or the Sacrifice before the Devi is the 
Best. O Fair One! Of old, Visnu, Brahma, Indra and when 
Tripurasura was killed, Maha Deva did such a sacrifice. O Beautiful 
One! This sacrifice before the S’akti is the highest and best of all the 
sacrifices. There is nothing like this in the three worlds. This Great 
Sacrifice was done of yore by Daksa when he collected abundant 
sacrificial materials of all sorts. And a quarrel ensued on this account 
between Daksa and S’ankara. The Brahmins conducting the 
sacrifice cursed the Nandi and others. And Nandi cursed the 
Brahmanas. Mahadeva, therefore, disallowed the going on of 
sacrifice and brought it to a dead stop. Of yore the Prajapati Daksa 
did this Devi Yajha; it was done also by Dharma, Kas’yapa; Ananta, 
Kardama, Svayambhuva Manu, his son Priyavrata, S’iva, Sanat 
Kumara, Kapila and Dhruva. The performance of this sacrifice brings 



fruits equal to performing thousands and thousands of Rajasuya 
sacrifices. Therefore there is no other sacrifice greater than this Devi 
Yajha. One becomes surely endowed with a long life of one hundred 
years and is liberated while living. He becomes equal to Visnu in 
knowledge, energy, strength, and asceticism. This is as true as 
anything. O Child! This Devi Yajha is the best and highest of all the 
sacrifices as Visnu is the highest amongst the Devas; Narada, 
amongst the Vaisnavas; the Vedas, amongst all the S’astras; the 
Brahmanas amongst all the castes; the Ganges amongst the sacred 
places of pilgrimages, S’iva amongst the Holy of Holies, the Ekadas’i 
vow amongst all the Vratas; Tulasi, amongst all the flowers; the 
Moon, amongst the asterisms; Garuda, amongst the birds; Prakriti, 
Radha, Sarasvati and Earth amongst the females; the mind, 
amongst the quick-going and restless senses; Brahma, amongst the 
Prajapatis; Brahma, amongst all the subjects; Vrindraban, amongst 
all the forests; Bharat Varsa, amongst all the Varsas; Laksmi, 
amongst the prosperous; Sarasvati, amongst the learned; Durga, 
amongst the chaste; Radhika, amongst the fortunate. If one hundred 
horse sacrifices are performed, Indrahood is sure to be obtained. It is 
by the influence of bathing in all the Tirthas, performing all the 
sacrifices, observing all the Vratas, practising all the austerities, 
studying all the Vedas and circumambulating the whole earth, that 
this Highest S’akti’s service is obtained and this service of S’akti is 
the direct cause of Mukti (liberation). To worship the lotus-feet of the 
Devi is the best and highest, is stated in all the Puranas, in all the 
Vedas, and in all the Itihasas. To sing the glories of Mula Prakriti, to 
meditate on Her, to chant Her Name and attributes, to remember Her 
stotras, bow down before Her, to repeat Her Name, and to drink daily 
Her Padodoka (water after washing Her feet) and the offerings 
already offered to Her, these are approved of by all; and everyone 
desires this. So worship, worship this Mula Prakriti, Who is of the 
nature of Brahma, and, lo! Who is again endowed with Maya. O 
Child! Take your husband and live happily with him in your home. O 
Child! Thus I have described to you the fruition of the Karmas. This 
is auspicious to every human being, desired by all and approved of 



by all. The Real Knowledge springs from this. There is no doubt in 
this. 

Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the 
conversation between Savitri and Yama and on the fruition of 
Karmas in the Great Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 31. On The Yama’s Giving S’akti 
Mantra To Savitr! 


1-2. Narayana said O Narada! Hearing thus the supreme nature 
of Mula Prakriti from Dharmaraja Yama, the two eyes of Savitri were 
filled with tears of joy and her whole body was filled with a thrill of 
rapture, joy and ecstacy. She again addressed Yama “O 
Dharmaraja! To sing the glories of Mula Prakriti is the only means of 
saving all. This takes away the old age and death of both the 
speaker and the hearer. 


3-12. This is the Supreme Place of the Danavas, the Siddhas, the 
ascetics. This is the Yoga of the Yogins and this is studying the 
Vedas of the Vaidiks. Nothing can compare even to one sixteenth of 
the sixteenth parts of the (full) merits of those who are in S’akti’s 
Service; call it Mukti, immortality, or attaining endless Siddhis, 
nothing can come to it. O Thou, the foremost of the Knowers of the 
Vedas! I have heard by and by everything from Thee. Now describe 
to me how to worship Mula Prakriti and what are the ends of karmas, 
auspicious and inauspicious.” Thus saying, the chaste Savitri bowed 
down her head and began to praise Yama in stotras according to the 
Vedas. She said “O Dharmarajan! The Sun practised of yore very 
hard austerities at Puskara and worshipped Dharma. On this, 
Dharma Himself became born of Surya as his son. And Thou art that 
son of Surya, the incarnation of Dharma. So I bow down to Thee. 
Thou art the Witness of all the Jivas; Thou seest them equally; 
hence Thy name is Samana. I bow down to Thee. Sometimes Thou 
by Thy own will takest away the lives of beings. Hence Thy name is 
Kritanta. Obeisance to Thee! Thou boldest the rod to distribute 
justice and pronounce sentence on them and to destroy the sins of 
the Jivas; hence Thy name is Dandadhara; so I bow down to Thee. 
(Note :-- Any Jiva, in course of his travelling towards Mukti, can 
expect to pass through the stage Yamaship; and if he pleases, he 



can become a Yama.) At all times Thou destroyest the universe. 
None can resist Thee. Hence Thou art named Kala; so obeisance to 
Thee! Thou art an ascetic, devoted to Brahma, self-controlled, and 
the distributor of the fruits of Karmas to the Jivas; Thou restrainest 
Thy senses. Hence Thou art called Yama. Therefore I bow down to 
Thee. 


13-17. Thou art delighted with Thy Own Self; Thou art omniscient; 
Thou art the Tormentor of the sinners and the Friend of the Virtuous. 
Hence Thy name is Punya Mitra; so I bow down to Thee. Thou art 
born as a part of Brahma; the fire of Brahma is shining through Thy 
body. Thou dost meditate on Para Brahma, Thou art the Lord. 
Obeisance to Thee!” O Muni! Thus praising Yama, She bowed down 
at the feet of Him. Yama gave her the mantra of Mula Prakriti. How 
to worship Her and He began to recite the fruition of good Karmas. O 
Narada! He who recites these eight hymns to Yama early in the 
morning, getting up from his bed, is freed of the fear of death. Rather 
he becomes freed of all his sins. So much so, that even if he be a 
veritable awful sinner and if he recites daily with devotion this 
Yamastakam, Yama purifies him thoroughly. 


Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Yama’s 
giving S’akti Mantra to Savitri in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 32. On The Enumeration Of Various 
Hells For Sinners 


1-28. Narayana said Then, initiating her with the Great Seed, the 
Adi Radical Mantra of the Maha S’akti, S’ri BhuvanesVari in 
accordance with due rules, the son of Surya began to recite the 
various effects of various Karmas, auspicious and inauspicious. 
Never do the persons go to hell when they perform good Karmas; it 
is only the bad works that lead men to hells. The different Puranas 
narrate various heavens. The JTvas go to those places as the effects 
of their various good Karmas. The good Karmas do not lead men to 
hells; but the bad Karmas do lead them veritably to various hideous 
hells. In different S’astras, different hell-pits are ascertained. 

Different works lead men to different hells. O Child! Those hell-pits 
are very wide, deep, painful and tormenting, very horrible and ugly. 
Of these, eighty six pits or Kundas are prominent. Many other 
Kundas exist. Now listen to the names of the Kundas mentioned in 
the Vedas. Their names are Vahni Kunda, Tapta Kunda, Ksara 
Kunda, Bhayanaka Kunda, Vit Kunda, Mutra Kunda, S’lesma Kunda, 
Gara Kunda, Dusika Kunda, Vasa Kunda, S’ukra Kunda, S’onita 
Kunda, As’ru Kunda, Gatramala Kunda, Karnamala Kunda, Majja 
Kunda, Mamsa Kunda, impassable Nakra Kunda, Loma Kunda, 
Kes’a Kunda, impassable Asthi Kunda, Tamra Kunda, the 
exceedingly hot and painful Lauha Kunda (the pit of molten iron), 
Charma Kunda, the hot Sura Kunda, sharp Thorny Kunda, Visa 
Kunda, the hot Taila Kunda, very heavy Astra Kunda, Krimi Kunda, 
Puya Kunda, terrible Sarpa Kunda, Mas’aka Kunda, Dams’a Kunda, 
dreadful Garala Kunda, Vajra Damstra Vris’chika Kunda, S’ara 
Kunda, Sula Kunda, awful Khadga Kunda, Gola Kunda, Nakra 
Kunda, sorrowful Kaka Kunda, Manthana Kunda, Vija Kunda, painful 
Vajra Kunda, hot Pats’ana Kunda, sharp Pas’ana Kunda, Lala 
Kunda, Masi Kunda, Chakra Kunda, Vakra Kunda, very terrible 
Kurma Kunda, Jvala Kunda, Bhasma Kunda, Dagdha Kunda, and 
others. Besides these, there are the Taptasuchi, Asipatra, 



Ksuradhara, Suchimukha, Gokhamukha, Kumbhipaka, Kalasutra, 
Matsyoda, Krimi, Kantuka, Pams’ubhojya, Pas’avesta, Sulaprota, 
Prakampana, Ulkamakha, Andhakupa, Vedhana, Tadana, 
Jalarandhra, Dehachurna, Dalana, S’osana, Kasa, S’urpa, 
Jvalamukha, Dhumandha, Nagavestana and various others. O 
Savitri! The Kundas give much pain and torment greatly the sinners; 
they are under the constant watch of innumerable servants. They 
hold rods in their hands; some of them have nooses; others hold 
clubs, S’aktis, awful scimitars; they are fierce fanatics, maddened 
with vanity. All are filled with Tamogunas, merciless, irresistible, 
energetic, fearless and tawny-eyed (like copper). Some of them are 
Yogis; some are Siddhas, they assume various forms. When the 
sinners are about to die, they see these servants of Yama. But those 
who do their own duties, who are S’aktas, Sauras, or Ganapatyas or 
those who are virtuous Siddha Yogis, they never see the servants of 
Yama. Those who are engaged in their own Dharmas, who are 
possessed of wisdom, who are endowed with knowledge, who are 
mentally strong, who are untouched by fear, who are endowed with 
the feelings of the Devas, and those who are real Vaisnavas, they 
never see these servants of Yama. O Chaste One! Thus I have 
enumerated to you the Kundas. Now hear who live in the Kundas. 


Here ends the Thirty-second Chapter of the Ninth Book on the 
enumeration of various hells for sinners in the Mahapuranam S’ri 
Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 33. On The Description Of The 
Destinies Of Different Sinners In Different 
Hells 


1-19. Dharmarajan said Those that are in Hari’s service, pure, the 
Siddhas in Yoga (those that have attained success in Yoga), the 
performers of Vratas (vows), the chaste, the ascetics, the 
Brahmacharis never go to hells. There is no doubt in this. Those 
persons that are proud of their strong positions and who use very 
harsh burning words to their friends, they go to Vahni Kunda and live 
there for as many years as there are hairs on his body; next they 
attain animal births for three births and get themselves scorched 
under the strong heat of the Sun. He goes to the Tapta Kunda hell 
who does not entertain any Brahman guest with any eatables who 
comes to his house hungry and thirsty. He lives there for as many 
years as there are hairs on his body and he has to sleep on a bed of 
fire, very tormenting. Then he will have to be born for seven births as 
birds. If anybody washes any clothing with any salt on Sunday, or on 
the day of Samkranti (when the Sun enters another sign), or on any 
new-moon day or on any S’raddha day (when funeral ceremonies 
are performed), he will have to go to the Ksara Kunda hell where he 
remains for as many years as there are threads in that clothing and 
finally he becomes born for seven births as a veritable washerman. 
The wretch that abuses Mula Prakriti, the Vedas, the S’astras, 
Puranas, Brahma, Visnu, S’iva and the other Devas, Gauri, Laksmi, 
Sarasvati and the other Devis, goes to the hell named Bhayanaka 
Narakakunda. There is no other hell more tormenting than this. The 
sinners live here for many Kalpas and ultimately become serpents. 
There is no sin greater than the abuse of the Devi. There is no 
expiation for it. So one ought never to abuse the Devi. If one 
discontinues the allowances given by oneself or other persons to the 
Devas or Brahmanas, one goes to Vistha Kunda and has to eat the 
faeces there for sixty thousand years and finally to be born in 



Bharata as worms in faeces the same number of years. If any 
person without the owner’s permission digs another’s tank dried of 
water, or makes water in the water of any tank, he goes to Mutra 
Kunda and drinks urine for as many years as there are the particles 
in that tank. Then he becomes born in this Bharata its an ox for one 
hundred years. If any person eats good things himself without giving 
any portion thereof to the member of his family, he goes to S’lesma 
Kunda where he eats phlegm, for full one hundred years. Then he 
becomes born as Preta (disembodied spirits) in this Bharata for 
hundred years and drinks phlegm, urine and pus; then he becomes 
pure. He who does not support his father, mother, spiritual teacher, 
wife, sons, daughters and the helpless persons, goes to Gara Kunda 
where he eats poison for full one hundred years. Finally he becomes 
born and wanders as Bhutas (disembodied spirits). Then he 
becomes pure. 


20-50. He who becomes angry and shrinks his eyes at the sight of a 
guest who has come to his house offends the Devas or Pitris, who 
do not accept the water offered to them by that villain. On the 
contrary, he earns all the sins of Brahmahatya (murder of a 
Brahmin and so forth) and finally goes to Dusikakunda where he 
remains for one hundred years and eats polluted things. Then 
wandering as Bhutas for one hundred years he becomes purified. If 
anybody makes a gift of any article to a Brahmin and then again 
gives that article to a different man, he goes to Vasa Kunda where 
he eats marrows for one hundred years. Then he has to roam about 
in India for seven births as a Krikalasa (lizard) and finally he 
becomes born as a very poor man with a very short life. If any 
woman or any man makes another of a different sex eat semen, out 
of passion, he goes to S’ukra Kunda where he drinks semen for one 
hundred years. Then he crawls about as worms for one hundred 
years. And then he gets purified. If anybody beats a Brahmana who 
is a family preceptor and causes his blood to come out, he will have 
to go to Rakta Kunda where he has to drink blood for one hundred 



years. Finally he has to roam about for seven births in India as 
tigers; then he becomes pure by degrees. If anybody mocks and 
laughs at any devotee of Krisna who sings with rapt consciousness 
and sheds tears of joy, he will have to go to As’ru Kunda where he 
drinks tears for one hundred years. Then he has to roam as 
Chandala for three births and then he becomes pure. He who always 
cheats his friends, lives for one hundred years in Gatramala Kunda. 
Then roaming about for three births as an ass and for three births as 
a fox concurrently, he becomes purified. Out of vanity, if anybody 
jests at a deaf person, he goes to Karnamalakunda where he eats 
for one hundred years the wax of the ear. Next he comes to the earth 
as a deaf and very poor man for seven births, when at last he gets 
purified. If anybody commits murder out of greed to support his 
family, he goes to the hell Majjakunda where he eats marrow for one 
lakh years. Next he becomes a fish for seven births, for seven births 
he becomes a mosquito, for three births he becomes a boar, for 
seven births he becomes a cock, deer and other animals 
concurrently; at last he gets purified. If any stupid person sells the 
daughter whom he has supported, out of greed for money, he goes 
to Mansakunda and lives there for as many years as there are hairs 
on her body. The Yama’s servants beat him with their clubs. His 
head becomes overloaded with the burden of the flesh; and, out of 
hunger, he licks the blood coming out of his head. Next that sinner 
comes to Bharata and for sixty years becomes a worm in any 
daughter’s faeces, for seven births he becomes a hunter; for three 
births, a boar; for seven births, cock; for seven births, frog; for seven 
births, leech; and for seven births, crow; when he gets purified. One 
who shaves on the day of observing vows, fasting and funeral 
ceremony day, becomes impure and unfit to do any action, and, in 
the end, he goes to the Nakha Kunda where he receives blows of 
clubs and eats nails for one hundred Deva years. If anybody 
worships, out of carelessness, the earthen S’iva phallic symbol with 
any hairs on it, he goes to the hell Kes’a Kunda where he remains 
for as many years as there are particles in that hair; then he gets to 
the yoni (womb) a Yavanani (a MIechcha woman) out of Hara’s 
wrath. After one hundred years he becomes freed from that and then 



he becomes a Raksasa; there is no doubt in this. He who does not 
offer Pindas to the Visnupada in honour of his Piths at Gaya goes to 
the hell Asthikunda where he remains for as many years as there are 
dirts on his body. Then he becomes a man; but for seven births he 
becomes lame and poor. Then he gets purified. The stupid man who 
commits outrage and violence on his pregnant wife, resides for one 
hundred years in the hot Tamra Kunda (where coppers are in a 
molten condition). He who takes the food of a childless widow and 
the same of any woman that has just bathed after menstruation goes 
for one hundred years to the hot Lauha Kunda (where iron is in a 
molten condition). For seven births he becomes then a crow and for 
seven births he becomes born of a washerwoman, full of sores and 
boils, and poor. Then he gets purified. 


51-61. If one touches the things of the Devas after touching skins or 
impure hides, one remains in the Charma Kunda for full one hundred 
years. If any Brahmin eats a S’udra’s food, requested by him, he 
lives for one hundred years in the hot Sura Kunda. Then for seven 
births he performs, the funeral rites for a S’udra; at last he becomes 
pure. If any foul-mouthed person uses always harsh and filthy 
language to his master, he will have to go to Tiksna Kantaka Kunda 
where he eats thorns. Besides, the Yama’s servants give severe 
beatings to him with their clubs. For seven births he will have to 
become horses when he gets purified. If any man ministers poison to 
another and so takes away his life, he will have to remain for endless 
years in Visakunda, where he will have to eat poison. Then he will 
have to pass for one hundred years as a murderer Bhilla, full of 
sores and boils, and for seven births he will have to be a leper when 
at last he gets purified. Being born in this holy land Bharatavarsa, if 
any man strikes a cow with a rod or any driver does so whether by 
himself or by his servant, he will have to dwell certainly in the hot 
Lauha Kunda for four yugas. He will have to pass as many years as 
a cow as there are hairs on that cow when ultimately he gets 
purified. If anybody strikes any other body with a red-hot iron dart 



(Kunta weapon), he will have to dwell in the Kunta Kunda for ayuta 
years. Then he will have to remain for one birth in a good womb, with 
a diseased constitution, when ultimately he will be purified. 


62-85. If any Brahmin villain eats, out of greed, any flesh (not 
sacrificed before the goddess) or anything not offered to Hari, he will 
have to remain in the Krimi Kunda where he eats those things for as 
many years as there are hairs on his body. Then he will have to pass 
for three births as MIechchas when ultimately he becomes born in a 
Brahmin family. If any Brahmin performs the S’radh of a S’udra, eats 
the food pertaining to a S’radh of a S’udra or burns the dead body of 
a S’udra, he will have to dwell certainly in Puya Kunda, where, being 
beaten by the rod of Yama, he eats the pus, etc., for as many years 
as there are hairs on his body. Then he becomes reborn in this 
Bharata as one greatly diseased, poor, deaf and dumb and ultimately 
he will have to roam for seven births as a S’udra. He who kills a 
black serpent on whose hood there is the lotus mark, lives in Sarpa 
Kunda for as many years as there are hairs on his body and he is 
bitten by serpents there and beaten by the servants of Yama and 
eats the excrescences of snakes and finally becomes born as a 
serpent. Then he becomes a man shortlived and having the 
cuticaneous disease and ringworm. And his death also comes out of 
snake-bite. He who kills mosquitoes and other small fanged-animals, 
that earn their substance rightly and pass so their lives, goes to 
Dams’a mas’a Kunda where he is eaten by mosquitoes and other 
fanged-creatures and lives there without food and crying, weeping, 
for as many years as the numbers of lives destroyed. Besides the 
Yama’s servants tie his hands and feet and beat him. Then he 
becomes born as flies when ultimately he becomes purified. He who 
beats and chastises any man not fit to be chastised and beaten and 
as well as a Brahmana, goes to Vajra Damstra Kunda, full of worms, 
and lives there day and night for as many years as there are the 
number of hairs on the chastised person. When he is bitten by the 
worms and beaten by Yama’s servants, he cries sometimes, weeps 



sometimes, and becomes very miserable. Next he is reborn as a 
crow for seven births when ultimately he gets purified. If any foolish 
king punishes and gives trouble to his subjects out of greed of 
money, he goes to Vrischika Kunda where he lives for as many years 
as there are hairs on the bodies of his subjects. There is no doubt in 
this. Finally he becomes born in this Bharata as a scorpion; then a 
man diseased and defective in limbs, when ultimately he becomes 
freed of his sins. If any Brahmin carries or raises weapons, washes 
the clothes of others who do not perform Sandhyas and abandons 
his devotion to Hah, he lives in Saradi Kunda for as many years as 
there are hairs on his body; he is, then, pierced by arrows. Finally he 
becomes purified. If any king maddened by his own folly and fault, 
shuts his subjects in a dark cell and kills them, then he will have to 
go to a dreadful dark hell filled with worms having fanged teeth and 
covered with dirt. This hell is named Gola Kunda. He lives there 
bitten by insects for as many years as there are hairs on the bodies 
of his subjects. Finally he becomes a slave of those subjects, when 
he gets purified. 


86-103. If anybody kills the sharks and crocodiles, etc., that rise out 
of the water spontaneously, he will have to remain, then, in Nakra 
Kunda for as many years as there are thorns or edged points on 
those animals. Then he will have to be born as crocodiles, etc., for 
some time, when he will be purified. If any man, overpowered with 
lust, sees another’s wife’s uncovered breast, loins, and face, he will 
have to remain in Kaka Kunda for as many years as there are hairs 
in his own body. Here the crows take out his eyes. Finally for three 
births he gets himself burned by Fire when he becomes pure. He 
who steals in India the gold of the Devas and the Brahmanas, dwells 
certainly in Manthana Kunda for as many years as there are hairs on 
his body. My servants give him good beatings, and cudgellings; his 
eyes are covered by Manthana Danda insects (or animals) and he 
eats their dirty faeces. Then he is reborn as a man but for three 
births he becomes blind and for seven births he becomes very poor. 



cruel, and a sinful goldsmith and then he is born a Svarnavanik 
(Sonar bene). O Fair One! He who steals in India copper or iron, 
silver or gold, dwells in Vija Kunda for as many years as there are 
hairs on his body. There the Vijas (a kind of insect) cover his eyes 
and he eats the excrescences of those insects. My messengers 
torment him. Finally he gets purified. If anybody steals in India any 
Devata or the articles of a Devata, he dwells in Vajra Kunda for as 
many years as there are hairs on his body. There his body gets burnt 
up. My messengers torment him and he a cries and weeps and 
remains without any food. Then he gets purified. If anybody steals 
the metal gold or silver, cows, or garments of any Deva or a 
Brahmana, certainly he dwells in hot Pasana Kunda for as many 
years as there are hairs on his body. Next for three births he 
becomes a tortoise and all sorts of white birds. Finally for three births 
he becomes a leper and for one birth be becomes a man with white 
marks on his body. Next for seven births he becomes diseased with 
a severe colic pain and bad blood and lives short. Then he gets 
purified. If anybody steals brass or Kamsya properties of any Deva 
or a Brahmana, he will have to remain in the sharp Pasana Kunda 
for as many years as there are hairs on his body. Next he becomes 
born in Bharata for seven births as horses; and ultimately his both 
the testicles get enlarged and he gets diseases in his legs when he 
gets purified. If anybody verily eats the food of an adulterate woman 
or lives on her alms, he will have to go to the Lala Kunda for as 
many years as there are hairs on his body. My messengers torment 
him there and he eats the saliva and thus lives miserably. Then he 
gets eye diseases and colic; when ultimately he gets purified. 


104-126. If any Brahmana lives on writing only or on the service of 
MIechchas, he lives in Masi Kunda very painfully, eating ink, 
tormented by My messengers for as many years as there are hairs 
on his body. Then he becomes a black animal for three births and for 
another three births he becomes a black goat. Then he becomes a 
Tal tree when he gets purified. If anybody steals a Deva’s or a 



Brahmana’s grains, or any other good materials, betel, Asan (seat) 
or bedding, he lives in Churna Kunda for one hundred years, 
tormented by My Dutas (messengers). Next for three births he gets 
himself born as a goat, cock, and monkey. Finally he becomes born 
as a man with the heart disease, without any issue, poor, and short 
lived. When, at last, he gets purified. If anybody steals any Brahmin’s 
property and thereby does chakra puja (the famous chakra circle 
worship in Tantra), or prepares a potter’s wheel or any other wheels, 
he will have to go to Chakra Kunda and remain there for one 
hundred years, tormented by My messengers. Then he will be born 
for three births as an oilman suffering from very severe diseases 
when he will ultimately be poor, without any issue and diseased. 
Finally he gets purified. If anybody casts a sinful eye on any 
Brahmana or on cows, he will have to remain in Vakra Kunda for one 
hundred Yugas. Next for three births he becomes a cat, for three 
births he becomes a vulture; for three births he becomes a boar; for 
three births he becomes a peacock; for seven births he becomes a 
man deformed and defective in limbs, his wife being dead, without 
any issue. Finally he becomes purified. If any person born in a 
Brahmin family eats the flesh of a tortoise that is prohibited, he lives 
in Kurma Kunda, for one hundred years, eaten by tortoises. Then he 
becomes for three births a tortoise; for three births, a boar; for three 
births a cat; for three births, a peacock; till at last he gets purified. If 
anybody steals clarified butter or oil of any Devas or a Brahmana he 
will have to go to Jvala Kunda or Bhasma Kunda. That sinner 
remains in oil for one hundred years and gets soaked through and 
through. Then for seven births he becomes a fish and a mouse when 
he gets purified. If anybody, born here in this holy land Bharata 
steals sweet scented oil of a Deva or of a Brahmana, the powdered 
myrobalan or any other scent, he goes to Dagdha Kunda where he 
lives, burnt day and night for as many years as there are hairs on his 
body. For seven births he becomes born emitting a nasty smell, for 
three births he becomes musk (mriga-nabhi); for seven births, as a 
Manthana insect. Then he becomes born as a man. If, out of envy, a 
powerful man appropriates to his purpose another’s ancestral 
property by cheating, by using force, he goes to the hot Suchi 



Kunda, being tormented there like a Jiva dropped in the midst of a 
very hot oil tank, full of boiling oil. His body is, then, being burnt up 
severely as the result of his own Karma; the wonder being that his 
body never gets completely destroyed nor reduced to ashes. For 
seven manvantaras he lives there without any food. My messengers 
give him good beatings and cudgellings and chastise him; he cries 
aloud. Next he gets himself born as worms of faeces for sixty 
thousand years. When he becomes born as a pauper without owning 
any land. Thus that villain, getting a fresh lease of human birth, 
begins again to do fresh good acts. 


Here ends the Thirty-third Chapter of the Ninth Book on the 
description of the destinies of different sinners in different hells in S’ri 
Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 34. On The Description Of The Various 
Hells 


1-28. Dharma Raja Yama said O Fair One! If, in this Bharata, any 
murderer, merciless and fierce, kills any man, out of greed for 
money, he goes and miserably dwells in the Asipattra hell for 
fourteen Indra’s life periods. And if that murderer kills a Brahmana, 
he lives in that hell for one hundred manvantaras. While in hell, his 
body becomes fiercely cut and wounded by the swords. There My 
messengers chastise him and beat him and he cries aloud and 
passes his time without any food. Then he becomes born for one 
hundred years as a Manthana insect, for hundred births as a boar, 
for seven births as a cock; for seven births as a fox, for seven births 
as a tiger; for three births, as a wolf; for seven births, as a frog; then 
as a buffalo when he becomes freed of his sins of murders. If 
anybody sets fire to a city or a village, he will have to live in 
Ksuradhara Kunda for three yugas with his body severed. Then he 
becomes a Preta (disembodied spirit) and travels over the whole 
earth, being burnt up with fire. For seven births he eats unclean and 
unholy food and spends his time as a pigeon. Then for seven births 
he becomes diseased with a severe colic pain, for seven births as a 
leper; when ultimately he gets a pure human body. If anybody 
whispers in one’s ear another’s calumny and thus glorifies himself 
and abuses and vilifies the Devas and Brahmanas, he goes and 
remains in Suchi Kunda for three Yugas, and he is pierced there by 
needles. Then he becomes a scorpion for seven births, a serpent for 
seven births, and an insect (Bhasma Kita) for seven births; then he 
gets a diseased human body when, at last, he becomes purified. If 
anybody breaks into another’s house and steals away all the 
household articles, cows, goats or buffaloes, he goes to Goka 
Mukha Kunda where faeces are like cow’s hoofs, there, beaten by 
My servants, for three Yugas. (Goka is Goksura, hoof of a cow). 
Then, for seven births, he becomes a diseased cow; for three births, 
a sheep; for three births, a goat; and finally he becomes a man. But 



in this man-birth he is born first as diseased, poor, deprived of wife 
and friends, and a repenting person; when ultimately he is freed of 
his sin. If anybody steals any ordinary thing, he goes to Nakra 
Mukha Kunda and lives there for three years, greatly tormented by 
My messengers. Next for seven births, he becomes a diseased ox. 
Then he attains a very diseased man-birth, and ultimately he is freed 
of his sins. Such are the horrible results. If anybody kills a cow, 
elephant, horse, or cuts a tree, he goes to Gaja Dams’a Kunda for 
three yugas. There he is punished by My messengers freely by the 
teeth of elephants. Then he attains three elephants’ births, three 
horse-births; then he becomes born as a cow and ultimately he is 
born a MIechcha when he becomes pure. If anybody obstructs any 
thirsty cow from drinking water, he goes to Krimi Kunda and 
Gomukha Kunda filled with hot water and lives there for one 
manvantara. Next when he attains a human birth he owns not any 
cattle nor any wealth; rather he is born as a man, very much 
diseased, in low castes, for seven births when he becomes freed. If 
anybody, being born in Bharata, kills cows. Brahmins, women, 
beggars, causes abortions or goes to those not fit to be gone into, he 
lives in the Kumbhipaka hell for fourteen Indra’s life periods. There 
be is pulverised always by My messengers. He is made to fall 
sometimes in fire, sometimes over thorns, sometimes in hot oil, 
sometimes in hot water, sometimes in molten iron or copper. That 
great sinner gets thousand vulture births, hundred boar births, seven 
crow births and seven serpent births. He then becomes worms of 
faeces for sixty thousand years. Thus travelling frequently in ox 
births he at last becomes born as a very poor leper. 


29-31. Savitri said “O Bhagavan! What is, according to the 
S’astras, Brahmahattya (murdering a Brahmin) and Gohatya (killing 
a cow)? Who are called Agamyas (women unfit to be approached)? 
Who are designated as void of Sandhya (daily worship of the twice 
born castes)? Who can be called uninitiated? Who are said to take 
Pratigrahas (gifts) in a Tirath? What are the characteristics of a real 



Gramayaji (village priests), Devala, (Brahmana of an inferior order 
who subsists upon the offerings made to the images which he 
attends), the cook of a S’udra, of one who is infatuated (Pramatta) 
and the VrisalTpati (one who has married an unmarried girl twelve 
years old in whom menstruation has commenced; a barren woman) 
Kindly describe all these to me.” 


32-91. Dharmarajan said O Fair Savitri! If anybody makes a 
distinction between Krisna and His Image or between any Deva and 
his image, between S’iva and His phallic emblem, between the Sun 
and the stone Surya Kanta (a precious stone of a bright and glittering 
colour) between Ganes’a and Durga, he is said to be guilty of the sin 
Brahmahattya. If anybody makes any difference (superiority or 
inferiority) between his own Ista Deva (his Deity), his Spiritual 
Teacher, his natural father, and mother, is certainly involved in the sin 
of Brahmahattya. He who shews any difference (superiority or 
inferiority) between the devotees of Visnu and those of other Devas, 
is said to commit Brahmahattya. He who makes any difference in 
matters of respect between the waters of the feet of any Brahmana 
and those of S’alagrama stone, is said to commit Brahmahattya. The 
difference between the offerings to Hari and Hara leads to 
Brahmahattya. He who shews any difference between Krisna, Who 
is verily the God of gods, the Cause of all causes, the Origin of all. 
Who is worshipped by all the Devas, Who is the Self of all. Who is 
attributeless and without a second yet Who by His Magic powers 
assumes many forms and who is Is’ana, is said to commit, indeed, 
the Brahmahattya. If any Vaisnava (a devotee of Visnu) abuses and 
envies a S’akta (a devotee of S’akti), he commits Brahmahattya. He 
who does not worship, according to the Vedas, the Pitris and the 
Devas or prohibits others in doing so, commits Brahmahattya. He 
who abuses Hrisikes’a, Who is the Highest of the Holy things. Who is 
Knowledge and Bliss and Who is Eternal, Who is the only God to be 
served by the Devas and Vaisnavas, and those Who are 
worshippers of His Mantra, and those who do not worship 



themselves are said to commit Brahmahattya. He who abuses and 
vilifies Mulaprakriti Maha Devi, Who is of the nature of Causal 
Brahma (Karana Brahma), Who is All Power and the Mother of all. 
Who is worshipped by all and who is of the nature of all the Devas 
and the Cause of all Causes, Who is Adya S’akti Bhagavati, is said 
to commit Brahmahattya. He who does not observe the Holy S’ri 
Krisna Janmastami, S’ri Rama Navami, S’ivaratri, the Ekadas’i 
happening on Sunday, and five other holy Parvanas (festivals), 
commits Brahmahattya; is considered more sinful than a Chandala. 
He who in this land of Bharata, digs earth on the day of Ambuvachi 
or makes water, etc., in the waters of the tanks, is involved in the sin 
of Brahmahattya. He who does not support his spiritual teacher, 
mother, father, chaste wife, son and daughter, though they are 
faultless, commits Brahmahattya. He whose marriage does not take 
place during his whole life-time, who does not see the face of his 
son, who does not cherish devotion to Hah, who eats things 
unoffered to S’ri Hah, who never worshipped throughout his life 
Visnu or an earthen symbol of S’iva, verily commits Brahmahattya. O 
Fair One! Now I will recite the characteristics, according to the 
S’astras, of Gohattya (killing a cow). Listen. If anybody does not 
prohibit one, seeing one to beat a cow, or if he goes between a cow 
and a Brahmin, he is involved in the sin of Gohattya. If any illiterate 
Brahman, carrying an ox, daily beats with a stick, the cows, certainly 
he commits the Gohattya. If anybody gives the remains of another’s 
meal to a cow to eat, or feeds a Brahmin who carries, rather moves 
or drives, cows and oxen; or eats himself the food of such a 
Brahmin driver, he commits Gohattya. Those who do sacrifices of the 
husband of a barren woman (Vrisali) or eat his food, commit sin 
equal to one hundred Gohattyas; there is no doubt in this. Those 
who touch fire with their feet, beat the cows or enter the temple 
bathing but not washing their feet, commit Gohattya. Those who eat 
without washing their feet or those who sleep with their feet wetted 
with water and those who eat just after the Sun has risen, commit 
Gohattya. Those who eat the food of women without husbands or 
sons or the food of pimps and pampers or those who do not perform 
their Sandhyas thrice, commit Gohattya. If any woman makes any 



difference between her husband and the Devata, or chastises and 
uses harsh words to her husband, she commits Gohattya. If anybody 
destroys cow’s pasture land, tanks, or land for forts and cultivates 
there grains, he commits Gohattya. He who does not do 
Prayas’chitta (expiation, atonement) for the expiation of the sin of 
Gohattya done by his son (for fear of his son’s life), commits the sin 
himself. If any trouble arises in the state or from the Devas, and if 
any master does not protect then his own cows, rather torments 
them, he is said to commit Gohattya. If any Jiva oversteps the image 
of a Deva, fire, water, offerings to a god, flowers, or food, he commits 
the great sin Brahmahattya. When a guest comes, if the master of 
the house always says, “there is nothing, nothing with me; no, no,” 
and if he be a liar, cheat and an abuser of the Devas, he commits the 
above sin. O fair One! Whoever seeing his spiritual teacher, and a 
Brahman, does not bow down and make respectful obeisance to 
them, commits Gohattya. If any Brahmin, out of sheer anger, does 
not utter blessings to a man who bows down or does not impart 
knowledge to a student, he commits Gohattya. O Fair One! Thus I 
have described to you the characteristics, approved by S’astras, of 
cow-killing (Gohattya) and murdering a Brahmin(Brahmahattya). 

Now hear which women are (Agamyas) not fit to be approached and 
those which are fit to be approached (Gamyas). One’s own wife is fit 
to be approached (Gamya) and all other women are Agamyas, so 
the Pundits, versed in the Vedas, declare. This is a general remark; 
now hear everything in particular. O Chaste One! The Brahmin wives 
of S’udras or the S’udra wives of Brahmanas are Atyagamyas (very 
unfit to be approached) and blameable both in the Vedas and in the 
society. A S’udra going to a Brahmani woman commits one hundred 
Brahmahattyas; so a Brahmana woman going to a S’udra goes to 
the Kumbhipaka hell. As a S’udra should avoid a Brahmani, so a 
Brahmana should avoid a S’udra woman. A Brahmana going to a 
S’udra woman is recognised a Brisalipati (one who has married an 
unmarried girl twelve years old in whom menstruation has 
commenced). So much so that that Brahmana is considered an 
outcast and the vilest of the Chandalas. The offerings of Pindas by 
him are considered as faeces and water offered by him is considered 



as urine. Nowhere whether in the Devaloka or in the Pitriloka, his 
offered Pindas and water are accepted. Whatever religious merits he 
has acquired by worshipping the Devas, and practising austerities for 
Koti births, he loses all at once by the greed of enjoying the S’udra 
woman. There is no doubt in this. A Brahmin, if he drinks wine, is 
considered as the husband of a Vrisali, eating faeces. And if he be a 
Vaisnava, a devotee of Visnu, his body must be branded with the 
marks of a Taptamudra (hot seal); and if he be a S’aiva, his body is 
to be branded with the Tapta S’ula (hot trident). The wife of a spiritual 
teacher, the wife of a king, step-mother, daughter, son’s wife, 
mother-in-law, sister of the same father and mother, the wife of one’s 
brother (of the same father and mother), the wife of a maternal 
uncle, the father’s mother, mother’s mother, the mother’s sister, 
sisters, the brother’s daughter, the female disciple, the disciple’s 
wife, the wife of the sister’s son, the wife of the brother’s son, these 
all are mentioned by Brahma as Atyagamyas (very unfit to be 
approached). The people are hereby warned. If anybody, 
overpowered by passion, goes to these Atyagamya women, he 
becomes the vilest of men. The Vedas consider him as if going to his 
mother and he commits one hundred Brahmahattya sins. These 
have no right to do any actions. They are not to be touched by any. 
They are blamed in the Vedas, in the society everywhere. Ultimately 
they go to the dreadful Kumbhipaka hells. O Fair One! He who 
performs Sandhyas wrongly or reads it wrongly or does not perform 
at all the three Sandhyas daily, is called as void of Sandhya. He is 
said to remain uninitiated who does not, out of sheer vanity, receive 
any Mantra, whether he be a Vaisnavite, S’aivite, or a Sun 
worshipper or the Ganes’a worshipper. Where there is the running 
stream of the Ganges, lands on either side, four hands in width, are 
said to be the womb of the Ganges (Ganga Garbha) Bhagavan 
Narayana incessantly dwells there. This is called the Narayana 
(Ksetra). One goes to Visnupada who dies in such a place. Varanasi 
(Benares), Vadari, the Confluence of the Ganges with the ocean 
(Ganga-Sagara), Puskara, Hah Hara Ksettra (in Behar near Chapra), 
Prabhasa, Kamarupa, Hardwar, Kedara, Matripura, the banks of the 
river Sarasvati, the holy land Bindraban, Godavari, Kaus’iki, Triveni 



(Allahabad), and the Himalayas are all famous places of pilgrimages. 
Those who willingly accept gifts in these sacred places are said to be 
Tirthapratigrahis (the acceptors of the gifts in the Tirtha). These 
Tirthaprathigrahis go in the end to Kumbhipaka hell. The Brahmana 
who acts as priest to the S’udras is called S’udrayaji; the village 
priests are called Gramayajis. Those who subsist on the offerings 
made to the gods are called Devalas. The cooks of the S’udras are 
called Supakaras. Those who are void of Sandhya Bandanams are 
called Pramattas (mad). O Bhadre! These are the marks of the 
VrisalTpatis that I have (now) enumerated. These are the Great 
Sinners (Maha Patakas). They go ultimately to the Kumbhipaka hell. 
O Fair One! I now state by and by the other Kundas (hells) when 
other people go. Listen. 


Here ends the Thirty fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the 
description of the various hells in the Maha Puranam S’rimad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 35. On The Description Of The Various 
Hells For The Various Sinners 


1-44. Dharmarajan said O Chaste One! Without serving the Gods, 
the Karma ties can never be severed. The pure acts are the seeds of 
purities and the impure acts lead to impure seeds. If any Brahmana 
goes to any unchaste woman and eats her food, he will have to go 
ultimately to the Kalasutra hell. There he lives for one hundred years 
when ultimately he gets a human birth when he passes his times as 
a diseased man and ultimately he gets purified. Those women who 
are addicted to their (one) husbands only are called Pativratas. 

Those addicted to two persons are named Kulatas; to three, are 
called Dharsinis; to four, called Pums’chalis; to five, six persons, 
called Ves’yas; to seven, eight, nine persons are called Pungis; and 
to more than these, are called Mahaves’yas. The Mahaves’yas are 
unfit to be touched by all the classes. If any Brahmana goes to 
Kulata, Dharsini, Pums’chali, Pungi, Ves’ya and Mahaves’yas, he 
will have to go to the Matsyoda Kunda. Those who go to Kulatas 
remain there for one hundred years; those who go to Dharsinis, 
remain for four hundred years, those who go to Pums’chalis for six 
hundred years; those who go to Ves’yas, for eight hundred years; 
those who go to Pungis, remain for one thousand years and those 
who go to Mahaves’yas remain in the Matsyoda Kunda for ten 
thousand years. My messengers chastise and beat and torment 
them very severely. And when their terms expire, the Kulata-goers 
become Tittiris (a bird), the Dharsini-goers become crows, the 
Pums’chali-mongers become cuckoos, the Ves’ya haunters become 
wolves; the Pungi-goers become for seven births boars. If any 
ignorant person eats food during the lunar and solar eclipses, he 
goes to Aruntuda Kunda for as many years as there are particles in 
that food. He then becomes born diseased with Gulma (a chronic 
enlargement of spleen) having no ears nor teeth, and after passing 
his time so, he becomes freed of his previous sin. If anybody makes 
a promise to give his daughter to one but he gives actually to a 



different person, he goes to Pams’u Kunda where he eats ashes for 
one hundred years. Again if anybody sells his daughter, he sleeps on 
a bed of arrows in Pams’uvesta Kunda for one hundred years, 
chastised and beaten by My messengers. If any Brahmana does not 
worship with devotion the phallic emblem of S’iva, he goes to the 
dreadful S’ulaprota Kunda for that heinous sin. He remains there for 
one hundred years; then he becomes a quadruped animal for seven 
births and again he becomes born a Devala Brahmin for seven births 
when he becomes freed. If any Brahmana defeats another 
Brahmana in a bad useless argument and trifles him and makes him 
tremble, he goes to the Prakampana Kunda for as many years as 
there are hairs on his body. If any woman, being very furious with 
anger, chastises and uses harsh words to her husband, she goes to 
Ulkamukha Kunda for as many years as there are hairs on his body. 
My servants put fiery meteors or torches in her mouth and beat on 
her head. At the end of the term, she becomes a human being but 
she has to bear the torments of widowhood for seven births. Then 
she is again born as diseased; when at last she gets herself freed. 
The Brahmana woman, enjoyed by a S’udra, goes to the terrible 
dark Andhakupa hell, where she remains, day and night, immersed 
in the impure water and eats that for fourteen Indra’s life periods. Her 
pains are unbounded and My messengers beat her severely and 
incessantly. 


At the expiry of the term in that hell, she becomes a female crow for 
thousand births, a female boar for one hundred births, a female fox 
for one hundred births, a hen for one hundred years, a female 
pigeon for seven births, and a female monkey for seven births. Then 
she becomes a ChandalT in this Bharata, enjoyed by all. Then she 
becomes an unchaste woman with the pthisis disease, a 
washerwoman, and then an oilwoman with leprosy when she 
becomes freed. O Fair One! The Ves’yas live in the Vedhana, and 
Jalarandhra hells; the Pungis live in the Dandatadana hell; the 
Kulatas live in the Dehachurna hells; the Svairinis live in the Dalana 



hells; the Dharsinis live in S’osana hells. Their pains know no 
bounds at all those places. My messengers always beat and 
chastise them and they eat always the urine and faeces for one 
Manvantara. Then, at the expiry of their hell period, they become 
worms of faeces for one lakh years when they become freed. If a 
Brahmana goes to another Brahmana’s wife, if a Ksattriya, Vais’ya 
and S’udra do so, they go to the Kasaya hell. There they drink the 
hot Kasaya water for twelve years when they become purified. The 
lotus-born Brahma has said that the wives of Brahmins, Ksattriyas, 
etc., live in hells like Brahmins, Ksattriyas, etc., and they then get 
freed. If a Ksattriya or a Vais’ya goes to a Brahmin’s wife, he is 
involved in the sin of his going to his mother and goes and lives in 
the S’urpa hell. There the worms of the size of a S’urpa bite that 
Ksattriya, that Vais’ya and that Brahmana’s wife. My messengers 
chastise them and they have to eat the hot urine. Thus they suffer 
pains for fourteen Indra’s life periods. When they become boars for 
seven births and goats for seven births, when at last they are freed. 
Now if anybody makes a false promise or swears falsely, taking the 
Tulasi leaf in his hands, if anybody makes a false promise, taking the 
Ganges water, S’alagrama stone, or any other images of God in his 
hand; if anybody swears falsely, placing his right palm on the palm of 
another; if anybody swears falsely, being in a temple or touching a 
Brahmana or a cow; if anybody acts against his friends or others, if 
he be treacherous or if he gives a false evidence; then all these 
persons go to Jvala Mukha hell, and remain there for fourteen 
Indra’s life periods, chastised and beaten by My messengers and 
feeling pain as if one’s body is being burnt by red hot coal. One who 
gives a false evidence, with the Tulasi (holy basil) in his hand 
becomes a Chandala for seven births; one who makes a false 
promise with the Ganges water in his hand, becomes a MIechcha for 
five births; one who swears falsely while touching the S’alagrama 
stone, becomes a worm of the faeces for seven births; one who 
swears falsely, touching the image of the God, becomes a worm in a 
Brahmin’s house for seven births; one who gives a false evidence 
touching with the right hand, becomes a serpent for seven births; 
then he becomes born as a Brahmin, void of the knowledge of the 



Vedas, when he becomes freed. One who speaks falsely, while in a 
temple, is born as a Devala for seven births. 


45-59. If one swears falsely, touching a Brahmana, one becomes a 
tiger. Then he becomes dumb for three births, then for three births 
he becomes deaf, without wife, without friends, and his family 
becomes extinct. Then he becomes pure. Those that rebel against 
their friends, become mongoose; the treacherous persons become 
rhinoceroses; the hypocrite and treacherous persons become tigers 
and those who give false evidences become frogs. So much so, that 
their seven generations above and seven generations below go to 
hell. If any Brahmana does not perform his daily duties (Nitya 
Karma), he is reckoned as Jada (an inert matter). He has no faith in 
the Vedas. Rather he laughs at the Vedic customs. He does not 
observe vows and fastings; he blames others who give good 
advices. Such persons live in Dhumrandhakara hell where they eat 
dark smoke only. Then he roams about as an aquatic animal for one 
hundred births successively. Then he becomes born as various 
fishes when he is freed. If anybody jests at the wealth of a Deva or a 
Brahmana, then he with his ten generations above and below 
becomes fallen and he himself goes to the Dhumrandhakara hell, 
terribly dark and filled with smoke. There his pains know no bounds 
and he lives there for four hundred years, eating smoke only. Then 
he becomes a mouse for seven births, and he becomes various 
birds and worms, various trees and various animals when ultimately 
he gets a human birth. If a Brahmin earns his livelihood by being an 
astrologer or if he be a physician and lives thereby or if he sells lac, 
iron, or oil, etc., he goes to the Nagavstana Kunda hell where he 
lives for as many years as there are hairs on his body, tied up by 
snakes. Then he becomes born as various birds; ultimately he gets a 
human birth and becomes an astrologer for seven births and a 
physician for seven births. Then for sometime he becomes a 
cowherd (milkman), for sometimes a blacksmith; for sometimes a 
painter, when he becomes freed of his sin. O Chaste One! Thus I 



have described to you all the famous Kundas or hells. Besides there 
are innumerable small Kundas. The sinners go there and suffer the 
fruits of their own Karmas and travel through various wombs. O Fair 
One! What more do you now want to hear ? Say. 


Here ends the Thirty-Fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the 
description of the various hells for the various sinners in the Maha 
Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 36. On The Destruction Of The Fear Of 
The Yama Of Those Who Are The Worshippers 
Of The Five Devatas 


1-7. Savitn said “O Dharmarajan! O Highly Fortunate One! O 
Thou! Expert in the Vedas and the Amgas thereof! Now kindly 
describe that which is the essence of the various Puranas and 
Itihasas, which is the quintessence, which is dear to all, approved of 
by all, which is the seed by which the Karmic ties are cut asunder, 
which is high, noble and happy is this life. Kindly describe the above 
by which man can acquire all his desires, and what is the only 
source of all the good and auspicious things. All by knowing which 
man has not to face any dangers or troubles, nor has he to go to the 
dreadful hells that thou hast severally just now described and that by 
which men can be freed of those various wombs. Kindly now 
describe all these. O Bhagavan! What is the size of the several 
kundas or hells that Thou hast just now enumerated? How do the 
sinners dwell there? When a man departs, his body is reduced to 
ashes. Then of what sort is that other body by which the sinners 
enjoy the effects of their Karmas and why do not those bodies get 
destroyed when they suffer so much pains for so long a time? What 
sort of body is that? Kindly describe all these to me.” 


8-33. Narayana spoke Hearing the questions put forward by 
Savitri, Dharmaraja remembered S’ri Hari and began to speak on 
subject that sever the bonds of Karma O Child! O One of good 
vows! In the four Vedas, in all the books on Dharma, (Smritis) in all 
the Samhitas, all the Itihasas, all the Puranas, in the Narada 
Pahcharatram, in the other Dharma S’astras and in the Vedangas, it 
is definitely stated that the worship of the Pahcha Devatas (the five 
Devatas) S’iva, S’akti Visnu, Ganes’a, and Surya is the best, the 
highest, the destroyer of the old age, disease, death, evils and 



sorrows, the most auspicious and leading to the highest bliss. In fact, 
the worship of these Pahcha Devatas is the source of acquiring all 
the Siddhis (the success) and saves one from going to the hells. 
From their worship springs the Bhaktic Tree and then and then only 
the Root of the Tree of all Karmic bonds is severed for ever and ever. 
This is the step to Mukti (final liberation) and is the indestructible 
state. By this one can get Salokya, Sarsti, Sarupya, and Samipya, 
the different state of beatitudes in which the soul (1) resides in the 
same world with the Deity, (2) possesses the same station, 
condition, or rank, or equality with the Supreme Being in power and 
all the Divine attributes (the last of the four grades of Mukti), (3) 
possesses the sameness of form or gets assimilated to the Deity or 
(4) gets intimately united, identified or absorbed into the Deity. O 
Auspicious One! The worshipper of these five Devatas has never to 
see any of the hells, watched by My messengers. Those who are 
devoid of the devotion to the Devi see My abode; but those who go 
to the Tirthas of Hari, who hold Harivasaras (festivities on the days 
of Hari) who bow down at the feet of Hari and worship Hari, never 
come to My abode named Samyamana. Those Brahmanas that are 
purified by their performing the three Sandhyas and by the following 
the pure Acharas (customs and observances), those that find no 
pleasure until they worship the Devi, those that are attached to their 
own Dharmas and their own Acharas, never come to My abode. 


My terrible messengers, seeing the devotees of S’iva, run away out 
of terror as snakes run away terrified by Garuda. I also order My 
messengers with nooses in their hands never to go to them. My 
messengers go mostly to other persons than the servants of Hari. No 
sooner do My Messengers see the worshippers of the Krisna 
Mantra, than they run away as snakes get terrified at the sight of 
Garuda. Chitragupta, too, one of the beings in Yama’s world, 
recording the vices and virtues of mankind, strike off the names of 
the Devi worshippers, out of fear and prepare Madhuparka, etc., for 
them (a mixture of honey; respectful offering made to a guest or to 



the bridegroom on his arrival at the door of the father of the bride). 
They rise higher than the Brahma Lokas and go to the Devi’s abode, 
i.e., to Manidvipa. Those that are the worshippers of the S’akti 
Mantra and are highly fortunate, whose contact removes the sins of 
others, they deliver the thousand generations (from the downward 
course). As bundles and bundles of dry grasses become burnt to 
ashes, no sooner they are thrown into fire, so the delusion at once 
becomes itself deluded at the sight of the forms of those devotees. 

At their sight, lust, anger, greed, disease, sorrow, old age, death, 
fear, Kala (time that takes away the life of persons), the good and 
bad karmas, pleasures and enjoyments drop off to a great distance. 
O Fair One! Now I have described to you the states of those persons 
that are not under the control of Kala, good and bad karmas, 
pleasures and enjoyments, etc., and those that do not suffer those 
pains. Now I am speaking of this visible body. Listen. Earth, water, 
fire, air, and ether are the five Maha Bhutas (the great elements); 
these are the seeds of this visible body of the person and are the 
chief factors in the work of creation. The body that is made up of 
earth and other elements is transient and artificial, i.e., that body 
becomes burnt to ashes. Within this visible body, bound, is there a 
Purusa of the size of a thumb; that is called the Jiva Purusa; the 
subtle JTva assumes those subtle bodies for enjoying the effects of 
karmas. In My world, that subtle body is not burnt by the burning fire. 
If that subtle body be immersed in water, if that be beaten 
incessantly or if it be struck by a weapon or pierced by a sharp thorn, 
that body is not destroyed. That body is not burnt nor broken by the 
burning hot and molten material, by the red hot iron, by hot stones by 
embracing a hot image or by falling into a burning cauldron. That 
body has to suffer incessant pains. O Fair One! Thus I have dwelt on 
the subject of the several bodies and the causes thereof according to 
the S’astras. Now I will describe to you the characters of all the other 
Kundas. Listen. 



Here ends the Thirty-sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the 
destruction of the fear of the Yama of those who are the worshippers 
of the Five Devatas, in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 37. On The Eighty-Six Kundas And 
Their Characteristics 


1-60. Dharmaraja said All the Kundas (hells) are circular in form 
like the Full Moon. Of these, the Vahnikunda has the fire lit at its 
bottom, by the help of various kinds of stones. This Kunda will not be 
destroyed till Mahapralaya comes. Here the sinners are tormented 
severely. It looks like a blazing coke. The flames are rising from it 
one hundred hands high. In circumference those flames are two 
miles. This is named Vahnikunda. It is full of sinners crying loudly. It 
is constantly watched by My messengers who are chastising and 
punishing the sinners. Next comes the Tapta Kunda. It is filled with 
hot water and full of rapacious animals. The sinners there are 
severely beaten by My messengers and they are always crying out 
very loudly, which is being echoed and re-echoed all around terribly. 

It extends for one mile. This Kunda is filled with hot salt water and 
the abode of many crows. Then there is the Bhayanaka Kunda. It 
extends for two miles and it is filled with sinners. They are being 
punished by My messengers and they are incessantly crying, “Save 
us, save us.” 


Next comes the Vistha Kunda. It is filled with faeces and excrements 
where the sinners are moving without any food and with their palate 
and throats dry. Its size is two miles and it is very bad and ugly with 
foetid and nasty smell. It is always filled with sinners, who are being 
chastised by My Dutas (messengers) and eat those faeces and 
excrements. The worms therein are constantly biting and stinging 
them and they are crying, “deliver us, deliver us.” Then comes the 
hot Muttra Kunda. It is filled with the hot urine and the worms thereof. 
The great sinners always dwell here. It measures four miles; and it is 
quite dark. My Dutas always beat them and their throats, lips, 
palates are all dry. Then comes the S’lesma Kunda. It is filled with 
phlegm and the insects thereof. The sinners dwell in phlegm and eat 



that phlegm. Then comes the Gara Kunda. It is filled with (factitious) 
poison. It measures one mile. The sinners eat this poison and dwell 
here. The worms thereof bite them. They tremble at the 
chastisement of My Dutas and cry aloud. My messengers look like 
serpents, with teeth like thunderbolt and they are very furious and 
fierce, with their throats dry and their words very harsh. Then comes 
Dusika Kunda. It is filled with the rheum and dirt of the eyes and it 
measures one mile. Innumerable worms are born therein. 
Numberless sinners live there, and as they move, the insects 
immediately bite and sting them. Next comes the Vasa Kunda. It is 
filled with the serum or marrow of the flesh and it measures one-half 
mile. The sinners dwell there, chastised and punished by My 
messengers. Then comes the S’ukra Kunda. It measures two miles 
in diameter. The insects, born in the semen, bite the sinners, and 
they move on and on. Then comes the Rakta Kunda, with very 
offensive, foetid smell. It is deep like a well and filled with blood. The 
sinners dwell here, drinking blood. The insects therein are always 
biting them. Then follows the As’ru Kunda. It measures in size one 
fourth the measure of the well (above-mentioned). It is always filled 
with hot tears of the eyes; and many sinners are seen there living 
weeping and crying and being bitten by the snakes. Then there is the 
Gatra Mala Kunda. The sinners are chastised and punished there by 
My messengers and being bitten by the insects thereof, they eat the 
dirts of the body and dwell there. Then comes the Kama Mala 
Kunda. The sinners eat the wax of the ear and fill the place. The 
insects always bite them and they are crying aloud. It measures one 
fourth the measure of a Vapi. Then comes the Majja Kunda. It is 
filled with fat and marrow, emitting foetid offensive odour. It 
measures one fourth the measure of a Vapi. The great sinners 
always dwell there. Then comes the Mamsa Kunda. This is filled with 
the greasy flesh. It measures (one-fourth) that of a Vapi. Those who 
sell their daughters dwell here. My messengers always chastise and 
punish them and horrible insects bite and sting them and they cry, 
out of fear and agony, “Save us, save us,” and eat at times that flesh. 
Then come in succession the four Kundas Nakha, Loma and others. 
They also measure each one-fourth that of a Vapi. The sinners dwell 



there, always chastised by My messengers. Next comes the very hot 
Tamra Kunda. Burning cokes exist on the top of very hot coppers. 
There are lakhs and lakhs of very hot copper figures in that Kunda. 
The sinners, being compelled by My messengers, are made to 
embrace each of these hot copper figures and they cry loudly and 
live there. It measures four miles. Then come the burning Angara 
Kunda and the hot Lauha Dhara Kunda. Here the sinners are made 
to embrace the hot iron figures and, feeling themselves burnt, cry out 
of fear and agony. Whenever My messengers punish them, they 
immediately cry out, “Save us, save us.” It measures eight miles; and 
it is pitch dark and very awful. This is named the hot Lauha Kunda. 
Then come the Charma Kunda and Sura Kunda. The sinners, 
beaten by My men, eat the skin and drink the hot urine and dwell 
there. Then comes the S’almalT Kunda; it is overspread with thorns 
and thorny trees, causing intense pain. It measures two miles. 
Millions and millions of great sinners are made by My men to fall 
from the tops of those trees down below where their bodies get 
pierced by very sharp thorns, six feet long; and thus they dwell there, 
beaten by My men. Out of thirst, their palates get dried up; and they 
cry out repeatedly, “Water, water.” Out of fear, they get very anxious 
and then their heads get broken by the clubs brought down on them 
by My men. So they move there like the beings burnt in very hot oil. 
Then comes the Visoda Kunda. It measures two miles in diameter 
and is filled with the poison of the serpent called Taksakas. My men 
punish the sinners and they drink the poison thereof and dwell there. 
Then comes the hot Taila Kunda. There are no insects here. Only 
the great sinners dwell. All around burning coals are flaring and 
when My men beat the sinners, they run hither and thither. It is filled 
with horrible intense darkness and it is exceedingly painful. It looks 
dreadful and measures two miles. Then comes the Kunta Kunda. 
Sharp pointed iron weapons like tridents are placed in order all 
round. The sinners, pierced by those weapons, are seen encircling 
the Kunda. It measures one-half mile. Beaten by My men, their 
throats and lips get dried up. Then comes the Krimi Kunda. It is filled 
with terrible worms and insects, snake-like with sharp teeth, of the 
size of a S’anku (a Sal tree) deformed and hideous looking; and it is 



filled with pitch darkness, terrible to look at. Beaten by My men, the 
great sinners dwell there. Then comes the Puya Kunda. It measures 
eight miles in diameter (or in circumference?). The sinners dwell and 
eat the pus thereof and, are beaten by My men. Then comes the 
Sarpa Kunda. Millions and millions of snakes of the length of a Tal 
tree are existing there. These serpents encircle the sinners and as 
they bite them. My men also beat them at the same time. So there 
arises a general hue and cry, “Save us, save us; we are done for.” 
Then come in order the Dams’a Kunda, Mas’aka Kunda, and the 
Garala Kunda. These are filled with gad-flies, mosquitoes, and 
poison respectively. Each of them measures one mile. The sinners’ 
hands and feet are tied up. So when the gad-flies and mosquitoes 
fiercely sting them, and My men violently beat them simultaneously, 
they raise a loud uproar and are made to move on, in their tied 
states by My persons. Their bodies get thoroughly reddened and 
covered with blood by the stinging of the flies, etc. Then come the 
Vajra Kunda and the Vris’chika Kunda filled respectively with Vajra 
insects and the scorpions. Each of them measures one-half that of 
the Vapi. The sinners that dwell there, are incessantly bitten by 
insects (Vajras and scorpions). Then come in order the S’ara Kunda, 
S’ula Kunda, and the Khadga Kundas. They are filled respectively 
with arrows, spikes, and scimitars. Each of them measures one half 
that of the Vapi. The sinners are pierced by arrows, etc., and 
become covered over with blood and dwell there. Then comes the 
Gola Kunda. It is filled with boiling hot water and it is pitch dark. The 
sinners live there, bitten by the insects. This Kunda measures half 
that of the Vapi. The insects bite them and My men beat them so 
their fear knows no bounds; everyone of them is weeping and crying 
loudly. This Kunda is filled with hideously offensive smells. So the 
pains of the sinners are infinite. The Nakra Kunda comes next. It 
measures half the Vapi, is filled with millions and millions of 
crocodiles living in water. The horrible looking deformed sinners live 
there. The Kaka Kunda then follows. The sinners here are being 
bitten by hundreds of deformed crows eating faeces, urines and 
phlegm. Then come the Manthana Kunda and Vija Kunda. These 
are filled respectively with insects called Manthana and Vija. Each of 



them measures one hundred Dhanus (one Dhanu - four hastas). 
Those insects are stinging the sinners and they cry out very loudly. 
Then follows the Vajra Kunda. It measures one hundred Dhanus. 
Many insects with their teeth as hard as thunderbolt live there and 
bite the sinners who cry out loudly. It is pitch dark. Then comes the 
hot Pasana Kunda. It measures twice that of the VapT. It is so built of 
hot stones as it resembles a burning mass of coal. The sinners 
become restless with the heat and turn round and round in the 
middle. Then comes the Pasana Kunda and the Lala Kunda. The 
Pasana Kunda is made up of the sharp pointed stones, having sharp 
edges. Innumerable sinners dwell there. Many red beings live in the 
Lala Kunda. Then comes the Mapi Kunda. Its size is one hundred 
Dhanus and its depth is two miles. It is made up of hot stones, each 
measuring the Anjana mountain. The sinners, beaten and driven by 
My persons, move on and on in the middle. Then comes the Churna 
Kunda. It measures two miles (in circumference) and is filled with 
(seven) churnas (powders). The sinners, driven and beaten by My 
men, go on, restless hither and thither and eat the powders and get 
themselves burnt. Then comes the Chakra Kunda. Here a potter’s 
wheel with sixteen sharp-edged spokes is constantly whirling round 
and round; the sinners are being crushed by this wheel. 


61-80. Then comes the Vakra Kunda. Its depth is eight miles. It is 
fashioned very much curved; and with and sharp slope it has gone 
down. It is built on the plan of a mountain cave, filled with hot water 
and it is enveloped with deep dense darkness. The aquatic animals 
there are biting the sinners, who got very much restless and are 
crying out very loudly. Then comes the Kurma Kunda. Here millions 
and millions of tortoises in the water awfully distorted, are biting the 
sinners. Then comes the Jvala Kunda. It is built of fierce fiery flames. 
It measures two miles in circumference. The sinners here are always 
in great difficulty, with intense pain and crying out loudly. Next follows 
the Bhasma Kunda. It measures two miles. The sinners get 
themselves well burnt in hot ashes and live there, eating the ashes. 



It is filled with hot stones and hot irons. The sinners here are always 
being burnt in hot irons and hot stones and their throats and palates 
are being parched up. Then comes the Dagdha Kunda. It is deep 
and horrible. It measures two miles in circumference. My 
messengers threaten always the sinners there. Then comes the 
Suchi Kunda. It is filled with salt water. Waves are always rising 
there. It is filled with various aquatic animals making all sorts of 
noises. It measures eight miles in circumference and it is deep and 
dark. The sinners here cannot see each other and are bitten by the 
animals. Pained very much, they cry out loudly. Then comes the 
Asipattra Kunda. On the top surface of the Kunda there is a very big 
Tal tree very high. The edges of the leaves of this tree are sharp like 
the edge of a sword. One mile below this Tal tree is situated the 
Kunda. The sharp-edged Tal leaves, then, fall on the bodies of the 
sinners from the height of a mile and they get cut and wounded; 
blood comes out of them and the sinners, in great pain, cry out 
“save, save.” It is very deep, very dark and filled with Rakta Kita a 
kind of blood like insects. This is the horrible Asipatra Kunda. Next 
comes the Ksura Dhara Kunda, measuring one hundred Dhanus 
(one Dhanu - four hastas). It is filled with keen-edged weapons, as 
sharp as nice razors. The blood of the sinners is flowing here 
profusely. Then comes the Suchi Mukha Kunda, filled with sharp 
weapons of the form of long needles. It measures fifty Dhanus. The 
sinners get pierced by them end are constantly emitting blood. Their 
intense pain knows no bounds. Then comes the Gokamukha Kunda; 
inhabited by a sort of insect, called Goka. They look like mouths; 
hence they are named Gokamukha. It is deep like a well and it 
measures twenty Dhanus. The great sinners suffer an intense 
amount of pain there. They have got to keep their mouths always 
downwards as the Goka insects always bite and sting them. Then 
comes the Nakra Kunda. It resembles like the mouth of a crocodile 
and measures sixteen Dhanus. It is deep like a well and numbers of 
sinners dwell there. Then comes the Gaja Dams’a Kunda. It 
measures one hundred Dhanus. Next comes the Gomukha Kunda. It 
measures thirty Dhanus and resembles the mouth of a cow. It gives 
incessant pains and troubles to the sinners. 



81-101. Then comes the Kumbhipaka Kunda. It is like a wheel 
resembling that of this Kalachakra, very horrible; and it is rotating 
incessantly. It looks like a water-jar, measuring eight miles, and it is 
quite dark. Its depth is one lakh Purusas of the height of 100,000 
persons. There are many other Kundas, Tapta Taila Kunda and 
Tapta Taila Tamra Kunda, etc., within it. This Kunda is filled with 
almost unconscious great sinners and insects. They beat each other 
and cry out loudly. My messengers also threaten them with clubs 
and Musalas. So at times they fall dizzy-headed, at times they get 
unconscious, and sometimes they get up and cry. O Fair One! The 
numbers of sinners here equal to four times that of all the other 
sinners in all the other Kundas. They know no death, however much 
you beat them. Their lives persist. For the body is built up for 
sufferance, it is indestructible. This Kumbhipaka Kunda is the chief 
of all the Kundas. This Kunda where the sinners are tied to a thread 
built by Kala, where My men lift the sinners on high at one time, and 
sink them down below at another time, where the sinners becoming 
suffocated for a long time, get unconscious, where their sufferings 
know no bounds, where it is filled with boiling oil, is named the 
Kalasutra Kunda. Then comes the Matsyoda Kunda, hollow like a 
well. It is filled with boiling water and it measures twenty-four 
Dhanus. Next comes the Abatoda Kunda. It measures one hundred 
Dhanus. The sinners get their bodies burned and chastised by My 
persons, live there. No sooner they drop into the water of this Kunda, 
then they are attacked with all sorts of diseases. Then comes the 
Krimikantuka Kunda. The sinners are bitten by the Krimi Kantuka 
insects and cry out loudly, creating a general consternation and live 
there. Its another name is Aruntuda Kunda. Next comes the Pams’u 
Kunda. It measures one hundred Dhanus. It is overspread with 
burning rice husks. The sinners eat those hot husks and live there. 
Then comes the Pas’avestana Kunda. It measures two miles. No 
sooner the sinners fall in this Kunda than they are twined round by 
this rope or Pas’a. Hence its name. Then comes the Sulaprota 
Kunda. It measures twenty Dhanus. No sooner the sinners fall here 



than they are encircled with the Sulastra (darts). Then comes the 
Prakampana Kunda. It measures one mile. It is filled with ice-cold 
water. The sinners, going there, shiver at once. Next follows the Ulka 
Kunda. It measures twenty Dhanus. It is filled with burning to ashes 
and meteors. My messengers thrust the torches and meteors into 
the mouths of the sinners living there. Next comes the Andha-Kupa 
Kunda. It is pitch-dark, shaped like a well, circular and very horrible. 
The sinners beat each other and eat the insects thereof. Their 
bodies are burnt with hot water; they cannot see anything on account 
of dire darkness. 


102-118. The Kunda where the sinners are pierced by various 
weapons is known as the Vedhana Kunda. It measures twenty 
Dhanus. Then comes the Dandatadana Kunda. It measures sixteen 
Dhanus. The sinners dwell here, threatened by My messengers. 
Then comes the Jalarandhra Kunda. Here the sinners live 
encompassed by a great net as fishes, etc., are tied in a net. Next 
comes the Dehachurna Kunda. It is quite dark and its depth is that of 
the height of one koti persons; its circumference is twenty Dhanus. 
The sinners, here, encompassed by iron chains are made to fall 
below where their bodies are reduced to powders and they are inert 
and almost unconscious. The Kunda where the sinners are crushed 
and threatened by My messengers is known as the Dalana Kunda; it 
measures sixteen Dhanus in circumference. Next comes the 
S’osana Kunda. It is deep up to the height of one hundred persons 
and it is very dark. It measures thirty Dhanus. On falling on the hot 
sand, the throats and palates of sinners get dried up. Their pain 
knows no bounds. Hence it is called the S’osana Kunda. Then 
comes the Kasa Kunda. It measures one hundred Dhanus. It is filled 
with the juices of skins and its smell is very offensive. The sinners 
eat those astringent waters and live there. Then comes S’urpa 
Kunda. It measures twelve Dhanus and is extended like a winnowing 
basket. It is filled with hot iron dust and many sinners live there, 
eating those foetid iron dusts. Next comes the Jvalamukha Kunda. It 



is filled with red hot sand. From the (bottom) centre rises a flame, 
over-spreading the mouth of the Kunda. It measures twenty Dhanus. 
The sinners are burnt here by the flame and live awfully; they get 
fainted no sooner they are dropped in this Kunda. Then comes the 
Dhumrandha Kunda. It is dark, quite filled with smoke. Within that 
the hot bricks are placed. The sinners get suffocated with smoke; 
and their eye-sight becomes also obstructed. It measures one 
hundred Dhanus. Then comes the Nagabestana Kunda. It is 
encircled and filled with the serpents. No sooner the sinners are let 
fall there, than they are surrounded by the snakes. O Savitri! Thus I 
have spoken to you about the eighty-six Kundas and their 
characteristics. Now what more do you want to hear? Say. 


Here ends the Thirty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on the 
eighty-six Kundas and their characteristics in the Maha Puranam S'ri 
Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 38. On The Glories Of The Dev! And On 
The Nature Of Bhakti 


1-6. Savitn said “O Lord! Give me the devotion to the Devi to that 
Adya S’akti Bhagavati Maha Maye, ParamesVari Mayi that is the 
Essence of all essences, the Door of final liberation to the human 
beings, and the Cause of delivering them from hells, that is the Root 
of all the Dharmas that lead to Mukti, that destroys all the 
inauspiciousness, that takes away the fear of all the Karmas, and 
that takes away always all the sins committed before. O Thou, the 
Foremost amongst the knowers of the Vedas! How many kinds of 
Muktis are there in this world? What is the True Bhakti? What are its 
characteristics? What is to be done by which the enjoyment of the 
karmas done can be desisted and nullified? O Bhagavan! The 
woman kind has been created by the Creator as devoid of any 
Tattvajhana or true knowledge; now tell me something about this 
True Knowledge. All the charities, sacrifices, bathing in the sacred 
places of pilgrimages, observing vows and austerities cannot be 
compared with one sixteenth of imparting knowledge to those who 
are ignorant (of true knowledge). Mother is hundred times superior to 
father; this is certain; but the Spiritual Teacher, the Giver of True 
Knowledge, is hundred times more to be reverenced and worshipped 
than the mother. O Lord!” 


7-79. Dharmaraja said O Child! What boons you desired of Me 
before, I granted them all to you. Now I grant this boon to you that, 
“Let the devotion towards the S’akti now arise in your mind.” O 
Auspicious One! You want to hear the reciting of the Glories of S’ri 
Devi; by this, both he who puts forward the question and he who 
hears the answer, all their families are delivered. When the S’esa 
Naga Ananta Deva with His thousand mouths is unable to recite the 
glories of the Devi, when Mahadeva cannot describe with His five 
mouths, when the Creator Brahma is incapable to recite Her glories 



with His four mouths, when Visnu, the Omniscient, falls back, when 
Kartikeya with His six mouths cannot sufficiently describe, when 
Ganes’a, the Guru of the Gurus of the great yogis is incapable, when 
the Pundits, the knowers of the four Vedas, the Essence of all the 
S’astras, cannot know even a bit of Her, when Sarasvati becomes 
inert in going to describe Her glories; when Sanatkumara, Dharma, 
Sanatana, Sananda, Sanaka, Kapila, Surya and other sons of the 
Creator have fallen back, when the other Siddhas, Yogmdras, 
Munindras are quite incapable to glorify the deeds of Prakriti Devi, 
then how can I recite fully the Glories of Her? Whose lotus-feet 
Brahma, Visnu, S’iva and others meditate; and lo! when it becomes 
difficult for Her devotees even to think of Her, then what wonder is 
there that She will be so very rare to others! Brahma, skilled in the 
knowledge of the Vedas knows more of Her than what other ordinary 
persons know so little of Her auspicious Glories. More than Brahma, 
Ganes’a, the Guru of the Jhanins, knows; again S’ambhu, the 
Omniscient, knows the best of all. For, in ancient times, the 
knowledge of the Prakriti Devi was given to Him by Krisna, the 
Highest Spirit in a solitary place in the Rasa Mandalam in the region 
of Goloka. Mahadeva, again, gave it to Dharma in the S’ivaloka; 
Dharma again gave the Prakriti Mantra to My father. My father 
became successful (Siddha) in the worship of Prakriti Devi when he 
practised austerities. Of old, the Devas wanted to offer to me the 
Government of the Yama Loka; but as I was very much 
dispassionate towards the world, I became unwilling and became 
ready to perform austerities. Then my Father told the Glories of 
Prakriti Devi. Now I describe to you what I heard from my Father and 
what is stated in the Vedas, though very difficult to comprehend. 
Listen carefully. O Fair Faced One! As the eternal space does not 
know its own extent, so Prakriti Devi Herself knows not Her own 
Glories; then what can be said of any other person on this! She is 
the Self of all, endowed with all powers and lordship, the Cause of all 
causes, the Lord of all, the Origin of all and the Preserver of all; She 
is Eternal, always with Her Cosmic Body, full of everlasting bliss, 
without any special form, unrestrained, having no fear, without any 
disease and decay, unattached, the Witness of all, the Refuge of all. 



and Higher than the Highest; She is with Maya and She is Mula 
Prakriti; the objects created by Her being known as the Prakriti 
creation; Who rennains as Prakriti and Purusa inseparable from each 
other as Agni and Her burning force; the Maha Maya, of the nature 
of everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss. Though formless. 

She assumes forms for the gratification of the desires of Her 
Bhaktas. She created first the beautiful form of Gopala Sundari, i.e., 
the form of S’ri Krisna very lovely and beautiful, captivating the mind. 
His body is blue like the fresh rain cloud; He is young and dressed 
like that of a cow herd. Millions of Kandarpas (the Love deity) are, as 
it were, playing in his body. His eyes vie with the midday lotus of the 
autumn. The beauty of His face throws under shade the millions and 
millions of the Full Moon. His body is decorated with invaluable 
ornaments decked with jewels. Sweet smile reigns ever in His lips; it 
is adorned moreover with His yellow coloured invaluable robe. He is 
Parama Brahma. His whole body is burning with the Brahma Teja, 
the Fire of Brahma. 


His Body is Fiery. He is lovely, sweet to look at, of a peaceful temper, 
the Lord of Radha and He is Infinite. (Note The Universe; as we 
see, is unreal like what we see in the kaleidoscope; various apparent 
pictures of an endless variety of beautiful colours and forms.) He is 
sitting on a jewel throne in the Rasa Mandalam, and is incessantly 
looked upon by the smiling lovely Gopis at one and the same time. 
He is two-armed. A garland made of wild flowers is hanging from His 
neck. He is playing on His flute. His breast is resplendent with 
Kaustubha gem that He always wears. His body is anointed with 
Kunkuma (saffron), aguru (the fragrant and cooling paste of the 
Aguru wood), musk, and sandal-paste. The garland of beautiful 
Champaka and Malati flowers is hanging from His neck. On His 
head, the beautiful crest is being seen, a little obliquely situated in 
the form of the beautiful Moon. Thus the Bhaktas, filled with Bhaktis, 
meditate on Him. O Child! It is through His fear that the Creator is 
doing His work of creation of this Universe; and is recording the 



Prarabdha fruits of their Karmas. It is through His fear that Visnu is 
awarding the fruits of Tapas and preserving the Universe. By His 
command the Kalagni Rudra Deva is destroying all. By Whose 
favour S’iva has become Mrityumjaya, the Conqueror of Death and 
the Foremost of the Jhanins; knowing whom S’iva has become 
Himself endowed with knowledge and the Lord of the knowers of 
knowledge, full of the Highest Bliss, devotion and dispassion. 
Through Whose fear the wind becomes the foremost of runners and 
carries things, the Sun gives heat, Indra gives rain, Yama destroys, 
Agni burns, and Water cools all the things. By Whose command the 
Regents of the (ten) quarters of the sky are watching and preserving 
nice orders; through Whose fear the planets are describing their 
several orbits. Through Whose fear, trees flower and yield fruits; By 
Whose command the Kala destroys all. By Whose command all the 
beings whether on land or in water are quitting their lives in time; 
until the proper time comes no man does not die even if he be 
pierced whether in battle or in danger. By Whose command the wind 
supports the water; the water supports the tortoise; the tortoise 
supports the Ananta and the Ananta supports the earth; the earth 
supports the oceans, mountain and all the jewels. The earth is of the 
nature of forgiveness, i.e., endures all. For this reason all things, 
moving and non-moving, rest on Her and again melt away in Her. 
Seventy-one Divine Yugas constitute one Indra’s life period. Twenty- 
eight Indra’s life periods constitute Brahma’s one day and one night. 
Thus thirty days constitute Brahma’s one month; so two months 
constitute one Ritu (season); six Ritus make one year. Thus one 
hundred years constitute Brahma’s life. When Brahma dies, S’ri 
Hari’s eye closes. That is the Prakritik Pralaya. At this time, 
everything, moving and non-moving, from the Deva loka to Bhur loka 
(earth) dies. The Creator Brahma gets dissolved in the navel of S’ri 
Krisna. The four-armed Visnu, of Vaikuntha, sleeps on Ksira 
Samudra, the ocean of milk, i.e.. He dissolves on the left side of S’ri 
Krisna, the Highest Spirit. All the other S’aktis (forces) dissolve in 
Mula Prakriti, the Maya of Visnu. The Mula Prakriti Durga, the 
Presiding Deity of Buddhi (reason) dissolves in the Buddhi of Krisna. 
Skanda, the part of Narayana, dissolves in His breast. Gane’sa, the 



foremost of the Devas, born in part of Krisna, dissolves in the arm of 
S’ri Krisna. And those who are born in parts of Padma, dissolve in 
Her body and Padma dissolves in the body of Radha. All the cow- 
herdesses and all the bodies of the Devas dissolve in Radha’s body. 
But Radha, the Presiding Deity of the Prana of S’ri Krisna, dissolves 
in the Prana of S’ri Krisna. Savitri, the four Vedas and all the 
S’astras dissolve in Sarasvati; and Sarasvati gets dissolved in the 
tongue of S’ri Krisna, the Highest Self. The Gopas in the region of 
Goloka dissolve in the pores of His skin; the Prana Vayu of all 
dissolve in His Prana Vayu; the fire dissolves in the fire in His belly; 
water dissolves in the tip of His tongue, and the Vaisnavas, 

(devotees of Visnu), drinking the nectar of Bhakti, the Essence of all 
essences, dissolve in His lotus-feet. All smaller Virats dissolve in the 
Great Virat and the Great Virat dissolves in the Body of S’ri Krisna. O 
Child! He is Krisna, on the pores of Whose skin are situated endless 
Universes; at the closing of Whose eyes, the Prakritic Pralaya comes 
and on the opening of Whose eyes, the creation takes place. The 
closing and opening of the eyes takes the same time. Brahma’s 
creation lasts one hundred years and the Pralaya lasts one hundred 
years. O One of good vows! There is no counting how many 
Brahmas or how many creations and dissolutions have taken place. 
As one cannot count the number of dusts, so one cannot count the 
creations and dissolutions. This is the Great Unspeakable Wonder! 
Again on Whose closing of the eyes the Pralaya takes place and on 
whose opening of the eyes the creation takes place, out of the will of 
God, That Krisna dissolves at the time of Pralaya in Prakriti. This 
Highest S’akti, the Mula Prakriti is the Only One without a second; it 
is the only one Nirguna and the Highest Purusa. It is considered as 
“Sat” existing, by the Seers of the Vedas. Such a thing as Mula 
Prakriti is the unchanged state (Mukti). During the Pralaya, this only 
One Mula Prakriti appears as Jhana S’akti or the Knowledge Force. 
Who can in this universe recite Her glories? Mukti is of four kinds. 



(1) Salokya, (2) Sarupya, (3) Samipya and (4) Nirvana. So it is 
stated in the Vedas. Out of them Bhakti towards the Deva is the 
highest; so much so that the Deva Bhakti is superior to Mukti. Mukti 
gives Salokya, Sarupya, Samipya, and Nirvana. But the Bhaktas do 
not want anything. They want service of the Lord. They do not want 
anything else. The state of becoming S’iva, of becoming an Amara 
or an immortal, becoming a Brahma, the birth, death, disease, old 
age, fear, sorrow, or wealth, or assuming a divine form, or Nirvana or 
Moksa all are looked on alike by the Bhaktas with disregard and 
contempt. Because Mukti is without any service while Bhakti 
increases this service. Thus I have told you the difference between 
Bhakti and Mukti. Now hear about the cutting off of the fruits of the 
past Karmas. O Chaste one! This service of the Highest Lord severs 
the ties of Karmas (past acts). This service is really the True 
Knowledge. So, O Child! I have now told you the Real Truth, leading 
to auspicious results. Now you can go freely as you desire. Thus 
saying to Savitri, Yama, the son of Surya, gave life back to her 
husband and blessing her, became ready to go to His own abode. 
Seeing Dharmaraja ready to go away, Savitri became sorry to have 
the bereavement of a good company, bowed down at His feet and 
began to cry. Yama, the Ocean of Mercy, hearing the crying of Savitri 
began to weep and told the following words 


80-96. Dharma said O Child! You enjoy in this holy Bharata 
happiness for one lakh years and you will in the end go to the 
Deviloka or Mani Dvipa. Now go back to your house and observe for 
fourteen years the vow called Savitri-vrata for the mukti of women. 
This Vrata is to he observed on the fourteenth day of the white 
fortnight in the month of Jyaistha. Then observe the Maha-Laksmi 
Vrata. Its proper time is the eighth day of the bright fortnight of the 
month of Bhadra. For sixteen years consecutively without any break 
this vow is to be observed. The woman who practises with devotion 
this vow, goes to the abode of Mula Prakriti. You would worship on 
every Tuesday in every month the Devi Mangala Chandika, the giver 



of all good; on the eighth day in the bright fortnight you should 
worship Devi Sasthi (i.e., Devasena); you should worship Manasa 
Devi, the giver of all siddhis, on the Samkranti day (when the Sun 
enters another sign) in every year; you should worship Radha, the 
Central Figure of Rasa, more than the Prana of Krisna on every Full 
Moon night in the month of Kartik and you should observe fasting on 
the eighth day in the bright fortnight and worship the Visnu Maya 
Bhagavati Devi, the Destructrix of all difficulties and dangers. 


(Note The Rasa is the playing out of the Vedantic saying of 
Brahma as “Raso vai Sah.” He is of the nature of Rasa, the most 
sweet and lovely Divine Principle which unites the Rasika and the 
Rasika.) The chaste woman having husband and sons who worships 
the World Mother Mula Prakriti, whether in Yantra, or in Mantra or in 
image, enjoys all pleasures in this world; and, in the end, goes to the 
Deviloka or Mani Dvipa. O Child! The worshipper Sadhaka (one who 
is in one’s way to success) must worship all the manifestations of the 
Devi, day and night. At all times one must worship the omnipresent 
Durga, the Highest Isvari. There is no other way to attain 
blessedness than this. Thus saying, Dharmaraja went to His own 
abode. Savitri, too, with her husband Satyavan went to her home. 
Both Savitri and Satyavan, when they reached home, narrated all 
their stories to their friends and acquaintances. In time, by the 
blessing of Yama, Savitri’s father got sons and father-in-law 
recovered his eye-sight and kingdom and Savitri Herself got sons. 
For one lakh years, Savitri enjoyed pleasures in this holy land of 
Bharata, and ultimately went with her husband to the Deviloka. 

Savitri is the Presiding Deity of the Suryamandalam, the solar orb. 
The Sun is the central Para Brahma. The Gayatri Mantra, the 
Presiding Devi, proves the existence of the highest Brahma in the 
centre of the Sun. Therefore She is called Savitri. Or Her name is 
Savitri because all the Vedas have come out of Her. Thus I have 
narrated the excellent anecdote of Savitri, and the fruitions of the 



Karmas of the several Jivas. Now what more do you want to hear? 
Say. 


Here ends the Thirty-eighth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the glories 
of the Devi and on the nature of Bhakti in the Maha Puranam S’ri 
Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 39. On The Story Of Maha Laksm! 


1-3 Narada said “O Lord! I have heard in the discourse on Savitri 
and Yama about the Formless Devi Mula Prakriti and the glories of 
Savitri, all true and leading to the endless good. Now I want to hear 
the story of the Devi Laksmi. O Thou, the Chief of the knowers of the 
Vedas! What is the nature of Laksmi? By whom was She first 
worshipped? and by what Mantra? Kindly describe Her glories to 
me. 


4-33. Narayana said Of old, in the beginning of the Prakritik 
Creation, from the left side of Krisna, the Supreme Spirit, appeared 
in the Rasamandalam (the Figure Dance) a Devi. She looked 
exceedingly handsome, of a dark blue colour, of spacious hips, of 
thin waist, and with high breast, looking twelve years old, of steady 
youth, of a colour of white Champaka flower and very lovely. The 
beauty of Her face throws under shade millions and millions of 
autumnal full moons. Before Her wide expanded eyes, the midday 
lotus of the autumnal season becomes highly ashamed. By the Will 
of God, this Devi suddenly divided Herself into two parts. The two 
looked equal in every respect; whether in beauty, qualities, age, 
loveliness, colour, body, spirit, dress, ornaments, smile, glance, love, 
or humanity, they were perfectly equal. 


Now she who appeared from the right side is named Radha and she 
who came from the left side is named Maha Laksmi. Radha wanted 
first the two armed S’ri Krisna, Who was Higher than the highest; 
then Maha Laksmi wanted Him. Radha came out of the right side 
and wanted first Krisna; so Krisna, too, divided himself at once into 
two parts. From His right side came out the two-armed and from his 
left side came out the four-armed. The two-armed person first made 
over to Maha Laksmi the four armed One; then the two armed 



Person Himself took Radha. Laksmi looks on the whole universe 
with a cooling eye; hence She is named Laksmi and as She is great, 
She is called Maha Laksmi. And for that reason the Lord of Radha is 
two-armed and the Lord of Laksmi is four-armed. Radha is pure 
Apra kritic S’uddha Sattva (of the nature of pure Sattva Guna, the 
illuminating attribute) and surrounded by the Gopas and GopTs. The 
four-armed Purusa, on the other hand, took Laksmi (Padma) to 
Vaikuntha. The two-armed person is Krisna; and the four-armed is 
Narayana. They are equal in all respects. Maha Laksmi became 
many by Her Yogic powers (i.e.. She remained in full in Vaikuntha 
and assumed many forms in parts). Maha Laksmi of Vaikuntha is 
full, of pure Sattva Guna, and endowed with all sorts of wealth and 
prosperity. She is the crest of woman-kind as far as loving one’s 
husbands is concerned. She is the Svarga Laksmi in the Heavens; 
the Naga Laksmi of the serpents, the Nagas, in the nether regions; 
the Raja Laksmi of the kings and the Household Laksmi of the 
householders. She resides in the houses of house-holders as 
prosperity and the most auspicious of all good things. She is the 
progenetrix. She is the Surabhi of cows and She is the Daksina (the 
sacrificial fee) in sacrifices. She is the daughter of the milk ocean 
and she is Padmini, the beauty of the spheres of the Moon and the 
Sun. She is the lustre and beauty of the ornaments, gems, fruits, 
water, kings, queens, heavenly women, of all the houses, grains, 
clothings, cleansed places, images, auspicious jars, pearls, jewels, 
crest of jewels, garlands, diamonds, milk, sandal, beautiful twigs, 
fresh rain cloud, or of all other colours. She was first worhipped in 
Vaikuntha by Narayana. Next She was worshipped by Brahma and 
then by S’ankara with devotion. She was worshipped by Visnu in the 
Kshirode Samudra. Then she was worshipped by Svayambhuva 
Manu, then by Indras amongst men, then by Munis, Risis, good 
householders, by the Gandharbas, in the Gandharbaloka; by the 
Nagas in the Nagaloka. She was worshipped with devotion by 
Brahma for one fortnight commencing from the bright eighth day in 
the month of Bhadra and ending on the eighth day of the dark 
fortnight in the three-worlds. She was worshipped by Visnu, with 
devotion in the three worlds on the meritorious Tuesday in the 



months of Pausa, Chaitra, and Bhadra. Manu, also, worshipped Her 
on the Pausa Sankranti (the last day of the month of Pausa when the 
Sun enters another sign) and on the auspicious Tuesday in the 
month of Magha. Thus the worship of Maha Laksmi is made 
prevalent in the three worlds. She was worshipped by Indra, the Lord 
of the Devas and by Mangala (Mars) on Tuesday. She was then 
worshipped by Kedara, Nila, Subala, Dhruva, Uttanapada, S’akra, 
Bali, Kas’yapa, Daksa, Kardama, Surya, Priyavrata, Chandra, Vayu, 
Kuvera, Varuna, Yama, Hutasana and others. Thus Her worship 
extended by and by to all the places. She is the Presiding Deity of all 
wealth; so She is the wealth of all. 


Here ends the Thirty-ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the story of 
Maha Laksmi in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 40. On The Birth Of Laksm! In The 
Discourse Of Narada And Narayana 


1-2. Narada said “O Lord! How did the eternal Devi Maha Laksmi 
the dweller in Vaikuntha, the beloved of Narayana, the Presiding 
Deity of Vaikuntha, come down to the earth and how She, became 
the daughter of the ocean? By whom was She first praised? Kindly 
describe all these in detail to me and oblige.” 


3-10. Narayana said O Narada! In ancient days when on 
Durvasa’s curse, Indra was dispossesed of his kingdom, all the 
Devas came down to earth. Laksmi, too, getting angry, quitted the 
Heavens, out of pain and sorrow and went to Vaikuntha and took the 
shelter of Narayana. The Devas, then, went to Brahma with their 
hearts full of sorrow and, taking Him from there, they all went to 
Narayana in Vaikuntha. Going there they all took refuge of the Lord 
of Vaikuntha. They were very much distressed and their throats, 
palate and lips were quite dry. At that time Laksmi, the wealth and 
prosperity of all, came down on earth by the command of Narayana 
and became born in part as the daughter of the ocean. The Devas, 
then with the Daityas churned the Ksiroda Ocean and, out of that, 
Maha Laksmi appeared. Visnu looked on Her. Her joy knew no 
bounds. She smiling, granted boons to the Devas and then offered a 
garland of flowers on the neck of Narayana (as a symbol of marriage 
celebrated). O Narada! the Devas, on the other hand, got back their 
kingdoms from the Asuras. They then worshipped and chanted 
hymns to Maha Laksmi and since then they became free from 
further dangers and troubles. 


11-12. Narada said “O Bhagavan! Durvasa was the best of the 
Munis; he was attached to Brahma and had spiritual knowledge. 



Why did he curse Indra? What offence had he committed? How did 
the Devas and Daityas churn the ocean? How, and by what hymns 
Laksmi became pleased and appeared before Indra? What passed 
on between them. Say all this, O Lord.” 


13-25. Narayana said In ancient days, Indra the Lord of the three 
worlds, intoxicated with wine and becoming lustful and shameless, 
began to enjoy Rambha in a lonely grove. After having enjoyed her, 
he became attracted to her; his mind being wholly drawn to her, he 
remained there in that forest, his mind becoming very passionate. 
Indra then saw the Muni Durvasa on his way from Vaikuntha to 
Kailas’a burning with the fire of Brahma. From the body of the Risi, 
emitted, as it were, the rays of the thousand midday Suns. On his 
head was the golden matted hair. On his breast there was the hoary 
holy thread; he wore torn clothes; on his hands there was the Danda 
and Kamandalu; on his forehead there was the bright Tilaka in the 
form of the Crescent Moon. (Tilaka - a sectarian mark on the 
forehead made with coloured earth or sandalpaste.) 


One hundred thousand disciples, thoroughly-versed in the Vedas 
and the Vedangas, were attending him. The intoxicated Purandara, 
seeing him, bowed down to him and he began to chant with devotion 
hymns to his disciples also. They were very glad. The Risi with his 
disciples then blessed Indra and gave him one Parijata flower. 


When the Muni was returning from the region of Vaikuntha, Visnu, 
gave him that beautiful Parijata flower. Old age, death, disease, 
sorrows, etc., all are removed by the influence of the flower; and the 
final liberation is also attained. The Devendra was intoxicated with 
his wealth; so taking the flower given by the Risi, he threw it on the 
head of the elephant Airarata. No sooner the elephant touched the 
flower, than he became suddenly like Visnu, as it were, in beauty. 



form, qualities, fire and age. The elephant, then, forsook Indra and 
entered into a dense forest. The Lord of the Devas could, in no way, 
get him under his control. On the other hand, the Muni Durvasa 
seeing that Mahendra had thus dishonoured the flower, became 
inflamed with rage and cursed him saying, “O Indra! You are so mad 
with wealth that you have dishonoured me. The flower that I gave 
you so lovingly, you have thrown that, out of vanity, on the elephant’s 
head! 


26-46. No sooner one gets the food, water, fruits that had been 
offered to Visnu, one should eat that at once. Otherwise one incurs 
the sin of Brahmahattya. If anybody forsakes the things offered to 
Visnu, that he has got perchance, he becomes destitute of wealth, 
prosperity, intelligence, and his kingdom. And if he eats the food 
already offered to Visnu with devotion, he then elevates his hundred 
families passed before him and he himself becomes liberated while 
living. If anybody daily eats Visnu’s Naivedyam (food offered to 
Visnu) and bow down before Him or worships Hah with devotion and 
chants hymns to Him, he becomes like Visnu in energy and wealth. 
By mere touch with the air round about his body, the places of 
pilgrimage become all purified. O You Stupid! The earth becomes 
purified by the contact of the dust of the feet of such a one devoted 
to Visnu. If anybody eats the food unoffered to Hari and flesh that is 
not offered to any Deity; if he eats the food of any unchaste woman, 
any woman without husband and sons, the food offered at any 
S’udra’s Sradh (funeral) ceremony, the food offered by a Brahmana, 
who is a priest to the S’udras in honour of a S’iva Lingam, the food of 
a Brahman priest who subsists on the presents of a temple, the food 
of one who sells his daughter, the food of one who subsists on 
dealing with womb concerns, the leavings of others, the stale food 
left after all others had eaten, the food of the husband of an 
unmarried girl (twelve years old in whom menstruation has 
commenced), the driver of oxen, the food of one uninitiated in one’s 
Istamantram, of one who burns a corpse, of a Brahmin who goes to 



one not fit for going, the food of a rebel against friends, of one who is 
faithless, treacherous, who gives false evidence, the food of a 
Brahmin who accepts offerings in a sacred place of pilgrimage, all 
his sins (incurred in the ways above-mentioned) will be removed if 
he eats the prasadam of Visnu, i.e., the food offered to Visnu. Even if 
a Chandala be attached to the service of Visnu, he sanctifies his 
millions of persons born in his family before him. And the man who is 
devoid of the devotion to Hah is not able even to save himself. If 
anybody takes unknowingly the remains of an offering (such as 
flowers) made to Visnu, he will certainly be freed from all the sins 
incurred in his seven births. And if he does this knowingly and with 
intense devotion, he will certainly be freed of all sorts of sins incurred 
in his Koti births. So, O Indra! I am a devotee of S’ri Hah. And when 
you have cast away the Parijata to flower offered by me on the 
elephant’s head, then I say unto you that the Maha Laksmi will leave 
you and She will go back to Narayana. I am highly devoted to 
Narayana; so I do not fear anybody, I fear neither the Creator, nor 
Kala, the Destroyer, nor old age, nor death; what to speak of other 
petty persons! I do not fear your father Prajapati Kas’yapa nor do I 
fear your family priest Brihaspati. Now he, on whose head there lies 
the flower Parijata offered by me, verily he should be worshipped by 
all means.” Hearing these words of Durvasa, Indra became 
bewildered with fear, and being greatly distressed and holding the 
feet of Muni, cried out loudly. He said “The curse is now well 
inflicted on me; and it has caused my delusion to vanish. Now I do 
not want back my Raja Laksmi from you; instruct me on knowledge. 
This wealth is the source of all coils; it is the cause of the veil to all 
knowledge, it hides the final liberation and it is a great obstacle on 
the way to get the highest devotion.” 


47-67. The Muni said :-“This birth, death, old age, disease, and 
afflictions, all come from wealth and the manipulation of great power. 
Being blind by the darkness of wealth, he does not see the road to 
Mukti. The stupid man that is intoxicated with wealth is like the one 



that is intoxicated with wine. Surrounded by many friends, he is 
surrounded by the unbreakable bondage. The man that is intoxicated 
with wealth, blind with property and overwhelmed with these things 
has no thought for the real knowledge. He who is Rajasik, is very 
much addicted to passions and desires; he never sees the path to 
Sattvaguna. The man that is blind with sense-objects is of two kinds, 
firstly, Rajasik and secondly Tamasik. He who has no knowledge of 
the S’astras is Tamasik and he who has the knowledge of the 
S’astras is Rajasik. O Child of the Devas! Two paths are mentioned 
in the S’astras; one is Pravritti, going towards the sense objects and 
the other is Nivritti, going away from them. The Jivas first follow the 
path of Pravritti, the path that is painful, gladly and of their own 
accord like a mad man. As bees, blind with the desire of getting 
honey, go to the lotus bud and get themselves entangled there, so 
the Jivas, the embodied souls, desirous first of getting enjoyments 
come to this very painful circle of births and deaths, this worldly life, 
which in the end is realised as vapid and the only cause of old age, 
death, and sorrow and get themselves enchained there. 


For many births he travels gladly in various wombs, ordained by his 
own Karmas, till at last by the favour of gods, he comes in contact 
with the saints. Thus one out of a thousand or out of a hundred finds 
means to cross this terrible ocean of world. When the saintly persons 
kindle the lamp of knowledge and show the way to Mukti, then the 
JTva makes an attempt to sever this bondage to the world. After 
many births, many austerities and many fastings, he then finds 
safely the way to Mukti, leading to the highest happiness. O Indra! 
What you asked me, I thus heard from my Guru.” O Narada! hearing 
the words of the Muni Durvasa Indra became dispassionate towards 
the Samsara. Day by day his feeling of dispassion increased. One 
day, when he returned to his own home from the hermitage of the 
Muni, he saw the Heavens overspread by the Daityas and it had 
become terrible. At some places outrage and oppression knew no 
bounds; some places were devoid of friends; at some places, some 



persons had lost their fathers, mothers, wives, relations; so no rest 
and repose could be found. Thus, seeing the Heavens in the hands 
of the enemies, Indra went out in quest of Brihaspati, the family 
preceptor of the Devas. Seeking to and fro Indra ultimately went to 
the banks of the Mandakini and saw that the Guru Deva had bathed 
in the waters of the Mandakini and sitting with his face turned 
towards the East towards the Sun, was meditating on Para Brahma, 
Who has His faces turned everywhere. Tears were flowing from his 
eyes and the hairs of the body stood erect with delight. He was 
elderly in knowledge; the spiritual Teacher of all, religious, served by 
all great men; he was held as most dear to all the friends. Those who 
are Jhanins regard him as their Guru. He was the eldest of all his 
brothers; he was considered as very unpopular to the enemies of the 
Devas. Seeing the family priest Brihaspati merged in that state of 
meditation, Indra waited there. When after one Prahara (three 
hours), the Guru Deva got up, Indra bowed down to his feet and 
began to weep and cry out repeatedly. Then he informed his Guru 
about his curse from a Brahmin, his acquiring the true knowledge as 
so very rare, and the wretched state of Amaravati, wrought by the 
enemies. 


68-92. O Best of Brahmanas! Hearing thus the words of the disciple, 
the intelligent speaker Brihaspati spoke with his eyes reddened out 
of anger. “O Lord of the Devas! I have heard everything that you 
said; do not cry; have patience; hear attentively what I say. The wise 
politicians of good behaviour, with moral precepts, never lose their 
heads and get themselves distressed in times of danger. Nothing is 
everlasting; whether property or adversity; all are transient; they only 
give troubles. All are under one’s own Karma; one is master of one’s 
own Karma. What had been done in previous births, so one will have 
to reap the fruits afterwards. (Therefore property or adversity, all are 
due to one’s own Karma.) This happens to all persons eternally, 
births after births. Pain and happiness are like the ring of a rolling 
wheel. So what pain is there? It is already stated that one’s own 



Karma must be enjoyed in this Holy Bharata. The man enjoys the 
effects of his own Karmas, auspicious or inauspicious. Never the 
Karma gets exhausted in one hundred Koti Kalpas, without their 
effects being enjoyed. The Karma, whether auspicious or 
inauspicious must be enjoyed. Thus it is stated in the Vedas and as 
well by S’ri Krisna, the Supreme Spirit. Bhagavan S’ri Krisna 
addressed Brahma, the lotus-born, in the Sama Veda Sakha that all 
persons acquire their births, whether, in Bharata or in any other 
country, according to the Karma that he had done. The course of a 
Brahmana comes though this Karma; and the blessings of a 
Brahmana come again by this Karma. By Karma one gets great 
wealth and prosperity and by Karma again one gets poverty. You 
may take one hundred Koti births; the fruit of Karma must follow you. 
O Indra! The fruit of Karma follows one like one’s shadow. Without 
enjoyment, that can never die. The effects of Karma become 
increased or decreased according to time, place, and the person 
concerned. As you will give away anything to persons, of different 
natures, in different times and in different places, your merit acquired 
will also vary accordingly. Gifts made on certain special days bring in 
Koti times the fruits (merits, punyam) or infinite times or even more 
than that. Again gifts, similar in nature, made in similar paces yield 
punyam the same, in character also. Gifts made in different countries 
yield punyams, Koti times, infinite times, or even more than that. But 
similar things given to similar persons yield similar punyams. As the 
grains vary in their natures as the fields differ, so gifts made to 
different persons yield different grades of punyas infinitely superior 
or infinitely inferior as the case may be. 


Giving things to a Brahmana on any ordinary day yields simple 
punya only. But if the gift be made to a Brahman on an Amavasya 
day (new moon day) or on a Sankranti day (the day when the Sun 
enters another’s sign) then hundred times more punyam is acquired. 
Again charities made on the Chaturmasya period (the vow that lasts 
for four months in the rainy season) or on the full moon day, yield 



infinite punyams. So charities made on the occasion of the lunar 
eclipses yield Koti times the result and if made on the occasion of 
the solar eclipse yield ten times more punyams. Charities made on 
Aksayaya Tritiya or the Navami day yield infinite and endless results. 
So charities on other holy days yield religious merits higher than 
those made on ordinary days. As charities made on holy days yield 
religious merits, so bathing, reciting mantrams, and other holy acts 
yield meritorious results. As superior results are obtained by pious 
acts; inferior results are obtained by impious acts. As an earthen 
potter makes pots, jars, etc., out of the earth with the help of rod, 
wheel, earthen cups or plates and motion, so the Creator awards 
respective fruits to different persons, by the help of this thread 
(continuity) of Karma. Therefore if you want to have cessation of this 
fruition of Karma, then worship Narayana, by whose command all 
these things of Nature are created. He is the Creator of even 
Brahma, the Creator, the Preserver of Visnu, the Preserver, the 
Destroyer of S’iva, the Destroyer and the Kala (the great Time) of 
Kala (the Time). S’ankara has said He who remembers 
Madhusudana (a name of Visnu) in great troubles, his dangers 
cease and happiness begins.” O Narada! The wise Brihaspati thus 
advised Indra and then embraced him and gave him his hearty 
blessings and good wishes. 


Here ends the Fortieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the birth of 
Laksmi in the discourse of Narada and Narayana in the Maha 
Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 41. On The Churning Of The Ocean And 
On The Appearing Of Laksm! 


1-2. Narayana said O Twice-born! Indra then remembered Hah 
and took Brihaspati, the Guru of the Devas, to the assembly of 
Brahma, accompanied by the other Devas. They soon reached the 
region of Brahma and no sooner they saw Him, than Indra and the 
other Devas and Bihaspati all bowed down to Him. 


3-25. Brihaspati, the Acharya of the Devas, then communicated all to 
Brahma. Hearing this. He smiled and spoke, addressing Indra O 
Indra! You have been born in My race; nay, you are My grandson; 
the Arya Brihaspati is your Guru; you yourself are the ruler of the 
Devas and you are very wise and sagacious; the mother of your 
father is the powerful Daksa, a great Visnu Bhakta. How is it, then 
that when the three sides of the family are pure, one would turn out 
so haughty and arrogant! Whose mother is so much devoted to her 
husband, whose father, mother’s father and mother’s brother are 
self-controlled and of pure Sattva Guna, he is not expected to be so 
very haughty! Every man may be guilty to Hari for the three faults :-- 
For some fault due to that of his father, or of his mother’s father, or of 
Guru, the Spiritual Teacher. Bhagavan Narayana, resides in this 
great holy temple of our this physical body controlling the hearts of 
all. At whatever moment, S’ri Narayana quits this temple-body, at 
that moment this body becomes dead. I myself am the mind; 
S’ankara is the Knowledge, Visnu is the vital breaths, Bhagavati 
Durga is the intelligence (Buddhi), sleep, etc., the powers of Prakriti; 
when these are being reflected on by the Atman, JTva is formed with 
a body for enjoyment called Bhoga S’arirabhrit. When a king 
departs, his attendants also follow him; so when this Atman departs 
from this temple of body, his attendants mind, buddhi, etc., instantly 
depart from this body and follow the Atman. O Indra! We all, are 
verily, the parts of S’ri Krisna. I myself, S’iva, Ananta Deva, Visnu, 



Dharma, Maha Virat, you all are His parts and entirely devoted to 
Him. And you have shown contempt for His flower. Bhagavan 
S’ankara, the Lord of the Bhutas, worshipped the lotus-feet of S’ri 
Krisna with that flower. The Risi Durvasa gave you that flower. But 
you showed disrespect to it. The flower, Parijata, after being offered 
at the lotus-feet of Krisna, should be placed on the head of an 
Immortal; His worship is to be done first; and it is the foremost 
amongst the Devas. So you are now being afflicted by the inevitable 
course of Fate; Fate is the most powerful of all. Who can save that 
unlucky man against whom Fate has turned? Seeing that you have 
rejected the flower offered to S’ri Krisna, S’ri Laksmi Devi has left 
you out of anger. Now come with Me and with your family priest 
Brihaspati to Vaikuntha and worship the Lord of Laksmi; then by His 
grace you may get back your Heavens. Thus saying, Brahma with 
Indra and all the other Devas, went to the Eternal Purusa, Bhagavan 
Narayana and saw that He was full of Fire and Energy like one 
hundred koti summer midday Suns, yet perfectly cool and calm. He 
has no beginning, and no end, nor any middle. He is Infinite. The 
four-armed Parisadas, Sarasvati, the four Vedas, and the Ganges, 
all were surrounding Him. Seeing Him, Brahma and the other Devas 
bowed down with devotion and began to chant hymns to Him with 
tears in their eyes. Brahma, then, informed Him of everything when 
all the Devas, dispossessed of their places, began to weep before 
Him. Narayana saw that the Devas were very afraid and much 
distressed. They had no jewel ornaments as before, no vehicles 
(Vahanas), nor the Daivic splendour as before, not that brillance; 
always fearful. Then Narayana, the Destroyer of fear, seeing the 
Devas in that state, addressed Brahma and the other Devas O 
Brahman! O Devas! Discard all fears. What fear can overcome you? 

I am here. I will give you again the immoveable prosperous Rajya 
Laksmi (the Laksmi of the kings). 


26-47. But for the present, I give you some advice proper for this 
moment. Listen. There are endless universes where exist 



innumerable persons. All of them are under Me. So know verily, that 
I am under them also. My devotees regard Me as the Highest. They 
know no other than Me; they are fearless; so I do not remain in that 
house where My devotees are dissatisfied. I instantly quit that house 
with Laksmi. Durvasa Risi is born in part of S’ankara. He is highly 
devoted to Me. He is a pakka Vaisnava. He cursed you and, as a 
matter of fact, I and Laksmi instantly left your house. 

Laksmi does not reside in that house where conch shells are not 
blown, where there are no Tulasi trees, where there is no worship of 
S’iva and S’iva, where the Brahmanas are not fed. O Brahman! O 
Devas! Where I and My Bhaktas are blamed, Maha Laksmi becomes 
greatly displeased. She instantly goes away out of that house. 

Laksmi does not stay even for a moment in that house where the 
stupid person, without any devotion for me, takes his food on the 
Harivasara Ekadas’i day (the eleventh day of the moon’s wane or 
increase) or on My anniversary birthday. If anybody sells My name or 
his own daughter, where the guests are not served, Laksmi quits that 
house instantly and goes away. 


(Note That Guru is the Real Guru, who, being capable, imparts 
the name of God to worthy persons without taking any fee at all.) 


If the son of an unchaste woman be a Brahmana, he and the 
husband of an unchaste woman are great sinners. If anybody goes 
to such a person’s house or eats the food of a S’udra during a 
Sraddha ceremony, Laksmi becomes very angry and vacates that 
house. Being a Brahmin, if one burns a S’udra’s corpse, one 
becomes very wretched and the vilest of the Brahmins. Laksmi 
never stays for a moment more in that house. Being a Brahmin, if he 
be a S’udra’s cook and drives oxen, Laksmi fears to drink water 
there and quits his house. Being a Brahmin, if his heart be unholy, if 
he be cruel, envies others and blames persons, if he officiates as a 
priest for the S’udra, Laksmi Devi never stays in his house. The 



World-Mother never stays even for a moment in his house who eats 
at the house of one who marries an unmarried girl twelve years old 
in whom menstruation has commenced. He who cuts grass by his 
nails, or writes on the ground with his nails, or from whose house a 
Brahmana guest goes back disappointed, Laksmi never stays in his 
house. If any Brahmana eats food at the early sunrise, sleeps during 
the day or engages in a sexual intercourse during the day, Laksmi 
never stays in his house. Laksmi slips away from that Brahmana 
who is devoid of Achara (rules of conduct), who accepts gifts from 
S’udras, from him who remains uninitiated in his Mantram. The 
ignorant man who sleeps naked and with his feet wet, who laughs 
always, and always talks at random on disconnected subjects like a 
mad man, is forsaken at once by Laksmi. Laksmi becomes angry 
and goes away from the house of that man who applies oil all over 
his body first and then touches the bodies of others and always 
makes some sounding noise on several parts of his body. If any 
Brahmana forsakes observing vows, fastings, the Sandhya 
ceremony, purity and devotion to Visnu, Kamala (Laksmi) does not 
remain in his house any longer. If anybody blames always the 
Brahmanas and shews his hatred always towards the Brahmanas, if 
he does injury to the animals, and if he does not indulge in his heart 
anything of pity, kindness, Laksmi, the Mother of the Worlds, quits 
him. O Lotus-born! But where Hah is worshipped and Hari’s Name is 
chanted, Laksmi, the Mother of all auspiciousness, remains there. 
Laksmi remains where the glories of S’ri Krisna and His Bhaktas are 
sung. 


48-59. Laksmi always remains there with the greatest gladness 
where conch-shells are blown, where there are conchsells, the 
S’alagrama stone, the TulasT leaves and the service and meditation 
of Laksmi are daily done. 



Where the phallic emblem of S’iva is worshipped, and His glories 
sung, where S’ri Durga is worshipped and Her glories are sung, 
Laksmi, the Dweller in the Lotus, remains there. Where the 
Brahmanas are honoured and they are gladly feasted, where all the 
Devas are worshiped; the chaste Laksmi, the Lotus-faced, remains 
there. Thus saying to the Devas, the Lord of Laksmi said O Devi! 
Go without any any delay to the Ksiroda Ocean and incarnate there 
in part. He then addressed Brahma and said “O Lotus-born! You 
also better go there and churn the Ksiroda Ocean; when Laksmi will 
arise, give her to the Devas.” O Devarsi! Thus saying, the Lord 
Kamala went to His inner compartment. On the other hand the 
Devas, after a long time, reached the shores of the Ksiroda Ocean. 
The Devas and the Daityas then made the Golden Mountain (the 
Sumeru) the churning rod, the Deva Kurma (the tortoise), the 
churning pot and Ananta Deva (the thousand headed serpent) the 
churning cord and began to churn the ocean. While churning was 
going on, by and by arose Dhanvantari, Amrita (the nectar), the 
horse Uchchaihs’rava, various other invaluable jewels that were 
desired, the elephant Airavata and the beautiful eyed Laksmi. 
Visnupriya, S’ri Laksmi Devi, no sooner She got up from the ocean, 
she, the chaste woman, presented on the neck of Narayana, of 
beautiful appearance, the Lord of all. Who slept on the Ksiroda 
ocean the garland (indicative of accepting Him for her bridegroom). 
Then Brahma and MahesVara and the other Devas gladly 
worshipped Her and chanted hymns. At this time Laksmi Devi being 
pleased, cast a favourable glance towards the homes of the Devas, 
in order to free them from their curse. Then, by the grace of Maha 
Laksmi and by the granting of the boon by Brahma, the Devas got 
back their own possessions from the hands of the Daityas. O 
Narada! Thus I have described to you the story of Laksmi Devi, the 
Essence of all Essences, and very pleasant to hear. Now what more 
do you want to hear? Say. 



Here ends the Forty-first Chapter of the Ninth Book on the churning 
of the ocean and on the appearing of Laksmi in the Maha Puranam 
S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 42. On The Dhyanam And Stotra Of 
Maha Laksm! 


1-50. Narada said O Bhagavan! I have heard about the glories of 
Hari, about the Tattvajhanam (the True Knowledge) and the story of 
Laksmi. Now tell me Her Dhyanam (meditation) and Stotram 
(recitation of hymns) of Her. Narayana said O Narada! Indra then, 
bathed first in the Tirath (holy place) and, wearing a cleansed cloth, 
installed, first of all, an earthen jar (ghata) on the beach of the 
Ksiroda Ocean. Then he worshipped with devotion Ganes’a, Surya, 
Fire, Visnu, S’iva, and S’iva, the six deities with scents and flowers. 
Next Indra invoked Maha Laksmi, of the nature of the highest 
powers and greatest prosperity, and began to worship Her as 
Brahma, who was acting as an officiating priest in the presence of 
the Munis, Brahmanas, Brihaspati, Hari and the other Devas, had 
dictated him. He first smeared one Parijata flower with sandal paste 
and reciting the meditation mantra of Maha Laksmi offered it to Her 
feet. The meditation mantra that was recited by Devendra, was what 
Bhagavan Hari first gave to Brahma. I am now telling you that. 
Listen. 


“O Mother! Thou residest on the thousand-petalled lotus. The beauty 
of Thy face excels the beauty of koti autumnal Full Moons. Thou art 
shining with Thy own splendour. Thou art very beautiful and lovely; 
Thy colour is like the burnished gold; Thou art with form, chaste, 
ornamented all over with jewel ornaments; Thou art wearing the 
yellow cloth and look! What beauty is coming out of it! Always a 
sweet smile reigns on Thy lips. Thy beauty is constant; Thou art the 
bestower of prosperity to all. O Maha Laksmi! I meditate on Thee.” 
Thus meditating on Her endowed with various attributes with this 
mantra, Indra worshipped devotedly with sixteen upacharas (articles 
offered). Every upachara (article) was offered with the repetition of 
mantra. All the things were very excellent, right and commendable. 



“O Maha Laksmi! VisVakarma has made this invaluable Asan (a 
carpet seat) wonderfully decked with jewels; I am offering this Asan 
to Thee. Accept. O Thou residing in the Lotus! This holy Ganges 
water is considered with great regard and desired by all. This is like 
the fire to burn the fuel in the shape of the sins of the sinners. O 
Thou! The Dweller in the Lotus! This Durbha grass, flowers, this 
Arghya (offering) of the Ganges water perfumed with sandalpaste, I 
am offering to Thee. Accept. O Beloved of Hari! This sweet scented 
flower oil and this sweet scented Amalaki fruit lead to the beauty of 
the body; therefore I present this to Thee. Accept. O Devi! I am 
presenting this cloth made of silk to Thee; Accept. O Devi! This 
excellent ornament made of gold and jewels, which increases the 
beauty, I am presenting to Thee. Accept. O Beloved of Krisna! I am 
presenting this sweet scented holy Dhupa prepared from various 
herbs and plants, exquisitely nice and the root of all beauty, to Thee. 
Accept. This sweet scented pleasant sandalpaste I offer to Thee, O 
Devi! Accept. O Ruler of the Devas! I present this pleasing holy DTpa 
(lights) which is the eye of this world and by which all the darkness is 
vanished; accept. O Devi! I present to Thee these very delicious 
offerings of fruits, etc., very juicy and of various kinds. Accept. O 
Deves'i! This Anna (food) is Brahma and the chief means to 
preserve the life of living beings. By this the nourishment of the body 
and the mental satisfaction are effected. Therefore I am presenting 
this food to Thee. Accept. O Maha Laksmi! I am presenting this most 
delicious Paramanna, which is prepared out of rice, milk and sugar, 
to Thee. Accept. O Devi! I am presenting this most delicious and 
pleasant svastika prepared of sugar and clarified butter to Thee; 
accept. O Beloved of Achyuta! I am presenting to Thee various 
beautiful Pakkannas, ripe delicious fruits and clarified butter out of 
cow’s milk; accept. O Devi! The sugarcane juice, when heated, 
yields a syrup which again heated yields very delicious and nice 
thing called Gur. I am presenting this Gur to Thee; accept. O Devi! I 
am presenting to Thee the sweetmeats prepared out of the flour of 
Yava and and wheat and Gur and clarified butter; accept. I am 
presenting with devotion the offering made of Svastika and the flour 
of other grains; accept. O Kamale! I am presenting to Thee this fan 



and white chamara, which blows cool air and is very pleasant when 
this body gets hot; accept. O Devi! I am presenting this betel scented 
with camphor by which the inertness of the tongue is removed; 
accept. O Devi! I am presenting this scented cool water, which will 
allay the thirst and which is known as the life of this world; accept. O 
Devi! I am presenting this cloth made of cotton and silk that 
increases the beauty and splendour of the body. Accept. O Devi! I 
am presenting to Thee, the ornaments made of gold and jewels 
which are the source of beauty and loveliness. Accept. O Devi! I am 
presenting to Thee these pure garlands of flowers which blossom in 
different seasons, which look very beautiful and which give 
satisfaction to the Devas and to the kings. Accept. O Devi! I am 
presenting to Thee this nice scent, this very holy thing to Thee by 
which both the body and mind become pure, which is most 
auspicious and which is prepared of many fragrant herbs and plants; 
accept. O Beloved of the God Krisna! I am presenting this 
Achamaniya water to Thee for rinsing the mouth, pure and holy, and 
brought from holy places of pilgrimages; accept. O Devi! I am 
presenting to Thee, this bed made of excellent gems and jewels and 
flowers, sandalpaste, clothings and ornaments; accept. O Devi! I am 
presenting to Thee all those things that are extraordinary, very rare 
in this earth and fit to be enjoyed by the Devas and worthy of their 
ornaments; accept.” O Devarsi! Uttering those mantras, the 
Devendra offered those articles, with intense devotion according to 
the rules. He, then, made Japam of the Mula Mantra (the Radical 
Seed Mantra) ten lakhs of times. Thus his Mantra revealed the Deity 
thereof and thus came to a successful issue. The lotus born Brahma 
gave this Mantra “S’rim Hrim Klim Aim Kamalavasinyai Svaha” to 
the Devendra. This is like a Kalpavriksa (the tree in Indra’s garden 
yielding whatever may be desired). This Vaidik mantra is the chief of 
the mantras. The word “Svaha” is at the end of the mantra. By virtue 
of this Mantra, Kuvera got his highest prosperity. By the power of this 
Mantra, the King-Emperor Daksa Savarni Manu and Mangala 
became the lords of the earth with seven islands. Priyavrata, 
Uttanapada, and Kedararaja all these became Siddhas (were 
fructified with success) and became King-Emperors. O Narada! 



When Indra attained success in this Mantra, there appeared before 
hinn Maha Laksmi, seated in the celestial car, decked with excellent 
gems and jewels. The Great Halo, coming out of Her body made 
manifest the earth with seven islands. Her colour was white like the 
white champaka flower and Her whole body was decked with 
ornaments. Her face was always gracious and cheerful with sweet 
smiles. She was ever ready to shew Her kindness to the Bhaktas. 

On Her neck there was a garland of jewels and gems, bright as ten 
million Moons. O Devarsi! No sooner did Indra see that World 
Mother Maha Laksmi, of a peaceful appearance, than his body was 
filled with joy and the hairs of the body stood on ends. His eyes were 
filled with tears; and, with folded palms, he began to recite stotras to 
Her, the Vaidik stotras, yielding all desires, that was communicated 
to him by Brahma. 


51-75. Indra said “O Thou, the Dweller in the lotus! O Narayani! O 
Dear to Krisna! O Padmasane! O Maha Laksmi! 


Obeisance to Thee! O Padmadaleksane! O Padmanibhanane! O 
Padmasane! O Padme! O Vaisnavi! Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the 
wealth of all; Thou art worshipped by all; Thou bestowest to all the 
bliss and devotion to S’ri Hari. I bow down to Thee. O Devi! Thou 
always dwellest on the breast of Krisna and exercisest Thy powers 
over Him. Thou art the beauty of the Moon; Thou takest Thy seat on 
the beautiful Jewel Lotus. Obeisance to Thee! O Devi! Thou art the 
Presiding Deity of the riches; Thou art the Great Devi; Thou 
increasest always Thy gifts and Thou art the bestower of increments. 
So I bow down to Thee. O Devi! Thou art the Maha Laksmi of 
Vaikuntha, the Laksmi of the Ksiroda Ocean; Thou art Indra’s 
Heavenly Laksmi; Thou art the Raja Laksmi of the Kings; Thou art 
the Griha Laksmi of the householders; Thou art the household Deity 
of them; Thou art the Surabhi, born of the Ocean; Thou art the 
Daksina, the wife of the Sacrifices; Thou art Aditi, the Mother of the 



Devas; Thou art the Kamala, always dwelling in the Lotus; Thou art 
the Svaha, in the offerings with clarified butter in the sacrificial 
ceremonies; Thou art the Svadha Mantra in the Kavyas (an offering 
of food to deceased ancestors). So obeisance to Thee! O Mother 
Thou art of the nature of Visnu; Thou art the Earth that supports all; 
Thou art of pure S’uddha Sattva and Thou art devoted to Narayana. 
Thou art void of anger, jealousy. Rather Thou grantest boons to all. 
Thou art the auspicious Sarada; Thou grantest the Highest Reality 
and the devotional service to Hari. Without Thee all the worlds are 
quite stale, to no purpose like ashes, always dead while existing. 
Thou art the Chief Mother, the Chief Friend of all; Thou art the 
source of Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksa! As a mother nourishes 
her infants with the milk of her breasts, so Thou nourishest all as 
their mother! A child that sucks the milk might be saved by the Daiva 
(Fate), when deprived of its mother; but men can never be saved, if 
they be bereft of Thee! O Mother! Thou art always gracious. Please 
be gracious unto me. O Eternal One! My possessions are now in the 
hands of the enemies. Be kind enough to restore my kingdoms to me 
from my enemies’ hands. O Beloved of Hari! Since Thou hast 
forsaken me, I am wandering abroad, friendless, like a beggar, 
deprived of all prosperities. O Devi! Give me Jhanam, Dharma, my 
desired fortune, power, influence and my possessions.” O Narada! 
Indra and all the other Devas bowed down frequently to Maha 
Laksmi with their eyes filled with tears. Brahma, S’ankara, Ananta 
Deva, Dharma and Kes’ava all asked pardon again and again from 
Maha Laksmi. Laksmi then granted boons to the Devas and before 
the assembly gladly gave the garland of flowers on the neck of 
Ke’sava. The Devas, satisfied, went back to their own places. The 
Devi, Laksmi, too, becoming very glad went to S’ri Hari sleeping in 
the Ksiroda Ocean. Brahma and Mahes’vara, both became very glad 
and, blessing the Devas, went respectively to their own abodes. 
Whoever recites this holy Stotra three times a day, becomes the 
King Emperor and gets prosperity and wealth like the God Kuvera. 
Siddhi (success) comes to him who recites this stotra five lakhs of 
times. If anybody reads regularly and always this Siddha Stotra for 
one month, he becomes very happy and he turns out a Rajarajendra. 



Here ends the Forty-second Chapter of the Ninth Book on the 
Dhyanam and Stotra of Maha Laksmi in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 43. On The History Oe Svaha 


1-4. Narada said “O Risi Narayana! O Highly Fortunate One! O 
Lord! Thou art equal to Narayana whether in beauty or in qualities, or 
in fame or in energy or in everything. Thou art equal to Narayana. 
Thou art the foremost of the Jhanins; there cannot be found a 
second like Thee as a Siddha Yogi, the ascetics and the Munis. And 
Thou art the crest of the knowers of the Vedas. I have heard the 
wonderful anecdote of Maha Laksmi that Thou hast told me. Now tell 
me any other thing that is unknown, very good in everyway, in 
accordance with Dharma, in the Vedas, and that which is not as yet 
written in the Puranas.” 


5-6. Narayana said “There are many wonderful hidden anecdotes 
that are not published as yet in the Puranas. What you have heard is 
very small in fact. Please mention to me what you like to hear, what 
you think as best amongst them and I will describe that to you.” 


7-8. Narada said “When clarified butter is poured as libations in all 
the sacrificial ceremonies to the gods, Svaha is to be uttered 
everywhere as excellent, and commendable; so Svadha is to be 
repeated in the offerings when the oblations are offered to the Pitris, 
the deceased ancestors. Then, again, Daksina (the sacrificial fee) is 
always to be paid as right and excellent. So, O Knower of the Vedas! 
I like to hear the accounts of Svadha, and Daksina and their merits. 
Please now tell me about them.” 


9. Suta said “Hearing the words of Narada, Narayana Risi smiled 
and began to speak the very ancient words of the Puranas.” 



10-11. Narayana said Before the creation, the Devas assembled 
in the beautiful Brahma’s Council to decide on their food question. 


They all brought to the notice of Brahma the scarcity about their 
food. Brahma promised to remove their food difficulties and began to 
chant hymns to Hah. 


12. Narada said “O Lord! Bhagavan Narayana Himself incarnated 
in part as Sacrifice. Are not the Devas satisfied when the Brahmanas 
pour oblations of ghee to the Devas in those sacrifices?” 


13-17. Narayana said O Muni! The Devas, in fact, did not get the 
offerings of the clarified butters that were poured in with devotion in 
sacrificial acts by the Brahmanas and Ksattriyas. So they were very 
much depressed and went again to the council of Brahma and 
informed Him that they could not get any food for themselves. On 
hearing this, Brahma at once meditated and took refuge of S’ri 
Krisna; Krisna advised them to worship Mula Prakriti. Brahma then, 
by the command of S’ri Krisna, began to meditate on Prakriti, 
worship Her and chant hymns to Her. Then from the part of Prakriti, 
an all-powerful Devi appeared. She was very beautiful, Shyama (of a 
blue colour) and very lovely. This Devi was Svaha. She looked 
always gracious with smile in Her face; it seemed that She was 
always ready to show favour towards the Bhaktas. She appeared 
before Brahma and said “O Lotus born! Want any boon you 
desire.” 


18-22. Hearing Her words, the Creator spoke reverentially “O 
Devi! Let Thou be the burning power of Fire; without Thee Fire would 
not be able to burn anything. At the conclusion of any Mantra, 
whoever taking Thy name, will pour oblations in the Fire to the Gods, 



will cause those oblations to go to the Gods and reach them. And 
then they will be very glad. O Mother! Let Thou be the wealth of Fire, 
the beauty and housewife of Fire; let Thou be incessantly 
worshipped in the regions of the Gods and amongst men and other 
beings.” Hearing these words of Brahma, Svaha Devi became very 
sad and expressed Her own intentions “I will get Krisna as my 
husband; let me perform Tapasya as long as it takes. This is my 
object. All other things are false as dreams. 


23-28. I always meditate with devotion on the lotus-feet of S’ri 
Krisna, serving Which You have become the Creator of this world, 
S’ambhu has become the Conqueror of death, Ananta Deva is 
supporting this universe, Dharma is the Witness of the virtuous, 
Ganes’a is getting, first of all, the first worship. Prakriti Devi has 
become the adorable of all and the Munis and the Risis respected by 
all.” O Child! Having spoken thus to the Lotus-born, Padma, with Her 
lotus-face, meditating incessantly on the Lotus-Feet of S’ri Krisna, 
free from any disease, started to perform tapasya for attaining Him. 
She, first of all, stood on one leg and practised austerities for one 
lakh years. Then She saw the Highest Purusa S’ri Krisna, Who is 
beyond Prakriti and Her attributes. The beautiful amorous Svaha, 
seeing the Lovely Form of the Lord of Love, fainted. 


29-43. The omniscient Bhagavan Krisna knowing Her intentions, 
took Her to His lap, reduced very much in body by long continued 
Tapasya, and He said “O Devi! Thou shalt be My wife in the next 
Varaha Kalpa. Then Thou wilt be the daughter of Nagnajit and wilt be 
known by the name of Nagnajiti. O Beloved! At present let Thou be 
the Energy of Fire and be His wife. By My boon Thou wilt be 
worshipped by all. Fire will make Thee the Lady of His house and 
take the utmost care of Thee. Thou wilt be able to enjoy easily with 
Him.” O Narada! Thus saying to Svaha, Bhagavan disappeared. On 
the other hand. Fire came in there by the command of Brahma, with 



a doubtful mind and began to meditate on Her, the World Mother as 
per Sama Veda and worshipped Her. He then pleased and married 
Her with mantrams, etc. For one hundred divine years they enjoyed 
each other. In a very solitary place while they were enjoying each 
other, Svaha Devi felt pregnant. For full twelve divine years She 
retained Her pregnancy. Then She delivered gradually three sons 
Daksinagni, Garhyapatyagni, and Ahavaniyagni. The Risis, Munis, 
Brahmanas, Ksattriyas poured oblations of clarified butter 
pronouncing the terminal mantra “Svaha.” He who pronounces this 
excellent terminal Mantra “Svaha” gets immediate success in his 
actions. Then all the mantras without “Svaha” in the end became 
impotent as snakes become when void of poison, the Brahmanas 
when they are devoid of the knowledge of the Vedas, the wife when 
she does not serve her husband, the men when they turn illiterate 
and the trees, when void of fruits and branches. O Child! The 
Brahmanas then became satisfied. The Devas began to receive the 
oblations. With the “Svaha” mantra everything turned out fruitful. 
Thus I have described to you the anecdote of “'Svaha.” One who 
hears this essential anecdote gets his happiness enhanced and the 
Moksa in his hands. What more do you want to hear ? Say. 


44. Narada said 1 like to hear how Fire worshipped Svaha and 
recited stotras (hymns of praise) to Her. Kindly tell me the method of 
worship, the Dhyanam and Stotra. 


45-49. Narayana said O Best of Brahmanas! I now tell you the 
meditation (Dhyanam) as per Sama Veda, the method of worship 
and stotra. Listen attentively. At the commencement of any sacrificial 
ceremony, one should first of all worship whether on the S’alagrama 
stone or in an earthen jar (ghata), the Devi Svaha and then 
commence the ceremony with the expectation of getting the desired 
fruit. The following is the Dhyanam (meditation) of Svaha Devi O 
Devi Svaha! Thou art embodied of the Mantras; Thou art the 



success of the Mantras; Thou art Thyself a Siddha; Thou givest 
success and the the fruits of actions to men; Thou dost good to all. 
Thus meditating, one should offer Padya (water for washing the 
feet), etc., uttering the basic Mantra; success then comes to him. 
Now hear about the Radical Seed Mantra. The said mantra (Mula 
mantra) is this “Om Hrim S’rim Vahnijayayai Devyai Svaha.” If the 
Devi be worshipped with this Mantra, all the desires come to a 
successful issue. 


50-54. Fire recited the following stotra “Thou art Svaha, Thou art 
the Beloved of Fire, Thou art the wife of Fire; Thou pleasest all; Thou 
art the S’akti, Thou art the action. Thou art the bestower of Kala 
(time); Thou dost digest the food; Thou art the Dhruva; Thou art the 
resort of men; Thou art the burning power; Thou canst burn 
everything. Thou art the essence of this world; Thou art the deliverer 
from the terrible world; Thou art the life of the gods and Thou 
nourishest the Gods.” O Narada! He who reads with devotion these 
sixteen names, gets success both in this world as well as in the next. 
None of his works become deficient in any way; rather all the works 
are performed successfully and with a successful issue. Reading this 
stotra, one who has no wife, gets wife. So much so that the man who 
recites the stotra gets for his wife equal to Rambha, the heavenly 
nymph, and passes his time in greatest bliss. 


Here ends the Forty-third Chapter of the Ninth Book on the history of 
Svaha in S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam, the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 44. On The Story Of Svadha Dev! In The 
Discourse Between Narada And Narayana 


1-18. Narayana said said O Narada! I will tell you now the 
excellent anecdote of Svadha, pleasing to the Piths and enhancing 
the fruits of the S’radh ceremony when foods are offered to the Pitris. 
Listen. Before the creation, the Creator created seven Pitris. Four 
out of them are with forms and the other three are of the nature of 
Teja (light). 


Note Kavyavahoanalah Some Yamaschaivaryama tatha, 
Agnisvattah Barhisadah Somapa Pitri Devatah. These seven Pitris 
are according to the other Puranas. Seeing the beautiful and lovely 
forms of the Pitris, He made arrangements for their food in the form 
of S’raddhas and Tarpanas, etc. (funeral ceremony and peace- 
offerings), etc. (S’radh, solemn obsequies performed in honour of the 
manes of deceased ancestors.) 


Taking bath, performing S’radh ceremony upto Tarpanam (peace- 
offerings), worshipping the Devas and doing Sandhya thrice a day; 
these are the daily duties of the Brahmanas. If any Brahmana does 
not perform daily the Trisandhyas, S’raddha, Tarpanam, worship and 
the reciting of the Vedas, he becomes devoid of fire like a snake 
without any poison. He who does not perform the devotional service 
of the Devi, who eats food not offered to S’ri Hari, who remains 
impure till death, is not entitled to do any karma whatsoever. Thus, 
introducing the S’raddhas, etc., for the Pitris, Brahma went to His 
own abode. The Brahmanas went on doing the S’raddhas for the 
Pitris, but the Pitris could not enjoy them and so they remained 
without food and were not satisfied. They all, being hungry and sad, 
went to the Council of Brahma and informed Him everything from 



beginning to end. Brahma then created out of His mind one daughter 
very beautiful, full of youth and having a face lovely, as if equal to 
one hundred moons. That woman was best in all respects whether in 
form, beauty, qualities or in learning. Her colour was white like the 
white Champaka flower and her body was adorned all over with 
jewel ornaments. This form was very pure, ready to grant boons, 
auspicious and the part of Prakriti. Her face was beaming with 
smiles; her teeth were very beautiful and her body showed signs of 
Laksmi (i.e., of wealth and prosperity). Her name was Svadha. Her 
lotus-feet were situated on one hundred lotuses. She was the wife of 
the Pitris. Her face resembled that of a lotus and Her eyes looked 
like water lilies. She was born of the lotus born Brahma. The Grand¬ 
father Brahma made over that daughter of the nature of Tusti 
(Contentment) to the hands of the Pitris and they were satisfied. 
Brahma advised the Brahmanas privately that whenever they would 
offer anything to the Pitris, they should offer duly with the mantra 
Svadha pronounced at the end. Since then the Brahmanas are 
offering everything to the Pitris, with the Mantra Svadha uttered in 
the end. Svaha is laudable, when offerings are presented to the 
Gods and Svadha is commendable when offerings are made to the 
Pitris. But in both the cases, Daksina is essential. Without Daksina 
(sacrificial fee), all sacrifices are useless and worthless. The Pitris, 
Devatas, Brahmanas, the Munis, the Manus worshipped the 
peaceful Svadha and chanted hymns to Her with great love. The 
Devas, Pitris, Brahmanas, all were pleased and felt their ends 
achieved when they got the boon from Svadha Devi. Thus I have 
told you everything about Svadha. It is pleasing to all. What more do 
you want to hear? Say. I will answer all your questions. 


19. Narada said “O Thou, the Best of the knowers of the Vedas! O 
Muni Sattama! I want now to hear the method of worship, the 
meditation and the hymns of Svadha Devi. Kindly tell me all about 
this.” 



20-27. Narayana said You know everything about the all- 
auspicious Dhyan, Stotra, as stated in the Vedas; then why do you 
ask me again? However I will speak out this for the enhancement of 
knowledge. On the thirteenth day of the Dark Fortnight in autumn 
when the Magha asterism is with the Moon and on the S’raddha day. 
One should worship with care Svadha Devi; then one should perform 
S’raddha. If, out of vanity, a Brahmin performs S’radh without first 
worshipping Svadha Devi then he will never get the fruits of 
Tarpanam or S’radh. “O Devi Svadhe! Thou art the mind-born 
daughter of Brahma, always young and worshipped by the Piths. 
Thou bestowest the fruits of S’raddh. So I meditate on Thee.” Thus 
meditating, the Brahmin is to pronounce the motto (mula mantra) 
and offer the Padyam, etc., on the S’alagrama stone or on the 
auspicious earthen jar. This is the ruling of the Vedas. The motto is 
“Om Hrim, S’rim, Klim, Svadha Devyai Svaha.” She should be 
worshipped with this Mantra. After reciting hymns to the Devi, one is 
to bow down to the Svadha Devi. O Son of Brahma! O Best of 
Munis! O Skilled in hearing! I now describe the stotra which Brahma 
composed at the beginning for the bestowal of the desired fruits to 
mankind. Listen. 


Narayana said The instant the Mantra Svadha is pronounced, 
men get at once the fruits of bathing in the holy places of 
pilgrimages. No trace of sin exists in him at that time; rather the 
religious merits of performing the Vajapeya sacrifice accrue to him. 


28-36. “Svadha,” “Svadha,” “Svadha,” thrice this word if one calls to 
mind, one gets the fruits of S’radh, Tarpanam, and Bali (offering 
sacrifices). So much so, if one hears with devotion during the S’radh 
time the recitation of the hymn to Svadha, one gets, no doubt, the 
fruit of S’radh. If one recites the Svadha mantra thrice every time in 
the morning, midday and evening, every day, one gets an obedient, 
chaste wife begetting sons. The following is the hymn (Stotra) to 



Svadha “O Devi Svadhe! Thou art dear to the Pitris as their vital 
breaths and thou art the lives of the Brahmanas. Thou art the 
Presiding Deity of the S’radh ceremonies and bestowest the fruits 
thereof. O Thou of good vows! Thou art eternal, true, and of the 
nature of religious merits. Thou appearest in creation and 
disappearest in dissolution. And this appearing and disappearing go 
on forever. Thou art Om, thou art Svasti, Thou art Namas Kara 
(salutation); Thou art Svadha, Thou art Daksina, Thou art the various 
works as designated in the Vedas. These the Lord of the world has 
created for the success of actions.” No sooner Brahma, seated in His 
assembly in the Brahma Loka, reciting this stotra remained silent, 
than Svadha Devi appeared there all at once. When Brahma handed 
over the lotus-faced Svadha Devi over to the hands of the Pitris, and 
they gladly took Her to their own abodes. He who hears with 
devotion and attention this stotra of Svadha, gets all sorts of rich 
fruits that are desired and the fruits of bathing in all the Tirthas. 


Here ends the Forty-fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the story of 
Svadha Devi in the discourse between Narada and Narayana in the 
Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 45. On The Anecdote Of Daksina 


1-63. Narayana said The excellent, most sweet stories of Svaha 
and Svadha are told; now I will tell you the story of Daksina; hear 
attentively. In early days, in the region of Goloka, there was a good- 
natured GopT named Sus’ila, beautiful, Radha’s companion and very 
dear to S’ri Hari. She was fortunate, respected, beautiful, lovely, 
prosperous, with good teeth, learned, well qualified and of exquisitely 
handsome form. Her whole body was tender and lovely like Kalavati 
(one versed in 64 arts; moon). She was beautiful and her eyes were 
like water lilies. Her hips were good and spacious; Her breasts were 
full; she was Shyama (a kind of women having colour like melted 
gold; body being hot in cold and cool in summer; of youthful beauty); 
as well She was of the Nyagrodha class of women (an excellent 
woman. Stanau Sukathinau Yasya Nitambe cha Vis’alata. Madhye 
Ksma bhavedya Sanyagrodha parimandala). Always a smile 
sweetened Her face; and that looked always gracious. Her whole 
body was covered with jewel ornaments. Her colour was white like 
the white champakas. Her lips were red like the Bimba fruits; Her 
eyes were like those of a deer. 


Sus’TIa was very clever in amorous sciences. Her gait was like a 
swan. She was specially versed in what is called Prema Bhakti (love 
towards God). So She was the dearest lady of S’ri Krisna. And She 
was of intense emotional feelings. She knows all the sentiments of 
love; she was witty, humorous, and ardent for the love of S’ri Krisna, 
the Lord of the Rasa circle. She sat by the left side of S’ri Krisna in 
the presence of Radha. S’ri Krisna, then cast His glance on Radha, 
the Chief of the Gopis and hung down His head through fear. 
Radha’s face turned red; the two eyes looked like red lilies; all Her 
bodies began to quiver out of anger and Her lips began to shake. 
Seeing that state of Radha, Bhagavan S’ri Krisna disappeared, 
fearing that a quarrel might ensue. Sus’TIa and other GopTs seeing 



that the peaceful Krisna of Sattva Guna and of lovely form had 
disappeared, began to tremble with fear. Then one lakh Koti GopTs 
seeing Krisna absent and Radha angry, became very much afraid 
and bowing their heads down with devotion and with folded palms 
began to say frequently, “Radhe! Protect us, protect us,” and they 
took shelter at Her feet. O Narada! Three lakh Gopas also including 
Sudama and others took shelter at the lotus feet of S’ri Radha out of 
fear. Seeing, then, Krisna absent and Her companion Sus’ila running 
away, Radha cursed her thus “If Sus’ila comes again to this 
Goloka, she will be reduced to ashes.” Thus cursing Her companion 
Sus’ila out of anger, Radha, the Darling of the Deva of the Devas, 
and the Lady of the Rasa circle went to the Rasa circle and called on 
Krisna, the Lord of the same. Not being able to find out S’ri Krisna, a 
minute appeared a yuga to Her and she began to say “O Lord of 
Pranas! O Dearer than My life! O Presiding Deity of my life! O 
Krisna! My life seems to depart from Thy absence! Come quickly and 
show Thyself to me. O Lord! It is through the favour of one’s 
husband that the pride of women gets increased day by day. 
Women’s safeguards of happiness are their husbands. Therefore 
women, who are helpless creatures, ought always to serve their 
husbands according to Dharma. The husband is the wife’s friend, 
presiding deity and the sole refuge and the chief wealth. It is through 
husbands that women derive their pleasures, enjoyments, Dharma, 
happiness, peace and contentment. If husbands are respected, 
wives are respected and if husbands are dishonoured, women are 
dishonoured too. The husband is the highest thing to a woman. He is 
the highest friend. There is no better friend than him. The husband is 
called Bharta because he supports his wife; he is called Pati, 
because he preserves her; he is called S’vami, because he is the 
master of her body; he is called Kanta because he bestows the 
desired things to her; he is called Bandhu, because he increases her 
happiness; he is called Priya, because he gives pleasure to her; he 
is called Is’a, because he bestows prosperity on her; he is called 
Pranes’vara, because he is the lord of her Prana; and he is called 
Ramana, because he gives enjoyment to her. There is no other thing 
dearer than husband. The son is born of the husband; hence the son 



is so dear. The husband is dearer to a family woman than one 
hundred sons. Those who are born in impure families, cannot know 
what substance a husband is made up of. Taking Baths in all the 
Tirthas, giving Daksinas in all the Yajhas (sacrifice), 
circumambulating round the whole earth, performing all austerities, 
observing all vows, making all great gifts, holy fastings, all that are 
dictated in the S’astras, serving the Guru, the Brahmanas and the 
Devas all cannot compare to even one sixteenth part with serving 
faithfully the feet of the husband. The husband is the highest; higher 
than the Spiritual Teacher (Guru), higher than the Brahmanas, higher 
than all the Devas. As to man, the Spiritual Teacher who imparts the 
Spiritual Knowledge is the Best and Supreme, so to the women their 
husbands are the best of all. Oh! I am not able to realise the glory of 
my Dearest, by Whose favour I am the Sole Ruler of one lakh Koti 
Gopis, one lakh Koti Gopas, innumerable Brahmandas, and all the 
things thereof, and all the lokas (regions) from Bhu (earth) to Goloka. 
Oh! The womanly nature is insurmountable.” Thus saying, Radhika 
began to meditate with devotion on S’ri Krisna. Tears began to flow 
incessantly from Her eyes. She exclaimed, “O Lord! O Lord! O 
Ramana! Shew Thyself to me. I am very much weak and distressed 
from Thy bereavement.” Now the Daksina Devi, driven out from 
Goloka; practised Tapasya for a long time when She entered into the 
body of Kamala. The Devas, on the other hand, performed a very 
difficult Yajha; but they could not derive any fruit therefrom. So they 
went to Brahma, becoming very sad. Hearing them, Brahma 
meditated on Visnu for a long time with devotion. At last Visnu gave 
Him a reply. Visnu got out of the body of Maha Laksmi a Martya 
Laksmi (Laksmi of the earth) and gave Her Daksina to Brahma.Then 
with a view to yield to the Devas the as a fruits of their Karmas, 
Brahma made over to the Yajha Deva (the Deva presiding the 
sacrifice) the Devi Daksina, offered by Narayana. Yajha Deva, then, 
worshipped Her duly and recited hymns to Her with great joy. Her 
colour was like melted gold; her lustre equalled koti Moons; very 
lovely, beautiful, fascinating; face resembling water lilies, of a gentle 
body; with eyes like Padma Palasa, born of the body of Laksmi, 
worshipped by Brahma, wearing celestial silken garments, her lips 



resembling like Bimba fruits, chaste, handsome; her braid of hair 
surrounded by Malati garlands; with a sweet smiling face, 
ornamented with jewel ornaments, well dressed, bathed, enchanting 
the minds of the Munis, below the hair of her forehead the dot of 
musk and Sindura scented with sandalpaste, of spacious hips, with 
full breasts, smitten by the arrows of Kama Deva (the God of Love). 
Such was the Daksina Devi. Seeing Her, the Yajha Deva fainted. At 
last he married her according to due rites and ceremonies. Taking 
her to a solitary place, he enjoyed her for full divine one hundred 
years with great joy like Laksmi Narayana. Gradually then Daksina 
became pregnant. She remained so for twelve divine years. Then 
she duly delivered a nice son as the fruit of Karma. When any Karma 
becomes complete, this son delivers the fruits of that Karma. Yajha 
Deva with His wife Daksina and the above named Karmaphala, the 
bestower of the fruits of actions, gives the desired fruits to all their 
sacrificial acts and Karmas. So the Pundits, the knowers of the 
Vedas, say. Really he, henceforth, began to give fruits to all the 
persons of their acts, with his wife Daksina and son, the bestower of 
the fruits of the actions. The Devas were all satisfied at this and went 
away respectively to their own abodes. Therefore, the man who 
performs Karmas, generally known as Karma Kartas, should pay the 
Daksina (the Sacrificial fee) and so he completes at once his actions. 
It is stated in the Vedas, that no sooner the Karma Karta pays the 
Daksina, than he obtains the fruits of his Karmas at once. In case the 
Karma Karta, after he has completed his acts, does not pay either 
through bad luck or through ignorance, any Daksina to the 
Brahmanas, its amount is doubled if a Muhurta passes away and if 
one night elapses, its amount is increased, to one hundred times. If 
three nights pass away, and the Daksina not paid, the amount last 
brought forward, is increased again to hundred times; if a week 
passes, the last amount is doubled, and if one month passes away, 
the Daksina is multiplied to one lakh times. If one year passes away, 
that is increased to ten millions of times and the Karma, also, bears 
no fruit. Such a Karma Karta is known as taking away unfairly a 
Brahmana’s property and is regarded as impure. He has no right to 
any further actions. For that sin, he becomes a pauper and diseased. 



Laksmi Devi goes away from his house, leaves him, cursing him 
severely. So much so that the Pitris do not accept the S’radh, 
Tarpanam offered by that wretched fellow. So the Devas do not 
accept his worship, nor the Fire accepts the oblations poured by him. 
If the person that performs sacrifices does not pay the sacrificial fee 
that he resolves to pay and he who accepts the offer does not 
demand the sum, both of them go to hell. But if the performer of the 
sacrifices does not pay when the priests demand the fee, then the 
Yajamana (the performer of the sacrifices) only falls down to hell as 
the jar, severed from the rope, falls down. The Yajamana (pupil) is 
denominated as a Brahmasvapahari (one who robs a Brahmana’s 
property); he goes ultimately to the Kumbhipaka hell. There he 
remains for one lakh years punished and threatened by Yama’s 
messengers. He is then reborn as a Chandala, poor and diseased. 
So much so that his seven generations above and his seven 
generations below go to hell. 


64-65. O Narada! Thus I have narrated to you the story of Daksina. 
What more do you want to hear? Say. Narada said “O Best of 
Munis! Who bears the fruits of that Karma where no Daksina is paid. 
Describe the method of worship that was offered to Daksina by 
Yajha Deva.” Narayana said Where do you find the fruit of any 
sacrifice without Daksina? (i.e., nowhere.) That Karma only gets 
fruits where Daksinas are paid. And the fruits of the acts void of any 
Daksina, Bali who lives in the Patala only enjoys; and no one else. 


66-71. For, in olden times, it was ordained by Vamana Deva that 
those fruits would go to the king Vali. All those that pertain to S’radh 
not sanctioned by the Vedas, the charities made without any regard 
or faith, the worship offered by a Brahmin who is the husband of a 
Vrisala (an unmarried girl twelve years in whom menstruation has 
commenced), the fruits of sacrifices done by an impure Brahmana (a 
Brahmana who fails in his duties), the worship offered by impure 



persons, and the acts of a nnan devoid of any devotion to his Guru, 
all these are reserved for the king Bali. He enjoys the fruits of all 
these. O Child! I am now telling you the Dhyan Stotra, and the 
method of worship as per Kanva S’akha of Daksina Devi. Hear. 
When Yajha Deva, in ancient times got Daksina, skillful in action, he 
was very much fascinated by her appearance and being love- 
stricken, began to praise her“O Beautiful One! You were before 
the chief of the Gopis in Goloka. You were like Radha; you were Her 
companion; and you were loved by Sri Radha, the beloved of S’ri 
Krisna. 


72-97. In the Rasa circle, on the Full Moon night in the month of 
Kartik, in the great festival of Radha, you appeared from the right 
shoulder of Laksmi; hence you were named Daksina. O Beautiful 
One! You were of good nature before; hence your name was Sus’ila. 
Next you turned due to Radha's curse, into Daksina. It is to my great 
good luck that you were dislodged from Goloka and have come here. 
O highly fortunate One! Now have mercy on me and accept me as 
your husband. O Devi! You give to all the doers of actions, the fruits 
of their works. Without you, their Karmas bear no fruit. So much so, if 
you be not present in their action the works never shine forth in 
brilliant glory. Without Thee, neither Brahma, nor Visnu nor Mahes’a 
nor the Regents of the quarters, the ten Dikpalas, can award the 
fruits of actions. Brahma is the incarnate of Karma. MahesVara is 
the incarnate of the fruits of Karmas; and I Visnu myself is the 
incarnate of Yajhas. But Thou art the Essence of all. Thou art the 
Para Prakriti, without any attributes, the Para Brahma incarnate, the 
bestower of the fruits of action. Bhagavan S’ri Krisna cannot award 
the fruits of actions without Thee. O Beloved! In every birth let Thou 
be my S’akti. O Thou with excellent face! Without Thee, I am unable 
to finish well any Karma.” O Narada! Thus praising Daksina Devi, 
Yajha Deva stood before Her. She, born from the shoulder of 
Laksmi, became pleased with His Stotra and accepted Him for Her 



bridegroom. If anybody recites this Daksina stotra during sacrifice, 
he gets all the results thereof. 


If anybody recites this stotra in the Rajasuya sacrifice, Vajapaya, 
Gomedha (cow sacrifice) Naramedha (man sacrifice), AsVamedha 
(horse sacrifice), Langala Sacrifice, Visnu Yajha tending to increase 
one’s fame, in the act of giving over wealth or pieces of lands, 
digging tanks or wells, or giving fruits, in Gaja medha (elephant 
sacrifice), in Loha Yajha (iron sacrifice), Svarna Yajha (gold 
sacrifice), Ratna Yajha (making over jewels in sacrifices), Tamra 
Yajha (copper), S’iva Yajha, Rudra Yajha, S’akra Yajha, Bandhuka 
Yajha, Varuna Yajha (for rains), Kandaka Yajha, for crushing the 
enemies, S’uchi Yajha, Dharma Yajha, Papa mochana Yajha, 
Brahmani Karma Yajha, the auspicious Prakriti Yaga, sacrifices, his 
work is achieved then without any hitch or obstacle. There is no 
doubt in this. The stotra, thus, is mentioned now; hear about the 
Dhyanam and the method of worship. First of all, one should worship 
in the S’alagrama stone, or in an earthen jar (Ghata) Daksina Devi. 
The Dhyanam runs thus “O Daksina! Thou art sprung from the 
right shoulder of Laksmi; Thou art a part of Kamala; Thou art clever 
(Daksa) in all the actions and Thou bestowest the fruits of all the 
actions. Thou art the S’akti of Visnu, Thou art revered, worshipped. 
Thou bestowest all that is auspicious; Thou art purity; Thou 
bestowest purity. Thou art good natured. So I meditate on Thee.” 
Thus meditating, the intelligent one should worship Daksina with the 
principal mantra. Then with the Vedic Mantras, padyas, etc. 

(offerings of various sorts) are to be offered. Now the mantra as 
stated in the Vedas, runs thus “Om S’rim Klim Hrim Daksinayai 
Svaha.” With this mantra, all the offerings, such as padyas, arghyas, 
etc., are to be given, and one should worship, as per rules, Daksina 
Devi with devotion. O Narada! Thus I have stated to you the 
anecdote of Daksina. Happiness, pleasure, and the fruits of all 
karmas are obtained by this. Being engaged in sacrificial acts, in this 
Bharatavarsa, if one hears attentively this Dhyanam of Daksina, his 



sacrifice becomes defectless. So much so that the man who has got 
no sons gets undoubtedly good and qualified sons; if he has no wife, 
he gets a best wife, good natured, beautiful, of slender waist, 
capable to give many sons, sweet speaking, humble, chaste, pure, 
and Kulma; if he be void of learning, he gets learning; if he be poor 
he gets wealth; if he be without any land, he gets land and if he has 
no attendants, he gets attendants. If a man hears for one month this 
stotra of Daksina Devi, he gets over all difficulties and dangers, 
bereavements from friends, troubles, inprisonments, and all other 
calamities. 


Here ends the Forty-fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote 
of Daksina in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 46. On The Anecdote Of Sasth! Dev! 


1. Narada said “O Thou, the foremost of the Knowers of the 
Vedas! I have heard from you the anecdotes of many Devis. Now I 
want to hear the lives of other DevTs also. Kindly describe.” 


2. Narayana said “O Best of the Brahmanas! The lives and 
glorious deeds of all the DevTs are described separately. Now say, 
which lives you want to hear.” 


3. Narada said :--“0 Lord! SasthT, Mangala ChandT, and Manasa, are 
the parts of Prakriti. Now I want to hear the lives of them.” 


4-22. Narayana said O Child! The sixth part of Prakriti is named 
as SasthT. The DevT SasthT is the Presiding Deity of infants and 
children; She is the Maya of Visnu and She bestows sons to all. She 
is one of the sixteen Matrikas. She is known by the name of 
Devasena. She performs Vratas (vows); She is the chaste and 
dearest wife of Skanda. She decides on the longevity of children and 
is always engaged in their preservation. So much so, that this 
Siddha YoginT always keeps the children on her side. 


O Best of Brahmanas! I will now talk about the method of 
worshipping this DevT and the history about Her bestowing children 
that I heard from Dharma Deva. Hear. Svayambhuva Manu had one 
son Priyavrata. He was a great YogTndra and remained in practising 
austerities. So he was not inclined to have any wife. At last by the 
effort and request of Brahma, he got himself married. But many days 
passed, and he could not see the face of a son. Then Maharsi 
Kas’yapa became his priest in the Putresti Sacrifice (to get a son); 



and when the sacrifice was over, he gave the sacrificial offering 
called charu to his wife Malini. On eating the charu, the queen Malini 
become pregnant. For twelve Deva years she held the womb. After 
twelve years she delivered a full developed son, of a golden colour; 
but the son was lifeless and his two eyeballs were upset. At this, the 
friends’ wives became very sorry and began to weep. The mother of 
the child became so very sorrowful that she became senseless. O 
Muni! The King himself took the son on his breast and went to the 
burning ground. There with his child on his breast he began to cry 
aloud. Rather he got himself ready to quit his own life than leave the 
son from away his breast. At this time he saw in the space overhead 
an aerial car, white as crystal, made of excellent jewels, coming 
towards him. The car was shining with its own lustre, encircled with 
woven silken cloth, which added to its beauty. Innumerable garlands 
of variegated colours gave it a very nice and charming appearance. 
On that car was seated a Siddha Yogini, very beautiful, of a lovely 
appearance of a colour like that of white champakas, always 
youthful, smiling, adorned with jewel ornaments, ever gracious to 
show favour to the devotees. On seeing Her, the King Priyavrata 
placed the child from his breast on the ground and began to worship 
Her and chant hymns to Her with great love and devotion. And he 
then asked that peaceful lady, the wife of Skanda, Who was shining 
like a summer sun “O Beautiful! Who art Thou? Whose wife art 
Thou and whose daughter art Thou? From Thy appearance it seems 
that Thou art fortunate and respected amongst the female sex.” 


23-24. O Narada! In ancient times, when the Daityas dispossessed 
the Devas of their positions, this Lady was elected as a general and 
got victory for the Devas; hence She was named Devasena. Hearing 
the words of the King Priyavrata, Devasena, who fought for the 
Devas and was all good to the whole world, said 



25-42. O King! I am the mind-born daughter of Brahma. My name is 
Devasena. The Creator before created Me out of His mind and made 
Me over to the hands of Skanda. Amongst the Matrikas, I am known 
as Sasthi, the wife of Skanda. I am the sixth part of Prakriti; hence I 
am named Sasthi. I give sons to those who have no sons, wives to 
those who have no wives, wealth to the poor, and I give works to 
those who are workers (karmis.) 


Happiness, pain, fear, sorrow, joy, good, and wealth and adversity all 
are the fruits of Karmas. As the result of one’s Karmas, people get 
lots of sons and it is due to the result of one’s Karma again that 
people are denuded of all the issues of their family. As the result of 
Karma, the people get dead sons; and as the result of Karma the 
people get long lives. All enjoy the fruits of their Karmas, whether 
they be well qualified, or deformed or whether they have many 
wives, or whether they have no wife, whether they be beautiful, 
religious, diseased, it is all through Karmas, Karmas. Disease comes 
out of their Karmas. Again they get cured by their Karmas. So, O 
King! It is stated in the Vedas that Karma is the most powerful of all. 
Thus saying, Devasena took the dead child on her lap; and, by the 
wisdom, early made the child alive. The King saw the child, of a 
golden colour got back his life and began to smile. Thus bidding 
goodbye to the King, Devasena took the child and became ready to 
depart. At this the King’s palate and throat got dry and he began 
again to chant hymns to Her. The Devi Sasthi became pleased at 
the stotra made by the King. The Devi then addressed the King and 
said “O King! All that is stated in the Vedas, is made up of 
Karmas. You are the son of Svayambhuva Manu, and the Lord of the 
three worlds. You better promulgate My worship in the three worlds 
and you yourself worship Me. Then I will give you your beautiful son, 
the lotus of your family. Your son, born in part of Narayana, will be 
famous by the name of Suvrata. He will be well-qualified, a great 
literary man, able to remember his conditions in his former lives, the 
best of Yogis, performer of one hundred Yajhas, the best of all. 



bowed down by the Ksattriyas, strong as one lakh powerful 
elephants, wealthy, fortunate, pure, favourite of literary persons, 
learned and bestower of the fruits of the ascetics, renowned and 
bestower of wealth and prosperity to the three worlds.” Thus saying 
Devasena gave the the child to the king. When the king pronnised 
that he would promulgate Her worship, the Devi granted him boons 
and went up to the Heavens. 


43-57. The king, too, becoming very glad and surrounded by his 
ministers, returned to his own abode and informed all about the son. 
The ladies of the house, become highly delighted when they heard 
everything. On the occasion of the son’s getting back his life, the 
king performed everywhere auspicious ceremonies. The worship 
of Sasthi Devi commenced. Wealth was bestowed to the Brahmins. 
Since then, on every sixth day of the bright fortnight in every month, 
great festivals in honour of Sasthi Devi began to be celebrated. 

Since then, throughout the kingdom, on every sixth day after the 
birth of a child in the lying-in-chamber, Sasthi Devi began to be 
worshipped. On the twenty-first day, the auspicious moment, at the 
ceremony of giving rice to a child for the first time, when sixth 
months old, and on all other auspicious ceremonies of the 
children, Sasthi Devi’s worship was made extant and the king 
himself performed those worships with great care and according to 
due rules. Now I will tell you about the Dhyanam and method of 
worship and stotra as I heard from Dharma Deva, and as stated in 
Kauthuma S’akha. Hear. He has said In a S’alagrama stone, in a 
jar, on the root of a Bata tree, or drawing the figure on the floor of the 
rooms, or making an image of Sasthi Devi, the sixth part of Prakriti 
and installing it, one should worship the Devi. The Dhyanam is this :- 
- “O Devasena Thou art the bestower of good sons, the giver of good 
luck; Thou art mercy and kindness and the progenitor of the world; 
Thy colour is bright like that of the white Champaka flowers. Thou art 
decked with jewel ornaments. Thou art pure, and the highest and 
best Devi. Obeisance to Thee! I meditate on Thee.” Thus meditating. 



the worshipper should place flower on his own head. Then again 
meditating and uttering the principal mantra one is to offer the Padya 
(water for washing feet), Arghya, Achamaniya, scents, flowers, dhup, 
lights, offerings of food and best roots and fruits and one should 
worship thus with various things Sasthi Devi. “Om Hrim Sasthi 
Devyai Svaha” is the principal Mantra of Sasthi Devi. This great 
Mantra of eight letters a man should repeat as his strength allows. 
After the Japam, the worshipper should chant hymns with devotion 
and undivided attention and then bow down. The Stotra (hymn) 
of Sasthi Devi as per Sama Veda is very beautiful and son- 
bestowing.The lotus-born Brahma has said If one repeats (makes 
Japam) this eight lettered mantra one lakh of times, one gets 
certainly a good son. O Best of Munis! Now I am going to say the 
auspicious stotra of Sasthi Devi as composed by Priyavrata. Hear. 


58-73. One’s desires are fulfilled when one reads this very secret 
stotra. Thus the King Priyavrata said “O Devi, Devasena! I bow 
down to Thee. O Great Devi! Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the 
bestower of Siddhis; Thou art peaceful; obeisance to Thee! Thou art 
the bestower of good; Thou art Devasena; Thou art Sasthi Devi, I 
bow down to Thee! Thou grantest boons to persons; Thou bestowest 
sons and wealth to men. So obeisance to Thee! Thou givest 
happiness and moksa; Thou art Sasthi Devi; I bow down to Thee. 
Thou thyself art Siddha; so I bow down to Thee. O Sasthi Devi! Thou 
art the sixth part of this creation; Thou art Siddha Yogini, so I bow 
down to Thee. Thou art the essence. Thou art Sarada; Thou art the 
Highest Devi. So I bow down again and again to Thee. Thou art the 
Presiding Deity Sasthi Devi of the children; I bow down to Thee. 

Thou grantest good; Thou Thyself art good and Thou bestowest the 
fruits of all Karmas. O Thou O Sasthi Devi! Thou shewest thy form to 
thy devotees; I bow down to Thee! Thou art S’uddha Sattva and 
respected by all the persons in all their actions. Thou art the wife of 
Skanda. All worship Thee. O Sasthi Devi! Thou hadst saved the 
Devas. So obeisance to Thee O Sasthi Devi! Thou hast no envy, no 



anger; so obeisance to Thee. O SuresVari! Give me wealth, give me 
dear things, give me sons. 

Give me respect from all persons; give me victory; slay my enemies. 
O Mahesvari! Give me Dharma; give me name and fame; I bow 
down again again to Sasthi Devi. O Sasthi Devi! worshipped 
reverentially by all! Give me lands, give me subjects, give me 
learning; have welfare for me; I bow down again and again to Sasthi 
Devi.” O Narada! Thus praising the Devi, Priyavrata got a son, 
renowned and ruling over a great kingdom through the favour 
of Sasthi Devi. If any man that has no son, hears this stotra of Sasthi 
Devi for one year with undivided attention, he gets easily an 
excellent son, having a long life. If one worships for one year with 
devotion this Devasena and hears this stotra, even the most barren 
woman becomes freed from all her sins and gets a son. Through the 
grace of Sasthi Devi, that son becomes a hero, well qualified, 
literate, renowned and long-lived. If any woman who bears only a 
single child or delivers dead children hears with devotion for one 
year this stotra, she gets easily, through the Devi’s grace, a good 
son. If the father and mother both hear with devotion, this story 
during the period of their child’s illness, then the child becomes 
cured by the Grace of the Devi. 


Here ends the Forty-sixth chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote 
of Sasthi Devi in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 47. On Manasa’s Story 


1-25 Narayana said O Narada! I have now narrated the anecdote 
of Sasthi as stated in the Vedas. Now hear the anecdote of Mangala 
Chandi, approved of by the Vedas and respected by the literary 
persons. The Chandi, that is very skilled in all auspicious works and 
who is the most auspicious of all good things, is Mangal Chandika. 
Or the Chandi who is an object of worship of Mangala (Mars), the 
son of earth and the bestower of desires is Mangala Chandika. Or 
the Chandi who is an object of worship of Mangala of the family of 
Manu who was the ruler of the whole world composed of seven 
islands and the bestower of all desires is Mangala Chandi. Or it may 
be that the Mula Prakriti, the Governess, the Ever Gracious Durga 
assumed the form of Mangala Chandi and has become the Ista 
Devata of women. When there was the fight with Tripurasura, this 
Mangala Chandi, higher than the highest was first worshipped by 
Mahadeva, stimulated by Visnu, on a critical moment. O Brahmin! 
While the fighting was going on, a Daitya threw out of anger one car 
on Mahadeva and as that car was about to fall on Him, Brahma and 
Visnu gave a good advice when Mahadeva began to praise Durga 
Devi at once. Durga Devi that time assuming the form of Mangala 
Chandi appeared and said “no fear no fear” Bhagavan Visnu will be 
Thy Carrier buffalo. I will be also Thy S’akti in the action and Hah, full 
of Maya, will also help Thee. Thou better slayest the enemy that 
dispossessed the Devas. O Child! Thus saying, the Devi Mangala 
Chandi disappeared and She became the S’akti of Maha Deva. 

Then with the help of the weapon given by Visnu, the Lord of Lima 
killed the Asura. When the Daitya fell, the Devas and Risis began to 
chant hymns to Mahadeva with devotion and with their heads bent 
low. From the sky, a shower of flowers fell instantaneously on Maha 
Deva’s head. Brahma and Visnu became glad and gave their best 
wishes to Him. Then ordered by Brahma and Visnu, S’ankara bathed 
joyously. Then He began to worship with devotion the Devi Mangala 
Chandi with padya, Arghya, Achamaniya and various clothings. 



Flowers, sandal paste, various goats, sheep, buffaloes, bisons, 
birds, garments, ornaments, garlands, Payasa (a preparation of rice, 
ghee, milk and sugar), Pistaka, honey, wine, and various fruits were 
offered in the worship. Dancing, music, with instruments and the 
chanting of Her name and other festivals commenced. Reciting the 
Dhyan as in Madhyandina, Mahadeva offered everything, 
pronouncing the principal Radical Mantra, “Om Hrim S’rim Klim 
Sarvapujye Devi Mangala Chandike Hum Phat Svaha” is the twenty- 
one lettered Mantra of Mangala Chandi. During worship, the Kalpa 
Vriksa, the tree yielding all desires, must be worshipped. O Narada! 
By repeating the Mantra ten lakhs of times, the Mantra Siddhi 
(success in realising the Deity inherent in the Mantra) comes. Now I 
am saying about the Dhyanam of Mangal Chandi as stated in the 
Vedas and as approved by all. Listen. “O Devi Mangala Chandike! 
Thou art sixteen years old; Thou art ever youthful; Thy lips are like 
Bimba fruits. Thou art of good teeth and pure. Thy face looks like 
autumnal lotus; Thy colour is like white champakas; Thy eyes 
resemble blue lilies; Thou art the Preserver of the world and thou 
bestowest all sorts of prosperity. Thou art the Light in this dark ocean 
of the world. So I meditate on Thee.” This is the Dhyanam. Now hear 
the stotra, which Mahadeva recited before Her. 


26-37. Mahadeva said Protect me. Protect me, O Mother! O Devi 
Mangal Chandike! Thou, the Destroyer of difficulties! Thou givest joy 
and good. Thou art clever in giving delight and fortune. Thou the 
bestower of all bliss and prosperity! Thou, the auspicious. Thou art 
Mangala Chandika. Thou art Mangala, worthy of all good. Thou art 
the auspicious of all auspicious; Thou bestowest good to the good 
persons. Thou art worthy to be worshipped on Tuesday (the 
Mangala day); Thou art the Deity, desired by all. The King Mangala, 
born of Manu family always worships Thee. Thou, the presiding Devi 
of Mangala; Thou art the repository of all the good that are in this 
world. Thou, the Bestower of the auspicious Moksa. Thou, the best 
of all; Thou, the respository of all good; Thou makest one cross all 



the Karmas; the people worship Thee on every Tuesday; Thou 
bestowest abundance of Bliss to all. Thus praising Mangala 
Chandika with this stotra, and worshipping on every Tuesday, 
S’annbhu departed. The Devi Sarva Mangala was first worshipped by 
Mahadeva. Next she was worsh ipped by the planet Mars; then by 
the King Mangala; then on every Tuesday by the ladies of every 
household. Fifthly she was worshipped by all men, desirous of their 
welfare. So in every universe Mangal Chandika, first worshipped by 
Mahadeva, came to be worshipped by all. Next she came to be 
worshipped everywhere, by the Devas, Munis, Manavas, Manus. O 
Muni! He who hears with undivided attention this stotra of the Devi 
Mangala Chandika, finds no evils anywhere. Rather all good comes 
to him. Day after day he gets sons and grandsons and so his 
prosperity gets increased, yea, verily increased! 


38-58. Narayana said O Narada! Thus I narrated to you the 
stories of Sasthi and Mangala Chandika, according to the Vedas. 
Now hear the story of Manasa that I heard from the mouth of 
Dharama Deva. 


Manasa is the mind-born daughter of Maharsi Kas’yapa; hence she 
is named Manasa; or it may be She who plays with the mind is 
Manasa. Or it may be She who meditates on God with her mind and 
gets rapture in Her meditation of God is named Manasa. She finds 
pleasure in Her Own Self, the great devotee of Visnu, a Siddha 
Yogini. For three Yugas She worshipped S’ri Krisna and then She 
became a Siddha Yogini. S’ri Krisna, the Lord of the GopTs, seeing 
the body of Manasa lean and thin due to austerities, or seeing her 
worn out like the Muni Jarat Karu called her by the name of Jarat 
Karu. Hence Her name has come also to be Jarat Karu. Krisna, the 
Ocean of Mercy, gave her out of kindness. Her desired boon; She 
worshipped Him and S’ri Krisna also worshipped Her. Devi Manasa 
is known in the Heavens, in the abode of the Nagas (serpents), in 



earth, in Brahmaloka, in all the worlds as of very fair colour, beautiful 
and charming. She is named Jagad Gauri as she is of a very fair 
colour in the world. Her other name is S’aivT and she is the disciple 
of S’iva. She is named Vaisnavi as she is greatly devoted to Visnu. 
She saved the Nagas in the Snake Sacrifice performed by Pariksit, 
she is named NagesVari and Naga Bhagini and She is capable to 
destroy the effects of poison. She is called Visahari. She got the 
Siddha yoga from Mahadeva; hence She is named Siddha Yogini; 
She got from Him the great knowledge, so she is called Maha 
Jhanayuta, and as she got Mritasamjivani (making alive the dead) 
she is known by the name of Mritasanjivani. As the great ascetic is 
the mother of the great Muni Astik, she is known in the world as 
Astika mata. As She is the dear wife of the great high-souled Yogi 
Muni Jarat Karu, worshipped by all, she is called as Jarat 

Karupriya, Jaratkaru, Jagadgauri, Manasa, Siddha Yogini, Vaisnavi, 
Naga Bhagini, S'aivi, NagesVari, Jaratkarupriya, Astikamata, 
Visahari, and Maha Jhanayuta; these are the twelve names of 
Manasa, worshipped everywhere in the Universe. He who recites 
these twelve names while worshipping Manasa Devi, he or any of 
his family has no fear of snakes. If there be any fear of snakes in 
one’s bed, if the house be infested with snakes or if one goes to a 
place difficult for fear of snakes or if one’s body be encircled with 
snakes, all the fears are dispelled, if one reads this stotra of Manasa. 
There is no doubt in this. The snakes run away out of fear from the 
sight of him who daily recites the Manasa stotra. Ten lakhs of times 
repeating the Manasa mantra give one man success in the stotra. 

He can easily drink poison who attains success in this stotra. The 
snakes become his ornaments; they carry him even on their backs. 
He who is a great Siddha can sit on a seat of snakes and can sleep 
on a bed of snakes. In the end he sports day and night with Visnu. 


Here ends the Forty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on Manasa’s 
story in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 48. On The Anecdote Of Manasa 


1-30. Narayana said O Narada! I will now speak of the Dhyanam 
and the method of worship of S’ri Devi Manasa, as stated in the 
Sama Veda. Hear. “I meditate on the Devi Manasa, Whose colour is 
fair like that of the white champaka flower, whose body is decked all 
over with jewel ornaments, whose clothing is purified by fire, whose 
sacred thread is the Nagas (serpent), who is full of wisdom, who is 
the foremost of great Jhanins, who is the Presiding deity of the 
Siddhas, Who Herself is a Siddha and who bestows Siddhis to all.” O 
Muni! Thus meditating on Her, one should present Her, flowers, 
scents, ornaments, offerings of food and various other articles, 
pronouncing the principal Seed Mantra. O Narada! The twelve 
lettered Siddha Mantra, to be mentioned below, yields to the Bhaktas 
their desires like the Kalpa Tree. Now the Radical mantra as stated 
in the Vedas is “Om Hrim S’rim Klim Aim Manasa Devyai Svaha.” 
Repetition of this, five lakhs of times, yields success to one who 
repeats. He who attains success in this mantra gets unbounded 
name and fame in this world. Poison becomes nectar to him and he 
himself becomes famous like Dhanvantari. O Narada! If anybody 
bathes on any Samkranti day (when the sun enters from one sign to 
another) and going to a private room (hidden room), invokes the 
Devi Manasa Is’ana and worships Her with devotion, or makes 
sacrifices of animals before the Devi on the fifth day of the fortnight, 
he becomes certainly wealthy, endowed with sons and name and 
fame. Thus I have described to you the method of worship of 
Manasa Devi. Now hear the anecdote of the Devi as I heard from 
Dharma. In olden days, men became greatly terrified on earth from 
snakes and took refuge of Kas’yapa, the supreme amongst the 
Munis. The Maharsi Kas’yapa became very afraid. He then with 
Brahma, and by His command composed a mantra following the 
principal motto of the Vedas. While composing this mantra, he 
intensely thought of the Devi, the Presiding Deity of that Mantra, 
through the power of his Tapasya and through the mental power, the 



Devi Manasa appeared and was named so, as She was produced 
from the sheer influence of mind. On being born, the girl went to the 
abode of S’ankara in Kailas’a and began to worship Him and chant 
hymns to Him with devotion. For one thousand Divine years, the 
daughter of Kas’yapa served Mahadeva when He became pleased. 
He gave her the Great Knowledge, made Her recite the Sama Veda 
and bestowed to her the eight-lettered Krisna mantra which is like 
the Kalpa Tree. S’rim Hrim Klim Krisnaya Namah was the eight 
lettered Mantra. She got from Him the Kavacha (amulet) auspicious 
to the three worlds, the method of worship and all the rules of 
Purascharana (repetition of the name of a deity attended with burnt 
offerings, oblations, etc.) and went by His command to perform in 
Puskara very hard austerities. There she worshipped Krisna for the 
three Yugas. S’ri Krisna then appeared before Her. On seeing 
Krisna, immediately the girl, worn out by austerities, worshipped 
Him, and she was also worshipped by S’ri Krisna. Krisna granted her 
the boon, “Let you be worshipped throughout the world” and 
departed. O Narada! She was thus first worshipped by the Supreme 
Spirit, the Devi Krisna; secondly by S’ankara; thirdly by the Maharsi 
Kas’yapa and the Devas. Then she was worshipped by the Munis, 
Manus, Nagas, and men; and She became widely renowned in the 
three worlds. Kas’yapa gave Her over to the hands of Jaratkaru 
Muni. At the request of the Brahmin Kas’yapa, the Muni Jarat Karu 
married Her. After the marriage, one day, being tired with his long 
work of Tapasya, Jarat Karu laid his head on the hip and loins of his 
married wife and fell fast asleep. Gradually the evening came in. The 
sun set. Then Manasa thought, “If my husband fails to perform the 
Sandhya, the daily duty of the Brahmanas, he would be involved in 
the sin of Brahmahatya. It is definitely stated in the S’astras, that if 
any Brahmana does not perform his Sandhya in the morning and in 
the evening, he becomes wholly impure and the sins Brahmahattya 
and other crimes come down on his head.” Arguing thus, these 
thoughts in her mind, as commanded by the Vedas, at last she 
awakened her husband, who then got up from his sleep. 



31-60. The Muni Jarat Karu said “O Chaste One! I was sleeping 
happily. Why have you thus interrupted my sleep? All his vows turn 
out useless who injures her husband. Her tapas, fastings, gifts, and 
other meritorious works all come to vain who do things unpleasant to 
her husband. If she worships her husband, she is said to have 
worshipped S’ri Krisna. For the sake of fulfilling the vows of the 
chaste women. Hah himself becomes their husbands. All sorts of 
charities, gifts, all sacrifices, fastings, practising all the virtues, 
keeping to truth, worshipping all the Devas, nothing can turn out 
equal to even one-sixteenth part of serving one’s husband. She 
ultimately goes with her husband to the region of Vaikuntha, who 
serves her husband in this holy land Bharata. She comes certainly of 
a bad family who does unpleasant acts to her husband or who uses 
unpleasant words to her husband. She goes to the Kumbhipaka hell 
as long as the Sun and Moon last and then she becomes born as a 
Chandali, without husband and son.” Speaking thus, Jarat Karu, the 
best of the Munis, became angry and his lips began to tremble. 
Seeing this, the best Manasa, shivering with fear, addressed her 
husband 


I have broken your sleep and awakened you, fearing you might miss 
your time of Sandhya. I have committed an offence. Punish me as 
you think. I know that a man goes to the Kalasutra hell as long as the 
Sun and Moon last in this world, who throws an obstacle when any 
man eats, sleeps or enjoys with the opposite sex. O Narada! Thus 
saying, the Devi Manasa fell down at the feet of her husband and 
cried again and again. On the other hand, knowing the Muni angry, 
and ready to curse her, the Sun came there with Sandhya Devi. And 
He humbly spoke to him with fear“O Bhagavan! Seeing Me going 
to set, and fearing that you may miss Dharma, your chaste wife has 
awakened you. O Brahmin! Now I am also under your refuge; forgive 
me. O Bhagavan! You should not curse Me. The more so, a 
Brahmana’s heart is as tender as the fresh butter. The anger of a 
Brahman lasts only half the twinkling of an eye (Ksan). When a 



Brahmana becomes angry, he can burn all this world and can make 
a new creation. So who can possess an influence like a Brahmana. 

A Brahmin is a part of Brahma; he is shining day and night with the 
Tejas of Brahma. A Brahmana meditates always on the Eternal Light 
of Brahma.” O Narada! Hearing the words of the Sun, the 
Brahmin became satisfied and blessed Him. The Sun also went to 
His own place, thus blessed daily. To keep his promise, the Brahmin 
Jaratkaru quitted Manasa. She became very sorry and began to cry 
aloud with pain and anguish. Being very much distressed by the then 
danger, she remembered Her Ista Deva, Mahadeva, Brahma, Hah 
and Her father Maharsi Kas’yapa- On the very instant when Manasa 
remembered S’ri Krisna, the Lord of the Gopis, Mahadeva, Brahma 
and Maharsi Kas’yapa appeared there. Then seeing his own desired 
Deity S’ri Krisna, superior to Prakriti, beyond the attributes, Jaratkaru 
began to praise Him and bowed down to Him repeatedly. Then 
bowing down to Mahadeva, Brahma and Kas’yapa, he enquired why 
they had come there. Brahma, then, instantly bowed down at the 
lotus feet of Hrisikes’a and spoke in befitting words at that time if the 
Brahmin Jaratkaru leaves at all his legal wife, devoted to her own 
Dharma, he should first of all have a son born of her to fulfil his 
Dharma. O Muni! Any man can quit his wife, after he has 
impregnated her and got a son. But if without having a son, he 
leaves his wife, then all his merits are lost as all water leaks out of a 
sieve or a strainer. O Narada! Hearing thus the words of Brahma, the 
Muni Jaratkaru by his Yogic power recited a Mantra and touching the 
navel of Manasa spoke to her“O Manasa! A son will be born in 
your womb self-controlled, religious, and best of the Brahmanas. 


61-77. That son will be fiery, energetic, renowned, well-qualified the 
foremost of the Knowers of the Vedas, a great Jhanin and the best of 
the Yogis. That son is a true son, indeed, who uplifts his family who 
is religious and devoted to Hari. At his birth all the Pitris dance with 
great joy. And the wife is a true wife who is devoted to her husband, 
good-natured and sweet-speaking and she is religious, she is the 



mother of sons, she is the woman of the family and she is the 
preserver of the family. He is the true friend, indeed, the giver of 
one’s desired fruits, who imparts devotion to Hari. That father is a 
true father who shows the way to devotion to Hari. And She is the 
True Mother, through whom this entering into wombs ceases for 
ever, yea, for ever! That sister is the true kind sister from whom the 
fear of Death vanishes. That Guru is the Guru who gives the Visnu 
Mantra and the true devotion to Visnu. That Guru is the real 
bestower of knowledge who gives the Jhanam by which S’ri Krisna is 
meditated in whom this whole universe, moving and non-moving 
from the Brahma down to a blade of grass, is appearing and 
disappearing. There is no doubt in this. What knowledge can be 
superior to that of S’ri Krisna. The knowledge derived from the 
Vedas, or from the sacrifices or from any other source is not superior 
to the service to S’ri Krisna. The devotion and knowledge of S’ri Hari 
is the Essence of all knowledge; all else is vain and mockery. It is 
through this Real Knowledge; that this bondage from this world is 
severed. But the Guru who does not impart this devotion and 
knowledge of S’ri Hari is not the real Guru; rather he is an enemy 
that leads one to bondage. Verily he kills his disciple when he does 
not free him. He can never be called a Guru, father or friend who 
does not free his disciple from the pains in the various wombs and 
from the pains of death. Verily he can never be called a friend who 
does not show the way to the Undecaying S’ri Krisna, the Source of 
the Highest Bliss. So, O Chaste One! You better worship that 
Undecaying Para Brahma S’ri Krisna, Who is beyond the attributes. 

O Beloved! I have left you out of a pretence; please excuse me for 
this. The chaste women are always forgiving; never they become 
angry because they are born of Sattvagunas. Now I go to Puskara 
for Tapasya; you better go wherever you like. Those who have no 
desire have their minds always attached to the lotus feet of S’ri 
Krisna.” O Narada! Hearing the words of Jaratkaru, the Devi Manasa 
became very much distressed and bewildered with great sorrow. 
Tears began to flow from her eyes. She then humbly spoke to her 
dearest husband “O Lord! I have not committed any such offence, 
as you leave me altogether when I have thus broken your sleep. 



78-115. However kindly show Thyself to me when I will recollect you. 
The bereavement of one’s friend is painful; more than that is the 
bereavement of a son. Again one’s husband is dearer than one 
hundred sons; so the bereavement of one’s husband is the heaviest 
of all. To women, the husband is the most beloved of all earthly 
things; hence he is called Priya, i.e., dear. As the heart of one who 
has only one son is attached to that son, as the heart of a Vaisnava 
is attached to S’ri Hari; as the mind of one-eyed man to his one eye, 
as the mind of the thirsty is attached to water, as the mind of the 
hungry is attached to food, as the mind of the passionate is attached 
to lust, as the mind of a thief is attached to the properties of others, 
as the mind of a lewd man to his prostitute, as the mind of the 
learned is attached to the S’astras, as the mind of a trader is 
attached to his trade, so the minds of chaste women are attached to 
their husbands.” Thus saying, Manasa fell down at the feet of her 
husband. Jaratkaru, the ocean of mercy, then, took her for a moment 
on his lap and drenched her body with tears from his eyes. The Devi 
Manasa, too, distressed at the bereavement of her husband also 
drenched the lap of the Muni with tears from her eyes. Some time 
after, the true knowledge arose in them and they both became free 
from fear. Jaratkaru then enlightened his wife and asked her to 
meditate on the lotus feet of S’ri Krisna the Supreme Spirit 
repeatedly; thus saying he went away for his Tapasya. Manasa, 
distressed with sorrow, went to his Ista Deva Mahadeva on Kailas’a. 
The auspicious S’iva and Parvati both consoled her with knowledge 
and advice. Some days after, on an auspicious they and on an 
auspicious moment she gave birth to a son born in part of Narayana, 
and as the Guru of the Yogis and as the Preceptor of the Jhanins. 
When the child was in mother’s womb, he heard the highest 
knowledge from the mouth of Mahadeva; therefore he was born as a 
Yogindra and the Spiritual Teacher of the Jhanins. On his birth, 
Bhagavan S’ankara performed his natal ceremonies and performed 
various auspicious ceremonies. The Brahmanas chanted the Vedas 
for the welfare of the child; various wealth and jewels and Kiritas and 



invaluable gems were distributed by S’ankara to the Brahmanas; and 
Parvati gave one lakh cows and various jewels to others. After some 
days, Mahadeva taught him the four Vedas with their Angas (six 
limbs) and gave him, at last, the Mrityumjaya Mantra. As in Manasa’s 
mind there reigned the devotion to her husband, the devotion to her 
Ista Deva and Guru, the child’s name was kept Astika. 


Astika then got the Maha Mantra from S’ankara and by his command 
went to Puskara to worship Visnu, the Supreme Spirit. There he 
practised tapasya for three lakh divine years. And then he returned 
to Kailas’a, to bow down to the great Yogi and the Lord S’ankara, 
Then, bowing down to S’ankara, he remained there for some time 
when Manasa with her son Astika went to the hermitage of 
Kas’yapa, her father. Seeing Manasa with son, the Maharsi’s 
gladness knew no bounds. He fed innumerable Brahmanas for the 
welfare of the child, and distributed lakhs and lakhs of jewels. The 
joy of Aditi and Diti (the wives of Kas’yapa) knew no bounds; 

Manasa remained there for a long, long time with his son. O Child! 
Hear now an anecdote on this. One day due to a bad Karma, a 
Brahmana cursed the king Pariksit, the son of Abhimanyu; one Risi’s 
son named S’ringi, sipping the water of the river Kaus’iki cursed thus 
“When a week expires, the snake Taksaka will bite you, and you 
will be burnt with the poison of that snake Taksaka.” Hearing this, the 
King Pariksit, to preserve his life, went to a place, solitary where 
wind even can have no access and he lived there. When the week 
was over, Dhanvantari saw, while he was going on the road, the 
snake Taksaka who was also going to bite the king. A conversation 
and a great friendship arose between them; Taksaka gave him 
voluntarily a gem; and Dhanvantari, getting it, became pleased and 
went back gladly to his house. The king Pariksit was lying on his 
bed-stead when Taksaka bit the king. The king died soon and went 
to the next world. The king Janamejaya then performed the funeral 
obsequies of his father and commenced afterwards the Sarpa Yajha 
(a sacrifice where the snakes are the victims). In that sacrifice. 



innumerable snakes gave up their lives by the Brahma Teja (the fire 
of the Brahmins). At this, Taksaka became terrified and took refuge 
of Indra. The Brahmins, then, in a body, became, ready to burn 
Taksaka along with Indra, when, Indra and the other Devas went to 
Manasa. Mahendra, bewildered with fear, began to chant hymns to 
Manasa. Manasa called his own son Astika who then went to the 
sacrificial assembly of the king Janamejaya and begged that the 
lives of Indra and Taksaka be spared. The king, then, at the 
command of the Brahmanas, granted their lives. The king, then, 
completed his sacrifice and gladly gave the Daksinas to the 
Brahmins. The Brahmanas, Munis, and Devas collected and went to 
Manasa and worshipped Her separately and chanted hymns to Her. 
Indra went there with the various articles and He worshipped 
Manasa with devotion and with great love and care; and He chanted 
hymns to Her. Then bowing down before Her, and under the 
instructions of Brahma, Visnu and Mahes’a, offered her sixteen 
articles, sacrifices and various other good and pleasant things. O 
Narada! Thus worshipping Her, they all went to their respective 
places. Thus I have told you the anecdote of Manasa. What more do 
you want to hear. Say. 


Narada said “O Lord! How did Indra praise Her and what was the 
method of His worshipping Her; I want to hear all this.” 


116-124. Narayana said Indra first took his bath; and, performing 
Achamana and becoming pure. He put on a fresh and clean clothing 
and placed Manasa Devi on a jewel throne. Then reciting the Vedic 
mantras he made Her perform Her bath by the water of the 
Mandakini, the celestial river Ganges, poured from a jewel jar and 
then He made Her put on the beautiful clothing, uninflammable by 
fire. Then He caused sandalpaste to be applied to Her body all over 
with devotion and offered water for washing Her feet and Arghya, an 
offering of grass and flowers and rice, etc., as a token of preliminary 



worship. First of all the six Devatas Ganes’a, Sun, Fire, Visnu, S’iva, 
and S’iva were worshipped. Then with the ten lettered mantra, “Om 
Hrim S’rim Manasa Devyai Svaha” offered all the offerings to Her. 
Stimulated by the God Visnu, Indra worshipped with great joy the 
Devi with sixteen articles so very rare to any other person. Drums 
and instruments were sounded. From the celestial heavens, a 
shower of flowers was thrown on the head of Manasa. Then, at the 
advice of Brahma, Visnu and Mahes’a, the Devas and the 
Brahmanas, Indra, with tears in his eyes, began to chant hymns to 
Manasa, when his whole body was thrilled with joy and hairs stood 
on their ends. 


125-145. Indra said “O Devi Manase! Thou standest the highest 
amongst the chaste women. Therefore I want to chant hymns to 
Thee. Thou art higher than the highest. Thou art most supreme. 

What I now praise Thee? Chanting hymns is characterised by the 
description of one’s nature; so it is said in the Vedas. But, O Prakriti! 

I am unable to ascertain and describe Thy qualities. Thou art of the 
nature of S’uddha Sattva (higher than the pure sattva unmixed with 
any other Gunas); Thou art free from anger and malice. The Muni 
Jaratkaru could not forsake Thee; therefore it was that he prayed for 
Thy separation before. O Chaste One! I have now worshipped Thee. 
Thou art an object of worship as my mother Aditi is. Thou art my 
sister full of mercy; Thou art the mother full of forgiveness. O 
Sures’vari! It is through Thee that my wife, sons and my life are 
saved. I am worshipping Thee. Let Thy love be increased. O World- 
Mother! Thou art eternal; though Thy worship is extant everywhere in 
the universe; yet I worship Thee to have it extended further and 
further. O Mother! Those who worship Thee with devotion on the 
Sankranti day of the month of Asudha, or on the Naga Pahchami 
day, or on the Sankranti day of every month or on every day, they 
get their sons and grandsons, wealth and grains increased and 
become themselves famous, well gratified, learned and renowned. If 
anybody does not worship Thee out of ignorance, rather if he 



censures Thee, he will be bereft of Laksmi and he will be always 
afraid of snakes. Thou art the Griha Laksmi of all the householders 
and the Raja Laksmi of Vaikuntha. Bhagavan Jarat Karu, the great 
Muni, born in part of Narayana, is Thy husband. Father Kas’yapa 
has created Thee mentally by his power of Tapas and fire to 
preserve us; Thou art his mental creation; hence thy name is 
Manasa. Thou Thyself hast become Siddha Yogini in this world by 
thy mental power; hence thou art widely known as Manasa Devi in 
this world and worshipped by all. The Devas always worship Thee 
mentally with devotion; hence the Pundits call Thee by the name of 
Manasa. O Devi! Thou always servest Truth, hence Thou art of the 
nature of Truth. He certainly gets Thee who always thinks of Thee 
verily as of the nature of truth.” O Narada! Thus praising his sister 
Manasa and receiving from her the desired boon, Indra went back, 
dressed in his own proper dress, to his own abode. The Devi 
Manasa, then, honored and worshipped everywhere, and thus 
worshipped by her brother, long lived in Her father’s house, with Her 
son. 


One day Surabhi (the heavenly cow) came from the Goloka and 
bathed Manasa with milk and worshipped Her with great devotion 
and revealed to Her all the Tattva Jhanas, to be kept very secret. 
(This is now made the current story wherever any Lingam suddenly 
becomes visible.) O Narada! Thus worshipped by the Devas and 
Surabhi, the Devi Manasa went to the Heavenly regions. O Muni! 
One gets no fear from snakes who recites this holy Stotra composed 
by Indra and worships Manasa; his family descendants are freed 
from the fear due to snakes. If anybody becomes Siddha in this 
Stotra, poison becomes nectar to him. Reciting the stotra five lakhs 
of times makes a man Siddha in this Stotra. So much so that he can 
sleep on a bed of snakes and he can ride on snakes. 



Here ends the Forty-eighth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the 
anecdote of Manasa in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 49. On The Anecdote Of Surabhi 


1. Narada said “O Bhagavan! Who was that Surabhi, who came 
down from the region of Goloka. I want to hear Her life. Kindly 
describe.” 


2-23. Narayana spoke “O Devarsi! The Devi Surabhi sprang in the 
Goloka. She was the first in the creation of cows; and, from Her, all 
the other cows have come. She is the Presiding Deity of the cows. I 
will now speak Her history from the very beginning. Hear. Before, 

She appeared in the holy Vrindaban. One day the Lord of Radha, 
surrounded by the GopTs, was going gladly with Radha to the Holy 
Vrindavan. There he began to enjoy in a solitary place with great 
pleasure. He is All Will and suddenly a desire arose in His mind that 
He would drink milk. Then He created easily the Devi Surabhi, full of 
milk, with Her calf, from His own left side. The calf of Surabhi is 
nothing else but Her wish personified. Seeing Surabhi, S’ridama 
milked Her in a new earthen jar. The milk is more sweet than even 
the nectar and it prevents birth and death! The Lord of the GopTs 
drank the milk. What milk dropped out of the jar, created a big tank! 
The tank measured one hundred Yojanas in length and in breadth 
and is known in Goloka by the name of KsTrasagara. The GopTkas 
and Radha play therein. At the will of S’rT Krisna, Whose Nature is All 
Will, that tank become full of excellent gems and jewels. Then, from 
every pore of Surabhi, there appeared suddenly one lakh koti 
Kamadhenus (cows who yields according to one’s desires). So much 
so that every Gopa who used to live there in Goloka had one 
Kamadhenu and each house had one such. Their calves again 
became so many that no limit can be put to them. Thus, by degrees, 
the whole universe was filled with cows. This is the origin of the Cow 
Creation. O Narada! Surabhi was first worshipped by Bhagavan S’rT 
Krisna. Therefore She is so much honoured everywhere. On the day 
next the DivalT night (new moon in the month of October), Surabhi 



was worshipped by the command of S’ri Krisna. This is heard from 
the mouth of Dharma Deva. O Child! Now hear the Dhyanam, Stotra, 
and the method of worship of Surabhi as mentioned in the Vedas. I 
will now speak on this. “Om Surabhyai namah,” is the principal six- 
lettered mantra of Surabhi. If anybody repeats this mantra one lakh 
times, he becomes Siddha in this mantra. This is like Kalpa Vriksa (a 
tree yielding all desires) to the devotees. The Dhyanam of Surabhi is 
mentioned in the Yajur Vedas. Success, prosperity, increase and 
freedom come as the result of worshipping Surabhi. The Dhyanam 
runs as follows “O Devi Surabhi! Thou art Laksmi, Thou art best. 
Thou art Radha; Thou art the chief companion of S’ri Radha, Thou 
art the first and the source of the cow-creation. Thou art holy and 
Thou sanctifiest the persons; Thou fufillest the desires of the 
devotees and Thou purifiest the whole universe. Therefore I meditate 
on Thee.” Reciting this Dhyanam, the Brahmanas worship the Devi 
Surabhi in jars, on the heads of cows, or on the pegs where cows 
are fastened or on S’alagrama stone or in water or in fire. O Muni! 

He who worships with devotion on the next day morning after Divali 
night, becomes also worshipped in this world. Once a day in the 
Varahakalpa Surabhi did not yield milk, by the influence of Visnu 
Maya. The Devas became very anxious. Then they went to the 
Brahmaloka and began to praise Brahma. At His advice, Indra began 
to chant hymns (Stotra) to Surabhi 


24-33. The Devendra said “O World-Mother! O Devi! O Maha 
Devi! O Surabhi! Thou art the source of the cow creation. Obeisance 
to Thee! Thou art the dear companion of Radha; Thou art the part of 
Kamala; Thou art dear to S’ri Krisna; Thou art the mother of cows, I 
bow down to Thee. Thou art like the Kalpa Vriksa (a tree yielding all 
desires). Thou art the Chief of all; Thou yieldest milk, wealth and 
prosperity and increase thereof. So I bow down to Thee. Thou art 
auspicious. Thou art good. Thou bestowest cows. Obeisance to 
Thee! Thou givest fame, name and Dharma. So I bow down to 
Thee.” O Narada! Thus hearing the praise sung by Indra, the eternal 



Surabhi, the originator of the world, became very glad and appeared 
in the Brahmaloka. Granting boon to Mahendra, so very rare to 
others and desired by him, Subrabhi went to the Goloka. The Devas, 
also, went back to their own abodes. The whole world was now full 
of milk; clarified butter came out of the milk; and from clarified butter 
sacrifices began to be performed and the Devas were fed and they 
became pleased. O Child! He who recites this holy Stotra of Surabhi 
with devotion, gets cows, other wealth, name, fame and sons. The 
reciting of this Stotra qualifies one as if he had bathed in all the 
sacred places of pilgrimages and he had acquired the fruits of all the 
sacrifices. Enjoying happiness in this world, be goes in the end to the 
Temple of S’ri Krisna. There living long in the service of Krisna, he 
becomes able to be a son of Brahma. 


Here ends the Forty-ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the 
anecdote of Surabhi in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 50. On The Glory Of S’akti 


1-4. Narada said “O Bhagavan! I have heard all the anecdotes of 
Prakriti, as according to the S’astras, that lead to the freedonn from 
birth and death in this world. Now I want to hear the very secret 
history of S’ri Radha and Durga as described in the Vedas. Though 
you have told me about their glories, yet I am not satisfied. Verily, 
where is he whose heart does not melt away on hearing the glories 
of both of them! This world is originated from their parts and is being 
controlled by them. The devotion towards them frees one easily from 
the bonds of Samsara (rounds of birth and death). O Muni! Kindly 
describe now about them.” 


5-44. Narayana said O Narada! I am now describing the 
characters of Radha and Durga, as described in the Vedas; listen. I 
did not describe to anybody this Secret which is the Essence of all 
essences and Higher than the highest. This is to be kept very secret. 
Hearing this, one ought not to divulge it to any other body. Radha 
presides over the Prana and Durga presides over the Buddhi. From 
these two, the Mulaprakriti has originated this world. These two 
S’aktis guide the whole world. From the Mahavirat to the small 
insect, all, moving or non-moving, are under the Mulaprakriti. One 
must satisfy them. Unless these two be satisfied, Mukti cannot be 
obtained. 


Therefore one ought to serve Mula Prakriti for Her satisfaction. Now 
of the two in Mula Prakriti, I will describe fully the Radha Mantra. 
Listen. Brahma, Visnu, and others always worship this mantra. The 
principal mantra is “S’ri Radhayai Svaha.” By this six lettered mantra 
Dharma and other fruits all are obtained with ease. If to this six 
lettered Mula mantra Hrim be added, it yields gems and jewels as 
desired. So much so, if thousand koti mouths and one hundred koti 



tongues are obtained, the glory of this mantra cannot be described. 
When the incorporeal voice of Mula Prakriti was heard in the 
Heavens, this mantra was obtained, first by Krisna in the Rasa 
Mandalam in the region of Goloka where all love sentiments are 
played. (The Vedas declare him as Raso vai Sah). From Krisna, 
Visnu got the Mantra; from Visnu, Brahma got; from Brahma Virat 
got, from Virat, Dharma, and from Dharma I have got this Mantra. 
Repeating that Mantra, I am known by the name of Risi. Brahma and 
the other Devas meditate always on the Mula Prakriti with greatest 
joy and ecstasy. Without the worship of Radha, never can the 
worship of S’ri Krisna be done. So men, devoted to Visnu, should 
first of all worship Radha by all means. Radha is the Presiding Deity 
of the Prana of S’ri Krisna. Hence S’ri Krisna is so much subject to 
Radha. The Lady of the Rasa Mandalam remains always close to 
Him. Without Her S’ri Krisna could not live even for a moment. The 
name Radha is derived from “Radhnoti” or fulfills all desires. Hence 
Mula Prakriti is termed Radha. I am the Risi of all the mantras but 
the Durga Mantra mentioned in this Ninth Skandha. Gayatri is the 
chhanda (mantra) of those mantras and Radhika is the Devata of 
them. Really, Narayana is the Risi of all the mantras; Gayatri is the 
chhanda; Pranava (om) is the Vija (seed) and BhuvanesVari (the 
Directrix of the world) is the S’akti. First of all the principal mantra is 
to be repeated six times; then meditation of the great Devi Radhika, 
the S’akti of the Risis is to be done, as mentioned in the Sama Veda. 
The meditation of Radha is as follows O Devi Radhike! Thy colour 
is like white Champaka flower; Thy face is like the autumnal Full 
Moon; Thy body shines with the splendour of ten million moons. Thy 
eyes look beautiful like autumnal lotus; Thy lips are red like Bimba 
fruits. Thy loins are very heavy and decked with the girdle (Kanchi) 
ornament; Thy face is always gracious with sweet smiles; Thy 
breasts defy the frontal globe of an elephant. Thou art ever youthful 
as if twelve years old; Thy body is adorned all over with ornaments! 
Thou art the waves of the ocean of S’ringara (love sentiments.) Thou 
art ever ready to show Thy grace to the devotees; on Thy braid of 
hair garlands of Mallika and Malati are shining; Thy body is like a 
creeping plant, very gentle and tender; Thou art seated in the middle 



of Rasa Mandalam as the Chief Directrix; Thy one hand is ready to 
grant boons and another hand expresses “Have no fear.” Thou art of 
a peaceful appearance; Thou art ever youthful; Thou art seated on a 
jewel throne; Thou art the foremost guide of the Gopikas; Thou art 
dearer to Krisna than even His life; O Parame’svari! The Vedas 
reveal Thy nature. Meditating thus, one is to bathe the Devi on a 
S’alagrama stone, jar, yantra or the eight petalled lotus and then 
worship Her duly. First the Devi is to be invoked; then Padya and 
Asana, etc., are to be offered, the principal Mantra being pronounced 
at every time an offering is given. After giving water for washing both 
the feet, Arghya is to be placed on the head and Achamaniyam 
water to be offered three times on the face. Madhuparka (an oblation 
of honey, milk etc.) and a cow giving a good quantity of milk are next 
to be offered. Then the yantra is to be thought of as the bathing 
place where the Devi is to be bathed. Then Her body is to be wiped 
and a fresh cloth given for putting on. Sandalpaste and various other 
ornaments are next to be given. Various garlands of flowers with 
Tulasi Manjari (flower stalks) Parijata flower and Satapatra etc., then, 
are to be offered. Then within the eight petals, the family members of 
the Devi are to be thought of; worship is next to be offered in the 
right hand direction (with the hands of the watch). First of all, 

Malavati on the petal in front of (on the east) the Devi, then MadhavT 
on the southeast corner, then Ratnamala on the south, Sus’ila on the 
south-west, Sas’ikala on the west, Parijata on the north-west, 

Paravati on the north and the benefactions Sundari on the north-east 
corner are to be worshipped in order. Outside this, Brahmi and the 
other Matrikas are to be worshipped and on the Bhupuras (the 
entrances of the yantra,) the Regents of the quarters, the Dikpalas 
and the weapons of the Devi, thunderbolt, etc., are to be worshipped 
. Then all the attendant Deities of the Devi are to be worshipped with 
scents and various other articles. Thus finishing the worship, one 
should chant the Stotra (hymns) named Sahasra-nama (thousand 
names) Stotra with care and devotion. O Narada! The intelligent man 
who worships thus the RasesVari Devi Radha, becomes like Visnu 
and goes to the Goloka. 



He who performs the birthday anniversary of S’ri Radha on the Full- 
Moon day of the month of Kartik, gets the blessings of S’ri Radha 
who remains near to him. For some reason Radha, the dweller in 
Goloka was born in Brindaban as the daughter of Vrisavanu. 
However, according to the number of letters of the mantras that are 
mentioned in this chapter, Purascharana is to be made and Homa, 
one-tenth of Purascharana, is to be then performed. The Homa is to 
be done with ghee, honey, and milk; the three sweet things mixed 
with Til and with devotion. 


45. Narada said “O Bhagavan; Now describe the Stotra (hymn) 
Mantra by which the Devi is pleased.” 


46-100. Narayana said O Narada! Now I am saying the 
Radha Stotra. Listen. O Thou, the Highest Deity, the Dweller in Rasa 
Mandalam! I bow down to Thee; O Thou, the Chief Directrix of the 
Rasa Mandalam; O Thou dearer to Krisna than His life even, I bow 
down to Thee. O Thou, the Mother of the three Lokas! O Thou the 
Ocean of mercy! Be pleased. Brahma, Visnu and the other Devas 
bow down before Thy lotus feet. Thou art Sarasvati; Thou art Savitri; 
Thou art S’ankari; I bow down to Thee; Thou art Ganga; Thou art 
Padmavati; Thou art Sasthi; Thou art Mangala Chandika; Thou art 
Manasa; Thou art Tulasi; Thou art Durga; Thou art Bhagavati; Thou 
art Laksmi; Thou art all, I bow down to Thee. Thou art the Mula 
Prakrit!; Thou art the Ocean of mercy. Obeisance to Thee! Be 
merciful to us and save us from this ocean of Samsara (round of 
birth and death). O Narada! Anybody who remembers Radha and 
reads this Stotra three times a day does not feel the want of anything 
in this world. He will ultimately go to Goloka and remain in the Rasa 
Mandalam. O Child This great secret ought never to be given out to 
any. Now I am telling you the method of worship of the Durga Devi. 
Hear. When any one remembers Durga in this world, all his 



difficulties and troubles are removed. It is not seen that anybody 
does not remember Durga. She is the object of worship of all. She is 
the Mother of all and the Wonderful S’akti of Mahadeva. She is the 
Presiding Deity of the intellect (Buddhi) of all and She controls the 
hearts of all and She removes the great difficulties and dangers of 
all. Therefore She is named Durga in the world. She is worshipped 
by all, whether a S’aiva or a Vaisnava. She is the Mula Prakriti and 
from Her the creation, preservation and destruction of the universe 
proceed. O Narada! Now I am saying the principal nine lettered 
Durga Mantra, the best of all the Mantras. “Aim Hrim Klim 
Chamundayai Vichche” is the nine lettered Vija mantra of S’ri Durga; 
it is like a Kalpa Vriksa yielding all desires. One should worship this 
mantra by all means. Brahma, Visnu, and Mahes’a are the Risis of 
this mantra; Gayatri, Usnik and Anusthubha are the chhandas; 
Mahakali, Maha Laksmi and Sarasvati are the Devatas; Rakta 
Dantika, Durga, and Bhramari are the Vijas. Nanda, Sakambhari, 
and Bhima are the S’aktis and Dharma (Virtue), Artha (wealth) and 
Kama (desires), are the places of application (Viniyoga). Assign the 
head to the Risi of the mantra (Nyasa); assign the chhandas to the 
mouth and assign the Devata to the heart. Then assign the S’akti to 
the right breast for the success and assign the Vija to the left breast. 


Then perform the Sadamga Nyasa as follows Aim Hridayaya 
namah, Hrim S’irase Svaha, Klim S’ikhayam Vasat, Chamundayai 
Kavachaya Hum, Vichche Netrabhyam Vausat, “Aim Hrim Klim 
Chamundayai Vichche” Karatalaprisihabhyam Phat. Next say 
touching the corresponding parts of the body “Aim namah 
S’ikhayam, Hrim Namah” on the right eye; “Klim Namah” on the left 
eye, “Cham Namah” on the right ear, “Mum namah” on the left 
ear, ndam Namah” on the nostrils; “Vim Namah” on the face; 
“Chchem Namah” on the anus and finally “Aim Hrim Klim 
Chamundayai Vichche” on the whole body. Then do the meditation 
(dhyan) thus “O Chamunde! Thou art holding in Thy ten hands ten 
weapons, viz., Khadga (axe). Chakra (disc), Gada (club), Vana 



(arrows), Chapa (bow), Parigha, Sula (spear), Bhus’undi Kapala, 
and Khadga. Thou art Maha Kali; Thou art three-eyed; Thou art 
decked with various ornaments. Thou shinest like Lilanjan (a kind of 
black pigment). Thou hast ten faces and ten feet. The Lotus born 
Brahma chanted hymns to Thee for the destruction of Madhu 
Kaitabha; I bow down to Thee.” Thus one should meditate on Maha 
Kali, of the nature of Kamavija (the source whence will comes). Then 
the Dhyanam of Maha Laksmi runs as follows O Maha Laksmi, 
the destroyer of Mahisasura! Thou boldest the garland of Aksa (a 
kind of seed), Paras’u (a kind of axe), Gada (club), Isu (arrows), 
Kulis’a (the thunderbolt) Padma (Lotus), Dhanu (bow), Kundika (a 
student’s waterpot), Kamandalu, Danda (rod for punishment), S’akti 
(a kind of weapon), Asi (sword), Charma (shield) Padma (a kind of 
waterlily), Ghanta (bell,) S’urapatra (a pot to hold liquor), S’ula 
(pickaxe), Pas’a (noose) and Sudarsana (a kind of weapon). Thy 
colour is of the Rising Sun. Thou art seated on the red Lotus. Thou 
art of the nature Mayavija (the source whence female energy 
comes). So Obeisance to Thee! (The Vija and the Devi are one and 
identical). Next comes the Dhyanam of Maha Sarasvati as follows 
O Maha Sarasvati! Thou boldest bell, pickaxe, plough (Hala), Conch 
shell, Musala (a kind of club), Sudars’ana, bow and arrows. Thy 
colour is like Kunda flower; Thou art the destroyer of S’umbha and 
the other Daityas; Thou art of the nature of VanMja (the source 
whence knowledge, speech comes). Thy body is filled with 
everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss. Obeisance to Thee! O 
Narada! Now I am going to say on the Yantra of Maha Sarasvati. 
Listen. First draw a triangle. Draw inside the triangle eight petalled 
lotus having twenty-four leaves. Within this draw the house. Then on 
the Yantra thus drawn, or in the S’alagrama stone, or in the jar, or in 
image, or in the Vanalingam, or on the Sun, one should worship the 
Devi with oneness of heart. Then worship the Pitha, the deities 
seated also on the dais, i.e., Jaya, Vijaya, Ajita, Aghora, Mangala 
and other Pitha S’aktis. Then worship the attendant deities called 
Avarana Puja Brahma with Sarasvati on the east, Narayana with 
Laksmi on the Nairirit corner, S’ankara with Parvati on the Vayu 
corner, the Lion on the north of the Devi, and Mahasura on the left 



side of the Devi; finally worship Mahisa (buffalo). Next worship 
Nandaja, Raktadanta, S’akambhari, S’iva, Durga, Bhima, and 
Bhramari. Then on the eight petals worship Brahma, MahesVari, 
Kaumari, Vaisnavi, Varahi, Nara Simhi, Aindri, and Chamunda. Next 
commencing from the leaf in front of the Devi, worship on the twenty 
four leaves Visnu Maya, Chetana, Buddhi, Nidra (sleep), hunger, 
shadow, S’akti, thirst, peace, species (Jati), modesty, faith, fame, 
Laksmi (wealth), fortitude, Vriti, S’ruti, memory, mercy, Tusti, Pusti 
(nourishment), Bhranti (error) and other Matrikas. Next on the 
corners of the Bhupura (gates of the Yantra), Ganes’a Ksettrapalas, 
Vatuka and Yoginis are to be worshipped. Then on the outside of 
that Indra and the other Devas furnished with weapons are to be 
worshipped as per the aforesaid rules. For the satisfaction of the 
World-Mother various nice offerings and articles like those given by 
the royal personages are to be presented to the Mother; then the 
mantra is to be repeated, understanding its exoteric and esoteric 
meanings. Then Saptas’ati stitra (Chandi patha) is to be repeated 
before the Devi. There is no other stotra like this in the three worlds. 
Thus Durga, the Deity of the Devas, is to be appeased every day. He 
who does this gets within his easy reach Dharma, Artha, Kama, and 
Moksa, the four main objects of human pursuits (virtue, wealth, 
enjoyment and final beatitude). O Narada! Thus I have described to 
you the method of worship of the Devi Durga. People get by this 
what they want. Hah, Brahma, and all the Devas, Manus, Munis, the 
Yogis full of knowledge, the As’ramis, and Laksmi and the other 
Devas all meditate on S’ivani. One’s birth is attained with success at 
the remembrance of Durga. The fourteen Manus have got their 
Manuship and the Devas their own rights by meditating on the lotus 
feet of Durga. O Narada! Thus I have described to you the very 
hidden histories of the Five Prakritis and their parts. Then, verily, the 
four objects of human pursuits Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksa are 
obtained by hearing this. He who has no sons gets sons, who has no 
learning gets learning and whoever wants anything gets that if he 
hears this. The Devi Jagaddhatri becomes certainly pleased with 
him who reads with his mind concentrated on this for nine nights 
before the Devi. The Devi becomes obedient to him who daily reads 



one chapter of this Ninth Skandha and the reader also does what is 
acceptable to the Devi. To ascertain before-hand what effects, merits 
or demerits, would accrue from reading this Bhagavata, it is 
necessary by examining through the hands of a virgin girl or a 
Brahmin child, the auspicious or inauspicious signs. First make a 
Sankalpa (resolve) and worship the book. Then bow down again and 
again to the Devi Durga. Then bring there a virgin girl, bathed well 
and worship her duly and have a golden pencil fixed duly in her hand 
and placed in the middle on the body. Then calculate the auspicious 
or inauspicious effects, as the case may be, from the curves made 
by that pencil. So the effects of reading this Bhagavata would be. If 
the virgin girl be indifferent in fixing the pencil within the area drawn, 
know the result of reading the Bhagavata would be similar. There is 
no doubt in this. 


Here ends the Fiftieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Glory of 
S’akti in the Mahapuranam S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Here ends the Ninth Book. 


The Ninth Book Completed. 



THE TENTH BOOK 



Chapter 1. On The Story Of Svayambhuva Manu 


1-6. Narada said O Narayana! O Thou, the Supporter of this 
whole world! The Preserver of all! Thou hast described the glorious 
characters of the Devi, that take away all the sins. Kindly describe 
now to me the several forms that the Devi assumed in every 
Manvantara in this world as well as Her Divine Greatness. O Thou, 
full of mercy! Describe also how and by whom She was worshipped 
and praised; how She, so kind to the devotees, having been thus 
pleased, fulfilled their desires. I am very eager to hear these, the 
very best and blissful characters of the Devi. S’ri Narayana said 
Hear, O Maharsi! The glories and greatness of the Devi Bhagavati 
leading to the devotion of the devotees, capable of giving all sorts of 
wealth and destroying all sins. From the navel lotus of Visnu, the 
holder of the Chakra (discus), was born Brahma, the Creator of this 
universe, the great Energetic One, and the Grand Sire of all the 
worlds. 


7-14. The four faced Brahma, on being born, produced from His 
mind Svayambhuva Manu and his wife S’atarupa, the embodiment of 
all virtues. For this very reason, Svayambhuva Manu has been 
known as the mind-born son of Brahma. Svayambhuva Manu got 
from Brahma the task to create and multiply; he made an earthen 
image of the Devi Bhagavati, the Bestower of all fortunes, on the 
beach of the sanctifying Ksira Samudra (ocean of milk) and he 
engaged himself in worshipping Her and began to repeat the 
principal mystic mantra of Vagbhava (the Deity of Speech). Thus 
engaged in worship, Svayambhuva Manu conquered by and by his 
breath and food and observed Yama, Niyama and other vows and 
became lean and thin. For one hundred years he remained standing 
always on one leg and became successful in controlling his six 
passions lust, anger, etc. He meditated on the feet of that Adya 
S'akti (the Primordial S'akti) so much that he became inert like a 



vegetable or mineral matter. By his Tapas the Devi, the World 
Mother appeared before him and said “O King! Ask divine boons 
from Me.” Hearing these joyous words, the King wanted his long 
cherished and heart-felt boon, so very rare to the Devas. 


15-22. Manu said O Large eyed Devi! Victory to Thee, residing in 
the hearts of all! O Thou honoured, worshipped! O Thou! the 
Upholdress of the world! O Thou, the Auspicious of all auspicious! 


By Thy Gracious Look, it is that the Lotus born has been able to 
create the worlds; Visnu is perserving and Rudra Deva is destroying 
in a minute. By Thy command it is that Indra, the Lord of S'achi, has 
got the charge of controlling the three Lokas; and Yama, the Lord of 
the departed, is awarding fruits and punishing according, to their 
merits or demerits, the deceased ones. O Mother! By Thy Grace, 
Varuna, the holder of the noose, has become the lord of all aquatic 
creatures and is preserving them; and Kuvera, the lord of the 
Yaksas, has become the lord of wealth. Agni (fire), Nairrit, Vayu 
(wind), Is'ana and Ananta Deva are Thy parts and have grown by 
Thy power. Then, O Devi! If Thou desirest to grant me my desired 
boon, then, O Thou! the Auspicious One! Let all the great obstacles 
to my work of procreating in this universe and increasing my 
dominions die away. And if anybody worships this great Vagbhava 
Mantra or anybody hears with devotion this history or makes others 
hear this, they all shall be crowned with success and enjoyment and 
Mukti be easy to them. 


23-24. Specially they would get the power to remember their past 
lives, acquire eloquence in speaking, all round beauty, success in 
obtaining knowledge, success in their deeds and especially in the 
increase of their posterity and children. O Bhagavati! This is what I 
want most. 



Here ends the First Chapter of the Tenth Book on the story of 
Svayambhuva Manu in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 2. On The Conversation Between 
Narada And The Bindhya Mountain 


1-6. The Devi said “O King! O Mighty armed One! All these I grant 
unto you. Whatever you have asked for, I give them to you. I am very 
much pleased with your hard Tapasya and with your Japam of the 
Vagbhava Mantra. Know Me that My power is infallible in killing the 
Lords of the Daityas. O Child! Let your kingdom be free from 
enemies and let your prosperity be increased. Let your devotion be 
fixed on Me and in the end you will verily get Nirvana Mukti.” O 
Narada! Thus granting the boon to the highsouled Manu the Great 
Devi disappeared before him and went to the Bindhya Range. O 
Devarsi! This Bindhya mountain increased in height so much so that 
it was well nigh on the way to prevent the course of the Sun when it 
was arrested by Maharsi Agastya, born of a kumbha (water jar). The 
younger sister of Visnu, VaradesVari, is staying here as 
Bindhyavasini. O Best of the Munis! This Devi is an object of worship 
of all. 


7-8. Saunaka and the other Risis said O Suta! Who is that 
Bindhya Mountain? And why did He intend to soar high up to the 
Heavens to resist the Sun's course? And why was it that Agastya, 
the son of Mitravaruna quietened that rising mountain? Kindly 
describe all these in detail. 


9-15. O Saint! We are not as yet satisfied with hearing the Glories of 
the Devi, the ambrosial nectar, that have come out of your mouth. 
Rather our thirst has been increased. Suta said O Risis! There 
was the Bindhya Mountain, highly honoured and reckoned as the 
chief of the mountains on the earth. It was covered with big forests 
and big trees. Creeping plants and shrubs flowered these and it 



looked very beautiful. On it were roaming deer, wild boars, buffaloes, 
monkeys, hares, foxes, tigers and bears, stout and cheerful, with full 
vigour and all very merrily. The Devas, Gandharbhas, Apsaras, and 
Kinnaras come here and bathe in its rivers; all sorts of fruit trees can 
be seen here. On such a beautiful Bindhya Mountain, came there 
one day the ever joyful Devarsi Narada on his voluntary tour round 
the world. Seeing the Maharsi Narada, the Bindhya Mountain got up 
and worshipped him with padya and arghya and gave him a very 
good Asana to sit. When the Muni took his seat and found himself 
happy, the Mountain began to speak. 


16-17. Bindhya said “O Devarsi! Now be pleased to say whence 
you are coming; your coming here is so very auspicious! My house is 
sanctified today by your coming. O Deva! Your wandering is, like the 
Sun, the cause of inspiring the beings with freedom from fear. So, O 
Narada! Kindly give out your intention as to your coming here which 
seems rather wonderful.” 


18-28. Narada said “O Bindhya! O Enemy of Indra! (Once the 
mountains had a very great influence. Indra cut off their wings and 
so destroyed their influence. Hence the mountains are enemies of 
Indra). I am coming from the Sumeru Mountain. There I saw the nice 
abodes of Indra, Agni, Yama, and Varuna. There I saw the houses of 
these Dikpalas (the Regents of the several quarters), which abound 
in objects of all sorts of enjoyments.” Thus saying, Narada gave out 
a heavy sigh. Bindhya, the king of mountains, seeing the Muni 
heaving a long sigh, asked him again with great eagerness, “O 
Devarsi! Why have you heaved such a long sigh? Kindly say.” 
Hearing this, Narada said “O Child! Hear the cause why I sighed. 
See! The Himalaya Mountain is the father of Gauri and the father-in- 
law of Mahadeva; therefore he is the most worshipped of all the 
mountains. The Kailas'a Mountain again, is the residence of 
Mahadeva; hence that is also worshipped and chanted as capable of 



destroying all the sins. So the Nisadha, Nila, and Gandhamadana 
and other nnountains are worshipped at their own places. What more 
than this, that the Sumeru Mountain, round whom the thousand- 
rayed Sun, the Soul of the universe, circumambulates along with the 
planets and stars, thinks himself the supreme and greatest amongst 
the mountains, “I am the supreme; there is none like me in the three 
worlds.” Remembering this self-conceit of Sumeru, I sighed so 
heavily. O Bindhya! We are asceties and though we have no need to 
discuss these things, yet by way of conversation I have told this to 
you. Now I go to my own abode.” 


Here ends the Second Chapter of the Tenth Book on the 
conversation between Narada and the Bindhya Mountain in the 
Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 3. On The Obstruction Of The Sun’s 
Course By The Bindhya Mountain 


1-16. Suta said O Risis! Thus advising, the Devarsi, the great 
Jhani and Muni going wherever he likes, went to the Brahmaloka. 
After the Muni had gone, the Bindhya became immersed in great 
anxiety and becoming always very sorrowful, could not get peace. 
What shall I do now so as to overthrow Meru? Until I do that, I won't 
be able to get the peace of my mind or my health. The highsouled 
persons always praised me for my enthusiasm and energy. Fie to my 
energy, honour, fame and family! Fie to my strength and heroism! O 
Risis! With all these cogitations in his mind, Bindhya came finally to 
this crooked conclusion “Daily the Sun, stars and planets 
circumambulate round the Sumeru; hence Sumeru is always so 
arrogant; now if I can resist the Sun's course in the heavens by my 
peaks. He will not be able to circumambulate round the Sumeru. If I 
can do this, certainly I will be able to curb the Sumeru in his pride.” 
Thus coming to a conclusion, Bindhya raised his arms that were the 
peaks high up to the heavens and blocking the passage in the 
Heavens, remained so and passed that night with great uneasiness 
and difficulty, thinking when the Sun would rise and he would 
obstruct His passage. At last, when the morning broke out, all the 
quarters were clear. The Sun, destroying the darkness, rose in 
Udaya Giri. The sky looked clear with His rays; the lotus, seeing 
Him, blew out with joy; while the excellent white water-lilies, at the 
bereavement of the Moon, contracted their leaves and closed as if at 
the separation of one's lover, gone to a distant place. The people 
began to do their own works on the appearance of the day; the 
worship of the gods, the offerings to the Gods, the Homas and the 
offerings to the Piths were set a going on (in the morning, afternoon 
and evening respectively). The Sun marched on in His course. He 
divided the day into three parts, morning, midday, and afternoon. 

First of all he consoled the eastern quarter which seemed like a 
woman suffering from the bereavement of her lover; then he 



consoled the south eartern corner; then as He wanted to go quickly 
towards the south, His horses could not go further. The charioteer 
Aruna, seeing this, informed the Sun what had happened. 


17. Aruna spoke “O Sun! The Bindhya has become very jealous 
of the Sumeru as You circumambulate round the Sumeru Mountain 
daily. He has risen very high and obstructed your course in the 
Heavens, hoping that you would circumambulate round him. He is 
thus vying with the Sumeru Mountain.” 


18-26. Suta said O Risis! Hearing the words of Aruna, the 
charioteer, the Sun began to think thus “Oh! The Bindhya is going 
to obstruct My course! What can a great hero not do, when he is in 
the wrong path? Oh! My horses' motions are stopped to-day! The 
fate is the strongest of all (Because Bindhya is strong today by 
Daiva, therefore he is doing this). Even when eclipsed by Rahu (the 
ascending node) I do not stop for a moment even; and now 
obstructed in My passage, I am waiting here for a long time. The 
Daiva is powerful; what can I do?” The Sun's course having been 
thus obstructed, all from the Gods to the lowest became helpless 
and could not make out what to do. Chitragupta and others ascertain 
their time through the Sun's course; and that Sun is now rendered 
motionless by the Bindhya mountain! What a great adverse fate is 
this! When the Sun was thus obstructed by the Bindhya out of his 
arrogance, the sacrifices to the Devas, the offerings to the Pitris all 
were stopped; the world was going to rack and ruin. The people that 
lived on the west and south had their nights prolonged and they 
remained asleep. The people of the east and the north were 
scorched by the strong rays of the Sun and some of them died; 
some of them lost their health and so forth. The whole earth became 
devoid of S'raddhas and worships and a cry of universal distress 
arose on all sides. Indra and the other Devas became very anxious 
and began to think what they should do at that moment. 



Here ends the Third Chapter of the Tenth Book on the obstruction of 
the Sun's course by the Bindhya Mountain in the Maha Puranam S’ri 
Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 4. On The Devas Going To Maha Deva 


1-2. Suta said O Risis! Then Indra and all the other Devas taking 
Brahma along with them and placing Him at the front, went to 
Mahadeva and took His refuge. They bowed down to Him and 
chanted sweet and great hymns to Him, Who holds Moon on His 
forehead, Deva of the Devas, thus 


3-5. O Thou, the Leader of the host of Gods! Victory to Thee! O 
Thou, Whose lotus feet are served by Lima, Victory to Thee! O Thou, 
the Giver of the eight Siddhis and Vibhutis (extraordinary powers) to 
Thy devotees. Victory to Thee! O Thou, the Background of this Great 
Theatrical Dance of this Insurmountable Maya! Thou art the 
Supreme Spirit in Thy True Nature! Thou ridest on Thy vehicle, the 
Bull, and residest in Kailas'a; yet Thou art the Lord of all the Devas. 

O Thou, Whose ornament is snakes. Who art the Honoured and the 
Giver of honours to persons! O Thou! the Unborn, yet comprising all 
forms, O Thou S'ambhu! That findest pleasure in this Thy Own Self! 
Victory toThee! 


6-9. O Thou, the Lord of Thy attendants! O Thou, Giris'a! The Giver 
of the great powers, praised by Maha Visnu! O Thou, That livest in 
the heart lotus of Visnu, and deeply absorbed in Maha Yoga! 
Obeisance to Thee! O Thou that can'st be known through Yoga, and 
nothing but the Yoga itself; Thou, the Lord of the Yoga! We bow 
down to Thee. Thou awardest the fruits of yoga to the Yogins. O 
Thou, the Lord of the helpless! The Incarnate of the ocean of mercy! 
The Relief of the diseased and the most powerful! O Thou, whose 
forms are the three gunas, Sattva, Rajo, Tamas! O Thou! Whose 
Emblem (carrier) is the Bull (Dharma); Thou art verily the Great Kala; 
yet Thou art the Lord of Kala! Obeisance to Thee! (The Bull 
represents the Dharma or Speech). 



10. Thus praised by the Devas, who take the offerings in sacrifices 
the Lord of the Devas, whose emblem is Bull, smilingly told the 
Devas in a deep voice 


11.0 Thou, the excellent Devas! The residents of the Heavens! I am 
pleased with the praises that you have sung of Me. I will fulfil the 
desires of you, all the Devas. 


12-15. The Devas said O Lord of all the Devas! O Giris'a! Thou 
whose forehead is adorned with Moon! O Thou, the Doer of good to 
the distressed. O Thou, the Powerful! Dost Thou do good to us. O 
Thou, the Sinless One! The Bindhya Mountain has become jealous 
of the Sumeru Mountain, and has risen very high up in the Heavens 
and he has obstructed the Sun's course, thereby causing great 
troubles to all. O Thou, the Doer of good to all! O Is'ana! Dost Thou 
check the mountain's abnormal rise. How can we fix time if the Sun's 
course be obstructed! And when there is no knowledge, what is now 
the time, the sacrifices to the Devas and the offerings to the Pitris 
are now almost dead and gone. O Deva! Who will now protect us? 
We see Thee as the Destroyer of the fear of us and of those who are 
terrified. O Deva! O Lord of Giris'a! Be pleased with us. 


16-18. S’ri Bhagavan said O Devas! I have no power to curb the 
Bindhya Mountain. Let us go to the Lord of Rama and pay our 
respects to Him. He is our Lord, fit to be worshipped. He is Gobinda, 
Bhagavan Visnu, the Cause of all causes. We will go to Him and tell 
Him all our sorrows. He will remove them. 


19. Hearing thus the words of Giris'a, Indra and the other Devas with 
Brahma placed Mahadeva at their front and went to the region of 



Vaikuntha, trembling with fear. 


Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the going of the 
Devas to Mahadeva in the Maha Puranam S’rimad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 5. On The Devas Going To Visnu 


1-5. Suta said Then the Devas, on arriving at Vaikuntha, saw the 
Lord of Laksmi, the Deva of the Devas, the World-Teacher, with his 
eyes beautiful like Padma Palasa (lotus-leaves), shining with 
brilliance and began to praise Him in a voice choked with intense 
feelings of devotion, thus “Victory to Visnu! O Lord of Rama! Thou 
art prior to the Virat Purusa. O Enemy of the Daityas! O Thou, the 
Generator of desires in all and the Bestower of the fruits of those 
desires to all! O Gobinda! Thou art the Great Boar and Thou art of 
the nature of Great Sacrifices! O Maha Visnu! O Lord of Dharma! 
Thou art the Cause of the origin of this world! Thou didst support the 
earth in Thy Fish Incarnation for the deliverance of the Vedas! O 
Thou Satyavrata of the form of a Fish! We bow down to Thee. O 
Thou! The Enemy of the Daityas! The Ocean of mercy! Thou dost do 
the actions of the Devas out of mercy. O Thou! the Tortoise 
Incarnation! That grantest Mukti to others! Obeisance to Thee! 


6-18. O Thou! That didst assume the form of a Boar for the 
destruction of the Daityas Jaya and others and for raising the earth 
from the waters! Obeisance to Thee! Thou didst assume that form - 
Half man and half Lion of the Nrisimha Murti and tore asunder 
Hiranya Kas'ipu, proud of his boons, by Thy nails. We bow down to 
Thee! Obeisance to Thee! That in Thy Dwarf Incarnation, didst 
deceive Bali, whose head got crazed by the acquisition of the 
kingdom over the three Lokas. We bow down to Thee, that in Thy 
Paras'u Rama Incarnation, didst slay Karta Viryaryuna, the thousand 
handed, and the other wicked Ksattriyas! Obeisance to Thee! That 
wert born of the womb of Renuka as the son of Jamadagni. 
Obeisance to Thee, of great prowess and valour, that in Thy Rama 
Incarnation as the son of Das'aratha, didst cut off the heads of the 
wicked Raksasa, the son of Pulastya! 



We bow down again and again to Thee, the Great Lord, that in Thy 
Krisna incarnation, didst deliver this earth from the clutches of the 
wicked King Duryodhana, Kamsa and others and didst establish the 
religion by removing the then prevailing vicious ideas and doctrines. 
We bow down to Thy Buddha Incarnation, that Great Deva who didst 
come down here to put a stop to the slaughtering of the innocent 
animals and to the performance of the wicked sacrificial ceremonies! 
Obeisance to the Deva! When almost all the persons in this world 
will turn out in future as MIechchas and when the wicked Kings will 
oppress them, right and left. Thou wilt then incarnate Thyself again 
as Kalki and redress all the grievances! 

We bow down to Thy Kalki Form! O Deva! These are Thy Ten 
Incarnations, for the preservation of Thy devotees, for the killing of 
the wicked Daityas. Therefore Thou art called as the Great Reliever 
of all our troubles. O Thou! Victory to Thee! The Deva Who 
assumest the forms of women and water for destroying the ailings of 
the devotees! Who else can be so kind! O Thou, the Ocean of 
mercy!” O Risis! Thus praising the yellow robed Visnu, the Lord of all 
the Devas, the whole host of the Devas bowed down to Him and 
made Shastamgas. Then Visnu Gadadhara, hearing their hymns, 
gladdened them and spoke 


19-27. S’ri Bhagavana said “O Devas! I am pleased with your 
stotra. You need not be sorrowful. I will remove all your troubles that 
have become unbearable to you. O Devas! I am very glad to hear 
the praises that you have offered on Me. 

Better ask boons from Me. I will grant them though very rare even 
and obtained with difficulty. Any person who rises early in the 
morning and recites with devotion this stotra sung by you, will never 
experience any sorrow. O Devas! No poverty, no bad symptoms, no 
Vetalas nor planets nor Brahma Raksasas nor any misfortunes will 
overtake him. No disease, due to Vata (windy temperament). Pitta 
(bile) and Kapha (phlegm) nor untimely death will visit him. His family 



will not be extinct and happiness will always reign there. O Devas! 
This stotra can give everything. 

Both the enjoyment and freedom will come within anyone's easy 
access. There is no doubt in this. Nov what is your difficulty? Give 
out. I will remove it at once. There is not a bit of doubt in this.” 
Hearing these words of S’ri Bhagavan, the Devas became glad and 
spoke to Visnu. 


Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the Devas' going 
to Visnu, in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 6. On The Devas Praying To The Muni 
Agastya 


1-6. Suta said O Risis! Hearing the words of the Lord of Laksmi, 
all the Devas became pleased and they spoke. The Devas said O 
Deva of the Devas! O Maha Visnu! O Thou, the Creator, Preserver 
and the Destroyer of the Universe! O Visnu! The Bindhya mountain 
has risen very high and it has stopped the Sun's course. Therefore 
all the works on earth are suspended. We are not receiving our 
share of Yajhas. Now where we will go, what we will do, we do not 
know. S’ri Bhagavan said “O Devas! There is now in Benares the 
Muni Agastya of indomitable power, in devoted service of that 
Primordial S'akti Bhagavati, the Creatrix of this Universe. This Muni 
alone can put a stop to this abnormal Bindhya Range. Therefore it 
behoves you all to go to that fiery Dvija Agastya at Benares where 
the people get Nirvana; the Highest Place and pray to him (to kindly 
fulfil your object).” 


7-19. Suta said: - O Risis! Thus ordered by Visnu, the gods felt 
themselves comforted and, saluting Him, went to the city of Benares. 


In a moment they went to the Holy City of Benares, and bathing 
there at the Manikarnika ghat, worshipped the Devas with devotion 
and offered Tarpanas to the Piths and duly made their charities. 
Then they went to the excellent As'rama of the Muni Agastya. The 
hermitage was full of quiet quadruped animals; adorned with various 
trees, peacocks, herons, geese and Chakravakas and various other 
birds, tigers, wolves, deer, the wild boars, rhinoceros, young 
elephants, Ruru deer and others. Though there were the ferocious 
animals, yet the place was free from fear and it looked exceedingly 
beautiful. On arriving before the Muni, the gods fell prostrate before 



him and bowed down again and again to him. They then chanted 
hymns to him and said O Lord of Dvijas! O Thou honoured and 
most worshipful! Victory to Thee. Thou art sprung from a water jar. 
Thou art the destroyer of VatapT, the Asura. Obeisance to Thee! O 
Thou, full of S’ri, the son of Mitravaruna! Thou art the husband of 
Lopamudra. Thou art the store house of all knowledge. Thou art the 
source of all the S'astras. Obeisance to Thee! At Thy rise, the waters 
of the ocean become bright and clear; so obeisance to Thee! At Thy 
rise (Canopus) the Kas'a flower blossoms. Thou art adorned with 
clots of matted hair on Thy head and Thou always livest with Thy 
disciples. S’ri Rama Chandra is one of Thy chief disciples. O great 
Muni! Thou art entitled to praise from all the Devas! O Best! The 
Store-house of all qualities! O great Muni! We now bow down to 
Thee and Thy wife Lopamudra! O Lord! O very Energetic! We all are 
very much tormented by an unbearable pain inflicted on us by the 
Bindhya Range and we therefore take refuge of Thee. Be gracious 
unto us. Thus praised by the gods, the highly religious Muni Agastya, 
the twice born, smiled and graciously said 


20-27. O Devas! You are the lords of the three worlds, superior to all, 
highsouled, and the preserver of the Lokas. If you wish, you can 
favour, disfavour, do anything. Especially He who is the Lord of 
heavens, whose weapon is the thunderbolt, and the eight Siddhis 
are ever at his service is your Indra, the Lord of the Devas. What is 
there that he cannot do? Then there is Agni, Who burns everything 
and always carries oblations to the gods and the Pitris, Who is the 
mouth piece of the Devas. Is there anything impracticable with him! 

O Devas! Then again Yama is there amongst you, the Lord of the 
Raksasas, the Witness of all actions, and always quick in giving 
punishment to the offenders, that terrible looking Yama Raja. What is 
there that he cannot accomplish? 



still, O Devas! if there be anything required by you that awaits my 
co-operation, give out at once and I will do it undoubtedly. Hearing 
these words of the Muni, the Devas became very glad and joyfully 
began to say what they wanted. O Maharsi! The Bindhya mountain 
has risen very high and thwarted the Sun's course in the Heavens. A 
cry of universal distress and consternation has arisen and the three 
worlds are now verging to the ruins. O Muni! Now what we want is 
this that Thou, by Thy power of Tapas, curbest the rise of this 
Bindhya Mountain. O Agastya! Certainly, by Thy fire and austerities, 
that mountain will be brought down and humiliated. This is what we 
want. 


Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the Devas' 
praying to the Muni Agastya for checking the abnormal rise of the 
Bindhya Range in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 7. On The Checking Of The Rise Of The 
Bindhya Range 


1-21. Suta said Hearing the words of the Devas, Agastya, the 
Best of the Brahmins promised that he would carry out their works. O 
Risis! All the Devas then became very glad when the Muni, born of 
the water jar, promised thus. They then bade good-bye to him and 
went back gladly to their own abodes. The Muni then spoke to his 
wife thus “O daughter of the King! The Bindhya Mountain has 
baffled the progress of the Sun's course and has thus caused a 
great mischief. What the Munis, the Seers of truths said before 
referring to Kas’i, all are now coming to my mind when I am thinking 
why this disturbance has overtaken me. They said that various 
hindrances would come to him at every step, who is a Sadhu 
intending to settle at Kas'i. Let him who wants Mukti, never quit 
Kas'i, the Avimukta place in any case. But, O Dear! Today I have got 
one hindrance during my stay at Kas'i.” Thus talking with much 
regret on various subjects with his wife, the Muni bathed in the 
Manikarnika ghat, saw the Lord Vis'ves'vara worshipped Dandapani 
and went to the Kala Bhairava. He said in the following terms “O 
Mighty armed Kalabhairava! Thou destroyest the fear of the Bhaktas; 
Thou art the God of this Kas'i City. Then why art Thou driving me 
away from this Kas'idham. O Lord! Thou removest all the obstacles 
of the devotees and Thou preservest them. Then why, O Destroyer 
of the sorrows of the Bhaktas! art Thou removing me from here? 
Never I blamed others; nor did I practise any hypocrisy with any 
person nor did I lie; then under what sin. Thou art driving me away 
from Kas'i.” O Risis! Thus praying to Kala Bhairava, the Muni 
Agastya, born of water jar and the husband of Lopamudra, went to 
Saksi Ganes'a, the Destroyer of all evils and seeing and worshipping 
Him, went out of Kas'i and proceeded to the south. The Muni, the 
ocean of great fortune, left Kas'i; but he became very much 
distressed to leave it and he remembered it always. He began to 
march on with his wife. As if riding on his car of asceticism he arrived 



at the Bindhya mountain in the twinkling of an eye and saw that the 
Mountain had risen very high and obstructed the passage of the Sun 
in the Heavens. The Bindhya Mountain, seeing the Muni Agastya in 
front, began to tremble and as if desirous to speak something to the 
earth in a whisper became low and dwarfish and bowed down to the 
Muni and fell down with devotion in sastangas with devotion just like 
a stick dropped flat on the ground before the Muni. 


Seeing the Bindhya thus low, the Muni Agastya became pleased and 
spoke with a gracious look “O Child! Better remain in this state 
until I come back. For, O Child! I am quite unable to ascend to your 
lofty heights.” Thus saying, the Muni became eager to go to the 
south; and, crossing the peaks of the Bindhya, alighted gradually 
again to the plains. He went on further to the south and saw the S’ri 
S'aila Mountain and at last went to the Malayachala and there, 
building his As'rama (hermitage), settled himself. O Saunaka! The 
Devi Bhagavati, worshipped by the Muni went to the Bindhya 
Mountain and settled there and became known, in the three worlds, 
by the name of Bindhyavasini. 


22-26. Suta said Anybody who hears this highly pure narrative of 
the Muni Agastya and Bindhya, becomes freed of all his sins. All his 
enemies are destroyed in no time. This hearing gives knowledge to 
the Brahmanas, victory to the Ksattriyas, wealth and corn to the 
Vais'yas and happiness to the S’udras. 


If anybody once hears this narrative, he gets Dharma if he want 
Dharma, gets unbounded wealth if he wants wealth and gets all 
desires if he wants his desires fulfilled. In ancient times 
Svayambhuva Manu worshipped this Devi with devotion and got his 
kingdom for his own Manvantara period. O Saunaka! Thus I have 



described to you the holy character of the Devi in this Manvantara. 
What more shall I say? Mention please. 


Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Tenth Book on the checking of 
the rise of the Bindhya Range in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 8. On The Origin Of Manu 


1. Saunaka said “O Suta! You have described the beautiful 
narrative of the first Manu Svayambhuva. Now kindly describe to us 
the narratives of other highly energetic Deva-like Manus.” 


2-3. Suta said “O Risis! The very wise Narada, well versed in the 
knowledge of S’ri Devi, hearing the glorious character of the first 
Svayambhuva Manu, became desirous to hear of the other Manus 
and asked the Eternal Narayana O Deva! Now favour me by 
reciting the origin and narratives of the other Manus.” 


4. Narayana said O Devarsi! I have already spoken to you 
everything regarding the first Manu. He had worshipped the Devi 
Bhagavati, and thus he got his foeless kingdom. You know that then. 


5-24 Manu had two sons of great prowess, Priyavrata and 
Uttanapada. They governed their kingdoms with fame. The son of 
this Priyavrata, of indomitable valour, is known by the wise as the 
second Svarochisa Manu. Dear to all the beings, this Svarochisa 
Manu built his hermitage near the banks of the Kalindi (the Jumna) 
and there making an earthen image of the Devi Bhagavati, 
worshipped the Devi with devotion, subsisting on dry leaves and 
thus practised severe austerities. Thus he passed his twelve years in 
that forest; when, at last, the Devi Bhagavati, resplendent with 
brilliance of the thousand Suns, became visible to him. She got very 
much pleased with his devotional stotrams. The Devi, the Saviour of 
the Devas, and Who was of good vows, granted to him the 
sovereignty for one Manvantara. Thus the Devi became famous by 
the name Tarini Jagaddhatri. O Narada! Thus, by worshipping the 
Devi Tarini, Svarochisa obtained safely the foeless kingdom. Then 



establishing the Dharma duly, he enjoyed his kingdonn with his sons; 
and, when the period of his manvantara expired, he went to the 
Heavens. Priyavrata's son named Uttama became the third Manu. 

On the banks of the Ganges, be practised tapasya and repeated the 
Vija Mantra of Vagbhava, in a solitary place for three years and 
became blessed with the favour of the Devi. With rapt devotion he 
sang hymns wholly to the Devi with his mind full; and, by Her boon, 
got the foeless kingdom and a continual succession of sons and 
grandsons. Thus, enjoying the pleasures of his kingdom and the gifts 
of the Yuga Dharma, got in the end, the excellent place, obtained by 
the best Rajarsis. A very happy result. Priyavarata's another son 
named Tamasa became the fourth Manu. He practised austerities 
and repeated the Kama Vija Mantra, the Spiritual Password of Kama 
on the southern banks of the Narmada river and worshipped the 
World Mother. In the spring and in the autumn he observed the nine 
nights' vow (the Navaratri) and worshipped the excellent lotus eyed 
Deves'i and pleased Her. On obtaining the Devi's favour, he chanted 
excellent hymns to Her and made pranams. There he enjoyed the 
extensive kingdom without any fear from any foe or from any other 
source of danger. He generated, in the womb of his wife, ten sons, 
all very powerful and mighty, and then he departed, to the excellent 
region in the Heavens. 


The young brother of Tamasa, Raivata became the Fifth Manu and 
practised austerities on the banks of the Kalindi (the Jumna) and 
repeated the Kama Vija Mantra, the spiritual password of Kama, the 
resort of the Sadhakas, capable to give the highest power of speech 
and to yield all the Siddhis, and thus he worshipped the Devi. He 
obtained excellent heavens, indomitable power, unhampered and 
capable of all success and a continual line of sons, grandsons, etc. 
Then the unrivalled excellent hero Raivata Manu established the 
several divisions of Dharma and enjoying all the worldly pleasures, 
went to the excellent region of Indra. 



Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the origin of 
Manu in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 9. On The Narrative Of Chaksusa Manu 


1-7. Narayana said O Narada! I will now narrate the suprenne 
glories of the Devi and the anecdote how Manu, the son of Anga, 
obtained excellent kingdom by worshipping the Devi Bhagavati. The 
son of the king Anga, named Chaksusa became the Sixth Manu. 

One day he went to the Brahmarsi Pulaha Risi and taking his refuge 
said O Brahmarsi! Thou removest all the sorrows and afflictions of 
those that come under Thy refuge; I now take Thy refuge. Kindly 
advise Thy servant how he may become the Lord of an endless 
amount of wealth. O Muni! What can I do so that I may get the sole 
undisputed sway over the world? How my arms can wield the 
weapons and manipulate them so that they may not be baffled? How 
my race and line be constant and my youth remain ever the same, 
undecayed? And how can I, in the end, attain Mukti? O Muni! Kindly 
dost Thou give instructions to me on these points and oblige. 

Hearing thus, the Muni wanted him to worship the Devi and said 
“O King! Listen attentively to what I say you today. Worship today the 
all auspicious S'akti; by Her grace, all your desires will be fulfilled.” 


8. Chaksusa said “O Muni! What is that very holy worship of S’ri 
Bhagavati? How to do it? Kindly describe all these in detail.” 


9-20. The Muni said O King! I will now disclose all about the 
excellent Puja of the Devi Bhagavati. Hear. You recite (mentally) 
always the seed mantra of Vakbhava (Speech) (The Deity being 
Maha Sarasvati). If any one makes japam (recites slowly) of the 
Vakbhava Vija thrice a day, one gets both the highest enjoyment 
here and, in the end, release (Mukti). O Son of a Ksattriya! There is 
no other Vija Mantra (word) better than this of Vak (the Word). 
Through the Japam of this Vija Mantra comes the increase of 
strength and prowess and all successes. By the Japam of this. 



Brahma is so powerful and has become the Creator; Visnu 
preserves the Universe and MahesVara has become the Destroyer 
of the Universe. The other Dikpalas (the Regents of the quarters) 
and the other Siddhas have become very powerful by the power of 
this Mantra, and are capable of favouring or disfavouring others. So, 
O King! You, too, worship the Devi of the Devas, the World Mother 
and ere long you will become the Lord of unbounded wealth. There 
is no doubt in this. O Narada! Thus advised by Pulaha Risi, the son 
of the King Anga went to the banks of the Viraja river to practise 
austerities. There the king Chaksusa remained absorbed in making 
Japam of the Vakbhava Vija Mantra and took for his food the leaves 
of the trees that dropped on the ground and thus practised severe 
austerities. 


The first year he ate leaves; the second year he drank water and in 
the third year he sustained his life by breathing air simply and thus 
remained steady like a pillar. Thus he remained without food for 
twelve years. He went on making Japam of the Vakbhava Mantra 
and his heart and mind became purified. While he was sitting alone, 
absorbed in the meditation of the Devi Mantra, there appeared 
before him suddenly the ParamesVari, the World Mother, the 
Incarnate of Laksmi. The Highest Deity, full of dauntless fire and the 
Embodiment of all the Devas, spoke graciously in sweet words to 
Chaksusa, the son of Anga. 


21-29. O Regent of the earth! I am pleased with your Tapasya. Now 
ask any boon that you want. I will give that to you. Chaksusa said 
“O Thou, worshipped by the Devas! O Sovereign of the Deva of the 
Devas! Thou art the Controller Inside; Thou art the Controller 
Outside. Thou knowest everything what I desire in my mind. Still, O 
Devi! When I am so fortunate as to see Thee, I say Thou grantest 
me the kingdom for the Manvantara period.” The Devi said “O 
Best of the Ksattriyas! I grant unto you the kingdom of the whole 



world for one manvantara. You will have many sons, very powerful, 
indeed, and well qualified. Your kingdom will be free from any danger 
till at last you will certainly get Mukti.” Thus granting the excellent 
boon to Manu, She disappeared then and there, after being praised 
by Manu, with deep devotion. The Sixth Manu, then favoured by the 
Devi, enjoyed the sovereignty of the earth and other pleasures and 
became the best of the Manus. His sons became the devotees of the 
Devi, very powerful and expert and became respected by all and 
enjoyed the pleasures of the kingdom. Thus getting the supremacy 
by the worship of the Devi, the Chaksusa Manu became merged in 
the end in the Holy Feet of the Devi. 


Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the narrative of 
Chaksusa Manu in the Mahapuranam S’rimad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 10. On The Anecdote Of The King 

SURATHA 


1-4. Narayana said Now the Seventh Manu is the Right Hon'ble 
His Excellency the Lord Vaivasvata Manu S'raddha Deva, honoured 
by all the kings, and the Enjoyer of the Highest Bliss, Brahnnananda. 

I will now speak of this seventh Manu. He, too, practised austerities 
before the Highest Devi and by Her Grace, got the sovereignty of the 
earth for one Manvantara. 


The Eighth Manu is the Sun's son, known as Savarni. This 
personage, a devotee of the Devi, honoured by the kings, gentle, 
patient and powerful king Savarni worshipped the Devi in his 
previous births and, by Her boon, became the Lord of the 
Manvantara. 


5. Narada said O Bhagavan! How did this Savarni Manu worship 
in his previous birth the earthen image of the Devi. Kindly describe 
this to me. 


6-13. Narayana said O Narada! This Eighth Manu had been, 
before, in the time of Svarochisa Manu (the second Manu), a famous 
king, known by the name of Suratha, born of the family of Chaitra, 
and very powerful. He could well appreciate merits, clever in the 
science of archery, amassed abundance of wealth, a generous 
donor, a very liberal man and he was a celebrated poet and 
honoured by all. He was skilled in all arts of warfare with weapons 
and indomitable in crushing his foes. Once on a time, some of his 
powerful enemies destroyed the city of Kola, belonging to the 
revered king and succeeded in besieging his capital wherein he 



remained. Then the king Suratha, the conqueror of all his foes went 
out to fight with the enemies but he was defeated by them. Taking 
advantage of this opportunity, the king's ministers robbed him of all 
his wealth. The illustrious king then went out of the city and with a 
sorrowful heart rode alone on his horse on the plea of having a game 
and walked to and fro, as if, absent-minded. 


14-25. The king, then, went to the hermitage of the Muni Sumedha, 
who could see far-reaching things (a Man of the Fourth Dimension). 
It was a nice, quiet As'rama, surrounded by quiet and peaceful 
animals and filled with disciples. There in that very sacred As'rama, 
his heart became relieved and he went on living there. 


One day, when the Muni finished his worship, etc., the king went to 
him and saluted him duly and humbly asked him the following “O 
Muni! I am suffering terribly from my mental pain. O Deva on the 
earth! Why I am suffering so much though I know everything, as if I 
am quite an ignorant man. After my defeat from my enemies, why 
does my mind become now compassionate towards those who stole 
away my kingdom. O Best of the knowers of the Vedas! What am I to 
do now? Where to go? How can I make me happy? Please speak on 
these. O Muni! Now I am in want of your good grace.” The Muni said 
“O Lord of the earth! Hear the extremely wonderful glories of the 
Devi that have no equal and that can fructify all desires. 

She, the Maha Maya, Who is all this world, is the Mother of Brahma, 
Visnu and Mahes'a. O King! Know verily that it is She and She alone, 
that can forcibly attract the hearts of all the Jivas and throw them in 
dire utter delusion. 

She is always the Creatrix, Preservrix and Destructrix of the 
Universe in the form of Hara. This Maha Maya fulfills the desires of 
all the JTvas and She is known as the insurmountable Kalaratri. She 
is Kali, the Destructrix of all this universe and She is Kamala residing 



in the lotus. Know that this whole world rests on Her and it will 
become dissolved in Her. 


She is therefore, the Highest and Best. O King! Know, verily, that he 
alone can cross the delusion (Moha) on whom the Grace of the Devi 
falls and otherwise no one can escape from this Anadi Moha.” 


Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the anecdote of 
the King Suratha in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 11. On The Killing Of Madhu Kaitabha 


1-2. The king Suratha spoke “O Best of the twice born! Who is 
that Devi that you spoke just now? Why the Devi deludes all these 
beings? What for does She do so? Whence is the Devi born? What 
is Her Form? and what are Her qualities? O Brahmin! Kindly 
describe all these to me.” 


3-9. The Muni spoke O King! I will now describe the nature of the 
Devi Bhagavati and why does She take Her Form in due time. 
Listen. In ancient days, when Bhagavan Narayana, the king of the 
Yogis, was lying in deep sleep on the ocean on the bed of Ananta, 
after He had destroyed the Universe, there came out of the wax of 
his ear the two Danavas, Madhu and Kaitabha, of monstrous 
appearances. They wanted to kill Brahma, who was lying on the 
lotus coming out of the navel of Bhagavan. Seeing the two Daityas 
Madhu and Kaitabha and seeing also Hah asleep the Lotus-born 
Brahma became very anxious and thoughtNow Bhagavan is 
asleep; and these two indomitable Daityas are ready to kill me. Now 
what am I to do? Where to go? How shall I get ease? O Child! Thus 
thinking, the high souled Lotus born suddenly came to a practical 
conclusion. He said “Let me now take refuge to the Goddess 
Sleep, Nidra, the Mother of all and under Whose power Bhagavan 
Hah is now asleep.” 


10-24. Brahma then began to praise Her thus “O Devi of the 
Devas! O Upholdress of the world! Thou grantest desires of Thy 
devotees. O Thou auspicious! Thou art Para Brahma! By Thy 
Command all are doing respectively their works in their proper 
spheres! Thou art the Night of Destruction (Kala Rath); Thou art the 
Great Night (Maha Rath). Thou art the greatly terrible Night of 
Delusion (Moha Rath); Thou art omnipresent; omniscient; of the 



nature of the Supreme Bliss. Thou art regarded as the Great. Thou 
art highly worshipped; Thou art alone in this world as highly 
intoxicated; Thou art submissive to Bhakti only; Thou art the Best of 
all the things; Thou art sung as the Highest; Thou art modesty; Thou 
art Pusti (nourishment); Thou art forgiveness (Ksama); Thou art 
Beauty (Kanti); Thou art the embodiment of mercy; Thou art liked by 
all; Thou art adorned by the whole world; Thou art of the nature of 
wakefulness, dream and deep sleep; Thou art the Highest; Thou art 
alone Highest Deity; Thou art highly attached to the Supreme Bliss. 
There is no other thing than Thee. There is One only and that is 
Thee. Hence Thou art denominated as One; Thou becomest again 
the two by contact with Thy Maya. Thou art the refuge of Dharma, 
Artha and Kama; hence Thou Thou art Three; Thou art the Turiya 
(the fourth state of consciousness) hence Thou art Four. Thou art the 
God of the five elements; hence Thou art Panchami (five); Thou 
presidest over the six passions Kama, anger, etc.; hence Thou 
art Sasthi; Thou presidest over the seven days of the week and 
Thou grantest boons seven by seven; hence Thou art Seven. Thou 
art the God of the eight Vasus; hence Thou art Astami; Thou art full 
of the nine Ragas and nine parts and Thou art the Goddess of nine 
planets; hence Thou art Navami. Thou pervadest the ten quarters 
and Thou art worshipped by the ten quarters; hence Thou art named 
Das'ami (the tenth day of the fortnight); Thou art served by the 
Eleven Rudras, the Goddesses of eleven Ganas and Thou art fond 
of Ekadas'i Tithi; hence Thou art denominated Ekadas'i; Thou art 
twelve armed and the Mother of the twelve Adityas; hence Thou art 
Dvadas'i; Thou art dear to the thirteen Ganas; Thou art the presiding 
Deity of Visve Devas and Thou art the thirteen months including the 
Malas Masa (dirty month), hence Thou art Trayodas'i. Thou didst 
grant boons to the fourteen Indras and Thou gavest birth to the 
fourteen Manus; hence Thou art Chaturdas'i. Thou art knowable by 
the Pahchadas'i. Thou art sixteen armed and on Thy forehead the 
sixteen digits of the Moon are always shining; Thou art the sixteenth 
digit (ray) of the Moon named Ama; hence Thou art Sodas'i. O 
Deves'i! Thou, though attributeless and formless, appearest in these 
forms and attributes. Thou hast now enveloped in Moha and 



Darkness the Lord of Rama, the Bhagavan, the Deva of the Devas. 
These Daityas, Madhu and Kaitabha are indomitable and very 
powerful. So to kill them, Thou better dost awake the Lord of the 
Devas.” 


25-34. The Muni said Thus praised by the Lotus-born, the Tamasi 
Bhagavati (the Goddess of sleep and ignorance), the Beloved of 
Bhagavan, left Visnu and enchanted the two Daityas. 


On being awakened, the Supreme Spirit Visnu, the Lord of the world, 
the Bhagavan, the Deva of the Devas, saw the two Daityas. Those 
two monstrous Danavas, beholding Madhu Sudana, came up before 
Him, ready to fight. The hand-to-hand fight lasted amongst them for 
five thousand years. Then the two Danavas, maddened by their 
great strength, were enchanted by the Maya of Bhagavati and told 
the Supreme Deity, “Ask boon from us.” Hearing this, the Bhagavan 
Adi Purusa, (the Prime Man) asked the boon that both of them would 
be killed that day by Him. Those two very powerful Danavas spoke 
to Hah again, “Very well. Kill us on that part of the earth which is not 
under water.” O King! Bhagavan Visnu, the Holder of the conch and 
club, spoke “All right. Indeed! Let that be so.” 


Saying this He placed their heads on His thigh and severed them 
with His disc (chakra). O King! Thus Maha Kali, the Queen of all the 
Yogas arose on this occasion when the praise was offered Her by 
Brahma. O King! Now I will describe another account how this Maha 
Laksmi appeared on another occasion. Listen. 


Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Tenth Book on the killing of 
Madhu Kaitabha in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 12. On The Anecdote Of Savarni Manu 


1-6. The Muni said O King! The powerful Asura Mahisa, born of a 
she-buffalo, defeated all the Devas and became the Lord of the 
whole universe. That indomitable Danava seized forcibly all the 
rights of the Devas and began to enjoy the pleasures of the kingdom 
over the three worlds. The Devas, thus defeated, were expelled from 
their abodes in Heavens. They took Brahma as their Leader and 
went to the excellent regions where Maha Deva and Visnu resided 
and informed them of all that had been done by that vicious Asura 
Mahisa. They said “O Deva of the Devas! The insolent 
Mahisasura has become unbearable and he has taken possessions 
of the rights and properties of the whole host of the Devas and he is 
now enjoying them. Both of you are quite capable to destroy the 
Asura. So why do you not devise means to annihilate him in no 
time!” 


7-10. Hearing these pitiful words of the Devas, Bhagavan Visnu 
became quite indignant. S’ankara, Brahma and the other Devas all 
were inflamed with anger. O King! From the face of the angry Hah, 
then emanated an Unusual Fire, brilliant like thousand Suns. Then 
by and by emanated fires also from the bodies of all the Devas who 
were filled then with joy. From the mass of fire thus emanated there 
came out a beautiful Female Figure. The face of this figure was 
formed out of the fire that emanated from the body of Maha Deva. 
Her hairs were formed out of the fire of Yama and Her arms were 
formed out of the fire that emanated from Visnu. 


11-21. O King! From the fire of the Moon came out two breasts; from 
the fire of Indra came out Her middle portion; from the fire of Varuna, 
appeared Her loins and thighs; from the fire of Earth, Her hips were 
formed; from the fire of Brahma, Her feet were formed; from the fire 



of the Sun, Her toes were formed; from the fire of the Vasus, Her 
fingers were formed; from Kuvera's fire, Her nose came out; from the 
excellent tejas of Prajapati, teeth; from the fire of Agni, Her three 
eyes; from the fire of the twilights. Her eye-brows and from the fire of 
Vayu, Her ears appeared. 


O Lord of men! Thus Bhagavati Mahisamardini was born of the Tejas 
(fiery substances) of the Devas. Next S’iva gave Her the S’ula 
(weapon spear); Visnu gave Sudars'ana (Chakra); Varuna gave the 
conchshell; Fire gave S'akti (weapon); Vayu gave Her bows and 
arrows; Indra gave Her thunder bolt and the bell of the elephant 
Airavata; Yama gave Her the Destruction Staff (Kala Danda); Brama 
gave Her the Rudraksa, rosary and Kamandalu; the Sun gave Her, in 
every pore the wonderful rays; the Time (Kala) gave Her sharp axe 
and shield; the oceans gave Her the beautiful necklace and new 
clothes (two in number); VisVakarma gladly gave Her the crown, ear¬ 
rings, kataka, Angada, Chandrardha, tinklets; and the Himalayas 
gave Her the Lion as Her Vehicle and various gems and jewels. 


22-30. Kuvera, the Lord of wealth gave Her the cup filled with the 
drink; Bhagavan Ananta Deva gave Her a necklace of snakes 
(Naghara). Thus the World Mother, the Devi, became honoured by 
all the Devas. The Devas, very much oppressed by Mahisasura, 
then, chanted various hymns of praise to the World Mother 
MahesVari Maha Devi. 


Hearing their Stotras, the Deves'i, worshipped by the Devas, 
shouted aloud the War-Cry. O King! Mahisasura, startled at that War- 
Cry, came to Bhagavati with all his army corps. Then that great 
Asura Mahisa hurled various weapons in the air and overcast the sky 
with them and began to fight with great skill. The several generals 
Chiksura, Durdhara, Durmukha, Vaskala, Tamraka, Vidalaksa and 



various other innumerable generals as if Death incarnate, 
accompanied Mahisa, the chief Danava. A fierce fight then ensued. 
Then the Devi Who enchants all the beings, became red-eyed with 
anger and began to kill the generals of the against party. When the 
generals were killed one by one Mahisasura, skilled in the science of 
magic, came up quickly to the front of the Devi. 


31-40. The Lord of the Danavas, then, by his magic power, began to 
assume various forms. Bhagavati, too, began to destroy his those 
forms. Then the Daitya, the crusher of the Devas, assumed the form 
of a buffalo and began to fight. The Devi then fastened the animal, 
the Asura, the Death of the Devas, tightly and cut off his head by Her 
axe. The remainder of his forces, then, fled away in terror and 
disorder with a loud cry. The Devas became very glad and began to 
chant hymns to the Devi. O King! Thus the Laksmi Devi appeared to 
kill Mahisasura. Now I will describe how Sarasvati appeared. Listen. 
Once on a time the two very powerful Daityas S’umbha and 
Nis'umbha were born. They attacked the Devas, oppressed them 
and seized their houses and rights. The Devas became 
dispossessed of their kingdoms and went to the Himalayas and 
offered stotras to the Devi with the greatest devotion “O Deves’i! 

O Thou, skilled in removing the difficulties of the Bhaktas! Victory to 
Thee! O Thou, the Sinless One! Old age and death cannot touch 
Thee. O Thou! Death incarnate to the Danavas! O Deves’i! O Thou, 
of mighty valour and prowess! O Thou, the embodiment of Brahma, 
Visnu and Mahes'a! Unbounded is Thy might; Thou canst be easily 
reached by the power of devotion. O Thou, the Creator, Preserver 
and Destroyer! O MadhavT! O Thou, the Giver of Bliss! Thou dancest 
with great joy at the time of the dissolution of all the things (Pralaya). 


41-50. O Thou, full of mercy! O Deva Deves’T! Be gracious unto us. 
O Thou, the Remover of the sufferings of the refugees! We now 
come unto Thy protection. The terror of S’umbha and Nis'umbha is 



like an endless ocean unto us. Save, save us from their fast 
clutches. O Devi! save us O King! verily.” When the Devas praised 
thus, the daughter of the Himalayas, Bhagavati became pleased and 
asked “What is the matter?” In the meanwhile, there emitted from the 
physical sheath of the Devi another Devi Kaus'iki who gladly spoke 
to the Devas “O Suras! I am pleased with Thy Stotra. Now ask the 
boon that you desire.” The Devas then asked for the following boon 
“O Devi! The two famous Daityas S’umbha and Nis'umbha have 
attacked forcibly the three worlds. The wicked Lord of the Danavas, 
S’umbha, has overcome us by the power of his arm and is now 
tormenting us without any break. Kindly devise some means to kill 
him.” The Devi said “O Devas! Be patient. I will kill these two 
Daityas, S’umbha and Nis'umbha and thus remove the thorn on your 
way. At an early date I will do good to you.” Thus saying to Indra and 
the other Devas the merciful Devi disappeared at once before their 
eyes. The Deva with their hearts delighted went to the beautiful 
Sumeru Mountain and dwelt there in the caves thereof. 


Here the servants of S’umbha and Nis'umbha Chanda and Munda, 
while they were making their circuits, saw the exquisitely beautiful 
Devi, the Enchantress of the world, and came back to S’umbha their 
King and said 


51-60. “O Destroyer of enemies! O Giver of honour! O Greal King! 
You are the Lord of all the Daityas and are fit to enjoy all the gems 
and jewels. To-day we have seen an extraordinary beautiful woman 
jewel. She is fit to be enjoyed by you. So now you would better bring 
that perfectly beautiful woman and enjoy. No such enchanting 
women can be seen amongst the Asura women Naga Kanyas 
Gandharbha women, DanavTs or men.” Hearing thus the words of 
the servant, S’umbha, the tormentor of the foes, sent a Daitya 
named Sugriva as a messenger to Her. The messenger went to the 
Devi as early as possible and spoke to Her all that S’umbha had told 



him. “O Devi! The Asura S’umbha is now the conqueror of the three 
worlds and respected by the Devas. O Devi I 


He is now enjoying all that is best, the gems and jewels; O Devi! I 
am his messenger sent here to convey to you his message as 
follows O Devi! I am the sole enjoyer of all the jewels. O Beautiful¬ 
eyed! You are a gem; so you would worship me. O Fair One! All the 
gems and jewels that are in the Deva loka, in the Daitya loka, or 
amongst the regions of men, are under my control. So you would 
lovingly worship me.” The Devi said “O Messenger! True that you 
are speaking for your King; but I made a promise before, how can I 
act against it? O Messenger! Hear what I promised. 


61-70. Whoever in the three worlds will conquer Me by sheer force 
and thus crush My vanity, whoever will be as strong as Myself, He 
can enjoy Me. So the King of Daityas can prove My promise true and 
by sheer force can marry Me. What is there with him that he cannot 
do? So, Messenger! Go back to your master and tell him all this so 
that the powerful S’umbha may fulfil My promise.” Hearing thus the 
words of the Great Devi, the messenger went back to S’umbba and 
informed him everything regarding the Devi's sayings. The very 
powerful Lord of the Daityas, S’umbha became very angry at the 
unpleasant words of the messenger and commanded the Daitya 
named Dhumraksa “O Dhumraksa! Listen to my words with great 
attention. Go and catch hold of that wicked woman by her hairs and 
bring her to me. Go quickly; do not delay.” Thus commanded, the 
very powerful and the best of the Daityas, Dhumraksa, went at once 
to the Devi with sixty thousand Daityas and cried aloud to Her 


“O Auspicious One! You would better worship quickly our Lord 
S’umbha, who is very powerful and mighty; you will then acquire all 



sorts of pleasures; else I will hold you by your hairs and take you to 
the Lord of the Daityas.” 


71-80. Thus addressd by Dhumraksa Daitya, the enemy of the 
Devas, the Devi said “O Powerful One! O Daitya! What you have 
spoken is perfectly right, but tell me first what you or your king 
S’umbha can do to Me?” When the Devi said thus, the Daitya 
Dhumralochana rushed on Her at once with arms and weapons. 

With one loud noise, MahesVari burnt him immediately to ashes. O 
King! The other forces were partly crushed by the Lion, the vehicle of 
the Devi and partly fled away in disorder to all the quarters; some 
became senseless out of fear. S’umbba , the Lord of the Daityas, 
became very angry to hear this. His face assumed a terrible form 
with eyebrows contracted. Then he became impatient with anger and 
sent in order Chanda, Munda and Raktabija. 


The three powerful Daityas went to the battle and tried their might to 
capture the Devi. The Devi Jagaddhatri, of violent prowess, seeing 
that these three Daityas were coming to Her, killed them by Her 
trident and laid them prostrate on the ground. Hearing their death 
with all their army, S’umbha and Nis'umbha came in their own 
persons arrogantly to the battlefield. S’umbha and Nis'umbha fought 
for a time with the Devi a terrible fight and became tired, when the 
Devi killed them outright. When the Bhagavati, Who is all this world, 
killed S’umbba and Nis'umbha, the Devas began to praise Bhagavati 
the Supreme Deity of Vak (Word) incarnate. 


81-93. O King! Thus I have spoken to you in due order the manner in 
which the beautiful Kali, Maha Laksmi and Sarasvati incarnated 
themselves on the earth. That Supreme Deity, the Devi Parames'vari 
thus creates, preserves, and destroys the Universe. You better take 
refuge of that highly adored Devi, that causes the distinction and the 



delusion of this Universe. Then only you will attain success. 
Narayana said The king Suratha, hearing these beautiful words of 
the Muni, took refuge of the Devi, that yields all desired objects. He 
built an earthen image of the Devi and, with concentrated attention, 
thought wholly of the Devi and began to worship Her with devotion. 
When the worship was over, he offered sacrifices of the blood of his 
body to the Devi. Then the World-Mother, the Deity of the Devas, 
became pleased and appeared before him and asked him Accept 
the boon that you desire. When the Devi said thus, the king asked 
from the MahesVari that excellent knowledge whereby the ignorance 
is destroyed and as well the kingdom free from any dangers or 
difficulties. The Devi said “O King! By My boon, you will get your 
foeless kingdom in this very birth as well as the Jhanam that 
removes ignorance. O King! I will tell you also what you will be in the 
next birth. Hear. In your next birth, you will be the son of the Sun and 
be famous as Savarni Manu. By My boon you will be the Lord of the 
Manvantara, become very powerful and you will get good many 
sons.” Thus granting him this boon, the Devi disappeared. By the 
Grace of the Devi, Suratha became the Lord of the Manvantara. O 
Sadhu! Thus I have described to you the birth and deeds of Savarni. 
He who hears or reads this anecdote with devotion, will be a 
favourite of the Devi. 


Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the anecdote of 
Savarni Manu in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 13. On The Account Of Bhramar! Dev! 


1-21. S’n Narayana spoke O Child Narada! Hear now the 
wonderful anecdotes of the births of the remaining other Manus. The 
mere remembrance of these birth anecdotes causes Bhakti to grow 
and well up towards the Devi. Vaivasvata Manu had six sons viz., 
Karusa, Prisadhra, Nabhaga, Dista, Saryati, and Tris'anku. All of 
them were stout and strong. Once they all united went to the 
excellent banks of the Jumna and began to practise Pranayama 
without taking any food and became engaged in worshipping the 
Devi. Each of them built separately an earthen image of the Devi 
and worshipped Her with devotion and with various offerings. In the 
beginning, they took the dry leaves of the trees that dropped of 
themselves for their food; then they drank water only, then breathed 
air only; then the smoke from the fire of the Homa; then they 
depended on the Solar Rays. Thus they practised tapasya with great 
difficulties. The continual worship of the Devi with the greatest 
devotion made them conscious of their clear intellect, destructive of 
all sorts of vanities and delusions, and the Menu's sons thought only 
of the Hallowed Feet of the Devi; their intellects were purified and 
they were greatly wondered to see within their Self the whole 
Universe. Thus they practised their Tapasya full twelve years when 
Bhagavati, the Ruling Principle of this Universe resplendent wiih the 
brilliance of the thousand Suns, appeared before them. The princes 
with their intelligences thus purified saw Her, bowed down and, with 
their lowly hearts, began to chant hymns to Her with greatest 
devotion. “O Is'ani! O Merciful! Thou art the Devi presiding over all. 
Thou art the Best. So Victory to Thee! Thou art known by the 
Vagbhava Mantra. Thou gettest pleased when the Vagbhava Mantra 
is repeated. O Devi! Thou art of the nature of Klim Kara (of the form 
of Klim). Thou gettest pleased with the repetition of Klim Mantra. O 
Thou, that gladdenest the Lord! Thou bestowest joy and pleasure in 
the heart of the King of Kama. O Maha Maya! When Thou art 
pleased. Thou givest that Unequalled Kingdom. O Thou that 



increasest the enjoyments! Thou art Visnu, Surya, Hara, Indra and 
the other Devas.” When the highsouled princes praised Her thus, 
Bhagavati became pleased and spoke to them the following sweet 
words “O Highsouled Princes! You all have worshipped Me and 
practised, indeed, very hard tapasyas and thus you have become 
sinless and your intellects and hearts have become thoroughly 
purged and thus purified. Now ask boons that you desire. I will grant 
them ere long to you.” The Princes said “O Devi! We want 
unrivalled Kingdoms, many sons of long longevity, continual 
enjoyment of pleasures, fame, energy, freedom in all actions, and as 
well the good and keen intelligence. These will be beneficial to us.” 
The Devi said Whatever you have desired, I grant them to you all. 
Besides I give you another boon. Listen attentively. By My Grace you 
all will be the Lords of the Manvantaras and acquire strength that will 
experience no defeat, and you will get prosperity, fame, energy, 
powers, and a continual line of descent and abundant full 
enjoyments. 


22-32. Narayana said After the World Mother Bhramari Devi 
granted them these boons, the princes chanted hymns to Her and 
then She instantly vanished. The very energetic princes acquired in 
that birth excellent kingdoms and abundance of wealth. They all had 
sons and thus established their families, and became the Lords of 
Manvantara in their next births. By the Grace of the Devi, the first of 
the princes Karusa became the Ninth Manu, the exceedingly 
powerful Daksa Savarni; the second prince Prisadhra became the 
Tenth Manu, named Meru Savarni; the third prince, the highly 
enthusiastic Nabhaga became the Eleventh Manu, named Surya 
Savarni; the fourth prince Dista became the Twelfth Manu, named 
Chandra Savarni; the powerful fifth prince S'aryati became the 
Thirteenth Manu named Rudra Savarni and the sixth prince Tris'anku 
became the Fourteenth Manu named Visnu Savarni and became the 
celebrated Lord of the world. 



33-41. Narada questioned “O Wise One! Who is that Bhramari 
Devi? What is Her Nature? What for She takes birth? Kindly 
describe all this beautiful and pain destroying anecdotes to me. I am 
not satiated with the drinking of the nectar of the Glories of the Devi; 
my desire to hear further more is as strong as ever. As the drink of 
the nectar takes away death, so the drink of this anecdote of the 
Devi takes away the fear of death.” Narayana said O Narada! I 
will now narrate the wonderful glories of that unthinkable, 
unmanifested World Mother, leading to Mukti. Hear, as a Mother 
behaves towards Her child kindly and without any hypocrisy, so the 
World Mother in all Her lives manifests Her merciful sincere dealings 
for the welfare of the humanity. In days gone by, in the nether 
regions, in the city of the Daityas, there lived a powerful Daitya 
named Aruna. He was a furious Deva Hater and a pakka hyprocrite. 
With a view to conquer the Devas, he went to the banks of the 
Ganges in the Himalayas, practised a very bard Tapasya, to Brahma, 
taking Him to be the Protector of the Daityas. First influenced by 
Tamo Guna, he withheld in his body the five Vayus and partook only 
the dry leaves and repeated, the Gayatri Mantra and practised 
austerities. Thus he practised for full ten thousand years. Then for 
another ten thousand years the Daitya lived drinking some drops of 
water only; then for another ten thousand years he remained by 
inhaling air only; and then for another ten thousand years he did not 
take any thing and thus practised he his wonderful Tapasya. 


42-49. Thus practising his Tapasya a sort of wonderful halo of light 
emitted from his body and began to burn the whole world. This thing 
then appeared a great wonder. All the Devas then exclaimed. “Oh! 
What is this! Oh! What is this!” And they trembled. All were very 
much terrified and took refuge of Brahma. Hearing all the news from 
the Devas, the four-faced Bhagavan rode on His vehicle, the Swan, 
and with the Gayatri went very gladly to where the Daitya was 
practising his austerities and saw that the Daitya was immersed in 
meditation with his eyes closed; and he looked, as it were, blazing 



with fire, as if a second Fire himself. His belly had become dried up, 
body withered and the nerves of the bodies, too, became almost 
visible; only the life breath was lingering there. Brahma then spoke to 
him “O Child! Auspices to you! Now ask the boon that you desire.” 
Hearing these gladdening nectar-like words from the mouth of 
Brahma, Aruna, the chief of the Daityas opened his eyes and saw 
Brahma in his front. Seeing Brahma before him with a rosary of 
beads and Kamandalu in his hand and attended by Gayatri and the 
four Vedas, muttering the name of the Eternal Brahma, the Daitya 
rose up and bowed down to Him and sang to Him various Stotras. 


50-59. Then the intelligent Daitya asked from Brahma the following 
boon that “I shall not die. Grant this.” Brahma then gently explained 
to him “O Best of the Danavas! See that Brahma, Visnu, 
MahesVara and others are not free from this limitation of death! 

What to speak then for others! I cannot grant you a boon that is an 
impossibility. Ask what is possible and just. The intelligent persons 
never show an eagerness to an impossibility.” Hearing the above 
words of Brahma, Aruna again said with devotion “O Deva! If 
Thou art unwilling to grant me the above boon, then, O Lord! Grant 
me such a boon, as is practicable, that my death shall not be caused 
by any war, nor by any arms or weapons, nor by any man or any 
woman, by any biped or quadruped or any combination of two and 
grant me such a boon, such a large army as I can conquer the 
Devas.” Hearing the words of the Daitya, Brahma said “Let that be 
so” and went back instantly to His own abode. Then, puffed up with 
that boon, the Daitya Aruna called on all the other Daityas that lived 
in the nether regions. The Daityas, that were under his shelter, came 
and saluted him, as their king and, by his command, they sent 
messengers to the Heavens to fight with the Devas. Hearing from 
the messenger that the Daityas were willing to fight with the Devas, 
Indra trembled with fear and went instantly with the Devas to the 
abode of Brahma. Taking Brahma, too, along with them from there. 



they went to the Visnu Loka and took Visnu with them and all went to 
the S’iva Loka. 


60-70. There they all held a conference how to kill the Daitya, the 
enemy of the Gods. While, on the other hand, Aruna, the king of the 
Daityas surrounded by his army, went ere long to the Heavens. 


O Muni! The Daitya, then, through the power of his Tapas, assumed 
various forms and seized the rights and possessions of the Moon, 
the Sun, Yama, Agni and all the others. All the Devas, then, 
dislodged from their stations went to the region of Kailas'a and 
represented to S’ankara about their own troubles and dangers 
respectively. Then, what was to be done on this subject, on this, 
great discussions cropped up. When Brahma said, that the death of 
the Daitya would not ensue from any fight, with any arms or 
weapons, from any man or woman, biped, quadruped or from any 
combination of the above two. Then the Devas became all anxious 
and could not find out any solution at that instant, when the 
Incorporeal Voice was clearly heard in the Heavens Let you all 
worship the Queen of the Universe. She will carry out your work to 
success. If the king of the Daityas, always engaged in muttering the 
Gayatri, forsakes the Gayatri any how, then his death will occur. 
Hearing this gladdening Celestial Voice, the Devas held the council 
with great caution. When it was settled what ought to be done, Indra 
asked Brihaspati and said “O Guru Deva! You would better go to 
the Daitya for the carrying out of the Devas' ends and do so that he 
forsakes the Devi Gayatri ParamesVari. We will all now go and 
meditate on Her. When She will be pleased. She will help us. 


71-77. Thus commanding Brihaspati and thinking that the beautiful 
Protectress of Jambu Nada would protect them the Devas all started 
to worship Her and, going there, began the Devi Yajha and with 



great devotion muttered the Maya Vija and practised asceticism. On 
the other hand, Brihaspati went ere long in the garb of a Muni to the 
Daitya Aruna. The king of the Daityas then asked him “O Best of 
Munis! Whence and why have you come here. Say, O Muni! Where 
have you come? I am not one of your party. Rather I am your 
enemy.” Hearing the above words, Brihaspati said When you are 
worshipping incessantly the Devi whom we too worship, then say 
how you are not a one on our side! O Saint! The vicious Daitya, 
hearing the above words and deluded by the Maya of the Devas, 
forsook the Gayatri Mantra out of vanity and therefore he became 
weak, bereft of the Holy Fire. 


78-85. Then Brihaspati, having succeeded in his work there, went to 
the Heavens and saw Indra and told him everything in detail. The 
Devas became satisfied and worshipped the Highest Deity. O Muni! 
Thus, a long interval passed, when one day the World Mother, the 
Auspicious Devi appeared before them. She was resplendent with 
the brilliance of ten million suns and looked beautiful like ten millions 
of Kandarpas (Gods of love). Her body was anointed with variegated 
colours, etc.; She wore a pair of clothings; a wonderful garland 
suspended from Her neck; Her body was decked with various 
ornaments and in the fists of Her hands there were wonderful rows 
of hornets (large black bees). Her one hand was ready to grant 
boons and Her other hand was ready to hold out “no fear.” On the 
neck of Bhagavati, the Ocean of Mercy, and peaceful, were seen 
the variegated garlands with large black bees all round. Those male 
and female bees singing incessantly all round Her the Hrimkara 
Mantra (the First Vibration of Force), kotis of black bees surrounded 
Her. The All-auspicious Bhagavati, praised by all the Vedas, Who is 
all in all, composed of all. Who is all good, the Mother of all. 
Omniscient, the Protectress of all, was adorned fully with dress. 



86-96. Seeing suddenly the Devi, in their front Brahnna and the other 
Devas became surprised and by and by they got relieved and gladly 
began to chant hymns of praise to Bhagavati, Whose Glories have 
been written in the Vedas. 


The Devas said “O Devi! Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the Highest 
Knowledge and the Creatrix, Preservrix and the Destructrix of the 
Universe. O Thou, the Lotus-eyed! Thou art the Refuge of all! So we 
bow down to Thee. O Devi! Thou art collectively and individually 
VisVa, Taijasa, Prajha, Virat and Sutratma. O Bhagavati. Thou art 
differentiated and undifferentiated; Thou art the Kutastha Chaitanya 
(the Unmoveable, Unchangeable Consciousness). So we bow down 
to Thee. O Durge! Thou art unconcerned with the creation, 
preservation and destruction; yet Thou punishest the wicked and art 
easily available by the sincere devotion of Thy Bhaktas. O Devi! 

Thou scorchest and destroyest the ignorance and sin of the 
embodied souls. Hence Thou art named Bharga. So we bow down to 
Thee. O Mother! Thou art Kalika, Nila Sarasvati, Ugra Tara, 

Mahogra; Thou assumest many other forms. So we always bow 
down to Thee. O Devi! Thou art Tripura Sundari, Bhairabi, Matangi, 
Dhumavati, Chhinnamasta, S'akambhari and Rakta Dantika. 
Obeisance to Thee! O Bhagavati! It is Thou that didst appear as 
Laksmi out of the milk ocean (Ksira Samudra). Thou hadst 
destroyed Vritrasura, Chanda, Munda, Dhumralochana, Rakta Bija, 
S’umbha, Nis'umbha and the Exterminator of the Danavas and thus. 
Thou didst do great favours to the Devas. So, O Gracious 
Countenanced! Thou art Vijaya and Ganga; O Sarade! We bow 
down to Thee. O Devi! Thou art the earth, fire. Prana and other 
Vayus and other substances. O Merciful! Thou art of the form of this 
Universe; the Deva form, and the Moon, Sun and other Luminous 
forms and of the Knowledge Form. 



97-109. O Devi! Thou art Savitri; Thou art Gayatri; Thou art 
Sarasvati; Thou art Svadha, Svaha, and Daksina. So we bow down 
to Thee. Thou art, in the Vedas, the Agamas, “Not this, not this.” 
Thou art what is left after the negation of all this. This all the Vedas 
declare of Thy True Nature thus as the Absolute Consciousness in 
all. Thus Thou art the Highest Deity. So we worship Thee. As Thou 
art surrounded by large black bees. Thou art named Bhramari. We 
always make obeisance to Thee! Obeisance to Thee! Obeisance to 
Thy sides! Obeisance to Thy back! Obeisance to Thy front! O 
Mother! Obeisance to Thy above! Obeisance to Thy below! 
Obeisance to everywhere round of Thee! O Thou, the Dweller in 
Mani Dvipa! O Maha Devi! Thou art the Guide of the innumerable 
Brahmandas! O World Mother! Let Thou be merciful to us. O Devi! 
Thou art higher than the highest. O World Mother! Victory be to 
Thee! All Hail! O Goddess of the universe! Thou art the Best in the 
whole universe; Victory to Thee! O Lady of the world! Thou art the 
mine of all the gems of qualities. O ParamesVari! O World Mother! 
Let Thou be pleased unto us.” Narayana said Hearing those 
sweet, ready and confident words of the Devas, the World Mother 
said in the sweet tone of a Mad Cuckoo:- “O Devas! As far as 
granting boons to others is concerned, I am ever ready. I am always 
pleased with you. So, O Devas! Say what you want.” Hearing the 
words of the Devi, the Devas began to express the cause of their 
sorrows. They informed Her of the wicked nature of the vicious 
Daitya, the neglect of the Devas, the Brahmanas and the Vedas and 
the ruins thereof, and the dispossession of the Devas of their abodes 
and the receiving by the Daitya of the boon from Brahma; in fact, 
everything what they had to say, duly and vigorously. Then the 
Bhagavati Bhramari Devi sent out all sorts of black bees, hornets, 
etc., from Her sides, front and forepart. 


110-120. Innumerable lines of black bees then were generated and 
they joined themselves with those that got out of the Devi's hands 
and thus they covered the whole earth. Thus countless bees began 



to emit from all sides like locusts. The sky was overcast with the 
bees; and the earth was covered with darkness. The sky, mountain 
peaks, trees, forests all became filled with bees and the spectacle 
presented a grand dismal sight. Then the black bees began to tear 
asunder the breasts of the Daityas as the bees bite those who 
destroy their beehives. Thus the Daityas could not use their 
weapons nor could they fight nor exchange any words. Nothing they 
could do; they had no help but to die. The Daityas remained in the 
same state where they were and in that state they wondered and 
died. No one could talk with another. Thus the principal Daityas died 
within an instant. Thus completing their destruction, the bees came 
back to the Devi. All the people then spoke to one another “Oh! 

What a wonder! Oh! What a wonder!” Or like this “Whose Maya is 
this! What a wonder that She will do like this!” Thus Brahma, Visnu 
and Mahes'a became merged in the ocean of joy and worshipped 
the Devi Bhagavati with various offerings and shoutings of chants 
“Victory to the Devi” and showered flowers all around. The Munis 
began to recite the Vedas. The Gandharbas began to sing. 

121-127. The various musical instruments, Mridangas, Murajas, the 
Indian lutes, Dhakkas, Damarus, S'ankhas, bells, etc., all sounded 
and the three worlds were filled with their echoes. All with folded 
palms chanted various hymns of praise to the Devi and said “O 
Mother! Isani! Victory to Thee!” The Maha Devi became glad and 
gave to each separate boons and when they asked “for unshakeable 
devotion to Thy lotus feet,” She granted them that also and 
disappeared before them. Thus I have described to you the glorious 
character of the Bhramari Devi. If anybody hears this very wonderful 
anecdote, he crosses at once this ocean of the world. Along with the 
glories and greatness of the Devi, if one hears the accounts of 
Manus, then all auspiciousness comes to him. He who hears or 
recites daily this Greatness of the Devi, becomes freed from all his 
sins and he gets himself absorbed in the thoughts of the Devi 
(Sajuya). Note The Mantra is here not merely the Seed, the 
Spiritual Password, but it connotes, besides the idea of the 
password, the Adi First vibration and it exhibits the First Spiritual 



Form, endowed with the highest feelings of Faith, Wisdom, Bliss and 
Joy, displayed with the grandest colours, startling thrills, rapt 
enchanting signs, gestures, and postures, the shooting forth of all 
powers, the sources of Siddhis, that cannot be ordinarily conceived 
in the worldly concerns. Their faint echoes govern this mighty world. 
The Mantras are seated in the six chakras or plexuses or the six 
Laya centres in the spinal cord. Within these chakras, the 
transformations of the Tattvas take place. Some vanish. Some 
appear and so on. Remark In this chapter we find clearly the 
mention of the several names of the ten Das'a Maha Vidyas. 

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Tenth Book of the account 
of Bhramari Devi in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa and here ends as well the 
Tenth Book. 


[The Tenth Book completed.] 



THE ELEVENTH BOOK 



Chapter 1. On What Is To Be Thought Of In The 
Morning 


1-13. Narada said O Bhagavan! O Thou, the Eternal One! O 
Narayana! O Lord of the past and the future! Thou art the Creator 
and the Lord of all the beings that lived in the past and that will come 
into existence in the future. Thou hast described to me the highly 
wonderful and excellent anecdote of the Exalted Devi. How She did 
assume the forms of MahakalT, Maha Laksmi, Maha Sarasvati and 
Bhramari, for the fulfilment of the Devas' purposes and how the 
Devas got back their possessions by the Grace of the Devi. All you 
have described. O Lord! Now I want to hear the rules of Sadachara 
(right way of living), the due observance of which by the devotees 
pleases the World-Mother. Kindly describe them. 


Narayana said O Knower of Truth! Now I am telling you those 
rules of the right way of living, which rightly observed, always please 
Bhagavati. Listen first, I will talk of the Brahmins, how their welfare is 
secured, what the Brahmanas ought to do on getting up early in the 
morning from their bed. From the sunrise to the sunset the 
Brahmanas should do all the daily and occasional duties (Nitya and 
Naimittik Karmas) and they are to perform the optional works for 
some particular object such as Puttresti Yajha and other good works 
(not acts of black magic as killing, causing pain and inconveniences 
to others, etc.). It is the Self alone and not the Father, Mother, etc., 
nor any other body that, helps us on our way to that happiness in the 
next world. Father, Mother, wife, sons and others are helps merely to 
our happiness in this world. None of them are helpful to us in 
bettering our states in the next world. 



Deliverance of one's Self depends verily on his own Self. Therefore 
one should always earn and store dharma (religion) and observe 
always there the right conduct to help one in the next world. If 
Dharma be on our side, this endless sea of troubles can be safely 
crossed. The rules of right living as ordained by Manu in S’rutis and 
Manu Smritis are the principal Dharmas. The Brahmanas should 
always be observant to their Dharma as ordained in the S’astras, 
S’ruti and Smriti. Follow the right conduct and then you will get life, 
posterity and increase of happiness easily here and hereafter. By 
right conduct, food is obtained and sins are easily destroyed; the 
right conduct is the auspicious principal Dharma of men. Persons of 
right living enjoy happiness in this world as well as in the next. 
Those, who are veiled in darkness by Ignorance and thus wildly 
enchanted, can verily see their way to Mukti if they follow the Great 
Light revealed to them by Dharma and the right conduct. It is by 
Sadachara, that superiority is attained. Men of right conduct always 
do good deeds. From good deeds, knowledge comes. This is the 
advice of Manu. 


14-24. Right way of living is the best of all the Dharmas and is great 
Tapasya (asceticism). The knowledge comes from this Right Living. 
Everything is attained thereby. He who is devoid of Sadachara, is 
like a S’udra, even if he comes of a Brahmin family. There is no 
distinction whatsoever betwen him and a S’udra. Right conduct is of 
two kinds (1) as dictated by the S’astras, (2) as dictated by the 
popular custom (Laukika). Both these methods should be observed 
by him who wants welfare for his Self. He is not to forsake one of 
them. O Muni! The village Dharma, the Dharma of one's own caste, 
the Dharma of one's own family and the Dharma of one's own 
country all should be observed by men. Never, never he is to do 
anything otherwise. With great loving devotion that is to be 
preserved. Men who practise wrong ways of living, are censured by 
the public; they always suffer from diseases. Avoid wealth and 
desires that have no Dharma in them. Why? If in the name of 



dharma, painful acts (e. g. killing animals in sacrifices) are to be 
committed, those are blamed by the people; so never commit them. 
Avoid them by all means. Narada said “O Muni! The S’astras are 
not one, they are many and they lay down different rules and 
contradictory opinions. How then Dharma is to be followed? And 
according what Dharma S’astra?” Narayana said S’ruti and Smriti 
are the two eyes of God; the Puranam is His Heart. Whatever is 
stated in S’ruti, the Smriti and the Puranams is Dharma; whatever 
else is written in other S’astras is not Dharma. Where you will find 
differences between S’ruti, Smriti and Puranas, accept the words of 
the S’rutis as final proofs. Wherever Smriti disagrees with the 
Puranas, know the Smritis more authoritative. 


And where differences will crop up in the S’rutis themselves, know 
that Dharma, too, is of two kinds. And where the differences will crop 
up in the Smritis themselves, consider, then, that different things are 
aimed at. In some Puranas, the Dharma of the Tantras is duly 
described; but of these, which go against the Vedas, they are not to 
be accepted any means. 


25-37. Tantra is accepted as the authoritative proof then and then 
only when it contradicts not the Vedas. Whatever goes clearly 
against the Vedas can in no way be accepted as a proof. In matters 
concerning Dharma, the Vedas is the Sole Proof. Therefore that 
which is not against the Vedas can be taken as proof; otherwise not. 
Whoever acts Dharma according to other proofs than what is 
ordained in the Vedas, goes to the hell in the abode of Yama to get 
his lesson. So the Dharma that is by all means to be accepted as 
such, is what is stated in the Vedas. The Smritis, the Puranas, or the 
Tantra S’astras can be taken also as authoritative when they are not 
conflicting to Vedas. Any other S’astras can be taken as authoritative 
when it is fundamentally coincident with the Vedas. Else it can never 
be accepted. 



Those who do injury to others even by the blade of a Kus'a grass 
used as a weapon, go to hell with their heads downwards and their 
feet upwards. Those that follow their own sweet free will, that take up 
any sort of dress (e. g. Bauddhas), those that follow the 
philosophical doctrines called Pas'upatas, and the other hermits and 
saints and persons that take up other vows contrary to the religions 
of the Vedas, for example, the Vaikhanasa followers, those who 
brand their bodies by the hot Mudras, at the places of pilgrimages, e. 
g. Dvarka, etc., they go to hell with their bodies scorched by red hot 
brands (Tapta Mudras). So persons should act according to the 
excellent religions commanded by the Vedas. Everyday he should 
get up from his bed early in the morning and think thus “What 
good acts have I done, what have I given as charities? Or what I 
advised others to do charities what greater sins (Mahapatakas) and 
what smaller sins have I committed?” At the last quarter of the night 
he should think of Para Brahma. He should place his right leg on his 
left thigh and his left on his right thigh crosswise keeping his head 
straight up and touching the breast with his chin, and closing his 
eyes, he should sit steadily so that the upper teeth should not touch 
the lower jaw. 


He should join his tongue with his palate and he should sit quiet, 
restraining his senses. He should be S’uddha Sattva. His seat 
should not be very low. First of all he should practice Pranayama 
twice or thrice; and within his heart he should meditate the Self of the 
shape of the Holy Flame or the Holy Light. (Om Mani Padma Hum.) 


38-49. He should fix his heart for a certain time to that Luminous Self 
whose Eyes are everywhere. So the intelligent man should practise 
Dharana. Pranayama is of six kinds (1) Sadhuma (when the 
breaths are not steady), (2) Nirdhuma(better than the Sadhuma), (3) 
Sagarbha (when united with one's mantra), (4) Agarbha (when the 



practice is without the thought of any mantra), (5) Salaksya (when 
the heart is fixed on one's Deity) and (6) Alaksya (when the heart is 
not fixed on one's Deity). No yoga can be compared with 
Pranayama. This is equal to itself. Nothing can be its equal. This 
Pranayama is of three kinds, called Rechaka, Puraka and 
Kumbhaka. The Pranayama consists of three letters. A, U, M, i. e. of 
the nature of “Om”. Or, in other words the letter A, of the Pranava 
Om indicates Puraka, the letter “U” denotes Kumhhaka and the letter 
“M” denotes Rechaka. By the Ida Nadi (by the left nostril) inhale as 
long as you count “A” (Visnu) thirty-two times; then withold breath, 
i.e., do Kumbhaka as long as you count “U” (S’iva) sixtyfour times 
and by the Pingala Nadi (the right nostril) do the Rechaka, i.e., 
exhale the breath as long as you count “M" (Brahma) for sixteen 
times. O Muni! Thus I have spoken to you of the Sadhuma 
Pranayama. After doing the Pranayama as stated above, pierce the 
Six Chakras (i. e., plexuses) (called Sathakra bheda) and carry the 
Kula Kundalini to the Brahma Randhra, the brain aperture, or to the 
thousand petalled lotus in the head and meditate in the heart the Self 
like a Steady Flame. (The Nadis are not those which are known to 
the Vaidya or the Medical S’astras. The latter are the gross physical 
nerves. The Nadis here are the Yoga Nadis, the subtle channels 
(Vivaras) along which the Pranik currents flow. Now the process of 
piercing the six Chakras (or nerve centres or centres of moving 
Pranik forces) is being described. Within this body, the six nerve 
centres called Padmas (Lotuses) exist. They are respectively 
situated at the (1) Muladhara (half way between Anus and Linga 
Mula), called the Sacral Plexus; (2) Linga Mula (the root of the 
genital organs); called postatic plexus; (this is also called 
Svadhisthana) (3) Navel, the Solar Plexus (4) Heart, the cardiac 
Plexus, (5) Throat (6) Forehead, between the eye brows there; the 
lotus in the forehead, called the cavernous plexus (Ajna Chakra) has 
two petals; in these two petals, the two letters “Ham” “Ksam” exist in 
the right hand direction (with the bands of the watch; going round 
from left to right keeping the right side towards one circumambulated 
as as a mark of respect). I bow down to these which are the two- 
lettered Brahma. The lotus that exists in the throat laryngeal or 



pharyngeal plexus has sixteen petals (vis’uddha chakra); in these 
are in due order in right hand direction the sixteen letters (vowels) a, 
a, i, I, u, u, ri, ri, Iri, Iri, e, ai, o, au, ann, ah; I bow down to these which 
are the sixteen lettered Brahma. The lotus that exists in the heart, 
the cardiac plexus (anahata chakra), has twelve petals; wherein are 
the twelve letters k, kh, g, gh, n, ch, chh, j, jh, h, t, th; I bow to to 
these twelve lettered Brahma. The Solar plexus forms the Great 
Junction of the Right and Left sympathetic chains Ida and Pingala 
with the Cerebro spinal Axis. The lotus that exists in the navel, called 
the Solar Plexus, or Epigastric plexus (Manipura Chakra) has ten 
petals wherein are the ten letters d, dh, n, t, th, d, dh, n, p, ph, 
counting in the right hand direction (that is clockwise) (and the action 
of this clock is vertical in the plane of the spinal cord; also it may be 
horizontal). The lotus that exists at the root of the genital organ, the 
genital plexus or postatic plexus has six petals. The petals are the 
configurations made by the position of Nadis at any particular centre. 
Svadhisthana chakra or Svayambhu Linga, wherein are situated the 
six letters, b, bh, m, y, r, I; I bow down to this six-lettered Brahma. 
(These are the Laya Centres). The lotus that exists in the Muladhara, 
called the sacral or sacrococcygeal plexus has four petals, wherein 
are the four letters v, s', s, s. I bow down to these four-lettered 
Brahma. In the above six nerve centres or Laya Centres, or lotuses, 
all the letters are situated in the right hand direction (clockwise). 

(Note All the nerves of the body combine themselves in these six 
nerve centres or Laya Centres. Each of these centres is spheroidal 
and is of the Fourth Dimension. At each centre many transitions take 
place, many visions take place, many forces are perceived and 
wonderful varieties of knowledge are experienced. These are called 
the Laya Centres. For many things vanish into non-existence and 
many new Tattvas are experienced.) Thus meditating on the Six 
Chakras or plexuses, meditate on the Kula Kundalini, the Serpent 
Fire. She resides on the four petalled lotus (Centre of S’akti) called 
Muladhara Chakra (Coccygeal plexus); She is of Rajo Guna; She is 
of a blood red colour, and She is expressed by the mantra “Hrim,” 
which is the Mayavija; she is subtle as the thread of the fibrous stock 
of the water lily. The Sun is Her face; Fire is Her breasts; he attains 



Jivan mukti (liberation while living) within whose heart such a Kula 
Kundalini arises and awakens even once. Thus meditating on Kula 
Kundalini, one should pray to HerHer sitting, coming, going, 
remaining, the thought on Her, the realisation of Her and chanting 
hymns to Her, etc., all are Mine, Who is of the nature of all in all; I am 
that Bhagavati; O Bhagavati! All my acts are Thy worship; I am the 
Devi; I am Brahma, I am free from sorrow. I am of the nature of 
Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss. Thus one should 
meditate of one's own-self. I take refuge of that Kula Kundalini, who 
appears like lightning and who holds the current thereof, when going 
to Brahmarandhra, in the brain, who appears like nectar when 
coming back from the brain to the Muladhara and who travels in the 
Susumna Nadi in the spinal cord. Then one is to meditate on one's 
own Guru, who is thought of as one with God, as seated in one's 
brain and then worship Him mentally. Then the Sadhaka, controlling 
himself is to recite the following Mantra “The Guru is Brahma, the 
Guru is Visnu, it is the Guru again that is the Deva Mahes'vara; it is 
Guru that is Para Brahma. I bow down to that S’ri Guru.” 


Here ends the First Chapter of the Eleventh Book on what is to be 
thought of in the morning in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 2. On Cleansing The Several Parts Of 
The Body 


1-42. Narayana said Even if a man studies the Vedas with six 
Amgas (limbs of the Vedas), he cannot be pure if he be devoid of the 
principle of right living (Sadachara) and if he does not practise it. All 
that is in vain. As soon as the two wings of the young ones of birds 
appear they leave their nests, so the chhandas (the Vedas) leave 
such a man devoid of Sadachara at the time of his death. The 
intelligent man should get up from his bed at the Brahma muhurta 
and should observe all the principles of Sadachara. In the last 
quarter of night, he should practise in reciting and studying the 
Vedas. Then for some time he should meditate on his Ista Deva (his 
Presiding Deity). The Yogi should meditate on Brahma according to 
the method stated before. O Narada! If meditation be done as above, 
the identity of JTva and Brahma is at once realised and the man 
becomes liberated while living. After the fifty-fifth Danda from the 
preceding sunrise, i.e., 2 hours before the sunrise comes the 
Usakala; after the fifty seventh Danda comes the Arunodayakala; 
after fifty eighth Danda comes the morning time; then the Sun rises. 
On should get up from one's bed in the morning time. He should go 
then to a distance where an arrow shot at one stretch goes. There in 
the south-west corner he is to void his urines and faeces. Then the 
man, if he be a Brahmachari, should place his holy thread on his 
right ear and the householder should suspend it on his neck only. 
That is, the Brahmachari, in the first stage of of his life should place 
the holy thread over his right ear; the householder and the 
Vanaprasthis should suspend the holy thread from the neck towards 
the back and then void their faeces, etc. He is to tie a piece of cloth 
round his head; and spread earth or leaves on the place where he 
will evacuate himself. He is not to talk then nor spit nor inhale hard. 
One is not to evacuate oneself in cultivated lands, that have been 
tilled, in water, over the burning pyre, on the mountain, in the broken 
and ruined temples, on the ant-hills, on places covered with grass. 



on road side, or on holes where living beings exist. One ought not to 
do the same also while walking. One ought to keep silence during 
both the twilights, while one is passing urine or voiding one's faeces, 
or while one is holding sexual intercourse, or before the presence of 
one's Guru, during the time of sacrifice, or while making gifts, or 
while doing Brahma Yajha. One ought to pray before evacuating, 
thus “O Devas! O Risis! O Pis'achas! O Uragas! O Raksasas! You 
all who might be existing here unseen by me, are requested to leave 
this place. I am going to ease myself here duly.” Never one is to void 
oneself while one looks at Vayu (wind), Agni (fire), a Brahmana, the 
Sun, water or cow. At the day time one is to turn one's face 
northward and at the night time southward, while easing oneself and 
then one is to cover the faeces, etc., with stones, pebbles, leaves or 
grass, etc. Then he is to hold his genital organ with his hand and go 
to a river or any other watery place; he is to fill his vessel with water 
then and go to some other place. 


The Brahmana is to use the white earth, the Ksattriya is to take the 
red earth, the Vais'ya is to use the yellow earth and the S’udra is to 
apply the black earth and with that he is to cleanse himself. The 
earth under water, the earth of any temple, the earth of an anthill, the 
earth of a mouse hole, and the remnant of the earth used by another 
body for washing are not to be used for cleansing purposes. The 
earth for cleansing faeces is twice as much as that used in case of 
urine clearance; in the cleansing after sexual intercourse thrice as 
much. In urine cleansing the earth is to be applied in the organ of 
generation once, thrice in the hand. And in dirt clearing, twice in the 
organ of generation, five times in anus, ten times in the left hand and 
seven times in both the hands. Then apply earth four times first in 
the left feet and then on the right feet. The house holder should 
clean thus; the Brahmachari is to do twice and the Yatis four times. 

At every time the quantity of wet earth that is to be taken is to be of 
the size of an Amalaki fruit; never it is to be less than that. This is for 
the clearance in the day time. Half of these can be used in the night 



time. For the invalids, one-fourth the above measurements; for the 
passers-by, one-eighth the above dimensions are to be observed. In 
case of women, S’udras, and incapable children, clearings are to be 
done till then when the offensive smell vanishes. No numbers are to 
be observed. Bhagavan Manu says for all the Varnas the clearing is 
to be done till then when the offensive smell vanishes. The clearing 
is to be performed by the left hand. The right hand is never to be 
used. Below the navel, the left hand is to be used; and above the 
navel the right hand is to be used for clearing. The wise man should 
never hold his water pot while evacuating himself. If by mistake he 
catches hold of his waterpot, he will have to perform the penance 
(prayaschitta). 


If, out of vanity or sloth, clearing be not done, for three nights, one is 
to fast, drinking water only, and then to repeat the Gayatri Mantra 
and thus be purified. In every matter, in view of the place, time and 
materials, one's ability and power are to be considered and steps are 
to be taken accordingly. Knowing all this, one should clear oneself 
according to rule. Never be lazy here. After evacuating oneself of 
faeces, one is to rinse one's mouth twelve times; and after passing 
urine and clearing, one is to rinse four times. Never less than that is 
to be done. The water after rinsing is to be thrown away slowly 
downwards on one's left. Next performing Achaman one is to wash 
one's teeth. He is to take a tiny piece, twelve Angulas (fingers) long 
(about one foot) from a tree which is thorny and gummy. The 
cleansing twig (for teeth) is thick like one's little finger. He is to chew 
the one end of it to form a tooth brush. Karanja, Udumbara (figtree). 
Mango, Kadamba, Lodha, Champaka and Vadari trees are used for 
cleansing teeth. While cleansing teeth, one is to recite the following 
mantra “O Tree! Wherein resides the Deity Moon for giving food to 
the beings and for killing the enemies! Let Him wash my mouth to 
increase my fame and honour! O Tree! Dost Thou please give me 
long life, power, fame, energy, beauty, sons, cattle, wealth, intellect, 
and the knowledge of Brahma.” If the cleansing twig be not available 



and if there be any prohibition to brush one's teeth that day, (say, 
Pratipad day, Amavas, Sasthi and Navami), take mouthfuls of water, 
gargle twelve times and thus cleanse the teeth. If one brushes one's 
teeth with a twig on the new moon day, the first, sixth, ninth and 
eleventh day after the Full or New Moon or on Sunday, one eats the 
Sun (is it were, by making Him lose his fire), makes his family line 
extinct and brings his seven generations down into the hell. Next he 
should wash his feet and sip pure clean water thrice, touch his lips 
twice with his thumb, and then clear the nostrils by his thumb and 
fore finger. Then he is to touch his eyes and ears with his thumb and 
ring finger, touch his navel with his thumb and little finger, touch his 
breast with his palm and touch his head with all his fingers. 


Here ends the Second Chapter of the Eleventh Book on cleansing 
the several parts of the body in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 3. On The Glories Of The Rudraksa 
Beads 


1-21. S’n Narayana said O Narada! There are the six kinds of 
Achamana (1) S’uddha, (2) Smarta, (3) Pauranik, (4) Vaidik, (5) 
Tantrik and(6) S’rauta. The act of cleaning after evacuating oneself 
of urine and faeces is known as S’uddha S’aucha. After cleaning, the 
Achannan, that is performed according to rules, is named as Smarta 
and Pauranik. In places where the Brahma Yajha is performed, the 
Vaidik and S’rauta Achamanas are done. And where acts, e.g., the 
knowledge of warfare are being executed, the Tantrik Achaman is 
done. Then he is to remember the Gayatri Mantra with Pranava 
(Om) and fasten the lock of hair on the crown of his head, thus 
controlling all the hindrances (Bighna Bandhanam). Sipping again, 
he is to touch his heart, two arms, and his two shoulders. After 
sneezing, spitting, touching the lower lip with teeth, accidentally 
telling a lie, and talking with a very sinful man, he is to touch his right 
ear (where the several Devas reside). On the right ear of the 
Brahmanas reside Fire, Water, the Vedas, the Moon, the Sun, and 
the Vayu (wind). Then one is to go to a river or any other reservoir of 
water, and there to perform one's morning ablutions and to cleanse 
his body thoroughly. For the body is always unclean and dirty and 
various diets are being excreted out of the nine holes (doors) in the 
body. The morning bath removes all these impurities. Therefore the 
morning bath is essentially necessary. The sins that arise from going 
to those who are not fit for such purposes, from accepting gifts from 
impure persons or from the practice of any other secret vices all are 
removed by the morning ablutions. Without this bath, no acts bear 
any fruit. Therefore everyday, this morning bath is very necessary. 
Taking the Kus'a grass in hand, one is to perform one's bath and 
Sandhya. If for seven days, the morning ablutions are not taken, and 
if for three days, the Sandhyas are not performed, if for twelve days, 
the daily Homas be not performed, the Brahmanas become S’udras. 
The time for making the Homa in the morning is very little; therefore 



lest ablutions be done fully which would take a long time and hence 
the time for the Homa might elapse, the morning bath should be 
performed quickly. After the bath the Pranayama is to be done. Then 
the full effects of bath are attained. There is nothing holier in this 
world or in the next than reciting the Gayatri. It saves the singer who 
sings the Gayatri; hence it is called Gayatri. During the time of 
Pranayama, one must control one's Prana and Apana Vayus, i.e., 
make them equal. The Brahmin, knowing the Vedas and devoted to 
his Dharma, must practise Pranayama three times with the repetition 
of Gayatri and Pranava and the three Vyarhitis (Om Bhu, Om 
Bhuvar, Om Svah). 


While practising, the muttering of Gayatri is to be done three times. 
In Pranayama, the Vaidik mantra is to be repeated, never a Laukika 
Mantra is to be uttered. At the time of Pranayama, if anybody's mind 
be not fixed, even for a short while, like a mustard seed on the apex 
of a cow-horn, he cannot save even one hundred-and one persons 
in his father's or in his mother's line. Pranayama is called Sagarbha 
when performed with the repetition of some mantra; it is called 
Agarbha when it is done simply with mere meditation, without 
repeating any mantra. After the bathing, the Tarpanam with its 
accompaniments, is to he done; i.e., the peace offerings are made 
with reference to the Devas, the Risis, and the Pitris (whereby we 
invoke the blessings from the subtle planes where the highsouled 
persons dwell). After this, a clean pair of clothes is to be worn and 
then he should get up and come out of the water. The next things 
preparatory to practise Japam are to wear the Tilaka marks of ashes 
and to put on the Rudraksa beads. He who holds thirty-two 
Rudraksa beads on his neck, forty on his head, six on each ear (12 
on two ears), twenty four beads on two hands (twelve on each hand) 
thirty-two beads on two arms (sixteen on each), one bead on each 
eye and one bead on the hair on the crown, and one hundred and 
eight beads on the breast, (251 in all) becomes himself Maha Deva. 
One is expected to use them as such. O Muni! You can use the 



Rudraksas after tieing, stringing together with gold or silver always 
on your S’ikha, the tuft of hair on the head or on your ears. On the 
holy thread, on the hands, on the neck, or on the belly (abdomen) 
one can keep the Rudraksa after one has repeated sincerely and 
with devotion the five lettered mantra of S’iva, or one has repeated 
the Pranava (Om). Holding the Rudraksa implies that the man has 
realised the knowledge of S’iva Tattva. O Brahman! The Rudraksa 
bead that is placed on the tuft or on the crown hair represents the 
Tara tattva, i.e., Om Kara; the Rudraksa beads that are held on the 
two ears are to be thought of as Deva and Devi, (S’iva and S’iva). 


22-37. The one hundred and eight Rudraksa beads on the sacrificial 
thread are considered as the one hundred and eight Vedas 
(signifying the Full Knowledge, as sixteen digits of the Moon 
completed; on the arms, are considered as the Dik (quarters); on the 
neck, are considered as the Devi Sarasvati and Agni (fire). The 
Rudraksa beads ought to be taken by men of all colours and castes. 
The Brahmanas, Ksattriyas and Vais'yas should hold them after 
purifying them with Mantras, i.e., knowingly; whereas the S’udras 
can take them without any such purification by the Mantras, i.e., 
unknowingly. By holding or putting on the Rudraksa beads, persons 
become the Rudras incarnate in flesh and body. There is no doubt in 
this. By this all the sins arising from seeing, hearing, remembering, 
smelling, eating prohibited things, talking incoherently, doing 
prohibited things, etc., are entirely removed with the Rudraksa beads 
on the body; whatever acts, eating, drinking, smelling, etc., are done, 
are, as it were, done by Rudra Deva Himself. O Great Muni! He who 
feels shame in holding and putting on the Rudraksa beads, can 
never be freed from this Samsara even after the Koti births. He who 
blames another person holding Rudraksa beads has defects in his 
birth (is a bastard). There is no doubt in this. It is by holding on 
Rudraksa that Brahma has remained steady in His Brahmahood 
untainted and the Munis have been true to their resolves. So there is 
no act better and higher than holding the Rudraksa beads. He who 



gives clothing and food to a person holding Rudraksa beads with 
devotion is freed of all sins and goes to the S’iva Loka. He who 
feasts gladly any holder of such beads at the time of S’radh, goes 
undoubtedly to the Pitri Loka. He who washes the feet of a holder of 
Rudraksa and drinks that water, is freed of all sins and resides with 
honour in the S’iva Loka. If a Brahmana holds with devotion the 
Rudraksa beads with a necklace and gold, he attains the 
Rudrahood. O Intelligent One! Wherever whoever holds with or 
without faith and devotion the Rudraksa beads with or without any 
mantra, is freed of all sins and is entitled to the Tattvajhana. I am 
unable to describe fully the greatness of the Rudraksa beads. In fact, 
all should by all means hold the Rudraksa beads on their bodies. 


Note The number one hundred and eight (108) signifies the One 
Hundred and Eight Vedas, the Brahman, the Source of all Wisdom 
and Joy. 


Here ends the Third Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the glories of 
the Rudraksa beads in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 4. On The Greatness Of The Rudraksam 


1-11. Narada said O Sinless one! The greatness of the Rudraksa 
seed that you have described is verily such. Now I ask why is this 
Rudraksam so much entitled to worship by the people. Please speak 
clearly on this point. Narayana spoke O Child! This is the very 
question that was asked once by Kartika, the sixfaced One, to 
Bhagavan Rudra, dwelling in Kailas'a. What He replied, I say now. 
Listen. Rudra Deva spoke O Child Sadanana. I will dwell briefly 
on the secret cause of the greatness of the Rudraksa seed. Hear. In 
days of yore, there was a Daitya called Tripura who could not be 
conquered by any body. Brahma, Visnu and the other Devas were 
defeated by him. They then came to Me and requested Me to kill the 
Asura. At their request, I called in my mind the Divine Great weapon, 
named Aghora, beautiful and terrible and containing the strength of 
all the Devas, to kill him. It was inconceivable and it was blazing with 
fire. 


For full divine one thousand years I remained awake with eyelids 
wide open in thinking of the Aghora weapon, the destroyer of all 
obstacles, whereby the killing of Tripurasura might be effected and 
the troubles of the Devas be removed. Not for a moment my eyelids 
dropped. There by my eyes were affected and drops of water came 
out of my eyes. Note here. How enemies are to be killed. It requires 
great thought, great concentration, great yoga and great powers. O 
Mahasena! From those drops of water coming out of my eyes, the 
great tree of Rudraksam did spring for the welfare of all. This 
Rudraksa seed is of thirty-eight varieties. From My Surya Netra, i.e.. 
My right eye, symbolizing the Sun, twelve yellow coloured (Pingala 
colour) varieties have come; and from my left eye representing the 
Moon, the Soma Netra, sixteen varieties of white colour and from my 
third eye on the top, representing Fire, i.e., the Agni Netra, ten 
varieties of black colour have come out. Of these the white 



Rudraksams are Brahmins and they are used by the Brahmanas; the 
red coloured ones are the Ksattriyas and should be used by the 
Ksattriyas and the black ones are S’udras and should be used by the 
Vaisyas and the S’udras. 


12-19. One faced Rudraksa seed is the S’iva Himself, made 
manifest and rendered vivid; even the sin incurred in killing a 
Brahmana is destroyed thereby. Two faced or two headed 
Rudraksam is like the Deva and the Devi. Two sorts of sins are 
destroyed thereby. The three faced Rudraksam is like fire; the sin 
incurred in killing a woman is destroyed in a moment. The four faced 
Rudraksa seed is like Brahma and removes the sin of killing 
persons. The five faced Rudraksam is verily an image of Rudra; all 
sorts of sins, e.g., eating prohibited food, going to the ungoables, 
etc., are destroyed thereby. The six faced Rudraksam is Kartikeya. It 
is to be worn on the right hand. One becomes freed of the 
Brahmahatya sin. There is no manner of doubt in this. The seven 
faced Rudraksam is named Ananga. Holding this frees one from the 
sin of stealing gold, etc., O Mahasena! The eight faced Rudraksa is 
Vinayaka. Holding this frees one from the sin of holding an illicit 
contact with a woman of a bad family and with the wife of one's 
Guru, etc., and other sins as well. It enables one to acquire heaps of 
food, cotton, and gold; and in the end the Highest Place is attained. 


20-35. The fruit of holding the eight faced Rudraksa seed has been 
said. Now I will talk of the nine-faced Rudraksam. It is verily the 
Bhairava made manifest. On the left hand it should be worn. By this, 
the people get both Bhoga (enjoyment) and Moksa (liberation) and 
they become powerful like Me and get themselves freed at once, 
without the least delay, of the sins incurred by committing thousands 
of abortions, hundreds of Brahmahattyas (killing the Brahmanas). 
Holding the ten-faced Rudraksa is verily wearing Janardana, the 
Deva of the Devas. The holding of which pacifies the evils caused by 



planets, Pis'achas, Vetalas, Brahma Raksasas, and Pannagas. The 
eleven-faced Rudraksam is like the Eleven Rudras. The fruits, the 
efficacy of which I now describe. Hear. The fruits obtained through 
the performance of one thousand horse sacrifices, one hundred 
Vajapeya sacrifices, and making gifts of one hundred thousand cows 
are obtained thereby. 


If one wears the twelve-headed Rudraksam on one's ear, the Adityas 
get satisfied. The fruits of performing Gomedha and As'vamedha 
sacrifices are obtained thereby. No fear comes from burned 
buffaloes, armed enemies and wolves and tigers and other 
murderous animals. Also the several diseases of the body never 
come to him. The holder of the twelve-faced Rudraksa seed feels 
always happy and he is the master of some kingdoms He becomes 
freed of the sins incurred in killing elephants, horses, deer, cats, 
snakes, mice, frogs, asses, foxes and various other animals. 


O Child! The thirteen faced Rudraksam is very rare; if anybody gets 
it, he becomes like Karti Keya and gets all desires fulfilled; and the 
eight siddhis are under his grasp. He learns how to make gold, silver 
and other metals; he attains all sorts of enjoyments. There is no 
manner of doubt in this. O Sadanana! If anybody holds the thirteen 
faced Rudraksam, he becomes freed from the sins incurred in killing 
mother, father and brothers. 


O Son! If one holds on one's head the fourteen faced Rudraksam 
always, one becomes like S’iva. O Muni! What more shall I speak to 
you! The Devas pay their respects to one holding the fourteen faced 
Rudraksas and he in the end attains the Highest Goal, the state of 
S’iva. His body becomes verily the body of S’iva. 



36-40. The Devas always worship the Rudraksa seed; the highest 
goal is attained by wearing the Rudraksam. The Brahmanas should 
hold on their heads at least one Rudraksam with devotion. A rosary 
of twenty-six Rudraksams is to be made and tied on the head. 
Similarly a rosary of fifty seeds is to be worn and suspended on the 
breast; sixteen each on each of the two arms; twenty-four 
Rudraksams to be worn on the wrists, twelve on each. O Sadanana! 
If a rosary be made of one hundred and eight, fifty or twenty-seven 
Rudraksams and if japam be done with that, immeasurable merits 
are obtained. If anybody wears a rosary of one hundred and eight 
seeds, he gets at every moment the fruit of performing the 
As'vamedha sacrifices and uplifts his twenty-one generations and 
finally he resides in the S’iva Loka. 


Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the 
Greatness of the Rudraksam in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 5. On The Rudraksam Rosaries 


1-14. Is'vara said O Kartikeya! Now I will speak how to count the 
Japam (repetition of the mantra) with the rosary. Hear. The face of 
Rudraksam is Brahma; the upper summit point is S’iva and the tail 
end of Rudraksam is Visnu. The Rudraksam has two-fold powers :-- 
It can give Bhoga (Enjoyment) as well as Moksa (Liberation). Then 
string or tie together, like a cow's tail, and like the snake's coiling a 
body, twenty-five five faced Rudraksa seeds, thorny and of red, 
white, mixed colours bored through and through. The rosary is to 
taper as a cow's tail tapers down. In stringing the beads into a 
rosary, it should be seen that the flat face of one Rudraksam is in 
front of the flat face of another Rudraksam; so the tail, the pointed 
end of one, must come in front of the tail or the narrower end of 
another. The Meru or the topmost bead of the string must have its 
face turned upwards and the knot should be given over that. The 
rosary, thus strung, yields success of the Mantra (mantra-siddhi). 
When the rosary is strung, it is to be bathed with clear and scented 
water and afterwards with the Pahchagavya (cow-dung, cow urine, 
curd, milk, and ghee); then wash it with clear water and sanctify it 
with the condensed electrical charge of the Mantra. Then recite the 
Mantra of S’iva (Six limbed), with “Hum” added and collect the 
rosaries. Then repeat over them the Mantra “Sadyojata, etc.”, and 
sprinkle water over it one hundred and eight times. Then utter the 
principal mantra and place them on a holy ground and perform 
Nyasa over it, i.e., think that the Great Cause S’iva and the World- 
Mother Bhagavati have come on them. Thus make the Samskara of 
the rosary (i.e., purify it) and you will find then that your desired end 
will be attained successfully. Worship the rosary with the Mantra of 
that Devata for which it is intended. One is to wear the Rudraksa 
rosary on one's head, neck or ear and controlling oneself, one 
should make japam with the rosary. On the neck, head, breast, or 
the ears or on the arms, the rosary should he held with the greatest 
devotion. What is the use in saying about it so often? It is highly 



meritorious and commendable to hold always the Rudraksam. 
Especially on such occasions as taking baths, making gifts, making 
japams, performing the Homas,or sacrifices to Visve Devas, in 
performing the Poojas of the Devas,in making Prayaschittams 
(penances), in the time of S’radh and in the time of initiation, it is 
highly necessary to hold Rudraksam. A Brahmin is sure to go to hell 
if he performs any Vaidik act without wearing any Rudraksam. Note 
It would be offering an insult to S’iva! 


15-29. It is advisable to use the true Rudraksam with gold and jewel, 
on the head, neck or on one's hand. Never use the Rudraksam worn 
by another. Use Rudraksam always with devotion; never use it while 
you are impure. Even the grass that grows with the air in contact with 
the Rudraksa tree, goes verily to a holy region for ever. Jabala Muni 
says in the S’ruti If a man wearing Rudraksam commits a sin, he 
gets deliverance from that sin. Even if animals hold Rudraksam, they 
become S’iva; what of men! The devotees of S’ri Rudra should 
always use at least one Rudraksa on the head. Those great 
devotees, who with Rudraksam on take the name of the Highest Self 
S’ambhu, get themselves freed of all sorts of sins and pains. Those 
who are ornamented with Rudraksam are the best devotees. It is 
highly incumbent on those who want their welfare to wear 
Rudraksam. Those who hold Rudraksam on their ears, crown hair, 
neck, hands, and breast, get Brahma, Visnu, and Mahes'vara under 
them as their Vibhutis (manifestations, powers). The Devas and all 
those Risis that started the Gotra, the Adipurusas (the first chief men 
in several families), held with reverence the Rudraksams. All the 
other Munis, that descended from their families, the ardent followers 
of S’rauta Dharma, the pure souled, held the Rudraksams. It may be, 
that many might not like at first to hold this Rudraksam, the visible 
giver of liberation and so well written in the Vedas; but after many 
births, out of the Grace of Mahadeva many become eager to take 
the Rudraksams. The Munis that are the Jabala Sakhis are famous 
in expounding the inestimable greatness of Rudraksams. 



The effect of holding Rudraksams is well known in the three worlds. 
Punyam (great merit) arises from the mere sight of Rudraksams; ten 
million times that merit arises by its touch; and by wearing it, one 
hundred Koti times the fruit arises and if one makes Japam every 
day, then one lakh koti times the punyam arises. There is no manner 
of questionings in this. 


30-36. He who holds in his hand, breast, neck, ears, head, the 
Rudraksams, becomes an image of Rudra. There is no manner of 
doubt in this. By holding Rudraksams, men become invulnerable of 
all the beings, become respected, like Maha Deva, by the Devas and 
Asuras and they roam on the earth like Rudra. Even if a man be 
addicted to evil deeds and commits all sorts of sins, he becomes 
respected by all, on holding Rudraksams. By this men are freed of 
the sin of taking Uchhista and of all the other sins. Even if you 
suspend a Rudraksam rosary on the neck of a dog and if that dog 
dies in that state, he gets liberation! Then what to speak of others! 

By holding Rudraksams, men even if they be devoid of Japam and 
Dhyanam, become freed of all sins and attain the highest state. Even 
if one holds merely one Rudraksa seed purified and surcharged with 
Mantra S’akti, he uplifts his twentyone generations, gets to Heaven 
and resides there with respect. I am speaking now further of the 
Greatness of Rudraksam. 


Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the Rudraksam 
rosaries in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 6. On The Greatness Of Rudraksams 


1-21. Is'vara said O Kartikeya! Kus'agranthi, JTvapattn and other 
rosaries cannot compare to one-sixteenth part of the Rudraksa 
rosary. As Visnu is the best of all the Purusas, the Ganga is the best 
of all the rivers, Kas'yapa, amongst the Munis, Uchchaihsrava 
amongst the horses, Maha Deva amongst the Devas, Bhagavati 
amongst the Devis, so the Rudraksam rosary is the best of all the 
rosaries. All the fruits that occur by reading the stotras and holding 
all the Vratas, are obtained by wearing the Rudraksam bead. At the 
time of making the Aksaya gift, the Rudraksam bead is capable of 
giving high merits. The merit that accrues by giving Rudraksam to a 
peaceful devotee of S’iva, cannot be expressed in words. If anybody 
gives food to a man holding the Rudraksam rosary, his twenty one 
generations are uplifted and he ultimately becomes able to live in the 
Rudra Loka. He who does not apply ashes on his forehead and who 
does not hold Rudraksam and is averse to the worship of S’iva is 
inferior to a chandala. If Rudraksam be placed on the head then the 
flesh-eaters, drunkards, and the associates with the vicious become 
freed of their sins. Whatever fruits are obtained by performing 
various sacrifices, asceticism and the study of the Vedas are easily 
attained by simply holding the Rudraksam rosary. Whatever merits 
are obtained by reading the four Vedas and all the Puranas and 
bathing in all the Tirthas and the results that are obtained by 
immense practice in learning all are obtained by wearing 
Rudraksam. If at the time of death, one wears Rudraksam and dies, 
one attains Rudrahood. One has not to take again one's birth. If 
anybody dies by holding Rudraksam on his neck or on his two arms, 
he uplifts his twenty-one generations and lives in the Rudra Loka. Be 
he a Brahman or a Chandala, be he with qualities or without 
qualities, if he applies ashes to his body and holds Rudraksam he 
surely attains S’ivahood. Be he pure or impure; whether he eats 
uneatables or be he a MIechha or a Chandala or a Great Sinner, any 



body if he holds Rudraksam is surely equal to Rudra. There is no 
doubt in this. 


If any body holds Rudraksam on his head he gets Koti times the fruit; 
on his ears, ten Koti times the fruit, on his neck, one hundred Koti 
times the fruit; on his holy thread, ayuta times the fruit; on his arm, 
one lakh Koti times the fruit and if one wears Rudraksam on one's 
wrist, one attains Moksa. Whatever acts, mentioned in the Vedas be 
performed with Rudraksam on, the fruits obtained are unbounded. 
Even if a man be without any Bhakti and if he wears on his neck the 
Rudraksa rosary though he does always vicious acts, he becomes 
freed of the bondage of this world. Even if a man does not hold 
Rudraksa but if he be always full of devotion towards the 
Rudraksam, he attains the fruit that is got by wearing the Rudraksam 
and he attains the S’iva Loka and is honoured like S’iva. As in the 
country of Kikata, an ass which used to carry Rudraksam seed got 
S’ivahood after his death, so any man, whether he be a Jhani (wise) 
or Ajnani (unwise), gets S’ivahood if he holds Rudraksam. There is 
no doubt in this. 


22-28. Skanda said “O God! How is it that in the country of Kikata 
(Bihar), an ass had to carry Rudraksa; who gave him the 
Rudraksams! And what for did he hold that?” 


Bhagavan Is'vara said O Son! Now hear the history of the case. In 
the Bindhya mountain one ass used to carry the load of Rudraksam 
of a traveller. Once the ass felt tired and became unable to carry the 
load and fell down on the road and died. After his death the ass 
came to Me by My Grace, becoming Mahes'vara with trident in his 
hand and with three eyes. O Kartikeya! As many faces as there are 
in the Rudraksam, for so many thousand Yugas the holder resides 
with honour in the S’iva Loka. One should declare the greatness of 



Rudraksam to one's own disciple; never to disclose its glories to one 
who is not a disciple nor a devotee of Rudraksam nor to him who is 
an illiterate brute. Be he a Bhakta or not a Bhakta, be be low or very 
low, if he holds Rudraksam then he is freed from all sins. No equal 
can be to the merit of him who holds the Rudraksams. 


29-39. The Munis, the Seers of truth, describe this holding on of 
Rudraksam as a very great vow. He who makes a vow to hold one 
thousand Rudraksams, becomes like Rudra; the Devas bow down 
before him. If thousand Rudraksams be not obtained, one should 
hold at least sixteen Rudraksams on each arm, one Rudraksam on 
the crown hair; on the two hands, twelve on each; thirty-two on the 
neck; forty on the head; six on each ear and one hundred and eight 
Rudraksams on the breast; and then he becomes entitled to worship 
like Rudra. If any body holds Rudraksam together with pearls, 
Prabala, crystal, silver, gold and gem (lapis lazuli), he becomes a 
manifestation of S'iva. If a body, through laziness even, holds 
Rudraksam, the sin cannot touch him as darkness cannot come near 
light. If any body makes japam of a mantram with a Rudraksa rosary, 
he gets unbounded results. Such a merit giving Rudraksam, if one 
such Rudraksam be not found in any one's body, his life becomes 
useless, like a man who is void of Tripundrak (three curved 
horizontal marks made on the forehead by the worshippers of S'iva). 
If any body simply washes his head all over with Rudraksam on, he 
gets the fruit of bathing in the Ganges. There is no doubt in this. One 
faced Rudraksam, the five faced, eleven faced and fourteen faced 
Rudraksams are highly meritorious and entitled to worship by all. 

The Rudraksam is S'ankara made manifest; so it is always 
worshipped with devotion. The greatness of Rudraksam is such as it 
can make a king out of a poor man. On this point, I will tell you an 
excellent Puranic anecdote. 



40-49. There was a Brahmin, named Girinatha in the country of 
Kosala. He was proficient in the Vedas and Vedamgas, religious and 
very rich. He used to perform sacrifices. He had a beautiful son 
named Gunanidhi. The son gradually entered into his youth and 
looked beautiful like Kandarpa, the God of Love. While he was 
studying at his Guru Sudhisana's house, he, by his beauty and youth 
captivated the mind of his Guru's wife named Muktavali. The Guru's 
wife became so much enchanted by his extraordinary beauty that 
she, being unable to control herself, mixed with him and for some 
time remained with him in secret enjoyment. Then feeling 
inconveniences, due to the fear of. his Guru, to enjoy her freely, used 
poison to the Guru, killed him and then he began to live freely with 
her. Next when his father, mother came to know about this, he put to 
death instantly his father and mother, administering poison to them. 
He became addicted to various pleasures and his wealth was 
exhausted gradually. He began to steal in Brahmans' houses and 
became addicted very much to drinking. His relatives outcasted him 
from the society for his bad behaviour and banished him outside the 
town. He then went into a dense forest with Muktavali; and he began 
to kill the Brahmins for their wealth. Thus a long time passed away; 
when at last he fell into the jaws of death. 


50-54. Then to take him to the region of Death, thousands of the 
Yama's messengers came; at the same time the S’iva's messengers 
came from S’iva Loka. O Kartikeya! A quarrel then ensued between 
both the parties of Yama and S’iva. The Yama's messengers then 
said “O Servers of S’ambhu! What are the merits of this man that 
you have come to take him? First speak to us of his merits.” S’iva's 
messengers spoke “Fifteen feet below the ground where this man 
died, there exists the Rudraksam. O Yama's messengers! By the 
influence of that Rudraksam, all his sins are destroyed; and we have 
come to take him to S’iva.” Then the Brahmin Gunanidhi assumed a 
divine form and, getting on an aerial car went with S'iva's 
messengers before S'iva. O One of good vows! Thus I have 



described briefly to you the greatness of Rudraksam. This is capable 
to remove all sorts of sins and yield great merits. 


Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the Greatness 
of Rudraksams in the Mahapuranam S'ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 7. On The Greatness Of One Faced, 
Etc., Rudraksam 


1-4. S’n Narayana said O Narada! When Gins'a thus explained to 
Kartikeya the greatness of Rudraksam, he became satisfied. Now I 
have spoken to you of the glories of the Rudraksams as far as I 
know. Now, as to our subject of right way of acting, I will now speak 
on other things that ought to be known. Listen. The seeing of 
Rudraksam brings in a lakh times of Punyam and koti times the merit 
arises from touching that; holding it brings in koti times merit; again if 
one makes the japam of a Mantra with that Rudraksam, one obtains 
merit one hundred lakh koti times and one thousand lakh koti times 
the merit. The merit in holding the Rudraksam is far superior to that 
in holding Bhadraksam. The Rudraksam seed that is of the size of 
an Amalaki is the best; which is the of the size of a plum, is middling; 
and which is of the size of a gram is the worst, this is my word and 
promise. The Rudraksam tree is of four kinds Brahmana, 

Ksattriya, Vais’ya, and S’udra. The white colour is Brahmana; the red 
colour is Ksattriya; the yellow colour is Vais'ya and the black 
coloured Rudraksam seed is S’udra. The Brahmanas are to use the 
white coloured Rudraksams; the Ksattriyas, the red coloured ones, 
the Vais'yas, the yellow coloured ones; and the S’udras, the black 
ones. Those Rudraksa seeds that are nicely circular, smooth, hard, 
and whose thorns or points are distinctly visible, are the best. Those 
that are pierced by insects, broken in parts, whose thorns are not 
clearly visible, with swells and holes and those that are coated over, 
these six varieties of Rudraksams are faulty. Those Rudraksams that 
have their holes by nature running through and through are best; and 
those that base their holes pierced by men are middling. The 
Rudraksa seeds that are all of uniform shape, bright, hard, and 
beautifully circular should be strung together by a silken thread. How 
to test the Rudraksa seed? As gold is tested by a touch stone; so the 
Rudraksam is tested by drawing lines on it; those on which the lines 
are most uniform, bright and beautiful are the best and they should 



be worn by the S’aivas. One should hold one Rudraksam on the 
crown hair, thirty on the head, thirty six on the neck; sixteen on each 
arm, twelve on each wrist, fifty on the shoulders, one hundred and 
eight Rudraksams in the place of the sacrificial thread; and the 
devotee should have two or three rounds on the neck. On the 
earrings, on the crown of the head, the head, on bracelets, on 
armlets, on necklace, on the ornament worn on the loins one should 
hold Rudraksam always, whether one sleeps or eats. Holding three 
hundred Rudraksams is the lowest; holding five hundred is middling; 
holding one thousand Rudraksams is the best; so one ought to wear 
one thousand Rudraksams. At the time of taking Rudraksam, on 
one's head, one should utter the Mantra of Isana; the mantra of Tat 
Purusa while holding on one's ears; Aghora mantra on one's 
forehead and heart; and the vija of Aghora mantra, i.e., “hasau” 
while holding on one's hands. One should wear the rosary of fifty 
Rudraksa seeds, suspended up to the belly, uttering the Vamadeva 
mantra, i.e., Sadyojatadi, etc., the five Brahma mantras, and the six- 
limbed S’iva mantra. One is to string every Rudraksa seed, uttering 
the root mantra and then hold it. One-faced Rudraksa reveals 
Paratattva (the highest Tattva); when worn, the knowledge of the 
highest Tattva arises; the Brahma is seen then. The two-faced 
Rudraksam is Ardhanaris'vara, the Lord of the other half which 
represents women (in the same person); if worn, Ardhanarisvara 
S’iva is always pleased with that man who holds it. The three-faced 
Rudraksam is Fire made manifest; it destroys in a moment the sin of 
killing a woman. 


The three-faced Rudraksam is the three Agnis, Daksinagni, 
Garhapatya, and Ahavaniya; Bhagavan Agni is always pleased with 
that man who wears the three-faced Rudraksam. The four-faced 
Rudraksam is Brahma Himself. The wearer gets his prosperity 
enhanced, his diseases destroyed, the divine knowledge springs in 
him and his heart is always pleased. The five-faced Rudraksam is 
the five faced S’iva Himself; Mahadeva gets pleased with him who 



holds it. The Presiding Deity of the six faced Rudraksam is 
Kartikeya. Some Pundits take Ganapati to be the Presiding Deity of 
the six-faced Rudraksam. The presiding Deity of the seven-faced 
Rudraksam is the seven Matrikas, the Sun and the seven Risis. By 
putting on this, the prosperity is increased, health and the pure 
knowledge are established. It should be put on when one becomes 
pure. The Presiding Deity of the eight-faced Rudraksam is Brahmi, 
the eight Matrikas. By holding this, the eight Vasus are pleased and 
the river Ganges is also pleased. The putting on of this makes the 
JTvas truthful and pleasant-minded. The Devata of the nine-faced 
Rudraksam is Yama; holding this puts off the fears of Death. The 
Devata of the eleven-faced Rudraksam is ten quarters, the ten 
quarters are pleased with him who wears the ten-faced Rudraksam. 
The Devata of the eleven mouthed Rudraksam is the eleven Rudras 
and Indra. Holding this enhances happiness. The twelve-faced 
Rudraksam is Visnu made manifest; its Devatas are the twelve 
Adityas; the devotees of S’iva should hold this. The thirteen-faced 
Rudraksam, if worn, enables one to secure one's desires; he does 
nowhere experience failures. The Kama Deva becomes pleased with 
him who wears this. The fourteen-faced Rudraksam destroys all 
diseases and gives eternal health. While holding this, one ought not 
to take wine, flesh, onion, garlic, Sajha fruit, Chalta fruit and the flesh 
of the boar which eats excrements, etc. During the Lunar and Solar 
eclipses, during the Uttarayana S’amkranti or the Daksinayana 
S’amkranti, during the full Moon or the New Moon day, if Rudraksam 
be worn, one becomes instantly freed of all one's sins. 


Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the 
greatness of one faced, etc., Rudraksam in the Maha Puranam S’ri 
Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 8. On Bhuta S’uddhi 


1-21. Narayana said O Great Muni! Now I shall tell you the rules 
of Bhuta S’uddhi, i.e., the purification of the elennents of the body (by 
respiratory attraction and replacement, etc.). Firstly, think of the 
Highest Deity Kundalini (the Serpent Fire) as rising up in the hollow 
canal Susumna in the Spinal Cord from the Muladhara (the sacral 
plexus) to the Brahmarandhra (the aperture supposed to be at the 
crown of the head). Next, the devotee is to meditate on the Mantra 
“Hamsa” and consider his Jivatma (the embodied soul) united with 
Para Brahma. Then think from leg to the knees in the form of a 
square Yantra (diagram as furnished with Vajra thunderbolt, 
represented by 63 lines at the four corners); consider this square as 
the earth, of a golden colour and represented by the letter “Lam,” 
representing the Seed Mantra of earth. Next from the knee to the 
navel consider the semi-moon and at its two ends consider that the 
two Lotuses are situated. Consider this as the circle of water, of 
white colour, represented by the letter “Vam” the Seed Mantra of 
water. Then again from the navel to the heart consider it as of a 
triangular form and the Svastik mark at its three angles and think it 
as of fire and represented by the letter “Ram” its root Mantra, of red 
colour. Next from the heart to the centre of the eyebrows, consider 
as marked with six dots, with the Seed Mantra “Yam” of a smoke- 
coloured colour (dark-red) and of a circular appearance and consider 
it as air. Then again from the centre of the eyebrows to the crown of 
the head consider as Akas’a Mandalam (a region of ether) beautiful 
and clear and with “Ham” as its vija letter. Thus thinking consider 
firstly the earthy principle originated from watery principle, dissolved 
in water. Then think water as dissolved in fire, its cause; fire 
dissolved in air, its cause; and air dissolved in Akas’a ether, its 
cause; then consider Akas’a dissolved in its cause Ahamkara, 
egoism; then again Ahamkara dissolved in the Great Principle 
(Mahattatva); and Mahattatva again in its cause Prakriti and consider 
Prakriti again diluted in its cause, the Supreme Self. Then consider 



your ownself as the Highest Knowledge and only that. Think, then, of 
the Papa Purusa, the Sinful Man in your body. The size of this Man 
is that of a thunnb and it is situated in the left abdomen. The head of 
him is represented by Brahmahatya (murdering a Brahman); his area 
as stealing gold; his heart as drinking wine; his loins as going to the 
wife of his Guru, his legs as mixing with people who go to their 
Guru's wives, and his toes as representing other sins and venial 
offences. The Sinful Man holds axes and shield in his hands; he is 
always angry, with his head bent down and his appearance is very 
horrible. Inhale air through the left nostril thinking of “Vam” the Root 
Mantra of air and make Kumbhaka, i.e., fill the whole body with that 
air, and hold it inside, purifying the sinful man; then repeating “Ram,” 
the seed Mantra of fire, think the sinful man with his own body burnt 
down to ashes. Then exhale outside through the right nostril those 
ashes of the Sinful Man. Next consider the ashes due to the burning 
of the Sinful Man, as rolled and turned into a round ball with the 
nectar seed of the Moon. Think steadily this ball as transformed into 
a golden egg by the Seed Mantra “Lam” of the earth. Repeat then, 
“Ham” the seed Mantra of Akas’a and think yourself as an ideal 
being; pure and clear, and shape thus your body and the several 
limbs. 


Create, then, fresh in an inverse order from the Brahma the 
elements Akas’a, air, fire, water, earth and locate them in their 
respective positions. Then by the Mantra “Soham” separate the 
JTvatma from the Paramatma and locate the Jivatma in the heart. 
Think also that the Kundalini has come to the Sacral Plexus, after 
locating the JTvatma, turned into nectar by contact with the Highest 
Self, in the heart. Next meditate on the vital force, the Prana S’akti, 
thus located as follows There is a red lotus on a wide boat in a 
vast ocean of a red colour; on this lotus is seated the Prana S’akti. 
She has six hands holding, in due order, the trident, the arrows made 
of sugarcane, noose, goad, five arrows and a skull filled with blood. 
She is three-eyed. Her high breasts are decorated; the colour of Her 



body is like the Rising Sun. May She grant us happiness. Thus 
meditating on the Prana S’akti, Who is of the nature of the Highest 
Self, one ought to apply ashes on his body in order to attain success 
in all actions. Great merit arises from the application of ashes 
(besmearing ashes) on the body. I will now dwell on this subject in 
detail. Listen. This point of holding ashes on to the body is 
particularly proved in the Vedas and Smritis. 


Here ends the Eighth Chapter in the Eleventh Book on Bhuta 
S'uddhi (purification of elements in the body) in the Mahapuranam 
S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 9. On The Rules Of S’irovrata 


1-43. S’n Narayana said The Brahmanas that will perform duly the 
S’irovrata, to be described in the following, are the only ones who will 
attain very easily the highest knowledge, destroying all Avidya or 
Ignorance. So much so that the rules of right living and right conduct 
as ordained in the S’rutis and Smritis are not necessary to be 
observed by those who duly and devotedly perform the S’irovrata 
(i.e., vow of the head; i.e., vow to apply ashes on the forehead). O 
Learned One! It is through this S’irovrata that Brahma and the other 
Devas have been able to get their Brahmahood and the Devahood. 
The ancient sages glorified highly this S’irovrata. Brahma, Visnu, 
Rudra and the other Devas all performed this S’irovrata. O Wise 
One! Those that performed duly this S’irovrata, all became sinless 
though they were sinful in every way. Its name is S’irovrata, 
inasmuch as it is mentioned in the first part of the Atharva Veda. 

Only this vrata (vow) is called S'irovrata; no other thing is 
denominated by this name. By no other merit can this be acquired. O 
Muni! Different names are assigned to this vrata in different S’akhas; 
in fact, they are all one and the same. 


N. B. - Pasupata vrata, S'ivavrata, etc., are the different names 
assigned to it. In all the S’akhas, the One Substance, Intelligence 
solidified named S'iva and the knowledge thereof is mentioned. This 
is “S’irovrata.” He who does not perform this S’irovrata, is irreligious 
and he is banished from all religious acts, though he is well-qualified 
in all branches of learning. There is no manner of doubt in this. This 
S’irovrata is like the blazing fire in destroying wholly the forest of 
sins. All knowledge fleshes before him who performs this S’irovrata. 
The Atharva S’ruti expounds the subtle and particularly 
incomprehensible things; this S’ruti declares the above S’irovrata as 
daily to be done; so it is one of the daily observances. “Fire is 
ashes,” “water is ashes,” “earth is ashes,” “air is ashes,” “ether or 



Akas'a is ashes,” “all this manifest Universe is ashes.” These six 
mantras stated in the Atharva Veda are to be recited; after this, 
ashes are to be besmeared all over the body. This is named the 
S’irovrata. The devotee is to put on these ashes named S’irovrata 
during his Sandhyopasana (practising Sandhya thrice a day); so long 
as the Brahma Vidya (the knowledge of Brahma) does not arise in 
him. One is to make a Sankalpa (resolve) of twelve years before one 
starts with this Vrata. In cases of incapability, a period of one year or 
six months, or three months or at least twelve days are to be 
adopted. That Guru is considered very cruel and his knowledge will 
come to an end who hesitates and does not impart the knowledge of 
the Vedas and other things to him who is purified by observing this 
S’irovrata. Know him certainly as a very merciful Guru who illumines 
the heart by Brahma Vidya just as God is very merciful and 
compassionate to all the living beings. One who performs one's own 
Dharmas for many births, acquires particular faith in this S’irovrata; 
others can have no faith in this. Rather he gets animosity for this 
vrata, because of the abundance of ignorance in him. So one ought 
never to advise on spiritual knowledge to an enemy who has no 
faith, rather who has hatred for any such thing. Those only that are 
purified by the observance of S’irovrata are entitled to Brahma Vidya; 
and none others. So the Vedas command Those are to be 
advised on Brahma Vidya who have performed S’irovrata. Even the 
animal becomes freed of his animalism, as a result of this vrata; no 
sin occurs in killing that animal; this is the decision of the Vedanta. It 
has been repeatedly uttered by Javala Risi that the Dharma of the 
Brahmanas is to put on the Tripundra (three curved lines of ashes on 
the forehead). The householders are instructed to put on this 
Tripundra by repeating the mantra “triyamvaka”' with Om prefixed. 
Those that are in the stage of the Bhiksus (Sannyasis, etc.,) are to 
put on this Tripundra uttering thrice the mantra “Om Hasah.” Such is 
regularly stated in Javala S’ruti. The house holders and the 
Vanaprasthis (foresters) are to put on this Tripundra, uttering 
Triyamvaka mantra purified with “Haum” the pranava of S’iva 
prefixed. 



Those that are the Brahmacharis are to use daily this Tripundra 
uttering the mantra “Medhavi,” etc. The Brahmanas are to apply the 
ashes in three curved lines on the forehead. The God S’iva is always 
hidden under the cover of ashes; so the S’aivas, the devotees of 
S’iva are to use the Tripundra. The Brahmanas are to use daily this 
Tripundra. Brahma is the Prime Brahmin. When He used Tripundra 
on His forehead, what need to tell, then, that every Brahman ought 
always to use it! Never fail, out of error, to besmear your body with 
the ashes as prescribed in the Vedas and worship the S’iva Lingam. 
The Sannyasins are to apply Tripundra on their forehead, arms, 
chest, uttering the Triyamvaka mantra with Om prefixed and also the 
five lettered mantra of S'iva “Om Namah S’ivaya.” The Brahmacharis 
should use Tripundra of ashes, obtained from their own fire, uttering 
the mantra “Triyayusam Jamadagneh,” etc., or the mantra 
“Medhavi”, etc. The S’udras in the service of the Brahmins are to use 
the ashes with devotion, with the mantra “Namah S’ivaya.” The other 
ordinary persons can use the Tripundra without any mantra. To 
besmear the body all over with ashes and to put on the Tripundra is 
the essence of all Dharma; therefore this should be used always. 

The ashes from the Agnihotra Sacrifice or from Virajagni (Viraja fire) 
are to be carefully placed on a clean and pure basin. Cleansing 
hands and feet, one is to sip (perform Achamana) twice, and then, 
taking the ashes in the hand, utter the five Brahma mantras 
“Sadyoyatam prapadyami,” etc., and perform short Pranayama 
thrice; he is, then, to utter the seven mantras “Fire is ashes,” “water 
is ashes,” “earth is ashes” “Teja is ashes,” “wind is ashes,” “ether is 
ashes,” “All this whatsoever is ashes” and purify and impregnate the 
ashes with the mantra by blowing out air through the mouth. 

Then one is to think of Maha Deva, repeating the mantra “Om 
Apojyoti,” etc., and apply dry ashes of white colour all over the body 
and become sinless. After this he is to meditate on the Maha Visnu, 
the Lord of the universe and on the Lord of the waters and repeat 
again the mantras “Fire is ashes” and mix water with the ashes. He 



is, then, to think of S’iva and apply ashes on his forehead. He is to 
think of the ashes as S’iva Himself and then, with mantras 
appropriate to his own As'rama (stages of life) use the Tripundra on 
his forehead, chest and shoulders. 


By the middle finger and ringfinger he is to draw the two lines of the 
ashes from the left to the right and by his thumb draw a third line of 
ashes from the right to the left. These Tripundras are to be used in 
the morning, midday and in the evening. 


Here ends the Ninth chapter of the Eleventh Book on the rules of 
S'irovrata in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 10. On The Subject Of Gauna Bhasma 


1-33. Narayana said O Knower of Brahma! O Narada! The ashes 
prepared from ordinary fire are secondary (Gauna). The greatness of 
this secondary ashes is to be considered by no means trifling; this 
also destroys the darkest ignorance and reveals the highest 
knowledge. It is of various kinds. Amongst the secondary ashes, that 
prepared from Virajagni is the best; it is equivalent to that obtained 
from Agnihotra Yajha and it is as glorious. The ashes obtained from 
the marriage sacrificial fire, that obtained from the burning of the 
Samidh fuel, what is obtained from the conflagration of fire are 
known as the secondary ashes. The Brahmanas, Ksattriyas and 
Vais'yas should use the ashes from the Agnihotra and the Viraja 
Fire. For the householders, the ashes from the marriage sacrificial 
fire are good. For the Brahmacharis, the ashes from the Samid fuel 
are good and for the S’udras the fire of the cooking place of the Veda 
knowing Brahmanas is good. For the other persons, the ashes 
obtained from the conflagration of fire are good. Now I will talk of the 
origin of the ashes obtained from the Viraja fire. The chief season of 
the Viraja fire sacrifice is the Full-moon night with Chitra asterism 
with the Moon. If this does not take place, the sacrifice may be 
performed at other seasons; and it should be remembered that the fit 
place is where one adopts as one's dwelling place. The auspicious 
field, garden or forest is also commendable for the above sacrifice. 
On the Trayodas'i Tithi, the thirteenth night preceding the full-moon 
night, one is to complete one's bathing and Sandhya; then one is to 
worship one's Guru and bow down before Him. Then, receiving his 
permission, the sacrificer is to put on pure clothing and perform the 
special Puja. Then with his white sacrificial thread, white garlands, 
and white sandal paste one is to sit on the Kus'a seat with sacrificial 
(Kus'a) grass in one's hands. With his face towards the east or north 
he is to perform Pranayama thrice. 



Then he is to meditate on S’iva and Bhagavati and get mentally their 
permissions. “O Deva Bhagavan! O Mother Bhagavati! I will perform 
this vow for my life-time.” Thus making the resolve, he should start 
with this sacrifice. But this is to be known that this Vrata can be 
performed for twelve years, for six years, for three years, for one 
year, for six months, for twelve days, for six days, for three days, 
even at least for one day. But in every case, he must take mentally 
the permission of the Deva and the Devi. Now, to perform the Viraja 
Homa, one is to light the fire according to one's Grihya Sutras and 
then perform Homa with ghee, Samidh (fuel) or with charu (an 
oblation of rice, milk, and sugar boiled together). Then on the 
fourteenth lunar day (Chaturdas'i) one is to pray “Let the tattvas 
(principles) in me be purified” and then perform the Homa ceremony 
with Samidh, etc., as above-mentioned. Now recollecting that “My 
principles in my body are purified,” he is to offer oblations to the fire. 
In other words, uttering “Priththitattvas me sudhyatam jyotiraham 
viraja vipapma bhuyasam Svaha” one is to offer oblations to the Fire. 
Thus uttering the five element (Mahabhutas), five tanmatras, five 
Karmendriyas (organs of action), five Jhanendriyas (organs of 
perception), five Pranas, seven dhatus Tvak, etc., mind, buddhi 
(intellect), Ahamkara (egoism), Sattva, Raja, Tamah gunas, Prakriti, 
Purusa, Raga, Vidya, Kala (arts etc,) Daiva (Fate), Kala (time), Maya 
S’uddhavidya, Mahes'vara, Sada S’iva, S’akti S’ivatattva, etc., 
respectively by its own name, one is to offer oblations to the fire by 
the five-lettered Viraja Mantra; then the sacrificer will become pure. 
Then form a round ball of fresh cowdung and purifying it by Mantram 
place it on fire and carefully watch it. On that day, the devotee is to 
take Havisyanna (a sacred food of boiled rice with ghee). On the 
morning of the Chaturdas'i, he is to perform his daily duties as above 
and then to perform Homa on that fire; uttering the five lettered 
Mantra. He is not to take any food the rest of the time. On the next 
day, that is, on the full-moon day, after performing the morning 
duties, he is to do the Homa ceremony, uttering the Five lettered 
Mantra and then take leave of the Fire (invoked for worship). He is, 
then, to raise up the ashes. Then the devotee is to keep data (matted 
hair) or to shave clean his head or to keep only one lock of hair on 



the crown of the head. He is to take his bath, then; and if he can, 
then he should be naked or put on a red coloured cloth, hide, or one 
piece of rag or bark; he is to take a staff and a belt. Washing his 
hands and feet and sipping twice he by his two hands, is to pulverise 
the ashes and, uttering the six Atharvan Mantras, “Fire is ashes” and 
so forth, apply ashes from his head to foot. Then, as before, he is to 
apply ashes, gradually to his arms, etc., and all over the body 
uttering the Pranava of S’iva, “Vam, Vam.” He is to put on the 
Triyayusa Tripundra on his forehead. After he has done this, the Jiva 
(the embodied self) becomes S’iva (the Free Self) and he should 
behave himself like S’iva. O Narada! Thus, at the three Sandhya- 
periods; he is to do like this. This Pas’upata vrata is the source of 
enjoyment as well as liberation and as well as of the cessation of all 
brutal desires. By the performance of this vrata the devotee is to free 
himself gradually of his animal feelings and then to worship 
Bhagavan Sada S’iva in the form of a phallic symbol. The above 
bath ashes is highly meritorious and it is the source of all happiness. 
By holding the ashes, one's longevity is prolonged, one gets even 
great bodily strength, becomes healthy and his beauty increases and 
he gets nourishment. This using of ashes is for the preservation of 
one's own self; it is the source of one's good and of all sorts of 
happiness and prosperity. Those who use ashes (Bhas'ma) are free 
from the danger of plague and other epidemic diseases; this bhasma 
is of three sorts as it leads to the attainment of peace, nourishment, 
or to the fufilment of all desires. 


Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the subject 
Gauna Bhasma (secondary ashes) in the Mahapuranam S’rimad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 11. On The Description Of The 
Greatness Of The Three Kinds Of Bhasmas 


Narada asked O Bhagavan! How is the above Bhasma of three 
kinds? I am eager to hear this. Kindly describe this to me. Narayana 
said O Narada! I am now talking of the three kinds of ashes; 
hearing this even destroys one's sins and brings in good fame. 
When a cow evacuates her dung, just as the cow dung leaves her 
and is far from reaching the ground, one should catch it with one's 
hand and this cow-dung burnt with “Sadyojatadi,” i.e., Brahma 
Mantra, becomes ashes which are called “S’antika Bhasma,” i.e., 
ashes producing peace. Before the cowdung is about to reach the 
ground, the devotee should take it with his hand and uttering the six 
lettered Mantra, he is to burn the cowdung. The ashes from this are 
called Paustik Bhasma, i.e., ashes leading to nourishment. 


If the cowdung be burned with the Mantra “Haum,” the ashes of this 
are called “Kamada Bhasma,” i.e., ashes leading to the granting of 
desires. O Narada! On the full moon day, new moon day or on the 
eighth lunar day, a man is to get up from his bed early in the morning 
and be pure and go the cow enclosure. He is to salute the cows and 
take the cowdung, uttering the Mantra Haum. If he be a Brahmin, he 
is to collect the white cow dung; if he be a Ksattriya, he would take 
the red cow dung; a Vais'ya, yellow cow dung and if he be a S’udra, 
he would take the black cow dung. Then by the mantra “Namah” he 
is to form that into a ball and cover it with the husk of rice or some 
other grain and dry it in a sacred place, repeating the mantra 
“Haum.” Bring fire from a forest or from the house of a Veda-knowing 
Brahmin and reduce the cowdung to ashes by this mantra, uttering 
the mantra Haum. Next take out the ashes carefully from the fire 
place (Agni Kunda) and place it in a new jar or pot, again 
remembering the mantra “Haum”. Mix with the ashes the Ketaki 
dust, the Patala flower dust, the root of the fragrant grass called khas 



khas, saffron and other sweet scented things with the mantra 
“Satyojatam prapadyami,” etc. First perform the water bath, then the 
bath of the ashes. In case one cannot have the water bath, one is to 
have the ash bath. Washing the hands, feet and head with the 
mantra “Is'anah Sarvavidyanam,” etc., and uttering “Tatpurusa” one 
is to besmear one's face with ashes and by the mantra “Aghora” 
apply ashes on one's chest; with the mantra Vamadeva. He is to use 
ashes on his navel; and with the mantra “Sadyo data,” etc., all over 
his body; he is to quit his former cloth and put on another fresh cloth. 
Wash your hands and feet and sip (do Achaman). It will serve the 
purpose if one simply uses Tripundrak and if one does not besmear 
the whole body with ashes. Before the midday one is to use Bhasma 
with water; but after the midday with dry ashes one is to draw the 
Tripundra lines of ashes with the forefinger, middlefinger and 
ringfinger. The head, forehead, ears, neck, heart, and the arms are 
the places whereon the Tripundras are used. On the head the ashes 
are applied with five fingers and with the mantra “Haum”; on the 
forehead, the Tripundra is applied with mantra Svaha by the 
forefinger, mindlefinger and ringfinger; on the right ear, it is applied 
with “Sadyojata” mantra; on the left ear, with “Vamadeva” Mantra; on 
the neck with Aghora mantra by the middlefinger; on the chest with 
“Namah” mantra by the forefing middlefinger and ringfinger; on the 
right arm with vasat mantra by the three fingers; on the left arm with 
“Ham” mantra by the three fingers; and on the navel, the ashes are 
to be applied with the mantra Is'anah sarva devanam by the 
middlefinger. The first line in every Tripundra is Brahma; the second 
line is Visnu; and the third, the topmost line is Maha Deva. The line 
of ashes that is marked by one finger is Is'vara. The head is the 
place of Brahma; the forehead is the site of Is'vara; the two ears are 
the seats of the two As'vins and the neck is where Ganes'a resides. 
The Ksattriyas, Vais'yas, and S’udras are to use Tripundras without 
any mantra; they are also not to use the ashes on the whole of the 
body. The lowest classes (e.g. the chandalas, etc.,) and the 
uninitiated persons are to use the Tripundraks without any mantra. 



Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the 
description of the greatness of the three kinds of Bhasmas in the 
Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 12. On The Greatness In Holding The 
Tripundra And Bhasma 


1-20. S’n Narayana said O Devarsi Narada! Hear now the great 
secret and the fruits of besmearing one's body with ashes, yieding all 
desires. The pure cowdung of the Kapila (brown) cow is to be taken 
up by the hand before it reaches the ground. It should not be like 
mire, i.e., not like a liquid; it should not be also very hard nor should 
it emit a bad stench. And in case if the cowdung that has already 
fallen on the earth, has to be taken, it should be scraped off from the 
top and bottom; make it into a ball and then burn it in a pure fire, 
repeating the principal mantra. Take the ash and tie it in a piece of 
cloth and keep it in a pot. The pot in which the ashes are to be kept 
should be nice and good, hard, clean and sprinkled over for 
purification. Uttering the principal mantra, one is to keep the ashes in 
the pot. The pot may be of metal, wood, earth, or cloth; or it can be 
kept in any other nice pot. The ashes can be kept in a silken bag 
where the mohurs are kept. In going to a distant land, the devotee 
can take the ashes himself or kept with his accompanying servant. 
When it is to be given to somebody, it is to be given with both the 
hands; never with one hand. Never keep it in an unholy place. Never 
apply feet to the ashes, nor throw it in an ordinary place nor ever 
cross it by your legs. Use always the ashes after purifying it with 
mantra. These rules of holding the Bhasma are according to the 
Smritis. By holding Bhasma in this way, the devotee becomes, no 
doubt, like S’iva. The ashes, that the Vaidik devotees of S'iva 
prepare are to be taken with devotion. All can ask for that. But the 
ashes that the followers of the Tantra cult prepare, are taken by the 
Tantriks only; it is prohibited to the Vaidiks. The S’udras, Kapalikas, 
and other heretics (e.g., Jains, Buddhists) can use the Tripundras. 
Never do they conceive in their minds that they would not take the 
Tripundra. The holding on of Bhasma (ashes) is according to the 
Vedas. Therefore one who does not apply it falls down. The 
Brahmanas must use the Tripundras, repeating the mantra; and they 



are to besmear their whole body with ashes; if they don't do so, they 
are surely fallen. He can never expect to get liberation even after koti 
births who does not besmear his body with ashes devotedly and who 
does not hold the Tripundras. O Narada! The vile man who does not 
hold Bhasma duly, know the birth of that man as futile as is the birth 
of a hog. Consider that body as a burning ground which does not 
bear the Tripundra marks. The virtuous man should not cast a glance 
at him even. Fie on that forehead which does not carry the 
Tripundra! Fie on that village which has not a single temple of S’iva! 
Fie on that birth which is void of the worship of S’iva! Fie on that 
knowledge which is void of the knowledge of S’iva. Know them to be 
the slanderers of S’iva who mock at Tripundra. Those that put on the 
Tripundras, bear S’iva in their forehead. The Brahmin who is 
Niragnik (without the holy fire) is not nice in every way. So if the 
worship of S’iva be not done with any Tripundra is not praiseworthy, 
even it be attended with abundance of other offerings. Those who do 
not besmear their bodies with ashes or who do not use the 
Tripundras, get their previous good deeds converted into bad ones. 


21-42. Unless the Tripundra mark is taken up according to the 
S’astras, the Vaidik Karmas (works) or those performed according to 
the Smritis prove injurious; the good works whatsoever done by any 
man count for nothing; the holy words heard seem as if unheard and 
the study of the Vedas counted as if not studied. 


The study of the Vedas, Sacrifices, Charities, asceticisms, vows and 
fastings of that man, who does not use the Tripundra, all become 
fruitless. Without using Bhasma (ashes) if one wants liberation, then 
that desire is equivalent to live after taking poison. There is no doubt 
in this. The Creator has not made the forehead vertically high nor 
round; but he has made it slightly slanting and curved fit to have the 
Tripundra. Making thus the forehead, the Creator wants, as it were, 
to inform everyone that every one ought to use Tripundra marks; the 



curved lines also are made visible for this purpose. Still the igorant 
illiterate man does not put up the Tripundra. Unless the Brahmanas 
use the curved Tripundras, their meditation won't be successful; they 
will not have liberation, knowledge, nor their asceticism would bear 
any fruit. As the S’udras have no right in the study of the Vedas, so 
the Brahmans have not any right to perform the worship of S’iva, 
etc., unless they use the Tripundras. First of all, facing eastward, and 
washing hands and feet, he ought to make a resolve and then he 
takes a bath of the ashes mentally, controlling his breath. Then 
taking the ashes of the Agnihotra sacrifice he is to put some ashes 
on his own head, uttering “Is'ana” mantra. Then he is to recite the 
Purusa S’ukta Mantra and apply ashes on his face; with the Aghora 
mantra on his chest; with the Vamadeva mantra, on his anus; with 
Sadyojata mantra on his legs; and with the mantra Om, he is to 
besmear his whole body with ashes. This is called the bath of fire by 
the Munis. So bring all the actions to a successful issue one is to 
take first of all this bath of fire. Washing his hands, then, he is to 
make Achaman duly; and, according to the above-mentioned rules, 
he is to apply ashes on his forehead, heart, and all round the neck 
with the five mantras above-mentioned; or with each mantra he is to 
apply the Tripundras. Thus all works are fructified and he gets the 
right to do all the Vaidik actions. The S’udras, even, are not to use 
the ashes touched by the lowest classes. All the actions ordained by 
the S'astras are to be done after being besmeared with ashes of the 
Agnihotra sacrifice; otherwise no action will bear any fruit. All his 
truth, purity, Japam, offering, oblations to the sacrifice, bathing in the 
holy place of pilgrimage, and worshipping the gods become useless, 
who does not hold Tripundra. No fear of disease, sins, famine, or 
robbers comes to the Brahmins who use Tripundra and rosary of 
Rudraksa and thus remain always pure. In the end, they get the 
Nirvana liberation. During the time of Sraddhas (solemn obsequies 
performed in honour of the manes of deceased ancestors) the 
Brahmins purify the rows where persons are fed; so much so that the 
Devas glorify them. One must use the Tripundra marks before one 
performs any Sraddha, Japam sacrifice, offering oblations or 
worshipping the Visvedevas; then one gets deliverance from the 



jaws of death. O Narada! I am now speaking further of the greatness 
in holding the Bhasma; listen. 


Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the 
greatness in holding the Tripundra and Bhasma in the Mahapuranam 
S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 13. On The Greatness Of Bhasma 


1-20. Narayana said O Best of Munis! What shall I describe to you 
the effects of using the Bhasma! Only applying the ashes takes away 
the Mahapatakas (great sins) as well as other minor sins of the 
devotee. I speak this truly, very truly unto you. Now hear the fruits of 
using simply the ashes. By using Bhasma, the knowledge of Brahma 
comes to the Yatis; the desires of enjoyments are eradicated; the 
improvement is felt in all the virtuous actions of the householders 
and the studies of the Vedas and other S’astras of the Brahmacharis 
get their increase. The S’udras get merits in using Bhasmas and the 
sins of others are destroyed. To besmear the body with ashes and to 
apply the curved Tripundras is the source of good to all beings. The 
S’ruti says so. That this implies the performance of sacrifices by all, 
is also asserted in the S’rutis. To apply ashes to the whole of the 
body and to use Tripundra is common to all the religions; it has 
nothing, in principle, contradictory to others. So the S’ruti says. This 
Tripundra and the besmearing with ashes is the special mark of the 
devotees of S’iva; this again is asserted in the S’ruti. This Bhasma 
and the Tripundra are the special marks by which one is 
characterised; it is said so in the Vaidik S’ruti. S’iva, Visnu, Brahma, 
Indra, Hiranyagarbha, and their Avataras, Varuna and the whole host 
of the Devas all gladly used this Tripundra and ashes. Durga, 

Laksmi, and Sarasvati, etc., all the wives of the gods daily anoint 
their bodies with ashes and use the Tripundras. So even the Yaksas, 
Raksasas, Gandharbhas, Sidhas, Vidyadharas, and the Munis have 
applied Bhasma and Tripundra. This holding on of ashes is not 
prohibited to anybody; the Brahmanas, Ksattriyas, Vais’yas, S’udras, 
mixed castes, and the vile classes all can use this Bhasma and 
Tripundra. O Narada! In my opinion they only are the Sadhus (saints) 
who use this Tripundra and besmear their bodies with ashes. In 
seducing this Lady Mukti (liberation is personified here as a lady) 
one is to have this gem of S’iva Lingam, the five lettered Mantra 
Namah S’ivaya as the loving principle, and holding on the ashes as 



the charming medicine (as in seducing any ordinary woman, gems, 
jewels and ornaments, love and charming medicines are necessary). 
O Narada! Know the place where the person, who has besmeared 
the holy with ashes and who has used Tripundra takes his food as 
where S’ankara and S’ankari have taken their food together. Even if 
anybody himself not using the Bhasma, follows another who has 
used the Bhasma, he will be soon honoured in the society even if he 
be a sinner. What more than this, if anybody himself not using the 
ashes, praises another who uses the Bhasma, he is freed from all 
his sins and gets soon honour and respect in the society. All the 
studies of the Vedas come to him though he has not studied the 
Vedas, all the fruits of hearing the S’rutis and the Puranas come to 
him, though he has not heard them, all the fruits of practised Dharma 
come to him though he has not practised any, if he always uses this 
Tripundra on his forehead and gives food to a beggar who uses 
Tripundra on his forehead. Even in courtries as Bihar (Kikata, etc., 
that have got a bad name) if there be a single man in the whole 
country whose body is besmeared with ashes and who uses this 
Tripundra, that is considered then as Kas’i (Benares city). Anybody, 
of a bad or of a good character, be he a Yogi or a sinner, using 
Bhasma, is worshipped like my son, Brahma. O Narada! Even if an 
hypocrite uses Bhasma, he will have a good future, which cannot be 
attained even by performing hundreds of sacrifices. If anybody uses 
Bhasma daily either through good companion or through neglect, he 
will be entitled, like me, to the highest worship. O Narada! Brahma, 
Visnu, MahesVara, Parvati, Laksmi, Sarasvati and all the other 
Devas become satisfied with simply holding on this Bhasma. The 
merits that are obtained by using only the Tripundra, cannot be 
obtained by gifts, sacrifices, severe austerities, and going to sacred 
places of pilgrimages. They cannot give one-sixteenth part of the 
result that accrues from holding the Tripundra. As a King recognises 
a person as his own, whom he has given some object of recognition, 
so Bhagavan S’ankara knows the man who uses Tripundras as His 
own person. They that hold Tripundras with devotion can have Bhola 
Natha under their control; no distinction is made here between the 
Brahmanas and Chandalas. Even if anybody be fallen from the state 



of observing all the Acharas or rules of conduct proper to his 
As’rama and if he be faulty in not attending to all his duties, he will 
be Mukta (freed) if he has used even once this Bhasma Tripundra. 
Never bother yourself with the caste or the family of the holder of the 
Tripundras. Only see whether the sign Tripundra exists in his 
forehead. If so, consider him entitled to respect. O Narada! There is 
no mantra higher than this S’iva Mantra; there is no Deity higher than 
S’iva; there is no worship of greater merit-giving powers than the 
worship of S’iva; so there is no Tirtha superior to this Bhasma. This 
Bhasma is not an ordinary thing; it is the excellent energy (semen 
virile) of fire of the nature of Rudra. All sorts of troubles vanish, all 
sorts of sins are destroyed by this Bhasma. The country where the 
lowest castes reside with their bodies besmeared with ashes, is 
inhabited always by Bhagavan S’ankara, Bhagavati Lima, the 
Pramathas (the attendants of S’iva) and by all the Tirthas. Bhagavan 
S’ankara, first of all, held this Bhasma as an ornament to his body by 
purifying it first with “Sadyo data,” etc., the five mantras. Therefore if 
anybody uses the Bhasma Tripundra according to rules on his 
forehead, the writings written at the time of his birth by Vidhata 
Brahma will all be cancelled, if they had been bad. There is no doubt 
in this. 


Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the 
greatness of Bhasma in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 14. On The Greatness In Holding The 
Bibhuti 


1-17. Narayana said O Narada! Whatever is given as charities to 
any man besmeared with the holy ashes, takes away instantly all the 
sins of the donor. The S’rutis, Smritis, and all the Puranas declare 
the greatness of this Bhasma. So the twice-born must accept this. 
Whoever holds this Tripundra, of this holy ashes at the three 
Sandhya times, is freed from all his sins and goes to the region of 
S’iva. The Yogi who takes a bath of ashes throughout his body 
during the three Sandhyas, gets his Yoga developed soon. By this 
bath of ashes, many generations are lifted up. O Narada! This ash 
bath is many times superior to the water bath. To take once a bath of 
ashes secures to one all the merits acquired by bathing in all the 
sacred places of pilgrimages. There is no doubt in this. By this bath 
of ashes, all the Mahapatakas (great heinous sins) and other minor 
sins as well are instantly destroyed as heaps of wood are brought 
down to ashes in a moment by the fire. No bath is holier than this 
one. This is first mentioned by S’iva and He took Himself this bath. 
Since then this bath of ashes has been taken with great care by 
Brahma and the other Devas and the Munis for their own good in all 
the virtuous actions. This bath of ashes is termed the bath of fire. So 
he who applies ashes on his head, gets the state of Rudra while he 
is in this body of five elements. Those who are delighted to see 
persons with this ashes on their bodies are respected by the Devas, 
Asuras, and Munis. He who honours and gets up on seeing a man 
besmeared with ashes is respected even by Indra, the Lord of 
Heavens. Even if anybody eats any uneatables, then the sin incurred 
thereby won’t touch him, if his body be then besmeared with ashes. 
He who first takes a water bath and then an ash-bath, be he a 
Brahmachari or an house-holder or an anchorite (Vanaprasthi) is 
freed of all sins and gets in the end the highest state. Specially for 
the Yatis (ascetics), this ash bath is very necessary. This ash bath is 
superior to the water bath. For the bonds of Nature, this pleasure 



and pain, are cut asunder by this ash bath. The Munis know this 
Prakriti as moist and wet; and therefore Prakriti binds men. If 
anybody desires to cut asunder this bondage of the body, he will find 
no other remedy for this in the three worlds than this Holy Bath of 
ashes. 


18-43. In ancient days the ashes were first offered to the Devi gladly 
by the Devas for their protection, their good and purification, when 
they first saw the ashes. Therefore anybody who takes this bath of 
fire, gets all his sins destroyed and he goes to S’iva Loka. He who 
daily uses this ashes has not to suffer from the oppression of the 
Raksasas, Pis’achas, Putanas and the other Bhutas or from disease, 
leprosy, the chronic enlargement of spleen, all sorts of fistulae, from 
eighty sorts of rheumatism, sixty four kinds of bilious diseases, 
twenty two varieties of phlegmatic diseases and from tigers, thieves, 
and other vicious planetary influences. Rather he gets the power to 
suppress all these as a lion kills easily a mad elephant. Anybody 
who first mixes the ashes with pure cold water and then besmears 
his body with that and puts on the Tripundras, attains soon the 
Highest Brahma. He who holds the Tripundra of ashes becomes 
sinless and goes to the Brahma loka. He can even wipe off the 
ordnances of the fate on his forehead to go to the jaws of Death, if 
he uses, according to the S’astras, the Tripundras on his forehead. If 
the ashes be used on the neck, then the sin, incurred through the 
neck, is completely destroyed. If the ashes be used on the neck, 
then the sin incurred by the neck, in eating uneatable things is 
entirely destroyed. If the ashes be held on the arms, then the sin 
incurred by the arms is destroyed. If it be held on the breast, the sin 
done mentally is destroyed. If it be held on the navel, the sin incurred 
by the generative organ is destroyed. If it be held on the anus, then 
the sin incurred by the anus is destroyed. And if it be held on the 
sides, then the sin incurred in embracing other’s wives is destroyed. 
So, know fully, to use ashes is highly commendable. Everywhere 
three curved lines of ashes are to be used. Know these three lines 



as Brahma, Visnu and Mahes’a; Daksinagni, Garhapatya fire and 
Ahavaniva fire; the Sattva, Rajas and Tamas qualities, Heaven, 
earth and Patala (nether regions). If the wise Brahmin holds properly 
the ashes his Mahapatakas are destroyed. He is not involved in any 
sin. Rather he, without any questionings, gets his liberation. All the 
sins, in the body besmeared with ashes, are burnt down by the 
ashes, which is of the nature of fire, into ashes. He is called 
Bhasmanistha (a devotee of Bhasma, i.e., ashes) who takes a bath 
of ashes, who besmears his body with ashes, who use the 
Tripundras of ashes, who sleeps in ashes. He is called also 
Atmanistha, a devotee of Atman (Self). At the approach of such a 
man, the Demons, Pis’achas, and very serious diseases run away to 
a distance. There is no doubt in this. In as much as these ashes 
reveal the knowledge of Brahma, it is called Bhasita from Bhasma, to 
shine; because it eats up the sins, it is called Bhasma; because it 
increases the eight supernatural powers Anima, etc., it is called 
Bhuti; because it protects the man who uses it, it is called “Raksa.” 
As the sins are all destroyed by the mere remembrance of Bhagavan 
Rudra, so seeing the person using the Tripundra, the demons, bad 
spirits and other vicious hosts of spirits fly away quickly, trembling 
with fear. As a fire burns a great forest by its own strength, so this 
bath of ashes burns the sins of those who are incessantly addicted 
to sins. Even if at the time of death one takes a bath of ashes, 
though he has committed an inordinate amount of vices, all his sins 
are soon destroyed. By this bath of ashes, the Self is purified, the 
anger is destroyed; the senses are calmed down. The man who uses 
even once this Bhasma comes to Me; he has not to take any more 
births in future. On Monday Amavasya (also on the full moon day) if 
one sees the S’iva Lingam, with his body besmeared all over with 
ashes, one’s sins will all be destroyed. (All the sins are not seen; 
hence the tithi is called Amavas.) If people use Bhasma daily, all 
their desires will be fructified whether they want longevity, or 
prosperity or Mukti. The Tripundra that represents Brahma, Visnu 
and S’iva is very sacred. Seeing the man with Tripundra on, the 
fierce Raksasas or mischievous creatures flee to a distance. There is 
no doubt in this. After doing the S’aucha (necessary cleanliness) and 



other necessary things, one bathes in pure cold water and besmears 
his body with ashes from head to foot. By taking the water bath only, 
the outward unclean things are destroyed. But the ash bath not only 
cleanses the outer external uncleanliness but cleanses also all the 
internal uncleanliness. So even if one does not take the water bath, 
one ought to take this ash bath. There is to be no manner of doubt in 
this. 


44-47. All the religious actions performed without this ash bath seem 
as if no actions are done at all. This ash bath is stated in the Vedas. 
Its another name is the Fire Bath. By this ash bath both outside and 
inside are purified. So a man who uses ashes gets the entire fruit of 
worshipping S’iva. By the water Bath only the outside dirt is 
removed; but by this bath of ashes, outside dirts and inside dirts, 
both are fully removed. If this water bath be taken many times daily, 
still without an ash bath, one’s heart is not purified. What more shall I 
speak of the greatness of ashes, the Vedas only appreciate its 
glories rightly! Yea, very rightly! 


48-50. Or Maha Deva, the Gem of all the Devas, knows the 
greatness of this Bhasma. Those who perform rites and works 
prescribed by the Vedas, without taking this bath of ashes, do not get 
even a tithe of the fruits of their works done. Only that man will be 
entitled to the entire fruits of the Vedas who perform this bath of 
ashes duly. This is the opinion of the Vedas. This bath of ashes 
purifies more the things that are already pure; thus the S’ruti says. 
That wretch who does not take the bath of ashes as aforesaid is a 
Great Sinner. There is no doubt in this. By this bath greater 
interminable merits accrue than what is obtained by innumerable 
baths taken by the Brahmanas on the Varuni momentous occasion. 
So take this bath carefully in the morning, midday and evening. This 
bath of ashes is ordained in the Vedas. So know those who are 
against this bath mentioned in the Vedas, are verily fallen! After 



evacuating oneself of one’s urine and faeces, one ought to take this 
bath of ashes. Otherwise men will not be purified. Even if one 
performs duly the water bath and if one does not take this bath of 
ashes, that man will not be purified. So he cannot get any right to do 
any religious actions. After evacuating one’s abdomen of the 
outgoing air, after yawning, after holding sexual intercourses, after 
spitting and sneezing, and after easing oneself of phlegm, one ought 
to take this bath of ashes. O Narada! Thus I have described to you 
here the greatness of S’ri Bhasma. I am again telling you more of it 
specially. Listen attentively. 


Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the 
greatness in holding the Bibhuti (ashes) in the Mahapuranam S’ri 
Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 15. On The Rules Of Using The 
_ ^ 

Tripundra And Urdhapundra Marks 


1-10. Narayana said Only the twice born are to take this Tripundra 
on the forehead and the other parts of the body after carefully 
purifying the ashes by the mantra Agniriti Bhasma, etc. The 
Brahmans, Ksattriyas, and Vais’yas are known as the twiceborn, (the 
Dvijas). So the Dvijas ought to take daily this Tripundra with great 
care. O Brahmana! Those who are purified with the ceremony of the 
holy thread, are called the Dvijas. For these the taking of Tripundra 
as per S’ruti is very necessary. Without taking this Vibhuti, any good 
work done is as it were not done. There is no doubt in this. Even the 
japam of Gayatri is not well performed if this Bhasma be not used. O 
Best of Munis! The Gayatri is the most important and the chief thing 
of the Brahmanhood. But that is not advised if the Tripundra be not 
taken. O Munis! As long as the ashes born of Agni are not applied on 
the forehead, one is not entitled to be initiated in the Gayatri Mantra. 
O Brahman! Unless ashes be applied on the forehead, no one will 
recognise you as a Brahmana. For this reason I take this holding of 
the merit-giving Tripundra as the cause of the Brahmanhood. I speak 
this verily unto you, that he is recognised as a Brahmana and literary 
on whose forehead there is seen the white ashes purified by the 
mantra. He is entitled to the state of a Brahmana who is naturally 
very eager to collect the ashes as he collects the invaluable gems 
and jewels. 


11-20. Those who are not naturally eager to collect the Bhasma as 
they are naturally eager to collect gems and jewel, are to be known 
as Chandalas in some of their previous births. Those who are not 
naturally joyous in holding Tripundra, were verily Chandalas in their 
previous births; this I tell you truly very truly. 



Those who eat roots and fruits without holding ashes go to the 
terrible hells. He who worships S’iva without having Bibhuti on his 
forehead, that wretch is a S’iva hater and goes to hell after his death. 
He who does not hold Bibhuti is not entitled to any religious act. 


Without taking Bibhuti, if you make a gift of Tula Purusa made of 
gold, you won’t get any fruits. Rather you will have to go to hell! 


As the Brahmanas are not to perform their Sandhyas without their 
holy threads, so without this Bibhuti, one ought not also to perform 
one’s Sandhya. 


If at times a man by chance has no holy thread, he can do his 
Sandhya by muttering the Gayatri or by fasting. But there is no such 
rule in holding Bhasma. 


If one performs Sandhya, without having any Bibhuti, he is liable to 
incur a sin; as without holding this Bhasma, no right can come to him 
to perform his Sandhya. 


As a man of a lowest caste acts contrary and incurs a sin if he hears 
the Veda mantra, so a twice-born incurs a sin if he performs 
Sandhya without having his Tripundra. The twiceborn must therefore 
collect his thoughts with his heart intent on this Tripundra whether it 
be according to S’rauta or Smarta method; or in absence thereof the 
Laukika Bhasma. Of whatsoever sort is the Bhasma, it is always 
pure. In the Sandhya and other actions of worship, the twiceborn 
ought to be very careful and punctilious in using this Bhasma. 



21-31. No sin can enter into the body of one besmeared with ashes. 
For this reason, the Brahmanas ought always to use ashes with 
great care. One is to hold the Tripundra, six Angulas high or greater 
by the fore, middle and ring fingers of the right hand. If anybody uses 
Tripundra, shining and brilliant, and extending from eye to eye, he 
becomes, no doubt, a Rudra. The ring-finger is the letter “A,” the 
middle finger is “U” and the forefinger is “M”; so the Tripundra marks 
drawn by the above three fingers is of the nature of the three gunas. 
The Tripundra should be drawn by the middle, fore, and ring fingers 
in a reverse way (from the left of the forehead to its right). I will now 
tell you an anecdote, very ancient. Listen. Once Durvasa, the head 
of the ascetics, with his body besmeared with ashes and with 
Rudraksam, all over, on his body went to the region of the Pitris, 
uttering loudly, “O S’ankara, of the Form of All! O S’iva! O Mother 
Jagadambe, the Source of all auspiciousness!” The Pitris Kavya- 
Valas, etc., (Kavya Valanalah Somah Yamah schaivaryama Tatha, 
Agnisvattva, Varhisadah, Somapah Pitri Devatah) got up, received 
him heartily and gave him seats and shewed him great honours and 
respect and held many pure conversations with the Muni. During 
their talk, the sinners of the Kumbhipaka hell were crying, “Oh! Alas! 
We are killed, we are being killed. Oh! We are being burnt!” some 
others cried, “Oh! Oh! We are cut down.” Thus various cries and 
lamentations reached their ears. 


32-40. Hearing their piteous cries, Durvasa, the prince of the Risis, 
asked with a grievous heart the Pitris, “Who are those crying?” The 
Pitris replied There is a city close to our place called “Samyamani 
Puri” of the King Yama where the sinners are punished. Yama gives 
punishment to the sinners there. O Sinless One! In that city the King 
Yama lives with his terrible black-coloured messengers, the 
personifications of Kala (the Destruction). For the punishment of the 
sinners, eighty-six hells exist there. The place is being guarded 
always by the horrible messengers of Yama. Out of those hells, the 
hell named Kumbhipaka is very big and that is the chief of the hells. 



The ailings and torments of the sinners in the Kumbhipaka hell 
cannot be described in hundred years. O Muni! The S’iva-haters, the 
Visnu-haters, the DevT-haters are made to fall to this Kunda. Those 
who find fault with the Vedas, and blame the Sun, Ganes’a and 
tyrannise the Brahmanas fall down to this hell. Those who blame 
their mothers, fathers. Gurus, elder brothers, the Smritis and 
Puranas and those as well who take the Tapta Mudras (hot marks on 
their bodies) and Tapta S’ulas (i.e., those who being S’aivas act as 
they like) those who blame the religion (Dharma) go down to that 
hell. 


41-50. We hear constantly their loud piteous cries, very painful to 
hear; hearing which naturally gives rise to feelings of indifference 
(Vairagyam). Hearing the above words of the Piths, Durvasa, the 
prince of the Munis, went to the hell to see the sinners. O Muni! 
Going there, the Muni bent his head downwards and saw the sinners 
when, instantly the sinners began to enjoy pleasures more than 
those who enjoy in the Heavens. The sinners became exceedingly 
glad. Some began to sing, some began to dance, some began to 
laugh; some sinners began to play one with one another in great 
ecstasy. The musical instruments Mridanga, Muraja, lute, Dhakka, 
Dundubhis, etc., resounded with sweet sonorous tones (in 
accordance with five resonants). The sweet fragrant smell of the 
flowers of Vasanti creepers spread all round. Durvasa Muni became 
surprised to see all this. The messengers of Yama were startled and 
immediately went to their King Yama and said “O Lord! Our King! 
A wondrous event occurred lately. The sinners in the Kumbhipaka 
hell are now enjoying pleasures more than those in the Heavens. O 
Bibhu! How can this take place! We cannot make out the cause of 
this. O Deva! We all have become terrified and have come to you.” 
Hearing the words of the messengers, Dharmaraja, mounting on his 
great buffalo, came there instantly and seeing the state of the 
sinners sent news immediately to the Heavens. 



51-60. Hearing the news Indra came there with all the Devas, 

Brahma came there from His Brahmaloka; and Narayana came there 
from Vaikuntha. Hearing this, the regents of the quarters, the 
Dikpalas came there with all their attendants from their respective 
abodes. They all came there to the Kumbhipaka hell and saw that all 
the beings there are enjoying greater pleasures than those in the 
Heavens. They all were astonished to see this; and they could not 
make out why this had happened. “What a wonder is this! This 
Kunda has been built for the punishment of the sinners. When such 
a pleasure is now being felt here, the people won’t fear anything 
henceforth to commit sins. Why is this order of the Vedas created by 
God reversed? Why has God undone His own doing? What a 
wonder is this! Now a great miracle is before our sight.” Thus 
speaking, they remained at a fix. They could not make out the cause 
of this. In the meanwhile Bhagavan Narayana after consulting with 
the other Devas went with some Devas to the abode of S’ankara in 
Kailas’a. They saw there that S’ri Bhagavan S’ankara (with crescent 
of the Moon on His forehead) was playing there attended always by 
the Pramathas and adorned with various ornaments like a youth, 
sixteen years old. His parts of the body were very beautiful as if the 
mine of loveliness. He was conversing on various delightful subjects 
with His consort Parvati and pleasing Her mind. The four Vedas 
were there personified. Seeing Him, Narayana bowed down and 
informed him clearly of all the wonderful events. He said 


61-75. “O Deva! What is the cause of all this? We cannot make out 
anything! O Lord! Thou art omniscient. Thou knowest everything. So 
kindly mention how is this brought about!” Hearing Visnu’s words. 
Bhagavan S’ankara spoke graciously in sweet words, grave as the 
rumbling of a rain-cloud “O Visnu! Hear the cause of this. What 
wonder is there? This is all due to the greatness of Bhasma (ashes)! 
What cannot be brought about by Bhasma! The great S’aiva 
Durvasa went to see the Kumbhipaka hell, besmearing his whole 
body with Bhasma and looked downwards while he was looking at 



the sinners. At that time, accidentally a particle of Bhasma from his 
forehead was blown by air to the bodies of the sinners in the hell. 
Thereby they were freed of their sins and they got so much pleasure! 
Such is the greatness of Bhasma! Henceforth the Kumbhipaka will 
no more be a hell. It will be a Tirtha (holy place of pilgrimage) of the 
residents of the Pitrilokas. Whoever will bathe there will be very 
happy. There is no doubt in this. Its name will be henceforth the Pith 
Tirtha. 


O Sattama! My Lingam and the form of Bhagavati ought to be placed 
there. The inhabitants of the Pith Loka would worship them. This will 
be the best of all the Tirthas extant in the three Lokas. And if the 
PitrisVari there be worshipped, know that the worship of the Triloki is 
done. Narayana said Hearing thus the words of S’ankara, the 
Deva of the Devas, He thanked Him and, taking His permission 
came to the Devas and informed them of everything what S’ankara 
had said. Hearing this, the Devas nodded their heads and said, 
“Sadhu (well, very well)” and began to glorify the greatness of 
Bhasma. O Tormenter of the enemies! Hah, Brahma and the other 
Devas began to eulogise the glories of ashes. The Pitris became 
very glad to get a new Tirtha. The Devas planted a S’iva Lingam and 
the form of the Devi on the banks of the new Tirtha, and began to 
worship them regularly day by day. The sinners that were there 
suffering, all ascended on the celestial chariot and got up to Kailas’a. 
Even today they are all dwelling in Kailas’a and are known by the 
name of the Bhadras. The hell Kumbhipaka came to be built 
afterwards in another place. 


76-84. Since that day the Devas did not allow any other devotee of 
S’iva to go to the newly created hell Kumbhipaka. Thus I have 
described to you the excellent greatness of the Bhasma. O Muni! 
What more can there be than the glories of the Bhasma! O Best of 
Munis! Now I am telling you of the usage of Urdhapundra (the 



vertical marks) according to the proper province of the devotees. 
Listen. I will now speak what I have ascertained from the study of the 
Vaisnava S’astras, the measure of Urdhapundra, according to the 
Anguli measurements, the colour, mantra, Devata and the fruits 
thereof. Hear. The earth required is to be seen red from the crests of 
hills, the banks of the rivers, the place of S’iva (S’iva Ksettram), the 
ocean beaches, the ant-hill, or from the roots of the Tulasi plants. 

The earth is not to be had from any other places. The black coloured 
earth brings in peace, the red-colour earth brings in powers to bring 
another to one’s control; the yellow-coloured earth increases 
prosperity and the white-coloured earth gives Dharma (religion). If 
the Urdhapundra be drawn by the thumb, nourishment is obtained; if 
it be drawn by the middle finger, longevity is increased; if it be drawn 
by nameless or ring finger, food is obtained and if it be drawn by the 
fore finger, liberation is attained. So the Urdhapundras ought to be 
drawn by these fingers, only be careful to see that the nails do not 
touch at the time of making the mark. The shape of the Urdhapundra 
(the vertical mark or sign on the fore-head) is like a flame or like the 
opening bud of a lotus, or like the leaf of a bamboo, or like a fish, or 
like a tortoise or like a conch-shell. 


85-95. The Urdhapundra, ten Angulis high is the super best; nine 
Angulis high, is best; eight Angulis high, is good; the middling 
Urdhapundra is of three kinds as it is of seven Angulas, six Angulas, 
or five Angulas. The lowest Urdhapundra is again of three kinds as it 
is four Angulas, three Angulas or two Angulas high. On the 
Urdhapundra of the forehead, you must meditate Kes’ava, on the 
belly you must think of Narayana; on the heart, you must meditate on 
Madhava; and on the neck, you must meditate on Govinda. So on 
the right side of the belly, you must meditate on Madhusudana; on 
the roots of the ears, on Trivikrama; on the left belly, on Vamana; on 
the arms, on S’ridhara; on the ears, Hrisikes’a; on the back, 
Padmanabha; on the shoulders Damodara; and on the head 
Brahmarandhra you must meditate on Vasudeva. Thus the twelve 



names are to be meditated. In the morning or in the evening time 
when you are going to make the Puja or Homa, you are to take duly, 
single-in-intent, the above names and make the marks of 
Urdhapundras. Any man, with Urdhapundra on his head, is always 
pure, whether he be impure, or of unrighteous conduct or whether he 
commits a sin mentally. Wherever he dies, he comes to My Abode 
even if he be of a Chandala caste. My devotees ( Vira Vaisnavas or 
Mahavira Vaisnavas) who know My Nature must keep an empty 
space between the two lines of Urdhapundra of the form of the 
Visnupada (the feet of Visnu) and those who are my best devotees 
are to use nice Urdhapundras, made of turmeric powder, of the size 
of a spear (S’ula), of the form of the feet of Visnu (Visnu padah). 


96. The ordinary Vaisnavas are to use with Bhakti, the Urdhapundras 
without any empty space, but the form of it is to be like a flame, the 
blossom of a lily or like a bamboo leaf. 


97-110. Those who are Vaisnavas in name only can use 
Urdhapundra of both the kinds, with or without any empty space. 
They incur no sin if they use one without an empty space. But those 
who are My good devotees, incur sin if they do not keep an empty 
space between the two vertical lines (in the Urdhapundra three 
vertical lines are used). The Vaisnavas who use excellent vertical rod 
like Urdhapundras keeping an empty space in the middle and 
uttering the mantra “Kesvaya Namah” build My Temple there. In the 
beautiful middle space of Urdhapundra, the Undecaying Visnu is 
playing with Laksmi. That wretch, the twice-born who uses 
Urdhapundra without any empty apace kills Visnu and Laksmi, 
seated there. The stupid who uses Urdhapundra without a vacant 
space goes successively to twenty-one hells. The Urdhapundra 
should be of the size of a clear straight rod, lotus, flame, a fish with 
sharp straight edges and with vacant spaces between them. O Great 
Muni! The Brahmana should always use the Tripundra like the lock 



of hair on the crown of his head and like his Sacrificial thread; 
otherwise all his actions will be fruitless. Therefore in all ceremonies 
and actions the Brahmanas ought to use Urdhapundras of the form 
of a trident, a circle or of a square form. The Brahmana who knows 
the Vedas is never to use the semi-moonlike mark (Tilak) on his 
bead. The man who is of the Brahmin caste and follows the path of 
the Vedas should not even by mistake use any other mark than 
those above-mentioned. Other sorts of pundras (marks) that are 
mentioned in other Vaisnava S’astras for the attainment of fame, 
beauty, etc., the Veda-knowing Brahmanas should not use them. 
The Vaidik Brahmanas should not use even in error any other Tilaks 
than the curved Tripundras 


If, out of delusion, the man, following the path of the Vedas, uses 
other sorts of Tripundras, he would certainly go down to hell. 


111-118. The Veda-knowing Brahmanas would certainly go down to 
hell if they use other sorts of Tripundras on their bodies. Only the 
Tilakas, prescribed in the Vedas ought to be used by those who are 
devoted to the Vedas. Those who do not observe the duties of the 
Vedas would use Tilaks approved of by other S’astras. Those should 
use marks approved of by the Vedas whose Deity is that of the 
Vedas. Those who follow the Tantra S’astras different from the 
Vedas, should use marks approved of by the Tantras. 


Maha Deva is the Veda’s Deity and, ready to deliver from the 
bondages of the world. He has prescribed the Tilakas prescribed in 
the Vedas for the benefit of the devotees. The marks prescribed by 
Visnu, also a Deity of the Vedas, are also those of the Vedas. His 
other Avataras also use marks approved of by the Vedas. The 
Tripundras and the besmearing of the body with ashes are according 
to the Vedas. In the Tantra S’astra different from the Vedas, there is 



the usage of Tripundra and other marks. But they are not to be used 
by the Vaidiks. No never. 


Those who follow the path of the Vedas should use the curved 
Tripundras and Bhasma on their foreheads according to the rules 
prescribed in the Vedas. 


He who has obtained the highest state of Narayana, i.e., who has 
realised My Nature, ought to use always on their foreheads S’ula 
marks scented with fragrant sandalpaste. 


Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the rules of 
using the Tripundra and Urdhapundra marks in the Mahapuranam 
S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 16. On The Description Of Sandhya 
Upasana 


1-24. Narayana said Now I am speaking of the very holy 
Sandhyopasana method of Sandhya worship of Gayatri, the 
Presiding Deity of the morning, midday and evening, and of the 
twice-born. Listen. The greatness of using Bhasma has been 
described in detail. No further need be stated on the subject. I shall 
talk, first of all, of the morning Sandhya. The morning Sandhya is to 
be done early in the morning while the stars are visible. When the 
Sun is in the meridian, the midday Sandhya is to be performed; and 
while the Sun is visibly going down, the evening Sandhya is to be 
recited over. Now again, the distinctions are made in the above three 
Sandhyas The morning Sandhya with stars seen is the best; with 
stars disappeared, middling; and with the Sun risen above the 
horizon, inferior. So the evening Sandhya, again, is of three kinds 
best, middling, and inferior. When the Sun is visibly disappearing, the 
evening Sandhya is the best; when the Sun has gone down the 
horizon, it is middling and when the stars are visible, it is inferior. The 
Brahmanas are the root of the Tree, the Sandhya Vandanam; the 
Vedas are the branches; the religious actions are the leaves. 
Therefore its root should be carefully preserved. If the root be cut, no 
branches or leaves of the tree will remain. That Brahmana who 
knows not his Sandhya or who does not perform the Sandhyas is a 
living S’udra. That Brahmana after his death verily becomes a dog. 
Therefore the Sandhyas must be observed every day. Otherwise no 
right comes at all to do any action. At the sunrise and the sunset the 
time for Sandhya is two Dandas (48 minutes) and if Sandhya be not 
done or rather neglected in the interval, the Prayas’chitta (penance) 
is to he paid duly (performed duly). If the proper time for Sandhya 
expires, one more offering of Arghya is to be made in addition to the 
three Arghayas daily made or the Gayatri is to be repeated one 
hundred and eight times before the Sandhya is commenced. In 
whichever time any action ought to be done, worship, first of all, the 



Sandhya Devi, the Presiding Deity of that time and do the actions 
proper to that time afterwards. The Sandhya performed in dwelling 
houses is ordinary; the Sandhya done in enclosures of cows is 
middling and on the banks of the rivers is good and the Sandhya 
performed before the Devi’s temple or the Devi’s seat is very 
excellent. The Sandhyopasana ought to be done before the Devi, 
because that is the worship of the very Devi. The three Sandhyas 
done before the Devi give infinitely excellent fruits. There is no other 
work of the Brahmanas better than this Sandhya. One can rather 
avoid worshipping S’iva or Visnu; because that is not daily done as 
obligatory; but the Sandhyopasana ought to be done daily. The 
Gayatri of the Great Devi is the Essence of all the mantras in the 
Vedas. In the Veda S’astras, the worship of Gayatri is most definitely 
pronounced. Brahma and the other Devas meditate in the Sandhya 
times on this Devi Gayatri and make a japam of that. The Vedas 
always make japams of Her. For this reason the Gayatri has been 
mentioned as the object of worship by the Vedas. The Brahmanas 
are called S’aktas inasmuch as they worship the Primal S’akti 
(Force) Gayatri, the Mother of the Vedas. They are not S’aivas nor 
Vaisnavas. 


Firstly make the ordinary Achaman three times, and, while inhaling, 
drink a little of the water of Achaman, repeating “Om Kes’avaya 
Svaha, Om Narayanaya Svaha, Om Madhavaya Svaha.” Then wash 
your two hands, repeating “Om Gobindaya Namah, Om Visnave 
Namah.” Then by the root of the thumb rub the lips repeating “Om 
Madhu sudanaya Namah, Om Trivikramaya Namah.” So rub the 
mouth, repeating “Om Vamamaya Namah, Om S’ridharaya Namah.” 
Then sprinkle water on the left hand, saying “Om Hrisikes’aya 
Namah.” Sprinkle water on the legs, saying “Om Padmanabhaya 
Namah.” Sprinkle water on the head, saying “Om Damodaraya 
Namah.” Touch the mouth with the three fingers of the right hand, 
saying “Om Samkarsanaya Namah.” Touch the nostrils with the 
thumb and forefinger saying “Om Vasudevaya Namah, Om 



Pradyumnaya Namah.” Touch the eyes with the thumb and ring- 
finger, saying “Om Aniruddhaya Namah, Om Purusottamaya 
Namah.” Touch the ears with the thumb and ringfinger saying “Om 
Adhoksajaya Namah, Om Narasimhaya Namah.” Touch the navel 
with the thumb and little finger saying “Om Achyutaya Namah.” 
Touch the breast with the palm, saying “Om Janardanaya Namah.” 
Touch the head saying “Om Upendraya Namah.” Touch the roots of 
the two arms saying “Om Haraye Namah, Om Krisnaya Namah.” 


25-50. While sipping the Achaman water on the right hand, touch the 
right hand with your left hand; otherwise; the water does not become 
pure. While doing Achaman, make the palm and the fingers all 
united and close, of the form of a Gokarna (the ear of a cow) and 
spreading the thumb and the little finger, drink the water of the 
measure of a pea. If a greater or less quantity be sipped, then that 
would amount to drinking liquor. Then thinking of the Pranava, make 
the Pranayama, and repeat mentally the Gayatri with her head and 
the Turiya pada, i.e., Apojyotih rasomritam Brahma Bhurbhuvah 
svarom. Inhale the air by the left nostril (Purak), close both the 
nostrils (Kumbhak) and exhale the air, by the right nostril (Rechak). 
Thus Pranayama is effected. While doing Purak, Kumbhak and 
Rechak repeat the Gayatri every time; hold the right nostril with the 
right thumb and hold the left nostril with the ringfinger and little finger 
(i.e., don’t use forefinger and middle finger). 


The Yogis who have controlled their minds say that Pranayama is 
effected by the three processes Puraka, Kumbhaka and Rechaka. 
The external air is inhaled in Puraka; air is not exhaled nor inhaled (it 
is retained inside) in Kumbhaka; and air is exhaled in Rechaka. 

While doing Puraka, meditate on the navel, the four-armed high- 
souled Visnu, of the blue colour (Syama) like the blue lotus. While 
doing Kumbhaka, meditate in the heart lotus the four-faced grandsire 
Brahma Prajapati, the Creator seated on the lotus and while doing 



Rechaka meditate, on the fore-head, on the white sin-destroying 
S’ankara, pure as crystal. In Puraka, the union with Visnu is 
obtained; in Kumbhaka, the knowledge of Brahma is attained and in 
Rechaka, the highest position of IsVara (S’iva) is attained. This is the 
method of Achaman according to the Puranas. Now I am speaking of 
the all sin destroying Vaidik Achaman. Listen. Reciting the Gayatri 
mantra “Om Bhurbhuvah,” sip a little water; this is the Vaidik 
Achaman after repeating the seven great Vyahritis Om Bhuh; Om 
Bhuvah, Om Svah, Om Mahah, Om Janah, Om Tapah, Om Satyam, 
repeat Gayatri and the head of the Gayatri Apojyoti Rasomritam 
Brahma Bhurbhuvah svarom and practise Pranayama three times. 
Hereby all sins are destroyed and all virtues spring. Now another 
sort of Pranayama Mudra is described The Vanaprasthis and 
Grihasthas would do Pranayama with five fingers, holding the tip of 
the nose; the Brahmacharis and Yatis would do Pranayama with the 
thumbs, little finger, and ring finger (avoiding middle and fore). Now I 
am speaking of the Aghamasana Marjana mantra. Listen. The 
Mantra of this Marjana is “Apohistha Mayobhuvah, etc.” There are 
three mantras in this. There are three Padas in every mantra, prefix 
Om to every pada (thus nine times Om is to be prefixed); at the end 
of every pada sprinkle water on the head with the sacrificial thread 
and the Kus’a grass. Or at the end of every mantra do so. By the 
above Marjana (cleaning) the sins of one hundred years are instantly 
destroyed. Then making Achaman (taking a sip of water to rinse the 
mouth before worship), repeat the three Mantras “Om Suryas’cha 
ma manyus’cha, etc.” By this act, the mental sins are destroyed. As 
marjana is done with Pranava, Vyarhitis, and Gayatri, so make 
Marjana by the three mantras “Apohistha, etc.” Make your right palm 
of the shape of a cow’s ear; take water in it and carry it before your 
nose and think thus “There is a terrible sinful person in my left 
abdomen, his colour is dark black and he is horrible looking.” Recite, 
then, the mantras “Om ritamcha satyamchabhidhyat, etc.” and 
“Drupadadiva Mumuchana, etc.” and bring that Sinful Person 
through your right nostril to the water in the palm. Don’t look at that 
water; throw it away on a bit of stone to your left. And think that you 
are now sinless. Next, rising from the seat, keep your two feet 



horizontal and with the fingers save forefinger and thumb, take a 
palmful of water and with your face towards the Sun, recite the 
Gayatri three times and offer water to the Sun three times. Thus, O 
Muni! The method of offering the Arghyas has been mentioned to 
you. 


51-80. Then circumambulate, repeating the Surya Mantra. The one 
thing to be noted in offering Arghyas is this Offer once in the 
midday, and three times in the morning and three times in the 
evening. While offering the Arghya in the morning, bend yourself a 
little low; in offering the arghya in the midday, stand up; and while 
offering the arghya in the evening, it can be done while sitting. Now I 
will tell you why the Arghya is offered to the Sun. Hear. Thirty Koti 
Raksasas known as the Mandehas, always roam on the path of the 
Sun (the mental Sun also). They are great heroes, treacherous and 
ferocious. They always try to devour the Sun, while they assume 
terrible forms. For this reason the Devas and the Risis combined 
offer the water with their folded hands to the Sun, while they perform 
the great Sandhya Upasana. The water thus offered, becomes 
transformed into the thunderbolt and burns the heads of the cruel 
demons (and throws them on the island Mandeharuna) Therefore 
the Brahmanas daily do their Sandhyopasana. Infinite merits accrue 
from this Sandhya Upasana. O Narada! Now I am speaking to you of 
the Mantras pertaining to the Arghya. No sooner they are 
pronounced the full effects of performing the Sandhyas are obtained. 
I am That Sun; I am That Light; I am That Atman (Self); I am S’iva; I 
am the Light of Atman; I am clear and transparently white; I am of 
the nature of all energy; and I am of the nature of Rasa (the 
sweetness, all the sweet sentiments). O Devi! O Gayatri! O Thou! 
Who art of the nature of Brahma! Let Thee come and preside in my 
heart to grant me success in this Japa Karma. O Devi! O Gayatri! 
Entering into my heart, go out again with this water. But Thou 
wouldst have to come again. Sit thus on a pure seat and with a 
single intent repeat the Gayatri, the Mother of the Vedas. O Muni! In 



this Sandhyopasana, the Khhechan Mudra ought to be done after 
practising the Pranayama. Hear now the meaning of the Khhechari 
Mudra. When the soul of a being leaves the objects of senses, it 
roams in the Akas’a, i.e., it becomes aimless when the tongue also 
goes to the Akas’a and roams there; and then the sight is fixed 
between the eyebrows; this is called the Khhechari Mudra. There is 
no Asana (seat) equal to Siddhasana and there is no Vayu (air) 
equal to the Khumbaka Vaya (suspension of air in the body). 


O Narada! There is no Mudra equal to the Khhechari Mudra. One is 
to pronounce Pranava in Pluta (protracted) accents like the sound of 
a bell and, suspending his breath, sit quiet motionless in Sthirasana 
without any Ahamkara (egoism). O Narada! I am now talking of 
Siddhasana and its characteristic qualities. Hear. Keep one heel 
below the root of the genital and the other heel below the scrotum; 
keep the whole body and breast straight and motionless; withdraw 
the senses from their objects and look at the point, the pituitary body, 
between the eyebrows. This posture is called the Siddhasan and is 
pleasant to the yogis. After taking this seat, invoke the Gayatri. “O 
Mother of the Vedas! O Gayatri! Thou art the Devi granting boons to 
the Bhaktas. Thou art of the nature of Brahma. Be gracious unto Me. 
O Devi! Whoever worships Thee in the day gets his day sins 
destroyed and in the night, night sins destroyed. O Thou! Who art all 
the letters of the alphabet! O Devi! O Sandhye! O Thou who art of 
the nature of Vidya! O Sarasvati! O Ajaye! O Thou immortal! Free 
from disease and decay. O Mother! Who art all the Devas! I bow 
down to Thee.” Invoke the Devi again by the mantra “Ojosi, etc ,” 
and then pray “O Mother! Let my japam and other acts in Thy 
worship be fulfilled with success by Thy Grace.” Next for the freedom 
of the curse of Gayatri, do the things properly. Brahma gave a curse 
to Gayatri; Vis’vamitra gave a curse to Her and Vas’istha also cursed 
Her. These are the three curses; they are removed in due order by 
recollecting Brahma, Vis’vamitra and Vas’istha. Before doing Nyasa, 
one ought to collect oneself and remember the Highest Self; think in 



the lotus of the heart that Purusa (Person) who is Truth; who is all 
this Universe, who is the Highest Self and who is All knowledge and 
who cannot be comprehended by words. Now I am speaking of the 
Amganyasa of Sandhya; Hear. First utter Om and then utter the 
mantra. 

Touch the two legs, saying “Om Bhuhpadabhyam namah” 

Touch the knees, saying “Om Bhuva Janubhyam namah” 

Touch the hip, saying “Om Svah Katibhyam namah” 

Touch the navel, saying “Om Maharnabhyai namah” 

Touch the heart, saying “Om Janah Hridayaya namah” 

Touch the throat, saying “Om Tapah Kanthaya namah” 

Touch the forehead, saying “Om Satyam Lalataya namah” 

Thus perform the Vyarhiti nyasa. 


Next perform the Karamganyasa thus Om Tat 
savituh ramgusthabhyam namah (referring to the thumb); Om 
Varenyam Tarjanibhyam namah (referring to the forefinger); Om 
bhargo devasya madhyama bhyam namah (referring to the middle 
finger); Om Dhimahi anamikabhyam namah (referring to the 
ringfinger); Om dhiyo yonah, Kanisthabyam namah (referring to the 
little finger); Om prachodayat kara tal pristhabhyam namah (referring 
to the upper part and lower part of the palm and all over the body). 


81-106. Now I am speaking of the Amganyasa. Hear. Om tat savitur 
Brahma tmane hridayaya namah (referring to the heart.) 



Om Varenyam Visnva tmane S’irase namah (referring to the head); 
Om bhargo devasya Rudratmane S’ikhayai namah (referring to the 
crown of the head); Om dhimahi S’aktyatmane Kavachaya 
namah (referring to the Kavacha); Om dhiyoyonah Kalatmane 
netratrayaya namah (referring to the three eyes); Om prachodayat 
sarvatmane astraya namah (referring to the Astra or armour, 
protecting the body). Now I am speaking of the Varnanyasa. O Great 
Muni! Hear. This Varnanyasa is performed by the letters in the 
Gayatri mantra. If anybody does this, he becomes freed of sins. 

“Om Tat namah” on the two toes; (touching them). 

“Om Sa namah” on the two heels; (touching them). 

“Om Vi namah” on the legs; 

“Om Tu namah” on the two knees; 

“Om Va namah” on the two thighs; 

“Om re namah” on the anus; 

“Om ni namah” on the generative organ; 

“Om ya namah” on the hip; 

“Om bha namah” on the navel; 

“Om Rgo namah on the heart; 

“Om De namah” on the breasts; 

“Om va namah” on the heart; 

“Om sya namah” on the throat; 

“Om dhi namah” on the mouth; 

“Om ma namah” on the palate; 

“Om hi namah” on the tip of the nose; 



“Om dhi namah” on the two eyes; 

“Om yo namah” on the space between the eye-brows; 
“Om yo namah” on the forehead; 

“Om nah namah” to the east; 

“Om pra namah” to the south; 

“Om cho namah” on the west; 

“Om da namah” on the north; 

“Om ya namah” on the head; 

“Om ta namah” on the whole body from head to foot. 


Some Japakas (those who do the Japam) do not approve of the 
above nyasa. Thus the Nyasa is to be done. Then meditate on the 
Gayatri or the World-Mother. The beauty of the body of the Gayatri 
Devi is like that of the full blown Java flower. She is seated on the 
big red lotus on the back of the Hansa (Flamingo); She is holding the 
red coloured garland on Her neck and anointed with red coloured 
unguent. She has four faces; every face has two eyes. On her four 
hands are a wreath of flowers, a sacrificial ladle, a bead, and a 
Kamandalu. She is blazing with all sorts of ornaments. From the 
Devi Gayatri has originated first the Rig veda. Brahma worships the 
virgin Gayatri; on the idea of S’ri ParamesVari Gayatri has four feet. 
The Rig Veda is one; the Yajurveda is the second, the Samaveda is 
the third and the Atharva veda is the fourth foot. The Gayatri has 
eight bellies; the east side is the one; the south is the second; the 
west is the third; the north is the fourth; the zenith is the fifth; the 
nadir is the sixth; the intermediate space is the seventh and all the 
corners are the eighth belly. Gayatri has seven S’iras (heads); 
Vyakaranam (Grammar) is one; S’iksa is the second (that Amga of 
the Veda, the science which teaches the proper pronunciation of 
words and laws of euphony); Kalpa is the third (the Vedanga which 



lays down the ritual and prescribes rules for ceremonial and 
sacrificial acts); Nirukta is the fourth (the Vedanga that contains 
glossarial explanation of obscure words, especially those occurring 
in the Vedas); Jyotish or astronomy is the fifth; Itahasa (history) and 
Puranas is the sixth head; and Upanisadas is the seventh head. Agni 
(fire) is the mouth of Gayatri; Rudra is the S’ikha (the chief part); Her 
gotra (lineage) is Samkhyayana; Visnu is the heart of Gayatri and 
Brahma is the armour of Gayatri. Think of this MahesVari Gayatri in 
the middle of the Solar Orb. Meditating on the Gayatri Devi as 
above, the devotee should shew the following twenty-four Mudras 
(signs by the fingers, etc., in religious worship) for the satisfaction of 
the Devi (1) Sanmukh; (2) Samput; (3) Vitata (4) Vistrita; (5) 
Dvimukha; (6) Trimukha; (7) Chaturmukha; (8) Panchamukha; 

(9) Sanmukha; (10) Adhomukha; (11) Vyapaka; (12) Anjali; (13) 
S’akata (14) Yamapas’a; (15) fingers intertwined end to end; (16) 
Vilamba (17) Mustika; (18) Matsya; (19) Kurma; (20) Varaha; (21) 
Simhakranta; (22) Mahakranta; (23) Mudgara; (24) Pallava. Next 
make japam once only of one hundred syllabled Gayatri. Thus 
twenty-four syllabled Savitri, “Jatavedase sunavama, etc.,” forty-four 
syllabled mantra; and the thirty two syllabled mantra, “Tryamvakam 
Jajamahe, etc.” These three mantras united make up one hundred 
lettered Gayatri. (The full context of the last Mantra is this Om 
Haum Om yum sah - Trayamvakam yajamahe Sugandhim Pusti 
Vardhanam. Urbharukamiva bandhanan mrityo muksiya ma mritat 
Bhur Bhhuvah. Svarom Yum Svah Bhurbhuvah Svarom Haum.) Next 
make japam of Bhurbhuvah Svah, twenty four lettered Gayatri with 
Om. O Narada! The Brahmanas are to perform daily the Sandhyo 
pasana repeating Gayatri, completely adopting the rules above 
prescribed and then he will be able to enjoy completely pleasures, 
happiness and bliss. 


Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the 
description of Sandhya Upasana in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagvatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 17 . On The Description Of Sandhya And 
Other Daily Practices 


1-5. Narayana said If one divides or separates the padas while 
reciting or making Japam of the Gayatri, one is freed from the 
Brahminicide, the sin of Brahmahatya. But if one does so without 
breaking the padas, i.e., repeats at one breath, then one incurs the 
sin of Brahmahatya. Those Brahmanas who do the Japam of the 
Gayatri without giving due pause to the padas, suffer pains in hells 
with their heads downwards for one hundred Kalpas. O Gayatri! 

Thou art of one foot, of two feet, of three feet and of four feet. Thou 
art without foot, because Thou art not obtained. Salutation to Thy 
Fourth Foot beautiful and which is above the Triloki (Rajas). This 
cannot obtain that. Firstly, Gayatri is of three kinds “Samputa,” 
“Ekomkara,” and “Sadomkara.” There is also the Gayatri, with five 
Pranavas, according to the Dharma S’astras and Puranas. There is 
something to be noted while muttering or making the japam of the 
Gayatri Note how many lettered Gayatri you are going to repeat 
(make japam). When you have repeated one-eighth of that, repeat 
(make japam) the Turiya pada of Gayatri (i.e., the fourth Pada, the 
mantram parorajase Savadoma prapat) etc., (see the daily practices, 
page 107) once and then complete repeating the Gayatri. If the 
Brahmana makes the Japam (the silent muttering) in the above way 
he gets himself united with Brahma. Other modes of making the 
Japam do not bear any fruit. Om Gayatryasye kapadi dvipapi Tripadi 
chatus padasi nahi padyase namaste Turyaya dars’atayapadaya 
pare Rajase Sabado ma prapat. Gayatri is one-footed in the form of 
Triloki, two-footed, the Trayi Vidya from thy second foot; tripadi (all 
Pranas are thy third foot, chatuspadi, as the Purusa apadi without 
any foot, Parorajase above the Rajas, the dust; asau-that; adah this 
not prapat may obtain. The Yogis who are Urdharetas (hold Brahma 
charyam, continence) are to make Japam of the Samputa Gayatri 
(i.e., with Om). Gayatri with one pranava and as well the Gayatri with 



six pranavas. The householder Brahmachari or those who want 
moksa are to make Japam of Gayatri with Om prefixed. 


6. Those householders who affix Om to the Gayatri do not get the 
increase of their families. 


7-8. The Turiya pada (foot) of Gayatri is the mantra “Parorajase 
Savodoma prapat.” (Brihad. up. v.14.7). Salutation to Thy beautiful 
Fourth Foot which is above the Triloki (Rajas). This cannot obtain 
that. The presiding deity of this mantra is Brahma. I am now 
speaking of the full Dhyanam (meditation) of this Brahma so that the 
full fruit of the Japam (recitation) may be obtained. There is a full 
blown lotus in the heart; its form is like the Moon, Sun, and the Spark 
of Fire; i.e., of the nature of pranava and nothing else. This is the 
seat of the inconceivable Brahma. Think thus. Now on that seat is 
seated well the steady constant subtle Light, the essence of Akas’a, 
the everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss, the Brahma. May He 
increase my happiness (see page 107 the daily practice of the 
Hindus by R. B. Sris Chandra Basu, on the Invocation of the 
Gayatri). 


Note Aum! Gayatryasyekapadi dvipadi, tripadi, chatuspadasi, 
nahi padyase namaste turyaya dars’ ataya padaya parorajase, 
savado maprapat O Gayatri! Thou art of one foot (in the farm of 
Triloki), of two feet (the Trayi vidya from Thy second foot) of three 
feet all Prana, etc., are Thy third foot and of four feet (as the 
Purusa). Thou art without foot because Thou art not obtained. 
Salutation to Thy beautiful fourth foot which is above the Triloki 
(Rajas). This cannot obtain that. 



9. Now I am speaking of the Mudra of the Tunya Gayatri (1) 
Tris’ula, (2) Yoni, (3) Surabhi, (4) Aksamala, (5) Linga, (6) Padma 
and (7) Mahamudra. These seven Mudras are to be shewn. 


10-14. What is Sandhya, that is Gayatri; there is no difference 
whatsoever between the two. The two are one and the same. Both 
are of the nature of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss. The 
Brahmanas would daily worship Her and bow down before Her with 
greatest devotion and reverence. After the Dhyanam, first worship 
Her with five upacharas or offerings. Thus 


Om lam prithivyatmane gandham, arpayami name namah. Om Ham 
akas’atmane puspam arpayami name namah. Om ram 
Vahnyatmane dipam arpayami name namah. Aum vam 
amritatmane naivedyam arpayami name namah. Om yam ram lam 
vam ham puspanjalim arpayami name namah. Thus worshipping 
with five upacharas, you must shew Mudras to the Devi. 


15-16. Then meditate on the Form of the Gayatri mentally and slowly 
repeat the Gayatri. Do not shake head, neck and while making 
japam, do not show your teeth. According to due rules repeat the 
Gayatri one hundred and eight times, or twenty-eight times. When 
unable, repeat ten times; not less than that. 


17-20. Then raise the Gayatri placed before on the heart (seat) by 
the mantra “Gayatrasyai kapadi Dvipadi, etc., and then bid farewell 
to Her after bowing down to Her and repeating the mantra 
“Omuttame S’ikhare Devi bhumyam parvata murdhani Brahmana 
ebhyobhya anujhata Gachcha Devi yathasukham” on the highest top 
of the mountain summit in earth (i.e., on the Meru mountain) dwells 
the goddess Gayatri. Being pleased with Thy worshippers go back. 



O Devi! to Thy abode as it pleaseth Thee.” (See page 110, The Daily 
Practices of the Hindus.) 


The wise men never mutter nor recite the Gayatri mantra within the 
water. For the Maharsis say that the Gayatri is fire-faced 
(agnimukhi). After the farewell shew again the following mudras 
Surabhi Jhan, Surpa, Kurma, Yoni, Padma, Linga and Nirvana 
Mudras. 


Then address thus “O Devi! O Thou who speakest pleasant to 
Kas’yapa! O Gayatri! Whatever syllables I have missed to utter in 
making Japam, whatever vowels and consonants are incorrectly 
pronounced, I ask Thy pardon for all my above faults.” O Narada! 
Next one ought to give peace offerings to the Gayatri Devi. 


21-33. The Chchhanda of Gayatri Tarpanam (peace offerings to 
Gayatri) is Gayatri; the Risi is VisVamitra; Savita is the Devata; its 
application (Niyoga) is in the peace offerings. 

“Om Bhuhrigvedapurusam tarpayami.” 

“Om Bhuvah Yajurvedapurusam tarpayami.” 

“Om Svah Samaveda purusam tarpayami.” 

“Om Mahah Atharvaveda purusam tarpayami.” 

“Om Janah Itihasapurana purusam tarpayami.” 

“Om Tapah Sarvagama purusam tarpayami.” 

“Om Satyam Satyaloka purusam tarpayami.” 

“Om Bhuh bhurloka purusam tarpayami.” 



“Om Bhuvah bhuvoloka purusam tarpayami.” 

“Om Svah svarloka purusam tarpayami.” 

“Om Bhuh rekapadam Gayatrim tarpayami.” 

“Om Bhuvo dvitiyapadam Gayatrim tarpayami.” 

“Om Svastripadam Gayatrim tarpayami.” 

“Om Bhurbhuvah Svas’chatuspadam Gayatrim tarpayami.” 


Pronouncing these, offer the Tarpanams. Next add the word 
Tarpayami to each of the following words “Usasim, Gayatrim, 
Savitrim, Sarasvatim Vedamataram, Prithvim, Ajam, Kaus’ikim, 
Samkritim, Savajitim, etc.,” and offer Tarpanams. After the Tarpanam 
is over, offer the peace-chantings, (S’antivari) repeating the following 
mantras. 


“Om data vedase sunavama romam, etc.” 
“Om Manastoka, etc.” 

“Om Tryamvakam Yajamahe, etc.” 

“Om Tachchhamyoh, etc.” 


Then touch all the parts of your bodies, repeating the two mantra, 
“Om atodeva, etc.” And reciting the mantram “Svona Prithivi,” bow 
down to the earth, after repeating one’s name, Gotra, etc. 


34-45. O Narada! Thus the rules of the morning Sandhya are 
prescribed. Doing works so far, bid farewell to the above-mentioned 
Gayatri. Next finishing the Agnihotra Homa sacrifice, worship the five 
Devatas, S’iva, S’iva, Ganes’a, Surya and Visnu. Worship by the 



Purusa Sukta mantra, or by Hrim mantra, or by Vyahriti mantra or by 
S’rischate Laksmis’cha, etc., place Bhavani in the centre; Visnu in 
the north east corner, S’iva in the south-east corner; Ganes’a in the 
south-west corner, and the Sun in the north-west corner; and then 
worship them. While offering worship with the sixteen offerings, 
worship by repeating sixteen mantras. As there is no other act more 
merit-giving than the worship of the Devi, so the Devi should first of 
all be worshipped. Then worship in due order the five Devatas 
placed in five positions. As the worship of the Devi is the chief 
object, so in the three Sandhyas, the worship of the Sandhya Devi is 
approved of by the S’rutis. Never worship Visnu with rice; Ganes’a 
with Tulasi leaves; the Devi Durga with Durba grass and S’iva with 
Ketaki flower. The under-mentioned flowers are pleasing to the Devi 
Mallika, Jati, Kutaja, Panasa, Palasa, Vakula, Lodha, Karavira, 
S’ins’apa, Aparajita, Bandhuka, Vaka, Madanta, Sindhuvara, 

Palas’a, Durbha, S’allaki, Madhavi, Arka, Mandara, Ketaki, 
Karnikara, Kadamba, Lotus, Champaka, Yuthika, Tagara, etc. 


46-47. Offer incenses Guggul, Dhupa and the light of the Til oil and 
finish the worship. Then repeat the principal (male) mantra (make 
Japam). Thus finishing the work, study the Vedas in the second 
quarter of the next day; and in the third quarter of that day feed 
father, mother and other dependent relatives, with money earned by 
one’s own self according to the traditions of one’s family. 


Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the 
description of Sandhya and other daily practices in the 
Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 18. On The Greatness Of The Dev! Puja 


1. Narada spoke “O Bhagavan! I am now very eager to hear the 
special Puja of S’ri Devi. The people get their desires fulfilled if they 
worship Her.” 


2-23. Narayana said O Devarsi! I shall now specially speak to you 
how the World Mother Bhagavati is worshipped; by worshipping 
Whom one easily gets objects of enjoyments, liberation and the 
destruction of all evils. Controlling one’s speech and making 
Achaman, one must make one’s sankalpa and perform 
Bhutas’uddhi, Matrikanyasa, sadanganyasa, placing conchshell and 
doing other necessary acts. Offering the ordinary Arghya, one should 
give special Arghya and with the mantra “Astraya Phat” sprinkle over 
all the articles brought for worship. Taking the Guru’s permission, he 
is to go on with his Puja. First worship the pitha or seat whereon the 
Devi would be placed; then perform dhyan (meditation of the Devi). 
Then with great devotion, offer to the Deva, the seats (Asana) and 
other articles of worship; then perform the bath of the Devi by the 
water of the Panchamrita (the five nectars). If anybody performs the 
bath ceremony of S’ri Devi with one hundred jars of sugarcane juice, 
he will not have to incur any future birth. 


He who performs this bath, and recites the Veda Mantras, with 
mango juice or sugarcane juice gets for ever Laksmi ever and ever 
and Sarasvati bound at his doors. He who gets this sacred bath of 
the Devi with grape juice, along with his relatives and acquaintances 
dwells in the DevT-loka for as many years as there are atoms in the 
juice. He who bathes the Devi with the Vedic mantras, and with 
water scented with camphor, the fragrant aloe wood (aguru), saffron, 
and musk, becomes freed at once of the sins acquired in his 
hundred births. He who bathes the Devi with jars of milk, lives in the 



ocean of milk (ksira samudra) for one Kalpa. So he who does this 
bathing ceremony with jars of curd, becomes the lord of Dadhikunda 
(the reservoir of curd). He who performs the Snanams of the Devi 
with honey, ghee and sugar becomes the lord of these things. He 
who bathes the Devi with one thousand jars, becomes happy in this 
world as in the next. Note Make the liquid current flow pure in your 
body is the esoteric meaning of the bath. If you give Her a pair of 
silken clothes, you will go to the Vayu-Loka. If you give Her the jewel 
ornaments, you will become the Lord of gems and jewels. (Make 
your mind like the gem.) If anybody gives saffron, sandalpaste, 
musk, Sindura and Alaktak (red things), he will go to the Heavens 
and become there the Indra, the Lord of the Devas, in the next birth. 
Various flowers ought to be offered in S’ri Bhagavati’s worship; or 
the flowers of the season offered to the Devi will lead the devotee to 
Kailas’a. The devotee that offers the beautiful Bel leaves to the Devi 
never experiences anywhere pains and difficulties. The devotee who 
writes the Vija mantra of Maya “Hrim BhuvanesVaryai Namah” with 
red sandalpaste thrice on the tri-leaves of the Vilva tree leaf and 
offers this to the lotus feet of the Devi, becomes Manu by the merit 
of this virtuous act! The devotee becomes the Lord of the whole 
universe who worships the Devi Bhagavati with ten millions of entire 
Vilva leaves, fresh, green and spotless. 


24-40. If any devotee worships with ten millions of entire fresh green 
Kunda flowers, with eight scents, he gets surely the Prajapatihood. 
The worship of the Devi with ten millions of Mallika and Malati 
flowers besmeared with eight scents makes a man the four faced 
(Brahma); and one hundred millions of such flowers will make the 
devotee a Visnu. In days of yore, Visnu worshipped the Devi in the 
aforesaid way and so got His Visnuhood. If any devotee worships 
the Devi with one hundred Kotis of Mallika or Malati flowers, the man 
becomes certainly Sutratma Hiranyagarbha. In ancient days 
Hiranyagarbha worshipped thus the Devi with great devotion and so 
he became Hiranyagarbha! (These Hiranyagarbha, Brahma, Visnu 



and Mahes’a were mere ordinary men before. See the 
Brihadaranyaka Upanisada). Note The eight scents refer to data 
mamsi Kapiyuta S’aktergandhas takam! So will be the results if 
Java, Vandhuka and Dadimi flowers be offered in the worship. 
Various other beautiful flowers can be offered duly to the Devi by the 
devotee. The merits accruing from such offers are not known even to 
the God IsVara. The flowers that spring in their proper seasons are 
to be offered every year to the Devi, repeating Her thousand names 
enumerated in the Twelfth Book or in the Kurma Purana. If the above 
worship be offered to the Devi, then that man, whether he be a 
sinner or a great sinner, will be freed from all the sins and after 
leaving his mortal coil, he will get, no doubt, the lotus feet of the S’ri 
Devi Bhagavati. Offer Dhupa made of black Aguru, camphor, 
sandalpaste, red sandalpaste, Sihlaka and Guggula, saturated with 
ghee in such a way as the whole room of S’ri Bhagavati scents with 
pure fragrant smell. The Devi Bhagavati becomes pleased with this 
and offers the lordship of the three Lokas to the devotee. The 
devotee, who offers daily the light of camphor to the Devi, goes to 
the Surya Loka. There is no doubt in this. With one’s whole heart, 
one should give one hundred or one thousand lights to the Devi. The 
devotee should offer heaps of food consisting of six Rasas, the 
plates and dishes for chewing, sucking, licking and drinking, that is, 
all kinds of food solid, and liquid, mountain-like high. Always give 
food on golden flat plates and cups and various delicious sweet juicy 
nice heavenly fruits, nicely arranged on trays, cups and saucers. 
When S’ri Mahadevi Bhuvane’svari gets pleased, the whole universe 
gets pleased. For the whole Universe is all Devi; as a rope is 
mistaken for a snake, so this Mahadevi is mistaken for the universe. 


41-59. Offer a jar of drinking Ganges water, cool and nice, scented 
with camphor to the Devi; then offer betels with camphor, cardamum, 
cloves, and various delicious scents. These all are to be offered with 
great devotion so that the Devi may be pleased. Next have music 
with lovely mridangas, flutes, murajas, Dhahkas and dundubhis and 



so please Her. The Veda mantras are to be recited, the Puranas are 
to be read and the hymns to be chanted. With whole head and heart 
offer to the Devi the umbrella and chamara, the two kingly offerings. 
Then circumambulate round Her and prostrate before Her and ask 
Her kindness and pray to Her to forgive all faults and shortcomings. 
The Devi is pleased with anybody who remembers Her even once! 
What wonder then that She will be pleased with all these offerings! 
The Mother is naturally merciful to her child. When She is loved with 
devotion, then She becomes very merciful. There is nothing strange 
here! On this point I will recite to you the history of Vrihadratha 
Rajarsi. Hearing which gives rise to Bhakti and Love. 


Once in a certain region in the Himalayas there lived a bird called 
Chakravak. It flew over many countries and went once to Kas’idham. 
As a fruit of his Prarabdha Karma, that bird, desirous to find some 
rice beans, voluntarily went like an orphan round about the temple of 
S’ri Annapurna Devi. There circumambulating round the Devi 
Bhagavati the bird left the city Kas’i, that grants liberation and flew 
away to another country. In time the bird left his body and went to 
Heavens. There he assumed a heavenly form of a youth and began 
to enjoy various pleasures. Thus he enjoyed for two Kalpas. Then he 
got back to the earth and took his birth as the best in the Ksattriya 
family. He became celebrated as the king Vrihadratha in this world. 
That King was truthful, controlled his senses, and practised 
S’amyama and deep concentration and knew everything of the past, 
the present and the future. He conquered all the enemies and 
performed various sacrifices and became the Emperor of the sea-girt 
earth and acquired the very rare faculty in the knowledge of 
everything of his previous births. The Munis came to know of this 
from various rumours and came to the King. The King Vrihadratha 
duly entertained those guests. The Munis took their seats and asked 
“O King! We hear that all the events of previous births are vividly 
reflected in your memory. On this point great doubts have come 
upon us. Kindly describe in detail. By what Punyam (merits) you 



have come to know all about previous births and the knowledge of 
the past, the present and the future. We have come to you to know 
how you got this wonderful supersensual knowledge. Kindly say to 
us sincerely everything about this and oblige.” 


60-71. Narayana said O Brahman! The very religious King 
Vrihadratha heard them and began to speak out all the secret 
causes for his knowledge of the past, the present and the future, 
thus O Munis! Hear how I acquired this knowledge. In my 
previous birth I was a very low bird chakravak. Once, out of my 
ignorance, I circumambulated round the temple of the Devi 
Bhagavati Annapurna at Kas’i. And, as the result of that, I lived in 
the Heavens for a period of two Kalpas and I have got this birth and I 
have got the knowledge of the past, the present and the future. O 
You of good vows! Who can ascertain what amount of merits 
accrues from remembering the Feet of the World-Mother. 
Remembering Her glories, I always shed tears of joy. Those who do 
not worship the adorable Deity Jagadamba are the Great Sinners 
and they are treacherous. Fie on their births! The worship of S’iva or 
Visnu is not eternal. Only the Jagadamba’s worship is eternal. Thus 
it is stated in the S’rutis. What more shall I speak on this worship of 
the World-Mother, which is void of the best trace of any doubt. 
Everyone ought to serve devotedly the lotus feet of the Devi 
Bhagavati. There is no other act more glorious in this world than 
serving the feet of Jagadamba. It is highly necessary to serve the 
Highest Deity, whether in Her Saguna or in Her Nirguna aspect. (Eat 
the sugarcandy, holding it in any way. It makes no difference.) 
Narayana said Hearing the aforesaid words of the virtuous Rajarsi 
Vrihadratha, the Munis went back to their respective abodes. Such is 
the power of the Devi Jagadambika! So who can question about the 
certainty of the high merits arising from the Jagadambika’s worship 
and who will not reply, when so questioned? Their births are really 
fruitful who possess faith in the Devi worship; but of those who have 
no such faith, there is some wrong mixture, no doubt; in their births. 



Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the 
Greatness of the Devi Puja, in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 19. On The Midday Sandhya 


1-24. Narayana said O Narada! Now I am speaking of the 
auspicious midday Sandhya, the practice of which leads to the 
wonderfully excellent results. Listen. Here the Achamana and other 
things are similar to those of the morning Sandhya. Only in 
meditation (Dhyanam) there is some difference. I will now speak of 
that. The name of the midday Gayatri is Savitri. She is ever a 
youthful maiden, of white colour, three-eyed; She holds in Her one 
hand a rosary, in Her other hand a trident and with Her two other 
hands She makes signs to Her Bhaktas to dispel fear and to grant 
boons. Riding on the bull. She recites the Yayur Vedas; She is the 
Rudra S’akti with Tamo gunas and She resides in Brahmaloka, She 
daily traverses in the path of the Sun. She is Maya Devi, 
beginningless; I bow down to Her. After meditating on the Adya Devi 
Bhagavati perform Achamanas and other things as in the morning 
Sandhya. Now, about the offering of Arghya (an offer of green grass, 
rice, etc., made in worshipping a God or Brahman). Collect flowers 
for Arghya; in the absence of flowers, the Bael leaves and water will 
serve the purpose. Facing the Sun, and looking upwards, offer the 
Arghya to the Sun upwards. Then perform other acts as in the 
morning Sandhya. In midday, some offer Arghya to the Sun, only 
with the recitation of the Gayatri mantra. But that is not approved of 
by the tradition and community; there is the likelihood of the whole 
work being thwarted or rendered fruitless. For, in the morning and 
evening Sandhyas, the Raksashas named the Mandehas become 
ready to devour the Sun. This is stated in the S’rutis. Therefore the 
midday offering of the Arghya is not for the destruction of the Daityas 
but for the satisfaction of the Devi; so with the mantra “Akrisnena, 
etc.,” the offering of Arghya can be effected; and the reciting of the 
infallible Gayatri mantra is only to create disturbance in the shape of 
thwarting the action. So in the morning and evening, the Brahmana 
is to offer the Suryarghya, repeating the Gayatri and Pranava; and in 
the midday to offer flowers and water with the mantra “Akrisnena, 



rajasa etc.,” else it will go against the S’ruti. In the absence of 
flowers, the Durba grass, etc., can be offered carefully as the 
Arghya; and the full fruits of the Sandhya will be secured. O Best of 
Devarsis! Now hear the important points in the Tarpanam (peace 
offerings). Thus 

“Om Bhuvah purusam tarpayami name namah.” 

“Om Yajurvedam tarpayami name namah.” 

“Om Mandalam tarpayami name namah.” 

“Om Hiranyagarbham tarpayami name namah.” 

“Om antaratmanam tarpayami name namah.” 

“Om Savitrim tarpayami name namah.” 

“Om Devamataram tarpayami name namah.” 

“Om Samkritim tarpayami name namah.” 

“Om Yuvatim sandhyam tarpayami name namah.” 

“Om Rudranim tarpayami name namah.” 

“Om Nimrijam tarpayami name namah.” 

“Om Bhurbhuvah Svah purusam tarpayami name namah.” 


Thus finish the midday Sandhya mga Tarpanam. Now, with your 
hands raised high up towards the Sun, worship Him by the two 
mantras, praising thus “Om Udutyam Jatavedasam, etc.,” “Om 
Chitram Devanam, etc.” Next repeat the Gayatri. Hear its method. In 
the morning, repeat the Gayatri at the proper moment with hands 
raised; in the evening time with hands lowered and in the midday 
with hands over the breast. Begin with the middle phalanx (joint) of 
the nameless finger, then the phalanx at its root, then the phalanx at 



the root of the little finger, its middle phalanx and its top, then the 
tops of the nameless, fore and ring fingers, then the middle and 
finally the root of the ring finger (in the direction of the hands of the 
watch; avoiding the middle and root phalanx of the middle finger). 
Thus ten times it is repeated. In this way if the Gayatri be repeated 
one thousand times, the sins arising from killing a cow, father, 
mother, from causing abortions, going to the wife of one’s Guru, 
stealing a Brahmana’s property, a Brahman’s field, drinking wine, 
etc., all are destroyed. Also the sins acquired in three births by mind, 
word, or by the enjoyments of sensual objects are thereby then and 
there instantly destroyed. All the labours of him, who works hard in 
the study of the Vedas without knowing the Gayatri, are useless. 
Therefore if you compare on the one hand the study of the four 
Vedas with the reciting of the Gayatri, then the Gayatri Japam 
stands higher. Thus I have spoken to you of the rules of the midday 
Sandhya. Now I am speaking of Brahma Yajha. Hear. 


Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the 
midday Sandhya in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 20. On The Description Of Brahma 
Yajna, Sandhyas, Etc. 


1-25. The twice born (Brahmana) is firstly to sip three times (make 
Achamana); then to make the marjana (sprinkle water) twice; he is to 
touch the water by the right hand and sprinkle water on his two feet. 
Next, he is to sprinkle with water his head, eyes, nose, ears, heart, 
and head thoroughly. Then speaking out the Des’a and Kala (place 
and time) he should commence the Brahma Yajha. Next for the 
destruction of all the sins and for getting liberation, he should have 
the Darbha (sacrificial grass, and the Kus’a grasses), two on his right 
hand, three on his left hand, one grass each on his seat, sacrificial 
thread, his tuft, and his heels. No sin can now remain in his body. 


“I am performing this Brahma Yajha for the satisfaction of the Devata 
according to the Sutra,” thus thinking he is to repeat the Gayatri 
thrice. Then he is to recite the following mantras “Agnimile 
purohitam, etc.,” “Yadamgeti” “Agnirvai,” “Mahavratanchaiva pantha,” 
“Athatah S’amhitayas’cha vidamaghavat,” “Mahavratasya,” 
“Isetvorjetva,” “Agna ayahi” “S’anno Devi rabbistaye,” “Tasya 
Samamnayo” “Briddairadaich” “S’iksam pravaksyami,” “Pancha 
Samvatsareti,” “Mayarasatajabhetyeva,” “Gaurgma,” also he is to 
recite the two following Sutras “Athato Dharma Jijhasa,” “Athato 
Brahma Jijhasa.” Next he is to recite the mantra “Tachhamyoh” and 
also the mantra “Name Brahmane name stvagnaye namah prithivyai 
nama Osadhibhyoh namah”. (These mantras are the famous 
mantras of the Rig Veda). Next perform the Deva-tarpanam, thus 
“Om Prajapati stripyatu”, “Om Brahma stripyatu”, “Om Vedas 
tripyantu,” “Om Risayastri pyantu”, “ Om Devastripantu,” “Om 
Sarvani chhandamsi tripyantu”, “Om Om Kara stripyatu”, “Om 
Vasat Kara stripyatu”, “Om Vyarhitayas tripyantu”, Om Savitri 
tripyatu”, “Om Gayatri tripyatu”, “Om Yajha stripyantu,” Om Dyava 
prithivyau tripyatam. Om antariksam tripyatu, Om Ahoratrani 



tripyantu, Om Samkkya stripyantu, Om Siddha stripyantu, Om 
Samudra stripyantu, Om Nadyas tripyantu, Om girayas tripyantu, 

Om Ksettraus adhivana spati gandharva Psarasas tripyantu, Om 
naga vayamsi gavascha sadhya viprasta thaiva cha, yaksa raksansi 
bhutani tyeva mantani tripyantu. Next, suspending the sacrificial 
thread from the neck, perform the Risi tarpanam, thus Om 
S’atarchinas tripyantu, Om madhyamas tripyantu, Om Gritsamada 
stripyatu, Om VisVamitra stripyantu, Om Vamadeva stripyantu, Om 
Atri stripyatu, Om Bharadvajastripyatu, Om Vas’isthastripyatu, Om 
Pragathastripyatu, Pavamanyastripyantu. Next, holding the sacrificial 
thread over the right shoulder and under the left arm, perform the 
Tarpanam, thus 


Om Ksudrasukta stripyantu. 

Om Mahasuktastripyantu. 

Om Sanaka stripyatu. 

Om Sananda stripyatu. 

Om Sanatana stripyatu. 

Om Sanat Kumara stripyatu. 

Om Kapila stripyatu. 

Om Asuristripyatu, 

Om Vohalistripyatu. 

Om Pahchas’ikha stripyatu. 

Om Sumantu Jaimini Vais’ampayana Paila Sutra Bhasya bharata 
Maha Bharata Dharmacharyah stripyantu. 

Om Janantivaha vigargya Gautama S’akalya vabhravya Mandavya 
Mandukeya stripyantu. 


Om Gargi Vachaknavi tripyatu. 



Om Vadava pratitheyi tripyatu. 

Om Sulabha maitreyi tripyatu. 

Om Kahola stripyatu. 

Om Kausitaka stripyatu. 

Om Maha Kausitaka stripyatu. 

Om Bharadvaja stripyatu, 

Om Paimga stripyatu. 

Om Mahapaimga stripyatu. 

Om Sujajna stripyatu. 

Om Samkhyayana stripyatu. 

Om Aitareya stripyatu. 

Om Mahaitareya stripyatu. 

Om Vaskala stripyatu. 

Om Sakala stripyatu. 

Om Sujata vaktra stripyatu. 

Om Audavahi stripyatu. 

Om Saujami stripyatu, 

Om S’aunaka stripyatu, 

Om AsValayana stripyatu. 

26-54. Let all the other Acharyas be satisfied. “Om Ye Ke 
chasmat kule data aputra gotrino mritah. te grihnantu maya dattam 
vastranispidi to dakam.” Saying thus offer water squeezed out of a 
cloth. O Narada! Thus I have spoken to you of the rules of Brahma 



Yajna. Whoever performs thus the Brahma Yajha gets the fruits of 
studying all the Vedas. Then performing, in due order, the VaisVa 
deva, Homa, S’raddha, serving the guests, and feeding the cows, 
the devotee is to take his meals during the fifth part of the day along 
with the other Brahmanas. Then the sixth and the seventh parts of 
the day he is to spend in reading histories and the Puranas. Then 
the eighth part of the day he is to devote in seeing the relatives, 
talking with them and receiving visits from other persons; then he will 
be prepared to perform the evening Sandhya. O Narada! I am now 
talking of the evening Sandhya. Listen. S’ri Bhagavati is pleased 
very quickly with him who performs the evening Sandhya. First make 
the Achaman and make the Vayu (air) in the body steady. With heart 
tranquilled and with the seat Baddha Padmasana, be calm and quiet 
while engaged in performing the Sandhya. At the commencement of 
all actions prescribed in the S’rutis and Smritis, first perform the 
Sagarbha Pranayama. In other words recite the mantra mentally for 
the due number of moments and make the Pranayama. Simply 
meditating is called Agarbha Pranayama. Here no mantra is 
necessary to be recited. Then have the Bhutas’uddhi (have the 
purifications of the elements) and make the Sankalpa. First of all, the 
purification of elements, etc., are to be done first; one becomes, 
then, entitled to do other actions. While doing Puraka (inhaling), 
Kumbhaka (retaining) and Rechaka (exhaling) in Pranayama, 
meditate on the Deity stated duly. In the evening time meditate on 
the Bhagavati Sandhya Devi thus The name of the then Gayatri 
Devi is Sarasvati. She is old, of black colour, wearing ordinary 
clothes; in her hands are seen conch shell, disc, club and lotus. On 
Her feet the anklets are making sweet tinkling sounds; on Her loins 
there is the golden thread; decked with various ornaments. She is 
sitting on Garuda. On Her head the invaluable jewel crown is seen; 
on Her neck, the necklaces of stars; Her forehead is shining with a 
brilliant lustre emitting from the pearl and jewel Tatamka ornaments. 
She has put on yellow clothes; Her nature is eternal knowledge and 
ever-bliss. She is uttering Sama Veda. She resides in the Heavens 
and daily She goes in the path of the Sun. I invoke the Devi from the 
Solar Orb. O Narada! Meditate on the Devi thus and perform the 



Sandhya. Then perform the Marjanam by the mantra “Apohistha” 
and next by the mantra “Agnis’cha ma manyus’cha.” The remaining 
actions are the same as before. Next, repeat the Gayatri and offer, 
with a pure heart, the offering of Arghya to the Sun for the 
satisfaction of Narayana. While offering this Arghya, keep the two 
legs level and similar and take water in folded palms and meditating 
on the Devata within the Solar Orb, throw it towards Him. The fool 
that offers Suryarghya in the water, out of ignorance, disregarding 
the injunctions of the S’rutis, will have to perform Prayas’chitta for 
that sin. Next, worship the Sun by the Surya mantra. Then taking 
one’s seat, meditate on the Devi and repeat the Gayatri. One 
thousand times or five hundred times the Gayatri is to be repeated. 
The worship, etc., in the evening is the same as in the morning. Now 
I am speaking of the Tarpanam in the Evening Sandhya. Hear. 
Vas’istha is the Risi of the aforesaid Sarasvati. Visnu in the form of 
Sarasvati is the Devata; Gayatri is the Chhanda; its application is in 
the Evening Sandhya Tarpanam. Now the Tarpanam of the 
Sandhyanga (the adjunct of Sandhya) runs as follows 


“Om Svah Purusam Tarpayami.” 

“Om Samavedam Tarpayami.” 

“Om Suryamandalam tarpayami.” 

“Om Hiranyagarbham tarpayami.” 

“Om Paramatmanam tarpayami.” 

“Om Sarasvatim tarpayami.” 

“Om Devamataram tarpayami.” 

“Om Samkritim tarpayami.” 

“Om Vriddham Sandhyam tarpayami 
“Om Visnu rupinim Usasim tarpayami.” 



“Om Nirmrijim tarpayami.” 

“Om Sarvasiddhi karinim tarpayami.” 

“Om Sarvamantra dhipatikam tarpayami.” 
“Om Bhurbhuvah Svah Purusam tarpayami.” 


Thus perform the Vaidik Tarpanam. O Narada! Thus have been 
described the rules of the sin destroying evening Sandhya. By this 
evening Sandhya, all sorts of pains and afflictions and diseases are 
removed. And ultimately the Moksa is obtained. What more than this 
that you should know this Sandhya Bandanam as the principal thing 
amongst the good conduct and right ways of living. Therefore S’ri 
Bhagavati fructifies all the desires of the Bhaktas who perform this 
Sandhya Vandanam. 


Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the 
description of Brahma Yajha, Sandhyas, etc., in the Mahapuranam 
S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 21. On Gayatr! Puras’charanam 


1-55. Narayana said Now I shall speak of the Gayatri- 
puras’charanam. Hear. By its performance all the desires are 
obtained and all the sins are destroyed. On the tops of mountains, 
on the banks of the rivers, on the roots of Bel trees, on the edges of 
tanks, within the enclosures of the cows (cow-stalls), in temples, on 
the root of AsVattha trees, in gardens, in the Tulasi groves, in the 
Punya Ksetrams (holy places), before one’s Guru, or wherever the 
mind feels exalted and cheerful, and gets strength, the 
Puras’charanam if performed, lead to a speedy success. Before 
commencing the Puras’charanam of a mantra (the Puras’charanam 
means repetition of the name of a deity or of a mantra attended with 
burnt offerings, oblations, etc.,) first Prayas’chitta (penance) is done 
in the shape of repeating one million times the Gayatri with the 
Vyarhitis. In any Vaidic Karma or in making Puras’charanam of the 
mantra of the Devatas Nrisinha, Surya, Varaha, etc., the first thing 
done is to repeat the Gayatri. Without the japam of Gayatri, no 
action is attended with success. The reason is this Every 
Brahman is a S’akta (a follower of S’akti); he cannot be a Vaisnava 
or S’aiva; for he is the worshipper of the Prime Force Vedamata 
Gayatri. Therefore obtain first the Grace of one’s own Ista Devata 
Gayatri by Her Japam. Then worship the other Deities. 


Thus one should purify one’s japya mantra (the mantra that is to be 
repeated) by first repeating one million times the Gayatri; then one is 
to commence Puras’charanam. Again before purifying the mantra, 
one is to purify one’s Atman (Self). In this purification of one’s Atman 
three lakh times, in case of inability, one lakh times Gayatri is to be 
repeated without one’s Atman’s purification, the Japam, Homa and 
other actions all become useless. This is specially noted in the 
Vedas. By Tapas e.g., Japam, Chandrayana and Vrata, (asceticism) 
mortify your body. By offering Tarpanam (peace-offerings) to the 



Fathers and the Devas, one can get self purification. If you want to 
get the Heavens and if you want to become great, practise Tapasya. 
There is no other way. Tapasya is the intent calling of the Mother, 
That Call which penetrates through and through the Brahmanda. The 
Ksattriyas should cross difficulties and dangers by force of arms; the 
Vais’yas, by wealth; the S’udras, by serving the twice born; and the 
Brahmanas should cross difficulties and dangers, by Tapasya, 

Homa, Japam, etc. So the Brahmanas should always be cheerful 
and in prompt readiness to do Tapasya. Of all sorts of tapasyas, 
mortifying the body by observing vows and fastings is the best. So 
say the Risis. (This mortification of the body gives self-reliance and 
self intuition more surely and speedily than all the other studies and 
other practices.) The Brahmanas should purify themselves by 
following duly Krichhra Chandrayana vratas, etc., O Narada! Now I 
am speaking of the purification of food. Hear. The following four 
occupations of the Brahmanas are the bestAyachita, (without 
begging or asking for anything), Unchha, (the gathering in of 
handfuls of the corn left by the reapers), S’ukla (the maintenance 
derived by a Brahmana from other Brahmanas; a pure mode of life). 
And Bhiksu (begging). Whether according to the Tantras or 
according to the Vedas, the food obtained by the above four means 
is pure. What is earned by Bhiksa (begging) is divided into four parts 
one part is given to the Brahmanas; the second part is given to 
the cows; the third part is given to the guests, the fourth part is to be 
taken by him and his wife. Whatever is fixed for taking (swallowing) 
mouthfuls of food, that is to be taken on a tray or a platter. First throw 
a little cow-urine over that and count duly the number of mouthfuls. 
The mouthfuls are to be of the size of an egg; the house-holders are 
to take eight such mouthfuls and the Vanaprasthis are to take four 
such mouthfuls. The Brahmacharins can sprinkle their food with cow- 
urine nine times, six times, or three times as they like; while 
sprinkling, the fingers are to remain intact. The Gayatri is to be 
repeated also. The food offered by a thief, Chandala, Ksattriya or 
Vais’ya is very inferior. The food of a S’udra, or the companion with a 
S’udra or taking food in the same line with a S’udra leads one to 
suffer in the terrible hells as long as there are the Sun and Moon. 



The Puras’charanam of Gayatn is repeating this twenty four lakh 
times (i.e., as many lakh times as there are syllables in the Gayatri). 
But, according to VisVamitra, repeating thirty two lakh times is the 
Puras’charanam of Gayatri. As the body becomes useless when the 
soul leaves the body, so the mantra without Puras’charanam is 
useless. The Puras’charanam is prohibited in the months of Jyaistha, 
Asadha, Pausa and Mala (dirty) months. Also on Tuesday, Saturday; 
in the Vyatipata and Vaidhriti Yogas; also in Astami (eighth), Navami 
(ninth), Sasthi (sixth), Chaturthi (fourth) Trayodas’i (thirteenth), 
Chaturdasi (fourteenth) and Amavasya (New Moon), Tithis (lunar 
days); in the evening twilight and in the night; while the star Bharani, 
Krittika, Ardra, As’lesa, Jyestha, Dhanistha, S’ravana, or the Janma 
naksatra (Birth time star) is with the Moon; while the signs Mesa, 
Karkata, Tula, Kumbha, and Makara are the Lagnas (signs in the 
ascendant). When the moon and the start are auspicious, especially 
in the bright fortnight, the Puras’charanam performed, gives the 
Mantra Siddhi. First of all repeat Svasti vachan and perform duly the 
Nandi mukha S’raddha and give food and clothing to the 
Brahmanas. Take the permission of the Brahmanas and begin the 
Puras’charanam. Where the S’iva Lingam exists, facing west, or in 
any S’iva temple, commence repeating the mantra. The other S’iva 
Ksettrams are Kas’i, Kedara, Maha Kala, S’ri Ksettra, and 
Tryamvakam. These five are the Great Ksettrams, known widely on 
this earth, for the fructification and the siddhis of the Mantras. At all 
other places than these, the Karma Chakra is to be drawn according 
to the principles of the Tantra. And then they will be fit for 
Puras’charanam. The number of times that the Puras’charanam (the 
repeating of the mantra) is done on the first day, the same number is 
to be continued every day until completion; not greater nor less than 
that and also no intermission or stoppage should occur in the 
interval. 


The repeating of the Mantra is to be commenced in the morning and 
should be done up to midday. While doing this, the mind is to be kept 



free from other subjects, and it is to be kept pure; one is to meditate 
on one’s own Deity and on the meaning of the mantra and one 
should be particularly careful that no inaccuracies nor omissions 
should occur in the Gayatri, Chhandas and in the repetition of the 
Mantra. One tenth of the total number of Puras’charanams that are 
repeated is to be used for the Homa purpose. The Charu is to be 
prepared with ghee, til, the Bel leaves, flowers, jaya grain, honey and 
sugar; all mixed, are to be offered as oblations to the fire in the 
Homa. Then the success in the Mantra comes (i.e., mantra siddhi is 
obtained or the Mantra becomes manifested). After the 
Puras’charanam one should do properly the daily and occasional 
duties and worship the Gayatri that brings in dharma, wealth, objects 
of desire and liberation. There is nothing superior an object of 
worship to this Gayatri, whether in this world or in the next. The 
devotee, engaged in the Puras’charanam, should eat moderately, 
observe silence, bathe thrice in the three Sandhya times, should be 
engaged in worshipping one’s Deity, should not he unmindful and 
should not do any other work. He is to remain, while in water, to 
repeat the Gayatri three lakhs of times. In case the devotee repeats 
the mantra for achieving success in any other desired work (kamya 
karma), then he should willingly stick to it until the desired success is 
attained. Now is being told how to get success in ordinary Kamya 
karmas. When the sun is rising, repeat the Purascharanam mantra 
daily thousand times. Then one’s life will be lengthened, no disease 
will occur, and wealth and prosperity will be obtained. If it be done 
this way, success is surely attained within three months, six months 
or at the end of one year. If the Homa (offering oblations to the fire) 
be offered one lakh times with lotuses besmeared with ghee 
(clarified butter), Moksa (liberation) is attained. If, before the Mantra- 
Siddhi, or the success in realising the Mantra, is attained, one 
performs Japam or Homam for Kamya Siddhi (to get certain desires) 
or moksa, then all his actions become useless. If anybody performs 
twenty-five lakh Homas by curd and milk, be gets success (Siddhi) in 
this very birth. So all the Maharsis say. By this the same result is 
attained that is got by the aforesaid means, i.e., by the eight-limbed 
Yoga, whereby the Yogis become perfect. 



He will attain Siddhi if he be devoted to his Guru and keep hinnself 
under restraint for six months only (i.e., practise Samyama) as 
regards taking food, etc., whether he be incapable or his mind be 
attached to other sensual objects. One should drink Pahcha gavya 
(cow-urine, cow-dung, milk, curd, ghee) one day, fast one day, take 
Brahmana’s food one day and be mindful in repeating the Gayatri. 
First bathe in the Ganges or in other sacred places and while in 
water repeat one hundred Gayatris. If one drinks water on which one 
hundred Gayatris are repeated, one is freed from all one’s sins. He 
gets the fruit of performing the Krichhra vrata, the Chandrayana 
vrata and others. Be he a Ksattriya King, or a Brahmana, if he is to 
remain in his own house, hold As’rama and be engaged in 
performing Tapasya then he will be certainly freed of all his sins. Be 
he a house holder or a Brahmachari or Vanaprasthi, he should 
perform sacrifices, etc., according to his Adhikara (or his rights) and 
he will get fruits according to his desires. The Sagnik man (who 
keeps the Holy Fire) and other persons of good conduct and of 
learning and of good education should perform actions as prescribed 
in the Vedas and Smritis with a desire to attain Moksa. Thus one 
should eat fruits and vegetables and and water or take eight 
mouthfuls of Bhiksanna (the food got by begging). If the 
Puras’charanam be performed this way, then the Mantra Siddhi is 
obtained. O Narada ! If the Puras’charanam be done with the mantra 
thus, his poverty is removed entirely. What more shall I say than this 
that if anybody hears this simply, his merits get increased and he 
attains great success. 


Here ends the Twenty First Chapter of the Eleventh Book on Gayatri 
Puras’charanam in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 22. On The Rules Of Vais’vadeva 


1-45. Narayana said O Narada! In connection with this 
Puras’charanann it comes now to my memory about the rules 
concerning the VaisVa Deva worship (An offering made to the 
VisVadevas; an offering to all deities made by presenting oblations 
to fire before meals). Hear. The five yajhas are the following (1) 
The Devayajha, (2) Brahma yajha, (3) Bhuta yajha, (4) Pitri yajha, 
and (5) Manusya yajha. Fireplace, the pair of stone pestles, brooms 
(for sweeping, etc.), sieves and other house-hold things of the sort, 
wooden mortars (used for cleansing grains from husk) and water- 
jars, these five are the sources of evils inasmuch as they are the 
means of killing. So to free one’s self from the above sins, one is to 
sacrifice before the Vais’vadeva. Never offer oblations of Vais’vadeva 
on hearths, on any iron vessel, on the ground or on broken tiles. 

They are to be offered in any sacrificial pit (Kunda) or on any 
sacrificial altar. Do not fire the hearth by fanning with hands, with 
winnowing baskets, or with holy deer skin, etc., but you can do so by 
blowing by your mouth. For the mouth is the origin of fire. If the fire 
be ignited by clothes, one is liable to get disease; if by winnowing 
baskets, then less of wealth comes; if by hands, one’s death ensues. 
But if it be done by blowing, then one’s success comes. (There is the 
danger of catching fire.) 


One should sacrifice with curd, ghee, fruits, roots and vegetables, 
and water and in their absence with fuel, grass, etc., or with any 
other substances soaked with ghee, curd, Payasa or lastly with 
water. But never with oil or with salty substances. If one performs the 
Homa with dry or stale substances, one is attacked with leprosy; if 
anybody performs Homa with leavings of other food he becomes 
subdued by his enemy; if one does so with rude and harsh 
substances, he becomes poor and if one does with salty substances, 
he meets with a downward course, gets degraded in position and 



honour. You can offer oblations to VaisVadeva with burning coals 
and ashes from the north side of the fire of the hearth after the 
preparation of the meals. But you should never offer sacrifices with 
salty things. The illiterate Brahmana who eats before offering 
oblations to VaisVadeva goes headlong downwards into the Kala 
Sutra hell. Whatever food that you are intending to prepare, whether 
they be vegetables, leaves, roots or fruits, offer oblations to 
VaisVadeva with that if, before the Homa be performed of 
VaisVadeva, any Brahmachari comes, then take off, for the Homa, 
first something; and then give to the beggar and satisfy him and tell 
him to be off. For the Brahmachari mendicant can remove any 
defects that may occur to VaisVadeva but VaisVadeva is unable to 
remove any defects that may occur regarding the mendicant 
Brahmachari. Both the Paramahansa or Brahmachari mendicant are 
the masters of the prepared food (Pakkanna); so when anybody 
takes one’s food without giving to any of these two, if they happen to 
come there, he will have to make the Chandrayana (religious or 
expiatory penance regulated by the moon’s age, that is, waxing or 
waning). O Narada! After the offering given to Vais’vanara, one is to 
offer Gograsa, that is, mouthfuls of food to the cows. Hear now how 
that is done. The mother Surabhi, the beloved of Visnu, is always 
stationed in the region of Visnu (Visnupada); so O Surabhi! I am 
offering you mouthfuls of food. Accept it. “Salutation to the cows,” 
saying this, one is to worship the cows and offer food to them. 

Hereby Surabhi, the Mother of the cows, becomes pleased. After 
this, one is to wait outside for a period that is taken to milch a cow, 
whether any guests are coming. For if any guest goes back 
disappointed from any house without any food; he takes away all the 
punyams (merits) of the house-holder and gives him back his own 
sin. The house-holder is to support mother, father. Guru, brother, 
son, servants, dependants, guests, those that have come, and Agni 
(Fire). Knowing all these, he who does not perform the functions of 
the house-hold is reckoned as fallen from his Dharma both in this 
world and in the next. The poor house-holder gets the same fruit by 
performing these five Maha jajhas that a rich Brahmana gets by 
performing the Soma Yajha. O Best of the Munis! Now I am talking of 



the Pranagni Hotra or about taking food, knowing the rules of which 
makes a man free from birth, old age and death and from all sorts of 
sins. He who takes his food according to proper rules, is freed of the 
threefold debts, delivers his twenty one generations from the hells, 
obtains the fruits of all the Yajhas and goes unhampered to all the 
regions of the righteous. Think of the belly as Arani or the piece of 
wood for kindling the fire 

(by attrition), think of the mind as the churning rod, and think of the 
wind as the rope, and then kindle the fire, residing in the belly; the 
eyes are to be considered as the sacrifice^ (the Addharyu), and 
consider fire in the belly as the result of churning. In this fire of the 
belly, one is to offer oblations for the satisfaction of Prana, etc., the 
five deities. First of all offer oblations to the Prana Vayu with food 
taken by the forefinger, middlefinger and thumb; next offer oblations 
to the Apana Vayu with the thumb, middle finger and the nameless 
(anama) finger; next offer oblations to the Vyana Vayu (breath) with 
the thumb, nameless finger and the little finger; next offer oblations 
to the Udana Vayu with the thumb, forefinger and the little finger and 
lastly offer oblations to the Samana Vayu with food taken by all the 
fingers. At the same time repeat respectively the mantras 


“Om Pranaya Svaha,” 

“Om Apanaya Svaha,” 

“Om Samanaya Svaha,” 

“Om Udanaya Svaha,” 

“Om Vyanaya Svaha.” 

Within the mouth, there is the Ahavaniya fire; within the heart, there 
is the Garhapatya fire; in the navel, there is the Dhaksinagni fire; 
below the navel, there is the Sabhyagni fire and below that there is 
the Avasathyagni fire. Think thus. Next consider the Speech as the 



Hota, the Prana as the Udgatha, the eyes as the Addharyu, the mind 
as the Brahma, the ears as the Hota and the keeper of the Agni, the 
Ahamkara (egoism) as beast (Pas’u), Om Kara as water, the Buddhi 
(intellect) of the house-holder as the legal wife, the heart as the 
sacrificial altar, the hairs and pores as the Kus’a grass, and the two 
hands as the sacrificial ladles and spoons (Sruk and Sruva.) Then 
think of the colour of the Prana mantra as golden the fire of hunger 
as the Risi (seer), Surya (the sun) as Devata, the chhandas as 
Gayatri and Pranaya Svaha as the Mantra uttered; also repeat 
“Idamadityadevaya namah” and offer oblations to the Prana. The 
colour of the Apana mantra is milk white. S’raddhagni is the Risi, the 
Moon is the Devata, Usnik is the chhandas, and “Apanaya Svaha,” 
“Idam Somaya na namah” are the mantras. The colour of the Vyana 
mantra is red like red lotuses; the fire Deity Hutasana is the Risi, the 
fire is the Devata; Anustup is the chhandas, “Vyanaya Svaha” and 
“Idamagnaye na namah” are the mantras. The colour of the Udana 
mantra is like that of the worm Indra Gopa; fire is the Risi; Vayu is 
the Devata, Brihati is the chhandas; “Udanaya Svaha” and “Idam 
Vayave na namah” are the mantras. The colour of the Samana 
mantra is like lightning; Agni is the Risi; Parjanya (the rains, water) is 
the Devata; Pankti is the chhanda; “Samanaya Svaha” and “Idam 
Parjanyaya na namah” are the mantras. O Narada! Thus offering the 
five oblations to the five breaths, next offer oblations to the Atman; 
the Bhisana Vahni is the Risi; the Gayatri is the chhanda; the Self is 
the Devata; “Atmane Svaha,” and “Idamatmane na namah” are the 
mantras. O Narada! He who knows this Homa of Pranagnihotra 
attains the state of Brahma. Thus I have spoken to you in brief the 
rules of the Pranagni hotra Homa. 


Here ends the Twenty-Second Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the 
rules of VaisVadeva in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 23. On The Tapta Krichchhra Vrata 
And Others 


1-20. Narayana said The best Sadhaka, then uttering after his 
meals, the mantra “Amritapidhanamasi.” (O Water-nectar! Let Thou 
be the covering to the food that I have taken), should make 
Achaman (sip one Gandusa water) and distribute the remnant food 
(the leavings) to those who take the leavings. “Let the servants and 
maid-servants of our family that expect the leavings of food be 
satisfied with what leavings I give to them.” “Let those inhabitants of 
the Raurava hell or other unholy places who have remained there for 
a Padma or Arbuda years and want to drink water, be satisfied with 
this water that I offer to them and let this water bring unending 
happiness to them.” Repeating the above two mantras let the house¬ 
holder distribute the leavings of food to the servants and the water to 
those who want water respectively. Then opening the knot of the 
Pavitra (a ring of Kus’a grass worn on the fourth finger on certain 
religious occasions), let him throw this on the square mandalam or 
the ground. The Brahmana that throws this Kus’a grass on the 
vessel (Patra) is said to defile the vow of Brahmanas, taking their 
food. The Brahmana that has not yet washed his face after taking 
the food, or touching another such Brahmana or a dog, or a S’udra, 
should fast one day and then drink Pahchagabya and thus purify 
himself. And in case the Uchchista Brahmin (who has not washed 
his mouth and hands after meals) be touched by another Brahmin, 
who is not Uchchista, then simply bathing will purify him. By offering 
this Ekahuti (oblation once) according to rules mentioned above, one 
obtains the fruit of performing ten million sacrifices; and by offering 
this oblation five times one gets the endless fruit, of performing fifty 
million sacrifices, and if one feeds such a man who knows well how 
to do this Pranagnihoma, then he as well as he whom he feeds both 
derive full benefits and they ultimately go to heaven. The Brahmana 



acquires while taking each of his mouthful of food the fruit of eating 
Pahchagavya, who takes his food duly with the holy Pavitra Kus’a 
grass tied on his finger. During the three times of worship, the 
devotee is to do his daily Japam, Tarpanam and Homa and he 
should feed the Brahmins. Thus the five limbed Puras’charana is 
completely done. The religious man should sleep on a low bedding 
(lie on the ground); he is to control his senses and anger; he is to eat 
moderately, the things that are light, sweet and good; he is to be 
humble, peaceful and calm. He is to bathe thrice daily and not to 
hold any unholy conversation with any woman, a S’udra, one who is 
fallen, without any initiation, and who is an atheist; as well he should 
not speak in a language spoken by the chandalas. One is to bow 
down before him who is in the act of performing the Japam, Homa 
and worship, etc; one is not to talk with him. Never by deed, mind or 
word, on all occasions never speak about sexual intercourses; nor 
hold any contact with such people. For the relinquishment of this 
subject is called Brahmacharyam (continence) of the kings as well as 
of the house-holders. But one should go to one’s legal wife during 
the night time after her menstruation duly according to the rules of 
the S’astras; the Brahmacharyam is not thereby destroyed. Man 
cannot repay the three-fold debts and he cannot aspire for moksa 
without procreating sons or without doing the duties of the house¬ 
holders, as prescribed by the S’astras. An attempt to do so becomes 
entirely fruitless like the breast on the neck of a goat. Rather it drags 
one downward. So the S’rutis say. So let yourself be free first from 
the debts due to the Devas, the debts due to the Risis and the debts 
due to the Piths. Make sacrifices first and then be free from the 
Devas’ debt. Hold Brahmacharyam and be free from the Risis’ debt. 
Offer til and water; that is, do S’raddhas and tarpanams and be free 
from the debt due to the Pitris. Then do readily practise your own 
Varnas’rama Dharma. 


21-33. One is to practise Krichchra Chandra yana Vrata and to take 
for his food, milk, fruits, roots and vegetables, Habisyannam and 



food obtained by begging so that one may become sinless. One is to 
make japam for Puras’charanam. One is to avoid salt, salty or 
alkaline substances, acid, garlic, turnips, eating in Kamsa vessels, 
chewing betels, eating twice, putting on impure clothings, the 
intoxicating things and the unsastric nocturnal japam; also one is not 
to waste one’s time over blaming and trying to find faults with the 
relatives, playing at dice, or talking at random with one’s wife (so that 
evil effects may arise). One is to spend one’s time in worshipping the 
Devas, reciting the hymns of praise, and studying the S’astras. One 
is to sleep on the ground, practise Brahmacharyam, and the vow of 
silence, bathe thrice, not practise anything which befits the S’udras 
only. One is to worship everyday, make charities duly and be always 
happy, recite stotras daily, do occasional Deva worships, have faith 
in one’s Guru and Deva. These twelve rules are to ensure success 
to the devotee who does Puras’charanam. One is to daily praise the 
Sun, with one’s face turned towards Him, do japam before Him; or 
one is to worship one’s own Deity in front of fire or the image of any 
god, and do japam simultaneously. The devotee who practises 
Puras’charanam is to bathe, worship, do japam, meditate, practise 
Homa, Tarpanam, is to have no desires and to surrender all fruits to 
one’s own desired Deity, etc. These are necessarily to be observed 
by him. Therefore while doing japam, Homa, etc., the devotee’s mind 
is to remain always pleasant and satisfied. One should be ready to 
practise tapasya, to see the S’astras and be merciful to all the 
beings. As asceticism leads one to to heaven and to the attainment 
of one’s desires, therefore know this that all the powers come to an 
ascetic. An ascetic can cause another’s death (maran); he can injure 
others, cure diseases and kill all. Whatever the several Risis wanted 
from the Devi Gayatri and to that end made Puras’charanam and 
worshipped Her, they obtained from Her all those things. O Narada! I 
will speak of S’anti Karmas etc., in a future chapter. Here I will speak 
of those rules, etc., that are to be observed in Puras’charanam in as 
much as they play the principal part to success. 



First of all shave yourself and have your hairs and nails, etc., cut off 
and bathe and be pure. Then perform the Prajapatya prayas’chitta 
for one’s peace and purification and next do the puras’charanam of 
the Gayatri. Do not speak the whole day and night. Keep your 
thoughts pure. If words are to be spoken, speak only what you take 
as true. First recite Mahavyarhiti and then the Savitri mantra with 
Pranava prefixed. Then recite the sin-destroying mantra “Apohistha, 
etc.,” and Svasti mati Sukta and “Pavamani Sukta.” In every action, 
in its beginning and at its end one is to understand the necessity of 
doing the Japam, why and what for one is doing that. 


One is to repeat the Pranava, the three Vyarhitis and Savitri ayuta 
times or one thousand times or one hundred times or ten times. 

Then offer with water, the peace offerings (tarpanam) to the Acharya, 
Risi, Chhandas, and the Devas. Being engaged in action, do not 
speak any impure language of the MIechchhas or talk with any 
S’udra or any bad person. Do not talk with wife in the period of 
menstruation, with one who has fallen, with the low-class person, 
with any hater of the Devas and the Brahmanas, Acharyas and 
Gurus, with those who blame the fathers and mothers; nor show any 
disrespect to anybody. Thus I have spoken in due order about all the 
rules of Krichchhra vrata. Now I will speak of the rules of the 
Prajapatya Krichchhra, S’antapana, Paraka Krichchhra and 
Chandrayana. 


34-54. One becomes freed of all the sins, if one performs the above 
five Chandrayanas. By the performance of the Tapta Krichchhra, all 
sins are burnt off in an instant. By the performance of the three 
Chandrayanas the people get purified and go to the Brahma Loka. 
By doing eight Chandrayanas, one sees face to face one’s Devata, 
ready to grant boons. With ten Chandrayanas, one gets the 
knowledge of the Vedas and one acquires all what one wants. 



In the observance of the Krichchhra Prajapatya Vrata, one has to 
take food once in midday for three days, once in the evening for 
three days, and for the next three days whatever one gets without 
asking anything from anybody. For the next three days one is not to 
take any thing at all and go on with one’s work. These twelve days’ 
work constitutes the Prajapatya Vrata. 


Now about the rules of the S’antapana Vrata. On the preceding day 
one has got to eat food consisting of the mixture of cow urine, cow- 
dung milk, curd, ghee and the water of the Kus’a grass; the day 
following he is to fast. These two days’ work constitutes the 
S’antapana Vrata. 


Now about the Ati Krichchhra vrata. For the first three days, one is to 
eat one mouthful of food a day and for the next three days one is to 
fast. This is the Ati Krichchhra vrata. This vrata repeated three times 
is called Maha S’antapana vrata. Note According to the opinion of 
Yama, the fifteen days’ work constitutes Maha S’antapana. For the 
three days one has to eat cow-urine; for the next three days, cow- 
dung, for the next three days, curd; for the next three days milk; and 
for the next three days one has to take ghee. Then one becomes 
pure. This is called the all sin-destroying Maha S’antapan Vrata. Now 
I am speaking of the nature of the Tapta Krichchhra Vrata. 


The Tapta Krichchhra vrata is carried out for the twelve days. For the 
first three days, one has to drink hot water; for the next three days, 
hot milk; for the next three days, the hot ghee and for the next three 
days, air only. Everyday one has to bathe once only under the above 
rules, and remain self-controlled. If one drinks water simply everyday 
under the above conditions, that is called the Prajapatya vrata. 



To remain without any food for twelve days according to rules is 
called the Paraka Krichchhra vrata. By this vrata, all sins are 
destroyed. 


Now about the rules of taking food in the Chandrayana vrata. In the 
dark fortnight one will have to decrease one mouthful of food every 
day and in the bright fortnight one will have to increase one mouthful 
every day and one has to fast completely on the Amavasya (new 
moon) day. One has to bathe thrice daily during every Sandhya time. 
This is known as the Chandrayana Vrata. 


In the S’is’u Chandrayana Vrata one will have to take four mouthfuls 
of food in the midday and four mouthfuls in the evening. In the Yati 
Chandrayana one has to take eight mouthfuls in the midday and to 
control his passions. 


55. These abovementioned vratas are observed by the Rudras, 
Adityas, Vasus, and Maruts; and they are enjoying thereby their full 
safety. 


Each of the above vratas purifies the seven Dhatus of the body in 
seven nights simply! First skin, then blood, then flesh, bones, 
sinews, marrows and semen are purified. There is no doubt in this. 
Thus purifying the Atman by the above vratas, one is to do religious 
actions. The work done by such a purified man is sure to be met with 
success. First control the senses, be pure and do good actions. 

Then all your desires will be undoubtedly fructified. Fast for three 
nights, without doing any actions and see the result. (You will not do 
anything and you want self control! Is this a child’s play?) Perform for 
three days the nocturnal vratas. Then proceed with your desired 
duties. If one works according to these methods, one gets the fruits 



of Puras’charanam. O Narada! By the Puras’charanam of S’n 
Gayatn Devi all desires are fulfilled and all sins are destroyed. 
Before doing Puras’charanam purify your body by perfornning the 
above vratas. Then you will get all your desires connpletely fulfilled. 
O Narada! Thus I have spoken to you of the secret rules of 
Puras’charanam. Never disclose this to any other body. For it is 
recognised equivalent to the Vedas. 


Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the 
Tapta Krichchhra vrata and others in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 24. On Sadachara 


1. Narada said O Bhagavan! Thou art the ocean of mercy; kindly 
speak out to me in brief all the things and the duties to be observed 
and applied in the S’anti Karmas (the peace bringing acts) of 
Gayatri. 


2-20. Narayana said O Narada! The question asked by you is 
esoteric. Never divulge this to a wicked person or any hypocrite. It is 
to be kept secret. While doing this S’anti Karma, the Brahmanas are 
to perform the Homas with fuel soaked in milk (Payah). If the fuel of 
the S’ami tree be offered in Homa ceremony, then diseases caused 
by planets are cured. If the Homa be performed with wet As’vaththa 
or Udumbara or other ksira trees, the diseases caused by demons 
and hob-goblins are cured. If one offers Tarpanam with one palmful 
of water, repeating the mantra “Suryam Tarpayami namah”, the 
pending evils are also averted and troubles are ceased. The 
repetition of the Gayatri mantra with knees immersed in water averts 
all evils. The repetition of Gayatri with body immersed in water upto 
the throat, averts the danger of life; and the same with whole body 
immersed grants all success. This is the best of all the S’anti 
karmas, the acts that bring health, wealth, happiness and peace. 
While performing Homa, light with the fuel of Ksiravriksa (the trees 
that emit milky juice); place Pahchagavya in a vessel made of gold, 
silver, copper or wood of ksira trees, or in the vessels made of earth, 
without any knot or crack; utter the Gayatri mantra and offer one 
thousand homas. Sprinkle with water at every offering, touching the 
Pahchagavya with Kus’a grass, thousand times. Then offer the 
sacrifices there where calamities or nuisances are seen and 
meditate on the Highest Devata. Thus all the magic spells used by 
other persons for a malevolent purpose will be rendered nugatory. 
Bring under your control any Deva yoni, Bhute Yoni, or Pis’acha Yoni 
that causes you troubles; then they will quit the house, village, city. 



way, even that kingdom. Now hear how they are brought under 
control. Prepare a sacrificial altar with sand, draw a square on it, 
place a Sula (spear) in its centre and plaster with Astagandha. For 
the sake of converting all the evils, repeat Gayatri mantra thousand 
times and impregnate it with the mantra, dig the ground and place or 
bury the Sula under it. Place on the level ground or sthandila a jar or 
Navaphala, a fruit made of gold, silver, or copper or a newly made 
earthen jar and enclose it with thread. Then have the sacred waters 
brought from the several Tirthas by the Brahmins and fill the jar, 
repeating the Gayatri Mantra. Put within this jar the twigs, then of 
Cardamom tree, sandal tree, karpura tree, jati, aparajita. Saha Devi, 
Patala, Mallika flower, Bel leaves, rice, barley. Til, mustard, asVattha, 
and udumbara trees and throw them within the jar. (The Ksira trees 
are AsVaththa, Udumbara, Plaksa, and Nyagrodha.) Doing all these, 
prepare one Kus’a Kurcha made of twenty seven Kus’a grass in the 
form of a braid of hair, round one end of a straight rod and tied in a 
knot and place it there. Then take your bath and repeat the Gayatri 
mantra over it one thousand times with your whole mind fully 
concentrated. Then the Veda knowing Brahmanas would recite the 
Saura mantra and sprinkle the man attacked by the demon with 
water and make him drink also the water saturated with the mantra 
and bathe him also with that. Then that person will be dispossessed 
of the devil and be happy. Even when the man (possessed by a 
devil), is going to die, he gets his life again if he be made to drink this 
water saturated with this mantra and have his bath with that. So a 
wise King must do this, with a desire to have a long life; and after he 
is sprinkled with this mantra-charged water he is to give one hundred 
cows to the Brahmanas as the Daksina. 


21-44. The Daksina is to be given according to one’s might; and 
specially what gives satisfaction to the Brahmanas. If one be terrified 
by a Devil or so or by the mischievous magic spells of others, one is 
to sit on Saturday under an As’vattha tree and repeat one hundred 
Gayatris. For the cure of all diseases, if one has to perform the 



Mrityunjaya Homa, one will have to do Homa with the Gulancha 
creeper, soaked in milk and deducting the knots thereof. For the 
pacification of fever, mango leaves soaked with milk ought to be 
used in the Homa ceremony. The wasting diseases are cured if 
Homa be performed with the leaves of the Vacha soaked in milk; 
phthisis or consumption is cured if Homa be performed with curd, 
milk and ghee. Again, if offerings be given to the Solar Deity and if 
Payasannam be given to him and if this be given to the consumptive 
patient, his disease will be cured. Again, on the Amavasya tithi (new 
moon day) if Homa be performed with Soma creeper (excluding the 
knot joints) soaked in milk, then consumption will be cured. If Homa 
be made with the flowers of the S’amkhya tree, then leprosy is 
cured; if the Homa be done with the seed of Apamarga, the Mrigis or 
the hysteric and epileptic fits are cured. So if Homa be performed 
with the fuel of Ksira trees, lunacy is cured; if, with the fuel of 
udumbara, meha (spermatorrhea) is cured; if with sugarcane juice, 
gonorrhea is cured; if with curd, milk and ghee or with the ghee of 
Kapila cow, the homa be performed, the Masurika disease or 
smallpox will be cured, and if Homa be performed with the fuels of 
Udumbara, Vata, and AsVatha be performed, then the diseases of 
cows, elephants and horses are cured. If the trouble be caused by 
many ants and ant-hills (Madhu Valmika) then perform the Homa 
ceremony with the fuel of Sami tree one hundred times and with the 
food prepared of ghee one hundred times and offer sacrifices with 
the rest of the food; then the above troubles will cease. If there be a 
earth quake or if there be seen flashes of lightnings, then homa is to 
be performed with the fuel of Vana Vetasa and the whole kingdom 
will be happy. If you surcharge any piece of iron with Gayatri mantra 
repeated hundred times and if you throw it in any direction then no 
fear will arise from that quarter out of fire, air, or any other enemy. If 
one be imprisoned, and if he repeats the Gayatri mentally, he will be 
liberated from the prison. If you touch the man possessed by a devil, 
disease or mortification and sorrow with the Kus’a grass and repeat 
the Gayatri mantra, and thus charge him with Divine electricity, that 
man will be liberated from the fear caused thereby. If you make the 
man possessed by devils, etc., drink the water charged with the 



Gayatn mantra or if you cast on his body the ashes charged with 
hundred Gayatris or tie those ashes on his head repeating the 
Gayatri mantra, he will be instantly freed of all diseases and will live 
for one hundred years in happiness. In case a man is unable to do 
fully all these himself, he can get all these done by other Brahmanas 
and pay Daksina (fees) to them duly for the same. 


O Narada! Now I will tell you how nourishment and wealth are 
attained. Wealth is attained if the Homa be performed with red lotus 
or fresh Jati flower or with the S’ali rice or with the fuel of Bel tress, 
leaves, flowers, fruits or roots or with any portions thereof. If for one 
week the oblations be offered with fuel of Bel tree mixed with Payasa 
or with ghee one hundred times, then Laksmi Devi will surely be 
attained. If the Homa be performed with Laja (fried rice) mixed with 
curd, milk, and ghee, the daughter will be obtained. If for one week, 
the Homa be performed with red lotus, then gold is obtained. If the 
Tarpanam (peace offering) be offered to the Sun, then the treasures, 
gold hidden under the water, are obtained. If the Homa be performed 
with food (Anna) then Anna is obtained; if Homa be performed with 
rice, then rice is obtained. 


45-51. If Homa be performed with calfdung, dried and powdered, 
then animals are obtained. If Homa be performed with Priyangu, 
Payasa or ghee then the progeny is obtained. If the oblations of 
Payasanna be offered to the Solar Deity and if the Prasadam 
(remnant) be given to one’s wife under menstruation to eat, then 
excellent sons will be obtained. If the Homa be performed with the 
fuel of wet pointed Ksira trees, then longevity is attained. If Homa be 
performed with the fuel of the Palas’a tree, pointed and wet and 
mixed with curd, milk, and ghee for one hundred times consecutively, 
then longevity and gold are attained. If the Homa be performed with 
Durba grass, milk, honey or ghee, one hundred times, then longevity 
and golden lotus are obtained. If for one week the Homa ceremony 



be performed with the fuel of S’ami tree mixed with food, milk or 
ghee one hundred times of each or if for one week the Homa he 
performed with the fuel of Nyagrodha tree and afterwards one 
hundred Homas be made with Payasanna, the fear of unnatural 
death is removed. 


52-60. That man can conquer death who can remain for one week 
living on milk only and who performs during that time hundreds, and 
hundreds of Homas and repeats the Gayatri, controlling his speech. 

If anybody can fast three nights and control his speech and repeat 
Gayatri he gets himself freed from the hands of Death; or totally 
immersed in water if he repeats Gayatri, he will be saved from the 
impending danger of death. If anybody repeats the Gayatri mantra 
for one month, taking his seat under a Bel tree or performs Homa 
with Bel fruit, root or leaves, he gets kingdoms. (Know all the 
Mantrams are electric in their effects). Similarly if anybody performs 
Homa with one hundred lotuses, he gets a foeless kingdom. So one 
becomes the lord of a village if one performs Homa with Yavagu 
(barley gruel) and Salidhanya. If the Homa be performed with the 
fuel of Asvaththa tree, victory in battle is ensured and if the Homa be 
performed with the fuel of Akanda tree, then victory everywhere is 
ensured. If one hundred Homas be performed extending a week with 
Vetasa tree’s leaves or fruits, dipped in milk and mixed with Payasa, 
the rainfall is ensured. Similarly if anybody repeats Gayatri for one 
week with his body upto navel immersed in water, the rainfall is 
ensured; on the contrary if the Homa be performed with ashes in 
water, then the cessation of heavy rainfall is ensured. The Homa with 
the fuel of Palasa gives Brahmateja; Homa with the flowers of 
Palasa gives everything desired. Homa with milk or drinking 
Brahmarasa, charged with mantra, increases the intellect; and the 
Homa with ghee gives Buddhi (medha) (intelligence). 



61-69. Homa with flowers gives good smell; Homa with thread gives 
cloth; Homa with salt and honey mixed or Bel flowers gives one 
power to control anything and everything that is desired. If anybody 
bathes everyday immersed completely within water and sprinkles 
water on his body, he becomes cured of diseases and he becomes 
very healthy. If any Brahmana does these things for others, he 
becomes also no doubt healthy. If anybody wants to increase his life 
period he should practise good deeds and repeat Gayatri thousand 
times daily for one month. Thus his longevity will be increased. Two 
months’ such practice gives long life and perpetual health; three 
month’s such practice will give life, health, and wealth, four months 
such practice gives longevity, wealth, fame, women, sons, etc., five 
months such practice gives longevity, health, wealth, wife, sons and 
learning. So one should repeat this as many months in proportion to 
the number of his desires and he would get them. Again any 
Brahmana who stands on one leg without holding any other thing 
and raises both his hands and daily repeats three hundred Gayatris 
for one month, gets all his desires fulfilled. And if he repeats one 
thousand one hundred Gayatris, there is nothing in this world that is 
not met and attained with success. Controlling the Prana (inhaling) 
and Apana (exhaling) Vayu (breath), he who repeats daily three 
hundred Gayatris to the Devi, his highest desires are satisfied. 


70-77. Vis’vamitra Risi says Standing on one leg, with both hands 
raised and controlling Vayu he who repeats daily one hundred 
Gayatris for one month, gets all his desires fulfilled. Similarly with 
three hundred or thousand repeatings, all things are attained. 
Submerged under water, if one repeats Gayatris as many times as 
mentioned above, he gets everything. If, for one year, with hands 
uplifted and without holding anything, anyone stands on one leg, 
controls one’s breath and repeats Gayatri mantra three hundred 
times or thousand times, eating Havisyannam only in the night time, 
he becomes a Risi (Seer). This thing repeated two years gives 
infallible speech; three years gives knowledge of the present, past 



and future; four years will enable one to see face to face the Solar 
God; five years will give the eight Siddhis, lightness, etc., six years 
will enable one to assunne forms as he desires; seven years gives 
immortality; nine years gives Manuhood; ten years gives Indrahood; 
eleven years gives Brahma-hood; and twelve years gives the state of 
Parama Brahma. 


78-90. O Narada! By these practices of Tapasyas you and other 
Risis have been able to conquer the three Lokas (regions). Some ate 
only vegetables; some fruits; some, roots; some simply water; some, 
ghee; some, Somarasa; whereas some others ate only charu and 
did tapasya. Some Risis practised this great Tapasya by eating very 
little for a fortnight only. Some ate food, only what they got by 
begging during the day; and some ate only Havisyanna. O Narada! 
Now hear the rules for the purification and expiation of sins. For the 
expiation of the sin incurred in stealing gold, one is to repeat three 
thousand Gayatris (daily) for one month; then the sin will be 
destroyed. By this act also the sins incurred by drinking or by going 
to one’s Guru’s wife are destroyed. Vis’vamitra Risi says The sin 
incurred by killing a Brahmana (Brahmahatya) is destroyed if one 
erects a shed in a forest and, living there, repeats three thousand 
Gayatris daily for one month. Those Brahmanas that have 
committed the Great Sins (i.e., Mahapatakas), become free, if they 
repeat one thousand Gayatris daily, submerged under water, for 
twelve successive days. By controlling speech and by practising 
Pranayama, if one repeats three thousand Gayatris daily for one 
month, one will be free from the Mahapatakas. If one practises one 
thousand Pranayamas repeating the Gayatri, one becomes freed 
also of Brahmahatya. If one draws upwards the Prana and Apana 
Vayus six times, repeating the Gayatri with collected mind, this 
destroys all the sins and it is called all-sin destroying Pranayama. If 
one practises this Pranayama one thousand times for one month, 
the lord of the earth becomes freed of all sins. If any Brahmana 
incurs the sin of killing a cow, for twelve days he is to repeat three 



thousand Gayatris daily for expiation. Similarly the repetition of ten 
thousand Gayatris removes the sin of going to those not fit to be 
gone into, eating the uneatables, stealing and killing and this act 
brings in peace. All sins are destroyed by performing one hundred 
Pranayamas with Gayatri. Again if there be a mixture of various sins, 
one will have to live in the forest for one month and repeat one 
thousand Gayatris or practise fasting and repeat three thousand 
Gayatris; thus all sins will be destroyed. 


91-100. To repeat Gayatri twenty-four thousand times is equal to 
performing the Krichchhra vrata and to repeat sixty four thousand 
Gayatris duly is equal to performing the Chandrayana. If anybody 
repeats, in the morning and evening Sandhya times, the merit giving 
Gayatri one hundred times, with Pranayama, all his sins are 
destroyed. So, submerged under water, if one repeats the Gayatri 
Devi, meditating Her in the Sun, one hundred times daily, one’s all 
the sins are fully destroyed. O Narada! Thus I have described to you 
all about averting or destroying the evils and the purification of 
various sins. All this is secret. Keep it carefully concealed. Never 
divulge this. Whoever divulges this will bring his own ruin. I have 
spoken to you, in brief, all about Sadachara (right way of living). If 
anybody practises this duly, according to rules, S’ri Mahamaya 
Durga Devi becomes pleased with him. If anybody wants to have 
both enjoyment and liberation, he is to practise all these daily, as 
well as the occasional, and Kamya (desired) duties duly according to 
rules. It is stated in all the S’astras, that this Achara (right way of 
living) is the foremost and the chief Dharma, the Deity of which is the 
Supreme Mother Herself. O Narada! That man who practises duly 
this Achara is, in this world, holy, happy and blessed. This I speak to 
you truly. If anybody desires to get the Devi Bhagavati’s Grace, he 
should first of all set himself at once to practise this Sadachara. He 
who hears this gets wealth and great happiness. There is no doubt in 
this. Now speak what more you want to hear. 



Here ends the Twenty fourth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on 
Sadachara in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. The Eleventh Book 
Completed. 


[Here ends the Eleventh Book.] 



THE TWELFTH BOOK 



Chapter 1. On The Description Of Gayatr! 


1-7. Narada said O Deva! The rules of Sadachara (right ways of 
living) and the all-sin-destroying unequalled Glories of the Devi 
Bhagavati have been described by Thee. And I, too, have heard the 
nectar of the Glories of the Devi from Thy lotus mouth. The 
Chandrayana and other Vratas; described by Thee, are very difficult 
to practise. So they are impracticable with the ordinary persons. 
Therefore, O Lord! Kindly describe those actions which can easily be 
carried out by common persons, at the same time, the Devi's Grace 
and Siddhis can be obtained by those practices. Again what thou 
hast described about the Gayatri in connection with Sadachara 
kindly say which are the chief and foremost as well as those that are 
more meritorious. O Best of the Munis! Thou hast told that there are 
the twenty-four syllables in the Gayatri. Kindly describe now their 
Risis, Chhandas, Devatas and other things that should be known 
regarding them and thus satisfy my longings. 


8-27. S’ri Narayana said O Narada! The twice-born would have 
done what they ought to do if they be engaged in repeating their 
Gayatri only, whether they be able or not able to practise the 
Chandrayana and the other vratas. Whichever Brahmin repeats the 
Gayatri three thousand times and offers Arghya to the Sun in the 
three Sandhya times, the Devas worship him; what to speak of other 
ordinary persons! Whether he practises Nyasa or not, if anybody 
sincerely repeats the Gayatri Devi, Whose Nature is Existence, 
Intelligence, and Bliss and meditates on Her, even if he attains siddhi 
in one syllable even, then as a result of that, he can vie with the best 
of the Brahmanas, the Moon, and the Sun; nay, with Brahma, Visnu, 
and Mahes'vara even! O Narada! Now I will tell in due order the 
Risis, Chhandas, and the Devatas of the twenty-four syllables of the 
Gayatri. The Risis, in due order, are (1) Varna Deva, (2) Attri, (3) 
Vas'istha, (4) S’ukra, (5) Kanva, (6) Paras'ara, (7) the very fiery 



VisVamitra, (8) Kapila, (9) S’aunaka, (10) Yajnavalkya, (11) 
Bharadvaja, (12) the ascetic Jamadagni, (13) Gautama, (14) 
Mudgala, (15) Vedavyasa, (16) Lomas'a, (17) Agastya, (18) 
Kaus'ika, (19) Vatsya, (20) Pulastya, (21) Manduka, (22) the ascetic 
in chief Durvasa, (23) Narada and (24) Kas'yapa- 


Now about the chhandas (1) Gayatn, (2) Usnik, (3) Anustup, (4) 
Brihati, (5) Pankti, (6) Trisnup, (7) Jagati, (8) Atijagati, (9) S’akkan, 
(10) Ati S’akkan, (11) Dhriti, (12) Ati Dhriti, (13) Virat, (14) 
Prastarapankti, (15) Kriti, (16) Prakriti, (17) Akriti, (18) Vikriti, (19) 
Samkriti, (20) Aksarapankti, (21) Bhuh, (22) Bhuvah, (23) Svah and 
(24) Jyotismati. The Devatas of the several letters in due order, are 
- (1) Agni, (2) Prajapati, (3) Soma, (4) Is'ana, (5) Savita, (6) Aditya, 
(7) Brihaspati, (8) Maitravaruna, (9) Bhagadeva, (10) Aryama, (11) 
Ganes'a, (12) Tvastra, (13) Pusa, (14) Indragni, (15) Vayu, (16) 
Vamadeva, (17) Maitra varuni (18) VisVadeva, (19) Matrika, (20) 
Visnu, (21) Vasu, (22) Rudra Deva, (23) Kuvera, and (24) the twin 
As'vini Kumaras. O Narada! Thus I have described to you about the 
the Devatas of the twenty-four syllables. The hearing of this destroys 
all sins and yields the full results of repeating the mantra Gayatri. 
(Note The Devatas, mentioned in the Gayatri Brahma Kalpa are 
different from those mentioned here.) 


Here ends the first Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the description of 
Gayatri in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 2. On The Description Of The S’aktis, 
Etc., Of The Syllables Of Gayatr! 


1-18. Narayana said O Narada! O Great Muni! Now hear which 
are the S’aktis in due order of the twenty four syllables of the Gayatri 
Devi:- 


(1) Varna Devi, (2) Priya, (3) Satya, (4) VisVa, (5) Bhadravilasini, (6) 
Prabha Vati, (7) Jaya, (8) S’anta, (9) Kanta, (10) Durga, (11) 
Sarasvati, (12) Vidruma, (13) Vis'ale'sa, (14) Vyapini, (15) Vimala, 
(16) Tamopaharini, (17) Suksma, (18) VisVayoni, (19) Jaya, (20) 
Vas'a, (21) Padmalaya, (22) Paras'obha, (23) Bhadra, and (24) 
Tripada. 


Now hear the respective colours of the several syllables of the 
Gayatri Devi (1) like Champaka and AtasT flowers, (2) like 
Vidruma, (3) like crystal, (4) like lotus; (5) like the Rising Sun; (6) 
white like conchshell; (7) white like Kunda flower; (8) like Prabala 
and lotus leaves; (9) like Padmaraga, (10) like Indranilamani; (11) 
like pearls; (12) like Saffron; (13) like the black collyrium of the eye; 
(14) red; (15) like the Vaidurya mani; (16) like Ksaudra (Champaka 
tree, honey, water); (17) like turmeric; (18) like Kunda flower; and the 
milk (19) like the rays of the Sun; (20) like the tail of the bird S’uka; 
(21) like S’atapatra; (22) like Ketaki flower; (23) like Mallika flower; 
(24) like Karavira flower. 


Now about their Tattvas (1) earth; (2) water; (3) fire; (4) air; (5) 
Akas'a (ether); (6) smell; (7) taste; (8) form; (9) sound; (10) touch; 
(11) male generative organ; (12) anus; (13) legs, (14) hands; (15) 
speech; (16) Prana (vital breath); (17) tongue; (18) eyes; (19) skin; 



(20) ears; (21) Prana (up going breath); (22) Apana; (23) Vyana, (24) 
Samana. 


Now about the Mudras of the syllables:-- (I) Sammukha; (2) 
Samputa; (3) Vitata; (4) Vistrita; (5) Dvinnukha, (6) Trimukha; (7) 
Chaturmukha; (8) Pahchamukha; (9) Sanmukha; (10) Adhomukha; 
(11) Vyapakanjali (12) S’akata; (13) Yamapas'a; (14) Grathita; (15) 
Sanmukhon mukha (16) Vilamba; (17) Mustika; (18) Matsya; (19) 
Kurma; (20) Varahaka; (21) Simhakranta, (22) Mahakranta; (23) 
Mudgara, and (24) Pallava. 


The Mahamudras of the fourth foot of Gayatri are (1) Trisulayoni (2) 
Surabhi; (3) Aksa mala; (4) Linga; and (5) Ambuja. O Narada! Thus I 
have described to you all about the Mudras, etc., of the several 
syllables of the Gayatri. If during Japam, one thinks all these and at 
the same time repeats, all his sins are destroyed and his wealth gets 
increase and the fame attends on him. 


Here ends the Second Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the 
description of the S’aktis, etc., of the syllables of Gayatri in the 
Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 Verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 3. On The Description Of The Kavacha 
Of S’Ri Gayatr! Dev! 


1-3. Narada spoke O Bhagavan! Thou art the Lord of this world; 
Thou canst shew favour and disfavour both; Thou art specially 
versed in the sixty-four Kalas (arts of learning); Thou art the chief of 
the Yogis. I therefore ask Thee to solve a doubt of mine. By what 
Punyam a man can become free from all his sins and limitations and 
he can realise and become of the nature of Brahma. O Lord! And 
what are duly the Risis, Chhandas, Devatas, Dhyan, and Nyasa, 
etc., of this meritorious act? I want to hear. 


4-25. Narayana said O Narada! There is but one and the only one 
way to this and though that is very secret, I will disclose that to you. 

It is the Gayatri-Kavacha. It can destroy all sins. Therefore to recite 
or to hold it on one's body enables the man to become free from all 
his sins and to get all his desires fulfilled and he gets the Sayuya 
Mukti with the Devi (be merged in the DevT-Body). Now hear the 
Risis, Chhandas, etc., of this Kavacha Brahma, Visnu and 
Mahes'vara are the Risis; the Rik, Yajus, Sama and Atharva Vedas 
are the Chhandas; the Parama Kala Gayatri of the nature of Brahma 
is the Devata; “Tat” in Gayatri is the Vija; “Bharga” is the S’akti; and 
“Dhiyah” is the Kilaka; and its viniyoga (application) is in getting the 
Moksa (liberation.). With the first four syllables touch the heart; with 
the next three letters touch the head; with the next four letters touch 
the tuft on the crown of the head; with the next three letters on the 
Kavacha; with the next four letters on the eyes and with the last four 
letters make the Nyasa, all over the body repeating “Astraya Phat,” 

O Narada! Hear now the Dhyanam of Gayatri, that grants all desires. 
The Gayatri Devi has five faces; one of which is of white colour; and 
the other four is of pearl, Vidruma, golden, and Nilakantamani colour 
respectively. Each face has got three eyes; on the head there is a 
crown of jewels and the digit of the Moon is shining there. Her body 



is composed of the twenty-four tattvas. She has ten hands On the 
top right and left hands there are two lotuses; lower down, there are 
disc and conch shell; lower down, there are rope and skull; lower 
down, there are noose and goad; and on the bottom hands right and 
left she is making signs of “No fear” and “ready to grant boons.” Thus 
meditating on S’ri Gayatri, one is to recite the Kavacha thus Let 
the Gayatri Devi protect my front; Savitri Devi protect my right; the 
Sandhya Devi, my back and the Devi Sarasvati, my left. Let my 
Mother Parvati Devi protect my quarters. Let Jalas'ayini protect the 
southeast; Yatudhana Bhayankari protect my South-west; 
Pavamanavilasini my north-west; Rudrarupini Rudrani protect my 
north-east. Let Brahmani protect my top and Vaisnavi protect my 
nether regions. Let the word “Tat” in the Gayatri protect my legs; 
“Savituh” protect my Knees; “Varenyam,” protect my loins; 

“Bhargah,” my navel. Let “Devasya” protect my heart; “Dhimahi” 
protect my neck; “Dhiyah,” protect my eyes; “Yah,” protect my 
forehead; “Nah” protect my head; and “Prachodayat” protect the tuft 
on the crown of my head. 


Again let the “Tat” of the twenty-four syllabled Gayatri protect my 
head; “Sa,” protect my forehead; “Vi” protect my eyes; “Tu” my 
cheeks; “Va,” protect my nostrils; “Re,” my mouth; “ni” protect my 
upper lip; “Yah” protect my lower lip; “Bha” within my face; “rgo,” 
protect my cheeks; “De,” my throat; “Va” my shoulders; “Sya” my 
right hand; “Dhi” my navel; “ma,” my heart, “Hi,” my belly; “Dhi,” my 
navel; “Yo” my loins; “Yo”, my anus; “nah,” my thighs, “Pra,” my 
Knees; “Cho” my shanks “Da” my heels; “Ya” my legs; and let “at” 
protect all my sides. O Narada! This divine Kavacha of the Devi 
Gayatri can baffle hundreds and thousands of obstructions and evils; 
can grant sixty-four Kalas and liberation. By the glory of this 
Kavacha, man can become free from all evils and can attain the 
state of Brahma. Moreover whoever reads or hears this acquires the 
fruits of making a gift of a thousand cows. 



Here ends the Third Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the description 
of the Kavacha of S’ri Gayatri Devi in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 4. On Gayatr! Hridaya 


1-2. Narada said O Bhagavan! I have heard from you all about the 
Kavacha and the Mantra of S’ri Gayatri. O Deva Deva! O Thou, the 
Knower of the present, the past, and the future! Now tell about the 
Hridaya, the highest, the interior or esoteric Essence of the Gayatri, 
holding which, if one repeats the Gayatri, he acquires all the punyam 
(merits), I am desirous to hear this. 


3-8. Narayana said O Narada! This subject on the Hridaya of 
Gayatri is explicitly written in the Atharva Veda. Now I will speak on 
that, the great secret, in detail. Listen. First, consider the Gayatri, the 
Devi, the Mother of the Vedas as of a Cosmic Form (Vira trupa) and 
meditate all the Devas as residing on Her Body. Now in as much as 
the Pinda and Brahmanda are similar, consider yourself as of the 
form of the Devi and meditate within yourself on the Devatas, thus 
The Pundits, the Knowers of the Vedas, say this He is not yet fit to 
worship the Deva and he is not an Adhikari as yet who has not been 
able to make himself a Deva; therefore to establish the knowledge of 
the oneness of the Deva and himself, he is to meditate the Devas 
within his body, thus :-0 Narada! Now I will speak on the Hridaya of 
Gayatri, knowing which every man becomes able to become all the 
Devas. Listen. The Risi of this Gayatri Hridaya is Narayana; the 
Chhandas is Gayatri; and S’ri ParamesVari Gayatri is the Devata. 
Perform the Nyasa of this as mentioned before and taking your seat 
in a lonely place, meditate intently on the Devi with your heart and 
head well collected. Now I am speaking of the Arthanyasa. Hear. 
Meditate on the Devata Dyau on your head; the twin AsVins on the 
rows of the teeth; the two Sandhyas on your upper and lower lips; 
the Agni, Fire, within your mouth; Sarasvati, on the tongue; 

Brihaspati on the neck; the eight Vasus on the two breasts; the 
Vayus, on the two arms; the Paryanya Deva on the heart; Akas'a, on 
the belly; Antariksam (the middle space) on the navel; Indra and 



Agni, on the loins; Prajapati, the condensed form, as it were, of 
Vijhana, on the hip joints; the Kailas'a and the Malaya mountains on 
the two thighs; the Visvedevas on the two knees; VisVamitra on the 
shanks; the Sun's northern and southern paths, the Uttarayana and 
Daksinayana on the anus; the Piths on the thighs; the Earth on the 
legs; the Vanaspati on the fingers and toes; the Risis on the hairs of 
the body; the Muhurtas on the nails; the planets on the bones; the 
Ritus (seasons) on the blood and flesh; the Samvatsaras on the 
Nimisa (twinkling of eye) the Sun and the Moon on the day and night 
respectively. Thinking thus, repeat “I take refuge of the Divine Holy 
Gayatri, the Chief and most Excellent One, the Thousand eyed and I 
take refuge wholly unto Her.” 


Then repeat “I bow down to Tat savitur varenyam,” “I bow down to 
the Rising Sun on the East,” “I bow down to the Morning Aditya,” “I 
bow down to the Gayatri, residing in the Morning Sun” and “I bow 
down to all.” O Narada! Whoever recites this Gayatri Hridaya in the 
morning finds all the sins committed in the night all destroyed! 
Whoever recites this in the evening gets his sins of the day all 
destroyed! Whoever recites this in the evening and in the morning 
can rest assured to have become free of sins; he gets the fruits of all 
the Tirthas; he is acquainted with all the Devas; he is saved if he has 
spoken anything that ought not to have been spoken; if he has eaten 
anything that is not fit to be eaten; if he has chewn and sucked 
anything that ought not to have been chewn and sucked; if he has 
done anything that ought not to have been done and if he has 
accepted hundreds and thousands of gifts that ought never to have 
been accepted. 


The sins incurred by eating with the others in a line cannot touch 
him. If he speaks lies, he will not be touched by the sins thereof; 
even if a non-Brahmachari recites this, he will become a 
Brahmachari. O Narada! What more shall I say to you of the results 



of Gayatri Hridaya than this that whoever will study this will 
acquire the fruits of performing thousand sacrifices and repeating the 
Gayatri sixty thousand times. In fact, he will get Siddhi by this. The 
Brahmana, who daily reads this in the morning will be freed of all the 
sins and go upwards to the Brahma (Loka) and is glorified there. 

This has been uttered by Bhagavan Narayana Himself. 


Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on Gayatri 
Hridaya in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 5. On The Gayatr! Stotra 


1. Narada said O All knowing One! Thou showest Thy grace to 
Thy devotees! Thou hast described this sin-destroying Gayatri 
Hridaya. Now describe Her Stava (hymn of praise). 


2-29. Narayana said O World-Mother! O Thou, favouring Thy 
devotees! O Thou, the Prime Force, O Omnipresent! Infinite! S’ri 
Sandhye! I bow down to Thee. Thou art the Sandhya; Thou art the 
Gayatri, Savitri and Sarasvati; Thou art Brahmi, Vaisnavi and Raudri 
and Thou art red, white, and black (the colours of Gayatri, Savitri 
and Sarasvati) that Thou assumest respectively. O Bhagavati! Thou 
art always meditated by the Munis as young in the morning, full of 
youth in the mid-day, and aged in the evening. I bow down to Thee. 
Thou art seen by the Tapasvis (ascetics) as Brahmani, riding on 
Hamsa (swan), Sarasvati riding on Garuda, and Savitri riding on 
Bull. Thou art seen within by the ascetics as manifesting the Rigveda 
(in the form of Savitri) in this world, as manifesting Yayurveda in the 
middle space (antariksam) and as manifesting Samaveda 
everywhere in the Rudra loka, thus roaming in the three worlds. I 
bow down to Thee. O Devi! Thou art Rudrani in the Rudra loka, 
Vaisnavi in the Visnu loka, and Brahmani in the Brahma loka; thus 
Thou shewest Thy favour to the Immortals. O Devi! Thou art the 
Mother delighting the seven Risis (of the Great Bear); Thou art 
Maya. Thou grantest great many boons to Thy Bhaktas. Thou art 
sprung from the eyes and hands, tears and perspiration of S’iva and 
S’iva. Thou art the Mother of delights, Durga Devi, recited by the 
following ten names Varenya, Varada, Varistha, Varavarnini, 
Garistha, Varaha, Vararoha, Nilaganga, Sandhya and Bhoga 
Moksada. Thou art the Bhagirathi (the river Ganges) in this world; 
the Bhogavati in the Patala; and the Mandakini (the milky way) in the 
Heavens. Thou art in this world (Bhur loka) the all-enduring PrithvT 
(earth); Thou art the Vayu S’akti (air power) in the middle space 



(Bhubhar Loka); Thou art the energy (the ocean of Tejas) in the 
Heavens (Svar loka); Thou art the Great Siddhi in the Mahar loka; 
Thou art Jana in the Janar Loka; Thou art Tapasvini in the Tapar 
loka; Thou art Truth (True Speech) in the Satya lokann. Thou art 
Kamala in Visnu loka; Gayatri in Brahma loka; and the other half of 
Hara as Gauri in the Rudra loka. O Devi! Thou art sung as Prakrit! - 
“Aham” “Om-Mahat” tattva and beyond that the Highest Sarva 
Brahma rupini and Samyavastha Prakrit!. Thou art the Para S’akti; 
Thou art the Parama S’akti; O Devi! Thou art the Tri-S’akti the 
Ichchha S’akti (the will power), the Kriya S’akti (power of action) and 
the Jhana S’akti (the force of knowledge). 

Thou art the Ganga, Yamuna, Vipas'a, Sarasvati, Sarayu, Devika, 
Sindhu; Narmada, Iravati, Godavari, S’atadru; Kaveri, Kaus'iki, 
Chandra Bhaga, Vitasta, Gandaki, Tapini, Karatoya, Gomati, and 
Vetravati and other rivers; Thou art the Ida, Pingala, and Susumna 
nerves; Thou art Gandhari, Hastajihva, Pusa, Apusa, Alambusa, 
Kuhu, S’ankhini, Pranavahini and other nerves in the body; O Devi! 
Thou art the vital power in the lotus of the heart; Thou art Svapna 
naika in the throat; Thou art Sadadhara in the palate; and Thou art 
the Vindumalini S’akti in the pituitary space between the eyebrows. 


Thou art the Kundalini in the Muladhara (sacral plexus), the Vyapini 
extending upto the roots of the hairs; Thou art Madhyasana on the 
crown of the head, and Thou art Manonmani in the Brahmarandhra. 
O Devi! What need there is in stating these? Suffice it to say that 
whatever there is seen in this universe, all art Thou; therefore, O S’ri 
Sandhya Devi! I bow down to Thee. O Narada! Thus I have spoken 
to you about the Gayatri-Stotra that gives all successes, destroys all 
sins, and yields all merits. 

He who reads this in the Sandhya times, with all attention, will get 
sons if he has no sons, will get wealth if he has no wealth. There is 
no doubt in this. Whoever reads this Stotra gets the fruits of all 
Tirthas, all Tapasyas, all gifts, all sacrifices and all Yogas. He enjoys 



happiness in this world and finally gets the Moksa. The Munis who 
are engaged in Tapasyas read this Stotra. While bathing, if one 
reads this, merged under water, acquires the fruits of his being 
merged in the Sandhya. O Narada! I speak this verily, verily, verily, 
unto you that there is no trace of any doubt in this statement. 
Whoever will hear with devotion this Sandhya stotra, the nectar-like 
thing, will be freed from all sins. 


Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the Gayatri 
Stotra in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 6. On The One Thousand And Eight 
Names Of The Gayatr! 


1-3. Narada said O Bhagavan! O All-knowing One! O Thou versed 
in all the S’astras! I have heard from Thy mouth all the secrets of 
S’rutis and Smritis. Now I ask Thee, O Deva! How can the 
knowledge of that Veda Vidya (Learning) be obtained by which all 
sins are rooted out and destroyed, how is Brahmajhanam obtained 
and how can Moksa be obtained? How can death be conquered and 
how can the best results be obtained in this world and in the next. O 
Lotus-eyed One! Thou ought’st to describe fully all these to me. 


4-9. Narayana said O Narada! O Highly Learned One! Sadhu! 
Sadhu! You have now put a nice question indeed! Now I will describe 
one thousand and eight names of the Gayatri Devi. Listen 
attentively. These all sin-destroying auspicious names were 
composed by Brahma and first recited by Him. Its Risi is Brahma; the 
Chhandas is Anustup; the Devata is Gayatri; its Vija is Halavarna 
(consonants) and its S’akti is Svaravarna (vowels). Perform the Anga 
Nyasa and the Kara Nyasa by the Matrika varnas (that is, by the fifty 
syllables). Now hear its Dhyanam, that will do good to the Sadhakas 
(the practisers). [N.B. Amga Nyasa - Touching the limbs of the 
body with the hand accompanied by appropriate Mantras. Kara 
Nyasa - assignment of the various parts of fingers and hand to 
different deities which is usually accompanied with prayers and 
corresponding gesticulations.] I worship the Kumari (virgin) Gayatri 
Devi, the Lotus-eyed One, riding on the Swan (the Pranas), and 
seated on a lotus (creation); Who is three-eyed and of a red colour; 
and Who is bright and decorated with gems and jewels of red, white, 
green, blue, yellow and other variegated colours; Who is holding in 
Her hands Kundika, the rosary, lotus and making signs as if ready to 
grant the desired boons and on whose neck is suspended the 



garland of red flowers. I worship the Devi Gayatri. [Note The 
colours are the various emotions and feelings.] 


10-16. Now I will recite the one thousand and eight names of the 
Gayatri, beginning with the syllable “a” and going on a, a, i, i, etc., in 
due order of the alphabets. Listen! Her ways and actions cannot be 
comprehended by intellect (Buddhi); She is therefore Achintya 
Laksana; She is Avyakta (unmanifested; unspeakable); She is 
ArthamatrimahesVari, (because She is the Controller of Brahma, 
etc.); She is Amritarnava madhyastha, Ajita and Aparajita. Thou art 
Animadigunadhara, Arka mandalasamsthita, Ajara, Aja, Apara, 
Adharma (she has no dharma, caste, etc.), Aksasutradhara, Adhara; 
Akaradaksakaranta (beginning with the syllable “a” and ending with 
the syllable “ksa”, thus comprising the fifty syllables), 
Arisadvargabhedini (destroying the five passions), 
Anjanadripratikas’a, Anjanadrinivasini, Aditi, Ajapa, Avidya, 
Aravindanibheksana, Antarvahihsthita, Avidyadhvamsini, and 
Antaratmika. Thou art Aja. Ajamukhavasa (residing in the mouth of 
Brahma), Aravindanibhanana, (Vyanjanavarnatmika, therefore 
called) Ardhamatra, Arthadanajha (because She grants all the 
Purusarthas.) 


Arimandalamarddini, Asuraghni, Amavasya, Alaksighni, 
Antyajarchita. Thus end Her names beginning with “A”. Now the 
names with “A” Thou art Adi Laksmi, Adi S’akti, Akriti, Ayatanana, 
Adityapadavichara, Adityaparisevita, Acharya, Avartana; Achara, 
and Adi Murti nivasini. 


17-18. Thou art Agneyi, Amari, Adya, Aradhya, Asanasthita, Adhara 
nilaya (seated in the Muladhara), Adhara (the Refuge of all), and 
Akas’anta nivasini (of the nature of Aham tattva; Thou art Adyaksara 
samayukta, Antarakas’arupini, Adityamandalagata, 



Antaradhvantanas’ini, (i.e., destroyer of the Moha of Jivas). Then 
come the names beginning with “I.” 


19-25. Thou art Indira, Istada, Ista Indivaraniveksana, Iravati, 
Indrapada, Indrani, Indurupini, Iksukodandasamyukta, 
Isusandhanakarini, Indranilasamakara, Idapingalarupini, Indraksi, 
IsVari, Devi lhatrayavivarjita. Thou art Lima, Usa, Udunibha, 
Urvarukaphalanana, Uduprabha, Udumati, Udupa, Udumadhyaga, 
Urdha, Urdhakes’i, Urdhadhogatibhedini, Urdhavahupriya, 
Urmimalavaggranthadayini. Thou art Rita, Risi, Ritumati (the 
Creatrix of the 

world), Risidevanamaskrita, Rigveda, Rinahartri, Risimandala 
charini, Riddhida, Rijumargastha, Rijudharma, Rijuprada, Rigvedanil 
aya, RijvT, Lupta dharma pravartini, Lutarivarasam bhuta, 
Lutadivisaharini. 


26-30. Thou art Ekaksara, Ekamatra, Eka, Ekaikanisthita, Aindri, 
Airavatarudha, Aihikamusmikaprada, Omkara, Osadhi, Ota, 
Otaprotanivasini, Aurbba, Ausadhasampanna, 
Aupasanaphalaprada, Andamadhyasthita, Ahkaramanurupini. 
(Visargarupini). Thus end the names beginning with vowels. 


Now begin the names beginning with consonants. Thou art 
Katyayani, Kalaratri, KamaksT, Kamasundari, Kamala,. Kamini, 
Kanta, Kamada, Kalakanthini, Karikumbha stana bhara, Karavira 
Suvasini, Kalyani, Kundalavati, Kuruksetranivasini, Kuruvinda, 
dalakara, Kundali, and Kumudalaya. 


31-32. Thou art Kalajhibha, Karalasya, Kalika, Kalarupini, 
Kamaniyaguna, Kanti, Kaladhara, Kumudvati, Kaus’iki, Kamalakara, 



Kamacharaprabhanjini. Thou art Kaumari, Karunapangi, Kakubanta 
(as presiding over all the quarters), and Karipriya. 


33-37. Thou art Kes’ari, Kes’avanuta, Kadamba Kus’umapriya, 
Kalindi, Kalika, Kahchi, Kalas’odbhavasamstuta. Thou art 
Kamamata, Kratumati, Kamarupa, Kripavati, Kumari, Kunda nilaya, 
Kirati, Kiravahana, Kaikeyi, Kokilalapa, Ketaki, Kusumapriya, 
Kannandaludhara, Kali, Karmanirmulakarini, Kalahansagati, Kaksa, 
Krita, Krita, Kautukamangala, Kasturitilaka, Kamra, Karmdra 
Gamana, Kuhu, Karpuralepana, Krisna, Kapila, Kuharas’raya, 
Kutastha, Kudhara, Kannra, Kuksisthakhilavistapa. 


Thus end the names with Ka. Now come those with Kha. 


38-62. Thou art Khadga Khetadhara, Kharbha, Khechari, 
Khagavahana, Khattanga dharini, Khyata, Khagarajoparisthita, 
Khalaghni, Khanditajara, Khadaksyanapradayini, Khandendu tilaka. 


Thou art Ganga, Ganes’a guhapujita, Gayatri, Gomati, Gita, 
Gandhari, Ganalolupa, Gautami, Gamini, Gadha, 
Gandharvapsarasevita, Govinda charana kranta, Gunatraya 
vibhabita, GandharvT, Gahvari, Gotra, Giris’a, Gahana, Garni, 
Guhavasa, Gunavati (of good qualities), Gurupapapranas’ini, 
Gurbhi, Gunavati (of the three gunas), Guhya, Goptavya, 
Gunadayini, Girija, Guhyamatangi, Garudadhvajavallabha, 
Garvapaharini, Goda (grating Heaven), Gokulastha, Gadadhara, 
Gokarnanilaya sakta, and Guhyamandala vartini. 


Now the names with “Gha”. Thou art Gharmada, Ghanada, Ghanta, 
Ghora Danava marddini, Ghrini mantra mayi (of the Surya mantra. 



Ghrini is to shine). Ghosa, Ghanasampatadayini, Ghantara-vapriya, 
Ghrana, Ghrinisantustikarini (giving pleasure to the Sun), 
Ghanarimandala, Ghurna, Ghritachi, Ghanavegini, 

Ghanadhatumayi. Thou art Charcha, Charchita, Charuhasini, 
Chatula, Chandika, Chitra, Chitramalyayi bhusita, Chaturbhuja. 

Charu danta, Chaturi, Charitaprada, Chulika, Chitravastranta, 
Chandramah Kama Kundala, Chandrahasa, Charudatri, Chakori, 
Ghandrahasini, Chandrika, Chandradhatri, Chauri, Chora, Chandika, 
Chanchadvagvadini, Chandrachuda, Choravinas’ini, Charuchandana 
liptangi, Chanchachchamaravijita, Charumadhya, Charugati, 
Chandila, Chandrarupini, Charuhoma priya, Charva, Charita, 
Chakrabahuka, Chandramandalamadhyastha, Chandramandala 
Darpana, Chakravakastani, Chesta, Chitra, Charuvilasini, 
Chitsvarupa; Chandavati, Chandrama, Chandanapriya, Chodayitri 
(as impelling the Jivas always to actions), Chiraprajha, Chataka, 
Charuhetuki. 


Thou art Chhatrayata, Chhatradhara, Chhaya, 
Chhandhahparichchhada, Chhaya Devi, Chhidranakha, 
Chhannendriyavisarpini, Chhandonustuppratisthanta, 
Chhidropadrava bhedini, Chheda, ChhatresVari, Chhinna, Chhurika, 
and Chhelanpriya. Thou art Janani, Janmrarahita, Jataveda, 
Jaganmayi, Jahnavi, Jatila, Jatri (Jetri), Jaramarana varjita, Jambu 
dvipa vati, Jvala, Jayanti, Jalasalini, Jitendriya, Jitakrodha, Jitamitra, 
Jagatpriya, Jatarupamayi, Jihva, Janaki, Jagati, Jara (Jaya) Janitri, 
Jahnutanaya, Jagattrayahitaisini, Jvalamuli, Japavati, Jvaraghni, 
Jitavistapa, Jitakrantamayi, Jvala, Jagrati, Jvaradevata, Jvalanti, 
Jalada, Jyestha, Jyaghosa sphota dinmukhi, Jambhini, Jrimbhana, 
Jrimbha, Jvalanmanikya Kundala. Jhinjhika, Jhananirghosa, Jhanjha 
Maruta vegini, Jhallakivadya kus’ala, Nrupa, Nbhuja, Tanka bhedini. 
Tanka banasamayukta. Tankini, Tanka bhedini, 

Tankiganakritaghosa, Tankaniya mahorasa, Tankara Karini, Tha tha 
s’avdaninadini. 



63-80. Now come the names beginning with “Da.” They are 
- Damari, Dakini, Dimbha, Dundamaraikanirjita, Damaritantramargas 
tha, Dandadamarunadini, Dindiravasaha, Dimbhalasat 
kridaparayana (dancing with joy in battles). Then Dhundhi vighnes’a 
janani, Dhakka hasta, Dhilivraja (followed by S’iva ganas), 
Nityajhana, Nirupama, Nirguna and Narmada river. Now Triguna, 
Tripada, Tantri, Tulasi, Taruna, Tara, Trivikramapada kranta, 
Turiyapadagamini, Taruna ditya samkas’a, Tamasi, Tuhina, Tura, 
Trikalajhana Sampanna, Trivali, Trilochana, Tri S’akti, Tripura, 

Tunga, Turangavadana, Timingilagila, Tibra, Trisrota, Tamasadini, 
Tantra mantravis’esajha, Tanumadhya, Trivipstapa, Trisandhya, 
Tristani, Tosasamstha, Talapratapini, Tatankini, Tusarabha, 
Tuhinachala vasini, Tantujalasamayukta, Tarahara valipriya, 
Tilahomapriya, Tirtha, Tamala kusuma kriti, Taraka, Triyuta, Tanvi, 
Tris’am kuparivarita, Talodari, Tirobhasa, Tatamka priyavadini, 
Trijata, Tittiri, Trisna, Tribidha, Taruna kriti, Tapta kanchanasamkas’a, 
Tapta kahchana bhusana, Traiyambaka, Trivarga, 

Trikalajhanadayini, Tarpana, Triptida, Tripta, Tamasi, Tumvarustuta, 
Tarksyastha, Trigunakara, Tribhangi, Tanuvallari, Thatkari, Tharava, 
Thanta, Dohini, Dmavatsala, Danavanta kari, Durga, 
Durgasuranivahrini, Devariti, Divaratri, Draupadi, Dunda bhisvana, 
Devayani, Duravasa, Daridrya bhedini. Diva, Damodarapriya, DTpta, 
Digvasa, Digvimohini, Danda karanya nilaya, Dandini, Deva pujita, 
Deva vandya, Divisada, Dvesini, Danava kriti, Dmana thastuta, 

Diksa, Daivas’a disvarupini, Dhatri, Dhanurdhara, Dhenur Dharini, 
Dharmacharini, Dhurandhara, Dharadhara, Dhanada, Dhanya 
dohini, Dharmas’ila, Dhanadhyaksa, Dhanurvedavis’arada, Dhriti, 
Dhanya, Dhritapada, Dharmarajapriya, Dhruva, Dhumavati, 
Dhumakes’i Dharmas’astraprakas’ini. 


81-98. Nanda, Nandapriya, Nidra, Nrinuta, Nandanatmika, 
Narmmada Nalini, Nila, NTIakanthasamas’raya, Rudrani, 
Narayanapriya, Nitya, Nirmmala, Nirguna, Nidhi, Niradhara, 
Nirupama, Nityas’uddha, Nirajhana, Nadabindu Kalatita, Nadavindu 



Kalatmika, Nrisimhini; Nagadhara, Nripanaga vibhusita, Naraka 
Kles’anas’ini, Narayanapadodbhava, Niravadya, Nirakara, 
Naradapriyakarini, Nanajyotih, Nidhida, Nirmalatmika, 
Navasutradhara, Niti, Nirupa drava karini, Nandaja, Navaratnadhya, 
Naimisaranya vasini, Navanitapriya, Nan, Nila jimuta nisvana, 
Nimesini, Nadirupa, Nilagnva, Nis’isVan, Namavali, Nis’umbhaghni, 
Nagaloka nivasini, Navajambu nadaprakhya, Nagaloka dhidevata, 
Nupura Krantacharana, Narachitta pramodini, Nimagna rakta 
nayana, Nirghata-sama-nisvana, Nandanodyanilaya, Nirvya 
hoparicharini. 


99-107. Parvati, Paramodara, Parabrahmatmika, Para, 
Panchkos’avinirmukta, Panchapataka-nas’ini, Para chitta 
vidhanajna, Panchika, Pancharupini. Purnima, Parama Priti, 
Paratejah prakas’ini, Purani, Paurusi, Punya, Pundari kanibheksana, 
Patala tala nirmmagna, Prita, Pritivivardhini, Pavani, Pada sahita, 
Pes’ala, Pavanas’ini Prajapati, Paris’ranta, Parvatastana mandala, 
Padmapriya, Padmasamstha, PadmaksT, Padmasambhava, 
Padmapatra, Padmapada, Padmini, Priyabhasini, Pas’upas’a 
vinirmukta, Purandhri, Puravasini, Puskala, Purusa, Parbha, Parijata 
Kusumapriya, Pativrata, Pativrata, Pavitrangi, Puspahasa parayana, 
Prajnavatisuta, Pautri, Putrapujya, Payasvini, Pattipas’adhara, 
Pankti, Pitrilokapradayini, Purani, Punyas’ila, Pranatarti vinas’ini, 
Pradyumnajanani; Pusta, Pitamahaparigraha, Pundarikapuravasa, 
Pundarikasamanana, Prithujangha, Prithubhuja, Prithupada, 
Prithudari, Pravalas’obha, Pingaksi, Pitavasah, Prachapala, 

Prasava, Pustida, Punya, Pratistha, Pranava, Pati, Panchavarna, 
Panchavani, Panchika, Panjarasthita, Paramaya, Parajyotih, 
Parapriti, Paragati, Parakastha, Pares’ani, Pavani, Pavaka Dyuti, 
Punyabhadra, Parichchhedya. Puspahasa, Prithudara, Pitangi, 
Pitavasana Pitas’aya, Pis’achini, Pitakriya, Pis’achaghni, Patalaksi, 
Patukriya, Pahchabhaksapriyachara, Putana pranaghatini, 
Punyagavanamadhyastha, Punyatirthanisevita, Panchangi, 
Paras’akti, Paramadhada karini, Puspakandasthita, Pusa, 



Positakhilavistapa, Panapriya, Panchas’ikha, Pannagoparis’ayini, 
Panchamatratmika, PrithvT, Pathika, Prithudohini, 
Purananyayamimansa, Patali, Puspagandhini, Punyapraja, 
Paradatn, Paramargaikagochara, Pravalas’obha, Purnas’a, Pranava, 
Palhabodan. 


108-149. Phalini, Phalada, Phalgu, Phutkan, Phalakakriti, Phanindra 
bhogas’ayana, Phanimandalamandita, Balabala, Bahumata, 
Balatapanibhams’uka, Balabbadrapriya, Vandya, Badava, 
Buddhisamstuta, Bandidevi, Bilavati, Badis’aghini, Balipnya, 
Bandhavi, Bodhita, Buddhirbandhukakusumapriya, Bala 
bhanuprabhakara, Brahmi, Brahmana devata, Brihaspatistuta. 
Brinda, Brindavana viharini, Balakini, Bilahara, Bilavasa Bahudaka, 
Bahunetra, Bahupada, Bahukarnavatamsika, Bahubahuyuta, 
Bijarupini, Bahurupini, Bindunadakalatita, Bindunadasvarupini, 
Baddhagodhangulitrana, Badaryas’ramavasini, Brindaraka, 
Brihatskandha, Brihati, Banapatini, Brindadhyaksa, Bahunuta, 

Vanita, Bahuvikrama, Baddhapadmasanasma, Bilvapatratalasthita, 
Bodhidrumanijavasa, Badistha, Bindu darpana, Bala, Vanasanavati, 
Badavanalavegini, Brahmanda bahirantastha, 

Brahmakankanasutrini, Bhavani, Bhisanavati, Bhavini, Bhayaharini, 
BhadrakalT, BhujangaksT, Bharati, Bharatas’aya, BhairavT, 
Bhisanakara, Bhutida, Bhutimalini, Bhamini, Bhoganirata, Bhadrada, 
Bhurivikrama, Bhutavasa, Bhrigulata, Bhargavi, Bhusurarchita, 
Bhagirathi, Bhogavati, Bhavanastha, Bhisagvara, Bhamina, Bhogini, 
Bhasa, Bhavani, Bhuridaksina, Bhargatmika, Bhamavati, 
Bhavabandhavimochini, Bhajaniya, Bhutadhatri-ranjita, 
BhuvanesVan, Bhujangavalaya, Bhima, Bherunda, Bhagadheyini; 
Thou art Mata, Maya, Madhumati, Madhujihava, Manupriya, 
Mahadevi, Mahabhagia, Maliri, Minalochana, Mayatita, Madhumati, 
Madhumansa, Madhudrava, Manavi, Madhusambhuta, 
Mithilapuravasini, Madhukaitabhasamhartri, Medini, Meghamalini, 
Mandodara, Maha Maya, Maithili, Masrinapriya, Maha Laksmi, Maha 
Kali, Maha Kanya, MahesVari, Mahendri, Merutanaya 



Mandarakusumarchita, Manjumanjiracharana, Moksada, 
Manjubhasini, Madhuradravini, Mudra, Malaya, Malayanvita, Medha, 
Marakatas’yanna, Magadhi, Menakatmaja, Mahamari, Mahavira, 
Mahas’yanna, Manustuta, Matrika, Mihirabhasa, Mukundapada 
Vikrama, Muladharasthita, Mugdha, Manipuranivasina, Mrigaksi, 
Mahisarudha, Mahisasuramardini. Thou art Yogasana, Yogagamya, 
Yoga, Yauvanakas’raya, Yauvani, Yuddhamadhyastha, Yamuna, 
Yugadharini, Yaksini, Yogayukta, Yaksarajaprasutini, Yatra, Yana 
bidhanajha, Yaduvans’asamudbhava, Yakaradi-Ha Karanta, (all 
antahstha varnas), YajusT, Yajha rupini, Yamini, Yoganirata. 
Yatudhana, bhayamkari, Rukmini, Ramani, Rama, Revati, Renuka, 
Rati, Raudri, Raudrapriyakara Rama mata, Ratipriya, Rohini, 
Rajyada, Reva, Rasa, Rajivalochana, Rakes’i, Rupasampanna, 
Ratnasimhas’anasthita, Raktamalyambaradhara, Raktagandhanu 
lepana. Raja hamsa samarudha, Rambha, Raktavalipriya, 
Ramaniyayugadhara, Rajitakhilabhutala, Rurucharmapari-dhana, 
Rathini, Ratnamalika, Roges’i, Rogas’amani, Ravini, Romaharsini, 
Ramachandra pada Kranta, Ravanachchhedakarini, Ratnavastra 
parichchhinva, Rathastha, Rukma bhusana, Lajjadhidevata, Lola, 
Lalita, Lingadharini, Laksmi, Lola, Luptavisa, Lokini, Lokavis’ruta, 
Lajja, Lambodari, Lalana, Lokadharini Varada, Vandita, Vidya, 
VaisnavT, Vimalakriti, Varahi, Viraja, Varsa, Varalaksmi, Vilasini, 
Vinata, Vyomamadhyastha, Varijasanasamsthita, Varuni, 
Venusambhuta, Vitihotra, Virupini, Vayumandalamadhyastha, 
Visnurupa, Vidhikriya, Visnupatni, Visnumati, Vis’alaksi, Vasundhara, 
Vamadevapriya, Vela, Vajrini, Vasudohini, Vedaksaraparitamgi, 
Vajapeya-phalaprada, Vasavi, Vamajanani, Vaikunthanilaya, Vara, 
Vyasapriya Varmadhara, Valmikiparisevita. 


Thou art S’akambhari, S’iva, S’anta, S’arada, S’aranagati, S’atodari, 
S’ubhachara, S’umbhasuramardini, S’obhabati, S’ivakara, 
S’amkarardhas’aririni, S’ona (red), S’ubhas’aya, S’ubhra, 
S’irahsandhanakarini, S’aravati, S’arananda, S’arajjyotana, 
S’ubbanana, S’arabha, S’ulini, S’uddha, S’abari, S’ukavahana, 



S’nmatT, S’ndharananda, S’ravananandadayini, S’arvani, 
S’arbhanvandya, Sadbhasa, Sadritupriya, Sadadharasthitadevi, San 
mukhapriyakarini, Sadamgarupasumati, Surasuranamaskrita. 


150-155. Thou art Sarasvati, Sadadhara, Sarvamangalakarini, 
Samaganapriya, Suksma, Savitri, Samasambhava, Sarvavasa, 
Sadananda, Sustani, Sagarambara, SarvaisVaryapriya, Siddhi, 
Sadhubandhuparakrama, Saptarsimandalagata, 
Somamandalavasini, Sarvajha, Sandrakaruna, Samanadhikavarjita, 
Sarvottunga, Sangahina, Sadguna, Sakalestada, Saragha (bee), 
Suryatanaya, Sukes’i, Somasamhati, Hiranyavarna, Harini, Hrimkari, 
Hamsavahini, Ksaumavastraparitangi, Ksirabdhitanaya, Ksama, 
Gayatri, Savitri, Parvati, Sarasvati, Vedagarbha, Vararoha, S’ri 
Gayatri, and Paramvika. 


156-159. O Narada! Thus I have described to you one thousand 
(and eight) names of Gayatri; the hearing of which yields merits and 
destroys all sins and gives all prosperity and wealth. Specially in the 
Astamitithi (eighth lunar day) if after one’s meditation (dhyanam) 
worship, Homa, and japam, one recites this in company with the 
Brahmanas, one gets all sorts of satisfactions. These one thousand 
and eight names of the Gayatri ought not to be given to anybody 
indiscriminately. Speak this out to him only who is very devoted, who 
is a Brahmana, and who is an obedient disciple. Even if any devotee, 
fallen from the observances of Achara (right way of living), be a great 
friend, still do not disclose this to him. 


160-165. In whatever house, these names are kept written, no cause 
of fear can creep in there and Laksmi, the Goddess of wealth, 
though unsteady, remains steady in that house. 



This great secret yields merits to persons, gives wealth to the poor, 
yields moksa to those who are desirous of it, and grants all desires. 

If anybody reads this, he gets cured of his diseases, and becomes 
freed from bondages and imprisonment. All the Great Sins, for 
example, murdering Brahmanas, drinking wine, stealing gold, going 
to the wife of one’s Guru, taking gifts from bad persons, and eating 
the uneatables, all are destroyed, yea, verily destroyed! O Narada! 
Thus I have recited to you this Great Secret. All persons get, indeed, 
united with Brahma (Brahama sayujya) by this. True. True. True. 
There is not the least trace of doubt here. 


Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the one 
thousand and eight names of the Gayatri in the Mahapuranam S’ri 
Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 7. On The DIksa Vidhi Or On The Rules 
Of Initiation 


1-3. Narada said I have heard the one thousand nannes or nama 
stotras equivalent in its fruits to S’ri Gayatri, highly potent in making 
a good fortune and tending to a splendid increase of the wealth and 
prosperity. Now I want to hear about how initiations in Mantrams are 
performed, without which nobody, be he a Brahmin, a Ksattriya, a 
Vais’ya or a S’udra, is entitled to have the Devi Mantra. O Lord! 
Kindly describe the ordinary (Samanya) and the special (vis’esa) 
rules thereof. 


4-41. Narayana said O Narada! Listen. I am now telling you about 
the rules of initiation (Diksa) of the disciples, pure in heart. When 
they are initiated, they become entitled then and not before that, to 
worship the Devas, the Fire and the Guru. That method of 
instruction, and religious act and ceremony is called the Diksa 
(initiation) by which the Divine Knowledge is imparted; and at once 
flashes in the heart and mind of the initiated that Knowledge and all 
his sins are then destroyed. So the Pundits of the Vedas and the 
Tantras, say. (The Divine Knowledge is like lightning, fire, arising and 
permeating the body, mind, and spirit.) This Diksa ought to be taken 
by all means. This gives excellent merits and pure results. Both the 
Guru and the S’isya (disciple) ought to be very pure and true. (This is 
the first essential requisite. Then the results are instantaneous). First 
of all, the Guru is to perform all the morning duties, he is to take his 
bath and perform his Sandhya Vandanams. He is to return home 
from the banks of the river with his Kamandalu and observe maunam 
(silence). Then, in order to give Diksa, he is to enter into the 
assigned room (Yaga Mandapa) and take his seat on an Asana that 
is excellent and calculated to please all. He is to perform Achanara 
and do Pranayama. Then he should take water in his Arghya vessel 
and putting scents and flowers in that, charge that water with 



Phatkara mantra (that is, condense electricity Spirit in that). Then 
uttering the Phat mantra, he is to sprinkle the water on the doorways 
of the worshiproom and begin his Puja. Firstly, on the top of the door 
at one end invoke the Deity Gananatha by His mantra, at the other 
end invoke Sarasvati by Her mantra and at the middle, invoke 
Laksmi Devi by Her mantra duly and worship them, with flowers. 
Then, on the right side worship Ganga and Bighnes’a; and on the left 
side worship Ksettrapala and Yamuna, the daughter of the Sun. 
Similarly, on the bottom of the door, worship the Astra Devata by the 
Phat mantra. Then consider the whole Mandapa as inspired with the 
presence of the Devi, and see the whole place as pervaded by Her 
through and through. Then, repeat the Phat mantra and destroy the 
Celestial obstacles as well as those from the middle space 
(Antariksa); strike the ground thrice with the left heel and thus 
destroy the Terrene obstacles. Then touching the left branch on the 
left side of the choukat, put the right foot forward and enter into the 
Mandapa. Then instal the S’anti Kumbha (the peace jar) and offer 
the ordinary Arghya (Samanyargha). Next worship the Vastunatha 
and Padmayoni with flowers and Atapa rice and the Arghya water, 
on the south-west and then purify the Pancha Gavya. Next sprinkle 
all the Mandapa and the entrance gate with that Arghya water. And, 
while sprinkling with Arghya water, consider the whole space right 
through as inspired with the presence of the Devi and repeat the 
Mula Mantra with devotion and sprinkle with Phat mantra. The Karta, 
then, uttering the mantra “Phat,” is to drive away all the evils from the 
Mandapa and uttering the mantra “Hum” sprinkle water, all around, 
thus pacifying the atmosphere and bringing peace into the hearts of 
all present. 


Then burn the Dhupa incense inside and scatter Vikira (water, 
sandal-paste, yava, ashes, Durba grass with roots, and Atapa rice). 
Then collect all these rice, etc., again with a broom made of Kus’a 
grass to the north east corner of the Mandapa; making the Sankalpa 
and uttering Svasti vachana (invocation of good), distribute and 



satisfy the poor and orphans with feeding, clothing and money. Then 
he should bow down to his own Guru and take his seat humbly on 
the soft Asanam allotted to him with his face eastwards and meditate 
on the Deity (Ista Deva) of the mantra that is to be imparted to the 
disciple. After meditating thus, he is to do the Bhuta s’uddhi 
(purification of elements) and perform Nyasa, etc., of the Deya 
mantra (the mantra that is to be imparted to the disciple) according 
to the rules stated below, i.e., the Risi on the head; the chhandas in 
the mouth, the Ista Devata in the heart, Bija on the anus and S’akti 
Nyasa on the two legs. Then he is to make sound thrice by the clap 
of his palm and thus thwart off all the evils of the earth and the 
middle space and then make digbandhan (tieing up the quarters) by 
the mudra chhotika three times (snapping the thumb and forefinger 
together). Then perform the Pranayama with the Mula mantra of the 
would-be-lsta-Devata and do the Matrika Nyasa in one’s own body, 
thus Om Am namah s’irasi, Om Am namah on the face, Om Im 
namah on the right eye, Om Im namah on the left eye, and so on, 
assign all the letters duly to their respective places. Then perform the 
Karanga Nyasa on the fingers and the Sadanga Nyasa thus 
Speak: Om Hridayaya namah, touching on the heart, utter 
Om S’irase svaha, touching the head; Om S’ikhayai Vasat, touching 
the tuft; Om Kavachaya Hum, touching on the Kavacha, 

“Om netratrayaya Vausat,” touching the eye, and “Om Astraya Phat” 
touching both the sides of the hand, the palm and its back. Then 
finish the Nayasa by doing the Varnanyasa of the Mula mantra in 
those places that are said in the cognate kalpas (i.e., throat, heart, 
arms, legs, etc.). 


O Narada! Next consider within your body the seat of an auspicious 
Asana (a seat) and make the Nyasa of Dharma on the right side, 
Jhanam on the left side, of Vairagyam (dispassion) on the left thigh, 
prosperity and wealth on the right thigh, of non-Dharma in the mouth 
and of Non-Jhanam on the left side, Avairagyam (passion) on the 
navel, and poverty on the right side. Then think of the feet of the 



Asana (the body) as Dharma, etc., and all the limbs as Adharma 
(non-Dharma). In the middle of the Asana (body), i.e., in the heart 
consider Ananta Deva as a gentle bed and on that a pure lotus 
representing this universe of five elements. Then make Nyasa of the 
Sun, Moon, and Fire on this lotus and think the Sun as composed of 
twelve Kalas (digits) the Moon composed of sixteen Kalas (digits) 
and the Fire as composed of ten Kalas. Over this make Nyasa of 
Sattva, Raja and Tamo Gunas, Atma, Antaratma, Paramatma and 
Jhanatma and then think of this as his Ista’s altar where the devotee 
is to meditate on his Ista Devata, the Highest Mother. Nyasa- 
assignment of the various parts of the body to different deities which 
is usually accompanied with prayers and corresponding 
gesticulations. Next the devotee is to perform the mental worship of 
the Deya Mantra Devata according to the rules of his own Kalpa; 
next he is to show all the Mudras, stated in the Kalpa for the 
satisfaction of the Deva. The Devas become very pleased when all 
these Mudras are shown to them. 


42-46. O Narada! Now, on one’s left side, erect an hectagon; inside it 
a circular figure; inside this again a square and then draw within that 
square a triangle and over it show the S’ankha Mudra. After finishing 
the Puja of the Six Deities at the six corners of the hectagon. Fire, 
etc., take the tripod of the S’ankha (conch-shell) and sprinkling it with 
Phat mantra, place it within the triangle. Utter, then, the Mantra 
“Mam Vahniman dalaya Das’a Kalatmane Amuka Devya 
Arghyapatrasthanaya namah” and thus worshipping the S’ankhya 
vessel place it within the mandala. Then worship in the S’ankha 
patra, the ten Kalas of Fire, beginning from the East, then south-east 
and so on. Sprinkle the S’ankha, conchshell, with the Mula Mantra 
and meditating on it, place the S’ankha (conch shell) on the tripod. 
Repeating the mantra “Am Surya mandalaya Dvadas’akalatmane 
Amukodevya Arghyapatraya namah” worship in the Arghyapatra 
S’ankha, sprinkle water in the S’ankha with the Mantra 
“Sam S’ankhya namah.” Worship in due order the twelve Kalas of 



the Sun Tapini, Tapini, Dhumra, etc., utter the fifty syllables of the 
Matrika in an inverse order (i.e., beginning, see the Sarada Tilaka, 
with Ksam, Ham, Sam, Sam, S’am, etc.,) and repeating the Mula 
Mantra also in an inverse order, fill the S’ankha, three-fourths, with 
water. Next perform in it the Nyasa of Chandrakala and uttering the 
Mantra “Urn Soma mandalaya Sodas’akalatmane Amukademtaya 
Arghya-mritaya namah,” worship in this conchshell. Next with 
Ankus’a mudra, invoke all the tirthas there, repeating the Mantra 
“Gange Cha Yamune chaiva, etc.,” and repeat eight times the Mula 
Mantra (the basic Mantra). Then perform the S’adamga Nyasa in the 
water and with the Mantra “Hrida namah, etc.,” worship and, 
repeating eight times the Mula Mantra, cover it with Matsyamundra. 
Next place on the right side of the S’ankha, the Proksani Patra (the 
Kos’a vessel from which water is taken for sprinkling) and put a little 
water in it. By this water sprinkle and purify all the articles of worship 
as well as one’s own body and consider one’s Atman as pure and 
holy. 


47-81. After doing works thus far the until Vis’esarghya is placed, the 
devotee should erect Sarvato bhadra mandala within the altar and 
put the S’ali rice within its pericarp. Next spread Kus’a grass on that 
Mandala and put on one Kurcha, looking well and auspicious within 
it, made of twenty-seven Kus’a grass knotted with Venyagra granthi. 
Worship here the Adhara S’akti, Prakriti, Kurma, S’esa, Ksama, 
Sudhasindhu, Manimandala, Kalpa vriksa and Ista devata and the 
Pitha. (Durga Devi yoga pithaya namah). Then have an entire 
kumbha (waterjar) having no defect, wash it inside with Phat mantra, 
and encircle it with the red thread thrice as symbolising the three 
Gunas. Place within this jar the Nava ratna (nine jewels) with Kurcha 
and worshipping it with scents and flowers put them in the jar 
repeating the Pranava, and place that on the Pitha (seat). Next 
consider the Pitha and Kumbha (waterjar) as one and the same and 
pour waters from the Tirthas, repeating in an inverse order the 
Matrika Varnas (from Ksa to Ka) and fill it, thinking of the Ista Deva 



and repeating the basic mantra, put the new and fresh twigs 
(Pallavas) of AsVattha, Panasa and mango trees, etc., in the jar and 
cover its mouth and place over it fruits, rice, and chasaka (honey) 
and wrap it with two red cloths. Then perform the Prana-Pratistha 
and invoke the Spirit of the Devi by the Pranasthapana Mantra and 
show the Mudras, Avahana, etc., and thus satisfy the Devi. Then do 
the Sodas’opachara Puja of the Devi after me- ditating on the 
ParamesVari according to the rules of the Kalpa. 


First offer “welcome” in front of the Devi and then duly offer the 
Padya, Arghya, Achamaniya water, Madhuparka, and oils, etc., for 
the bath. Then offer nice red silken clothes and various jewels, 
ornaments; repeating the Matrika syllables electrified with the Deya 
Mantra, worship the whole body of the Devi with scents and flowers. 
Next offer to the Devi the sweet scent of Kalaguru mixed with 
camphor and the Kas’miri sandalpaste mixed with Kasturi and 
various nice scented flowers, for example, the Kunda flowers, etc. 
Then offer the Dhupa prepared from Aguru, Guggula, Us’ira, 
sandalpaste, sugar, and honey and know that the Dhupa is very 
pleasing to the Devi. Next offer various lights and offerings of fruits, 
vegetables and feeding. Be particular to sprinkle everything with the 
water of the Kosa, thus purifying, before it is offered to the Devi. 

Then complete the Anga Puja, and the Avarana-Puja of the Devi, 
then perform the duty of VaisVadeva. On the right side of the Devi 
erect an altar (sthandila) six feet square and instal Agni (Fire) there. 
Invoke there the Deity, thinking of Her Form and worship Her with 
scents and flowers. Then with the Vyarhiti Mantra with Svaha 
prefixed and Mula (Deya) Mantra perform the Homa ceremony with 
oblations, charu and ghee, twenty five times. Next perform Homa 
again with Vyarhiti. Next worship the Devi with scents, etc., and 
consider the Devi and Pitha Devata as one and the same. Then take 
leave of (visarjana) the Agni (Fire). Offer valis (sacrifices) all round to 
the ParsVadas of the Devi with the remnant charu of the Homa. 



Now again worship the Devi with five offerings and offer betel, 
umbrella, chamara and others and repeat the Mula mantra thousand 
times. After finishing the Japam, place Karkari (a water-jar with small 
holes at the bottom, as in a sieve) on the rice in the north-eastern 
corner and invoke the Devi there and worship Her. Uttering the 
mantra “Raksa Raksa” moisten the place with water coming out of 
Karkari, and repeat the Phat mantra. After re-worshipping the Devi, 
place Karkari in due position. Thus the Guru finishes the Adhivasa 
(foregoing) ceremony and takes his meals with the disciple and 
sleeps that night on that altar. 


82-106. O Narada! Now I am describing briefly about the Homa 
Kunda (a round hole in the ground consecrated to the Deity) and the 
Samskara ceremony of the Sthandila (the sacrificial altar). Uttering, 
first, the Mula Mantra, see, fix your gaze on the Kunda; then sprinkle 
it with water and the Phat mantra and drive away the evil-spirits from 
there. Then with mantra “Hum” again sprinkle it with water. 


Then draw within it three lines Pragagra and Udagagra (on the 
eastern and northern sides). Sprinkling it with water and the 
Pranava, worship within the Pitha, uttering the mantras from Adhara 
S’aktaye namah to Amuka Devi Yoga Pithaya namah. Invoke, in that 
Pitha, the Highest One, Who is S’iva S’iva with all one-ness of heart 
and worship Her with scents and offerings. Then think for a moment 
the Devi as having taken bath and as one with S’ankara. Bring then 
fire in a vessel and taking a flaming piece thereof throw that in the 
south-west corner. Then purifying it by the gaze and quitting the 
portions of Kravyadah, impart the Chaitanya by “Ram,” the Vahnivija 
repeat “Om” over it seven times. Shew, then, the Dhenumudra and 
protect it by Phat Kara and cover, veil, it with the mantra “Hum.” 

Then turn the fire, thus worshipped with sandalpaste, etc., thrice 
over the Kunda and with both the knees on the ground and repeating 
the Pranava, consider the Agni as the Virya of S’iva and throw it on 



the yoni of the Devi in the Pitha. Then offer Achamana, etc., to the 
Deva and the Devi and worship. Then light the flame with the mantra 
“Chit Pingala Hana Hana Daha Daha Pacha Pacha Sarvajha 
Jhapaya Svaha.” Then utter the stotra to the Agni Deva with great 
love, repeating the mantra “Agnim Prajvalitam vande Jatavedam 
Hutas’anam suvarna varnamamalam samiddham Visvatomukham.” 
Then perform the Sadamganyasa to the Agni Deva “Om 
Sahasrarchchise namah, Om Svasti Purnaya Svaha,” “Om Uttistha 
purusaya vasat,” “Om Dhuma vyapine Hum Om Sapta Jihvaya 
vausat” “Om Dhanur dharaya Phat.” Repeating the above six 
mantras, perform the Nyasa on the heart, etc., the six places. Now 
meditate on the Agni as of a golden colour, three-eyed, seated on a 
lotus and holding in His four hands signs of granting boons, S’akti, 
Svastika and sign of “no fear,” also meditate on Agni, as the seat of 
the greatest auspiciousness. Then moisten the Kunda on the top of 
the belt (mekhala) with water. Next spread the Kus’a grass all around 
and draw the Agni yantra over it, i.e., triangle, hectagon, circle, eight- 
petalled figure and Bhupura; rather have this drawing before the 
Agnisthapana. Now meditate this only. Then, within the Yantra, recite 
“VaisVanara Jataveda Lohitaksa sarvakarmani Sadhaya Svaha” and 
worship Agni. Then worship in the centre and in the hectagon at the 
corners worship the Saptajihva (seven tongues Hiranya, Gagana, 
Rakta, Krisna, Suprabha, Bahurupa, Atiraktika) and next worship 
within the pericarp of the lotus the Anga Devatas. Then recite the 
following mantras within the eight petals “Om Agnaye Jatavedase 
namah,” “ Om Agnaye Saptajihvaya namah,” “ Om Agnaye 
Havyavahanaya namah,” “Om Agnaye AsVodarajaya namah,” 

“Om Agnaye VaisVanaraya namah,” “Om Agnaye Kaumara tejase 
namah,” “Om Agnaye VisVamukhaya namah,” “Om Agnaye 
Devamukhaya namah” and considering the forms to hold S’akti and 
Svastik, worship them. Then consider Indra and the other Lokapalas 
(Regents of the several quarters) situated in the east, south-east, 
and so on together with their weapons, the thunderbolt and the other 
weapons, and thus worship them. 



107-134. O Narada! Next purify the sacrificial ladles, etc., sruk, 
sruva, etc., and ghee; then, taking ghee by sruva, go on with the 
Homa ceremony. Divide the ghee of the Ajyasthali (the vessel in 
which the ghee for the Homa purposes is kept) in three parts; take 
ghee from the right side and saying “Om Agnaye Svaha” offer 
oblations on the right eye of the Agni; take ghee from the left side 
and saying “Om Somaye Svaha” offer oblations on the left eye of the 
Agni; take ghee from the centre and saying, 

“Om Agnisomabhyam Svaha,” offer oblations on the central eye of 
the Agni. Take ghee again from the right side and saying 
“Om Agnaye Svistakrite Svaha” offer oblations to the mouth of the 
Agni. Then the devotee is to repeat “Om Bhuh Svaha,” 

“Om Bhuvah Svaha,” “Om Svah Svaha” and offer thrice the 
oblations; next he is to offer oblations thrice with the Agni mantra. 
After this, O Muni! for impregnation and each of the ten Samskaras, 
natal-ceremony, tonsure, etc., he is to repeat the Pranava Mantra 
and offer the eight oblations of ghee on each occasion. Now hear of 
the tenfold Samskaras (1) Impregnation, (2) Pumsavan (a 
ceremony performed as soon as a woman perceives the foetus to be 
quick), (3) Simantonnayana (a ceremony observed by women in the 
fourth, sixth or the eighth month of pregnancy), (4) data Karma 
(ceremony at the birth of a child), (5) Namakarana, (naming the 
child), (6) Niskramana (a ceremony performed when a new-born 
child is first taken out of the house into the open air usually in the 
fourth month), (7) Annapras’ana (when the rice is put in the mouth of 
the child), (8) Chudakarana (the ceremony of the first tonsure), (9) 
Upanayana (holding the sacrificial thread; (10) Godana and Udvaha 
(gift of cows and marriage). These are stated in the Vedas. Next 
worship S’iva Parvati, the Father and the Mother of Agni and take 
leave of them. Next in the name of Agni, offer five Samidhas (fuel) 
soaked in ghee and offer one oblation of ghee to each of the 
Avarana Devatas. 



Then take the ghee by the S’ruk and covering it with the S’ruva, offer 
ten oblations to Agni, and Maha Ganes’a with mantras ending in 
Vausat, 


The Maha Ganes’a mantras run as follows (1) Om, Om Svaha (2) 
Om S’rim Svaha, (3) Om S’rim Hrim Svaha, (4) Om S’rim Hrim Klim 
Svaha, (5) Om S’rim Hrim Klim Glaum Svaha, (6) Om S’rim Hrim 
Klim Glaum Gam Svaha, (7) Om S’rim Hrim Klim 
Glaum ityantah Gam Ganapataye Svaha, (8) Om Vara Varada 
ityantah Svaha, (9) Sarvajanam me Vas’am ityanto Svaha and (10) 
Anaya Svaha ityantah. 


Next perform in the Agni the Pitha Puja and meditate on the Deya 
Istadeva and worship him. Next offer twenty-five oblations to his 
face, repeating the Mula Mantra. Then think of that and Agni Deva 
as one and the same, and then again as one with Atman. Then offer 
oblations to each of the Sadamga Devatas separately. Then search 
for the Nadis (veins) of Vahni and Ista Devata and offer twenty one 
oblations. Then offer oblations to each of the two Devatas 
separately. Next offer one thousand and eight oblations to the Ista 
Deva with Til soaked in ghee or with the materials enumerated in the 
Kalpa. O Muni! Thus finishing the Homa ceremony, consider that the 
Ista Deva (the Devi), Agni and the Avarana Deities are all satisfied. 
Then, by the command of the Guru, the disciple is to take his bath 
and perform his Sandhya, etc., and put on new clothes (cloth and 
chadar) and golden ornaments. He is to come then, to the Kunda 
with Kamandalu in his hand and with a pure heart. He is to bow 
down to the elders and superiors seated in the assembly and take 
his seat in his Asana. S’ri Guru Deva then would look at the disciple 
with kind eyes and think the Chaitanya of the disciple within his own 
(the Guru’s) body. Then the Guru Deva would perform the Homa and 
look at the disciple with a divine gaze, so that the disciple becomes 
pure-hearted and able to get the favours of the Devas. Thus the 



Guru must purify all the Adhvas (the passages) of the body of the 
disciple. 


Then the Guru is to touch respectively the feet, generative organ, 
navel, heart, forehead, and the head of the disciple with Kurcha (a 
bundle of Kus’a grass) and til soaked in ghee, in his left hand and 
offer at each touch eight oblations, repeating the mantra “Om adya 
S’isyasya Kaladhvanam S’odhayami Svaha, etc.” Thus the Guru 
would purify Kaladhva (in the feet) Tattvadhva (in the generative 
organ), Bhuvanadhva (in the navel), Varnadhva (in the heart), 
Padadhva (in the fore-head) and Mantradhva (on the head), the six 
Adhvas and think these all to be dissolved in Brahma (Brahmalma). 


135-155. Then, again, the Guru would think all these to be re-born 
from Brahma and transfer the Chaitanya of the disciple that was in 
him to the disciple. Then the Guru must offer Purnahuti and consider 
the Ista Devata, placed in the fire by the visarjana mantra for the 
Homa purposes, as entered into the water-jar. He is to perform again 
the Vyarhiti Homa and offer all the Amgahutis (oblations to all the 
limbs) of the fire and take leave of the fire withdrawing the Deity from 
the jar, into his own body. Uttering then the Vausat Mantra he would 
tie the eyes of the disciple with a piece of cloth and would bring him 
from the Kunda to the mandala and make the disciple offer 
puspanjali (flowers in his palm) to the Ista deva. Then he would take 
away the bandage or piece of cloth from his eyes and ask him to 
take his seat in the seat Kusasana. Thus the Guru, after having 
purified the elements of the body of the disciple and performed the 
Nyasa of the Deya Mantra, would make the disciple sit in another 
mandala. Then he would touch the head of the disciple with the twigs 
(Pallavas) of the Kunda and repeat the Matrika Mantra and make 
him have his bath with the water of the jar which is considered as the 
seat of the Ista Deva. Then, for the protection of the disciple, he 
would sprinkle (abhiseka) him with the water of the Vardhani vessel 



placed already in the north-east corner. Then the disciple would get 
up and put on the pair of new clothes and besmear his whole body 
with ashes and sit close by the Guru. When the merciful Guru would 
consider that the S’iva S’akti has now passed out of his own body 
and that Divine Force, the Devi, has entered into the body of the 
disciple, i.e., charged the disciple with the pass. Thinking now the 
disciple and the Devata to be one and the same, the Guru would 
now worship the disciple with flowers and scents. The Guru would 
then place his right hand on the head of the disciple and repeat 
clearly in his right ear the Maha Mantra of the Maha Devi . The 
disciple is to repeat also the Maha Mantra one hundred and eight 
times and fall prostrate on the ground before the Guru and thus bow 
down to the Guru, whom the disciple now thinks as the incarnate of 
the Deva. 


The disciple, the devotee of the Guru, would now give as a Daksina 
all his wealth and property for his whole life to the Guru. Then he 
would give Daksina to the priests and make charities to the virgins; 
the Brahmanas, the poor and the destitute and the orphans. Here he 
is not to be miserly in any way in the expenditure. O Narada! Thus 
the disciple would consider himself blessed and he would daily 
remain engaged in repeating the Maha Mantra. Thus I have 
described to you above 

The most excellent Diksa. Thinking all these, you are to remain ever 
engaged in worshipping the lotus feet of the Great Devi. There is no 
Dharma higher than this in this world for the Brahmanas. The 
followers of the Vedas would impart this Mantra according to the 
rules stated respectively in their own Grihya Sutras; and the 
Tantrikas would also do the same according to their own Tantras. 
The Vaidiks should not follow the Tantra rules and the Tantriks are 
not to follow the Vaidik rules. Thus all the S’astras say. And this is 
the Sanatan Creed. Narayana said O Narada! I have described all 
about the ordinary Diksa that you questioned me. Now the essence 
in brief is this that you would remain always merged in worshipping 



the Para S’akti, the Highest Force, the Maha Devi. What more shall I 
say than this that I have got the highest pleasure and the Nirvana, 
the peace, that passeth all understanding, from my daily worshipping 
That Lotus Feet duly. Vedavyasa said O Maharaja! O 
Janamejayan! After having said this Diksatattva, the highest Yogi 
Bhagavan Narayana, meditated by the Yogis, closed his eyes and 
remained merged in Samadhi, in the meditation of the Lotus Feet of 
the Devi. 


Knowing this Highest Tattva, Narada, the chief of the Risis, bowed 
down at the feet of the Great Guru Narayana and went away 
immediately to perform the tapasya so that he also might see the 
Maha Devi. 


Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the Diksa 
vidhi or on the rules of Initiation in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 8. On The Appearance Of The Highest 
S’akti 


1-8. Janamejaya spoke to Veda Vyasa O Bhagavan! Thou art the 
knower of all the Dharmas and Thou art the chief, the crown of the 
Pundits, knowing all the S’astras. Now I ask Thee how is it that the 
twice-born have ceased to worship the Highest S’akti, the Gayatri 
and they now worship the other Devatas, on the face of the distinct 
command in the S’rutis that the worship of the Gayatri is nitya, that 
is, daily to be done at all times, especially during the three Sandhya 
times, by all those that are twice-born? 


In this world some are the devotees of Visnu, some, the followers of 
Ganapati, some are Kapalikas, some follow the doctrines prevalent 
in China; some are the followers of Buddha or Charvaka; some of 
them again wear the barks of trees and others roam naked. So 
various persons are seen having no trace of faith in the Vedas. 


O Brahmana! What is the real cause underlying secretly here in this! 
Kindly mention this to me. Again there are seen many men, well 
versed in various metaphysics and logic, our B.A.s and M.A.s but 
then, again, they have no faith in the Vedas. How is this? Nobody 
wants anything ominous to him consciously. But how is it that these 
so-called learned men are fully aware and yet they are wonderfully 
void of any trace of faith in the Vedas? Kindly mention the cause 
underlying this, O Thou! The foremost of the knowers of the Vedas. 


There is, again, another question Thou hadst described before the 
glories of Manidvipa, the highest and the best place of the Devi. Now 
I want to hear how is that Dvipa greater than the great. Satisfy this 



servant of thine by describing these. If the Guru be pleased, he 
reveals even the greatest and the highest esoteric secret to his 
disciple. 


9-10. Suta spoke Hearing the words of the King Janamejaya, the 
Bhagavan Veda Vyasa began to answer the questions in due order. 
The hearing of this increases the faith of the twice-born in the Vedas 


11-30. Vyasa said Well has this been asked by you, O King! in 
due time and in an appropriate moment. You are intelligent and it 
seems that you have got the faith in the Vedas. I now answer. Listen. 
In ancient days, the Asuras, maddened with pride, fought against the 
Devas for one hundred years. The war was very extraordinary and 
remarkable. In this great war various weapons were used, 
variegated with numerous Mayas or ingenious devices. It tended to 
destroy the whole world. By the mercy of the Highest and the Most 
Exalted S’akti, the Daityas were overcome by the Devas in that 
Great War. And they quitted the Heavens and the Earth and went to 
the nether regions, the Patala. The Devas were all delighted and 
began to dwell on their own prowesses and became proud. They 
began to say “Why shall not victory be ours. Why are not our 
glories great? We are by far the best! Where are the Daityas? They 
are devils, powerless. We are the causes of creation, preservation 
and destruction. We all are glorious! Oh! What can be said before us 
in favour of the Asuras, the devils?” Thus, not knowing the Highest 
S’akti, the Devas were deluded. At this moment, seeing this plight of 
the Devas, the World Mother took pity on the Devas and, to favour 
them, O King! She appeared before them in the form of the Most 
Worshipful, the Great Holy Light. It was resplendent like ten million 
Suns, and cool as well like ten million Moons. It was brilliant and 
dazzling like ten million lightning flashes, without hands and feet, and 
exceedingly beautiful! Never was this witnessed before! Seeing this 
Extraordinary Beautiful Lovely Light, the Devas were taken aback; 



they spoke amongst themselves, thus “What is this! What is this! 

Is this the work of the Daityas or some other great Maya (Mayic) 
played by them or is it the work of another for creating the surprise of 
the Devas!” O King! Then they all assembled together and decided 
to approach towards that Adorable Light and to ask It what It was. 
They, then, would determine its strength and decide what to do 
afterwards. Thus, coming to this ultimate conclusion, Indra called 
Agni and said “O Agni! You are the mouth-piece of the Devas. 
Therefore do you go first and ascertain distinctly what this Light is.” 
Hearing thus the words of Indra, Agni, elated by his own prowess, 
set out immediately from the place and went to that Light. Seeing 
Agni coming, the Light addressed him thus “Who are you? What 
is your strength? State this before Me.” At this Agni replied “I am 
Agni. All the yajhas, ordained in the Vedas are performed through 
me. The power of burning everything in this universe resides in me.” 
Then that adorable Light took up a straw of grass and said “O 
Agni! If you can burn everything in this universe, then do you burn 
this trifling straw.” Agni tried his best to burn the straw but he could 
not burn it. He got ashamed and fast went back to the Devas. Asked 
by the Devas, Agni told them everything and said “O Devas! Know 
verily that the pride cherished by us that we are supreme, is entirely 
false.” 


31-50. Indra then asked Vayu (wind) and said “O Vayu! You are 
dwelling in this universe, through and through; by your efforts, all are 
moving; therefore you are the Prana of all; it is possible that all 
forces are concentrated within you. Go and ascertain what is this 
Light? Verily I do not see any other person here than you who can 
ascertain this great adorable Light.” Hearing these commendable 
words of Indra, Vayu felt himself elated and went at once to that 
place where was that Light. Seeing the Vayu, the Light, the Yaksa, 
the demi-god, the Spirit asked in a gentle language “Who are 
you? What strength is there in you? Speak out all these to me.” At 
this, Vayu spoke arrogantly, “I am Matarisvan, I am Vayu; about my 



strength, I can move anything and I hold everything. It is through the 
strength of mine, that this universe is, and is alive and brisk with 
movements and works.” That Highest Mass of Light then replied 
“O Vayu! Move this straw that lies before you, and if you cannot, quit 
your pride and go back to Indra ashamed.” At this Vayu tried all his 
might but, alas! He could not move the straw a bit from that place! 


Vayu then gave up his pride and returned to the Devas and spoke to 
them all about the Yaksa (a sort of demi-god, a ghost). O Devas! Our 
pride is vain; in no way can we be able to ascertain the nature of that 
Light. It seems that that Holy Light, adorable by all, is extraordinary. 
Then all the Devas spoke with one voice to Indra 


“When You are the King of the Devas, better go yourself and 
ascertain the reality of Its Nature.” Indra, then, with great pride, went 
himself to the Light; the Light, too, began to disappear gradually from 
the place, and ultimately vanished from Indra’s sight. When Indra 
found that he could not even speak to That Light, he became greatly 
ashamed and began to conceive of his own nothingness. He thought 
thus “I won’t go back to the Devas. What shall I say to them? 
Never will I disclose to them my inferiority; one is better to die than 
do this. One’s self-honour is the only treasure of the great and 
honourable. If honour is gone, what use, then, is there in living?” O 
King! Then Indra, the Lord of Devas, quitted his pride and took 
refuge unto That Great Light which exhibited, ere long, such a 
glorious character. At this moment, a celestial voice was heard from 
the Heavens “O Indra! Go on now and do the japam, the reciting 
of the Maya Vija Mantra, the basic Mantra of Maya. All your troubles 
will, then, be over.” Hearing this celestial voice, Indra began to 
repeat the Maya Vija, the Seed Mantra of Maya, with rapt 
concentration and without any food. 



51-61. Then on the ninth lunar day of the month of Chaitra when the 
Sun entered the meridian, suddenly there appeared in that place a 
Great Mass of Light as was seen before. Indra saw, then, within that 
Mass of Light, a Virgin Form in full youth. The lustre from Her body 
was like that of ten million Rising Suns; and the colour was rosy red 
like a full-blown Java flower. On Her forehead was shining the digit of 
the Moon; Her breasts were full, and, though veiled under the cloth, 
they looked very beautiful. She was holding noose and a goad in Her 
two hands and Her other two hands indicated signs of favour and 
fearlessness. 


Her body was decked with various ornaments and it looked 
auspicious and exceedingly lovely; nowhere can be seen a woman 
beautiful like Her. She was like a Kalpa Vriksa (celestial tree yielding 
all desires); she was three eyed and Her braid of hair was encircled 
with Malati garlands. She was praised on Her four sides by the Four 
Vedas, Incarnate, in their respective Forms. The brilliancy of Her 
teeth shed lustre on the ground as if ornamented with Padmaraga 
jewels. Her face looked smiling. Her clothing was red and Her body 
was covered with sandalpaste. She was the Cause of all causes. 
Oh! She was all Full of Mercy. O King Janamejaya! Thus Indra saw, 
then, the Lima Parvati MahesVari Bhagavati and the hairs of his 
body stood on ends with ecstasy. His eyes were filled with tears of 
love and deep devotion and he immediately fell prostrate before the 
feet of the Devi. Indra sang various hymns to Her and praised Her. 
He became very glad and asked Her, “O Fair One! Art Thou that 
Great Mass of Light? If this be, kindly state the cause of Thy 
appearance.” O King! Hearing this, the Bhagavati replied. 


62-83. This My Form is Brahma, the Cause of all causes, the Seat of 
Maya, the Witness of all, infallible and free from all defects or 
blemishes. What all the Vedas and Upanisadas try to establish, what 
ought to be obtained, as declared by all the rules of austerity, and for 



which the Brahmanas practise Brahmacharyam, I am all that. I have 
told you about that Brahma, of the nature of the Great Holy Light. 

The sages declare that That Brahman is revealed by “Om” and 
“Hrim”, the two Vijas (mystic syllables) that are My two first and 
foremost Mantras wherein I remain hidden. I create this universe 
with My two parts (in My two aspects); therefore My Vija mantra is 
two. “Om” Vija is denominated as Sachchidananda (everlasting 
existence, intelligence and bliss) and “Hrim” Vija is Maya Prakriti, the 
Undifferentiated Consciousness, made manifest. Know, then. That 
Maya as the Highest S’akti and know Me as that Omnipotent 
Goddess at present revealed before your eyes. As moonlight is not 
different from the Moon, so this Maya S’akti in the state of 
equilibrium is not different from Me. (The powerful man and the 
power he wields are not different. They are verily one and the same.) 
During Pralaya (the Great Latency period), this Maya lies latent in 
Me, without there being any difference. Again at the time of creation, 
this Maya appears as the fructification of the Karmas of the Jivas. 
When this Maya is potential and exists latent in Me, when Maya is 
Antarmukhi, it is called Unmanifested and when the Maya becomes 
Kinetic, when the Maya is Bahirmukhi, when She is in an active 
Kinetic state, it is said to be Manifested. There is no origin or 
beginning of this Maya. Maya is of the nature of Brahma in a state of 
equilibrium. But, during the beginning of the creation. Her form 
consisting of the several Gunas appears, when Maya is Bahir Mukhi, 
She becomes Tamas, in Her Unmanifested state. O Indra! For this 
reason Her state of abstraction, and becoming introspective, this is 
Her Antarmukhi state; it is known as Maya and Her looking outward 
is Her Bahirmukhi state; it is denominated by Tamas and the other 
gunas. From this comes Sattva and then Rajas and Brahma, Visnu 
and Mahes’a are of the nature of the three gunas. Brahma has the 
Rajo guna in Him preponderating; in Visnu, the Sattva guna 
preponderates and in Mahes’a, the Cause of all Causes, is said to 
reside the Tamo guna. Brahma is known as of the Gross Body; 

Visnu is known as of the Subtle Body; and Rudra is known as of the 
Causal Body and I am known as Turiya, transcending the Gunas. 



This Tunya Form of Mine is called the state of equilibrium of the 
Gunas. It is the Inner Controller of all. Beyond this there is another 
state of Mine which is called the Formless Brahma (Brahman having 
no Forms). Know, verily, that my Forms are two, as they are with or 
without attributes (Saguna or Nirguna). That which is beyond Maya 
and the Mayic qualities is called Nirguna (without Prakritic attributes) 
and that which is within Maya is called Saguna. O Indra! After 
creating this universe, I enter within that as the Inner Controller of all 
and it is I that impel all the JTvas always to their due efforts and 
actions. Know, verily, that It is I that engage Brahma, Visnu and 
Rudra, the causes of the several works of creation, preservation and 
destruction of this universe (they are performing their functions by 
My Command). 

Through the terror from Me the wind blows; through my terror, the 
Sun moves in the sky; through My terror, Indra, Agni, and Yama do 
their respective duties. I am the Best and Superior to all. All fear Me. 
Through My Grace you have obtained victory in the battle. Know, 
verily, that it is I that make you all dance like inert wooden dolls as 
My mere instruments. You are merely My functions. I am the Integral 
Whole. I give sometimes victory to you and sometimes victory to the 
Daityas; Yea, I do everything as I will, keeping My independence 
duly and, according to the Karmas, justly. 

Oh! You all, have forgotten me though your pride and sheer 
nonsense. You have been carried deep into dire delusion by your 
vain egoism. And know now that to favour you, this My Adorable 
Light has issued suddenly. Hence forth banish ever from your heart 
all your vain boastings and idle pratings. Take refuge wholly unto Me 
with all your head, heart and soul, unto My Sachchidananda Form 
and be safe. (At times the Devas forget and so fall into troubles). 


84-93. Vyasa said Thus saying, the Mula Pakriti, the Great Devi, 
the Goddess of the Universe, vanished from their sight. The Devas, 



on the other hand, began to praise Her then and there, with rapt 
devotion. Since that day, all the Devas quitted their pride and 
engaged themselves in worshipping the Devi devotedly. They 
worshipped the Gayatri Devi daily during the three Sandhya times 
and performed various Yajhas and thus they worshipped Bhagavati 
daily. Thus, in the Satya Yuga, everybody engaged themselves in 
repeating the Mantra Gayatri and worshipped the Goddess 
indwelling in the Pranava and Hrimkara. So, See now for yourself, 
that the worship of Visnu or S’iva or initiation in the Visnu Mantra or 
in the S’iva Mantra are not mentioned anywhere in the Vedas as to 
be done always and for ever. They are done for a while and not 
required any more when the objects are fulfilled; only the worship of 
Gayatri is always compulsory, to be done at all times, as mentioned 
in the Vedas. O King! 

If a Brahmana does not worship the Gayatri, know, then, for certain, 
that in every way, he is sure to go down lower and lower. There is no 
doubt in this. A Brahmin is not to wait, no never, to do any other 
thing; he will have all his desires fulfilled if he worships only the Devi 
Gayatri. Bhagavan Manu says that a Brahmin, whether he does any 
other thing or not, can be saved if he worships only the Divine 
Mother Gayatri. (This worshipping the Gayatri is the highest, 
greatest, and most difficult of all the works in this universe). If any 
devotee of S’iva or Visnu or of any other Deity worships his desired 
Deity without repeating the Gayatri, he is sure to suffer the torments 
of hell. (But this age of Kali deludes the people and draws away their 
minds from reciting this Gayatri save a few of them.) O King! For this 
reason, in the Satya Yuga, all the Brahmanas kept themselves fully 
engaged in worshipping the Gayatri and the lotus feet of the Devi 
Bhagavati. 


Here ends the Eighth Chapter in the Twelfth Book on the 
appearance of the Highest S’akti in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi 
Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 




Chapter 9. On The Cause Of S’raddha In Other 
Devas Than The Dev! Gayatr! 


1-20. Vyasa said O King Janamejaya! Once on a time, on account 
of an evil turn of Fate (Karma) of the human beings, Indra did not 
rain on this earth for fifteen years. Owing to want of rain, the famine 
appeared horribly; and almost all the beings lost their lives. No one 
could count in every house the number of the dead persons. Out of 
hunger the people began to eat horses; some began to eat bears 
and pigs, some began to eat the dead bodies while some others 
carried on any how their lives. The people were so much distressed 
with hunger that the mother did not refrain from eating her baby child 
and the husband did not refrain from eating his wife. O King! The 
Brahmanas then united and after due discussion, came to the 
conclusion that they would go to the hermit Gautama who would be 
able to remove their distress. So all of them wanted to go quickly to 
the hermitage of the Muni Gautama. They began to say “We hear 
that there is no famine in the hermitage of Gautama. Various 
persons are running there from various quarters.” Thus coming to a 
conclusion, the Brahmanas went to the Gautama’s As’rama with 
their cows, servants and relations. Some went from the east; some 
from the south; some from the west, and some from the north. Thus 
from various quarters the people flocked there. Seeing the 
Brahmanas coming there, the Risi Gautama bowed down to them 
and gave them a cordial welcome and served them with seats, etc. 
When all took their seats and became calm and quiet, Gautama 
enquired about their welfare and the cause of their arrival. They 
described everything about the dire famine and their own states and 
expressed their deep regret. Seeing them very much distressed, the 
Muni gave them word not to have any fear; he said “I am today 
become blessed by the arrival of the great ascetics and honourable 
persons like you. I am your servant. You consider all my houses as 
yours. Be quite comfortable. Bear no uneasiness. When your servant 
is alive, what fear do your entertain and whom do you fear? When 



the demerits are transformed into good merits by your mere sight, 
and when you have blessed my house with the dust of your holy 
feet, then who is more blessed than me? O Vipras! Kindly perform 
your Sandhyas, and Japams and rest here at ease.” Vyasa said O 
King Janamejaya! Thus consoling the Brahmanas, the Risi Gautama 
began to worship the Gayatri Devi with rapt devotional trance. “O 
Devi Gayatri! Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the Great Vidya, the 
Mother of the Vedas, Higher than the Highest; Thou art Vyarhiti 
represented by the Mantra ‘Om Bhur Bhuvah Svah,’ O Mother! Thou 
art the state of equilibrium, i.e., the Turiya; Thou art of of the Form of 
Hrim; Thou art Svaha and Svadha; Thou grantest the desires of the 
Bhaktas. Thou art the Witness of the three states, Jagrat (waking), 
Svapna (dreaming) and Susupti (deep sleep). Thou art the Turiya 
and Sachchidananda Brahma. O Devi! Thou resident in the Solar 
Orb and appearest as a ruddy girl in the morning, an youthful maiden 
at noon and a black old woman in the evening. O Devi! Obeisance to 
Thee! Now shew favour on us at this severe famine time when all the 
beings are well nigh on the way to destruction.” 


21-40. Thus praised and worshipped, the World-Mother appeared 
and gave to the Risi one vessel (cup) full to the brim by which every 
one can he fed and nourished. The Mother told the Muni “This full 
vessel, given by me to you will yield whatever you wish.” Thus 
saying, the Devi Gayatri, Higher than the Highest, vanished. Then, 
according to the wish of the Muni, came out from that cup, 
mountains of cooked rice, various curries and sweetmeats, lots of 
grass and fodder, silken clothings, various ornaments and various 
articles and vessels for sacrificial purposes. In fact whatever the 
Muni Gautama wished, that came out of the brimful cup, given by the 
Devi Gayatri. Then the Muni Gautama called the other Munis that 
came there and gave them wealth, grains, clothing, ornament, and 
the sacrificial ladles and spoons and cows and buffaloes for the 
sacrificial purposes. The Munis then assembled and performed 
various yajhas. The place all round, then flourished and became so 



much prosperous that it looked like a second heaven. In fact 
whatever fair and beautiful there exist in the Trilokas, all came from 
the brimful cup given by the Devi Gayatri. At this time the Munis, 
with sandalpaste all over on their bodies, and decorated with very 
bright ornaments looked like the gods and their wives looked like 
goddesses. Daily utsabs began to be held in in the As’rama of 
Gautama. Nowhere were seen any diseases or dacoities and there 
was no fear from any such things. Gradually the As’rama’s boundary 
extended to one hundred Yojanas (4 hundred miles). Hearing this 
greatness of Gautama, many persons came there from various 
quarters. And the Muni Gautama, too, gave them words, “cast away 
fear” and fed them. The Devas, on the other hand, became very 
much satisfied by the various Yajhas and extolled the Muni’s 
greatness. So much so, that the famous Indra, the Lord of the 
Devas, came in the midst of the assembly and extolled his 
greatness, thus “This Gautama has fulfilled all our wishes and has 
verily become a Kalpa Vriksa (celestial tree yielding all desires). If 
this man had not done such things, in this hard famine time, we 
would not have got the Havih offered in sacrifices and the prospect 
of our lives would have been at stake.” O King Janamejaya! Thus the 
Muni Gautama fed and nourished for twelve years all the Munis, like 
his sons and that place came to be recognised as the chief centre 
(the Head Quarters) of the Gayatri Devi. Even today, all the Munis 
perform with devotion the Purasacharanams and worship thrice the 
Bhagavati Gayatri Devi. Even today the Devi is there seen as a girl 
in the morning, as a youthful maiden at noon, as an old woman in 
the evening. Then, once on a time, Narada, of best conduct, came 
there playing on his great lute and singing in tune the highest glories 
of Gayatri and took his seat in the assembly of the Munis. 


41-62. Seeing the tranquil hearted Narada coming there, Gautama 
and the other Munis received him duly and worshipped him with the 
Padya and Arghya. In course of conversation he began to describe 
the glories of Gautama and said “O Best of Munis! I have heard 



from the mouth of Indra, in the assembly of the Devas, your glories 
as to your supporting and feeding the pure-hearted Munis and I have 
come to see you. By the Grace of S’ri Bhagavati Gayatri Devi, you 
have now become blessed. There is no doubt in this.” Thus saying, 
the Devarsi Narada entered into the temple of the Devi Gayatri and 
with eyes gladdened by love, saw the Devi there and offered due 
hymns in praise of Her and then ascended to the Heavens. Here, on 
the other hand, the Brahmanas that were fed by Gautama, became 
jealous at so much honour offered to Gautama and tried their best so 
that no further honour be paid to him. They further settled not to stay 
any longer in his As’rama, when the next good harvest season 
comes. (Thus his glories will wane). O King! Some days passed 
when good rains fell and there was an abundance of crops 
everywhere and the famine ended. Hearing this, all the Brahmins 
united, Alas! O King! to curse the Gautama. Oh! Their fathers and 
mothers are blessed in whom do not arise such feelings of jealousy! 
This all is the wonderful play of the powerful Time; it cannot be 
expressed by any person. O King! These Brahmins created, by 
Maya, an aged cow, who was to die and pushed her in the sacrificial 
hall of the Muni Gautama at the time of the Homa ceremony. Seeing 
that cow entering into the enclosure where the Homa was being 
performed, Gautama cried out “Hoorn Hoorn” when the cow fell there 
and died. And the other Brahmanas instantly cried out “Look! Look! 
The wicked Gautama has killed the cow.” Seeing this inconceivable 
event, Gautama was greatly nonplussed and, completing his Homa 
ceremony, entered into Samadhi and began to think the cause of it. 
Then, coming to know that this has been concocted by the Maya of 
the Brahmins, he became angry like Rudra at the time of dissolution; 
his eyes were reddened and he cursed the Risis, thus Oh vile 
Brahmins! When you are ready to cause mischief to me unjustly then 
let you be averse to meditate and do the japam of the Devi Gayatri, 
the Mother of the Vedas. For your this act, never you will be eager to 
perform any Vedic sacrificial acts or any action concerning thereof. 
There is no doubt in this. You will be always averse to the mantra of 
S’iva or the Tantra of S’iva. You will be always averse to Mula Prakrit! 
S’ri Devi, to Her Dhyanam, mantra, to any conversation regarding 



Her; to the visiting of Her place or Temple, to do worship and other 
ceremonies to Her, to see the Grand Festivals of the Devi, to singing 
the names and glories of the Devi, to sit before the Devi and to 
adore Her. 


63-81. O vile Brahmanas! You will be always averse to see the 
festivals of S’iva, to worship S’iva, to Rudraksa, to the Bel leaves, 
and to the holy Bhasma (ashes). You will be wholly indifferent to 
practise the right ways of living as presented in the Vedas and 
Smritis, to preserve your conduct good and to observe the path of 
knowledge to Advaita Jhanam, to practise restraint of senses and 
continence, to the daily practices of Sandhya Bandanam, to 
performing the Agnihotra ceremonies, to the study of the Vedas 
according to one’s own S’akha or to the daily studies thereof as to 
teach those things or to give, as gifts, cows, etc., or to perform the 
S’raddhas of the fathers, etc., or to perform Krichchra Chandrayana 
and other penances. O Vile Brahmanas! As you are ready to do 
these mean things, you will have to suffer for this that you will desist 
from worshipping the Most Adorable S’ri Bhagavati Devi and that 
you will worship the other Devas with faith and devotion and hold on 
your bodies S’amkha, Chakra and other signs. You will follow the 
Kapalikas, Bauddha S’astras and other heretics. You will sell your 
father, mother, brothers, sisters, sons and daughters and even your 
wives tool 


You will sell the Vedas, Tirthas, and your Dharma. You will not feel 
ashamed in any way to sell all these. You will certainly have faith in 
Kapalika and Bauddha opinions, Pahcharatras and Kama S’astras. 

O vile Brahmanas! You will not hesitate to go to your mother, 
daughters or sisters and you will always be licentious with others’ 
wives and spend your time in that. This is not to you only but to the 
women and men, all that will come in your families. Let the Gayatri 
Devi be always indignant with you and let you all go in the end to the 



Andha Kupa hells, etc. Vyasa said O Janamejaya! Thus taking the 
water symbolising the true rules and laws of creation, and cursing 
the Brahmanas, the Muni Gautama went hastily to see the Gayatri 
Devi and, on arriving at the temple there bowed down to Her. The 
Devi, too, became surprised to see their actions. O King! Even to 
day Her Lotus Face looks similarly astonished! 


82-90. Then the Gayatri Devi told Gautama with amazement“O 
Gautama! The venom of the snake does not become less if you feed 
the serpents with milk; so never mind all these things; the Karmas 
take their peculiar turns; it is hard to say when will happen what 
things. Now be peaceful. Do not be sorry.” Hearing these words of 
the Devi, Gautama bowed down to Her and went thence to his own 
As’rama. Here, on the other hand, the Brahmanas forgot everything 
due to the curse of Gautama, of the Vedas and the Gayatri Mantra. 
They then began to look at this event with wonder as unique and 
extraordinary. All united they afterwards repented and going before 
Gautama, fell prostrate at his feet. But they could not speak any 
word out of shame. Only they said frequently “Be pleased, be 
pleased with us.” When all the assembly of the Brahmanas prayed to 
him for favour and grace, the Muni Gautama took pity on them and 
replied. My word will never turn out false. You will have to remain in 
Kumbhipaka hell upto the time when S’ri Krisna will take his 
incarnation. Then you will be born in the earth in the Kali age and 
whatever I have uttered will exactly come unto you. And if you are in 
earnest to avert my curse then go and worship the Lotus Feet of S’ri 
Gayatri Devi. The is no other remedy. 


91-100. Vyasa said Thus dismissing the Brahmanas, Gautama 
Muni thought that all these occurred as a result of Prarabdha Karma 
and he became calm and quiet. For this reason, after S’ri Krisna 
Maharaja ascended to the Heavens, when the Kali age came, those 
cursed Brahmanas got out of the Kumbhipaka hell and took their 



births in this earth as Brahmins, devoid of the three Sandhyas, 
devoid of the devotion to Gayatri, devoid of faith in the Vedas, 
advocating the heretics’ opinion and unwilling to perform Agnihotra 
and other religious sacrifices and duties and they were devoid of 
Svadha and Svaha. They forgot entirely the Unmanifested Mula 
Prakriti Bhagavati. Some of them began to mark on their bodies 
various heretical signs, e.g., Taptamudra, etc.; some became 
Kapalikas; some became Kaulas; some Bauddhas and some Jainas. 
Many of them, though learned, became lewd and addicted to other’s 
wives and engaged themselves in vain and bad disputations. For 
these, they will have to go again surely to the Kumbhipaka hell. So O 
King! Worship with your heart and soul S’ri Bhagavati Parames’vari 
Devi. The worship of Visnu or S’iva is not constant (to be done 
everyday); only the worship of S’akti is to be constantly performed. 
For this reason whoever does not worship S’akti is sure to fall. Thus I 
have answered all your questions. Now I shall describe the highest 
and most beautiful place, Manidvipa of the Primal Force Bhagavati, 
the Deliverer from this bondage of world. Listen. 


Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the cause of 
S’raddha in other Devas than the Devi Gayatri in the Mahapuranam 
S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda 
Vyasa. 



Chapter 10. On The Description Of Mani DvIpa 


1-20. Vyasa said O King Janamejaya! What is known in the 
S’rutis, in the Subala Upanisada, as the Sarvaloka over the 
Brahmaloka, that is Manidvipa. Here the Devi resides. This region is 
superior to all the other regions. Hence it is named “Sarvaloka.” The 
Devi built this place of yore according to Her will. In the very 
beginning, the Devi Mula Prakriti Bhagavati built this place for Her 
residence, superior to Kailas’a, Vaikuntha and Goloka. Verily no 
other place in this universe can stand before it. Hence it is called 
Manidvipa or Sarvaloka as superior to all the Lokas. This Manidvipa 
is situated at the top of all the regions, and resembles an umbrella. 
Its shadow falls on the Brahmanda and destroys the pains and 
sufferings of this world. Surrounding this Manidvipa exists an ocean 
called the Sudha Samudra, many yojanas wide and many yojanas 
deep. Many waves arise in it due to winds. Various fishes and 
conches and other aquatic animals play and here the beach is full of 
clear sand like gems. The sea-shores are kept always cool by the 
splashes of the waves of water striking the beach. Various ships 
decked with various nice flags are plying to and fro. Various trees 
bearing gems are adorning the beach. Across this ocean, there is an 
iron enclosure, very long and seven yojanas wide, very high so as to 
block the Heavens. Within this enclosure wall the military guards 
skilled in war and furnished with various weapons are running gladly 
to and fro. There are four gateways or entrances; at every gate there 
are hundreds of guards and various hosts of the devotees of the 
Devi. Whenever any Deva comes to pay a visit to the JagadisVari, 
their Vahanas (carriers) and retinue are stopped here. O King! This 
place is being resounded with the chimings of the bells of hundreds 
of chariots of the Devas and the neighings of their horses and the 
sounds of their hoofs. The Devas walk here and there with canes in 
their hands and they are chiding at intervals the attendants of the 
Devas. This place is so noisy that no one can hear clearly another’s 
word. Here are seen thousands of houses adorned with trees of 



gems and jewels and tanks filled with plenty of tasteful good sweet 
waters. O King! After this there is a second enclosure wall, very big 
and built of white copper metal (an amalgam of zinc or tin and 
copper); it is so very high that it almost touches the Heavens. It is 
hundred times more brilliant than the preceding enclosure wall; there 
are many principal entrance gates and various trees here. What to 
speak of the trees there more than this that all the trees that are 
found in this universe are found there and they bear always flowers, 
fruits and new leaves! All the quarters are scented with their sweet 
fragrance! 


21-40. O King! Now hear, in brief, the names of some of the trees 
that are found in abundance there Panasa, Vakula, Lodhra, 
Karnikara, S’ins’apa, Deodara, Kanchanara, mango, Sumeru, 
Likucha, Hingula, Ela, Labanga, Kat fruit tree, Patala, Muchukunda, 
Tala, Tamala, Sala, Kankola, Nagabhdra, Punnaga, Pilu, Salvaka, 
Karpura, AsVakarna, Hastikarna, Talaparna, Pomegranate, Ganika, 
Bandhujiva, Jamvira, Kurandaka, Champeya, Bandhujiva, 
Kanakavriksa, Kalaguru (usually coiled all over with cobras, very 
black poisonous snakes), Sandaltree, Datetree,Yuthika, Talaparni, 
Sugarcane, Ksira-tree, Khadira, Bhallataka, Ruchaka, Kutaja, Bel 
tree and others, the TalasT and Mallika and other forest plants. The 
place is interspersed with various forests and gardens. At intervals 
there are wells, tanks, etc., adding very much to the beauty of the 
place. The cuckoos are perching on every tree and they are cooing 
sweetly, the bees are drinking the honey and humming all around, 
the trees are emitting juices and sweet fragrance all around. The 
trees are casting cool nice shadows. The trees of all seasons are 
seen here; on the tops of these are sitting pigeons, parrots, female 
birds of the Mayana species and other birds of various other species. 
There are seen rivers flowing at intervals carrying many juicy liquids. 
The Flamingoes, swans, and other aquatic animals are playing in 
them. The breeze is stealing away the perfumes of flowers and 
carrying it all around. The deer are following this breeze. The wild 



mad peacocks are dancing with madness and the whole place looks 
very nice, lovely and charming. Next this Kamsya enclosure comes 
the third enclosure wall of copper. It is square shaped and seven 
yojanas high. Within this are forests of Kalpavriksas, bearing golden 
leaves and flowers and fruits like gems. Their perfumes spread ten 
yojanas and gladden things all around. The king of the seasons 
preserves always this place. The king’s seat is made of flowers; his 
umbrella is of flowers; ornaments made of flowers; he drinks the 
honey of the flowers; and, with rolling eyes, he lives here always with 
his two wives named Madhu S’ri and Madhava S’ri. The two wives of 
Spring have their faces always smiling. They play with bunches of 
flowers. This forest is very pleasant. Oh! The honey of the flowers is 
seen here in abundance. The perfumes of the full blown flowers 
spread to a distance of ten yojanas. The Gandharbhas, the 
musicians, live here with their wives. 


41-60. The places round this are filled with the beauties of the spring 
and with the cooing of cuckoos. No doubt this place intensifies the 
desires of the amorous persons! O King! Next comes the enclosure 
wall, made of lead. Its height is seven yojanas. Within this enclosure 
there is the garden of the Santanaka tree. The fragrance of its 
flowers extends to ten yojanas. The flowers look like gold and are 
always in full bloom. Its fruits are very sweet. They seem to be 
imbued with nectar drops. In this garden resides always the Summer 
Season with his two wives S’ukra S’ri and S’uchi S’ri. The 
inhabitants of this place always remain under trees; otherwise they 
will be scorched by summer rays. Various Siddhas and Devas 
inhabit this place. The female sensualists here get their bodies all 
anointed with sandal paste and all decked with flower garlands and 
they stalk to and fro with fans in their hands. There is water to be 
found here very cool and refreshing. And owing to heat all the people 
here use this water. Next to this lead enclosure comes the wall made 
of brass, the fifth enclosure wall. It is seven yojanas long. In the 



centre is situated the garden of Hah Chandana trees. Its ruler is the 
Rainy Season. 


The lightnings are his auburn eyes; the clouds are his armour, the 
thunder is his voice and the rainbow is his arrow. Surrounded by his 
hosts he rains incessantly. He has twelve wives (1) Nabhah S’ri, 
(2) Nabhahsya S’ri, (3) Svarasya, (4) Rasyasalini, (5) Amba, (6) 

Dula, (7) Niratni, (8) Abhramanti, (9) Megha Yantika, (10) Varsayanti, 
(11) Chivunika, and (12) Varidhara (some say Madamatta). All the 
trees here are always seen with new leaves and entwined with new 
creepers. The whole site is covered all over with fresh green leaves 
and twigs. The rivers here always flow full and the current is strong, 
indeed! The tanks here are very dirty like the minds of worldly 
persons attached to worldly things. The devotees of the Devi, the 
Siddhas and the Devas and those that consecrated in their life times 
tanks, wells, and reservoirs for the satisfaction of the Devas dwell 
here with their wives. O King! Next to this brass enclosure comes, 
the sixth enclosure wall made of five fold irons. It is seven yojanas 
long. In the centre is situated the Garden of Mandara trees. This 
garden is beautified by various creepers, flowers and leaves. The 
Autumn season lives here with his two wives Isalaksmi and 
Urjalaksmi and he is the ruler. Various Siddha persons dwell here 
with their wives, well clothed. O King! Next to this comes the seventh 
enclosure wall, seven yojanas long and built of silver. 


61-80. In the centre is situated the garden of Parijata trees. They are 
filled with bunches of flowers. The fragrance of these Parijatas 
extend upto the ten Yojanas and gladden all the things all around. 
Those who are the Devi Bhaktas and who do the works of the Devi 
are delighted with this fragrance. The Hemanta (Dewy) season is the 
Regent of this place. He lives here with his two wives Saha S’ri and 
Sahasya S’ri and with his hosts. Those who are of a loving nature 
are pleased hereby. Those who have become perfect by performing 



the Vratas of the Devi live here also. O King! Next to this silver, there 
comes the eighth enclosure wall built of molten gold. It is seven 
Yojanas long. In the centre there is the garden of the Kadamba tree. 
The trees are always covered with fruits and flowers and the honey 
is coming out always from the trees from all the sides. The devotees 
of the Devi drink this honey always and feel intense delight; the 
Dewy Season is the Regent of this place. He resides here with his 
two wives Tapah S’ri and Tapasya S’ri and his various hosts, and 
enjoys gladly various objects of enjoyments. Those who had made 
various gifts for the Devi’s satisfaction, those great Siddha Purusas 
live here with their wives and relatives very gladly in various 
enjoyments. O King! Next to this golden enclosure well comes the 
ninth enclosure made of red Kum Kum like (saffron) Pusparaga 
gems. The ground inside this enclosure, the ditches or the basins for 
water dug round their roots are all built of Pusparaga gems. Next to 
this wall there are other enclosure walls built of various other gems 
and jewels; the sites, forests, trees, flowers birds, rivers, tanks, 
lotuses, mandapas (halls) and their pillars are all built respectively of 
those gems. Only this is to be remembered that those coming nearer 
and nearer to the centre are one lakh times more brilliant than the 
ones receding from them. This is the general rule observed in the 
construction of these enclosures and the articles contained therein. 
Here the Regents of the several quarters, the Dikpalas, representing 
the sum total of the several Dikpalas of every Brahmanda and their 
guardians reside. On the eastern quarter is situated the Amaravati 
city. Here the high-peaked mountains exist and various trees are 
seen. Indra, the Lord of the Devas, dwells here. Whatever beauty 
exists in the separate Heavens in the several places, one thousand 
times, rather more than that, exists in the Heaven of this cosmic 
Indra, the thousand-eyed, here. Here Indra mounting on the elephant 
Airavata, with thunderbolt in his hand, lives with S’achi Devi and 
other immortal ladies and with the hosts of the Deva forces. On the 
Agni (south-eastern) corner is the city of Agni. This represents the 
sum total of the several cities of Agni in different Brahmandas. 



81-100. Here resides the Agni Deva very gladly with his two wives 
Svaha and Svadha and with his Vahana and the other Devas. On 
the south is situated the city of Yama, the God of Death. Here lives 
Dharma Raja with rod in his hand and with Chitragupta and several 
other hosts. On the south-westen corner is the place of the 
Raksasas. Here resides Nirriti with his axe in his hand and with his 
wife and other Raksasas. On the west is the city of Varuna. Here 
Varuna raja resides with his wife Varuni and intoxicated with the 
drink of Varuni honey; his weapon is the noose, his Vahana is the 
King of fishes and his subjects are the aquatic animals. On the north¬ 
western corner dwells Vayudeva. Here Havana Deva lives with his 
wife and with the Yogis perfect in the practice of Pranayama. He 
holds a flag in his hand. 


His Vahana, is deer and his family consists of the forty nine Vayus. 
On the north resides the Yaksas. The corpulent King of the Yaksas, 
Kuvera, lives here with his S’aktis Vriddhi and Riddhi, and in 
possession of various gems and jewels. His generals Manibhadra, 
Puma bhadra, Maniman, Manikandhara, Manibhusa, Manisragvi, 
Manikar-mukadhari, etc., live here. On the north eastern corner is 
situated the Rudra loka, decked with invaluable gems. Here dwells 
the Rudra Deva. On His back is kept the arrow-case and he holds a 
bow in his left hand. He looks very angry and his eyes are red with 
anger. There are other Rudras like him with bows and spears and 
other weapons, surrounding him. The faces of some of them are 
distorted; some are very horrible indeed! Fire is coming out from the 
mouths of some others. Some have ten hands; some have hundred 
hands and some have thousand hands; some have ten feet; some 
have ten heads whereas some others have three eyes. Those who 
roam in the intermediate spaces between the heaven and earth, 
those who move on the earth, or the Rudras mentioned in the 
Rudradhyaya all live here. O King! Isana, the Regent of the north 
eastern quarter lives here with BhadrakalT and other Matriganas, with 
Kotis and Kotis of Rudranis and with Damaris and Vira Bhadras and 



various other S’aktis. On his neck there is a garland of skulls, on his 
hand there is a ring of snakes; he wears a tiger skin; his upper 
clothing is a tiger skin and his body is smeared with the ashes of the 
dead. He sounds frequently his Damaru; this sound reverberates on 
all sides, he makes big laughs called Attahasya, reverberating 
through the heavens. He remains always surrounded with 
Pramathas and Bhutas; they live here. 


Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the description 
of Mani Dvipa in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 11. On The Description Of The 
Enclosure Walls Built Of Padmaraga Mani, 
Etc., Of The Mani DvIpa 


1-30. Vyasa said O King Janamejaya! Next to this Pusparaga 
mani enclosure wall comes the tenth enclosure wall, made of 
Padmaraga mani, red like the red Kunkuma and the Rising Sun. It is 
ten yojanas high. All its ground, entrance gates and temples and 
arbours are all made of Padmaraga mani. Within this reside the sixty 
four Kalas or Sub-S’aktis adorned with various ornaments and 
holding weapons in their hands. Each of them has a separate Loka 
(region) allotted and within this Loka he has get his own formidable 
weapons, Vahanas, families and their leaders or Governors. O King! 
Now hear the names of the sixty four Kalas. They are Pingalaksi, 
Vis’alaksT, Samriddhi, Vriddhi, S’raddha, Svaha, Svadha, Maya, 
Sahgha, Vasundhara, Trilokadhatri, Savitri, Gayatri, Tridas’esVsri, 
Surupa, Bahurupa, Skandamata, Achyutapriya, Vimala, Amala, 
Aruni, Aruni, Prakriti, Vikriti, S’risti, Sthiti, Samrhiti, Sandhya, Mata, 
Sati, Hamsi, Mardika, Vajrika, Para, Devamata, Bhagavati, Devaki, 
Kamalasana, Trimukhi, Saptamukhi, Surasura vimardini, Lambosthi, 
Urdhakes’i, Bahusirsa, Vrikodari Ratharekhahvaya, S’as’ireka, 
Gaganavega, Pavanavega, Bhuvanapala, Madanatura, Ananga, 
Anangamathana, Anangamekhala, Anangakusuma, Visvarupa, 
Suradika, Ksayamkari, Aksyobhya, Satyavadini, Bahurupa, 
S’uchivrata, Udara and Vagis’T. These are the sixty four Kalas. All of 
them have got luminous faces and long lolling tongues. Fire is 
always coming out from the faces of all of them. The eyes of all of 
them are red with anger. They are uttering We will drink all the 
water and thus dry up the oceans; we will annihilate fire, we will stop 
the flow of air and control it. Today we will devour the whole universe 
and so forth. All of them have got bows and arrows in their hands; all 
are eager to fight. The four quarters are being reverberated with the 
clashing of their teeth. The hairs on their heads are all tawny and 



they stand upwards. Each of them has one hundred Aksauhini 
forces under them. O King! What more to say than this that each of 
them has got power to destroy one lakh Brahmandas; and their one 
hundred Aksauhini forces also can do the same. There is nothing 
that is not impracticable with them. What they cannot do cannot be 
conceived by mind nor can be uttered in speech. All the war 
materials exist within their enclosures. Chariots, horses, elephants, 
weapons, and forces all are unlimited. All the war materials are 
ready at all times and in abundance. Next comes the eleventh 
enclosure wall built of Gomedamani. It is ten Yojanas high. Its colour 
is like the newly blown Java flower. All the ground, trees, tanks, 
houses, pillars, birds and all other things are all red and built of 
Gomedamani. Here dwell the thirty-two Maha S’aktis adorned with 
various ornament made of Gomedamani and furnished with various 
weapons. They are always eager to fight. Their eyes are always red 
with anger; their bees are like Pis’achas and their hands are like 
chakras (discs). “Pierce him,” “Beat him,” “Cut him,” “Tear him 
asunder,” “Burn him down,” are the words constantly uttered by 
them. The inhabitants of the place always worship them. Each of 
them has ten Aksauhini forces. These are inordinately powerful. It is 
impossible to describe that. It seems that each S’akti can easily 
destroy one lakh Brahmandas. 


Innumerable chariots, elephants, hordes, etc., and other vahanas 
are here. Verily all the war materials of the Devi Bhagavati are seen 
in this Gomedamani enclosure. 


31-51. Now I am mentioning the auspicious, sin destroying names of 
these S’aktis :-- Vidya, Hri, Pusti, Prajha, Sini vali, Kuhu, Rudra, 
Virya, Prabha, Nanda, Posani, Riddhida, S’ubha, Kalaratri, 

Maharatri, Bhadra Kali, Kaparddini, Vikriti, Dandi, Mundini, 
Sendukhanda, S’ikhandini, Nis’umbha s’umbha mathani, 

Mahisasura marddini, Indrani, Rudrani, S’ankarardha saririni, Nari, 



Nirayani Tris’ulini, Palini, Ambika, and Hladini. (See the Daksina 
Murti Samhita and other Tantras.) 


Never there is any chance that they will be defeated anywhere. 
Hence if all those S’aktis get angry at any time, this Brahmanda 
ceases to exist. Next to this Gomeda enclosure comes the enclosure 
made of diamonds. It is ten yojanas high; on all sides there are the 
entrance gates; the doors are hinged there with nice mechanisms. 
Nice new diamond trees exist here. All the roads, royal roads, trees, 
and the spaces for watering their roots, tanks, wells, reservoirs, 
Saranga and other musical instruments are all made of diamonds. 
Here dwells S’ri BhuvanesVari Devi with Her attendants. O King! 
Each of them has a lakh attendants. All of them are proud of their 
beauty. Some of them are holding fans in their hands; some are 
holding cups for drinking water; some, betelnuts; some are holding 
umbrellas; some chowries; some are holding various clothings; some 
flowers; some, looking glasses; some, saffrons; some collyrium, 
whereas some others are holding Sindura (red lead). Some are 
ready to do the painting works; some are anxious to champoo the 
feet; some are eager to make Her wear ornaments; some are 
anxious to put garlands of flowers on Her neck. All of them are 
skilled in various arts of enjoyments and they are all young. To gain 
the Grace of the Devi, they consider the whole universe as trifling. 
Now I shall mention to you the names of the attendants of the Devi, 
proud of their possessing lots of amorous gestures and postures. 
Listen. They are Anangarupa, Anangamadana, Madanatura, 
Bhuvanavega, Bhuvanapalika, Sarvas’is’ira, Anangavedana, 
Anangamekhala, these are the Eight Sakhis. Each of them is as fair 
as Vidyullata. Each is adorned with various ornaments and skilled in 
all actions. When they walk to and fro with canes and rods in their 
hands in the service of the Devi, they look as if the lightning flashes 
glimmer on all sides. 



52-71 On the outer portion of the enclosure wall, on the eight sides 
are situated the dwelling houses of these eight Sakhis and they are 
always full of various vahanas and weapons. Next to this enclosure 
of diamond comes the thirteenth enclosure wall made of Vaidurya 
mani. Its height is ten yojanas. There are entrance gates and 
doorways on the four sides. The court inside, the houses, the big 
roads, wells, tanks, ponds, rivers and even the sands are all made of 
Vaidurya mani. On the eight sides reside the eight Matrikas Brahmi, 
etc., with their hosts. These Matrikas represent the sum-total of the 
individual Matrikas in every Brahmanda. Now hear their names (1) 
Brahmi, (2) MahesVari, (3) Kaumari, (4) Vaisnavi, (5) Varahi, (6) 
Indrani, (7) Chamunda, and (8) Maha Laksmi. Their forms are like 
those of Brahma and Rudra and others. They are always engaged in 
doing good to the Universe and reside here with their own Vahanas 
and weapons. 


At the four gates, the various Vahanas of Bhagavati remain always 
fully equipped. Somewhere there are Kotis and Kotis of elephants. At 
some places there are Kotis and Kotis of horses; at others there are 
camps, houses, at others there are swans, lions; at others there are 
Garudas; at other places there are peacocks, bulls and various other 
beings all fully equipped and arranged in due order. Similarly the 
above mentioned animals are yoked to Kotis and Kotis of chariots; 
there are coachmen (syces); at some places flags are fluttering high 
on them so as to reach the heavens and thus they are adding 
beauty. At other places the aerial cars are arranged in rows, 
countless, with various sounding instruments in them, with flags 
soaring high in the Heavens and endowed with various ensigns and 
emblems. O King! Next to this Vaidurya enclosure, comes the 
fourteenth enclosure wall built of Indranilamani; its height is ten 
Yojanas. The court inside, houses, roads, wells, tanks and 
reservoirs, etc., all are built of Indranilamani. There is here a lotus 
consisting of sixteen petals extending to many Yojanas in width and 
shining like a second Sudars’ana Chakra. On these sixteen petals 



reside the sixteen S’aktis of Bhagavati, with their hosts. Now I am 
mentioning the names of these. HearKarali, Vikarali, Lima, 
Sarasvati, S’ri, Durga, Usa, Laksmi, S’ruti, Smriti, Dhriti, S’raddha, 
Medha, Mati, Kanti, and Arya. These are the 16 S’aktis. They all are 
dark blue, of the colour of the fresh rain-cloud; they wield in their 
hands axes and shields. It seems they are ever eager to fight. O 
King! These S’aktis are the Rulers of all the separate S’aktis of the 
other Brahmandas. These are the forces of S’ri Devi. 


72-90. Being strengthened by the Devi’s strength, these are always 
surrounded by various chariots and forces, various other S’aktis 
follow them. If they like, they can cause great agitation in the whole 
universe. Had I thousand faces, I would not have been able to 
describe what an amount of strength they wield. Now I describe the 
fifteenth enclosure wall. Listen. Next to this Indranilamani enclosure, 
comes the enclosure made of pearls (mukta), very wide and ten 
Yojanas high. The court inside, its space, trees, all are built of pearls. 
Within this enclosure there is a lotus with eight petals, all of pearls. 
On these petals reside the eight S’aktis, the advisers and ministers 
of the Devi. Their appearances, weapons, dresses, enjoyments, 
everything is like those of S’ri Devi. Their duty is to inform the Devi 
of what is going on in the Brahmandas. They are skilled in all 
sciences and arts and clever in all actions. They are very clever, 
skillful and clever in knowing beforehand the desires and intentions 
of S’ri Devi and they perform those things accordingly. Each one of 
them has many other S’aktis who also live here. By their Jhana 
S’akti they know all the news concerning the Jivas in every 
Brahmanda. Now I mention the names of those eight Sakhis. Listen. 
Anangakusuma, Anangakusuma-tura, Anangamadana, Ananga 
madanatura, Bhuvanapala, Gaganavega, S’as’irekha, and 
Gaganarekha. These are the eight Sakhis. They look red like the 
Rising Sun; and in their four hands they hold noose, goad, and signs 
of granting boons and “no fear.” At every instant they inform S’ri Devi 
of all the events of the Brahmanda. Next to this comes the sixteenth 



enclosure wall made of emerald (marakata); it is ten Yojanas high; 
the court inside, its space, and houses and everything are built of 
emeralds (marakata mani). Here exist all the good objects of 
enjoyments. This is hexagonal, of the Yantra shape. And at every 
corner reside the Devas. On the eastern corner resides the four¬ 
faced Brahma; he lives with Gayatri Devi; he holds Kamandalu, 
rosary, signs indicating “no fear” and Danda (rod). The Devi Gayatri 
is also decorated with these. Here all the Vedas, Smritis, the 
Puranas, and various weapons exist incarnate in their respective 
forms. All the Avataras of Brahma, Gayatri, and Vyahritis that exist in 
this Brahmanda, all live here. On the south-west corner Maha Visnu 
lives with Savitri; He holds conch shell, disc, club, and lotus. Savitri 
has got also all these. The Avataras of Visnu that exist in every 
Brahmanda Matsya, Kurma, etc., and all the Avataras of Savitri that 
exist in every universe, all dwell in this place. On the north western 
corner exists Maha Rudra with Sarasvati. Both of them hold in their 
hands Paras’u, rosary, signs granting boons and “no fear.” 


91-110. All the Avataras of Rudra and Parvati (Gauri, etc.) facing 
south that exist in all the Brahmandas, dwell here. All the chief 
Agamas, sixty four in number and all the other Tantras reside here, 
incarnate in their due forms. On the south-eastern corner, the Lord of 
wealth, Kuvera, of Bhagavati, surrounded by roads and shops 
resides here with Maha Laksmi and his hosts holding the jar of 
jewels (Mani Karandika). On the western corner exists always 
Madana with Rati, holding noose, goad, bow and arrow. All his 
amorous attendants reside here, incarnate in their forms. On the 
north-eastern corner resides always the great hero Ganes’a, the 
Remover of obstacles, holding noose and goad and with his Pusti 
Devi. O King! All the Vibhutis (manifestations) of Ganes’a that exist 
in all the universes reside here. What more to say than this, that 
Brahma and the other Devas and Devis here represent the sum-total 
of all the Brahmas and the Devas and the DevTs that exist in all the 
Brahmandas. These all worship S’ri Bhagavati, remaining in their 



own spheres respectively. O King! Next come the seventeenth 
enclosure wall made of Prabala. It is red like saffron and it is one 
hundred Yojanas high. As before, the court inside, the ground and 
the houses all are made of Prabala. The goddesses of the five 
elements, Hrillekha, Gagana, Rakta, Karalika, and Mahochchhusma 
reside here. The colours and lustres of the bodies of the goddessses 
resemble those of the elements over which they preside respectively. 
All of them are proud of their youth and hold in their four hands 
noose, goad and signs granting boons and “no fear.” They are 
dressed like S’ri Devi and reside here always. Next to this comes the 
eighteenth enclosure wall built of Navaratna (the nine jewels). It is 
many yojanas wide. This enclosure wall is superior to all others and 
it is higher also. On the four sides there exist innumerable houses, 
tanks, reservoirs, all built of Navaratna; these belong to the DevTs, 
the presiding Deities of Amnayas (that which is to be studied or 
learnt by heart; the Vedas). The ten Maha Vidyas, Kali, Tara, etc., of 
S’ri Devi and the Mahabhedas, that is, their all the Avataras all dwell 
here with their respective Avaranas, Vahanas and ornaments. All the 
Avataras of S’ri Devi for the killing of the Daityas and for showing 
favour to the devotees live here. They are Pas’amkus’esVari, 
BhuvanesVari, Bhairavi, Kapala BhuvanesVari, Amkus’a 
BhuvanesVari, Pramada bhuvanesVari, S’ri Krodha BhuvanesVari, 
TriputasVarudha, Nityaklinna, Annapurna, Tvarita, and the other 
avataras of BhuvanesVari, and Kali, Tara and the other Mahavidyas 
are known as Mahavidyas. They live here with their Avarana 
Devatas, Vahanas, and ornaments respectively. (Note The 
Avarana Deities are the attendant Deities.) Here live also the seven 
Kotis of DevTs presiding over the Maha Mantras, all brilliant and fair 
like the Koti Suns. O King! Next to this enclosure wall comes the 
chief and crowning palace of S’rT DevT, built of Chintamani gems. All 
the articles within this are built of Chintamani gems. Within this 
palace are seen hundreds and thousands of pillars. Some of these 
pillars are built of Suryakantamani, some are built of Chandrakanta 
mani, and some are built of Vidyutkanta mani. O King! The lustre 
and brilliance of these pillars is so strong that no articles within this 



palace are visible to the eye. (Note The face of the Goddess Kali 
is so bright that it appears like a shadow, i.e., black.) 


Here ends the Eleventh Chapter on the description of the enclosure 
walls built of Padmaraga mani, etc., of the Mani Dvipa in the 
Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 12. On The Description Of Mani DvIpa 


1-17. Vyasa said O King Janamejaya! The Ratnagriha, above 
mentioned, is the Central, the Chief and the Crowning Place of Mula 
Prakriti. [The nine jewels are (1) Mukta, (2) Manikya, (3) Vaidurya, 
(4) Gomeda, (5) Vajra, (6) Vidruma, (7) Padmaraga, (8) Marakata, 
and (9) Nila.] This is situated in the centre of all the enclosures. 
Within this there are the four Mandapas, i.e., halls built of one 
thousand (i.e., innumerable) pillars. These are the S’ringara 
Mandapa, Mukti Mandapa, Jhana Mandapa and Ekanta Mandapa; 
on the top there are canopies of various colours; within are many 
scented articles scented by the Dhupas, etc. The brilliance of each of 
these is like that of one Koti Suns. On all sides of these four 
Mandapas there are nice groups of gardens of Kas’mira, Mallika, 
and Kunda flowers. Various scents, and scented articles, for 
example, of musk, etc., are fully arranged in due order. There is a 
very big lotus tank here; the steps leading to it are built of jewels. Its 
water is nectar, on it are innumerable full-blown lotuses and the bees 
are humming always over them. Many birds, swans, Karandavas, 
etc., are swimming to and fro. The sweet scents of lotuses are 
playing all round. In fact, the whole Manidvipa is perfumed with 
various scented things. Within the S’ringara Mandapa, the Devi 
Bhagavati is situated in the centre on an Asana (seat) and She 
hears the songs sung in tune by the other Devis along with the other 
Devas. Similarly sitting on the Mukti Mandapa, She frees the Jivas 
from the bondages of the world. Sitting on the Jhana Mandapa, She 
gives instructions on Jhana, and sitting on the fourth Ekanta 
Mandapa, She consults with Her ministers, the Sakhis, Ananga 
Kusuma, etc., on the creation, preservation, etc., of the universe. O 
King! Now I shall describe about the main, Khas, room of S’ri Devi. 
Listen. The Khas Mahal palace of the Devi Bhagavati is named S’ri 
Chintamani Griha. Within this is placed the raised platform, the dais 
and sofa whereon the Devi taketh Her honourable seat. The ten 
S’akti-tattvas form the staircases. The four legs are (1) Brahma, (2) 



Visnu, (3) Rudra, and (4) MahesVara. Sadas’iva forms the upper 
covering plank. Over this S’ri BhuvanesVara Maha Deva or the 
Supreme Architect of the Universe is reigning. Now hear something 
about this BhuvanesVara. Before creation while intending to sport, 
the Devi Bhagavati divided Her Body into two parts and from the 
right part created BhuvanesVara. He has five faces and each face 
has three eyes. He has four hands and He is holding in each hand 
speer, signs indicating do not fear, axe, and signs granting boons. 
He looks sixteen years old. The lustre of of His Body is more 
beautiful then Koti Kandarpas and more fiery than thousand Suns; 
and at the same time cool like Koti Suns. His colour is crystal white, 
and on His left lap S’ri BhuvanesVari Devi is always sitting. 


18-29. On the hip of S’ri BhuvanesVari, is shining the girdle with 
small tinkling bells, built of various jewels; the ornaments on the 
arms are made of burnished gold studded with Vaiduryamanis; the 
Tatanka ornaments on Her ears are very beautiful like S’richakra 
and they enhance very much the beauty of Her lotus face. The 
beauty of Her forehead vies with, or defies the Moon of the eighth 
bright lunar day. Her lips challenge the fully ripened Bimba fruits. Her 
face is shining with the Tilaka mark made of musk and saffron. The 
divine crown on Her head is beautified with the Sun and Moon made 
of jewels; the nose ornaments are like the star Venus and built of 
transparent gems, looking exceedingly beautiful and shedding 
charming lustre all around. The neck is decorated with necklaces 
built of gems and jewels. Her breasts are nicely decorated with 
camphor and saffron. Her neck is shining like a conchshell decorated 
with artistic designs. Her teeth look like fully ripe pomegranate fruits. 
On Her head is shining the jewel crown. Her lotus face is beautified 
with alaka as if these are mad bees. Her navel is beautiful like the 
whirls in the river Bhagirathi; Her fingers are decorated with jewel 
rings; She has three eyes like lotus leaves; the lustre of Her body is 
bright like Padmaragamani cut and carved and sharpened on stone. 
The bracelets are adorned with jewel tinkling bells; Her neck 



ornaments and medals are studded with gems and jewels. Her 
hands are resplendent with the lustre of the jewels on the fingers; the 
braid of hair on Her head is wreathed with a garland of Mallika 
flowers; Her bodice (short jacket) is studded with various jewels. 


30-45. O King! S’ri Devi is slightly bent down with the weight of Her 
very high hard breasts. She has four hands and She is holding 
noose, goad and signs granting boons and “do not fear.” The all 
beautiful all merciful Devi is full of love gestures and beauties. Her 
voice is sweeter than that of lute; the lustre of Her body is like Kotis 
and Kotis of Suns and Moons if they rise simultaneously on the sky. 
The Sakhis, attendants, the Devas and the Devis surround Her on 
all sides. Ichcha S’akti, Jhana S’akti, and Kriya S’akti all are present 
always before the Devi. Lajja, Tusti, Pusti, Kirti, Kanti, Ksama, Daya, 
Buddhi, Medha, Smriti, and Laksmi are always seen here incarnate 
in their due Forms. The nine Pitha S’aktis, Jaya, Vijaya, Ajita, 
Aparajita, Nitya, Vilasini, Dogdhri, Aghora, and Mangala reside here 
always and are in the service of the Devi BhuvanesVari. On the side 
of the Devi are the two oceans of treasures; from these streams of 
Navaratna, gold, and seven Dhatus (elements) go out and assume 
the forms of rivers and fall into the ocean Sudha Sindhu. Because 
such a Devi BhuvanesVari, resplendent with all powers and 
prosperities, sits on the left lap of BhuvanesVara, that He has, no 
doubt acquired His omnipotence. O King! Now I will describe the 
dimensions of the Chintamani Griha. Listen. It is one thousand 
Yojanas wide; its centre is very big; the rooms situated further and 
further are twice those preceding them. It lies in Antariksa (the 
intervening space) without any support. At the times of dissolution 
and creation it contracts and expands like a cloth. The lustre of this 
Chintamani Griha is comparatively far more bright and beautiful than 
that of other enclosure walls. S’ri Devi Bhagavati dwells always in 
this place. O King! All the great Bhaktas of the Devi in every 
Brahmanda, in the Devaloka, in Nagaloka, in the world of men or in 
any other loka, all those that were engaged in the meditation of the 



Devi in the sacred places of the Devi and died there, they all come 
here and reside with the Devi in great joy and festivity. 


46-59. On all sides rivers are flowing; some of ghee, some of milk, 
curd, honey, nectar, pomegranate juice, jambu juice, and some of 
mango juice, sugarcane juices are flowing on all sides. The trees 
here yield fruits according to one’s desires and the wells and tanks 
yield water also as people desire. Never is there any want felt here 
of anything. Never are seen here diseases, sorrow, old age, 
decrepitude, anxiety, anger, jealousy, and envy and other lower 
ideas. All the inhabitants of this place are full of youth and look like 
one thousand Suns. All enjoy with their wives and they worship S’ri 
Bhuvanes’vari. Some have attained Salokya, some Samipya, some 
Sarupya and some have attained Sarsti and pass their days in 
highest comfort. The Devas that are in every Brahmanda all live here 
and worship S’ri Devi. The seven Koti Maha Mantras and Maha 
Vidyas here assume forms and worship the Maha Maya S’ri 
Bhagavati, Who is of the nature of Brahma. O King! Thus I have 
described to you all about this Manidvipa. The lustre of Sun, Moon 
and Kotis and Kotis of lightnings cannot be one Kotieth of one Koti 
part of Its lustre. At some places the lustre is like Vidrumamani; 
some places as are illumined like the lustre of Marakata Mani; some, 
like Surya Kanta mani and some places are rendered brilliant like 
Kotis and Kotis of lightnings. The light at some places is like Sindura; 
at some places like Indranilamani; at some places, like Manikya, and 
at some places like diamond. Some places are blazing like the 
conflagration of fire; and some places look like molten gold; some 
places seem filled with the lustre of Chandrakantamani, and some 
places look brilliant like Suryakantamani. 


60-73. The mountains here are all built of gems and jewels; the 
entrance gates and enclosures are built of gems and jewels; the 
trees and their leaves all are of gems; in fact all that exist here are all 



of gems and jewels. At some places numbers of peacocks are 
dancing; at some places cuckoos are captivating the minds of 
persons by cooing in the fifth tune and at others doves and pigeons 
and parrots are making sweet cackling sounds. Lakhs and lakhs of 
tanks are there with their pure crystal-like waters. The Red lotuses 
have blown fully and enhanced the beauty of the place. The 
captivating scents of these lotuses extend to a distance one hundred 
Yojanas all round and gladden the minds of people. The leaves are 
rustling with gentle breeze. The whole sky overhead is radiant with 
the lustre of Chintamani gems and jewels. All the sides are 
illuminated with the brilliancy of the gems and jewels. O King! These 
jewels act like lamps. And the sweet scented trees emit their 
flagrance and it is transmitted by breeze all around. Thus these trees 
serve the purpose of dhup (scent). The rays of these gems pierce 
through the openings of the jewel screens on the houses and fall on 
the mirrors inside, thus causing a nice brilliant appearance that 
captivates the mind and causes confusion. O King! And what shall I 
say of this place, more than this, that all the powers, and wealth, all 
the love sentiments, all the dress suited to amorous interviews, all 
the splendours, fire, energy, beauty and brilliance, the omniscience, 
the indomitable strength, all the excellent qualities and all mercy and 
kindness are present here! The All Comprehending Bliss and the 
Brahmananda can always be witnessed here! O King! Thus I have 
described to you about the Manidvipa, the most exalted place of the 
Devi Bhagavati. At Her remembrance all the sins are instantly 
destroyed. The more so, if a man remembers the Devi and about 
this place at the time of death. He surely goes there. O King! He who 
daily reads the five Chapters, i.e., from the eighth to this twelfth 
chapter, is surely untouched by any obstacles due to the Bhutas, 
Pretas and Pis’achas. Especially the recitation of this at the time of 
building a new house and at the time of Vastuyaga ensures all good 
and auspiciousness. 



Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the description 
of Mani Dvipa in the Mahapuranam S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 13. On The Description Of Janamejaya’s 
Dev! Yajna 


1-4. Vyasa said O King Janamejaya! Thus I have answered all 
your nice queries; also what Narayana spoke to the highsouled 
Narada is also said by nne. He who hears this greatly wonderful 
Puranam S’ri Devi Bhagavatam certainly becomes dear to the Devi 
and all his actions become fructified with success. Now as regards 
your mental distress, how you prevent any evil falling to your late 
father in his future life, I advise you to do the Yajna in the name of 
Bhagavati; and certainly your father will be saved. And you also 
better take the Most Excellent Mantra of the Maha Devi duly, 
according to rules; and your human life will then be crowned with 
success; (your life will be saved; thus you as well as your father will 
be saved). 


5-12. Suta said O Risis! Hearing thus, the King asked Vyasa Deva 
to initiate in the Great Devi Mantra and thus to become his Guru. He 
was then initiated duly according to rules with the Great Mantra of 
Bhagavati united with Pranava. When the Navaratra period arrived, 
he called Dhaumya and other Brahmanas and performed the 
Navaratra Vrata so very dear to the Devi, according to his state. At 
this time for the satisfaction of the Devi, he caused this Devi 
Bhagavata Purana to be read by the Brahmanas and fed 
innumerable Brahmanas and Kumaris (virgins) and gave in charity 
lots of things to the poor, orphans, and the Brahmin boys and thus 
finished the Vrata. O Risis! Thus completing the Deviyajha, while the 
King was sitting on his seat, the fiery Devarsi Narada came there 
from above playing with his lute. Seeing him there, all on a sudden, 
the King got up, and paid due respects to him by asking him to take 
his seat, with other necessary things. When the Devarsi became 
relieved of his labour of journey, the King asked him about his 
welfare and then enquired into the cause of his coming there. 



13-19. O Devarsi! Whence and what for are you now conning? By 
your arrival here I am become blessed and feel that my Lord has 
come to me; now what can I serve to you; kindly command and 
oblige. Hearing this, the Devarsi Narada said “O King! Today I 
saw in the Devaloka a very wonderful event. I wanted eagerly to 
inform that to you. Hence I have come here. Your father met with a 
bad turn of fate for his bad action. I saw today he assumed a divine 
form and he was going on a chariot. The Devas were praising him 
and the Apsaras were encircling him. It seemed he was going in that 
dress to the Mani Dvipa. O King! You performed the Navaratra Vrata 
and read the Devi Bhagavata; it seems, as a result of that, your 
father has now been rewarded with such a noble and good turn of 
fate. Now you have become blessed and your actions have borne 
fruits. You have delivered your father from the hell and so you have 
become an ornament in your family. Today your name and fame 
have extended to the Devaloka.” 


20-30. Suta said O Risis! Hearing these words from the mouth of 
Narada, the King Janamejaya became very much happy and 
delighted and fell prostrate at the feet of Vyasa Deva of glorious 
deeds and said O Best of Munis! By Thy Grace, today I have 
become blessed. Now what return can I pay to Thee save bowing 
down to Thee. I pray that Thou dost shew such favours to me ever 
and again. O Risis! Hearing these words of the King Janamejaya, 
Vadarayana Veda Vyasa blessed him and spoke to him in sweet 
words :-- “O King! Now leave all other actions. Read always the Devi 
Bhagavata and worship the Lotus Feet of S’ri Devi. Leave off all 
laziness and now perform the Devi Yajha with great eclat. And you 
will surely be able to cross this bondage of the world. True there are 
various Puranas, the Visnu Purana, the S’iva Purana, but those 
cannot compare with one sixteenth of this Devi Bhagavatam. In fact, 
this Purana is the Essence of all the Puranas. How can the other 
Puranas be compared with this, wherein is established the Devi 



Mula Prakriti? Reading this Purana from the beginning to the end 
yields the result of reading the Vedas. So the wise persons should 
try their best to study it always.” Thus saying to Janamejaya, Veda 
Vyasa departed. Then the pure minded Dhaumya and the other 
Brahmanas highly praised the Devi Bhagavatam and went to their 
desired places. And the King Janamejaya, on the other hand, began 
to read and hear always the Devi Bhagavatam and spent his days 
happily in governing his kingdom. 


Here end the Thirteenth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the 
description of Janamejaya’s Devi Yajha in the Maha Puranam S’ri 
Mad Devi Bhagavatam of 18000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 



Chapter 14. On The Recitation Of The Fruits Of 
This Puranam 


1-17. Suta said “O Risis! In days of yore, from the Lotus Face of 
the Devi Bhagavata came out S’ri Mad Bhagavatam in the form of 
half a S’loka, as the decided conclusion of the Vedas. About what 
She gave instructions to Visnu, sleeping on a leaf of a Banyan tree, 
that same thing, the seed of the S’ri Mad Bhagavata, Brahma 
Himself expanded into one hundred Koti s’lokas. Then, Veda Vyasa, 
in order to teach his own son S’uka Deva, condensed them into 
eighteen thousand s’lokas, in Twelve Books and named it S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam, the present volume. That voluminous book 
comprising one hundred Koti s’lokas compiled by Brahma are still 
extant in the Deva loka. There is no Purana like the Devi 
Bhagavatam, so merit-giving, holy and capable to destroy all the 
sins. The reading of every line yields the fruits of performing many 
As’vamedha sacrifices. Human beings addicted to worldly affairs will 
get the merit of giving lands to the Brahmanas and they will enjoy 
also all the pleasures of the world and in the end will go to the region 
of the Devi, if they can hear, after they have fasted and controlled 
their passions, the recitation of this Puranam from the mouth of a 
Pauranik Brahmana, who has been worshipped and given clothings 
and ornaments and is considered as a second Veda Vyasa. Or, if 
anybody writes the whole of the Devi Bhagavatam with his own hand 
or gets it written by a writer from the beginning to the end and gives 
to a Pauranik Brahmin the book placed in a box of the form of a lion 
made up of gold and a cow yielding milk with her calf with gold as his 
sacrificial fee; or if he feeds as many Brahmanas as there are the 
number of chapters of the Devi Bhagavatam and worship as many 
Kumaris (virgin girls) with saffron, sandalpaste and ornaments and 
feeds them with Paysanna, he gets the merits of giving lands and 
enjoys all the pleasures of the world and goes in the end to the 
region of the Devi. He has no want of anything who daily hears with 
rapt devotion this Devi Bhagavatam. One who has no wealth gets 



abundance of wealth, those who are students get knowledge, one 
who has no sons, gets sons if one hears this Devi Bhagavatam with 
true devotion. A barren woman, or one who bears still-born children 
or whose offsprings never live long or who bears only a single child, 
gets all her defects removed, if she hears this Devi Bhagavatam with 
a steadfast devotion. The house where this Purana is worshipped, 
Laksmi and Sarasvati dwell there, leaving their animosities towards 
each other. By the influence of this Devi Bhagavatam the Dakinis, 
Vetalas, Raksasas, and other ghosts cannot cast a glance even on 
its devotee. If anybody gets fever and if the S’ri Devi Bhagavatam be 
read touching him with a concentrated attention, all the complaints 
disappear. By reading this Bhagavatam, one hundred times even 
more difficult than the severe disease pthisis is cured. 


18-20. If after performing the Sandhya, one reads only one chapter 
of this Bhagavatam with a collected mind, he soon acquires the Real 
Knowledge. O Muni S’aunaka! While going to read this Bhagavatam, 
first examine omens and then read. I have spoken already on this 
subject. If during the S’aradiya Puja (the autumnal Durga Puja), at 
the Navaratra period, one reads with devotion this Bhagavatam, the 
Devi Bhagavati becomes greatly pleased and awards him results 
more than his desires. 


21-31. During the Navaratri period all can read well this book for the 
satisfaction of his Ista Deva (his own deity) whether he be a 
Vaisnava, S’aiva, Saura, Ganapatya or a S’akta. All can read this for 
the satisfaction of Laksmi, Uma and other S’aktis. The Vaidik 
Brahmanas are to recite this daily for the satisfaction of the Devi 
Gayatri. This Puranam is not contradictory to any sectarian belief. 
The reason of this being that to whatever deity he pays his worship, 
he must worship some S’akti or other, this is stated everywhere. So 
for the satisfaction of one’s own S’akti, all can read this, without 
contradicting each other. Never any woman nor any S’udra, is to 



read this herself or himself, even out of ignorance; rather they should 
hear this from the mouth of a Brahmana. This is the rule of the 
S’astras. (The vibrations and the consequent results would be truer 
then.) O Risis! What more to say on this book than this, that this 
Puranam is the most excellent of all and yields great merits. It is the 
essence of the Vedas. This I tell you with great certainty. There is not 
the least doubt in this. Reading or hearing this yields results 
equivalent to reading or hearing the Vedas. I now bow to the Devi of 
the nature of Hrim and established by Gayatri, of the nature of 
Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss, Who stimulates our 
activities to the understanding of various subjects. Thus hearing the 
excellent words of Suta, the great Pauranik, all the Munis of 
Naimisaranya worshipped him specially and as the result of hearing 
this Puranam glady became the servants of the Lotus Feet of the 
Devi and they attained the Highest Rest. The Munis expressed their 
humility and gratitude to Suta frequently and bowed down to him 
again and again. And they said “O Suta! It is you that have saved 
us from this ocean of world.” Thus (the great Bhagavata) Suta, the 
bee drinking the honey of the Lotus Feet of the Devi, recited before 
the assemblage of the best of the Munis this Puranam from the 
beginning to the end, the Secret of all the Nigamas and full of the 
Glories of the Devi Bhagavati. After this the Risis bowed down to 
him and he blessed and honoured them. 

Then he went away to his desired place. Here the Devi Bhagavatam 
ends and is fully completed. 


THE END. 

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the 
recitation of the fruits of this Puranam in the Maha Puranam S’ri Mad 
Devi Bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 

Here ends as well the Full Treatise, S’ri Mad Devi Bhagavatam. 

Om. Om. Om. Om Tat Sat. Om Hah Om. 




Notes 


Kosala is a country situated, according to Ramayana, along the banks of the Sarayu 
(or Gogra). It was divided into Uttara-Kosala and Dakshina Kosala. The fornner is also 
called Ganda and it nnust have therefore signified the country, north of Ayodhya 
connprising Gonda and Bahraich. Aja and Dasaratha, etc., are said to have ruled over 
the province. At the time of Rama's death, his two sons Kusa and Lava reigned 
respectively at Kusavati in Southern Kosala in the defiles of the Vindhyas and at 
Sravasti in northern Kosala. 


[^ 2 ] 


Vasavi is the name of the mother of Vyasa. 


