A Dictionary  of 
Hindu  Architecture 

Treating  of  Sanskrit  Architectural 
terms  with  illustrative  quotations 
from  Siipasastras,  General 
Literature  and  Archaeological  Records 


by 

Prasanna  Kumar  Acharya 


Manasara  Series  : VoL  I 


ORIENTAL  REPRINT 


OBIOIKAXXY  FtTBUSHSD  IH  1934 
BY  OXBOBD  TTNIVKHSITY  BBBS3,  LONDON 

FXJBX.I8HED  BY  OBIKNTAI.  BOOKS  BEBBJtNT  COBPOBATION, 
54  BAN]  JHANSl  BOAD.  NE'W  DELHI  110055  AND 
BBINTED  BY  OAYATBI  OFFSET  PBX8S,  A-76  DAYANAND 
COLONY,  LAjPAT  NAOAR,  NEW  DELHI  110024 


“ Whafe  the  learned  world  demand  of 
us  in  India  is  to  be  quite  certain  of 
our  data,  to  place  the  monumental 
record  before  them  exactly  as  it  now 
exists,  and  to  interpret  it  faithfully 
and  literally.’’ 


$iMV^  T'lSn  dktid  j ^ 


PREFACE 


.'•v. 


Origin  and  scope  of  the  «?ori5:— This  dictionaiy  owes  its  name  to 
the  University  of  IiondoG\  A glossary  of  the  architectural  terms  used 
in  the  ManasSra,  the  standard,  work  on  Hindu  arohiteoture,  was 
prepared  for  my  private  use  when  I found  it  indispensable  after 
straggling  for  two  and  half  years  to  edit  for  the  first  time  and  trans- 
late into  English  a text  which  is  written  in  five  diSerent  scripts^ 
possesses  eleven  badly  preserved  manuscripts,  has  undergone  five 
recensions  and  comprises  more  than  10,000  lines  of  a language  rightly 
remarked  by  Dr,  Btihler  as  the  “ most  barbarous  Sanskrit.  ® In  this 
connection  there  arose  an  occasion  for  me  to  express  to  the  University 
the  opinion  that  an  Enoyolopjedia  of  Hindu  architecture  was  badly 
needed.  Architectural  expressions  appear  throughout  the  whole  field 
of  general  Sanskrit  literature  and  the  epigraphical  records,  as  well  as 
in  the  extensive  special  branch  of  literature  known  as  Vastu-feastras, 
more  familiarly  called  ^ilpa-^astras.  Existing  dictionaries,  in  Sanskrit, 
English  or  any  other  language,  do  not  elucidate  architectural  expres- 
sions : and  the  texts  of  the  Vastu-feastras  have  been  waiting  for 
hundreds  of  years  to  be  unearthed  from  manuscripts  which  are  quite 
inaocessihle  without  the.  guidance  of  a special  dictionary  that  would 
also  be  instrumental  in  bringing  to  light  many  new  things  hitherto 
left  unexplained  in  inscriptions  and  general  literature.  The  Univer- 
sity selected  me  as  the  person  most  immediately  concerned  and 
entrusted  me  with  the  task  suggesting  that  I should  “ make  a full 
dictionary  of  all  architectural  terms  used  in  the  Manasara,  with 
explanations  in  English  and  illustrative  quotations  from  cognate 
literature  where  available  for  the  purpose.” 

* li;  ha:i  dovelopeS  out  of  a Theaig,  which  was  aooupted  by  the  Universily  for  the  D Lit. 

degres. 

* Grautba,  Tamil,  Telugu,  Mftlayalam,  and  Bagati. 

» Ep  lud,,  vol,  I,  p.  377  : compare  also  Bit  B.  O,  Ehandarkar,  Ind.  Ant,,  vol.  xii,  pp.  l40,  Ul. 

vfi  ,,, 


PEEFACB 


viii 

Thus  the  terms  inclrided  in  tliis  dictionary  are  primarily  those 
found  in  the  Manasara.  But  all  the  new  architectural  terms  of 
any  importance  discovered  in  all  the  known  architectural  treatises, 
epigraphical  documents,  and  general  literature  have  also  been  added. 
I should  estimate  the  new  terms  at  about  one-fourth  of  the  total 
numbering  approximately  three  thousand.  Ho  record  has,  however, 
been  kept  of  the  extent . of  the  architectural  manuscripts  or  the 
general  literature  searched,  but  some  50,000  pages  of  archgeological 
documents  have  been  gone  through  almost  line  by  line. 

Extent  of  afchitecturat  terms  iiomprehen>ded — In  the  Vastu-tustras 
architecture  is  taken  in  its  broadest  sense  and  implies  what  is  built  or 
constructed.  Thus,  in  the  first  place,  it  denotes  all  sorts  of  buildings, 
religious,  residential,  and  military,  and  their  auxiliary  members  and 
component  mouldings.  Secondly,  it  implies  town-planning;  laying 
out  gardens ; constructing  market  places ; making  roads,  bridges, 
gates  ; digging  wells,  tanks,  trenches,  drains,  sewers,  moats  ; building 
enclosure  walls,  embankments,  dams,  railings,  ghats,  flights  of  steps 
fox  hills,  ladders,  etc.  Thirdly,  it  denotes  articles  of  house  furniture, 
such  as  bedsteads,  couches,  tables,  chairs,  thrones,  fans,  wardrobes, 
docks,  baskets,  conveyances,  cages,  nests,  mills,  etc. 

Architecture  also  implies  sculpture  and  deals  with  the  making  of 
phalli,  idols  of  deities,  statues  of  sages,  images  of  animals  and  birds. 
It  includes  the  making  of  garments  and  ornaments,  etc. 

Architecture  is  also  concerned  with  such  preliminary  matters, 
as  the  selection  of  site,  testing  of  soil,  planning,  designing,  finding  out 
cardinal  points  by  means  of  a gnomon,  dialling ; and  astronomical  and 
astrological  calculations. 

These  and  similar  matters  are  expressed  by  technical  names  which 
are  to  be  understood  as  architectural  terms  for  the  purpose  of  this 
dictionary. 

Prinoipal  sources  and  arrangement  of  materials—'Th.e  sources 
drawn  upon  in  this  compilation  may  be  classified  under  two  divisions, 
namely,  literary  and  arohasological.  The  former  includes  all  the  known 


PEEFACE 


ix 


Vastu-^ilstras,  mostly  in  manuscript,  wliich  are  aYOwedly  architectural 
treatises,  such  as  the  MSnasara,  etc. ; architectural  portions  of  the 
Agamas  and  the  PurSnas ; cognate  portions  of  the  Yedio  and  Classical 
literature,  such  as  the  Brahmanas,  the  Sutras ; the  Epics,  Kavyas, 
Dramas,  etc.  The  archaeological  records  comprise  all  the  inscriptions 
and  other  cognate  matters  published  in  the  following  series  : — ^Epigraphia 
Indiea  (13  volumes),  Indian  Antiquary  (44  volumes),  Corpus  Insorip- 
tionum  Indicarum  (2  volumes),  Epigraphica  Carnatica  (12  volumes,  in 
16  parts),  South  Indian  Inscriptions  of  Dr.  E.  Hultzsch,  late  Bai  Baha- 
dur V.  Tenfeayya,  and  Bao  Sahib  H.  Krishna  Sastri  (3  volumes,  in  8' 
parts),  deneral  Sir  A.  Cunningham^s  Archseological  Survey  Beports  (23 
volumes),  Archseological  Survey,  new  Imperial  series  (vols.  iv,  xi, 
XII,  XVIII,  XXI,  XXIII,  XXIV,  XXXIII,  xxxiv),  and  Mysore  ArGh»ologica.l 
Survey  Boports. 

Illustrative  quotations  from  these  sources  are,  to  speak  very 
generally,  arranged  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  mentioned  above. 
Illustrations  from  other  sources  of  smaller  extent  have  been  given 
where  they  seemed  most  suitable, 

A^endieei, — A sketch  of  the  important  Sanskrit  treatises  on 
architecture  is  given  in  appendix  1.  In  appendix  II  is  given  an 
alphabetical  list  of  the  historical  architects  mentioned  in  the  archaeo- 
logical records',  together  with  short  notes  on  their  works  and  dates 
where  available. 

Ideal  and  general  method’— 'Dt.  F.  W.  Thomas  was  the  first  to 
suggest  the  idea  of  compiling  such  a dictionary  long  before  I felt 
the  necessity  of  the  glossary  mentioned  above.  In  carrying  out 
Dr.  Thomas’s  kind  advice  it  seemed  to  me  that  the  most  natural 
method  was  the  one  suggested  by  Dr.  Burgess  (Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xiv, 
pp.  319-320)  for  collecting  materials  for  the  ancient  Greography  of  India 
by  indexing  separately  aU  the  geographical  words  occurring  in  the 
archaeological  and  literary  documents,  Dr,  Fleet  illustrated  this 


X 


PBIFAOE 


principle  by  making  a topographical  list  of  such  words  found  in  the 
Brihat-samhita  (Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xxii,  p.  169).  This  was  followed  by 
a similar  list  of  words  from  the  Bhagavata-Purana  by  Bev.  J . B.  Abbott 
(Ind,  Ant.,  vol.  xxvni,  p.  1 f).  There  such  list-making  stopped.  It 
would  have  been  much  easier  for  me  if  I could  have  made  use  of  any 
such  list  of  architectural  terms  from  any  of  the  documents  consulted. 

Professor  L.  D.  Barnett,  M.A.,  litt.d.,  suggested  that  I should  take 
Br.  S.  Sbrensen’s  Index  to  the  names  in  the  Mahabharata  as  my  model, 
I have  followed  his  method  as  well  as  that  of  Professors  Macdonell  and 
Keith  in  the  Yedic  Index  so  far  as  these  indexes  are  concerned  in 
bringing  together  everything  useful  in  the  form  of  a short  article. 

Despite  its  bulk,  Sorensen's  Index  mostly  confines  itself  to 
the  proper  names  contained  in  the  Mahabharata,  and  does  not 
include  any  illustrative  quotations.  But  I had  to  go  much  beyond  a 
single  work  and  consult  an  extensive  field  of  literature,  like  the 
veteran  workers  of  the  Vedio  Index  of  names  and  subjects,  which 
though  it  contains  subjects  in  addition  to  proper  names,  has  not  for 
obvious  reasons  cited  the  original  passages  in  text  or  translation  in 
addition  to  giving  references  to  them.  In  this  respect  I took  the 
largest  Sanskrit  work,  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  as  my  ideal.  But 
there,  too,  I had  to  difier  from  its  immortal  authors,  Messrs.  Bohtlingk 
and  Both,  the  fathers  of  the  most  useful  Sanskrit  researches,  in  two 
important  points.  First,  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  does  not,  for 
obvious  reasons,  give  in  all  cases  the  full  context  of  the  passages  quoted 
therein.  For  instance,  from  the  illustrations  like  ‘ prasadilrudha ' and 
‘ prasadangana  ’ (see  St.  Pet.  Diet,  under  Prasada),  it  is  difficult  to  see 
whether  ‘prasada’  implies  a temple  or  a palace  or  an  ordinary  residential 
building,  or  the  assembly  room  and  confessional  hall  of  the  Buddhist 
priesthood.  In  spite  of  some  tremendous  difficulties,  I found  it  un- 
avoidably necessary  to  cite  long  passages,  in  text  or  translation,  or 
sometimes  both,  to  illustrate  the  particular  bearing  of  a term,  ‘ Pitha,  ’ 
for  example,  implies  a seat,  an  altar,  a,  platform,  the  pedestal  of  a 


PEIFAOJE 


XI 


tlie  basemunt  of  a building,  the  plinth,  the  Yoni  part  of  the 
Linga,  etc.;  these  different  shades  of  meanings  cannot  be  made  clear  by 
such  quotations  as  * pi^hopari  ’ or  ‘ pithani  aslitangulamb  The  second 
point,  by  far  the  more  significant,  will  further  explain  the  need  of  long 
contexts.  The  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  refers  only  to  well  known 
treatises  which,  though  covering  an  extensive  field,  are  yet  easily 
accessible,  and  does  not  deal  with  manuscripts  locked  up  and  preserved 
as  relics ; nor  has  it  anything  to  do  with  the  epigraphical  docnments. 
My  literary  quotations  are  in  most  cases  from  a large  number  of  works 
and  manuscripts,  some  of  which  are  written  in  unfamiliar  scripts  and 
most  of  which  are  neither  well  known  nor  easily  accessible ; and  the 
illustrations  from  all  the  published  inscriptions  and  other  arohseologioai 
records,  comprising  approximately  50,000  pages,  also  necessitated 
^he  full  context,  partly  for  reasons  stated  above,  and  partly  with  a view 
130  avoiding  the  possibility  of  distracting  the  attention  of  the  reader 
and  interfering  with  his  grasping  the  argument  rapidly. 

Alphabetical  order  and  iranslUeraiion—1  could  not  avail  myself 
of  the  express  advice  of  Dr.  Fleet  in  his  highly  appreciative  Eeview 
of  Dr.  Sorensen’s  masterly  Index  (Ind.  Ant,,  vol.  xxxiv,  p.  92)  to 
arrange  the  words  according  to  the  European  alphabetical  order,  which 
in  the  opinion  of  the  reviewer  has  enhanced  the  value  of  the  work.  The 
European  alphabet,  being  more  imperfect  than  the  Sanskrit  alphabet 
with  regard  to  the  number  of  characters  especially  the  vowels,  and  the 
phonetioal  arrangement  of  them,  seemed  unsuitable  for  the  terms  which 
are  included  in  this  diotionary.  In  either  of  the  alphabets,  the  transli- 
terated Sanskrit  words  in  some  cases  would  be  more  or  less  confusing 
(e.g.,  Eishi,  Eiksha,  Bintika,  Eipu).  But  for  the  difficulties  of  making 
type-written  copies’  before  the  diotionary  went  to  press,  I should  have 
preferred  to  have  Sanskrit  words  written  in  Sanskrit  characters.  Follow- 
ing the  order  of  the  Sanskrit  alphabet,  words  like  ‘vam^a’,  and  kanku’, 
are  given  not  before  ‘vakra’  and  ‘&aka’  (as  in  the  St.  Pet.  Diet.,  M.  W. 
Diet,  and  the  Vedic  Index),  but  after  ‘vahana’  and  kashpa’.  The 
amismra  is  derived  from  at  least  four  nasal  characters  of  the  Sanskrit 


Fpur  oopips  of  tjie  Thesis  referred  to  above  hfkd  to  be  su'bmitted  to  the  University  of  London, 


xii 


PEEFAOE 


alphabet  (h,  fi.,  n>  m).  Logically  the  anusvdfa  should  follow  the  ordeE  of 
the  original  letters  ; ‘tamku’  should  he  where  ‘feafiku*  would  he  placed  i 
hut  this  is  an  extremely  confusing  arrangement  (see  Apte’s  Diet.). 
There  is  no  reason  why  ‘tamku’  should  he  read  before  ‘taka’,  there  w 
also  no  reason  for  its  being  placed  after  ‘tashpa'*,  although  one  should  he 
quite  justified  in  doiiig  so  when  he  is  following  the  order  of  a particu- 
lar alphabet,  and  does  not  hesitate  to  read  in  another  alphabet  e after  d, 
i after  h,  o after  n,  and  u after  t,  or  1 after  k,  h after  g,  and  so  forth. 

In  Transliteration  I have  followed  the  system  of  the  Archseologioal 
Survey  of  India.  But  I have  not  made  any  distinction  between  e and 
4,  o and  <5,  simply  because  there  is  no  such  distinction  in  the 
Sanskrit  language.  These  deviations  from  the  trodden  paths  which 
seem  to  be  untenable,  will  not,  it  may  be  hoped,  cause  any  incon- 
venience to  readers. 

AoiSinoiyZecZyweaf— Except  in  important  oases  which  deserve 
special  notice,  the  names  of  the  scholars  who  have  edited  a particular 
inscription  or  written  an  article,  have  not  been  added  after  the 
quotations.  This  need  not  oSend  anybody,  I am  sincerely  grateful 
to  the  scholars  to  whom  I owe  the  quotations.  It  seems,  however, 
of  little  interest  to  know  the  name  or  names  of  the  authors  or  editom 
of  a particular  passage,  quoted  occasionally  a dozen  times  with  full 
references  to  the  article  where  it  occurs.  ‘ Vedi  ’,  for  example,’ 
implying  a throne,  has  a parallel  instance  in  a passage  quoted  from 
an  inscription,  The  passage  is  borrowed  from  the  editors  and  my 
indebtedness  is  shown  by  the  usual  quotation  marks,  and  I have 
stated  that  this  passage  occurs  in  “ Inscriptions  from  Nepal,  no.  16, 
inscription  of  Jayadeva,  verse  26,  Indian  Antiquary,  vol,  ix,  pp.  179, 
182.*'  It,  however,  in  no  way  enlightens  the  reader  to  knows  the 
names  of  the  editors,  Pandit  Bhagwanlal  Indraji  and  Dr.  G-.  Biihler, 

C.I.E. 

Again,,  a portion  of  a verse  of  the  ^ankhyayana  l^rauta-sutra  is 
quoted  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  but  the  full  context  is 


PBEFAGE 


xiii 


gi-ven  in  our  dictionary,  and  it  is  stated  thus:  ^ahkhyayana  ^rauta- 
stitra,  XTI,  18,13  (St.  Pet.  Diet,).  Beyond  this,  it  seems  unnecessary 
to  add  the  names  of  Messrs.  Bohtlingk  and  Both.  Lastly,  in 
cases  of  quotations  from  general  literature,  the  extent  of  which 
cannot  be  indicated  even  by  an  approximate  number  of  books,  it 
was  impossible  in  some  Instances  to  mention  the  author's  name. 
Compare,  for  example,  a ‘ Glossary  of  Grecian  Architecture*,  an  anony- 
mous work;  and  ^ilpa&astra-sara-samgrahah  Sivanarayanatmajena 
piaohina-granthebhyah  saram  uddhritya  praka&itah — ‘^ilpa^astra- 
sara-saihgraha’  compiled  by  collecting  essential  portions  of  the  ancient 
treatises  by  a son  of  ^ivanarayana ; again,  ‘ Visvakarma-jhana'  corrected 
(^amtodhita)  by  Krishna-'8ankara-&astri : the  author,  if  there  were  a 
real  one  beyond  the  mythical  Yitvakarman  (Creator  of  the  Universe), 
is  not  stated  anywhere  in  the  treatise  itself. 

JYesd  of  showing  the'  results  achieved— klthough.  it  would  be  pre- 
sumptuous for  anybody  to  say  that  the  subject  of  a dictionary  like  this 
has  been  exhausted  in  a pioneer  work,  I might  be  permitted,  in  justice 
to  myself,  to  add  that  all  the  known  and  knowable  materials  which 
were  likely  to  be  of  any  use  for  this  dictionary,  have  been  closely 
consulted  and  utilized.  Whether  the  results  will  justify  the  great  labour 
involved  will  have  to  be  left  to  the  actual  experiment  of  those  who  are  in 
need  of  such  a work.  But  the  tremendous  dijBficulties  of  a compilation 
like  this  will  perhaps  be  not  fully  brought  home  to  all  readers,  because 
“ no  one  but  those  who  have  taken  part  in  similar  labours,  can  at  all 
realize  the  amount  of  tedious  toil,  I might  almost  say  drudgery,  in- 
volved in  doing  everything  ‘ singlehanded  ’,  collecting  the  quotations 
and  verifying  references  and  meanings,  making  indices  and  lists  of 
words,  sorting  and  sifting  an  ever-increasing  store  of  materials, 
revising  old  work,  arranging  and  re-arranging  new,  correcting  and  re- 
correoting,  writing  and  re-writing,  and  interlineating  ‘copy till  reams 
upon  reams  of  paper  have  been  filled,  putting  the  eye-sight,  patience, 
and  temper  to  a severe  trial.*' 


PEBI-AGE 


xiv 


Aids  and  encouragement  received — My  sincere  obligations  are 
due  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  India  in  Council  for  all  facilities  and 
help  which  I had  the  privilege  of  receiving  as  a Government  of  India 
State  Scholar  and  which  were  needed  by  a pioneer  in  this  most  exact- 
ing branch  of  oriental  researches  specially  during  the  great  European 
war.  I take  this  opportunity  to  ofler  my  respectful  thanks  in  parti- 
cular to  Mr.  (now  Sir)  Austen  Chamberlain,  Mr.  (now  Sir)  T.  W. 
Arnold,  o.i.e.,  and  Mr.  N.  G.  Sen,  o,b.e.  Words  fail  me  to  express 
adequately  my  gratitude  to  Dr.  E.  W.  Thomas,  the  then  Librarian  of 
India  Office,  London.  As  stated  above,  I owe  to  him  the  inception  of 
the  idea  and  courage  to  undertake  this  task.  He  placed  at  my  disposal 
all  the  materials  in  India  Office  and  procured  for  me  most  of  the 
available  manuscripts  from  different  libraries  in  India  and  Europe. 
He  facilitated  my  work  in  Holland.  He  arranged  through  the  appreoia- 
tion  and  kindness  of  Sir  John  H.  Marshall,  o.i.e.,  d.litt.,  the  Director 
General  of  Archeology  in  India,  the  creation  of  a prize-post  for  me 
directly  under  the  Governor  in  Madras  for  the  publication  of  this 
work ; this  arrangement  unfortunately  fell  through  owing  to  absence 
on  leave  of  Sir  John  Marshall  and  retirement  of  Lord  Pentland  at  the 
time  when  I went  to  take  up  this  appointment.  It  was  again  through 
Dr.  Thomases  introduction  that  Sir  Claude  de  la  Fosse,  o.i.e.,  m.a., 
D.LITT.,  the  first  Vice-Chancellor  of  the  reconstructed  Allahabad 
University,  became  personally  interested  in  this  work  and  readily 
induced  the'  great  educationist  Governor,  Sir  Haroourt  Butler  to 
recommend  to  the  Government  of  the  United  Provinces  of  Agra  and 
Oudh  to  defray  the  cost  of  its  publication. 

I take  this  opporfciinity  to  express  my  respectful  gratitude  to  Sir 
Haroourt  Butler  and  Ms  GoYermneut.  And  to  Sir  Claude  I am  further 
indebted  for  his  scholarly  sympathy,  friendly  adYioe  and  constant 
encouragement.  To  the  great  loTers  of  oriental  scholarship,  Bai 
^jeshwar  BaU  Sahib,  03.E.,  the  Minister  of  Education,  Kunwar 
Jagdish  Prasad,  o.b.e.,  i.o.b.,  the  Educational  (now  Chief) 

Secretary,  and  Mr.  A.  H.  Mackenzie,  M.A.,  e.so.,  the  Director  of  Public 
Instruction,  I am  in  a debt  of  gratitude  for  further  encouragement 


PEBFAGB 


iv 


which  has  kept  up  my  energy  and  spirit  needed  in  bringing  out  this 
dictionary  after  working  on  it  for  the  past  twelve  years. 

For  suggesting  many  improvements  I am  indebted  to  the  veteran 
orientalists, . Dr.  L.  D.  Barnett  of  British  Museum,  London,  and 
Professor  E.  J.  Eapson  of  Cambridge  University,  who  examined  the 
whole  manuscript  before  it  went  to  press.  I am  thankful  to  Professor 
J.  Ph.  Vogel,  ph:.Do  of  Leiden  University  for  helping  me  with  all 
necessary  books  during  my  stay  there.  To  Mr.  B,  L.  <3-.  den  Dooren 
de  Jong  and  Miss  Oh.  L.  Du  Ey  van  Beest  Holle  of  Bodtomical 
Laboratory,  Leiden,  I owe  many  friendly  services  in  connection  with 
this  work,  but  for  which  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  me  to  get 
on  in  Holland.  To  another  talented  lady  friend,  Miss  E.  J.  Beck,  who 
took  the  trouble  of  putting  in  the  diacritical  marks  to  a duplicate 
type-written  copy  of  this  dictionary,  I owe,  like  many  other  Indian 
students,  more  obligations  than  I can  adequately  express. 

Last  but  not  least  I am  pleased  to  record  my  grateful  thanks  to 
Major  W.  0.  Abel,  M.B.E.,  V.D.,  lately  the  Superintendent  of  Q-overn- 
ment  Press,  Allahabad,  and  to  his  able  successor,  Mr.  D.  W.  Orighton, 
and  to  their  staff  for  their  ever  sympathetic  and  kind  treatment 
towards  me  and  their  zealous  and  careful  handling  which  was  peces- 
sary  in  printing  a dictionary  like  this. 

P.  K.  AOHAEYA. 

SANSKEIT  DBPABTMENT, 

Univeebity  oe  AiiEahabad: 

Augutt,  1927. 


ABBREVIATIONS 


[Eeferences  to  the  quotations  are  given  in  full  in  all  cases.  No  list  of  works  and  authors  is, 
therefore,  appended.  Abbreviations  have  been  used  only  in  the  following  cases.  The 
order  is  that  of  the  English  alphabet  as  the  names  in  the  following  list  are  all  English.] 


Areb,  Surv.,  new  Imp.  series,., 
Buddhist  Cave  Temples 


C.  1.  I. 


C.  L I.,  F.  G.  I. 

Chalukyan  Architecture,  Arch, 
Surv,,  new  Imp.  aeries  (fol- 
lowed by  volume  and  page, 
etc.). 

Cook 

Cunuingbam,  Arch.  Surv. 
Reports 


Arclmological  Survey,  new  Imperial  series. 

Archmological  Survey  of  Western  India ^ new 
Imperial  series,  vol.  it,  ‘‘Reports  on  the 
Buddhist  Cave  Temples  and  their  Inscrip- 
tions,” by  Jas  Burgess,  LL.D.,  f.k.g.6. 

Corpus  Inscriptionum  Indicarum,  vol,  ill, 
“ Inscription  of  the  Early  Gupta  Kings,”  by  Dr. 
Fleet.  (Corpus  Inscriptionum  Indicarum, 
vol.  I,  “Inscriptions  of  Asoka,”  by  General 
Sir  A.  Cunningham,  has  not  been  referred 
to,  neither  M.  Senart’s  editions  of  the  same 
inscriptions  in  diflPereut  volnmes  of  the  Indian 
Antiquary  as  well  as  in  his  French  volumes. 
The  only  reference  to  these  inscriptions  is 
given  from  Dr.  Biihler’s  edition  in  the  JBpi- 
graphia  Indian;  the  difference  in  reading,  if 
any,  among  the  editors  has  been  noted  by  their 
names  Cunningham,  Senart,  Buhler.) 

Corpus  Inscriptionum  Indicarum, 

Gupta  Inscriptions.” 

Archcsological  Survey  of  India,  new  Imperial 
scries,  vol.  xxi,  ” Chalukyan  Architecture,” 
by  Alexr,  Rea,  M,R.A.s. 

Mne  Oud’indische  atad  Volgens  het  Epos,  hy 
Dr.  J.  K,  de  Cock,  Groningen,  1899. 

Archmological  Survey  of  India  Reports,  by 
General  Sir  Alexander  Cunningham. 


Tiviii 


ABBEEVIATI0N8 


F.  G.  I.  ...  ...  Dr.  Fleet* 8 Oupta  Inscriptions, 

Ep.  Carnafc,  ...  ...  ' Mpigraphia  Carnatio(i,hy  Lems  UicQ,* 

Bp,  Ind.  ...  ...  Bpigraphia  Indica, 


* The  most  arbitrary  abbreviations  of  the  names  of  the  Taluqs,  approximately  100  in  the  12 
volumes,  have  not  been  followed,  first  baoausa  it  seems  impossible,  at  least  for  me,  to  read,  from  Ms 
abbreviation  On.,  Ohannarayapattana  (in  the  Introduotion,  and  the  table  of  contents,  but  indifiorently 
spelt  Ohannarayapaiua’  in  the  title  at  the  top  of  each  page),  f.>ora  MJ.,  Manjarabad,  etc.  (see  In- 
troduction, vol.  V,  part  I,  p.  1)  ; secondly,  100  such  abbreviations  will  be  too  tedious  for  any  patient 
reader  to  remember.  These  names  have,  therefore,  been  written  hundreds  of  times  in  full. 

Again  there  areas  many  as  12  kinds  of  paging  sometimes  in  (each ipart  of)  each  volume.  Com- 
pare, for  instance,  vol.  iii.  ‘ Contents*  after  one  fob  of  the  fly-leaf,  one  of  the  names  of  the  TsJnqs, 
and  one  of  a plate : — 

(1)  Preface  (page  number  is  not  given). 

(2)  List  of  illustrations  (page  number  is  not  given). 

(3)  Introduction  ..  ..  ..  .. 

(4)  List  of  the  Inscriptions  classified  in  ohronologioal  order 

(6)  Text  of  the  Inscriptions  in  Eoman  characters 

(6)  Translations  of  the  Inscriptions  . , 

Text  of  the  Insorlptions  : 

(7)  in  Kannada  oharaoWs 

(8)  in  Grantha  and  Tamil  oharaoters 

(9)  in  Arabic  and  Persian  oharaoters  . . 

(10)  Addenda  et  Corrigenda 

(11)  Alphabetical  list  of  towns  and  villages  where  the  inscriptions  wore  found  .. 

(12)  Index  tok Introduction 

This  is  not  a solitary  instanoe  ; compare  also  vol.  v,  part  I,  which  bears  9 kinds  of  paging 
exolTOiva  cf  the  fly-leaf,  names  of  Taluqs,  and  a plate  ; vol.  vii  has  10  binds  of  paging. 

Theta  is  yet  another  difficulty,  perhaps  the  most  irritating  one,  of  consulting  and  referring 
to  this  extensive  work  comprising  approximately  12,000  pages.  Many  of  the  readers  for  whose 
service  this  dictionary  is  made  are  not  expected  to  be  familiar  with  the  various  South  Indian  scripts. 
It  is  for  this  reason  and  also  for  sparing  readers  thp  troubles  of  confusing  pagings  that  I have 
referred  to  the  Eoman  text  only,  But  neither  the  Eoman  text  nor  the  translation  even  of  the  largest 
.inscriptions  oovering  sometimes  10  pages  of  40  lines  to  a page  (of.  vol.  v,  part  I,  pp.  862,  364,  680,  etc.) 
has  been  numbered  by  verses,  lines  or  paragraphs.  Consequently,  no  one  convenient  method  oonld  be 
followed  in  referring  to  a particular  passage  in  the  Eoman  text  and  in  the  corresponding  translation. 
I might  have  counted,  from  the  beginning  of  the  inscription,  Ithe  lines  in  both  the  places  (which 
I have  actually  done  in  referring  to  the  smaller  inscriptions),  but  that  would  not  save  troubles  of 
readers,  as  they  would  themselves  be  required  to  count  say  400  lines  twice,  onoe  in  the  text  and 
secondly  in  the  translation.  In  such  oases  my  referenoes  to  a particular  passage  has  been  thus  ; 

Ep.  Oamat.,  vol.  v,  part  I,— Ohannaragapattana  Taluq  no , Eoman  text  or  Translation,  p. ' 

line  (of  that  particular  page,  and  not  from  the  beginning  of  the  inscription),,  sometimes  from’ 
the  bottom  upwards,  stated  dlstinotly  in  so  many  words  (e.g..  line  2 from  bottom  upwards,  instead 
of  saying  lino  43,  i.e.,  from  the  top  downwards);  occasionally  it  appeared  more  convenient  to  say 
p.'43,  para.  7,  Une  9,  instead  of  counting  all  the  lines  from  the  top  or  bottom  of  the  page. 


1-86 

I-IX 

1—218 

1—117 

1—381 
1— 82 
1—4 
1-2 
1—4 
1—11 


4BBEEVJATI0NS 


six 


Gloss.  Grecian  Aroh. 


Gwilfc,  Enoycl,  (generally 
followed  by  the  cardinal 
number  of  articles  and  occa- 
sionally by  page), 

H.  S.  1. 1. 

Fergusson,  Hkb.  of  Ind.  and 
East,  Arch. 

Hist,  of  Arch.  Fletcher 
lad.  Ant,  ...  ... 

J,  A.  S,  B,  (followed  by  volume 
and  page,  etc.). 

J,  A S,  Bom,  Br,  (followed  by 
volume,  page,  etc,  and  N,  8, 
added  to  indicate  new  series), 
J.  A,  0.  S.  (followed  by  part 
and  page,  eto,). 

J.  R.  A.  S.,  N.  S,  (followed  by 
volume,  page,  etc.), 


A Glossary  of  Terms  used  in  Grecian,  Roman, 
Italian  and  Gothic  architecture,  by  Anony- 
mous, Ijondon,  1888, 

An  EncydopcBdia  of  Architecture,  by  Joseph 
GwUt,  F.R.A.S,,  1867. 

South  Jndinn  Inscriptions,  by  Dr.  Hultascb, 
History  of  Indian  and  Eastern  Architecture,  by 
James  Fergusson,  d.c.l,,  f.r.s.,  M.R.A.S.,  1891. 
A History  of  Architecture,  by  Fletcher,  1908, 
The  Indian  Antiquary,* 

Bengal  Asiatic  Society’s  Journal. 

Bombay  Branch,  Asiatic  Society’s  Journal. 

The  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 

The  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland,  new  series, 


• In  the  earlier  volumes  of  this  series,  are  divided,  not  invariably,  bowever,  into  two 
oolumns,  whioh  are  abbreviated  thus ! Ind.  Ant.,  vol,  V (preceded  by  the  naroo  of  the  article  or  the  in- 
soription),  p.  320,  0. 1 or  2 (ssoolumn  1st  or  2nd),  para,  lor  2 (where  there  is  more  than  one),  line,  say, 
7 (of  the  para,  when  it  is  followed  by  any,  or  simply  lines  to  beccunted  from  the  top  ; in  oases  where  it 
appeared  more  convenient,  it  is  stated  thus  : line  7 from  bottom  upwtrds).  In  the  earlier  volumes  the 
foot-notes  are  not  rnsrhed  by  the  numerical  figures,  1, 2,  8 and  so  forth ; they  are  indicated  by  some 
inconvenient  signs,  e.g.,*,  ft  t»  eto.  It  was  not  possible  to  refer  to  these  notes  by  any  particular  uamo. 
Some  of  the  insociptions  published  in  this  series  have  been  given  three  difierent  titles  in  three  places 
of  reference,  namely,  one  in  the  table  of  oontents,  a different  one  as  the  heading  of  the  insoription  in 
the  body  of  the  volume,  and  a third  one  on  the  top  of  the  pages  wherein  it  is  described.  Compare,  for 
example,  the  following  !— 

(1)  Two  Pratastis  of  Nanillsa,  a court  poet  of  Vifcladova  of  Gujarata  (Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xi,  contents, 

at  the  end  of  the  volume). 

(2)  Sanskrit  Grants  and  Inscriptions  of  Gujiat  Kings,  nos.  in  and  iv,  Prasastis  of  Nanaka,  a 

court  poet  of  King  Yisaladeva  of  Gujrat  (in  the  heading  of  the  article, ip.  98). 

(8)  Sanskrit  Grants  and  insoriptions  (on  the  top  of  pages  99, 101, 103,  lOS,  107). 

1 have  generally  referred  to  the  last  named  title.  i*e.,  the  one  occurring  on  the  top  of  the  pages 


XX 


ABBBBYIATIONS 


K.  S.  1. 1 ... 

M.  ... 

MoQumential  Antiquities  and 
Inscriptions,  iSrorth- Western 
Provinces,  Arch.  Surv., 
new  Imp,  series  (followed 
by  volume,  page,  eto.). 

Muhamma'lan  Architecture  of 
Bfiaroch,  etc.,  Burgess,  Arch. 
Surv.,  new  Imp,  series  (fol- 
lowed by  volume,  page,  etc ). 


South  Indian  Inscriptions,  by  Rao  Sahil*  H, 
Krishnasbastri, 

The  Mdnas5,Ta,  edited  and  translated  by  P.  K, 
Acbarya,  ie.s.,  m.a.,  ph.d.,  d.litt. 

Arohmologiml  Survey  of  India,  now  Imperial 
series,  vol,  xii,  * The  Monumental  Antiquities 
and  Inscriptions  in  the  North-Western 
Provinces  and  Oudh,”  by  A.  FQbrer,  pb.b. 

Archmlogical  Survey  of  India,  new  Imperial 
series,  vol.  xxin  (Western  India,  vol.  vi), 
on  “The  Muhammadan  Architecture  of  Bha- 
roch,  Cambay,  Dholka,  Qbampanir,  and  Mah- 
mudabad  in  Gnjrat,”  by  Jas  Burgess,  o.i.E,, 


Arch.  Surv.  Report, 
Narasimhaohar  (followed  by 
year,  page,  eto ), 

M,  W,  Diet. 

Ballava  Architecture,  Rea, 
Argh.  Surv.,  new  Imp. 
series  (followed  by  volume, 
page,  etc,). 

Pet,  Diet, 

Ram  Raz.  Ess,  A.rch.’(of)  Hind, 

Sharqi  Arch,  of  Jaunpur, 
Fhbrer,  Arch.  Surv,,  hew 
Imp.  series  (followed  by 
volume,  page,  etc.). 

V.  S.  1. 1. 

Vedic  Index,  Maedonell  and 
Keith. 

Vitruvius  followed  by  Book 
and  chapter). 


Annual  Report  of  the  Mysore  Archcsological 
department,  by  R.  Narasiraliaehar, 

A Sanakrit-English  Dictionary,  by  Sir  Monier 
Williams,  M.A.,  1S72. 

Archceological  Survey  of  India,  new  Imperial 
series,  vol,  xxiv,  Pallava  Architecture, “ 
by  Alexander  Rea,  F,s.A.  (Soot.),  m.B.a  s, 

6anskrit-Worterbuch  von  BShtlingk  and  Rudolf 
Roth,  1855. 

Essay  on  the  Architecture  of  the  Hindus,  by 
Ram  R&z,  London,  1834. 

Archaeological  Survey  of  India,  new  Imperial 
series,  vol.  XI,  “ The  Sharqi  Architecture  of 
Jaunpur,’’  by  A.  Fuhrer,  pii.d.,  with  drawings 
and  architectural  descriptions  by  Ed.  Smith. 

South  Indian  ImoTiptions,  by  Rai  Bahadur  V 
Venkayya. 

Vedic  Index  of  names  and  subjects,  by  Arthur 
Anthony  Maedonell,  m.a.,  ph.d,,  and  Arthur 
Berriedale  Keith,  m.a.,  d.o.l.,  1912, 

The  ten  Books  of  Vitruvius,  translated  from 
Latin  by  Joseph  Qwilt,  f.s.a,,  ISSO. 


The  Dictionabt  Obder  of  the  Eoman  Alphabet 

a,  a 5 i,  J ; ti,  u ; e,  ai ; o,  an; 

Is,  kli  ; g,  gii;  oh,  ohli;],  jh;  fi; 

t,  ^h;  d,  dh;  n;  t,  th;d,  dh;n; 
p,  ph ; b,  bh ; m ; y,  r,  1,  v ; 

I 8,  sh,  s ; h ; m ; h. 


67104 


A 

DICTIONARY 

OF 

HINDU  ARCHITECTURE 

A 

AKSHA — ^The  eye,  a die,  the  base  of  a column. 

(1)  The  base  of  a column  : 

Athavaksham  (—adhishthanam)  navam&oohcham  janma  ohai- 
kena  karayet  \ 

(Manasara,  xiv.  17,  note.) 

(2)  The  eye : 

Asyayamam  tri-matram  syad  vistaram  chaika-matrakam  \ 
Akshayamardba-matram  syad  Yistaiam  yuktito  nyaset  1 

‘ (M.  LX.  29-30.) 

(3)  A die: 

Akshaih  spha^ika-samyuktam  tula-bhajanam  eva  oha  \ 

(M,  Lxvm.  28.) 

(4)  Referring  to  the  window-like  part  of  a dold  (swing,  hammock, 

palanquin),  and  of  chariot : 

Puratah  prishthato  madhye  parva(darpa)nam  bhadra- 
samyutam  \ 

Partvayor  va(dva)ranam  kuryat  taayadho’ksham  susamyutam  I 

(M.  L.  165-166.) 

Tasyadhah  karnanam  kuryad  akshotsedhardham  eva  cha  1 

(M.  XLi.  61,  see  further  context  under  Ahsha-hhdra.) 
See  OavdJcsha. 

Of.  MitaJcshard  (ed.  Gal,  1829.),  146. 1.  (Pet.  Diet.) : 

Akshah  pada-stambhayor  upari-nivishta-tuladhara-pattah  I 
Akshagra-kila  \ 

Pushkaraksha  (see  Pdnini,  6,  4,  76), 

Dharabhir  aksha-matrabhih  (Arjunammdgama,  ed.  Bopp,  8,  4). 


AKSHA-BHARA 


AKSHA-BHARA-“-A  lower  part  of  a chariot : 

Tasyadho  (= below  the  pada  or  pillar)  karnam  kuryad 
akshotsedhardham  eva  oha  \ 

Tat-tad-deke  tu  ohhidram  syad  aksha-bhare  rathaiitakam  \ 

Chhidre  prave^ayet  kilam  yuktya  cha  pattayojitam  \ 

(M.  XLii.  61-53.) 

AKSHL SUTRA— The  line  of  the  eyes  : 

Mukhriyamam  tridha  bhavet  \ 

Akshi-sutravatanam  oha  tasyudho(as)  tat-padantakara  I 
Hikka-sutrad  adho  bahu-dirgham  rikahahgulam  bhavet  I 
AGNI-DVARA — The  door  on  the  south-east : 

Ohatnr-dikshn  ohatuah-kon.e  maha-dvaram  prakalpayet  I 
Purva-dvaram  athaitane  chagni-dvaram  tu  daksliino  1 
Fitnr-dvaram  tu  tat-pratyag  vayau  dvaraih  tathottaram  1 

(M.  IX.  292,  294-295.) 

AGEAHiLEA — A village  inhabited  by  the  Bra  hmanas  : 

Yiprair  vidvadbhir  abhogyam  mahgalam  oheti  kirtitam  I 
Agraharaa  tad  evam  nktam  viprendrah  .Kamikugame  li 

(Kamikagama  xx  3.) 

Agraharam  vinanyeshu  sthaniyadishu  vastushu  I 
Frag-adishn  ohatur-dikshu  vayau  ite  kivalayah  II 

(Ibid.  XXVI.  32.) 

NUakantha,  16.  8.  {Pet.  Diet) : 

Agram  brahraana-bhojanam  tad-artham  hriyaiite  raja-dhanat 
pyithak  kyiyante  te  agraharah  kshetradayah  I 
Chatur-bhuja  (comm.  Mbh.) : Agraharas^sasana. 

AG  HAN  A — N ot  solid,  a hollow  moulding,  column  or  pillar  : 

Ghanam  chapy  aghanam  chaiva  vinyasam  atha  vakshyate  \ 
(Yistarayama-tobhadi  purvavad-gopurantakam)  \ 

Yam  manam  bahir  anyena  chulika-mana-sammitam  I 

(M.  XXXIII.  290—292,  see  also  298—309.) 
Referring  to  windows  (or  rather  pillar  of  windows)  : 

Tad- vistara-ghanam  sarvam  kuryad  vai  &ilpi(a)vit-tamah  | 

Gopure  kuta-kosht  (h)adirgrive  padantare  tatha ) 

Ghane  vapy  aghane  vapi  yatha  vatayanair-yutam  | 


ane:a(ga)na 


592-694  . 

of*.  Vistaraih  oha  4vi-matram  syad  agram  ekangulam  bhavet  ^ 
Q-liaiiam  ekangulam  chaiva  I 
(M.  LX.  17-18). 

Eef wring  to  the  image  of  a bull : 

G-hanam  vapy  aghanam  vapi  kuryattu  ailpi(a)-vit-tamab.  | 

(M.  Lxii.  17). 

AGHANA-MANA— (see  aghana.)  Measurement  by  the  interior  of  a 
structure. 

Bvam  tat(d)  ghana-manam  uktam  aghanam  vakshyate^  dhuna  “H 
Vis’tarayama-bhaktih  syad  uktavat  yuktito  nyaset  I 
Dvi-tribhaga-vi§ale  tu  ayatam  tat  prakalpayet  I 
Bhakti-tri-bhagam  ekamtam  bhitti-vistaram  eva  oha  I 
^eshaih  tad  garbha  geham  tu  madhya-bhage  tu  ve&auam  » 

(M:  XXXIII.  331-336 1). 

ANKA(GA)NA— (see  prdngana.)  Same  as  Ahgana,  a court,  a court- 
yard. 

Yatha  madhye’hkanam  kuryat  pancha-bhagena  vistritam  (M. 
XXXIV.  143). 

Kalpa-drumasya  purato  bahir  ahkanam  syat  (M.  xLviii.  72). 
Athatah  sampravakshye’ham  ahganasya  tu  lakshanam  I 
Anganam  dhvaja-yonih  syan  mukhayamabhisamyutam  il 
Padukanam  bahir-bhagam  anganam  tat  vidur  budhah  1 
Dhvajah  sarvatra  sampanna  iti  ^astra-nidar^anam  I)  (VdslU’-vidyd 
ed.  Ganapati  Sastri.  VI.  1-2). 

Madhye  tu  prahgapam  karyam  vi'salenaika-pamktikam  I 
Ardha-pamkti-vivridhya  tu  trimsat  pamkty  antara  ishyate  II  40. 
Ayame  chaika-pamkty  adi  tri-gunantam  visalata  1 
Evam  brahmahganam  karyam  jala-pata-yutam  nava  I!  41. 
Madhyamam  changana-sthanam  mandapena  yutam  tu  va  II  66. 
Prag  anganam  pradhanam  syat  pragavagahganam  jYarah  i|  131. 

(“  Kamikagama”,  xxxv) : 

Ujatahgana-bhumishu  (“  Raghuvamta  ed.  Oal.  1.  62, 

Pet  Diet), 


4 


AN0A-.-DITBHANA 


Vimanam  hamsa-yuktam  etat  tishtliafci  te’ngane  (“  Devi 
mahatimya,”  ed.  Cal.  5.  60  {ibid), 

ISfripangana.  (Ka'^’ya  cliandrika  166,  16  (ibid) , 

Kripangana  (dontal,  n.  Bharbrihari.  2.  46  (ibid) . 

Maharajanganam  silrali  pravi&antu  makodayaro.  {BmiuyaV^  11,  3, 
19  {ibid). 

Matsya-tirfchada  sannidlianadali  Linganna  bagitinda  dodda-asva- 
tbada  balige  angana  12  madida  seva— “ Linganna  with  devotion 
erected  (a  manbapa  of)  12  anganas  near  the  big  aavatfha  tree  in 
proximity  to  the  Matsyatirtha,  on  the  baiik  of  the  Arkapuah- 
karini.”  Oarndt.  vol,  IV.  Edatore  Taliiq,  no.  3,  Boihan 

text.  p.  84,  Transl.  p.  62), 

Al^CA-DUSHANA— The  defects  of  the  limbs  ; the  penalties  of  a 
defective  construction. 

“ Mfinasara  ”,  Chap.  Lxix,  1 — 73: 

The  chapter  is  named  Angadushana  in  the  colophon.  The  term 
would  literally  mean  the  defects  of  the  limbs.  The  chapter  opens 
with  the  proposal  that  the  penalties  on  the  master,  the  king, and 
the  kingdom  following  a defective  construction  will  be  described : 

Alayfidyahga-sarveshu  hinadhikyam  bhaved  yadi  1 

Eaja-rashtradi-kartrinam  dosha-praptim(-r)ihochyate  (1 — 2), 

There  should  not  be,  as  stated,  any  defect  in  the  width,  height, 
plinth,  lintel,  pillar,  entablature,  finial,  dome,  door,  adytum, 
staircase,  terrace,  gate  house,  pavilion,  wall  etc.  (3—- 10). 

Cf : Tasmat  tu  dosha  samprapti(h)  tilpidrishti(r)  nivarayet  (11). 

The  illustrations  too  of  penalties  for  defective  construction  are 
taken  from  the  different  architectural  objects,  such  as  door,  stair- 
case, pillar,  wall,  dome,  spire,  etc.,  etc.  Thus  it  is  stated  that  if 
the  altar  (vedika)  be  defective,  the  master  would  lose  his  eyesight 
(26) ; if  the  dome  be  larger  or  shorter,  the  people  wmuld  suffer 
from  poverty  (29) ; if  the  pillars  be  larger  or  shorter,  the  race 
of  the  master  would  be  exterminated  (23),  and  so  forth, 


A.NOTLA 


5 


A!I^G-ULA — A finger,  a finger-breadth,  a measure  of  about  three-fourths 
of  an  inch  ; one  of  some  equal  parts,  into  which  an  architectural 
or  sculptural  object  is  divided  for  proportional  measurement. 

(1)  “ Manasara^’,  Chap,  ii : 

(The  definition  of  paramanu  or  atom ; 

MuninSm  nayanodvikshya(s)  tat  paramanur  udah^’itam  (40). 
of  .‘  Byihat-Bamhita  (below). 

Paramanu  or  atom  is  the  lowest  measurement.) 

The  details  of  the  angula-measure  (41 — 46) ; 

8 Paramanu  (atoms )=  1 Eatha  dhiili  (cardiist), 

8 Gardusts  =1  Valagra  (hair’s  end), 

8 Hair’s  ends  ==  1 Liksha  (nit), 

8 Nits.-  = 1 Tiika  (louse). 

8 Lice  ==  1 “Yava  (barley  corn). 

8 Barleycorns  ==  1 Angula  (finger). 

Three  kinds  of  angulas  are  distinguished,  the  largest  of  which 
is  equal  to  8 yavas,  the  intermediate  one  7 yavas,  and  the 
smallest  one  6 yavas  (47-— 48). 

Further  details  (49 — 53)  : 

12  Angulas  =*  1 Vitasti  (span). 

2 Spans  or 

24  Angulas  = 1 Kishku-hasta  (samllest  cubit). 

25  „ = 1 Prajapatya-hasta. 

26  „ = 1 Dhanur-mushti-hasta. 

27  „ =1  Dhanur-graha-hasta. 

4 Cubits  « 1 Bhanuh  or  danda  (bow  or  rod). 

8 Bandas  (rods)  = 1 Bajju  (rope). 

Direction  is  given  with  regard  to  the  use  of  the  cubits  of 
different  lengths  and  other  measures  (54 — 58) : conveyances 
and  bedsteads  etc.  are  stated  to  be  measured  in  the  cubit  of 

24  angulas,  buildings  in  general  (vimanas)  in  the  cubit  of 

25  angulas,  the  ground  hr  land  (vastu)  in  the  cubit  of  26 
angulas,  and  the  villages  etc.  in  the  cubit  of  27  angulas. 
The  cubit  of  24  angulas  can,  however,  be  employed,  as  stated 
in  measuring  all  these  objects. 


6 


A]^GUtiA 


Chap.  Lv  : 

Three  kinds  of  bhe  Ahguia-measure  : 

Matrahgnla-gatam  proktam  angulam  fcri-vidham  bhavet  \ (53). 
The  manahgula  is  the  standard  measure ; it  is  equal  to  eight 
barley  corns : 

Yava-tarashta-matram  syan  manahgulam  iti  smritam  \ (56). 
The  matrahgula  is  the  measure  taken  iu  the  middle  finger  of 
the  master : 

Kartur  dakshina-hastasya  madhyamangula-madhyame  \ 
Parya-dirgham  tan-naham  matrangulam  udahyitam  \ (67-68). 
The  details  of  the  ‘ deha-labdhSngula  ’ are  left  out ; but  this 
measure  is  frequently  referred  to  : 

Trayas-  tritaoh  chhatantam  syad  deha-labdhangulena.  va  I (64). 
The  ‘ deha-labdhangula  ’ is  to  be  understood  as  the  measure, 
which  is  equal  to  one  of  the  equal  parts,  into  which  the 
whole  height  of  a statue  is  divided  for  sculptural  measure- 
ment. This  alone  should  otherwise  be  called  aihsa  (part) ; 
but  the  term  (am&a)  is  indiscriminately  used  for  all  the  three 
angula-measures,  as  well  as  for  the  term  ‘ matra.  ’ Compare, 
for  example,  chap.  Lxv  : 

Murdh(n)adi-pada-paryantam  tunga-manam  pra^asyate  \ (2). 
Ghatur-vim^ach-chhatam  kritva  tathaivamtena  manayet  \ (3). 
Ushnishat  kesa-paryantam  chatur-matram  pra&asyate  1 (4b 
Ardhamtam  gala-manam  syad  vedaihtam  gala-tungakam  I (6), 
Sa  yava-tryamtakam  chaivanamikayamam  ishyate  \ (26). 
Medhrantam  uru-dirgham  syat  sapta-vimtangulam  bhavet  I (9) 
The  ‘ deha-labdhahgula  ’ is  also  called  the  bera  (idol)-anguia 
and  the  linga  (phallus) -angula,  chap.  Lxiv.  49-63  : 
Am'sakam'manam  evoktam  angulair  manam  uchyate  I 
Yal-linga-tungam  samgrahya  chatur-vimtach-chhatantakam  I 
Lifigangulam  iti  proktam  beram  talavatad-api  I 
Kritva  berangulam  proktam  manangulam  ihoohyate  I 
Yava-tarashta-matram  syad  devanam  angulam  bhavet  I 
The  ‘ deva  (god’s) -angula  ’ mentioned  in  the  last  line  (63)  is 
apparently  the  mana  (standard)  angula. 


7 


(2)  “ Brihaii-SamMta L-vjii.  1— >2: 

Jalantarage  bhanau  yad-anutaram  darsanam  rajo  yati  I 
Tadvindyat  paramantiin  prathamam  tad-dhi  pramaiaanam  11 
Paramapu-rajo-valagra-liksha-yuka  yavo’ngulam  cbeti  I 
Ash^a-gunani  yafchotfearam  angiilam  ekam  bbavati  matra  11 
“ Commentary  quotes  a parallel  passage,  tbe  former  stanza  of 
which  recurs  in  Mann,  viii, . 1,32  (of . below),  whereas  the 
latter  wholly  differs : 

Tatha  cha  jalantara-gate  bhanau  yat  siikshmam  dri&yate  rajah  1 
Prathamam  tat  pramapanam  trasa-reniim  prachakshate  11 
Tasmad  rajah  kaoh^affi  cha  liksha  yuka  yavo’ngulam  \ 

Kramad  ashte-gunam  jneyam  jina-samkhyangulaih  samah  If 
Prom  an  unknown  author  are  the  verses  quoted  by 

(3)  Bapu-Deva  in  his  editiop  of  the  Siddhanta-kiromafpi  p.  62  : 

Ve§mantah  patiteshu  bhaskara-kareshvalokyafce  yad-rajah  \ 

Sa  proktah  paramanur  ashta  gunitais  tair  eva  renur  bhavet  II 
Tair  valagram  athashtabhih  kaoha-mukhair  liksha  cha  yuka 
shtabhih  I 

Syat  tribhi&oha  tadashtakena  cha  yavo’shtabhi&  cha  tair 
angulam  II 

“ Digit  (angula)  has  here  (B.  S.  Lviii  4)  no  absolute,  but  a 
relative  value ; it  is  the  module  and  equal  to  of  the 
whole  height  of  the  idol,  or  xity  of  idol  and  seat  together  ” 
Commentary : yasmat  kashthat  pashanadikad  va  pratima  kriyate 
tad  dairghyaih  pitha-pramana-vivarjitam  dvada&a-bhaga- 
vibhaktam  kritva  tatraiko  bhago  navadha  karyah,  so’ngula- 
sajhako  bhavati,  yasmad  ashtadhikam  angula-^atam 
pratima  pramanam  vakshyati. 

(Kern.  J,  B.  A,  S.  (N.  S.)  volume  Vi,  p.  323,  notes  1,2). 

(4)  Introduction  (pp.  8-9)  to  “ Rajavallabha  Mandana  ” , Ed. 

Narayana  Bharati  and  Ya&ovanta  Bharati 

1 angula  = matra.  6 angula  = tala. 

2 „ = kala.  6 » = hara  pada. 

3 „ = parvan.  = dyishti. 

4 „ = mushti.  8 „ = tuni. 


8 


AHC3-TJLA 


9 angula  = pradesa. 

24  angula 

w aratni. 

10  „ = saya  tala. 

42  „ 

==:  kishkii. 

11  „ • = go-karna. 

12  „ = vitasti  (span). 

84  „ 

— purusha  (height 
of  a man). 

14  „ “ anaha-pada. 

96  „ 

= dhanus. 

21  „ = ratni. 

106  „ 

danda. 

This  is  apparently  taken  from  the  Brahmanda  Parana.  (See 
below.) 

(6)  “ Brahmanda  Parana/’ ohap,  7 (Vayn-pxokte  purva-bhage  dvitiye 
anashahgapade)  gives  a curious  origin  of  the  angola  measure; 
It  is  stated  (in  v.  91-95)  that  people  at  first  used  to  live  in  caves, 
mountains  and  rivers  etc.  They  began  to  build  houses  in  order 
to  protect  themselves  from  cold  and  heat  (^itoshna-vSranat). 
Then  they  built  khetas  (towns),  puras  (houses),  gramas 
(villages)  and  nagaras  (cities).  And  to  measure  their  length, 
breadth,  and  the  intermediate  distance  between  two  settle- 
ments (sannivesa)  the  people  instinctively  (yathajnanam) 
employed  their  own  fingers.  Thence  forward  the  angolas 
are  used  as  standard  of  measurement. 

Then  follow  the  details  of  the  angula  measurement  (V.  96-10l) 
Jay angula-pradet arils  trin  hastah  kishkuih  dhanuriishi  oha  \ 
Da§atvarigula-parvani  prade&a  iti  sariajiiitah  II  9fe. 

Angushthasya  prade&inya  vyasa(h)  pradesa  nohyate  \ 

Talah  smyito  madhyamaya  gokarnat  chapyanamaya  II  97. 
Kanishthaya  vitastis  to  dvadatagrigula  uchyate  \ 

Batnir  arigula-parvani  saihkhyaya  tvekaviih&atih  II  98. 
Chatvari-virii&ati^  ohaiva  hastah  syad  arigulani  tu  I 
Kishkuh  smyito  dviratnis  tu  dvi-ohatvarim&ad  angulah  11  99. 
Chatur  hasto  dhanur  dando  nalika  yugam  eva  cha  I 
Dhanuh  sahasre  dve  tatra  gavyutis  taih  kyita  tada  It  100. 
Ashtau  dhanuh  sahasrani  yojanaih  tair  vibhavitam  1 
Etena  jojaneneha  sannive^as  tatah  kyitah  II  101. 

(6)  Matsya  Parana"'’,  chap.  268,  v.  17-19  : 

Jalantara-pravishtanaih  bhanunarii  yad  rajah  sphutam  I 
Trasa-renuh  sa  vijneyo  valagrarii  taix  athashtabhih  H 17. 


AN<3-UIiA 


Tad-ashfcakena  tu  likhyafcu  yuka  iikhyashlakair  mata  I 
J avo  yiikashtakaih  fcad,*vad  ashtiabhis  tais  tad  angulam  II  18. 
(Svakiyanguii-manena  mukham  syad  dvada&angulam  \ 
Mukha-manena  karfeavya  sarvavayava-kalpana  11  19). 

(7)  Yastii-vidya,  Ed.  Granapati  Sastri,  1.  3-6  f ; 

Tatradau  stampravakshyami  sarvesbam  maua-sadhanam  1 
Manenaivakbilam  loke  vastu  samsadhyate  yatah  II 
.Paramanuh  kramad  vriddbo  manailgula  iti  smritali  1 
Paramauur  ifei  prokto  yoginam  drisbti-gocharah  II 
Paramanur  ashtabbia  trasa-re^nr  iti  smritab  I 
Trasa-renus  cha  roniagraib  liksha-yuka-yavas  tatha  11 

and  so  forth  (see  Mmasdra), 

(8)  " Bimbamaua  ”,  Ms.  (British  Museum  668,  5‘292),  V.  9 : 
Yad-bimba-pramanena  maiiangula(m)  vibhajite  1 
Teua  bimbasya  mtlnam  tu  fcatra(m)  ayamam  isbyate  I 

(9)  “ Suprabhedagama,”  xxx: 

Atbfitab  sampravaksbyami  angulauam  tu  lakshanam  \ 
Mfinangulam  tu  pratbamam  syat  matrangulain  dvitiyakam  II  1. 
Deha-labdlia-pramapam  tu  tritiyam  angulam  smritam  1 
Yasmat  param  anur  nSsti  paramainus  tad  uobyate  IV  2. 
Paramanur  adbas  ohaiyapi  cba  kesagra  eva  cha  I 
E(l)iksha-yuka-yayas  tatra  kramaso’sbta-gunair  matam  II  3. 
Manangulam  iti  proktam  tato  matrangulam  ferinu  I 
Acbarya- daksbine  baste  madhyamanguli-madbyame  II  4. 
Parva(ih)  matrangulam  jiieyaih  deha-labdbangulam  'srinu  I 
Pratimayas  tathotsedhe  tala-ganyena  bbajite  II  5. 

Teshvekaiii  bbaga-vau-manam  deha-labdbangulam  smritam  I 
The  objects  measured  iu  the  tbre’e  kinds  cf  angulas  : 
Prasada-mandapam^  chaiva  prakaran  gopuran  api  U 6. 
Gramadya-kshetra-ganyesbu  manangula-vidhanatali  I 
Acharya-dakshangulibbir  mite  vyasa-mitadbikaih  (sic)  II  7. 
Kurcbe  pavitrake  chaiva  sruve  srugbbir  athanyakaih  I 
Yage  prayojitaniha  matranguli-vidhit  cbaret  II  8. 

Atba  manaugnlair  vapi  karayed  yaga-karmani  I 
JDeha-labdbangulenaiva  pratimS-ih  karayed  budbab  U 9. 


to 


ANGtfLA 


Thea  follo'v  the  technical  names  of  the  angulas  (v.  10—16) : 

One  angdia  is  called ^bindu,  moksha. 

Two  angulas  are  „ — -kala  (elsewhere  it  is  the  name  of  one 

Three  ,, 

B’our  , 

Five  ,, 

Six 

Seven  „ 

Eight  „ 

Nine  „ 

Ten  ,, 

Twenty  „ 

Thirty  „ 

Forty  „ 

Fifty  „ 

Sixty  „ 

Seventy  „ 

Eighty  „ 

Ninety  „ 

Hundred  „ 

The  cardinal  numbers  are  described  (v.  17 — 20)  : 

Ekarh  dasam  tatam  chaiva  sahasram  ayutam  punah  \\  17. 
Niyutam  prayutam  chaiva  kotim  chaiva  yatharbudam  \ 
Brindam  kharvam  nikharvam  cha  &ahkham  padmam  atah 

param  II  18. 

Samudra-madhyantarakhyam  aparam  tatha  1 
Parardham  evakhyatam  dasa-vritt(-ddh)yuttarottaram  \1  19. 
Evam  etani  ohoktani  samkhya-sthanam  vim^atih  I 

Three  kinds  of  the  vitasti  (span),  which  is  equal  to  12  angulas, 
are  distinguished  by  their  technical  names  : 

Talam  yamam  tri-bhagam  cha  shat-kala&  cha  vitastakam  11  20 
Shat-kolakaih  mukham  chaiva  dvada&ahgula-samjnakam  I 


ahgula),  kolaka,  padma,  akshi, 
a&vini. 

„ — — rudrakshi,  agni,  guna,  lula  (and! 
vidya. 

„ ^ynga  (and)  bhaga,  veda,  and  turiya. 

„ rudranana,  indriya,  bhuta,  and  vapa. 

„ karman,  ahga,  ayana^  and  rasa. 

„ patala,  muni,  dhatu,  and  abdhi. 

„ basu,  loka-(i&a?),  and  murti. 

„ dvara,  sutra,  graha,  and  &akti. 

„ — dis,  nadi,  ayudha,  and  pradurbhava. 

„ — — trishu  (and)  vishku. 

,,  gati. 

,,  trijagat  (?). 

„ ^akvari. 

„ ati&akvari. 

„ • yashti. 

„ atyashti. 

„ dhfiti. 

„ -- — atidhriti. 


Al^GULA 


11 


Angushfcha-tarjaai-yttkfcam  pradelam  ifei  kirtitam  U 21. 
(Madhyamangi:^h^lia-samyiikfcam  feala-manam  iti  smritam  1 ) 
Angushfehauamika-yuktam  vitastir  iti  chocliyate  I)  22. 
Kanishthangushtliayor  yuktam  go-karnam  iti  samjfiikain  j 
The  correct  reading  of  the  last  two  lines  should  be  : 
Ahgushthanamika-yuktam  go-kamam  iti  samjnikam  II  22. 
JKanishthahgushthayor  yuktam(4H)  vitastir  iti  chochyate  I 
Compare  : Brahmanda  purana  i,  VXi,  97^98  (see  under  ookab^ta 
andviTASTi). 

Prade^a's  cha  vitastit  cha  gokarna^  cha  ime  trayah  1 1 23. 

The  two  kinds  of  the  measure  by  the  fist : 

Jajnadike  prayoktavyah  prasadSdau  na  mapayet  I 
Ratnih  saihvrita-mushtih  syad  aratnih  prasyitangulih  ||  24. 

Different  kinds  of  the  hasta  or  cubit  measures  : 

Kishkus  cha  prajapatya's  cha  dhanur-mu8h^i-dhanu(r)grahau  I 
Angulas  tu  chatur-vimliat  kishkur  ityuchyate  budhaih  U 26. 
Paftoha-vim§atibhi§  ohaiva  prajapatyam  udahiitam  I 
Shad-vimtati-dhanur-mushtih  sapta-viriisad-dhanu(r)grahah 


The  objects  measured  in  these  cubits  : 
Kishku-haatadi-chatvari-manangula-va&at-tamah  (?)  I 
Bbhir  hasta-pramanais  tu  prasadadini  karayet  11  27. 

Sayanam  ohasanam  ohaiva  kishku-mana-vasat  kuru  \ 

Lingam  cha  pindikam  chaiva  prasadam  gopuraih  tatha  il  28. 
Prakara-mandapam  ohaiva  prajapatya-karena  tu  I 
The  higher  measures ’• 

Dhanu(r)graha&  ohatushkam  yad  danda-manam  prakirtitam 

1129 

Sahasra-danda-mahena  krosa-matram  vidhiyate  \ 

G-avyutir  dvi-gunam  jileyam  tad-dhi(dvi)-gunam  cha  ghata- 

kam  II  30. 

Ghatakasya  ohatushkam  tu  yojana  parikirtita  II  31, 
flO)  “ Manu-samhita  viii.  271  (of.  under  “ Byihat-samhita 
above) : 

Nikshepyo’yomayah  &ankur  jvalannasye  dakangulah  I 


12 


ANG-TJLA 


(11)  Eamayana,  Yl.  20,22  : 

Na  hyaviddhaiii  tayor  gatre  babhuvangiilam  antaram  1. 

(12)  “ Aratni,  cubit  According  to  the  Buioaiilim  of  Baudliayana 
(Fleet.  J.  E.  A.  S.,  1912,231,  2),  this  measure  is  equal  -to  24 

ahgulas  or  ‘ finger-breadths’.  The  -Satapaiha  Brahma na 
(x.  2,1,3)  also  mentions  24  angulas  dr  ‘ finger -breadths’  as  a 
measure,  but  without  reference  to  the  aratni  (see  below), 
ot  'Eggelingf  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  4:3,  BOO, 

(13)  “ Pradeta  frequently  occurs  in  the  “ Brahmanaa  ” (Vedio  Index 

11,  152).  (“  Aitareya,”  viii  5 ; “Satapatha,”  HI,  5,  4,  5 ; 

“ Chhandogya  upanishad  ”,  V.  18,  1,  etc.,)  as  a measure  of 
length,  a span”,  {ibid.  11-60.) 

(14)  “ The  *■  6atapatha-Brahmana ”,  10,  2, 1,2  ; — Tasy-alsh-avama 

rxiatra  yad  angulayah  this  is  his  lowest  measure,  namely 
the  fingers.” 

(15)  “ In  some  table  the  aratni  is  distinguished  from  the  hasta,  and 

is  defined  as  measuring  21  angula.  But  the  ” Sulvasutra  ” of 
Baudhayana  defines  it  as  equal  to  2 pradesa  each  of  12 
angula,  and  so  agrees  in  making  it  equal  to  24  angula.  In 
any  case,  our  present  point  is  that  the  “ Kautiliya- 
■ Artha^astra  ” gives  its  value  as  24  angula.  ” 

(Fleet  J.  B.  A.  8.,  1912,  p.  231  notes  1, 2.).  Compare  also  ibid. 
pp.  231,  232,  233  : 

(16)  “ Like  some  of  the  other  Hindu  tables,  it  “ (Kautillya-Arthasas- 

tra”)  starts  (p.  106,  line  3)  with  the  param^nu  or  ‘most  minute 
atom.  ’ It  takes  its  measures  up  to  the  angula,  through 
four  intermediate  grades,  by  “ eights  ” : it  defines  the  angula 
(line  7)  as  being  equal  to  8 yava-madhya,  or  8 barley-corns 
laid  side  by  side : and  it  further  defines  it  as  the  middle 
breadth  of  the  middle  finger  of  a middle-sized  man.  It  tells 
us  (line  11)  that  12  aiigala  are  1 vitasti  or  “ span  and  (line 
13)  that  2 vitasti  are  1 aratni:  here,  by  its  aratni  of  24 
angula  it  means  the  measure  which  in  other  tables  is  usually 
called  hasta  or  kara,  “ the  foje-arm,  the  cubit  and,  in  fact, 
it  adds  prdjdpatya  hasta  as  another  name  of  its  aratni” 


aSghbi 


13 

“ In  the  regular  course  of  the  table  it  tells  ns  next  (line  20) 
that  4 aratni  (i.e.  4 hasta  or  cubits)  are  1 danda,  ‘ staff 
or  dhanus,  ‘ bow  ’ (from  which  it  follows  that  1 dhanus— 
96  angulaj.” 

“ Now  the  ahgula  or  finger-breadth  may  be  the  theoretical 
unit : it  may  well  have  been  originally  the  actual  unit  and 
the  source  of  the  other  measures.  But  we  can  hardly  doubt 
that  the  hasta  or  cubit  eventually  took  its  place  as  the  prac- 
tical unit ; and  that  a correct  scale  was  maintained  by 
keeping  in  public  offices  a standard  hasta  marked  off  into  2 
vitasti  and  24  angula.  At  any  rate,  the  hasta  is  the  prac- 
' tical  measure  to  which  we  must  attend  in  estimating  all  the 
others.  ” 

(17)  “ Following  Oolebropke  (“  Essays,’*  I.  640,  note),  I take  the 
hasta  for  easy  computation  at  exactly  18  inches,  which  gives 
I inch  as  the  value  of  the  angula.” 

ANGHKI — A foot,  generally  a small  (dwarf)  pillar  constructed  on  a 

larger  one,  or  in  the  upper  parts  of  a storey  ; a pilaster  : 

Tad-dvayam  chiiiighri-tungani  syad  ekftm^am  prastaranvitam 

(M.  XII,  36). 

Chatush-padam  tri-padam  cha  dvi-padaikaiighriin  eva  va  (M. 

Lxyii...  8). 

Tatra  hinadhikam  ohet  pada-sthananghrika^rayam  I 

Sarveshani  bhitti-maneshu  tatra  dosho  na  vidyate  (M.  Lxix, 

60-61). 

Ab  a synonym  of  the  pillar: 

Jangha  cha  charanam  chaiva  sthali  stambhamanghrikam 

(M.  XV.  4\ 

As  a pillar  of  the  first  floor  ; 

Tadurdhve’nghri  fearara^am  syat  (M.  xx.  16), 

Adri-sopana-par&ve  tu  na  kuryat  pfirsvayor  anghrikam  (M. 

XXX.  163). 

As  a dwarf  pillar  placed  upon  a larger  column  : 

Athava  sapta-saptaihsam  vibhajet  tritalodaye  I 

Ohatur-bhagara  adhishthanara  tad-dvayam  pada-tuiigakam  I 


14 


ANMRIKA-VAET 


Adh.ish|hana-samam  maicloham  mafiohordhve’rdliena  vap-ray-uk  1 
Sa-tripada-shadam&ena  ohorhve  padodayam  bhavet  J 
Tadtirdbve  prastarottungam  sa-tri-padam  tri-padakam  \ 
Tadurdhve’rdbena  -vapram  syat  tadiirdhve’Bghri  sbadaiii4akam  t 
(M.  XXL  12-17). 

A subordinate  pillar : 

Miila-pada-vi&alam  va  tat-tri-pada-vi&alakam  i 
Etat  kumbhanghrikam  proktam  antaralam  oha  yojayet  i (M.  xv, 
228-229). 

ANG-HEIKA-VABI— A moulding  of  the  lamp-post  (dipa-danda) : 

Agre  cha  phalakantam  oha  tatikadyair  vibhushitam  1 
Athavahghrika-varim  syad  urdhve  cha  kudmalanvitam  (M.  L. 
78-79). 

AOHALA-SOPANA  (see  Sqpdna) — a flight  of  stationary  or  immov- 
able steps : 

Achalam  oha  ohalam  chaiva  dvidha  sopanam  iritam  (M.  xxx. 
90). 

See  the  contents  of  93-124  under  Sopdna. 

Of. : Evam  tu  chala-sopanam  achalam  tat  pravakshyate  (151). 
Then  follows  the  measurement  (162-154) . 

ATTA,  ATTALA— High,  lofty. 

ATTALAKA — “ an  apartmeat  on  the  roof;  an  upper  storey,”  a 
tower,  a military  post. 

ATT  Alik  A — “ a house  of  two  or  more  storeys,  a lofty  house, 
palace  ” (M.  W diet). 

(1)  “ Kautllya.Artha&astra:” 

‘ Vishkambha-ohatura&ram  attalakam  utsedha-samavakshepa- 

‘ Trim&ad-dandantaram  cha  dvayor  at^alakayor  madhye  sa-har- 
mya-dvi-talam  dvyardhayamam  pratoliih  karayet.’ 

' Attalaka-pratoli-madhye  tri-dhanushkadhishthanam  sapidha- 
na-ohohhidra-phalaka-samhatam  itindrakotiaih  karayet,’ 
('Chap.  xxiv.  52), 


ATTALIKA 


16 


(2)  “ Kamikagama,”  xxxv : 

Agratio’lmdakopetam  afcfcalaih  salakantare  I 
Gopurasya  til \\  126. 

(3)  “ Bajatarangini 

I.  274 : prakarattala-mandalam kinnara-piiram  I 

I.  301 : nagaryah trutyad  attala-mekhalah  I 

(4)  “ Mahabharata  ” (Cock): 

II.  80,30 : prlikarattalakeshu  I 

III,  16,16  : pun........... sattalaka-gopura  I 

III.  160,39  ; Vaiferavanavasam prakarena  parikshiptam  1 

chayattalaka-tobhiaam  I 

III.  173,3 : puram gopurattalakopetam  I 

III.  207,7:  Mithilam gopurattalakavatim  I 

XV.  6,16  : puram  atMlaka-sambadham  (witb  very  high  storey), 

XVI.  6,24:  nagarim prakaratfcalakopefcam  I 

(6)  “Kamayana”; 

I.  6,11 : Uobcbattala-dhvaja-vatim  §atagbui-tata-samkulam  | 
Commentary  : atfcala  upari  griham  (lit.  house  at  the  top). 

II.  6,11:  Ghaityeshvattalakeshu  cha  \ 

Commentary  : atfcalakah  prakaroparitana-yuddha- 
sthanam=atcalakas  imply  the  military  towers  built 
on  the  top  of  the  enclosure  walls. 

V.  3,33 : lahkam,.,.. satta-prakara-toranain  I 

V.  37,39 : satta-prakara-toranaih  lahkam  1 
V.  66,82  : lahka  satfca-prakara-torana  I 
V.  61,36:  purim  aafcta-pratolikam  I 
V.  68,168  : purim  satta-gopuram  I 

VI.  76,  6 : gopuratta-pratolishu  charyasu  cha  vividhasu  cha  I 

V.  2,17  ; lahkam attalaka-^atakirnam  I 

V.  2,21  : purim vapra-prakara-jaghanam  I 

&ataghni-Sula-ketantam  attalakavatam&akam  \ 

<6)  Turrets : 

Giri-Sikhara-taru-tati-attalak-opatalpa-dvara4aranochchhraya- 
compare  with  : Baghuvaib^a.  xvi.  11,  visirna-talp-atta-^ato 


16 


ANBA 


nivekBih  (Kielhom,  Jundgadh  Book  inserip.  of  Mudradaman, 
line  6,  Ep.  Ind.,  vol,  vni,  pp.  43,  46  and  note  3). 

ANDA— A cupola,  of.  Shoda&andayutah,  furnislied  with  16  cupolas; 
vibhushito^ndai^  cha  vim&atya— adorned  with  20  cupolas 
“ (Brihatsaihhita,”  lvi.  22,  24,  28  ; Kern.  J.  R.  A.  S.  (N.  S.) 

^ vol.  VI.  p.  319,  320). 

Sobhanaih  patra-vallibhir  andakais  cha  vibhushitah  \ 

(“  Matsya  Purana.”  Chap.  269.  v.  20  ; see  also  : v.,  37). 
ATI-BHAKGrA  — (See  A pose,  in  which  the  idol  is  bent  in 

more  than  two  or  three  places,  cf  : 

Sarvesham  deva-devinam  bhahga-manam  ihochyate  \ 

Abhahgaiii  saina-bhahgani  cha  ati-bhangam  tridha  bhavet  (M, 
Lxvn,  96-96). 

Evam  tu  sama-bhaugam  syad  ati-bhahgam  ihochyate  1 
Parshnyantaram  tarahgnlyam  tat-padahgnshthayor  antare  \ 

Tad  dvayor  madhyame  vimtad  ahgulyam  dvyantaram  bhavet  1 
Taj-janu-dvayor  madhye  dvyantaram  dvadatangulam  I 
IJru-mula-dvayor  madhye  s5rdha-dvyahgula-kantakam  I 
Evam  ati-bhahgam  syad  etani  yuktito  nyaset  I 
117-122'. 

ADBHUTA— (see  utsedha)  One  of  the  five  proportions  of  the 
measurement  of  the  height ; in  this  proportion  the  height  is 
twice  the  breadth,  cf : 

(1)  Panchadhotsedham  utkrishtam  manat  pancha-vidham  nama  \ 
Santikam  paushtikarii  fereshthaih  parshnikam  (also,  jayadara) 
madhya-mane  tu  1 

Hinam  tu  dvayam  ta(d)-dvi-gunam  chadbhutam  kathitam  I 
Karadhikodayarii  harmye  sarvakamikam  udiritaml  (M.  xi. 
20-23). 

Santikam  paushtikam  jayadam  chadbhutam  uttuhgam  sarva- 
kamikain  (M.  XI  76). 

A clear  statement  of  the  rule  : 

Tad-vistara-samottuhgam  sapadardham  tu  tuhgakam  ! 
Tri-padadhikam  utsedham  vlstaram  dvi-gunodayam  1 
Prathamam  tantikotsedhaih  d^itiaym  paushtikodayam  | 


adhishthana 


17 


I'ptiyam  jayadottungaiii  chaturtham  dhanadodayam  (i.o. 
sarvakamikam)  \ 

Paftohamain  cliadbhuljotisedliam  Janmadi-stiupikantakam  I (M. 
XXXV.  21-26) 

(2)  “ Kamikagania  L.  24-28  ; 

A measurement  of  the  height,  of : 

^antikam  pushti-jayadam  adbhutam  sarvakamikam  I 
Utsedhe  dvi-guna-vyasah  padadhikyam  cha  sammatam  II  24 
Vistara-d-vi-gunad  ashtam&adhikaih  vadhiyojayet  1 
Kshudranam  evam  uddishtam  kanishthauam  athoehyate  II 26 
Saptamte  tn  krite  vyaae  saptadisam  Tfa  shad-amtakam  I 
Vistarad  adhikas  tmago  madhya-manam  athoehyate  II  26 
Vistaram  purvavat  kyitva  chatush-pahohadhikam  tu  yat  I 
Madhya-manam  idam  proktam  uttamanam  trayarii§akam  II 
Purvam  uddesa-manam  syad  etam  nirddeaa-manakam  11  27 
Eka-d'yi-tri-karayor  yuktam  mana-hinam  tu  vadhikam  I 
Utsedham  kalpayed  dhiman  sarvesham  api  sadmanam  II  28 
(8)  A class  of  the  two  storeyed  buildings  (see  M.  xx.  94,  28-33,  under 
Prasada). 

A class  of  buildings  (see  “ Kamikagama  ”,  xlv.  61a,  under 
maliha) 

AD  El -SOP  AN  A — (See  Popawa-)— A flight  of  steps  for  a hill,  of : 
Adri-sopana-partve  tu  na  kuryat  partvayo  anghrikam  (M.  xxx.  163) 
Adri-sopana-de&e  tu  dirgha-manam  yatheshtakam  {ibid.  136) 
Adri-dete  samarohya  yatra  tatraiva  karayet  {iUd.  118) 
ADHIMANDAPAKABA —Having  the  shape  of  the  adhimandapa 
(outside  pavilion) : 

Kshudra-devalayam  sarvam  purvavaj  janmadim  uditami 
Mandapam  nava-talam  kuiyad  bhavanam  anya-rangam  vadhiman  • 
dapakaram  I (M.  XI.  143 — 144). 

ADHISHTHANA— Etymologically  (‘  adhi-stha,"  to  stand)  it  denotes 
an  object  on  which  something  stands.  Hence  it  is  the  basement 
or  the  lowest  member  of  a building.  In  the  same  way,  it  implies 
the  stand  or  base  of  the  column,  being  the  member  between  the 
shaft  and  the  pedestal  if  there  be  any.  Its  identification  with 


18 


ADHISHTHANA 


the  base  and  the  basement  need  not  be  questioned.  It  is  clear 
beyond  donbt  by  a.  comparison  of  the  component  parts  and  the 
offices  it  serves  with  the  corresponding  details  (quoted  below) 
of  the  Grecian  and  Boman  architecture. 

(1)  “ Kamikagama  **  xxxv : 

Tajamanasya  janvantaih  navyantam  hridayavadhi) 

Galavadhi  6iro’ntam  cha  padardham  vS  tri-bhagikamll  22 
Tri(tra)yadi-Bhodata-bhaganam  adhikam  vokta-manatah  \ 

Adhisthanasya  manam  syat..... ...........H  23 

Taladhishthana-padebbyah  kimohid-una-pramanakam  it  114 
Mula-dhama-talottungadhishthana-tala-samyutam  I 
Tad-vihlna-taiam  vapi  sama-sthaia-yutam  tu  va  II  116 
Adhishthanadi  shad-vargam  tan-manam  upapithake  \ 
Dvarotsedhaya  datavyam  samam  vapyadhikam  tu  va  II 122 
ibid,  LV.  202 : 

Masurakam  adhishthanara  vastvadharam  dharatalam  1 
Talam  ku^^imadyangam  adhishthanasya  kirtitam  II 
These  are  stated  to  be  the  synonyms  of  ‘adhishthana^ 

But  they  appear  as  the  component  parts  of  it. 

(2)  “ Suprabhedagama  ” xxxi : • 

Tato  jahgala-bhumit  ched  adhishthanam  prakalpayet  I 
Tach-ohatur-vidham  akhyatam  iha  tastre  vifeeshatah  II  16 
Padma-bandham  oharu-bandham  pada-bandham  prati-kramam  1 
Vistarasya  ohaturthamtam  adhishthanoohohhrayam  bhavet  11  17 
(See  the  mouldings  of  these  four  bases  under  those  terms). 
Padayamam  adhishthanam  dvi-gunam  sarva-sammatam  II  28 

(3)  “ Manasara  ”,  Chap,  xiv  (named  Adhislithdna) , 1 — 412  : 

Twelve  kinds  of  heights  (from  one  large  span  to  four  large 

cubits)  to  be  employed  in  twelve  storeys,  one  above  the  other  : 
Trayodatahgulam  arahhya  shal?-shad-ahg.ula-vardhanat  I 
Chatur-hastavasanaih  syat  kuttima(=adhishthana)-dva- 
da&onnatam  I 

Eka-dva-data-bhumyantam  harmyantam  tat  kramat  nyaset  i 
(2-4). 


ADHISHTHANA 


19 


These  heights  vary  in  buiWings  of  the  ditrerent  castes  and 
ranks ; 

Vipranam  tu  chatnr-hastam  bhu-patinam  tri-hastakam  \ 

Sardha-dvi'hastam  utsedham  yuva-rajasya  harmyake  \ 

Dvi-hastam  tn  vi&air.  proktam  eka-hastam  tn  §udrake  I 
These  heights  are  stated  to  be  proportionate  to  the  heights 
of  the  buildings : 

Harmya-tuhga>va§at  proktam  tasya  masu(u)rakonnatam  I 

J anmadi-vajanantam  syat  ku^^imodayam  iritam  \ (8 — 9) 

The  height  of  the  base  as  compared  with  that  of  the  pedestal: 

Adhishthanonnate  de&e  chopapitham  hi  samtritam  \ 

Ete  tat-tvam  adhishthanam  tungam  taoh  chatur-aTh§akam  1 

(xiii.  2-3). 

The  comparative  heights  of  the  base,  pedestal  and  shaft 
or  pillar : 

“ In  a Tamil  fragment  of  a manuscript,  purporting  to  bo  a 
translation  of  MaySmata  (?Mayamata'),  it  is  said — ‘The 
height  of  the  shaft,  or  pillar  is  to  be  divided  into  four 
parts,  and  one  to  be  given  to  the  base,  which  may  or 
may  not  be  accompanied  by  a pedestal ; and  in  the 
case  where  a pedestal  is  joined  to  the  base,  the  height 
of  the  pedestal  may  be  either  equal  to  that  of  the  base, 
or  twice  or  three  times  as  much  (Ram  Raz.  “ Ess. 
Arch,  of  Hind.”  p.  26). 

According  to  Ram  Raz,  the  passage  xili,  2-3,  quoted  above,  is 
meant  to  imply  that  the  height  of  the  pedestal  consists  “ of 
from  one  quarter  to  six  times  the  height  of  the  base 
(ibid,  p.  26). 

According  to  the  “ Manasara  ” (xxi,  13  ; see  below)  and  the 
“ Suprabhedagama  ” (xxxi,  quoted  above)  the  base  is  half  of 
the  pillar  (pada).  The  ” Eamikagama  ” does  not  give  exact 
proportion  but  says  (xxxv,  114 ; see  above)  that  the  tala  (the 
lowest  part  or  the  pedestal  and  the  base)  is  a little  less 
(kimohid  tina)  than  the  pillar  or  shaft  (pada). 

Compare  also  verses  22,  23  of  the  same  Agama  quoted  above. 


20 


ADHTSHTHlNA 

The  height  of  the  base  is  sometimes  included  in  that  of  the 
pillar  : 

Padayamavasanam  oha  adhishthanodayena  oha  \ (M.  xv.  9). 

Further  comparative  measurement  of  the  base  : 

Athava  sapta-saptamtam  vibhajet  tri-talodaye  1 
Ohatur-bhagam  adhishthanam  tad-dvayam  pada-tuhgakam  I 
Adhishthiina-samaTh-maiicham  manchordhve’rdhena  vapra- 
yuk  KM.  XXI,  12-14). 

‘ Adhishthana  * implying  the  basement  of  a building  .* 
G-arbhavatasya  (=of  the  foundation  pit)  nimnam  syad  aclhish- 
^hana(ih)-samonnatam  \ 

Ish^akair  api  pashanaife  chaturatram  samam  bhavet  \ (xii,  64). 
The  employment  of  various  bases  recommended ; referring  to 
the  building  of  three  storeys  ; 

Nanadhishthana-samyuktam  nana-padair  alankritaml 
Nana-gopana-samyuktam  kshudra-nasyair  vibhtishitam  \ (M. 
XX,  66-66). 

The  penalty  for  having  a disproportionate  base  : 
Adhishthanottuhga-hmam  syat  sthana-natam  dhana-kshayam  I 
(M.  Lxix,  20). 

The  64  types  of  bases : 

Bvam  ohatush-shaahti-masurakanii.^adhishthanam)  tas- 
trokta-manena  vibhijitani  I 

Jnatva  prakurvann  iha  tiipi-varyas  tp.d  vastu-bhartuli 
pradadati  sampat  I (M.  XIV,  393-396), 

These  64  bases  are  described  under  19  technical  class  names 
(10-372) ; the  details  thereof  are  as  follow  : 

Manasdra.  Chap.  xiv. : 

(The  mouldings  are  arranged  in  the  successive  order,  as  given 
in  the  text,  from  the  bottom  upwards). 

I. — ^Pada-handha  (10-22) 

(a)  24  parts : 

(1)  Yapraka  (oavetto)  ....  ....  8 

(2)  Kumuda  (astragal)  ....  ....  7 

(3)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  X 


ABHISHTHANA 


n 


(4)  Karna  (ear)  .... 

.... 

3 

(6)  Kampa  (fillet) 

.... 

1 

(6)  Patfcika  (band,  fillet) 

.... 

O 

(7)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(&)  29  parts : 

.... 

1 

(1)  Janman  (plinth) 

.... 

2 

(2)  Padma^  (cyma) 

.... 

2 

(3)  Kampa  (fillet) 

.... 

1 

The  rest  as  before. 

(c)  29  parts : 

(1)  Janman  (plinth) 

.... 

1 

The  rest  as  before. 

(d)  28  parts: 

(1)  Janman  (plinth) 

.... 

2 

(2)  Kampa  (fillet) 

.... 

1 

(3)  Vapra  (oavetto) 

.... 

1 

(4)  Kandhara  (dado) 

2 

The  rest  as  before. 

II. — Uraga-handba  (23-43) : — 

(a)  18  parts : 

(1)  Vapra  (cavetto) 

i.... 

7 

(2)  Kumnda  (astragal) 

.... 

6 

(3)  Kampa  (fillet) 

.... 

1 

(4)  Kandhara  (dado) 

.... 

1 

(5)  Patina  -i 

(6)  PaflikSs 

2 

(7)  Kampa  (fillet) 

.... 

1 

(6)  20  parts : 

(1)  Vajana  (fiUet) 

.... 

1 

(2)  Kandhara  (dado) 

.... 

2 

(3)  Vajana  (fillet) 

(c)  22. parts : 

.... 

1 

(1)  Kampa  (fillet)  above  Kumbha  (pitcher) 

1 

.'.'I,' 

(2)  Karna  (ear) .... 


22 


ADHISHTHlNA 


(3)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  1 

(4)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(7)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  S 

(8)  Gropanaka  (beam)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(9)  Prativajana  (cavetto)  ....  ....  11 

(cZ)  24  parts ; 

(1)  Vapra  (cavetto)  ....  ....  .■■.  ^ 

(2)  Kiimiida  (torus)  ....  , ....  ....  d 

(The  peculiarity  of  this  part  is  that  it  is 
decorated  with  makara  (shark)  etc.  (40). 

(3)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(4)  Kampana  (fillet)  ....  ....  1 

(5)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  I 

(6)  Prativajana  (cavetto)  ....  ....  8 


These  four  types  of  bases  are  shaped  like  the  face  of  a snake 
and  furnished  with  two  Pratis  at  the  top  (44) ; and  their 
Kumbha  (pitcher)  is  circular  (45).  These  are  employed  in 
the  buildings  of  G-ods  (i.e.  temples) j Brahmans  and  Kings 


(46). 

III.— Prati-krama  (44—64) : — 

(a)  21  parts  : 

(1)  Kshudropana  (small  plinth)  ....  ....  1 

(2)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  2| 

(3)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  .... 

(4)  Vapra  (caVetto)  ....  ....  ....  7 

(5)  Dhara-kumbha  (supporting  pitcher)  ....  6 

(6)  Alinga  (fillet)  ....  ....  1 

(7)  Antarita  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(8)  Padma  (cyma)  or  .... 

Kampa  (fillet)  or  ....  ....  1 (or  2) 

Patta  (band)  ....  ....  ....  1 (or  2) 


This  base  is  decorated  with  elephants,  horses,  and  makaras 
(sharks)  etc.  (xiv  63). 


ADHISHTHANA  23 


(bj/  22  parte  (Aumbhe  kurtmdordhve  •vileshatah.) : 

(1)  Alinga  (fillet)  ....  ....  ’ ....  i 

(2)  'Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(3)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(4)  Pattika  (band)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 


(This  part  is  decorated  with  the  carvings  of  trees 
and  all  ornaments  (57). 

The  rest  as  before. 

(g)  23  parts  (Knmbhantam  purvavat  sordhve,  69) : 


(1)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(2)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(3)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(4)  Karna  (ear)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(5)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  1 

The  rest  as  before. 

(d)  24  parts : 

(1)  Kampana  (fillet)  (upper  and  lower)  ....  1 each 

(2)  Antara(rita)  (intervening  fillet)  ....  1 

(3)  Tripatta  (three  bands)  ....  ....  2 

(4)  Antara  (intervening  fillet)  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Pratima  (?  Prativajana=Cavetto)  ....  1 

(6)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

The  rest  as  before. 


These  are  employed  in  the  buildings  of  G-ods  and  three  higher 


castes  (XIV  100-101). 

IV. — Kumuda-bandha  (66—77)  : — 

(a)  27  parts ; 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(2)  Ambuja  (oyma)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(3)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(4)  Vapra  (cavetto)  ....  ....  ....  6 

(6)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Karna  (ear)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(7)  Amfeu  (filament)  ....  ....  ....  1 


ABH-ISHTHANA 


(8)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  1 

(9)  Kiimiida  (astragal)  ....  ....  S 

(10)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(11)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(12)  Karna  (ear)  ....  ....  1 

(1.3)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(14)  Abja  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(16)  Patta  (band)  ....  ....  ,...  3 

(16)  Abja  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  .1 

(17)  Kampa  (fillo.t)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(b)  27  parts  (pattike  tu  vise-sliatali) : 

G-opaiia  (beam)  ....  ....  ....  2 


Bcme  authorities  recommend  Tripatta  in  the  Knmuda  (a.stragal) 
= Nriga  (snake)  part  (79). 

Pattas  (bands)  in  the  middle  are  decorated  with  fiowers  and 
icwels  (80). 

It  is  covered  with  Kataka  (ring)  or  it  may  be  circular  (81). 
Kumiida  (astragal)  may  bo  triangular  or  hexagonal. 

In  this  way,  eight  kinds  of  (.siicli)  bases  should  be  made ; 


Evam  ashtavidham  kuryat  (83). 

V.— Padma-kesara  (suitable  for  all  buildings)  (78—91) : — 

(a)  19  part.s  ; 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  ....  ....  . ....  2 

(2)  Vapra  (cavetto)  ....  ....  ....  4 

(3)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  | 

(4)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  | 

(5)  Ardha-padma  (half  cyma)  ....  ....  | 

(6)  Knmuda  (astragal)  ....  ....  1 

(7)  Padma' (cyma)  ■ ....  .... 

(8)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  .... 

(9)  Karna  (ear)  ....  ....  ...  2 

(10)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ^ 

(11)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ^ 

(12)  Pattika  (band)  ....  2 


ADHISHTSiNA 


•25 


(13)  Padma  (oywm) 

(14)  ilampa  (fillol)  ^ 

i 

ih)  19  parts : 

(1)  Janmati  (plinfch)  .... 

1-i 

(2)  Kampa  (fillet) 

h 

The  rest  should  be  as  before. 

(c)  19  parts ; 

(1)  Jaumau  (plinth)  .... 

1 

(2)  Padma  (fillet) 

h 

The  rest  should  be  as  before. 

(4)  19  parts : 

In  this  last  sort  of  this  base,  there  Is  a slight 

difference 

(Kifiohit  feeshaih  vifreshatah,  95),  There  should  be  two 

pat^ikaa  or  (one)  hapota,  and  the  rest  as  before. 

VI.— Pushpa-pushhala  (suitable,  as  stated,  for  all  the 

storeys  of 

the  buildings  of  the  small,  intermediate  and  largo  sizes) 

(92-108):— 

(a)  32  parts ; 

(1)  lanman  (plinth)  .... 

(2)  Vajana  (fillet)  . 

M..  1 

(8)  Mabft-padma  (large  oyma) 

.M.  7 

(4)  Karpa  (ear) 

1 

(6)  Ambuja  (oyma) 

1 

(8)  Kumbha  (pitaher)  ..M 

4 

(7)  Padma  (oyma)  ..., 

1 

(8)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

<9)  Grala  (dado) 

3 

(10)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

(11)  Gala  (dado) 

1 

(12)  Gopana  (beam)  .... 

4 

(13)  Alifiga  (fillet) 

1 

(14)  Antarita  (fillet) 

1 

(16)  Pratimukha  (a  face -like  ornament) 

2 

(16)  Vajana  (fillet) 

1 

26 


ADHlSHTHlNA 


(6)  32  parts  : 

Padma  (cyma)  above  the  large  portion  is  one  part  more 
and  the  rest  as  before. 

(c)  32  parts  ; 

The  cyma  above  the  plinth  is  one  part  and  the  rest  as 
before. 

(d)  32  parts ; 

(1)  Kampa  (fillet)  below  mahambnja  (large 

cyma)  ....  ....  ....  ....  1 

(2)  Mahambnja  (large  cyma)  ....  ...  6 

The  rest  as  before. 

VII. -—Sri -bandha  (suitable  for^ the  palaces  of  emperors  and  the 


temples  of  Vishnu  and  Siva)  (109 — 122) : — 

(a)  26  parts  : 

(1)  Janman  (plinth.)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(2)  Vapra  (oavetto)  ....  ....  ....  6 

(3)  Kumuda  (torus)  ....  ....  6 

(4)  Karna  (ear)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Karna  (ear)  ....  ....  ....  4 

(6)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  1 

(7)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(8)  G-opana  (beam)  ....  ....  ....  *1 

(9)  Aligna  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(10)  Antarita  (fillet)  .....  ....  ....  1 

(11)  Prati-vaktra  (a  face-like  ornament)  ....  2 

112)  Vaj ana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(i)  26  parts : 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  ....  ....  ....  2 


(2)  Pratika  (= Prati-vaktra,  a face-like  1 

ornament). 

The  rest  as  before.  + 

(o)  26  parts ; 

(1)  Kshepapa  (above  J anman  or  plinth)  (pro- 
jection) ....  ]_ 

(2)  Gopana  (beam)  ....  ....  ^ 

(3)  Alinga  (fillet)  ....  .... 

(4)  Antarita  (fillet)  ....  ....  1 


ADHISHTHANA 


(5)  Prati-vaktra  (a  face-like  ornament)  1 

(6)  Ardha-vajana  (half  fillet)  ....  ....  | 

The  rest  as  before. 

(d)  26  parts: 

(1)  Janinan  (plinth)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(2)  Abjata  (small  oyma)  ....  ....  1 

(3)  E;ampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

The  rest  as  before. 

VIII, — Maiicha-bandha  (for  temples  and  palaces)  (123— 143) • 

(a)  26  parts ; 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  ....  ....  ....  4 

(2)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(3)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(4)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(6)  Vapra  (oavetto)  ....  ....  ....  6 

(6)  Kumbha  (pitcher)  ....  ,...  ....  4 

(7)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(8)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ..i.  2 

(9)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  I 

(10)  Patta  (band)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(11)  Kshepana  (projection)  ....  1 

(12)  Alinga  (fillet)  ....  . ....  ....  4 

(13)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(14)  Prati  (fillet)  ....  ....  . .... 

(15)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  4 

This  is  decorated  with  the  carvings  (rupa)  of  vyalas 

(snakes),  lions,  and  sharks,  etc.  (137). 

{b)  26  parts  : 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(2)  Ambuja  (cyma)  ....  . ....  ,...  2 

(3)  Kshepana  (projection)  ....  ....  1 

(4)  Vapra  (oavetto)  ....  ....  6 

(5)  Kumuda  (torus)  ....  ....  ....  4 

(6)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(7)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  2 


^8 


ADHISHTHlNA 


(8)  Kampa  (fillet)  ^3!  1 

(0)  Patfcika  (band)  ....  q 

(10)  Kampa  (fillet)  .... 

(11)  Kama  (ear)  ....  ’ I 

(12)  yajana  (fillet)  ....  l 

(13)  Prati  (fillet)  ....  ^ 

(14)  Vajana  (fillet)  „„  , 

(c)  26  Parts: 

The  Kumuda  and  prati  are  furnished  with  a tripafta ; 
and  the  rest  as  before,  and  the  ornaments  also  are  the 
same. 


(d)  26  parts : 

(1)  Pattika  (fillet)  same  as  before, 

(2)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  .... 

The  rest  as  before. 

(e)  26  parts  : 

The  Pattika  ia  the  same  bnt  the  Kandhara  above  is  one 

partj  and  the  rest  as  before.  The  ornaments  should 

he  discreetly  made  (148), 

IX^—^reni-bandha  (for  temples  and  all  other  hnildinga)  (144—160) . 
(a)  18  parts  : 


(1)  Janman  (plinth) 

(2)  Kshndra-kampa  (small  fillet) 

(3)  Mahambuja  (large  cyma) 

(4)  Kandhara  (dado)  .... 

(5)  Abja  (cyma)  „„  . 

(6)  Kumbha  (pitcher) 

(7)  Padma  (cyma)  . 

(8)  Alinga  (fillet) 

(9)  Vajana  (fillet) 

(10)  Prati  (fillet)  • "3 

(11)  Vajana  (fillet)  ...t 

(i)  22  parts ; 

(1)  Janman  (plinth) 

(2)  Kshudra-kshepana  (small  projection) 


ADHISHTHANA 


29 


(3)  Ambuja  (oyma)  ....  ....  ....  4^ 

(4)  Eandliara  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(5)  Abjaka  (small  cyma)  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Kiimbba  (pitcher)  ....  ....  ....  3 

(?)  Padma  (oyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(8)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  i 

(9)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(lO’v  Ksliepana  (proiection)  ....  ....  1 

(11)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(12)  Pa^tika  (band)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(13)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(14)  Vajaiia  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(c)  23  parts : 

(1)  Paduka  (plinth)  ....  ....  . .... 

(2)  Kampa  ffillet)  ....  ...A  ....  | 

(3)  Mahambuja  (^large  cyma) . ....  ....  5 

(4)  Kandhara  (dado)  ...  ....  1 

(5)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  : ....  1 

(6)  Kumuda  (astragal)  ....  ....  ....  .3 

(7)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  i 

(8)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(9)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(10)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  l 

(11)  Autarita  (fillet)  ....  . ..  ....  3 

(12)  Prati  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(13)  Vaiana  (fillet).  ....  ....  ....  1 

(d)  24  parts : 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  ....  ....  ....  i 

(2)  Kshudra-padma  (small  cyma)  ....  1 

(3)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(4)  Maha-padma  (large  cyma)  ....  ....  5 

(6)  Bala  (petal)  ....  ....  ....  1 

The  rest  as  before. 

These  are  decorated -witli  lions  etc.  (174). 


30 


4DHISHTflANA 


X.-Padma-bandlia  (for  the  uemples  of  gods  and  goddesses) 
(170—194) 

(а)  21  parts : 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(2)  Padma  (oyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(3)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(4)  Kumbha  (pitcher)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Kshepana  (projection)  ....  ...•  1 

(6)  Adhah-padma  (lower  cyma)  ....  ....  3 

(7)  Karna  (ear)  ....  ....  .t..  1 

(8)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(9)  Pattika  (band)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(10)  Kampa  (fillet)  ...  ....  ....  1 

(11)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(12)  Pa^ta  (band)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(б)  21  parts  : 

(1)  Upana  (plinth)  ....  ....  ....  S 

(2)  Padma  (oyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(3)  Knmuda  (astragal)....  ....  ....  5 

(4)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  4 

(6)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(7)  Gala  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(8)  Kshepana  (projection)  ...  ....  1 

(9)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(10)  Kapota  (dove  cot)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(11)  Kampa  (fiUet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(o)  21  parts  : 

(1)  Abja  (oyma)  as  before. 

(2)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(3)  Karna  (ear)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(4)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ...  1 

(6)  Antarita  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(6)  Prati  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(7)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  „„  1 


!■ 


ABHISHTHlNA 


31 


id)  19  parts : 

(1)  tTanman  (pHntih)  ....  3 

(2)  Patoa  (oyma)  ....  ....  1 

(3)  Ean3hara  (dado)  ....  ....  i 

(4)  Padma  (oyma)  ....  ....  ....  i 

(5)  Kumbha  (pitcher)  ....  .n..  ....  6 

(6)  Padma  (oyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(7)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  l 

(8)  Karna  (ear)  — ....  1 

(9)  Padma  (oyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(10)  Kapota  (dove  cot)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(11)  Alinga  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(19)  Antarita  (fillet)  ....  ....  1 

(13)  Prativajana  (fillet)  ....  ...  ....  1 


These  are  discreetly  adorned  with  gralias  (sharks). 


lions,  etc.  (203). 

XI. — Kumbha-bandha  (195 — 239):  - 
(tt)  24  parts : 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(2)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(3)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(4)  Earna  (ear)  ....  ....  ....  3 

(5)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Pattika  (band)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(7)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ...  ....  1 

(8)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(9)  Karna  (ear)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(10)  Padma  (oyma)  ....  ....  ....  I 

(11)  Kumbha  (pitcher)  ....  ....  ....  3 

(12)  Padma  (oyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(13)  Ximna  (drip)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(14)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  1 

(16)  Nimna  (drip)  ....  ....  1 

(16)  Prati  (fillet)  ....  l 


32 


adhishthAna 


(fc)  24  parts  : 

(1)  Kumbha  (pitcher) 

(2)  Nirrmaka  (drip) 

(3)  Janman  (plinth)  »... 

(4)  Padma  (oyma) 

(6)  Kimna  (drip) 

(6)  Kumbha  (pitcher)  .... 

(7)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(8)  Kandhara  (dado)  .... 

(9)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(10)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(11)  Kapota  (dove  cot)  .... 

(12)  Vajana  (fillet) 

(13)  Padma  (cyma)  .... 

(14)  Nimna  (drip) 

(15)  Padma  (cyma) 

(16)  Kumbha  (pitcher)  .... 

(17)  Padma  (cyma)  .... 

(18)  Nimna  (drip) 

(19)  Kshepana  (projection) 

(20)  Nimua  (drip)  .... 

(21)  Prati  (fillet) 

(c)  24  parts  : 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  .... 

(2)  Padma  (oyma)  ■— 

(3)  Kandhara  (dado)  .... 

(4)  Kumbha  (pitcher)  .... 

(5)  Nimna  (drip) 

(6)  Kshudra-patta  (small  band) 

(7)  Abja  (cyma) 

(8)  Kapota  (doYe  cot)  .... 

(9)  Kshepana  (projection) 

(10)  Padma  (oyma)  .... 

(11)  Kandhara  (dado) 


ADHISHTHANA 


33 


(12)  Padma  (cyma) 

(13)  Kumbha  (pitoher)  .... 

(14)  Adhali -padma  (lower  cyma)  .... 

(15)  Kandhara  (dado)  .... 

(16)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(17)  Kshudrabja  (small  cyma) 

(18)  Kapota  (dove  cot)  .... 

(19)  Prativajaua  (fillet),  the  remainder. 


(d)  26  parts : 

(1)  Janmau  (plinth)  .... 

2 

(2)  Padma  (cyma) 

2 

(3)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

(4)  Kandhara  (dado)  .... 

2 

(6)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

(6)  Padma  (cyma) 

1 

(7)  Pattika  (band) 

2 

(8)  Padma  (cyma) 

1 

(9)  Alinga  (fillet) 

1 

(10)  Padma  (cyma) 

1 

(11)  Kumbha  (pitcher)  .... 

3 

(12)  Padma  (cyma) 

1 

(13)  Padma  (cyma) 

1 

(14)  Kendra  (central  part) 

.... 

2 

(16)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

(16)  Abja  (cyma) 

.... 

1 

(17)  Kapota  (dove  cot)  .... 

1 

(18)  Kampa  (fillet) 

The  rest  should  be  discreetly  made. 

1 

These  should  be  decorated  with  sharks  etc.  and  Kshudra-nasi 


(small  nose)  (246). 

This  is  stated  to  be  of  five  kinds  (see  b.  1,  2,  above)  specially 
in  the  Kumbha  part  (247), 

These  may  be  circular,  triangular  (tri-patta),  rectangular  (? 
dharaya),  and  should  be  furnished  with  kanakas.  These  are. 
suitable  for  temples  and  palaces  (248). 

3 


H4 


ADHISHTHANA 


XI  [.— Vapra-bandlia  (240— '248)  : 

(a)  (?)  31  parts  ; 

(1)  Jaiiraaii  (pliutii)  .... 

(2)  Kampa  (fillet)  .... 

(3)  Padma  (cyma)  .... 

(4)  Vajaiia  (fillet) 

(5)  Vapra  (cavetto)  .... 

(6)  Padma  (cyma) 

(7)  Kampa  (fillet)  .... 

(8)  Kandhara  (dado)  .... 

(9)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(10)  Padma  (cyma) 

(11)  Pattikil  (band) 

(12)  Padma  (cyma) 

(13)  Vujaua  (fillet) 

(14)  Karna  (ear) 

(15)  Ksliepana  (projection) 

(16)  Ambuja  (cyma) 

(17)  Kapota  (dove  cot)  .... 

(18)  Prativajana  (fillet).... 
XIIT.—Vajra-baudlia  (249—259) 

{a)  31  parts  : 

(1)  Janmaii  (plinth)  .... 

(2)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(3)  Padma  (cyma) 

(4)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(5)  Kandhara  (dado)  .... 

(6)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(7)  Padma  (cyma) 

(8)  Vajra-kumbha  (round  pitcher) 

(9)  Saro-ruha  (cyma)  .... 

(10)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(11)  Karna  (ear) 

(12)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(13)  Ambuja  (qyma)  »„* 


2 

i 

H 

ih 

•2 

h 


i 

i 

4 

1 


h 

u 

k 

h 

h 

h 

2 

4 

4 

1 

4 

4 


ABHISHTHANA 


(14)  Kapota.  (dove  cot) 

(16)  Prativajana  (fillet),... 

(16)  Kandhara  (dado)  .... 

(17)  Kampa-padma  (fillet  and  cyma) 

(18)  Vajra-patta  (round  band) 

(19)  Padma-kampa  (cyma  and  fillet) 

XIV.  - 8ri.bhoga  (260  -280) 

(a)  27  parts : 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  .... 

(2)  Kshudra-kampa  (small  fillet)  .... 

(8)  Ambnja  (cyma) 

(4)  Kshiidra-padma  (small  cyma)  .... 

(It  is  attached  to  the  small  Karna  (275) 

(6)  Karna  (ear)  ....  .... 

(6)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(7)  Ksliudrabja  (small  cyma) 

(8)  Kumuda  (astragal).... 

(9)  Padma  (cyma) 

(10)  Kshepana  (projection) 

(11)  Karna  (ear) 

(12)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(18)  Padma  (cyma) 

(14)  Pattika  (band) 

(16)  Padma  (cyma) 

(16)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(17)  Kandhara  (dado)  .... 

(18)  Kampa^padma  (fillet  and  cyma) 

(19)  Kapotaka  (dove  cot) 

(20)  Alihga  (fillet) 

{/))  27  parts  ; 

(D^Janman  (plinth)  .... 

(2)  Kshudropana  (small  plinth) 

(3)  Mahambuja  (large  cyma) 

(4)  Kshudra-pankaja  (small  cyme).... 

(6)  Kampa-karna  (fillet  and  ear) 


36 


ADHISHTHANA 


(6)  Eampa-padma  (fillet  and  cyma)  ....  1 

(7)  Two  Kapotas  (dove  cots)  ....  ....  2 

(8)  Q-ala  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(9)  Prativajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(10)  Gala  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  | 

(11)  Padma-kampa  (cyma  and  fillet)  ....  1 

(12)  Pati^ika  (band)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(13)  Gaia  (dado)  ....  ....  ...  | 

(14)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  I 

(16)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  4 

(16)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  2| 

(17)  Kapota  (dove  cot)  ....  ....  ....  2|- 

(18)  Prati(ma)  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  2 

XV.  ~ Batna-bandha  (281 — 296) : — 

(a)  26  parts  : 

(1)  Janmaii  (plinth)  ....  ....  14 

(2)  Kshudra-vajana  (small  fillet)  ....  ....  4 

(3)  Vapra  (cavctto)  ....  ....  ....  1 (?  3) 

(4)  Padma  (cyinal  ....  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Asana  (seat)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Ba.tma- vapra  (jewelled  cavetto)  ....  4|- 

(7)  Kampa  (fillet)  ...  ....  ....  44 

(8)  Nimna  (drip)  ....  ....  ....  4 

(9)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  4 

(10)  Abja  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  4 

(11)  Batna-kampa  (jewelled  fillet)  ....  ....  2 

(12)  Kampaja  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  4 

(13)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  4 

(14)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(16)  Kampa-padma  (fillet  and  cyma)  ...  1 

(16)  Eatna-patta  (jewelled  fillet)  ....  ....  1 

(17;  Padma-kampa  (cyma  and  fillet)  ....  1 

(18)  Kama  (ear)  ....  ....  ....  14 

(19)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  4 

(’20)  Abja  (cyma)  ...  ....  ....  4 


ADHISHTHANA 


37 


(21)  K.apota  (dove  cot)  ....  ....  2 

(22)  Alinga  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  14 

(23J  Prativajana  (fillet),  tlie  remainder. 

Thi.s  part  is  adorned  with  the  carvings  of  snakes  and  sharks, 
etc.,  and  all  other  parts  are  decorated  with  jewelled  lotuses. 
This  base  should  be  made  in  the  temples  of  Siva  and  Vishnu 


(307-309). 

XVI.— Pa^ta-bandha  (297-304) 

26  parts  : 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(2)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  4 

(3)  Mahabja  (large  cyma)  ....  ....  24 

(4)  Padma-kampa  (cyma  and  fillet)  ....  1 

(5)  Nimna-kampa  (drip  and  fillet)  ...;  ....  1 

(6)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(7)  Maha-patta  (large  band)  ....  ....  2 

(8)  Padma-kampa  (cyma  and  fillet)  ■ ....  1 

(9)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(10)  Eshepana-abja  (projection  and  cyma)  ....  5 

(11)  Kapota  (dove  cot)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(12)  Prativajana  (fillet),  the  remainder. 


This  is  adorned  with  all  ornaments  (318). 


XVII.-Kaksha-bandha  (305-346) 

(a)  18  parts 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(2)  Kanjpa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  4 

(3)  Mahambuja  (large  cyma)  ....  ....  24 

(4)  Padma-kampa  (cyma  and  fillet)  ....  1 

(6)  Nimna  (drip)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Antarita  (fillet)  ,...  ....  ....  1 

(7)  Prati  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  f 

(8)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(9)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(10)  Kampa-padma  (fillet  and  cyma)  ....  1 

(11)  Vritta-kumbha  (round  pitcher)  ....  2 


m'  ABHiSHTMMA 

(12)  Padma-kshepana  (cyma  and  projection)  ....  1 

(13)  Karria  (ear)  ....  ••••  1 

(14)  Kainpa-padma  (fillet  and  cyma)  ....  1 

(15)  Kapota  (dove  cot)  ....  ....  ....  1| 

(16)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  I 

This  is  adorned  with  all  ornaments,  and  sharks  and 

snakes,  etc.,  (328). 

(b)  19  parts : 

(1)  Janman(pHnth)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(2)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  I 

(3)  Eampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  4 

(4)  Mahambnja  (large  cyma)  ....  ....  2 

(5)  Padma-nima  (cyma  and  drip)  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Abja  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  h 

(7)  Kumuda  (astragal) ....  ....  .... 

(8)  Abja  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  | 

(9)  Karna  (ear)  ....  ....  ....  i 

(10)  Abja  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  i 

(11)  Pattika  (band)  ....  ....  ....  li 

(12)  Padma-kampa  (cyma  and  fillet)  ....  1 

(13)  Nimnaka  (drip)  ....  ....  ....  4 

(14)  Antarita  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  4 

(16)  Prati  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(16)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  | 

(17)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(18)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  | 

(19)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  | 

(20)  Kapota  (dove  cot)  ....  ....  ....  U 

(21)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(22)  Prati-bandha  (fillet  and  band) ....  ....  1 

The  rest  should  be  as  before  and  it  should  be 

decorated  with  all  ornaments  (340). 

(c)  26  parts : 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  ..  . ....  ....  1 

(2)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  1 


ADHISHTSANA 

39 

(3)  Xandlaara  (dado)  .... 

....  2 

(4)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

(6)  Padma  (oyma)  ....  .... 

1 

(6)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

(7)  Argala  (bar) 

1 

(8)  Kampa  (fillet) 

,...  1 

(9)  Padma  (cyma) 

1 

(10)  Kapota  (dove  cot)  .... 

•••.  2 

(11)  Pr''tivajaaa  (fillet),  bbe  remainder' 

Patta-kampa,  Jiapota,  and  the  two  Pastas  may  be 

circnlar  (348). 

The  parts  of  the  two  lower  Karnaa  are  adorned  with 

images  of  snakes,  etc.,  (349). 

(d)  24  parts : 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  .... 

3 

(2)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

(3)  Nimna  (drip) 

1 

(4)  Bhadras  (projecting  ornament;.... 

...,6  (each) 

(5)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

(6)  Nimnaka  (drip) 

1 

(7)  Antarita  (fillet) 

1 

(8)  Prati  (fillet) 

1 

j (9)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

i (10)  Kandhara  (dado)  .... 

•I'; 

j (11)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

1 (12)  Padma  (oyma) 

1 

i (13)  Kapota  (dove  cot)  .... 

3 

] (14)  Kandhara  (dado)  .... 

1 

i (16)  Prati  (fillet) 

1 

I (16)  Kumbha  (pitcher"! 

8 (?  octangular) 

} There  should  be  Bhadra-patta 

and  Patra-patta  in 

the  Kapota  part  (369). 

40  adhissthana 

KVIII.— Kampa-bandha  (347 — 858) 

36  parts : 

(1)  Tunga  (eleYation)  ....  ....  4 

(2)  Kshudra-upana  (small  plinth)  ....  ....  1 

(3)  Mahabja  (large  cyma)  ....  ....  5 

(4)  Kshudrabja  (small  cyma)  ....  ....  1 

(5)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Nimaa  (drip)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(7)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(8)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(9)  Kumbha-mahabja  (pitcher  and  cyma)  ....  5 

(10)  Abja  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  i 

(11)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(12)  Alinga  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(13)  Antarita  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(14)  Prati  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  2 

(15)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(16)  Ksiiepana  (projection)  ....  ....  1 

(17)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(18)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(19)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  i 

(20)  Kapota  (dove  cot)  ....  ....  ....  3 

(21)  Alinga  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(22)  Prati  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

XIX. — l^ri-kanta  (359 — 372)  : — 

36  parts : 

(1)  Upana  (plinth)  ....  ....  ....  3 

(2)  Xshudropana  (small  plinth)  ....  ....  1 

(3)  Hahambnja  (large  cyma)  ....  »...  8 

(4)  Kshubrabja  (small  cyma)  ....  ....  1 

(5)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(7)  Pat tika  (band)  ....  ....  ....  8 

(8)  Kshudra-kampa  (small  fillet)  ....  ....  1 

(9)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  4 


ADSISHTHANA 


41 


(10)  B^siilidrabja  (small  oyma)  ....  ....  1 

(11)  Nimna  (drip)  ....  ....  1 

(12)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(13)  Eumbha  (pitcher)  ....  ....  ....  3 

(14)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(15)  Kshepana  (projection)  ....  ....  1 

(16)  Kandhara  (dado)  ....  ....  ...  2 

(17)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(18)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(19)  Kapota  (dove  cot)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(20)  Alinga  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(21)  Prati  (fillet)  ....  ...  ....  1 


This  l^ri-kanta  is  stated  to  be  of  four  kinds  (376)  but 
only  one  type  is  illustrated. 

In  the  kumbha-part  it  should  be  round  or  there 
should  be  a patta  (372).  These  should  be  con- 
structed ia  the  temples  of  Siva  and  Vishnu  (387). 
Projections  (318-409)  : 

Projections  are  the  peculiarities  of  the  mouldings  from  the 
plinth  to  the  crowning  fillet* : 

Janmadi-vajanantam  cha  am&anam  tad  viteshatah  \ (373). 
These  projections  vary  from  oeing  equal  to  to  one-fourth  of 
the  mouldings ; 

Tat-samam  nirgamam  v5pi  tri-padam  ardhardham  eva  cha  I 
Tad-eva  kshepapam  sarve  yatha-sobham  tu  karayet  I 
Upana-tunga-samam  vapi  tat-padona-vivardhanat  1 
Tungena  tri-vidhanam  cha  tri-padam  nirgamam  bhavet  1 
Vaproohcham  tu  samam  vapi  yavat  kumuda-nirgamam  I 
Kumudochoham  vapra-pattantaih  pattika-nirgamaih  bhavet  1 
Tat-samam  nirgamam  vapi  pattam  gopana-nirgamam  I 
Kshudrarpankaja-sarvesham  tat-samam  nirgamam  bhavet  I 
Yatha-tobham  balat  sarvam  anganam  sahito(am)  nyaset  \ 

(376-384). 


42 


adhishthAna 


These  general  rules  are  illustrated  by  giving  in  danda  (rod)  and 
hasta  (cubit)  measures  the  projections  of  some  plinths  (402— 
409). 

For  a comparative  study  and  general  knowledge  of  the  subject 
the  details  of  the  bases  employed  in  early  European  archi- 
tecture are  given  below. 

Bach  column  has  its  particular  base, 

I. — Tuscan  order  (G-wilt.  Enoycl.  art.  2665) : — 

Base  of  the  column  12  parts  ; 

Projeotion  from  the  axis  of 
colamn  in  parts  of  a 
Module. 

(1)  Fillet  1 13| 

(2)  Torus  ....  6 164 

(3)  Plinth  ....  6 16| 

II.— Doric  order  (art.  2666) : — 


Base  of  the  column  12  parts  : 

Projeotioo. 


(1)  Apophyge  or  congd 

...  2 modules 

12 

(2)  Fillet  .... 

1 „ 

14 

(3)  Astragal 

- 14  ,> 

14| 

(4)  Torus  .... 

...  4 

17 

(6)  Plinth  .... 

... 

17 

G-recian  Doric : 

Cornice 

16*32  parts. 

Entablature  .... 

...  Frieze 

...  14*88  „ 

Architrave .. 

...  17*10  „ 

Capital 

...  11*16  „ 

Column  (proper) 

...  Shaft 

...  20*30  modules, 

1st,  step  or  plinth  6’90, 

2nd. 

„ 6*70. 

3rd 

„ 6*90. 

III.— Ionic  order  (art.  2573) 

Base  of  the  column  194  parts,  excluding  Apophyge  2 parts 

and  Projection  18. 

20 
224. 


(1)  Fillet 

(2)  Torus 


li 

6 


ADHISHTHANA 


43 


(3)  Fillet 

i 

20i 

(4)  Scotia 

2 

20 

(6)  Fillefi 

i 

22 

(6)  Two  beads 

2 

224 

(7)  Fillet 

i 

22 

(8)  Scotia 

2 

21 

(9)  Fillet 

i 

24 

(10)  Plinth 

6 

26 

Grecian  Ionic  (art.  9681  j * 

Base  of  the  column  33*27  parts : 

PtojeoUoQ  iu  partis  of  a 
Module.from  axis  of 
the  oolumn. 

(1)  Apophyge 

....  1*080 

(2)  Fillet 

....  0*460 

18*960 

(3)  Bead 

....  1-080 

19*320 

(4)  Torus  (horizon- 

tally  fluted) 

6*120 

22- 600 

(5)  Fillet 

....  0*460 

22*600 

(6)  Scotia 

....  6*000 

21*840 

(7)  Fillet 

....  0*460 

23*640 

(8)  Torus 

....  5*760 

24*960 

(9)  Plinth 

....  11*880 

26*620 

-Corinthian  order  (art.  2682) : — 

Base  of  the  column  144  parts  : 

Heigiits  in  pajrts 
of  a Module. 

PvojeotioQ  ia  parts 
of  a Module. 

(1)  Torus 

3 

22 

(2)  Fillet 

i 

204 

(3)  Scotia 

....  14 

20 

(4)  Fillet 

i 

21| 

(6)  Two  beads 

....  1 

22 

(6)  Fillet 

i 

21| 

17)  Scotia 

14 

214 

(8)  Fillet 

i 

23 

(9)  Torus 

4 

26 

(10)  Plinth 

6 

26 

44 


V.— Composite  order  (art.  2691)  : — 
The  base  of  the  columii  18  parts  : 


(1)  Oong^ 

Heights  i n parts  of  a 
Module 

....  2 

Projection  in  part« 
of  a Module, 

20 

(2)'  Fillet 

n 

20 

(3)  Torus 

....  3 

22 

(4)  Fillet 

....  1 

m 

(6)  Scotia 

....  4 

20 

(6)  Fillet 

i 

21i 

(7)  Bead 

....  k 

21f 

(8)  Fillet 

i 

21i 

(9)  Scotia 

....  2 

20| 

(10)  Fillet 

....  i 

23 

(11)  Torus 

....  4 

25 

(12)  Plinth 

....  6 

26 

From  the  details  givea  4bove  it  would  be  easy  to  understand  and 
subscribe  to  the  following  quotation  : 

The  Indian  (pedestals  and)  bases  are  made  more  systematic- 
ally, and  afford  by  far  a greater  variety  of  proportions  and 
ornaments  than  the  Grecian  and  Roman.  In  the  European 
architecture,  the  forms  and  dimensions  of  pedestals  and 
bases  are  fixed  by  invariable  rules,  with  respect  to  the  orders 
in  which  they  are  employed,  but  in  the  Indian,  the  choice  is 
left  to  the  option  of  the  artists.” 

(Ram  Raz,  “ Ess.  Arch,  of  Hind.”  p.  39-40  and  see  Plate  II). 

AHAHTA — (See  lupd) — A kind  of  lupa  or  “ a sloping  and  projecting 
member  of  the  entablature  representing  a continued  pent-roof 
Ambaram  eha  vyayam  Jyotir  gaganam  cha  vihayasi  I 
Anantam  chantariksham  cha  prastaram  (?  pushkalam)  chashtadha 
lupah  li 

(M.  xviii,  174-175). 

ANU-GRIHA—The  roof  of  a house. 

Of.  Karna-kilaya-sambandho’nugyiham  setuh — “ The  fastening  of 
the  roof  of  a house  to  the  transverse  beam  by  means  of  iron 
bolts  is  called  (Kaut,  Arthatastra.”  Chap,  lxv,  p.  166), 


ANTA.EA 


46 


ANU-SALA-~(Cf . §wZ«)~Lifcerally,  an  antechamber,  a hall  or 
room  behind  or  at  the  side  of  a main  hall  Butin  the  passages 
quoted  below  it  seems  to  mean  a speeial  kind  of  hall. 

“ Manasara,’’ xxvi,  9, 19,.23^; 

(a)  Shoda&am§akam  adhikyam  bhagam  harmya-vi&alakam  17 
Bkam&am  karna-kutam  syad  dharantara(m)  §ivam§akam  I S 
Dvi-bhagenanu-&ala  cha  tad-ardham  chantaralakam  1 9 
Saptam§ena‘>maha-§ala  harmyam  etat  tu  vinyaset  I 10 
{b)  Athavashpdasam'se  tu  kiita-hara  cha  purvayat  I 16 
Shad-bhagena  maha-'sala  chatuh-'sala  tri-bhagikam  1 17 
Madhya-&ala  yngamsena  bhadra-§ala  cha  madhyame  I 18 
Anusala  oha  madhye  cha  chaika-bhagena  bhadrakam  | .19 
(c)  Bkona-vim§ad-am&ena  a'shta-bhumi-vi&alake  I 21 
Ekaika-kuta-vistaram.maba-§ala.saramsakam  i 22 
Anusala  tri-bhaga  va  bha(ha)rantara(ni)  dyi-bhagikam  I 23 
Maha-^ala  tri-bhagena  bhadra-&ala  vi&alata  1 24 

ANBKA-LIKGA — (Bee  Uhga) — A class  of  the  phallus,  phalli  in 
group  ; 

Vedalram  vasva^rakam  Va  vrifetaii?  chaiyam  proktaneka-lihga-mulej 
Ekanekan  ohokta-lihge  ^iyam^e  kuryad  dhara  shoda^adi-dvayena  I 
(M.  MI  128-129,  132-133). 

ANILA-BHADRAKA — ^A  kind  of  chariot  ('see  M.  xliii,  114,  under 
Eatha). 

ANTARA-— (See  andante)— A moulding  of  the  pedestal  and  the  base ; 
literally  the  distance  between  any  two  obieots,  hence  it  implies  a 
moulding  which  separates  two  other  larger  mouldings.  In  this 
office  it  would  resemble  the  fillet,  listel  or  annulet  (see  Gwilt.  art. 
2532,  fig.  874)  : 

Sbad-am&am  chantare  karne  uttaramaam  tad-urdhvako  I (M.  xiii, 
121). 

Purvottara-pradefee  tu  kampanam  ohantaram^akam  I 
-Bvim^akam  cha  tri-pattam  syat  tad-urdhve  chiintaram  bhavet  I 
(M,  xtv,  69-60). 


46 


ANTAEALA 


AN  TAB  Ala— The  intermediate  space,  the  interior  (s=antaralaya). 

(1)  Interoolumnation  : 

Mula-pada-vi&alam  va  tat-tri-pada-vi&alakam  \ 

Btat  kumbhahghrikaih  proktam  antaralam  cha  yojayet  \ 

(M.  XV,  231-232). 

(2)  Eeferring  to  some  part  of  the  fifth  storey  ; 

Tasmat  tri-mula-harmyantam  tad-dvayor  miila-defeake  \ 
Antaralam  prakurvita  par&ve  sopana-samyiitam  I 
Sarva-pradakshinaih  kuryad  yaktya  dvaram  prakalpayet  I 

(M.  xxm,  20—22). 

(3)  Some  part  of  a building  : 

Gopurair  mandapadyai&  cha  ohantarale  tvalindake  |(M.  Lxix,  8). 

(4)  “ The  second  mandapa  of  a temple,  between  the  ardha-mandapa 

and  the  shrine,  J.B.*’ 

Of.  " Gorakshakam  bhairavam  anjaneyam  Sarasvatim  Siddhi- 
vinayakam  cha  I 

Chakara  panohayatanantarale  balendu-mauli-sthita-manaso 
yah  I 

(Gintra  pratasti  of  the  reign  of  Sarangadeva,  verse 
46,  Bp.  “ Indie,”  Vol.  I,  pp.  284,  276,  note  16). 

(6)  “ In  the  antarala  (or  interior),  they  erected  a most  beautiful 
ranga-mantapa,  and  a fine  chandra-sale  (or  upper-storey)  ac- 
cording to  the  directions  given  by  the  king  Timmendra.” 
(Bp.  Carnat,  Vol.  xii.  Pavugada  Taiuq,  no.  46,  pp.  122. 
Translation,  line  14,  203,  Eoman  text,  v,  9). 

(6 ) “ An  antamla  or  intermediate  porch.’^ 

(Bergusson,  quoted  by  Bice,  Ep.  Carnat.,  Vol.  v,  part  1, 
Introduot  p.  xxxix,  para.  2,  line  6). 

ANTABIKSHA — A quarter. 

Jayante  tat-pare  saumye  antarikshe’ka-ptirvake  I (M.  vii,  93). 

Mrige  chaivantarikshe  va  bhringaraja-mrishe  tatha  \ (M.  ix,  367). 

A synonym  of  the  lupa  or  pent-roof  : 

Aihbaram  cha  vyayam  Jyotir  gaganam  cha  vihayasi  I 
Anantam  cha  antariksham  cha  pushkalam  chashtadha  lupah  II 

(M.  XVIII,  174-176). 


ANTIKA 


47 


AHTAEIKSHA-EANTA — A class  of  ten  storeyed  buildings  (M. 

xxYin,  14-15,  see  under  Prtisttda). 

ANTAEITA— A fillet. 

(1)  A moulding  of  the  pedestal,  the  base  and  also  of  the  entablature. 

In  base  it  is  connected  with  another  crowning  moulding 
called  alinga  and  in  pedestal  with  prativajana. 

In  its  office  and  situation  it  would  resemble  a fillet. 

Its  synonyms  are— vajana,  kshepana,  vetra,  patta,  uttara, 
pattika,  kampa,  drikka,  and  manda,  etc.  (M.  XVI,  46-47). 

A crowning  moulding  of  the  pedestal  and  the  base  : 

(2)  Tad-urdhve’ntaritam  cham'saih  tat-samam  prativajanam  I 
Bkam  chantaritam  ohordhve  sardhamtam  prativajanam  I 

CM.  XIII,  68,  69,  etc.) 

Alingam  amtakam  ohaiva  tat-samantaritaih  tatha  I 
Alingam  amtakam  chordhve  aihtenantaritam  tatha  I (M.  Xiv, 

61, 101,  etc.). 

(3)  The  10th  moulding  from  the  top  of  the  entablature  (See 

“ Kamik^gama  ” Liv,  2,  under  Pmsdda). 

(See  Earn  Eaz,  “ Ess,  Arch,  of  Hind.”  p.  25). 
ANTAEITA-MANpAPA — The  ante-chamber  in  front  of  a shrine. 
(Chalukyan  Architecture,  Arch.  Surv.  New.  Imp.  Series,  Vol.  xxi, 
p.37). 

ANTAE-MANDALA — The  circular  court  in  the  interior  of  a compound: 
Antar-mandalam  arabhya  mahamaryadikantakam  \ 
Panoha-kut(d)ya8ya  chotsedharn  pratyekam  panchadha  bhavet  I 

(M.  XXXI,  67-68). 

ANTAE-MUKHA — Literally,  with  face  towards  the  inside. 

Of.  Griha-garbham  (=  foundations)  antar-mukham  syad  grama- 
garbham  bahir-mukham  1 (M.  xii,  216). 

ANTAE-YAPEA — The  internal  rampart,  the  internal  side  of  the 
rampart. 

Cf.  Antar-vapram  bahir-bhittit  cheshtam  dirgham  cha  chulika  < 

(M.  IX,  362). 

ANTIKA— A class  of  the  two  storeyed  buildings  (M.  xx,  94,  26-27, 
see  under  Pmsdda). 


48 


ANTAH-PnBA 


ANTAT^-PUEA— The  female  aparfemeEfcs. 

(1)  “ Eamayana  ” rCock) — 

II,  3,  13  ; Antah-purasya  dvarani  sarvasya  nagarasya  oha  I 
II,  14, 29  : Dadarsanijah-puram  §riraan  nana-dhvaja-gaiiayiitjam  I 

II,  14,  66  : Nirjagama...... sagara-hrada-smakafeat  siimant- 

ro’ntah-purach  ohhubhat  1 

II,  15,  18  : Ityiiktvantahpura-dvaram  ajagama  puranavit  \ 

V.  4,  30  : Sa  hema-jambu-nada-chakraYalam  maharha-mukta- 
mani-bhushitanfeam  \ 

Pararghya-kalagtiru-ohaudauarham  sa  EaYanautabpuraiii  pra- 
viTe§a  ii 

II,  16,  47  of. ; Samriddham  antahpuram  avive^a  ha  II 
Tatodii’-kuta-chala-megha-sannibham  mahavimanopama- 
Ye^ma-samyntam  I 

YII,  42,  27  ; Purvahne  dharma-karyani  kritva  dharmena  dhar* 
mavit  I 

^esham  divasa-bhagardham  autahpura-gato  bhaYet  II 
Compare  also  : II,  10,  11—17  ; 70,  20;  II,  70,  27  ; II,  114,  29  ; 
III,  54,  13 ; IV,  26,  22  ; V,  4,  24. 

(2)  “ Panchatantra  ”,  ed.  Bombay,  I,  pp.  38,  68,  61,  168 ; 

Gratva  kanyantahpure ,raja-kanyam sapba-bhumi- 

ka-prasada-praiita-gatam ...bhaja  II 

Iha  rajnas  bu  banaya  PataDbyasbi  kanyaka  I 
Uparyanbah-pure  sa  cha  xabnam  ityabhirakshyate  il 
Pravibya  so’dri&rmgagra-tuhga-Yabayanena  bam  1 
Anbakpure  dadar§abha  supbam  rahasi  Pabalim  II 
PraYiajaka^  cha  gabYaiYa  vabayana-pabhena  sah  \ 
Pravifeyanbah-puram  prapa  sapbam  ni^  aripabmajam  I! 

(3)  “When  bhe  greab  minisber,  Yerggade  of  bhe  female  aparbmonts 

(anbahpura),  greab  masber  of  robes  ” 

(Bp.  Oarnab.  Vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Takiq.  no.  144,  Transl. 
p.,  107  ; Eoman  bexb.  p.  191). 

ANTIMA— Limib,  boundary,  pilasber  borminabing  bhe  side  wall  of  a 
temple,  and  haYing  base  and  capital  generally  differing  from 
those  of  adjacent  columns. 


ABJA-KAMTA 


49 


Tad  (=s*prati)-'ardhve  8ardha-panchaiii§am  padayamaih.  tritlyakam  | 
Antimam  cha  dvi-bhagam  syad  vedikodayam  iritam  \ 

(M.  xxxiii.  226-327). 

ANlfA-BANQ-A— The  second  court  or  theatre  of  a compound. 

Mandapam  nava-talam  kuryad  bhavanam  anya-rahgam 
vadhimandapakaram  i (M.  XI.  1 14). 

ANVANTA — A synonym  of  mahoha  or  a raised  platform  or  couch. 

(M.  XVI.  43,  see  under  mancha)» 

APASAMCHITA—A  class  of  buildings  in  which  the  width  (at  the 
bottom)  is  the  standard  of  measurement;  the  temples  in  which  the 
principal  idol  is  in  the  recumbent  posture. 

Pratyekam  tri-vidham  proktam  samchitam  ohapy-asamchitam 

upa(apa)-samohitamityeva, ..(Kamikagama,  XLV.  6-7). 

Utsedhe  manam  grihyam  chet  sthanakam  tat  prakathyate  I 
Vistare  manam  samkalpya  chasanam  tad  udiritam  1 ^ 

Parinahe  pade  vapi  manam  ^ayanam  iritam  \ 

Asanam  samchitam  proktam  sthanakam  syad  asamchitam  I 
Apasamchitam  ^ayanaih  chet  tat  tat  tri-vidha-harmyake  I 

(M.  XIX.  7-11).  , 

Samohitasaibohitanaih  cha  am&air  ayadibhir  yutam  t 
Apasaihohita-harmyanam  tithyantam  shad  grahiahyate  { 

(M.  XXX.  173-174). 

APOHA—  (see  Ohn) — A superfluous  member  attached  to  a structure. 

ABJA— (see  Padma) — A lotus,  the  cyma  or  “ a moulding  taking  its 
name  from  its  contour  resembling  that  of  a wave,  being  hollow  in 
its  upper  part  and  swelling  below.  0^  this  moulding  there  are 
two  sorts,  the  cyma  recta,  just  described  ; and  the  cyma  reversa 
wherein  the  upper  part  swells,  whilst  the  lower  is  hollow.  By 
the  workmen  these  are  called  og4es.” 

Compare  the  lists  of  mouldings  given  under  ‘ Adhishthana  ’ and 
/ Upapitha.’ 

ABJA-KANTA— A class  of  the  ten  storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  xxvm.  18,  see  under  Prdfidda), 

4 


do 


ABHAYA 


ABHAYA—Fearless,  a refuge-offering  pose  of  the  hand  of  an  image. 
Chatur-bhujam  feri-netram  cha  Jap-makuta-bliushitam  \ 
Varadabhaya-samyuktam  krishna-parafeu-dharipam  \ 

(M.  xn,  120-121), 

Abhayam  dak8hine,.......(M.  vii.  159). 

Purve  eha  tivabhayam........(ibid.  166). 

Varadam  chabhayam  purve  vame  tu  dvara-hastakam  I (M.  Liv.  154). 
ABHAYA-HASTA— (see  Ahhg>ya). — With  hand  in  the  pose  of  offer- 
ing refuge. 

Varadabhaya-hastam  cha  jafca-makufea-manditam  \ (M.  li.  30). 

ABHISHBKA-MANPAPA— (see  Mandapa)^T]ie  coronation  hall, 
Nripanam  abhishekartham  mandapam  \ (M.  xxxiv.  38). 

See  Inscrip,  of  Rajaraja  III  (no.  39,  H.  S,  I.  I.  voL  III,  p.  86), 
under  Mandapa. 

ABHYAVAHARA-MANPAPA— A dining-hall 

See  Rahganatha  inscript,  of  Sundarapandya  (verse  2-3,  Ep.  Ind. 
Vol.  III.  pp.  13,  16)  under  Mandapa. 

AMBIT  A-N  AND  AH  A— A pavilion  with  58  pillars. 

(Matsya-purana,  chap,  270,  v.  8,  see  under  Mandapa). 
AMBARA — The  sky,  one  of  the  eight  kinds  of  the  lupa  or  pent  roof. 

(M.  xvili.  174-175,  see  under  Anania). 

(If.  Lupakaradi-Jadanam  manayen  mauavit-tamah  1 
Ambaradyashtadhamani  nidanam  lupamanayet  \ 

(M.  xvin.  329-330). 

AMBUJA — Lotus,  the  cyma  (see  Ahja  and  Padwa). 

Cf,  Tad-dvayam  ohambujam  chordhve  kapotochoham  gunamfeakam  I 

(M.  XIII.  57). 

(A)RAN<3t-A — A synonym  of  harmya  (building). 

Arahgam  iti  chaitani  harmyam  uktam  puratanaih  \ (M.  iii.  8). 
ARATNI — (see  under  AhgiLla)-~-A  measure. 

(1)  k.  cubit  of  24  ahgulas  (Introduot.  Rajavallabha  Mandana  and 
Brahmanda-Puranaj  p viif  99,  see  under  Aw-pw/a). 


AEGALA 


51 


A measure  equal  feo  the^leagth  of  the  fore  arms  with  the  fingers 
fully  stretched  (Suprabhedagama,  xxx.  24,  see  mider 
Ahgula), 

(2)  A measure  equal  to  the  fist  with  fully  stretched  fingers  (Sup- 
rabhedagama,  xxx.  24  , see  under  ‘ Angula  ’), 

According  to  this  Agama  (ibid.  v.  26)  and  the  Manasara  (ii. 

49)  a meaure  of  21  angulas  is  called  Kishku  (hasta). 

“This  word  (aratni),  which  primarily  means  'elbow’, 
occurs  frequently  from  the  Eigveda  onwards.  (E.  V.  vili.  80, 
8 j A.  -V.  XIX.  57,  6;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  5 ; ^atapatha 
Brahmana,  vi.  3,  1,  33,  etc.)  as  denoting  a measure  of 
length  (ell  or  cubit),  the  distance  from  the  elbow  to  the  tip 
of  the  hand.  The  exact  length  nowhere  appears  from  the 
early  texts.”  (Maodonell  and  Keith,  Vedio  Index  i,  34). 
8atapatha  Brahmana  also  Vii;  1.  2,  6 
Kau§ika- Sutra,  85  (Pet.  Biot) : Bahur  va  aratnih  I 
ARKA-KANTA— A class  of  the  eleven  storeyed  buildings. 

Evam  tu  vajra-kantam  syad  arka^kantam  ihochyate  \ 

Tad  eva  feala-prante  tu  parsve  chaikena  saushtikam  \ 

Tad-dvayor  antare  dete  tat-samam  kshudra-harayoh  1 
Purvavat  kuta-vistaram  sesham  harathta-panjaram  1 
Tan-madhye  tu  tri-bhagena  kshudra-  feala-vitalatah(ta)  I 
Tat-par^ve  tri-tri-bhagena  hara-madhye  sa-bhadrakam  1 
Kshudra-feala-tri-bhagana  madhya-bhadram  samanvitam  \ 
Kshudra-hara  cha  sarvesham  nasika-panjaranvitam  I 
Madhye  madhye  mahanasi  netra-tala  cha  parsvayoh  I 
Sarvalankara-saihyuktaih  shad-vidhaih  (ekada§a-talam)  parikirti- 
tam  \ (M.  XXIX.  26-34). 

ARG-ALA — A bolt  or  pin  for  fastening  a door. 

Argalam  dakshine  bhage  vama-bhage  tu  talpakam  il 
Kavata-yugmam  kartavyam  kokilargala-samyutam  II 

(Kamikagama,  Lv.  49,  52). 


67104 


62 


ABDHA-CHITRA 


A moulding  of  the  base  (see  Kakshahandha,  under  Adbisbtbana). 
Kampam  ekam  tad-urdhve  oha  ekenargalam  eva  olia  I 

(M.  XIV.  331,  note). 

ABDHA-OHITEA— (see  Mhdsa) — Half  transparent  Abhasa  or  a 
kind  of  marble. 

Ardhanga-drilyamanam  cba  tad  ardha-cbitram  iti  smritam  \ 

(M.  Li.  lO). 

Chitrangam  ardha-chitrangam  abhasangam  tridkoohyate  I 

(M.  li.8). 

Sthavaram  jangam  vapid  aru-feailam  cba  lobajam  I 
Ghitraih  va  obardha-obitram  cba  cbitrabbasam  atbapi  va  \ 

(M.  LVi.  14-15). 

ARBHA-NARi^VARA-A  name  of  ^iva,  an  image  tbe  right  half  of 
which  is  the  representation  of  ^iva  and  the  left  half  of  his  consort 
Burga. 

Pa&chima-mula-tale  madhye  koshthe  lingam  adbhutam  I 
Athavardha-nari§vara(m)  sthanakam  \ (M.  xix.  224-226). 
ARBHA-PRAHA — (see  Sandhi-Tcarmam) — -K  kind  of  joinery  resembl- 
ing the  shape  of  the  bisected  heart,. 

Sartesham  api  darunam  sandheh  prante  tu  yojayet  \ 

Yatheshtam  phan,a(m)-samgrahyam  ohodayed  vistarantakam  I 
Mnlagre  kllakam  ynktam  ardha-pranam  iti  smritam  \ 

Tad  eva  dvi-lalate  cha  vistarafdhardha-ohandravat  1 
Madhye  cha  danta-samyuktam  agra-mule  tu  yojayet  \ 
l^esham  tu  purvavat  kuryat  mahavi’itam  iti  smritam  \ 

CM.  xvii.  97-102). 

AHBHA-MANDAPA — A half-pavilion,  a vestibule,  a court,  a porch. 

(1)  Idam  ayadikam  ohardha-mandape  feishta-mandape  II 

(Kamikagama,  l.  68). 

Ardha-iiiandapa-dakshamfee  vighnefe a-n jitta-rupinam  \ 

(Ibid.  LV.,  73). 

(2)  “ On  the  west  wall  of  dilie  ardha-mandapa  in*  front  of  the  rock- 

cut  Jambuke&vara  shrine  at  Tiruvellarai.  ” 

(Inscription  no.  xii,  Ind.  Ant,  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  268), 


ALAl^KABA-MANpAPA  63 

(3)  Pile  “ Gourfj  in  a temple  next  to  the  sacred  shrine*”  Winslow, 

Tamil  dictionary  (loo.  oit). 

(4)  ‘‘  Ardha-mandapa  : the  enclosed  building  in  front  of  a shrine.” 

(Ohalukyan  architecture,  Bea,  p.  37.  Arch.  Surt.  New. 
Imp.  Series,  vol.  xxi). 

The  detatohed  building,  sometimes,  open  and  sometimes  en- 
closed, in  front  of  a shrine,  is  generally  called  the  Mukha- 
mandapa  (the  pavilion  in  front  of  the  shrine). 

(5)  The  ardha-mandapa  is  “ a narrow  passage  or  vestibule  connect- 

ing ” the  garbha-griha  and  mukha-mandapa,  and  “is  open 
on  two  sides  to  permit  the  priestly  worshipper  circumam- 
bulating the  central  shrine.” 

(H.  Krishna  Sastri,  South  Indian  images  of  gods  and 
goddesses,  p.  2.  For  this  reference  I am  indebted 
to  Prof.  B.  Wh  Frazer)* 

AEDHA-^ALA-A  half-hall,  an  antechamber  with  one  or  mure 
closed  sides. 

Ardha-tala  vi'sesho’sti  ohordhva-sala-samanvitam  I 
Madhya-koshthe  (tha)  dvi-partve  tu  chardha-sala-samanvitam  \ 

(M.  XX.  67,  73). 

Netra-'salardha-^ala  cha  bhadra-taladi-bhushitam  \ (M.'ixxvi.  67). 
Bhadra-tala  maha-nasi  chardha-^aladhyalankritam  I (M.  XXV.  34). 
AED'HA-HABA — A half  chain,  an  ornament. 

Nakshatra-malam  api  chardha-haram  \ 

Suvarna-sutram  paritah  stanabhyam  \ (M.  L.  297-298). 

ALAKSHA — A member  of  the  entablature  I 

Etat  tu  sarvato-bhadram  alakshakritir  ihochyate  I 
Tad  eva  karnava^ad  vam&am  prastiryat  tu  sarvatah  I 
Uttaraih  prag-uktahghrih  syat  tad-vatat  parito  nyaset  I 
Tad  evantam  alaksham  cha  karnayo^  chottaram  vina  I 

(M.  XVI.  186-188). 

ALANKAEA-MANDAPA—The  dressing  room,  an  attached  hall  or 
detached  pavilion  of  a temple  where  the  idols  are  dressed, 

(H.  S.  1. 1,  vol.  I,  p.  127,  first' para,  see  under  Mandajpa). 


54 


AlilNI>A 


ALINI)A(KA)--A  corridor,  a terrace,  a balcony,  a gallery. 

(1)  ‘ Alinda-'sabdena  'sala-bhitter  babye  ya  gamanika  jaiakavrit- 
angana-sammukha  kriyate’  (commentary  on  Bribat-sambita  or 
Kirana-tantra,  see  below) — By  tbe  word  * alinda  ’ is  understood, 
tbe  lattice-coYered  path  beyond  tbe  wall  of  a hall  and  facing 
(or  in  front  of)  the  court-yard.  Compare  ‘ Amarakosba  ^ 
(2,  2,  12), 

2)  ‘ Senapati-nripatlnam  saptati-sabite  dvidba-krite  vyase  \ 
^ala-cbatur-da'sa-brite  paficba-trimfead-vrite  ’(a)lindab  11 
“ Add  the  number  of  70  to  those  for  tbe  breadth  of  tbe  man- 
sions of  the  King  and  tbe  Commander-in-chief.” 

Tbe  same  is  more  plainly  expressed  in  Vi&vak : 

“ Write  down  tbe  sum,  at  two  places.  Divide  it,  at  one  place, 
by  14 ; this  gives  tbe  measure  for  a ball.  Divide  tbe  sura 
by  35 ; tbe  quotation  is  tbe  measure  of  tbe  terrace.  ” 
Pramitam  tveka-ljalam  tu  ^ubbadam  tat  prakirtitam  \ 
Senapati-nripadinam  saptatya  sabite  krite  II 
Vyase  cbaturda^a-brite  &ala-manam  vinirdi^et  I 
Paftoba-triiiisad-hrite’nyatralinda-manam  bhaveob  cba  tat  II 
“ The  word  might  as  well  be  rendered  by  balcony,  gallery.  ” 

(Kern,  Bribat-sambita,  Llli.  17 ; J.  B.  A.  S.  (K.  S.) 

Yol.  VI.  p.  282,  note  3). 

Apratisbiddhalindam  samantato  vastu  sarvato-bbadram  I 
“ An  edifice  with  uninterrupted  terraces  on  every  side  is 
termed  Sarvato-bbadra,” 

Nandyavartam  alindaib  sala-kudyat  pradakshinantargataih— 
“ Nandyavarta  is  the  name  of  a building  with  terraces  that 
from  the  wall  of  tbe  room  extend  to  tbe  extremity  in  a 
direction  from  east  to  south  (alias  from  left  to  right).” 

The  Yardbamana  has  a terrace  before  tbe  (chief)  entrance, 
extending  to  the  end  ;;then,  when  you  proceed  in  a direction 
from  left  to  right,  another  beautiful  terrace,  and  there  on, 
again,  another  in  the  aforesaid  direction.” 


AtiINDA 


55 


“ The  Svastika  is  auspicious,  it  ii  iiave  the  terrace  on  fclie  east 
side,  and  one  continual  terraoe  along  the  west  side,  at  the 
ends  whereof  begin  two  other  terraces  going  from  west  to 
east,  while  between  the  extremities  of  the  latter  lies  a fourth 
terrace.” 

“ The  Euchaka  has  a western  and  eastern  terraoe  running  to 
the  end,  and  between  their  extremities  two  others.” 

(BH.  VV.  31.35,  pp.  ‘385-286). 

(3)  Agni-Purana,  chap.  106.  v.  20-24 : 

Chatuh-talam  tri-talam  va  dvi-&alam  chaika-talakam  \ 
Ghatuh-tala-grihanam  tu  talalindaka-.bhedatah  II 
Sata-dvayam  tu  jayante  pafiohatat-panoha  teshvapi  I 
Tri-talani  tu  chatvari  dvi-talani  tu  pahchadha  11 
Bka-tala'ni  chatvari  ekalindani  vaohmi  oha  I 
Ashta-vimtad-alindani  grihani  nagarani  oha  II 
Chaturbhih  saptabhit  ohaiva  pahoha-panolia&ad  eva  tu  1 
Shad-alindani  vimtaiva  ashtabhir  vimta  eva  hi  II 
Ashtalindaih  bhaved  evam  nagaradau  gfihani  hi  t 
(41  Kamikagama,  xxxv; 

Asam  ( = talanam)  agre  tu  alinda(h)  syuh  pradhane  va  visesha- 
tah  \ 

Bka-dvi-tri-chatush-pafioha.shat-saptalinda-samyutah  tl  37 
Prishthe  parsve  tathaiva  syuh  ishta-dete’thava  punah  I 
Prithu-dvaral  oHa  dvarams  cha  evam  eva  prakalpayet  It  38 
Alindah  prithu-dvarena  samo  va  ohardha-manatah  II  44 
Alinde  dvaram  evaih  syad  anyatrapy-evam  eva  tu  II  49 
Alindasya  samantat  tu  bhagenaikena-varakam  II  77 
See  also  ibid.  l.  74,  75,  87. 

Ibid.  Lv.  201  (the  synonyms  of  alinda) : 

......andharam  griham  adyakam  I 

Parimandana(m)  salinda  va  alindasyabhidanakam  II 
(6)  Chantarale  tvalindake  \ (M-  Lxix.  8). 

Urdhvordhva-talanam  tu  chaika-bhagenalindakam  \ 

(M.  XXIV.  45,  etc). 


56 


ALFA 


(6)  See  the  views  of  the  corridors  (Pallava  Architecture,  Arch. 
Surv.  New.  Imp.  Series,  vol.  xxxiv.  plates,  vi,  Vii,  viii,  ix). 
ALFA — A class  of  buildings. 

(Kamikagama,  XLv.  53-54,  see  under 
ALPA-NA-SIKA— (see  Nasa)— A small  nose,  a small  vestibule. 
Chatiir-dikshu  chatur-dvaram  chatuh-shashty-alpa-nasikam  I 

(M.  XXXIV.  106). 

AVACHGHHAYA-A  light  shadow. 

Kanya-vrishabha-rnasau  cha-avachchhaya  na  vidyate  1 
Meshe  cha  mithune  chaiva  tula-simha-chatushtaye  I 
Bvaiii  hi  dvyahgulam  nyastam  vyiscMkashadha-mmayoh  I 
Chatur-ahgulam  prakartavyam  dhanuh-kumbhau  shad  angulam  I 
Makare’shtangulaih  proktam  avaehchhayam  viteshatah  1 

(M.  ?L  31-35). 

Compare  Vitruvius,  Book  ix,  Chap,  viii,  under  Sanht, 
AYALAMBANA—A  pendant. 

Babu-valaya-dama(m)  cha  skandha-malavalambanam  \ 

(M.  L.  15). 

AVASATHA— The  rest  house,  a house  (see  Pratiiraya). 
Ramyamavasatham  chaiva  datvamuih  lokamatritah — 

“Having  given  away  a charming  house,  he  attained  the 
other  world”.  (Hemadri  p.  646). 

Ramyamt  chavasathan  datva  dvijebhyo  divam  agatah — 

“ Having  given  away  charming  houses  to  the  twice-born  and 
_gone  to  heaven  (Mbh.  Anu^asanika-parvan,  chap.  137,  v.  10). 

(Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xii.  p.  142,  C.  1-2). 
AYASANA — (see  Mancha)— A synonym  of  the  Mancha  or  a raised 
platform  (M.  xvi.  43), 

ASVATTHA.VRIRSHA--The  holy  fig  tree. 

Referring  to  the  Bauddha  images  ; 

Sthanakam  chasanam  vapi  simhasanadi-samyutam  I 
Asvattha-vriksha-samyuktam  kalpa-vyiksham  tatha  nyaset  \ 

(M.  LVI.  3-4> 


ASHTA-TAXjA 


67 


ASHTA-TALA— The  ©ighfch  storey. 

(Mana-sara,  xxvi.  146,  see  under  Prmada). 

The  description  of  the  seventh  floor  • 

Evam  ^reshitham  tvashta-tale  sarvalankara-sathyutam  \ 
Janmadi-stupi-paryantam  chahga-manam  ihochyate  \ 
Saikaah^a-^paflohakamta-harmye  tungafli  vibhajite  I 
Xdharam  chashta-bhagena  vedaihtam  charanSyatam  I 
Tad-ardham  valabhyutsedham  sardhajh  vahnyaihlam  anghrikam  I 
Sa-tri-padamsakam  mancham  flrdhve  padam  giinamtakam  I 
Tad-ardham  chordhva-maftoham  syat  tri-padakshaiighri-tungakam  I 
Sa-padam&am  prastarottuflgaih  dvyardham&am  charanayatam  I 
Tad-ardham  prastarotsedham  janghayamam  oha  sardhakam  I 
Prastaram  chaika-bhagena  dvyam&a-padadhik5ughrikam  I 
Urdhva-manoham  tri-padaih  syat  sa-bhagam  pada-tungakam  \ 
Ekaihijam  prastarotsedham  tad-tirdhve  oha  tri-bhagikam  1 
Tat-tri-bhagaika(a)  vedim(h)  syad  dvi-bhagam  gala-tungakam  \ 
Sa-padafli  ohamtakam  chordhve  &irah-tesham  feikhodayam  I 
Keohit  tad  eva  tunge  tu  sapta-bhagadhikam  tatha  I 
■Ordhvordhva-pada-mula  tu  yuktyam&eua  mastlrakam  \ 

Talanam  chaika-bhagena  karna-harmyavritam  nyaset  I 
AntaraCm)  prastaropetam  sarvalahkara-samyutam  \ 
Tasyantasyaika-bhagena  kuryad  avartyalindakam  I 
Mule  bhage  padamtena  chordhve’rdha-tal&m'sakam  \ 
Hetra-&alardha-tala  cha  bhadra-saladi-bhuahitam  \ 

Tbranair  nida-taladi  nasikabhir  alankritam  I 
Kosht(h)o  taladi-madhye  oha  chordhva-kala  cha  manditam  I 
Nasika-panjara-tala  kuta-kostlie  tu  bhushitam  I 
Nasika-pafijaradyasya  bhadra-^alyair  alaiikritam  I 
Kshudra-feala-prade&a  tu  sarvalaukara-samyutam  1 
Karna-kutanga-madhye  tu  nasika-panjaranvitam  I 
Sarvahgam  kshudra-n^syaflgam  prastaralankriti-kriya  \ 
Nanadhishthana-samyuktam  nana-padair  alankritam  \ 
Nagara-dravi^adinam  vesaxadip,  likhanvitam  I 


58 


ASHTA-TAIiA 


Sarvilankara-sarnyuktam  purvavat  parikalpayefi  I 

(M.xxvi.  47-76). 

ASHTA- TALA— (see  under  Tala-mana)—K  kind  of  sculptural 
measurement  in  which,  the  whole  height  of  an  idol  is  generally 
eight  times  the  face. 

ASHTA-TRIM^AT-KALA— Thirty-eight  kinds  of  mystic  marks. 

Padadi-murdha-paryanta(m)  paryayadi-chaksharam  nyaset  I 

Ashta-trimtat-kalah  sarvas  tat-tad-ahgani  vinyaset  I 

(M.  Lxx.  90-91). 

ASHTA-YAEO-A — The  eight  component  parts  of  a single  storeyed 
building,  namely,  adhishthana  (basement),  ahghri  (dwarf  pillar), 
prastara  (entablature),  griva  (a  platform  or  neck),  tikhara  (spire), 
stupi  (dome),  grlva-mancha  (a  projecting  seat  at  the  neck)  and 
vedika  (a  raised  platform)  (M.  xix.  80-85). 

ASH'J'AS(S)RA-'Bigth-corn6rd,  a kind  of  single  storeyed  building 
which  is  octangular  in  plan  and  has  one  cupola. 

(1)  Brihat-samhita,  Lvi.  28,  and  Ka&yapa,  J.  R,  A.  S.  (N.  S.) 

vol.  VI,  p.  320,  note  1 (see  under  Prasuda). 

(2)  Matsya-purana,  chap.  269,  vv.  29,  53  (see  under  PrCudda). 

(3)  Bhavishya-purana,  chap,  130,  v.  25  (see  under  Ptdsdda), 

ASA'^ICHITA— A class  of  buildings  in  which  the  height  is  the 

standard  of  measurement,  the  temples  in  which  the  main  idol  is 
in  the  erect  posture. 

(M,  XIX,  7-11 ; XXX,  173-174,  see  under  ApasamoHla), 

Pratyekam  tri-vidham  proktam  samchitam  chapyasamohitam 
upasamchitam  ityevam  I 

(Kamikagama,  XLV.  6-7). 

Al!kl6A— A part,  one  of  the  six  Varga  formulas.  (See  undLeiShadvarga). 

AM^ARU — The  rim,  the  edge. 

cf.  Darpanam  suvrittam  syad  ambaru  kimchidunnatam  I 

(M,  L.  117). 

AlElSUKA-  - A moulding  of  the  pedestal,  generally  placed  between  a 
cyma  and  a corona  (kapota).  (M.  xv.  122,  see  under  UpapUha). 


AchchhIdana 


m 

A 

AGAJRA— A house,  a room,  a oell. 

For  syaonyms  see  Amara-kosha,  (ii,  2,  5). 
ci  (1)  Eamayana  (Dock): 

V.  8,  18 : jKoshthagaravatam&ikam uagarim  I 

II.  8,44:  Kosh^hagara-yudhagaraih  kfitva  saihnichayan 
bahun  I 

YL  127,56 : Aneka-^afeam  bhavan  ko&am  koshfchagaram  griham 
balam  I 

(2)  Mahabharata  (Cook) : 

XII.  69,54  : Bhandagara-yudhagaran  yodhagaraihfe  oha  sarva'aah  ! 

Alivagaran  gajagaran  baladhikaranani  cha  I 
XII.  86,121 : Bhandagara-yudhagaran.prayatnenabhivardhayel;  I 
I.  134,11 : Prekshagaram  suvihitam  chakrus  te  tasya  Silpinah  I 
Eajdah  sarvayudhopetam  strinam  chaiva  nararshabha  II 
I.  134,14 : Mukta-jala-parikshiptam  vaidurya-mani-^obhitara  I 
Bata-kumbhamayam  divyam  prekshagaram  upagatam  l( 
IV.  23,16  : Yad  etan  narfeanagaram  matsya-rajepa  ka'ritam  \ 
Bivya-atra  kanya  nrityanti  ratrau  yanti  yathagyiham  II 

(3)  Manasara  (xxv.  29  etc.) 

Tale  tale  bhadra-koshtha&ramagaram  parikirtitaih  \ 

(4)  Dharmma-sastra-prachoditaih  yogi-(a)garam  idam  proktam 

stiribhih  parivesh^itam  \ 

“ Agara,  abode,  room,  covered  place,  cell.  Fleet. 

(Skt.  and  OldjiOanarese  inscriptions,  no.  oxxx,  line  3,  Ind. 
Ant.  Yol.  XIII,  p.  222,  note  44). 

(5)  Vikhyata  ^a'ntalakhya  sa  Jinagaram  akarayat — The  celebra- 

ted lady  had  this  Jina  temple  made.  ” 

(Ep.  Oarnat.  vol.  ii,  no.  62,  Eoman  text.  p.  59,  last  line, 
Translation  p.  148,  last  line). 

ACH0HHA,DANA— A roof,  the  8th  covering  moulding  from  the  top 
of  the  entablature  (Kamikagama,  ny.  2,  see  under  Prasada), 


60 


IDIKA 


ADIKA — A fast  conveyance. 

Adikam  syandanaih  feilpi(n)  feibika  cha  rathaih  tatha  \ 

Sarvair  yanam  iti  khyatam  feayanajn  vakshyafce  tatha  \ 

(M.  in.  9-10). 

A(E)DEA-PUSHAKEITI— (see  under  Linga) — A kind  of  phallus 
looking  like  the  rising  sun. 

Lihgakaram  ihochyate 

Daivikam  dipdimakaram  manu8h(am)a(r)dra-pushakriti(h)  I 

(M.  nil.  237,  240). 

ADHAEA — ^Tiie  basement, 

Dvitalanain  alankaram  vakshye  samkshipyate’dhuna  I 
TJpanadi-stupi-paryantam  ashpvim&ad  vibhajite  I 
Adharoohcham  gunam&am  syat  pada-tuhgam  shad-am§akam  I 

(M.  XX,  1,  3-4), 

Janmadi-stiipi  paryantarii  changa-manam  ihochyate  \ 
Saikashta-panchakaih^am  harmye  tuhgaih  vibhajite  1 
Adharam  ohashta-bhagena  vedamfeaih  charanayatam  i 

’ (M.  XYi.  48.60). 

Utfcaram  vajanadharam  adheyaih  feayanaih  tatha  I 
Uddhritam  oha  murdhakam  ohaiva  maha-tauil  svavam&akam  I 
Praohchhadanasy(am)  adharam  etat  parySyam  iritam  I 

(M,  XVI.  66-68.) 

Parimana-virodhena  rekha-vaishamya-bhushita  1 
Adharas  tu  chatur-dvarati  chatur-mandapa-feobhitah  il 
Sata-ferihga-samayukto  Meruh  prasada-uttamah  \ 

Mandapg-s  tasya  karttavya  bhadrais  tribhir  alahkritaCh)  li 
Ghatanakara-mananam  bhinna  bhinna  bhavanti  te  (prasadiih)  \ 
Kiyanto  yeshu  chadhara  niradharas  cha  kechana  ll 

(Oaruda-Purapa,  chap.  47,  V.  38-40). 

Valabhl  chhadiradharah  I 

(Hemaohandra-Abhidhana-ohintamani,  1011,  Pet.  Diet). 
ADHI — Foundations. 

(An  inscription  from  Dabhoi,  verse  in,  Bp.  Indie,  vol.  I,  p.  81, 
see  foot  note,  p.  24). 


IPANA 


61 


AND  OLA— A swing  or  hammoels:. 

Tad-urdliT6  pati^ik&m  nyasya  kflagre  oha  kabandhanam  \ 
CbaturbMh  ferinkbala-yuktam  Mdolam  obaikatopari  I 
Deva-bhti-sEra-bhupinam  anyesham  &ayan§rfehakam  { 

(M.  XLiy.  6941). 

ANDHAEA  (-BIEA)— A closed  veranda,  a balcony. 

Kamikagama,  L : 

Panjaro(ra&)  cbardha-bbago  va  tri-pado  vStha  bhagikab  | 
Alindandharikandbara-bara  bhagena  kalpitah  II  74 
Nava-bbaga-tri-bbago  va  vyasa-nali-gribanvitab  f| 

Babir  andbarikandbara-bara  bbagena  vis  tritab  II  76 
Paflobalindam  sbat-kndyam  babir  andbarikavyitam  II  8b 
Andbarandbari-harokta-kbanda-barmya-vi&esbitam  (vimanam)ll  91 
‘Acdbarika*  and  ‘ andbSra  * are  used  as  the  synonyms  of 
‘ griba-pindi  ’ and  ‘ alinda  ’ respectively,  (see  Kamikagama, 
LV.  201,  under  Alinda). 

APANA— ‘A  shop,  a market-place. 

(1)  Eamayana  (Cook)  : 

II.  6. 12  ; Nana-panya-samyiddbesbu  vanijam  apanesbu  \ 

II.  14.  27  ; Samyiddba-vipanapanam ...(purim)  I 

II.  114.  13  : Samksbipta-vipanapanam  (Ayodbyam)  I 
VII.  43.  13  : Cbatvarapana-ratbyasu  1 
II.  71.  41 : Malyapanesbu  rajante  nadya  panyani  v5  tatba  | 

II.  42.  23  : Samvyitapana-vedikam ..purim  \ 

II.  41.  21 : Samvyitapana-vitbika  I 

I.  6rl0  : Su-vibbaktantarapanam ...(purim)  I 

II.  67.15  : Anvantarapanam  I 
YI.  112.  42  : (Ayodbyam)  sikta-ratbantarapanam  \ 

YII.  101.  13  ; 'Ubbe  (Tal&ba&ila  and  Pusbkalavati).^^ ...su- 

vibbaktantarapane  t 

(2}  *Eajatarauginb  I.  201  etc,  : Eiddbapanam. 


.nagaram  | 


62 


APANA 


(3)  Mahabharata  (ibid)  : 

XII.  86.  8:  Chatvarapana-feobhitam  (puram)  1 

XIII.  30.  17  : (Varanasim) .samyiddba-vipanapanam  \ 

II.  21,  25 : Malyapananam  cba  dadri&ub  §riyam  ufctamam  \ 
IX.  26.  33  ; Vipanyapana-panyanam  I 

Comm.  Nilakantba  ; Vipanaib  panya-vltbika  \ 

Apana  battab  panyani  vikreya-dravyani  I 

(4)  Vapi-kiipa-tadaga-kuttima-matha-prasada-satralayan  I 
Sauvarna-dbavja-torapapana-pura-grama-prapa-mandapau  I 

vyadbapayad  ayam  Cbaulukya-cbudamauib  I 

(Sridbara’s  Beva  pattana  Prasasti,  verse  10,  Ep.  lud.  vol.  ii,  p. 

440-441). 

APANA— A tavern,  a liquor-shop,  a watering  station,  huts  on  road 
sides  where  drinking  water  is  distributed  gratis. 

l)6vanam-piye  Piyadasi  laja  bevam  aba  (:)  magesu-pime  nigobani 
lopapitani  (:)  obbsyopagani  bosamti  pasumunisanam ; amba- 
vadikya  lopapita  (;)  adhak(o)s(i)kyani  pi  me  uda-panani  (2) 
kbanapitani  (;)  nimsidbiya  cba  kalapita  (;)  apanan  ime  babukani 
tata  tata  kalapitani  pa^ibbogaye  pasu-munisanam  (.) 

“ Apana  cannot  have  here  its  usual  meaning,  namely,  tavern, 
liquor-sbop.” 

“ As  professor  Kern  (Der  Buddbismus,  vol,  ii,  p.  386)  assumes,  it 
must  denote  a watering  station.  Probably  the  huts  on  the  roads 
are  meant,  where  water  is  distributed  to  travellers  and  their 
beasts  gratis  or  against  payment.  The  usual  Sanskrit  name  is 
prapa,”  Dr.  Bubler. 

(Pillar  edict  of  Asoka.  no.  vii,  line  2-3  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  ii.  pp.  270, 
274). 

ABHAl^G-A— (see  under  and  Bhanga)"A  pose  in  which 

the  idol  is  slightly  bent. 

Sarvesbam  deva-devin§m  bbanga-manam  iboobyate  I 

jS.bhanga-sama-bhangam  cba-ati-bbangam  tridba  bbavet  II 

(M.  LXVU.  96.96), 


ABHASA 


63 


A.BHASA — One  of  fehe  nine  materials  of  whicli  idols  are  made,  a 
marble,  a class  of  buildings  etc. 

A class  of  buildings  : 

(1)  Etaj  jati-vatat  prokfeam  cbEandadinam  tantikotsedham  I 

Kava-tale  tri-paficha-Yidham  vai  vipulam  kanyasadi-tresh- 
tharii  pravaksbyate  I 

Eramatas  tri-padam  ardha-karaih  padam  cha  (m)idam  sam- 
kalpam  abhasam  idam  1 (M.  ix.  103-104), 

Eka-bhumi-Yidbim  Yaksbye  laksbanam  Yaksbyate’dbnna  I 
Jatit  cbbandam  vikalpam  tu  cbabhasam  tu  cbatnr-Yidbam  I 
PiirYa-bastena  sam-ynktam  barmy  am  jafcir  iti  smritam  I 
Cbbandam  tri-pada-bastena  Yikalpam  syat  tad-ardhakam  1 
Abhasam  ohardba-hastena  barmyadinam  tu  manayet  \ 

(M.  XIX.  1-6). 

Eka-tri-padam  ardbam  cba  pada-bastam  yatba-kramam  I 
Jatit  cbbanda(m)  vikalpam  cba-abbasam  obatur-vidbam  I 
Etab  tad  eva  samyuktam  barmyanam  mana-kalpanam  \ 

(M.  XXX.  176-177). 

Pavilions  of  some  particular  shape  : 

Devanam  bhu-suranam  cba  mandapam  jati-rupakam  I 
Bbupanam  mandape  sarve  cbhanda-rupam  itiritam  1 
Vaityakanam  tu  sarvesbaih  vikalpam  cbeti  katbyate  \ 
^iidranam  mandapam  sarvarii  cbabhasam  iti  kirtitam  I 

(M.  XXXI v.  647-660). 

In  connection  with  doors  : 

Sapta-vim&odayam  by-evam  tad-ardbam  vistritam  bbavet  I 
Evam  jati-va&at  prol^tam  cbbandadinaih  pravaksbyate  I 
Trayovimfea-tatantam  syacb  cbbanda-dvara-vitalakam  \ 
Panoha-vimtangulam  arabhya  dvi-dvyangula-vivardbanat  I 
Eka-vimkangulam  arabhya  dvi-dvyanguia-vivardbanat  I 
Bka-vim&a(m)-tatantarii  syad  vikalpa-dvara-yistyitam  \ 
Nava-panktyangulam  arabhya  dvi-dvyangula-vivardbanat  I 
Eka-panktyanguladbikyam  tatantam  abbasa -vistritam  I 

(M.  XXXIX.  28-36). 


64 


ABHASA 


In  connection  with  the  phallus  : 

Jatich-ohhanda-vikalpam  cha-abhasam  tu  chatur-vidham  1 

(M.  Lii.  49). 

A kind  of  marble  of  which  idols  and  statues  are  made  ; 
Brahma-Yishnu-mahe§anam  lakshanam  vakshyate’dhuna  I 
Hiranya-raiatenaiva  tamrenaiva  sile  vapi  I 
Darve  va  sudhe  vapi  tarkarabhasa-mrittika  I 
Etais  tu  navadha  dravyai(§)  chottamadi  trayaih  trayam  I 
Chalam  chapy-aohalaih  chapi  nava-dravyais  tu  nirmitah  I 
Lohajair  mrit-sudha  chaiva  sarkarabhasa-mrittika  I 
Chala-dravyam  iti  proktam  anyesham  chaohalam  viduh  I 

(M.  LI.  1-7). 

Three  kinds  : 

O'hitraugam  ardha-ohitrahgam  abhasahgam  tridhochyate  I 
Sarvahgam  dritya-manam  yat  chitram  evam  prakathyate  | 
Ardhahga-dri'syamanam  cha  tad  ardha-chitram  iti  smritam  \ 
Ardhardha-darsauam(dri§ya)-manam  abhasam  iti  kathyate  I 

(M.  LI.  8-11). 

Uttamam  lohajam  bimbam  pithabhasam  tu  ohottamam  1 

{Ibid,  19). 

Of.  Eka-kale  kritaiii  sarvam  sudha-mrit-kata-§arkaraih  \ 

ilbid.  24-26). 

Beranaih  dravyam  ityuktam lohaja  ya  tiie’thaya  I 

Darvabhasa-ratnena  8udha-mnt-ka^a-tarkara(aih)  \ 

Ghanam  vapy-aghanam  yapi  kuryat  tu  tilpi(a)yit-tamahj 

(M.  Lxii.  16-17). 

(2)  Silodbhavanam  v(b)imbanam  chitrabhasasya  ya  punah  I 
Jaladhiyasanaih  proktam  yrishendrasya  prakirtitam  II 

(Lihga-Purana,  part.  II  (Uttara-bhaga),  chap.  48,  y.  43). 

(3)  Pratima  saptadha  prokta  bhaktanam  feuddha-yriddhaye  I 
ICahchani  rajati  tamri  parthiyi  &ailaja  smrita  l| 


ABHASA 


66 


Virkshi  chalekliyaka  Yeti  murfei-sfelaaiiaBitsa-'pta  vai  I 
‘ Alekhyaka’  and  ‘ abhasa’  seem  to  have  the  same  meaning 
and  indicate  the  same  material. 

(Bhavishya-Purana,  chap.  131.  v.  2,  3). 

(4)  Indhanani  cha  vinyasya  palalani  oha  vinyaset  I 

Tasmin  loshtani  vinyasya  palalaia  chhadayet  punah  II 
Palalabhasakaih  pa&chad  brihyabhasais  tushais  tatha  j 
Aohchhadyadbhir  atha  sinchech  chhakham  prajjvalayet  punah  II 
(Vastu-Yidya,  ed.  Ganapati  Sastri,  xvi.  32-33). 
(6)  Another  class  of  buildings  : 

(Jati)  Ghhandam.  Yikalpam  Abhasam  ekaike  tu  dvi- 
samkhyakam  1 

(Kamikagama,  l.  13). 

A class  of  kuta-koshtha  or  top-room  being  a combination  of  the 
Ghhanda  and  Vikalpa  classes  (Kamikagama,  LV.  130, 
123-127,  see  under  Karna-kuta). 

(6)  Suprabhedagama,  xxxiv.  3-4  (refers  to  the  image  of  Itvara) : 
Ghitraih  chitrardham  eYam  tu  chitrabhasaih  tathaiva  cha  1 
SarvaYayava-sampurnam  drisyam  taoh  chitram  uohyate  II 
ArdhaYayava-samdrityam  ardha-chitram  ohaiva  cha  I 
Pate  bhittau  cha  yo  (al)  likhyam  chitrabhasam  ihoohyate  II 
Exactly  similar  definitions  are  giYeii  in  the  Manasara,  but 

therein  * abhasa  ’ refers  to  a material  of  which  an  idol 
is  made,  whereas  in  this  Agarna,  ' abhasa  ’ refers  to  the 
image  itself. 

Materials  of  which  images  are  made  : 

Mrinmayam  yadi  kuryaoh  ohech  chhulana(m)  tatra  prakal- 
payet  I 

Lohajam  cha  viteshena  madhuchchhishtena  nirraitam  I 

ribid.Slj. 

(7)  Lohajatve  madhuohohhishtam  agninardrikritas  tu  yat  I 
Vastrena  todhayet  sarYam  dosham  tyaktva  tu  ^ilpina  Ij 

(Karanagama,  XI.  41). 


5 


AJBHASA 


(8)  Murfeis  tu  vriksha-pashana-loha-dravyaih  prakarayet  I 

The  image  should  be  made  of  materials  like  timber,  stone,  and 
iron. 

(Silpa-feastra-sara-samgraha,  xi.  6), 

(9)  Sauvarni  rajati  vapi  tamri  ratnamayi  tatha  \ 

Saili  darumayi  chapi  loha-sisa-mayi  tatha  II 
Eitika-dhatn-ynkta  va  tamra-kamsa-mayi  tatha  \ 
Sndha-darn-mayi  vapi  devatarcha  pra&asyate  II 

(Matsya-Pnrana,  chap.  258,  V.  20-21). 

(10)  Mrinmayl  darn-ghatita  lohaja  ratnaja  tatha  II 
^ailaja  gandhaja  chaiva  kaumudi  saptadha  smrita  I 
Kamaamayi  gandhaja  chaiva  mrinmayi  pratima^  tatha  II 

(Agni-Pnrana,  chap.  43.  v.  9-10). 

(11)  Mrinmaye  prativ(b)imbe  tu  vaset  kalpa-yutam  divi  I 
Daru-pashapia-dhatunam  kramad  da'sa-gunadhikam  11 
Myinmaye  vahane  datte  yat  phalaih  jayate  bhuvi  \ 

Danije  tad-dasa-gnnam  feilaje  tad-dasadhikam  11 
Eitika-kamsa-tamradi-nirmite  deva-vahane  I 

Eatte  phalam  apnoti  kramat  &ata-gunadhikam  II 

(Mahanirvana-Tantra,  xiii.  22,  30,  31). 

(12)  Svarnadi-lauha-bimbe  cha  deha-garbham  na  karayet  U 4 
Eash^ha-pashana-bimbe  cha  yat  sandhan  vidhir  uchyate  \\  6 
Tat  bimbe  cha  kfita  dravyam  avarnam  tamram  tu  mrinmaye  I 
i^aile  kashthe  ishtika-churnaih  biiribam  tatra  prachakshate  1 1 3 

(Bimbamana,  British  Museum,  Ms.  1.  558,  5292,  v.  4,  6 ; 
Ms.  2.  6291,  659,  v.  3). 

(13)  “Here  they  produced  a Lihga,  of  seven' metals  viz.  gold, 

silver,  tin,  lead,  copper,  iron  and  bell-metal*’’ 

(Sahyadri-khanda  of  the  Skanda-Purana,  Ind.  Ant. 
Vol.  Ill,  p.  194,  c.  1.  last  para). 

Of.  “ Again,  when  the  people  make  images  and  chaityas  which 
consist  of  gold,  silver,  copper,  iron,  earth,  lacquer,  bricks,  and 
stone,  or  ( ? and)  when  they  heap  up  the  snowy  sand  (lit, 


AYATANA 


67 


sand-snow,  ? abhasa),  they  put  in  images  or  chaityas  two 
kinds  of  §ariras  (relics)— (1)  the  relics  of  the  great  Teacher, 
and  (2)  the  GI-<Uha  of  the  chain  of  causation. 

■(Itsing’s  work,  ‘ Eecord  of  the  Buddhist  Eeligion,’ 
transl.  Takakusu,  p.  160,  quoted  by  V.  A.  Smith, 
Ind.  Ant.  Vol.  xxxiil.  p.  175). 

ALIhlG A —A  flat  moulding  resembling  the  fillet.  It  is  placed  alter- 
nately together  with  the  Antarita  and  is  inseparably  conuected 
with  the  latter  {see  Antarita). 

AYA— One  of  the  six  varga  formulas  (see  under  Shadvarga). 
AYAKA-SKAMBHA — A sort  of  pillar  (see  under  Stamhha). 
AYATANA — ^A  dwelling,  a temple  where  an  idol  is  installed. 

(1)  Purvena  phalino  vrikshah  kahira-vrikshas  tu  dakshine  I 
Pa&chimena  jalam  ^reshtham  padmotpala-vibhushitam  11 
Uttare  saralais  talaih  tubha  syat  pushpa-vatika  11 
Sarvatas  tu  jalam  treshtham  sthiram  asthiram  eva  oha  1 
Partve  chapi  kartavyam  parivaradikalayam  1 

Yamye  tapovana-sthfinam  uttare  matrika-griham  I 
Mahauasam  tathagneye  nairritye’tha  viuayakam  11 
Varune  trinivasas  tu  vayavye  griha-malika  1 
Uttare  yajfia-^ala  tu  nirmalya-sthanam  uttare  11 
Varune  soma-daivatye  bali-nirvapanam  smritam  1 
Purato  vrishabha-sthanam  Seshe  syat  kusumayudhah  11 
dale  vapi  tathaitSne  Vishnus  tu  jala-tayyapi  1 
Bvam  ayatanam  kuryat  kunda-mandapa-samyutam  11 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  28-34). 

(2)  Pafichayatana-madhye  tu  Vasudevam  nWekayet  1 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  43.  v.  1). 

(3)  Devatayatana-vapi-kupa-tadagadi-nirmanam  1 
(Narada-Purana,  part  I (purva-bhaga),  chap.  13,  Colophon). 

(4)  Ohatuh-shashti-padam  kuryat  devayatanam  sada  1 
(Bhavishya-Purania,  chap.  130,  v.  17  ; Brihat-samhita,  Lvi.  10). 
Pura-madhyam  samatiritya  kuryad  ayatanam  raveh  11 

(Bhavishya-Purana,  chap.  130,  v.  40;  see  also  v.  41). 


AYATANA 


(6)  (Oook)  : 

I.  6.13  : piiriin .....devayatanaife  chaiva  vimanair  api 

feobhitam  \ 

I.  13.37  : yajbayatana  \ 

I.  77.13:  devatayatanani  I 
II.  6.  4 : ferlmatyayatane  vislmoh  I 
11.  6.  11 : sitabhra-sikliarabheshu  devatayafcaneshu  \ 

II.  3.  18 : devayatana-cbaityeshu  J 

II.  26.  4:  obaityeshv-ayataneabTi  oba  \ 

IL  62.90:  tirtbany-ayatanani  oha  I 

II.  66.33  : Pbaityanyayatanani  oba  \ 

II.  71.42 : devayafeana-cbaityesbn  { 

VII.  101.16:  ubbe  purottame .....Aobbite  &obban!y^i&  cba 

dovayafeana-yistaraih  I 

(6)  Mahabharata,  II.  80,  30  etc.  (ibid) : 

Devayatana-obaityesha  \ 

(7)  Taittirlya-sambita,  2,  2,  6, 1 etc.  (Pefc.  Diet.)  : 

Devanam  evayatane  yatate  jayati  tarn  samgramam  \ 

(8)  ^atapatba-Brabmana,  4,  4,6,3;  6,2,  13  ; 6,2,1,  14;  12,  6, 

1,  17  etc.  (ibid)  :* 

Kupa  iva  bi  sarpanam  ayatanani  \ 

Chhandogya-upanisbad,  6,  8,  2 etc.  (ibid)  ; 

Sa  yatba  &akunih  sutrena  prabaddbo  difeam  di&am  pati- 
^t’eanyatrayatamnalabdbva  bandbanam  evopatrayate  \ 

(9)  ^ivasyayatanam  ramyarii  ebakre — “ built  a beautiful  temple 

of  ^iva.” 

(An  Abu  Inscrip,  of  the  reign  of  Bbimadeva  II,  Idd.  Aint. 
Tol.  XI.  pp.  221,  222). 

(10)  Obakarayatanam  ^ambbor.  ambhonidhi-samam  sarab — he 

built  the  temple  of  ^ambbu  and  a tank  equal  to  the  sea.” 

(Harsauda  Inscrip,  of  DeYapaladeva,  line  13 — 14, 
Ind.  Ant.  voLxx,  p.  312), 


AEAMA 


(11)  &i-Namgasvami  devayatanam  karaplfeaija  I 

‘ Tha  temple  of  the  illustrious  god  Nanigasvamin  was  caused 
to  be  made.’  * 

(Atpiir  Inscrip,  of  Sakti-kiimara,  line  1-2,;  Ind.  Ant. 
Vol.  XXXIX . p.  191). 

(12)  Some^varayatana-manclapam  uttarena  1 

(Cintra  Praiiasti  of  the  reign  of  Sarangadeva,  verses, 
40,  41,  42,  45,  72-  Bp.  Ind.,  VoL,  I,  p.  284). 
AYADI-EARMAN — The  consideration  of  Aya  and  other  formulas. 
(Se^  under  Shad-varga) ; cf . 

Bvam  tu  dandakaih  (gramam)  proktam  tasyayamam  ihoohyate  I 
Yistarad  dvi-dandena  yardhayed  dvigunantakam  I 
Yah  feubhayadi-karmartham  danda-hinadhikam  tu  va  I 

(M  IX.  12-14). 

AYABI-BHUSHANA—The  consideration  of  Aya  etc.. 

(See  under  Shad- yarga) ; of. 

Padanam  api  sarvesham  lakshanam  vakshyate’dhuna  1 
Ayamarii  oha  vi^alam  cha  ayadi  bhushanadikam  \ 

(M.  XV.  1-2). 

AYADI-SHAP-YARGA— The  Aya,  Yyaya,  Riksha,  Yoni,  Yara,  and 
Am§a  or  Tithi.  (See  under  Shad-varga);  cf. 

Evam  ayadi  ahad-vargam  kuryat  tatra  vichakshanaih(  nah)  \ 

’ ’ (M.ix.  74). 

AYIKA-PADA— A kind  of  pillar  (cf.  stambha). 

Yedam'aam  ohanghri-tuhgam  chardham  prastarotsedham  \ 
Tad-dvayam  ayika-p5daih  sardhamsam  prastaram  uttuhgam  \ 
Tad-urdhvahghri  gunam&am  tad-ardham  urdhva-manchochcham  i 

(M.  xxvin.  26-27). 

ARAMA — (cf.  Udyana) — A pleasure-garden,  a garden-house,  an 
orchard. 

(1)  Nagasya  vamake  yamye  kuryad  arama-defeakam  \ 

Pushpodyanam  tatah  kuryat  mukhya-bhallatake’pi  cha  I 
Nrittagaram  tatah  kuryan  naha-nrittahganani  cha  | 

(M.  XI..  119-121). 


abama 


(2)  Prantaeli-chhaya-vmir-mukta- na  manojna  jaksayah  I 
Yasmad  ato  jala-pranteshvaraman  vinive&ayet  II 

“ Conaidering  that  water  reservoirs  without  shade  on  the 
margin  are  not  loVely,  one  ought  to  have  gardens  laid  out 
on  the  banks  of  the  water. 

(Brihat-samhita,  lv.  1,  J.  B.  A.  S.  (N.  S.)  vol.  vi.  p.  312 

(3)  Kamayana  (Cook) : 

II.  61,  23  : aramodyana-sampannam rajadhanim  \ 

VII.  70, 13 : aramais  cha  viharai&  cha  tobhamanam(-naih) 
samantatah  \ 

Sobhitam.... purimll 

(4  Mahabharata  (ibid),  xii,  69,  11  etc.  ; 

Vihareshu arameshu  tathodyane  I 

(6)  G-arden : 

Kashte  kale  kaiavapy-abhibhavati  jagat  kiipa-vapi-tadagair 
asannara'ma-sattraih  sura-sadana-ma^hairm-manditayam 
amushyam ....  nagaryam  I 

(Dewai  Pratasti  of  Lalla  the  Chhinda,  verse  20,  Ep. 
Ind.  vol.  I.  pp.  79,  83). 

(6)  Pleasure-gardens,  houses,  orchards  : 

Aramany-atanot^saran  sarobhi^  sobhitamtaraih  \ 
Utphulla-kamja-kimjalka-pumja-pimjaritantaraih  II 

(Two  pillar  inscriptions  at  Amararvati,  no.  A.,  Inscrip, 
of  Keta  II.  verse  42,  Ep.  Ind.  vi.  p.  152). 

(7) .  Satra-prapa-prasraya-vrishotsargga-vapi-kupa-tadlagarama- 

devalayadi-karanopakaranartharii  cha  I 

(Cambay  Plates  of  Govinda  iv,  line  68,  Bp.  Ind. 
vol.  VII.  pp-  41,  46,). 

(8)  Krishnaya^asa  ar&ma,—-garden  (Sir  E.  C.  Bayiey,  Dr.  Vogel)  . 

vihdra  or  monastery,  (Sir  A.  Cunningham)  of  Krishnaya&a. 
(Book  Inscriptions  in  the  Kangra  valley,  the  Kanhiara 
inscrip.  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  vii.  pp.  117 — 118). 


ULINGA 


11 


(9)  Grove  (Dr.  Liiders)  : 

Yamoda-pushkaraninaih  paschima  pushkarani  udapano  aramo 

stambho  sila  pafcto  oha—  ‘‘ a tank, 

the  western  tank  of  these  twin  tanks,  a reservoir,  b,  grove,  a 
pillar  and  this  stone  slab  ” (was  caused  to  be  made). 

(Three  early  Brahmi  inscriptions,  iii,  Mathura  stone 
inscrip,  of  the  time  of  Sondasa,  lines  2 — 3,  Ep.  Ind. 
vol.  IX,  p.  247). 

(10)  Nana-de^a-prabhava-suphala-vrata-bharati-namra-vriksha- 

§reni-niyama-khaohitah  kila-samgupta-madhyah  \ 
Aramo’yam  surabhi-sumanoraii-samarajamanah  nana-virullaU- 
tasaranih  purna-kamah  sadastam  II  , 

(Inscriptions  from  Nepal,  no.  23,  Insorip.  of  Queen 
Lalita-tripura-sundari,  v.  2.  second  series,  Ind. 
Ant.  IX.  p.  194). 

ARSHA— "Beloging  or  relating  to  the  ascetics. 

A kind  of  phallus  (Kamikagama,  L.  30,  37,  see  under  Lihga ; 

M.  Lli.  232,  see  under  Lihga), 

ALAMBANA— The  base. 

Sarveshaiu  mukha-bhadranam  syat  lakshanam  vakshyate*  dhuna  li 
Sikharalambanaih  chadau  tat  palikavasanakam  \ 

(M.  xvm.  276-276  etc.). 

AliAYA— A temple,  a house. 

Ramekvaraya  ghanaman^apa-vapra-saudharamalayam  samatanot 
samatarasajnah — he  erected  a temple  (alaya).,  adorned  with  a 
solid  hall  (mantapa),  a wall  (vapra),  and  a plastered  mansion 
(saudha)  to  R§.mefevara. 

(Mangalagiri  pillar  inscrip,  v.  39,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  vi.  pp.  123, 114). 
A.DINGA — :(cf.  Antarita)— tA  moulding  like  the  fillet,  but  with  greater 
proiection. 

The  9th  moulding  from  the  top  of  the  entablature  (Kamikagama, 
Liv.  2,  see  under  Pmsdda). 

A crowning  moulding  of  the  pedestal  and  the  base  (e.g,,  M.  xin, 
126 ; XIV.  50,  etc.  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  AdhieMham 
and  UpapUha), 


72- 


AVASA 


A siniliar  moulding  of  a throne: 

Alingiintaritaih  ohordhve  prativajanam  uchyate  \ 

(M.XLy.  110), 

AVASA— 'A  residence,  a dwelling-house. 

Avasa-vasa-vesmadau  pure  grume  vanik-pathe  II 
Prasadarama-diirgeshu  devalaya-matheshu  dial 

(Garuda-Purana,  chap.  46,  v.  2,  3). 
Nirjagama  iiripavasan  manya-manah  priyam  mahafc  I 

(Eamayana,  II,  15— 28). 

AVRITA — (see  Prakara)^ — An  enclosure. 

6ikhare  chavrite  pare  sabha-mandapa-gopure ....  manayefc  I 

(M.  XVIII.  200  f). 

AVRITA-MANDAPA— An  open  pavilion  surrounding,  a building. 

(1)  Kamikagama,  XXXV : 

Evambhutasya  vasasya  samantan  mandapam  nay'et  11  97 
Paiicha-bhagavasanantam  kuryad  avrifca-mandapam  li  98 
Hasta-manena  va  kuryat  tri-hastad  arddha-vriddhifcah  I 
Paftcha-da^a-karantam  tu  kuryad  avrita-mandapam  II  99 
Mandapena  vina  vapi  tona  manena  pifchika  II  100 
■ (2)  Suprabhediigama,  xxxi.  137  : 

Prakara-bhittim  asritya  kuryad  avrita-mandapam  II 
ASRAMA — (see  under  Shoda&a-inandira-chakra)— A temple,  a hermi- 
tage, a dwelling.  A religious  establishment  comprising  the  main 
temple,  its  attached  tank,  kitchen,  alms-house,  guest-house, 
store-house,  cow  sheds,  halls,  dressing -houses  for  the  deity,  bed 
rooms  and  other  houses  and  flower  gardens,  orchards  and  the 
surrounding  walls. 

8iixebhyah  puratah  karyo  yasyagneyyam  mahanasam  1 
Va(?  ka)pi.nirgamane  yena  purvvatah  sat(t)ra-mandapam  li 
Gandha-pushpa-griham  karyyam  ai&anyam  patta-samyutam  I 
Bhandagaram  oha  kauberyyam  goahthagaraih  cha  vayave  It 
Udagasrayarh  cha  varunyam  vatayana-samanvitam  I 
Samit-ku^endhana-sthanam  ayudhanaih  cha  nairrite  II 
Abhyagatalayam  ramya-sa&ayyasana-padukam  I 
Toyagni-dipa-sad-bhrityair  yuktam  dakshinato  bhavet  11 


ASANA 


73 


G-rihantara;Qi  sarva^i  sajalaih  kadali-griliaili  I 
Panoha-varnais  oha  kusumaiK  sobhifcani  prakalpayet  n 
Prakaram  tad-bahir  dadyat  pancha-hasta-pramanatah  I 
Evam  vishnvasramam  kuryyad  vanaikohopavanair  yutam  It 

(Garuda-Purana,  chapter  46,  v.  14-19). 
ASEAMAGARA~A  class  of  the  seven  storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXV.  29,  see  under  P/dmt/a). 

ASANA  - A seat,  a throne,  a bed-stead,  a moulding,  a ground-plan,  a 
temple,  a type  of  dwellings,  a class  of  buildings,  a sitting  posture. 
(1)  Manasira : 

A class  of  the  throe  storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxx.  12— 31,  see 
under  Prasada). 

A class  of  buildings  in  which  the  breadth  is  the  standard  of 
measurement ; the  temples  in  which  the  idol  is  in  the  sitting 
posture  (M.  XIX.  7— 11,  sea  under  ‘ Apasamohita ’). 

A synonymi  of  Dayana  or  bed-stead  (M.  m.  10— '12,  see  under 
Dayana). 

Aground-plan  the  area  of  which  is  divibed  into  100  equal 
squares  : 

• Datamaih  tata-padam  syah  namanam(namna)  asanam  Iritam  \ 
(M.  VIII.  11,  see  details  under 

A moulding  of  the  base  (M.  xiv.  296,  see  under  Adhishthma). 
I'he  seat  underneath  the  base  of  a pillar  : 

Tan  (pillar’s) -mule  chasanam  kuryat  padukam  va  sahambujam  \ 

(M.  XV.  31). 

A seat  as  opposed  to  a bed-stead : 

Evam  tu  tayanadin^m  asananam  cha  darubhih(runi)  1 

(M.  XLiv.  74). 

A throne : 

Pevanam  bhu-patinam  cha  bhushanartham  tu  toranam  I 
Asanopari  vinyasya  sarveaham  toranam  I 

(M.  XLvi.  1,  3). 

toranam  r 

Pevanam  bhu-patinam  cha  sthanakasyasanasya  cha  \ 

(I6fd.  29— 30). 


74 


ISANA 


Devanawibhu-patmam  cha  sthanakasana-yogyakam  \ 
Mukta-prapanga-manam  oha  lakskanam  vakskyafee’dhuna  I 

(M.  XLvn.  1—2). 

Devanara  chakra vartyadi-bhii-palanaih  cha  yogyakam  I 
Kalpa-vrikshadinam  fearam  mjinam  lakshanam  uohyate  \ 
Torauodaya-padam  tu  padardhadhikodayam  I 
Bvaiii  trikahasya  tungasya  asanasyopari  nyasefc  I 
Asanayama-madhye  tu  toranasyopari  nyasefc  \ 

(M.  XLviii,  1—5). 

The  sitting  posture  (of  the  G-aruda  image) : 

Sthanakaiii  chasanam  chaiva  gamauam  cha  yathavidhi  \ 

(M.lxi.  19). 


Evam  proktarii  simha-rupam i 

Sayanam  va  sthanakam  ohasanara  va  i 


(M.  Lxiii.  44,  49). 

The  sitting  posture  in  connection  with  the  plumb-lines  : 
Sarvesharii  deva-deviniliii  riju-sthanakahi  chasane  I 
Mftna-sutra-vidhiiii  samyak(g  / lakshanaih  vakshyato’dhuna  I 

(M,  Lxvii.  1—2). 


(2)  Ramayana  (Cock) ; 

V.  16.  4 : Bahva8ana-kuthopetam............,...(a§oka-vanikam)  \ 

VII.  42.  16  f : Bahvasana-grihopetam... atoka  vanikam  \ 


pravisya  Raghu-nandanah  i 
Asane  cha  subhakare  pushpa-prakara-bhuahite  II 
Kii^astarana-samstirne  Ramah  samnisasada  ha  \ 

(3)  Katyayana-Srauta-sutra  (Pet.  Diet,)  Sabhasana  (4,  16,  33) ; 
Salasana  (7,  5,  8) ; Brahma-yajamanayor  asane  (1,  8,  27  ; 7,  4, 

32  ; 9,  9,  12,  4, 15  etc). 

(4)  Manu-samhita  (ibid) : 

Sahasana  (8,281  > ; Sahakhaljvasana  (8,367) ; Rahah 
sthanasanam  (6,69) ; asaneshupaklpiteshu  (3,208 ; and 
Kiimara-sambhava . 7,12)  ; Saihpraptaya  tvathithaye  pra- 
dadyad  asauodake  (3,99)  ; dadyach  chaivasanam  svakam 
(4,154) ; of  : 


ASTHlNA-MANDAPA  76 

Eajfio  mahatmike  sfctiane  sadyah  feaucham  -vidbiyate  I 
Prajanam  pariraksharfcham  asanam  ohanna-karanam  M (5,94) 
Amatya-mukham 1 

Sthapayed  asane  fcasmin  iva  nab  karye  kshane  ni-inam  II  (7,141) 

(5)  Bhagavadgifea  (ibid.),  6,11 : 

^ncbau  de&e  prafcishfchapya  sthiram  asanam  Stmanah  I 

(6)  Nalopakhy ana  (ibid)  6,4: 

Asanesbu  vividbeshvasinah  I 

(7)  Bagu-vam&a  (ed.  Cal.  Bibl.  134),  2,  6 : 

^ayyasane’dbyaebarite  preyasa  I 

Compare : padmasana;  bhadrasana,  vajrasana,  vJrasana,  and 
syastikasana  (see  M.  W.  Diet.  loo.  cit), 

(8)  Babn-batbika-asana  bhagavaljo  Mabadevasa— “ Tbe  seat  of 

tbe  blessed  Mahadeva  (under  tbe  banyan  tree)  Babuhastika 
(where  many  elephants  are  worshipping).’^ 

(Bbaraut  Inscriptions,  no.  160,  Ind.  Ant.  xxi.  p.  239). 
ASTHANA-MANDAPA— (see  under  ‘ Mandapa  ’) — ^An  assembly  hall. 

(1)  Astbana-mandapam  obaiva  cbatur-diksbu  vidiksbu  oba  I 

(M.  XXXII.  73). 

Sama^ram  vatba  vedatram  kuryad  astbana-mandapam  I 

(M.  XXXIV.  208). 

Astbana-mandapam  kuryat  pushkarinyam  oba  vayave  I 

(M.  XL.  118). 

(2)  Riksha-bballata-somesbu  bbaved  astbana-mandapam  I 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  191). 

(3)  See  first  Draksbarama  pillar  Inscrip.  1,  9,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  iv,  pp. 

329,  330,  under  ‘ Mandapa.’ 

(4)  A hall  (Vanapalli  Plates  of  Anna-Vema,  verse  10,  Ep.  Ind.  vol. 

III.  pp.  61,  59). 

Cf.  Astbana-sila-manddapa  (First  Draksbarama  pillar  Insorip. 
line  9,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  iv,  pp.  329,  330). 

(6)  cf.  “ The  curious  long  series  of  subterranean  chambers  to  the 
west  of  Chitaldoorg,  now  forming  part  of  the  Ankli  ma^ha,  are 


76 


IKSHU-KANTA 


deserving  of  notice.  They  are  approached  by  a good  stone 
stair  case,  which  leads  down  to  rooms  of  various  sizes  at 
different  levels.  In  these  are  shrines,  lihgas,  baths,  and 
pedestals,  the  latter  apparently  for  yogasana.” 

(Ep,  Carnat.,  vol.  xi,  Introdiict.  p.  31-32). 

IKSHU-KANTA — A class  of  the  six  storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXIV.  56,  see  under  ' Pnlsada’). 
INDEA-rEANTA— 'A  class  of  the  four  storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXII.  60-88,  see  under  ‘ Prasada’). 
A class  of  gopuras  or  gate-houses. 

(M.  xxxm.  658,  see  under  ‘ Gopura’). 
INBEA  KiLA(KA)-A; pin,  nail,  bolt. 

Phalaka  bhajanordhve  tu  tad-nrdhve  chondrakilakam  \ 

Tatah  pratima-samyuktaih  sthapayet  sthapatir  budhah  \ 

(M.xn.  126-126). 

An  iron  bolt : aratnir  indrakilah — the  iron  bolt  is  one  cubit  long 
(Kautiliya-Artha-sSstra,  chap,  xxiv,  p.  63). 
INDEA-KOSA  v ...  , . 

INDE.A  KOSHTHA  \ projection  of  the  roof  of  a house  forming  a 

kind  of  balcony. 

Attalaka-pratoli-madhye  tri-dhanushkadhishthanam  sapi-dhanaoh- 
chhidra-phalaka-samhatam  itindrako^am  karayet  i 

(Kautiliya-Artha-^astra,  chap,  xxiv,  p.  62). 
ISHTAKA  -Prick,  a building  material. 

(1)  Silabhis  oheshtakair  vapi  darubhib (M.  xxx.  96). 

Eka-dva-da&a-bhumyantam  cheshtake  dva-da§antatah  | 
Harmyam  nirmanato  vakshye  prathameshtaka-lakshanam  I 

(M.  XII.  i88-189). 

(^)  Trinadi-nirmitam  yo  dadyat  parame&vari  ) 

Varsha-koti-sahasrani  sa  vased  deva-ve&mani  II 
Ishtaka-griha-dane  tu  tasmaeh  chhata-gunam  phalam  I 
Tato’yuta-gunam  punyam  sils-geha-pradanatah  il 

(Mahanirvana-Tantra,  xiil.  24,  26). 


I^A-KANTA 


77 


(3)  '' The  following  written  declaration  (vyavastha)  is  (also) 

granted  (for  the  guidance  of  the  donee) : Mansions  of  burnt 
tiles  (briol^)  may  be  built  (without  special  permission) ; 

.......*......with, the  written  declaration  thus  defined 

(the  village)  wais  placed  in  the  (hands)  of  the  assembly  as  a 
deva  dana,  with  all  immunities,  to  the  (G-od)  MahadeYa  of 
the  Yajfie&vara  (temple).” 

(Velurpalaiyam  plates,,  lines,  47  to  63  ; no.  98,  K.  S.  1. 1.,  vol. 
II,  p,  612). 

(4)  “ Mansions  and  large  edifices  may  be  built  of  burnt  bricks.” 

(Tandantottam  Plates,  no.  99,  lines  26—38;  K.  S. 
I.I.,  vol.  Il,  p.  631). 

(-6)  “The  walls  of  the  temple,..., are  in  great  preservation, 

the  bricks,  which  compose  them,  are  of  well  burnt  red  earth, 
each  measuring  12  inches  by  7 and  14  thick,  disposed  with 
about  l/Stn  of  an  inch  of  chunam  between  them,  and  the 
layers,  being  quite  even,  look  as  if  the  plaster  had  just  been 
stripped  off.  ” 

Lieut.  Fagan  ('Oeylon  Govt.  Gazette,  Aug.  1,  1820^  after  des- 
cribing about  20  buildings  ('temples  and  edifices)  made  of 
• such  burnt  bricks  concludes  : 

“ I will  leave  it  to  the  curious  in  Oeylon  antiquities  to 
discover  the  reason  that  the  people,  who  built  these  great 
edifices,  should  take  the  trouble  of  making  so  many  millions 
of  bricks  for  the  work,  where  there  was  abundance  of  fine 
atone  well  calculated  for  their  construction  in  the  immediate 
neighbourhood.” 

(An  account  of  the  ruins  of  Topary,  Ind.  Ant.  vol. 
xxxYin.  p.p.  110,  c.  2,  line  12  f ; c.  2,  para  2). 

■ 1 • 

l^A-KANTA — A class  of  the  eleven  storeyed  buildings. 

(M,  XXIX.  10-11,  see  under  PrdsaJa), 


78 


ISVABA-KANTA 


I6VARA-KANTA— A ground-plan,  a class  of  buildings. 

A ground-plan  in  which  the  whole  area  is  divided  into  961  equal 
squares : 

.....ohaika  triihkat-vidhane  tu  I 

Eka-shash^i-sainadhikyam  padam  nava-^ata-yutam  I 

Evam  i&vara-kantam  syab.... \ 

(M.  VII.  46-48,  see  further  context  under  Pada-vinyCtsa) . 

A class  of  the  four  storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  xxn.  44-46,  see  under  Pramda). 

U 

UTTAMA-NAVA-TALA — ^A  sculptural  measurement ; in  this  system 
the  whole  height  of  an  image  is  divided  into  112  equal  parts 
which  are  proportionately  distributed  among  the  different  parts 
of  the  body  from  head  to  fpot.  The  measurement  of  breadth 
of  the  various  limbs  is  not  included  in  these  112  parts.  The 
measurement  of  the  arms  is  also  excluded  from  these. 

Eor  details  see  M.  lix.  14 — 64,  under  Tala. 

UG-BA-PITHA — A ground-plan  in  which  the  whole  area  is  divided 
into  36  equal  squares. 

(M.  VII,  7 ; see  further  details  under  Pada-vinyma). 

UCHCHHRAYA— A kind  of  pillar. 

Giri-&ikhara-taru-talattalakopatalpa-dvara-taranochchhraya — 
raised  places  of  shelter,  (Kielhorn  quotes  also  Drs.  Indraji  and 
Biihler  who  translate  ‘ Parana  ’ by  ‘ shelter  ’ and  ‘ uchohhraya  ’ 
by ‘ pillars  of  victory ’). 

(Junagadh  rock  Inscrip,  of  Rudradaman,  line  6,  Ep.  Ind. 
vol.  vm.  p.  p.  43,  46  and  note  3). 

UTTAMA-DAI^A-TALA — A soulpural  measurement  in  which  the 
whole  height  of  an  image  is  generally  divided  into  120  equal 
parts.  See  details  under  Tala  (M,  lxv.  2 — 179). 

UTTAMBHA — A kind  of  rectangular  building, 

Garuda-pinana  (chap.  47,  v,  21-22;  26-27,  see  under  Prasdda). 


UTTABA 


^9 


UTTABA — A rectangular  mouldjrig. 

It  is  used  sometimes  to  signify  the  whole  architrave  or  the  beam 
Le.  the  lowest  division  of  the  entablature,  which  extends  from 
column  to  column;  also  applied  to  the  moulded  frame  which 
bounds  the  sides  and  head  of  a door  or  window  opening.  It 
also  denotes  a particular  member  of  the  pedestal  and  entablature 
and  resembles  the  corona  or  the  square  projection  of  the  upper 
part  of  the  cornice,  having  a broad  and  vertical  face  generally 
plain,  (of : Bam  Baz.  Ess.  Arch.  Hind.  p.  26). 

(1)  Manasara  : 

A crowning  moulding  of  the  pedestal  : 

Uttaram  chamsakam  chordhve  kshepanardhadhikambujam  1 
Uttaram  ehardha-kampam  syat  tad-tirdhve  cha  saro-ruham  I 
(M.  xni.  67,  76  etc.  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 
under  UpapUha). 

A similar  moulding  of  the  column  : 

Adhishthanopari8ht(h)at  tu  chottaradho’vasanakam  \ 
Upapithoparisht(h)at  tq  janmadau  ohottarantakam  I 
PadaySmavasanaih  cha-adhishthanodayena  oha  1 

(M.  XV.  7-9). 

A similar  moulding  of  the  entablature  : 

Uttarordhve  chatush-pabcha-shat-saptashtakam  bhavet  t 
Purva-bhagika-manena  chottarochoham  gunam^akam  I 

(M.  XVI.  30,  69,  etc.  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 
under  ‘ Prastara  ’)• 

Its  synonyms  (or  terms  of  similar  signification)  : 

Uttaram  bhajauam  adharam  adheyarh  ^ayanam  tatha  \ 
Uddhritaih  cha  murdhakaifa  chaiva  mahatauli  svavam^akam  1 
Prachchhadanasyadharam  etat  paryayam  Iritam  1 

(M.  XVI.  66-68). 

(2)  Vastu-vidya,  ed.  Ganapati  Sastri,  ix.  1 ; 

Atha  vakshyami  samkshepat  pada-manam  yathavidhi  \ 
Uttaropanayor  madhya-gabam  etat  prakirtitam  II 


80 


UTTAEOSHTHA 


(3)  Kamikagama  (liv.  see  under  Siamhhd)  : The  moulding  at  the 
top  of  the  entablature. 

(4)  Suprabhedagama  (xxxi.  X07,  see  under  Siamhha)  : A crown- 
ing moulding  of  a column. 

UTTAEOSHTHA — (see  under  ‘ Stambha  ’) — The  upper  lip,  the 
OYolo  or  the  moulding  above  the  cavetto  or  mouth  (see  Owilt. 
Encycl.  fig.  867,  and  also  the  list  of  mouldings  in  the  five  orders, 
e.g.  art.  2563). 

Stambham  vibhajya  navadha  vahanam  bhago  ghato  syabhago’- 
nyah  \ 

Eadmam  tathottaroshUiam  kuryad  bhagena  il 

(Brihat-samhita,  LUi.  29). 

UT TANA-PAT T A— A pavement. 

Vyudham  ohottana-pattam  sakala-kanakhale ...,ya^  chakara-^ 

“ who  made  a broad  pavement  of  (stone)  slabs  in  the  whole  of 
Kanakhala.” 

(An  Abu  inscrip,  of  the  reign  of  Bhumadeva  n,' v.  9., 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  XI.  pp.  221,  222). 

UT  SAY A— (see  U^sed^)— The  height  of  a draught  animal  (vahana) 
in  comparison  with  that  of  the  principal  idol. 

(1)  Mula-bera-valam  manam  utsavodayam  iritam  \ 

(M.  lv.34). 

Brahma-viahnu(t  oha)-rudranam  buddhasya  3a(Ji)nakasya  cha  { 
Anyai&  cha................va  manam  tu  samgraham  \ 

Evam  tu  chotsavadinam  sthavara(m)-Jamgamadinam  I 

(M.  LXIY.  91-93), 

Yihahga-raja-manam  oha  lakshanam  vakshyate’dhuna  1 
Mula-bera-samottunga(m)  tat-tri-padardham  eva  va  I 
Utsavochoha-samam  vapi  dvi-gunam  tri-gunam  tu  va  I 
Tri-guuam  vadhikam  vapi  taoh-chatur-gunam  eva  va  { 

Evam  navodayam  proktam  uttamadi  trayam  trayam  I 

(M.  Lxi.  1-5). 

Yrishasya  lakshanam  samyag  vakshyate’dhuna  I 
Yayor  abhimukham  sthapyam  pithe  va  chotsave’pi  va  I 
Yimane  mandape  vapi  oharopari  parinyaset  1 

■'(M.  Lxii.  1-3). 


UTSAVA-MANDAPA 


81 


Three  types : 

Miila-berodayam  &reshtha(m)  tri-padam  madhyamam  bhavet  I 
Tuhgardham  kanyasam  proktam  tri-vidham  ohotsavodayam  I 

(M.  Lv.  36-36). 

Berotsedha-samam  kreshtham  karnantam  madhyamaih  bhavet  I 
Bahvaatam  kanyasam  proktam  utsavam  vrishabhoday am  I 

(M.  LXii.  10-11). 

Nine  kinds  ; 

Eyam  lihga-vakat  proktam  vishnu-bera-vako(ad  u)ohyate  I 
Mula-bera-samam  vapi  netrantam  va  putantakam  \ 
Hanvantam  bahu-simantam  stanantam  hridayantakam  I 
Nabhyantam  medhra-simantam  nava-manam  ohotsavodayam  1 
Tad-ardham  kantukotsedham  kanyasadi  trayam  trayam  I 

(M.  LXiv.  24-28). 

Athaya  tena  manena  shoda&amfeam  yibhajite  I 
Ekaikamkakam  tasmat  pafioha-vim&amtakantakam  1 
Kanyasad  uttamantam  syan  naya-lnanam  utsayodayam  I 
Athaya  mula-berasya  kekantam  tn  bhrnyantakam  \ 

Netrantam  nasikagrantam  hanyantam  bahu-simakam  I 
Stanantam  hridayantam  oha  nayyantam  oha  nayodayam  1 
Kanyasad  uttamantam  syat  naya  tad,  utsayodayam  I 
Utsaye  ohardha-manena  kautukodayam  iritam  1 
Tsiin-manam  chashta-bhagaikam  naya-bhagayasanakam  I 
Kanyasad  uttamantam  syan  naya-manaih'  kautukodayam  \ 

(M.lv.  37-46) 


It  is  measured  in  the  idol’s  finger  : 

Mula-berangulam  ohaiya  manayed  utsayodayam  \ 

(M.  Lv.  66). 

Tat-tan-mana-yasat  kechin  mula-bera-yatan  nayet  \ 

Utsaye  ohotsay am  proktam  angulam  mana-y it vatah  I 

CM.  LXi.  21-22). 

UTSAYA-MANDAPA-A  festiye  hall. 

See  under  Mat^dapa  and  of  : 

Gopura-prakarotsaya-mamtapair  upaohitam  Sriramabhadraya  cha  \ 
(Kondavidu  Insorip.  of  Krishnaraya,  y.  27,  Ep. 

Ind.  yol.  VI.  pp.  237,  231). 


82 


UTSAVA-VIGEAHA 


UTSAVA-VIGRAHA — linage  for  procession,  idols  to  be  carried  in 
procession. 

Utsava-vigraliala  samarpimchi — presented  idols  to  be  carried  in 
proooBsioii. 

(Kondavidu  Inscrip,  of  Krisnaraya,  v.  28,  lines 
118-119,  Ep.  Ind.  voL  Vi.  pp.  231,  232,  237). 

UTSEDHA — (see  Mdna) — The  height,  called  sdntika,  pausJiiika, 
jayada,  sarvakdmika  or  dlianada,  and  adhhuia  ; they  are  respect- 
ively equal  to  the  breadth,  1|,  14,  If,  and  twice  of  it, 

(See  Mana'sara,  XXXV.  22-26,  under  ad6/mte). 

The  height  of  a building  is  stated  to  be  measured  from  the  base- 
ment to  the  top  of  the  dome: 

Utsedham  janmadi-stupikantam  (M.  XXXV.  26). 

The  technical  names  of  the  proportions  of  the  height  are  signifi- 
cant. The  first  one  is  called  hdntika  or  peaceful.  In  this 
proportion  the  height  is  equal  to  the  breadth  (ibid.  22) ; and  this 
is  aesthetically  a graceful  proportion.  The  second  one  is  called 
pavslitika  which  might  be  rendered  as  strong,  eminent,  rich, 
complete,  or  perfect.  In  this  proportion  the  height  is  If  of  the 
breadth  (ibid.  22) ; and  this  would  give  the  building  a good 
stability.  The  third  one  is  called  jayada  or  joy -giving.  In  this 
proportion  the  height  is  14  of  the  breadth  (ibid.  22)  ; and  this 
gives  a pleasant  appearance  to  the  building.  The  fourth  one 
has  two  names,  saruahamika  or  good  in  every  way,  and  dhanada 
or  wealth-giving.  In  this  proportion  the  height  is  If  of  the 
breadth  (ibid.  23)  ; and  according  to  the  literal  meaning  of  the 
term,  sarvakdmika,  this  would  make  the  building  strong  as  well 
as  beautiful.  The  fifth  or  last  one  is  called  adbhtita  or  marvel- 
lous. In  this  proportion  the  height  is  twice  the  breadth  (ibid. 
22) ; and  this  would  give  a wonderful  loftiness  and  gorgeous 
look  to  the  building. 

The  comparative  height  of  the  component  members  of  an  archi- 
tectural structure  is  technically  called  gat^ya^mana.  The  details 
thereof  will  be  found  under  Ganya-mana. 


UDUMBAEA 


83 


Six  kinds  of  measurement  are  prescribed  for  an  image : mdwa 
(full  heiglit  of  the  image),  pi'amdna  (breadth),  parimdna  (width 
or  circumference),  lambamdna  (length  by  the  plumb-lines), 
unmdna  (thickness)  and  upan^na  (measurement  of  the  inter- 
space, e.g.  between  the  two  feet)  (M.  nv.  3-9,  see  under  mam). 
Of  these,  mdna  or  height  is  stated  to  be  compared  with  nine 
objects  such  as  the  adytum,  door,  basement,  and  the  height 
of  the  worshipper  etc.  (ibid.  11-14,  see  under  mdna).  In  each 
case,  the  height  of  the  idol  admits  of  nine  kinds  as  it  is  made 
equal  to  nine  successive  parts  of  the  object  (ibid.  16-33).  When 
compared  with  the  worshipper,  it  is  equal  to  his  full  height, 
reaches  his  hair-limit  (on  the  forehead),  nose -tip,  chin,  arm-limit 
(to  the  shoulder),  breast,  heart,  navel  and  sex-organ  : 

Kanyasad  uttamantam  syad  yajamanodayam  param  I 
Ketantam  nasikagrantam  hanvantam  bahu-simakam  I 
Stanantam  hridayantam  oha  nabhyantam  medhra-simakam  1 
Navadha  kanyasantam  syat  sthavaram  jahgamodayam  \ 

(M.  LV.  30-33). 

The'  height  of  the  riding  animals  (vahana)  of  the  gods  is  divided 
into  two  kinds,  utsava  and  hautuha  (see*  details  under  these 
terms).  The  latter  is  stated  to  be  half  of  the  former,  and  it 
does  not  seem  to  bear  any  other  independent  signification.  The 
former  is  compared  with  the  height  of  the  main  idol,  exactly 
in  the  same  way  as  the  idol  is  compared  with  the  height  of  the 
worshipper  (see  e.g.  M.  lxiv.  24-28,  LV.  40-43,  under  utsava). 

UDAPANA — ^A  well,'a  pool  or  pond  near  a well. 

Ima^-kshayamada-pushkarapinam  pa&chima-pushkaranim,  iidapana, 
arama,  stambhah  I 

(Mathura  inscriptions,  no.  1,  line  2,  Cunningham, 
Arch.  Surv.  Eeports.  vol.  ill,  p.  30). 

See  Bhagavad-gita,  II.  46. 

UDUMBAEA— The  threshold  of  a house,  a door. 

(1)  Uohchhrayat  pada-vistirna  sakha  tad-vad  udumbarah — “'the 
side  frame  of  the-4oor  has  a breadth  of  i of  the  altitude  ; 


84 


UDPHBITA 


like  wise  the  threshold.”  ^akha-dvaye’pi  karyaih  sfvrdhaih  tat 
syad  iidiimbarayoh — the  thickness  of  tlie  two  side  frames  of 
a door  is  as  many  digits  (ahgulas)  as  the  altitude  nimibers 
cubits,  one  and  a half  that  measure  gives  the  thickness  of 
the  threshold  and  upper  timber.” 

(Brihat-saiiihita,  Lili.  26  ; LVI.  13,  Kern,  J.  E.  A.  8., 
(N.  S.),  voL  VI.  pp.  284,  318). 

(2)  G-arbha-griha-udumbara-pramana — ^measures  of  the  central 

hall  and  the  threshold. 

(Prasadamandana-Vastutastra  of  Shtradhara 
Mandana,  iii.  H.S.,  Egg.  3147,  2263  fol.  16a). 

(3)  Plakslia-dvaram  bhavet  purvaiii  yamye  chodumbaraiiTi  bhavet 

— the  back-door  should  be  at  the  east  and  the  udimbara  or 
front-door  at  the  south. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  264,  v.  16). 
Tatha  dvi-guna-vistirna-mukhas  tad-vad  udumbarah  I 

(Ibid.  chap.  270,  v.  20  . 

(4)  Vistarad  dvi-ganaiii  dvaram  kartavyam  tu  suaobhanam  I 
Udinxibarau  tad-urddhvam  oha  nyaseoh  ohhasnam  {?)  smnaii- 

galaih  II 

Dvarasya  tu  chaturthaui§e  karyau  chanda-prachandakau  II 
Vi^vak  senilvat  sadantau  ^ikharddhoduinbara-triyam  II 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  42,  v.  19-20). 

(5)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap.  130,  v.  20)  has  the  same  verse  as  (1) 
except  that  it  reads  ‘ udumbari  ’ in  place  of  ‘ udumbarah  ’ iu 
the  Brihat-samhitfi. 

(6)  See  jamb  ornaments,  Chalukyan  Architecture,  Arch.  Sure, 
new  Imp.  series,  vol.  xxi,  plates  cl,  figs.  2,  8. 

UDDHRIT  A — A synonym  of  uttara  or  a crowning  fillet. 

(M.  XVI.  66-58,  see  under  uttara). 

XJDBHUTA— A kind  of  Phallus. 

(M.  hll.  226,  233,  236,  238,  241,  see  under  ‘ Linga  ’). 


trPATAL^A 


85 


tJDYANA — (of.  Arama) — ^A  pleasure-garden. 

(1)  Eamayana  (Gook)  ii.  71,  21.: 

Esha  natipratita  me  punyodyana  ya§a8vini  I 

Ayodhya  dri^yate  durat il 

lUd.  22-26  : 

TJdyanani  hi  sayahne  krlditvoparatair  naraih  II 
Samantad  yipradha'vadbhih  prakasante  mamanyatha  1 
Tanyadyanurudantiva  parityaktani  kamibhih  II 
Aranya-bhuteva  puri  sarathe  pratibhati  mam- 1 
Nahyatra  yanair  dri'syante  na  gajair  na  cha  vajibhih  Ii 
Niryanto  vabhiyanto  va  nara-mukhya  yatha  pura  I 
TJdyanani  pura  bhanti  matta-pramuditani  cha  II 
Jananam  rati-samyogeshvatyanta-gunavanti  cha  \ 
Tanyetanyadya  pa^yami  niranandani  sarva&ah  I! 

Of.  ibid,  ii,  67,  19  : 

Narajake  jana-pade  vahanaih  &ighra-vahibhih  I 
Nara  niryantyaranyani  naribhih  saha  kaminah  I) 

(2)  Lilodyana  or  pramadodyana — pleasure-garden,  on  the 
Dharagiri  hill,  the  scene  of  the  second  Act. 

(Dhar  Pra^asti  of  Arjunavarman,  lines  6,  12,  31, 
verse  30,  lines  36,  75,  Ep,  Ind.  vol.  viii.  pp.  99-100). 
UNMANA — (see  Muna) — The  measurement  of  thickness  or  diameter. 

(M.  Lv.  3-9,  see  under  Mdna). 
Atah-param  pravakshyami  manonmanam  vi&eshatah  \ 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  268,  v.  16). 
Manam  tad-vistaram  prokfcam  unmaaam  naham  eva  cha  il 
Pramanam  dirgham  ityuktam  mfmonmana-pramanatah  II 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxiv.  36,  36). 
UPAKANTA — A class  of  the  six-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXIV.  16,  see  under  prasada). 
UPATULA — (see  Tula) — A part  of  the  column. 

{Bpihat-samhita,  Lill.  30,  see  under  Tula). 
TJPATALPA — An  upper  storey,  a room  on  the  top  of  a house. 

(Raghuvam&a,  XVI.  11,  etc). 


86 


tJPADVlEA 


UPADVAEA — The  smaller  door. 

See  Manasara.  ix.  306,  309,  354,  360  under  dvdra. 

Upadvaro(ramu)ktaYat  kuryad  vishnu-dhisnam-tupaschime  1 

(M.  IX.  109). 

Ohatur-dikshu  chatur  dvaram  upadvaram  antaralake  \ (M.  xxxi.  77). 

UPAPADA — The  upper  or  dwarf  pillar  which  is  subordinate  to  a 
larger  column. 

Upapadani  sarvesham  purva(?mula)-pade  tu  yojayet  \ 
Bkopapada-samyuktam  dvi-try-upapadena  samyutam  I 
Vedopapada-samyuktam  brahma-kantam  iritam  1 

(M.  XV.  239,  242,  244,  see  also  245,  247). 

UPAPITHA — (of.  Pitha) — The  pedestal,  the  upper  pedestal,  the  outer 
surface,  a ground-plan.  The  pedestal  is  the  lowest  division  in  an 
order  of  columns,  called  also  stylobates  and  stereobates.  It 
consists  of  three  principal  parts  the  die,  the  cornice,  and  the  base. 

(1)  “ The  pedestal  is  not  only  placed  under  the  base  of  a column 

or  pilaster,  but  frequently  employed,  both  singly  and  together 
with  the  latter,  as  a pavement  for  temples-  and  porticoes,  over 
oornices  of  edifices  consisting  of  several  storeys  in  height  and 
also  as  a platform  for  thrones,  and  as  seats  for  statues,^’ 

In  a Tamil  fragment  of  a manuscript,  purporting  to  be  a 
translation  of  Mayamata,  it  is  said  that  “ the  height  of  the 
shaft  or  pillar  is  to  be  divided  into  four  parts,  and  one  to  be 
given  to  the  base  which  may  or  may  not  be  accompanied  by 
a pedestal,  and  in  the  case  where  a pedestal  is  joined  to  the 
base,  the  height  of  the  pedestal  may  be  either  equal  to  that  of 
the  base,  or  twice  or  three  times  as  much.  Here,  the  gijeatest 
height,  given  to  a pedestal,  namely,  three  times  that  of  the 
base,  is  equal  to  a little  more  than  a third  part  of  the  highest 
column,  which  is  not  perhaps  a bad  proportion.” 

(Bam  Raz,  Ess.  Arch.  Hind.  pp.  23,  26). 

(2)  Kamikagama,  XXXV : 

Tad-varddhitopapitham  va  tad-varddhita-masurakam  II  115 
Adhishthanadi-shad-vargam  tan-manam  upapithake  II  122 


UPAPITHA 


87 


(3)  Suprabhedagama,  xxxi,  12  ; 

Pithasya  tri-gupam  garbbam  ta(fc)-tri-bhagaika-bhittikam  1 
Samvikshya  sama-’bbumi&  cbed  upapifcbam  prakalpayet  if 

(4)  Manasara  : 

A ground-plan  in  which  the  whole  area  is  divided  into  25  equal 
squares  (see  under  Padavinyasa) : 

Panohamam  pahoha-pahcharafeam  upapitham  iti  snaritam  \ 

(M.  yii.  6). 

Evam  sutra-sthitan  devan  padastham&  chopapithake  1 (ihidy  70). 
In  connection  with  foundation  : 

Ekam^am  koshtha-bhittyuGhchhra(ya)ih  ghanam  prag- 
uktavan-nayet  \ 

Upapitham  pade  devan  koshtham  chokta-kramam  nyaset  \ 

(M.  XII.  38-39). 

In  connection  with  the  ‘ pi^ha  ^ or  yoni  part  of  the  Lihga  : 
Athava  kumbha-dig-bhagam  padma-tuhga(m)  yugamtakam  I 
Sesham  prag-ukta-vat  kuryad  upapitham  prakalpayet  ‘ 

The  pedestal  of  the  column  (M.  xiii.  2-166) : . 

Its  situation  : 

Adhishthanonnate  de&e  ohopapitham  hi  samsyitam  \ a 
Its  heights  (of.  also  Mayamata,  quoted  above)  : 

Ete  tattvam  adhishthanam  tach-chatur-amtakam  \ 

Vibhajet  tvadimamfeena  ekaikamtam  vivardhanat  \ 

Tad  ashtarh^avasanam  syaj  janmadi-pattikantikam  I 
Bvarii  tu  ohopapithochoham  navabhir  bhedam  iritam  \ 

Athava  kshudra-harmye  tu  chatur-bhagamtam  unnatam  I 
Dvi-bhagam  va  tri-bhagam  va  chatur-bhagam  athapi  va  \ 
Pancha-da'sodayam  vapi  ri(&a)ntikadi-fearodayam  \ 

(3-9,  see  also  10-16  under  Utsedha). 

The  generSl'deseription : 

Bhaga-padadi-sarvesham  udgrivas  tu  va&a(n)  nyasyet  I 
Padanam  api  sarvesham  pfiitrajaty(ly)air  alahkritam  I 
Antare  natakair  yuktam  padmanam  tu  dalair  yutam  \ 


88 


tJPAPlTHA 


Chatur-a&rakritim  chaiva  prathamadin  kampa-vajanaih  I 
Athava  ratna-pushpai^  cha  patradyair  alaakyitam  I 
Anyair  yukfcam  svalankritya  prativajana-de^ake  \ 
Prativajanakam  teaham  kriteh  karkarikritam  1 
Anyena  Yantararfa  ohaiva  vyala-aiiiih^di-rupakaili  \ 

Khadgeva  Iroai-aaiiiyuktam  vyittakam  pushpakair  yutani  I 
Anyanukfeam  cha  sarvesham  yukfeya  tatraiva  yojayet  I (145»154). 
Sixteen  typea  of  pedeatala  are  described  under  three  technical 
names,  details  whereof  are  given  below  (37-127). 

The  various  types  : 

(The  mouldings  are  arranged  in  the  successive  order,  as  given 
in  the  text,  from  the  bottom  upwards). 

I.  Vedibhadra  (27-63) : 

(a)  24  parts 


(1)  Upana  (plinth) 

6 

(4)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

(2)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

(6)  Vajana  (fillet  with 

(3)  Griva  (dado) 

12 

greater  projection).... 

4 

(6)  Kampa  (fillet) 

....  1 

(6)  12  parts 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  .... 

2 

(6)  Kshepana  (projection) 

14 

(2)  Padma  (oyma)  .... 

1 

(6)  Padma  (cyma) 

1 

(3)  Kampa  (fillet) 

i 

j (7)  Pattika  (fillet)  .... 

4 

(4)  Kan^ha  (dado) 

6 

1 (8)  Kampa  (fillet) 

•4 

(c)  12  parts 

(1)  Paduka  (plinth) 

14 

(6)  Kshepana  (projection) 

4 

(2)  Abja  (cyma) 

H 

(6)  Padma  (oyma) 

4 

(3)  Kampa  (fillet) 

4 

(7)  Vajana  (fillet) 

1 

(4)  Griva  (dado) 

(8)  Kampa  (fillet) 

i 

id)  12  parts  : — 

(1)  Gpana  (plinth) 

1 

(5)  Pa^^ika  (fillet) 

1 

(2)  Abja  (cyma) 

1 

(6)  Kandhara  (dado)  .... 

6 

(3)  Kampa  (fillet)  .... 

4 

(7)  Kampa  (fillet) 

4 

(4)  Karna(ear) 

i 

(8)  Vajana  (fillet) 

2 

(9)  Kampa 

(fillet) 

....  4 

TIPAPlfHA  89 

These  are  suitable  for  all  kinds  of'  buildings  : 

Sarva-hamyeshu  yogyam  syad  vedibhadram  chatur- 
vidham.  I (62). 

11.  Pratibbadra  (63—89)  : 


(a)  26  parts 


(1)  Janman  (plinth)  .... 

3 

(6)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

(2)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

(7)  Ambuja  (cyma) 

2 

(3)  Abja  (cyma)  .... 

2 

(8)  Kampa  (fillet) 

3 

(4)  Kampa  (fillet) 

1 

(9)  Antarita  (fillet) 

1 

(6)  GriYa  (dado) 

11 

(10)  Prativajana  (oavetto) 

1 

(6)  32  parts  : — 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  .... 

2 

(12)  Kandhara  (dado)  .... 

LO 

(2)  Kshepana  (projection) 

(13)  Kampa  (fillet) 

i 

(3)  Padma  (cyma) 

(14)  Padma  (cyma)  .... 

i 

(4)  Kshudrabja  ^ «mall 

(16)  Kampa  (fillet) 

i 

cyma) 

k 

(16)  Kandhara  (dado)  .... 

1 

(6)  Kampa  (fillet) 

h 

(17)  IJttara  (fillet) 

1 

(6)  JKandhara  (dado)  .... 

2 

(18)  Kshepana  (projection) 

h 

(7)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(19)  Ambuja  (cyma) 

i 

(8)  Abja  (cyma) 

(20)  Kapota  (corona)  .... 

3 

(9)  Pat/^i^  (fillet) 

2 

(21)  A-linga  (fillet) 

i 

(10)  Padma  (cyma) 

i 

(22)  Antarita  (fillet) 

1 

(11)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(23)  Prativajana  (cavetto) 

u 

(c)  33  parts 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  .... 

(9)  Dala  (petal) 

n 

(2)  Kampa  (fillet) 

h 

(10)  Gala  (dado) 

6 

(3)  Padma  (cyma) 

6 

(11)  Uttara  (fillet) 

2 

(4)  Kampa  (fillet) 

i 

(12)  Ardha -kampa  ^half- 

(5)  Kandhara  (dado)  .... 

k 

fillet).... 

7 

(6)  Kampa  (fillet) 

h 

(13)  Saroruha  (cyma)  .... 

1 

(7)  Ambuja  (cyma) 

(14)  Kapota  (corona)  .... 

3 

(8)  Vajrakumbha 

(15)  Alinga  (fillet) 

h 

(round  pitcher)  .... 

2 

(16)  Antarita  (fillet) 

1 

(17)  PrativSjana  (oavetto)  li 

90 


UPAPlTHA 


(d)  33  parts  - 

(1)  Jaaman  (plinth)  ....  2^ 

(2)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  4 

(3)  Padma  (oyma) 3 

(4)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  | 

(6)  Karna  (ear)  ....  ^ 

(6)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ^ 

(7)  Ambuja  (oyma)  ....  4 

(8)  Batna-patta  (Jewelled 

fillet),...*'  ....  4 

(9)  Bala  (petal)  ....  ^ 

(10)  Kshepana  (projection)  4 

(11)  Aarna  (ear)  ....  1 

(12)  Kshepana  (projeotion)  4 


(13)  Ambuja  (oyma)  ...  1 

(14)  Kshepana  (projeotion)  1^ 

(15)  Kan^ha  (dado)  ....  11 

(16)  Uttara  (fillet)  ....  i 

(17)  Ardha-kampa  (half- 

fillet)....  ....  i 

(18)  Ambnja  (oyma)  ....  2 

(19)  Kapota  (oorona)  ....  1| 

(20)  Alinga  (fillet)  ....  14 

(21)  Antarita  (fillet)  ....  1 


(22)  Prativajana  (ca- 

vetto)....  ....  1 

(23)  Vajana  (fillet)  ...  14 


These  are  suitable  for  temples,  buildings  of  the  Brahmanas,  and 
palaces  (91  ^ 


III.  Mafiohabhadra  (90—124) 
(a)  30  parts 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  ....  3 ^ 

(2)  Kampa  (fillet)  4 

(3)  Mahambuja  (large 

cyma‘,..,  ....  3 

(4)  Kampa(fillet)  ....  4 

(6)  Kan^ha  (dado)  ....  44 

(6)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  14 

(7)  Abmuja  (oyma)  ....  I4 

(8)  Kapota  (corona)  ....  24 

(Oi  last  three  memb 
(6)  31  parts  . 

(1)  Upana  (plinth)  ....  3 

(2)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  4 

(3)  Saroruha  (oyma)  ....  34 

(4)  Kshepana  (projection)  I4 


(9)  Prativajana  (oavetto)  1 

(10)  Kan^ha  (dado)  ....  8 

(11)  Uttara  (Met)  ....  1 

(12)  Kshepana  (projeotion)  ] 

(13)  Padma  (oyma) 

(14)  G-opanaka  (beam)  .... 

(15)  Alinga  (fillet) 

(16)  Antarita  (fillet) 

(17)  Prativajana  foavetto) 
j of  the  next  type). 


(5)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  4 

(6)  Karna  (ear)  ....  4 

(7)  Ambuja  (oyma)  ....  4 

(8)  Gopana  (beam)  ....  24 


Eeminder. 


trPAPITHA 


91 


(9)  Prativajana  (oavetto) 

3 

(13)  Abja  (oyma) 

4 

(10)  0ala  (dado) 

8 

(14)  Kapota  (corona) 

3 

(11)  Uttara  (fillet) 

1 

(15)  Alinga  (fillet)  .... 

4 

(12)  Xampa  (fillet) 

4 

(16)  Antarita  (fillet) 

4 

(17)  Prativajana  (oavetto)  ....  1| 

(c)  32  parts  : — 

(1)  Upana  (plinth) 

2 

(14)  Kampa  (fillet) 

4 

(2)  Kampa  (fillet) 

(3)  Mahambnja  (large 

i 

(16)  Ambuja  (oyma) 

(16)  Ardha-kampa  (half- 

4 

oyma)  .... 

fillet)  .... 

4 

(4)  Kshndrabja  (small 

(17)  Prativajana  (oavetto) 

4 

cyma) 

U 

(18)  Antarita  (fillet) 

4 

(6)  Kampa  (fillet) 

i 

. (19)  Karna  (ear) 

3 

(6)  Antarita  (fillet) 

2 

(20)  Uttara  (fillet) 

1 

(7)  Kampa  (fillet) 

i 

. (21)  Kampa  (fillet) 

4 

(8)  Padma  (oyma) 

1 

(22)  Padma  (oyma) 

4 

(9)  Pattika  (fillet)  ...; 

1 

(23)  Kapota  (oorona) 

3 

(10)  Padma  (oyma) 

4 

(24)  Alinga  (fillet) 

4 

(11)  Kampa  (fillet) 

4 

(26)  Antarita  (fillet) 

4 

(12)  Gala  (dado) 

5 

(26)  Gala  (dado) 

2 

(13)  Uttara  (fillet) 

4 

(27)  Uttara  (fillet) 

1 

(d)  34  parts  : — 

(1)  Janman  (plinth)  .... 

3 

(9)  Padma  (cyma) 

4 

(2)  Kampa  (fillet) 

4 

(10)  Am&uka  (filament)  .... 

24 

(3)  Abja  (oyma) 

34 

(11)  Kapota  (oorona) 

14 

(4)  Kshudra-padma  (small 

(12)  Antara  (fillet) 

6 

oyma)  .... 

4 

(13)  Karna  (ear) 

(5)  Kampa  (fillet) 

4 

(14)  Uttara  (fillet) 

r 

(6)  Gala  (dado) 

7 

(15)  Kampa  (fillet) 

4 

(7)  Antara  (fillet) 

1 

(16)  Abja  (oyma) 

4 

(8)  Kampa  (fillet) 

4 

(17)  Gopana  (beam) 

3 

(18)  Vaj ana  (fillet)  ....  2 


m 


OTAPlTSA, 


ProjeoMons  (125 — 144): 

The  projection  of  the  plinth  (and  other  members)  is  equal  to 
the  moulding,  larger  by  one-fourth,  one-half,  three-fourths,  or 
twice : 

Tat-tad-ahgani  sarveaham  upanadi-tathakramam  \ 

Tat-samaih  nirgamam  ’vapi  tat-padadhikam  eva  cha  \ 

Tad  ardhadhika-bhagam  vapi  tat-tri-bhagadhikam  tatah  \ 
Tat-samadhikam  evam  va  padad  upana-nirgamam  1 (128  --131, 
Janma-nirgamam  evoktam  padma-nirgamam  ishyate  | (138) 

The  projection  of  the  cyma  is  not  up-to  twice  of  it : 
Tuhgam  tat-samam  evam  va  padadhikyardham  adhikam  I 
Padona-dvi-gunam  vapi  padmam  evam  tu  nirgamam  I 

(139-140) 

Upamanasya  mahena  yuktya  padmam(sya)  tu  nirgamam  \ (142) 
The  projections  of  the  other  mouldings  are  (generally)  equal  to 
them  : 

Kshudra-padmUni  kampani  tat-samam  vatha  nirgamam  \ 
Pattikadini  sarvani  tat-samam  nirgamam  bhavet  \ (143-144) 
The  projection  of  the  (whole)  pedestal  (20-36) : 

The  height  of  the  pedestal  is  divided  into  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10, 
11, 12,  13,  14,  or  15  equat  parts  ; of  these  1, 2,  3, 4,  6,  6,  7 or  8 
parts  are  projections  (20-26).  But  the  choice  of  that 
proportion  which  would  make  it  look  beautiful  is  left  to  the 
discretion  of  the  artist !. 

Purvam  nirgamam  proktam  yan-manoramyam  anayet  I (26) 
The  extent  of  projection  : 

Nirgamam  ohopapitham(tha3ya)  syat  pada-bahyavasanakam  I 

(34) 

These  pedestals  of  the  Indian  architecture  may  be  compared,  in 
the  following  pages,  with  those  of , the  early  European  orders, 
for  a general  knowledge  of  the  subject. 


UPAPlTHA 


93 


(5)  “ Wiiebher  the  pedestal  is  to  be  considered  a component  part  of  an 
order  is  of  little  importance.  There  are  so  many  cases  that 
arise  in  desiguing  a building,  in  which  it  cannot  be  dispensed 
with,  that  we  think  it  nsefnl  to  connect  it  with  the  column  and 
entablature.  Vitruvius,  in  the  Doric,  Corinthian,  and  Tuscan 
orders,  makes  no  mention  of  pedestals,  and  in  the  Ionic  order  he 
seems  to  consider  them  rather  as  a necessary  part  in  the  cons- 
truction of  a temple  than  as  belonging  to  the  order  itself.  ” 
(Dwilt,  Encycl,  art.  2601). 

“ The  height  of  the  podium,  or  pedestal,  with  its  cornice  and  base, 
from  the  level  of  the  pulpitum,  is  i\th  part  of  the  diameter  of  the 
orchestra  (in  a theatre).  The  columns  on  the  podium,  with  their 
capitals  and  bases,  are  to  be  | of  its  diameter  high.  The  archi- 
traves and  cornices  of  those  dolums  are  i|-th  of  their  height.  The 
upper  pedestal,  inclu,ding  the  base  and  cornice,  is  half  the  height 
of  the  lower  ped,estal.  The  columns  on  this  ped,estal  are  |th  less 
in  height  than  the  lower  colums 

The  architrave  and  its  cornice  are  -^th  of  the  columns.  If 
there  is  to  be  a third  order,  the  upper  pedestal  is  to  be  half  the 
height  of  that  under  the  middle  order  and  the  architrave  and 
cornice  |th  of  the  columns.”  (Vitruvius,  book  v,  chapter  vix). 


Tables  showing  the  height  of  pedestals  in  ancient  and  modern 
works  : . 


Plinth  (base) 

Doric  mmmato 

Mouldings 

hbove 

plinths 

Die 

Cornioe 

Totnl 

Palladio  .... 

26 

14 

80 

20  = 

140 

Soamozzi .... 

30 

22J  = 

166* 

Ionic : — 

Temple  of  Fortune  Virilia 

44 

m 

93f 

231;  = 

.00  . 

o 

Coliseum  .... 

33i 

Sir 

17  = 

141i^ 

Palladio  .... 

281 

14i 

97|, 

. m == 

162i 

Soamozzi .... 

.30 

15 

82§ 

22i  = 

150 

Corinthian 

Arch  of  Constantine  .... 

17J 

29 

153 

29i-  = 

229 

Coliseum,,.. 

23 

. Ilf 

78 

19i  « 

1311 

94 


UPAPITHA 


P|ini.h  (base) 
in  minntea 

Mouldings 

above 

plinths 

Die 

Coenioe 

Total 

Palladio  .... 

m 

144 

93 

19  = 

160 

Soamozzi  .... 

30 

15 

1324 

224  * 

200 

Composite * 

Arch  of  Titus 

66 

30 

141 

29  = 

266 

Arch  of  the  Goldsmiths 
Arch  of  Septimus 

46 

25i 

1444 

11 

241 

Severus 

30 

30f 

1404 

m = 

2314 

Palladio 

33 

17 

133 

17  = 

200 

Soamozzi.... 

30 

16 

1124 

224  = 

180 

The  minutes  used  in  the  above  table  are  each  equal  to  1/60  of  the 
diameter  of  the  shaft.  (Q-wilt,  EncycL  art.  2600). 


Heights  in  parts 
of  a module 

Piojeotion 
from  the  axis 
of  column  in 
parts  of  a 
module 

In  the  Tuscan  order  (Art.  2656) 

Cornice  cyma-i 

1. 

(Listel)  .... 

2 parts 

20 

tium  6 parts 

2. 

Ogde 

4 

j 

3. 

Die  or  dado  3 modules 

4 

164 

Die  44  parts  ....^ 

and 

4. 

Congd  or  apophyge 

2 „ 

134 

Base  6 parts  ....| 

6. 

Fillet 

1 part 

184 

6. 

Plinth 

5 parts 

204 

In  the  Doric  order  (Art.  2666) 

1- 

Listel  ....  .... 

4 ps-rt 

28 

2. 

Echinus  .... 

1 „ 

22f 

Cornice  6 parts 

3. 

Fillet  ...  .... 

4 ,, 

21| 

4. 

Corona 

24  parts 

21 

6. 

Cyma  reversa 

li  „ 

184 

Die 

6. 

Die  4 modules 

UPAPiTHA 


95 


Heights  in  parts 
ot  a module 

Projection 
from  the  axis 
of  column  in 
parts  of  a 
module 

1. 

Cong^  .... 

1 part 

17 

a 

Fillet  .... 

1 „ 

18 

9. 

Astragal  ....  ... 

1 » 

18f 

10. 

Cyma  (inverted) 

2 parts 

19 

11. 

Second  plinth 

21 

,12. 

First  plinth 

4 „ 

21f 

III.  In  the  Ionic  order 

f 1- 

Fillet 

1 

35 

2. 

Cyma  reversa 

li  parts 

34f 

3. 

Corona 

334 

Cornice  Ilf 

.4. 

Fillet  of  the  drip 

4 pS'rt 

30 

parts 

5. 

Ovolo 

3 parts 

29.4 

6. 

Bead 

1 part 

27 

7. 

Fillet  .... 

1 » 

26i 

.8. 

Cong(^ 

If  parts 

25 

Die  (4  modus) ... 

. 9. 

Die  .... 

12f  „ 1 mod.  7 . 

flO. 

Cong4 

2 „ 

25 

11. 

Fillet 

1 part 

27 

Base  10  parts,...- 

^2. 

13. 

Bead 

Cyma  reversa 

If  parts 

3 „ 

28 

274 

14. 

Fillet  ....  ■ . 

f part 

31f 

.15. 

Plinth  .... 

4 parts 

33 

IV.  In  the  Corinthian  order  (Art.  2582)  ; — 

^ 1. 

Fillet 

1 part 

334 

2. 

Cyma  reversa 

If  parts 

33f 

3, 

Corona  ....  .... 

3 » 

32 

Cornice  14f 

4. 

Throat  ....  .... 

li  „ 

30f 

parts 

5. 

Bead  ....  .... 

1 part 

264 

6. 

Fillet 

1 » 

26| 

7. 

Frieze  ....  .... 

5 parts 

26 

8. 

Bead 

li  „ 

26f 

TJPAPlTHA 


Projeotloa 

, . . from  the  axis 

H^gbts  m parts  m 

01  » module  p^yts  of  a 
uiodtila 


9.  PiUefe 
10.  Gong6 

Die  91i  parts..,.]  11.  Die 

12.  Fillet  .... 

13.  Oong^  .... 

14.  Bead 

16.  Inverted  cyma  reversa 
Base  14^  parts  ■ 16.  Fillet 

17.  Torus 

18.  Plinth 

V.  In  the  Composite  order  (Art.  2591) 

■ 1.  Fillet 

2.  Cyma  reversa 

3.  Corona 
1 4.  Cyma  recta 

Cornice  14  parts^j  Fillet  .... 

6.  Cavetto  .... 

7.  Frieze 
^ 8.  Bead 

9.  Fillet 

10.  Cong^ 

Die  94  parts  11.  Die 

12.  Apophyge  .... 

.18.  Fillet 

14.  Bead 

15.  Inverted  cyma  reversa 

16.  Fillet  .... 

17.  Torus 

18.  Plinth 


I part 

26| 

1|  parts 

26 

87i  „ 

26 

Ih  » 

26 

1 part 

26| 

If  parts 

27i 

S „ 

26| 

1 part 

301 

3 parts 

324 

<5  „ 

CO 

1 part 

33 

14  parts 

32| 

3 

314 

li  „ 

28J 

4 part 

264 

1 » 

264 

6 parts 

26 

1 part 

27 

1 „ 

274 

14  parts 

25 

88|  „ 

26 

2 » 

27 

1 part 

27 

1 » 

27| 

3 parts 

304 

1 part 

314 

3 parts 

33 

4 „ 

33 

UPAMlNA 


97 


Oa  the  comparison  of  the  pedestals  employed  in  the  early 
periods  of  Indian  and  European  architecture,  Earn  Eaz 
and  others  are  of  opinion  that  “ the  most  finished  specimens 
of  them  (Indian  pedestals)  maybe  justly  said  to  surpass 
anything-  of  the  kind  in  the  Grecian  or  Eoman  orders,  both 
in  the  beauty  of  their  proportions  and  the  richness  of 
their  ornament.”  (Bam  Eaz,  p.  23). 

(6)  See  Ranganatha  inscription  of  Sundarapandya  (verse  19,  Ep, 

Ind.  vol.  in.  pp.  13, 16). 
The  ends  of  the  ring  (of  the  Konkadara  plates  of  Allava- 
Dodda)  are  secured  in  the  crescent  shaped  base  of  an 
oblong  pedestil,  which  bears  a recumbent  figure-  of  the 
sacred  bull  Nandin,  with  the  symbols  of  the  sun  and  the 
moon  in  front  of  it.  (Ep.  Ind.  vol.  v.  p.  63). 

(7)  “ One  lower  pedestal  (npapitha),  on  which  this  image  stood,  set 

with  jewels  (and  measuring)  one  muram  and  eleven  viral 
in  length,  three  quarters  (of  a muram)  and  five  viral  in 
breadth,  and  seven  viral  in  height,”  (Inscription  of  Eajaraja, 
no.  34,  para  6,  H.  S.  1. 1,  vol.  li.  p.  144). 

(8)  One  pedestal  (having  or  called)  an  auspicious  mark  (bhadra).” 
“ The  word  bhadra  occurs  in  two  other  inscriptions  in  the 

description  of  a pedestal  (above,  p.  228,  paragraph  4 ; p.  226, 
paragraph  4).” 

^V.  S.  1. 1,  vol.  II,  no.  79,  paragraph  4,  page  398,  note  2). 

(9)  See  Essay  on  arch,  of  Hind.  Ram  Raz,  plate  i.  fig.  1-12. 

(10)  See  pedestal  of  statue  inside  the  great  temple  at  Gaya, 

Cunningham,  arch.  surv.  Reports,  vol.  i.  plate  v.  p.  6,  ibid, 
vol.  IX.  plate  III  (plan  and  section  of  pedestal  for  statues). 
UPABHAYANA—A  sub-temple. 

“ Caused  to  be  erected  a sub-temple  (upabhavana)  adorned  with 
the  images  of  Hari  and  Gane&a.”  (Ep.  Garnat.  vol.  v.  part  1. 

Atsikere  Taluqno.  79,  Transl.  p.  142,  last  two  lines). 
UPAMAl^A— The  measurement  of  the  interspace. 

(M  LV.  3,  9,  see  under  Mana), 


7 


98 


TJPALEPANA 


UP  ALEPAN  A-?»-Pla8termg. 

Tad-vasati-sambandhi-nava  - karmmottara-bhavi-khanda-sphutita- 
sammarjjanopalepana-paripalanadi  \ 

(Konnur  Insorip.  of  Amoghatarsha  I,  line  87,  Bp. 

lud.  vol.  VI.  p.  31,  86). 

Deva-griham  karapya  punas  tasya  upalepana  1 

(Buohkala  Insorip.  of  Naga  Bhatta,  lines  17-18,  Bp.  Indie,  vol. 

IX.  p.  200). 

UPAVANA — A pleasure-garden,  a planted  forest. 

Upavanam  atba  obakre  tena  meghe&varasya  sphurita-kusuma- 
renu-^reni-chandratapa-tri  \ 

Avirata-makaranda-syanda-sandoha-varshair  ddbrita-rati-pati-lila- 
yantradharagrihatvam  II 

(Two  Bhuvanetvar  Inscriptions,  no-  A of  Svapne&vara, 
V.  26,  Bp.  lud.  vol.  VI.  p.  202’. 
UPAVBDI — The  upper  or  the  smaller  pedestal,  a seat  or  dais, 
^uddha-toyena  saihpfirya  vedikopari  vinyaset  I 
Upavedyopari  sthapya  ohoktavaoh  ohashta-mahgalam  \ 

(M.  Lxx.  41,  46). 

UPASTHANA—  (of.  Asthana-mandapa) — ^A  reception-room. 

“ The  meritorious  gift  of  a reception  room  (upaathana)  by  the  two 
men 

(Junnar  Inscriptions,  no.  2,  Arch.  surv.  new  Imp. 

series,  vol.  iv.  p.  92). 

UPASTHANA-BHUMI-A  hall  of  audience. 

Yasyopasthana-bhumi  ‘ whose  haU  of  audience.’ 

(Kahaura  stone  pillar  insorip.  of  Skandagupta,  line  1, 
0.  1. 1,  vol.  III.  B.  G.  I.  no.  15,  p.  67  . 
UP  An  A — A rectangular  moulding ; it  corresponds,  in  the  import  of  the 
term  and  the  purpose  to  which  it  is  applied,  to  the  plinth  or  the 
lower  square  member  of  the  base  of  a column  or  the  projecting 
base  of  any  moulding  (of.  Bam  Baz,  Ess.  arch.  Hind  p.  26). 

Atha  vakshyami  saihkshepat  pada-manam  yathS-vidhi  I 
Uttaropanahor  madhya-gatam  etat  prakirtitam  II 
Apparently,  ‘ upanaha  ^ is  used  in  the  sense  of  ‘ upana 

(Vastuvidya,  ed,  Ganapati  tastri,  ix.  1), 


USHNiSHA 


99 


The  bottom  of  the  foundafcioQ-pit  : 

Tat-pada-mtile  de&e  va  tathopana-prade^ake  ! 

Kudya-stambhe  griha-stambhe  harmya-garbham  vinikshipet  | 

(M.  xn.  130-131). 

The  moulding  (plinth)  at  the  bottom  of  a pedestal,  it  is  also  called 
janman : 

tJtsedhe  tn  ohatur-vim^at  paficham§am  upanam  iritam  1 
Ekena  kampam  ityuktam  grivoohoham  dva-da&am&akam  \ 

Kampam  ekaih  tu  vedamtam  vajanam  kampam  amsakam  I 
Vedibhadram  iti  proktam  athava  dva-da&amfeakam  I 
Janma  dvayam&akam  padam  kampam^  ardhena  karayet  \ 

(M.  xm.  36-40,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  ‘ Upapitha  ’). 
The  similar  moulding  of  the  base  is  also  called  ‘ janman  ’ : 
Eka-vimtam^akam  tuhge  kshudropanam  ^ivamtakam  I 
Janmadi-vajanantam  oha  sapta-vim§amtam  uohohhrayet  I 
Dvi-bhagam  janma-tuhgam  syat  tat-samam  ohambujodayam  \ 

(M.  XIV.  44,  66-66). 

It  is  also  called  paduka  and  vap>  a,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 
under  Adhishfhdna. 

XJBAQ-A-BANDHA — (see  under  Adhishthdna) — A class  of  bases.  It 
has  four  types  differing  from  one  another  in  the  height  and  num- 
ber of  the  mouldings.  (See  the  details  under  Adhishthdna). 

It  is  shaped  like  the  face  of  a snake  (uraga)  and  is  furnished  with 
two  praiis  at  the  top  (M.  xiv  44).  The  pitcher-shaped  moulding 
of  this  class  of  bases  islciroular  or  round  (M,  xiv.  46). 

USHNiSHA — The  top  of  a building,  a diaden,  a crownet,  the  top  knot 
on  the  Buddha’s  head. 

(1)  The  top  of  a building  : 

^alavrite  §alakute  cha  ni^e  cha  &ikhare  chordhva-kutake  I 
Lupa-yukta-bhramakare  tat-tad-ushnisha-dekike  I 
Stupikayahanam  bhavet  1 


(M.  XVIII.  333—334), 


100 


USHNlSHi 


The  top  knot  on  fche  crown  of  a Buddhist  image  ; 

Bauddhasya  lakshanam  Yakshye  samyak  cha  vidhinadhunu  I 
Dvi»bhujam  cha  dvi-netram  cha  choshnlshojivala-maulikam  \ 

(M.  LVI.  1,  10). 

The  crown  of  the  statue  of  a devotee  (bhakta) ; 

Ushnishat  pada-paryantam  bhavottara-featam^akam  I 
Ushnisham  tu  chatur-matram  netrantaiii  tu  yugahgulam  i 

(M.  LTX.  14-16). 

Eef erring  to  the  situation  of  the  plumb-lines  : 
Ushnisha-madhyame  ohaiva  lalatam(sya)  chaiva  madhyarae  } 
Ushnishat  tu  yatha  par&ve  lalatasya  tu  par&vake  I 
Ushnishat  purva-par&ve  tu  yathoktam  netra-madhyame  I 

(M.  Lxvii.  98,  103, 107). 
(2)  The  word  ‘ ushnisha  ’ usually  means  a turban,  but  is  used 
by  the  Buddhists  as  a technical  term  for  the  top  knot  on 
Buddha’s  head,  by  which  all  figures  of  him  are  distinguished  : 
he  is  never  represented  in  Indian  sculpture  with  any  sort  of 
covering  on  his  head.”  Dr.  Burgess. 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  p.  196,  note  3). 
USH!^lSHl— A type  of  round  building. 

(1)  Agni-Purana,  chap.  104,  v.  17 — 18  (see  under  Prdsdda), 

(2)  Garuda-Purana,  chap.  47,  V.  21, 23, 28 — 29  (see  under  Prmdda). 

U 

U(U)HAPOHA — An  additional  moulding,  a moulding,  an  architectural 
object  which  completes  a structure. 

(1)  Manasara; 

In  connection  with  the  ground-plan  : 

Ajnanad  anga-hinaih  cha  karta  chaiva  vina&yati  \ 

Tasmat  tu  tilpibhih  prajftair  uhapohan  na  yojayet  1 

(M.  vil.  268-269). 

Eef  erring  to  two-storeyed  buildings  : 

Sarvesham  devata-harmye  purvavad'devatah  nyaset  I 
Ukta-vaoh  chhastra-margena  uhapohena  yojayet  l 

(M.  XX.  105-106). 


UVAEAKA 


101 


Ie  connection  with  penalties  for  defects  in  important  members  ; 
Uhapohadi-kirtibhyam  ^astrokte  tu  yad(th)a  tatha  1 
Uhi(uha)-hina  ohokta-hina  Ivadhikartri(ta)  vinatyati  I 
Tasmat  tu  §ilpa-vidvadbhih  parigrahoktavat  kuru  I 

(M.  Lxix.  66-68). 

(2)  Kamikagama,  xlv  : 

Sabhavad  vihita  bahye  prasadavad  alahkrita  \ 
Uha-pratyuha-samyukta  ya  sabha  sa  oha  malika  il  3 
Antara-prastaropetam  uha-pratyuha-sarhyutam  11  13 
Ibid.  XLi: 

’Uha-pratyuha-samyuktam  yatha-yukti  yatha-ruchi  li  37 

(3)  Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  71 : 

A quadrangular  moulding  of  an  arch  ; 

Vyitter  firdhve  u(u)ham  kyitva  ohatur-ayatam  eva  tu  II 
(For  the  context  see  v.  68 — 70  under  ‘ Torana  0- 

(4)  Gf.  MahabliSrata,  1.  3.  133 : 

Nagalokam  . . . aneka-vidha-prasada-harmya-^alabhi-niryuha* 
tata-samkulam  I 

UEDHVA-DHAEANA— A kind  of  phallus  and  pedestal  combined. 

In  connection  with  the  phallus  : • 

Berasyaika-tila  proktam  lihganam  taoh-chatuh-tila  I 
Nandya’varta(a)-kritih,sthapya  tatha  chaikafemana  bhavet  \ 
Atho(dhah)  pashana-kurmakhyam  ohordhva-dharanam  iti  smyitanf  I 

(M.  Lii.  176-178). 

UBBHVA-SALA — (see  The  upper  room  or  hall. 

Beferring  to  two-storeyed  buildings : 

Nana-gopana-saihyuktam  kshudra-nasyair  vibhushitam  1 
Ardha-tala-vitesho’sti  chordhva-sala-samanvitam  I ‘ 

CM.  XX.  66-67  etc.). 

UVAEAKA — A kind  of  room. 

Eamadattasya  deya-dhama^  cha  bhikshu-griham  uyaraka's  oha 
bharyayah  sa  velidattaya  deyadharma  uyarakah  1 
A dwelling  for  the  ascetics  and  an  uyaraka  (has)  been  dedicated  as  a 
charitable  gift  by  Eamadatta  . . . and  an  uyaraka  (has  been 

given)  as  a charitable  gift  by  his  wife  Velidata  (Velidatta),  whose 
husband  is  alive. 


102  BIKSHA-NAYAKA 

“ Uyaraka  apparently  corresponds  with  maraha  of  Nasik  no.  24. 
Transactions  of  Oongr.  1874  p.  347.  which  Professor  Bhandarkar 
renders  by  apartment.  Childers’  Pali  Bict,  gives  ovaraha  with 
the  meaning  of  inner  or  store  room  and  this  explanation  fits 
here  also  very  well.”  Prof.  H.  Jacobi. 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  vii.  Kuda  inscriptions,  no.  8,  p.  266.; 

El 

EIKSHA-NAYAKA — (see  Simha)-— A kind  of  round  building. 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  104,  V.  19 — 20,  see  under  Prasada). 

E 

EKA-TALA  (-BHtJMI)— (see  under  Prasada)— Th a ground  floor. 
Ahatyam  (vibhajya)  ashtadha  harmyam  ganya-manam  ihochyate  I 
Utsedhe  chashta-bhage  tu  ekamkena  masurakam  ) 

Bvi-bhagam  chahghrikottungam  mahcham  ekena  karayet  1 
Kandharam  tat>samam  kuryat  tad-dvayaih  ^ikharodayam  \ 
Tad-ardham  stupikottuhgam  vaktram  shad-vidham  iritam  1 

(M.  XIX.  20— 24). 

Athava  manu-bhagam  tu  harmya-tuhga(m)  vibhajite  I 
Sa-tri-padam  adhishthanam  tad-dvayam  changhri-bhajite  (-konna- 
tam)  I 

Tad-ardham  prastarotsedham  yugamsam  griva-tuhgakam  \ 
Tad-ardham  feikharottuhgam  tad-urdhve  stupikam&akam  | 
Griva-mahchordhvam  am^eha  yatheshtadhishthana-samyutain  I 
Urdhve  padodaye  bandham(— 4)  bhagam  ekamfea(m)-vedikam  I 
Sesham  purvavat  kuryad  ashta-Varga-vido  viduh  1 

(Ibid.  80-86). 

Evam  proktam  harmyake  madhya-bhadram  \ 

^ala-koshtham  dig-vidike  kuta-yuktam  I 
Hara-^ranta-nasika-panjaradhyam  I 
Kuryat  sarvam  yedika-bhadra-yuktam  I 

Harmya-tara-samani  ohatur-a&rakam  tat-tri-padam  ardham  athapi 
oha  I 


EKA-LINGA 


103 


Kudya-tara-aamadi  (?)  yatha-kramam  I 

Kanyasam  tri-vidham  mukha-mandapam  I 

Tan-miikha-man^apam  mukliya-viiiiaiie  I 

Madhya-vimanasya  mandapa-par&ve  I 

Ambaram  dandam  atba  dvayam  I 

Harmya-va&ad  upave&ana-yuktam  I 

Yat  tati  ksbudra-vimane  fean-mukhe  mandapam  Syat  \ 

(Ibid.  192—203). 

Anya-inandapa-dese  yan-manoramyam  alarikritam  \ 

Mandape  prastarasyordhve  karna-harmyadi-manditam  1 
Yafc  tan  namantaralaih  chordhve  nasika  jala-pan  jaram  vapi  I 
Tat-tan-mandapa-madbye  prasada-vafead  dvara(m)“Samkalpyam  I 
Purva^at  kayata-yuktam  mandapasyantab  sa-kila-yuktam  I 

(Ibid.  213-217). 

Eka-bbumim  kuryad  adbikam  obopapifcba(m)  rucbirarfiba(m)- 
samyiitam  1 

Sopapitba-bbavanair  ynfcam  tu  va  karayet  tu  katbitaih  pnratanaih  \ 
Evam  sarva-barmyalabkara-yuktya  nana-padair  vedika-tara-man- 
cbam  (kuryat)  I (Ibid.  258— 261). 

EKATALA — (see  under  Tala)— 'A.  kind  of  sculptural  measurement. 
EKA-PAKSHA — (of.  Dvipaksba)— One  side,  a road  or  wall  having  tbe 
footpath  on  one  side  only. 

Antar-vithi  ohaika-paksbam(a)  babya-vitbi  dvi-pakshakam  1 

(M.  IX.  396). 

Anyat  salam  tu  sarvesbam  chaika-paksbalaya-kramat  I 
Anyat  salam  tu  sarvesbam  alayartham  dvi-pakshakam  \ 

(M.  XXXVI.  86-87). 

See  also  M.  ix.  361—364,  466,  tinder  Dvi-pahsha. 

BKA-LINdA — Tbe  single  Phallus  as  opposed  to  Phalli  in  group. 
Sarvesbam  cbaika-barmye  tu  ekaika-linge  tu  sammatam  I 
Babudha  sarva-lingesbu  tat-tri-karnam  na  karayet  \ 

Dvi-karnam  bahu-linge  tu  tri-karnam-cbaika-lingake  I 
Evam  tu  obaika-lingam  syad  vistaram  parikirtitam  I 

(M.  Lii.  71—73,  82). 


104 


eka-h1b1 


EKA-HA.BA — (cf.  Hara) -“With  one  chain. -like  omamenfc  below  the 
neck  of  the  column,  head  or  astragal. 

In  connection  with  a single-storeyed  building  : 

Sala-kuta-dvayor  madhye  chaika-hara  sapaniaram  \ 

. XIX.  67). 

EKADASA-TALA— The  eleventh  storey. 

Tad-adhastat  talam  chaika-dasa-dva-dasa-bhiimikani  I 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  ^). 

Sesha-bhagam  tu  sarveshaih  yuktya  tatraiva  yojayet } 

Evam  vistara-ganyaih  syat  tuhga-ganyam  ihochyate  I 
Janmadi-stupi-paryantam  uktavat  sariigraham  viduh  \ 
Bka-datamta-bhagena  dasa-talodayadhikam  1 
Tad  eva  sardha-bandh(v)am8am  masxxrakottuhgam  ishyate  1 
Saptamtam  pada-dirgham  syat  tad-ardham  prastarodayam  I 
^eshaih  prag-uktavad  ganyani  eka-data-talodaye  1 
Talordhvordhva-tale  sarve  karna-harmyadi-manditam  1 
Eka-bhaga-dvi-bhagam  va  parito’lind(r)am  ishyate  I 
Nanadhishthana-samyuktam  nana-padair  alahkj’itam  I 
8ala-kutait  oha  uktavat  samalahkritam  I 
Harantare  kuta-'sala  oha  griva-detokta-devatan  (h)  I 
Anu-talashta-dik-palaCm)  stat-tad-vahana-samyutam  I 
Yaksha-vidyadharadinam  garudadinii  vinyaset  I 
G-a^etyadi-ganait  chaiva  sarva-harmyeshu  nikshipet  \ 

CM.  XXIX.  36—49). 

EVAMEANTa — ^A  column  connected  with  one,  two  or  three  minor 
pillars,  and  having  a lotus-shaped  base. 

Ekopapada-saihyuktam  dvi-try-upapadena  samyutam  1 
Bvam-kantam  iti  proktaih  mule  padmasananvitam  I 

(M.  XV.  242— 243). 

AI 

AIRAVATA — The  great  elephant,  the  riding,  animal  (vahana)  of  the 
god  ita  (?-  Indra). 

I&a-murtim  iti  dhyatva  rakta-varnam  oha  sishp(-r8h)atam  I 
Dvi-bhujam  dvi-netram~cha  rathairavata-vahanam  I . 

(M.  VII.  190—191). 


KatakA 


105 


A class  of  the  five  siioreyed  buildings. 

(M.  xxni.  3—12,  see  under  F.nhtlda). 


KAKSHA— The  arm-pit. 

Kakshayor  antaram  taraih  vimsa-matrarii  pra&asyate  I 

(M.  Lix.  29). 

Bka-Yiiiibahguiam  chordhve  kakshayor  antara-sthale  I 

(M.  LXV.  52  etc.). 

KAESHA-BANDHA^A  class  of  bases. 

See  the  four  types,  the  component  mouldings  and  other  details 
under  AdJmMhdna. 

^M,  XIV.  320—358). 

KA^AEA — ^An  ornament  (like  a ring)  of  a base,  a bracelet, 

Madhye  pattair  vi&esham  tu  pushpa-ratnait  oha  ^obhitam  I 
Eatakavyitam  eVa  va  tuddha-vrittam  athapi  va  1 

(M.  XIV.  '75—76). 

Compare  also  the  list  of  mouldings  under  Adhhkthdna. 

Vyittam  vidhiih  tri-patfam  va  dharaya-katakanvitam  1 

(Ibid.  238). 

Etat  tu  ohitra-kalpaiii  (—an  ornament)  tu  natakabhi(kai)r  alahkyi- 
tam  i 

(M.  L.  11). 

Eeyura-katakair  yuktam  prakoshtha-valayam  tatha  I 

(M.  Liv.  13). 


In  connection  with  the  plumb-lines  : 

l^aktinam  pushpa'-hastam  tu  stanantahi  katakagrakam  1 

Tad-angushthavasanantam  oha  dvy antaram  ohatur-ahgulam  I 

(M.  Lxvn.  135—136). 

“ One  pair  of  bracelets  (kataka)  for  the  arms  of  the  goddess  (con- 
sisting of)  fifty -six  kaySaju,  two  manjadi  and  (one)  kunri  of  gold.” 
(Inscription  of  Rajaraja,  no.  2,  line  37.  H.  8.  I.  I.  vol.  ii.  p.  19). 
One  pair  of  bracelets  (kanaka)  for  the  arms  of  the  goddess,  consist- 
ing of  thirty -nine  kayanju  and  seven  manjadi  of  gold.^’ 
(Inscription  of  Rajendra-Ohola,  no.  8,  line  19.  H.  S.  1. 1.  vol.  il.  p.  89). 


106 


KATAKAKABA 


Astyuttara-giri-kafeakd  (declivity  of  the  Northern  Mountain) 
Vijayapuraih-nama  nripa-dhani  I 

(Grant  of  Jayaditya  of  Vijaya-pura,  line  6,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xxi. 

p.170). 

“In  the  world-renowned  Eaya-ohalukya’s  camp  (or  capital,  kataka), 
the  bodyguard  Keta-nayaka  gained  unlimited  fame  and  the 
greatest  reputation  for  energy  and  readiness.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  V.  part  i.  Channarayapatna  Taluq, 
no.  210,  transl.  p.  216,  line  9 of  no.  210). 
KA'JAKAkAEA — An  ornament  shaped  like  a bracelet  or  ring. 

Bef  erring  to  ‘lupa’  or  a pent -roof  ; 

Bvam  cha  lakshapam  proktam  katakakaram  tu  yojayet  1 

(M.  xvm.  249). 

KA!ri — The  hip-part  of  a building. 

(1)  Yo  vistaro  bhaved  yasya  dvi-guna  tat-samiiunatih  \ 
Uohchhrayad  yas  tritiyo’mtas  tena  tulya  katir  bhavet  \ 

The  height  of  a building  should  be  twice  its  width  and  its 
kati  (lit.  hip)  should  be  (equal  to)  ^ of  its  height.  (Bjihat- 
samhita,  liyi.  11).  / 


Dr.  Kern  translates  ‘ ka^i  ’ by  ‘ the  flight  of  steps  ’ (J.  E.  A.  S. 
N.  S.  vol.  vii  p.  318) ; but  in  this  sense  the  word  never 
occurs  in  dictionaries  or  literature  ; nor  does  this  rendering 
suit  the  context  here,  first,  because  the*  description  concerns 
a single  storeyed  building,  where  the  flight  of  steps,  if  there 
be  any  at  the  entrance,  would  not  be  usually  J of  the 
height  of  the  whole  building ; secondly,  the  measures  of 
the  flight  of  steps  mostly  in  buildings  of  more  than  one 
storey  are  never  considered  in  any  architectural  treatises  as 
being  dependent  on  the  height  of  the  building  or  the  storey. 


(^2)  Ohatuh-shashti-padam  kritva  madbye^  dvaram  prakalpayet  I 
Vistarad  dvi-gunoohohhrayam  tat-tri-hhagah  katir  bhavet  II 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  18). 


KANTHA 


107 


(3)  Bhavishya-Purana  fchap.  130,  v.  18)  has  the  same  versa-as  (1), 

except  ‘ tasya  ’ in,  place  of  ‘ yasya  ’ in  the  first  line,  and 
‘ atha  ’ for  ‘ amsa’  in  the  second  line.  Brihat-^mhita 
seems  to  have  improved  the  lines. 

(4)  In  the  sense  of  the  hip  or  buttocks  : 

Ka|i(^)  ohoru-vi^alam  syan  madhya-kaflchina-lambavat  i 

(M.  Liv.  91). 

Ka^i-taram  bhaskaramtam  syad  ashtam^iam  choru-vistyitam  \ 
Mukham  vakshat  cha  kukshis  cha  kati-dirghe  dvadatam&a- 
kam  \ (M.  lvii.  32,  55). 

VimtaLm^aih  cha  kati-taram  urdhve  koni-visalakam  1 

(M.  LXV.  48). 

KATI-SUTEA — The  (plumb)  line  by  the  hip  or  buttocks,  a girdle. 
Kati-sutravasanarh  syat  pura-stitram  iti  smyitam  I 
Ka^i-sutram  tu  samyuktam  kati-prante  sa-pattika  1 

(M.l.  21,27). 

Tasmat  kati-stitrantam  sapta-vimtangulam  bhavet  \ 
Trayoda&arhfeakam  chaiva  kati-sutram  tu  vistyitam  I 

(M.  LXV.  160, 164). 

A girdle : 

Katakam  ka^i-stitram  oha  keyuraih  ratna-puritam  I (M.  Ll.  67). 
KANTHA— Also  called  G-ala,  G-riva,  Kandhara,  meaning  literally  the 
neck  or  throat.  This  is  a quadrangular  moulding,  sometimes 
square  and  sometimes  rectangular.  “ When  employed  in  pedestals, 
(see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  U'pwpitha),  it  is  made  very  high 
and  it  resembles  the  dado  (or  the  portion  of  a pedestal  between  its 
base  and  cornice,  also  applied  to  the  lower  portions  of  the  walls). 
But  everywhere  else  it  serves  as  a neutral  member  from  which  the 
projection  of  the  i;est  of  the  mouldings  are  generally  measured:” 

(Ram  Eaz,  Ess.  arch.  Hind.  p.  25). 
The  neck  of  a column  (Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  68,  seemnder  Siam- 
hha). 


108 


KApA^GA 


Tunge  trim&ati-bhagena \ 

Tad-Grdlive  kan^ham  ashfeamsam \ (M.  xili.  90,  94). 

tltsediie  tu  chatur-vim§ia<;......i..„ I 

Grivochchiam  dva-da§amsakam  I ilbid.dB — 37). 

Tad-evam&ena.... 

Paiioliam§a(m)  kandharam  prokfcam (Ibid.  48,  K)). 

Tad-evam&a  (of  30  parts).. 


Tad-tirdhve  galam  ashtam&am. 

For  further  examples,  see  the  lists  of 
UpapitJia. 

G-aia-tuhgaih  yiigangulam  I 
Grala-taram  sSrdham  ash^am^am. 


...  1 


(Ibid.  97, 101). 
mouldings  under 


(M.  Lix.  71,  81). 


For  further  examples, 
KABAlsfGA-^A  trench. 


3 the  lists  of  limbs  under  Tdla-mdna. 


Kadahgas  or  war-trenches  are  described  in  the  Eev.  G.  Eichter’s 
Manual  of  Goorg  (pp.  190 — 191) ; these  are  enormous  trenches 
defended  by  a bank  of  the  excavated  soil,  and  ‘ stretch  over  hills, 
woods,  and  comparatively  flat  countries,  for  miles  and  miles,  at 
some  place  branching  ofl  in  various  directions,  or  encircling  hill- 
tops.’ Mr.  Eichter  quotes  old  records  to  show  that  they  were  con- 
structed by  ancient  Eajas  to  fortify  the  principality.  In  South 
Kanara  also  these  trenches  abound.  ” 


“ So,  too,  great  and  massive  walls  eight  feet  high,  half  as  thick,  and 
extending  for  long  distances,  are  found  buried  in  deep  forest  on 
the  crest  of  the  ghats  between  Kanara  and  Maisur,  with  large 
trees  rooted  in  them.”  (See  ‘ Gr&ma  ’ and  compare  the  above 
with  the  surrounding  defensive  ditches  of  the  village  as  given  in 
the  Manasara). 


(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  iv.  p.  162,  c.  I.  last  para,  line  2 f. ; c.  2.  line  6). 
From  this  it  appears  to  follow  that  the  Goorg  Kadahgas  or  large 
trenches,  originally  were  intended  for  landmarks  ”. 

(Three  Kongu  inscriptions,  no.  ii.,Ind.  Ant.  vol.  vi.  p. 
103,  c.  I.  line  29,  transl.  and  foot  note,  last  para). 


KAPOTA 


109 


KANBARA-GBIHA — (see  Darigriha) — A cave  house, 

Khyataih  (?  syatam)  kanakadi-kandaragrihodirna-pratapaih  divi 
divi  khyatam  naikavanig-vi&ala-vi^havo  bhutabMsobham  &u- 
bham  \ 

(Description  of  the  town  of  Atapura,  A^tpur  insorip, 
of  Sakti-kuinara,  v.  ii.  Ind,  Ant.  vol.  xx.xix.  pp.  191, 

note  25,  181). 

KANDHARA— The  neck,  the  dado. 

See  ‘ Kantha  ’ and  compare  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  ‘ Upapitha  ’. 

KANYA — A girl,  a' virgin,  the  name  of  a month,  a lower  part. 

Lupam  prag-ukta-vistaram  tat-tad-vam§ahghri-kantakam  \ 
Adho(ah)-padasya  lupadyai&  cha  tatra  dosho  na  vidyate  1 
Karnat  kanyavasanam  syan  nava-sutram  prasarayet  \ 

(M.  xviii.  231-233). 

KAPATA — (see  Eavdta)—k  door,  the  panel  of  a door. 
Kapata-torana-vatim  suvibhakantarapanam  I 

(Ramayana,  l.  6,  10), 

Dridha-baddha-  kapaijani  mahaparighavanti  cha  l 

(Tbid.  VI.  3, 11). 

KAPOTA— A section  of  circular  moulding  made  in  the  form  of  a 
pigeon’s  head,  from  which  it  takes  it  name.  It  is  a crowning 
member  of  bases , pedestals  and  entablatures.  Compare  the  lists  of 
mouldings,  from  the  Mdna  dm,  given  under  ' Upapitha  ’ (where 
‘ Kapota  ’ occurs  eight  times),  ‘Adhishtha'na’  (fifteen  times),  and 
' Prastara  ’ (five  times)  and  also  see  G-wilt  {Enoyol.  of  Aroh,  art. 
2632, 2565,  pp.  806,  813-814).  When  employed  in  the  entablature, 
it  serves ‘the  purpose  of  a epout  in  the  shape  of  a pigeon’s  beak  to 
throw  off  water  falling  on  the  cornice.  In  this  office  it  resembles, 
in  some  measure,  the  corona  having  a broad  vertical  face  and 
with  its  soffit  or  under  portion  recessed  so  as  to  form  a drip  which 
prevents  water  running  ’down  the  building.  Its  synonyms  are  : 
vaktra-hasta.  (face  supported  by  hand),  ^wp«(pent  roof), 
Qupdmka{hestm},  and  chandra  (the  moon). 


110 


KA-POTA-PALIEA 


(1)  Manasara : 

Beferring  to  the  pedestal : 

Tad-dTayam  charabujam  ohordhve  kapotoohoham  gunam^a- 
kam  I (M.  xiii.  67). 

For  further  illustrations  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under 
Upapiiha. 

Referring  to  the  base  : 

Padmam  am&am  tad-firdhve  tu  kapotoohoham  tri(y)am&akam  1 

(M.  XIV.  367), 

For  further  illustrations  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under 
Adhishthand. 

Beferring  to  the  entablature': 

Tad-urdhve  vaianam  chaikam  dhatu-bhagam  kapotakam  I 

(M.  XVI.  27). 

For  further  illustrations  see  the  lists  of  rpouldings  under 
Prastara. 

A synonym  of  the  entablature  : 

Kapotam  prastram  ohaiva  mafioham  praohohhadanaih  tatha  \ 
paryaya-vaohakah  \ (Ibid.  18,  20). 

Beferring  to  the  six-storeyed  buildings  : 

Prastaradi-kapotantam  k8hudra-na3ya(m)  vibhushitam  I 

(M.  XXIV.  39). 

(2)  “ A kapotam  is  a section  of  moulding  made  in  th,e  form  of  a 

pigeon’s  head.  It  is  a crowning  member  of  oornioes,  pedestals 
and  entablatures.  When  employed  in  the  latter,  it  often 
connects  utility  with  beauty,  inasmuch  as  the  beak  of  the 
bird  is  so  placed  as  to  serve  the  purpose  of  a spout.  ” (Bam 
Baz,  Ess.  arch,  of  Hind.  p.  24). 

KAPOTA-P ALIKA  (I)— A pigeon-house,  an  aviary,  “ properly  ‘ dove- 
ridge,^  ‘ dove-list,’  may  be  rendered  by  crown-work,  fillet,  gable- 
edge,  and  even  by  cornice.  In  Tamil,  hapotakam  is  explained  as 
^ a moulding  in  masonry,;’  see  Winslow’s  Tam.  Diet,  i.v.”  Then 
Dr.  Kem  quotes  Bam  Baz’s  passage  noticed  under  ‘ Kapota  ’ and 


KAPOTA-PALIKA 


111 


adds  “ the  same  author  (Ram  Raz)  notices  (p.  61)  that  the 
spout  may  be  made  to  sprinsr  from  tbe  head  of  a lion,  etc.” 

With  this,  Kern  compares  TJtpala’s  definition  : 

Kapota-palika  grahanena  bahir  nirgata  mukhani  kashthany- 
uchyante— by  the  acceptation  of  Kapota-pali,  the  projecting 
lion-face  timbers  (mouldings)  are  understood  ; 

(and  also  Vi&vak,  6.  767) : 

Prasadau  nirgatau  karyau  kapotau  garbha-manatah  \ 
tjrdhvam  bhitty-uohchhrayat  tasya  manjariih  tu  prakalpayet  \ 
Manjaryat  ehardha-bhagena  tuka-nasam  prakalpayet  \ 

UrdhYam  tathardha-bhagena  vedi-bandho  bhaved  iha  II 
Then  Kern  finds  fault  with  Oolebrooke^s  rendering  of  Kapota- 
palika  -and  vitjanka  (in  his  Amara-Kosha,  quoted  below)  as 
‘ dove-cot  * and  says  “ Golebrooke's  error,  strange  to  say,  has 
been  perpetuated  in  all  dictionaries ; the  more  reason  now  to 
draw  attention  to  it.”  (J.  R.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vi.  p.  320,  note  2). 

“ A storey's  altitude  is  of  108  digits  (angulas)  according  to  Maya, 
but  Vitva-karman  pronounces  it  to  be  of  8 cubits  and  a half 
(i.e.  84  digits).  As  to  this,  however,  able  architects  have 
declared  that  in  reality  there  is  no  discrepancy  of  opinion,  for,  if 
you  add  the  height  of  the  crown-work  (Kapota-pali),  the  smaller 
number  will  equal  (the  greater).”  (Brihat-samhita,  Lvi.  29,  30). 
There  is  a compound  word  ‘ Kapota-palika  ’ or  ‘ Kapota-pali  ' 
(dove-cot)  in  Sir.  M.  Williams's  Diet.  p.  202.  o.  3.  Similarly  the 
two  words,  Icapota  and  paliM  or  p&li  occur  together  in  the 
Brihat-samhita  and  (its  commentary)  Utpala  quoted  above. 
But  they  do  not  occur  as  one  word  in  Winslow's  Tamil  Diet., 
in  Vitvak,  and  in  Ram  Raz.  In  the  twety-eight  instances 
in  the  Manasara  too,  poiiited  out  above  (under  Kapota),  only 
the  word  ‘ Kapota  ' occurs.  There  is  a different  moulding 
called  both  * Pali  ' and  ‘ Palika  ' in  the  Manasara.  As  regards 
the  correctness  of  Dr.  Kern’s  rendering  of  the  term  by 


112 


ElAPOLA 


^ dove-ridge, ' or  of  Colebrooke’s  and  Sir  M.  Williams’s  by 
* dove-cot  ’ nothing  can  be  stated  definitely  as  the  term  is  nsed 
figuratively  to  indicate  a moulding. 

Kapota-palini-yukta-mato  g^chchhati  tuiyatam  j 

(Bhavishya-Pnrana,  chap.  130,  V.  31). 
Kona-paravatam  kuryat  stupy-achchhadanakani  cha  II 
Kona-paravatam  nyasya  kona-loshtani  vinyaset  II 

(Vasttt-vidya,  ed.  Ganapati  6astri,  xvi.  27,  36). 
Bahih  kapota-karapam  vajanopari  kalpayet  II 
Ardha-tri-pada-dandaih  va  kapota-lambanam  bhavet  II 

(Kamikagama,  Liv.  21,  22;  see  also  v.  36,  37). 
Ohatur-gunam  (of  the  main  temple)  mukhayamaih  prakaranam 
Yi^eshatah  i 

Kapotantam  samutsedham  hasta-vistara-bhittikam  ll 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  119). 
Kapota-palikayam  tu  vitankaih  pum-napuihsakam  II 

(Amarakosha,  ii.  3,  15). 

KAPOLA — The  cheek,  an  upper  part  of  a building. 

(1)  Prasadau  nirgatau  karyau  kapolau  garbha-manatah  \ 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  269,  V.  11). 

(2)  Chaturdha  feikharam  bhajya(m)  ardha-bhaga-dvayasya  tu  t 
^uka-naaam  prakurvlta  tritiye  vedika  mata  II 
Kan^ham  araalasaram  tu  chaturthe  parikalpayet  | 

Kapolayos  tu  sariiharo  dvi-guno’tra  vidhiyate  II 

{Ibid.  chap.  269,  18-19). 

(3)  Mukha-taram  kapolantara  nava-matram  pra&asyate  I 

(M.  lixili;  7). 

KABANDHANA — A knob  at  the  end  of  the  nail  above  the  post  of  the 
bedstead. 

Adhah  kllena  padanaih  madhye  randhram  pravetayet  \ 

Tad-tirdhve  pattikam  nyasya  kilagire  cha  kabandhanam  I 
Chaturbhih  arinkhaia-yuktam  andolaih  ohaikatoparii 
Beva-bhu-surarbhupanam  anyesham  ^ayanarthakam  I 

(M.  XLIV,  68-71). 


KA.MPA 


im 

K(H)A-BHITTI— An  upper  storey. 

Garbliadh.ana-krainanakaiii  kah(kha)-bliifctir  mnkhya-dhamani  }| 
iiLab(kha)-bbititer  dakshine  bhage  saumyuvfvsah  prasasyate  II 
£ali(kba)-bbitty-agrabhitter  dvara-dvayam  kuryad  vi&esh- 
atahU 

Vastn-dvara-yutam  obaiva  k(h)a-bhitte&  cha  vi&eshatah  II 
Vasfcunam  parivayor  madhye  stambba-sajfiam  nidhapayet  [ 
K(b)a-bhitti“Vistritartham  tu  tat-par&vayor  dvayor  hi  (tab)  li 
(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  45,  47,  48,  63 ; LV.  31), 
KAMALA — A lotus,  a class  of  the  six-storeyed  buildings, 

(M.  XXIV.  17-18,  see  under  Prasd^a). 
KAMALANG-A— A class  of  the  three-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXI.  33-38,  see  under  Frasada), 
KAMPA — ^A  fillet,  a small  flat  band  which  occurs  chiefly  between 
mouldings  to  connect  or  separate  them.  “ Of  all  the  rectangular 
mouldings  it  has  the  least  height.  Its  projection,  though  generally 
equal  to  its  altitude,  frequently  varies  according  to  the  position  of 
the  principal  members,  which,  it  is  employed,  to  connect  or  to 
separate.  It  answers  in  everj^  respect  to  the  fillet.  ” (Earn  ESz, 
Ess.  Arch.  Hind.  p.  24). 

Eeferring  to  the  pedestal : 

Utsedhe  tu  chatur-vimsat,... \ 

Ekena  kampam  ityuktam.. I 

Kampam  ardhaih  tatha  karnam I 

(M.  XIII.  36-37,  49). 

For  further  examples,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Upapz^ha. 
Eeferring  to  the  base  ; 

Ekona-triihtad  afigam  (==am&am)  tu  tugnam  kritya, I 

Kampam  ekena  kartavyam \ 

(M.  XIV.  14-16). 

For  further  examples,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Jdhishfdna, 

8 


114 


KAMPA-OTARA 


KAMPA>DVA.RA — A side-door,  a private  entrance. 

(1)  Kampa-dvaram  tn  va  knryan  madhya-parsva-dvayos  tatlia  \ 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  49). 

(2)  Mukhya-dvaraih  tu  tad-vame  kampa-dvaram  tad-anyake  \ 

(Ibid,  LY.  32). 

KAMPANA”*-(same  as  Kampa)— A fillet. 

Compare  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  AdhishthCma. 
KAMPA-BAHDHA— A class  of  bases.  It  has  four  types  differing 
from  one  another  in  height  and  in  the  addition  or  omission  of 
some  mouldings.  (See  M.  xiv.  361-372,  under  Adlmhthma), 
KAMPA-VEITTA — The  round  or  circular  fillet. 

Kampa-vrittaih.  oha  lupa-miile  ^obhartham  tu  balarthakam  1 

(M.  xviii.  2 74). 

KARANDA — A head-gear,  a basket  or  bee-hive-like  ornament. 
Karanda-makutopetam  rakta-vastrottariyakam  i 
Karanda-makutopetam  dhyatva. 1 

(M.  Vli.  164-206). 

Devanam  bhupatinam  oha  mauli-lakshanam  uohyate  1 
data -mauli-kiri tarn  cha  karandam  oha  §irastrakam(stranam)  1 
Eanyasa(m)  devatanam  oha  karanda-makutanvitam  l 

(M.  XMx.  12-13,  19). 

Dvi-bhu]am  oha  dvi-netram  cha  karanda-makutanvitam  I 

(M.  Liv.  69  76). 

EAEAVlRA — A fragrant  plant,  or  flower  (oleander  or  Nerium 
Odorum),  an  ornament  of  that  shape. 

In  connection  with  the  pent  roof : 

^ronyam  madhya-lupah  sarve(va)  lupa-samkhya  yatheshtaka  \ 
Earavira-bahu-varna  sariiputabham  vikalpayet  \ 

(M.  XYlli.  242-243). 

KARI-KARNA(NIEA) — The  ear  of  the  elephant,  (?  the  tip  of  an 
elephant’s  trunk,  karnika),  an  ornament  of  that  shape. 

Upabja(m)  karikarna- (another  reading,  karn,ikai)-yuktam  kuryat 
tat  kshudra-pithakam  I (M.  XXXII.  117). 


KARKAEi-KEITA 


115 


KARIKA— A moulding  of  a column. 

Vira-kama(-kanfeha)syodayaih  jfiatva  nava-bliaga(-e}  vibhajite  I 
Bkamlam  padukam  kuryat  pancha-bhagam  tu  samgraham  1 
Tad-urdbve  karikamfearh  syad  abjam  am&ena  yojayet  1 

(M.  XV.  176-178). 

KARUNA-VlNA — A flute,  a sculptural  ornament. 
Vadana-garuda-bhavam  bahukau  paksha-yuktau  I 
Makuta-kamala-ynkfeam  pushpa-saohchhaya-varnam  I 
Parita(h)  karunavina  kinnarasya  rupakam  I 

(M.  LVJii.  21-22). 

KAE.OTI(Tl)  —A  basin,  ttie  drum  of  tlie  ear,  an  ornament. 

An  ornament  of  the  pent  roof : 

Bvam  uktarii  lupa  ohordhve  ^ikliarair  vambare’pi  va  1 
Phalaka-kshepanarh  vapi  tftmram  vayasi  kilayet  I 
Hemajena  karotim  va  mrit-karotim  vidhanayet  I 

(M.  XVIII.  269-271). 

Referring  to  a single-storeyed  building  : 

Karotivad  alankrityu  lambane  patra-samyutam  1 

(M.  xm.  41). 

KARKATA— A moulding,  a kind  of  joinery  resembling  the  crab’s  lag, 
Karkatakanghrivat  kritva  pautra-nasanghrim  ve§ayet  \ 

Etat  sarhkirna-sandhih  syat  sarva-harmyesliu  yogyakam  1 

(M.XVIT.  143-148). 

KARKARl-KRITA— Paved  with  small  pieces  of  stone. 

(1)  Maha-margam  tu  sarveshiiih  vithinarh  karkari-kritam  \ 

VitherCthyfi  :)  etad  dvayam  proktarii  tan-madhye  karkari- 
kritam  \ 

(M.  IX.  197,  333). 

Referring  to  the  pedestal : ■ 

Prativajanakaiii  teshaih  kriteh  karkari-kritam  l 

(M.  XIII.  161). 

Referring  to  the  gate -house  (gopura) : 

Etat  tu  ^ikharaiii  proktam  karkari-nSsika-kritam  \ 

(M.  XXXTii.  561). 


116 


KARHA 


Berferring  to  the  Mandapa  (pavilion) : 

Tach-chatush-karna-de&e  tvi  karkari  chasta-bhaclrakam  I 
Tat  kariiaiii  cha  dvayor  bliadraih  chatiirtham  karkarl-kntam  \ 
Karkari-bhadra-saTbyuktam  mandapasya  vi&alakaml 

(M.  XXXIV.  305,  308,  809). 

Mandape  chordliva-kutaih  syat  saiakaraih  tu  yojayet  I 
Aslita-vaktra-samayaktaih  karneshii  karkari-kritam  I 

{Ibid,  530-581), 

Bef erring  to  the  Sala  (hall) : 

Veda-vedfirii&akam  madhye  vivritam  samvritahk(g)anam  \ 
Tad-hahis  cMvritamaena  karkari-samalahkritam  I 

(M.  XXXV.  300-301). 

(2)  In  connection  with  the  description  of  a svastika  (shaped) -house  : 
Pyishfche  tn  dirgha-koshfcham  syat  piirva-koshfcham  tathu 
bhavet  \ 

Bahya(-e)  bahya(-e)  ^ala-dvayam  netram  yuktam  tu  karkarl- 
yiitam  II 

(Kamikagama,  XLii.  7). 


KARNA-^The  ear,  a moulding,  any  side-object,  a corner-tower. 
Kainpam  ardhaih  tatha  karnam  tad-urdhve’mseua  pattika  I 

(M.  xm.  49). 

For  further  examples,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  UpapUha. 

A moulding  of  the  base  : 

Karna-tuiiga(ih)  tr(i)yaiii&aiu  syat  tad-iirdhve  kampa(m) 
sivam&akam  II 


(M.  xiY.  12). 

For  further  examples,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Adhisli- 
fhdna, 

A moulding  of  the  column  : 

Kumbhayamarh  tathotkarnam  urdhve  karua(m)  samam  bhavet  \ 

(M.  XV.  54), 

Referring  to  the  vimfina  (building  in  general) : 

Padraasyopari  karnaih  syfit  tat-tridhg.  kumbha-vistyitam  I 

(M.  xviii,  129). 


KAENA-KtTA 

Karjgiat  kanyavasanam  syaii  nava-suferam  prasarayet  \ 


m 


(I6iU235). 

Eeferring  to  the  door  ; 

Ardhena  kampa-samyuktam  karna(m)  bandh(T)amtaiii  iritam  \ 

(M.  xxxix.  69). 

Eeferriiig  to  the  Tula  (balance) : 

Suviitta-nala-de&e  tu  patra-mule  tu  karpa-yuk  \ 

(M.l.206). 

A moulding  of  a Vedika  (altar,  railing,  platform)  ; 

Vedikayam  vihinam  chet  kartri-drishti(r)  dinam  vrajet  \ 
Tat-karne’dhika-hmam  ched  bhojanena  vinatanam  I 

(M.  Lxix.  26-27). 

Eeferring  to  a single -storeyed  building  : 

Tad  eva  vedikam&ena  nava-bh5ga(-e)  vibhajite  \ 

Dvi-bhagam  vajanam  mCile  chordhve"  karnam  gunamfeakam  I 

(M.  xix.  64-66). 

KAENA-KUTA — (see  Kti^a-koshtha) — The  tower  at  the  corner  of 
the  roof,  the  side-niches. 

(1)  Karna-harmyasya  vistaram  shad-bhagam(ge)  tu  vibhajite  \ 
Ekamtam  karna-kutam  syan  madhye  tala  dvayamtakam  I 

(M.  XIX.  64-65,  see  also  167). 
In  connection  with  the  six-storeyed  buildings : 

Ekam  vatha  dvi-bhagaih  va  karna-kQta-vitalakam  \ 

Tale  tale  karna-kuta-koshtha-haradi-bhushitam  \ 
Karna-kuta-vitale  tu  tri-bhSgaikam  madhya-bhadrakain  \ 

(M.  xxiY.  29,  30,  33). 

Ekam  vatha  dvi-bhagam  va  karna-kuta-yitalakam  1 

(M.  XXV.  17). 

In  connection  with  the  gate-house  (gopura) : 

Evam  lalatayo's  ehaiva  dirgham  vinyasyam  uchyate  1 
Karna-ku^a-dvayaih  ehaiva  tad-bhaga-dvayam  iritam  \ 
Madhya-koshtham  ohaturtham  cha  karha-kutaih  chatush- 
tayam  \ 


(M.  xxxiii.  418-419,424). 


118 


KARNA-K.UTA 


(2)  Agra-karna-samayukfcam  karna-ku^a-dvayanvitam  !i 
Earjia-kiita-viMnaiii  va  ohanyat  sarvam  tu  vastiishu  II 
Gkatiiisli-kone  okatush-kutam  tad-vistarena  nirmitam  If 
Panjara-dvitayam  karyam  kama-kula-samoday^m  \ 
Pradhaiiavasa-netrastha-netra-kufca-dvayam  nayet  II 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  65,  66,  78,  75). 
Sarvam  aagaiii  sakhakararh  karna-kuta-YivarJitam  II 
Chatasras  tu  sabha  karya  kona-kuta-cbatushtayam  ii 

(IWd.  XLV.  41,  44). 

Kuta-koshtbaka-nidanam  pramanam  iha  kirfcitam  l 
Kiita-koshfchadi-sarvangam  mana-sutrad  bahir  nayefc  II 
Anfcah  pramaiia-stitrat  tu  vesauam  sarva-de^adam  1 
Cbafiur-asram  vasYasram  sbodasasram  tu  Yartulam  ti 
Mastakam  stupikopetam  karna-ku^m  idam  matam  I 
Madhye  nasa-sarDayukta.m  ardha-kuti-samanvitam  II 
Mukha-pattikayopetam  &akti-dvaya-samanYitam  I 
Aneka-stupikopetam  koshthakam  madhya^o  bbaYet  tl 
Hamsa-tuncla-mbhaih  prishthe  fealakaram  mukhe  mukhe  I 
Pafijararh  Yihitaiii  kuta-kosb|hayor  antaram  dYijab  Ii 
Par^Ya-Yaktram  tad  evasktain  hasti-tunda-sa-maudapain  I 
Esha  jati-kramat  proktah  karna-koshtha-samauvitam  II 
Madliye  ku^am  tayor  madbye  kslmdra-koabtbadi^obbitam  I 
Cbbandam  etat  samuddisbtam  kiitam  Ya  kosbthakam'tu  Ya  H' 
Antara-prastaropetam  nimnam  vonnatam  eva  YaT 
Vikalpam  iti  nirdisbtam  abhasam  tad  Yimiferitam  II 

(Ibid,  Lv.  123-130). 

(3)  Prastarad  ufdbYa-bbage  tu  karna-kuta-samayutam  Ii 

■ ■ (Suprabbedagama,  XXX,  30). 

“ I'be  attio  is  formed  of  different  kinds  of  little  paYiiipns. 
Those  which  are  at  the  angles  of  the  edifice  are  called 
Karna-kuta,  They  haYe  a roof  of-square  or  circular-  section 
and  are  surrounded  by  a single  awn,  st&pi” 

“ Those  which  are  placed  in  the  middle  are  called  s&la,  they 
have  an  elongated  roof  and  have  three  stupis’\ 


KAENA-HAEMYA 


il9 


“ Between  the  Karnar-kuta  and  &ala  are  found  some  kinds  of 
little  windows  called  Panjara.” 

(Dra vidian  Architecture  by  Jouveau-Buhreuil  ed« 
S.  Krishna  Swami  Aiyangar,  pp.  13,  6jl. 
KAENA'-EATEA— A leaf -like  ornament  for  the  ear. 

Tasyadho  ratna-damai(bhi)&  cha  lalatordhve^rdha-ohandravat  f 
Karna-patra  samayuktam  &rotrordhve  karna-pushpayuk  I 
Tasmat  tu  lambanam  dama  sarva-ratnair  alahkritam  \ 

(M.  xhix.  112  114). 

KAENA-PUEAKA  — An  ear-ornament. 

Kuryat  tri-valayopetaih  na  kuryat  tu  feikha-manim\ 

Srar'Va-ratnam  vinyaaya  vina  cha  karpa  ptirakam  1 

(M.  XLix.  188-139). 

KAENA-BAEBHA — An  ornament  for  the  ear,  a part  of  the  ear. 
Karpa-bandhaih  karna-rudraksha-mala  \ 

(M.lxii.67). 

The  lower  part  of  the  ear ; 

Hanvantam  karna-bandhantaih  dvayantaraim  datanguiairH 

(M.  LXY.  102). 


KAENA-HAEMYA — A tower,  a side-tower. 

In  connection  with  single -storeyed  buildings  : 

Karna-iiarmyasya  vistaram  shad-bhagam  tu  vibhajite  \ 

Ekamtam  karna-kutam  sySn  madhye  tala  dvayaihtakam  1 
Ekam  va  dvi-tri-dandena  nirgamam  bhadram  eva  va  1 
6ala-ku.ta-dvayor  madhye  chaika-hara  sa-pahjaram  t 
Tat-tuhga(m)  sapta-bhagam  syad  ekamtam  vedikodayam  \ 
Tad-urdhve’dhyardha-bhagena  galam  tryamtaba(sena)  mastakam  I 
Tad-ardham  stupikottuhgam  karna-harmyarn  iti  smritam  \ 

(M.  XIX.  64-60). 

Mandape  prastarasyordhve  karna  (another  reading,  khanda)- 
harmyadi-manditam  \ 

(Z&id.  214). 


Stupi-tuhgam  dvayamsam  syad  dvi-tale  tad  dvitiyakam 
Tad  -evordhyam  adhishthanam  vimanam8eka(aika)-Yitastikam  I 


120  KAKHIKA 

Tad-tirdhve’ngh|'i  saram&am  syat  kama-harmyadi-mandlitam  I 

(M.  XX.  14-16). 

Praohchhadanopari  stambham  karna-harmyadi-manditam  I 

(M.xxxi.  10). 

Tad-urdhve  mapdapanam  oha  chulika  kar^a-liarmyakain  I 

(M.  XXXIV.  64). 

Harmye  ohordbva-tale  padam  b»bya-kufcadi(m)  vinyaset  I 

Karna-harmyakritim  vatba  saiitara-prasfearam  tu  va  I 

(M,  XX.  67-58). 

Of.  They  (tombs  of  the  Bajas  at  Mahadevapura  in  Coorg  from 
1809)  are  square  buildings,  much  in  the  Muhammadan  style, 
on  well-raised  basements,  with  a handsome  dome  in  the  centre, 
and  minaret-like  turrets  at  the  four  corners  (?  Karna-harmya) 
surmounted  by  basavas  or  bulls.  On  the  top  of  the  dome  is 
a gilded  ball,  with  a vane.  All  the  windows  have  well- 
carved  syenite  frames  with  solid  brass  bars...;..,..,,.,.,.,  Opod 
wood-carving  may  sometimes  be  seen  in  the  domestic  archite- 
cture.” (Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  i.  Introduction,  p.  27,  last  paragraph). 

K^BNIKA — G-enerally  implies  a crowning  projection  and  resem- 
bles the  cornice  i.e.,  the  crowning  or  upper  portion  of  the 
entablature. 

Vistare  pafioha-bhage  tu  vedardham  padma-vistritam  I 

Padma-tara-tri-bhagaikam  karnika-vistyitam  bhavet  I 

(M.  xxxn.  110-111). 

A moulding  of  the  entablature  : 

Kapota-nasika-kshudra-nivrordhve  sthita-kaniika  l( 

Vatahata-ohalaoh-charu-iatavat  karnika-kriyS  II  ■ 

(Kamikagama,  uv.  37,  40.) 

KABBIKABA — A pavilion  with  20  pillars,  a tree,  a class  of  people. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  y.  13„8ee  under  Mapdapa). 

Mahendre  vatha  satye  va  karnikaralayam  bhavet  I 


(M.  IX.  238). 


KALASA 


121 


EALA6  (S)A--(of.  Stupi) — A pitcher,  a cupola,  a finial,  a dome,  a 
pinnacle,  a tower,  a type  of  round  building. 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (obap.  104,  v.  17-18,  see  under  Pritsada). 

(2)  Q-aruda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  21,  23,  28-29,  see  under  Pra- 

sada). 

(3)  Stambhardham  kalatad  babye  lata-vartanam  ishyate  II 
Mushti-bandbopari  kshiptarii  vyalantam  kalassVadhi  II 

(Kamikagarna,  LV,  103,  109). 

(4)  Dome  : Kaficbananda-kalasa  I 

(Kbajurabo  Inscrip,  no.  v,  line  19,  Ep.  Ind.  vpl.  I.  p.  150). 

(6)  Pinnacle  : Yimanopari  sauvarpnab  kalata........pratishtbapitSb  I 

Placed  golden  pinnacle  on  the  shrine. 

(Yena-Madala  Inscrip,  of  Gana-pamba,  v.  17,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  in.  pp.  99, 102). 

(6)  Dome  or  pinnacle  : 

DeYalayais  sudba-feubbrais  snYarna-kalatamkitaih  I 
Pataka -ohuibbitambbodair  yyad-dbarmmo  nita  unnatim  II 

(Two  pillar  insorip.  at  Amaravati,  no.  A,  Insprip. 
of  Keta  II,  Y.  43,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  Yl.  p.  162). 

(7)  Prasadam  navabbi^  oba  hema-kalalair  atyunnatam  gopura- 

prakarotsava-mamtapair  upaohitam  tri-Kamabbadraya  oba  I 
An  exceedingly  high  temple  ftirnisbed  with  nine  gilt  domes, 
a gate-tower,  a wall,  and  a festive  ball,  to  the  holy 
Bamabhadra.” 

(Kondavidu  Insorip.  of  Erisbnaraya,  v.  27,  Bp. 

Ind.  vol.  VI.  pp,  237,  331). 

(8)  Suvarnpa-kalasa-sthapana  oba*— in  setting  golden  pinnacles  (on 

temples). 

(Karkala  Inscrip,  of  Bbaira-va  ii,  luie  18,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  VIII.  pp.  132,  136). 

(9)  Abbinava-niabpanna-preksha-madbya-mamdape 

Suvarnnamaya-kala^a-ropana-pratisbtha  kyita — “ the  ceremony 

of  placing  a golden  cupola  on  the  newly  made  central  hall, 


122 


KALASA 


intended  for  dramatio  performances  was  carried  out/’ 

(The  Chahamanas  of  Marwar,  no.  XEX,  Jalor 
stone  Insorip.  of  Samarasimhadeva,  lines  5, 
6,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  XI.  p.  56). 

(10)  TJttnmgataspada-devayatanagra-hema-kala&am.... 

purnna-kalatam “The  golden  on  the  summit 

of  the^  god’s  dwelling,  a seat  of  exaltation like  a full 

pitcher.” 

(Insorip.  at  Ittagi,  A of  A.  B.  1112,  y.  64,  Ep. 

Ind.  YOl.  XIII.  pp.  46,  66). 

(11)  “ And  Vi^akarmma  built  his  temple  (Ananta-Koti&- 

vara)  with  complete  devotion,  adorned  with  all  manner  of 
pictures,  its  fronts  brilliant  with  many  golden  kala'sas  decked 
with  precious  stones,  its  tower  kissing  the  clouds.^^ 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  viii.  part  i,  Sorab  Taluq,  no.  276, 
Transl.  p.  47,  second  para,  last  sentence). 

(12)  “ We  grant  to  you,  in  addition,  two  five-branched  torches,  five 

kalatas  above  the  palanquin  and  so  forth.” 

(Ep.  Oarnat.  vol.  vili.  part  i,  Nagar  Taluq,  no.  68, 
p.  163,  Transl.  line  12). 

(13)  Chakre  jambu-nadyiair  gurutara-kalatair  bhasvarair  eka- 

vimfeaih  1 

Nepala-kshoni-palah  prathita-bhuia-bhushapam  tan- 
mathasya  II  , 

(Insorip.  from  Nepal,  no.  17,  Insorip.  of  Siddhi 
Nrisimha  of  Lalita  pattana,  v.  17,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  IX.  pp.  186, 187,  c.  1). 

(14)  “ Above  the  seventh  or  highest  row  of  cells,  there  is  a 

roomy  terrace  occupied  by  four  large  bulls  couchant  at  the 
corners  and  from  the  centre  rises  a comparatively  slender 
neck  surmounted  by  an  umbrella  or  semi-dome  crowned 
by  the  usual  kalaka  or  finial.” 

(Gangai-Konda-puram  6aiva  temple,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XI.  p.  118,  c.  1). 


EALASA 


123 


(16)  “ Erected  a new  gopuxa  with  golden  finials  (suvarna-kalasa) 
in  the  Chamnnde&vari  hill.” 

(Ep,  Garnat.  vol.  in.  Mysore  Talnq,  no.  20,  T ansi. 

p.  3,  Eoman  text,  p.  6). 

(16)  “ The  pinnacle  (halasa)  of  a rained  temple  in  the  fort  of 

Bellur,  in  Naga  mahgala  Taluq  shows  exactly  what  the 
•finral  ornament  of  this  style  of  temple  was,  which  Fer- 
gusson,  from  its  appearance  in  photographs,  mistook  for  a 
lantern  and  though  unable  to  account  for  so  incongruous 
a feature  introduced  it  into  his  picture  of  Halebid  temple 
restored  (Hist,  of  Ind.  and  East.  Arch.  p.  400).  The 
crowning  ornament  is  really  a Kalata  or  sacrificial  vase, 
such  as  is  used  at  the  final  consecration  ceremonies,  round 
the  rim  of  which  is  tied  a cloth  in  narrow  folds  and  knot- 
ted into  a bunch  at  each  of  the  four  cardinal  points,  In 
later  ornamentation  the  cloth  was  replaced  by  wreaths  of 
leaves  and  flowers  with  a cluster  or  bouquet  at  the  four 
points  the  sprays  and  flowers  depending  from  which  went 
down  as  far  as  the  root  of  the  vase,  and  thus  produced  the 
appaarauoQ  which  in  the  picture  suggested  a lantern.  ” 

(Ep.  Garnat.  vol.  iv  Introduction,  p.  38). 

(17)  Saiimya-kesava-nathasya  gopuragre  hirap.mayi  \ 

Sthapita  kala^i  gunda-danda-niithena  ^afevati  11 
Saudhagram  iijvalad  anyuna-divakarabho  1 
Balatapa-pratima-kantir  aharni^aih  yah  11 

(Bp.  Garnat.  vol.  v,  part  i,  Belur  Taluq,.  no.  3, 
Boinan  text,  p.  103,  last  two  verses ; Ttansl. 

p.  46,  para  1,  last  two  lines). 

(18)  Murahara-bhavanada  Aalakheyaui  madisi  vistaradim 

kala&ama  nilisida— “ He  made  a spire  to  the  temple  of 
Murahara,  and  fixed  a kalasa  upon  it.  ” 

(Ep.  Garnat.  vol.  v.  part  - i,  Arsikere  Taluq, 
no.  131,  Eoman  text,  p.  396,  Transl.  p.  172). 


124 


kalaSa-bandha 


(19)  Aiieka-ratjna-khachita-riicMra-man£-kaik8a-.kalifca--kQfca-ko1^i- 

ghalitam  apy-uttunga-cliaifcyaiayam — “ kaving  erected., a 

lofty  chaityalaya,  with  kalaHs  (perhaps  by  mistake  Mr.  Eioe 
has  put  in  gopuraa)  or  tower?  surmounted  by  rounded 
pinnacles  set  with  all  manner  of  jewels.  ” 

(Bp.  Oamat.  vol.  vi.  Mudgere  Taluq,  no,.  122,  Eoman 
text,  p.  148,  line  12 ; Tranal.  p.  63,  para  2). 

(20)  “ Kalata,  a term  applied  generally  to  the  summit  of  a tower ; 

also  a pot  or  vessel  with  water  and  some  grains  in  it.” 

(Eea,  Chalnkyan  Architecture,  Arch.  Surv.  new 
Imp.  series,  vol.  xxi.  p.  38). 

(21)  “ Kalasa  (Kalas) — pinnacle  of  temple  steeple.’^ 

(Smith, Gloss  (loo.  cit)  to  Cunningham-Arch.  surv.  Eeporbs). 

(22)  See  Maghul  arch,  of  Batepur-Sikri,  Smith,  Arch.  Surv.  new 

imp.  series,  vol.  xviil.  plate  Lxn,  fig.  1,  2,  3 ; 

Essay  on  Arch,  of  Hind.  Earn  Ea25,  plates  xx  to  SLii* ; 

Mysore  Arch.  Eeport,  1914-16,  plate  xiv.  fig.  3,  p.  28  ; fig.  1, 
p.  22 ; plate  v.  fig.  2,  p.  10 ; Top  of  tower  of  Bhoganan- 
disvara  shrine  at  Nandi,  ibid.  1913-14,  plate  Ti.  fig.  2, 

p.  16 ; 

Cunningham  Arch.  surv.  Eeports,  vol.  vii.  plates  xvil 
(showing  the  details  of  the  mouldings  of  the  tower  of  the 
temple  at  Khalari) ; xiv  (showing  the  mouldings  and  section 
of  another  temple  tower). 

KALA8A-BANDHA~(see  Kumbha-bandha) — A class  of  bases. 

(M.  XIV.  196-239,  see  under  Adhish^hana). 
KALAPAKA—A  tuft  of  braided  hair,  a sectarian  mark  on  the  fore- 
head of  an  image. 

Prakoshte  valayam  ohaiva  mani-bandha-kalapakam  I 

(H.  L.  16,  etc.). 

KALKA—A  paste  used  as  plaster  or  cement,  also  called  yoga 
(mixture). 

(Brihat-sarhhita,  Lvn.  3,  6,  7,  8,  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  - 
S.,  vol.  VI.  pp.  321,  322). 


KALPA-DEUMA 


125 


KALPA-DEUMA.  )The  ornamental  tree,  employed  as  a carving  (see 
K ALPA-YMKSHA  5 ^.ri -vriksha) . 

(1)  Miiiiasara  (chap.  XLViir.  1-77)  : 

The  name  of  the  chapter  is  JKalpa-vviksha.  wliicli  literally 
means  !a  tree  yielding  all  wishes,  or,  in  other  words,  an  ali- 
prodnctive  tree.  This  tree  is  used  as  an  ornament  of  the 
throne  of  gods  and  kings  (lines  1-2).  Such  a tree  is  made 
above  the  throne  and  the  arch,  as  well  as  at  the  middle 
of  the  length  of  the  throne  (4-5).  It  is  also  constructed 
inside  the  Mukta-prapahga  or  an  open  courtyard,  the 
Mandapa  or  a pavilion,  and  the  Eoyal  palace  (68-69). 
Beyond  the  front  of  the  ornamental  tree,  there  should  be 
represented  a yard  where  the  votaries  of  gods  and  kings 
are  seated  in  the  pose  of  praising  and  w^orshipping  them 
(70-76). 

The  minute  description  and  measurement  of  all  the  various 
parts  of  the  tree  are  given.  The  tree  is  coiled  round  with 
a serpent  the  outspread  hood  of  which  reaches  the  top 
(11-12).  The  measurement  of  the  hood  and  tail  of  the 
serpent  is  described  at  great  length  (13-20).  The  number 
of  branches  as  also  t he  measurement  of  them  varies  accord- 
ing to  the  various  thrones  for  the  decoration  of  which  the 
tree  is  constructed  (21-43).  The  tree  is  beautifully 
decorated  with  creepers,  leaves  and  flowers  of  various 
colours  and  forms  (114-165,  62-66).  Bees  are  repre- 
sented on  the  branches  (66).  Jewels  and  garlands  of 
pearls  are  inserted  in  suitable  places  (57).  The  figures 
of  monkeys,  deities  and  semi-divine  beings  (Siddhas, 
Vidyadharas,  etc.)  are  beautifully  carved  in  the  intervals 
between  the  branches  (58— 61) . 

Many  other  particulars  regarding  the  ornamental  tree  are 
expressly  left  to  the  choice  and  discretion  of  the  artists  : 

Evam  tu  kalpa-vrikshah  syat  teshaih  yuktya  prayojayet  \ 167 


126 


KALPA-DHUMA 


Tasya  madliye  clia  range  tu  maukbtkena-prapanvifcam  | 

Tan-madhye  ^asanadmarii  toranatii  kalpa-vriksiiakam  \ 

(M.  XXXIV.  218-219). 

A carving  on  the  car  : 

Kalpa-vriksha-yufca-ohakravarbibhir  manditam  kurii  sarva- 
vedibhih  \ 

CM.  XLIIL  169-170). 

The  materials  of  which  the  tree  is  constructed  : 

Simhasanaih  makara-torana-kalpa-vriksham  \ 

Mukta-prapangam  api  darii-^ileshtakadyaih  i 

Eatnair  aneka-bahu-loha-viseshakait  oha  (Euryat)  I 

(M.  XLYii.  30-33). 

Patohat  simhasanadyaia  oha  kalpa-vyiksham  cha  toranam  I 

(M.  XLix.  185). 

Padma-pitham  maha-pithath  tri-murtinam  cha  yojayet  \ 

Prapa  cha  toranam  vapi  kalpa-vriksham  oha  samyutam  I 

(M.  LI.  86-87). 

Apare  tu  niryuharii  kiiryan  makara-toranam  \ 

Tad-virdhve  kalpa-vrlkshaih  syat  sa-haC?  ga)jendra-tva(?  sya) 
raih  saha  I 

(M.  LV.  79-80). 

(2)  “ (He")  covered  with  fine  gold  the  enclosure,  the  gate-towers, 

halls  and  buildings  surrounding  the  shrine  of  pure  gold ; 

covered  with  splendid  gold  the  altar  on  which  offerings 

abound ; covered  with  pure  gold  and  adorned  with 

numerous  strings  of  large  round  pearls  the  sacred  car  temple 
...i.... ; was  pleased  to  build  a long  temple  street  of  mansions 
covered  with  jewels  and  called  it  after  his  royal  prosperous 
name;  and  made  numberless  splendid  insignia,  beginning 
with  dishes  cut  off  fine  gold,  together  with  a Kalpa  (tree)  of 
pure  gold.” 

(Tnscrip.  at  Tirumalavadi,  no.  79,  lines  14-23, 
H.  S.  I.  I.  vol.  ni.  p.  186). 


KAVATA 


U1 


Boshonmosha-vrisha-praghosha-divisliat-sautosiia-posha- 
ksharnali  samyatatula-tirfcha-bhuta-parisiiat-satkara-kalpa- 
drumah  t 

Nana-maiigala-divya-vastu-nivyitias  taurya-trikollasito  hri- 
dyah  ko*pi  sa  vasarali  samabhaval-loka-pramodoj]valali  il 

(Inscrip,  from  Nepal,  no.  23,  Inscrip,  of  Queen 
Lalita-bripura-sundari,  v.  4,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix. 

p.  194). 

KALYA.NA — A class  of  the  five-storeyed  buildings,  (same  as  G-riha- 
kanta). 

(M.  XXIII.  30-32,  see  under  Prasada). 
KALYANA-MANDAPA—A  wedding-pavilion. 

(See  details  under  Mandapa), 
KAYATA—The  leaf  or  panel  of  a door,  a door. 

(1)  Vastu-vidya,  (ed.  (xanapati  §astri),  xiv.  l ; 

Kavata-dvitayam  kuryan  matri-putry-abhidham  budhah  II 

(2)  Kautiliya-Arbha-sastra,  chap.  XXIV,  p.  53  : 

Tri-pancha-bhagikau  dvaukavata-yogau  1 

(3)  Kamikiigama,  lv  : 

Deva-dvija-narendraiaam  kavata-yugalarii  matam  1 
Anyayor  ekam  uddishtam  maha-dvare  ohatiir-yugam  II  51 
Aneka-srinkhalopetam  bahu-kundala-bhrishitam  \ 
Kavata-yugmaiii  kartavyam  kokilargala-saihyutam  II  62 
Bhitti-madhyad  bahis  tasya(h)  stambha-yoga-kavata-yuk  1 
Kavata-yugalam  va-ekam  ghafcanodghatam  samam  II  166 
See  also  verses,  38,  49,  63. 

Ibid.  XLi.  8 : 

J alaka's  oha  kavata's  cha  bahye  bahye  prakalpayet  11 

(4)  Eg,mayana,  VI.  39.  27  etc. : 

Purirh  maha-yantra-kavata-mukhyam  i 

(5)  Manasara  : 

Yon(g)yam  kavata-yugmaih  cha  ^reshtham  madhyatii  cha 
harmyake  1 

(M.  XIX.  152), 


12B 


KAKASHTA 


Daksiiine  cha  kava^e  tii  dvaram  kuiyat  fcu  mukhyake  I 
BeTanam  cha  maimshyanam  maha-dvaram  kavatake  \ 

(M.  xsxviil.  9,11). 

oompated  with  ‘ prakara’ : 

Bakshinasya  kavatarix  tu  viSaladhikain  ayatah  l 
Eka-dvi-tryahg\ilam  vapi  kavataih  syat  dvi-hastakam  \ 
liurySt  kavata-dirgheshu  kshepanaiii  vistiito’dhikam  I 
Prakare  cha  maha-dvaram  kahudra-dvaram  kavatake  1 

(M.  XXXIX.  101,  102, 108,  115;  see  also  124437). 
(6)  “ He,  the  emperor  of  the  south,  caused  to  be  made  of  stone  for 
Yijaya-uarajana  temple,  latticed  window,  secure  door-frame, 
(di’idha-kavatam),  door-lintel,  kitchen,  ramparts,  pavilion, 
and  a pond  named  the  Yasudeva-tirtha.^’ 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  i,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  72, 
Transl.  p.  61,  Roman  text,  p.  142,  line  7), 
KAKASHTA — ^A  synonym  of  Paiyahka  or  bedstead., 

(M.  in.  11-12,  see  imder  Paryahka), 
KACHA— 'A  house  with  a southern  and  northern  halh 

(Bvihat-sanihitS,.  Lin.  40). 

KANTA— A type  of  pavilion. 

CM.  XXXIV.  513-616,  see  under  Mandapa). 
KAHTARA— A large  forest,  a difficult  road,  a class  of  the  six-storeyed 
buildings. 

(M.  XXIV.  13-14,  see  under  Prasada). 
KAMA-KOSHTA — comfortable  compartment,  usually  a bed-room,  a 
temple  of  one  of  the  32  attendant  deities. 

Jayante  hhaskaram  sthapya(m)  i&e  pasupatam  tatha  I 
Athava  kama-koshthaih  syad  alayam  kalpayet  sudhih  \ 

Dvatrimtan  murtir  evarii  va  kuryat  tu  parivarakam  I 

CM.  XXXII.  68-60). 

KAMAKSHI-DHARMA'MAHBAPA— Atype  of  pavilion. 

(Madras  Museum  Plates  of  Srigiri-bhu-pala,  V.  21-22, 
Ep.  Ind,  vol,  Till,  pp,  311,  316,  see  under 

Mandapa). 


KALA-MUKHA 


m 


KAMYA — A class  of ’biaildings. 

Pafioha-prakara-harmyanam  adhuna  vaksliyate  kramat  t 
Kamyadi-bheda-harmyanam  tan-manena  vinyaset  1 

(M.  XXXI.  2-3). 

.Nitya-naimittikakhyadi-kamyair  api  cha  sarvabhih  \ 

(M.  XLyii.  27). 

KAEAPAKA — ^Persons  appointed  to  look  after  tlie  construction  of  a 
temple. 

Karapakas  tu  sunuk  pitamahakbyasya  satya-devakhyah  \ 

Gosbthya  prasadaparaya  nirnpito  janmana  sa  vanik  II 
“ The  Aarapaka  selected  by  the  Goshthi  (assembly)  to  see  this 
work  through  was  Satyadeva,  the  son  of  Pitamaha,  who  was 
a merchant  by  birth.”  B.  E.  Bhandarkar  also  refers  to 
Prof.  Kielhorn,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xix,  p.  62,  no.  63,  “persons 
appointed  to  look  after  the  construction  of  the  temple.” 

(Vasantagadh  Inscrip.  of  Varmalata,  v.  9,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  IX.  pp.  192, 189,  notes  4 and  8). 

Cf.  Gomanasa  Karavakasa  \ 

“ The  gift  of  Gomana  the  Karavaka  ”( =karapaka). 

(Four  early  Inscrip.  no.  B,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  xil.  p.  301). 
KAEMUKA— A kind  of  village  fM.  ix.  3,  462-472,  see  under  Grama). 
It  is  situated  on  the  banks  of  a river  or  sea  (Nadi-tire’bdhi-tire 
va  karmukam  cha  vinyaset,  ibid.  469).  Its  plan  is  like  a bow 
(Tad-dvayor  vithi-bahye  tu  karmukakaravat  prithak,  ibid.  463). 
See  further  details  under  Grama. 

KAEYA-SUTEA — The  plumb-lines  drawn  for  the  purpose  of  the 
sculptural  measurement. 

(M.  Lxvii.  93,  see  under  Pralamba). 
KALA-KUIA— A kind  of  poison,  the  cobra  represented  on  the  neck 
of  the  image  of  6iva. 

Grivasya  vama-par^ve  tu  kala-ku^-samanvitam  1 

(M.  Li.  80). 

KALA-MUKHA— A kind  of  Phallus. 

(M.  LII,  2,  LXVIII.  2,  see  under  Linga). 
9 


130 


KALINGA 


KALIN GA-  (K AN T A) — A class,  of  the  twelve-storeyed  huildings  once 
prevailing  in  the  country  along  the  Coromandel  coast 
Madhya-kantam  iti  proktam  tasya  knta-dvi-bhagike  \ 

Ann-feala  shad-am^am  syat  tasyahgam  purvavad  hhavet  I 
E vam  kalihga-kantam  syan  nanakaranga-samyuktam  1 

(M.  XXXI.  14-16). 

KIKITA— A diadem,  a crown,  a tiara. 

Devanarii  bhu-patinam  cha  manli-lakshanam  nohyate  1 
Jata-mauli-kiritaih  cha  karandam  cha  ^irastrakam  \ 

(M.xlix.  12-13). 

Kirita-makutam  chaiva  narayanam&a-yogyakam  I 

(Ibid.  18). 

KI]lIIBAEA(-EI) — A crocodile,  a shark. 

Ohitra-toranam graha-kimbara-samyuktam  \ 

(M.  XLVI.  52-53, 

Syama-varnam  mnkham  sarvam  kimbari-makarananam  \ 

(M.  xviii.  311} 

In  connection  with  the  ^alas  or  bnildings 
Sarve(a)-&ala-nasika-toranadyaih  I 
Patrai&  ohitraih  kimbari-vaktra-yuktam  \ 

(M.  XXXV.  401-402) 

In  connection  with  the  single-storeyed  buildings  : 

Nasikagrantam  sarvam  kinibari-samalankritam  \ 

(M.  XIX.  36) 

KISHKXJ — ^A  measure,  a cubit  of  24  or  42  ahgulas. 

Kishku(h)  smrito  dvi-ratnis  tu  dvi-ohatvarimtad  ahgulah  \ 
(Brahmanda-Purana,  part  I,  2nd  anushahga-pada,  chap.  7,  V.  99)- 
But  according  to  the  Suprabhedagama  (xxx.  25,  see  under  Ahgula), 
it  is  a cubit  of  24  ahgulas,  which  in  the  above  Purana  (v.  99)  is 
called  aratni. 

KlETANA — (also  Kirttana)— A temple,  a shrine. 

(1)  S(t)ambhor  yo  dva-das(t)api  vyarachayad  aohirat  kirt- 
tanani— who  erected  (soon)  twelve  temple  of  Sambhu.  ^' 
Mr.  Telang  at  the  suggestion  of  Pandit  Bhagvan  Lai. 

(New  Silara  copper  , plate  grant,  line  7,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  IX.  pp.  34,  36,  and  note  13). 


kIetanA 


131 


(2)  Kartapi  yasya  khalu  -viamayam  apa  ^ilpi  tan-nama-kirttanam 

akaryyata  rajna  I 

“ This  is  the  abode  of  Svayambhu  Siva,  and  no  artificially 
made  (dwelling)  ; Sri,  (if  she  conld  be)  seen,  (would  be) 
such  as  this.  Verily  even  the  architect  who  built  it  felt 
astonishment,  saying  * (the  utmost)  perseverance  would 
fail  to  accomplish  such  a work  again  ; aho  I how  has  it 
been  achieved  by  me?’  (and),  by  reason  of  it  the  king 
was  caused  to  praise  hiis  name.  ” Dr.  Fleet. 

(Skt.  and  Old  Canarese  Inscrip,  no.  cxxvii,  line  14 
f.  Ind,  Ant.  vol.  xii.  pp.  169, 163.  c.l). 

(3)  Dr.  Hultesch  referring  to  the  passage  quoted  above  says  : 

“ The  word  ' Kirtana  ’ has  been  understood  in  its  usual 
and  etymological  sense  by  Mr.  Fleet  and  the  first  trans- 
lator (B.  A.  S.  J.  vol.  VIII,  p.  292  f.,  Mr,  Prinsep)  ; that 
sense  is  not  at'all  appropriate  here  and  the  word  must  be 
taken  to  signify  a temple  ^ He  then  refers  to  the  ^iliira 
grant  mentioned  above  and  quotes  the  following  : 

(a)  Kirtanani  chg  karayet  \ 

“ Cause  temples  to  be  constructed.'’ 

(^ni-Purana,  Bib.  Ind.  vol.  i.  p.  HI). 

(6)  Kurvan  kirtanani  lekhayan  &asanani,..,....prithmm 

viohaohara — he  travelled  the  earth, constructing 

temples,  causing  grants  to  be  written,  etc.,  (Sana’s 
Kadambari). 

(c)  Purta-kirtanoddharanena  tu— by  the  restoration  of  dila- 
pidated works  of  public  utility  (such  as  tanks,  wells, 
etc.)  and  temple.'’ 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  Xli.  pp.  228-229). 

(4)  “ In  addition  to  the  authorities  quoted  by  Bhandarkar  in 

support  of  this  meaning  of  Kirttana  (in  no.  2 above), 


132 


KlBTLVAKTRA 


I have  since  found  that  it  is  used  in  the  same  sense  in  the 
five  inscriptions  of  Devalabdhi,  the  grandson  of  the 
Chandella  king  Yafeovarman  and  the  son  of  Ki-ishnapa  and 
Asarvva,  in  the  temple  of  Brahma  at  Dudahi  (Arch.  Survey 
of  Ind.  vol.  X.  plate  xxxii).”  Dr.  Fleet. 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xii.  p.  289,  c.2). 
(6)  Aohikarat  kirttanam — ^built  temples. 

(G-walior  Insorip.  v.  15,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xv.  pp.  203, 

202,  note  8). 

(6)  Kirttanam  idam  sarvvam  karitam  (a.  line  9 f). 

Kirttanam  idam  sarvvam  api  (b.  line  8 f). 

Sarvva-kirttanam  idam  (c.  line  5). 

^aktam  kirttanam  idam  (d.  line  3). 

Kirttanam  idam  (e) 

In  all  these  places,  ‘ Kirttana’  means  a temple. 

(Chandella  Inscrip,  no.  A,  Dudahi  stone  Insdrip. 
of  Devalabdhi,  a grandson  of  Yo§ovarman,  Ind. 

Ant.  vol.  XVIII.  p.  237). 

(7)  Cf.  Sa  dakshin^arkkasya.... chakara  kirttim  bahu-kirtti- 

nathah — he  famous  for  many  (good)  deeds  made  the  temple 
of  Dakshinarka. 

(Gaya  Insorip.  of  Vikrama-samvat  1429,  lines  4-5, 
8,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xx.  pp.  314-316). 
KlRTI-VAKIJRA — The  mounmental  face. 

In  connection  with  the  ■ mukha-bhadra  ’ or  front  tebrnacle  : 
Tad-urdhve  kirti-vaktram  tu  nirgamakriti(r)  bhavet  \ 

(M,  XVIII.  293). 

KIRTI-STAMBHA — A memorial  or  monumental  pillar. 

(Ahmadabad  Arch.  Burgress,  Arch.  Sur.  new.  Imp. 
series,  vol.  XXXIII.  p.  94,  see  under  Stambha). 
KiLA — ^A  stake,  pin,  nail,  wedge. 

Etat  tu  pratimarii  bhavet  l 

Kila-tara-samady-ardaih  dvi-gunam  va  galaka  bhavet  \ 

(M.  XII.  122-123). 


KUKSHI 


133 


In  connection  with  joinery  : . 

Mulagre  kilakam  yuktam  ardha-prSnam  iti  smritain  I 

(M.  xyn.  .99). 

In  connection  with  the  looking-glass  : 

Darpanasya  tri-bhagaikam  mule  kilayatam  tatha  \ 

(M.  L.  120). 

See  also  M.  XXXIX.  121-123. 

KILA-BHA.JANA-— The  pin-hold. 

In  connection  with  the  door : 

Kila-hhajanam  ity-uktam  kilanam  bn  pravakahyate  I 

(M.  XXXIX.  119,  see  also  120-131). 

KILA-SULAKA — The  pin-point. 

In  connection  with  the  door : 

Knryat  tat  kava^anam  yukbya  tat  kila-tulakam  I 

(M.  XXXIX.  128). 

KUKSHI— The  belly,  a cavity,  the  middle  part,  the  interior. 

In  connection  with  the  foundations ; 

G-ramadinam  nagaradinam  pura-pattana-kharva^e  \ 
Eoshtha-koladi-sarvesham  garbha-sthanam  ihoohyate  \ 
Sthira-vastu-kukshi-de&e  tu  chara-vastu  tathSpi  oha  I 
Grama-dvarasya  yoge  va  garkha-tvabhram  prakalpayet  \ 

(M.  XII.  168-171), 

In  connection  with  the  pent  roof  (lupa) : 

Tat-sutrad  adho  dete  kukshim  jnatva  purordhvake  \ 

(M.  xvm.  286), 

In  connection  with  the  front  tabernacle  (mukha-bhadra) : 
Pahoham&a-dvi(-ya)m&a-taram  syad  ardham  va  kukshi-vistritam  \ 
Knkshy-antaram  sadma-saniyuktam  vatayanam  athapi  va  1 

(Ibid.  286-287). 

In  connection  with  the  single-storeyed  buildings  : 

Nasi-taram  tri-bhagaikam  kukshshi-taram  iti  smritam  \ 

(M.  XIX.  37)» 


m 


KUKSHI-BANDHA 


In  connection  witli  the  cliariot  (ratlia)  : 

Yistaram  cha  tridha  kritYa  madhye  kuik3hy.(im)-am^akena  tu  \ 
Pancha-dalam  cha  vipulaih  nalam  kuksh(as)ya  ve^anam  \ 

(M.  XLin.  12,14). 

In  connection  with  the  arch ; 

Eatnakarahganair  ynktam  kukshir  avrita-lambitam  , 

Toranasyopari  dete  tu  bhujanga-pada-dvayor  api  I 

(M.  XLvi.  59). 

Mukham  vaksha&.  cha  kukshir  cha  kati-dirghe  dva-da^amtakam  \ 

(M.  Lvii.  65). 

Kukshi-tarashta-matram  syat t 

(M.  LX.  14). 

KUKSHI-BANDHA- — A class  of  bases  ; it  has  four  types  differing 
from  one  another  in  height  and  the  addition  or  omission  of  soirifl 
mouldings. 

(M.  XIV.  319-369,  see  under  Adhish^hana). 
KIJCHA-BANDHANA—- An  ornament  for  the  (female)  breast, 
Kucha-bandhana‘Samyuktam  bahu-mala-vibhushini  \ 

(M.  Liv.  12). 

KUNJAEA—A  type  of  building  which  is  shaped  like  the  ele- 
phants back,  is  16  cubits  long  and  broad  at  the  bottom,  and  has 
a roof  with  three  dormer-windows. 

(1)  Brihat-samhita  (lvi.  25,  J,  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S,,  vol.  vi.  p.  319). 

(2)  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  269,  v,  36,  41,  49,  63,  see  under  Pra- 

sada). 

(3)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap.  130,  v.  32,  see  under  Prasada). 
EUNJAEAKSHA— (cf.  Vatayanal— A wdndow  resembling  the  ele- 

phant^s  eye. 

Naga-bandham  tatha  valli  gavaksham  kufi jarakshakam 

esham  vatayanam  rupam  I 

(M.  XXXIII.  681,  682,  685). 
Gavakshakaraih  yuktya  cha  pattikordhve  samantatah 
Eufijaraksham  alaksham  va  patra-pushpady-alahkritam  \ 

(M.  XLiv,  22,  23), 


KUTTIMA 


136 


KUTI— (s6e  Q-andb.a'.kuli)— A hall,  a ootitage. 

Kosambaikuti— “ The  hall  at  Kausambi,-'  Dr.  Hultzaoh. 

(Bharaut  Inacrip.  no.  39,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xxi.  p.  230), 
KTJTIKA— A village  under  one  head-man. 

Eko  gramaniko  yatta  sa-bhribyap-paricharakah  I 
Kutikam  tad  vijaniyad  eka  bhogah  aa  eva  tu  II 

(Kamikagama,  xx.  4). 

KUTUMBA-BHUMI — The  ground  for  houses,  a site  where  a house  is 
built. 

Ku|uinba-bhumi-manam  tu  vata-kshetra-vivarjitam  I 

(Kamikagama,  xxr.  3). 

JiUT'piMA — A floor,  abase,  a wall,  a pavement,  a cottage,  a small 
house,  the  ground  prepared  for  the  site  of  a building,  a paved 
ground. 

It  is  also  used  as  a synonym  of  Prastara  or  entablature. 

(M.  XVI.  2-4,  see  under  Prastara), 
(1)  Same  as  adhisthana  or  the  base  of  a column  : 

Adhishthana-vidhim  vakahye  &aatre  samkshipyate’dhima  I 
Trayoda&angulam  arabhya  shat-shad-angula-vard-hanat  I 
Ohatur-hasbavasauam  syat  kuttima-dvSda&onnatam  I 

(M.XIV.  1-3). 

Janmadi-vajanantam  syat  kut^imodayam  iritam  I 

(Ibid.  9). 

Vimana-^aleshu  cha  mandapeshu  \ 

Nidhana-sadmeshv-api  gopureshv-api  I 
Eteshv-adho-de^a-talopapithe  \ 

Tasyoparishthab  krita-kuttimani  \ 

(Ibid.  397-400). 

Eef erring  to  the  entablature : 

Shad-vidham  kut^imottungam  prastaroday am -iritam  \ 

(M.  XVI.  4). 

In  connection  with  the  four-storeyed  buildings : 

Tad-urdhve  pada(ni)-bandham&aTh  gopanoohoham  tad-ardha- 
kaml 


136 


KUTTIMA 


Tacl-iirdhvo  kiitfeimam  oharhsaih  sardha-paksHaiigliri-timga- 
kam  \ 

(M.  XXII.  36-37). 

In  connection  •with,  the  gopura  or  gate-house 
BYi-hhagam  chopapithoohoham  tasmad  ekarh^a(m)  kutti- 
mam  \ 

(M.  xxxiil.  249). 

(2)  As  a synonym  of  the  wall  (bhitti) 

dvari  kundam  cha  kuttimam  II 

Bhitter  akhyeyam  akhyatam.. ...11 

(Kamikagama,  nv.  199-200). 
As  a member  (lit.  limb)  of  the  base  : 

Mastirakam  adhishthanam  vastvadharam  dharatalam  \ 

Talam  kuttimady-ahgam  adhishthanasya  kirtitam  II 

(Ibid.  202).  ■ 

(S)  Prasada-bata-sambadham  mapi-pravara-kuttimam  \ 

Karayamasa  vidhivad  dhema-ratna-vibhushitam  II 

(Mahabharata,  XIV.  25,  22),. 

........prasadaih  sukyitochhrayaih  II 

Suvarpa-iala-samvritair  mani-kuttima-bhushanaih  II 

. * (Ibid.  i.  185.  19-20). 

(4)  Kut^iiho^stri  nibaddha-bhufe  phandra-&ala  kirogriham  i 
Commentary  : Pashapadi-nibaddha-bhuh  sa  kutljima  ity-ekam  \ 

(Amarakosha,  n.  5-8). 

(5)  Griham  kahohana-kuttimam  \ 

(RamSyapa,  vi.  37,  27  etc.). 

(6)  Tan .......pathi........,...mamlatur  na  mapi-kuttimoohitau  \ 

(Raghuvam§a,  ea.  Stenzler,  ii.  9). 

(7)  Padahgushthalulita-kusume  kuttime  \ 

(Malavikagnimitra,  ed.  Tullherg,  ii.  27), 

(8)  Vedikeyam  tu  samanyg  kuttimanam  prakirtita  \ 

(Vastu-vidya,  ed.  Ganapati  Sastri,  ix.  19). 

(9)  Mapi-kuttlma—“  jewel-paved  floor”. 

(Kadaba  plates  of  Prahhutavarsha,  line.  29,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  IV,  pp.  341,  342). 


KUTTIMA 


187 


(10)  Vapi-kfipa-tadaga-kufefcima-matha-prasiida-safetalayan ) 
Sauvama-  dhYaja-tdranapana-pura-grama-prapa-maih^apan  H 
vyadhapayad  ayam  Chaulukya-oliu^a-manik  \ 

Here  ‘ ku|fcima  ’ i3_evidently  a detached  building. 

(Srldhara^s  Devapattana  Prasasti,  v.  10,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  II.  p.  440), 

(11)  Mani-kiit$ima*—“ jewel-paved  floor.’’  “And  it  must  have 

been  an  uncommonly  magnificent  building,  for  nearly  the 
sixth  part  of  whole  inscription  (of  103  lines)  is  devoted 
to  its  description,  and  its  erection  is  the  only  deed  of 
the  king,  which  the  author  has  thought  w:orth  mentioning. 
The  temple  spoken  of  here  mast,  therefore,  necessarily  be 
that  splendid  ^iva  temple  which,  according  to  the  Baroda- 
grant,  was  built  by  Erishpa  on  the  hill  of  Etapura, 
the  modern  Elura.?’ 

(hadaba  plates  of  Prabhutavarsha,  line  34,  Ep.  Ind. 
vol.  IV.  p.  337  and  note  2;  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  XII.  p.  159 
and  p.  228  f). 

(12)  ^rikrishna-kahiti-pala-datta-ma^ibhir  vidvat-kavLiiam  gyiha 

nana-ratna-vichitra-kuttima-bhuvo  ratuakaratvarh  gatah — 
“ Through  the' preoious  stones  presented  by  the  glorious  king 
Erishpa,  the  houses  of  the  learned  and  the  poets  have 
pavements  (?  floor)  sparkling  with  jewels  of  different  kinds, 
and  have  (thus)  become  jewel-mines.” 

(Two  insorip.  of  Krishnaraya,  no.  A,  Mangalagiri 
pillar  Insorip.  V.  7,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  VI.  pp.  118, 128). 

(13)  Mani-ku$tima-vithi8hu  mukta-saikata-setubhih  I 
Danambuni  nirumdhana  yatra  kridanti  balikah  II 

“ There  the  girls  play  on  roads  paved  with  precious  stones, 
stopping  by  embankments  of  pearl  and  the  water  poured  out 
at  donations.” 

(Vljayanagara  Inscrip,  of  Harihara  ii,  v.  27,  H.,  S.  I- 
vol.  I.  no,  162,  pp.  158, 160). 


138 


kubya 


(14)  Loliaika-ohudamanina  mani-kufcfcima-sankramta-prati-bim'ba- 
vyajeEa  svayam  avatirTya...,! 

“ The  sim under  pretence  of  seeing  his  reflection  in 

jewelled  floor.  ” 

(Ep.  Garnat.  vol.  xii.  Guhhi  Taluq,  no.  61,  Eoman 
text,  p.  49,  line  32,  Transl.  p.  29,  line  20). 

KTIDYA— A wall,  plastering. 

Bhittih  stri  kudyam  I 

‘ Bhittih  kudye  prahhede  cha  ’ iti  Haimah  , 

‘ Kudyaih  bhittau  vilepane  ’ iti  Medini  I 

(Amarakosha,  2,  2,  4). 

(1)  Prasada-harmya-valabhi-liflga-pratimasn  kudya-kupasliu  I 

“ In  the  temple,  mansion,  roof,  phallus,  image  (idol),  wall,  and 
tank  (the  cement  should  be  used). 

(Byihat-samhita,  LVii.  4,  J.  B.  A.  S.  N.  S.,  vol.  vi.  p.  322). 

(2)  ^ilaya  cha  mridapy-athava  taruna  rachayed  atha  kudyam  ativa- 

dyidham  \ 

Tad-ihottara>vistaratah  sadritaih  bahalam  kathitam  talipadi- 
yutam  II 

Svotsedha-daram&aika-hina-mastakam  eva  tat  I 
KucLyam  kuryad  bahir-bhagam  svantar-bhagam  bhavet  samam  II 
(Vastuvidya,  ed.  Ganapati  kastri,  xv.  1-2). 

(3)  Para-kudyam  udakenopaghnato— “ cause  to  collect  and  thereby 

injure  the  wall  of  a neighouring  hoime.  ” 

(Eautiliya-ArthaSastra,  chap.  LXV.  p.  167). 

(4)  Panohalindam  shat-kudyam  bahir  andharikavrijam  II 
Binge  tilante  cha  krodhe  bhitti(h)  pafichata-vaij  tah  I 
Eimchin  nyunam  alindam  va  tesham  kudyeshu  ^ ojayet  1! 

(Kamikagam,  L.  83,  87). 

Jalakaih  phalakam  tailain  aishtam  kudyam  cheshyate  I 
Jalakair  bahubhir  yuktam  jalakam  kudyam  ishyate  II 
Niahpadam  vS.  sa-padam  va  kudyam  tailam  atheshfcakam  > 
Athava  myinmayam  vapi  kudyam  ishtam  dvijottamah  l| 


EUDYA-STAMBHA 


139 


Eudye  stambha-lata  karya  vastvMharasya  ohopari  I 
Vedikordlivadliare  kufca-koshtadmaih  tridha  smrifcak  1} 

(Ibid.  ly.*94,  97,  98). 

Jalaka  oha  kaYata§  oba  babye  babye  prakalpayet  1 
SarYafcab  ku^ya-sarnyuktam  mukbya-dbamatra  kirfcitam  II 
Anta-Yivrita-padam  oha  babye  kudyam  prakiriitam  I! 

Babir  abbyantare  mukbya-gebam  Yidbivate  I, 

(Ibid.  XII.  8,  9,  14). 

(5)  In  conueotion  with  the  mimber  of  walls  (sala)  in  the  buildings 
of  the  kings  of  various  ranks  : 

Bkadikam  tri-salanfcam  pa^tadharadibbis  fcribbih  I 
Prabarakastragrababhyam  kudyam  etad  (?  ekam)  dvayantakam  1 

. (M.  ,xl;  42-43). 

Geba-tridbaika-parito  babi(h)  kudya-taram  I 

(M.liii.  59). 

Eudya(ama)ty-adhika-binam  cbed  vistare  obodaye’pi  va  I 
Bvi-jati-sarva-Yarnanam  sarva-ua^akaram  bbavet  \ 

(M.  Lxix.  57,  68). 

EUDYA-STAMBHA — The  column  of  the  wall,  thus  the  pilaster  or 
a square  pillar  projecting  from  the  wall. 

Sila-starabbam  ^ilS-kudyam  naravase  na  karaye't  H 

(Kamikagama,  XXXY.  161). 

In  connection  with  the  foundations : 

Kudya-stambbe  giiba-stambbe  barmy a-garbbaib  vinikshipet  \ 

(M.XII.  132). 

Eeferring  to  the  pillar ; 

Tri-cbatusb-panoha-sban-matrain  kudya-stambba-vi^alakam  I 
Tad-dvi-gunitam  vapi  tri-gunam  va  cbatur-gunam 
Etat(s)  kampa(-bba)-Yi&alam  syad  atbava  tunga-manatab  \ 

(M.  XY.  14-16). 

See  Chalukyan  Architecture,  Arch.  Surv.  New  Imp.  series,  yoI. 
XXI.  plates  XYI,  XLVI,  fig.  3;  plate  lxxyiii,  figs.  1,  2;  Buddhist 
Cave  Temples,  ibid.  vol.  iv,  plate  XYXii,  no.  3 ; plate  x "^i,  no.  2 ; 
plate  XXIX.  no.  2,  - 


140 


KUNDA 


KUNBA—A  pool  or  well  in  or  about  a ternple. 

Sarvatab  bunda-samyukbam  gyiha-dvara-samanvitam  I 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  64). 

“At  Kapadvanj. is  a large  spuare  kunda  or  reservoir  in 

the  market  place.  This  cooupies  an  area  about  a hundred  feet 
square,  with  a platform  below  the  first  descent,  from  which 
a series  of  short  stairs,  parallel  to  the  sides#  lead  down  from  one 
narrow  lauding  to  another,  and  reaching  a broader  one  about  33 
feet  from  the  first.  Between  each  pair  of  descending  steps  in 
each  of  five  tiers  is  a niche — some  hundred  and  thirty-six  in  all — 

originally  occupied  by  images........ .In  the  centre  is  a deep  well 

about  nine  and  a half  feet  square. 

(Ahmadabad  Arch,  Burgess,  Arch.  Surv.  New. 

Imp.  series,  vol.  xxxili,  p.  94,  plates  lxxx,  lxxxi). 

KUNBIKA— A water  pot  on  the  hand  of  an  image. 

Kundika  chaksha-mala  cha  vame  vame  kare  kramat  \ 

(M.  li.  31). 

Kundika  vama-haste  cha  dharayet  tu  sarasYati  I 

(M.  PiY.  22). 

KXJNTALA— A head  gear,  a look  of  hair. 

Devanam  bhupatinSih  oha  mauli-lakshanam  uchyate  i 

Jata-mauli-klritaih  oha  karandam  cha  tirastrakam  | 

Kuntalam  ke§a-bandham  oha  dhammillalaka*  ohudakam  ; 

Makutam  oheti  khyatam..... I 

(M.  xLix.  12-16b 

Dukula-vasanopetaih  makutam  kuntalam  tu  va  l 

(M.  Liv.  78). 

Keohit  tu  kuntala-nibham  tungam  makutam  kuntalaih  tu  va  1 

(Ibid.  119). 

KXJBJAKAK—  (of.  Nagara) — Hump  backed,  crooked ; a town  of  the 
similar  plan  (of;  Kanya-kubja) ; according  to  the  Kamikagama, 
it  is  a suburb  or  a place  on  the  confines  of  any  city  or  large 
village . 


KUMUDA 


141 


Q-ranjadinam  samipam  yafe  abhanam  kubjam  iti  smritam  II 

(Kamikagama,  xx.  15). 

Sarvesham  nagaradinam  bhedam  laksbanain  uoliyat/e  I 

Kubjakaiii  patbanam  obaiva., \ 

durgam  aahta-vidham  bhavet  1 

(M.  X.  37,  40,  42). 

KUMARl-PURA— A gyinnaaium  or  sobool  for  bigber  studies. 
Sotsadba-raadhra-prakaram  sarvabah  khatakavritam  I 
Eucbaka(b)-prabika-dvaram  kumari-puram  eva  cba  li 
Dvi-bastab  srotaaa  ^rasbtbam  kumari-puram  anohatam  I 
Hasta-feato  da^a-^resbbbo  navabasbo’sbta  eva  oba  II 

(Brabmanda-Purana,  part  l,  2ud  anusamga-pada, 
chap.  7,  V,  103,  104). 

Prakara-madbye  kritva  vapim  pushkariuiib  dvaram  cbatu§-&a- 
iam  adbyardbantarauikam  kumari-puram  munda-barmyam 
dvi-talam  mundaka-dvaram  bbumi-dravya-vabeua  va  tri- 
bbagadbikayamab  bbanda-vabini(h)-kulyab  karayet  I 

(Kautiliya-Artba&astra,  xxiv,  54,  see  translation 
under  Cbuli-barmya). 

EUMUBA—Tbe  water-lily.  “A  semi-circle  projecting  from  a 
vertical  diameter.  It  is  cbiefly  employed  in  cornices  and  bases.  It 
corresponds  with i the  astragal  (a  small  circular  moulding  ornamented 
with  a bead  or  reel),  or  with  torus  ” (a  large  convex  moulding  used 
principally  in  tbe  bases  of  columns).  (Eam-Raz,  Arcb.  Hind,  p 23). 
In  bases  it  may  be  triangular  or  hexagonal. 

(M.  XIV.  83). 

In  connection  with  tbe  foundations  : 

Janmantam  vatbava  prantam  kumudantam  va  galantakam  \ 
Pattikantam  ksbipeob  cbapi  vinyaset  pratbamesbtakam  I 

(M.  xii.  202-203) 

A moulding  of  the  base  (M.  xiv.  12,  etc,  see  tbe  lists  of  mould- 
ings under  Adhisthfina), 

A moulding  of  the  throne  : 

Taob-cbbesbaih  dvi-bbage  tu  kumudam  vrittakritis  tatba  \ 

(M,  XLV.  136) 


142 


KUMUBA-BANDHA 


A head  gear  ; 

Etesham  mahishibhyam(shyoli^  cha  diiammilla(m)  kumiida- 
kritam  \ 

(M.  XLix.  28). 

KUMUDA-BANT)HA~A  class  of  bases,  ife  has  four  types  differing 
from  one  another  in  height  and  in  the  addition  or  omission  of 
some  mouldings. 

(M.  XIV.  65-108,  see  under  Adhishthana). 

KUMBHA— (see  Kalasa) — ^A  pitcher,  the  capital,  a moulding,  the  cupola. 

(M.  XIV.  33,  etc.,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Adhishthana). 

A kind  of  building  (see  under  G-hata). 

A part'  of  a column  (Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  58,  see  under 

Stambha). 

A pinnacle : 

Prasadam  apy-amala-kafiohana-kumbha-sampata-saihbhavaniyam 
akarod  anukarmma  Silpaih  I 

(Chebrolu  Inscrip,  of  Jaya,  postoript,  lines  9-11,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  V.  pp.  160;  151). 

Ghanam  praSildam  nava-hema-kumbha-kalitam  ramyam  maha- 
mamtapam-*-a  solid  temple  adorned  with  nine  golden  pinnacles 
and  a beautiful  large  halL 

(Mangalagiri Pillar  Insorip.  v.  61,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  vi.  pp.  126, 116). 

Prottumge’py-aparajitelia-bhavane  sauvarnn,a-kumbha-dhvaiaropi 
rupyaja-mekhala-vitaranas  tasyaiva  devasya  yah....l 

“ He  placed  a golden  cupola  (kumbha)  and  a flagstaff  (dvaja)  on 
the  temple  of  (the  god)  AparSjite&a,  to  whom  at  the  same  time 
he  gave  a silver  girdle”.  Prof.  Kielhorn. 

(The  Chahamanas  of  Naddula,  no.  C,  Sundha  hill 
Insorip.  of  Ghaohigadeva,  V.  61,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  IX. 

pp.  78,74). 

Prasadam  urddhva-3(t)ikhara-sthira-hema-kumbham — “ (Into) 

the  temple,  (which  by  the  stately  display  of)  firm  golden  capitals 
upon  lofty  spires.” 

(Bhubaneswar  Insorip.  v.  16,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  xiii.  pp.  162. 164). 


KtJLIKlNaHEl  143 

KUMBHAKA — The  base  of  a column. 

Ayam  kumbhaka-danam.  ... 

“ This  pillar-base  (where  the  inscription,  is  written)  is  the  gift 
of’.  ... 

The  same  inscription  is  repeated  on  many  other  bases  of  pillars. 

(Catalogue  of  the  Arch,  museum  at  Mathura, 
sections  21,  22,  26,  30,  32,  pp.  176,  177, 178). 

EUMBHA-PANJAEA— A niche  in  the  wall.  It  consists  of  a vase, 
a pilaster  and  a little  pavilion  (pailjara)  at  the  top  (compare 
Panjara). 

EXJMBHA-PADA — Literally  the  pillar  at  the  foot  of  a pitcher,  an 
upper  pillar  of  the  two-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xx.  63),  of  the 
bedstead  (M.  xliv.  59). 

EUMBHA-BANDHA — A class  of  bases,  it  has  five  types  differing 
from  one  another  in  height  and  in  the  addition  or  omission  of 
some  mouldings. 

(M.  XIV.  196-239,  see  under  Adhishthana). 

EUMBHALANKAEA — Ornaments  of  the  column,  mouldings  of  the 
pedestal,  base  and  entablature. 

(M.  XV.  201-232,  see  under  Upapitha,  Adhishthana,  and  Prastara). 

EUMBHA-STAMBHA — (see  Kumbha-pada)— A small  pillar,  generally 
employed  at  the  upper  part  of  a structure. 

(M.  XV.  72-200,  see  under  Stambha). 

KTJLA-BHAEAl^A— A type  of  pavilion. 

(M.  XXXIV.  262,  see  under  Mandapa). 

EULABHA-BVAEA—-A  front  door,  the  threshold. 

(M.  XXXIV.  365). 

KULIKANGHEKKA)— (see  Stambha)— An  ornament  of  the 
entablature,  the  main  pillar. 

Vallika  patra-valli  cha  ohitrangaiii  kulikanghrikam  \ 

Etat  paryaya-vakyani................  I 


(M.  XVI.  54-56). 


144  KtJHABA 

KUHAE A— A window,  the  interior  windows. 

Tatra  shad-a^rir  merur  dvada&a-bhanmo  vichitra-kuharab  ohaV 

Commentary : Kuhara  abhyantara-gavakshah  I 

(Brihat-samhita,  LVI.  20,  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  vi.  p.  318). 

Merur  d-?ada&a-bhaumo  vividha-kuharal  oha  I 

(Bhaviahya-Purana,  chap.  130,  V.  27). 

K!ULI(1)EA — A crab,  a part  of  the  joinery  shaped  like  a crab. 

(M.  XTii.  163\ 

KUTA — The  peak  or  summit,  head,  top. 

(1)  The  top  of  a building  : karna-kuta,  sala-kuta  (M.  xix.  66,  67, 

XV.  134,  LX.  46,  Lxx.  20). 

(2)  Ekaika-bhagam  syat  tu  ku|a-saladikam  nayet ) 

Adho  bhaga-dvayenatha  kutam  ekena  va  bhavet  I 
Ku^a-^ala  (v.  92),  mtila-kuta,  vana-kuta  (95). 

(Kamikagama,  l.  88,  80,  92,  95). 

(3)  Pinnacle:  Mata-kuta-prakara-khanda-sphu^ita-jirnpoddhara- 

kam—for  the  repairs  of  whatever  might  become  broken  or 
torn  or  worn-out  belonging  to  the  enclosure,  with  beautiful 
pinnacles. 

(Insorip.  at  Ablur,  no.  E,  lines  59,  76,  Ep.  Ind.  vol. 

V.  pp.  249,  257,  250,  258). 
l9ivagamokta-vage  parvvata-pramanada  degulamam  tri-kuta- 

vage in  accordanoe  with  8iva  traditions,  founded  a 

temple  with  three  pinnacles,  as  vast  as  a mountain. 

(Ibid  no.  E,  line  74,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  V.  pp  260,  268). 

(4)  Tara-ganeshunnata-kuta-.koti4atarppitusriJvala-dipikasu  I 
“Like  clusters  of  stars  the  bright  lamps  be  placed  on  its 
pinnacles.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  xil.  G-ubbi  Taluq,  no.  61,  Eoman 
text,  p.  49,  lines  28 ; Trausl.  p.  29,  line  17). 


Kvm 


m 


(6)  Sambho§  charu-^ubhair  akari  bhaYanam  pasbana-kufcair 
idam  \ 

He  builti  this  temple  of  ^ambha  with,  beautiful  aad  brilliaut 
most  excellent  stones.”  Dr.  Biihler. 

This  translation  of  kuta  does  not  seem  to  suit  the  context. 

(Two  Skt.  Inscrip,  in  the  British  Museum,  no.  1,  line 
12,  Ind.Ant.  voL  xlil.  p.  251). 

(6)  Aneka  - ratna  - khaohita  - ruchira-mani-kalafea-kalita-kfit^-koti- 
ghatitam  apy-uttuhga-ohaityalayam— (having  erected)  a 
lofty  Chaityalaya,  with  ‘ kalafeas  ’ or  towers  surmounted  by 
rounded  pinnacles  set  with  all  manner  of  jewels.” 

(B’or  ‘kalasa’,  Mr.  Eioe  has  put  in  ‘gopura,^  perhaps  a slip). 

(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol.  vi.  Mudgere  Taluq,  no.  22,  Boman 
text,  p.  148,  line  12;  Transl.  p.'63,  para  2). 

(7)  ^ri-vira-somanatha-deyara  tri-kuta-devalaya — —the  three- 

pinnaoled  temple  of  the  god  Vira-Somanatha. 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  vii.  Channagiri  Taluq,  no.  32,  Boman 
text,  p.  322,  line  18 ; Transl.  p.  183). 
KUTA-KOSHTHAr-A  compartment  on  the  top  of  a building. 

(Kamikagama,  ly.  123-130,  see  under  Karna-kuta). 
KUTA-^ALA — A small  room  on  the  top  of  a building. 

Euta-&Ma  sabham  kritva  bhoga-bhogyam  vi'seshatah  II 
Kuta-tala-yutam  vapi  kuta-talMtam  eva  cha 
Prakarena  samayuktam  gopurena  vidhiyate  11 

(SuprabhedS-gama,  XXXI.  113,120). 

KtjPA-.Awell. 


(1)  Dewal  Pratasti  of  Lalla  the  Chhinda  (verse  20,  Ep.  Ind. 

Yol,  I.  pp.  79,  83). 

(2)  ^ridhara^s  Devapattana  Pratasti  (verse  10,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  II.  p.  440). 


10 


i46 


KUTAaAEA 


(3)  A well  witiL  flights  of  steps  : 

6ita-svadu-Ti§iiddlia-bhtiri-8alilam  sopana-malojjvalam  I 
kupam  chainam  akarayadi 

(G-angdhar  stone  Inscrip,  of  Yisvavarman,  lines  38, 
39,  C.  1. 1.  vol.  Ill,  E.  G.  I.,  no.  17,  p.  76). 

(4)  Anamda-putrena  Samgamitrena  kue  (kupa)  ka^ite  mata- 

pitae  puyae  sava-satana  Mda-suhae This  well  was 

excavated  by  Samgamitra,  the  son  of  Ananda,  in  honour 
of  his  father  and  mother  (and)  for  the  well-being  and  hap- 
piness of  all  beings. 

(Paja  Inscrip,  of  the  year  III,  New  Kharosh^hi 
Inscrip  from  the  Lahore  Museum,  no.  II,  line  2, 
Ind.  Ant.  XXXVII.  p.  66). 

(5)  Khane  ktipe  Dasha verana — he  dug  well  of  Dashaveras. 

(Insorip  of  Ara,  lines  4-6,  Ind.  Ant.  voL  XLii.  p.  133). 
KU^'AG^JBrA— (see  Nnta*&ala) — ^A  small  room  at  the  top  of  a 
building. 

Bamayana  (i.  6. 15,  etc.)  : 

Kutagaraife  cha  sampurpam  indrasyevamaravatim  II 
Commentary : Kutakhyair  agaraih  strinam  krida-gpihair  iti  yavat 
ku^ah  fealagaram  griham  anye  \ 

KEISHNA-MANDALA — The  iris  of  the  eye  of  an  image. 

(M.  Lxv.  66,  Lxvi.  66,  lxx.  69). 
KEYUBA — The  armlet  worn  on  the  upper  arm  of  an  image. 

(M.  L.  14,  Liv.  13,  etc.). 

KEBALA-(KANTA)^ — A class  of  the  twelve-storeyed  building,  once 
prevailing  in  the  ancient  country  of  Kerala. 

Tad  eva  bhuta-bhagena  kshudra-&ala-visalakam  1 
Hara  cha  tat-tri-bhagena  yuktya  cha  samalankritam  I 
^eshaih  prag-ukta-vat  kuryad  eva(ih)  kerala-kantakam  I 

(M.. XXX.  28-30,  see  under  Yarata,  17-27). 
KESA-KLTAKA — The  tip  of  the  hair,  the  top  knot. 

(M.  L.  301,  see  Ushnisha). 


KOKILAEaALA 


147 


KBSA-BANDHA — A head  gear. 

(M.  xLix.  14,  88,  Liv.  88,  see  details  under  Bhushana). 
KE^AEA— A lion’s  or  horse’s  mane,  the  filament  of  a lotus,  a mould- 
ing, a type  of  building. 

A class  of  the  single-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xix.  173-175,  see 

under  Prasada). 

A class  of  the  three-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxi.  31-39,  see  under 

Prasada). 

KAIIiA^(S)A — A type  of  building  which,  is  twenty-eight  cubits 
wide,  has  eight  storeys,  and  turrets. 

(1)  Byihat-samhita  (lvi.  21,  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vi.  p.  319  see  under 

Prasada). 

(2)  A class  of  the  three -storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXI.  62,  see  under  Prasada). 

(3)  Mataya-Purana  (chap.  269,  v.  32,  47,  63,  see  under  Prisada). 

(4)  Bhavi8hya-Puran.a  (chap.  130,  v.  28,  see  under  Prasada). 

(6)  A building  with  four  ^alas  (compartments)  and  four  kuljas 
(towers  or  domes) : 

Chatuh-feala-ohatush-kuta-yuktah  kailafea  eva  hi  II 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  42). 
A class  of  buildings,  circular  in  plan  and  named  - as  follows  : 
(1)  Balaya,  (2)  Dundubhi,  (3)  Padma,  (4)  Maha-padma,  (6) 
Yarddhani,  (6)  TJshnisha,  (7)  l^afikha,  (B)  Ea’asa  and 
(9)  Sva-vriksha. 

(6)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v,  21,  23,  24-29,  see  under  Prasada). 

(7)  Agni-Purapa  (chap.  104,  v.  II,  17, 18,  see  under  Prasada). 
KOKILA — ^A  moulding  of  the  throne. 

(M.  XLV.  125,  see  under  Simhasana). 
KOKILAEGALA — A latch,  bolt  or  bar  attached  to  the  throne. 
Aneka-trinkhalopetam  bahu-kundala-bhushitam  1 
Kavata-yugmafii  kartavyam  kokilargala-samyutam  \ 

(Kamikagama,  LY.  52). 


148 


KOTA 


KOTA— -A  fort,  a hut,  a shed. 

Atyuchair  bhitti-bkagair  diYi  divasa-pati-syandauam  va  yi- 
griknau  yenakari  kotak  \ 

By  whom  the  fort  (in  this  place)  wag  built,  which  perhaps  may 
arrest  the  chariot  of  the  sun  in  the  sky  by  its  high  walls.’' 

(An  Abu  inscrip.  of  the  reign  of  BhimadeYa  ii,  y.  9, 

Ind.  Ant.  Yol.  XI.  pm  W.1 

KONA — A class  of  buildings. 

(Kamikagama,  xlv.  65-58^  see  under  Malika) 
KONA-PAEAVATA— (see  E-apota-palika) — A dove-cot  or  doYeridge. 

(Yastu-vidya,  XYI.  27,  36,  seeunder  Kapota-palika) 
K ONA-LOSHTA — A moulding,  the  finial. 

(See  details  under  Loshta) 
KOLAKA»-rA  measurement  of  t-wo  ahgulas  (see  Ahgula),  a fort,  f 
village,  a building  material. 

A kind  of  village  (M.  ix.  486,  see  under  Orama;. 

A kind  of  fort  (M.  x.  41,  see  under  Durga  and  Nagara). 

Some  fruit  or  material  employed  in  the  foundation-pit. 

(M,  zn. 

KOLHI-YE^MIKA— A hall-mansion. 

^ri-kyish^agiri-maharaja-maha-vihare  upafeama-koinivetmikah 
feachivarikah  sameta  akshainitih  dramma-kataikena  kSra- 
pitah — “ have  had  hall-mansions  (suitable)  for  meditation 
built  at  this  great  monastery  of  the  famous  mount  of 
Krishna  and  have  given  as  a perpetual  endowment  one 
hundred  drammas  ’*. 

^rimat-krishna-giri-maha-vihare  bhadra-&ri-vishnu-bhikshunam 
tatra3tharya-(samghasya)  drammanam  katamekam  (datvo) 
pakamana-sadri&am  chivarikadi-labha-samanvitam  kolhi- 
vekmikam  kshityam  nyavivi&at — “gave  one  hundred 


KOSHTHA-STAMBHA 


149 


drammaa  to  the  monka  of  the  worshipful  community 
dwelling  at  the  great  monastery  of  the  famous  mount  of 
Krishna,  and  caused  to  be  built  in  the  ground  - a hall- 
mansion  suitable  for  meditation.”  Dr.  Hultzsch. 

The  translations  quoted  above  are  it  should  be  noticed,  too  free. 
The  term  ‘ kolhi  ’ also  does  not  sound  like  a Sanskrit  word ; 
but  there  are  words  like  kalhana ; there  is  a phonetic  resem- 
blance between  ‘kolhi’  and  ‘kulya’  which  means  some 
thing  belonging  to  the  family  and  hence  ‘ main  ’ or  ‘ chief.’ 

(Three  Insorip,  from  Kanheri,  no.  15,  line  4 f: 
no.  43  A,  line  2 f.  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xiil.  pp.  134, 

135, 136). 

KO^A-MANDAPA—A  store-room,  a treasury. 

(M.  XXXII.  68,  see  under  Mandapa). 

KOSHTHA — ^A  store-room,  a granary,  a chamber,  a wall. 

Eka-nasikaya  yuktam  pahjaramsamudahritam  1 

Kuljeshu  nasika-yuktam  koshtam  etat  prakirtitam  it 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  80). 

KOSHTHAKA — A part  of  the  pillar,  a granary,  a surrounding  wall. 

Kosh^hakasty-iha  chatvara's  ohatush-koneshu  ohaiva  hi  t 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  50). 

Koshfehakam  tad-dvi-parsve  tu  janma-padakriti(s)  tatha  I 

(M.xv.  85). 

Astaih  tavat  pratoli  tad-upaviraohitam  koshthaka-dvam- 
dvam  etat  prauchchair  alana-yugmam  viiaya-(vara)-kareh 
(karipah)  featru-lakshmyafe  cha  sadma — “ near  the  gate  way 
were  constructed  two  granaries.” 

(Hansi  Stone  Tnscrip,  of  Prithyiraja,  V,  S.  1224, 
V.  6,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xli.  pp.  19,  17). 

KOSHTHA-^ALA— A kind  of  closed  hall. 

(M.  XXVI.  37,  see  under  Sala). 

KOSHTHA-STAMBHA— A kind  of  pillar,  a pilaster. 

(M.  xv,  84-87,  see  upder  Stambha), 


160 


KOSHTHAG-lEA 


KOSHTHAG-ABA—A  store-hoTise.. 

feta&txyanam  maha-mafcranam  &asaiiam  manaYasiti-kapt  I 
^rimati  Tam&a-grame  evaite  dve  koshfelaagare  (duve  ko|agalaai) 
tri-garblie .....1 

(Translated  into  Sanskrit  by  Dr.  Blibler). 

“ The  order  of  the  great  officials  of  ^ravasti  (issued)  from 
(their  camp  at)  Manavasitikata 

“ These  two  store-houses  with  three  partitions,  (which  are  situated) 
e^en  in  famous  Vam&agrama),  require  the  storage  of  loads 
(bharaka)  of  black  Panicum 

(Sohgaura  copper  plate  Insorip.  1-2,  Ind.  Ant. 
vol.  XXV.  pp.  266,  262  ; see  B.  A.  Society  proceed- 
ings of  1894,  p.  84  f). 

Narayana-devara  kottaravan  akalpam  age  yakshe&ana  bhap- 
daram  enalu  madisidan  udaram  ballala-deva  dharani-natham  \ 

“ Erected  a kottara  (koshthagara)  giving  it  the  name  of 
Yakaheta-bhandara  (=  store-house).” 

(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol.  v.  part  i,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  20, 
Boman  text,  p.  119,  line  3 f ; Transl.’ p.  62). 
KAUTUKODAYA — (compare  Utsava  and  see  Dtsedha) — A kind  of 
height. 

Utsave(-savasys)  chardha-manena  kautukodayam  iritam  \ 

(M.  LXij  22,  see  context  under  Utsava). 
Nabhyantam  medhra-simantam  nava-manam  chotsavodayam  \ 
Tad-ardham  kautukotsedham  kanyasadi  trayam  trayam  I 

(M.  iiXiv.  27-28,  see  context  under  Utsava). 
EAU^ALYA — A pavilion  with  fifty-six  pillars. 

iMatsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  8,  see  under  Mandapa). 
KAU^IKA — A type  of  pavilion. 

(M.  xxxiv.  249,  see  under  Mandapa). 
KElDA-KETANA — A pleasure-house. 

Tirthottumga-sarasvati-kyita-parishvaihgasya  sarasvatam  \ 
Erida-ketanam  etad  atra  vidadhe  varamnidhe  rohdasi  It 


KSHEPANA 


151 


“ (Tbe  poet)  Nanaka  erected  here)  this  SarasTata  pleasiire-house 
on  the  banks  of  tbe  sea  that  has  been  embraced  by  the  high 
Tirtha  (sacred  banks)  of  the  Sarasvati.” 

(Sanskrit  Grants  and  Inscrip.  Prasasti  no.  iv,  33, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xi.  pp.  103, 106). 

KSHANIKA-BEEA — An  idol  for  temporary  use  (M.  LXYin.  26,  etc.). 

KSHAl^IKAuLAYA — A temple  where  temporary  idols  are  worshipped. 

(M.m.l27). 

KSHTJDEA-GOPALNA — (see  Gopana) — The  small  beam,  a moulding 
of  the  entablature. 

(Kamikagama,  Liv.  2,  see  under  Prastara). 

KSHUDEA-NASA(-X) — The  small  nose,  a moulding  resembling  the 
-nose,  a vestibule. 

It  terminates  by  the  beam  in  entablatures ; all  the  kshudra-nSsas 
correspond  to  lower  pillars ; and  that  corresponding  to  the 
karna-pada  (side-pillar)  is  half  of  the  forepart  of  the  column 
(or  entablature). 

(M.  XVI.  92-95,  XLVi.  24,  etc.). 

Tilaka-k8hudra-na3i-yakta-toranai&  oha  samanvitam  (vimanam)  II 

(Kamikagama,  I).  93), 

See  Amarakosha  (ii,  ii,  15)  under  Gopana. 

KSHUDEA-^ALA— A small  hall,  room  or  house. 

Kshudra-^ala-pradeae  tu  sarvalahkara-samyutamV 

(HA.  XXVI.  71  see  6ala  etc.). 

KSHUBEABJA — A small  lotus,  a moulding  of  the  pedestal. 

(M.  XIII.  61,  etc.,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  XJpapitha). 

KSHEPANA — The  projection.  A moulding  above  the  plinth  in 
pedestal,  generally  placed  between  a dado  and  oyma,  a fillet  and 
oyma,  or  a petal  and  fillet.  Etymologically  it  would  indicate  a 
moulding  like  a spout  to  throw  oS  water,  and  in  this  office  it 
would  resemble  the  corona  (kapota),  i.e.  the  square  projection 
having  a broad  vertical  face  and  the  soffit  or  under  portion 
recessed  so  as  to  form  a drip  which  prevents  water  from  running 


162 


ESHEMA 


down  the  building.  In  bases  it  would  resembie  a cornice  (of.  M, 
XIV.  370)  which  is  used  as  the  term  for  any  crowning  projection. 
In  this  sense  it  is  also  found  lia  the  western  architecture  (of. 
Fletcher,  Hist,  of  Arch.  figs.  nos.  191,  192,  197, 198). 

A moulding  of  the  pedestal  (M,  xiil.  46,  etc.,  see  the  lists  of  mould- 
ings under  Upapitha). 

A moulding  of  the  base  (M.  xiv.  120,  etc.,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 

under  Adhishithana). 

In  connection  with  the  door  : 

Madhye  tu  kshepanam  vilme  &uddha-dvara?asaiiakam  \ 

xxxix.  106). 

In  connection  with  the  bedstead  : 

Ekam  vatha  dvayarii  vapi  kshepanam  bahudhanvitam  I 

(M.  XLiv.  20). 

A moulding  of  the  pitha  or  pedestal  of  the  phallus : 

Utsedhe  shoda'sam'se  tu  prathamochcham  dvi-hhagikam,  \ 
Padmoohcharh  tu  tri-bhagam  syat  tad-urdhve  kshepanam takam  \ 

(M.  LIU.  30,  31). 


ESHEMA*— A class  of  buildings. 

(ESmikagama,  xxxv.  32-34,  see  under  Malika). 
ESHO]jlI— A kind  of  pent  roof,  stated  to  be  employed  in  residential 
buildings. 

(M.  xvici.  177-178) 


KH 

HATTAKA(-TTA) — A bedstead,  a seat,  a pedestal  or  throne. 
Murttinam  iha  prishthatah  kari-Yadhu-prishtha-pratishtha-jushaiL 
tau-murttir  vame  atma-kha$taka-gatah  kamta-sameta  data  I 

“ Behind  the  statues  placed  on  the  backs  of  female  elephants, 

............(he)  caused  to  be  made  here  ten  images  of  those  (persons 

mentioned  above)  together  with  their  wives  on  * kha^taka  * of 
spotless  stones.’’ 

The  word  khattaka,  judging  from  the  context,  seems  to  have 
the  meaning  of  pedestal  or  throne.’'  Dr,  Luders. 

(Mount  Abu  Inscrip.  no,  I,  v.  64,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  viii. 

pp.  212,  218,  200), 


KHAEVATA 


163 


EHADGA — A type  of  oetaagular  baiiding. 

(Garada-Parana»  eliap.  47,  v.  21,  23,  31-32,  see  uader  PrasMa). 
KHANDA-HAEMYA — A sectional  tower. 

Adho-bhaga-dvayenatha  kiitam  ekena  va  bhavet  * 

Talam  ekam  bbaved  grasaiii  (?)  kbanda-barmyam  tri-bbQmike  li 
AndbftraadhSri-barokfea-kbanda-harmya-vi&esbitam  (vimSnam)  H 

(Kamikagama,  L.  80,  91). 

KHANDOPTABA— A kind  of  entablature  (prastara). 
Fada-vistara-vistaram  samodaya-samanYitam  I 
Khand-ottaram  iti  jneyam  padenotsedbam  sainyutamll 

(Kamikagama,  liy.  6). 

KHAEVATA— A village,  a fort,  a fortified  city. 

(1)  A village  (M.  IX.  456).  a fortified  town  (M.  X.  36). 

In  oonneotion  with  the  foundations : 

G-ramadin5in  nagaradinam  pura-pattana-kbarvate  \ 
Kosbtba-koladi-sarvesbam  garbha-stbanam  ibocbyate  \ 

(M.  xn.  168-i69). 

A kind  of  pavilion  used  as  the  dining-hall  of  the  kings  •. 
Hj’ipanam  bhojanftrthaih  syat  kharvatakhyaih  tu  mandapam  \ 
(M.  XXXIV.  455,  see  also  466-472,  667). 

(2)  A fortress  to  defend  a group  of  two  hundred  villages  : 
Dvi-feata-gramya  kharvatikam  \ 

(Kautiliya-Artba&astra,  chap.  xn.  p.  46). 

(3)  Kshullaka-prakara-veahtitam  kharva^am  1 

(Eayapaseni-autra-vyakyane,  ibid.  p.  206). 

(4)  Karvaijani  kunnagarani  1 

(Pra^na-vyakarana-sutra'Yyakhyane,  ibid.  p.  306). 
(6)  Dbanub-featam  parinaho  grama-kshetrantaram  bbavet  \ 

Pve  §ate  kharva^asya  syan  nagarasya  chatnb-^atam  1! 

(Yajnavalka,  II.  167). 


164 


KHABYATA 


(6)  Vanijam  api  bhogyam  feu  fead-vad  eva  (like  nagara)  samirifeam  I 
Tab  stbanam  brabmananam  feu  kharva^aiii  puraYSsini-iu  H 
Nagaryavarbanam  yafe  kharva^am  fcad  udahrifeam  Ij 

(Kamikagama,  XX.  7,  9j. 

(7)  lya-khavadambi — “ (By  means  offehis  vase  Yagra  Mar^ga’s 

son  Kamagulya,  who  has  fixed  his  residence)  in  fehis  place 
Khavafea  ........  ” Mr.  Pargifeer. 

So  far  fehe  editor  is  right.  But  in  his  long  note  on  this 
expression  he  has  rather  too  elaborately  dwelt  on  a number 
of  conjectures  without  however  having  been  able  to  arrive 
at  any  conclusion  whatever.  This  Prakrit  expression  ^ pan 
easily  be  rendered  into  Sanskrit  by  air  a Jcharvafe  (in  this 
city  or  town). 

(The  Insorip.  on  the  Wardak  vase,  line  .l,  Bp.  Ind. 

vol.  XI.  pp.  *210,  211,  212,  last  para), 

(8)  “ An  ornament  to  the  Kuntala-defea  was  the  Yanavase  twelve 

thousand  Kingdom,  the  chief  capital  (pradhana-rajadhani) 
was  Chandragupti,  with  another  name  of  Gomanta-parvata, 
in  fehe  twelve  Teharoata  country  (attached  to  which),  in 
Nag^rakhanda  of  Yada-nada  Kantapuri,  otherwise  named 
Yira-Marapapuri,  belonging  to  Kamafetapuri,  situated  on  the 
bank  of  the  Yarada-river,  the  king,  in  order  that  his  govern- 
ment might  continue  as  long  as  sun  and  moon,  as  an  offering 
to  Krishna  (with  all  fehe  usual  rights),  gave,  free  of  all 
imposts/’ 

(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol.  yill.  part  i,  Sorab  Taluq,  no.  376, 
Transl.  p.  66,  last  para). 

(9)  Grama-nagara-khedla-karvvada-madamba-dronamukha  - patta- 

nanigalinidam  aneka-mata-kuta-prasada-devayatananigali- 
darn  oppuva-agrahara-patl|anamgalimdam  atisayav-appa  «...  t 
“ At.  Teridal  a merchant  town  situated  in  the  centre  and  the 
first,  in  importance  among  the  twelve  (towns)  in  the  glorious 
Kundi  three-thousand,  adorned  with  villages,  towns,  hamlets, 


KHALUEAEA 


165 


yillagM  som^rojittSed  by  hills,  groups  of  villages,  sea-girt 
towns,  amd  chief  cities,  with  elegant  mansipns,  palaces  and 
temples,  and  with  shining  agrahara-towns  in  the  country 
of  Knntala 

(Old  Kanarese  Inscrip,  at  Terdal,  line  68,  Ind.  Ant. 

voL  xiY.  p.  19,  26). 

(10)  “ With  myriads  of  people,  pra’otioes  of  virtue,  agreeable 
occupations,  streams  of  the  (nine)  sentiments,  pleasure 
^rdens,  separated  lovers,  splendid  tanks,  full  lotus -beds, 
gilded  boats  for  spring  festivals,  ghatika-s'thanas  ( religions 
centres),  the  supports  of  dharmma  and  mines  of  enjoyment, 
moats  which  were  as  if  the  sea  being  overcome  had  returned 
here  on  account  of  the  collection  of  gems,  groups  of  the  lotus 
faces  of  beautiful  women  fair  as  the  moon,  (grama-nagara- 
kheda-bharvvana-ma^amba-dropamukha-pura-pattana-  raja- 
dhani),  on  whatever  side  one  looked,  in  these  nine  forms 
did  the  Kuntala-de&a  shine,” 

(Ep,  Oarnat.  vol,  vm.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no.  197, 
Transl.  p,  124,  para  1,  last  seven  lines  ; Eoman 
text,  p.  214,  line  27,  f), 

EHALUBAKA(-EIKA.)-— Wafienubungen  bestimter  Platz  (Pet. 
Biot.),  a parade,  a place  for  military  exercise  (M.  Williams, 
Biot.)  ; a parlour,  a reception-hall  or  a drawing-room  round  a 
house;  an  enclosure-building  round  a house,  village,  city  or 
fort  (KamikSgama,  Lv.  20,  see  below), 

(1)  Etad  dronana  oha  bhupSuam  ayudhabhyasa-mapdapam  I 
Sarvam  dataihtakam  dirgham  netra-tri-bhaga-mandapam  I 
Tat-pure’lindam  ekamtam  navamtena  yutankanam  1 
Tat-partve  purata&  ohaiva  te  yugmamte  khalurikab  I 
Bronakbya-map^apam  ohaivam  esha  yuddhartha-yogyakam  I 

(M,  xxxiv.  434-439)» 


156 


KHA.LURAKA 


Askiashtam&a-visfcaram  ayamam  feafcra  kalpayefc  } 

Tan-madhye  dvi-dYi-bhag0na  kalpayefc  Yivrifcankanana  I 
Tad-bahifc  cbavrifcSmfcena  kiiryaclr  cbaika  kbalurika  II 

(Ibid.  440-442). 

See  also  lines  443-453,  and  then  compare  : 

Nripftnaih  bhojanarbham  svafc  kharvafcakhjam  tii  mandapam ) 

(ibid.  456). 

Then  (line.s  446,  450)  ‘ kbalurika  ’ is  stated  to  be  built  round  a 
dining-hall  and  hence  not  for ‘ any  military  purpose;  it 
appears  like  a parlour. 

Compare  also : 

Tan-madhye  pancha-bhagena  sapfca-bhSgahkanam  tathS,  I 
Tad-bahye  paritgmfcena  kuryad  antar  alindakam  I 
Kalurikapi  tad-bahye  tri-tri-bhagena  mandapam  I 

(Ibid.  284-286). 

Evam  Yasanfca-yogyam  syat  devanam  kshatrivadinam  I 

(Ibid.  296). 

Tad-vibhaga-dvl-bhagena  Yistftraih  mandapam  bhavet  I 
Dvi-tri-bhagahkanam  ptirve  eka  bhagam  khalurakam  I 

Ibid.  351-362). 

(2)  Evambhutasya  vasasya  samantat  syat  kbalurika  I 

Vasa-vyasam  ohafcur-bhagam  kyitvS  ohaikadi-bhSgatah  il 
Vi’iddhyam  vasasya  bahye  tu  shodafcaYadhi-bhagakan  I 
Vyapohya  paritah  kuryat  prafchamavaranaditah  II 
K.alurikam(s)  tu  chaikadi-sapta-bhagavasanakah  I 
Mukhe  oha  parsvayoh  prishthe  pafctayah  syur  yatheshtafcah  H 
Oja-yugma-pramanena  nyuna  vapy-adhika  tu  va  I 
Sabhadra  va  vibhadra  vu  khaiuri  syad  yatheshtafcah  II 
Etasam  antaralam  tu  samaiii  va  vishamam  tu  va  I 
Kaluri-dhama-madhyam  tu  tad-vad  eva  vidhiyate  !i 

(Kamikagama,  xxsv.  103-107  see  also  108-116), 


KHBfAKA 


m 

Etam  khalCirikam  kurySt  prasadadishu,  buddMman  H 
DeYanam  maDnijaiiam  eba  Yi&esbad  raja-dbamani  II 
G-opnram  cba  khalSri  oka  mfila-taski  nirikshifcam  If 

(Ibid.  10?a,  118,  128). 

SamaYpita  fcbaldrika  tany‘evokfcani  paa(Jitah  l 
Nagara-grama-dnrgartaih  feeshany-ukfeSni  Ye&manam  If 

(Ibid.  LV.  20). 

EHETAKA — A village  (M.  ix.  456),  a fortified  town  (M.  x,  36-  39) 

(1)  Tatas  fean-ninnayamasub  khefeani  eba  purani  cha  If 
Gramam^  obaiva  yatbabbagam  tatbaiva  nagarani  oba  II 
KbelSnam  cba  puranaib  cba  gramanafii  cbaiva  sarva&ab  \ 
Tri-vidbanam  cba  durganam  parvatodaka-dhanvinam  H 
Nagarad  ardba-visbkambab  kbetam  param  tad-urddvafcab  \ 
Hagarad  yojanaib  kbetam  kbetad  gramo’rdha-yojanairf  II 

(Brabmanda-Purana,  part  I,  2ad  anusbamgapada, 
obapter  7,  v.  93,  94, 105,  111). 

(2)  Pamsu-prakara-nibadba-kbetam  \ 

(Eayapaseni-sutra  vyakbana,  p.  206). 

(3)  Kbetani  dbuli-prakaropetani  I 

(Pra&na-vyakarana-sutra-vyakbyana,  p.  306\ 
See  Kautiliya-Artba^astra  (obap.  xxii.  p.  46,  foot  note). 

(4)  Vane  jana-pade  obaiva  kevale  &udra-sevitab  I 
Kan^akab  kbefeako  gramah  kramat  tri-vidbam  iritab  )l 

Kamikagama,  XX,  10). 

(5)  Nagarani  kbe^an  jana-padams  tatba  \ 

(Mababbarata,  in.  13,  220,  etc). 

(6)  Pura-gramakara-kbeta-vata-sibira-vraja-gbosba....  \ 

(Bbagavata-Purana,  6,  30). 

(7)  Gne  of  the  750  villages  “ wbiob  are  designated  by  (their  chief 

town)  fei-Harsapnra.  ” 

(Easbtrakuta  Grant, of  Krishna  ii,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  i. 

p.  56,  67,  line  33,  p.  63,  foot  note  3). 

(8)  “ The  modern  Kbeda  (Kbaira).  ■’ 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  x.  p.  378;  vol.  XIV.  p.  198). 


15B  KHE’rAEA 

(9)  Lata-de^antarwartti  khefcaka-mandalantarggatah  Kovanolia- 
nama  gramak  ( 

(Cambay  Plates  of  Govinda  iv,  line  62,  Ep.  Ind. 

voL  VII.  pp.  40,46). 

(10)  ^ri-khetakabare-uppalaheta-pathake  mahilabali-nama-gramah 

— “ The  village,  named  Mohibabali,  in  the  Uppalahe- 
tapathaka  in  the  famous  Khetaka  (?city)  ahara. 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  vil.  p.  72,  plate  ii,  line  6-6). 

(11)  Khetakaharam  vishaye  bandarijidri-pathakantarggata-a§ila- 

paUika-gramah  } 

“ Khetaka  is  of  course  the  modern  Kheda  or  Kaira  itself  (lat. 
22M4'N.  ; long  72°  46' E).” 

(Alina  Copper  plate  Inscrip,  of  Siladitya  vii,  lines 
66-67,  C.  I.  I.  vol.  III.  F.  G.  I.  no.  39,  pp.  179, 
189,  173,  and  notes  2,  3). 

(12)  Grama-nagara-kheda-karvva^a-madamba-dronamukha-patta- 

nanigalimdam  aneka-mata-kuta-prasada-devayatanam  gali- 
dam  oppuva-agrahara-pattanamgalimdam  atisayavappa  \ 
At  Teridala  ,a  merchant-town  situated  in  the  centre  and  the 
first  in  importance  among  the  twelve  (towns)  in  the 
glorious  Eundi  Three  thousand,  adorned  with  villages, 
towns,  hamlets,  villages  sourrounded  by  hills,  groups  of 
villages,  sea-girt  towns,  and  chief  cities,  with  elegant 
mansions,  palaces,  and  with  shining  temples,  and 
agrahara-towns  in  the  country  of  Kuntala.  ” 

(Old  Kanarese  Inscrip,  at  Terdal,  line  68,  Ind. 

Ant.  vol.  XI Y.  pp.  19,  25). 

(13)  “ With  myriads  of  people,  practices  of  virtue,  agreeable  occu- 

pations, streams  of  the  nine  sentiments,  pleasure-gardens, 
separated  lovers,  splendid  tanks,  full  lotus  beds,  gilded 
boats  for  spring  festivals,  ghatika-sthanas  (religious  centres), 
the  supports  of  dharmma  and  mines  of  enjoyment,  moats 
which  were  as  if  the  sea  being  overcome  had  returned  here 
on  account  of  the  collection  of  gems,  groups  of  the  lotus 


G-ANYA-MAHA  169 

faces  of  beautiful  women  fair  as  tbe  moon  (grama-nagara- 
kbeda-kharvvana-madamba-dronamukba-pura-pattana-raja- 
dhanim)  on  whatever  side  one  looked,  in  these  nine  forms 
did  the  Kuntala-de&a  shine.’^ 

(It  should  be  noticed  that  the  passage  within  brackets  is  almost 
identical  with  the  corresponding  passage  in  quotation  no.  12 
above). 

(Ep.  Oarnat.  vol.  Vli.  Shikappur  Taluq,  no.  197, 
TransL  p.  134,  para  1,  last  seven  lines  ; Boman 
text,  p.  2X4,  line  27  f). 

G 

GAGANA— A kind  of  pent-roof. 

(M.  XVIII.  174-180,  see  under  Lupa). 
GAJA — (cf.  Hasti-prishtha) — A.  type  of  building  (see  under  Kufijara). 
A kind  of  oval  building  : 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104.  v.  19-20,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47.  v.  29-30,  see  under  Prasada). 

See  the  Plan  and  Sections  of  a Gaja-prishl?hakriti  building. 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xii.  between  pages  104-6). 
GANYA-MANA— The  comparative  height  of  the  component  members 
of  an  architectural  structure.  In  the  sculptural  measure- 
menti  the  similar  height  is  generally  called  the  Tala-mana. 
Implying  the  comparative  height  of  the  component  members  of 
the  buildings  of  one  to  twelve  storeys  •* 

Janmadi-stupi-paryantam  ganya-manam  ihoohyate  \ 

Harmye  chashta-tale  tuhge  sash^a-bhagadhi  kam  tatha  I 
Sardha-dvyamiam  adhishthanam  tad-dvayam  pada-tuhgakam  1 
Tad-ardham  prastarotsedham  lesham  ashta-taloktavat  I 
Evam  nava-talotsedham  sarvalahkara-samyutam  I 

(M.  XXVII.  36-39). 

Evarii  vistara-ganyaih  syat  tuhga-ganyam  ihoohyate  I 
Janmadi-stupi-paryantam  uktavat  samgraham  viduh  \ 

(M.  XXIX.  36-37,  see  also  38-49  under  Eka-data-tala). 


1^0 


GANYA-MAHA 


See  the  details  of  the  other jsfcoreys  under  Eka-tala,  Bvi-tala,  Tri- 
tala,  Ghatus-tala,  Panoha-tala,  Shat-tala,  Sapta-tala,  Ashfa- 
tala,  Dat'a-tala,  Ekadata-tala  and  Dva-daka-tala. 

The  similar  comparative  measurement  referring  to  the  sixteen 
storeys  of  the  gopiiras  (gate-houses) : 

Tuhge  cha  trayo-vimsad  bhagam  evam  vibhajite  \ 
Eka-datopapitham  oha  ohatur-bhaga(m ) masiirakam  I 
Yasu-bhagahghri-tungam  syat  shad-bhagam  tu  vibhajite  I 
Tri-bhilgarh  chopapxtham  tu  siva-bhaga(m)  masurakam  t 
Dyi-bhagam  pada-tuhgam  syat  tad-urdhve  prastarad(h}lkam  \ 
^ikhurhsam  ohordhYa-maiie  tu  talanam  adhuaochyate  \ 
Adhishthiina-samam  maiioha(m)  tat-samam  gala-tuhgakam  I 
Galocboha-dvi-gunaih  proktam  tikharasyodayam  nyaset  I 
^ikharordhva(m)  tikhottungam  stfipi(pi)-traya-sam(m)eva  cha  \ 
Evam  eka-talam  proktam  dYi-taladi-tala(m)  eva  cha  \ 
Kshudra-madhyam  oha  mukhyauam  gopure  tu  viteshatah  \ 
Prastaradi  (?  upanadi)-tikhantarii  syat  ganya-manarh  pravkshyate  I 

(M.  XXXIII.  133-144). 

Piirvavat  prastarady-autam  chordhve  stupikantakam  \ 
Ganya-mauarh  cha  sarvesham  bhaga-mana(m)-va§ochyate  I 

(Ibid.  216-216). 

Bhaga-mana-yasad  ganya-manam  yat  prochyate  budhaih  \ 

(Ibid.  247). 

The  similar  comparative  measurement  referring  to  the  component 
parts  of  a throne : 

Sarvesham  manam  ity-uktam  ganya-manam  ihochyate  1 
Asanasyodayardham  va  tri-bhagaikonam  eva  va  \ 

Upapithodayam  hy-eva(m)  chokta-tuhgeMhikam  tu  va  J 
Sesham  masurakam  vapi  samadhishthana-tuhgakam  I 
IJtsedha-ravi-bhage  tu  janma-tuhgam  tivamtakam  i 
Tad-urdhve  ohardha-kampam  syat  pada-bhSgena  yojayet  I 

(M.  XLv.  86,  96-100). 


aANBHA-KXJTl 


161 


The  similar  measurement  referring  to  the  component  mouldings 
of  the  Pi^ha  (Yoni  or  the  pedestal  of  the  Phallus) : 

Pitha-tuhgam  iti  proktam  ganja-inanam  ihochyate  I 
Utsadhe  shoda^aihse  tu  prathamochoham  dvi-bhagikam  \ 
Padmoohoham  tu  tri-bhagam  syat  tad-iirdhve  kshepanamsakam  \ 
Kandharam  oha  tri-bhagam  syat  tad-urdhve  kampam  am^akam  \ 
tirdha-padmam  tr(i)yaihtam  syad  vajanam  oha  tri-bhagikam  \ 
Ekamtam  ghpita-vari  syad  bhadra-pitham  iti  sroritam  I 

(M.  Liii.  29-34). 

The  similar  measurement  referring  to  the  component  mouldings 
of  the  Upa-pitha  or  pedestal  of  the  column : 

Etat  tu  nirgamam  proktam  ganya-manam  ihochyate  \ 

Utsedhe  tu  chatur-vim&at  pafichamfeopanam  iritam  I 
Ekena  kampam  ity-uktam  grivoohcham  dTa-da'samaakam  1 
Eampam  ekam  tu  vedamtaih  vajanam  kampam  aihtakam  I 
Vedi-bhadram  iti  proktam  athava  dva-datamtakam  I 

(M.  xiii.  36-39). 

eANpA-BHBEANpA.(STAMBA)‘-A  kind  of  pillar. 

(See  under  Stambha); 

GAB  A'- A type  of  octangular  ouilding. 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  v.  20-21,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  21,  23,  31-32,  see  under  Prasada). 
GANBHA-KUTI(-T) — The  Buddhist  temple,  any  chamber  used  by 

Buddha. 

(1)  Punyodde&a-vataoh  chakara  ruohiram  tauddhodaneh  ^rad- 
dhayS  trimad-gandha-kutim  imam  iva  kutim  mokshaaya 
aaukhyasya  cha  r 

“ — has  constructed  this  gandha-kuti  of  Buddha,  graceful. aaad 
like  a hall  of  emancipation  and  bliss  for  the  spiritual  benefit 
of^^— 

‘ Gandha-kuti  ’ is  literally  a * chamber  of  perfume,’  an  epithet 
applied  to  Buddha-temples.  The  large  temple  at  BuMl^- 
gaya  is  called,  in  the  inscriptions,  ‘ Maha-gandha-kuti- 
11 


m 


GANDHA-MADANA 


prasada’  (Ind.  Anfe.  vol.  ix.  p.  142-143)  ; aadtlie  room  in 
which.  Buddha  lived  in  Jetavana  at  l§ravasti  waa  also  known 
by  this  name  (Ounningham’s  Bharhnt  Stupa,  plate  xxxyiil, 
and  page  133,  no.  22). 

(An  insorip,  at  Gaya,  v.  9,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  X.  pp.  342, 

343,  note  8), 

(2)  Kyitavantan  oha  navinam  ashta-maha-sthana-feaila-gandha- 

kutim — “ they  constructed  this  new  gandha-kuti  (made)  of 
stones  (coming  from)  eight  holy  places.” 

Gandhakuti— “ perfumed  chamber,  any  private  chamber 
dovoted  bo  Buddha’s  use/’  Childers,  (s.  v.)  gandhaku|i. 

The  gandhakuti  at  Jetavana  near  ^ravasti  is  represented 
on  a Bharhnt  bas-relief. 

See  also  Ounningham’s  Bharhnt  Stupa,  (plate  LYll). 

See  Sarnabh  insorip.  of  Mahipalala,  (line  2,  Ind,  Ant.  vol.  xiv, 

p.  140,  note  7). 

(3)  * Gamdha-kuti’ — “ the  hall  of  perfumes,  ” i.e.,  the  Buddhist 

temple.” 

(Bharaut  Inscrip,  no.  40,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xxi.  p.  230, 
note  34  refers  to  Arch.  Surv.  of  W.  India,  vol. 
Y,  p.  77  and  to  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  XIY,  p.  140,  already 
quoted  above). 

(4)  “ On  the  other  side  of  his  (Buddha’s)  body,  towards  the  west, 

he  caused  to  be  built  a beautiful  gandha-kuti,  pleasing  bo 
the  eye.” 

(Ajanta  Insorip.  no.  4,  line  27,  Arch.  Surv.  new 
Imp.  series,  vol.  lY.  pp.  130, 132). 
GANBHA-MADANA — ^A  class  of  pavilions. 

(M.  xxxiY.  164,  see  under  Mandapa). 
GANDAEVA— 'A  class  of  demi-gods  inhabiting  Indra’s  heaven,  and 
serving  as  celestial  musicians.  See  the  description  of  their  images. 

(M.  Lvm.  8, 16-19). 

GABHAEA  (GAEBHAGAEA)~An  underground  shrine,  the  sanc- 
tuary of  a temple,  the  room  where  the  deity  is  placed,  a private 
room,  the  female  apartments,  a lying-in-ohamber. 


aAEtJpA-SKAMBHA 


163 


“ Through  the  door  at  the  east  end  of  the  hall,  we  descent  by 
some  nine  steps  into  the  Gabhard  or  shrine,  which  is  also 
square,  measuring  13  feet  9 inches  each  way.’' 

(The  temple  of  Amarnath,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  nr.  p. 

318,  c.  I,  last  para). 

Q-AEUPA — The  king  of  birds,  the  sun-eagle  ; a type  of  building 
which  is  shaped  like  the  sun-eagle  (garuda),  has  wings  and 
tail,  and  seven  storeys,  twenty  ^.cupolas  (anda)  and  twenty-four 
cubits  wide. 

Nandi  tadakritir  Jheyah  pakshadi-rahitah  punah  II 
Q-arudakritit  cha  garudah  I 

Commentary  quotes  clearer  description  from  Katyapa : 

G-arudo  garudakarah  paksha-puchchha-vibhushitah  1 

Cf,  Karanam  shat-ohatu8hkam&  cha  vistirnau  sapta-bhumikau  \ 

Databhir  dvigunair  andair  bhushitau  karayet  tu  tau  II 

(1)  Brihat-samhita  (lvi.  24.  J.E.A.S.,  N.S.,  vol.  vi.  p.  319). 

(2)  Matsya-Burana  (chap.  269,  v.  41-43,  61,  see  under  Prasada). 

(3)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap.  180,  V.  31,  see  under  Prasada). 

A type  of  oval  building  : 

(4)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  29-30,  see  under  Prasada). 

In  connection  with  the  temples  of  the  attendant  deities  : 

(6)  Yan-mula-harmye  vrishabhadi-vishnur-adi 

Mandapadi-garudadi  cha  gopuradin  \ 
Tan-mula-harmya-paritah  sthita  pa&yate’smin  (?) 

Kuryat  tu  sarva-parivaram  idam  pratastam  1 

(M.  XXXII.  168-171). 

The  description  of  the  image  of  Garuda  (M.  lxi.  1-148). 
Compare  also  M.  XIX.  224. 

GAEXJPA-SK(-T)AMBHA^ — (see  under  Stambha)— .Pillars  generally 
bearing  the  statues  of  the  garuda-bird  and  belonging  to  the 
Yaishnavas. 


164 


0AEUTMAN 


“Had  tlie  temple  built,  and  setting  up  this  lafeana  erected 
Bi  garuda-sJcamhJia  in  tront 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  xii.  Pavugada  Talug,  no.  78, 
Transl.  p.  180). 

G-AEIJTMAH — (see  G-aruda) — A type  of  oval  building. 

'Angi-Purana,  chap.  104,  v.  19-20,  see  under  Prasada). 
GAEBHA— The  womb,  the  foundation,  the  adytum,  the  chamber  in 
a temple  where  the  deity  is  placed. 

(1)  Vist^ardham  bhaved  garbho  bhitty-anyah  samantatah  J 

Garbha-padena  vistirnam  dvaram  dvi-gunam  uohohhritam  ll 
“ The  adytum  measures  half  the  extent  (of  the  whole)  and 
has  its  separate  walls  all  around.  Its  door  is  ^ of  the 
adytum  in  breadth  and  twice  as  high.  ” 

(Brihat-samhita,  LXI.  12,  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S,,  vol.  VI.  p.  318). 

(2)  Baja  prasada-garbham  gatva  \ 

(Hitopade&a,  ed.  Botlingk,  p.  157,  etc). 

(3)  The  foundations  of  the  village  (M.  ix.  7), 

The  adytum : 

G-arbhe  nanda-vibhage  tu  ekaikam  lihga-tuj^akam  \ 
Garbha-tara-samam  treshtham  tri-vidhada  lihga-tuhgakam  \ 

(M.  Lii.  16,  21) 

(4)  ^ravastiyanSm  maha-matranam  tasanam  manava«iti-katat  \ 

Srimati  vamtagrama  evaite  dve  koshthagare  tri-garbhe I 

“ The  order  of  the  great  officials  of  ^ravasti . (issued  fro  m 
their  camp  at)  Manavasitikata ; these  two  store-houses  with 
three  partitions  (which  are  situated)  even  in  famous 
Vamsagrama  require  the  storage  of  black  loads  of  Panioum.” 
(Sohgaura  Copper  Plate,  line  1-2,  Ind.  Ant,  vol. 

XXV.  p,  266), 

GAEBHA«GE(-BI)FA — The  central  hall,  the  adytum,  the  sanotu 
ary  in  the  middle  of  which  is  placed  the  statue  of  the  deity ; thii 
is  sometimes  called  Mula-sthana  (see  GarbhSgara) 

(11  Harmya-tare  tu  bhutamsam  tr(i)yamtam  garbha-gehakam  \ 

(M.  XIX.  114,  see  also  119). 


GAEBHA-NYASA 


165 


B vi-fcale  tara-saptam&am  vedam&am  garbha-gehakam  \ 

(M.  XXXIII.  164,  see  also  161). 
G-arbha-gehe  tu  mauam  syat  Imga-tungam  prakalpayefe  \ 

(M.  Lii.  22,  see  also  Liii.  4). 

(2)  “ And  the  balance  he  will  apply  to  building  the  garbha- 

griha  and  enclosure  of  the  goddesse’s  temple.” 

(Ep.  Garnat.  vol.  viil.  part  I,  Sagar  Taluq,  no.  135, 
Eoman  text,  p.  225,  TransL  p.  119,  last  para, 

last  line). 

(3)  “ His  wife  (with  various  praises)  Kallard-Siyamma  had  the 

shrine  (garbba-grihada)  of  the  god  Bidda-Mallikarjuna 
renewed.” 

(Ep.  Garnat.  vol.  xil.  G-ubbi  Taluq,  no.  29,  Eoman 
text,  p.  41,  TransL  p.  23,  line  8). 

(4)  Garbha-griharsthita-mantapa-&ikhara — “ the  ruined  tower  over 

the  shrine  (of  the  god  Arkanatha).” 

(Ep.  Garnat.  vol.  iii.  Malavalli  Taluq,  no.  64, 
Eoman  text,  p.  127,  line  3 ; TransL  p.  63). 

(5)  “ Garbha-griha — sanctum  of  a temple.” 

Vincent  Smith’  gloss  (loo.  cit)  to  Cunningham’s  Arch.  Surv, 
Eeports. 

GAKBHA-NYASA — Laying  the  foundation,  the  foundations. 
Manasara  (chap,  xii,  named  Garbha-nyasa,  1-128)  : 

The  foundation  is  classed  under  three  heads— for  buildings  (lines 
4-169),  for  villages,  etc.  (172-186),  and  for  tanks,  etc.  (188-216). 
The  last  named  foundation,  which  is  meant  for  a tank,  well  or 
pool,  is  said  to  be  as  high  as  the  joint  palm  of  man  (narahjali) 
(188). 

The  foundation  of  buildings  is  first  divided  into  two  classes,  as  it 
belongs  to  temples  (4-149)  and  to  human  dwellings  (155-169) . 
Of  temples,  those  of  Vishnu  (4-137)  and  Brahman  (139-149)  are 
illustrated  and  the  others  are  said  to  be  like  these  (of.  132). 


166 


aAEBHA-BHAJANA 


Of  feho  liiimaii  dwellings,  there  are  four  classes  ^ according  to  the 
four  castes — Brahman,  Kshatriya  Vaiiiya  and  Sudra. 

The  depth  of  the  foundation-pit  is  stated  to  be  equal  to  the 
basement : 

Garbhavatasya  nimnam  syad  adhishthana(ni)  -samonnatam  I 

Ishtakair  api  pashanait  chatur-a§ram  samam  bhavet  I 

(M.  Xli.  6-7). 

The  details  of  laying  the  foundations  are  given  (M.  xvii.  6-9) : 

The  best  ground  selected  for  foundations  is  excavated  to  the  depth 
of  a man*s  height  with  uplifted  arms.  The  bottom  of  the  pit 
thus  excavated  should  be  rooky  or  water,  and  the  pit  is  filled 
with  sands  and  water  which  are  closely  pressed  and  hardened  by 
means  of  wooden  hammers  shaped  like  the  elephant’s  foot. 
Upon  such  foundations,  the  strength  whereof  varies  according 
to  the  weight  of  the  construction  above,  various  structures  are 
constructed. 

From  this  it  would  appear  that  the  best  soils  for  receiving  founda- 
tions are  rock,  gravel,  or  closely  pressed  sandy  earth. 

GAEBHA-BHAJANA— The  foundation-pit,  the  excavation. 

(M.  XII.  103). 

GARBHA-MAt JUSHA(-IKA)— The  basket-shaped  roof  upon  the 
foundation-pit,  the  vault.' 

(M.  XII.  47). 

GAEBHA-YINYASA — ^(see  Garbha-nyasa)— The  arrangement  of 
the  foundation,  the  foundations. 

tM.  xn.  2). 

Garbha-nyasa-vidhim  vakshye  gramadinaih  cha  sadmanam  I 

Sa-garbham  sarva-saihpattyair  vigarbham  natanam  bhavet  II 

(Kamikagama,  XXXI,  2-104). 

GAEBHA-SUTEA — The  line  in  the  interior  or  middle. 

Garbha-sutrasya  karpaife  cha  dvirdvi-feankum  nikhanayet  \ 

(M.  VI.  106). 


GANAYA  167 

GAEBHAYATA— The  fouadatioa-pit,  fehe  exoavatioa. 

(M.  XII.  6,  see  under  Garbha-ayasa). 

GALA — (see  Kaai?ha) — The  neoh,  a moulding  called  dado,  the  frieze 
of  the  entablature. 

See  the  lists  of  mouldfnga  under  Adhiahthana.,  Upapi^ha  and 
Prastara. 

Pee  Kamikagama  (liv.  47)  under  Prastara. 

GALA-KUTA— A side-tower,  a dome  at  the  neck-part  of  a building 
(see  Kuta). 

GAYAKSflA — (see  Yatayana)  -Windows  resembling  the  cow’s  eye, 
a latticed  window. 

Sardha-gayakshakopeto  nirgavaksho’thaya  bhavet  \ 

(Garuda-Purana,  chap.  47,  y.  36). 

Compare  M.  xyiii.  290,  xx.  81,  xxxiii.  582,  etc. 

“The  chief  adornment  of  the  temple  at  Gahgai-konda-puram  is 
the  repetition  eyerywhere  on  the  cells  and  cornices  of  the  fan- 
like window  ornament  resembling  a spread  peaook’s  tail.  ” 

(Ind.  Ant.  yol.  ix.  p.  118,  o.  i,  para  3,  last  sentence). 

See  Pallaya  Architecture  iAroh.  Sury.  New.  Imp.  series,  yol.  xxxiv. 

plate  oxxii). 

See  the  pierced  window  in  Bhoganandisvara  shrine  (Mysore  Arch. 

Beport,  1913-14,  plate  V.  fig;  2,  p.  14). 

GAYAKSHAKABA— Eesembling  the  cow’s  eye,  a moulding  or  struc- 
ture shaped  like  a cow’s  eye. 

In  connection  with  the  bedsteads  : 

Yrittakritishta-padanam  yuktya  varnena  lepayet  \ 

Gayakshakara-yuktya  cha  patljikordhve  samantatah  \ 

Kunjaraksham  alaksham  ya  patra-pushpady-alankritam  I 

(M.  XLiv.  21-23). 

GATBA — ^Literally  the  body,  the  columns  of  a pavilion. 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  102-103,  see  under  Mandapa). 

GANAYA- A kind  of  phallus. 

(Kamikagama,  L.  36,  37,  see  under  Linga), 


I 


168 


GIEI-BUBG-A 


GIEI-BUEGA— (see  Durga)— A fort,  a Mli-forfc. 

Of.  “ In  the  reign  of  Chikka-Beva-Eaya-vodeya-raiya  the  servant  of 
the  lord  of  this  village,  Bilugeli  Kempar-Sjayya’s  son  Basarajayya 
began  to  build  the  stone  fort  of  Nijagal,  which  has  received 
another  name  of  Sura-giri-durgga. 

“ Iul698  to  1700  the  bastions  of  the  fort  and  the  town-gate  on 
the  east  were  completed.  In  1701  to  1702  the  town-gate  on 
the  south  was  made.  In  Parthiva  (1706)  the  elephant-gate 
on  the  east,  this  hall  and  the  chavadi  with  the  tiger-f ace-gate, 
and  the  Yighnek vara  temple  at  the  town-gate  on  the  south’^ 
(were  built). 

(Ep.  Carnat,  vol.  ix.  Nelamangala  Taluq,  no,  65^ 
Eoman  text,  p.  64,  Transl.  p.  46). 
GUETJ-BVABA — A Sikh  monastery. 

See  Vincent  Smith’s  Gloss  (loo.  cit.)  to  Cunningham’s  Arch. 
Surv.  Eeports. 

GUVA-VETESHA — A type  of  round  building. 

(Garuda-Purana,  chap,  47,  v.  21,  23,  28-29,  see  under  Prasada). 
GIJHA-EA-JA — ^A  type  of  building  which  is  sixteen  cubits  wide  and 
has  a roof  with  three  dormer-windows. 

(1)  Brihat-aamhita  (lvi.  26,  E.  A,  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  ?i.  p.  319, 

see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap.  130,  v.  32,  see  under  Prasada). 
GBIHA — The  house,  a building,  a room,  a hall. 

Gyiham  gehodavasitam  vetma  sadma  niketanam  II 
Hitanta-vastya-sadanaih  bhavanagara-mandiram  l 
Grihah  pumsi  cha  bhumny-eva  nikayya-nilayalayah  \\ 

(Amarakosha,  li,  ii,  4,  5). 
Of.  Sudipika-griham— a house  of  beautiful  lamps. 

(Three  Inscrip,  from  Travancore,  no.  B,  line  3,  Ep. 

Ind,  vol.  IV.  p.  203), 

See  M IX.  7,  8 ; XXXVi.  2 ; xxxvii.  1 ; XL.  78,  etc. 


0EIHA-PBAVESA 


169 


G-l^IHA-K^NTA— A class  of  the  five-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXIII,  30-32,  see  under  Prasada). 

O-BIHA-G-AEBHA— -(see  0arbha-uyli3a)«T he  foundation  of  a house. 
Q-yiha-garbbam  iti  proktaih  grama-garham  ihochyate  I 
G-liha-garbham  antar-mukham  syad  grama -garbhaih  bahir-mukham  1 

(M.  xii.  167,  216). 

GRIHA-OHULLl— A building  with  an  eastern  and  western  hall, 

“ a house  with  two  rooms  contiguous  to  each  other,  but  one 
facing  west  and  the  other  east. 

(Brihat-saiuhitfi,  liii.  40). 

GBIHA-PINpi-“(see  Pindika) — The  basement  of  a building. 

.......gfiha-pindir  athoohyate  II 

Madhye  chasavritarh  vasavasa-pindkandharlketi  oha  I 
Samjfievam  griha-pindeh  sayat I! 

(Kamikagama,  lv.  200-201,. 

GrBIHA-PRAVEl^A— The  opening  of  or  the  first  entry  into  the  house, 
the  house-warming  ceremony, 

Manasara  (chap,  xxxyil,  named  Griha-pravesab 
The  ceremonies  in  connection  with  the  opening  of  and  first  entry 
into  a house  are  described  in  detail  (lines  1-90).  The  considera- 
tion of  auspicious  day  and  moment,  and  the  worship  and  sacrifice 
in  this  connection  are  also  described  in  detail  (5-74).  The 
masters  of  the  ceremonies  are  stated  to  be  the  Sthapati  (architect) 
and  the  Sthapaka  (14,  15,  16,  17,  58,  73,  74,  83,  85).  They  lead 
the  procession  in  circumambulating  the  village  and  the  compound 
before  the  ceremonial  entry  into  a new  house  (73-90).  The 
guardian-angel  of  the  house  (Gyiha-Lakshmi)  is  prayed  after 
completing  the  worship  andsaorifioe  to  confer  happiness,  comfort, 
plenty  of  wealth,  children,  health  and  long  life  to  the  master 
and  other  members  of  the  family  (67-72). 

The  chapter  closes  with  the  description  of  an  elaborate  scheme 
of  feeding  the  Brahmins  and  the  artists,  and  of  liberal  gifts 
to  them  for  the  sake  of  prosperity  and  success  of  the  family 
(84-90).  (See  also  M.  ix.  8). 


170 


aBIHA-MAlSfGALA 


GEIHA-MANGrAtiA— An  auspicious  ceremony  in  oonaeoMon  with 
a newly  built  house. 

Sarva-mahgala-ghoshai&  oha  s-^asti-vachana-purvakain  \ 

Palohat(d,)  griha-mahgalam  kuryat  nana-vastrait  cha  tobhitam  \ 

(M.  XXXVII.  66-66). 

aEIHA(-MANA-STHANA)-YINYASA~The  dismensions  and  situ- 
ation of  houses. 

(1)  Manasara  (chap,  xxxvi.  named  Griha-mana  -sthana  vinyasa, 
1-96): 

The  dimensions  of  houses  in  general  (lines  6-13).  The  breadth 
of  a house  is  said  to  be  of  five  kinds,  from  two  or  three  dandas 
(4  or  6 yards)^  to  ten  or  eleven  dandas  (20  or  22  yards).  The 
length  may  be  equal  to  twice  the  breadth. 

The  situation  (houses  are  built  in  villages,  towns,  settlements, 
suburbs,  groves,  hermitages,  near  a hill,  and  on  the  banks 
of  a sea  or  river)  (1-6)  : 

Dvi-jatinam  cha  sarvesham  varnanam  vasa-yogyakam  \ 
Grihanam  mana-vinyasam  sthanam  cha  vakshyate’dhuna  \ 
Grame  oha  nagare  vapi  pattane  khetake’pi  va  I 
Vane  va  ohalrame  vapi  nadyadri(e)§  cha  partvake  I 
Tesham  tu  ve&manah  sthanam  kalpayeoh  ohhilpavit-tamah  \ 
In  the  chapter  on  pavilions  (Mandapas)  various  sorts  of 
houses  are  stated  to  be  located  in  diSerent  parts  of  the 
five  courts  into  which  the  whole  compound  is  divided.  In 
that  chapter  houses  for  various  purposes  of  a family  are 
located  in  different  squares  in  which  a single  court  is  divided, 
and  which  have  been  described  in  the  chapter  called 
Pada- vinyasa. 

The  Brahma-sthana  or  the  central  square  is  stated  to  be 
unfit  for  a residential  building  (15),  The  temple  of 


aBIHA-ViNYASA 


171 


the  family  god  is  geaerally  built  in  this  part.  Bound 
this  are  constructed  all  other  houses  (16-85),  such  as 
the  house  for  the  master  of  the  family,  for  his  wife,  for 
the  children,  for  servants,  for  cows,  horses,  fowls,  etc,,  for 
kitchen  and  dining  hail  etc-,  for  guests,  for  the  library 
or  study,  for  the  daily  sacrifices  of  the  upper  castes,  for 
amusements  and  music,  for  the  dancing  girls,  and  for  all 
other  domestic  purposes.  But  the  distribution  of  these 
several  detached  buildings  is  left  to  the  choice  of  the 
master  of  the  house  (85). 

(2)  Kautilxya-Artha-feastra  (chap,  xxiv.  p.  53)  : 

Adi-talasya  panoha-bhag^i  sala  vapi,  sima-grihaiii  cha  da&a- 
bhagikau  dvau  prati-manohau,  antara  mani-harmyam  cha 
samuchohhrayad  ardha-talam,  sthrmavabandha^  cha  ardha- 
vastukam  uttamagaraih  tri-bhagantaram  va  ishtakavaban- 
dha-par&vam,  varnatah  pradakshiua-sopauam  gadha-bhitti- 
sopanam,  itaratah  dvi-hastaih  torana-§irah,  tri-pafioha- 
bhagikau  dvau  kavata-yogau,  dvau  dvau  parighau,  aratnir 
indra-kilah,  paficha-hasta-mani-dvaraih,  chatvaro  hasti-pari- 
ghah,  nivefeardham  hasti-nakhah  mukha-samas*sankrimo^ 
samharyo  va  bhumi-mayo  va  I 

“ Of  the  first  fioor,  5 parts  (are  to  be  taken)  for  the  formation 
of  a hall,  a well,  and  a boundary  house ; two-tenths  of  it 
for  the  formation  of  two  platforms  opposite  to  each  other ; 
and  upper  storey  twice  as  high  as  its  width,  carvings  of 
images,  an  upper  most  storey,  half  or  three-fourths  as  broad 
as  the  first  floor  j side  walls  built  of  bricks  ; on  the  left  side, 
a staircase  oiroummambulating  from  left  to  right ; on  the 
right  a-seoret  staircase  hidden  in  the  wall,  a top-support  of 
ornamental  arches  projecting  as  far  as  two  cubits,  two  door- 
pauels,  (each)  occupying  three-fourths  of  the  space,  two  and 
two  cross  bars  (to  fasten  the  door)  ; an -iron  bolt  (indrakila) 
as  long  as  an  aratni  (24  angulas) ; a boundary-g^te 


172  GBIHA-MUKHA 

5 cubits  in  width,  four  beams  to  shut  the  door  against 
elephants  j and  turrets  (hasti-nakha)  (outside  the  rampart) 
raised  up  to  the  height  of  the  face  of  a man,  removable  or 
irremovable,  or  made  of  earth  in  places  devoid  of  water.’* 
GrRIHA-MUKHA — A door,  a fa9ade,  the  exterior,  front  or  face  of  a 
building. 

Banam  ghara-mukha  \ 

(Earle  Cave  Insorip,  nos.  4,  6,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  VII.  p.  62-63), 
“ A fa§ade  implies  also  the  architrave  and  sculpture  round  the 
door  with  the  arch  over  it.”  Br.  Burgess. 

(Earle  Insorip.  no.  4,  Arch.  Surv.  New  Imp.  series, 
vol.  IV.  p.  90,  note  4). 

CBIHA-EAIA^ — (see  Q-uha-raja) — A type  of  building. 

(1)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap.  130,  v.  32,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Agai-Purana  (chap.  104,  v.  16-17,  see  under  Prasada). 

(3)  G-aruda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  21-22, 26-27,  see  under  Prasada). 
GRIHA-STAMBHA — The  main  column  of  the  house. 

Kudya-stambhe  griha-stambhe  harmya-garbham  vinikshipet  \ 

(M.  XII.  132). 

See  more  details  under  Stambha. 

GEIHA(-EA) — A hall  or  room,  a house,  a habitation. 

Gopuraih  tri-talam  nyasam  lakshanaih  vakshyate’dhuna  \ 
Bvi-bhagam  bhitti-vistaram  paritah  tesham  tu  gehakam  \ 

(M.  xxxiii.  489,  492). 

GOEARNA — A measure,  the  distance  between  the  tips  of  the  fully 
stretched  thumb  and  ring-finger. 

Talah  smrito  madhyamaya  gokarnat  chapy-anamaya  \ 

(Brahmanda-Purana,  part  1,  2nd  anushanga-pada, 

chap.  7,  V,  97). 

(2)  Amgushthanamika-yuktam  gokarnam  iti  samjnikam  \ 

(Suprabhedagama,  XXX,  22), 


GOPANA* 


173 


GOEHIiA— -The  niche,  a recess  in  a wall. 

“In  the  east  wall  of  fche  mandapa  on  each  side,  is  a or 

niche  for  images,  and  in  that  on  the  south  side  is  a defaced 
Ganefea”. 

“ In  the  vestihnle  to  the  shrine  are  also  small  recesses  one  on  each 
hand.” 

(The  Temnle  at  Amarnath,  Ind.  Ant.  toI.  iix.  p. 

818,  0. 1,  para  2,  middle). 

GOJI-— The  septum  of  the  nose,  the  bridge-like  part  between  the  two 
nostrils  oonneoting  the  tip  of  the  nose  with  the  surface  of  the 
upper  lip. 

(M.  Lxv.  105,  etc.,  see  the  lists  of  limbs  under  'laia-mSua), 

GOPJlNA — (Gopanaka) — The  beam,  a moulding. 

A moulding  of  the  pedestal  generally  placed  between  a oyma 
and  cayetto  or  a oyma  and  fillet  (M.  xiii.  95, 100,  etc.,  see  the 
lists  of  mouldings  under  Upapftha). 
A moulding  of  the  base  (M.  xiv.  32,  etc.,  see  the  lists  of 

mouldings  under  Adhisjihana), 
A synonym  of  the  entablature  (M.  xvi.  19,  see  under 

Parastaxa). 

Abeam-iike  ornament  of  the  single -storeyed  buildings  (M.  xix. 

46). 

A similar  ornament  of  the  buildings  of  two  to  twelve  storeys. 

(See  M.  XX.  25.  etc). 

A moulding  of  the  entablature  : 

Dandikordhve  valayam  gopanam  syat  tad-urdhvatah  1 

(Eamikagama,  Liv.  34). 

Cf.  Gopana^i  tu  valabhi-ohhadane  yakra-darupi  I 

(Amarakosha  11.  ii,  15), 


m 


G-OPUKA — A gate-house,  doors  ia  general,  the  colossal  huildiags  over 
or  near  the  gate  giving  entrance  to  a city,  temple,  monastery  etc. 
Pura-dvaram  tu  go-puram  I 
Bvara-matre  tu  go-puram  j 

(Amarakosha,  n.  ii,  16 ; in.  hi,  182). 

(1)  Prasadat  pada-Mnam  tu  gopurasyoohchhrayo  bhavet  \ 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  42,  v.  22). 

(2)  Prakara-samam  mukham  avasthapya  tri-bhaga-godha-mukham 

gopuram  karayet*—”  A turret  above  the  gate  and  starting 
from  the  top  of  the  parapet  shall  be  constructed,  its  front 
resembling  an  alligator  up  to  | of  its  height.” 

(Kautiliya-Arthat^stra,  chap.  xxiv.  p.  5B). 

(3)  Sala-gopurayos  buhgas  tv-adhikat  chapi  mulatah  \ 
G-opurasyapy-alahkararh  talaUhkaravan  nayet  II 
Sabhakara-tiro-yuktam  ^alakara-airah-kriyam  I 
Mandapakara-samyuktam  chtili-harmya-vibhushitam  il 
Agrato’lindakopetam  attSlam  salakantare  \ 

Gopurasya  tu  vistara-tri-bhagad  eka-bhagikam  II 
Chatur-bhagaika-bhagas  tu  pancha-bhagaika-bhagikah  | 
Nirgamo  gopuranam  tu  prakarad  bahyato  bhavet  11 
Gopuraih  cha  khaluri  cha  mula-vastu-nirikshitam  I 
Antare  raja-devinam  grihany-antar-mukhani  cha  II 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  124-128). 
In  the  above  instance,  it  should  be  noticed,  the  gopura  or  gate- 
house does  not  belong  to  a temple ; it  is  the  part  of  a resi- 
dential house. 

(4)  Pamayana,  vi.  76,  6,  etc. : Gopuratta-pratolishu  oharyasu  1 
(6)  Mahabharata ; 

III.  173,  3 : Puram  gopurattalakopetam  | 

III.  207,  7 : Mithilaih  gopurattalakavatim  I 
These  two  examples  will  show  that  gopura  denotes  gate-houses 
of  palaces  and  cities,  and  that  they  need  not  necessarily 
belong  to  a temple  alone. 


GOPUEA 


176 


(6)  Manasira : 

l!lie  gate-house  of  a town  (M.  x.  48). 

In  oonneotion  with  the  height  of  storeys  (bhumi-lamba)  : 

Deyatalayanam  nyipanaih  saIa-go^iire(e)vain  uttuhgam  \ 

(M.  XI,  113). 

In  conneoMon  with  the  base  (M.  XIY.  415). 

In  connection  with  the  column  : 

PrSaade  mandape  vapi  prakare  gopure  tat  ha  \ 

(M.  XV.  433)  . 

In  connection  with  the  windows  (M.  xxxiii.  594). 

In  connection  with  images  of  Yakshas,  VidySdharas  etc. ; 

Janv-uferita-hastau  gopurodhrita-hastakau  V 

Evam  vidyadharah  prpktah  sarvabharana-bhushitah  1 

(M.  Lviii.  16-17). 

Chapter,  xxxili.  (named  Gopura),  1-601 : 

The  gate-houses  are  built  for  temples  and  residential  buildings 
alike  (line  I).  Hence  it  will  be  inaccurate  to  suppose  that 
gopuras  are  constructed  only  for  temples.  In  the  Manasara 
rules  are  laid  down  for-  gopuras  belonging  to  residential 
buildings  of  various  descriptions  (of.  2-601). 

They  are  built  in  front  of  each  of  the  five  courts  into  which 
the  whole  compound  of  a house  is  divided.  The  gopura 
belonging  to  the  first  court  (antar-mandala)  is  technically 
called  the  Dvara-tobha  or  the  beauty  of  the  gate  (8)  ; that 
belonging  to  the  second  court  is  known  as  Dvara-tala  or  gate- 
house (9).  The  gate-house  of  the  third  court  is  called  Bvara- 
prasSda  (9),  and  of  the  fourth  court  Dvara-harmya  (9). 
The  gate-house  of  the  fifth  court  or  at  the  furthest  boundary 
(maha-maryada)  is  known  as  Maha-gopura  or  the  great  gate- 
house (10). 


176 


GOPTTBA 


The  gopuras  are  furnished  with  as  many  as  sixteen  storeys  (97, 
103).  They  are  divided  into  ten  classes  (564)  with  regard 
to  the  number  of  architectural  members  designated  as 
feikharas  or  cupolas^  domes  (stupika),  side-tower  or  dome 
^ala-kiita)  and  vestibules  (k8hudra-na8i)X536-564),  A gopura 
is  thus  technically  called  ^ribhoga  when  its  feikha  (spire) 
is  like  a tala  (Hall),  it  has  a circular  surrounding  dome  and 
is  furnished  with  a side-tower,  four  small  vestibules 
and  eight  large  vestibules  (653-564),  The  remaining  nine 
classes  are  called  respectively  l^rivitala,  Vishpiu-kanta, 
Indra-kanta,  Brahma- kanta,  Skanda-kanta,  ^ikhara,  Stupika 
and  Saumya-kanta  (556-664). 

The  fifteen  kinds  of  gate-houses  referred  to  above  may  have 
one  to  sixteen  or  seventeen  storeys.  But  the  details  of  five 
storeys  only  are  given,  others  being  left  to  the  discretion  qf 
the  arohtects  and  stated  to  be  built  in  the  same  way  as  those 
five  storeys  illustrated  so  minutely. 

The  measurement,  both  absolute  and  comparative,  of  length, 
breadth,  and  height  of  each  storey  belonging  to  each  of  the 
fifteen  kinds  of  gate-houses,  is  described  at  great  length. 
The  ornaments  and  mouldings  of  eacn  storey  are  also  given 
in  detail.  The  central  or  main  hall  as  well  as  all  other 
rooms,  together  with  their  different  parts,  such  as  pillars, 
entablatures,  walls,  roofs,  floors,  doors,  and  windows,  etc. 
are  desoribed  in  great  detail  (of.  2-601), 

(7)  Gate-tower  (Hampe  Insorip.  of  Krishnaraya,  line  33,  north 

face,  Ep.  Ind.,  vol,  i.  p.  336). 

(8)  Tower  (Eanganath  Insorip.  of  Sundarapandya,  v.  7,  Bp.  Ind. 

voL  III.  pp.  12,  15). 

(9)  Durggam  cha  Tamranagarim  abhito  vyadhatta  praka-ram 

umnatam  udaniohita-gopuram  sah— “ he  surrounded 
Taniranagari  with  a wall  surmounted  by  towers.”  Hultzsch. 

(Chebralu  Inscrip,  of  Jaya,  v.  27,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  V. 

pp.  147,  149). 


GOPURA 


177 

(10)  Gafee-tower; 

Vapra-gopura-mayair  na’^a-harmaili  -by  erecting  new  bnild- 
ings  adorned  with  a wall  and  a gate-tower. 

(Mangalagiri  Pillar  Inscrip,  v.  29,  Ep.  Ind.  yoI.  vi. 

pp.  121, 131). 

(11)  Vapra-gopEra-yutair-nava-harmyaih  (verse  26). 
Gopnra-prakarotsava-maihtapair  upachitam  (verse  27), 
i^ikhara-mamtapa-gopuralu  (line  116). 

(Kondavidu  Inscrip,  of  Krisbnaraya,  v.  26,  27,  line 
116,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  VI.  pp.  236,  237,  321,  232). 

(12)  Vipulottnmga-gopuram  deva-mamdiram — the  temple  of  god 

(adorned)  with  lofty  towers. 

(Krishnapuram  Plates  of  Sadasivaraya,  v.  66,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  IX.  pp.  336,  341). 

(13)  “In  it  (Taulava)  country,  on  the  south  bank  of  the 

Ambu-river  shining  like  the  6ri-pundra  (central  sectarian 
mark  on  the  forehead  of  Vaishnavas)  is  Kshemapura,  like 
Purandara  (Indra’s  city),  with  glittering  gopuras  (temple- 
towers).’’ 

(Ep.  Carnat.,  vol.  VIII.  part  I,  Sagar  Taluq,  no.  65, 
Transl.  p.  100). 

(14)  “ Bnilt  (in  the  year  specified)  the  tower  of  the  temple  (Gopnra) 

of  the  god  Sivamifevaram  udaiyar.*’ 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  ix.  Bangalore  Taluq,  no.  139  a, 
Transl.  p.  26,  Roman  text,  p.  32). 
(16)  “ Brought  to  the  door  of  the  gopnra  of  the  mantapa. facing 
mukha-mantapa  of  the  god  Varadaraja,  and  having  the 
wood-work  done  by  the  hand  of  the  carpenter  Bevoja’s  son 
Ohaja-oja,  and  having  the  door  set  up  and  the  iron  work 
done  hy  the  hand  of  the  blacksmith  Anjala  Divingoja.” 
(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  X.  Malur  Taluq,  no,  3,  Roman  text, 
p.  186,  Transl.  p.  154). 


I'IS 


GOOTBA 


(16)  Gate-pyramid,  gafee-way-tower.  Colonel  B.  B,  Branfill. 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  p.  117,  c.  i ; p.  119,  c.  l). 

(17)  Nntatia-Yagi  gopnravam  kattisi  gopiira-pratisli^he  suvarna- 

kalasa-pratishfche  saka  maditi— “ erected  a new  gopura  with 
golden  finlais  in  the  Ohamundeivari  hill.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  Iii.  Mysore  Talnq,  no.  20,  Eoman 
text,  p.  6,  Trans,  p.  3). 

(18)  Virat  tri-ohika-deya-raya-nripati  reme  pure  sajhvasan  \ 
^rirahge  ramaniya-gopnravati  kshoni-vadhu-bhushane  II 

The  heroic  king  Ohikka-DeYa  Raya,  residing  in  the  beautiful 
city  6riranga  having  (i.e.  which  is  furnished  with)  splendid 
gateways  ('?  gate-house)  an  ornament  to  the  lady  Barth,. . . 

It  should  be  noticed  that  from  this  instance  it  is  clear  beyond 
doubt  that  gopuras  or  gate-houses  were  conscruoted  not  only 
in  connection  with  temples  but  also  as  parts  (of  residential 
houses  and)  of  the  city-gates. 

(Bp.  Carnat,  vol.  ili.  Malavalli  Taluq,  no.  61, 
Eoman  text,  p.  126,  line  11  f ; Transl.  p.  62). 

(19)  “With  his  approval  causing  a gopura  of  seven  storeys  to 

be  newly  erected  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  holy  presence 
dedicated  the  gopura.  together  with  its  golden  kalasas,  for  the 
services  of  the  god,  to  continue  as  long  as  auu  and  moon.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  ill.  Nanjangud  Taluq,  no.  I. 

Transl.  p.  95,  Roman  text,  p.  183). 

(20)  Mero&  krihgam  uta-ndhakari-hhavanam  praleya-prithvi-dhritah 

kutam  kim  muravairi-nirmmita-maha-dvaravati-gopuram  j 
Kim  va  kim  maya-^ilpa-sara-sahitam  pandudbhavanarh  sabha- 
dvaram  gunda-chamupa-nirmita-mahashatkaih  samajrim- 
bhate  I! 

Sapta-dvipa-samudra-gotra-dhara-loka-chhanda-rishyaSvasam 
kbyataneka-jagan-nidhana-malianiyatesha-vastu-sriyam  \ 


GOMATHA 


Saram  gopura-nishfcha-sapfca-blmvana-vyajeiia  sliatko  mahan 
ekibliutam  ivayabhati  safeataih  ^ri-gunda-dandadhipahll 
‘‘And  rebnilfc  with  seyen  storeys  the  gopura,  oyer  the  doorway 
(and  its  praise).” 

(Bp.  Carnat,  yol.  v.  part  i,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  3,  Bonian 
text,  iix.  p.  103,  line  10  f,  Transl.  p.  46). 

(21)  “In  front  of  the  temple  of  Harihara-natha,  he  made  a 

wide  and  beantifnl  gateway  (gopnra)  of  fiye  storeys,  adorned 
with  golden  kalalas.’’ 

(Bp.  Carnat.  yol.  xi.  Davanagere  Taluq,  no.  36‘ 
Transl  (p.  47;  Boman  text,  p 77-78;  see  Intro- 
duction, p.  32,  para.  2,  line  3 f). 

(22)  See  “ Views  of  the  second  main  entranoe-gopura,  Kaila'sa- 

natha  temple)  Pallava  Architecture,  Arch.  Surv.  nevy 
Imp.  series^  vol.  xxxiv.  plate  v). 

GOPUBAKABA(-KRITI) — Buildings  of  the  gate-house-shape. 

Kechid  vai  malikakara  keonid  yai  gopurakritih  it 
Matrinam  alayam  kuryad  gopurakaram  eya  tn  II 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  123,  129). 
GO-MATHA — ^Literally  a monastery  for  cows,  a cow-stall. 

Yo  dharmma-pumiam  hi  yioharya  y(b)uddhya  so’karayad  go- 
maKth)a-namdheyam  II 

V(b)atihadim-pure  ramye  go-mat(th)ah  karitah  subhah  \ 

A^rayah  saivva-jantunam  kailas(&)adrir  iyaparah  II 
“ Caused  to  be  made  the  place  known  by  the  name  of  Gomatha.” 

“ This  auspicious  Gomatha  was  caused  to  be  made  in  the  beautiful 
town  of  Batihadim.  (It  is)  a shelter  to  all  being  like  another 
Kailata  ” (B.  B.  Hira  Lai,  B.A.). 

But  from  the  context  the  meaning  of  Gomatha  (lit.  house  for 
cows)  seems  certain  : it  is  Pasu-sala  or  sheds  for  animals. 

(Batihagarh  Stone  Inscrip,  v.  8,  9.  Bp.  Ind.  vol,  xil.  p.  46-47). 


180 


GOSHTHA-PAtjABA 


GOSHTHA-PAST JAEA — The  niche  or  recess  in  the  wall  which  gene- 
rally contains  a statue,  and  sometimes  serves  as  a decoration, 

(See  Pafijara). 

GOSHTHI-CKA) — ^A  committee,  the  managing  committee  of  a .btiild- 
'ing,  ■ 

Members  of  Pahoh  or  committee  entrusted  with  the  management 
of  religious  endowments.^’  Prof.  Biihleir. 

(Ep.  Ind.  yol.  I.  p.  190,  note  60,  ‘trustee,^  Dr. 
Hultzsch,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xi.  p.  338,  last  line  of  the 

text). 

Of.  Goshthika-bhutena  idam  stambham  ghatitam  \ 

(Deogadh  Pillar  Inscrip,  of  Bhojadeve  of  Eanauj, 
no.  A,  line  9,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  iv,  p.  310,  829,  note  6). 
The  managing  committee  of  a building : 

Garishtha-guna-goshthyadah  samudadidharad-dhira-dhiru-daram 
atisumdaram  prathama-tirthakrin-mamdiram  1 

(Bijapur  Insorip.  of  Bhavala  of  Hastikundi,  V.  34, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  X.  p,  22). 

GETA— A class  of  buildings. 

(KamikSgama,  xly.  68a-69,  see  under  Malika). 

GBAMA — (of,  Nagara) — ^A  village. 

(1)  “ The  primitive  sense  of  this  word,  which  occurs  frequently 
from  the  Bigveda  ^ onwards,  appeam  to  have  been  ' village.* 
The  Vedic  Indians  must  have  dwelt  in  villages,  which  were 
scattered  over  the  country,  some  close  together  some  far 
apart  and  were  connected  by  roads  The  village  is  regularly 
contrasted  with  the  forest  (aranya),  and  its  animals  and 

K i.  lit  10 ; 114, 1 ; ii,  12,  7 (perhaps  to  bo  taken  as  in  n- 10) : X.  146,  I ; 149,  4,  ofcs. ; Av. 

iv,  80,  7,  8 ; V.  17, 4 j Vi.  40,  2,  etc. ; Vajasaneyi  Samhiti,-  iii,  46  ; xx.  17,  eto. 

*,  fiatopalha-BtahmaiDia,  xui.  2,  4,  2 ; Aitaieya  Brahma^a,  iii.  44, 

*.  Ohbindogya-UpatiiBtcl,  Yiii.  0, 2. 


aBlMA 


181 


plants  with  those  that  lived  or  grew  wild  in  the  woods  h 
The  villages  contained  cattle,  horses,  and  other  domestic 
animals,  as  well  as  men  “ Grain  was  also  stored  in  them.® 
In  the  evening  the  cattle  regularly  returned  thither  from  the 
forest  The  villages  were  probably  open,  though  perhaps 
a fort  (pur)  might  on  occasion  be  built  inside®.  Presumably 
they  consisted  of  detached  houses  with  enclosures,  but  no 
details  are  to  be  found  in  Vedio  literature.  Large  villages 
(maha-gramah)  were  known*.’* 

(Professors  Macdonell  and  Keith,  Vedio  Index,  vol, 

I.  pp.  244-245). 

(2)  Kamikagama  (xx.  4,  the  definition)  : 

Viprair  athanyair  varnair  va  bhogyo  grama  udahyitah  H 

The  situation  of  the  village-gods  and  temples  (ibid.  xxvi.  1-41). 

The  general  arrangement  (ibid.  XXVIII.  1-21). 

Further  details  of  the  same  (ibid.  ix.  1-9  and  xxx.  1-22). 

Of.  Jaty-otkarsha-vatenaiva  sthanam  ynkfeya  prakalpayet  I 

Utkyishtanam  samipe  syan  nikyishtanam  tu  durafcah  ii 

(Ibid.  xxx.  9). 

(3)  Brahmanda-Piirana  (part  i,  2nd  anusbamga-pada,  chap.  7, 

V.  105,  111,  see  also  v.  94) : 

Khetanam  oha  puranam  oha  gramanam  ohaiva  sarvatah  \ 

Tri-vidhanam  oha  durganam  parvatodaka-dhanvinam  11 

Nagarad  yojanam  khetam  khetad  gramo’rddha-yojanam  \ 

Dvi-kro'sah  parama-sima  kshetra-sima  chatur-dhanuh  I! 

K Anittwls ! Rt.  X.  90,  8 ; Av.  ii,  34,  4 ; jii.  10,  6 ; 81,  3 ; OJaittiiiiya  Saibhila,  vii.  2, 8, 1 ; 
Ki^haka.Saihhita,  vii.  7 ; xiii.  I ; Vajasaneyi-Samhita/ix.  82 ; PafiohaviihSa-Brahma^a, 
XTi.  I,  9 ; ^atapatha-Brahmana,  iii.  8,  4, 16,  etc.  Planbj ; Tittii!p-Sa:&bita,  v.  2,  3,  5 ; 
vU.  8, 4, 1,  eto. 

*,  Av.  iv.  22,  3 ; viii.  7,  II,  efco 

' Brihadata^yaka-Dpanisad,  vi.  8, 13  (Kai>va=s22,  Madhyamdina). 

*.  Rv.  X 149,  4 j Mairtayajol-Saiiihila,  iv.  I,  I. 

^ As  noW'-a.days,  sea  Zimmer,  Altiadiaohss  Eiabea,  141,  Hugel,  Kashmir,  2,  45. 

•.  JaimiDlp'Bpanisad.Brahmafaiui.  18, 


182 


GElMA 


(4)  Kautiliya-Arbliasastira  (chap.  xxii.  p.  46,  46) ; 

Sudra-karshaka-prayaih  kula-satavaram  paSoha-safca-kuIa- 
param  gramam  krofea-dvi-kro&a-aimanam  aiiyonya-raksham 
hivefeayet  \ 

Nadi-^aila-vana-gayishbi-dari-setubandha-Balmali-^ami-kshira- 
•vyikshan  anteshn  simaaih  athapayet  \ 

Ashta-aata-gramya  madhye  sthaniyam  chatu^-kaba-gramya 
drona-mukham  dvi-feata-gramya  kharvatikam  da&a-grami- 
samgrahena  samgrahanam  sthapayet  I 

Yillages  consisfeing  each  of  nob  less  than  a hundred  families 
and  of  nob  more  than  600  families  of  agriculbural  people  of 
6udra  casbe,  wibh  boundaries  extending  as  far  as  a krota 
(2,250  yds.)  or  two,  and  capable  of  protecting  each  other 
shall  be  formed.  Boundaries  shall  be  denoted  by  a river, 
a mountain,  forests,  bulbous  plants,  caves,  artificial  buildings 
(?  setubandha— bridge)  or  by  trees  such  as  salmali,  'sami 
and  milky  trees. 

“ There  shall  be  set  up  a sthaniya  (fortress  of  that  name)  in 
the  centre  of  eight-hundred  villages,  a drona-mukha  in  the 
centre  of  four  hundred  villages  and  a sarhgrahana  in  the 
midst  of  a collection  of  ten  villages. 

(6)  Yajnavalka-samhita  (il.  167,  etc.)  : 

Dhanuh-^atam  parinaho  grama-kshetrantarani  bhaveb  I 
Dve  late  kharvatasya  syan  nagarasya  chatiih-latam  il 

(6)  Manu-samhita  (viii.  237,  etc.)  ; 

Dhanuh-latam  pariharo  gramasya  syat  samantatah  | 
^amyapatas  trayo  vapi  trhguno -nagarasya  jtu  II 

(7)  Mahabharata  (xii.  69,  36)  : 

Q-hoshan  nyaseba  margeshu  graman  utthapayed  api  | 
Pravelayech  cha  tan  sarvan  lakha-nagareshv-api  II 
Ibid.2,  6,  81: 

Kechid  nagara-gupty-artham  grama  nagaravat  kritah  1 


GElMA 


183 


(8)  Manasara  (chap.  IX.  named,  Grama,  1-538). 

According  to  stiape  the  -villages  are  divided  into  eight  classes, 
namely,  Dandaka,  Sarvatobhadra,  Nandyfivarta,  Padmaka, 
Svastika,  Prastara,  Karmnka  and  Chatur-miikha  (lines  2-4). 
(For  the  plans  represented  by  these  eight  names,  see  Earn 
Eaz,  Ess.  Arch,  of  Hind,  plates  xliii— XLVl).  The  measure- 
ment, the  ground-plans,  the  offerings  to  the  presiding  deity, 
the  internal  arrangement,  the  laying  out  of  the  houses,  and 
the  ceremonial  opening  of  new  buildings  are  described  in 
order  (6-8)  : 

Prathamam  grama-manam  cha  dvitiyaih  padam  vinyaset  I 
Tritiyam  tad-balim  datva  ohaturtham  grama(m)  vinyaset  I 
Pahchamam  griha-vinyasam  tatra  garbham  vinikshipet  I 
Sha^kam  griha-pravetam  cha  tan-manam  adhunoohyatel 
The  general  plan  (96-603)  : 

Bach  village  is  surrounded  by  a wall  made  of  brick  or  stone, 
strong  and  high  enough  to  prevent  leaping  over  (143,  etc). 
Beyond  this  wall  there  is  a ditch  broad  and  deep  enough  to 
I cause  a great  obstruction  in  the  event  of  an  attack  on  the 

village  (143,  etc).  There  are  generally  four  main  gates  at 
the  middle  of  the  four  sides  and  as  many  at  the  four 
corners  (109-110,  144,  etc).  Inside  the  wall  there  is  a large 
street  around  the  village.  This  street  is  generally  used 
for  circumambulation  on  some  special  occasion,  daily  round 
of  the  police,  open-air  drive  and  similar  matters  of  public 
i concern.  Two  other  large  streets  are  those  which  run  from 

i one  gate  to  another  in  the  middle  of  the  wall  on  each  side. 

They  intersect  each  other  at  the  centre  of  the  village,  where 
a temple  or  a hall  is  generally  built  for  the  meeting  of  the 
f villagers.  The  village  is  thus  divided  into  four  main  blocks, 

each  of  which  is  again  subdivided  into  many  blocks  by  streets 
which  are  always  straight  from  one  end  to  the  other  of  a 
main  block.  The  ground-floor  of  the  houses  on  the  main 
; streets  are  shops.  The  surrounding  street  has  foot-paths  and 


184 


GEAMA 


houses  only  on  one  side.  These  houses  are  mainly  public 
buildings,  such  as  schools,  colleges,  libraries,  guest-houses, 
etc.  All  other  streets  generally  have  residential  buildings 
on  both  sides.  The  houses  high  or  low  are  always  uniform 
in  make  (600,  see  also  501).  Congestion  is  carefully 
avoided.  The  drains  or  jala-dvara  (lit.  water-passage) 
are  made  towards  the  slope  of  the  village.  Tanks  and 
ponds  are  dug  in  all  the  inhabited  parts  and  located  in  such 
quarters  as  can  be  conveniently  reached  by  a large  number 
of  inhabitants.  The  temples  of  public  worship  as  well  as 
the  public  commons,  gardens  and  parks  are  similarly  located. 
The  people  of  the  same  caste  or  profession  are  generally 
housed  in  the  same  quarter. 

(9)  The  following  words  of  Mr.  Havell  may  throw  some 
further  light  on  some  of  the  points  referred  to  above  (Ancient 
and  Mediaeval  architecture  of  India,  pp.  9, 13,  12) : 

The  experience  of  many  generations  had  proved  that  they 
(plans  of  villages)  were  the  best  for  purposes  of  defence, 
and  gave  the  most  healthy,  pleasant  and  practical  lay-out 
for  an  Indian  village  or  town.  The  easterly  axis  of  the 
plan  ensured  that  the  principal  streets  were  purified  by  the 
rays  of  the  sun  sweeping  through  them  from  morning  till 
evening ; while  the  intersection  of  main  streets  by  shorter 
ones  running  north  and  south  provided  a perfect  circulation 
of  air  and  the  utmost  benefit  of  the  cool  breezes.’’ 

“ The  Mauasara  recognises  forty  different  classes  of  villages 
and  towns,  according  to  the  extent  of  the  lands  owned 
by  them ; commencing  with  a village-unit  which  was  600 
dandas,  or  4,000  feet  square,  so  that  the  extent  of  the  largest 
cities  would  be  20,000  dandas  or  about  30  English  miles 
square.  Of  this  area  about  one-third  was  devoted  to  build- 
ing space,  and  the  rest  to  the  agricultural  lands  owned  by 

the  community ....In  the  description  of  Ayodhya  given 

in  the  Eamayana  (see  under  Nagara),  the  proportion  between 


Q-BlMA 


186 


its  breadth  and  length  is  as  one  is  to  four.  Pafaliputra 
was  about  9 miles  in  length  and  miles  in  breadth.  Hindu 
Ganr  was  also  a long  rectangle,  one  of  the  long  sides  gener- 
ally faced  a lake  or  river,  an  arrangement  which  provided 
bathing  facilities  for  all  the  inhabitants,  and  obviated  the 
necessity  of  building  defensive  works  all  round.” 

The  Manasara  gives  the  maximum  width  of  the  maiu  village- 
streets  as  6 dandas,  (a  danda,  rod  or  pole==8  feet).  The 
others  varied  in  width  from  1 to  6 dandas.  The  size  of  a 
single  cottage  was  reckoned  as  being  94  feet  by  16  feet  to 
40  feet  by  82  feet.  They  were  generally  grouped  together  by 
fours,  so  as  to  form  an  inner  square  or  quadrangle.  The 
magic  of  the  square  depends  on  the  fact  that  it  afforded  the 
best  protection  for  the  cattle  of  the  Joint  household  when 
they  were  driven  in  from  pastures  every  evening,  ” 

' Of  stone-built  walls,  such  as  ancient  Indian  fortified  village 
or  town  possessed,  there  is  an  extant  example  older  than 
the  sixth  century  B.  o.  in  the  hill-fortress  of  Q-iribraja, 
near  the  modern  Bajgir,  said  to  have  been  planned  by  a 
niaster-bnilder  called  MahS-govinda.” 

(Bhys  Davids,  Buddhist  India,  p.  37). 
Ordma-nagara-kheda-karwada-madamba-drona-mukha-patta- 
nam  galimdam  aneka-ma^a-ku^a-prasada-devayatanani 
galidampppnva-agrahaxa-pattanamgalimdam  atisayav- 
appa I 

**  (At  Teridala,  a merchant-town  situated  in  the  centre  and 
the  first  in  importance  among  the  twelve  (towns)  in  the 
glorious  Kundi  Three  Thousand,  adorned,  with) — 
villages,  towns,  hamlets,  sea-girt  towns,  and  chief  cities, 
with  elegant  mansions,  palaces  and  temples,  and 
with  shining  agrahara-towns  in  the  country  of  Kun- 
tala ” 

(Old  lianarese  Inscrip,  at  Terdal,  line  58,  Tnd.  Ant. 

vol.  xjv.  pp.  19,  26). 


186 


aBAMA-aARBHA 


(12)  “ Witih  myriads  of  people,  practices  of  virtue,  agreeable  occu- 
pations, streams  of  tbe  (nine)  sentiments,  pleasure-gardens, 
separated  lovers,  splendid  tanks,  full  lotus  beds,  gilded 
boats  for  spring  festivals,  gbatikS-sthanaa  (religious 
centres),  the  supports  of  dharmma  and  mines  of  enjoy- 
ment, moats  which  were  as  if  the  sea  being  overcome  had 
returned  here  on  account  of  the  collection  of  gems,  groups 
of  the  lotus  faces  of  beautiful  women  fair  as  the  moon — • 
(G-rama-nagara-kheda-kharvvana-madamba-drona-mukha- 
pura-pattana-rajadhani) — on  whatever  side  one  looked,  in 
these  nine  forms  did  the  Kuntala-deta  shine.*’ 

(It  should  be  noticed,  that  the  passage  within  brackets  is 
almost  identical  with  the  corresponding  passage  in  quota- 
tion no.  11  above.) 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no.  197, 
Transl  p.  124,  para  1,  last  seven  lines  ; Roman 
text,  p.  214,  line  27  f). 

GRAMA-Q-ABBHA — (see  under  Garbha-nygsa) — The  foundation  of  a 
village. 

GRAMA-A[ARGA — The  village-road. 

Vimtad-dhanur  grama-margah  sima-margo  dataiva  tul 

(Brahmapda-Purana,  part  I,  2nd  anushamga-pada, 
chap.  7,  V.  112), 

See  details  under  Grama  and  Nagara. 

GBAMA-LAKSHANA-— The  description  of  the  village. 

(M.  IX.,  see  under  Grama). 

GEAMA-VINYASA — The  arrangement  or  laying-out  of  the  village. 

(See  Grama). 

GBAHA — A crocodile,  a shark,  an  architectural  and  sculptural  orna- 
ment. 

A kind  of  mukha-bhadra  or  front  tabernacle. 


(M.  xyiii,  302,  etc). 


aHATA 


187 


An  ornament  of  the  arch : 

G-raha-Mnnara-samyuktam  I 
Graha-kinnara-hhushitam  \ 

Ghraha-pnohohhadi'Sarvesham  svarna-ratnena  bandhayet  I 
Granantaih  sarva-ratnait  cha  puritam  sreni-samyufcam  \ 

(M.  XLVi.  53,  56,  57,  60). 

GBAHA-KUNpAIiA — The  crocodile-shaped  ear-ring. 

Cf . Graha-knpdala-bhushanam  \ 

(M.  LIY.  8). 

Anyatha  sarva-saktinam  graha-kundala-bhushinim  I 

(M.  LIY.  168). 

GBIVA^ — (see  Kantha) — The  neck,  the  dado  ; as  a member  of  the 
pillar  it  comprises  vedika  (altar),  griva  (dado  proper),  and  bhushana 
(ornament).  (M.  XY.- 105-107). 

GBlVA-BHUSHANA — The  ornaments  of  the  neck  part  of  the  pillar. 
It  comprises  uttara  (fillet),  Yajana  (fillet),  gala  (dado),  and  vlljana 
(fillet).  (M.  XY.  111-113). 

G-BAIVEYAKA— A neckdace. 

Sapta-suYarnpa-nishka-kalitam  graiveyakarh  kantimat— charm- 
ing neck-lace  made  of  seYen  nishkas  of  gold. 

(Four  Inaorip.  at  ^riknrmam,  no.  B,  line  6,  Ep.  Ind, 

Yol.  Y.  p,  87). 

G-H 


GHATA— A pot,  jar,  pitcher ; same  as  kumbha  of  the  column  (see 
Stambha),  the  torus  (see  Gwilt,  Bnoyol.  fig,  870),  a type  of  building, 
a carYing  on  the  door. 

Cf.  Stambham  Tibhajya  navadha  Yahanam  bhago  ghato’sya 
bhago’nyah  \ 

(Brihat-samhita,  Lin.  29). 

Dr.  Kern’s  rendering  by  ‘ base  ’ seems  rather  doubtful. 

(1.  B.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  Yol.  Yi.  p.  286). 
(1)  A type  of  building  which  is  shaped  like  a waterjar  (kalata)  and 
is  eight  cubits  wide. 

(Bfihat-samhita,  lyi.  26,  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  yoI.  yi. 


p,  319,  see  under  Prasada), 


188 


&HATTA 


A jar-shaped  carving  (on  the  door  frame)  ; 

Sesham  mahgalya-vihagaih  &ri-vrik3ha-SYastika-gha|aih  J 
, Mifehunaih  patra-Yallibhih  pramathait  ohopatobhayet  II 

(Ibid,  im,  16). 

A type  of  building-*. 

(2)  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  269,  v.  37,  49,  S3,  see  under  Prasida). 

(3)  BhaYishya-Piirana  (chap.  130,  v.  33,  see  under  Prasada). 

(4)  Manaaara  (xLli.  15-18)  : 

Shat-saptashfcahgulam  vapi  &ila-8tapibham  vifeSlakam  I 
Vrittam  va  ohatur-a&ram  va  ashtatram  shodatatrakam  1 
Pada-tuhge’  shta-bhage  tu  trim&enordhYam  alahkyibam  V 
Bodhikam  mush^i-bandham  oha  phalaka-tatika^-gha^am  1 

(See  further  oontext  under  l^ila-stambha). 
Q-HATTA — (see  Sopana) — A flight  of  steps. 

^r!-vatsa-raja-ghatfco’yam  nunaih  tenatra  kS.ritah  \ 

Brahmandam  ujjvalam  kirttim  arohayitum  atmanab  II 
“ He  indeed  caused  this  flight  of  steps  to  be  built  here,  of  the 
illustrious  Vatsa-iaja,  in  order  to  make  his  bright  fame  ascend  up 
into  the  universe.” 

(Chandella  Insorip.  no,  B,  Deoga^h  Book  Insorip. 
of  Kirtivarman,  v,  7,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  XYIH-Iip.  238, 

239). 

Of . “ G-hat — (1)  A flight  of  steps  leading  to  water,  (2)  a 
mountain  pass,  (3)  a ferry.” 

Vincent  Smith’s  Gloss  (loo.  oit)  to  Cunningham’s  Arch.  Surv. 
Eeports. 

GHATIKALAYA — The  building  where  the  water-clock  is  placed, 

(Cintra  Prasasti  of  the  reign  of  Sarangadeva,  v,  40, 
Ep,  Ind.  vol.  I,  pp.  284,  276). 
GHATIKA-STHAHA — The  place  or  building  where  a clock  is  placed, 
a religious  centre,  an  institution. 

(1)  Uttankoktya  aama-vede  vySdhattaih  ghatikatramam — ‘‘  in 
accordance  with  IJttahka’a  saying  in  the  Sama-veda,  the 
was  established.’^ 


GHATIKl-STHANA 


189 


(It  should  be  noted  that  this  insoription  is  on  the  door  of  the 
Ammanavaragudi  in  the  enclosure  of  the  same  Janardana- 
svami  temple. 

(Bp.  Gamat,  'vol.  Y.  part  I,  Ohamunarayapatna  Taluq, 
no.  178,  Eoman  text,  p.  462,  Transl.  p.  202). 

(2)  Possessor  of  thirty-two  velama,  eighteen  cities,  sixty-four 
yoga-pithas,  and  sixty-four  ghatiM-ntJidnas.*^ 

‘(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no.  94,  Transl. 
p.  61,  line  6 f ; Eoman  text,  p.  114,  line  4 f)* 

(5)  “ He  set  out  for  the  city  of  the  Pallava  Bings,  together  with 

his  guru  Viratarmma,  desiring  to  be  proficient  in  pra- 
vachana,  entered  into  all  religious  tentres  (ghatika-sthana) 
and  (so)  became  a quick  (or  ready)  debater  (or  deputant).” 

(Ibid.  no.  176,  Transl.  p.  113,  para,  last  but  one). 

(4)  “ With  myriads  of  people,  practices  of  virtue,  agreeable  occu- 
pations, streams  of  the  (nine)  sentiments,  pleasure-gardens, 
separated  lovers,  splendid  tanks,  full  lotus  beds,  gilded  boats 
for  spring  festivals,  ghatilcd-sthmas,  the  supports  of  dharmma 
and  mines  of  enjoyment did  the  Kuntala-deba  shine.*’ 

(Ibid.  no.  197,  Transl.  p.  127,  first  para,  last  seven 
lines ; Eoman  text,  p.  214,  line  30). 

(6)  Mr.  Eioe  is  not  certain  about  the  accurate  meaning  of  the 

term.  He  refers  to  quotations  nos.  1,  2,  3,  4,  and  seems  to 
think  that  it  means  some  kind  of  institution.  He  says  that 
Mr.  Pathak  has  translated  it  as  ‘ religious  centre’  (Ind. 
Ant.  XIY,  34).  Dr.  Kielhoxn  has  published  an  article  on 
the  subject  (G-ottingen  Nachrichten  for  1900,  Heft  3)  with 
special  reference  to  the  use  of  the  word  in  this  insoription 
(quotation  no.  3 above)  and  givesjquotations  in  support  of  his 
view  that  it  means  something  like  brahma-puri”  It  is  to  be 
noted  that  Mr.  Eioe’s  reference  to  Ind.  Ant.  is  not  accurate 
see  below. 

(Ep.  Carnat,  vol.  vii.  Introduct.  p.  8,  note  2). 


(^HAHA 


190 

(6)  DTa-trim&afe  tu  velayuramum  ashtada^a-pa^lanamum  basa- 
sbafci-yoga-pitbamum  aruvafetanalku-gbafeika-atbaiiam'ara 
“ — ^(the  people  of  the)’ thirty-two  sea-side  towns,  the  18 
towns,  62  seats  of  contemplation,  and  64  religious  centres 

(together  with held  a convocation  there). 

(Old  Kanarese  Inscrip,  at  Terdal,  line  60,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XIV.  pp.  19,  25). 

GHANA — Solid,  a kind  of  measurement,  thickness. 

Eka-hasta-samam.  dirgham  tad-ekahgula-vistritam  \ 

Ghanam  ardhahgulam  proktam  hasta-ni&chitya  yojayet  \ 

(M.  II.  64-65 ; see  also  xxxiii.  311-313,  593-596  ; 

LX.  17-18;  Lxii.  17,  under  Aghana). 
GHANA-MANA — (see  Aghana-mana) — The  measurement  by  the 
exterior  of  a structure. 

(M.  XXXIII.  291-330,  and  331-335,  see  under  Aghana-mana). 

Of.  Yogildi-ghana-manam  cha  kritva  bahye  navamtakam  \ 

(M.  XXXIX.  64). 

GHA-TANA— Abolt. 

Yogyam  kavata-yugmam  treshtham  madhyam  cha  harmyake  1 
Antar  vapi  bahir  vapi  ghatanam  kila-saihyutam  1 

(M.  XIX.  162-153). 

GHBITA-VARI^ — (of.  Pitha) — The  water-pot,  a part  of  the  pitha  or 
the  Pedestal  of  the  Phallus. 

Pi^hasyordhve  vitale  tu  ohatush-pancha-shad-am§ake  \ 
Ekam^enacha  tesham  tu  ghrita-vari-vi^alakam  1 

(M.  Liii.  24-25). 
CH 

CHAKRA  — The  disc  of  Vishnu,  a type  of  building. 

See  Manasara  (lxv.  146,  liv.  147,  xxxii.  126,  etc). 
A class  of  octangular  buildings  : 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  V.-20-21,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  21,  23,  31-32,  see  under  Prasada). 


CHATUB-MtJKHA 


191 


In  conneotion  with  the  foundations  : 

Madhye  chakram  tu  bnauinena  bhajanantam  yinikshipet  ] 
(M.  xjl.  137,  see  also  158). 

CHAKBA-KANTA — A class  of  the  eleyen-*.storeyd.  buildings. 

(M.  XXXIX.  11-15,  see  under  Prasada). 

CHANpiTA — A typo  of  storeyed  building,  a ground-plan. 

A class  of  the  nine-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxyii.  11-12,  see  under 

Prasada). 

A ground-plan  in  which  the  whole  area  is  divided  into  sixty-four 
equal  squares  (M.  Yli.  9,  see,  for  details,  77-110,  cf.  also  viii.  39  ; 

IX.  166,  in  connection  with  the  village  ; xv.  390,  etc). 

CHATUB-ASEA — (see  Ohatushkona) — A type  of  building  which  is 
quadrangular  in  plan,  has  one  storey  and  five  cupolas. 

(1)  Brihat-saihhita  (lvi.  28  and  Katyapa,  J.  B.  A.  S.,  N.  8., 

vol.  VI.  p.  320,  note  1). 

(2)  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  269,  v.  28,  53,  see  under  Prasada). 

(3)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap,  130,  v.  26,  see  under  Prasada). 

OHATXJE-MUKHA — (see  under  Grama  and  ^^5la) — Literally  four- 

faced,  a class  of  villages,  a type  of  building,  a kind  of  hall. 

A class  of  the  four-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxii.  12-23,  see  under 

Prasada). 

A class  of  villages  (M.  ix.  3,,  cf.  the  description  in  detail,  490-507, 

see  also  XIX.  212). 

A class  of  fealas  (halls,  pavilion,  etc.,  M.  xxxv,  3-4,  see  under 

Ma). 

Cf . 8 ar  V vatobhadra-ohatur-mukha  -ratna-tray  a -rupa  -tri-bhuvana- 

tilaka-Jina-chaityalayavanu — “ the  Tribhuvana-tilaka-Jina- 

chaityalaya  (temple)  (which  is)  auspicious  on  every  side 
(sarvatobhadra),  has  four  faces  (chaturmukha),  and  is  the 
embodiment  of  the  three  jewels,” 


192 


CHATTJB-VABaA 


“The  temple  has  four  doors  each  of  which  opens  on  three 
identical-  stone  images  of  the  Tirthamkaras  Ara,  Malli  and 
Munisuvrata 

(Karkala  Insorip.  of  Bhairava  ii,  line  17,  Ep.  Ind. 
vol.  vni.  pp.  132, 136,  notes  11, 12,  and  p.  134,  note  3). 
CHATUB-VABQ-A — A set  of  four  mouldings  of  the  door,  consisting  of 
■vedika  (platform),  piida  (pillar),  §irah  (spire)  and  &ikha  (finial). 

(M.  XXXIX.  164466). 

CHATUB-YARG-A-KANTAKA — A set  of  four  architectural  members. 

(M.  XXXIII.  631). 

CHATUR-YlMSATI-TlRTHA~The  -twenty -four  Jain  saints  or 
apostles.  (M.  lv.  90). 

Of.  Eergusson,  Hist,  of  Ind.  and  Bast.  Arch.  (p.  748)  : 


Name  Diatinctive  sign 


1. 

Adinatha 

....  Bull. 

2. 

AjitanStha 

....  Elephant. 

3. 

Sambhunatha 

....  Horse. 

4. 

Abhainandanatha 

....  Monkey. 

6. 

Sumatinatha 

....  Chakwa  (red  goose). 

6. 

Supadmanatha 

Lotus. 

7. 

SupartTanatha 

....  Swastika. 

8. 

Chandraprabha 

....  Crescent  moon. 

9. 

Pushpadanta 

....  Crocodile. 

10. 

^italanatha 

....  Tree  or  flower. 

11. 

!§ri-Amtanatha 

....  Rhinoceros. 

12. 

Yasupadya 

....  Buffalo. 

13. 

Yimalanatha 

....  Boar. 

14. 

Anantanatha 

....  Porcupine. 

16. 

Bharmmanatha 

....  Thunderbolt. 

16. 

^antanatha 

....  Antelope. 

17. 

Kunthanatha 

....  Goat. 

18. 

Aranatha 

....  Eish. 

19. 

Mallinatha 

...  Pinnacle. 

20. 

Munisuvrata 

....  Tortoise. 

OHATug-sHiA 


193 


Name  Distinctim  sign 

21.  Naminatha  ....  Lotus  with  stalk. 

22.  Neminatha  ....  Shell. 

23.  Par^vanatha  ....  Snake. 

24.  Vardhamana  or  Mahavira  Lion. 

For  reference  to  their  images  see  Jina(ka). 

CHATUSH-K0;NA — ^Literally  four-cornered,  a type  of  quadrangular 
building  (see  under  Ohatur-asra) . 

(1)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap.  130,  v.  26,  see  under  Prasada) . 

(2)  Brihat-samhita  (Chap.  LVi.  18, 28,  see  under  Prasada). 
OHATUH-^AL  A — A house  with  four  talas  (rooms,  or  halls),  an  open 

or  closed  quajdrangle  surrounded  by  buildings  on  all  four  aides, 
an  enclosed  court-yard. 

Bvam  ohatur-griham  proktam  talayam  kalpayen  na  va  II 
Chatut-tala-pradete  tu  tad-adho-bhumir  uohyate  II 
Madhya-mandapa-samyuktam  ohatur-gyiham  udahpitam  It 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  6-7,  70,  93), 
Chatuh-tala-gra(gri)ham  treshtham  tri-'salam  madhyamam  bhayet  I 
Dvi-talam  adhamam  proktam  hinam  syad  eka-talakam  ll 

(Ibid.  XXV.  13,.  14). 

l§alaika  danda-khandabha  dvi-tala  tad-dvayena  tu  i 
Tat-trayena  tri-tala  syat  chatuh-tala  chatush^ayi  II 
Saptabhih  sapta-tala  syad  eyam  anyam  tu  kirtitah  (-m)  II 

(Ibid.  xxxy.  34,  36). 

Shad-bhagena  maha-tala  chatuh-tala  tri-bhagikam  I 
Madhya-tala(-ir)  yugamtena  bhadra-tala  cha  madhyame  I 
Anutala  cha  madhye  cha  ohaika-bhagena  bhadrakam  I 

(M.  xxYi.  17-19). 

Chatuh-talam  (Amarakosha,  ll.  ii,  6). 

CHATUH-SILA — Literally  four  pieces  of  stone,  a pedestal. 
BenasyaikaC'ka)-tila  proktam  lihganam  taoh-chatuh-tila  \ 

(M.UI.  177), 


13 


194 


CHATUja-STALA 


CHATUH-S TALA —The  fourfch  storey,  the  geaeral  desoripfeion.  (M.xii. 
89-106),  the  eight  classes  (Ibid.  1-88). 

(See  Tinder  Prasada). 

CHANDRA-KANTA  A ground-plan  in  which  the  whole  area  is 
divided  into  1024  equal  squares  (M.  vii.  60,  see  under  Pada- 
vinyasa),  a class  of  the  ten-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxviii.  6-8, 
see  under  Prasada),  one  of  the  five  Indian  orders  (Suprabhed- 
agama,  xxxi.  65,  66,  see  under  Stambha). 

CHANDRA-^AL A (-LIKA) — A room  at  the  top  of  a house,  a kind  of 
windows. 

(1)  Tri-ohandra-feala  bhaved  valabhr — the  roof  must  have  three 

dormer-windows. 

(Brihat-samhita,  lvi.  25,  27,  ‘J.  R.  A.  S.,  N.  S., 
vol.vi.  pp.  319,  320). 

(2)  Par^vayo^  chandra-tale’sya  uchohhrayo  bhumika-dvayam  I 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  269,  v.  33,  see  also  v.  40,  41,  42, 46). 

(3)  Chandra-talanvita  karyya  bheri-likhara-samyuta  il 

(Q-aruda-Purana,  chap.  47,  v.  44). 

(4)  Tri-ohandra-tala  bhaved  valabhi  \ 

Bahu-ruchira-ohandra-talah  shad-vimtad-bhaga-bhumit  cha  I 

(Bhavishya-Purana,  chap.  130,  v.  32,  34). 
(6)  Hasti-prishtha-yuktam  ohandra-^alabhit  cha  samanvitam 

(vimanam)  II 
(Kamikagama,  L.  92). 

(6)  Ku^timo’stri  nibaddha  bhut  ohandra-tala  feirogriham  I 

Commentary : ohandradi-dvayam  grihoparitana-gfihasya 
uparam  adi-attali  ityadi  prasiddhasya  \ 

(Amarakosha,  ii.  6,  8). 

OHARANA—A  synonym  of  the  pillar  (M.  xv.  4) ; a foot  (M.  nviii.  3, 
etc.)  (See  under  Stambha). 

CHARA-YASTU— A movable  structure,  a temporary  building. 
Gramadinam  nagaradinam  pura-pattana-kharvate  \ 
Koshtha-koladi-sarvesham  garbha-sthanam  ihoohyate  \ 
Sthira-vastu-kukshi-de'se  tu  chara-vastu  tathapi  cha  \ 

(M.  XII.  168-170). 


CHITBA 


195 


GHAEUKA  ~ (see  Euchaka) — A type  of  building. 

Nishpatam  ohariikaih.  vidyat  sarvatraiva  vifesshabab  i 

(Kamikagama,  XXXV.  91,  see  also  88-90  under  Nandyavarta). 
CHALA-DANDA — The  movable  lamp-post. 

Chatur-a&ram  va  tad  ashtagram  vrittam  va  ohala-dandakam  \ 
Sthira-danda-vitale  tu  manahgula-va&au  nayet  \ 

(M.l.  84-86). 

CHALA-SOPANA— The  movable  stair-case. 

(M.  XXX.  130,  see  under  Sopana). 

CHAEA  — A platform. 

Vrishabhasya  lakshapiam  samyag  vakshyate’dhuna  I 
Timane  mandape  vapi  oharopari  parinyaset  I 

(M.  Lxii.  1,  3). 

CHAEU-BANDHA— A type  of  base. 

Tato  jahgala-bhumi&  ched  adhishthanam  prakalpayet  \ 

Taoh  chatur-vidham  akhyatam  iha  feastre  vifeeshatah  II 
Padma-bandham  oharu-bandham  pada-bandham  pratikramam  II 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  16-17). 
OHABYA — A road  which  is  eight  cubits  broad, 
Ashta-hasta-pramana-margah  I 

(See  KautiKya-Artha&astra,  under  Patha). 
OHITEA— *An  image,  a painting,  a marble. 

A painting  (M.  XXXV*  402,  etc), 

A kind  of  marble  (M.  lvi.  15,  etc), 

A kind  of  octangular  building  (Agni-Purana,  chap.  104,  v.  20-21, 

see  under  Prasada). 

A full  relief  or  image  whose  whole  body  is  fully  shown : 

Sarvahgam  dri&yamanam  yat  chitram  evam  prakathyate  1 

(M.  L.  1-9). 

See  Suprabhedagama  (xxxjv,  3)  under  Abhasa. 


196 


GHlTEA-KAliPA 


CHITRA-KALPA — A head-gear,  an  ornament. 

Patra-kalpam  ohitra-kalpam  ratna-kalpam  oha  mitritam  I 
Bshaih  chatiir--7idham  proktam  knryad  abharanam  bndhah  \ 

(M.l.3-4). 

CHITEA-EARNA  -A  kind  of  piUar. 

(M.  XV.  30,  see  under  Stambha). 
OHITRA-TOBANA— (see  Toraria)  - A type  of  arch. 

Tad  eva  (like  the  Makara-torana)  parsvayor  madbyam  ptiritarii 
cha  dvayor  (makarayor)  api  I 
Eakra-tnnda-prag-grahaik  chatayor  asya-vinirgataih  II 
'Vidyadharai^  cha  bhutai's  oha  sirb.he(-hairi)va  vyala>hamsakair  api  \ 
Bale  srag-dandakair  anyair  mani-bandhair  vichitritam  II 
Chitra-torapam  etat  syad  devana'm  bhu-bhritam  varam  \ 

Ihasu  pratimadyaau  padah  sarvahga-tobhitah  II 
Ohatur-asrashta-vrittabha  kumbha-mandya  samyutah  I 
Pottika-sahita  va  syur  viyukta  va  prakirtitah  II 
Utsandhad  avalambam  tn  kuryan  makara-prishthakam  II 

(Kamikagama,  ly.  66-70). 
CHITRA-PATTA — A moulding  of  the  pillar. 

(M.  XV.  34,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Adhish- 
thana  and  Upapitha). 

OHITRA-SKAMBHA — A column  with  all  characteristics  of  the 
Padma-kanta  (see  below)  except  the  asana  (seat). 

(M.  xv.  39,  see  under  Stambha). 
CHITRABHASA — (see  Abhasa) — A kind  of  marble,  an  image. 

(M.  Lvi.  16,  see 'Under  Abhasa). 
^ilodbhavanam  vi(bi)mbanaih  chitrabhasasya  va  punah  I 
Jaiadhivasanam  proktam  vrishendrasya  prakirtitam  II 

(Lihga-Purana,  part  II,  TJttara-bhaga,  chap.  48,  V.  43). 
An  image  painted  on  a pata  (a  piece  of  cloth,  a tablet,  a plate)  or 
wall  (Suprabhedagama,  xxxiv.  4,  see  under  Abhasa). 
CHITRARDHA — A half  relief  or  an  image  half  of  whose  body  is 
shewn. 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxiv.  4,  see  under  Abhasa), 


CHULIKl 


197 


CHULLl— A building  lacking  a soutbern  ball,  an  apartment  of  three 
divisions,  one  looking  north,  another  east,  and  the  third  west. 
YSmya-hinam  ohulli  tri-fealakam  vitta-nata-karam  etat  \ 
(B?ihat-samhita,  Liii.  38,  J.  R.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  vi.  p.  282). 
CHULIjKA — •(OHULT)— A tower,  a head-ornament,  the  capital,  the 
top. 

(1)  Antar  vapra(h)  bahir  bhittife  oheshtaih  dirgham  oha  chiilika  i 

(M.ix.  362). 

In  connection  with  the  joinery  : 

Etat  snvritta-padanam  tri-karnam  vaksliyate  ’dhuna  1 
Tad  eva  oha  tri-karpam  syat  tri-chulikam  eva  oha  I 

(M.  xvii.  104-105). 

In  connection  with  the  gopura  or  gate-house  (M,  xxxili.  313). 
In  connection  with  the  mandapa  (pavilion) : 
Tad(prastara)-urdhve  mandapanSm  oha  ohulika-karria- 
harmyakam  \ 

(M.  xxxiv.  64). 

An  ornament  for  the  head  : 

Lamba-haram  api  ohtilikadibhih  \ (M.  L,  301). 

(2)  Stambhasya  parikshepash  shad-ayama  dvi-guno  nikhatah 

ohulikaya^  chatur-bhagah— “ in  fixing  a pillar  6 parts  are  to 
form  its  height  on  the  floor,  twice  as  much  (12  parts)  to  be 
entered  into  the  ground,  and  one-fourth  for  its  cavital.  ” 
(Kautiliya-Arthatastra,  chap.  xxiv.  p.  63) 

(3)  Trichuli  vai^ya-sudranam  panoha  sapta  mahibhritam  \ 
Brahmananam  tathaiva  syur  ekadata  tu  vedikah  II 
Pashandatraminam  yugma-samkhya  ohuli  -vidhiyate  II 

(Eamikagama,  XXXV.  160, 161). 

The  synonyms  of  chiilika  : 

St(h)upika  cha  ghatah  kilo  tulakah  st(h)upir  ity-api  \ 

Sikh  a st(h)upir  iti  khyata  chulika  oha  dvijottamah  II 

(Ibid,  Lv,  207), 


198 


CHULI.HARMYA 


CHULI-HARMYA — (of.  Chulli)— A feower,  a room  at  the  top  of  a 
house. 

(1)  Prastarordhve  vi&esho’sti  chuU-harmyadi-manditaai  { 

(M,  XXXIV.  499). 

(2)  Ekuiieka-talantam  syat  chuli-harmyadi-manditam  I 

(M.  XXXV.  37,  etc). 

(3)  ChuU-harmya-yutam  chorddhve  ohagra-dvara-lamanvifeam  }| 
Sorddhva-vasfcavya-samyuktam  chuliharmya-yufcam  tu  vS  II 
Sa  bhuioir  mandapagara-oliuli-harmya-xibhushitia  i| 

Athava  mandaporddhve  tu  chuli-harmya-vibhushitam  | 
Taladhishthana-padobbyab  kimchid-una-pramanakam  1} 

(Eamikagama,  xxxv.  63,  66,  71,  114). 

(4)  Prakara-madhye  kritva  -vapim  pushkarinim  dvaram  chatu^- 

§alam  adbyardhantaranikam  kumari-puram  munda-harmyam 
dvi-fcalaiii  muudaka -dvaram  bb.umi-dravya-va§eiia  va  tri- 
bhagadhikayaniali  bhanda-vahinih  kulyah  karayefc  ! 

“ In  the  centre  of  the  parapets,  there  shall  be  constructed  a 
deep  lotus  pool ; a rectangular  building  of  four  compartments, 
one  within  the  other ; an  abode  of  the  goddess  Aumari  (?) 
having  its  external  area  1|  times  as  broad  as  that  of 
its  innermost  room ; a circular  building  with  an  arch 
ivay  ; and  in  accordance  with  available  space  and  materials, 
there  shall  also  be  constructed  canals  (?)  to  hold  weapons 
and  three  times  as  long  as  broad.” 

(Kantiliya-Arthafeastra,  chap.  xxiv.  p.  64). 
Pandit  Shama  Sastri’s  translation,  as  given  above,  does  not 
seem  to  have  resulted  from  a happy  construction  of  the  text. 
‘Kumaripura  hnunda-liarniya'  and  ‘dvi-tala  (two-storeyed) 
mundaka-dvara'  bear  apparently  some  technical  meanings 
which  are  not  well  expressed  in  the  translation. 
‘Munda-harmya*  might  be  identical  with  ‘chuli-harmya’  inas- 
much as  hnnnla’  and  ‘ohuli’  are  almost  synonyms,  both 
meaning  top  or  summit  (see  Kumari-pura), 


OHAITYA 


199 


OHAITYA— (CHAITYALAYA)-— A monuraental  tomb,  a sauotuary, 
ate  1 I . 

(1)  Tasmiim  Iruga-dandefea-pure  cbaru-^ilamayam  \ 
^ri-Kumtliu-Jinanathasya  chaityalayam  aclnkarat  II 

“ la  this  city  the  general  Iruga  caused  to  be  built  of  fine  stones 
a temple  (ohaityalaya)  of  the  blessed  Kunthu,  the  Lord  of 
Jinas.” 

(Yijayanagara  Inscrip.  of  Hariliara  ii,  v.  28,  H.  S. 

1. 1,  vol.  I.  no.  152,  pp.  158, 160). 

(2)  Par^vana  thasya  Arfcatah  silamayam  chaityalayam  achikarat  I' 

“ — caused  a temple  (ohaityalaya)  of  stone  to  be  built  to  the 
Arhat  Parsvanatha.” 

Of.  Bhavya-paritosha-hetum  Silamayam  .setum  akhila- 
dharmmasya  1 

Ghaityagaram  aohikarad  adharani-dyumani-hima-kara-sthai- 
ryyam  il 

(Vijayanagara  Inscrip.  of  Devaraja  ii,  v.  20,  H.  S. 

I.  I.  no.  153,  pp.  162,  164,  166). 

(3)  ^ri-yogasvaminah ..esha  Malukaya-chaitya— this  is  the 

Malukaya  temple  of  the  god  Yoga  Svamin. 

(Sanskrit  and  old  Oanarese  Inscrip.  no.  170,  Asni 
Inscrip.  of  Mahipala,  line  7 f.  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xvi. 

p.  175,  note  12). 

(4)  Abode  ohatiyam — “ The  chaitya  on  (Mount)  Arbuda.” 
Miga-samadakam  ohetaya— “ The  chaitya  which  gladdens  the 

antelopes.” 

(Bharaut  Inscrip.  nos.  5,  11,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xxi. 

pp.  227,  228). 

(5)  “ Kayastha  Palhadeva  (or  Palhaja) built  a tank  and  a 

temple  (chaitya)  of  ^ambhu  (^iva),  and  also  laid  out  a gar- 
..  '.•■■■.  den.”  . ■ ■ ■ ■ 

(Nar war  Stone  Inscrip.  of  Ganapati  of  Nalapura, 

V,  22-25,  Ind,  Ant,  vol,  xxii.  p.  81), 


2*30 


CHAITYA 


(6)  Boppanapara-namaiakas  ohaitiyalayam  achikarat—^  he,  having 
another  name  Boppana,  had  the  Jaina  temple  made.” 

(Ep.  Garnat.  vol.  ii.  no.  66,  Boman  text,  p.  60,  Tranal.  p.  149). 
“ They  caused  to  be  erected  the  lofty  chaityalaya  called 
Trijagan-niahgalam,  and  set  up  (the  god)  Manikya-deva ; 
also  caused  to  be  repaired  the  Parametvara-chaityalaya 
which  the  blessed  ones  (or  Jains)  had  formerly  erected  in 
Hdllanahalli  and  granted  lands  to  provide  for  the  offerings 
at  the  two  chaityalayas.” 

(Ep.  Garnat.  vol.  iii.  Hanjangud  Taluq,  no.  64, 
TransL  pp.  101,  102,  Boman  text,  p.  193). 

(8)  “ Caused  to  be  set  up  afresh  the  image  of  the  Tirtha(h)~ 

kara  Ohandraprabha,  the  god  Vijaya  and  the  goddess  Jvalini, 
ill  the  ehaityalaya  at  JKelasur,  w’’hich  he  had  caused  to  be 
repaired  and  painted  anew,” 

(Bp.  Garnat.  vol.  ry.  G-undlupet  Taluq,  no.  18,  TransL  p.  38). 

(9)  Aneka-ratna-kbacbita-rucbira-mani-kalata-kalita-kuta-koti- 

ghatitam  apy-uttunga-ohaity5layamam—‘‘ having  erected 
in......... ...a  lofty  chaityalaya,  with  kalalas  or  towers  sur- 
mounted by  rounded  pinnacles  set  with  all  manner  of 
jewels.” 

(Ep.  Garnat.  vol.  vi.  Mn^gere  Taluq,  no.  22,  Boman 
text,  p,  148,  line  12,  TransL  p.  63,  para  2). 

(10)  “ Chaityas  or  Assembly  halls — These  in  Buddhist  art  corres- 
pond in  every  respect  with  the  churches  of  the  Christian 
religion.  Their  plans,  the  position  of  the  altar  or  relic- 
casket,  the  aisles,  and  other  peculiarities  are  the  same  in 
both,  and  their  uses  are  identical,  in  so  far  as  the  ritual 
forms  of  the  one  religion  resemble  those  of  the  other.” 

(Pergusson,  Hist,  of  Ind.  and  East.  Arch.  pp.  50-51). 
For  architectural  details  of  the  existing  (Buddhist)  chaitya- 
halls  see  Eergusson ; 

Blaus  of  ohaity  hall  at  Sanohi  (j).  106,  fig,  41), 


CHAITYA. 


201 


Lomas  EisM  cave  (p.  109,  figs.  43, 44). 

Plan  and  elevation  of  Ohaitja  cava  at  Bhaja  (pp.  110-111, 

figs.  45-47). 

Plan  of  cave  at  Nassick  (p.  115,  fig,  49). 

Plan,  section,  elevation  and  view,  of  Cave  at  Karii  (pp. 
117-118, 120,  figs.  54,  63,  65,  66). 

Cross  section  and  view  of  Oaves  at  Ajnnta  (pp.  123-125, 
figs.  68,  67,  69,  60). 

Cave  at  Ellora  (p.  128,  fig.  63). 

Plan  of  Cave  at  Dhiimnar  (p.  131,  fig,  66). 

(11)  See  Buddhist  cave-temples  (Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp.  Series 
vol.  IV.  the  ehaitya-cave  at  Kondane,  photo,  facing  the 
title  page). 

(12)  The  word  chaitya  is  derived  from  the  root  ‘ chin  ohayane,’ 
to  collect,  and  the  commentary  on  Amara,  called  the  G-uruba- 
laprabodhika,  says  that  it  denotes  a building,  because  it  is 
the  result  of  the  collection  or  putting  together  of  stones 
(ohiyate  pashanadimi  chaityam).  But  it  will  be  seen  that  in 
some  of  the  above  quotations  the  word  is  used  in  close  con- 
nection with  yupa,  the  sacrificial  post.  The  ceremony  per- 
formed at  the  end  of  the  great  sacrifices  is  called  chayana, 
i.e.,  the  collection  of  the  sacred  ashes  and  other  relics  and  the 
grouping  them  into  the  form  of  a tortoise,  or  of  the  bird 
Garutmat  as  in  the  sacrifice  called  Garudaohayana ; chita 
being  the  sacred  things  thus  collected,  it  appears  that  the 
building  constructed  to  preserve  them  for  the  purpose  of 
worship  was  called  chaitiya  or  chaitya,” 

“ This  place  of  worship,  from  its  connection  with  Vedio  rites, 
is  probably  of  older  date  than  the  devayatanas.” 

“ It  is,  therefore,  clear  that  the  Eamayana  alludes  to  the  Bra- 
hmanioal  and  not  to  the  Bauddha  Chaitya.  The  commenta- 
tors are  not  consistent  in  saying  that  chaitya  means  a 
Brahmanioal  building  when  it  is  mentioned  in  connection 
with  Bama  and  his  country,  a Buddhist  building  when 


m 


CHAITYA 


mentioned  in  connection  with  the  enemy’s  country,  forgett- 
ing that  Yalmiki  has  peopled  Lanka  with  Vedic  students  and 
sacrificers  without  eter  mentioning  the  Buddhists 

“ Ko,  7 (Eiimayana,  v.  12,  17)  mentiouft  ohaitya  trees,  so 
called  probably  because  instead  of  constructing  a building  it 
was  also  the  custom  to  plant  trees  with  revetment  round 
their  stems,  where  the  chayaaa  ceremony  was  performed. 
In  course  of  time,  however,  all  revebed  trees  began  to  be 
called  ohaitya  trees  ; and  to  such  trees,  which  are  generally 
found  in  all  villages,  Kalidasa  evidently  alludes  when 
describing  the  Da^arna  country  in  his  Meghadilta.  Malli- 
natha  quotes  Vi^va  (chaityam  ayatane  Buddhavandye 
ohodde^apadape).” 

“ The  ceremony  performed  after  the  burning  of  dead  bodies  is 
samohayana,  in  which,  after  collecting  the  bones,  a portion 
of  the  ashes  is  grouped  into  a human  form,  and  batiili  or  food 
offered  to  it.  I take  the  ^matana-chaitya  alluded  to  in  no,  9, 
to  be  a monumental  building  erected  on  such  spot  in  memory 
of  departed  kings  and  other  great  personages.” 

“ It  may,  therefore,  be  presumed  that  in  accordance  with  custom 
a ohaitya  was  built  in  memory  of  Buddha,  and  that  his  disci- 
ples began  to  worship  and  multiply  it  by  taking  his  funeral 
relics  to  different  parts  of  the  country,  while  the  sacrificial 
chaityas  of  the  Brahmans  became  scarce  owing  to  the 
opposition  made  by  the  Bauddhas  to  animal  sacrifices,  and 
the  Brahmans  themselves  having  prohibited  the  asvamedha 
for  the  Kaliyuga.” 

“ It  will  be  seen  that  the  R amayana  mentions  temples  and 
idolatry  ; but  these  seem  to  be  of  old  date  in  India,  though 
not  so  very  prevalent  as  at  present.  Stenzler’s  Gautama 
Siitra  (9,  66)  prescribes  the  going  round  of  Devayatana  ; 
griba-devatas  or  household  gods  are  mentioned  (in  5, 13).” 

(Ind,  Ant.  vpl,  xi.  pp.  21-22). 


CHHATEA 


203 


(13)  “ Properly  speaking  it;  is  not  the  temple  (Chaitya-griha) 
but  the  dagaba  inside  it  that  is  called  a Ohaitya.  In  a 
secondary  sense  it  is  used  by  Jainas  and  Buddhists,  howeyer, 
to  denote  a temple  containing  a Ohaitya,  and  is  also 
applied  in  Buddhist  books  to  a sacred  tree  as  well  as  to  a 
8tupa’^ 

“ Hence  it  is  closely  connected  in  meaning  with  stupa.  Ohai- 
tyas  were  known  before  Buddha’s  time  (see  J.  As.  Soo.  Beng., 
vol.  Yli,  p.  1001,  cf.  Alwis,  Buddhism,  pp.  22,  23).”  Dr. 
Burgess. 

(Ibid.  pp.  20,  21,  notes  1,  2). 

CHEEIK.A — (cf.  Pandi-cheri)— A village,  a town. 

A suburb  town  inhabited  by  the  weavers  ; 

Gramadimlm  samipaih  yat  sthanam  kiibjamiti  sinritam  II 
Tad  eva  oherika  prokta  nagari  tantuvaya-bhuh  II 

(Kamikagama,  xx.  15,  16). 
According  to  the  Mauasara,  it  is  a prosperous  capital  city  con- 
nected with  rivers  and  hills,  and  well  fortified : 
Hadyadi-kauanopetam  bahu-tira-janalayam  \ 
Ba]a-mandira-samyuktani  skandhavara-samanvitam  \ 

Par§ve  chanya-dvi-iatinam  grihantat  cherikoditah  I 

(m.  X.  86-88). 

OHAUVApi—A  building  with  four  sloping  roofs. 

“ In  the  tiger-face  chavadi  (i.e.  chauvadi)  ho  set  up  images  of 
his  family  gods  (named).” 

(Ep.  Oarnat.  vol.  v.  part  I,  Ghannarayapatna  Taluq, 
no.  160,  Transl.  p.  196,  Eoman  text,  p.  461). 
In  East  Bengal  also  the  term  is  used  in  the  same  sense,  but 


there  it  generally  denotes  straw-built  houses. 


CHH 

CHHAT-(T)EA(-I)— -(see  Sattra) — Free  quarters  in  connection  with 
temples. 

(1)  See  Inscriptions  from  northern  Gujarat  (no.  xvii.  line  6,  and 
no,  XIX.  line  6,  Bp.  Ind,  vol.  Ii.  pp.  30,  31). 


204 


CHHANDA 


(2)  “ An^  as  a wofk  of  dharma  wish  to  erect  a ohhatra  in  the 

presenoe  of  the  god  yinayai[a....aiid  erecting  a chhatra  for 
daily  feeding  of  6 Brahmans  in  the  presenoe  of  the  god 
YinSyaka.*’ 

(Ep.  Caraat.  vol.  x.  Mnlbagal  Talnq,  no.  269, 

TransL  p.  132). 

(3)  “ And  presented  the  land  to  Amaresvara-tirtha-^ripada,  for 

a ohhatra’  (perhaps  by  slip  Mr.  Rice  pats  in  ‘ohatra’, 
beoanse  m the  text,  the  reading  is  ‘ ohhatra ’)  in  connec- 
tion with  this  matha,  providing  for  1 yati,  4 Brahman 
pilgrims,  and  2 cooks,  altogether  7 persons,  from  the  proceeds 
of  onltivating  the  land.” 

Erom  this  passage  it  is  clear  beyond  doubt  that  ‘ ohhatra  ’ and 
Sattra  point  to  the  same  object,  namely,  a building  or 
buildings  constructed  in  connection  with  a temple,  matha, 
or  ohaityalaya  to  provide  lodgings  and  food  gratis  to 
deserving  persons. 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  vi.  Koppa  Taluq,  no.  27,  Transi.  p.80, 
(Roman  text,  p.  274,  para  2,  line  6 f;. 
CHHANDA — (see  Vimana-ohhanda) — A building,  a door,  a phallic. 
The  temple  (prasada)  named  vimana  belonging  to  the  chhanda  class, 

(Brihat-samhita,  lyi.  17,  22). 
A class  of  buildings  (Kamikagama,  xlv.  20). 

Karne  tala  sabba  madhye  chhandaih  syaoh  ohhandam  eva  tat  il 

(See  ibid.  L.  13  and  7). 

A type  of  Kuta-koshtha  or  top-room  (Ibid.  Lv.  129,  123-127). 

A class  of  buildings  or  top-rooms  (M.  xi.  104-107,  xix.  1-5,  xxx. 

176-177,  XXXIV.  549-552,  see  under  Abhasa). 
A class  of  doors  (M.  xxxix.  28-35,  see  under  Abhasa). 

A type  of  the  Phallus  (M.  Lii.  49,  see  under  Abhasa). 
OHHANDA-PEAK.ARA*— The  court  or  the  enclosure  of  the  ohhanda- 
class  of  buildings. 


(M.  XXXI.  24). 


JASATl 


ms 

CHHANNA-YlEA — An  ornament. 

tjrdh'va'kaye  oha  haradi  parsTayor  bala-lambanam  J 
Madbye  dama  oba  lambam  syaob  cbbanria-yiram  iti  smritam  11 

<M.  L.  35-36). 

CHHELA— (PHBLA) — (see  Qarbha-maftjusba) — The  vault  of  the 
foundation-pit. 

Hemakarena  tamrena  obbelam  va  karayed  budbab  !{ 

Cbbelotsedham  tri-padam  syad  apidbanasya  samucbobbmyab  a 
Gbbela  pafiobangula  prokta  gribanam  nadhika  bhavet  II 
Pbela  is  perhaps  the  same  as ‘cbbebV  : 

Shad-ahgula(m)  pramanaiii  tr  ohatur-vim&angulautakaai  1 
Bhajanasya  samantat  tu  savakasa-samanvitam  II 
Tatbalimana  cheshtakaya  phelakaram  tu  garttakam  II 
(Kamikagama,  xxxi.,  named  Garbba-nyasa-vidhi,  G,  1,  12,  74,  75). 

J 

JAGATl — (of.  Jati) — A moulding  of  the  base,  or  of  the  ped.jstai  of  an 
idol  or  phallus,  a class  of  buildings. 

(1)  Pitbika-laksbanaih  vakshye  yatbavad  auupurvatab  li 
Pitbochcbhrayam  yatbavach  oba  bbagau  sbodata  karayet  il 
Bbumfwekah  pravisbtah  syacb  obaturbbir  jagati  mata  II 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  262,  v.  1-2,  see  also  4-5). 

(2)  Sikbarena  samam  karyam  agre  3agati(ti)-vistaram  I 
Dvi-gunenapi  karttavyaiii  yatba-tobhanurupatab  il 

(Agni-Purana,  chap,  42,  v.  5). 
Jagati -vistararddhena  tri-bbagena  kvachid  bhavet  11 

(Ibid.  chap.  104,  v.  6). 

(3)  Pravrita  jagati  karyya  pbala-pusbpa-jalanvita  II 

(Garuda-Purana,  obap.  47,  v.  47). 

(4)  Pada-bandha-vimane  tu  geba-garbbopari  nyaset  I 
Pratibandha-vimane  tu  vriter  upari  vinyaset  II 
Vriter  upari  vipranam  kumudopari  bbubbritam  \ 

Jagatyupari  vaifeyanam  ttidranam  padukopari  II 

(Kamikagama,  xxx.  91,  92). 


206 


JAl^aAMA 


(6)  A moulding  of  fehe  base  (adhishthana): 

Jagati  fcu  sbad-amfea  syad  dvi-bbagardba-dali  kramat  II 
Shad-bbagS  Jagafei  prokta  kumudam  pafioba-bhagikam  II 

(Suprabbedagama,  xxxi.  19, 24). 
(6)  A class  of  buildings  (Bp.  Ind,  vol.  1.  pp.  165,  277;  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XIV.  p.  161,  note  22). 

JA]^(3-AMA-(BEBA)— The  movable  idol. 

Sthavaraih  jangamam  cbaiva  dvi-vidbam  beram  uobyate  i 
Jangamam  cbotsavam  bbavet  sarvam  stbavaram  isbyafce  I 

(M.  LI.  17-18). 

Evam  tu  cbotsavadinam  sthavaram  jangamadinab(“nam)  I 

(M.  LXiv.  93). 


JA3^GHA~*Tbe  leg,  tbe  pillar. 

(1)  A synonym  of  tbe  pillar  (M.  xv.  4,  see  under  Stambba). 

A pillar  in  an  upper  storey  (M.  xxvi.  65,  see  under  Stambba). 
A part  of  tbe  leg  from  tbe  ankle  to  tbe  knee  ; 

Janu-taram  taramtam  syaj  jangba-taram  yugamtakam  I 

(M.  Lvii.  33,  etc). 

(2)  Jangbocbobbrayam  tu  karttavyam  obatur-bbagena  cbaya- 

tam  I 

Jangbayam(-yah)  dvi-gunoobobbrayam  mafijaryyah  kalpayed 

budbah  1} 

(Agni-Purana,  obap.  v.  423). 

(3)  tirddbva-ksbetra-sama-jangba  jangbarddba-dvi-gunam  bbavet  11 


Tad-dvidha  oba  bbaved  dbitir  jangba  tad  vistararddbaga  II 
Tad-vistara-sama  jangba  tikharam  dvi-gunam  bbavet  II 

(Graruda-Purana,  obap.  47,  v.  3,  12, 17,  see  also  v.  13). 


JAl^fGHA-PATHA — (see  Eaja-patba)— Tbe  foot-patb, 

Jangba-patbas  cbatusb-padas  tri-padam  oba  gribantaram  I 
Bbyiti-margas  turddbva-sbasbtbam  kramatah  padikab  smritab  I! 

(Brahmanda-Purana,  part  I,  2nd  anuahamga-pada, 
chap.  7,  V.  115;  see  also  v.  113,  114  under  Eaja-patba). 


JAYA.H'TA-PURA 


207 


JA  Jl^A-KANTA — A class  of  the  five-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  xxm.  41,  see  under  Prasada). 
JANAKA — (JANA-KA.NTA) — A class  of  the  eight-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXVI.  39,  see  under  Prasada). 
A class  of  the  twelve-storeyed  buildings  once  prevailing  in  the 
ancient  country  of  Janaka  (Mithila)  ; 

Tad  eVa  maha-§ala  tu  dvi-bhagam  madhya-bhadrakam  \ 
Jana-kantam  iti  proktam  treshtho  ravi-talanvitam  I 

(M.  XXX.  36-36,  see  also  33-34  under  Magadha-kanta). 
JANA-CHAPAKBITI-A  type  of  bow-shaped  arch. 

Yyittam  vatha  tri-yugmam  va  chardha-chandrakritis  tatha  1 
Jana-ohapakritir  vapiyatheshtakara-toranam  \ 

(M.  XLvi.  31-32). 

JANMAN — (of.  XJpana) — The  base,  the  plinth,  the  basement. 

The  basement  (M.  xi.  126,  126 ; xn.  202,  etc). 

The  plinth  of  the  pedestal  (M.  xin.  6,  etc.,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 

under  Upapitha). 

The  plinth  of  the  base  (M.  xiv.  16,  etc.,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 

under  Adhishthana). 

JANMA-NIBG-AMA  (-NISHKEAMANA)-— The  projection  or  exten- 
sion of  the  base  or  basement. 

(M.  xni.  138 ; VI.  106,  etc). 

JA-YADA — (see  Otsedha)— -A  height  which  is  1|-  of  the  breadth* 

(M.  XXXV.  22-26,  and  Kamikagama,  L.  24  f.,  see 

under  Adbhuta). 

JAYANTA-PUBA — A town,  a village,  an  establishment  for  pious  and 
learned  Brahmans. 

(Kamauli  Plates  of  the  kings  of  Kanauj,  no  U,  line  28, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  IV.  pp.  128, 129). 


208 


JAYANTI 


JAYANTI(-I)— A oolman,  a post,  a moulding. 

(1)  A synonym  of  the  balance -post  (tnla-danda) ; 

Tnla-dandam  jayanfci  cha  pbalaka  paryaya-vachakab  j 

(M.  XTI.  48). 

(2)  A part  of  the  column  : 

Mudrikaoh  oha  tuiadhikya  jayanti  tu  tulopari  i( 
(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  108,  see  also  106-109  under  Stambha). 

(3)  A moulding  of  the  column  : 

Tuia-'viBtara-tarochoha  jayanti  syat  tulopari  II 
J ayanti  v-amsaka  jneya  tulavad  anumargakam  if 

(Kamikagama,  Liv.  13, 16).* 

JAyAHTIKA(-KA) — A post,  a moulding. 

In  connection  with  the  entablature  ( prastara)  : 

Etat  prachohhadanat  sthane  dandam  chopari  tayayet  I 
Etad  dvara-va&ad  dirgham  tasyopari  jayantikam  I 
Daru-dandam  tila  vapi  ishtakena  jayantikam  I 
AthaVa'daru-jayantit  oha  tila  chet  saha-dandakam  \ 

Yina  dandam  tatha  kuryat  pashanam  phalaka  nyaset  I 
Etat  sarvalaye  kuryad  de'va-harmye  Yi^eshatah  \ 

(M.  XYi.  124-129). 

Adhara-patpa-samyuktam  sa-tulam  tu  jayantikam  \ 

(Ibid.  XVI.  149). 

JAYA-BHADEA — A pavilion  with  twenty-two  columns. 

(Suprabhedagam,  xxxi.  102, 100,  see  under  Mandapa). 
JAYAS-TAMBHA — A pillar  of  vitory  (see  under  Stambha). 

JAYALA — A type  of  pavilion. 

(M.  XXXIV.  294,  see  under  Mandapa). 
JAYAVAHA — A pavilion  with  fifty  pillars. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  V.  9,  see  under  Mandapa). 
JALA-GAEBHA— (see  Garbha)— The  water-foundation,  the  founda- 
tion of  a tank,  etc. 

(M.  XII.  184-189,  see  under.  G-arbha-nyasa). 


JALA-STHALA 


JALA-DUEGA— (see  Burga) — ^A  water-forfc. 

(1)  Kaufeiliya-Arthafeastra  chap.  (xxiv.  para  1,  p.  61,  see  under 
Durga). 

(2)  See  Sukraniti  under  Durga. 

JALA-DVA.EA — Tiie  water-door,  a gutter,  a drain. 

Jala-d-varam  punas  tesham  pravakshyami  niYe&anam  il 
In  tke  three  following  lines  the  positions  of  the  water-door  are 
described. 

(Kamikagama,  XXXV.  167). 

A gutter : 

Kuryat  tu  hhitti-muie  tu  jala-dvaram  yatheshta-dik  1 

(M,  XXXI.  99 ; see  also  ix.  310-812,  under  Dvara). 
Jala-dvaram  yathasara  (-salam)  nimna-dete  prakalpayet  I 

(M.  xxxviii.  8,  see  also  40). 
JALA-DHAEA — The  gutter-like  part  of  the  pedestal  (pitha)  of  the 
Phallus. 

Nala-tara-tri-bhagaikam  jala-dhara-vi^alakam  I 

(M.liii.  23  etc), 

JALA-PUEITA-MANDAPA — A detached  building  where  water  is 
preserved  for  bathing,  washing,  etc. 

Parjanye  majjanarthaya  jala-purita-mandapam  1 

(M.  xxxn.  66,  etc.), 

JALA-STHALA— A reservoir  of  water. 

In  connection  with  the  three-storeyed  buildings  ; 

Paritat  ohaika-bhagena  kuta-taladi-bhushitam  I 
Tasyantak  chavritamtena  chordhva-deke  iala-sthalam  I 

(M.  XXI.  68-59). 


In  connection  with  the  four-storeyed  buildings ; 

Ekena  karna-harmyadi  tasyantar  iala-(tat)-sthaiain  \ 

(M.  XXII.  78,  etc). 


In  connection  with  the  nine-storeyed  buildings  : 

^reshtharii  nava-talam  proktam  vi^va-kantam  udiritam  I 
Tad-urdhve  dvyamta-manena  vakshye  chordhve  jala-sthalaui  I 

(M.  XXVII.  33,  .34,  etc). 


14 


210 


JALANTA 


In  connection  with  the  prakara-buildings  : 

Shad-angulava^anaih  syat  kramafc  (?bhramafc)  sarve  Jala-stbale  \ 

(M.  XXXI.  95). 

JALANTA — Foundations  reaching  the  underground-water  in  connec- 
tion with  buildings. 

(1)  Khanayed  bhu-talam  sreshtham  purushafiiali-matrakam  1 
Jalantam  va  §ilantam  va  purayed  valukair  jalaih  I! 

(M.  XVIII.  6 “7). 

(2)  Saihgraha-tiromani  by  Sarayu  Prasada  (xx.  28)  quotes  from 

Mandavya : 

Jalantam  prastarantam  va  purushantam  athapi  va  I 
Kshetram  saih^odhya  obodhritya  fealya-sadanam  arabhet  \ 

(8)  Yastu-yaga-tattva  by  Raghunandana  quotes  from  the  Linga 
(•Purana)  without  any  reference  : 

Agratah  feodhayitva  tu  bhumim  yasya  puroditam  \ 

Dvi-hastam  ohatur-hastam  va  jalantam  vapi  feodhya  oha  I) 
JALA-SUTRA(-SUTRADA) — ^A  channel,  (a  hydraulic  engineer). 

(1)  “ The  engineers  of  the  Belala  Kings  did  not  confine  their 

attention  to  building  alone,  but  irrigation  works  were  also 
taken  in  hand.  Tradition  has  it  that  the  waters  of  the 
Yagaohi  which  flows  through  a valley  distant  10  miles  and 
divided  by  a range  of  hills  from  the  Halabid  valley,  were 
brought  by  a channel  to  supply  the  capital  with  water 
and  fill  the  neighbouring  tanks ; a deep  cutting  on  the 
Hasan-Bailur  road  at  the  16th  mile,  works  the  spot  where 
the  channel  crossed  the  saddle  of  the  hills.” 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  i.  p.  44.  o.  2,  para  2 middle). 

(2)  “ Where  as  we  constructed  a new  dam  in  the  Kaveri  and  led  a 

channel  therefrom,  and  the  Brahmans  of  Harahu  made 
with  us  the  following  agreement  in  order  that  the  channel 
might  be  brought  within  the  limits  of  their  village  Harahu.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  in.  Seringapatam  Taluq,  no.  139, 
Transl.  p.  33,  line  3,  Roman  text,  p.  77,  line  5). 


jati 


211 


(3)  Jalandarava  madisi  devange — “erecting  a jalandara  (?)  for  the 

god  ” ( ? temple). 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  in.  Maiavalli  Taluq,  no.  64, 
Boman  text,  p.  147,  line  3,  Tranal.  p.  63). 

(4)  “ Vira-prataya  Bukka-Eaya  in  his  court  gave  an  order  to 

the  emperor  (or  master)  of  ten  sciences  (da^a-vidya-chakra- 
varti),  the  hydraulic  engineer  (Jala-sHtra-da)  Singaya- 
bhatta,  that  they  must  bring  the  Henne  river  to  Penugonde 
■ — and  that  Singaya-bhatta  conducting  a channel  to  the 
Siruvera  tank  gave  to  the  channel  the  name  Pratapa-Bukka- 
Baya  mandala  channel  and  had  this  feasana  written.” 

“ An  interesting  case  is  recorded  in  this  inscription  : when  the 
prince  Bukka  Baya  was  Governor  of  Penugonda  in  1388  (A. 
D.),  he  ordered  the  hydraulic  engineer  to  bring  the  Kenne 
river  (the  modern  Pennar)  to  the  city.  Accordingly  a channel 
was  made  from  Kalludi  to  the  Siravera  tank,  10  miles  to  the 
north.  How  the  water  was  carried  beyond  that  does  not 
appear.  An  amusing  account  is  given  of  the  accomplish- 
ments of  the  engineer  who  was  master  of  tan  sciences.” 

J ala-sutra-svara-§a8tre  rasa-vaidye  satya-bhashayam  1 
Budraya-sihgari-bhavatah  sadyitah  ko  va  mahi-tale  fefirah  il 
(Ep.  Oarnat.  vol.  X.  Goribidpur  Talug,  no.  6,  Boman 
text,  p.  259  f.  Transl.  p.  212,  Preface,  p.  2). 

(6)  “ Saying  to  them  ‘ you  must  make  this  channel’  they  sent 
for  the  last  Voja’s  son  Peda-Bayiraboja,  and  gave  them 
the  contract.  And  they  dug  a channel  from  before  Peda 
Nandisiriyuru  and  carrying  it  on  below  led  it  so  as  to 
fill  the  tank.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  x.  Bagepalli  Taluq,  no.  10,  Boman 
text,  p.  286,  Transl.  p.  232), 

JATI — ^A  class  of  buildings,  a door,  a type  of  top-room,  a phallus. 

Ketaryadi-prasada-jati — ^the  Eesari  and  other  classes  of  buildings.- 
(Prasada-Mandaua-Vastu&'astra  of  Sutra-dhara-Man- 
dana,  vi.  Ms,  Egg.  3147, 2253,  fol.  26  b). 


jAti-pbakaba 


212 

A class  of  buildings  : 

Karna-madbye’ntare  kuta-koshthe  pafijara-samyutam  I 
Shad-’vargaka-samayukfcam  jatir  esham  hy-anarpitam  It 

(Karaikagama,  XLV.  19,  see  also  7 and  of.  L.  9,  11). 
A class  of  kufca-koshtba  or  top-rooms  (Kamikagama,  lv.  123-128, 

see  under  Karna-kuta). 
A class  of  buildings  (M.  xi.  104-107,  xix.  1-5,  xxx.  176-177, 
XXXIV.  649-662,  see  under  Abhasa). 
Of.  Kecbid  bbadra-vitesbena  ijatir  uktam  puratanaib  \ 

(M.  xxxiv.  663). 

A class  of  doors  (M.  xxxix,  28-36,  see  under  Abbasa), 

A type  of  the  phallus  (M.  lii.  49,  see  under  Abhasa). 
JATI-BBAKAEA — The  enclo8ure-(buildings)  of  the  J§ti  class. 

(M.  XXXI.  36,  see  under  Prakara). 
JA.TI-6ALA — (see  Jati) — The  tala  (hall)  of  the  Jati  class. 

Evam  jati-tala  cha  kuryad-dharmya-vatat  sudhih  I 

(M.  XXXI.  20,  etc). 

JATI-ELABMYA — The  buildings  of  the  Jati  class. 

Takshe’ham  jati-harmyanam  ayadi-lakshanam  kramat  I 

(M.  xxx.  169,  etc). 

JALA-(KA,KA)-  (of.  Vatayana)— A latticed  window,  an  orna- 
ment. 

(1)  Manasara : 

In  connection  with  the  single-storeyed  buildings  ; 

Yat  tan  namantaralam  chordhve  nasika  jala-pafijaram  vapi  V 

(M.  XIX.  216). 

In  connection  with  the  seven-storeyed  buildings  : 
Bana-prastara-samyuktam  jalakabhir  alahkritam  1 

(M.  XXV.  37). 

In  connection  with  the  nine-storeyed  buildings  ; 
Toranady-ahga-nidait  cha  jalakadi-vibhushitam  I 

(M.  XXVII.  44). 


JlLA 


m 


In  oonneofcion  witJi  the  gopuras  (gate-houses^ : 

Naranam  jalaham  sarvam  devanam  api  yogyakam  I 

(M.  XXXIII.  672). 

In  connection:  with  the  mandapas  (pavilions) : 

Tad  eva  oheshta-dig-vasara  kuryad  evam  tu  Jalakam  \ 

(M.  XXXIV.  206). 

In  connection  with  the  door  : 

layante  va  mrige  vapi  chopadvaram  tu  jalakam  \ 

(M.  xxxvm.  19). 

In  connection  with  the  doors  of  the  kitchen  (latticed  win- 
dows are  provided  for  the  easy  passage  of  smoke) : 
Tad-urdhva-gamanarthaya  kahudra-jalaka-samyutam  \ 

(M.  xxxvm.  36). 

DevanSih  harmyake  sarvam  madhya-dvaram  tu  jalakam  I 

(M.  XXXIX.  138). 

Jalakadhika-hinam  syad  tri-hinam  artha-nafeanam  \ 

(M.  Lxix.  36). 

An  ornament  for  the  feet : 

Eatnahguliyakau  hastau  padam  jala-sarataakam  1 

(M.  li.39). 

Chamundi  ]vala(?  jala)-mauli  cha  hhairavi  pibaralakam(-ka)  [ 

(M.liv.  136). 

(2)  Manu-samhita  (vin.  132,  etc.)  ; 

Jalantara-gate-bhanau  yat  sukshmam  dyityate  rajah  \ 

(3)  Bamayana  (Cock) ; 

V.  2.  49  *•  (Purim)  tata-kumbha-nibhair  jalair  gaudharva- 
nagaropamam  \ 

Y.  2.  53 ; Maharha-jambu-nada-jala-toranaib  (Lahkam)  \ 

Y.  4.  6 ; Yajra-jala-vibhuahitaih  griha-meghaih  I 


214 


JlLA 


Y.  8. 1 : Mahad  Yimanam...pratapfea-iambti-iiada-jala- 
kfitrimaml 

Y.  9.  22  : (Salam)...hema-iala-Yirajitain  \ 

Y.  64. 22  : KaD,oliana-jalaiii„..(bhaYanani)  \ 

III.  66.  10:  Hema-jalavyita&  chasams  tatra  praaada- 

' panktayah  i 

(4)  Mahabkarata : 

I.  185,19-20 : Prasadaih  sukritoohobhrayaik  \ 

Suvarna-jala-samvritair  mani-kutitima-bhliskanaih  I 
I.  134.  14 : Makfea-jala-parikskiptaki  vaidurya-mani-&obkitam  | 
^ata-kumbka-mayam  divyam  prekshagaram  upagatam  I 

I.  128.  40  *.  O-aYakskakaia  tatka  jalaik  \ 

II.  34.  21:  (AYa3atkaE)...suYama-jala-samYitan  I 
(6)  ^ilpalastra-sara-samgraka  (ix.  23) : 

Eka-bkaga&  oka1Jus-s{iambka&  okatur-dvarak  sa-jalakak  I 
Gkkadya-gkamta-yato  mada-&obkitak  &ridharamatak  11 
(6)  Kamikagama  (lv.  94, 168-163). 

Jalakam  palakarh  feailam  aisktam  kudyam  oka  iskyate  I 
Jalakair  bahubkir  yuktam  jalakam  kudyam  iskyate  U 94 
Tke  seYen  kinds  of  tke  latticed  windows  : 

Biju-jalakam  adyam  syat  gaYakskam  kunjarakskakam  \ 
Go-mutram  ganika-patra(m)  nandyaYartam  oka  saptadha  II 168 
Eiju-kampa-yutam  yat  tu  riju-jalakam  uokyate  I 
Karna-gatya  yada  ^rotram  gaYakskam  iti  kirtitam  II  159 
Tad  6Ya  okatur-a&rottkam  kufijarakakam  iti  smritam  I 
Vidig  Yaktra-gatam  drisktim  go-mutram  iti  kirtitam  II  160 
Mulam  apy-agra-gulika-mridu-bkitty-antararckitam  I 
Nana-okckhidra-saTnayuktam  ganika-jalakam  bkaYet  It  161 
Patrair  Yickitram  randkram  patra-jalakam  iskyate  I 
Patra-sutra-gatam  randkram  pradakshinya-kramena  tu  li  162 
NandyaYartam  iti  proktam  Yedy-urdkve  jalakam  nayet  I 
B^ayambkuY^di  linge  tu  yath^kamam  prayojayet  l|  163 


JlLA 


215 


Jalakam  oha  kavatam  oka  bakye  bakye  prakalpayet  I 
Sarwatak  kudya-samyukfeam  mukkya-dkamatra-kirliitam  II 
Okatjur-dig-bkadra-sarhyuktam  dvara-jalaka-l^obkitam  11 

(Ibid.  XLi.  8,  26). 

Jalaka-sfcambka-kiidyanga-n53ika-torananvitiara  I 
Prastara-kskudra-sopanam  sopanadi-samanvitsam  II 

(Ibid.  XLll.  26). 

(7)' Suprabkedagama  (xxxi.  62,  eto.)  : 

Vedika-jalakopeta  (paryatakritik,  a building), 

(6)  “ He,  ^tke  emperor  of  tke  soufck,  caused  to  be  made  of 
stone  for  Vijaya-Narayana  (temple)  lalticed  window  (jala- 
ka-jalakam),  secure  door-frame  (kavatam),  door-lintel, 
kitoken,  ramparts,  pavilion,  and  a pond  named  tke  Vasu- 
deva-tirtka.” 

“ Tke  pierced  stone- windows,  wkiok  form  one  of  the  moat 
beautiful  features  of  tke  Belur  temple,  may  be  of  a later 
date,  about  1200  (refers  to  the  inscription  quoted  above)  and 
due  to  B allala  II.” 

In  connection  with  the  same  windows,  Mr.  Eioe  quotes  Mr. 
Fergusson — Tke  richness  and  variety  of  pattern  - displayed 
in  tke  windows  of  tke  porch  are  astonishing.  ^Tkey  are 

twenty -eight  in  number,  and  all  are  different Tke  pierced 

slabs  themselves,  however,  are  hardly  so  remarkable  as  tke 
richly  carved  base  on  which  they  rest,  and  tke  deep  cornice 
wkiok  overshadows  and  protects  them.” 

(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  72, 
Transl.  p.  61,  Koman  text,  p.  61,  line  7,  Introduce 
pp.  XXXVI,  XXXVIII,  xxxix). 

(7)  See  bars  on  tke  perforated  windows. 

. (Okalukyan  Architecture,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp.  series, 
vol.  XXI.  plate  xxxvii,  fig.  2). 

(8)  See  samples  of  tke  perforated  windows. 

(Ibid,  vol,  xxiji:.  plate  lxxiv,  ibid,  vol.  sxix.  plate  xm), 


216 


JALA-GAYAKSHA 


(9)  See  264  kinds  of  geomeferioal  and  very  arfeisfcio  patterns  of 
screens. 

(Jala  Kaumndi  by  Pandit  Knndanlal,  pp.  188,  second 

paging). 

JALA-GrAVAKSHA— The  latticed  window. 

(1)  Jala-gavakshaka-yuktah — furnished  with  latticed  windows. 

(Brihat-samhita,  Lvi.  22,  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  xi.  p.  319). 

(2)  Jala-gavakshair  yuktah  (JBhavishya-PurSna,  chap.  130,  v.  29). 

(3)  Mundana  jalandaravam  madisidaru — had  the  latticed  win- 

dows made  for  the  Tirthakaras,  which  their  father  had  had 
made.^’ 

(Ep.  Oarnat.  vol.  ii.  no.  78,  Eoman  text,  p.  62,  TransL  p.  161). 
3 ALl-— A trellis  window  or  screen. 

j^ri-Witarefevara-deva-mandape  jali  karapita — “ a trellis  was 
caused  to  be  made  in  the  temple  of 

(Ahmadabad  Inscrip.  of  Yitaladeva,  A.  D.  1251,  lines 
7-8,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  v.  pp.  103, 102). 
JINA-(KA)— The  temple  of  the  Jains,  the  Jain  deity. 

(M.  XIX.  262,  XXXII.  165,  xLiii.  145  etc). 
The  description  of  the  Jain  deities  (Manasara,  chap.  lv.  71-96) : 
They  are  either  stationary  or  movable  (71). 


The  general  features  : 

Dvi-bhujam  cha  dvi-netram  cha  munda-taram  oha  tirshakam  I (72) 
Sphatika-feveta-raktam  oha  pita-tyama-nibham  tatha  1 (86) 

They  are  made  in  the  erect,"  sitting  or  recumbent  posture  . (73-76) 
and  in  the- lotus-seat  pose  (padmasana). 

The  attendant  deities  are  Narada,  Yakshas,  Vidyadharas,  Nagen- 
dra,  Dik-palas  and  Siddhas  (82-88).  They  are  stated  to  be  of 


five  classes  (89). 


The  24  TIrthaa  (i.e.  Tirthankaras  or  apostles)  are  measured 
according  to  the  data-tala  system(91). 

Their  general  features  : 

Nirabharana-sarvMgam  nirvastranga-manoharam  1 
Savya-vak8ha(h)-8thale  hema-varnam  srivatsa-lanohhanam  i 

(91-92). 


TABlGA 


211 


jyA-— A kind  of  pent-roof. 

(M.  XVIII.  177,  see  under  Lupa). 

JYOTIIJ— A kind  of  pent-roof. 

(M.  XVIII.  174,  see  under  Lupa). 

jyOTISH-KANTA— A class  of  the  six-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  xxiv.  20,  see  under  Prasada). 

JVABA-DBYALAYA — The  temple  of  the  god  of  fever. 

Aguim  (agnau)  pusha-pade  vapi  jvara-devalayam  bhavet  j 

(M.  XI.  390). 

“ This  (no.  43)  and  the  next  following  seven  (44-50)  (Velur) 
insoriptions  record  grants  to  Jvara  Khandetvarasvamin  of  Velur, 
i.  e.  to  the  Vellore  temple,  which  is  now-a-days  called  Jala- 
kanthetvara  (North  Aroot  Manual,  p.  189).  The  name  of  the 
temple  is  spelt  Jvara-kap^e&vara  in  five  insoriptions,  Jvara- 
kanthetvara  in  two  others,  and  Jvara-kandhesvara  in  one  of 
them.  The  Sanskrit  original  of  these  various  forms  seems  to 
have  been  Jvara-khapde&vara.  Jvara-khanda, ' the  destroyer  of 
fever  ’ would  be  a synonym  of  Jvara-hara,  which  is  applied  to 
6iva  in  the  name  of  one  of  the  Kafiohipuram  temples.  (Sewell’s 
Lists  of  Antiquities,  vol.  i.  p.  180).” 

(H.  S.  1. 1,  vol.  I.  Velur  Inscrip,  nos.  43-50, 
p.  69,  para  2,  notes  3,4). 

P 

POLA— (for  Lola)— A hammock,  a swing,  a litter. 

(M.  ii.  47, 162-171,  see  under  Paryanka). 


T 

TAKSHAKA— A wood-cutter,  aloarpenter. 

(See  details  under  Sbhapati). 

TADAQ-A-— A tank,  a pool. 

(1)  Mina-manduka-makara-kurmmas  cha  jala-jantavah  \ 

KSrya  dhatu-mayat  ohaite  karttyi-vittanusaratah 
Matsyau  svarnamayau  kuryat  mandu  vapi  hemajau  \ 


5518 


tadAga 


Eajatau  makarau  kurmma-mith.rinam  tamra-ritikam  I! 

Etair  jala-charaih  sarddham  tadagam  api  dirghikam  I 
Sagaram  oha  sam-atsrijya  prarbhayaa  nagam  arGhchayefc  ii 
The  execution  of  the  images  of  fish,  shark,  frog  and 
tortoise  for  a tank  with  metals  like  gold,  silver,  copper,  etc., 
is  worth  notice. 

(Mahanirvana-tantra,  xiri.  167, 168,  169). 
(2)  See  Dewal  Pratasti  of  Lalla  the  Chhind  (verse  20,  Ep.  Ind, 

vol.  I.  pp.  79,  88). 

(8)  See  Khajuraho  Inscrip,  no.  iv.  (verse  38,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  i.  p.  144), 
(4)  See  6ridhara’s  Devapattana  Pratasti  (verse  10,  Ep.  Ind.  vol. 

II.  p.  440). 

(6)  Anamta-prSni-Bupriti-karibhir  bhuribhih  l 

Tadagais  sagarabhogair  yo  vibhushita-bhti-talah  II 

(Two  pillar  Inscrip,  at  Amaravati,  no.  A, 
Inscrip,  of  Keta  li,  v.  41,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  vi. 

p.  162). 

(6)  Wayside  tank  : 

Aparia  feala-malah  pathi  pathi  tadagah  I 

(Two  Bhuvanetvara  Inscrip,  no.  A,  of  Sva- 
pnetivara,  v.  30,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  vi.  p.  202). 

(7)  Khsetrefeasya  tatha  suralaya-varam  sphitam  tadagam 

tatha  bandham  Kaudika-samjfiakam  bahu-jalam  dirgham 
tatha  khanitami 

(Ranker  Inscrip.  of  JBhamideva,  v.  7,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  IX.  p.  127). 

(8)  Pratinidhim  udadhinam  samchayan  toyasrishter  akrita 

jagati-kesaryyakhya  yas  tatakam  \ 

‘^And  who  constmcted  a tank  (which  he  called)  by  vhis) 
name  Jagati-kesarin,  which  equalled  the  oceans,  and  which 
accumulated  the  downpour  of  water.*’ 

(Bkamranath  Inscrip.  of  Ganapati,  v.  9, 
Ind,  Antu  vol,  xxi.  pp.  200,  201). 


TALA 


210 


TANDITLA-MANPAPA — The  store-room,  a granary,  a detached 
building  where  stores  are  kept. 

(M.  XXXII.  64,  see  under  Mandapa). 

TADBHADBA — ^A  ground-plan  in  which  the  whole  area  is  divided 
into  196  equal  squares. 

(M.  VII.  18,  see  under  Pada-vinyasa). 

TAPASH-KANTA— -A  class  of  the  eight-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  xxyi.  41-42,  see  under  Prasida). 

TAEASfGA-Wavea,  an  ornament  or  moulding  employed  in  capitals 
terminating  by  undulating  lines. 

Bodhikoohoha-tarahgam  syat  sarvalahkara-samyutam  I 
Tad  eva  tunga-mane  tu  dva-dataihte  vibhajite  1 
Adho-bhage  tri-bhagena  tarahgakriti(m)  vinyaset  I 

(M.  XV.  166-167,  see  also  164), 

A similar  ornament  of  the  entablature : 

Devanaih  bhu-patinam  oha  ohordhve  madhye  tarahgakam  l 

(M.  XVI.  202), 

Taranga-vetra-samyuktam  kufijarakshair  alahkritam  I 
Padanam  oha  tarahgam  va  ohoktavat  samalahkritam  l 

(M.  L.  267-268), 

TALA — (see  Bhumi) — The  storey,  the  palm,  the  sole. 

(1)  Manasara : | 

Buildings  of  one,  to- twelve  storeys  are  prescribed  for  people  I 

(and  animals)  of  different  ranks  : 

Ekadi-dvi-bhumyantam  kalpa-gramasya  harmyake  bhavatil 
Ekadi-tri-bhumyantam  prabhakarasya  ohalayam  proktam  1 
Ekad'-ohatut-talantam  pattabhak-ohalayam  iti  kathitam  \ 
Tri-talady-ashta-talantam  narendrasya  ohalayam  proktam  I e 

Tri-taladi-nava-talantam  maharajasya  bhavanam  uditam  | s 

Panoha-talady-arka-talantam  chakra varti-harmyam  syat  l 
Ekadi-tri-talantam  yuva-rajasya  ohalayaih  proktam  I 
Samanta-pramukhanSm  ohaikadi-tri-tala-paryantam  syat  \ 
K8hudra-bhupa8ya(-paDaih)  sarvesham  ekadi-tri-tala-bhumi- 

paryantaw  I 


ATALPAKA 


m 

Sfchapati-sfehapakSnam  tu  gabhastika<3[ikam(-ik5i2am)  tu  yStha* 

kanSniclial 

Pvi-iati-&(-si]Q)arain5m  tv-eka-dvi-tri-tala-paryaniiam ) 
Pgraiva-jmnam  ohaiva  fealaika-dvi-tri-tala-paryantam  I 
G-ajafe'vadi-salanam  talaxa  ekam  kartavyaib  proktam  I 
Devaaam  api  sarveshaih  hary-aikady-anta  bhupatinSm  ohaiva  I 
Anyat  sarva-jatinam  nava-talam  kuryat  tad-alayam  prokfcam  I 
Mandaparii  nava-talam  kurySd  bhavanam  anya-rafigam  ySdhi- 

mandapSkaram  1 

Etat  tn  bhumi-lambam  piiranaih  sarvais  tanfcravit -proktam  \ 

(M.  XL  127-141,  144-146), 

The  sole  : 

Nalakantam  tri-matram  syat  tala-taram  yugahgulam  1 

(M.  Lvii.  34;  see  also  Lxvi.  13,  etc). 

The  palm : 

Tala-di]^hath  shad-angulyaih  feeahaih&am  madhyamahgulam  I 

CM.  Lix;  49, .etc). 

(2)  Eka-bhtimam  dTi-bhumam  va  bshudranam  bhavanam  nrinam  I 
^udranam  tri-talam  kuryad  vaifeyanam  tu  chatus-talam  il 
Kshatriyadeh  pafioha-bhumir  dvijanam  raga-bhiimikam  1 
Saptadhyam  mandalikanam  bhu-bhujani  aava-bhumikam  M 
Ekada&a-bala-geham  vidadhyach  ohakra-varbtinam  \ 
XJdayarkarka-bhagena  hina  iirdhordhva-bhumikah  II 

(l§ilpa&astra-sara-samgraha,  vili.  29-81). 

(3)  Aruroha prasadam  hima-pandnram  bahu-tala  samut- 

sedham  { 

(Ramayana,  vi.  26,  6,  etc). 

(4)  A moiilding  of  the  colunm. 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  108, 106-107,  see  under  Stambha). 
TALPAKA — “ A couch,  bed,  sofa,  an  upper  storey  a room  on  the  top 
of  a house,  a turret,  tower.  ” 


TALA-MlNA 


m 

Argalam  dakshine  bhage  Yania-bhage  tu  talpakam  fl 
Yugme  mabati  talpe  oba  daksbinasfebe  kavafcake  II 

(Kamikagama,  LV.  49,  4‘2,  see  also  39,  48). 

TAT(-P)A3^KA — ^An  ornament  for  febe  ear. 

(1)  Karne  vibbusbanam  knryan  raakaraukita-kundalam  I 
Atbava  svarna-tatankau....  \ 

(M.  L.  43-44,  see  also  294,  etc). 

(2)  See  Deopara  Inscrip,  of  Vijayasena  (verse  11,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  i. 

pp.  308,  313). 

(3)  Tadanka-darpano  nama  dvitiyo’nkab — tbe  second  act  named 

“ tbe  reflecting  ear-ring.” 

(Dbara  Pra&asti  of  Arjunavarman,  line  82,  Bp. 

ind.  vol,  VIII.  pp.  116,  100). 

TATIEA^ — A moulding  of  tbe  column. 

(M.  XV.  60,  142,  see  under  Stambba). 

Kumbbadbafe  cbordbva-dese  tu  vata-patradi-^obbitam  l 

Nimnam  tatikadini  yuktya  prag-uktavan  nayet  I 

(M.  XV.  189-190). 

Pada-tunge’sbta-bbage  tu... 1 

Bodbikam  musbiji-bandbam  oba  pbalaka-tatika-gbatam  I 

M.  XLVir.  17-18). 

Agre  oba  pbalakantam  cba  tatikadyair  vibbtisbitam  \ 

(M.L.78). 

TALA-MANA — A sculptural  measurement.  In  this  system  tbe 
length  of  tbe  face  (including  the  head)  is  stated  to  be  tbe  unit 
(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  268,  v.  19).  But  it  seems  more  logical  to 
have  tbe  span  or  tbe  distance  between  tbe  tips  of  the  fully 
stretched  thumb  and  middle  finger,  which  is  technically  called 
tala  (see  below),  as  the  unit.  It  admits  of  many  varieties  : 
tbe  ten  tala  measures  are  mentioned  in  tbe  Manasara.  But 
tbe  Bimbamana  has.  reference  to  twelve  kinds  (see  below). 
Eacbr  of  these  ten  or  twelve  kinds  is  again  sub-divided  into 
three  types,  namely,  the  uttama  or  tbe  largest,  the  madbyama 


222 


tIla-mIna 


or  the  intermediate,  and  the  adhama  or  the  smallest.  Thus*  an 
image  is  of  data-tala  measure  when  its  whole  length  is  equal 
to  ten  times  the  face  (ineluding  the  head).  In  the  largest  type 
of  the  data-tala  system,  however,  the  whole  length  is  divided 
into  124  equal  parts  which  are  proportionately  distributed 
over  the  diSerent  parts  of  the  body  ; in  the  intermediate 
type,  the  whole  length  is  divided  into  120  equal  parts,  and 
in  the  smallest  type  into  116  equal  parts.  In  the  nava- 
tala  system,  the  whole  length  would  be  nine  times  the  face, 
in  the  ashta-tala,  eight  times,  and  so  forth.  The  details  of 
the  following  til,la  measures  are  given  in  the  Manasara. 

The  largest  type  of  the  two-tala  system  in  which  the  goose, 
the  riding-animal  of  Brahma,  is  measured  (m,  lx.  6-36)  : 


1. 

Height  of  head 

4 parts. 

2-3. 

„ „ neck 

8 

4. 

Height  (length)  of  heart  (chest) 

11 

6. 

{Below  this)  height  of  thigh 

6. 

Height  of  knee 

1 

7. 

Length  of  leg .... 

If 

8. 

Height  of  foot 

1 

9. 

Breadth  of  face  ....  .... 

3 

10. 

At  the  back  6!  the  head  .... 

2 

11. 

Length  of  face 

4 

12. 

Neck  at  the  root 

1 

It  .tapers  from  bottom  to  top  and  is 
two  faces  (beaks). 

furnished  with 

13. 

Length  of  belly  (kukshi)  .... 

8 parts. 

14. 

Place  of  the  stomach  (udara-sthana)  .... 

8 

16. 

Prom  the  belly  to  the  root  of  the  tail.... 

16 

16. 

Breadth  of  wing 

6 

17. 

Length  of  wing 

8 

18. 

Height  of  wing 

2 

^l.LA.MANA 


223 


20. 

Thickness  of  wing 

1 part. 

21. 

Length  of  arm  (bahu) 

8 parts. 

22. 

Elbow 

1 part. 

23. 

Width  at  the  forepart  of  the  head 

6 parts. 

24. 

Width  at  the  root  of  the  perfectly 

round  thigh  .... 

2| 

25. 

Breadth  at  the  forepart  ... 

26. 

„ of  knee  .... 

i 

27. 

Breadth  of  leg 

1 

28. 

„ „ solo  (palm) 

2 

29. 

„ „ middle-finger  at  the  fore- 

part 

4 

30. 

Bach  of  two  fingers  on  either  side 

2 

31. 

Length  of  face 

3 

32. 

Breadth  of  face 

1 

33. 

Length  of  eye 

and  its  breadth  should  be  proportionate. 

34. 

Distance  between  the  eye-line  and  ear- 

line 

2 yavas. 

35. 

The  crest  above  the  head.... 

1 or  2 parts. 

36. 

Its  width  ending  by  the  back  of  head.... 

6 

37. 

Its  breadth  i... 

4 

And  the  rest  is  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  artist : 
^sham  yuktya  prayojayet  (35). 

In  the  seven-tala  system  the  whole  height  is 

divided  into 

equal  parts  which  are  distributed  as  follows 

1. 

Crown  of  the  head  (murdhni) 

2 parts. 

2. 

Face  ....  ....  .... 

10 

3. 

Neck  . ....  ....  . .... 

3 

4. 

(From  neck  to)  heart  ....  .... 

10 

5. 

(From  heart  to)  navel 

10 

6. 

(From  navel  to)  sex-organ 

5 

•224 


TALA-MlNA 


7. 

Buraga  (?snrahga,  the  hole)  .... 

pithamfea  (?) 

8. 

Thigh  (urn)  ....  .... 

3 parts. 

9* 

Knee  (jami)  .... 

3 

10. 

Leg  (pada)  .... 

3 

11. 

Length  of  arm.... 

20 

12. 

Elbow  ....  .... 

13. 

Eore  arm  (prakoshtha) 

16 

14. 

Palm  (including  fingers)  .... 

8 

16. 

Foot 

11 

16. 

Breadth  of  the  face 

7 

17. 

Width  of  the  neck 

6 

18. 

„ at  the  arm-joint 

6 

19. 

„ of  the  chest  between  arm-pits 

14 

20. 

„ by  heart  .... 

12 

21. 

„ „ mid-belly 

16 

22. 

„ „ loins  (kati) 

12 

23. 

„ of  the  thigh 

8 

24. 

„ „ „ knee 

6 

26. 

» » „ leg  (jangha) 

4 

26. 

„ at  the  ankle 

3 

27. 

„ of  the  sole 

4 

28. 

„ of  the  forepart  of  arm 

4 

29. 

„ of  the  fore-arm 

30 

The.  wrist  ....  .... 

1 

31. 

Width  of  palm  3|-  and  length 

.... 

4 

32. 

Length  of  finger 

1 

In  the  eight -tala  system  the  whole  lengtjh  is  divided  into  96 
equal  parts  which  are  distrihuted  as  follows  ; 

1.  Head  from  the  crown  (nshnisha)  to  the 

end  of  the  hair  on  the  forehead  ....  3 parts. 

2,  Thence  the  face  (lip  to  the  chin)  ...  10^ 

j 3.  Thence  the  neck  ....  ....  3 


l^ALA-MANA 


•225 


4.  Thence  to  heart  ....  ....  10^  parts. 

6.  „ „ na-vel  ....  ....  10| 

6.  „ the  mid-belly  (up  to  sex-organ)  10| 

7.  The  thigh  (below  sex-organ  up  to  knee)  21 

8.  Knee  ....  ....  ....  3 

9.  Leg  ....  ....  ....  21 

10.  Foot  (height)  ....  ....  ....  3 

11.  Length  of  foot ....  ....  ....  14 

12.  Breadth  of  face  ....  ....  9 

13.  Width  of  neck ....  ....  ....  6 

14.  Shoulder  (up  to  arm-joint)  ....  4|  ( 3 A 1^) 

16.  Width  at  the  root  of  arm  ....  ....  6 

16.  Length  of  arm....  ....  21 

17.  Elbow  ....  ....  ....  14 

18.  (From  elbow)  forearm  (half  of  face)  ....  5^ 

19.  Palm  (including  lingers)  (equal  to  face)  104 

The  rest ‘should  be  as  before. 


In  the  largest  type  of  the  nine-tala  system  the  whole  length  is 
divided  into  112  equal  parts  (m.  lix.  14-64)  : 


I.  Crown  (head  proper)  ....  ....  4 parts. 

^ 2.  (Thence)  fore-head  (up  to  the  eye-line)  4 

Facel24  3.  Thence  to  tip  of  nose  ....  ....  4 

V 4.  Thence  to  chin  ....  ....  4 

6.  Neck  ....  ....  ....  4 

6.  Thence  to  heart  ....  ....  12 

7.  „ „ navel  ....  ....  12 

8.  „ „ sex-organ  ....  ....  12 

9.  Thigh  (twice  the  face)  ....  ....  24 

10.  Knee  (=  neck)  ....  ....  4 

II,  Leg  (=  thigh)....  ....  24 

12.  Foot  (=  knee)....  ....  ....  4 

13.  Palm  (from  thumb  to  forefinger)  ....  16 

15 


tAla-mIna 


14.  Arm  ....  ....  ....  24  p^-rts. 

16.  Elbow  ....  ....  ....  2 

16.  Forearm  ....  ....  ....  12 

17.  Palm  (up  to  the  tip  of  middle  finger)  ....  12 

18.  Breadth  of  face  ....  ....  li 

19.  Width  of  neck-  ....  ....  8 

20.  „ round  the  arm-joint ....  ....  8 

21.  „ of  knee  ....  ....  ....  8 

22.  Shoulder  ....  ....  ....  6 

23.  Chest  between  the  arm-pits  ....  20 

24.  Width  (breadth)  at  the  mid-belly  ....  16 

26.  „ at  buttocks  ....  ....  17 

26.  of  the  loins  ....  ....  19 

27.  „ at  the  root  of  the  thigh  ....  10^ 

28.  „ „ „ „ „ „ leg  ...  7^ 

29.  „ „ „ middle  of  the  leg  ....  6 

30.  Breadth  at  „ „ „ Z » 4’ 

31.  Knee-bube  ....  ....  ...  If 

32.  Ankle  ....  ....  ....  1| 

33.  Heel-breadth  ....  ....  ....  4|- 

34.  Breadth  of  prapada  (fore  part  of  the  foot)  17(?)' 

36,  „ „ the  palm  (?  sole)  ....  6 

36.  Length  of  the  largest  toe  ....  ....  4 

37.  Breadth,,  „ „ „ ....  ....  2 

Breadth  of  nails  is  half  of  their  length. 

38.  Length  of  fore-toe  (==  thumb)  ....  4 

39.  Breadth,,  „ ....  ....  1 (?  2) 

40.  Middle  toe  ....  ....  3 ,(breadth  7 yavas). 

41.  Fourth  toe  .....  ....  2|',  (breadh  6 yavas). 

42.  Little  toe  ....  ....  2,  (breadth  6 yavas). 


Breadth  of  nails  is  half  the  breadth  of  the  fingers. 


43.  Width  at  the  middle  of  the  arm 

44.  „ „ „ elbow 


7 parts. 
7 


TALA-MAHA 


227 


46. 

Width  at  the  forearm 

4 parts. 

46. 

),  ),  „ wrist  ....  ,,.4 

3 

47. 

Breadth  at  the  root  of  the  palm 

6 

48. 

„ „ „ forepart  of  the  palm  .... 

4 

49. 

Length  of  the  palm 

6 

and  the  remainder  is  the  middle  finger  (?). 

60. 

Fore-finger  ....  .... 

H 

61. 

Ring-finger  .... 

62. 

Little  finger  .... 

3k 

68. 

Breadth  of  thumb 

1 

64. 

„ „ fore-finger  .... 

6 yavas. 

66. 

„ ,,  middle  finger  ... 

7 

66. 

„ „ ring  finger 

6 » 

67. 

f,  ,,  little  finger 

4 ,, 

Fingers  ars  made  tapering  from  the  root  towards  the  tip.  The 
fora  part  of  the  nails  is  ^ or  J more  than  their  length  and 
their  breadth  at  the  tip  is  one>  two,  or  three  yavas.  The 
thumb  is  divided  into  two  parts  (par van)  and  the  othor 
fingers  into  three  parts  (parvan).  The  line  of  wisdom  and 
such  other  lines  are  drawn  on  the  palm. 

The  eye-brow  should  extend  from  the  eye-line  to  the  hair 


(near  the  ear). 

68.  Length  of  eye.... 

....  2 parts. 

69.  Breadth  of  eye 

.... 

1 part, 

60.  Length  of  ear  .... 

.... 

4 parts. 

61.  Drum  of  ear  .... 

.... 

4 

62.  Breadth  of  ear 

.... 

2 

The  rest  should  be  as  in  the  (uttama)  da^a-tala  system: 

Kavatalottamaih  proktam  ^eshafii  oha  da&a-talavat  \ (64). 
In  the  intermediate  type  of  the  nine -tala  system  the  whole 
length  is  divided  into  108  equal  parts  : — 

1.  Head  ....  .....  3 parts. 

2.  Neok  ....  -M.  ....  3 


228 


3. 

Knee  ....  .... 

3 parts. 

4. 

Foot  ....  ... 

3 

5. 

Face 

12 

6. 

Chest 

12 

7. 

Belly  ....  ....  ... 

12 

8. 

Loins 

12 

9. 

Thigh 

24 

10. 

Leg  ....  .... 

24 

11. 

Arm 

24 

12. 

(From  arm)  forearm  (including  middle 

finger) 

18 

13. 

Largest  toe  (up  to  heel)— face 

12 

14. 

Foot 

The  rest  should  be  discreetly  made. 

15 

In  the  smallest  type  of  the  ten  tala  system  the  whole  height 

is  divided  into  116  equal  parts  (m.  lix.  67-100)  : 

1. 

Head  (from  crown  to  hair-line  in  the 

fore-head) 

4 parts. 

( 

Thence  to  the  eye-line  (i.e.,  fore-head) 

Faoel2  j S. 

Thence  to  the  tip  of  the  nose 

4 

i 4. 

Thence  to  the  chin 

CO 

6. 

Neck-joint 

1| 

6. 

Neck 

4 

7. 

Thence  to  heart 

12 

8. 

Thence  to  navel 

12 

9. 

Thence  to  sex-organ 

12 

10. 

Thigh  (from  below  sex-organ) 

26 

11. 

Knee 

4 

12. 

Leg 

25 

13, 

Foot  .... 

4 

14. 

Length  of  foot  from  heel  to  largest  toe 

16| 

TALA-MANA 


229 


15. 

Length  of  arm  below  the  line  of  hic- 

cough 

25  parts. 

16. 

„ „ elbow 

2 

17. 

„ „ forearm 

19 

18. 

„ „ palm  (up  to  the  tip  of  middle 

finger) 

12i 

19. 

Breadth  of  face 

114 

20. 

Width  „ neck 

8| 

21. 

„ „ arm  .... 

84 

22. 

„ „ knee 

84 

23. 

„ „ arm  by  root,  elbow,  wrist  6,6,1^ 

24. 

(Length,  of)  shoulder 

204 

26. 

Width  of  the  mid-belly  .... 

164 

26. 

„ „ the  buttocks 

184 

27. 

Breadth  of  the  loins 

19 

28. 

Width  at  the  root  of  thigh 

124 

29. 

Width  of  the  knee-(cap)  .... 

64 

30. 

Breadth  or  width  of  knee-tube 

4 

31. 

Breadth  of  ankle 

5 

32. 

Prapada  (tip  of  the  toes)  .... 

6 

33. 

Length  of  largest  toe 

4 

34. 

,,  „ fore-toe 

4 

86. 

„ „ other  toes  (half  a part  leas).... 

and  their  breadth  or  width  is  the 
same  (?  half  of  their  length) . 

34 

36. 

Breadth  of  elbow 

6| 

37. 

„ „ forearm 

6 

88. 

„ „ wrist 

4 

39. 

Breadth  of  palm 

6 

40. 

Length  of  palm 

7 

41. 

„ „ middle  finger  .... 

54 

42. 

„ „ fore-finger 

5 

230 


tAla.m5.na 


43. 

Length  of  ring-finger 

....  5 parts. 

44. 

„ „ little  finger 

....  44 

45. 

„ „ thumb 

....  44 

46. 

„ „ ear 

....  4J 

47. 

Height  of  ear-drum 

^ 

The  rest  not  specified  here  should  be  as  in  case  of  the 
largest  type  of  ten-tala  system. 

In  the  intermediate  type  of  the  ten  tala  system  the  whole 
height  of  the  image  (of  a female  deity)  is  divided  into  120 
equal  parts  (m.lxvi.  2-78) : 

1.  Head  (from  crown  to  hair-line  on  the 

forehead)  ....  ....  ....  4 parts. 


2. 

Forehead  (up  to  eye-line) .... 

6 

3. 

Nose  (up  to  the  tip) 

4 

4. 

Thence  to  chin 

34 

6. 

Neck-joint 

4 

6. 

Neck 

4 

7. 

From  hiccough  to  heart  .... 

13 

8. 

Thence  .to  the  limit  of  navel 

13 

9. 

Thence  to  sex-organ 

13 

10. 

Thigh  below  sex-organ 

26 

11. 

Knee 

4 

12. 

Leg 

26 

13. 

Foot 

4 

14. 

Length  of  foot  (from  heel  to  the  tip  of 

largest  toe)  .... 

16 

15. 

Length  of  arm  below  the  line  of  hic- 

cough 

26 

16. 

Elbow 

2 

17. 

Forearm 

20 

18. 

Palm  (up  to  the  tip  of  middle  finger)  .... 

13 

19. 

Middle  finger  .... 

6 

and  palm  proper  the  remainder 

7 

20. 

Thumb 

4 

TlLA-MlNA 


231 


21. 

Pore-finger 

22. 

Eing-finger 

23. 

Little  finger 

4 

24. 

Breadth  of  face  up  to  ear  .... 

12 

25. 

„ „ „ (below  this)  from  ear  to 

ear 

11 

26. 

Breadth  of  neck  (at  root,  middle,  and 

top) 

7 

27. 

Breadth  of  chest  (between  arm-pits)  .... 

16 

28. 

"Width  of  each  breast 

29. 

Height  of  breast 

30. 

Distance  between  breasts  (nippies)  .... 

1 

31. 

Width  of  the  nipple 

2 

32. 

Breadth  (below  the  breasts)  by  the  heart 

13 

33. 

Width  of  mid-belly 

11 

34. 

Breadth  (below  this)  by  the  navel  ...♦ 

13 

36. 

Breadth  (of  lower  belly)  below  navel 

15 

36. 

Width  of  buttocks 

20 

37. 

Width  of  loins 

24 

88. 

Width  at  the  root  of  each  thigh 

13 

39. 

Width  by  the  mid-thigh  .... 

12 

40. 

Width  at  the  fore-part  of  the  thigh  .... 

9 

41. 

Width  of  knee 

7 

42. 

Width  at  the  root  of  leg  .... 

6 

43. 

Width  at  the  mid-leg 

5 

44. 

Breadth  of  knee-tube 

4 

45. 

„ „ ankle 

4| 

46. 

Width  of  sole  .... 

4 

47. 

Breadth  of  sole  at  the  fore-part 

6 

48. 

Breadth  of  heel 

4 

49. 

Length  of  largest  toe 

4 

60. 

„ „ fore-toe  .... 

4 

61. 

„ „ middle-toe 

34 

62. 

„*  „ fourth  toe 

3 

232 


TALA-MINA 


63. 

Length  of  little  toe  ....  .... 

2 parts. 

64. 

Width  (breadth)  of  largest  toe 

2 

66. 

„ „ „ fore-toe  1 part  = 

8 yavas. 

66. 

„ „ middle  toe 

7 „ 

67. 

„ „ „ fourth  toe 

6 „ 

68. 

,,  „ „ little  toe 

5 „ 

59. 

Width  at  the  root  of  arm  is  3 and  width 

of  knee 

10  parts 

60. 

Width  at  mid-arm 

H 

61. 

„ „ fore  part  of  arm 

6 

62. 

„ „ elbow 

5|- 

63. 

„ „ root  of  forearm 

5 

64. 

„ „ middle  of  forearm  ;... 

44 

66. 

„ „ fore  part  of  forearm  .... 

4 

66. 

,,  „ wrist 

3 

67. 

Width  (breadth)  of  the  palm  (from 

thumb  to  little  finger).... 

6 

68. 

Width  (at  the  root)  of  the  fore-finger,... 

6 yavas. 

69. 

„ „ „ ring-finger  (same) 

6 » 

70. 

,,  „ ,,  little  finger  .... 

54  „ 

71. 

„ j)  » middle  finger.... 

7 „ 

Eye-brows  are  placed  between  fore-head  and  eyes. 

72. 

Breadth  of  eye.... 

1 part 

73. 

Length  of  eye .... 

3 parts. 

74. 

Breadth  of  nose  up  to  end  of  the  tip  .... 

2 

76. 

Width  of  nose  at  the  middle 

1 

76. 

„ „ „ at  the  root 

4 

77. 

Distance  between  the  eyes 

If 

78. 

„ „ „ eye-brows 

1 

79. 

Length  of  eye-brow 

9 

80. 

Breadth  of  eye-brow 

2 

The  interior  of  the  eye  is  divided  into  three  (equal)  parts 
(as  before),  of  which  the  black  sphere  is  one  part ; the 


TALA-MANA 


233 


rest  of  the  details  is  stated  to  he  found  in  the  list  of  the 
largest  type  of  the  ten  tala  system. 


81. 

Breadth  and  height  of  nostril  (each)  .... 

I part. 

82. 

Width  of  face  (up  to  the  corner) 

4 parts. 

83. 

Width  of  upper  lip 

5 yavas, 

84. 

Width  of  lower  lip 

6 „ 

85. 

Length  of  lip  .... 

2 parts. 

86. 

Ear  s=>  mid-eye-brow 

(?) 

87. 

Height  of  ear  .... 

4 

88. 

Length  of  the  drum  of  ear 

4 

89. 

Depth  (of  the  drum  of  ear).... 

90. 

Width  of  sex-organ 

4 

91. 

Length  of  sex-organ 

7 

92. 

Upper-breadth  of  sex-organ  (=lengbh) 

7 

The  rest  should  be  as  in  the  case  of  the  largest  type  of 
the  ten  tala  system  (78). 

In 

the  largest  type  of  the  ten  tala  system  the  whole  height 

of 

a male  person  (god)  is  divided  into  124 

equal  parts  '(m. 

Lxv.  2479) : 

1. 

Head  (from  crown  to  hair-line  on  the 

forehead)  .... 

4 parts. 

2. 

Face  (from  hair-line  on  the  forehead  to 

chin) 

13 

8. 

Neck 

4. 

Neck  to  heart  (chest) 

5. 

Heart  to  navel 

6. 

Navel  to  sex-organ 

13J 

7. 

Thigh  from  below  sex-organ 

27 

8. 

Knee 

4 

9. 

Leg 

27 

10. 

Foot 

4 

The  length  of  face  is  divided  into  three  parts,  head  to  eye- 

line, eye-line  to  lip-line,  lip-line  to  hiooough-line. 

11. 

Length  of  arm  from  (below  the  line  of) 

hiccough  „„ 

27 

2S4 


TilA-Ml-NA 


12. 

Elbow 

2 parts. 

13. 

Forearm  (extending  to  wrist-joint)  .... 

21 

14 

Length  of  palm  (up  to  the  tip  of  middle 

finger) 

13i 

a.  Palm  proper 

7 

h.  Middle  finger 

6^ 

la. 

Length  of  foot.... 

17 

16. 

Largest  toe  (from  heel)  .... 

Its  breadth 

% 

Its  nail 

Breadth  of  nail 

1 

The  nail  is  made  circular  and  its  fore-edge 
one  part  in  extent. 

is  fleshy  and 

17. 

Pore-toe 

4 parts  less 
one  yava. 

Its  breadth 

1 part  and  1 
yava 

18. 

Middle  toe 

3f  parts 

Its  breadth  ....  .... 

li 

19. 

Fourth  toe 

S parts  plus 
one  yava. 

Its  breadth  ....  ... 

1 part  minus 
one  yava. 

20. 

Little  toe 

21 

Its  breadth 

1 plus  1 yava. 

Their  nails  are  half  of  their  respective  breadths. 

21. 

The  middle  line  from  anhle  to  the  tip  of 

sole 

8 parts  and 

6 yavas. 

22. 

From  this  line  to  the  root  of  heel 

4 parts. 

Breadth  of  heel 

6 parts  and  1 
yava. 

23. 

From  side  to  heel 

31  parts. 

24. 

Boot  of  heel 

6 

TXliA.MlNA 


236 


26, 

Width  of  mid-sole  (below  ankle) 

6 parts  and  i 
yavas. 

26. 

Breadth  of  sole  (at  the  fore-part) 

6 parts. 

27, 

Its  thickness  .... 

3 

28. 

Height  of  the  roid-foot 

The  toes  have  two  parts  (parvan) 

4|  parts. 

29. 

Breadth  of  ankle  .... 

30. 

Breadth  of  the  tube  (above) 

4i 

31, 

Breadth  at  the  middle  of  leg 

6^ 

32. 

Width  at  the  root  of  leg  .... 

8 

33. 

Width  of  knee,.,.  .... 

9 

34, 

„ „ mid-thigh 

12 

36. 

Width  at  the  root  of  thigh 

134 

36. 

Width  of  loins 

20 

37, 

„ „ buttocks  (above) 

184  (?) 

38. 

„ „ mid*belly 

184 

39, 

„ at  the  heart 

16 

40. 

„ by  the  chest 

184 

41. 

Distance  between  the  arm-pits 

21 

42. 

Breadth  above  this 

22 

43, 

Breadth  betweenlthe  arms.,..  .... 

244 

44. 

Breadth  of  neck 

9 

46, 

Breadth  of  face  in  its  fore.-part  ,... 

12 

46. 

Breadth  of  head  by  the  hair-line  on  the 

forehead  ....  ....  .... 

10 

From  the  hair-line  on  the  forehead  to  the  eye-lme  there  are 

two  (equal)  parts  one  of  which  is  the  forehead,  and  the 
remainder  is  the  eye-part. 

Between  the  forehead  and  the  eyes,  the  places  for  eye- 
brows are  left. 

47. 

Length  of  eye -brow  ....  .... 

6 

48. 

Breadth  „ .... 

2| 

The  breadth  at  the  middle  is  half  of  this 
taper  from  root  to  the  other  end, 

1 and  the  brows 

236 

TALA  .MAN A 

49. 

Distance  between  two  brows 

1 part  and  6 yavas. 

50. 

Length  of  eye 

8 parts. 

51. 

Breadth  of  eye 

1 part. 

52. 

Distance  between  two  eyes 

2 parts. 

The  interior  of  the  eye  is  diyided  into 

three  parts  of  which 

the  black  sphere  is  one  part  and  the  remainder  is  the  white 

sphere.  The  shiny  sphere  within 

the  blaok  sphere  is  one 

part.  The  sight  (retina)  proper  is  situated  within  the  shiny 

sphere.  The  upper  and  lower  coverings  (lids)  of  the  interior 

of  the  eye  are  each  two  parts. 

The  eyes  are  shaped  like  the  fish  and  the  brows  like  a bow. 

53. 

Length  of  ear  .... 

4 parts, 

54. 

Drum  of  ear  .... 

....  4| 

55. 

Forepart  of  ear  (= mid-brow) 

....  u 

56. 

Ear-hole,  its  length  and  breadth 

2 and  1 

57. 

Distance  between  the  drums 

2 

58. 

Depth  (befitting  the  ear)  .... 

1 

59. 

Breadth  of  ear.... 

....  2| 

The  rest  is  left  to  the  choice  of  the  skilful. 

60. 

Distance  from  eye  to  ear  .... 

7 

61. 

Width  of  nose 

....  24 

62. 

Tip  of  nose 

1 

63. 

Breadth  of  nostril 

....  4 

64. 

Length  of  nostril 

....  6 yavas. 

65. 

Hole  of  nostril 

4 part. 

66. 

Its  breadth 

6 yavas. 

67. 

Height  of  nose-tip  (pnshkara  or 

four- 

faced  part)  .... 

1 part. 

68. 

Breadth  of  nose-tip 

2 parts. 

69. 

Breadth  of  the  middle  of  nose 

3 

70. 

„ at  the  root,  of  nose 

....  1| 

71. 

Height  of  nose  .... 

....  U- 

Height  of  nose  (from  bottom  to  tip)  ....  2 

73. 

Tip  (from  below  bottom)  .... 

4 yavas. 

TALA-MANA 


237 


74. 

Drip  ....  ....  .... 

1 yava. 

75. 

Breadth 

3 yavas. 

76. 

Oiroumfereiice  (above  this) 

1 yava. 

77. 

Breadth  of  upper  lip  below  this 

6 yavas. 

78. 

Lower  lip 

1 part. 

79. 

Width  of  upper  lip 

4 parts. 

80. 

Length  of  crescent-shaped  lower  lip  .... 

81. 

Throe-faced  part  (trivaktra),  length 

and  breadth  each 

2 : 

82. 

Clirciimference  (above) 

2 ■ 

Teeth  numbering  3‘2  are  in  both  lower  and  upper  jaws. 

83. 

Chiu  below  the  lower  lip  .... 

1 

84. 

Length  of  jaw 

34 

85. 

From  this  (jaw)  to  ear-joint 

10 

86. 

Height  of  drip  between  the  jaws 

1 

87. 

Breadth  of  semi-circular  jaw 

If 

88. 

G-oji  (nose-bottom)  from  jaw 

1 part  and  2 
yavas. 

89. 

Mid-neck  (from  jaw  to  its  root) 

2 parts. 

90. 

Its  projection  .... 

1 

91. 

The  eye  on  the  fore-head  (third  eye)  .... 

1 or  I of  other  eyes. 

There  should  be  98  eye-lashes  ; the  hairs  on  the  neck 
and  face  should  be  discreetly  made. 

92. 

Width  at  mid-arm 

8 parts  and  2 
yavas. 

93. 

Width  of  elbow  .... 

7 parts. 

94. 

Width  at  mid-forearm 

5 parts  and  1 
yava. 

95. 

Width  of  wrist 

3|-  parts. 

96. 

Breadth  at  the  root  of  palm 

7 

97. 

Breadth  of  mid-palm 

. Qh 

98. 

Breadth  of  fore-palm 

. 5 parts  and  4 

yava. 

99. 

Back  of  palm  up  to  wrist  .... 

{>4  parts. 

‘238 


^daal^mIna 


Thence  the  length  of  the  fingers  should  be  proportionate 
as  stated  before* 


100 

Length  of  ring-finger  and  of  middle  finger  each  parts. 

101. 

„ „ fore-finger 

. & 

102. 

„ „ thumb 

4 

103. 

„ „ little  finger 

4 

104. 

Width  at  the  root  of  thumb  

li  parts. 

m 

„ „ „ „ „ fore-finger 

1 

106. 

,,  „ „ ,,  ring-finger 

1 

107. 

„ ,,  , „ „ „ middle  finger  .... 

I 

The  width  of  (tapering)  fingers  at  their  tips  is  | or  one- 
fourth  less  than  at  the  root. 

The  width  of  the  nails  isf  of  the  breadth  of  the  respec- 
tive finger-tips,  and  the  length  of  the  nails  is  i greater  than 
their  width,  and  the  fore-parts  of  the  nails  measure  two 
yavas. 

The  four  fingers  (beginning  with  the  fore-finger)  are  each 
divided  into  three  parts  and  the  thumb  into  two  parts. 


108. 

The  portion  between  the  roots  of  fore-finger 

and  thumb  .... 

3 parts. 

109. 

Its  thickness  .... 

2 

110. 

Thence  to  wrist 

111. 

Thickness  of  the  portion -below  the 

thumb 

% 

112. 

Its  width 

3 

113. 

Breadth  of  heel 

4 

114. 

Its  thickness  .... 

3 

116. 

Its  fore-part 

1 part  and  ' 

yavas. 

116. 

Interior  of  palm 

2 parts. 

117. 

Tts  width 

4 yavas. 

The  palm  is  lined  with  the  five  marks  like  of 

lotus,  trident 

conch, disc,  etc.  And  the  rest  regarding  the  hand  should  be 
discreetly  made  by  the  wise  artist. 


TALA-MANA 


239 


Measurement  by  the  back-side  : • 


118. 

Width  at  the  back  of  head  .... 

9 parts 

119. 

Thence  to  the  end  of  ear  .... 

13| 

120. 

Thence  to  the  end  of  nose.... 

iH 

121. 

Shoulder  (above  the  line  of  hiccough) 

from  the  neck-joint 

4 

122. 

From  neck-joint  to  hump 

6 

123. 

Thence  to  the  line  of  buttocks 

27 

124 

Thence  to  anus 

m 

125. 

Breadth  to  the  left  of  it  ....  .... 

21 

126. 

Width  of  the  back  of  loins 

17 

127. 

Width  of  the  back  or  middle-body 

(madhya-kaya)  above  this 

17 

128. 

Distance  between  the  breadths  above 

this 

21 

129. 

Distance  between  the  arm-pits 

27 

130. 

Drip  of  the  back-bone 

1 

131. 

Breadth  of  the  loins-joint  connected 

with  the  backbone 

Thence  should  be  measured  the  belly. 

2 

132. 

Width  (breadth)  of  ribs-plank 

12 

133. 

Distance  between  ribs-planks 

4 

134. 

Height  from  ribs-plank  to  shoulder  .... 

136. 

The  portion  between  the  breast  and 

backbone  (brihati)  ....  .... 

7 

136. 

Its  length  (up  to  arm-pit) .... 

cn 

137. 

Brihati  up  to  breast-limit 

16^ 

138. 

Breadth  of  loins-line 

13 

139. 

Projection,  of  the  root  of  thigh 

5 

140. 

Width  of  perfectly  round  or  spheri- 

cal balls 

9 

141. 

Width  at  the  back  of  perfectly  round 

breast 

2 

142. 

Drip  or  depth  of  hiccough 

1 yava. 

143. 

„ » » heart 

1 

240 


a?ALA-MANA 


144. 

Distance  between  the  limit  of  breasts.... 

134  parts. 

146. 

,,  „ hicGOug-h  and  arm-pit 

13| 

146. 

Depth  of  navel.... 

2 ya%''as. 

The  navel-pit  is  made  circular. 

147. 

Length  of  lower  belly  from  navel  to 

loins 

6 parts. 

148. 

Lower  belly  from  navel  to  where  cloth 

is  attached  to  body 

4 

149. 

Height  from  loins  to  the  root  of  sex- 

organ  ....  .... 

n 

160. 

Breadth  of  sex-organ  at  the  back 

4 

161. 

Thence  (?loins)  the  length  of  sex-organ 

12 

162. 

Length  of  testicle 

153. 

Breadth  of  testicle  ....  ■ 

2| 

154. 

Breadth  of  sex-organ  .... 

1 

The  rest  is  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  artist : 
Sesham  yuktito  nyaset  (M.  LXV.  179). 


This  largest  type  of  the  ten  tala  measure  is  used  in 
measuring  the  images  of  Brahma,  Yishnii,  Kudra  and 
such  other  gods  (M.  LI.  29;  xlv.  184-186)  and  of  the 
statues  of  the  devotees  of  the  Sayujya  class  (M.  Lix.  12). 

These  rules  are  for  the  general  guidance,  there  is  no  restric- 
tion in  altering  them  for  {esthetic  reasons  : 

Tad  evadhika-hinam  va  tohhartham  ohaika-matrakam  I 
Ukta-manahgakaih  sarvaih  tatra  dosho  na  vidyate  I 
Tad-urdhve’dhika-hinam  ohet  sarva-dosha-samudbhavam  I 
Tasmat  pariharech  chhilpi  pratimanaiii  tu  sarvada  \ 

(M.  Lxv.  180-183). 

(2)  See  Aiiisumadbheda  of  Kasyapa  (Ms.  Egg.  3148, 
3012 ; fol.  261,  different  kinds  of  the  tala  measures). 

(3)  Talah  smrito  madhyamaya  gokarnas  chapy-anainaya  i 

The  distance  between  the  tips  of  the  fully  stretched 
thumb  and  middle  finger  is  called  Tilla. 

(Brahnifinda-Puraiia,  part  1,  2Lid  anu- 
shaihga-pada,  chap.  7,  v.  97). 


TALA-MANA 


24i 

(4)  Tala  is  the  distance  between  the  tips  of  the  fully 

stretched  thnmb  and  middle  finger, 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxx.  22,  see  under  Angnla). 

(5)  Bimba-mana  (British  Museum,  Ms.  no.  668-592) : 

Illustration  in  minute  detail  of  the  largest  type  of  the  ten  tala 

measure  (v.  71-72).  ' 

Description  of  the  plumb-lines  and  the  horizontal  measurement 
of  the  idol  (v.  73-91). 

The  measurement  of  the  idol  when  it  is  made  in  the 
sitting  posture,  such  as  Yogasana  (v.  92-122)  and  the, 
recumbent  posture  (y.  123-138). 

In  an  appendix  are  given  the  rules  regarding  the  objects 
to  be  measured  in  twelve  tala-measures  : 

One  (eka)  tala  is  used  for  measuring  the  vandhuka  (?). 

Two  (dvi)  tala  „ „ „ „ birds. 

Three  (tri)  tala  „ „ „ ,,  kinnaras  (mythical 

beings  with  human  body  and  horse’s  head). 

Four  (chaturthaka)  tala  is  used  in  measuring  bhutas  (goblins). 

Five  (pancha)  tala  „ „ gape&a  (a  mythi- 

cal deity  with  human  body  and  elephant’s  head). 

Six  (shat)  tala  is  used  for  measuring  tiger. 

Seven  (sapta)  tala  „ „ „ yakshas  (demi-gods). 

Bight  (ashta)  tala  „ „ „ man  (male  and  female). 

Nine  (nava)  tala  „ „ „ dSnavas  (demons). 

Ten  (dafea)  tMa  ,,  „ ,,  superhuman  beings 

and  Buddha. 

Eleven  (ekada&a)  tala  is  used  for  measuring  gods. 

T-v?elve  (dvadafea)  tala  is  used  for  measuring  Eakshasas 

(fiends). 

Of.  Brahmadi-lokefevara-deva-devam  surasuca-danava-rakshasam 
oha  yaksham  oha  naga-garudam  cha  nS-kinuaram  bhutam 
cha  kumbhanda-nara-avarupam  vyaghram  chatush-pada- 
vihangamadi-sarvam  tu  dirghayata-vandhukadi- 

tala  pramanam  bhuvana-trayoktam  I 
16 


242 


TALA-MANA 


This  is  followed  by  the  details  of  the  twelve  tala  measures 
quoted  above. 

The  next  appendix  gives  the  dhyanas  (features)  of  the 
eight  deities  (ashta-natha). 

(6)  Suprabhedagama  (xxxiv.  30-34]^ : 

Bvaradi-chatur-murttim  da&a-talena  karayet  I!  30 
^aktinam  anya-devanam  nava-talam  prakirttitam  J 
Divyam  arsha-manushyapam  ashta-talena  karayet  II  31 
Eakshasam  asuranam  cha  sapta-talena  ihoehyate  \ 
Shat-talenaiva  gandharvan  panoha-talena  vighnakam  II  32 
Vamanat(-nam)  pancha-talais  tu  ohatus-talais  tu  bhutakan  \ 
Tritalam  kinnaranam  tu  matsyanam  tu  dvi-talakam  11  33 
Eka-talas  tu  kusmandat  (?)  pi&aoha  vimfead-ahgulah  | 
Sthula-sukshma-prabdedams  tu  tala-bhedam  ihoehyate  II  34 
Measures-  of  the  ten  talas  of  three  types  each  (Ibid.  xxx. 

31-40)  : 

Pratimayas  tad-utsedham  tala-dandena  bhajayet  II  31 
Chatur-vim^aoh  ohhatarh  chaiva  uttamam  da§a-talakam  1 
Vim&ach  chhatam  cha  madhyam  tu  kanyasam  shoda§a- 

dhikam  II  32 

Dva-da&adhikam  evam  yan  nava-talottamam  bhavet  [ 

Ashtau  featam  ohatuh  featam  madhyam  am  kanyasam  tatha  II  33 
^atam  shan-navati&  chaiva  navaty  -uttara-kara-dvayam  i 
Ashta-talam  idam  proktam  tri-vidham  purvah-paddhatih  II  34 
Ety-evam  bhaga-hinam  syad  eka-tMam  tarn  eva  hi  \ 
Mesurement  of  the  face  : 

Trayo-da&ardham  mukham  jyeshtham  trayo-da^am  tu 

madhyamam  II  36 

Tad-dva-da§ardham  adhamam  uttamat(-m)  da&a-talake  | 
Nava-talottame  chaiva  mukham  vai  dva-da'sahgiilam  II  36 
Ardhardhahgula-hinena  madhyamadhamam  uohyate  II 

The  statues  measured  tin  these  tala  measures  (cf.  above 
XXXIV.  30-34)  ; 

Tn-vidha  dasa-talena  tri-murttinahi  tu  kirttita  II  37 


TALA-MANA 


243 


Tri-vidham  nava-talena  devanam  yoshitam  api  I 
Ash^a-talena  marfeyanam  sapta-talena  rakshasam  ii  38 
Shafe-talena  tu  gandharvan  panoha-fcalo  ganadhipah  I 
Vamanasya  tafehaiva  syaoh.  chatus-talas  tu  bliutakah  )l  39 
Tri-fcalam  kinnaranam  tu  matsyanam  tu  dvi-talakam  I 
Auujanam  tatHaikam  ayat  pi&aoliauam  tu  vimsatili  11  40 

(7)  Matsya-Puraua  (ohap.  253,  v.  19) : 

Svakiyanguli-mauena  mukham  syad  dva-dasangnlam  I 

(8)  Brihat-samhita  (lvih.  4)  : 

Svair  angula-pramanair  : dva-da^a-viatirnamayatam  cha 

mukham  \ 

Naguajita  tu  chatur-da&a-dairghyena  dravidam  kathitam  II 
According  to  ons’a  own  ahgula  (finger-breadth)  the  face  of  his 
own  statue  is  twelve  angulas  long  and  broad.  But  according 
to  (the  arcliitect)  Nagnajit  it  should  be  fourteen  angulas  in 
the  Dravida  style. 

The  commentary  quotes  Nagnajit  in  full : 

Vistirnam  dvada^a-mukham  dairghyena  cha  ohatur-da&a  1 
Angulani  tatha  karyam  tan-manaih  dravidarii  smritam  II 
The  face  shall  be  12  angulas  broad  and  14  angulas  long ; such 
a measure  is  known  as  Dravida  (i.e.  this  is  the  DrSviiJa 
style  of  measurement). 

(Brihat-samhita,  Lviii.  4,  J.  B.  A.  S.,  N.  S., 
vol.  VI.  p.  823,  note  3). 

(9)  See  “ The  Elements  of  Hindu  Iconography  ” by  T.  A.  Gropi- 

natha  Eao,  vol.  i.  Appendix  B. 

(10)  See  “ Some  Hindu  Silpa  Shastras  in  their  relation  to  South 
Indian  Sculpture  ” by  Mr.  W.  S.  Hadaway  (Ostasiatische 

Zeitsohrift,  April- June, '1914,  vol.  ii.  no.  I). 

(11)  “ In  appendix  B,  the  author  (G-opinatha  Bao)  gives  a detailed 

description  of  the  uttama-dafeatala  measure  to  be  used  in 
the  making  of  images,  and  shows  that  the  formal,  apparently 
mechanical,,  rules  for  construction  followed  by  Indian  artists 
work  out  in  practice  as  the  adequate  expression  of  assthetic 


TiTHI 


m 

principles.  The  same  subject  has  been  treated  on  broader 
lines"  . . . . . .by  Mr.  W.  S.  Hadaway  (gee  above), 

who  is  himself  a worl^er  in  metal,  with  practical  knowledge 
of  the  application  of  the  rules.  (The  war,  unfortunately,  has 
prevented  the  author  from  continuing  his  valuable  study, 
as  he  had  hoped  to  do).’* 

“ The  Hindu  image  maker  or  sculptor,”  Mr.  Hadaway  observes, 
“ does  not  work  from  life,  as  is  the  usual  practice  among 
Europeans,  but  he  has,  in  place  of  the  living  model,  a most 
elaborate  and  beautiful  system  of  proportions,  whidh  he 
uses  constantly,  combining  these  with  those  observation  and 
study  of  natural  detail.  It  is,  in  fact,  a series  of  anatomical 
rules  and  formulae,  of  infinitely  more  practical  use  than 
any  European  system  which  I know  of,  for  the  Indian 
one  treats  of  the  actual  proportion  and  of  the  surface  form, 
rather  than  the  more  ‘scientific  ’ attachments  of  muscles 
and  the  articulation  of  bones.” 

“ There  is  in  the  Hindu  system,  nothing  complicated  or 
difficult  to  understand  or  remember,  but  like  every  other 
canon  of  artistic  proportion,  these  methods  are  no  more 
capable  of  producing  works  of  art  in  unskilled  hands  than 

are  any  other  aids  or  methods These  tastras 

are  the  common  property  of  Hindu  artisans,  whether  of 
northern  or  southern  India.”  Mr.  V.  A.  Smith. 

(Architecture  and  Sculpture  in  Mysore, 
Ind,  Ant.  vol,  xliv.  pp.  90-91). 

TITHI — One  of  the  six  varga-formulas  (see  details  under  Shad-varga). 

TILAEA — A mark  made  on  the  forehead  and  between  the  eye  brows 
either  as  an  ornament  or  as  a sectarian  distinction  of  an  image. 

(M.  jii.  160,  LI.  41). 

Cf.  Tilaka-kshudra-nasi-yuktam  toranaia  oha  samanvitam  1 

(Kamikagania,  L.  93). 


TULl 


245 


TILAMAKA — A channel,  a water-course,  a pipe. 

(1)  Viditam  astu  bhavatam  , . . yushmadiya-gramanam  iipa- 

karaya  yo’sau  tilamaka  anito’bhtife  pratisamskarabhavad 
Yinashtam  udvikshya  yushmad-gramanam 

eyopakaraya  pratisamskritah  \ 

“ Be  it  known  to  you  that,  seeing  the  water~c<mrs3,  which  the 
illustrious  lord  and  great  king  Am'suYarman  led  to  your 
villages  for  your  benefit,  destroyed  through  want  of  repairs, 
(we  being  addressed  by  the  feudal  chief  Chandra varman, 
have  presented  it  to  him ; that  he,  with  our  permission), 
has  repaired  it  for  the  benefit  of  your  villages.” 

“ The  word  ' tilamaka  ’ is  not  found  in  any  dictionary.  But 
it  seems  certain,  from  the  context,  that  it  must  be  some 
kind  of  water-course.  Probably  it  denotes  a channel  which 
leads  the  water  from  the  hill-side  over  the  fields  which  rise 
in  terraces  one  above  the  other.”  Pandit  Bhagvanlal  Indraji 
and  Dr.  Biihler. 

(Inscriptions  from  Nepal,  no.  9,  Jishnugupta’s 
Insorip.  line  6 f.  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  p.  172, 

note  30). 

(2)  Devena  yathayam  tilamako  bhavatam  anye3h(en)am  ohopaka- 

raya  \ (Ibid.  no.  10,  line  14,  p.  178). 

(3)  Tilamakat  cha  saptadha  vibhajya  paribhoktavya]^  I 

“ The  water-course  is  to  be  used  by  dividing  it  into  seven 
parts.”  (Ibid.  no.  14,  line  10,  p.  177). 

TULA — (see  under  Stambha)— A balance,  a moulding  of  the  column, 

a month,  a beam, 

(1)  Stambha-samarh  bahulyam  bhara-tulanam  upary-upary- 
asam  \ 

Bhavati  tulopatulanam  unam  padena  padena  11 

(Brihat-sarhhita,  Liii.  30;  see  Kern’s  transl. 

J,  B,  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol,  VI,  p.  285). 


246 


TULA-I)ANBA 


A moulding  of  fche  entablature  : 

(2)  Maha-bhara-tula  karyS  balikordhve  vi&esbatab  \ 

Tula-vistara-tarooblia  jayanti  syat  tulopari  II 
Tula-balikayor  madlr^e  dti-dandam  athava  punab  il 

(I^amik^ama,  liv.  13, 16). 

(3)  A member  of  a column  (Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  108,  106-107, 

see  under  Stambha). 

(4)  Tbe  name  of  a montH  (M.  vi  32);  the  beam  of  a balance  (M.  Xii, 

163),  a balance  (M.  L.  48, 172-196). 

TUIiA-jDANPA — The  horizontal  rod  of  a balance,  the  beam. 

Tuladandam  jayanti  cha  phalaka-paryaya-vachakSh  I 

(M.  XVI.  48,  etc). 

TULiL-BH ABA—An  article  of  furniture  used  as  a hanging  balance. 
Bhupanarii  oha  tula-bhara-tula-lakshanam  uohyate  I 

(M.l.48). 

In  connection  with  the  pavilion: 

Evam  tu  nripa-harmye  tu  tula-bharam  tu  yogyakam  1 

(M.  XXXIV.  287). 

TAILA-MAl^JUSHIKA— An  oil-pot,  used  as  an  article  of  furniture. 

(M.  L.  144,  see  under  Bhushana). 

T OB  AN  A— 'An  arch,  a mechanical  arrangement  of  blocks  of  any 
hard  material  disposed  in  the  line  of  some  curve  and  support- 
ing one  another  by  their  mutual  pressure. 

In  modern  architectural  treatises  arches  are  considered  in 
three  aspects,  namely,  (i)  form,  (ii)  the  mode  in  which  their 
parts  are  constructed,  and  (iii)  the  thrust  they  exert. 

In  respect  of  their  form  arches  are  either  straight,  triangular, 
seiiii-circular  or  circular.  The  Manasara  adds  another  form 
called  bow-shape  which  is  apparently  a little  wider  than  the 
semi-circle.  “The  investigation  of  the  equilibrium  of  arches” 
as  truly  said  by  Mr.  Gwilt  (Enoycl,  Article  1363),  “ by  the 
laws  of  statics  does  not  appear  to  have  at  all  entered  into  the 


tora;na 


247 


thoughts  of  the  ancient  architects.  Experience,  imitation 
and  a sort  of  mechanical  intuition  seem  to  have  been  their 
guides.  They  appear  to  have  preferred  positive  solidity  to 
nice  balance  and  the  examples  they  have  left  are  rather  the 
result  of  art  of  science.  Titruvius,  who  speaks  of  all 
the  ingredients  necessary  to  form  a perfect  architect  (see 
under  Sthapati),  does  not  allude  to  the  assistance  which  may 
be  afforded  in  the  construction  of  edifices  by  a knowledge  of 
the  resolution  of  forces  nor  of  the  aid  .that  may  be  derived  from 
the  study  of  such  a science  as  descriptive  geometry,  though 
of  the  latter  it  seems  scarcely  possible  the  ancients  could 
have  been  ignorant,  seeing  how  much  it  must  have  been 
(practically,  at  least)  employed  in  the  construction  of  such 
vast  buildings  as  the  Coliseum,  and  other  similarly  curved 
structures,  as  respects  their  plan.” 

(2)  “Whoever  invented  the  true  or  radiating  arch,  the  Eomana 

were  the  first  who  applied  it  as  a regular  and  essential 
architectural  feature,  and  who  at  the  same  time  introduced 
its  complements,  the  radiating  dome,  into  architectural 
construction  at  what  period  it  is  not  now  known.” 

(Ferguson,  Hist,  of  Ind.  and  East.  Architecture  p.  212). 

(3)  Manasara  (chap.  XLVI,  named  Torana,  1-77)  : 

The  torana  or  arch  is  an  ornament  (bhushana)  for  all  kinds  of 
thrones  (line  1),  as  well  as  for  temples  and  royal  palaces  (30). 

These  arches  admit  of  various  forms.  They  may  be  circular, 
semi-oiroular,  triangular  (^hexagonal,  tri-yugma),  bow -shaped 
or  of  any  other  desirable  forms  (31-32,  33-36).  The 
directions  for  making  these  arches  as  well  as  the  measure- 
ments of  their  different  parts  are  given  in  detail  (3-29, 
46-76).  With  regard  to  ornaments  and  decorations,  arches 
are  divided  into  four  kinds,  technically  called  Patra- 
torapa'.fleaf-arch),  Pushpa-torana  (flower-arch),  Eatna-torana 
jewelled  arch),  and  0hrita4orana  (ornamental-arch)  (37-38), 


248 


TORANA 


All  these  arches  are  both  structurally  and  orna- 
mentally decorated  with  the  carvings  of  gods,  sages, 
demigods,  goblins,  crocodiles,  sharks,  fish,  leographs,  serpents, 
lions,  flowers,  leaves,  creepers,  etc.,  and  are  beautifully  set 
with  jewels : 

Barvesham  torana-madhye  chordhve  tumburu-naradam  I 
Tad-prade^e  dvi-par&ve  tu  makaradi-vibhushitam  \ 
Toranasyagra-mule  tu  graha-patrai&  cha  bhushitam  \ 
Toranadyam  tu  patradi-bhuta-vyala-samanvitam  \ 

Padanaih  cha  dvi-par&ve  tu  vyala-torana-dharinam  I 

(M.  XLYl.  46-49). 

Eatnakaranganair  yuktaih  kuk8hi(r)  avrita-lambitam  \ 
Toranasyopari-dele  tu  bhujanga-pada-dvayor  api  f 
G-rShantam  sarva-ratnaife  cha  puritam  fereni-samyubam  \ 

(M.  XLVI,  68-60). 

But  these  arches  may  as  well  be  quite  plain,  that  is,  without 
any  such  carvings  (ohitra-hina)  (M.  XLVi.  68,  70). 

In  connection  with  a detached  pavilion  (mandapa) : 
Ohatur-dikshu  ohatur-dvaraih  chatus-torana-sarnyutam 

(M.  Lxx.  21,  see  also  xxxiy.  217). 
In  connection  with  the  pedestal  of  an  image  : 

Padma-pitharii  maha-pithaih  tri-murtinarii  cha  yojayet  I 
Prapa  cha  -toranam  vapi  kalpa-vriksham  cha  samyutam  i 

(M.  LI.  86-87;, 

In  connection  with  the  coronation-hall : 

Pa^chat  simhadyait  cha  kalpa-vriksharh  cha  toranam  I 

(M.  XLix.  186). 

In  connection  with  the  oar  or  chariot : 
^ikhi-tikhanclaka-ohamara-toranam  I 

(M.  XLiii.  166). 

In  connection  with  the  two-storeyed  buildings  : 

Toranair  ni^a-bhadradi(-dyaih)  mule  chordhve  cha  bhushitam  I 

(M.  XX.  64). 


TOEANA 


249 


In  conneotioa  with 'biiiWinga  ia  general  (vimana)  ; 

^ala  cha  nasika-hhadre  kuta-nidais  tu  toranaih  1 

(M*.  xviii.  201,  etc). 

In  connection  with  the  dome  and  the  pillar  : 

Athava  toranaih  kritva  stambhasyopari  vajanam  I 
Tad-urdhye  toranasyante  makara-patra-samyutam  1 
Tad-urdhve  toranantam  syad  eka-dandam  tu  tach-ohhiram  I 
Makari-vaktra-saihyaktam. ...... .(M.  xiv.  130, 133-135). 

(4)  Tilaka-kshudra-nasi-yukta-toranais  cha  samanvitam  i| 

(Kamikagama,  L,  93,  etc). 
See  ibid.  nv.  69-63,  65-70,  and  compare  : 

Toranam  tri-Yidham  patra-toranam  makaranvitam  I 
Chitra-toranam  ity-esham  manclanam  ohadhunoohyate  tl 
Deva-dvija-narendranam  toranam  makarakhyakam  I 
Toranam  ohitra-sajham  tu  vaityanam  pravidhiyate  I 
Padma(patra)khya-toranam  tudre  sarvam  sarvatra  ya  matam  II 
(Kamikagama,  LY.  64,  93), 

(6)  ........Torapam  yakshyate’dhuna  I 

Prishthe  tu  par'svayct  chaiva  kartavyas  toranas  tatha  II 
Dvarasyotsedha-manam  yat  toransyochohhrayam  bhayet ) 
Tad-ardham  vistaram  proktam  uohohhraye  shad-vibhajite  II 
Makaram  tu  dv(i)yamtena  &esham  padam  iti  smritam  I 
Mula-padasya  chardhena  tasya  pada-pramanakam  II 
Makaram&arii  tad-urdhye  tu  madhye  yrittam  sa-nimnakam  I 
Vritter  urdhve  uham  kritva  ohatur-ayatam  eya  tu  II 
Pramapaih  torapasyoktam  prastaraih  cha  tatah  sripu  il 

(Suprabhed^ama,  XXXI.  68-72). 

(6)  Mahabharata  (Cock) : 

XIV,  26,  23;  Stambhan  kanaka-ohitrams  cha  torapani 

vritanti  cha  I 

Cf.  also : 

XIY.  86,  29  ; Torapani  tata-kumbha-mayani  \ 

XV.  6, 16  ; Puraih....dndha-prakara-toranam  \ 


260 


TOBA^A 

XII.  44,  8 : Hema-toraELa-bhuahitam- gyiham  I 
VIII.  33, 19  : Balra-prakara-tora^am  \ 

V.  191,  21 : Sthuna-bhayanam.,.uohoha-prakara-torapiam  I 
S'ee  also  v.  143,  23 ; in.  284,  2 ; m.  160,  39 ; in.  16,  6 ; ii.  9, 
1 ; II.  3, 26 ; i.  186, 17  ; 1. 109,  8,  etc. 

7)  BamSyana  (Cock) : 

II.  91,  32  : Harmya-prasada^-saihyuktaxt'orapani  I 
Of.  also : 

I.  6, 10  : Kapata-torana-vatim,...pTirim  \ 

II.  15,  32  : Eama-ve&ma mani-Yidruma-toranam  \ 

III.  45,  11 : Hema-kakshya  puri  ramya  vaidurya-maya-torapa 
V.  3,  33  : Nagarim  lankam  aatfca-prakara-toranam  i 

Y.  4,  24 : Griham,...ma]ia-bataka-toranam  \ 

See  also  IV.  33,  17  ; v.  2, 18,  61 ; V.  6, 4 ; v.  18,  8 ; v.  27,  31 ; 
V.  37,  39 ; v.  41,  21 ; v.  42,  27  j v.  39,  42 ; v.  44,  6 ; v.  42,  6 j 

V.  46,  20,  41 ; v.  47,  7,  38  ; V.  63,  39 ; v.  65,  32  ; VI.  26,  24,  30  j 

VI.  26,  12  ; VI.  41,  31,  56  ; VI.  42,  l6 ; vi.  76,  21 ; VII.  3,  27  ; 

VII.  6,  26;  VII.  13,  6;  vii.  14,  24,27,28,29;  vil.  16,  36  ; 
VII.  38, 17. 

(8)  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  264,  v.  16) : 

Chaturbhis  toranair  yukto  mandapa(h).'syach  ohatur-iiiiikhah  II 
The  pavilion  should  have  four  faces  and  be  furnished  with 
four  arched  gateways  (arches). 

Aishtaka  dar(a)va&  ohaiva  feaila  va  syuh  sa-torana  II 

(Ibid.  chap.  269,  v.  46). 

(9)  Vayu-Purana  (part  I,  chap.  39,  v.  36,  61,  60)  : 
Harmya-prasada-kalilah  piam^u-prakara-toranah  || 
A^ity-amara-pury-abha  msi.ha-prakara-toranah  II 
Pandure  charu-^ikhare  wiaha-prakara-torane  i| 


TOEANA 


261 


(10)  Kau^iliya-Arfeha&astra  (ohap.  xxiY.  p.  68) : 

Bvi-hastam  torana-feirah — “ a top-support  of  ornamential  arches 
projecting  as  far  as  two  cubits.” 

(11)  Sarya-deva-maya-oharu-toranam  svarga-kbapdam  iva  yedhasa 

syayam — the  beaptiful  porch  which  contains  all  the  gods  like 
a portion  of  heaven  made  by  the  Creator  himself. 

" In  his  account  of  the  ruins  of  the  temple,  Mr.  Dean  speaks 
of  a doorway  relieved  by  an  architrave  of  most  elaborate 
sculpture,  divided  into  twelve  compartments  in  each 
of  which  a group  from  the  Hindu  Pantheon  occupies  a 
place.” 

(Harsha  stone  Insorip.  v.  44,  Bp.  Ind.  voL  li. 
pp.  121, 126, 124, 128 ; of.  note  72). 

(12)  “ A sort  of  triumphal  arch,  supported  by  two  pillars ; 
A.tma-b5hu-yuga-sauhpid-amdhita-stambha-saurabha-tubharh 

su-torapam  1 

(Cintra  Pratasti  of  the  reign  of  Sarangadeva, 
V.  46,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  i.  pp.  284, 276). 

(13)  See  Siidhara’s  Devapattana  rasasti  (verse  10,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  ir. 

p.  440),  and  compare  : 

Sughatita-vrisha-sat-torapa-dvaram — “ an  excellent  porch  at 
which  a hull  is  skilfully  carved.”  (Ibid,  verse  12,  p.  121). 

(14)  Ornamental  arch  (for  the  temple) : PrSsada-toranam  \ 

(Jaina  Inscrip,  from  Mathura,  no.  1,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  ir.  p.  198). 

(15)  A semi-circular  arch  with  sculpture. 

(Specimens  of  sculptures  from  Mathura,  plate 
III,  Ep.  Ind.  vol,  II.  p.  320-321). 

(16)  Makara-torana — arch  (with  a shark). 

(Banganatha  Inscrip,  of  Sundarapandya,  v.  9, 
Bp.  Ind.  vol.  m.  pp.  12,  .16). 

(17)  Arch  (Cochin  plates  of  Bhaskara  Eavivarmau,  line  10,  Bp. 

Ind.  vol.  III.  p.  68,  69). 


TOBANA 


m2 

(18)  Vyadliatta  &ri-aoine&a3pada-mukiita?afc  toranam  kamohanasyal 

“ Erected  a golden  feorana  like  a diadem  for  the  abode  of 
the  holy  Some'sa.’^ 

(The  Chahamanas  of  Naddnia,  no.  o,  Srmdha  Hill 
Insorip.  of  Chaohigadeva,  v.  34,  Ep.  Ind.  voL  ix, 

pp.  77,  72). 

(19)  “ In  front  of  the  basadi  of  Nokkijabbe,  the  family  goddess  of  her 

husband  Vlra-»Santara,  she  had  a makara-torana  ’ made.” 
(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  viii.  part  I,  Nagar  Taluq,  no.  47, 
Transl.  p.  161,  para  2.) 

(20)  “We  grant  to  you  in  addition  throne,  crown,  palanquin, 

white  umbrella,  ohamaras  on  both  sides,  ^ makara-torana’ 
(a  kind  of  arched  canopy),  fan,  daylight  torch,  yellow  and 

red  flags  and  sxieh  insignia,  with  cymbals, ” 

(Ibid.  no.  67,  Transl.  p.  167,  line  14  f). 

(21)  “Who  (Sri-Bajendra-Sola-Eevar,  A.  D.  1034) —haying 

sent  (many  ships  in  the  midst  of  the  bellowing  sea)  and 
having  captured  ^angirama-viaaiyot-tuhgapannam,  the  king 
of  Kidaram,  along  with  his  victorious  fine  elephants 
which  had  (well  formed)’  frontal  globes  and  resembled  the 
impetuous  sea— took  the  large  heap  of  treasure  which  he  had 
rightfully  amassed,  the  Viohchadira-toranam  at  the  war-gate 
of  the  enemy’s  extensive  city,  the  wicket-door  set  with 
jewels  of  great  splendour,  and  the  door  set  with  large  jewels.  ” 
(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  IX.  Ohannapatna  Taluq,  nos.  82, 
83,  Boman  text,  p.  185,  line  5 from  the  bottom 
upwards,  Transl.  p,  149). 

(22)  “ White  ohamaras,  the  crown -banner,  makara-torapia,  herds 

of  camels.”  (Ibid.  no.  86,  Transl.  p.  160). 

(23)  “ Built  a beautiful  stone  temple  with  the  torapa-gate  and 

the  surrounding  walls.  Having  provided  the  temple  with  a 
flower-garden,  kitchen,  pond,  suitable  environs,  mnsical 
instrument  (two  named)  and  ornaments  (some  named)” 

(Bp.  Carnat,  yoi.  x.  Kolar  Taluq,  no,  132.  Boman 
text,  p,  64,  Transl.  p.  49). 


TOBANA  258 

(24)  Svarna-dYaram  sthapitam  toranena  sarddhaiii  Srimal-Loka- 
mlthasya  gehe  I 

Placed  a golden  door  and  torana  in  the  temple  of  glorious 
Lokanatha.” 

The  inscription  is  “ on  the  lintel  of  the  door  of  the  temple  of 
AYalokitetvara  in  Bungmati.  The  door  is  made  of  gilt 
brass  plates,  and  adorned  by  relieves.  The  arch  or  torana 
above  the  door,  which  is  likewise  made  of  brass,  encloses 
three  images  of  Loke&vara 

(Insorip.  from  K epal,  no.  21,  Inscrip,  of  Srinivasa, 
line  6 f.,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  p.  192,  note  62). 

(26)  Suganaiii  raje ...Dhanabhutina  karitam  torananx 

silakammamta  cha  upamno  (=»^uhgSnam  rajye.,.. Dhanabhu- 
tina karitam  toranam  feilakarmanta^  chotpannah)  | 

“ During  the  reign  of  the  Sung  as  (first  or  second  century 
B.  0.)  this  gateway  was  erected,  and  the  masonry  finished 
by  "Vachhi-puta  (Vatsi-putra)  Dhanabhuti.” 

(Sunga  Inscrip,  of  the  Bharhut  Stupa,  line  3 f.,  Ind, 
Ant.  vol.  XIV,  pp.  138,  139  ; no.  1,  vol.  XXI.  p.  221). 

(26)  “ Pulling  down  the  temple  which  had  fallen  to  ruin,  had  it 
securely  rebuilt  with  a gopura,  a ‘ makara-torapa  * for  the 
god  Durgitvara,  and  god  Vrishabha.’^ 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  iii.  Tirumakudlu-Narasipur  Taluq, 
no.  103,  Transl.  p.  88,  Boman  text,  p.  ITO). 

(27)  “ The  sculptor  Kalidasi,  champion  over  the  proud,  a 
thunderbolt  to  the  rook  (vajra-giri),  titled  sculptor,  made 
the  ‘makara-torana  ^ (or  carved  head  piece  for  the  lintel).” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  V.  part  I,  supplement,  Belur  Taluq, 
no.  239,  Transl.  p.  276,  Boman  text,  p.  692). 

(28)  “ Those  Brahmans,  pleased  with  Basi-Setti,  gave  to  his  wife 
and  children  a large  palanquin  and  a canopy  (torana)  to 
descend  to  his  childrens  children.” 

(Bp.  Carnat,  vol.  vi.  Chikmagalur  Taluq,  no.  44, 
Transl.  p.  39,  Boman  text,  p.  104). 


254 


TAULl 


(29)  “ The  Vira-hhikshavati-udana -sYami  honoured  the  Svami 
of  the  Galipuje  throne  with  the  following  : a palanquin  with 
silver  mountings,  a pearl  neoMaoe,  a golden  umbrella,  the 
double  chamaras,  a makara  (torana)  canopy....,  for  the  feet, 
a Mukkanna  drum,  a Basava  drum,  a Nandi  flag,  etc.  ” 

(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol.  vi.  Ohikmagalur  Taluq,  no.  109, 
Transl.  p.  51,  para  2,  Eoman  text,  p.  124,  line  8 f). 
(SO)  “ Toran(a) — A structure  formed  of  one  or  more  horizontal 
beams  resting  on  columns  : a gateway  or  other  detached 
entrance.’’ 

(Eea,  Chalukyan  Architecture,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp. 

series,  vol.  XXI.  p.  40). 
(31)  See  Cunningham,  Arch.  Surv.  Beports  (vol.  xxi.  plate  XL, 
Torana  of  great  temple,  Nand>Chand). 
(2)  “ Torana — (1)  Gateway  of  a temple  or  Stupa,  (2)  a peg 
used  in  marriage  ceremonies  ” 

(Vincent  Smith  Gloss  to  Cunningham’s  Arch.  Surr, 

Beports.) 

TAULI — The  top  of  a building  lengthwise,  a roof. 

Mukhottarayate  nyasya  tiryak  taulim  prakalpayet  l 
Padam  vayate  taulim  kuryad  yuktya  vichakshanah  \ 

Tad-tirdhve  jayantikaih  kuryat  tat-tat-prachohhadananvitam  I 

(M.  XXXIII.  372-374). 

See  Praohchhadana  and  compare  Pratauli. 

TRI-KAEANA— A kind  of  joinery. 

(M.  XVII.  106,  see  under  Sandhi-karman). 
TEI-TALA—  The  second  floor,  third  storey. 

The  description  of  the  third  storey  (M.  xxi.  56-72  ; the  eight 
classes  2-55,  see  under  Priisrida). 
TEI-PATTA — A three -fold  band,  a moulding. 

A moulding  of  the  base  (M.  xiv.  74, 143,  248,  etc,,  compare  the  lists 
of  mouldings  under  Adhishthana). 


TVASHTRI  255 

TBI-BHA^G-A — (see  Bhaaga) — 'A  pose  in  which  the  image  is  bent  in 
three  places. 

(See  details  under  Bhahga), 
TEI-BB[ITTI-(KA) — ^A  three-fold  wall,  a structure  having  such  a wall. 

(M.  XXXIV.  74). 

TEI-BHtfMI — The  third  storey,  a three  storeyed  building  (see  Tri- 
tala). 

In  oonneotion- with  an  image : 

Evam  tu  vishnu-murtih  syach  chhakti-yuktam  til  parsvayoh  I 
Tri-bhumir  dakshine  vame  sibhavare  jahgame’  pi  va  I 

(M.  LI,  62-63). 

TEI-MURTI — The  Triad,  the  images  of  BrahmH,  Vishnu  and  Siva. 

(M.  LI.  2-95). 

TEI-YUTA — A ground-plan  in  which  the  whole  area  is  divided  into 
289  equal  squares. 

(M.  VII.  23,  see  under  Pada-vinyasa). 
TEI-VAEGAKA — A set  of  three  architectural  members  or  mouldings. 
Pinopapitham  harmyam  oheva  mandaparh  cha  tri-vargakam  I 

(M.  XXXIV.  68). 

Nanda-pafikty.amta(-&e)  vibbajet  chatus-tale  tu  tri-vargakam  \ 

(M.  xxxiir,  506). 

In  connection  with  the  foundations  : 

Maniushochchrayam  chatur-bhagam  tat-tad  ekasanam  bhavet  \ 
Tad-dvayam  chahghri-tuhgam  syad  ekamtam  prastarSnvitam  I 
Tri-varga-mandap5karam  adbhih  svantam  pravishatake  I 

(M.  XII.  34-36). 

TEI-VISHTAPA— A class  of  buildings  octangular  in  plan  and  c ailed 
(1)  Vajra,  (2)  Chakra,  (3)  Svastika,  (4)  Vajra-svastika,  (5)  Chitra, 
(6)  Svastika-khadga,'(7)  Gada,  (8)  Srikantha,  and  (9)  Vijaya. 

(1)  Agni -Parana  (chap.  104,  v,  12,  20-21,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47,  V.  21,  22,  23,  31-32,  see  under 

Prasada). 

TVABHTEI — An  architect  (see  details  under' Sthapati). 


256  DANBA 

D 

I)ANPA-(MANA) — A measure,  a type  of  building,  a flag-staff,  a pillar. 

(1)  A measure  of  four  cubits  (see  under  Angula)  : 

Ghatur-hastam  dhanur  dandam  dandashtam  rajjum  eva  oha  1 

(M.  ii.  5S). 

Compare  hasta-danda  (ibid.  68),  mana-danda  (ibid.  76). 

A stick  (M.  II.  223) ; as  a measure  (M.  ix.  10,  etc.) ; in  connec- 
tion with  joinery  (M.  xvn.  200). 

(2)  A house  with  a northern  and  eastern  hall  (see  Danda-kanta). 

(Brihat-samhita,  Llii,  39). 

(3)  Chatur-hasto  dhanur  dando  niilika-jugam  eva  cha  \ 

(Brahmanda-Purana,  part  I,  2nd  anushamga-p5da, 

chap.  7,  V.  100). 

(4)  A class  of  buildings  (Kamikagama,  XLV.  64,  see  under  Malika). 
(6)  Aohaleta-damdam  uchchaih  sauvarnnarii  Samara-bhupalah 

karayamasa  \ 

“ The  protector  of  the  earth,  Samara,  caused  a golden  flag-staff 
to  be  erected  here  (in  the  temple  at  Ahu)  for  the  lord  of  the 
mountain.” 

(Mount  Abu  Inscrip,  of  Samarasimha,  v.  64,  Ind. 

Ant.  vol.  XVI.  pp.  360,  365). 
(6)  Banda— “ an  unspecified  measure,  also  called  Stambha.” 

(Bamani  Inscrip,  of  the  Silahara  Yijayaditya,  lines 
20,  21,  23,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  Hi.  pp.  212,  218). 
BANBAKA — ^A  pillar,  a village,  a pavilion,  a hall,  a moulding. 

(1)  A part  of  a column  (Suprabhedagama,  xxx.  686,  etc.,  see 

under  Stambha). 

(2)  Manasara : 

A class  of  villages  (M.  ix.  2,  etc.,  see  under  Q-rama). 

A part  (?  shaft)  of  the  column  (M.  xv.  44, 149 ; l.  86). 

A small  pillar  (M.  xvm.  172). 


BAUBHA 


m 


A type  of  pa'^ilion  : 

Dvi-Yaktram  dandakam  proktam  tri-vaktram  sYastikaiii  tatha  I 

(M.  XXXIV.  662,  see  further  context  under  Mandapa). 
A class  of  halls  (M.  xxxv.  3,  description  ibid.  65-66,  82-96,  see 

under  ^ala''. 

BANDA-KANTA — A class  of  halls. 

(M.  XXXV.  104,  see  Dandaka). 
BANpIKA — The  6th  moulding  from  the  top  of  the  entablature. 

(Kamikagama,  Liv.  2,  see  under  Prastara). 
BANBITA — Smaller  buildings,  pavilions  near  the  door. 

Of.  Bvara-manam  tathaivam  syat  dandito  dvaram  ardhatah  I 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  46,  etc). 
BANTA-KlLA — A kind  of  tooth-like  joinery. 

(M.  XVII;  177,  see  Sandhi-karman). 
BAHTA-NALA — A tooth-like  drain  or  canal. 

In  connection  with  the  general  description  of  the  single-stoteyed 
buildings  : 

Madhyame  ohottame  harmye  danta-nalam  pramanakam  I 

(M.  XIX.  168). 

BAEI-G-EIHA — (see  Kandara-griha) — The  cave-house. 

'See  Kalidasa’s  Kumarasambhava  (I,  10,  14  ; quoted  also  by 
Professor  Luders,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  199). 
BAEPANA  A looking-glass,  a mirror,  an  ornament. 

In  connection  with  the  single. storeyed  buildings  ; 

Palike  lambanam  tatra  srenya  darpana(m)  proktavat  \ 

(M.  XIX.  42). 

In  connection  with  the  car  or  chariot ; 

Eathanam  chordva-detasya  alahkaram  pravakshyate  I 
Vividha-kihkini-nirmala-darpanam  . , . \ (M.  XLiii.  148,  157). 

An  article  of  furniture  (M.  i«.  46),  its  description  (ibid. 
1 111-131). 


BAEBHA — A type  of  pavilion. 


(M.  XXXIV.  263,  see  under  Mafiidapa). 
17 


268 


BALA 


BALA — ^A  petal,  a leaf,  a moulding. 

A moulding  of  the  pedestal  (M.  xiii,  76,  82,  etc.,  see  the  lists 

of  mouldings  under  IJpapi^ha). 
A moulding  of  the  throne  (M.  xly.  160,  etc). 

BA^A-KANTA — The  oolleotive  name  of  the  ten  classes  of  twelTe- 
storeyed  buildings.  (M.  xxx.  7). 

BA6A-TALA — The  tenth  storey. 

Btad  da&a-talam  proktam  rajju-  sutram  adhas-talam  \ 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  85). 
The  description  of  the  tenth  storey  (M.  xxviii.  20-40),  six 
classes  (ibid.  2-18,  see  under  PrSsada). 

BASA-TALA— A sculptural  measure  (see  under  Tala-mana). 

See  Am&umadbheda  of  Ka&yapa  (Ms.  Egg.  3148,  3012,  fol.  266, 
the  largest  type  of  the  da&a-tala  measure;  and  fol.  274,  the 

smallest  type  of  the  same). 

BA^A-BHUMI— (see  Ba^a-tala)— The  tenth  storey. 

BlPArBAEDA— A lamp-post,  a lamp-bearing  pillar. 

Compare  Bipa-stambha,  Bipa-skambha  under  ‘ Stambha  ’ and  see 
the  plates  referred  to. 

The  stationary  lamp-post  is  generally  built  in  front  of  the  house 
(M.  L.  64)  ; the  movable  lamp-stand  is  square,  octaonal  or 
circular  (ibid  84) ; they  are  made  of  iron,  wood,  or  atone  ; 
(ibid.  71-89)  ; their  description  in  detail  (ibid.  67-83,  84,  96). 

BIPA-BAEA— A lamp  pillar.  In  the  south  (of  India)  it  is  usually  a 
high  monolith,  with  an  iron  lamp-bracket  in  the  top.  In 
the  north-west  of  the  Presidency  of  Madras  such  pillars  are 
sometimes  constructed  in  courses,  with  lamp-brackets  in  the 
joints.  These  pillars  are  erected  outside  the  front  entrance. 

(Ghalukyan  Architecture,  p.  38,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp. 

series,  vol.  xxi.  plate  cix,  fig.  i). 

BlPA-MALA(.SKAMBHA— BlPA-STAMBHA,  BlPTI-STAM- 

BHA) — A lamp-bearing  pillar,  generally  belonging  to  the  Jain 
(see  Stambha). 


BTJEaA 


259 


A small  lamp-pillar,  standing  inside  tlie  temple  (Chalukyan 
Architecture,  p.  38,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp.  series, 
vol.  XXI.  see  plate  oix.  fig.  1) 
DUNDUBHI— A type  of  round  building. 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  V.  17-18,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  21, 23, 28,  29,  see  under  Prasada). 
BUEGA — A fort,  a fortified  city. 

(1)  Manasara : 

As  fortified  cities,  the  forts  are  called  tibira,  vahini-mukha, 
sthaniya,  dronaka,  samviddha,  kolaka,  nigama  and  skandh- 
avara  (M.  x.  40-42). 

Por  purely  military  purposes,  they  are  classified  as  giri-durga 
(hill -fort),  Tana-durga  (forest-fort),  salila-durga  (water- 
fort),  panka-durga  (clay-fort),  ratha-durga  (chariot-fort), 
deva-durga(divine-fort),  and  mitra-durga  (mixed  fort)  (M.  x. 
90-91).  Their  description  in  detail  is  given  (ibid.  90-103). 
Their  common  features : 

Sarvesham  api  durganam  vaprail  cha  parikhair  vijitam  \ 
Prave&a-nirgama-sthane  dvarair  api  samanvitam  \ 
Ish^akadi-kyitam  vapram  hasta-dvadalakoohchhrayam  I 
Tad-ardham  bhibti-mule  tu  samoharaih  saha  vistritam  \ 

(M.  X.  106-109). 

(2)  Kautiliya-Artha&astra  (chap.  xxiv.  para  1,  p.  61) : 

Chaturdifeam  jana-padante  samparayikam  daiva-kritam  durgam 

karayet  I 

Antar-dvipam  sthalam  va  nimnavaruddham  audakam  prasta- 
ram  guham  va  parvatam  nirudaka-stambam-irinam  Va- 
dhanvanam  kha-janodakam  stamba-gahanam  va  vana- 
durgam  \ 

Tesham  nadi-parvata  - durgam  jan  - padaraksha-sthanam 
dhanvana-vana-durgam  atavi-sthanam  apadya  prasaro  va  I 


DtJBGI-A 


Then  follows  tlie  Yery  interesting  description  of  the  plan  and 
other  architectural  details,  the  military  defences,  and  internal 
arrangement  for  the  comfort  and  convenience  of  the 
inhabitants. 

The  contents  of  chap,  xxiv,  xxv  and  xxii,  when  taken 
together,  will  give  a good  idea  of  the  ancient  fortified 
cities : 

They  can  be  circular,  square  or  rectangular.  They  are  sur- 
rounded with  moats  (parikha),  enclosure-walls  and  ramparts 
(prakara  and  vapra),  and  are  furnished  with  various  entrances, 
exits  and  gateways  (pratoli).  Circumambulating  flights  of 
steps  (pradakshina-sopana)  and  secret  staircases  in  the 
walls  (gudha-bhitti-sopana)  are  constructed.  Towers  are 
built  on  the  enclosure-walls  and  warlike  weapons  are  placed 
therein.  In  the  interior  are  constructed  tanks,  ponds,  canals, 
etc.  Various  kinds  of  roads  are  constructed  and  build- 
ings for  the  people  of  diflerent  castes  and  professions  are 
erected  in  a suitable  manner. 

(3)  ^ukraniti  (chap.  iv.  sect,  vi,  V.  2-16,  23-28,  ed.  Jivananda 
vidyasagara,  p.  447  f.) : 

“Portresses  are  made  inaccessible  through  ditches,  thorns, 
rooks  and  deserts.  The  Parika  fort  is  that  which  is 
surrounded  on  all  sides  by  great  ditches  (parikha) ; and  the 
Parigha  fort  is  known  to  be  that  which  is  protected  by  walls 
of  bricks,  stones  and  mud.  The  Yana  or  forest-fort  is  one 
which  is  encircled  by  huge  thorns  and  clusters  of  trees.  The 
Dhanva-durga  is  known  to  be  that  round  about  which  there 
is  no  water.  The  JaZa-dwrpa  or  water-fort  is  that  which  is 
surrounded  by  great  sheets  of  water.  The  Oiri-durga  or 
hill-fort  is  described  as  that  one  which  is  on  the  high  level 
and  is  supplied  with  plenty  of  water.  The  Sainya-durga 
or  troop-fort  is  that  One  which  is  defended  by  heroes  well 
up  in  Vyuhas  or  military  defence,  and  hence  impregnable. 


i>umA. 


m 


The  Bahaya-durga  or  help-fort  is  known  to  he  that  which 
belongs  to  valorona  and  friendly  kinsfolk.” 

(4)  liankapnri  ijiiralaniha  deva-durga-bhayavaha  i 

Nadeyam  parvatam  vanyam  kritrimam  oha  chatnr-Yidham  il 
^ailagre  rachita-dnrga  sa  pur  deva-puropama  )| 

(Eamayana,  Lahkakanda,  Sarga  3,  V.  20,  22). 
(6)  Khetanam  oha  puranam  oha  gramanam  ohaiva  sarva^ah  \ 
Tri-vidhanam  oha  durganam  parvatodaka-dhanvinam  II 

(Brahmanda-Purana,  part  1,2nd  annshamga-pada, 
chap.  7,  V'.  106,  see  also  v.  102). 

(6)  Phanur-durga-mahi-durgam  ab-durgam  varksham  eva  va  \ 
Nri-durgam  giri-durgam  va  samatritya  vaset  piiram  11  \ 

(Manu-samhita,  vii.  70,  etc). 
{!)  Shad-vidham  dnrgam  asthaya  purany-atha  nive&ayet  \ 
Sarva-sampat-pradhanam  yad  bahnlyam  chapi  sambhavet  II 
Dhanva-durgam  mahi-durgaih  giri-durgam  tathaiva  oha  i 
Manushya-durgam  myid-durgam  vana-durgam  oha  tani  shat  II 
Then  follows  the  description  of  details  of  these  fortified  places, 
(Mahabharata,  xil.  86,  4-6,  etc). 

(8)  Yo’yam  samastam  api  mandalam  atu  featror  achohhidya  kirtti- 

giri-durggam  idam  vyadhatta — “having  quickly  wrested 
from  the  enemy  this  whole  district  (mandala)  made  this 
fort  of  Kirtigiri,” 

(Ohandella  Insorip.  no.  B,  Deogattha  rock 

Insorip.  of  iCirtivarman,  v.  6,  Ind.  Ant.  vol. 

xviii.  pp.  236,239). 

(9)  Lalshmi-nyisimha-paripalita-purva-tish^e  durge  su-bhima- 
parighe  Malavalli-namni  \ 

Vedantagaih  trutiparaih  smriti-dharma-vidyaih  purne  sma 
karayati  deva-nyipas-saro’gryam  II 

“ In  the  fort  named  Malaval|i,  protected  on  the  east  by  (the 
teioiplQ  of)  Lakshmi-Nrisimha,  having  a deep  moat,  filled 


262 


DUELABHA-G-EAMA 


with  men  learned  in  the  Vedanta  (i.  e.,  philosophy),  Sruti 
(Vedas),  Smriti  and  Bharma-tastra  that  Deva-nripati  made 
a magnificent  pond.” 

Evidently  this  ' durga  ’ or  fort  is  not  a military  post  or  station  j 
its  inmates  are  people  learned  not  in  the  military  science 
but  in  philosophy  and  religion.  At  the  same  time  it  is  pro- 
tected by  ‘ deep  moat  It  is,  therefore,  just  like  the  villages 
or  towns  described  in  the  Manasara. 

(Bp.  Caraat.  vol.  iii.  MalavaDi  Taluq,  no.  61,  Eoman 
text,  last  verse,  p.  126 ; Transl.  p.  62). 
(10)  See  the  fort-temple  (Chalukyan  Architecture,  Arch.  Surv.  new 
Imp.  series,  vol.  xxi.  plate  cxiv,  figs.  1,  2). 

DUELABHA-GEAMA — ^A  village  situated  close  to  a large  village 
(maha-grama)  and  inhabited  by  the  free-holders  (agraharopajivin) 

(M.  X,  79-80). 

BBVA-KANTA — A class  of  the  eight- storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXVI.  46-47,  see  under. Prasada). 

I)BVA-KULA(-IKA) — A chapel,  a shrine,  a temple. 

(1)  Kanda^enan  (Skandasena) caused  (this)  temple 

(deva-kula)  to  be  made.  ” 

(Vallam  Inscrip.  of  Mahendrapotaraja,  no.  72,  A.  B ; 

H.  S.  1. 1.  vol.  ii.  p.  341). 
2)  See  Inscriptions  from  northern  Gujarat  (no.  xxi,  line  4,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  II.  p.  31.) 

BEVA-GAEBHA — Foundations  of  temples  (see  under  Garbha-nyasa). 

DEVATA-MAEDAPA— A class  of  pavilions. 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  96,  98,  see  under  Mandapa). 

BEVA-DUEGA— (see  Burga)— Agod^a  fort,  a divine  or  natural  fort. 

“ Having  sacked  Beva-durga,  which  formerly  the  Ghola  Eing 
(or  the  Chola  named  Narendra)  had  made  certain  could  not 
be  taken,  he  by  his  valour  captured  Uohohangi,  together 
with  all  the  empire  of  the  Pandya  King.  ” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  I,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  119, 
TransJ,  p.  78,  Eoman  text,  p,  182-183), 


DBYAYATANA 


263 


DEVA-NIKITA-MANPALA— A group  of  tiemples. 

Aohikarad  deYa-niketa-mandalam .......stambha-Yaro- 

ohohliraya-PrablaasG — caused  to  be  made  a group  of 

temples,.... wMob  is  beautiful  with  the  erection  of  (this) 

best  of  columns.” 

(Bihar  Stone  Pillar  Inscrip,  of  Skandagupta,  lines  5-6, 
0. 1.  I.  voL  111.  F.  G-.  I.  no.  12,  pp.  49,  61). 
DEYA-BHUSHANA-MANDAPA — A detached  pavilion  where  the 
idols  are  dressed,  a dressing  room  in  a temple. 

(M.  sxxii.  71,  see  under  Mandapa), 
DEYAYATANA — (see  Ayatana) — A temple. 

Kritva  prabhutam  salilam  araman  vinive&ya  oha  I 

DevSyatanam  kuryad  yaso-dharmabhivriddhaye  II 
“ Having  made  great  water -reservoirs  and  laid  out  gardens,  let 
one  build  a temple  to  heighten  one’s  reputation  and  merit. 

(Brihat-samhita,  LVi.  1,  J.  E.  A.  8.,  N.  S,,  vol.  yi.  p.  316). 

Eamayana  (Cook) : 

I.  6, 13 ; (Purim).,..devayatanai&  chaiva  vimanair  api  feobhitam  1 

I.  77,  13  ; Devayatanani  \ 

II.  6,  4 : ^rimaty-ayatane  vishnoh  \ 

II.  6,  11 : Sitabhra-feikharabheshu  devayataneshu  \ 

II.  3,  18 ; Bevayatana-ohaityeshu  (also  li.  71,  72). 

11.  25,  4:  Beveshv-aytaneshu  oha  I 

YII.  101,  16 : (Ubhe  purottame) &obhite  feobhaniyai^  cha 

devayatana-vistaraih  I 

Bevayatana-ohaityeshu  \ (Mahabharata,  ii.  80,  30  etc). 

Of,  Grama-nagara-kheda-karwada-madamba-drona-mukha-pat- 
tanamgalimdam  aneka-mal|a-kuta-prasada-devayatanamgal- 
idam  oppuva-agrahara-pafjtanamgalimdam  ati&ayav-appa...,  \ 

“ (At  Teridala,  a merchant-town  situated  in  the  centre  and 
the  first  in  importance  among  the  twelve  (towns)  in  the 
glorious  Kundi  Three-Thousand,  adorned  with)-— villages,  towns, 


264 


DEV1.LAYA 


hamlets,  villages  surrounded  by  bills,  groups  of  village^, 
sea-girt  towns,  and  chief  cities,  with  elegant  mansions,  palaces 
and  temples,  and  with  shining  agrahara-towns  in  the  country  of 
Kimtala  ...” 

(Old'Kanarese  Inscrip,  at  Terdal,  line  68,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XIV.  pp.  19,  26). 

©BVALAYA— A god’s  residence  or  dwelling,  in  the  sense  of  temple 
it  is  of  very  common  occurrence  and  needs  no  illustrative  quota- 
tions. ■ But  the  passages  quoted  below  are  the  most,  descriptive 
of  all  the  essential  features  of  a Hindu  temple  and  will  fully 
explain  the  denotation  of  the  term. 

The  general  plan  : 

(1)  “ Sometimes  a portico  is  made  round  the  garbha-gyiha  and 

antarala  together.  The  whole  being  closed  on  all  sides  but 
the  front,  in  which  are  the  doors  for  entrance,  approached  by 
the  front  portico,  which  is  generally  a peristyle,  and  it  serves 
as  the  innermost  court  for  pradakshina”. 

“ Temples  on  a large  scale  have  three  or  four  successive  porti- 
coes (mandapa)  attached  to  them  in  the  front,  which  are 
called  ardha-mandapa,  maha-mandapa,  sthapana-rhandapa, 
vritya-mandapa,  etc.” 

“A  water  spout  is  made  over  the  base  on  the  back  wall  of 
the  garbha-griha  on  the  left  side  of  the  idol.  On  the  surface 
of  the  spout  a cavity  is  made  for  discharging  water.  The 
spout  may  be  made  to  spring  from  the  head  of  a line,  etc. 
and  the  whole  so  devised  as  to  project  like  a plantain  flower.” 

(EamaEaz,  Ess.  Arch  of  Hind.  pp.  49,  60,  61). 

(2)  Kpishnaraja-udayar,  having  created  Chamaraja-nagara, 

created  the  Gha-maraje&vara  temple  (devalaya),  together 
with  its  precincts  (prakara),  gopura  adorned  with 
golden  kala&as,  and  tower  (vimana),— set  up  the  great 
(mahal  linga  under  the  name  of  Ghamarajetvara,  and  in  the 


BEVALAYA 


26S 


shrine  (garhha-griha)  to  his,  left  set  up  the  goddess  named 
Kempa-Nahjamaha,  and  in  the  shrine  to  his  right  the  goddess 
Chamundesvari,— -and  at  the  main  entrance  (maha-dvara) 
on  the  east  set  np  a gopura,  on  the  colonnade  (kaisaleyalli), 
to  the  south  the  ancient  images  (puratana-vigraha),  on  the 
colonnade  to  the  west  a row  of  lingas  forming  the  thousand 
(sahasra)  lingas,  and  on  the  colonnade  to  the  north  twenty- 
five  pleasing  statues  (lilamiirti,  of,  dhyana-mfirti),— and  on 
the  south-west  side  building  a separate  temple  (mandapa), 
set  up  the  god  Narayana  together  with  Lakshmi.  ” 

(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol,  IV.  Ohamarajnagar  Taluq,  no.  86, 
Transl.  p.  11,  line  4 f. ; Roman  text,  p.  18,  line  8 f). 

“ In  Lakkugundi,  which  was  his  birth  place,  Amritadandfidhita 
built  a temple  (devalaya),  made  a large  tank,  established  a 
satra,  formed  an  agrahara,  and  set  up  a water-shed.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  vi.  Radur  Taluq,  no.  36, 
Roman  text,  p,  22,  lino  11  f.,  Transl..  p,  8). 

Devalayaih  prathayata  nija-kirttim  uchohaih— ” who  spread 
his  fame  aloft  by  (building)  temples 

(Sharqi  Arch,  of  Jaunpur,  Shahet-Mahet  Insorip.  v. 
14,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp.  series,  vol.  xi.  pp.  72, 73). 

(The  general  plan) : “ The  temple  itself  consists  of  the  usual 
three  parts : an  open  mapclapa  on  a base, ....with  a double  row 
of  pillars  on  the  three  exposed  sides,  and  roofed  by  a large 
ribbed  dome  standing  on  the  twelve  inner  pillars,  on  each  of 
the  three  outer  sides  it  has  a large  projecting  porch. 

Beyond  this  is  the  principal  mapdapa..., In  the  inner 

corner  of  this  man(Japa  are  two  rooms Three  doors  with 

richly  carved  thresholds  lead  from  the  hall  into  the  shrine.’^ 
(Ahmadabad  Arch.  Burgess,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp. 

series,  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  29). 

“ It  (the  MaUefevata  temple  at  Hnlikat)  faces  north  and  con- 
sists of  a.  garhha-griha,  an  open  ‘ sukha-nasi,  a navaranga 
and  a*  porch,  ’’ 


266 


DEHAEI 


The  Ohenneke^ava  temple,  which  faces  east,  consists  of  a 
garbha-griha,  a suhha-nasi  and  a nava^ra&ga,  and  may 
have  had  a porch  once/’ 

“ The  newly  restored  Sarada  temple,  situated  to  the  north  of 
the  Vindya-tahkara,  is  a fine  structure  in  the  Bravidian 
style,  consisting  of  a garbha-griha,  sukha-nasi,  a nava-rafiga, 
and  a prakara  or  enclosure.  It  faces  east  and  has  three 
entrances  on  the  north,  south,  and  east,  the  east  entrance, 
which  is  the  main  entrance,  having  two  open  mandapas  at 
the  sides  inside.*’ 

(Mysore  Arch.  Eeports,  1915-16,  p.  4,  para  10  ; 

p.  5,  para  12 ;p.  15,  para  19;  see  plate  III,  figs. 

1,2). 

(7)  “ There  is,  however,  no  doubt  that  it  (the  Hindu  temple  at 
Danui)  was  in  the  form  of  a cross  with  the  usual  ardha- 
mandapa,  mandapa,  maha-mandapa,  antarala,  and  gyiha- 
garbha  (garbha-griha).” 

(Cunningham  Arch.  Surv.  Eeports,  vol.  vil.  p. 

40  ; see  also  ibid,  plate  xix,  showing  in  detail  the 
mouldings  of  the  Narayapa-pura  temple,  ibid, 
vol.  XIV.  plate  VII  (Ionic  temple  of  sun),  ibid, 
vol.  XV.  plate  vii  (island  temple),  ibid,  vol, 
XIII.  plates  XI,  XII,  xiii,  xiv,  xv,  xvi  (groups 
of  temples), 

BEHAEl(-Iil) — ^A  temple,  the  threshold  of]  a door,  a raised  terrace. 
See  Inscriptions  from  northern  Gujarat  (nos.  xxii.  line  3,  xxxill, 
line  2,  xxiv.  line  1,  xxv.  line  2,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  ii.  p.  32). 

BEHA-LABBHAI^GXJLA— (see  under  Angula)— A measure  equal 
to  one  of  the  equal  parts  into  which  the  whole  height  of  the 
statue  of  a god  (or  of  the  master  and  sometimes  of  the  sculptor 
too)  is  divided  according  to  the  tala  measures.  This  is* 
employed  in  measuring  the  sculptural  objects  like  the  image 
of  a god  or  man, 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxx.  5,  6,  9,  see  under  Angula), 


BBONAKA 


267 


DEHAEA— -A  porch  or  terrace. 

(1)  “ In  a discourse  on  dharmma  in  an  assembly  held  in  the 

porch  or  terrace  (dehara),  the  chaplain set  up  a 

god  in  the  name  of  their  father.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  Y.  part  I,  Arsikere  Taluq,  no. 

123,  Trausl.  p.  167,  para  2,  line  4). 

(2)  “ From  Vira-Hoysala  he  obtained  (the  appointment  of) 

inspector  of  the  servants  of  the  porch  or  terrace  (dehara).” 

(Ibid.  no.  127,  Transl.  p.  170,  para  2,  line  16). 
BAIVIKA-(LI1^ GIA)— A type  of  phallus. 

Bevai^  cha  sthapitam  lihgam  daivikam  lingam  uohyate  | 

(M.  Lir,  230). 

See  Kamikagama  (l.  36,  37,  under  Lihga). 

BOLA.— A swing  or  hammock. 

“ The  great  minister  caused  to  be  erected  a dipti-stambha  for 
the  Krittika  festival  of  lights  and  a swing  (dola)  for  the  swinging 
cradle  festival  (dolSrohotsavakke)  of  the  god  Chenna-Ketava 
of  Belur.” 

(Ep.  Oarnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  14, 
Transl.  p.  47,  Eoman  text,  p.  107). 
See  Manasara  under  Bhushana. 

BEAVIDA—A  style  of  architecture,  a type  of  building  once 
prevailing  in  the  ancient  BrSvida  country,  (see  details  under 
Nagara). 

A class  of  the  twelve -storeyed  buildings  ; 

Eavi-bhumi-vitale  tu  ohash^a-vimtamtakam  bhavet  l 
Maha-talSi  datam^am  syat  tesham  ptirvavad  acharet  I 
Panchalam  dravidam  chaiva  ravi-bhumy-alpha-harmyake  I 

(M^.  XXX.  8-10). 

BEONAKA  — (see  under  Burga  and  Nagara)— A fortified  city 
situated  on  the  bank  of  a sea. 

Samudratatini-yuktam  tatinya  dakshinottare  \ 

Vanigbhih  saha  nanabhih  janair  yuktam  janaspadam  \ 


268 


DRONA-MUKHA 


Nagarasya  prati-tate  grahakai&  clia  samavyitam  \ 
Kraya-Tikraya-aamyuktam  dronantaram  udaliyitam  \ 

(M.  X.  76-78). 

A class  of  pavilion  (M,  xxxiv.  423,  see  under  Man^apa), 

DRONA-MXJKHA — A fort,  a fortified  town. 

A fortress  to  defend  a group  of  400  villages  ; 

(1)  Ohatut-^ata-gramya  drona-mukham  \ 

(Kautiliya-Arthatastra,  chap,  XXll.  p.  46). 
Root  note  to  the  passage  quoted  .above  : 

(2)  Ragarani  kara-varjitani  nigama-vanijaih  athanani  janapada 

detah  pura-varani  nagaraika-de^a-bhutani  dropa-mukhani 
jala-sthala-pathopetani  \ 

(Pratna-Vyakarana-sutra-vyakhyane,  p,  306), 

(3)  G-rama-nagara-kheda-karvvada-madamba-dropa-mukha-pat- 
tana-galimdam  aneka-mata-kuta-prasada-devayatanamgal- 
iihdam-oppuva-agrahara-pattanamgalimdamatisayav-appa.  \ 

" (At  Teridala,  a merchant  town  situated  in  the  -centre 
and  the  first  in  importance  among  the  twelve  (towns)  in 
the  glorious  Kundi  Three-Thousand,  adorned  with’) 
villages,  towns,  hamlets,  villages  surrounded  by  hills, 
groups  of  villages,  sea-girt  towns  and  chief  cities,  with 
elegant  mansions,  palaces  and  temples,  and  with  shining 
agraharatowns  in  the  country  of  Kuntala,” 

(Old  Kanarese  Insorip.  at  Terdal,  line  68,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XIV.  pp.  19,  26). 

(4)  ‘With  myriads  of  people,  practices  of  virtue,  agreeable 

occupations,  streams  of  the  (nine)  sentiments,  pleasure- 
gardens,  separated  lovers,  splendid  tanks,  full  lotus-beds, 
gilded  boats  for  spring  festivals,  ghatika-sthSnas  (religious 
centres),  the  supports  of  dharmtna  and  mines  of  enjoyment, 
moats  which  were  as  if  the  sea  being  overcome  had  returned 
here  on  account  of  the  collection  of  gems,  groups  of  the 


DVlUA 


om 


lotus  faces  of  beautiful  women  fair  as  the  moon,  (grama- 
nagara-kheda-kharYvana-ma^amba-drona-mukha-pura-patta- 
na-raja-dhani),  on  whatever  side  one  looked,  in  these  nine 
forma  did  the  Kuntala-de&a  shine.’' 

(It  should  be  noticed  that  the  passage  within  brackets 
is  almost  identical  with  the  corresponding  passage  in 
quotation  no.  3 above). 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no.  197, 
TransL  p.  124,  para  1,  last  seven  lines,  Roman  text, 
p.  214,  line  27  f). 

'DVA-BA^A-TALA — The  twelve-storeyed  buildings,  the  twelfth  storey. 

(1)  See  Manasara  (chap.  xxx.  1-191,  ten  classes,  ibid,  5-7, 
8-36,866  under  Prasada;  the  general  description  of  the 
twelfth  storey,  ibid.  37-88,  89-191). 


(2)  Tad-adhastat  talam  ohaikadasa-dva-da'sa-bhumikam  \ 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  86). 

(3)  Adva-data-talad  evam  bhumau  bhumau  prakalpayat  l 

(Surprabhedagama,  xxxi.  33), 


BVA-RA — A.  door,  a gate. 

(1)  Manasara  (chap,  xxxvni.  2-54  ; xxxix.  1-163)  : 

The  situation  of  gates  in  the  village  or  town  (called  Nandya- 
varta)  ; 

Gramasya  parito  bahye  rakshartham  vapra-saiiiyutam  I 
Tad-bahih  parito  yuktam  paritoya-pravedakaih  t 
Ohatur-dikshu  ohatush-kone  maha-dvaraih  prakalpayet  I 
Vjittam  va  ohatur-atram  va  vastu-SVa(-a)-kriti-vaprayuk  i 
Putva-dvaram  athai&ane  ohagni-dvaram  tu  dakshine  1 
Pitur.dvaram  tu  tat-pratyag  vayau  dvararii  tathottaram  } 
Purva,-:pa§Ghima-tad-dvarau(-rayoli)  riju-sutram  tu  yojayet  \ 
Dakshinottarayor  dvarau  tatra  seshaih  (?  de§e)  vi§eshatah  } 
Dakshinottaratah  sutram  vlnyasech  chhilpavit-tamah  \ 


270 


BYAEA 


Tasya  suferat  tu  tafe-purve  hastam  tad-dvara-madhyame  \ 
Bvam  dakshinato  dvaram  tad-dhi  fcaro(-iam)  tatkoktavat;  \ 
Uttare  dvaram  tat  stjtrat  pratyag-hastayasSnakain  I 
Oliatur-dikshu  ckatur-dvaram  ynktam  va  neshyate  budhaih  \ 
Ptirve  pa&chimake  vapi  dyaram  etad(-kam)  dyayor  api  I 
Parita^  chatur-a^ragrad  dyaram  kuryat  tu  sarvada  I 
Etat  saryam  maka-dyaram  upa-dyaram  iokockyate  I 
Tke  smaller  doors  ; 

Nage  yapi  mrige  vatka  aditi§  ekodito^pi  ya  1 
Parjanye  yantarikske  ya  ptiske  ya  yitatke^tkaya  \ 

Gandkarye  bkringaraje  ya  sugriye  yasure’tkayS  I 
Yatkeskt'(am)eyam  upa-dyaram  kuryat  tal-lakskanoktayat  I 
Tke  water-doors  (drains)  : 

Mukhyake  yatka  bkallate  myige  ya  ckodito’pi  ya  \ 

Jayante  ya  makendre  ya  satyake  ya  bkrifee^tkaya  \ 

Byam  eyam  jala-dyaram  kuryat  tatra  yickakskana  I 

(M.  IX.  290-313). 

Tke  gates  of  yillages  : 

Syastikagram  okatur-diksku  dyaram  teskam  prakalpayet  \ 
Eyam  okask^a-maka-dyaram  diksku  diksku  dyayam  tatak  \ 
Mrige  ckaiyantarikske  ya  bkriugaraja-bkri&e  tatka  \ 

6eske  yapi  oka  roge  ya  okaditau  ckodite’pi  yal 
Eyam  etad  upa-dyaram  kuryat  tatra  yickakskanak  \ 
Maka-dyaram  tu  saryeskam  langalakara-sannibkam  1 
Kapata-dyaya-samyuktam  dyaranam  tat  pyitkak  pyitkak  \ 

(M.  IX.  366-361), 

Ckatur-diksku  okatur-dyaram  upa-dvaram  antaralake  I 
Deyanam  ckakrayartinam  madkye  dvaram  prakalpayet  | 


BVAEA 


271 


Maha-dvaram  ifci  prokfcam  upa-dvaram  tu  choktavat  I 
Bliu-siiradi-iiaranam  olia  madhye  dvaram  na  (oha)  yojayefc » 
Madhya-sukam  tu  tame  tu  harmya -dvaram  prakalpayet  \ 

(M.  xxxL  77-81). 

Eeferring  to  the  two-storeyed  buildings  : 

Tat-pure  madbyame  dvaram  gavaksham  vatha  kalpayet  I 
Dakshine  madbyame  dvaram  syad  agre  madbya-mandapam  I 
Obatur-dvara-samayuktampurve  sopana-samyutam  I 

(M.  XX.  81-83). 

Two  entire  obapters  are  devoted  to  tbe  description  of  doors 
of  tbe  residential  buildings  and  temples — in  one  of  them 
(obap.  XXXIX.  1-163),  tbe  measurement,  tbe  component  parts 
and  mouldings  are  given ; mainly  tbe  situation  of  tbe  doors 
is  described  in  tbe  other  (obap.  xxxviii.  2-54). 

It  is  stated  (obap.  xxxix)  that  tbe  beigbt  of  tbe  door 
should  be  twice  its  width  (line  14).  But  various  alter- 
native measures  are  also  given  (see  17-18).  The  beigbt 
may  vary  from  l^^  cubits  to  7 cubits  (7).  Tbe  beigbt 
of  tbe  smaller  doors  vary  from  one  cubit  to  three  cubits 
(9-10).  Tbe  beigbt  of  tbe  windows  which  are  some- 
times made  in  place  of  smaller  doors  vary  from  half  a cubit 
to  two  cubits.  This  measurement  is  prescribed  for  doors  in 
tbe  Jati  class  of  buildings  (28).  Such  other  measurements 
are  given  to  doors  of  buildings  of  tbe  Cbhanda,  Yikalpa,  and 
Abbasa  classes  (29  f).  Tbe  pillars,  joints,  planks  and 
other  parts  of  doors  are  described  at  great  length  (60  f.,  111- 
163),  Boors  are  generally  of  two  flaps ; but  one-flaped  doors 
are  also  mentioned  (98). 

Doors  are  profusely  decorated  with  the  carvings  of  leaves  and 
creepers  (116).  Tbe  images  of  (xanesa,  Sarasvati  and  other 
deities  are  also  carved  on  both  sides  of  a door  (cf.  the  con- 
cluding portions  of  chaps.  XIX,  xxx). 


272 


DVIeA 


Tha  cliapter  closes  witb,  a lengthy  descripioia  of  the  six  or 
rather  the  four  main  parts  of  doors.  The  door-panel  (kaYata), 
door-joint  (dvara-sandhi),  door-plank  (phalaka),  holt  and 
(kilahhajana),etc.,  are  minutely  desorijbed  (137  f). 

It  is  stated  (chap.  xxxYin)  that  four  main  doors  should 
be  constructed  on  the  four  sides  of  all  kinds  of  buildings  of 
gods  and  men  (linee  2-4)  and  the  smaller  doors  are  stated  to 
be  constructed  at  convenient  places  (4).  Many  other  still 
smaller  doors  are  constructed  at  the  intervening  spaces  (19, 
etc).  The  gutters  are  made  conveniently  and  sloped  down- 
wards (5-7).  Brains  or  jala-dvara  (water-gate)  are  made 
beneath  the  halls  (8).  The  main  doors  are  always  furnished 
with  a flight  of  stairs  (12). 

In  some  residential  buildings  the  entrance  door  is  made,  not 
in  the  middle  of  the  frontage,  but  on  either  side  of  the 
middle  (17),  although  the  general  rule  is  to  make  the  door 
in  the  middle  of  the  front  wall  (6,  etc).  But  in  temples 
and  in  case  of  kitchens  in  particular,  the  doors  are 
generally  made  at  the  middle  of  the  wall  (35,  see  also  chap. 
XXXIX.  140).  For  the  easy  upward  passage  (urdhva-gamana) 
of  the  kitchen  smoke,  they  are  furnished  with  the  lattice 
(jala)(37). 

(2)  Yaraha-mihira  (Brihat-samita,  Liii  26-27,  70-82 ; LVI.  10) 
has  condensed  the  contents  of  the  two  chapters,  dealing  with 
the  measurement  of  door  (dvara-mana)  and  situation  of  the 
door  (dvara-sthana)  of  the  Manasara.  But  he  does  not  give 
any  absolute  measurement.  As  regards  the  situation 
of  door,  the  principle  seems  to  be  two-fold  in  all  the  archi- 
tectural treatises.  “The  door  is  made  on  either  side  of 
the  middle  of  the  wall,  mostly  in  private  residential  buildings 
for  ladies  in  particular.'’  But  according  to  Earn  Eaz  (p.  46) 
“if  the  front  of  the  house  be  ten  paces  in  length,  the 
entrance  should  be  between  five  on  the  right  and  four  on 
the  left.” 


BVlEA 


273 


After  this,  Dr.  Kern  quotes  Utpala  to  show  the  different 
principles: 

Tatha  oha  karyani  yatha  bhananam  grihabhyantaram  anga- 
nam  vitatam  tany-eva  vasa-grihani  dakshinato  dakshina- 
syam  di&i  bhavanti  I Btad  uktam  bhavati  pran-mukhasya 
grihasyangana-(8yagara)-dvaram  uttrarabhimukham  karyam 
dakshinabhimukhasya  prah-mukham  patohimabhimukhasya 
dakshi^abhimukham  uttarabhimukhasaya  pa&ohimabhimu- 
kham  iti  \ 

“ How  a house  can  be  said  to  face  the  east,  without  having 
its  door  facing  the  same  quarter,  is  beyond  our  comprehen- 
sion,*’Campare  no.  4 below. 

(J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  VI,  p.  291,  note  1). 

Varaha-mihira  himself,  however,  states  (Brihat-samhita,  lvi. 
10)  the  most  general  principle  of  the  position  of  the  door, 
which  Dr.  Kern  does  not  seem  to  have  taken  any  notice  of 
(compare  his  translation  of  the  following  verse,  J.  E.  A.  S., 
N . S.,  vol.  VI,  p.  318)  : 

Chatuh-shashti-padaih  karyam  devayatanam  sada  \ 

Dvaram  oha  madhyamam  tatra  samadikstham  pratasyate  II 

‘ The  (area  of  the)  temple  is  always  divided  into  64  squares 
(see  Pada-vinyasa).  Therein  (i.e.  in  the  temple)  the  door 
is  made  at  the  middle  (of  the  front-wall)  and  it  is  highly 
commendable,  when  the  door  is  placed  at  the  same  line  (lit. 
same  direction)  with  the  idol.’ 

Dr.  Kern  interprets  the  second  line  as  ‘ the  middle  door  in 
one  of  the  four  cardinal  points.’  But  the  rules  in  the 
Manasara  as  also  the  existing  temples  support  our  interpre- 
tation, namely,  ‘ the  door  is  made  at  the  middle’  (of  the  front 
wall). 

(3)  Vastusara  (by  one  Mandana,  Ahmedabad,  1878)  lays  down 
(1.6)  that  the  house  may  have  the  front  side  (with  entrance) 
18 


274 


miBk 


£tit  any  dirootion  according  to  tke  ckoice  of  the  occupants, 
and  states  distinctly  that  the  face  of  the  house  may  he  .made 
at  four  directions  (kuryach  chatur-ditam  mukham). 

(4)  Garga-samhita  (Ms.  E.  15, 96,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge)  has 

apparently  three  chapters  on  the  subject  of  door  : dimensions 
of  door  (dvara-pramana,  fol.  57b,  68b,  same  as  dTara-rnSna 
of  the  Manasara) ; situation  of  door  (dvara-nirde&a,  chap,  in, 
fol.  57a,  corresponds  more  or  less  with  dvara-sthana  or  posi- 
tion of  door,  of  the  Manasara) ; and  height  of  the  door-pillar 
(dYara-stambhoohchbraya-vidhi,  fol.  60b)  there  is  no  such 
separate  chapter  in  the  Manasara,  although  door  pillars  are 
occasionally  described. 

As  regards  dvara-dosha  (penalties  of  defective  doors),  Varaha- 
mihira  seems  to  have  condensed  (Brihat-samhita,  LIII. 
72-80)  the  contents  of  Garga  (fol.  68b). 

(5)  Vastu-feastra  (of  Eajavallabha  Mandana,  v.  28.  ed.  Narayana 

Bharati  and  Ya&ovanta  Bharati,  Anahillapura,  8,  V.  947): 
Bvaram  matsya-matanusari  da&akam  yogyam  vidheyam  bu- 
dhaih — ^following  the  rules  of  the  Matsya-Purana  the 
learned  (architects)  recommend  ten  suitable  doors  (for  a 
building). 

(6)  Vastu-pravandha  (n.  8,  compiled  by  Eajakisora  Varmma)  : 
Dvarasyopari  ya(d)-dvaram  dvarasyanya  (?)  oha  sammukham  \ 
Vyayadam  tu  yada  taoh  cha  na  karttavyam  feubhepsubhih  II 

‘ Those  who  want  prosperity  should  not  make  one  door  above 
or  in  front  of  another  because  it  is  expensive^ 

(7)  ^ilpafeastra-sarasamgraha  (vn.  24)  : 

Chatur-dvaram  chatur-dikshu  chaturam  (?)  cha  gavakshakam  1 
Nyipanam  bhavane  ^reshtham  anyatra  parivarjayet  II 
‘ It  is  highly  commendable  for  the  buildings  of  the  kings  to 
make  four  doors  at  four  directions  and  four  windows.  This 
rule  need  not  be  observed  in  other  oases.^ 


BVAEA 


m 


(9)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap.  130,  v.  17)  has  the  satne  verse  as 
(2)  except  that  it  reads  ‘ samadik  sampra&asyate  ’ in  place  of 
‘ samadikstham  .prafeasyate  ’ of  the  Byihat-samhita, 

(10)  Matsya-Purana  (chap,  255,  V.  7-9)  : 

Vasa-geham  sarvesham  pravised  dakshinena  tu  I 
Dvarani  tu  pravakshyami  pra&astaniha  yani  tu  II  7 
Purvenendraih  jayantam  cha  dvaram  sarvatra  ^asyate  1 
Yamyam  cha  vitatham  chaiva  dakshipena  vidur  budhah  (I  8 
Paschime  pushpadantam  cha  varunam  cha  pra&asyate  I 
Uttarena  tu  bhallatam  saumyam  tu  subhadam  bhavet  H 9 

Por  all  kinds  of  residential  buildings  the  southern  face  of  the 
house  is  expressly  recommended  here,  while  doors  are 
directed  to  be  constructed  at  all  the  eight  cardinal  points. 

Of.  Data-dvarani  ohaitani  kramenoktani  sarvada  \ 

(Ibid.  chap.  270,  V,  28). 

(11)  Agni’Purana  (chap.  104,  v.  24) : 

Dikshu  dvarani  karyani  na  vidikshu  kadaohana  \ 

The  doors  should  be  constructed  at  the  cardinal  points  and 
never  at  the  intermediate  corners. 

(12)  G-aruda-Purana  (chap.  46,  v.  31)  : 

Dvaram  dirgharddha-vistaram  dvarany-ashtau  smritani  cha  I 
The  breadth  of  the  door  should  be  half  of  its  height  (lengthl 
and  there  should  be  eight  doors  (in  each  house). 

(13)  Vastu-vidya  (ed.  Ganapati  tastri,  iv.  1-2,  19-22 ; V.  21  j 

XIII.  24-32  ; XIV.  1-3)  : 

Atha  dve  prahmukhe  dvare  kuryad  dve  dakshinamukhe  t 
Dvare  pratyanmukhe  dve  cha  dve  cha  kuryad  udanmukhe  ti  1 
Mahendre  prahmukham  dvaram  pra&astam  ^ishta-jatishu  \ 
Aparam  tu  tatha  dvaram  jayante  praha  nisohayat  H 2 
Antar-dvarani  ohoktani  bahir -dvaram  athochyate  ii  19 
Yatronnatam  tato  dvaram  yatra  nimnam  tato  griham  I 
Grihe  chapy-ashtame  ratau  tatra  dvaram  na  karayet  il  20 
Grihakshate  cha  mahendre  brahmananam  prakirtitam  \ 
Mahidhare  cha  some  cha  pha(bha)llatargalayos  tatha  ii  21 


m 


BVAEA. 


^ayaniyam  ta  karbavyam  pra&astam  purvatah  §ikh5  ) 
Na¥a-dvar5kritam  kuryad  antarikshe  mahanasam  H 22 
Dvaram  yabra  oka  vihifcam  tad-dig-adhi&adMpam  bhaved 
dhamal 

Eka-talam  va  dvi<talaih  dvi-tale  dvi-mukham  oka  nirmukbam 
VS  syat  II  21 
Poaifeion  of  tike  door : 

Dvarain  oka  diksku  karfcavyain  sarveskam  api  vefemanam  I 
Madkyastka-dvara-madkyaik  syad  vaafeii-mandira-stitirayok  11  24 
, Upadvarani  yujyantani  pradakskinyat  sva-yonitak  J 
Dvara-padasya  vistarajh  tulyam  uttara-taratak  II  25 
Sva-sva-yonya  grikadinaik  kartavya  dvara-yonayah  \ 26 
Tken  follows  tke  raeasnrement  of  fcke  mouldings  of  the  door 
(26-30). 

Agneyyam  mandiram  dvaram  dakskinabkimukkam  smyitam  I 
Pratyanmukkam  tu  nairrityam  vayavyam  tad  udakmukbam  II 

81 

Ifee  tat  pranmukkam  kuryat  tani  syuk  padukokari  \ 32 
Tke  door-panels  are  described  next ; 

Kava^a-dvitayam  kuryan  mStri-putry-abkidkam  budkak  I 
Dvara-tare  ckatnsk.panoka-ska^-saptaskta  vibkajite  II 1 
Ekamfea(m)  stitra-pattlk  syat  samam  va  bakalam  bhavet  \ 
Ardkam  va  pada-kinam  va  bakalam  parikirtitam  II  2 
Dvarayama-samayama  karya  yugmafe  oka  panktayak  I 
A&vyadi-vefema-paryantak  panktayak  parikirtitak  II  3 
(14)  Ma^ka-pratisktka  by  Bagkunandana  quotes  from  tke  Devi 
Purana  without  further  reference  : 

Plakskam  dvaram  bhavet  purve  yamye  chaudumbaram 
bhavet  I 

Pa&okad  a&vattha-gkatitam  naiyagrodham  tatkottare  \ 

(16)  Kautiliya-Arthatastra  (chap.  XXIV.  pp.  62,  63,  54) : 

Agrahye  defee  pradkavitikatn  niskkura-dvaram  oka  I 
Prakaram  ubkayato  mandalaka-madkyardka-dandam  kritva 
pratoli-skat-tulantaram  dvaram  nivefeayet  \ 


BVAEA 


277 


Paficha-liasta-mam-dYarain  1 

Prakara-madhye  kyitya  Vapim  pushkarinim  dyaram  ohatu&-&li- 
1am  adhyardhantaranikam  kumari-puram  munda-harmyam 
dyi-talam  mundaka-dyaram  bhumi-dravya-yafeena  ya  tri-bha 
gadbikayamah  bhanda-yahini-kulyab  karayet  { 
Sa-dvada&a-dyaro  yuktodaka-bhumioh-obbanna-patihah  \ 
Siinapatyani  dyarani  babib  parikbayah  I 

(Ibid,  obap.  xxv.  p.  64  f). 
Kisbku-matra-mani-dyaram  antarikayam  kban.da-pbxillartbam 
asampatam  karayet  I 

Pratiloma-dyara-yatayana-badbayam  cba  anyatra  raja-marga- 
lathyabbyab  \ 

(Ibid.  obap.  LXY.  pp.  166, 167). 

(16)  Ramayana  (LankakSpida,  Sarga  3, 1, 11, 13, 16): 
Dyi^ba-yaddba-kapa^ni  maba-parigba-yanti  oba  \ 

Cbatyari  yipulany-aaya  dvarani  sumabanti  oba  II  11 
Dyaresbu  samskyita  bbimab  kalaya-samayab  feitab  t 
^ata^o  raobita  yiraih  tatagbnyo  raksbasS  ganaih  II  13 
Dvaresbu  tasam  obatyarab  sakramab  paramayatah  I 
Yantrair  upeta  babubbir  mabadbbir  griba-panktibbib  II 16 

(17)  Kamikagama  (xxxv.  6-13) : . 

Bballate  pusbpadante  cba  mabendre  cba  graba(griba)ksbate  1 
Cbatur-dyaram  prakartayyam  saryesbam  api  yastunam  II  6 
Tben  are  giyen  tbe  details  oonoerniiig  tbe  position  of  doors  in 
yarious  quarters  (7-9).  Next  follows  tbeir  measurement 
(10-13). 

Of.  Deyanam  manujanam  oba  yifefisbad  raja-dbamani  I 
Pusbpadante  cba  bballate  mabendre  oba  graba(griha)k8bate  II 
Upa-madbye’tbaya  dvaram  upa-dyaram  tu  ya  nayet  II 

(Ibid.  V.  118, 118a). 

Pratyanmukbam  tu  feayanam  dosbadam  daksbinamukbam  I 
Dyare  pade  tu  nesh^a(m)  syat  nodak-pratyak  obh(8)iro  bhayet  l| 


278 


DV^BA 


Bhojanam  nanuvamfeam  syaoh.  chhayaiiaih  cha  fcafchaiTa  oli&  I 
Anuvam&a-grilaa-dvaram  naiva  karyam  ^abharfehibhih  11 

(Ibid.  V.  146, 157). 

Bkallate  dv5ram  ishtam  syad  brahmananam  vifeesbatah  II 
Madhya-sutrasya  vame  va  dvaram  vidiuvad  acharet  II 

(Ibid.  V.  166, 168). 

‘Jala-dvaram  punas  tesham  pravakshyami  nivelanam  | 

(Ibid.  V.  167-176). 

De*?aiiam  ubhayam  grahyam  madhya-dvaram  tu  vai  tale  l( 
G-opuram  oha  khaluri  cha  mula-vastu-nirikshLitam  } 

Antare  raja-de'vinam  gribany-anfear-mukbani  oba  II 

(Ibid.  XXXV.  54, 128). 

Dandika-vara-samyuktam  8han-netra-saina-vam§akam  I 
Vamfeopari  gatak  &ala&  chattaro’shtanananvitah  II 

(Ibid.  XLil,  19). 

(18)  Suprabhedagama  (xxxi.  7, 131-133): 

Bahya-bbittau  obatur-dvaram  abbaya  dvaram  ekatab  11  7 
Beferring  to  tbe  temples  of  the  attendant  deities  built  in  tbe 

five  courts  (prakara) ; 

Prakara-samyutam  kyitva  babye  vabbyantare’pi  va  I 
Ptirve  tu  pa&obime  dvaram  patobime  ptirvato  mukbam  II  131 
Dakshine  cbottara-dvaram  uttare  daksbinonmukbam  I 
Vabni&ana-stbitam  yat  tat  patcbime  dvaram  isbyate  II  132 
Nilanila-stbitam  cbaiva  purva-dvaram  pra&asyate  1 
Vyisbasya  mandapam  tatra  obatur-dtara-samayutam  II  133 

(19)  Mababbarata  (v,  91,  8 | i.  186,  119-122)  : 

Tasya  (duryodbana-gribasya)  kaksbya  vyatikramya  tisro  dvah- 
stbair  avMah  II 
Prasadaih  sukritocbbrayaib  II 
Suvarnajala-samvritair  mani-kuttima-bbusbanaih  II 
Sukbarobana-sopanair^mabasana-pariobobbadaib  11 
Asambadba-tata-dvaraih  tayanasana-tobbitaib  II 

(20)  See  Ep.  Ind.  (vol,  I.  Dabboi  Insorip.  v,  111,  p.  31). 


BVAEA-G-OPUEA 


279 


(21)  Vijaya-viksiiepat  bharukaohchha-pradvaravasakafcat — “ from. 

tile  camp  of  Tictory  fixed  before  the  gates  of  Bharukaohchha.” 

(Umeta  grant  of  Dadda  ii,  line  1,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  Vli.  pp.  63,  64). 

(22)  Svarna-dvaram  sthapitam  toranena  sarddham  ferimal-lokanS- 

thasya  gehe — “ placed  a golden  door  and  a torana  in  the 
temple  of  glorious  Lokanatha.” 

“ The  inscription  is  on  the  lintel  of  the  door  of  the  temple 
of  AvalokiteSvara  in  Bungmati.  The  door  is  made  of  gilt 
brass  plates,  and  adorned  by  relieyes.  The  arch  or  torana 
above  the  door,  which  is  likewise  made  of  brass,  encloses 
three  images  of  Loketvara.” 

(Inscriptions  from  Nepal,  no.  21,  Inscrip,  of 
Srinivasa,  line  6 f,  Ind.  Anti  vol,  ix.  p.  192, 

note  62). 

(23)  Atirtha-dvara-paksha-tobhartthaih  madisidam-^"  had  the 

side-doors  of  that  tirtha  made  for  beauty.*' 

(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol.  it.  no.  115,  Eoman  text,  p.  87, 
TransLp.  171). 

(24) .  See  Ohalukyan  Architecture  (Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp.  series 

vol.  XXI.  plates  v.  figs.  1,  2 ; liv  ; Lxxiv ; xov ; oxiii 
figs.  1,  2). 

(26)  See  Buddhist  Cave  temples  (ibid.  vol.  iv.  plates  xxiv ; xxiv, 
no.  1 ; XXXII,  nos.  1,  2 ; xxxY ; xliii,  no.  2). 

(26)  See  Cunningham’s  Arch.  Surv.  Eeports  (vol.  XIX.  plate  xix). 
DVA.EAKA- A gate-house.  ; 

Prasade  mandape  sarve  gopure  dvarake  tatha  I 
Sarva-harmyake  kuryat  tan-mukha-bhadram  \ 

' (M.  xviii.  326-328). 

DVAEA-O-OPUEA— (same  as  Maha-gopura)— The  gate-house  of  the 
fifth  or  last  court. 

(Suprabhedagama,  XXXI.  126,  see  under  Prakara), 


280 


DYlBA-KOSHTHA 


DYABA-K0SHTHA-(EA)— Agate-cliaiiiber. 

The  index  of  the  DiYyavadana  quoted  by  way  of  comparison 
with  SvakiyavasanikSi-dtaroah.tha,  dvarosh^ha-nishkasa- 
pravetaka,  and  niahkasa-praveta-dvaroshthaka. 

(Siyodoni  Insorip.  lines  14,  32,  33,  Bp.  Ind,  vol.  i.  pp.  165,  IT'S,  177), 

DVAEA-PRASADA— The  gate-house  of  the  third  courts 

See  Manasara  (xxxill.  9,  under  Gopura). 

See  also  Suprabhedagama  (xxxi.  124,  under  Prakara). 

DTAEA-I^AKHA — The  door-lintel,  the  door-frame,  jamb  or  post  (see 
6akha). 

“ He,  the  emperor  of  the  South,  caused  to  be  made  of  stone 
for  Vijaya-Narayana  (temple),  latticed  window,  secure  door- 
frame, door-lintel  (dvara-sahhaU),  kitchen,  ramparts,  pavilion 
and  a pond  named  Yasudeva-tirtha.*' 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  V.  part  I,  Belure  Taluq,  no.  72,  Transl. 

p.  61,  Eoman  text,  p.  142,  line  7). 

DVABA-^ALA— (see  Gopura) — ^A  gate-house. 

The  gate-house  of  the  second  court  (M.  xxxiil,  8,  and  Supra- 
bhedagama, XXXI.  124,  see  under  Prakara). 

DVARA-^OBHA — (see  Gopura) — A gate-house. 

The  gate-house  of  the  first  court  (M.  xxxiii.  8,  and  Suprabheda- 
gama, xxxi.  123,  see  under  PrSkara). 

HVAEA-HARMYA— (see  Gopura) — Agate-house. 

The  gate -house  of  the  fourth  court  (M.  xxxin.  9,  and  Supra- 
bhedagama, XXXI.  125,  see  under  Prakara). 

DVI-TALA — The  tWo-storeyed  buildings. 

ManasSra  describes  the  two-storeyed  buildings  in  a separate  chapter 
(xx.  1-116) ; the  eight  classes  (ibid.  2-45,  see  under 
Prasada) ; the  general  description  of  the  second  floor  (ibid. 
46-116). 

Cf.  Purato’sya  shodatanSm  varamgakanam  dvi-bhumika-grihani 
ali-dvayena  ramyany-achikaraj  jaya-sainye&ah — “in  front  of  the 
temple  he  (Jaya)  erected  two  rows  of  double-storied  houses  for 
sixteen  female  attendants.” 

(Chebrolu  Insorip.  of  Jaya,  v.  46,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  vi.  pp.  40,  39), 


BHANVA-DUEGA 


281 


DYI-TALA— A sculptural  measure  (see  details  under  Tsla-mana). 
DYI-PAKSHA— (of.  Eka-paksha) — Two  sides,  a street  (or  wall)  having 
foot-paths  on  both  sides. 

Dakshipottara-rathyam  tat  tat  samkhya  yatheshtaka  1 
Evaih  vithir  dvi-paksham(-8ha)  syan  madhya-rathyena(-ka)-pak8ha- 
kam  I 

Tasya  mulagrayo(r)  dete  k8hatra(?  kskudio)-manam  prakarayet  \ 
Bahya-vithir  dvi-pak8ham(-3ha)  syat  tad-bahit  ohavritam  budhaih  I 

(il.  IX.  350-353). 

Bathya  sarva  dvi-pak8ham(-sha)  syat  tiryan-mSrgaih  yatheoh- 

chhaya I 
(Ibid.  465). 

See  also  M.  IX.  396,  xxxvi.  86-87,  under  Eka-paksha. 
BYI-VAJEAKA—A  column  with  sixteen  rectangular  sides. 

Of,  Vajro’shtatrir  dvi-vajrako  dvi-gunah  \ 

(Byihat-samhit  a,  Liii.  28,  see  under  Stambha), 
DYTA^EA-Vl^ITTA  -A  two  angled  circle,  an  oval  building; 

(M.  XIX.  171,  XI.  3,  etc.,  see  under  Prasada). 


BH 

BHAEABA — (see  Btsedha) — A type  of  pavilion,  a kind  of  height,  an 
image. 

A height  which  is  1|  of  the  breadth  of  an  object  (see  M.  xxxv. 

22-26  and  cf,Kamikagama,L.  24-28,  under  Adbhuba). 

The  image  of  the  god  of  wealth  (M.  xxxii.  140). 

A class  of  pavilions  (M.  xxxiv.  328,  see  under  Mandapa). 
BHANUE-G-BAHA — A measure,  a cubit  (hasta)  of  27  ahgulas. 

(M.  II.  62,  and  Buprabhedagama,  xxx.  26,  see  under  Ahgula). 
BHANUB-MIJSHTI---A  measure,  a cubit  (hasta)  of  26  ahgulas. 

(M.  II,  61,  and  Buprabhedagama,  xxx.  26,  see  under  Ahgula). 
BHANUS — A measure  of  four  cubits. 

(M.  II.  63,  see  under  Ahgula), 
BHANYA-BXJBGA-— A fort  (see  details  under  Burgab 


282 


DHAMMILLA 


DHAMMILLA — The  braided  and  ornameiitied  hair  of  a woman  tied 
round  the  head  and  intermixed  with  dowers,,  pearls,  etc. 

A head  gear  (M.  XLix.  14,  etc). 

DHAEMA-RAJIKA— A monument,  a tope. 

Taudarmma-rajikam  sahgaih  dharmma-ohakraih  punar  navam  I 
“ They  repaired  the  dharma-rajika  (i.  e.  stupa)  and  the  dharma- 
ohakra  with  all  its  parts.’* 

(Sarnath  Insorip.  of  Mahipala,  line  2,  Ind.  Ant.  voL 
xiY.  p.  X40,  note  6), 

DHARMA*teLA — A rest-house. 

Vincent  Smith  G-loss  (loc.  oit)  to  Cunningham*s  Aroh.Surv,  Eeporta, 
BHAEMA-STAMBHA— A kind  of  pillar. 

(M.  XLVii.  14,  see  under  Stambha), 

BHAEMALAYA— A rest-house. 

Tatraiva  Ba(t)tra-tala  ya  agneye  paniya-mandapam  1 
Anya-dharmalayam  sarvam  yathe'shtaih  difeato  bhavet  I 

(M.  IX.  139-140). 

BHANYA-STAMBHA-A  kind  of  pillar. 

(M.  XLVII.  14,  see  under  Stambha), 
BHAEANA — A type  of  building,  a pillar,  a roof,  a tree. 

A class  of  the  seven-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxv.  26,  see  under 

PrSsada). 

A synonym  of  pillar  (M.  xv.  6)  and  of  roof  (M.  XVI.  62). 

A kind  of  tree  of  which  pillars  are  constructed  (M.  xv,  348-360). 
BHXEA-K-UMBHA— A moulding  of  the  base. 

(M.  XIV.  46,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Adhishthana). 
BHARA-NlLA — A blue  stream  of  water,  the  line  of  sacred  water 
descending  from  the  phallus. 

In  connection  with  the  phallus  : 

Garbha-geha-sthale  dhara-nila-madhye  samam  bhavet  I 
_ . (M.  lii.173). 

BHAEA-LI15G-A — A kind  of  phallus. 

(M.  Lii.  136  ; Llil.  48,  see  details  under  Lihga). 
BHVAJA-STAMBHA— (see  Stambha)— Flag-staffs,  free-pillars  erect- 
ed generally  by  the  worshippers  of  ^iva,  a pillar  or  pilaster  decora- 
ted with  banner  or  flag  (dhvaja)  at  the  top. 


HAGABA 


283 


N 

NAKUIiA — The  cage  of  the  mungoose  (M.  L.  245,  see  under  Bhtishna). 

NAKHA— -The  nail,  its  measurement,  eto,,  when  belonging  to  an  image. 

(M.  Lix.  LXv.  eto.,  21). 

HAKSHATBA-MALA— The  garland  of  stars,  an  ornament. 

(M.  L.  297,  see  under  Bhushana). 
hrAGABA(-Bl)— (of.  Grama)--A  town,  a city. 

(1)  Definition : 

Janaih  parivritam  dravya-kraya-vikrayakadibhih  I 
Aneka-jati-samyuktam  karmakaraih  samanvitam  II 
Sarva-devata-samyuktam  nagaram  ohabhidhiyate  II 

(Kamikagama,  xx.  6-6). 

(2)  Dhanu-featam  pariharo  gramasya  syat  samantatah  \ 

SamySpatas  trayo  7api  tri-guno  nagarasya  tu  II 

(Manu-saihhita,  yin  237), 

(3)  Dhanuh-tatam  pariharo  grama-kshetrantaram  bhayet  I 
Dye  tate  kharyatasya  syan  nagarasya  chatuh-tatam  II 

(Tajfiayalka,  II.  167). 

(4)  Nagaradi-yastum  oha  yakshye  rajyadi-vriddhaye  \ 
yojanam  yojanarddham  va  tad-artham  sthauam  atrayet  II 
Abhyarohya  vastu-aagaram  prakaradyam  tu  karayet  I 
Itadi-trimtat-padake  ptirva-dvaraih  oha  suryake  II 
Gandharvabhyam  dakshipe  syad  varunye  patohime  tatha  I 
Saumya-dvaram  saumya-pade  karya  hatyas  tu  vistarah  il 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  106,  y.  1-3). 
Then  follows  the  location  of  the  people  of  difierent  castes  and 
professions  in  yarious  quarters  (ibid,  v,  6-17). 

(6)  Chhinna-karna-vikarnam  oha  yyajanakriti-sarhsthitam  II 
Vrittam  vajraih  oha  dirgham  oha  nagaram  na  pratasyate  II 

.(Brahman^a-Purana,  part  I,  2nd.  Anushamga-pada, 
chap.  7,  Y,  107, 108,  see  also  v,  94, 110,  111). 


284 


NAGABA 


(6)  KautiHya-Artiia&astra  (oliap.  xxii.  p.  46,  foot  note)  : 

Nagaram  raja-dhani  I 

(Eayapaseni-sutra-vyakliyane,  p.  206), 
Nagrani  kara-Tarjitani  nigama-vanijam  stMnani  \ 

(Pratna-vyakarana-sutra-vyakhyane,  p.  306). 

(7)  Manasara  (chap.  x.  named  Nagara)  : 

The  dimension  of  the  smallest  town-tmit  is  100  x 200  x 4 cubits; 
the  largest  town-nnit  is  7,200  x 14,400  x 4 cubits  (lines  3-33). 
A town  may  be  laid  out  from  east  to  west  or  north  to  south 
according  to  the  position  it  occupies  (102).  There  should 
be  one  to  twelve  large  streets  in  a town  (110411).  It 
should  be  built  near  a sea,  river  or  mountain  (73,  61),  and 
should  have  facilities  for  trade  and  commerce  (48,  74)  with 
the  foreigners  (63).  It  should  have  defensive  walls,  ditches 
and  forts  (47)  like  a village.  There  should  be  gate-houses 
(gopura,  46),  gates,  drains,  parks,  commons,  shops, 
exchanges,  temples,  guest-houses,  colleges  (48  f)  etc.,  on  a 
bigger  scale  than  in  a village. 

Towns  are  divided  into  eight  classes,  namely,  Eaja-dhSni, 
Nagara,  Pura,  Nagari,  Kheta,  Kharvata,  Kubjaka,  and 
Pattana  (86-88), 

The  general  description  of  towns  given  above  is  applicable 
more  or  less  to  all  of  these  classes. 

For  purposes  of  defence,  the  capital  towns  commanding  stra- 
tegic points  are  well  fortified  and  divided  into  the  following 
classes— 6ibira,  Vahini-mukha,  Sthaniya,  Dropaka,  Sam- 
viddha,  Kolaka,  Nigama,  and  Skandhavara  (38-41,  66-86), 
The  forts  for  purely  military  purposes  are  called  giri-durga, 
vana-durga,  salila-ducga,  panka-durga,  ratha-durga,  deva- 
durga  and  mi'sra-durga  (86-87,  88-90,  90-107,  see  under 
Durga). 

(8)  “ On  the  banks  of  the  Sarayu  is  a large  country  called  Kotala, 

gay  and  happy,  and  abounding  with  cattle,  corn  and  wealth. 
In  that  country  was  a famous  city  called  Ayodhya,  built 


NiG-ABA 


285 


formerly  by  Mami,  the  lord  of  men.  A great  city  twelve 
yojanas  (108  miles)  in  length  and  nine  yojanas  (81  miles) 
in  breadth,  the  houses  of  which  stood  in  triple  and  long 
extended  rows.  It  was  rich  and  perpetually  adorned  with 
new  improvements,  the  streets  and  lanes  were  admirably 
disposed,  and  the  principal  streets  well  watered.  It  was 
filled  with  merchants  of  various  descriptions,  and  adorned 
with  abtLndanoe  of  jewels ; difficult  of  access,  filled  with 
spacious  houses,  beautified  with  gardens,  and  groves  of 
mango-trees,  surrounded  by  a deep  and  impassable  moat,  and 
completely  furnished  with  arms ; was  ornamented  with 
stately  gates  and  porticoes,  and  constantly  guarded  by 
archers.  As  Maghavan  protects  Amaravati,  so  did  the  magna- 
nimous Dataratha,  the  enlarger  of  his  dominions,  protects 
Ayodhya,  fortified  by  gates,  firmly  barred,  adorned  with  areas 
disposed  in  regular  order,  and  abounding  with  a variety  of 
musical  instruments  and  warlike  weapons;  and  with  artifices 
of  every  kind.  Prosperous,  of  unequalled  splendour,  it  was 
constantly  crowded  with  charioteers  and  messengers,  fur- 
nished with  tataghnis  (lit.  an  instrument  capable  of  des- 
troying a hundred  at  once,  that  is,  a cannon)  and  parighas 
(a  kind  of  club),  adorned  with  banners  and  high  arched 
porticoes,  constantly  filled  with  dancing  girls  and  musicians, 
crowded  with  elephants,  horses  and  chariots,  with  merchants 
and  ambassadors  from  various  countries,  frequented  by  the 
chariots  of  the  gods,  and  adorned  with  the  greatest  magni- 
ficence. It  was  decorated  with  various  kinds  of  jewels,  filled 
with  wealth,  and  amply  supplied  with  provisions,  beautified 
with  temples  and  sacred  chariots  (large  cars),  adorned  with 
gardens  and  bathing  tanks  and  spacious  buildings  and  full  of 
inhabitants.  It  abounded  with  learned  sages,  in  honour 
equal  to  the  immortals ; it  was  embellished  with  magnificent 
palaces,  the  domes  of  which  resembled  the  tops  of  mountains, 
and  surrounded  with  the  chariots  of  the  gods  like  the 


286 


NAaARA 


AmaraYati  of  Indra,  it  resembled  a mine  of  jewels  or  tbe 
residence  of  Laksmi  (tbe  goddess  of  prosperity)  ; the  walls 
were  variegated  with  divers  sorts  of  gems  like  the  division 
of  a chess-board,  and  it  was  filled  with  healthful  and  happy 
inhabitants  ; the  houses  formed  one  continued  row,  of  equal 
height,  resounding  with  the  delightful  music  of  the  tabor, 
the  fl.ute  and  the  harp.  ” 

The  city,  echoing  with  the  twang  of  the  bow,  and  sacred 
sound  of  the  Veda  was  eonstantly  filled  with  convivial 
assemblies  and  societies  of  happy  men.  It  abounded  with 
food  of  the  most  excellent  kinds ; the  inhabitants  were 
constantly  fed  with  the  tali  rice ; it  was  perfumed  with 
incense,  chaplets  of  flowers,  and  articles  for  sacrifice,  by  their 
odour  cheering  the  heart.” 

It  was  guarded  by  heroes  in  strength  equal  to  the  quarter- 
masters and  versed  in  all  tastras ; by  warriors,  who  protect  it, 
as  the  Nagas  guard  Bhogavati.  As  the  great  Indra  protects 
his  capital,  so  was  this  city,  resembling  that  of  the  gods, 
protected  by  King  Ba&aratha,  the  chief  of  the  Ikshvakus. 
This  city  was  inhabited  by  the  twice-born  who  maintained 
the  constant  sacrificial  fire,  (men)  deeply  read  in  the  Veda 
and  its  six  Angas,  endowed  with  excellent  qualities,  profusely 
generous,  full  of  truth,  zeal,  and  compassion,  equal  to  the 
great  sages,  and  having  their  minds  and  appetites  in  complete 
subjection.”  (Ramayana,  i.  6,  6-17). 

“ Lanka,  filled  with  mad  elephants,  ever  rejoioeth.  She  is 
great,  thronging  with  cars  and  inhabited  by  Rakshasas. 
Her  doors  are  firmly  established  and  furnished  with  massy 
bolts.  And  she  hath  four  wide  and  giant  gates.  (At  those 
gates)  are  powerful  and  large  arms,  stones,  and  engines, 
whereby  a hostile  host  approaching  is  opposed.  At  the 
entrance  are  arrayed  and  set  in  order  by  bands  of  heroic 
Rakshasas,  hundreds  of  sharp  iron  tataghnia  (fire-arms, 
guns).  She  hath  a mighty  impassable  golden  wall,  having 


NAaABA 


287 


its  side  emblazoned  in  the  centre  with  costly  stones,  coral, 
lapises  and  pearls.  -Bound  about  is  a moat,  exceedingly 
dreadful,  with  cool  water,  eminently  grand,  fathomless,  con- 
taining ferocious  aquatic  animals,  and  inhabited  by  fishes. 
At  the  gates  are  four  broad  bridges,  furnished  with  machines 
and  many  rows  of  grand  structures.  On  the  approach  of  the 
hostile  forces,  their  attack  is  repulsed  by  these  machines, 
and  they  are  thrown  into  the  ditch.  One  amongst  these 
bridges  is  immovable,  strong  and  fast  established;  adorned 

with  golden  pillars  and  daises ....And  dreadful  and 

resembling  a celestial  citadel,  Lanka  cannot  be  ascended  by 
means  of  any  support.  She  hath  fortresses  composed  of 
streams  (cf.  Jala-durga),  those  of  hills,  and  atifioial  ones  of 
four  kinds.  And  way  there  is  none  even  for  barks,  and 
all  sides  destitude  of  division.  And  that  citadel  is  built  on 
the  mountain’s  brow ; and  resembling  the  metropolis  of  the 
immortals,  the  exceedingly  invincible  Lanka  is  filled  with 
horses  and  elephants.  And  a moat  and  ^ataghnis  and 
various  engines  adorn  the  city  of  Lanka,  belonging  to  the 

wicked  Ravana his  abode  consists  of  woods,  hills,  moat, 

gateways,  walls,  and  dwellings.”  (Ibid.  vi.  Lanka-kanda, 
3rd.  Sarga). 

(9)  The  Mahabharata  has  “ short  but  comprehensive  account  of  the 

city  of  Dvaraka  ( i.  Ill,  15),  Indra-prastha  (i.  207,  30  f),  the 
floating  city  (iii.  173,3),  Mithila  (iii.  207,7),  Eavapa’s  Lanka 
(iii.  283,3  and  284,4,30),  the  sky -town  (viii.  33, 19),  and  the 
ideal  town  (xv.  5,  16).  In  the  Ramayana  we  find  nearly  the 
same  disoriptions  as  those  in  this  later  part  of  the  Epic 
(Mhb.).” 

(10)  "We  may  examine  the  general  plan  of  a Hindu  city 

It  had  high,  perhaps  concentric,  walls  about  it,  in  which 
were  watch-towers.  Massive  gates,  strong  doors’-  protected 
chiefly  by  a wide  bridge  moat,  the  latter  filled  with  crocodiles 

* XV. ,16.  3 ; the  king  left  Hastinapuc  by  a high  gate. 


238 


NA^AEA 


and  armed  with  palings,  guarded  the  walls.  The  store- house 
was  built  near  the  rampart.  The  city  was  laid  out  in  several 
squares.^  The  streets  were  lighted  with  torches.^  The  trader 
and  the  king’s  court  made  this  town  their  residence.  The 
farmers  lived  in  the  country,  each  district  guarded  if  not  by 
a tower  modelled  on  the  great  city,  at  least  by  a fort  of  some 
kind.  Out  of  such  fort  grew  the  town.  Eound  the  town  as 
round  the  village,  was  the  common  land  to  some  distance” 
(later  converted  into  public  gardens,  as  we  see  in  the 
Mudrarakshasa). 

In  the  city  special  palaces  existed  for  the  king,  the  princes, 
the  chief  priests,  ministers  and  military  oflaoers.  Besides 
these  and  humble  dwellings  (the  larger  houses  being  divided 
into  various  courts),  there  were  various  assembly-halls,  danc- 
ing-halls, liquor-saloons,  gambling-halls,  courts  of  justice,  and 
the  booths  of  small  traders  with  goldsmiths*  shops,  and  the 
work-places  of  other  artisans.  The  arsenal  appears  to  have 
been  not  far  from  the  king’s  apartments.  Pleasure-parks 
abounded.  The  royal  palace  appears  always  to  have  had 
its  dancing-hall  attached.  The  city-gates  ranged  in  number 
from  four  to  eleven,  and  were  guarded  by  squads  of  men  and 
single  wardens.^  Door-keepers  guarded  the  courts  of  the 
palace  as  well  as  the  city  gates.^”  (Hopkin,  J.  A.  0.  S. 
13,  pp.  175,  176).  

* ‘*a?he  Mbb.  recommends  six  squares,  but  I find  only  four  mentioned  in  the  Eiimayaua 
n.  48,19. 

Mdh.  XV,  6,  16 : Puram  Sapta-padwh  sarvato-difiam  (town  oi  seven  wall,  but 
Hopkin  does  not  think  that  there  were  walls. 

* Bimayapa,  VI.  112,  i2!  Sikta-ratbyantarapapa. 

hibh,  I.  231,  86:  Indraprastba  ia  desotibed  aa  aammriBbta-BiktB.paatba 
» Katliaka-Upanisbad,  v.  1,  speaks  of  a (own  with  eleven  gates  as  a possibility  (tlis  body 
is  like  a town  with  eleven  gates).  Nine  gates  are  given  to  a town  by  VarSha,  p 52,  6 : 
TSava  dvarem,. , . ..eka-stambham  obatnsh-patham.  Lafika  has  four  bridged 
gate8(eigbt  in  all  and  eight  walla)  (B.  vi.  98,  (f).  Four  gates  are  implied  in  the  6tb 
act  of  Mflobcbhakatika  where  the  men  are  told  to  go  to  the  four  quarters  to  the 
gales. 

* Those  courts  have  mosaic  pavements  of  gold ; B.  vi.  87,  87,  68  j Mbb.  i.  186,  20  ; ii. 

83  and  84." 


NAGARA 


(11)  “It  will  probably  be  a revelation  to  modern  arobitecta  to 
know  how  scientifically  the  problems  of  town-planning  are 
treated  in  these  ancient  Indian  architectural  treatises. 
Beneath  a great  deal  of  mysticism,  which  may  be  scoffed 
at  as  pure  superstition,  there  is  a foundation  of  sound 
common  sense  and  scientific  knowledge  which  should  appeal 
to  the  mind  0 the  European  expert.  ” 

“ The  most  advanced  science  of  Europe  has  not  yet  improved 
upon  the  principles  of  the  planning  of  the  garden  cities  of 
India  based  upon  the  Indian  village-plan  as  a unit.^’ 

“ The  Indo-Aryan  villages  took  the  lay-out  of  the  garden-plot 
as  the  basis  of  its  organisation.  But  more  probably  the 
village  scheme  was  originally  the  plan  of  the  military  camp 
of  the  Aryan  tribes  when  they  first  estabished  themselves 
in  the  valley  of  the  Indus. 

(Havel,  A study  of  Indian  Civilisation,  pp.  7-8, 18). 

(12)  The  principles  of  Indian  town-planning  have  some  striking 
similarity  to  those  of  early  European  cities.  It  would  be 
interesting  to  compare  the  Manasara  with  Vitruvius : 

“ In  setting  out  the  walls  of  a city  the  choice  of  a healthy 
situation  is  of  the  first  importance.  It  should  be  on  high 
ground  neither  subject  to  fogs  nor  rains  : its'  aspects  should 
be  neither  violently  hot  nor  intensely  cold,  but  temperate  in 
both  respects,... 

“ A city  on  the  sea-side,  exposed  to  the  south  or  west,  will  be 
insalubrious.  ” (Vitruvius,  Book  I,  chap.  iv). 

“ When  we  are  satisfied  with  the  spot  fixed  on  for  the  site  of 
the  city,  as  well  as  in  respect  of  the  goodness  of  the  air  as  of 
the  abundant  supply  of  provisions  for  the  support  of  the 
population,  the  oommunioations  by  good  roads  and  river 
or  sea  navigation  for  the  transport  of  merchandise,  we 
should  take  into  consideration  the  method  of  constructing 
the  walls  and  towers  of  the  city.  These  foundations  should 
19 


290 


NAGABA 


be  carried  down  to  a solid  bottom  (of.  Manasara  under 
‘ Garbba-nyasa  0 if  snob  can  be  found,  and  should  be  built 
thereon  of  such  thickness  as  may  be  necessary  for  the  proper 
support  of  that  part  of  the  wall  which  stands  above  the 
natural  level  of  the  ground.  They  should  be  of  the  soundest 
workmanship  and  materials,  and  of  greater  thickness  than 
the  walls  above.  From  the  exterior  face  of  the  wall,  towers 
must  be  projected,  from  which  an  approaching  enemy  may 
be  annoyed  by  weapons,  from  the  ambrasures  of  those 
towers,  right  and  left.  An  easy  approach  to  the  walls 
must  be  provided  against : indeed  they  should  be  surrounded 
by  uneven  ground,  and  the  roads  leading  to  the  gates  be 
winding  and  turn  to  the  left  from  the  gates.  By  this 
arrangement  the  right  sides  of  the  attacking  troops,  which 
are  not  covered  by  their  shields,  will  be  open  to  the  weapons 
of  the  besieged.” 

‘ Q^he  plan  of  the  city  should  not  be  square,  nor  formed  with 
acute  angles,  but  polygonal,  so  that  the  motions  of  the 
enemy  may  be  open  to  observation ” 

“ The  thickness  of  the  walls  should  be  sufficient  for  two  armed 
men  to  pass  each  other  with  ease.  The  walls  ought  to  be 
tied,  from  front  to  rear,  with  many  pieces  of  charred  olive 
wood ; by  which  means  the  two  faces,  thus  connected,  will 
endure  for  ages.'^ 

“ The  distance  between  each  tower  should  not  exceed  an  arrow’s 

flight The  walls  will  be  intercepted  by  the  lower 

parts  of  the  towers  where  they  occur,  leaving  an  interval 
equal  to  the  width  of  the  tower  ; which  space  the  tower  will 
consequently  occupy.  The  towers  should  be  made  either 
round  or  polygonal.  A square  (tower)  is  a bad  form,  on 
account  of  its  being  easily  fractured  at  the  quoins  by 
the  battering-ram;  Whereas  “the  circular  tower  has  this 
advantage,  that  when  battered,  the  pieces  of  masonry 


HA^AEA 


291 


whereof  it  is  composed  being  ounelform,  they  cannot 
be  driven  in  towards  their  centre  without  displacing 
the  whole  mass.  Nothing  tends  more  to  the  security  of 
walls  and  towers  than  backing  them  with  walls  or  terraces : 
it  counteracts  the  effects  of  rams  as  well  as  of  under- 
mining”. 

“ In  the  construction  of  ramparts,  very  wide  and  deep  trenches 
are  to  be  first  excavated ; the  bottom  of  which  must  be  still 
further  dug  out  for  receiving  the  foundation  of  the  wall. 
This  must  be  of  sufficient  thickness  to  resist  the  pressure 
of  the  earth  against-  it.  Then,  according  to  the  apace 
requisite  for  drawing  up  the  cohorts  in  military  order  on 
the  ramparts,  another  wall  is  to  be  built  within  the  former, 
towards  the  city.  The  outer  and  inner  walla  are  then  to 
be  connected  by  cross  walls,  disposed  on  the  plan  after  the 
manner  of  the  teeth  of  a comb  or  a saw,  so  as  to  divide  the 
pressure  of  the  filling  in  earth  into  many  and  less  forces, 
and  thus  prevent  the  walls  froin  being  thrust  out.  ” The 
materials  are  stated  to  be  “ what  are  found  in  the  spot : 
such  as  square  stones,  flint,  rubble  stones,  burnt  or  unburnt 
bricks.”  (Ibid.  Book  I,  chap.  v). 

“ The  lanes  and  streets  (of  which  no  details  are  given)  of  the 
city  being  set  out,  the  choice  of  sites  for  the  convenience 
and  use  of  the  state  remains  to  be  decided  on ; for  sacred 
edifices,  for  the  forum,  and  for  other  public  buildings.  If 
the  place  adjoin  the  sea,  the  forum  should  be  seated  close  to 
the  harbour : if  inland  it  should  be  in  the  centre  of  the 
town.  The  temples  of  the  gods,  protectors  of  the  city,  as 
those  of  Jupiter,  Juno,  and  Minerva,  should  be  on  some 
eminence  which  commands  a view  of  the  greater  part  of  the 
city.  The  temple-of  Mercury  should  be  either  in  the  forum 
or,  as  also  the  temple  of  Isis  and  Serapis  in  the  great  public 
square  j those  of  Apollo  and  Bather  Bacchus  near  the 
theatre.  If  there  be  neiUier-amphitheabre  nor  gymnasium, 


292 


NAG-AB^ 


the  temple  of  Hercules  should  be  near  the  oirous.  The 
temple  of  Mars  should  be  out  of  the  city,  in  the  neighbour- 
ing country ; that  of  Venus  near  to  the  gate.  According  to  the 
revelations  of  the  Hetrurian  Haruspices,  the  temples  of  Venus, 
Vulcan  and  Mars  should  be  so  placed  that  those  of  the  first 
be  not  in  the  way  of  contaminating  the  matrons  and  youth 
with  the  influence  of  lust ; that  those  of  Vulcan  be  away 
from  the  city,  which  would  consequently  be  freed  from  the 
danger  of  fire  ; the  divinity  presiding  oyer  that  element  being 
drawn  away  by  the  rites  and  sacrifices  performing  in  his 
temple.  The  temple  of  Mars  should  be  also  out  of  the  city, 
that  no  armed  frays  may  disturb  the  peace  of  the  citizens, 
and  that  this  divinity  may,  moreover,  be  ready  to  preserve 
them  from  their  enemies  and  the  perils  of  war.  The  temple 
of  Ceres  should  be  in  a solitary  spot  out  of  the  city,  to 
which  the  public  are  not  necessarily  led  but  for  the  purpose 
of  sacrificing  to  her.  This  spot  is  to  be  reverenced  with 
religious  awe  and  solemnity  of  demeanour  by  those  whose 
affairs  lead  them  to  visit  it.  Appropriate  situations  must 
also  be  chosen  for  the  temples  and  places  of  sacrifice  to  the 
other  divinities.  ” (Ibid.  Book  I,  chap.  vii). 

(iS)  Vijitya  vitvam  viiayabhidhanam  vitvottaram  yo  nagarim 

vyadhatta  I 

Ya  hema-kfitam  nija-sala-bahu-lata-chhaleneva  parishvajanti  11 
Yat-prakara-tikhavali-parilasat-kinjalka-puniaohitam  yach 

chhaka-pura-jala-nachitaih  sad-danti-bhringanvitam  1 
Sphayad  yat-parikha-iala-pratiphaladyat-pranta-pyithvi-dhara- 
ohchhaya-nalam  idam  purabjam  anitam  lakshmya  sahalam- 

bate  1! 

Having  conquered  all  the  world,  he  (Bukka-Eaja)  built  a 
splendid  city  called  the  city  of  victory  (Vijayanagari).  Its 
four  walls  were  like  arms  stretching  out  to  embrace  Hema- 
kuta.  The  points  of  the  battlemants  like  its  filaments,  the 


NAGAEA 


293 


suburbs  like  ifes  blossom,  fcbe  elephants  like  bees,  the  hills 
reflected  in  the  water  of  the  moat  like  stems, — the  whole 
city  resembled  the  lotus  on  which  Lakshmi  is  ever  seated.  ” 
(Ep.  Oarnat.  voL  v.  part  1,  Channarayapatna 
Taluq,  no.  256,  Eoman  text,  p.  521,  lines  1-6, 
TransL  p.  732,  para  2,  line  4). 

(14)  Grama-nagara-kheda-karvvada-maijamba-drona-mukha-pat- 
tanam  galimdam  aneka-mata-kuta-prasada-devayatanaihga- 
lidam  oppuva-agrahara-patta-namgalimdam  atitayav-apya — 
“ (At  Teridala,  a merchant-town  situated  in  the  centre  and  the 
first  in  importance  among  the  twelve  (towns)  in  the  glorious 
Kundi  Three-Thousand,  adorned  with)  villages,  towns,  ham- 
lets, villages  surrounded  by  hills,  groups  of  villages,  sea-girt 
towns,  and  chief  cities,  with  elegant  mansions,  palaces  and 
temples,  and  with  shining  agrahara-towns  in  the  country  of 
.Kuntala.  ” 

(Old  Kanarese  Inscrip,  at  Terdal,  line  58,  Ind. 

Ant.  vol.  XIV.  pp.  19,  25). 

(16)  “ With  myriads  of  people,  practices  of  virtue,  agreeable  occu- 
pations, streams  of  the  (nine)  sentiments,  pleasure-gardens, 
separated  lovers,  splendid  tanks,  full  lotus  beds,  gilded  boats 
for  spring  festivals,  ghatika-sthanas  (religious  centres),  the 
supports  of  dharmma  and  mines  of  enjoyment,  moats  which 
were  as  if  the  sea  being  overcome  had  returned  here  on 
account  of  the  collection  of  gems,  groups  of  the  lotus  faces 
of  beautiful  women  fair  as  the  moon  (grama -nagara-kheda- 
kharvvana-madamba-drona-mukha-pura  -pattana-raja-dhani) 
on  whatever  side  one  looked,  in  these  nine  forms  did  the 
Kuntala-deta  shine. 

(It  should  be  noticed  that  the  passage  within  brackets  is 
almost  identical  with  the  corresponding  passage  in 
quotation  no,  14  above). 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no, 
197,  Transl.  p.  124,  para  1,  last  seven  lines; 

Eoman  text,  p.  214,  line  27  f). 


294 


NATOAN-A 


(16)  Tisiting  the  gramas,  nagaras,  hhe^as,  khaxYvadas, 
madambas,  pafetanas,  drona-ttmkhas,  and  samTahanas,— the 
cities  ol  the  elephants  at  the  cardinal  points,” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  'vti.  Shikarpnr  Takq,  no.  118, 
Transl.  p.  86,  last  para,  line  14). 

(17)  “ Thus  entitled -in  many  ways  to  honour,  residents  of  Ayya- 
vole,  Challanki  and  many  other  chief  gramas,  nagaras, 
khedas,  kharwadas  madambas,  dronamukhas,  pnras,  and 
pattanas,  of  li5la  Q-anla,  Bangala  Eatmira,and  other  connt- 
ries  at  the  points  of  the  compass.  ” 

(Ibid.  no.  119,  transl*  p.  90,  para  6). 
NANBANA— (of.  Nanda-vritta)— -A  storeyed  bnilding,  a pavilion. 

A type  of  building  which  has  six  Storeys  and  sixteen  cupolas  (anda), 
and  is  32  cubits  wide : 

(1)  Byihat-samhita  (lyi.  22,  J.  R.  A.  S.,  N.S.,  vol.  vi,  p.  319,  see 

under  Prasada). 

(2)  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  269,  V.  29,  33,  48,  63,  see  under  Prasada). 

(3)  Bhayishya-Purana  (chap.  130,  y.  29,  see  under  Prasada). 
A type  of  quadrangular  building : 

(4)  G-aruda-Purana  (chap.  47,  y.  24-26,  see  under  Prasada). 

(6)  A pyvilion  with  thirty  pillars : 

, (Matsya-Purana,  chap.  273  y.  12,  see  Imder  Mandapa,  and 
of.  Buprabhedagama  under  Nanda-vritta). 
NANBA-VRITTA — ^An  open  pavilion  gracefully  built  with  16  columns.- 
(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  101,  see  under  Mandapa). 
NANBI-MANBAPA— (see  under  Mandapa) — A pavilion. 

See  Pallava  Architecture  (Arch.  Surv.  new.  Imp.  series,  vol. 

xxxiy.  plate  Lxix,  fig.  4). 
NANBYAVARTA-ir-A  type  of  building,  a pavilion,  a village,  a ground, 
plan,  a joinery,  a window,  a phallus,  an  entablature. 

(1)  Manasara 

A class  of  the  six-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxiv.  24,  see  under 

Prasada), 

A class  of  villages  (M.  ix.  2,  see  under  Grama), 

A kind  of  joinery  (M.  xvii.  64,  see  under  Sandhi-karman). 


NANBYAVABTA 


295 


A type  of  window  (M.  xxxiir.  683,  see  under  Vatayana). 

A type  of  four-faoed  pavilion  (M.  xxxiv.  555,  see  under 


In  connection  with  the  phallus  (M.  Eii.  177,  see  under  Lihga). 
In  connection  with  the  ground-plan  (M.  vni.  35,  see  under 

Pada-vinyasa). 

(2)  Nandyavartam  alindaih  tala-kudyat  pradakshinantargataih  I 
Dvaram  patchimam  asmin  vihaya  §esham  karyani  II 

“ Nandyavarta  is  the  name  of  a building  with  terraces  that 
from  the  wall  of  the  room  extend  to  the  extremity  in  a 
direction  from  east  to  south  (alias  from  left  to  right).  It 
must  have  doors  on  every  side,  except  the  west.’V 
(Byihat-saihhita,  liiii.  32,  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  vi.  p.  285). 

(3)  Sarvatohhadram  ashtasyam  vedasyaih  vardha-manakam  II 
Dakshine  chottare  ohaiva  shan-netrath  svastikaih  matam  1 
Partvayoh  puratat  ohaiva  ohatur-netra-samayutam  II 
Nandyavartam  smritam  purve  dakshipe  patchime  tatha  \ 
Uttare  saumya-taladi  salanam  asyam  iritam  II 

(Kamikagama,  XXXV,  88,  89,  90). 

An  entablature  (ibid.  Liv,  7). 

Ibid. ^XLI.  (named  Nandyavarta-vidhi:  1-37)  : 

The  three  sizes  (1-6),  and  the  four  classes^  namely,  jiiti, 
chhanda,  vikalpa  and  abhasa  (7-9)  : 

Nandyavartam  ohatush-pattammulenatra  vihinakam  I , 
Dvaram  chatushtayaih  vapi  yatheshtha-diti  va  bhavet  It  7 
Jalakat  cha  kavatat  cha  bahye  bahye  prakalpayet  I 
Sarvatah  kudya-samyuktam  mukhya-dhamatra  kirtitam  II  8 
Autar-vivrita-padam  oha  bahye  kudyam  prakirtitam  \ 
Chatur-dikshu  vinishkrantam  ardha-kutam  prayojayet  II 
Eandika-vara-samyuktam  jati-rupam  idam  matam  11  9 


296 


NANDIKA 


The  other  details  of  this  and  the  remaining  three  classes  and 
the  sub-classes  are  also  given  (10-36) : 

Bvam  shodatadha  proktam  nandyavartam  dvijottamah  !1  37 
(4)  A class  of  buildings : 

Nandyavartam  iti  triiDLU  I 

Ohatush-kutat  chatuh-salat  chatvarah  partva-nasikah  II 
Mukha-nasi  tatha  yuktam  dva-datam  chanu-nasikSh  \ 
Chatuh-sopana-samyuktam  bhumau  bhumau  vileshatah  II 

Nandyavartam  idam  yatsa... II 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  48,  49,  50). 
A pavilion  with  36  columns  (ibid.  xxxi.  103,  see  under  Man-- 

dapa). 


NANDIKA — A type  of  quadrangular  building. 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  104,  V.  14-16,  see  under  Prasada). 
NANDI-VAEDHAHA— -A  type  of  building, 

(1)  A kind  of  building  which  is  shaped  like  the  sun-eagle,  but  is 

devoid  of  the  wings  and  tail,  has  seven  storeys  and  twenty 
cupolas,  and  is  24  cubits  wide  : 

Garudakyitit  cha  garudo  nanditi  oha  shat-ohatushka- 

vistirnah 

Karyafe  cha  sapta-bhaumo  vibhushito’ndait  oha  vimlatya  It 
Commentary  quotes  the  clearer  description  from  Katyapa : 

Garudo  garudakarah  paksha-puchohha-vibhushitah  I 
Nandi  tad-akritir  jfieyah  pakshadi-rahitah  punah  II 
Karanam  shat-ohatushkamt  cha  vistirpau  sapta-bhumikau  I 
Databhir  dvi-gunair  andair  bhushitau  karayet  tu  tau  II 

(Brihat-samhita,  LVII  24,  J.  B.  A.  S.,  N.  S,  vol.  vi. 

p.  319). 

(2)  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  269,  V.  33,  48,  63,  see  under  Prasada). 

(3)  Bhavishya-Purapa  (chap.  130,  V.  28,  31,  see  under  Prasada). 

A kind  of  quadrangular  building : 

(4)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  v.  14-16,  see  under  Prasada). 

(6)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v,  24-36,  see  under  Prasada). 


NAYA-TALA 


297 


NAPUKESAKA — ’(of.  Sferili:6ga  and  Pumlinga)— A neuter  type  of 
building,  (see  under  Prasada), 

Cf . Pancha-varga-yutam  mi&ram  arpitanarpitangakam  \ 
Pashandanaih  idam  feastam  napumsaka-samanvitam  II 

(Kamikagama,  XM.  11). 
For  the  meaning  of  panoha-varga  see  ibid.  xxxv.  21  under 
Shad-varga. 

HABHAsVAN — A class  of  chariots. 

(M.  XLiii.  112,  see  under  Eatha). 

NAYANONMlLANA — Chiselling  the  eye  of  an  image;  sculpturally 
it  would  imply  the  finishing  touch  with  regard  to  making  an 
image. 

For  details  see  M,  Lxx.  (named  Nayanonmilana)  1-114, 
NAEA-Q-AEBHA — The  foundation  of  the  residential  buildings, 

(See  details  under  Carbha-nyasa). 
NALlNAKA — A class  of  buildings  distinguished  by  open  quadrangles 
surrounded  by  buildings  and  furnished  with  platforms  and  stairs. 
Chatuh-tala-samayukto  vedi-sopana-sanayutah  1 

Nalinakas  tu  samprokta(-tah)........ ..II 

(Suprabhedagama,  XXXI.  46). 
.NAYA-TALA — The  nine-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxvii.  2-47) ; the 
description  of  the  ninth  storey  (ibid.  36-47) ; seven  classes  (2- 
33).  See  under  Prasada, 

NAYA-TALA — ^A  sculptural  measurement  in  accordance  with  which 
the  whole  length  of  an  image  is  nine  times  the  height  of  the  face 
which  is  generally  twelve  angtilas  (nine  inches) ; this  length  is 
divided  into  9 x 12  =»  108  equal  parts  which  are  proportionally 
distributed  over  the  different  limbs.  (See  under  Tala-mana). 

Cf.  Nava-tala-pramanas  tu  deva-danava-kimnarah  \ 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  268,  V.  16)." 
Evam  narishu  sarvasu  devanam  pratimasu  cha  \ 

Nava-talam  proktam  lakshanam  papa-nafeanam  il 

(Ibid.  V.  75). 

The  details  of  this  system  of  measure  employed  both  for  male  and 
female  statues  are  given  (ibid.  V.  26-74). 


NAVA-BHtMI 


298 

NAVA-BHUMI — (same  as  Nava-fcala) — ^Nine-storeyed  buildings,  the 
ninth  storey  (see  Nava-tala). 

NAYA-RANGA — (see  Sapta-ranga) — A detaohed  paYilion  (with  108 
columns) . . 

(1)  Salindam  nava-rahgaiii  syad  ashtottara-^atfinghrikam  1 

(M,  XXXIV.  107). 

(2)  Koneri  “erected  a nava-rahga  of  10  ahkanas,  with  secure 

foundation  and  walls,  ior  the  god  Tirumala  of  the  central 
street  of  MalalaYadi.” 

(Ep.  Carnat,  vol.  iv.  Hunsur  Taluq,  no.  I, 
Transl.  p.  83,  Roman  text,  p.  134), 

(3)  Buntigramada  nava-raiigada  kalla-bagilann  kattisi  huli-mukha- 

yan — (Deva^Maharaya)  “ caused  the  stone  gateway  of 
Santigrama  to  be  constructed  and  ornamented  with  the 
tiger-face.  (This  work  was  carried  out  by  Sihganahe- 
baruya  of  the  yillage).” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  I,  Hassan  Taluq,  no. 

17,  Roman  text,  p.  76,  Transl.  p.  34), 

(4)  Sri-gopala-svamiyavara  nava-ranga-patta-tale-prakaravanu 

kattisi — for  the  god  Gopala  “ ho  erected  a nava-rahga-patta- 
tale  (a  naya-rahga  and  a patta&ala,  see  below)  and  an 
enclosure-wall  (and  promoted  a work  of  merit), 
Naya-ranga-prakara-patta-§ale-8amasta-dharmma — “ this  nava- 
rahga,  enclosure-wall,  patta-lala  and  all  the  work  of  merit 
were  carried  out........ 

(Bp.  Carnat.  yol.  v.  part  I,  Channarayapatna  Taluq, 
no.  186,  Roman  text,  p.  467,  lines  8,17  ; Transl. 

' p.206). 

(5)  Compare  Sapta-ranga  (at  Oomilla  in  Bengal)  which  is  a pagoda- 

shaped detached  building  of  seven  storeys  built  on  the 
right  side  of  the  rahga-mandapa,  another  detached  building, 
facing  the  front  side  of  the  main  shrine  or  temple  of  the 
god  Jagannatha.  All  these  buildings  and  the  tank  behind 
the  shrine  are  within  the  enclosing  wall  (prakara). 


NlGlAEA 


299 


(6)  “ It  (Mallei vara  temple  at  Hulikat)  faces  north  and  consists  of 
a garhha-griha,  an  open  snkha-nasi,  a nava-rahga,  and 
a porch.  The  garbha-griha,  sukha-nasi  and  porch  are  all  of 
the  same  dimensions  being  about  4|  feet  square,  while  the 
nava-rahga  measures  16  feet  by  14  feet.” 

(Mysore  Arch.  Eeport,  1915-16,  p.  4,  para,  10 ; see 
also  p.  6,  para.  12,  plate  III,  fig,  2). 
“ The  * nava-rahga  ’ is  an  open  hall  with  two  rows  of  four 
pillars  at  the  side,  all  the  pillars  except  two  being  carved 
with  large  female  figures  in  relief  in  the  front.’* 

(Ibid.  p.  15,  para.  19). 

NA.GA-KALA— -A  stone  on  which  the  image  of  a serpent  is  carved. 

See  Oh^ukyan  Architecture  (Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp.  series,  vol.  xxi, 
p.  39,  plates  xoix.  fig.  2,  Xo.  figs.  2,3), 

N AGA-BANDHA— A kind  of  window  resembling  the  hood  of  a cobra. 

(M.. XXXIII.  682,  see  under  Vatayana). 
HAGAEA— One  of  the  three  styles  of  architecture  ; it  is  quadrangular 
in  shape,  the  other  two  (Vesara  and  Dravida)  being  respectively 
■ round  and  octagonal. 

(1)  Manasara ; 

The  characteristic  features  of  the  three  styles ; 
Mhladi-stupi-paryantam  Vedaferam  ohayata&rakam  l 
Dvya&ram  vrittakfitam  vatha  grivadi-feikharakiitih  1 
Stupi-karpa-sarnyuktam  dvayam  vS  ohaikam  eva  va  \ 
Ohatur-atrakyitim  yas  tu  Nagaram  tat  prakirtitam  I 
Mulagraih  vyittam  akaram  tad  yat  ayatam  eva  va  I 
Grivadi-stupi-paryantana  yuktatho(-dhas)  tad  yuga&rakam  I 
Vyittasyagre  dvyatrakam  tad  Vesara-nSmakam  bhavet  1 
Mulagrat  stupi-paryantam  ashtaferam  va  shad-atrakam  I 
Tad-agram  chayatam  vapi  grivasyadho  yuga&rakam  I 


300 


NAGAEA 


Purvavaoh.  chordhva-de&aih  syad  Dravidam  tat  jJrakirtitam  | 
Samri§raika-&ikha-yaktam  ckayame  taoh-cliliikha-trayam  t 
Dryasra-vrittopari-stupi  vrittam  va  diatur-a^rakain  1 
Padmadi-kudmalantam  syad  uktatad  vakriti(m)  nyaset  \ 

(M.  xvni.  90-102). 

The  Nagara  style  is  distinguished  by  its  quadrangular  shape ; 
the  Vesara  by  its  round  shape,  and  the  Dravida  by  its 
octagonal  or  hexagonal  shape; 

See  Suprabhedagama  below  and  compare  : 

(Eeferring  to  the  pedestal  of  the  pallus)  ; 

Ntigararh  chatur-atram  ashtatram  Dravidam  tatha  \ 

Yrittam  cha  Vesaram  proktam  etat  pithakritis  tatha  I 

(M,  Lin.  63-54). 

These  distinguishing  features  are  noticed  generally  at  the 
upper  part  of  a building: 

Oriva-mastaka-tikha-prade&ake  \ 

Nagaradi-samalahkritoktavat  \ 

(M.  XXI.  71-72).  • 

N agara-Drfi vida- V esaradin(-dinrim ) t ikhanvitam, . . . (barmy am)  j 

(M.  XXVI.  76), 

Referring  to  chariots  (ratha)  : 

Veda^ram  Nagaram  proktam  vasvatram  Dravidam  bhavet  \ 
Suvrittaiii  Vesaraiii  proktam  ra(A)ndhram  syat  tu  shad-atra- 

kam  i 

(M.  XLiri.  123-124). 

Au  important  addition  is  noticed  in  this  passage  ; this  style  is 
designated  as  Randra,  which  is  perhaps  a corruption  of 
Andhra. 

In  an  ephigraphical  record  Kalihga  also  is  mentioned  as  a 
distinct  style  of  architecture  (see  below). 


NlGAEA 


301 


If  the  identification  of  Yesara  with  Telugu  or  Tri-kalinga  is 
accepted  (see  below),  and  if  the  reading  Andhra  for  Randhra 
is  also  accepted,  the  Kalinga  and  the  Andhra  would 
be  two  branches  of  Yesara.  And  as  the  Dravida  style  is 
stated  to  be  of  the  hexagonal  or  octagonal  shape  (see  above) 
it  would  appear  that  the  Dravida  proper  is  octagonal  and 
the  Andhra,  which  is  placed  between  the  Dravida  and  the 
Yesara,  is  hexagonal  (see  further  discussion  below). 
The  same  three  styles  are  distinguished  in  sculpture  also: 
(Lingam)  Nagaraih  Dravidam  chaiva  Yesaram  cha  tridha 

matam  1 
(M.  Liii.  76,  also  100). 

Kuryat  tu  nagare  linge  pitham  Nagaram  eva  cha  \ 

Dravide  Dravidam  proktam  vesare  Yesaram  tatha  I 

(M.  LIII.  46-47,  etc). 

(2)  Kamikagama  (lxy.  6-7,  12-18)  : 

Pratyekam  tri-vidham  proktam  samohitam  chapy-asamchitam  \ 
Upasamohitam  ity-evam  Nagaram  Dravi^m  tatha  II  6 
Yetaram  cha  tatha  jatit  ohhando  vaikalpam  eva  cha  11  7 
Savistara-vatach  chhanna-hasta-purnayatanvitam  \ 
Yugmayugma-vibhagena  Nagaram  syat  samikritam  II 12 
Antara-prastaropetam  dha-pratyuha-sarnyutam  I 
Nivra-sandhara-samstambha-vrate  paridyidhaih  tubhaih  II  13 
Dravidam  vakshyate’  thatah  vistara-dvayorghakam(?)  1 
Raktaohchhanna-pratikshepat  yugmayugma-viteshatah  j|  14 
Hitva  tatra  samibhutam  bhadralankara-samyutam  I 
Aneka-dvara-saihyuktam  shad-vargam  Dravidam  smritam  II  16 
Labdha-vyasayatam  yat  tu  natiriktam  na  hinakam  ! 
Bahu-varga-yutam  vapi  dandika-vara-tobhitam  II  16 
Maha-varam  vimanordhve  nirvuhanana-samyutam  (?)  I 

Sakshetropeta-madhyamghri-yuktam  tad  Yesaram  matam  II  17 


Wl 


NMAEA 


Yatinam  ganik5iiam  oha  jivinSm  krum-karmanah  I 
Pralastam  Yesaraih  teshain  anyesham-itare  ^ubhe  ]i  18 
The  details  of  the  three  styles  are  desorihed  more  briefly  but 
explicitly  in  the  following  Agama: 

(8)  Suprabliedagama  (xxxi.  37-39)  : 

Dvara-bhedam  idam  proktam  jati-bbedam  tatah  &finu  i|  37 
Nagaram  Dravidam  ohaiYa  Vesaram  oba  tridha  matam  I 
Kap^bad  arabhya  vrittam.  yad  Yesaram  iti  smritam  II  38 
G-rivam  arabbya  obasbtam^am  Yimanam  Bravidakhyakam  \ 
SarYam  vai  cbatura'sram  yat  prasadam  Nagaram  tu-idam  <1  39 
According  to  tbis  Agama,  tbe  buildings  of  tbe  blagara  style 
are  quadrangular  from  tbe  base  to  tbe  top ; those  of  the 
Drayida  style  are  octagonal  from  tbe  neck  to  tbe  top  ; and 
those  of  the  Yesara  style  are  round  from  tbe  neck  to  the  top. 
Apparently  tbe  lower  part  of  tbe  buildings  of  tbe  two  latter 
styles  is  quadrangular. 

(4)  Svair  angula-pramanair  dya-da^a-vistirnam  ayatam  cha 

mukbam  \ 

Nagnajita  tu  cbatur-da&a  dairgbyena  Dravida{m)  kathitam  II 
According  to  one’s  own  angula  (finger)  tbe  face  (of  bis  own 
statue)  is  twelve  angulas  long  and  broad.  But  according 
to  (tbe  architect)  Nagnajit  it  should  be  fourteen  angulas 
in  the  Bravida  style. 

The  commentary  quotes  Nagnajit  in  full : 

Yistirnam  dva-dasa-mukham  dairgbyepa  cha  obatur-da^a  I 
Angulani  tatha  karyam  tan-manam  Bravidam  smritam  II 
Tbe  face  should  be  twelve  angulas  broad  and  fourteen  angulas 
long : such  a measure  is  known  as  Bravigla  (i.  e.,  tbis  is  the 
Drayida  style  of  measurement), 

(Bfibat-sambita,  nvili.  4,  J.  B.  A.  S.,  N.  S., 
Yol.  YI.  p.  323,  note  3). 


nagaba 


(5)  Like  the  face  of  the  lady  Earth  shone ‘the  Yanavase-na^ 
on  which  Nagara-khanda  at  all  times  was  conspiouoiis  like 
the  tilaka,  a sign  of  good  fortune,  (then  follows  a descrip- 
tion of  its"  groves,  gardens,  tanks,  etc).  In  the  Nagara-khapda 
shone  the  splendid  Bandhavanagara 

“ In  Nagara-khanda,  like  the  mouths  of  Hara,  were  five 
agraharas,  from  which  proceeded  the  sounds  of  all  Bra- 
hmans reading  and  teaching  the  reading  of  all  the  Vedas, 
Buranas,  moral  precepts,  lastras,  logic,  agamas,  poems, 
dramas,  stories,  smriti,  and  rules  for  sacrifices. 

(Ep.  Cardat.  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no.  225,  Transl 
p.  1S2,  paras  6, 7 ; Boman  text,  p.  229,  line  24  to  p.  235, 

line  2). 

(6)  “ In  the  world  beautifnl  is  the  Kuntala-land,  in  which  is  the 

charming  Yanavasa  country;  in  it  is  the  Nagara-khanda, 
in  which  was  the  agreeable  Bandhavapura.  (The  list  of 
its  trees  and  other  attractions).  In  that  royal  city  (raja- 
dhani)  was  formerly  a king  of  that  country  famed  for  his 
liberality,  Sovi-deva.” 

(Ibid.  no.  236,  Transl.  p.  135,  para  2 ; Boman  text, 
p.  238,  line  20  f). 

(7)  Nagari-khan^  and  Nagari-khan^a  (ibid.  no.  236,  Transl. 

p.  137,  paras  3, 4),  Nagara-khanda  seventy  (no.  240,  Transl. 
p.  138),  NSgara-khanda-nada  (no.  241,  Transl.  p.  138), 
Nagara-khanda  (no.  243,  Boman  text,  p.  248,  line  8),  Nagara- 
khanda  seventy  (no.  267,.  Transl.  p.  143,  last  para,  line  7), 
Nagari-khanda  seventy  (no,  277,  Transl.  p.  145,  largest  para, 
line  6). 

(8)  Nagara-bhuktau  valavi-vaishayika-taiva  . . . padralik 

(?ksh)antash-pati  Varunika-grama — “ Of  the  village  of 
Yarunika,  which  lies  ....  in  the  Nagara  bhukti, 
(and)  belonging  to  the  Valavi-vishaya.” 

(Deo  Baranark  Inscrip,  of  Jivitagupta  n,  lines  6-7  ; 

C.  1. 1,  vol.  III.  E.  a.  I.  no.  46,  pp.  216, 218). 


304 


NAGAEA 


(9)  “ When  that  king  (king  Harihara’s  son  Deva-Eaya)  of  men 

was  ruling  the  kingdom  in  peace  and  wisdom,,  shining  in 
beauty  beyond  all  countries  was  the  entire  Karnnata  pro- 
vince ; and  in  that  Karnnata  country  famous  was  the  Grutti- 
nad,  which  contained  eighteen  Kampanas  in  which  the 
most  famous  nad  was  ‘ Nagara-khanda  ’ to  which  Kuppatur 
was  an  ornament,  owing  to  the  settlement  of  the  Bhavyas 
(or  Jains),  and  its  Ghaityalayas,  beautiful  with  lotus -ponds, 
pleasure-gardens  and  fields  of  gandha-tali  rice.  (Further 
description  of  its  attractions),’^ 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  viii.  part  I,  Sorab  Taluq,  no.  261, 
Boman  text,  p.  82,  Transl.  p.  41). 

(10)  “ In  the  island  of  Jambu  trees  (Jambu-d-vipa),  in  the 
Bharata-kshetra,  near  the  holy  mountain  (^ridhara), 
protected  by  the  wise  Chandragupta,  an  abode  of  the  good 
usages  of  eminent  Kshatriyas,  filled  with  a population 
worthy  of  gifts  (dakshina-pStra),  a place  of  unbroken  wealth, 
was  the  district  (viahaya)  named  hi  aga-khapda  of  good 
fortune,  possessed  of  all  comforts,  and  from  being  ever  free 
from  destruction  (laya)  of  the  wise,  called  Nilaya  (an  asylum). 
There,  adorned  with  gardens  of  various  fruit  trees  (named), 
shines  the  village  named  Kuppatur,  protected  by  Grope&a. 
There,  like  the  forehead-ornament  to  the  wife,  in  the  territory 
of  king  Harihara,  was  a Jina  Ghaityalaya  which  had 
received  a tasana  from  the  Kadambas.” 

(Ibid.  no.  263,  Eoman  text,  p.  86,  Transl.  p.  43). 

The  identity  of  Nagara-khanda  with  Naga-khanda  is 
undoubted  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  one  and  same  village 
Kuppatur  is  contained  in  both. 

(11;  “ The  headman  of  Pithamane  village,  the  first  in  the 
Kuppatur  Twenty-Six  of  the  Nagara-khanda  Malu-nad, 


NlOABA 


305 


belonging  to  the  Chandragutti-venthe  of  the  Banavaai 
Twelve  Thousand  in  the  South  country.....” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  voL  vm.  part  I,  Sorab  Taluq, 
no.  266,  Eoman  text,  p.  87,  Transl.  p.  43). 

(12)  “ In  Jambud-vipa,  in  the  Karnnataka-vishaya,  adorned  with 
all  manner  of  trees  (named)  is  Nagara-khanda.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  vm.  part  I,  Sorab  Taluq, 
no.  329,  Transl.  p.  68,  para.  2,  line  4). 

(13)  The  expression  ‘ Nagara-kanda  Seventy  ’ occurs  in  several 
of  the  Sorab  Taluq  Inscriptions,  e.g.,  nos.  326,  327,  328,  336, 
337,  etc. 

“ To  the  ocean-girdled  earth  like  a beautiful  breast  formed 
for  enjoyment  was  Nagara-khanda  in  the  Banavasi-mandala.” 

(Ibid.  no.  345,  Transl.  p.  60), 

(14)  “ In  the  ocean-girdled  Jambu-diva  (dvipa)  is  the  Mandara 
mountain ; to  the  south  of  which  is  the  Bharata-kshetra, 

in  which  is wherein  is  the  beautiful  Nagara-khanda. 

Among  the  chief  villages  of  that  nad  is  the  agrahara  named 
Kuppatura.” 

‘‘ G-rants  were  also  made  (as  specified)  by  the  oil-mongers, 
the  betel-sellers  and  the  gan^as  (?)  of  Nagara-khanda  for 
the  perpetual  lamp.” 

(Ibid.  no.  276,  Transl.  p.  47). 

(16)  ” In  the  pleasant  Nagara-khanda  is  the  agrahara  which  is 
jewel  mirror  to  the  earth,  the  beautiful  Kuppatur,  with  its 
splendid  temples,  its  golden  towers,  its  lofty  mansions,  its 
streets  of  shops,  its  interior  surrounded  with  a moat, 

its and  the  houses  of  dancing  girls, — how  beautiful 

to  the  eyes  was  Kuppatur.  It  surpassed  Alakapura,  Amara- 
vati  and  BhogaVati.  Within  that  village,  vying  with 
Kaila^a,  stood  the  temple  of  Kotinatha,  built  by  Vitva- 
kaniiinii  and  carved  with  complete  devotion,  planned  in 


306 


KAGABA 


perfect  accordance  with  the  many  rules  of  architecture, 
and  freely  decorated  with  dravida,  hlmmija  Midindgara.^' 

“ These  and  bhadropeta  appear  to  be  technical  terms  of  the 
Silpa-§a8tra  or  science  of  architecture.”  Mr.  Eice. 

(They  are  evidently  the  three  styles  of  architecture  called  the 
Dravida,  Vesara  and  Nagara  in  the  Manasara  and  elsewhere). 

(Ep.  Qarnat.  vol.  viii.  part  I,  Sorab  Taluq, 
no.  276,  Boman  text,  p,  92,  line  9 from 
bottom  upwards,  Transl.  p.  46,  note  1). 

(16)  “ The  earliest  Vijayanagar  inscription  (Sb.  263,  noted  above) 

contains  the  interesting  statement  that  the  district  (vishaya) 
named  Naga-khanda  (generally  Nagara-khanda, corresponding 
more  or  less  with  the  Shikarpur  Taluq)  was  (formerly)  pro- 
tected by  the  wise  Chandragupta,  an  abode  of  the  usages 
of  eminent  Kshatriyas.” 

(Ep.  Oarnat.  vol.  viil.  part  I,  Introduction 
p.  11,  para  6). 

(17)  The  Sorab  Taluq  Inscriptions  (no.  261  f)  have  reference  to 

Nagara-khanda  and  its  pompous  buildings  (temples),  pic- 
turesque gardens  and  other  natural  and  artificial  beauties. 
From  these  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  buildings  of  Nagara- 
khanda  possessed,  as  stated  in  the  Manasara,  a distinct 
style  of  architecture  like  those  of  the  Dravida  and  Yesara 
countries. 

(18)  Compare  Fah  Hian’s  Kingdom  of  the  Dakshina  (Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  VII.  pp.  1-7,  note  2) : 

'‘  Going  two  hundred  yojanas  south  from  this,  there  is  a 
country  called  Ta-thsin  (Dakshina).  Here  is  a Sangharama 
of  the  former  Buddha,  Katyapa.  It  is  constructed  out  of  a 
great  mountain  of  rock  hewn  to  the  proper  shape.  This 
building  has  altogether  five  storeys.  The  lowest  is  shaped 
into  the  form  of  an  elephant,  and  has  live  hundred  stone 


NAaAEA 


307 


cells  in  it.  The  second  is  in  the  form  of  a lion  and  has 
four  hundred  chambers.  The  third  is  shaped  like  a horse, 
.and  hsiS  three  hundred  chambers.  The  fifth  storey  is  in 
the  shape  of  a dove,  and  has  one  hundred  chambers  in  it. 
At  the  very  top  of  all  is  a spring  of  water,  which,  flowing 
in  a stream  before  the  rooms,  encircles  each  tier,  and  so, 
running  in  a circuitous  course,  at  last  arrives  at  the  very 
lowest  Istorey  of  all,  where,  flowing  past  the  chambers  as 
before,  it  finally  issues  through  the  door  of  the  building. 
Throughout  the  consecutive  tiers,  in  various  parts  of  the 
building,  windows  have  been  pierced  through  the  solid  rook 
for  the  admission  of  light,  so  that  every  chamber  is  quite 
illuminated,  and  there  is  no  darkness  (throughout  the 
whole).  At  the  four  corners  of  this  edifice  they  have  hewn 
out  the  rook  into  steps,  as  a means  for  ascending.  Men 
of  the  present  time  point  out  a small  ladder  which  reaches 
up  to  the  highest  point  (of  the  rook)  by  which  men  of  old 
ascended  it,  one  foot  at  a time  (?).  They  derive  the  name 
which  they  give  to  this  building,  viz.  Po-loyaj  from  an 
Indian  word  (paravata)  signifying  ‘pigeon.’  There  are 
always  Arhats  abiding  here.  This  land  is  hilly  and  barren, 
without  inhabitants.  At  a considerable  distance  from  the 
hill  there  are  villages,  but  all  of  them  are  inhabited  by 
heretics.  They  know  nothing  of  the  law  of  Buddha  or 
^ramans,  of  Brahmans,  or  of  any  of  the  different  schools 
of  learning.  The  men  of  that  country  continually 
see  persons  come  flying  to  the  temple.  On  a certain 
occasion  there  were  some  Buddhist  pilgrims  from  different 
countries  who  came  here  with  a desire  to  pay  religious  wor- 
ship at  this  temple.  Then  the  men  of  the  villages  above 
alluded  to  ask  them  saying  ‘Why  do  you  not  fly  to  it? 
We  behold  the  religious  men  who  occupy  those  chamber 
constantly  on  the  wing.’  ‘ Because  our  wings  are  not  yet 
perfectly  formed.’  The  country  of  Ta-thsin  is  precipitous, 


308 


NAGABA 


and  the  road  dangerous  and  difficult  to  find.  Those  who 
wish  to  go  there  ought  to  give  a present  to  the  king  of  the 
country,  either  money  or  goods.  The  king  then  deputes 
certain  men  to  accompany  them  as  guides,  and  so  they 
pass  the  travellers  from  one  place  to  another,  each  party 
pointing  out  their  own  roads  and  intricate  bye-paths.  Tah 
Hi  an  finding  himself  in  the  end  unable  to  proceed  to  that 
country,  reports  in  the  above  passages  merely  what  he 
heard.” 

(Beal’s  Travels  of  Fah  Hian  and  Sung-Yiin, 
pp.  139,  141). 

(19)  ” The  territory  (Driivida)  which  also  ^includes  the  northern 

lialf  of  Ceylon,  extends  northwards  up  to  an  irregular  line 
drawn  from  a point  on  the  Arabian  sea  about  1,000  miles 
below  G-oa  along  the  Western  Ghats  as  far  as  Kolhapur, 
thenoe  north-east  through  Hyderabad,  and  farther  eastwards 
to  the  Bay  of  Bengal.”  (Bncyclopfedia  Brit.  ed.  11,  p.  650). 

(20)  Vesara  is  otherwise  called  Andhra  or  Telugu.  “ The  old 

Telugu  country  covers  about  8000  square  miles,  and  is 
bounded  on  the  east  by  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  on  the  north 
by  the  river  Godavari,  on  the  south  by  the  Krishna.” 

(Dr.  Barnett,  Catalogue  of  the  Telugu  Books,  Preface). 

The  boundaries  of  the  Telugu  or  Vesara  country  are  given  in 
detail  in  the  Linguistic  Survey  of  India : “ The  Telugu 
country  is  bounded  towards  the  east  by  the  Bay  of  Bengal 
from  about  Barwa  in  the  Gan  jam  district  in  the  north  to 
Madras  in  the  south.  From  Barwa  the  frontier  line  goes 
westwards  through  Ganjam  to  the  Eastern  Ghats,  and  then 
southwards,  crosses  the  Sobari  on  the  border  of  the  Sunkum 
and  the  Bijai  Talukas  in  the  Baster  state,  and  thenoe  runs 
along  the  range  of  the  Bela  Dila  to  the  Indravati.  It 
follows  that  river  to  its  confiuenoe  with  the  Godavari,  and 
then  runs  through  Chanda,  cutting  off  the  southern  part 


NAG-AEA 


309 


of  fehe  district,  and  further  eastwards,  including  the 
southern  border  of  the  district  Wun.  It  then  turns  south- 
wards to  the  G-odavari  at  its  confluence  with  the  Manjira, 
and  thence  farther  south,  towards  Bidar,  where  Telugu 
meets  with  Kanarese.” 

(Linguistic  Survey  of  India,  vol.  iv.  p.  577). 

See  also  the  following  : 

Trikanda§6sha  (Bibl.  268,  Cal.  2,  8,  44). 
Hemachandra,-Abhidhana-chintamani,  (12,  53). 

Halayudha  (2,  295). 

Naishadha-karika(Bibl.Cal.lO,8).* 
Brihadaranyaka-upanishad  (8,  16). 
l^itupalabadha  (Bibl.  141,  Cal.  12,  19). 

(21)  Nagara  seems  to  be  a very  popular  geographical  name  (see 
J.  A.  S.  B.  1896,  vol.  Lxv,  part  I,  pp.  116-117) : 

It  is  clear  from  the  references  that  Nagara  was  formerly  the 
capital  of  Birbhum  in  Bengal ; that  Nagara  is  the  name 
of  a famous  port  in  Tanjore ; that  it  is  the  name  of 
an  extensive  division  in  Mysore ; that  a town  named 
Nagara  and  an  ancient  place  called  Nagarakota  are 
situated  on  the  Bias  in  the  district  of  Kangra,  in  the  Punjab ; 
that  we  find  Nagaravasti  in  Darbhanga,  the  town  Na- 
garaparken  in  Sindh  and  Nagarakhas  in  the  district  of 
Basti ; that  there  is  a number  of  ancient  villages  in  the 
Deccan  called  Nagaram ; and  that  Nagara  is  the  name 
of  two  rivers  in  North  Bengal,  the  name  of  a village 
in  the  district  of  Dacca  ; and  that  of  some  9 or  10  places, 
called  Nagara  in  Eajputana  proper,  three  are  towns;  that 
a fortified  village  in  the  Santal  Parganah  is  called  Nagara, 
The  ancient  Madhyamika,  which  was  once  besieged  by 
Menander,  is  now  called  Nagari  near  Ghitor  (Smith’s  His- 
tory, p.  187).  Hieun  Tsiang  also  mentions  Nagara  (modern 
lellalabad)  which  was  a province  of  ancient  Kapi&a 


310 


nagaba 


(Eadphisa),  the  people  whereof  were  the  followers  of  Buddha 
(see  his  Travels,  Ihdex). 

The  Nagaras  are  meutioned  in  the  list  of  countries  and 
peoples,  given  in  the  Yogavasistha-Eamayana  (Utpatti- 
prakarana,  xxxv,  33)  as  a people.  The  same  list  refers  to 
the  Dravidas  (ibid.  40)  also  as  a people  living  south  of  the 
mount  Ohitra-kuta,  below  the  river  Godavari.  In  this  list 
the  Andhras,  Ealidgas,  and  Ohaulikas  are  clearly  distin- 
guished from  the  Dravidas  (ibid.  26-27). 

Nagara  is  the  name  of  a script  also,  mostly  prevailing  in 
Northern  India.  There  lives  a powerful  tribe  called  Nagara, 
in  the  mountainous  tract  of  Kabul  in  Afghanistan. 
NSgara  is  the  designation  of  a sect  of  Brahmins  also  who,  it 
is  held,  came  over  from  some  part  in  Northern  India  and 
settled  down  in  Gujrat  at  a place  known  as  Nfigaranandapura. 
Krom  these  Nagara  Brahmans,  it  is  said,  came  the  use  of 
the  Nagari  alphabet.  A portion  (part  vi)  of  the  Skanda- 
Purana  bears  the  name  Nagara-khan^a.  From  this 
instance,  it  would  appear  that  the  expression  Nagara  is 
at  least  as  old  as  the  Nagara-khanda  incorporated  into  the 
Skanda-Purana  which  was,  according  to  a general  concen- 
sus, composed  in  honour  of,  or,  at  least,  named  after  Skanda- 
gupta  (456-480  A.  D.),  the  seventh  Emperor  of  the  early 
Gupta  dynasty. 

Why  the  Nagara-khanda,  the  6th  part  of  the  Skanda- 
Purana,  is  so  called  is  not  explained  explicity  in  the 
Purana  itself.  But  from  the  contents  of  chapters  114,  163, 
199,  200,  201  and  203  of  this  (6th)  part,  it  seems  to 
have  been  named  after  the  Nagara  Brahmins.  The 
etymological  origin  of  the  term  is,  however,  explained 

in  chapter  114  of  the  Nagara-khapda.  It  is  stated  (VY. 
76,  77,  78,  93)  to  have  arisen  from  an  incantation  of  snake- 
poisoning (cf.  verses  1-113,  nagara,  no  poison).  Compare 


nag-aea 


311 


the  following : 

Garam  visham  iti  proktam  na  tatrasti  oha  sampratam  II 
Na  garam  na  garam  ohaitach  ohhrntva  ye  pannagadhamah  \ 
Tatra  sthasyanti  te  vadhya  bhavishyanti  yatha-aukham  II 
Adya  prabhriti  tat  sthanam  (Chamatkara-puram)  nagara- 

khyam  dhara-tale  \ 

Bhavishyati  an-vikhyatam  tava  kirtti-vivarddhanam  II 
Eyam  tan  nagaram  jatam  asmat  kalad  anantaram  II 

(Skanda-Purana,  part  VI,  Nagarakhanda,  chap.  114, 
V.  76,  77,  78,  93). 

From  all  the  literary  and  epigraphioal  instances  given  above, 
it  appears  certain  that  the  expressions  Nagara,  Vesara,  and 
Dravida  are  primarily  geographical.  But  the  precise  bound- 
aries of  Nagara,  like  those  of  Dravida  and  Yesara,*  are  not 
traceable.  The  epigraphioal  quotations,  however,  would 
tend  to  localise  Nagara  somewhere  v/ithin  the  territory  of 
modern  Mysore.  But  the  Nagara  script,  the  Nagara- 
khanda  of  the  Skanda-Purana,  and  the  Nagara-Brah- 
mins,  representing  some  way  or  other  the  Northern  India 
from  the  Himalaya  to  the  Vindhya  and  from  Gujrat  to 
Magadha,  would  jointly  give  a wider  boundary  to  Nagara. 
Besides  the  author  of  the  Manasara  shows  his  acquaintance 
with  buildings  of  the  whole  of  India  in  the  passage  where 
he  divides  the  bast  types  of  buildings  by  the  following  desig- 
nations, namely,  Panohala,  Dravida,  Madhya-kanta  (meaning 
apparently  Madhyade&a),  Kalinga,  Yar^a  (Yirata),  Kerala, 
Yamsaka,  Magadha,  Janaka,  and  Sphu(Gu)rjaka  (M, 
XXX.  6-7). 

If  the  country  of  Nagara,  like  those  of  Dravida  and  Yesara, 
be  included  in  Southern  India,  in  other  words,  if  Northern 
India  be  excluded  from  the  scope  of  the  styles  of  buildings 
mentioned  in  records  quoted  above,  the  passage,  mentioning 
the  ten  different  types  of  buildings  of  the  ten  countries 
covering  the  whole  of  India,  will  have  to  be  treated  as  what 


312 


NXeARA 


is  called  a spurious  record,  a term  under  which  the  conflict- 
ing ideas  are  reconciled  by  many  a scholar.  Let  whatever 
be  the  boundaries  of  Nagara.  It  is  clear  beyond  doubt  that 
the  three  styles  of  architecture  have  arisen  from  three 
geographical  names,  Nagara,  Vesara,  and  Lravida.  And 
there  we  have  a parallel  instance  of  similar  divisions  in 
the  early  Grecian  architecture  : 

The  three  ancient  orders— the  Doric,  Ionic,  Corinthian — -on 
which  were  based  the  three  styles  of  Grecian  architecture 
have  been  traced  by  Vitruvius,  an  authority  on  architec- 
ture of  the  first  century. 

“ In  this  country  (Smyrna)  allotting  different  spots  for 
different  purposes,  they  began  to  erect  temples,  the  first  of 
which  was  dedicated  to  Apollo  Panionios,  and  resembled 
that  which  they  had  seen  in  Aohaia,  and  they  gave  it 
the  name  of  Doric,  because  they  had  first  seen  that  species 
in  the  cities  of  Doria.  ” (Book  iv,  chap,  i), 

Gwilt  comments  on  it  thus  ; “ The  origin  of  the  Doric  order 
is  a question  not  easily  disposed  of.  Many  provinces  of 
Greece  bore  the  name  of  Doria  ; but  the  name  is  often  the 
least  satisfacfoiy  mode  of  accounting  for  the  birth  of  the 
thing  which  bears  it.’^  (Bncycl.  Art.  142). 

“ The  Ionic  order,  at  first  chiefly  confined  to  the  states  of 
Asia  Minor,  appears  to  have  been  coeval  with  the  Doric 
order  ” (Gwilt,  Bncycl.  Art.  153).  " That  species,  of  which 
the  lonians  (inhabitants  of  Ion)  were  the  inventors,  has 
received  the  appellation  of  lonio.^’  (Vitruvius,  Book  iv. 
chap.  i). 

The  third  species,  Corinthian,  is  so  called  because,  “ Calli- 
machus, who  for  his  great  ingenuity  and  taste  was  called  by 
the  Athenians  Catateohnos,  happening  at  this  time  to  pass 
by  the  tomb,  observed  the  basket  and  the  delicacy  of  the 
foliage  which  surrounded  it.  Pleased  with  the  form  and 


nAgaea 


318 


novelty  of  combination,  he  oonatrncted,  from  the  hint  thus 
afforded,,  columns  of  this  species  in  the  country  about 
Corinth.”  (Vitruvius,  Book  iv.  Chap,  i), 

‘When  Solomon  ascended  the  throne,  anxious  to  fulfil  the 
wish  his  father  had  long  entertained  of  erecting  a fixed 
temple  for  the  reception  of  the  ark,  he  was  not  only  obliged 
to  send  to  Tyre  for  workmen,  but  for  an  architect  also. 
Upon  this  temple  a dissertation  has  been  written  by  a 
Spaniard  of  the  name  of  Villalpanda,  wherein  he,  with  con- 
summate simplicity,  urges  that  the  orders,  instead  of  being 
invention  of  the  Greehs,  were  the  invention  of  God  Himself, 
and  that  Callimachus  most  shamefully  put  for  the  preten- 
sions to  the  formation  of  the  Corinthian  capital  which,  he 
says,  had  been  used  centuries  before  in  the  temple  at  Jeru- 
salem.” (G-wilt,  Enoycl.  Art.  62). 

“ The  other  two  orders,  Tuscan  and  Composite,  which  are 
of  a later  date  than  the  time  of  Vitruvius,  are  of  Italian  or 
Eoman  origin.  The  Composite,  as  its  title  denotes,  is  the 
combination  of  other  orders  and  has  thus  no  independent 
importance.  The  Tuscan  order  has  also  reference  to  the 
country  of  Tuscany,  formerly  called  Eutruria,  a country 
of  Italy,"  (Gwilt,  Enoycl.  Art.  178). 

The  origin  of  the  Indian  architecture  is  attributed  to  a my- 
thological person  Vifeva-karman,  literally,  the  Creator  of  the 
Universe.  But  the  styles  of  architecture  are  stated  to  have 
been  invented  by  one  Bammoja  : 

“ An  interesting  record  from  Holal  is  the  label  cut  on  the 
capital  of  a finely  carved  pillar  in  the  Amyitetvara  temple. 
It  is  called  in  the  inscription  a Sukara-pillar.  Speaking  of 
the  sculptor  who  made  it,  the  record  says  that  he,  Bammoja, 
the  pupil  of  Padoja  of  Soge,  was  a Vitvakarma,  i.  e.  the 
architect  of  the  gods  in  this  Kali  age,  the  master  of  the 
sixty-four  arts  and  sciences,  the  clever  builder  of  the  sixty -four 


314 


NA0ARA 


varieties  of  mansions  and  the  arohiteot  who  had  in- 
vented (?  discovered)  the  font  types  of  buildings,  viz,  Nagara, 
Kalihga,  Draviiia  and  Vesara.  An  earlier  soalptor  of  about 
the  9th  century  A,  D,  of  whom  we  hear  from  an  inscription 
on  a pedestal  at  K6gali>  was  a grandson  of  l§ivananni.  It 
is  stated  that  he  made  the  image  of  the  sun  (divasa-kara)  of 
which  the  stone  in  question  was  evidently  the  pedestal.” 

(G-overnment  of  Madras,  G,  0.  no,  1260, 15th  August, 
1915,  p,  90,  see  also  Progress  Eeport  of  the  assistant 
archaelogical  superintendent  for  Epigraphy,  Southern 
circle,  1914-15,  p.  90). 

It  has  been  pointed  out  already  that  Kalihga  is  mentioned  in 
the  Manasara  (xxx.  6-7)  as  the  name  of  a typ&  of  build* 
ing,  but  therein  it  is  never  stated  as  a styU  like  the  Nagara, 
Yesara  and  Dravida,  the  Kalihga  type  of  buildings  being 
apparently  included  in  one  of  these  three  styles,  In  the 
same  treatise  there  is  another  passage,  pointed  out  above, 
where  Eandhra  or  Andhra  is  mentioned  as  a type  of 
chariots.  It  has  also  been  stated  above  that  these  Kalihga 
and  Andhra  might  be  two  branches  of  the  Vesara,  being 
geographically  placed  on  the  two  sides  of  it,  the  three 
together  forming  Tri-Kalihga  or  three  Kalihgas.  In  one  of 
the  epigraphioal  quotations  (no.  15)  Bhhm’ija  is  men- 
tioned alongside  Dravida  and  Nagara,  and  this  Bumija 
(lit.,  originated  in  the  land  or  the  style  of  the  land, 
where  the  document  was  written)  is  apparently'  same  as 
Vesara, 

Some  of  the  numerous  literary  and  epigraphical  quotations 
given  above  must  be  placed  in  dates  later  than  the  time  of 
Bammoja  mentioned  in  the  present-  document.  But  neither 
his  name  nor  his  style  (Kalihga)  is  associated  with  the 
three  styles,  Nagara,  Vesara,  Dravida,  in  any  of  the  instances 
quoted  above,  It  is  not  unlikely  that  Bammoja  * discovered  ’ 


NAG-ABA 


315 


tli6  three  styles,  which  had  beea  perhaps  existing  long 
before  him,  and  adding  his  own  invention  (Kalihga) 
claimed  the  originality  for  all  the  four.  Such  instances  of 
nnsorupiilonsly  adding  to  the  works  of  one^s  predecessors 
and  claiming  the  originality  are  not  rare  in  the  literary  or 
the  archseologioal  records. 

It  does  not  seem  probable  that  any  one  person  could  have 
invented  all  the  styles  of  architecture  at  one  time  and  issued 
them  as  a royal  command ; they  are  more  likely  to  have 
arisen  out  of  the  local  circumstances  at  difierent  periods, 
before  they  were  recorded,  presumably  first  in  the 
architectural  treatises  and  then  in  the  epigraphical  records. 

The  object  of  this  article  is  not,  however,  to  identify  the 
country  of  Nagara,  nor  to  find  out  the  inventor  or  inven- 
tors of  the  styles,  although  on  them  depend  many  interest- 
ing points  of  the  ancient  Indian  architecture.  Here  it  is 
clear  that  the  expressions  Nagara,  Yesara  and  DrSvida  are 
geographical,  and  that  they  imply  three  styles  of  architec- 
ture in  its  broadest  sense. 

But  on  the  last  point,  too,  modern  authorities  hold  difierent 
views.  In  discussing  the  styles  of  Indian  architecture, 
Mr,  Havell  is  of  opinion  (Study  of  the  Indian  Civilization, 
Preface)  that  they  are  ^iva  and  Visnu,  and  not  Northern  and 
Southern,  or  the  Indo-Aryan  and  the  Dra vidian,  as  Pergusson 
and  Burgess  suppose  to  be  (ofi  History  of  lad.  and  Bast  arch. 
1910).  The  ^ilpa-^astras  and  the  Agamas  seem  to 
disagree  to  HavelFs  theory,  nOr  do  they  wholly  support  the 
views  of  Fergusson  and  Burgess.  The  division  proposed 
by  Havell,  being  not  geographical,  may  be  systema- 
tically applied  to  religious  architecture,  while  that  adopted 
by  Fergusson  and  Burgess  being  of  a geographical  nature, 
is  more  in  agreement  with  the  system  of  the  ^ilpa-Sastras 
than  HavelFs  division, 


816 


NATAKA 


The  fact  that  the  Hindu  arb-oonsoiousness  is  largely  dominated 
by  a spiritual  motive  being  strictly  adhered  to,  it  would 
follow  that  Ha  veil’s  division  into  ^iva  and  Vishnu,  or 
others’  into  Hindu,  Buddhist  and  Jain,  would  be  more 
logical  than  that  into  Northern  , Bastera  and  Southern,  or 
Nagara,  Vesara  and  Dravida.  But  even  admitting  this,  we 
must  not  forget  that  the  Hindus  knew  the  point  where 
exactly  to  draw  the  line  between  religion,  on  the  one  hand, 
and  social  and  political  life,  on  the  other.  It  is  needless  to 
observe  that  within  the  three  geographical  styles  the 
sectarian  sub-divisions  are  quite  feasible. 

NATAKA— A moulding,  a theatre,  a crowning  moulding  or  ornament 
of  a pillar : it  is  generally  used  together  with  petals  ; the  part 
of  the  capital  which  supports  the  abacus  (phalaka)  is  sometimes 
so  called;  a cardinal  number. 

Padanam  api  sarvesham  patra-jatyair  alahkyitam  I 

Antare  natakair  yuktaih  padmanam  tu  dalair  yutam  I 

(M.  XIV.  149-150). 

In  connection  with  the  entablature  : Natakanta-mrinalika  I 

(M,  XVI,  53). 

N'aralr  va  natakahge  tu  kuryad  devalayadinam  I 

Harmyantaralayah  sarve  nrinam  nataka-samyutam  1 

Etat  tu  prastarasyordhve  natakasyordhvam'savat  | 

(Ibid.  112,  114,  117). 

Athava  tapasvininam  cha  mathe  va  natakahakam  (mandapam)  1 

. ^ (M.  XXXIV.  426). 

In  connection  with  pavilions  (mandapa) ; 

Nataka-vistaram  paiioha-pahoha-bhagena  yojayet  1 

(Ibid.  603). 

In  connection  with  the  arch  (torana) : 

Makara-kimbari-vaktram  natakadi-bhujahgavat  1 

Kesari-mandanam  bhavati  ehitra-torana-natakaih  \ 

‘ ■ (M.  XLvi.  66-67). 

The  cardinal  number  ten  : 

Bhat-saptashtaka-dandaih  va  nanda-nataka-rudrakam  \ 

(M.  IX.  430). 


NALA-GEHA 


317 


NATIKA— A moulding. 

In  connection  with  the  arch  (torana) : 

Natika  phalaka  mushti-bandhanam  patra-vallikam  I 

(M.  XXVI.  65). 

In  connection  with  the  pillar : 

Kumbhayamam  tathotkantham  urdhve  karna-samam  bhavet  \ 
Tat-sainam  natikakhyam  syad  unnatam  tad  viseshatah  \ 

(M.  XV.  54-55). 

NATTA  (NATYA)-6ALA — A detached  building  used  as  a music- 
hall. 

Natta-tahX  cha  karttavya  dvara-desa-samatraya  \ 

And  the  music  hall  should  be  built  attached  to  the  gateway  (of 
the  temple).  (Garuda-Purana,  chap.  47,  v.  45). 

A Mandapa  or  hall  for  religious  music,  built  in  front  of  the  main 
temple : 

Durgga-devalayasyabharanam  iva  purah  sthapayamasa  gurvviih 
triman  trinatha-viryyah  sthagita-data-ditau  natya-salam 
ohhalena  \ 

(Dirghasi  Insorip.  of  Vanapati,  lines  14-15,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  IV.  p.  316). 

NABHI-VlTHI— A road  proceeding  from  the  central  part  of  a village 
or  town.  . 

Brahma-bhaga-vriddhya  vithir  nabhi  -vithiti  kathyate  1 

(Eamikagama,  xxv.  1). 

NAEACHA— A road  running  towards  the  east. 

Pran-mukha  vithayah  sarva  naraohakhye(a  i)ti  smritah  \ 

(Kamikagama,  xxv.  3). 

NALA — A canal  or  gutter  (M.  xix.  144, 148, 163,  etc.),  a tubular  vessel 
of  the  body  (M.  l.  198,  201,  205,  etc)  . 

In  connection  with  the  phallus  (M,  Lil.  294-296,  etc), 
NALA-GBHA— A canal-house. 

Bhitti-geham  ihochyate  \ 

Tri-chatush-pahcha-shad-bhagam  saptamtarh  kudya-vistaram  t 
Scsham  tu  nala-geham  tu....,,..  I (M.  xxxill.  359,  360). 


Sl8 


NALIKA 


NALIKA — (see  Nala) — A canal,  the  lower  leg. 

Ekamtam  tad-dhatam  bhitti-taram  sesham  oha  nalika  \ 

(M.  XXXIII.  438). 

The  lower  leg  (M,  XLV.  42,  etc). 

NALIKA-GRIHA — (see  Nala-geha) — canal  house. 

(M.  XIX.  98,  etc). 

NALI — (see  Nalika) — A canal,  a gutter. 

Geha-fcare  tu  saptamtam  nali-taram  yugamtakam  1 

(M.  XIX.  115,  see  also  116). 
NASA — ^A  nose,  a nose-shaped  object,  the  upper  piece  of  a door,  a 
vestibule, 

Vijheya  nasika  nasa  nasa  dvarordhva-daru  oha  | 

(Amarakosha,  ii.  ii,  13). 

In  connection  with  the  base  : 

Grahadi-ohitra-sarvesham  kshndra-nasadi-bhushitam  \ 

(M.  XIV.  236,  etc). 

NASIAA(-St)— “(see  Nasa) — ^A  Inose-shaped  architectural  object,  a 
vestibule. 

In  connection  with  the  pillar  (M.  xvi.  76,  77,  90,  120,  etc). 

Some  component  part  of  a building  (M.  xvii.  207,  xix.  174,  etc). 
Ohatur-dikshu  chatur-nasi  (M.  L.  284). 

Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  (referring  to  a class  of  buildings)  : 
Chatush-kuta&  chatuh-talat  ohatvarah  parsva-nasikah  II  48 
Mukha-nasi  tatha  yuktam  dva-datam  chanu-nasikah  II  49 
Chatur-nasi-samayuktam  anu-nasi-datashtakam  II  61 
Ktita-tala-samayukta  punah  panjara-nasika  II  52 
Par&vayor  nasika-yuktara  tan-madhye  tanu(tvanu) -nasika  II  79 
Eka-nasikaya  yuktam  panjaram  samudahritam  I 
Kuteshu  nasika-yuktarh  koshtham  etat  prakirtitam  II  80 
Karaikagama,  LV.  (eight  kinds  of  Nasika)  : 

Nasika  tv-ashtadha  jueya  tasyadau  simha-samjhitam  I 
Sardha-paujaram  anyat  syat  tyitiyam  matam  II 132 


NASIKI 


319 


Niryuha-panjaram  palohafe  panohamam  lamba-nasikam  I 
Simlia-&rotraih  tu  sliash.|am  syat  khaada-niryukakam  tafcha  II 
Jhasa-pafijaram  anyat  syat  tasamlakshaaam  uckyate  i|  133 
They  are  also  called  pafijaras : 

Sarveskaiii  panjaranam  tu  manam  evam  udahritam  II  149 
The  details  of  these  nasikas  or  pahjaras  (ibid.  134-146) : 
^lishta-prasada-niYranga-vipulam  sama-uirgamam ) 
Shat-vaiga-sahitam  takti-dhvajayor  mukha-pattikam  II  134 
Vedika-jalaka-stambha-raj  itam  simha-pafi  jaram  i 
Tri-daudadi-chatur-danda-paryantaih  vipulanvitam  It  135 
YathaThayama-samyuktam  suohi-pada-dvayam  dvijah  I 
Sarvesham  pafijaranam  tu  madbyame  samprayojayet  tl  136 
Dbamni  prasadam  atUsbtaib  sauivram  obardba-nirgatam  1 
Adbistbanadi-paiichahga-takti-dbyaja-samauvitam  I!  137 
Mukba-pattikayopetam  vedika-jalakauYitam  I 
Karna-pada-yutam  sardba-paujaram  tu  Yidbiyata  II  138 
Pragvad  vipula-sarnyuktam  pada-uirgamanYitam  I 
Tri-bbagam  nirgatam  Yapi  vrita-spbatiika-sanuibbam  J|  139 
Panjarasyadimam  §e3ba(m)  pragvad  atra  samiritam  II  140 
Svanlirupa-tikbasY-agrain  tUsbta-nivranga-karnakam  \ 
Eapotadyanga-samyuktain  etau  niryuba-panjaram  II  141 
Samtlishta-niYra-karnangbri-krita-iiaga-talam  feirab  I 
Niryuha-rahitam  yuktam  sarvangam  lamba-nasikam  II  142 
Tad  eYa  simba-trotrabba-tikham  yad-vad  nivrakam  I 
Samtritam  karna-padena  simha-trotram  tad  uchyate  II 143 
Vistare  panobamamte  tu  dYyamtam  nirgamananvitam  \ 
Nivradbastat  kapotadyair  amtair  mandita-rupakam  II 
Namna  tu  khanda-niryuba(in)  jnatYa  samyak  prayojayet  II  144 
Danda-dandanta-nisbkrantam  nivradbastad  upary-adbab  1 
Angair  yuktam  kapofcfidyaih  kandbaram  torananvitam  II  146 
Jhasa-paiijaram  etat  syad  ash^amain  namatab  dvijab  II  146 


320 


NAHA-LII^GA 


NAHA.LI]^GA— A kind  of  phaUus. 

Aoharya-liastena  va  iingam  &ishya-(sya)s  tu  naha-linga-vat  I 

(M.  Lii.  335,  see  details  under  Linga). 
NIGAMA — A town,  the  quarters  inhabited  by  traders,  a market. 

(M.  X,  42,  see  details  under  Nagara). 
Gf.  Nagara-nigama-jana-padanam — “towns,  marts  and  rural  parts, 
(e.  g.  grama-nagara-nigama,  Harshacharita,  p.  220,  1. 1)”. 

(Junaga^h  Inscrip,  of  Rudradaman,  lines  10,  11. 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  VIII.  pp.  43,  37,  and  note  6). 
Nigama-sabhaya-nibadha — registeredTat  the  town's  hall. 

(Senart,  Nasik  Cave  Inscrip,  no.  12,  lino  4, 
Bp.  Ind.  vol.  vm.  pp.  82,  83). 
NIGAMA-SABHA — (see  Nigaina) — guild-hall,  the  traders’assembly. 
Of.  Eta  cha  sarva  sravita  nigama-sabhaya  nibadha  oha  phalakavare 
charitralj  ti — “and  all  this  has  been  proclaimed  in  the  guild- 
hall and  has  been  written  on  boards  according  to  oust  om.” 

“ Nigama-sabhaya,  ‘ in  the  guild  hall,^  may  also  be  translated  ‘ in 
the  assembly  of  the  traders.”  Dr.  Burgess. 

(Kshatrapa  Inscrip,  no.  9,  line  4,  Arch.  Surv. 
new  Imp.  series,  vol.  iv.  pp.  102, 103,  note 
3 on  page  103). 

NIDRA — A moulding. 

Yajanam  chaika-bhagena  nidreka  vajanarn  tribhih  it 
Vajanam  chaika-bhagena  tatha  nidra  tri-bhfigatah  11 

(Kamikagama,  LV.  10,  11). 

NIDHANA— A store-room,  a treasury. 

Vimana-baleshu  cha  manclapeshu  nidhana-sadmeshv-api  gopu- 
reshv-apH 

(M.xiv.  397-400). 

■NIB(-V)ipA— An  ornament  covering  the  lower  part  of  the  pent-roof,  a 
moulding. 

Agram  vika^itabham  syan  miilam  cha  nibidaiivitam  \ 

(M.  xviii.  215,  etc). 


NIEGAMA 


321 


]SriM]SfA-(KA) — 'The  cavity,  depth,  depressed  part,  drip,  projection, 
edge  of  an  architectural  or  sculptural  object,  a moulding. 

A moulding  of  the  base  (M.  xiv  247,  etc.,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 

under  Adhishthana). 

A moulding  of  the  column  (M.  xv.  62). 

A moulding  of  the  pitha  or  pedestal  of  the  phallus  (M.  Liii.  27). 
Ohatur-dikshu  Sabhadram  va  chaika-dvy-am^ena  nimnakam  \ 

(M.l.285). 

The  depressed  part  of  the  chin : 

Hanvantam  tad-dvayor  madhye  ninma-tuhgam  feivayatam  I 

(M.  XLV.  103). 


NIEGAMA — The  projection. 

(1)  Manasara ; 

The  projections  of  the  mouldings  of  the  base  (M.  xiv.  386-412, 

see  under  Adhishthana). 
The  projections  of  the  mouldings  of  the  pedestal  (M.  xiii, 
128-146,  see  under  Upapitha). 
The  projection  of  the  (whole)  pedestal  (ibid.  20-36). 

Cf.  Nirgamodgamane  vapi  putra-na&am  avapnuyat  \ 

(M.  Lxix.  19). 

(2)  Nirgamarh  tu  punas  tasya  yavad  vai  tesha-pattika  1 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  262,  v.  4). 
Chatur-dikshu  tatha  jneyam  nirgamam  tu  tatoh  budhaih  I 

(Ibid.  chap.  269,  v.  2). 


(3)  Ashtamam^ena  garbhasya  rathakanam  tu  nixgamah  I 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  42,  v.  13,  see  also  v.  14). 

(4)  Nirgamas  tu  Sukanghret  cha  uohchhraya-feikhararddhagah  II  4 
Chatur-dikshu  tatha  j&eyo  nirgamas  tu  tatha  budhaih  II  9 
Bhagam  ekam  grihitVa  tu  nirgamam  kalpayet  puiiah  II  10 
Nirgamas  tu  samakhyatah  teshara  purvavad  eva  tu  II  14 
l^ukahghrih  purvavaj  jfleya  nirgamoohohhrayakam  bhavet  II  17 

(Garuda-PurSna,  chap.  47,  v.  4,  9, 10,  14, 17). 
21 


322 


NIBGIALA 


(6)  ^alanam  tu  ohatur-dikshu  chaika-bhagadifcak  kramat  \ 
Fada-bhaga-viyriddhya  cha  asbta-bhagavasanakam.  II  101 
Yinirgamasya  ohayamo  tad-vriddhya  tasya  vistarab  II  102 
Nirgamo  gopuranam  tu  prakarad  bahyato  bhavet  II 127 

(Kamikagama,  xsxv.  101,  102, 127). 
Madhyagara-vinishkranta-nirgamena  samanvitah  ii 
Nirgamas  tu  dvi-bbagena  vistara-dy(a)yamta-maiiatab  II 

(Ibid.  XLV.  24,  26). 

Adbyardba-dyi-tri-dando  va  nirgamat  cbodgamo  bhavet  II 

(Ibid.  Liv.  21). 

(6)  Sarvesbam  eva  padanam  tat-padam  nirgam  bhavet  II 
Of  all  oolumna  the  projection  is  i of  the  height. 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  65) 
NIEGtALA — A part  of  a swing,  a moulding. 

Ayase  nirgalam  kuryad  yojayet  rajjum  eva  va  I 
Yastrordhve  ohaika-hastantam  dolaya  phalakantakam  l 
Tad-urdhve  vajanantam  syan  nirgalayamam  iritam  I 
Nirgalagre  dvayagram  syat  phalaka-valayanvitam  \ 

(M.  L.  168-171). 

KIBE  TAN  A — The  fore  part  of  the  branch  of  an  ornamental  tree 
(kalpa-vriksha). 

Of.  Bhramarair  abhirayuktam  sarva-takha-niretane  \ 

(M.  XLvili.  68). 

KIBYUHA — ‘ A kind  of  a turret-like.ornament  on  columns  or  gates, 
a pinnacle,  turret ; a chaplet,  crest,  head-ornament, the  crest  of 
a helmet ; a peg  or  bracket  projecting  from' a wall  to  hang  or 
place  anything  upon  (of.  nSga-niryuha) ; wood  placed  in  a wall 
for  doves  to  build  their  nest  upon;  a door,  gate.^ 

(1)  Kiryuhadyair  alankritya  (M.  xwx.  186,  etc). 

(2)  Eamayana: 

Y.  9,  20  : Yimanair  bema-niryuhaih  \ 

Y.  9,  58 : Charu-torana-niryuha  (lanka)  l 


NISHKASA 


323 


(3)  Mahabharata  ; 

I.  43,44  : Dvara-torana-niryfthair  yuktam  nagaram  > 

I.  7,96 : Au6ka-vidba-prasada-harinya-valabbi-niryuba-&ata- 
saibkiilali  (uaga-lokab)  I 

(4)  HarLvam&a,  (Pot.  Diet.),  5021  (5015,  6018,  5023) : 

Nagaryrili  pasebimam  dvaram  uttaram  naga-dva- 
ram  purvaib  nagara-niryubam  daksbinam 
nagara-dvaram  I 

NlEVASA-MANpAPA — A pavilion  for  banisbmeniJ,  a private  room. 
Tat -pure ’lindam  ekarhsam  atbava  nirvasa-mandapam  \ 

(M.  XXXIV.  326,  etc). 

NIRVYUHA — A cross  circle,  a small  tower. 

Of.  Maba-varam  vimanordhve  nirvyubanana-samyntam  \ 

(Kamikagama,  XLV.  17). 

NIVATA-BHADRAKA — A dlass  of  chariots. 

(M.  XLiii.  113,  see  under  Eatha). 
NISJE[ADAJA(-DHA)— A class  of  pavilions,  a type  of  building. 

(M.  XXXIV.  152,  see  under  Mandapa). 
A class  of  buildings  without  the  kuta-tala  (top-hall)  but  with 
eight  other  halls  and  eight  aviaries  : 

Prasado  nishadhas  tatra  kuta-tala-vihinakah  \ 
Ashta-tala-samayuktat  chashtia-pahjara-samyutah  II 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  45). 

NISHAD  YA — A bedstead,  a couch,  a hall,  a shop,  a market-place. 

(l§i&upala-vadha,  xvill.  15,  .etc). 
HISHIDHI— (see  Nisaddhi) — A monument, 

NISHKALA — A ground*plan. 

Yugmam  nishkalam  proktam  ayugmam  sakalam  tatha  \ 

(M.  VII.  73,  see  under  Pada-vinyasa). 
NISHKASA — A veranda,  a portico,  a balcony,  a projection. 
Prag-grivah  paiioha-bhagena  nishkasas  tasya  ohochyate  I 
Karayet  susbiram  tadvat  prakarasya  tri-bhagatah  II 


324 


NISABBHI 


Prag-grivab  panoha-bhagena  nishkasena  vi&esbatak  I 
Kuryad  va  paficha-bhagena  prag-grivam  karna-mulafeab  il 

(Matsya-Puraiia,  ohap.  269,  v.  24-26). 

NISADDHI-— (NISiDI) — (see  Nishadya) — A house  of  rest,  a tomb,  a 
monument. 

(1)  Rami  settiyara  Nisidi — “ The  Nisidi  of  Rami  setti.” 

“ Nisidi  is  given  by  Sanderson  as  a bill  of  acquaintance  ; Dr. 
Bhau  Daji  (Journ.  Rom.  Br.  R.  As.  Soc.  vol.  ix.  p.  316,  Ins- 
cription, no.  4)  translates  it  by  house  of  rest,  on  the  analogy 
of  an  inscription  in  the  Udayagiri  cave  in  Orissa ; this  is 
probably  its  meaning  as  used  here.”  Dr.  Fleet. 

(Sanskrit  and  old  Kanarese  Inscrip.  no.  LVI.  Ind. 

Ant.  vol.  VIII.  p.  246,  note  48). 
Bp.  Carnat,  (vol.  ii.  Inscriptions  on  Chandragiri,  Yindhyagiii 
and  in  the  town)  : 

(2)  Erected  a stone  hall  for  gifts  in  Jinanathapura  and  set  up  a 

tomb  (nisidhiyam)  in  memory  of  the  Maha-mandalaoharyya 
Devakirtti  Pandita  DeVa.  (No.  40,  Roman  itext,  p.  10,  line  3 
from  the  bottom  upwards,  Transl.  p.  122,  line  19  f). 

(3)  “ By  Madhavachandra  Deva  was  the  tomb  (Nishadyaka- 

karayeta)  raised  to  his  memory. (No,  41,  Roman  text, 
p.  12,  line  16,  Transl.  p.  123,  line  6). 

(4)  “ The  excellent  minister  Naga-deva  erected  in  memory  of  the 

famous  Yogi  Nayakirtti a tomb  (nishidhyalayam)  to 

endure  as  long  as  sun,  moon  and  stars  continue.”  (No.  42 
Roman  text,  p.  16,  line  10,  Transl.  p.  124,  line  4). 
(6)  “ Raised  a tomb  (Nisidhigeham)  to  her  memory.”  (No.  44, 
Roman  text,  p.  20,  line  23,  Transl.  p.  126,  line  20). 
(6)  “ A group  of  tombs  (nisidhika),  a collection  of  ponds  and  lakes, 
who  (but  him)  made  these  in  memory  of  Nayakirtti  Deva 
Saiddhantika  ? ” (No.  90,  Roman  text,  p.  73,  line  23,  Transl. 

p.  169,  line  1). 


325 


NiBA 

(7)  “ He,  from  devotion  to  his  guru,  set  up  his  tomb  (Hishadyam) 

(No.  106,  Eoman  text,  p.  80,  hue  27,  Transl.  p.  165,  line  80). 

(8)  “ Mahkabbe  Ganti  had  erected  a tomb  (Nisidhiggehayam) 

for  her  guru.”  (No.  139,  Roman  text,  p.  110,  line  6 from 
bottom  upwards,  Transl.  p.  185,  line  9). 

(9)  “ Had  a tomb  (nisidhigeham)  for  him.”  (No.  144,  Roman  text, 

p.  114,  line  22,  Transl.  p.  8,  line  9 from  bottom  upwards). 

(10)  “ His  son  Taila-gauda  made  a grant  for  the  god  Jidde&vara 

and  set  up  this  monument  (nisaddhi).”  (Bp.  Oarnat.  vol. 

vii.  Honnali  Taluq,no.  79,  Transl.  p.  174). 

(11)  “ A third . feature,  even  more  characteristic  of  the  style,  is 

found  in  the  tombs  of  the  priests,  a large  number  of  which  is 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Moodbidri.  Three  of  these  are 
illustrated  in  the  annexed  woodcut  (no.  154,  photo).  They 
vary  much  in  size  and  magnificence,  some  being  from  three 
to  five  or  seven  storeys  in  height,  but  they  are  not,  like  the 
storeys  of  Dra vidian  temples,  ornamented  with  simulated 
cells  and  finishing  with  domical  roofs.  The  division  of  each 
storey  is  a sloping  roof,  like  those  of  the  pagodas  at  Kat- 
mandhu,  and  in  China  or  Tibbet.” 

(In  Bengal,  especially  in  Comilla  and  Noakhali  districts, 
these  tombs  or  monuments,  which  are  even  now  built,  have 
generally  the  cone-shape.  At  the  bottom  there  is  in  most 
cases  a square  cell  or  chamber.  They  are  sometimes  con- 
structed in  groups  and  supplied  with  chambers  at  the  top,  of. 
Chatkhil,  Noakhali). 

(Bergusson.  Ind.  and  East.  Arch.  p.  276). 
NIHAEA — (see  Prakara)“A  court  of  the  compound,  a courtyard. 
Dvitiyam  anta-nihara  oha  madhyama-hara  tritiyakam  [ 

(M. XXXI.  11). 

Nip  A — A nest,  a lair,  a covered  place. 

In  connection,  with  buildings  : 

Nidasya  ohadho  grivo-Vatayanam  karayet  1 

(M.  xviil.  329). 


326  NEITTA-MANDAPA 

Toranair  nida-bhadradi-mule  chordJive  oba  bbushitam  ( 

(M.  XX.  64). 

NEITTA(-TYA)-MANpAPA— (see  Mandapa) — A detaoned  buitding 
used  as  a musio  ball. 

Nripanam  abbisbekSrfcbam  mandapam  nfitta-mandapam  | 

(M.  XXXIV.  38,  etc). 

A pavilioa  generally  in  front  of  a temple,  where  religious  music  is 
performed  (Suprabbedagama,  xxxi.  96,  98,  see  under  Mapdapa). 
NBTEA-KUTA — (see  Earpia-kuta)— -A  front  apartment,  aside-ball, 
a corner-tower. 

Pradbanavasa-netrastba-netra-kuta-dvayam  nyayet  II 

(Eamikagama,  XXXV.  76). 

NETEA-BHADBA — (see  Mukba-bbadra) — A side  tabernacle. 
Parito^lind(r)a-bbagena  varanam  mukba-bbadrakam  I 
Atbava  netra-bbadram  syat  1 

(M.  XXXIV.  261-252). 

Earnaika-kara-bbadram  syat  fealagre  netra-bbadrakam  \ 

(M.  XXXV.  246,  etc). 

NBTEA-BHITTI— A side-wall. 

Daksbine  netra-bbittau  va  garbbadbanam  prakirtitam  \ 

(Kamikagama,  XXXV.  46  etc). 

EBTEA-SALA— A side-ball. 

Tad-adbo  bbu-prave&e  tu  tad-dvarasyavasanakam  \ 

Sbannam  vai  netra-&alanam  antarale  cba  va  stbalam  II 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  81). 

Tacb-cbbalaya  dvi-parfeve  tu  netra-sala  sa-bbadrakam  \ 

(M.  XXVI.  40,  etc). 

NBMI — (see  Prakara  and  Pradaksbina) — Tbe  circumference,  a 
surrounding  veranda  or  balcony. 

(1)  Nemib  padona-vistirna  prasadasya  pamantatah  1 

(Agni-Purana,  cbap.  104,  V.  7), 

(2)  Nemih  padena  vistirna  prasadaaya  samantatab  \ 

G-arbbam  tu  dvi-gunam  karyyam  nemya  manam  bbaved 
iba  II 


(Garuda-Purana,  cbap.  47,  v.  19-20), 


PACHANALAYA 


327 


P 

PAK8HA-(KA) — A side,  a flank,  a foot-patk. 

In  connection  with  staircases  (M.  xxx.  100,  etc). 

In  connection  with  streets  : 

Evam  vithir  dvi-paksham  syan  madhya.rathyaika-pakshaka  \ 

(M.  XI.  3.60) 

In  connection  with  walls  ; 

Anyat  salam  tu  sarvesham  ehaika-pakshalayakshma-kramat  I 
Anyat  salam  tu  sarvesham  alayartham  dvi-pakshakam  \ 

(M.  XXXVI.  86-87). 

See  further  illustrations  under  ' Bka-paksha  ’ and  ‘ Dvi-paksha.  ’ 
PAKSHAG-HNA — A type  of  building. 

Yamya  hinam  chulll  tri-lalakam  vitta-na§a-karam  etat  \ 
Pakshaghnam  aparaya  varjitam  suta-dhvam&a-vaira-karam  II 
“ A building  lacking  a southern  hall  is  called  ohulli ; it  oa^ses  loss 
of  prosperity,  one  in  which  there  is  no  western  hall  (the  so) 
called  Pakshaghna,  occasions  the  loss  of  children  and  (the) 
enmity.  ’’ 

(Brihat-samhita,  liii.  38,  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol  Vl.  p.286). 
PAKSHA-^ALA— A side-hall. 

Madhya-koshthasya  s5le  tu  bhadra-&ala  vi&eshatah  \ 
Paksha-fealanvitam  vatha  urdhva-&alanvitam  tu  va  I 

(M.  xxxili.  618-619), 

PAl^KA — ^A  moulding  of  the  pillar. 

^ikharasyordhve  pattoohcham  uttarochcham  samam  bhavet  \ 
Tad-urdhve  vajanam  pankam  nimnam  kumbham  sadandakam  \ 

(M.  XV.  126-127). 

In  connection  with  Joinery  : 

Eka-rupa(m)  oha  pankam  cha  vidhih  syad  eka-rupakam  \ 

(M.  xvii.  163). 

PACHANALAYA — A kitchen,  the  refectory  of  a temple. 

Devanam  paohana-mandapam — “built  a beautiful  stone  temple 
with  the  torana-gate  and  the  surrounding  walls.  Having 


328 


PANCHA-TALA 


provided  the  temple  with  a flower-garden,  kitchen,  pond  and 
suitable  environs.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  x.  Kolar  Taluq,  no.  132,  Eoman 
text,  p.  54,  Transl.  p.  49). 

PAS'CHA-TALA — The  fifth  storey,  the  five-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXIII.  1-55). 

The  description  of  the  fifth  storey  (M.  xxxi.  48-61). 

The  eight  classes  (ibid.  1-48,  see  under  Prasada). 
PAISCHA-PEAKAEA-HARMY— The  various  attached  and  detached 
buildings  constructed  in  the  five  courts  into  which  the  whole 
compound  is  divided  (see  Prakara).  (M.  xxxi.  2). 

PAl&OHA-BHUMI— (see  Panoha-tala) — The  fifth  storey,  the  five- 
stored  buildings. 

PAI^OHA-SALA— The  enclosure-wall  of  the  fifth  court. 

(M.  XXXI.  28,  29). 

Cf , Tatah  panohama-sala  cha  maha-maryadim  iritam  \ 

(M.  XXXI.  13,  etc). 

PA^STCHAYATANA — A phallus  with  five  heads. 

(Chalukyan  Architecture,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp. 

series,  vol.  xxi.  p.  39). 

paSjaba-a  cage,  an  aviary,  a nest,  an  architectural  object. 

The  cages  for  domestic  birds  and  animals,  such  as  pigeon,  tiger, 
etc.,  are  counted  among  the  articles  of  furniture  (M.  i.. 
60-66),  their  architectural  description  (ibid.  213-288), 

(Kamikagama,  Lv,  134-146,  see  under  Nasika). 
PA^TJAEA-SALA — A small  top-room,  a small  window,  a class  of 
storeyed  buildings,  a type  of  bedstead,  a moulding,  a nest-like 
architectural  object. 

(1)  Manaaara  ; 

A small  room  above  the  dome  (stupi)  ; 

Etat  panjara-talam  cha  padmam  ekam  tikha-trayam  1 

(M.xv.  131). 

A class  of  the  seven-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxv.  27,  see 

under  Prasada). 


pa:^jaba.bali 


329 


A synonym  of  tho  bedstead  (M.  III.  11). 

A memember  of  the  pillar  (M.  xv.  89,  98,  99-103,  etc). 

In  connection  'with  buildings  of  one  to  twelve  storeys  : 
Sfilil-kuta-dvayor-madhye  chaika-hara  sa-pafijaram  I 

(M.  XIX.  57,  see  also  178,  etc). 

(2)  Kamikagama,  XXXV.  76 ; 

Panjara-dvitayaih  karyam  karna-kuta-samodayam  II 
Ibid.  L.  92: 

Knta-^alanvitam  yat  tn  panjarais  oha  samanvitam  (vimanam)  II 
Ibid.  Lv.  196-198,  (the  synonyms  of  the  pafijara)  : 
Pramana-bhavanam  karma-prasadasyushtakam  tatha  I 
Sabheti  kuta-nama  syaoh  chhaya  valabhi(r)  eva  oha  II 
Brahma-dvaram  tato  madhye  mandapam  koshthake  matam  li 
Eiju-vaktram  dvijavasam  kridam  syat  simha-vaktrakam  I 
Panjarabhidhanam  syat  II 

(See  further  details  under  Nasika). 

(3)  Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  80 : 

Eka-nasikayil  yuktam  panjaram  samudahritam  \ 

Kuteshu  nasika-yuktam  koshtham  etat  prakirtitam  II 

(See  also  V.  79,  under  Nasika). 

(4)  “ Between  the  ‘ karna-kuta  ’ and  ‘ &ala’  are  found  some  kinds 

of  little  windows  called  pafijara.” 

(Bravidan  Arch,  by  Jouveau-Bubrenii,  ed.  S. 

Ilrishnaswami  Aiyangar,  p.  6). 

(6)  “ His  son  Kahgala-deva  having  wandered  abroad  (as  a 
mendicant)  and  brought  alms,  had  a kuta-panjara  made  for 
the  god  Hanumanta,  and  that  fame  might  come  to  all,  had  a 
lipi-^feasana  made  and  set  up  it.  ” 

(Bp.  Carnat  vol.  vii.  Channegiri  Taluq,  no.  17, 
Transl.  p.  180,  Eoman  text,  p.  317). 

(6)  See  Chalukyan  Architecture  (Arch  Surv.  new  Imp.  series 

vol.  XXI.  plates  xxvi,  xoviii). 

(7)  See  Mysore  Arch.  Eeport  (1915-16,  p,  22,  plate  x,  fig.  2). 

(8)  See  Cunningham,  Arch  Surv.  (vol.  i.  plate  v,  p,  6). 


330 


PATTA 


PATTA  -N  A band,  a fillet,  a moulding  of  the  base,  etc,,  an  ornament 
PATTIKA  > for  the  body,  a crown,  a diadem,  a turban,  an  upper 
PATTI  ^ garment,  a cloth,  a plate,  a slab,  a seat,  a Junction, 
a town,  an  edict. 

(1)  “ It  is  often  confounded  with  the  mouldingl 'called  ‘ Tajana  ’ 

especially  in  pedestals  and  bases  as  it  appears  to  be  of  the 
same  form,  to  be  used  in  the  same  situation,  and  to  have  the 
same  height  and  projection  with  the  latter;  but  when 
employed  in  architraves  and  friezes  its  height  and  projection 
increase  considerably.” 

(Bam  Eaz,  Bass.  Arch.  Hind.  p.  25), 

(2)  In  connection  with  the  plough  : phala-patta,  tri-pa^t^,  madhya^ 

patta  (M.  V.  52,  61,  73). 

In  connection  with  the  foundations  : 

Pattikantam  kshipech  chapi  vinyaset  prathameshtakam  \ 

(M.  XII,  203). 

A crowning  moulding  of  the  pedestal  (M.  xili.  5,  49,  82,  etc., 
see  the  lists  if  mouldings  under  Upapitha ). 
A moulding  of  the  base  (M.  xiv,  13,  26,  48,  etc,,  see  the  lists 
of  mouldings  under  Adhishthana). 
A moulding  of  the  pillar  (M.  XV.  121,  35,  etc). 

In  connection  with  the  staircase  (M,  xxx.  140), 

In  connection  with  the  door  (M,  xxxix,  73,  etc). 

In  connection  with  the  bedstead  (M,  XLiv.  18, 19,  etc). 

An  ornament  for  the  body  : 

Kati-sutram  tu  samyuktam  kati-prante  sa-pattika  \ 

(M,  L.  27,  see  also  28,  etc). 

Athava  ratna-pattam  syat  svarpa-tHtanka-karnayoh  1 

(M.  Liv.  47). 

Compare  ‘Patta-dhara,’  and  ‘Patta-bhaJ  ^ meaning  kings,  with 
special  crowns.  (M.  LI.  3,  4). 

(3)  Bhagais  tribhiatatha  kap.|hah  kaptha-pattas  tu  bhagatah  \ 
Bhaga(?go)bhyasam  urdhva-pattat  oha  tesha-bhagena  pattika  I! 
Hirgamas  tu  punas  tasya  yavad  vai  tesha-pattika  li 


PATTA-BANBHA 


331 


■ The  neok  (of  tihe  pedestal  of  an  idol  or  phallus)  is  made  of 
three  parts  and  the  band  of  the  neck  of  one  part.  The 
abhyasa  (?)  is  one  part,  the  upper  band  is  also  one  part,  and 
the  remaining  part  is  pattika  (fillet  or  band).  Its  projection 
should  extend  as  far  as  the  last  pattika.’ 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  262,  V.  3,  4). 

(4)  Vedikam  prastara-samam  shaii-amtikritya  bhagatah  I 
Ekam&am  prati-pattam  syad  anitabhyam  antarr  bhavet  II 
tjrdhva-vajanam  ekam&am  aih^am  tat-pattika  bhavet  | 
Urdhva-pat^am  tad-ekarhtam  antari  kusumair  yufca  II 

(Vastu-vidya,  ed.  Gianapati  ^astri,  ix.  23,  24). 

(6)  PolakeMr  apy-avadid  anujan  pratibaddha-pattam  avantu  1 
“ Pulakesi  too  declared  to  his  brethren  (in  the  presence  of  his 
vassals)  that  they  were  to  support  the  encircling  diadem  of 
his  sons  and  grandsons,” 

(Grant  of  Kusumayudha  iv,  line  18,  Ind. 

Ant,  vol.  XXXII.  pp.  282,  284). 

PATTANA(-NA)— (see  Pattana)— A town,  a commercial  city  acces- 
sible by  water-ways. 

(1)  Kautiliya-Arthatastra  (chap.  xxii.  p.  46,  foot  note) ; 

Pattanam  takatair  gamy  am  ghatikair  naubhir  eva  oha  I 
Naubhir  eva  tn  yad  gamyaiii  pattapam  tat  prachakshate  II 
Drona-mukham  jala-nirgama-pravefeaih  pattanam  ity-arthah  \ 
(Rayapaseni-sutra-vyakhyane,  p.  206), 
(^2)  Kraya-vikraya-sarhyuktam  abdhi-tira-samatritam  \ 
De^antara-gata-janair  nana-jatibhir  anvitam  II 
Pattanam  tat  samakhyatam  vai&yair  adhyushitam  l| 

(Kamikagama,  xx.  8,  9). 

PATTA-BANDHA — The  coronation,  a crown,  a class  of  bases  com- 
prising four  types  which  differ  from  one  another  in  height  and 
in  the  addition  or  omission  of  some  mouldings. 

See  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  ‘Adisthtoa  ’ (M.  xiv.  297-804), 

A part  of  the  crown  (M.  L.  Ill), 


S32 


PATT-I§1LA 


Nija-patfa-baEdlaa-samaye— “ at  the  time  of  his  coronation.” 

(Six  Eastern  Chalukya  Grants,  Bervada  Plates  of 
Ohalukya-Bhima  I,  line  20,  Ep.  Ind.  7ol.  V, 
pp.  129, 130). 

GodaTari-tata-samipasthe  Kapitthakagrame  patta-Y(b)aadha'- 
mahotsa^e  tula-purusham  aruhya.” 

“ The  term  Pattabandha,  which  literally  means,  ' binding  of  the 
fillet  ’ has  been  generally  supposed  to  signify  ‘ coronation  cere- 
mony.’ But,  it  does  not  suit  here.”  Mr.  B.  B.  Bhandarkar, 

(Cambay  Plates  of  Govinda  lY,  line  46,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  Yii.  pp.  40,  27,  note  2). 

^ri-patta-bandhotsavaya  Eurundakam  agatena  maya  \ 

(The  grants  of  Ihdraraya  ni,  no.  11,  line  47,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  IX.  pp.  36,  40,  26,  note  2 refers  to  vol. 

VII.  p,  27,  note  2). 

Coronation  and  crown : 

dva-da&a-varshe  tu  janmanah  pa^tam  \ 

Yo’dhad  udaya-girindro  ravim  iva  lokanuragaya  II 

“ Put  on,  to  please  the  world,  the  fillet  (crown)  in  the  twelfth 
year  of  (his)  birth.” 

Niravadya-dhavalah  Kataka-raja-patta-feobhita-lalatah-- “ (his  son 
was)  Niravadyadhavala,  whose  forehead  was  decorated  with  the 
fillet  (crown)  of  Katakaraja,”  Dr.  Hultzsch. 

(Maliyapundi  grant  of  Ammaraja  ii,  lines  40,  46, 
^ _ Ep,  Ind.  vol.  IX.  pp.  63,  66,  66). 

PATTA-SALA— A religious  establishment. 

See  Mandhata  Plates  of  Jayasimha  of  Dhara  (line  11,  Ep.  Ind.  vol. 

III.  pp.  49,  47). 

Cf.  “ (To  provide)  for  the  eight  kinds  of  ceremonies  of  the  god 
Mallinatha  of  the  patta-&ale  (la)  which  they  had  made  within 
precincts  of  that  ^antinatha  basadi.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  V.  part  I,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  129, 
Transl.  p.  Se,  Boman  text,  p.  193). 

PANDI-^ALA-A  kind  of  hall.  , 

(M.  XXXV.  98,  see  details  under  Sala). 


PATTANA 


333 


PAT  TAN  A — (see  Pattana) — A village,  a town,  a oommeroial  city  on 
the  bank  of  a river  or  sea,  a new  settlement. 

(1)  A village  inhabited  mostly  by  traders  (Vaitya). 

(M.  IX,  466-467). 

A town  (M.  X.  40). 

A sea-side  commercial  city : 

Abdhi-tira-pradete  tu  nana-jati-grihair  vritam  I 
Vanig-jatibhir  akirnam  kraya-vikraya-puritam  \ 

Eatnair  dvipantarair  nityaih  kshaumaih  karpflradibhih  I 
Etat  pattanam  akhyatam  vaprayata-samanvitam  \ 

(M.x.  63-66). 

(2)  A sea-side  commercial  city  inhabited  mostly  by  tradesmen. 

(Kamikagama,  xx.  8,  9,  see  under  Pattana). 
Kautiliya-Arthasastra  (chap.  xxii.  p.  46,  foot  note) : 

(3)  Pattanam  feakatair  gamyam  ghatikair  naubhir  eva  oha  \ 

Naubhir  eva  tu.  yad  gamyam  pattanam  tat  praohakshate  II 

(Eayapaseni-sutra-vyakhyane,  p.  206). 

(4)  Pattanani  jala-sthala-pathayor  anyatara-yuktani  \ 

(Pratna-vyakarana-sutra-vyakhyane,  p,  306). 
(6)  Tad-bhuktau  pattanam  ramyarn  feamipatxti  namakam  \ 

(The  Ghahanas  of  Marwar,  no.  iv,  Sevadi  stone 
insorip-  of  Katukaraja,  v.  6.  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  xi.  p.  31). 

(6)  “ Piriya-Eajaiya-Beva,  son  of , caused  this  town  (pattana) 

to  be  rebuilt  and  gave  it  the  name  of  Piriyaraja  pattana 

(patana  in  the  text)  after  himself... Whoever  calls  it 

Sihgapattana  is  guilty  of  killing  his  father  and  mother.'^ 
(Bp.  Carnat.,  vol.  iv.  Hunsur  Taluq,  no.  16,  Transl. 

p.  84,  Eoman  text,  p.  136-136). 

(7)  Dva-trimfea(t)tu  velavaramum  ashtadata-pattanamum  basashti 

yoga-pithamum— “ (the  people  of)  the  thirty-two  sea-side 

towns,  the  18  towns,  62  seats  of  contemplation (held 

a convocation  there).’’ 

(Old  Kanarese  Insorip,  at  Terdal,  line  60,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XIV.  pp.  19,  26), 


834 


PATRA 


(8)  G-rama-iLagara'klied5i,-karvvada-ma4amba-  dconamukha  - pabfca- 

nam  - galiiindam  aneka-mata-kuba-pnisada-devayatanamgali- 
dam  oppuva-agrahara-pattianamgaliiridam  atisayav-appa....  \ 
“ (At  Terida|a,  a mercliant  town  situated  in  the  centre  and 
the  first  in  importance  among  the  twelve  (towns)  in  the 
glorious  Kundi  Three  Thousand,  adorned  with)— villages, 
towns,  hamlets,  villages  surrounded  by  hills,  groups  of  villa- 
ges, sea-girt  towns,  and  chief  cities,  with  elegant  mansion^, 
palaces  and  temples,  and  with  shining  agrahara-towns  in 

the  country  of  Kuntala 

(Old  Kanarese  Insorip.  at  Terdal,  line  58.  Ind. 

Ant.  vol.  XIV..  pp.  19,  25). 

(9)  “ With  myriads  of  people,  practices  of  virtue,  agreeable  occu- 

pations, streams  of  the  (nine)  sentiments,  pleasure-gardens 
separated  lovers,  splendid  tanks,  full  lotus  beds,  gilded  boats 
for  spring  festivals,  ghatika-sthanas  (religious  centres),  the 
supports  of  dharmma  and  mines  of  enjoyment,  moats  which 
were  as  if  the  sea  being  overcome  had  returned  here  on 
account  of  the  collection  of  gems,  groups  of  the  lotus  faces 
of  beautiful  women  fair  as  the  moon,  (grama-nagara-kheija- 
kharvvana-madamba-drona-mukha-pura-pattana-raja-dhani), 
on  whatever  side  one  looked  in  these  nine  forms  did  the 
Kuntala  deta  shine.’’ 

(It  should  be  noticed  that  the  passage  within  brackets  is 
almost  identical  with  the  corresponding  passage  in  quota- 
tion no.  8 above). 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  VII.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no.  197, 
Transl.  p.  124,  para  1,  last  seven  lines,  Roman 
text,  p.  214,  line  27  f). 

PATBA — A leaf,  a leaf -like  ornament,  a moulding. 

An  ornament  of  the  pillar  (M.  xv.  36,  etc). 

A member  of  the  tala  or  hall  (M.  xxxv.  402). 


IPATHA 


835 


Of.  VatsarSminblia-lektiarthani  patram — A leaf  for  writing  the 
almanac  on. 

(M.l.49). 

In  oonneotion  with  the, balance  (fenla)  (M.  L.  190-191, 197, 199). 

See  more  details  under  Bhushana. 

PATEA-PATTA--;-A  leaf-shaped  diadem,  a moulding. 

A turban  or  crown  (M.  xlix.  16). 

A moulding  of  the  base  (M.  xiv.  346). 

PATRA-KALPA — ^A  set  of  ornaments  for  the  use  of  kings  and  gods. 

(M.  L.  3,  6,  see  under  Bhushapa). 
PATRA-TORANA^ — An  arch  (see  details  under  Torana). 
Bala-ohandra-nibhaih  patraife  ohitritam  patra-toranam  II 

(EamikSgama,  LV.  64). 

PATRA-BANDHA — A type  of  entablature  (see  details  under  Prastara). 
Pada-Yistara-samyuktam  patra-bandham  iti  smritam  1 

(Kamikagama,  LiV.  6). 

PATRA-VALLI-(KA) — A moulding  of  the  entablature  (M.  xvi.  64), 
of  the  arch  (M.  xlyi.  66). 

Bee  more  details  under  Prastara. 

PATHA — ^A  road,  a street,  a way,  a path. 

(1)  Kautiliya-Arthatastra  (measures  of  various  paths)  : 

Antareshu  dvi-hasta-vishkambham  par§ve  ohatur-gunayamam 
anu-prakaram  ashta-hastayatam  deva-patham  karayet  \ 
Dandantara  dvi-dandantara  va  charyah  (ashta-hasta-pra- 
mana-margah,  Rayapaseni-sutra-vyakhyane,  p.  13)  karayet  \ 
Bahir  jauu-bhaginim  tri-sula-prakara-kutavapata-kantaka- 
pratisaradi-prishtha-tala-patra-fei:mgataka-&va-damshtrarga- 
lopaskandana-padukambarisodapanakaih  chhanna-patham 
karayet  V 


(Ohap.  XXIV-  p.  52-63). 


336 


PADA 


Trayat  praohina  raja-margas  feraya  udioliiiia  iti  vastu-viblia- 
gah  \ 

Sa-dva-dafea-dvaro  yuktodaka-bhiimicli-chhaniia-pathab  \ 
Ghatur-dandantara  rathya  raja-marga-drona-mukha-sthaniya- 
rashtra-viYita-patbab  \ 

Sayomya-yyuha-^ma§ana-grama-patb.a&  ohasbta-dandab  } 
Chatur-dandas  sefcu-vana-patb-ah  I 
Dvidando  basti-ksbetra-pathah  \ 

Pancbaratnayo  ratha~patba&  cbatvarab  pa^u-patbab  | 

Dvau  ksbTidra-pa&u-maniishya-patbah  1 

(Chap.  XXV.  64-66). 

PABA— -A  part,  the  foot,  a plot  of  the  ground-plan  (see  Pada-vinyasa). 

(1)  Vastu-yaga-tattva  by  Eagbunandana  -quotes  from  the  Linga 

-(Parana)  without  further  reference  : 

Gbatuh-sbasbti-padam  vastu  sarva-deva-gribam  prati  1 
Ekatiti-padam  vastu  manusham  pratisiddbidam  II 

(2)  Byibat-sambita  (liii.  42)  : 

Eka^iti-vibbage  da&a  da^a  purvottarayata  rekbah  \ 
Varabamibira  apparently  does  not  give  different  rules  for 
temples  and  residential  buildings. 

(3)  The  foot ; the  ground-plan  (M.  lvii.  47,  etc. ; vn.  1-267,  see 

under  Pada-vinyasa). 

PADA-VINYASA — The  ground-plan. 

“ The  plan  is  the  representation  of  the  horizontal  section  of  a 
building,  showing  its  distribution,  the  form  and  extent  of  its 
various  parts.  This  is  the  geometrical  plan  where  the  parts  are 
represented  in  their  natural  properties.  The  modern  architects 
consider  other  plans  too : in  the  perspective  plan  objects  are 
represented  on  a definite  surface  so  as  to  form  a certain  position 
to  affect  the  eye  in  the  same  manner  as  the  objects  themselves 
would ; while  in  the  raised  plan  the  elevation  of  a building  is 
shown.”  (Gwilt,  Encycl.  of  Arch.  (.Tlossary,  p.  1240). 


]?ADMA 


337 


(1)  Maaasara  (chap.  vir.  named  Pada-vinyasa) : 

Apparently  the  geometrical  plans  are  described  in  this  chapter 
(lines  1-267).  There  is  no  mention  of  the  perspective  or  the 
raised  plan.  What  is  given  there  is  all  about  the  ground- 
plot  or  the  piece  of  ground  selected  to  receive  the  building. 
Thirty-two  kinds  of  square  plans  are  described  (2  f).  They 
are  designated  by  different  names,  e.g.,  the  8th  plan  is  called 
Ohandita  and  is  divided  into  64  equal  squares  (9),  the  24th 
is  called  Chandrakanta  and  is  divided  into  1024  squares  (50) 
and  so  forth. 

(2)  Nagara-grama-durgadyaf-der)  griha-prasada-vriddhaye  1 
Eka&iti-padair  vastu(m)  pujayet  siddhaye  dhruvam  II 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  106,  v.  1). 

(8)  See  Cunningham,  Arch.  Snrv.  Beports,  vol.  ii,  plate  xovii 
(ground-plans  of  l^aiva  temples),  p.  419  ; plate  XOVill  (ground- 
plans  of  Vaishnava  temples),  p.  421 ; vol.  xx,  plate  xx  (ground 
plan  of  a Jaina  temple) ; vol.  xxi,  plate  XLii  (ground 
plan  of  Slab  temples,  Eundalpur) ; vol.  xxiii,  plate  XVIII 
(ground  plan  of  Jaina  temple  of  Naulakha,  mark  the  Svas- 
tika  figures) ; vol.  xil,  plate  v (plan®  of  a temple) ; vol.  xvil, 
plate  XXI  (peculiar  plan  of  a temple). 

(4)  See  elements  of  Hindu  Iconography  by  T.  A.  G-opinatha  Bao 
( Appendix  A,  p.  1-46,  diagrams  facing  pp.  1, 11). 

PAI)MA-(K,A) — A lotus,  an  eye,  a moulding,  a oyma  recta,  a oyma 
reversa  or  reversed  oyma  also  called  ogee  or  talon  (see  Gwilt, 
Bnoycl.  figs.  869,  868),  a ground-plan,  a pavilion,  a type  of  village, 
a class  of  buildings. 

(1)  “ The  moulding,  called  Padma,  (abja,  ambuja  or  saroruha,  etc), 
literary  lotus,  is  supposed  to  resemble  a petal  of  that  flower. 
It  is  a sort  of  compound  figure,  partly  convex  and  partly 
concave ; and  its  section  is  composed  of  two  opposite  curves, 
meeting  at  the  bisecting  point  of  a line  drawn  between  the 
points  of  recess  and  projection,  and  very  much  resembling  the 
‘ oyma  recta  ^ and  * oyma  reversa  ’ of  the  Western  architects. 


338 


PADMA 


This  moulding  is  distingmshed  into  greater  and  less,  and 
forms  the  principal  ornaments  of  Indian  architecture.  It 
is  generally  employed,  in  detached  pairs,  in  bases  and  corni- 
ces, one  facing  the  other  in  opposite  directions,  and  is 
formed  upright  or  the  reverse  according  to  its  situation, 
either  as  a crowning  member  of  the  former  or  the  support- 
ing ornament  of  the  latter.  The  concave  part  of  it,  when 
placed  with  its  bottom  reversed,  is  often  so  designed  as  to 
project  forward  or  rise  up,  after  having  touched,  as  it  were, 
the  fillet  below,  with  a small  perpendicular  curvature,  resem- 
bling in  shape  the  petal  of  the  lotus,  with  its  pointed  head 
somewhat  inclined  towards  the  top.  In  some  specimens, 
this  moulding  is  placed  at  the  base  of  columns,  and  looks 
very  much  like  an  apophyge  or  ogee  of  the  Ionic  and  Corin- 
thian orders  being  formed  either  with  a curved  line  having 
more  or  leas  convexity  at  the  top,  or  with  an  upright  tangent 
|jO  the  concave  part  below.  It  is  sometimes  made  exactly  in 
the  form  of  an  ovolo  of  the  Western  architects.^’ 

(Earn  Eaz,  Eass.  Arch.  Hind,  p.  23-24). 

(2)  Manasara ; 

A ground-plan  (M.  viii.  36  f.,  see  Pada-vinyasa). 

A kind  of  village  (M.  ix.  2,  see  under  Grama). 

A moulding  of  the  pedestal  and  the  base  (M.  xiil.  41,  61,  64, 
68,  etc.,  XIY.  68,  etc.,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Upa- 
pitha  and  Adhishthana). 

A type  of  pavilion  ; 

Bvam  tu  padmakam  proktam  devanam  pachanalayam  1 

Padmakhyam  pushpa-mandapam...,  \ 

(M.  xxxiv.  173, 180,  see  Mandapa). 

A moulding  of  pitha  or  the  pedestal  of  the  phallus  (M.  liii.  31). 

(3)  Stambham  vibhajya  navadha  vahanam  bhago  ghato’sya  bhago’- 

nyah  \ 

Padmam  tathottaroshthaiii  kuryad  bhagena  bhagena  11 


PABMA-BANBHA 


339 


Here,  Kera^s  rendering  of  ‘padma*  by  ‘capital’  seems  untenable. 

(Bribat-sambita,  liii.  29,  J..  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S., 
•vol,  71.  p.  285,  see  details  under  Stambba). 
A type  of  building  wbicb  is  planned  like  a lotus,  has  only  one 
storey  and  one  spire,  and  is  (?)  8 cubits  wide  (^ayanashtau) : 

(4)  Bribat-sambita  (lyi.  23,  see  under  Prasada). 

(5)  Matsya-Purana  (cbap.  269,  v.  30,  39,  49,  63,  see  under  Prasada). 

(6)  Bbavisbya-Purana  (cbap,  130,  v.  30,  see  under  Prasada). 

A class  of  round  buildings  : 

(7)  Agni-Purana  (cbap.  104,  y.  17-18,  see  under  Prasada). 

(8)  Garuda-PurSna  (cbap.  47,  v.  21,  23,  28-29,  see  under  Prasada). 
PADMA-KANTA—A  special  type  of  pillar  (M.  XY.  38).  It  is  based 

on  a seat  (asana),  plinth  or  lotus  (cyma).  Its  cornice  or  edge  of 
the  capital  is  decorated  with  opening  buds.  Its  base  is  decorated 
with  a bridge-like  moulding  (palika).  The  ornamental  fillets  are 
oonstuoted  and  two  angulas  (1^  inches)  on  all  sides  are  adorned 
with  foliage,  jewels,  flowers,  etc.  (ibid.  30-37). 

A class  of  the  six-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxiv.  3-12,  see  under 

Prasada). 

PADMA-KEl^(-S)AEA — A type  of  base,  a kind  of  throne. 

A class  of  bases  (M.  xiy.  81-97,  see  under  Adbisbtbana). 

A type  of  throne  (M.  XLV.  11-12,  see  under  Simbasana). 
PABMA-GAEBHA — ^A  ground-plan  in  which  the  whole  area  is 
divided  into  266  equal  squares.  (M.  Yii.  21). 
PADMA-PlTHA — A lotus -shaped  pedestal  for  an  image. 

(M.  LI.  86). 

PADMA-BHADEA— A type  of  throne. 

(M.  XLY.  12,  see  under  Simbasana). 
PADMA-BAHDHA — A class  of  bases  comprising  four  types  which 
differ  from  one  another  in  height  and  in  the  addition  or  omission 
of  some  mouldings. 

(M.  XIY.  170-194,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Adhishthana). 
A base  (of.  Suprabhedagama,  xxx  18-22) : 

Utsedham  sapta-vimtat  tu  dvi-bhaga  pattika  bhavet  II 


m 


PABMASANA 


Bkam§am  dalam  evoktam  Tipanam  chaika-bhagikam  I 
Jagabi  tu  shad-am^a  syad  dvi-bhagardha-dali-kramai  II 
Ard,ba-bhagam  bbavet  skaadham  bhagam  tirdbva-dalam  tabha  l 
Tri-bbagam  kamudam  vidyad  adho’  bjarh  bhagam  eva  bu  I! 

Patbika  ohaika-bhaga  bii  griva  ohaiva  dvi-bhagika  I 
Tad-urdham  eka-bhagam  bn  padn^-bandham  baba  upari  11 
DYi-bhaga  pabtika  ya  bu  eka-bhagena  yojauara  I 
Tad  vribes  ohaika-bhagam  bu  padma-bandhain  ibi  smribara  II 

(Suprabbedagama,  XXX.  18-22), 
PADMASANA' — A lobus-seab,  a lobus-like  posbure  iu  wbiob  an  image 
is  carved,  a bbrone,  a bype  of  base,  a kind  of  pedesbal. 

A lobus-sbaped  pedesbal  and  base  of  a column  (M.  xv.  67,  XLVii.  19). 
A bype  of  bbrone  (M.  XLV.  12,  see  under  Simhasana). 

A lobus-sbaped  pedesbal  for  an  image  (M.  Liv.  38,  etc). 

PAEATA — (corrupbed  inbo  Paraba) — ‘The  parapet,  the  coping  of  a 
wall.  . 

Cf.  Badaviya  durggavanu  mudana  parabavanu  Obamaraja 

“ Obamaraja  consbructed  the  fort  and  the  eastern  parapet  of  that 
same  Badavi.’’ 

(Sanskrit  and  Old  Kanarese  Inscript,  no.  Lxxxvil, 
lines  13,  14.  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  x.  p.  63,  notes  61,  63). 
PABAMA-^ADHIELA— A ground-plan  in  wbicb  tbe  whole  area  is 
d,i tided  into  81  equal  squares  (see  Pada-vinyasa). 

(M.  VII.  10,  72, 110 ; almost  same  in  Bribat-sambita,  Liii.  42  f). 
In  connection  with  the  plan  of  a village  (M.  ix,  174)  and  of  a wall 

•(M.  XL.  72). 

PABABTHA-LINGA — A phallus  for  the  public  worship. 

(M.  Lli.  243,  see  details  under  Linga). 
PABIKHA — A ditch,  a moat,  a trench  round  a fort  or  town. 

(1)  Manasara : 

In  connection  with  a village  and  a fortified  city  ; 
Vapram&a-bbitti-raksharbham  paritah  parikhanvibam  I 

(M,  IX.  364). 


341 


PABIKHA 

Sarvesham  api  durganam  vaprail  claa  parikhtair  vyitam  l 

(M.  X.  106). 

Bahye  prakara-saihyuktam  paritak  parikhanvitam  \ 

(M.  IX.  460). 

Paritak  parikka  bakye  vapra-yuktaih  tu  karayet  I 

(M.x.  108). 

Paritah  parikka  bakye  kiiryad  gramesku  sarva&ak  1 

(M.  IX.  62,  etc). 

Kautiliya-Arfekalastra  (Chap.  xxiv.  pp.  61,  66  paras  2,  3)  : 
Tasya  parikkas  tisro  dandantara  karayet  okatur-da&a  dva-dasa 
da^efci  dandanuvistirnak  visfcarad  aYagadhah  padunam 
ardham  va  tri-bkaga-mula  mule  okatur-a§rah  pashanopahitah 
paskaneshtakabaddka-parsYa  va  fcoyantikoragas  tu  toya- 
purna  va  sa-parivakah  padma-grahatih  \ 
Chatur-dau.claYaki’isktam  parikhayak  shad-dancloohchkritam 
avaraddham  tad-dviguna-viskkambkam  khatad  vapram 
karayet  \ 

Ibid.  chap.  XXV.  para  : 

Dvarani  bakik  parikhayak 

Durga-gambhira-parikkam  durgam  anyair  dur-asadam  \ 
Sarvata^  oka  malia-bkimak  &ifca4oya&ayak  §ubkak  II 
Agadka  graka-sampurnak  parikka  mina-sevitak  II 

(Bamayana,  I.  6, 13,  15). 

Yantrais  tair  avakiryante  parikkasu  samantatak  II 
Parikka^  oka  kataghnya&  cka  yantrani  vividkani  oka  !i 

(Ibid.  VI.  3,  17,  23) 

Parikkabkik  sapadmabkih  sotpalabkir  alamkritam  II 

(Ibid.  VI.  6,  2,  14). 

Parigke  for  Parikke  (Satyamangalam  Plates  of  Devaraya 
II,  V.  22,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  iii.  pp.  38,  40). 
Burllamgka-duskkara-vibkeda-vi&ala-sala-durggadka-dustara- 
byikat-parikka-parita  \ 


342 


PABIKHA-DUEaA 


“ (The  <}ity  of  KS,nohi)  whose  large  ramparfc  was  inaarmouni- 
able  and  hard  to  be  breached,  (and)  which  was  surrounded 
by  a great  moafe,  unfathomable  and  hard  to  be  crossed.” 

(Gadval  Plates  of  Vikramaditya  I,  V.  6,  line  21, 
Bp.  Ind.  vol.  X,  pp.  103, 105). 

(6)  Kanakojjvala-sala-ra&mi-jalaih  parikhambu-pratibimbitair  alam 

ya  vasudheva  Tibhati  badabarchohir-vrita-ratnakara-mekhala- 
parita  II 

“ Through  the  mass  of  the  rays  (which  issue  from)  its  golden 
walls,  and  which  are  reflected  in  the  water  of  its  moat,  this 
(city,  Vijayanagara)  closely  resembles  the  earth,  that  is 
surrounded  by  the  girdle  of  the  ocean,  which  is  encircled  by 
the  lustre  of  the  submarine  fire.” 

(Yijayanagara  Insorip.  of  Devaraja  ii,  line  7-8, 
H.  S.  1. 1,  vol.  I.  no.  163,  pp.  162,  164). 

(7)  Durge  subhima-parighe  Malavalli  nS,mni — >”  in  the  fort 

named  Malavalli,  having  a deep  moat.” 

(Ep.  Camat,  vol.  iii.  Malavalli  Taluq,  no.  61, 
Eoman  text,  last  verse,  p.  126,  Transl.  p.  62), 
PAEIKHl-DTJBGA— A ditch-fort,  a fort. 

Bor  details  see  6ukraniti,  etc.,  under  Durga. 

PAEIGHA(-GHA.) — Cross  bars  to  fasten  the  door,  a beam. 

(1)  Dvau  dvau  parighau  (Kautiliya-Arthatastra,  chap,  xxxiv, 

p.53). 

Chatvaro  hasti-parigha — “ four  beams  to  shut  the  door  against 
elephants.”  (ibid.  chap,  xxiv,  p.  63). 

(2)  Byidha-vaddha-kapatam  maha-parighavanti  cha  ( 

(Eamayana,  vi.  3,  11). 

PAEINAHA — The  width,  breadth,  circumference,  extent. 
Griva-madhya-parinahat  chatur-viihtatikangulah  \ 
Nabhi-madhya-parinaho  dvi-chatvarimtad-angulah  \ 

The  width  by  the  middle  of  the  neck  is  twenty -four  angulas. 


PAEIVlEA 


343 


The  width  by  the  middle  of  the  navel  is  forty -two  ahgnlas. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  258,  V.  43,  68 ; see  also  v.  41,  47, 
60,  61,  63,  64,  55,  66,  67,  69,  63,  66,  etc). 

See  Manasara  (lx,  68,  etc.) ; Kiratarjuuiya  (xii.  20,  etc.) ; Mrich- 
ohhakatika  (iii,  9,  etc.);  Mahavira-charita  (vn,  24,  etc.); 
Malati-madhava  (iii  16 : Stana-parinaha,  etc.) ; Eatnavali 
(ii.  13,  etc.)  ; ^itupala-vadha  (i.  19,  etc). 

PAEIMANA — The  measurement  of  width  or  ciroumferenoe. 

(M.  LV.  3-9,  see  under  Mana). 

PAEIVAEA(-EALAYA) — The  family  ; the  attendant  deities  ; the 
subordinate  temples,  attached  or  detached,  of  a large  religious 
establishment,  where  the  attendant  deities  are  enshrined. 

(1)  Manasara,  chap.  xxxn.  (named  Parivara) ; 

The  temples  of  these  deities  are  stated  to  be  built  round  the 
Parakara  (the  fourth  enclosure) : 

Sarvesham  api  devanam  prakaranta-pravishjiake  \ 

Paritah  parivaranam  lakshanam  vakshyateMhuna  \ (1-2) 

At  the  eight  cardinal  points  of  the  innermost  or  the  first  court 
the  temples  of  the  group  of  eight  deities  are  built  (3-6),  The 
jgroups  of  sixteen  and  thirty-two  deities  are  housed  in  the 
second  and  the  third  courts  respectively  (6-7).  Between 
the  third  and  the  fifth  court  is  stated  to  be  the  Viniyoga 
(offering)-pavilion  (8).  The  description  of  the  location  of 
temples  for  each  of  the  dMties  of  these  three  groups  is  given 
(10-119),  The  temples  of  the  attendant  deities  of  Vishnu 
are  specified  (121-166).  The  temples  and  the  attendant 
deities  of  daneta  and  Kshetrapala,  and  also  those  of  Buddha, 
Jina  and  all  such  petty  (kshudra)  gods  are  passed  over  and 
stated  to  be  built  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  ^astras 
(167-166). 

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  description  of  temples  intended 
for  so  many  deities  does  not  contain  any  measurement,  etc. 
It  is  solely  occupied  with  the  position  of  these  temples  or 


344 


PABIYAEA 


deities  in  the  compound.  But  a considerable  portion  of  the 
chapter  is  devoted  to  the  description  of  the  Mandapas 
(pavilions)  for  such  purposes  as  hath,  bed,  assembly,  horses, 
musicians,  dancing  girls,  and  cows,  etc  (67-101). 

(2)  Ete  parivara  vastoh  pujaniya  prayatnatah  \ 

. (Mahanirvana-tantra,  xiii.  45). 

(3)  Parsvatat  chapi  kartavyaih  parivaradikalayam  \ 

At  the  aide  (too)  should  be  built  temples  for  the  attendant 
and  other  deities. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  y.  30). 

(4)  Parivaralaye  tuhga-harmye  anyasmin  prakalpayet  it 

(Kamikagama,  L.  69). 

Parivaralayanam  tu  mulavat  karma  ohacharet  \ 

Salanam  tu  chatushkoneshv-ishta-dete  pragyihyatam  II 
Malika-yukta-salam  ohet  kona-stambhe  dvitiyake  \ 
Prathamavarane  vapi  dvitiyavarane  nyaset  II 

(Ibid.  XXXI.  96,  96). 

(6)  Pafioha-prakaram  evam  syat  parivaralayam  tri^u  II 

Prasadasya  chaturtham  va  tad-ardham  vardham  eva  va  I 
Matrinam  (of  female  deities)  alayam  kuryad  gopurtoram 
eva  tu  II 

Hasti-prishtham  tapa  (tarn)  proktam  prasadaih  tu  vi&eshatah  \ 
Madhyam  tu  pachanakaram  chatuh-salaika-talakam  II 
Prakara-samyutam  kjitva  bahye  vabhyantare^  pi  va  II 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  128-131). 
Then  follows  the  description  of  their  faces  and  doors  (ibid, 
v.  131-133,  see  under  DvSra). 

(6)  “ (He)  gave  to  the  (image  of)  Pillaiyar  Ganapati  in  the 
surrounding  hall  (parivaralaya)  of  the  temple  of  the 
Lord  l^ri  Eajarajesvara  one  brass  spittoon  (padikkam)  which 
he  had  caused  to  be  made  of  octagonal  shape  in  the  Oeylon 
fashion  (Iraparitu)  (and)  wMoh  weighed  sixty  mine  pal  am.” 

(Jnscrip,  of  Eajaraja,  no.  36,  H,  S,  I,  I,  vol.  ii.  p.  149  f). 


PABYAHKA. 


346 


(7)  “This  image  was  probably  in  the  central  shrine  and  was 
known  as  Alaiyattn  Pillaiyar  perhaps  to  distinguish  him 
from  the  ParWaralaiyattu-Pi|laiyar  set  up  apparently  in  the 
enclosing  verandah  of  the  temple.  ” 

(Y,  S.  1. 1,  vol.  II,  no,  85,  p.  407,  last  para). 

“ The  gold  presented  until  the  twenty-ninth  year  (of  the  king’s 
reign)  by  the  Lord  ^ri  Bajarajadeva  to  (the  image  of) 
Pijlaiyar  Q-apapatiyar  in  the  pariyaralaya  of  the  temple  of 

the  Lord  ^ri  Bajarajesvaramudaiyar...... ” parivaralaya 

i.e.  the  temple  (iiaya)  of  the  attendant  deities  which  was 
probably  in  the  enclosing  hall.  ” 

(Ibid,  no,  86,  para  1,  p.  410,  note  1) 

“ One  bell-dish was  presented to  (the  shrine  of) 

Pillaiyar  G-anapatiyar  in  parivaralaya  of  the  temple  of  the 
Lord  ^ri  Bajarajesvara  mudaiyar « 

(Ibid.  no.  88,  p.  412). 

(8)  Parivara-devata-vistaramam  lihga-pratishtheyam  madisidam  \ 
“ He  also  set  up  a lihga,  with  the  associated  gods,  in 
Bandapika,” 

(Bp.  Oarnat,  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Talaq,  no.  242, 
Transl.  p,  139,  para'6,  last  two  lines,  Boman 
text,  p.  248,  line  1-2). 

PABNA-MAI^JUSHA— A basket  made  of  leaves,  an  article  of  furni- 
ture, 

(M.  L.  47, 132-146,  see  details  under  Bhushana). 

PABYAI^KA— 'A  couch,  a bedstead. 

Manasara,  chap.  XLiv,  (named  Dayana)  ; 

Bedsteads  are  meant  for  the  use  of  deities,  the  twice-born  and 
all  other  people ; 

Devanaih  cha  dvi-jatinam  varnanam  tayanarthakam  \ (1). 

They  are  of  two  kinds — ^the  small  (bala-paryahka)  and  the  large 
(paryahka)  (26,  28).  The  former  is  intended  .to  be  used  by 
children  and  the  latter  by  the  grown  up,  the  one  being  distin?. 
guished  from  the  other  by  its  size  alone, 


346 


PAEVATA 


The  measurement  and  various  parts  of  the  two  kinds  of  bedsteads 
are  described  separately  (3-79). 

The  materials  of  which  bedsteads  and  seats  (asana)  are  generally 
constructed  are  various  kinds  of  timber  (74). 

PAEVATA— A class  of  buildings. 

Ktita-sala-samayukta  punah  panjara-nasika  \ 

Vedika-jalakopeta  parvatakritir  uchyate  11 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  52). 

See  details  under  Prasada. 

PAVANA — A type  of  chariot. 

(M.  xLin.  113,  see  under  Eatha). 
pA^fGHALA — A class  of  the  twelve  storeyed  buildings  once  prevail- 
ing in  the  ancient  country  of  Pafiohala  (the  G-angetio  Doab). 
For  details  see  M.  xxx.  8-10,  under  Tala  and  Dravifja. 

PADA — (see  Stambha) — The  foot,  the  lowest  part,  a (quarter,  the 
fourth  part,  the  architrave,  a pillar,  a column. 

(1)  M.  XV.  (named  Stambha)  1-448: 

Its  synonyms  are  jahghs,  oharapa,  stali,  stambha,  anghrika, 
sthapu,  sthuna,  pada,  kampa,  arani,  bharaka,  and  dharapa 
(ibid.  4-6). 

(2)  Atha  vakshyami  samkshepat  pada-m5nam  yatha-vidhi  \ 
XJttaropanayor  madhya-gatam  etat  prakirtitam  II 

(Vastuvidya,  ed.  Ganapati  Sastri,  ix.  1). 

(3)  The  architrave  of  the  entablature  (Kamikagama,  xxxv.  27, 

trv.  47,  see  under  Prastara). 

(4)  The  comparative  measures  of  pada  (pillar),  adhishthana  (base) 

and  prastara  (entabulature) : 

Padayamam  adhishthanam  dvi-gupam  sarva-sammatam  \ 
Padardham  prastaram  proktam  karpam  prastaravat  samam  11 
(Suprabhedagama,  XXXI.  28). 
The  five  kinds  of  pillars  and  their  obaraoteristio  features. 

(See  Suprabhedagama  under  Stambha). 
PADA-JALA — An  ornament  for  the  foot. 

(M.  L,  33,  LX,  59,  Liv.  17,  etc,  see  Bhushapa). 


PlLIKl 


mn 

PJlDA-BANDHA — k class  of  bases. 

(M.  XIY.  10-32,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Adhish^haua). 

A base  in  connection  with  the  bedstead : 

Pada-bandham  adhishtahnam  sarva-jatyarhakaih  bh.a¥et  I 

. (M.  xx/iv.  44). 

Ci  Suprabhedagama  (xxxi.  23-26) : 

Adhishthanasya  chotsedham  ohatur-vimtati-bhajitam  \ 

Bvi-baga  pattika  prokta  hy-upanam  chaika-bhagikam  H 
Shad-bhaga  jagati  prokta  kumudam  pailoha-bhagikam  \ 

Ekamta  pattika  prokta  griva  ohaiva  t(r)iyamtaka  II 
Ekamta  pattika  viddhi  (h)  tr(i)yamta  ohordhva^pattika  I 
Maha-pattika  tr(i)yamta  ekam  vajanam  uchyate  It 
Pada-bandham  iti  khyataih  sarva-karyeshu.pujitam  II 
PADA-BAJvfBHAKA— A type  of  throne. 

,(M.  XLV.  16,  see  under  Simhasana). 
PADUKA — The  plinth,  the  pedestal,  the  base,  a moulding. 

The  plinth  of  the  base  (M.  xiv.  162,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 

under  Adhishthana). 

The  pedestal  (or  base)  of  a 'column : 

Tan-mule  ohasanam  kuryat  padukam  va  sahambnjam  \ 

Ekamfeam  padukam  kuryat  panoha-bhagam  tu  samgraham  1 

(M.  XV.  31, 177). 

A moulding  at  the  bottom  of  the  pedestal  (M,  xin.  43,  see  the 
lists  of  mouldings  under  XJpapitha). 
PABAVATA-NIDA— A nest  for  the  pigeon,  an  article  of  furniture. 

(M.  L.  62,  description  of  its  architectural  details  224--227). 
PAEIYATBA— 'A  class  of  pavilions. 

(M.  XXXI V.  164,  see  under  Ma?i^apa). 
(PAe6VA)-PULI — -An  ornament,  a part  of  the  crown. 

(M.  xpix,  94). 

PALIKA  (-1)— a boundary,  a margin,  an  edge,  an  ornament,  a 
bridge-like  moulding  of  the  column. 

Atha  vakshye  viteshena  kumbhalahkaram  uchyate  \ 

Tan-mule  palikotsedhe  vibhajet  tu  shad-amtakam  1 

(M.  XV,  201-202,  see  also  220,  44,  33,  70,  etc,  cf.  xxxvn,  40), 


348 


PALIKA-STAMBHA 


In  connection  with  the  lip, •3_: 

Tr(i)yaih§ardhadharayam  chardha(m)-ohandravad-ak:fiti  \ 
Tri-vaktram  ohottara  pali  Gha(?9a)iitarai§  ohaiva  samyutam  I 

(M.  XLV,  95-96,  see  also  89). 

PAUKA-STAMBHA— A kind  of  pillar. 

(M.  XV,  39-73,  see  under  Stambha). 

PA^UPATA — A kind  of  phallus. 

(M.  Lii  2,  LXVtii.  2,  see  under  Lihga.) 
PASHANA-KUBMA— -A  stone  tortoise,  a component  part  of  a 
phallus. 

(M.  m,  178), 

PINpA— The  testicle,  its  sculptural  details  (M.  LXV.  166). 

PINpiEA — (see  Pitha) — The  pedestal  of  an  image,,  a seat,  the  Yoni 
part  or  the  pedestal  of  the  Phallus. 

(1)  Bvara-manashta-hhagona  pratima  syat  sapindika  \ 

Dvau-bhagau  pratima  tatra  tritiyaih&a(^)  oha  pipdikS,  11 
“ The  idol  along  with  the  seat  (i.e.,  pedestal)  ought  to  have 
a height  equal  to  that  of  the  door,  diminished  by  of 
which  two-thirds  are  'appropriated  to  the  image,  and  one- 
third  to  the  seat.” 

(Byihat-samhita,  LVi,  16,  also  LVIII.  3,  54,  J,  B.  A.  S., 
N.  8-,  vol. VI.  p,  318,  328,329). 

(2)  Linga-puja-pramanena  kartavya  pithik^  budhaih  \ 
Pindikardhena  bhagah  syat  tan-manena  tu  bhittayah  II 

(Matsya-PUrana,  chap,  269,  v.  8). 

(3)  Pratimayah  pramanena  karttavya  pindika  feubha  1 

G-arbhas  tu  pindikardhena  garbha-manas  tu  bhittayah  II 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  42,  v,  10). 
Arddha-hhagena  garbhah  syat  pindika  pada-vistarat  \ 
Panoh-hhagikrite  kshetre’ntar-bhage  tu  pindika  II 
G-arbho  hhagena  vistirno  bhaga-dvayena  pindika  \ 

Pipdika  kona-vistirna  madhyamanta  hy-udabrita  jl 


PITH  A 


349 


Atah  param  prayakshyami  pratimanam  tu  pmrlikam  1 
Dairgh.yena  pratima  tnlya  tad-arddliena  tu  vistrita  II 

(ibid.  obap.  104,  y.  1,  5,  24). 
Then  follows  a lengthy  description  (see  ibid.  chap.  56,  v.  1,  f. 

also  chap.  105,  V.  30 ; chap.  60,  V.  1). 
(4)  Manashtamena  bhagena  pratima  syat  sapindika  II 
I) van  bhagau  pratima  tatra  tritiyo  bhagah  pindika  II 
TrI-bhagaih  pindika  karya  dvan  bhagan  pratima  bhavet  II 

(Bhavishya-Purana,  chap.  130,  w.  22,  23;  chap.  131,  v.  6). 
The  Yoni  part  or  the  pedestal  of  the  Phallus  : 

(6)  Lihgam  oha  pindikam  chaiva  prasadam  gopuram  tatha  \ 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxx.  28), 
(6)  Kuryad  ekam  pindikam  tarn  tu  partve  1 

(M.  LTI.  162). 

PINDl — A base  for  an  image,  the  Yoni  part  or  pedestal  of  the  Phallus, 
(Inscrip,  from  northern  Gujarat,  no,  vii,  line  8,  Ep, 
Ind.  vol.  II.  p.  27,  see  details  under  Pitha), 
PiTHA(-THIKA ) — The  pedestal  of  an  idol,  the  Yoni  part  of  the 
Phallus,  a ground«plan,  a pavement. 

“ Pitha  Is  possibly  corrupted  from  pi-sad  to  sit  upon,  hence 
means  a stool,  seat,  chair,  throne,  pedestal,  altar.  ” 

The  well  known  fifty-one  Piijha-sthanas  are  the  sacred  spots, 
where  the  limbs  of  Parvati,  consort  of  6iva,  fell  after  she  had 
oeen  out  to  pieces  by  the  discus  of  Vishnu. 

As  the  Lihga  or  Phallus  symbolically  represents  6iva,  so  the 
Pitha  does  hie  consort  ParvatL  The  Pitha  forms  the  Yoni 
or  the  Ip wer  part  of  the  Phallus. 

(1)  Manasara  (chap.  Lm.  named  Pitha)  : 

The  Pitha  must  match  the  Phallus  of  which  it  forms  the  lower 
part  (line  49).  It  should,  therefore,  be  of  as  many  kinds  as 
there  are  Phalli.  But  the  mouldings  of  the  Pitha  are 
described  under  four  classes,  technically  called,  Bhadra-pitha, 


360 


HTHA 


febhadra,  fevi&ala,  and  Upapitha  (34,  36,  39,  41).  The 
principal  parts  of  the  Pitha  are  the  Nala  (canal),  the  Jala- 
dhara  (gutter),  the  Ghrita-vari  (water-pou;,  the  Nimna  (drip), 
and  the  Patitiika  (plate)  (22-27).  The  component  mouldings 
are  Prathama  or  Janman  (base),  Padma  (oyma),  Kshepana 
(projection),  Kandhara  (neck,  dado),  Kampa  (fillet),  XJrdha- 
padma  (upper  oyma),  Vajana  (fillet),  G-hrita-vari  (water-pot h 
or  Vritta-kumbha  (circular  pot)  (30-33). 

With  regard  to  shape,  the  Pithas,  like  the  Phalli  and  all  other 
architectural  and  sculptural  structures,  are  divided  into 
three  types,  the  Nagara,  Bxavida,  and  Vesara  (46-47),  The 
Nagara  Pithas  are  said  to  be  square,  the  Dravida  Pithas 
octagonal,  and  the  Vesara  Pithas  circular  or  round  (63-64). 

A ground-plan  in  which  the  whole  area  is  divided  into  nine 
equal  squares  (M.  vii.  4,  see  Pada-vinyasa). 

A pavement  on  the  side  of  a road : 

Peohakam  vatha  pitham  va  rathya  yuktam  tu  vinyaset  \ 

(M.  IX.  423). 

In  connection  with  the  palm  of  the  hand : 

Patra-tulyam  yugangulyam  pi^he  tunga(m)  dvayangulam  \ 

(M.L.  197). 

The  pedestal  of  an  image  : 

TJttamam  lohajam  bimbam  pithabhasam  tu  chottamam  \ 

(M.  LI.  19,  see  also  lvi.  16,  LXli.  13,  etc). 

The  pedestal  of  the  phallus  (M.  lii.  246,  246,  247), 

(2)  Etat  samanyam  uddishtam  prasadasya  hi  lakshanam  \ 

Linga-manam  ato  vakshye  pitho  linga-samo  bhavet  II 

DvSravat  pitha-madhye  tu  feesham  sushirakam  bhavet  II 

(Garuda-Pur^na,  chap.  47,  v.  11, 16). 

The  pedestal  or  the  Yoni  part  of  the  Linga. : 

(3)  Linga-vishkambha-manena  bhaved  dvi-tri-chatur-gunah  \ 

Tatha  paiLcha-gupo  vapi  pi^ha-vistara  ishyate  II 

(Kamikagama,  L.  46,  see  also  V.  44,  47,  48,  60). 


PlTHA 


S61 


Ibid.  xxvm.  18  (altar)  : 

Bralima(-t)ae)va  madbyame  bbage  pitbam  parikalpayet  l( 

Ibid.  XXXV  : 

Paficba-data-karantam  tu  kuryad  avyita-mandapam  II  99 
Mandapena  vina  vapi  tena  manena  pitbika  \ 

Yibbadra  va  sabbadra  va  kartavya  malika  budbaih  II  100 
Here  ‘ Pitbika  ’ would  indicate  tbe  projecting  part  of  the  base- 
ment, resembbng  tbe  Buddhist  railing  round  a tree,  etc. 

(4)  Yaval  lingasya  visbkambbam  tri-gunam  pitba-vistaram  It 
Pujamtam  dvi-gunam  pitbam  tri-gunam  va  vikesbatab  II 
Pitbasya  tri-gunam  garbbam  ta(t)-tri-bbagaika-bbittikam  I 

(Suprabbedagama,  XXXI.  9, 11, 12)- 

(5)  Bbaga-dvayena  pratima  tri-bbagikritya  tat  punab  I 

Pitbika  bbagatab  karya  natinicba  na  cbocbobhrita  II  26 
Pitbika  laksbanam  vaksbye  yatbavad  anupurvatahl 
Pitboobcbrayam  yatbavacb  cba  bbagan  sbodaaa  karayet  It  1 
Bbumavekab  praviabtab  syacb  cbaturbbir  jagati  mata  I 
Vritto  bbagas  tatbaikab  syad  vritab  patala-bbagatab  II  2 
Bbagais  tribbia  tatba  kantbab  kantba-pattas  tu  bbagatab  I 
Bbagabbyasam  urdbva-pattat  cba  teaba-bbagena  pattika  II  3 
Pravisbtam  bbagam  ekaikam  jagatim  yavad  eva  tu  I 
Hirgamam  tu  punas  tasya  yavad  vai  tesba-pattika  II  4 
Vari-nirgamanartbam  tu  tatra  karyab  pranalakab  \ 

Pitbikanam  tu  sarvaaam  etat  samanya-laksbanam  II  6 
Purna-cbandra  vajra  cba  padma  vardba-tati  tatba  \ 

Tri-kona  datami  tSsam  samatbanam  va  nibodbatab  II  7 
Bevasya  yajanartbam  tu  pitbika  data  kirtitab  II  19 

Linga-puja-pramanena  kartavya  pitbika  budbaih  If  8 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap,  258,  v.  26;  chap.  262,  v.  1-4, 
6-7,  19  ;obap.  269,  v.  8). 

YibhaiTa.  navadha  garbham  madhye  syal  liiga-pitbika  I 
^ ^ ^ ^ (Ibid.  chap.  269,  V.  16). 


352 


PlTHA 


(6)  Paftcha-hastasya  devasya  eka-hasfca  tu  pithika  \ 

When  the  idol  is  5 cubits  high,  its  pedestal  is  one  cubit. 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  42,  v.  22). 

(7)  “ One  pedestal  (pitha)on  which  the  god  and  the  goddess  stood, 

(measuring)  one  muram  and  two  viral  in  length,  sixteen  viral 
in  breadth,  and  six  viraA  in  height.  ” 

(Inscrip.  of  Bajaraja,  no.  30,  para  7,  H.  S.  I.  I. 

vol.  II.  p.  137). 

(8)  One  pedestal  (surmounted  by)  a lotus  (padma-pitha)  on  which 
this  (image  of  Pahohadeha  Siva)  stood,  (measuring)  three 
viral  and  four  torai  in  height,  and  fifteen  viral  and  four  torai 
square.  ” 

(Inscrip.  of  Eajaraja,  no.  80,  on  a pillar  of  the 
south  enclosure,  para  4,  H.  S.  I.  I.  vol.  ii.  p.  138). 

(9)  “The hero  Madavan  of  Anda,. got  this  pidam  (pedestal) 

made. 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.''X.  Kolar  Taluq,  no.  109  b,  Transl.  p.  40). 
“ He  had  a temple  and  a bali-pitha  built  for  the  god  Chandra- 
sekhara, the  processional  form  of  the  god  ^ankareSvara  of 
Kergodi. 

(Ibid.  vol.  VII.  Tiptur  Taluq,  no.  72,  Transl,  p.  57), 

(10)  “ Whose  daughter,  Vinapati,  having  at  this  very  place  bestow- 

ed the  entire  gift  of  a Hiranya-garbha,  and  having  made  a 
pedestal  (pitha)  fox  the  god  with  rubies.  ” 

(Sanskrit  and  Old  Kanarese  inscrip.  no.  xoiv,  line 
7,  Ind,  Ant.  vol.-x.  p.  103). 
(n)  “ He  made  petition  at  the  feet  of  Vidyaranya-i§ripada,  re- 
presenting that  in  Sringapura,  in  (connection  with)  the 
dharmma-pitha  (religious  throne, — Siriihasane  dharmamaye, 
in  the  original)  established  by  Sankaracharyya  (-oharya,  in 
the  original),  there  must  be  a matha  and  agrahara.” 

Of  this  dharma-pitha  (Simhasana)  Mr.  Eice  further  says:  “ The 
Wringer!  dharma-pitha  or  religious  throne  was  established 
as  is  well  known  (refers  to  the  insoription  quoted  above)  by 


PlTHA 


353 


Sankaraoharya,  the  great  ^aiva  reformer  of  the  8th  century. 
It  is  situated  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Tuhga  river,  in  a fertile 
tract  near  the  Western  G-hats.  The  celebrated  scholar 
Madhavaor  Vidyaranya  (forest  of  learning),  author  of  the 
Veda-bhashya,  who  was  instrumental  in  founding  the  Vijaya- 
nagar  empire  in  1336,  was  the  head  of  the  establishment  at 
that  time. (Then  is  added  that  his  brother  was  Say  ana,  the 
welhknown  commentator  of  the  Rig-Veda.  The  architectural 
characteristics  are,  however,  not  given). 

(Ep.  Carnat'.  vol.  vi.  Srihgeri  Jagir,  no.  11,  Transl. 
p.  96,  last  para  ; Roman  text,  p.  195,  line  1,  12  f ; 

Introduot.  p.  23,  para  5). 

(12)  “ Possessor  of  thirty-two  velama,  eighteen  cities,  sixty-four 
Yoga-pithas,  and  sixty-four  ghatika-sthanas.  ” 

(Ep.  Oarnat.  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no.  94,  Transl, 
p.  61,  line  7 f ; Roman  text,  p.  114,  line  4 f). 

(13)  Dva-trimtat  tu  velavuramum  ashtada^a-pa^tanamum  bSsashti- 
yoga-pi^hamum  aruvattanalku-ghatika-sthanamum  \ 

“ (The  people  of)  the  thirty-two  sea-aide  towns,  the  18  towns, 

62  seats  of  contemplation,  and  66  religious  centres ...(held  a 

convocation.)  ” 

(Old  Kanarese  Inscrip.  at  Terdal,  line  60,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XIV.  pp.  19,  26). 

(14)  “Having  thirty-two  velama,  eighteen  cities,  sixty-four 
yoga-pithas,  and  atramas  at  the  four  points  of  the  compass.  ” 

(Ep.  Oarnat.  vol.  vn.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no.  118, 
Transl.  p.  86,  last  para,  line  6). 

(16)  “ Made  a grant of  the  Mallasamudra  village belonging 

to  the  Sadali  throne  (pithika). 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  x.  Sidla-ghatta  Taluq,  no.  94,  Transl. 

p.  194,  last  para). 

(16)  Pithi — a pedestal  (Ranganath  Inscrip.  of  Sundara-pandya, 
V,  19,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  iii.  pp.  13,  16). 


364 


PEITHIYl-DHAEA 


(17)  Purana-pithe  pifehamfcaram  aa  oliaturarii  vidhivad  vidhaya  } 

(Chebrolu  Inacrip.of  Jaya,  postsorip.  line  7-8,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  V.  pp.  160,  151). 

(18)  Pithika— a platform  of  stone  (see  Specimens  of  Jain  sculptures 

from  Mathura,  plate  ill,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  Ii.  p.  320). 
PEITHIVi-DHAEA— A type  of  oval  building. 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  v.  19-20,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  G-aruda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  29-30,  see  under  Prasada). 
PUNpAElKA — A class  of  the  seven -storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXV.  3-23,  see  under  Prasada). 
PUEA — A house,  an  abode,  a residence,  the  female  apartments,  a store- 
house, an  upper  storey,  a castle,  a fortress,  a village,  a fortified 
town,  a city,  a wall,  a rampart. 

A village  (M.  ix.  216,  etc),  a town  (M.  x.  39,  etc). 
Gramadinam  nagaradinam  pura-pattana-kharvate  I 
Koshtha-koladi-sarvesham  garbha-sthanam  ihoohyate  \ 

(M.  XII.  168-169). 

Khe^anam  cha  puranam  cha  gramanam  chaiva  sarva&ah  | 
Trividhanam  cha  durganam  parvatodaka-dhanvinam  II 
Param  ardhardbam  ayamaih  prag-udak-plavanam  puram  II 
Chatur-a&ra-yutam  divyam  pra&astam  taih  puraih  kritam  II 

(Brahmanda-Purana,  part  I,  2nd  antmhamgapada, 
chap.  7,  V.  106,  107, 108,  see  also  v.  93). 
Pura-madhyaih  sama^ritya  kuryad  ayatanam  raveh  \ 

(Bhavishya-Purana,  chap,  180,  v.  40). 
(4)  Karkkotadhina-raksham  svapuram  idam  atho  nirmame  Javri- 
shakhyam^ — “ then  built  this  town  of  his  named  Javyisba, 
the  protection  of  which  was  entrusted  to  Karkota.  ” 

(Buddhist  Stone  Inscrip,  from  Sravasti,  line  4-5, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xvii.  pp  62,  63). 
(6)  Jagapala -puram  jatam  krite  de&e  punar  nnave— in  the  newly 
recreated  site,  the  town  of  Jagapala  grew  up  O'.e.  was  built). 

(Eajim  Inscrip,  of  Eajapal,  line  12,  Ind.  Ant.  vol, 

XVII,  p.  140), 


PUEATO-BHADRA 


355 


(6)  “ With  myriads  of  people,  practices  of  virtue,  agreeable  occupa- 
tions, streams  of  the  (nine)  sentiments,  pleasure*garden8 
separated  lovers,  splendid  tanks,  full  lotus  beds,  gilded  boats 
for  spring  festivals,  ghatika-sthanas  (religious  centres),  the 
supports  of  dharmma  and  mines  of  enjoyment,  moats  which 
were  as  if  the  sea  being  overcome  had  returned  here  on  account 
of  the  collection  of  beautiful  women  fair  as  the  moon,  (grama- 
nagara-kheda-kharvvana-madamba-drona  mukha-pura-pattana 
rajadhani),  on  whatever  side  one  looked  in  these  nine  forms 
did  the  Kuntala-desa  shine.  ” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no.  197,  Transl 
p.  124,  para  1,  last  seven  lines  ; Roman  text,  p.  214, 

line  27  f). 

(7)  “ The  three  puras  belonging  to  the  great  royal  city  (?  rajadhani) 

Balligave.  ” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no.  99,  Transl. 

p.  66,  last  two  lines). 

PURATO-BHADRA — (see  Mukha-bhadra) — The  front  tabernacle,  a 
porch,  a portico,  a vestibule. 

Deva-^ri-§atibhushanasya  (i,  e.,  of  Siva)  kyitva  devalayam 
katitam  yugmam  mamdapa-^obliitarii  cha  puratc-bhadram 
pratolya  saha  I 

“I  have  not  been  able  to  find  purato-bhadra  in  the  Kofeas  to  which 
I have  access,  but  sarvato-bhadra  is  described  as  a kind  of 
house  (?)  with  4 doors  facing  the  4 quarters  (hero  refers  to  Ram 
Raz’s  Essay  on  Architecture  of  the  Hindus,  1834,  p.  43  ; here  a 
village  called  sarvato-bhadra  is  described  not  a house  of  the  same 
.name).  Brom  this  I infer  that  a purato-bhadra  was  a building 
with  only  one  door  in  front.  ” Mr.  Hira  Lai. 

But  there  does  not  seem  to  be  much  doubt  that  Purato-bhadra  and 
Mukha-bhadra  are  identical  and  that  they  are  an  essential 


366 


PURI 


part  of  the  ancient  Hindu  buildings,  resembling  more  or  less 
the  front  tabernacle. 

(Kanker  Inscrip,  of  Bhanudeva,  v.  7,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  IX.  pp.  127,  126,  and  note  4). 
PURI(-i) — A temple,  an  adytum,  a building,  a town. 

(The  second  Pratasti  of  Baijnath,  v.  26,  Bp.  Ind. 

vol.  I.  pp.  117, 114 ; see  also  no.  32). 
PUBUSHAR  JALI — The  palm  of  a man.  It  refers  to  foundations  upon 
which  buildings  of  one  to  twelve  storeys  are  stated  to  be  erected. 
Khanayed  bhutalaifa  ^reshtham  purushaiijali-matrakam  \ 

Jalantarh  va  tilantam  va.. \ (M.  xviil.  6-7). 

The  depth  is  stated  here  to  reach  water  or  stone  under  ground. 
Hence  the  expression  seems  to  imply  a depth  measured  by  the 
height  of  a man  with  uplifted  arms. 

The  following  passage  seems  to  be  a parallel  instance  : 

Chihnam  api  chardha-purushe  manduka-panduro’tha  mrit-pitah  \ 
Puta-bhedakat  cha  tasmin  pashano  bhavati  toyam  adhah  II 
Commentary  : purusha-&abdenordhva*bahuh  purusho  jfieyah,  sa  cha 
vim&at-yadhikam  ahgula-tatam  bhavati — ^by  the  word 

‘ purusha  ’ is  to  be  understood  the  man  with  uplifted  arms, 
that  is,  120  ahgulas(or  6 cubits). 

(Brihat-samhita,  Liv.  7,  J.  B.  A.  S.,  N.  S , vol.  Vi. 

p.  301,  note  1). 

PUSHKABA — A blue  lotus,  a part,  a portion,  water,  a cage,  a type  of 
building. 

The  f ore-part  of  the  nose  (M.  lxv.  84). 

A class  of  buildings  (Kamikagama,  XLV.  61,  63,  see  under  Malika). 
PUSHKAEINI — (see  Tadaga  and  Vapi)— A tank,  a lotus-pool. 

Datia  putreria  thai  Norena  pukarani  karavita  savrasapana  puyae  I 
“ By  the  son  of  Uati,  the  Thera  Nora,  a tank  was  caused  to  be 
made  for  the  worship  of  all  snakes.  ” 

(New  Kharoshti  Insorip.  from  Swat,  Ind.  Ant. 
vol.  XXV.  p.  141,  and  vol.  xxxvii.  p.  66). 


PUSHPA-EATHA 


357 


PUSHKALA^ — A class  of  storayed  buildings,  a type  of  pent  roof,  a tree. 
A class  of  the  two-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xx,  94,  4!2.43,  see  under 

Prasada). 

A tree  (M.  XV.  354,  eto). 

A kind  of  pent  roof  (M.  xvm.  188). 

PUSHPAKA — A flower,  tke  oar  of  Kubera,  a bracelet,  a type  of 
pavilion,  a class  of  buildings. 

A pavilion  with  sixty-four  pillars  (Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  7, 

see  under  Mandapa). 

A class  of  buildings,  rectangular  in  plan  and  named  (1) 
Ba(va)labbi,  (2)  G-yiharaja,  (3)  ^alagriha  or 
^alamandira,  (4)  Vitala,  (5)  Sama,  (6)  Brahma-mandira  or 
Brabma-bhuvana,  (7)  Prabhava,  (8)  ^ivika,  and  (9)  Vetma  ; 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  v.  11, 16-17,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Q-aruda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  2-22,  26-27,  see  under  PrSsada). 
PU8HPA-PATTA— A flower-plate,  a turban,  a head  gear,  a tiara,  a 

diadem. 


(M.  iiXix.  16,  see  details  under  Bhuaha^a). 
PUSHPA-PUSHKALA— A class  of  bases. 

(M.  XIV.  97-112,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 
under  Adhish^hana). 

PUSHPA-BANBHA — ^A  type  of  window. 

(M.  XXXIII.  684,  see  under  Vatayana). 
PUSHPA-BANDHANA-MANDAPA— A detached  building  where 
flowers  are  garlanded  for  the  worship  of  the  deity. 
Pimhpa-danta-pade  chaiva  pushpa-bandhana-mapdapam  \ 

(M.  XXXII.  42). 

PXISHPA-BODHAEA. — ^A  type  of  capital. 

(M.  XV.  166-168,  see  under  Stambha), 
PtJSHPA-BHABBA— A pavilion  with  sixty-two  pillars. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  7,  see  Mandapa). 
PXJ8HPA-EATHA — A chariot. 

(Abulala-perumal  Inscrip.  of  Champa,  line  3-4, 
Bp.  Ind.  vol.  m,  p.  71). 


368 


PtrSHPA-VATIKA 


PUSHPA-VATIKA— (see  Vatika) — ^A  garden,  a bower,  an  arbour. 
tJtbare  saralais  talaih  §ubha  syat  pushpa-vatika  1 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  29). 

PUMLIl^G-A — (see  Samobita)— A class  of  buildings  with  the  six 
main  component  parts  (see  under  ‘ Shad-varga ')  and  with 
terraces,  a masculine  type  of  building,  a division  of  the  archi- 
tectural and  sculptural  objects  as  distinguished  from  the 
faminine  (strilinga)  and  neuter(napumsaka)  types. 
Alinda-sahitam  shad-varga-sahitam  cha  yad  arpitam  \ 
Samohitam  proktam  pumlihgam  tad  ghani-kritam  II 
Devanam  asuranam  cha  siddha-vidyadhareshv-api  [ 
Eaksha-gandharva-yakshanam  prafeastanam  cha  janminam 

(bhogyam)  It 
(Kamikagama,  XLv.  8,  9). 

See  the  Manasara  and  the  Agamas  under  Prasada,  and  compare 
Strilinga  and  Napumsaka. 

PUEANA-KAMBA — A vase,  a moulding. 

“ The  panel  or  flat  part  of  the  back  wall  of  each  recess  between  the 
projecting  tower-like  compartments,  is  ornamented  by  a vase  or 
some  very  florid  object  called  ‘ purana-kambam.’  ” 

(Q-angai-Konda  Puram  Temple,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  p. 

118,  0.  2,  para  4), 

• PUETA — A well,  a pond,  a step-well. 

(1)  Purtam  vapi-kupa-tadakadikam — (the  word)  purta  implies  the 
seep- well,  well,  and  pond,  etc. 

(?2)  Yapi-kupa-tadakadi-devatayatanani  cha  \ 

Anna-pradanaramah  purtam  ity-abhidhiyate  II 
The  step-well,  well,  pond,  and  the  temple,  (and)  the  pleasure- 
house  (aim-house,  hotel)  where  food  is  given  (gratis) — these 
are  called  the  purta. 

(3)  Yapi-kupa-tadakadi-purtam  ayatanani  cha  I 

Svarga-sthitim  sada  kuryat  tada  tat  purta-sajnitam  II 


PAUSHTIKA 


8^9 


The  step-well,  well,  pond  and  temples  are  piirta.  It  always 
ensures  the  residence  in  heaven  (for  the  doer) ; it  is  for 
this  reason  designated  as  piirta. 

(Quotations  from  the  commentary,  Ka&yapa, 
on  the  Brihat-samhita,  l-vi.  2.  J.  E;  A.  S., 
N.  S.,  voL  VI.  p.  316-37,  note  1). 
(4)  Vapi-kupa-tadagadi-devatayatanani  oha  I 

Anna-pradanaramah  purttam  aryah  praohakshate  H 

(Bp.  Ind.  vol.  IV.  p.  318,  note  3). 

PEISHTHA-SUTEA — The  plumb-line  drawn  by  the  baok-bone. 

(M.  Lxvii.  80,  see  under  Pralamba). 
PECHAXA— An  owl,  the  tip  or  root  of  an  elephant's  tail,  a couch,  a 
bed,  a shelter  on  a street. 

In  connection-  with  streets  in  a village  : 

Pechakaih  vatha  pitham  va  rathya  yuktam  tu  vinyaset  \ 

(M.  IX.  423,  etc). 

POTA(-I)KA — (Pottika)— A part  of  a column,  the  site  of  a house. 
Tat-samotsedham.  potikaiankriti-kriya  1 

(Kamikagama,  Liv.  11). 

Potikantavalambam  va  tulantaritam  antaram  \ (Ibid.  23). 

Pottika  (ibid.  LV.  69,  see  under  Makara-torana). 

Apart  of  the  bottom  of  a column  (Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  6Q, 

see  under  Stambha). 

POTEA— A moulding,  an  architectural  object  resembling  the  snout 
of  a hog  or  a ploughshare. 

In  connection  with  joinery : 

Karkatanghrivat  kritva  potra-nasahghrim  vefeayet  1 

(M.  xvii.  143). 

PAUSHTIKA— (see  Utsedha)— A height  which  is  li  of  the  breadth, 
a class  of  buildings.  ^ 

See  Manasara  (xxxv.  22-26)  and  compare  Kamikagama  (l.  24-28) 
under  Adbhuta. 

A class  of  the  two-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xx,  93,  19-26,  see  under 

PrasSda). 


360 


PEAKOSHTHA 


PEAK OSHTHA-(KA)— The  fore-arm,  a hall,  a room  near  the  gate 
of  a palace,  a court,  a quadrangle,  a part  of  the  door-frame. 
Ekam^am  madhya-bhadram  tu  madhye  yuktya  prakoshthakam  \ 

(M.  xxyi.  108). 

The  fore-arm: 

Prakoshbham  shodatamtam  syat  talam  ashtamtam  ayatam  \ 

(M.  LYil.  26,  etc). 

PEAOHOHHADANA—A  covering,  a canopy,  the  roof,  an  entablature. 
A synonym  of  the  entablature  (M.  xyi.  18,  see  under  Prastara). 

In  connection  with  the  three-storeyed  buildings : 

Praohohhadanopari  stambham  karna-harmyadi-manditam  \ 

(M.  XXI.  9). 

The  roof : 

Prastarasyopari-dete  karna-harmyadi-manditam  \ 

Yuktya  praohchhadanam  kuryat  sudheshtakadi-gulodakaih  \ 

(M.  XXXI.  69,  72). 

Padam  vayate  taulim  kuryad  yuktya  viohakshanah  1 
Tad-iirdhve  jayantikam  kuryat  tat-tat-praohohhadananvitam  \ 

(M.  XXXIII.  373-374). 

Praohohhadanahkanam  kuryan  na  praohchhadanam  eva  cha  I 

(M,  XXXV.  296). 

Praohchhadanam  yatha-harmye  dyaram  kuryat  tathaitake  I 

(M.  xxxvm.  7). 

Prasbaroohoham  iti  proktam  prachohhandanam  ihochyate  | 
Prasadadmi(-nam)  sarvesham  prachchhadanadi-lakshapam  \ 

Etat  praohchhadanam  gehe  proktam  mama  munityaraih  \ 
Anyat-yasbuni-(nam)  sarvesham  praohchhadanam  ihochyate  \ 

(M.  XVI,  120-121,  143-144;  the  proposed 
description,  ibid.  121-142,  146-168,  170-204). 
The  materials  of  which  they  are  constructed  : 

Kevalam  eheshtaka-harmye  daru-praohohhadananvitam  \ 
Sila-harmye  feila-taulim  kuryat  tat  tad  vi&eshatah  | 

From  this  passage  especially,  it  appears  that  the  term  prachohha- 
dana  indicates  the  roof  of  a building, 

(Ibid.  133-134). 


PRATI-KEAMA 


361 


PEANi.LA(iLA)— The  drip  or  ehannel-lifce  part  of  the  pedestal  of  the 
Lihga  (phallus),  a gutter,  a canal,  a patter,  a bracket. 

(1)  Vari-nirgamanartham  tu  tatra  karyah  pranalakah  1 

Therein  (in  the  pedestal)  should  be  made  the  pranala  (gutter) 
as  an  out -let  for  water. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  262,  v.  6). 
Ardhangula-bhruYO-rajl  pranala-sadrisi  sama  \ 

(Ibid.  chap.  268,  V.  37) 

(2)  A square  or  round  platter  or  bracket  to  which  a spout  is 

attached  for  ornamental  purposes  : 

Aifeanyam  pranalam  syat  ptirvasyam  va  prakirtita  li 
See  Manasara,  Lii.  298,  etc.  (Kamikagama,  lv.  82). 

PEANALA  (-LIKA,-Ll) — A canal,  a spout,  a conduit,  a water-course, 
a drain. 

(1)  Pi^uh  punya-vivriddhaye  karita  sat-pranaliyam....  I 

This  conduit  has  been  built....for  the  increase  of  his  father’s 
spiritual  merit.” 

(Insorip.  from  Nepal,  no.  8,  Vibhuvarman’s 
Inscrip.  line  2 f.  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  p.  171.  o.  2). 

(2)  Kugrame  pranalikayab  cha  khanda-sphutita-samadhanartham — 

“ for  repairing  the  spout  of  the  water-course  in  Ktigrama.” 

(Ibid.no.  11,  line  16,  p.  174). 

PEATIKA(.1)--A  moulding. 

(1)  A moulding  of  the  base  (M.  xiv.  39,  138,  148,  etc,  see  the  lists 

of  mouldings  under  Adhishthana). 
A moulding  of  the  column  (M.  XT.  217,  xxxiil.  226,  etc). 

(2)  Praftim  nivefeayet  tasya  tri-tri-bhagaika-bhagatah  li 
Anyayo&  ohardha-chandrabha  prati  karya  dvijottamah  li 

(Kamikagama.  Liv.  44,  46). 
PEATI-KEAMA— A class  of  bases  comprising  four  types  which  differ 
from  one  another  in  height  and  in  the  addition  or  omission  of 
some  mouldings. 

(M.  XIV.  44-64,  see  under  Adhishtihana). 
Vedikey  am  tu  samanya  kuttfimanam  prakirtita  I 
Pratikramasya  ohotsedhe  ohatur-vimtati  vibhajite  11 

(Vastu-vidya,  ed.  Ganapati  6astri,  ix.  19). 


362 


PBATI-BANDHA 


Pratikramam  vi^eshena  karfcavyam  pada-bandhavafc  I! 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  26,  see  the  details  under  Pada- 

bandha). 

PEATI-BANDHA — ^A  moulding  of  the  base. 

(M.  XIV.  324,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Adhish^hana). 
PEATI-BHABBA — One  of  the  three  classes  of  the  pedestals,  the  other 
two  being  Mafioha-bhadra  and  Vedi-bhadra ; it  has  four  types 
differing  from  one  another  in  height  and  in  the  addition  or  omission 
of  some  mouldings. 

(M.  XIII.  63-89,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  tJpapi^ha) 
PEATIMA — ^A  moulding,  an  architectural  object. 

In  connection  with  foundations  ; 

Brahma-garbham  iti  proktam  pratimam  tat  sva-rupakam  \ 

Evam  tu  pratimam  proktam  etad  garbhopari  nyaset  I 

(M.  XII.  149, 166). 

A moulding  of  the  base  (M.  xiv.  61, 137,  279,  see  the  lists  of  moul- 
dings under  Adhish^hana). 
PEATIMA — An  image,  an  idol,  a bust,  a statue. 

(1)  Manasara,  chap.  LXIV  (named  Pratima): 

Description  of  the  images  of  the  sixteen  attendant  deities  of 
the  Vishnu  temple  (lines  1-92). 

Of.  Pratimam  lohajam  choktam  tatha  ratnam  tu  vinyaset  \ 

(M.  nxx.  100). 

Pratimadhikara  (M.  Lxvii.  colophon). 

(2)  An  image  or  idol  (Brihat-samhita,  Lvi.  16.  J.  E.  A,  S.,  N.  8., 

vol.  IV.  p.  318). 

(3)  Eka-haata  dvi-hasta  va  tri-hasta  va  pramaniatah  I 
Tatha  sarva  tri-hasta  cha  savituh  pratima  tubha  11 

(Bhavishya-PurSna,  chap.  132,  v.  1). 

(4)  Athatah  sampravakshyami  sakalanam  tu  laksha^am  \ 

Sarva vayava-dyityatvat  pratima  tv-iti  choohyate  tl 
Itvaradi-chatur-murttih  pa^hyate  sakalam  tv-iti  ii 

(Suprabhedagama,  XXXIV.  1-2). 


PEATIMA 


363 


(5)  Angushtha-parvad  arabkya  vitastir-yavad  eva  tu  \ 

G-nheshu  pratima  karya  nadhika  feasyafce  budhaik  li 
Ashodafea  tu  prasade  karttavya  nadhika  tatah  \ 
Madhyottama-kanishtha  tu  karya  vittanusaratah  II 
'Dvarochohhrayasya  yan-manam  ashtadha  tat  tu  karayet  \ 
Bhagam  ekam  tatas  tyaktva  pari&ishtaih  tu  yad  bhavet  II 
Bhaga-dYayena  pratima  tri-bhagikritya  tat  punah  1 
Pithika  bhagatah  karya  nati  nicha  nachoohchhrita  II 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  268,  22-26), 

(6)  Vinirmmita  rajate  Chamkirajena  Supar&va-pratima  uttama— 

“ the  excellent  image  of  Suparsva  made  by  Ohamkiraja 
adorns  there.” 

(Honwad  Inscrip,  of  Somesvara  i,  line  32,  Ind. 

Ant.  vol.  XIX,  p.  273). 

(7)  “ An  image  (pratimS)  may  be  very  lofty  and  yet  have  no 

beauty,  or  it  may  be  lofty  and  of  real  beauty,  but  have  no 
dignity;  but  height,  true  beauty  and  exceeding  dignity 
being  all  united  in  him,  how  highly  is  he  worthy  of  worship 
in  the  world,  Gommatefevara,  the  very  form  of  Jina  himself.” 
“ Should  Maya  address  himself  to  drawing  a likeness,  the 
chief  of  Naka-loka  (Indra)  to  look  on  it  or  the  Lord  of 
serpents  (Adi&esha)  to  praise  it,  it  is  unequal ; this  being  so, 
who  else  are  able  to  draw  the  likeness,  to  look  fully  upon  or 
praise  the  unequalled  form  of  the  southern  Kukkute&a  with 
its  wondrous  beauty.” 

(Ep.  Camat.  vol.  Ii.  Vindhyagiri  Inscrip,  no.  86, 
Transl.  p.  154,  line  13  f.  Eoman  text,  p.  67  f). 

(8)  “ In  the  presence  of  these  gods,  setting  up  the  stone  images 

(tila-pratima)  of  the  crowned  queen  Lakshmivilasa,  the 
lawful  queen  Kyishna-vilasa,  and  the  lawful  queen  Eama- 

vilasa,  together  with  my  own.” 

(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol.  iv.  Chamarajnagar  Taluq,  no.  86, 
Transl.  p.  11,  pf'-ra  3 ; Eoman  text,  p.  18,  para.  1, 
last  three  lines). 


364  PEATlMl-MAMAPA 

(9)  Viohitiye  Jina-daaiya  pratima  Bhagavata  pitamahasa  pratiMa 

pratish^hapita  \ 

(Mathura  Inscrip.  no.  16,  line  2 ; Bitha  Insorip. 
no.  G,  line  1-3  ; Cunningham,  Arch.  Surv.  Ee- 
ports,  vol.  III.  pp.  34, 48). 

(10)  “ In  the  highly  celebrated  Somanatha-pura  he  made  a great 

temple,  setting  up  therein  according  to  all  the  directions  of 
the  Agftnna  the  various  incarnations  of  Vishnu, — and  shone 
with  the  fame  he  had  acquired,  Soma-ohamupati,  the 
G-Syi-govala.  Under  the  profound  name  of  Prasanna-ohenna 
he  set  Ke&ava  on  the  right  hand  side,  and  the  soinroe  of 
world^s  pleasure,  his  form  G-opala,  the  lord  who  fills  the 
mind  with  Joy,  Janardha, — ^these  three  forms,  united  among 
themselves,  were  the  chief  in  the  Vishnu  temple  in  that 
pura.  A cause  of  all  manner  of  festivity  were  all  the  various 
forms  around  the  enclosure,  as  they  were  all  exhibited  in 
different  ways  : the  Matsya  and  others,  all  the  ten  incarna- 
tions, Eetava  and  others,  Sankamhapa  and  others,  twelve  in 
name,  Narayapa  and  others  to  the  number  of  thirty -four, 
including  eighteen,  Krishna  and  others  ; Uanapa,  Bhairava, 
Bhaskara,  Vishvaksena,  Durggi,  and  such  gods  numbering 
seventy -three  adorned  the  Vishpu  temple  in  the  middle  of 
pura.  And  in  the  south-east  of  the  pura  Soma-dandadhipa 
set  up  Bijjaletvara,  Perggadetvara,  Revaletvara,  and  Bayira- 

letvara,  with  Somanatha  ^iva-linga  in  the  middle, ... 

And  he  set  up  Bhava  named  Nrisimhetvara,  Yoga-Narayana 
and  Lakshmi-Nrisimha  in  the  middle  of  the  Kaveri  at 
Somanathapura. 

(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol.  xi.  Davanagere  taluq,  no.  36, 
Transl.  p.  46,  para  3,  line  7 f.,  Eoman  text,  pp. 

76,77). 

PEATIMA-MANPAPA— A detached  building  used  as  a temple,  a 
pavilion. 


(M.  XXXIV.  66). 


PBATI^RAYA 


366 


FBATI-MUKHA — A moulding  of  the  base, 

(M.  xiY.  102,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 
under  Adhishthana). 

PBATI-PATTA — (see-  Patta) — A.  moulding,  a band,  a plate,  a slab, 
a tablet. 

(Vastu-vidya,  ix.  23-24,  see  under  Patta). 
PRATI-EUPA — A moulding  of  the  entablature. 

(M.  XVI.  45,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Prastara). 
PRATI-YAKTEA^ — A.  moulding  of  the  base. 

(M.  XIV.  118,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Adhishthana). 
PEATI-VAJANA — A concave  moulding  resembling  the  oavetto. 

See  Fletcher  (Hist.  Arch.  p.  101). 

It  is  the  same  thing  in  the  pedestal  to  answer  to  the  vajana ; 
its  form  though  generally  rectangular,  is  sometimes,  when 
placed  in  cornices,  found  to  be  externally  a little  more 
inclined  to  one  side  than  to  the  other,  and  in  this  situation  it 
resembles  the  oavetto.”  (Earn  Eaz,  Ess.  Arch.  Hind.  p.  26). 
Alingantaram  chordhve  prati  vajanam  uchyate  \ 

(M.  XLV.  111). 

A moulding  of  the  pedestal  (M,  xiii.  68, 93,  111,  etc.,  see  the 
lists  of  mouldings  under  IJpapitha). 
A moulding  of  the  base  (M.  xiv.  39  etc. ; see  the  lists  of 
mouldings  under  Adhishthana). 
PEATII^RAYA— Help,  a shelter-house  for  travellers,  a dwelling  house, 
a residence,  a sacrificial  hall,  an  assembly. 

(1)  Satra-prapa-pra(ti)traya-vri8hot8argga-vapi-kupa-tadarama- 

devala-yadi-karanopakaranartham  iha — “ for  the  purpose  of 
(supplying)  requisite  materials  for  preparing  alms-house 
(feeding  establishment),  a place  for  distributing  water  gratis 
to  travellers,  a shelter-house  for  travellers,  a Vyishotsargga 
(see-below  Ind.  Ant.  vol,  xn.  p.  142),  reservoirs,  wells,  tanks, 
orchards,  temples,  etc,” 

(Cambay  Plates  of  Govinda  iv,  line  68, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol,  VII.  pp.  41,  46,  note  8). 


366 


PRATI 


(2)  Chatu^-^alavasadha-prati^raya-pradena  arama-tadaga-udapatia- 

karena — “ has  given  the  shelter  of  quadrangular  rest- 
houses,  has  made  wells,  tanks,  and  gardens.” 

(Nasik  Cave  Insorip.  no.  10,  line  2,  Eip.  Ind. 

vol.  vni.  pp.  78,  79). 

“ But  Prati§raya,  as  I have  stated  in  a note  (Nasik  Inscrip- 
tion, the  International  Congress  of  the  Orientalists  held  in 
London  in  1874)  is  what  is  in  these  days  called  an  anna- 
sattra,  i.  e.  a house  where  travellers  put  up  and  are  fed  with- 
out charge.”  Dr.  Bhandarkar,  and  compares  : 

(3)  Hemadri  (p.  152) : Prati&rayah  pravasinam  a^rayah,  i.e.,  a 

shelter  house  for  travellers. 

(4)  Vahni-Purana  (p.  673,  quoted  also  by  Dr.  Hoernle); 

Prati^rayam  suvistirnam  sad-annam  sujalanvitam  \ 
Dina-natha-janarthaya  karayitv^  griham  §ubham  \ 

Nivedayet  pathisthebhyah 'auhha-dvaraih  manoharam  II 
“Having  caused  to  be  constructed  for  poor  and  helpless  persons 
a pratilraya  (in  the  shape  of)  a good  house,  very  commodious 
(wide),  having  food  and  plentiful  water,  provided  with  a 
good  door,  and  charming,  he  should  dedicate  it  to  travellers.” 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xii.  p.  142,  c.  1~2). 
PRATl-^(see  Prati) — A moulding. 

PRATOLI — A gate-way  sometimes  provided  with  a flight  of  steps, 
a small  turret,  the  main  road  of  a town. 

(1)  Eathya  pratoK  vifeikha  syach  chayo  vapram  astriyam  \ 

. (Amarakosha,  II.  ii,  3). 

(2)  TrimSad-dandamtaram  cha  dvayor  attalakayor-madhye 

saharmya-dvi-talam  dvy-ardhayamam  pratoliih  karayet  1 
Attalaka-pratoli-madhye  tri-dhanushkadhishthanam  sapi- 
dhana-chchhidra-phalaka-samhatam  indra-ko§am  karayet  ( 
Prakaram  ubhayato  mandalakam  adhyardha-dandam  kritva 
pratoli-shat-tulflntaram  dvaraih  nive&ayet  I 

(Kautiliya-Artha^astra,  chap.  xxiv.  paras 
8,9,  15,  pp.  52,  53). 


PBATOLT 


367 


(3)  Mahabharata  (Cock)  ; 

XIV,  25,21  ; Tam  cba  &ala-ohayaih  brimat  aampratoli- 

sugbattitam  \ 

XII.  69,  66 : Parikhafe  chaiva  kauravya  pratoUr  nisbkutani  cba  i 

(4)  Earn  ay  ana  (Cook) : 

II.  80, 18 : Pratolivara-^obhitab  ....  ...  ....  (nive&ab)i 

V.  3,17:  (Lankam)  ....  pandnrabbib  pratolibbir 

ucbcbabbir  abbisamvritam  I 

VL  76,  6 ; Gopurafeta-pratolisbu  obaryasn.  vividbasu  oba  \ 

(6)  See  “ Tbe  Sanskrit  Pratoli  and  its  new  Indian  derivatives.” 

(J.  B.  A.  S.  vol.  xiK..  July,  1906). 

(6)  Kritva  ^ . . . . abbiramam  muni-vasati avargga-sopana- 

rdpam  kaubera-obcbbanda-bimbam  spbatika-maihdala- 
bbasa-gauram  pratolim  \ 

“ Having  made  a gateway,  charming  (and) the  abode 

of  Saints,  (and)  having  the  form  of  a staircase  leading 
to  heaven  (and)  resembling  a (pearl) -necklace  of  tbe  kind 
called  Kauberachcbbanda,  (and)  white  with  tbe  radiance  of 
pieces  of  crystalline  gems.” 

“That  tbe  word  (pratoli)  has  tbe  meaning  in  tbe  present  inscrip- 
tion of  a gateway  with  a flight  of  steps  seems  to  be  shewn  by 
tbe  comparison  of  tbe  pratoli  with  a svarga-sopana  or  flight 
of  steps,  or  ladder,  leading  to  heaven,  and  by  its  being 
described  as  white  with  the  radiance  of  pieces  of  crystalline 
gems  (in  tbe  stones  of  which  it  was  constructed).” 

(Bilsad  stone  pillar  Inscrip,  of  Kumaragupta,  line 
10,  0. 1. 1,  vol.  III.  F.  &.  I.  no.  10,  pp.  44, 
45,  43,  and  note  1). 

(7)  Hammira  vira  kVa  sa  tava  mahima  nirdi^amti  dbvajagrair- 

divyakara-pratoli-hridayami-bbuvo  nirmita  Kilhanena  1 

Astam  tavat  pratoli  tad-upaviraohitaih  koshthaka-dvam-dvam 
etat  proohohair  alana-yugmam  Viiaya[vaTa]kareh  tatru- 
lakshmat  cha  sadma  \ 

(Hanai  stone  Insorip.  of  Pyithviraja,  V.  S.  1224, 
V.  6.  6,  Ind,  Ant,  vol.  xLj.  pp,  19,  17), 


368 


pbatya:^g^a 


(8)  Asyam  uttunga4ringa-3phuta-fea&i-kirana-(8V0tabliasa-saiia- 

tham-ramyarama)  pratoli-vividha-jana-pada-sferi-Yila- 

sabhiramam  I 

“In  this  (city  of  Benares  there  was)  a place,  renowned  on 
earth  (bathed  in  the  white  light)  of  the  bright  rays  of  the 
moon  (as  they  fell  on  its)  lofty  turrets  ; charming  with  the 
gracefulness  of  the  wives  of  the  various  inhabitants  of  the 
(beautiful  and  extensive,  lit.  whosA  extent  was  charming) 
streets.” 

(Benares  Inscrip,  of  Pantha,  v.  2,  Bpj  Ind. 

vol,  IX.  pp.  60,  61). 

(9)  Deva-tri-tabi-bhushanasya  kritina  devalayam  karitam  yugmam  . 

mamdapa-tobhitam  cha  purato-bhadram  pratolya  saha  \ 

“ Caused  to  be  built  two  temples  of  the  god  whose  orna- 
ment is  the  moon  (viz.  Mahadeva),  together  with  halls, 
a purato-bhadra  with  a gateway.” 

(Kanker  Insorip  of  Bhanudeva,  v.  7,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  IX.  pp.  127,  128, 126,  note  3). 

PBATYAl^Q-A—A  minor  limb,  a moulding  of  the  entablature. 

(Kamikagama,  liv.  2,  see  under  Prastara). 

PBATYUHA — (see  tiha) — A supporting  member,  a moulding,  an 
architectural  object. 

PBATHAMASANA — The  throne  for  the  preliminary  coronation. 

Of.  Prathamabhisheka-yogyam  sySt  prathamasanam  eva  cha  I 

(M.  XLV.  2-3). 

PBADAKSHINA — A surrounding  terrace  or  verandah,  a circumambu- 
lating path  round  a temple,  a circular  road  round  a village 
or  town. 

(1)  ^ikharardhasya  chardhena  vidheya  tu  pradakshina  I 
Q-arbha-sutra-dvayam  chagre  vistaro  mandalasya  tu  II 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  269,  v.  4). 

(2)  Pradakshinam  bahih  kuryat  prasadadishu  va  na  va  I 

(Agni-Purana,  chap  104,  V.  9). 

(3)  Sikhararddhasya  charddhena  vidheyas  tu  pradakshinah  | 

(Garuda-Purana,  chap.  47,  V.  8). 


PEAPl 


36d 


See  Matsya-Purana  above ; tMs  line  is  identical,  except  that 
it  is  used  in  the  plural  number  here. 

(4)  “ The  procession -path  round  the  cell — called  Pradakshina— as 

that  round  apse,  remained  for  some  centuries  as  a common 
but  not  a universal  feature.  The  verandah  disappeared. 
Bound  a windowless  cell  it  was  useless,  and  the  pillared 
porches  contained  in  themselves,  all  the  elements  of  shelter 
or  of  the  shadow  that  were  required/^ 

(Fergusson,  Hist,  of  Ind.  and  East.  Arch.  p.  221). 

(5)  “ In  the  pradakshina  or  passage  behind  images,  are  other  two 

gratings  over  shafts  from  the  lower  hail.’^ 

(Ahmadabad  Arch.  Burgess,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp. 

series,  vol.  xxxiii.  p,  87). 

PBADAKSHINA-SOPANA~A  surrounding  flight  of  steps. 

(Kau^iliya-Artha&atra,  see  under  Sopana). 
PEAPA — (PBAPANG-A) — A shed  on  the  roadside  for  accommodating 
travellers  with  water,  a place  where  water  is  distributed,  a 
cistern,  a tank,  a building. 

(1)  Kulluka  (M.  W.  Diet) : Pauiya-dana-gpiba — a house  where 

water  is  given  (gratis).  . 

(2)  Amarakosha  (ii.  6,  7) : Ave§anam  silpi-tala  prapa  paniya-^alika  \ 

(3)  A synonym  of  harmya  (edifice)  (M.  ii.  7). 

In  connection  with  the  stair-case  ; 

Prapange  pramukhe  bhadre  sopanam  purva-par^vayoh  \ 

(M.  XXX.  105). 

In  connection  with  mandapas  (pavilions) : 

Bhakti-mEnani  tatha  bhitti-vistaraih  chapy-alindakam  \ 
Prapanga-mandapakaram  paiioha-bhedaih  kramoohyate  \ 

(M.  XXXIV.  3-4,  see  also  16). 

Madhye  praohohhadanam  kuryat  prapangam  vadhikalpayet  \ 
Tasya  madhye  cha  range  tu  mauktikena  prapanvitam  \ 
Mandapagre  prapangam  syiit  ....  I 

(Ibid.  201,  218,  222,  see  alsq  224-226). 
24  ■ ■ 


310 


BBAPl. 


Mandapasya  baliir-de&e  prapam  pafitas  tu  karayet  I 

* (Ibid.  290). 

In  connection  witk  madhya-ranga  (central  quadrangle  or  court 
yard) ; 

Devanam  cha  nyipanam  ch.a  stbianakasana-yogyakain  \ 
Mukta-prapanga-manam  cha  lakshanam  vakshyate’dhuna  I 
Yad-ukta-madhya-rahge  tu  chatus-trim^ad  vibhajite  \ 
Bkaikaih-bhaga-hinam  syat  prapa-vistaram  ishyaita  \ 

prapa-tuhgam  feivamfeam  syat  | 

(M.  xLvii.  1-4,  9). 

In  connection  with  the  pedestals  of  the  images  of  the  Triad ; 
Prapjl  cha  toranam  vapi  kalpa-vriksham  cha  samyutam  \ 

(M.  LI.  87). 

(4)  Prag-vamtayor  anya-vamsait  cha  nalikera-daladibhih  I 

Aohchhaditah(-ta)  prapa  nama  prastaram  ohatra  mapdapah  II 

(Kamikagama,  l.  88). 

(6)  Prapa(?  pa)ya&  oha  mandapam — “ hall  for  the  supply  of  water."’ 

(Insorip-  of  the  Chandella  Viravarman,  v 19, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  I.  pp.  328,  330). 

(6)  Vapi-kupa-tadag.a-kuttima-matha-prSsada-satralayan  I 
Sauvarna-dh vaia-torapSpapa-pura-grama-prapa -mamdapan  \ 
Vyadhapayad  ayam  Ohaulukya-chudamapih  \ 

Here  ‘ Prapa  ’ does  not,  evidently,  mean  a tank,  which  idea 
is  expressed  by  the  words,  vapi,  kupa,  and  tadaga. 

(Sridhara’s  Devapattana  Pratasti,  V.  10, 
Bp.  Ind.  vol.  II.  p.  440). 

(7)  See  Banganath  Insorip.  of  Siindarapandya  (verse  15,  Ep.  Ind, 

vol.  m.  pp.  13, 16). 

(8)  Satra-prapa-pratraya-vrishotsargga-vapi-kupa-tadarama-devala- 

yadi-karapopakarapartham  oha  1 
Prapa — (?)  a place  of  distributing  water  gratis  (D.  E.  Bhand- 
arkar). 

(Cambay  Plates  of  Govinda  iv,  line  68,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  VII.  pp.  41,  46). 


fBABHA 


37-1 


(9)  Nadinjlm  ubhato  tiram  sabha  prapa-karena — erected  on  both 
banks  shelters  for  meeting  and  such  for  gratuitous  distri- 
buting of  water.” 

(Nasik  Cave  Inscrip,  no.  10,  line  2 f.  Ep.  lud. 

vol.  VIII.  pp.  78,  79). 

(10)  Aneka-devatayatana-sabha-praparamSvasatha-vihara-karayita 

— “ who  caused  to  be  built  many  temples  of  the  gods,  halls, 
drinking-fountains,  gardens,  rest-houses,  and  (Buddhist) 
monasteries.” 

(Palitana  Plates  of  Simhaditya,  line  13,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  XI.  pp.  18, 19,  note  3). 

(11)  Dakshina-diisabhage  karapita  vapi  tatha  prapeyam  cha-— 

“ in  the  southern  part  there  has  been  made  an  irrigation 
well  also  a watering-trough.” 

Tatha  prapa-kshetrarh  dvitiyam  tatha  grame  uttara-di^ayam — • 
” in  the  northern  part  of  the  village  there  is  given  a second 
field,  for  the  watering  trough.” 

(Grant  of  Bhimadeva  li,  Vikrama  Samvat  1266,  lines 
26, 27,  31,  32,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xviii.  pp.  113, 115). 

(12)  “ Apana  cannot  have  here  (Atoka  pillar-edict,  vii,  lines, 

2-3)  its  usual  meaning  ‘tavern, liquor-shop.’  As  professor 
Bern  (Der  Buddhism,  vol.  ii,  p.  386)  assumes,  it  must 
denote  a watering  station.  Probably  the  huts  on  the 
roads  are  meant,  where  water  is  distributed  to  travellers 
and  their  beasts  gratis  or  against  payment.  The  usual 
Sanskrit  name  is  prapa.”  Dr.  Biihler. 

(Ep.  Ind.  vol.  II.  p.  274,  i). 
PEABHAVA — A type  of  rectangular  building. 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  104,  V.  16-17,  see  under  Prasada). 
PBABHANJAEA-— A type  of  chariot. 

(M.  XLiii.  112,  see  under  Batha). 

PEABH A— A canopy,  a city. 

Sailam  feohhita-&ata-kumbha-vilasat  kumbharii  maha-manda- 
pam  prakaram  paramalika-vilasitaih  muktamayim  cha 
prapa(4)ha)m  I 


I’EAMANA 


sn 

“ A great)  maha-mandapa  of  stone,  resplendent  with  pitchers 
(?  domes)  of  shining  gold,  a surrounding  wall,  adorned  with 
excellent  buildings,  and  a canopy  of  pearls.’^  Dr.  Hultzsch. 

(fourteen  Insorip.  at 'Hirukkovalur,  no.  K,  Inscrip, 
of  Eajendradeva,  line  1-2,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  vii. 

pp.  146-6). 

PEAMANA— The  measurement  of  breadth. 

(M.  Lv,  3-6,  see  under  Mana). 

Pramanaih  dirgham  ity-iiktam  manonmana-pramanatah  i) 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxiv.  36). 

PEALAMBA — ^The  plumb-lines  or  the  lines  drawn  through  an  image 
in  order  to  find  out  the  perpendicular  and  the  horizontal  mea- 
surement of  the  different  parts  of-  the  body. 

(1)  See  Bimbamana  (v.  73-91,  92-122,  123-188)  under  Tala- 

mana. 

(2)  Manasara  (chap.  Lxvii.  named  Pralamba)  : 

The  instrument  by  means  of  which  the  plumb-lines  are  drawn 
is  called  Pralamba-phalaka.  This  is  a square  plank  of  four, 
three,  two  or  one  angula  in  thickness  with  the  sides  equal  to 
three -fourths  or  half  of  the  length  of  the  image  (line  6). 
Another  plank  of  the  same  size  is  made  and  used  as  the  stool 
on  which  the  image  is  placed.  The  other  plank  (Pralamba- 
phalaka)  is  fixed  to  the  crown  of  the  head  of  the  image. 
The  planks  are  kept  level  to  each  other.  Some  holes  are 
made  in  the  upper  plank  of  the  Pralamba-phalaka  wherefrom 
are  suspended  some  strings  at  the  other  end  of  which  are 
attached  small  balls  made  of  iron  or  stone  (7-16).  The 
number  of  holes  and  the  strings  suspended  through  the  planks, 
by  which  the  plumb-lines  are  determined,  varies  from  five 
to  eleven,  according  to  the  different  postures  and  poses  of  the* 
image.  The  five  principal  plumb-lines  consist  of  one  drawn 
from  the  centre  of  the  upper  plank  corresponding  to  the 
crown  of  the  head,  and  four  on  the  four  sides  of  the  body 
(19).  Two  other  lines  drawn  adjoining  the  right  and  left 
sides  of  the  face  make  the  number  seven  (20).  Another 


PEALAMBA 


373 


two  lines  drawn  on  the  right  and  left  sides  of  the  back  of 
the  head  make  the  number  nine  (2*2)  ; and  two  lines  drawn 
from  the  two  arm-pits  make  the  total  of  lines  eleven  (28). 

The  line  drawn  from  the  crown  of  the  head  (§ikha-mani) 
passes  by  the  middle  of  the  front,  root  and  pafcta  (band)  of 
the  diadem  (mauli),  middle  of  the  forehead,  eye-brows,  nose, 
chin,  neck,  chest  (hridaya),  navel,  sex-organ,  root  of  the 
thighs,  half-way  between  the  knees,  nalakas  (ankles),  heels, 
soles  (feet)  and  two  largest  toes  (32-40).  The  perpendicular 
and  horizontal  distances  between  the  difierent  parts  of  the 
body  are  described  in  detail  (41-78,  99-139).  The  variations 
of  these  measurements  are  considered  with  regard  to  pos- 
tures (1-96),  namely,  erect  (sthanaka),  sitting  (asana)  and 
recumbent  ('say ana),  and  poses  (98-140),  called  abhahga, 
sama-bhahga,  ati-bhahga  and  tri-bhahga(se6  under  Bhanga), 
These  plumb-lines  are  stated  to  be  drawn  only  for  the  purpose 
of  measuring : 

Bvarh  tu  karya-sutram  syiit  lambayet  feilpavittamah  I (91) 

The  principles  and  mechanism  of  plumb-lines  followed  by  the 
European  architects  are  almost  similar.  The  following 
quotations  from  Vitruvius  and  Gwilt  would  throw  more 
light  on  the  point. 

(3)  “Agatharous ...was  the  first  who  contrived  scenery, 

upon  which  he  left  a treatise.  This  led  Democritus  and 
Anaxagarus,  who  wrote  thereon,  to  exJSlain  how  the  points  of 
sight  and  distance  ought  to  guide  the  lines,  as  in  nature,  to 
a centre,  so  that  by  means  of  pictorial  deception,  the  real 
appearances  of  buildings  appear  on  the  scene,  which,  painted 
on  a flat  vertical  surface,  seem,  nevertheless,  to  advance 
and  recede.”  (Vitruvius,  Book  vii,  Introduction). 

“ This  (levelling)  is  performed  either  with  the  dioptra,  the  level 
(libra  aoquaria)  or  the  chorobates.  The  latter  instrument 
is  however  the  best,  inasmuch  as  the  dioptra  and  level  are 
often  found  to  be  incorrect.  The  chorobates  is  a rod  about 


374 


PBALAMBA 


twenty  feet  in  length,  having  two  legs  at  its  extremities 
of  equal  length  and  dimensions,  and  fastened  to  the  ends  of 
the  rod  at  right  angles  with  it  j between  the  rod  the  legs 
are  cross  pieces  fastened  with  tenons,  whereon  vertical 
lines  are  correctly  marked,  through  which  corresponding 
plumb-lines  hang  down  from  the  rod.  When  the  rod  is-  set, 
these  will  coincide  with  the  lines  marked,  and  show  that 
the  instrument  stands  level.”  (Vitruvius,  Book  viii,  chap, 
vt). 

(4)  “Plumb-rule,  Plumb-line,  or  Plummet  is  an  instrument 
used  by  masons,  carpenters,  (sculptors),  etc.,  to  draw 
perpendiculars  or  verticals,  for  ascertaining  whether  their 
work  be  upright,  horizontal  and  soon.  The  instrument  is 
little  more  than  a piece  of  lead  or  plummet  at  the  end  of 
a string,  sometimes  descending  along  a wooden  or  metal 
ruler  raised  perpendicularly  on  another,  and  then  it  is  called 
a level.”  (G-wilt.  Enoyol.  p.  1241). 

“ The  term  ‘ level'  is  used  substantively  to  denote  an  instru- 
ment which  shows  the  direction  of  a straight  line  parallel 
to  the  plane  of  the  horizon.  The  plane  of  the  sensible 
horizon  is  indicated  in  two  ways  : by  the  direction  of  the 
plummet  or  the  plumb-line,  to  which  it  is  perpendicular ; 
and  by  the  surface  of  a fluid  at  rest.  Accordingly,  levels 
are  formed . either  by  means  of  the  plumb-line,  or  by  the 
agency  of  a fluid  applied  in  some  particular  manner.  ” 

“ They  all  depend,  however,  upon  the  same  principle,  namely, 
the  action  of  terrestrial  gravity.  The  carpenter’s  level  con- 
sists of  a long  rule,  straight  on  its  lower  edge,  about  ten  or 
twelve  feet  in  length,  with  an  upright  fixed  to  its  upper  edge, 
perpendicular  to  and  in  the  middle  of  the  length,  having 
its  sides  in  the  same  plane  with  those  of  the  rule,  and  a 
straight  line  drawn  on  one  of  its  sides  perpendicular  to  the 
straight  edge  of  the  rule.  This  standing  piece  is  generally 


PEALlNAKA 


875 


mortised  into  the  other,  and  finally  braced  on  each  side  to 
secure  it  from  accident,  and  has  its  upper  endkerfed  in 
three  places,  yiz.  through  the  perpendicular  line,  and  on 
each  side.  The  straight  edge  of  the  transverse  piece  has  a 
hole,  or  notch,  cut  out  on  the  other  side  equal  on  eaohtside  of 
the  perpendicular  line.  A plummet  is  suspended  by  a string 
from  the  middle  kerf,  ’ at  the  top  of  the  standing  piedOj  to 
vibrate  freely  in  the  hole  or  notch  when  hanging  at  full 
length.  When  the  straight  edge  of  t]ie  level  is  applied  to 
two  distant  points,  with  its  two  sides  placed  vertically,  if 
the  plummet  hangs  freely,  and  the  string  coincides  with  the 
straight  line  on  the  standing  piece,  the  two  points  are 
level.  If  not,  suppose  one  of  the  points  to  be  at  the  given 
height,  the  other  must  be  lowered  or  raised,  as  the  case 
may  require,  till  the  string  is  brought  to  a coincidence  with 
the  perpendicular  line.  By  two  points  is  meant  two  surfaces 
of  contact,  as  two  blocks  of  wood,  or  the  upper  edges  of  two 
distant  beams.” 

” The  mason’s  level  is  formed  of  three  pieces  of  wood,  joined 
in  the  form  of  an  isosceles  triangle,  having  a plummet 
suspended  from  the  vertex  over  a mark  in  the  centre  of  the 
base.”  (Gi-wilt,  Bncycl.  p.  1217). 

PEALAMBA-PHALAKA— (see  under  Pralamba)— The  square 

plank  through  which  the  plumb-lines  are  drawn. 

PEALlNAKA — A class  of  buildings,  a column  with  82  rectangular 
sides,  i.e.,  32-8ided  shaft, 

Lva-trimtat  tu  madhye  Pralinakah  (Byihat-samhita,  Liii.  28). 

Pralinakam  atah  trinu... II 

^irshakam  ohatur-asram  tu  partvayoh  koshtha-samyutah  \ 

Panjaraih  nasika-yuktam  sopanam  partvayos  tatah  II 

Pralinaka  iti  prokta  (-ah) I 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi,  46,  47,  48), 


376 


PRASTARA 


PBASTABA— The  entablature.  It  comprises  the  parts  of  an  order 
above  a column.  The  assemblage  is  divided  into  three  parts  in  the 
Buropean  architecture,  namely,  the  architrave  which  rest  imme- 
diately on  the  column,  "the  frieze  next  over  the  architrave  being 
the  middle  member,  and  the  cornice  which  is  the  uppermost 
part.  These  three  parts  are  again  variously  sub-divided. 

(1)  The  entablature  is  stated  to  be  half  of  the  column  : 

Prastaram  pada-di(-ai)rghyasya  ehardha-manena  karayet  \ 
Nyunam  vapi  chadhikam  (?-kardhikam)  vapi  prastaram  kajayed 

budhah  !| 

Prastarokta-pramanaih  tu  sarvam  kanthe  vidhiyate  II 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  27,  28,  29). 
Ibid.  chap.  LIT.  (named  Prastara-vidhi) ; 

Three  essential  parts  of  the  Prastara  (entablature)  '• 
Hinadhikam  tu  ohahganam  prastarasya  dvijottamSh  I 
Padahganam  tatha  kuryad  galange  oha  masurake  II  47 
The  pada  (foot,  pedestal,  base),  gala  (neck,  middle  part),  and 
masuraka  (lintel)  would,  apparently,  correspond  to  the 
architrave,  frieze,  and  cornice. 

The  mouldings  of  the  Prastara  (entablalure) : 

Uttaram  vajanam  ohaiva  mushti-bandham  mi'inalikam  II 1 
Dandika  valaya-kshudra-gopanachohhadanam  oha  I 
Alihgantarita  ohaiva  pratyahgam  vajanam  kramat  II  2 
Their  comparative  measurement : 

Tr(i)yamtaikamtamfea-panohaika-dvi-tri-bhagaika-bhagaih  | 
Tri-bhagenaika-bh^ena  upary-upari  yojayet  II  3 
Three  kinds  of  the  Prastara  ; 

Etani  prastarahgani  tri-vidham  chottaram  bhavet  1 
Khandottaram  patra-bandham  rupottaram  iha  dvijah  II  4 
Their  description  (V.  6-6,  see  under  those  terms). 

Further  classification  under  Svastika,  Vardhamana,  Nandya- 
varta  and  Sarvatobhadra  (v.  7-8). 

The  other  details  of  the  Prastara  (v,  9-46), 


vnkmknk 


m 

Ibid.  LY.  204  (syiionyms)  : 

Prastaratfa.  ohaiva  gopanaiii  kapotani  mafiobam  eva  oha1 
Nivram  ifcy-evam  Skbyatam  prastarasya  dvijottamSb  II 
Prastara  (entablature)  oompared  with . base,  pillar,  tower 
(karna),  finial  Or  dome  (tekhara) : 

PadSyamam  adhishthanaih  dvi-guuaih  BarYa-saihmatam:  I 
Padardham  prastaram  proktam  karnam  prastara  vat  samam  II 
Prastara-dvi-gunayamam  tekharam  hi  tarn  )iohyate  !! 

Prastarad  urdhva-bhage  tu  karna-kflta-samayutam  II 

(Ibid.  XXXI.  28-30). 

(2)  Vedikam  prastara-samam  shad-amtikiitya  bhagatah  I 

(Vaatuvidya,  ed.  Q-anapati  ^astri,  ix.  23). 
Sva-sva-yonya  gfihadinam  kartavya  dv5ra-yonayah  I 
Prastarottarayor  madhyam  paftohadha  vibhajed  budhah  II 

(Ibid.  XIII.  26,  see  also  28). 

(3)  praataraih  oha  tatab  tyipu  I 

Prastarotaedha-manam  tu  pahoha-bhaga-vibhajitam  li 
Tri-bhagaih  uttarotsedham  padonottara-vSjanam  \ 
Eka-bhagam  tad-hrdhve  tu  kartavya  padma-pattika  it 
(I-aja-trepijh  rofiga-trenlm  prastarSnteshu  yojayet  I 
Evam  prastaram  akhyatam  talam  prati  viteshatah  II 

(SuprabhedSgama,  xxxi.  72,  73,  74,  see 
also  v.  68-71,  under  Torana). 

(4)  MSnasara  (ohap,  xvi.  named  Prastara) ; 

The  height  of  the  entablature  as  compared  with  that  of  the 
base  is  of  six  kinds  (line  4).  The  former  may  be  equal  to  the 
latter,  or  less  by  I-,  or  greater  by  4,  f ; or  twice  (2-3)  j or 
in  cubit  measurement,  these  six  kinds  of  height  of  the 
entablature  begin  with  7 cubits  and  end  in  4^  cubits,  the 
decrement  being,  by  ^ cubit  (5-6)*.  These  six  kinds  of 
entablatures  axe. respotively  employed  in  the  houses  of  the 
Gods,.the  Brahmins,  the  King  or  Kshatriyas,  the  Grown 
Princes,  the  Vaityas,and,  the  Madras  (8-9). 


378 


PBASTABA 


The  height  of  the  eiitabiature  as  oompared  with  that  of  the 
oplumn  may  be  half,  three-fourthi,  equal,  or  greater  by  J, 
and  f (10-12).  These  six  heights  of  entablature  should 
discreetly  be  employed  (13),  Another  set  of  six  heights  is 
also  prescribed : the  height  of  the  pillar  being  diyided  into 
8 parts,  7,  6,  6, 4, 3,  2,  may  be  given  to  that  of  the  entabla- 
ture, 

These  entablatures  are  divided  into  eight  or  rather  nine  classes, 
the  details  of  which  are  given  below ; 


I,  31  parts  (ibid,  lines  22-29) ; 

(1)  Uttara  (fillet)  ....  ....  31 

(2)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  1 

(3)  Valabhi(-bhi)  (roof,  capital)  „„  4 

(4)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  l|t 

(6)  Uttara  (fillet)  ....  3 

(6)  Vajana  (fiUet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(7)  Kshudra-padma  (small  oyma)  1 

(8)  MahS-padma  (large  cyma)  ....  ...  3 

(9)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  „„  1 

(10)  Kapota  (corona) ....  ....  .7 

(11)  llinga  (fillet)  ....  „„  1 

(12)  Antarita  (fillet)  ....  ....  4 

(13)  Prastara  (ovolo) ....  ....  2 ' 

(14)  Vajana  (fillet)  1^ 


The  projections  of  these  mouldings  are  in  most  oases 
equal  to  them ; but  in  some  oases  they  may  be  4,  or 


4 of  them. 

II.  31  p^rts  (ibid,  lines  59-71)  : 

(1)  Uttara  (fillet)  ....  ....  3 

(2)  Hampa  (fillet)  „„  „„  1 

(3)  ValabM  (roof,  capital)  1 

(4)  Abja  (oyma)  „„  ....  9 

(5)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  4 

(6)  Musb|i-bandha  (band)  „„  ....  24  (?2) 


mSTAEA 


879 


(7)  Yajana  (flllets) 

...  i 

(8)  Mi'inalika  (stalk) 

2 

(9)  Kandhara  (dado).,.. 

....  1 

(.10)  Kshepana  (projection) 

....  1 

(11)  Padma  (oyma)  ....  .... 

....  1 

(12)  VSjana  (fillet) 

....  1 

(IS)  JudhSra  (base)  ..., 

1 

(14)  Patta  (band) 

....  1 

(Id)  Yajana  (fillet)  ....  .... 

....  i 

(16)  Mnshfei-bandha  (band) 

....  li 

(17)  Ysjana  (fillet) 

....  1 

(18)  Maba-vSjana  (large  fillet) 

....  2 

(19)  Abja(oynia) 

....  1 

III,  36  parts  (ibid,  lines  72-77) : 

(1)  Base,  etc.,  should  be  as  before 

....  V 

(2)  Alinga  (fillet) 

....  2 

(3)  Yajana  (fillet) 

....  1 

(4)  Antarita  (fillet)  .... 

....  3 

(6)  Kampa  .... 

1 

(6)  Prati  (-yajana)  (eayetto) 

....  2 

(7)  Yajana  (fillet) 

....  1 

lY.  30  parts  (ibid,  lines  78-88) : 

(1)  mtara  (fiUet) 

....  3 

(2>  Kampa  (fillet) 

....  1 

(3)  YalabM  (roof,  oapital) 

....  2 

(4)  Yijana  (ffllet) 

....  1 

{$)  Kapota  (corona) 

f»,»  d 

(6)  Alifiga  (fillet) 

1 

(7)  Antarita  (fillet) 

....  2 

(8)  lilinina  (dripj  •,.> 

....  i 

(9)  Prati-yajana  (oavetto) 

■ li 

(10)  Kandhara  (dado),,., 

....  2 

(11)  Tajan*  .... 

....  1 

380 


PEASTARA 


(12)  Griha  (?  griva,  dado)  .... 

2 

(13)  Vajana  (fillet) 

1 

(14)  Kapota  (corona)  .... 

4 

(16)  Alinga  (fillet) 

h 

(16)  Antarita  (fillet)  .... 

1 

(17)  Nimna  (drip)  ....  .... 

1 

(18)  Prastara  (ovolo)  ....  .... 

1 

V.  30  parts  (ibid,  lines  89-99) : 

(1)  Mula  (base) 

as  before. 

(2)  Gopana  (beam)  .... 

as  before. 

(3)  Vajana  (fillet)  .... 

2 

(4)  Kulikanghri  (main  pillar) 

6 

(This  part  is  furnished  with  Na^aka). 

(5)  Nataka  (theatre,  quadrangular  part)  ... 

as  before. 

(6)  Kapota  (corona).... 

as  before. 

(7)  Kshudra-nasi  (small  hose  or  vestibule)  .... 

as  before. 

The  rest  as  before. 


This  entablature  is  decorated  all  over  with  crocodiles 
and  bees  (makara  and  bhramara,  94-9d). 


VI.  26  parts  (ibid,  lines  100-109) : 

(1)  XJttara  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  S 

(2)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(3)  Padma  (cyma)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(4)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(6)  Mushti-bandha  (band)  ....  ...,  2 

(6)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  1 

(7)  Myinalika  (stalk)....  ....  ....  3 

(8)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ...,  1 

(9)  Pattika  (band)  ....  ....  4 

(10)  Vajana  (fillet)  ....  ....  ....  1 

(11)  Kampa  (fillet)  ....  ....  | 

(12)  Padma  (cyma)  ...^  1 


mastaba 


.381 


(15)  Vajana  (fillefe) 

(14)  Kapota  (corona)  .... 

(16)  Alinga  (fillet) 

(16)  Vajana  (fiUet)  .... 

(17)  Antarita  (fiUet)  .... 

(18)  Prati-vajana  (cavetto) 

¥11.  26  parts  (ibid,  lines  110-116)  : 

(1)  Nafcaka  (theatre,  quadrangular  part) 

(2)  Upper  columns  .... 

(3)  Lower  columns  .... 

Above  these,  all  the  members  are  same  as  before  except  that 
their  projections  are  half  or  one-fourth  of  them,  or  their 
projections  may  be  one,  two,  or  three  dapdas. 

The  images  of  Bhutas  (imps),  Granas  (attendant  demigods  of 
Ganefea),  Yakshas  (attendant  demigods  of  Kubera),  Vidyadha- 
ras  (semi-divine  beings),  or  of  men  are  carved  in  the  Naijaka 
(crowning  or  capital)  parts  of  temples.  In  the  corresponding 
parts  of  the  palaces,  the  images  of  Yakshas  and  Yidyadharas 
are  carved ; in  all  other  residential  buildings,  the  human 
figures  are  made  in  the  Nataka  (cowning)  parts.  All  the 
Mushti-bandhaa  (fish  bands)  are  made  straight  with  the 
columns.  The  rest  should  be  as  before, 

YIII.  26  parts  (ibid,  lines  117  f.) : 

(1)  Kapota  (corona)  ,...  ....  ....  8 more 

(2)  Nataka  (theatre,  quadrangular  part)  ....  8 more 
The  rest  should  be  as  before. 

IX  34  parts  (ibid,  lines  117-119) : 

N ataka  (theatre,  quadrangular  part)  8 parts  more  and 
the  rest  should  be  as  before. 


4 

I 

1 

1 

...  as  before. 

as  before. 
...  as  before. 


PBAS1?AEA 


With  these  may  be  compared  the  details  of  the  early  European 
entablature : 

The  height  of  the  entablatures  of  the  different  orders  : 

(1)  In  the  Tuscan  order,  ^of  7=lf  diameters. 

(2)  In  the  Doric  order,  of  8 = 2 diameters. 

(3)  In  the  Ionic  order,  i of  9^==  21  diameters. 

(4)  In  the  Corinthian  order,  ^ of  10=2^  diameters. 

(5)  In  the  Composite  order,  | of  11  «■’  2|  diameters. 

According  to  Vitruvius  both  to  the  Corinthian  and  the  Com- 
posite ten  parts  are  given. 

Entablature  is  fourth  part  of  the  column.  “In  general  terms, 
its  sub-divisions  of  architrave,  frieze,  and  cornice  are 
obtained  by  dividing  its  height  into  ten  equal  parts,  whereof 
three  are  given  to  architrave,  three  to  frieze,  and  four  to 
cornice ; except  in  the  Eoman  Doric  order  in  which  the 
whole  height  of  the  entablature  is  divided  into  eight  parts 
of  which  two  are  given  to  the  architrave,  three  to  the  frieze, 
and  three  to  the  cornice.” 

“ From  these  general  proportions  variations  have  been  made 
by  different  masters,  but  not  so  great  as  to  call  for  particular 
observation.”  (Gwilt,  Bncyol.  Arch.  art.  2542,  2543,  2549). 


f Cymtinum 
and  parts 


Cornice  16 


Htighfc  in  parts 
of  a Modale 

projaotion  from  the  axis 
of  oolnmn  in  parts  of  a 
Module 

Encyol.  art.  2656)  : 
f(l)  Quarter  round 

4 

27i 

■!  (2)  Asragal 

i 

1(3)  Fillet 

281 

(4)  Congd  or  ca- 
vetto 

1 

22i 

(6)  Corona 

5 

22i 

i (6)  Drip  .... 

1 

24 

(7)  Sinking  from 
corona  or  hollow 

i 

19| 

^(8)  FiUet 

14 

PJtASTABA 


Eutablatuze 

Height  in  parts 
of  a Module 

FrojeotiOtt  from  the  axis 
of  oolomn  in  parts  of  a 
Module 

Bed  Moulding  (9)  Ogee  ....  4 

Frieze 

14  parts 

1 

1^(10)  Frieze  ....  14 

9| 

r ....Fillet 

.(11)  Fillet  or  listel  2 

HI 

Architrave 

1 

1 (12)  Cong^  or  small 

12  parts 

1 Foiaas,.., 

I * oavetto  ...  2 

[ 

1(13)  Fascia  8 

9| 

The  height  of  the  drip  under  the  corona  is  taken  on  that  member, 
and  that  of  the  hollow  in  the  neight  of  the  fillet. 


II.  Doric  (Gwilt,  Bncycl.  art.  2664,2562) : 


EntabaUliuje 


Height  in  parts 
of  a Module 


Projection  from  the  axis 
of  oolumn  in  parts  of  a 
V odule 


Cornice 
18  parts 


Frieze  18 
parts 


Architrave 
10  parts 


(1)  Fillet  of  corona 

1 

34 

(2)  Oavetto 

3 

31 

(3)  Fillet 

1 

26 

(4)  Cyma  reversa 

1| 

30 

(5)  Corona 

4 

281 

(6)  Drip 

1 

27| 

(7)  Fillet 

1 

26 

(8)  Gntta  under  the  corona 

i 

24| 

(9)  Dentil 

3 

16 

(10)  Fillet 

1 

13 

(11)  Cyma  reversa  ...% 

2 

12| 

^(l2)  Capital  of  triglyph 

2 

11 

KIS)  Triglyph 

18 

10| 

[(14)  Metope 

18 

10 

(16)  Listel 

2 

HI 

(16)  Capital  of  guttae 

1 

11 

(17)  Gnttae 

11 

11 

.(18)  Fascia 

10 

10 

pbastaba 


TT  - Projections  frcm  the  axis 

parts  ^ 

Modulo  Module 


Mufeular  Doric  : 


Frieze  18 
parts 


^ (1)  Fillet  of  the  corona  — 

1 

34 

(2)  Cyma 

3 

31 

(3)  Fillet  .... 

h 

31 

(4)  Cyma  reversa 

1 

30| 

(5)  Corona 

H 

30 

(6)  Cyma  reversa 

1 

29| 

(7)  Mutule 

3 

28i 

(8)  Drip 

1 

28 

(9)  Gutta  of  the  mutule 

26 

(10)  Echinus  or  quarter  round 

2 

134 

(11)  Fillet 

h 

114 

,(12)  Capital  of  triglyph 

2 

• 11 

(13)  Triglyph  .... 

18 

io.i 

(14)  Metope  ....  .... 

18 

10 

(IS)  Listel  .... 

2 

12 

(16)  Capital  of  tEe  guttae 

114 

(17)  Guttae 

1^ 

114 

(18)  First  fascia  .... 

6 

104 

^ (19)  Second  fascia 

4 

10 

Grecian  Doric  (Parthenon),  (ibid  art.  2679)  : 

^ (1)  Fillet  ....  ....  0-60 

(2)  Echinus  ....  ....  3*12 

(3)  Fillet,  with  sunk  cyma 

reversa  ....  ....  2*20 

Gornices  J (4)  Corona  ....  ....  4*88 

16-12  (5)  ....  ....  1*10 

^ (6)  Capitals  of. mutules  ....  1*10 

(7)  Mutules  ....  0*32 

(8)  Bead  and  capital  of 

triglyph  ..b.  ....  2*0C 


11*46 


fEAfeTAEA 


S86 


Heighb  in  parts 

BaUb«latace  of  a Module  and 

Projaotioa  from  axis  of 
column  in  parts  of  a 

Frieze  14*88 

(9)  Frieze  (in  metope) 

Deoimals 

16*12 

Module 

parts 

(10)  Triglyph 

14*88 

11*40 

^(11)  Fillet 

1*60 

12*60 

Architrave 

(l2)  Cap  of  guttae 

1*00 

12*40 

17*10 

1 (13)  G-uttae 

0*20 

parts  1 

[ (14)  Architrave  below  guttae 

14*40 

11*20 

III.  3 

hnic  (Gwilt,  Bncycl.  art.  2673,  2681) : 

Cornice  34  J 
parts  S 


Frieze  27 
parts 


Architrave 
22|  parts 


(1)  Fillet  of  cyma 

li 

46 

(2)  Cyma  recta 

6 

(3)  Fillet 

J 

41 

(4)  Cyma  reversa 

2 

404 

(6)  Corona  .... 

6 

384 

(6)  Fillet  of  the  drip 

1 

294 

(7)  Ovolo  ....  . .... 

4 

28i 

(8)  Astragal 

1 

25 

(9)  Fillet 

h 

244 

(10)  Dentel  fillet.... 

21 

(11)  Dentels 

6 

24 

(12)  Fillet 

1 

20 

'(13)  Cyma  reversa 

4 

194 

(14)  Frieze 

27 

16 

f (15)  Listol 

n 

20 

(16)  Cyma  reversa 

3 

19| 

(17)  First  fascia  ....  .... 

17 

J (18)  Second  fascia 

6 

16 

1 (19)  Third  fascia 

44 

16 

(20)  Capital  on  the  side 

19 

20 

(21)  Capital  on  the  coussinet 

m 

or  cushion.... 

16 

25 


386 


PRASTABA 


Grecian  Ionic  (in  the  Temple  on  the  Ilyssus)  : 


Pro  jeotioQ  from  the  axis 
of  oolumrt  in  parts  of  a 
Module 


Cornice, 

supposed 

height 

18-33 

parts 


parts 


83*66 

parts 


rv. 


Oomioe  38 
parts  ' 


(1)  Fillet 

....  restored 

restored. 

(2)  Gyma  recta 

....  ,, 

„ 

(3)  Fillet 

....  „ 

„ 

(4)  Eohinns  .... 

....  2*040 

30-440 

(5)  Corona  .... 

....  6-240 

33-960 

(6)  Drip 

....  4*680 

(7)  Oyma  reversa 

....  2-700 

20*620 

(8)  Fillet 

....  0*720 

(9)  Echinus  .... 

....  1*260 

18-360 

(10)  Frieze 

....  29*901 

17-400 

(11)  Fillet 

....  1-920 

30-620 

(12)  Echinus  .... 

....  2*520 

20*100 

(13)  Bead 

....  1-200 

17-880 

(14)  Fascia 

....  27-600 

17-160 

)iinthian  (Gwilt,  Encycl. 

art.  2683)  ; 

' (1)  Fillet  of  cornice 

1 

63 

(2)  Cyma  recta .... 

6 

63 

(3)  FiUet 

48 

(4)  Oyma  reversa 

....  Ih 

46^ 

(5)  Corona 

6 

46 

(6)  Cyma  reversa 

....  u 

464 

(7)  Modillion  .... 

6 

44i 

(8)  Fillet  (remainder  of  modil- 

lion  band).... 

....  i 

281 

(9)  Ovolo 

4 

28 

(10)  Bead 

1 

25 

(11)  Fillet 

i 

244 

(12)  Dentils 

6 

24 

(13).  Fillet 

4 

20 

(14)  Hollow  or  Cong4 

....  3 

19| 

peastaea 


Height  in  parts  Frojeotion  from  tie  aria 
nf  ftMniinio  column  in  part®  Of  8 


Frieze  1 ) 

mod.  7|  > (15)  Frieze 
park  ) 

(16)  Fillet 

(17)  Oyma  reversa 

(18)  Bead 

Ardiitraye  ) (l9)  First  fascia  .... 

27  parts  (go)  Oyma  reversa 
^21)  Second  fascia 
(22)  Bead 

^ (23)  Third  fascia.... 

V.  Composite  (G-wilt,  Bnoycl.  2691) 

(1)  Fillet  of  cornice 

(2)  Oyma  recta  .... 

(3)  Fillet 

(4)  Cyma  reversa 

(5)  Bead 

Cornice  36  (6)  Corona 

parts  Cyma  under  corona 

(8)  Fillet 

(9)  Cyma  reversa 

(10)  Fillet  of  the  dentils 

(11)  Dentils 

(12)  Fillet 

(13)  Ovolo  .... 

/ (14)  Bead 

(16)  Fillet 

Me.e27  •- 

^ (17)  Upright  face 

I (18)  Apophyge  .... 


Frieze  27 
parts 


PEAVBSA 


Entablature. 


Height  in  parts 
of  a Module 


Projection  from  axis 
of  a column  in  parts 
of  a Module 


(19)  Fillet 

(20)  Oavetto 

(21)  Ovolo 

(22)  Bead 

(23)  First  fascia  ... 

(24)  Oymareversa 

(25)  Second  fascia 


22 

20| 

20 

17| 

17 

16| 

16 


From  the  details  given  above  it  would  be  clear  that  both  the 
Indian  and  European  entablatures  have  much  similarity  in  their 
composition  and  relative  proportion.  In  the  words  of  Ram  Ba25, 

“ the  massiveness  of  the  Indian  entablature  offers  a striking  con- 
trast to  the  lightness  of  the  G-recian ; but  the  richness  of  the 
former  may  be  said  to  be  unrivalled.”  (Ess.  Arch,  of  Hind.  p.  40, 
also  see  plate  xix.  figs.  1-4). 

PRAVB^A — The  front  door,  the  gate,  the  entrance. 

Praveta-nirgama-sthane  dvarair  api  samanvitam  \ 

(M.  X.  107,  see  also  xxxiii.  636). 

PEAKARA — A wall,  an  enclosure,  a fence,  a rampart,  a surrounding 
wall  elevated  on  a motmd  of  earth.  In  the  ^arikhayana  Sranta 
Sutra  (xvi.  18,  14  quoted  below)  it  denotes  a walled  mound 
supporting  a raised  platform  (prasada)  for  spectators.  But  in  the 
Manasara  it  is  used  in  a slightly  different  sense  and  implies  the 
fourth  of  the  five  courts  into  which  the  compound  of  a house  is 
divided. 

(1)  Manasara  (chap.  xxxi.  named  Prakara,  1-134)  : 

The  uses  of  the  Prakaras  : 

They  are  built  for  bala  (strength),  parivara  (attendant  deity), 
tobha  (beauty),  and  rakshana  (defence) : 

Balartham  parivarartham  tobharfcham  rakshanarthakam  \ 

Pancha-prakara-harmy%am  adhuna  vakshyate  kramat  \ 1-2 


peakXea 


m 


The  whole  oompouiid  of  a house  or  temple  is  divided  into  five 
courts.  The  first  one  is  called  the  Antar«man.dala  or  the 
innermost  court  (lina  11).  The  second  is  known  as  Antar- 
nihara  and  the  third  as  Madhyama-hara  (12).  The  fourth 
court  is  technically  named  Prakara  (12).  The  fifth  and  last 
one  is  known  as  the  Maha-maryada  or  the  extreme -^boundary 
where  the  large-gate  houses  (gopuras)  are  constructed  (14). 
As  the  name  of  the  chapter  (Prakara-lakshana,  description  of 
Prakara)  indicates,  the  greater  part  of  it  describes  only  the 
fouth  court.  (16-102).  Prakaras  are  also  divided  into  the 
Jati,  Chhanda-  Vikalpa,  (Abhasa)  and  Kamya  classes  (3-6), 
Under  each  class  a number  of  buildings  (talas)  are  exhaus- 
tively described  (6-86). 

A further  classification  (Samkirna,  etc.)  is  made  with  regard  to 
materials  of  which  these  Prakara-buildings  are  made  (103). 
The  materials  are  same  as  in  other  oases,  namely,  stone,  brick 
and  wood  (102).  The  G-bpura  or  gate-house  of  the  first 
court  (antar-mandala)  is  technically  called  Dvara-feobha  or 
beauty  of  the  gate  ; and  those  of  the  second,  third,  fourth 
and  fifth  court  are  called  respectively  Dvara-tala,  Uvara- 
prasada,  Dvara-harmya,  and  Maha-gopura  (Ibid,  xxxiil.  9). 

(2)  Suprabhedagama,  chap,  xxxi ; 

Five  courts  or  enclosure-buildings  : 

Prakaranam  paritam  kuryat  prasadasya  pramanatah  \ 

Bhumau  vinyasya  vistaram  prasadasya  su-nifeohitam  il  116 
Prasadasya  tu  vistaram  tasya  dandam  ihoohyate  \ 


Bapidat  tena  kritam  yatra  tv-antarmala-samaiva  hi  II 116 
Eka-dajidantar-bhara  tu  madhya  bhara  dvi-dandatah  \ 
Ohatur-danda-pjramanena  kyitva  ma(r)yyadi-bhittikam  II  117 
Maha-ma(r)yyadi-bhittih  syat  sapra-dapda-pramaiiatah  \ 
Prishthe  chaiTagrato’  py-ardham  dvi-gunam  tri-gunana  tu  va  II 

m 


390 


peAkIea 


Ohatur-gunam  mukli5yamam  prakaranam  vileshatah  t 
Kapotautam  samutsedham  hasfca-vistara-bhifetikam  II  119 
Kuta4ala-yutam  vapi  kuta4alaiitam  eva  oha  I 
Prakarepia  samayuktam  gopurasya  vidhiyate  II  120 
Mandale  dvarake:vatha  dvara-&alam  tu  bbarake  \ 

Prasadam  madbya-bbarayam  ma(r)yyadau  barmy  am  eva  oba  II 

121 

G-opuram  tu  maba-madiiye  evam  pancha-vidbi  smritam  I 
Cbatur-diksbu  oba  samyojyab  prakaranam  pyitbak  pritbak  II 

122 

Keobid  vai  malikakSra  keobid  vai  gopurakyitih  \ 

Of,  The  measuremenii  of  fcbe  five  gafee-bouses  (goptiras)  of  tbe 
five  prakaras : 

Vistaram  dvara  §obbaya  dvi-tri-panoba-karam  bbavefc  II  123 
Sbat  saptaabfea-nava-karair  dvara-&ala  prakirtitita  I 
Eka-da&a-trayo-da&a-bastam  (dvara)-prasada-vistritam  II  124 
Cbatur-da&a-panoba-daba-dvara-barmyam  iti  smyitam  \ 
Eka-vim&as  trayo-vim&a  dvara-gopuram  uobyate  11  125 
Tbeir  beigbt  as  compared  with  length  and  breadth  : 
Vistara-dvi-gnnayamain  ayama-dvi-gnnioobobbrayam  I 
Bbaiimordbvottara-simantain  dvarasyoobobbraya-laksbanam  II 

’ 126 

Tad-ardham  vistaram  proktam(m)  alankaram  vimanavat  \ 
Prakara-bhittim  asritya  kuryad  avrita-mandapam  II  127 
Tad-babye’bbyantare  vapi  malika-manclapam  hi  va  I 
Panoba-prakaram  evam  syat  parivaralayam  ferinn  II  128 
Then  follows  tbe  description  of  tbe  temples  of  tbe  attendant 
deities  (v.  129  f).  These  buildings  are  built  in  the  five 
prakaras  (see  under  Parivaralaya). 

(3}  l§ankby5yana-l^rauta-&utra  (xvi.  18, 13,  14,  Bibliotheca  Indica, 
voL  I.  p.  210) : 

Samstbite  madbyame’hany-ahavaniyam  abbito  dikshu  prasa- 

dan  viminvanti  II  13 

T&n  uparisbtat  samvyadbaib  prakaraih  parigbnanti  l|  14 


PBlKAEA 


S91 


(4)  Matsya-Purana  (ohap.  269,  v.  24)  : 

Prag-griTah  pafioha-bliageiia  iiislika3(§)a3  tasya  ohoohyate  \ 
Karayet  suslairam  tadvat  prakarasya  tri-bhagatah  II 

(6)  Agni-Purana  (obap.  42.  v.  8, 12) : 

Tatha  prakara-vinyaae  ya|ed  dva-triih&ad  antagan  II 
Prasadaaya  ohatiirtham&aih  prakaiasyoobobbrayo  bbavet  II 
Ibid.  chap.  106,  v.  1-2 : 

Nagaradika-vastum  cha  vakabye  rajyadi-vyiddbaye  I 
Yojana-yojanarddham  va  tad-arfcbam  sthanam  a&rayet  11 
Abbyaroba  vasfeu-nagaram  prakaradyam  tii  karayet  II 
In  tbis  instance  prakara  indicates  the  whole  city  wall. 

(6)  G-aruda-Purana  (obap.  46,  V.  19)  : 

Prakaram  tad-bahir  dadyat  panoha-basta-pramanatah  | 

(7)  Brabbmanda-Purana  (part  I,  2nd  Annsbamga-pada,  obap.  7, 

V.  103) : 

Qotsedba-rariidra-prakaram  sarvatab  kbatakavfitam  I 

(8)  Kan^iliya-Artbatastra  (obap.  xxiy.  pp.  62,  63,  64) : 
Vaprasyopari  prakaram  visbkambba-dvi-gunotaedbam 

aisbtakam  dva-da&a-bastSd  nrdbvam  ojam  yi^mam  va 
aobatur-vimtati-bastad  iti  karayet  \ 

Antaresbn  dvi-basta-visbkambbam  pSrtve  obatur-gunayamam 
anuprakaram  asb$a-ba8t0yataih  deva-patham  karayet  \ 
Prakaram  ubbayato  mandalakam  adbyardba-dandarh  kyitvS 
pratoli-sba^-lulantaram  dvaram  nivetayet  I 
Prakara-samam  mnkbam  avastbapya  tri-bbaga-godha-mukbam 
gopuram  karayet  I 

Prakara-madbye  kritva  vapim  pusbkarinim I 

(9)  Eamliyana  (Oook) : 

VI.  3,  14 : Sauvarnat  cha  mabams  tasyah  prakaro  dusb- 

pradbarsbanab  ( 

Mani-vidruma-vaidiirya-mukta-viraobitantarahll 

VII.  6,  29  : Dpidba-prakara-parikbam lankam  \ 

V.  66,  32  : Lanka  atta-prakara-torana  \ 


892 


PR5.KAEA 


V.  3,  6 : (ptirini)....&ata-kuiabhena  mahata  prakarenabhisam- 

Yritam  \ 

IV,  31,  27;  V.  2.  16:  KafiLchanenaviritam  prakarena  maba- 

purim  \ 

III.  48, 11 ; (Lanka-nama  puri  Subha)....prakarena-parikship- 

ta  pandurena  \ 

See  also  t.  3,  7,  33 ; v.  4.  2 ; v.  37,  39  ; V.  55,  32  ; Vi.  3,  29 ; Vi. 
3,  32 ; VI.  24,  34 ; vi.  25,. 24 ; vi.  25,  30 ; vi.  26, 12  ; VI.  38, 10, 
11 ; VI.  31,  56,  98  ^ Vl.  42,  15,  21,  22,  45,  46  ; VI.  51,  8,  10 ; 
VI.  60,  15 ; VI.  65,  53 ; VI.  66,  1 ; VI.  67, 169 ; Vli.  3,  27;  vii. 
5,  25 ; VII.  38,  37. 

(10)  Mahabbarata  (ibid)  : 

I.  207,  30;  Prakarena  cha  Bampaiinain........(pura-&resb^bam)  \ 

II.  80,  80 : Prakarafcplakesbn  \ 

III.  160,  38  f : (Vai&ravapavasam).....,. .prakarena  pariksbip- 

tam  \ 

Sauvarnena  samantatah  sarva-ratna-dyutimatS  \ 
III.  200,  90  ; 207,  7 : (Mitbilam)... barmy a-prakara-feobbanam  \ 
See  also  III.  284,  2 ; IV.  11, 1;  v.  143,  23;  vm.  33,  19;  xii. 
86,  6 ; XV.  5, 16 ; xvi,  6,  24. 

(11)  “ This  insoripfcion  (Eanganafcba  Insorip.  of  Sundarapandya) 
was  discovered  on  tbe  east  wall  of  tbe  econd  prakara  of  tbe 
temple. 

“ Inscription  on  tbe  north  wall  of  tbe  fourth  prakara  of 
the  Ranganatba  temple  at  ferangam.  ” 

“ Inscription  on  tbe  west  wall  of  tjie  second  prSkara  of  tbe 
Jambnketvara  temple.” 

“ Inscription  on  tbe  south  wall  of  the  second  prakara  of  the 
Ranganatha  temple.” 

” Inscription  in  the  south-west  comer  of  tbe  third  prakara  of 
the  same  temple.  ” 

(Ranganatha  Insorip,  of  Sundarapandya,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol,  iri.  pp.  7,9,10). 


peakaea 


(12)  THs  insoiiption  (JambnkefeYara  Inscrip.  of  Valaka-Kamaya) 

is  engraved  on  the  north  wall  of  the  , prakSra  of  the 

^aiva  temple  of  Jamhuke&vara  on  the  island  of  the  l§rirarigam 
near  Triohinopoly.  ’’  (Ep.  Ind.,  vol.  m.  p.  72). 

(13)  " This  6-rantha  Inserip.  is  engraved  on  the  north  wall  of  the 

jirst  prakara  of  the  Adipnritvara  temple  at  Tiruvattiytir 
near  Hadras.”  (Ep.  Ind.  vol.  v.  p.  106). 

(14)  " Eanganatha  Ihsorip.  of  Eavivarman  of  Kerala  ” is  on  the 

north  wall  of  the  second  prakara  of  the  temple  of  Eanganatha 
(Tishpu)  on  the  island  of  i^riraGgam.” 

(Ep.  Ind.  vol.  IV.  p.  148). 

(15)  ^ilaprakara — anenolosnre  of  stone  for  the  temples  of  Knnti 

Madhava  and  Bhimetvara. 

(Pithapnrm  Pillar  Inscrip.  line  11,  second  Braksha- 
rama  Pillar  Inscrip.  line  13-11,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  iv. 

pp.  329,  330). 

(16)  Bnrggam  oha  Tamra-flagarim  abhito  vyadhatta  Prakaram 

umnatara  udamohita-gopnram  sah—"  he  surrounded  the 
Tamra  nagari  with  a wall  surmounted  by  towers. 

(Ghebrolu  Inscrip.  of  Jaya,  v.  27,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  V. 

pp.  147, 149). 

(17)  Mata-kuta-prakara-khanda  - sphutita-jirnnodharakham — for 

the  repairs  of  whatever  might  become  broken  or  torn  or  worn- 
out  belonging  to  the  enclosure  ” (“  the  more  usual  expression 
here  would  be  Prasada  ” Br.  Fleet  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  v.  p.  249® 
note  6). 

(fnsorip.  at  Ablur,  no.  B,  lines  59,  75,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  v. 

pp.  249,  257,250,268). 

(18)  Kimjalpitena  bahuna  gravarprakara-valaya-bahyam  iha  \ 

(Badag  Inscrip.  of  Vira-Ballala  li,  v.  47,  Bp.  Ind. 

’ voL  VI.  p.  97). 

(19)  Prakaram  atyunnatajh-^-a  very  high  wall. 

(Hahgalagiii  Pillar  Inscrip.  v.  dt,  Ep.  Ind.  voL  Vl. 

pp.  124, 126). 


394 


mkKA.Bk 

(20)  Prakar&ih  patitaia  samyak  parikhah  pariparyya  yak  \ 
Pradiivasaih  ripu-durggapam  prag-bkaya-samaTh  Tyadkat  \ 

(Two  pillar  InseBip.  at  Amarayati,  no.  A,  Insorip.  of 
Keta  II,  V.  19,  Ep.  Ikd.  vi.  p.  160). 

(21)  I ha  vijayina  prSkara-ferir  mmakopala-nirmmita  jala-dhara- 

gatir  afcy-aty-urma  niroddhnm  ivoddkata  1 

(Two  Bhnvane&vara  Insorip.  no.  A,  of  Svapne&vara, 
y.  24,  Ep.  Ind.  Yol.  vx.  p.  202). 

(22)  Gopnra-prakarotsaya-manitapair  upackitam  1 

(Kondayidn  Insorip.  of  Krishnaraya,  y.  27,  line  118, 
Ep.  Ind.  yol.  vi.  pp.  237,  231,  232). 

(23)  Mahamandapam  prakaram  para-malikavilasitam  muktamayim 

oka  prapa(bha)ni  \ 

(Eourteen  Insorip.  at  Tirukkovalnr,  no.  K,  lines  1-2, 
Bp.  Ind.  yol.  vii.  pp.  116-6). 

(24)  Prakarak  Kanakaokale  yiraokifcak — built  extenaiye  ramparts 

on  the  Kanakaohala  (the  name  of  the  fort  of  lalar,  Mr. 
Ojha).  Prof.  Kielkorn. 

(The  Okahamanas  of  Naddula,  no.  0,  Sundka  kill 
Insorip.  of  Ohaokigadeya,  y.  38,  Bp.  Ind.  yol.  ix. 

pp.  77,  73),. 

(26)  Paritah  pranayakara-pra(pra)kara  yalayamokitam — “encircled 
by  a wall  of  the  shape  of  the  pranaya.” 

(Kyiskpapuram  plates  of  Sadasiyaraya,  v.  66,  Ep. 

Ind.  yol.  IX.  pp,  336,  341). 

(26)  “ There  are  seyeral  similar  inscriptions  in  the  outer  wall  of 

the  (Velur)  teinple,  yiz.,  two  on  the  pedestal  of  the  two 
dvara-palakas  in  front  of  the  gopura,  one  on  the  left  outer 
wall  of  the  inner  prakara ” (H,  S.  I I.  yol.  i.  p.  127). 

(27)  “ This  insoription  (no.  86,  H.  S.  1. 1.  yol.  iii)  is  engrayed  on 
the  right  of  the  entrance  into  the  east  wall  of  the  prakara  of 
the  Vamana-purityara  temple  at  TirumSnikuli  in  the  Cudda- 
lore  Taluka  of  the  South  Aroot  district.  ” 

(H.  S.  1. 1.  yol.  in.  p.  209). 


PEAKAEA 


396 


(28)  “ This  inscription  (H.  S.  1. 1,  vol.  in,  no.  88)  is  engraved  on 
the  left  of  the  entrance  to  the  north  wall  of  the  fourth  prakSra 
of  the  Eanganatha  temple  on  the  island  of  ^rirahgam  near 
Trichinopoly.  ” 

(H.  S,  1.  L,  vol.  ra.  p.  217). 

(29)  “For  this  Prasanna-YirupaMha,  a temple,  enclosing  wall 
(prakara),  gopnra,  finial  potered  with  gold,  and  a Manmatha 
tank  were  eonstmoted.” 

(Bp.  Carnat,  vol.  x.  Mnlbagal  Talnq,  no.  2,  Eoman 
text,  p.  82,  Transl.  p.  71). 

(30)  Kafichipnra-prakarantarita-pratSpam  akarod  yah  PallavanSih 

patim— he  caused  the  leader  of  the  PaUavas .to  hide  his 

prowess  behind  the  ramparts  of  (the  city  of)  Kahchipnra.  ” 

(Sanskrit  and  Old  Kanarese  Inscrip.  no.  LV,  line  14, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  vm.  pp.  242,  246,  c.  1,  line  23  f). 

(31)  “ There  are  three  enclosures  (prakaras)  in  the  Tirave}layai 

temple,  the  first  two  being  studded  with  inscriptions.  ” 

(Notes  in  the  Tiruvellarai  .Inscrip.  Ind.  Ant.  vol. 

XXXIV,  p.  264,  para  6,  line  1 -2). 

(32)  “ The  stone  prakara  or  compound  wall  (of  the  Amritefevara 

temple  at  Amritapura  in  the  Tarikere  Taluq,  described  and 
illustrated  in  the  Mysore  Arohseological  Eeports  for  1911-12, 
pp.  24-26  and  frontispiece)  is  now  in  ruins.  It  had  on  the  top 
all  round  thick  stone  discs,  about.  6.J'  feet  in  diameter,  with 
rectangular  bases,-  both  in  one  piece,  the  outer  faces  being 
sculptured  with  fine  figures-  of  flowers, . animals,  gods,  etc.,  in 
relief The  prakara  must  have  once  presented  the  appe- 

arance of  a veritable  art -gallery,  seeing  that  the  artistically 
carved  figures  are  of  various  kinds  and  designs.  “ 

(V.  A,  Smith,  Architecture  and  Sculpture  in  Mysore, 
Ind.  z\nfc.  vol,  xliv.  p.  93,  para  6). 


PElG-ATA 


PEAG^ATA— A type  of  paviliona. 

(M,  xxliv.  410,.  see  un^er  Ma^^apa). 
PEANQ-ANA— (see  Angana)— The  court,  the  courtyard. 

(1)  KathS-sarit-sagara  (Pet.  Diet.)  ; 

59,  26  : Nyipasthana-prauganam  \ 

16,89;  Sa  prangana-dvara-kavatanta-vilambmi  1 

(2)  Hitopadeta  (2,  3,  etc.) : Tasya  prahgape  gardhabho  baddhas 
tishthati  kukkurat  ohopaYishtah  \ 

(3)  Eajatarahgini,  (1,247,  etc.)  : Prahganad  bahih  I 

(4)  See  the  first  Pratasti  of  Baijnath  (verse  34,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  I.  pp. 

107,111). 

(6)  Cl  Kalapriya  (name  of  the  god  and  temple  of  MahSkala  at 
Ujjain)-pranganam  tirnna  \ 

(Cambay  Plates  of  Govinda  iv,  v.  19i  Bp.  Ind. 

vol.  VII.  pp,  38,  29). 

PEADB^A-— (see  Angula)— The  distance  between  the  tips  of  the  fully 
atretohed  thumb  and  forefinger. 

(1)  DatatYa(?  alngula-parvapi  prade&a  iti  saxhjfiitah  )i 
Angushthasya  pradefeinya  vyasa-(h)  pradetauohyate  \ 

(Brahmanda  Purapa,  part  I,  2nd  Anushamga-pada, 
chap.  7,  V.  96,  97). 

(2)  Angushtha-taijani-yuktam  pradefeam  iti  kirtitam  \ 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxx,  21). 
PEASADA — A palace,  an  edifice,  a temple,  a.  platform,  a Buddhist 
assembly  or  confessional  hall. 

Harmyadi  dhaninam  vasah  pri^sado  deva-bhu-bhujam  1 

(Amarakosha,  n.  2,  9), 

(1)  Manasara : 

' Temple  : 

Prasada-mandapam  ohaiva  sabha-feala-prap5-(rii)  taths  1 
(A)rangam  iti  chaitani  harmyam  uktam(-  tani)  purStanaih  V 

(M.ni.'7-8>. 

Pr&sada-mandapam  tatha  varonadi-de&e  \ 

Safige  oha  gopura-pade  tv-apareshu  sarve  V 

(There  should  not  bb  any  defect).  (M,  Lxix.  70,  71). 


PEISADA 


397 


The  palace  of  a king  : 

Npipa-prasada-samynkta  (bhumih)  sama  ohaiijya-aamipaga  \ 

(M.IV.23). 

Palaces  are  elaborately  described  (M.  XLi.  1-61,  see  under  Ba|a- 

harmya). 

Buildings  in  general  (called  Vimana  in  the  Manasara  and 
Prasada  in  the  works  quoted-  below)  : 

The  general  description  (M.  xvni.  1-418) : 

They  are  used  as  residences  of  gods  and  men : 

Taitilanam  dvijafcinam  varnanam  vasa-yogyakam  \ (2). 

Their  sizes  (see  details  below) — from  one  to  twelve  storeys  : 
Eka-bhumi-vimanadi-ravi-bhumy-avasanakam  \ (3). 

Their  plans  (lines  12-91,  see  under  Vimana-lakshana). 

The  three  styles  and  their  characteristic  features  (92-106) 
are  given  under  Nagara,  Dravida  and  Vesara. 

The  description  of  the  towers  and  domes  (106-137,  see  under 

Stupi), 

The  building  materials  are  stone,  brick,  timber  and  iron  (138). 

I.  Three  classes  of  buildings— Suddha  or  pure,  made  of  one 

material  (lines  139, 140)1;  Mifera  or  mixed,  made  of  tWo 
materials  (139,  140) ; and  Samkirna  or  amalgamated, 
made  of  three  materials,  namely,  stone,  brick  and  timber 
(139,  141)  ; one  ma  terial  alone  is  especially  recom- 
mended (142). 

Description  of  the  Stupi-kila  which  comprises  all  the  parts 
above  the  Stupi  or  dome  is  given  in  detail  (146-417). 
Chap.  XIX  (named  Eka-bhum)  : 

The  classifications : 

II.  Eeferring  to  measurement,  in  accordance  with  the 

various  cubits— Jati  (lines  2, 3),  Ghhanda  (2,  4),  Vikalpa 
(2,  4),  and  Abhasa  (2,  6). 

III.  Sthanaka  referring  to  height  (7),  Asana  referring  to 
breadth  (8),  and  Sayana  referring  to  width  or  length  (9). 


398 


PEASADA 


IV.  The  same  are  otherwise  called  Samchita  (10),  Asam- 
ohita  (10)  and  apasamohita  (11)  respectively.  These 
classes  of  buildings  also  refer  to  the  postures  of  the 
idols,  namely,  erect,  sitting  and  recumbent.  But  the 
details  of  these  postures  are  reserved  for  a subsequent 
chapter. 

Y.  Masculine  buildings  are  equiangular  (14)  and  have  male 
deities  in  them  (16),  Feminine  buildings  are  rectangular 
(18)  and  house  female  deities  (16) ; but  in  the  Feminine 
class  of  buildings  the  male  deities  also  can  be  installed 
(17). 

The  common  details  of  the  component  parts  of  the  ground 
floor  (18-164). 

VI,  The  eight  kinds  of  the  single-storeyed  buildings  with 

their  characteristic  features  : 

(1)  Vaijayantika  is  furnished  with  round  spire  (feir- 

sha),  pinnacle  (feirah)  and  neck  (griva)  (166)  ; 

(2)  Bhogahas  similar  wings  (167) ; 

(3)  Srivitala  has  the  bhadra  or  front  tabernacle  in 
it  (168); 

(4)  Svastibandha  has  the  octangular  finial  (169)  ; 

(6)  ^rikara  has  a quadrangular  steeple  (170)  ; 

(6)  Hasti-prishtha  has  an  oval  steeple  (171) ; 

(7)  Skandatara  has  a hexag  onal  spire  and  neok(172)  ; 

and 

(8)  Kesara  has  the  front  tabernacles,  the  side-towers 
at  the  corners  of  the  roof,  and  its  nose,  head  and 
neck  are  round  or  quadrangular  (173-176). 

For  further  details  see  Eka-bhumi. 

VII.  The  eight  kinds  of  the  two-storeyed  buildings  (chap,  xx) : 

(The  general  features  are  similar  in  all  the  eight  kinds, 

the  distinction  lying  in  the  different  proportions  given 

to  the  component  parts  from  above  the  ground  floor 

to  the  top). 


PRlSl-BA  Sgg 

(9)  Srikara  (lines  94, 2-9) ; 

(10)  Vijaya  (94, 10-16) ; 

(11)  Siddha  (94, 16-18) ; 

(12)  Parahnika  or  Panshtika  (94, 19-26) ; 

(13)  Antika  (94, 26-27) ; 

(14)  Adbhnta  (94,  28-33) ; 

(16)  Swastika  (95,  35-41)  ; and 

(16)  Pushkala  (94,  42-43). 

The  projection,  general  features,  and  carvings  on  the  doors 
when  these  buildings  are  used  as  temples  are  described 
(44-93,  96-116). 

For  further  details  see  Dvi-tala. 

VIII.  The  eight  kinds  of  the  three-storeyed  buildings  (chap, 

xxi) : 

(The  general  features  and  the  oharaofceristio  marks  are 
similar  to  those  of  the  two-storeyed  buildings). 

(17)  Srikanta  (lines  2-11) ; 

(18)  Asana  (12-21) ; 

(19)  Sukhalaya  (22-30) ; 

(20)  Kesara  (31-32) ; 

(21)  Kamalahga  (33-38) ; 

(22)  Brahma-kanta  (39-dO) ; 

(23)  Meru-kanta  (41-49)  ; and 

(24)  Kailata  (60-62). 

For  further  details  see  Tri-tala. 

The  general  features,  charaoteristio  marks  and  concluding 
details  of  the  following  kinds  are  similar,  except  the 
number  of  storeys,  to  those  of  the  two  and  three-storeyed 
buildings. 

IX.  The  eight  kinds  of  the  four-storeyed  buildings  (chap* 
XXII) : 

(26)  Vishnu-kanta  (lines  3-12) ; 

(26)  Chatur-mukha  (13-24) ; 

(27)  Sada-kiva  (26-33); 


400 


PBASADA 


(28)  Budra-kanta  (34-43) ; 

(29)  I&vara-kanta  (44-46) ; 

(30)  Mancka-kanta  (47-67); 

(31)  Vedi-kanta  (68-69)  ; and 

(32)  Indra-kanta  (60-88) ; 

For  further  details  see  Chatus-tala. 

X.  The  eight  kinds  of  the  five-storeyed  buildings  (chap. 

XXlli) : 

(33)  Airavata  (lines  3-12) ; 

(34)  Bhuta-kanta  (13-16) ; 

(36)  Vitva-kanta  (16-18)  ; 

(36)  Murti-kanta  (19-24) ; 

(37)  Tama-kanta  (26-29)  ; 

(38)  Griha-kanta  (30-32) ; 

(39)  Tajna-kanta  (33-40)  ; and 

(40)  Brahma-kanta  (41-42). 

For  further  details,  see  Pafioha-tala. 

XI.  The  thirteen  kinds  of  the  six-storeyed  buildings  (chap. 

xxiv) : 

(41)  Padma-kanta  (lines  3-12) ; 

(42)  Kantara  (13-14) ; 

(43)  Sundara  (16)  ; 

(44)  Upa-kanta  (16)  ; 

(45)  Kamala  (17-18) ; 

(46)  Batna-kanta  (19) ; 

(47)  Vipulanka  (20) ; 

(48)  Jyoti(sh)-kanta  (60)  ; 

(49)  Saroruha  (60)  ; 

(60)  Vipulakritika  (62) ; 

(61)  Svasti-kanta  (53) ; 

(62)  Nandyavarta  (54)  ; and 

(63)  Ikshu-kanta  (66). 

For  further  details  see  Shat-tala. 


PEASlDA 


401 


XII.  The  eight  kkids  of  the  seven-storeyed  buildings  (chaj 

xxv) : 

(64)  Pundarika  (lines  3-23) ; 

(66)  ^ri-kanta  (2^) ; 

(36)  ^ri-bhoga  (25) ; 

(67)  Bharana  (26) ; 

(68)  Pahjara  (27) ; 

(69)  A&ramagara  (28) ; 

(60)  Harmya-kanta  (29)  ; and 

(61)  Hima-kanta  (30). 

For  further  details  see  Sapba-tala. 

XIII.  The  eight  kinds  of  the  eight-storeyed  buildings  (ohap 

xxvi)  ; 

(62)  Bhu-kanta  (lines  3-21) ; 

(63)  Bhupa-kanta  (22-28)  ; 

(64)  Svarga-kanta  (29*-34) ; 

(65)  Maha-kanta  (36-39) ; 

(66)  Jana-kanta  (40) ; 

(67)  Tapa(s)-kanta  (41-42) ; 

(68)  Satya-kanta  (43-45) ; and 

(69)  Beva-kanta  (46-47). 

For  further  details  see  Ash^a-tala. 

XIV.  The  seven  kinds  of  the  nine-sfcoreyed  buildings  (chap, 
xxvil) : 

(70)  Saura-kanta  (lines  6-9) ; 

(71)  Eaurava  (10) ; 

(72)  OhanPa  (11-12) ; 

(73)  Bhushana  (13-14) ; 

(74)  Vivrita  (20-22) ; 

(75)  Siiprati-kanta  (23-26) ; and 

(76)  Vitva-kanta  (27-33). 

For  further  details  see  Nava-tala. 


402 


tEASADA 


XV  The  six  kinds  of  the  ten-storeyed  buildings  (chap, 
xxviii) : 

(77)  Bhu-kanta  (lines  6-8)  ; 

(78)  Ohandra-kanta  (6-8) ; 

(79)  Bhavana-kanta  (9-13)  ; 

(80)  Antariksha-kanta  (14-16) ; 

(81)  Megha-kanta  (16-17) ; and 

(82)  Ahja-kanta  (18). 

For  further  details  see  Da&a-tala. 

XVI.  The  six  kinds  of  the  eleven-storeyed  buildings  (chap, 
xxix) : 

(83)  ^ambhu-kanta  (lines  3-7)  ; 

(84)  Isa-kanta  (8-9)  ; 

(85)  Ohakra-kanta  (10-14) ; 

(86)  Yania-kanta  (15-17) ; 

(87)  Vajra-kanta  (18-24)  ; and 

(88)  Akra-kanta  i,24-33). 

For  further  details  see  Ekada§a-tala. 

XVII.  The  ten  kinds  of  twelve-storeyed  buildings  (chap,  xxx) : 

(89)  Pafiohala  (lines  8-10)  ; 

(90)  Dravida  (8-10)  ; 

(91)  Madhya-kanta  (11-14) ; 

(92)  Kalihga-kanta  (14-16) ; 

(93)  Varata  (?  Virata)  (17-27)  : 

(94)  Kerala  (28-30) ; 

(95)  Vamta-kanta  (31-32) ; 

(96)  Magadha-kanta  (33-34) ; 

(97)  Jana-kanta  (36-36)  ; and 

(98)  Sphu(Gi-u)riaka,  (7,  37-84,  description  of  the 

twelfth  storey). 

These  ten  kinds  are  named,  it  should  be  noticed,  after  the 
historic  places  well  marked  in  the  ancient  geography  of 
India,  which  cover  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the 
continent.  Of  these,  the  Panchala  and  the  Dravida  are 


PEASADA 


403 


stated  to  be  of  the  smallest  type  (10),  next  in  size  and 
importance  are  respectively  the  Madhya-kanta,  the  Kali- 
hga-kanta,  the  Yarata  ( ? Virata),  the  Kerala,  and  the 
Vam^a-kanta.  The  largest  and  the  most  important  are 
the  Magadha  (connected  with  the  capital  of  King 
A&oka  and  of  the  early  Grupta  Emperors)  and  the  Jana- 
kanta,  and  also  perhaps  the  Sphu(Gu)riaka,  which,  how- 
ever, is  not  specified  in  detail  (11). 

The  architectural  details  of  these  buildings  will  be  found 
under  these  ten  terms.  The  description  of  the  twelfth 
storey  is  given  under  Dva-dafea-tala. 

(2)  Agni-Purana,  chap.  42.  v.  1-9  (general  plan),  10-25  (plan  with 
reference  to  the . idol),  chap.  104,  v.  1-11,  22-34,  (further 
general  plan),  11-21  (names,  classes,  shapes  and  description 
of  forty-five  kinds  of  temples)  : 

Prasadarii  sampravakshyami  sarva-sadharanam  fepinu  II 

Sarva-sadharanam  ohaitat  prasadasya  cha  lakshnam  \ 

Manena  pratimaya  va  prasad^im  apa.ram  feyinu  li 

’(Chap.  42,  V,  1,  9). 

Yakshye  prasada-sSmanya-laikshanam  te  feikhidhvajal 

(Chap.  104,  V.  1). 

Five  divisions  depending  on  five  shapes  or  plans,  and  each 
including  nine  kinds  of  temples  (chap.  104,  v.  11-13) : 

I.  Vairaja — quadrangular  or  square — ’includes  : 

(1)  Meru, 

(2)  Mandara, 

(3)  Vimana, 

(4)  Bhadra, 

(6)  Sarvato-bhadra, 

(6)  Charuka  (Ruchaka,  in  the  Kamikagama,  xsxv. 

87,91), 

(7)  Nandika, 

(8)  Nandi-vardhana,  and 

(9)  ^rivatsa. 


(Chap.  104,  V.  14, 16). 


404 


PEASADA 


II  Pashpaka — ^rectangular— includes  : 

(10)  Ba(Va)lablii, 

(11)  driha-raja, 

(12)  ^ala-griha  or  Sala-mandira, 

(13)  Vitala, 

(14)  Sama, 

(16)  Brahma-mandira, 

(16)  Bhavana  or  Bhuvana, 

(17)  Prabhava,  and 

(18)  ^ivika-ve&ma. 

(Cbap.  104,  V.  16, 17). 

III.  Kailata — round — includes  : 

(19)  Ba(Va)laya, 

(20)  Dundubhi, 

(21)  Padma, 

(22)  Maba-padmaka, 

(QS’^  Varddhani, 

(26)  Kalata,  and 

(27)  Sva-vyiksba. 

(Obap.  104,  V.  17,  18). 

TSf  Manika — oval  (vrittayata) — includes: 

(28)  Gaja, 

(29)  Vriababba, 

(80)  Hamsa, 

(31)  G-arutman, 

(32)  Bikaba-nayaka, 

(33)  Bbusbana, 

(34)  Bbu-dbara, 

(36)  ^rijaya,  and 
(36)  Pyitbiyi-dbara. 


(Cbap.  104,  V.  19, 20). 


EASADA 


406 


V.  Tri-vishfapa — octangular — includes: 

(37)  Vajra, 

(38)  Otiakra, 

(39)  Swastika, 

(40)  Vajra-avastika, 

(41)  Chitra, 

(42)  Svastika-khadga, 

(43)  Gada, 

(44)  Srikantha,  and 

(45)  Yijaya. 

(Chap.  V.  20,  21). 

(3)  Graruda-Purana  (chap.  47)  has  exactly  the  same  general  plan, 
(v.  1-20,  32-47),  five  shapes,  five  classes  (v.  21-23)  andr 
46  kinds  of  buildings  (v.  24-32);  bub  the  wording  is  not 
identical.  The  fourth  class  is  called  Malika  (v.  21)  in  the 
general  description  but  the  other  reading  Manika  (v.  30) 
is  given  later  on  : 

I.  Vairaja — square  (v.  21-22) — includes  the  same  nine  kinds, 
but  (7)  Nandika  is  called  Nandana,  and  (6)  Oharuka  is 
correctly  read  as  Euchaka  (v.  24-25). 

II.  Pushpaka — rectangular  (v.  21-22) — includes  nine  kinds  of 
which  (10)  Valabhi  is  correctly  spelt,  (13)  Vitala  is  read 
as  Vimana,  which  it>  apparently  a mistake  in  the  Garuda- 
Purana  because  (3)  Vimana  is  a kind  of  building  included 
in  the  square  (1)  Vairaja-class,  But  the  reading  of  the 
Pushpaka  class  (11)  seems  better  in  the  Garuda-Parana, 
which  may  be  quoted  here  : 

(10)  Valabhi, 

(11)  Griha-raja, 

(12)  ^ala-gyiha, 

(13)  Mandira, 

(14)  Vi&ala  (text  has  Vimana), 


406 


PBISJlDA 


(15)  Brahma-mandira, 

(16)  Bhavana, 

(17)  Uttambha,  and 

(18)  ^iM(-vi)ka-ve&ina. 

(Chap.  47,  V.  26-27). 

III.  Kailala — around  (v.  21, 23)— includes  nine  kinds  which  also 
seem  to  have  better  reading ; 

(19)  Yalaya, 

(20)  Dundubhi, 

(21)  Padma, 

(22)  Maha-padma, 

(23)  Mukuli  (in  place  of  Yardhani), 

(24)  Uahnishi, 

(25)  J^ahkha, 

(26)  Kalata,  and 

(27)  Guva-vyiksha. 

(Chap.  47,  V.  28-29). 

lY.  Manika— oval  (v.  30) — includes  the  same  nine  kinds  of 
which,  however,  (31),  (32)  and  (33)  are  read  as  Garuda, 
Simha,  and  Bhumukha  respectively  (v.  29,  30). 

Y.  Tri-vishtapa  —octangular  (v.  21,  23) — includes  nine  kinds 
'which  seem  to  be  better  read  here  : 

(37)  Yajra, 

(38)  Chakra, 

(39)  Mushtika  (preceded  by  Babhru,  v.  31), 

(40)  Yakra, 

(41)  Svastika, 

(42)  Ehadga, 

(43)  Gada, 

(44)  fe-vyiksha,  and 

(45)  Yijaya, 


(Chap.  47,  V.  31-32). 


PBASlDA 


407 


(4)  Matsya-Piirana  (chap.  269,  v.  1-7,  8-14,  16-20,  21-27) : 

(a)  The  general  plan  : 

Evam  vastn-halim  kritva  bhajet  shoda'sa-bhagikam  I 
Tasya  madhye  chaturhhis  tu  bhagair  garbham  tu  kilra- 

yet  II  1 

Bhaga-dva-da^aka-sardham  tafeas  tu  parikalpayet  \ 
Chatur-dikshu  tatha  jheyam  nirgamam  tu  tato  budhaib  II  2 
Ohatur-bhagena  bhittinam  uchchbrayah  syat  pramanatab  I 
Dvi-gunab  §ikbarocbchbrayo  bbitty-ucbcbbraya-prama- 

natab  II  3 

Sikbarardhasya  obardbena  yidbeya  tu  pradaksbina  \ 
G-arbha-subra-dvayam  cbagre  vistaro  mandalasya  tu  II  4 
Ayatah  syat  tribbir  bbagair  bhadra-yuktab  sufeobbanah  \ 
Panoba-bbagena  sambhajya  ’ garbba-manaih  viobak- 

sbapab  II  6 

Bbagam  ekam  gribitya  tu  prag-griyam  kalpayed  budbab  \ 
G-arbba-sutra-sama-bbagad  agrato  mukba-mandapab  II  6 
Etat  samanyam  uddisbtam  prasSdasya  oba  laksbnam  I 7 
This  description  of  the  general  plan  is  followed  by  that  of 
some  special  plans,  (see  y.  8-14,  16-20). 

Samanyam  aparam  tad-yat  prasadam  ferinuta  dyijab  \ 
Tri-bbagam  karayet  kshetram  yatra  tisbtbanti  deya- 

tab  II  21 

Eatbankas  tenamianena  babya-bbaga-yinirgatab  \ 

Nemi  padena  vistirna  prasadasya  samantatab  II  22 
G-arbbam  tu  dyi-gunam  kuryat  tasya  manam  bbayed  iba  \ 
Sa  eya  bbitter  utsedbo  dyi-gunab  tikbaro  matah  II  23 
Prag-griyab  pafioba-bbagena  nishkasas  tasya  cboohyate  \ 
Karayet  sushiram  tad-yat  prakarasya  tri-bhagatah  II  24 
Prag-grivam  panoba-bbagena  nisbkasbena  yitesbatah  \ 
Kuryad  ya  pafioba-bbagena  prag-griyam  karna-mulatab  II 

26 


408 


PRASADA 


Sthapayet  kanakaih  tatra  garbhanfee  dvara-mulatab  I 
Evaih  ta  tri-vidham  Imryaj  jyeshfeha-madhya-kaniyasam  I! 

26 

Linga-mananabhedena  rupa-bhedena  va  puaah  \ 

Ete  samasafcab  prokta  namatab  §ripatadhana  II  27 

(fe)  The  names  (v.  28-30),  desorlption  of  arobitectaral 
details  (v.  31-46),  measares  (47-61),  and  division 
(63-64),  of  twenty  kinds  of  buildings  (temples)  r 

(1)  Mera  has  100  cupolas  (tringha),  16  storeys  (bhu- 

mika),  many  variegated  spires  (likharas),  and 
is  60  cubits  broad  (v.  28,  31,  63), 

(2)  Mandara  has  12  storeys,  many  spires  and  faces, 

and  is  43  cubits  broad  (v.  28,  37,  47,  63). 

(3)  Kailata  has  9 storeys,  many  spires  and  faces,  and 

is  40  cubits  broad  (v.  32,  47,  63). 

(4)  Vimana-chchhanda  has  8 storeys,  many  spires  and 

faces,  and  is  34  cubits  broad  (v.  26,  32,  33,  47, 
63). 

(6)  Nandi-vardhana  has  7 storeys,  and  is  32  cubits 
broad  (v.  29,  33,  48,  63). 

(6)  Nandana  has  7 storeys,  and  is  furnished  with 

horns  (vishana)  and  is  30  cubits  broad  (v.  29, 
33,  48,  63). 

(7)  Sarvato-bhadra  has  5 storeys,  16  corners  with 

various  shapes,  furnished  with  art-galleries 
(ohitra-feala),  and  is  30  cubits  broad  (v.  29,  34, 
36,48,  63). 

(8)  Vallabhi-ohohhandaka  has  6 storeys,  many  spires 
and  faces,  and  is  16  cubits  broad  (v.  35,  60,  63). 


PElStoA 


409 


(9)  Vrisha  should  resemble  the  height  and  length  of 

the  bnll,  should  be  round  and  without  corners ; 
it  should  have  5 cupolas  and  2 storeys,  and  it 
should  be  4 cubits  at  the  central  hall  (v.  30,  36, 
44,  46,  63). 

(10)  Simha  resembles  the  lion  and  is  16  cubits  broad, 

is  adorned  with  prominent  top-rooms,  and 
should  be  at  the  front  neck  6 storeys  high 
(v.  29,  36,  40, 49,  63). 

(11)  Gaja  resembles  the  elephant  and  is  16  cubits 

broad,  and  has  man  top-rooms  (v.  36,  41,  49, 
63). 

(12)  Kumbha  resembles  the  water- jar,  has  9 storeys, 

5 cupolas  and  a cavity  (ahguli-pu^a-samsthana), 
and  is  16  cubits  broad  (v.  37,  49,  63). 

(13)  Samudraka  has  16  sides  around,  2 top-rooms  (? 

gable  windows)  at  the  two  sides,  and  2 storeys 
(v.  38,  63), 

(14)  Padma  has  3 storeys,  16  corners,  a variegated 

auspicious  spire  and  is  20  cubits  broad  (v.  30, 
39,49,63). 

(16)  Garuda  has  the  bird-shape  around,  7 storeys  and 
3 top-rooms,  is  8 cubits  broad,  and  there  should 
be  86  storeyes  (?)  or  compartments  (bhumika) 
(v.  42)  aU  around  the  outside  (v.  41,  43,  61). 
There  is  a similar  Garuda-building  with  10 
storeys  and  a second  Padmaka  building  with 
2 storeys  more  (i.e,,  12  storeys,  v.  43). 

(16)  Hamsa  is  10  cubits  broad  (30,  61). 

(17)  Yartula  is  20  cubits  broad  (v.  29,  49,  63), 


410 


PEAS  ADA 


No  special  desoription  is  given,  of  the  remaining  kinds  : 

(18)  Ohatnr-asra  (ionr-oornered,  V.  28.  6S). 

(19)  Ashtasra  (eight-cornered,  V.  29,  63). 

(20)  Shoda&astra  (sixteen-cornered,  V.  29,  63). 

The  three  divisions  of  these  buildings  according  to  three  sisses  ; 
Tatha  mervadayah  sapta  jyeshtha-lihge  §ubhavahah  1 
Sriv¥ikshaka(==valabhi)daya&  chashtan  madhyamasya  pra- 

kirtitah  !|  63 

Tatha  hamsadayah  pahoha  kanyase  §nbhada  matah  II  64 
The  similar  kinds  of  prasadas  (temples)  are  described  almost 
in  the  same  manner  in  both  the  Bhavishya-Purana  and 
the  Brihat-samhita : 

(6)  Bhavishya-Purana,  chap.  130,  names  (v.  23-26),  description 
of  the  architectural  details  and  measures  (v.  27-36),  and  the 
twenty  kinds  of  buildings  (almost  same  as  in  the  Byihat- 
samhita,  see  below)  : 

(1)  Meru  is  39  cubits  high  and  32  cubits  broad,  has  12 

storeys,  various  windows  (kuhara)  and  four  gateways 
(V.27). 

(2)  Mandara  is  80  cubits  broad  and  has  10  storeys  (v.  28). 

(3)  Kailata  is  28  cubits  broad,  has  spires  and  finials,  and 

8 storeys  (v.  28). 

The  description  of  the  following  is  clearer  in  the 
Byihat-samhita,  quoted  below.  The  names  are  given 
here  : 

(4)  Vimanawith  latticed  windows  (v.  29). 

(6)  Nandana  (v.  29). 

(6)  Samudga  (v.  30),  but  Samudra  (v.  24)  as  in  the  Byihat- 

samhita  (lvi.  28,  63). 

(7)  Padma  (v.  30). 

(8)  Garuda  (v.  31). 

(9)  Nandi-vardhana  (v.  29,  but.Nandi,  v.  31). 


PEASlDA 


411 


(10)  Enfijara  (y.  32). 

(11)  G-yiha-raja  (v.  32) ; Brihati-BamMta  (lvi.  26)  reads  Guha- 

raja. 

(12)  Vrisha  (v.  33). 

(13)  Hamsa  (v.  33). 

(14)  Ghata  (v.  33). 

(16)  Sarvafco-bliadra  (v.  34). 

(16)  Simha  (v.  36). 

(17)  Viitta  (as  in  the  Byihat-samliita,  IiVi.  29,  49)  hut  here 

(v.  33)  it  is  read  Vrisha  like  (12),  which  is  apparently 
a mistake,  (see  v.  30). 

No  special  description  is  given  of  the  remaining  kinds  : 

(18)  Chatush-kona  (four-cornered,  v.  26) ; Matsya-Purana 

(chap.  269,  V.  28,  63)  -reads  Chatur-asra,  and  Byihat- 
samhita  (lvi.  28)  has  Ohatur-atra. 

(19)  Ashta&ra  (octangular,  v.  26). 

(20)  Shodatatra  (sixteen  cornered,  v.  26). 

(6)  Brihat-samhita  (lvi.  1-19)  : 

The  religious  merits  acquired  by  building  temples  (v.  1-2). 

The  suitable  sites  are  stared  to  be  gardens,  woods,  banks  of  rivers, 
seas  or  tanks  (v.  3-8) ; ground  (v.  9) ; general  plan  (v.  10) ; 
situation  of  doors  (v.  10)  ; comparative  measures  of  the 
length,  breadth,  and  height  (v.  11) ; of  the  adytum  (garbha, 
V.  12),  of  the  doors  and  their  different  parts  (v.  12-14) ; 
carvings  on  doors  (v.  16) ; comparative  measures  of  the 
idol,  pedestal,  and  door  (v.  16) ; the  heights  of  storeys  (v. 
29-30). 

This  is  followed  by  the  classification  (v.  17-19)  and  the 
description  of  the  architectural  details  (v.  20-28)  of  the 
same  twenty  kinds  of  temples  (prasada)  as  are  given  in  the 


412 


PEASABA 


Matsya-Pariina  and  tilie  Bhavishya-Purana.  The  names  of 
these  buildings  are  given  below : their  details  which  are 
almost  same  as  in  the  Puranas,  will  be  found  described 
under  these  terms  : 

(1)  Meru  (v.  20). 

(2)  Mandara  (v.  21). 

(3)  Kailata  (v.  21). 

(4)  Yimana-(chchhanda)  (v.  17,  22). 

(6)  Nandana(v.22). 

(6)  Samudga  (v.  23). 

(7)  Padma  (v.  23). 

(8)  G-aruda  (v.  24), 

(9)  Nandi-vardhana  (v.24). 

(10)  Eufijara  (v.  26). 

(11)  Guha-raja  (v.  26). 

(12)  Vrisha  (v.  26). 

(13)  Hamsa  (v.  26). 

(14)  Ghata.  Cv.  26). 

(15)  Satvato-bhadra  (v.  27) 

(16)  Siihha  (v.  28). 

(17)  Yritta  (v.  18,  28). 

(18)  dhatush-ko]Qa  (v.  18,  28). 

(19)  Ashtatra  (v.  18,  28). 

(20)  Shoda^atra  (v.  18,  28). 

(7)  Kamikagama : 

No  distinction  is  made  between  Prasada  and  Yimaua  (of. 

also  the  Manasara,  L.  40,  etc) : 

Jatyadi-bhedakair  yuktam  vimanam  sampadam(-s)-padam  1 

(lv.  131,  this  chapter  is  named  Prasada-bhushana). 


PBASABA 


413 

Buildings  in  ’ general  (lv.  1-210) : 

Their  component  parts : 

Prasada-bhuahanaCm)  vakshye  sruyatam  dvijasattamah  | 

Syat  pada-prastararh  griva-varge  mule  tu  vedika  II 1 
Shapes  and  kinds  of  Prasada  (buildings  in  general)  : 

Yanam  M §ayanam  vapi  gopurakritir  eva  va  I 
Pithakyitir  va  mervadi-parvatakpitir  eva  va  II  194 
Nandya-kritir  Va  dhama  vidheyam  ches^-desake  I 
Mapd.S'Pe  gopure  vapre  parivaralaySdishu  II 
Evam  evam  vidheyam  syat  tatha  bhuvi  vi&ishyate  li  196 
The  synonyms  : 

Vimanam  bhavanam  harmyam  saudham  dhama  niketanam  1 
Prasadah  sadanam  sadma  geham  avasatham  gyiham  II  208 
Alayam  nilayam  vaso’py-alayo  vastu-vastukam  \ 

Kshetram  ayatanam  ve&ma  mandiram  dhishnakam  padam  II  12  9 
Layam  kshayam  agaram  oha  tathodSvasitam  punah  \ 

Sthanam  ity-evam  uktani  paryaya-vachanani  hi  II  210 
The  four  classes  : 

Jati  (v.  128),  Chhanda  (129),  Vikalpa  (130),  and  Abhasa  (130). 
The  chapter  lv.  refers  to  the  description  of  a single  building 
and  its  component  parts. 

So  also  does  the  chapter  XLV.  (see  under  Malika) ; it  is  named 
Malika-(lakshana),  but  it  does  not  mean  anything  but  Pra- 
sada : Prasada-vyasa-dirghoohoha  prokta  prasada-maiika  II  4 
Chapter  xly  : 

Further  classifications  : 

I.  Samohita,  Apasamohita,  and  Upasamohita  (v.  6). 

II.  Nagara  (6,  12,  13),  Dravida  (6,  14,  16),  and  Vesara 
(7,16-18). 

III.  Jati  (7,19),  Chhanda  (7,20),  and  Vikalpa  (7,  20). 

IV.  Buddha  (7,  21),  mra  (7,  22),  and  Samkirna  (7,  22). 


414 


PBASADA 


V.  Piimlinga  or  masculine,  also  called  Samdiita  (8,  9),  Stri- 

linga  or  feminine  (9,  10),  and  Isfapumsaka  or  neuter  (11). 
This  class  (V)  does  not  refer  (like  the  Manasara)  to  the 
sexes  of  the  deities  installed  in  temples.  Here  they 
appear  like  residential  buildings.  Their  characteristic 
features  are  determined  by  some  architectural  details, 
(see  under  these  terms — Pumlihga,  etc). 

The  distinguishing  marks  of  the  other  four  classes  (I-IV) 
are  similar  to  those  of  the  Manasara  noticed  above,  (see  the 
details  under  those  terms,.  Samchita,  Nagara,  etc). 

VI.  The  technical  names  of  Prasada  : 

(1)  Sindhuka  (xlt.  23-28). 

(2)  Sampurna  (29-30). 

(3)  Meru-kuta  (31). 

(4)  Bshema  (32-34). 

(6)  ^iva  (36-38). 

(6)  Harmya  (39-40). 

(7)  Saumya  (40). 

(8)  Vifeala  (41). 

(9)  Sarva-kalyana  (42-49). 

(10)  Vijaya  (60). 

(11)  Bhadra  (61). 

(12)  Eahga-mukha  (62). 

(13)  Alpa  (63-64). 

(14)  Kona  (66-68). 

(16)  G-eya  (68a-69). 

(16)  Sara  (60). 

(17)  Pushkara  (61-63). 

(18)  Adbhuta  (61a). 

(19)  Samkirpa  (62). 

(20)  Banda  (64).  . 

See  details  under  * Malika  ’ and  these  * terms 


PEISABA 


416 


In  chapter  xxxv,  ^alas,  in  almost  the  same  sense  as  of  Prasada, 
are  divided  into  five  classes,  namely,  Sarvato-bhadra  (87,  88), 
Vardhamana  (87,  88),  Svastika  (87,  89),  Nandyavarta  (87, 
90),  and  Charnka  (87,  91). 

Their  oharaoteristio  features  will  be  found  under  these  ‘terms’. 

(8)  Suprabhedagama,  chap.  xxxi.  (named  Prasada=t6mple)  : 

The  nine  kinds  of  width  (v.  1-3) ; the  comparative  measure- 
ment of  the  temple  and  adytum  (4-6),  of  the  inner  and  outer 
walls  (6-8),  of  the  Linga  or  phallus  and  the  Pi^ha  or 
pedestal  (9-16). 

The  description  of  the  four  types  of  bases,  namely,  Padma- 
banda,  Charu-bandha,  Pada-bandha,  and  Pratikrama 
(16-27). 

The  description  of  the  ground  floor  consisting  in  the  compa- 
rative measurement  of  the  base,  column,  entablature, 
finial,  dome,  corner-tower,  dove-cot,  and  spire  (28-31). 

All  the  twelve  storeys  are  stated  to  be  built  in  the  same  way; 
Adva-data-talad  evam  bhiimau  bhtimau  prakalpayet  \ 

Bvam  uktam  ihotaedham  dvara-bhedam  tatah  tyinu  II  38 
The  doors  are  then  described  (34-37). 

Three  styles  of  temples,  namely,  Nagara,  Dravi^a  and  Vesara, 
are  mentioned  (38), 

Their  essential  features  (38-39,  see  under  those  ‘ terms  ’). 

Ten  types  of  temples  : 

(1)  Kailata, 

(2)  Mandara, 

(3)  Meru, 

(4)  Himavat, 

(6)  Nishadha  (also  called  NilSi-parvata,  and  Mahendra), 

(6)  Nalinaka, 

(7)  Pralinaka, 

(8)  Nandyavartrt, 

(9)  ^rivarba  (also  ^ripada),  and 

(10)  Parvata. 


(See  V.  40-6). 


416 


PElBADA 


The  comparative  measurement  of  the  storeyes  : 

Bvam  tale  tale  karyam  nunam  ekaika-bhagikam  II  63 

The  five  kinds  of  columns — Srikara,  Ghandra-kSnta,  Sau- 
mukhya  (also  Sumukha),  Priya-dartana,  and.  Subhamkari(-ra) 
(66);  their  shapes — ^four-sided,  eight-sided,  sixteen-sided, 
cylindrical,  and  of  the  combination  of  the  first  two  (67). 
They  may  be  with  or  without  a kumbha  or  pitcher  (64). 
The  general  features  of  the  component-  parts  (66-64) 
and  the  special  features  of  the  five  orders  are  described 
(66-67). 

The  description  of  arches  is  given  (68-71). 

Some  ornaments,  like  nasika  (vestibule),  vedika  (platform), 
tikhara  (spire),  stupi  (dome),  etc.,  are  also  described, 
(72-93). 

Here  closes  the  description  of  the  temples  ; 

Prasada-lakahanam  proktam  mandapanam  vidhim  tyinu  II  94 

This  leads  to  the  description  of  the  detached  buildings  such  as 
the  pavilions,  quarters  for  the  attendant  deities,  gate-houses, 
and  the  enclosures,  tanks,  guest-houses,  etc.,  which  form 
parts  of  the  temple  in  its  wider  sense. 

The  man^apas  or  pavilions  are  first  divided  into  four  classes, 
namely,  Deva(god)-mandapa,  snapana(bath)-mandapa, 
Vyisha  (the  bull,  Nandin)-mandapa,  and  Nyitta  (music)- 
mandapa  (96-97,  98-99). 

They  are  further  classified  under  the  names  Nanda-vyitta, 
Sriya-vyitta,  Virasana,  Jaya-bhadra,  Nandyavarta,  Mani- 
bhadra,  and  Vitala  (100-104). 

These  pavilions  are  distinguished  by  the  number  of  columns 
they  are  furnished  with  ; 

Stambhanam  tu  tatair  yuktam  vitalam  iti  samjnitam  \ 

Prasad- vat  samakhyatam  prastarantaiii  pramanatah  II  104 

The  columns  of  the  Prasadas  and  those  of  the  Mandapas  are 


ill 


stated  to  be  differently  measured : 

Prasada-stambha-manasya  etat  stambbam  vi^isbyate  II  105 

These  latter  columns  have  also  other  oharaoteristio  features 
(see  106-113). 

The  description  of  the  pavilions  closes  with  that  of  the  flights 
of  steps  : 

Sopanam  oha  yathftyuktya  hasti-hastam  tathaiva  oha  \ 

Evam  samasatah  proktam  mandapam  vi4hi-purvakam  II  114 

The  Prakaras  or  enclosures  are  then  described  (115-128).  They 
are  strikingly  similar  to  those  described  in  the  Manasara. 

This  Agama  like  the  Manasara  divides  the  whole  compound 
into  five  enclosed  quadrangular  courts.  In  both  the  trea« 
tises,  each  of  the  courts  is  stated  to  be  furnished  with  a 
separate  gate-house.  Moreover  these  gate-houses  are  given 
the  same  technical  names  in  both  the  works,  viz.,  Dvara- 
tobha  (in  the  first  court),  Dvara-sala  (in  the  second), 
Dvara-prasada  (in  the  third),  'Dvara-harmya  (in  the  fourth), 
and  the  Dvara-gopura  (in  the  fifth  or  the  extreme 
boundary,  maha-maryada)  (cf.  Manasara  under  ‘ Gopura’). 

The  Parivaralayas  (temples  of  attendant  deities),  which  are 
made  in  some  of  these  five  courts,  are  described  (129  f.), 
and  are  also  similar  in  both  the  treatises. 

In  the  remaining  portion  of  the  chapter  some  objects  like  the 
facades  of  the  temples,  etc.,  are  described. 

From  the  abstracts  given  above,  it  will  be  clear  that  this  chapter 
of  the  Suprabhedagama  deals  with  all  the  essential  parts  of  a 
temple,  which  in  the  Manasara,  including  the  residential 
buildings,  occupy  a space  of  twenty -eight  chapters  (xiii- 
XXXIX,  XLVi).  The  description  of  this  Agama,  though  brief, 
is  very  explicit  and  to  the  point.  The  language  also  of  the 
Suprabhedagama  is  much  better  than  most  of  the  arohitoc- 
tural  treatises  I have  consulted. 

The  attention  of  readers  is  invited  to  the  lists  of  the  build- 
ings described  in  the  eight  works  under  observation. 

27 


m 


I^BASADA 


The  list  in  the  Manasara  contains  under  12  classes  (or  storeys) 
98  types  of  buildings ; the  Agni -Parana  has  under  6 classes 
46  types,  the  Garuda-Purana  also  has  under  the  same 
5 classes  46  types  ; the  Matsya-Purana  has  under  3 classes 
20  types;  the  BhaYiahya-Purana  has  left  out  the  broader 
diYisions  and  contains  20  types ; the  Brihat-samhita  in 
the  very  same  way  contains  20  types  ; the  Kamikagama 
has  under  3 divisions  (of  various  kinds)  20  types  ; and  the 
Suprabhedagama  has  left  out  all  the  minor  divisions  but 
has  preserved  the  most  important  division,  namely,  the  3 
styles  (Nagara,  Yesara,  and  Bravida)  which  comprise  10  types 
of  buildings. 

The  various  broader  divisions,  such  as  the  Suddha,  Samchita, 
Sthanaka,  Jati,  Pumlihga,  etc.,  we  have  seen  in  the  Manasara, 
are  repeated  in  the  same  terms  and  same  sense  in  the 
Agamas.  The  most  imporcant  division,  namely,  the  styles^ 
Nagara,  Vesara  and  Bravida — is  also  preserved  intact  in 
the  latter  works.  These  are  purely  architectural  divisions, 
consequently  they  are  not  taken  into  consideration  in  the 
non-arohitectural  treatises  like  the  Puranas  and  the  Brihat- 
samhita.  Even  the  broadest  division  into  storeys  under 
which  the  Manasara  describes  the  buildings  in  twelve  or 
thirteen  chapters  has  lost  its  prominence  in  the  latter  works. 

Thus  the  Manasara  has  the  largest  number  of  the  types, 
namely,  98. 

The  Agni-Purana  and  the  Garuda-Purana  have  46  types  each. 

The  Matsya-Purana,  the  Bhavishya-Putana,  the  Brihat- 
.samhita,  and  the  Kamikagama  have  20  types  each. 

The  Suprabhed^ama  has  the  smallest  number  of  types, 
namely,  10. 

The  technical  names  of  the  types  of  buildings  are  common  in 
many  cases.  In  some  instances  the  architectural  details  are 
identical.  The  lists  of  the  Agni-Purana  and  the  Garuda- 
Purana  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  Matsya-Purana,  the 


PEASlDA 


410 


Bhavishya-Pnraiaa  andtiie  Brih.at-samhita  on  the  other,  are 
strikingly  similar.  Of  the  works  containing  the  lists  of  twenty 
types,  the  Brihat-samhita  has  the  most  improved  descrip- 
tion. But  in  respect  of  brevity,  explicitness  and  precision, 
the  Suprabhedagama,  which  contains  the  smallest  number 
of  types,  surpasses  all  others. 

The  common  names  of  the  types,  the  identity  of  their  details 
and  the  similarity  in  their  description  do  not  seem  to  be 
accidental.  The  grades  of  the  linguistic  style  and  the  expli- 
citness and  precision  of  the  description  are  not  perhaps  un- 
connected. And  the  variation  in  the  number  of  types  des- 
cribed in  these  works  does  not  also  seem  to  be  meaningless. 

The  mutual  relation  and  the  historical  connection  of  these 
eight  works  have  been  discussed  in  great  detail  in  the 
chapter  on  the  date  of  the  MSnasara  in  the  writer’s  Silpa- 
feastra. 

The  object  of  this  article  is,  however,  to  show  by  illustrations 
the  denotation  of  the  term  ‘ Prasada.’  And  before  draw- 
ing any  conclusion,  we  shall  examine  briefly  a few  more 
literary  quotations  from  works  which  are  not  architectural 
and  where  the  term  occurs  quite  incidentally,  as  well  as 
from  the  arohmologioal  records  and  the  Buddhist  canonical 
texts,  where  too  the  term  is  used  casually. 

(9)  Sankhyayana-^rauta-sutra,  xvi.  18,  13  (Pet.  Diet.)  : 

Samsthite  madhyame’  hany-ahavaniyam  abhito  dikshu  prasa- 

dan  viminvanti  I 

(10)  Adhbhuta-Brahmana,  in  Indisohe  Studien,  i,  40  (ibid.)  : 

Harmya-prasada-samkula  I 

(11)  “ Prakara  in  the  Sahkhyayana-l^rauta-sutra  (xvi.  18,  14) 

denotes  a walled  mound  supporting  a raised  platform  (pra- 
sada)  for  spectators.  ” (Professors  Macdonell  and  Keith, 

Of.  the  text : Tan  uparishtat  samvyadhaih  prakaraih  pari-. 

ghnanti  { 


m 


PEASADA 


“ Prasada  in  the  sense  of  palace  does  not  occur  until  the  late 
Adbhiita-Brahmana  ”,  (see  above  no.  10). 

(Indiache  Studien,  1,  40,  Vedic  Index,  li,  51). 
(12)  Eamayana  (Cock)  : 

II.  7,  1 : Prasadam  chandra-aamkafeam  aruroha  H 

Ayodhyaih  manthara  tasmat  prasadad  anvavaik- 

shata  \ 

II.  7,  12  : Kailafea-^ikharakaxat  prasadad  avarohata  i 

II.  3,  27  : Prasadastho  da§arathah \ 

(Here  ‘ Prasada  ’ must  mean  a palace). 

II.  3,  31 : Sa  tarn  kada^a-feringabham  prasadam .ragu- 

nandanah  ....aruroha . \ 

II.  16,  42  : Prasada-ferihgeshu  \ 

Yl.  26,5:  Aruroha prasadam  hima-panduram  I 

Bahu  tala-samutsedham \ 

VI.  42,  2 : Euddham  tu  nagarim  ferutva prasadam,,.. 

arohata  \ 

II,  33,  3 : Tatah  prasada-harmyani  vimana-feikharani  cha  \ 
Abhiruhya  janah  feriman  udasino  vyalokayata  II 
II.  33,  4 : Aruhya  tasmat  prasadad  dinah  pafeyanti  raghavam  \ 

V.  43,  4 ; Aruhya  giri-samkafeam  prasadam \ 

IV.  26,  41  ; Tato  hema-pratishthane  varastarana-saihvrite  I 
Prasada-sikhare  ramye  ohitra-malyopafeobhite  II 
Prah-mukham  vidhivan  mantraih  sthapayitva  varasane  I 

II.  17,  17  :■  Megha-saimghopamaih  ^ubhaih ....| 

Prasada-ferihgair  vividhaih  kailafea-feikharopamalh  \ 
TV.  33,  16  : Vanarendra-grihaih....feukla-prasada  feikharaih  kai- 

la&a-&ikharopamaih  I 

41,  88  : Prasada-feikharam  laila-ferihgam  ivonnatam  I 
Yl.  41,  90  : Prasada-feikhareshu  { 

il.  61,  21 : Harmya-prasada-sampannam raja-dhanim  \ 

II.  100,  42  ■ Prasadair  vividhakarair  Vfitam ...ayodhyam  I 

V.  2,  49  : Prasada-mala-vitatam ;.maha-purim  \ 


PRAStoA 


421 


VI.  39>  21 : Prasadaife  lanka  parama-bhusMta  I 

VI.  39;27  ; Prasada-malabbix  alankritaiii purim  \ 

III.  66,7:  G-riham  deva-grihopamam harmya-prasada- 

Bambadham  I 

III.  66,10 : Hema-jala-vritafe  obasama  tatra  prasada-pank. 

tayah  1 

V.  6,  44  : Prasada-samghata-yutam.. maha-gribam  \ 

V.  9,  2 : Bhavanam  rakshasendraaya  babii-prasada-sam. 

kulam  \ 

' IV.  83,  8 : Vindhya-meru-prakhyaib  prasadair  naika-bhumi- 

. bhihl 

II.  66, 3 : Rajanam  atuvatam  te3ham.,..pragadabhoga-vis- 
tirpas  tu  &abdo  hy-avarfeata  b 
(Cl  also  II.  27,  9 ; 67, 18 ; 67,  20). 

I.  80,  19  : Prasada-mala-samyukfcah  ....uivelah  1 

II.  88,  6 : Prasadagra-vimaneshu  valabhishn  oha  sarvadS  1 
Haima-rajata-bhaumeshu  varastarnasalishu  II 
II.  88,  7 : Prasada-vara-varyeshu  sifcavatsu  sagandhishu  I 

Usbitva  meru-kalpesbu  krita-kanohana-bbittisbu  II 

II.  91,  82 : Harmyar-prasada-saihyukta-tiorap.aui  \ 

IV.  33,  6 : Mahatim  giihani...,harmya-par8ada-sambadham  \ 

IV.  42,  44 ; Bhavanam........ prasadangana-sambadbam  \ 

VI.  41,  86  : Prasadam  ^aila-samka&am  1 

(Cl  also  V.  6,  16;  67,7). 

VI. . 76,  7 ; Prasadah  parvatakarah  1 (of.  also  vi.  76,  6). 

VI.  76,  12  : Mukta-mapi-viobitrams  oba  prasadams  oha... 

agnir  dahati  tafcra  vai  I 

V.  6,  3 : Harmya-prasada-sambMbam  I 
I.  5,  6 : Prasadair  anta-vikritaib  parvatair  iva  feobbitam  \ 

(lb)  Mababbarat;a(Cock)  : 

V.  91,  3 ; Tasya  (DuryodbaQa-gpibasya)  kakshya  vyatikramya 

tisro  dvab-stbair  avaribah  | 

Tato  abbra-ghana-8amka§am  gri-kutam  ivoobchhritam  II 
^riya  ivalantam  prasadam  aruroba  maba^ayab  I 


pbABada 


L 3,  13b  : Naga-lokam. ...... aueka-vidha-prasada-harmya-vala- 

bhi-iiiryuha-&ata-samkulani  I 

I.  109,  9 : Nagaram .prasada-feata-sambadbam  \ 

II.  10,  3 ; Sabha....  divya  bomamayair  ucbobaib  prasadair 

upa^obbita  \ 

V.  88, 20 : BtadCDub&asanasya  griham)dbi  ruohirakaraib 

prasadair  upakobbitam.  I 
V,  89,  11 : Gyibam  (Bbritarasbtrasya).. ..prasadair  upa^obbi* 

tam  \ 

Xll.  44,  6 ; Buryodbana-gribam  prasadair  upa'sobbitjam  \ 
XII.  44,8:  Prasada-mala-samyuktaih  {Duhfeasanasya  gri- 

bam)  I 

I.  185, 19 j 20, 22:  Sarvatah  samvritab  (samajavatab)  kubbraib 
prasadaib  sukritoobobbrayaih'  I 
Suvarna-jala-saihYyitair  mani-kuttima-bbtisbanaih  \ 
Sukharobana-sopanair  mabasana-pariobcbbadaib  II 
Asambadba-feata-dyaraih  ^ayanasana-^obbitaib  \ 
Babu-dbatn-pinaddbangair  bimavacb  obbikarair  iva  H 
V.  90,14:  Ye...praaadagr08bv-abodhyaiitiarabka-vajina-  &5yi- 

nab  (Pand.avah)  \ 

XV.  16,  1 : Prasada-barmyesbu  vasudbayam  oba....  1 

Narinam  oba  naranam  oba  nibsvaaah  sumabari  abbufc  I 
XIV.  26,  22: 

Seyam  bbumau  pari&ranta  &ete  prasada-^ayini  I 
Prasada-feala-sambadbam  mani-praYara-kuttimam  1 
Karayamasa  vidhivad-dhema-raiina-vibbusbitam  I 
(14)  MarLUsamhita  (vii.  147,  etc.) : 

G-iri-pyisbtbam  samarubya  prasadam  Ya  rabo  gatab  I 
Aranye  nih&alake  ya  mantrayed  avibhayitah  II 
(16)  Panobatantra  (Bombay,  i.  p.  38,  etc) : 

Eajakanyam sapta-bbumika-prasada-pranta-gatam  1 

(16)  Hitopad0&a^(Bobtlmgk,  p.  167,  1.  30,  etc.) : 

Baja prasada-garbbaib  gatva.. \ 

Prasada-prish^be  spkbopavisbtaiiam  raja-putranam  \ 


PEASA.DA 


423 


(17)  Meghadiita  (ed.  Sbenzler,  64,  etc.):  Abhram-lihagraih  prasadaih  \ 

(18)  Baghnvam'sa  (14,  29,  etc.) : Prasadam  abhram-liham  Sraroha  )| 

(19)  Mrichohbakatika  (ed.  Stenzler,  Cook) : 
p.  79;  Arama-prasada-vedikayam  \ 

p.  84 ; Vidyut-kancbana-dipikeva  raobita  prasada-samcbarmU 
p.  21, 132, 162,  164 ; Prasada-balagram  \ 

(20)  Eraiatarangioii  (Pet.  diet.  4, 102,  etc.) ; PrSsadangaaaiii  \ 

(21)  Ekas  tayor  amum  akarayad  indu-mauleb  prasadam  adri 

tanaya-bhavanam  tathanya — “tbe  one  of  them  built  this 
temple  of  the  god  who  wears  the  moon  on  his  head,  and  the 
other  that  of  the  Daughter  of  the  Mountain.” 

(Dewal  Pra&asti  of  Lalla  the  Ohhinda,  v.  27,  Ep, 
Ind.  vol.  I.  pp.  80,  84). 

(22)  Ishtapurtta-praohura-sukyitarambha-nityadritena  prM&do’yaih 

...... ..nirmapyate-—"  he  caused  this  edifice  to  be  erected 

....in  it  there  is  here  the  god  NarSyana.” 

(Mau-chandella  Inscrip.  of  Madanavarman,  v.  46, 
Bp.  Ind.  vol.  I.  pp.  202,  206). 

(23)  Prasadena  tavamunaiva  haritam  adhva  niruddho  mudha^ 

bhano’dyapi  krito’ati  dakshinaditah  konantavasx  munih  \ 
(Deopara  Inscrip.  of  Vijaya  Sena,  v.  27,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  I.  pp.  310,  314). 

(24)  Akarayat  svaym  Sambhu-prasadali-dvayam  nijah — “ She  too 

made  her  people  construct  that  hall  of  study,  (and)  lay  out 
that  long  line  of  gardens  in  two  ranges  (adjoining)  i§am- 
bhu’s  temple. 

(Bhera-ghat  Inscrip.  of  Alhanadevi,  v.  38,  Bp. 

Ind.  vol.  II.  pp.  13, 16). 

(25)  Aneka-prasadaih  parivritamati  pramtukala&am  giri&a- 

prasadam  vyaraohayat  I 

(Ohitorgadh  Inscrip.  of  Mokala  of  Mewad,  second 
part,  V.  2,  Bp.  Ind,  vol.  il.  p.  421). 


434 


PEASADA 


(26)  Vapi-kupa-tacLaga-kuttima-matha-prasada-satralayan  \ 

(Sridhaxa’s  Devapattana  Pra&asiii,  v.  10,  Bp. 

Ind.  vol.  ii.  p.  440). 

(27)  Maha-Ma-prasada — ^great  stone  temple. 

(Pattadakal  Insorip.  of  Kirtiyarman  II,  lines  7, 
11, 14,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  III.  pp.  4, 6). 

(28)  G-hanam  prasadam  nava-hema-kumba-kalitam  ramyam  maha- 

mamtapam  \ 

“ (He  presented)  a solid  temple  (prasada)  adorned  with  nine 
golden  pinnacles  (knmbha)  and  a beautiful  large  hall  (to  the 
temple  of  Hari,  the  lord  of  MahgaMaila). 

(Mahgalagiri  pillar  Insorip,  v.  51,  Ep.  Ind.  vol. 

VI.  pp,  125, 116). 

(29)  Prasado  raohitas  sudha-chchhavi-hasat-kailata-§aile§yarasya 

y.  22),  prasadam  I^asya  (v.  32),  prasada-kirttih  (v^  34). 

(Two  Bhuvane&yara  Inscrip,  no.  A of  Svapne- 
&vara,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  VI.  p.  202). 

(30)  Prasadam  navabhi^  oha  hema-kalatair  aty-unnatam 

gopura-prakarotsava-mamtapair  upaohitaih  §ri-rama-bha- 
draya  oha — “ an  exceedingly  high  temple  furnished  with  nine 
gilt  domes,  a gate  tower,  a wall  and  festive  hall,  to  the  holy 
Eamabhadra.’’ 

(Kondavidu  Inscrip,  of  Krishnaraya,  v.  27.  Bp. 

Ind.  vol.  VI.  pp.  237,  231). 

(31)  Khanda-sphutita-prasada-punah-samskaranartham  pratipadi- 

tah — “ he  granted  for  defraying  the  expenses  of  the  repairs 
of  the  temple  broken  in  parts.” 

(Plates  of  Dantivarman  of  Gujarat,  line  67,  Ep. 

Jnd.  vol.  VI.  pp.  293,  286). 


iprasAda 


(52)  Tena  bbrairi-yugena  ya  prati-puira-graniSdhVa-&aitei-sthalaiK 
vapi-kupa-nipanaka  satah  ptasada-satradika  1 

Dbaimma-sthaua-parampara  nava-tara  ohakre’fcba  jirnnod- 
dhrita-tat-sarnkbyapi  na  budhyate  yadi  param  tad-Yedini 
meami  I 

(Mount  Abu  Inscrip,  uo.  I,  v.  66,  Up.  Ind.  voL 
vm.  p,  213). 

(33)  TIrtbe  deva-hrade  tena  kritam  prasada-pafiobakam  1 
Sviyam  tatra  dvayam  jatani  yatra  &amkara-ke§iavau  II 

(Sihawa  stoue  Inscrip,  of  Karnaiaja,  v.  9,  Bp. 

Ind.  vol.  IX.  p.  186). 

(34)  l^ri-nemi&varasya  nirakrita-jagad-vishadah  prasadab  samudda- 

dhre — “ Erected  the  temple  of  Nemitvarf>-  which  (temple) 
baa  removed  the  sorrows  of  the  world.’^ 

(The  Ohahamanas  ot  Mar  war,  no.  xxv,  Nadlai 
stone  Insorip.  of  Eanaviradeva,  line  15  f Bp, 
Ind.  vol.  XI.  p.  64). 

(35)  Esba  bbagavato  varaha-murtter  jagat-parayanasya  narayanasya 

tila-prasadah  sva-vishaye’sminn  Airikine  karitah  I 
“ This  stone  temple  of  the  divine  (god)  Naxayana,  who  has 
the  form  of  a Boar  (and)  who  is  entirely  deveted  to  (the 
welfare  of)  the  universe,  has  been  caused  to  be  made  in  this 
in  his  own  vishaya  of  Airikina. 

(Bran  stone  Boar  Insorip.  of  Toramana,  line  7, 
C.  I.  L,  vol.  III.  P.  G.  I.  no.  36,  pp.  160,  161). 

(36)  Nana-dhatu  viohitre  gopahvaya-namni  bhti-dhare  ramye 

karibavan  &aila-mayam  bhanoh  prasada-vara-mukhvam  \ 

“ Has  caused  to  be  made,  on  the  delightful  mountain  which 
is  feokled  with  various  metals  and  has  the  appellation  of 
G-opa,  a stone  temple,  the  chief  among  the  best  of  temples 
of  the  Sun.*’ 


426 


PE  AS  ADA 


Tavad  giri-murdhni  j5ish.th.atii  Sila-prasada-mukliyo  ramye-— “ so 
long  (this)  chief  of  (atone)-t0niples  shall  stand  upon  the 
delightful  summit  of  the  hill.” 

(G-walior  stone  Inscrip,  of  Mihirakula,  lines  6,  8,  9, 
C.  1. 1.,  vol.  in.  F.  a.  I.  no.  37,  pp.  162, 163,  164). 

(37)  Tenochchair  bodhimande  tati-kara-dhavalah  sarvvato  manda- 

pena  I 

Kantah  prasada  esha  smara-bala-jayinah  karito  loka-tastuh  II 

“ By  him  this  beautiful  mansion  of  the  Teacher  of  mankind, 
who  overcame  the  power  of  (the  god)  Smara,  dazzling 
white  as  the  rays  of  the  moon,  with  an  open  pavilion  on  all 
sides,  has  been  caused  to  be  made  at  the  exalted 
Bodhimanda.” 

(Bodhimanda  is  also  called  Vajrasana,  the  throne  under  the 
Bodhi-tree  at  Bodh-gaya,  on  which  Buddha  sat  when 
attaining  Bodhi  or  perfect  wisdom.  The  word  ‘kanta’ 
here  might  have  a technical  architectural  meaning.  In  the 
MSnasara,  the  names  of  the  buildings  of  various  storeys 
generally  end  with  kanta,  e.  g.,  Meru-kanta,  Hima-k5nta 
etc.,  etc.;  so  also  the  names  of  the  columns,  e.g.,  Brahma- 
kanta,  Vishnu-kanta,  etc). 

(Bodh-Gaya  Inscrip,  of  Mahanaman,  lines  10,  11, 
0. 1.  I.,  vol.  in.  F.  a.  I.  no.  71,  pp.  276,  278, 
276,  and  Sanskrit  and  old  Oanarese  Insorip. 
no.  166,  Bodh-gaya  Inscrip,  of  Mahanaman 
line  10  f.,  of  A.  D.  688,  589,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xv. 

pp.  368,  359,  367,  c.  I,  para  2) 

(38)  Abdhutah  sirhha-paniya-nagare  yena  karitah  | 

Kirbti-stambhgi  ivabhati  prasadah  parvvati-pateh  II 

■ ‘ In  the  town  of  Simhapaniya  he  caused  to  be  built  a wonder- 
ful temple  of  the  Lord  of  Parvati,  which  shines  like  a column 
of  fame, 

(Sasba.hu  Inscrip,  of  Mahipala,  v.  11,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XV.  pp.  37,  42). 


PEi.Sl.DA 


427 


(39)  Sa  prasadam  aohikarad  divishadam  kedara-devasya  cha  \ 

“ He  caused  to  be  built  a temple  of  the  inbabitauts  of  heaven 
and  of  the  god  Kedara.” 

(Gaya  Inscrip,  of  Yakshapala,  v,  12,  Ind  Ant. 

vol.  XVI.  pp.  66,  66). 

(40)  Vejaiiito  pasade  (priisada) — “ Vaijayanta,  the  palace  (oi 

Indra) 

(Bharaut  Inscrip,  no.  79,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xxi. 

p.233). 

(41)  Nayaka-iri-hari-raja-devo  Ha(ha)take§vara3ya  prasSdam  kyi- 

tam  — “ The  temple  of  Hataketvara  (Siva)  was  founded  by 
Nayaka  (leader),  the  illustrious  Hariiaja.” 

(Nagpur  Museum  stone  Insorip.  of  Brahmadeva 
of  Eayapura,  lines  9-12,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xxil. 

p.83). 

(42)  Maha-lakshmi-deviya  prasadavam  geyada  Vitvakarmma-nir- 

mmita-subbasitan — “ built  the  temple  of  the  goddess  MahS- 
lakshmx,  as  if  a creation  of  Vitvakarmma.” 

(Ep.  Oarnat.  vol.  V.  part  I,  Hassan  Taluq,  no.  149, 
Eoman  text,  p.  86). 

The  above  mentioned  inscription  (dated  conjeoturally  A.  D. 
1113)  ends  with  the  following  passage  apparently  quoted 
from  a book  for  sculptors  and  architects  (griha-vastu) : 
Vimaia-sarvvato-bhadra-vrishabha-nalinika  - uttuhga-viraja- 
gari  da  - varddhamana  - ^ahkha-vyitta  - pushpaka  -griha-raja 
svasti.”  (Ibid,  text,  p.  89,  last  3 lines). 

(43)  Prasada-malabhir  alamkyitaih  dharam  vidaryyaiva  samutthi- 

tam  \ 

Vimana-mala-sadyi&am  yattrS  gyiham  purnnendu-karamalam  II 
Here,  cleaning  as  under  the  earth,  there  rise  up  houses 
which  are  decorated  with  succession  of  storeys ; which 
are  like  rows  of  aerial  chariots ; (and)  which  are  as 
pure  (?  white)  as  the  rays  of  the  full  moon.” 

(Mandasor  stone  Insorip.  of  Kumaragupta,  line 
7,  C.  1. 1.,  vol.  HI,  F.  G,  I.  no,  18,  pp.  81,  86), 


m 


PElBADA 


(44)  Svargarfeham  kritayau  pratapa-nripatik  sadyoahito-refeayok 

prasadam  yasii-patra-padma-sadi’ifeam  feringash^akaik  &obki- 
tam  \ 

Tke  iuaoription  ia  on  a slab  in  tke  wall  near  tke  soutkern 
door  of  a temple  of  Viaknu  close  to  tke  royal  palace  in 
Katmandu.  Tkis  temple  is  apparently  tke  building  men- 
tioned in  tke  inscription  (quoted  above).  It  is  an  octagon, 
and  kas  three  stories  ” 

T'ke  plan  of  tke  temple  is  like  a lotus  of  eight  leaves  (Vasu- 
patra-padma-sadri&a) . 

(Inscrip,  from  Nepal,no.l8,In8orip.-ofPratapa- 
malla,  v.  10,  Ind.  .Ant.  vol.  IX.  pp.  188,  187  L, 
189,  0.  2,  para  2). 

(45)  Big  - bkagantara  - sannive&ita  - okatur  - dvarak  sukkaroksnak 

pasckad  ramya-auvarna-ketana-tala-nyaata-tri-tulo’ntarah  1 
Sauyarnojivala-kumbka-patra-patala-prodbhaaita&a-mukhah 
prasado  ditatad  abkipsita-sadavasa-prasakbo  mudah  II 

(Inaorip.  from  Nepal,  no.  23,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix. 

p.  194). 

(46)  Grama-nagara-kheda-kharvada-madamba-dronamukka  - patta- 

namgalimdam  aneka-mata-kuta-prasada-devayabapiamgali- 

daxn  oppuya-agrahara-pattapamgaliikdam  atisayav-appa \ 

“ (At  Teridala,  a merchant  town  situated  in  eke  centre  and 
tke  first  in  importance  among  tke  twelve  (towns)  in 'thf 
glorious  Kundi  Three  thousand,  adorned  with) — villages, 
towns,  hamlets,  villages  sorrounded  by  hills,  groups  of 
villages,  sea-girt  towns  and  chief  cities,  ^ with  elegant 
mansions,  palaces  and  temples,  and  with  shining  agrahara 
towns  in  tke  country  of  Kuntala.” 

(Old  Canarese  Insorip.  at  Terdal,  line  68,  Ind. 

Ant.  vol,  XIV.  pp.  19,  26). 


PRlSADA 


m 


(47)  ‘Prasadam  Ke&avasya  sphuta-ruchi-kala&enanohayat  kanoha- 
nena  1309M 

‘ Prasadam  Ke&avasya  sthira-kala&a-y afeam  karayamasa 

divyam  1669'| 

‘ Prasadam  Kefeavasya  sthira-kala§a-yutam  Hajnayaryo 

vyatanit  1697’  I 

Mi\  Eice  has  translated  ‘ prasada  ’ in  all  these  three  instances 
by  ‘tower’  although  the  term  means  primarily  temple 
here. 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  I,  Belur  Talug^  nos. 

63, 64,  65,  Eoman  text,  pp.  136,  136, 
Transl.  p.  69). 

(48)  “Causing  a tower  (prasadal,  decorated  with  carvings  and 

figures  (chitra-vichitra-patra-nutamam  prasadamam),  to  he 
erected  of  stone,  and  a golden  kala&a  to  he  made  for  the 
pinnacle  of  the  temple  (devalayagrakke),  he  in  many  ways 
increased  his  fame  in  the  world.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no. 

242,  Transl,  p.  139,  para  6 ; Eoman  text, 
p.  247,  last  four  lines). 

(49)  Katyam  vitve&vara-dvari  hima-diti  kharopamam  } 
Padmetivarasya  devasya  prasadam  iikarot  sudhih  \ 

‘ On  the  north  side  of  the  entrance  to  the  Vitvetvara  temple 
at  Kafei  built  a solid  and  lofty  tomple  of  the  god  Padmefevara 
(Vishnu)”  on  May  16th,  1296  A.  D. 

(Sharqi.  Arch,  of  Jaunpur,  Insorip  no.  xxvi, 
v.  3,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp.  series,  vol.  i. 

p.  61). 

(60)  Vapi-ktipa-tadaga-kuttima-matha  prasada-satrSlayan  1 

Sauvarna-dhvaja-toranapana-pura-grama-prapa-mandapan  \ 
Vyadhapapad  ayam  chaulukya-chudamanih  1 

(Sridhara’s  Devapattana  Pratasti,  v.  10,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol,  11.  p.  440-441). 


4$0 


PEASADA-MALmi. 


(61)  In.  the  Buddhist  literature  buildings  are  divided  into  five 
classes  (panoha-lenani) — Vihara  (monastery),  Ardha-yoga 
(stated  by  the  commentator  Buddhaghosa  to  imply  ‘ suvarua- 
vanga-griha a special  type  of  the  then  Bengal  building, 
partly  religious  and  partly  residential),  Prasada  (wholly 
residential  storeyed  building),  Harmya  (larger  type  of 
storeyed  buildings),  and  Guha  (underground  buildings) 

(Yinaya  texts,  Mahavagga,  i.  30,  4,  p.  73-74 ; 

Chulla-vagga,  vi.  1,  2,  p.  168). 

The  commentator  Buddhaghosa  does  not  explain  ‘ Prasada  ’ 
quoted  above  from  the  Yinaya  texts;  he  simply  says  ‘ pasado 
iti  digha-pasado.  ’ According  to  Ehys  Davids  ‘ Prasada  ’ is 
“ a long  storied  mansion,  or  the  whole  of  an  upper  storey,  or 
the  storied  buildings  (cl  his  transL  of  Mahavagga,  p.  173; 
Chulla-vagga,  p.  161,  note  2).  Sir  M,  Williams  seems  to 
explain  (in  his  dictionary)  this  ‘ Prasada  ’ by  “ the  monks’ 
hall  for  assembly  and  confession.” 

Of,  satta-bhumika-pasada — “ buildings  of  seven  storeys  in 
light.” 

(Jataka,  i.  pp.  227,  346;  v.  pp.-  62,  426 ; vi.  p.  577). 

From  the  illustrations,  given  above,  it  is  clear  that  the  term 
‘ prasada  ’ implies  both  religious  and  residential  buildings. 
It  denotes  the  gorgeous  temples  as  well  as  small  pavilions 
(mandapa)  where  a deity  or  the  emblematical  phallus  of 
^iva  is  installed.  It  includes  magnificent  palaces  and 
smaller  residences.  It  implies  a succession  of  storeys,  and  a 
tower,  ‘ a lofty  seat  or  platform  for  spectators,  a building 
erected  on  high  foundations  and  approached  by  means  of 
steps,  a building  consecrated  to  a deity  or  inhabited  by  a 
prince,  a temple,  a palace,  and  the  assembly  room  and  con- 
fessional hall  of  the  Buddhist  priesthood.’ 

PBASADA-MALIKA — A class  of  buildings. 

(Kamikagama,  XLv.  4,  see  under  Malika). 


BANDHA 


4S1 


PBIYA-DAR^ANA — One  of  the  five  Indian  orders. 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  65,  67,  see  under  Stambha). 
PLAKSHA-DVA.RA — ^A  baok-door,  a side-door,  a private  entrance. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  264,  v,  16,  see  under  IJdumbara). 


PH 

PHANA — A hood  in  connection  with  the  joinery. 

(M.  XVII.  134,  see  Sandhi-karman). 
PHALAKA — A plank,  a moulding,  an  architectural  member. 

(1)  A plank  s of.  pralamba-pbalaka  (M.  xn.  126). 

A member  of  the  column  (M.  xv.  60,  51,  83, 186,  etc). 

In  connection  with  the  arch  (torana) : 

Natika  pbalaka  musbti-bandbanam  patra-vallikam  \ 

(M.  XLVi.  65). 

See  also  M.  L.  66, 74,  Lxv.  161, 162,  lxvii.  16,  etc. 

(2)  Padashtam&a-sbad-ani&aika-pbalakai&  cbbadayet  paritab  II 
Kaya-padantaram  cbbadyam  pbalakaib  sara-darujaih  11 

(Kamikagama,  Liv.  24,  30). 

(3)  A part  of  a column  (Suprabbedagama,  xxxi.  68,  see  under 

Stambha). 

PHAIiAKASANA^ — A synonym  of  the  bedstead. 

(M.  III.  II,  see  under  Paryanka). 
PHELA. — (cf.  Chbela) — The  vault  of  the  foundation-pit. 

(Kamikagama,  xxxi.  74-76,  see  under  Chbela). 


B 

BANDHA — Joining  or  folding  together,  a band,  the  foundation. 

Dvav-aratniih  tri-padini  va  pade  bandham  karayet — “Foun- 
dation shall  be  2 aratnis  by  3 padas. 

(Kau^iliya-Artha&astra,  chap.  LXV.  p.  166). 


hAJjANAMk 


m 

BA(VA)LANAKA — A raised,  platform  or  seat  along  the  wall  of  the 
council  hall  of  a temple. 

Teiah-pala  iti  k8]ii1]imdn-saohivah  feamkhojjvalabhih  §ila-l.rBniDnia 
sphnrad-imdu-riiohiram  nemi-prabho3r  mamdiram  \ 

Uohchair  mamdapam  agrato  jina-(yara)-tasa-dvipairi  oha^atam  tab- 
parfeveshn  balanakam  oha  purato  nishpadayamasivan  il 
It  “ apparently  is  identical  with  Marathi  balam  which  acoordinp  to 
the  Dictionary  of  Molesworth  and  Candy  means  a raised  seat 
along  the  walls  of  the  gabhara  or  Sabha-mandapa  of  a temple.” 
Dr.  Liiders. 

(Mount  Abn  Inscrip,  no.  1,  61,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  VIII.  pp.  W,  200). 
BALI(-I)KA(-A) — A moulding  of  the  entablature,  the  edge  of  a roof. 
Maha-bhara-tula  karya  balikordhve  vi&eshatah  1( 

'Dula-balikayor  madhye  dvi-dandam  athava  punah  II 
Hamsa-bhuta-balir  vatha  nidra  va  danda-manatah  I 
Tri-padodaya-yukta  va  vidheya  vajarnpari  II 

(Kamikagama,  liv.  13,  16,  ^10), 

BALI-PlTHA-(KA) — The  seat  of  sacrifice,  an  altar  for  offerings. 

(1)  Brishabhasyopari-bhage  tu  kalpayed  bali-pithakam  » 

Copurasya  bahir  vapi  sthapayed  antar  vapi  bali-pithakam  I 
Antar  mandala-defee  tu  purvavat  bali-pithakam  I 

(M.  XXXII.  09, 100, 133). 

(2)  6rimat-saimdara-paficha-ratra-vidhiyim  nirmanamam  madisi  1 
Srimantam  bali-pithamam  pramudadim  viprarggalam  madisi  II 

“ Caused  a bali-pitha  to  be  erected  according  to  the  rule  of 
the  (l^ilpa-tastra)  Panoharatra.  ” 

(Ep.  Oarnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  8, 
Eoman  text,  p.  106,  Transl.  p.  46). 

(3)  “ There  ho  enlarged  the  Kalideva-mantapa,  and  re-established 

the  bali-pitha.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  I,  Arsikere  Taluq,  no.  22, 
Transl.  p.  119,  largest  para,  last  line). 


BASADl 


433 


(4)  “ There  are  also  fragments  (of  inscriptions)  belonging  to  the 
time  of  Bajaraja  I,  and  Bajendra-Chola  I,  on  a mandapa 
to  the  west  of  the  bali-pitha.  ” 

(Notes  on  Tiruvellarai  Inscrip.  Ind,  Ant.  vol. 

XXXIV.  p.  264,  para  6,  line  10  f). 

(6)  “ Haridasa-Eaiita,  set  up  in  front  of  the  god  Prasanna- 

Madhava  of  Bel|ur,  a festival  (utsava)  inantapa,  a pillar  for 
lights  (dipa-maleya-kambha),  and  an  altar  for  ofierings  (balH- 
pitha,  i.e.,  bali-pitha).” 

(Ep.  Oarnat.  voL  IV.  Nttgamahgala  Taluq,  no.  42, 
Transl.  p.  124,  Eoman  text,  p.  213). 

BASADI— (see  Vasati) — A Jain  temple,  a shrine,  a monastery,  modern 
Basti. 

(1)  Badalalaya-basadi — Jaina  temple  of  the  Jaina  goddess  Kadala- 

laya. 

(Anmakonda  Inscrip.  of  Prola,  v,  9,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  IX. 

pp.  262,  257). 

(2)  “ And  on  the  top  of  the  rock  to  the  south  of  the  Badra  tank  of 

that  mountain,  Ganeyana  Mara  had  the  Par§va-Jiua  vasati, 
erected.  This  Jogavattige  basadi,  may  it  endure  as  long  as 
sun  and  moon,  protected  by  the  paucha-maha-sahda  (five 
words  for  Jain  obeisance),  and' by  unnumbered  others,  ” 

‘ Basadi  ’ in  the  sense  of  Jaina  temple  is  of  frequent  use  in  the 
volumes  of  Ep.  Garnat.  Its  Sanskrit  form  is,  of  course, 
‘ vasati  ’ an  instance  of  which  should  be  noticed  in  the 
passage  quoted  above. 

(Bp.  Garnat.  vol.  xii.  Pavugada  Taluq,  no,  52, 
Transl,  p.  126,  line  2,  Boman  text,  p.  206  f), 

(3)  “ Being  actuated  by  veneration,  gave  to  the  basadi  of  the 

Bha|arar five  mattars  (of  land).  ” 

28 


434 


BASABl 


“ Basadi  (means)  a Jain  temple  ; ttie  word  is  a Tadbhava 
corruption  of  the  Sanskrit  ‘ vasati  abode,  dwelling,  a Jain 
monastery ; the  modern  form  is  ‘ Basti/  ” Dr.  Meet. 

(Sanskrit  and  Old  Kanarese  Insorip.  Ind.  Ant.  'Vol. 

IV.  p.  181,  c.  1,  line  10,  and  foot  note). 

(4)  Purigereyalu  madisid-Anesejjeya-basadige 

“In  the  lands  of  G-udigere,  which........ were  under  the 

control  of  the  Jain  temple  called  Ane  8ejjeya„...,» 

built  at  Purigere.  ” 

(Gudigere  Jain  Insorip.  line  21,  Ind.  Ant.  vol. 

XVIII.  pp.  39,  37). 

Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  ii.  Inscriptions  (i)  on  Chandra-giri, 
nos.  1-74,  (ii)  on  Vindhya-giri  nos.  76-123;  and  (iii)  in 
the  town,  nos.  124-144  : 

(6)  “ Caused  basadis  and  mana-stambhas  to  be  erected  in  numerous 
places. ” 

(No.  38,  Roman  text,  p.  7,  line  17,  Transl.  p.  121,  line  6). 

(6)  “ The  basadi  of  his  guru  Sri-rupa-narayana  of  Eollapura.” 

(No.  39,  Roman  text,  p.  7-8,  Transl.  p.  122,  line  18). 

(7)  “ The  basadis  of  Gahga-vadi,  however  many  there  were,  he 

restored.  ’V  ^ ^ 

(No.  46,  Roman  text,  p.  21,  .Transl.  p.  126,  line  12). 

(8)  “ This  Lakshmi,  wife  of  Gahga  sena-pati,  the  abode  of  all 

good  qualities,  had  this  new  Jina  temple  (vasati)  made.’' 

(No.  63,  Roman  text,  p.  59,  Transl.  p.  149). 

(9)  “ The  Dandanayaka  Gahga  had  this  basadi  made  for  his 

mother  Pochavue  .” 

(No.  64,  Roman  text,p.  59,  Transl.  p.  149). 

(10)  “ The  bastis  (basadinal)  of  Gahga-vadi,  however  many  there 

were,  he  had  renewed.  " 

(No.  90,  Roman  text,  p.  72,  line  10  from  bottom 
upwards,  Transl.  p.  168,  para  6). 

(11)  “ He  had  these  images  of  Bharata  and  Bahubali  Kevali, 

the  basadis,  and  the  side  doors  of  that  tirtha  made  for 


BASADT 


436 


beauty  ; having  erected  eighty  virgin  (?  new) 

baaadis,  and  repaired  two  hundred  (that  were  in  ruins),  he 
obtained  glory,  the  general  Bharata.  ” 

(No.  116,  Roman  text,  p.  87,  Transl.  p.  171). 

(12)  “ He  built  a small  basti  on  the  lower  hill  ; repaired  three 

bastis  at  the  north  gate,  (and)  the  Mangayi  basti,  repaired 
the  Hagalaya  (a  village  to  the  south  of  Sra  vana  Belgola)- 
basti,  and  made  gifts  for  supplying  food  in  one.  ” 

(No.  134,  Roman  text,  p.  100,  Transl.  p.  179), 

(13)  “ And  in  Kellahgere  he  (also)  made  five  large  bastis  and  five 

beautiful  ponds.” 

**  The  money  obtained  from  this  place,  will  be  used  for  repairing 
the  Archari’s  and  other  dwelling  and  the  basadis,  for  the 
worship  and  decoration  of  the  god,  and  for  gifts  of  food  to 
the  people  visiting  the  basadi  and  to  the  assembly  of 
Rishis.  ” 

(No.  137a,  Roman  text,  p.  104,  lines  6,  9, 
Transl.  p.  182,  paras  6, 11). 

(14)  “ Keep  whatever  you  have  obtained  from  the  paddy  lands  and 

dry  fields,  together  with  the  waste  land,  the  firewood,  leaves, 
decay  of  the  basadi  house  and  so  forth,  belonging  to  the 
endowments  of  Hommata  deva,  Kama^ha  Par&va  deva,  6ri- 
vallabha  deva  of  Bhapd^raiya's  basadi*  and  principal 
basadis. 

(No.  187  0.,  Transl.  p.  183). 

(16)  ” And  for  the  basadi  whioh  he  had  made ..a  small  tank 

east  of  the  basadi......  .'V 

(No.  144,  Transl.  p.  187,  line  9 from  bottom 
upwards). 

(16)  “ He  made  a grant  of  lands  for  the  basadis  of  the  Tri-kuta* 
basadi  whioh  he  had  caused  to  be  erected  in  Arakottara  in 
the  Enne-nad.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  iv.  Chamarajnagara  Taluq. 

no.  83,  Transl.  p.  10). 


486 


BASADI 


(17)  “ He  caused  a basadi  to  be  erected  iu  Muguli  iu  Sige-nad, 

and  setting  up  therein  the  god  Par'sva,  presented  the  basadi 
and  land  for  the  god  to  their  guru.” 

In  this  instance,  it  should  be  noted,  the  meaing  of  ‘ basadi  * as 
a Jaina  temple  is  unquestionable, 

(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol.  V.  part  I,  Hassan  Taluk,  no.  129, 

Transl.  p 36). 

(18)  “ Hoysaia-Gavunda,  son  of in  memory  of  his  mothers 

death,  erected  a basadi,  and  in  the  presence  of  all  the  resi- 
dents and  farmers  of  the  town,  divided  certain  land  (specified) 
equally  to  the  basadi  and  the  temple  (basadigaih  deval- 

yakkam  bhumi  samana-vagi  basadige .),  washing  the  feet 

of  Ahobala-Pamdita.” 

The  distinction  made  here  between  the  basadi  and  the  temple 
(devalaya)  should  be  noted. 

(Bp,  Oarnat.  vol.  iv.  Kadur  Taluq,  no.  69,  Transl, 
p.  13,  para  5,  Eoman  text,  p.  46,  last  para,  line  4 f). 

(19)  ” Thus  celebrated,  Barmma-Beva,  the  Bhujabala-Ganga 

Pennmadi-Deva,  made  the  basadi,  which  Badiga  and 
Madhava  had  formerly  established  on  the  hill  of  Mandali, 
and  for  which  the  kings  of  his  Ganga  line  had  continued  to 
provide  the  offerings,  and  which  they  had  afterwards  caused 
to  be  built  of  wood,  the  chief  of  all  the  basadis  hitherto 
existing  Or  in  future  to  be  established  in  the  Bdadore-seventy 
of  the  Mandali-Thousand,  giving  it  the  name  of  Pattada- 
basadi  (the  Crown-basadi),  and  endowed  it  with  certain 
lands  (specified).” 

(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol.  vii.  Shimoga  Tainq,  no,  4, 
Transl.  p.  8,  para  4). 

(20)  " The  great  minister,, enlarged  a tank,  formed 

paddy  fields,  erected  a temple,  and  established  places  for 
distribution  of  water  and  food.  And  the  basadi  he  built 
shone  with  big  tank  of  Tattekere  surrounding  it.” 


BASADI 


437 


“ And  for  those  two  hasadis  of  Mlavatti  and  Tafetikere,  on 
the  death  of  Jinadasa  as  a reward  of  perggade  Nokkayya’s 
boldness  and  liberality,  G-anga-Permmadi-Beva  granted  the 
royal  insignia  of  two  horns,  a canopy,  ohamaraa,  and  bi? 
drnms.^’ 

“ And  Gahga-permmadi-deva  granted  for  the  basadi  the  shop- 
tax  and  customs  of  Tattikere.’’ 

(Ibid  no.  10,  Transl.jp.  11,  last  two  paras,  p.  12, 

paras  2,  3). 

(21)  “ For  the  mathadhi-pati  of  Bandanike  was  erected  a mantapa 

in  front  of  the  Santi-Jina  basadi/’ 

(Ep.  Carnat,  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Talug,  no.  228, 
Transl.  p.  133,  Roman  text,  p.  232). 

(22)  See  both  ‘ basti  ’ and  basadi  ’ (in  Bp.  Carnat.  yoI.  m.  Seringa- 

patam  Taluq,  no.  144,  146,  etc.  etc.,  Transl.  p.  34,  and  also  in 
other  volumes  of  Ep.  Carnat.  referred  to  above)  and  the  sket- 
ches of  bastis  between  pp.  60,  61,  (Introduction,  Ep. 
Carnat.  vol.  ii),  and  pp.  150, 161  (Translation),  and  compare 
the  following  from  Eergusson : 

“ The  principal  group  of  the  Bastis  of  the  Jains,  at  present 
known  at  least  above  the  ghats,  is  that  of  Sravana  Belgula. 
There  are  there  two  hills—the  Indragiri,  on  a shoulder  of  the 
other,  called  Ohandragiri,  stand  the  Bastis,  fifteen  in  num- 
: her.  As  might  be  expected  from  their  situation,  they  are 
all  of  the  Bravidian  style  of  architecture,  and  are  conse- 
quently built  in  gradually  receding  stories,  each  of  which  is 

ornamented  with  small  simulated  cells No  instance 

occurs  among  them  of  , the  curvilinear  sikra  (^ikhara)  or 
spire,  which  is  universal  with  the  northern  Jains,  except 
in  the  instance  of  Ellora.” 

“ The  following  wood-out  (photo  no.  149)  conveys,  however,  an 
idea  of  the  general  external  appearance,  which  is  more 
ornamental  than  that  of  northern  Jain  temples.  The 
outer  wall  of  those  in  the  north  is  almost  always  quite  plain. 


438 


BASUNDHEA 


The  southern  ones  are  as  generally  ornamented  with  pilas- 
ters and  crowned  with  a row  of  ornamental  cells.  Inside 
is  a court  probably  square  and  surrounded  by  cloisters,  at 
the  back  of  which  rises  the  vimana  over  the  cell,  which 
contains  the  principal  image  of  the  Tirthankar.  It  always 
is  surmounted  by  a small  dome,  as  is ' universally  the  case 
with  every  vimana  in  Dravidian  architecture,  instead  of 
with  the  mysterious  amalaka  ornament  of  northern  sikraa 
(^ikharas).” 

'*  It  may  be  a vain  speculation,  but  it  seems  impossible  to  look 
at  this  wood-out  (no,  149),  anci  not  to  be  struck  with  its 
resemblance  to  the  temples  of  southern  Babylonia.  The 
same  division  into  stories  with  their  cells  : the  backward 
position  of  the  temple  itself:  the  panelled  or  pilastered 
basement,  all  these  points  of  resemblance,  it  seems  difficult 
to  regard  as  purely  accidental.” 

(Bergusson,  Ind.  & East.  Arch.  p.  2 69-270), 

BACVAySUNBHEA— The  earth,  a type  of  pent-roof. 

(M.  xvm.  177.  see  under  Lupa). 

BAHALA— “(see  Bahulya)— An  extension,  a projection,  a sugar-cane- 
like  moulding. 

(1)  Dvara-tare  ohatush-paiioha-shat-saptashta-vibhajite  II  1 

Ekamta(m)  sutra-pattih  syat  samam  va  bahalam  bhavet  I 

Ardham  va  pada-hinam  va  bahalam  parikirtitam  11  2 

6ilaya  cha  mrida  py-athava  taruna  raohayed  atha  kudyam 

ativa-dridham  \ 

Tad  ihottara-vistaratah  sadrifeam  bahalam  kathitam  tali- 

padi-yutam  II  1’ 

(Vastu-vidya,  ed,  Ganapati  ^astri,  xiv.  1,  2 ; xv.  1). 

(2)  In  connection  with  a pillar ; 

Ash^aihtam  yoga-vistaram  tad-ardham  bahalam  bhavet  I 

(M.  XXXIX.  69), 


BAHULA 


(3)  Stamblia-Yyaaa-aamo(-mam)  va  tad-ardham  bahalam  (?  bahu- 

lam)  bhavet  11 

Kavata-bahulam  prokbam  dandardham  va  ghanam  bhavet  II 

(Kamikagama,  lv.  36,  38). 
It  is  clear  from  v.  38,  that  ghana  or  thickness  is  not  to  be 
confused  with  bahala  or  bahula. 

BAHIB'AI^Q-A—'The  outer  court,  the  external  side  of  a building. 
Athava  bahir-ange  tu  cheahU-dig-vishnor  alayam  \ 

Anyesham  sarva-lihganam  nagarat  bahir-ahgatah  i 

(M*.  IX.  267,  402). 

BAHIE-BHITTI — The  outer  wall,  an  outside  partition. 

Antar-vapram  bahir-bhittir  treshtham  dirgam  cha  ohulika 

(-am)  I 
(M.  IX.  361,  etc). 

BAHIE-MUKHA — With  face  towards  the  outside,  projecting  out- 
ward. 

In  connection  with  foundations  : 

G-yiha-garbham  antar-mukham  syad  grSma-garbham  bahir- 

mukham  \ 
(M.  XII.  216). 

BAHtl-MANDAPA — (cf.  Mukha-mandapa)— -A  kind  of  group  pavilion. 
Devalayeshu  sarveshu  sammnkhe  bahu-mandapam  \ 

(M.  XXXIV.  33). 

The  pavilion  in  front  of  a temple  is  generally  called  Mukha- 
mandapa. 

BAHU-LII^IG-A— A kind  of  phallus,  phalli  in  group. 

CM.  MI.  76,  77,  72,  etc.,  see  under  Lihga). 
BAHULA — ^An  architectural  member  of  the  balance,  the  extended 
part  of  the  scales  outside  the  holes  through  which  the  scales 
are  joined  with  the  beam  by  strings. 

Tad(jihvagra)-ardham  bahulaih  kuryat  tan-mule  ohhidra- 

samyutam  | 
(M.I..  184). 


440 


BALA-PAEYAl^KA 


BALA-PAEYA^KA — (see  Paryaaka)— A small  bedstead,  a couch, 

BALHTJLYA — (perhaps  for  bahalya,  seeBahala) — Abundance,  super- 
fluity, extension,  hence  projection. 

(1)  Stambha-samam  bahulyam — bahulya  is  equal  to  the  column  . 

(Brihat-saihhita,  mi.  30). 

Vistara-pada-pratimaih  bahulyam  feakhayoh  smyitam — the  pro- 
jection of  the  two  door-frames  is  equal  to  nearly  | of  the 
breadth  (of  che  door) 

(Brihat-samhita,  lvi.  13). 

Kern  translates  ‘ bahulya  ’ by  thickness,  which  does  not  suit 
at  least  to  the  first  instance,  (see  J.  B.  A*.  S.,  N.  S„  vol.  VI. 

pp.  286,  318), 

(2)  Yistara-pada-pratimam  bahulyam  §akhayoh  smritam-  \ 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  20,  same  as  no.  2 above). 

(3)  Yiatararddhena  bahulyam  sarvesham  eva  kirtitam  \ 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  104,  v.  29). 

BIMBA — An  idol,  an  image. 

(M.  m.  22,  Lxvni.  1,  etc). 

Kirmmitam  tamti-nathasya  bimbakam — “image  of  ^anti- 
natha  was  made.” 

(Honwad  Insorip.  of  Sc^mstvara  i,  line  30,  Ind. 

Ant.  vol.  xix.  p,  273). 

BI(Yl)EA-G-ALA — (also  Biragal  or  Birakal,  see  Vira-tasana)-— 
Monuments  set  up  in  memory  of  a hero  at  first,  and  this  honour' 
is  next  extended  to  any  one  who  dies  after  having  done  some 
good  work;  lastly  it  implies  a simple  memorial  monument, 
resembling  perhaps  the  pagoda-shaped  ma^has,  constructed  by 
the  relatives  and  admirers  of  the  departed ; a monumental  stone 
erected  in  memory  of  a warrior. 

(1)  “ But  her  son  Pilleya-Nayaka,  (after  her  death)  performing 
the  further  ceremonies,  set  up  this  biragal  in  the  presence 
of  the  god  Honnetvara,  and  made  a grant  of  laud  (specified) 
for  the  offerings  to  the  god  Honnetvara  and  for  carrying  on 
the  worship  of  the  biragal  washing  the  feet  of  Janneya- 


BODHIKA 


441 


gTjru.  Thafc  Janneya-guru  and  his  suoeeasors  will  carry  on 
the  worship  of  that  biragal  we  most  firmly  believe.” 

(Bp,  Oarnat,  vol.  yii.  Shimoga  Talnq,  no.  62, 
last  four  lines,  Boinan  text,  p,  42,  Transl 
no.  61-62,  p.  24,  line  4 f). 

(2)  “ His  yonnger  brother  Channappa  put  up  this  bira-kallu  for 

him.” 

“ Her  junior  nnole  Chenna  put  up  this  biragal.” 

(Bp.  Camat.  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Talug,  nos.  1, 
%i  Transl.  p.  S9). 

(3)  “ A grant  of  land  (specified)  was  .made  for  maintaining  the 

worship  and  ceremonies  of  this  biragal.” 

(Bp,  Carnat,  vol.  vn.  Honnati  Taluq,  no.  117, 
Transl  p.  178). 

(4)  ” And  killing  many  who  opposed  him,  he  did  his  duty  to  his 

lord  and  gained  the  world  ot  gods.  His  brother-in-law  with 
his  son  and  daughter  set  up  this  vira-tasana  for  him.” 

(Bp.  Oarnat,  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Talnq,  no.  144, 
Transl  p.  107,  Boman  text,  p.  191). 
BUDBHI-SAMKlEN A— A pavilion  with  50  pillars. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v,  9,  see  under  Mandapa). 

Wy  between  the  breast  and  backbone. 

In  Qonneotion  with  the  da&a-tsla  measure  ; 

Bfihati  saptamtakam  kaksha-taram  samayatam  j 
Brihati  stana-simantam  sardha-dvir-ashta  matrakam  I 

(M.  Lxv.  162-163). 

BBBA— An  idol  or  image.  (M.  ni.  17,  26;  nxYii.  3,  etc). 

“ Created  the  temple  of  Chamaraje&vara  together  with  new 
images(bera),” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  IV.  ChSmaraJnagar  Taluq, 
no.  86,  Boman  text,  p.  18,  line  9 f,  Transl. 

‘ P.ll). 

BOI)HIKA(-A)— (also  Vodhikaj  see  Mandi)— The  crowning  member 
of  the  capital ; this  is  placed  upon  the  abacus  (phalaka)  and  under 
the  table  of  cornices.  It  may  he  identified  with  the  oarbel  which 


449 


BQDHI-MAI^PA 


in  European  arohiteoture  is  a blook  of  stone  projecting  from  a wall 
and  supporting  the  beams  of  a roof  or  any  weight. 

(See  Dravidian  Arch.  Jouveau  Pubrenil,  ed,  Aiyangar,  p.  26), 

See  Suprabhedagama  (xxxi.  107,  67)  under  Stambha. 

Of,  Bodhikam  mushti-bandham  cha  phalakS.  tl^lka  ghatam  I 

(M.  xjjYli,  18,  etc), 

See  the  photographic  views  of  the  Corinthian  capitals  from 
Jamalgiri  (Fergusson,  Hist,  of  Ind.  & Bast.  Arch,  p,  173,  figs.  94, 

96), 

See  Buddhist  Cave  temples  (fig.  no.  21,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp, 
series,  vol.  IV.  p,  62 ; vol.  XLi.  figs.  1,  2,  3,  4,  6,  6), 

®OI)HI-MANPA’*—A  raised  terrace  near  a temple,  the  miraculous 
throne  under  the  Bodhi-tree  at  Q-aya  also  called  VajrSsana  or 
diamond  throne. 

Tenoohohair  Bbodhi^mandle  tati^kara-dhavalah  sarvvato  mand*®'” 
pena  kantah  prasada  esha  smara-bala.’-jayinah  karito  loka*tastuh  \ 

“ By  him  this  beautiful  mansion  of  the  Teacher  of  mankind,  who 
overcame  the  power  of  (the  god)  Smara,  dassling  white  as  the  rays 
of  the  moon,  with  an  open  pavilion  on  all  sides  has  been  caused 
to  be  made  at  the  exalted  Bodhi-manda.” 

“ Bodhi-manda  is  the  name  of  the  miraculous  throne  under  the 
bodhi-tree  at  Bodh-G-aya,  also  called  the  vajr^sana  or  ‘ diamond 
throne’,  on  which  Buddha  and  his  predecessors  sat,  when 
attaining  bodhi  or  perfect  wisdom.  And  Professor  Childers,  in 
his  Pali  Dictionary,  added  that  he  inferred  that  the  term  was 
also  applied  to  the  raised  terraoe  built  under  the  bodhi-tree 
within  the  precincts  of  any  Buddhist  temple,  in  imitation, 
presumably,  of  Buddha’s  throne.  This,  rather  than  the  throne 
itself,  seems  to* be  its  meaning  in  the  present  inscription.” 

(Sankrit  and  old  Oauaarese  Inscrip,  no,  166,  Bodh 
Q-aya  Insorip.  of  Mahanaman,  line  10  f.,  Ind,  Ant. 

vol,  XV,  pp.  868,  369  ; 367,  c,  1,  9), 


BBAHMA-DVJlRA 


443 


BAXJjDBHA — Belonging  fco  the  Buddhists  or  Buddha,  the  Buddhist 
images. 

Minasara  (chap,  Lvi,  named  Buddha,  1-18) : 

Bike  all  other  images,  the  Buddhist  images  also  are  made  of  wood, 
stone  or  iron  (line  14),  Their  pedestals  are  made  of  the  three 
kinds  of  ahhasa  (marble),  of  earth  and  of  gravel,  etc.  (16-16). 
They  are  also  both  stationary  and  movable  (14).  They  are  made 
in  the  ereot  or  sitting  posture  and  placed  on  the  throne  (3-4), 
and  are  furnished  with  the  peepul  tree  and  the  wonder-tree  (Kalpa- 
vyiksha).  They  have  two  arms,  two  legs,  and  two  eyes  (that 
is,  one  face)  (10),  They  are  measured  in  the  large  type  of  the 
BatS'tala  system  (17).  They  are  pure  white  in  colour  (5).  Their 
garment  is  yellow  (12),  face  large  (6),  ears  long  (6),  eyes  smiling 
at  the  corner  (6),  chest  gracefully  broad,  arms  long  (10),  belly  large 
and  round,  and  the  body  fleshy  (8) . They  are  furnished  with 
shining  top-knots  (ushnishojjvala-moulika)  (10), 
BBAFMA-KANTA— A class  of  pillars,  a type  of  storeyed  buildings, 
a class  of  gate-houses, 

The  square  columns  with  four  minor  pillars : 

Ohatur-alram  brahma -kantam  syat  \ 

(M.  XV.  20). 

Vedopapada-symyuktam  hrahmarkantam  iritam  I 

(Ibid.  244). 

A class  of  the  three-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxi.  39-40,  see  under 

Prasada). 

A class  of  the  five-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxill.  41-42,  see  under 

Prasada). 

A class  of  gate-houses  (M.  xxxni.  668,  see  under  G-opura). 
BBAHMA-G-ABBHA— The  foundations  of  the  temples  of  Brahma. 

(M.  XII.  142-162,  see  under  Garbha-nyasa). 
BBAHMA-BVABA— "The  door  in  the  middle  or  central  part  of  an 

object. 

Brahma-dvara-patftkadyair  angair  yuktam  vimanakam  \ 

(Kamikagama,  L.  93). 


444 


BBAHMA-PADA 


BraSma-dvaram  iti  proktam  vimanaaaiii  sauatiauam  | 

(Ibid.  Lt.  Ifi6). 

Brahma-dvaram  t^ito  tnadhye  mandapaih  koshfcbake  matam  \ 

(Ibid. 

BEAHMA-PADA — The  central  part,  the  plot  at  the  centre  of  a design. 

(M.  XL.  73,  Lii.  165,  eto.,  see  under  Pada-vinyaaa). 
BRAHMA-BHITTI— The  middle  wall, 

Athava  brahma-bhittau  va  garhhadhanam  vidhiyate  \ 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  46). 

BRAHMA-MANpALA — The  central  part  of  a village  or  town. 

(M.  IX.  128,  see  under  0rSma). 

BRAHMA-MANDIRA — A type  of  reotangulai  building, 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  v.  16-17,  see  under  PrSsada). 

(2)  Graruda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  21-22,  26-27,  see  under  Prasada). 

BRAHMA-MASTAKA — A kind  of  pinery. 

(M.  xvii,  149,  see  under  Sandhi -karman). 

BRAHMA-VAHANA — The  riding  animal  of  Brahma,  the  goose. 

The  measures  and  description  of  the  goose  (M.  lx.  4-46,  see 

•under  iTahana). 

BRAHMA-STHANA—The  central  part -of  a village  or  town,  where 
a public  hall  is  built  for  the  assemblage  of  the  inhabitants, 

(M.  XII.  142,.  see  under  Grama). 

(1)  Brahma-sthane  sabhadini  kaipayed  vidhina  hudhah  li 
Brahma(.me)  va  madhyame  bhage  pitham  parikalpayet  I! 

(Kamikagama,  xxvni.  16,  18), 

(2)  “ Senai.. ..................  .... ...assigned  (one)  patti  of  land  in  the 

neighbourhood,  to  last  as  long  as  the  moon  and  the  suu, 
for  his  own  merit  (and)  for  the  meritorious  purpose  of 
supplying  to  the  Brahma-sthftna  in  this  village  water  during 


BHAKTA 


445 


aix  months  and  firepans  (agEishtha)  during  six  months  and 
of  constructing  a water-lever  in  front  of  the  mandapa/’ 

(Inscrip,  of  Aditya  ii,  no.  14,  line  1-2,  H.  S.  I.  I. 

vol.  iiL  p.  21-22). 

(3)  “ We  the  great  assembly  of  Manimangalam,  .....being 

assembled  without  a vacancy  in  the  assembly,  in  the 
Brahma-sthana  in  our  village. 

(Insorip.  of  Bajadhiraja,  no.  28,  line  7,  H.  S.  I.  I, 
vol.  in.  p.  57). 

(3)  “ We  the  great  assembly  of  Manimangalam, ..being 

assembled,  without  a vacancy  in  the  assembly,  in  the  large 
mandapa  (of)  the  Brahma-sthana  of  our  yillag0.’^ 

(Inscrip.  of  Virarajendra  I,  no.  30,  line  ;36,  H.  S. 

I.  I.  vol.  iii.p.  70). 

BEAHMAl^G-ANA— The  central  courtyard. 

(See  Kamikagama  under  Angana). 

BBAHMAM^A — (see  Brahma-sthana)— The  central  part  of  a village 
or  town,  where  a public  hall  isigenerally  built. 


BH 

BHAKTA — ^A  devotee,  a faithful  worshipper,  a class  of  sages. 

Description  of  their  images  (M.  chap.  Lix,  named  Bhakta) : 

The  devotees  are  divided  into  four  classes,  namely  Salokya,  Samipya, 
Sarupya,  and  Sayujya  (lines  3-4).  The  Salokyas  are  those  who 
specialize  in  devotion,  knowledge  and  renunciation  (vairagya) 
(5).  The  Samipyas  specialize  in  knowledge  and  renunciation  (6). 
The  Sarupyas  are  distinguished  as  those  who  are  devoted  to  the 
meditaticm  of  God  (7).  And  the  Sayujyas  are  those  who  have 
acquired  the  true  knowledge  (of  God)  and  are  aware  of  the  final 
beatitude  (paramartha)  (8). 

The  limbs  of  the  Salokya  class  of  great  men  are  measured  in  the 
largest  type  of  the  nava-tala  system  (9).  The  Samipyas  are 
measured  in  the  smallest  type  of  the  dasa-tala  system  (10), 


446 


BHAN0A 


The  Sarupyas  are  measured  in  the  intermediate  type  of  the 
da&a-tala  system  (11).  And  the  Sayujyas  are  measured  in  the 
largest  type  of  the  data-tala  system  (12). 

(For  details  of  these  measures  see  Tala‘mana). 

BHA!^(3-A — ^A  po^e  in  which  an  image  is  carved. 

There  are  four  bhahgas  or  poses,  namely,  sama-bahga,  abhahga, 
ati-bhahga  (M.  Lvn.  98),  and  tri-bhahga  (ibid.  126). 

“ In  this  (Sama-bhahga)  type  the  right  and  left  of  the  figure  are 
disposed  symmetrically,  the  stitra  or  plumb-line  passing  through 
the  naval,  from  the  crown  of  the  head  to  a point  midway 
between  the  heels.  In  other  words,  the  figure  whether  seated 
or  standing,  is  poised  firmly  on  both  legs  without  inclining  in 
any  way  to  right  or  left.  Images  of  Buddha,  Surya  (sun)  and 
Vishnu  are  generally  made  to  follow  this  scheme  of  rigid,  verti- 
cal symmetry.  The  dispositions  or  attitudes  of  the  limbs  and 
organs  on  either  side  are  made  exactly  similar,  except  that  the 
mudra  or  symbolical  posing  of  the  fingers  is  difierent.  ’’ 

“ In  such  a (Abhanga)  figure  the  plumb-line  or  the  centre-line,  from 
the  crown  of  the  head  to  a point  midway  between  the  heels, 
passes  slightly  to  the  right  of  the  naval.  In  other  words,  the 
upper  half  of  the  figure  is  made  to  incline  slightly  towards  its  right 
side,  without  inclining  in  any  way  towards  either  of  the  attendant 
deities.  The  ^aktis  or  attendant  deities  are  two  male  and 
two  female  Tri-bhangas  placed  on  either  side  with  their  heads 
inclined  inwards  towards  the  principal  figure.  The  figures  on 
either  side  are  exactly  similar  in  poise,  except  that  one  is  a 
reverse  or  reflex  of  the  other.  This  is  a necessary  condition  as 
otherwise  one  of  the  figures  would  lean  away  from  the  central 
figure,  and  spoil  the  balance  and  harmony  of  the  whole  group.” 

‘ A Tri-bhanga  figure  had  its  head  and  hips  displaced  about  one 
amfea  to  the  right  or  left  of  the  centre  line.  ” 

“ This  (Ati-hhanga)  is  really  -an  emphasised  form  of  the  Tri- 
bhanga,  the  sweep  of  the  Tri-bhanga  curve  being  considerably 
enhanced.  The  upper  portion  of  the  body  above  the  hips,  oi 


BHABEA 


U1 


the  limbs  below,  are  thrown  to  right  or  left,  backwards  or 
forwards,  like  a tree  caught  in  a storm.  This  type  is  usually 
seen  in  such  representations  as  diva’s  dance  of  destruction,  and 
fighting  gods  and  demons,  and  is  specially  adapted  to  the 
portrayal  of  violent  action,  of  the  impetus  of  the  Tandava 
dancing,  etc 

(Translated  by  S.  Ray,  Modern  Review,  March,  1914,  p.  1 f). 

BHADRA — (qI . Barvato-bhadra  and  Mukha-bhadra) — A type  of 
portico,  a moulding,  the  general  epithet  of  chariots,  a type  of 
building. 

(1)  A moulding  of  the  base  (M.  xiv.  845,  see  the  lists  of 
mouldings  under  Adhishthana) . 

A kind  of  portico : 

In  connection  with  buildings  of  one  to  twelve  storeys  : 

Ekam  va  dvi-tri-dandena  nirgamam  bhadram  eva  va  \ 

(M.  XIX.  56). 

Of.  Madhya-bhadra  (M.  xix.  177). 

Toranair  nida-bhadradi-mtile  ohordhve  oha  bhtishitam  \ 

(M.  XX.  64). 

In  connection  with  pavilions  (mandapas)  *. 

Ohatur-dig-bhadra-vistSram  eka-bhagena  nirgamam  \ 

(M.  XXXIV.  76). 

In  connection  with  halls  (fealas) : 

6alayah  parito’lindam  pfishthato  bhadra-samyutam  \ 

(M.XXXV.40). 

Dvi-ohatur-bhaga-vistaram  partvayor  bhadra-samyutam  \ 

Pfishthe  oha  dvyaika-bhagena  bhadrana  kuryad  vichakshanah  \ 

(Ibid.  322-823). 

In  connection  with  chariots  : 

Ghabur-dikshu  ohatur-bhadram  syat  \ 

Bhadra-madhye  tu  bhadram  syat \ 

Yuktya  bhadram  sarvesharii  nasika-yuktam  eva  va  \ 

(M.  XLlil.  107-109). 


448 


BBAirRAKA 

Bhadra  is  the  general  name  for  chariot  (ratha)  : 

HiTSta-bhadra,  Pavana-bhadra,  Prabhahjana-bhadra,  Habha- 
svan-bhadra,  etc. 

(M.  XLin.  111-116), 

In  connection  with  dola  (palanquin  or  hammock) : 

Purato  prish^hato  madhye  parva  (?darpa)nam  bhadra- 

samyutam } 
(M.  L.  166). 

Ohatur-dikahu  sa-bhadram  va  chaika-dvyamtena  nimnakam  I 

(Ibid.  284). 

^'2)  Ayatahsyat  tribhir  bhagair  bhadra-ynkta-sutobhanah  \ 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  269,  V.  6). 
(.3)  Mandapasya  cliaturthamfead  bhadrah  karyyo  vijanata  II 
Mandapas  tasya  karttavya  bhadrais  tribhir  alahkritah  || 

(Garnda-Purana,  chap.  47,  y.  36,  39). 
A type  of  quadrangular  building  : 

(4)  Agnd-Purana  (chap,  104,  v.  14-15,  see  under  Prasada). 

(6)  Garuda-Purana  (chap,  47,  v,  24-26,  see  under  Prasada). 

(6)  Vi-bhadra  va  sa-bhadra  va  kartavya  malika  budhaih  11 
Sa-bhadra  va  vi-bhadra  va  khaluri  syad  yatheshtatah  11 

(Kamikagama,  XXXV.  IGO,  106). 
^alananam  prakartavyam  eka-dvyamta-vinirmitam  I 
Tad-tad-agre  prakartavyam  vare  bhadrasya  patohime  II 

(Ibid.  XLv.  36). 

Chatur-dig-bhadra-samyuktaih  dvara-jalaka-tobhitam  II 

(Ibid.  XLi.  26). 

A class  of  buildings  (Ibid.  xlv.  41,  see  under  Malika). 
BHADBAKA — The  general  name  for  chariots. 

(M.  xLiii.  112-116,  see  under  Bhadra), 
BHABBA-PATTA — ’A.  moulding  ot  the  base. 

(M.  XIV.  345,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Adhishthana). 
BHADBA-PlTHA — A type  of  pedestal  of  the  phallus  or  an  image. 

■ (M.  Liii.  .34,  see  under  Pitha). 
The  pedestal  of  an  image  (M,  wv.  129,  173). 


BHAVANA 


449 


BHABEA-MAHPABA — ^A  type  of  pavilion. 

Of.  Mapdapam  bhadram  ity-uktam  bah,ya(dbanya)-niksbepa-yogya- 

kam  \ 

(M.  XXXIV.  190). 

See  Bilvanathetvara  Insorip.  of  Vira-ohampa  (verses,  1,  2,  3,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  III.  pp,  70,  71 ; see  under  Mandapa). 
BHADEA-i^ALA — A type  of  hall,  a front  room,  a drawing  room. 

In  oonneotion  with  the  eight-storeyed  buildings  : 
Netra-talardha-tala  oha  bhadra-taladi-bhushitam  I 

(M.  XXVI.  67,  etc). 

BHADEASANA— A kind  of  throne,  a chair  of  state,  a great  seat. 

(M.  XLv.  14,  etc). 

BHAVANA — An  abode,  a residence,  a dwelling,  a site,  a building  a 
mansion. 

A kind  of  rectangular  building  : 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  v.  16-17,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Garuda-Purapa  (chap.  47.  v.  21*22,  26-27  see  under 

Prasada). 

(3)  Mandapam  nava-talam  kuryad  bhavanam  anya-rangam  vadhi- 

mandapakaram  \ 
(M-.xi.  144). 

(4)  Tenedam  Parame&varsya  bhavanam  dharmmatmana  kari- 

tam kanvatrame  r 

“ He,  the  pious  minded,  had  his  dwelling  (temple)  of  the 
supreme  Lord  made, ....... .....in  the  hermitage  of  Kanva.’* 

(Kanaswa  Insorip.  of  Sivagana,  line  II  f.,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XIX.  pp.  68,  61). 

(6)  ^ubhrabrabham  idam  Bhavasya  bhavanam  karapitam  bhu- 

tale  1 

“ This  temple  of  Bhava  (l§iva),  resembling  the  white  cloud  (or 
mountain,  snowy  Himalayas)  was  caused  to  be  built  on  the 
earth.  ” 

(Dhanop  Insorip.  of  Chaohoha,  v.  2,  Ind.  Ant.  voK 

XL.  p.  176). 


460 


BHAYANA-KlNTA 


BHAVA,NA-KANTA—- A class  of  the  ten-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  xxviii.  9-13,  see  under  PrasSda). 
BHAG-A-PA^GHA — A pavilion  with  thirty -two  pillars. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  12,  see  Mandapa). 
BHAGA-M^NA — (of.  Gapya-mana)- -Proportional  measurement. 

(M.  XIII.  43,  XVIII.  84,  xxxirr.  216,  247,  etc.,  see  Mana). 
BHAEA — ^^(see  Bhara  and  Stamhha) — Beams,  cross-beams. 

Probably  same  as  hara  or  harika,  a chain,  an  ornament  (?  bead, 
astragal,  baguette,  see  Gwilt.  Bncycl.  fig.  873)  below  the  neck  of 
the  column. 

Stambha-samam  bahulyam  bhara-tulanam  upary-upary-asam  \ 
Bhavati  tulopatulanam  unam  padena  padena  il 

(Brihat-samhita,  Llii.  30). 
Dr.  Kern  translates  ‘ bhara  ’ by  cross-beams  (J.  E.  A.  8.,  N.  8., 

voL  VI.  p.  286). 

BHAEAKA— A support,  a synonym  of  the  column. 

(M.  XV.  6,  see  under  Stambha). 
See  Suprabhedagama  (xxxL.  121)  under  Bhara. 

BHAEA-— (see  Bhara  and  Hari)— A support,  a beam. 

(1)  in  connection  with  buildings  of  one  to  twelve  storeys  : 
Chatuh-tala  ohatush-kutam  chashta-bhara  sa-paiijaram  | 

(M.xx.  72,  etc). 

(2)  Eka-dapdantar-bhara  tu  madhya-bhara  dvi-dandatah  I 
Ohatur-danda-pramSpena  kritva  maryyada-bhittikam  II 
Mandale  dvarake  vatha  dvara-talam  tu  bharake  I 
Prasadam  madhya-bharayam  maryyadau  harmyam  eva  cha  il 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  117,  121 ; for  full  con- 
text see  V.  116-122,  under  Prakara). 
BHITTI — A wall,  a partition,  a support. 

(1)  Bhittih  stri  kudyam  \ 

Bhittih  kudye  prabhede  cha  \ 


(Amarakosha,  2,  2,  4). 


BHITTI 


.461 


(2)  Parato’lmdam  ek&m&am  bhittim  kurySt  samaatafeah  } 

(M.  XXXV.  118,  compare  also  xv.  231,  xxxviii.  6,  xl. 

57jJ  Lvi.  16,  etc). 

(3)  Vistarardham  bbaved  garbho  bhittayo’nyab  samanta'tab  I 

“ The  adytum  measures  half  the  extent  (of  the  whole)  aud 
has  its  separate  walls  all  around.’’ 

(Brihat-samhita,  Lvi.  12,  J.  R.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  vx., 
p.  318  ; see  also  Matsya-Purana,  chap.  269,  v.  8, 

9,  12). 

(4)  Tri-hastantam  tu  vistaro  bhittmam  parikirtitah  II 
Mula-bhitter  idam  manam  urdhve  padardha-hinakam  < 
Anyo’nyam  adhika  vapi  nyuna  va  bhittayah  samah  It 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  32,  33). 
Tri-bhagena  bhaved  garbham  samantad  bhittir  ishyate  II 
Dvy-adhikena  bahir-bhittih  ^eshaih  pragvat  prakirtitam  II 
Linge  kilahta(-te)  cha  krodhe  bhitti(h)  paficha-(m)&a.varjitah  \ 
Kimohin  nyunam  alindam  va  feesham  kudyeshu  yojayet  II 

(Ibid.L.  82,86,87). 

The  synonyms  of  bhitti : 

.....dvari  kudyam  oha  kuttimam  II 

Bhitter  akhyeyam  akhyatam.......; .....11 

(Ibid.  Lv.  199-200). 

(6)  Navam&am  garbha-geham  tu  bhitti-manam  tu  shodaSa  ii 
Shodafeam  bhitti-manam  tu  bhittim  abhyantaram  viduh  \ 
Tad-bahyaikam  tu  salilam  tad-bahyaikam  tu  bhittikam  Ii 
Bahya-bhittau  ohatur-dvaram  athava  dvaram  ekatah  \ 

Anyat  sarvam  samam  proktam  stupy-antam  karayed  budhah  I! 
Yad  uktam  bhitti-vistaram  bahyabhyantarayoh  samam  \ 
Bahye  vabhyantare  vapi  tri-vidham  bhitti-manakam  II 
Pithasya  tri-gupam  garbham  ta-(t)-tri-bhagaika-bhittikam  II 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  4,  6,  7,  8,  12). 
(6)  Prasada-vara-varyeshu  feilavatsu  sugandhishu  \ 

Ushitva  meru-kalpeshu  krita-kanchana-bhittishu  II 

(Bamayana,  ii.  88,  7,  etq). 


459 


BHITTI-GEIHA 


(7)  Atyuokohair  bhitti-bhagair  divi  divasa-pati-syandaaam  va 

vigrihnaa  yenakari  kofcah— “ By  whom  the  fort  (in  this 
place)  was  built,  which  perhaps  may  arrest  the  chariot  of 
the  8 an  in  the  sky  by  its  (very)  high  walls.” 

(An  Abn  Insorip.  of  the  reign  of  Bhimadevan, 
V.  9.  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xi.  pp.  221,  222). 

(8)  Snttalayada  bhittiya  madisi  ohavvisa-tirttha-karam  madi- 

sidaru  I 

“ ^ri  Basavi  SettL had  the  wall  round  the  cloisters 

and  the  twenty -four  Tirtha-karaa  made.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  n.  no.  78,  Eoman  text,  p.  62, 
Transl,  p.  161). 

(9)  Koneri,  son  of........ereoted  a nava-rahga  of  10  ahkanas,  with 

secure  foundation  and  walls  (vajra-bhitti-go^e)  for  the 
god  Tirumala  of  the  central  street  of  Malalavadi.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  iv.  Hunsur  Taluq,  no.  i, 
Transl.  p.  83,  Eoman  text,  p,  134). 
BHITTI-GBIHA— A wall-house,  a small  closet  inside  the  wall  re- 
sembling  a cupboard. 

(M.  XL.  63,  etc). 

BHITTI-SOPANA— A kind  of  surrounding  steps  made  through  a wall. 

(See  Kautiliya-Arthatastra  under  Sopana). 
BHINNA  I^ALA — A kind  of  detached  building  with  a balcony  in 
front. 

(M.  XXXV.  98,  see  under  6ala). 
BHtS'-KANTA— A class  of  storeyed  buildings. 

A class  of  eight-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxvi.  3-20,  see  under 

Prasada). 

A class  of  the  ten-storeyed  T)uildings  (M.  xxviil.  6-8,  see 

under  Prasada). 

BH'D'TA-KANTA — A class  of  the  five-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXIII.  13-16,  see  under  Prasada). 


BHU-PABlKSHl 


453 


BHU-DHABA — A type  of  oval  building. 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (obap.  104.  v.  19-20,  see  under  Frasada). 

(2)  Garuda-Purana  (obap.  47.  v.  29-30,  see  under  PrasSda). 

BHUPA'KXNTA— A class  of  tbe  eight-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXVI.  22-28,  see  under  Prasada). 

BHU-PABIKSHA — Testing  the  site  and  soil  where  a village,  town 
or  building  is  constructed. 

All  the  Vastu-tastraa  have  elaborate  descriptions  on  the  sub- 
ject. The  principles  and  details  are  similar  in  the  treatises 
exammed  below. 

(1)  The  soil  of  the  plot,  where  a village,  town,  fort,  palace,  temple  or 
house  is  to  be  built,  is  examined  with  regard  to  its  shape, 
colour,  odour,  feature,  taste  and  touch  (M.  ili.  16-32).  The 
elevation  of  the  ground  as  well  as  the  luxuriant  growth  of 
oercain  plants,  trees  and  grasses  on  the  ground  are  also 
examined  (M.  iv.  4-38).  If  a plot  of  land  is  found  to  be 
Satisfactory  on  all  or  moat  of  these  examinations,  it  should 
be  selected  for  a village,  town,  fort,  or  house,  as  the  case 
ma^  be.  But  even  after  this  selection,  it  would  be  wise  to 
test  the  ground  by  some  other  ways. 

A square  hole  of  one  cubit  deep  should  be  dug  on  the  selected 
site  and  be  filled  up  with  water.  After  24  hours  the  chief 
architect  should  mark  the  condition  of  the  water  in  the  hole. 
If  all  the  water  be  dried  tip  by  this  time,  the  earth  is  taken 
to  be  very  bad.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  there  remains  some 
water  in  the  hole,  the  selected  plot  of  land  would  be  fit 
for  any  building.  (M.  v.  20-30). 

Another  final  test  is  this  that  a similar  hole  is  dug  on  the  plot 
and  filled  up  with  the  earth  taken  out  of  it.  If  this  earth  be 
not  quite  enough  to  fill  up  tho  hole,  the  ground  is  taken  to  be 
very  bad,  but  if  this  earth  overfills  the  hole,  the  soil  is  stated 
to  be  very  good  for  any  building.  (M.  V.  34-37). 


464 


BHU-PABIKSHA 


The  general  import  of  the  last  two  tests  oeems  to  be  this  that 
in  the  former  case,  the  very  dry  land  is  avoided,  while  in  the 
latter,  very  loose  or  sandy  land  is  said  to  be  unfit  for  the 
construction  of  a building. 

(2)  Byihat-samhita,  chap.  Liil,  (ed.  Kern,  Bibliotheca  Ind.  A.  S. 
Bengal,  new  series,  nos.  61,  64,  69,  63,  68,  72  and  73) ; 
Sita-rakta-pita-krishna  vipradinam  pratasyate  bhumih  \ 
G-andhat  oha  bhavati  yasya  ghrita-mdhirannadya-madya- 

samah  II  96 

Ku&a-yukta  sara-bahula  durvakafeav|ita  kramena  mahi  I 
Anuvarnam  vriddhi-kari  madhnra-kashayarala-katuka  oha  II  97 
See  also  v.  86-94  and  then  compare  the  last  line  of  96  : 

Tat  tasya  bhavati  tubhadam  yasya  cha  yasmin  mano  ramate  V 
“ In  general  the  soil  (ground)  will  be  suitable  to  any  one  whose 
mind  is  pleased  with  it.” 

Compare  also  the  eleven  lines  quoted  from  j 

(3)  Garga  by  the  commentary  of  Byihat-samhita,  which  are  again 

quoted  by  Dr.  Kern. 

(4)  “ The  Vitvak  (1,61,  sqq.)  contains  the  same  rules,  but  in  other 

words.^’ 

(6)  Part  of  the  corresponding  passage  from  KSsyapa  is  quoted  by 
Bam  Baz  (Arch,  of  Hind.  p.  17). 

(J.  B.  A.  S.,  N.  8.,  vol.  VI.  p.  296,  note  2). 
Vastu-Batnavali  (a  compilation,  ed.  Jivanatha  Jyotishi,  1883 

pp.  8, 10) : 

(6)  On  colour  of  ground,  quotation  from.  Vasish^ha-samhita  : 
Sveta-tasta  dvijendranam  rakta  bhumir  mahi-bhujam  \ 

Yifeam  pita  cha  tudranam  kyishpanyesham  vimitrita  II 

(7)  From  the  Vastu-pradipa : 

^ukla-mpitsna  cha  ya  bhumir  brShmani  sa  prakirtita  I 
Kshatriya  rakta-myitsna  cha  harid-vaitya  praldrtita  II 
Krishna  bhumir  bhavech  ohhudra  chaturddha  parikirtita  11 


BHUMI 


455 


(8)  On  taste,  from  NSrada : 

Madhnram  katukam  tiktam  kashayam  oha  raskah  kramat  II 

(9)  On  smell,  from  the  G-yiha-karika  : 

’ O-hlitasyig-anna-madyaiiam  gandhat  oha  kramat  o bhavet  11 

(10)  On  declivity,  from  Bhyigu : 

Udag-adi  nlavam  ishtam  vipradinam  pradakshinenaiva  I 
Viprah  tarvvatra  vased  anuvarnam  atheshtam  anyesham  iti  i( 

(12)  6ilpa-dipaka  (ed.  G-ahgadhara.  i.  22-23) : 

Sveta  bramhana-bhumika  cha  ghritavad-gandha  snsvadini  I 
Eatka  tonita-gandhini  nripati-bhuh  svade  kashaye  cha  sa  II 
SvSde’mla  tila-taila-gandhir  udita  pita  oha  vaitya-mahi  i 
Kyishna  matsya-sugandhini  oha  katuka  tudreti  bhh-laksha- 

nam  II 

(13)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap.  330^  y,  42-44) : 
Ishta-gandha-rasooeta  nimna  bhumih  prataayate  \ 
Sarkara-thsha-ketSsthi-ksharai^ara-vivarjita  II 
Megha-dnmdtibhi-nirghosha  sarva-viia-nrarohini  \ 

SuHa  rakta  tatha  pita  krishna  kathita  kshitih  H 
Bvija-raianya-vaityanam  tudranam'cha  yatha-kramat  * 

Then  follows  the  examination  proper  of  the  soil  (v.'  44-46).  A pit 

is  dug  in  the  ground  and  filled  up  with  the  sand  which  is 
taken  out,  exactly  in  the  same  way  as  in  the  Manasara. 
The  quality  of  the  soil  varies  from  best  to  wora*t  as  the  sand 
is  in  excess,  equal  and  less  in  filling  up  the  pit. 

BHUMA — (see  Tala) —A  storey,  a tioor. 

Eka-bhomam  dvi-bhumam  va  kshudranarii  bhavanam  nrinaml 
(Silpa-sastra-sara-samgraha,  vm.  29). 
BHUMl-(KA) — (see  TaIa)-^Earth,  ground,  soil,  a place,  a region,  a 
spot,  '&  site,  a situation,  a storey,  a floor  of  a house. 


m 


BHUMI-LAMBA 


(1)  In  the  Manasara  a chapter  (xi)  is  named  Bhumi-lamha  which 

describes  the  dimensions  of  different  storeys : 
Bhumi-lamba-vidhim  vakshye  &astre  samkshepatah  kramat  I 
Uktam  hi  bhiimi-lambam  syad  ekanta-bhumikam  \ 

Btad  dva-daka-bhumy-antam  janmadi-stupikantam  syat  \ 

(M.  XI.  Ij  6/125,  etc). 

(2)  Kshatriyadeh  paficha-bhumir  dvijanam  raga-bhumikam  \ 

(l§ilpa-&a8tra-sara-saibgraha,  vm.  30). 

(3)  Vimano’stri  de7a-yane  sapta-bhiiman  oha  sadmani  | 

(Nigantu,  see  Eamayana  under  VirnSna). 

(4)  Sapta-bhaumashta-bhaumas  cha  sa  dadarta  mahapurim  \ 

(Eamayana,  v.  2,  60,  see  also  vi.  33,  8). 

(6)  Ekaiva  oha  bhumika  tasya  syad  eka  tasya  oha  bhumika  I 

(Brihat-samhita,  lvi.  23 ; see  Katyapa,  quoted  by 
Kern,  J,  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  Yi.  p.  320). 

(6)  !§ata-&ririga&  ohatur-dvaro  bhumika-shodatoohchhritah  \ 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  269,  v.  31,  see  also 
V,  37,  38,  39,  40,  42,  43,  44,  etc). 

(7)  Eaja-kanyam  . . , . sapta-bhumika-prasada-pranta-gatam  ( 

(Panchatantra,  ed.  Bombay,  i,  p.  38), 

(8)  A floor  (Bheraghat  Inscrip,  of  Alhanadevi,  t.  27,  Bp.  Ind. 

vol.  ii.  p.  12, 16). 

BHUMI-BAMBA — The  height  of  a storey ; according  to  the  Kami- 
kagama  (see  below)  and  the  Manasara  the  term  implies  the 
dimensions  of  storeys. 

(1)  The  five  series  of  breadth  in  the  smallest  type  of  one-storeyed 
buildings  are  2,  4,  6,  8 and  10  cubits ; and  the  five  series  of 
length  are  3,  6,  7,  9 and  11  cubits.  In  the  intermediate  type 
the  five  series  of  breadth  are  6,  7,  9, 11  and  13  cubits  and  the 
five  series"  of  length  6, 8, 10, 12  and  14  cubits.  In  the  largest 
type  the  five  series  of  breadth  are  6,  8, 10, 12  and  14  cubits 
and  the  five  series  of  length  are  7,  9, 11,  13  and  16  cubits. 

(M.  XI.  6-12). 


BHU-MUKHA 


467 


AU  the  twelve  storeys  are  in  this  way  measured  separately. 

(M.  XI.  13-126). 

These  are  stated  to  be  the  dismensions  in  the  Jati  class  of 
buildings. 

Three-fourths,  half  and  one-fourth  of  these  dismensions  are 
prescribed  for  the  Ghhanda,  Vikalpa  and  Abhasa  classes 
respectively, 

(2)  Ohatur-amtadi-samsthanaih  bhumi-lambam  iti  smritaml 

(Kamikagama,  l.  1). 

Then  follow  the  dismensions  of  the  storeys  from  one  to  twelve 
and  sixteen  (ibid,  v.  2-34).  The  five  proportions  of  the  height 
of  storeys,  as  ‘ bhumi-lamba  ’ means,  are  given  under  the 
same  five  technical  names  as  in  the  Manasara,  vi25.,  ^antika, 
Pushta,  Jayada,  Adbhuta,  and  Sarva-kamika  (v.  24,  26-28). 
The  Jati,  Ghhanda,  Vikalpa  and  Abhasa  classes  of  buildings 
are  also  distinguished  (v.  9-13). 

(3)  VarShamihira  describes  the  height,  etc.,  of  the  buildings  of  the 
Brahmins,  kings,  ministers  and  others  (Brihat-samhita,  liii. 
4-26),  But  the  general  rule  about  the  height  of  the  storey 
(bhfimika)  is  also  given  (Bjihat-samhita,  lvi.  ^9-30) : 

Bhumikangula-manena  mayasyashtottaram  featam  1 

Sardham  hasta-trayaih  chaiva  kathitam  vitvakarmana  II 

Prahuh  sthapatayat  chatra  matam  ekam  vipatohitah  I 

Kapota-paii-saihyukta  nyiina  gaohohhanti  tulyatam  II 
A storey’s  altitude  is  of  108  digits  according  to  Maya,  but 
Vifevakarman  pronounces  it  to  be  of  three  cubits  and  a half 
(i.e.  84  digits).  As  to  this,  however,  able  architects  have 
declared  that  (in  reality)  there  is  no  discrepancy  of  opinion, 
for,  if  you  add  the  height  of  the  crown-work  (kapota-pali) 
the  smaller  number  will  equal  (the  greater).  ” Br.  Kern. 

BHtl-MUKHA — ^A  type  of  oval  building. 

(G-aru(Ja*:Purap,a,  chap.  47,  v.  29-80,  see  under  Prasada;. 


468 


bhCrha^a 


BHU8HA.NA — »A  class  of  storeyed  bmldings,  a type  of  pavilion,  a 
moulding,  articles  of  fnrnitnre,  ornaments. 

A type  bf  oval  building  (Agni-Purana,  chap.  104,  v.  19-20,  see  under 

PrasSda). 

A class  of  the  nine-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxvii.  13-14,  see  under 

PrSsSda), 

A moulding  of  the  column  (M,  xv.  93,  etc). 

A type  of  pavilion  : 

Devanam  oha  maunartham  bhushanakhyam  tu  mandapam  \ 

(k.  XXXIV.  349). 

Manasara  (chap.  l.  named  Bhuahana,  1-309) : 

The  ordinary  ornaments  for  the  body  are  called  ‘ ahga-bhtishana  ^ 
(lines  1-44,  288-309)  and  the  articles  of  house-furniture  ‘ bahir- 
bhuahana  ’ (44-288). 

Ornaments  are  here  divided  broadly  into  four  classes,  namely, 
Patra-kalpa,  Chitra-kalpa,  Eatna-kalpa  and  Mitrita  or  Mifera- 
kalpa  (3-4).  All  these  are  suited  to  the  deities.  The  emperor  or 
Chakravartin  can  put  on  all  these  except  the  Patra-kalpa.  The 
kings  called  Adhiraja  and  Narenda  can  wear  both  Eatna-kalpa 
and  Mitrita.  The  Mitra-kalpa  is  prescribed  for  all  other  kings 

Patra-kalpa  is  so  called  because  it  is  made  of  leaves  and.  oreeuers. 
Chitra-kalpa  is  made  of  flowers,  leaves,  paintings,  all  precious 
stones  and  other  decorations.  The  Eatna-kalpa  is  made  of 
flowers  and  jewels.  And  the  Mifera-kalpa  is  made  of  leaves,  jewels 
and  the  mixture  of  all  others.  These  four  kinds  are  specially 
made  for  the  images  of  Gods  and  Kings  only  (1). 

The  ordinary  ornaments  of  the  body  include  among  others  Pada- 
nupura  (anklet),  Kirita  (diadem),  Mallika  (a  jasminerlike  orna- 
ment), Kundala  (ear-ring),  Valaya  (bracelet),  Mekhala  (belt), 
Hara  (chain),  Kankana  (bracelet  for  tne  wrist),  6iro-vibhushana 
(head-gear),  Kinkini  (little^bells),  Karna-bhushana  (ear-rings, 
etc.),  Keyura  (armlet),  Tatafika  (large  ear-ring),  Karpa  (ear- 
ornament),  Ohuda-mani  (crest-jewel),  BSla-patta  (Utt)e-tiara), 
Eakshatra-mala  (neck-lace  of  27  pearls),  Ardha-h&ra  (half-chain 


BHEAMA 


469 


of  64  strings),  Suvarna-sutra  (gold  chain,  worn  round  the  breast), 
Eatna-malika  (^garland  of  jewels),  Ohira  (a  pearl-necHaos  of  four 
strings),  Svarna-kahohuka.  (gold-armour),  Hirah^a-malika  (gold- 
chain),  LambahSra  (long  suspended  chain),  etc.,  etc.  The  orna- 
ments like  crown,  etc  are  described  elsewhere. 

The  articles  of  house-iurnicure  include  among  others  Bipa-danda 
(lamp-post),  Vyajana  (fan),  Barpana  (mirror),  Mahjasha 
(basket,  wardrobe,  almirah,  etc),  Bol$  (swing,  hammock, 
palanquin,  etc),  Tula  and  Tula-bhara  (balance),  Pafijara 
(cage),  and  Nida  (nest),  etc.,  for  the  domestic  animals 
(except  cows,  horses,  elephants,  described  elsewhere)  and 
birds  (46-288).  The  articles  of  furniture  like  car,  chariot, 
throne,  bedstead,  etc.,  are  described  elsewhere. 

BHOG-A — A class  of  the  single-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XIX.  167,  see  under  Prasada).- 

BHOG-A-MANPAPA-— (of.  Mapdapa) — The  refectory,  an  appurtenance 
of  the  temple. 

(M.  XXXII,  66,  etc.,  see  under  Mandapa). 

BHOJAHA-MATHA — A refectory,  a dining-hall, 

“ The  meritorious  gift  of  a refeotiory  (bhojana-matha)  for  the 
community  (Sahgha)  by  the  Yavana  Chita  (Chaitra)  of  the 
gates  (or  of  the  G-ata  country).” 

(Junnar  Insorip.  no.  8,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp. 

series,  Yol.  rvi  p.  94). 

BHAITMA-^(see  BhQmi) — ^A  storey,  the  floor  of  a house. 

BYSdata-bhauma,  dafea-bhauma,  shad-bhauma,  sapta-bhauma  \ 

(Byihat-samhita,  LVI.  20,  21,  22,  24,  27). 

BHEAMA — The  enclosing  cloisters,  a covered  arcade,  an  enclosed 
place  of  religious  retirement,  a monastic  establishment. 

“ The  temple  itself,  with  its  enclosing  cloisters  (bhrama)  measures 

The  court  is  surrounded  by  cloisters  (bhamti- bhrama)  in 

which,  besides  three  small  temples  on  the  north,  south  and  west 
sides  each  in  line  with  the  centre  of  the  principal  mandapa, 
there  are  the  orthodox  number  of  fifty -two  small  shrines 


460  BHBAMAKA 

(cf.  Prakara  and  PariYaralaya)  eaoh  crowned  by  a feikbara  or 
spire/'' 

'■The  inner  facade  of  the  cloister  or  bhaihti  (Skr.  bhrama)  is 
interrupted  only  by  the  three  small  temples  mentioned  above, 
by  the  large  entrance  porch  on  the  east,  and  by  smaller 
entrances  on  the  north* and  south  near  the  east  end.  The 
corridor  (alinda)  is  about  nine  feet  wide  all  round  and  is 
raised  by  four  steps  above  the  level  of  the  court.” 

The  entrance  porch  on  the  east  projects  considerably  and  is 
hanked  inside  by  stairs,  in  line  with  the  bhamti  (bhrama) 
on  each  side„ ” 

”(Ahmadabad  Arch.  Burgess,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp, 
series,  vol,  xxxin.  pp.  87,  88). 
BHEAMANA — (see  Pradakshina) — ^A  surrounding  terrace,  an  enclos- 
ing verandah,  a circular  path. 

6ikharasya  tu  turyyena  bhramanam  parikalpayet  \ 

(Agni-Purapa,  chap.  42,  v.  12,  etc), 
BHEAMA-DA^?I)A — ^A  kind  of  post  for  a large  fan.^ 

(M.  P.  104,  see  under  Vyajana) 
BHRAMALINBA — ^A  surrounding  balcony  or  terrace, 

(M.  xxxiv.  304,  497,  etc.,  see  under  Aliudaj. 


M 

MAKABA-EU$ipALA— An  ornament  for  the  ear  of  an  image. 

(M,  LI.  53,  see  under  Bhushana). 
MAKABA-TOBANA^ — (see  Torapa) — An  arch  marked  with  mafcara 
(an  animal  like  shark  or  crocodile). 

Bvayor  makarayor  vakraih  taktam  madhyama-puritam  I 
!NSna.vidha.latS*yuktam  etan  makara-torapam  II 

(Kamikagama,  LVi  65).. 

Bor  the  details  of  such  an  arch,  see  Annual  Beport  Arch.  Survey  of 
India  (1903-1904,  p.  227  f,),  ManasSra  (chap.  XLVI,  XLViii,)  and 
Suprabhedagama  (xxx.  68-72)  under  Torapa. 
MAKABA-BHUSHANA — ^An  ear-ornament. 

(M.  L.  26,  see  under  Bhushapa), 


ma:&oha 


461 


MAKABAPATRA — ^An  ornament  of  an  aroh.  generally  above  the 
column. 

Tad-Qrdhve  toran,a8yante  makarapatra-saihyutam  \ 

(M.  XV.  133). 

MAKARALA — An  architectural  member  of  a hall 

(M.  XXXV.  373,  see  under  Sala). 

MAEARl-VAKTBA— The  face  of  a female  shark,  employed  as  an 
ornament  for  an  aroh  above  a column. 

(M.  XV.  136). 

MAKUTA— A head-gear,  a diadem,  a crown. 

(M.  VII.  164,  xii.  120,  XLix.  16,  Liv.  23,  etc). 

MAl^Q-ALA — A kind  of  throne,  a village,  a type  of  pavilion. 

(M.  XLV.  4,  see  under  Simhasanal 
A village  (Kamikagama,  XX.  3,  see  under  Agrahara). 

A type  of  pavilion  (M.  xxxiv.  4S1-448,  see  under  Mapdapa). 

MaI^Q-ALA-VITHI— A broad  road  surrounding  a village  or  town, 
also  called  Raja-vithi  and  Eatha-vithi. 

(See  Kamikagama,  under  Raja-vithi). 

MAJJANALAYA — A detached  building  for  bath  or  washing. 

(M.  XI..  103). 

MANCHA — A bedstead,  couch,  bed, -sofa,  a chair,  throne,  a platform, 
a pul  pil  . 

A synonym  of  the  bedstead  (H.  iii.  11),  of  the  entablature 

(M.xvi.  18). 

Mafioha«paryanka-palyankah.  katVya-samah  1 

Palyanko  madoha-paryanka-vrishi-paryastikasu  oha  I Iti  Medini  \ 

(Amarakosha,  2,  3,  138). 

In  connection  with  buildings  of  one  to  twelve  storeys  j 
Adhishlihana-samain  mahohardhe*rdhena  vapra-yuk  \ 

(M.  XXI.  14,  etc). 


462 


MAtOHA-KJLNTA 


A compoaent  parti  of  fehe  bedstead  (M.  XLiv.  86). 

A platform : 

Data-bhagaa  dvau  pratimanokau — “ two-tentks  of  it  for  the  forma- 
tion of  two  platforms,  opposite  to  each  other 

(Eautiliya-Arthaliastra,  ohap.  xxiv.  p.  63). 
MA^GHA-KA-NTA— A class  of  the  foar-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXII,  47-67.  see  under  PrSsada). 
MAi^CHA-BANDHA— A class  of  bases  comprising  four  types  which 
differ  from  one  another  in  height  and  in  the  addition  or  omission  of 
some  mouldings. 

(M.  XIV.  127-149,  dee  the  lists  of  mouldings 
under  Adhish^hana). 

MA!510HA-BHADRA — One  of  the  three  classes  of  pedestals,  the  other 
two  being  Vedi-bhadra  and  Prati-bhadra.  It  has  four  types  differ- 
ing from  one  another  in  height  and  in  the  addition  or  omission  of 
some  mouldings. 

(M.  XIII.  93-127,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 
under  Upapitha), 

ma:&chali~-a  synonym  of  the  bedstead. 

(M.  III.  11,  see  under  Paryanka), 
MA!SrjARI(-i) — A flower-bud,  a shoot,  sprout,  stalk,  a parallel  line  or 
row. 

(1)  Prasadau  nirgatau  karyau  kapotau  garbha-manatah  \ 
tjrdhvam  bhitty-uohohhrayat  tasya  manjarim  tu  prakalpayet  II 
Manjaryat  ohardha-bhagena  tuka-nasam  prakalpayet  | 
tirdhYam  tathardha-bhagena  vedi-bandho  bhaved  iha  i! 

(Vitvak,  6,  767,  quoted  by  Kern,  J.  R.  A.  8., 
N,  8.,  vol.  VI.  p.  821,  note  2 of  p.  320). 

(2)  Prasadaii-nirgatau  karyau  kapolau  garbha-manatah  \ 

The  remaining  three  lines  are  same  as  in  Vitvak. 

(Matsya-Purapa,  ohap.  269,  V.  11,  see  also 
V.  13,  18-19). 


MATHA 


468 


(3)  Jangh.ay5Tiiaih(-yah)  dvi-guiiLOohclihrayaminafiiaryyalt  kalpayed 

budhah  li 

Txirya-bhagena  mabjaryyah  karyyah  samyak-pradaksbinab  I 
Tan-mana-nirgamam  karyyam  iibbayah  par&vayoh  samam  II 

(Agni-PraSna,  obap.  42,  V.  3-4). 

(4)  Prasade  manjari  kSryya  cbitra  vishama-bbumika  II 

(Garuda-Purana,  chap.  47,  v.  37). 
MAblJU-BANpA — A kind  of  lamp-post  also  called  dipa-dan^a. 

(M.  L.  93). 

MAl^JUSHA. — ^A  box,  casket,  receptacle,  !a  wardrope,  a foundation- 
pit,  a vault,  an  arobed  roof  to  receive  a foundation. 

Pitakah  petakah  peta  manjusba  1 

Pitakas  trisbu  vispbote  manjushayam  punah  puman  \ iti  Medini  \ 

(Amarakosba , 2,  10,  29). 
Tbe  vault  of  the  foundation  pit  (M.  xil.  21). 

A wardrobe  (M.  L.  148, 161). 

A casket  (The  Bbattiprolu  Insorip.  nos.  i,  vi,  viii, 

Bp.  Ind.  vol.  II.  pp.  326,  327,  328,  329). 
MATHA — A building  inhabited  by  a devotee,  a college,  a rest-house 
(see  Sattra),  a cloister,  convent,  monastery,  a temple. 

1 1)  Agantukanam  sarvesham  naisbthikanam  nivasa-bhQh  | 
Anna-pamya-samyukta(h)  kevalo  va  matbo  matah  li 

Vidya  sthSnam  tu  tad-vat  syat  ........  ...II 

(Kamikagama,  xx.  13,  14). 

(2)  Mathafe  obhatradi-nilayah  \ 

Commentary : obhatradi-nilayah  kishyadinam  gi-iham  matha 
ity-uohyate  ohhatro’ntevasy-adir  yesbam  parivrajaka- 
ksbapanakadmam  tesham  nilaya  iti  va  adina  kapalikadi 
samgrabah  I Bauddhan.am  tu  viharo’stri  I 

(Amarakosba,  2,  2,  8), 


464 


MATHA 


(3)  Kiihohid  (ia)d.iiratah  karya  ma^has  tatropajivinam  I 

At  a little  distance  (from  tke  temple)  the  ma^na  should  be 
built  for  those  who  reside  there. 

(G-aruda-Purapa,  chap.  47,  v.  46 ; see  also  chap. 

46,v.3). 

(4)  See  MSnsara  (ix.  138,  etc). 

(6)  Monastery  (Dewal  Pra&asti  of  Lalla  the  Ohhinda,  v.  20, 

Ep.  Ind.  vol.  I.  pp.  79,  83). 

(6)  Cloister  (Bheraghat  Inaorip.  of  Alhauadevi,  v.  27,  Ep.  Ind. 

Yol.  n.  pp.  12,  16^). 

(7 1 Of.  Kodiya-matha — ^whioh  is  a college  and  a place  of  various 
kinds  of  charity,  a hospital,  etc.  It  would  look  like  the 
famous  Nalanda  university.  A singular  description  of  it  is 
given. 

(Ep.  Ind,  vol  V.  p.  222). 

(8)  A college  or  place  of  learning  : 

Bhaktiyim  sakala-kala-sarasvatiye  madisidam  ma^hamam 
samasta-sabdika-kavi-tarkkikagamika-vaidika-sak8hara-8a3ia- 
naferayam  \ 

“ Constructed  a monastery  in  piety  to  Sarasvati  of  all  arts, 
represented  by  literature,  Vedas,  mystic  formulae,  (and)  the 
holy  Akshara.  ” 

(Insorip.  at  Ittagi,  A,  of  A.  D.  112,  v.  71,  Bp.  Ind. 

vol.  XIII.  pp.  47,  66). 

(9)  “ Gryjari  Vitvanatha  had  the  dharma&ala  maths  built  (in  the 

year  specified)”. 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  ix.  Bangalore  Taluq,  no.  2, 
'Transl.  p.  1). 

(10)  EadSohid  etena'mahonnatena  mathah  kyitah  ko’pi  ghanair 

anekah  \ 

Sri-bala-gopala-virama-bhumir  vikurvata  martya-dhara  jaga- 

tyam  it 

Here  ' matha  ^ is  the  ‘ temple  * of  Bala-Gopala  (Krishna). 

(Inscrip,  from  Nepal,  no.  17,  Insorip.  of 
Siddhinrisimha  of  Lalta-pattaua,  v.  16,  Ind. 

Ant.  vol.  IX.  pp.  186,  187,  c.  I). 


MATHA 


465 


(11)  “Todakinara  used,  to  call  her  * sister  ^ but  the  year  after  festival 

he  said  to  her — if  we  live  together  in  one  matham  the  people 
may  scoff,  so  you  had  better  have  this  one  to  yourself,  and 
I will  make  the  eight  tenants  of  the  land  build  a separate 
one  for  me  in  the  West.  ” 

In  this  passage. ‘matha’  apparently  means  an  ordinary  ‘ dwel- 
ling-house.’ 

(Todakinara  Paddana,  Ind.- Ant.  vol.  xxill.  p.  99, 
para  14,  see  also  paras  3, 7, 8, 13, 15,  and  pp.  96-97). 

(12)  “ Had  a matha  built  (matha  kattiti)  for  ^iva-Basappa-Svami 

of  the  G-ovi-matha.  ” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  iii.  Mysore  Taluq,  no.  24,  Transl. 

p.  3,  Eoman  text,  p.  7), 

(13)  “ On  my  king  (i.e.,  husband)  going  to  Svarga,  having  caused 

to  be  erected  a matha  in  Kalale  and  attached  it  to  the  great 
palace,  Kurahatti  and  ^ambhupura  are  granted  as  an  endow- 
ment for  it,  as  an  offering  to  ^iva.  ” The  peculiarities  of 
this  matha  should  be  noted. 

(Ep.  Oarnat.  vol.  ili.  Nanjangud  Taluq,  no.  81, 
Transl.  p.  103,  Eoman  text,  p.  196), 

(14)  “Having  erected  a matha  (Sattra  or  almshouse)  for  the 

distribution  of  food  to  those  who  come  to  the  oar-festival 

of  the  god caused  his  guru  to  take  up  his  residence 

in  the  king’s  matha  (a  detached  residential  building  which 
belongs  to  a house  and  is  intended  for  receiving  and  accom- 
modating the  guests)  to  conduct  the  worship  of  Ohandra- 
tekhara  (who  might  be  installed  in  a matha  or  temple  which, 
however,  does  not  occur  in  the  present  inscription)  and  to 
minister  to  the  Jangamas,  and  give  shelter  and  food  to 

mendicants  and  pilgrims, .in  order  to  meet  all  the 

expenses  of  the  same  made  a grant  of  Haranahalli.  ” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  iv.  Hunsur  Taluq,  no.  104, 
Transl.  p.  93,  Eoman  text,  p.  16), 
30 


466 


MATHA 


The  different  meanings  of  the  term  ‘ matha  ’ noted  within 
brackets  in  the  above  passage  should  be  noted. 

(16)  “ He  had  the  stone-fort  built,  together  with  the  ma^ha,  man- 
tapa,  pond,  well 

“ In  the  evening-matha  (sandhya-matha)  he  set  up  the  image 
of  the  god,  and  built  the  pond.  ” 

“ He  caused  the  stone-fort  to  be  built,  and  set  up  the  matha, 
mantapa,  evening-matha  (sandhya-matha),  pond,  well, 
Basava  pillar,  swing  and  images  of  gods 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Channarayapatna  Taluq, 
nos.  168,  160,  166,  Transl.  pp.  196,  196,  198, 
Boman  text,  pp.  460,  451,  464). 

(16)  l§ri-6ankaraoharya-vinirmite  lasat-simhasane  dharmamaye 

mathe  subhah. 

“ He  made  petition  at  the  feet  of  Vidyaranya  ^ri-pada,  repre- 
senting that  in  ^rihgapura,  in  (connection  with)  the  dharma- 
pitha  (or  religious  throne)  eatablished  by  ^ankaraoharyya, 
there  must  be  a ma^ha  and  agrahara.  ” 

(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol.  vi.  l^ringeri  Jagir,  no.  II,  Boman  text, 
p.  196,  line  12  f.,  Transl.  p.  96,  last  para). 

This  matha  is  mentioned  in  no.  13  and  is  called  ^ri-matha  in 
nos.  26,  26  and  31.  Qf  this  matha  Mr.  Bice  gives  a history 
and  says  that  “ the  head  of  the  Wringer!  matha  is  styled  the 
jagad-guru  or  the  guru  of  the  world  and  is  possessed  of  exten- 
sive authority  and  influence.  He  wears  on  ceremonial  occa- 
sions a tiara  like  the  Pope’s,  covered  with  pearls  and  precious 

stones and  a handsome  necklace  of  pearls,  with  an 

emerald  centre  piece  ” (Introduot.  p.  24,  para  2).  But  no 
architectural  details  are  given. 

(17)  “ This  temple  is  a Brahma-ohari-matha  I 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no.  242,  Transl. 

p.  140,  line  7,  Boman  text,  p.  248,  line  20-21), 


MANI-HABMYA 


467 


(18)  Viiiite&vara-matlia-aamave&am  matham  etat  karitam 

Narayana-devakulasya — “built  this  ma^ha  of  the  deva-kala  of 
Narayana,  near  the  temple  of  Vimtetvara/’ 

(Munde&vari  Insorip.  of  Udayasena,  lines  5, 
6,  Bp.  lud.  vol,  IX.  pp.  Q19,  290). 
MANIKA — A water-jar,  a class  of  buildings. 

A class  of  buildings  which  are  oval  in  plan  and  sub-divided  under 
the  following  names  : 

(1)  Q-aja,  (2)  Vrishabha,  (3)  Hamsa,  (4)  Garutman,  (6)  Riksha- 
nayaka,  (6)  Bhushana,  (7)  Bhu-dhara,  (8)  ^rijaya,  and  (9) 
Pfithivi-dhara : 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104.  v.  11, 19-20,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  29-30,  see  under  Prasada). 

Of.  Rook  inscriptions  at  Mulbe  (no.  IV,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xxxv. 

pp.  79,  80). 

MANI-DVARA — A kind  of  top  door  or  window. 

IJparishtat  trayam^am  tu  ohatvarardhamtam  dvi-partvayoh  I 
Tesham  madhye  tu  yad  dvaram  mani-dvaram  ihoohyate  11 

(Kamikagama,  Lv.  48). 

MANI-BANDHA—An  ornament  for  the  wrist,  a string  of  pearls,  the 
collet. 

Prakosh^he  valayam  chaiva  mani-bandha-kalapakam  \ 

(M.  L.  16). 

Mani-bandha-katakam  va  mauktika-ohudam  eva  oha  \ 

(M.  Liv.  14), 

Prakoshtha-valayam  chaiva  valayair  mapi-bandhakaih  \ 

(Ibid.  99,  etc). 

MANI-BHADRA— (see  Mand.apa) — A pavilion  with  64  columns. 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  101, 103,  see  under  Mandapa). 
MANI-BHITTI — The  residence  of  the  great  serpent  (^eshaj, 
MANI-BH‘0'-(MI)-— A floor  inlaid  with  jewels. 

MA^fl-MANDAPA — A jewelled  pavilion,  the  residence  of  the  great 
serpent  (^esha) . 

MANI-HARMYA — An  upper  storey,  a crystal  palace,  a jewelled  man- 
sion. (See  Artha&astra  under  Gyiha-vinyasa). 


468  MANDAPA  

M ANpAPA — A detaohied  building,  a pavilion,  an  open  hall,  an  arbour, 
a tower,  a temple. 

Atha  mandapo’stri  janaferayab  I 

(Amarakosha,  2,  2,  9). 

“ Mandapas  are  not  furnished  with  walls  : the  roofing  is  formed 
of  large  slabs  of  granite  supported  by  monolithic  pillars.” 

(B.  A.  Iyengar,  p.  20). 

‘ ■ The  resting  place  where  the  gods  are  every  year  (oooasionally) 
carried.  The  most  celebrated  part  of  the  temple  of  Madura 
is  the  Pudu  mantapam  which  is  only  a vast  corridor.” 

(Ibid.  p.  38). 

(1)  Manasara  (chap,  xxxiv.  namediMan^apa,  1-678)  ; 

Mandapa  generally  means  a temple,  bower,  shed  or  hall.  But 
the  term  has  been  used  in  three  technical  senses  in  this 
chapter. 

It  implies  in  the  first  place  a house  in  the  village,  etc.,  or  built 
on  the  bank  of  a sea,  river,  tank,  or  lake;  secondly,  the 
detached  buildings  in  a compound  which  is  generally  divided 
into  five  courts  (see  Prakara).  But  in  the  most  general 
sense,  it  implies  various  sorts  of  rooms  in  a temple  or  resi- 
dential building.  The  most  part  of  this  long  chapter  is 
devoted  to  a description  of  these  rooms. 

Mandapas  are  both  temples  and  residential  buildings  : 
Taita(-ti)lanam  dvi-jatinam  varnanam  vasa-yogyakam  \ (2). 
The  general  comparative  measurement  of  the  mandapas  is 
discussed  at  the  beginning.  This  is  followed  by  the  measure- 
ment and  other  descriptions  of  (ii)  the  bhitti  (wall),  (iii) 
balcony  (alinda),  (iv)  prapa  (alms-house),  and  (v)  the  form  of 
the  mapdapas  (lines  3-4). 

Seven  mapdapas  are,  as  stated,  built  in- front  of  the  prasada 
or  the  main  edifice  (167).  They  are  technically  called 
Himaja,  Nisbadaja,  Vijaya,  Malyaja,  Pariyatra,  Gaudha- 
madana  and  Hema-ku^a  (163-166).  Various  parts  of  these, 


MANDAPA 


such  as  walls,  roofs,  floors,  balconies,  courtyards,  doors, 
windows,  pillars,  etc.,  are  described  in  detail  {166-175). 
Besides  these  seven,  various  other  mandapas  are  also  des- 
cribed in  acGordancQ  with  their  architectural  details  and  the 
various  purposes  for  which  they  are  built. 

Moruja  mandapa  is  for  the  library-room  (161  \ Vijaya  for  wedd- 
ing ceremonies  (163),  Padmaka  for  refectory  or  kitchen  of  gods 
(174),  Sioha  for  ordinary  kitchen  (175),  Padma  for  collecting 
flowers  (181),  Bhadra  for  water  reservoir,  store-house,  etc., 
(185),  Siva  for  unhusking  paddy  corn  (197),  Veda  for  assem- 
bly-hall (209),  Kula-dhfirana  for  keeping  perfumes  (262), 
Sukhahga  for  guest-house  (sattra)  (272),  Darva  for  elephant’s 
stable,  and  Kausika  for  horse’s  stable,  Saukhy aka  and  others 
built  on  the  hank  of  a sea,  river,  lake,  etc.,  are  for  the  pilgri- 
mage of  gods  (281),  Jay  ala  and  others  for  summer  residence 
(294).  Soma  mandapas  are  made  for  banishment  (sea  below), 
some  for  bedrooms  of  queens  and  others,  Dlianada  (328),  BhU- 
shana  (349,  366),  Kharvata  (465,  472),  Dropa  (423-434),  {5ri- 
rupa  (480),  Mahgala  (488),  etc.,  are  described  under  those 
terms.'. 

The  plan,  ornaments,  etc.,  of  Mandapas  are  described  in  detail. 
A description  of  the  forms  of  Mandapas  is  given 
(649-567).  The  Mandapas  (rooms)  of  temples  and  of  the 
houses  of  the  Brahmans  should  have  the  Jati  shape;  the 
Chhauda  shape  is  given  to  the  Mandapas  of  the  Kshatri- 
yas,  the  Vikalpa  -shape  to  those  of  the  Vaifeyas,  and  the 
Abhasa  shape  to  those  of  the  Sudras.  But  according  to 
some,  these  four  classes  are  also  based  on  the  form  of  the 
Bhadra  (portico). 

The  Mandapas  of  two  faces  are  called  Bandaka,  of  three  faces 
Svastika,  the  latter  one  having  also  the  plough  shape ; the 
Mandapas  of  four  faces  are  known  as  Chatur-mukha,  of  six 
faces  Maulika,  and  of  five  faces  Sarvato-bhadra  (664-556). 

A short  description  of  the  Mandapas  in  a village  or  town  is 
also  given  (568-572).  Their  principal  members  are  stated 


470 


mandapa 


to  be  the  Lupa  (pent  roof),  Prastara  (entablature),  Praohohha- 
dana  (roof),  Sabha  (council-hall),  and  Kuta  (dome),  etc. 
Mandapas  are  also  built  on  the  road  side  and  at  other  places. 
All  the  Mandapas  mentioned  above  are  separately  described 
as  they  belong  to  a temple  or  to  the  houses  of  the  Brahmins, 
the  JKshatriyas,  the  Vaityas,  and  the  Sudras  respectively 
(of.  671-578). 

Of.  the  following : 

The  detached  buildings  or  attached  halls  for  various  purposes  : 
Some  bhallata-mukhye  cha  kalpayet  kota-mandapam  I 
Pushpa-dante  sukarau  cha  ^iistra-mandapa-samyutam  \ 

Varune  vasiire  vapi  vastu-nikshepa-mandapam  \ 

Nage  vapi  mrige  vapi  deva-bhushana-mandapam  \ 

A(a)ditau  choditau  vapi  tayanartham  cha  mandapam  I 
Asthana-manclapam  chaiva  chatur-dikshu  vidikshu  cha  I 
Snapanartham  mandapam  snana-mandapam  eva  cha  \ 
G-fiha-kshate  yame  vapi  vahana-sthana-mandapam  1 
Maryadi  bhittikasyantam  mandapam  pavanalayam  I 

(M.  XXXII.  68-76). 

Bakshine  nairriti  vapi  bhoianartham  tu  mandapam  \ 
Vayavyena  dhanangaiiite  pu8hpa-mandapa-(m)  yojayet  \ 
Tat-tad-bahya-pradete  tu  kaya-tuddhyartha-mandapam  \ 
Vayavye  nairpite  vapi  sutika-mandapam  bhavet  \ 

(M.  XL.  98,  102,  104,  106). 

The  height ; 

Mandapam  nava-talam  kuryad \ 

(M.  XI.  144). 

Itanadi-ohatush-karne  matham  va  mandapam  tu  va  \ 

(M.  IX.  138). 

Mandapadi  clia  bhapaurim  vetma  kuryat  tu  purvavat  I 

(Ibid.  445). 

In  connection  with  columns  ; 

Prasade  inandape  vapi  prakare  gopure  tatha  1 

(M.  XV.  433). 


MANDAPA 


471 


Cf.  Ayuda-mandapa  (M.  xxxvi.  34),  v(b)alalokaiia-mandapa 
(ibid.  48),  vivaha-mandapa  (49),  vasfcrachohhadana-maELdapa 
(SO),  vidyabhyasartha-mandapa  (53),  tailabliyangartha-man- 
dapa  (54),  asthana-mandapa  (55),  vilasartha-mandapa  (56), 
dlianya-karshana-maii(Japa  (69),  piishpa-mandapa  (71), 
nritya-yogya-mandapa  (74),  nityarchana-mandapa  (79),  efec. 
Some  mandapas  arc  stated  to  be  furnished  with  100  or  1000 
columns  : 

6ata-pada-yutaih  vatha  sahasrahglirika-mandapam  \ 

(M.  XXXIV.  240). 

(2)  Bandha-sthanam  bahih  kuryat  snana-mandapam  eva  oha ) 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  266,  v.  36). 
Prasadasyottare  vapi  piirve  va  mandapo  bhavet  11 
Ohaturbhis  toranair  yukto  mandapa-(h)  syaoh  ohatur-mukhah  II 
(Ibid.  chap.  264,  V.  13, 16). 

‘ Uhe  mandapa  should  be  built  to  the  north  or  east  of  the  temple. 
It  should  have  four  faces  (fa§ade8)  and  be  furnished  with 
four  arched-gateways  (lit.  arches).’ 

Athatah  sampravakshyami  mandapanam  tu  lakshanam  I 
Mandapa-pravaran  vakshye  prasadasyanurupatah  II  1 
Vividha  mapdapah  karya  jyeshtha-madhya-kaniyasah  I 
Namas  tan  pravakshyami  &yinudhvam  rishi-sattamah  II  2 
Then  follow  the  names  of  twenty-seven  mandapas.  They  are 
divided  according  to  the  number  of  columns  they  are  furnish- 
ed with,  the  largest  one  having  64  pillars,  the  next  62,  one 
following  60,  and  so  on  : 

(1)  Pushpaka,  (2)  Pusha-bhadra,  (3)  Suvrata,  (4)  Amrita- 
nan-dana,  (6)  Kaufealya,  (6)  Buddhi-samkirna,  (7)  Gaja- 
bhadra,  (8)  Jayabaha,  (9)  Srivatsa,  (10)  Vijaya,  (11)  Vas- 
tu-kirti,  (12)  ^rutiihjaya,  (13)  Yajha-bhadra-,  (14)  Vifeala, 
(15)  Sulilishta,  (16)  l^atru-mardana,  (17)  Bhaga-pahoha, 


472 


MANpAPA 


(18)  Nandana,  (19)  Manaya,  (20)  Mana-bhadraka,  (21) 
Sugriva,  (22)  Harita,  (23)  Karni-kara,  (24)  ^atardhika, 
(26)  Simba,  (26)  Syama-bhadra,  and  (27)  Snbhadra. 

The  plans  of  Mandapas  are  given  next ; 

Tri-konam  vrittaro  ardhendiim  ashta-kbnam  dvir-ashtakam  I 
Ghatush«konam  tu  kartavyam  samsthanam  mandapasya  tn  II 
(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  1-2,  3-6,  7-15, 16). 

(3)  Bhitter  dvaigupyato  vapi  karfrtavya  inandapah  kvaobit  \ 

(Garuda  Purana,  chap.  47,  V.  37). 
Prasadasyagratah  kuryan  mapdapam  daka-hastakam  H 
Kuryad  dva-dafea-haatam  va  stambhaih  shoda^abhir  yntam  I 
Dlivajash^akai§  chatur-hastam  madbye  vediih  cha  kSrayet  II 

■ , (Ibid.  chap.  48,  V.  4-6)i 

(4)  Ahuya  yi&va-karmmanaih  karayamasa  sadarami 

Mandapam  oha  suvistirnam  vedikabhir  manoramam  11  2 
Description  of  its  carvings  and  paintings  : 

Jalarh  kim  nn  sthalam  tatra  na  vidna  tattvato  janah,  \ 

Kvaobit  simbab  kvaohid-dhamaab  sarasa^  oba  maba-pra- 

bhab  II  6 

Kvaobiob  obhikbamdinas  tatra  kritrima  sumanobarab  \ 

Tatba  nagab  kritrima^  cha  bayat  obaiva  tatba  mfigah  II  7 
Ke  satyab  ke  asatyat  cha  samskrita  vitva-kaymana  | 
Taitbaiva.obaivam  vidbina  dvara-pada-bbutab  kritah  II  8 
Batba  rathi-yuta  by-asan  kritrima  by-akritopamah  \ 

Sarvesham  mobanarthaya  tatba  oba  samaadah  kritah  |j  13,  etc. 
Bvambbutah  kritas  tena  mandapo  divya-rupavfc  II  20 

(Skanda-Purana,  Mabetvara-khanda-pratbama, 
obap.  24,  V.  2,  6,  7,  8,  13,  20,  for  further 
description,  see  V.  36-67). 

Katbasye&ana-dig-bhage  kalam  kritva  sutobbanam  I 
Tan-madbye  mandapam  kritva  vedim  atra  sunirmalam  II 

(Ibid.  Vaishpava-kbapda-dvitiya,  chap.  25,  v.  26), 


MANDAPA 


473 


(6)  Eka-dvi-tri-talopetam  chatush-panoha-talaiii  tu  va  II 
Mandapam  tu  vidhatavyam  salanam  agra-defeake  II 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  96,  96a), 
(6)  Mandapas  implying  the  detatched  buildings  and  forming  part 
of  a temple : 

Measurement  as  compared  with  the  temple  : 

Prasada-lakshanaiii  proktam  mandapanam  vidhim  &rinu  II  94 
Prasadardham  mukhayamam  vistaram  samam  uchyate  \ 
Tri-padam  va  mukhayamam  sardham  mandapam  uchyate  II  95 
Glassification.: 

Devata-mandapam  purvam  dvitiyam  anapanarbhakam  1 
Vrishartham  mandapam  paschach  chaturtham  nritta-manda- 

pam  II  96 

Description  of  these  four  classes  of  mandapas  : 
Devaba-prabima-rupa(-am)  sthapitam  deva-mandapam  \ 
Kala&a-sthapanam  yatra  proktam  snapana-mandapam  II  97 
Vl’ishabha-sthapitam  yatra  vrishabha-mandapaih  tatha  1 
Nyittam  yatra  kfitam  tat  tu  nritta-mapdapam  eva  tu  II  98 
<3-opure’tha  yayavye’  pi  Vayavye  yikyitam  tatha  \ 

Eyam  ohatur-vidheshy'aaya-mapdapam  chagrato  bahih  II  99 
Their  names; 

Tesham  namani  vakshySmi  tyipu  vatsa  samahitah  I 
Nanda-vrittam  feriya-yyittam  yirasanam  oha  yyittakam  II  100 
Nandyavartam  man,i-bhadram  yisalam  cheti  kirttitam  \ 

Their  characteristic  features : 

Nanda-yrittam  chatush-padam  shodatam  tripratishthitam  il 

101 

Vimsati-stambha-samyuktam  yirasanam  iti  smyitam  \ 
Dvatrimfead-gatra-sainyuktam  jaya-bhadram  iti  kathyate  II  103 


4t4 


MANDAPA 


Shati-trim&ad-gafcra-samyuktam  naudyavarbam  ifci  smyitam  \ 
Chafcuh-shashti-samayiikfeam  gtambhanarh  mani-bhadrakam  I! 

103 

Stambhunam  fell  satair  yuktam  visalam  ifci  sainjiiitam  I 
Prasada-vati  samakhyatam  praataruafcam  pramanatab  II  104 

(Suprabliedagama,  xxi:v.  94-104). 
Then  follows  an  account  of  these  columns  (ibid.  v.  105-108, 

see  under  Stambha). 

Kaufciliya-Artha&astra  (chap.  xxii.  p,  46,  foot-note)  j 

(7)  Ardha-gavyuta(-?ti)-tritiyanbar-grrimaD,tara-rahitaih  mauda- 

pam  I 

(Rayapaseni-sutra-vyakhyane,  p.  206). 

(8)  Mandapani  dura-sthala-simanbarani  I 

(Pra§na-vyakarana-sufcra-Yyakhyane,  p.  306). 

(9)  See  the  first  Prasasti  of  Baijuath  (verse  29,  Ep,  Ind.  vol.  i. 

p.  106),  also  the  second  Prasasti  (verse  25,  pp.  114,  117). 

(10)  Some'svaraya  tan-mandapam  uttareua — ‘To  the  north  of  the 

hall  of  the  temple  of  Somesvara.” 

(Cliiatra  Prasasti  of  the  reign  of  Sarangadeva,  v,  40, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  I.  pp,  284,  276). 

(11)  A hall  for  the  supply,  of  water  (Insorip.  of  Ghandella  Viravar- 

man,  v.  19,  Bp,  lad,  vol,  I.  pp.  328,  330). 

(12)  A chapel  (Harsha  Stoue  Insorip.  v,  12,  44,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  ii. 

pp.  121,  124,  126, 128). 

(13)  Naroyapasyayatanaiii saha  mandapena — the  temple  of 

Earayana  together  with  the  hall. 

(Khalari  Stone  Insorip,  of  Haribrahmadeva,  v.  10, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  n.  p.  231), 

(14)  Somes vara-maihdapa — the  temple  of  Somauath. 

(Sridhara’s  Devapattana  Prasasti,  v.  23,  Ep,  Ind. 

vol.  II.  p,  442,  see  also  v.  10,  p.  440). 
(L6)  Mantiapa  (the  Kanarese  form)-— a hall. 

(Satyraangalam  Plates  of  Bovaraya  lI,  v.  8,  Bp.  Ind. 

vol.  III.  pp.  37,  40). 


MANDAPA  4*76 

(16)  Sri-’^alladhipatea  feivasya  sukhadam  bhadrabiYayam  mapda- 

pam.. II 

akarod  bhadrahvyam  man^apam...... II 

Bhadrakhya-mandapain(mum)  viraohayya  ^ambhor  nidra- 
vasana-vijayiti  oha  nama  kyitva  \ 
Chakre  oha  Nayaka-feiYalayam  asya  parsve  feri-jiiaiia-murttir 
afcisampadi-valla-puryyam  I! 

(Bilvanafche&vara  Insorip.  of  Viraoliainpa,  v. 

1,  2,  S,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  III.  pp,  70,  71). 

(17)  Dhama,  Mamdira,  Prasada  and  Bhavana  are  used  indiscrimin* 

ately  for  temple  or  Maudapa. 

(Ganapesvaram  Insciip.  of  Ganpati, 23-26, 
Bp.  Ind.  vol.  in.  pp.  86*87). 

(18)  Abhyavahara-man().apa'— a dining  ball. 

(Banganath  Insorip,  of  Siindarapandya,  v.  23, 
Bp.  Ind.  vol.  III.  pp,  13,  16). 

(19)  “ The  immediate  purpose  of  the  Eanganatha  inscription  of 

Sundara-Pandya  ia  a description  of  his  building  operations 
at,  and  gifts  to,  the  temple.  He  built  a shrine  of  Narasimha 
(verses  2 and  10)  and  another  of  Vishnu^s  attendant 
Vishvaksena  (8),  both  of  which  were  covered  with  gold,  and  a 
gilt  tower  which  contained  an  image  of  Narasimha  (7). 
Burther  he  covered  the  (original  or  central)  shrine  of  the 
temple  with  gold — ^an  achievement  of  which  he  must  have 
been  specially  proud,  as  he  assumed,  with  reference  to  it, 
the  surname  Hema-ohohhadana-raia,  i.e,,  the  king  who  has 
covered  (the  temple)  with  gold,  and  as  he  placed  in  the 
shrine  a golden  image  of  Vishnu,  which  he  called  after  his 
own  surname  (3).  He  also  covered  the  inner  wall  of  the 
(central)  shrine  with  gold  (22)  and  built,  in  front  of  it,  a 

dining-hall,  which  he  equipped  with  golden  vessels  (23) 

In  the  month  of  Chaitra  he  celebrated  the  proces- 
sion-festival of  the  god  (20).  Bor  the  festival  of  the  gods 


476 


MANPAPA 


sporting  wifch  Lakshmi,  he  builfe  a golden  ship  (21).  The 
last  ‘Verse  (30)  of  the  inscription  states  that  the  king  built 
three  golden  domes  over  the  image  , of  Hema-ohohhadana- 
raja-Hari,  over  that  of  Garuda  (16)  and  over  the  hall  which 
contained  the  conch  of  Vishnu  (6).’V 

'‘  The  following  miscellaneous  gif ts  (for  articles  of  furniture)  to 
Ranganatha  are  enumerated  in  the  inscription : — A garland 
of  emeralds  (verse  4),  a crown  of  jewels  (5),  a golden  image 
of  ISesha  (6),  a golden  arch  (9),  a pearl-garland  (11),  a 
canopy  of  pearls  (12),  dilferent  kinds  of  golden  fruits  (13), 
a golden  oar  (14),  a golden  trough  (IS),  a golden  image  of 
Garuda  (16),  a golden  under-garment  (17),  a golden 
aureola  (18),  a golden  pedestal  (19),  ornaments  of  jewels 
(24),  a golden  armour  (25^  golden  vessels  (28),  and  a golden 
throne  (29).” 

(Ranganatha  Insorip.  of  Sundarapandya,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  III.  p.  11). 

(20)  Kfishnalayam  mandapam— -an  abode  of  Kjishna,  an  open 

hall. 

(Three  Insorip.  from  Travanoore,  no.  B,  lino  4, 
Ep.Ind.  vol.  IV.  p.  203). 

(21)  Asthana-liila-mandapa  (not  translated,  Hultzsch). 

(First  Graksharama  Pillar  Insorip.  lino  9,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  IV.  pp.  329,  330). 

(22)  Ghana-mantapa-vapra-saudha-ramyalayam  (v.  39)—“  a temple 

(alaya)  adorned  with  a solid  hall,  a wall  and  a plastered 
mansion.”  (pp.  123, 114). 

Sudha-liptaih  tiia-mamtapam  (v,  43) — “ a plastered  hall  of 
stone.  ” (pp.  123,  114). 

Vipnlam  ramyam  maha-mamtapam  (v.  44) — “ a fine  large 
hall.  ” (pp.  123,  114). 


mandapa 


477 


Ramyam  maha-mamfeapam  (v.  47) — " a beautiful  large- hall.  ” 
(pp.  124,  115). 

G-kanam  prasadam  naYa-bema-kumbha-kalitam  ramyam  inaha- 
mamtfapam  (y.  61)—“  he  presented  a solid  temple  (prasada), 
adorned  with  nine  golden-pinnacles  (kumbha),  and  a beauti- 
ful large  hall,  to  the  temple  of  Hari.  ” (pp,  126,  116). 

(Mangalagiri  pillar  Inscrip.  Ep.  Ind. 
vol.  VI.  pp.  114, 116, 124, 125). 

(23)  Anandaika-niketanaih  nayanayoh  s(fe)asvan  manah-kairava- 
jyotsnaughah  khalu  vi&vakarmma-nipuna-vyapara-vaidagdhya- 

bhuh  \ 

Griahma-grasa-bhayatibhita-janata-feautirya-durggalayo  marg- 
gah  kirtti-vijrimbhanasya  jayina  prottambhito  mandapah  II 

(Two  Bhuvanetvara  Inscrip.,  no.  1,  of 
SvapnetvaTa,v.  29,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  vi. 

p.  202), 

(24)  “ This  inscription  (Bhimavaram  inscrip,  of  Eulottunga  i)  it 

engraved  on  a pillar  in  the  mandapa  in  front  of  the  Kara- 
yanasvamin  temple  at  Bhimavaram  in  the  Cooanada  divi* 
sion  of  the  Godavari  district.” 

(Ep.  Ind.  vol.  VI.  p.  219). 

(25)  Utsava-mamijapa — a festive  hall. 

(Kondavidu  Inscrip.  of  Erishnaraya,  v. 
27,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  vi.  pp.  237,  231). 

(26)  “ The  village  of  iSivamahgalam  of  the  North  Arcot  district 

contains  a ^iva  temple  named  Stambhe&vara,  which  consists 
of  a rock-out  shrine,  two  mandapas  in  f ront  of  it,  and  a 
stone  enclosure.  The  two  rook-out  pillars  of  the  gate  by 
which  the  shrine  is  entered  bears  the  two  subjoined  inscrip- 
tion. Besides,  there  are  several  Ohola  inscriptions  on  the 
walls  of  the  enclosure.” 

(Dr.  Hultzsoh,  Bp,  Ind.  vol.  VI.  p.  319). 

(27)  Madapo  nava-gabha — a nine-celled-  hall. 

Patho  madapo — a study. 

(Earle  Cave  Inscrip.  no.  20,  Bp.  Ind. 

vol.  VII.  pp.  71,  72, 73). 


ms 


MANDAPA 


(28)  ^ri-Kafiolii-Jma-Yardh.p.mana-.iiilaya3y|gre  maha-mandapam 

larngifcarttham  aohikaraoh,  oha  feilaya  baddham  &amaiiiiat 
sthalam  II 

“ Caused  to  be  built,  in  front  of  the  temple  of  the  Jina-Vardha- 
mana  at  the  prosperous  Kanchi,  a great  hall  for  concerts 
and  (caused  to  be)  paved  with  stones  the  space  all  round.  ” 
(Two  Jaina  Inscrip,  of  Irugappa,  no.  B, 
line  2,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  vii.  p.  116). 

(29)  “ The  buildings  to  be  erected  in  the  temple  of  Arujalanatha 

(are)  a mandapa  of  one  thousand  pillars,  a canopy  of  gems 

for  (the  image  of)  Mudivalahginan 

(Arulala-Perumal  Insorip.  of  Pratapa- 
rudra,  line  8,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  vil.  pp. 

131, 132). 

(BO)  ^ri-nara-simha-varma-nyipatih  Sri-kovalure  bhajan  vasam 
vi&va-jagan-nivasa-vapushah  l^rl-vSmanasyakarot  I 
^ailam  tumbhita-tata-kumbha-vilasat-kumbham  maha-man^a. 
pam  prakaram  para-malika-vilasitaih  muktamayim  oha 
prapa(-bha)m  I 

“ The  glorious  prince  Nara-simha-varman,  residing  in  !§riko- 
valtira  made  for  the  god  Vamana,  in  whose  body  the  whole 
world  abides,  a great  mandapa  of  stone,  resplendent  with 
pitchers  (kalata  or  kumbba)  of  shining  gold,  a surrounding 
wall,  adorned  with  excellent  buildings,  and  a canopy  of 
pearls.” 

(Pourteen  Inscrip,  at  Tirukkovalur, 
no.  K,  of  Eajendradeva,  lines  1-2,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  VII.  pp.  146,  146). 

(31)  Dhara-giri-garbha-marakata-mamdape — in  an  emerald  pavi- 

lion on  the  Dharagiri  hill. 

(Dhara  Pratasti^of  Arjunavarman,  line 
12,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  Ylli.  pp.  103, 100). 

(32)  Tejahpala  iti  kshitumdu-saohivah  samjjvalabhih  sila-treni- 

bhih  sphurad  imdu-kumda-ruchiram  Nemi-prabhor.  mam- 

diram  I 


MANBAPA 


479 


Uoholiair  mamdapam  agrato  Jma-(vara)-Ta8a‘-dvi-paih.oha- 
§atam  fcat*parlvesb.ti  balanaljata  oha  purato  nishpadayama- 

sivan  II 

" The  minister  Tejahpala,  a moon  on  earth,  erected  the  temple 
of  the  Lord  Nemi,  which  shines  by  lines  of  stones  as 
white  as  conch-shells  (and)  is  resplendent  like  the  moon  and 
jasmine  flowers,  a lofty  hall  (mandapa)  in  front  (of  it),  fifty- 
two  shrines  for  the  best  of  the  Jinas  on  the  aides  of  it,  and 
a seat  (?  balanaka)  in  the  front 

(Monnt  Abn  Insorip.  no.  I,  t.  61,  Bp.  Ind.  vol. 

Vin.  pp.  212, 218). 

(33)  Kamakshi-dharma-mandape  II 

Pratyabdan  dvija-bhnkty-arttham  bhagam  ekam  akalpayat  II 
“ Set  apart  one  share  for  the  yearly  feeding  of  Brahmanas  in 
the  Kamakshi-dharma-mandapa.” 

(Madras  Museum  Plates  of  ^rigiribhupala, 
V.  21,  22,  Ep.  Ind.  Yol.  vni.  pp.  311,  316). 

(34)  “ Mayangari the  prime  minister  of  king  Marafijadai- 

yan,  made  this  stone  temple  and  ascended  heaven  (i.e.,  died) 
without  consecrating  it.  Subsequently  his  brother  Maran, 
Eyinan who  attained  to  the  dignity  Of  prime  minis- 

ter, made  the  mukha-mandapa  (muga-mandapan)  and  con- 
secrated (the  shrine)  ” . 

(Two  Anaimalai  Inscrip,  no.  II,  Ep.  Ind.  vol. 

VIII.  pp.  320,  321). 

(36)  Of.  Mandapika  (lit.,  a small  pavilion ) : 

^ri-Naddula-maha-sthane  ^ri-Samderaka-gaohchhe  ^ri-Maha- 
vira-devaya  6ri-Naddiila-talapada-feulka-mamdapikayam 
masanumasaih  dhupa-ve(tai)lartham ) 

“(Granted  to  the  Jaina  temple  of)  Mahaviradeva  in  the 
Sanderaka  gachchha,  at  the  holy  place  (Mahasthana)  of 
Naddula,  a monthly  (sum  of  five  drammas),  (to  be  paid) 
from  the  custom-house  in  the  grounds  (talapada-s vatala)  of 
l^addula.  ” 


480 


MANBAPA 


(For  passages  in  which  the  term  MaridapikS  occurs,  compare, 
e.g,,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  l,  pp.  114, 1-27 ; p.  173,  1-6,  (Siyadoni- 
Satka-mandapika) ; p.  176, 1, 19 ; p.  177,  1,  29  and  1,30; 
p.  179, 1,  45 ; p.  262,  1,  3 (pa^^ana-raandapika) ; Ind.  Ant. 
vol.  XIV.  p.  10,  col.  2 (^ripathastha-mandapika) ; Journ.  As. 
Soo.  Beng,  vols.  Lv.  part  I,p.  47,  iv.  p.  48,  and  v.;  Bhavnagar 
insoiip.  p.  206, 1,  7.  6nlka-mandapika  occurs,  e.g.,  in  Bhav- 
nagar Inscrip,  p.  168  1,  11, 10, 16  and  18). 

“ The  meaning  of  mandapika  is  suggested  by  the  Marathi 
mamdavi,  a custum-house.”  Prof.  Kielhorn. 

(The  ohahamanas  of  Naddula,  no.  A,  Nadol 
plates  of  Alhanadeva,  lines  22-23,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  IX.  pp.  66,  63,  and  note  8). 

(36) .. .....Vidadhe’  sya  mamdire  mamdapam  II 

Ghakre*(a)kshaya-tyitiyayam  pratish^ha  maihdape  dvijaih  11 

(Ohahamanas  of  Naddula,  no.  0,  Sundha 
Hill  Insorip.  of  Chaohigadeva,  v.  66,  67, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol,  IX,  p.  79). 

(37)  Beva-^ri-Sa&i-bhushanasya  kyitina  devalayam  karitam  yug- 

mam  mamdapa-^obhitam  oha  purato-bhabraih  pratolya 

saha ) 

Eshetre&asya  tatha  suralaya-varam  sphitam  tadagam  tatha 
bandham  Kaudika-samjfiakam  bahu-jalam  dirgham  tatha 

khanitam  II 

(Kanker  Insorip.  of  Bhanudeva,  v.  7,  Ep. 

' Ind.  vol,  IX.  p.  127) . 

(38)  Kamaniya-tila-stambha-kadambottambitamvaram  II 

Vitamkata-vi^amkali-virajad  ramga-mam^apam  \ 

“ It  is  a large  rangamapdapa  raised  on  a collection  of  beautiful 
stone  pillars  and  adorned  with  rows  of  spouts. 

(Krisbnapuram  Plates  of  Sada&ivaraya, 

V.  66,  66,  Ep.  Ind.  vol,  ix.  pp.  336,  341). 


MANDAPA 


481 


(39)  Pahini  mamdapa  karaniyah  Akahasamalapaniyali  dama 

karfcfcavya  pash5na-itakayam  ghatitah........! 

“ Pahini  (the  architect)  oonstraoted  the  jiiandapa,  aksha-sama 
(?),  and  dama  (?)  with  atones  and  bricks.” 

(The  Chahamanas  of  Marwar,  no.  xiii,  Sanderava 
stone  Inscrip,  of  Kelhanadeva,  line  2 f.,  Bp. 

Ind.  vol.  XI.  p.  48). 

(40)  “ This  inscription  (the  Chahamanas  of  Marwar,  no.  xvii)....... 

is  incised  on  a pillar  in  the  Sabha-mandapa  of  the  temple 
of  Mahavira.” 

(Bp.  Ind.  Vol.  XI.  p.  51). 

(41)  Abhinava-nishpanna-prelffiha'niadhya-mamdape A 

Snvarnnamaya-kalataropana-pratishtha  krita  \ 

“ The  ceremony  of  placing  a golden  cupola  on  the  newly 
made  central  hall,  intended  for  dramatic  performances  was 
carried  out.” 

(The  Chahamanas  of  Marwar,  no.  xix,  Jalar  stone 
Inscrip.  lines  5,  6,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  xi.  p.  65). 

(42)  Tenochchair  bbodhi-mande  sa^i-kara-dhavalah  sarvvato 

mandapena  kantah  prasada  esha  smara-bala-jayinah  karito 
loka-sastuh  II 

“ By  him  this  beautiful  mansion  of  the  Teacher  of  mankind, 
who  overcame  the  power  of  (the  god)  Smara,  dazzling  white 
as  the  rays  of  the  moon  with  an  open  pavilion  on  all  sides, 
has  been  caused  to  be  made  at  the  exalted  Bodhi-manda  ” 
(also  called  Vajrasana,  the  miraculous  throne  under  the 
Bodlii  tree  at  Bodh-G-aya,  on  which  Buddha  sat,  when 
attaining  Bodhi  or  perfect  wisdom). 

(Bodh-Gaya  Inscrip.  of  Mahanaman,  lines  10-11, 
C.I.I.  vol.  m.  F.  G.  I.  no.  71,  pp.  276,  278, 
275;  also  Sanskrit  and  Old  Canarese  Inscrip. 
no.  166,  Bodh-Gaya  inscrip.  of  Mahanaman, 
line  10  f.,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xv.  pp.  368,  359). 


m 


MANpAPA 


(43)  “ There  are  severallother  insoripfeions  in  the  outer  parts  of  the 

(Yelur)  temple,  ■viz.,  two  on  the  pedestals  of  the  two  dvara- 
palakas  in  front  of  the  gopura,  one  on  the  left  outer  wall  of 
the  inner  prakara,  and  five  on  the  floor  of  the  alamkara- 
mandapa.” 

(H.  S.  1. 1,  vol.  I.  p.'  127,  first  para). 

(44)  “ We  the  great  assembly  of  Manimaugalam, being 

assembled,  without  a vacancy  in  the  assembly,  in  the  large 

mandapa  (of)  the  Brahma-sthana  in  our  village 

(Inscrip.  of  Virarajendra  i,  no.  30,  line  36, 
H.  S.  I.  I.  vol.  III.  p.  70). 

(46)  Brahmapriyan ..........caused  to  be  made  the  stonework 

of  a flight  of  steps,  with  tiger’s  head  at  the  bottom,  for 
the  abhisheka-mandapa  in  the  temple  of  Yanduvarapati 

Emberuman  at  Manimaugalam ” 

(Inscrip.  of  Bajaraja  lii,  no.  39,  H.  S.  I.  I. 

vol.  III.  p.  86). 

(46)  ^ri-ku&ala-mandapadi-yukta-rajaka-mala  karakhya-padma- 

karabhirama-nutana-omkare^vara-deva-sthanam  1 
“ A beautiful  new  Omkaretvara  temple,  a lotus  ornament  to  the 
earth,  which  with  its  skilfully  designed  mantapas,  etcetera, 
might  be  called  a royal  lotus.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  i.  pp.  38  i,  61). 

(47)  “ This  is  the  sacred  marriage  hall  (Kalyana-naandlapa)  built 

(on  the  date  specified)  by  Tirukkanam  Ayya  Mudeliyar’s  son 
Yedagiri  Mudeliyar  for  the  god  ^ri-Subharaya  Subhamiyar 
of  Alabur.” 

“This  inscription  is  at  Halasur,  on  the  basement  of  the 
Kalyana-mandapa  in  the  prakara  of  the  Subrahmanya 
temple.” 

(Ep.  Ca  nat.  vol.  IX.  Bangalore  Taluq,  no.  14, 
Boman  text,  p.  8,  Tranal.  p.  7). 


MANpAPA 


483 


(48)  “This  is  the  outer  mandapa.  (?  Ohurrii-maudapam)  called 

Sri-Erijendra-^ola-devar  after  the  name  of  (the  king)  Sri- 
Eaiendra-Sola-devar,  caused  to  be  erected  by  Jakkiyappai, 
daughter  of  Tribhuvauaiyam  of  Ittakirai,  at  the  foot  of 
Sulkal-malai,  otherwise  called  Kanaka -parvvatam  (the  golden 
mountain)  in  the  KadambanSkkai-nadu.’^ 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  x.  Kolar  Taluq,  no.  115,  Roman 
text,  p.  49,  Transl.  p.  44). 

(49)  “ Agrahara  village,  mantapas,  mantapas  for  alms  (bhiksha- 

mantapa),  and  all  other  religious  provisions”...., 

(Ibid.  vol.  X.  Mulbagal  Taluq,  no.  2,  Roman  text,  p. 

82,  Transl.  p.  71) 

(60)  “ Caused  to  be  built  in  the  temple  of  Jayambu-nayakar  the 

dancing  hall  (nirutta,  i.e.,  niitta-mandapam),  the  vestibule 
(nadai-maligai),  the  surrounding  hall  and  the  tower.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  x.  Bowringpet  Taluq,  no.  88a, 
Roman  text,  p.  176,  Transl.  p.  146). 

(61)  Varadaraia-devara-mukha-mantapada-sannidhiyalu  Rajagam- 

bhiran  emba  kottalavanu.” 

“In  proximity  to  the  mantapa  facing  the  god  Varadaraja 
having  erected  the  bastion  named  Eajagambhira.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  X.  Malur  Taluq,  no.  1,  Roman 
text,  p.  186,  Transl.  p.  165). 
(52)  “ That  Siuga-Raja  had  the  two  lines  of  fortification  round  this 
city  built,  and  holding  the  office  of  pattana-svami  by  order 
of  the  god  Nayin^r,  so  that  all  the  people  could  see,  for  the 
god’s  tirumana  had  mantapas  made  before  and  behind  the 
temple  (hindana-mundana-bhagada  mantapa),  had  a pond 
constructed  called  after  Gopa  Raja  the  Gopa-samudra,  had 
a palace  built  for  Gopa  Baja  to  the  west  of  that  pond,  and 
to  the  right  of  the  god,  Singa-Baja’s  palace  ; and  that  he 
might  at  sunrise  and  at  evening  twilight  bathe  at  both 
times,  and  have  a room  for  domestic  saorifioe.  from  the 
threshold  of  which  he  might  look  to  the  spire  of  Varada 


m 


manbapa 


Eaja^s  temple,.....«.........and  at  the  eastern  gopura  which 

Kundapa-dannayaka  had  hnilt  in  front  of  the  mantapa 
facing  the  god  (rnnkha-mantapa).” 

(Ibid  no.  4,  Eoman  text,  p.  187,  Tranal. 

p.  166). 

(63)  “ Setlji  De van  built  a beautiful  stone  temple  with  a mantapa 

in  front  of  it.*’ 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  x.  Chintamani  Taluq, 
no.  83,  Transl.  p.  268,  para  2). 

(64)  That  the  king  Praudha-Raya  (on  the  date  specified,  1426 

A.  D.)  being  in  the  dana-mantapa,  in  the  presence  of  the  god 
Virupaksha  on  the  bank  of  the  Tungabhadra,  for  the  purpose 
of  making  the  great  Kalpalata  gift 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  xii.  Tumkur  Taluq, 
no.  11,  Transl.  p.  6,  para  2). 
(56)  “ Caused  to  be  made  the  Honna-devi-mantapa.” 

This  expression  is  like  those,  as  Vishpu-mandapa;  where 
mandapa  is  a detached  shrine  or  temple. 

(Ibid.  no.  26,  Transl,  p.  8). 

(66)  " His  wife  (with  various  praises)  Kallarasiyamma,  had  the 

shrine  of  the  god  Sidda-Mallikarjuna  renewed,  and  having 
the  whole  (temple)  strengthened,  had  the  two  domes  built, 
and  the  plastering  done,  had  a portico  made  to  the  front ’of 

the  temple,  erected  a bhoga-mandapa, and  building  a 

tower  and  a hall  for  the  god,  made  a grant  of  land  to  provide 
for  the  offerings  (specified)”. 

(Ibid.  Gubbi  Taluq,  no.  29,  Roman  text, 
p.  41,  middle,  Transl.  p.  23,  line  6). 

(67)  “ Presented  at  the  feet  of  the  god  Chandra-tekhara  the  proces- 

sional form  of  the  god  ^ankare&vara,  a dipamale  pillar,  and 
a pStala-mantapa.*’ 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  xii.  Tiptur  Taluq, 
no.  70,  Transl.  p.  67). 

(68)  “At  the  time  of  the  eclipse  of  the  sun,  in  the  presence  of  the 

god  Virupaksha  on  the  bank  of  the  Tungabhadra,  in  the 


MANDAPA 


486 


mukti-iaantepa  to  the  aaorifioer  Naganatha  (desoeiit,  etc#, 

stated),  he  granted  the  Timaduga  village.” 

fBp.  Carnat.  Pavugada  Talnq,  no.  4,  Transl. 

p.  117,  Boman  text,  p.  193  f). 

(^9)  In  the  antarala  (interior)  they  erected  a most  beautiful 
rahga-mantepa,  and  a fine  chandra-&ale  ( upper  storey) 
according  to  the  directions  given  by  the  king  Timmendra.” 

(Ibid.  vol.  XII.  Pavugada  Taluq,  no.  46, 

Transl.  p,  122,  line  14,  Boman  text,  p.  203, 

V.  9). 

(60)  “ Kaila^adres  svatulyam  kalita-&uchi-gunam  &rimati  &ri- 

suchindre  Vanchi-bhu-pala-chuda-manir  akrita  puro-man^a- 
pe  ohandra-mauleh  il 

“ Bamavarma,  the  crowning  gem  of  the  Vanohi  sovereigns, 
constructed  the  front  mandapa  of  the  moon-crested  (^iva)  at 
Suchindram,  equalling  Kailafea  in  splendour,  and  full  of  the 
purest  qualities.” 

(Inscrip,  in  the  Pagodas  of  Tirukurungudi, 
in  Tinnevelly  and  of  Suchindram,  in  south 
Travancore,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  il.  p.  361,  o.  2,  v.  • 

2,  p.  362,  o>  1,  para  2),  I 

(61)  “ In  the  centre,  fronting  the  single  doorway,  is  a -shrine  or  f 

mandapa  covering  a slab,  on  which  is  carved  in  relief  a I 

sitting  figure  with  the  right  foot  on  an  elephant,  the  left  on  | 

a bullock.” 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  vii.  p.  19,  c.  I,  last  four  lines). 

(62)  Bambha  - patra  - phala  - prasima-lalite  sat-toranachohhadane  j 

nana-varna-pataka-ketana-lasat-prante  maha-mandape  \ 

Kundanam  navakaih  vidhayya  vidhivad-viprair  vidhana- 
kshamaih  karma&charya-karam  samapayad  idam  Sri- 
Ranganatho  guruh  II 

(Inscrip.  from  Nepal,  no.  23,  Insorip.  of 

Queen  Lalitatripura  Sundari,  v.  3,  Ind*  ; 

Ant.  vol.  IX.  p.  194).  j 


486 


MANBAPA 


(65)  “ On  the  east  side  of  this  great  Stubi  or  Vimana  stands  the 

Veli-mandapam  or  ‘outer  hall  a plain  rectangular  building 
160  feet  long  by  83  feet  wide,  with  a flat  roof  supported  by 
four  rows  of  plain  stone  pillars...” 

“ Between  the  Veli-mandapam  or  outer  court  and  the  great 
Vimana,  there  is  a three-storeyed  building  joining  them  to- 
gether, called  Mele-mandapam,  covering  the  transverse  aisle 
between  the  north  and  south  entrances  by  which  the  shrine 
is  approached.  This  portico  or  transept  is  designed  and 
completed  in  keeping  with  the  grand  scale  and  style  of  the 
Vimana.” 

(G-angai-Kondapuram  l^aiva  temple,  Ind. 

Ant.  vol.  IX.  p.  118,  c.  I). 
(64)  ^ri-Brahma-Devara-mantapavanu—“  presented  the  Brahma 
Beva  mantapa.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol,  il.  no.  121,  Roman  text, 
p.  88,  Transl.  p.  172), 

(66)  “ Tupada-Vengatapa  made  a stone  mantapa  and  a well  for 

the  god  Prasanna-Vengataramana  to  the  north-west  of  the 
precincts  of  the  temple  of  the  god  Pa&ohima-RanganStha.” 

(Ep,  Camat.  vol.  iii.  Seringapatam  Taluq, 
no.  9,  Transl.  p.  8,  Roman  text,  p.  17\ 

(66)  “ Also  land  for  the  god  Hanumauta  newly  set  up  in  the  man- 

tapa in  the  middle  of  the  village,  to  which  the  god  Rama 
pays  a visit  at  the  Ramanavami  (festival),  i.e,,  the  idol  of 
Rama  is  brought  there  on  that  occasion.” 

(Ibid.  no.  13,  Transl.  p,  9,  Roman  text,  p.  21). 
It  should  be  noticed  that  this  mandapa  does  not  belong,  as  an 
attached  or  detached  building,  to  any  temple.  It  is  by  it- 
self a temple.  Such  mandapas  or  temples  are  named  after 
the  gods  whose  idols  are  consecrated  in  them,  such  as 
Vishnu-mandapa,  Kali-mandapa,  and  so.forth. 

(67)  “ His  lawful  wife  Bangamma,....,.......had  erected  a mantapa, 

with  a large  pond,  and  presented  a palanquin  set  with 


MANDAPA 


48? 


Jewels  and  all  ofcher  kinds  of  gifts,  a bank  having  grown  up 
and  being  unsightly,  he  bought  the  ground  and  established 
there  a matha,  also  endowing  it  so  that  24  chief  Vaidika 
Vaishnava  Brahmans  of  the  Bamanuja  sect  might  be  fed  in 
the  ranga-mantapa.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  m.  Seringapatam  Taluq, 
no.  89,  Transl.  p.  26-27,  Eoman  text,  p.  67). 

(68)  tSri-Timma-dandanayaka  mahisi  Sri-Eanga-nayaki  rachita  \ 
Sampat-kumara-mahisi  puratah  prafibhati  ranga-mantapika  II 

Timma-dandanay aka’s  wife  (Queen  Consort)  Banga-nayaki 
erected  a ranga-mantapa  in  front  of  (the  temple  of)  the  god- 
dess of  Sampat-kumara 

(Ibid.  no.  97,  Eoman  text,  p.  69,  Transl.  p.  28). 
In  this  sense  majudapa  is  most  generally  understood.  This  is 
what  is  called  na^  (i.e.,  nritya  or  rahga)-mandira,  as  stated 
above. 

(69)  “ Caused  to  be  erected  the  rahga-maptapa  of  the  god  Kefeava, 

; also  the  ranga-map^apa  of  the  god  Eahganatha  to 

the  south-east  of  that  village,  and  a sabha-man^apa  for 
.....the  village.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  lii.  Tirumakudlu-Earasipur 
Taluq,  no.  68,  Transl.  p.  78). 

(70)  “ The  accountant  Lihgana,  son  of with  devotion 

erected  (a  mantapa  of)  12  ahkanas  near  the  big  atvattha 
tree,  in  proximity  to  the  Matsya-tirtha,  on  the  bank  of  the 
Arkapushkarini.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  iv.  Yedatore  Taluq,  no.  3, 
Transl.  p.  52,  Eoman  text,  p.  84). 

(71)  “ The  manager  of  his  (Krishna-Deva-maharaya’s)  palace, 

made  for  the  god  Virabhadra a gandhagodi-mantapa, 

in  front  of  the  rahga-man^apa.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  Nagamahgala  Taluq,  no.  4,  Transl. 

p.  114,  Eoman  text,  p.  188). 


488  MANDAPA 

(72)  “ Haridasa-Eaufea,  son  of set  up  in  front  of  the  god 

Prasanna-Madhava  of  Belltir  a festival  (utsava)  mantapa, 
a pillar  for  lights  (dipa-maleya-kambha)  and  an  altar  for 
offerings  (bali-pitha).” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  iv.  Nagamangala  Taluq, 
no.  42,  Transl.  p.  124,  Eoman  text,  p.  213). 

(73)  “ Caused  a uyyale-mantapa  to  be  erected  for  the  spring  festi- 

val of  the  god.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  I,’Belur  Taluq,  no.  12, 
Transl.  p.  46,  Eoman  text,  p.  106). 

(74)  “ Newly  built  the  Kalyana-mandapa  (Kattisi  samarpisida 

Kalyana-mantapa  ahkana)  as  an  offering  at  the  lotus-feet 
of  the  god  Chenna-Ketava.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  I,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  21, 
Transl.  p.  52,  Eoman  text,  p.  119). 
(76)  The  grant  was  made  “ that  a pond  and  mantapa  may  be  con- 
structed in  front  of  the  temple  upper  storey  for  the  Spring 
water-festival  (vasanta-kaladalli  abage-seve  nadeve-bagge) 
for  the  god.” 

(Ibid.  no.  29,  Transl.  p.  64,  Eoman  text,  p.  122, 

line  16  f). 

(76)  “ He  constructed  a ipond  for  a raft  and  a Vasanta-mantapa  ; 

and  in  order  to  provide  for  ten  days  raft  festival  in  Phalguna, 
for  the  oblation  and  feeding  of  Brahmans  during  the  festival 

he  made  a grant.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  I,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  78, 
Transl.  p.  64-66,  Eoman  text,  p.  160). 

(77)  “ Built  a brick  enclosure  for  the  temple,  erected  a kalasa  to 

it,  and  a wooden  ranga-mantapa  in  front,  had  the  whole 
plastered,”........,.,..... 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  I,  Arsikere  Taluq, 
no.  8,  Transl.  p.  116,  line  6 f.,  Eoman  text, 
p.  263,  line  9), 


MANDAPA 


489 


(78)  “ Seated  on  tbe  diamond  throne  in  the  mag,tapa  in  front  of 

the  Basavetvara  temple  in  the  square  in  the  middle  of  the 
street  of  the  sun  and  moon  in  the  Eanthiraya-pete  of 
Bapavara  situated  to  the  south  of  ^ritaila.” 

(Ibid.  no.  94,  Transl.  p.  160,  line  2 f). 

(79)  “(On  the  date  specified),  aU  the  Brahmapas  of  the  immemorial 

agrahara  Brahma-samudra,  agreeing  among  themselves, 
and  going  to  the  prabhu-mantapa  (pabu-mantapadalli) 
and  seating  themselves,  Damoja,  son  of  the  carpenter 
Madiyoja,  having  worshipped  their  feet  and  presented  6 
pa,  they  granted  to  him  a rent-free  estate  (specified).” 

(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol.  VI.  Kadur  Taluq,  no.  67, 
Transl.  p.  12,  Roman  text,  p.  38-39). 

(80)  “ Caused  a bhoga-mantapa  to  be  erected  in  front  of  (the 

temple  of)  the  god  Janarddana.” 

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  bhoga-man^apas  are  generally 
built  on  the  side,  and  not  in  front,  of  the  temple. 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  vi.  Kadur  Taluq,  no.  91, 
Transl.  p.  16,  Roman  text,  p.  62). 

(81)  “ Caused  the  Nandi-maptapa  to  be  erected.” 

(Ibid.  Ghikmagalur  Taluq,  no,  76,  Transl. 

p,  44,  Roman  text,  p.  Ill,  line  7). 

(82)  “ Outside,  it  (the  temple  of  -SambhaVa-natha)  is  very  plain 

and  unpretentious,  whilst  inside  it  consists  of  three  apart- 
ments^— a mapi^apa  or  porch,  the  Sabha-mapdapa  or  assem- 
bly hall,  and  the  nij  (a)  mandira  or  shrine.  The  floors  are 
laid  with  coloured  marbles  and  the  roof  supported  on 
pillars.” 

“ The  man^apa  or  hall  is  roofed  by  an  octagonal  dome  sup- 
ported, as  usual,  on  twelve  pillars... ” 

(Ahmadabad  Architecture,  Burgess,  Arch.  Surv. 
new  Imp.  series,  vol.  xxxiii,  pp.  87,  90). 

(83)  See  Mukha-mapdapa,  of  Sometvara  temple  at  Kolar. 

(Mysore  Arch,  Report,  1913-14,  plate  vii.  fig.  3, 

p.  20). 


490 


MANDAPIKA 


(84)  Its  (Karidariya  Mahadeo  temple’s)  general  plan  is  similar  to 
that  of  most  of  the  larger  mediaeval  temples  of  Northern- 
India  (see  its  plan,  plate  xovii).  It  has  the  usual  ardha- 
mandapa  or^portico,  the  man^apa  or  nave,  the  maha-mandapa 
or  transept,  the  antarala  or  antechamber,  and  the  garbha- 
griha  or  sanctum,  each  of  which  has  its  separate  pinnacled 
roof  rising  in  regular  gradation  from  the  low  pyramid  of  the 
entrance  to  the  lofty  spire  of  the  sanctum.” 

(Ounningham,  Arch,  Surv.  Beports,  vol.  ii.  p. 

419,  no.  3). 

“ There  are  eighteen  carved  pillars,  each  of  W 9'''  high,  support- 
ing the  dome  of  the  outer  hall  or  the  ardha-mandapa, 
which  affords  an  area  of  16'  8"  inside  for  loungers  and 
devotees  to  rest  in.” 

(Ibid.  vol.  xxin.  p,  135). 

(85)  ” Mandapa — any  open  or  enclosed  building  in  connection  with 

a temple.  If  used  for  any  purpose,  the  distinctive  name  is 
prefixed.”  Eea. 

(Chalukyan  Architecture,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp. 

series,  vol.  xxi,  p.  39). 

(86)  Madhya-mandapa— second  hall  of  a temple. 

Maha-mandapa^ — central  hall  of  temple,  nave. 

Mandapa— porch  of  a temple. 

(Vincent  Smith,  G-loss.  to  Ounningham^s  Arch, 

' Surv.  Beports). 

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  architectural  treatises,  general 
literature,  and  epigraphical  records  corroborate  one  another 
. as  regards  the  various  types  of  this  class  of  buildings. 

MANpAPIKA— (see  Mandapa) — A small  pavilion,  a custom  house. 

(1)  iSri-Naddula-maha-sthane  feri-Saihderaka-gachohhe  tri-Maha- 
viradevaya  tri  - Naddula  - talapada  - feulka-mamdapikayam 
masanumSsam  dhupa-tailartham  \ 

(Q-ranted  to  the  Jaina  temple  of)  Mahaviradeva  in  the  San- 
deraka  gaohchha,  at  the  holy  place  (Mahasthana)  of  Naddula, 
a monthly  (sum  of  five  drammas),  (to  be  paid)  from  the 
custom  house  in  the  grounds  (talapada-svatala)  of  Naddula, 


MANDI 


491 


“ For  passages  in  wMch  tlie  term  man^apiki  occurs,  compare 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  I.  p.  114,  line  27  ; p.  173,  line  6 (Siyadoni- 
tatka-mandapika);  p.  176,  line  19;  p.  177,  lines  29  and 
30 ; p.  179,  line  46 ; p.  262,  line  3 (pattana-mandapika);  Ind. 
Ant.  vol.  XIV,  p.  10,  col.  2 (^ri-pathastha-mandapika) ; 
Journ.  As.  soc.  Beng.  vols.  ly.  part  I,  p.  47,  IV.  p.  48,  and  v.; 
Bhavnagar  Inscrip,  p.  206,  line  7.  ^ulka-mandapika  occurs, 
e.g.,  in  Bhavnagar  Inaorip.  p.  158  f.,  lines  10,  15  and  18.  The 
meaning  of  mandapika  is  suggested  by  the  Marathi  mam- 
davi,  a custom  house.”  Prof.  Kielhorn. 

(The  Ohahamanas  of  Naddula,  no.  A,  Nadol 
plates  of  Alhanadeva,  lines  22-23,  Bp.  Ind. 

vol.  IX.  pp.  66,  63,  and  note  8). 

(2)  Of.  Manclapika-dayat  treshthi-nara-siraha-go-vyisha-dhiradi- 

tyaih  ( 

(Shergadh  stone  Inscrip.  line  1-2,  Ind.  Ant, 
vol.  XL.  p.  176). 

(3)  Mandapika — evidently  means* some  public  or  official  building  of 

the  town, 

(Ind,  Ant.  vol.  XIV.  p.  10,  second,  ool.  line  6 ; 
and  Journ.  Beng.  As.  soc,  vol.  xxx.  p.  332, 
last  line ; Siyadoni  inscrip.  lines  6, 19,  29, 
30,  45,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  I.  pp.  166,  173  f). 

(4)  ^ri-Timma-dandanayaka  mahisi  i§ri-Eahga-nayaki  raohita  1 
Sampat-kumara.-mahisi-puratah  pratibhati  rahga-mantapika  It 
“ Timma-dandanayaka^s  wife  (queen  consort)  Rahga-nayaki 

erected  a rahga  mantapa  in  front  of  (the  temple  of)  the 
goddess  of  Sampat-kumara.” 

(Ep.  Carnafc  vol.  iii.  Seringapatam  Taluq, 
no.  97,  Roman  text,  p.  69,  Transl.  p.  28). 
MANpI — (see  Bodhika) — The  crowning  part  of  the  capital  of  a 
column,  a market-place,  a market. 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxx.  67,  107,  see  under 
Stambha). 


492  MATTA-YABANA 

MATTA-YAEAKA — An  elephant  in  rat,  a kind  of  entablature. 

(M.  XVI.  19,  also  L.  279,  see  Prastara). 

MAI)IEA-GBIHA(-i^ALA) — A drinking  house,  a tavern.  an  ale- 
house. 

6iva-vaitravanatvi-trimadira-griham  cha  pura-madhye  karayet  I 

(Kautiliya-Arthafeastra,  ohap.  xxv.  p.  66-66). 

MADDALA — (see  Yalabhi)— A synonym  of  valabhi  or  a sloping  roof. 

(M.  XVI.  61,  see  under  (Ba)Yalabhi). 

MADHUCHOHHISHTA—Wax,  the  casting  of  an  image  in  wax. 

Manasara  (chap.  Lxvill.  named  Madhuchchhish|a,  1-66)  : 

The  chapter  opens  with  an  enumeration  of  phalli  and  ascetics  as 
well  as  architects  whose  images  are  to  be  cast  in  wax  (lines  2-19). 
The  architects,  called  sthapati  and  sthapaka,  make  the  can  for 
preparing  the  wax  therein  ; but  the  actual  preparation  is  not  expli- 
citly described.  All  kinds  of  images,  temporary  or  permanent, 
stationary  or  movable,  have  to  be  cast  in  wax.  The  process  seems 
to  be  this  (20-44)  : some  part  of  the  image  is  covered  with  a thin 
copper-leaf  and  the  wax  is  laid  on  two  or  three  ahgulas  deep. 
Mulika(?)  is  spread  above  the  part  covered  with  wax.  The 
idol  is  heated  after  it  has  been  besmeared  with  wax.  If  the 
master  likes,  the  process  of  smearing  may  be  done  with 
melted  iron  too.  The  half  of  the  image,  nob  covered  with 
earth,  is  washed  in  water.  This  process  is  repeated  several 
times.  If  any  of  the  minor  limbs  be  lost  through  this 
process,  the  image  should  be  furnished  with  it  again  after 
having  been  heated.  But  if  the  head  or  the  middle  of  the 
body  be  damaged,  the  whole  image  should  be  changed.  If  the 
master  does  not  like  the  image,  it  should  be  recast. 

The  whole  process  has  to  be  performed  through  many  ritualistic 
ceremonies  in  difierent  stages. 

In  other  texts  the  process  of  casting  an  image  in  wax  is  much  more 
clearly  described ; 

“ If  images  have  to  be  oast  in  metal,  the  wax  must  first  be 
melted  and  poured  (out  of  the  mould)  and  all  defects  removed  with 
cloth,”  (Karanagama,  ll.  41). 


MADHYA-BHTTVAlsfG-A 


493 


“ If  the  images  be  required  to  be  made  of  earth,  rods  (of  metal  or 
wood)  must  be  (inserted  in  them)  ; if  of  metal  it  must  first 
be  prepared  well  in  wax.’* 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxiv.  21). 

“ If  an  image  is  to  be  made  of  metal,  it  must  first  be  made  of  wax, 
and  then  coated  with  earth  ; gold  and  other  metals  are  purified 
and  oast  into  (the  mould)  and  a complete  image  is  thus  obtained 
by  capable  workmen.” 

(Vishnu-samhita,  Patala  xiv). 
“ In  regard  to  bronze  images  ” says  Mr.  Kao  “ it  is  believed  by 
some  that  India  could  not  have  known  the  Cire  perdue  method  of 
making  metal  images  earlier  than  about  the  10th  century  A.  D. 
and  that  India  must  have,  therefore,  borrowed  it  from  Europe. 
That  the  art  of  casting  metals  in  wax  moulds  is  much  earlier 
in  India  can  be  shewn  in  more  ways  than  one.”  In  support  of 
his  assertion,  Mr.  Kao  gives  the  three  above  mentioned  quota- 
tions. (Elements  of  Hindu  Iconography). 

MADHYA-KANTA7-A  class  of  the  twelve-storeyed  buildings  once 
prevailing  in  the  Central  country,  (see  details  under  PrasSda). 
Madhyamalaya-vistafe  trayas-trimfead-vibhajite  I 
Tri-bhagam  kuta-vistaram  madhya-bhadraika-bhagikam  \ 
Maha-feala  navaih^am  syat  ^eshaih  purvavad  acharet  \ 
Madhya-kantam  iti  proktam  \ 

(M.  XXX.  11-14). 

MADHYA-KOSHTHA— -The  middle  compartment,  the  central  hail. 

(M.  xxxni.  306,  etc) 

MADHYA-NASI — (see  Nasi) — The  middle  vestibule. 

(M.  XV.  119,  124,  etc). 

MABHYA-BHAEEA— (see  Bhadra) — The  middle  tabernacle. 

(M.  XV.  110,  XIX.  177,  xxxin.  380,  etc). 

MADHYA-BHUVAl^GA — ^A moulding  of  the  door, 

(M.  XXXIX.  72). 


494 


MABHYA.EAjSTG'A 


MADHYA-EANGrA — (see  Miikhta-prapauga) — ‘The  ueatral  theatre, 
the  enolosecl  courtyard,  the  (Juadrangle  surrounded  by  buildings 
on  four  sides  and  open  at  the  top. 

Manasira  (chap.  XLVii.  named  Madhya-rauga,  1-36)  refers  in  this 
connection  to  the  open  quadrangle,  stone  column  and  grain- 
column  (mukta-prapahga,  ^il5-stambha  and  dhanya-stambha). 
The  Madhya-rahga  is  provided  with  dwarf  pillars,  entablatures, 
platforms,  daises,  pedestals,  tabernacles,  vestibules,  pent-roofs, 
top-rooms,  etc.  The  upper  portion  is  adorned  with  figures  of 
leographs  and  crocodiles. 

The  meaning  of  the  term  is  clear  from  the  contents  of  this  chapter 
and  also  from  the  quotations  given  below. 

Madhya-rahgam  tad-nddiaya  ohordhve^  lahkara(m)  vakshyate  \ 

Evam  tu  ohordhvalankaram  madhya-rauge  tu  vinyaset  \ 

(M.  XVI.  155, 169,  see  also  lines  156-168). 

In  connection  with  mandapas  or  pavilions  (M.  xxxiv.  128,  210, 

234,  324,  456,  etc). 

Q-^ihe  va  madhya-rahge  va  partve  va  chaisa-konake  (ankurar- 
papam  kuryat)  \ 

(M.  XXXVII.  13). 

The  central  part  of  the  coronation  hall  (M.  xlix.  183). 

MABHYA-SALA — (of.  ^ala)- — The  middle  hall,  a special  interior 
chamber,  a kind  of  council-hall. 

Kshudra-fealashtadha  proktam  koshtha-&ala  chatushtayam  \ 

Madhya.-tiala  tri-bhagena  bhadra-^ala  oh  a madhyame  \ 

(M,  xxvi.  12-13,  see  also  M.  xx.  56,  etc). 

MAEDAEA — A type  of  building  which  is  thirty  cubits  wide,  has  ten 
storeys  and  turrets, 

(1)  Trim&ad-dhastayamo  da&a-bhaumo  mandarah  ^ikhara-yuktah  \ 
(Compare  this  with  Eafeyapa  quoted  by  the  commentary  and 
given  below)  : 


MANBIEA 


496 


Mandarah  ^ikharair  ytiktah  shad-a&rir  da§a-bh-Qmika]ti  I 
Trimlad-dhastaih^  oka  yistimak  prasado’yaiii  dyitiykak  II 
(Brikati-samhita,  Lyi.  21,  J.  B.  A.  S.,  N.  8.,  vol.  vi.  p.  319). 
^2)  BkayiskyarPurana  (okap.  130,  V.  28,  see  under  Prasada). 

(3)  Matsya-Purana  (ohap.  269,  y.  28,  32,  47,  53,  see  under  Prasada). 

(4) - Agni-Purapa  (chap.  104,  y.  14, 16,  see  under  Prasada). 

(6)  Garuda-Purana  (okap.  47,  y.  21-22,  24-25,  see  under  PrasMa). 

(6)  A building  with  four  ^alas  (compartments)  and  eight  kutas 
(towers  or  domes): 

Mand(k)ara-nama  ity-ukta's  okatuk-^alashta-kutakam  II 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  43). 
MANDIBA— (see  Skodafea-maudira-ckakra) — A hall,  a room,  a temple 

a shrine,  a type  of  building. 

(1)  A type  of  rectangular  building  (Garuda-Purana,  ohap.  47,  y. 

21-22, 26-27,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Three  kinds  of  mandira  (Vastu-yidya,  ed.  Ganapati  j^astri,  vil. 

16-18). 

(3)  Parifeak  pranayakara-prakara-yalayamckitam  1 
Kamaniya-^ala-stambka-kadambottambitamyaram  II 
Visamkata-yitam  kali-virajad  ramga-mamtapam  I 
Vidkaya  yipulottumga-gopuram  deya-mamdiram  II 
Vitalam  ratka-vitkim  oka  syamdanam  mamdaropamam  1 
Tatra  pratishthitarya-feri-Taraka-brahma-rupipe  II 

“Built  a temple  (at  Krishpapura)  which  was  encircled  by  a 
wall  of  the  shape  of  the  prapava  and  a broad  and  lofty 
tower.  It  has  a large  ranga-mapdapa  raised  on  a collection 
of  beautiful  stone  pillars  and  adorned  with  rows  of  spouts. 
He  built  a car  like  the  Mandara  mountain  and  also  broad 
roads  round  the  temple  and  for  the  propitiation  of  the  god 
Viskpu,  set  up  there  (i.e,  in  the  temple).*' 

(Krishnapuram  Plates  of  Sadafeivaraya,  y.  56,  6d, 
67,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  ix.  pp.  336,  341). 


m 


MASITl 


(4)  Tenadam  karitam  tungam  dhQrjjafeer  mandira-gyiham  \ 

He  caused  to  be  made  this  lofty  dwelling  of  Dhurjjati 
(6iva). 

(Insorip.  at  the  Ganeta  temple,  Mamallapuram, 
V.  10,  H.  S.  1.  L voL  I.  no.  18,  p.  4,  6;  ibid, 
no.  18,  Inscrip,  at  the  Dharmaraja  mandapa, 
Mamallapuram,  v.  10,  p.  6). 
(6)  “ Kota- varddhana-girer  anupur warn  so’y am  unmishita-dhih 

sugatasya  \ 

Vyastam  arani-karaika-garimnyo  mandiraiii  sma  vidadhati 

yathartham  II 

“ To  the  east  of  mount  Kota-vardhana,  this  man  of  open 
intielleot  established  in  a manner  suitable  to  the  purpose  a 
temple  of  that  Sugata  (Buddha),  the  dignity  of  whom  alone 
sufficed  to  defeat  hosts  of  Maras.” 

(Buddhist  Sanskrit  Inscrip,  from  Kota,  v.  17, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xiv.  pp.  46,  48). 

(6)  Tenedam  mamdiram  Kama-vidvishah  I 

Karitam  muktaye  bhaktya  kirttaye  cha  kritatmanam  II 

(Insorip.  of  the  Kings  of  Chedi,  no.  A,  Tewar 
stone  Insorip,  of  Gaya  Karnadeva,  line  17,  Ind. 

Ant.  vol.  XVIII.  p.  211). 

(7)  Jainam  mandiram  indira-kula-griham  sad-bhaktito’chikarat  I 

“ Out  of  pure  faith,  he  made  this  Jaina  temple,  a home  for 
Lakshmi.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol,  ii.  no.  65,  Eoman  text,  p.  60, 
Transl.  p.  149). 

MASI(-Si)TI— -A  mosque,  a Mohammedan  place  of  worship. 

“ Rahgai-Nayak-ayya,  in  order  to  endow  the  stone  masifii  (mosque) 
(kalla-masitiya-deva-sthanakke),  which  Babu  Setti  had  erected 
in  the  inner  street  of  Sindaghatta,  made  a grant  for  it  of 
the  village  of  Sivapura  and  Habiba’s  house.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  iv.  Krishnarajapet  Taluq,  no.  72, 
Transl.  p.  ill,  Koman  text,  p.  183). 


MAHA-TAULI 


497 


MAS&BAKA— A lintel,  i.e.,  the  piece  of  timber  or  stone  that  covers 
an  opening  and  supports  a weight  above  it.  It  is  sometimes 
need  in  the  sense  of  adhishthana  or  base. 

(1)  Adhishthana-vidhiih  vakshye  tastre  saihkshipyate’dhnna  I 
Harmya-tuhga-vafeat  proktam  tasya  masurakonnatam  { 

.(M.  XIV.  1,  8). 

Tasman  masurepa  sahaiva  sarvam  kyitaih  vimaneshu  oha 

bhushanani  I 
(Ibid.  409-410). 

Evam  chatuh-shash^i-masurakani  tastrokta-manena  vibha- 

jitani  \ 
(Ibid.  393-394). 

Ahatya(m)  ashtadha  harmyam  ganya-manam  iboohyate  I 
Utsedhe  chashta-bhage  tn  ekamtena  masurakam  \ 

Dvi-bhagam  ohanghri-tuhgam... J 

(M.  XIX.  20-22,  see  also  XLVii.  6,  xxxiv.  266  etc). 

(2)  Tad-varddhitopapitham  va  tad-varddhita-masurakam  \ 
Padayama-samottunga-masuraka-yutSm  tu  va  I! 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv,  116). 
Masiira  implies  the  cornice  of  the  entablature. 

(Ibid.  Liv.  47,  see  under  Prastara). 
Masura,  a synonym,  as  stated,  but  apparently  a component 
part,  of  adhishthana  or  base : 

Masurakam  adhish^hanam  vastvadharam  dharatalam  \ 

Talam  kuttimady-angam  adhishthanasya  kirtitam  II 

(Ibid.  Lv.  202). 

MAHA-KANTA — A.  class  of  eight-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXVI.  35-39,  see  under  Prasada). 
MAHA-Q-OPURA — The  gate-house  of  the  fifth  court  or  at  the  extreme 
boundary  of  a compound. 

(M.  XXXIII.  10,  see  under  Gopura  and  Prakara). 
MAHA-GEAMA — A large  village, 

(M,  X.  79,  see  details  under  Grama). 
MAHA-TAULI — A synonym  of  praohohhadana  or  roof,  the  top-floor, 

(M.  XVI.  67). 


83 


MAHA-DVABA 


MAH^-DVAEA — The  great  door,  the  chief  or  outer  gate  of  a village, 
town  or  nouse* 

(M.  IX.  290,  316,  see  under  Dvara). 
Maha-dvaraih  tu  sarveshSm  lahgalakara-sannibham  \ 
Kapata*dvaya-samyuktam  dvaranam  tat  prithak  prithak  1 

(M.  IX.  360-361,  see  also  xxxi.  79). 
MAHA-NASI — (see  Nasi) — A large  vestibule, 

(Nasika-tikharanvitam)  tad-ardham  stupikottuhgetau-maha  nasika- 

sraye  i 
(M.  XV.  91). 

Dvi-lalate  maha-nasi  ekadafea-tikhanvitam  1 

(M.  xxxiir.  202,  etc). 

MAHA-PADMA — A type  of  round  building. 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  v,  17-18,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Q-aruda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  21,  23,  28-29,  see  under  Prasada). 
MAHA-PATTA — A moulding  of  the  base,  a fillet. 

(M.  XIV.  301,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Adhishthana). 

MAHA-PITHA — The  pedestal,  a ground-plan,  the  lower  part  of  the 
phallus. 

Aground-plan  in  which  the  whole  area  is  divided  into  sixteen 
equal  squares  (M.  vn.  6,61,  see  under  Pada-vinyasa). 

Gf.  Maha-pitha-pade  rathya  dikshu  dikshu  trayam  tatha  \ 

(M.  IX.  429,  etc), 

The  pedestal  of  an  image  : 

Padma-pithaih  maha-pitham  tri-murtinam  cha  yojayet  \ 

(M.  LI.  86,  etc). 

MAHA-MANBAPA— (see  under  Mandapa)— The  great  hall  -of 
entrance  to  the  main  shrine  of  temples. 

(Chalukyan  Architecture,  Arch.  Surv.  new. 

Imp.  series,  vol.  xxi,  p.  39), 


MAHX-MARYlDl 


499 


See  under  Mandapa  : 

Mangalagiri  pillar  iusorip.  (vdrses,  44,  47,  51.  Ep,  Ind.  yoL  vi.  pp. 

114,116,123,124,126). 

Two  Jain  insorip.  of  Irugappa  (no.  B,  line  2,  ibid.  vol.  vil.  p.  116). 

Inscrip.  from  Nepal  (no.  23,  Inscrip,  of  Queen  Lalifcartripura 
Sundari,  v.  3,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  p.  94). 

“This  building  (maha-mandapa)  stands  in  the  east  central  portion 
of  the  large  court«*.it  originally  stood  ietached  from  the  central 
vimana,” 

“ The  plan  is  a rectangle  with  the  greater  length  from  north  to 
south.  The  four  sides  are  open  in  the  centre,  and  on  each 
fa§ade  a portion  of  the  wall  is  returned  along  the  several  eleva- 
tions from  the  four  corners.  The  east  front  has  the  entrance 
divided  into  three  bays  by  two  square  piers,  with  a responding 
pilaster  on  the  return  wall  at  each  side.’’ 

“ The  west  side  or  back  is  similarly  divided,  but  the  piers  are 
octagonal  for  a portion  of  their  length.” 

“ The  north  and  south  entrances  are  simple  openings,  with  pilas- 
ters on  the  sides,  undivided. by  piers.” 

“ Two  yalis  on  the  back  responding  pilasters  are  abutted  against 
and  partly  covered  by  the  east  wall  of  the  modern  ardha- 
mandapam.  The  perforated  window  in  the  east  wall  oi  the 
ardha-mandapam  opens  into  the  maha-mandapam.” 

(Pallava  Architecture,  Arch.  Surv.  new.  Imp,  series^ 
vol.  XXXIV.  p.  36,  paras  1,  2,  3,  4,  8, 10,  see  also 

plate  l)  . 

“ The  maha-mandapa  was  roofed  also  by  overlapping  courses  of 
stones;  the  square  corners  were  gradually  rounded  off  by  success- 
ive small  portions,  till  it  formed  an  octagon,  over  which  the 
circular  roof  proper  rested.” 

(Outiningham,  Arch.  Surv.  Eeports,  vol.  VIII.  p.  171, 

para  2), 

MAHA-MARYADA. — The  fifth  enclosure  (prakara)  at  the  extreme 
boundary  of  a compound,  the  gate-hoiBe  thereof  is  called  maha- 
gopura  or  dvara-gopura. 

(Sunrabhedagama,  xxxi.  118, 126,  see  under  Pral^ra), 


600 


MAHA-VAJANA 


MAHA-VAJANA — A large  fillet,  a moulding  of  the  entablature. 

(M,  XVI.  69,  seethe  lists  of  mouldings  under  Prastara), 
MAHA.~VBITA — A kind  of  phallus. 

(M.  Lil.  2,  see  under  Linga), 

MAHA-VBITTA — A kind  of  joinery. 

(M.  XVII.  102,  see  under  Sandhi-karman). 
MAHA-^AIiA — large  hall. 

Of.  of  the  sixteen  parts  width  of  a building  the  maha-tala  is  seven 
parts  broad  (M.  xxvi.  10,  etc). 

MAHASANA— A ground-plan  in  which  the  whole  are  is  divided  into 
226  equal  squares. 

(M.  VII.  18-20,  see  under  Pada-vinyasa). 
MAHAIUBUJA — A large  oyma,  a moulding  of  the  pedestal. 

(M,  XIII.  91,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Upapitha). 
MJiGADHA-(KANTA)— 'A  class  of  twelve-storeyed  buildings  once 
prevailing  in  the  country  of  Magadha, 

Tad  evam  anu-feals  madhye  bhadra-fealaika-bhagikam  I 
Evam  magadha -kantam  syat  kar^a-kuta-sabhadrakam  I 

(M.  XXX.  33*34,  see  also  31-32  under  Vam&a-kanta). 
MANI-BHADBA— -(see  Mani-bhadra) — A pavilion  with  sixty -four 
columns. 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  103,  see  under  Mandapa). 
MXTBA]?fGI-ULA — (see  under  Angula)~A  measure  equal  to  the 
middle  digit  of  the  middle  finger  in  the  right  hand  of  the  archi 
tect  or  priest,  employed  in  measuring  the  sacrificial  objects 
like  the  kuta-grass  or  seat,  the  spout  of  a ladle,  and  the  ladle, 
etc. 

(Suprabnedagama,  xxx.  4-6,  7-8,  see  under  Angula). 
MANA — The  measurement  of  height  or  length. 

(1)  The  linear  measurement  is  divided  into  six  kinds — Mana,  Pra- 
mana,  Parimana,  Lamba-mana,  TJnmana,  and  Upamana. 
The  measurement  from  the  foot  to  the  top  of  the  head  is 
called  Mana  which  is  in  fact  nothing  but  neight.  Pramana 
is  the  measurement  of  breadth  (vistrita).  Parimana  is  the 


MlNA 


601 


measurement  of  width  or  oiroumference  (paritah).  Lamba- 
mana  is  the  measurement  along  the  plumb-lines  or  the 
lines  drawn  perpendicularly  through  difierent  parts  of  the 
body,  Mana  or  the  measurement  of  height  being  determined 
by  the  surface  of  the  body.  Unmana  is  the  n^easurement 
of  thickness  (nimna)  or  diameter.  And  XJpamana  is  the 
measurement  of  interspace  (antara),  such  as  the  distance 
between  the  two  feet  of  au.  image;  this  measurement  is 
apparently  taken  from  one  plumb-line  to  another  : 

Manarn  ohapi  pramanam  cha  parimanam  lamba-manakam  \ 
Unmanam  upamanarh  cha  manarn  padmam  samiritam  \ 
Padahgushthi-sasimantam  feiro’ntam  manarn  chapi  praka- 

thyate  \ 

Pramanam  yistfitam  proktam  paritah  parimanakam  \ 

Tat-sutral  lamba-manam  syan  nimnam  unmanam  uohyate  I 
Avantaropamanam  syad  bimbodayadi-sarvatah  \ 

Manarn  evam  tu  shad-bhedam  manenahgani  manayet  I 

(M.iiV.  3-9). 

The  primary  measurement  (adi-manaj  is  but  the  comparative 
measurement  and  is  divided  into  the  following  nine  kinds : 
The  height  of  an  image  is  determined  by  comparing  it  vjith 
(i)  the  breadth  (tara)  of  the  main  temple  (harmya),  (ii)  the 
height  of  the  sanctuary  or  central  hall  (garbha-griha),  (iii) 
the  length  of  the  door  (dvara-mana),  (iv)  the  measurement  of 
the  basement  (adhishthana),  (v)  cubit,  (vi)  tala  (a  span),  (vii) 
angula  (finger’s  breadth),  (viii)  the  height  of  the  worshipper, 
and  (ix)  the  height  of  the  riding  animal  (vahana)  of  the 
principal  idol : 

Adimana-vidhim  samyak(-g)  lakshanam  cha  ihoohyate  \ 
Harmya-tara-va§an  manarn  garbha-geha-vafeodayam  l 
Dvara-mana-va§at  tungam  adhishthana-vatodayam  \ 
Hasta-mana-vatan  manarn  tala-mana-va'sodayam  1 
Angulenapi  ohottungam  yajamana-vo&odayam  1 
Mula-bera-va&an' manarn  uttamadi  trayam  trayam  1 

(M.  LV.  10-16). 


502 


MANA 


Baoh  of  these  nine  measures  is  again  divided  into  nine  kinds : 

Tasmad  ekam  tupratyekam  nava-manam  ihoohyate  I (ibid.  22'. 

Under  (i),  (ii),  (iii),  (iv),  the  proportions  naturally  vary  on 
various  occasions;  no  specific  rules  are,  therefore,  preaGribod, 

The  details  of  (v)  cubit  or  hasta  and  (vii)  angula  will  be 
found  under  the  term  ‘ Angola  ’ and  the  details  of  (vi)  Ula 
are  given  under ' Tala-mana.’ 

Of  the  division  under  (viii)  the  details  of  the  height  of  ail 
image  as  compared  with  the  height  of  the  worshipper  are- 
given  here.  The  height  of  the  image  may  be  equal  to  the  full 
height  of  the  worshipper,  may  extend  up  to  his  hair -limit 
(on  the  fore-head)  or,  as  sometimes  stated,  to  the  eye-line, 
nose-tip,  chin,  arm-limit  (to  the  shoulder),  breast,  heart, 
navel,  and_sex-organ : 

Kanyasad  iittamautam  syad  yajainfmodayaih  param  1 
Kesantam  nasikagrantam  hanvantam  bahu-simakaiii  \ 
Stanantaih  hjidayantam  oha  navyantam  inedhra-simakam  I 
Navadha  kanyasantam  syat  sthavaraiii  jangamodayam  \ 

(Ibid.  30-38). 

And  of  the  division  under  (ix)  th6_height  of  the  riding  animal 
evahana)  as  compared  with  the  height  of  the  principal  idol 
(mula-bera)  admits  of  similar  nine  kinds  as  under  (viii)  (see 
details  under  Utsava  and  Kantuka). 

Hasta  (v)  axid  angula  (vii)  are  the  real  units,  employed  equally 
in  measuring  both^arohiteotural  and  sculptural  objects. 

The  rest  are  exclusively  sculptural  aud  comparative  measures. 
The  similar  measures  have  also  been  prescribed  for  architec- 
tural objects.  The  architectural  G-anya-mana  * or  the 
comparative  heights  of  the  component  members  of  a struc- 
ture corresponds  to  the  sculptural  ‘ Tala-mana’  or  the  com- 
parative heights  of  the  component  limbs  of  a statue  (see 
details  under  Ganya-maua  and  Tala-mana). 


MINA 


503 


Five  proportions  of  the  height,  as  compared  with  the  breadth 
of  an  architectural  object,  are  given  under  five  technical 
terms,  namely,  Santika,  Paushtika,  Jayada,  Sarva-kamika 
or  Dhariada,  and  Adbhuta  (see  details  under  Utscdha). 

The  ‘ G-hana-miina  ’ or  the  measurement  by  the  exterior  and  ‘ 
the  ‘ Aghana-mana  ’ or  the  measurement  by  the  interior  are 
exclusively  architectural  (see  details  under  these  terms). 

Like  the  sculptural  terms  Mana,  Pramana,  Parimuna,  Lamba- 
mana,  Unmima  and  Upamaha,  there  are  architectural  terms 
also  to  express  length,  breadth  and  width,  e.  g.  dirgha  (for 
dairghya),tara,  vistara,  visala,  vistyiti,  visti'ita,  vishkambha, 
etc.  Mana  as  stated  above  is  the  technical  name  for 
sculptural  height ; but  to  express  the  same  idea  the 
general  terms  for  height,  such  as  unnati,  unnata,  utsedha, 
etc.,  are  also-  used.  Mana  is  also  used  in  its  general 
sense  of  measurement,  area,  etc.  Pramana  and  Parimapa 
are  also  used  in  their  general  senses  of  length,  breadth, 
width,  etc.  (Further  details  will  be  found  under  these 
terms). 

(2)  Atah-param  pravakshyami  manonmanam  viseshatah  \ 

‘ After  this  I shall  speak  about  the  Mana  and  Unmana  measure- 
ments in  particular.* 

This  is  followed  by  an  account  of  various  measures.  (Note  the 
different  tala  measurements  employed  in  statues). 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  258,  v.  16). 

(3)  Manaiii  tad-vistaraih  proktam  unmanam  naham  eva  oha  \ 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxiv.  85). 

(4)  Parimanonmana-manam  dhaiyam  riija-vimudritam  I 

G-una-sadhaua-saihdaksha  bhavamtu  nikhila  janah  I! 

Prof.  Benoy  Kumar  Sarkar’s  translation  of  ‘ Parimaua  ’ 
by ‘standard  of  measurement  for  lands’,  ‘Unmana’  by 
‘ unit  of  measurement  for  liquids  ’,  and  ‘ Mana’  by  ‘ unit  of 
measurement  for  grains  * is  untenable. 

(^ukranitisara,  ed.  Oppert,  I.  310). 


604 


MANA-BHADEA 


MANA-BHADBA— A pavilion  with  twenty-six  pillars. 

(Matsya-Puxana,  chap.  270,  V.  12,  see  under  Mapdapa) 
MA.NA-MANDIBA — (see  Mandira)  — The  observatory. 

Cl  The  observatories  at  Benares,  Delhi,  Ujjain,  Mathura,  and 
Jaipur.  (See  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xxxv.  p.  234). 

MA-NAVA— Belating  to  Manu  or  human  being,  a pavilion  with 
twenty-eight  pillars. 

(Matsya-Pur^na,  chap.  270,  v.  12,  see  under  Man- 

dapa). 

MANANGTJLA — (see  under  Ahgula) — The  standard  measure  (equal 
to  I inch),  the  unit  of  length. 

The  smallest  measure  is  the  atom  or  paramanu,  i.e.,  the  particle  of 
dust  visible  in  the  sunshine  through  a lattice  (Brihat-samhita, 
LVIII.  1). 

8 atoms  = 1 car-dust. 

8 oar-dusts— 1 hair’s  end. 

8 hair’s  ends  = 1 nit. 

8 nits  = 1 louse. 

8 lice  = 1 barley  corn. 

8 barley  corns  = 1 manahgula. 

This  standard  angula  measure  is  stated  to  be  used  in  measuring  the 
architectural  objects  like  the  villages,  lands,  and  buildings,  etc. 

(Suprabhedftgama,  xxx.  2-3, 6-7,  see  under  Ahgula). 
MANUSHA — Belating  to -the  human  being,  a kind  of  phallus. 

(Kamikagama,  h.  36,  38,  see  under  Linga). 
MAEG-A — A road,  a street,  a way,  a path,  a lane,  a passage,  a canal, 
a course. 

Chandalanam  pravetaya  nirgamaya  malasya  cha  1 
Jalasya  nirgarnartham  tu-kshudra-margah  pratamsitah  II 

(KSmikagama,  xxxvill.  8). 

MALIKA(-KA)-— A class  of  buildings,  a type  of  pavilion. 

(1)  Kudyasyanta-prade&e  tu  yuktya  ohavyita-malikam  I 
Malikopari  vapra(ih)  syad  adhishthanam  samodayam  I 

(M.  XXXI.  60,  64). 


MlLIKA 


506 


A type  of  pavilion  (mandapa); 

Evaiii  tu  malikakaram  §eaham  prag-uktavan  nayet  \ 

(M.  XXXIV.  315,  see  for  description  297-314). 
Map^ape  ohordhva-kutam  sySn  malikaknti(m)  vinyaset  I 

(M.  XXXIV.  291). 

(2)  Kechid  vai  malikakara  keohid  vai  gopurakritih  II 

(Buprabhedagama,  xxx.  123  ; see  for  full 
conte'xt  116-122,  under  Prakara). 
Tad -bahye’bhyantare  vapi  malika-mandapam  hi  va  H 

(Ibid.  XXXI.  128). 

(3)  Ta  (tala)  eva  malikah  prokta  malavat  kriyate  yatah  tl 
Panoha-data-karantam  tu  kuryad  avrita-mandapam  II 
Mapdapena  vina  vapi  tena  manena  pithika  \ 

Vibhadia  va  sabhadra  va  kartavya  malika  budhaih  II 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  6,  99, 100). 
Chap.  XLI  (named  Malika-lakshapa) : 

Classification: 

Chaturdha  malika  tala  ^abha-mup^aja-saudhaje  II 1 
Definitions  (2-6) : 

Balayam  api  talanga  nishkrantanana-tobhita  I 
Sa  tala  malika  jneya  tastre’  smin  Kamikagame  II 
Sabhavad  vihita  bahye  prasadavad  alafikyita  \ 
Uha-pratyuha-samyukta  ya  sabha  sa  oha  malika  11 
Yathesh^a-diti  samyukta  bhoga-bhumi-samanvita  I 
Prasada-vyaaa-dirghooheha  prokta  prasada-malikS  |1 
Mandapasyokta-vistarayama-tunga-vibhushini  I 
Sarvatra  mundakaratvat  kathita  munda-malika  II 
Further  classifications  ( 6-7) : 

(i)  Saihohita,  Asamohita,  and  Upa(al80  Apa)samohita ; 

(ii)  N^ara,  Dravida,  and  Vesara; 

(iii)  Jati,  Ohhanda,  and  Vikalpa ; 

(iv)  Buddha,  Mitra,  and  Samkirna ; 

(v)  Vija,  Mtila,  and  Ankura,  (this  class  is  not  specified). 


506 


MALIKA-HA^rpAPA 


(Except  the  last,  all  the  other  classes  occur  iu  the  Mauasara 
also,  see  under  Vimana-lakshana). 

The  details  of  these  classes  are  given  (8-22). 

Still  further  classifications  are  given  under  the  following 
names  : 

Sindhuka  (v.  23-28),  Sampurna  (29-30),  Meru-kuta  (31), 
Kshema  (82-34),  l^iva  (36-38),  Harmya  (39-40),  Saumya  (40), 
Vitala  (41),  Sarva-kalyina  (42-49),  Vijaya  (50),  Bhadra 
(61),  Eanga-'mukha  (62),  Alpa  (53-54),  Kona  (55-68),  Geya 
(68-69),  Sara  (60),  Pushkara  (61*63),  Adbhuta  (61a),  Sam- 
kirna  (62),  and  Banda  (64). 

Aneka-bhumi«yukta  tu  malakara  tu  malika  II 

(Ibid.  h.  89). 

Malika-yukta-s^(?8a)lam  chet  kopa-sthambhe  dvitlyake  | 

Prathamavarape  vapi  dvitiyavarane  nyaset  I' 

(Ibid  XXXI.  96). 

(4)  Sailam  ^umbhita-sata-kumbha-vilasat-kumbham  maha-mapgia- 
pam  prakaram  paramalika-vilasita(fii)  mukta-mayiih  oha 
prapa(-bh5)m, 

'*  Made  for  the  god  Vamana  great  man^apa  of  stone,  resplen- 
dent with  pitchers  (domes)  of  shining  gold,  surrounding 
wall,  adorned  with  excellent  buildings,  and  a canopy  of 
pearls.” 

(Fourteen  Inscrip.  at  Tirukkovalur,  no.  K,  of 
Bajendradeva,  lines  1-2,  Ep,  Ind.  vol,  vii.  pp« 

145,146). 

MALIKA^MANBAPA — A pavilion  of  the  Malika-class  of  buildings. 

( Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  128,  see  under  Malika). 

MALYAJA — A class  of  buildings,  a type  of  pavilion. 

Old.  xxxiV.  163,  see  under  Mandapa). 

MALYAHUTA — A class  of  buildings, .’a  type  of  pavilion. 

(M,  XXXIV.  316,  see  under  Mandapa), 


MtTKHA- 


507 


MISBA — A building  made  of  auy  two  materials  out  of  wood,  brick 
stone,  iron,  etc. 

Eka-dravyam  tu  suddaih  syad  dyi-dravyam  mi^ra-harmyakam  l 

(M.  xyiii.  138,  etc). 

Drayya-dyaya-yutaiii  mikam  samkirjGiam  bahubhir  yutam  V 

(Kamikagama,  xny . '12) . 

MISEITA— A kind  of  ornament  prescribed  for  idols  and  kings. 

(M.  L.  1-3,  see  under  Bhushana). 

MUKULA—A  bud-like  crowning  ornament  of  a pillar, 

(M.  XV.  32,  see  lists  of  mouldings  under 
Adhiabthana,  Upapitha,  and  Prastara). 

MUKULI— A type  of  round  building. 

(Garuda-Purana,  chap.  42,  v.  21, 23,  28, 29, 
see  under  Prasada). 

MUKTA-PEAPANG-A—Csee  Madhya-ranga)— The  open  courtyard 
connected  with  a tank,  (‘mukta  ’ meaning  open,  and  ‘ prapahga  * 
the  body  part  or  bank  of  a tank).  It  is  built  inside  the  court. 

(M.  XLvil,  2 f). 

It  is  stated  to  be  made  of  wood,  stone,  brick,  etc.,  and  also  of 
jewels  and  iron  especially  ; 

Miikta-prap5hgam  api  daru-lileshtakadyaih  \ 

Eatnair  aneka-bahu-lolia-vilieshakaiH  I 

(M.  xLvii.  31-32,  see  also  XLytii,  68), 

MUKHA— The  face,  the  frontispiece,  the  front  aide  of  a building,  the 
facade. 

Svakiyanguli-maneua  mukham  syiid  dva-dasahgulam  \ 
Mukha-munena  karttavya  sarvayava-kalpana  II 
‘ The  face  (of  one’s  statue  in  length)  should  be  12  ahgulas  1=9  in- 
ches), being  measured  with  one’s  own  finger.  The  whole  body 
should  be  made  symmetrical  to  the  face’. 

(Matsya-Purauia,  chap.  258,  v.  19). 
The  front-side  of  a building  (see  Kamikagama  and  Brihat-sarahita 

under  Bvara). 


m 


MtTKHA  BHADHA 


MUKHA-BHABEA — (see  BhadraX—A  poitico,  a porob.,  febe  front; 
tabernacle,  felie  middle  niche. 

Sarvesham  mnkha-bhadram  syal  lakshanam  vakshyate’dhuna  \ 

(M.  xym.  276,  see  also  276  f). 
Sarveshaih  mukha-bhadranam  par&ve  sopana-samyutam  \ 

(M.  XXX.  93). 

Parito’linda  -bhagena  varanaih( = door)  mnkha  -bhadrakam  \ 

(M.  XXXIV.  251). 

“ The  temple  (at  Amarnath)  itself  faces  the  west  but  the 
mapdapa  or  antarala — the  hall  of  the  shrine — ^has  also  doors 
to  the  north  and  south.  Bach  of  the  three  doors  has  a porch 
(mukha-bhadra),  approached  by  four  or  five  steps,  and  sup- 
ported by  four  nearly  square  pillars,  two  of  them  attached  to 
the  wall.” 

(The  temple  of  Amarnath,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  iil. 

p.  317,  0. 1,  last  para). 
Beva-l^ri-tafei-bhushanasya  kyitina  devalayam  karitam  yugmam 
mamdapa-feobbitam  oha  purato-bhadram  pratolya  saha  I 
Kshetrefeasya  tatha  suralaya-varam  sphitam  tadagam  tatha 
bandham  Kaudika-samjnakam  bahu-jalam  dirgham  tatha 
khanitam  II 

(Banker  Inscrip,  of  Bhanudeva,  v.  7,  Bp.  Ind. 

vol.  IX.  p.  127). 

MBKHA-MANpAPA — The  pavilion  in  front  of  a temple. 

(M.  XIX.  198,199,  etc.,  see  under  Map^apa), 
0arbha-siitra-sama-bhagad  agrato  mukha-mapdapam  II 

(Matsya-Purapa,  chap.  269,  v.  6,  see  also  V.  11  j 
also  G-aruda-Purapa,  chap*  47,  v.  10). 
Prasada-garbha-manam  va  kurvvita  mukha-mapdapam  II 
^ikharasya  ohaturthena  agrato  mukha-mapdapam  II 

(Agni-Purapa,  chap.  42,  V.  7,  12). 
” Made  the  mukha-mandapa  (muga-mapd,aman)  and  consecra- 
ted (the  shrine).** 

(Two  Anaxinalai  In8orip.no,  11,  Ep.  Ind.  vol. 

VIII.  pp.  320-321). 


MUBHTI-BANBHA 


509 


MUKHA-VABANA — The  entrance-door, 

(M.  XXXV.  396,  see  Dvara). 

MlJKHyA-HAEMYA — The  main-bnilding,  the  chief  temple. 

(M.  xm.  14). 

MUI^PA.MALXKA — A class  of  buildings,  the  top-room. 

(Kamikagama,  XLI,  6,  see  under  Malika). 

MUNPA-HAEMYA— The  top-room, 

(See  Kautiliya-Arthatastra  under  Chuli- 
barmy  a). 

MUNPAKA-BVABA— A kind  of  upper  door^ 

(See  Kautiliya-Artha&astra  under  Dvara). 

MUDBIKA— A small  seal,  a stamped  coin,  an  impression,  a moulding 
of  the  column. 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  108, 106-177, 109, 
see  under  Stambha), 

MUNI — An  ascetic.  An  account  of  the  images  of  the  seven  patri- 
archs is  given  in  detail  in  the  Manasara.  Agastya  is  measured 
according  to  the  seven  tSla,  Katyapa  and  Bhrigu  according 
to  the  eight  tala,  and  Vasishtha,  Bhargava,  Vi&vamitra  and 
Bharadvaja  according  to  the  nine  tala.  (Details  of  these 
measures  will  be  found  under  Tala-mana). 

(M.  Lvil.  2-6) 

The  characteristic  features  of  the  patriarchs  are  also  described. 

(Ibid.  7-17). 

MUSHTI-BANDHA—A  moulding  of  the  entablature  and  of  the 
column,  a kind  of  roof,  the  top-most  part  of  a building,  a part  of 
the  rampart  and  of  the  arch. 

The  third  moulding  from  the  top  (downwards)  of  the  entabla- 
ture (Kamikagama,  Liv.  1,  see  under  Prastara). 

A member  of  the  column  (M.  xv.  186,  see  under  Stambha). 

A kind  of  roof  (M.xyi.  61,  see  under  Valabhi). 

A (crowning)  part  of  a building  (M.  XVIII.  202), 


610 


MUBTI 


A parti  of  tiie  ramparfe 

Va3rakyilii&  olia  vaprangam  ohhafcrakaram  afcliapi  va  ! 

Uttaram  vajanam  ohaiva  mushti-bandham  tridhanvitam  l 

CM.  XXXI.  66.67). 

A parfc  of  an  arch  (M.  XL VI.  66,  see  under  Torana). 

MUETl — An  image,  a statue,  an  idol. 

(1)  An  image,  a statue  (M.  li.  26 ; ix.  Iii,  etc). 

(2)  Amgulai&  oha  tatha  murtife  cbatur-a^iti-saibrnitaib  \ 

(Bhavishya-Purana,  obap.  132,  y,  7). 

<3)  Defeanurupa-bhusbana-veshalankara-murtibbib  karya  \ 

(Brihat-samhita,  LViil.  29). 

(4)  ^ilakharena  janita  satya-sandhasya  bhautiki  \ 

Murbih  kirtimayi  obasya  krita  tenaiva  §a&vati  II 

“ By  tbe  stone-cbisel  a material  body  of  Satyasandba  was 
executed,  and  by  tbe  same  an  eternal  body  of  bis  fame  was 
produced.” 

**  Tbe  two  inscriptions  (nos,  33,  34,  H.  S.  1. 1,  vol.  i.)  record 
that  a king  Grnnabbara  . . . , constructed  a temple 

of  6iva  on  tbe  top  of  tbe  mountain  and  placed  in  it 
a Binga  and  a statue  of  himself.” 

(Trisirapalli  cave  Insorip.  no.  33,  v.,4, 
H.  S.  1. 1,  vol.  1.  pp.  29,  30). 

XJttara-bbagada  Kaisaleyalli  pabcha-vim&ati-lila.murtigalam 
pratishtbeyam  \ 

“ Set  up  on  tbe  colonnade  to  tbe  north  twenty -five  pleasing 
(lila — a particular  attitude,  like  dbyana-murti)  statues.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  iv.  Chamarajbagar  Taliiq, 
no.  86,  Eoman  text,  p.  18,  lines  16, 10  (bera),  13 
(vigraba) ; Transl.  p.  11). 

In  this  inscription,  tbe  expressions,  bera,  vigraha,  and  mftrti 
occur ; they  are  to  be  distinguished  : hera  or  bimba  is  an 
idol  of  a god ; vigraJia  (or  image)  expresses  almost  the  same 
idea ; mUrti  implies  the  statue  of  both  gods  and  men,  and  so 
also  does  pmftwtd. 


MBIHALAKA 


511 


MUBTI-KANTA — A type  of  storeyed  building, 

i class  of  five-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxiii.  19--24,  see  mdei 

Prasada). 

MULA-DANDA — The  regulating  column  of  a building,  the  founaaiiun 
pillar. 

The  main-column  (M.  xv,  236,  see  also  l.  104,-  etc.,  under 

Stambha). 

MUIiA-BBBA— The  chief  deity  in  a shrine,  the  principal  idol  of  a 
temple. 

(M.  Lv.  34,  Lxi.  21,  Liv.  3,  etc). 

MULA-STAMBHA— The  foundation  pillar,  the  regulating  column 
of  a building. 

(M.  XV.  234,  etc.,  see  under  Stambha). 

MULA-STHANA — The  foundation,  the  base,  a temple  in  the  centre 
of  a villiage  or  town. 

“ One  perpetual  lamp  was  given  to  Mahadeva,  the  lord  of  the 
^ri-Mula-sthana  at  Tirukkajukkunyam.” 

(Insorip.  at  Tirukkalukkunram,  line  34, 
H.  S.  1. 1,  vol.  HI.  p.  148). 

MtJIjA-HABMyA— The  chief  of  the  buildings  forming  a group,  the 
principal  shrine,  the  main  temple. 

(M.  XIII.  19,  XXXIX.  136,  etc). 

MEIG-A-YANA — ^A  deer-forest,  a place  for  sport  or  recreation  of  kings. 

Tavan-matram  eka-dvaram  khata-guptam  svadn-phala-gulma- 
gnchoham  akantaki-drumam  uttaria-toyatayam  danta-myiga- 
chatush-padam  bhagna-nakha-damshtra-vyala-margayuka-hasti- 
hastini-kalabha-mriga-vanam  viharartham  rajfiah  karayet  \ 
Sarva-tithi-mrigaih  pratyante  chanyan  mriga-vanaih  bhumi- 
vatena  va  nivetayet  1 

(Kautiliya-Arthatastra,  chap,  xxill,  p.  49). 

MEINALAKA—A  lotus  stalk  or  fibre,  a moulding  of  the  entablature, 
base  or  pedestal  shaped  dike  the  lotus  stalk  or  fibre. 

A moulding  of  the  lintel  (M.  xix.  146,  etc). 


MEGHA-KiLNTA 


im 

The  iourtib  mouidiiig  from  the  top  (downwards)  of  an  entablature. 

(Kamikagama,  Liy.  1,  sjae  under  Praatara). 
A moulding  of  the  entablature  (M.  xvi.  63,  see  the  lists  of 

mouldings  under  Prastara). 
ME0HA.-KA.NTA—A  type  of  storeyed  building, 

A class  of  ten*8toreyed  buildings  (M.  xxviii.  16-17,  see  under 

Prasada). 

ME  EXT— A class  of  buildings  mostly  storeyed. 

(1)  A type  of  buildings  which  are  hexagonal  (in  plan),  have 

twelve  storeys,  variegated  windows  and  four  entrances,  and 
are  thirty-two  cubits  wide. 

(Byihat-samhita,  LVi;  20,  see,  J.  B.  A. 

S.,  N.  S.,  vol  VI.  p.  318). 
Paiioha-ohatvarinitan-meru-lakshapadhySyah — ^the  chapter  on 
the  description  of  forty-five  kinds  of  Mem  buildings ; they 
are  described  by  the  following  authorities : 

(2)  Prasada-man^ana-'Va8tu-&a8tra  of  Sutradhara  Mapdana  (chap. 

VI.,  Ms.  Egg.  3146,  2263,  fol.  26  b). 

(3)  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  269,  v.  28,  31,  63,  see  under  PrSsada). 

(4)  Bhavishya-Purapia  (chap.  130,  v.  27,  see  under  Prasada). 

(6)  Agni-Pur&pa  (chap.  104,  v.  14-16,  see  under  Prasada). 

(6)  Gaiuda-Purana  also  describes  the  same  kind  of  Meru  temple  as 
the  Agni-Purana  j 

6ata-&yifiga-aamayukto  merah  prasada-uttamah  \ 

Mandapas  tasya  karttavya  bhadrais  tribhir  alafikyitah  II 

(Ghap.  47,  V.  24,  cf.  also  v.  39,  see  under  Prasada). 
(7;  A building  with  eight  talas  foompartments)  and  eight  kutas 
(towers  or  domes); 

Merur  nama  itl  khyStas  tV'ashta>talashta-ku^akam(-h)  il 

(Suprabhedagama,  XXXI.  43). 


MEBU 


518 


(8)  “ Meru  denofeea  a parfciouiar  kind  of  temple  (hexagonal  with 
twelve  stories,  variegated  windows,  and  four  entrances, 
Brihat-samhita,  Lvi.  20).” 

(Jabalpur  copperplate  of  Ya8ahkamadeva,v.  13, 
j Bp.  lud.  vol.  II.  pp.  4,  6,  note  42). 

I (9)  See  Bheraghat  Insorip.  of  the  Queen  Alhana  Devi  (verse  9,  Ep, 

: Ind.  vol.  II,  pp.  11, 15). 

(10)  E.anaka-si(fei)glapita-gagana-khelat.kheohari»ohakra-khedah  \ 

l Kim  aparam  iha  kas(&)yam  yasya  dugdhabdhi-viohi-valaya- 

bahala-kirtteh  kirttanam  karnna-meruh  11 

“ Of  him  whose  fame  is  like  the  circle  of  waves  of  the  milky 
ocean,  need  we  say  more  than  that  here  at  Kali  there  is  a 
temple  (erected  by  him),  Karna-meru,  (so  lofty)  that  the 
wind  of  the  flags  which  wave  from  its  golden  spires  lessens 
the  fatigue  of  the  damsels  of  heaven,  when  playing  in  the 
sky.” 

(Khairha  Plates  of  Yasahkarnadeva,  v.  13,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  XII.  pp.  211,  212,  210), 

(11)  ” Meru  is  primarily  tne  name  of  the  fabulous  golden  mountain 

(hemadri),  the  centre  of  Jambu  dvipa  on  which  the  gods 
dwell  (suralaya),  and  it  is  figuratively  applied  in  geographi- 
cal names  to  any  hill  covered  with  spendid  temples  and 
palaces.” 

“ Another  figurative  meaning  of  Meru,  derived  from  the  notion 
! that  mount  Meru  is  the  home  of  the  gods,  a large  temple 

with  six  towers,  twelve  stories  and  wonderful  vaults  (Byihat- 
samhita,  LYI.  20).” 

“ According  to  Prabandha-ohinta-mani  ip.  134,  see  also 
p.  176f)  King  Karna  of  G-ujarat  constructed  a building  of 
this  kind,  called  Karna-meruh  Prasadah,  in  Aphilvad.” 

' “ Similarly  the  Prabhavaka-oharitra  (xii.  402)  mentions  a 

Siva  temple,  called  Siddha-merii.” 

3S 


514 


MBBU 


“ As  regards  the  name  Ajaya-meru  its  meaning  is  no  doubt, 
(as  the  Prithvi-raja-vijaya,  Y.  100,  suggests),  the  Meru  made 
by  Ajaya-raja.” 

“ Thus  we  have  in  Eajputana  Jesala-meru,  (this  form  is  still 
used  by  Pandits  and  Tatis,  and  occurs  regularly  in  the 
colophons  of  the  palm-leaf  Mss.,  in  the  inscriptions  and  the 
Jaina  books),  ‘ the  Meru  made  by  Jesala  \ which  primarily 
denotes  the  hill-fort,  rising  with  its  temples  and  palace 
above  the  town  of  Jdsalmdr  or  Jesalmir  in  Maryad,  Komal- 
mdr,  properly  Kumbhala-meru,  ‘ the  *meru  built  by  Kum- 
bhala  or  Kumbha-karna’,  .which  is  the  well-known  hill-fort 
in  'Mevad.  (In  the  Eajputana  Gazetteer,  vol.  lii.  p.  52,  the 
fort  is  called  Komalgarh,  while  Col.  Tod  gives  Komalmer). 
The  name  Eumbhala-meru  occurs  in  the  Jaina  Pat^avalis, 
(see  the  description  of  the  Kharatara,  no.  56,  ^ripuj- Jina- 
samudra,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xi.  p.  249),  and  Balmer  or  Barmer, 
properly  Bahada-meru,  the  Meru  made  my  Bahada,  a hill- 
fort  in  Mallani,  (Eajputana  Gazetteer,  vol.  ii.  p.  271).  The 
form  Bahada-meru  is  used  by  che  Jainas,  (see  the  description 
of  the  Kharatara,  no.  68,  l§ripuj-Jina-samudra,  Ind.  Ant, 
vol,  XI.  p.  249).  In  KathiSvild,  there  is  Jhanjmer,  (Bombay 
Gazetteer,  vol.  vin.  p.  469)  properly  Jhafijha-meru,  the  Meru 
made  by  Jhanjha,  and  in  the  Central  Provinces  there  is 
another  Ajmir-garh,  properly  Ajaya-meru-ga^ha,  the  fort, 
i.e. , the  Meru  made  by  Ajaya.” 

(Origin  of  the  town  of  Ajmer  and  of  its  name, 
Dr.  Biihler,  Ind,  Ant.  vol.  xxvi.  p.  164,  last 
para,  notes  11-16). 

(12)  “ There  are  other  temples  in  honour  of  the  holy  mount  Girnar 

in  the  south  wing  being  Sameta- 

^ikhara  and  the  other  Su-meru  or  a personified  mount 
Meru.” 

(Ahmadabad  Jaina  temples,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp. 

series,  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  85). 


MAULI 


615 


(IS)  Maadiram  had  the  surname  Jaya-meru-Sri-Karana-mangalam 
(lm«s  11  and  15  f),  which  seems  to  be  derived  from  Jaya-meru, 
one  of  the  Surnames  of  the  Bana  king  Vikramaditya.” 

(Insorip.  of  Eajaraja  i,  no.  60,  H.  S.  1. 1,  vol.  m. 

p.  lOS,  para  2). 

MERU-KA-NTA — ^A  type  of  storeyed  building. 

(1)  A class  of  three-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxi.  41-49,  see  under 

Prasada). 

(2)  A type  of  building  (Kamikagama,  Lxv.  31,  see  under  Malika). 

MBRUJA — ^A  type  of  building,  a class  of  pavilions, 

(M.  XXXIV.  160,  see  under  Mandapa). 

MBSHA-YTJDDHA — ^A  kind  of  joinery. 

(M.  xvii.  93, 112-113,  see  under  Sandhi-karman). 

MAULI — A head  gear,  a crown. 

Manasara  (chap.  XLix.,  named  Mauli-lakahana) : 

Various  crowns  and  head  dresses  are  described ; Jat5,  Mauli,  Kirita, 
Karapda,  Sirastraka,  Rundala  (Kuntala),  Ke&a-bandha,  Dham- 
milla,  Alaka,  Ohuda,  Maku^a,  and  Patta  (lines  13-16), 

Of  these,  the  Pattas  are  sub-divided  into  three  kinds,  uamely,  Patra 
pat^a,  Ratna-pa^ta,  and  Pushpa-pa^ta  (16).  Kuntala, 
Ke&abandha,  Dhammilla,  Alaka  and  Ohtida  are  apparently 
various  fancy  modes  of  hair-dressing,  data  (clotted  hair)  and 
Makuta  (lit.  diadem)  are  stated  to  suit  Brahma  and  6iva 
(Rudra)  ; Kirita  and  Makuta  are  prescribed  for  Vishnu  in  his 
different  forms,  such  as,  Narayana  and  others  (17-18). 

Other  petty  gods  wear  Karanda  and  Makuta  (19).  The  love 
goddess  Rati  (Manonmani)  wears  Jata,  Mauli,  Mandala  or 
Kundala.  Saras  vati  and  Savitri  put  on  Keta-bandha  and 

Kundala.  All  the  female  deities  may  wear  Karanda  or 
Makuta.  The  kings  Chakra-vartin  (Sarva-bhauma)  and  Adhi- 
raja  wear  Kirita,  Narendra  puts  on  Karapda,  Parshpika  uses 
Sirastraka,  or  the  Chakra-vartin  and  other  kings  may,  as  stated, 
wear  Karanda  or  Makuta.  Patra-pattia  is  stated  to  be 
suitable  for  the  king  Pa|ta-cBiara,  Ratna-patta  for  Parshpika, 


616 


MATOIKA 


Pashpa-pafcfea  for  Patta-bhaj,  and  Puslapa-malya  (flower  wreath) 
for  Astra-graha  (20-28). 

Kundala  (Eudmala)  and  Maknta  are  prescribed  for  the  queen 
of  Chakra- vartin,  Ke§a-bandha  for  the  queens  of  Adhiraja  and 
Narendra,  Bhammilla  and  Kumnda  for  the  queens  of  Parshnika 
Patta-dhara,  Mandale'aa  and  Patta-bhaj,  and  Alaka  and  Ghuda 
for  the  queens  of  Astra-graha  (29-33). 

The  height,  etc.,  of  a crown  is  determined  in  comparison  with  the 
width  of  the  face  of  the  wearer.  Different  proportions  are  sug- 
gested in  difierent  oases  (34-63) 

Next  is  described  in  detail  the  number  of  gold  pieces  and  pre- 
cious jewels  in  the  crowns  of  the  kings  of  various  ranks  and 
of  their  consorts  (64-88,  89-92). 

Forms  of  these  crowns  are  then  described : 

data,  Maknta,  Ketabandha  and  Dhavala  (?)  are  stated  to  be  shaped 
like  tri-purusha  (lit.  three  ancestors  or  the  length  of  three  men) 
jSirita  like  venu-karna  (bamboo-ear),  Karanda  like  the  beak  o 
a peacock,  ^irastra  like  budbnda  (water  bubble),  and  Dhammilla 
like  vallika  (creeper)  (93-96) 

Then  follows  the  description  of  the  plan  and  the  various  parts  of 
these  crowns,  as  well  as  of  their  measurement  (96-168). 

MAULIEA— A type  of  pavilion,  a class  of  halls,  a type  of  building. 

A type  of  pavilion  with  six  faces  (M.  xxxiv.  *664,  see  undoi 

Mapdapa). 

A class  of  halls  (M.  xxxv.  3, 10,  see  under  Sala). 
MADLI-BANDHA—A  head-gear. 

(M.  xux.  109,  see  under  Bhushana). 

MAULI-MUNDA — The  top  part  of  a branch  of  the  ornamental  tree 
(kalpavriksha). 

^akha-mulasya  parve  tu  mauli-mundam  cha  yojayet  1 

(M.  XLViii.  66). 


BAKTA.PATTl 


mi 

Y 

YAK,BHA — A class  of  derai-gods ; tha  attendants  of  Kubera  or  the  god 
of  wealth,  who  gnard  his  treasures  ; they  are  also  the  ohowry- 
bearers  of  other  gods.  They  are  stated  to  be  measured  according 
to  the  nine  tala;  they  assume  a purely  human  appearance, 
possess  two  arms  and  two  eyes,  dark  blite  and  yellow  complexion, 
and  benevolent  disposition. 

(M.  LViil.  2-5,  see  Tala-mana). 
yAJ^^A-KAlNTA — ^A  type  of  five -storeyed  building. 

(M.  XXIII.  34-41,  see  under  Prasada). 
YAJNA-BHAUKA — A type  of  building,  a pavilion  with  forty  pillars. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  11,  see  under  Mandapa). 
YANTBAKA— -An  architectural  member  of  the  bedstead,  a band. 
Padagre  chantaralam  syat  kuryat  tiryak  oha  yantrakam  \ 

(M.  XLiv.  13). 

YAMA-SORYA — ^A  type  of  building,  a house  with  a western  and 
northern  hall. 

(Brihat-samhita,  MU.  39). 
YAMA-KANTA — A type  of  storeyed  building. 

A class  of  five-storeyed  and  eleven-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXIII.  26-29,  XXIX.  16-18,  see  under  Prasada). 
YAGtA-MANDAPA—A  sacrificial  pavilion. 

(M.  XXXIV.  37,  xxxn.  65,  etc). 

YA(xA-8ALA — A sacrificial  hall. 

(M.  XXXII,  55,  etc). 

YANA — A conveyance,  a car;  one  of  the  four  kinds  of  Vastu 
consisting  of  Adika,  Syandana,  Sibika,  and  Eatha. 

(M.  III.  3,  9-10). 

YUPA-STAMBHA — The  sacrificial  pillar  (see  under  Sthambha). 


R. 

EAKTA-KAMPA— A moulding  of  the  base,  a fillet, 

(M.  XIV.  287,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Adhishthana). 
BAKTA-PATTA — (cf.  Batna-patta) — ^A  moulding  of  the  base,  a band. 

(M.  XIV.  289,  see  the  lists  of  mouldiugs  under  Adhiahsthana). 


518 


EAKTA-BANDHA 


BAKTA-BANDHA— A class  of  bases. 

(M.  XIV.  281-296,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Adhish- 

^hana;  see  also  xv,  223). 

BAELTA-VAPBA— -A  moulding  of  the  base,  the  cavetto. 

(M.  XIV.  284,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Adhishthana). 
BAI^G-A — ^A  theatre,  an  amphitheatre,  a stage,  an  arena,  an  assembly- 
hall,  a court,  a courtyard. 

(1)  A pavilion  within  another  pavilion  is  called  Rahga  ; 

Mapdape  mandapam  yat  tu  rahgam  ity-abhidhiyate  ii 

(Kamikagama,  h.  94). 

(2)  Courtyard: 

Tasya  madhye  oha  range  tu  maukbikena  prapanvitam  \ 

(M.  xxxiv.  218). 

Mukha-tala  visala  cha  chatur-bhagam  tathayatam  1 
Purato’  lindam  ekamtam  bhittim  kuryat  samantatah  I 
Mtilagre  dvi-dvi-bhagena  vasa-rahgam  oha  karayet  \ 

(M.  XXXV.  117-119,  see  also  xxiii.  60,  xxxviil.  44,  etc). 

(3)  TFttare  rangam  ity-uktam  tad-grihinya  gyiham  bhavet  II 

Eka-tala  pratasta  syat  strinam  rangopajivinam  II 
Pradhana-tala  yatraiva  ranga-sthanam  vidhiyate  II 
Eanga-bhitti-samayuktam  dhama-sopana-samyutam  Ii 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  47,  60,  62,  64). 
BAl^^GA-MANDAPA— A pavilion,  an  assembly -hall,  a oounoil-oham- 
ber. 

Of.  Nat  (nyitta)  mandira  implying  the  detached  mapdapa  or 
hall  in  front  of  a temple,  where  the  visitors  assemble  and 
indulge  in  religious  music, 

(1)  An  assembly-hall  (Hampe  inscrip,  of  Krishnaraya,  lines  24,  32, 
north  face), 

“ In  the  Zeitsohrift  der  Deutsohen  Morgenlandisohen  (Bd.  Lviil. 
s,  466)  Dr.  Bloch  makes  some  remarks  respecting  a cave 
in  Bamgarh  hill  in  Sarguja,  which,  from  its  arrangements 
and  inscription,  appears  to  have  been  evidently  intended 


EATHA-KANTA 


519 


“ Tlie  so  called  Queen’s  cave  and  that  of  Q-anefea  in  Udayagiri 
are  further  undoubted  examples,  to  the  reliefs  of  which 
Jacobi  has  directed  my  attention  ; they  represent  the  doings 
of  these  ladies  and  gentlemen  (actresses  and  actors)  in  a 
highly  realistic  way.  The  cave-theatre  discovered  by  Bloch 
has,  however,  a special  interest ; it  is  arranged  after  the 
Greek  pattern.^’ 

Prof.  Luders  refers  to  Kalidasa  (1)  dari-gyiha  (Kumara-sam- 
bhava,  1, 10, 14) ; (2)  Sila-vetman  (Megha-duta,  1,  26). 

(Indian  Caves  as  Pleasure-resorts,  Ind.  Ant, 
vol.  XXXIV.  p.  199,  para  3 ; p.  200,  para  1). 

(2)  Irahgada  happaligeyuman  imaha-sopana  pantiyumam  rachi- 

sidam  ^ri-Gomma^a-devara  suttalu  rahgama-happaligeyam 
bigiyisidan — “ had  this  rahgada  happalige  (?  painted  hall 
or  hall  of  assembly)  and  the  flight  of  grand  stairs  laid  out ; 
had  the  rahgama  happalige  set  up  around  6ri-Gomma^a 
Deva.” 

(Ep.  Carnac.  vol.  li.  no.  116,  Eoman  text,  p.  87, 
Transl.  p.  171), 

(3)  Karite  vira-Ballala-pa^tana-svaminamuna  \ 

ISiagena  Pax^va-devagre  nritya-ranga^ma-ku^time  \ 

“ By  Naga,  the  Vira-Ballala-pattana-svami,  were  built  the 
dancing-hall  and  terrace  of  Partva  Deva.” 

Nfitya-rangamumaih  madisida — “ and  in  front  of  the  basadi  of 
Kamatha  Par^va  Deva  stone  pillars  and  a dancing  hall  ” 
were  made. 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  ii.  no.  130,  Eoman  text, 
p.  99,  lines  1-4 ; Transl.  p.  178,  para  1). 

BAhfGA-MXJKHA— A class  of  buildings. 

(Kamikagama,  XLV.  62,  see  under  Malika). 

EAThlA-KALPA — A kind  of  ornament  prescribed  for  idols  and 


(M.  L.  3,  see  under  Bhushana). 
EATNA-KANTA — A class  of  six-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXIV.  19,  see  under  Prasada), 


520  EATKA-GBIHA 

BATNA-GEIHA— The  Jewel-house,  the  adytum  of  a Buddhist  temple, 
(?)  a stupa  or  tope. 

Eatna-gi’ihe  oha  dipako  Jvalatu  \ mama  ohapararddliat  paiichaiva 
bhikshavo  bhumjatam  ratna-grihe  cha  dipaka  iti  II 

“From  the  interest  of  the  dinaras  given  by  him.  . .let  a lamp 
burn  in  the  jewel-house,  . . . and  with  the  other  half  . . . let  the 
same  number  of  five  Bhiksh us  be  fed  and  a lamp  burn  in  the 
Jewel-house 

“ It  seems  to  denote  the  stupa  itself,  as  the  abode  of  the  three  ratnas 
or  ‘Jewels  or  precious  stones  viz.  (1)  Buddha ; (2)  Dharma,  the 
law  or  truth ; and  (3)  Sarhgha,  the  community  or  congregation.” 

This  rendering  of  the  term  by  the  whole  ‘ stupa  ’ seems  unsuitable 
to  the  context : a lamp  was  provided  to  light  up  the  ‘ ratna-gyiha  ’ 
which  must  imply  a room  or  a particular  part  thereof,  and  not 
the  whole  ‘ stupa.’ 

(Sanohi  stone  Inscrip.  of  Chandragupta  ii, 
lines  9-10,  G.I.I.  vol.  in. 

F.  Gi,  I,  no.  6,  pp.  32,  33-34,  note  5 on  p.  33)i 

EATNA-PATTA — ^A  moulding,  a Jewelled  band,  a Jewelled  turban. 
A moulding  of  the  pedestal  (M.  xiii.  84,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 

under  Upapitha). 

A head  gear  (M.  XLix.  16,  see  under  Bhushana). 

KATNA-PUSHPA— A diamond-flower,  an  armament. 

(Beopara  Inscrip.  of  Vijayasena,  v.  11,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  I.  pp.  308,  313). 

EATNA-BANDHA — (see  Eakta-bandha) — A class  of  bases, 

(M.  XIV.  281-296,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 
under  Adhishthana). 

EATNA-MANBAPA— A kind  of  pavilion. 

(M,  xxxii.  48,  see  Mandapa). 

EATNI — (of,  Aratni) — ’A  measure  of  21  ahgulas  or  about  16  inches. 

Eatnir  augula-parvam  samkhyaya  tv-eka-Vimsatih  \ 

(Brahmanda-Purana,  part  I,  2nd  anushamga- 
pada,  chap.  7,  v.  98). 

A measure  equal  to  the  cubit  with  closed  or  clenched  fist  (Supra- 

bhedagama,  xxx.  24). 


MTHA 


521 


RATHA— A chariot,  a carriage,  a oar,  a vehicle,  a tank,  a war-chariot, 
the  body,  a limb,  a shrine. 

(1)  Manasara  (chap.  named  Ratha)  I 

Bathas  are  constructed  for  ceremonial  and. ordinary  drives 
of  idols,  Brahmins  and  Kings,  as  well  as  for  fighting, 
mock* fighting,  and  other  purposes  (lines  1, 131-133). 

Wheels  and  other  parts  of  Rathas,  their  shapes,  mea- 
surement, and  ornaments  an^  mouldings  are  described 
(2-3  f).  Other  architectural  details  are  also  given  (3-11), 
With  regard  to  shape,  Rathas  are  divided  into  seven  classes, 
namely,  Nabhasvan-bhadraka,  Prabhafijana-bhadraka, 
Kivata-bhadraka,  Pavana-bhadraka,  Prishada-bhadraka, 
Indraka-bbadraka,  and  Anila-bhadraka  (112-115).  The  first 
of  these  is  square,  the  second  hexagonal ; the  third  should 
have  two  bhadras  or  porticoes  and  the  fourth  three  porticoes, 
the  fifth  and  the  sixth  should  have  ten  porticoes,  and  the 
last  one  should  have  twelve  porticoes  (117-120).  But  accor- 
ding to  some,  the  seven  shapes  are  respectively  semi-circular, 
circular,  elliptical,  rectangular,  octagonal,  hexagonal,  and 
oval  (121-123). 

Rathas  are  further  divided  into  four  types,  namely,  Kagara, 
Rravida,  Andhra,  and  Vesara,  The  square  Rathas  are  called 
Hagara,  the  octagonal  ones  Bravida,  the  hexagonal  ones 
Andhra,!and  the  round  ones  Vesara  (124-126). 

In  accordance  with  various’.purposes,  Rathas  are  furnisUed  with 
different  kinds  of  wheels  and  other  parts.  Thus  a war  chariot 
or  tank  has  three  wheels,  the  chariot  for  mock-fighting  has 
four  wheels,  one  for  ordinary  festival  is  furnished  with  five 
wheels,  one  for  special  festival  may  have  six,  seven,  eight, 
nine  or  ten  whe6lsl(X31"137), 

The  number  of.vedis  or  platforms,  storeys,  etc,,  of  these  Rathas 
as  well  as  the  Bathas  of  the  Banddhas  and  of  the  Jinakaa 
also  described  (136-171,  3'-lll)‘ 


BATHAKA. 


(2)  Swnaili  siiglxa|itam  sadhu-ratha-trayam  alamki’ifcam  I 

Dukula-ratna-maladyair  balm-inulyair  dridbaiii  malaat  1! 

(Skanda-Puruna,  Vaisbnava-khanda- 
dvitiya,  chap.  26,  v.  8). 

(3)  “ On  the  east  elevation  of  the  temple  eight  small 

shrines  (known  as  Ratha)  stand  in  a row  from  north  to 
south  on  each  aide  of  the  eastern  entrance,  sis  on  the  left.” 

“ The  Batha,  on  the  extreme  left,  stands  completely  detached. 
It  is  a square  shrine,  with  carved  panels  on  the  hack  of 
the  chaniher.” 

“ A small  platform  is  in  front,  with  yah  piers  (blocks  nncarved), 
each  having  its  capital  complete.” 

“ The  basement  is  a square  granite  plinth,  and  square  free  stone 
course  with  semi-Ootagonal  moulding  over the  upper  base 
is  a square  granite  course  on  which  the  superstructure  rests  ; 
on  the  wall  head  over  the  pilasters  are  brackets  which  carry 
the  cornice.” 

“ As  these  shrines  are  very  similar  to  the  monoliths  at  Mama- 
Uapuram,  known  by  the  name  of  Bathas,  the  term  is  here  used 
advisedly.” 

(Pallava  Architecture,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp.  series, 
vol.  XXXIV.  p.  22,  paras  3,  4,  6,  6 : note  96 ; 

see  plate  xxv). 

RATHAKA— A type  of  building,  a shrine,  a temple. 

Ashtamamtena  garbhasya  rathakanam  tu  nirgamah  \ 

Paridher  gupa-bhagena  rathakams  tatra  kalpayet  il 
Tat-tritiyena  va  kuryad  rathakanam  tu  nirgamah  \ 

Vama-trayam  sthapaniyam  rathaka-tritaye  sada  II 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  42,  v.  13-14). 
Nemih  padona-vistirna  prasadaaya  samantatah  \ 

Paridhes  trayaihtako  madhye  rathakams  tatra  kSrayet  il 

(Ibid.  chap.  104,  v.  7). 

RATHA -KUMBHA — A pitoher-Iike  part  of  the  column. 

(M.  xy.  68,  see  under  Stambha). 


BAJA.PATHA 


m 


BATHA-TlTHI — The  broad  road  fit  for  driving  chariot  and  other 
vehicles,  the  high  way,  the  main  street. 

(See  Kamihagama  under  Baja-vithi). 

BAHASYAVASA-MANDAPA^ — ^A  pavilion  where  kings  reside  in 
secret,  a bed-room,  a private  chamber. 

(M.  xIj.  147,  see  under  Man^apa). 

BAJA-G-BIHA— The  royal  palace. 

(See  details  under  Baja-harmya). 

BAJA-BHANI — (see  under  Nagara) — The  king’s  residence,  the 
capital  city  where  the  king  usually  resides,  the  seat  of  Govern- 
ment, the  metropolis. 

Definition : 

Vidya  sthanam  tu'tadvat  syat  bahu-sena-samanvitam  I 

Baja-vefema-samayukta  raja-dhaniti  kathyate  II 

(Kamikagama,  xx.  14) . 

Of.  “With  myriads  of  people,  practices  of  virtue,  agreeable 
occupations,  streams  of  the  (nine)  sentiments,  pleasure- 
gardens,  separated  lovers,  splendid  tanks,  full  lotus  beds, 
gilded  boats  for  spring-festivals,  ghatikS-sthanas  (religious 
centres),  the  supports  of  dharmma  and  mines  of  enjoyment, 
moats  which  were  as  if  the  sea  being  overcome  had  returned 
here  on  account  of  the  collection  of  gems,  groups  of  the 
lotus-faces  of  beautiful  women  fair  as  the  moon,  (grama- 
nagara-kheda-kharvvapa-madamba-drona-mukha-pura  - pattana- 
raja-dhani),  on  whatever  side  one  looked,  in  these  nine  forms 
did  the  Kuntala-deta  shine.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  vn.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no.  197, 
, Transl.  p.  124,  para  1,  last  seven  lines  ;Boman 
text,  p.  214,  line  27f). 

EAJA-PATHA — The  broad  street,  the  big  road,  the  high  way 
Dhanumshi  dafea-vistirnah  triman  raja-pathah  kritah  \ 
Nyi-vaji-ratha-naganam  asambadhas  tu  samcharah  11 
Dhanumshi  chapi  ohatvari  takha-rathyat  oha  tair  mita  i 
Trika  rathyoparathyah  syur  dvikat  ohapy-uparathyakah  II 


524 


JangM-paijlia&  chatush-padas  tri-padam  oha  grihantaram  \ 

Dhrifci  margas  tQrddhva-8liash.feh.am  kramalah  padikah  smyitah  !! 

• (Brahmanda-Piirana,  part  I,  2nd  anushamga-pada. 

chap.  7,  V,  113,  114,  116). 

RAJA-ViTHI — The  public  road,  the  broad  street,  a road  which  runs 
round  a village  or  town,  also  called  Mangala-vithi  and  Ratha- 
vithi. 

Eaja-vithiti  vikhyafea  gramader  bahir-aviita  \ 

Saiva  mahgala-vithiti  ratha-vithiti  kathifea  11 

(Kamikagama,  xxi.  2). 

RxAJA-HARMYA — The  palace  of  a king. 

Manasara  (chap.  XL.,  named  Raja-grilia)  : 

Palaces  are  divided  into  nine  classes  with  regard  to  their  size  and 
as  they  belong  to  the  nine  classes  of  kings,  namely,  Sarva- 
bhupa  (or  Sarva-bhauma,  otherwise  called  Chakra- varbin),  (lines 
32, 1-9),  Maha-raja  (10-16),  Narendra  (16-19),  Parshnika  (19-22), 
Pat^a-dhara  (23-25),  Mandalesa  (26-28),  Patta-bhiij  (29-31), 
Praharaka  (32-36),  and  Asbragraha  (37). 

Each  palace  admits  of  three  sizes,  namely,  the  largest,  the  inter- 
mediate, and  the  smallest,  both  as  regards  the  measurement 
of  dimensions  (lines,  4,  10,  16,  36)  and  the  number  of 
walls,  storeys,  rooms,  ditches,  gardens,  etc.,  (38-69),  Thus 
three  kinds  of  breadth  are  given  to  each  palace.  The 
length  and  height  are  determined  in  comparison  with  the 
breadth.  The  former  (length)  may  vary  from  being  equal 
to  the  breadth  to  being  '■11  times  of  it.  Height  is  deter- 
mined mostly  by  the  number  of  storeys,  rules  for  which 
have  been  discussed  in  another  place  “ (see  under  Tala  and 
Bhumi-lamba).  The  number  of  storeys,  a palace  should  possess, 
has  also  been  discussed  in  the  same  place  The  enclosure,  sur- 
rounding moat,  etc.,  of  each  palace  are  briefly  described  in  the  pre- 
sent chapter.  But  the  main  object  of  the  chapter  is  to  give  an 
account  of  inner  and  outer  buildings  belonging  to  royal  palaces 
(71-111,  112-153), 


BAJA-HABMYA 


525 


The  Brahma-pi^ha  or  royal  ehapel  is  instialied  in  the  Bramasthana 
or  central  part  (156-169).  The  main  palace  is  built  in  the 
best  of  the  remaining  parts,  called  Indra,  Varuna,  Yama,  Pn'ahpa- 
danta,  etc.  Bound  the  palace  proper  are  arranged  all  other 
houses,  such  as  the  houses  for  the  queen  and  the  princesses,  for 
private  council-hall,  drawing-room,  dressing-room,  bath-room, 
dining-hall,  kitchen,  bed-chambers,  quarters  for  attendants, 
places  for  tanka  and  inner  gardens,  etc.,  (cf.  Sbodasa-mandira 
chakra). 

Beyond  the  royal  harem,  the  charm  and  luxuries  of  which  are  so 
well-known,  are  placed  the  official  quarters,  including  residences 
of  the  crown  prince,  family-priest,  ministers,  and  others. 

The  royal-counoil  and  other  offices  are  suitably  accommodated ; 
e.g , the  palace  of  peace  and  war-office  are  directed  to  be  built 
at  the  fourth  compound  in  the  southern  side  of  the  palace  (148). 
Pleasure-gardens,  flower-gardens,  groves.,  tanks,  etc.,  are  grace- 
fully laid  out.  Compare  the  following : 

Yamye  cha  soma-dig  vapi  vayavye  vatha  nairrite  1 
Asthana-mandapam  kuryat  pushkarinyam  oha  vayave  \ 
Nagasya  vamake  yamye  kuryad  arama-detakam  \ 
Pushpodyanam  tatah  kuryat  mukhya.bhaila|ake’pi  oha  ] 
Nrittagaram  tatah  kuryan  nana-urittanganani  oha  I 

(M.  XL  117-121). 

Tritiye  vithis  tasyam&e  rahasyavasa-mandapam  1 

(Ibid.  147). 

Ifee  va  vitathe  ohaiva  rahga-mandapam  eva  oha  l 

(Ibid  162). 

Stables,  cow-sheds,  eto,,  where  domestic  animals  are  kept, 
are  generally  built  near  the  main  gate  ; 

Bvauvarika-pade  ohaiva  mayuralayam  eva  oha  I 
Dvarasya  dakshine  par&ve  vyagrakalayam  eva  cha  \ 

(Ibid.  144-146). 

Parfeyake  mesha-&ala  cha  satyake  vanaralayam  \ 

Somad  ifeana-paryantam  vaji-talam  prakalpayet  \ 
Yamyadi-pavakantam  syad  gaja-talam  prakalpayet  \ 


BAJI-^FGA 


526 

Tasmat  tu  nairfityantam  kukkutalayam  eva  cha  \ 

Vayu-konadi-mukyantiam  miiganam  karirialayam  \ 

(Ibid*  128-132). 

The  elevated  platforms  to  see  the  mock  fight  from  are  also  placed 
near  the  door  (148-160).  The  iron-pike  (tula-kampa)  for  capital 
pmiishment  is  placed  in  a prominent  place  near  the  gate  (136). 
But  the  Jail  (karagara)  is  built  in  a rather  out-of-the-way 
place,  such  as  the  Bhri&a,  or  the  Antariksha  part. 

All  these  are  given  by  way  of  illustrations,  the  most  part  of  the 
arrangement  being  left,  as  stated  here,  to  the  discretion  of  the 
artists,  and  the  choice  of  the  king  (166). 

EAJA.I^GI'A — The  royal  court,  persons  forming  the  king^s  suite  or 
council,  anything  related  to  the  king,  the  royal  palace. 

In  a chapter  (xLi),  named  Eajanga,  of  the  Manasara  are 
described  the  nine  classes  of  kings,  their  courts,  kingdoms,- 
royalties  and  some  special  characteristics. 

“ Had  a palace  (Eajanga)  built  for  G-oparaja  to  the  west  of  that 
pond.” 

(Ep.  Carnat,  vol,  x.  Malur  Taluq,  no.  4,  Eoman 
text,  p.  187,  Transl.  p.  166). 

EXJOHAKA — 'A  type  of  building,  a class  of  columns. 

(1)  Prak-patchimavalindav-anta-gatau  tad-avadhi-sthitau  seshau  I 

Euchake  dvaram  na  tubhadam  uttarato’  nyani  tastani  I) 

“ The  (building  called)  Euohaka  has  a western  and  eastern 
terrace  running  to  the  end,  and  between  their  extremities 
two  others.  A northern  door  in  it  brings  evil,  doors  on  any 
other  side  are  auspicious.” 

(Byihat-samhita,  Liil.  36,  J,  E.  A.  S.,  N.  8., 
vol.  VI.  p.  286). 

Sama-chaturatro  ruchakah— a column  with  four  rectangular 
sides  is  (called)  ruohaka  (ibid.  v.  28). 

A kind  of  quadrangular  building  : 

(2)  Agni-PuraDia  (chap.  104,  v,  14-16  has  ‘ Charuka  *,  see  under 

PrasSda). 

(3)  Qaru^a-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  24-26,  see  under  Prasada.) 


IiAMBANA 


627 


EUGHIEA — ^A  Mnd  of  pedestal  or  platform  at  the  bottom  of  a oolnmn, 
a portico. 

G-arbha-mana-pramanena  prasadam  tyinuta  dvijsb  1 
Vibbajya  navadba  garbham  madhye  syal  lii^a-pitbika  II 
Padashtakam  tu  ruobiram  partvatab  parikalpayet  \ 

Maoena  tena  yistaro  bbittinam  tu  vidhiyate  II 

(Matsya-Purapa,  chap.  269,  v.  16, 16) 
EUDEA-KANTA — ^A  type  of  building,  a class  of  columns. 

The  sixteen  sided  or  circular  pillars  (M.  xv.  21,  see  under 

Stambha). 

A class  of  four-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxii.  34-43,  see  under 

PrasSda). 

EUDEA-BANDHA — A kind  of  band,  an  ornament. 

(M.  LI.  69,  see  under  Bhushana), 
ETJPOTTAEA — A type  of  entablature  (see  Prastara). 

Of.  Athoohoham  pada-yistaram  rupottaram  ihoditam  I 

(KamikSgama,  Liy.  6,  etc). 

EAXJEAVA — ^A  type  of  storeyed  building. 

A class  of  nine-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxvii,  10,  see  under 

Frasada). 

L 

LAK8HMl-SK(-ST)AMBHA-- (see  Stambha) — A type  of  column ; the 
main  pillar  of  a house,  which  is  believed  to  be  the  abode  of  the 
guardian  angel  of  the  house. 

LAMB  AN  A — A pendant,  a moulding  of  the  front  portico. 

(M.  XVIII.  286,  see  Mukha-bhadra). 
{^ikharalambanantam  oha  vedi-tara-samanvitam  I 

(M.  XIX.  27). 

Lambanordhve  dalam  badhya..... I 

(Ibid.  39). 

Utsedhe  cha  tri-bhagaikam  tasyadho  ohagra-lambanam  I 

(Ibid.  170). 

Tr(i)yamtam  chagra-vistaram  lambanaih  pafioha-bhagikam  1 

(Ibid,  172). 

See  also  M.  xx.  26,  etc. 

A pendant  (M.  L.  16,  etc). 


LAMBA-PATBA 


LAMBA-PATRA — ^An.  ornament  shaped  like  a lea.! 

(M^  Id.  73,  see  Bhuahana). 

LAMBA-M An  k — The  measurement  along  the  plumb-lines. 

(M.  LV.  3-6,  see  under  Mana). 

LAMBA-HARA — A kind  of  long  necklace,  a pendant. 

_ . (M.  L.  301,  see  Bhuahana). 

LAI^Q-ALA— The  plough. 

^ For  its  architectural  details  see  Manasara  (chap.  v.  66-77). 

L AISIGALAKARA-— Any  thing  shaped  like  the  plough,  a pavilion  with 
three  faces,  a type  of  hall. 

(M.  XXXIV.  563,  see  under  Map^apa  ; 

XXXV.  67,  see  under  l§alal 

LAI^GALA-BHITTI — ^A  kind  of  wall  shaped  like  the  plough. 

Karne  lahgala-bhittih  syad  bhramaravrita-bahyake  1 

CM.  XXXIV.  333) 

Prapagraika-dvi-bhagam  va  karne  lahgala-bhittikam  l 

(Ibid.  226). 

LIl^GA — A distinguishing  mark,  a badge,  a symbol,  an  emblem,  the 
genital  organ,  the  image  of  a god,  an  idol,  the  emblematical 
phallus  of  l§iva. 

(1)  Manasara  (chap.  Lil.,  named  Lihga)  : 

Various  classifications  of  phalli  have  been  given  (line  2 f).  They 
are  classified  firstly  into  six  heads,  (1)  6aiva,  Patupata, 
Kala-mukha,  Maha-vrata,  Varna  and  Bhairava;  secondly 
into  four,  (2)  Sama-karna,  Vardhamana,  ^ivanka  and  Svas- 
tika  ; thirdly  into  four  with  regard  to  height,  (3)  Jati, 
Chhanda,  Vikalpa  and  Abhasa ; fourthly  into  three  types 
with  regard  to  breadth  or  width,  (4)  Nagara,  Bravi^a  and 
Vesara  (line  99) ; fifthly  into  five,  (6)  Svayambhu  or  Udbhuta, 
Daivika,  Manusha,  Ganava  and  Arsha;  sixthly  into  two,  (6) 
Atmartha  (for  one’s  personal  worship),  and  Parartha  (for 
others,  for  public  worship) ; again  into  two,  C7)  Eka  (single) 
linga,  and  Bahu-linga  (phalli  in  group) ; then  into  many 
kinds,  such  as  (8)  Vajra,  Svarna,  etc.,  with  regard  to 
materials  of  which  they  are  made ; and  lastly  into  two, 
(9)  Kshanika  (for  temporary  worship)  as  constrasted  with 


LIl^GA 


629 


the  (10)  Sthira  or  permanent-Hhga.  All  these  kinds 
of  phalli  are  des(3ribed  at  great  length.  Various  alternative 
measures  are  prescribed  for  each  of  them  (lines  13-376). 
In  some  cases  as  many  as  thirty-six  alternative  heights 
have  been  suggested.  But  in  most  oases  their  number  is 
nine.  The  nine  alternative  heights  of  a phallus  are  deter- 
mined  in  some  oases  by  a comparison  to  different  parts  of 
the  body  of  the  worshipper  (yajamana).  The  height  of  the 
Phallus  may  reach  the  worshipper’s  sex-organ,  naval, 
heart,  breast,  arm- joint,  chin,  nose,  eye,  or  be  equal  to  his  full 
height.  Another  comparative  measurement  is  given  with 
regard  to  the  Garbha-gyiha  or  adytum.  Various  absolute 
measures  are  also  given  in  some  oases.  The  set  of  the  nine 
alternatives  prescribed  for  height  may  begin  with  one  oubit 
and  end  with  four  cubits  and  a half,  the  increment  being 
by  half  a cubit.  The  breadth  or  width  of  the  phallus  is 
in  like  manner  discussed  at  great  length. 

(2)  Athatah  saihpravakshyami  lihga-lakshanam  uttamam  I 
Susnigdham  oha  suvarnam  oha  lihgam  kuryad  viohakshanah  II 
Prasadasya  pramapena  lihga'-manam  vidhiyate  I 
Lihga-manena  va  vidyat  prasadam  tubha-lakshanam  II 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  263,  v.  1-2). 
Etat  samanyam  uddishtam  prasadasyeha  lakshanam  I 
Tathanyam  tu  pravakshyami  prasadam  lihga-manatah  II 

(Ibid.  chap.  269,  Y.  7). 

Evaiii  ratna-mayam  kuryat  sphatikam  parthivam  tatha  i 
^ubham  daru-mayaih  ohapi  yad  va  manasi  roohate  II 

(Ibid.  chap.  263,  v.  26). 

(3)  In  the  Brihat-sarhhita  Clviii.  63-66),  where  Varahamihira 

seems  to  have  condensed  the  details  from  the  Matsya- 
Purana,  are  given  especially  the  architectural  characteris- 
tics : 

Lihgasya  vritta-paridhiih  dairghyenasutrya  tat  tridha  vibhajet  | 
Mule  tach  chaturatram  madhye  tv-ashtatri  vrittam  atah  II 

84 


630 


JjIMA 


Ohaturakam  avani-khate  madhyam  karyam  tu  pindika- 

§v-abhre  1 

Dyi§yoohohhrayena  sama  samanfcatah  pipdika  svabhrat  It 
“ (For  the  construction  of  an  emblem  of  Siva),  set  out  in 
the  length  the  (measure  of  the)  oiroumference  of  the  round 
part  and  divide  the  whole  phallus  into  three  portions,  of 
which  the  part  at  the  bottom  must  be  quadrangular,  that 
' in  the  midst  octangular,  and  the  rest  round,  (The  same 
shapes  are  prescribed  in  the  ManasSra).  Sink  the 
quadrangular  portion  into  a pit  in  the  earth  and  put  the 
middle  member  into  the  cavity  of  the  pedestal.  The 
pedestal  is  visible  upwards  to  its  cavity,  in  all  directions, 
over  an  extent  equal  to  its  height.” 

(Byihat-samhita,  l»vni.  63,  64,  d.  B,  A.  S., 
N.  8.,  vol.  VI.  p.  329,  notes  1,  2). 

(4)  Sarvesham  eva  liiiganam  lakshanam  trinu  sumpratam  II 
Madhya-sutram  samasadya  brahma-rudrantika  budhah  i 
Shodatangula-lihgasya  shad-bhagair  bhajito  yatha  II 
Tad  vaiyamaua-sutrabhyam  manam  antaram  uchyate  | 
Yavashtam  uttare  karyyam  teshanam  yava-hanitah  II 
Adho-bhagam  tridhfi  kritva  tv-arddham  ekam  parityajet  l 
Ash^adha  tad-dvayam  kyitva  urddha-bhaga-trayam  tyajec  II 
Urddhvam  cha  panchamad  bhagad  bhrarnya-rekhaiii  pralam- 

bayet  \ 

Bhagam  ekam  parity ajya  samgamam  karayet  tayob  II 
Etam  sadharanam  proktam  lihganam  lakshanam  maya  II 

(Agni-Purana,  chap..  63,  v.  8-13), 

(5)  Svayambhuvam  vana-lihgaiii  daivikam  charshakam  tu  iti  \ 
BhaCGI-aluavam  manusham  lihgaiii  shat  prakaram  prakirti- 

■ tarn  II 

(iCamikagama,  l.  36). 
Details  of  these  Lihgas  (see  ibid.  36-43)  are  the  same  as  given 
in  the  Munasara. 

The  Pitha  (pedestal)  of  the  Lihga  (phallus)  is  described. 

(Ibid,  44-62). 


LOSHTA 


5S1 


LI]^G-A-(MUDRA)“STAMBHA— -A  pillar  marked  with  the  Lihga  or 
, emblem  of  ^iva  (see  under  Stambha). 

LU(-U}PA— A sloping  and  projecting  member  of  the  entablature 

etc.,  representing  a continued  pent  roof ; it  is  made  below  the 

cupola,  and  its  ends  are  placed  as  it  were  suspended  from  the 
architrave  and  reaching  the  stalk  of  the  lotus  below. 

, (See  Ram  Eaz,  Ess.  Arch,  of  Hind.  p.  62). 

(1)  Atha  samkshipya  vakshyamo  lupanam  lakshanam  vayam  I 
Uttarasyanurupena  tasam  taram  udiritam  II 

(Vastu-vidya,  ed.  G-anapati  ^itstri,  x.  1,  f). 

(2)  Luparoha-kriya-yuktam  anyat  purvokta-vartmana  i 
Athava  sarva-talayam  luparohanam  eva  va  II 

fKamikagama,  xxxv.  69). 

(8)  In  connection  with  the  entablature : 

Lupakaram  tu  tat  kuryad  dalasyakritir  eva  va  \ 

(M.  XVI.  139,  see  also  20, 196). 
An  account  is  given  in  great  detail  (M.  xviii.  168-278,  xxx. 

132,  etc). 

The  Lupas  prescribed  for  temples  are  technically  called  ambara, 
■vyaya,  jyotis,  gagana,  vihayas,  ananta,  antariksha,  and 
pushkala ; and  those  for  residential  buildings  are  called  mahi, 
jya,  katyapi,  kshoni,  -Qrvi,  gotra,  vasum-dhara,  and  vasudha. 

(M.  XVIII.  177-184). 

LOSHTA — (see  Kalata) — A lump  of  earth,  a clod,  an  architectural 
object  resembling  partly  the  finial. 

The  Vastu-vidhya  (ed.  I^astri)  has  a chapter  (xvi)  named 
Mrit-losh^a-lakshana  (description  of  the  lump  of  earth). 
In  it  loshta  is  directed  to  be  built  on  the  sttipi  (top,  dome)  (v.  27, 
37).  At  the  top  of  a building  the  kalafea  (water-jar,  finial)  is 
generally  built.  It  is  variously  named  in  this  last  chapter  of 
the  work  : loshtani  (v.  28-30,  32),nivraTlo8htani  (v.  34),  krura- 
loshtani  (v.  36),  kona-losh^ani,  puta-losh^ani.urdhW-losh^ani  (v. 
36),  and  svarnadi-loshta  (v.  39). 


632 


LOHA 


LOHA — (see  under  Abhiisa')— Iron,  used  both  as  an  architeotuxal  and 
sculptural  material. 

One  of  the  metals  of  which  idols  are  made  : 

(1)  Mrinmayam  yadi  kuryach  chooh  ohhulam  tatra  prakalpayet } 

Ijohajam  tv-aviseshena  madhuohohhishtena  nirmitam  II 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxiv.  21). 

(2)  Evam  dvi-tryahgulaih  vapi  lohajaih  pratimodayam  \ 

(M.  xii.  119). 

Lohajair  mrit-sudha  chaiva,... t 

Uttamain  lohajam  bimbam  pithabhaaam  tu  chottamam  1 

(M.  LI.  6, 19). 

See  further  illustrations  under  Abhiisa. 

V 

VAKTRA-— -The  face,  a moulding. 

A moulding  of  the  column  (M.  xv.  212-219). 

The  face  (M.  lvii.  20,  etc). 

See  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  Adhishthana,  and  Upapitha. 
VAKRA — ^Bent,  winding,  curved,  curled,  a type  of  optangonal  building. 

(Garada-Purana,  chap.  47,  V.  21,  23,  31-32,  see 
under  Prasada). 

VAJRA— Adamantine,  forked,  zigzag,  a diamond,  the  thunderbolt  of 
Tndra,  a type  of  building,  a type  of  column,  a paste,  plaster 
or  cement. 

A column  with  eight  rectangular  sides  (Brihat-aamhita,  liii.  28). 
A paste,  plaster  or  cement : Kalkah  kyito  dvitiyo’yam  vajrakhyah  I 
(Brihat-samhita,  LVII.  6,  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  k, 
vol.  VI.  p.  322). 

A type  of  octangular  building  ; 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  v.  20-21,  see  uuder  Prasada). 

(2)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  37,  v.  21,  23,  31-32,  see  under 

Prasada). 

VAJBA-KANTA — A type  of  storeyed  building. 

A class  of  eleven-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxxiv.  19*26,  see  under 

Prasada). 


VAJEASANA 


333 

VAJEA-KTJMBHA— A moulding  of  the  base  and  the  pedestal, 
generally  placed  between  a cyma  and  petal ; it  is  so  called,  as  it 
resembles  an  elongated  pitcher. 

A moulding  of  the  base  (M.  xiv.  253,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 

under  Adhishthana). 

A moulding  of  the  pedestal  (M.  xiii.  74,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 

under  Upapitha). 

VAJEATARA — ’A  paste,  plaster,  cement, 

Vajrabaro  nama  kalko’nyah  1 (Brihat-samhita,  Lvii.  7,  J,  R.  A. 

S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  VI.  p.  822). 

VAJEA-PATTA — A moulding,  a diamond-band,  a fillet, 

A mouding  of  the  base  (M.  xiv.  268,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under 

Adhishthana). 

YAJEA-PADA — A diamond-pillar,  a type  of  small  pillar. 

A pillar  of  the  bedstead  (M.  xliv.  61). 

VAJEA-BANDHA — A diamond-band,  a type  of  base. 

A class  of  bases  (M.  xiv.  269-271,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under 

Adhishthana). 

VAJEA-LBPA— A paste,  plaster,  cement 
Kalko’yairii  vajra-lepakshah  \ 

• (Brihat-samhita,  lvii.  3,  see  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vi.  p.  321). 
VAJEA-I/I3?fGA — (see  Linga) — A kind  of  phallus. 

(M.  LI.  330,  see  under  Linga). 
VAJEA-SAl2[G-HATA-r--A  paste,  plaster,  cement. 

Maya-kathito  yogo’yam  vijiieyo  vajra-samghatah  l 

(Brihat-samhita,  lvii.  8,  see  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N,  S.,  vol.  vi.  p.  322). 
VAJRA-SVASTIKA— A type  of  buUding. 

A kind  of  octangular  building  (Agni-Purana,  chap.  104,  v.  20- 

21,  see  under  Prasada). 

VAJEASANA — (see  Bodhi-manda)— A diamond  throne,  the  miracu- 
lous throne  under  the  Bodhi-tree  at  Gaya,  on  which  Buddha 
and  his  predecessors  sat  when  attaining  perfect  wisdom. 

(1)  “ Bodhimanda  is  the  name  of  the  miraculous  throne  under  the 
Bodhi-tree  at  Bodh  Gaya,  also  called  the  Vajrasana  or 


634  VABHU-NXTAKA 

diamond-throne,  on  which  Bnddha  and  his  predecessors  sat, 
when  attaining  bodhi  or  perfect  wisdom.” 

(Ind.  Ant.  7ol.  XV.  p.  267,  0. 1-2). 
(2)  Tenaitad  atra  kritam  atma-manovad  uohohair  vajrasanasya 
bhavanam  bhnvanottamasya  \ . 

“ He  erected  here’for  the  diamond  throne,  the  best  thing  in 
the  world,  this  habitation,  lofty  like  his  own  mind.’V, 

(Grhpsrawa  Buddhist  Insorip.  line  14-16,  Ind. 
Ant.  vol.  XVII.  pp.  310,  311,  308,  note  6), 
VADHU-NATAKA—A  theatre  for  females,  a gallery,  a balcony. 
Vadhu-nataka-samghaife  oha  samyuktaih  sarvatah  purim  I 
Commentary:  vadhunam  nataka-tala  1 

(Eamayana,  i.  5, 12). 

VANA-BUECA—Ccf.  Nagara)— A forest-fort 

(See  details  under  Durga). 
VAPEA— "A  rampart,  a wall,  a mohlding  Of  the  base,  an  architectural 
member  at  the  upper  part  of  a building,  a summit,  a bank,  a 
mound,  a ditch,  the  foundation  of  a building,  the  gate  of  a town. 

(1)  Chatur-dandavaki’ishtaih  parikhayah  shad-dandoohohhritam 
avaruddharh  tad-dvi-guna-vishkambham  khatad  vapraih 
karayet  \ 

Vaprasyppari  prakaram ....i 

(Kautiliya-Arthafeastra,  ohap.’XXiv.  up.  61,  62). 

(2)  The  surrounding  wall  of  a village  : 

Gramasya  parito  bahye  rakshartham  vapra-samyutam  1 
Bahye  vapraih  suvirittakam V 

(M.  vm.  11,  ‘■^7). 

Evam  grama(in)-prasaram  cha  bahir  vapra-samyutam  I 
Paritah  parikha  bahye  vapra-yuktam  tu  karayet  1 

(M.ix.  61, 107,  see  also  147). 

In  oonneotion  with  towers  : 

Etat  pattanam  akhyatam  vaprayata-samanvitam  1 
Sarvesham  api  durganam  vapraiti  cha  parikhair  vyitam  1 

(M.  X.  66,  106). 

A moulding  of  the  base  (M.  -xiV.  20,  24,  etc.,  see  the  lists  of 
mouldings  under  Adhishthlina)* 


VIBITA 


535 


liiooiinectiOiiwifchbmldmgsofonefcotwelvestoreys: 
Adhishthana-samam  mafioham  mafioliordbiV6’rdh.0Ea 'vaprayukl 

(M.  xxi.  14,  eto): 

Malikopari  Yapram  syad  adhishthanam  samodayam  t 

(M.  XXXI,  64). 

(3)  Wall  (Dabhoi  Insorip.  v.  Ill,  Ep.  Ind.  Yol.  i.  p.  31). 

(4)  Eampart  (Badnagar  Pra&asfei  of  the  reign  of  Knmarapala, 

V.  23,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  i.  pp.  300,  303). 

(6)  Yasyottumga-turamga-tamdaYa-bhavah  pramsutkarah  sainikah 
svah -simasu  marud-ganabhaya-maha-Yapra-prakaro’bhavat  \ 
(Sridhara’s  Deyapattana  Pralasti,  v.  13,  Ep. 

Int.  vol.  II.  p.  441). 

(6)  Eamefevaraya  ghana-mamtapa-vapra-sandha-ramyalayam  sam- 
atanot  samata  rasajhab  | 

“ He  erected  a temple  (alaya),  adorned  with  a solid  hall 
(mantapa),  a wall  and  a plastered  mansion  (sandha)  to 
Eame&vara.” 

(Mangalagiri  Pillar  Insorip.  v.  39 ; see  also  v.  29, 
38,'48,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  VI.  pp.  123;121,  122,  124$ 
112, 113,  114, 115). 

(7)  Vapra-gopura-yutair  nava-harmyaih  I 

(Kondavidu  Insorip.  of  Krishnaraya,  v.  26,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  vr.  pp.  237,  231). 

(8)  “ He,  the  emperor  of  the  south,  caused  to  be  made  of  stone  for 
Vijaya-Narayana  (temple),  latticed  window,  secure  door-frame, 
(kavata),  door-lintel,  kitchen,  ramparts  (ndagra-vapra), 
pavilion,  and  a pond  named  the  Vasudeva-tirtha.*^ 

(Bp.  Oarnab,  vol.  V.  part  I,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  72, 
Transl.  p.  61,  Eoman  text,  p.  142,  line  8). 
VAPEA-BAKDHA — A type  of  base. 

A class  of  bases  (M.  xiv.  250-259,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under 

- Adhish^hana). 

VI(VAI)EATA — A type  of  storeyed  building,  a class  of  twelve- 
storeyed buildings  onoe  prevailing  in  the  country  of  Virata 
(Jaipur). 


536 


YABDHAKI 


Ghato-adhika-tri-dafea-bhagam  barmya-vi&alake  I 
Ashpmsena  33aaha-&ala  par&ye  &ala  fei-vamlakam  \ 

Dvyaih&am'  pafijara-kala  tad-ardham  ohantaralakam  \ 

Anufeala  tri-bhagam  syad  ekam&am  antaralakam  1 
r>?i(dvya)mfeam  pafijara-feala  cha  par&ve  bha(ha)rab  livam- 

&akam  \ 

KQta-nava(-naih  oha)  dvi-bbagam  syat  sarvam  yuktyam  sa-bbadra- 

kam  1 

Maba-^aia  yugam&ena  madbyam  atra  (bbadram)  prakarayet  \ 

Tale  tale  vimane  tu  ^ala-pabjara-sbodafeam  \ 

Ksbudra-tala  dvi'bara  cha  tan-madbye  cbasbtakam  bbavet  I 
Cbatur-diksbu  maha-feala  cbatusb-kutam  tale  tale  \ 

Evaiii  vairata-kantam  syaob  chbesbaifa  bhagain  tu  purvavat  I 

(M.  XXX.  17-27), 

TAEDHAKI — ^Au  arobiteot,  the  designer,  the  painter. 

(See  details  under  Sthapati). 

VAEDHANI — A type  of  building. 

A class  of  round  buildings  (Agni-Purana,  obap,  104,  v.  17-18,  see’ 

under  Prasada). 

VAEDSAMANA,— A class  of  buildings,  a type  of  ball,  a kind  of 
phallus,  an  entablature,  a joinery. 

(1)  A kind  of  joinery  (M.  xvii,  84). 

A class  of  &al38  or  balls  (M.  xxxv.  4,  see  also  303). 

A kind  of  phallus  (M.  Lii.  4). 

(2)  Dvaralindo’  nta-gatab  pradakshino^  oyab  tubbas  tatas  obanyab  \ 
Tad-Yacb  cha  vardhamane  dvaram  tu  na  daksbipam  karyam  II 

“ The  Vardhamana  has  a terrace  before  the  (chief)  entrance, 
extending  to.  the  end ; then,  when  you  proceed  in  a direction 
from  left  to  right,  another  beautiful  terrace  and  thereon 
again,  another  in  the  aforesaid  direction.  No  southern  door 
should  be  made  in  it.” 

(Byihat-samhita,  Llii.  33,  J.  B.  A.  S.,  N.  8.,  vol. 

VI.  pp.- 286-286), 

(3)  Vedasyam  vardhamanakam— the  Vardhamana  house  (tala)  has 
four  faces. 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  88). 
An  entablature  (Kamikagama,  Liv.  7). 


VALABfil 


S3f 

VA(BA)LABHI(-1)— The  roof,  the  frame  of  a thatch,  the  topmost  part 
of  a house,  a class  of  storeyed  buildiuga,  a type  of  entablature,  a 
class  of  rectangular  buildings,  a top-room,  a turret,  a balcony,  an 
awning,  a tent,  any  temporary  erection  on  the  flat  roof  of  a house. 

(1)  Tri-chandra-^ala  bhaved  valabhi  I 

“ The  roof  must  have  three  dormer-windows.” 

Br,  Kern  adds  the  following  : 

” Comm,  valabhi  vatayana;  vatayana  in  general  means  ‘ any 
place  whither  one  goes  to  take  an  airing ; sometimes  ‘ a 
window  ’ is  intended  by  it,  other  times  the  flat  ‘ roof  ’ of  an 
Indian  house.  In  the  latter  acceptation  it  is  here  used  by 
Utpala,  and  frequently  elsewhere;  e.g.  Katha-sarit-sagara 
(96,  18) : sva-grihottunga-vatayana-gat^h ; (103,  162) ; 
harmya-vatayanarudhah,  etc.” 

(Byihat-samhita,  nvi.  25,  Lvii.  4,  J,  R.  A.  S.,  N. 

S.,  vol.  VI.  pp.  319,  322,  note). 

(2)  A class  of  five-stomyed  'buildings  (Matsya-Purana,  chap.  269, 

V.  85, 60,  63,  see  under  Prasada). 
A type  of  rectangular  building  ; 

(3)  Agni-PurSpa  (chap.  204,  v.  16-17,  see  under  Prasada). 

(4)  Garu(jia-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  21-22,  26-27,  see  under  Prasada), 

(5)  Prasadagravimaneshu  valabhishu  cha  sarvada  \ 

(Ramayana,  II.  88,  6,  see  further  context  under  Prasada). 

(6)  .Naga-lokam aneka-vidha-prasada-harmya-valabhi- 

niryuha-^ata-samkulam  I 

(Mahabharata,  i.  3,  183), 

(7)  A synonym  of  the  entablature  (M.  xvi.  19,  see  under  Prastara), 
A moulding  of  the  entablature  (M.  xvi.  79,  see  the  lists  of 

mouldings  under  Prastara). 
In  connection  with  four-storeyed  biiildings  ; 
Nanadhishthana-padait  cha  valabhibhil  cha  bahu-vidhaih  \ 

(M.  XXII.  94). 

(8)  Kaila&a-tunga-sikhara-pratimani  ohanyany-abhanti  dirggha* 

valabhini  sa-vedikaui  I 
Gaudharwa-tabda-mukharspi  nivishta  chitra-karmmani  lola- 

kadali-vaua-sobhitani  II 


S88 


VALAtA 


“ And  other  long  buildings  on  the  roofs  of  the  houses,  with 
arboura  in  them,  are  beautiful,  being  like  the  lofty  summits 
of  (the  mountain)  Kailali a;  being  vocal  with  songs  (like 
those)  of  the  Gandharvas  ; having  pictured  representations 
arranged  (in  them);  (and)  being  adorned  with  groves  of 
waving  plantain  trees.” 

(Mandasor  stone  Inserlp.  of  Kumaragupta,  lines 
6-7,  C.  1. 1,  vol.  III.  F.  G.  I.  no.  18,  pp.  81,  85). 

(9)  punyabhivriddhy-artham  vad('l)abhim  kara(ya)yitva 

ananta-avaimi-padam  pratishthapya............  \ 

“ Having  caused  (a  temple  having)  a flat  roof  to  be  made,  for 

the  sake  of  increasing  the  religious  merit  of,... (aiid) 

having  installed  the  feet  of  (the  god)  Anantasvamin”.......,  . 

“ Vadabhi  (also  valabhi,  see  above)  is  explained  as  meaning 
the  wooden  frame  of  a roof ; a fiat  roof,  house-top,  top-room, 
turret,  top-floor,  balcony ; any  temporary  erection  on  the 
top  of  a palace ; an  awning,  a tent ; but  it  seems  to  refer  to 
a building  here,  and  to  denote  a flat-roofed  temple.” 

(Gadhwa  stone  lasorip.  line  2,  C.  1. 1,  vol.  iii.  F. 

G.  I.  no.  66,  p.  268,  note  9). 

(10)  “Whose  arms  like  jewelled  pihara  supporting  the  roof 
(valabhi)  of  the  three  worlds.” 

(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol.  v.  part  I,  Ohannarayapatna  Taluq, 
no.  179,  line  2,  Koman  text,  p.  462,  Transl.  p.  202). 

VALAYA— An  ornament,  a type  of  building,  a moulding. 

(1)  A bracelet  (M.  xlix.  138,  n.  33,  etc.,  see  Bhusbana). 

A class  of  round  buildings  : 

(2)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  v.  12-18,  see  under  Prasada). 

(3)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47.  v.  21, .23,  28,  29,  see  under  Prasada). 

(4)  the  sixth  moulding  from  the  top  of  an  entablature  (Kamika- 

gama,  Liv.  9,  see  under  Prastara). 

(6)  Bracelet  (Deopara  Insorip.  of  Vijayasen,  v.  11,  Bp.  Ind,  vol.  i. 

pp.  303,  313). 

VALLl— (of.  Vatayana) — ^A  type  of  window. 

(M.  XXXIII.  483,  see  under  Vatayana). 


YAMk 


VASATI*^(see  Basadi)-— A residence,  a shrine,  a Jain  monastery  or 
temple. 

(Jaina  Rook  lusorip.  at  VaUimalai,  no.  A,  v.  2, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  IV.  p.  141,  note  7,  and  refer  to 
Mr.  KitteFs  Dictionary,  p.  1383). 
VASUDHA— -The  earth,  a kind  of  pent  roof. 

(M.  XVIII.  178,  see  under  Lupa). 
VASTEA-NIP(Y)A— A jar-shaped  ornament  of  the  column. 

Kumbha-madhye  rakta(ratna)-bandham  vastra-nip(y)am  oha 

vinyaset  \ 
CM.  XV.  223). 

VACVA)HA-(KA,  LA) — Bearing,  carrying,  supporting,  a way,  a road, 
a vehicle,  a conveyance,  a river,  a channel. 

(1)  “Given  the  village  with its  hills  and  water-courses 

(vahala).” 

(Plate  of  Deva  Varmadeva,  line  8 f.,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XVI.  pp.  206,  207,  note  33), 

(2)  “Vahaka—a  water  channel  in  the  Gwalior  insorip.  of  Samvat 
933;  Hultzsoh  in  J.  D.  Morg  Ges.  vol.  XL.  p.  87;  (baha,  a 
water  course,  Elliot,  Suppl.  Glossary,  vol.  ii.  p.  226 ; Grierson, 
Bihar  pesant  life,  ss.  904)  ” 

(3)  V(b)allala-devakasya  vahah  1 

“ Water-channel  constructed  by  Ballaladeva.^’ 

(Lala-Pahad  Rook  Insorip.  of  Narasimhadeva, 
line  6,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  iviii.  pp.  212, 213,  note  2) . 
VAHANA— (see  under  Stambha)— Conveying,  carrying,  supporting, 
flowing,  a boat,  a raft,  a conveyance,  a part  of  a column. 
Stambham  vibhajya  navadha  vahanam  bhago  ghato’sya  hhago’ 

nyah  I 

(Brihat-samhita,  liii.  29,  J.  R.  A.  S.,  N.  S., 
vol.  VI.  p.  286). 

VAJStyA— ‘A  bamboo,  a shaft,  a flute,  a reed-pipe,  a cross-beam,  a 
joint,  the  backbone,  a term  for  the  rafters  and  laths  fastened  to 
the  beams  of  a house  (as  generally  made  of  split  bamboos),  or 
laths  running  across  a roof.’ 


S40 


VAMSA 


(1)  Bhojanam  ntoiivam&am  syaoh  olihayanam  oha  tathaiva  oha  I 
Anu'^am&a-griha-dvaram  naiva  karyaiii  lubharthibhi'h  II 
Dvija-gehasya  vamsam  tu  purvagram  parikalpayet  !i 
Yamyagraiii  kshatriy^aiii  tu  paschiiiiSgram  vifeam  bhavet  1 
Sudraiiam  uttarasyaiii  syad  esha  Yamtagrako  vidhih  II 

.(Kamikagama,  XXXV.  147,  149,  150). 
Prag-Yaiitsayor  anya-Yaifasait  cha  nalikera-daladibhih  I 
Aohcbhaditab  prapa  nama  prastaram  cbatra  mandapah  It 
Vam&adir  asmta-sabita  sikhara-stupikanvitah  t ■ 
Nasika-inukha-pattaiiita  ^aleti  parikirtita  II. 

(Ibid.  L.  88,  90). 

layanti  vam§aka  jneya  tula-vad  amimargakaBi  II 

(Ibid.  Liv.  16). 

Bandika-vara-samyuktam  shan-netra-sama-vamsakam  \ 
Vamtopari  gatab  talat  ohatasro’  sbtanananvitah  II 

(Ibid.  XLil.  19). 

(2)  The  backbone  (M.  vii.  264,  see  also  lxv.  168,  lxvii.  82). 

In  oonneotion  with  the  entablature  : 

Yatha-balam  yatha-bharam  tatha  vamtadi(m)  yojayet  I 

(M.XV1.198), 

In  connection  with  the  pillar : 

Kutya-vaih8a-prati(r)-vamfeam  tuhgam  yat  tu  samam  bhavet  \ 
Tungasyadhika-hinam  ohed  dvi-pahktim  nityam  avahet  1 

(M.  XVII.  120-121). 

In  oonneotion  with  the  pavilion  (mandapa) ; 

Adhishthanam  vina  kuryaj  janmadi-prastarantakam  I 
Athava  pada-vamfeaih  oha  samyuktam  tat  prapahgakam  I 

(M.  XXXIV.  14.-16). 

Vamsa-mulagrayoh  sarve  karkarikyita-netrakam  \ 

(Ibid.'396) 

In  oonneotion  with  the  hall  (tala) : 

Vamta-mulagrayor  vSsaih  vamta-mulaika-vasakam  I 

(M.  XXXV.  128) 

Harmya-tara-vatad  dvaram  vamksdhishthana-paduke  \ 

(M.  Lxiv.  6). 


VATAEA 


641 


VADI^A-KANTA— A class  of  twelve-storeyed  buildings  once 

prevailing  in  Vamfea.(ka)  (the  capital  of  Kanfeambi). 

Tad  eva  haraih(-ra)  taii-madhye  ohaika-bhagena  saushtikam  I 
Vamka-kantam  iti  proktam  ^eshaiii  purvavad  aoharet  II 

(M.  XXX.  31-32,  see  also  28-30  under  Kerala-kauta). 
VA  JANA — A square  or  rectangular  moulding  resembling  a fillet,  i.e., 
a small  band  which  is  placed  between  mouldings  and  as  the 
uppermost  member  of  a cornice. 

Urdhva-vaianam  ekam&am  amsam  tat  pattika  bhavet  \ 

(Vastu-vidya,  ed.  ^astri,  ix.  24). 
The  moulding  at  the  top  and  bottom  of  the  entablature  (Kamika- 
gama.  liv.  1,  see  under  Prastara). 
A crowning  moulding  of  a column  (Suprabhed^ama,  xxxi.  108,  sea 

under  Stambha), 

A moulding  of  the  pedestal  (M.  xiii.  46,  61,  etc.,  see  the  lists  of 

mouldings  under  Upapitha). 
A crowning  moulding  of  the  base  (M.  XIV.  9,  see  the  lists  of  mould- 
ings under  Adhishthana). 

A moulding  of  dola  (swing,  hammock); 

Vajane  oha  dvi-valayam  syad  ayasena  balabalam  1 

(M.  L.  106). 

VAJI-^ALA — A horse -stable. 

(M.  XL.  362,  see  under  6ala). 
VATA—A  road,  a fence,  an  enclosure,  a courtyard. 

Cf.  Vata-bhumi  (Kamikagama,  xxi.  3). 

Corrupted  to  Bada,  “ enclosure  of  a town  or  village,  fence,  wall, 
hedge.^’ 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  iv.  p.  211,  foot  note  under  Kampanab 
VATAKA— A hamlet. 

Tamara-bheru-gramo  nama  I 
Chikhali-vatakena  samam  ekikritya \ 

“ The  village  named  Tamara-oheru  combined  with  the  Chikhali 
hamlet." 

(The  Madras  Museum  Plates  of  Vajrahasta  iii,  lines 
43-44,  Ep,  Ind.  vol.  ix.  pp.  98-96). 


642  VATIKA 

TATIKA— A small  house,,  a garden-house,  a,  pleasure -pavilion,  an 
orchard. 

Vame  bhage  dakshine  va  .>nripanam  tredha  karya  vatika  kridan- 
artiham  1 

‘ At  the  left  or  right  side  a three  fold  pavilion  should  be  built  for 
the  sport  of  the  kings.’ 

(I^ilpa-tastra-sara-samgraha,  ix.  29). 
Uttare  saralais  talaih  tubha  syat  pushpa-vatika  i 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap,  270,  v.  29). 
Bhaktya  vidhapitam  ohabhyam  amralohita-mamdirarh  (ma)tri-ha 
(rmyelna  (samyu)ktani  vapya  vatikayapi  hi  \ 

“ Out  of  devotion  he  caused  to  be  erected  a temple  of  red  colour 
and  surrounded  it  with  shrine  of  some  mata  (?  three  shrines), 
a step-well  and  an  orchard.” 

(Bhanop  Insorip.  of  Chaohcha,  v.  6,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XL.  pp.  176,  174). 

YATA — ^A  type  of  building,  a house  with  an  eastern  and  southern 
hall. 

(Brihat-samhita,  Liii,  39,  see  under  Prasada). 
VATA-KSHETRA — ^(see  Yatayana) — A place  for  airing,  a roof. 
iCutumba-bhumi-manam  tu  vata-kshetra-vivarjitam  I 

(Kamikagama,  xxi.  3). 

YANA-LI^GA — ^A  kind  of  phallus. 

(Kamikagama,  l.  36,  36,  see  under  Lihga). 
YATAYANAr— A window,  a porch,  a portico. 

(1)  Description  of  windows  (M,  xxxin.  668-697); 

Windows  are  constructed  in  all  kinds  of  buildings  (ibid.  569- 

672). 

The  latticed  windows  are  also  prescribed  : 

Naranam  jalakam  sarvam  devanam  api  yogykam  I (672). 

The  measures,  etc.,  are  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  architects 
(673). 

The  general  plan  of  windows  is  also  given  (674-681). 

Their  shapes  are  represented  by  the  following  : naga-bandha 
(snake’s  band),  valli  (creeper),  gavaksha  (cow’s  eye),  kuh- 
jaraksha  (elephant’s  or  deer’s  s eye),  svastika  (a  figure), 


VlPT 


543 


sarvato*bliadra  (a  figure), nandyavarta  (a figure),  and  pualipa- 
bandha  (fl.ower-band)  (ibid.  582-684). 

Their  architectural  details  are  given  (686-600), 

(2)  Udag-a§rayam  oha  varunyam  vatayana-samanvitam  ! 

(G-aruda-Purana,  chap.  46,  V.  16). 

(3)  Praka&artham  alpam  urdhvam  vatayanau)  karayet  I , 
Pratiloma-dvara-vatayana-badhayain  oha  anyatra  raja-marga- 

rathyabhyah  1 

(Kautiliya-Axtha&astra,  chap.  Lxv.  p.  167). 
yAPI(-Pl)-(KA.) — A tank,  a well,  a reservoir  of  water. 

(1)  A tank  (Dewal  Pra&asti  of  Lalla  the  Ohhinda,  v.  20,  Bp.  Ind. 

vol.  i.  pp.  79,  83). 

(2)  “ A well  with  a flight  of  stairs,  while  Kupa  denotes  an  ordinary 

well.” 

(Mahefevara^s  commentary  on  the  Amarakosha, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  vii.  p.  46,  note  2 ; p.  41,  line  68). 

(3)  Bakshina-di&abhage  karapita  vapi  taths  prapeyam  oha  1 

“ In  the  southern  part  there  has  been  made  an  irrigation-well 
and  also  a watering- trough.” 

(Grant  of  Bhimadeva  ii,  V.  8.  1266,  line  26-27, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  XVIII.  pp.iillS,  116). 

(4)  Vapi-putake  bhumi-hala-vaha  I 

“ In  the  hollow  ground  below  an  irrigation-well.” 

(Grant  of  Bhimadeva  II,  Simba-samvat  93,  line  7, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol,  xvni.  p.  110). 
(6)  “ During  the  reign  of  Ganapati,  the  son  of  the  prince  Gopala, 
the  thakkura  Vamana  built  a public  tank  (vSpikS).” 

(Sarwaya  stpne  Insorip.  of  Ganapati  of  Nalapura, 
V.  23-28,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xxii.  p,  82). 
(6)  Dharmmarthe  svayam  eva  vapi  karapita  l 

‘ For  charitable  purpose  the  step- well  was  caused  to  be  oons- 
at  his  own  cost.’ 

(Manglan  stone  Insorip.  line  6,  Ind.  Ant.  vol. 

XLI.  p.  87), 


m 


vama 


VAMA— A kind  of  phallus. 


(M,  Lii.  3,  see  under  Liuga). 
VABA— A day  of  the  week,  a door,  a gate,  a formiila  of  arohiteotural 
measurement. 


(See  details  under  Shad-varga). 
VAEA-(KA,  NA) — cohering,  an  enclosure,  a door,  a gate. 
Bamikagama,  xxx : 

Alindasya  samantat  tu  bhagenaikena  varakam  1 
■parkvayor  uhhayob  ohaivaohagra-fealanusaratah  II  77 
Ibid,  xxxy; 

Etat  sapta-talam  proktam  rajiiam  avasa-yogyakam  II  84 
Tad-adhastat  samantat  tu  bhSgenaikena  varakam  II  86 
^ala-bhage  tu  alinde  va  pfithu-varamkake  api  \ 

Vinyasas  tv-ish^a  akbyato  mandapa  ukta-bhumike  II  93 
Vinirgamasya  ohayamo  tad-vyiddhya  tasya  vistarah  \ 

Evi-gunanto  vidheyah  syad  evam  sySn  madhya*varanam  I!  102 
Madhya-varana-yuktam  va  tad-vihinam  tu  ya  dvijah  \ 
Evambhutasya  vasasya  samantat  syat  khadurika  II  103 
Ibid.  XLV  : 

Bahu  varga-yutani  vSpi  dandikS-vSra-kobhitam  1116 
Parito  varam  ekamkam  kala-vyaso  dvi-bhagatah  II  23 
Bahir-v&ra-samayuktam  vyasa-parkva-dvayor  api  II  26 
Samklishta-vara-samyuktam  sbatsu  ohardba-sabha-mukham  I!  28 
Purvokta-8indukam(  = a building)  vara-vrikaha-stbala- 

samanvitam  II  31 

Agre  oha  parkvayok  obaiva  kuryad  ekamka-varakam  II  38 
Tad-bahir  varam  ekamkam  tad-babye  tu  vrisha-sthalam  i 
Tad-babik  cba  chatur-dikshu  dvyamkamkahi  vSra-nisbkramah  II  43 
See  also  verses  44, 46,  46,  56,  66,  etc. 

Ibid.  XLil ; 

Utkrisb^e  tu  ankanam  dvyamkam  margas  tu  parito’mkatah  1 
Antar-varam  atbaikena  kala-vyaso  dvi-bbagatab  11  23 
See  M.  IX,  300,  619 ; xxxni.  383 ; xxxiv.  119,  190,  200,  394,  408, 
614,  621,  626,  629 ; xxxv.  100,  120,  123,  238,  243,  266  ; xXxix. 
128,  etc. 


VASTU 


646 


VASANTKA—^A  dwelling  for  iise  in  spring,  a house  for  the  spring 
festiyal. 

Tatha  vanik-Mahallakena  satka  vasanika  pradatta — “by  the 
Mahallaka  the  satka  (‘?)  hamlet  (?  house)  was  given.” 

Pasohimatah  thakkiira-kumflanakasya  vasanika  maryada — “ to  the 
west  the  boundary  is  the  dwelling  of  the  Brahman  Kiiiidana.” 

^Shergadh  stone  Inscrip.  lines  12,  13,  14, 
see  also  9,  10,  11,  lud.  Ant.  vol,  XL.  p.  176). 

VASA-EANGrA  - (see  Bauga)”— The  open  or  closed  quadrangular 
eiioloBure,  the  courtyard  of  a residential  building. 

Pnrato’liudam  okaihsam  bhittiih  knryat  sainantatali  \ 

Mfilagre  dvi-dvi-bhagena  vasa-raugam  oha  kalpayet  I 

(M.  XXXV.  118-119). 

VASTU — Architectujte  in  the  broadest  sense  implying  the  earth 
(dhara),  building  (harmya),  conveyance  (yana),  and  bedstead 
(paryahka)  (M.  m.  2-3).  The  building  or  Harmya  includes 
prilsada,  mandapa,  sabha,  sala,  prapa,  and  (a)rahga.  The 
conveyance  or  Yana  includes  adika,  syandana,  tibika,  and 
ratha.  The  bedstead  or  Paryanka  includes  panjara,  inanohali, 
mancha,  kakiishta,  phalakasana,  and  bala-paryahka  (ibid.  7-12). 
The  term  denotes  also  villages,  towns,  forts,  commercial 
cities,  etc. 

Sculpture  is  the  handmaid  of  architecture  and  is  secondarily 
implied  by  the  term  Vastu. 

(2)  Nagaradika-vastum  oha  vakshye  rajyadi-vriddhaye  1 

(Agni-Purana,  chap,  106,  v.  1). 

(3)  Prasadarama-durga-devalaya-mathiidi-vrvstu-iuaiia-lakshana- 

nirupanam  \ 

(G-aruda-Purana,  chap.  46,  colophon). 
Of : Avasa-vasa-vesmadau  pure  grame  vap.ik-pathe  II 
Prasadarama-durgeshu  devalaya-matheshu  oha  \ 

(Ibid.  chap.  46,  v.  2-3). 

85 


546 


VASTU 


(4)  Samgraha-siroman.!  by  Sarayu  Prasada  (xx.  1)  qnotes  from  oae 

Vasish^ba  without  further  reference  ; 

Vastu-juanaih  pravakshyami  yad  uktaih  brahmana  pura  I 
Grama-sadma-puradinaih  nirmanam  vakshyate’  dhuna  II 

(5)  Griham  kshetram  aramas  setu-bandhas  tatakam  adharo  va 

vastuh — Houses,  fields,  gardens,  buildings  of  any  kind  (see 
Setu),  lakes  and  tanks  are  each  called  Vastu. 

(Kaufeiliya-Arthakastra,  chap.  Lxv,  p.  166). 

(6)  The  heavenly  architect  Vikvakarman,  the  mythical  originator  of 

Vastu,  is  stated  to  be  the  father  of  nine  artiaans-r-goldsmith 
(svarna-kara),  blacksmith  (karma-kara),  braaier  or  utensil- 
maker  (kamsya-kara),  maker  of  shell -ornaments  (sankha- 
kara),  carpenter  (sutra-dhara),  potter  (kumbha-kara), 
weaver  (kiivindaka),  painter  (chitra-kara),  and  liorist, 
gardener  or  garland-maker  (mala-kara). 

(Brahmavaivarta-Purana,  Brahma-khanda, 
chap.  10,  V.  19-12). 

(7)  On  the  different  branches  of  architecture  Vitruvius  agrees 
with  the  Manasara  (1)  : 

It  might  be  pointed  out  that  Vitruvius  deals  with  similar 
objects,  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  Manasara.  He 
describes  the  subject  ill  three  chapters  : 

“ Of  those  things  on  which  architecture  depends.” 

“ Of  the  different  branches  of  architecture.” 

“ Of  the^choice  of  healthy  situations.” 

On  the  first  of  these  topics  Vitruvius  says  that  Architecture 
depends  on  fitness  and  arrangement ; it  also  depends  on 
proportion,  uniformity,  consistency  and  economy.” 

“ Fitness  is  the  adjustment  of  size  of  the  several  parts  to  their 
several  uses  and  requires  due  regard  to  the  general  propor- 
tions of  the  fabric  ; it  arises  out  of  dimensions.  Dimension 
regulates  the  general  scale  of  the  work,  so  that  the  parts 
may  all  tell  and  be  effective.” 

Proportion  is  that  agreeable  harmony  between  the  several 
parts  of  a building,  which  is  the  result  of  a just  and  regular 


VXSTU 


64? 


agreement  of  them  with  each  other ; the  height  to  the  width, 
this  to  the  length,  and  each  of  these  to  the  whole.  Unifor- 
mity is  the  parity  of  the  parts  to  one  another  ; each  corres- 
ponding to  its  opposite,  as  in  the  human  figure.  The  arms, 
feet,  hands,  fingers  are  similar  to  and  symmetrical  with  one 
another  ; so  should  the  respective  parts  of  a building  corres- 
pond.” 

“ Arrangement  is  the  disposition  in  their  just  and  proper  places 
of  all  the  parts  of  the  building  and  the  pleasing  efieot  of  the 
same,  keeping  in  view  its  appropriate  character.  It  is 
divisible  into  three  heads,  which  considered  together,  cons- 
titute design : these,  by  the  Greeks,  are  named  ideals  : 
they  are  called  ichnography,  arthography,  and  soinography. 
The  first  is  the  representation  on  a plane  of  the  ground- 
plan  of  the  work,  drawn  by  rule  and  compasses.  The  second 
is  the  elevation  of  the  front,  slightly  shadowed,  and  shewing 
the  forms  of  the  intended  building.  The  last  exhibits  the 
front  and  a receding  side  properly  shadowed,  the  lines 
being  drawn  to  their  proper  vanishing  points.”  (Book  I, 
chap.  il). 

“ Architecture  consists  of  three  branches,  namely,  building, 
dialling  and  mechanics.  Building  is  divided  into  two  parts, 
(in  the  Manasara,  buildings  are  divided  into  six  classes  as  we 
have  seen  above).  The  first  regulates  the  general  plan  of 
the  walls  of  a city  and  its  public  buildings  ; the  other  relates 
to  private  buildings.  Public  buildings  are-  for  three  pur- 
poses : defence,  religion  and 'the  security  of  the  public,” 
(compare  M.  xxxi.  1-2  under  Prakara). 

(Ibid.  Book  I,  chap.  III). 

On  the  choice  of  healthy  situation,  that  is,  on  the  selection  of 
site  aud  the  examination  of  soil,  directions  of  Vitruvius 
are  not  so  elaborate  as  those  of  the  Manasara  (see  Bhu- 
pariksha) , and  differ  so  far  as  two  different  climates  would 
necessarily  require. 


548 


VASTU-KAEMAN 


“ The  choice  of  a healthy  situatioD.  is  of  the  first  importance  : 
it  should  be  on  high  ground,  neither  subject  to  fogs  nor 
rains  ; its  aspects  should  be  neither  violently  hot  nor  inten- 
sely cold,  but  temperate  in  both  respects.  The  neighbonr- 
hood,  of  a marshy  place  must  be  avoided.” 

(Ibid.  Book  I,  chap,  iv). 

VASTXJ-KABMAN— (of.  Vastu-vidya)— The  building-work;  the  actual 
work  of  constructing  temples,  palaces,  houses,  villages,  towns, 
forts,  tanks,  canals,  roads,  bridges,  gates,  drains,  moats,  sewers, 
thrones,  couches,  bedsteads,  conveyances,  ornaments  and  dresses, 
images  of  gods  and  sages. 

The  huilding-work  (vastu-karman)  is  distinguished  from  the  science 
of  building  (vastu-vidya)  : 

Vatthn-vijja  ghara-vatthn-arama-vatthadinam  guna-dosa-sallak- 
khana-vijja  I Vathn-kammanti  • akata-vatthuinhi  geha-patittha- 
pana  1 

(Digha-nikaya,  I.  pp.  9,  12) 

Gf.  $ukra-niti  (iv.  3.  116, 116, 169). 

See  the  Preface  to  this  Dictionary. 

VASTU-EJRTI — A type  of  pavilion,  a pavilion  with  forty-four  pillars, 
,Mabsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  V.  10,  see  Mandapa). 

VASTU-VIDYA — (see  Vastu-karman)— The  science  dealing  with  the 
rules  of  construction  of  all  kinds  of  architectural  and  sculptural 
objects,  the  science  of  architecture. 

According  to  Buddhaghosha’s  definition,  Vastu-vidya  is  ‘ a science, 
the  object  of  which  is  to  ascertain  whether  a site  selected  for  a 
building  is  lucky  or  not.  ’ 

(Dialogues  of  Buddha,  part  I,  p.  18). 

According  to  Sukracharya,  Vastu-vidya  or  l^ilpa^tastra  is  ‘the  science 
which  deals  with  the  rules  for  the  construction  of  palaces,  images, 
parks,  houses,  canals  and  other  good  works.’ 

V^nkra-niti,  iv.  3. 116-116). 

See  the  Harsha  stone  Inscrip,  (v.  43,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  ii.  pp,  123, 

128). 


VUaYA 


549 


VAHAN A— Carrying,  conveying,  a vehicle,  a conveyance,  an  animal 
for  riding  or  draught. 

The  riding  animals  of  gods  (M.  lx.  1),  their  images  are  described 
(M.  LX.  2,46  ; LXi.  2-161  ; Lxii.  2-73 ; LXiii.  2-46),  see  under 
Hamsa,  G-aruda,  Vyishabha,  and  Simha. 

VAHINtMUKHA— A fort,  a fortified  city. 

(M.  X.  40,  see  under  ISfagara  and  Durga). 
VIKATA — Formidable,  a hall,  a courtyard. 

(Harsha  stone  Inscrip,  v.  12,  33.  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  ii. 

pp.  121,  126,  notes  64, 123,  128). 
VIKALPA — A class  of  buildings,  a kind  of  door,  a type  of  chamber, 
a kind  of  phallus. 

A class  of  buildings  (M.  xi.  104-107  ; xix.  1-5  ; xxx.  176-177  ; xxxiv. 

549-662,  see  under  Abhasa). 
A type  of  door  (M.  xxxix.  28-36,  see  under  Abhasa). 

A kind  of  phallus  (M.  m.  49,  see  under  Abhasa). 

Karne  §ala  sabha  madhye  chhandam  syaoh  ohhandam  eva  tat  \ 
Tat-tad-madhyamsake  koshthe  yasya  syat  tad  vikalpakam  11 

(Kamikagama,  xlv.  20,  see  also  xlv.  7,  L.  13), 

A class  of  top-chambers  (Kamikagama,  Lv.  130,  123-127). 
VIGEAHA — An  idol,  an  image,  a figure,  a form,  a shape. 

(M.  Liv.  180,  etc). 

Dakshina-bhagada-kisaleyalli  puratana-vigrahagala  pratish- 
they  am — “ set  up  on  the  colonnade  to  the  south  the  ancient 
images.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  iv.  Chamarajnagar  Taluq,  no.  86, 
Eoman  text,  p.  18,  line  13,  Transl.  p.  11). 
VIJAYA — A class  of  storeyed  buildings,  a type  of  pavilion  and  hall, 
a kind  of  throne. 

A class  of  two-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xx.  93,  10-16,  see  under 

Prasada). 

A class  of  pavilions  (M.  xxxiv.  163,  see  under  Mandapa), 

A type  of  throne  (M.  XLV,  6,  see  under  Simhrisana) 

A pavilion  with  forty-six  pillars 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  10,  see  under  Mandapa), 


650  yiTAteA 

A class  of  octagonal  buildings : 

(1)  Agni-Pnrana  (chap.  104,  v.  20-21,  see  under  Prasada), 

(2)  G-aradla-Pura]9a  (chap,  47,  v.  21, 23,  31-32,  see  under  Prasada) 
A type  of  building  (Kamikagama,  xm,  60,  see  under  Malika). 

yiTAl^KA — (see  Kapota-palikS) — 'A  dovecot,  a moulding  of  that 
shape. 

“ V4a6ka  is  exactly  the  English  ‘fillet’  in  its  different  accepta- 
tions; it  denotes  more  generally  also  gable-edge,  battlement.” 
Kern. 

(J.  B.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  VI.  pp.  321,  320,  note  2). 
See  further  references  under  Kapota  and  Kapota-palika. 
yiTASTI — (see  under  Angula) — A measure,  the  span,  the  distance 
between  the  tips  of  the  fully  stretched  thumb  and  the  little 
finger. 

(1)  Kanishthaya  vitastis  tu  dva-dafeangula  uohyate  \ 

(Brahmand.a-Purana,  part  I,  2nd  anushamga- 
pSda,  chap.  7,  V.  98). 

(2)  Three  kinds  of  span  (SuprabhedSgama,  xxx.  20-23,  see  under 

Angula). 

yiTANA-(KA) — A cushion,  a canopy. 

A canopy  of  pearls  (Eanganath  Insorip.  of  Sundarapandya,  v. 

12,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  III.  pp.  12,  16). 
Cf : ‘ Torana-vitana — canopy  (in  the  shape)  of  an  arch.  ’ 

(Cochin  plates  of  Bhaskara  Bavivarman,  lines, 
10-11,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  III.  pp.  68,  69). 
yiDYADHAEA — A class  of  demi-gods,  a kind  of  fairy. 

Their  images  are  measured  according  to  the  nine  tala  (see  details 
under  Tala-mana). 

(M.  LVin.  6,  other  details  ; 7-14). 

YIDHANA — ^An  entablature. 

(M.  XVI.  20,  43,  203,  see  under  Prastara). 
yiNIYOGA-MANpAPA— A refectory,  a type  of  pavilion  built  in  the 
third,  fourth  or  fifth  court  of  the  compound  of  a temple,  where 
refections  or  meals  are  prepared, 

(M,  XXXII.  8,  see  under  Mandapa), 


VIMlNA 


651 


VIPULAlsfKA — A type  of  storeyed  building,  a class  of  six -storeyed 
buildings. 

(M.  XXIV.  19,  see  under  Prasada). 
VIPULAKRITIKA — A type  of  storyed  building,  a class  of  six- 
storeyed buildings. 

(M.  XXIV.  52,  see  under  Prasada), 
VIPRA-KAN  TA — A ground-plan  in  which  the  whole  area  is  divided 
into  729  equal  squares. 

(M.  VIII.  39-40,  see  under  Pada-vinyasa), 
VIPRA-G-ARBHA — A ground-plan  in  which  the  whole  area  is  divided 
into  67G  equal  squares. 

(M.  VII.  33-34,  see  under  Pada-vinySsa). 
VIPRA-BHAK.TI—'A  ground-plan  in  which  the  whole  area  is  divided 
into  841  equal  squares. 

(M.  VII.  43-44,  see  under  Pada-vinyasa). 
VIMANA — Etymologically  implies  an  object  measured  (from 
root  ma)  or  prepared  or  made  in  various  ways,  a conveyance^ 
a baloon,  a heavenly  car,  a temple,  buildings  in  general,  the 
palace  of  an  emperor,  a tower  surmounting  the  sanctuary 
(garbha-gyiha)  which  is  made  in  the  centre  of  the  temple. 

“ A car  or  chariot  (of  the  gods)  sometimes  serving  as  seat  or 
throne,  sometimes  self -moving  and  carrying  its  occupants  through 
the  skies ; other  descriptions  make  the  Vimana  more  like  a house 
or  palace  and  one  kind  is  said  to  be  seven  stories  high  ; that  of 
Ravana  was  called  Pushpaka-fvimana) ; any  oar  or  vehicle ; 
a horse ; a palace,  the  palace  of  an  emperor  or  supreme  monarch.^’ 
Of.  Rajato-vimanam  sapta-ohakram  ratham  I (Pet.  diet.). 

(1)  Manasara  (chap.  XVIII.,  named  Vimana,  1-422) : 

Vim  anas  are  buildings  of  one  to  twelve  storeys  and  are  used  as 
residences  of  gods  and  men,  i.e.,  the  term  implies  both  temples 
and  residential  buildings : 

Taitilanam  dvi-jatinam  varnanam  vaea-yc^yakam  I 
Eka-bhumi-vimanadi  ravi-bhumy-avasanakam  1 


(Ibid,  2,  3), 


652 


VIMANA 


That  the  term  ‘ Vimana  ’ implies  not  temples  alone  but  build- 
ings in  general,  is  clear  from  the  expression  ‘vimana-ve&man^, 
‘vimana-sadman’,  * deva-vimana  ^ (god’s  buildings),  etc., 
which  are  freouently  mentioned  (e.  g.,  M.  xii,  214). 

Further,  the  general  features  of  all  kinds  of  buildings  are 
described  in  the  chapter  (xvili)  which  is  named  Vimana  : 

The  general  comparative  measures  of  different  storeys  are  given 
(ibid.  12-91). 

The  three  styles,  namely,  Nagara,  Dravida  and  Vesara,  are 
described  (92-113). 

These  styles  are  distinguished  generally  by  the  shapes  of  the 
stupis  (domes),  which  are  next  described  (114-171). 

A special  account  of  the  lupas  (pent-roofs)  which  are  appa- 
rently very  characteristic  features  of  ail  buildings  is  eiven 
(171-278).  ® 

Mukha-bhadras  (front  porticoes  or  tabernacles)  are  also 
charaoteritsic  features  of  all  buildings,  large  or  small,  and 
they  are  described  in  detail  (279  fj. 

Spires  (stupi-kilas)  are  also  described  (144-171,  364-417). 
Vimanasya  tu  aarvesham  prajapatyena  manayet  I 

(M.  II.  66,  see  also  iii.  6-6,  xiy.  426,  etc). 

VimSne  tri-grihe  vapi  mandapadini  vastuke  \ 

Gramadinam  cha  sarvesham  manayen  maua-sutrakam  1 

(M.  VI.  101-102). 

Purusham  deva-vimanasya  sthapayet  purusheshtakam  I 

(M.  XII.  214). 

A tower; 

Tad-iirdhve  oha  vimanam  oha  vedika-vedikantakam  I 

(M.  xxii.  57). 

Mandape  dve  vimanam  syad  ekam  va  dvi-talarh  tu  va  I 

(M.  xxxiy.  221), 


vimAna 


553 


(2)  Bamayana,  I.  6,  16  : 

Sarva-ratna-samakirnam  vimana-griha-'sobhitam  1 
Commentary  : Vimana-griharii  sapta-bhumi-griham  (a  soven- 
storeyed  building),  and  quotes  the  following  from  Nighantu  : 
Vimano’stri  deva-yane  (god’s  conveyance)  sapta-blmmau  cha 
sadmani  (seven-storeyed  building). 

See  also  the  following : . 

II,  88,  6 : Prasadagra-vimanesliu  valabliishii  cha  sarvada  I 
(See  further  context  under  Prasada) , 

II.  2,  16 ; IL  15,  48 ; ii.  33,  3 ; ii.  67,  18  ; ii.  69,  12 ; il.  88,  5 ; 
III,  32,  4 ; IV.  60,  30  ; V.  2,  63 ; V.  4,  27  ; V.  6,  1 ; V.  10,  34 ; 
V.  12, 14 ; V.  12,  26 ; V.  13,  1 ; Y.  63,  19;  V.  64,  23  ; vi.  24, 
10;  VI.  39,  21;  Vl.  67,  82;  vi.  76,23;  vi,  76,  40  ; vii. 
101,14. 

(3)  Mahabharata,  i.  185,  23  : 

Nana-prakareshu  vimaneshu  I 

(4)  Commentary  quotes  Medinx  (N.  121) : Vinanam  vyoma-yane 

sapta-bhdmi-grihe’  pi  ohet  \ 

See  the  following  Koshas  also  : 

(6)  Hema-chandra  (Abhidhana-ohintamani,  89,  190  ; 3,  417). 

(6)  Halayudha  (I,  83,  etc). 

(7)  Amarakosha,  (I.  1,  1 ; 4,  3,  36,  Pet.  Diet.). 

The  essential  parts : 

(8)  Shad-varga-sahitam  yat  tu  garbha-griha-samanvitain  \ 
Andharandhari-harokta-khanda-harmya-vi^eshitam  II 
Kuta-^alanvitam  yat  tu  panjarai^  cha  samanvitam  1 
Tilaka-kshudra-nasi-yukta-toranaife  cha  samanvitam  I 
Brahma-dvara-patSkadyair  angair  yuktam  viinanakam  li 

(Kamikagama,  L.  91-93). 

A type  of  quadrangular  building : 

(9)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  v.  14-15,  see  under  Prasada). 

(10)  G-aruda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  24-25,  see  under  Prasada). 


664 


VIMlHA 


(11)  “There  is  one  other  peculiarity  common  to  both  Jain  and 

Hindu  architecture  in  the  north  of  India  that  requires 
notice.  It  is  the  form  of  the  towers  or  spires  called  si kras  or 
Yiman  as  which  invariably  surmount  the  cell  in  which  the 
images  are  placed.  ” E’orgusson. 

(.Hist,  of  Ind.  and  Bast.  Architecture,  p.  221). 

(12)  A oar  of  the  gods  (Atoka’s  Book  Edicts,  no.  IV,  Ep.  Ind.  voL 

„ II.  pp,  451,  467). 

(13)  A shrine  and  dome  (Banganatha  Insprip.  of  Sundarapandya, 

V.  3,  8, 10,  22,  30,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  iii.  pp.  11-17). 

(14)  A shrine  (Tenamadala  Inscrip,  of  Ganapamha,  v.  17,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  III.  pp.  99,  102). 

(16)  “ Having  perceived  that  the  central  shrine  of  the  god  of  the 

Tiruvidaikali  (temple) which  formerly 

consisted  of  layers  of  bricks,  had  become  old  and  cracked, — ■ 

the  lord  of  Miladu pulled  down  the  temple,  rebuilt 

the  central  shrine  and  the  mapdapa  of  granite,  placed 
on  the  shrine  fine  solid  pitchers  (?  dome)  of  gold,  built  a 
surrounding  wall  and  a mandapa  in  front,  and  gave  a 
canopy  of  pearls.  ” 

(Eourteen  Inscrip,  at  Tirukkovalur,  no.  K, 
lines,  6-7,  Bp.  Ind. vol.  vii.  pp.  146, 146,  147), 

(16)  Prasada-malabhir  alamkritam  dharam  vidaryyaiva  aamut- 

thitam  I 

Vimana-mala-sadritani  yattra  grihani  purnneudu-karamalani  II 
“ Here,  cleaving  asunder  the  earth,  there  rise  up  houses  which 
are  decorated  with  successions  of  storeys,  which  are  like 
rows  of  serial  chariots  (and)  which  are  as  pure  as  the  rays 
of  the  full-moon.  ” 

(Mandasor  stone  Inscrip,  of  Kumaragupta,  line 
7,  C.  1. 1,  vol.  III.  F.  G-,  I.  no.  18,  pp.  81, 


vimAna 


666 


(17)  “ .....a  copy  of  a stone  iusoription  wMch  existed 

before  the  sacred  'vimana  (i.  e.  th6  central  shrine)  had  been 
pnUed  down 

(Insorip.  of  Vanavidyadhara,  no.  47,  line  I, 
H.  S.  L L vol.  m.  p.  100). 

(18)  “ Vimarasa-nayakkan  oansed  to  be  built  vimanas  with 

all  the  necessary  oharacteriatios  for  the  god  and  goddesses 
at  Ponnudukki,’^ 

(Ep.  Gamat,  vol.  xii,  Tumkur  Taluq,  no.  19, 
Transl.  p,  6,  para  2). 

(19)  “ The  vimana  (of  the  temple  of  Parametvara  at  G-udimal- 

1am)  has  the  so-called  gaia-ppishthakyiti  shape,  (i.e.,  like 
the  back  of  an  elephant,  see  plate  c-b,  facing  the  page  104> 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  XL.);  but  a close  study  of  the  plan  and 
sections,  given  in  the  accompanying  plate  (referred  to 
above),  warrant  the  conclusion  that  the  architect  had 
distinctly  in  view  the  shape  of  the  lihga  (Phallus  of  6iva) ; 
and  hence  the  vimSna  might  better  be  styled  a lingakyiti- 
vimana.  ” 

“ The  gajaprishthakyiti-vimana  is  found  only  in  ^aiva  temples, 
e.g„  the  Dharmetvara  temple  at  Manimafigalam,  the  Saiva 
temples  at  Sumangalam,  Pepnagaram,  Bhara-dvaj  aferama 
near  Aroot,  Tiruppulivanam,  Eonnur  (near  Madras),  vada 
Tirumullaivayil,  etc.,  etc. 

(Five  Bana  Insorip.  at  G-udimallam,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XL.  p.  104,  line  6,  note  2). 

(20)  Nirmifeiprakara-svarna-kalata-yukta-gopura-vimana-sahitam  \ 

“ Created  the  Ghamarajefevara  temple  together  with  its 
precincts,  gopura  adorned  with  golden  Kala^as,  and  tower.’* 
(Bp.  Carnat,  vol.  iv.  Ohamarajnagar  Taluq, 
no,  86,  Roman  text,  p.  18,  line  8-9  f, 
Transl.  p.  11). 


666 


VIMANA-CHCHHANDAKA 


(21)  “ Yimana — The  tower  of  a shrine/’  Bea. 

(Chalnkyan  Arohiteoture,  Arch.  Surv. 
new.  Imp.  series,  vol.  XXI.  p, -!£)). 
YIMANA-GHGHHANDAKA- A class  of  buildings. 

A type  of  building  which  is  twenty -one  cubits  wide,  has  seven 
storeys  and  latticed  windows  : 

(1)  Byihat-saihhita  (chap.  LVi,  22,  J.  B.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  vi.  p,  319, 

see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  269,  v.  28,  32,  83,  47,  63,  see  under 

Prasada). 

(3)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap.  130,  v.  29,  see  under  Prasada). 
YIVAHA'MANDAPA — (see  Mandapa)— A pavilion  erected  for  the 

wedding  ceremonies. 

(Skanda-Purapa,  Mahetvara-khap^a- 
prathama,  chap.  24,  v.  1-67). 
YIYEITA— A type  of  storeyed  building,  a class  of  the  nine-storeyed 
buildings. 

(M.  XXVII.  20-22,  see  under  Prasada). 
YI^AIjA-(KA)—-A  type  of  building,  a class  of  pavilions,  a type  of 
hall. 

A type  of  rectangular  building  : 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  v.  16-17,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  21-22,  26-27,  see  under  Prasada). 
A pavilion  with  100  columns  (Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  104,  see 

under  Mandapa). 

A class  of  buildings  (Kamikagama,  xnv.  41,  see  under  Malika). 

A hall  with  thirty -eight  pillars  (Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  11, 

see  under  Mandapa). 

YI^YA-KANTA— A type  of  storeyed  building. 

A class  of  hve-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxxili.  16-18,  see  under 

Prasada,). 

A class  of  nine-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxvii.  27-33,  see  under 

Prasada). 


VISHHU-KANTA 


■ 567 


VI^VESA-SAEA — A ground-plan  m which  the  whole  area  ie  divided 
into  900  equal  squares. 

(M,  VII.  45-46,  see  under  Pada-vinyasa). 
VISHAh5A-(JiA) — The  horn,  the  tusk,  the  wing  of  a building. 
Vishanaka-samayukto  nandanah  sa  udahritah  \ 

‘ That  (prasada)  is  called  Nandana  which  is  furnished  with  a 
vishanaka  (wing)’ 

(Matsya-Pnrana,  chap.  269,  V.  33). 
VI8HK.AMBHA — ^A  post,  a pillar,  the  prop  or  beam,  the  bolt  or  bar 
of  a door,  the  diameter  of  a circle^  the  length  or  width. 

(1)  Harmya-padasya  vishkambham  samam  mahjusha-vi&tritih  I 
‘The  length  of  the  vault  is  equal  to  the  width  at  the 

foot  of  the  mansion.’ 

(M.  XII.  29). 

(2)  Dvarasyardhena  vishkambhah — ‘ half  of  the  door  gives  the 

width  ’ (Bfihat-samhita,  liii.  24). 
Sashtamfeo  vishkambho  dvaraaya  dvi-guna  uohhrayah  \ 

(Ibid.  V.  26,  see  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol,  vi. 

p.  284,  note  3). 

(3)  Tesham  ayama-vishkambhah  sannivesamtarani  cha  I! 
Kyitrimanam  cha  durganSm  vishkambhayamam  eva  cha  ! 
Yojanad  arddha-vishkambham  ashla-bhagadhikayatam  II 

(Brahmapda-Purana,  part  1,  2nd.  anu- 
shamga-pada,  chap.  7,  v,  94,  106). 

(4)  Chatur-dandavakyishtam  parikhayah  sha^-dapdoohohhritam 

avaruddham  tad-dvi-guna-vishkambham  khatad  vapraih 
karayet  \ 

Vaprasyopari  prakaram  visbkambha-dvi-gunotsedham  \ 
Antareshu  dvi-haata-vishkambham  parfeve  ohaturgunayamam 
anuprakaram  ash^a-hastayatam  deva-patham  karayet ) 

(Kautiliya-Artha&astra,  chap.  xxiv. 

paras  3,  6,  10,  pp.  51,  52). 
VISHNU-iCANTA — ^A  class  of  storeyed  buildings,  a type  of  column, 
a type  of  gate-house,  a kind  of  phallus,  a jewel. 

A class  of  four-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxii.  3-12,  see  under 

Prasada), 


568 


VISHNU-GAKBHA 


A jewel  (M.  XII.  90,  etc).  • 

An  octagonal  column  with  eight  minor  pillars  fM.  xv.  20,  246,  see 

under  Stambha). 

A gate-house  with  sixteen  towers  (M.  xxxiii.  567,  see  under  Gopura). 
A kind  of  phallus  (M.  Lii.  164,  see  Linga). 

ViSHNU-GAEBHA— (see  under  Garbha-nyasa)— A kind  of  founda- 
tion prescribed  for  the  Vishnu-temples. 

{M.xn.l41). 

VIHARA-r A Buddhist  monastery,  a convent,  a temple. 

(1)  Prag-GangeiJvara-sannidhau.... chakre-danimayani 

viharam  a-malam  i^ri-Lokanathaspadam  I 

Made  a spotless  vihftra  of  wood,  an  abode  for  the  Lord  of 

the  world,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Gangesvara  (temple).  ” 

(Arigom  Sarada  Inscrip,  v.  2,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  IX.,  p.  302). 

(2)  VihSro  nava-khapda-mapdala-mahi-harah  krito’yaiii  taya 

tarinya  vasudharayft  nanu  vapur  vibhranyfilamkyitah  I 
yam  drish^vS  pratiohitra-&iipa-raohana-ohaturyya-sim&- 
ferayam  girvapaih  sudri&am  oha  vismayam  agad  vi&va- 
karmapi  sail  II 

“ This  vihara,  an  ornament  to  the  earth,  the  round  of  which 
consists  of  nine  segments,  was  made  by  her,  and  decorated 
as  it  were  by  VasudharS  herself  in  the  shape  of  Tarini,  and 
even  the  Creator  himself  was  taken  with  wonder  when  he 
saw  it  accomplished  with  the  highest  skill  in  the  applying  of 
wonderful  arts  and  looking  handsome  with  (the  images  of) 
gods.” 

(Sarnath  Inscrip,  of  Kumaradevi,  V.  21, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  IX.  pp.  325,  327). 

(3)  ” Throughout  this  work  the  term  Vihara  is  applied  only  to 

monasteries,  the  abodes  of  monks  or  hermits.  It  was  not, 
however,  used  in  that  restricted  sense  only,  in  former  times, 
though  it  has  been  so  by  all  modern  writers.  Hioueu 


vmiBA 


659 


Thsang,  for  instance,  calls  the  great  tower  at  Buddh  Gaya 
a vihara,  and  describes  similar  towers  at  Nalanda,  200 
and  300  feet  high,  as  viharas.  The  Mahawanso  also 
applies  the  term  indiscriminately  to  temples  of  a oertain 
class,  and  to  residences.  My  impression  is  that  all  buildings 
designed  in  storeys  were  called  viharas  (?),  whether  used 
for  the  abode  of  priests  or  to  enshrine  relics  or  images. 
The  name  was  used  to  distinguish  them  from  stupas  or 
towers,  which  were  relic  shrines,  or  erected  as  memorials 
of  places  or  events,  and  never  were  residences  or  simulated 
to  be  such,  or  contained  images,  till  the  last  gasp  of  the 
style,  as  at  Kholvi.  At  present  this  is  only  a theory.  ” 

(This  is  a false  impression  ; it  is  not  substantiated  by  literary 
or  arohgeoiogical  evidences). 

Like  the  oliaityas,  “ these  (Yihar as  or  monasteries)  resemble 
very  closely  corresponding  institutions  among  Christians, 
In  the  earlier  ages  they  accompanied,  but  were  detached 
from,  the  chaityas  or  churches.  In  later  times  they  were 
furnished  with  chapels  and  altars  in  which  the  service 
could  be  performed  independently  of  the  Chaitya  halls, 
which  may  or  may  not  be  found  in  their  proximity.^’  Fer- 
gusson. 

(Hist,  of  Ind.  and  Bast.  Arch.  pp.  130,  note  1, 

61). 

For  the  photographic  views  and  architectural  details  of  the 
existing  viharas  see  Fergusson 

Diagram  explanatory  of  the  arrangement  of  a Buddhist 
vihara  of  four  storeys  in  height  (p.  134,  fig.  67,  66). 

Ajuiita  Viharas  (p.  164-166,  fig.  83,  84,  86). 

Plan  of  the  great  Vihara  at  Bagh  (p.  160,  fig.  87). 

Plan  of  Dehrwarra  at  B)lora  (p.  163,  fig.  88), 

Plan  of  Monastery  at  Jamalgiri  (p.  171,  fig.  92). 

Plan  of  Monastery  at  Takht-i-Bahi  (p.  171,  fig.  93). 

Plan  of  Ionic  Monastery  at  Sha  Dehri  (p.  176,  fig.  961. 


660 


VIHEITA 


(4)  See  Budhisb  cave  temples  (Arch.  Snrv.  new  Imp.  series, 

vol.  IV.  plate  xxvii). 

VIHBIl’A — All  architectural  ornament,  a moulding,  a moulding  of 
the  upper  part  of  a column. 

(M.  XV.  78,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings  under 
Starnbha). 

VINA — A flute,  a carving  on  the  chariot. 

(M.  XLiii.  168,  etc). 

VlTHI(-l) — A road,  a way,  a street,  a market-place,  a stall,  a shop,  a 
terrace. 

Madhya-rathyavyita  vithi  samam  evam  vidliiyate  I 
Mukhya  vithi  dvi-paksha  syad  griha-taram  tri-danclakam  \ 

Evam  bahya-vithi  syad  antar-vithir  ihoohyate  \ 

Paksha-yukta  tu  vithi  syat  pakaha-hinarii  tu  margakam  \ 
Tri-chatush-pancha-dan^am  va  vithinam  vistritir  bhavet  I 
Shat-saptashta-dapdam  va  nanda-panktita-bhanum  va  \ 

Evam  tu  svastika-vithi  langalakaravad  bhavet  I 
Antar-vithi  ohaika-paksha  bShya- vithi  dvi-pakshaka  I 
Paritas  tu  maha-vithir  vither  esha  dvi-pakshayuk  \ 

Vithinam  parsvayor  dete  vithikadyair  alankritam  \ 

(M.  IX.  101, 104,  191,  196,  199,  200,  338,  396, 
477,  629,  see  also  99,  136, 184-187,  197,  201, 
208,206,324,339,  345,  347,  362,  426,  431, 
463,619). 

Pada-danclam  samarabhya  pada-pada-vivardhitam  \ 

Syad  eka-da^a-dandantaiii  vithi -manam  ihagame  II 
Marga-manam  tu  tavat  syan  na  dvararh  vithikagrake  \ 

(Kamikagama,  xxv.  4,  6). 


VIRA-OALA 


mi 


VlTHIKA— A gallery,  a picture-gallery,  a road,  a narrow  street,  a lane. 

(1)  Salato  yaa  tritxyamsas  tena  karya  tu  vithika  1 

(Kiranakhya-Tantra,  see  Brihat-samhita  below). 

(2)  8ala-tri-bhaga-tulya  clia  kartavya  vithika  bahili  \ 

(Vi&vaka,  see  Brihat-samhita  below). 
(8)  Bala-tri-bhaga-tulya  kartavya  vithika  bahir-bhavanat  1 

“Outside  the  dwelling  one  should  make  a gallery,  being  in 
width  a third  part  of  the  hall.  ” 

(Brihat-samhita,  Liii.  20,  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol. 

VI.  p.  288,  note  2), 

(4)  Asmat  tu  ohatu-rathyagrad  avrita  vithika  tatah  \ 
Tat-pailiaoha-pade  de&e  vavrita  vithika  bhavet  \ 
Antat-chatush'padam  madhye  vithikagram  chatiir-di&i  1 
Vithinaih  par^vayor  de&e  vithikadyair  alahkritam  I 

(M.  IX.  337,  434,  478,  629,  see  also  323,  334-336). 
VlBA-KANTHA“-(8e0  Vira-gala)-— A warrior’s  neck,  a part  of  the 
column,  a monument  (Suprabhedagama,  xxxi,  69, 
see  under-  Stambha), 

VlEA-KARNA — A warrior’s  ear,  apart  of  the  column,  a monument. 

(M.  xv.  49,81,  142). 

VIRA-KANDA — An  upper  part  of  the  column. 

Tri-bhago  maulikotsedhah  vira-kapdad  upary-adhah  II 
Vira-kandavadlii  kshepya  tad-urdhve  nakra-pattika  II 

(Kamikagama,  Lv.  62,  111). 
ViRA-G-ALA — (see  Biragala) — ^A  warrior’s  neck,  a monument,  a 
memorial. 

A monumental  stone  (Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  p."  96,  c.  2,  line  10). 

A stone  erected  in  memory  of  a fallen  warrior  (Ghalukyan 
Architecture,  Arch.  Surv.  new.  Imp.  series,  vol.  xxi.  p.  40). 


tlBA-PAl?TA 


ViBA-PATTA — The  front  plate,  the  diadem,  of  heroes  forming  part  of 
a crown. 

(1)  “ (These  pearls)  were  strung  on  two  strings  (vadam)  on  both 

sides  of  the  front  plate  (vira-patta,  literally  the  diadem  of 
heroes,  ‘ this  ornament  forms  part  of  a crown,’  vol.  ii.  p.  242, 
note  1.)  ” 

(Insorip.  of  Bajendra  Chola,  no.  8,  para  26, 
H.  S,  I.  L vol.  n.  p.  90). 

(2)  **  (G-iven  to  the  image  of  Ardha-naritvara)  one  front-plate  (vira- 

patta),  weighing, —inclusive  of  sixteen  nerufiji  (a  kind  of 
thistle)  flowers,  made  of  gold, — -four  karanju  and  three 
mafijadi,  and  worth  three  ka^u.  ” 

“ On  (it)  were  strung  one  hundred  and  eleven  pearls,  viz.,  old 
pearls,  round  pearls,  roundish  pearls,  polished  pearls,  small 
pearls,  ambumudu,  crude  pearls,  sappatti  and  sakkattu.’' 

(Insorip.  of  Bajraja,  no.  39,  para  9,  H.  S.  1. 1. 

vol.  II.  p.  166). 

(3)  “ One  front-plate  (vira-pat^a),  laid  (round  the  head  of  'the 

image  of  Kshetrapala  and  consisting  of)  seven  mafljadi  of 
gold.” 

(Insorip.  of  Bajendra  Ohola,  no.  43,  para  5, 
H.  8.  I.  I.  vol.  II.  p.  173). 

(4)  “ One  diadem  (vira-patta),  made  for  the  lord  of  the  fe-Baja- 

rajetvara  temple........,...-...” 

(Inscrip,  of  Bajraja.  no.  69,  para  22,  H.  S.  I.  I. 

vol.  II.  p,  242). 

VlBA-^ASANA — (see  Biragala  and  Vira-gala) — A monument,  a 
memorial. 

ViBASANA— A throne,  a type  of  pavilion. 

A kind  of  coronation  throne  (M.  xlv.  41,  see  under  Sirhhasana). 

A pavilion  with  twenty  columns  (Suprabhedagama,  xxxi,  102,  see 

Mandapa). 


VBISHA 


663 


VETTA(-TTA) — A circular  object,  a kind  of  ooluma,  a type  of  building, 
a class  of  pavilions. 

Dva-trim§ata  tu  madkye  pralinako  vritta  iti  Vrittah  l 

(Brihat-aamhita,  Lili.  28,  see  under  Stambha)- 

A type  of  building  which  is  circular  in  shape,  has  one  storey  and 
one  cupola.  According  to  Kern’s  interpretation  it  is  dark  in  the 
interior  (afijanarupa,  Varaha-mihira  ; sandhyakara,  Ka&yapa) : 

(1)  Brihat-samhita  (chap.  LVI.  28,  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  vi. 

p.  320,  note  1,  see  under  Prasada.) 

(2)  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  269,  v.  29,  49,  53,  see  under  Prasada) 

(3)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap.  130,  V.  30,  see  under  Prasada). 

A type  of  pavilion  (mandapa)  : 

(4)  Suprabhedagama  (chap.  xxx.  100,  102  where  it  is  called  Jaya- 

bhadra,  see  under  Jaya-bhadra). 

(6)  Of.  “Within  this  and  rising  from  a ledgiug  of  cut  stone  4 feet 
high  and  3 broad,  stand  the  walls  of  the  temple,  a perfect  circle 
about  20  ieet  high  and  2 thick,  with  a handsome  cornice  of 
brick  enoirling  the  top.  The  whole  appears  to  have  been  coated 
with  fine  pilaster,  small  parts  of  which  still  adhere.  I 
examined  closely  but  could  not  discover  the  smallest 
appearance  of  its  ever  having  had  a roof.”  Lieut.  Pagan. 

(An  account  of  the  ruins  of  Topary,  Ceylon  Govt. 
Gazette,  Aug.  1,  1820,  Ind.  Ant.  vol,  xxxviil. 

p.  110.  c.  1,  para  1,  line  24). 

VBIDDHA — A fiuial,  a spire,  the  top-part  of  a building. 

(M.  XVII.  126,  see  under  Sikha). 

VBISHA-(BHA) — The  bull,  the  riding  animal  of  a god,  a type  of 
building. 

The  riding  animal  of  Siva,  description  of  his  image  (M.  lxii.  2-73, 

see  Vahana). 


564 


VKISHABHALAYA 


A type  of  building  which,  has  one  storey,  one  turret  (ferihga),  is 
round  everywhere  and  tweWe  cubits  wide  : 

(1)  Brihat-samhita  (chap.  Lvi.  26,  J.  B.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  vi.  p.  319, 

see  under  PrasMa). 

(2)  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  269,  v.  30,36,  44,  45,  53,  see  under 

Prasada). 

(3)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap.  130,  v,  33,  see  under  Prasada). 

A type  of  oval  building  : 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  V.  19-20,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  G-aruda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v,  29-30,  see  under  Prasada). 
VBISHABHALAYA— A detached  building  near  the  gate  of  a temple 

where  the  bull  (nandin)  is  installed. 

Prakara-dvara-sarveshiim  kalpayed  vrishabhalayam  I 
Vrishabhasyopari-bhage  tu  kalpayed  bali-pithakain  I 

(M.  XXXII.  98-99). 

YllISHA-MANDAPA — A pavilion  where  the  hi  an  din  or  bull  is  ins- 
talled. 

Suprabhedagama  (xxxi.  96,  98,  see  under  Mandapa)  and  compare  : 
Vrishasya  mandapaih  tatra  chatur-dvara-saniayutam  I 

(Ibid.  XXXI.  133), 

VBPBA — The  cane,  a stick,  an  architectural  ornament,  a moulding. 
A moulding  of  the  diadem  (makuta)  (M.  xlix.  99-100). 

A moulding  of  the  bedstead  (M.  xliv.  41). 

An  ornament  of  the  throne  (M.  xLv.  162, 188). 

YEI)I-^(KA) — Originally  a hall  for  reading  the  Vedas  in,  an  altar,  a 
stand,  a basis,  a pedestal,  a bench,  a kind  of  covered  verandah  or 
balcony  in  a courtyard,  a moulding,  ‘bands  or  string-courses 
■carved  with  rail -pattern.’ 

(1)  Salantam  vedikordhve  tu  yuddbartham  kalpayet  sudhih  I 

(M,  IX.  364). 

A moulding  of  the  column  : 

Griva-tungam  tridha  bhajyam  ekam&e  vedikonna>tam  \ 

(M.  XV.  105). 


Ymi 


665 


Urdhive  padodaye  bandham  bhagam  ekam^a-vedikam  1 

(M.  XIX.  99). 

The  porfeion  above  the  neok-part  of  a building  (M.  xxii.  60, 

54,  67,  eto). 

The  altar  or  dais  (M.  lxx,  29,  35,  etc). 

Kuryat  sarvaih  vedikam  bhadra-yuktam  I 


(M.  XIX.  180). 

(2)  Tri-chuli  va,i§ya-^udranam  pafioha-sapta  inahi-bhritfim  } 
Brahinanaiiam  tathaiva  syur  ekada^a  tu  vedikah  11 
It  should  be  noticed  that  ‘ vedika  ’ and  ‘ chilli  ’ refer  to  the 
same  object. 

(Kami kagama , xxx v,  60) . 

The  basement : 

Prasada-bhushanam  vakshye krCiyatam  dvija-sattamfili  | 

Syat  pada-prastaram  griva  varge  miile  tu  vedika  II 

(Ibid.  I.V.  1). 


(3)  Vedikeyam  tu  samanya  kutblmauaih  prakirbita  1 
Pratikramasya  chotsedhe  chatur-vim&ati  bhajite  1) 
Vedika-prastara-samam  shad-amsikritya  bhagatah  \ 
Ekiiih^am  prati-pattam  syad  am^abhyam  antaribhavet  II 


(Vastu-vidya,  ed.  Sastri,  ix.  19,  23). 

(4)  Kanchanair  bahubhih  stambhair  vedikabhi's  cha  sobhitah  1 

(Ramayana,  vi.  3,  18,  etc). 

(5)  (Nalinim) maha-raani-Hla-patta-badclha-paryanta- 

vedikam  1 

(Mahabharata,  ii.  3,  32,  etc). 

(6;  Athatah  sampravakshyami  pratiabtha-vidhim  uttamam  1 
Kunda-mandapa-vedinam  pramanaifa  cha  yatha-kramam  II 
Praaadasyottare  vapi  purve  vS  mandapo  bhavet  I 
Hastau  shodasa  knrvita  dasa  dva-da§a  va  punah  l| 


S66 


VBDI 


Mai^hye  vedikaya  yuktah  parikshiptah  samantatab  I 
Paftoha-saptapi  cbaturab  karan  kurvita  vedikam  II 

(Matsya-PurSna,  chap.  264,  1,  13,  14  ; see 

also  chap.  269,  v.  13, 18). 
Prom  the  position  and  measures  given  here  to  the  vedi  or 
vedika,  it  appears  to  imply  some  platform  other  than  the 
pedestal  or  throne  of  the  idol. 

(7)  Tad-urdhvam  tu  bhaved  vedi  sakantha  manasarakam  II 
tJrddhvam  cha  vedika-manat  kalatam  parikalpayet  II 

(Agni -Parana,  chap.  42,  v,  17,  18). 

(8)  Mandapam  cha  su-vistirnam  vedikabhir  manoramam  II 
Tan-madhye  mandapam  kritva  vedim  tatra  su-nirmalam  II 

(Skanda-Purana,  Mahetvara-khanda-prathama, 
iohap.  24.  v.  2,  Taishpiava-khanda-dvitiya, 
chap.  26,  V.  26). 

(9)  See  specimens  of  Jaina  sculptures  from  Mathura  (Plate  m, 

Ep.  Ind.  vol,  II.  p.  319,  last  para). 

(10)  Hathi  cha  puvado  hathinam  cha  uparima  hethima  cha  veyika — 

“ the  elephants  and,  before  the  elephants,  the  rail-mouldings 
above  and  below.” 

(Karle  Inscrip.  nos.  3, 17,  18,  Ep.  Ind,  vol.  vii. 

pp.61,  63-64). 

(11)  Chanytoy-abhanti  dirggha-valabhim  sa-vedikam  I 

“ And  other  long  buildings  on  the  roofs  of  the  houses,  with 
arbours  in  them,  are  beautiful.” 

(Mandasor  stone  Inscrip.  of  Kumaragupta, 
lines  6-7,  C.  I.  I.  vol.  ni.  P.  G-.  I. 

no.  18,  pp.  81,  86). 

(12)  Bsha  bhati  kulachalaih  parivrita  praleya-samsarggibhir  vvedi 

meru-&ileva  kahchana-mayi  devasya  vitrama-bhuh  I 
^ubhraih  pranta-vikasi-pahkaja-dalair  ity-akalayya  svayam 
raupyam  padmam  aohikarat  pa&upateh  pujartham  aty-ujjva- 
1am  II 


VEBl 


667 


“ Thinking  that  this  throne  on  which  the  deity  rests,  golden 
like  mount  meru,  was  surrounded  by  the  imperishable  (seven) 
primeval  mountains  covered  by  snOw,  (the  king)  himself 
caused  an  exceedingly  resplendent  silver  lotus  with  brilliant 
wide  opened  petals  to  be  made  for  the  worship  of  Pa&upati.” 

“ (The  poet  tries  to  prove  that  the  lotus  resembled  4he  shrine 
of  Pa'supati.  As  the  latter  is  of  gold,  so  the  centre  also  of 
the  lotus  is  golden,  and  as  the  temple  is  surrounded  by 
snowy  mountains,  so  the  petals  of  the  lotus  are  made  of 
silver).” 

(Inscrip.  from  Nepal,  no.  15,  of  Yaya-deva,  v.  25, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  IX.  pp.  179,  182). 

(13)  “ Vedi  (bedi)— Hall  for  reading  the  Vedas  in.” 

(Vinoent-Smith,  G-loss.  to  General  Cunningham’s 
Arch.  Surv.  Beports). 

(14)  See  Cunningham,  Arch.  Surv.  Beports  ( vol.  xvil.  plate  xxxi, 

Buddhist  railings). 

(16)  “ Veyika,  which,  as  well  as  ‘,vedika  ’ and  ‘jvetika  ’ in  other 
Buddhist  inscriptions,  stands  for  Sanskrit  ‘ vedika  *,  does 
not  mean  altar,  dais,  etc.,  but  bands  or  string-courses 
carved  with  rail-pattern ; compare  MahSvam&o,  228.”  Dr. 
Burgess. 

(Karle  Inscrip.  no.  3,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp.  series, 
vol.  IV.  p.  90,  note  3 ; see  also  nos.  16, 
16 ; Kshatrapa  Inscrip.  no.  3). 

(16)  “ These  (rails,  ?vedi)  have  recently  been  discovered  to  be  one 
of  the  most  important  features  of  Buddhist  architecture. 
Generally  they  are  found  surrounding  Topes,  but  they  are 
also  represented  as  enclosing  sacred  trees,  temples  and 
pillars,  and  others  objects.  ” Pergusson. 

(Hist,  of  Ind.  and  Bast  Arch,  p,  50). 


668 


VEBI-KANTA 


See  fche  photographic  views  and  architectural  details  of  the 
following  Bails  in  Pergusson  : 

Buddh  G-aya  Bail  (p.  86,  figs.  26,  26). 

Bail  at  Bharhut  (p.  88,  figs.  27). 

Bail  at  Sanchi  (p,  92-93,  figs.  29,  30,  31). 

Bail  in  Q-autamiputra  cave  (p.  94,  fig.  32). 
VEDI-KA.NTA-(KA) — A type  of  storeyed  building,  a class  of  four- 
storeyed buildings. 

(M.  XXII.  68-69,  see  under  Prasada). 
VBDI-BANDHA — The  pedestal,  the  base,  the  basement. 

Prasadau  nirgatau  karyau  kapotau  garbha-manatah  \ 

Urdhvam  hhitty-uchchhrayat  tasya  manjarirh  tu  prakalpajet  l( 
Manjaryafe  chardha-bhagena  §uka-nasam  prakalpayet  I 
Urdhvam  tathardha-bhagena  vedi-bandho  bhaved  iha  II 

(Vifevak,  6,  767,  J.  B.  A.  8.,  N.  S.,  vol.  vi. 

pp.  421,  320,  note  2). 

These  lines  are  identical  in  the  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  269, 

v.11-13). 

VEDI-BHADBA^ — One  of  the  three  classes  of  pedestals,  the  other 
two  being  Prati-bhadra  and  Maiicha-bhadra.  It  has  four  types 
difiering  from  one  another  in  the  addition  or  omission  of  some 
mouldings  and  in  height. 

(M.  XIII.  27-63,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 
under  Upapitha). 

VB6ANA— An  entrance,  a gate,  a gateway,  a band,  an  architectural 
moulding. 

Eka-dvi-tri-dandarii  va  chiintaralasya  vesanam  syat  I 
Harmya-va^ad  upa-vetanam  yuktam  1 

(M.  XIX.  191,  187). 

A band  in  connection  with  joinery  (M.  xvil.  139). 

Of.  Urdhva-kuta-vefeanam  1 (M.  xx.  72). 

....bhitti-vistaram  eva  cha  \ 

Sesham  tad-garbha-geham  tu  madhya-bhage  tu  vefeanam  I 

(M.  XXXIII,  333-334,  see  also  488), 


VYAYA 


569 


In  connection  with  chariots  : Kukshasya  vesanam  I 

(M.  XLiii.  14)  . 

In  connection  with  the  phallus  : 

Lihga-tuhga-vi&esham  syad  vefeanam  tan  nayet  budhah  I 

(M.  Lii.  313). 

VBSAEA— -A  style  of  architecture,  once  pra vailing  in  the  ancient 
Vesara  or  Telugu  country. 

(See  details  under  Nagara). 
VAIJAYANTIKA — A type  of  building,  a class  of  single-storeyed 
buildings. 

(M.  XIX.  166,  see  under  Prasada). 
VAIKAJA — A class  of  buildings,  sqiiare  in  plan  and  named  as 
follows : (1)  Mem,  (2)  Mandara,  (3)  Vimana,  (4)  Bhadra,  (5) 
Sarvato-bhadra,  (6)  Euchaka,  (7)  Nandika,  (8)  Nandi- varddhaua 
and  (9)  ^rivatsa. 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  V.  11, 14-16,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  G-aruda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  21-22,  24-25,  see  under  Prasada). 
VAHi^YA-GAEBHA — (see  Garbha-nyasa) — A kind  of  foundation  pres- 
cribed for  the  buildings  of  the  Vaityas. 

(M.  XII.  162,  see  under  Garbha-nyasa). 
VYAJANA — A fan,  an  account  of  its  architectural  details. 

(M.  L.  46,  97-110,  see  Bhushana). 

VYAYA — One  of  the  six  Varga-formulas,  an  architectural  measure, 
the  name  of  a year. 

(See  details  under  Shad-varga). 
(1)  Srlmach-Chhali-^akabdake  cha  galite  nfigubhra-banemdubhis 
chiibde  sad-vyaya-namni  chaitra-sita-shashthyam  saumya- 
vare  vrishe  \ 

“ And  in  the  excellent  year  named  Vyaya 

(Karkala  Insorip.  of  Bhairava  ii,  v.  6,  line  7,  Bp. 

Ind.  Yol.  vili.  pp.  131,  134,  124). 


570 


VYAGHBA-NiDA 


Sali-vahana-^aka-varsha  (1608)  neya  Yyaya-samvatsarada  1 
“ In  the  ^aiivahana  saka  year  which  corresponded  to  the  Vyaya 
samvatsara ” 

(Ibid,  line  9). 

(2)  “ When  the  year  of  the  glorious  era  called  ^alifeaka,  having 
the  excellent  name  of  Vyaya  and  to  be  expressed  in  words 
by  the  elephants,  the  sky,  the  arrows,  and  the  moon,  had 
expired... 

“ The  month  Chaitra  of  the  Vyaya  samvatsara,  which  was  the 
year  of  the  ^ri-^alivahana  ^aka  1608.^’ 

(Sasana  of  the  Jaina  temple  at  Karkala,  Ind.  Ant.  vol. 

V.  p.  43.  0.  1,  lines.  23, 32), 
VYA-GHEA-NIDA — The  cage  for  a domesticated  tiger,  included  in 
the  articles  of  furniture. 

(M.  L.  66,  261-269,  see  under  Bhushana). 
VYALA-TOEANA — (see  Torana) — An  arch  marked  with  the  leograph, 
Tatah  samabhyunnata-purvva-kayas  tenadhirudhah  sa  naradhi- 

pena  I 

Samutpatann  uttama-sattva-vegah  khe  torana- vyala(ka)-vaddha 

bhase  II 

(Jatakamala,  Sarabha-Jataka,  xxv.  22,  v.  19,  ed. 

Kern,  p.  166). 


6AKTI— Power,  energy,  capacity,  strength,  female  divinity,  the 
female  deities  in  general. 

Manasara  (chap.  Liv.,  named  ^akti,  1-196): 

Saras vati  or  goddess  of  learning,  Lakshmi  or  goddess  of  wealth 
and  fortune,  Mahi  or  the  earth  goddess,  Manonmani  or  goddess  of 
love,  Sapta-matri  or  the  seven  goddesses  collectively  so  called, 
and  Diirga  are  the  different  phases  of  6akti  (lines  2-4). 


^A^iKV 


mi 


Of  these,  Laksmi  is  distinguished  into  Maha  or  the  great  Lakshmi 
and  Samanya  or  the  ordinary  Lakshmi,  the  latter  being  installed 
in  all  family  chapels  (63-64).  The  seven  goddesses  consist  of 
Varahi,  Kaumari,  Ohamundi,  Bhairavi,  Mahendri,  Vaishnavi, 
andBrahmani  (126-127). 

These  [seven  goddesses  are  measured  in  the  nine  tala  system 
(128) ; all  other  female  deities  are  measured  in  the  ten  tala  system 
(38-34).  (Details  of  these  measures  will  be  found  under  Tala- 
mana). 

The  sculptural  details  include  the  measures  of  the  limbs,  and  the 
poses  ; and  the  ornaments  and  features  of  each  of  these  female 
deities  are  described  in  detail  (4-128,  132-195). 

Of.  Matyi-ganah  kartavyah  sva-nama-devanurupakrita-ohihnah  I 

(Brihat-samhita,  lviii.  56). 

SAKTI-DHVAJA — moulding  of  the  column. 

(M.  XV.  77,  see  lists  of  mouldings  under  Stambha). 

^Al^KD — A stake,  a peg,  a post,  a pole,  a measuring-rod,  the  gnomon 
by  ni^eans  of  which  the  cardinal  points  are  ascertained  for  the 
orientation  of  buildings  (see  details  under  Dvara). 

(1)  Manasara  (chap,  vi.,  named  ^ahku,  1-120)  : 

Rules  are  laid  down  on  the  principles  of  dialling  and  for 
ascertaining  the  cardinal  points  by  means  of  a gnomon.  The 
gnomon  is  made  of  some  particular  wood  (lines  10*12, 106-108). 
It  may  be  24, 18,  or  12  ahgulas  in  length  and  the  width  at  the 
base  should  be  respectively  6,  6,  and  4 ahgulas  (13-22).  It 
tapers  from  bottom  towards  the  top  (14).  The  rules  are  des- 
cribed (23-88) ; but  they  are  more  explicit  in  the  quotations 

^ ^ As  regards  the  principles  of  dialling,  each  of 

the  twelve  months  is  divided  into  groups  of  ten  days  each,  and 
the  increase  and  decrease  of  shadow  (or  days,  as  stated  by 


572 


^Al^KU 


VitruYius,  see  below)  are  calculated  in  these  several  parts  of 
the  different  months. 

Pegs  (khata-^ahkn)  are  stated  to  be  posted  in  the  foundations 
(110418). 

(2)  Surya-siddhanta  (chap.  iii.  v.  1,  2,  3,  4)  : 

“ On  the  surface  of  a stone  levelled  with  water  or  on  the 
levelled  floor  of  the  Chunam  work,  describe  a circle  with  a 
radius  of  a certain  number  of  digits.  Place  the  vertical 
gnomon  of  12  digits  at  its  centre  and  mark  the  two  points 
where  the  shadow  (of  the  gnomon)  before  and  after  noon 
meets  the  circumference  of  the  circle ; these  two  points 
are  called  the  east  and  the  west  points  (respectively).  Then 
draw  a line  through  the  Timi  (fish)  formed  between  the 
(said)  cast  and  west  points  and  it  will  bo  the  north  and  south 
line  or  the  Meridian  line.  ” 

(To  draw  a line  perpendicular  to  and  bisecting  the  line 
joining  two  given  points,  it  is  usual  to  describe  two  arcs  from 
the  two  given  points  as  centres  with  a common  radius,  inter- 
secting each  other  in  two  points  : the  line  passing  through 
the  intersecting  points  is  the  line  required.  In  this  construc- 
tion the  space  contained  by  the  intersecting  arcs  is  called 
‘ Timi,’  a fish,  on  account  of  its  form). 

“ And  thus,  draw  a lino  through  the  Timi  formed  between 
the  north  and  the  south  points  of  the  Meridian  line  ; this 
line  would  be  the  east  and  west  line.  ” 

“ In  the  same  manner,  determine  the  intermediate  directions 
through  the  Timis  formed  between  the  points  of  the  deter- 
mined directions  (east,  south,  etc).  ” 

(3)  The  Siddhanta-siromaui  (chap.  7,  v.  86-39)  refers  to  the 

“ rules  for  resolving  the  questions  on  directions  ” by  means 
of  a gnomon.  But  it  does  not  apparently  deal  with  the 
cardinal  points  we  are  discussing  here. 


673 


(4)  The  Lilavati  (parfc  2,  chap.  2,  section  4)  lays  down  a few  rules 

for  ascertaining  the  shadow  of  the  gnomon  of  12  digits 
as  well  ‘as  the  height  of  the  lamp  by  which  the  shadow  is 
caused  in  this  case  instead  of  by  the  sun.  But  itihas  no 
specific  reference  to  the  cardinal  points. 

(5)  See  Earn  Eaz  (Eass.  Arch,  of  Hind.  pp.  19-20). 

(6)  Eev.  Kearns  gives  some  extracts  from  Myen  <Maya)  (Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  V.  p.  231) ; 

Eule  I. 

“ Stand  with  the  sun  to  your  right,  join  your  hands  horizon- 
tally— reject  the  thumbs — erect  the  index-finger  from  the 
middle.  If  the  shadow  of  the  erect  finger  extends  to  the 
outer  edge  of  the  finger  next  adjacent — to  the  index  finger  of 
the  left  hand — it  denotes  48  minutes  past  sunrise,  and  so  on.’’ 

When  the  sun  has  passed  the  mt'ridian,  the  position  must  be 
altered  accordingly. 

Eule  II. 

“ Take  a straw  eleven  fingers  in  length,  place  it  on  the  ground, 
bend  it,  raising  one  part  to  serve  as  a gnomon,  the  gnomon 
being  erected  against  the  sun,  east  or  west  of  the  meridian. 
The  height  of  the  gnomon  is  found  by  raising  the  end  of 
the  bent  portion  no  higher  than  suffices  exactly  to  throw  its 
shadow  to  the  extreme  point  of  the  recumbent  portion  of  the 
remainder  of  the  straw.  The  gnomon  so  found  gives  the 
time  of  day.  Ascertain  how  many  fingers  it  contains : the 
sum  is  the  time  in  Indian  hours.  ” 

(7)  The  details  given  above  may  be  compared  for  further 
knowledge  of  the  subject  with  those  quoted  below  from 
Vitruvius: 

“ Thus  are  expressed  the  number  and  names  of  the  winds 
and  the  points  whence  they  blow.  To  find  and  lay  down 
their  situation  we  proceed  as  follows : — 

“ Let  a marble  slab  be  fixed  level  in  the  centre  of  the  space 
enclosed  by  the  walls,  or  let  the  ground  be  smoothed  or 


574 


SAl^KU 


levelled,  so  that  the  slab  may  not  be  necessary.  In  the 
centre  of  this  plane,  for  the  purpose  of  marking  the  shadow 
correctly,  a brazen  gnomon  must  be  erected.  The  Greeks 
call  this  gnomon  skiatheras.” 

‘ The  shadow  cast  by  the  gnomon  is  to  be  marked  about  the 
fifth  anti-meridional  hour  and  the  extreme  point  of  the 
shadow  accurately  determined  From  the  central  point  of 
the  'space  whereon  the  gnomon  stands,  as  a centre, 
with  a distance  equal  to  the  lengtli  of  the  shadow  just 
observed,  describe  a circle.  After  the  sun  has  passed  the 
meridian,  watch  the  shadow  which  the  gnomon  continues 
to  oast  till  the  moment  when  its  extremity  again  touches 
the  circle  which  has  been  described.  From  the  two  points, 
thus  obtained  in  the  circumference  of  the  circle,  describe  two 
arcs  intersecting  each  other  and  through  their  intersection 
and  the  centre  of  the  circle  first  described  draw  a line  to 
its  extremity : this  line  will  indicate  the  north  and  south 
points.  ” 

‘ One-sixteenth  part  of  the  circumference  of  the  whole  circle 
is  to  be  set  out  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  north  and  south 
points  and  drawing  lines  from  the  points  thus  obtained  to 
the  centre  of  the  circle,  we  have  one -eighth  part  of  the 
oiroumfereuce  for  the  region  of  the  north,  and  another 
eighth  part  for  the  region  of  the  south.  Divide  the  remain- 
ders of  the  circumference  on  each  side  into  three  equal  parts 
and  the  divisions  or  regions  of  the  eight  winds  will  be  then 
obtained : then  let  the  directions  of  the  streets  and  lanes 
be  determined  by  the  tendency  of  the  lines  which  separate 
the  difierent  regions  of  the  winds 

“ Inasmuch  as  the  brevity  with  which  the  foregoing  rules 
are  laid  down  may  prevent  their  being  clearly  understood, 
I have  thought  it  right  to  add  for  the  clearer  understanding 
thereof  two  figures The  first  shows  the  precise 


I^ANKU 


regions  whence  the  difiEerent  winds  blow,  the  second,  the 
method  of  disposing  the  streets  in  such  a manner  as  ' to 
dissipate  the  yiolence  of  the  winds  and  render  them 
innoxious.’* 

**  Let  A be  the  centre  of  a perfectly  level  and  plane  tablet 
whereon  a gnomon  is  erected.  The  ante-meridional  shadow 
of  the  gnomon  being  marked  at  B,from  A,  as  a centre  with 
the  distance  A B,  describe  a complete  circle.  Then  replac- 
ing the  gnomon  correctly,  watch  its>  increasing  shadow, 
which  after  the  sun  has  passed  his  meridian,  will  gradually 
lengthen  till  it  become  exactly  equal  to  the  shadow  made 
in  the  forenoon,  then  again  touching  the  circle  at  the  point 
C,  from  the  points  B and  0,  as  centres,  describe  two  arcs 
cutting  each  other  in  D.  From  the  point  D,  through  the 
centre  of  the  circle,  draw  the  line  E F,  which  will  give 
the  north  and  south  points.  Divide  the  whole  circle  into 
sixteen  parts.  From  the  point  E,  at  which  the  southern 
end  of  the  meridian  line  touches  the  circle,  set  off  at  Gr  and 
H to  the  right  and  left  a distance,  equal  to  one  of  the  said 
sixteenth  parts,  and  in  the  same  manner  on  the  north  side, 
placing  one  foot  of  the  compasses  on  the  point  F,  mark  on 
each  side  the  points  I and  K,  and  with  lines  drawn  through 
the  centre  of  the  circle,  join  the  points  G-K  and  HI,  so  that 
the  space  from  G-  to  H will  be  given  to  the  south  wind  and 
its  region  ; that  from  I to  K to  the  north  wind.  The  remain- 
ing spaces  on  the  fright  and  left  are  each  to  be  divided  into 
three  equal  parts  ; the  extreme  points  of  the  dividing  lines 
on  the  east  sides,  to  be  designated  by  the  letters  L and  M : 
those  on  the  west  by  the  letters  N 0 : from  M to  0 and 
from  L to  N draw  lines  crossing  each  other : and  thus 
the  whole  circumference  will  he  divided  into  eight  equal 
spaces  for  the  winds.  The  figure  thus  described  will  be 
furnished  with  a letter  at  each  angle  of  the  octagon.  ” 

(Vitruvius,  Book  I,  chap.  VI). 


676 


SA^Ktr 


It  is  clearly  by  a divine  and  surprising  arrangement,  that  the 
equinoctial  gnomons  are  of  different  lengths  in  Athens, 
Alexandria,  Borne,  Piacenza  and  in  other  parts  of  the  earth. 
Hence  the  construction  of  dials  varies  according  to  the 
places  in  which  they  are  to  be  erected : for  from  the  size 
of  the  equinoctial  shadow,  are  formed  analemmata,  by 
means  of  which  the  shadows  of  gnomons  are  adjusted 
to  the  situation  of  the  place  and  the  lines  which  mark  the 
hours.  By  an  aualemma  is  meant  a rule  deduced  from  the 
sun’s  course  and  founded  on  observation  of  the  increase 
of  the  shadow  from  the  winter  solstice,  by  means  of  which, 
with  meohanioal  operations  and  the  use  of  compasses,  we 
arrive  at  an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  true  shape  of  the 
world.  ” 

(Book  IX,  chap.  iv). 

‘ From  the  doctrines  of  the  philosophers  above  mentioned, 
are  extracted  the  principles  of  dialling  and  the  explanation 
of  the  increase  and  decrease  of  the  days  (shadows  in  the 
ManasSra)  in  the  different  months.  The  sun  at  the  times 
of  the  equinoxes,  that  is,  when  he  is  in  Aries  of  Libra, 
oasts  a shadow  in  the  latitude  of  Borne  equal  to  eight- 
ninths  of  the  length  of  the  gnomon.  At  Athens  the  length 
of  the  shadows  is  three-fourths  of  that  of  the  gnomon ; 
at  Rhodes  five-sevenths ; at  Tarentum  nine-elevenths;  at 
Alexandria  three-fifths : and  thus  at  all  other  places  the 
shadows  of  the  gnomon  at  the  equinoxes  naturally  differ. 
Hence  in  whatever  place  a dial  is  to  be  erected,  we  must 
first  obtain  the  equinoctial  shadow.  If,  as  at  Rome,  the 
shadow  be  eight-ninths  of  the  gnomon,  let  a line  be  drawn 
on  a plane  surface,  in  the  centre  whereof  is  raised  a 
perpendicular  thereto  ; this  is  called  the  gnomon,  and  from 
the  line  on  the  plane  in  the  direction  of  the  gnomon  let 
nine  equal  parts  be  measured.  Let  the  end  of  the  ninth 


mi 


part  A,  be  considered  as  a centre,  and  extending  the  conj- 
passes  from  that  centre  to  the  extremity  B of  the  said 
line,  let  a circle  be  described.  This  is  os.lled  the  meridian. 
Then  of  those  nine  parts  between  the  plane  and  the  point 
of  the  gnomon,  let  eight  be  allotted  to  the  line  on  the  plane, 
whose  extremity  is  marked  0.  This  will  be  the  equinoctial 
shadow  of  the  gnomon.  From  the  point  0 through  the 
centre  A,  let  a line  be  drawn,  and  it  will  represent  a ray 
of  the  sun  at  the  equinoxes.  Extend  the  compasses  from 
the  centre  to  the  line  on  the  plane,  and  mark  on  the  left 
an  equidistant  point  B,  and  on  the  right  another,  lettered 
I,  and  join  them  by  a line  through  the  centre,  which  will 
divide  the  circle  into  two  semi-circles.  This  line  by  the 
mathematicians  is  called  the  horizon.  A fifteenth  part  of 
the  whole  circumference  is  to  be  then  taken,  and  placing 
the  point  of  the  compasses  in  that  point  of  the  circumfei^enoe 
F,  where  the  equinoctial  ray  is  cut,  mark  with  it  to  the  right 
and  left  the  points  G-  and  H.  From  these,  through  the 
centre,  draw  lines  to  the  pjano  whore  the  letters  T and  E 
are  placed,  thus  one  ray  of  the  sun  is  obtained  for  the 
winter  and  the  other  for  the  summer.  Opposite  the  point 
E,  will  be  found  the  point  I,  in  which  a line  drawn  through 
the  centre,  outs  the  circumference;  and  opposite  to  G 
and  H the  points  K and  L,  and  opposite  to  0,  F,  and  A, 
will  be  the  point  N.  Diameters  are  then  to  be  drawn  from 
G to  L,  and  from  H to  K.  The  lower  one  will  determine 
the  summer  and  the  upper  the  winter  portion.  These 
diameters  are  to  be  equally  divided  in  the  middle  at  the 
points  M and  0,  and  the  points  being  thus  marked,  through 
them  and  the  centre  A a line  must  be  drawn  to  the  circum- 
ference, where  the  letters  P and  Q are  placed.  This  line 
will  be  perpendicular  to  the  equinoctial  ray  and  is  called 
in  mathematical  language  the  Axon.  From  the  last 
obtained  points  as  centres  (M  and  0)  extending  the 
37 


SAj^KHA 


compasses  to  the  extremity  of  the  diameter,  two  semicircles 
are  to  be  described,  one  of  which  will  be  for  summer,  the 
other  for  winter.  In  respect  of  those  points  where  the  two 
parallels  out  that  line  which  is  called  the  horizon ; on  the 
right  hand  is  placed  the  letter  S,  and  on  the  left  the 
letter  V,  and  at  the  extremity  of  the  semicircle,  lettered  G-, 
a line  parallel  to  the  Axon  is  drawn  to  the  extremity  on  the 
left,  lettered  H.  This  parallel  line  is  called  Lacotomus. 
Finally,  let  the  point  of  the  compasses  be  placed  in  that 
point  where  this  line  is  cnt  by  the  equinoctial  ray,  and 
letter  the  point  X,  and  let  the  other  point  he  extended  to 
that  where  the  summer  ray  outs  the  circumference,  and  be 
lettered  H.  Then  with  a distance  equal  to  that  from 
the  summer  interval  on  the  equinoctial  point,  as  a centre, 
describe  the  circle  of  the  months,  which  is  called  Manacus. 

Thus  will  the  anaiemma  will  be  completed 

“ In  all  the  figures  and  diagrams  the  effect  will  be  the 
same,  that  is  to  say,  the  equinoctial  as  well  as  the  solstitial 
days,  will  always  be,  divided  into  twelve  equal  parts. 

(Book  IX,  chap.  viii). 

^AJ^KHA' — A type  of  round  building. 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  v.  17-18,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  G-aruda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  21,  23,  28-29,  see  under  Prasada). 

SAI^KHA-KXJNpALA — ^An  ornament. 

(M.  Liv.  16f,  170,  see  Bhushana). 

1§A1?[KHA-PATBA— An  ornament. 

(M.  LIV.  170,  see  Bhushana). 

!§ATARDHIKA — A pavilion  with  eighteen  pillars. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  13,  see  under 
Mandapa). 

Katanga— A car,  a carriage,  a war-chariot,  (an  arm-chair,  a sofa), 
(Raganath  Inscrip,  of  Sundara-pandya,  v.  14, 
Ep.  lud.  vol.  Ill,  pp.  12,  16) 


SASTBA-MANBAPA  579 

See  Ohiillavagga  (vi.  2,  4 ; also  vi.  20,  2 ; viii.  1,  3)  which  reads 
Satfcahgo.  There  seems  to  be  another  expression,  Apasayam, 
to  mean  a sofa  or  arm-chair  (see  Buddhaghosa’s  note  on  ibid. 
VI.  2,  4). 

SATBU-MAB.DANA — A pavilion  with  thirty -four  pillars. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  11, 
see  under  Mandapa). 

SAMBHU-KANTA — A class  of  eleven-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXIX,  2-8,  see  under  Prasada). 

S A YAK  A — Lying  dowm,  a bed,  a building-material,  a couch,  the 
recumbent  posture,  the  roof  of  a house,  a class  of  buildings  in 
which  the  width  (at  the  bottom)  is  the  unit  of  measurement, 
the  temples  in  wliich  the  idol  is  in  the  recumbent  posture. 

A temple  (M.  xix.  7-11,  see  under  Apa-samohita). 

A bedstead  (M.  ill.  10,  11,  12;  xliv.  74,  and  colophon). 

A synonym  of  the  roof  of  a house  (M.  xvi.’ 66,  68,  see  Praohohha- 

dana). 

The  wood  used  in  constructing  a bedstead  (M.  xliv.  74). 

The  recumbent  posture  (M.  lxii.  16,  LXlli.  47,  etc). 

SAYANA-MANpAPA — A bed-phamber,  sleeping  apartments. 

(M.  XXXII.  72,  etc). 

SAEKAEA— Bugar,  a small  stone,  a pebble,  a gravel,  sand,  any  hard 
particle. 

A material  of  which  idols  are  made  (M.  li.  6,  etc.,  see  under 

Abhasa). 

Of.  Miisaloua  tu  sampidya  tarkaradi-samanvitam  I 

(Suprabhedagama,  XXXI.  110). 

8ASTBA-MANPAPA-— An  arsenal,  a detached  building  for  the  storage 
of  arms. 


680  SlKHl 

SAKHA— A branch,  an  arm,  a part  of  a work,  a wing,  the  door-frame, 
the  door-post,  the  Jamb. 

(1)  Sakha-dvaye’pi  karyam  sardham  tat  syad  udumbarayoh  11 
Uchchhrayat  pada-vistirna  &akha  tadvad  udnmbarah  i 
Vistara-pada-pratimaih  bahulyam  §akhayoh  smritam  II 
Tri-paiioha-sapta-navabhih  feakhabhis  tat  pra^asyate  \ 
Adhah-^akha-chatur-bhage  pratiharan  nive&ayet  II 

(Brihat-samhiha,  Liii.  24  ; LVI.  13,14). 

(2)  The  third  and  fourth  lines  of  the  Byihat-samhita  quoted  above 

are  identical  with  those  in  the  Matsya-Purana  (see  chap. 

270,  v.  20-21). 

(3)  Uchchhrayat  pada-vistirna  sakhas  tadvad  udumbare  II 
Vistararddhena  bahulyam  sarvesham  eva  kirtitam  \ 
Tri-pafioh'a-sapta-navabhih  ^akhabhir  dvaram  iahtadam  II 
Adliah-&akha-ohaturtham&e  pratih|irau  nivetayet  1 
Mithunaih  pada-varnabhih  feakha-feesham  vibhushayet  II 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  104,  v.  28-30), 

(4)  A wing  (Babhoi  Inscrip,  v.  Ill,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  I.  p.  31). 

SANTIKA— (see  Utsedha) — A measure,  the  height  which  is  equal  to 
the  breadth. 

(See  M.  XXXV.  22-28,  and  of.  Kamikagama, 
L.  24-28,  under  Adbhuta). 

SALA— A hall,  a room,  an  apartment,  a house,  a stable,  a stall.  The 
three  terms,  l^ala,  Mandapa,  and  Griha,  are  indiscriminately  used 
to  imply  houses  in  general.  All  of  them  consist  of  similar  parts 
and  are  used  for  same  purposes  in  fact.  Go-tala  (cow-shed)  (M. 
xxxii.  87),  patha-tala  (college  or  school) ; vaji-feala,  gaja-tala,  and 
mesha-tala  (M.  XL.  127-128,  etc.)  generally  indicate  a separate 
house  for  domestic  animals  ; while  paka-tala  (kitchen),  etc.,  may 
imply  a hall  or  room  inside  a building  also. 


6Ala 


681 


(1)  Mana8ara(oliap.  XXXV.,  named  Sala,  1-404)  : 

In  this  chapter  ‘ §ala  ’ is  used  mostly  in  the  sense  of  a house, 
^alas  imply  both  temples  and  residential  buildings  for  the 
Brahmins,  the  Kshatriyas,  the  Vai&yas  and  the  Madras 
(lines  1-2). 

Their  oharaoteristic  features  as  single  buildings  : 

^alayah  parito’lindam  prishthato  bhadra-sariiyutam  | 40 

Purato  mapidapopetam. \ 41 

Bkaneka-talantam  syat  chuli-harmyadi-manditam  I 47 
Like  villages,  Salas  are  divided  into  six  classes,  namely 
Dandaka,  Svastika,  Maulika,  Ohatur-mukha,  Sarvato-bhadra, 
and  Vardhamana  (lines  3-4).  Soma  of  these  with  a certain 
number  of  halls  are  stated  to  be  temples,  while  others  vary- 
ing in  the  number  of  rooms  are  meant  for  the  residences  of 
different  castes  (32-37).  A distinction  is  made  with  regard 
to  the  number  of  storeys  they  should  be  furnished  with 
(78,  369-373,  etc). 

The  maximum  number  of  storeys  a sala  has  is  twelve  as 
usual.  All  the  storeys  of  all  these  salas  are  described  in 
detail  (6-401). 

(2)  Kamikagama  (chap.  xxxv.  l-193a)  : 

l^alas  are  meant  to  be  the  dwellings  of  the. Brahmins  and  others 
(v.  1-2): 

Bka-dvi-tri-chatuh-sapta-dasa-^ala  prakirtitah  I 
Tad-urdham  tri-tri-vridhya  tu  yavad  ishtam  pragrihyatam  II 
TaAva  malikah  prokta  mala-vat  kriyate  yatah  II 
Then  follow  the  measurement  (v.  3-12),  and  the  ayadi-shad- 
varga  (v.  13-20). 

The  different  parts  of  the  Sala ; 

Adhishthanam  cha  padam  oha  prastaram  karnam  eva  oha  \ 
^ikharam  sttipika  ohaiva  kalahgam  iti  kathyate  II  21 
The  measurement  of  the  base,  pillar,  entablature,  tower,  fiuial 
and  dome  is  given  next  (v.  22-32). 


582 


SALA 


The  wall  is  also  described  (v.  32,33): 

Tri-hastantam  tu  vistaro  bhittinam  parikirtitah  II 
Mula-bhitter  idam  manam  urdhve  padardha-hinakam  \ 
Anyonyam  adhika  vapi  nyuna  va  bbittayab  samab  II 
The  groups  of  Salas  are  described  (y.  34-36). 

The  terraces  (alinda)  are  also  described’(v.  36-38)  : 

Asam  agre  tu  alindah  syuh  pradhane  va  vi^eshatah  I 
Bka-dvi-tri-ohatusb-panoha-shat-saptalinda  8amyu^(-a)b  11 
Prishthe  par&ve  tathaiva  syuh  ishta-dese  athava  punah  I 
The  courtyard  (prahkana  or  prahgana)  is’i  described  (see  v. 
39-42).  The  adytum,  the  open  quadrangle,  and  the  upper 
storey,  etc.,  are  also  described  (v.  46-67).  This  section  is 
closed  with  the  statement  that  the  description  of  &alas  given 
above  is  but  general  characteristics  (68). 

This  is  followed  by  a brief  reference  to  the  uses  of  §alas  : 
Taitilanam  dvi-jatinam  pashanda&raminam  api  1 
Hasty-a§va-ratha-yodhanam  yaga-homadi-karmasu  I 
Devanam  bhu-patinam  oha  nritta-gitadi-kannasu  ||  68 

Then  follow  the  architectural  and  other  details  of  the  storeys 
which  number  as  many  as  sixteen  (69-86)  : 

Bvam  eva  prakarena  kuryad  ashodafea-kshmakam  H 86 
The  talas  are,  like  the  villages  and  towns,  classified  (87-88)  : 
Adyam  tu  sarvato-bhadram  dvitiyam  vardhamanakam  i 
Tritiyam  svastikaih  proktaiii  nandyavartam  chaturthakam  !l 
Charukarh  (?  Ruchakam)  pailcham-(ara)  vidyach  chhalanam 

api(-abhi)dhanakam  II 

Details  of  these  talas  are  given  next  (v.  89-96). 

Mandapas  and  talas  are  distinguished  from  each  other  : 
Mandapam  tu  vidhatavyam  talanam  agra-detake  II  96a 
The  remaining  portion  of  the  chapter  deals  with  some  con- 
stituent members  of  talas,  such  as  the  pxthika,  bhadra,  khalu- 
rika  (103, 117-118),  gopura  (124a),  chuli-harmya  (126),  ahkana 
(131),  parigha  (132a),  vamta  (147,  149).  pinda  (168),  etc, 


SiLA 


m 


The  stone -pillars  and  stone-walls  are  stated  not  to  be  built  in 
residential  ^alas  or  buildings  (161) : 

^ila-stambham  tila-kudyam  naraVase  na  karayet  \ 

The  drains  (jala-dvara),  etc.,  are  next  described. 

The  chapter  closes  with  an  account  of  the  rules  regarding  the 
situation  of  halls  like  the  drawing  room  (asthana-mandapa, 
V.  191),  kitchen  (v.  176-178),  bedroom  (179),  etc. 

Sarvada  bhinna-salasu  sandhi-karma  na  karayet  II  157a 
Devata-sthapanam  pindam  salasu  na  vidhiyate  II  158 
Ibid.  h.  90  (definition  ) ; 

Yamfeadir  amta-rahita  8ikhara-3tupikanvita(h)  \ 
hfasika-mukha-pattamta  saleti  parikirtita  II 
(B)  Dhana-dhanyam  cha  vayavye  karmma-'salam  tato  bahih  I 

' The  treasury  and  granary  should  be  built  at  the  north-west, 
outside  that  should  be  the  office.’ 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  266,  v.  35) 
(4)  Sampadaya  padma-nidhe.(h)  salam  svarna-raayim  kuru  II 
Eathasye&ana-dig-bhage  &alaih  kritva  su^obhanam  I 
Tan-madhye  mandapam  kritva  vedim  tatra  sunirmalam  11 

(Skanda-Purana,  Yaishnava- 
khanda,  li.  chap.  26,  v.  B,  26). 
(6)  Manavanam  griha  prokta  vasavas  te  kak\ib-gatah  i 

Samsthana-bhedena  te  jfieyah  panohadha  syuh  pramanatah  II 
Svayoni-vyasa-gatayo  dig-vidikshu  cha  samsthitah  I 
Bhinna-^tila  cha  sa  prokta  manujanam  &ubha-pradah  II 
Dig-vidikshv-eka-yonistha  paryastena  tathaiva  cha  I 
Jiieya  chatur-taleti  &ilpa-tastra-nidar^ibhih  II  ^ 

(Vastu-vidya,  ed.  Sastri,  vili.  1-3) 
(6)  Purva-dakshinam  bhagaih  mahanatam  hasti-&alam  koshtha- 
garafii  cha  \ 

Pa&ohimottaram  bhagaih  yana-ratha-&ala  \ 

(Kautiliya-Artha&astra,  chap.  XXV. 

p,  56). 


684 


sAlA. 


(7)  ^ala-feri-bhSgar-tulya  kartavya  vithika  bahir  bhavanat  I 

“ Outside  the  dwelling  one  should  make  a gallery,  being  in 
width  a third  of  the  hall.” 

(Brihat'Samhita,  Mil.  20,  see  J.  B.  A.  S., 
N.  S,,  vol.  VI.  p.  283). 

(8)  Vyakhyana-lialu — hall  of  study. 

(Bheraghat  Inscrip,  of  Alhanadevi,  v. 

28,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  ii.  pp.  13, 16). 

(9)  Teneyam  karita  &ala  srivisala  monorama  I 
Bhatreva  sveohohhaya  srishtih  sthapitadisura-trayah  II 
Sala  Manovativaisha  Brahma-yukta  virajate  I 

Atra  vidyarthinah  santi  nana-janapadodbhavah  II 
“ He  got  this  school  made  here,  magnificent  in  its  splendour 
and  handsome,  as  it  were,  made  by  the  Creator  after  his 
own  will,  in  which  he  placed  the  three  principal  gods.  This 
school  shines  forth  like  Manovati  (a  mythical  town  on 
mount  Meru)  Joined  by  Brahman  ; here  there  are  scholars 
bom  in  various  lands.” 

“ To  judge  by  the  description  of  it,  the  6ala  must  have  been 
an  establishment  of  some  importance.” 

(Salotgi  Pillar  Insorip.  no,  A,  v.  16,  17, 
Bp.  Ind.  vol.  IV.  pp.  60,  61, 
63,  68,  note  6). 

(10)  Go-'sala — cow-shed  (Three  Insorip.  from  Travancore,  no.  B, 

line  3,  Bp.  Ind.  vol,  iv.  p.  203). 

(11)  Natya-tala — a hall  for  religious  music  (?danoing)  built  in  front 

of  the  Durga  temple. 

(Dirghasi  Inscrip,  of  Vanapati,  line  16, 
Bp.  Ind.  vol.  IV.  pp.  316,  318). 

(12)  Bhakta-tala — an  almshouse  or  place  for  the  distribution  of 

food. 

(Assam  Plates  of  Vallabhadeva,  V.  13,  Bp. 

Ind,  vol.  V.  pp.  184,  183,  187), 


salA 


686 


(13)  Chakre  feri-Aparajite&a-bliavaue  feala  feathasyam  rathah  Kaila&a- 

pratimas  triloka-kamalalamkara-ratnochohayab  ( 

“ For  the  temple  of  Aparajitefea  he  provided  a hall  -with  a car 
richly  decked  with  precious  stones.” 

(The  Chahamanas  of  Naddula,  no.  C,  Sundha 
hill  Inscrip,  of  Chachigadeva,  v.  62,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  IX.  pp.  78,74). 

(14)  Chatu(h)-&alava3adha-prati&raya-pradena  arama«tadaga-udai 

pana-karena  1 

“ Who  has  given  the  shelter  of  quadrangular  rest-houses  and 
made  wells,  tanks,  and  gardens.” 

(Nasik  Cave  Inscrip,  no.  10,  line  2f.,  Ep,  Ind. 

vol.  viii.  pp.  78,  79), 

(16)  “ Caused  to  be  built  in  stone  on  the  summit  japa-tale,  satra, 
and  a fort  with  bastion.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  x.  Bagepalli  Taluq,  no.  68, 
Transl,  p.  240). 

(16)  “ In  the  antarala  (or  interior)  they  erected  a most  beautiful 

rahga-mantjapa,  and  a fine  chandra-§ale  (or  upper  storey) 
according  to  the  directions  given  by  the  Eing  Timendra.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  xii.  Pavugada  Taluq,  no.  46, 
Transl.  p.  46,  line  14  f. ; Boman  text,  p. 

203,  V.  9). 

(17)  “ By  him  this  college  (6ala)  has  been  caused  to  be  constructed 

(established),  rich,  spacious  and  beautiful And  this 

college  full  of  intelligence  is  resplendent  with  Brahmanas. 
Here  there  are  scholars  born  in  various  districts.  For 
their  subsistence  is  (hereby)  provided.”  (cf.jno.  9 above), 

(Salotgi  Inscrip,  Ind,  Ant,  vol.  i.  p.  210,  c.  2. 

para  1), 


6Al1 


(18)  6aleyam  vividha-pravasi-manuja-prajyopakara-kshama  rathya 

ohaf^ara-ramya-kosh^a-vilasad-vatayana  &lakshna-bhuh  | 
Nana-defea-samagatan  pathi  pariferantan  asangrahino  nityam 
bbojana-vasa-dana-'vidhiiia  kamaimgan  toshayet  !i 

(Insorip.  from  Nepal,  no.  23,  Inscrip,  of 
Qneen  Lalita-tri-pura-Sundari,  v.  4,  second 
aeries,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  p.  194). 

(19)  “ The  building,  represented  in  the  plate  as  adjoining  the 

temple,  is  a dharma-^ala  or?  house  of  rest,  where  pilgrims 
of  good  (?)  caste  receive  board  and  lodging  gratis  for  a 
fixed  period.” 

(Ind,  Ant.  vol.  xvi.  p.  11.  c.  2,  line  I f), 

(20)  “ Erected  a stone  hall  for  gifts  (dana-tala)  in  Jinanathapura 

(a  suburb  of  8ravana-Belgola).” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  ii.  Insorip.  on  Chandragiri, 
no.  40,  Transl.  p.  122,  line  20  ; Boman  text, 
p.  10,  line  4 from  bottom  upwards). 

,(21)  “ His  mother  .......and  his  sister..... erected  a paddi-tala  in 

his  memory.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  ii.  no.  61,  Transl.  p.  129,  last 
para  ; Eomau  text,  p.  34,  last  three  lines, 
Introduction  p.  61,  para  3) 

(22)  Madida  padatale  (pada  or  pada-tala) — Mr.  Bice  translates 

it  by  verandah. 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  iii.  Mysore  Taluq,  no.  69, 
Boman  text,  p«T3,  Transl.  p.  6). 

(23)  “ He  was  pleased  to  set  with  precious  stones  the  Kandalur 

hall  (fealai).” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  iii.  Tirumakridlu-Narasipur 
Taluq,  no.  36,  Boman  text,  p.  147,  line  1, 
Transl.  p.  74,  line  1 f). 


SALA 


687 


(24)  Endowed  it  (basadia  or  Jaina  temple)  with  Arhanaliaili  (a 
village  or  town) , together  with  a fine  tank,  a street  with  a 
hall  for  gifts  (dana-^ala)  in  the'  middle,  ’’two  oil-mills  and 
two  gardens.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  iv.  Krishnarujapefc  Taiuq, 
no.  3,  Transl.  p.  99,  Eoman  text,  p.  169, 
last  three  lines). 

(26)  Out  of  love  for  (the  god)  Chennigaraya,  ('reoted  the  Yfiga- 
^ale.  • 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  I,  Belur  Taluq,  no. 

13,  Transl.  p.  47,  Eoman  text,  p.  107). 

(26)  “'Sri-Q-opala-3vamiyavara-nava-ranga-patta-§rile  prakara-vauu 

kattisi.” 

Bor  the  god  G-opala he  erected  the  nava-rahga,  the 

patta-&ala,  and  the  enclosure  wall  . 

Nava-rahga  prakara-patta  tale-samasta-dharmma— this  nava- 
rahga,  enclosure  wall  and  patta-tala  and  all  other  work  of 

merit  were  carried  out  by ” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  I,  Channaraypatna 
Taluq,  no.  186,  Eoman  text,  p.  467,  Transl. 

p.206). 

(27)  “ The  Virupaksha-tala  was  erected  to  the  temple,” 

The  inscription  is  ‘ on  the  floor  of  the  mantapa  in  front  of 
the  Virabhadra  temple.  Bala  apparently  means  here  a 
mandapa  or  detached  building  (pavilion)  where  the.  god 
Virupaksha  is  installed’. 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  vi.  Koppa  Taluq,  no.  4, 
Transl.  p.  76,  Roman  text,  p.  166). 

(28)  “ To  the  thousand  of  Gautamagrama  were  given  three  talas 

(halls  or  public  rooms)  to  continue  as  long  as  moon  and 
stars.” 

^ale  or  tala  in  the  sense  of  a hall  or  house  has  been  used  in 
this  inscription  more  than  twenty-five  times. 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  Vlir.  Shikarpur  Taluq, 
no.  46  (bis),  Transl.  pp.  49,  50 ; 

Roman  text,  pp.  97-98), 


688 


SALA-GRIHiV 


I^5.LA~Q-RIHA“A  dwelling  house,  a type  of  building. 

A type  of  rectangular  building  ; 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  v.  16-17,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  21-22,  26-27,  see  under  Prasada). 

^ALAli^GA — The  limbs  of  the  &ala  (hall  or  house),  the  essential  parts 
of  a house  comprising  the  basement,  pillar,  entablature,  tower, 
finial  and  dome. 

Adhisl^hanam  cha  padam  cha  prastaram  karnam  eva  cha  \ 
^ikharam  stupika  chaiva  fealahgam  iti  kathyate  II 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  21), 

^AIiA-MALIKA — A class  of  buildings,  a type  of  hall. 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  6,  see  under  Malika). 

^ASA1?A — ^An  architectural  member,  a plate,  a part  of  an  enclosing 
wall. 

Tad  (mukha-bhadra)-agre  vatha  partve  oha  kuryat  sopana-bhusha- 

nam  I 

Tasya  (man^apasya)  madhye  oha  range  tu  mauktikena  prapa- 

nvitam  1 

Tan-madhye  tSsanadinam  toranam  kalpa-vrikshakam  \ 

(M.  xxxrv.  217-219). 

6lKHABA-^The  top,  an  apex,,  a spire,  a cupola,  the  lower  part  of  the 
finial,  a spherical  roof  rising  like  an  inverted  cup  (Latin  cupa) 
over  a circular,  square  or  multangular  building,  a small  tower  or 
turret. 

Above  the  dome  (stupi)  are  built  in  order  Sikhara,  Sikha,  Sikhanta, 
and  l^ikhamani. 

(1)  Small  towers  or  turrets  (Brihat-saifahita,  LVI.  21,  J,  B.  A.  S., 

N.  S.,  vol.  VI.  p,  319). 

(2)  See  M.  xviii.  276,  xix.  61,  etc. 

(3)  Padoktam  sarva-manam  tu  'sikbaro’pi  vidhiyate  I! 
Dhruva-vidhaua-ritya  va  tikharaih  parikalpayet  II 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  29,  30),. 


SIKHARA 


The  synonyins : 

Sikharam  feirah  murdha  cha  &ikha  mauli^  oha  mundakam  I 
Sirsham  kam  iti  vijneyam  &iro-vargasya  panditah  H 

(Ibid.  L.  206). 

(4)  Vanarendra-griham... aukia-praaada-sikharaih  kailasa- 

sikharopamaih  l 
(Ramayana,  iv.  33,  15,  see  also  iv.  26,  31 ; 

VI.  41,  88,  under  Prasada). 

(5)  Spire : 

Devuniki  §ikharamu  gatfciihchi  feikhara-mamfcapa-gopitralii  \ 

(Kondavidu  luscrip.  of  Krishnaraya,  V.  27, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  VI.  pp.  237, 232). 

(6)  Mula-sikhare  oha  kanaka-maya-dhvaja-damdasya  dlivajaro- 
pana-pratish^hfiyam  kritayam — “ also  of  the  hoisting  of  the 
flag  on  the  golden  flag-staff  on  the  original  spire.” 

(The  Ghahamanas  of  Marwar,  no.  xix,  Jalor 
stone  Insorip.  of  Saniarasimhadeva,  line 
4 f.,  Ep.  Ind..  vol,  XI,  p.  56)i 

(7)  Idu-rajabadri  hema-tikhara-pratipattiyau-Itaniye  pettudu 

Harahasa-kalpa-taru  kemdalirindesev-agra-bhagadol-puclidiid 
Umadhinatha-sita-gatra-sapimga-sutumga-jutadondo-davenipa 
Svayambhu-^iva-gehada  pomgalafeam  sa-mamgalam  II 
“The  golden  spire,  with  its  auspicious  ornament  of  this  house 
of  Svayambhu-^iva  is  such  that  it  may  be  said  that  this  is 
the  silver  mountain  which  has  obtained,  by  the  gift  of  I&a, 
the  possession  of  a golden  summit ; it  is  a tree  of  desire  on 
(the  white  pile  of)  Hara’s  laughter,  (namely,  the  mountain 
Kailata),  crowned  by  a summit  radiant  with  young  red 
spouts,  in  it  there  is  combined  the  unique  substance  of  the 
white  body  and  the  tawny  towering  matted  hair  of  the  Lord 
of  Uma.” 

(Inscrip,  from  Yewur,  B.  oi  A.l).  1017,  v.  98, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  XII.  pp.  282,  289). 


590 


^IKHAEl 


(8)  Prasadam  urddhva-sikhara-atliira-liema-kumbham  \ 

“(Into)  the  temple  (which  by  the  stately  display  of)  firm 

golden  capitals  upon  lofty  spires ” 

(Bhuvane&war  Inscrip,  v.  15,  line  11,  Bp. 

Ind.  vol.  XIII.  pp.  162,  164). 

(9)  Vistirnna-tunga-sikharam— “( a temple  having)  broad  and 

lofty  spire.” 

Manoharaih-sikharaih — -with  (its)  charming  spires. 

(Mandasor  stone  Insorip.  of  Bumaragupta, 
lines  17,  20,  C.  I.  I.  vol.  in.  P.  G-.  I. 

no.  18,  pp.  83,  8B,  87). 

(101  “ For  this  god  Prasamia-Virupaksha,  a temple,  enclosing  wall, 
gopura,  finial  (§ikhara)  covered  with  gold,  a Manmatha  tank, 

decorations  and  illuminations ” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  x.  Mulbagal  Taluq,  no.  2, 
Eoman  text,  p.  82,  Transl.  p.  71). 
The  same  word  in  a similar  sentence  is  translated  by  ‘ tower  ’ 
in  the  following  inscription  : 

(11)  “For  the  god  Prasanna-Some&vara  having  restored  the  temple, 

enclosure,  tower  (tikhara),  Manmatha  tank,  the  endowed 
villages,  the  mantapas  for  alms,  and  all  other  religious 
provisions.” 

(Ibid.  no.  18,  Roman  text,  p.  87,  Transl. 

p.  75). 

(12)  Varadaraja-devara  sikhara  (sikhara) — “the  spire  of  Varadarja’s 

temple.” 

(Ibid.  Malur  Taluq,  no.  4,  Roman  text, 
p.  187,  Transl.  p.  166). 

(13)  “And  erecting  a stone  pillar,  according  to  the  rules  set  up  the 

spire  or  tower  (Sikhara).” 

(Ibid,  vol,  XII.  Pavugada  Taluq,  no.  46, 
Transl.  p.  122,  line  16  j Eoman  text, 
p.  203,  V.  10). 


SIBIKl-VESMA 


(14)  Garbha  griha-sthita-maiitfapa-&ikharam— “fche  ruined  tower 
over  the  shrine  (of  the  god  Arkanatba).” 

(Ibid.  vol.  HI.  Malavalli  Taluq,  no.  64, 
Eojnan  text,  p.  127,  line  3,  Transl.  p.  63). 
(16)“ 6ik(h)ara— Applied  to  the  summit  of  a tower.”  Rea. 

(Chalakyan  architecture.  Arch.  Surv.  new 
Imp.  series,  vol.  XXI.  p.  39). 

(16)  “The  platform  on  which  this  temple  stands  is  approached  by 
twelve  steps,  and  six  more  lead  to  the  sanctum,  over  which 
rises  a tall  dome  or  truncated  sikri  (sikhara).” 

(Cunningham,  Arch.  Surv.  Reports,  vol. 

xxni.  p.  136). 

(17)  “Sikhara  (sikar,  sikri) — Steeple  of  temple.” 

(Yincent  Smith,  G-loss,,  loo.  cit.,  to  Cunning- 
ham’s Arch.  Surv.  Reports). 
6IKHA — The  lower  part  of  the  tinial,  pinnacle  or  small  turret-like 
termination. 

^ikha  is  the  upper  part,  and  Silfhara,  the  lower : 
iSikharordhva-feikhottuhgaih  stupi-traya-samam  eva  oha  I 
Prastaradi-^ikhantam  syad  ganya-manarh  pravakshyate  I 

(M . XXXIII . 141 , 144,  etc) . 
I§IKHA.NTA — The  finial  (Latin  finis),  the  top  or  finishing  portion  of 
a pinnacle. 

(M.  XI.  119,  etc). 

SIKHA-MANI — The  crest-jewel,  the  top  end  of  the  finial,  the  apex. 

(M.  XLix.  86,  iixvii.  31,  etc). 

Cf.  ^iro-ratna — crest-jewel. 

(Deopara  Insorip.  of  Vijayasena,  v.  14,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  I.  pp.  308,  313). 

SIBIKA — A synonym  of  yana  or  conveyance,  a litter,  a palanquin. 

(M.  III.  9,  etc). 

SIBIKA-VESMA— A type  of  rectangular  building. 

(1)  Agni-Purima  (chap.  104.  v.  16-17,  see  under  Prusada). 

(2)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  21-22,  26-27,  see  under  Prasada). 


SIBIEA — camp,  a royal  residence,  a fortified  city. 

(M.  X.  40,  etc). 

Sama  (sama)ntanam  samriddhanam  yat  sthanam  feibiram  smritam  I 
Gaja-vaji-samayuktam  sena-sthanam  tad.eva  hi  11 

(Kamikagama,  xx.  11). 

6IRAS-— The  head,  the  finial,  the  top,  the  summit,  the  pinnacle. 

(M.  XV.  231,  etc.,  LVii;  54^  etc). 
6IBASTRAKA(-STRANA)--A  head-gear,  a helmet. 

(M.  XL?;x.  13,  etc.,  see  Bhiishana). 
6IRALAMBA — A crowning  ornament  of  a column. 

(M.  XV.  101,  see  Stambha), 
^ILA-KARMA— Masonry,  the  art  of  building  in  stone,  the  stone-work. 
Siigana  raje-Dhanabhutana  karitam  toranam  &ilakaibmamto  cha 
upaihno  (tila-karmanta&-ohotpannah)  \ 

“During  the  reign  of  the  Sungas  (l^ungas)  (this)  gateway  was 
erected  and  the  masonry  finished  by  Dhanabhuti.” 

(Sunga  Insorip.  of  the  Bharhut  Stupa, 
line  3 f.,  Tnd.  Ant.  vol.  xiv.  pp.  138, 139 ; 

no.  1.  vol.  XXL  pp.  227). 
iSILADHIVASANA — Preparation  of  stones  for  building,  the  worship 
of  stones  for  building. 

Siladhivaaaua(h)-karmma  yathavidhi  sampadya  tasminn-eva  &ake 
bhiidra-krishna-navamyam  tukle  &ila-pravetam  vidhaya.. ......  | 

“The  worship  of  the  atones  for  the  building.”  Dr.  Bfihler  and 
Bhagvanlal  Indraji. 

This  interpretation  of  ^iladhivasana  does  not  seem  to  be  appropri- 
ate. The  term  may  refer  to  some  processes  or  ceremonies  similar 
to  those  in  connection  with  Sila-samgraha  or  collecting  and 
selecting  stones  for  buildings, 

(Inscrip,  from  Nepal,  no.  23,  Inscrip,  of 
Queen  Lalita-tri-pura-sundari,  line  14, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  pp.  193,  194,  c.  2). 
6ILA-PATTA-VAM6A— “ Now  known  as  Silawat  caste,  who  are 
masons  and  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Damoh.”  Rai  Bahadur 
Hiralal. 


(Ep.  Ind.  vol.  XII.  p.  44,  note  i). 


SILA-STAMBHA 


693 


S(&)ila-patta-&iibhe  vam&e  sutradhara  viohaksliaiiah  \ 

Bhojukali  Kamadevafe  cha  karmanistha  Hala,  sudhih  II 

(Batihagarh  stone  Inscrip,  v.  12,  ibid.  p.  46). 
^ILA-PEAVBSA—  Laying  the  corner-stone  or  foundation, 

6iladhivasana(h)-karmma  yathavidhi  sampadya  tasminn  eva  take 

sila-pravetam  vidhaya — ’“the  cornerstone  was  laid.” 

Dr.  Buhler  and  Bhagvanlal  Indraji. . 

(Inscrip,  from  Nepal,  no.  23,  Inscrip,  of 
Queen  Lalita-tri-pura-sundari,  line  14, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  pp.  193,  194,  o.  2). 
yiLA-MAEDDAKA  (SILE-MUDDAS)— A guild  of  stone  masons, 
the  stone-cutters. 

“ Sile  is  the  Oanarese  form  of  the  Sanskrit  tila,  a stone,  and  Mudda 
is  a jam  gam  or  Lihgayat  name.  Sile-mudda  must  be  the  name 
of  some  particular  guild  of  stone-masons,  Dr.  Eleet. 

(Sanskrit  and  Old-Canarese  Inscrip,  no.  114, 
line  1,  Ind.  Ant.  Yol.  x.  pp.  170,  117, 
note  68), 

6ILA-VE^M A— Stone-houses,  cave-houses. 

Of.  Megha-duta,  i.  26,  (quoted  by  Prof.  Liiders,  Ind,  Ant.  vol, 

XXXIV.  p,  199). 

l^ILA-STAMBHA — The  stone-column,  a kind  of  column,  the  mono* 
lith. 

Shat-saptashtahgulam  vapi  tila-stambha(ih)-vitalakam  \ 

Vrittam  va  ohatur-atram  va  ashta'sraih  shodatasrakam  I 
Pada-tuhge’shta-bhage  tu  trimaenordhvam  alankyitam  I 
Bodhikam  mushti-bandham  oha  phalaka  tatika  ghatam  \ 
Sarvalahkara-samyuktam  mule  padmasananvitam  \ 

Chatur-dikshu  chatur-bhadram  keohid  bhadram  tu  karayet  I 

Kuttimaih  chopapitham  va  sopapitha-masurakam  1 
Athava  chihna-vedih  3yat-p>rapalahkaram  uchyate  1 

(M.  Lvii,  16-22). 


38 


694 


SILPA-^ASTEA 


^ILPA-SASTEA — Tha  science  of  architecture  and  other  cognate  arts. 
See  details  under  Vastii,  Vastu-yidya  and  Vastn-karman. 

See  also  the  Preface  of  this  Dictionary  and  the  Preface  of  ‘ Indian 
Architecture  ’ by  the  writer. 

^ILPDLA'KSHANA — The  description  of  the  arfcists ; their  qualifi- 
cations, rank,  caste,  etc.  (see  under  Sthapati). 

SILPI-^ALA — A school  or  workshop  of  architecture. 

(M.  LXViii.  60). 

^IVA — A class  of  buildings. 

(Kamikagama,  XLV.  35-38,  see  under  Malika). 
SITA-KANTA— The  pentagonal  or  five-sided  pillar  furnished  with 
five  minor  pillars. 

(M.  XV.  22,  245,  see  uuder  Stambha). 
^lYA-MANDAPA — The  ^iva-temple,  a type  of  pavilion. 

(M.  XXXIV.  196). 

^ISHTA-MANDAPA — A type  of  pavilion. 

(See  Kamikagama  under  Ardha-mandapa). 
61ESHA — The  top  end  of  a building,  almost  same  as  ^ikhanta, 
^irsham  oha  tikha-grivarii  vrittarii  syad  vaijayautikam  I 

(M.  XIX.  181,  etc). 

SUKA-NA.SA(-SIKA) — The  parrot’s  nose,  an  object  having  an 
acquiline  nose,  the  part  of  the  finiaj  looking  like  the  parrot’s 
nose.  • 

(1)  Chaturdha  tikharam  hhajya  ardha-baga-dvayasya  tu  I 
^uka-naaam  prakurvita  tritiye  vedika  matu  II 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  269,  v.  18). 

(2)  ^ikharartham  (?-dham)  hi  sutrfini  chatvari  vinipatayet  \ 
6uka-nato(-sa)rddhatah  sutrara  tiryyag-bhutam  nipatayet  li 
^ikhaiasyardha-bhagastham  siihham  tatra  tu  karayet  I 
^uka  •nasam  sthirikritya  madhya-sandhau  nidhapayet  II 
Apare  cha  tatha  pars ve  tadvat  sutram  nidhapayet  I 
Tad-urddhvam  tu  bhaved  vedi  sakantha  manasarakam  ii 

(Agai-Purana,  chap.  42,  V.  16-17), 


SUBHAiaKARl 


595 


Chaturdha  ^ikharam  kritva  ^uka-nasa  dvi-bkagika  !l 

(Ibid.  chap.  104,  v.  10). 

(3)  Prasadau  nirgatau  karyau  kapotau  garbha-manatah  1 
’Utdhvam  bhitty-uchohhrayat  tasya  mahjarim  tu  prakalpayet  11 
Manjarya&  charha-bhagena  feuka-nasam  prakalpayet  1 
tirdhvam  tatluirdha-bhagena  vedi-bandho  bhaved  ilia  II 

(Yi&vak,  6,  767,  quoted  by  Kern,  J.  E.  A. 
S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  VI,  p.  321,  note  2 of 
p.  320). 

The  above  lines  are  identical  in  the  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  269,  V. 

11-13). 

(4)  Yrittakaram  samam  chet  tu  torapahghrivad  ayatam  I 
Sakandharam  tad-urdhye  tu  &uka.nasya  vibhushitam  II 
G-arbha-dvi-tri-kara-vya3a-&uka-na35  mukhe  mukhe  1 
Na  kartavya  vimaneshu  nasikordhve  na  nasika  II 

(Kamikagama,  LV.  120,  157). 

^UKANG-HEI — A type  of  pillar. 

Urddhva-kshetra-sama  jahgha  jahgharddha-dvi-gunaih  bhavet  I 
G-arbha-vistara-vistirnah  &ukahghri&  cha  vidhiyate  II 
Tat-tri-bhagena  karttavyah  pahcha-bhagena  va  punah  > 

Nirgamam  tu  feukanghrafe  cha  uohohhrayah  §ikhararddhagah  II 

(G-aruda-Puraua,  chap.  47,  v.  3-4,  see  also 
V.13, 17). 

^UBBHA^ — A house  built  (generally)  of  one  material,  namely,  wood, 
brick,  or  stone,  etc. 

Drumeneshtakaya  vapi  dri&adadyair  athSpi  va  , 

Etena  sahitam  geham  §uddham  ity-abhidhiyate  II 

(Kamikagama.  XLV.  2i). 

See  also  Manasara,  etc.,  under  Prasada. 

SUBHAiaKAEl— The  fifth  or  composite  type  of  the  five  Indian 
orders, 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxr.  65,67,  see  under 
Stainbha), 


696 


l§ULA 


^tJLA — A pike,  a dart,  a lance,  the  trident  of  ^iva,  the  finial. 

A dart  (M.  vn.  223,  236,  Liv.  142). 

A synonym  of  tikha  or  finial  (M.  xvii.  126). 

A pike  as  a component  part  of  the  cage  for  the  tiger  (M.  l.  262). 
^ULA-KAMPA—Csee  6nla)— A pike. 

Paritah  tula-kampam  syad  dvaram  tad  dakshinottaram  1 

(M.  XL.  136). 

^EH^KHALA—A  chain. 

In  connection  with  the  bedstead  : 

Chatnrbhih  trinkhalayuktam  andolarh  chaikatopari  I 

(M.  xLiv.  70). 

^ElhlGiA — The  top,  the  turret,  elevation,  height,  the  spire,  a horn. 

(M.  LXii.  26,  etc). 

^yingenaikena  bhavet — ^furnished  with  one  spire. 

(Bpihat-samhita,  LVI.  23,  26,  J.  E.  A.  S., 
N.  8.,  VOL.  VI.  p.  319). 

^EI^Q-AEA-MANDAPA — A bed-chamber,  the  pavilion  or  room  where 
the  deity  of  a temple  is  made  to  retire  at  night. 

Devanam  oha  vhasartham  tringarakhyam  tu  mandapam  I 

(M,  XXXIV.  388,  etc). 

^YAMA-BHADEA—A  type  of  pavilion  with  fourteen  pillars. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  14,  see 
Mandapa). 

6eANTA  An  architectural  ornament,  a shed. 

In  connection  with  single-storeyed  buildings  : 

Evam  proktam  harmyake  madhya-bhadram  \ 
l^ala-koshtham  dig-vidike  kuta-yukta  I 
Hara-tranta-nasika-pailjaradhyam  l 

(M.  XIX.  192-194). 

6e1-KANTHA — Anything  possessing  a beautiful  neck,  a class  of 
buildings. 

A type  of  octagonal  building  (Agni-Purapa,  chap.  104,  v.  20-21, 

see  under  Prasada). 


697 


^Bl-KAEA — An  order,  a class  of  columns,  a type  of  storeyed 
buildings,  a sect  of  people. 

(1)  One  of  the  five  orders  (Suprabhedagama.  xxxi,  66,  66,  see  under 

Stambha), 

(2)  A class  of  single -storeyed  buildings  (M.  xix.  170,  see  under 

Prasada). 

(3)  A class  of  two-storeyed  buildings ; the  measurement  of  the 
component  parts  (see  under  ^alanga),  etc.,  (M.  xx.  93,  2-9, 

see  under  Prasada), 

(4)  A sect  of  people  (M.  ix.  162,  226,  etc). 

^EI-KANTA — A type  of  storeyed  building,  a class  of  bases  comprising 
four  types  which  differ  from  one  another  in  the  addition  or 
omission  of  some  mouldings  and  also  in  height. 

(M.  XIV.  371-387,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 
under  Adhishthana). 

A class  of  three-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxi.  2-11,  see  under 

Prasada) 

A class  of  seven-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxv.  24,  see  under. 

Prasada) 

l§El-JAYA — A type  of  oval  building. 

(1)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  v.  19-20,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  29-30,  see  under  Prasada). 
^El-PADA — ^A  class  of  buildings. 

.....6ri-padam  cha  tatah  ferinu  I 

Kosh^hakastv-iha  ohatvara§  ohatush-koneshu  ohaiva  hi  II 
Chatur-nasi-samayuktam  anu-nasi-da&ashtakam  \ 

‘ Bvam  lakshapa-samyuktam  &ri-padam  tv-iti  kirtitam  II 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  60,  61). 

^El-BANDHA— A class  of  bases  comprising  four  types  which  differ 
from  one  another  in  the  addition  or  omission  of  some  mouldings. 

(M.  XIV.  109-122,  see  the  lists  of  mould- 
ings under  Adhishthana). 


sm  8E1.BANDHA-KIJTTIMA 


^EI-BAHBHA-KUTTIMA — The  flat  part  of  the  Sri-bandha  type 
of  bases. 


(M.  XLiv.  43). 

§El-BHADBA — A kind  of  throne,  a type  of  pedestal. 

A class  of  thrones  (M.  XLV.  13,  etc). 

A kind  of  Pitha  or  the  pedestal  of  the  Phallus  (M.  Liii.  36,  etc). 
SEl-BHOG-A— A type  of  storeyed  building,  a class  of  bases  comprising 
two  types  which  differ  from  each  other  in  the  addition 
or  omission  of  some  mouldings. 

(M.  XIV.  260-280,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 
under  Adhishthana). 

A class  of  seven-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxv.  25,  see  under 

Prasada). 

8E1-MUKHA — A beautiful  face,  a kind  of  throne. 

(M.  XLV.  14,  etc). 

8El-BtjPA-~A  type  of  pavilion. 

(M.  xxxiv.  478,  etc.,  see  under  Mapdapa). 
^Ei-VATSA — A class  of  buildings,  a type  of  pavilion,  a special 
mark  on  the  breast  of  the  image  of  Vishnu. 

A pavilion  with  48  pillars  (Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  V.  9,  see 

under  Mapdapa). 

A type  of  quadrangular  building  : 

(1)  Agni-Puruna  (chap.  104,  v.  14-15,  see  under  PrSsada). 

(2)  Q-aruda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  24-26,  .see  under  Prasada.) 

A particular  mark  on  the  breast  of  Vishnu  or  Krishna  “re- 
presented in  pictures  by  a symbol  resembling  a cruciform 
flower.’' 


(M.  XLix.  150,  Lv.  92,  XVIII.  376,  etc). 
8EI-VJ6aLA — A type  of  gate-house,  a class  of  storeyed  buildings, 
a kind  of  tnrono,  a type  of  pedestal. 

A class  cf  gopuras  or  gate-houses  (M.  xxxiii.  665!. 


SHAT.d:ALA 


A class  of  single-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xix.  168,  see  under 

Prasada). 

A kind  of  throne  (M.  xlv.  13,  see  Simhasana). 

A type  of  the  Pitha  or  pedestal  of  the  Phallus  (M.  liii.  39). 
SRI-VEIKSHA — (see  Kalpa-vriksha) — An  ornamental  tree  employed 
as  a carving. 

^esham  mahgalya-vihagaih  ^ri-vriksha-svastikair  ghataih  l 
Mithunaih  patra-vallibhih  pramathaife  chopa^obhayet  II 

“ Let  the  remaining  part  (of  the  door)  be  ornamented  with 
(sculptured)  birds  of  good  augury,  ^ri-vyiksha-figures,  crosses 
(svastika),  jars,  cupolas,  foliage  (leaves  and  creepers),  tendrils  and 
goblins. 

(Brihat-samhita,  LVI.  15,  J.  R.  A.  S.,  N.  S., 
vol.  VI.  p.  318), 

6R1JTI1JIJAYA — A pavilion  with  forty-eight  pillars. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  10,  see 
under  Mandapa). 

SRBNITA-DVARA — A kind  of  door,  doors  or  gates  in  a row. 

Madhye  dvaram  tu  kuryad  madhya-sutrat  tu  vamake  I 
Kuryaj  jala-dvaram  tu  ferenita-dvaram  kalpayet  \ 

(M.  XXXVIII,  39-40). 

SBENI(-Nl)-BANDHA— A class  of  bases  comprising  four  types  which 
differ  from  one  another  in  height  and  in  the  addition  or  omission 
of  som'e  mouldings. 

(M.  XIV.  149-176,  see  the  lists  of  mouldings 
under  Adhishthana). 

yVETA-MANDA — The  white  part  of  the  eye  of  an  image. 

(M.LXV.6b). 

SH 

HHAT-TALA — The  sixth  storey,  the  six-storeyed  buildings. 

Their  general  features  (M.  xxiv.  27-46). 

Thirteen  types  (ibid.  2-26,  see  under  Prasaua;. 


600 


SHODA^A-TAtA 


SHOPASA-TALA — The  sixteenth  storey-j  the  sixteen-storeyed  gate- 
houses (see  G-opura). 

Bvam  eva  prakarena  kuryad  ashodata-kshmakam  \ 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  86). 

SHAP-VABGA — A group  of  six,  six  formulas,  six  proportions,  six 
main  component  parts  of  a building  comprising  adhishthana 
(base),  pada  or  stambha  (column),  prastara  (entablature),  karna 
(ear),  tikhara  (spire),  and  stupi  (dome). 

(1)  According  to  the  Manasara  the  A.yadi-Shad-varga  represents  a 
set  of  six  formulas  with  which  any  particular  measurement 
must  conform  before  it  can  be  accepted.  Mention  of  the 
Shad-varga  is  found  also  in  the  Bimba-mana  and  the  Agamas. 
The  formulas  in  each  case,  however,  are  not  the  same  and  differ 
in  these  several  works  (see  below). 

The  formulas  according  to  the  Manasara  : 


Aya 

is  the  remainder  of 

1 X'8 
12 

(1  for  length). 

Vyaya 

„ 

» if 

bX9 

10 

(b  for  breadth). 

Biksha 

if 

if  if 

IX  8 
27 

Yoni 

,, 

ff  if 

hX8 

B 

Vara 

„ 

if  if 

0 X 0 

7 

( 0 for  circumference,  thickness  or 

height). 

Tithi| 

„ 

ff  ff 

0X9 

SO 

Aihta  j 

fi  if 

c X 4 

0 

Etesham  grama-rupanam  ayjidi-lakshanaih  tathil  1 
Eandayama-samuhe  va  chayate  vatha  vistare  I 
Parinahe  pade  vapi  ayadi-tuddhim  oha  karayet  1 
Keohit  tv-ayatane  chaivam  Syam  cha  tad-dine  (uakshatre) 

bhavet  I 

Parinahe  tithir  varam  vyaya-yoni(fj)  oha  vistare  I 


Shad. Varga  eoi 

Yasubiiir  gunitam  bh.anur(-iiiina)  hanyayamam  ashta-^ishta- 

'kaml 

Asbtabhir  vardhite  rik8bam{-shena)  hritva  feesham  ksham 

ishyato  \ 

Navabhir  vardbayet  panktih(.tya)  hritva  ^esham  vyayam 

bhavet  \ 

G-una-nagam  oha  yoni(h)  syad  vriddhi-hanya  yatha-kramam  I 

Nava-vyiddhya  rishim(-ahina)  hritva  taoh-ohhesham  Varam 

eva  oha  \ 

Navabhir  gupite  trimfeat  -(a)  kshapeoh  ohhesham  tithir  bhavet  \ 

(M.  ix.  63-73). 

The  six  formulas  include  ‘ am&a  ’ in  the  Samohita  and  Asam- 
ohita  buildings,  while  in  the  Apasamohita,  ‘tithi’  is  included : 

Vakshye’ham  jati-harmya^am  ayadi-lakshanam  kramat  \ 

Purvoktanam  vimananam  vistaradi-va'sadibhih  \ 

Aya-vyayam  oha  yonim  oha  uakshatram  varam  amfeakam  I 

Tithir  vatha  shad  etani  tathayadi-vido  viduh  \ 

Samohitasamohitanam  oha  amtair  ayadibhir  yutam  I 

Apasamchita-harmyanam  tithy-antani  shad  grahishyate  \ 

(M.  XXX.  169-174). 

(It  should  be  noticed  that  the  divisor  in  each  case  is  the  same 
in  all  the  works  under  observation). 

The  names  of  all  the  difierent  classes  of  formulas,  such  as  Aya, 
Vyaya,  Vara,  etc.,  represent  well  known  groups  of  objects 
that  always  follow  a certain  serial  order.  Aya  represents 
the  group  of  twelve  beginning  with  Siddhi.  Vyaya 
represents  thejgroup  of  ten  beginning  with  ^ikhara.  Biksha 
represents  the  well-known  group  of  twenty -seven  planets. 
Yoni  represents  the  group  of  eight  animals,  namely,  Dhvaja, 
Dhuma,  Simha,  6una,  Vrisha,  Gardhava,  Dantin,  and  Kaka. 
Vara  represents  the  group  of  seven  days  of  the  week.  Tithi 


60^ 


SHAP-VAEG^A 


represents  the  group  of  thirty  lunar  days  comprising  fourteen 
of  the  dart  half,  fourteen  of  the  light  half,  new  moon  day 
and  the  full  moon  day.  And  Amsa  represents  the  group  of 
nine  beginning  with  Tasbara : 

Siddhadi-dva-datiayah  sySoh  chhikharadi-vyayam  data  I 

Dhvajadim  ashta  yoni(h)  syat  taskaradi-navaihtakam  \ 

Prathamadi-tithir  ity-evam  choktayad  ganayet  sndhih  1 

(M.  XXX.  188-190). 

Bhyaja-dhuma  simha-tunaka-vrisha-gardabhat  cha  \ 

Banti  cha  kakat  oha  •vasu-yoni(h)  yatha-kramena  I 

(M.  Lii,  867-368). 

Tach-ohhesham  ohapi  nakshatram  ganayed  atvini-kramat  I 

Sesham  tad  varam  ity-uktam  arka-variidi-vara-yuk  1 

(M.xxx.  183,  186,  see  context  below). 

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  measurement  of  length  is 
tested  by  the  formulas  under  Aya  and  Biksha,  of  breadth 
under  Vyaya  and  Yoni,  and  of  circumference  or  height 
under  Vara  and  Tithi. 

It  will  be  noted  that  the  formula  in  each  case  consists  of  the 
product  of  the  measurement  to  be  considered  and  a certain 
other  number  divided  by  a figure  which  corresponds  to  the 
number  constituting  the  group  or  series  under  which  it  is 
placed. 

In  each  case,  therefore,  by  resolving  the  formula,  the  remainder 
that  may  be  left  can  be  referred  to  that  particular  number  in 
the  series  represented  by  that  class,  aud  if  this  happens  to 
be  one  that  under  the  conditions  prevailing  would  be  consi- 
dered auspicious  then  the  particular  measurement  would  be 
acceptable,  if  not  lit  would  have  to  be  rejected.  For  ex- 
ample, if  in  a particular  instance  coming  under 


mAMkmk 


the  class  Yoni,  the  remainder  left  is  two,  it  will  point  to 
the  second  Yoni  Dhuma.  If  this  Yoni  is  stated  to  be 
itiauspioious,  then  the  particular  measurement  of  breadth 
cannot  be  approved.  If  again  in  the  formula  “ ^ ^ the  re- 
mainder happens  to  be  4,  it  will  indicatQ  the  4th  day 
(Wednesday)  of  the  week,  and  if  it  be  stated  to  be 
auspicious,  the  circumference  (c)  selected  satisfies  the  test. 

The  auspicious  and  inauspicious  remainders  : 

When  there  is  no  remainder  left  in  the  formula  of  ‘Aya’  it 
increases  religious  merits,-  and  when  there  is  no  remainder 
left  in  the  formula  of  ‘Vyaya  ’ it  is  auspicious.  There  is  no 
defect  if  the  ‘ Aya  ’ be  equal  to  ‘ Vyaya 
Ayam  sarva-haraiii  punyam  vyayani  sarva-haram  hibham  I 
Ayadhikyaih  vyayam  hinaiii  sarva-sampat-karani  sada  | 
Yat-phalaih  kibha-yuktam  ched  aya-hinarii  tu  dushanam  \ 
Pojyam  vyayam  samam  evam  tatra  dosho  na  vidyate  I 

(M.  Lxiv.  69-72). 

Ayam  sarva-haram  pilrnam  (?  punyam)  Vyayani  sarva-gatena 

hi  I 

Ayiidhikyam  vyayani  hinafii  sarva-sariipat-karani  tatha  \ 
Aya-hinarii  vyayadhikyaiii  sarva-dosha-karam  bhavet  \ 

(M.  IX.  75-77) 

^ubhadam  purna-nakshatram  a&ubhani  karna-rikshakam  I 
Yugmayugmadya-turyaih  shad-ashta-nanda-kubharksha-yuk  \ 
Dvitiya-paryayasyardlic  ganauais  cha  subhavaham  \ 
Sita-guru-sasi-budha-Vuram  evam  ^ubhaiii  bhavet  \ 

(M.  IX.  78-81). 

Dhvaja-^imha-vyisha-hasti  syat  teshaih  subha-yonayah  \ 

J anma  dvayam  chatuh-shashtibhir  ashta-nanda-feubha-ksham  \ 
Nama-jaumadi-nandam  cha  gananais  tu  vidhiyate  \ 


604 


SHAD-VABGA 


(Kartri-rafeyadi-nafeyam.  cha  sena-dtitiyantakam  I 
Tritiye  mana-J(y)akshadau  purva-vad  gananais  tu  va  \) 

Tasmjlt  trifeiya-paryantam  rik8liai|i  sarva-^ubhavaham  \ 
G-uru-&ukra-bTidha&  cbandra-mukbya-varam  prasasyate  \ 
Taskaro  dhana-shapdafe  oba  preshtanyani  feubham&akam  \ 
Varjyam  sbashtashtamam  ra§im  any  at  sarvam  feubbaih 

bhavet  \ 

Giajah  sarva-§ubham  proktaiii  mamisha8ura(m)  varjayet  \ 

(M.  LXIV.  73-82). 

G-aja-yonim  vina  kuryat  simbasananyablia  &ubbam  \ 
Ayiidhikyam  'vyayam  hinam  sarva-sampaob-ohbubbavabam  \ 
Aya-hinam  'vyayadbikyam  sarva  sampad  vinaianam  \ 

(M.  LV.  81-83). 

Bbuma-yonil  cba  kaka&  cha  gardbavan  hino  varjayet  \ 
Aiiya-yoni-&ubbam  sarve  ^ubbaySn  iba  yojayet  I 

(M.  LV.  81,  84-86). 

l)bvaia-simba-ba8ti-vyisba-yoni(b)  subbam  prafeastam  I 
Auyesbu  yonir  afeubbam  uditam  puranaih  I 

(M.  Lii.  369-360). 

There  are  other  rules  as  well,  e.g.,  where  Aya,  etc.,  are  consi- 
dered with  regard  to  height  in  the  Jati  class,  and  with 
regard  to  length  in  the  other  classes  of  buildings. 

Again  Aya,  etc.,  are  considered  with  regard  to  breadth  ; 
Jati-dvarodaye  sarve  chayadi-samgraham  bhavet  \ 
Chhandadinam  tu  sarveshaih  tare  chayadi-samgraham  1 
Vpiddhi-hanyadi-sarvesham  prasadasyoktavad  bhavet  I 

(M,  XXXIX.  39-41). 

Vistare  chatur-ahge  va  shat-§ubhayadi  karayet  | 

(M.lv.  72). 

The  formulas  also  vary  on  different  occasions  : 
Tri-chatuh-paficha-shat-vyidhya  ohashta  hanife  cha  yonayah  I 
Shat-aaptashtaka-vj’iddhya  tu  dvadaaa  kshapayet  budhah  \ 


SHAP-VARG-A 


606 


^esham  ayam  iti  proktam  saptashfca-nava- vardliaaat  I 
Da&abMk  ksiiapayeoh  ohhesh.am  OYaiii  vyayani  iidiritam  l 
Askta-nanda-da&e  vriddliya  sapta-vim'se  kshayo  bhavet  1 
^esham  dinam  iti  proktam  vriddhashta-nandanadhika  I 
Saptaika-chandrage  ^esliam  varam  evam  -udiritam  I 
Tri-ohatush-panoha-vriddhya  tu  kahapayet  tu  iiavam&akam  I 

(M.  Lv.  73-80;. 

Etat  tad  eva  saiiiyuktaih  harmyanam  mana-kalpanam  i 
Shat'saptashtaka-vriddik  syad  dva-da§antam  kshayam  ayayet 
^eskam  tad  ayam  ity-iiktam  samohitadi-yatha-kramam  | 
Saptaslita-iiava-vriddliya  tu  haret  panktya  vyayam  bhavet  i 
Eka-dvi-traya-vriddbya  tu  kshapayet  tv-ashta  oba  yonikam  \ 
Sbat-saptasbta-vriddbya  tu  sapta-vimfea-kshayo  bbavet  I 
Taob-obbesbam  obapi  naksbatram  ganayed  a^vini-kramat  1 
Sbasb^a-uauda-vriddbya  tu  saptabbib  ksbapayet  tatab  I 
^esbam  tad  varam  ity-uktam  arka-varadi-vara-yuk ) 

Tribbir  vedas  tu  vriddbib  syan  nanda-bani-navamfeakam  I 
Titbi-randbrosbna-vriddbih  syat  trimtata  tu  ksbayo  bbavet  I 

(M.  XXX.  177-187). 

Dirgbe  liugam  ayadi-sbad-varga-^uddbim  kuryat  sarvatokta- 

vat  \ 

Mana-lmge  oba  any  at  svayambbuvadim  ananya-yuktam 
tatbayadim  sarvam  na  kurySt  I 
Ba(n)ddbadya  nanda-vasu-nanda-yugena  vyiddbya  I 
Sasbtarka-pankti-turagair  muni-nanda-banya  I 
Yonya&  oba  vriddbir  apy  abbayaih  cba  tu  varam  aihsam  I 

Lingaikena  kuryat  tu  parartba-linge  I 

(M.  Lil.  351-364). 

Application  of  the  rules  : 

They  are  applied  in  measuring  both  the  arcbiteoturai  and  the 
sculptural  objects. 


606 


SHAB-YAEOA 


These  rules  are  considered  in  connection  with  the  measure- 
ment of  villages  and  towns  (M.  ix.  67-74),  of  the  twelve- 
storeyed buildings  (xxx.  164-174),  and  of  the  phallus 
(lii.  360-356). 

Of.  also  : 

Ayadi-shad-varga-(h)  surair  (==suranam)  vimane  I 
Chayadhikam  kshina-vyayam  &ubham  syat  I 
G-ramadi-kartri-nripatika-kriyanam  \ 

Sarvam  subham  tat  kiirute  tu  vidvan  1 

(M.  XXX.  192-196). 

The  necessity  of  these  Shad-varaga  formulas  seems  due  to  the 
fact  that  in  most  instances  where  the  measurement  of  any 
object  is  concerned,  the  Agamas,  the  Bimbamana,  the 
Manasara  and  the  other  works  on  architecture  quote  more 
dimensions  than  one.  Thus  for  the  length  that  an  pbject 
is  to  be  of,  they  instead  of  giving  a single  figure  would 
quote , say,  nine  different  measures.  The  Manasara  in  fact 
invariably  gives  nine  different  lengths,  nine  different 
breadths,  and  five  heights  concerning  a building  or  image. 
Out  of  these  different  and  varying  measures  which  is  to  be 
selected  would  be  determined  by  the  application  of 
the  six  formulas.  Any  of  the  different  measures  prescribed 
is  open  to  be  accepted  only  when  it  satisfies  the  tests  of  the 
Shad-varga.  By  a verification  of  the  measurements  with 
the  respective  formula  it  would  eliminate  the  risk  of  dimen- 
sions being  selected  that  would  be  disproportionate  among 
themselves  and  improper.  This  might  have  been  the  pur- 
pose that  the  authorities  had  in  contemplation  in  prescrib- 
ing the  rules  of  the  Ayadi  Shad-varga  in  all  the  architec- 
tural treatises.  The  testing  of  measurements  by  the  Shad- 
varga  thus  formed  one  ol  the  most  important  points  to 
be  followed  in  architecture  and  sculpture,  and  we  find  a 


SHAP-VARGA 


607 


reference  to  it  in  these  ancient  works  so  many  times  and 
almost  without  exception  wherever  there  are  any  specifica- 
tions prescribed. 

(2)  Bimbamana  (British  Museum,  Ms.  no.  658,  6292,  v.  10,  11-13)  : 
Manam  tu  yoni-nakshatra-sarhyuktam  II 
Ayamashta-gunite  cha  dva-da&am§e’ti  leshata  I 
Nandanise  tu  gunite’pi  dharmaih^e’ti  vyayam  bhayet  il 
Yonir  gunibhir  gunitau(-ta)  chashtamse’pi  tathaiva  cha  1 
Rlkshakam  ashta-gunitam  cha  sapta-vim^ati-^eshatah  II 
Varakam  nava-gunitaih  cha  saptamfee  tu  hritana  bhavet  \ 
Am&akam  chabdhi-gunite’pi  nava-bhaga-hritam  matam  II 

(8)  Kilmikagama  (xxxvi.  18-20,  169-172) ; 

Ayadi-saiiipad-arthaih  tu  vistare  chayatau  tathaj 
Utsedhe  chaiva  hastanam  samyak  sampurnatarh  nayet  II  13 
Vistarat  kevalam  vatha  vayamad  unnates  tafcha  1 
Vistarayama-saihsargad  ayadyam  parigrihyatain  I!  14 
Ashta-tri-tri-ashtabhir  hitvashta-manvarka-bbaLr  bhajot  1 
Ayo  vyayas  cha  youis  cha  nakshatraiii  ^eshato  bhavet  II  15 
Trinidad  apnuta  paryantaih  tithir  vanam  tu  saptabhih  I 
Athavrmya-prakarena  chayadya'm  parigriliyatam  \ 

Dvayor  bhyam  dvayardhasya  vistaraih  dvayardhaih  uaiiaiii  tu 

iiabakamll  16 

Ashta-naadagni-vasubliir  ganayen  nanda-nanda-iiaha  I 
Arka-dig-yasu-bhah-sapta-navabhi&  cha  kramud  bhajet  II  17 
Ayadyaih  purva-vat  proktam  ayadhikam  tiibha-pradam  I 
Yajamanasya  yanmarkshe  nanukiilam  yatha  bhavet  It  18 
Tatha  parikshya  kartavyam  nama  nakshatrakam  tu  vS  \ 
Parikshya  bahudha  kuryiid  ubhayaih  va  parikshayet  li  19 
Sarvannkulyam  sarvatra  vastu  yasmaii  na  labhyatc  \ 

Tasmad  gunadhikaih  grahyam  alpa-doshaih  yatha  bhavet  II  20 
Eka-tri-paficha-saptaihte  dhvaja-siihha-vyisha-dvipah  I 
Purvad  yasu  subha  hy-etc  uyadyas  tv-aniilobhatah  II  169  - 


608 


SHAP-VAEG-A 

Dvi-ohatjuh-slia.d-vasu-8tha.nani  dhuma-^va-khara-vayasah  I 
Agneyadi  vidikshvrote  varjaniya  bubhukshubhih  It  170 

and  so  on. 

See  also  ibid.  chap,  l : 

E vam  adau  parikshyaiva  prasadam  parikalpayet  t 
Btesham  api  sarvesham  ayadi-vidhir  uchyate  I!  57 
Various  rules  are  again  given : 

Vistaraih  dvi-gunaih  kfitva  vasubhir  bhajite  sati  [ 

^ishtam  yonir  iha  prokta  tad-abhave  tulaudhakah  II  58 
Udaye  vasubhih  sapta-vimsadbhir  bham  ihodibam  \ 

Paridhau  nanda-gunibe  sapba-bhur  dvaram  uchyate  II  59 
Sakalam  tri-gunarh  kritva  trimbadbhir  bhajibva  \ 

Tibhi-udayam  vasubhir  bhakbva  suryayas(-yai8)  bu  lesha- 

bah  II  60 

Punar  apy  udayam  nanda- vasubhir  vyayah  uohyabe  \ 
Padadhikaih  bu  yab  feishbam  tab  sarvaih  sakalam  bhaveb  II  61 
Purva-vad  gu^ibam  kritva  bhagaih(?)  bharam  samam  kribvS  I 
Tenaiva  vibhajed  yal-labhad  adhikam  bhaveb  II  62 
Yugma-haabaih  svarodbhhbaih  feikhibhir  yonir  uohyabe  \ 
Athavanya-prakarena  ayadi-vidhir  uohyabe  II  63 
Nage  sutragni-iandhra-bhuvana-dasa-vasvabdhi-feishtas  bu  \ 

Tat  syad  ayo  na  yonir  varam  vasu-habam  udubhir  (?) 

bhakva  It  64 

6ishtaih  bu  riksham  hatva  bhaktvatha  shtrair’  bhuvanam  \ 
Atha  phalam  bishtam  amtam  vasughnam  briihsad  bhaktam  li  65 
Tibhih  syad  graha-dina-bithi-yogadayo  yoni-bhedah  [ 
Athavanya-prakarena  chayadin  parikalpayet  H 66 
N aga-nanda-guna-naga-nanda-drik-bhanu-nadi-vasu-bham- 

munir  va  I 

Ay  am  anyatra  yoni-i-ikshakam  varam  ambaka-guna-kshaya- 

kramat  II  67 


SHAB-VAEG-A 


Application  of  the  rules  : 

Idam  lij^e  cha  sakale  dvare  athaihhhadike  matam  \ 

Idam  ayadikahi  chardha-mandape  feishta-ma^dape  I!  68 
Parivaralaye  tuhga-harmye  anyasmin  prakalpayet  \ 

Bvam  parikshya  bahudha  prasadam  parikalpayet  II  69 
Ibid.  Lv.  28-30 : 

Mtoam  labdhodayam  yat  syat  bhaktva  matrayor  vi&eshatah  1 
Paribyityanguli-ohchhedyain  ayadyam  parikalpayet  11  28 
Ashta-nandagnibhit  ohaiva  vasu-nanda  cha  ohatuah^ayair  hi  \ 
Gunatvara-vidhi-murti-riksha-sapta-navamfeakair  hi  I!  29 
Hyityam  ayam  vyayam  ohaiva  yonis  taras  tu  varakah  \ 
Amtaka  ohavatish^as  tu  kalpaniyas  tu  defeikaih  II  30 
Ibid.  XXXV.  21  (refers  to  six  component  parts  of  a building) : 
Adhish^hanam  cha  padam  cha  prastaraih  karnam  eva  cha  I 
^ikharam  stupika  ohaiva  talahgam  iti  kathyate  II  21 
These  are  called  Shad-varga ; of.  xlv.  8 (under  Pumlihga),  16 
(under  Dravida),  10  (under  Strilihga),  and  11  (under 
Napumsaka). 

(4)  Laghu-tilpa-jyotih-sara  (ed.  ^ivarama,  i.  3-6)  : 

A.J0  rati&  cha  nakshatram  vyayas  taramtakas  tatha  I 
Graha-maitri  ra^i-maitri  nadi-vedha-ganendavah  II 
Adhipatyam  Vara-lagne  tithy-utpattis  tathaiva  cha  I 
Adhipatyaih  varga-vairam  tathaiva  yoni-vairakam  II 
Bxksha-vairam  sthitir  nato  lakshanany-eka-vimtatih  1 
Kathitani  muni-lreshthaih  tilpa  bi(vi)dbhir  grihadishu  II 
These  Shad-varga  formulas  are  rules  which  are  not  easily 
grasped  in  the  abstract  form.  They,  however,  need  not  be 
neglected  if  we  are  incapable  of  interpreting  them  correctly. 
While  quoting  a few  extracts  on  this  subject  from  a Tamil 
version  of  the  Myen  (?Mayamata)  Eev.  J.  P,  Kearns, 
Missionary,  Tanjore,  lost  his  temper  and  priestly  patience 
and  has  recorded  the  following ; 

89 


6.10 


SHAP-VAKOA 


“ Strange  as  all  this  appears  to  us  Europeans,  natives  regard 
these  things  as  matters  of  great  importance/’  (Ind,  Ant, 
vol.  V.  p.  296,  0. 1,  last  para). 

I fear  -whether  the  learned  missionary  understood  the  impor- 
tanoe  of  the  matters  correctly.  We  may,  however,  compare 
in  the  absence  of  the  Tamil  tent  his  translation  (ibid.  p. 
296-296) : 

“ Ascertain  the  length  of  the  house,  square  it,  multiply  the 
sum  by  8,  and  divide  the  product  by  12,  the  remainder  is 
the  (Adayam?)  or  profit.  Again,  take  the  square  number  and 
multiply  it  by  9,  divide  the  product  by  10,  the  remainder  is 
the  ;8elavu  or  loss  (i.e.,  Vyaya).  Again,  take  the  square 
number  and  multiply  it  by  27,  and  divide  the  product  by  100, 
the  remainder  is  the  age  or  durability  of  the  house.  Again, 
take  the  square  number,  multiply  it  by  8,  and  divide  the 
product  by  27,  the  remainder  is  the  star  (i.e.,  Eiksha). 
Again,  multiply  the  square  number  by  3,  and  divide  the 
product  by  8,  the  remainder  is  the  Yoni.  Multiply  the 
square  number  by  9,  and  divide  the  product  by  7,  the 
remainder  is  the'  day  (i.e..  Vara).  Multiply  the  square 
number  by  9,  and  diyide  the  product  by  4,  the  remainder 
is  the  caste.  Multiply  the  square  number  by  4,  and  divide 
the  product  by  9,  the  remainder  is  the  Amtam.  Multiply 
the  square  number  by  9,  and  divide  the  product  by  30, 
the  remainder  is  the  Tithi.” 

“If  this  falls  within  16,  it  belongs  to  the  orescent  moon,  but 
if  above  16  to  the  decrescent  moon.  Again,  multiply 
the  square  number  by  4,  and  divide  the  product  by  12,  the 
remainder  is  the  constellation.  Multiply  the  square  number 
by  8,  and  divide  the  product  by  6,  the  remainder  gives  the 
Sutra.  The  following  are  the  Yonis  ; — Graruda,  (Punai  ?) 
Simha,  Noy,  Pambu,  Eli,  Ani,  Mutl : of  these  (Punai?)  (oat), 
Eli  (rat),  and  Mutl  (hare)  are  bad.  The  following  are  the 
Amtams  : — ^Arsam,  Soram,  Putthi,  Satthi,  Thanium,  Easium, 


SHOPASA-PEATIMI, 


611 


Kalibam,  Vamttham,  Eokam,  and  Subam.  The  following 
are  the  Sutras ; (Balan  ?)  (Kumaran  ?)  Rajan,  Kilavan, 
Maranan.” 

The  following  examples  are  given  to  illustrate  the  foregoing : 

“ G-i veil  the  length  of  the  house  11  cubits,  and  the  width  6 
cubits,  to  find  the  age, — that  is  to  say,  how  many  years 
such  a house  will  stand.  By  the  rule  11  x 5=a66,  and  66  x 
27=1486,  1486-M00=14,  the  remainder  being  86, — which 
remainder  indicates  the  number  of  years  the  house  will 
stand.” 

” Griven  the  length  of  a house  16  cubits,  and  the  width  7 
cubits,  to  find  the  caste  for  whom  it  is  suitable,  16  x 7=106,- 
106  X 9 = 946,  and  945  -r  4=236,  remainder  1.  The  remainder 
1 indicates  the  first  caste,  i.e..  Brahmans.” 

” G-iven  the  length  of  the  house  17  cubits,  and  the  width  7, 
to  ascertain  the  caste  for  whom  it  is  suitable',  17  x 7 = 119, 
119x9=1071,  and  1071 -r  4 = 267,  remainder  3.  The  re- 
mainder 3 denotes  the  third  or  Vai&ya  caste.” 

“ The  next  example  exhibits  the  entire  series.  G-iven  the 
length  of  the  house  9 cubits,  width  3 cubits,  to  find  the 
(Adayam)  and  ^elavu,  etc.,  etc.  By  the  rule  9 x 3=27,  27  x 
8=216,  and  216  ^ 12  = 18, —12  = (Adayam)  27  x 9 = 243,  and 
243-r  10=24,  remainder  3, — which  is  the  ^elavu  or  loss,  and 
so  on  according  to  the  rule.  The  Yoni  is  Garuda,  the  star 
Revati,  the  part  of  the  lunar  month  the  third  day,  the  day 
of  the  week  Thursday,  the  constellation  Pisces,  and  the 
caste  Vaitya.” 

SHODASA-PRATIMA — The  sixteen  images,  a group  of  sixteen 
deities. 


(M.  ixiv.,  named  Pratima,  1-93). 
Cf.  Purato’sya  shoda&anam  vara-ganikanam  dvi-bhflmika- 
grihani  ali-dvayena— “ in  front  of  the  temple  he  erected  two 
rows  of  double-storied  houses  for  sixteen  female  attendants  ” 
(Ghebrolu  Insorip.  of  Jaya,  v.  46,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  VI.  pp.  40,  39). 


612 


SHODA^A-MANDIBA-OHAKBA 


SHODASA-MANDIBA-GHAKEA— The  plan  of  a house  having  a 
quadrangular  courtyard  in  the  centre  and  comprising  sixteen 
halls  or  rooms  (mandira)  : 

(1)  In  the  north-east  corner  is  stated  to  be  (1)  the  family  chapel 

(deva'gyiha) ; in  the  east  (2)  the  room  for  all  things  (sarva- 
vastu-griha),  (3)  the  bath  room  (snana-griha),  and  (4)  the 
room  for  churning  milk  (dadhi-manthana) ; in  the  south-east 
corner  (5)  the  kitchen;  in  the  south  (6)  the  Bri(Vri)tasagyiha 
(?),  (7)  the  6aina-griha,  (?  6auna  = meat  kept  at  a 
slaughter  house),  and  (8)  the  lavatory  (purisha-griha)  ; in  the 
south-west  corner  (9)  the  library  (tastra-griha)  ; in  the  west 
(10)  the  study  (vidyabhyasa-griha),  (11)  the  dining-hall 
(bhojana-griha),  and  (12)  the  weeping-room  (rodana-gyiha)  ; 
in  the  north-west  corner  (13)  the  granary  (dhanya-griha)  ; 
in  the  north  (14)  the  bedroom  (sambhoga-gpiha,  or  the  house 
for  enjoying  one  self  in),  (16)  the  store-room  (dravya-gyiha), 
and  (16)  the  room  for  invalids  or  medicine  (aushadha-gyiha). 

(Vastu-tattva,  Lahore  1863,  p.  1 f.). 

(2)  Stha(?Sna)nagaram  diti  praohyam  agneyyam  paohanSlayam  1 
Tamyayam  ^ayanftgaram  uairrity&ih  §astra-mandiram  || 
Pratichyam  bhojanagarara  vayavyam  paSju-mandiram  I 
Bhanda-kofeaih  chottarasyam  a(,i)!3inyam  deva-mandiram  II 

(Vastu-pravandha,  II.  26,  26,  compiled  by 
Kajakisora  Varmma). 

(3)  Almost  same  plan  as  (1)  : 

Ifeanyilm  devata-geham  purvasyaih  snana-mandiram  1 
Agueyyiim  paka-sadanam  dravyagararh  tathottare  II 
Agneya-purvayor  madhye  dadhi-manthana-mandirain  1 
Agni-prete^ayor  madhye  ajya-geham  prafeasyate  II 
yamya-nairrityayo(r)  madhye  purisha-tyaga-mandiram  I 
Nairrityam-bu(?)payor  madhye  vidyabhasasya-mandiram  II 


SHOPA^A-MAI!?  DIEA-OHAKEA 


613 


Pasohimanilayor  madhye  rodanarfcham  griliam  smritam  I 
Vayavottarayo(r)  madhye  rati-geham  pra^asyate  II 
Uttarefeanayor  madhye  aushadharfeham  fcu  karayet  I 
Nairrityam  sutika-geham  npipanam  hhutim  iohchhatam  11 

(6ilpa-sastra-sara-samgraha,  ix.  24-28). 

(6)  Another  similar  plan  : 

IJ?ane  devatagaram  tatha  feiinti-griham  bhavet  II 
Mahanasam  tathagneye  tat-par^ve  chottare  jalam  I , 
Gfihasyopaskaram  sarvam  nairyitye  sthapayed  budhali  11 
Ba{n)dha-sthanam  bahili  kuryat  sntoa-mandapam  ova  oha  I 
Phana-dhSnyam  oha  vayavye  karmma-salam  tato  bahili  II 
Evam  vastu-vi&eshah  syad  griha-bharttiih  ^nbhuvahah  II 

(Matsya -Parana,  chap.  266,  V.  33"36). 
In  this  plan,  it  should  be  noticed,  the  bandha-sthana  (lit. 
place  to  bind  in ; ? slaughter-house,  vadha-sthana),  the  bath- 
room and  the  office  (karmma-&ala)  are  directed  to  be  built 
outside  (the  residential  building  proper). 
t6)  Puryayam  &ri-griham  proktam  ^neyyam  vai  mahanasam  I 
i^ayanam  dakshinasyam  tu  nairj’ityam  ayudhasrayam  11 
Bhojanam  p5feohimayam  tuyayayyam  dhanya-sarhgrahah  \ 
Uttare  dravya-samsthanam  aifeanyam  de-yata-gfiham  II 
Chatuh-^alam  tri-fealam  Va  dvi-&alam  chaika-talakam  I 
Ohatuh-sala-gyihanaih  tu  salaliudaka-bhedatah  II 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  106,  v.  18-20). 
This  plan  is  specially  meant  for  houses  in  towns,  etc.  (of.  Y. 
1-12), 

(7)  Grfiha-vastu-pradipa  (Lucknow,  1901)  quotes  from  some 

authority  without  mentioning  his  name  the  following  : 

Atha  nripanam  shodasa-griha-raohanopayah  I 
Snana-paka-&ayanatra-bhuie3va(?)-dhanya-bhamdara-daivata- 
gyihani  oha  purvata{h)  syuh  1 
Tan-madhyas  tu  mathana-ajya-purisha-vidyabhyasakhya- 
rodana-rataushadha-sarva-dhama  II 


614 


SHOBASA-MANDIBA-OHAKEA 


(8)  Yet  another  similar  plan  . 

Ai&anyam  paohana-sfchanam  brahmananam  'vidhiyate  \ 

And  of  the  Kshatriyas  to  the  south-east,  of  the  Vai^yas  to  the 
south-west,  and  of  the  ^udras  to  the  north-west  (v.  177- 
178). 

Purvasyam  bhojana-sthanam  agneyyam  tu  mahanasam  { 
Yamyayam  sayana-sthanam  nairrityam  ayudhalayah  II  179 
Maitra-sthanam  tu  tatra  tatra  varunyam  udakalayah  \ 
Goshthagaram  cha  vayaYyam  uttarasyam  dhanalayah  II  180 
Hitya-naimittikartham  syad  aisanyam  yaga-inanclapam 
Kahii-lavanayoh  patram  prag-udag-diti  vinyaset  II  181 
Antariksho’  pi  va  ohullyulukhali  savita  api  I 
Anna-pra^anam  aryam&e  ohendragnyam  oha  savitrake  II  182 
VivasYad-amse  ^raYanam  vivado  maitra-de^ake  \ 

Kshaudram  indrajaye  vidyad  vayau  some  oha  va  bhavet  II  183 
Vitathopanayofe  ohaiva  pityi-dauvarike  pade  \ 

Bugrive  pushpa-daute  oha  prasuti-griham  ishyate  II  184 
Apavatse  tu  ko§ah  syat  kundam  ape  vidhiyate  II  184a 
Ahkanam  tu  mahendramle  peshani  oha  mahidhare  II  185 
Arishtagaram  ishtam  syat  tatropaskara-bhiimikam  II  186 
Yahanam  dvara-yame  syat  snana-feala  oha  varune  | 

Asure  dhanya-vasah  syad  ayudhad  (?)  indra-rajake  II  187 
Mitravasas  tatha  mitre  roge  volukhalam  matam  I 
Bhudhare  kota-geham  syan  nagamfee  ghritam  aiishadham  II 

188 

Jayante  ohapavatse  oha  parjanye  oha  &ive  kramat  \ 
Visha-pratyaushadham  ohaiva  kupe  deva-griham  bhavet  II 

189 

Eikaha-bhallata-someshu  bhaved  asthana-mandapam  II  191 

(KSmikagama,  XXXV.  177-191). 

(9)  Compare  the  Manasara,  XL.  71-11 1 (antah-tala,  or  houses  in 

the  inner  court,  112-163  (bahih-tala,  or  buildings  forming 
part  of  the  palace  in  the  outer  court). 

(See  under  Baja-harmya). 


SATBA 


m 


SB[OpA^A^(-S)llA — A type  of  building  which  has  sixteen-angular 
shape,  one  storey  and.  one  cupola. 

(1)  Brihat-samhita  (lyi.  28,  J.  B.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  Tor.  Yl,  p.  320, 

note  1,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  269,  V.  29,  53,  see  under  Prasada). 

(3)  Bhayishya-Purana  (chap.  130,  v.  25,  see  under  PrSsada}. 


S 

SAKALA — An  idol,  a group  of  images  of  four  deities  including  Itvara, 
a ground-plan. 

(1)  A ground-plan  (M.  Yii.  2,  51,  73,  xii.  64,  see  Pada-vinyasa). 

(2)  An  image  or  idol  (M.  lxiv.  48). 

(3)  Suprabhedagama  (xxxiY.,  named  Sakala-lakshana-vidhi,  1,  2) : 
Athatah  sampravakshyami  sakalanam  tu  lakshanam  \ 
Sarvavayava-drityatvat  pratima  tv-iti  ohoohyate  II 
Ifeyaradi-chatur  murttih  pathyate  sakalam  tv-iti  II 

SATl-MAKDAPA — ^A  kind  of  pavilion  where  perhaps  certain  ceremo- 
nies used  to  be  performed  in  connection  with  the  obsolete  practice 
of  burning  alive  a devoted  wife  with  her  dead  husband,  the  temple 
of  the  goddess  Durga  or  Sati  who  was  the  Wife  of  ^iva  and  a 
daughter  of  Daksha. 

Arbhakanam  mukhalokam  mandapam  sati-mandapam  \ 

(M.  XXXIY.  41). 

SATYA-KXNTA — A class  of  eight-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XLYI.  43-45,  see  under  Prasada). 
SATEA(-TTEA)— (of.  Chhatra,  Ghhatri)— The  modern  Dharma-lala, 
a rest  house,  a residence,  an  alms-house. 

(1)  Alms-house  (Dewal  Pratasti  of  Lalla  the  Ghhinda,  v.  20,  Bp. 

Ind.  vol.  I.  pp.  79,  83). 

(2)  Hall  of  charity  (Stone  Insorip.  at  Vaghli  in  Kandesh,  no.  G, 

lines  4, 12,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  n.  pp.  226,  227). 

(3)  See  l^ridhara’s  Devapattana  Pra&asti  (verse  10,  Ep.  Ind.  vol. 

II.  p.  440). 

(4)  Rest-house  (Nilgund  Inscrip,  of  Taila  ir,  line  30,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol  IV.  pp.  207,  208). 


616 


SATEA 


(6)  OMtraia  satral  ;iyair  yyasya  prithivyam  prathita-yafeasah  \ 
Bubhukshu-bhikshu-saihgliata-prabhuta-priti-hetiibliihi  II 

(Two  Pillar  Insorip.  at  Amaravati,  no.  A,  of 
Keta  n,  v.  40,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  vi.  p.  162). 

(6)  A feeding  eatablishment : 

Deva-bhogartbam  oha  deva-kulebbyab  khanda-sphufcitadi-nimi- 
ttam  gandha-dhupa-pushpa-dipa-naivedady-upaoharartbam 

tapovana-sattrottarasanga-danady-artham  cha...... 1 

(Cambay  plates  of  Grovinda  iv,  line  48,  Bp.  Ind. 

vol.  vii.  pp.  40-46). 

(7)  BiWapadrake  parikalpita-sattra-bhokt^inam  yatha-prapta- 

brahmanadi-jananam  trim&atah  pratyabam  npabbogaya  . . 

“ In  order  to  feed  daily  thirty  Brahmanas  or  other  men  who 
happen  to  arrive  (and)  who  use  the  rest-house  established  at 
Bilvapadraka.” 

(Baloda  Plates  of  Tivaradeva,  lines  26-27,  Bp. 

Ind.  vol.  VII.  pp.  106,  107). 

(8)  A charitable  dining-hall  of  a temple  : 

^ri-Sarvva-loka^raya-jma-bhavana-khyata-satrarttham— “for 

the  purpose  of  the  renowned  dining-hall  of  the  holy  and 
famous  Jain  temple  called  Sarvaloka§raya-Jina-bhavana.“ 
(Kaluohumbarru  Grant  of  Amma  ii,  line  60,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  VII.  pp.  188,  191,  179). 

(9)  Khanda-sphu^a-nava-kiityopili-prapujadi-sattra-siddhyarthaml 

“ For  the  cost  of  repairs  of  breaks  and  cracks,  offerings,  wor- 
ship, etc.,  and  of  an  aim-house.’^ 

(Maliyapundi  Grant  of  Ammaraja  Ii,  line  64,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  IX.  pp.  64,  66). 

(10)  Drakaharame  pavane  punya-bhaja  punya-kshetre  Pi^hapury- 

yam  oha  yena  1 

Bhoktuin  pritya  pratyabam  bramhananam  akalpamttam 

alpitaih  sattra-yugmam  II 


SATEA 


61? 


“ Ali  holy  Bfaksliarama  and  at  the  sacred  place  of  Pi^hapuri, 
this  charitable  one  joyfully  founded  two  sattras  for  Bramha- 
nas,  in  order  that  they  might  daily  enjoy  their  meals  (there) 
till  the  end  of  the  Kalpa/’ 

(Eastern  Ohalukya  Grants,  no.  39,  a Grant 
of  Vira-Ohoda,  V.  33.  H.  S.  1. 1,  vol.  i.  pp. 
56,  61 ; see  also  quotation  no.  16  below). 

(11)  “The  hiranya-garbha,  brahmanda,  and  all  the  other  great  gifts 

prescribed  in  the  tastras  had  he  made, — wells,  ponds,  tanks, 
with  satras  from  road  to  road,  had  he  established — and 
temples  of  the  gods  he  had  made.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol,  xil.  Kunigal  Taluq,  no.  37, 
Transl.  p.  38,  para  3). 

(12)  “ Having  allotted  to  the  avasara-satra  of  the  god  feri-Hari- 

haradeva  two  shares  of  the  village 
“ Satra — oblation,  charity,  asylum  or  alms-house,  charitable 
dining  hall ; ‘ avasara-satra’  seems  to  mean  an  occasional 
satra  ” Dr.  Fleet. 

(But  ‘ rest-house  ’ as  opposed  to  both  resting  and  dining  hall 
would  perhaps  give  better  meaning.) 

(Sanskrit  and  Old  Oanarese  Insorip.  no.  VI, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  iv.  p.  329,  o.  1,  line  3 f.,  and 
foot  note), 

(13)  Sa  prasadam  aohikarad  divishadam  Kedara-devasya  oha 

khyatasyottara-manasasya  khananam  sattram  tatha  ohak- 
shaye I 

“ He  caused  to  be  built  a temple  of  the  inhabitants  of  heaven 

called and  of  the  god  Kedara ; ho  likewise  had  the 

famous  Uttara-manasa  (tank)  dug,  and  (established)  a hall 
of  charity,  to  last  for  ever.” 

(Gaya  Insorip.  of  Yakshapala,  v.  12 j Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XVI.  pp.  66,  66). 


618 


SATEA-MA]^PA1?A 


(14)  “ A grant  of  land  for  a satra  for  feeding  twelye  Brahmans  in 
front  of  the  matha  on  the  bank  of  the  Tungabhadra.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  tol.  VI.  Koppa  Taluq,  no.  32, 
Transl.  p.  81,  Eoman  text,  p,  176-177). 

(16)  He  halting  at  Marasinga’s  Behur,  oonstructed  there  the 
Birndasarvvajna-gatta  and  other  tanks ; and  to  provide  a 
satra  for  food  for  the  students  in  the  matha  of  the  god  Malli- 
karjuna  there made  a grant  of  land.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no.  19, 
Transl  p.  43,  Eoman  text,  p.  98). 

(16)  Draksharame  pa  vane  punya-bhaja  punya-kshetre  Pithapury- 

yam  oha  yena kalpitam  sattra-yugam,  (of.  no.  10 

above). 

“ At  the  pure  Braksharama  and  at  Pithapuri,  a place  of 
sanctity,  he  established  two  sattras.” 

(Chellur  G-rant  of  Vira-Oholadeva,  line  97''98, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xix.  pp,  432,  436), 

BATEA-MANDAPA— A type  of  pavilion,  the  alms-house  of  a temple. 
Vapi  (?  Eapi)-nirgamane  yena  purvatah  satra-map^apam  \ 

(Garuda-Purapa,  chap.  46,  v.  14). 

SATEAVASA-MATHA — ^A  monastery,  a free  rest-house. 
Ghatushkone  tapasvinam  satravasa-ma^ham  bhavet  \ 

(M.  XXXII.  89). 

SAB  ANA — A seat,  a sacrificial  hall,  a temple,  a house,  a mansion,  a 
palace,  the  abode  of  the  god  of  death  (Yama). 

(1)  A teniple  (.Babhoi  Insorip.  v.  Ill,  Bp,  Ind,  vol.  i.  p,  31). 

(2)  Sura-sadana  (Bewal  Pra&asti  of  Lalla,  v.  20,  Ep.  Ind,  vol.  I. 

p.79). 

(3)  Sadauam  atuia-nathasyoddhyitam  yena  Jirnpam  I 

“By  whom  the  (old)  temple  of  Atula-natha  was  repaired.** 

(An  Abu  Insorip.  of  the  reign  of  Bhimadeva  ii, 
V.  10,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xi,  pp.  221,  222). 


SANBHI-KABMAK 


619 


(4)  Sarasvatam  krida-ketanam  etad  atra  vidadhe  \ 

Sarasvatam  sadanam  akshayam  etad  aatu  \ 

(Sanskrit  Grants  and  Insorip.  no.  I,  v.  33,  34, 
Ind.  Ant.  voL  xi.  pp.  103,  106) 

SABXSIVA — A class  of  four -storeyed  buildings , 

(M.  xm.  25-33,  see  under  Prasada). 

SADMAN—A  seat,  an  altar,  a temple,  an  abode,  a dwelling,  a bouse. 
Ohakre  nava-nivida-vitale  sadmani  Sulapaneb — built  a new 
solid  large  temple  of  Sula-puni,” 

Sambhob  sadmani  8tambba-maiiam....vyatatana — erected  a 
row  of  pillars  in  the  temple  of  6ambbu.” 

(An  Abu  Insorip.  of  the  reign  of  Bhimadcva  il, 
V.  10, 12,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  Xl.  pp.  221,’ 222). 

SANDHI —A  joint,  a connection,  a combination,  a junction. 
Eka-§alanu-sandbit  oha  dvi-&ala  ohaika-sandhikam  | 

Tri-sala  oha  dvi-sandhih  syaoh  ohatuh-sandhit  ohatur-mukham  \ 
Shat-sandhih  sapta-sala  oha  bahu-sandhi(r)  datalayam  \ 

(M.  XXXV.  73-74), 

SANDHI-KARMAN  —The  joinery,  the  framing  or  joining  of  wood 
for  the  internal  and  external  finishings  of  houses:  thus  the 
covering  and  lining  of  rough  walls,  the  covering  of  rough  timbers, 
the  manufacture  of  doors,  shutters,  sashes,  stairs,  and  the  like, 
are  classed  under  the  head  of  joinery. 

(See  Guilt,  Encyoi.  of  Arch,  p,  1214). 
Manasara  (chap,  xvn.,  named  Sandhi-karman,  2-226) : 

The  definition  : 

Harmyanam  daru-samyogarh  sandhi-karma' (m)udiritam  I (2). 
Various  kinds  of  joinery  are  described  under  the  following 
names : 

Malla  made  with  two  pieces  of  wood,  Brahma-raja  with  three  or 
four  pieces,  Vej^u-parvan  with  five  pieces,  Puga-parvan  with  six 


620 


SANBHI-BANDHA 


pieces,  Deva  with  seven  pieces,  Par  van  with  eight  pieces,  and 
Banda  with  more  than  eight  pieces  of  wood  and  other  materials 
(line  18  1). 

Porms  of  the  joinery  are  described  under  the  titles  NandyS- 
varta  and  Svastika  (59-60),  etc.,  see  details  (18-58,  61*2‘25). 

SANDHI-BANDHA— A bond  of  union,  a material  that  makes  two 
bodies  stick  together,  cement,  mortar. 

Samsthapyapi  na  tasya  tushtir  abhavad  yavad  BhaVaui-grihaiii 
autlishtamala-sandhi-bandha-ghatitam  ghanta-ninadojjvalam  \ 

“ hjot  satisfied  with  the  erection  (of  this  image  only,  the  pious 
man)  caused  to  be  built  a shrine  of  Bhavani,  which  was  joined 
with  a very  adhesive  and  bright  cement,  resplendent  with  the 
sounds  of  bells. 

(Benares  Insorip.  of  Pantha,  v.  5,  Bp.  Ind. 

vol,  IX,  pp.  61-62). 

SAPTA-TALA — (see  Tala)-— The  seventh  storey,  seven-storeyed 
buildings. 

Btat  sapta-talam  proktam  rajiiam  Svasa-yogyaklam  \ 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv*  84). 

The  seven  storeyed-buildings  are  described  in  a separate  chapter  in 
theManasara: 

Description  of  the  seventh  storey  (M.  xxv.  2-23,  32-39),  the  eight 
classes  (ibid.  3-31),  see  under  Prasada. 

SAPTA-TALA— (see  Tala-mana) — A system  of  measurement  in 
accordance  with  which  the  whole  body  is  seven  times  the  face 
inclusive  of  head. 

(^ukraniti,  chap.  iv.  sect,  iv,  ed.  Jivananda 
Vidyasagara,  p.  359,  see  details  under  Tila). 

SAPTA-BHtJMI-(K!A) — (see  Sapta-tala)— The  seventh  storey,  seven- 
storeyed  buildings. 

Eaja-kanyam.. .sapta-bhamika-prasada-pranta-gatam  I 

(Pafiohatantra,  ed,  Bombay,  i.  p.  38). 


SABHl 


621 


BA  PTA-8lLl.«-A  seven-fold  wall. 

Madkya-stitmiii  tu  Y&me  tu  harmya-dvaram  prakalpayet  \ 

Tad-bahih  parito-dese  sapta-salam  prakalpayet  \ 
Naravasaitha-ratbya  oba  prakara-dvaya-manditam  \ 

(M.  XXXI.  81-83) , 

SABHA — A type’  of  building,  an  edifice,  a public  hall,  an  assembly 
room,  a council  chamber. 

(1)  A class  of  buildings  : 

Prasada-mandapam  chaiva  sabha-'sala-prapam  tatha  I 
(A)rangam  iti  ohaitani  harmyam  uktam  puratanaih  1 

(M.  III.  7-8). 

Sikhare  chavrite’pare  sabha-mandapa-gopure  \ 

(M,  xvm.  200). 

A public  hall : 

Mandapam  sabham.  vapi  grama-yogyaih  yatha-diM  \ 

Nagare  oha  yathakaram  dvi-gunatyarthakayatam  I 

(M.  XXXIV.  662-663), 

Bhudhare  ohasure  vapi  sabha-sthanam  prakalpayet  I 

(M.  VIII.  34), 

(2)  A council  chamber  : 

Tato  viohintya  manasa  loka-nathah  Prajapatih  \ 

Chodayamasa  tvaih  Krishnah  sabha  vai  kriyatSm  iti  U 
Yadi  tvam  kartukamo^si  priyam  &ilpa-vatam  vara  I 
Bharmma-rajasya  daiteya  yadrifeim  iha  manyase  II 
Yam  kritam  nanukurvanti  manavah  prekshyadhishthitah  ( 
Manushya-loke  sakale  tadri&im  kuru  vai  sabham  II 
Yatra  divyan  abhiprayan  pa&yema  hi  kritSihs  tvaya  \ 

Asuran  manusham&  chaiva  sabhaih  taiii  kuru  vai  Maya  II 
Pratigrihya  tu  tad  vakyam  samprahrishto  Mayas  tada  \ 
Vimana-pratimam  ohakre  Pandavasya  ^ubham  sabham  11 
The  penultimate  verse  is  explained  by  the  commentator 
Nilakantha  ; 

Asuran  manushan  ity  upalakshanam  deva-gamdharvadinara 
apy  abhiprayan  lepa-chitre  lekhya-ohitre  oha  ohaturdasa- 
bhuvanamtarastha-tat-taj-jatiya-svabhavika-nana-vidha- 


SABHA 


lila-pradar&anena  manovrittih  pafeyema  yad-darkanena  brah- 
mamdamtara-varti-sarvam  vastu-jatam  drishta-prayam  bha- 
vatity  arthah  \ 

(Mahabbarata,  Sabba-par-van,  cbap,  i.  y.  9-13). 
See  also  tbe  description  of  the  Indra-sabha  (ibid.  chap.  Vli), 
Yama-sabba  (cbap.  vili),  Varuna-sabba  (chap,  ix), 
Knbera-sabha  (chap,  x),  and  Brabma-sabha  (cbap.  xi). 
Sabba...,....diyya  bema-mayair  ucbcbaib  prjisadair  upa&obbita  | 

(Ibid.  II.  10,  3). 

(3)  Gbatnr-bbaga-dvi-bbagena  priabtbavasa-sabbam  nayet  It 
Agra-kuta-dvayor  madbye  fealab  prishtba-sabba  yatba  II 
Prishthavasa-sabba  tad-vad  anyat  sarvam  aubas-tale  II 

(Kamikagama,  xxxy.  73, 74,  76). 

Definition  ; 

Mnla-kuta-samaynkta  vana-kuta-samanvita  II 
Kaobobba  ( ==k6iia)-griba-sainaynkta  sabbeti  parikirtita  II 

(Ibid.  XXXV.  4,  95). 

Brabma-stbane  sabbadini  kalpayed  vidbina  budbah  II 

(Ibid,  xxvili.  15). 

(4)  ‘‘  Martanda-varma,  tbe  king  of  Kerala,  dosirons  of  extensive 

prosperity,  fame  and  long  life,  built  tbe  sabha  of  ^ambhu 
(Siva)  at  ^uobindram.” 

Stbane  niani-tucbindre  samakuruta  sabbarii  Kerala-kshma- 
patindtabl 

(Inscrip.  in  the  Pagodas  of  Tirukurungudi,  in 
Tinnevelly,  and’  of  ^ucbindram,  in  South 
Travancore,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  II.  p.  361,  o.  2 : 

V.  1 ; p.  362,  para.  1). 

(6)  “Tbe -word  (Sabba)  denotes  also  (i.e.,  other  than  a regular 
assembly  or  meeting)  a ‘ ball  ’ or  a ‘ bouse.’  Dr.  Bbandar- 

■:;;ka 


(Ind.  Ant.  voi  XII.  p.  145,  c.  2.  line  9 f), 


SAEVA-KALYl^TA 


(6)  ^ri-ramga-kafichaiia-sabha  yatha-puram  abhasayat  I 

“ The  regilded  (central  shrine  of  the  temple  at)  8rirahgam 
and  the  golden  hall  (at  Chidambaram).  ” 

(Ariyur  Plates  of  Viriipaksha,  lines  21-22,  Ind. 
Ant.  vol.  XXXVIII.  pp.  14  ; 12,  para  4,  line  6). 
SABHA-MALIKA — A class  of  buildings. 

(Kamikagama,  XLv.,  see  under  Malika). 

S AMA — (see  Samudga) — A type  of  rectangular  building. 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  104,  v,  16-17,  see  under 

Prasada), 

SAMA-BHAhlG-A — (see  Bhahga) — A pose,  in  this  type  the  right  and 
left  of  the  figure  are  disposed  symmetrically,  the  figure  seated  or 
standing  being  poised  firmly  on  both  legs  without  inclining  to 
right  or  left. 

SAMUDGA — A type  of  round  building. 

Of.  Vvittah  Samudga-nama  \ 

(1)  Brihat-saihhita  (chap.  LVI.  23,  J.R.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  VI,  p.  319, 

see  under  Pnlsada). 

(2)  Matsya-Purapa  (chap.  269,  V.  38,  63,  see  under  Prasada) . 

(3)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap.  130,  v.  30,  24,  see  under  Prasada), 
SAMUDBA— A type  of  building. 

(1)  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  269,  V.  38,  63,  see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap.  130,  v.  24,  see  under  Prasada). 
SAEORUHA— ’A  type  of  building,  a moulding. 

A moulding  of  the  pedestal  (M,  xiii.  76,  eto). 

See  Padma  and  compare  the  lists  of  mouldings  under  ‘ Upapl- 
tha’  and  ‘ Adhishthana.’ 

A class  of  six-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxiv.  47,  see  under 

Prasada), 

SAEVA-KALYANA— A class  of  buildings. 

(Kamikagama,  XLV,  42-49,  see  under  Malika). 


624 


SABVA-EAMIKA 


SABVA-KAMIEA — (see  XJtsedha^ — ^Also  called  ‘ dhanada  *,  a height 
which  is  If  of  the  breadth. 

(See  M.  XXXV.  22-26,  and  cf . Eamikagama,  l. 

24-28,  under  Adbhnta). 

SAEYATO-BHADBA — ^A  type  of  bnilding,  pavilion,  hall,  entablature, 
window,  phallus  ; a joinery,  a four-fold  image  one  on  each  side 
of  a four-faced  column  ; a village,  a town,  having  a'surrounding 
road  and  entrances  on  four  sides ; a house  furnished  with  surroun- 
ding terraces. 

(1)  Apratishiddhalindaih  samantato  vastu  sarvato-bhadram  \ 
hTyipa-vibudha-samuhanaih  karyam  dvarait  ohaturbhir  api  11 
“ An  edifice  with  uninterrupted  terraces  on  every  side  is  termed 
Sarvato-bhadra  (i.e.  goodly  on  every  side)  ; such  a one  is  fit 
for  kings  and  gods,  and  ought  to  have  four  entrances.” 

(Brihat-samhita,  Lili.  31,  J.  B.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol, 

VI.  p.  286). 

“ Sarvato-bhadra  is  the  name  of  a kind  of  building,  which  has 
four  entrances,  many  spires  or  turrets  (feikhara),  many  beauti- 
ful dormer  windows  and  five  storeys,  and  is  26  cubits  broad,” 
(Ibid.  LVi.  27,  J.  B,  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  VI.  p.  320). 

(2)  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  269,  V.  29,  34,  36,  48,  63,  see  under 

Prasada), 

(3)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap.  130,  v.  34,  see  under  Prasada). 

A type  of  quadrangular  building: 

(4)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  v,  14-16,  see  under  PraaSda). 

(6)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  24-26,  see  under  Prasada). 

(6)  Sarvato-bhadram  ashtasyam — ^the  Sarvato-bhadra  house  (tala) 

has  eight  faces. 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  88). 

An  e itablature  (ibid.  UY,  8). 

(7)  A class  of  villages  (M.  ix.  2, 126  f), 


8AHAYA.DUEGA 


626 


A type  of  prastara  or  entablature  (M.  xvx.  185). 

A kind  of  joinery  (M.  XVII.  63), 

A class  of  mandapa  or  pavilions  (M.  xxxiv.  665). 

A type  of  feala  or  hall  (M.  xxxv.  4). 

A class  of  windows  (M.  xxxm.  683). 

A kind  of  phallus  (M.  Lll.  114). 

(8)  Sarvato-bhadra-devalaya — “ according  to  Varahamihlra  (Bri- 
hat-samhita,  LVI.  27)  it  means  a temple  with  four  doors  and 
many  spires,  i.  e.,  such  s one  which  looks  equally  pleasing 
from  all  sides.” 

(Bp.  Ind.  vol.  I.  p.  382,  note  50). 

(9)  Sarvato-bhadra-chatur-mukha-ratna-traya-rupa-tri-bhuvana- 

tilaka-dina-chaityalaya  vanu  \ 

“ The  Tribhuvana  Jina  chaityalaya  temple (which  is) 

auspicious  on  every  side,  has  four  faces  (and)  is  the  embodi-^ 
ment  of  the  three  jewels  (of  the  Jainas).” 

(Karkala  Inscrip,  of  Bhairava  ii,  line  17,  Bp. 

Ind.  vol.  viix.  pp.  132,  136). 

(10)  Nayana-mano-harali  Sarvvato-bhadrah  \ 

“ Apperently  the  name  of  a hall  in  the  first  storey  of  the  cave 
temple.” 

(The  Pallava  Inscrip.  of  the  seven  Pagodas, 
no.  13,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  x,  p.  7). 

(11)  Sarvato-bhadra-pratima — ‘'literally  an  image  lovely  on  all 
- sides,  is  apparently  a technical  term  for  an  ‘ four  fold  image,’ 

one  being  carved  on  each  side  of  a four-faced  column.” 

(Jaina  Inscrip.  from  Mathura,  no.  11,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  I.  p.  382,  foot  notes  50,  51). 

SAHA.YA-DURGA— A kind  of  fort.' 


4.0 


(See  details  under  Durga), 


626 


SAHASBA-LIl^GA 


SAHASRA-LII^GA— A thousand-phalli,  a group  of  phalli  of  ^iva. 

■■  Set  up  on  the  colonnade  to  the  west  a row  of  lihgas  forming 
the  thousand  lihgas/’ 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  iv.  Ghamrajnagar  Taluq,  jao.  86, 
Transl.  p.  XI,  line  9,  Roman  text,  p.  18,  line  14) 

SAlilKlRNA — A type  of  building,  houses  built  with  a certain  number  of 
materials,  a joinery. 

Buildings  made  of  more  than  two  materials  (M.  xviii.  139,  etc. 

see  under  Vimana  and  Prasada). 
A class  of  buildings  (Kamikagama,  xlv.  62,  see  under  Malika). 

A kind  of  joinery  (M.  xvii.  140, 146). 

SAlStGRAHA-— A combination  of  mouldings  at  the  bottom  of  a column. 
Bkam&am  padukam  kurySt  pahoha-bhagam  tu  samgraham  \ 

(M.  XV.  179,  etc). 

SAMQ-RAHAKA — A fortress  to  defend  a group  of  ten  villages 
Da&a-grami-samgrahena  samgrahanam  sthapayet  I 

(Kaul/iliya-Arthafeastra,  oh^tp.  XXII.  p.  46). 
Sj^iMG-HARAMA— (see  Vihara) — ^Residences  of  monks  or  hermits,  the 
monastery. 

(Taxila  plate  of  Patika,  line  3,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  iv. 

pp.  66,66). 

SAMCHARA—^Ao  entrance,  a door,  a gate,  an  outlet,  a military  post, 
a tower  or  circuit  on  the  top  of  the  surrounding  wall  of  a village 
or  town. 

(M,  X.  iu9,  etc). 

SAMCHITA — A class  of  buildings  in  which  the  breadth  is  the 
unit  of  measurement,  the  temples  in  which  the  idol  is  in 
the  sitting  posture. 

(M;  XIX.  7-11,  XXX,  103-174,  see  under  Apasam* 

chita). 


SlBA 


6m 

Prafiyekam  fcri-vidham  proktam  samohitam  ohapy-asamohitam  \ 
tJpa-aamoliitam  ity  evam I 

(Kamikagataa,  xly,  6-7). 

c^AMPURNA — ^A  class  of  buildings 

(Kamikagama,  XLV.  29-30,  see  under  Malika). 
SAMVIDDHA— A fortified  city. 

(M.  X.  41,  see  under  Nagara). 
Cf.  Visioing  ■■  tne  gramas,  nagaras,  khefcas,  kbarvatas,  madambas, 
pattanas,  dronamukhas  and  samvahauas — 'the  cities  of  the  ele- 
phants at  the  cardinal  points.’’ 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  vii.  Shikarpur  Taluq,  no.  118, 
Transl.  p.  86,  last  para,  line  14). 
SAMSAD — An  assembly  hall  (built  within  a wedding  pavilion). 

Cf.  Ratha-rathi-yuta  hy  asan  kritrima  hy  akritopamah  I 
Sarvesham  mohanarthaya  tatha  cha  samsadah  kritah  II 

(Skanda-Purana,  Mahesvara-khanda-prathma, 
chap.  24,  V.  13). 

SAtiCSTHANA — The  arraugemem,  laym^-uai},  plans  of  buildings  aiid 
other  objects. 

(1)  Tri-konam  vrittam  ardheudum  ashta-konam  dvir-ashtakam  l 
Chatush-konam  tu  kartavyam  samsthanam  mandapasya  tu  II 
The  plan  of  a mandapa  should  be  made  triangular,  quadrangular, 

octagonal,  sixteen-angular,  half -moon-shaped  and  circular. 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  15-16). 

(2)  Tri-konaiii  padmam  arddhendum  ohatush-kopam  dvir-ashta- 

kam I 

Yatra  tatra  vidhatavyam  samsthanam  mandapasya  tu  II 

(Garuda-Purana,  chap.  47,  v.  32-33). 

^ARA— -A  class  of  buildings. 

(Kamikagama,  xiiV.  60,  see  under  Malika). 


SALA 


SALA(-LA) — A wall,  a rainparti,  an  apartment,  a house. 

(1)  Udyanamra-vanopetam  mahabiih  sala-meldialam  I 
Commentary  : salah  prakarah  (enclosure  wall),  sala-vanam  ta  I 

(Ramayana,  1.  5-12) 

(2)  Antare  &esha-bhagams  tu  hitva  madhye  tu  salakam  I’ 
Sala-gopurayos  tuhgastv-adhika&  chapi  mulatah  li 
Agrato’lindakopetam  attalaih  salakantare  II 

Kamikagama,  xxxv.  112A,  124,  126). 

(3)  Salantam  vedikordhve  tu  yuddharthaih  kalpayet  sudhih  \ 

(M.  IX.  364). 

See  also  M.  xxxi.  36,  37  (pauoha-sala),  39,  (Jati-sala),  40, 

41,44,48,  52,  etc. 

Sala(-a)-3anma-samam  ohaiva  dhamna-janma-samam  tu  vS  \ 
Salangadhikaih  hinam  cheoh  chorair  artham  vinafeyate  \ 

(M.  Lxix.  42,  45 

(4)  Kanakojvala-sala-rafemi-jalaih  parikhambu..,.prati-bimbitaih  \ 

“ Through  the  mass  of  the  rays  which  issue  from  its  golden 

walls  and  which  are  reflected  in  the  water  of  its  (Vija- 
yanagara’s)  moat” 

(Vijayanagara  Inscrip,  of  Devaraja  ii,  lines  7-8, 
H.  S.  I.  I.,  vol.  I.  no.  153,  pp.  162, 164)! 

(5)  Antaram  sadma-salam — the  inner  wall  of  the  shrine.” 

(Ranganatha  Inserip.  of  Sundara-pandya,  v.  22, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  Ill,  pp,  13,  16). 

(6)  Spha|ika-sala-nibham  babandha — “ like  a wall  of  crystal.” 

(Two  Inscrip,  of  Tammusiddhi,  no.  A,  Tiruvalah- 
gadu  Inserip.  V.  16,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  vii.  pp.  124, 

125). 

(7)  Hurllamgha-dushkara-vibheda-viltala-sala-durggadha-dustara- 

hrihat-parikha-parita  \ 


SILA-VATA 


629 


“ (The  city  of  Kanohi)  whose  large  rampart  was  in«urmoantable 
and  hard  to  he  breached  (and)  which  was  surrounded  by  a 
great  moat,  unfathomable  and  hard  to  be  crossed.” 

(Gradval  Plates  of  Vikramaditya  i,  v.  6,  line  21, 
Ep,  Ind.  vol.  X.  pp.  103,  106). 

(7)  Sriman  esho’rkka-kirttir  nnripa  iva  vilasat  sala-sopanaka- 
dyaih  I 

“ That  honourable  one,  like  a king  of  sun-like  glory  (erected) 
splendid  walls  and  stairs.” 

(Bp.  Caraat.  vol.  il.  no.  105,  Eoman  text,  p.  79, 
line  14,  Transl.  p.  164,  para  6). 

SIDDHA — A type  of  storeyed  building,  a class  of  divine  beings. 

A class  of  two-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xx.  94,  16-18,  sec  under 

Prasada). 

Semi-divine  beings,  their  images  are  described  (M.  LV.  88  f). 
SIDDHAETHA — A type  of  building  furnished  with  two  halls. 
Siddhartham  apara-yamye  yama-suryaih  pa&ohimottare  lalo  ! 

“ A house  with  only  a western  and  southern  hall  is  termed 
Siddhartha.” 

(Brihat-samhita,  Liii.  39,  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.S., 
vol.  VI.  p.  286). 

SINDHXJKA — A class  of  buildings. 

(Kamikagama,  XLV.  23-28,  see  under  Malika), 
SI(SI)LA-VATA — A stone  mason. 

‘Sudradhara-Asalena  bamdhita  tatha  silavata-jahadena  ghatita  I 
“ The  step-well  was  constructed  by  the  architect  Asala  and 
(the  stones  were)  worked  and  shaped  by  the  mason  Jahada. 

(Manglan  stone  Inscrip.  line  13-14,  Ind.  Ant. 

Vol.  XLi,  p.  88). 


630 


Sl^HA 


SIHHA— A type  of  pavilion,  a olaas  of  oval  buildings,  a riding  animal 
(lion)  of  gods. 

A mandapa  or  pavilion  with  sixteen  pillars  (M'atsya-Purana,  chap. 

270,  V.  13,  ^see  under  Mandapa). 
Simha  is  tbe  name  of  a kind  of  one-storeyed  building  which  is 
dudeoagonal  in  plan,  covered  by  lions  (?  simhakranta)  and 
eight  cubits  wide  : 

(1)  Brihat-samhita  (chap.  XLV.  28",  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  vi, 

p.  329). 

(2)  See  quotation  of  the  commentary  from  Katyapa,  which  is  more 

explicit : 

Simhah  simhaih  samakrantah  konair  dva-da§abhir  yutah  | 
Vishkambhad  ashta-hastah  syad  eka  tasya  cha  bhumika  II 
(8)  Matsya-Purana  (chap.  269,  v.  29,  36,  40,  49,  63,  see  under 

Prasada). 

(4)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap,  130,  v.  36,  see  under  Prasada). 

A kind  of  oval  building  : 

G-aruda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  29-30,  see  under  Prasada). 

The  lion,  a riding  animal  of  gods  : 

Devanam  vahanam  simham  (M.  Lxlii.  1),  the  sculptural  descrip- 
tion of  his  image  (ibid.  2-46). 

SiMHASANA — (of.  Asana) — A throne  or  seat,  marked  with  a lion. 
(1)  Siihha-mudrita-manoharasanam  I 

Kesari-lafiohhitam  tv-atha  manoharasanam  1 

(M.  XLV.  204,  206). 

Manasara  (chap.  xlv.  named  Siihhasana,  1 — 112): 

The  lion  seat  or  throne  is  made  for  the  use  of  deities  and 
kings  (line  1).  These  thrones  are  first  divided  into  four  class- 
es (4-8) — the  Prathama  (first)  throne  is  stated  to  be  fit  for 
the  first  coronation,  the  Mangala  throne  for  the  Mangala- 
coronation,  the  Vira  throne  for  the  Vira-ooronatiou, 


sii^hAsana 


631 


and  the  Vijaya  throne  for  the  Vijaya-coronation.  It  should 
be  noted  that  these  four  thrones  are  used  for  the  four  stages 
of  coronation  of  the  same  king  (M.  XLix.  166^  etc). 

oncerning  deities,  the  Nityarohana  throne  is  used  for  daily 
worship,  Vi&esha-throne  on  some  special  occasions ; the  Nit- 
yotsava  throne,  and  the  Vi&eshotsava-throne  are  used  for 
ordinary  and  special  festivals  respeotivelv  (9-11 V 

But  the  thrones  for  both  deities  and  kings,  for  all  purposes, 
are  divided  into  ten  kinds  (see  below).  An  aoooimt  of 
the  general  plan  as  well  as  of  the  measurement  of  the  various 
parts  of  them  is  given  in  detail  (17-213),  They  are 
technically  called — Badmasana,  Padma-kefeara,  Padma- 
bhadra,  ^ri-bhadra,  ^rl-vi&ala,  6ri-bandha,  §ri-mukha, 
Bhadrasana,  Padma-bandha,  and  Pada-bandha  (12-16). 

Of  the  ten  kinds,  the  first,  Padraasana,  is  used  as  the  throne 
for  ^iva  or  Vishnti  (121),  the  Padma-bhadra  for  the  king 
Adhiraja  (i.e.,  Chakravartin  or  emperor)  (143),  8ri-bhadra  is 
fit  for  the  kings  Adhiraja  and  Narendra  for  all  purposes 
(153),  the  ^ri-visala  is  fit  for  the  kings  Parsiip.ika  and 
hfarendra  (171),  the  Sri-bandha  is  for  the  kings  Parshnika 
and  Patta-dhara  (174),  ^ri-mukha  for  the  king  Mandaleta 
(177),  Bhadrasana  for  the  king  Patta-bhaj  (179),  Padma- 
bandha  for  the  king  Praharaka  (182),  and  the  Pada-bandha 
throne  is  fit  for  the  king  Astra-graha  (190). 

The  lion-legs  are,  however,  noc  attached  to  the  throne  of 
Astra-graha  (191).  Thrones  of  all  other  petty  kings  of 
the  Vaifeya  and  the  Sudra  castes  are  stated  to  be  furnished 
with  pedestals  instead,  and  are  made  four  cornered  (square) 
(192-193).  But  thrones  of  all  other  kings  are  marked 
with  lions  and  furnished  with  six  legs  (196).  These  thrones 
are  stated  to  be  made  facing  the  east  (pranmukha)  (197). 


632  STJKA-NASIKl 

Of  the  thrones  of  deities,  the  Nirikshana  (eyes,  ? windows) 
is  made  on  the  four  sides  (198). 

Various  kinds  of  thrones  are  thus  described  but  the  most 
beautiful  one  according  to  one’s  choice  should  be  used  : 

Bvam  cha  vividharh  proktam  yan  manoramya(inl 
manayet  i (200). 

''2)  This  is  the  mighty  lion-throne  (Simhasana)  on  which  sat 
the  glorious,  powerful  king,  in  whose  arm  is  strength,  the 
Lord  Emperor  Kalihga  Ni§tahka  Lahke^wara.” 

“ Sinhasanaya- — on  the  lion  1 , 2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8 (pillars).  Lion 

throne,  royal  throne,  throne  .In  this  case  there  was 

actually  a large  lion,  whose  fine  proportions  remind  one 
of  the  Assyrian  bulls  and  which  formed  the  support,  or  one 
of  the  supports,  of  the  royal  seat.  A frieze  of  lions  runs 
round  the  building.”  Bhys  Davids. 

(Insorip.  at  the  Audience  Hall  of  Parakrama 
Bahu,  Pulastipur,  Ceylon,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  Ii. 

p.  247,  c.  2,  para  4 ; p.  249,  c.  2). 

(3)  “ The  other  shrine  contains  a fine  large  figure  of  Buddha, 
seated  on  a simhasana  or  throne  with  recumbent  lions  at  the 
base,  and  elephants  and  other  carved  accessories  at  the 
sides.” 

(Monumental  Antiquities,  N.  W.  Provinces  and 
Oudh,  j!\roh.  Surv.  new  Imp.  series,  vol.  ii. 

Agra  division,  p.  96,  no.  23,  line  6). 

SUKA(-KHA)-NASIKA — A small  room  in  front  of  the  idol  in  a 
temple. 

(1)  “ "The  great  minister  Kampanna  for  the  repair  of  the  roof- 
stones  in  the  Sukanasike  (a  small  room  in  front  of  the  idol) 
of  the  god  Chenna-ke&ava,  set  up  four  pillars -with  capitals 
and  repaired  them.” 

(Ep,  Carnat.  vol.  V.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  62, 
Transl.  p.  66,  note  1 ; Boman  text,  p.  126). 


SUGRlTA 


633 


(2)  “ It  (Malle^vara  temple  at  Hulikal)  faces  north  and  consists 

of  a ‘ garbliagriha  an  open  ‘ sukhanasi  a ‘ navarahga  and 
a porch.  The  ‘ garbhagriha  ‘ sukhanasi  * and  porch  are 
all  of  the  same  dimensions,  being  about  4|  feet  square, 
while  the  ‘ navarahga  ’ measures  16  feet  by  14  feet.” 

The  ‘ Sukhanasi  ’ doorway  has  on  its  lintel  a figure  of 

The  ‘ garbliagriha  ’ and  ‘ sukhanasi  ’ have  likewise  ceilings 
of  the  same  kind,  but  that  of  the  porch  is  the  largest  and 
the  best  of  all.” 

(Mysore  Arch.  Beport,  1915-16,  p.  4,  para  10  ; see 
also  p.  6,  para  12 ; p.  7,  para  13  ; p.  15,  para  19). 

(3)  “ The  outer  walls  of  the  ‘ garbliagriha  ’ and  ‘ sukhanasi  ’ have 

besides  pilasters  and  turrets ” 

(Ibid.  p.  21,  para  27). 

SUKSHETBA— An  edi’fice,  a type  of  building. 

Pruk-talaya  viyuktam  Sukshetram  vyiddhidam  vustu  I 

An  edifice  “ without  an  eastern  hall  is  named  Sukshetra  and 
brings  prosperity.” 

(Byihat-samhita,  Liii.  37,  see  J.  B.  A.  8.,  N.  S., 
vol.  VI.  p.  286). 

SUKHAI^GA — A type  of  pavilion,  a rest-house. 

A kind  of  pavilion  used  as  a rest  house  : 

Sukhahgakhyam  iti  proktam  satra-yogyarii  tu  mandapam  I 

(M.  XXXIV.  272,  see  under  Mandapa). 
SUKHALAYA—A  pleasure-house,  a type  of  storeyed  building. 

A class  of  three-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxi.  22-30,  see  under 

Prasada). 

SUGKIVA — An  object  having  a beautiful  neck,  a type  of  pavilion. 

A pavilion  with  twenty-four  pillars  (Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v. 

13,  see  under  Mandapa). 


634 


StJDHA 


SUBHA — StiucGO,  a bailding  material,  brick,  plaster,  mortar,  wMte- 
wasb. 

(1)  See  Eatnapura  Insorip.,  1114  A.  B.,  of  Jajalladeva,  V.  16,  Ep. 
lad.  vol,  I.  pp.  35-38. 

(5i)  See  Bewal  Prasasti  of  Lalla  the  Ohhmda,  v.  28,  Ep.  Ind. 
vol.  I.  pp.  80,  84? 

(3)  See  Mansara  under  Abhasa. 

SUNBAEA— A beautiful  object,  a type  of  storeyed  building. 

A class  of  six-storeyed  buildings  (M.  XXIV..16,  see  under  Prasada) . 

SUPEATI(-1)KANTA — A typo  of  building,  a kind  of  ground-plan. 

A kind  of  prakara  or  enclosure  buildings  (M.  xxxi.  24,  see  Pari  vara 

and  PrakSra). 

A class  of  nine-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxvii.  23-36,  see  under 

Prasada). 

A ground  plan  in  which  the  wboie  area  is  diviuecl  into  484  equal 
squares  (M.  Vii.  30-31,  see  under  Pada-vinyasa). 

SUBHABEA“A  building  furnished  with  a beautiful  front  tabernacle,  a 
type  of  pavilion. 

A pavilion  with  twelve  pillars  (Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  V.  14,  atjw 

under  Mandapa). 

SUBHUSHANA — A well  decorated  house  for  tne  use  of  a married 
couple,  a type  of  pavilion  where  a oremoney  is  performed  on  a 
wife^s  perceiving  the  first  signs  of  conception. 

Subhushanakhyam  vipranam  yogyam  pumsavanarthakam  I 

(M.  XXXIV.  364,  see  under  Mandaptu,. 
SUMANGADl — ^A  kind  of  ornament. 

An  ornament  for  the  images  of  female  deities  (M.  liVc  49,  95, 

see  under  Bhushana). 


SUlXLAtA 


63  d- 

SUVEATA— A type  of  pavilion. 

A pavilion  with  sixty  pillars  (Matsya-Purana,  chap.  270,  v.  7,  see 

under  Mapdapa). 

SU8LISHTA — A type  of  pavilion. 

A pavilion  with  thirty-six  pillars  (Matsya-Purapa,  chap.  270,  v.  11, 

see  under  Mapdapa). 

SITSHIEA — ^A  hole,  a hollow,  an  aperture,  a cavity, 

(1)  Prag-grivah-panoha-bhagena  nishkasa(ta)s  tasya  ohoohyate  \ 
Karavet  sushiram  tad- vat  prakarasya  tri-hhagatah  II 

(Matsya-Purana,  chap.  269,  v.  24}. 

(2)  Sushiram  bh^a-vistirpam  bhittayed  bhag-vistarat  \ 

(Agni-Purapa,  chap.  104,  v.  3).’ 

(3)  Dvara-vat  pifcha-madhye  tu  tesham  sushirakam  bhavet  I 

(Graruda-Purapa,  ohap.  47,  v.  16). 

(4)  See  M.  Lxv.  83,  lxvii.  16,  etc. 

SUSAMHITA — A ground-plan  in  which  the  whole  area  is  divided 
into  400  equal  squares. 

(M.  yii.  28-29,  also  xxxi.  18  etc.,  see  under 
Pada-vinyasa). 

SU(-SU)T-(T)ALAYA— An  enclosure,  a cloister,  a covered  arcade 
forming  part  of  a monastic  or  collegiate  establishment,  an 
enclosed  place  of  religious  retirement,  a Jain  monastery. 

Cf.  Ep.  Oarnat.  vol,  n.  nos.  69,  76,  76,  78,  86;  Introduction, 
p.  37,  last  para,  line  3 ; Eoman  text,  p.  67,  line 
27,  pp.  62,  70 ; Txansl.  pp.  147, 161,  156  : 

(1)  Sri-Gahga-Eajem  Suttale  karaviyale  (no.  76,  Eoman  text, 

p.62). 

(2)  Sri-Gahga-Eaja  Suttalayatam  madisidam  (no.  76,  Eoman 

text,  p.  62). 

(3)  Suttalayada  bhittiya  madisi— “ had  the  wall  round  the  cloisters 

and  the  twenty -four  Tirthahkaras  made”  (no.  78,  line  1), 


636 


StTBA-GBAHIN 


(4)  G-ommatia  devara  Suttalayadolu  (ao.  86,  line  1). 

(6)  G-angavadiya  gommata-devaigge  suttalayaman  eydo  miidisi- 
dain  — for  Gommatadeva  of  Gangavadi  he  had  the  cloisters 
around  made.” 

(No.  90,  Boman  text.  p.  72,  line  9 from  bottom 
upwards;  Transl.  p.  168,  para  6 ; see  also  no. 

59,  Boman  text,  p.  57,  line  27). 
(6)  “ Inside  (the  bastis  or  Jaina  temples)  is  a court  probably 
square  and  surrounded  by  cloisters  (see  photo  no.  149  of 
Jaina  basti  at  ^ravana  Belgola,  Bergusson,  p.  270),  at  the 
back  of  which  rises  the  vimana  over  the  cell,  which  contains 
the  principal  image  of  the  Tirthahkara.”  , 

(Fergussou,  Ind.  and  East.  Arch.  p.  269,  last 
para,  photo  no.  149,  p.  270). 
SCfTBA-GBAHIN — (see  under  Sthapati)— The  draftsman,  an 

architect. 

S0TBA-DHA.BA — (see  under  Sthapati) — A carpenter,  an  architect. 
SUTBA-DHARIN — (see  under  Sthapati) — The  thread-holder,  the 
manager,  an  architect. 

SUTRA-PATTI — (see  Patta  and  Pattika) — A part  of  a door. 
Dvara-tare  chatush-pancha-shat-saptashta  vibhajite  il 
Ekamtam  sutra-pattih  syat  samaiii  va  bahalam  bhavet  II 

(Vastu-vidya,  ed.  Gapapati  Sastri,  xiv.  1,  2). 
SETU — A bridge  in  general,  a barrier,  a boundary,  a limit,  a land- 
mark, a ridge  of  earth,  a cause-way,  a narrow  pass  or  mountain- 
road,  a mound,  a bank,  a dam. 

(1)  Karna-kilaya-sambandbo’  nugyiharii  setuh-- “ the  fastening  of 

the  roof  of  a house  to  the  transverse  beam  by  means  of  iron 
bolts  is  called  setu.” 

(Kautiliya-Arthafeastra,  chap.  Lxv.  p.  166,  para  1). 

(2)  Matha  vedadinam  dvija-pura-viharah  prati-di§am  virajante 

satryany  api  cha  paritas  setu-nivabhah  l( 

(Two  Bhuvane&vara  Inscrip.  no.  A,  of  Svapne- 
svara,  v,  30,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  vi.  p.  202). 


SOPANA 


637 


(3)  Sa  khalu  Bhagirathi-patha-pravarttamana-nana-vidh.a-iiau- 
’vata-sampadita-setn  - vandha  - nihita  - feaila  - &ikhara  - &reni- 
vibhramat...,» 

“ From  the  illusferatious  camp  of  victory  at  Sri-Mudgagiri — 
where  the  bridge,  which  is  produced  by  the  wall  of  boats  of 
various  kinds  proceeding  on  the  path  of  the  Bhagirathi, 
surpasses  the  beauty  of  a chain  of  mountain  tops.” 

Dr*  Hultzsoh  seems  to  think  that  “ the  broad  line  of  boats 
floating  on  the  river  resembled  the  famous  bridge  of  Kama.” 

Dr.  Rajendralal  Mitra,  however,  concludes  from  this  passage, 
that  “ Narayanapala  had  made  a bridge  of  boats  across  the 
Ganges.’* 

(Bhagalpur  Plates  of  Narayanapala,  lines  24-25, 
Ind.  Ant,  vol.  xv.  pp.  306,  308-9,  and  note  29). 

SBNA-MXJKHA — -A  division  of  an  army,  a mound  in  front  of  the 
gate  of  a city,  a prosperous  royal  city  (see  under  Nagara), 

(1)  Nana-janaife  cha  sampurnam  bhupa-harmyena  samyutam  1 

Bahu-raksha-samopetam  etat  sena-mukham  bhavet  \ 

(M.  X.  70-71). 

(2)  Raja-vetma-samayuktam  sarva-jati-samanvitam  \ 

Guhya-pradefea-samyuktam  sena-mukham  ihoohyate  II 

(Ramikagama,  xx.  12;. 

3E(-&I)LA-RtjPAKA — A statue,  a rock-sculpture. 

Of.  “ The  rock  sculpture  or  statues,  gift  of  his  (Sivama’s)  wife 
Vijaya.*’ 

(Kuda  Insorip,  no.  6,  line  7,  Arch.  Surv.  new 
Imp.  series,  vol.  iv.  p.  85). 

SAIiN  XA-DURGA — A fort  (see  details  under  Durga). 

SOPANA — Stairs,  steps,  a stair-case,  a ladder. 

(1)  Manasara,  chap.  XXX  : 

Flights  of  steps  are  constructed  for  ascending  up  and  descend- 
ing from  temples,  residential  buildings,  pavilions,  enclo- 
sures (prakara),  gate-houses,  hilly  tracts  (parvata-deta),  step- 
wells,  wells,  ponds,  villages,  and  towns  (lines  85-89), 


6^ 


SOPANA 


Their  sifmatiion  : 

They  are  stated  to  he  constructed  on  the  feont,  haofe  and  sides 
of  a residential  building  or  temple  : 

Sarveaham  mukha-bhadranam  partve  sopana-samyptam  \ 93 
Par^vayor  dvara-dete  tu  mukha-sopanam  eva  va  1 94 
Guhyanta-dvara-dete  tu  vame  sopana-samyutam  1 97 
Pramukhe  mukha-sopanam  kuryach  chhilpa-vit-tamah  I 102 
Prapange  pramukhe  bhadre  soptoam  purva-parsvayoh  \ 106 
Par&vayoh  prishtha-dete  tu  tat-purve  paksha-partvayoh  \ 100 
Yatra  dete  tu  sopanam  tatra  dosho  na  vidyate  \ 101 
Alinda-yuktam  tad-dvare  vame  sopana-samyutam  \ 113 
Vinalinda-pradete  tu  pramukhe  sopanam  eva  oha  I 114 
Their  situation  in  other  places  : 

Gopuranaih  tu  tat-par&ve  sopanam  lakshananvitam  I 117 
Adri-defee  samarohya  yatra  tatraiva  karayet  \ 118 
Vapi-kupa-tatake  va  paritah  sopana-samyutam  I 119 
Chatur-dikshu  ohatush-kone  ohantarale’thava  punah  I 120 
Evam  eva  yatha-dete  bhadra-sopauam  eva  va  I 121 
Their  plan : 

Trayo-vimtach  chhatantam  syad  devanam  iti  kathyate  \ 141 
Pattadri-marga-paryantam  tiryak  ohordhvordhva-ohoktavat  \ 

. .142 

Manushanam  tu  sopanarii  pattika-yugma-samyutam  \ 143 
Sopana-par§vayor  dete  hasti-hasta-vibhushitam  \ 166 
Hasta-mula-vitale  tu  ohokfcangulim  na  manayet  1 166 
Miilena  tat  (mCile  ch%ra)-tri-bhagaikam  hastagrantam  ksha- 

yam  kramat  1 167 

Hasti-hasta-vad  akaram  raga-yuktam  manoharam  1 160 
Tri-ohatuah-pancha-vaktram  va  mulena  simhananair  yutam  \ 

169 


SOPlNA 


639 


Agradho  dharapatfcam  syat  pafctika  chokta-manakam  1 160 
Ad.hara(agradhara)m  palikakaram  pattika  vedikakritih  I 161 
Adri-sopana-parSve  tu  na  knryafc  par§vayo’nghrikam  I 163 
Adri- sopana-de&e  tu  dirgka-manam  yatlifishfcakam  \ 136 
Sarvalankara-samyuktam  aopanqim  lakshananvitam  \ 162 
Measures  of  the  other  ..flights  of  steps  are  given  in' detail 
(126-132,  134-i.36); 

The  two  kinds  of  -steps  (and  the  materials  of  which  they  are 
constructed)  : 

Aohaiam  oha  ohalam  chaiva  dvidha  sopanam  iritatn  \ 90 
^ilahhis  cheshtakair  vapi  darubhih  saohalam  matam  \ 91 
Sarvaife  ohaivachalam  proktam  kshudra-sopana-samyutam  { 92 
The  account  given  above  is  that  of  the  stationary  steps,  that 
of  the  moveable  (?moving)’‘Step8  is  also  given ; 

Achalam  oheti  proktam  ohalam  sthapyam  yathesh^akam  \ 124 
Tri-ohatush-pahcha-shap-matram  ohalam  sopana-padake,  I 144 
Tad-ghanam  oha  vi&ale  tu  samam  va  ^adam  adhikam  \ 146 
Ardhadhikam  tu  padona-dvi-gunam  tri-gunam  tatah  J 146 
Danda-dvaya-samayuktam  ohitra  (?ohhidra)-yuktam  tu  patti- 
ka \ 147 

Eka-dvi-try-angularii  vapi  pattika-ghanam  eva  oha  i 148 
Dvi-tri-veda-fearahgulyam  shat-saptahgulam  eva  va  \ 149 
Ashta-nanda-datahgulyam  pattika-vistyitam  bhavet  \ 160 
Evam  tu  ohala-sopanam  achalam  tat  pravakshyate  \ lol 
(2)  Vishkambha-ohatur-a&ram  a^talakam  utsedha-samavakshepa- 
sopanam  karayet  \ 

Ishtakavabandha-parsvam  vamatah  pradakshina*  sopanam 
gudha-bhitti-sopanam  itaratah  \ 

(Kautiliya-Artha&astra,  chap.  XXIV.  pp.  62,  63). 


640 


SOPANA 


(3)  Sopanam  oha  yatha-yuktya  haati-hasfcam  tathaiva  clia  il 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxx.  114). 

Ibid.  LV  : 

Tale  tale  tu  sopanam  arohartbaiii  prakalpayet  II  167 
Compare  ^ankha-sopana  (v.  170),  hasti-sopana  and  laja-sopana 
(174),  pradakshina-sopana  (176). 

The  general  plan  : 

Sopanam  par&vayor  agre  tan-mulasya  prayojayet  \ 

Tan-mulam  syad  adhishthanam  pada-prastara-varga-ynk  II  177 
Afeva-padopari  sthitvarohanaih  dakshinahghrina  \ 
Idrig-lakshana-samyuktam  sopanam  sampadaspadam  II  178 

(4)  Mahabharata,  1. 186,  20 : 

Prasadaih  sukritochchhrayaih I 

Sukharohana-sopanaih  mahasana.-parichohhadaih  II 

(6)  Plights  of  steps  (Vanapalli  Plates  of  Anna-voma,  v.  10,  Bp. 

Ind.  vol.  III.  pp.  61,  69). 

(6)  Mern-mamdara  kaila&au  arnrnkshur  mahamatih  | 
Sopana-pahktim  ^ri-kaile  vyatanod  vema-bhu-patih  II 

Desirous  of  ascending  Meru,  Mandara  and  Kaila&a  i.  e.  to 
gain  heaven  through  charity)  the  high  minded  king  Verna 
constructed  a flight  of  steps  at  ^ri-&aila.” 

(Nadiipuru  Grant  of  Anna-Vema,  v..  6,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  HI.  pp.  288,  291). 
The  sopana  is  a kind  of  religious  architecture  peculiar  to  India, 
of.,  e.g.,  the  flight  of  steps  in  Chandra.&ekhara  peak,  Sita- 
kun^a,  Chittagong,  Bengal. 

(7)  Patala-gahga-tate  &ri-&aile...,sopaua  vithim  subham  a beauti- 

ful flight  of  steps  in  the  bank  of  the  Patala-gahga  at  the 
fort  of  the  ^ri-tiaila  hill.  ’ 

(Tottaramudi  Plates  of  Kataya-vema,  v.  8,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  IV.  p.  322). 


SOPANA 


641 


(8)  ^ri-feailagrat  prabhavati  pathi  prapta-pStala-gaGge  ( 

Sopanani  pramatha-padavim  arurukshufe  chakara  W 

'' CoBstruoted  the  flight  of  steps  from  Patalagahga  to  the 
summit  of  the  6ri-baila  as  if  to  climb  up  to  the  abode  of 
§iva.” 

(Insorip.  of  the  Reddis  of  Kondavidu,  no.  A, 
V.  6,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  xi.  pp.  320,  314). 

(9)  “ Brahmapryan caused  to  be  made  the  stone  work  of 

■ a flight  of  steps,  with  tiger^s  head  at  the  bottom  for  the 

abhisheka-mandapa  in  the  temple  of  VanduvarSpati-Em- 

beruman  at  Manimahgalam ” 

(Insorip.  of  Eajaraja  iii,  no.  39,  H.  S.  1. 1., 
vol.  ni.  p.  86). 

(10)  Sri-Vagmati*ialavatara-aopanarama-ghanta-dharmma-6aIa-pra- 

tishtha-karmma  samUpayan  \ 

Sopanalir  iyam  vidagdha-raohana-sufelishta-ohitropala  ramya 
vayu-sut5dhiva3a-vihita*proddama-vighnavalih  I 
Sampadyanhika-sakta-loka-vihita-sveohohhavakafea-sthala 
snana-dhyana-hita  sudha-dhavallta-pranta  chiram  rajatam  li 
(Insorip.  from  Nepal,  no.  23,  Insorip.  of 
Queen  Lalita-tri-pura-sundari,  v.  1,  second 
series,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  p,  194). 

(11)  Sriman  esho’rkka-kirttir  nnripa  iva  vilasat  sala-sopanakS- 

dyaih  \ 

“ That  honourable  one,  like  a king  of  Sun-like  glory  (erected) 
splendid  walls  and  stairs.” 

(Ep.  Caruat.  vol.  ii.  no.  105,  Roman  text, 
p.  79,  line  14,  Transl.  p.  164,  para  6). 

(12)  Maha-sopana-!pahktiyumam  rachisidam — '‘had  the  flight  of 

grand  stairs  laid  out.” 

(Bp.  Camat.  vol.  ii.  no.  115,  Roman  text, 
p.  87,  Transl.  p.  171). 

(13)  “ Eor  the  new  Jina  temple  in  the  place  of  his  government, 

in  order  that  long  life  might  be  to  Permmana^i,  caused 
41 


642 


SOMA-SUTEA 


steps  to  be  out  to  the  deep  tank  of  Balora-Ka^^a,  had  the 

embankment  built,  provided  a sluice,  and 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  ill.  Man^ya  Taluq,  no.  78, 
Transl.  p.  47,  Eoman  text,  p.  101-102). 
SOMA-SUTEA — A drain,  a channel  for  conveying  holy  'wttter  from  a 
Phallus  of  Siva  or  any  other  deity  of  a shrine. 

“ The  drainage  channel  from  the  shrine,  an  ornamental  feature 
of  these  temples”.  ■ , . 

(Ohalukyan  Architecture,  Arch.  Surv.  new. 

Imp.  series,  vol.  xxi.  p.  39). 
SAUKHYAKA — A pleasure-house,  a type  of  pavilion. 

(M.  XXXIV.  279,  see  under  Mandapa). 
SAXJDHA — ^A  plastered,  stuccoed  or  white-washed  house,  a large 
house,  a great  mansion,  a palatial  building,  a palace. 

(1)  Kaila^a-^aila-vilasinas  samuttumgga-Sikharasya  saudhasya- 

sthana-bhumau  \ 

(Teki  Plates  of  Eajaraja-chodaganga,  line  82t 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  VI,  p.  342). 

(2)  Kshetre  prabhSse  sukyitadhivase  svakarita-brahma-puri-gyi- 

heshu  \ 

Prakshalya  padau  pradadau  sa  saudham  Nanaka-namne  kavi- 

panditaya  H 

“ (He)  in  the  sacred  Prabhasa,  the  habitation  of  good 
actions,  gave  to  Nauaka,  the  Poet  and  Pandit,  having 
washed  his  feet,  a palace  among  the  mansions  of  the 
Brahma-puri  founded  by  himself.” 

(Sanskrit  G-rants  and  Inscrip.  no.  11,  v.  8, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  XI.  pp.  106, 107). 
SAUHHA-MALIKA — (see  Prasada-malika) — A class  of  buildings, 
an  edifice  of  the  Malika  class. 

SAHMXJKHYA — ^An  object  having  a beautiful  face,  a type  of  column, 
one  of  the  five  Indian  orders. 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxxi.  66,  67,  see  under  Stambha), 


SKANDHXVXEA 


643 


SAUMYA—A  class  of  buildings. 

( Kamikagama,  XIjV.  40,  see  under  Malika). 
SAIJMYA-KANTA — A type  of  gate-house. 

(M.  xxxni,  663,  see  under  Gopura), 
SAtJEA-KANTA — A type  of  storeyed  building. 

A class  of  niue-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xxvii.  5-9,  see  under 

Prasada). 

SAUSHTHIKA — ^An  arohitactural  object  or|nioulding  added  for  the 
sake  of  elegance  or  beauty. 

Tad-eva  sala-par&ve  ohaikam  dvyaikena  shauathika-harah  \ 

(M.  xxviii.  16). 

Tad-eva  ^ala-prante  tu  par&ve  ohaikena  saushthikam  1 

(M.  XXIX.  i26,  see  for  context,  24-33,  under 
Akra-kanta). 

SKANI)-(H)A-KANTA — A type  of  column,  a type  of  gate-house. 

The  hexagonal  or  six-sided  pillars  with  six  upa-padas  or  minor 
pillars  (M.  xy.  246,  23-246). 

A type  of  gata-house  (M.  xxxiii.  559,  see  under  Gopura). 
SKANDHA-TAEA — A type  of  building  extending  like  the  shoulderst 
A class  of  single-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xix.  172,  see  under 

Prasada). 

SKANDHAVAEA— A division  of  an  army,  a camp,  a royal  residence, 
a capital  city,  a fortified  town. 

(M.  X.  42  f*,  see  under  Nagara). 
Of.  6ri-Venu-grama-skamdhavare  sukhena  samrajya-lakshmim 
anubhavan  1 

“ While  he  is  enjoying  the  good  fortune  of  universal  sovereignty 
at  the  famous  camp  of  Yenu-grama.” 

(Bhoj  Grant  of  Kartavirya  iv,  line  96-97, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xix.  pp,  247,  248). 


644 


STAMBHA 


8TAMBHA — ’Fixedness,  a support,  a stem,  a trunk,  a post,  a pillar, 
a column. 

The  column  is  generally  four  times  the  base  (M.  xiit.  2-3,  see  under 
Adhisthana),  and  the  pedestal  is  stated  to  be  twice  or  three 
times  the  base  (see  Mayamata,  under  Adhishthana)  and  the 
entablature  is  directed  to  be  f of,  equal  to,  or  greater  by  |r,  4,  # 
or  twice  of,  the  base  (M.  xvi.  2-4,  see  under  Prastara) 

(1)  ManSsara  (chap,  xv.,  named  Stambha,  1-448)  : 

Columns  are  called  jahgha,  charapa,  (8)tali,  stambha,  ahgrika, 
sthanu,  thuna,  pSda,  skambha,  arani,  bharaka,  and  dharana 
(lines  4-6).  The  height  or  length  of  a column  is  measured 
from  above  the  base  to  below  the  Uttara,  or  above  the  pedestal 
from  Janman  to  the  Uttara  (7-9).  The  height  of  a column  is, 
in  other  words  “ measured  from  the  plinth  (of  the  former) 
up  to  the  lowest  part  of  the  entablature,  that  is,  from  the 
base  to  the  capital  inclusive.*’  The  length  of  a column  is 
twice,  14  or  14  times  of  its  base  (8-10)  ; or  the  heights  of 
the  column  begin  with  24  cubits  and  end  at  8 cubits,  the 
increment  being  by  6 ahgulas  or  4 cubit  (11.^12).  But 
according  to  Kafeyapa  (see  Bam  Baz,  Ess.  Arch,  of  Hind, 
p.  29),  the  height  of  the  pillar  may  be  3 times  that  of 
the  base ; or  6 or  8 times  that  of  the  pedestal.  The 
diameter  of  a pillar  may  be  4th,  ^th,  4th,  or  ^Vth  of  its 
height ; if  it  be  made  of  wood  or  stone,  l-J^d  l-th,  or 
4th,  of  the  height,  if  it  be  a pilaster  joined  to  a wall 
(kudya-stambha).  In  other  words,  the  column  is  from  three 
to  ten  times  the  diameter.  The  width  of  the  pilaster,  accord- 
ing to  the  Manas5.ra  is  3,  4,  6,  or  6 matras  (parts),  and 
twice,  thrice,  or  four  times  of  these  should  be  the  diameter 
of  the  pillar  (M.  XV.  14-15).  The  height  of  a pillar  being 
divided  into  12,  11,  10,  9,  or  8 parts,  one  of  these  parts 
is  the  diameter  of  the  pillar,  and  at  the  top  it  is  diminished 
by  one-fourth  (16-18). 


STAMBHA 


646 


Columns  admit  almost  of  all  shapes  (lines  20-23),  A quadran- 
gular (four-sided)  pillar  is  called  Brahma-kanta ; an  octangular  - 
one  is  called  Vishnu-kanta  ; a sixteen  sided  or  circular  one  is 
known  as  Eudra-kanta  ; a pentagonal  one  is  called  ^iva- 
kanta ; and  a hexagonal  column  is  called  Skanda-kanta. 
These  columns  are  stated  to  be  uniform  from  bottom  to  top  ; 
but  the  bases  of  these  may  bo  quadrangular  (24-26). 

With  reference  to  dimensions  and  ornaments  the  five  kinds  of 
columns— Brahma-kanta,  Vishnu-kanta,  Eudra-kanta,  Siva- 
kanta,  and  Skanda-kanta — are  called  Chitra-karna  (31^, 
Eadma-kanta  (39),Ohitra-skambha  (40),  Palika-stambha  (73), 
and  Kumbha-stambha  (73,204),  The  sixth  one,  Kosh^ha- 
stambha  (84)  in  the  latter  division,  is  stated  to  be  two-sided, 
and  hence  it  is  same  as  Kudya-stambha  or  pilaster.  It 
should  be  noticed  that  the  former  set  of  five  names  refers  to 
the  shapes  of  columns,  i.  e.,  shafts,  whilst  the  latter  set 
of  five  names  is  based  on  the  shapes  of  the  capitals.  But  in 
the  detailed  account  both  the  capital  and  shaft  are 
included. 

Columns,  when  in  rows,  must  be  in  a straight  line, 

“ The  intercolumniation  may  be  two,  three,  four  or  five  dia- 
meters ; it  is  measured  in  three  ways,  Ist  from  the  inner 
extremity  of  the  base  of  one  pillar  to  that  of  another,  2adly 
from  the  centre  of  two  pillars  j and  3rdly  from  the  outer 
extremities  of  the  pillars  including  the  two  bases.”  “ There 
are  no  fixed  interoolumniations  in  Indian  architecture.” 

(Earn  Eaz,  pp.  32,  39). 
Of.  Dhvaja-stambha  (M.  lxix.  24),  Dhanya-stambha  and  Sila- 
stambha  (M.  xlvii.  1).  The  shapes  and  mouldings  of  the 
last  one  (ibid.  16-18  ) : 

Vrittam  va  chatur-asrarh  va  ashta&ra-shoda'sattrakam  I 
Pada-tunge’  shta-bhaga  tu  trim^enordhvam  alankritam  \ 
Bodhikam  mushti-bandhaih  oha  phalaka  tatika  ghatam  I 
These  are  apparently  the  five  component  parts  of  the  shaft. 


646 


STAMBHA 


The  eptablature,  base,  and  pedestal  are  separately  described  : 
Knttimam  chopapitbam  va  sopapitha-masurakam  (ibid.  21) ; 
see  further  details  under  ‘ XJpapitha’,  ‘ Adhishthana  ’ and 
‘ Prastara.  ’ 

For  the  component  parts  of  a column  see  further  details 
below. 

(2)  Kamikagama,  xxxv  : 

Nava-hasta-pramanantah  stambhotsedhah  prakirtitah  if  24 
Ohatur-amtam  samarabhya  shad-datarhtam  yatha-vidhi  \ 
Bhagat  kritvaika-bhagena  nyunam  syad  agra-vistarah  II  26 
l§ila-stambham  tila-kudyam  naravase  na  karayet  II  161 
Ibid.  m.  203  (the  synonyms) : 

Sthanu(h)  sthupat  oha  padat  oha  jangha  cha  oharanahghri- 

kam  I 

Sthambho  hasto  lipyam  kampam  (skambham)  padanam  abhi- 

dhanakam  II 


(3)  Suprabhedagama,  xxxi ; 

The  column  compared  with  its  base  and  entablature  ; 
Padayamam  adhishthanam  dvi-gunam  sarva-sammatam  \ 
Padardham  prastaram  proktam  karnam  prastaravat  samam  II 

28 

The  shapes  of  the  live  orders,  the  fifth  being  composite 
of  two  : 

Jati-bhedam  samakhyatam  padanam  adhanoohyate  II  63 
Ohatur-asram  athashtasraih  shodatasram  tu  vrittakam  \ 

Kumb  ha-yukbas  tatha  keohit  keohit  kumbha-vihinakah  II  64 
The  five  names  and  characteristic  features  of  the  five  orders  ; 
^ri-karam  chandra-kantam  cha  saumukhyam  priya-darta- 

- nam  II  66 

^ukhamkarl  oha  namani  kartavyani  viteshatah  I 
^ri-karam  'vritta-padanam  sho^atasre  tu  kantakam  II  66 


STAMBHl 


647 

Saumukliyam  hi  fcafehash^asre  turyagre  priya-dar&anam  \ 
Chatur-asrashfca-mi§re  cha  pada  karya  &ubhamkari  II  67 
This  last  one  is  the  Indian  Composite  order. 

The  common  features  and  mouldings  of  the  five  orders  : 

Pada  nama  iti  prokto  tesham  lakshanam  uohyate  II  65 
Vistarasya  ohatur-vim&at(d)-hhagaikaih  pada-vistaram  1 
Tad  eva  dandam  akhyatam  padalamkara-karmani  II  66 
Mula-padasya  vistarat  saptaikam&ena  margatah  \ 

Dvi’dandam  mandir  utsedham  danda-padam  fcu  vistaram  II  67 
Ashtam^am  kantham  utsedham  dvi-dandam  kumbha- vistaram  I 
Utsedham  tu  tri-padam  hi  padona  phalaka  bhavet  II  68 
Tri-dandam  vistaram  proktam  tad-ardham  nirgatam  smritam  I 
Vira-kantham  tu  dandena  vistaram  tat-samam  bhavet  II  69 
Tad-ilrdhve  potikayamam  tat-tri-padam  tad-uohohhritam  I 
Tri-dandam  adhamayamam  chatur-dandam  tu  madhyamam  II 

60 

Uttamam  pailoha-dandam  tu  potikayamam  uohyate  \ 
Chitra-patra-taramgaife  oha  bhushayitva  tu  potikam  II  61 
Kumbha-padam  idam  proktam  kumbha-nimnam  praehaksh- 

mahel 

Padam  potikaya  yuktam  feesham  karma  na  karayet  II  62 
Xumbha-hinas  tv-ime  prokta  lata-kumbham  tad  uohohyate  I 
Kumbhakaram  tu  tan-mule  tad-iirdlavam  padmam  eva  tu  li  63 
Pbalakordhve  latam  kuryat  taoh-olihesham  kumbha-pada-vat  \ 
Padantare  tu  kartavyam  afeakta^  ohet  tu  varjayet  11  64 
Sarvesham  eva  padanam  tat-padam  nirgamam  bhavet  11  66 
(Of  all  the  orders,  the  projection  is  i). 

The  columns  of  the  main  prasada  (edifice)  and  of  the  subordi- 
nate mandapas  (pavilions)  are  distinguished  : 
Prasada-stambha-manasya  etat  stambhaih  vi&ishyate  I 
Padadhikam  athadhyardham  padona-dvi-gunara  bhavet  II 105 
Stambhayamashta-bhagaikam  stambhasyaiva  tu  vistaram  \ 
Vj’ittam  va  ohatux-asram  va  ohatur-ashtasra-misrakam  II 106 


648 


STAMBHA 


Shodalasra-yiiCam  vapi  &ilpaih  sarvaih  su^obhitam  \ 
Stambhaob.  oha  bodhikadhikya  bodher  apy  ufetaradbika  )l  107 
Utfcarad  vajanadbikya  tasyordhve  mudrikam  nyaset  I 
Mudrikaoh.  oha  tuladhikya  jayanti  tu  talopari  II  108 
Ohhadayed  ish^akabhis  tu  tasyordhve  kalakau  kshipet  II  109 
The  above  passage  refers  to  only  a part  of  the  order.  The 
pedestal,  base,  and  entablature  are  described  elsewhere.  (See 
Suprabhedagama  under  Pitha  & Upapitha,  Adhishthana.  and 
Prastara). 

The  mouldings  of  the  part  between  the  entablature  and  base, 
that  is,  the  capital  and  the  shaft,  are,  as  described  above, 
called  Danda  (v.  66),  Mapdi  (v.  67),  Kantha  (58),  Kumbha 
(68),  Phalaka  (v.  58),  Vira-kantha  (v.  69),  and  Potika  (v.  60). 
The  same  are  otherwise  called  Bodhika,  Uttara  (v.  107), 
Vajana,  Mudrika,  Tula,  Jayanti,  and  Tala  (v.  108\ 
Kautiliya-Arthatastra  (chap.  xxiv.  p.  63)  : 

Stambhasya  parikshepash  shad-ayama  dvi-guno  nikhatah 
ohulikayat  ohatur-bhagah — “ in  fixing  a pillar,  6 parts  are 
to  form  its  height  on  the  floor,  twice  as  much  (12  parts)  to 
be  entered  into  the  ground,  and  one-fourth  for  its  capital.” 

(6)  Eamayapa  (18,  yi.  3,  etc) : 

Kafiohanair  bahubhih  stambhair  vedikabhit  oha  ^obhitah  \ 

(6)  Mahabharata  (xiv.  2523,  etc)  : 

Stambhan  kanaka-ohitramt  cha  toranani  vrihanti  oha  I 

(7)  Mataya-Purana  (chap.  256,  v.  1-6)  : 

Athatah  sampravakshami  stambha-mana-vinirnayam  I 
Kyitva  sva-bhavanoohchhrayam  sada  sapta-gunam  budhaih  II  1 
Atity-amtah  prithutve  syad  agre  nava-gune  sati  1 
Ruohakat  chatur-asrah  syat  tu  ashtatro  vaira  uchyate  li  2 
Dvi-vajrah  shodatattras  tu  dva-trimtatrah  pralinakah  1 
Madhya-pradote  yah  stambho  vritto  vritta  iti  smyitah  li  3 
Ete  paficha-maha-stambhah  prafeastah  sarva-vastushu  I 
Padma-valli-lata-kumbha-patra-darpapa-ropitah  II  4 


STAMBHA 


049 


Stambhasya  navamamaena  padma-kumbbastaram  tu  ^ 
Stambha-tulya  tula  prokta  hina  cbopabula  tatab  j!  5 
Tri-bhageueha  sarvatra  chatur-bhagena  va  punah  I 
3inam  hinam  ohaturbham&at  tathasarvasu  bliumishu  II  6 
These  verses  are  almost  identical  in  the  Brihat-saihhita  (liil 
27-30),  see  below. 

(8)  Brihat-samhita  (liti.  27-30,  J.  E.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  vi.  p, 
286,  notes  1,  2)  : 

IJohohhrayat  sapta-gupad  a&iti*bhagan  prithutvam  etesham  1 
Nava-gunite  asityam&ah  stambhasya  da&amla-hino’gre  II  27 
The  eightieth  part  of  nine  times  the  altitude  (of  the 
storey)  gives  the  width  of  a column  at  tho  bottom ; this 
diminished  by  one-tenth  is  the  width  of  the  column  at  the 
top.’’  Kern. 

Sama-chatur’atro  ruohako  vajro’shta^rir  dvi-vajrako  dvi- 

gunah  1 

Dva-trimsa&ras  tu  madhye  pralinako  vpitta  iti  vrittah  II  28 
A column  with  four  sides  equally  rectangular  (lit,  of  four  equal 
corners)  is  called  Kuchaka  ( = beautiful)  ; one  with  such 
eight  sides  is  called  Vajra  ; one  with  such  sixteen  sides  is 
called  Dvi-vajra ; one  with  such  thirty-two  sides  at  the 
middle  (i.e.,  by  the  shaft)  is  called  Pralinaka  ; and  a round 
one  is  called  Vritta. 

Stambham  vibhajya  navadba  vahanam  bhago  ghal/o’sya 

bhago’  nyah  1 

Padmam  tathottaroshtham  kuryad  bhagena  bhagena  II  29 
Of.  Commentary  quotes  Kirana-Tantra  (?  Kiranagama ) ; 
Vibhajya  navadha  stambham  kuryad  udvahanam  ghatani  \ 
Kamalam  ohottaroshtham  tu  bhage  bhage  prakalpayet  II 
“ When  you  divide  the  whole  column  into  nine  parts,  one 
part  would  be  the  pedestal  (?)  ; the  second,  the  baBe(?). 
The  capital  (?)  and  also  the  upper  lip  (?)  must  be  made  so 
as  to  form  one  part,  each  of  them.”  (see  below). 


660 


STAMBHA 


“ All  this  exceedingly  vague.”  Kern. 

Stambha-samam  bahulyam  bhara-tulanam  upary  npary  asam  I 

Bbavati  tulopatulanam  unam  padena  padena  li  30 

“ Equal  to  the  thickness  of  the  column  is  that  of  the  archi- 
traves ; the  thickness  of  the  superior  cross-beams  and  upper 
rafters  is  lessened  by  one-quarter,  again  and  again.” 
Kern. 

The  eight  component  parts  of  the  column  (order)  mentioned 
in  the  Matsya-Purana,  Brihat-samhita,  and  Kirana-tantra 
are  (1)  vabana,  (2)  gbata,  (3)  padma,  (4)  uttaroshtha,  (5) 
bahulya  (6)  bhara  (?hara),  (7)  tula,  and  (8)  upatula. 

Br.  Kern’s  conjectural  rendering  of  these  terms  does  not  seem 
tenable.  Nothing  can,  however,  be  stated  with  certainty 
about  their  identification.  But  there  is  a very  striking 
similarity  between  the  number  (eight)  of  the  mouldings  of 
which  the  Indian  and  the  Greco-Roman  orders  are  com- 
posed (see  below). 

(9)  Samgraha-tiromani  by  Sarayu  Prasada,  (xx.  132-134),  cites  the 
same  three  verses  from  Varaha-mihira  (B.  S.  liii,  28-30) 
as  quoted  above. 

(10)  The  subservient  parts  of  an  order,  called  mouldings,  and 
common  to  all  the  orders,  are  eight  in  number.  They  are — 
(1)  The  ovolo,  echinus,  or  quarter  round  (fig.  867).  It  is 
formed  by  a quadrant,  or  sometimes  more  of  a circle,  but 
in  Grecian  examples  its  section  is  obtained  by  portions  of 
an  ellipse  or  some  other  conic  section.  This  latter  obser- 
vation is  applicable  to  all  mouldings  of  Greek  examples,  and 
we  shall  not  repeat  it  in  enumerating  the  rest  of  them.  It 
is  commonly  found  under  the  abacus  of  capitals.  The  ovolo 
is  also  almost  always  placed  between  the  corona  and 
dentils  in  the  Corinthian  cornice  ; its  form  gives  it  the 
appearance  of  seeming  fitted  to  support  another  member.  It 
should  be  used  only  in  situations  above  the  level  of  the  eye. 


STAMBHA 


661 


2.  The  talon,  ogee,  or  reversed  oyma  (fig.  868)  seems 

also,  like  the  ovolo,  a moulding  fit  for  the  support 
of  another. 

3.  The  oyma,  cyma  recta,  or  oymatium  (fig.  869)  seems 

well  contrived  for  a covering  and  to  shelter  other 
members.  The  oyma  recta  is  only  used  properly 
for  crowning  members,  though  in  Palladio’s  Doric, 
and  in  other  examples,  it  is  found  occasionally 
in  the  bed  mouldings  under  the  corona. 

4.  The  torous  (fig.  870),  like  the  astragal  presently  to  be 

mentioned,  is  shaped  like  a rope,  and  seems  intended 
to  bind  and  strengthen  the  parts  to  which  it  is 
applied ; while, 

6.  The  Scotia  or  troohiios  (fig.  871),  placed  between  the 
fillets  which  always  accompany  the  tori,  is  usually 
below  the  eye ; its  use  being  to  separate  the  tori, 
and  to  contrast  and  strengthen  the  effect  of  other 
mouldings  as  well  as  to  impart  variety  to  the  profile 
of  the  base. 

6.  The  cavetto,  mouth  or  hollow  (fig.  872)  is  chiefly 

used  as  a crowning  moulding  like  the  oyma  recta. 
In  bases  and  capitals  it  is  never  used.  By  workmen 
it  is  frequently  called  a casement. 

7.  The  astragal  (fig.  873)  is  nothing  more  than  a small 

torus,  and,  like  it,  seems  applied  for  the  purpose 
of  binding  and  strengthening.  The  astragal  is 
also  known  by  the  names  of  bead  and  baguette. 

8.  The  fillet,  listel  or  annulet  (fig.  874)  is  used  at  all 

heights  and  in  all  situations.  Its  chief  office  is  the 
separation  of  curved  mouldings  from  one  another. 

(Grwilt,  Bnoycl.  of.  Arch.  art.  2632,  see 
also  G-losa,  Grecian  Arch,  plates  xxxiv, 
xxxiv.  bis). 


662 


STAMBHA 


(Attention  of  the  reader  should  also  be  drawn  to  another 
striking  affinity  between  the  Indian  and  the  Grffico-Boman 
orders  : in  both  cases  they  are  principally  five  in  number  ; 
see  details  below). 

Whatever  be  the  reasons  of  these  affinities,  chance  or  influence, 
some  of  the  eight  mouldings  of  an  Indian  order  may  be 
identified  with  an  amount  of  certainty  with  the  correspond- 
ing mouldings  of  the  Greeco-Eoman  order.  Padma  means 
lotus  and  it  is  same  as  cyma,  Uttaroshtha,  literally  lower 
lip,  and  cavetto,  mouth  or  hollow,  are  apparently  the  same. 
Bhara  is  read  as  hara  (in  the  Manasara)  meaning  a chain 
and  the  latter  expression  implies  the  torus,  bead  or  astragal. 
Ghata  might  correspond  to  conge,  Vahana  to  abacus,  and 
Tula  and  XJpatula  (also  called  vajana  and  iittara)  to  fillet  or 
listel. 

(11)  Pillar  with  Garuda  bird  on  the  top  (Badal  Pillar  insorip. 

V.  27,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  ii.  pp.  164,  167). 

(12)  Thambhani  (Pillar  Edicts  of  Aaoka,  no.  vii.  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  ii. 

p.  270). 

(13)  Stambhatvanr...Bri-tailam  evanayat — “converted  the  ^ri-taila 

into  a pillar.” 

(Vanapalli  Plates  of  Anna-vema,  v.  10, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  m.  pp.  61,  64). 

(14)  Pillar  (Boogadh  Pillar  Inscrip,  of  Bhojadeva  of  Kanauj,  lines 

6,  9,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  iv.  p.  310). 

(15)  Tri-tiila-mudramkah  svakiyayatana-dvare  maha-taila-stam- 

bhah  I 

“ The  pillar  is  (now)  called  the  Lakshmi  Kambha,  or  the 
pillar  of  (the  goddess)  Lakshmi.” 

“ The  upper  part  of  the  pillar  is  octagonal  (and  this  part  con- 
tains the  inscription).  Immediately  below  the  inscription, 
the  pillar  is  square.  It  is  stamped  with  the  mark  of  the 
tri-'sula  or  trident,  which  is  the  weapon  of  Biva,  was  set  up 


STAMBHA 


663 


in  the  middle  of  the  three  shrines  by  a sonlptor  named 
^ubhadeva.” 

(Pattadakal  Insorip.  of  Kirtivarman  li,  line 
18,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  HI.  pp.  1,  3,  6,  7). 

(16)  A foar-faced  pillar  made  of  stone  (A.  B.  1250)  now  “ lying 

in  the  temple  of  Venugopala  in  the  Kistna  district.” 

(Yenamadal  Insorip.  of  Q-anapamba,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  III.  pp.  94,  96). 

(17)  “ This  inscription  (^ravana-Belgola  Epitaph  of  Mallisena, 

Saka  1050)  is  on  four  faces  of  pillar  on  a hill  at  Sravana- 
Belgola  in  Mysore.*’ 

(Bp.  Ind.  vol.  III.  p.  184). 

(18)  6ila-Stambha — stone  pillar,  (?)  solid. 

(^ravana-Belgola  Epitaph  of  Mallisena,  v.  9, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol  III.  pp.  190,  186). 

(19)  Used  in  the  sense  of  daada  (a  measure)  ; 

Trimtat-stambha-pramana-pushpa-vatika  \ 

(Bamani  Insorip.  of  Silhara  Vijayaditya, 
line  22,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  Hi.  p.  213), 

(20)  “ At  the  eastern  entrance  of  this  temple  (named  Xunti- 

Madhava  at  Pithapuram,  in  the  Godavari  district)  in  front 
of  the  shrine  itself,  stands  (still)  a quadrangular  stone 
pillar.” 

, (Ep.  Ind.  vol.  IV.  p.  32). 

(21)  “ Ihe  (Salotgi)  pillar  is  inscribed  on  all  its  four  faces  ; on  the 

front  or  the  first  face,  above  the  writing,  are  some  sculp, 
tures,  towards  the  top  a linga,  and  beloiv  it  a cow  and  a calf 
and  something  else  which  has  been  defaced.” 

(Ep.  Ind.  vol.  lY.  p.  57), 
22)  Sila-thabe  cha  usapapite— “ he  caused  a stone  pillar  to  be 
erected,” 

(The  Afloka  Edicts  of  Paderna,  line  3,  Bp. 

Ind.  vol.  V.  p.  4) 


664 


STAMBHA 


(23)  “ The  Vishnu  temple  of  Kurme&vara  at  ^rikurman  near  Ghi- 

oaloole  in  the  Ganjam  district  contains  many  inscribed 
pillars  of  hard  black  stone  which  have  successfully  withstood 
the  influence  of  the  climate/’ 

(Bp.  Ind.  vol.  V,  p.  31); 

(24)  Chakre.......Vijaya-stambham  ambhodhi-tire  II 

Punye  sahyadri-tyimge  tri-bhuvana-vijaya-stambham  I) 

(Four  Insorip.  of  Kulottunga-Ghola,  no.  A, 
V.  1,  2,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  v.  p.  104). 

(26)  “ This  inscription  (^ravana-Belgola  Epitaph  of  Marasimha 
ii)  was  engraved  on  the  four  faces  of  the  base  of  a pillar, 
which  is  known  as  the  Kuge-Brahma-deva-Kambha,  at  the 
entrance  to  the  area,  occupied  by  the  temples  on  the 
Chandragiri  hill  at  l^ravana-Belgola.” 

(Bp.  Ind.  vol.  V.  p.  161). 

(26)  Mana-stambha  (Sravapa-Belgola  Epitaph  of  Marasimha  li, 

line  109). 

(Bp.  Ind.  vol.  V.  pp.  178,  171,  note  6). 

“ The  word  * Mana-stambha  *,  which  means  literally  * a column 
of  honour,’  is  explained  by  Mr.  Bice  (Insorip.  at  6ravapa- 
Belgola,  Introduction,  p.  19,  note  2)  as  denoting  technically 
“ the  elegant  tall  pillars,  with  a small  pinnacled  mantapa  at 
the  top,  erected  in  front  of  the  Jain  temples”  and  he  refers 
us  to  a discussion  regarding  them  in  Fergusson’s  Indian  and 
Eastern  architecture,  p.  276.”  Dr.  Fleet  (see  below). 

(27)  Maua-sthambha — Jaina  pillar  (Krishna  6astri  refers  also  to 

Bp.  Ind.  vol.  V.  p.  171,  note  6). 

” The  Manastambhas,  which  are  generally  graceful,  high  and 
imposing,  have  to  be  distinguished  from  other  Jaina  pillars 
neither  so  tall  as  the  former  nor  bearing  any  mandapas  on 
their  tops.  These  latter  are  called  Brahma-deva  pillars 
(of  Brahma-kanta,  in  the  Manasara)  and  appear  to  be 
usually  set  up  in  front  of  colossal  statues.  The  Tyagada- 
Brahma-deva  pillar  (figured  on  plate  facing  p.  33  of  the 


STAMBHA 


656 


latroduotion  to  Mr.  Bice's  l^lravana-Belgola  Inscriptions) 
is  set  np  opposite  to  the  colossal  statue  on  the  Doddabetija 
hill  at  ^ra-vana-Belgola ; the  Kuge  Brahma-deva  pillar 
at  the  entrance  into  the  bastis  on  the  Chikkapetta  hill  of 
the  same  village,  indicates  perhaps  the  existence  of  the 
unfurnished  colossus  on  that  hill  (ibid.  p.  29,  note  1)  ; and 
the  colossi  at  Karkala  and  Venur  have  similar  pillars  in 
front  of  them,  bearing  an  image  of  Brahma-deva  on  their 
tops  (Government  Epigraphist's  Annual  Beport  for  1900- 
1901,  paragraphs  6 and  7).” 

“ A lithograph  of  a similar  pillar  at  Veptir  is  given  in  Ind, 
Ant.  vol.  V.  'plate  facing  p.  39.” 

(Karkala  Inscfip.  of  Bhairava  ii,  Bp.  Ind. 

vol.  vni.  p.  123,  note  2), 

(28)  Trai-lokya-nagararambha-mula-stambhaya  sambhave  \ 

“ He  is  the  foundation-pillar  for  the  erection  of  the  city  of 
the  three  worlds.” 

(Insorip.  at  Ablur,  no.  E,  line  1,  Ep.  Ind.  vol. 

V.  pp.  246,  252). 

(29)  “ It  (^rikurmam  Inscrip,  of  E ara-hari-tirtha)  is  inscribed  on 

the  east  and  north  faces  of  one  of  the  black  granite  pillars, 
which  support  the  hall  enclosing  the  temple.” 

(H.  Krishna  ^astri,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  vi.  p.  260). 

(30)  Siha-thabo — lion  pillar  (no.  1). 

Sihadhayana-thambho  (no.  7). 

Sasariro  thabo — pillar  containing  relics  (Senart), 

(Karle  Cave  Inscrip,  nos.  1,  7,  9,  also  8,  11, 
Ep.iind.  vol.  vil.  pp.  49,  63,  64,  66,  66). 

(31)  Chafichat-kirtti-patakaya  tilakita-stambhah  pratishtHapitah  1 
Yasyagre  Qaruda....,..."  All  erected  the  famous  pillar  adorned 

with  a waving  banner  of  fame the  Garuda  at  the  top.” 

(Two  insorip.  of  Tammusiddhi,  no.  A, 
Tirutaiabgadu  Insorip.  v.  12,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  VII.  pp.  123, 126). 


656 


STAMBHA 


(32)  “ The  inscription  (l&ravana-Belgola  inscription  of  Trugapa)  is 

engraved  on  three  faces  of  a quadrangular  pillar  behind  the 
image  of  the  Kushmandini  Yakshi  which  is  set  up  in  the 
Brahma-deva-mandapa  in  front  of  the  Q-ummata  temple  on 
the  Yindhyagiri  at  ^ravana-Beigola.” 

(Br.  Liiders,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  Vlll.  p.  15). 

(33)  “ According  to  Mr.  Bice,  the  inscription  (Talagunda  pillar 

inscrip,  of  Kakusthavarman)  is  engraved  on  a pillar  of  very 
hard  grey  granite,  which  stands  in  front  of  the  ruined 
Prabhavefevara  temple  at  Talagunda,  in  the  Shikarpur  Taluk 
of  the  Shimoga  district  of  the  Mysore  State.  The  pedestal 
of  the  pillar  is  6 ft.  4 inches  high  and  1 foot  4 inches  at 
the  top,  a little  more  at  the  base.  The  shaft  is  octagonal, 
6 feet,  4 inches  high  (‘  judging  by  the  length  of  the  lines, 
the  shaft  must  really  be  slightly  higher’),  each  face  being  7 
inches  wide,  bub  tapering  slightly  towards  the  top.^’ 

(Prof.  Kielhorn,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  viii.  p.  24). 

(34)  “ Alupa  inscriptions  nos.  i-viii  are  engraved  on  octagonal 

pillars  in  front  and  in  the  courtyard  of  the  l^ambhukallu 
temple  at  Udiyavara.” 

(Bp.  Indr  vol.  IX.  p.  17  f). 

(35)  Stambho’yam  nagarasya  \ 

(Banker  Inacrip.  of  Bhanudeva,  v.  6,  Bp. 

Ind.  vol.  IX.  p.  126). 

(36)  In  1848  Captain  J.  B.  Cunningham  (in  J.  B.  A.  S.  Bengal, 

vol.  XVII.  part  1,  p.  305  ff)  proceeds  thus  : “ near  to  the 
western  edge  of  the  similar  lake  stands  the  wand  or  pillar 
(in  the  town  of  Pithari  in  the  Bhopal  Agency  of  Central 
India)  now  called  Bheem  Sen.  It  is  composed  of  a single 
block  about  30  ft.  in  height  and  2^  thick.  The  shaft  is 
square  in  section,  for  a height  of  8 feet,  and  it  then  becomes 
circular.” 


STAMBHA 


667 


In  1880  General  Sir  A.  Cunningham  (in  his  Archaeological 
Survey  of  India,  vol.  x,  p.  70),  noticed  thus  : “ Inside  the  town 
on  the  top  of  the  slope,  there  is  a tall  monolith  with  a hell- 
shaped capital.  The  shaft  is  circular,  rising  from  a base  8 

feet  3 inches  high  and  2 ft.  9 inches  square and  from 

their  (of  the  letters  of  the  inscription  on  the  pillar)  shapes  I 
would  assign  the  monument  to  somewhere  about  A.  D.  600. 
Close  by  this  pillar  there  is  a small  temple  with  Vishnu 
sitting  on  Garuda  over  the  door -way.” 

The  main  object  of  the  iusoription  is  to  record  the  erection 
of  the  pillar  of  which  a vivid  description  is  given.; 

(Pathari  Pillar  Inscrip.  of  Parabala,  v.  24-28. 

Ep.Ind.  vol.  IX.  pp.  264,  248,  249,  260). 

(37)  “ In  front  of  the  temple  is  an  inscribed  quadrangular  pillar  of 

black  granite  bearing  in  relief  within  a countersunk  square 
at  the  top  of  each  of  its  four  faces,  the  figure  of  a squatting 
Jaiua  ascetic  with  his  arms  folded  over  his  lap  crosswise.” 

“ The  thousand-pillared  temple  in  the  middle  of  the  village 
of  Anmakonda  was  built  by  Prola’s  son  Eudra  in  or  about 
A.  I).  1162-1163  (Ind.  Ant.  vol.  XI.  p.9f).” 

, (Anmakonda  Inscrip.  of  Prola,  JSp.  Ind,  vol.  ix, 
pp.  267,  266,  note  8). 

(38)  ” The  first  verse  (quoted  below)  invokes  the  blessings  of 

Viuayaka  (Ganapati)  who,  we  are  told,  was  placed  on  the 
column  to  ensure  prosperity  at  the  top  by  a quadruple  image 
of  Ganapati,  facing  the  cardinal  directions.” 

Siddhirh  karotu  sarvvattra  stambha-dhama-Vinayakah  I 

(Ghatiyala  Inscrip  of  Kakkuka,  no.  ii,  v.  1,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  IX.  pp.  280,  278-279). 

(39)  Kamaniya-sila-stambha-kadambottambitarhvarara  II 

Visamkafiavitaiiikali-virajad  ramga-maiiitapam  II 

,■  ■ ■ 42 


668 


STAMBHA 


“ It  (the  temple)  has  a large  Rahga-mandapa  raised  on  a collec- 
tion of  beautiful  stone  pillars  and  adorned  with  rows  of 
spouts.” 

(Krishnapuram  Plates  of  Sada^ivaraya,  v. 
66-66,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  ix.  pp.  336,  341). 

(40) ‘‘  The  two  (Nalamba  inscriptions  from  Dharmapuri  of  the  9th 

century,  A*.  D.)  are  engraved  on  the  four  faces  of  a pillar 
which  was  removed  in  1904  from  Dharmapuri  in  the  Salem 
district  to  the  Madras  Museum.” 

“ The  pillar  measures  5'  4^"  by  1'  4^'  on  the  east  face,  6'  6^"  by 
1'  4"  on  the  west  and  6'6i"  by  1'  3"^  on  the  north  and  south 
faces. , It  is  surmounted  by  a pinnacle  from  which  proceed 
in  the  eight  directions  eight  petals,  which  open  [downwards 
and  are  slightly  raised  at  the  edges  where  they  meet  the 
margins  of  the  pillar..... ...The  pillar  was  built  into  the  floor 

of  a mandapa,  in  front  of  the  Mallikarjuna  temple  at  old 
Dharmapura.” 

(H.  Krishna  Sastri,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  x.  p.  64). 

(41)  Matri-pada-feri-nimitte  stambhakah  pradattah— “ the  pillar 

was  presented  in  memory  of  (their)  mother,” 

(The  Chahamanas  of  Marwar,  no.  xvir 
Sanderav  stone  Inscrip.  of  Kelhanadeva, 
line  1,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  xi.  p.  62), 

(42)  “ Tenanena  Srhganapati-deva-maha-rajena  sakala-dvipaihta- 

ripa-delamtara-pattaneshu  gatagatam  kurwanebhyah 
sfimya-kritebhya  evam  abhayasasanam  dattam  1 
Gana-pati-devah  kirtyai  sthapitavam&  chhasana-stambham  \ 
“ By  this  glorious  Maharaia  Gana-pati-deva  the  following 
edict  (assuring)  safety  has  been  granted  to  traders  by  sea 
starting  for  and  arriving  from  all  continents,  islands,  foreign 


STAMBHA 


659 


countries,  and  cities G-ana-pati-deva  set  up  for  the  sake 

of  glory  (this)  edict-pillar.” 

(Motupalli  pillar  Insorip.  of  Ganapatideva,  lines 
136-140,  V.  28,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  xii.  pp.  195,  196, 

197). 

(43)  Agrya-dhama  treyaso  veda-vidyavallikandah  svah-sravantyah 

kiritani  1 

Vra(bra)hnm-stainbho  yena  karnnS,vatiti  pratyashthSpi 
kshma-tala-brahma-lokah  li 

“ He  set  up  the  pillar  of  piety,  called  Karnayati,  the  foremost 
abode  of  bliss,  the  root  of  the  creeping  plant,  knowledge  of 
the  Vedas,  the  diadem  of  the  stream  of  heaven,  the  world 
of  Brahman  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,” 

(Khairha  plates  of  Yasahkarnadeva,  v.  14,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  XII.  pp.  212,  216). 

(44)  Kirti-stambham  (pillar  of  victory)  nikhaya  tri-bhuvana- 

bhavana-stuyamanS.padanah  1 

(Oonjeeveram  plates  of  Krishnadeva-Eaya,  6aka 
1444,  V.  9,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  xlll.  p.  127). 

(46)  Sthapayitva  dharani-dharamayan  sannikhatas  tato’yam  kaila- 
stambhah  su-charur  giri-vara-tikharagropamah  klrtti-karttSII 
“ There  was  then  planted  in  the  ground  this  most  beautiful 
pillar  of  stone,  which  resembles  the  tip  of  the  summit  of  the 
best  of  mountains,  (and)  which  confers  fame  (upon  him).” 

(Kahaum  stone  pillar  Inscrip,  of  Skandagupta,  lines 
11-12,  C.  T.  T„  vol.  III.  E.  G.  I.,  no.  15,  pp.  67, 

68). 

(46)  Dhvaia-stambha,  also  called  simply  ‘ dhvaja  ^ : 

Matri(ta)pittroh  punya-pyayanartliam  esha  bhagavatah 
punnya-janarddanasya  Janarddanasya  dhyaja-stambho’  bhyu- 
chohhritah  il 


660 


STAMBHA 


This  flag-stalf  of  the  divine  (god)  Janardana,  the  troubler  of 
the  demons,  has  been  erected,  for  the  purpose  of  increasing 
the  religious  merit  of  (their)  parents/’ 

Vishnu-pada  girau  bhagavato  vishnor  dhvajoh  sthapithah  \ 

This  lofty  standard  of  the  divine  Vishnu  was  set  up  on  the 
hill  (called)  Vishnupada.” 

(Eraii  stone  pillar  Inserlp.  of  Budhagupta,  lines  8-9; 
Meharauli  posthumous  iron  pillar  Inscrip,  of 
Chandra,  line  6,  0.  I.  I.,  vol.  HI.,  P.  Gr.  I.,  nos. 

19,  32,  pp.  89  and  note  1,  90  ; 141,  142). 

(47)  “ The  original  lower  part  of  the  pillar  (at  Eran)  is  now  broken 
away  and  lost ; the  remnant  of  it  is  about  3'  11''  high  and 
1'  6"  in  diameter.  The  hollow  part  is  octagonal  ; and  the 
inscription  (Erau  posthumous  stone  pillar  inscrip,  of  Oopa- 
raja,  no.  20)  is  at  the  top  of  this  octagonal  part,  on  three  of 
tlae  eight  faces,  each  of  which  is  about  7"  broad.  ......Above 

this  the  pillar  is  sixteen-sided.  Above  this,  it  is  again  octa- 
gonal ; (and  the  faces  here  have  sculpture  of  men  and  women, 
who  are  probably  intended  for  the  Goparaja  of  the  inscrip- 
tion and  his  wife  and  friends  ; the  compartment  immedi- 
ately above  the  centre  of  the  inscription  represents  a man 
and  a woman,  sitting,  who  must  be  Goparaja  and  his  wife). 
Above  this,  the  pillar  is  again  sixteen-sided.  Above  this,  it 

is  once  more  octagonal Above  this  the  pillar  curves 

over  in  sixteen  liutes  or  ribs,  into  a round  top.” 

“ As  noted  by  Cunningham,  there  are  several  other  Sati- 
pillars  (in  commemoration  of  a Sati),  but  of  much  later  date 
than  at  Eran.” 


STAMBHA 


661 


(48)  The  boundaiy-pillair  ; 

^iva-dasena  vala-yashfci  uchclihritah— (this)  ^‘boiindary- 
pillar  has  been  set  up  by  ^ivadasa.” 

(Bhumara  stone  pillar  Inscrip,  of  the  Maharajas 
Hastin  and  Sarvanatha,  lines  6-7,  G.  I.  I.,  vol. 

III.,  F.  G . I.,  no.  24,  pp.  Ill , 112). 

(49)  “ The  inscription  (Meharauli  posthumous  iron  pillar  inscrip- 

tion of  Chandra,  no.  32)  is  on  the  west  side  of  a tapering  iron 
column,  sixteen  inches  in  diameter  at  the  base  and  twelve 
at  the  top,  and  twenty -three  feet  eight  inches  high,  standing 
near  the  well  known  Kutb  Minar  in  the  ancient  fort  of  Bay 
Pithara.” 

(C.  1. 1.,  vol.  in.,  F.  G.  I.,  no.  32,  p.  140). 

(60)  Tenakalpanta-kalavadhir  avani-bhuja  i^ri-Yafeodharmmanayam 
sthambhah  sthambhabhiriima-sthira-bhuja-parighei^ooh- 
chhritim  nayito’ttrall 

This  is  one  of  the  two  Kana-stambhas  or  columns  of  victory 
in  war  at  Mandasor.  Their  architectural  characteristics  are 
given  by  Dr.  Fleet : 

Of  the  first  one  he  says  “ The  base  of  it  is  rectangular,  about 

W 4^  square  by  4'  5"  high From,  this  base  there  rises  a 

sixteen-sided  shaft,  each  of  which  is  about  81"  broad,  where 

it  starts  from  the  base. The  total  length  of  which  (the 

shaft)  was  thus  about  39'  3"  or  34'  10"  above  the  base 

The  next  part  of  this  column,  the  lower  part  of  the  capital, 

is  a fluted  bell,  about  2'  6"  high  and  3'  2"  in  diameter, 

almost  identical  in  design  with  the  corresponding  part  of  a 
small  pillar 'from  an  old  Gupta  temple  at  Sanchi,  drawn  by 
General  Cunningham  (in  the  Arch.  Surv,  Ind.  vol.  x. 
plate  xxn,  no.  1........).  The  total  length  of  this  column,  up  to 

the  top  of  the  lion-capital,  is  about  44'  5",  or  forty  feet  above 
the  ground,  if  it  stood  with  the  entire  base  buried.  The 


662 


STAHBHA 


square  lion-capital  must  have  surmounted  by  a statue  or 
statues,  of  the  same  kind  as  that  which  stands  on  the 
summit  of  the  column  at  Bran.”  (See  above  and  Arch. 

Surv.  Ind.  vol.  x.  p.  81  and  plate  XXvi). 

“ The  base  (of  the  other  column  about  20  yards  north)  is 
rectangular,  about  3'  S'®'  square  by  3'  11"  high.  Differing  from 
the  first  column,  the  base  is  followed  by  a concave  circular 
part,  about  1'  O'' high... From  this  there  rises  a sixteen-sided 
shaft,  each  face  of  which  is  about  8"  broad,  where  it  starts 

from  the  base.,... This  column  also  tapers  slightly  from 

bottom  to  top the  fluted  bell  part  of  the  capital,  about 

3'  0"  high  and  3'  3"  in  diameter  (is)  similar  in  design  to  the 

same  part  of  the  capital  of  the  other  pillar the  top  has 

one  circular  and  eight  rectangular  socket-holes,  Just  as  in 
the  top  of  the  lion-capital  of  the  first  column.” 

“The  two  inscribed  columns  were  evidently  intended  as  a pair, 
though  the  full  view  of  the  second  cannot  be  taken.  (From 
the  distance  between  them  ; from  the  difference  in  the 
detailed  measures  ; and  from  the  analogous  instance  of  the 
Bran  column,  as  shewing  the  way  in  which  they  must  have 
been  finished  off  at  the  top — they  can  hardly  have  been 
connected  by  a beam,  after  the  fashion  of  a torapa  or  arched 
gate  way  ; and  there  are  no  traces  of  any  temple  to  which 
they  can  have  belonged).  They  are  evidently  an  actual 
instance  of  two  Eana-stambhas  or  “ columns  of  victory  in 
war,”  such  as  the  Kauthem  grant  of  Vikramaditya  v (Ind. 

Ant.  vol.  Xvi.  p,  18) ...speaks  of  as  having  been  set  up  by 

the  Eashtrakuta  king  Karkara  or  Kakka  iii,  and  as  having 
then  been  cut  asunder  in  battle  by  the  western  Ohalukya 
king  Taila  ii.” 


(C.  I.  I.,  vol.  in.,  F.  d.  I.,  no.  33,  line  7,  pp.  147, 

143  f). 


STAMBHA 


668 


(61)  “The  inscription  (Pahladpnr  stone  pillar  inscription,  P.  G.  I, 

no.  67)  is  on  a sandstone  monolith  column  about  three  feet  in 
diameter  : polished  and  rounded  for  a length  of  twenty- 
seven  feet : with  a rough  base  of  nine  feet ; the  total  length 

being  thirty-six  feet in  or  about  1863  removed  to 

Benares  and  set  up  in  the  grounds  of  the  Sanskrit  College 
there.” 

(C.  1.  I.,  vol.  III.,  P.  G.  I.,  no.  67,  p.  249  f). 

(62)  Kritau  pundarike  yupo’yam  prati8hthapitas...Varikena  1 

“ On  the  ceremony  of  the  Pundarika  sacrifice  (having  been 
performed),  this  sacrificial  post  has  been  caused  to  be  set 
up  by  the  Varika.” 

The  architectural  characteristics  of  this  imciificial)  column 
are  given  by  Dr.  Pleet : “ The  pillar  (Bijayagadh  stone 
pillar  insorip.  of  Vishnuvardhana  of  A.  D.  372)  stands  on  a 
rubble  masonry  platform  (which  is  plainly  of  much  more 
recent  construction  than  the  pillar  itself),  which  is  about  13' 
6"  high  and  9'  O!'  square  at  the  top.  The  height  of  the  pillar 
above  the  plinth  is  26'  Q."  ' The  base  is  square,  to  the  height 
of  3'  8'''  ; each  face  measuring  1'  6/'  Above  this,  the  pillar  is 
octagonal,  for  a length  of  22'  7'^,  and  it  then  tapers  off  to  a 
point.  The  extreme  top  is  however  broken;  and  a metal  spike, 
which  projects  from  it,  indicates  that  it  was  originally 
surmounted  by  a capital  on  the  south  side  of  the  pillar, 
towards  the  top  of  the  square  base  there  is  engraved  a 
Sriyogi  Vra(Bra)hma-sagara  (the  holy  ascetic,  Brahma- 
sagara).”" 

This  may  be  compared  with  the  Brahma-kanta  column  of  the 
Manasara. 

(Bijayagadh  stone  pillar  Iiiscrip.  of  Vishnu - 
vardhana,  line  3,  G.  1. 1.,  vol.  iir,  F.  G.  I., 
no.  69,  pp.  263,  262). 


604 


stambha 


(53)  Sphara  kupara-tiravali-nihita-jaya-  stambha- vinyasfca-kirtfcih  i 
“ Who  has  deposited  his  fame  in  pillars  of  victory,  which  he 
erected  in  an  uninterrupted  line  on  the  shore  of  the  great 
ocean.'’ 

(Vijayanagara  Inscrip,  of  Devaraja  ii,  V 6, 
“ H.  S.  1. 1.,  vol.  I.,  no.  153,  pp.  163,  166), 

(64)  ^akra-prat&pas  tri-bhuvana-vijaya-stambham  ambhodhi-tire  il 
Punye  sahyadri-^rihge  tri-bhuvana-vijaya-stambham  ambho- 

dhi-pare  1 

(Tiruvallam  Inscrip,  of  Eajaraja,  V.  1,  2,  H. 

S.  I.  I.,  vol.  I.,  no.  166,  p.  168). 

(65)  Trailokya-nagararambha-niula-stambhaya  Sambhave  II 

“ Adored  be  6iva,  the  original  foundation-pillar  of  the  city  of 
the  three  worlds.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  l.,  no.  11,  pp,  35,  67  first 

para). 

(66)  Hire-ohavutiya-Ramefevara-devara-gudiya-kallu-kelasa  madiai 

dipamale-kambada — “ had  the  temple  of  Eamesvarain  Hire- 
Ghavuti  built  of  stone  and  erected  a dipa-male  pillar.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  viii.  part  1,  Sorab  Taluq,  ho. 
238,  Eoman  text,  p.  77,  Transl.  p,  37). 

(57)  “ When  6ivappa-Nayaka  was  protecting  the  kingdom  in 
righteousness; — (on  a date  specified),  through  the  agency 
of  Siddha-Basappayya  of  the  treasury,  this  dhvaja-stambha 
(or  flag-stai!)  was  set  up.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  viii.  part  1,  Sagar  Taluq, 
no.  38,  Transl.  p.  97). 

(68)  ” In  order  that  they  both  might  acquire  merit,  (the  couple) 
informed  the  guru  that  they  would  erect  a Mana-stambha 
in  front  of  the  Nemifevara  ohaityalaya  which  their  grand 

father,  Yojana  ^reshthi,  had  built On  a propitious  day  they 

carried  out  their  promise  and  had  a pillar  of  bell-metal 
made.  Meanwhile,  to  Devarasa  were  born  twin  daughters, 


STAMBHA 


665 


Padmarasi  and  Bevarasi,  and  taking  that  as  an  auspicions 
omen,  they  had  the  bell-metal  pillar,  which  had  been  made, 
set  np  in  front  of  the  chaityalaya.  And  upon  the  pillar 
they  fixed  a golden  kala&a  of  the  same  height  as  that  of  the 
twins,  Padmarasi  and  Bevarasi.” 

"To  describe  the  Mana-stambha  ; — In  dimension  like  a mast 
of  the  great  ship  of  dharma  and  in  the  midst  of  the  group 
(of  temples)  the  Mana-stambha  (towered  up)  as  if  gathering 
the  constellations  in  the  sli^  like  flowers  with  which  to 
worship  the  feet  of  the  four  Jaina  images.” 

" In  front  of  Neihifevara  Jina’s  temple,  a Mana-stambha  of 
polished  hell-metal,  with  a golden  kalata,  on  the  instruc- 
tion of  Abhinava-Samantabhadra-ISfagappa-iyreshthi’s  son, 
Ambvana-^reshthi  caused  to  be  made  a rod  for  the  umbrella 
of  dharmma.  Thus  did  they  have  the  Mana-stambha  made.” 

(Ep,  Carnat.  vol.  vm.  part  1,  Bagar  Taluq, 
no.  65,  Eoman  text,  p.  192  f,  Trausl.  p.  102i 
last  two  paras). 

(69)  " When  the  Mahamapdalefevara  Baluvendra-maharaja,  with- 
out any  enemies,  was  ruling  the  kingdom  in  peace; — 
with  beautiful  lofty  chaityalayas,  with  groups  of  man^iapas, 
with  Mana-stambhas  of  heU-metal,  with  pleasure-groves  for 
the  town,  with  many  images  of  metal  and  stone.” 

(Ibid.  no.  163,  Eoman  text,  p.  234,  line  27, 
Transl.  p.  124). 

(60)  " G-lorious  with  a Mana-stambha,  a lotus  pond  and  a 

moat.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol,  viii,  part  1,  Tirthahaili 
Taluq,  no.  166,  Transl.  p.  196,  second  para), 

(61)  Bipa-mSleya-kambha— lamp-staud-piilar, 

(Ibid.  Bagar  Taluq,  no.  60,  Eoman  text,  p. 
194,  third  line  from  the  bottom  upwards, 
and  p.  103  ; Transl.  p.  103,  second  para). 


666 


STAMBHA 


(62)  “ Bommanna-setiji^s  son  Machiru&a-seti^i  had  this  dipamale 

pillar  (dipa^maleya-kambhaklje)  made.” 

This  inscription  is  “ at  the  base  of  G-anida-kambha  in  front  of 
the  Go pala- Krishna  temple  in  the  fort.” 

(Ep.  Garnat*  vol.  ix.  Bangalore  Taluq,  no.  16, 
Transl.  p.  7,  Boman  text,  p.  9). 

(63)  “ Heggiinda  Baira-BSsa’s  son  Mara-Basa,  for  the  god 

Sivagangenatha,  on  the  rook  in  front  of  the  Maoha'sale  set 
up  this  dipamale  pillar  ” (Kambha). 

(Ibid.  vol.  IX.  Nelamangala  Taluq,  no.  37, 
Boman  text,  p.  59,  Transl  p.  49). 

(64)  “ Chika-Ankiya-Nayaka,  from  love  to  the  god  Tirumalenatha, 

set  up  in  front  of  it  this  dipamale  pillar”  (Kambha). 

(Ibid  vol.  IX.  Bevanhalli  Taluq,  no,  40, 
Boman  text,  p.  97,  Transl.  p.  79). 

(66)  “ Chandalir-Beva-ravutta  had  this  dipamale  pillar  made  for 
the  god  of  Varadaraja  of  Voga^ta,” 

(Ibid.  vol.  IX.  Hoskote  Taluq,  no.  131,  Boman 
text,  p.  128,  Transl.  p.  104). 

(66)  “ Who  (^ri-Bajendradeva),  having  conquered  the  Ira^^apadi 

seven  and  a half  lakh  (country),  set  up  a pillar  of  victory 
(Jaya-stambha)  at  Kollapuram.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  X,  Kolar  Taluq,  no.  107, 
Boman  text,  p.  36,  Transl.  p.  36). 

(67)  “ Had  this  Mana-stambha  made.*’ 

(Ibid.  Mulbagal  Taluq,  no.  69,  Transl.  p.  911, 

(68)  ” Set  up  the  Yupa-stambha  for  the  Sarvaprishtha  and  Aptor- 

yama  (sacrifices).*’ 

(Ibid.  vol.  X.  Bagehalli  Taluq,  no.  17,  Transl. 

p.  233). 


STAMBHA 


667 


(69)  “ Those  who  did  the  work  (Bevambudhi  tank) : — 

Ga^temadana  Basavana  made  the  pillars  (Kamba),  Koma- 
raiya  the  ornamental  work,  and  the  stone-vedda  Chenne- 
Boyi  built  the  stones  of  the  embankment.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  xii.  Tumkur  Taluq,  no.  24, 
Transl.  p.  8,  para  2). 

(70)  Harmya-mula-stambhannm — “ foundation  pillar  of  the 

palace.” 

(Ibid.  Gubbi  Taluq,  no.  13,  Boman  text,  p.  36, 
second  line  of  the  first  prose  portion,  Transl. 

p.  19,  para  3), 

(71)  Linga-mudre-stambha--"  pillar  marked  with  the  linga.” 

(Ibid.  vol.  XII.  Tiptur  Taluq,  no.  108,  Eonian 
text,  p.  102,  Transl.  p.  64). 

(72j  “We  have  had  the  village  built,  set  up  (the  god)  Sanjivaraya, 
erected  this  Garuda-Kamba,  and  had  this  tank  and  well 
constructed.” 

(Ibid.  Sira  Taluq,  no.  92,  Transl.  p.  101,  lino 

2 f). 

(73)  “ The  roof  of  this  hall  is  supported  by  four  very  elaborately 

carved  columns,  nearly  square  at  the  base,  changing  into 
octagons  at  a little  above  one»third  their  height.  The 
capitals  are  circular  under  square  abaci.  These  again  are 
surmounted  by  square  dwarf  columns  terminating  in  the 
usual  bracket  capitals  of  the  older  Hindu  works,” 

(The  temple  of  Amarnath,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  iii. 

p,  317,  0.  2,  para  1 middle). 

(74)  MalakarSya  Mugu  (palitasya  de)yadharmah  stambhah  II 

“ This  pillar  is  the  benefaction  of  the  gardener  Mugupalita.” 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  vil.  Knda  Inaorip.  no,  9, 
pp.  266,267). 


668 


STAMBHA 


(75)  “This  inscription  (Inscriptions  from  Nepal,  no.  1,  dated, 

Samvat  386)  is  incised  on  the  lower  part  of  the  broken  pillar 
placed  to  the  left  of  the  door  of  the  temple  of  Chahgii- 
Narayana,  about  five  miles  to  the  north-east  of  Katmandu, 
The  pillar  about  twenty  feet  high  is  without  the  capital. 
Its  lower  half  is  square,  half  of  the  upper  part  is  octagonal, 
higher  up  it  becomes  sixteen-cornered  and  finally  round. 
Originally  it  was  crowned  by  a lotus-capital  surmounted  by 
a Garuda,  about  four  feet  high,  shaped  like  a winged  man 
kneeling  on  one  knee.  The  workmanship  is  very  good,  and 
the  figure  shews  the  flowing  locks,  which  occur  frequently 
on  the  sculptures  of  the  Gupta  period.”  Pandit  Bhagwanlal 
Indraji  and  Dr.  G.  Buhler. 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  IX.  p.  163,  o.  1 , para  2). 

(76)  “ Just  outside  the  south-west  gate  of  the  village  there  is  a 

modern  shrine  of  the  god  Hanumanta,  with  a stone  Dhvaja- 
stambha  standing  in  front  of  it.  Into  the  pedestal  of  this 
Dhvaja-stambha  there  has  been  built  a Virgal  on  monumen- 
tal stone.”  Dr.  Fleet. 

(Sanskrit  and  Old  Canarese  Insorip.  no.  lxix, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  p.  96). 

(7?)  “ There  stands  a monolith  pillar  (on  which  the  inscription 
referred  to  below  is  engraved)  apparently  of  red  sand  stone. 
The  pillar  is  called  Laksmi-Kambha  or  the  ‘ pillar  of  the 
goddess  Lakahmi,’  and  is  worshipped  as  a god.” 

“ The  upper  part  of  the  pillar  is  octagonal.  Below  the  octago- 
nal part  of  the  pillar  is  a square  four-sided  division.” 

(Ibid.  no.  CXI,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  x.  pp.  168,  169). 

(In  villages  of  eastern  Bengal  there  is  a custom  to  call  one 
of  the  pillars  in  the  house  of  each  family,  the  Laksmi  pillar 
and  to  worship  it  as  a god). 


STAMBHA 


669 


(78)  “ The  central  tower  or  compartment  of  each  face  is  ornamen- 

ted simply  by  sixteen -sided  pilasters  at  the  angles  the 

pilasters  are  octagonal,  whilst  the  outer  compartments  or 
towers  at  the  four  corners  of  the  temple  have  plain  square 
pillars  and  pilasters.” 

(Gaugai-Kondapuram  Saiva  Temple,  Ind. 

Ant.  vol.  IX.  p.  117,  0.  2), 

(79)  Bhagvato  Budhasa  puva-dare  ayakakara  6 sava  niyute 

apano  deyadhamina  savatfina  hata-sukhaya  patithiLpitati 
(no.  I,  line  6-6). 

Bhagavato  Budhasa  mahachetiye  (puva)  dare  aya{ka)- 
khamhhe  pamoha  6 savamyute  apano  deyadhaihmam  (no. 
II,  line  6). 

Bhagavato  Budhasa  mahri-clietiya  puva-dare  ayaka-khani- 
bhe  save  niyute  apano  deyadharhma  sava-satfinarii  hita-su- 
khaya  pati^hilvitati  II 

“ Erected  near  the  eastern  gate  of  divine  Buddha,  five  (5) 
Ay  aka-pillars  which  were  dedicated  for  the  good  and  the 
welfare  of  all  living  beings.” 

“ I am  unable  to  say  at  present  what  is  meant  by  the  epithet 
ay  aka  or  ay  aka.  It  is  possible  to  connect  it  either  with 
aryaka  ‘venerable  ’ or  with  ayas  ‘ iron,  metal.’  But  I think 
it  more  likely  that  the  word  has  some  technical  meaning.” 
Dr.  Biihler. 

“ I would  suggest  ‘ lofty  ’ or  ‘ frontal  they  were  pillars  about 
16  feet  heigh,  erected  on  the  east  front  of  the  stupa,  exactly 
as  represented  on  the  Amaravati  slabs  bearing  representa- 
tions of  stupas.”  Dr.  Burgess. 

(Insorip,  from  J aggayyapetta,  nos.  i,  ii,  ill, 
lud.  Ant.  vol.  XI.  pp.  268,  note  6 ; 259). 

(80)  Prathama-vihita-kirtti-prauclha-yajua-kriyasu  pratikritim  iva 

navyam  mamdape  yupa-rupam  1 

Iha  Kanakhala-Bambhoh  aadmani  atambha-malam  amala-ka- 
shana-pashanasya  sa  vyStatana  Ii 


STAMBHA 


“He  erected  in  the  mandapa  of  this  temple  of  Kanakhala- 
Sambhn  a row  of  pillars  made  of  pure  black  stone  and 
shaped  like  sacrificial  posts,  a modern  imitation,  as  it  were 
(of  those  which  were  used)  for  the  high  famed  sacrifices  of 
yore/’ 

(An  Abu  Inscrip,  of  the  reign  of  Bhimadeva 
II,  V.  12,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  XI.  p.  221,  c.  2 ; p.  222 

c.  2). 

(81)  Thabha,  thabha,  thariibha,  thambha  (pillar,  pillars,  stamblia 

or  sthambhah)  gift  of  some  person  or  persons. 

(Bharaut  Inscrip,  nos,  22,  26,  26, 36,  37,  64,  66, 
67,  69,  70,  71,  75,  81,  88,  90,  94,  96,  97,  Ind. 

Ant.  vol.  XXI.  p.  227  f). 

(82)  “ In  one  of  the  inscriptions  (the  one  entitled  I,  A.  of  Bhaga- 

vanlal  and  Biihler),  the  interpretation  of  which,  it  is  true,  is 
very  doubtful,  it  would  seem  that  reference  is  made  to  an 
army,  to  war  and  victory : and  if  so,  the  pillar  would  have 
been  both  a Dharma-stamblia  and  a Jaya-stambha,  a monu- 
ment of  devotion  and  a trophy  of  victory.” 

(The  Insorip.  P.  on  the  Mathura  lion  capital, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xxxvii.  p.  246,  para  3,  last 
sentence), 

(83)  “ Caused  hasadis  and  Mana-stambhas  to  be  erected  in  numer- 

ous places.” 

“ Mana-stambha  is  the  name  given  to  the  elegant  tall  pillars 
with  a small  pinnacled  mantapa  at  the  top  erected  in  front 
of  the  Jaina  temples.”  (See  photograph  nos.  149, 166,  Per 
gusson.  Ind.  and  Bast.  Arch.  pp.  270,  276,  and  his  desorip 
tion  quoted  below). 

(Ep.  Camat.  vol.  ii.  Insorip.  on  Ohandragiri 
^ravana  Belgola,  no.  38,  Transl.  p.  121,  lin 
6 ; Boman  text,  p.  7,  line  16  ; Introduc 
tion,  p.  19,  note  2) 


STAMBHA 


671 


(84)  “ The  sub -base  (of  these  Mana-stambhas,  photo,  nos,  149, 
166)  is  square  and  spreading;  the  base  itself  is  square,  chang- 
ing into  an  octagon  and  thence  into  a polygonal  figure 
approaching  a circle ; and  above  a "wide-spreading  capital 
of  most  elaborate  design.  To  many  this  may  at  first  appear 
top-heavy,  but  it  is  not  so  in  reality.  If  you  erect  a pillar 
at  all,  it  ought  to  have  something  to  carry.  Those  we 
erect  are  coped  from  pillars  meant  to  support  archi- 
traves and  are  absurd  solicisms  when  merely  supporting 
statues : we  have,  however,  got  accustomed  to  them  and 
our  eye  is  offended  if  anything  better  proportioned  to  the 
work  to  be  done  is  proposed:  but  looking  at  the  breadth  of 
the  base  and  the  strength  of  the  , shaft,  anything  less  than 
here  exhibited  would  be  found  disproportionately  small.” 

“ On  the  tower  or  square  part  of  these  (Mana)  stambhas  we 
find  that  curious  interlaced  basket-pattern,  which  is  so 
familiar  to  us  from  Irish  manuscripts  or  the  ■ ornaments  on 
the  Irish  cros8es....it  is  equally  common  in  Armenia  and  can 
be  traced  up  the  valley  of  the  Danube  into  central  Europe  : 
but  how  it  got  to  the  west  coast  cf  India  we  do  not  know, 
nor  have  we,  so  far  as  I know,  any  indication  on  which  we 
can  rely  for  its  introduction.” 

(Under  the  circumstances,  is  it  not  easy  and  reasonahle  to 
give  the  credit  of  the  invention  to  the  Indian  architects  ?) 

(Fergusson,  Ind.  and  East.  Arch.  pp.  276,  277). 

(86)  Sila-stambham  athapayati  sma — “ caused  a stone  pillar  to 
be  erected.’^ 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  il,  no,  46,  Eoman  text,  p.  22, 
line  6 from  bottom  upwards  ; Transl  p.  127, 
line  6). 

(86)  Tasya  Jayastambha-nibham  feilaya  stambham  vyavastha- 
payati  sma  Lakshmih-— “ a stone  pillar  (for  her)  as  if  a 
pillar  of  victory,  did  Lakshmi  erect.” 

(Ibid.  no.  49,  last  verse,  Eoman  text,  p.  28, 
Transl.  p,  128). 


672 


STAMBHA 


(87)  Sri-G-ommata-Jina-padagrada  chhagada  Kambakke  yakslaa- 

naiii  madisidam — For  the  pillar  of  gifts  in  front  of  Sri- 
Gomma^a  Jinapa,  he  had  a Yaksha  made.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  ii.  no.  110,  Eoman  text, 
p.  86,  Transl.  p.  170). 

(88)  “Bachappa,  son  of  Kirtti  of  Aruhanahalli,  on  the  death  of  his 

elder  brother  Tammarappa,  in  conjunction  with  that  deva’s 
queen  Bayiohakka,  had  his  form  engraved  on  a pillar 
(Kambha)  and  set  it  up.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  iii.  Malavalli  Taluq,  no.  13, 
Transl.  p.  56,  Bomamtext,  p.  116). 

(89)  “ The  royal  karanika  Eevarasa  set  up  in  the  name  of  his 

father... ...  a Bipa-stambha.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol,  iv.  Chamarajhagar  Taluq, 
no.  156,  Transl.  p.  20). 

(90)  “ Made  a grant  of  a I)ipa-mala  pillar  (Kambha)  for  the 

god  Lakshmi-kanta.”  - 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol-  iv.  Heggadadevankote  Taluq, 
no.  21,  Transl.  p.  70,  Bonian  text,  p,  117). 

(91)  “ He  made  a brass  ornament  for  the  Dhvaja-stambha  (flagstaff) 

of  the  goddess  Mahalakshmi  and  the  goddess  Sarsavati 
of  Kannambadi.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  iv.  Krishnarajapet  Taluq, 
no.  23,  Transl.  p.  103). 

(92)  “ The  groat  minister  caused  to  be  erected  a Dipti-stambha 

for  the  Krittika  festival  of  lights  (Krittika-dipotsavake 
dipti-stambha)  and  a swing  for  the  swinging  cradle 
festival  of  the  god  Chenna-Ke&ava  of  Velapura.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  14, 
Transl.  p.  47,  Eoman  text,  p.  107). 


BTAMBHA 


m 


(93)  “ While  thus  all  the  world  was  praising  him  as  the  founder 
of  the  greatness  and  increase  of  king  Ballala  and  the 
cause  of  his  prosperity — the  dandita  Lakshma,  together  with 
his  wife,  mounted  up  on  the  splendid  stone  pillar  (6ila- 
stambha)  covered  with  the  poetical  Vira-tasana,  proclaim- 
ing his  devotion  to  his  master.  And  on  the  pillar  they 
became  united  (?)  with  Lakshmi  and  with  Garuda.^’ 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq, 
no.  112,  Transl.  p.  74,  last  para,  Eoman  text, 
pp.  173,174). 

(94)  “ He  erected  temples,  raised  pillars  for  lights  (Dipa-male), 
granted  lands  to  Brahmans  till  they  were  satisfied, 
constructed  five  forts  and  large  tanks.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Arsikere  Taluq, 
no,  109,  Transl.  p,  169,  para  1,  Homan  text 
p.  366). 

(96)  ‘ Dipa-mala-kambha  ’ and  ‘ Basava-pillar.’ 

(Ibid.  Channarayapatna  Taluq,  nos.  166, 166, 
Transl.  pp.  196, 198). 

(96)  “ The  unshaken  pillar  (Tolagada  kambha).” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  vi.  Tarikere  Taluq,  no.  12, 
Transl  p.  106). 

(97)  “ Taking  that  to  mind  and  desirous  of  performing  a work 

of  merit,  the  king  Lakshma  built  of  stone  that  abode  of 
Jina,  as  if  erected  by  India  to  endure  in  permanence, 
and  afterwards  set  up  a stone  pillar  (6ila-stambha)  at 
the  great  gate-way  of  the  temple,  on  which  was  inscribed 
a feasana  containing  all  his  names  and  titles,  to  continue 
as  long  as  sun,  moon  and  stars.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  Yii.  Shikarpur  Taluq, 
no.  186,  Transl.  p.  103,  para  3,  last  sen- 
tence ; Boman  text,  p.  184,  line  10  from 
bottom  upwards). 


43 


674 


STAMBHA 


(98)  “ Several  persons  (named)  set  up  this  Yira-stambha  in  his, 

name.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  xi.  Ohallakere  Taluq,  no.  42, 
Transl.  p.  102,  Koman  text,  p.  176). 

(99)  “ The  maha-mandale^vara  Chamnnda-Eayarasa  (on  the  date 

specified)  erected  a G-anda-bherunda  pillar  (stambha)  in 
front  of  the  (temple  of  the)  god  Jagad-eka-mallefevara.” 

(Ibid.  no.  151,  Transl.  p.  109,  para.  2 ; Eoman 
text,  p.  193,  last  para). 

(100)  ” The  most  striking  object  standing  in  the  village  is 
perhaps  the  Bhernndetvara  pillar,  now  called  the 
Garnda-kambha.  It  is  a lofty  and  elegant  monolith,  with 
a figure  of  the  Ganda  Bherunda  at  the  top.  It  was  erected, 
according  to  the  inscription  on  its  base  (quoted  above, 
Shikarpur  Taluq,  no.  151)  by  Chamunda-Eaya  in  1047, 
and  probably  fixed  the  length  of  the  Bherunda  pole  used 
in  measuring  length  (refers  to  inscrip,  no.  120  of  the 
Shikarpur  Taluq).” 

“ Its  dimensions  are  as  follows — the  shaft,  to  the  top  of 
the  cornice  of  the  capital,  80  feet  6 inches  high ; the 
Bherupde^vara  at  top,  about  4 feet  high ; the  bottom  of 
the  pillar  is  1 foot  6 inches  square  to  8 fe.et  from  the 
ground ; above  that  it  is  circular,  of  the  same  diameter, 
with  decorative  bands.  The  Bherunda  is  a double-headed 
eagle  with  human  body.” 

(Ep.  Oarnat.  Tol.  VII.  Introduot.  p.  47,  note  1). 

(100a)  The  dimensions  of  the  Talagunda  pillar,  on  which  the 
incrip.  no.  176  of  the  Shikarpur  Taluq  is  incised,  are 
given  by  Mr.  Eice— “ The  pillar,  which  is  of  a very  hard  dark 
grey  granite,  is  standing  in  front  of  the  ruined  Pranavefevara 
temple.  Its  pedestal  is  6 feet  4 inches  high  and  1 foot  4 
inches  square  at  the  top,  a little  more  at  the  base.  The 


STAMBHA 


676 


shaft  is|  octagonal,  6 feet  4 inches  high,  each  face  being  7 
inches  wide,  but  tapering  slightly  towards  the  top.  The 
finial  is  a pear-shaped  ornament,  1 foot,  11  inches  high.” 

(Ep,  Carnat.  -vol.  vii.  Introduct.  p.  47,  para  2). 

(101)  Maha-rathisa  Goti-putrasa  Agi-mitrahakasa . siha-thabho 

danam— ” The  gift  of  a lion  pillar  (Simha-stambha)  by  the 
Maha-rathi  Agni-mitranaka,  the  son  of  Goti.” 

(Karle  Inscrip,  no.  2,  Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp, 
series,  vol.  iv.  p.  90). 

(102)  “ On  the'  east  side,  steps  lead  up  to  a platform  on  which 

stands  a fine  Kirtti-stambha  or  Torana  arch.  It  consists 
of  two  highly  carved  pillars,  4 feet  broad  at  the  plinth,  and 
rising  to  a height  of  13  feet  10  inches  including  a broad 
cruciform  capital,  whose  inner  arms  support  the  ornamental 
torana  or  cusped  arch,  over  this  capital  a prolongation  of  the 
shaft  supports  a sur-capital,  3 feet  abov-e  the  first,  over  which 
again  lies  the  architrave  in  two  fascise  richly  oarved....Thi3 
supports  the  projecting  comice  with  its  decorative  guttae, 
surmounted  by  a plinth  and  on  this  stands  the  pediment  in 
which  6iva  or  Bhairava  is  the  central  figure.” 

(Ahmadabad  Architecture,  Burgess,  Arch. 

Surv.  new  Imp.  series^  vol.  xxxiii.  p.  94, 
plate  Lxxxii). 

(103)  “He  set  up  Eama  in  the  Kondarama  temple.  Subsequently 

Janmejaya  performed  the  serpent  sacrifice  here,  a stone 
pillar,  about  9 feet  high,  with  the  top  fashioned  like  a 
trident  or  spear....being  pointed  out  as  the  Yfipa-stambha 
or  sacrifibial  post  used  by  him«’* 

(Mysore  Arch.  Eeport,  1916-16,  p.  21,  plate  x, 
fig.  1,  on  p.  22). 


676 


STAMBHA 


(104)  See  Buddhist  cave  temples  (Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp.  series 
vol.  IV.  plates  xvili,  nos.  1,  2 ; xxii,  nos.  1,  3 ; xxix, 
no.  3). 

See  Sharqi  Architecture  of  Jaunpur  (Arch  Surv.  new  Imp. 
series,  vol.  xi.  plates  xxxix,  figs.  1,  2,  3, 4;  XL,  fig.  2;  and  read 
the  Inscrip,  no.  xxvii,  p.  51,  under  ‘ j^ilpin  ’ and  ‘Sthapati’). 

Compare  Moghul  Architecture  of  Fatehpur-Sikri  (Smith,  Arch. 
Surv.  new  Imp.  series,  vol.  xvin.  part  1,  plates  Liii  to  Lxxi). 

See  Earn  Eaz,  Essay  on  Arch,  of  Hind,  plates  iv  to  xvili. 

See  Lion-pillar  (Mysore  Arch.  Eeport,  19J  6-16,  plate  vii,  fig.  1, 
p.l4). 

Elephant  pillars,  Brahma-deva-pillar  (ibid.  1914-16,  plates  IX, 
fig.  3 ; XIII,  fig.  I,  pp.  18,  26). 

See  pillars  of  Mukha-mantapa  with  a stone  umbrella  in  front, 
(Ibid.  1913-14,  plate  v.  fig.  I,  p.  14). 

(106)  See  Cunningham,  Arch.  Surv.  Eeports,  vol.  i,  plates  xxii 
(Bakhra  and  Lauriya  Lion  pillars),  p.  68 ; xxix  (Kahaon  and 
Bhitari  pillars),  p.  92;  xLVl  (capital  of  Atoka  Elephant  pillar), 
p.  274f 

Ibid.  vol.  in.  plate  xxxiv  (G-aya  granite  pillars). 

Ibid.  vol.  IV.  plate  v,  the  so  called  Kutb-minar,  which  is  in 
reality  a Hindu  structure. 

Compare  its  details — “ Total  length  of  outer  inclosure  is  228  feet 
....The  law  of  geometrical  proportion  is  thus  seen  to  govern 
the  entire  Hindu  Kutb  structure  ; from  the  size  and  the  dis- 
position of  the  inclosures  which  bound  it  down  to  the  spacing 
of  the  ornamental  bands  that  adorn  its  gates,  every  impor- 
tant feature  is  subject  to  the  great  law.  But  where  is  the 
law  that  governs  the  Muhammadan  structures  ? They  (the 
Muhammadans)  designed  like  giants,  and  their  Hindu 
workmen  ‘ finished  like  jewellers  ’ ; but  from  the  giant  killed 
by  Jack,  right  through  the  whole  genus,  giants  have  hitherto 


STAMBHA 


mi 


been  noted  only  for  supreme  stupidity,  combined  with 
immense  strength”  (ibid.  p.  66-67). 

Ibid.  voi.  V.  plates  xxyii  (Mallot  temple  pillar);  xlv,  xlvi  (Indo- 
Persian  pillars) ; xLvn  to  L (Indo-Corinthian  pillars). 

Ibid  vol.  VI,  plate  xx  (Vi&ala-deva  temple  pillar). 

Ibid.  vol.  vn.  plates  xviii  (Sati  pillar  from  Simga ; the  details  of 
its  mouldings);  ix  (section  of  interior  of  garbha-griha 
shewing  a pillar  in  elevation) ; x (elevation  of  a pillar  of  the 
Maha»^mandapa). 

Ibid.  vol.  VIII.  plates  xi,  xii  (brick  pillar,  Balrampur). 

Ibid,  vol,  IX,  plates  xiv,  xxiv,  xxix. 

Ibid.  vol.  X.  plates  xiv  (Besnagar  Crocodile  and  Pan-palm 
pillars,  p.  42);  XXI  (pillar  of  Swami-Gosura) ; xxil,  figs.  1,  2 
(Sanohi  pillars),  3 (Eran  pillar),  4,  6 (IJdayagiri  pillars) ; 
XXVII  (Eran  pillar) ; xxviii  (Toran-pillar) ; xxx  (Eran  pillar 
of  Narasinha  temple). 

Ibid.  vol.  XIV.  plates  xxix,  xxx  (Sati  pillars). 

Ibid.  voi.  XVI.  plates  xxx,  xxxi  (Bhagalpur  pillar). 

Ibid.  vol.  XIX.  plate  x (Baijnath  pillar). 

Ibid,  vol,  XX.  p.  149,  plate  xxxiv  (Thieves  pillars). 

Ibid.  vol.  xxii.  plate  VII  (Section  of  Afeoka  pillar,  Eampurwa). 

Ibid.  vol.  XXIII.  plate  xxii  (pillar  of  victory  or  Jayastambha). 

(106)  “ These  pillars  are  common  to  all  the  styles  of  Indian  archi- 
tecture. With  the  Buddhists  they  were  employed  to  bear 
inscriptions  on  their  shafts,  with  emblems  or  animals  on  their 
capitals.  With  the  Jains  they  were  generally  Beepadaus 
(Bipa-stambhas)  or  lamp  bearing  pillars;  with  the  Vaishna- 
vas  they  as  generally  bore  statues  of  Garuda  or  Hanuman 
(Garuda-stambhas);  with  the  ^aivas  they  were  flag -staffs 
(Blivaja-stambhas) ; but  whatever  their  destination  they 


678 


STAMBHA 


were  always  the  most  original,  and  frequently  the  most 
elegant  productions  of  Indian  art.” 

(Fergusson,  Hist,  of  Ind.  and  East.  Arch.  p.  60). 

“ If  any  one  wished  to  select  one  feature  of  Indian  architecture 
which  would  illustrate  its  rise  and  progress,  as  well  as  its 
perfection  and  weakness,  there  are  probably  no  objects  more 
suited  for  this  purpose  than  these  diambhas  or  free  standing 
pillars.  They  are  found  of  all  ages,  from  the  simple  and 
monolithic  lats  which  Atoka  set  up\to  bear  inscriptions  or 
emblems,  some  360  B.  0;  down  tp  the  seventeenth  or 
perhaps  even  eighteenth  century  of  our  era.  During  these 
2000  years  they  were  erected  first  by  the  Buddhists,  then  by 
the  Jains,  and  occasionally  by  the  other  sects  in  all  parts  of 
India ; and  not-withatanding  their  inherent  frailty,  some 
fifty — it  may  be  a hundred — are  known  to  be  still  standing. 
After  the  first  ahd  most  simple,  erected  by  A&oka,  it  may  be 
safely  asserted  that  no  two  are  alike  though  all  bear  strongly 
the  impress  of  the  age  in  which  they  were  erected,  and  all 
are  thoroughly  original  and  Indian  in  design.” 

(Fergusson,  ibid.  p.  277,  para  2). 

(107)  The  following  references  will  give  a glimpse:  of  the  pillars  of  the 
pre-Buddhistic  periods  (especially  of  the  early  Yedic  period), 
when,  it  should  be  noticed,  they  were  employed  both  as  free- 
pillars  (compare  the  yupas)  and  as  forming  the  essential 
members  of  a building. 

‘ The  column  or  pillar  in  Indian  architecture  is  indeed  very 
ancient.  The  word  Stliuna  which  is  a synomym  of  pillar  in 
the  Manasara  is  used  in  the  Eigveda  ^ and  the  later  literature® 
in  the  same  sense.  The  word  Stambha  ^ is  not  perhaps  so 

^ Bv.  1.  69,  l jv.  46,  2;  62,7;vm,l7,  H:  X,  ]8. 13(of  thegrave).  ” 

» Av.  Ill,  12,  6 (of  the  ya:^,  boBna,  being  placed  on  the  pillar)  ; xjv.  1,63. 
Sata-patha-Brahmapa,  iiT,  3, -3, 7 } 8, 1,  22,  etc. 

Sthupa-raja— main  pillar,  m,  1, 1, 11 ; 6, 1, 1. 

> Kathaka-SeAbita,  XXXI,  3 ; end  patten  Bhltas. 


STAMBHA 


old  but  Skamba  is  used  in  the  Bigveda  in  the  same  sense’ 
(Maodonall  and  Keith,  Vedio  Index,  II,  pp.  488,  483). 

The  word  upa-mit,  not  used  in  the  Manasara,  Occurs  in  the 
Eigveda^  and  the  Atharvaveda^  in  the  sense  of  pillar. 

According  to  Professors  Macdonall  and  Keith,  in  the  Eigveda 
the  word  Upa-mit  is  used  in  the  sense  of  an  upright 
pillar.  In  the  Atharvaveda,  the  word,  coupled  with 
Parimit  and  Pratimit,  denotes  the  beams  supporting  the 
Upamit.  Parimit  denotes  the  beams  connecting  the 
Upamit  horizontally^. 

“ Concerning  the  proportions  of  columns,  the  second  sort  of 
column  in  the  Hindu  architecture  (as  depicted  in  the 
Manasara)  may  be  compared  with  the  Tuscan,  the  third 
with  the  Doric,  the  fourth  with  the  Ionic,  and  the  fifth 
with  the  Corinthian  or  composite  pillar.”  (Bam  Eaz,  ibid. 
p.38). 

The  following  details  of  the  Indian  and  G-reeco-Boman  orders 
may  be  compared  here  for  a clear  knowledge  of  the 
subject. 

Bam  Eaz  describes  the  Indian  Orders  on  the  authority  of  the 
Katyapa  and  the  Manasara  and  “ partly  from  the  models 
found  in  the  temples  and  porticoes  of  a pure  Hindu  style.  ” 
And  the  details  of  the  five  Grseco-Boman  orders  are  quoted 
below  from  Vitruvius,  Palladio  and  others  as  given  by  Gwilt. 

“ The  second  sort  of  column  is  seven  diameters  in  height  : 
it  is  placed  in  most  examples  upon  a base  and  pedestal : the 
base  is  two  diameters  high  : it  belongs  to  the  species  called 
Kumbha-bandha.  The  pedestal  is  equal  in  height  to  three- 
fourths  of  the  base  and  is  of  the  kind  called  Vedi-bhadra. 

J Bv.  1. 34,a  ; iv.  13,5.  ate. 

» Kv.  1. 59,  1 ; iv.  6,  1- 
» Av,  ix.  3,  1. 

oC.  Zimmer,  ABiadishahosLsbas,  1S3, 

♦ Vedio  Index.  I.  p-  93. 


680 


STAMBHA 


The  column  is  also  placed....only  on  a pedestal  which  is 

equal  to  half  the  height  of  the  pillar,  and  which  is  one  of 
the  sorts  called  Mancha-hhadra.  The  capital  given  to  the 
first  design  of  this  pillar  is  taken  from  a model  found  at 
Tiruvottiyur,  near  Madras  ; it  is  the  same  which  Manasara 
and  others  call  Taranga-Bodhika  (?),  and  is  one  diameter  high 
and  projects  equal  to  its  height.  Speaking  of  this  sort  of 
capital,  Manasara  says  ‘ it  should  be  decorated  with 
Tarangas  (projecting  moulding  employed  in  capitals,  termi 
nating  by  a number  of  undulating  lines)  and  other  appro- 
priate ornaments  ; the  height  of  the  capital  being  divided 
into  twelve  parts,  let  the  form  of  Tarangas  occupy  three 
of  them,  let  the  Bodhika  (capital),  which  should  resemble 
the  cobra  de  capello,  occupy  six,  and  adorned  with  flowers 
and  the  like,  and  let  one  part  above  this  be  given  to.... ....one 

to  the  oyma,  and  one  to  the  listel.  The  projecting  part  of 
the  Bodhika  should  be  fashioned  like  the  stalk  of  a plantain 
flower.  At  the  upper  extremity  are  the  Tarangas  of  equal 
height  or  something  more.  The  lower  part  of  the  head  of 
the  Bodhika  is  one-third  on  the  upper  in  breadth,  and  a 
third  of  the  former  being  divided  into  five  parts,  one  of  them 
is  given  to  the  cavetto,  one  to  the  fillet^  two  to  the  cyma 
and  one  to  the  listel ; and  the  whole  should  be  decorated 
with  foliages,  rows  of  gems,  and  the  like.’  In  another  place 
the  same  author  says  ‘ let  the  capital  (Bodhika)  be  made 
to  consist  of  one,  two,  three,  four,  five,  six  faces,  according 
to  the  situation  in  which  it  is  placed  ’.  ” 

The  other  form  of  capital  given  to  the  column  is  taken  from 
a mandapa  at  Mayalapur.  It  is  to  be  met  with  in  many 
other  ancient  buildings  and  is  what  the  artists  call  in  Tamil 
surub -bodhika,  roll  capital.  I cannot  find  any  particular 
description  of  it,  except  a passage  in  the  Manasara,  which 
says : ‘ The  projecting  ornaments  on  the  sides  of  the 

capital  are  made  either  in  the  form  of  an  inverted  apex  or 


STAMBHA 


681 


of  a wheel  (ehakra)  or  circle.  It  is  one  diameter  in' height 
and  projects  but  three  quarters  of  the  diameter.’  ” (Ram  Eaz, 
pp.  31.32). 

This  is  compared  with  the  Tuscan  order,  the  details  whereof 
are  given  below  from  Vitruvius  and  Vignola  as, quoted 
Gwilt. 

I.  Tuscan  order : 

“ Vitruvius  (Book  rv,  chap,  vii)  in  this  order  forms  the 
columns  six  diameter  high,  and  makes  their  diminution  one 
quarter  of  the  diameter.  He  gives  to  the  base  and  capital 
each  one  module  in  height.  No  pedestal  is  given  by  him. 
Over  the  capital  he  places  the  architrave  of  timber  in  two 
thicknesses  connected  together  by  dovetailed  dowels.  He, 
however,  leaves  the  height  unsettled,  merely  saying  that 
their  height  should  be  such  as  may  be  suitable  to  the 
grandeur  of  the  work  where  they  are  used.  He  directs  no 
frieze,  but  places  over  the  architrave  cantilevers  or  mutuli 
projecting  one-fourth  of  the  height  of  the  column,  including 
the  base  and  capital.  He  fixes  no  measure  for  the  cornice, 
neither  does  he  give  any  directions  respecting  the  interoolum- 
nations  of  this  order.  The  instructions  are  not  so  specific 
as  those  which  he  lays  down  for  other  orders,  and  there 
have  been  various  interpretations  of  the  text,  which  unfor- 
tunately cannot  in  any  of  the  suppositions  be  tested  on 
ancient  remains.”  (Gwilt.  Enoycl.  art.  2666). 

In  the  following  table  of  the  parts  of  the  Tuscan  order 
(G-wilt.  Encyol.  art.  2666)  the  whole  height  according  to  the 
measuring  unit  of  Vignola  is  16  modules  and  3 parts. 

Mouldings  whereof  the  parts  are  composed : 

Projection  from  the 
Heights  of  monld.  axis  of  column 
BHXABLATUBE  ings  in  parts  of  in  parts  of  a 

a module  module 


A.  Cornice 
16  parts 


\ Cymatium 
I and  parts 


Quarter  round 

Astragal 

Fillet 


682 


STAMBHA 


BNTABULATtJKE 


Heights  of  inonld.^*”Jf 

module 


A.  Oornioe 
16  parts 


B.  Frieze 
14  parts 
C.  Archit- 
rave 12 
parts 


B.  Capital 
12  parts 


Shalt  .... 
12  modules 


B.  Base 
12  parts.... 


Fillet 

Fascia 


' Abacus 

] Cymatium 

I Neck  or 

(Astragal, 
or 

necking 
Shaft  , 


Congd,  or  Cavetto 

1 

22| 

Corona 

5 

22| 

Drip 

1 

21| 

Sinking;  from  corona, 

h 

19| 

or  hollow  • 

Fillet 

h 

14 

Bed  moulding  Ogee 

4 

13i 

14 

9| 

...  Fillet,  or  listel 

2 

114 

( Cong^  or  small  cavetto  2 

9| 

■**  c Fascia 

8 

94 

) drip  under  the  corona  is  taken  on  that  member. 

in  the  height  of  the  fillet. 

COLUMN. 

1"  JPillet 

1 

144 

,...'1 

, Oong^,  or  cavetto 

1 

134 

\ Band 

2 

134 

f Ovolo 

3 

134 

m , 

Fillet 

1 

104 

[ Gong6,  or  cavetto 

1 

94 

Hypotrachelin 

3 

94 

/ Bead 

1 

11 

1 Fillet 

h 

104 

V Cong^,  or  cavetto 

1 

94 

j Shaft  ....11  mod.  8 parts 

94 

( Conge,  or  apo- 

l phyge 

li 

12 

f Fillet 

1 

134 

J Torus 

6 

164 

Plinth  Pedestal 

6 

164 

STAMBHA 


683 


COLUMN 

'“‘“.■IS"'  ‘"■a.jj* 

Q-.  Cornice  f 

Cymatium  | 

Listel 

2 

201 

6 parts  ....  ( 

Ogee 

4 

20 

P,  Die  f 
44  parts....  1 

I 

Die,  or  dado  .... 
Cong4,  or  apo- 

3 mod.  4 parts 

164 

L 

phyge 

2 

Base  r 

Fillet 

1 

18| 

6 parts....  t 

....  [ 

Plinth 

5 

204 

The 

third  sort  of 

column,  with  its  base  and  capital,  is  eight 

diameters  high,  with  a diminution  of  the  shaft  at  the  top 
of  the  eighth  part  of  the  thickness  at  its  bottom.  The  base 
occupies  half  a diameter  and  this  height  is  to  be  divided 
into  ten  parts.  Two  to  be  given  to  the  plinth,  one  to  the 
fillet,  three  to  the  oymatia  and  its  fillet,  one  and  a half  to 
the  cavetto,  the  same  to  the  torus,  and  one  to  the  cymbia. 
The  whole  projection  of  the  base  is  half  of  its  height. 
The  following  passage  from  the  Manasara  refers  to  this  kind 
of  base  ; ‘ let  a base  ornamented  with  the  lotus  be  made 
under  the  foot  to  the  pillars  one  or  two  diameters  in  height, 
and  let  it  be  adorned  with  figures  of  demons,  lions,  and 
the  like  *. 

The  height  of  the  capital,  which  is  made  after  the  manner 
of  the  Phalaka,  is  three  quarters  of  the  lower  diameter  of 
the  column,  and  is  divided  into  thirteen  parts ; two  are 
given  to  the  abacus,  one  to  the  fillet,  two  to  the  Mandana, 
seven  to  the  oymareota,  and  one  to  the  cymbia.  The 
upper  part  of  the  shaft,  about  one  and  a half  diameters  below 
the  capital,  being  divided  into  twenty-four  parts,  three  are 
given  to  the  coUarino  with  its  fillet,  three  to  the  ovolo, 
three  to  the  lower  coUarino,  five  to  the  lower  torus  with 
its  cymatia,  and  ten  below  to  the  strings  of  pearls  (mukta- 
dama).  The  projection  of  the  capital  i«  one  diameter,  or 


684 


STAMBHA 


about  an  eighth  part  beyond  that  of  the  lowest  part  of  the 
base,  the  fillet  projects  the  full,  and  the  torus  three-quarters 
of  their  respective  heights.” 

“ The  height  of  the  entablature  is  one-fourth  of  that  of  the 
column.  It  is  to  be  divided  into  twenty-one  parts  : eight  are 
given  to  the  architrave,  seven  to  the  cornice,  and  six  to 
the  vyalam  (frieze).  Of  the  eight  parts  of  the  architrave, 
one  is  to  be  given  to  the  cavetto,  three  to  the  tema  or  benda 
(uttara)  with  its  listels,  two  to  the  oymarecta  and  to  the 
upper  fascia  (vajana).  Of  the  seven  parts  of  cornice,  one 
occupies  the  fillet,  and  the  remainder  the  ovolo  (prastara) ; 
and  of  the  six  parts  of  the  cornice  (or  frieze,  vyala) 
three  to  be  given  to  the  cavetto  (or  fillet,  vajana),  two 
to  the  prati-vajana  (cavetto),  and  one  to  the  fillet.  The 
projection  of  the  vajana  (fillet)  of  the  architrave  is  equal 
to  that  of  the  capital,  that  of  the  prastara  (ovolo)  is  twice 
as  much,  and  that  of  the  cornice  equal  to  its  own  height. 
After  making  a similar  division  of  the  entablature,  our 
author  (Manasara)  lays  down  the  following  rule  respecting 
the  projection  of  the  membem.  The  height  of  the  architrave 
being  divided  into  four,  five,  six,  seven  or  eight  parts,  one 
should  be  given  to  its  projection  beyond  the  pillars,  The 
Kapota  (corona)  projects  equal  to  its  height,  or  to  bbrfee- 
fourths  of  it,  and  the  vajana  (fillet)  one-fourth.  The  Slinga 
(fillet)  recedes  about  one  diameter,  and  the  antarita  (fillet) 
projects  equal  to  its  own  height,  and  the  same  may  be  said 
of  the  prati.”  (Ram  Raz,  pp.  32,  33). 

This  third  sort  of  Ram  Raz’s  column  is  apparently  without  a 
pedestal.  Its  base  boo  doet  not  exactly  correspond  with 
any  of  the  bases  mentioned  in  the  Manasara  (chap.  xiv). 
None  of  the  Manasara^s  eight  entablatures  consists  of 
twenty-one  parts  like  the  one  prescribed  above  for  the 
column  under  description. 


STAMBHA 


68S 


Bam  Eaz  (p.  38)  identifies  this  column  with  the  Boric  order, 
the  details  whereof  are  given  below  from  both  Yitruvius, 
and  Vignola,  as  quoted  by  G-wilt. 

II.  Doric  order : 

Vitruvius  (Book  iv,  chap,  iii)  describes  the  Boric  order  more 
clearly  than  others.  " In  order  to  set  out  its  proportions, 
he  tells  us,  though  not  giving  a direct  rule,  that  its  pedestal 
is  composed  of  three  parts,  the  cymatium  or  cornice,  the 
die  and  the  base  : and  that  the  base  and  the  cymatium  are 
composed  of  many  mouldings,  whose  individual  proportions, 
however,  he  does  not  give.  He  assigns  nd  particular  base 
to  the  Boric  order ; but  nevertheless,  places  under  half  a dia- 
meter in  height  the  Attic  base,  whose  members  are  the  plinth, 
small  fillet,  scotia,  and  the  upper  torus  with  its  superior  and 
inferior  fillets,  together  with  the  apophyge  of  the  column. 
He  gives  to  the  projection  of  the  base  a fifth  part  of  the 
diameter  of  the  column.  The  height  of  the  shaft  he  makes 
of  six  diameters,  and  its  diminution  a sixth  part  of  the 
diameter.  The  oapitaFs  height  he  makes  equal  to  half  a 
diameter,  and  divides  it  into  three  parts,  dne  for  the  abacus 
and  its  cymatium,  another  for  the  echinus  and  its  fillet,  the 
third  for  the  hypotrachelium.  To  the  architrave  he  assigns 
the  height  of  one  half  diameter  of  the  column  and  to  the 
frieze  fifty  parts  of  the  module  (semi-diameter  divide'd  into 
thirty  parts),  including  the  fascia,  forming  the  capital  of  the 
triglyphs.  His  cornice  consists  of  thirty  parts  of  the  module, 
and  its  projection  forty.  The  whole  height  which  he 
gives  to  the  order  is  (in  the  measurement  here  adopted) 
seventeen  modules  and  twenty  parts.’^  (Gwilt,  Bncyol. 
art.  2666). 

In  the  following  table  all  the  details  of  the  Boric  order  are 
given  (Gwilt.  Bnoycl.  art.  2666). 


686 


STAMBHA 


A.  Cornice j 
18  parts 


B.  Prieze, 
18  parts 

0.  Archit- 
rave, 10 
parts 


D.  Capital, 
12  parts 


E.  Base,  12 


Members  composing  the  order  : 

BNTAELATCBE 

Fillet  of  corona .... 

Cavetto 
Fillet 

Cyma  reversa  .... 

Corona 
Drip 

Fillet  ....  ... 

G-utta  under  the  corona 
Dentil 
Fillet 

Cyma  reversa  .... 

Capital  of  triglyph 
Triglyph 
Metope 
Listel 

Capital  of  guttae 
Cuttae 
Fascia 

COLUMN 

Listel 

Cyma  reversa  ... 

Band 

Echinus  or  quarter  round  .. 
Three  annulets  ... 

Neck  of  capital .... 

I I Ovolo 

Astragal  ....  x Fillet 
\ [ Congd 

Shaft  of  the  Column,  14  modules 
Apopbyge  or  eong^ 

FiUet  ....  , 

Astragal 


Helgblis  izt  ProJectioQS  in  parte 


1 

3 

i 

U 

4 


2 

2 

18 

18 

2 

i 

H 

10 


1 

24 

H 

4 

1 

4 

14 


14 


34 

31 

26 

30 

28| 

271 

26 

24| 

16 

13 

124 

11 

10| 

10 

114 

11 

11 

10 

164 

164 

14 
13f 

114 

10 

12 

14 

10 

12 

14 

14| 


STAMBHA 


68*? 


COLUMN 

Heights  ia 
part  of  a 

Projections  in  parts> 
of  a module  from 

E.  Base,  12  ( 

Torus 

module 

4 

axis  of  Qoluma 

17 

parts  ' 

. Plinth 

6 

17 

PEDEPBTAL 

Listel 

23 

E.  Cornice, 

Echinus 

1 

22| 

6 parts  ' 

Eillet 

h 

21f 

1 Corona 

21 

\ Cyma  reversa  .... 

184 

Lie  of  the  pedestal,  4 modules 
/ Congd 

1 

17 

Fillet 

4 

18 

G.  Base,  iO 

1 Astragal 

1 

18f 

parts  ^ 

Inverted  cyma  .... 

2 

19 

Second  plinth 

24 

21 

V First  plinth 

4 

214 

“ The  fourth  sort  of  column  is  nine 

diameters  high.  The 

base  is  one  of  those  called  Prati-bhadra  (see 

under  Adhish- 

^hana),  and  is  one  diameter  in  height. 

It  is  without  a 

pedestal.” 

The  base  is  to  be  divided  into  eighteen  equal  parts,  two  to  be 
given  to  the  plinth,  one  to  its  fillet,  three  to  the  cyma  recta, 
three  to  the  oavetto  with  its  listel,  three  to  the  toms,  three 
to  the  upper  oavetto,  two  to  the  plat-band"  (pada-bandha), 
and  one  to  the  cimbra  (?  oymbia).  The-  projection  of 
the  plinth  is  one-third  of  the  height  of  the  whole  base,  the 
torus  and  the  plat-band  project  equal  to  their  respective 
heights.” 

The  upper  ornaments  (?entablature)  of  this  column  occupy 
two  diameters,  and  the  capital  takes  three-quarters  of  the 
diameter,  which  is  to  be  divided  into  ten  parts  : two  to  be 
given  to  the  abacus,  which  projects  half  a diameter,  one  to 
the  strings  of  pearls,  one  to  the  fillet,  four  to  the  cymatia, 


STAMBHA 


and  one  to  th<3  circular  cymbia.  The  ornaments  under  the 
capital  are  to  be  divided  into  sixteen  parts  ; of  which  give 
two  to  the  cavetto  or  collarino,  one  and  a half  to  the  cyma, 
four  to  the  torus,  which  projects  perpendicular  to  the  plinth 
or  three-quarters  part  of  its  height,  one  and  a half  to  the 
lower  cyma,  three  to  the  lower  collarino,  two  to  the  astragal, 
which  projects  equal  to  its  own  height,  and  two  to  the 
third  cyma  and  its  fillet,  below  which  a space  equal  to 
three  diameters  is  taken  up  by  strings  of  pearls,  but  which 
are  omitted  in  some  columns  of  a similar  description/’ 

(Earn  Eaz,  p,  34). 

The  sources  of  the  details  given  above  are  not  specified.  The 
account  of  the  entablature,  capital  and  shaft  is  also  not 
quite  clear. 

Earn  Eaz  (p.  38)  identifies  this  column  with  the  Ionic  order, 
the  details  whereof  are  given  below,  for  comparison,  from 
Vitruvius  and  G-wilt. 

III.  Ionic  order : 

Vitruvius’s  description  of  this  order  (Book  iii,  chap.  lii)  is 
not  clear.  According  to  his  commentator  Daniel  Barbairo 
(Grwilt,  Bncycl.  art.  2677)  “ the  height  of  the  pedestal  is  made 
nearly  a third  part  (including  its  base  and  oymatium)  of 
the  height  of  the  column.  To  the  base  of  the  column  he 
assigns  half  a diameter,  and  to  the  shaft  itself  nearly  eight 
diameters,  its  surface  being  cut  into  twenty-four  flutes  sepa- 
rated by  fillets  from  each  other.  His  method  of  describing 
the  volute  is  not  thorougly  understood:  it  is,  perhaps,  of 
little  importance  to  trouble  ourselves  to  decipher  his  direc- 
tions, seeing  that,  the  mode  of  forming  it  is  derived  from 
mathematical  principles,  as  well  understood  now  as  in  the 
days  of  the  author.” 

“The  architrave  he  leaves  without  any  fixed  dimensions, 
merely  saying  that  it  must  be  larger  or  smaller  according  to 
the  height  of  the  columns.  He  prescribes,  however,  thai 


STAMBHA 


689 


the  architrave,  frieze,  and  cornice  should  together  be  some- 
what less  than  a sixth  part  of  the  height  of  the  column, 
with  its  base  and  capital.  The  total  height  he  makes  for  the 
order,  according  to  our  measures,  is  twenty -five  modules  and 
nearly  nine  parts.” 

“ Of  the  Ionic  order  there  are  many  extant  examples,  both 
Grecian  and  Eoman,  and  except  the  debased  later  examples 
of  the  latter  there  is  not  that  wide  difference  between  them 
that  exists  between  the  Grecian  and  Eoman  Doric.” 

Gwilt  (Bnoyol.  art.  2574)  gives  in  the  following  table  the 
heights  and  projections  of  the  parts  of  the  order. 


Members  composing  the  order  : 


ENrABEATURB 

Haights  in 
parts  of  a 
module 

Trojeotions  from 

parts  of  a module 

''  Fillet  of  oyma  .... 

H 

46 

Cyma  recta 

6 

Fillet 

h 

41 

Cyma  reversa  .... 

2 

404 

Corona 

6 

38| 

A.  Cornice, 

Fillet  of  the  drip  .... 

1 

29^ 

34  parts  ^ 

Ovolo 

Astragal 

4 

1 

284 

26 

Fillet 

i 

244 

Dentel  fillet 

21 

Dentals 

6 

24 

Fillet  

1 

20 

‘ Cyma  reversa  .... 

4 

194 

B. 

Frieze 

27 

16 

1 Listel 

1| 

20 

C.  Archi- 

Cyma reversa  .... 

3 

191 

trave,  22^  < 

, First  fascia 

n 

17 

patts 

Second  fascia  .... 

6 

16 

' Third  fascia 

16 

r Capital  on  the  side 

19 

20 

D 

< Capital  on  the  coussinet,  or 

m 

[ cushion 

16 

44 


690 


STAMBHA 


Heights  in 

Proiections  from 
clxis  of  column  in 

COLUMN 

psrts  of  B 
module 

parts  of  a module 

Fillet 

1 

20 

Gyma  reversa  .... 

2 

19| 

Listel 

1 

174 

E.  Capital, 

Channel  of  the  volute 

3 

17 

17  parts  " 

Ovolo 

5 

22 

JBead 

2 

18 

Astragal  ^ Fillet 

1 

17 

1 Gong^,  or  oavetto 

2 

16 

f Above 

16 

lB-0d.6parts. 

1 Below 

.... 

18 

Apophyge 

2 

18 

/ Fillet 

U 

20 

Torus 

6 

224 

Fillet 

i 

204 

Scotia 

2 

20 

E.  Base, 

. Fillet 

i 

22 

19^  parts 

Two  beads 

2 

224 

Fillet 

i 

22 

Scotia 

2 

21 

Fillet 

i 

24 

Plinth 

6 

26 

PEDEPSTAL 

' Fillet 

1 

36 

Cyma  reversa  ....  .... 

34| 

Corona  ....  .... 

3 

334 

G-.  Cornice, 

Fillet  of  the  drip  .... 

1 

30 

Ilf  parts 

' Ovolo 

3 

294 

Bead  ....  .... 

1 

27 

Fillet  ....  .... 

1 

264 

, Conge  ....  .... 

i 

26 

Die,  4 modules  4., 

1 mod.  7 

STAMBHA 


691 


PEDEPBTAL 


tiaights  in  Projections  from 
parts  of  a.  axis  of  column  in 
module  parts  of  a module 


f 

H.  Base, 

10  parts  1 


Conge 

Fillet 

Bead 

Cyma  reversa 

Fillet 

Plinth 


2 26 

1 27 

li  28 

3 m 

I 31| 

4 33 


“ The  fifth  sort  of  column  is  ten  diameters  high,  including 
the  base  which  ought  to  be  three-quarters  of  the  diameter. 
It  should  be  divided  into  twelve  parts  ; two  for  the  plinth 
whose  projection  is  a fourth  part  of  the  diameter,  one  for 
the  fillet,  four  for  the  cyma,  and  one  and  a half  for  the 
oavetto,  one  for  the  lesser  cyma,  one  and  a half  for  the  torus, 
and  one  for  the  oymbia.  The  projection  of  ,the  cyma 
and  torus  is  equal  to/their  respective  heights.  This  column 
is  sometimes  erected  on  a high  pedestal,  which  is  about  a 
third  part  of  the  height  of  the  column.” 

” The  height  of  the  capital,  which  is  called  Pushpa-bandha, 
is  equal  to  the  upper  diameter  of  the  colmun : its  projection  on 
the  side  is  equal  to  its  height,  and  the  middle  most  square 
is  ornamented  with  the  petals  of  a lotus.  ‘ The  altitude 
of  the  capital,’  says  Eatyapa,  ‘ may  be  equal  to  the  higher, 
lower,  or  the  middle  diameter  of  the  column.  Its  breadth 
may  be  equal  to  its  height,  or  four  or  five  diameters.’  A 
capital,  the  height  of  which  is  from  one  to  two  diameters, 
and  the  breadth  twice  its  height,  is  of  the  superior  sort ; and 
that  which  in  height  is  half  the  diameter,  and  in  breadth 
from  one  to  three  diameters,  is  of  the  inferior  sort.’’ 


In  colonnades  of  porticoes,  the  inter  columnations  are  found 
to  be  from  one  diameter  and  a half  to  two  diameters.” 

(Earn  Eaz,  pp.  34-36). 


692 


STAMBHA 


In  this  order  the  description  of  the  entablature  is  not  given. 
Ram  Eaz  (p.  38)  identifies  this  “ with  the  Corinthian  or 
Composite  pillar  ” the  details  of  both  of  which  are  given 
below  for  comparison  from  Vitruvius  and  Palladio  as  quoted 
by  Gwilt. 

IV.  Corinthian  order  ; 

“ Vitruvius  (Book  iv,  chap,  i)  is  scanty  in  the  information 
he  gives  on  the  Corinthian  order,  and  what  he  says  respect- 
ing it  relates  more  to  the  origin  of  the  capital  and  the  like 
than  to  the  proportion  of  the  detail.  He  makes  the  capital 
only  one  diameter  high,  and  then  forms  upon  the  plan  a 
diagonal  two  diameters  long  by  means  whereof  the  four 
faces  are  equal  according  to  the  length  of  the  arc,  whose 
curve  will  be  the  ninth  part  in  length  and  its  height  the 
seventh  part  of  the  capital.  Reforms  the  order  with  a 
pedestal,  with  base  and  cornice  (as  Daniel  Barbaro  would 
have  it).  The  whole  height  given  to  it  in  our  measures  is 
about  twenty-seven  modules  and  two  parts.”  (Gwilt.  Encycl, 
art.  2587). 


In  the  following  table  Gwilt  (Encycl.  art.  2683)  gives,  on  the 
authority  of  Vignola,  measurements  of  the  mouldings  of  the 
Corinthian  order. 

Members  composing  the  order  : 


A,  Cornice, 
38  parts 


ENTABLATURE 

Fillet  of  cornice.... 

Heights  in 
parts  of  a 
modulo 

1 

Piojoctions  from 
axis  of  column  in 
parts  of  a modulo 

63 

Cyma  recta 

6 

53 

Fillet  ....  • 

h 

48 

Cyma  reversa  .... 

.... 

11 

454 

Corona 

. 6 

46 

Cyma  reversa  .... 

454 

Modillion 

6 

444 

STAMBHA 


693 


ENTABLiTUBE 

Heights  in 
parts  of  a 

Proiections  from 
axis  of  oolumn  in 

/ 

Fillet  (remainder  of  modillion 

modulo 

parts  of  a module 

band) 

4 

28| 

Ovolo 

4 

28 

A.  Gornioe,  ^ 

Bead 

1 

25 

38  parts  ^ 

Fillet 

1 

244 

Dentils  .... 

6 

24 

Fillet 

4 

20 

Hollo-w  or  conge 

3 

19| 

B 

Frieze,  1 mod.  parts  high 

.... 

16 

Fillet 

1 

20 

Cyma  reversa  .... 

4 

19| 

Bead 

1 

17 

0.  Archi- 

First fascia 

7 

164 

trave,  27  < 
parts 

Cyma  reversa  .... 

2 

164 

Second  fascia  .... 

6 

164 

Bead 

1 

164 

Third  fascia 

colomn 

6 

16 

' Echinus 

2 

diagonally  36, 
on  plane  334 

■Fillet 

1 

.... 

D.  Capital,' 

Lower  member  of  abacus  .... 

3 

.... 

42  parts  , 

Inverted  echinus  of  the  bell 

2 

22| 

(Pig.  890) 

Large  volutes  .... 

6 

314 

Upper  small  leaves 

4 

.... 

Large  leaves 

12 

at  top,  244 

^ Lower  leaves 

12 

at  top,  204 

694 


STAMBHA 


Shaft,  17  J 
modules  \ 
Imparts 


E.  Base,  / 
144  parts  \ 


E.  Cornice,  ) 
14|:  parts  I 


Die,  914 
parts 


f 

I 


\ 


Astragal 

Fillet 

Conge 

d.  ( upper  part 

i lower  part 

Apophyge 

Fillet 

Torus 

Fillet  .... 

Scotia  .... 

Fillet  : 

Two  beads  .... 

Fillet 

Scotia 

Fillet  .... 

Torus 

Plinth 

, PBDEPSTAL 

Fillet 

Cyma  reversa  .... 

Corona 

Throat 

Bead 

Fillet 

Frieze 

Bead  .... 

Fillet 

Cong^ 

Die  .... 

Fillet 

Cong^ 


Heights  in 
parts  of  a 
module 

Projections  from 
axis  of  column  in 
parts  of  a module 

2 

18 

1 

17 

2i 

15 

.... 

18 

2 

20 

H 

211 

3 

22 

i 

20| 

•14 

20 

201 

1 

22 

i 

21| 

n 

214 

i 

23 

4 

25 

6 

26 

1 

884 

14 

334 

3 

32 

li 

30| 

1 

26.4 

1 

25f 

6 

25 

H 

264 

1 

264 

14 

25 

874 

25 

14 

25 

1 

264 

STAMBHA 


695 


Heights  in  Projections  from 
PEDBSTAIi  parts  ot  a axis  o!  column  in 

module  parts  of  a'lnodole 

Bead  ....  . ....  li  274 

Inverted  cyma  reversa  ....  3 26| 

Fillet  ....  1 30| 

Torus  ....  ....  3 32| 

Plmtk  ....  ....'  6 32|  . 

V.  Composite  order  (compound  of  Corinthian  and  Ionic)  i 

Vitruvius  has  not  given  any  instructions  on  this  order.  Gwilt 
(Bnoyol.  art.  2696)  gives  Palladio’s  details  of  this  order. 
“ To  the  pedestal’s  height  this  master  assigns  3 diameters 
and  three-eighths  of  the  column  adding  to  it  a lower  plinth 
of  the  height  of  half  a diameter.  He  makes  the  base  of  iihe 
column  half  a diameter  in  height  and  assigns  to  the  shaft 
eight  diameters  and  a little  more  than  one -fourth,  and  cuts 
it  into  twenty-four  flutes.  The  height  of  this  capital  is 

one  diameter  and  a sixth The  architrave,  frieze 

and  cornice  he  makes  a little  less  than  a fifth  part  of  the 
height  of  the  column.  The  whole  height  of  his  profile  in 
our  measures  is  thirteen  modules  and  twelve  parts.’* 

In  the  following  table  Gwilt  (Bnoycl.  art.  2692)  gives,  on  the 
authority  of  Vignola,  measurements  of  the  mouldings  of  the 
Composite  order  •’  . 

Members  composing  the  order  ; 

Heights  in  Projections  from 
parts  of  a axis  of  column  in 
moclule  parts  of  a modulo 

1|  61 

6 , . 

1 m 

% ^■.,:46i';■ 

■■'■.I ' 43|' 


G.  Base, 
144  parts 


696 


STAMBHA 


A.  Cor- 
nice, 36 
parts 


B.  Frieze, 
27  parts 


C.  Archi- 
trave, 27 
parts 


D.  Capi- 
tal, 42 
parts 


Heights  in  Projections  from 
ENTABLA-TUBE  parts  of  a axis  of  column  In 

module  parts  of  a module 


Corona 

5 

43 

Cyma  under  the  corona 

Ih 

41 

Fillet 

1 

33 

Cyma  re  versa  .... 

4 

m 

Fillet  of  the  dentil's 

28 

Dentils 

7^ 

29 

Fillet 

1 

23 

Ovolo 

5 

22 

Bead 

1 

17 

Fillet 

1 

16|r 

Conge 

....  ■■ 

15 

Upright  face  . .... 

....  17i 

16 

Apophyge  .... 

7 

22 

Fillet 

1 

22 

Cavetto 

2 

20| 

Ovolo  .... 

....  3 

20 

Bead 

17| 

First  fascia 

....  10 

17 

Cyma  reversa  .... 

....  ■ ■:  ,2"  ■ ■ 

16f 

Second  fascia  .... 

1 

16 

COLUMN 

Echinus  and  fillet 

2 

Lower  member  of  abacus 

....  4 diagonally 

m 

Volute 

....  12  diagonally 

30f 

Band  of  upper  leaves 

3 

24 

Upper  leaves 

9 

22i 

Band  of  lower  leaves 

3 

20| 

Lower  leaves  .... 

9 ■ 

m 

•Column  16 
mod.  12 
parts 


E.  Base 
of  column, 
18  parts 


F.  Cor- 
nice, 14 
parts 


STAMBHA 


COLUMN 

Heights  in 
parts  of  a 

Projections  from 
axis  of  column  in 

module 

pacts  of  a module 

f'  Astragal 

2 

17| 

Fillet 

1 

16i 

Cong^ 

2 

( above 

... 

. 15 

Shaft  j 16  mod. 

12  parts. 

(.  below 

... 

18 

Apophyge 

2 

20 

, Fillet 

n 

20 

Cong4 

2 

20 

j Fillet 

li 

20 

1 Torus 

3 

22 

j Fillet  .... 

i 

o 

tof- 

Scotia 

u 

20 

Fillet 

i 

21^ 

Bead 

h 

21| 

Fillet  .... 

i 

21i 

Scotia 

2 

20§ 

Fillet 

i 

23 

Torus 

4 

25 

' Plinth 

6 

25 

PEDESTAL 

’ Fillet 

I 

33 

Cyma  reversa  .... 

1| 

32f 

Corona 

3 

3li 

Cyma  recta 

U 

28.^ 

Fillet  .... 

i 

26i 

Cavetto 

1 

Frieze 

5 

25 

V Bead 

1 

27 

698 


STAMBHA 


I)ie,-  94 
parts 


G.  Base 
12  parts 


PEDBBTAIi 

Height ts  In 
parts  of  a 
moudle 

Projections  feom 
axis  of  column  in 
parts  of  a mounc 

Fillet 

1 

27i 

Cong4 

li 

25 

Die.... 

88| 

25 

Apophyge  .... 

2 

27 

FiUet  .... 

1 

27 

Bead 

1 

27| 

Inverted  cyma  reversa 

3 

30^ 

Fillet  .... 

1 

31i 

Torus 

3 

33 

Plinth 

4 

33 

“ The  orders  and  their  several  characters  and  qualities,  do  not 
merely  appear  in  the  five  species  of  columns  into  which  they 
have  been  subdivided,  blit  are  distributed  throughout  the 
edifices  to  which  they  are  applied,  the  column  itself  being  the 
regulator  of  the  whole  composition.  It  is  on  this  account 
that  the  name  of  orders  has  been  applied  to  the  differ- 
ently formed  and  ornamented  supports,  as  columns,  which 
have  received  the  names  of  Doric,  Ionic,  Corinthian, 
Tuscan,  and  Composite  orders,  whereof  the  three  first  are  of 
Grecian  origin,  and  the  two  last,  it  is  supposed,  of  Italian 
or  Eoman  origin.  Each  of  these,  by  the  nature  of  its  pro- 
portions and  the  character  resulting  from  them,  produees 
a leading  quality,  to  which  its  dimensions,  form  and  orna- 
ments correspond.  But  neither  of  the  order  is  so  limited 
as  to  be  confined  within  the  expression  of  any  single  quality. 
Thus  the  strength  indicated  in  the  Doric  order  is  capable  of 
being  modified  into  many  shades  and  degrees  of  that 
quality.  ^’  (Gwilt.  art.  2638). 

(Further  accounts  of  the  origin  of  orders  will  be  found  under 

Isfagara). 


STAMBHA 


699 


' There  are  other  columns,  ” says  EamBaz  (p.  38),  “in  the 
Indian  architecture,  not  only  one  diameter  Idwer  than  the 
Tuscan,  but  from  one  to  two  diameters  higher  than  the  Com- 
posite.” “ The  first  sort  is  a column  six  diameters  high;  it 
is  rarely  made  but  upon  a high  base  and  pedestal.  The  en- 
tablature is  more  than  half  the  altitude  of  the  column,  and 
the  intercolumnation  generally  four  diameters.  The  pedestal 
is  of  the  Prati-bandha  kind  (see  under  Upapitha,  and  there  it 
is  called  Prati-bhadra) : and  its  height  is  equal  to  that  of  the 
base  which  is  one-third  of  that  of  the  column  itself,  or  two 
diameters.  The  base  is  called  Maficha-bandha  (see  under 
Adhishthana)  and  is  divisible  into  thirty  parts.  The  capital 
is  equal  in  height  to  upper  diameter  of  the  shaft,  and  its 
projection  is  equal  to  its  height.  The  form  of  the  capital 
is  called  , Ptishpa-bandha.  * The  height  of  the  capital’,  says 
Manasara,  ‘ may  be  either  equal  to  the  breadth  of  the  shaft, 
or  one-half  or  three-quarters  of  it,  according  as  it  may 
appear  proportionate  to  the  size  of  the  column.  Let  the 
breadth  of  it  be  either  one,  one  and  a quarter,  half,  or  three 
quarters  of  the  diameter.’  The  entablature  placed  on  this 
cohirnn  does  not  differ  from  that  placed  on  other  pillars, 
except  perhaps  in  the  height.  On  this  subject  Manasara 
observes  generally  : ‘ The  whole  height  of  the  entablature 

may  be  either  three-quarters,  one,  one  and  a quarter,  one  and 
a half,  one  and  three  quarters,  or  twice  that  of  the  base. 
The  height  of  the  entablature  may  be  a half,  one-fourth,  or 
three-quarters  of  that  of  the  shaft,  or  the  height  of  the  pillar 
being  divided  into  eight  parts,  six,  five,  three,  or  two  may 
be  given  to  that  of  the  entablature,  The  height  of  the 
entablature  is  measured  from  the  architrave  up  to  the 
corona.”  (Bam  Eaz,  p.  30). 

“ The  sixth  sort  of  pillar  is  eleven  diameters  high.  The 
design  made  to  illustrate  this  is  selected  from  among  the 
pillars  found  at  Conjeveram  ; it  represents  a square  pillar  of 


700 


STAMBHA 


the  same  height,  exclusive  of  the  base,  which  is  composed 
of  a plinth,  a cyma  recta  and  torus,  with  their  fillets,  and 
is  one  diameter  high.  The  same  pillar,  including  the  base, 
may  be  taken  as  an  example  also  of  the  seventh  sort,  which 
ought  to  be  twelve  diameters  in  height.’’ 

(‘  When  the  pillar,  ’ says  Ka&yapa,  ‘ is  measured  in  height  from 
the  upper  fillet  of  the  base,  it  is  called  Nigata-stambha,  but 
when,  it  is  measured  from  the  plinth  below  it,  is  termed 
Nichata-stambha.’) 

"At  the  foot  of  the  shaft  a space  equal  in  height  to  the 
hypotenuse  of  the  lower  diameter  is  made  quadrangular, 
around  which  are  sculptured  images  of  the  deities,  and  the 
like,  in  bas-relief.  In  about  half  a diameter  above  this,  is 
made  the  ornament  called  Naga-bandha  (a  serpent-shape- 
moulding), The  remainder  of  the  shaft,  about  three  diame- 
ters and  a half,  is  made  to  consist  of  eight  sides,  including 
the  strings  of  pearls,  which  occupy  three-quarters  of  a diame- 
ter, and  appear  to  be  suspended  from  the  fillet  of  the  upper 
ornament  called  Padma-bandha  (a  lotus-shape-moulding), 
which  takes  up  half  a diameter.  Next  above  this  is  the 
Kalata  or  water-pot,  above  three  quarters  of  a diameter,  and 
above  this  are  made,  with  the  same  height  given  to  them, 
three  other  mouldings,  Harika,  Asya,  and  Tatika,  which 
last  projects  a fourth  part  of  the  diameter.  Above  this 
again  is  the  lower  collarino,  in  height  about  a quarter 
of  a diameter,  then  the  ornament  called  Kumbha 
(pitcher)  which  is  half  a diameter  high  and  projects  as 
much  ; next  the  upper  collarino,  a little  less  than  the  lower 
one  ; next  the  moulding  called  Phalaka  (abacus)  which  is 
one  diameter  high  and  projects  equal  to  its  height;  next 
the  third  collarino,  about  three-fourth  of  a diameter  ; and 
last  of  all  the  capital  of ' the  kind  called  Pushpa-bandha.  ” 

(Earn  Eaz,  pp.  36-36). 


STAMBHA 


701 


This  pillar  may,  according  to  the  definition  of  its  form,  be 
called  Vishnii-kanta  and  appears  in  most  of  its  ornaments, 
thongh  not  in  their  proportions,  to  agree  •with  the  descrip- 
tion given  in  the  Manasara  of  that  which  he  calls  Palika- 
stambha  (?).  He  says  ‘ the  height  of  the  eollarino  should  be 
one  diameter  of  the  oolntnn ; that  of  the  Bhalaka  (abacus) 
one,  three-quarters,  or,  two  or  three  diameters,  and  its 
projection  one-fourth  of  its  height.  The  height  of  the 
Kumbha  (pitcher)  below  the  eollarino  may  be  half,  one  and 
a half,  or  two  diameters  and  its  breadth  equal  to  the  upper 
or  lower  eollarino.  The  height  of  the  Tatikasya  is  half  or 
three-quarters  of  the  diameter.  Let  the  lower  oyma  be 
equal  to  its  height  and  let  its  breadth  be  one  and  a quarter 
diameter.  Below  that  comes  the  Harika  of  half  that  height. 
The  height  and  breadth  of  the  Tatika  are  equally  one  diame- 
ter. Below  that  let  a Kalafea  (pitcher)  be  made  about  two 
diameters  in  breadth  and  let  the  upper  part  of  it  be  shaped 
in  the  form  of  a durdhura-flower,  and  in  such  a manner  as 
may  appear  graceful.  Below  this,  about  three  quarters  of 
the  diameters  should  be  decorated  with  strings  of  pearls.” 

Concerning  the  dimensions  of  his  seventh  sort  of  column.  Bam 
Raz  gives  accounts  of  a few  more  specimens  which  are 
quoted  below. 

‘The  pillars  at  Tiruvannaraalai  are  estimated  to  be  about  thirty 
feet  high,  with  proportionate  thickness,  diminished  at  the 
top  by  a twelfth  part  of  the  lower  diameter.  There  are 
three  kinds  of  them.  The  first  isiplaoed  on  a high  pedestal 
and  base  ; the  whole  shaft  is  divided  into  ten  compart - 
meiits,  each  being  equal  in  height  to  the  hypotenuse  of  the 
diameter  of  the  pillar ; and  on  all  the  four  sides  of 
these  compartments  are  sculptured,  in  relief,  four  small 
pillars  or  pilasters  supporting  an  entablature.  The  second 
pillar  differs  from  the  firab  in  having  two,  instead  of  four, 
small  ornamental  pilasters  in  relief,  on  each  side  of  the  ten 


im 


STAMBHA 


oomparfements,  into  wMoh.  the  shaft  is  divided,  with  an 
ornamented  niche  in  the  middle,  which  in  the  third  speci- 
men is  flanked  by  two  small  panjaras  or  ornamented  cages 
on  both  sides  of  it.  The  second  sort  of  pillar  is  placed  on  a 
base  without  a pedestal,  and  the  third  on  a pedestal  without 
abase.”  (Earn  Eaz,  p.  37). 

“ The  difleronoe  in  the  Indian  orders,  consists  chiefly  in  the 
proportion  between  the  thickness  and  the  height  of  pillars, 
while  that  of  the  Grecian  and  the  Eoman  orders,  not  only 
on  the  dimensions  of  columns,  but  also  on  the  form  of  the 
other  parts  belonging  to  them.  *’ 

“ The  Egyptian  columns  appear  to  have  no  fixed  proportion 
in  regard  to  thickness  and  height.  In  some  of  the  specimens 
of  the  ruins  of  upper  Egypt,  the  height  of  the  columns 
consists  of  from  four  to  six  times  the  lower  diameter,  which 
last  proportion  coincides  with  that  of  the  first  sort  of  the 
Indian  pillar.  ” 

“ The  orders  of  India,  andlof  Greece  and  Eome,  are  remarkable 
for  beautiful  effect  of  their  proportions,  a circumstance  to 
which  little  regard  has  been  paid  by  the  Egyptians. 
Both  the  Indian  and  Grecian  columns  are  diminished  gra- 
dually in  their  diameter  from  the  base  to  the  summit  of 
the  shaft,  a practice  which  has  never  been  observed  in  the 
Egyptian  : on  the  contrary,  a diametrically  opposite  rule  has 
been  observed  in  their  shafts,  which  are  made  narrower  at  the 
bottom  than  at  the  top,  and  placed  upon  a square  or  round 
plinth.  The  proportion  in  which  the  diminution  at  the  top  of 
the  columns  of  the  two  former  is  made,  seems  to  have  been 
regulated  by  the  same  principle,  though  not  by  the  same  rule. 
The  general  rule  adopted  by  the  Hindu  architects  in  this  res- 
pect is  that  the  thickness  at  the  bottom,  being  divided  into 
as  many  parts  as  there  are  diameters  in  the  whole  height  of 
the  column,  one  of  these  parts  is  invariably  diminished  at 
the  top  ; but  in  the  Grecian  and  Eoman  architecture,  the 


STAMBHA 


703 


diameter  of  the  upper  part  of  the  shaft,  in  a column  of  15 
feet  in  height,  is  made  one-sixth  less  than  its  thickness  at 
the  base  ; and  in  a column  of  50  feet,  the  diminution  is 
one-eighth.  The  higher  the  columns  are,  the  less  they 
diminish,  because  the  apparent  diminution  of  the  diameter 
in  columns  of  the  same  proportion,  is  always  greater  accord- 
ing to  their-  height,  and  this  principle  supposed  to  have  been 
discovered  with  greater  scientific  skill,  and  is  adduced  as 
one  of  the  proofs  of  the  highly  refined  taste  of  the  Greeks  ; 
but  we  observe  that  precepts  derived  from  the  same  principle 
have  been  taught  and  practised  in  India  from  time  im- 
memorial.” 

The  plan  of  the  Grecian  columns  is  always  round  j but  the 
plan  of  the  Hindu  columns  admits  of  every  shape,  and  is 
frequently  found  in  the  quadrangular  and  octangular  form, 
and  richly  adorned  with  sculptured  ornaments.  The  form 
of  the  Egyptian  pillars  too,  is  circular,  and  their  shafts  are 
often  fluted  like  the  Corinthian,  but  the  fluting  of  the  Indian 
columns  rbsembles  neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  The 
decorations  of  the  Egyptian  columns  often  consist  in  re- 
presentations ‘ of  the  bundle  of  reeds  ’ tied  up  with  a cord 
on  the  top,  having  a square  stone  placed  over  it ; in  some 
specimens  are  also  found  bindings  or  fillets  in  various  parts 
of  the  shaft,  and  in  the  interval  between  them,  reeds  and 
hieroglyphics  are  represented.  But  there  is  nothing  like  these 
ornaments  in  the  Indian  orders,  except  in  the  columns  found 
in  the  excavated  temple  of  Elephanta,  and  some  other 
places,  and  which  differ  materially  from  those  employed  in 
other  situations  in  Hindustan.’ V 
“ There  are  no  fixed,  as  we  saw  before,  intercolumnations  in 
'the  Hindu  architecture,  as  are  found  in  the  Grecian,  but  the 
spaces  allowed  between  pillar  and  pillar  in  different  Hindu 
buildings,  are  found  nearly  to  coincide  with  the  Grecian 
mode  of  intercolumnations,  though  in  too  many  instances, 
they  differ  widely  from  it,  and  the  same  may  perhaps  be 
said  of  the  Egyptian  colonnades.*’ 


704 


STAMBHA 


“ The  capital  of  the  Grecian  columns  invariably  marks  the 
distinction  of  the  several  orders  ; those  of  the  Indian  are 
varied  at  pleasure,  though  not  without  regard  to  the  diameter 
and  length  of  the  shaft ; and  the  forms  of  the  plainest  of 
them,  though  they  have  in  reality  nothing  in  common  with 
the  Grecian  order,  are  found  at  a distant  view,  to  bear  some 
resemblance  to  the  Doric  and  Ionic  capitals  ; but  those  of  a 
more  elaborate  kind  are  sometimes  so  overloaded  with  a sort 
of  filligree  ornaments,  as  to  destroy  the  effect  of  the  beauti- 
ful proportions  of  the  whole.  The  Egyptian  capitals,  on  the 
other  hand,  are  formed  into  elegant  vase  shapes,  decorated 
with  the  stalks,  leaves,  and  blossoms  of  the  lotus,  and  occa- 
sionally with  palm  leaves,  which  latter  ornaments  are 
supposed  to  have  given  the  first  idea  of  the  Corinthian 
capitals.  And  in  some  specimens,  the  Egyptian  capital  is 
composed  of  the  representation  of  the  head  of  the  goddess 
Isis.” 

In  view  of  the  classification  and  number  (5)  of  the  orders, 
their  principal  composing  mouldings  (8),  and  other  details  of 
similarity  pointed  out  above,  the  “ affinity,”  says  Ram  Raz 
truly  (p.  38),  “ between  the  columns  of  India  and  of  Rome 
and  Greece  is  so  striking,  that  one  would  be  apt  to  ascribe 
it  to  something  more  than  mere  chance.  ” ^ 

1 “ OoDBiderablo  interest  is  attaohed  to  the  recent  diseovery  (in  Japan)  beneath  the  corner  stones 
oi  the  Dottble-Biidgo  (main  entrance  to  the  Imperial  Palace)  of  eight  human  skeletons.  Moat  of  the 
skeletons  were  found  upright  about  twelve  feet  below  the  bsd  of  the  Palace  moat  which  is  at  present 
undergoing  repair  work  neoesaitated  by  the  earthquake  of  1928. 

“ The  theory  of  some  Japanese  scientists  is  that  the  skeletons  are  the  remains  of  persons  who, 
several  centuries  past,  oSeied  themselves  as  * human  pillars, / for  the  immortalisation  of  the  corner- 
stones used  in  oonstruoting  Edo  Castle.  The  tradition  of  the  < human  pillars  ’ is  an  old  one  in  Japan. 
In  a past  age  it  was  believed  that  if  hnman  beings  were  buried  alive  beneath  the  oorner-stones  of  great 
Btruotuies,  the  gods  would  accord  permanent  strength  and  solidity  to  the  foundations  and,  in  addition, 
those  who  thus  saorificed  themselves,  would  beoomo  immortal.  It  was  considered  that  those  ohosen 
as  ‘ human  pillars  ’ were  greatly  honored.  They  were  buried  alive  in  a standing  position. 

The  drst  traditional  instance  of  the  < human  pillars  ' recorded  in  Japan  dates  back  to  the  reign 
of  Emperor  Uintokn,  more  than  a thousand  years  ago.  The  Vodo  river  at  Osaka,  where  the  Emperor 
bad  his  palace,  used  to  overflow  each  year,  drowning  many  people  and  oausing  much  damage.  Every 
dike  built  by  the  best  engineers  was  unable  to  withstand  the  floods.  One  night,  it  is  said,  the 
Emperor  dreamed  that  the  gods  had  advisod  him  if  he  would  use  human  bodies  as  pillars  lor  the 
oonstrnotion  of  the  embankments,  there  would  be  no  more  flood  trouble.  The  story  has  it  that  the 
Emperor  immediately  caused  human  beings  to  be  buried  alive  beneath  the  foundation  stones  of  the 
dike  and,  sinoe  then,  the  embankment  has  withstood  all  So(>dB.”~~4fscpiale(i  PrBsa  of  Ameriw 
Dispa/eh,  ToWo,  11, 1925, 


STUPA 


705 


STUPA — A heap,  a mound,  a funeral  pile,  a tope,  a Buddhist  monu- 
ment. 

(1)  “ The  Buddhist  dome-shaped  tower  built  over  relics,  or  as  a 

memorial.  The  earliest  Stupas  were  tombs.^’ 

(Vincent  Smith,  Gloss,  to  Cunningham’s  A.roh.  Surv,  Reports). 

(2)  “ Stupas  or  Topes — These,  again,  may  be  divided  into  two 

classes,  according  to  their  destination  ; first,  the  true  stupas 
or  towers  erected  to  commemorate  some  event  or  mark,  some 
sacred  spot  dear  to  the  followers  of  the  religion  of  Buddha ; 
secondly,  Dagobas  or  monuments  containing  relics-  of 
Buddha,  or  of  some  Buddhist  saint.  If  it  were  possible  these 
two  ought  always  to  be  kept  separate,  but  no  external  signs 
have  yet  been  discovered  by  which  they  can  be  distinguished 
from  one  another,  and  till  this  is  so,  they  must  be  con- 
sidered, architecturally  at  least,  as  one.” 

“ In  Nepal,  according  to  Hodgson,  and,  I believe,  in  Tibet, 
the  monuments,  which  are  called  Stupas  in  India,  are  there 
called  Chaityas.  Etimologically,  this  is  no  doubt  the  correct 
designation,  as  ohaitya  like  stupa,  means  primarily  a heap  or 
tumulus.” 

(Pergusson,  Hist,  of  Ind.  and  East.  Arch.,  p.  60,  note  2). 

For  the  photographic  views  and  the  architectural  details  of  the 
following  stupas,  see  Fergusson  ; 

The  great  Tope  at  Sanchi  (p.  63,  figs.  10, 11,  12’. 

The  cut  in  the  rock  on  a Dagoba  at  Ajunta  (p,  64,  fig.  13). 

Tope  at  Sarnath  (p.  66,  fig.  14). 

Temple  at  Buddh  Gaya  (p.  70,  fig.  16). 

The  great  Tope  at  Amravati  (p.  72,  fig.  17). 

Gandhara  Topes  (description,  pp.  72-76). 

Jeiaiabad  Topes  (p,  78,  figs.  18, 19). 

Manikyala  Tope  (pp.  80-82,  figs,  21,  22,  20,  23) 

. 45 


STUPA 


"Joe 


(,3)  A diversity  of  opinion  exists,  as  to  the  propriety  or  otherwise 
of  calling  such  monuments  as  the  high  stupa  of  Takkal 
Bala  ‘ Tope’  ; and  it  must  be  said  that  this  monument  is  a 
striking  illustration  of  the  inaccuracy  of  much  that  has 
been  written  on  the  subject.  The  following  is  one  of  the 
mapy  instances  where  a conclusion  has  been  somewhat 


hastily  arrived  at : ...the  term  now  used  is 

‘ Thtip  ’ it  is,  therefore,  much  to  be  regretted 


that  we  should  have  adopted  the  word  ‘Tope,’  which 
preserves  neither  the  spelling  nor  the  pronunciation  of  the 
true  name.” 

(B.  A.  S.  J.  vol.  HI.,  p.  313). 

(4)  “ Again,  Mr.  Pergusson,  writing  on  this  subject,  complains 
bitterly  of  the  Bhilsa,  and  the  Sarnath,  and  the  Sanohi 
‘ Topes.  ’ To  make  the  confusion  worse  he  laments — ‘ Tope 
is  also  the  common  Anglo-Indian  word  for  a clump  of  trees,’ 
Very  true,  but  that  hardly  justifies  the  following—'  In  neither 
sense  is  the  word  ever  used  by  natives,  who  associate  ‘ tope  ’ 
with  something  very  different,  that  is,  with  cannon  or  artil- 
lery.’ That  the  natives  do  use  the  word  freely  in  designating 
such  monuments,  I will  now  endeavour  to  show.  While  they 
called  all  lower  mounds  in  this  neighbourhood  dehiri,  the 
peasantry  denied  the  existence  of  a Thupi,  Thupa,  Thuva, 
or  even  the  common  dih  ; and  in  my  enquiries  being  com- 
pelled to  paraphrase  the  word  for  their  comprehension,  after 
trying  buland-tila  and  other  expressions  in  vain,  I acciden- 
tally mentioned  the  much  abused  ‘ tope,’  and  was  much 
surprised  to  find  that  they  understood  my  meaning  instantly, 
and  helped  me  to  a minute  description  of  the  monument 
and  its  surroundings.  They  did  not  call  it]  thupa  nor  thiipi, 
but  simply  ‘ tope  ’ or,  more  correctly,  ‘ top.’  Now,  it  would 
appear  from  the  above  that  the  word  is  no  mere  ‘ adoption 
of  ours,^  and  that  it  is  used|by  the  natives  of  India  (unless 


STUPI 


707 


we  allow  the  breadth  of  the  Indus  to  make  a fine  distinction), 
moreover,  by  the  commonest  of  those  natives  far  and  wide.” 

(Cunningham,  Arch.  Surv.  Reports,  vol.  xix., 
pp.  134, 135), 

(5)  Takshatilae  ayam  thuvo  pratithavito  sava-budhana  puyae  t 

“ This  stupa  was  erected  at  Takhatila  (Takahatila)  in  honour 
of  all  the  Buddhas.” 

(Taxila  Vase  Inscrip.  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  vili.  p.  297). 

(6)  Thuva  oha  samgharama  cha  \ 

(Insorip.  on  the  Mathura  Lion  Capital,  no.  A. 

II,  line  14,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  IX.  p.  141). 

STtiPI— A dome,  a cupola,  a spherical  roof  rising  like  an  inverted 
Qup  over  a circular., 'square  or  multangular  building,  a p.innaole,  a 
steeple-tower. 

(1)  M.  XI.  13,1  XV.  91,  xvni.  4, 413,  xxii.  10,  etc. 

(2)  Kona-paravatam  kuryat  stupy-achchhadanakani  oha  II 
Su-muhurte  su-nakshatre  sttipy-achchhadanakam  nyaset  II 

(Vastu-vidya,  ed  .Ganapati-feastri,  xvi.  27,  37). 

(3)  Eanthoktam  sarva-manam  tu  stiipy-utsedhah  prakirtitah  II 

(Kamikagama,  xxxv.  SO). 

(4)  Eavi-varma-mahS-raja  alias  the  Lord  Kula-feekhara-deva  was 

pleased  to  bathe  up  to  the  pinnacle  (stupi-paryyanta)  the 
Vanakaiyilaya-Tirumalai  (name  of  the  central  shrine)  in 
the  temple  of  the  Lord  of  Tiruvirattanam,  the  Lord  of  Tiru- 
vadigai,  and  to  fix  the  stones  which  were  bulging  out  (?  stu- 
pi-kila).” 

(Tiruvadi  Inscrip,  of  Ravivarman,  line  3 f.,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  VIII.  p.  9). 


708 


STUPI-KlLA 


(5)  “ This  insoripion  (V.  S.  I.  I.  vol.  II.  no.  90)  records  the  gifts, 

by  the  priest  Ifeana  Siva  Pandita,  of  8 gilt  copper-pots,,.. 

A ninth  pot  was  presented  by  Pavana-Pidaran. .The  gilt 

copper-pots  were  all  intended  to  be  used  as  pinnacles  (Sttipik- 
kndam,  para  2).  Nine  of  them  were  presented,  of  which  one 
is  said  to  have  been  for  the  temple  of  the  Lord  (para  9)  and 
another  for  the  temple  of  the  Lord  Sri-Kajarajetvara  rniidai- 
yar  (para  11).  The  other  seven  appear  to  have  been 
intended  as  pinnacles  for  the  shrines  of  the  regents  of  the 
eight  quarters.  The  regents  are  eight  in  number,  viz.,  Indra, 

Agni,  Yama,  Nirriti,  Varuna,  Vayu,  Soma,  and  Itana, 

The  shrine  of  Indra,  who  is  the  regent  of  the  East,  seems 
to  have  been  in  the  second  gopura  for  which  five  pinnacles 
had  apparently  been  provided  by  the  king  himself.” 

(V.  S.  I.  I.  vol.ii.no.  90,  paras  1,  2,  p,  4131). 

(6)  ‘^  The  Gangai-konda-puram  temple’. ..consits  of  a nine 

storeyed  stubi  (steeple-tower)  or  vimana  over  the  shrine  or 
sanctuary,  99  feet  square  at  the  base,  and  about  165  feet 
iiigli-” 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  p.  117,  o.  2,  para  1). 

(7)  See  Chalukyan  Architecture,  Arch.  Surv.  new..  Imp.  series,  vol. 

XXI.  plates  LxxxTi,  figs.  1,  2 ; lxxxiv,  figs.  1,  2 ; xci. 

See  Cunningham,  Arch.  Surv.  Eeports,  vol.  iii.,  plates  xlvi, 
fig.  4 (Birdaban  Stupa),  xLVii.  fig.  3 (Nongarh  Stupa)  ; 
vol.  XI.  plate  xxvii  (plan  and  section  of  Mediaeval  Stupa)  ; 
vol.  XVIII.  plates  v,  vi  (Nirvana -stupa) ; vol.  xix.  plate  III 
(Mahadeopur  pinnacle). 

STUPI-KlLA — (see  Stupa  and  Stupi) — The  spire,  the  nail  above  the 
dome. 

(M.  XVIII,  144). 

Cf.  “ The  Lord  ^ri-Bajarajadeva  gave  one  copper  waterpot  (kuta), 
to  be  placed  on  the  copper  pinnacle  stupittari ; according  to 


STHAPATI 


709 


Wiaslow,  a synonym  of  l§ikhara,  or  the  upper  pinnacle  of  a temple) 
of  the  sacred  shrine  (6ri-Vimana)  of  the  Lord  of  the  8ri-Eaja- 
raje^vara  (temple),  weighing  three  thousand  and  eighty-three 
pala.” 

(Inscrip,  of  Eajaraja,  no-.  1,  line  18,  H.  S.  I.  I., 
vol.  II.,  p.  9). 

STEl-LIl^GA — A class  of  buildings,  a feminine  type  of  architectural 
object. 

See  definition  and  other  details  under  PrSsa da. 

Cf  Sarvatra  bhoga-bhiimy-angam  alinda-pari&obhitam  1 

Sarva  (?  shad)-varga-samay-uktaifa  manah-priti-samanvitam  II 
Ghaturnam  anta  (m)-lomasam  (lokanam)  yogyarh  stri-lingam 

ishyate  II 

(Kamikagama,  XLV.  10,  xxxv.  21,  see  under  Salaiiga 
aud  Shad-varga). 

STHANDILA — A ground-plan  in  which  the  whole  area  is  divided  into 
forty-nine  equal  squares. 

(M.  VII.  8,  VIII.  39,  IX.  129,  etc.,  cf.  Lxx.  30,  see 
Pada-vinyasa). 

STHAPATI — The  chief  architect,  the  master  builder. 

(1)  Manasara  (chap,  il.,  named  ^ilpi-lakshana  or  ranks  and  quali- 
fications of  architects)  : 

From  the  four  faces  of  Brahman  are  stated  to  have  originated 
the  four  heavenly  architects,  namely,  Vi^va-karman,  Maya, 
Tvashtyi  and  Manu.  And  their  son  are  called  respectively 
Sthapati,  Sutragrahin,  Vardhaki  and  Takshaka.  These 
latter  four  evidently  represent  the  four  classes  of  terrestrial 
artists  ; 

Purvanane  vilyakarma  Jayate  dakshine  mayab  l 
Uttar asya  inukhe  tvashta  patchime  tu  manuh  smrltah  1 


STHAPATI 


7J:0 

Vis-vakarmakhya-naiaano’sya  putrah  sthapatir  uoliyate  I 
Mayasya  tanayak  stitragrahiti  parikirtitah  \ 

Tvashtur  devarsheh  putrah  varddhakiriti  prakathyate  I 
Manoh  putras  takahakah  syat  sthapatyadi-ohatuslifcayam  \ 

(M.  II.  11-12, 17-20). 

Of.  One  Mann  is  stated  to  be  the  architect  who  built  the  city 
of  Ayodhya  : 

Ayodhya-nama-nagari  tatrasil  loka-vi&ruta  t 
Manuna  manavendrena  ya  puri  nirmita  svayam  1 

(Eamayana,  I,  5,  6); 

Their  ranks  : 

Sthapatyadi^  chatur  varnah  tilpibhih  parikirtitah  \ 

(M.  II.  29). 

The  Sthapati  is  in  rank  the  director  general  and  the  consult- 
ing architect  (M.  II.,  line  21).  The  SCitragrahin  is  the  Guru 
of  Vardhaki  and  Takshaka  (22),  while  the  Vardhaki  is  the 
instructor  of  Takshaka  (23).  The  Sthapati  must  be  well 
versed  in  all  sciences  (24).  He  must  know  the  Vedas  (26). 
He  must  have  all  the  qualifications  of  a supreme  director 
(aoharya)  (31). 

Of.  Sthapatih  sthapanayarhah  veda-vich  chhastra-paragah  \ 
Sthapanadhipatir  yasmat  tasmat  sthapatir  uchyate  \ 

Sthapate^  chajnaya  sarve  sutragrahyadayah  sada  \ 

Kurvanti  tastra-drishtena  vastu-vastu  prayatnatah  \ 

Acharya-lakshanair  yuktah  sthapatir  ity-abhidhiyate  I 

Sthapatis  tu  sva-turyebhyas  tribhyo  gurur  iti  smyitah  \ 

(M.  II.  26— 29,  31,  21). 

Schapatih  sarva-tastrainah  (24). 

See  also  M.  xxxvil.  14,  16,  16,  17,  68,  73-74,  83,  86. 

These  passages  refer  to  the  Sthapati  as  the  master  of  the 
opening  ceremonies  of  a dwelling  house. 


STHAPATI 


711 


The  Sutragrahin  also  should  have  the  general  knowledge  of  all 
the  sciences  and  the  Vedas.  But  he  must  he  an  expert  in 
measuring  accurately  and  must  make  a special  study  in 
drawing  (M  ii.  32,  24,  22,  25,  33,  23,  25,  34) : 

^rutajhah  sutragrahi  oha  rekhajnah  tastra-vit-tamah  i 32. 
Stitra-grahiti  stitra-dhrit  \ 24. 

Stitra-grahi  gurur  dvyabhyam  tuvyehhyo’dya  iti  smritah  \ 22. 

The  Vardhaki,  too,  should  have  the  general  knowledge  of  the 
Vedas  and  practical  sciences.  But  the  object  of  his  special 
study  is  painting.  He  must  also  be  able  to  design  (vioha- 
rajna)  architectural  and  sculptural  objects  from  his  own 
ideas.  Like  the  Sutragrahin,  the  Vardhaki  too  should  have 
an  idea  of  accurate  measurement. 

Cf.  Vardhakir  mana-karmajfiah  \ 26. 

Vioharajhah  ferutajnat  oha  ohitra -karma j no  vardhakih  1 33. 
Takshakasya  gurur  nama  vardhakir  iti  prakirtitah  I 23. 

The  Takshaka  must  be  expert  in  his  own  work,  i.  e.,  carpentry. 
He  should  be  obedient  to  his  superiors  and  aspire  to  rise  in 
rank. 

Of.  Takshanat  takshakah  smritah  \ 26^ 

Takshakah  karma-vidyuk  cha  bala-bandhudaya-parah  \ 34. 

(2)  Sthapatih  sthapanarhah  syat  sarva-feastra-vi^aradah  Ii 
Na  hinahgo’tiriktahgo  dharmikas  tu  dayaparah  I 
Amatsaryo’nasuyafe  cha  tantrikastv-abhijatavan  11 
Granitajnah  puranajnah  anandatma  py-alubdhakah  I 
Ghitrajilah  sarva-detajhah  satya-vadi  jitendriyah  II 
Arogi  ohapramadi  cha  sapta*vyasana-varjitah  i 
Sunama  dridha-vandhufe  oha  vastu-vidyabdhi-paragah  II 

(Vastu-vidya,  ed.  Ganapati  ^astri,  1.12-15). 


712 


STHAPATI 


‘ The  Sthapati  or  master  builder  must  be  able  to  design  ' lit.  plac- 
ing, sbhapana).  He  must-be  proficient  in  all  sciences,  (feastras 
see  below).  He  must  not  be  deformed  by  lacking  in  or  posses- 
sing too  many  limbs.  He  must  be  pious  and  compassionate. 
He  must  not  be  malicious  or  spiteful.  He  must  be  trained 
in  music  (tantra=a  stringed  musical  instrument,  see  Vitru- 
vius below).  He  must  be  of  noble  descent.  He  must  be  a 
mathematician  and  historian.  He  must  be  happy  in  mind 
and  free  from  greed.  He  must  be  proficient  in  painting.  He 
must  know  all  countries,  i.e.,  he  must  be  a geographist.  He 
must  be  truthful,  and  possess  self-control.  He  must  not 
have  any  disease,  and  must  be  above  committing  errors.  He 
must  be  free  from  the  seven  vices  (hunting,  gambling,  day- 
dreaming, blackmailing,  addiction  to  women,  etc.,  see  Manu 
samhita,  vii.  47-48).  He  must  have  a good  name  and  be 
faithful  to  friends.  He  must  be  deep  in  (lit.  cross)  the 
ocean  of  the  science  of  architecture.* 

Compare  these  qualifications  of  the  master  builder  with  those 
of  the  Grseoo-Boman  architects  quoted  below  from  Vitruvius. 
The  classification  of  the  architects  and  the  account  of  their 
qualifications  are  almost  identical  to  those  given  in  the 
Mtoasara  : 

Sthapates  tasya  tishyo  va  sutra-grahi  suto’thavii  \ 
Sthapaty-ajnanusari  cha  sarva-karma-vitaradah  II 
Sutra-danda-pramanajiio  manonmana-pramanavit  1. 
Takshitanam  takshakenapy  upary-upari  yuktitah  II 
Vriddhikrit  vardhakih  proktah  sutragrahy-anugah  sada  II 

(Vastu-vidya,  ibid  I.  16-18). 

Takshapat  sthula-stikshmapam  takshakah  sa  tu  kirtitah  II 
Mrit-karmajiio  guni  taktah.  sarva-karma-sva-tantrakah  \ 
Q-uru-bhaktah  sada  hrishtah  sthapaty-ady-anugah  sada  II 

(Vastu-vidya,  ibid,  i,  18-19). 


STHAPATI 


713 


(3)  Su§ila(&)  ohaturo  dak8ha-&a8trajfi.a-loblia-varjita(-tah)  I 
Kshamavan  asya  dvijal  ohaiva  8utradhara(h)  sa  uohyate  )l 

‘ One  who  is  of  good  behaviour,  clever,  skilful,  learned,  free  from 
lust  (excessive  desire  of  gain),  can  forgive  (rivals),  and 
belongs  to  the  twice-born  class  (?  Brahmin),  is  called  Sutra- 
dhara/ 

(6ilpa-dipaka,  ed.  Q-amgadhara,  i.  3). 

(4)  Vastu-vidhanajdo  laghu-hasto  jita-lramah  1 
Dirgha-dar'si  cha  feurafe  cha  sthapatih  parikirtitah  li 

‘ One  who  is  conversant  with  the  architectural  design  (vidhana, 
the  act  of  arranging,  disposing,  etc.),  skilful  (lit.  swift  at 
hand),  industrious  (or  patient  labourer),  and  foresees  (every- 
thing), and  is  a champion  (in  architectural  matters),  is 
described  as  a sthapati.  ’ 

(Matsya-PurSna,  Pet.  Diet.) 

(6)  Mahabharata  (xil.  3243-3244)  : 

Sat-kyita§  cha  prayatnena  achSryyartvik-purohitah  1 
MaheshvSsah  sthapatayah  samvatsara-chikitsakah  It 
Prajna  medhavino  danta  dakshah  tura  bahu-trutah  I 
Kulinah  sattva-sampanna  yuktah  sarvveshu  karmmasu  il 
Sthapatis, meaning  apparently  architects,  are  stated  here  to 
be  very  learned,  meritorious,  patient,  dexterous,  champion,  of 
large  experience,  of  high  birth,  full  of  resources,  and  capable 
of  application  to  all  works. 

Ibid,  xni,  5073-6074  : 

Brahmapa-sthapatibhyaih  cha  nirmmitam  yan  nive^anam  II 
Tad  avaset  sadi  prajfio  bhavarthi  manujetivara  1 
Here,  a house  built  by  a BrShmana  and  a Sthapati  is  specially 
recommended.  Stapati  implies  an  architect  but  his  caste  is 
not  clear  from  this  passage. 

Ibid.  XIV.  2620-2524  : 

Tato  yayau  bhimasenah  prajnah  sthapatibbih  saha  \ 
Brahmanan  agratah  kyitva  kutalan  yajfia-karmmanr  K 


714 


STHAPATI 


Tam  sa  ^ala-ohayaih  ferimat  sampratoli-suglial^itam  { 
Mapayamasa  kauravyo  yajna-vatam  yatha-vidhi  )i 
Prasada-^ata-sambadham  mani-pravara-kufetimam  \ 
Karayamasa  vidhiYad-dbema-ratna-Yibhusbitam  I! 

Stambbaa  kanaka-obitramfe  oha  toranani  vrihanti  cba  \ 
Yajjnayatana-de&eshu  datva  feuddham  cba  kaficbanam  II 
Anfcah-purapam  rajnam  cba  nana-defea-^amiyusbam  l 
Karayamasa  dbarmmafcma  tatra  tatra  yatbavidbi  II 
Here,  too,  Stbapati  is  apparently  fcbe  architect  who  built  the 
palace  with  jewelled  floor,  columns,  arches,  etc.,  and  also  the 
well  designed  high  gate-houses. 

Ibid.  Y.  265  : 

Tato’atibbito  rupat  tu  feakra  aste  Yicbarayan  \ 

Atbajagama  para'sum  skandhenadSya  varddbakih  II 
Vardbaki  is  called  here  Takshan  (see  Yerses  266—266)  not  in 
the  sense  of  carpenter  but  to  imply  an  executioner. 

(6j  Varttika  of  Katyayana  on  Panini,  2 (Pet.  Diet.)  : 

Sutra-graba  = yah  sutram  gyibpati  na  tu  dharayati. 
Sutra-graba  = yab  sutram  gyihnati  dbarayati  cba. 

This  subtle  distinction  is  not  quite  clear. 

(7)  Cbaurapafloba^ika  (ed,.  ‘Boblen,  7-8): 
Surata-tandava-sutra-dbari. 

(8)  Eamayana,  (ii.  80,  2,  etc.)  : 

Karmantikah  stbapatayah  purusha  yantra-kovidah  \ 

Tatha  vardbakayat  ebaiva  margino  vriksha-taksbakah  II 

(9)  Sakala-guna-gapalamkrita-kritoltamangaru  Parama-Brabma- 

nife  obala-SYarupar  upade&a-p(r)arakarmaru  Mauu-kfaya- 
Mandabye-Vi&Yakarmma-nirmmitam  appa  Hem-migadeya 
mane  enisida  stotakaebaru  \ 

“ Of  the  ViWamitra-gotra,  supreme  Lord  of  Labka-dYipa-pura, 
possessed  of  property  and  Yebicles,  versed  in  all  feastras, 
sought  after  to  construct  ornamental  buildings  and  upper 


STHAPATX 


716 


storeys,  adorned  with  all  good  qualities,  Ms  head  sprinkled 
with  sandal  water  from  ^iva,  in  the  unchanging  form  of 
Parama  Brahma,  distinguished  in  giving  advice,  of  the 
Hemmigade  house  created  by  Manu,  Maya,  Mandabya,  and 
Vifevakarmma,  was  Stotakaohari.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  i,  Channarayapatna  Taluq, 
no.  265,  Eoman  text,  p.  630,  line  23  ; Transl. 

p.  237,  para  2). 

(10)  This  Pra&asti  was  written  by  Skandasadhu,  the  son  of  6ri- 

kantha,  a descendant  of  a family  of  architects  (sthapati- 
kula). 

(Sholinghur  Inscrip,  of  Parantaka  i,  line  21, 
Bp.  Ind.  vol.  IV  .pp.  224,  226). 

(11)  Sthapati-Kalisuta-Simgali-kargi  hfavagrama-drauga  vraC?  lu)- 

dhajana  1 

The  Sthapati  (architect  of  the  tank  was)  Sirngali  Eargi,  the 
son  of  Kali,  a Pandit  (?  vulha)  from  the  Navagrama-drahga 
(compare,  Eaja  Tarahgini,  Translation  by  Dr.  Stein,  vol, 
II.  p.  291,  ‘watch-station  near  mountain  passes’).”  Dr. 
Stein  Konow. 

(Peshawar  Museum  Inscrip,  of  Vanhadaka,  line  6, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  X.  p.  80,  note  3 ; p.  81). 

(12)  Visadru-siitah  Kamau  ^ilpi— “ Visadru^s  son,  Kamau,  the 

architect  (of  the  fifth  octagonal  pillar,  middle  row,  of  the 
north-west  cloister).  This  simple  record  of  the  architect 
or  head  mason  Kamau  is  the  most  valuable  inscription  of 
the  Lai  Darwasa,  as  it  is  another  proof  of  the  truth  of  Eer- 
gusson’s  remark  that  the  ca,use  of  the  admixture  of  Hindu 
and  Muhammadan  styles  in  the  Jaunpur  was  the  employ- 
ment of  Hindu  masons.”  Dr.  A.  Eiihrer. 

(Sharqi  Arch,  of  Jaunpur,  Inscxip.  xxvii.,  Arch. 

Surv.  new  Imp.  series,  vol,  i.  p.  611 


716 


STHAPATI 


(13)  Eajapalasya  putrena  palhanena  oha  ^ilpina  t 
Utkirnna-varnna-ghatana  vaidagdhi-vi&yakarmana  II 

“ (The  document)  is  engraved  by  the  artist  Palhana,  son  of 
Eajapala,  who  is  a master  of  the  art  and  craft.” 

(Pachar  Plate  of  Paramardideva,  line  22,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  X.  pp.  49,  45). 

(14)  Tvashtri,  a recognised  architect,  connected  with  (the  ancestor 

of)  both  Sutradhara  and  Sthapati  : 

Tad-vad  Vatakhyam  nagaram  vane’smin  Tvashtuh  prasadat 
kritavan  Vasiahthah  1 

Prakara-vapropavanais  tadagaih  prasada-ve&maih  su-ghanam 
sn-tumgaih  II 

Bhanor  griham  daiva-va§ad  vibhagnam  Vasishtha-pauraih 
ankritam  yad  asit  II 

Asioh  cha  Nagat  sthapates  tu  Durggah  ii 
Durggarkkato  Deuka  Suttra-dhiirah  il 
Asyapi  sumih  ^ivapala  nSina  II 
Yenotkrite’yaih  sn^ubha  pratastih  II 

(Vasantgadh  Inscrip.  of  Purnapala,  A.  D.  1042, 
V.  21, 27,  34,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  ix.  pp.  12,  13,  14,  15). 

(16)  Sada^ivamaharaya-tafeanad  Viranatmajah  'i 

TvashtS.  feri-viranacharyo  vyalikhat  tamra-§asanam  t| 

(Krishnapuram  Plates  of  Sada^ivaraya,  v.  107.  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  IX.  p.  339). 

(16)  8ila-&ilpi — stone  mason  (G-ovindapur  stone  Inscrip.  of  the  poet 

Gangadhara,  v.  39,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  ii.  pp.  338,  342). 

(17)  Silpin — engraver  (Vilapaka  Grant  of  Venkata  i,  v.  62,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  IV.  pp.  277,  272). 

(18)  Cf.  Inscrip.  from  Bablioi  (verse  112,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  i.  p.  31). 

(19)  Vardhaki — carpenter,  sculptor  (Senart)  ; 

Vadhakina  samina  venuvasaput  (e)  na  gharasa  mugha  kata  \ 
(Karle  Cave  Inscrip.  no.  6,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  vii.  p.  63). 


STHAPATI 


717 


(20)  Siitradhara— architeot,  arfeizan  (Bheragliafc  Insorip.  of 

AlhanadeTi,  v.  36, 37,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  ii.  pp.  13, 17). 

(21)  Mason  (Inscrip,  from  Dabhoi,  v.  112.  Bp.  Ind.  vol,  I.  p.  31). 

(22)  Of.  the  first  Pra&asti  of  Baijnath  (verse  36.  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  i. 

pp.  107,111). 

(23)  Sutra-dhrit — artizan  (Kudarkot  Inscrip,  v 17,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  I.  pp.  182,  183). 

(24)  Sutradhara^ — sculptor  (Verawal  Image  Inscrip,  line  6,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  III.  pp.  303, 304). 

(25)  Si(si)la-patta-feubhe  vam&e  sutra-dhara  vichakshanah) 
Bhojukah  Kamadeva^i  cha  karmmanishtha  Hala  siidhih  II 

“ (Born)  in  the  auspicious  family  of  ^ilapatfia,  the  conspicuous 
architects  (were)  Bhojuka,  Kamadeva,  and  the  wise  Hala, 
(who)  were  perfect  in  their  work.” 

“ A Muhammadanlruler  Jallala  Khoja,  son  of  Ifeaka,  appointed 
these  architects  to  build  a 6jpma^h(a)  (?  cow-shelter),  a 
garden,  and  step-well  in  the  town  of  Batithadim.” 

(Bhatihagarh  stone  Inscrip,  v.  12,  Ep.  Ind.  vol. 

XII.  pp.  46,  47,  44). 

(26)  Gokarna-svami~who  is  set  up  on  the  pure  peak  of  the 
Mahendra  mountain,  master  (guru)  of  things  movable  and 
immovable,  the  sole  architect  (siitra-dhara)  for  the  creation 
of  all  the  world  (sakala-bhuvana-nirmanaika-sutra-dhara- 
sya).” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  ix.  Bangalore  Taluq,  no.  140, 
Eoman  text,  p.  33,  Transl.  p.  26). 

(27)  Krishna-suto  gunadhyafe  cha  suttra-dharo’tra  Nannakah  I 
Etat  Kanva&ramaih  jfiatva  sarvva-papa-harani  feubham  \ 
Kritam  hi  mandiraih  ^aiubhoh  dharmma-kirtti-vivarddhanam  It 

Here,  Sutra-dhara  is  the  architect  who  built  the  t emple  of 
^iva. 

(Inscription  from  the  Mahadeva  temple,  v.  29, 
30,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xili.  p.  166). 


ST^APATf 


IlS 

(28)  Sufcradharo^sya  Haridasanama — the  architect  (employed  on 

the  repair  of  the  temple  of  Dakshinaditya)  was  Haridasa. 

(G-aya  Insorip.  of  Vihrama  Samvat  1429,  line  9, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xx.  pp.  316,  313). 

(29)  Cf.  “ When  the  house  is  finished  Brahmans  and  the  friends  of 

the  family  are  feasted.  The  mistri  (master-builder)  attends 
the  dinner  and  receives  from  the  owner  complimentary  gifts, 
such  as  shawls,  turban,  clothes  and  money,  as  his  merits 
and  the  generosity  of  his  employer  dictate.” 

(Ind,  Ant.  vol.  xxiv.  p.  303.  c.  2,  last  para). 

(30)  “ The  royal  draughtsman  ^raya  or  raja  sutra-dhari)  Gopoja’s 

younger  brother  Suroja  engraved  it.” 

(Ep,  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  i,  Arsikere  Taluq,  no.  123, 
Transl.  p.  168,  line  2). 

(31)  Svasti  samadhigata-paficha-maha-^abda svaradhipatimaha 

nayaka-vibudha-vara-dayakan  animitta  Malla-vijaya-Sutra- 

dhari  svami-drohi... biruda,  etc. 

“Be  it  well,  (with  various  epithets,  including),  Malla-vijaya- 
sutradhari,  the  dandanayaka  Lachimayya’s  son,  of  the 
ministry  for  peace  and  war,  Hodimaiya  and  others  (named) 
enlarging  the  town  ; Eajimaiya,  the  master  of  the  town, 
desiring  to  make  a feast  granted  certain  land  (specified).” 

(Ibid.  no.  194,  Roman  text,  p.  433,  Transl.  p.  187). 

(32)  “ Born  in  the  family  of  Vitvakarma,  the  architect  of  the  three 

worlds,  Vitvanatha-— the  son  *of  Basavachariya,  who  was 
the  son  of  Vodeyappaya  considered  to  be  the  jagad-guru — 
engraved  it.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  I,  Chanuarayapatna  Taluq, 
no.  187,  Transl.  p.  207). 

(33)  “ To  Bamoja,  son  of  the  carpenter  Madiyoja  granted  a rent- 

free  estate.” 

(Ep.  Oarnaf.  vol,  vi.  Kadur  Taluq,  no.  67,  Transl. 

p.  12). 


STBtAPATT 


719 


(34)  “ Hail  1 There  is  no  excommnmeation  (balligavarfc0==bahish- 
kaxa,  Mr.  Venkat  Bahgo  Katti)  of  the  skilful  people  (binna- 
nigala,  those  who  are  conversant  with  painting  or  architec- 
ture, Sanderson’s  Canarese  Dictionary)  of  the  world  who 
have  attained  the  favour  (of  the  god),  having  given  the 
pam  (a  patent,  royal  grant  or  order)  called  mume-perjerepu 
(and)  the  name  of  Tribhuvanacharya  to  6ri-Gunda,  whose 
(observance  of  the)  established  rules  of  conduct  was  unim- 
peded, the  Sutra-dhari  who  made  the  temple  of  the  queen 
of  Yikramaditya  (ii,  of  the  Western  Ghalukyas),  the  favourite 
of  the  world  ; (and  there  is)  immunity  (parihara)  to  the 
others  who  united  themselves  with  the  guilty  man  (doshika).*’ 
(Sanskrit  & Old  Canarese  Insorip.  no.  99, 
lines  1-7,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  x.  p,  164,  notes  6-10). 
(c6)  “ Hail  1 Let  it  be  known  that  these  are  the  names  (not  given) 
of  the  Aoharya  who  averted  the  excommunication  (bal|iga  ■ 
vartG=hahislikara)  of  the  skilful  people  (better  perhaps 
‘ those  who  art!  conversant  with  painting  or  arohiteotura ’) 
of  this  district,  after  that  they  had  given  the  mume  perjerepu 
to  the  Sutra*dhari  who  made  this  temple  of  Loketvara  (still 
exists  under  the  name  of  god  Yirupaksha,  Ante  p.  163,  c.  1, 
paras  3, 1,  2)  of  Lokamahadevi  (the  queen)  of  Yikramaditya, 
the  worshipful  one,  who  three  times  conquered  K&nohi.” 

“ Hail  t ^ri-Sarvasiddhi-acharya,  the  asylum  of  all  virtuous 
qualities,  the  Pitamaha  (Brahma,  i.e,,  the  Creator),  the  maker 
of  many  cities  and  houses;  he  whose  conversation  is  entirely 
perfect  and  refined,  he  who  has  for  a jewelled  diadem  and 
creast-jewel  the  houses  and  palaces  and  vehicles  and  seats 
and  coaches  (that  ho  has  constructed),  the  (most  eminent) 
sutra-dhfiri  of  the  southern  /country.” 

Svasti  Sri-sarvva*siddhi-aohari  sakala-guna&raya-aneka-pura 
vastn-Pitamahan  sakala-nishkala-sukshmatibhashitan  vastu- 
prasada-yanasana-^ayana-mani-  makuta-ratnachudamani-  te 
(ih)  kana-di^eya-sutra-dhari. 


(Ibid.  no.  iOO,  Ante  p.  166). 


720 


8THAPATI 


(36)  “ Halit  The  grant  that  was  given  of  ^ri-Vijayaditya  and 

Vikramaditya . ..the  grant  that  was  given  to  the 

temple  of  (the  architect)  Avanta-guna— -(was)  a stone  seat 
(pare)  and  a bracelet  (?)  to  the  temple  of  (the  god)  8ri*Loka- 
paletvara,  after  having  given  the  office  (sthana,  see  below) 
of  the  holy  Anjanacharya  to  the  holy  Devacharya  (datti 
Aftjanacharya  bhagavantargge  kottu  6ri  Lokapalefevarakam 
pare  balli).” 

“ Sthana  may  mean  the  office  of  the  priest  of  the  temple,  or  the 
locality,  i.e.,  allotment  of  laud,  belonging  to  the  holder  of 
tha  office.’^ 

Of.  Manasara,  ii.  26-26,  above.  (The  first  meaning  suits  the 
context  better). 

(Ibid.  no.  101,  pp.  166, 166,  and  note  18). 

(37)  “ Hail  t Chattara-Revadi-Ovajja  (Ojha,  see  below)  of  the 

Sarva-siddhi-Acharyas,  who  was  acquainted  with  the  secrets 
of  Sri-feilemuddas  (tila-mudda,  the  name  of  some  particu- 
lar guild  of  stone  masons),  made  the  southern  country.’* 

(Old  Canarese)  “ Ovajja  is  perhaps  the  (modem)  Cauarese  ojja, 
a priest,  preceptor”  (exactly  the  same  meaning  as  aoharya 
etymologically  indicates), 

(Ibid.  no.  114,  pp.  170-171, 172,  notes  67,  68). 

“ In  addition  to  recording .the  readmission 

into  caste  of  the  artisans  of  the  locality,  this  inscription 
(no.  100)  gives  several  titles  of  the  builder  of  the  temple. 
Amoug  them  is  that  of  Sarva-siddhi-Aoharya.  The  Sarva 
siddhi-Acharyas  are  mentioned  again  in  no.  cxiv  below, 
and  seem  to  have  been  some  celebrated  guild  of  architects 
or  builders.”  Dr.  Fleet. 


STHAPATI 


721 


“ In  addition  to  recording  the  name  of  G-nnda  as  the  builder 
of  the  temple,  this  inscription  (no.  99),  as  also  the  next 
(no.  100)  seems  to  be  intended  to  record  the  readmission 
into  caste  of  the  artisans  of  the  locality,  who  had  been 
outoasted  for  some  act  which  is  not  stated.  The  purport  of 
this  portion  hinges  entirely  upon  the  meaning  to  be  given  to 
the  word  balligavarte  (in  nos.  99  and  100).*’ 

Dr.  Fleet  is  not  quite  certain  whether  he  should  agree  with 
Mr.  Katti  who  says  that  ‘ it  sounds  to  him  like  the  Dra vi- 
dian equivalent  of  the  Sanskrit  bahishkara.’ 

(Ibid.  pp.  168-164,  last  para), 

“ The  Siitra-dhari  or  Sutra-grahi,  ‘ the  holder  of  the  thread’ 
was  the  assistant  of  the  sthapati,  ‘ the  master-carpenter  or 
master-mason’,  the  architect  ” 

(Ibid,  p.  168,  note  3). 

(38)  It  should  be,  noted  that  Chari,  Achariya,  Acharya  (with 
diSerent  prefixes),  Ojha,  and  Sutra-db&ri  are  the  surnamos 
or  titles  of  the  Sthapati  (master-builder)  who  is  also  called 
Acharya  in  the  Manasara.  (See  above). 

(The  titles  in  another  form — Acharya  or  Acharyya — are  the 
surnames  of  the  Jain  teachers,  of  the  famous  philosoplier 
Sankara,  and  the  distinguished  astronomer  Bhaskara). 

Here  in  these  inscriptions  we  have  seen  that  the  architects 
have  many  such  titles,  namely,  Aohari  (no.  99,  line  4, 
no.  100,  line  8) Aohariya  (no.  100,  line  7)  ; Sarva-siddhi- 
Aohari  (ne.  100,  line  8)  ; Sarva-siddhi-Acharjya  .(-yya) 
(no.  1 14,  line  3 f) ; Tri-bhuvanachuri  (no.  99,  line  5) ; 
Anjanacharya  (no.  101,  line  6);  Devaoharya  (no.  101,  line 
6) ; Ovajja  ( = Ojha,  no.  114,  line  4) ; 6ile-mudda  (?^§ilH- 
marddaka  or  modaka,  no.  114,  line  1),  The  very  same 
architects  are  again  given  the  little  of  Sutradhari  (nos.  99, 
line  3 ; no.  100,  lines  4, 12). 


722 


STHAPATI 


The  titles,  Chari  and  Aohari,  are  frequently  met  with  as 
the  surnames  of  stone  masons  or  engravers  of  Copper- 
plates or  other  Sasanas  in  the  Epigraphia  Carnatica 
of  Mr.  Eice  and  also  in  the  South  Indian  Inscriptions 
edited  by  Prof.  Hultzsch  and  Yenkkayy a : compare  the 
following : 

(39)  “ The  naga  (i.e.,  the  cobra  on  the  slab  on  which  the  inscrip- 

tion is  incised)  has  been  made  by  Nataka  (ISfartaka),  the 
pupil  of  the  Achariya  (i.e.,  Acharya)  Idomora  (Indra- 
mayura)  of  the  town  of  Sam  jay  anti  “ Acharya — probably 
means  Master-(mason),  i.e.,  Sthapati.’’ 

(Banawasi  Prakrit  Insorip.  line  2 f.,  Ind.  Ant.  vol. 

XIV.  p.  334,  notes  20,  23). 

(40)  Badhuvallabha-Mallasya  vachanenaiva  feasanam  tvash^a 

Nandi varmaoharyya-danasyasya  likhamy-aham  \ 

“ By  order  of  Badhuvallabha-Malla  I,  the  carpenter  Nandi- 
varmaoharya,  inscribe  the  charter  of  this  grant.” 

(Bana  Grant  of  Saka  261,  lines  60-61,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XV.  pp.  176, 177). 

(41)  “ The  carpenter  Virana,  son  of  Muddanacharya,  was  the 

engraver  of  the  feasana,  for  which  he  received  one  share  in 
the  village.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  iii.  Seringapatam  Taluq,  no.  11, 
Transl.  p.  9,  line  3). 

(41a)  “ It  was  engraved  by  the  carpenter  Varadapacharya.” 

(Ibid.  no.  16,  TransL  p.  il). 

(42)  “ The  ^asana  was  engraved  by  ^rigiri,  the  son  of  the  carpen- 

ter Varadapacharya.”  ^ 


(Ibid.  no.  16,  Transl.  p.  32). 


STHAPATI 


723 


(43)  ” And  it  is  engraved  by  the  carpenter  Viranaoharya,  son  of 

Malla.” 

(Bp.  Carnat, 'vol.  iii.  MandyaTalnq,  no,  56,Transi. 

p.  46,  last  para), 

(44)  “For  the  carpenter  Mallana,  son  of  Viranaoharya,  who 

engraved  the  grant,  one  share  was  given.”  A.  D.  1474. 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  ill.  Malavalli  Talug,  no.  121, 
Transl.  p.  68). 

(46)  “ It  was  engraved  by  Mallanacharya,  son  of  Viranaoharya.” 

(Ibid.  Nanjangud  Taluq,  no.  16,  Transl.  p.  97,  A.  D. 

1613). 

(46)  “ Kontachari,  son  of  Konguni-acharya,  blacksmith  of  Bai.„. 

of  Bagnli,  fighting  in  the  war  along  with  the  ruler  of  the 
nad,  went  to  Svarga  (died).” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  iv.  Chamarajnagar  Taluq,  no.  20* 

Transl,  p.  3). 

(47)  ” Engraved  by  the  carpenter  Viranaoharya,  son  of  Mallana.” 

(Ep,  Carnat,  vol.  iv.  Transl.  p.  41,  no.  30). 

(48)  “ Audit  was  engraved  by  the  carpenter  Viranachilrya,  son  of 

Virapa.”  A.  D.  1646. 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  iv.  Nagamangala  Taluq,  no.  68, 
Transl.  p.  128). 

(48a)  “ And  this  copper  tasana  was  engraved  by  the  carpenter 
MallanSoharya,  son  of  Viranaoharya.”  A.  D.  1616. 

(Ibid.  vol.  V.  Husan  Taluq,  no.  16,  Transl.  p.  5, 

para  2). 


(49)  “ Engraved  by  the  carpenter  Viranaoharya,  son  of  Virana,” 
A.  B.  1661. 

(Ibid.  no.  7.  Transl.  p.  6). 
(60)  “ Engraved  by  Appanaoharya,  son  of  Viranaoharya.”  A.  I). 
1624. 


(Ibid,  no,  94,  Transl.  p.  29). 


724 


STHAPATI 


(61)  “ Mallanacharya,  son  of  Viranachdrya,  enjoys  one  share  as 

the  engraver.”  A.  D.  1612, 

(Ibid.  Belur  Taluq,  no.  79,  Transl  p.  66). 

(62)  “Engraved  by  Yiranacharya,  son  of  Malla-natha.”  A.  D.  1639, 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  i,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  197, 
Transl.  p.  108). 

(63)  “ By  Mallana’s  son,  the  carpenter  Viranacharyya,  was  it 

written.”  A.  D.  1636. 

(Ibid.  Araikere  Taluq,  no.  126,  Eoman  text,  last 
line  ; Transl,  p.  169). 

(54)  “ Mallana’s  son  carpenter  Yiranacharya  wrote  (or  engraved) 
■■  it.” 

(Ibid.  Channaraypattana  Taluq,' no.  167,  Transl. 

P.  199). 

(66)  “ Written  by  the  SenabovalKalajachariya’s  son  I&vara.”  A,  D. 
1279. 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  VI.  Mudgere  Taluq,  no.  72, 
Transl.  p.  72). 

(66)  “ The  carpenter  Yiranacharya,  son  of  Mallana,  engraved  it.” 

(A.  D.  1513).  Engraved  by  Yiranacharya,  son  of  Ganapaya.” 
(A.B.  1687). 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  vii.  Shimoga  Taluq,  no.  83, 

Transl.  p.  33). 

(67)  “ Engraved  by  Yiranacharya,  son  of  Mallanatha.”  (A.  D.  1627). 

(Ibid.  no.  85,  Transl.  p.  33). 

(68)  Acharya,  distinctly  mentioned  as  an  ‘ architect  ’ : 
Acharya-dakshine  haste  madhyamanguli-madhyame  )l  4 

Paivam  matrahgulam  jfieyam \ 6 

Gramadhva-kshetra-ganyeshu  manangula-vidhanatah  I 
Acharya-dakshahgulibhir  mite  vyasa-mithadhikaih  (?)  II  7 

(Suprabhedagama,  xxx.  4,  6,  7), 


STHAPATI 


726 


Cf.  Acharya-laksh^air  yuktam  sthapatir  ity  abhidhiyate  I 

(Manasara,  il.  80,  quoted,  above). 

(69)  Vastu-jfianain  athatab  karoalabhavanaa  muni-paramparayatam 

Kriyate’dhuna  mayedaib  vidagdha-samvatsara-prityai  II 

(Bribat-samhita,  Liii.  1). 

‘The  knowledge  of  the  science  of  architecture  has  come  down 
from  Brahman  through  an  imbroken  scries  of  seers  (sages). 
I am  now  dealing  with  this  (science  of  architecture)  for  the 
pleasure  (i.e.,  benefit)  of  the  learned  (educated,  experienced, 
hence  professional)  astrologers  ( = ‘?sthapatis,  professional 
architects).’ 

Samvat8ara= astrologer  (see  Sir  M.  W.  Diet.  p.  1102),  Kern 
translates  the  last  pada  as  “ to  gratify  clever  astrologers  ** 
but  he  attempts  no  explanation  as  to  why  the  astrologers  in 
particular  are  to  be  gratified  on  “a  work  on  the  art  of 
building  ” (Kernes  translation  of  Vastu-jnana),  which  in  fact 
forms'noVpart  of  astrology.  It  is  apparent  that  in  Varaha- 
mihira’s  time  the  astrologers  were  intimately  connected  with 
the  work  of  professional  architects  (Sthapati),  as  also  the 
astronomers  like  Bhaskaracharya  and  others:  ^ankaraoharya 
is,  however,  a philosopher. 

Concerning  the  qualifications  of  architects  it  will  be  noticed 
that  the  sciences  (feastras)  mentioned  in  the  Manasara  and 
other  records  examined  above  are  not  enumerated.  But  by 
‘ Sastra  ’ is  generally  meant  (cf.  M.  W.  Biot.  loc.  oit.)  “ any 
instrument  of  teaching,  any  manual  or  compendium  of 
rules,  any  religious  book  or  scientific  treatise,  any  sacred 
book  or  composition  of  divine  or  temporal  authority.”  It 
is  sometimes  known  as  VidyS,  meaning  knowledge,  science, 
learning,,  scholarship  or  philosophy.  It  also  means  practical 
arts,  such  as  agriculture,  commerce,  medicine,  architecture, 
sculpture,  painting  (of.  6ilpa-&astra,  Vastu-feastra,  etc). 
6astra  or  Vidya  has  14  divisions,  viz.,  the  four  Vedas,  the 
six  Vedangas,  the  Purajgtas,  the  Mimamsa,  the  Nyaya,  and 


STHAI^AtDl 


m 

the  Dhai'ma  or  lawj  or  witli  the  four  Upa-Vedas,  18  divi- 
sions ; others  reckon  33  and  even  64  sciences,  generally 
known  as  Kalas  or  arts.i 

But  the  expression  ‘ versed  in  all  feastras  ’ need  not  be  taken 
in  too  literal  a sense.  What  architects  are  expected  .to 
know  can  he  inferred  from  the  details  given'  occasionally 
in  many  places  in  the  Manas  ara  and  other  works.  The  chap- 
ters on  the  selection  of  site  and  the  minute  examination  of 
soil  (see  Bhii-pariksha)  will  indicate  an  intimate  knowledge 
of  practical  geology  which  is  essentially  necessary  for 
achitectural  purposes.  The  chapters  on  gnoman  (see  ^ahku) 
and  ground  plan  (see  Pada-vinySsa)  demand  proficiency  in 
mathematics  (see  also  Jala).  The  frequent  references  to  the 
minute  examination  of  trees  and  wood  show  a fair  amount 
of  knowledge  in  timber  work  (?Botany).  The  examination 
of  stones  and  bricks  for  building  purposes,  the  preparation  of 

Tadya,  (8)  ufitya,  (4)  alekbya,  (5)  yifeeshaka-obqhhedya,  (6)  ta^dun-kusnaia* 
vali-'sik&ea,  (7)  ptidipastaia^ia,  (8)  aafeana.vasana-anga-iagaj  (9)  ma^ii-bbtoika-katnia,  (10)  kayana- 
raohona,  (11)  udaba-vadya,  (12)  udskSghata,  (IS)  ohitra-yogS,  (14)  i]ofilya-grat]3aiia.vikalpa,  (16) 
flekbaraka-gi^na-jojana,  (16)  nopatby.a-prayoga,  (17)  kar^a-palta-bbanga,  (18)  gandha-ynktl,  (19) 
bhOsbatia-yoiaop,  |20) ‘sindra-jaJa,  (21)  kaucbuicSra-yoga,  (22)  baeta-lfigbava,  (23)’ vlcbitra-eaka- 
yashapflpa-bhaksbya-Vikara-kriya,  (24)  panakarasa-tagaBaTa-ycijana,  (2S)  Bfiohi.'vaya.karma,  (26) 
Butra-krida  (27)  viija-damaruka-vadya,  (28)  prabelika,  (29)  pratimala,  (80)  durvaohaka-yoga,  (81) 
pustaka-vaohana,  (82)  i)atakakhy5yik5*da*&ana,  (88)  kavya-samasya-puraija,  (84)  pa^ka-vetra- 
vana-vikalpa,  (36)  larka-kaman,  (86)  takaha-ija,  (8?)  Tastu-Tidya,  (88)  BUTarna.rupya-parSkBha, 
(89)  dhatu-vada,  (40)  mapi.tagakara-jfiana,  (41)  vyikshayni-vcda-yoga,  (42)  mesba-kukkuta-lavaka. 
yuddha.Tidhi,  (43)  finka-Barika-pralapana,  (44)  utsadana-saiiivabana-kefeairjardana-marjaDa-kaufiala, 
(45)  aksbaTa*mu8b(ika<kaibaQa,  (46)  mlaobohbita>katarka-Tikalpa,  (47)  deba-bbiBba-vijSafia,  (48) 
pasbpa«eaka(lka,  (49)  nimitta.ifiatta,  (SO)  yantia-saatrika,  (51)  dbara^a-matrikS,  (52)  sampfitbya, 
(63)  laanasUkiivya-kriya,  (54)  abhidhana-kosha,  (55)  ohhanda-ifiana  (66)  kriya-vikalpa,  (67) 
cbbalitaka-yoga,  (68)  vabtia-gopana,  (69)  dyuta-vi&8Bba,  (60)  ateaTsha-kfida , (61)  bala-kri£lanaka, 
(62)  yaitalika,  (63)  vaijayika,  (64)  7yayamika*vainayika-vidyS-jfiana. 

(XamaButia  of  Vatsyayana,  ed.  Bombay,  p.  32—35,  see 

also  pp.  48,  96). 

Similar  lists  are  also  givea  by  Bzidhaiain  bis  Commentary  on  §rimad  Bhagavata  (part  X, 
ohap.  46,  verse  88),  Jiva-gosvami  in  explaining  firidhata’s  commentary  refete  also  to  the  Vishriu 
Fnia^,  and  Bari-vamsa  *,  in  the  Bnddbist  Lalitavistaia  (ed.  B.  U.  Milra,  p.  178, 179,  see'also  p.  417) 
and  in  the  Jain  IJttafadbyayana>sdtra  (dlransl,  B-  B.  E.  vol.  46,  p.  108).  See  also  ’The  Balas’  by 
Venka(asubbia  (pp.  26-82).  ■ 


STHAMI 


727 


different  colours  and  mixtures  of  different  materials  for  paint- 
ing, and  the  testing  of  jewels,  etc.,  for  decorative  purposes, 
point  to  an  acquaintance  with  chemistry  and  other  allied 
sciences.  The  chapter  on  the  joining  of  wood  (see  Sandhi- 
karman)  will  indicate  a knowledge  of  everything  architec- 
tural, however  insignificant  it  may  appear  to  a layman. 
The  chapter  on  ornaments  (see  Bhushana)  and  mouldings 
(cf.  Stambha)  will  show  a high  sense  of  sestheties.  A know- 
ledge of  the  climate  and  weather  of  the  locality  where  a 
house  is  to  be  built  is  essential  to  their  work.  The  astrolo- 
gical and  astronomical  calculation  is  also  frequently  referred 
to. 

All  these  branches  of  knowledge  are  necessary  for  architects. 
Three  out  of  the  four  architects  forming  a guild  must  be 
qualified  generally  in  all  of  these.  But  each  of  the  four 
must  be  an  expert  in  his  own  special  subject.  Takshaka  must 
be  an  expert  carpenter  and  joiner.  Yardhaki  must  be  expert 
in  designing  and  painting.  Sutragrahin  must  be  an  expert 
in  drawing.  The  chief  architect,  Sthapati,  should,  in  addition 
to  all  these  qualifications,  have  an  intuitive  foresight  so  as  to 
be  able  to  calculate  and  decide  everything  quickly.  This 
wise  division  of  labour  is  necessary  for  successfully  carry- 
ing out  a big  design  in  architecture  or  sculpture.  From 
this  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  architects  of  ancient  India 
were  once  a well  organised  guild.  It  should  he  noticed  that 
from  the  epigraphical  records  quoted. above  Dr. Fleet  has 
come  to  the  same  conclusion. 

It  is  very  interesting  to  note  that  Vitruvius  describes  the 
qualifications  of  architects  in  exactly  the  same  way  as 
given  in  the  Manasara  (and  the  other  records  quoted  above). 
In  both  the  treatises  this  topic  is  discussed  at  the  beginning 
and  in  fact  in  the  same  place,  the  second  chapter,  which  is 
preceded  by  a table  of  contents  in  tbe  Manasara,  and  an 
introduction  in  Vitruvius. 


728 


STHAPATl 


An  architect,  ” says  Vitruvius  (Book  I,  chap,  i),  “ should  be 
ing  enious,  and  apt  in  the  acquisition  of  knowledge.  Defi- 
cient in  either  of  these  qualities,  he  cannot  he  a perfect 
master.  He  should  be  a good  writer,  a skilful  draftsman, 
versed  in  geometry  and  optics,  expert  at  figures,  acquainted 
with  history,  informed  on  the  principles  of  natural  and  moral 
philosophy,  somewhat  of  a musician,  not  ignorant  of  the 
sciences  of  both  law  and  physic,  nor  of  the  motions,  laws, 
and  relations  to  each  other,  of  the  heavenly  bodies.” 

By  means  of  the  first  named  acquirement,  he  is  to  commit 
to  writing  his  observations  and  experience,  in  order  to 
assist  his  memory.  Drawing  is  employed  in  representing 
the  forms  of  his  designs.  Geometry  affords  much  aid  to 
the  architect : to  it  he  owes  the  use  of  the  right  line  and 
circle,  the  level  and  the  square,  whereby  his  delineations 
of  buildings  on  plane  surfaces  are  greatly  facilitated.  The 
science  of  optics  enables  him  to  introduce  with  judgment 
the  requisite  quantity  of  light,  according  to  the  aspect. 
Arithmetic  estimates  the  cost,  and  aids  in  the  measurement 
of  the  works  ; this  assisted  by  the  laws  of  geometry,  deter- 
mines those  obstruse  questions,  wherein  the  different  pro- 
portions of  some  parts  to  others  are  involved.  Unless 
acquainted  with  history,  he  will  be  unable  to  account  for 
the  use  of  many  ornaments  which  he  may  have  occasion  to 

introduce Many  other  matters 

of  history  have  a connexion  with  architecture,  and  prove 
the  necessity  of  its  professors  being  well  versed  in  it,” 

Moral  philosophy  will  teach  the  architect  to  be  above  mean- 
ness in  his  dealings,  and  to  avoid  arrogance  : and  will  make 

him  just,  compliant  and  faithful  to  his  employer ; 

That  branch  of  philosophy  which  the  Greeks  call  the  doc- 
trine of  physios  is  necessary  to  him  in  the  solution  of  various 

problems  ; as  for  instance,  in  the  conduct  of  water 

Music  assists  him  in  the  use  of  harmonic  and  matbematical 


STHAPATi 


729 


proportion.  It  is,  moreover,  absolutely  necessary  in  adjust- 
ing the  force  of  the  balistae,  catapult ae  and  scorpions,  .... 
Skill  in  physic  enables  him  to  ascertain  the  salubrity  of’ 
different  tracts  of  country,  and  to  determine  the  variation 

of  olimates, Law  should  be  an  object  of  his  study, 

especially  those  parts  of  it  which  relate  to  party-walls,  to 
the  free  course  and  discharge  of  the  eaves’  waters,  the  regu- 
lations of  cesspools  and  sewage,  and  those  relating  to  window 
lights  ....... 

“ Astronomy  instructs  hini  in’  the  points  of  the  heavens,  the 
laws  of  the  celestial  bodies,  the  equinoxes,  soltices,  and 
courses  of  the  stars ; all  of  which  should  be  well  understood, 
in  the  construction  and  proportions  of  clocks.'’’ 

It  is  important  to  notice  that  Yitruvius  denies  the  necessity 
of  an  architect’s  being  completely  trained  in  ‘ all  the  sciences 
and  arts  ’ as  suggested  in  the  Manasara: 

“On  this  account  Pythius,  one  of  the  ancient  architects  of 
the  noble  temple  of  Minerva  at  Priene,  says  in  his  com- 
mentaries, that  an  architect  should  have  that  perfect  know- 
ledge of  each  art  and  science,  which  is  not  even  acquired  by 
the  professors  of  any  one  in  particular,  who  have  every 
opportunity  of  improving  themselves  in  it.  This,  however, 
cannot  be  necessary  *,  for  how  can  it  he  expected  that  an 
architect  should  equal  Aristarchus  as  a grammarian,  yet 
should  he  not  (?)  he  ignorant  of  Grammar.”  (Yitruvius,  Book 
I,  chap.  I,  translated  by  Gwilt). 

The  social  position  of  architects  is  not  quite  clear  from 
the  literary  or  epigraphical  records  examined  above.  Bnt 
from  the  functions  assigned  to  each  of  the  four  architects,  it 
would  appear  that  the  first  three,  namely,  Bthapati,  Sutra- 
grahin  and  Yardhaki,  belong  to  the  higher  classes,  further, 
from  the  liberal  presents  and  rewards  given  on  each  occasion 
equally  to  the  Guru  (preceptor)  and  the  Sthapati.  which  are 


STHANA 


so  frequently  mentioned,  it  seems  probable  that  the  Sthapati 
had  an  enviable  position.  This  latter  point  might  account 
for  his  excommunication  mentined  in  the  epigraphical  re- 
cords quoted  above. 

STHA'NA — The  place  of  standing  or  staying,  any  place,  spot,  locality, 
the  abode,  dwelling  house,  room,  shrine  ; an/onastic  establishment. 

(1)  “ We,  Kautika-Hagama-Bhattana,  a ^iva-Brahmana,  in  charge 
of  the  shrine  (sthana)  of  the  temple  of  Tiruvallam-udaiyar 
at  Tiruvallam  . . . . ” 

(Inscrip,  of  Rajendra,  no.  65,  line  4,  H.  S.  1. 1. 

vol.  III.  p.  11.3). 

(2)  “List  of  shrines  to  which  allotments  were  made; — Virabhadra- 
deva  (1.  12),  Brahmani,  Ifevari  (1.  13),  Vaishnavi  (1.  14), 
Indnmi  (1.  16),  Gapapati  (1. 16',  Chamundetvari  of  the  chief 
shrine  (mula-sthana)  ..... 

(Inscrip.  at  Kolar,  no.  66,  H.  S.  1. 1,  vol.  m, 
p.  136-137). 

STHANAKA — A class  of  buildings  in  which  the  height  is  the  unit  of 
measurement,  the  temples  in  which  the  idols  are  placed  in  the 
erect  posture, 

(M.  XIX,  7 — 11,  see  under  Apasamohita;  cf. 
also  XLVi.  30,  xLVii.  1,  Lviii.  11,  etc). 
STHANlYA— A city,  a fortress,  a ground-plan  in  which  the  whole 
area  is  divided  into  121  equal  squares. 

(M.  VII.  13  ; of.  also  ix. 

365,368,478). 

A fortified  oity  (M.  x.  41). 

A fortress  to  defend  800  villages  : 

Ashta-tata-gramya  madhye  sthaniyam,  chatut-tata-gramya  drona- 
mukham,  dvi-tata-gramya  kharvatikaih,  data-gramhsamgrahena 
saihgramm  sthapayet  I 

(Kautiliya-Arthatastra,  chap.  xxii.  p.  64,  para  4)* 
Jana-pada-madhye  samudaya-sthanam  sthaniyam  nivetayet  \ 

(Ibid.  chap.  xxiv.  p.  51,  para  2). 


SNlPANA-MANpAPA 


731 


STHANTT— A synonym  of  Sfeambha  or  ooiumn. 

(M.  XV.  6,  see  under  Stambha), 

STSAPATYA — A house  relating  to  aiohitects  or  architecture,  an 
architectural  or  sculptural  work-shop. 

Analanila-kone  va  sthapatyalayam  eva  cha  \ 

(M.  XXXII.  78,  of.  also  66). 

STHAPANA-MANBAPA— A room  or  pavilion  where  the  idol  is 
installed  after  it  is  washed  and  dressed,  the  sanctuary. 
Prasadabhimukhe  sapta-mapdapam  kalpayet  kramat  I 
AdaU'  cha  snapanartham  cha  dvitiyam  adhyayana-mandapam  1 
Vifeesham'snapanartham  cha  mandapam  oha.tritiyakam  \ 
Chaturtham  pratimagaram  pafichamam  sthapana-roapdapam  1 

(M.  XXXIV,  46-48). 

STHAVAEA-BEEA — A stationary  idol. 

(M,  lil.  17,  etc). 

STHIEA-VASTU — ^A  permanent  building. 

Sthiia-vastu-kukshi-dete  tu  cbara-vastu  tathapi  cha  \ 

garbha-t^abhram  prakalpayet  \ 

(M.  XII.  170-171,  see  also  43). 
STH'UNA-~A  synonym  of  Stambha  or  ooiumn. 

(M.  XV.  6,  see  under  Stambha). 
SNAPANA-MANBAPA — ^A  class  of  pavilions  used^  for  bathing,  a 
washing  room. 

(M.  XXXIV,  dS—dS,  etc;  Suprabhedagama,  xxxi. 

96,  97,  see  under  Mapdapa), 

SNAEA-MANBAPA----A  pavilion  for  bath,  a bath  room. 

(M.  XXXII.  74,  etc.,  see  Mapdapa) 
SNAPAhlA-MANBAPA— A washing  room,  a pavilion  where  idols 
are  washed. 

Snapanartha-mandapam  chapi  snana-mandapam  eva  cha  \ 

(M.  XXXII.  74;  of.  xxxiv.  46,  47,  etc). 


732 


SPHtEJAKA 


SPHUBJAK A— (perhaps  for  Gurjaka) — A class  of  twelve-sfeoreyed 
buildings  once  prevailing  in  the  country  of  Sphurjaka  (Gujarat). 
Pahchalaih  dravidam  chaiva  madhya-kantam  kalihgakam  \ 

Viratam  keralam  chaiva  vamtakajh  luagadham  tatha  \ 

Janakam  sphu(gu)rjakaih  chaiva  data-kantaih  prakirtitam  r 

(M.  XXX.  6-7,  see  under  Prasada). 
SYABBANA — A synonym  of  yana  or  conveyance,  a chariot. 

iM.  III.  9,  10 ; XIX.  146). 

Cf.  Vitala-ratha-vithirii  oha  syandanam  mandaropamam  \ 

'‘Built  a car  like  the  Mandara  mountain  and  also  broad  roads 
Ground  the  temple).” 

(Erishnapuram  Plates  of  Sadativaraya,  v.  67, 
Bp.  Ind.  vol.  IX.  pp.  336,  341). 
SVAYAMBHTJ— -Self-revealed,  a kind  of  phallus. 

(Kamikagama,  l.  35;  M..HI. 227,  see  under 

Lihga). 

SVABGA-KANTA — A class  of  eight-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXVI.  28-33,  see  under  Prasada), 
SVARNA-Lll^GA— A kind  of  phallus,  a phallus  made  of  gold. 

■ (M!.  Lil.  333,  etc). 

SVA-VBIKSHA — A type  of  round  temple. 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  104,  v.  17-18,  see  under 

Prasada). 

SVASTIEA — An  auspicious  mark,  a symbol  for  Buddha  and  Siddha, 
the  crossing  of  the  arms,  the  meeting  of  four  roads,  a type  of 
village,  a Joinery,  a -window,  a type  of  pavilion,  a kind  of 
phallus,  a class  of  halls,  a type  of  building,  a sitting  posture. 

A class  of  two-storeyed  buildings  (M.  xx.  94,  34*-  41,  see  under 

Prasada). 

A class  of  villages  (M.  IX.  3,  380,  see  Grama;  compare  M.  xii. 

76,  77,  146  ; XLIX.  162 ; Liv.  120 ; LVIII.  12). 
A kind  of  Joinery  (M.  xvii.  60). 

A kind  of  window  (ML.  xxxm.  683,  see  under  Vatayana). 


SVASTIKA 


733 


A pavilion  with  three  faces : 

Dvi-vaktram  dandakam  proktam  tri-vaktraih  svastikam  tatha  I 

(M  . xxxiv.  662). 

A class  of  ^alas  or  halls  (M.  xxxv.  3,  80). 

A kind  of  phallus  (M.  lh.  4, 120). 

(2)  Aparo’nta-gato’  lindah  pranta-gatau-tad-utthitau  chanyaul 
Tad-avadhi*vivrita&  chanyah  prag-dvaraih  svastike  feubhadam  II 
“ The  Svastika  is  auspicious  if  it  have  the  entrance  on  the 

east  side,  and  one  continual  terrace  along  the  west  side,  at 
the  ends  whereof  begin  two  other  terraces  going  from  west 
to  east,  while  between  the  extremities  of  the  latter  lies  a 
fourth  terrace.’’ 

Commentary  quotes  G-arga : 

Patohimo’ntagato’lmdah  prag-antau  dvau  tad-utthitau  \ 

, Anyas  tan-madhye  vidhritah  prag-dvararh  svastikaiii  feubham  II 
(Brihat-samhita,  Mil.  34,  J,  B.  A.  S,,  N.  S., 
vol.  VI.  p,  286,  note  1)* 

A kind  of  octagonal  building  : 

(3)  Agni-Burana  (chap.  104.  v.  20,  21,  see  under  Prasada). 

(4)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  21,  23, 31-33,  see  under  Prasada). 
(6)  Kamikagama  (xxxv.  89)  refers  to  a house  (tala)  ; 

Dakshine  chottare  chaiva  shan-ijetram  svastikam  matam  \ 
Partvayoh  purataa  chaiva  chatur-netra-samayutam  II 
An  entablature  (ibid.  Liv.  7). 

Ibid.  XLii.  (named  Svastika-vidhi)  divides  buildings  into  four 
classes,  namely  Jatl,  Chhanda,  Vikalpa,  and  Abhasa  (v. 
3-4),  which  are  described  in  detail  (5 — '30). 

(6)  See  the  figure  ypi  (specimens  of  Jaina  sculpture  from  Mathura, 

Ep.  Ind.  vol.  H.  p.  311)* 

(7)  “ The  capacity  of  the  well,  well  accounts  fox  the  time  taken 

in  its  construction.  There  are  four  entrances  leading  into 
the  well,  and  they  are  so  constructed  as  to  give  it  the  shape 
of  the  svastika  symbol  4-\.  (This  should  be  compared  with 


734 


SVASTIKA 


the  yillage  named  Syastika).  From  each  of  the  entrances, 
a flight  of  steps  leads  to  the  interior  of  the  well.” 

(Fp.  Ind.  voi  XI.  p.  165,  para  2,  note  1). 

(8)  " In  the  inscriptions  from  the  cave  temples  of  Western  India, 

Bombay,  1881,  are  given  a quantity  of  clearly  Buddhist 
Square  Pilli  Inscriptions  from  Kuda,  Karle,  l^ailawadi, 
Jimnar,  etc.  Many  of  these  contain  Svastikas  at  the  begin- 
ning and  end.  Kuda  no.  27  has  at  the  end  ; but  at  the 
end  of  29  is ‘Jt  which  occurs  again  at  the  beginning  and 
end  of  Karle  inscriptions,  and  beginning  and  end  of  Junnar 
3G,  at  the  beginning  of  ”Junnar  6,  20,  28,  82  and  34,  and  at 
the  end  of  Junnar  32;  while  occurs  at  the  beginning  of 
Kuda  30  and  of  Junnar  6 and  27,  and  the  end  of  33.  The 
form  fl  is  found  at  the  end  of  the  Sailawadi  inscription, 
and  Hi  at  the  end  of  Karle  2.  Thus  cave  temple  disproves 
the  theory  that  “ the  Christian  Svastikas  point  to  the  left 
or  westwards,  whereas  the  Indian  including  Buddhist  and 
Jain  Svastikas,  point  to  the  right  or  eastwards.” 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xv.  p.  96). 

(9)  “ The  Svastika  is  called  by  the  Jains  Satbis,  who  give  it  the 

first  place  among  the  eight  chief  auspicious  marks  of  their 
faith.  It  would  be  well  to  repeat  here,  in  view  of  what 
follows,  the  Jain  version  of  this  symbol  as  given  by  Pandit 
Bhagwanlal  Tndraji  (the  Hathigumpha  insoriptions,  Udaya- 
giri  Caves,  p.  7),  who  was  told  by  a learned  Yati  that  the 
Jains  believe  it  to  be  the  figure  of  Siddha.  They  believe 
that,  according  to  a man’s  karma,  he  is  subject  to  one  of  the 
following  four  conditions  in  the  nest  life — he  either  becomes 
a god  or  deya,  or  goes  to  hell  (naraka),  or  is  born  again  as  a 
man,  or  is  born  as  a lower  animal.  But  a Siddha  in  his  next 
life  attains  bo  nirvana  and  is,  therefore,  beyond  the  pale  of 
these  four  conditions.  The  Svastika  represents  such  a 
Siddha  in  the  following  way.  The  point  or  bindu  in  the 
centre  from  which  the  four  paths  branch  out  is  jiva  or  life, 


SVA8TIKA 


m 


and  the  four  paths  symbolise  the  four  conditions  of  life. 
But  as  a Siddha  is  free  from  all  these,  the  end  of  each  line 
is  turned  to  show  that  the  four.^8tates  are  closed  for  him.” 

“ The  Buddhist  doctrines  mostly  resemble  those  of  the  Jains, 
it  is  just  possible  that  the  former  might  have  held  the 
Svastika  in  the  same  light  as  the  latter.  In  the  Nasik  ins- 
cription, no.  10,  of  Ushavadata,  the  symbol  is  placed  imme- 
diately after  the  word  ‘ Siddham  ’ a juxtaposition  which 
corroborates  the  above  Jain  interpretation.  We  find  the 
Svastika  either  at  the  beginning  or  edd  or  at  both  ends  of  an 
inscription  and  it  might  mean  Svasti  or  Siddham.”  Mr.  Y. 
S.  Vavikar, 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xxvii.  p.  196). 

(10)  ” The  usual  Indian  symbols  are  of  frequent  occurrence,  e.g., 

the  Svastika  in  various  forms  on  most  of  the  Plates  and 
specimens  of  the  familiar  circular  Sun-symbols.” 

Mr.  Fawcett  quotes  32  sun  and  fire  symbols  of  Plate  I of  Mr. 
Murray  Ansley’s  papers  on  Asiatic  Symbolism  (Ind.  Ant. 
vol.  XV.  p.  66)  and  says  that  “ The  whole  of  these  may  be 
taken  to  be  developments  in  various  directions  of  the  cross, 
and  for  Indian  investigations  of  the  Svastika,” 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xxx,  pp.  413-414). 

(11)  “ This  emblem  (the  ancient  mystic  emblem  of  the  Bon  reli- 

gion Tungdrung  yi)  in  my  view  was  invented  to  represent 
the  Sun  as  the  creator  of  East,  South,  West  and  North,  the 
little  mark  at  the  end  of  each  line  indicating  the  inclination 
of  the  sun  to  proceed  from  one  point  to  the  other.” 

Eev.  A.  W,  Heyde  of  Ghum  tells  me  that  Yungdrung 
as  a monogram  is  said  to  be  composed  of  the  two  syllables,  if 
su  and  (4*  tii*  suti-Svasti.”  Mr.  A.  H,  Franoke. 

(Ladakhi  pre-Buddhist  marriage  Eitual,  Ind.  Ant. 

vol,  xxx,  p.  132,  paras  1, 4). 


736 


SVASTIKA 


(12)  Plate  IV  (facing  p 400)  fig.  2 (rp,  3£)  contains  two  re’9er3ed 
forms  of  the  Svastika  (yimgdnng).” 

Mr.  Franoke  refers  to  the  above  quotation  “ for  an  explanation 
of  this  form  of  Svastika  in  Ladakh,”  and  repeats  that  “ it 
is  the  emblem  of  the  bon  Beligion.” 

(Notes  on  Book -Carvings  from  lower  Ladakh, 
Ihd.'  Ant.  vol.  XXXI,  p.  400,  para  3). 

(13)  “M.  Burnouf  holds  that  this  mysterious  and  much  debated 

symbol  (Svastika  FB,  ypi)  is  intended  to  denote  the  invention 
of  the  fire-drill,  and  preserve  the  sacred  remembrance  of  the 
discovery  of  fire  by  rotating  a peg  in  dry  wood.  It  repre- 
sents according  to  him,  the  two  pieces  of  wood  laid  cross- 
wise, one  upon  another,  before  the  sacrificial  altar,  in  order 
to  produce  the  holy  fire.  The  ends  of  the  cross  were  fixed 
down  by  arms,  and  at  the  point  where  the  two  pieces  are 
joined  there  was  a small  hole  in  which  .a  wooden  peg  or 
lance  (pramantha,  whence  the  myth  of  Promotheus  the 
fire-bearer)  was  rotated  by  a cord  of  cow-hair  and  hemp  till 
the  sacred  spark  was  produced.  The  invention  of  the  fire- 
drill  would  mark  an  epoch  in  human  history.  Mr.  Tylor,  in 
his  early  history  of  mankind,  has  largely  shown  its  use  at 
some  period  in  every  quarter  of  the  globe,  and  it  is  conceiv- 
able that  its  mvention  would  be  commemorated  by  a holy 
symbol.  After  this  Mr.  Walhouse  has  shewn  that  both 
forms  existed  in  all  countries  of  Europe,  Asia  and  Africa. 
‘ Its  first  appearance  (in  Europe)  is  on  the  pottery  of  archaic 
G-reecft,  as  on  that  in  the  British  Museum  ascribed  to 
betwen  the  years  700  and  600  B.  C.’  About.  India,  he  says 
that  ‘ a character  bfi  nearly  resembling  the  runic  G.,  occurs 
in  a Pali  inscription,  and  reversed  Fti>  in  9'  rock-inscription 
at  Salsette’  (J.  B.  A.  S.  vol.  xx.  p.  250,  etc).  He  has  also 
shewn  tnat  it  is  both  a Buddhist,  Jaina,  and  Christian 
emblem  Tn  our  own  day’,  says  he,  ‘ it  has  become  a 
favourite  ornamental  device’, -^we  may  be  sure  with  no 


SVASTIKA 


7S7 


thought  of  symbolism,' — and,  firchaeologist  returning  from 
India  may  observe  it  covering  ceilings,  cornices,  fenders,  and 
other  iron  works/’ 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  vii.  p.  177,  o.  2,  para  2 f). 

(14)  “ In  describing  coin  no.  3 of  this  series  (Numismatic 
chronicle,  N.  S.,  vol.  xx,  pp.  18-48,  p.  62)  I pointed  out 
that  the  place  of  the  more  definite  place  of  the  Sun,  in  its 
rayed  wheel  form,  was  taken  up  by  the  emblematic  cross  of 
the  Svastika.” 

“ Under  the  advanced  interpretation  of  the  design  and  pur- 
pose of  Svastika,  from  an  Indian  point,  of  view,  now  put 
forward  ...  the  figure,  as  representing  one  of  the  receiv- 
ed attributes  of  the  Sun,  was  used  conventionally,  to  typify 
the  solar  orb  itself.”  E,  Thomas. 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  p.  66,  o.  1,  para  2; 

p.  66,  0. 1,  para  2). 

(16)  ‘‘  I come  now  to  show  that  the  figure  called  the  Svastika 
symbolizes  the  idea  of  oircumambulation,  derived  from  the 
apparent  movement  of  the  sun  from  left  to  right  round  the 
earth.  The  idea  is  this,  that  if  a person  face  the  east  at 
sun-rising  and  follow  its  movement  southward  and  westward, 
he  will  turn  with  his  right  hand  fixed  towards  an  object 
supposed  to  be  placed  like  the  earth  in  relation  to  the  sun, 
in  the  centre  of  a circle.” 

“ The  argument,  therefore,  amounts  to  this : that  as  the  figure 
or  the  Svastika  is  found  scattered  through  countries  reach- 
ing from  Japan  to  England,  so  also  the  custom  of  turning 
sunways,  or  with  the  sun,  is  equally  widespread;  and 
secondly,  that  as  the  Svastika  is  a sign  of  good  luck,  signi- 
fied by  its  etymology,  so  also  the  practice  of  turning  with  the 
sun  is  considered  a lucky  or  fortunate  proceeding  and  turning 
in  the  contrary  way,  especially  among  northern  people,  is 
47 


738 


SVASTIKA-KHADGA 


dreaded  as  entailing  a curse  . . . ; the  custom  and  the 

symbol,  therefore,  we  argue  are  oo-related.”  Eev.  S.  Beal. 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  ix.  p.  67,  o.  2,  para  5 ; p. 

68,  c.  2,  para  2). 

(16)  Mr.  Sewel  after  quoting  a number  of  theories  on  the  origin  of 

the  symbol,  namely,  of  General  Cunningham  (Edinburg 
Eeview,  January,  1870),  Eev.  Haslam  (the  Cross  and  the 
Serpent,  1849),  Mr.  Brinton  (Myths  of  the  New  Worldh 
Dr.  J.  G.  Miihler  (Geschichte  der  Amerikanischen  Urreli- 
gionen,  p.  497),  and  of  Mr.  Baldwin  (Ancient  America,  New 
York,  1879,  p.  186),  says  “ for  myself,  I boldly  range  myself 
under  Mr.  Thomas’s  Sun-standard.” 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  x.  p.  202,  c.  1,  line  6). 

(17)  Mr.  Murray -Ansley  seems  to  agree  with  the  theory  that  the 

Svastika  has  orginally  been  an  emblem  of  the  sun.  He  cor- 
rectly adds  that  “in  India  Hindus  belonging  to  certain  sects 
are  in  the  habit  of  tracing  one  or  more  figures  of  the  Svastika 
on  the  outer  walls  of  their  houses.”  He  also  mentions  its  use 
in  connection  with  the  marriage  presents  in  India  and  Spain. 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xv.  p.  93,  c.  1,  para  1,  c. 

2,  para  2)  . 

SVASTIKA-KHADGA — ^A  type  of  octagonal  building. 

(Agni-Purana,  chap.  104,  v.  20, 
21,  see  under  Prasada). 

SYASTI-KANTA — A class  of  six-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXiy.  53,  see  under  Prasada). 
SVASTI-BANDHA — A class  of  single-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XIX.  169,  see  under  Prasada). 

SVAEA8ANA—The  lintel. 

“ The  Svarasana  of  the  gateway  was  made.” 

(This  inscription  is  on  the  top  of  the  door  of  the  Bhimefevara 
temple.) 


(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  x.  Goribidnur 
Tahiq,  no.  2,  Eomaii  text, 
p.  260,  Transl.  p.  212  f). 


HARMYA 


739 


H 

HATTA — A market,  a market-place,  a fair. 

(1)  Saumya-d^^aram  saumya-pade  karya  ha^tas  tu  vistarak  I) 

(Angi-Purana,  chap,  106,  V.  3). 

(2)  Attra  hattah  maha-Janat  cha  sthapitak — kere  tke  market-place 

and  tke  skopkeeper  (lit.  big  folk)  were  established. 
Vichittra-yitki-sampurnnam  kattam  kritva  grikani  oka— kav- 
ing  oonstrjicted  a market-place  full  of  variegated  (various) 
streets  and  kouses  (skops). 

(Ghatiyala  Insorip.  of  Kakku- 
ka,  no,  1,  V,  6 ; no.  11,  V.  3 ; 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  IX.  p.  280). 

(3)  Nitranikskepa-kattam  ekamnarapatina  dattarn  I 

A bazar  building  or  w are-kouse  for  storing  goods  to  be  export- 
ed ” was  granted  by  tke  king. 

(Tke  Chakamanas  of  Marwar, 
no.  XXIII.  Jalor  stone  Inscrip, 
of  Samantasimkadeva,  lines 
22,  2B,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  XI.  p.  62). 

H AEIKA-KABN  A— A kind  of  leg  for  tke  bedstead. 

(M.  XMV.  60). 

H Alii T A— A pavilion  witk  twenty-two  pillars. 

(Matsya-Purana,  ckap.  270,  v.  13). 
tIARITA— A moulding,  an  arckiteotural  ornament,  (see  under  Man- 
dapa). 

A moulding  of  the  column  (M.  XV.  160,  of.  L.  106). 

An  ornament  of  the  pedestal  (M.  xxi.  31). 

HAliMYA— (of.  Raja-karmya) — An  edifice,  an  upper  room,  a turret, 
an  apartment,  buildings  in  general,  a palace. 

(1)  One  of  the  four  divisions  of  the  architectural  objects  : 

Eliara  harmyadi-yanam  cha  paryankadi-chatur-vidham  \ 

(M.  III.  3). 


740 


HARMYA 


Buildings  in  general  including  prasada  (big  buildings), 
mandapa  (pa-vilion),  sabha  (hall),  &ala  (house),  prapa  (alms- 
house) (a)rahga  (house  with  quadrangular  court-yards)  (ibid. 
7-8). 

Purva-hastena  sarnyuktaro  harmyaih  Jatir  iti  sinritam  \ 

(M.  XIX.  3), 

A palace ; 

Bhlipatinam  oha  hannyanaih  lakshanaih  Yaksbyate’dhuna  \ 

(M,  XL.  1,  etc). 

Harmya-Janma-samarabbya  sala-janma-pradefeakam  I 

(M.  LXis.  37). 

K-udya-stambhe  griha-stambhe  harmya-garbham  vinikshipet  I 

(M,  xn.  132). 

(2)  Prasada-harmya-valabhi-lihga-pratimasu  kudya-kupeshu  1 

‘ In  the  temple,  mansion,  roof,  phallus,  idpl,  wall  and  well/ 
(Brihat-samhita,  J.  R.  A.  S.,  N.  S., 
vol.  VJ.  p.  332). 

(3)  Hannyam  prasada-manditam— the  edifice  furnished  with  a 

temple. 

(Vayu-Purana,  part  I,  chap.  39,  v,  67) 

(4)  Prabhuta-feikharopetam  harmySm  nama  prakirtitam  \ 

(Kamikagama,  l.  89). 
A class  of  buildings  (Kamikagama,  XXXY.  39,  40  see  under 

Malika). 

(6)  Eamayana  (ii.  91,  32 ; iv.  33,  6) : 
Harmy-prasada-samyukta-toranani  \ 

Mahatim  guham  . . . harmya-prasada-sambadham  1 
See  also  il.  61,  21 ; ii.  91,  32  ; ill.  66,  7 ; it.  33,  6 ; v.  16,  3, 19  j 
Ti.  76,  26,  etc. 

(6)  Mahabharaba  (Cock) : 

I.  3,  133 ; Kaga-lokam  . . . aneka-vidba-prasada-hariniya-va- 
labhi-niryuha-^ata-samkulam  \ 

III.  207,  7 : Harmya-prakara-feobhanam  . . . nagarini  ) 

See  also  i.  3,  33;  xv.  16, 1 ; v.  118,  19,  etc. 


HARMYA 


741 


(7)  Vikramorva&i  (Cook),  p.  38 : Manihamma-alam  (mani-har- 

mya-talam). 

(8)  Mrichchhakatika  (ibid.),  pp.  47  ; 168 : 

Jirnam  harmyam  ; harmyasthah  striyah  I 

(9)  Eaghuvamfea,  vi.  47,  etc., : 

Harmyagra-aamrudha-tfinamkureshu  . . . ripu-mandireshu  1 

(10)  Jatakaroala  (vl,  ed.  Kern,  p,  80, 1.20) : 

Vidynd-i-va  gbana-feikkaram  harmya-talam  avabbasanti  vyati- 
sbtbata  \ 

(11)  Katba-sarit-sagara  (Cook),  14,  19: 

Harmyagra-samstbah  . . . panra-naryah  \ 

(12)  Vapra-gopuramayair-nava-barmaih  I 

‘ By  erecting  new  buildings  adorned  with  a wall  and  a gate- 
tower,’ 

(Mangalagiri  Pillar  Insorip.  v.  29,  Ep. 

Ind.  ^ol.  VI.  pp.  121, 131). 

(13)  Navxna-ratnojjvala-barroya-triingam — ‘ tbe  top  of  tbe  royal 

palace,  tbe  scene  of  tbe  first  act.’ 

(Dhar  Pratasti  of  Arjunavarman,  v.  8. 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  VIII,  pp.  108,  99). 

(14)  Madana-dahana-barmyam  karayamasa  tungam  sa  guna-gana- 

nidbana-  ^rirndrarajabbidhanab  \ 

“ Then  that  store  of  all  virtues,  tbe  illustrious  Indraraja, 
ordered  to  be  built  this  lofty  temple  of  tbe  destroyer  of  Cupid 
(Siva).” 

(An  Insorip.  of  Govinda  iii,  v.  17, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  viii.  pp.  41,  42). 
(16)  Gommata-pura-bbushanam  idu  \ 

Gommatam  ayat  ene  samasta-parikara*sabitam  A 
Sammadadim  Hulla  ohamu  \ 

Pam  madisidam  Jinottamalayaman  idam  il 


742 


HARMYA-KANTA 


Parisutram  nritya-geham  pravipula-vilasat-paksha-desastha- 
^aila-sthira-Jainavasa-yugniam  vividha-suvidha-patrollasad 
'bhava-rupotkara-raja-dvara  harmmyam  beras  afcnla-ohatur- 
vvim^a-tirtthesa-gehana  I 

Paripiirnnam  punya-punja-prafcimam  esudud  iyandadiih 
Hullanindam  \ 

Ahsiract : — “ He  also  built  an  abode  (or  temple)  for  the  TTrthah- 
karas  in  this  chief  Tirtha  of  Belgula.  And  he  built  a large 
Jina  temple,  which,  like  G-ommata,  was  an  ornament  to 
Gommatapura.  Together  with  its  cloisters,  a dancing  hall, 
a Jina  house  of  stone  on  either  side,  a palace  with  royal 
gates  adorned  with  all  manner  of  carving,  and  an  abode  for 
the  24  Tirthahkaras.'” 

(Bp*  Carnat.  vol.  ii,  no.  137A.,  Roman  text,  p.  104, 
lines  21-28;  Transl,  p.  182,  line  16  f). 

HARMYA-KANTA — A class  of  seven-storyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXV.  29,  see  under  Prasada). 

HAEMYA-TALA — The  flat  roof  of  a house. 

Chandram&u-harmya-tala-ohandana-tala-vrinta-haropabhoga-rahite 

hima-dagdha-padme  I 

“ Which  (on  account  of  the  cold)  is  destitute  of  the  enjoyment  of 
the  beams  of  the  moon,  and  (sitting  in  the  open  air  on)  the  fiat 
roofs  of  houses  and  sandal-wood  perfumes,  and  palm- leaf -fans, 
and  necklaces.’* 

(Mandasor  stone  Inscrip,  of  Kumaragupta,  lines 
17-18,  C.I.  I.,  vol.  III.,  F.G.  I.,  no.  18,  pp.  83,  87). 

HAST  A— (see  Angula) — A cubit,  a measure  generally  equal  to  24 
angulas  or  18  inches. 

(1)  Chatyari-vimfeatife  ohaiva  hastah  syad  ahgulanaria  tu  I 

(Brahmanda-Purana,  part  I,  second  anushamga- 
pada,  chap.  7,  v.  99). 


HASTI-PAEIGHA 


743 


(2)  Vasfcu-sarani  (ed.  Matri  Prasada  Pande,  Beaares)  quotes  the 

following  withouii  giving  reference — Vi^vakarmokta-hasta- 
pramanam : 

Anamikantam  hastah  syad  urdhva-vahau  savarh§akah  I 
Kanishthika-mahyama-pramanenaiva  karayet  II 
Svami-hasta-pramanena  jyeshfcha-patni-karepa  cha  I 
Jyeshtha-putra-karenapi  karma-kara-karena  cha  il 
‘ According  to  this  passage,  the  cubit  is  the  measure  of  distance 
from  the  end  of  the  forearm  (?  elbow)  to  the  tip  of  the  ring- 
finger,  the  little  finger  or  the  middle  finger  ; and  this  cubit 
may  be  determined  in  accordance  with  the  measure  of  the 
arm  of  the  master  of  the  house,  his  eldest  wife,  his  eldest  son, 
or  of  the  architect  who  is  employed  to  build  the  house.’ 

(3)  Dvadafea-hasta-pramana-gyiha-nivesanam  I 

(Barmani  Inscrip,  of  Vijayaditya,  lines  22-23,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  III.  p,  213). 

(4)  Paramekvariya-hasta  —the  “ royal  yards.” 

(Second  Inscrip,  of  Villabhattasvamin  temple  at 
G-walior,  line  4,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  i.  p.  169,  see  also 

p.  166). 

(6)  Xyamato  hasta-katam  samagram  vistaratah  shash^ir  athapi 

chashtau  II 

Utsedhato’nyat  purushani  sapta  . . . ha.<3ta-kata-dvayasya  II 

” (Built  an  embankment)  a hundred  cubits  in  all  in  length, 
and  sixty  and  eight  in  breadth,  and  seven  men’s  height 
in  elevation  ...  of  two  hundred  cubits.” 

(Junagadh  Eock  Inscrip,  of  Skandagupta,  lines 
20-21,  0.  I.  I.,  vol.  III.,  F.  Gr.  I.,  no.  14,  pp.  61, 

64). 

HASTI-NAKHA—The  elephant’s  nail,  a turret. 

(Kautiliya-Arthakastra,  see  under  G-riha-vinyasa). 

HASTI-PAEIGHA — (see  Parigha)— A beam  to  shut  the  door  against 
elephants. 

(Kautiliya-Arthakastra,  see  under  Griha-vinyasah 


744 


HASTI-PEISHTHA 


HASTI-PEISHTHA — (of.  Gaja)— A class  of  single-storyed  build- 
ings, a parfc  of  a building. 

(M.  XIX.  171,  see  under  Prasada). 

A part  of  a building  (KSmikagama,  l.  92,  see  under  Vimana). 

“ The  present  structure  (of  the  temple  of  Parame&vara,  where- 
from the  five  Van  inscriptions  at  G-udimallam  are  copied)  is 
not  after  the  common  model  of  the  period  bo  which  it  belongs  : 
the  Vimana  has  the  so-called  gaja-prishthakriti  shape  : but  a 
close  study  of  the  plan  and  sections  . . . warrant  the  conclu- 
sion that  the  architect  had  distinctly  in  view  the  linga.” 

“ The  gaia-pyishthakriti-vimana  is  found  only  in  6aiva  tem- 
ples, e.g.,  the  Dharmefevara  temple  at  Manimangalam, 
the  ^aiva  temples  at  Sumangalam,  Pennagaram,  Bhara- 
dvaja&rama  near  Aroot,  Tiruppulivanam,  Konnur  near 
Madras,  Vada  Tirumullaivayil,  etc.  etc.'’ 

(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  XL.  p.  104,  note  2). 

See  the  plan  and  sections  of  the  Parame§ vara  temple  at  Grudimal- 
1am  (ibid,  plate  between  pp.  104,  106). 

See  the  Pallava  Antiquities  (vol.  il.  pp.l  9-20,  plate  iii,  the  Pal- 
lava  temple  at  Tiruttani ; plate  i,  the  Virat^anefevara 
temple  at  Tiruttapi  and  Sahadeva  Eatha  at  Mahabali- 
puram). 

See  Fergusson,  Hist,  of  Ind.  and  East  Arch.  vol.  i.  p.  127 
(fig.  61,  elevation  of  Ghezrala  Chaity  temple),  p.  336  (fig. 
192,  plan  of  Sahadeva’s  Eatha),  p.  337  (fig.  193,  view  of  the 
same  Eatha;. 

HASTI-HASTA — The  trunk  of  an  elephant,  employed  as  an  architec- 
tural member  generally  of  the  stair-cases. 

Bvaia-mukha-sopanam  hasti-hastena  bhushitam  \ 

(M.  XIX.  211). 

Sopana-parsvayor  de^e  hasti-hasta-vibhushitam  I 

(M.  XXX.  156,.  cf.  also  xviii.  209): 


HARIKA 


?46 


HAHSA — A type  of  building  which  is  shaped  like  the  swan,  a class  of 

oval  buildings. 

(1)  Brihat-samhita  (chap.  Lvi.  26,  J.  B.  A.  S.,  N.  S.,  vol.  V.  p.  319, 

see  under  Prasada). 

(2)  Matsya-Purapa  (chap.  269,  v.  30,  61,  see  under  Prasada). 

(3)  Bhavishya-Purana  (chap.  130,  v.  33,  see  under  Prasada). 

A class  of  oval  buildings  : 

(4)  Agni-Purana  (chap.  104,  V.  19-20,  see  under  Prasada). 

(6)  Garuda-Purana  (chap.  47,  v.  29-30,  see  under  Prasada). 

(6)  The  Vahana  (riding  animal)  of  Brahman. 

(M.  LX.  1,  4 ; the  sculptural  description  of  its 
image,  ibid.  6-46). 

HABA  "1  — A chain,  an  architectural  ornament  employed  below 

HABA  C the  neck  of  the  column,  head,  astragal  or  baguette 
HABIE:A(-A)  J (see  Gwilt,  Encycl.  fig.  873). 

(1)  A moulding  (bead)  of  the  column  : 

Tat  (padma)-tungardham  tu  harikam  I 

(M.  XV.  68). 


Hara-feranta-pafiijaradhyam (vimanam)  I 

(M.  XIX.  194,  see  also  xx.  66,  112). 
Adhishthanam  cha  padam  cha  prastaram  cha  tri-vargikam  \ 
^ala-kutam  cha  haram  cha  yuktya  tatraiva  yojayet  \ 

(M.  xxil.  73-74). 

Kutanam  eka-bhagena  ^esham  haram  sapanjaram  1 

(Ibid.  86) 


Haram  sapanjaram  I 


(M.  XXL  68). 

Chatush-kone  chatush-kutam  kosh^he  haradir  ashtadha  I 
Anu-^ala  tri-bhaga  va  harantara(m)-dvi-bhagikam  \ 

(M.  XXVI.  II,  23), 


746 


HIMA-KlNTA 


In  connection  with  the  gopura  or  gatehouse  : 

Harasya  inadhya-dese  tu  anu-'sala-vifealakam  I 
Tat-par§'va-dva(ya)yo(r)  haram  nasika-pafijaranvitam  r 

(M.  xxsiii.  449-460). 

Ekaiii^ani  karna-kutaih  oha  hara-taraika-bhagikam  | 

(M.  xxxill,  416,  see  also  431), 
Kute  cha  bhadrayor  madhye  haram^am  madhyamena  tu  ( 

■ (M.  XXXV.  343). 

A chain  : 

Haropagriva-keyura-katakais  cha  supilritam  I 

(M.  L.  14). 

(2)  Alindandharikandhara-hara  bhagena  kalpitah  i| 

Bahir  andharikaudhara-hara(-a)  bhagena  vistritah  II 
Hara-pramanam  bahye  tu  rachanartham  prakalpayet  [. 
Bhitty-antastham  pramanam  syad  bhitti-bahye  tv-abahyatah  II 
Andharandhari-harokto  ( = hara-yukto)  khanda.harmya-vi§e- 

shitam  (vimanam)  II 
(KamikSgaina,  l.  74,  76j  77,  93). 

(3)  Pearl-strings  (Beopara  Inscrip,  of  Vijayasena,  v.  11,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  I.  pp.  308,  313). 

HIMA-KAETA*— (cf.  Hima\at) — A class  of  seven-storeyed  buildings. 

(M.  XXV.  31,  see  under  Prasaba). 

HIMAJA — A class  of  pavilions. 

IM.  XXXIV.  152,  sec  under  Maudapa). 
HIMAVAT — A class  of  buildings  .with  sixteen  pafijaras  (compart- 
ments), eight  siila^  (halls),  and  eight  kutas  (towers). 

Himavan  iti  vikhyato  yukta-shodasa-paujarah  I 
Ashta-salaahta-kutas  tu  prasado  lakshananvitah  II 

(Suprabhedagama,!xxxi,  44). 


HOMA 


747 


HIEANYA-NABHA— A type  of  edifice. 

XJttara-tala-hiiiam  Hiranya-nabham  tri-salakam  dhanyam — “ An 
edifice  with  three  halls,  wanting  as  it  does  a northern  hall, 
is  styled  Hiranyanabha,  and  insures  luck.” 

(Briiiat-samhita,  liii.  37,  J.  R.  A.  S.,  N.  S , vol. 

VI.  p.  286). 

HBMA-KUTA — ^A  class  of  pavilions. 

(M.  XXXIV.  156,  see  under  Maudapa). 

HOMA — An  ofiering,  a crowning  moulding  of  the  cages  for  domestica- 
ted animals. 

Mriga-nabhi-vidalasya  panjarasya  . . . | 

Homat  prastarantam  va  mastakantaiii-tikhaiitakam  I 

(M.  XXXIV.  17). 


APPENDIX  1 

A SEKTCH  OF  S&NSEEIT  TEEATISES  ON  &EGHITECITUEE  > 


A 

AGrNl-PUEANA — See  under  Puranas. 

A]^KA-6ASTEA — On  architecture. 

(Oppert’s  List  of  Sanskrit  Mss,  in  Private  Libraries 
of  South  India,  vol.  i.  no.  249S,  p.  228). 
APAEAJITA-PEICHCHHA— by  Bhuvana-deva,  “quoted  by 

Hemadri  in  the  Paritesha-khanda,  2,  660-662,  819.” 

(Aufrecht,  Catalogus  oatalogorum,  part  ii,  p.  4). 
APAEAJITA-YASTU-6ASTEA— attributed  to  Yikvakarnian,  in 
possession  of  Mani  Sankara  Bhatte,  Surat. 

(Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  contained  in  Private 
Libraries  in’  Gujarat,  Kathiavad,  Kaohohh, 
Sindh,  and  Khandesh,  1872,  p.  276,  no.  I). 
ABHILASHITAETHA-CHIETAMANI— by  Malla  Sometvara,  on 
architecture. 

(Taylor’s  catalogue  Eaisoned,  i.  478). 
AETHA-6ASTEA— (Kautiliya)-  ed.  E.  Shama  Sastri,  b.a  , Mysore, 
1919. 

Chapters  : 

22.  Janapada-nivesa. 

23.  Bhuniichchhidra-vidhana. 

24.  Durga-vidhana. 

26.  Burga-niveta. 

66.  VSstuka,  Griha-vastuka. 

66.  Vastu-vikraya  ; 

Sima-vivada ; 

Maryada-sthapana ; 

Badha-badhika. 

67.  Vastuke  vivite  kshetra-patha-hiihsa. 

* CJompsre,  Vartta— The  Anoient  Hindu  Econoipio  by  Farendra  Nath  Law,  m.a.  b r, , pb.D. 
(Indian  Antiquary,  vol.  xLVJi  p 266). 


760 


AOTENDIX  I 


AjSlI^UMAT — (KASYAPiYA) — Od  architecture  and  sculpture. 

(Taylor's  catalogue  Eaison^e,  i.  314), 

AMSUMAD-BHBDAGAMA-See  under  Agamas. 
AH^UMANA-KATjPA — On  architecture. 

(Aufreeht,  ibid,  part  i,  p.  1). 


A 


AG-AMAS — Of  the  28  Maha-agamas',  the  following  have  special 
reference  to  architecture  and  cognate  arts. 

I.  Amfeumad-bhedagama  (patala  or  chapter): 

28.  Uttama-dafea-tala-vidhi. 

(There  is  another  Ani&urcad-bheda  by  Kafeyapa,  account  of 
which  is  given  elsewhere.) 

II.  Kamikagama  (patala  or  chapters) : 

11.  Bhu-pariksha-vidhi. 

12.  Praveta-bali-vidhi. 

13.  Bhu-parigraha-vidhi. 

14.  Bhu-karshana-vidhi. 

16.  Sahku-sthapana-vidhi. 

16.  Manopakarana-vidhi. . 

17.  Pada-vinyasa. 

18.  Stitra-nirmana. 

19.  Vastu-deva-bali. 


*.  1.  Kamikigaiua. 

2.  yogajagasaa. 

3.  Ohiniyagama. 

4-  Ears^agatna. 

5.  Ajitagania, 

6.  Diptagama. 

7.  Sukehxnagama. 

8.  Sahasragama, 

9 Amkumilnagama. 

10.  Suprabbedagama. 

11.  Vijayagama. 

12.  Ni&vasagama. 

14-  Anilagama. 

16.  Virugama. 


16.  Rauravagama. 

17.  Makutagama. 

18.  Vimalagama. 

19.  Chandra-ifiaoagamft. 

20.  Simbagama. 

21.  Prodgitagama. 

22.  Lalitagama.  ' 

28.  Siddhagamn,  also  called  Vaikhanai^agama. 
24.  Santyanagama. 

26.  Satvoktaguma. 

26.  Parame&vaTagama, 

27.  Kira:r^gatna, 

28.  Vatulagama. 


(Bee  8aVsbicagsma,BEiti8h  Museum,  14038,  ao,  26). 


TBBATISES  ON  AROHITBCTUEE 


751 


20.  Gramadi-lakshana. 

21.  Vistarayama-lakshana. 

22.  Ayadi-lakshana. 

24.  Dandika-vidhi  (dealing  with  doors  and  gateways). 

25.  Vithi-dvaradi-mana. 

26.  Gramadi-devata-sthapana. 

28.  Gramadi-vinyasa. 

29.  Brahma-deva-padati. 

30.  Gramadi-anga-sthana-nirmana. 

31.  Garhha-nyasa. 

32.  Bala-sthapana-vidhi. 

33.  Grama- gyiha-vinyasa. 

34.  Yastu-^anti-vidhi. 

36.  6ala-lakshana-vidhi. 

36.  Vifeesha-lakshana-vidhi. 

87.  Dvi-ijala-lakshana-vidhi. 

38.  Chatuh-feala-lakshaiia-vidhi. 

40.  Varta(?  dha)mana-feala-lakshana. 

41.  Nandyavarta-vidlii. 

42.  Svastika-vidhi. 

43.  Paksha-'saladi-vidhi. 

44.  (H)asti-&ala-vidhi. 

45.  Malika-lakshana  vidhi. 

46.  Langala-malika-vidhi. 

47 . Maulika-inalika-vidhi. 

48.  Padma-malika-vidhi. 

49.  Nagaradi-vibheda. 

50.  Bhumidamba-'vidhi. 

61.  Adyeshtaka-vidhana- vidhi. 

52.  Upapitha-vidhi. 

53.  Pada-mana-vidhi, 

54.  Prastara- vidhi. 

65.  Prasada-bhushana-vidhi. 

56.  . Kantha-lakshana- vidhi. 


APPENDIX  1 


57.  ^ikhara-lakshana-vidhi. 

58.  Sfcupika-Iakshana-vidM. 

59.  Naladi-sthapana-vidbi. 

60.  Eka-bhumyadi-vidhi. 

61.  Miirdlini-sthapana-vidhi. 

62.  Linga-Iaksbana-vidhi. 

63.  Ankurarpana-vidhi. 

64.  Linga-pratishtha-vidhi. 

66.  Pratima-lakshana-vidhi. 

67.  Devata-sthapana-vidhi. 

68.  Pratima-pratishtiha-vidhi. 

69.  Vimana-sfchapana-vidhi. 

70.  Mandapa-sthapana-vidhi. 

71.  Prakara-lakshana-vidhi. 

72.  Parivara-sthapana-vidhi. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  out  of  76  chapters  of  the  Kainika* 
garaa,  more  than  60  deal  with  architecture  and  sculpture. 
This  Agama  is  in  fact  another  Vastu-feastra  under  a different 
name. 

III.  Karanagama : 

Part  I,  (patala  or  chapters)  : 

3.  Vastu-vinyasa. 

4.  Adyeshtaka-vidhi. 

5.  Adhishthana-vidhi. 

6.  Gfarbha-nyasa-vidhi. 

7.  Prasada-lakshana-vidhi. 

8.  Prakara-lakshana-vidhi. 

9.  Lihga-lakshana. 

10.  Murdhnishtaka-lakshana. 

11.  Pratima-lakshana. 

12.  Stri-mana-da&a-tala-lakshana. 

13.  Kanishtha-dafea-tala-lakshana. 

14.  Nava-talottama-lakshana. 

16.  Bali-karma-vidhi. 


TBBATISES  ON  AEOHITBCTUBl 


763 


19. 

Mrit-samgrahana-vidhi, 

20. 

Ankurarpana-vidhi, 

41. 

Mahabliiskeka-vidlii. 

56. 

Vastu-homa-Yidhi. 

69. 

Linga-sthapana-vidhi. 

60. 

Parivara-sfchapana-Yidlii. 

61. 

Bali-pitha-pratishthil-vidlu. 

62. 

Bataa-linga-sthapana-Yidlii. 

66. 

Parivara-bali. 

70. 

Vimana-sthapana-vidlii. 

88. 

Bhakta-sthSpana-Yidhi . 

138. 

Mrit-saiiigraliana  (cf.  19). 

Part  II, 

obapters  *. 

4. 

Kila-parlksha. 

6. 

G-opura-lakshana. 

6. 

Mandapa-laksliana. 

7. 

Pifclia-lakshaiia. 

-8. 

Sakti-laksliana. 

9. 

Grama-^anti-vidhi. 

10. 

Vastu-ijanti-Yidhi. 

11. 

Mrit-samgrahaua. 

12. 

Ankurarpana. 

13. 

Bimba-kuddlii. 

14. 

Kautuka-baudhana. 

16. 

Nayanonrailana. 

18. 

Bimba-feuddhi,  (of.  II.  13). 

19. 

^ayaiiaropaaa. 

21. 

Siva-linga-sthapana. 

98. 

Matha-pratiahtha. 

IV.  Vaikhanasagama  (patala  or  chapfcers)  ; 
22.  Pratima-lakshana. 

43.  UttarDa-da&a-tala. 

48 


754 


APPENDIX  I 


V.  Suprabhedagama  (patala  or  ohapters)  : 

22.  Karanadhikara-lakshana,  deals  With  Dshnisha 

(crowns,  bead  gears),  Asana  (chair,  seats),  Paryanka 
(bedsteads,  couch,  etc.),  Siirihasana  (thrones), 
Kahga  (court-yards,  theatres),  Stambha  (columns, 
pillars),  etc. 

23.  Grfimadi-lakshana-vidhi. 

26.  Tarunalaya-vidhi. 

27.  Prasiida-vilstu-vidhi. 

28.  Adyeshtaka-vidhi. 

29.  Garhha-nyasa-vidhi. 

30.  Ahguli-lakshana-vidhi, 

31.  Prasada-lakshana-vidhi. 

32.  Miirdhnishtaka-vidhi. 

38.  Liiiga-lakshana. 

34.  Sakala-lakshana-vidhi, 

35.  Ahkurarpana-yidhi. 

36.  Linga-pratishtha-vidhi. 

37.  Sakala  (image,  idol) -pratishtha. 

38.  Sakti-pratishtha-vidhi. 

39.  Parivara-vidhi. 

40.  Vrishbaha-sthapana-vidhi. 

AGASTyA-SAKALABHlKAEA  (manuscript)— 

(Aufreoht,  part  i,  p.  683,  see  Taylor,  I,  72). 

Chapters  : 

1.  Mana-samgraha. 

2.  Uttama-dasa-tiila. 

3.  Madhyama-daka-tala. 

4.  Adhama-dasa-tala. 

5.  Pratimii-laks  liana. 

6.  Yrishabha-vahana-lakshana . 

7.  Nates^vara-vidhi. 

8.  Shodata-pratima-lakshana. 

9.  Daru-samgraha, 


TEE  ARISES  AN  ABCHITBCTUBE 


755 


10.  Mrit-samskara. 

11.  Varna-samskara. 

There  are  three  other  Mss.  in  the  G-overnment  Mas.  Library,  Mad- 
ras, attributed  to  Agastya.  See  catalogue  vol.  XXII.  nos.  1304:6, 
13047,  13068.  Nos.  13046, 13047  are  incomplete  and  deal  with 
astrological  matters  bearing  upon  architecture.  No.  13068  is  a 
portion  of  a large  Ms.  (see  under  6ilpa-saihgraha)  which  is  an 
anonymous  compilation.  The  following  chapters  of  it  are 
ascribed  to  Agastya 

1.  Mana-saihgraha-vi&esha. 

2.  Uttama-dafea-tala. 

3.  Madhyama-da&a-tala. 

4.  Somaskanda-lakshana. 

5.  Chaudra-feekhara-lakshana. 

6.  Vrisha-vahana-lakshana. 

It  is  not  quite  clear  whether  the  following  7 — 14  (which 
are  not  numbered  as  such  in  the  compilation) 
should  be  attributed  to  Agastya  : 

7.  Tripurantaka-lakshana. 

8.  Kalyana-sundara-lakshana. 

9.  Ardha-nari^vara-lakshana. 

■ 10.  Pa&upata-lakshana. 

11.  Bhikshatana-lakshana. 

12.  Chandefeanugraha-lakshana. 

13.  Dakshina-murti-lakshana. 

14.  Kala-dahanadakshana. 

16-18.  Apparently  missing. 

19.  Pratima-lakshana. 

The  following  found  in  another  portion  of  the  compilation  are 
indifferentlynumbered  as  shown  on  the  right  parallel  column: 

20.  (3)  Upapitha-Yidhana. 

21.  (9)  Hula-mana-vidhana. 

22.  (10)  Eajju-bandha-samskara'Vidhi, 


766 


APPENDIX  I 


23.  (11)  Yarna-samskara. 

24.  (21)  Akshi-mokshana. 

AGtA-RA-YINODA— On  the  oonstraction  of  houses. 

(Aufreoht.  ibid,  part  r,  p.  2). 

AYA-TATTYA—by  Mandana  Sukadhara.  . 

(See  Yastn-^astra  by  Rajavallabha  Manddana). 

AYADI-LAKSHANA— On  architectural  and  sculptural  measure- 
ment. 

(Aufrecht,  part  i,  62). 

AEAMADI-PEATISHTHA-PADDHATI-Ou  the  construction  of 
gardens,  etc. 

(Aufrecht,  part  I,  p.  53). 

■ 

KAMIKAGAMA — See  under  Agaraas. 

KARANAGAMA— See  under  Agamas. 

KA^YAPlYA — (Manuscript),  deals  with  architecture  and  cognate 
arts.  (Govt.  Mss.  Library,  Madras,  Catalogue  of  Mss.  vol.  .xxii. 
p.  8765  f,,  nos.  13032, 13033.  See  also  Oppert’s  List  of  Sanskrit* 
Mas.  in  Private  Libraries  of  South  India,  vol  ii.  p,  395,  no.  6336). 
This  work  has  attained  universal  authority  amongst  all  the 
sculptors  of  South  India  up  to  the  present  time,  and  the  young 
pupils  are  even  now  taught  to  learn  by  heart  the  verses  given  in 
this  book  regarding  the  rules  of  construction  and  measurements 
of  images.  Ka&yapa  is  said  to  have  learnt  this  science  from 
6iva  (patala  i,  verses  1 — 5). 

The  contents  are  divided  into  eighty-three  patalas  which  are 
classified  in  an  overlapping  manuer  into  the  following  headings 

1.  Karshana. 

2.  Prasada-vastu. 

3.  Yastu-homa. 

4.  Prathameshtaka-vidhi. 

6.  Upapitha-vidhana. 


> South  Indian  BrouBes,  by  GangooU, 


TBEATISES  ON  AECHITEOTUEE 

6.  Adh.islitharLa.vicLlii. 

7.  Nala-laksliana. 

8.  Stambha-lakshana, 

9.  Phalaka-lakshana. 

10.  Vedika-lakshana. 

11.  Jalaka-laksliana. 

12.  Tarana-lakshana. 

13.  Vritta-sphiitita-lakshana. 

14.  Sfcambha-torana-vidhi. 

15.  Kumbha*tala-lakshana. 

16.  Vritta-sphnfcita-lakshana,  cf.  13. 

17.  Dvara-lakshana. 

18.  Kampa-dvara-lakshana. 

19.  Prastara-lakabana. 

20.  G-ala-yidhaaa. 

21.  Sikhara-lakshana. 

22.  Naaika-lakshana. 

23.  Manopakarana. 

24.  Mana-siitradi-laksliana. 

26.  Nagaradi-vidhi. 

26.  G-arbha-nyasa-vidhi. 

27.  Eka-tala-yidhana. 

28-40.  Dvi-trayodafea-tala-vidhana. 

41.  Shodasa-bhumi-vidliana. 

42.  Murdhanishfcaka-vidhana. 

43.  Prakara-lakshana. 

44.  Manta(*da)pa-lakshana. 

45.  G-opuraJaksbana. 

46.  Sapta-matrika-lakshana. 

47.  Vinayaka-lakshaiia. 

48.  Parivara-vidbi. 

49.  Lmga-laksbaiioddhftra. 

60.  Uttama-dasa-tHla-purusha-mana. 

51.  Madbyama-dasa-tala-purusba-mana. 


767 


758 


APPENDIX  I 


52.  Uttama-nava-tfila. 

53.  Madhyama-nava-tala, 

54.  Adhama-na'va-tala. 

56.  Ashta-feala. 

56.  Sapta-tala. 

57.  Pifclia-lakshanoddhara. 

58.  Sakala-sthapana-vidhi, 

59-60.  Siikhasana. 

61 . Chandra-  &ekhara-murti  -lakshan  a , 

62.  Vyisha-Yahana-murfci-lakshana. 

63.  Nfifeta-murti-lakshana. 

64.  Gahgadhara-murfei-lakshana . 

65.  Tri-pnra-miirti-lakshana. 

66.  Kalyana-siindara-lakshana. 

67.  Ardha-nari§vara-lakshana. 

68.  Cajaha-mtirti-lakshana. 

69.  Pa&npati-murti-lakshana. 

70.  Kahkala-murfci-lakshana. 

71.  Hary-ardha-hara-lakshana. 

72.  Bhikshatana-miirti-lakshana. 

73.  Chapde^anugraha. 

74.  Daksbina-murti-lakshana. 

75.  Kalaha-murbi-lakshana. 

76.  Lihgodbliava-laksliana. 

77.  Vriksha-sariigrahana. 

78.  Sula-lakshana. 

79.  Siila-pani-lakshana. 

80.  EaJJu-baiidha-lakshana. 

81.  Mrit-samskara-lakshana. 

82.  Kalka-samskara*lakshana. 

83.  Varna-samskara-lakshana, 

84.  V arna-lepana-medhy  a-lakshan  a. 

85.  Grama  di-lakshana. 

86.  Grama-lakshana. 


TBBATISES  ON  AECHITEOTTJBE 


759 


KUPADI-JALA-STHANA-LAKSAHNA^ — On  the  construction  of 
wells,  etc. 

(In  possession  of  the  Maharaja  of  Travancore;  Oppert’s  List  of  Sans- 
krit Mss.  in  Private  Libraries  of  South  India,  vol.  i,  p.  467). 
EAUTUKA-LAKSHANA — On  Architecture. 

(Oppert’s  List  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  ii. 

p.  258). 

KEIYA-SAMGrEAHA-PA^lJIKA — A catalogue  of  rituals  by  Kula- 
datta.  It  contains  among  other  things  instructions  for  tha 
selection  of  site  for  the  construction  of  a Nihara  and  also  rules 
for  building  a dwelling  house. 

(The  Sanskrit  and  Buddhist  Literature  of 
Nepal  by  Eajendxa  Lai  Mitra,  1882,  p.  106), 

K.SHIEABNAVA — Attributed  to  Vitvakarman,  on  architecture,  etc, 
(Aufrecht,  ibid,  part  li.  pp.  26, 138). 

KSHlTEA-iillEMANA.VIDHI-On  the  preparation  of  ground  with 
a view  to  construction  of  buildings  thereupon. 

(In  possession  of  the  Eaja  of  Cochin  ; Oppert’s  List  of  Sanskrit 
Mss.  in  Private  Libraries  of  South  India,  vol.  i.  p.  354). 


Gr 

G-AEIJpA-PUBANA — See  under  Purapas. 

G-AECTA-SAtolTA— (Mss.  E,  16.  96,  in  Trinity  College,  Cam- 
bridge  ; it  contains  108  leaves,  in  oblong  folio  ; Indian  paper ; 
Devanagari  character ; copied  in  1814).  It  deals  with  the  fol- 
lowing architectural  subjects : 

Dvara-nirde&a  \ (fol.  51a,  chap.  3). 

Bvara-pramana-vidhi  1 (fol.  676). 

Gargiyayam  vastu-vidyayam  ohatuh-tala-dvi-tri-salaika- 
feala-vidhi  I (fol.  58(3.), 

Vastu-vidyayajii  ohatur-bhaga-tri-bhaga-prati-bhaga,  etc., 
(fol.  60a). 

Dvara-stambhochchhraya-vidhi  1 (fol.  606). 


760 


APPENDIX  I 


Vastu-vidyayam  prathamo’dyayah  1 (fol.  67 a). 

,,  „ dvitiyo’dhyayah  \ (foL  Qlb). 

„ „ dvara-pramana-nirde&am  I (fol.  68a.). 

Griha-prave§am  1 (fol.  68^»). 

GBIHA-NIEtiPANA-SAlVIKSHEPA— A siimmary-work  on  house- 
building. 

(Aiifrechfc,  ibid,  part  i.  p.  167). 

GBIHA-NIKMANA-VIDHI— 'On  rules  for  the  erection  of  houses, 
temples,  and  other  edifices. 

(Wilson’s  Mackenzie  Collection,  p.  304). 

GEIHA-PITHIKA — On  the  construction  of  houses. 

(Oppert’s  List  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  in  Private 
Libraries  of  South  India,  vol.  I.  p.  646). 

GEIHA-YASTXJ-PEADIPA — (Lucknow,  1901) — contains  87  pages, 
deals  mostly  with  astronomical  and  ritualistic  matters  in  connec- 
tion with  the  building  of  house. 

GEIHABAMBHA—by  6ripati. 

(Cf.  Yastu-sarani). 

GOPXJBA-YIMANADT-LAKSHANA — On  gate-houses  and  temples, 
etc.  . ■ 


(Oppert’s  List  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  ii. 

p.  269,  no.  4009). 

GEAMA-NIBNAYA— by  Narayana.- 

(Cf.  Yastu-sarani). 


GH 


GHATTOTSAEGA-SUOHANIKA’-On  the  erection  of  steps  on  the 
bank  of  a river. 

(Aufrecht,  ibid,  p.art  III  p,  37). 


CHAKEA-^ASTBA— On  architecture  and  cognate  arts. 

(Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  200). 


TEEATISES  ON  AEGHITECTUEE 


761 


OHITEA-KAEMA-^ILPA-SASTEA— On  painting. 

(Aufreoht,  ibid,  part  i.  p.  187). 

CHITEA-PATA—On  painting. 

(Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  440). 
CHITEA-LAIISHANA— (ed.  Laufer) — treats  largely  with  the 
sculptural  measurement  of  images  and  painting  ; translated  into 
German  from  Tibetan,  the  original  Sanskrit  version  is  apparently 
missing. 

CHITEA-SUTEA—On  painting  (mentioned  in  Kattani-mata,  22). 

(Aufreoht,  ibid,  part  i.  p.  187). 

J 

JAYA-MAOHAVA-MlNASOLLASA-attributed  to  one  Jaya- 
aimha-deva — On  architecture. 

(Aufreoht,  ibid,  part  i.  p.  201), 
JALAEGALA — attributed  to  Varahamihira^-On  door.bars  and 
latticed  windows. 

(OpperPs  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  il. 

no.  3146,  p.  217). 

JALAEGALA-YANTEA — On  the  architectural  instruments  and 
machines. 

(OpperPs  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  li. 

no.  3147,  p.  217). 

J^ANA-KATNA-KOSHA — attributed  to  Vifevakarman-— On  aTohiteo- 
ture. 

(Aufreoht,  part  i.  p,  210,  in  possession  of  Acha- 
ratalal  Vaidya,  Ahmedabad,  Catalogue  of 
Sanskrit  Mss.  contained  in  the  Private  Lib- 
raries of  Gujarat,  etc.,  1872,  p.  276). 

■■  T , 

TACHOHU-SASTEA  — same  as  Manushyalaya-ohandrika  (see  below). 
TAEA-LAKSHANA — On  sculpture  (imago  of  the  goddess  Tara). 

(Aufreoht,  part  I.  p.  229). 


m 


APPENDIX  I 


D 

DA^A-TALA-NYAGEODA  • PAEIMANDALA-BUDDHA  - PBATI- 
MA-LAKSHANA — On  the  ten-tala  measure  of  Buddha  images, 
exists  in  Tibetan  translation;  the  original  Sanskrit  version  is 
apparently  missing. 

DA^A-PEAKAEA — attributed  to  Vasishtha — On  architectural  defects. 

(See  Vastu-sarani  by  Matri-prasada-Pande,  Benares,  1909). 

DIK-SADHANA—attributed  to  Bhaskara*— On  architecture. 

(See  Vastu-sarani). 

DIEGHA-VISTAEA-PEAKAEA— attributed  to  Narada— On  archi- 
tectural  measurement. 

(See  Vastu-sarani). 

DEVATA  -SILPA*~  On  sculpture,  dealing  specially  with  the  images  of 
deities. 

(A  classified  catalogue  of  Sanskrit  works  in 
the  Sarasvati  Bhandaram  Libfary  of  His 
Highness  the  Maharaja  of  Mysore,  class  xix, 

no.  636). 

DEVALAYA-LAKSHANA— On  the  construction  of  temples. 

(Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  in  Private 
Libraries  of  South  India,  vol.  l.  p.  470). 

DVAB  A-LAKSHANA-PATALA'—  On  the  construction  of  doors. 

(Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  in  Private 
Libraries  of  South  India,  vol.  i.  no.  6003, 
p.  470). 

DH 

DHEUVADI-SHODASA-GEHANl-attribiited  to  Ganapati— On 
the  architectural  arrangement  of  buildings. 

(See  Vastu-sarani). 


TBEATISES  ON  ABOHITEOTtJBE 


76S 


■ N ■ , 

NAKADA-PUBANA— 'See  under  Purilnas. 

NABADA-SAMHITA — deals  with  the  following  subjects  ; 

(1)  Sura-pratishtha  (20  verses). 

(21  VUstu-vidhana  (62  verses,  describing  briefly  Bhu- 
pariksha,  Dvara-sthana,  Sahku-sthapana,  Pada- 
nyasa,  and  Griha-nyasa). 

(3)  Vastu-lakshana—  describes  ceremonies  of  Griha- 
pravefea. 

NAVA-SASTBA — '' On  ship-building  and  navigation.  ” But  the 
work  is  chiefly  astrological.  Some  directions  are,  however,  given 
respecting  the  materials  and  dimensions  of  vessels, 

(Taylor’s  Catalogue  Eaisonee,  vol.  m.  p.  6). 

In  Taylor’s  Catalogue  Eaisonee,  there  is  mentioned  another  Ms. 
of  which  the  title  is  lost.  It  is  on  the  art  of  constructing  forts, 
houses,  fanes,  of  settling  a village  ; navigation  and  Variety  ot 
other  similar  things  emunerated  as  taught  in  36  works,  the 
names  of  which  are  given.  ” (Ibid.  vol.  in,  p.  350), 

P 

PAKSHI-MANUSHTALAYA-LAKSHANA— On  the  construction  of 
human  dwellings  and  aviaries. 

(Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss,  ibid,  vol.  I.  p.  471). 

PAtCHA-EATEA-(PEA)DlPIKA— (also  called  Mantra-dipika)'- 
It  professes  to  form  a part  of  the  Padma-tantra  of  the  Narada- 
Pancha-ratra.  It  has  a Telugu  commentary  by  Peddanacharya. 
It  deals  with  images  and  consists  of  the  following  five  chapters : 

1.  Bila-samgraha-lakshana., 

2.  Daru-saiiigrahana. 

3.  Pratima-lakshana. 

4.  ........  nama-tritiyo’dhyaya. 

5.  Pratima-samgrahe  jaladhivasana-ashtamo’dhyaya. 

(See  Egg.  Mss.  3150,  2579,  II,  Mackenzie  collection). 


764 


APPENDIX  1 


PINDA-PRAKARA— attributed  to  G-opiraja—On  architectural  sub- 
jects. 

(See  VastU'Sarani). 

PITHA-LAKSHANA-On  pedastals. 

(Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  I.  p.  472). 
PIIEANAS — (Bombay  editions) — Of  the  18  or  19  Mahu-puranas,‘  the 
following  have  special  reference  to  Architecture  and  Sculpture. 

I.  Agni-Purana : 

Chapters  : 

42.  Prasada-lakshana-kathana. 

43.  Prasada-devata-sthapana. 

44.  Vasudevadi-pratima-lakshaua-vidhi. 

45.  Pindika-lakshana. 

46.  Salagramadi-murti-lakshana-kathana, 

49.  Matsyadi-dasavatara-kathana. 

60.  Devi-pratima-lakshana-kathana. 

51.  Suryadi-pratima-lakshana. 

62.  Devi-pratima-lakshana  (cf.  60). 

63.  Lihga-lakshana. 

64.  Lihga-manadi-kathana. 

55.  Pindika-lakshana-kathana  (ef.  46). 

60.  Vasudeva-pratishtha-vidhi  (cf.  44). 

62.  Lakshmi-pratishOiavVidhi. 

104.  Prasada-lakshana  (of.  42). 

106.  Grihadi-vastu-kathana. 

106.  Nagaradi-vastu. 

X.  Br#litna, 
a ,Padma. 

8.  Vith^iu. 

4>.  aiva. 

5.  BhagaVata. 

6.  Narada. 

7.  Mfirka^^eya. 

8.  Agni 

9.  Bhaviahya., 

1 0.  6rahQ)a*vamrta 


11.  Linga. 

12.  Varaha. 

13.  Skanda  (also  called  Kumilra). 

14.  Vamana. 

15.  Malsya, 

16-  Garad*. 

17.  Brahmaijda. 

18.  Viiyu. 

19.  Kiirma. 


TEBATISES  ON  AECHITECTUEE 


766 


II.  Garuda-Purana  ; 

Chapters  : 

46.  Salagrama-murti-lakahana, 

46.  Prasada-arama-durga  - devalaya-mathadi-vastu  - mana- 
lakshana-nirupana. 

47.  Pra8ada-lihga-inandapadi-&iibhaSublia-lakshana-iiiru- 

pana. 

48.  De^aEam  pratishtha-vidhi, 

III.  Narada-Purana  : 

Part  I,  chapter 

13.  Oeyatayana-vapi-kupa-tadagadi-Eirmaiaa. 

IV.  Brahmanda-Piirana  : 

Chapter  ; 

7.  Grihadi-nirmaEa. 

V.  Bhavishya-Purana  : 

Chapters: 

12.  Madhya-parvani,  Pratideyata-pratima-lakshna-yarnana 

130.  Brahma-parvani,  Prasada-lakshana-varnana. 

131.  Murti-sthana,  deals  with  the  materials,  etc.,  of  which 

images  are  made. 

132.  Pratima-mana,  deals  with  the  measuremeut  of  images. 

VI.  Matsya-Purana  : 

Chapters  : 

262.  Deals  with  the  mtroduction  of  eighteen  ancient 
architects— Bhrigu,  Atri,  Vasistha,  Vi&vakarma, 
Maya,  Narada,  Nagnajit,  Vi'salaksha,  Purandara, 
Brahma,  K.nmara,  Nandisa,  Bannaka,  Garga, 
Vasudeya,  Aniruddha,  Bukra,  and  Brihaspati. 

255.  Stambha-mana-viuirnaya.  » 

267.  Darvaharana. 

258.  Nava-tfila-mana. 

262.  Pithika-lakshana. 


766 


APPENDIX  I 


263.  Lmga-lakshana. 

269,  Prasada-varnana. 

270.  Mandapa-lakshana. 

VII.  Linga»Purana : 

Part  II,  chapter: 

48.  Yaga-kupda-vicyasa-kathana-purvakam  sarvasair 
devatanam  athapana-vidhi-nirupanam,  Praaadarchani- 
nirupanam. 

VIII.  Vayu-pTiraaa  : 

Part  I,  chapter : 

39.  6aila-sthita-vividha-devalaya-klrtana. 

IX.  Skanda-Piirana ; 

Chapters  ; 

24.  Mahe&vara-khande  prathame— Himalayena  sva-sutaya 
Tivahartham  Gargaoharya-purohitam  puraskritya 
VitVakarma-dvara  purva-mandapa-nirmanadi-varna- 
nam,  Naradad  Vi&vakarma-krita-vivaha-rQandapam 
ohaturyena  sarva-deva-pratikriti-chitra-Yinyasaih 
^rutYa  sarYesham  devanam  feanka-praptih. 
Mahe^Yara-khande  dYitiye — svayam  VikYakarma- 
dYara  nirmapite  Mahinagare  sthapana-varnana. 

25.  Vaishnava-khande  dYitiye — Narada-likhita-sahitya- 
sambhaYa-samgraha-patram  srutva  Jndradumnajfiaya 
Padmanidhina  sYarna-kala-nirmanam,  Naradajilaya 
VikYakarmana  syandana-traya-nirmanaih,  tasya 
rathasya  Narada-karena  sthapanam,  tat-prasamgena 
ratha-sthapana-prakara-Yidhi-Yarnanam, 

PEATIMA-DEAVYADI-VAGHANA— On  the  materials  of  which 
idols  are  made. 

(Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss,  ibid.  Yol.  i.  p.  490). 

PEATIMA-MANA-LAKSHANA— On  the  tala-measures  of  images, 
exists  in  Tibetan  Translation  ; Sylvain  Levi  reports  that  he  has 
traoed  its  original  Sanskrit  version  in  the  Palace  Library  of  Tibet 


TBBATISES  ON  ARCHITBCTUBB 


767 


PRATISHTHA-TATTVA — also  called  Maya-samgraha — On  arohi- 
teoture. 

(Aufreoht,  ibid,  part  m.  p.  74). 

PBATISHTHA-TANTBA — On  architecture  in  a dialogue  form  bet- 
ween ^iva  and  Parvati . 

(Aufrecht,  ibid,  part  m.  p.  74). 

PBASADA-kALPA — On  the  construction  of  buildings. 

(Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid,  vol.  ir.  p.  522). 
PBASADA-KlBTANA— On  architecture. 

(Author  not  known;  in  possession  of  Gopal 
Rao,  Malegamva,  Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  in 
Private  Libraries  of  Gujarat,  etc.,  1872,  p.  276). 
PBASABA-DlPIKA — On  architecture,  quoted  in  Madana-Parijata. 

(Aufrecht,  ibid,  part  I.  p.  364), 
PBlSADA-MANpANA-VASTU-^ASTBA— artributed  to  Sutra- 
dhara  Mandana — (Egg.  Mss.  3147,  2253).  It  is  written  in  Sans- 
krit, but  is  largely  mixed  with  Bhasha  forms.  It  contains  the 
following  eight  chapters  : 

1.  Milra-kala&a. 

2.  Jagati  drishfei-dosho  ayatanadhikara. 

3.  Bhitti-pitha-mandovara-garbha-gpihaudumbara-pra- 

mana. 

4.  Pramana-drishti-pada-sthana-ykhara-kalafea-lakshana. 

5.  Rajyadi-prasadadhikara. 

6.  Kefearyadi-prasada-jati-lakshana,  pancha-kshetra*. 

pafioha-chatvarim^an-meru-lakshanadhyaya. 

7.  Mandapa-balanaka-sambaranadhikara. 

8 Jirnoddhara-bhinna-dosha-sthavara-pratishtha,  Sutra- 
dhara-puja,  Jina-pratishtha,  Vastu-purusha-vinyasa. 
PBASADA-LAKSH  AN  A— attributed!  to  Varahamihira — On  archi- 
tecture. 

(Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  il.  p.  208), 


768 


APPENDIX  I 


PRASADA-LAKSHANA— On  buildings. 

(Opperfc’s  list  of  Sanskiife  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  473). 
PRASADALANKARA-LAKSHANA — On  the  decoration  (articles 
of  furniture)  of  buildings. 

(In  possession  of  the  Maharaja  of  Travancore ; 
Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  II.  p.  473). 


B 

BIMBAMANA — (Mss.  British  Museum,  nos.  i.  569,  5291,  foil.  33,  7 
lines  to  a page  ; n.  658,  6292,  foil.  27,  9 lines  to  a page ; written 
in  Simbalese  character,  has  a Simhalese  commentary) — This  is  a 
treatise  on  religious,  sculpture,  stated  to  be  extracted  from  a 
Oautamiya  ascribed  to  Sariputra.  The  last  colophon  runs  thus 
— Iti  Gautamiye  Sari-putra-sruteBimba-mtlnamsamaptam.  The 
commentator  explains  this  Bimbamana-vidhi  as  the  Sarvajiia- 
prat'ima-pramana-vidhi. 

BBTHAT-SAl^HITA — of  Varahamihira — On  architectural  and 

sculptural  matters. 

Chapters  : 

53.  Yastu-vidya. 

56.  Prasada-lakshana. 

67.  Yajra-lepa. 

58.  Pratima-lakshana. 

79.  Sayyasana-lakshana. 

BUDDHA-PRATIMA-LAKSHANA-On  the  tala  measure  of  Bud- 
dha-images  ; exists  in  Tibetan  Translation  ; the  original  Sanskrit 
version  is  apparently  missing. 

BRAHMANDA-PURANA — See  under  Puranas, 


BH 

BHAYISHYA-PURANA- — See  under  Puranas, 


TEEATISES  OE  AECHITECTUBE 


769 


. M 

MATHA-PBATISHTHA-TATTVA — attributed  to  Baghuhandana— 
contains  quotations  from  the  Devi-purana  and  the  Deva-pratish- 
tha-tattya,  both  of  which  deal  with  architectural  and  sculptural 
matters. 

MATSYA.PXJBA.NA-See  under  Puranas. 

MANUSHyALAYA^CHANDBIKA-~(also  called  Tachohu-^astra)- 
deals  with  measurement,  etc.,  concerning  private  dwelling 
houses  as  distingueshed  from  religious  temples,  and  military 
forts,  etc.  It  contains  66  stanzas  and  a Malayalam  translation. 
There  is  a Ms.  also  bearing  the  same  title. 

(Opperi’s  list  of  Sinskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  475). 

MANUSHYA.LAYA-LAKSHANA — On  the  building  of  human 
dwellings. 

(In  possession  of  the  Maharaja  of  Travancore, 
Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  475). 

MANTBA-DlPIKA — (see  Pafioha-ratra-pradipika) — 'On  architecture. 

MAYAMATA — an  oft  quoted  and  well  known  authority  on  architec- 
ture. There  are  several  treatises  attributed  to  Maya : — 

I.  Mayamata,  edited  by  Ganapati  ^astri,  1919,  from  three  frag- 
mentary and  one  incomplete  (with  a Tamil  translation) 
Mss. ; it  contains  34  chapters,  and  four  more  chapters  are 
missing  (see  below). 

There  are  some  other  Mss.  bearing  the  same  title  (Egg.  3160, 
2676) ; one  of  them  (in  the  Oriental  Mss.  Library,  Madras), 
written  in  modern  Telugu,  on  rough  paper,  contains  five 
chapters  with  a short  commentary  by  Gannamacharya. 

II,  Mayamata- ^ilpa-feastra-vidhana  (Egg.  3160,  2676,  3161,2630, 
with  Gannamacharya’s  Telugu  commentary  as  noted  above). 

III.  Maya-l^ilpa-tatika  (another  Ms.). 

IV.  Maya-^ilpa,  a few  extracts  from  this  have  been  translated  into 
English  by  Bev.  J.  E,  Kearns  (see  Indian  Antiquary,  vol. 
V,  pp.  230,  293) 


49 


770 


APPENDIX  I 


There  is  also  another  English  translation  of  Mayamata  in  the 
Mackenzie  collection  (Translation,  class  X,  Sanskrit,  2 — 6). 

V.  Maya-Tastn — text^pp.  33,  published  by  Pama  Svami  Sastralu 

& Sons,  Madras,  1916, 

VI.  May a-vastu-feastram— text,  pp.  40,  published  by  K.  Lakshman 

Mudali,  Madras,  1917. 

V3I.  Mayamata-Yastu-tastra — Oriental  Mss.  Library,  Madras,  Ckt- 
logue  vol.  XXII.  nos.  13034  (with  a Tamil  commentary),  13036 
(with  a Telugu  commentary),  13036,  13037,  13038,  13039 
(with  a Telugu  commentary). 

Of  these  Mss.  no.  13034  is  the.  largest,  containing  S90  pages 
of  13|  X 8"  paper  of  22  lines  to  a page.  The  subjeots  and  the 
method  of  description  are  strikingly  similar  to  those  of  the 
Manasara.  It  is  divided  into  the  following  thirty-six 
chapters  : — 

1.  Samgrahadhyaya. 

2.  Vastu-prakara. 

3.  Bhu-pariksha. 

4.  Bhu-parigraha. 

6.  Manopakarana. 

6.  Dik-parichohhedana. 

7.  Pada-devata-vinyasa. 

8.  Deva-bali-karma-vidhana  (incomplete). 

9. . Orama-garbha-vinyasa  (incomplete). 

10.  Nagara-vinytisa. 

11.  Bhu-lamb(h)a-vidhana. 

12.  G-arbha-nyasa-vidhana. 

13.  Upapitha-Yidhana. 

14.  Adhishthana-vidhana. 

16,  Pada-pramana-dravya-parigraha. 

16.  Prastara-karana. 

17.  Saudhi-karraa-vidhana. 

18.  Sikhara-karana-bhavana-samapti-vidhana, 

19.  Eka-bhumi-yidhana, 


TEEATISES  ON  AKCHTTEGTUKE 


771 


20.  Dvi-bhumi-vidhana. 

21.  Tri-bhumi-vidhana. 

22.  Bahu-bhiimi-vidhana. 

23.  Prakara-parivara  (elsewhere,  Sandlii-karma-vidliaua). 

24.  Gopura-vidhaiia. 

26.  Sabha(mandapa)-vidhaua. 

26.  8ala-vidhana, 

27.  Grilia-inauadliikara  (elsewhere*,  Ohatur-griha-vidhana) 

28.  Griha-prave&a. 

29.  Eaja-vesma-vidhana. 

30.  Dvara-vidhrina. 

31.  Yanadhikara. 

32.  Yana-^ayanadhikara. 

33.  Lingadakshana. 

34.  Pi^ha-lakshana  (incomplete). 

35.  Annkarma-vidhana. 

36.  Prafima-lakahana. 

Compare  no.  I,  which  contains  the  first  34  out  of  36  chapters 
given  in  the  above  list,  the  variations  are  noted  within 
brackets. 

No.  13036  contains  in  74  pages  tho  chapters  1-32. 

No.  18036  is  same  as  no.  13036. 

No.  13037  contains  only  two  incomplete  chapters  in  6 pages.  ’ . 
No.  13038  contains  in  94  pages  the  following  twelve  chapters  ; — ' 

1.  Pratima-vidhana, 

2.  Aya-lakshana. 

3.  Linga-lakshana. 

4.  Data-tala-vidhana 

6.  Kufichita-vidhana. 

6.  Nava-tala-vidhana. 

7.  Hasta-karma-vidhana. 

8.  Epapitha-vidh&na. 

9.  Eka-bhumi-vidhana, 


772 


Avmi^mx  I 


10.  Dvi-tala-vidhaua. 

11.  Tri-feala-vidhana. 

12.  Gopura-vidhana. 

Its  colophon  runs  thus — “ iti  Gannaoharya-viraolii- 
fcayam  Mayamate  Silpa-sastre...” 

No.  13039  coutaiiis  in  36  pages  the  first  four  chapters  of  no.  13038. 

“ There  is  in  Tamil  a treatise  on  8ilpa-§astra,  said  to  have  been 
originally  composed  in  Sanskrit  by  Myen  (i.e.,  Maya)  who, 
according  to  Mythology,  was  a son  of  Brahma  and  architect 
of  the  gods.  The  original  work  appears  to  have  been 
disseminated  far  and  wide,  and  to  have  suffered  by  omissions 
as  well  as  by  additions.  The  work  under  consideration 
seems  to  have  been  formed  from  selections  of  existing 
editions  of  the  original  work  under  the  superintendence 
and  guidance  of  persons  having  a practical  knowledge  of 
^ilpa-sastra  or  at  least  of  persons  professing  to  have  such 
knowledge  (Ind.  Ant.  vol.  V.  p.  230,  o.  1,  para  1;  see  also  M. 
II.  11-12, 17-20  under  Sthapati,  p.  709-710). 

In  regard  to  Maya  the  following  note  is  of  great  interest : — 

Exploration  of  the  sites  of  a lost  civilization  is  the  fascinating 
pursuit  of  Dr.  Gann,  who  has  discovered  a hitherto  unknown 
monolith  and  a once-populous  site  in  the  forests  of  Yucatan. 
He  is  exploring  for  traces  of  the  Mayas,  and  his  progress  is 
recorded  in  a aeries  of  articles  published  in  the  Morning 
Post. 

I discovered  the  ruins  of  the  great  city  of  Coba,”  he  writes, 
through  information  found  in  a recent  translation  6f  the 
ancient  Maya  manuscript  book  of  Chilan  Balam  of 
Chumayel.  This  describes  the  migration  of  the  Itzas.from 
Chiohenitza  to  Coba,  which  is  about  fifty  miles  to  the  east  of 
Chichenitza. 

“The  books  of  Chilan  Balam  are  the  old  traditions  of  the 
Mayas,  which  survived  the  Spanish  conquest  of  Yucatan. 
They  record  the  migrations  of  Maya-  clans,  and  were  reduced 
to  w'riting  in  the  sixteenth  century. . I was  informed  by  a 


TBEATISES  ON  ABOHITEGTUEE 


773 


wandering  Maya  Indian  that  in  the  Mexican  territory  of 
Quintana  Eoo  he  had  come  across  a great  slab  of  atones  lying 
buried  in  the  bush  upon  which  were  inscribed : ‘ Ubalob  uxben 
uincoob,’  or  things  belonging  to  the  ancient  people.  He  said 
he  had  found  it  not  many  miles  north  of  the  British  Honduras 
frontier. 

“ As  guide  I took  the  Indian  who  had  told  me  of  the  stone.  He,  like 
most  of  his  race,  had  nothing  to  say  to  strangers,  and  he  said 
it  most  efficiently. 

“ I had  no  difficulty  in  obtainiug  my  permit  to  tisit  the  shores  of, 
Ohetumal  Bay,  where  the  Maya  monolith  was  reported  to 
be. 

“ So  we  set  out  on  our  journey  up  the  Bay,  which  runs  almost  due 
north  for  about  thirty  miles  into  the  south  of  the  Yucatan 
peninsula.  This  is  surely  one  of  the  most  desolate  stretches 
of  water  in  the  world.  It  is  shallow  ; yellow  ; forbidding.  On 
the  east  separating  it  from  the  Caribbean  Sea,  is  an  unexplor- 
ed, uninhabited  peninsula,  covered  with  virgin  bush.  On  the 
west,  between  the  Bay  and  the  great  Bacalar  Lagoon,  the  land 
is  equally  desolate,  being  traversed  at  rare  intervals  only  by  a 
few  Indian  ‘ Chicle  bleeders,’  who  roam  in  search  of  the 
sapodilla  trees,  from  which  they  get  the  latex  that  forms  the 
raw  material  of  chewing  gum. 

“ About  thirteen  miles  from  Payo  Obispo  I lighted  on  my  great 
find.  We  came  to  a spot  on  the  west  coast  of  the  bay  where  an 
Indian  had  cut  down  the  bush  to  make  a small  maize  planta- 
tion. My  Indian  guide  directed  ua  to  land  here,  and  then  led 
us  to  the  stone  we  were  seeking. 

“ The'. full  importance  of  the  discovery  was  not  apparent  at  first.  It 
was  a block  of  greyish  schist,  twelve  feet  long,  eighteen  inches 
wide,  and  twelve  inches  thick.  It  had  at  one  time  stood  up- 
right, but  now  lay  flat  and  embedded  in  the  ground.  Upon 
one  edge  faint  traces  of  sculpture  were  visible,  but  the  greater 


'774 


APPENDIX  I 


part  of  the  exposed  surfaces  had  been  worn  quite  smooth  by  the 
tropical  down  pours  of  an  unknown  number  of  rainy  seasons. 
This  has  been  the  fate  of  many  Maya  inscriptions. 

“ I then  brushed  , the  soil  from  the  Stone,  and  there — ^glorious 
surprise  ' — I saw  the  Maya  Initial  Series  Date--9.  8.  0.  0.  0.  5 
Aban  3 Chen,  or  26  October,  333  A.D. ! The  sculpture 
preserved  by  its  burial  in  the  earth,  was  almost  as  clear  and 
plain  as  on  the  day  when  it  was  cut  in  the  stone,  nearly 
sixteen  centuries  ago. 

“ Amid  all  the  Maya  ruins  in  Yucatan  only  four  such  Initial  Series 
dates  have  been  found,  and  the  date  carved  on  the  monolith 
which  lay  before  me  was  more  than  three  hundred  years  earlier 
than  that  appearing  on  the  oldest  of  the  stelae  previously  found. 
Now,  one  of  the  most  baffling  mysteries  connected  with  the 
Mayas  is  their  abandonment  of  their  old  empire  and  founda- 
tion of  the  new  one ; for,  at  a certain  period  in  their  history, 
they  left  their  cities,  built  with  an  enormous  expenditure  of 
labour,  and  ihigrated  from  the  fertile  lands  in  which  they 
stood  to  found  new  settlements  in  what  were,  apparently, 
uninhabited  regions. 

“ Earthquakes,  pestilence,  and  foreign  invasion  have  been  suggest- 
ed as  possible  causes  of  this  migration.  The  cities  the  Mayas 
left  bear  no  traces  of  violence  having  been  wrought  by  man 
or  the  forces  of  Nature,  and  the  buildings  of  their  new  settle- 
ments were  obviously  erected  by  a people  with  unimpaired 
vigour.  It  is  therefore  important  to  fix  the  date  when  they 
first  established  themselves  in  Yucatan ; and  this  discovery 
may,  in  fact,  cause  a complete  reversion  of  the  ideas  generally 
held  as  to  their  first  immigration  into  this  peninsula  and  their 
foundation  of  what  is  known  as  the  New  Empire.  It  may, 
indeed,  afiect  our  views  of  the  whole  history  of  the  earliest  and 
most  advanced  aboriginal  civilisation  of  America,  which  was 
in  many  respects  the  highest  civilisation  of  ancient,  if  not  of 
any  time. 


TEEATISBB  ON  ARCHITECTUEE 


775 


The  carving  on  this  stela  begins  with  the  initial  glyph  and  in 
column  below  this  come  the  glyphs  meaning — 

9 Bactuns  (periods  of  400  years,  each  of  360  days). 

8 Kafcuns  (periods  of  twenty  years)  ; 0 Tuns  (years). 

0 Uinals  (Maya  months  of  twenty  days). 

0 Kins  (days).  It  thus  records  the  lapse  of  3760  years  from  the 
beginning  of  the  Maya  chronology.  The  Mayas  did  nob  count 
any  period  of  time  until  it  was  completed,  that  is  to  say,  their 
sign  for  the  first  day  of  a month  was  0.  So  if  written  in  our 
style  these  glyphs  would  read  1.  1.  3761. 

“ It  is  generally  assumed  that  the  date  from  which  the  Mayas 
reckoned  their  chronology  is  mythological  rather  than  histori- 
cal. But  for  the  present  purposes  consideration  of  such  a 
question  is  immaterial.  The  point  is  that  all  the  dates  on 
such  monoliths  are  reckoned  from  the  same  day,  and  therefore, 
according  to  Spinden's  correlation  of  their  system  with  ours, 
this  date  corresponds  to  our  26  October,  333  A.  D. 

" This  would,  apparently,  place  the  beginning  of  the  Maya  chrono- 
logy in  B.  0.  3381.  The  British  Museum  Q-uide  to  the 

. Maudsley  Collection  of  Maya  Sculptures  gives  this  Maya  date 
9.  8.  0.  0.  0.  5 Ahan,  3 Chen  as  A.D.  64.  But  it  mentions  that 
Professor  Morley  has  worked  out  another  correlation  which 
places  this  and  all  other  Maya  dates  some  270  years  later. 
Beneath  this  date  on  the  stela  was  a great  sheet  of  hieroglyphics, 
which  were  perfectly  clearly  defined,  but  they  are  in  our  pre- 
sent state  of  knowledge  indecipherable.  I have  uo  doubt 
though  that  if  we  could  read  them  we  should  find  that  they 
recorded  events  which  had  occurred  during  the  preceding 
Katun  or  period  of  twenty  Maya  years,  as  such  stelae  were  put 
up  by  the  Mayas  to  commemorate  the  ends  of  each  of  those 
periods. 

“ The  monolith  had  been  erected  just  in  front  of  a great  terraced 
pyramid  which  stood  between  two  others.  AH  these  pyramids 


776 


APPENDIX  1 


were  faced,  in  the  usual  Maya  style,  with  blocks  of  out  lime- 
stone.. The  central  one  had  three  terraces  and  was  thirty-two 
feet  high.  Its  flat  top,  upon  which  there  no  doubt  stood  a 
wooden  temple,  long  since  perished,  was  one  hundred  and 
thirty- five  feet  long  and  sixty-four  feet  across. 

“ Further  investigation  showed  that  these  pyramids  were  at  one 
end  of  a great  enclosure,  which  was  surrounded  by  a massive 
stone  wall.  This  wall  is  from  twelve  to  fifteen  feet  thick  at  the 
base,  and  in  the  places  where  it  has  remained  intact,  it  is  twe- 
lve feet  high  ; but  for  the  moat  part  the  growth  of  luxurious 
vegetation  has  thrown  the  stones  down  and  the  ruins  are  only 
three  or  four  feet  above  ground.  The  wall  is  a mile  and  a half 
long  and  forms  a semicircle  with  the  two  ends  running  down 
to  the  shore. 

“ I think  there  can  hardly  be  any  doubt  that  this  was  intended  as 
a fortification,  and  therefore  a particular  interest  is  attached  to 
it.  For,  judging  by  all  their  sculptures,  the  ancient  Mayas 
knew  nothing  of  war.  Their  sculptors  have  left  no  records  of 
battles  or  triumphs,  such  as  those  of  Greece,  Egypt,  or  Babylon. 
One  assumed  that  all  the  Maya  clans  dwelt  in  amity,  and  that 
until  quite  late  in  their  history  they  had  no  experience  of 
fighting,  either  among  themselves  or  with  alien  races, 

Yet  here  we  have  what  is  obviously  a defensive  work,  and  it 
seems  significant  that  the  only  two  walls  of  this  kind  which  have 
hitherto  been  discovered  are  also  in  Yucatan,  one  being  at 
Tuluum,  on  the  east’  coast,  and  the  other  at  Chicken  Itza,  in 
the  northern  interior.  Against  whom  were  these  defences 
erected  ? J udging  by  the  date  on  the  stela,  they  were  built 
centuries  before  the  Mayas  came  in  contact  with  the  Tolecs, 
on  the  north.  It  has  been  assumed  that  Yucatan  was  unin- 
habited when  the  Mayas  first  took  possession  of  it,  and  they 
were  not  in  the  habit  of  building  such  walls  in  their  earlier 
cities  to  the  south.  Why  this  innovation  ? 


TEBATISBS  ON  AECHlTECTBEE 


777 


‘\Th.e  space  enclosed  by  this  Wall  had  evidently  been  densely 
populated  in  bygone  times.  For  in  the  places  where  the 
Indians  have  cleared  the  imdergrowth  away,  one  could  see 
that  the  ground  is  literally  covered  with  potsherds,  flint  and 
obsidian  chips,  clay  beads,  spindle  whorls,  small  human  and 
animal  heads,  and  other  surviving  evidences  of  human 
habitation. 

“ A great  concourse  of  people  must  have  lived  there  for  many 
generations. 

" The  discovery  of  these  ruios  was,  more  or  less,  incidental.  Dur- 
ing this  season  my  primary  objective  is  Northern  Yucatan, 
where  Professor  Morley,  of  the  Carnegie  Institute,  and  I propose 
to  test  the  truth  of  some  wonderful  Indian  legends.  The 
Indians  have  told  me  of  a vast  subterranean  cavern  some 
twenty  , miles  long,  and  of  the  ruins  of  a great  city  which  no 
white  man  has  seen. 

Along  the  east  coast  of  Yucatan  live  the  Santa  Cruz  Indians, 
presumably  the  direct  descendants  of  the  ancient  Mayas  who 
erected  magnificent  temples  and  palaces,  most  of  which  now 
lie  buried  in  the  tropical  forests.  Some  have  been  discovered, 
but  there  is  no  doubt  that  ■ a great  number  of  them  yet  remain 
to  be  discovered. 

“ The  Santa  Cruz  Indians  have  never  been  subdued,  and  for  five 
centuries  they  have  successfully  resisted  all  the  efforts,  first  of 
the  Spaniards  and  later  of  the  Mexicans  to  conquer  their 
country.  These  Indians  so  far  as  is  known  lead  the  lives  of 
their  ancestors  cf  a thousand  years  ago.  They  worship  the 
same  gods  and  perform  the  ancient  religious  ceremonies.  But 
we  know  little  about  them,  because  their  villages  are  buried  in 
the  dense  forests  of  the  hills  and. they  permit  no  strangers  to 
intrude. 

**  The  danger  of  penetrating  into  this  Santa  Cruz  country  arises 
from  the'  fact  that'  the  suspicious  Indians  may  fire  from  the 
bush  v/ithout  inquiry  whether  the  strangers  are  friends  or  foes. 


APt^ENDlX  I 


About  the  vast  cave  of  Loltun,  which  is  possibly  the  largest 
cavern  in  the  world  he  adds  that  “this  cave  is  entered  by  great 
well-like  holes  in  the  earth  through  which  one  descends  by  lad- 
ders from  ledge  to  ledge  arriving  in  immense  rocky  chambers 
whose  floors  are  covered  with  stalagmites  and  cave  earth,  and 
from  whose  lofty  roofs  depend  vast  stalactites.  Two  of  these 
holes  are  a mile  apart,  and  the  intervening  space  has  never 
been  traversed  by  a European,  From  the  great  chambers 
unexplored  passages  branch  out  in  every  direction.  On  the 
floors  of  the  chambers,  buried  in  the  cave  earth,  innumerable 
potsherds  have  already  been  found,  also  human  and  animal 
bones,  flint  and  stone  weapons  and  implements,  and  many 
other  relics  of  the  ancient  inhabitants.  It  is  possible  that 
the  deeper  layers  of  this  earth  and  the  remote  galleries  and 
passages  may  contain  relics  of  the  pre-Maya  inhabitants  of 
Yucatan,  of  whom  nothing  whatever  is  known  at  present. 

“ It  is  said  by  the  Indians  that  subterranean  passages  from  this 
cavern  reach  to  the  ruined  city  of  Chicken  Itza  20  miles  away. 
There  is  a tradition  handed  down  amongst  the  modern  Indians 
that  during  one  of  the  innumerable  internecine  wars  amongst 
the  Maya  which  followed  the  breaking  up  of  the  central 
authority,  after  the  Conquest  of  Mayapan,  the  inhabitants  of 
a neighbouring  village  were  driven  to  take  refuge  in  this  cave 
by  a band  of  their  enemies,  who  pursued  them  even  into  this 
last  refuge,  and  that  of  neither  pursued  iior  pursuers  was  any 
trace  ever  again  seen. 

“ Some  believe  that  in  the  dark  all  fell  over  a precipice  into  some 
vast  chasm  in  the  limestone,  others  that  ail  lost  their  way  in 
the  intricate  m&zQ  of  endless  galleries,  and  others,  again  that 
all  were  suffocated  by  poisonous  gases.  Whatever  their  fate, 
the  possibility  of  coming  suddenly  at  any  turn  upon  groups  of 
rag  clad  skeletons  shrouded  in  the  impalpable  dust  of  ages  does 
not  detract  from  the  eerie  feeling  induced  by  traversing  these 


TBEATISBS  ON  ABCHITECTUBE 


779 


vast  catacombs,  where  silence  is  almost  palpable.  One’s  feet 
make  no  noise  on  the  soft  cave  earch,  and  one  is  almost  afraid 
to  raise  one’s  voice,  which  reverberates  round  the  Great  Stone 
chambers  and  is  thrown  back  in  a thousand  mocking  echoes 
from  the  rocky  walls.  Upon  the  walls  of  the  lighted  chamber 
many  crude  drawings  have  been  left  by  the  former  inhabitants, 
and  in  one  case  is  inscribed  a late  Maya  date  A.  D.  1379.” 

“ Whatever  Dr.  Gann’s  conclusions  may  be,  his  actual  discoveries 
are  of  stupendous  interest.  The  causeway  that  he  has  found 
is  of  supreme  importance.  He  regards  it  as  having  been  built 
for  the  purposes  of  human  sacrifice.  I disagree.  My  reason 
for  disagreeing  is  that  there  are  similar  causeways  in  Cambodia 
which  were  designed  purely  for  ceremonial  purposes. 

The  whole  Maya  remains  as  discovered  show  the  closest  possible 
relation  with  the  civilisation  as  it  existed  in  Java  and  Solith- 
East  Asia  to  what  has  been  found  in  Yucatan.  There  is 
nothing  to  my  mind  that  suggests  that  the  form  of  •civilisation 
is  indigenous,  and  I should  bo  inclined  to  hold  that  the  te'm- 
plos  at  Java  were  the  proto-types  of  what  has  been  found  in 
Yucatan. 

‘‘  Unquestionably  in  the  ^arly  days  perishable  wood  structures 
were  built,  but  when  stone  supplanted  wood,  you  find  pyramids 
being  built  precisely  on  the  same  lines  that  they  were  being 
built  in  South-East  Asia.  They  were,  so  far  as  the  staircases 
were  concerned,  a copy  of  what  the  Babylonians  were  building 
2,000  years  before  the  era  of  Christ.  It  is  necessary  to 
remember  that  as  Indian  civilisation  spread  eastwards  the 
type  of  pyramid  established  by  them  became  fashionable  and 
was  built  in  stone. 

“ While  tlie  great  causeway  was  of  outstanding  interest,  it  had 
to  be  remembered  that  it  could  be  paralleled  with  the  remains 


780 


APPBHDIX  I 


of  Indian  civilisation.  Farther  there  was  no  question  but  that 
Maya  carvings  represented  Indian  elephants  and  Indians  with 
typical  headdresses. 

“ Indian  navigators,  it  was  known,  had  combed  out  the  islands  in 
the  Pacific,  such  as  Easter  Island  and  many  others,  and  it  was 
unthinkable  that  they  should  not  have  discovered  a continent 
that  stretched  from  pole  to  pole. 

“ To  the  archaeologist  the  issue  now  raised  was  of  supreme  impor- 
tance. Until  fifty  years  ago  the  orthodox  held  that  the  Maya 
civilisation  was  of  Indian  origin.  The  dating  derived  from 
the  hieroglyphs  was  so  vague  as  to  give  little  help,  and  inter- 
pretation varies  by  as  much  as  three  or  six  centuries. 

“ What  supremely  interests  the  archaeologist,”  Professor  Elliot 
Smith  continued,  “ is  that  we  find  a civilisation  starting  full- 
blown  in  Central  America.  Under  Asiatic  influence,  it  rose  to 
great  heights,  but  had  already  collapsed  before  the  advent  of 
the  Spaniards,  who  may  have  given  it  the  coup  de  grace.  To 
know  the  real  secret  of  Maya  culture  afiecta  our  whole  inter- 
pretation of  civilisation. 

“Can  different  communities,  such  as  the  Indian,  the  Chinese  and 
the  American,  build  up  a civilisation  independent  of  each 
other,  oris  it  possible  for  a certain  civilisation  to  bespread 
about  the  world  in  the  same  way  that  a steam  engine  can  be 
distributed  ? 

“ This  is  the  great  problem  of  ethnology  to-day,  and  the  issue  now 
centres  in  the  problem  as  to  how  civilisation  started  in  Central 
America.  There  is  a large  gap  between  Asia  and  America, 
but  if  diffusion  means  anything  it  means  that  that  gap  must 
have  been  bridged  as  I have  shown  it  could  have  been. 

“ The  Maya  civilisation  rose  and  fell.  It  fell  so  soon  as  the 
energy  of  the  driving  force  that  inspired  it  declined.  That 


TEEATISES  OH  AECHITECTUEE 


781 


is  our  view,  and  we  do  not  believe  in  an  indigenous  culture 
that  rose  through  its  own  impetus,  and  that  fell  as  a result  of 
foreign  invasion.” 

No  one  now  questions  Er.  Gann’s  facts,  but  many  competent 
arohsaologists  dispute  the  conclusions  at  which  he  arrives.  An 
archeological  issue  has  now  been  fairly  raised.  Did  the  Maya 
civilisation  arise  from  native  American  civilisation,  or  was  it 
the  result  of  peaceful  penetration  by  the  Asiatic  ? 

Professor  Grafton  Elliot  Smith,  pf  University  College,  London, 
discussing  the  subject  with  fi, Morning  Post  representative,  dis- 
agreed absolutely  with  the  views  put  forward  by -the  American 
school,  and  supported  by  Dr.  Gann. 

‘‘At  University  College,”  he  said,  “ we  are  absolutely  convinced 
that  the  Maya  civilisation  was  directly  derived  from  India. 
We  regard  it  as  certain  that  between  the  Fourth  and  the 
Twelfth  Century  there  was  a penetration  from  the  South-East 
of  Asia.  The  question  of  dating  is  admittedly  difficult,  but 
from  the  facts  we  have  in  our  possession  I should  be  inclined  to 
think  that  Dr.  Gann’s  dates  may  err  by  as  much  as  three  cen- 
turies.” 

(OenU  al  News,  quottd  icoin  Morning  Post  by  S a/osman,  Mftroh  21,  April  9,  17,  26,  1926), 

MAHA-NIIWANA-TANTEA—- deals  with  both  architectural  and 
sculptural  matters,  such  as  temples,  idols,  phallus,  ponds,  and 
tanks,  as  well  as  with  the  directions  concerning  broken  limbs  of 
images,  especially  the  materials  of  which  buildings  and  idols 
should  be  made,  the  Vastu  god,  and  so  on  (chapter  Xlll,  verses 
22-286,  see  also  chapters  XIV,  and  vi). 

MAHABHAEATA — (Ist  Bombay  edition  ; 2nd  Calcutta  edition  ; Gild. 
Bibl.  98) — Sabha-parvan,  chapters  : 

1.  Maya  built  a council  hall  (sabha)  for  the  Pandavas. 

7.  Indra-sabha-varnana. 

8.  Yama-sabha-varnana. 


782 


APPENDIX  I 


9.  Varana-sabha-varnana, 

10.  Kiibera-sabha-varnana. 

11.  Brahma-sabha-varnana. 

MANA-KATHANA — On  the  system  of  measurement. 

(Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  IX.  p.  473). 
MANAVA-VASTXJ-LAXSHANA—On  architecture. 

(Oppert’a  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  476). 
MAN  ASA- (same  as  Manaaara)  See  below. 

(Oppert^s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  II.  p.  618). 
MANASAEA — (edited  and  translated  into  English  for  the  first  time  by 
the  writer)^ — The  standard  treatise  and  a complete  text  on  archi- 
tecture and  sculpture.  It  comprises  70  chapters  in  more  than 
10,000  lines,  There  are  eleven  manuscripts  of  it.  See  the 
details  given  , under  the  Preface  of  its  first  edition  by  the  writer. 
MANASOLLASA— (K.  L.  Mitra’s  Notices  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  vol.  ill. 
p.  182) — attributed  to  the  Chalukya  king  Sometvara.  In  two 
chapters,  it  deals  with  the  following  subjects  : 

1.  Mandirarambha-muhurta-kathana. 

2.  Shodata-prakara-griha-lakshana. 

3.  Eaja-griha-lakshana. 

4.  Vastu-deva-puja-vidhi. 

6.  Griha-pravefea-kathana. 

6.  Griha-varnana. 

7.  Griha-chitra-varna-lakshana. 

8.  Vajra-lepa-laksliana. 

9.  Lekhani-lakshana. 

10.  Tambula-bhoga-kathana. 

11.  Vilepanopabhoga-kathana, 

12.  Vaatropabhoga-kathana. 

13.  MSlyopabhoga-kathana. 

14.  Bhushabhoga-kathana. 

15.  Asana-bhoga-kathana, 


TBEATISES  ON  AECHITEOTUEE 


783 


16.  Putiiadi-bhoga-kathanii. 

17.  Anna-bhoga-kafehana. 

18.  Paniya-blioga-kathana. 

19.  Abbyanga-bhoga-kathana 

20.  Yana-bhoga-kathana. 

21.  Gbbabra-bboga-katbana. 

22.  Sayya-bboga-kafcbana. 

23.  Dbupa-bboga-katbana. 

■ 24.  Stri-bboga-katbana. 

This  work  should  not  to  be  confounded:  with  that  of  the  same  name 
in  Taylor’s  catalogue  Eaison^e  (vol.  l,  p.  1)  and  its  commentary, 
Manasollasa-vrittanta-praka&a  fin  Weber’s  Berlin  catalogue, 
p.179). 

MANASOLLASA-VEITTANTA-PEAKA^A~On  architecture. 

(In  possession  of  VimSna-Acbarya,  Benares, 
Weber’s  Berlin  catalogue,  p.  179), 

MUBTTI-DHYANA— On  sculpture. 

(Aufrecbt,  ibid,  part  l.  p.  464). 
MtiBTTI-LAKSHANA— On  idol-making. 

(Aufrecbt,  ibid,  part  i.  p.  464). 
There  is  another  Ms.  bearing  the  same  title  which  is  stated  to  nave 
been  taken  from  the  Garuda-samhita. 

MULA-STAMBHA-NIENAYA— On  architectural  description  of  the 
main  pillar  of  a house. 

(Aufrecbt,  ibid,  part  i.  p.  464  ; Oppert’s-  list 
of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  ii,  p.  202.) 


E 

EATNA-DlPIK A— attributed  to  Ohandetvara-  On  architecture. 

(Aufrecbt,  ibib,  part  li,  pp.  36,114). 


784 


APPENDIX  I 


EATNA-MALA— of  ^ripati— 'deals  with  astrological  matters  in  con- 
nection with  the  construction  of  houses  and  idols  of  deities  under 
the  following  chapters  : 

17.  Vastu-prakarana  (28  verses). 

18.  Griha-prave^a  (11  verses). 

20.  Deva-pratishtha  (13  verses). 

EAJA-*-GEIHA-NIRMANA — On  the  building  of  royal  palaces. 

(Burnell’s  classified  Index  to  the  Sanskrit  Mss. 
in  the  Palace  Library  of  Tanjore,  1880). 

RAJA-YALLABHA-TiKA — A commentary  on  Eaja-vallabha- 

Mandana. 

(Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  in  Private 
•Libraries  of  Gujarat,  etc.,  1872,  p.  276). 

RAMAYANA — (1st  Calcutta  edition,  ed.  Schlegel  Gild.  Bibl.  84,  ed. 
Gorrens,  Gild.  Bibl.  86,  2nd  Bombay  edition) — devotes  large 
portions  of  the  following  chapters  on  architecture; 

Adikanda,  th  Sarga,  the  description  of  the  city  of  AyodhyS. 

Lankakanda,  3rd  Sarga,  the  description  of  the  fort  of  Lanka. 

(There  are  also  numerous  casual  references  to  architectural 
and.  sculptural  matters  in  the  Epics,  the  Puranas  and  the 
Againas).,.. 

RASI-PRAKAR A— attributed  to  Garga— deals  with  astrological 
matters  concerning  architecture. 

(See  Yastu-Sarani). 

RUPA-MANPANA—attributcd  to  . Mandana  Sutradhara — On 
architecture, 

(Cf.  Rajavallabha  Mandana). 


■ L 

LAKSHANA-SAMUCHCHAYA — On  the  features  in  images  of 
deities,  quoted  by  Hemadri  in  Danakhanda  (p.  823),  in  Muhurta- 
dipaka,  and  Parafeurama-prakasa.” 

(Aufrecht,  ibid,  part  i.  p.  636). 


TEEATISES  ON  ARCHITECTURE 


186 


LAGHU-^ILPA.JYOTISHA— On  architecture 

(British  Museum  Catalogue,  20,  E.  32). 
LAOHU-6iLPA-JYOTIH-SARA — by  ^ivarama,  with  a Gujarati 
commentary.  This  pamphlet  deals  mostly  with  astrological 
matters  concerning  architecture.  The  contents  are  given  in  the 
following  verses  ; 

Aya-ra^i^  oha  nakshatraih  vyayas  taram^akas  tatha  I 
Graha-maitri  ra&i-maitri  nathivedha-ganendavah  li  3 
Adhipatyam  vara-Iagne  tithy-utpattis  tathaiva  oha  \ 
Adhipatyam  varga^vairam  tathaiva  yoni-vairakam  II  4 
Riksha-vairam  sthitir  na&o  lakshanany  eka-vimfeatih  I 
Kathitani  muni-&resh^haih  feilpa-vidvadbhir  grihadishu  II  6 
LIIsIGA-PUBANA— see  under  Puranas. 


V 

VALI-PlTHA-LAKSHANA— On  architecture. 

(Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid,  vol  i.  p.  473). 

VAYU-PURANA — see  under  Puranas. 

VASTU-CHAKRA — On  architecture. 

(Oppert's  list  of  Sanskrit.  Mss.  ibid,  vol,  I.  p.  638). 
YASTU-TATTYA—by  Ganapati  6ishya,  Lahore  1863 — consists  of 
four  chapters  and  deals  largely  with  astrological  matters  con- 
cerning aohiteoture. 

YASTU-NIRNAYA — On  architencture,  dealing  specially  with  the 
classes  of  vastu. 

(Aufreoht,  ibid,  part  i.  p.  668). 
YAS  TU-PURUSHA-LAKSHANA— On  architecture. 

Taylor’s  Catalogue  Raisonde  of  Oriental 
Mss.  in  the  Library  of  the  late  College  of 
Fort  St.  George,  vol,  I,  p.,  313). 


786 


APPENDIX  I 


YASTU-PBAKASA — attributed  to  Vifevakarman^Oa  architecture. 

(Aufrecht,  ibid,  part  I.  p.  568  ; in  possession 
of  Balabhari  Sapre,  Benares,  Catalogue  of 
Sanskrit  Mss.  in  N.  W.  P.,  1885,  part  x, 
no.  2,  p.  56). 

VASTU-PRADiPA— (cf.  Vastu-sarani)“by  Yiisudeva,  on  achitecture. 

(In  possession  of  Umri'samkara-Sastri,  Azam- 
garh,  Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  in  N.  W. 

P.,  1885,  part  x,  no.  1,  p.  56). 

VASTU-PBAVANDHA— by  Laia  Eajaki^ora  Varma,  Lucknow, 
1904— It  deals  largely  with  astrological  matters  in  connection 
with  achitecture,  and  contains  extracts  from  the  Brihat-samhita, 
Yisvakarma-praka&a,  Muhfirta-chintftmajii,  Saingraha-^iromani, 
Vastu-vidya-praka'sa,  Vastu-pradipa,  and  Jyotis-sara-muhurta- 
ohakra-dipika. 

VASTU-MAJNABi — attributed  to  Mandana  Sutradhara — On  archi- 
tecture. 

(Cf.  Ba3avallabha-Man,dana). 

YASTU-MANDANA — attributed  to  Mandana  Sutradhara — On  archi- 
tecture. 

(Cf  Bajavallabha-Mandana). 

YA.STU-YOGA-TATTYA — attributed  to  Baghunandana — ^treats  lar- 
gely of  offerings  to  Yastu  deity  ; contains  extracts  from  the  Mats- 
ay  Parana,  Devi-Purana,  Budra-yainala,  and  Yasishtha-samhita. 

YASTU-BATNA-PBADlPA— On  architecture. 

(Cf.  Yastu-sarani). 

YASTU-BATNAYALI— compiled  by  Pandit  Jivanath  Jyotishi, 
Benares,  1883 — This  compilation  contains  extracts  from 
the  Bhavishya-Purapa,  Jyotih-sagara,  Griha-karika,  Yastu- 
pradipa,  Bhuja-bala-bhima,  Yasishtha-samhita,  Sri-bhoja-raja, 


TREATISES  ON  ARCHITECTURE 


787 


Raja-vallabha,  Vastu-ratna-pradipa,  Siddhanta-feiromani  of  Blius- 
karacharya,  Ma.ndana-sutra-dhara,  Brihat-samhita  of  Varaliami- 
hira,  and  Eatna-mala. 

(Bumell’s  classified  Index  to  the  Sanskrit  Mss.  in 
the  Palace  Library  of  Tanjore,  p.  164) 

YASTU-RAJA-VALLABHA — attributed  to  Mandana  Sutradhara, 
probably  same  as  Vastu-kastra,  otherwise  called  l^ilpa-sascra— 
On  architecture 

(Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  in  N.  W.  P.  ibid.  p.  56) 

YASTU-LAKSHANA— On  architecture. 

(Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  yol.  i.  p.  480). 

YASTU-YICHARA— -attributed  to  Yi&vakarman — A treatise  on 
architecture,  apparently  old. 

(In  possession  of  Gaurinatli  §astri,  Benares,  Catala- 
guo  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  in  N.  W.  P.,  1886,  ibid, 
p.  66  ; Aufrecht,  part  i.  p.  668). 

YA.STU-YIDYA — (a  Ms.,  see  OpperPs  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  i. 
p.  480  ; Aufrecht,  ibid,  part  I.  p.  678;  also  a tex  edited  by  T. 
Ganapati  {§astri,  1913)— deals  with  materials,  etc.,  for  house 
building  in  the  following  sixteen  chapters  ; 

1.  Sadhaua-kathana. 

2.  Yasudha-lakshana. 

3.  Vastu-devata-kathana. 

4.  Yastu-purusha-kathana. 

6.  Yedi-saihsthana. 

6.  Yastu-marma-samsthana. 

7.  Kala-niyama. 

8.  ^ala-vidhana. 

9.  Pada-mana-kathana. 

10.  Lupa-lakshana. 

11.  Lupa-karana, 


788 


APPENDIX  I 


12.  Bliuli-nirodhana. 

13  Dvara-vinyasa, 

14.  Kavata-dvara-viuyasa. 

16.  Bhavana-parigraha. 

16.  Myil-loshta-laksliana. 

VASTU-VIDHI—attributed  to  Vil  vakarman — On  architecture. 

(Aiifrecht,  ibid,  part  i.  p.  668). 

VASTXJ-SASTEA — (see  under  Sanat-kumara)~On  architecture. 

(Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  680). 

VASTU-^ASTEA — also  called  Silpa-feastra — attributed  toEajavalk- 
bha  Mandana  and  Bhupati-vallabha,  (noticed  in  Egg.  3142,  1291); 
one  of  these  Mss.  is  published  in  Samvat  1947,  at  Anahilapura  in 
Patana,  by  Narayana  Bharati  and  Ya^avanta  Bharati — It  has  a 
Gujarati  commentary  and  some  illustrative  diagrams.  (Noticed 
in  the  Catalogue  of  printed  books  and  Mss.  in  Sanskrit  belonging 
to  the  Oriental  Library  of  the  Asiatic  Society,  Bengal,  p.  173). 

It  has  four  more  oopies—Egg.  3143,  3144,  3146,  3146,  p.  1136. 

This  is  a work  on  architectural  disposition  of  houses,  palaces, 
temples,  etc.,  and  the  rite  to  be  performed  at  their  inauguration, 
by  Mandana,  an  architect  in  the  employ  of  king  Kumbhakarna 
of  Medapati  (and  the  husband  of  Marabai).  According  to  Tod, 
“ the  king  Kumbha,  who  had  a taste  for  arts  and  built  many 
temples  and  strongholds,  ^uled^  over  the  country  of  Mewara  from 
1419  to  1469  A.  D.”  (Bhandarkar’s  Eeport,  1882-83,  p.  37). 
It  contains  the  following  fourteen  chapters  : 

1.  Mi^raka-lakshana. 

2.  Vastu-lakshana. 

3.  Ayadi-lakshana. 

4.  Prakara-yantra-vapi-ktipa-tadaga-lakshana. 

6.  Eaja-griha-nivefeadi-lakshana.  (Verse  28  of  this 
chapter  mentions  the  Matsya-Purana  as  an  authp^ 


$lEATISEB  OH  AEOHITECTtiBE 


^89 


6.  Eka-&aia-dvi4ala-griha-lakshana. 

7.  Dvi-^ala-tri-feala-ohatuh-'sala-giiha-laksiiana. 

8.  Sayana-simhasana-chhatra-gavaksha-aabhash^aka- 

vedika-chatiashtaya-dipa-lakshana. 

9.  Eaja-gyihadi-lakshania. 

10.  (Mapita)  kshetradbhuta-lakshana. 

11.  Dina-&uddh.i-grilia-nive§a-griha-pravefea-Yivaba-mu- 

hurta-lakshana. 

12.  Gochara-dina-ratri-mana»svarodaya-kpta-ohakra- 

mai/rika-lakshana. 

13.  Jyotisha-laksliana. 

14.  Sakuna-lakshana. 

Six  other  works  are  ascribed  to  Mandana  : — 

I.  Eiipa-mandaha. 

II.  Vastu-maridana. 

III.  PrasMa-mandana. 

IV.  A.ya-tattva. 

V.  Vastu-manjari. 

VI.  Vaatu-sara. 

VASTU-SASTBA-SAMAEAl^GAHA-StjTRADHlRA— attributed 
to  Bhojadeva — On  architecture. 

(Aufreoht,  ibid,  part  I.  p.  668). 

VASTU4lR0MAHI~0n  architecture. 

(Aufreoht,  ibid,  part  r.  p.  668). 
There  is  another  Ms.  of  the  same  title,  attributed  bo  Maharaja 
Syamasah  a Sankara. 

VASTU-SAMUCHCHAYA-On  architecture. 

(Aufreoht,  ibid,  part  i,  p.  668). 

VASTU-SAMKHYA—On  architecture,  “ an  extract  of  Todarananda, 
very  rare,  complete  and  incorrect.  ” 

(Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  Mss,. in  N.  W.  P.,  1885, 
part  IX,  p.  56). 


790 


APPENDIX  I 


YASTU-SAlJiGrEAHA — attributed  to  Vitva-karman— On  architecture. 

(Aufrecht,  ibid,  part  I.  p.  668). 

VASTTJ-SAldOEAHAMD— contains  100  pages,  written  in  Teliigu 
character,  and  deals  largely  with  astrological  niatuers  concerning 
architecture. 

(Mackenzie  collection,  by  Wilson,  p.  171). 

VASTU-SAEVASVA— On  architecture,  comprises  16  pages. 

(By  Nanjunda  Diksliita,  published  by  V.  Eama- 
svami  Sastralii  and  Sons,  Madras,  1916). 

VASTU-SAEA— attributed  to  Sutradhara  Mandana — with  a Gujarati 
commentary  (Ahmedabad,  1878),  it  deals  largely  with  astrological 
matters  concerning  architecture.  There  is  also  another  Ms.  of 
same  title. 

(Aufrecht,  ibid,  part  i.  p.  669). 

YASTU-SAEANI— by  Matri  Prasada  Pande,  Benares,  1909 — this  is 
a manual  of  astrological  details  in  connection  with  the  construc- 
tion of  a house,  compiled  from  the  following  treatises  : 

I.  Grama-nirnaya,  of  Narayana. 

11.  Ea&i-prakSra,  of  Garga. 

III.  Da&a-prakara,  of  Yasishtha. 

IV.  Dik-sadhana,  of  Bhaskara. 

Y.  Sthala-subhasttbha-kathana,  of  Narayana. 

VI.  Vastu-pradipa. 

VIT.  Eahii-mukha,  by  Eama. 

VIII.  Yitvakarma. 

IX.  Pincla-prakara,  by  Gopiraja. 

X.  Narada 

XI.  Dhruvadi-shodasa-gchani,  by  Ganapati. 

XII,  Griharambha,  by  ^ripati. 

XIII.  Yastu-ratna-pradipa. 

XIY.  Dikshu-Vi'iksharopana,  by  Ganapati. 


TBEATISEB  ON  AECHITECTUEE 


791 


VASTU  SAEA-SAEYASVA.SA]^[OEAHA--(Baiigalore,  1884)  with 
3,  Ganarese  commentary — A compilation  on  architecture. 

VIMANA-LAKSHANA — On  architecture. 

(In  possession  of  Archaka  Yogananda  Bhatta 
of  Melkota  ; Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss. 

ibid.  vol.  II.  p.  266). 

VISVAKAEMA-MATA  —quoted  by  Hemadri  in  Paritesha-khanda,  2, 
817,  826,  827,  828  (Aufrecht,  ibid,  part  li,  p.  138). 

There  is  another  treatise  ascribed  to  Visvakarman  (Eajendralala 
Mitra’s  Notices  of  Sanskrit  Mss.,  Calcutta,  1871,  vol.  ii.,  no.  731, 
p.  142),  fol.  63,  English  paper  9|  x 7|'',  copied  1872, 

“None  of  the  Mss.  examined  by  Mr.  Burnell  is  perfect  or  even 
tolerably  correct.  ” 

It  is  a treatise  on  the  manual  arts  attributed  to  Vi'svakarina,  the 
divine  architect,  but  . apparently  a compilation  ; it  is  written 
in  the  Tantrio  style,  having  Siva  for  its  narrator.  The  Ms.  has 
been  copied  for  Dr.  Mitra  from  old  codex  in  the  Halakanada 
character  in  the  Library  of  the  Eiija  of  Tanjore.  The  contents 
are  classified  under  the  following  seventeen  chapters  : 

1.  Vifevakarmotpattih,  karma-vi^esha-bhedena  vyava- 

hrita-takshaka-varddhakyfidi-sabda-vyutpatti. 

2.  Satyadi-yuga-jata-narochchata-pramanam,  yajiliya- 

kashthena-prastarena  va  deva-pratima>nirmane 
manadi. 

3.  Takshakasya  garbhadhanadi-samskHra-kathanani, 

garbhotpatti-kathanadi. 

4.  Siva-lingadi-pratishtharthani  sabha-nirmapadi, 

6,  Graha-pratima-nirmana-pramanarij,  linga-pitha-nirma- 
na-pramanadi. 

6.  Eatha-nirmana-vidhi-kathauani. 

7.  Eatha-pratishtha-vidhi. 

8.  Brahmi-Mahesvaryadinam  sva-rupadi-varnadi. 

9.  Yajnopavita-iakshana. 


m 


APPENDIX  I 


10.  Suvar5ia-ra3atia-iuaun3ya,di-Birinita-yajiiopaTita..katha- 

nam,  dig-bhedena  deva-stbapajia-prakaradi,  ineru- 
dakshina-stbita-bema-feila-katlianadi. 

11.  Laksbmi-Brahml-Mahefeyaryadi-^devmdradi-dik-pala- 

grahadi-murti>nirniana-prakara. 

1248.  Muku^a-kirita-jala-mukutadi'jiinaana-prakaradi. 

14.  Sthavarasfchavara-simhasaBa-nirmana-praKaraai,  ^pimar 

vi&eshena  kirita-lalata-pattiiadi-nirmana-prakara, 
Devataya  mandirasya  jirnoddhara-prakara. 

15.  Linga-murti-mandira-dvaradi-kathana. 

16.  Pratima-murti-mandira-dvaradi-katbana. 

17.  Vighne^a-murti-mandiradi-nirmanadi-vidhi. 

V-l^YAKAEMA-lMNA-edited  by  Krisbna  l^aoDkara  ^astii,  the 
real  author  is  not  known-- This  pamphlet  treats  largely  of 
ritualistic  matters,  such  as  the  sacrifices,  etc.,  to  Visvakarman. 

YI^VAEAEMA-PUEANA— The  title  here  adopted  is  that  given  to 
the  volume  on  the  flyleaf.  No  colophon  cf  any  kind  is  met 
with  on  the  Ms.  It  is  very  incorrect  and  illegible.  It  has  a 
Telugu  commentary  equally  unintelligible.  It  deals  with  archi- 
tectural matters. 

(Egg.  Ms.  3163,-2614  ; Oppert’s  list  of 
Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  480). 

YI^YAKABMA-PBAKAj^A — (Egg.  Ms.  p,  112a)  also  called  Yastu- 
feastra— it  gives  a course  of  directions  in  thirteen  chapters,  on  the 
building  of  houses,  the  making  of  roads,  tanks,  etc.,  and  the  rites 
observed  on  such  occasions,  purporting  to  be  founded  on  the 
revelation  of  Yifevakarman,  still  further  traced ^baok  successively 
to  B|-ihadratha,  Paratara,  and  l§ambhu. 

The  following  editions  of  it  are  published 
I.  This  is  published  in  the  Sri venkates vara  Press,  Bombay, 
by  Khemaraja  6ri  Krishnadasa,  in  Samvat  1962,  Saka  ISIt! 


TBBATISES  OH  ABCHlTECTtBE 


m 


II.  This  is  published  without  any  ccninentaiy  at  Benares,  in 
1888. 

Ill,  This  is  a translation  of  Palaranaavilasa  into  Bhaaha,  by 
Mukula  ^aktidhara  ^arma,  Lucknow,  1896.  The  topics 
treated  of  in  the  thirteen  chapters  are  the  following 

1.  Mahgalacharana. 

2.  Vastu-purushotpatti-varnana-purvakaiiipujanadika. 

3.  Bhunoi-lakshanam  phalam  cha. 

4.  Griha-praveta-samaye  'sakuna-phala. 

5.  Khanana-Tidhi. 

6.  STapna-Yidhi. 

7.  Bhumi-phala. 

8.  Gyiharambhe  samaya-kuddhi. 

9.  Dhvajadyaya-phalani. 

10.  Aya-vyayaib&admaih  phalahi. 

11.  Gyiha-madhye  devadinaih  sthilpana-nirnaya, 

12.  Dhruvadi-griha-bheda. 

13.  Dvara-manani. 

14.  Stambha-pramariani. 

16.  Grihanam  sala-nirnaya. 

16.,'  Gpiharambha-kala-nirnaya. 

17.  Griharambhe  lagna-kundalishtha-graha-phalani. 

18.  ^ayya-mandira-bhuvana-sudharadi-giihanarh  laksha- 

nani. 

19.  Paduka-upanaha-mahchadinam  inana-lakshana. 

20.  Sahkii-Sila-nyasa-nirnaya. 

21.  Vastii-deha-lakshanam  pujanaiii  bali-danaih  cha. 

22  jSila-nyasa  (of.  20  above). 

23.  Prasada-vidhana. 

24.  Kilpa-nyasa. 

25.  Prasada-nirnaya, 

26.  Pithika-lakshana. 

27.  Maiidapa-lakshana. 


794 


APPENDIX  r 


28.  D-vara-lakshana. 

29.  Vapi-kupa-tadagodyana-kriya. 

30.  Daru-ckhedana-vidhi. 

31.  Gryiha-prave&a-nirnaya. 

32.  Grika-pravefea-kala-'suddhi. 

33.  ^ayyusana-dolikadinaih  lakshana. 

34.  PraYe&a-kala&a-ohakradi-va8tii-&aiit}i. 

36.  Durga-nirnaya. 

36,  Salya-jifianam  Salyoddhara. 

37.  Nagara-aambandlii-raja-grihadiiiam  nirnaya. 

VI6VAKAEMA-SAMPEADA.YA — On  architecture,  dealing  specially 
•with  a mythological  account  of  the  race  of  architects  descended 
from  Vi^vakarman. 

(Egg.  Mss.  IV.  3161,  2680). 

VI^VAKAEMlYA-SlLPA'-^ASTEA— On  architecture  and  cognate 

arts 

(Oriental  Mss.  Library,  Madras,  Catalogue,  vol.  xxii.  no.  18067, 
p.  8776,  written  on  100  pages  of  palm-leaf  ll'^  x l^"^;  copied 
by  one  Nitla  Siirappa  on  Saturday,  the  6th  day  of  the  bright 
fortnight  of  the  A&vija  month  in  the  year  Jaya). 

The  author  acknowledges  his  debt  to  Brahma,  Indra,  Maya, 
Bhargava,  Augirasa,  Dhruva,  Gautama,  Gargeya,  Manu.  Vyasa 
and  Bhrigu.  He  also  cites  from  Agastya. 

The  colophon  runs  thus — Visvakarma-feastre  Visvakarma-mate, 
etc. 

VISVA-VIDYABHAEANA' — attributed  to  Basavacharya — “ This  is 'a 
treatise  on  the  duties  of  artisans  especially  members  of  carpenter 
(Eathakara)  caste.  Its  scope  is  limited  to  the  religious  duties  of 
the  Eathakara,  who  claims  Visvakarma,  Viavariipa,  and 
Tvashtri  as  his  divine  guardians.  It  consists  largely  of  quota- 
tions from  the  Puranas,  the  Epics,  the  Sutras,  and  other 
works.  Of  other  authorities  may  be  mentioned  Eudradatta’s 


TEEATISES  ON  AECHITECTUEE 


795 


commentary  on  the  Apastamba  Sutra,  the  Shad-guru  Bhashya 
on  the  Asvalayana-Samanukrama-mamka,  the  Vidyaranya,  and 
the  Sarasvati-vilasa  with  the  commentary  of  Vilhane^vara.” 

(Egg.  Mss.  V.  3161, 2680 ; Aufreoht,  ibid,  part  ii.  p.  138). 

VEDANTA-SABA— by  Garlapata  Lakshanaoharya— it  contains  79 
pages,  has  a Telugu  commentary,  and  treats  of  the  size  of 
images,  the  proper  time  foi  commencing  to  build,  and  similar 
subjects. 

(Egg.  Mss.  II.  3161,  2680). 

VAIKHAN ASA —On  architecture. 

(Aufrecht,  ibid,  part  i.  p.  610). 

VAIEH ANASAGAM A— see  under  Agamas. 


S 

SASTBA-JALADHI-BATNA — ^by  Hari  Prasada— On  architecture. 

(Aufecht,  ibid,  part  I.  p,  644). 

BILPA-KALA-DlPAKA— On  arctitecture. 

(Aufrecht,  ibid,  part  l.  p.  647), 

BILPA-GBANTHA— by  Bhuvanadeva  Aonarya  (Egg,  Mss.  3152, 
1603  h,  written  in  modern  Deva-niigari).  A short  history  of 
the  work  is  given  at  the  beginning.  It  is  stated  that  God  at 
the  request  of  Aparajita  reveals  the  theory  of  constructive  art, 
from  the  creation  of  mundane  egg  to  the  erection  of  a town 
gate,  and  the  measurements  of  banners,  waterpots,  and  bells  in 
sanctuaries. 

It  is  almost  identical  to  (1)  Aparajita-ppohchha  by  Bhava 
(?  Bluivana)  deva,  mentioned  in  Dr.  Bliaudarkar’s  Beport  (1883- 
1884,  p.  276),  and  to  (2)  Aparajita- vastuisastra  ascribed  to  Vi'sva* 
karman,  mentioned  in  Dr.  Biililer's  Catalogue  of  Gujarat  Mss. 
(iv.p.276). 


196 


^ILPA-DlPAKA — by  GanRadhara,  (B.  H.  Catalogue.  15,  G.  14,  14, 
B,  16)— On  arohibeoture,  printed  by  Mahadeo  Eamchandra ; 
second  edition  in  1908,  with  diagrams  of  instruments  and  houses, 
etc. 

^ILPA-NIGHANTXJ— by  Aghore  ^asbri-  On  architecture. 

(Classified  Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  works  in  the 
Sarasvati  Bhandara  Library  of  Mysore, 
Class  XIX  , no.  533). 

6ILPA-LEKHA— On  architecture,  according  to  Eaya-mukuta  quoted 
by  Sarvadhara. 

fAufrecht,  ibid,  part  T 647). 

6lLPA-SASTEA~(Egg.  Mss.  3148,  3012),  ascribed  to  both  Ka&yapa 
and  Agasby a— contains  276  foil,  of  which  1-72  marked  at  the 
top  ‘ j§ilpa  ^astra  73-150,.  251-276,  * j^ilpa-l^astram  Ka^yape- 
yam’,  and  1 61-260  ‘ !§ilpa-^fiBtram  Agastyam’.  This  is  appa- 
rently a combination  of  two  separate  works,  of  Ka&yapa  and 
Agastya. 

One  copy  was  transcribed  (for  C,  P.  Brown)  from  a Telugu  Ms.  at 
Miisalipatam  inl832.‘It  consists  of  extracts  from  various  works 
on  idols,  shrines,  etc.,  as  stated  in  the  following  chapters : 

1.  Aiiitumana  bhede  katyape  parivara-lakshana-patala. 

2.  Umilskanda-sahita-lakshapa-patala. 

3.  Chandra-sekliara-murtl-patala. 

4.  Bakshinfi-murti-lakshana. 

6,  Ksla-murti. 

6.  Liiigodbhava-lakshana. 

7.  Nritta-murti. 

. 6.  GangSdliara-murti. 

9.  Tri-purilntaka-mnrti. 

? 10.  Kalyanamurbi. 

11.  Ardha-naritvara-murti. 

12.  Gaja-bhara-murti. 

13.  Pa&upata-murti. 


TEEATISES  ON  AEOHITECTUEE 


797 


14.  Bhakfca-lakshna. 

16.  Bhurmana-patala. 

16.  G-ramadMakahana. 

Foil. 

161.  Ity-agasfcye  sakaladhikare  roanasa-grahya-viseshanam 
pyathamo’dhyaya. 

181,  Iti  paficha-viriiaati-rupa-blieda. 

261.  Ity-aiEsuiMana-bhede  kakyape  tala-bheda-patala. 

266.  Kakyape  iittama-dasatala-patala. 

274.  J(G)auri-laksliana-patala,  adliama-daka  tala-pra- 
mana. 

Tbis  chapter  is  inconiplete  ; the  work  termmates  ab- 
ruptly at  the  end  of  the  14th  verse, 
lu  the  Oriental  Mss.  Library,  Madras,  there  are  more  than  a 
dozen  Mss.  bearing  the  title  ‘‘ Silpa-sSstra ’’  (Catalogue, 
vol.  XXII.  nos.  13046,  13047,  13048-13056,  13057).  Of 
these  two  (nos.  13046, 13047)  are  attributed  to  Agastya,  and 
one  (no.  13067)  to  Vikvakarman.  The  rest  of  them  are 
apparently  compilations,  as  they  are  not  ascribed  to  any 
author  and  contain  frequent  quotations  from  authorities 
like  ESkyapa,  Mayamata,  Vikva-karman,  and  Agastya. 

There  is  another  Ms.  bearing  a slightly  different  title,  ‘ l§ilpa  ’ 
attributed  to  Vikvakarman.  The  details  of  this  will  be 
found  under  Vikvakarman. 

There  are  four  other  Mss,  bearing  the  title  ‘ Silpa-kastra  ’ but 
containing  no  information  regarding  their  authors.  They 
are  mentioned  in  the  descriptive  catalogue  of  the  Mackenzie 
collection  by  H.  H.  Wilson  (nos.  4—7) 

No.  4— deals  with  the  construction  of  temples  and  images. 

No.  6 — deals  with  the  construction  of  ornamental  gateways. 
No.  6 — deals  with  the  construction  of  images. 

No.  7 — deals  with  the  construction  of  images  and  ornamental 
work  in  gold  and  silver. 


798 


APPENDIX  I 


There  is  yet  another  Ms.  bearing  the  title  ‘ Silpa-^ifistra’.  It  is 
attributed  to  Kfityapa.  It  deals  with  the  structure  of  8aiva 
temples.  (See  the  Catalogue  Raisonee  of  Oriental  Mss.  in  the 
Library  of  the  late  College  of  Port  St.  George,  by  Taylor, 
vol.  I.  no.  1686,  p.  314). 

Another  work  bears  a slightly  different  title-,  ‘ Silpa-i&astra- 
bhushalaya.*  (See  the  classified  catalogue  of  Sanskrit  works 
in  the  ^aras-vati  Bhandara  Library  of  Mysore,  class  xix, 
no.  533). 

A ‘Silpa-^astra’ by  Myeii  (Maya)  is  also  extant.  (See  Ind. 
Ant.  vol.  V.  pp.  230.  293). 

Another  ' Silpa-tastra’  containg  no  information  regarding  its 

author  is  mentioned.  (See  the  ‘ List  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  in  Private 
Libraries  of  South  India,  by  Oppert,  vol.  ii.  no.  4187,  p.  267). 
^ILPA-^ASTRA-SAEA-SAIVIGEAHA— complied  by  a son  of  one 
^ivanarSyana — consists  of  extracts  from  ancient  (prachina) 
works  on  architecture,  and  was  compiled  in  the  6aka  era  1820. 

The  verses  describing  the  Bhu-lakshana  (examination  of  soil)  are 
same  as  those  given  in  the  ^ilpa-dipaka  by  Gangadhara  with  a 
Gujarati  translation  by  Kalyanadasa. 

SILPA-SARVASVA-SAMGRAHA — A compilation  on  architecture. 

(Aufrecht,  ibid,  part  i.  p.  647). 

^ILPA-SAlSlGRAHA— (a  large  Ms.  covering  429  pages  of  25  lines 
to  a page  of  paper  IS'J  x 8") — It  deals  with  the  construc  tion  of 
temples  and  images.  It  is  a compilation  from  various  sources 
notably  Manasara,  Mayamata,  Vi^vakarman,  Agastya,  Kusyapa, 
Paulastya,  Narada,  Bhrigu,  Sarasvata,  Dipti-sara,  Vifevasara, 
Chitrasara,  Chitra*jiiana,  Kapinjala-samhita,  Brahma-yamala, 
Chandra-jhana,  Manohalya,  Kauinudi,  Narayana  and  others. 

&ILPA-SARA— (an  incomplete  Ms.  in  the  Oriental  Mss.  Library, 
Madras,  Catalogue  vol.  xxil.  no.  13059,  p.  877),  containing  no  in- 
formation regarding  its  author — comprises  76  pages  and  deals 
with  the  descriptive  features  (dhySnaa)  of  gods  and  goddesses, 
apparently  intended  to  guide  the  artist  in  making  images. 


TBEATISES  ON  ABCHITECTUEE 


799 


SILPABTHA-^ASTBA^^ — On  architecture. 

(Oppert’s  List  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  in  Private 
Libraries  of  South  India,  ibid, 

Yol.  I.  no.  248,  p.  26). 

SILPI-SASTBA~(Egg.  Msa.  3149,  26786)— covers  71  pages;  the 
title  is  written  on  the  fly-leaf  in  Telugu  and  Marathi,  with 
‘ Vaustoo  ’ (Vastu-^astra)  added  underneath.  It  is  a treatise 
on  architecture,  with  a Telugu  commentary. 

This  manuscript  is  preceded  in  the  same  volume  by  two  sections  of 
the  Hagara-khanda  of  the  Skanda-purana,  viz.,  Visvakarniopakh- 
yana,  and  Yi&vakarma-vam&anuvarnana. 

SEKBA-NlTI — (ed.  Jivananda  Vidyasagara)— deals  with  architecture, 
and  sculpture  (in  chapter  iv,  sections  4,  6)  and  refers  to  the 
following  matters  ; — 

1.  Deva-mandiradi-nirmana-vyavastha. 

2.  Pratima-nirmana-vyavastha. 

3.  Murtinam  vahana-vyavastha. 

4.  Ganapati-murti-vyavastha. 

6.  Sati  (6akti)-murti-vyavastha. 

6.  Bala-murti-vya\astha. 

7.  Sapta-taladi-murti-bhavasya  nirmana-vyavastha. 

8.  Paitaohi-murti-vyavastha. 

9.  Bhagna-pratima-sthapana-vyavastha. 

10.  Utsava-vyapara-vyavastha. 

Section  6 : 

11.  Durga-nirmana  (construction  of  forts  etc). 

There  are  frequent  casual  references  to  both  architecture  and 
sculpture  in  other  portions  of  the  treatise  also. 

SULYA-SUTBAS— Befers  to  very  important  architectural  matters  : — 
The  rules  for  the  size  of  the  various  Yedis,  the  shape  and  the 
variations  of  the  Agni,  etc.,  are  given  in  the  Brahmanas  long 
before  they  are  embodied  in  the  Kalpa-sutras  of  which  the  Sulva- 
Sutras  are  but  portions.  But  the  explanations  of  the  manner 


800 


A^PPENDIX  I 


in  which  the  manifold  measurements  and  transfornaation  had 
to  be  managed  »re  not  clear  in  the  Brahmanas. 

l§ulva-sutra  is  the  name  given  to  those  portions  or  supplements  of 
the  Kalpa-shtras,  which  treat  of  the  measurement  and  construc- 
tion of  the  different  vedis  or  altars,  the  word  * sutra  ^ referring  to 
the  cords  which  were  employed  for  those  measurements.  But  in 
the  Sutras  themselves  the  word  ‘ rajju  ’ is  used  to  express  a 
chord  and  not  the  ‘sutra\  A j^ulva  Adhyaya  or  Pra&na  or 
^ulva-paritishta  belongs  to  all  Kalpa-sutras. 

Among  the  treatises  dealing  with  the  measurement,  etc.,  of  the 
Vedis,  the  two  most  important  are  the  ^ulVa-sutras  of  Baudha- 
yana  and  of  Apastamba.  Two  smaller  treatises,  a Manava  j$ulva« 
sutra  and  a Maitrayaniya  ^ulva-sutra  bear  the  stamp  of  later 
times,  compared  with  the  works  of  Baudhayana  and  Apastamba, 
which  are  entitled  to  the  first  place  by  a clearer  and  more  exten- 
sive treatment  of  the  topics  in  question.  The  literature  of  the 
white  Yajur-veda  possesses  a l^ulva-pari&ishta,  ascribed  to  Katya- 
yana,  and  Dr.  Thibaut  rightly  thinks  that  there  is  not  a suffici- 
ent reason  for  doubting  that  it  was  really  composed  by  the  author 
of  the  Kalpa-sutra. 

“ The  6ulva-sutras  begin  with  general  rules  for  measuring.  In  the 
next  place  they  describe  how  to  fix  the  right  places  for  the  sacred 
fires,  and  how  to  measure  out  the  Vedis  of  the  different  sacrifices, 
the  Samiki-vedi,  the  Paitriki-vedi,  and  so  on.,  The  remainder  of 
the  Sutras  contains  the  detailed  description  of  the  construction  of 
the  * Agni,’  the  large  altar  built  of  bricks,  which  was  required 
at  the  great  Soma  sacrifices,” 

The  construction  of  altars,  wherefrom  seems  to  have  developed  the 
Chaityas,  Dagobas,  Temples,  etc.,  was  probably  the  beginning  of 
ecclesiastical  architecture  in  India.  The  architectural  details 
of  these  altars  are  interesting. 

” The  altar  could  be  constructed  in  different  shapes,  the  earliest 
enumeration  of  which  is  found  in  the  Taittiriya-sanihita 


TEEATISBS  ON  ABCHITECTTJEB 


801 


(v.  4-11).  Following  this  enumeration  Baudhayana  and  Apas- 
tamba  furnish  us  with  full  particulars  about  the  shape  of  all 
these  different  ‘ohitis’  and  the  bricks  which  were  employed  for 
their  construction.” 

“ Everyone  of  these  altars  ^ was  constructed  out  of  five  layers  of 
bricks,  which  reached  together  to  the  height  of  the  knee  j for 
some  oases  10  or  16  layers  and  a correspondingly  increased 
height  of  the  altar  were  prescribed.  Every  layer  in  its  turn  was 
to  consist  of  .two  hundred  bricks,  so  that  the  whole  Agni  (altar) 
contained  a thousand;  the  first,  third  and  fifth  layers  were 
divided  into  two  hundred  parts  in*  exactly  the  same  manner;  a 
different  division  was  adopted  for  the  second  and  the  fourth,  so 
that  one  brick  was  never  lying  upon  another  brick  of  the  same 
size  and  form.” 

“ The  first  altar  covered  an  area  of  purushas,  that  means  7^ 
squares,  the  side  of  which  was  equal  to  a purusha,  i.e.,  the 
height  of  a man  with  uplifted  arms.  On  each  subsequent 
occasion,  the  area  was  increased  by  one  square  purusha.  Thus 
at  the  second  construction  of  the  altar  one  square  purusha  was 

Ohatur-asra-^yenaohit— so  called  because  it  reseiLbles  the  form  of  a faloou  and  because 
the  brioks  out  of  which  it  is  composed  are  all  of  a square  shape. 

(5)  Kanka'Chit—in  the  form  of  a heron  (of.  Burnell,  Cat.  S9,  cf  a Carrion  Kite),  is  the 
same  as  §y»na-obit  except  the  two  additional  feet. 

(8)  Alaja.cbit — is  the  same  as  (2)  except  the  additional  wings. 

(4)  Prauga-ehit -is  an  equilateral  BOute  angular  triangle;  and  the  Ubhayatah  PrangS' 
chit  is  made  up  of  two  such  triangles  joined  with  iheit  bases. 

(6)  Batha-obskra>ohit'>-is  in  the  form  of  a wheel,  (a)  a massive  wheel  without  spokes, 
and  (b)  a wheel  with  sixteen  spokes. 

(6)  Drona-ohit— is  like  a vessel  or  tube,  square  or  oiroular. 

(7)  Pariohayya*obit— has  a circular  outline  and  is  equal  to  the  Ralha-cbakra-ohit, 
differing  in  the  arrangement  of  biicks  which  are  to  bo  placed  in  six  concentric 
circles. 

(8J  Ssmuhyajohit  — is  oircnlar  in  shape  and  made  of  loose  earth  and  bricks. 

f9)  Kiirmn. obit— -resembles  a tortoise  and  is  of  an  angular  or  circular  shape. 

(Of.  7.  A.  8.  B.  187S,  part  I, ‘Sulva  Sutras ' by  Tbibaut ), 

51  ■ 


802 


APPENDIX  I 


added  to  the  constituting  the  first  ohiti,  and  at  the  third 
construction  two  square  purushas  were  added,  and  so  on.” 

But  the  shape  of  the  whole,- the  relative  proportions  of  the  single 
parts.,  had  to  remain  unchanged.  The  area  of  every  chiti  wiiat- 
ever  its  shape  might  be,  falcon,  wheel,  tortoise,  etc.,  had  ro  be 
equal  to  7^  square  purushas.  Thus  squares  had  to  be  round  which 
would  equal  to  two  or  more  given  squares,  of  equal  to  the  differ- 
ence of  two  given  squares,  oblongs  were  turned  into  squares  and 
squares  into  oblongs.  Triangles  were  constructed  equal  to  given 
squares  or  oblongs  and  so  on.  A circle  had  to  be  constructed, 
the  area  of  which  might  equal  as  closely  as  possible  that  of  a 
given  square. 

Diagrams  of  these  altars  are  given  in  the  Pandit  (New  series,  June, 
1876,  no.  1,  vol.  i and  iv,  1882  ; Old  series,  June,  1874,  no.  97, 
vol.  IX  and  x,  May,  1876.  See  also  6ulva  Sutra  by  G-.  Thibaut, 
PH.D.,  J.  A.  S.  B.,  part  i,  1876). 


SH 

SHAP-VIDIK-SAMDHANA — On  architecture,  chiefly  deals  with  the 
finding  out  of  the  cardinal  points  which  are  necessary  for  the 
orientation  of  buildings. 

(Oppert’s  list  of  Sanskrit  Mss.  ibid.  voL  il,  p.  200). 


S 

SAKALADHIKAEA — attrinbuted  to  AgaStya — On  sculpture. 

(Aufrecht,  ibid,  part  i.  p.  683 ; Taylor,  vol.  i.  p.  72). 
ANAT-KUMAEA-VASTU-SASTRA-contains  a brief  Telugu 
commentary.  The  last  colophon  run  thus  ; iti  Sanatkumara- 
vastutastre  sarvadliikaras  sainaptah. 

(Egg.  Mss.  III.  3161,  2680 ; see  also  the  List  of 
Sanskrit  Mss.  in  Private  Libraries  of  South 
India  by  Oppert,  vol.  i.  no.  8239,  p.  680). 


TBEATISBS  ON  AEOHTICTURB 


803 


In  the  Oriental  Mss.  Library,  Madras,  there  are  nine  incomplete 
mannscripts  of  this  work  (see  ¥oL  xxii,  no.  13060-13068,  p.  8780  f.). 
They  deal  with  the  following  subjects : 

1.  Griha-samsthapana. 

2.  Nakshatra-graha-yoga-tidhi. 

3.  Graha-lagna-vidhi. 

4.  Taru-tantra-yidhi. 

6.  Bhu-pariksha-Tidhi. 

6.  Nakshatra4ithi-vara-&uddhi. 

7.  Nakshatra-lagna-phala«dvara-bandha4ubha-sthana- 

nirnaya. 

8.  Gyiha-praveta. 

Sanat-kiimara  acknowledges  his  debt  to  Brahman,  ^akra,  Yama, 
Bhargava,  Ahgirasa,  Maya,  Gautama,  Garga,  Manu,  Vyasa, 
Bhrigu,  Vi^vakarman,  and  others  (see  no.  13060,  p.  8781). 

The  same  list  is  a little  differently  given  in  no.  13064,  where 
k^akra  is  replaced  by  Chandra,  and  Maya  is  omitted.  But  in 
nos.  13062  and  13068,  6akra  is  not  replaced  by  Chandra  although 
Maya  is  omitted. 

SARYA-YlHARlYA-YANTRA—by  Narayana  Dikshita— On  arohi- 
tectural  instruments,  and  machines. 

(Aufreoht,  ibid,  part  i,  p.  702). 

SA5iGRAHA-^IBOMANI — by  Sarayu  Prasad — as  the  title  implies 
it  is  a compilation  on  architecture  and  sculpture  largely  from 
Vasishtha,  Narada,  Varaha,  Vastu-pradipa,  Vi&vakarman,  Man- 
davya,  Maya-tastra,  Samarangana,  Sutradhara  Sarhgadhara  and 
others. 

SAEASVATlYA-SILPA-^ASTRA— On  architecture. 

(Aufreoht,  ibid,  part  i.  p.  714). 


804 


APPENDIX  I 


STJPEABHBDAG-AMA — see  under  Agamas. 

SKANBA-PUEANA — sea  under  Puranas. 

STHALA-^UBHlSUBHA-KATHANA— by  Narayana—Oa  aroM- 
teoture. 

(Of.  Yastu-sarani) 


H 

HASTA-PRAMANA — attributed  to  Vitvakarman — On  arohiteotural 
measures. 


(Of.  Yastu-sarani). 


appendix  11 

A LIST  Of  HISTORICAL  AROHITSOTS  WITH  SHORT  NOTES  OH 

THSIR  WORKS. 


A 

ACHYUTA— An  architect  of  A.  D.  882-917. 

**  A man  of  Kamboja  descent,  the  son  of  Rama,  whose  famous  name 
is  Achyuta,  was  here  the  overseer,  he  who  is  an  image  of  Dhan- 
vatri,  an  incarnation  of  the  quintessence  of  learning,  a friend  of 
the  virtuous,  and  a bee  on  the  lotus  of  the  heart  of  his -master.” 

**  AsDhanvatarl”,  adds  Dr.  Biihler,  “ is  the  Indian  Asklepios,  the 
statement  that  Achyuta  was  his  image,  may  mean  that  he  was 
a Vaidya  by  caste,  or  that  he  was  a . doctor  as  well  as  arohiteot.” 

(Pehoa  Pratasti  of  the  reign  of  Mahendrapala 
V.  23,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  i.  p.  250,  footnote  40). 

According  to  Vitruvius  (Book  I,  chap,  i,  Trans),  by  Gwilt,  pp.  3,  4) 
the  arohiteot  " should  be  a good  writer,  a skilful  draftsman, 
versed  in  geometry  and  optics,  expert  at  figures,  acquainted  .with 
history,  informed  on  the  principles  of  natural  and  moral  philo- 
sophy, somewhat  of  a musician,  not  ignorant  of  the  sciences  both 
of  law  and  physio,  nor  of  the  motions,  laws  and  relations  of  each 
other  of  heavenly  bodies.  ” But  these  do  not  include  medicine, 
ANAEOJA— Son  of  the  brazier  Marala,  of  A.  D.  1395. 

Mindoja  of  Patana  made,  together  with  his  brother  Kaloja,  a pillar 
(kambha)  of  bell  metal  (weight  specified)  for  a lamp. 

(Ep.  Carant.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq, 
no.  61,  Trans),  p.  61,  Roman  text,  p.  135). 

A 

ASALA — ^An  Arohiteot  (A.D.  1215,  V.  S.  1272)  who  constructed  the 
step-well. 

(Manglana  stone  Insorip.  line  13,  Ind.  Aut. 

vol.  XLi.  pp.  11 ; 86,  line  9). 

This  list  does  not  include  the  mere  StoDc  Masons  or  Engravers  ol  Inscriptions,  nor  those  arohiiecfca 
who  are  mentoued  in  tieaVises  less  historical  than  the  Epigraphiqal  records- 

806  ■ ■■  ■ .. 


806 


APPEJSBIX  II 


AHUKA— An  architect  who  built  the  ^iva  temple  (A.  B.  804). 

(The  first  Pra^asti  of  Baijnath,  v.  36,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  i.  p.  107). 


I 

IDAMGRAKA  (INBRAMAYURA).ACHARyA— Sthapati  or  architect 
the  guru  of  the  scnlptor  Nataka  (Nartaka)  who  made  the  image 
of  the  cobra  on  the  slab  on  which  the  inscription  is  incised. 

(Banawasi  Prakrit  Inscrip.  line  2 f.,  Ind.  Ant. 

Tol.  xiY.  p.  334,  notes  20,  23). 

IMBABAKA— Sutradhara  or  the  carpenter  who  assisted  the  chief 
architect  Pahini,  the  builder  of  the  MandapaV  Akshasama,  and 
Bama  of  the  temple  of  Bhimesvara  built  with  stones  and  bricks. 

(The  Ghahamanas  of  Marwar,  no.  xiii,  Sande- 
rav  stone  Inscrip.  of  Kelhana-deva,  line  2 f., 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  XI.  p.  48). 

0 

OBEYAPPA—An  architect  (A.  B.  1386). 

“ This  pillar  (dipamale  kambha)  was  made  by  Achari  Ponna- 
pille's  son  Odeyappa.  ” 

' (Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  IX,  Bevanhaili  Taluq, 
no.  40,- Trash  p.  78). 

K 

K ALLAY YA— An  architect,  son  of  Kalloja  of  Banfir,  by  whom  “ the 
work  of  the  (bhoga-)  mantapa  and  the  writing  of  this  ^asana. 
were  done.’’  A.  B.  1621. 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  vx.  Eadur  Taluq,  no.  91, 
Transi.  p.  16). 

KAMAIJ — The  architect  (kilpi),  son  of  Yisadru,  who  built  ‘ the  fifth 
octagonal  pillar  ’ on  the  face  ot  which  the  inscription  is  recor- 
ded. 

(Sharqi  Arch  of  Jaiuipur,  Inscrip.  no.  xxvii, 
Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp.  series, 
vol.  I.  p.  61). 


HISTOEIGAL  ABOHITBOTS 


807 


KAM A-DEVA — Of  ^ilapatfca  'vaihfea  (Silawat  caste,  masons),  an  aroM- 
tect,  appointed  by  a Muhammadan  ruler  Jallala  as  one  of  the  three 
architects  to  build  a gomatha,  a garden,  and  a step-well  in  the 
town  of  Batihadim. 

(Batihagarh  stone  Insorip.  v.  12,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  XII.  p.  46). 

KlLI-DASI- A sculptor  (A.  B.  1140). 

“Bor  Pratapa-Hosa|a-Naxasimha-Deva’s  sculptor  Kedaroja,  the  . 
sculptor  Kalidasi,  champion  over  the  proud,  a thunderbolt  to  the 
rock  (giri),  titled  (i.e.,  very  eminent)  sculptor,  made  the  makara- 
torana  (or  carved  head-piece  for  the  lintel).  ” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Supplement, 
Belur  Taluq,  no.  239,  Transl.  p.  276). 

See  also  references  under  Ballanna. 

KALABOJA—Son  of  the  braisier  Marala-Mindoja  of  Patana,  made  to- 
gether with  his  brother  Anakoja  a pillar  (kambha)  of  bell  metal 
(weight  specified)  for  a lamp  (A.  I).  1895). 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq, 
no.  61,  Transl.  p.  69,  Boman  textf  p.  136). 

BEKCHA-MALLIVANNA — The  sculptor  of  the  image  no.  32,  Belur 
temple  (A.  B.  1120). 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  V.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq, 
no.  47,  Boman  text,  p,  125,  Transl.  p.  55). 

KETANA — A sculptor  (see  under  Ballanna). 

BEDAEOJA— 'A  sculptor  (see  under  Ballanna). 

BEBABGJA — A sculptor  of  Hoysala  Narasimha-Deva  (A.  D.  1140). 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  V.  part  1,  Supplement,  Belur 
Taluq,  no.  239,  Transl.  p.  275). 

BUMARAM-ACHABI-  The  sculptor  of  the  image  no.  12,  Belur 
temple  (A.  D.  1120). 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  V.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq.  no.  40, 
Boman  text,  p.  124,  Transl.  p.  66). 


808 


APPENDIX  II 


a ■■  ;■ 

G-Al^GAOHlEI—An  architect  (A.  D.  966). 

“ The  work  of  this  temple  was  done  by  Gangachari.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  voL  is.  Magadi  Taluq,  no.  7S, 
Roman  text,  p.  74,  Transl.  p.  60). 

GA-NTEMADANA-BASAVANA-An  architect  (A,  B.  1539). 

“ Those  who  did  the  work  (Devambudhi  tank) : Gantpmadana- 
Basavana  made  the  pillars,  Komaraiya  the  ornamental  work, 
the  stone-Vedda  Ohenne-Royi  built  the  stones  of  the  embank- 
ment.” 

(Ep,  Carnat.  vol.  XII.  Tumkur  Taluq,  no.  24, 
Transl.  p 8,  para  2). 

(SRI)GI]KBAI1'-An  architect,  who  built  the  temple  of  the  (present) 
god  Virupaksha,  originally  of  Loketvara,  as  mentioned  in  the 
inscription  for  Loka-mahadevi,  the  Queen-consort  of  the  Western 
Chalukya  king  Vikramaditya,  the  second.. 

He  is  called  ‘ Sutradhari  ’ (one  who  supports  the  cause  is  the 
sutradhara  or  carpenter,  and  the  siitradhari  is  the  guru  or  priest 
of  the  carpenter).  He  is  again  called  the  Tribhuvanacharya  and 
also  the  Sar7a-siddhi-Acharya. 

(Sanskrit  and  Old  Canares  Inscrip,  no.  99,  also 
nos.  100, 101,  and  115,  Tnd.  Ant.  vol.  x. 
pp.  164,  163,  166,  166,  170-171). 


CH 

OHANDI-SlVA' — The  architect  of  the  Harsha  temple,  "the  famed 
son  of  "Virabhadra,  omniscient,  like  Visvakarman,  in  the  art  (or 
science)  of  building  houses  (Vastuvidya)....He  built  this  delight- 
ful house  of  6amkara  with  its  chapels  (mandapa),  the  beautiful 
porch  (torana)  which  contains  all  the  gods,  like  a portion  of 
heaven  made  by  the  Creator  himself.” 


HISTOBICAL  AECHITBCTS 


809 


“ In  his  account  of  the  rains  of  this  temple,  Mr.  Dean  speaks  of 
a doorway  relieved  by  an  architrave  of  the  most  elaborate  sculp- 
ture, divided  inio  twelve  compartments,  in  each  of  which  a group 
from  the  Hindu  Pantheon  occupies  a place.” 

(Harsha  stone  Inscrip,  v.  43,  44.  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  II.  pp.  123,  124,  128,  note  72). 
CHAVANA— A son  of  Dasoja,  sculptor  of  the  images,  nos.  6, 11,27, 
Belur  temple  (A.  D.  1120). 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  V.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq,  nos.  35, 
39,45,  Roman-text,  pp.  124,  125,  Transl.  p.  65). 
CHIKA-HAMPA-^The  sculptor  of  the  image  no.,  3,  Belur  temple 
(A.  D,  1120). 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Belur  Taiuq, 
no.  33,  Roman  text,  p.  123,  Transl.  p,  66). 
(SRi)-CHE]^GAMM  A— A sculptor  who  “ made  this  image  ” (pratima). 

(Sanskrit  and  Old  Canarese  Inscrip.  no,  Gix, 
Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  X.  p.  168,  0. 1). 
CHOLAJANA— The  sculptor  of  the  image  no.  17,  Belur  temple  (A.D. 
1120). 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq, 
no.  42,  Roman  text,  p.  124,  Transl,  p.  65). 
CHOUGA — A sculptor  (see  under  Ballanna), 

CHAIJDEVA— A sculptor  (see  under  Mallitamma). 

GHH 

CHHICHCHHA—An  architect  who  built  the  temple  of  Pramatha- 
natha,  is  called  the  Vijuana-vitva-karttri-dharmadhara-Sutra- 
dhara  (A.  D.  1116). 

(Khajuraho  Inscrip.  no.  iv,  v.  60,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  I.  p.  146). 

' ' _ ' _■  ■ ■■'  ^ ' ' ' 

JAKAN  ACHARYA — The  architect  of  the  temple  at  Halibid. 

Cf.  “ Jakanacharya  is  the  reputed  aroliitect  of  this  magnificent 
building  (Kait  Bvara  temple j,  but  he  is  also  credited  with 


810 


APPENDIX  II 


having  built  all  the  temples,  similar  in  style,  throughout  the 

district.......... A man  of  the  same  name  is  said  to  have  built 

the  temples  at  Madura.  Jakanacharya  was  a prince  who,  having 
accidently  killed  a Brahman,  employed  twenty  years  of  life,  with 
the  hope  of  washing  away  this  great  sin,  in  rebuilding  temples 
between  KaM  and  RameWara  (Cape  Comorin) — so  says  tradi- 
tion.^’ 

(Ind.  Ant.  voL  I.  p.  44,0.  2,  para  2.) 

JANGr AMAYA — ^An  arohitect  (A,  D.  1538). 

“ Chennema-Nayaka-aya  had  the  Yelayur  gate  built  with 
proper  pillars  by  the  hand  of  Muta-Nayaka’s  disciple  Jahga- 
maya.  ” 

(Ep.  Oarnafc.  vol.  xii.  Kumgal  Taiuq,  no.  20, 
Transl.  p.  36). 

JAHADA— The  mason  (^ilavata)  who  worked  and  shaped  the  stones 
for  the  step-well  built  by  the  architect  Asala  (A.D.  1215). 

(Manglan  stone  Insorip.  lines  18-14,'  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XLi.  pp.  88,  86,  lines  9-10). 


TH 

^THODHEKA — The  son  of  Sammana,  was  mne  of  the  architects 
who  fashioned  the  very  lofty  temple  of  Siva  with  the  chisel, 
as  well  as  the  Mandapa  (A.D.  804). 

(The  first  Prafeasti  of  Baijnath,  v.  36,  37, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  I.  pp.  107,  111). 


N 

NATAKA-~(Nartaka) — An  architect  and  sculptor,  who  made  the  cobra 
(naga)  on  the  slab  on  which  the  inscription  is  incised ; the  pupil 
of  Acharya  (Sthapati)  Idamoraka  (Indramayura). 

(Banawasi  Prakrit  Insorip.  line  2 f.7  Ind.  Ant. 

vol.  XIV.  p.  3S4,  notes  20,  23). 


HISTORICAL  ARCHITECTS 


811 


NANHAKA — A son  of  Krishna,  most  qualified  architect  of  the  temple 
of  6iva  (Malava  era  796,  A.  D.  738). 

(Inscription  from  the  Mahadeva  temple,  v.  29, 
30, 161,  Ind,  Ant.  vol.  Xlii.  pp.  165,  163). 


T 

TURAVASAEI-KALIYUGA-MEYYAK-  An  architect  (A.I).  1331). 
“ Another  grant,  by  the  same  man,  of  lands  (specified)  to  Tnrava- 
§ari  Kaliyuga-meyyan,  who  built  the  temple..  ” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  ix.  Hoskote  Taluq,  no.  96, 
Transl  p.  99). 


TH 

THALti— An  architect  of  the  temple,  an  account  of  which  is  given 
in  the  Behai  inscription  of  Singhana  (A.I).  1222-3). 

(Ep.  Ind.  vol.  III.  pp.  Ill,  113). 


D 

DASOJA-'Of  Balligrama,  sculptor  of  the  images  nos.  6,  7,  9 of  the 
Belur  temple  (A.D.  1120). 

(Ep.  Carnat,  vol.  v.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq, 
nos.  24,  86,  37,  Roman  text,  p.  124,  Transl. 

p.  66). 

DEMOJA — An  architect  who  “ made  the  frame  of  the  eastern  door  ” 
of  the  structure  referred  to  in  the  inscription  (A.D,  1240). 

(Ep.  Carnat,  vol.  v.  part  1,  Supplement,  Belur 
Taluq,  no.  241,  Transl.  p.  275), 

BEVAN  AGA — “ Crest  jewel  of  sculptors,  built  the  temple  of  Siva.  ” 
(Ratnapura  Insorip.  of  Prithvideva,  v.  29, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  1,  pp.  49,  52). 


812 


APPENDIX  II 


DEVA.DITYA— ‘‘  The  son  of  Ahladana  who  (became)  fehe  firm  (?  pro- 
fessional, permanent,  ‘ sthira ’)  8,rohitect  of  the  Vaidyefea,  is 
famons  among  the  first  rank  of  masons.  ” 

{Insorip.  from  Dabhoi,  v.  Ill,  112,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  I.  pp.  31,  24). 

DEYOJA— A sculptor  (see  under  Ballanna). 


N 

NAS^JAYA — A sculptor  (see  nnder  Mallitamma). 

NABA-^OBHA—An  architect  (Ith  or  8 century  A.D.). 
Jambu-dvipantare  kaschit  Vastu-prasada-tadgatah  \ 
Nara-sobha-samo  vidvan  na  bhiito  na  bhavishyati  I! 

“ There  has  not  been,  and  there  shall  not  be,  in  Jambu-dvipa 
(India)  any  wise  man,  proficient  in  (the  art  of  building)  houses 
and  temples,  equal  to  Nara-§obha.  ” 

(Sanskrit  & Old  Canarese  Insorip.  no.  LXI 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  IX.  p.  74) 

NAIUdIKA — An  architect. 

Cf . Yeyika  (Nam)dikena  katana*— the  rail  (the  gift  of; ..Koti)  was 

made  by  Namdika. 

(Karle  Cave  Inscrip,  no.  18,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  vii. 

p.  64). 

NAGI-DEVA-A  sculptor. 

Cf . “ This  l^asana  of  King  Harihar  was  engraved  by  his  orders  by 
the  carpenter  SasanacharyaNagideva,  the  sculptor.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  Vlli.  part  1,  Tirbhahalli 
Taluq,  no.  201,  Transl.  p.  208,  last  para). 

NAGOJA— Of  Gadugu,  the  sculptor  of  the  image  no.  37  of  the  Belur 
temple  (A.D.  1120). 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  V.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq, 
no.  61,  Boman  text,  p.  126,  Transl.  p.  56). 


HISTOBICAIi  AECHITEGTS 


813 


NAYAKA—“  The  high  minded  son  of  Asika,  who  is  at  the  head  of 
the  masons,  came  from  Sutarman’s  town,  was  one  of  the  architects 
who  “ fashioned  the  very  lofty  temple  of  Siva  with  the  chisel,  as 
well  as  the  Maj^dapa  (A.  D.  804). 

(The  first  Pratasti  of  Baijnath^  v.  36,  37,  Ep, 
Ind.  vol.  I.  pp.  107,  111). 


P 

PATEMAN — Carpenter  (Sutradhara),  son  of  Visaihva,  probably  the 
builder  of  the  gate  where  “ on  a stone  near  the  first  niche  on  the 
south  side  ’’  the  inscription  is  found. 

(Sharqi  Arch,  of  Jaunpur,  Inscrip.  no.  xiil, 
Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp,  series,  vol.  i.  p.  39). 

PADARI-MALLOJA — The  sculptor  of  the  image  no.  21  of  the  Belur 
temple  (A.l).  1120). 

(Ep,  Carnat.  vol.  V.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq, 
no.  43,  Roman  text,  p.  125,  Transl.  p.  66), 

PADU-MANNA— A sculptor  (see  under  Mallitamma). 

PADUMAYA — A sculptor  (see  under  Mallitamma). 

PADUMAVI — An  architect  (Sutra-dhara),  son  of  Sai- Sutradhara,  who 
constructed  the  door,  “ of  the  right  jamb  “ of  which  the  inscrip- 
tion is  Written  (A.D.  1407). 

(Sharqi  Arch,  of  Jaunpur,  Inscrip,  no.  xv, 
Arch.  Surv.  new  Imp.  series,  vol.  i.  p.  40). 

P AKA— An  architect. 

Hail  1 The  house  of  the  temple  of  (the  god)  Sri-Vijayetvara.  Paka 
(was)  the  fashioner  of  the  ornamentation  (alamkara-nirmmana- 
kara)  of  these  two  pillars  of  Matibhodamma.  ” 

(Sanskrit  & Old  Canarese  Inscrip.  no.  oxil, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  x.  p.  170,  o.  1). 

PAHINI — Son  of  the  Sutradhara  Mahadua  and  his  wife  Ja,sadevi, 
the  architect  who  constructed  the  Mandapa,  Akshasama,  and 
Dama  of  the  temple  of  Bhimetvara  with  stones  and  bricks. 


814 


APPENDIX*  II 


He  was  assisted  by  the  Sutradhara  Mahidara  and  Imdaraka. 

(The  Chahamanas  of  Marwar,  no.  xiii, 
Sanderav  stone  Insonp.  of  Kelhanadeva, 
line  2,  Ep.  Ind.  TOl.  XI.  p.  48). 

PiTHE — “The  architect  who  knows  the  rules  of  Vifevakarman  (the 
architect  of  the  gods,  also  means  one  who  knows  how  to  execute 
every  kind  of  work),  planned,  designed  and  executed  all  the 
buildings,  the  temple  of  ^iva  together  with  that  cloister  (matha) 
with  wonderful  floors  (bhiimika),  the  hall  of  study  (vyakhyana- 
fealii),  and  laid  out  that  long  line  of  gardens  in  two  rows  (adjoining) 
Sambhu’s  temple,”  (A.D.  1166-6),  . 

(Bhera-ghat  Inscrip,  of  Alhanadevi,  v.  36,  27, 
18,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  II.  pp.  13, 17,  9). 

PAISSANANARA-BIEA— The  sculptor  of  the  image  no.  16,  of  the 
Bolur  temple  (A.D.  1120). 

(Ep.  Oarnat,  vol.  v.  part  1,  Beluf  Taluq, 
no.  41,  Eoman  text,  p.  124,  Transl.  p.  36). 


B 

BAMAYA— -A  sculptor  (see  under  Mallitamma). 

BALUGA — A sculptor  (see  under  Mallitamma). 

BALEYA — A sculptor  (see  under  Mallijiamma). 

BALL  ANN  A — The  inscription  (Belur  Taluq,  no.  98,  Eoman  text, 
p.  165,  Transl.  p.  71)  informs  us  that  a shrine  of  the  goddess 
Nimbaja  was  set  up  in  the  temple  in  1261,  The  sculptors  who 
executed  the  marvellous  statues  and  figures  on  the  outer  walls  of 
this  temple  especially  on  the  western  side,  have  not  given  their 
names,  except  here  and  there,  the  following  are  the  only  ones 
(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Introduction,  p.  xxxviii  : — 
Ballanna,  Bochaua,-  Chauga,  Devoja,  Harisha  of  Odeyagiri, 
Harisha  of  Tanagundur,  Kalidasi,  Kedaroja,  KetILna,  Mabalaki, 
Maohanna,  Manibalaki,  Masa,  son  of  Kanimoja,  and  Eevoja. 


HISTOBICAL  ABCHTTBOTS 


816 


BIKKAHAPPA— The  sculptor  of  the  image  no,  36,  of  the  Belur 
temple  (A.  D.  1120). 

(Ep>  Garnat,  voi.  Y.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq,,  no.  50, 
Boman  text,  p.  125,  Transl.  p.  65). 
BIBANAVA — The  sculptor  of  the  image  no.  22,  of  the  Belur  temple 
(A.  D.  1120). 

(Bp.  Garnat.  voL  v.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  44, 
Boman  text,  p.  126,  Transl,  p.  66). 
BOGHAKA— A sculptor  (see  under  Balia nna). 


BE 

BHUTA-PALA — ^An  architect. 

Gf  : This  “rock-mansion  (selaghara),  the  most  excellent  one  in 
Jambu-dYipa,  has  been  completed  by  the  settlii  Bhfitapala  from 
Vaijayanti.” 

(Karle  Gave  Insorip.  no.  1,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  vn. 

pp>48,  49). 

BHOJUKA — Of  Silapatta-vamta  (Silawat  caste,  who  are  masons  and 
found  in  the  neighbourlipOd  of  Damoh),,  a Stitradhara  (carpenter) 
appointed  by  a Muhammadan  ruler  JalJala  as  one  of  three  archi- 
tects to  build  a Gomatha,  a garden,  and  a step-well  in  the  town 
of  Batihadim. 

(Batihagarh  stone  Inscrip,  v.  12,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  XII.  p.  46). 


MANI-BALAKI--*A  sculptor  (see  under.  Ballanna). 

MADANA“-“  A scion  of  (the  race  of)  Yi^vakarman  (?  of  the  Brah- 
mana  caste,  vipra),  tile  builder  of  the  wall  of  (glorious)  Vaidyefea, 
of  the  extensive  temple,  of  the  gates,  of  the  wings,  of  the  founda- 
tions.’^ 

(Insorip.  from  Dabhoi,  v.  Ill,  112,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  I.  pp.  31,' 24). 


816 


APPENDIX  II 


MAN  A”  An  architect,  son  of  Vijala  and  grandson  of  VilSlajhe  in 
stated  to  have  built,  being  assisted  by  his  followers,  the  famous 
temple  of  ^iva  together  with  many  palatial  buildings  having 
prominent  towers  (A.  D.  1428-29). 

Aneka-praaadaih  parivritamati  pram&u-kala&am  girita-prasadam 
vyarachayad  antinair  anuoharaih  I 
Manakhyo  vikhyatah  sakala-gunavan  Vijala-sutah  sutah  tilpi  jato 
guna-gana-yuto  Vi&ala  iti  II 
Vijalasya  sutah  tilpi  Manakhyah  sutra-dharakah  I 

(Ohitragadh  Inscrip,  of  Mokala  of  Mewad, 
second  part,  v.  2,  3,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  Ii.  p.  421). 

MANYUKA — An  architect  who  built  the  Siva  temple  (A.  D.  804). 

(The  first  Pra&asti  of  Baijnath,  v.  36,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  I.  p.  107). 

MAYINA—The  sculptor  of  the  image  no.  3X,  of  the  Belur  temple 
(A.  D.  1120). 

(Bp,  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  46, 
Boman  text,  p.  126,  Transl.  p.  66). 

MALAYA — A sculptor  (see  under  Mallitamma). 

MALI— A sculptor  (see  under  Mallitamma). 

MALLI-TAMMA— An  architect  (A.  D.  1196). 

“ A newly  discovered  inscription  on  a rock  at  i^ravana-Belgola, 
mentions  a sculptor  named  Bidigoja,  with  the  honorary  prefix 
Srimart,  somewhere  about  A.  D.  900  (Mysore  Archaeological 
Beport,  1908-09,  p.  16,  para  60) ; and  two  other  records  at  the 
same  place,  of  the  date  unspecified,  mention  Chandraditya  and 
Naga-varma  as  having  carved  Jinas,  animals,  and  other  figures 
for  the  Jains  ” (ibid.  Beport,  1912-13,  p.  32). 

“ The  earliest  records  of  the  Hoysala  sculptors  seem  to  be  those 
on  the  Amritetvara  temple  at  AmfitSpura,  built  in  A.  D.  1196. 
The  15  signatures  comprise  Mallitamma  or  Malitama,  and  Mali, 
each  four  times ; and  Padumanpa,  Baluga,  Majaya,  Subujaga, 
Padumaya,  and  Muhana,  each  once.  The  last  named  signs  in 
Nagari  character,  an  indication  that  he  came  from  the  north.’’ 


HISTOEIOAli  AEOHITECTS 


817 


“Eeport  for  1913-1914,  Plate  ii,  contains  illustrations  of  the  work 
of  seven  sculptors  : Masanitamma,  Nahjaya,  Chau-deya,  Baleya, 
Lohita,  Yalanaasaya,  and  Bamaya,  all  from  Somnathpur.*' 

(V.  A.  Smith,  Architecture  and  sculpture  in 
Mysore,  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xLiv.  p.  94,  paras  3, 
4;  p.  95,  para  1). 

MALLIYANA — The  sculptor  of  the  image,  no.  10,  Belur  temple 
(A.  D.' 1120). 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  38, 
Eoman  text,  p.  124,  Transl.  p.  55). 

MALLOJA— An  architect  who  built  the  central  shrine  (garbha-gi-iha) 
of  the  temple  described  in  the  inscription  (A.  I).  1167). 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  vii.  Shimcga  Taluq,  no.  65, 
T ransl.  p.  21,  line  3). 

MASA — A sculptor  (see  under  Ballanna). 

MASADA— The  sculptor  of  the  image  no.  S3,  of  the  Belur  temple 
(A.  D.  1120). 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  paTt  1,  Belur  Taluq,  no.  48, 
Eoman  text,  p.  126,  Transl.  p.  66), 

MA8ANI-TAMMA — A sculptor  (see  under  Mallitamma). 

MAHl-DHAEA — An  architect,  son  of  the  chief  of  artisans  (Sutra-dhara) 

(Bheraghat  Inscrip,  of  Alhanadevi,  v.  37,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  II.  pp.  13, 17). 

MAHID(H)AEA— An  architect  (Sutra-dhara),  who  assisted  Pahini, 
the  chief  architect  of  the  Mandapa,  Akshasama,  and  Dama 
of  the  temple  of  Bhimetvara  which  was  constructed  with  atones 
and  bricks. 

(The  Chahamanas  of  Marwar,  no.  xm,  Sande- 
rav  stone  Inscrip.  of  Kelhanadeva,  line  2, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  XI.  p.  48), 

MACHANNA — A sculptor  (see  under  Ballanna). 

: , ' * ■ 52 


818 


APPENDIX  II 


MACHOJA— .A  sculptor  and  architect  (A.  D.  1142). 

“ The  sculptor  Maohoja,  the  Acharya  of  Kaluhuni-nad,  the  Vitva' 
karaman  of  the  Kali-yuga,  built  it^’ (Jinalaya). 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  lY.  Nagamahgala  Taluq, 
no.  95,  TransL  p.  138,  Boman  text,  p.  239). 

MABALAKI— A sculptor  (see  under  Ballanna). 

MAMAEIYA^TCHI  TAMMA- A son  of  the  goldsmith  Bandiyoja; 
“ he  repaired  and  roofed  a bira-gal,  which  was  made  by  Alibanu- 
Aohari  (A.  D.  1242).” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  iii.  Mapdya  Taluq,  no.  85, 
TransL  p.  48). 

MUDDOJA — A son  of  Tipaji,  a stone  mason,  “ who  built  these 
(described  in  the  inscription)  temples  (A.  D.  1408).” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  x.  Garibidnur  Taluq,  no.  69, 
TransL  p.  226,  last  para). 

MIJLANA— A sculptor  (see  under  Mallitamma) 

MODHAKIN — ^(also  called  Podhakin) — An  architect,  son  of  Vara 
(of  the  7th  or  8th  century). 

(Eurther  Pabhosa  Insorip.  no.  1,  Bp.  Ind. 

vol.  II.  pp.  480-481). 


Y 

YAYYA — (otherwise  called  Jajja) — An  architect. 

(Further  Pabhosa  Inscrip,  no.  1,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  II.  pp.  480-481). 

YALAMASAYA— A sculptor  (see  under  Mallitamma). 

S' 

BAGHAVA — An  artizan  (sculptor),  son  of  artizan  (sculptor)  Vim- 
jhadeva,  who  carved  the  Verawal  image  (Valabhi  Saihvat,  927). 

(Verawal  Image  Inscrip,  line  6,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  III.  pp.  303,  304), 


HISTORIOAL  AEOHITECTS 


819 


EAMA-DEYA—^ilpin  (artist),  son  of  EOpa-kara  (sculptor),  the  en- 
graver of  the  famous  Dhar  Pra&asti  (panegyric)  of  Arjuna- 
varman. 

(Dhara  Pra&asti  of  Arjuna-varman,  V.  76,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  Tin.  pp.  117,  98). 

EEYOJA— A sculptor  (see  under  Ballanua). 


L 

LAKSHMl-BHAEA — ^An  architect  (A.  D.  1104). 

(Nagpur  stone  Inscrip.  v.  66,  Ep,  Ind.  vol.  ii. 

pp.  188, 194). 

LASE — The  sculptor  of  the  image  no.  36,  of  the  Belur  temple  (A.  Pt 

1120). 

(Ep.  Caxnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Belur  Taluq,  no*  49, 
Boman  text,  p,  l26,  Trahsl.  p*  66) 
LOHITA— 'A  sculptor  (see  under  Mallitamma). 

Y 

YA.MA-DEYA — “ Famous  for  having  built  the  temple  of  the  Sun 
called  Mula-sthana.” 

,(Insorip.  from  Dabhoi,  v,  111,112,  Ep.  Ind, 
vol.  I.  pp.  31,  29). 

VIEANAOHAEYA — A carpenter  (see  under  Sthapati)  (A.  D.  1668). 

“ This  copper  ^asana  was  composed  by  Sabhapati  Svayambhu,  and 
engraved  by  Yirana’s  son,  the  carpenter  Yiranaoharya.” 

(Bp.  Oarnat.  vol.  ix.  Channapatna  Taluq, 
no.  186,  Transl.  p.  170,  last  para). 
(BEl)  YIEANACHAEYA(2)— The  architect  (tvashlja),  who  engraved 
the  copper  plate. 

(Krishnapuram  Plates  of  Sadativaraya,  v.  107, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  IX.  p.  339,  see  more  details  of 
this  architect  under  Sthapati). 


820 


API^ENDIX  II 


VI^VAKAEMMAGHAYYA— An  artist  and  painter  (A.  D.  776). 

“By  the  abode  of  all  arts,  skilled  in  painting  pictures  (sarvva- 
kaladhara-bhuta-chitra-kalabhijhena),  was  this  ^asana  written.*' 
(Bp.  Carnat  vol.  iv.  Nagamahgala  Taluq, 
no.  86,  Transl.  p.  136,  last  para,  Boman  text, 
p.  236,  last  two  lines). 

YISYAKAEMMACHABYAf2)‘- A painter  (A.  D.  749). 

“ Skilled  in  all  arts  including  painting  ” (sarvva-kalantarpati- 
ohitra-kalahhijhena)  wrote  the  Sasana. 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  vi.  Miidgere  Taluq,  no.  36, 
last  para,  Transl.  p.  67,  Eoman  text,  p.  163). 

VI^VA-NATHA — An  architect  (A.  D.  1630). 

“ Born  in  the  family  of  Vitvakaima,  the  architect  of  the  three 
worlds,  Vitvanatha,  the  son  of  Basa\’achariya,  who  was  the  son 
of  Vodeyappayya,  considered  to  be  the  Jagad-guru,  engraved  it.” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Channarayapatna 
Taluq,  no.  187,  Transl.  p.  207). 

6 

6S.MU — “ This  mnst  be  the  name  of  some  writer  on  arohiteetnre." 

SSmu-drishtim  anusritya  nirmita — “ constructed  (the  lofty  temple 
of  ^iva,  by  two  architects,  Nayaka  and  Thodhuka)  in  accordance 
with  the  opinion  of  ^amu.’*  (A.  D.  804). 

(The  first  prafeasti  of  Baijnath,  v.  37,  Bp. 

Ind.  vol.  I.  pp.  Ill,  107,  foot  note  72). 

^IYA-PALA — A mason,  one  of  whose  ancestor  is  a Sutra-dhara  (car- 
penter, named  Deuka)  but  another  of  the  same  family  is  Stha- 
pati  (architect,  named  Eaga). 

(Prom  this  it  would  appear  that  both  Sutra-dhara  and  Sthapati 
belong  to  the  same  caste  and  that  these  are  professional  titles 
and  not  caste-names). 

Cf,  Asioh  cha  Naga-sthapates  tu  Durggah  \ 

Purggarkkato  Deuka-sutra-dharah  \ 


HISTOBIOAL  ARCHITECTS 


821 


Asyapi  sunuE  Siva-pala-nSmS  I 
Yenotkyiteyaih  su&ubha  pra&astih  \ 

(Vaaantgadh  Insorip.  of  Purnapala,  v.  34,  Ep. 

Ind.  vol.  IX.  p.  15). 

SURHA-DBVA — (A.  D.  754)^ — Of  ^andilya-gofcra,  sculptor  or  architect 
(rupakara),  “ son's  son  of  the  sculptor  6iva-vardhamana, 
son  of  the  sculptor  6iva;  or  rather  (bhuyah)  the  AchSrya 
Jhana-fiiva,  who  is  the  disciple  of  the  disciple’s  disciple  at  the  feet 
of  him,  the  venerable  and  worshipful  Payo-bhakshin,  who  had 
the  appellation  of  ^iva-feasana,  (and)  who  has  come  here  (Patta- 
dakal,  a village  in  the  Pijapur  district,  Bombay  Presidency)  from 
the  Mfigathanika-hara-vishaya  on  the  north  bank  of  the  (river) 
Ganga— there  has  been  set  up  in  the  (?)  gateway  (dvara)  of 
his  own  particular  (?  style  of)  shrine,  this  great  stone  pillar, 
which  bears  the  mark  of  the  seal  of  the  trident,”  and  is  octagonal 
at  the  upper  part  and  square  immediately  below. 

(Pat^adakal  Inscrip,  of  liirtivarman  II,  lines  16, 
16, 17,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  iii.  pp.  1,  3,  6,  7). 

(BANAKA)  6tJLA-PANI— The  crest-iewel  of  the  guild  of  Yftrendra 
artists  (varendraka<&ilpi-gosh$hi-ohuda.mani),  the  son  of  Byihas- 
pabi,  grandson  of  Manadasa,  and  great-grandson  of  Dharma 
(end  of  the  11th  century). 

(Deopara  Insorip.  of  Yijayasen,  v.  36,  Bp.  Ind. 

vol.  I.  pp.  311,  316). 


'■  s ■ 

SATYA-DEYA— A son  of  Pitamaha,  a merchant  by  birth,  who  was 
the  Karapaka  (persons  appointed  to  look  after  the  construction 
of  the  temple,  Kielhom,  Ind.  Ant.  701.  xix.  pp.  62,  note  63), 
selected  by  the  goshthi  to  see  this  work  (the  erection  of  the  temple 
of  the  goddess  Kshemarya). 

(Yasantagadh  Insorip.  of  Yarmalata,  v.  9, 8, 
Ep.  Ind,  vol.  IX,  pp.  192, 189), 


822 


APPENDIX  II 


SADEYA—Ah  arcMteofj. 

(Insorip,  from  Dabhoi,  v.  Ill,  112,  Ep.  Ind. 

voL  I.  pp.  31,  24). 

SAMI(]^A)—' otherwise  called  %amila,  Svamin —Yadhaki,  (i.e., 
Yardhaki),  carpenter  or  sculptor  (Senart). 

Samina  ....  Ya^hakina gharasa  mugha  kata — ^the  opening 

(or  door)  was  made  by  Sami,  the  Yardhakin. 

(Karle  Cave  Inscrip.  no.  6,  Ep.  Ind.  vol.  vil. 

, p.  53). 

SAMILA— also  called  Syamila— A carpenter. 

“ Son  of  Yepuvasa,  a carpenter,  a native  of  Dhenukakata,  made 
the  doorway.” 

(Karle  Inscrip.  no.  6,  Arch.  Surv.  new.  Imp. 

series,  vol  iv.  p,  90). 

SAMPULA — “ The  intelligent  artisan,”  engraver  of  the  Eatnapura 
inscription  of  Pfithvideva,  the  “ crest-jewel  of  sculptors,”  built 
the  temple  of  ^iva  (A.  D.  1189). 

(Eatnapura  Inscrip.  of  PrithvideVa,-  v.  28, 
29,  Bp.  Ind.  vol.  i.  pp,  49,62). 

SIG-OOJA — The  sculptor,  who  made  the  sculpture  mentioned  in 
the  inscription,  no.  626. 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  viil.  part  i,  Sorab  Talug, 
no.  626,  Eoman  text,  p.  168,  Transl.  p.  86). 

Sll^GANAHEBAEDYA—Tho  architect,  who  built  “the  stone  gate- 
way of  ^anti-grama,  ornamented  with  the  tiger-face.”  (A.  D. 
1673). 

(Ep,  Carnat.  vol.  v.  part  1,  Hassan  Taluq, 
no.  117,  Transl.  p.  34). 

SI^GAYA-BHATTA— Eudraya’s  son,  hydraulic  engineer  (jala- 
sutrada),  master  of  ten  sciences  (dasa-vidya-chakravartti), 
made  (in  A.  D.  1388),  at  the  order  of  Governor  Bukka-Eaya,  a 
channel  of  ten  miles  from  Kalludi  to  the  Siravera  tank.  An 
interesting  account  of  his  accomplishments  is  given  : 
Jala-sutra-svara-tastre  rasa-vaidye  satya-hhashayam  I 
Eudraya-sihgari  bhavatah  sadri^ah  ko  va  mahi-tale  surah  il 


mSTOBlOAIi  ABCHITlCTg 


823 


“ In  the  science  of  hydraulics,  fh  divination  or  telling  omens  from 
sounds,  in  medical  treatment  with  mercary  ( ? perhaps 
alchemy),  in  speaking  the  truth,— Budraya’s  (son)  Sihgari,  what 
learned  man  is  there  in  the  world  equal  to  you?” 

(Bp.  Carnat.  vol.  x.  G-oribidnur  Taluq,  no.  6, 
Transl.  p.  212,  Roman  text,  p,  259,  Preface, 

P-2). 

SII^GALI-KABGI— The  son  of  Kali,  a pandita  from  the  Nava- 
grama-drahga  (watch  station  near  mountain  passes,  of  : Trans- 
lation, Baja-Tarahgini,  v.  ii.  p.  291),  the  sthapati  (architect  of 
the  tank  specified). 

(Shawar  Museum  Inserip.  of  Vanhadaka,  lino 
6,  Bp.  Ind.  tol.  X,  p.  80). 

SUBUJA'G-A— A sculptor  (see  under  Mallitamma). 

SKANDA-SADHU— The  son  of  ^ri-kaptha,  a descendant  of  a family 
of  architects  (sthapati-kula). 

(Sholinghur  Inscrip,  of  Parantaka  i,  line  21, 
Ep.  Ind.  vol.  IV.  pp.  224,  226) 


H 

HARIDASA— An  architect  (sutra-dhara),  employed  to  repair  the 
temple  of  Dakshinaditya  (A.  D.  1373). 

(Gaya  Inscrip,  of  Vikiama  samvat  1429,  line  9, 
Ind.  Ant.  vol.  xx.  pp.  316,  313). 

HABISHA— (of  Tana  Gundur)— A sculptor  (see  under  Ballanna). 

HAEISHA  (2)— (of  Odeyagiri)— A sculptor  (see  under  Ballapna). 

HABOJA— A sculptor  (A.  B.  1243). 

“ Haroja,  son  of  Honnacharyya,  son  of  Bo^akaoharyya,  the  equal 
of  Manu,  Maya,  and  Vi&vakarmma,  .beloved  by  all  the  people 
and  farmers,  set  up  an  image  of  the  sun.” 

(Ep.  Carnat.  vol.  IV.  Nagamangala  Taluq, 
no.  65,  Transl,  p.  127,  Roman  text,  p.  219). 


824 


APPENDIX  II 


HAL  A —Of  6ilapat$a  vamfea  (Silawa^  caste,  masons),  an  aroMteOt, 
appointed  by  a Muhammadan  ruler  JallSla  as  one  of  the  three 
architects  to  build  a Goma^ha,  a garden,  and  a step-well  in  the 
town  of  Ba^ihadim. 

(Batihagarh  stone  Insorip.  V.  12,  Ep.  Ind. 

vol.  XU.  p.  46). 


INDEX 


[The  order  is  that  of  the  English  alphabet  as  the  words  in  the  following  list  are  English*] 


A 

Abacus,  682,  693,  696. 

Abode,  Pura,  364  j Bhavana,  449; 
Sadmau,  619 ; Sthana,  730. 

Abode  of  God  of  death,  Sadana,  618, 

Adytum,  Qarbha,  Garbha-ge(gri)ha, 
164 ; Puri  (-li),  366  ; (of  Buddhist 
temple),  Ratna-griha,  820. 

Airing  place,  Vata-kshetra,  542. 

Ale-house,  Madira-gfiha,  492, 

Almirah,  Mafijusba,  459. 

Alms-house,  Bhakta-4al4,  584 ; Satra, 
Sattra,  615,  616,  617 ; Satra-mau- 
dapa,  618, 

Altar  (for  oflferiugs),  Bali-pitha-(ka), 
432  ; Vedi-(ka),  564;  Sadmau, 
619;  its  construction  marks  the 
beginning  of  temple-building  in 
India,  800—802. 

Amphitheatre,  Rahga,  518. 

Ankle,  measure  of,  224,  229,  231,  235. 

Anklet,  Pada-nupura,  458. 

Ankle-tube,  measure  of,  226,  236. 

Annulet,  651,  686. 

Antechamber,  Anu^ala,  45;  Antariba- 
mapdapa,  47 ; Ardha-4ala,  53. 

Apartment,  ^ala,  580 ; Sala  (*la),  628; 
Harmya,  739. 

Aperture,  Sushira,  636. 

Apei,  ^ikhara,  688 ; l§ika»mapi,  691. 


Apophyge  (or  congfi),  42,  48,  44,  96, 
887,  682,  683,686,  690,694,  696, 
697,698. 

Appurtenance  (of  temple),  Bhoga- 
mandapa,  469, 

Arbour,  Pushpa-vatika,  368 ; Mapda- 
pa,  488. 

Arcade  (covered),  Bhrama,  459. 

Arob,  of  Constantine,  93 ; of  Septimus 
Severus,  94 ; of  the  Goldsmiths, 
94 ; of  Titus,  94 ; Ohitra-torapa, 
196  ; Jana-cb5p5kriti,  207 ; details 
of  246—254;  marked  with  a 
shark,  251,  460;  Patra-torapa, 
835 ; marked  with  a leograph, 
VySla-torapa,  670. 

Arch-ornament,  Makarapatra,  461  j 
Makari-vaktra,  461. 

Arched  roof  (to  receive  a foundation), 
Mafijusba,  463. 

Architect,  classes  of— Tvashtri,  25B; 
Vardhaki,  536  ; Sutra-grahin, 
Sutra-dhara,  Sutra-dhariu,  636 ; 
Sthapati,  709 ; genealogy  and 
qualifications  of,  694,  709,  710, 
711,  712,  725-726;  social  rank 
and  excommunication  of,  719— 
721 J surnames  of,  721—724; 
histories  of  those  known  from  in* 
seriptions,  805—824. 

Arohitectnre,  Vastu,  connotation  and 
other  details  of,  646—548 ; 
objects  denoted  by,  Preface,  iy. 


iNDi?; 


Architrave,  Ufctara,  79;  Pada,  846 
38S,  682,  686,  689,  693,  696. 

Arana,  Eahga,  518. 

Arm,  measure  of,  223,  224,  225,  226, 
228,  229,  230,  232,  233;  §akha, 
580. 

Arm-chair,  Katanga,  578, 

Arm-Joint,  measure  of,  224,  226. 

Armlet,  Keyura,  146,  458, 

Arm-pit,  measure  of,  224,  235,  239, 

Arsenal,  ^astra-maudapa,  579. 

Artificial  fort,  K,ritrima-durga,  261. 

Assembly,  Prati&raya,  365. 

Assembly-hall,  Asthana-mapdapa, 
75  ; Rauga,  518 ; Raiiga-ma^id^^pa, 
618 ; Saihsad,  627. 

Assembly-room,  Sabha,  621. 

Astragal,  Kumuda,  20,  21,  24,  29,  30, 
85, 38,  42;  95,  141,  382,  385,  651, 
681,  682,  680,  687,  689,  690,  694, 
697. 

Auspicious  mark,  Svastika,  782. 

Aviary,  Kapota-palika  (-pali),  110; 

Pafijara,  328, 

Awning,  Va(Ba)labhi^.l),  537. 

B 

Backbone,  (l^uraga),  measure  of,  224 ; 
Vam&a,  539. 

Back-door,  Plaksha-dvara,  431. 

Balance,  Tula,  245,  439, 

Balauoe-post,  Jayanti-(ka),'(tl),  208. 

Balcony,  Aliala-(ka),  64;  (closed), 
Audhara,  61 ; Nisbka^ia,  323  ; (sur- 
rounding), Nemi,  326,  Bhrama* 
linda,  460;  Vadhii-nataka,  534; 
Va(Ba)Iabbi  (-i),  587. 

Ball,  measure  of,  239. 

Baloon,  Vimana,  551. 

Bamboo,  Vadj^a,  539. 


Band,  Pat|ik5,  21,28,24,27,  29,30, 
81,  33,  34,  35,  36,  38,  40,  380  | 
Patta,  22,  24, 27,  80 ; (three- fold), 
tri-pa^ta,  23;  (round),  ?ajra» 
patta,  35 ; (small)  Kshudra-patta, 
32 } (large),  Mabapat|a,  87 ; 
Patta,  Pattika,  P&tti,  830,  379  ; 
Prati-patta,  365 ; Mushti-handha, 
378,  379,  880;  Bandha,  431; 
Rakfca-patta,  517 ; Yantraka,  617 ; 
Rudra-bandha,  527 ; (covered  with 
rail-pattern),  Vedi-(ka),  564; 
Yefiana,  668,  682,  686,  696. 

Bank,  Vapra,  634 ; Setu,  636. 

Banner  (or  flag-bearing)  pillar, 
Dhvaja-stambha,  282. 

Bar  (of  door),  Argala,  39 ; Kokilargala, 
147 ; Vishkambha,  567, 

Barrier,  Setu,  636. 

Basava-pillar,  673, 

Base  (of  a column),  Aksha,  1 ; (details 
of),  Adhiahthana,  17—44;  Alam- 
bana,  71,  94,  95,96;  Kuttima, 
135 ; Kumbhaka,  143  ; Janman, 
207  ; Patta-bandha,  331 ; Padma- 
ke^a(-3a)ra,  339;  Padma-bandha, 
339 ; Padmasana,  340 ; Pada- 
bandhaka,  346;  Paduka,  347  ; 
Pushpa-puahkala,  357 ; Prati- 
krama,  361;  Adhara,  379 ; 
Mula,  880;  MaEloha-baodha, 
482  ; Maauraka,  497  ; Mula-atha. 
na,  611;  Rakta-bandha,  518;  Rat- 
na-bandha,  520;  Vajra-bandha, 
531;  Vapra-bandha,  536;  Vedi- 
(ka),  664 ; Yedi-bandha,  568  ; ^ri 
bandha,  597  ; Sfi-kanta,  597;  §ri- 
bhoga,  598;  §reni(-ni)‘bandh8, 


INDEX 


S99,  681,  68S,  686,  687,  694,  696, 
698. 

Baaemenb  (of  a building),  Adbi3h|hana, 
1? , Qriha^pi^idi,  169 ; Janman, 
207  j Vedi-bandha,  568. 

Basin,  Karo^i  (-^1),  115. 

Basket,  Mafijuaha,  459  j Par^a-mafl- 
jusha,  345. 

Bath-room,  Majjanalaya,  461  ; Snapa- 
na-mandapa,  Snana-mandapa,  731. 

Bead,  43,  95,  96,  384,  380.  387,  388, 
682,  690,  691,  693, 694,  695,  696, 
697,  698. 

Beam,  Gopaaa-(ka),  22,  24,  25,  26,  90, 
91,  173,  380  J Uttara,  79;  (small). 
Kahudra-gopana*.  151;  Tala,  245 ; 
Tula-dacda,  246 ; Parigha  (-gha}, 
342  ; Bhrira  (-ra),  450 ; Vishbam- 
bha.  557  ; (to  shut  door  against 
elephants),  Hasti-parigha,  743. 

Bengal  (hanglow)  buildings,  Ardha- 
yoga,  430. 

Big  road,  Eaja-patha,  523. 

Boat,  Vahana,  639. 

Body,  Ratha,  521. 

Bolt  (of  door),  Argala,  61 ; Indrakila 
-(ka),  76;  Kokilargala,  147; 
GhStana,  190 ; Vishkambha,  567. 

Boundary,  Palika  (-11).  347. 

Boundary -pillar,  661. 

Bow-fort,  Dhanur-durga,  261. 

Bower,  Pushpa-vatika,  358. 

Box,  Mafijusba,  463. 

Bracelet,  Kataka,  105  } Pasbpaka,  357  ; 
Valaya,  458 ; Kankaua,  458, 

Bracket  (on  wall),  Niryuha,  322;  Pra- 
nala-(ka),  361, 

Brabma-devapillar,  676. 


Braided  hair,  Dhammilla,  282. 

Braueb,  §akha,  680. 

Breadth,  Pariuaha,  342 ; Pramaiia, 
372. 

Bed,  Talpaka,  220;  Peohaka,  359; 

Maficha,  461;  Sayana,  679, 
Bed-chamber,  Sayana-maudapa,  579; 

iSringara-maudapa,  596 
Bed-room,  Kama-koshtha,  128  ; Kaha- 
syavasa-maudapa,  528. 

Bedstead,  Asana,  73;  Kakashta,  128; 
Kha'ftaka  (-tta),  152 ; Pafijara- 
feala,  328 ; Nishadhya,  323 ; Par- 
yank  a,  346 ; Phalakdgana,  431 ; 
(small),  Bala-paryahka,  440 ; Wafi- 
cha,  461 ; Mfttichali,  482, 

Belly,  Kukshi,  133 ; measure  of,  222, 
224,  226,  228,  229,  231,  235,  240. 
Belt,  Mekhala,  458, 

Bench,  Vedi-(ka),  564, 
Beaefactiou'pillar,  Dharma-stambha, 
667. 

Breast,  measure  of,  231,  239,  240. 
Breast-band,  Kuoha-bandhana,  134. 
Brick,  Ishtaka,  76 ; Sudha,  634, 

Brick -pillar,  677. 

Bridge,  Seta,  638. 

Broad  road  (for  chariot  drive),  Ratha - 
vithi,  523. 

Broad  street,  Eaja-patha,  623,  524. 
Buddhiab  temple,  Gandha-kuti,  161. 
Bud-ornament  (of  pillar),  Mukula,  507, 
Buddhist  images,  Bauddha,  443. 
Buddhist  monument,  Stuna,  705, 


IHDEX 


Btiildmg,  Griha,  168  ; (with  four  slop- 
ing roof),  Ghauvata,  203;Ohhanda, 
204  j Jati,  211  j Jati-harmya,  212  J 
Pharaua,  282;  Nandana,  294; 
Nandyavarfca,  294;  Nandi-var- 
dbana,  296;  Nandika,  296;  nine- 
storeyed,  Nava-tala,  297  ; Nava- 
bhflmi,  298 ; Napuiiisaka,  297  ; 
Pariilihga,  358;  Stri-lihga,  709; 
Nalinaka,  297  ; Pakshaghna,  327 ; 
Pafijara-&ala,  328;  (of  the  fifth 
court),  Palieha-prakara-harmya, 
328;  Parvata,  346;  Paiichala, 
846 ; Prithivi-dhara,  354 ; Puuda 
rika,  354;  Pushkara,  356;  Puri- 
(-rl),  356  ; Pushpaka,  357 ; Push- 
kala,357  ; Paushtika,  359 ; Prapa, 
869  ; Prahbava,  371 ; Pralinaka,  ' 
375;  materials  of,  397  ; Harmya, 
430;  Prasada,  430;  of  Bengal 
(bunglow),  430 ; Prasada- malika, 
480 ; Brahma-kanta,  443 ; Brahma- 
mandira,  444 ; Bhadra,  447 ; 

’ Bhavana,  449 ; fibavana-kanta, 
450  ; Bhu-kanta,  452 ; (with  front 
balcony),  Bhinna-feala,  452; 
Bhuta-kanta,  452;  Bhudhara, 
453;  Bhiipa-kanta,  458;  Bhix- 
mukha,  457 ; Bhushaua,  458 ; 
Bhoga  459;  Maha-kafSta  497; 
Maficha-kanta,  462;  (for  de- 
votees), Matha,  463 ; Mauika, 
467;  Maudapa,  468;  Madhya- 
kanta,  493  ; Maodara,  494; 
Mandira,  495  ; Maha-kanta, 
497  ; Maha-padma,  498 ; Magadha- 
kanta,  500 ; Malika  (-ka), 
504  ; Malyaja,  506  ; Malyahuta, 
506;  Mi&ra,  507;Mukuii,  507; 
Muuda-malika,  509 ; MMi- 
kanta,  511;  Megha-kanta,  612; 


Meru,  512,  513,  514;  Meruja, 
515;  Meru-kanta,  616;  Maulika, 
616;  Yajfla-bhadra,  617  ; Yajfia- 
kanta,  517  ; Yama-surya,  517 ; 
Yama-kanta,  617;  Eahga-mukha, 
519;  Batna-kanta,  519  ; Bathaka, 
522  ; Ruchaka,  626 ; Rudra- 
kanta,  527 ; Raurava,  527  ; 
Vakra,  682  ; Vajra,  532  ; Vajra- 
kanta, ’532;  Vajra-svastika,  583; 
V‘i(Vai)ra|a,  635 ; yarc(hani, 
536;  Vardhamana,  536;  Va  (ba) 
iabhi  (-i),  637  ; Valaya,  638; 
Vam&a-kanta, '541 ; Vata,  642; 
Vijaya,  549;^  Vikalpa,  649; 
Vimana,  551  ; Vipulahkaj  651 ; 
Vipulaknitika,  551 ; Vi&a-kanta, 
566;  Vi&ala-(ka),  666;  Vivrita, 
556  ; Yimana-cbchhandaka,  556  ; 
Vishuu-kanta,  657  ; Vrisha-  (bha) 
663  ; Vrita-(ta),  568  ; Vedi- 
kanta-(ka),  668  ; Vairaja,  varieties 
of,  569;  Vaijayantika,  569; 
^ahkha,  57S;  Sastra-maudapa, 
579;  ^ambhu-kanta,  579;  Sayana, 
579  ; Sala-noalika,  588;  ^ala-giiha, 
588;  ^ibika-ve&ma,  691 ; Siva,  594 ; 
Sri-kautha,  696  ; Sri-jaya,  597  ; 
Sri-pada,  597 ; Strikara,  597  ; 
Sri-kanta,  597  ; Srivatsa,  598; 
SrI-vi&ala,  598  ; Sri-bhoga,  698  ; 
Shat-t^^ai  S99  ; Shodafea&(-s)ra, 
615;  Satya-kanta,  615;  Sada- 
&iva,  619 ; Sabha,  621 ; Sabba- 
malika,  Sama,  623 ; Samudga  623 ; 
Satvu’kalyaua,  623  ; Saroruha, 
623;  Samudra,  623;  Sarvato- 
bbadra,  624;  Saihchita,  626  ; 


8M 


Sajiikir^^a,  626 ; Sara,  627  ; Sam- 
purapa,  627 ; Siadhnka,  629 ; 
Siddhartha,  629 ; Siddha,  629 ; 
Simha,  630  ; Sukhalaya,  633  ; 
Sukshetra,  633 ; Sabbusha9a» 
634;  Subhadra,  634;  Suodara, 
634;  8uprabi(bi)-kanta,  634; 
Saadha-malika,  642 ; Skandha' 
bara,  643 ; Saumya,  643 ; Sanra- 
kanba,  613  ; SbrMinga,  709  ; 
Sbhanaka,  730;  Sphurjaka 
(Qiirjaka),  732 ; Svarga-kanba» 
732;  Svastika,  732;  Sva- 
vriksha,  732;  Syaabika-khadga, 
738  ; Svasbi-kanba,  738  ; Svasbi- 
bandba,  738;  Harmya^kftnba, 
742;  Hasbi-prishtha,  Gaja- 
ptiahtha,  744;  Hathaa,  745; 
Himavab,  746  ; Hima-kaaba,  746 ; 
bypes  of,  niaeby<eiglib,  898<402; 
anobher  forby-five,  403-405,  405- 
408,  another  bwenby,  408*410, 410; 
411,  412,  414,  another  ten,  415 ; 
varieties  depending  on  maberials, 
397 ; on  measures  of  oubibs,  397  ; 
on  heights,  897-398;  on  size, 
shape,  and  plan,  898 ; on  number 
of  storeys  398-402 

One  (or  single)-s  tor  eyed, 
Two-storeyed, 

Three-storeyed, 

Four-storeyed » 

Five-storeyed, 

Six-storeyed, 

Seven-storeyed. 

Eight-storeyed, 

Nine-storeyed, 

Ten-storeyed, 


Eleven-storeyed, 

Twelve-storeyed, 

Sixteen-storeyed, 
Seventeen-storeyed ; 

Masculine,  358,  398 ; 

Feminine,  398,  709 ; 

Neuter,  297 ; 

Rectangular,  404, 406 ; 
Quadrangular  (square),  408,  405  ; 
Octagonal,  405,  406  ; 
Sixteen-angular,  411,  412 ; 

Oval,  404.  406 ; 

Round,  404,  406 ; 

Building  work,  Yasta-karman,  648, 
Bull  (image  of).  Vyishni-fblift),  563, 
Bust,  Fratima,  362. 

Buttocks,  measure  of,  226,  229,  231, 
236. 

, ■ 0 ■ 

Cage,  Fafijara,  328,  459 ; Fusaxara, 
866;  (for  tiger),  Tyaghra-nida, 
670. 

Camp,  §ibira,592;  Skandhavara,  ua3. 
Canal,  Nala,  317  ;•  Nall,  818 ; Nalika, 
318;  Prapala,-  Franalikaj  Fra- 
nail,  361 ; Fra'nala-(ka)  861 ; Mar- 
ga,  504. 

Canal -house,  Nala-geha,  317;  Nalikft- 
griha,  318. 

Canopy,  Frachohhuduna,  360 ; Frabha, 
371;  Vitana-(ka),560. 

Capital,  42 ; Valabhi,  878,  379,  (of 
triglyph),  3S3,  384,  (ofguttae), 
383,  384,  (of  mutules),  884 ; 
Kumbha,  142 ; Chulika(.li)  197 ; 
Fushpa-bodhaka,  357 ; 682,  686, 
689,  690,  693,  696. 

Capital  city,  Skandha vara,  643;  Raja- 
dhani,  623;  kinds  of,  284. 


S32 


INDBK 


Oar,  (of  Ktibera),  Pushpaka,  857 ; 
Yana,  Sl7 ; Eafeha,  521 ; Katanga, 
578. 

Carbel,  Bodhika(-,ba),  Vodhika,  441. 

Carpenter,  Takshaka,  217 ; Sutra- 
dhSra,  886. 

Carriage,  Eatha,  521;  Katanga,  578, 

Carving  (on  chariot),  Vina,  660 ; (on 
image  of  Vishnu),  ^rivatsa,  598; 
(of  tree),  §r!-viiksha,  599. 

Carved  pillars,  details  of,  667,  668. 

Casket,  Mafijusha,  463. 

Casting  (of  image)  in  wax,  Madhu- 
chchhishta,  492. 

Castle,  Pur  a,  854, 

Cause-way,  Setu.  686. 

Cave-house,  Kandara-griha,  109 ; 
Dari-griha,  257 ; ^ila^vetma,  59S. 

Oavetto,  vapra-(ka),  20, 21,  22, 28,  24, 
26,  27,  34,86,  383;  (jwelled), 
Batna-pat^a,  36  ; Prativajana,  22, 
89,  90,  91,  S6  , 379,  881,  388; 
Pratima,  23,  382;  Prati-vajana, 
365 ; Rakta-vapra,  518,  651, 

682,  686,  690,  696,  697. 

Cavity,  Kukshi,  133  ; Nimna-(ka), 
321;  Sushira,  635. 

Cell,  Agara,  59. 

Cement,  Kaika,  124;  Vajra,  632;  Vaj- 
ratara,  533 ; Vajra-lepa,  633  ; 
Vajra- saraghata,  533 ; Sandhi- 
bandha,  620. 

Central  courtyard,  Brahmahgana,  445. 

Central  door,  Brahma-dvara,  448, 

Central  hall,  Qarbba-ge  (gri)  ba,  164  : 
Madhya-koshtha,  493. 

Central  part  (of  village,  eto,),  Brahma- 
sthana,  444;  Brahma-pada,  444 ; 


Brahma-mandala,  444 ; Brahma* 
ifa&a,  445, 

Central  road,  Nabhi-vithi,  317 

Central  theatre,  Madbya-ranga,  494. 

Centre  (moulding),  Kendra,  83, 

Chain,  Kara,  Hara,  Harika,  Harikii, 
458,  745  ; (long  suspended). 

Lamba-hara,  459  ; Maficba,  461  ; 
§ribkhala,  596. 

Chamber,  Koshtha,  149;  (used  by 
Buddha),  161 ; Vikalpa,  549. 

Chamnel,  Jala-sfltra,  210  ; Tilamakai 
245 ; Va(va)ba-(ka,  la),  639 ; (of 
Phallus),  Somansutra  642;  (of 
volute),  690. 

Chapel,  Deva-kula  (-kulika),  262, 

Chaplet,  Niryuha,  322. 

Chariot,  Anila-bhadra,  45;  NabhasvSn, 
297 ; Nivata-bhadraka,  323 
Pavana,  848  ; Pusbpa-ratba,  357  ; 
Prabhafijana,  371;  Bhadra,  447, 
Bhadraka,  448;  Ratha,  521; 
Syandana,  732. 

Chariot-fort,  Ratha-durga,  259. 

Charitable  dining-hall  (of  a temple), 
Satra,  Sattra,  616,  617. 

Charity-house,  Daoa-Mla,  686. 

Cheek,  Kapola,  112. 

Chest,  measure  of,  224,  226,228,  281, 
235. 

Chief  architect,  Sthapati,  709  ; classes 
and  genealogy  of,  709-710,  711, 
712;  exoommunation  of,  719-721, 
725 ; sixty-four  sciences  studied 
by,  726,  726-727  ; compared  with 
ancient  Roman  architects,  727-730, 

Chief  building  (of  a group),  Mula- 
harmya,  511. 


88B 


Oiiief  deity  (in  a shrine),  Mala«bera, 

Sll. 

Chief  gate  (of  village,  town  dr  house), 
Maha-dvara  498. 

Chief  temple,  Mukhya-harmya,  509, 

Chin,  measure  of,  287. 

Chiselling  the  eye  (of  an  image), 
Nayanonmxlana,  297. 

Circular  arch,  246. 

Circular  fillet,  Kampa-vritfea,  114. 

Circular  road  (round  a village  or 
town),  Raja-vlfchi,  624. 

Oiroumambulating  path  (round  a 
temple),  Pradakshina,  368. 

Circumference,  Nemi,  326{  Pariuaha, 
840;  Parimaua,  348. 

Cistern,  Prapa,  369 

City,  Kharvata,  153  j Khaluraka 
(■rika)  155 ; Drouaka,  267  ; (see 
town)  283*294;  (commercial), 
Pat^aua  (-na),  331;  333;  Pura, 
354 ; Prabha,  371 ; Sena-mukha, 
637 ; Sthaniya,  730. 

Olay-fort,  Pafika-durga,  259. 

Cloister,  (enclosing),  Bhrama,  469; 
Matha,  463 ; Su  (8u)t-(t)alaya, 
685. 

Closed  hall,  Koshtha-6ala,  149, 

Cloth,  Patta,  Pattika,  Pa^p,  330, 

College,  Matha,  463 ; §ala,  585. 

Coliseum,  93. 

Collect,  Maui-bandha,  467. 

Column  (see  pillar),  (hollow),  Aghana, 
2 ; Evamkanta,  104 ; (of  pavalion), 
Gatra,  167 ; Jayauti  (-ti),  208 ; 
(thirty*two-sided),  Pralinaka,  375 ; 


fiharaka,  450 ; Stambha,  644 ; 696, 
697,  for  details  see  Pillar. 

Committee  (to  manage  building-cons- 
truction), Qoshthi-(ka).  180, 

Composite  pillar,  history  and  other 
details  of,  895—698, 

Composite  order,  94,  382. 

Conduit,  Prauala,  Pranalika,  PratjiSli, 
361. 

Confessinal  hall  (of  Buddhist),  Piasada, 
896. 

Congd  (or  apophyge),  94,  95,  96,  383, 
386,  387,  682,  683,  686,  687,  690, 
691,  693,  694,  696,  697,  698. 

Convent,  Matha,  463;  Vihara,  558. 

Oonveyanco,  (fast),  Adika,  60 ; Yana, 
517;  Vahana,  539;  Va(va)ha. 
(ka,  la),  539 ; Vahana,  549 ; 
Vimana,  651 ; Sibika,  Yana,  591  j 
Syandana,  732. 

Coping  (of  wall),  Parana,  840. 

Corinthian  pillar  (order),  93,382 ; 
history  and  other  details  of, 
692-695. 

Corner-tower,  Kama,  116  ; Kama- 
kura, 117  J Netra-kuta,  326. 

Cornice,  Kamika,  120;  Kshepana, 
152;  42,  94,  95,  96,  681,  682, 
683,  686,  687,  689,  690,  692,  698, 
694,  695,  696,  697. 

Corn-pillar,  Dhanya-stambba,  645. 

Corona,  Kapota,  89,  90, 91,  94,  95,  96, 
109,  378,  379,  380, 381 ; 382,  383, 
884,  385,  386,  387;  Kshepaua, 
151,  682,  686,  687,  689,  690,  694, 
696,  697, 

Corridor,  Aimda-(ka),  64, 

Cottage,  Kuti,  135 ; Kutrima,  185. 


834 


INDIX 


Oouoh,  Anvanta,  405  Talpaka,  220; 
Kishadya,  323;  Paryanka,  345; 
Pechaka,  359 ; Bala-paryaiika, 
440;  Maficha,  461  ; Dayana,  579. 

Council-okamber,  Eanga-mapdapa, 

518 ; Sabha,  621. 

Counoibball,  Madhya-feala,  494. 

Course,  Marga,  504. 

Court,  Anka(:ga)aa,  3;  Ardha-mau- 
4apa.  62  ; Cbbanda*prakara,  204 ; 
Nibara,  825;  Prakosb^ha-Cka), 
360 ; Prauga^a,  396  ; Kanga,  518. 

Courtyard,  Anka(-ga)ua  3 ; (enclosed), 
Chatub-6ala,  193;  Nibara,  325;  j 
Praiigana  396;  (central),  Bra- 
hmangapia,  449 ; Rafiga,  698 ; Va^a, 
541;  (of  a residential  building), 
YSsa-ranga,  546  ; Vikata,  549, 

Covered  arcade,  (of  college  or  monas- 
tery), sa(au)t-(t)alaya,  635. 

Covered  balcony  (in  courtyard),  Vedi- 
(ka),  664. 

Covered  place,  Nida,  325. 

Covered  verandah,  Vedi-(ka),  664. 

Covering,  Praohohbadana,  360 ; Vara- 
(ka,  ua),  644. 

OQW*8tali,  Go-matlia,  179. 

Covr-shed,  Qo*4&la,  684. 

Crab-shaped  joinery,  Karkata,  115. 

Crest,  measure  of,  223,  235  *,  Niryuba, 
322. 

Crest-jewel,  Ohu^mapi,  458  ; 6ikha- 
maui,  6iro-ratna,  691. 

Crocodile  pillar,  677. 

Crocodile-shaped  ornament,  Qraba.  186. 

Cross  bars,  Parigha  (-gha),  342. 


Cross-beam,  Bhara,  450;  VamSa,  539. 
Gross  circle,  Nirvyuha,  823. 

Crossing  (of  four  roads),  Svastika,  732. 
Crown,  Kirita,  130 ; (of  the  head), 
measurement  of,  223,  225 ; Patta, 
Pat$ika,  Patti,  330 ; Patta- 
bandba,  331 ; Makuta,  461 ; Mauli, 
5lS  ; varieties  of,  615-616. 

Crownet,  Ushnisba,  99. 

Crowning  fillet,  Uddbrita,  14. 

Crystal  palace,  Mani-harmya,  467. 
Cubit,  Kiksnu,  130;  Hasta,  742, 

Cubit  measure,  Dbanur-graha,  Dbanur- 
mushti,  281. 

Cuckoo-shaped  moulding,  Kokila,  147. 
Cupola,  Apda,  16 ; Kala&a,  121 ; Kum- 
bha, 142;  §ikbara,  588;  Stupi, 
707. 

Cushion,  Vitana-(ka),  650, 
Custom-house,  Mapdapika,  490. 

Cyma,  Padma,  21,  2^  23,  24,  26.  26, 

27.  28,  29,  30,  31,  32,  33,  34,  35. 
36,  37,  38.  39,  40,  41,  88,  89,  90, 
91 ; Ambuja,  23,  25,  27, 29, 34, 35, 
89,  90 ; Abja,  24,  28,  30,32,  33, 
36,38,  40,  88,  89,  91;  (small), 
Abjaka,  27,  29  ; (small),  Kshudra- 
padma,  29,  35  ; Kshudra-abja,  83, 
35,  40,  41,  89,  91;  Kshudra 
pankaja,  35 ; Kshudra-padma, 
91, 378 ; (half),  Ardha-padma,  24, 
27  ; (large),  Maha-padma,  25,  29, 
378,  384  ; (large),  Mahamnuja,  26, 

28,  29,  35  ; Mahabja,  36,  37,  38, 
40,  90,  91  ;(lower),  Adbafi-padma, 
30, 33 ; Saro-ruha,  34, 89,  90  ; Abja, 
49,878,  379;  Padma,  379,  380; 
Ambuja,  50 ; (inverted)  95 ; (small). 


mixt 


Kshudiibja)  151 ; (large),  Maham- 
buja,  600,  651,  696. 

Cyma  recta,  96,  837,  38o,  386,  387, 
651,  689,  692, 695,  697. 

Oyma  re  versa,  Padmaka,  337  j 94,  95, 
96,  383,  384,  385,  386,  387,  388, 
686,  687,  689,  693.  691,  692,  693, 
694,695,696,697. 

Cymatium,  651,  681,  683, 

D 

Dado,  Gala,  26,  30,  36,  89,  91,  167 ; 
Gtiva,  88,  89,  91,  187,  380 ; Kaa-  , 
dhara.  21,  22,  23,  24,  27,  28,  29,  j 
30,  31,  32,  33,  34;  35,  36,  37,  38,  | 
39,40,41.88,89,  379;  Kaijtha,  j 
Kaadhara,  Gala,  Qriva,  107  ; 88, 
90. 

Dais,  Dpavedi,  98, 

Dam,  Setu,  636, 

Dart,  §1ala,  596. 

Deer-forest,  Mviga-vana,  511. 

Demi-god,  Gandharva,  162 ; Vidyadhara, 
660. 

Dentals,  689. 

Dentel,  885,  689. 

Dentil,  383,  386,  387,  686,  693,  696, 

Depth  of  foundation,  Purushalijali, 

866. 

Desert-fort,  Dhanva-durga,  260,  261. 

Designer,  Vardhaki,  536. 

Devotee  (class  of  sages),  Bhakta,  images 
of,  445. 

Devotion-pillar,  Dharma-stambha, 
670. 

Diadem,  Ushuiaha,  99 ; Pajta,  Pajtika, 
Patti,  880;  Patra.patta,  336; 
Pusbpa-pajjta,  357 ; Kirita,  130; 


458 ; Makuta,  461;  (of  beroes), 
Vira-patta,  562. 

Diameter  (measure  of),  Visbkambba, 
557. 

Diamond-band,  Vajra-baudha,  5S3 
Vajra  pa^ta.  633, 

Diamond-flower,  Ratna-pusbpa,  520. 

'Diamond-pillar,  Vajra-pada,  538, 

Diamond-throne,  Boclhirmanda,  Vajra- 
sana,  442,  533. 

Die,  (cubical  part  of  apedestal),  Aksha, 
J,  94,95,96,  683,687.690,  694, 
698. 

Dimensions  (of  buildings),  Giiha-mana, 
170;  (of  storey)',  Bhumi-lamba, 
456. 

Dining-hall,  Bbojana-matha,  459; 
Bhojana-6ala,-586. 

Disc  (of  Vishpu),  Chakra,  190. 

Ditch,  Parikba,  340 ; Yapra,  534, 

Ditch-fort,  Parikha-durga,  260. 

Divine-beings,  (image  of),  Siddba,  629. 

Divine-fort,  Deva-durga,  259,  261, 
262. 

Dome,  Kala&a,  121 ; Gala-kilta,  127  j 
Stupi,  707. 

Door,  Karats,  109,  127 ; Qriha-muka, 
172;  (in  general),  Qopura,  174; 
Ohhanda,  204  ; Jati,  211 ; Dvara, 
269  jNiryuha,  322 ; Yara-(ka,  9a), 
544;  Vikalpa,  549;  (central), 
Brahma-dv  ara,  443, 

Door-frame,  Dvara-kakha,  280  ; ^akha, 
580. 

Door-front,  Praveka,  388. 

Door-lintel,  Dv&ra-kakha,  280. 

Door-panel,  Kapata,  109. 


INDEX 


Door-post,  Sakha,  580. 

Door-row,  Sre^iita-dvara,  599. 

Door-top,  Mapi-dvara,  467. 

Doric  pillar  (order)  , history  and 
other  details  of,  685 — 688;  93;  382. 

Dova-cot,  Kapota,  30,  31,  S2,  33,  34, 
35,  36, 37, 38, 39,  40,  41 ; Kapota- 
palika  (-pali),  110 ; Kona-para- 
-vata,  148 ; Vitanka,  550. 

Dove-ridge,  Kapota-palifca  (-pali)  110; 
Koria-paravata,  148, 

Drafts  man,  Su.tra-gr5hm,  636. 

Drain,  Jala-dvara,  209 ; Prapala,  Pra- 
palika,  Pranall,  381 ; Soma-sutra, 
642. 

Draught  (riding)  animal,  Vahana,  549. 

Drawing  room,  KhalQraka  (-rika), 
165;  Bhadra-Sala,  449. 

Dressing  room  (in  a temple),  Deva- 
bhushana-mandapa,  263. 

Drinking-house,  Madira-griha,  492. 

Drip,  Nimna,  31,  32, 36,  37,  38, 39, 40, 
41,  321,  379,  380,  382,  383.  384, 
386,  387,  686,  measure  of,  237, 
239;  (of  Phallus-stand),  Prapala- 
(ka),361. 

Drum  (of  the  ear),  Karoti  (-fi),  116. 

Dwarf  pillar,  ITpapada,  86 ; Ahgbri^ 
1344. 

Dwelling-house,  Ayatana,  67;  J6rama, 
72;lvasa,  72;  Prati&raya  365; 
Bhavana,  449  ; YSsa-feala,  686  ; 
6ala-griha,  688;  Sadman,  619; 
Sthana,  730,  » 

E 

Eagle-pillar,  Garuda-skambha,  655, 
666, 667 ; details  of,  674, 674-676 ; 
Garuda-stambha,  862,  677, 


Ear,  (a  monlding),  Earua,  21,  SS,  24, 
25,  26,  28,  30,  01,  84,  35,  86,  88, 
88,  90,  91,  116 ; measure  of,  227, 
230,  233,  236 ; (of  column),  Vlra- 
karna,  561. 

Ear-band,  Karua-bandha,  119. 

Ear-drum,  measure  of,  227,  230,  238. 
236. 

Ear-hole,  measure  of,  236, 

Ear-ornament,  Tata(-da)hka,  22  i j 
Karua,  458 ; Karua'bhftshapa, 
458  ; Makara-kupdala,  460. 

Ear-ring,  Karpa-patra,  119;  Karua- 
puraka,  119 ; Qraha-kuu4ala,  187 , 
Kuudala,  458. 

Earth  (for  building),  Bhumi-(ka),  455. 

Earth-fort,  Mahi-durga,  261. 

Earth  goddess,  (image  of),  Mahi,  670. 

Eastern  (round)  style,  Vesara,  669, 
298-816. 

Eastward  road,  NSraoha,  317, 

Echinus,  94,  884,  388,  650,  686,  687, 
693,696. 

Edifice,  Prasada,  396;  Sabha,  621; 
Sukshetra,  633  ; Harmya,  789 ; 
Hirauya-nabha,  747, 

Edge,  Palika  (-11),  347  ; (of  roof), 
Balika,  Balika,  432, 

Edict-pillar,  658-668. 

Eight-coraered(octagonal)  buildings, 
410, 411. 

Eigbt-storeyed  buildings,  401,  402, 
408,410. 

Elbow,  measure  of,  223,  224,  225,  226, 
229,  230,  232,  234,  237. 

Elephant,  (image  of),  Airavasa,  104. 


ISDBX 


881 


ExoRvabion,  Garbhavaba,  167,  Garbha* 
bhajana,  166, 

Extension,  Bahala,  Bahulya,  468. 

Extent,  Pari^aha,  S42. 

External  side  (of  a building),  Bahir- 
afigft,  439. 

Eye,  measure  of,  223  , 227,  232,  236; 
Padma-{ka),  337, 

Eye-brow,  measure  of,  232,  235, 

Eye-line  (of  an  image),  Akshi-subra,  2. 

p 

Paoe,  (moulding),  Pratimukha,  25 
Pratika,  26  ; Prafcivaktra,  26,  2T, 
387  ; Mukba,  507  ; Vakbra,  632  ; 
measure  of,  222,  223,  224,  225, 
226,  228,  229,  231,  233, 235  ; (of  a 
house),  Griha-mukha,  172. 

P'aQade,  Griha-mukha,  172  ; Mukha, 
508.  . 

Fair,  Hatta,  739. 

Fairy,  (image  of),  Vjdyadhara,  550. 

Fan,  Yyajana,  459  ; details  of,  569. 

Fan-palm-pillar,  677. 

Fascia,  388,  384,385,  386,  387,  388, 


Elephant’s  nail,  Hasti-nakha,  748. 

Elephant-pillar,  675. 

Elephant-trunk  (in  staircases),  Hasbi* 
hasta,  744. 

Elevation,  (moulding),  Tanga,  40  j 
^ribga,  596. 

Eleven-storeyed  buildings,  402. 

Eleventh  storey,  EkadaSa-tala,  104. 

Enclosed  courtyard,  liladhya-ranga, 
494. 

Enclosed  space  (for  religious  retire- 
ment), eu  (su)  ti-(t)  alaya,  685 

Enclosure,  Avrita,  72  j Chhanda-pra- 
kara,  204  ; Prakara,  888 ; Maha- 
maryada,  499;  Vata,  541;  Vara- 
(ka,  ua)>  544;  Vasa-ranga,  5t5; 
Su  (su)  t-ft)  alaya,  635. 

Enclosure-buildings,  Khaluraka  (-rika), 
156 ; Jati-prakara,  212. 

Enclosure  wall  (of  fifth  court),  Panoha- 
sala,  828. 

Entablature,  Khandotbara,  153  j 
Gopana,  173 ; Nandyavarta,  294; 
Patra-bandha,  385;  Prachchhadana, 
360;  Praatara,  376;  Matba-va- 
rana,  492;  Rupottara,  527  ; Var- 
dhamana,  686  ; Va(Ba)labhi(i), 
637;  Vidhana,  650-;  Sarvato- 
bhadra.  624  ; 692,  693,  696. 

Entrance,  PraveSa,  888;  Vefiana,  568. 

Etrance-door,  Mukha-varaua,  508. 

Essential  parts  of  house  (basement, 
pillar,  entablature,  tower,  dome, 
finial),  ^aianga,  588. 

Establishment  (for  pious  and  learned 
Brahmaij.a8),Jayanfca-pura,  207. 


682,  686,  689,  693,  696. 

Feeding  Gstablishment,  Satra,  Sabcra, 
616. 

Female  apartment  Gabhara  (Qarbha- 
gSra),  162;  Pura,  354. 

Female  deities,  (images  of),  ^akti,  670. 

Feminine  types  (of  architectural  ob- 
jects), Stri-lingB,  709. 

Fence,  Prakara,  388;  Vata,  541. 

Festive  hall,  Utsava-mandapa,  81. 

Fifth  storey,  PaQoha-tala,  328 ; Paficha- 
bhumi,  328. 


138 


IND8X 


Figure,  Vigraha,  549. 

Bllament,  Aih&a-(ka)  23, 91. 

Filament  •shaped  moulding,  Kesara, 
147. 

Fillet,  Alihga,  22,  23,  25,  26,  27, 
28,  31, 33, 35, 36, 40. 41, 67, 71,89, 
90,  91,  378, 379,  380,  381  j Anta- 
ra  (-rita),  22,  28,  26,  26,  29,  30, 
31,  37,  38,  39,  40,  47,  89,  90,  91, 

378,  379,  380,  381,*  (half),  Ar- 
dha-Tajana,  27  ; Kampana,  20,  21, 
22,  23.  24  25,  26,  27,  28,  29,  30, 
h.  82, 33, 34,  35, 36,  (jewelled)  36, 
37, 38, 39,  40,  41 ; 42,  43,  44,  88, 
89,  (half)  89,  90,  (half)  90,  91 
(half),  91.  94  95,  96;  113;  114; 
878,  879,  380;  (small),  kehudra- 
kampa,  28,  35;  Pa^ta,  PattikS, 
Patti,  21, 28,  (jewelled),  36, 88, 89 
(jewelled)  90,  91,  830 ; Mahapa|ta, 
498  ; Eakta-kampa,  817 ; Vajra* 
patta,  333 ; Prati,  27, 28,  29,  30, 
31, 32, 35, 37,  38,  39,  40,  41 ; Pra- 
tima,  36 ; Prativajana,  31,  33,  34, 
36. 37, 39 ; Uttara,  89, 90, 91,  378, 

379,  380 1 382,  383,  384,  38fi.  386, 
887,  388;  Vajana,  21,  22,  23,  25, 
26,  27,  28,  29,  30,  32,  84,  36, 
(small)  36, 37,  38,  40,  88,  90.  91, 
378,  379,  380,  381 ; (also  called 
liatel  or  annulet),  46,  661 , 681, 
682,  683,  686,  687,  689,  690,  691, 
692,  693,  694,  695,  696,  697,  698. 

Finger,  measure  of,  223,  224, 

Finger-breadth,  (a  unit  of  measure), 
Angola,  5—18. 

Finiai,  Ealak,  121 ; Eoua-loshta,  148  ; 
^ikhanta,  591 ; ^iras,  592 ; Sula, 


586 ; Vriddha,  568. 

First-floor,  Dtntala,  280. 

Fire-faced  pavilion,  Sarvato-bhaui_, 
489. 

Five-storey ed  building,  Kalyapa,  127 ; 
Paflcha-tala,  328;  Pafioha-bhumi, 
328,  400,  408. 

Flag-pillar(-staflF),  Dhvaja-stambha,  282, 
645,  659-660,  664,  668,  672, 
677;  Dauda,  256. 

Flank,  Paksha-(ka),  327. 
i Flight  of  steps  (surrounding),  Pra* 
dakshiiia-sopana,  369. 

Floor,  Kuttima,  135  ; Bhuma,  455  ; 
Bhauma,  459;  Bhumia-(ka),  455  ; 
(inlaid  with  jewels),  Ma?ii-bhu- 
(mi).  467. 

Flower,  Pushpaka.  357. 

Flower-bud,  Mafljarl,  462. 

Flower-plate,  Pushpa-paHa,  857. 

Flute,  Vina,  560  ; Karuna-viija,  115  ; 
YamSa,  589. 

Foot,  measure  of,  222,  224,  225,  228, 

230,  233,  234,  235  ; Pada,  336, 
346. 

Foot-path,  Jangha-patha,  206 ; Paksha- 
(ka),  327. 

Foot-ornament,  Jalaka,  213. 

Fore-arm,  measure  of,  224,  225,  228, 
228,  229,  230,  232.  234,  237  ; 
Prako3htha-(ka},  360. 

Ifore-finger,  measure  of,  227,  229, 

231,  232,  238. 

Fore-foot,  measure  of,  226,  229, 
Fore-head,  measure  of,  230. 

Ifore-nose,  Pushkara,  356. 

Forest-fort,  Vana-durga,  259,  260, 261, 
534. 


nn>Bs: 


Foro'toe,  measure  of,  226, 229*,  231, 
232,234/ 

Fort,  Kota,  148  j Kolaka,  148  ; Khar- 
vata.’l53;  Khaluraka(.rika),155; 
llurga,  259 ; Droua-mukha,  268  ; 
Dhanva^durga,  281 ; kinds  of, 
284  j Vahini-mukha,  549 ; 
Sahaya-durga,  625 ; Sainya- 
durga,  63*7  ; Parikha-durga,  342. 

Fortified  city,  Dnrga,  269;  ^ibira, 
592;  Vahini-mukha,  549;  Sam- 
viddha,  627  j Skandhayara,  643  j 
Sthaniya,  780. 

Fortress,  Kharvata,  153;  Para,  354; 
(to  defend  ten  villages),  Saib- 
grahaua,  626;  Sthaniya,  730. 

Fortune-pillar,  Lakshmi-skambha, 
(-stambha),  662—  653,  668, 

Foundation,  Adhi,  60;  Qarbha,  164; 
Garbha-vinySsa,  186;  Bandha,  431 ; 
(projecting  outwards),  Bahir- 
mukha-garbha,  439 ; Brahma-gar- 
bha,  448;  Mula-sthana,  511; 
(type  of)  Vishnu-garbha,  558 ; 
Vai&ya-garbha,  569 ; (of  build- 
ing), Vapra,  634;  (of  a house) 
G:^a-garbha,  169 ; (of  a village), 
Grama-garbha,  186 ; (for  tank, 
etc.),  Jala-garbha,  208 ; (of  tem- 
ples) Deva-garbha,  262 ; (of  resi- 
dential buildings,  Nara-garbha, 
297. 

Foundation  pillar,  Mula-stambha, 
511,  655,  664,667. 

Foundation-pit,  Garbha-bhajaHa,  166 ; 
Qarbhavata,  167;  Mafijusha, 
468, 


Four-faced  pavilion,  ChatUMnukha, 
469. 

Four-faced  pillar,  Ohatnr-mukha-stam- 
bha,  653  ; Brahma-deva-skambha, 
654 ; details  of,  668. 

I Four-fold  image  (on  column),  Sarvato- 
bhadra,  624. 

Four-cornered  building,  410,  411. 

Four-storeyed  buildings,  899-400, 

Fourth-storey,  Ohatuh-sthala,  194. 

Fourth-toe,  measure  of,  226,  281.  282 
234. 

Frame  (of  a thatch),  Va(ba)labhi«(i), 
587. 

Free  pillar,  Ohvaja-stambba,  282. 

Free-quarters,  Ohhat-(t)  ra-(i),  203. 

Free-rest-honse,  Satravasa-matha,  618. 

Free-standing  pillars  (of  A^oka),  his- 
' tory  of,  678. 

VFtieze,  Gala,  167 ; 42, 95, 96,  388,  885, 
886, 887*  682,  686,  687,  689, 698 
694,696,  397. 

Front  apartment,  Netra-kuta,  826. 

Front  door,  Kulabha-dvara,  148. 

Frontispiece,  Mukha,  607. 

Front  plate,  Ylra-patta,  562. 

Front  room,  Bhadra-talfi,  449, 

Front  tabernacle,  Pnrato-bhadra, 
355  ; Mukha-bhadra,  508. 

Funeral  pile,  Stupa,  706. 

Furniture,  (articles  of),  Bhushapa, 
458459. 

a 

Gallery,  Alinda-(ka),  54 ; Vadbfi- 
nataka,  534  ; V!  thik&,  561. 

Qanda-bherunda-pillar,  674. 

Garden,  Pu8hpa-va(ik&.  858, 


m 


imvsL 


Gardea-hotise.  Arama,  69 7 Vatika, 
,642. 

Oarlaad,  (of  jewels),  Ratna-malika, 
459  j (of  stars),  Nakshatra-mala, 
283. 

Qarmeat  (upper),  patta,  pa^tika,  pattii, 
330. 

Garret,  Att^laka,  14  ; Upatalpa,  86. 

Gate,  Dvara,  269  j NiryQha,  322  ; 
Praveka,  388  ; (of  town),  Vapra, 
634;  VSra-(ka,na\  544  j Ve&ana, 
668  ; (in  rows),  Srenita-dvara- 
699. 

Qate*chamber,  Drara-goshtba-fka), 
280. 

Gate-house,  Qopura,  174  ; Dvaraka, 
2T9;  DvSra-gopura,  279;  I/vara- 
faarmya,  280 ; Dvara-prasada, 
28 J ; Dvara-kala,  280  ; DvSra- 
kobha,  280 Brahma-kanta,  443  ; 
(at  extreme  boundary),  M.aha- 
gopura,  497  J Vishnu-kSnta,  657 ; 
Srl-vikala,  698 ; Skandfh)a-kaata, 
613 Saumy-kiinta,  643. 

Qate-temple,  Vrishabhalaya,  564. 

Gate*tower,  Qopura,  176,  177. 

Gateway,  Qopura,  174;  (with  flight  of 
steps),  Pratoll,  366;  Ve&aoa,  568. 

Gift-pillar,  Ohhagada-kambha,  672. 

Girdle,  Kati*sutra,  107. 

Gnomon  (for  aseertaining  cardi- 
nal points  with),  Sahku,  671- 
678; 

Goddess  of  learning,  (image  of), 
Saraavati,  570 


Goddess  of  wealth,  (image  of), 

Lakshmi,  570,  571, 

God*s  residence,  Devalaya,  264. 
Gold-ohain,  (worn  round  the  breasts), 
Suvarna-sutra,  459;  Hiranya- 
malika,  459. 

Gold-armour  , Svarna-kaflchuka, 
459. 

Golden  pillar,  Kaflohana-stam- 

bha,  Kanaka-stambha,  648. 

Goose,  (image  of),  Brahma-vahana, 
444, 

Granary,  Koshtha-(ka),  149 ; 

Tandula-maudapa,  219. 

Granite  pillar,  654,  655,  656. 

Gravel,  (building  materal),  ^arkara, 
579. 

Great  mansion,  Saudha,  642. 

Great  seat,  Bhadrasana,  449. 

Ground  floor,  Eka-tala  (-bhilmi),  102. 
Ground-plan,  Asaua,  73 ; Ikvara- 
kanta,  78;  Ugra-pitha,  78; 
Upapltha,  88 ; Nandyavarta,  294 ; 
Nishkala,  323;  Pada-vioya8a,336; 
Padma-garbha,  839;  Parama-fiadhi- 
ka,  340;  Pitha  (4hika),  349; 
Bhuini.(ka),  455  ;Mahapitha,  498; 
Mahasana,  500 ; Vipra-kanta, 
Vipra-garbha,  Vipra-bhakti,  651  ; 
VifiveSa-sara,  657 ; Suprati(-ti> 
kanta,  634;  Sasamhita,  635  ; 
Sthaudila,  709;  Sthanlya,  730. 
Group-image  (of  four  deities),  Sakala, 
615. 

Group-phalli  (of  $iva),  Sahasra-lihga, 

626. 


INDEX 


841 


Qroup-templea,  DeYa-niketa-toapdala, 
263. 

Guild-hall,  Njgama-sabha,  320. 

Guttae,  383,  884,  385.  986. 

Guitar,  Jala-dvara,  209;  (of  the  pedes- 
tal of  the  Phallus),  Jala-dhara, 
209;  Nala,  317;  Nali,  318; 
Pra)jala“(ka),  363. 

Gymnasium,  Kumarl-pura,  141, 

H.  . 

Habitation,  Geha-(ka),  172. 

Half-chain  (of  64  strings),  Ardha-hara, 
458-469. 

Hall,  Anu^Sla,  45  ; (of  audience) 
Upasthana-bhumi,  98 ; (for  coro- 
nation), Abhisheka-maudapa,  50 ; 
(for  dinner),  Abhyavahara-mati- 
dapa,  50;  Ku^i,  135;  (small), 
Kshudra-fiala,  161 ; Qriha,  108; 
Qeha-(ka>,  172;  Jabi-fiala,  212; 
Dandaka,  266;  Nishadya,  323; 
Pandi-Sala,  332  ; Prako3htha-(ka), 
360;  (sacrificial),  Pratisraya,  365 ; 
Bhadra*fiala,  449 ; Mandira,  495 ; 
MahaSala,  500 ; Maulika,  516 ; 
Langalakara,  528 ; Vardhamana, 
636;  Vijaya,  649;  Vikata,  549; 
Vifealaka,  556  j ^aia,  680  ; Patta- 
feala,  587  ; §ala-malika,  588  j Sar- 
vato-bhadra,  624  ; Svastika,  732  ; 
(of  chanty),  Satra,  Sattra,  615 ; 
(for  gifts)  Dana-feala.  686,  687  ; 
(for  meditation),  Jupa-kal5,  585  ; 
(for  reading  Veda  in),  Vedi-(ka), 
664 ; (of  study),  Vyakhyana-kala, 
584. 

Hall-mansion,  Kolhi-vekmika,  148- 


Hamlet,  Yataka,  541, 

Hammock,  Andola,  61 , Pola,  Dola, 
217,  267,  459. 

Hanging  balance,  Tula-bhara,  246. 
Head,  measure  of.  222,  223,  224,  227, 
228,  230,  233,  235,  239  ; 6iras, 
' 692. 

Head-gear,  Karand^j  » Kuntala, 
140;  Kete-bandha,  147;  Chitra- 
kalpa,  196  ; Dhammilla,  282; 
Pu8bpa-pat|a,  357 ; §iro-vibhu- 
shaua,  458  ; Maku^a,  461  ; Mauli 
515  ; Mauli-bandha,  516  ; §iras- 
traka  (-strapa),  692. 
Head-ornameni,  Ghulika  (-li),  197  ; 
Niryuha,  322. 

Heart,  meaaurn  of,  222,  224,  235. 
Heavenly  car,  Vimana,  651. 

Heel,  measure  of,  226,  231,  234,  238. 
Height,  Adbhuta,  16  ; Utsava,  80; 
Kautukodaya,  160;  Jayada,  207; 
Dhanada,  281 ; Paush^ika,  359 ; 
Sarva-kamika,  624. 

Height  of  storey,  Bhumi-lamba,  456. 
Helmet,  Sirastraka  (-strana),  692. 
Help-fort,  Sahaya-durgA,  261. 
Hermitage,  Ah'ama,  72. 

Hiccough,  measure  of,  289. 

High  way,  Ratha-vithi,  623;  Raja- 
patha,  528. 

Hill-fort,  Giri-durga,  168,  259,  260, 
201;  ^ailagra-durga,  261. 

Hip  (of  a bailding),  Ka^i,  106. 

Hole,  Sushi  ra,  635. 

Hollow,  Sushira,  635;  386,  661,  682, 
698. 


84S 


tSDJfX 


Honour-pillar,  M§na«a{;ambha,  detaila 
of,  654-655,  664-665,  666 ; defi- 
nition of,  670 ; characteristic 
features  of,  671. 

Hood,  Phapa,  431. 

Horizontal -roof  (of  balance),  Tnla- 
danda,  246. 

Horn,  Srifiga,  596. 

Horse-stable,  Vaji-§ala,  641. 

House,  (for  rest),  Avasatha,  56 ; 
igara,  59  j Jilaya,  71 ; (small), 
Ksbadra4a'a,  151;  Griha,  168; 
Geha.(ka),  172;  Pura,  354; 
(with  eastern  and  southern 
halls),  Vata,  642;  (for  spring 
festival),  Vasantika,  545;  (in 
general),  ^ala,  680 ; six  classes  of, 
681 ; other  details  of,  582 — 587  ; 
Yama-surya,  517  ; Yimana,  651 ; 
(built  with  one  material),  §uddha, 
596  ; Sadana,  618 ; (wich  sar- 
rounding  terraces),  Sarvato- 
bhadora,  624 ; Sala  (4a),  628. 

House-warming  (ceremony),  Griha- 
pravei^a,  169. 

Human-pillars  (of  Japan),  704, 

Hut,  Kota,  148. 

Hydraulic  engineer,  Jala-sutrada,  210, 

Hypotraohelin, 

I 

Idol,  (for  temporary  worship),  Kshapi- 
ka-bera,  151 ; (movable),  Jahga'ma- 
beia,  206 ; Pratima,  362 ; Bimba, 
440;  Bera,  441;  Murti,  510; 
Yigraha,  549 ; Sakala,  625. 

Image,  Ghitra,  105  ; (painted  on  wall, 
etc.),  Chitrabhasa,  196; 


Dhanada,  281;  PratimS,  362; 
Bimba,  440 ; Bera,  441 ; (of  great 
personage),  Muni,  509;  Mfirti, 
510 ; (of  demi  gods),  Yaksba,  517  j 
Vigraha,  649. 

Indo-Corinthian  pillars,  677. 

Indo-Persian  pillars,  677. 

Inner-apartment,  Antah-pura,  48. 

Inner-circle  (in  the  compound  of  a 
house),  Antar-mapdala,  47. 

Inner-rampart,  Antar-vapra,  47. 

Institution  (religious),  Qhatika-sthana, 
188. 

Interior,  Kukshi,  133. 

Interior  chamber,  Madhya-&ala,  494. 

Inter-space,  Antarala,  46. 

Inverted  oyma,  687. 

Inverted  oyma  reverse,  695,  698. 

Ionic-pillar  (order),  history  and  other 
details  of,  9$,  382,  688-692. 

Iria  (of  the  eye),  Krishua-mandala, 
146. 

Iron  pillar,  661. 

J 

Jain  apostles,  Ohatur-vim&ati-tirtha, 
192. 

Jain  deity,  Jina-(ka),  216. 

Jain  monastery,  Yaaati,  539;  Su  (su)t- 
(t)  alaya,  635. 

Jain  temple,  Jina-(ka),  216;  Basadi, 
Yasati,  438,  589. 

Jamb  (of  door),  Sakha,  580;  Hvara* 
6&kba,  280. 

Jar,  Ghata,  187. 

Jaw,  measure  of,  237. 

Jewel,  Vishnu-kauta,  657. 

Jewelled  hand,  Batna-patta,  520, 


INDEX 


843 


Jewel-liouse,  Ratna-griha,  520. 

jewelled  mansion,  Maiji-harmya,  467- 

Jewelled  turban,  Ratna-patta,  620. 

Joinery,  Ardha-praria,  52 ; Kulira, 
144;  Tri-karapa,  254;  NandyS- 
varta,  294 ; Brahma-mandira, 
444  ; Maha-vritba,  500 ; Mesha- 
yuddha,  515  ; VardhamBna,  536  ; 
Sandhi-karman,  details  of,  619; 
Sarvafco-bhadra,  624 ; SaibMrpa, 
626 ; Svastika,  732. 

Joint,  VaibSa,  539;  vSandhi,  619. 

Junction,  Patta,  Paftika,  Pa|tl,  330 ; 
Sandhi,  619, 

K 

Kitchen,  Paehanalaya,  327. 

Knee,  measure  of,  222, 223,  224,  225, 
226,  228,  229,  280,  231,  238,  235. 

Knee*cap,  measure  of,  229. 

Knee4ube,  measure  of,  226,  229,  231. 

Knob,  Kabandhaua,  112, 

L 

Ladder,  Sopana,  637 

Lair,  Nida,  825. 

Lamp-pillar,  Dipa-dana,  268 ; Dipa  ■ 
mala,  673  ; Dipa-malu-skambha, 
664 ; Dlpti-stambba,  672, 

Lamp-bearing  pillar,  , Dipa-mala* 
skambha,  Dipa-stambha,  Dipti- 
stambba,  268  ; Dipa-dapda,  258  ; 
Dipa-dana,  677, 

Lamp  post  (movable),  Chala-dapda 
195  ; Dipa-dapda,  258,  459  j 

MafSju-dapda,  463. 

Lamp-stand  pillar,  Dipa-stambha, 
Dipa-mala-skambha,  665,  666, 
672, 


Lance,  ^ula,  598. 

Lane,  Marga,  504 ; Vithika,  661. 

Large  ear-ring,  Tatahka,  458. 

Large  fan-post,  Bhrama-dapda,  460. 

Large  fillet,  Maha-vajana,  500. 

Large  hall  (at  entrance  oi  temple), 
Maha-mapdapa,  498. 

Large  house,  Saudha,  642. 

Large  toe,  measure  of,  228,  229,  231, 
232,  234. 

Large  vestibule,  Maha-nasi,  498. 

Large  village,  Maha-grama,  497. 

LatchjKokilargala,  147. 

Latticed  window,  Gavakaha,  167  ; Jala- 
(ka,  ka),  212  ; Jiila-gavaksha,  21*^, 

Laths  (running  across  a roof),  Varh&a, 
539. 

Laying  of  foundation,  Garbha-nyasa, 
165 ; Garbha*vinyasa  166 ; f^ila- 
pravela,  693 

Leaf,  (of  a door),  Kavat-v,  127  ; Patra, 
334. 

Leaf-shaped  moulding,  Dala,  258, 

Leaves,  693,  (upper),  696. 

Leg.  Jangha,  206 ; measure  of,  222, 
223,  224,  225,  226,  228,  230, 
231,  283,  235  ; (lower),  NalikS, 
318 ; (of  bedstead),  Harika-karpa, 
739. 

Length,  Vishkambha,  667. 

Limb,  Batha,  521, 

lintel,  Masuraka,  497 ; Svarasana, 
738. 

Lion,  (image  of),  Simha,  630. 

Lion-pillar,  Siibha-stambha,  665,  675, 
676. 

Lip,  (upper),  Uttarosh^ha,  '80;  mea- 
sure of,  237. 


2 


844 


I»D«X 


Iiiquor-shop,  Spana,  62. 

Listel,  94,  388,  384,  385,  661,682,  683, 
686,687,689,690. 

Little  bells,  Kinkini,  458. 

Little  finger,  measure  of,  227, 230, 231, 
232,238. 

Litter,  pola.polas  217,  ^ibika,  691. 

Little  tiara,  Bala-patta,  458. 

Little  toe,  measure  of,  226,  232,  234. 

Loins,  measure  of,  224,  226,  228,  229, 
231,  235. 

Loins-joint,  measure  of,  239. 

Loins -line,  measure  of,  239. 

Lotus,  Padma,  337. 

Lotus-pool,  Puahkarini,  356. 

Lotus  seat,  Padmasana,  340. 

Lower  lip,  measure  of,  233,  237. 

Lower  part,  Kanya,  109 ; Pada,  346. 

Lying-in-chamber,  Qabhara  (Garbha- 
gara),  162, 

Lower  part  of  finial,  ^ikhara,  588, 

M 

Main  building,  Mukbya-harraya,  509, 

Main-pillar,  Kulikangbri-(ka),  143. 

Main  street,  Ratba-vithi,  623. 

Main  temple,  Mula*harmya,  511. 

Manager,  Sutra- dharin,  636. 

Man-fort,  Manushya-durga,  261 ; Nri- 
durga,  261. 

Mansion,  Bhavana,  449  i Sadana,  618, 

Marble,  kinds  of,  iibbasa,  68 ; Chitra, 
195  ; Chitrabhasa,  196. 

Margin,  Palika-(l!),  347, 

Market,  Nigama,  820  f Mandi,  491; 
Hatta,  739. 

Market-place,  Apana,  6lj  Nishadya, 
323 ; Mandi,  491  ; Vithi  (-1),  560 ; 
Hatta,  ’73^- 


Masculine  (type  of  buildings  and  other 
objects),  Puinlinga,  358. 

Masons,  (class  of),  Sila-patta-vaiiifea, 
592. 

Masonry,  §ila-karma,  592. 

Master  builder,  Sthapati,  709. 

Material  (for  building),  Kolaka,  148. 

Maya,  architectural  manuscripts  of, 
769-772  ; book  of  Ghilan  Balam 
from  Cbumayel,  772  j architectural 
remains  discovered  by  Gann  at 
Yucatan  forests  of  America, 
772—779 ; importance  of  the  dis- 
coveries, 779—781. 

Measure  (by  the  interior  of  a struc- 
ture), Aghana-mana,  3 ; Unmana, 
86 ; (of  1 J inches),  Kolaka,  148 ; 
Gapya-mana,  1.69 ; Gokarpa,  172 ; 
Dapda-mana,  256?  Deba-labdba- 
ftgula,  266  ; (of  four  cubits), 
Dbanus,  281  j (sculptural),  Dvi- 
tala,  28^  ; Nava-tala,  297  ; 
Prade&a,  396 ; (of  height  or 
length),  Mana,  500  ; Matrangula, 
600 ; Manailgula,  504 ; Katni, 
620  } Lamba-mana,  528  j Vitasti, 
660  ; Yyaya,  569  i (of  height), 
iSantika,  580 ; (sculptural ), 
Sapta-tala,  620 ; Haata,  742; 
Upamana,  97 ; (by  exterior), 
. Qhana-mana,  190 ; (proportional), 
Bhaga  noana,  450. 

Measuring- rod,  iSafiku,  671. 

Memorial,  Vira-gala,  561;  Yira- 
^asana,  562. 

Memorial  pillar,  Vira-stambha,  538, 
674 


INDEX 


845 


Metope,  383,  384,  686. 

Metropolis,  Pvaja-dhani,  523. 

Middle  arm,  measure  of,  226,  230, 
23i,  237. 

Middle  compartment,  Madhya* 
koshtba,  493. 

Middle-finger,  measure  of,  223,  227, 
229,  230,  232,  234. 

Middle  hall,  Madhya-feala,  494. 

Middle  niche,  Mukha-bhadra,  508. 

Middle  part,  Kukshi,  133. 

Middle  part  of  a structure,  Garbha- 
sutra,  166. 

Middle  tabernacle,  M adhya-bhadra, 
493. 

Middle-toe,  measure  of,  226,  231,  232, 
234, 

Middle  Yestibule,  Madbya-nasI, 
493. 

Middle  wall,  Brahma-bhitti,  444. 

Military  post,  Attalaka,  14, 

Minor  limb,  Pratyanga,  868, 

Miraculous  throne  (of  Buddha),  Vaj- 
rasaua,  533  ; Bodhi-manda,  533- 
534. 

Mirror,  Darpana,  257,  459. 

Mixed  fort,  M ifera-durga,  259, 

Moat,  Parikha,  340. 

Modillion,  386,  692. 

Monastery  (of  the  Sikhs),  Guru- 
dvara,  168,  430 ; Basadi,  Vasati, 
433;  Matha,  463;  Satravasa- 
matha,  618  ; Saifagharama,  626  ; 
(Buddhist),  Vihara,  558, 

Monastic  establishment,  Bhrama, 
459  ; Sthana,  730, 


Monkey -pillar,  Hanuman-stambha, 

677. 

Monolith-pillar,  ^iia-stambha,  693; 
Bheema-aena,  656-657 ; 663,  668. 

Monument,  (Buddhist),  Dharma- 
rajika  (-ka),  282;  Nishidhi,  323; 
Nisaddhi,  Nisidi,  324 ; (memorial), 
Bi(vi)ra-gala,  440;  Yira-kaptha, 
561 ; yira-karna,  561 ; Ylra-gala, 
561 ; Yira-feasana,  562. 

Monumental  face,  Kirti-vakra,  132. 

Momumental  pillar,  Kirti-stambha, 
details  of,  675. 

Monumental  stone,  Bi(vi)ra*gala,  440. 

Mortar,  Sandbi-bandha,  620;  SudhS, 
634. 

Mosque,  Masi(-8i)  ti,  496, 

Mother-goddesses,  (images  of),  Sapta- 
matyi,  670,  571. 

Moulding  (of  a lamp  post),  Afighrika- 
vari,  14 ; Kampa-padma,  Padma- 
kampa,  35,  86,  37 , 38  ; Kampa- 
karpa,  35,  Nimna-kampa,  37  ; Pra- 
ti-bandha,  88  ; Jagati,  206,  208; 
Jayantika  (-ka),  208 ; (of  the 
column),  Tula,  246 ; Dandaka, 
266;  Dhara-kumbha,  282;  (of 
base),  Dharapa-kumbha,  282; 
(crowning,  or  of  pillar),  Nayaka, 
316 ; Nayika,  317 ; Nibi  (-vi)  da, 
320;  Nidra,  320;  Nimna-(ka), 
321 5 Niretana,  322 ; Nirgala, 
822;  (of  pillar),  Pahka,  327; 
Pafijara-kala,  328 ; (of  base), 
Payta,  Fattika,  Patti,  830 ; 
Patra.  334 ; Patra-valli-(ka),  335 ; 


846 


INDEX 


Patra-p8t|a,  330;  Padina-(ka),  337 ; 
(of  column),  Palika  (-H),  347  ; 
Paduka,  347  ; Purapa-ktimbha, 
858;  (snout  or  ploughshare  shaped), 
Potra,  309 ; Pratika,  Pratiki, 
361  ; Pratima,  362  j (of  base),* 
Prati-bandha,  362  ; Prati-mukha, 
366 ; Prafcbpatta,  365  ; Prati- 
vaktra,  865  ; (of  entablature  , 
Prati-i'upa,  365  ; (coneave) 
Prati-vajana,  365 ; Prati,  366  ; 
(of  entablature),  368  ; Pratyuha, 
368;  Phalaka,  431;  (of  entabla- 
ture), Balika,  Baiika,  432; 
Bahala,  Bahulya,  438 ; Bhadra, 
447  ; (of  base),  Bhadra-pat^a, 
448;  Bhfishana,  458;  (of  door), 
Madhya-bhuyanga,  493 ; (of  base), 
Maha-pa^ta,  498  ; (of  entablature), 
MahSvajana,  500 ; (of  entablature), 
Mushti-bandha,  509  ; (of  arch  and 
rampart),  Mushti*bandha,  509 ; 
(of  column),  MudrikS^-^  609; 
Mfinalaka,  511 ; (of  base),  Kakta- 
katnpa,  517  ; (of  base),  Bakta- 
patta,  617 ; (of  base),  Eakta- 
vapra,  518  j Ratna  -patta,  520  ; (of 
column),  Eatha-kutabha,  522 ; (of 
partioo),  Lambana,  627  ; Vaktra, 

532  ; (of  base  and  pedestal), 
Vajra-kumbha,  533 ; Vajca-pat^a, 

533  ; (of  base),  Vapra,  634  ; 
Valaya,  538 ; (of  column),  Vahana, 
539  ; Vajaua,  541 ; Vitahka, 
560  ; Vibrita,  660 ; Vetra,  664  ; 
Vedi.(ka),  564;  Vekana,  668; 
(of  oolumo),  Sakti-dhvaja,  571  ; 


(of  column),  ^iralamba,  592; 
Grants,  696 ; Saro-ruha,  623  ; 
(added  for  beautifying),  Saush* 
tbika,  643 ; Harita,  789  ; (of 
column,  etc,),  Hara,  Hara, 
Harika,  HarikS,  746;  (of  cages), 
Homa,  747. 

Mound,  Vapra,  684  ; Sefcu,  636 ; (in 
front  of  city  gate),  Sena-mukba, 
637  ; Stupa,  706. 

Mountain-fort,  Paryata-durga,  261. 

Mountain-road,  Bern,  636, 

Mouth,  661. 

Movable  structure,  Ohara  vastu,  194. 

Mud-fort,  Mrid-durga,  261, 

Music-hall,  Nat^a(- tya)-6a]a,  317 ; 
Nritta  (.tya)-maijdapa,  326  ; (of 
religious  nature),  Natya-feala,  684. 

Mutule,  384, 

H 

Nail,  ludra-kila,  76 ; measure  of,  226, 
238,234;  (sculptural  details  of), 
Nakha,  283;  (over  the  dome), 
Stupi-kila,  708. 

Narrow  pass,  Setu,  636, 

Narrow  street,  Vlthika,  661. 

Natural  fort,  Deva-durga,  262. 

Navel,  measure  of,  223,  240. 

Neck,  Kantha,  Kaudhara,  Gala,  Griva, 
107,  167,  187  ; measure  of,  228, 
223,  224,  225,  226,  227,  228,  229, 
230,231,  235,  237;  (of  column), 
Vira-kap^ha,  661  ; (of  capital), 
686. 

Neck -joint,  measure  of,  228,  230. 

Neck-lace,  Graiveyaka,  187 ; (of 
twenty.seveu  pearls),  Nakshatra- 
mala,  458,  Lamba-bara,  528. 


INDEX 


847 


Neck -projection,  measure  of,  237. 

Neck-ornaments,  (of  pillars),  Qriva- 
bhushana,  187. 

Nest,  Ni^,  326,  459 ; Pafijara,  328; 
(for  pigeon),  Paravata-Di4a,  847. 

Niche,  (in  the  wall),  Kumbha-panja- 
ra,  143;  Qokhla,  173 ; Qoahtha- 
paisjara,  180. 

Nine-storeyed  buildings,  401, 408,  409. 

Ninth  storey,  Nava-tala,  297 ; Nava- 
bhumi,  298. 

Nipple,  measure  of,  231. 

Northern  (quadrangular)  style,  Naga- 
ra,  299-316. 

Nose  (small),  Kshudra-nasa  (-si)  161; 
Nasa,  318  ; measure  of,  230,  232, 
286. 

Nose-bottom,  measure  of,  237. 

Nose-tip,  measure  ol, 

Nostril,  measure  of,  233,  236. 

O 

Observatory,  Mana-mandira,  604. 

Octagonal  buildings,  (comprising 
nine  varieties),  Tri-vishtapa, 
255  ; 161 ; 405,  406. 

Octagonal  pillar,  ‘666. 

Ogee,  Padma-(ka),  337 ; 94,  383,  651, 
682,  688. 

Oil-pot,  Taila-mafijueha,  246. 

Open  courtyard  (connected  with  a 
tank),  Mukta-prapahga,  506, 

Open  hall,  Mandapa,  468. 

Opening  (of  a house),  Qriha-pravesa, 
169. 

Orchard,  Arama,  69 ; Vatika,  542. 

Order  (of  column),  Priya-darfiana, 
431 1 see  details  under  pillar. 


Ornament,  (of  the  column),  Kumbha- 
lankara,  143  j (set  of),  Patra- 
kalpa,  836  ; (for  foot),  Pada-jala, 
846;  (kind  of),  Palika  (-li)  347; 
ParSva-puli,  347 ; (for  body),  Bhu- 
shaua,  details  of,  458— -469  ; 
(marked  with  shark),  Makara- 
bhuabaua,  460 ; MiArita,  607 ; 
Ratna-kalpa,  519;  Rabna-pushpa, 
520 ; Budra-handha,  527 ; LamW 
patra,  628;  Valaya,  638;  (of 
column  Vaatra-nipya,  539; 
SaAkha-kundala,  518 ; Sahkha- 
patra,  678 ; Samahgali,  634, 

Ornamental  arch,  261. 

Ornamental  tree,  Kalpa-druma  f-vrik- 
sha),  126. 

Outer  court,  Bahir-ahga,  489. 

Outer  gate  (of  house,  village,  town), 
Mahadvara,  498. 

Outer  wall,  Bahir-bhithi,  439. 

Oval  buildings,  Qaja,  159 ; Dvya&ra- 
vritta,  281 ; Mauika,  404,  406. 

Overseer  (of  building),  Karapaka,  129, 

Ovolo,  XJttarosh^ha,  80;  95  ; Prastara, 
378,  380,  385,  386,  387,  388,  650, 
682,  636,  689,  690,  693,  696. 

Outside  partition,  Bahir-bhitti,  439. 

Owl,  Peohaka,  359. 

P 

Painter,  Vardhaki,  536. 

Painting,  Chitra,  195. 

Palace,  AtJalaka,  14  ; Prasadaj  396 ; (of 
king),  Baja-harmya,  524 ; (of  em- 
peror), Vimana,  551 ; Sadana,  618 ; 
Saudha,  642  ; Harmya,  739. 

Palanquin,  Dola,  459 1 $ibika,  591, 


848 


IKDEIIC  • 


Palatial  bailding,  Saudha,  642. 

Palladio,  93,  94, 

Palm,  Tala,  219  j measure  of  223,  224, 
226,  226,  227,  229,  230,  282,  234, 
287,  238. 

Panel  (of  a door),  Kavata,  127. 

Parade,  Khaluraba  (-rika),  155. 

Parapet.  Pat'a^a,  840. 

Parlour,  Khalaraka  (-nka),  155. 

Part,  Pada,  336 ; (of  balance),  Bahula, 
439 ; (of  the  body),  Brihabl,  441 ; 
(of  a column),  Potaka,  Pofcika,  Pot- 
tika,  859 ; (of  door),  Sutra-pa^ti, 
(-pat^a,  pattika),  686 ; (of  enclos- 
ing wall),  Sasana,  588  j (of  finial, 
Snka-nasa  (‘nasika),  694. 

Partition,  Bhitti,  460, 

Passage,  Marga,  504. 

Paste,  Vajra,  532;  Vajratara,  633; 
Vajra-lepa,  533;  Vajra-samghata, 
538. 

Path,  Patha,  335  ; (circular),  Bbra« 
mana,  460 ; Marga,  504. 

Fatter,  Prauala-(ka),  861. 

Paved  ground,  Kuttima,  135. 

Pavement,  Uttana-patta,  80  ; Kut^ima, 
186  ; Pitba  (-^hika),  349, 

Pavilion,  Adhimapdlapakara,  17  ; (for 
storing  water),  Jala-purita-man- 
dapa,  209  ; Daudaka,  256 ; (near 
the  door),  Dandita,  267 ; Darbha, 
257,  (for  gods),  DevatS-mau- 
^pa,  262 ; Dhanada,  281 ; 
Nandyavarta,  294 ; Nandi* 
mapdapa,  294 ; (open  and  sixteen- 
pillared),  Nanda*vrita,  294 ; 
Naudana,  294 ; Nava-ranga, 


298;  Nishadaja,  Niahadha,  328; 
(for  banishment),  Nirvasa-maijda- 
pa,  823;  Pariyatra,347;  Pushpaka, 
367  ; (for  garlanding  flowers  in), 
Pushpa-bandhana-mandapa,  857  ; 
(sixty-two  pillared),  Ptahpa- 
bhadra,  357 ; Pratima-mandapa, 
864;  Pragata,  396  ; (in  group/, 
Bahu-mandapa,  439 ; (fifty- 

pillared),  Buddhi-samkirua,  441  ; 
Bbadra-mandapa,  449  ; (thirty- 
two-pillared),  Bhaga-panoha,  450  • 
Bhushana,  458 ; Mangala, 
461 ; (jewelled),  Maui-maudapa 

467  ; (sixty-four  pillared),  Maoi- 

bhadra,  467,  500  ; Mandapa, 

468  ; divided  into  twenty-seven 

varieties  according  to  the  num- 
ber of  columns  they  are  furnished 
with,  471-472  ; Malika  (-ka>, 

504  ; (with  twenty-eight  pillars), 
Manava,  504  ; (with  twenty-six 
pillars),  Mana-bhadra,  604 ; 
Malika-mandapa,  506 ; Malyahuta, 
506 ; (in  front  of  a temple), 
Mukha-bhadra,  508 ; Meruja, 
616;  Maulika,  516;  (with  forty 
pillars),  YajAa-bhadra,  517  ; 
BAhga-maxidapa,  518 ; Batna- 

mandapa,  620 ; (three-faced), 
Langalakara,  528;  (with  forty-four 
pillars),  Vastmkirti,  548 ; Vijaya, 
549;  Viniyoga-mandapa,  550; 
Vi&alaka,  656  ; Virasana,  562  ; 
Vrita  (-tta),  563 ; V risha- map  dapa, 
564 ; (with  eighteen  pillars), 
^atardhika,  578 ; (withthirty-four) 


INDEX 


pillars,  ^aurumardana,  579  ; §iva- 
ma^idapa,  694;  6ish$a*mapdapa, 
694;  (with  fourteen  pillars), 
^yama-bhadra,  596;  ^rl-rupa, 
598;  ^rivatsa,  598*;  (with. forty- 
eight  pillars),  l§rutim-jayai  699  j 
Satl-mapdapa,  615 ; Satra* 
ma^dapa,  618;  Sarvafco-bhadra, 

624 ; Siihha,  630 ; Sugriva, 
638;  SukfaiAga,  633;  Subba* 
dra,  634 ; Subhusihana,  684 ; Suvra- 
ta,  Suslish^a,  635  ; Saukhyaka, 

642  ; Svastika,  732;  (with  twenty- 
two  pillars),  Harita,  739;  Hifiaaja, 

746  j Hema-ki^a,  747  i 

Paving  (with  stones),  Karkari-krita, 
116. 

Peak,  Kuta,  144. 

Pearl-neoklaoe  (of  four  strings),  Ofaira, 
459. 

Pebble  (building-material),  l^arkara, 
679. 

Pedestal,  Upa-pitha,  86;  (upper), 
Upa-vedi,  98;  Khattaka(-tta), 
152;  Ghatubi«tila,  -193;  (for 
image),  Padma-pitha,  389 ; 
Fithikha,  849;  Piudii^s,  349; 
Padmasana,  340 ; Paduka,  347  ; 
(classes  of),  Prati-bhadra, 
Malloha*bbadra,Yedi-bhadra,  862 ; 
Mallcha-bhadra,  462,  468 ; Bhad- 
ra-pitha  448 ; Mahapitha,  498 ; (of 
column),  Euohira,  527;  Yedi- 
(ka),  564;  Yedi-bandha,  568; 
Sri-bhadra,  698;  687,  690,  691, 
694,  679. 

•J  Peg,  Torapa,  264,  (on  wall),  Niryuba,! 
822;  ^aijku,  571.  I 


“^Pendant,  Avalambana,  56  ; Lambana, 
627 ; Lamba-hara,  628. 

*1Pent-roof,  Ananta,  44;  Ambara,  50; 
(of  residential  building),  Eshoni, 
152 ; Gagana,  169 ; Jyotib,  217  ; 
Jya,  217  ; Pushkala,  357  ; Ba  (va)- 
sundbara,  438 ; Yasudba,  539. 

Permanent  habitation,  Stbira-vastu, 
731. 

Petal,  Dala,  29,  89,  90. 

Petal-shaped  moulding,  Dala,  268. 
j Phallus,  (self-revealed),  Udbhuta,  84  ; 
Svayamhhu,  732;  Kala-mukha, 
129}  Gauava,  167 ; Ohhanda,  204 j 
Jati,  211 J (divine)  Daivik'a-liuga, 
267 ; DharS-linga,  282 ; Nandy  a 
varta,  294;  Naha-li6ga,  820; 
(with  five  heads),  Paflchayatana, 
328;  (for  public  worship),  Parartha- 
lihga,  840;  PStupata,  848  } (in 
group),  Bahu-linga,  439;  Maha- 
vrita,  500  j Manusha,  604 } diflfe- 
rent  classes  and  other  details  of, 
528—632 ; Yajra-lihga,  638 } 
Yardhamana,  636 ; Yana-liftga, 
642;  Varna,  544;Yikalpa,  549; 
Yishnu-kanta,  557  j Sarvato- 
bhadra,  624;  Svastika,  732; 
(golden),  Svarua-linga,  732. 

Phallus-pillar,  Linga-mudra-sta mbha, 
667, 

Phallus-stand,  Piudika,  348  ; Pludi, 
849}  Pitha  (-thifca),  349  ; Maha 
piifha,  498. 

Picture-gallery,  Yithika,  561. 

Piety-pillar,  Karuavati,  659. 


860 


INDEX 


Pigeon-house,  Kapota-palalika  (-pSli), 

no. 

Pike,  696  ; ^ula-kampa,  596., 
Pilaster,  Anghri,  13  j Kudya-stambha, 
139 } Koshtha-stambha,  149. 

Pillar,  (a  kind  of),  Aiighri,  13-14  ; Aya 
ka,  67  J Ayika-pada,  69 ; 
Uohohbraya  78;  Kirti-stambha, 
132  j (attached  to  wall),  Koshtha- 
stambha,  149;  Eoshthaka,  149; 
Gadiada-bherapda,  161, 674  j (bear- 
ing aun-eagle),  Garuda-ska(sta) 
mbha,  163;  (main),  Griha-stambha, 
172 ; Oharana,  194 ; Ohitra- 
skambha,  196  ; Ohitra-karua,  196; 
Jahgha  206  j Jayanci  (-ti),  208  j 
(of  victory),  Jaya-stambba,  208  ; 
Dan^-(ka),  256  ; (with  sixteen 
recangular  side),  Dvi-vajraka,  281 ; 
Dharana,  282  ; (bearing  flag  or 
banner),  Dhveja-stambha,  282  ; 
(monumental),  Dharma-stambha, 
282  ; Dhanya-stambha,  282  ; (reli- 
gious), Dharma-stambha,  282  ; 
Dharana,  282;  Padma-kanta,  889 ; 
Pada,  346,  Palika-stambha,  348; 
(main),  KulikaBghri-(ka),  143 ; 
Brahma-k  anta,  443;  (main  or 
foundation),  Mula-danda,  511 ; 
(sacrificial),  Yupa-stambha,  517 ; 
Euohaka,  526 ; Eudra-kanta, 
527  ; Lakshmi.ska(sta)mbha,  527  ; 
Vajra,  532 ; Vajra-piida, 

533 ; Vishkambha,  567  ; Vishnu- 
kanta,  557  ; Vrita  (-tta), 
663  ; l§ila-stambha,  593  ; (five- 
sided),  ^iva»kanta,  694 ; (composite 
order),  Subhaifakari,  695 } 

Sukhaf  ghri,  595  ; (for  beauty), 


Srikara,  697  ; Saumukhya,  642  ; 
8kand(h)a-kanfa,  643  ; Sthuna, 
781  ; Sthanu,  731 ; of  Jains, 
Buddhists,  Vaishnavas,  §aivas 
compared,  677— 678  ; (of  the 
Vedic  age),  details  of,  678 — 
679  ; (of  different  proportions), 
679—681  ; 699-702;  Indian  and 
Graeoo-Roman  compared  702— 
704 ; Stambha,  644 ; other  appella- 
tions, 644  ; measure  of,  644 — 645, 
648,  649,  699  -702  ; five  orders 
of,  646,  681— 698  ; interoolumnia- 
tion,  645  : component  parts  of, 
645—646,  648,  650—652;  plans  of, 
703 — 704  ; different  varieties  of  i — 
Banner  for  flag-bearing)  pillar, 
(Dhvaja-sLambha),  282. 
Basava-pillar,  673. 

Benefaction  pillar,  (Dharma- 
stambha),  667. 

Beauty  pillar,  (Srikara),  597. 
Boundary  pillar,  661. 

Brahcoa-deva  pillar,  676. 

Brick  pillar,  677. 

Carved  pillar,  667,  668. 

Composite  pillar,  695  — 698. 
Corinthian  pillar,  S3,  382,  892,  695, 
Corn  pillar,  (Dhanya-stambha),  645. 
Crocodile  pillar,  677. 

Devotion  pillar,  (Dharma-stamba), 
670. 

Diamond  pillar,  (Vajra-p&da),  533. 
Doric  pillar,  93,  382,  685 — 688. 
Dwarf  pillar,  (Upapada),  86  ; 

(Aighrika),  13-14, 

Eagle  pillar,  (Garuda-skambha, 
Qaruda-stambha),  652,  655, 

666,  667,  674,  674-675,  677. 


INDEX 


861 


EdicD  pillar,  658-659. 

Elephant  pillar,  6?5. 

Fan-palm  pillar,  677. 

Fortune  pillar,  (Lakahmi-skambha,- 
stambha),  652-663,  668. 

Foundation  pillar,  (Mula-atambha), 
511,  656,  664,  667. 

Four-faced  'pillar  (Ohatur-mukha- 
stambba,  Brahma*deva*ekam- 
bha),  653,  654,  658. 

Free  pillar,  (Dhiraja-atambha), 
282. 

Free  atanding  pillars  (of  A&oka), 
678. 

Qauda-bheraDda  pillar,  161,  674. 

Gate  pillar,  (Chhagada-fcambha), 

672. 

Gold  pillar  (Kafichana-,  Kanaka- 
stambha),  648. 

Granite  pillar,  654,  655,  656. 

Honour  pillar,  (Mana-atambha), 
664-656,  664-666,  666,  670, 
671. 

Human  pillar  (of  Japan),  704. 

Indo-Oorinthian  pillars,  677. 

Indo-Persian  pillars,  677. 

Ionic  pillars,  93,  382,  688-- 692. 

Iron  pillar,  661, 

Lamp-pillar,  (Dipa-dana,  Dlpa- 
mSiIa-skambha,  Dt  pa-  mala, 

Dipti-stambha),  258,  664,  672, 

673. 

Lamp-bearing  pillar,  (Dipa-mala- 
skambha,  Dipa-stambha,  Dipti- 
stambha,  Dipa-danda),  258,  677 

Lamp-stand  pillar  (Olpa-stambba, 
Dipa-mala-skambha),  665,  666, 
672. 


Lion  pillar,  655,  675,  676. 

Main  pillar,  (Kulikahghrika), 
143. 

Memorial  pillar,  (Vira-stambha), 

588,674. 

Monkey  pillar,  tH^anuman-scam- 

bha),  677. 

Monolith  pillar,  (l§ila-stambha, 
Bheema-sena),  593,  666-867, 
663, 668. 

Monumental  pillar,  (Eirti-, 
Dharma-stambha),  182,  282, 
675. 

Ootagoual  pillar,  656. 

Phallus  pillar,  (Lihga-mudra- 
stambha),  667. 

Piety  pillar,  (Karnavati),  659. 

Pilaster,  (Ahghri-,  Kudya-, 
Eoshtha-stambba),  18, 139,  149. 

Pleasure  pillar,  (Sukbabghri),  595. 

Projecting  pillar,  (Vinayaka- 
stambhal,  667. 

Quadrangular  pillar,  653.  656, 
667. 

Religious  pillar,  (Dharma- 
stambha).  282, 

Sacrificial  pillar,  (Yfipa-,  Yajfla- 
stambha),  663,  666,  669-670, 
675. 

Sati-pillar,  660,  677. 

Sixteen-sided  pillar,  669. 

Stone  pillar,  (l§ila-stambha),  593, 
645,  652,  653,  657,  668,  669, 
671,678. 

Thieves  pillar,  677, 

Thirty-two  sided  pillar,  648; 

Town  pillar,  (Nagara-stambha), 
656. 


S52 


INDEX 


Trident  pillar,  (TriSuIa-sfcambha), 
052. 

Tuscan  pillar,  94,  382,  681—686, 
Umbrella  pillar,  6^6 
Unshaben  pillar,  (Tolagada' 
kambha),  673. 

Upper  pillar,  ^Kumbha-pada, 
Kumbba-fitambha),  1?3. 

Victory  pillar,  (Jaya-,  Vijaya- 
stambha,  Kirti-stambha),  634, 
669,  664.  668,  670,  671,  677. 
Wall-pillar,  (Kndya-stambha), 
139. 

War- pillar,.  (Rana-atambha), 
661-662. 

Welfare-pillar  (lyaka-skambha), 
669. 

Pin,  Indra-kila-(ka),  76 ; Kila,  132. 
Pin-hold,  Klla-bhajana,  138. 

Pin-point,  Klla-knlaKa,  133. 

Pinnacle,  Kala&a,  121;  Kuta,  144  j 
Nirynha.  322  j ^ikha,  691* ; ^iras, 
5g2;Stupi,707. 

Pipe,  Tilamaka,  245. 

Pitcner,  Kumbha,  21,  26,  27,  28,  29, 
30,  81,  32, 33,^39,  41 ; Gha^a,  187  ; 
(Bupporting),  Dhara-kumbha,  22 ; 
(round),  Vajra-kumbha,  34; 
'Vritta-kumbha,  87, 89. 

Place,  Bhutni-(ka),  465 ;.  (for  military 
exercise),  Khaluraka  (-rika),  155  ; 
(enclosed  for  religions  retirement), 
Bhrama,  459  ; (for  sport  or 
recreation  of  kings),  Mriga-vana, 
■511 ';  (for  water-clock),  Ghojik- 
alaya,  Qbatika-stbana,  188. 

Plank  (for  plumb-lines),  Pralamba- 
phalaka,  87  5 ; Pbalaka,  431. 


Plans  (of  bidldings,  etc.),  Saiijsthana, 
627. 

Plaster,  Kalba,  124 ; Vajra,  532 ; Vajra- 
tara,  533 ; Vajra-lepa  533 ; Vajra- 
samghSta,  533 ; Sudha,  634. 
Plastering,  Upalepana,  98, 

Plate,  Patta,  Patfika,  Patti,  330 ; 

Prati-patta,  365  ; ^asana,  588. 
Platform,  (raised),  Anvanta,  49  j 
Avasana,  66 ; Ohara,  195 ; PrasMa, 
396 ; Ba(va)lanaka,  432  ; 
Maflcha,  461 1 Ruohira,  627, 
Pleasure-garden,  5.rama  69;  Udyana, 
85 ; Upavana,  98. 

'Pleasure-house,  Knda-ketana,  150  ; 

Saukhyaka,  642 ; Sukhalaya,  633. 
Pleasure-pavilion,  VStika,  542. 

Plinth,  Janman,  21,  23,  24,  25,  26,  27, 
28,  29,  80.  81,  32,  33,  84,  35, 
36,  37,  38,  39,  42,  43,  44  j 88.  89, 
90,  91,.  94,  95,  96,  207 ; Kshudro- 
pana,  22,  35,  40 ; Paduka,  29,  88 ; 
347  ; Upana,  80,  40,  88,  90,  91, 
98,  (small)  40 ; 682,  683,  687,  690, 
691,  694,  695,  697,  698. 

Plot,  (in  a ground-plan),  P5da,  836. 
Plough,  Lahgala,  528. 

Plumb-lines,  Karya-sutra,  129;  (by 
back-bone),  Prbhtba'SUtra,  859 ; 
Pralamba,  372. 

Pole,  6ahku,  571. 

Pond,  Purta.  358. 

Pool  (of  a temple),  Kunda,  140; 
Tadaga,  217. 

Porch,  Ardha-mandapa,  52  ; Dehara, 
267 ; Purato  bhadra,  355  ; Mukha- 
bbadra,  508 ; Vatayana,  542, 


ISfDBX 


853 


Portico,  Bhadra,  39,  447 ; Mukha- 

bhadra,  508 ; Kishkasa,  323 ; 
Rucbira,  527  ; VatSyana,  642; 
Purato-bhadra,  366. 

Pose,  (in  which  itaages  are  carved), 
Bhanga,  346;  Atibhanga,  16; 
Sbhanga,  62;  Tri- bhanga,  266; 
Sama'bhanga,  623. 

Post,  (of  door),  Dvara-6akha,  280 ; 
Vishkambha,  557;  Sanku,  671; 
Stambha,  644. 

Posture,  (of  an  image),  Padmasana, 
840 ; (sitting),  Asana,  73. 

Pot,  Qhata,  187, 

Preparation  of  stone,  (for  building), 
^iladhivasana,  592. 

principal  idol  (of  a temple),  Mula- 
bera,  511. 

Principal  shrine,  Mfila*harmya,  611. 

Private  chamber,  Rahasyavasa*man- 
4apa,  523. 

Private  entrance,  Kampa-dvara, 
114;  Plaksha-dvara,  431, 

Private  room,  Gabhara  (Qarbhagara), 
162 ; Nirvasa-mandapa,  823. 

Projection,  Kshepana,  26,  27,  29,  30, 
32,  34,  35,  40,  41,  88,  89,  90, 161, 
879;  (small),  Kshudra-kshepana, 
28;  Nirgama,  321;  Nimna-(ka), 
321  ; Nishkasa,  323;  Baba  la, 
Babulya,  438,  441;  (of  base  or 
basement),  Janma*nirgama- 
(-niahkramana),  207. 

Prop,  Vishkambha,  567. 

Prosperity -pillar,  Vi  naya  ka-s  tambha, 
657. 

Public  hall,  ^la,  687  ; Sabhfi,  621. 

Public  road,  Baja-patha,  524. 

Fulpit,  Mafioha,  461, 


q 

Quadrangle,  (open  or  closed)  , ehatub- 
fiala,  193 Prakoshtha-Cka),  360 ; 
(open  at  the  top  and  enclosed  on 
all  sides),  Madbya-ranga,  494. 

Quadrangular-pillar,  653,  656,  657. 

Quarter  round,  382,  660,  681,  686. 

R 

Raft,  nhana,  539. 

Rafter,  VaiD.^a,  639, 

'Raised  terrace,  Dehari  (-ii),  266. 

Rampart,  Pura,  364;  Prakara,  388; 
Vapra,  534;  S51a  (4a),  628. 

Reception  hall,  Khalnraka  (-rika),  165. 

Reception-room,  Upastbana,  08. 

Recess  (in  a wall),  Gokhia,  173; 
Qoshtha-pafijara,  180, 

Rectangular  buildings,  Pushpaka,  404, 
405,  407. 

Recumbent  posture  (of  image),  ^ayaua, 
679. 

Reed-pipe,  VaihSa,  539. 

Refectory  (of  temple),  PaohanSlaya, 
327  ; Bhoga-mandapa,  459 ; Bho* 
jana-ma^ha,  469;  Viniyoga-mau- 
dapa,  550. 

Region,  Bhumi-(ka),  456. 

Rblief,  (full),  Ohitra,  195 ; (half),  Chi- 
trardha,  196. 

Religious  centre,  Ghatika-sbhana,  188, 
189, 

Religious  establishment,  332. 

Reservoir  (of  water),  Jala-stbala,  209. 

Residence,  Avasa,  72 ; Pura,  354 ; Pra- 
ti&raya,  366  ; Bhavana,  449;  (for 
the  great  serpent),  Mabi-bhitti, 
467  ; (for  the  great  serpent),  Maui- 
maudapa,  467  ; Vasati,  539 ; (of 
monks  and  hermits),  Saibgharama, 


8S4 


iKBirs 


Best-house,  Dharma  lnla,  282,  586; 
DharmSlaya,  282 ; Nisaddhi, 
Niaidi,  324  ; Matha,  463 ; Satra, 
Sabtra,  615,  816 ; Sukhanga,  638. 

Betiriag  room  (in  a temple),  ^ringara- 
maijdapa,  696. 

Reversed  cyma,  6S1, 

Ribs-joint,  measure  of,  239. 

Ribs-plauk,  measure  of,  239. 

Ridge  (of  earth),  Setu,  636. 

Riding  animal,  (of  Brahma),  Brahma- 
vahana,  444  ; (of  gods),  Vahana, 
549 

Rim  (of  a mirror),  Aiii&aru,  58. 

Ring-finger,  measure  of,  227, 230,  231, 
232,  238. 

River- fort,  Nadeya-durga,  261. 

Road , (eight  cubit  broad),  Charya,  195  j 
Pabha,  335  ; (main,  of  a bown), 
Pratoli,  366  ; (oiroular,  round  a 
village  or  town),  Pradakshina, 
368;  (broad,  surrounding  a 
village  or  town),  Mangala-vlthi, 
Raja-vithi,  Ratbavlthi,  461; 
Marga,  604;  Va(Va)ha-{ka,  la), 
539;Vata,  541;  Vithi-fi),  560; 
Vithika,  561. 

Rock-sculpture,  Se  (^i)  la-rupaka,  637. 

Roof,  (of  a house),  Aau<griha,  44 ; 
Aohohhadana,  59 ; (of  foundation- 
pit),  Qarbha-mafijusha  (-shika), 
166 ; Tauli,  254 ; Dharapa,  282 ; 
Praohohhadana,  360;  Va(Ba) 
labhiC-i),  378,  379,  537;  (top- 
most),  Mahatauli,  497 ; Mushti- 
bandha,  609 ; Vfite-kshetra,  542 ; 


iayana,  579;  (flat,  of  a bonse), 
Harmya-tala,  742. 

Roof  moulding,  AohohhSdana,  59. 

Roof-projeotion,  Indra-kola,  Indra- 
kosbbha,  76. 

Room,  (for  dressing>.  Alankara-map- 
dapa,  63;  igara,  59:  tlvaraka, 
lOljGriha,  168;  Geha.(ka),  172; 
(near  the  gate  of  palace),  Prakosh- 
tha-(ka),  360;  Mandira,  496; 
§ala,  680  ; Sthana,  730. 

Root,  (of  elephant’s  tail),  Peohaka,  358. 

Round  buildings,  KailaSa,  404,  406. 

Royal  court,  RajShga,  626. 

Royal  palace,  Raja-griba,  523  ; Rajan- 
ga,  526. 

Royal  residence,  Sibira,  692;  Skan- 
dhavara,  643. 

8 

Sacrificial  hall,  Yaga-feala,  517,  Sadana, 
618. 

Sacrificial  pavilion,  Yaga-mapdapa> 
517. 

Sacrificial  pillar,  Yupa-stambha,  663, 
666 ; Yajfia  {1  upa)*stambha,  669 
—670,675. 

Sanctuary,  Gabhara  (Garbhagara), 
162;  Qarbha,  164;  Garbha-ge 
(gri)ha,  Mala-sthana,  164  ; 
Ohaitya,  199;  Sthapana- 
mapdapa,  731. 

Sand,  (building  material),  Sarkara, 
579. 

Sati-pillar,  details  of,  660,  677. 

Soamozzi,  93,94. 

School,  (for  higher  studies),  Kumari- 
puca,  141 ; (of  architecture), 
$ilpa-^la,  594, 


IWDBX 


855 


Science  of  arohiteature,  Vastu-vidya, 
548  ; §ilpa-&asfcra,  594. 

Scotia,  43,44,  651,  690,  695,  697. 

Screen,  Jali,  216. 

Sculptural  measures,  Tala-mana, 
varieties  of,  241 ; 221 — 244  jDa&a- 
tala,  268. 

Seat,  (moulding),  Ssana,  36,  73 ; 
Upavedi,  98 ; Khattaka  (-tta), 
152  ; Patta,  Pattika,  Pa^ti,  330  ; 
Piudifca,  348  ”,  (of  sacrifice),  Bali- 
pi^ha-^ka),  432 ; (along  the  wall  of 
Council-hall  in  temples),  Ba(va)- 
lanaka,  432  ; (of  Government), 
Raja-dhani,  523;  Sadana,  618; 
Sadman,  619;  Siiiihasana,  630; 
kinds  and  other  details  of,  681* 
632. 

Second  floor,  Tri*tala,  254. 

Sectional  tower,  Khapda-harmya,  153. 

Secret  pavilion,  Eahasyavasa-mau- 
dapa,  623. 

Sectarian  distinction,  (of  an  image), 
Tilaka,  244. 

Semi-oircular  arch,  246,  251. 

Septum,  (of  the  nose),  Goji,  173. 

Serpent«stone,  Naga«kala,  299. 

Settlement,  Pattana,  333. 

Seven-fold  vEall,  Sapta-sala,  621. 

Seven-storeyed  buildings,  401,  408, 
409,  620. 

Seventh  storey,  Sapba-tala,  620 ; Sap- 
ta-bhumi-(ka),  620. 

Sex-organ,  measure  of,  228, 233,  240. 

Shaft,  42,  682,  686,  690,  694,  697  ; 
Vamfea,  539. 


Shed,  Kota,  148;  Mapdapa,  468; 
^ranta,  596. 

Shelter-house,  (for  travellers),  Prati- 
6raya,  365, 

Shoot,  Mafljari,  462. 

Shop,  Apapa,  61  j Nishahadya,  323 ; 
YithI  (-i),  560. 

Shoulder,  measure  of,  225,  226,  229, 
238,  239. 

Shrine,  Kir  tana,  130 ; Deva-kula  (-ku- 
lika),  262;Ba8adi,  Vasabi,  483; 
Mandira,  49S ; Ratha,  621 ; Ra- 
thaka,  522  ; Yosati,  589 ; Stbana, 
870. 

Side-door,  Kampa-dvara,  114 ; Plak 
sha-dvara,  431. 

Side-hall,  Netra-kuta,  326 ; Netra- 
kala,  326;  Paksha-Sala,  327. 

Side  niches,  Earpa.knta,  117. 

Side  tabernacle,  Netra-hhadra,  826. 

Side-tower,  Karpa-harma,.110 ; Qala- 
167. 

Side-wall,  Netra-bhitti,  326, 

Single-storeyed  buildings,  398 

Sinking,  382,  682. 

Sit)G,  (for  building),  Kutumba-bhumi, 
135  ; Euttima,  135 ; Potaka,  Poti- 
ka,  Pottika,  359 ; Bhumi-(ka), 
456;  Bhavana,  449. 

Sitting  posture,  Svastika,  732. 

Situation,  (of  houses),  Griha-sthana 
170;  (of  building),  Bhumi-(ka), 
465, 

Six-faced  pavilion,  Maulika,  469, 

Six  formulas,  (of  measurement).  Shad- 
varga,  600 ; specified,  601-602  ; 
explanation  of,  602-603  ; use  of, 
606-607,  609—611. 


866 


INDEX 


Six-storyed  buildings,  128,  339,  409. 

Sixteen-cornered  building,  410,  411. 

Sixteen- roomed  house,  Sbodafea-man- 
dira-chakra,  612,  a favourite 
plan,  012--614. 

Sixteen-sided  pillar  (pilaster),  669, 

Sixteen-storeyed  buildings,  176,  408, 
600. 

Sixteenth  storey,  Shodafa-tala,  600. 

Sixth-  storey,  Shaf-tala,  599. 

Slab,  Patta,  Pattika,  Patti,  380 ; Prati- 
pat^a,  865. 

Sleeping-apartment,  Suyana-mandapa, 
579. 

^Sloping  roof,  Maddala,  492. 

Small  bnilding,  Dandita,  257. 

Small  closet,  (inside  the  wall),  Bhitti* 
griha,  452. 

Smaller  door,  Upadvara,  86. 

Small  house,  Va^ika,  542. 

Small  pavilion,  Mapdapika,  490. 

Small  room  (in  front  of  idol  in  tem* 
pies),  Suka(-kha)-na8ika,  632. 

Small  seal,  Mudrika,  509. 

Small  stone,  (building  material),  Sar- 
kara,  679. 

Small  tower,  ^ikhara,  588,  691. 

Sofa,  Talpaka,  220 ; Maflcha,  461  ; 
Satanga,  578. 

Soil,  (for  building),  Bhumi-(ka),  456. 

Sole,  Tala,  219 ; measure  of,  223,  224, 
226,231,  235. 

; Southern  (octagonal)  style,  Dravida, 
267,  299-316. 

Span,  Titasbi,  550. 

Spherical  roof,  §ikhara,  688  ; Stupi, 
707. 


''‘Spire,  Vriddha,  563 j Sikhara,  588, 
589,  590 ; ^ringa,  596  ; Stupi-klla, 
708. 

Spot,  Bhflmi-(ka),  455. 

Spout,  Kshepana,  161. 

Spring-dwelling,  Vasantika,  545. 

Sprout,  Prapala,  Papalika,  Prapali, 
361 ; Mafijari,  462. 

Square  buildings,  Vairaja,  403,  405. 

Stable,  §ala,  580. 

Stage,  Eanga,  518. 

Stairs  (staircase),  (stationary),  Aohala- 
sopana,  14;  (movable),  Ohala- 
sopana,  195 ; Sopiina,  687 ; varie- 
ties and  other  details  of,  637 — 642. 

Stake,  Kila,  132 ; ^ahku,  571. 

JStalk,  Mripalika,  379,  380  ; Mafijari 
(.ri),’462. 

Stall,  Vitbi  (-1),  560  ; ^aia,  680. 

Stand,  Vedi-(ka),  564. 

State-chair,  Bbadrasana,  449. 

Stationary  idol,  Stbavara-bera,  731. 

Statue,  Pratima,  362 ; Murbi,  610 ; Se 
(&i)larrupaka,  637. 

Steeple,  Sikhara,  591. 

Steeple-tower,  Stupi,  707. 

Steps,  (see  stairs),  Sopana,  14 ; (for  a 
hill),  Adri-sopana,  17  ; (flight  of), 
Ghatta,  188;  Sopana,  637. 

Step-well,  Purta,  858. 

Stereobates,  tJpapitha,  86. 

Stomach,  measure  of,  222. 

Stone-cutters,  ^xla-marddaka,  693. 

Stoue-houae,  6ila-ve&ma,  693. 

I Stoue-masons,  6ila-marddaka,  593; 

[ Si  (§i)lavata,  629  ; ^ila-feilpi,  716. 


liJDEi 


857 


Stone-pillar,  (monolith),  £§ila-,  6aila- 
stambha,  593,  645,  65 2, ‘653,  667, 
658,659,  671,673. 

Stone-work,  ^ila-karma,  692. 

Store-nouse,  Koshthagara,  150  ; Para, 
354. 

Store-room,  Koshtha,  149  j Ko&a- 
mandapa,  149 ; Tagdula-mancjapa. 
219 ; Nidhana,  320. 

Storey,  (upper),  Attalaka,  14,  57 ; 
Tala,  219 ; Bhuma,  455 ; Bhumi- 
(ka),  465 ; Bhauma,  459. 

Storeyed  house,  Attalaka,  14, 

Straight  arch,  246. 

Street,  (with  two  foot-paths),  Dvi-pak- 
sha,  281 ; Patha,  336 ; Marga, 
504?  Vithi(-i),  560. 

Street-shelter,  359. 

String-course,  (carved  with  rail-pal- 
tern),  Vedi-(ka),  664. 

String  of  pearls,  Maui-bandha,  467. 

Stucco,  Sudha,  684. 

Style,  (of  architecture,  etc.),  267  ; (of 
Telugu  country),  Veaara,  569  ; (of 
Dra vidian  country),  Dravida,  267; 
(of  Northern  country),  Nagara, 
299-816. 

Stylobates,  Upapada,  86. 

Subordinate  temples,  Parivaralaya, 
843. 

Sub-temple,  Upabhavaua,  97. 

Sugar,  (building-material),  Barbara, 
579. 

Summit,  Kuta,  144 ; Vapra,  534; 
Siras,  592. 

Support,  Bharaka,  450;  Bhara,  450; 
Bhiibi,  460. 

Supporting  member,  Pratyuha,  868. 


/ Surrounding  steps,  (through  wall), 
Bbitti-sopana,  452. 

Swing,  Andola,  61;  Pola,  Dola,  217, 
267,  459. 

Symbol,  (for  Buddha  and  Siddha), 
Svastika,  732;  varieties  and 
history  of,  734  —738. 

T 

Tablet,  Prati-patta,  365. 

Talon,  Padma-(ka),  337  ; 651. 

Tank,  Tadaga,  217 ; Pushkariui,  356  ; 
Prapa,  369  ; Sstha,  521. 

Tavern,  Apana,  62 ; Madira-griha,  492, 

Temple,  Ayatana,  67 ; Alaya,  71 ; 
A&rama,  72;  Asana,  78;  of  For- 
tune Virilia,  93;  Kirtana,  130 ; 
(for  temporary  worship  in), 
Kshauikalaya,  161  ;(of  fever  god), 
Jvara-devalaya  217 ; Deva-kula 
(-kulika),  262 ; Devayatana,  268 ; 
Devalaya,  264  ; Dehari  (-H),  266; 
Puri  (-ri),  356 ; Pratima-maudapa, 
364;  Prasada,  396;  Matha,  468; 
Mandapa,  468  ; Mandira,  495  j 
(in  the  centre  of  a village  or  town), 
Mula-sthana,  511 ; Rathaka,  622 ; 
Vimana,  551 ; Vihara,  658; 
Dayana,  579;  Virfipaksba-651S, 
587;  (of  ^iva),  ^iva-mandapa, 
694;  (of  Durgal  Sati-mandapa, 
615  ; Sadana,  618;  Sadman,  61'b  ; 
(with  sitting  idol),  Saifaehjta, 
626;  (with  standing  idol),  Bthana- 
ka,  730. 

Temporary  building,  Chara-vastu, 
194. 

Temporary  erection  (on  roof),  Va(Ba) 
labhi  (-i),  537. 


858 


INDEX 


Tent,  Va(Ba^labhi  H),  537. 

Ten-sfeoreyed  buildings,  402 ; Wanda- 
ra,  410,  412. 

Tenth  storey,  Dala-tala,  258;  Da6a- 
bhumi,  258, 

Terrace,  Almda-(ka),  54;  Behara, 
2fi7 ; (surrounding),  Pradakehipa, 
36S;  Bhramalinda,  460;  Bhra- 
maua,  460 ; (raised  near  a temple), 
Bodhbmanda,  442;  Vithi  (-i), 
560. 

Testicle,  measure  of,  240 ; Pipda,  348. 

Testing  (of  site  and  soil  for  building), 
Bhu-pariksha,  453, 

Theatre,  Nataba,  380,  381;  Ranga, 
518 ; (for  females),  Badhu.-nataka, 
534. 

Thickness,  Qhapa,  190. 

Thieves  pillar,  677. 

Thigh,  measure  of,  223,  224,  225,  226, 
228,  229,  230,  231,  233,  236, 

Third  storey,  Tri-bhumi,  254,  255. 

Three-faced  pavilion,  Svastika,  469. 

Three-fold  band,  Tri‘patta,  254. 

Three-fold  wall,  Tri-bbitti,  255. 

Three-storeyed  building,  Tri-bhumi, 
255,  399,  409. 

Threshold,  Kulabha-dvara,  143  (of  a 
door),  Dehari  (-11),  266, 

Throat,  Kantha,  Kandhara,  Gala, 
Grlva,  95,  107,  694.  ' 

Throne,  S,sana,  73 ; Khattaka  (-jita), 
162 ; Padma-bbadra,  339 Padma* 
ke6a(-sa)ra,  339 ; Padraasana, 
340 ; Pada-bandha,  346 ; Pratha- 
mSaana,  368;  (miraculous),  Bo- 
dhi-manda,  Vajtasana,  442,;  ; 


Bfaadrasaua,  449 ; MafScha,  461 ; 
Mapdala,  461;  Yirasana,  .562; 
Sri-mukha,  598 ; §)i-hhadra,  598 ; 
§ri-vikala,  598,  599  j (lion),  Siriihu- 
sana,  630. 

Thumb,  measure  of,  227,  230,  238. 

Tiara,  Kirita,  130 ; Pushpa-patta,  357. 

Tip  (of  elephant’s  tail),  Pechaka,  359. 

Toe,  measure  of,  226,  234,  229. 

Tomb,  (monumental),  Ohaxtya,  199; 
Nisaddbi,  Nisidi,  324. 

Tooth«(8haped)  canal,  Danta-mlla,  257. 

Tooth -(shaped)  drain,  Danta-nala,  257. 

Tooth-(8haped)  joinery,  Danta-kila, 
257. 

Top,  (of  a building),  Ushpisha,  99  ; 
Kuta,  144  5 Cbulika  (-li),  197  : 
Tauli,  254  ; (of  capital),  Bodhika 
(-ka),  Vodhika,  441 ; (of  column), 
Mapdi,  491;  (of  house),  Va(ba), 
labhi  (?),  537;  Vriddha,  568; 
^ikhara,588;  (of  finial),  ^ikha- 
mapi,  591 ; ^iras,  692 ; Sirsha, 
584}  ^riuga,  596;  (of  pinnacle), 
Sikhanta,  691, 

Tope,  Dharma-rajika,  282 ; Ratna- 
griha,  620  ; Stupa,  705. 

Top. floor,  Mahatauli,  497. 

Top-hall,  Ktita-feala,  145. 

Top-knot,  (of  an  image),  Ushpisha, 
99 ; Ke&a-kutaka,  146, 

Top-room,  Kuta-koahtha,  145 ; Ku$a- 
gara,  146  ; Cbandra-feala  (-lika), 
194 ; Chuli-harmya,  198  ; Jati, 
211 ; Talpaka,  220;  (small),  Pafi- 
jara-feala,  328;  Munda-malika, 
609;  Mupda-haimya,  509;  Va 
(ba)  labhi  (-i),  537. 

, s . 


INDEX 


869 


Tortoise,  (of  stone),  Pashava-kflrma, 
34.8. 

Torus,  Kumuda,  22,  26,  27,  42,  43,  44, 
96,  141;  Ghata,  187,  651,  682, 
687,  690,  694,  695,  697,  698. 
Tower,  Attalaka,  14 ; Kar^a-harmya, 
119;Gopura,  176;  OhRlika  (-lli, 
197  ; Ghuii-harmya,  198 ; Talpaka, 
220;  (small),  Nirvyuba,  823; 
Prasada,  429 ; Mapdapa,  468 ; 
(surrounding  the  sanctuary), 
Vimana,  651;  (dome-shaped,  built 
over  relics).  Stupa.  705. 

Town,  Kubjaka,  140;  Khetaka,  157  ; 
Cherika,  203;  Jayanta-pura,  207  ; 
Dropa-mubba,  268;  (plans,  etc., 
of),  Nagara  (-ri),  283-294; 

kinds  of,  284;  Nigama,  320; 
Patta,  Pat^ika,  Pat|i,  830 ; 
Pa^lana  (-pa  , 331 ; Pattana,  833  ; 
Pura,  354;  Puri  (-ri),  356; 

Sarvato-bbadra,  624 
Town-fort,  Pura-durga,  261. 
Town-pillar,  Nagara-stambha,  656. 
Traders’  assembly,  Nigama-sabha,  320 
Traders’  quarters,  Nigama,  320. 
Treasury,  Ko&a-mapdapa,  149,  Ni- 
dibana,  320. 

Treatises  (on  architecture),  sketch 
of,  749-804. 

Tree-fort,  Varksha-durga,  261 
Trellis  window,  Jali,  216. 

Trench,  Kadanga,  408 ; (round  a 
fort),  Parikha,  340. 

Triad,  Tri-murti,  256. 

Triangular  arch,  246. 


Trident  (of  ^iva),  6uia,  £ 96. 
Trident-pillar,  Trikula-stambha,  652. 
Triglypb,  388,  384,  885,  686. 

Trochiios,  651. 

Troop-fort,  Sainya-durga,  260 
Turban,  Patta,  Pattika,  Patp,  330; 
Pushpa-patta,  357. 

Turret,  Talpaka,  220;  Niryuha,  322  ; 
(small),  Pratoli,  366;  Va(Ba) 
labhi(-i),  5S7  ; ^ikhara,  588  ; 
^ringa,  596  ; Haati-nakha,  743 ; 
Harmya,  739. 

Tuscan  pillar  (order),  history  and 
other  details  of,  94, 382,  681—686, 
Twelfth  storey,  Dvadafea-tala,  269. 
Twelve-storeyed  buildings,  403,  408, 
410. 

Two-faced  pavilion,  Dapdaka,  489 
Two-storeyed  buildings,  398—399  ; 

409.  U 

Umbrella  pillar,  676. 

Underground  buildings,  Guha,  430. 
Underground  shrine,  Qabhara  (Gar- 
bhagara),  162. 

Unshaken  pillar,  Tolagada-kambha, 
673. 

Upper  door,  Mupdaka-dvara,  509. 
Upper-lip,  measure  of,  233,  237. 

Upper  part,  (of  a building),  Kapola, 
112 ; (of  column),  Vira-kapda, 
561. 

Upper  piece  (of  door),  Nasa,  818. 
Upper  pillar,  Kumbha-piida,  143  ; 

Kumbha-stambha,  143. 

Upper  room,  tJrdhva-tala,  101; 
Harmya,  739, 

Upper  storey,  Upatalpa,  85 ; K{b)a- 
bhitti,  113 ; Talpaka,  220 ; 


3 


860 


INDEX 


Fura,  S54 ; Mai:ii*harmya,  4.67  ; 
Chanclra-&ala,  585. 

Upright  face,  696,  697  ; 

1? 

Vase,  Purapa-kumbha,  358. 

Vault,  Garbha*maflju3ha-(ahika),  166  ; 
(of  fouadabioa-pit),  Chhela,  205  ; 
Phela,  Chhela^^  431  j Mafijuaba, 
463, 

Vehicle,  Eatha,  621;  Va(va)ha-(ka, 
la),  539  ; Vahana,  549, 

Veranda,  (closed),  Andharaf-rika),  61; 
Niehkasa.  323 ; (surrounding), 
Nemi,  326  ; Pradakshii^a,  368  ; 
(enolosing),  Bhramaija,  460 ; 
Paddi4ala,  Pada-Sala,  Pada-sala, 
586. 

Vestibule,  Ardha-maudapa,  52 ; 
(small),  Alpa-nasika,  56; 
Kshudra-nasa  (-si),  151 ; Nasa, 

Nasika,  Nasi,  318 ; Purato- 
bbadra,  355 ; Ksbudra-nasi,  380, 
Victory  pillar,  Vijaya-etatubha,  654; 
Kirti-stambha,  659 ; Jaya«stam< 
bha,  664,  666,  670,  67i,  677. 
Village,  Karmuka,  129 ; Ku^ika,  135 ; 
Kolaka,  148;  Kharva^a,  1.68; 
Khaluraka(-rika),  155 ; Khetaka, 
157 ; GrSma,  plans  and  varieties 
of,  180—186;  Cherika,  203; 
Jayanta-<paia.  207 ; Dapdaka, 
256;  ■ Durlabha-grama,  262; 
Nandyavarta,  294 ; Pattaua,  383 ; 
Pur  a,  854;  Manga  la,  461;  Sai- 
vato-bhadra,  624 ; Svastika,  782. 
Village  fort,  Grama-durga,  261; 
Kheta»durga,  261. 


Village^road,  Grama-marga,  186. 

Volute,  693, 696. 

W 

Wall,  Kuttima,  135;  Koshtha-(ka), 
149;  Fura,  854 ; (surrounding), 
Prakara,  889 ; (middle),  Brabma- 
bhitti,  444;  Bhitti,  460;  (plough- 
shaped),  Langala-bhitti,  528; 
Vapra,  534;  Sala(-a),  628. 

Walled  fort,  Parigba-durga,  260. 

Wall-house,  Bbitti-griha,  451, 

Wall-pillar,  Kudya-stambha,  139. 

War- chariot,  Ratha,  521 ; ^atafiga, 
578. 

Wardrobe,  Man jusha,  459,  463. 

War  pillar,  Raua-statubha,  details  of, 
661-662. 

Washing  room,  Majjanalaya,  461 ; 
Snapana  (Snapana)-niandapa,  781. 

Water-course,  Tilamaka,  245  ; Franala, 
Pranalika,  Prauali,  361 ; Va(ya) 
ha-(ka,  la),  589. 

Watei>door,  Jala-dvara,  209. 

Water-fort,  Jala-dttrga,  209,  260 ; 
Ab  durga,  261 ; Udaka-durga, 
261  ; Salila-durga,  259. 

Water-foundation,  Jala-garbha,  208 ; 
Jalant'i,  210. 

Water-jar,  Mapika,  467. 

Water-pot,  Kundika,  140;  (of  the 
Pedestal  of  Phallus),  Ghrita-vari, 
190. 

Water-shed,  Prapa,  369. 

Watering-station,  Apana,  61. 

Wave-shaped  moulding,  Tarahga,' 219. 

Way,  Patha,  335  ; Marga,  604 ; Va(va) 
ha-(ka,  la),  639 ; Vithi(-i),  660. 


INOSX 


Wedding-pavilion,  Kalya na-i)aan4apa> 
127 ; Yivaha-mandapa,  556'. 
Welfare  pillar,  iyaka-skambha,  669. 
Well,  (of  a temple),  Kun4a»  ; 

Kapa,  145;  Purta,  858. 

White  part  of  eye  (of  image),  ^veta- 
manda,  599. 

White-wash,  Sndha,  634. 

Width,  Parinaba,  342;  Parimapa, 
343 ; Yishkambba,  557. 

Window,  Knlijaraksba,  184;  (of  the 
interior),  Kuhara,  144  ; Gavaksha, 
187  ; (dormer;,  Ofaandra-fiSla,  194 ; 
Handyavarta,  294 ; Naga-bandha„ 


299;  (^small),  Pafijara-^ala,  328; 
Pushpa-bandha,  357 ; Mani*dvara, 
467  ; Yalli,  588;  VStayana,  542 ; 
Sarvato-bhadra,  624 ; Svastika, 
732. 

Wing,  measure  of,  222,  223 ; (of  build- 
ing), Yishana  (-ka),  667 ; (of 

house),  §akha,  680. 

Wood-cutter,  Takshaka,  217. 

Work-shop,  (of  architecture  and  sculp- 
ture), ^ilpa-feala,  694 ; Sthapatya, 
781. 

Wrist,  measure  of,  224,  227,  229,  232, 
287. 

Wrist-ornament,  Mapi-bandha,  467. 


