GOVEENMENT OF INDIA 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OP INDIA 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL 

LIBRARY 


ACCESSION NO. 
CALL Ko. 

D.G.A. 79. 







- > 
f 

f 

I 


/ 


I 



HISTORY OF INDIAN AND INDONESIAN ART 


BY 


ANANDA K. COOMARASWAMY 




HISTORY OF 

INDIAN AND INDONESIAN ART 


BY 


ANANDA K. COOMARASWAMY 

KEEPER OF INDIAN AND MUHAMMADAN ART 





fl 

WITH 400 ILLUSTRATIONS 
ON 128 PLATES AND 9 MAPS 



LONDON 



EDWARD GOLDSTON 


LEIPZIG 

1927 

NEW YORK 

KARL W. HIERSEMANN 

E. WEYHE 




i^EDlCATED TO 
S. B. 


:r '^tral archaeolotigal 

LIBRARY, NEW DELrll, 


'■x I . No, W 6 6 
Uuo If: 

c&ii 




AGENT FOR THE Tr 5 a t, 

COPYRIGHT 1927 by KARL W HIERSEMAmI NEW YORK 

“r 



CONTENTS 

List of Museums VII 

Preface i 

Part I: Pre-Maurja 5 

Indo-Sumerian 3 

Dravidians and Aryans 5 

Saisunaga-Nanda Period 642 — 320 B. C 9 

Early Asiatic ii 

Part II: Maurja^ ^uhga^ 'Early Andhra and ScythoAarthian (Ksafrapa) 15 

Maurya Period, 320 — 185 B. C 15 

Suhga, Andhra and Indo-Parthian or Ksatrapa Period, ca. 200 B. C. to A. D. 20 23 

Part III: Kusana^ later Andhra, and Gupta 41 

The beginnings of Hindu and Buddhist theistic art 41 

Kusana and later Andhra, ca. 50 — 320 A. D 49 

Gupta Period 320 — 600 A. D 71 

Part IV : Early mediaeval, mediaeval, Rajput painting and later arts and crafts 92 

Early mediaeval : Harsa of Kanauj ; early Calukyas ; Rastrakutas ; and Pallavas 92 

Early Calukya 1 94 

Rastrakutas 99 

Pallava loi 

Mediaeval from 900 A. D. : Pala, Calukya, Cola, Rajput, &c 105 

Rajput painting 127 

Indian arts and crafts 133 

Part V: KaJmzr, Nepal, Tibet, Chinese Turkistdn, and the Ear East 141 

Kasmir 141 

Nepal 144 

Tibet 146 

Chinese Turkistan 148 

The Far East 150 



Part VI: Farther Indiay Indonesia and Ceylon 156 

^.^y^arther India and Indonesia 156 

> yCeylon 158 

^ Burma 169 

/ Siam 175 

Cambodia 180 

Campa 195 

Sumatra 198 

Java 200 

Bibliography 214 

Books and essays 214 

Journals and series, with list of abbreviations 227 

Indices and bibliographies 228 

Description of the plates 229 

Maps 255 

Index 265 



LIST OF MUSEUMS IN WHICH INDIAN 
ART IS REPRESENTED 


AMERICA: Boston, Museum of Fine Arts; New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art, and 
Brooklyn Art Institute; Cleveland; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Museum and University 
Museum; Chicago, Art Institute and Field Museum; Detroit, Art Institute; Washington, 
Freer Gallery; Newark; Cambridge, Fogg Art Museum; Montreal. 

Berlin, Museum fiir Volkerkunde; PreuBische Staatsbibliothek; Lipperheidesche Bibliothek. 
Birmingham, Museum and Art Gallery. 

Ceylon, Colombo Museum and Kandy Museum. 

Copenhagen, Glyptothek. 

FARTHER INDIA: Burma, Rangoon, Pagan ; Siam, Bangkok; Cambodia, &c., Saigon, Phnoria 
Pen (Musee Sarrault), Tourane. 

Hamburg, Museum fiir Kunst und Gewerbe. 

INDIA: Calcutta, Indian Museum, and BahgiyaSahityaParisad; Madras, Government Museum; 
Bombay Prince of Wales Museum; Lahore, Pan jab Museum; Mathura, Archaeological 
Museum; Patna; Ajmere, Rajputana Museum; Jaipur; Rajshahi, Varendra Research 
Society; Nagpur; Dacca; Sarnath; Bhop^; Lucknow; Srinagar, Sri Pratap Singh Museum; 
Camba, Bhuri Singh Museum; Jhalrapatan; Haidarabad; Karachi; Taxila; Nalanda. 

Java, Batavia. 

Leiden, Ethnographisches Reichsmuseum. 

London, British Museum; Victoria and Albert Museum; India Office; Horniman Museum. 
Manchester, Museum. 

Miinchen, Museum fur Volkerkunde. 

Paris, Mus^ Guimet, 




PREFACE 


Like all students of Indian art, I am deeply indebted to the Archaeological 
vey of India, The work of this organisation in the time of Cunnigham, 
in more recent years imder the guidance of Sir John Marshall, provides 
W he Memoirs and Reports an indispensible source of information, of which 
' recent sensational discoveries in Sind are only the latest example, 
jp In the present work the following illustrations are reproduced by permission 
^ com photographs taken by the Survey: Nos. i — 6, 12 — 19, 22, 28,40, 5 8 — 60,65 — 67, 
69, 69a, 72, 73, 81—84, 89, 90, 102— 105, 137, 138, 155—138, 163—168, 171, 
176, 186, 199, 203—205, 218, 226, 233, 235, 248, 231, 257, 311— 314. To the 
Archaeological Survey of Gwahar I am indebted for Nos. 178, 183; the 
Archaeological Survey of Kashmir, Nos. 232; the Archaeological Survey of 
Ceylon, No. 184; the Direction des Arts Cambodgiens, Phnom Pen, Nos. 324, 
325, 333, 364; the Oudheidkundige Dienst in Java for Nos. 345 — 48, 352, 355, 
339 — 362, 366, 380; and to the PubUcity Department of the Great In di an Pen- 
insular Railway for Nos. 35, 234. The following are from photographs by the 
Lucknow Museum, Nos. 71, 74 — 79, 86, 222, 223; Rajshahi Museum, No. 227; 
Indian Museum, Calcutta, No. 47; Colombo Museum, Nos. 289, 290, 296; 
Victoria and Albert Museum, London, Nr. 382; Birmingham Museum and Art 
Gallery, No. 160; Manchester Museum, No. 133; British Museum, No. ^8; 
Field Museum, Chicago, No. 95 ; Detroit Institute of Arts, No. 91 ; Metropomtan 
Museum of Art, New York, No. 259; Fogg Art Museum, No. 335; University 
Museum, Philadelphia, Nos. 80, 224, 225, 272 ; Qeveland Museum of Art, N^h. 338; 
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Nos. 25, 37, 70, 85, 93, 94, 96 — 98, icP9, 114, 
121, 122, 123, 126, 131, 159, 228, 230, 242, 244, 246, 233a and b, 238, 2P0, 261, 
264, 266, 270, 271, 276—278, 280, 281, 297—299, 322, 336, 337, 363, 36»— 370, 
392 — 395, 397 — 400. I have to thank Mr. W. F. Barden for No. 32a; Mrs. 
W. E. Briggs for No. 326; M. G. Coedes for No. 323 ; Mr. Davis Ewing, NoV- 288, 
327, 331; M. Victor Goloubew for Nos. 181, 182, 195, 198; Mr. H. Graveuy for 
Nos. 197, 236; Mr. S.HadawayforNo. 234; the Hon. G. Kemp for Nos. 305-F307; 
Mr. H. Kevorkian for No. 229; Mr. Thornton Oakley for No. 262; M. H.\Par- 
mentier for Nos. 341, 342; Pandit Rai Bahadur Radha Krishna for Nos. 20, 21X92; 
Dr Denman Ross for Nos. 200, 201, 208, 240, 316, 317; Herrn R. Samson ^or 
Nos. 319, 321; Mr. H. L. H. Shutdeworth, for No. 273; Mr. D. V. Thompson', 
Jr. for No. 196; and Messrs. Yamanaka. for No. 87. Messrs. Johnston and Hoff- \^ 
mann have kindly permitted the use of their photos reproduced in figures 9, ii, 
24—27, 32—34, 36, 53, 61, 148, 152, 153, 179. ^80, 183, 188, 194, 202, 214—216, 
219 — 221, 237, 233, 279, 282, 302 — 304; and the Lux Photo Studio, Garoet, Java, 



of No. 357. The following are from the India Office and old India Museum nega- 
tives (the latter now stored by the Archaeological Survey in India): Nos. 8, 10, 
3°. 37— 39> 41—46, 48, 49> 135—136, i39> i4o— MT. ^54, 172, i74, ^11, 187, 
191 — 193, 208, 209, 21 1, 213, 247, 249, 250. No. 203 is by Messrs. Plate, Colombo; 
No. 286 by Messrs. Skeen and Co, Kandy. The following are from my own neg - 
fives: Nos. 29, 50—52, 54—56, 63, 64, 76, 149, 151, 161, 169, 173, 175, 2 . 

207, 238, 239, 241, 243, 252, 263, 267, 268, 269, 291, 292—294, 300, 309, 3 

329. 330, 334 , 339 » 340, 354 , 363, 367, 37 C 373—376, 378, 379 , 381, 383—39 
396. The sources of a few others, taken from published works, are mentioned ir^ 
the descriptions of the Plates. 

I am very grateful to Miss Mary Fairbank for her assistance in reading the 
first proof, to Dr, Hermann Goetz in Berlin both for his translation and a 
final revision, to Dr. Wilhelm Olbrich in Leipzig for reading all intermediate 
proofs and revising the index. 

Attention may be called to some special features of the present volume. 
The latest available information regarding Indo-Sumerian finds is embodied; the 
early architecture as represented in reliefs and on coins has been rather fully 
illustrated; the origin of the Buddha image is discussed in some detail; a synthetic 
' survey of Farther Indian and Indonesian arts is for the first time attempted, 
ex'viace did not permit a treatment of Musalman art in India, and works dealing 
Biblusively with this phase of Indian art are omitted from the Bibliography. The 
a sui.-igraphy and references in the footnotes, though not exhaustive, will provide 
visitea,jent guide to the student. It may be remarked that the author has personally 
Th| often on several occasions, most of the sites and museums referred to. 
but thi usually accepted International scheme of transliteration has been followed ; 
specific quantity of the vowels 0 and e, always long in Sanskrit, has not been 
place tally indicated in Sanskrit words and names. In the case of a few India n 
the sesames, such as “Lucknow”, properly Lakhnau, the accepted rather than 
with fentific transliteration is retained. Some words, e. g.yaksa^yakMa will be met 
placeboth in Sanskrit and in Pali forms. In the case of Farther Indian and Indonesian 
^ names I have not always been able to secure an adequate transliteration. 
iioy\s regards pronunciation, it may be remarked that the vowels should be pro- 
n^inced as in Italian; it is important to remember that a (short) should be pro- 
jfjunced like a in America, never like a in man. C should be pronounced like cb 
J.n church, s and s like sh in ship. In the case of Ah, gh &c., the aspirate should 
/ be distinctly heard. H is like ch in loch', the sound of kh andg>^ in Persian words 
such as Mughal is somewhat similar. Most of the other consonants may be 
pronounced approximately as in English. 

Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, May 15, 1926 


{ 


2 


Ananda K. Coomarastvamy 



PART I: PRE-MAURYA 


T INDO-SUMERIAN 

It has long been known that seals of a type unique in India have been found 
in the Indus valley Quite recently excavations at two sites, Harappa in the 
Panjab, and Mohenjo-Daro in Sind, have revealed the existence of extensive city 
sites with remains of brick buildings by no means of a primitive character, and an 
abundance of minor antiquities indicating a period of transition from the stone 
to the copper age. These remains underly those of the Kus^a period, but are 
not far from the surface; the existence of still lower strata suggests that the Indus 
valley culture must have had a long previous history in the same area and that 
it may be regarded as indigenous^. 

“The more we learn of the copper age”, says Rostovtzeff, “the more impor- 
tant it is seen to be. This epoch created briUiant centres of cultured life all over 
the world, especially in the Orient. To the centres already known, Elam, Meso- 
potamia and Egypt, we can now add Turkestan and Northern Caucasus”®. And 
finally the Indus vaUey. It may be remarked too that the further we go back in 
history, the nearer we come to a common cultural type, the further we advance, 
the greater the differentiation. The chalcolithic culture was everywhere characterised 
by matriarchy and a cult of the productive powers of nature, and of a mother 
goddess; and by a great development of the arts of design. We must now realise 
that an early culture of this kind once extended from the Mediterranean to the 
Ganges valley, and that the whole of the Ancient East has behind it this common 
inheritance. 

The antiquities found in the Indus valley, other than brick buildings and a 
limited amount of masonry, include limestone figures of bearded men (fig. i), 
and terracottas representing female figures and animals, the latter including the 
rhinoceros, now extinct in the Indus valley. No anthropomorphic images, other 
than the terracottas, have been found; but a blue faience tablet with pictographic 

1 Cunningham, 4, voL, p. 108 and pi. XXXIII; Fleet. 

’ For the Indus valley discoveries, still in progress, see Marshall, 9, 12, and in A. S. I., 
A. R., 1921 — 22, pi. XIII and 1923 — 24, pp. 47 — 54; Chanda, 2; Mackay. 

^ Tie Iranians and Greeks in South Russia, Oxford, 1922. 


1 


3 


characters at the back has in front the representations of a cross-legged figure, 
with kneeling worshippers right and left, and a Naga behind, a remarkable anti- 
cipation of familiar types in later Buddhist art of the historical period. Painted 
pottery analogous to the prehistoric pottery of Baluchistan is abvmdant; it may 
be remarked that in Baluchistm there survives an isolated Dravidian language, 
Brahui, which had long been regarded as a possible island, connecting Dravidian 
India with the West. Other remains include beads and other ornaments of 
chank, carnelian, etc; ring stones or maces; faience bangles; hematite pestle • 
polished gold jewellery; coins; abundant neolithic implements; and above all, 
seals. Iron is lacking, and the horse was unknown. 

The seals (figs. 2 — 6) are of ivory, or blue or white faience, square in form, 
and with a perforated boss at the back for suspension. They bear a great variety 
of designs, including bulls both with and without humps, elephants, tigers, and 
a representation of a pippala tree ( Ficus religiosa ) with two horned monsters affronted 
attached to the stem. Further, the seals bear numerous characters of a pictographic 
script which it has not yet been possible to decipher^. The representation of these 
various animals, especially that of the bull and elephant, is masterly in the extreme; 
that of the limestone sculpture is aesthetically decadent, rather than primitive. 

It has been shown that these antiquities bear a general resemblance to those 
found on Sumerian sites in Mesopotamia, especially Kish and Susa, dating from 
the fifth to third millenniums B. C. The resemblance amounts to identity in the 
case of an early Sumerian glazed steatite seal from Kish, alike in respect of the 
script and of the buU. The miniature funeral potteries of both areas are almost 
indistinguishable; it may be noted, too, that the oblong, short-legged terracotta 
sarcophagi of prehistoric South Indian sites are of a Mesopotamian type. Car- 
nelian beads found at Kish are decorated with white lines on a red ground, ob- 
tained by local calcination of the surface; this technique, unknown west of Meso- 
potamia, is so common in India, though at a later date, as to suggest a probable 
Indian origin®. Some Indian boat designs are of a Mesopotamian character, the 
coracle in particular, while the presence of conch at Susa and of teak and In dian 
cedar in Babylon are evidences of a seaborne trade, as early as the eighth century 
B. C., nor is there much reason to doubt that it had begun stUl earUer®. 

While the remains alluded to above as found in the Sind valley certainly 
go back to the third or fourth millennium B. C., it must not be supposed that a 

^ Attempted by Waddell, 4, and Note in J. R. A. S., Jan. 1926. Waddell identifies 
Sumerians with Aryans; the equation Sumerian = Dravidian is much more plausible. For 
another attempt to read the seals see Bishan Svarup in J. B. O. R. S., IX, 1923, and criticisms 
by Chanda in the same volume. Some scholars coimect Assyrians with Asuras. 

* Mackay. Bloch, i. 

® Kennedy; Hornell, 2, p. 208. 


4 



complete hiatus divides this early period from later times. A part of the remains 
at Mohenjo-Daro probably dates between looo and 400 B. C., and on the other 
hand the minor antiquities from various Indian sites, as at Basarh, Taxila (Bhir 
moimd), Pataliputra, and South Indian prehistoric sites go back at least to the 
fifth century B. C. 

The study of Indo-Sumerian antiquities is still in its infancy, and it is too 
early to draw far-reaching conclusions. But it is at least probable “that the civih- 
sation of which we have now obtained this first glimpse was developed in the 
Indus valley itself and was as distinctive of that region, as the civilisation of the 
Pharoahs was distinctive of the Nile” ; and if the Sumerians, as is generally suppo- 
sed, represent an intrusive element in Mesopotamia, “then the possibility is 
clearly suggested of India proving ultimately to be the cradle of their civilisation, 
which in its turn lay at the root of Babylonian, Assyrian and Western Asiatic 
culture generally”^. 

D RAVI D IANS AND ARYANS 

Certainly before the second millennium B. C. the Dravidians, whether of 
western origin, or as seems quite probable, of direct neolithic descent on Indian 
soil, had come to form the bulk of a population thinly scattered throughout 
India. These Dravidians should be the Dasas or Dasyus with whom the con- 
quering Aryans waged their wars; their purs or towns, are mentioned in the Vedas, 
and they are described as andsah, noseless, a clear indication of their racial type. 

Amongst the elements of Dravidian origin are probably the cults of the 
phallus® and of mother-goddesses, Nagas, Yaksas and other nature spirits; and 
many of the arts. Indeed, if we recognize in the Dravidians a southern race, and 
in the Aryans a northern, it may well be argued that the victory of kingly over 
tribal organisations, the gradual reception into orthodox religion of the phallus 
cult and mother-goddesses, and the shift from abstract symbolism to anthro- 
pomorphic iconography in the period of theistic and hhakti development, mark 
a final victory of the conquered over the conquerors. In particular, the popular, 
Dravidian element, must have played the major part in all that concerns the de- 
velopment and office of image-worship, that is, of pujd as distinct Itom jajnd^ . 

‘ Marshall, A. S. L, A. R., 1923 — 24. For the theory of the eastern origin of Western 
Asiatic and even Egyptian culture, with special reference to the origin of copper and of 
early religious systems, see de Morgan. 

2 Worshippers of the sisna are mentioned with disapproval in the Vedas. A prehistoric 
lihgam is illustrated by Foote, 2, pi. XV. An object resembling a lihgam has been found at 
Mohenjo-Daro. 

3 For the theory of northern and southern races see Strzygowski, Altai-lran, etc. In India, 
Marshall, ii; and Kramrisch, pp. 79 — 87. 


5 



To the Dravidians are probably due the forms of architecture based on bam- 
boo construction; the architecture of theToda hut has been cited as a prototype, 
or at any rate a near analogue, of the early barrel- vaulted r^/^<z-hall and the horse- 
shoe arch^. Curved roofs, common in India, are rare in the rest of the world. 
The stone slab construction of many early temples is likewise of Dravidian 
(dolmen) origin. Early maritime trade and all that has to do with fishing must 
be Dravidian. The chank or conch industry is a case in point; the use of chank 
bangles, and of the conch as a trumpet in ritual and war must have been borrowed 
from Dravidian sources before the epic period^. 

The early history of the Dravidians in the Dekkhan and Southern India is 
obscure. It is fairly evident that in these areas Dravidian culture had already 
attained a high level, economic, martial, and hterary, in centuries preceding the 
Christian era. Already in the third century B. C. the great Andhra empire stretch- 
ed across the Dekkhan from east to west^. In the far south a powerful and 
prosperous Pandyan kingdom flourished before the beginning of the Christian 
era, with a capital at Korkai. The first three centuries of the Christian era re- 
present an Augustan period in the history of Tamil culture, and there is sufficient 
literary evidence for a high state of development of poetry, music drama, sculp- 
ture and painting. At the same time there had grown up a flourishing trade with 
Rome on the one hand, and with Farther India and Indonesia on the other, the 
principal articles of export being pepper, cinnamon, pearls and beryP. 

A brief reference must be made to the prehistoric Indian antiquities which 
cannot be exactly placed or dated. Eoliths have been found in India and Ceylon, 
and paleoliths are widely distributed. Remains of the Neolithic cultures, some of 
incalculable age, others later than the beg innin g of the Christian era, include the 
usual types of stone weapons, pottery, and dolmens. In northern India a copper 
age succeeded and in part overlapped (Mohenjo-Daro, etc.) the neohthic. Finds 
of copper weapons have been made in many places, the most important being 
that at Gungeria, C. P., where silver ornaments were also found. The weapons 
include bare and shouldered celts, plain and barbed spearheads, swords and 
harpoons, often in handsome shapes and finely wrought ; some are of great weight 
and may have been used for cult purposes. There is no bronze age, nor does 
bronze begin to appear much before the first century A. D. Iron may have come 
into use in the earUer part of the first millennium B.C., or may have been known 

' Simpson, 3. But I cannot regard the “Indo-Aryan” sikhara as directly derived from a 
primitive t)rpe of bamboo construction: it is a later development, produced by the redupli- 
cation of vertically compressed storeys. See discussion on page 85. 

^ Hornell, i. 

^ Smith, 4, p. 217; Jouveau-Dubreuil, 6; Bhandarkar, Sir R. G., Barly history of the Dekkhan. 

* Smith, 4, ch. XVI; Aiyangar, M. D., Tamil studies, Madras, 1914; Kanakasabhai. 


6 



to the Aryans still earlier; the facts that there is no copper age in the south, that 
then is a continuity of stone and iron using cultures, that the technique of chank 
working requires a thin iron saw, and that iron weapons (of uncertain age) are 
characteristic of prehistoric sites in the south, that iron ore is abundant and rea- 
dily worked, and that steel was known already in Indiap and Ceylon in the second 
century B. Cd, aU suggest that iron and steel may have come into use at an early 
date and may have been discovered in India. Against this view are the facts 
that iron is not mentioned in the early Vedic literature, and that the Hittites were 
using iron already about 1500 B.C. According to Sayce the Khalybes, who were 
neighbours of the Hittites, and perhaps of the same race, had the reputation of being 
the discoverers of steel; in any case, they were its transmitters to the Greeks'*. 
The existence in India of Munda languages, of Mon-Khmer affinity, seems 
to show that the southward migration of Sino-Tibetan races which peopled the 
Irawadi, Menam and Mekong valleys and the Indonesian islands had also entered 
India at some very early period. A pre-Dravidian element in Southern India is 
probably Negrito or proto-Malay, and Hornell finds a trace of this first connection 
of India with the east in the single outrigger boat. Sylvain Levi recognizes sur- 
vivals of a pre-Dravidian language in the occurrence of doublet place-names®. 

The Aryans, whose origin is uncertain, appear in India and Western Asia 
about the same time. The Indo-Iranian separation may date about 2500 B. C. 
Aryan names are recognizable in the case of the Kassites, who ruled in Babylonia 
about 1746 — 1180 B. C., and those of Aryan deities were in use amongst the 
Mitani people at Boghaz-Koi in Cappadocia about 1400 B. C.^ The Aryans 
appear to have entered India between 2000 and ijcx) B. C. through Afghanistan 
and the Hindu Kush, settling at first in the upper Indus valley, later in the upper 
Ganges valley, later still reaching the sea, the Vindhyas and the Narbada, and 
still later penetrating to the Dekkhan and the far south®. 

'■ Hornell, i. 

“ For the prehistoric remains see Foote, i, 2; Bloomfield; Smith, V.A. in Imperial Gazetteer. 
vol II; and references in C. H. I., pp. 692, 693. Most of the literature on the stone age in Ceylon 
■will be found in Spolia Zeylanica (Colombo). For the literature on iron see p. 34, note 4. The making 
of steel in small ingots by a true “Bessemer” process has survived in Southern India and Ceylon 
into the present century. If the early Vedic ajas refers to iron we might suppose that the use of 
iron weapons enabled the invaders to overcome the indigenous copper-using Dasyus. 

^ Hornell, 2 (the introduction of the coconut, of Pacific origin, and of the double-outrigger 
boat, due probably to the seafaring Malays -who colonised Madagascar, are referable to the later 
period of maritime expansion, about the beginning of the Christian era); Levi, 3, pp. 55 — 57. 

* The Hittite language has Indo-European affinities. A treatise by a Mitanian author on 
horse-breeding found at Boghaz-koi contains numerous Sanskrit words ; the first breeders and 
trainers of horses seem to have been a Sanskrit speaking race. 

® For recent general discussions of the Aryan question in India see C. H. I., Chs. HI 
and IV; and Jarl Charpentier in B. S. O. S., IV. i. 1926 


7 



The Vedic Aryans were proficient in carpentry, building houses and racing 
chariots of wood; and in metal work, making vessels of ajas^ presumably copper, 
for domestic and ritual use, and using gold jewellery. They wove, knew sewing 
and tanning, and made pottery. The early books afford no certain evidence for 
the making of images of any kind ; on the other hand it is impossible to suppose 
that the manufactures alluded to above were devoid of significant decoration. 
In all probability, the early Aryan art was “decorative”, or more accurately, ab- 
stract and symbolical; in other words, a Northern art in Strzygowski’s sense 
The probable character of early Aryan art at the time of the Indo-Iranian 
separation has been brilUantly visualised by the same writer; he apphes to this 
ancient art of Altai-Iran, whose cognates we should naturally expect to find in 
India, the name Mazdean. The dominating conception is that of Hvarena (the 
Indian Varuna), the power of Ahura-Mazda “that makes the running waters 
gush from springs, plants sprout from the soil, winds blow the clouds, and men 
come to birth” and “governs the courses of the sun, moon, and stars”. The 
characteristic expression of such ideas is to be sought in a kind of landscape 
“originating in a philosophy of the universe, and based upon significance and 
form . . . not upon natural objects exactly reproduced”. This Mazdean art should 
include landscapes showing the sun and clouds, the earth with its plants and herds, 
and the waters ; river landscapes with formal trees ; hunting scenes ; and symbolic 
geometrical arrangements of birds, animals and plants. The use of ornamented 
textiles and decorative hangings, characteristic for nomad races, is also indicated; 
and these are the forerunners of mural decoration consisting of formal floral or- 
nament enclosed in framed spaces, where the essential element is pattern rather 
than representation*. Landscape of this type, indeed, can be recognized on punch- 
marked coins, in early Buddhist reliefs, Ajanta and Rajput paintings, and in types 
of folk-art used in ritual decoration* and in many textiles. Indian art and culture, in 
any case, are a joint creation of the Dravidian and Aryan genius, a welding together 
of symbolic and representative, abstract and exphcit language and thought. Already 
at Bharhut and Sanci the Aryan symbol is yielding to its environment and passing 
into decoration; Kusana art, with the fact of imagery and its roots in bhakti, is 
essentially Dravidian. Already, however, the Indra-Santi figure at Bodhgaya shows 
Aryan affecting Dravidian modes of expression, anticipating the essential qualities 
of all later sdttvik images. The Gupta Buddhas, Elephanta Mahesvara, Pallava 
lihgams, and later Natarajas, are all products of the crossing of two spiritual na- 
tures ; there is an originally realistic intention, but accommodated to the terms of 


8 


* Strzygowski, i, 2, 3, 4. 
^ Strzygowski, 4. 

^ Tagore, i; Annandale. 



pure design. Every icon is thus at once a symbol and a representation; the wor- 
shipper, though he knows that the deity takes the forms that are imagined by his 
worshippers, is nevertheless persuaded that the form is like the deity. Just in the 
same way the ascetic and sensual, opposed in primitive thought, and all other 
pairs of opposites, are theoretically and emotionally reconciled in mediaeval 
philosophy and faith. This in a very real sense was a “marriage of the East and 
West”, or North and South, consummated, as the donors of an image would 
say “for the good of all sentient beings’: a result, not of a superficial blending 
of Hellenistic and Indian technique, but of the crossing of spiritual tendencies, 
racial samskdras (preoccupations), that may well have been determined before 
the use of metals was known. 

THE SAISUNAGA-NANDA PERIOD 

642 — 320 B. C. 

A definitely historical period may be said to begin with the first half of the 
sixth century B. C. The kings of two dynasties ruling in Magadha include the 
Saisunagas (ca. 642 — 413 B. C.) and the Nandas (ca. 413 — 322); of the former, 
Bimbisara (Srenika), the builder of New Rajagrha, and Ajatasatru (Kunika), 
the founder of Pataliputra, were contemporaries of Mahavira and Buddha. The 
period is that of the later Vedic literature {Brdhmanas, Upanisads, and earlier 
Sutras, and for the latter part of it the Buddhist Jdtakas afford evidence. Vedic 
literature shows little or no knowledge of the West; but Darius in the sixth 
century B. C. had annexed a part of the Indus vaUey, and in the time of Alexander’s 
invasion (327) the Indus was still the boundary between India and Persia. Vast 
areas of the Panjab and in Sind, now arid, were then stiU rich and prosperous. 

The later Vedic books show that a knowledge of the metals has advanced; 
tin, lead, and silver are mentioned as well as two varieties of ayas, usually regarded 
as copper and iron. Cotton, linen, silk and woolen garments were worn; a linen 
robe used in the Rajasuya ceremony was embroidered with representations of 
ritual vessels. Storeyed buildings are mentioned (Rgveda Samhita, 6, 46, 9)^ 
Round and square huts, bricks, plates, cups and spoons of gold and silver, 
iron knives, needles, mirrors, elevated bedsteads, thrones and seats, musical 
instruments, millstones, cushions, turbans (worn by the king in the Rajasuya 
ceremony and by students after graduation), crowns, jewellery, earthen-ware 
and a ship are mentioned in connection with the rituals. Writing, no doubt 
an early form of the Brahmi character, must have been known in the eighth cen- 

1 For Vedic references to architecture, see Ganguly, 3. 


9 



tnry B. C. or earlier, but mnemonic methods were preferred for handing down 
the sacred texts. 

The Jdtakas etc. describe the organisation of craftsmen in gilds, eighteen in 
number, including “the woodworkers, the smiths, the leather-dressers, the pain- 
ters and the rest, expert in various crafts”. The smiths, workers in any metal, 
were already called kammdra, a name by which the higher craftsmen are still 
known in the south and in Ceylon. As in Ceylon, too, a characteristic localisation 
of industries in craft- villages in indicated; in towns, a further localisation in 
streets or quarters. Ivory workers amongst others are mentioned^. 

Actual remains of pre-Maurya date, apart from the prehistoric antiquities 
above referred to, are comparatively few. The cyclopean walls of Old Rajagrha 
are undoubtedly very ancient. Excavation of what are apparently Vedic burial- 
mounds of the seventh or eighth century B. C. at Lauriya-Nandangarh have 
yielded amongst other objets a small repoussee gold plaque (fig. 105) bearing 
the figure of a nude female, probably the Earth goddess of the burial hymn-. 
M. Jouveau-Dubreuil believes that he has discovered in Kerala (Malabar) rock- 
cut tombs of Vedic age. The most remarkable type is the “hollow stupa with 
central column”, a circular chamber, hemispherical in section, and with a very 
slender central pillar, apparently representing the centre pole of a tent or thatched 
hut, extending from floor to roof. A similar tomb is described by Longhurst; 
other caves by Logan, including another circular type with an opening or luffer 
in the roof®. 

Minor antiquities of undoubted pre-Maurya date have been found at various 
sites, of which the Bhir mound at Taxila is the most important. The remains 
excavated here include beads and lathe-turned polished hard stones, terra-cotta 
reliefs (some resembling the Earth goddess from Lauriya referred to above), 
and two polished sandstone discs. The antiquities found here and elsewhere 
prove that glass making had attained a high level before the Maurya period, and 
that the cutting and polishing of hard stones in the fourth and fifth centuries B. C. 
ha^ reached a level of technical accomplishment which was sustained in the 
Maurya period, but never afterwards surpassed. Other terra-cottas of pro- 
bably pre-Maurya date have been found at Nagari, Bhita, Basarh, and Patali- 
putra*. 

^ Rhys Davids in Ch. VIII, p. 206. 

“ Bloch, 4. 

’ Jouveau-Dubreuil, 4; Longhurst, 5 ; Logan, i and 2. The Vedic age of these interesting 
antiquities is doubtful: see Finot in B. E. F. E. O., 1922, p. 247, and Shastri in A. S. I., A. R. 
1922—23, p. 153. 

" For the antiquities of the Bhir mound see A. S. I., A. R., 1919—20 and 1920 21. The 

carved stone discs and some other probably pre-Mauryan objects are described on p. 20. 

10 



EARLY ASIATIC 


The Indo-Sumerian and Indo-Itanian backgrounff^utlined in the preceding 
chapters naturally prepares us for the recognition of many common elements 
in Early Indian and Western Asiatic art. And in fact a great variety of motifs 
found in Maurya, Suhga and early Andhra art, and thus antedating the age of 
Hellenistic influence, present a Western Asiatic appearance, suggesting parallels 
in Sumerian, Hittite, Assyrian, Mykenean, Cretan, Trojan, Lykian, Phoenician, 
Achaemenid and Scythian cultures. A partial list of such motifs would include 
such mythical monsters as winged lions, centaurs, griffons, tritons; animals for- 
mally posed in profile with head forward, facing, or turned back, animals addorsed 
and affronted, animal combats and friezes; the sun car with four horses; the bay 
wreath and mural crown; altar or battlement friezes of Bharhut and Orissa; 
the tree of fife; mountain and water formulae; pahnette and honeysuckle (blue 
lotus), rosette and petal-moulding (rose lotus), acanthus, reel and bead; lotus or 
“bell” (so-called “PersepoHtan”) capital; Troy mark and other symbols on punch- 
marked coins. These and others, such as the fret, spiral, volute, labyrinth and 
svastika have survived in folk art up to modem times and are widely distributed 
in India and Ceylon^. 

A striking example is afforded by the group of designs representing two or 
more animals having but one head, so placed as to be equally appropriate to 
each of the several bodies. Designs of Hons of this type occur on an Etruscan 
vase of the sixth century B. C., on a Suhga railing pillar from Garhwa, and in 
eighteenth century Sirhhalese folk art*. A design of four deer is even more re- 
markable; it occurs on a Chalcidian vase of the sixth century B. C. (derived, 
no doubt, as Morin-Jean suggests, from an oriental textile), then on a capital of 
Cave I at Ajanta (fig. 7), in a Rajput drawing of the nineteenth century, and finally 

‘ The material is too abundant to be cited in detail; see amongst other sources Birdwood, 
p. 325 fF. ; Coomaraswamy.j ; Cunningham, 2, 3 ; Fergusson, 1,2; Foucher, i ; Griinwedel; Marshall, 
5, 6, 7; Maisey; Perera; Spooner, 7, 8, 10; Strzygowski, 3; Tagore, i; Walsh. The Hittites, ca. 

1200 B. C. played a considerable part in developing Babylonian designs and transmitting 

them to the Eastern Mediterranean; most likely it is more for this reason than because of direct 
connections that Indo-Hittite and Indo-Lydian parallels can be recognized, the forms being 
cognate in West and East. The svastika appears in the lowest strata at Susa, the double-headed 
eagle is Hittite and probably earlier. For the early motifs see Pottier, Delegation en Perse, 
vol. 13. Animals with interlacing necks are Sumerian (Weber, O., p. 39, fig. 14). Indian 
numerals are used in ancient Hittite texts (Jensen, P., in Sitz. k. bai. Ak. Wiss., 1919, pp. 367ff.). 

2 Morin-Jean, fig. 175 ; Cunningham, 4, vol. X, pi. V ; Coomaraswamy, 3 ; cf. Martin, F. R., 
Miniature painters' and painting of Persia, India and Turkey, 1912, pi. 164; Sarre and Mittwoch, 
Zeichnungen von Pdt^a Abbasi, 1914, pl- ” : British Museum Ms. Or. 2329, f. 141 ; Museum of Fine 
Arts, Boston, Rajput drawing no. 23, 331. 


II 



in Southern India in the eighteenth and twentieth centuries^. An reverse type is 
illustrated by the two-headed bird which first appears in Hittite art at Boghaz- 
Koi, then on a Jaina sti^ base at Taxila, later as a common Saracenic and 
European armorial device, and finally in Simhalese folk art^. 

The cylindrical stupa with drum in two stages, as seen at Bedsa and in the 
Kusana period is identical in form with a Phoenician tomb at Amrith (Marath) 
in North Syria®. The Bharhut altar or battlement-frieze occurs as a string course 
on the same tomb and on a Babylonian kudurri^. Lydian excavated and monolithic 
tombs at Pinara and Xanthos on the south coast of Asia Minor present some analogy 
with the early Indian rock-cut sa/^^a-halls ; but the Lydian door jambs are erect®. 
The true arch, which is widely if sparsely distributed in India long before the 
Muhammadan period, occurs in Sumerian and other Mesopotamian sites®. 

Another parallel is afforded by the occurrence of shoulder wings (figs. i6, 105) 
on certain terra-cottas and figures of deities found in India’. An early Indian 
terra-cotta type of female divinity closely resembles a form found at Ur®. 

Other analogies are technical : thus, the art of granulating gold, which may 
have originated in Egypt in the sixth dynasty, and is highly characteristic of 
Trojan, Mykenean and later pre-Christian Mediterranean cultures, is typical of 
the gold jewellery found at many early Buddhist sites in India, e. g. Tordher in 
the Yusufzai district and Piprahwa in Nepal, and equally of modern Tamil and 
Simhalese jewellery in Ceylon®. On the other hand the art of encrusting gems seems 
to be of Indian origin, not appearing in the Mediterranean until after the time 
of Alexander®®. The beaten pottery technique of the early eastern Mediterranean 
has been recognized at Charsada, and is represented by ancient and modern 

* Morin-Jean, fig. 154; Coomaraswamy, 5; Rajput drawing, M. F. A. Boston, no. 26, 50. 

2 Springer, Kunstgeschichte, 1923, fig. 177; Marshall, 6, p. 74; Bell, 2; Coomaraswamy, i. 

® Springer, loc. cit. fig. 193; Perrot and Chipiez, Phe'nue-Chjpre, fig. 95; against this ana- 
logy is the fact that the early stupas are always hemispherical (cf, fig. 292). 

^ Springer, loc. cit.; Delaporte, fig. ii. The form occurs in India not only in the frieze, 
but as an altar and as a battlement. 

^ Springer, loc. cit. figs. 188, 191. 

® Sumerian examples, see Perrot and Chipiez, Phenice-Chy|:#i:e, fig. 5 5 ; Woolley, C. L. 
Excavations at Ur, Antiquaries Journal, V, London, 1925, p. 387, and pis. XXXVII, XLV. For 
Indian examples see note on p. 73 . 

’ Spooner, 8,p. ii6 and pl.XLIV(Basarh); Vogel, 6, 1909—10, pi. XXVIII, c, and 13, p. 104 
(Surya, D 46 in the Mathura Museum) ;A.S.I.,A.R., 1922—2 3 , pi. X, b (bron2e goddess from Akhun 
Dheri). Sir John Evans in Journ. Hellenic Soc. XLIV, 1925, pt. i, states that the sacral knots 
on the shoulders of the Minoan goddess became the shoulder wings of Greek art. 

» C. B. S. 15634 in the Philadelphia University Museum, from the cemetery of Diqdiqqeh 
near Ur, assigned to 2400 — 2000 B. C. 

s Marshall, ii; Coomaraswamy, i, pis. XL VIII— L. See also pp. 153, 136 and fig. 375. 

Marshall, 1 1 ; Coomaraswamy in Spolia Zeylanica, (technique), Vol. VI and I, pis. XLVIII, 
and p. 108, fig. 63, I. This does not refer to “orfevrerie cloissonnee”. 


12 



practise in Ceylon^ Early Indian and Assyrian glass are of similar com- 
position 

Thus, so far as its constituent elements are concerned, and apart from any 
question of style, there is comparatively Uttle in Indian decorative art that is pe- 
culiar to India, and much that India shares with Western Asia. 

In view of the fact that the forms referred to appear in Indian art for the first 
time in the Maurya and Suhga periods and that there is good evidence of Achae- 
menid influence at this time, it has been not unusual to assume that the whole 
group of Western Asiatic and Persian motifs came into India in the Maurya 
period®. It must, however, be constantly borne in mind that a motif was not 
necessarily invented or borrowed at the date of its first appearance in perman- 
ent material; indeed, a first appearance in stone is almost tantamount to proof 
of an earlier currency in wood. No one, in fact, doubts the existence of a pre- 
Maurya Indian art of sculpture and architecture in wood, clay modelling, ivory 
carving, cutting of hard stone, glass, textiles and metal work, and this art must 
have embraced an extensive ensemble of decorative motifs, ranging from lines 
and dots incised or painted on earthen pots and chank bangles to representations 
of the human figure. To suppose that the whole group of modfs of Western 
Asiadc aspect was introduced by Asoka’s Persian craftsmen en bloc, would thus 
necessarily imply a belief in the existence of a lost pre-Maurya art of some 
strange and xmknown kind. As a matter of fact, it would be fantastic to 
postulate the existence of any such art, and, in view of our knowledge of the con- 
tinous preservation of motifs, and the conservative character of Indian decorative 
art, it would be impossible to believe that it could have vanished without trace. 

All this amounts to proof that the themes and motifs of pre-Maurya art 
cannot have differed very greatly from those of Maurya and Suhga; fantastic 
animals, palmettes, rosettes, and bell capitals must have been common elements 
of the craftsman’s repertory under the Nandas as in the time of Asoka. India, 
in centuries and perhaps millenniums B. C., was an integral part of an “Ancient 
East” that extended from the Mediterranean to the Ganges valley. In this ancient 
world there prevailed a common type of culture, which may well have had a 
continuous history extending upwards from the stone age. Some of its most 
widely distributed decorative, or more accurately speaking, symbolic motifs, 
such as the spiral and svastika, with certain phases of its mythology, such as the 
cults of Sun and Fire, may go back to that remote past; more sophisticated motifs 

1 Marshall and Vogel, p. 181; Coomaraswamy, i, p. 220. 

2 A. S. I., A. R., 1923—24. P- II5- 

* According to Jouveau-Dubreuil, i, vol. i, p. 25, in the time of Darius, Cf, Kennedy, 
p. 283. 


13 



and technical discoveries may have originated in any part of the area; a majority, 
perhaps in southern Mesopotamia^, others in India or in Egypt. 

The effect of these considerations is to withdraw India from its isolation; 
j as a background to the existing art there is a “common early Asiatic art, which 
has left its uttermost ripple marks alike on the shores of Hellas, the extreme west 
of Ireland, Etruria, Phoenicia, Egypt, India, and China”^. AU that belongs to 
this phase of art is equally the common inheritance of Europe and Asia, and its 
various forms as they occur in India or elsewhere at various periods up to the 
present day are to be regarded as cognates rather than as borrowings. 

^ Pettier, E., Les Sumeriens et la Chaldee^ Rev. de Fart ancient et moderne, XXVII, 1910: 
“La Chaldee nous apparait comme le reservoir d’ou les formules d’art les plus connues se sont 
deversees sur le mond entier”; and Rostovtzeff, pp. 192, 193, 257; “All these types spread 
far and wide, eastward, westward, and northward^’. 

2 Okakura, introduction. Cf. Marshall in A. S. I., A. R., 1923 — 24, p. 49, and de Morgan. 


14 



PART II : 

MAURYA, SUNGA, EARLY ANDHRA 
AND SCYTHO-PARTHIAN (KSATRAPA) 


MAURYA PERIOD, 320 — 185 B. C. 

Candragupta Maurya, of whose origins little is known, displaced the last king 
of the Nanda dynasty about 320 B. C. and made himself master of Pataliputra, 
the capital of Magadha. His more famous grandson Asoka (272 — 232) B. C., 
whose early faith may have been Brahmanical, Jaina, or possibly Magian, early in Ufe 
became an ardent Buddhist; A^oka first made Buddhism a kind of state religion, 
and sent Buddhist missionaries to other parts of India and to Ceylon, and west- 
wards as far as Syria and Egypt. His monolithic pillar and rock edicts inculcating 
the practice of the Dhamma, or (Buddhist) Law of Piety are well known; he is 
credited with the erection of 80000 stupas, and countless monasteries; excavations 
have shown that his famous palace at Pataliputra formed a large and magnificent 
group of buildings. The empire included the whole of northern India from east 
to west, Afghanist^ and Ka^mir, and the Dekkhan, only the far south remaining 
independent. The later Mauryas ruled till about 184 B. C., when the Sunga 
dynasty succeeded; but the kingdom had already begun to break up soon after 
the death of Asoka, when the power of the Andhras in the Dekkhan was already 
developing. 

For this age we have abundant literary sources of all kinds. A general picture 
of Indian civilisation can be drawn from the Jdtakas and Sutras, with some re- 
serves from the Epics, in greater detail from the Arthasdstra of Kautilya, and 
from western sources, particularly Megasthenes. A few capital cities were now 
acquiring increasing importance, amongst which Taxila, Ayodhya, Ujjain, 
Vidisa, and Patahputra are most prominent; but the village is still the typical 
centre of Aryan life. All the crafts were practised, eighteen of the most important, 
amongst which that of the painters is mentioned, being organised in gilds {send)-, 
the term kammdra was already in use as a designation of the higher craftsmen. 
Carpenters, iron-smiths and potters occupy their own villages, the former tra- 




veiling up and down the Ganges with timber ready out for building. The more 
pretentious houses were built of wood with squared beams, sometimes of several 
storeys supported by pillars and well provided with balconies. City walls were of 
burnt or unburnt bricks. The arts of glass-making and cutting of hard stones had 
in previous centuries attained great perfection, unequalled at any later period. 
Fine materials of cotton, wool, linen and silk were woven, and the art of printing 
on cotton was practised. Stone begins to come into use both in architecture and 
for sculpture in relief and in the round, the special characteristic of the Asokan work 
being the fine finish and pohsh of the surface, conspicuous even in the case of 
the excavated monastic halls'. 

In rehgion, the Vedic rituals persist, and there must have existed Persian 
and Hindu modes of fire-worship; but the deities are now beginning to be con- 
ceived as worshipful persons {Bhagavata), rather than as elemental powers. Aryan 
philosophies, Aupanisadic and Bauddha, are undergoing great modifications in 
the process of adjustment to popular necessity, with a resulting development of 
devotional theism and the fusion of Dravidian with Aryan conceptions. 

To some extent a distinction can be drawn in the art of this period between 
an official or court art, and a purely indigenous art. Probably the most important 
examples of the latter are the famous free-standing stone figures from Besnagar 
and Parkham, etc. of colossal size (figs. 8, 9). Although of archaic aspect, and 
designed from a frontal viewpoint, with flattened sides, they represent a relatively 
advanced art and imply a long anterior development and practise, if only in the 
handling of wood. Magnificently conceived, they express an immense material 
force in terms of sheer volume ; they are informed by an astounding physical energy, 
which their archaic “stiffness” by no means obscures. There is no suggestion here, 
indeed, of introspection or devotion; this is an art of mortal essence, almost 
brutal in its affirmation, not yet spiritualised. But this is the material that must later 
on be used to serve the ends of passionate devotion iphakti) to spiritual and unseen 
powers, and for the exposition of cosmic theory in terms of an elaborate theology; 
this same energy finds expression in the early Kusana Buddhas and survives 
even in the more refined creations of the Gupta age. 

Mr. Jayaswal has attempted to prove that the Parkham statue inscription 
identifies it as representing Kunika Ajatasatru of the Saisunaga dynasty, who died 
about 459 (Pargiter) or 618 (Jayaswal) B.C.; and to show that two other massive 
figures discovered at Patna about a hundred years ago represent Udayin Nanda 

1 The official art of Asoka seems to have somewhat the same relation to the older Indian 
tradition that Mughal painting and architecture have to Rajput at a later period. The distinction 

15 not so much between a native and a foreign art as between a folk art and a court art. The 
same kind of distinction can be traced in Persia (Sarre, p. 29). 

16 



face are executed with extraordinary precision and accuracy; not only is great 
technical skill displayed in this respect, but the art itself is of an advanced and 
even late type with quite realistic modelling and movement. In other extant or 
now lost examples the crowning member consisted of similar lions, or of a single 
bull (fig. 14), horse, elephant or wheel, with the abacus variously ornamented, in one 
case with flying hamsas in low relief, in another with lotus and palmette motifs. AU the 
inscriptions are finely cut, and with the exception of two in Kharostlil are in 
Brahmi characters. It may be inferred from the existence of these edicts, and 
from the inscribed bricks of the Mora and Ganesra sites at Mathura, and those 
of Tissamaharama in Ceylon, that writing and reading had by this time become a 
fairly general accomplishment^. 

Architectural remains of Asoka’s reign in polished sandstone include a mono- 
lithic rail and fragments of inscribed capitals at Sarnath ; the altar (Bodhi-manda) 
at Bodhgaya, with four pilasters, exactly as represented in the Bharhut relief 
(fig, 41), and similar to the altar in the verandah at Bhaja; the capital from Pata- 
Hputra^; a railing (?) piUar with inscription from the Arjunpura site, Mathura, 
now lost; the oldest parts, subsequently enclosed, of various stupas •, foundations 
of ctf/^iZ-halls at Sanci and Sonari ; and the excavated caitja-haHls in the Barabar 
hills, Bihar, dedicated to the use, not of Buddhists, but of the Ajivikas. Of the 
latter, the Sudama cave, dated in the twelfth year of Asoka’s reign consists of a 
circular chamber and an antechamber with side entrance; the two chambers are 
separated by a wall which, except for the narrow doorway, completes the circle 
of the inner shrine, and the upper part of this wall has overhanging eaves repre- 
senting thatch. The remarkable plan of this cave is repeated in the somewhat 
later Buddhist cave at Kondivte, Salsette, in Western India, where, however the 
circular shrine or garbha-grha is occupied by a solid stiipa which leaves only a 
narrow passage for circumambulation within the screen; other examples at Junnar 
and Guntupalle. The Lomas Rsi cave, undated, and apparently unfinished, but 
certainly Maurya, has a similar plan, but the shrine chamber is oval, and the entrance 
facade is carved, in imitation of wooden forms, in the shape of an ogee arch above 
heavy sloping jambs, and the pediment is decorated with a frieze of well designed 
elephants (fig. 28). At least four other Maurya cave shrines or monasteries are found 
in the same district. All are excavated in the hardest rock, but are exquisitely finished 
and polished like glass inside. The forms are evidently those of contemporary 
structural buildings in indigenous style L 

1 Inscribed bricks at Mathura, Vogel, 15; in Ceylon, Parker, i. 

2 Waddell, 5, pi. II. 

® For the Barabar caves and related later types mentioned see Fergusson, 2, pp. 130, 158, 
167, 175; Jackson, 2; Banerji-Sastri. 

18 

p 



% 


(fig. 67) and Varta Nandin, later kings of the Nanda dynasty reigning about 400 B. C. 
The archaic aspect of the statues themselves lends plausibility to these views, which 
have been tentatively accepted by several scholars, and by myself in previous 
works. But in view of more recent criticisms it is impossible to adhere to Jayaswal’s 
views, and it is necessary to revert to the opinion that the statue represents a Yaksa 
and must date from the third century B.C.^ A seated figure in the same early 
style, with an inscription designating it, or rather her, as a Yaksi, is in pujd at 
Mathura under the name of Manasa DevP. The colossal standing female figure 
from Besnagar, sometimes called the Earth goddess, may be either a Yaksi or 
a human figure. Another and more perfect example of the same school of art is 
represented by the large female caun-hc2.tet (fig. 17) recently found at Patna®. 
The upper part of a colossal male figure from Baroda near Parkham is even 
more massive and archaic than any of the other figures; the complete statue 
must have been over twelve feet in height*. Whatever the actual age of this 
group of four large sculptures in the round, they illustrate and adequately 
establish the character of the indigenous school in and before the Maurya 
period. With this group must be associated the Besnagar halpa vrksa 
(fig. 10). 

The official art of Asoka’s reign is mainly represented by the monolithic 
pillars {stambha, Idf) on which the edicts are engraved®. Of the numerous extant 
examples the finest is that of Sarnath erected on the traditional site of the First 
Turning of the Wheel of the Law (fig. 1 2). The shaft is of plain polished sandstone, 
circular in section and sHghtly tapering; the capital consists of four addorsed 
lions, which originally supported a Dhamma-cakka or Wheel of the Law, resting 
on an abacus bearing in relief an elephant, horse, bull and lion separated by four 
small dhamma-cakkas, below which is the inverted lotus for min g the “bell”®. 
As in other typical examples of Asokan art the cutting and polishing of the sur- 

1 Jayaswal, i and 2; discussion in J. R. A. S., 1920, pp. 154—56. Criticism by Chanda, 1. 
The two Patna figures are probably the tutelary Yaksas of the city of Nandivardhana, as suggested 
by Gangoly, O. C., in the Modern Review, Oct. 1919, and are to be dated in the second century. 

“ A. S. I., A. R., 1920 — 21, pi. XVIII; and Chanda, 5, p. 165. 

® Spooner, ii. 

■* Vogel, 6, 1909 — lo, p. 76 and pi. XXVIII, a. 

= For Asoka pillars see Smith, 5 ; Oertel; MarshaO, 8, pp. 619 — 622 and figs. 27, 28; Sahni 
and Vogel, p. 28 and pi. IV. 

« It is impossible to regard the Asokan lotus or “bell” capital as a copy of a Persian form- 
the resemblances are by no means sufficient to justify the designation “Persepolitan” (cf. Diez 
p. ii). The two types are to be regarded as parallel derivatives from older forms current in 
Western Asia. Northern India as we now realise had long formed a part of the Western Asiatic 
cultural complex; inheritance of common artistic traditions, rather than late borrowing, affords 
the key to Indo-Persian affinities. Octagonal columns are essentially Indian (Ganguly, 3). 

2 

17 


5 


« 


i 



/ 





It may be remarked that the groimd plan of a church exhibited by a cave of 
the Sudama type corresponds to that of a circular shrine preceded by a hall of 
assembly or approach (such as in later times would be called a mandapa or porch) 
and that in fact it exactly reproduces that of the Sudhamma-sabha of the 
Bharhut relief (fig. 43). It is natural to suppose that simplest form of such a s hrin e, 
consisted of the circular ceUa alone, and that the porch was later added to accom- 
modate worshippers, the very narrow passage surrounding the stiipa at Kondivte 
being explained by the fact that circumambulation would be made in single file. 
By ehmination of that part of the shrine wall which separates the cella from the 
porch the apsidal form of the familiar r<z/^^2-halls is immediately obtained*. 

Asoka’s palace at Patahputra (modern Bankipore, near Patna) was described 
by Megasthenes as no less magnificent than the palaces of Susa and Ecbatana; 
it was still standing at the beginning of the fifth century A. D., when Fa Hsien 
teUs us that it was attributed to the work of genii, but when Hsiian Tsang visited 
the city in the seventh century the palace had been burnt to the ground and the 
place was almost deserted. Recent excavations have revealed the remains of a 
great hall with stone pillars, which seems to have been planned on the model 
related to that of the pillared halls of the Achaemenid kings of Persepolis. Sand- 
stone capitals with acanthus ornament have also been found. There exist also 
massive pier-like foundation of timber, the purpose of which has not been ex- 
plained. Minor antiquities included some fragments of pohshed sandstone sculp- 
ture, and a few very fine terracottas, now in the Museum at Patna^ (fig. 22). 

A number of interesting sculptures (Fig. 18, i9)oflateMauryaorearly Sunga 
date, known only by fragments, most of which have been found at S^nath estab- 
lish a well-marked stylistic group. These sculptures consist for the most part 
of broken heads, usually of moderate dimensions, but of quite extraordinary 
actuality, and not quite like anything else in Indian art. They can hardly be anything 
but parts of portrait figures, and presumably portraits of donors. They are 
characterised not only by their marked individuaUty, but by the type of headdress, 
which consists in most cases of a fillet, with a bay wreath or mural crown in other 
cases; the material, except in the case of the Mathura examples, is polished buff 

* It is quite possible and even probable that the circular and apsidal plans of early Christian 
church architecture were of eastern origin, and perhaps even of Indian origin so far as the ap- 
sidal form is concerned. Where practically a whole monastic system was copied, as happened 
in the case of Coptic Christianity, the adoption of an architectural formula may well have taken 
place. See also page 149. The question is briefly discussed by Stein, 7, p. 5 36, note 16. In Gandhara 
there is a circular domed temple near Chakdana. For Indian influences in western architekture 
see also Beylie; Dalton, pp. 77 ff.; Pulle (pp. iii, 112); Rivoira pp. 1141!. and 347). 

2 For Asoka’s palace see Waddell, 5,6; Spooner, 7, ii; Fergusson, 2, fig. 117; and A.S.I., 
A. R., 1917 — 18, pt. I. For the terracottas see pp. 20, 21. 


2 * 


19 


sandstone^ Similar to the Sarnath examples are a life-sized head from Bhita® 
and two fragmentary heads from Mathura, reproduced in figures 20 and 21. 

Some other fragments of similar date are reliefs with lyrical themes. A frag- 
ment from Sarnath representing a grieving woman appears to be a spandril 
filler belonging to a larger composition®. Another from Bhita (fig. 13), decidedly 
advanced in its knowledge of pose and movement, represents a woman recUning, 
with a man fanning, and apparently massaging her limbs*. Fragments of a Maurya 
ribbed polished stone umbrella (chatta) have been found at Sahci. 

In this connection reference may be made to two carved perforated circular 
stone plaques found at the Bhir mound site, Taxila, and of very early Maurya 
or pre-Maurya date; of these Sir John Marshall remarks that “For jewel-like 
workmansliip and exquisite finish these two objects are unsurpassed by any other 
specimens of stonework from ancient India”. These plaques, which I believe to 
be large earrings — they are not larger or heavier than many of those represented 
in the early reliefs — are elaborately decorated in concentric circles, one zone 
consisting of a spirited series of elephants recalling those of the Sudama cave pe- 
diment, another with a kind of palmette ornament alternating with mountains (?) 
and figures perhaps representing the Earth goddess; these zones being separated 
by narrow bands of cable and cross and bead ornament. The material is polished 
Chunar sandstone, the diameter of the plaques four inches in one case, two and three 
eighths in the other®. A similar disc in hard fine-grained soapstone, two and 
three quarter inches in diameter was obtained by Cunningham at Sankisa (fig. 134): 
here the outermost decorated circle is composed of radiating bud-forms like those 
of a modern campdkdlt necklace, the next zone repeats the same form on a smaller 
scale, while the inner zone has alternating representations of fan-palms, the nude 
Earth goddess (?), and taurine symbols. The centre is sunk, but not perforated, 
a fact apparently fatal to the earring interpretation suggested above®. 

No less important is a considerable group of Maurya and Suhga terracottas 
of which examples have been found in the lowest, or nearly the lowest, levels at 
several widely separated sites, extending from Pataliputra to Taxila (figs. 16, 23, 
37, 60). These moulded plaques and modelled heads and busts represent in most 

* Hargreaves, 2, p. Ill, and pis. LXV — ^LXVIII, and A. S. I., A. R., 1514 15^ pt. x, pi. 

XVIII ; Sahni and Vogel, p. 3 2 (B i in the Sarnath Museum). 

2 Marshall, 3, pi. XXXI, 7. 

“ Sahni and Vogel, p. 204 (C (b) 28 in the Sarnath Museum); Gangoly, O. C., Bin neues 
Blatt friiher indischer Kunst, Jahrb. d. as. Kunst, 1924. 

" Marshall, 3, pi. XXXI, 8. 

A. S. I., A. R., 1920—21, pi. XVII, 29, 30. Similar object from Basarh, Bloch, I o. 100 

fig. 16 (7). 

® Cunningham, 4, vol. XI, pL IX, 3. 



cases a standing female divinity, with very elaborate coifhire, dressed in a tunic 
or nude to the waist, and with a dhoti or skirt of diaphanous muslin. Despite the 
garment, especial care is taken to reveal the mount of Venus in apparent nudity, a 
tendency almost equally characteristic of the stone sculpture in the Suhga, Andhra 
and Kus^a periods. In some cases the figure stands on a lotus pedestal and in 
two examples from Basarh (fig. 1 6) there are shoulder wings ; the arms are generally 
akimbo, and there are often symbols represented in the space at the sides of the 
plaque. These types may have behind them a long history; they may have been 
votive tablets or auspicious representations of mother-goddesses and bestowers 
of fertility and prototypes of Maya-devi and Laksmi. Other plaques, often in high 
relief, represent male and female couples like the mithma and Uma-Mahesvara 
groups of later art^. 

The technique of these terracottas is stylistic and almost always accomplished ; 
although made from moulds, few or no duplicates are met with, and there is great 
variety of detail. In some cases the figure is endowed with real grace, foreshadow- 
ing, as Sir John Marshall remarks, the free and naturalistic developement of 
the succeeding century. A much more refined type of terracotta found at Patali- 
putra, and in particular the smiling child from that site, seems at first sight to 
belong to another and far more advanced school (fig. 22) ; but not only are similar 
types of headdress recognizable, a careful comparison with the less individualised 
types reveals an ethnic relation, and the refinement and sensitiveness that at first 
might suggest the working of some external influence may be only the result of 
local conditions. 

We have already referred to the foundab-sns of probably Asokan caitja-hs^s 
traceable at S^ci, Sarnath, SonM, and probably also in the Kistna-Godaveri 
delta. Besides these, remains of Brahmanical temples have been excavated at at 
least two sites. At Nagari near Chitor, the ancient Madhyamika, an inscription 
of from 350 — 250 B. C. refers to a temple of Sarhkarsana and Vasudeva at a place 
called Narayana-vata; this is the erliest known inscription indicating the existence 
of a Vaisnava cult, and also the earliest known Sanskrit inscription. A^vamedha 
and Vajapeya sacrifices are also mentioned. The original shrine was no doubt 

1 These terracottas have been found at Basarh, Spooner, 8: Taxila, Cunningham, 4, vol. XIV, 
pi. IX; A. S. I., A. R., 1919 — 20, pi. XI, 9, 10, and 1920 — 21, pi. XVI, 9, 15, 17; Bhita, Marshall, 3, 
pi. XXII, 8; Nagari, Bhandarkar, D. R., 6, pi. XXIV, 17, 21 ; Mathura, a series in the Museum 
of Fine Arts, Boston; Pataliputra A. S. I., A. R., 1915 — 16, pt. i, p. 14, and 1917 — 18, pt. i, 
pi. XVI; Kosam, Banerji, 4; and Sankisa, Cunningham, 4, vol. XI, p. 29, and pi. IX, 4. These 
terracottas may range in date from the fifth century B. C. to the first A. D. The more primitive 
types from Patahputra and Mathura, especially in respect of the two lateral masses or horns of 
the headdress, closely approximate to some very ancient examples from Mohenjo-Daro: cf. 
A. S. I., A. R., 1917 — pt- pl- XVI, I, 4, with ibid. 1923 — 24, pi. XXXI e. For mitbuna 
see Gangoly. 


21 


of wood, but continuous Vaisnava worship seems to have been conducted here 
from the third century B. C. to the seventh A. D. ; the excavations revealed remains 
of a rectangular enclosure with walls nearly ten feet in height at the site now known 
as Hathi-Bada, evidently the pujd-sild prakdra of the inscription^. What would 
appear to be the earliest known depiction of a specifically Brahmanical shrine is 
the pavilion with an ornamented basement, and enshrining figures of Skanda, 
Visakha and Mahasena, found on a coin of Huviska®. 

It is only after about 800 B. C. that we can trace or infer any contemporary 
contact of Aryan India with Persia. From the evidence of Indian art, Maurya to 
Gupta — Asoka’s capitals and palace, certain terracottas, fire-altars on seals and 
coins, pointed caps, and so forth — a “Zoroastrian period of Indian history” 
has been inferred, and a “semi-Mithraic Buddhism” spoken of®. Elements of 
sun- and fixe- worship are certainly indicated in early Buddhist art; we find the 
worship of a flaming piUar, and later, Buddhas, Sivas and kings (coins of Kaniska) 
with flames rising from their shoulders, while the nimbus is of solar origin and 
must have originated either in India or Persia. Magian ideas may have played a 
part in the development of the Buddhist holy legend, and of the Bodhisattva 
iconography; and were still current in the Panjab and Rajputana in the sixth cen- 
tury A. D. It is interesting too to remark that the doctrine of the passing on from 
kin g to king of a divine royal glory, which is the essential element of the later 
Javanese-Cambodian-(Jam Devaraja cult, is also Avestan. K-adphises II used the 
style “Mahesvara”; does this signify that he claimed to be a descent of Siva? A Se- 
mitic origin of the Kharosthi scriot about the fifth century B. C. can hardly be 
doubted; an Aramaic inscription, fv>o, of about the fourth century B.C. has been 
found at Taxila*. During a great part of the centuries immediately preceding 
the Christian era the Indus formed the eastern boundary of Persian dominion. 
It has been argued too that the Nandas, Mauryas and Licchavis were all of Iranian 
extraction. It is certain that during this period contacts with Persia were easy. 

Many of the parallels referred to, however, seem to indicate a common Aryan 
Weltanschauung, such as Hertel has adumbrated®, rather than contemporary bor- 
rowing. It may be taken for granted that Persian influences were actually felt in 
India in and after the Maurya period; but there is no reason to infer that any 
of these parallels or borrowings connote a refigious, social or political dependence 
of Northern India on Persia®. 

^ Bhandarkar, D. R., 6. 

^ Gardner, p. 1 5 1 and pi. XXVIII, no. 24. 

^ Spooner, ii; Maisey, pp. 124, 216, etc. Cf. C. H. I., p. 87. 

^ Marshall, 6, p. 75; Barnett and Cowley, in J. R. A. S., 1915. 

^ Hertel, J., Die arische Feuerlehre, 

® Marshall, in A. S. L, A. R., 1915 — 16, pt. I, p. 15. 


22 



SUNGA, ANDHRA AND INDO-PARTHIAN OR KSATRAPA 
PERIOD, CA. 200 B. C. TO A. D. 20 

(Suhgas, Andhras, K^vas, Satraps of the Western Ghats, 

Mathura, and Ujjain; Indo-Greek and Indo-Parthian 
rulers in the Panjab, Afghanist^ and Bactria.) 

The history is too comphcated to be noticed here in any detail. Pusyamitra 
Suhga, the immediate successor of the last Maurya king ca. 185 B. C. was a zealous 
Hindu, perhaps with Magian tendencies, and may have gone so far as to persecute 
Buddhists and destroy monasteries; his dominions included Magadha and ex- 
tended southwards to the Narmada, northwards to Jalandhar in the Pahjab. 
Pusyamitra repelled the Greek invader Menander, the Milinda of Buddhist tra- 
dition, about 175 B. C.; but was defeated by Kharavela about 161 B. C. The 
K^vas (73 — 28 B. C.) succeeded the Sungas. The dominant power in the Panjab 
and Mathura, ca. 70 B. C. — 20 A. D. was Scythian (Sakas of Seistan)^. Mean- 
while the Andhras, who already in Maurya times were a powerful Dravidian 
people possessing thirty walled towns in the Kistna-Godaveri delta (later Vengi), 
and had extended their domains across India as far as Nasik and Ujjain, ruled 
the Dekkhan; the dynasty lasted for four and a half centuries and was only suc- 
ceeded by the Pallavas in the East in the third century A. D. A relief figure of 
Satakarni, third king of the dynasty, accompanies the important Andhra inscrip- 
tion at Nanaghat, near Puna^. Most of the Andhra kings seem, by their names, 
to have been Brahmanical Hindus, but they are best known by their benefactions 
to Buddhist communities ; to them are due most of the cave temples and monaster- 
ies of the Western Ghats, the Ghantasala, Bhattiprolu, Guntupalle and Amara- 
vati stupas and other structures in the east, and probably the S^ci gateways. 

In eastern India the Kalihgas recovered the independence they had lost under 
Asoka. The Jaina king Kharavela, about 161 B. C. took Pataliputra, the Suhga 
capital (see pp. 37, 43). Other events were taking place in the North-west. About 
250 B. C. Parthia and Bactria broke away from the Seleukid Empire and set up 
as independent Greek principalities. Yavana (“Greek”) princes of the two houses 
of Euthydemus and Eucratides reigned in Bactria, Kabul, and the Panjab west 

1 The 8aka invasion of the Indus delta, ca. 75 B. C. may represent the historical foundation 
of the Jaina story of Kalakacarya; cf. C. H. I., p. 532. 

2 C. H. I., p. 530; Biihler, Arch. Surv. Western India, IV. The inscriptions refer in part 
to Brahmanical ceremonies performed for Andhra rulers at an enormous cost in priestly fees 
“which testify eloquently to the wealth of the realm and the power of the Brahman hierarchy at 
this date”. The royal statues represent Simuka, founder of the line, Satakarni and his queen, and 
three princes. So far as I know the statues have never been published. 


25 



of the Indus, the leading names being those of Demetrios of Bactria (ca. 175 B. C.) ; 
Menander (Milinda) of Kabul (160 — 140 B. C.) who invaded India, reaching 
Mathura, Saket, Madhyamika (= Nagari, Chitor) and perhaps Pataliputra, then 
the Suhga capital, and is claimed as a convert by Buddhist tradition; and Antial- 
kidas of Taxila, (ca. 140 — 130 B. C.) whose ambassador Heliodora professed 
himself a Bhagavata and dedicated a monolithic column at Besnagar in honour of 
Vasudeva (= Krsna). Meanwliile the nomad Sakas or Scythians had attacked both 
Bactria and Parthia and the Hellenistic Bactrian kingdom came to an end about 
130 B. C. but numerous princes with Greek names continued to rule as Parthian 
Satraps in Afghanistan and the western Panjab; amongst these, the best known 
are Maues (ca. 95 — 38), Azes I and Azes II (ca. 58 — 18 B. C.) and Gondophares 
(ca. 20 — 48 A. D.). At the same time Saka princes ruled in Taxila and Mathura 
(e. g. Sodasa) and established a dynasty in Western India, known as that of the 
Western Satraps, which lasted imtil the time of Candragupta, ca. 390. The Indo- 
Greek kings of the Panjab are known almost exclusively by their coins, which are 
at first in a purely classical style, and subsequently Indianised, and by small ob- 
jects, none of which are of a Buddhist or Hindu character. A temple with Ionic 
pillars, but not otherwise Greek, excavated at Taxila, may date from about 80 B. C. ^ 
Many authors are inclined to believe that the development of Graeco-Buddhist 
(Gandharan) sculpture had begun towards the end of the first century B. C., but 
at present no positive evidence for or against this view can be adduced®. Others 
attach considerable importance to the indirect influence of Hellenistic art in Bactria 
of which however we have no knowledge, and find evidence of it in the evolution 
which is certainly traceable at SancP. The subject of the Western Asiatic motifs 
in Maurya and later Indian art, and of Iranian (Magian) elements in Indian 
culture and art from the Maurya to the Gupta period have been referred to 
above. Objects in the Scythian animal style have been found at Taxila*. 

Only the more important monuments of the period can be discussed. The 
old vihdra (monastery) at Bhaja® near Puna in the Western Ghats is the oldest, or 
if not the oldest in point of time, at any rate the oldest in respect of its sculptures. 
The plan, though irregular, is similar to that of most excavated vihdras-, there is 
an outer verandah separated by a wall with two doorways and a barred window 
from an inner hall, surrounded, in this case on two sides only, by excavated cells 
The verandah roof is hollowed out to form half of a barrel vault, the two 

» Cunningham, 4, vol. II, p. 129; vol. V, pp. 69—72 and pis. XVII, XVIII. 

- See next Chapter; and references in Coomarasnamy, 16. 

^ Marshall, 5 and 8, p. 644. 

* A. S. I., A. R., 1920—21, pt. I, pi. XXIV, b and c. 

Fergusson, 2; Burgess, 5, 8; Jouveau-Dubreuil, i; Marshall 8. 



gable ends and flat inner wall with cornices supported by alternate stupas and 
caryatides. At the west end, a group of three cells is divided from the verandah 
by a pilaster and pillar, with a frieze below. The pillar has a lotus capital sur- 
mounted by addorsed sphinx-like creatures, with bovine bodies and female busts. 
The slender outer pillars of the verandah are all broken. The cave is most re- 
markable, however, in respect of its unique reliefs; these include the aforesaid 
frieze, five armed figures in niches on the east side of the hall and on the verandah 
wall, and the two reliefs at the east end of the verandah, separated by the cell 
doorway. On the left side is represented a royal personage driving in a four- 
horsed chariot (fig. 24); he is accompanied by two women, one a chatra-, the 
other a ^•^7»r/-bearer. Figures on horseback form an escort, and of these the female 
rider in the inner angle of the verandah is clearly provided with some kind of 
stirrups, of which this appears to be the earliest known instance in the worlds 
The chariot is being driven across the backs of very grossly proportioned 
nude female demons, who seem to be floating face downwards in the air. I see no 
reason to question the original identifications of this scene as representing Surya 
with his two wives driving through the sky and dispelling the powers of darkness. 

The relief on the right side is even more elaborate (fig. 27). A royal personage, 
with one attendant seated behind him bearing a standard, is riding on an enor- 
mous elephant which is striding over a broad landscape, and holds aloft in its 
trunk an uprooted tree. The elephant and its two riders are designed on a scale 
enormously greater than that of the landscape, and blotting out the greater part 
of it: an elephant forming part of the normal landscape is not much larger than 
the foot of the great elephant. Almost certainly, as former writers have suggested, 
this is Indra, riding upon his elephant Airavata^. In his character of god of rain, 
and bearer of the vajra (= lightning) Indra is a hostile and dangerous power, 
especially in the Kfsna-Vasudeva legends, which were already well known at 
this time. Moreover, nothing is more characteristic of the Vedic descriptions of 
Indra than the insistence upon his great size: “he surpasses in greatness heaven, 
and earth, and air”, “were the earth ten times as large, he would be equal to it”, 
and he is a warrior of irresistible power. And if it is only in the Epics that he 

^ Also at Sanci (Marshall, 5, p. 138) and at Pathaora nearBharhut (Cunningham, 2, pi. XX). 
But a majority of riders in the early periods, and even in Kusana and Gupta sculptures, are repre- 
rented without stirrups. For bits and bridles see Hopkins in J. A. O. S., XIX, pp. 29 — 56. 

2 Similar figures appear on a medallion at Bharhut, where too the elephant holds a tree in it strunk 
(fig. 48), on the Sahci tor anas ^ and on the Kulu lota (Marshall, 8 , fig. 2 2), but moving in calm and orderly 
progression. As regards these and other examples, it should be observed that not every rider in a 
four-horsed car necessarily represents the Sun, nor every rider on an elephant, Indra. The 
trisula standard with floating banner seems to be used as royal insignia without specific religious 
significance. 



is said to ride upon Airavata in battle, it is easy to see how this connection 
arose: Indra is the power of the storm, he rides upon the clouds, the Maruts 
are his allies; in the Mahdbhdrata, “ airdvatas" = lightning clouds; and in 
later poetry clouds and elephants ate so constantly associated as to be practically 
synonymous^. 

Whatever the iconographic significance, the relief deserves close study from 
every point of view. The princely rider is his own driver; the attendant behind 
him, wearing an enormous collar and crenellated drawers, carries a scythe- 
shaped standard the shaft of which terminates in a trident, and what appear to 
be two spears. Both are seated on a richly embroidered cloth which covers the 
whole back of the elephant. Below the uprooted tree are falling figures. 

The remainder of the landscape is unaffected by the storm. Below the falling 
figures is a sacred tree enclosed by a vedikd, and hanging on this caitja-vrksa are 
three human figures, suspended in each case from a sort of inverted funnel, similar 
to those by which the garlands are attached to another sacred tree shown below ; 
both trees are crowned by parasols, probably indicative of an indwelling spirit. 
It can hardly be doubted that this is a representation of human sacrifice^. Below, 
on the left, is a court scene, occupying the remaining space down to the foreground. 
The king, designated by a royal umbrella (chatra), is seated on a wicker throne 
{morhd or bhadrdsand), a r<2«r/-bearer at his side; before him are dancers and musi- 
cians. On his right is the second, railed, parasol-crowned, and garlanded, caitja- 
vrksa-, and further to the right a more confused jungle scene, in which appear an 
armed man and a horseheaded fairy®. On the whole the costume and accessories 
are not unlike those of the Bharhut reliefs, but the turbans and jewelry are much 
larger and heavier. 

The composition rises immediately from the wall surface, without a frame, 
and it is carried a httle way over the angle of the jamb of the doorway. This 

1 Cf. Kathdsarit Sdgara, l.c., taranga, L,V : “Then the mast elephant of the wind began to rush, 
showering drops of rain Uke drops of ichor, and rooting up trees”. The elephants in Maya-Devi 
and Gaja-Laksmi compositions must Hkewise be regarded as rain-clouds. Cf. Hopkins, p. 126. 

2 “dryads are vegetal divinities that eat human flesh and have to be appeased with offerings” 
(Hopkins, p. 7). Cf. Sutasoma Jdtaka (illustration at Degaldoruwa, Ceylon, Coomaraswamy, i, 
fig. 152.) 

3 This horse-headed fairy recalls the Yakkhini Assa-mukhi of the Padakusalamdnava Jdtaka 
(Nr. 432), “who dwelt in a rock cave in a vast forest at the foot of a mountain, and used to catch 
and devour the men that frequented the road”. The same or a similar fairy appears at Sand on 
a medallion of the railing of Stupa 2, and at Bodhgaya on a railing relief (Foucher, 5, pi. i, figs. 8 
and 9). At Bhaja it hardly seems that so small a detail on so large a composition can refer directly 
to the Jdtaka; more Hkely the Yakkhini is represented simply as a forest goblin, as a type, and 
not as an individual; just as she appears amongst the peaks of Mt. Govardhana on the 'later 
Mandor stele (fig. 166). Another “Assamukhi” appears on the ancient railing found at Patali- 
putra (Waddell, 5, pi. i). Cf.the Yakkhini mare of Mahdvamsa, Ch. X. 


26 



earliest Indian landscape is a mental picture without any attempt at the represen- 
tation of visual appearances as a whole, though realistic in detail; it shows great 
knowledge, but not a studj of nature. The question of perspective in a modern 
sense does not arise, because, as in Indian and Eastern landscape at all times, the 
various elements are successively presented in half-bird’s-eye view, with the hori- 
zon practically out of the picture; the “atmosphere” is not supposed to be seen 
in lateral section, but forms an ambient including the spectator and the whole 
picture^. To one accustomed to the convention, a three-dimensional effect is more 
obvious th^^n in a modern painting; there is no crowding, or overlapping of planes, 
and the mutual relations of the parts are unmistakable. 

The whole approach, hke that of early Indian art generally, is realistic, i. e. 
without arriere pensee or ideaUsation. The main interest is neither spiritual nor 
ethical, but altogether directed to human life; luxury and pleasure are represented, 
interrupted only by death, and these are nothing but practical facts, endorsed by 
the inherently sensual quality of the plastic language. The art of these reUefs 
expresses a philosophy older than the Great Enlightenment. 

These are not personal deities conceived in the manner of Hindu theism, but 
powers personified only in the way that they are personified in the Vedic hymns. 
Both reliefs are the creation of a wild and fertile, not to say an uncanny imagi- 
nation. The forces of Nature are regarded only in the light of their relation to 
human welfare, and over all there hangs the dread of the tiger-haunted forest, 
the power of the storm, and the marvel of the sim that journeys through the air. 
None of this mystery appears in the orderly reliefs of Bharhut and Sand, and only 
some trace of it in the far less accomplished art of the Orissan caves. What the 
true meaning of these reliefs in a Buddhist vihdra may be, is hard to determine; 
the vihdra must be Buddhist, but the sculptures are not Buddhist. This is rather, 
a sample of the kind of non-Buddhist art which the Buddhists had to adapt to 
their own edifying ends ; and it reminds us that much must have been going on 
outside the limited range of Buddhist art properly so called. 

From the fact that the rehef is high and the forms roimded. Sir John Marshall 
has assigned a late date to the cave (first century B. C. in place of the third or 
second century of former authors)^. The developed rehef at Sand does, indeed, 
represent an emancipation from an earlier compression, and tends to visual 
reahsm and conscious artistic grace; but the rehef at Bhaja is a quahty of volume 
and expansion, quite distinct from plastic modeUing, and due, hke the volume 

1 For a discussion of “vertical projection'^ which appears in western art only at a much 
later date, see Dalton, pp. 163, 229, 250. 

2 Marshall, 8 : the earlier dating adopted above was originally proposed by Fergusson (2) 
and is endorsed by Jouveau-Dubreuil (i). \ 


27 



of the Parkham statue, to pressure from within; at the same time both style and 
detail ate related to those of the Maur}'a-Suhga terracottas. 

Very near to the old vihdra at Bhaja there is a group of rock cut stupas, and 
a large excavated caityaAx'i^ (fig. 29), which, together with caitja^-nSSs at Bedsa 
(figs. 52, 33), Kondane, Pitalkhora, and Ajanta (cave X) may be dated about 
175 B. C. These caitja-PP&s, are excavated copies of wooden structural buildings 
as clearly appears in the literal imitation of timbered construction; occasionally 
wood was combined with the stone, forming a screen of concentric ribs within 
the arch of the entrance, or applied to the stone ceiling to represent rafters, and 
in one or two cases part of the original woodwork has survived. Another feature 
derived from wooden construction is the inward slope of the entrance jambs, 
which is most marked in the earliest examples (fig. 29), and becomes much less 
conspicuous as the style develops. 

The caitja-\\'3Si is really a Buddhist church, and like a Christian church, con- 
sits of a nave, apse and aisle, the latter separated from the nave by pillars, the apse 
containing in place of the altar, a solid stupa, the whole excavated in the living 
rock or built of wood and brick. The aisle is continued round the apse, thus 
providing for circumambulation (^pradaksina) and corresponding to the outer hall 
or verandah of structural temples. Except at Bhaja there is very little sculpture 
associated with the earliest vihdras and caitja-hsddi%. 

The caitja-P-iXS. at Nasik (fig. 31), and the Nahapana vihdra. Cave VIII, may 
be dated near the middle of the first century B. C. The facade of the caitja-^aSS. 
is divided horizontally into two storeys, the lower with an arched door, the upper 
with a great ‘V^z/^^z”-window; beside the door is a Yaksa guardian. The inscrip- 
tion states that the villagers of Dhambika gave, i. e. paid for^, the carving over 
the doorway, which is more than usually elaborate. By this time the “batter” of 
the doorway jambs, so conspicuous in the earlier caves, is greatly reduced, and 
is hardly noticeable; but the internal rafters are still supplied in wood. The Na- 
hapana cave (vihdra) pillars, supported by pots above pyramidal pedestals, are 
crowned by large bell capitals, which support another member, consisting of an 
inverted pyramid and addorsed bulls, a form to which the later pillars at Karli 
(fig. 34) closely approximate; the railing of the architrave is quite plain, affording 
a contrast to that of Cave III, which is covered with lotus rosettes, and is supported 
by a narrow frieze of animals*. 

The caitja-hsll. No. 9, at Ajanta, must be of about the same age. 

j ^ Many of the old Buddhist monuments were erected by public subscription. 

* For Nasik see Fergusson, 8, vol. i, pp. 140, 183; Jouveau-Dubreuil, i, vol. i, Chl^^ 
and 2; Marshall, 8, p. 637. In dating the early caves I follow Marshall, except as regards 
Bhaja. For the dating of the excavations in Cave III see Nilakantha Sastri in J. R. A. S., 1926, p. 663. 


28 



The largest of all the early Buddhist churches, and indeed, one of the most 
magnificent monuments in all India, is the great caitya-hfi!^ at Karli (figs. 34, 35), 
which may be dated near to the beginning of the Christian era. The general di- 
mensions are in excess of a hundred and twenty four by forty-five feet in area, 
and forty-five in height, comparable in size with those of an average Gothic 
cathedral. The stiipa is of the high cylindrical type with two rail courses ; the ori- 
ginal wooden umbrella is still preserved. As at Nasik the fagade consists of two 
stages ; there is a lower wall pierced by three doorways, and an upper gallery, over 
which is the usual enormous horse-shoe window, in which remains of structural 
woodwork, consisting of concentric arches forming a pediment, are still preser- 
ved. The great pillars separating the nave from the aisles have “Persepolitan” 
capitals, more elaborate than those which already appear at Pitalkhora and Bedsa, 
and having the effect, as Fergusson remarks, of a frieze and cornice; from these rise 
the wooden ribs attached to the domed stone of the roof, one of the last instances of 
this peculiar vestigial use of woodwork in combination with the solid stone. The 
lower storey of the screen or facade, in the spaces between the doorways, is deco- 
rated with sculptures of two periods. Those evidently representing donors, are 
pairs of human figures, of enormously massive type, and very grandly conceived; 
those representing Buddhas, which have been cut into the screen and side walls 
of the porch at a later date (Gupta) are far less vivid. The setting back of the en- 
trance into the face of the rock forms an outer porch, the sides of which are sculp- 
tured in architectural fagades of several storeys, the lowest supported by huge 
elephants, the second decorated with sculptured figures like those of the screen. 
Numerous mortice holes in the rock show that as usual the entrance was preceded 
by some kind wooden antechamber or porch, and further outside stands one 
of the two original monolithic dhvaja-stambhas with a capital of four lions which 
once supported a wheel {dhamma-cakkdp . 

The five groups of caves near Junnar (48 miles north of Puna) include a 
very interesting circular ra//}’^z-hall, in which a plain stiipa is surrounded by a ring 
of twelve pillars, the central area being domed, the circular “aisle” half domed, 
almost literally realizing the form of the double-roofed circular temple (the Sud- 
hamma Sabha) of the well-known Bharhut relief (fig. 43). Later, and probably 
coeval with the Karli church is the caitya-ofiso. at Manmoda hill (fig. 30); two 
Nagas are represented above the finial of the window, and the semicircular 
pediment is occupied by a standing figure of Maya Devi with the two elephants 
and four worshippers, standing in niches consisting of seven petals of an expanded 
lotus 

1 For Karli see Fergusson, i, vol. i, pp. i4off.; Jouveau-Dubreuil, 1; Marshall, 8, p. 637. 

2 For all the Western caves see Fergusson, 2; Burgess, i, 2, 5, 8; Marshall, 8. 


29 



At Nanaghat, 50 miles N, W. of Puna, there are important inscriptions, proofs 
of the westward extension of the Andhra power early in the second century B. C., 
and reliefs, including one of Satakarni, probably the third king of the Andhra 
dynasty and contemporary of Kharavela of Kalinga, affording an early example 
of the common Indian practise of placing figures of donors in the shrines due to 
them^. 

The most famous monuments of the post-Mauryan and pre-Kusana period 
are the Bharhut (N^odh State) and Sanci (Bhopal State) stupas and their railings 
and gateways. Before describing these specific examples of typical Buddhist 
architecture (the Jains also erected stupas, but no Hindu examples are known, 
though the technical \sxra.stupi'vi applied to the finial of a structural Hindu temple), 
we must briefly describe their nature. 

The stupa (“tope”, or dagaba), originally (pre-Buddhist) a funeral mound, 
becomes a symbol of the last great event of the Buddha’s life, viz. the Parinirvana, 
and usually enshrines relics of the Buddha (authentic relics have been discovered 
at Taxila), sometimes of other teachers, contained in reliquaries, which may be 
of crystal, gold, or other material. The early stupas are of brick or brick and rubble, 
the later usually enclosed in a masonry casing; others are monolithic, e. g. those 
in excavated caitja-haSSs,, where their character is purely symbolic. A stupa usually 
rests on a basement of one or more square terraces {medhi) or is at least surrounded 
by a paved square or circle for circumambulation, the terraces being approached 
by stairs isopdnd)-, it consists of a solid dome {anda ot garbha) with a triple circular 
base, and above the dome a cubical “mansion” or “god’s house” {harmikd, Sim. 
deva-kottrwd), from which rises a metal mast {jasti) the base of which penetrates 
far into the anda\ and this mast bears a range of symbolical parasols {chatrd) and 
at the top a rain- vase {varsa-sthala, corresponding to the kalasa of a Hindu shrine)*. 
The form undergoes stylistic development; at first there is no drum, but later 
on the circular base becomes a cylinder, and the dome is elevated and elongated, 
and the base terraces are multiplied. The Chinese pilgrims speak of certain stupas 
as towers; but a high wooden structure like Kaniska’s at Peshawar (see p. 55) 
must have been something more like a Chinese pagoda, and called a stupa only 
because it enshrined reHcs. 

The railing {vedika) is identical in nature with the wooden fence that pro- 
tected any caitja, for example the caitja-vrksas so often represented in old Indian 
art; it consists of a plinth (alambana), uprights {thabd) with lateral sockets for the 
reception of the horizontal “needles” {siici), and a coping {usnlsa). The railed 

1 Burgess, 5, p. 65; C. H. L, pp. 530, 600, etc. 

* As described in the Divjdvaddna, quoted Foucher, i, vol. i, p. 96. The harmikd is not, 
and never was, a “rehc box”. 


30 



enclosure has four angled entrances; and above these are often erected high and 
elaborate single, double or triple arches {torana), both railing and arches alike 
closely imitating wooden prototypes. 

The Bharhut brick stupa^, stone railing and entrance archways, of which 
^11 that now survives is to be found in the Indian Museum, Calcutta, most likely 
dates from about 150 B. C., in the Suhga period. The Bharhut reliefs are usually 
accompanied by contemporary descriptive inscriptions. Inscribed figures of 
guardian Yaksas and Yaksis, Nagarajas, Devatas, etc., constituting an extensive 
iconography, are found on the tor ana posts (figs. 3 7 — 39) ; Jdtakas( Vessantara, fig. 47), 
and scenes from the life of Buddha; a group of floral, animal and monster 
motifs; and lotus rosettes often enclosing heads of men or women, are represented 
on the railing medallions and coping. It is very important to remark that in the 
scenes from the life of Buddha (Incarnation, Nativity, Enlightenment, etc) the 
Master is never represented in human forms but only by symbols, of which the 
caitja-ttcc (Bodhi-druma = asvattha, pippala. Ficus religiosa), umbrella (chatta), and 
feet {padukd) (cf. Rama’s sandals, by which he is represented as ruler at Ayodhya 
during the period of exile) and wheel (JPhamma-cakkd) are the most usual. Beneath 
the Bodhi-tree is an altar or throne (Bodhi-manda, vajrdsand). The inscriptions 
make it certain that these symbols represent the actual presence of Buddha ; Elapatra 
kneeling before the tree and altar, Ajatasatru kneehng before the pdduka altar, are 
both “worshipping Buddha”. In later art the empty throne will be occupied by a 
visible image. On the other hand, in all Jdtaka scenes, the future Buddha (Bodhi- 
sattva) is visibly represented (fig. 47). 

The three-pointed Triratna symbol represents the “Three Jewels”, the Buddha, 
the Law, and the Order. The Nativity is represented by a figure of Maya Devi 
seated or standing on a lotus with or without elephants pouring water from in- 
verted jars ; this composition occurs also in Jaina usage, but after the third century 
A. D. disappears from Buddhist and Jaina art and invariably represents the Hindu 
goddess Sri or Laksmi®. 

Both at Bharhut and Sanci the elements of floral design are treated with an 
impeccable sense of decorative values. For Bharhut, I am tempted to quote Fer- 
gusson’s remarks, as an example of appreciation at a time when Indian art was but 
ill understood: “Some animals”, he says, “such as elephants, deer, and monkeys, 
are better represented there than in any sculpture known in any part of the world; 
so too are some trees, and the architectural details are cut with an elegance and 

1 Cunningham 2: for theories relating to the iconography see Waddell, 2, 5. 

2 For apparent exceptions to this rule, at Bodhgaya and Sand, see p. 33. 

^ It is highly probable that some older image of Abundance underlies both forms, cf. figures 
16, 74 and pp. 21, 64. Cf. Foucher, 3. 


31 



precision that are very admirable. The human figures, too, though very different 
from our standard of beauty and grace, are truthful to nature, and, where grouped 
together, combine to express the action intended with singular felicity. For an 
honest purpose-like pre-Raphaehte kind of art, there is probably nothing much 
better to be found elsewhere”^. 

Some of the pillar figures reveal combined with their wonderful decorative 
fitness, an astonishing and poignant sense of the beauty of the human body. 

Other fragments of Sunga date, and indicating the former existence of 
stupas and toranas have been found at Besnagar, Kosam(Kosambi), Bhita, Garhwa*, 
and at Amin, Karnal District, where there are two finely sculptured pillars near 
the Thakurji temple, Surajkund®. A monolithic column with a female figure in 
relief at its base is preserved at Rajasan (fig. 58)*. Remains of a railing from 
Pataliputra are preserved in the Calcutta Museum®. There are fine pillars from 
Mathura in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London®. 

A Siva-lihgam found at Bhita, and now in the Lucknow Museum, is of in- 
terest; it is of the panca-mukha type, the upper part consisting of a head and bust, 
the right hand in abhaya mudra, the left, as in the case of the Gudimallam example 
described below, holding a water-vessel. The four remaining heads are repre- 
sented in low relief in a position corresponding to the waist line of the terminal 
bust, and below these heads the suture of the lihgam is clearly indicated. The Brahmi 
inscription, mentioning the donors, and concluding “May the Devata be pleased !” 
has been assigned on palaeographic grounds to the first century B. C. 

The famous railing at Bodhgaya, referred to in the older descriptions as the 
“Asoka railing”, is, on the whole in Bharhut style, but more evolved, and may 
be dated not far from 100 B. C.®. It enclosed, not a stiipa, but a cankrama or prome- 
nade, where the Buddha was thought to have walked after the attainment of the 
Great Enlightenment beneath the Bodhi tree at the same site’’. Amongst the pillars 
of more especial interest are one with a fine figure in relief representing Indra in 
the form of the Brahman Santi (fig. 40)®; one completely covered with architectu- 

^ Fergusson, 2. p. 36 (originally published in 1867). 

^ Cunningham, 4, voL X. 

® Near Thanesar. See A. S. I., A. R., 1922 — 23, p. 89 and PL V, e. 

« A. S. L, A. R., 1918 — 19, pt. I, pp. 32 — 33, and pi. IX b. 

® Waddell, 5. 

« Codrington, K. de B., PL XIV. 

’ Banerji, i; Rao, i, vol. II, p. 63. 

® Marshall, 8, p. 626, and J. R. A. S., 1908, p. 1096; Cunningham, 3, and 4, vols. I 
and III; Bloch, 2; Mitra; Burgess, 8, pis. 171 — 175. 

“ Bachhofer, 2; Kramrisch, p.83. This pillar was dedicated by a king Nagadeva or queen 
Nagadeva between 100 and 50 B. C. The figure of $anti affords the earliest known example of 
the usnisa in sculpture. ^ 


32 



ral reliefs, and some subject panels, including a symmetrically and decoratively 
designed representation of the Sun in a chariot drawn by four horses (fig. 6i); 
and one with the familiar “woman and tree” motif, in this case a vrksakd embracing 
her tree^ Uke the Devata at Bharhut (fig. 39). Amongst the smaller reliefs in me- 
daUions or b^lf medallions may be remarked an illustration of the story of Assa- 
mukhi, referred to above (p. 26); a repUca of the Bharhut Jetavana-purchase scene; 
and two representing the approach to the Bodhi-tree. One of the latter is indeed 
of particular interest as it represents, in the figure approaching the tree, a personage 
who can be no other than the Bodhisattva, Siddhartha^ ; the same subject is later 
on illustrated in a very interesting manner in more than one Gandharan reliefs. 

A special form of temple is connected with the Bodhi-tree*, and consisted 
of a gallery, supported by pillars, encircling the tree. A large number of reliefs (figs. 
41 , 46, 3 5 , 70), ranging from the second century B. C. to the second A. D., illustrate 
such temples, and some of these may be intended for representations of the one 
asserted by tradition, very probably correctly, to have been erected by Asoka 
at Bodhgaya®, where Cunningham’s excavations revealed traces of an ancient struc- 
ture underlying the mediaeval temple. The best known example is the relief at 
Bharhut iasctihtdBhagavatoSakaMuninoBodho, i. e. “the attainment of enlightenment 
by the worshipful Sakya Muni” (fig. 41); there are others at Sahci, from Mathura, 
and at Amaravati. All ate of one type, representing a gallery with barrel-vaulted 
roof and caitja-^mAor^s of the usual type, supported by pillars, and with a ground 
plan hke a Maltese cross; with the single exception of the Mathura example in 
Boston (fig. 70), which represents a square structure supported by only four pillars, 
and with an entablature of the form of the harmikd shown above the stiipa in the 
Bharhut rehef (fig. 42). The only Bodhi temple now surviving is that of Anurad- 
hapura in Ceylon, where the tree rises from a terraced pyramid, approached by 
arched gates. But Bodhi-trees must once have existed on aU Buddhist sites; three, 

1 For this motif see page 64; and Berstl. 

2 See note 3 on p. 47. 

3 Spooner, 5, pp. referring to sculptures nos. 787, 792, then in Peshawar, 

now in the Lahore Museum; and A. S. I., A. R., 1921 — 23, p. 59 and pis. XXIV c and XXV b. 

^ For general discussion see Cunningham, 3; Bloch, 2; Coomaraswamy 17; Spooner 12. 
Reliefs representing Bodhi-manda temples at Bharhut, Cunningham, 2, pis. XIII and XXI; at 
Sand, Fergusson, 1, pis. XV, XVI, XXV, XXX, Maisey, pi. XVIII, MarshaU, 5, pL VII, 
Kramrisch, 2, pi. XXXIV ; at Mathura, Vogel, 6, 1909 — 10, p. 63 and pi. XXVII and Coomaras- 
wamy, 17; at Amaravati, Rea, 4, pi. XXX, and Burgess, 7, pL XXI, 2. 

3 One of the railing inscriptions refers to the rdjapdsada cetika^ which shows that it was 
erected round a temple originally built by a king, who in this case may well have been 
Asoka. For this inscription see A. S. L, A. R., 1923 — 24, p. 99. Rdjapdsada^ however, may 
only signify “regal’', “splendid”. The Ahkavadana mentions an ‘'enclosure surrounding the 
tree on all four sides”, upon which Asoka mounted to perform his offering of 4000 vessels 
of perfumed water. See Przyiuski, and Coomaraswamy, 17. 


3 


53 



of special fame, were planted respectively by Ananda at SravastI, by Kaniska 
at Peshawar, and by Devanampiyatissa at Anuradhapura in Ceylon. 

Two statues of Yaksas (fig. 67) inscribed with the names Nandi and Vardhana, 
found at Patna, have generally been regarded as dating in the second cen- 
tury _B. C.^. Very much in the same style is the figure of the Yaksa Manibhadra 
from Pawaya, Gwaliar (fig. 63), now in the Gwahar Museum, together with two 
fan-palm capitals from the same site; these were regarded by Garde as Kusana, 
but have since been placed by Chanda in the second half of the first century B. C. 
on palaeographic grounds, and this dating better accords with the stylistic evi- 
dence, since the type is very like that of the Yaksa statuettes at the top of the 
Sanci toranas (fig. 53)*. At Vidisa (== Besnagar) there still stands the Garuda 
pillar, lacking only its capital, which was erected in ca. 140 B. C. by Heliodora, 
the ambassador of Antialkidas, in honour of Vasudeva. At the same site have 
been found two fan palm capitals and a mahara capital apparently derived from 
other pillars®, indicating that at least one important Vaisnava temple must have 
been in existence here in the second century B. C., and excavations have revealed 
the existence of a dove-tailed solid stone panelled railing surrounding the sacred 
enclosure. Two pieces of steel found below the Heliodora pillar confirm the con- 
clusions based on the early steel found in Ceylon^. 

The Bhilsa topes, of which the Safici group afford the most complete and 
magnificent examples of structural Buddhist architecture in India, were erected 
near and about the old Malwa capital of Vidisa (Besnagar)®. The main structures 
at Sanci, other than the Asokan pillar, and the later temples referred to on p. 78, 
are the Great Stupa, No. i (fig. 50) and two others. Nos. 2 and 3. These may 
be dated as follows: 

Maurya, thud century B. C., the small brick stiipa which forms the core 
of No. I. 


1 Marshall, 8, figs. 29, 30; Chanda, i, p. z 6 ; Foucher in J.B.O.R.S., 1919, p. 519. 

^ Garde; Chanda, i. 

3 Chanda, 4, p. 16} supposes that the makaradhvaja implies a cult of Pradyumna. The 
capitals are now in the Museum at Gwaliar. 

^ Bhandarkar, D. R., 5. For steel manufacture in early and mediaeval India, see Hadfield, 
Sir R., Sinhalese iron and steel of ancient origin, in Journ. Iron and Steel Institute, i, London,i9i2, 
and in Proc. Roy. Soc., A., vol. 86, 1912; Lester, I. E., Indian Iron, Presidential Address, Stafford- 
shire Iron and Steel Institute, Stourbridge, 1912; Belck, W., Die Brfinder der Eisentechnik, Zt. 
fur Ethnologie, XLII, Berlin, 1910 (Enghshed in Ann. Rep. Smithsonian Institution, WasMng- 
ton, 1911); Coomaraswamy, i,andNeogi. Steel may have been exported from India westwards 
weU before the beginning of the Christian era. Quintus Curtius mentions that the chiefs of the 
Panjab presented Alexander with 100 talents of steel (ferrum candidum ). But see p. 7. 

‘ Cunningham, i; Maisey; MarshaU, 4, 5, 8, 12. A fully illustrated monograph on Sanci 
has been announced to appear within a few years. 


34 



Sunga, 184 — 72 B. C., Nos. 2 and 3 with their railings; enlargement of 
No. I and addition of the plain railing on ground level and terrace. 

Andhra, 72 — 25 B. C., the gateways {torand) of Nos. i and 3. 

The sculptured reliefs are found on the railing of No. 2 and the toranas of 
Nos. I and 3. As at Bharhut, the Buddha is invariably designated by symbols, 
and never represented in human form. The reliefs of the rail of No. 2 are not 
far removed in style from those of Bharhut; this however only applies to a part 
of the work, evidently the earlier part, in which, despite the extraordinary sense 
of decorative design, the treatment of the human figure is still primitive (fig. 51). 
These earlier reliefs are in silhouette without any differentiation of planes, the 
only approach to modelling appearing in the occasional rounding of the contour; 
the feet are always in side view, regardless of the position of the figure. In some 
respects this art seems to start from a point less advanced than that of the prece- 
ding century. Other reliefs on the same railing (fig. 5 2) exhibit a much greater 
knowledge of the figure, of spatial relations, and represent pose and movement 
not merely with animation, but with conscious grace. Some authors attribute 
this rapid development to the influence of hypothetical Bactrian Hellenistic art, 
• or to that of the Greek colonies in the Panjab^. Political relations would indeed 
have made this possible. But it must be remembered that development at one 
stage of any artistic cycle is as natural and inevitable as degeneration at another stage, 
and Indian art viewed as a whole offers no exception to the ordinary rules; so 
that external influences can never be taken for granted on the sole ground of a 
stylistic advance. Nor do Sir John Marshall’s phrases “direct observation of na- 
ture” and “free from the trammels of the memory image” quite meet the case; 
since rarely if ever have Indian artists drawn with a model before them, and the 
image proper is at all times, from first to last, obtained by a process of mental visuali- 
sation. The process, at first no doubt, unconscious, is later on prescribed by 
sdstraic injunction*. Thus the form is always reached by a process of synthesis and 
abstraction, rather than by observation, and is always in the last analysis a memory 
image. When we perceive increased reality or truth, we must ascribe this, not to a 
change of habit, but to heightened consciousness, a more complete identification of 
consciousness with the theme itself, — in other words, to a more profound empathy. 

The reliefs of the great gateways are marvels of decorative story-telling 
composition, and at the same time an encyclopedia of contemporary civilisation. 
The principal themes are drawn from the life of Buddha, and from the Jdtakas. 
The more extended compositions are found on the torana architraves, and here a 
whole succession of scenes belonging to a given event is represented within a 


3* 


^ Marshall, 5, 8. 

2 Sukiacarya, IV, ic. IV, 147 — 151. Cf. Masson-Oursel, discussing pramdna. 


35 



single frame, the presence of the Buddha at each stage of the story being indicated 
by an appropriate symbol. Figures of Yaksas are placed as guardians on the upright 
posts, while at the ends of the architraves there are represented beautiful nude 
dryads leaning from their trees (figs. 53, 54). 

The art of Sahci as a whole, is of course, Buddhist in theme; the story-telling 
reliefs successfully fulfil an edifying purpose. It is equally clear that their content 
is not religious, in the sense that Indian art at a later period becomes religious ; 
the intrinsic quality of the early art is realistic and sensuous, and this is only 
more evident in the case of the dryads, because there the theme is anything but 
Buddhist. Or if we recognize in this very sensuousness with which the art is 
saturated, a true rehgious feeling, then it is religious on a plane very far removed 
from that of the aristocratic philosophy of the Upanisads and Buddhism. It is 
religious in the very real sense of the ancient cults of mother-goddesses and ferti- 
lity spirits, not in the sense of the Great Enlightenment. 

We cannot therefore be surprised at the “Puritanical” objections to art which 
were voiced at this time or a little earlier by Brahmanical and Buddhist philo- 
sophers; art had not yet been conceived as an embodiment of spiritual ideas in 
terms of form; a theory of beauty as Perfect Experience (rasdsvadana = Brah- 
masvadand) had not yet been imagined h When the Church began to make use 
of art, it was only, as Sir John Marshall puts it, “as a valuable medium in which 
to narrate the legends and history of its faith”. The art of Sanci is not, as art, 
created or inspired by Buddhism, but is early Indian art adapted to edifying ends, 
and therewith retaining its own intrinsic quahties. A pure Buddhist content is 
far more apparent in the early architecture, and especially in the undecorated hemis- 
pherical stiipa, with its “unheimlichem, ja grauenhaftem Ernst”, and in the exca- 
vated caitya-BPBs, forming, so to speak „eine Art negativer Plastik”2. 

Art of the Sand school has been found also at Sarnath, where it is represented 
by twelve finely sculptured rail uprights ^ A circular terracotta sealing from 
Bhita, of minute and exquisite workmanship, in the style of the finest reliefs at 
Sahel, was probably made from an ivory die, and recalls the inscription at Sahci 
wliich describes one of the reliefs as the work of the “Ivory-workers of Bhilsa”*. 

1 For the mediaeval theory of beauty see Visvanatha, Sdhitya Darpana (v. 44 of Roer’s edition 
V. 33 in Ballantyne’s translation in the Bibliotheca India); Regnaud, La rhitorique sanskrite- 
Coomaraswamy, 14, 1918, pp. 3off; Masson-Oursel. 

Hoenig, p. 6. 

^ Sahni and Vogel, pi. VI. 

' Marshall, 3, pp. 33, 36, 71 and pis. XXIII, XXIV; 8, p. 63a and pi. XXIX. For an early 
silver signet, with the name “of Nandivardha” in Brahmi characters, and lion, fish and railed 
banner symbols, of fine workmanship, and dateable about 200 B. C., see Rapson in T R A S 
1900, plate, facing page 97. 



» The school of Mathura is more nearly related to Bharhut than to Sanci, and 
is represented by some fragmentary sculptures which must go back to the middle 
of the second century B. C. Better known are those of the Ksatrapa period imme- 
diately preceding the Kusanas. The famous lion-capital, indeed, which has a Kha- 
rosthi inscription and a somewhat Iranian aspect, was dedicated by the queen of 
the satrap Ranjubula or Rajula,the last Yavana king of the eastern Panjab, probably 
about 30 B. C.^. The same lady seems to have founded the Buddhist Guha- 
vihara, now represented by mounds beside the Jamna, south of Mathura city. 
A Jaina votive plaque dedicated by the lady Amohini in the reign of Sodasa, son 
of the aforesaid Ranjubula, is dated in the year 42 or 72 of an unknown era: 
Sodasa probably flourished ca. 10 — 1 5 A. D. Another, dedicated by the courtesan 
Lonasobhika, Q 2 in the Mathura Museum (fig. 72), without date, represents a 
Jaina stiipa of the high cylindrical type standing on a terrace {medht) approached 
by a single stair {sopdna ) : two female figures similar to those of the railing pillars 
lean against the stiipa drum, and there are two stambhas respectively with a dhamma- 
cakka and Uon at the sides. The basement shows two arched niches hke those of 
the Jaina stiipa base at Taxila, but containing figures^. 

The main Jaina estabhshment represented by the Kahkali Tila site already 
existed in the second century B. C. Amongst the most interesting sculptures are 
the dydgapatas or votive tablets, such as those above referred to, but usually 
square; they bear inscriptions inBrahmi characters which can scarcely be later than 
the beginning of the Kusana period. Some (fig. 71) bear in the centre the represen- 
tation of a seated Jina with shaven head of the type of the larger cult image of 
P^svanatha from the same site (fig. 86), and of the early Buddhas. Other reUefs 
include representations of Harinegamesa, a minor divinity connected with the 
nativity of Mahavira®. 

We must now refer to the Jaina and Buddhist caves of Eastern India, espe- 
cially those in Orissa, all of which are Jaina monasteries {vihdras). There is a large 
group of these excavations in the Udayagiri and Khandagiri hills. The Hath! 
Gumpha, already mentioned in connection with the important inscription of 
Kharavela, ca. 161 B. C., is little more than a natural hoUow. The Mancapuri 
(Vaikuntha or Patalapuri of earher authors) contains another inscription of 
Kharavela’s reign, and a crudely executed frieze, somewhat reminiscent of Bhaja 
and Bharhut: one female figure wears a mural crown. The most important of 
the remaining caves, viz. the Ananta, R^I and Ganesa Gumphas must range 

1 Ep. Ind. IX, p. 139; C. H. I., pp. 575 , 576, 633. 

2 Vogel, 13, p. 184 and pi. V. 

2 For the Kahkali Tila dyagapatas, etc. see Smith i . The majority are now in the Lucknow 
Museum. One example has been found at Kosam. 


37 


between 1 5 o and 5 o B. C. The pediment sculptures of the Ananta include a standing 
Maya Devi with elephants. In Buddhist art this would represent the Nativity of 
Buddha, in Hindu art Gaja-LaksmI, but what it represents, unless perhaps the 
Nativity of Mahavira, we do not know; it is one of many motifs, such as the mraina 
and the caitja-ttt&, which are elsewhere Buddhist, but here employed in Jaina art. 
Each doorway is adorned with a pair of three-headed Nagas, like those which 
appear at Nasik and elsewhere in Western India. 

The Rani and Ganesa caves are both two-storied, with friezes interrupted by 
the cell doorways, in both the upper and lower galleries; the former the largest 
and best decorated of all (fig. 36). The scenes, which include the hunting of a 
winged deer, fighting scenes, the carrjdng off of a woman, etc., have not been 
identified, but may be presumed to be taken from Jaina legends and to have an 
edifying value equivalent to that of the Buddhist Jdtakas. The style is original 
and vigorous. “Shield” and svastika symbols are found in the same cave. The same 
themes are repeated in the Ganesa Gumpha, in a somewhat inferior style, and 
degeneration proceeds further in the later Jayavijaya and Alakapuri caves. The 
style appears to have had no descendants in Orissa but may have had some con- 
nection with the earlier work in Farther India and Indonesia, the makara lintel 
arch appearing here for the first time.^ 

Farther south, in the Andhra homeland of the Kistna-GodWeri delta there 
certainly existed a stiipa at AmarWati in the first or second century B. C., and 
fragments of sculpture derived from it are extant (figs. 144 — 146), distinguish- 
able by their low relief from that of the later work^. What appears to have 
been a more important early stiipa existed at Jaggayapeta, some thirty miles from 
Amaravati, and from this site a number of early reliefs of high interest have been 
recovered; amongst these may be especially mentioned a number of pilasters 
(fig. 143) with bell capitals and addorsed winged animals in Bharhut style, one 
representing an elegant punya-sdla with worshippers (fig. 142), and another re- 
presenting a king surrounded by emblems of royalty 3 . .Near Guntupalle there 
is an important group of Buddliist caves, mclndimg'vihdras and monolithic stupas, 
and a small circular caitja-hzW similar to the curious early types at Junnar and 
Kondivte in the west, but with a fagade recalling that of the Lomas Rsi in the 
Barabar hills^. Here also are remains of the largest known structural caitja-haW, 
and there is another at Vidyadurrapuram near Bezwada®. A large Buddhist 

'■ For the Orissan caves see Fergusson, 2; description of reliefs in A. S. L, A. R.,1922 23 

2 Burgess, 7, Chs. VII and IX. But the distinction of inner and outer’rails is mistaken' 

® Burgess, 7, pis. LII — LV. 

* Fergusson, 2, vol. ii, p. 167. 

^ Madras A. S. Progress Report, Dec. 1888 and Jan. 1899. 


38 



monastery existed in the Sahkaram Hills, Vizagapatam District, the monoUthic 
stupas, some of the cells, and perhaps the three structural apsidal caitynAx-iSSs, 
dating from the first or second century B. C., though the site continued in 
occupation up to the Pallava period^. There was another large monastery at 
Ramatirtham, with the brick foundations of no less than six structural caitya- 
halls, some of which at least must be of quite early date^. 

In the same area, at Gudimallam, near Renigunta, North Arcot District, 
exists one of the most interesting and important monuments of pre-Kusana 
Brahmanical art extant, the Siva-lingam known as Parasuramesvara, still in piijd. 
This is a realistic phallic emblem, five feet in height, with a figure of Siva carved 
on its lower side (fig. 66). The deity is two-armed, holds as attributes a ram, 
battle-axe (parasu), and water- vessel, and stands firmly on a crouching Yaksa of 
the Bharhut pedestal type. This Yaksa is evidently the apasmdra purusa, the sym- 
bol of mala, which supports the figure of Nataraja in the later iconography; can 
it too have been by this route, and by sea, that the formula reached Japan? 
The stone is finely wrought and highly polished. Both in style and costume 
the figure is closely related to the standing Yaksa types of Bharhut and SMci, 
but the workmanship is more accomplished and more forcible. This sculp- 
ture is a document of great significance in the history of Indian art, and 
reminds us of what we are too apt to forget, that innumerable works and 
types of work must have existed, that are now lost. Rao is undoubtedly right 
in assigning the lihgam on stylistic grounds to the first or perhaps the second 
century B. C.®. 

Remains of painting of pre-Kusana date have survived in two localities. 
The early painting in Caves IX and X at Ajanta represents indigenous types of 
noble qualityS more vigorous and less highly refined than those of the Gupta 
period, the costume, especially the large turbans twisted round the hair to form 
a top-knot, recalling that represented at Bharhut and Sanci. This form is very 
suggestive of an usnJsa. A powerful standing figure, stylistically related to the 
early Yaksa-Bodhisattva types, has been reproduced in colour by Taki (Cave IX 
= Griffith, pi. XXXVII); the Chaddanta Jdtaka composition, with greater re- 
serve, and less emotional than the later picture in Cave XVII, is reproduced in 
outline by Griffiths ; and a beautiful royal group by Dey. In both caves there are 
later, probably early Gupta, paintings of seated and standing Buddhas, in part at 
least painted over the work of the early period. Burgess remarks that the pillars 

‘ Rea, I. 

^ Rea, 6. 

“ Rao, I, vol. II, pp. 65 — 69, with detailed illustration of the ornaments and attributes. 

* Burgess, 4, pis. VIII — X. 


39 



of the ra/^'a-hiLU at Bedsa were originally painted, but were whitewashed late in 
the nineteenth century b 

In the Joglmara cave, Sirguja State, Orissa, there is painting of two periods, 
the mediaeval work, of poor quality, almost obscuring that of the first century 
B. C., which, so far as decipherable, reveals figures, makaras, etc., drawn with 
vigour and decision^. 

The most detailed early literary reference to painting is found in the Pali 
Uffmaga Jdtaka. This is one of the younger Jdtakas, but certainly pre-Kusana. 
Painted halls and palaces are referred to, and in more detail the painted tunnel, 
as follows : “clever painters {cittakard) made all kinds of paintings, the splendour of 
Sakka, the zones of Alt. Sumeru, the sea and mighty ocean, the Four Continents, 
Himalaya, Lake Anotatta, the Sun and Moon, the Four Great Kings, the six sen- 
sational Heavens ... as though it had been the Sudhamma Hall of the gods”. 
There are incidental references to painting in the Vinaya Pi/aka, Therd-Therl- 
Gdthd, Mahdva/nsa, etc.; in the Brahmanical Epics; and in Patanjali®. 

^ For the Ajanta paintings see Griffiths {Chaddanta outline, pi. 41); Burgess, 4; Fergusson 
and Burgess, pp. 2 84 if. ; Dey, plate facing p. 106; Taki (= Griffiths, pi. 37); Foucher, 5. 

^ A. S. L, A. R., 1914 — 15, pt. I, p. 12. 

^ Patanjali, Mahdbbdsya, describing the exhibition of Krsna-Lila paintings, see Keith, A, B., 
The Sanskrit drama, pp. 32, 34. This seems to have been an exhibit of the Wajang Beber type. 


40 



PART III: 

KUSANA, LATER ANDHRA, AND GUPTA 


THE BEGINNINGS OF HINDU AND BUDDHIST 

THEISTIC ART 

There is evidence in the early Vedic texts, revealing a connection of the 
elemental deities with certain animals, by which they might be represented in 
the ritual. Thus the horse was associated with Surya and Agni, the bull with Indra 
and Rudra (= Siva). The animal Avatars of Prajapati, later appropriated by 
Visnu, may also be cited. Material objects, too, were used as symbols. The wheel 
{cakra), which later on becomes the mark of a Cakravartin, the discus of Visnu, 
and the Buddhist Wheel of the Law, originally represented the Sun. The disk 
of gold placed behind the fire altar to represent the Sun may well be the origin 
of the later prabhd-mandala or siras-cakra (nimbus’). Radiance is predicated of 
almost all the Devas, is indeed one of the root meanings of the word, and most 
of them are connected in their origins with Sun and Fire. Just as the tree behind 
the empty altar or throne, representing Buddha in the early art, remains in the 
later art when the throne is occupied, so the sun-disk behind the fire-altar may 
well have remained there when the deity was first made visible. The altar itself, 
usually wide above and below and narrow in the middle “like a woman’s waist”, is 
evidently the prototype of the as ana and pit ha of later images. 

The vajra (bolt) is constantly mentioned as wielded by Indra. A deprecatory 
reference to those who have the sisna for their deity (Rv. 7, 24®) seems to employ 
the early use of a phalhc symbol by non-Aryan. Caitja-vrksas (cf. figs. 10, 27) 
are mentioned in the Atharva Veda, parisista LXXI; large trees are sometimes 
addressed as deities, they are connected with human fertility, and nymphs inhabi- 
ting them are asked to be propitious to passing wedding processions. 

An elemental conception of the powers of nature does not necessitate an 
iconography, and there are no unmistakeable references to images in the early 
books. The most definite suggestion is that of Rv. 4. 24’“, “Who will buy my 

* We do not know when the nimbus was first used in Indian iconography, as no early 
images, for which we have adequate literary evidence at least in the second century B. C., are 
extant. In western art it first appears in Alexandrian times. Cf. p. 57. 


41 



Indra?”; but just as the Bodhi- tree and pdduka at Bharhut are called “Buddha” 
(Bhagavato), so here a symbol may have been referred to as “Indra”. The “golden 
Purusa” of the Agnisayana, however, must have been a plaque in human form, 
probably something like the little plaque supposed to represent Prthvi found in 
a burial, regarded as Vedic, at Lauriya-Nandangarh^. The ultimate tendency is 
to conceive the gods more and more in definitely anthropomorphic terms; and 
clear references to images occur not infrequently in the later Brahmanas and 
Sutras^. To a very considerable extent the development of theistic, devotional cults 
must represent an emergence of popular, non-Aryan tendencies, now recognized, 
absorbed, and systematised in relation to Aryan philosophies. It must never be 
overlooked that in the Vedas, and before the second centurj’’ B. C. we possess 
only a one-sided view of “Indian” religion, and representing, quantitatively at 
least, the smaller part of Indian rehgion. The mass of the people worshipped, 
not the abstract deities of priestly theology, but local genii (Yaksas and Nagas) 
and feminine divinities of increase, and mother goddesses. 

A description of a temple of post and thatch, with mat walls, is given in 
the Satapatha Brdhmana, but this was a building for the performance of sacrifices, 
not a temple in the later sense®. Many precise and elaborate details are given re- 
garding the building of altars, generally fire-altars ; and it is noteworthy that the 
rules for the construction of these sacrificial altars, given in the Sulva Sutras, make 
use of dynamic symmetry, of which no trace can be recognized at a later period*. 

In the Epics, Manu, the Grhja Sutras, etc., collectively good evidence for 
the second century B. C. or earUer, the transition from elemental to personal 
conceptions of the deities is completed, and at the same time images and temples 
are referred to fairly frequently and as a matter of course®. The words used for 
image are daivata, pratimd, pratikrti, miirti, devata-pratimd, and those who make 
or carry about images are called devalaha. The Harivamsa, somewhat later, 
refers to stone images, but no stone image of a Deva is certainly older than the 
first century B. C., the Maurya or possibly earlier figures representing either 
human beings or Yaksas®. 


^ Bloch, Th., 'Excavations at Eauriya, A. S. I., A. R., 1906 — 07; Marshall, 8, pi. XL 

2 Macdonell, i, pp. 150, 155; Bhattacharya, i, introduction. Bollensen’s interpretation of 
Rv. I, 145, in Z. D. M. G., XL VII, 1890, p. 586, as implying a picture of Agni painted on cow- 
hide, is very doubtful. 

® Discussed by Simpson, 6. 

* Mazumdar, N., Manava Sulha Sutram, Calcutta University, 1922. 

5 Hopkins, pp. 70—73. Quintus Curtius, Vit. Alex., VII, 14, ii, states that an image of 
“Hercules” was carried in front of the army of Porus as he advanced against Alexander. This 
may have been an image of Siva or of a Yaksa. 

' Supra, p. 16 ff. 


42 



Images are mentioned about the same time in several other connections : thus 
Patanjali, commenting on Panini, refers to the exhibition and sale of images of 
“Siva, Skanda, Visakha, &c.”^. The moving about of images of bucolic deities 
is referred to in Apastambha, Grhja Sutra, 19. 13, a work perhaps composed in 
the Andhra country, A Ndga-bali is described in Asvalayana, Ghrya Parisista, 
3. 16; a five-headed snake of wood or clay is to be made and worshipped for a 
year. This is interesting evidence of the making of images in impermanent ma- 
terials; stone images of Nagas, of the Mathura school, are common in the Kusana 
and Gupta periods. 

Late Buddhist legends describe in the same way the making of images of 
Buddha at an early period, and even in the hfetime of Buddha ; but these stories 
cannot be held to do more than emphasize the likelihood of wooden images 
having been made at some time anterior to the earliest known stone figures®. 
Kharavela’s Hathi-gumpha inscription mentions a wooden image of Ketu, a 
human hero; this inscription, dateable about 161 B. C. is good evidence for human 
images, and were it necessary the figure of Satakarni at Nanaghat, and the various 
epic references to human figures, generally of gold, might be cited as analogues®. 

The manner in which deities are or may be distinguished or represented by 
their symbols is well illustrated in a passage of the pseudo-epic, which claims all 
beings as creatures of Siva, on the ground that they are marked by distinctions of 
sex, and not by the cakra, padma, or vajra (discus, lotus, or thunderbolt), by which 
they might have been claimed as Visnu’s, Brahma’s or Indra’s. At a relatively 
early period the lotus may have represented Brahma, for he is the successor of 
Prajapati, who is born of the waters. The lotus pedestal appears already in Maurya 
or Suhga terracottas, and at Sanci and Bharhut as the seat of Mayadevi-Laksmi, 
and is very soon employed in the case of all divine beings to denote miraculous 
birth and apparitional character ; standing alone, in early Buddhist art, it seems 
to represent the Nativity. 

Such symbols {riipd) as are above referred to are found in great variety on the 
punch-marked coins {kdhdpana, kdrsdpana, purdnd) (figs. 106 — 108) which were in 

^ Konow. Figures of Skanda and Visakha appear on the coins of Huviska (fig. 126A, 
and Gardner, pi. XXVIII no. 24, &c.). 

^ Kern, p. 94; Hackin, J., in Ann. Musee Guimet, Bib. Vulg., 40; Bachhofer, i, p. 15. 

® For the Hathi-gumpha inscription see Jayaswal, K., Hdthi-gumphd inscription of the Emperor 
Khdravela, J. B. O. R. S., vol. Ill; Banerji, ibid-, and A. S. I., A. R., 1922 — 25, pp. 130 ff. The 
inscription further states that Kharavela recovered at the Magadhan capital (Pataliputra) some 
objects connected with the first Jina (Rsabhadeva) which had originally been taken away from 
Kalihga by King Nanda three centuries earlier. Smith, 4, p. 209, speaks of “it” as a statue, and 
were this justified, our ideas of the development of Indian art would have to be radically modified; 
in fact, however, the critical word is obliterated, and the correlative pronoun referring to it is 
in the plural. We may suppose that relics, or possibly symbols, may have been referred to. 


43 



general use from about 600 B. C. up to the beginning of the Kusana period or 
somewhat later, on the closely related native cast and die-struck coins (figs. 1 1 o-i 1 5 ) 
of the latter part of the same period, and also on some of the Indianised coins of 
the Indo-Greek and Indo-Parthian kings of the Panjab e. g. Agathokles^. Some 
of the same symbols appear in Maurya, Sunga and Kusana art at Pataliputra, 
Bharhut, Sanci, Mathura and in Orissa, and together with some new forms on 
Kusana and Gupta sealings from Bhita, Basarh, and many other sites, and 
on padukas (Buddha-pada, Visnu-pada) and astamahgala of various periods^. 
With them can be associated, as belonging to the same kind of hieroglyphic 
art, the banner cognizances of gods and heroes mentioned in the Epics, 
those stiU used by Pandas at tirthas to facilitate recognition by visiting pil- 
grims, tattoo marks ancient and modern, cattle-brands, and folk art generally®. 
A few of the types appear in Western Asia, and the svastika is of world- wide 
distribution. 

In determining the nature of the objects represented, all these, together with 
the formulae commonly employed in Indian art of less abstract types, must be 
considered; had this been done at first, the now universally recognized “moun- 
tain” would never have been mistaken for a stupa*. The special religious meanings 
possible for each symbol must be considered in the light of Vedic and Epic re- 
ferences to avatars and attributes, and to later and modern iconography, re- 
membering always that the vocabulary was equally available to all sects. Brah- 
mans, Buddhists and Jains each employing them in senses of their own. Finally, 
the heraldic significance, the secular usage by a particular king, city, or com- 
munity, must be considered in the light of a comparative study of find places, 
and incidental references to rdja-afika of particular rulers, such as the bull mark 
of the Brhataratha dynasty of Magadha mentioned in the Mahdbhdrata, the tiger 
mark of the kings of Kaveri-pum-pattinam mentioned in the Pattinappdlar, the 
later royal emblems used as seals on copperplate grants, and the heraldic usage of 
symbols on banners and standards. A passage of the Visuddhimagga, referring to 
kdhdpanas states that an experienced banker would be in a position to distinguish 
at what village, borough, town, mountain or river bank they were issued, and by 

^ On punch-marked coins and their symbols see Bhandarkar, 5; Rapson, i; Spooner, 9; 
Theobald; Walsh; Smith, 6; and Whitehead, W. H. 

^ For symbols on padukxis see Fournereau, 2; Coomaraswamy, i, fig. 69, and cf. ibid. pi. 
XLVin, 15. 17. For the Jainai2//<7«?it«gi74?, Coomaraswamy 9 (4) pi. XXXVII; Smith,i; and fig. 72. 

^ For tattoo marks see Cunningham, 2 and Luard, i. 

* The mountain represented by ‘arches’ (peaks) is found in Mesopotamia and throughout 
the ancient world, as well as in later Indian and Central Asian and Chinese art, cf. Glotz, G., 
The Aegean civilisation, 1925, fig. 40, and Petrucci, R., in Burlington Mag., vol. v. 29, 
PP- 74 — 79> 2nd Coomaraswamy, 8, pi. II. cf. Burgess, 7, pi. LV, 5. 


44 



what mint-master^. In general, the obverse marks seem to be those of the issuing 
authority, the reverse signs those of private bankers and merchants. 

The commonest coin symbols (see figs. io6 — 114) in general use before the 
Kusana period include human figures (singly or in threes), elephant, horse, bull, 
bull’s head, dog, cobra, fish, peacock; caitya-vrksa (railed tree), branch, flower, 
lotus; sun (circle with rays), moon (crescent); moimtain (many varieties with 
one or more peaks, and with or without the dog, peacock, tree or crescent), river 
(often with fish), tank; taurine, nandipada, triratna or trisuluy svastika, double 
triangle (hke a Tantrik yantrd), steel-yard, so-called cotton-bale or caduceus, 
shield (= triratna or fire-altar?), Taxila mark (equal-armed cross, tipped with four 
circles enclosing dots), “Troy” mark (three chatras or arrow heads interspaced 
with ovals about a central circle, generally regarded as another solar symbol), 
bow and arrow, pile of balls (= heap of gems?), and many others. Rarer marks 
include the lion, rhinoceros, camel and makara. Marks which we might expect, 
but which are not found, include the lingam, vajra, paduka, and Garuda. Nor is there 
any sign clearly representing a stupa of any kind; when this symbol finally appears 
on seals in the Gupta period it is quite unmistakeable^. 

For our purpose, the importance of these symbols, many of which have re- 
mained in use to the present day, lies in the fact that they represent a definite early 
Indian style, amounting to an explicit iconography. In Buddhist art, for example, 
we find at Bharhut and Sanci the tree, wheel, &c., on or behind an altar, clearly 
designated in the inscriptions as “Buddha” (Bhagavato) and worshipped as such; 
even in elaborate scenes from the Life, the Master is represented only by the sym- 
bols (tree, wheel, chatta, paduka), repeated as often as the technique of continuous 
narration may require. Later on the figure of a human teacher takes its place 
upon the throne, the old symbols being retained as specific designations, and in 
the scenes from the life too, he appears in human form. In the same way with 
Hindu types; thus we find at first the humped bull alone (fig. 109), then a two- 
armed (fig. 122), and finally a four-armed figure (figs. 125, 126) accompanying the 
bull, once the representative of the deity, now his “vehicle” {vdhanam), while other 
symbols are held in the hands as attributes. Finally the forms of such images are 
codified in descriptive mnemonic texts {dhjana mantrams, sadhana, included in 
the Silpa-sastras), and these texts, which are a development and definition of the 
older Vedic and Epic lauds, must be visuaUsed before the work is begun. 

1 Text quoted, Bhandarkar, 5, appendix. 

2 For the sfiipa on Gupta seals see Spooner, 8, pi. XL VI, no. T59. The so-called square 
stupa of Amoghabhuti’s coins (Smith, 6, p. 167, and pL XXII; and fig. 115) seems to be simply 
a railed parasol caitya like those represented on the Bodhgaya railing, Cunningham, 3, pL IX, 
no. 14. Structural shrines or pavilions appear on the Audumbara coins (figs. n6, 117) about 
the beginning of the Christian era, also on coins of Kaniska in the second century A. D. 


45 



Thus there is a natural development from indications, appropriate to elemen- 
tal conceptions of the deities, to representations appropriate to the new con- 
ception of them as worshipful persons. As is always the case in India, styles of 
art are not developed arbitrarily, but as the result of changes in racial psychology. 
In this case the change may have been due in the last analysis to a fusion of Nor- 
thern with Southern racial types, of Aryans with Dravidians. 

It must always be remembered that the Vedas exhibit only a certain aspect 
of early Indian religion. Behind the pale of Aryan orthodoxy and its tendency to 
abstract symbolism there lay an extensive and deep-rooted system of popular 
beliefs and cults and a decided tendency to anthropomorphic presentation. These 
popular beliefs implied an iconography, such we actually find at Bharhut, of 
Yaksas and Nagas, Devatas and Vrksakas, the Earth and Mother-goddesses and 
divinities of fertility, fairies and goblins and human heroes^. Gradually all of 
these found their place in a theistic Hinduism and Buddhism which were not 
purely Aryan, but Indian; partly in proprid persona as minor divinities acting on 
behalf of the higher gods as guardians or servants, but also, by a fusion of concepts, 
representing them. India offered no exception to the general rule that a higher 
or developing rehgion absorbs, embodies and preserves the types and rituals of 
older cults without destroying them and establishes its churches in places 
already sacred®. If popular belief thus contributed a large element to the person- 
alities of the gods as they came to be imagined, it can hardly be doubtful that 
popular religious art, of which the early terracottas and the Mathura railing 
pillars may be cited as examples, made large contributions to the iconography of 
the ultimate pantheon. With this in view, for example, it is easy to see how it 
happened that the early figures of Siva and the early Bodhisattvas should have 
so much resembled the current types of Yaksas. The attendant r^zan-bearers of 
early Buddha images (fig. 84), for example, predecessors of the Bodhisattvas of 
later trinities, are evidently Yaksas: there is a good example in Amaravati style in 
the Field Museum, Chicago. What we see taking place in Indian art towards the 
beginning of the Christian era is not so much the creation of a brand-new icono- 


* In addition, cf. the popular deities still worshipped (Whitehead, H.; Parker, 2, pp. 133 — 
206, etc.). 

2 Thus, according to HsuanTsang,Nalanda was originally the name of a Naga, “and the mon- 
astery built by the side of the pool is therefore called after his name” (Beal, 2, p. 1 10). It is highly 
probable that the Tibetan Dulva preserves a true tradition when it says that the ^akyas were 
accustomed to present all new-born children before the image of the Yaksa Sakya-vardhana, 
(Rockhill, W. W., L(fe of the Buddha^ popular ed., p. 17). For Yaksas as tutelary deities see also 
p. 17, note I, 47, 68; and Schiefner, i, p. 8i. For Yakkha (Yaksa) worship in Ceylon, Mahd- 
vamsa, Ch. X, vv. 84 — 90. The designation Bhagavata is applicable to Yaksas and Nagas (Chanda, 
I, and Hopkins, p. 145), as well as to Visnu, Siva and Buddha. 

46 



graphy as the adaptation of an older iconography to new requirements, and the 
giving of a new and deeper content to time-honoured forms. 

Temples or shrines are referred to in the Epics as devatd-djatana^ deva-grha, 
devagdra^, caitja. Inscriptions mention deva-kula, arahat-djatana, &c. The general 
meaning of the word caitja (from ]/a) is something built or piled up, the related 
derivative citja referring to the altar or fire-altar. Hence the usual application to 
funeral mounds, built in honour of heroes, teachers or prophets, of which the 
Buddhist and Jaina stiipa is a familiar example. But the word applies to many other 
kinds of sacred objects coming under the head of sanctuary or holystead. Sacred trees 
{caitja-vrksd) are perhaps the most commonly mentioned in the Epics, where it is 
remarked that “not even the leaf of a caitja may be destroyed, for caitjas are the resort 
of Devas, Yaksas, Nagas, Apsarasas, Bhutas, &c.”. The Bodhidruma (njagrodha of 
most Buddhist texts, the aksaja vata of the Epic, but pippala or asvattha of the 
reUefs) was certainly a sacred tree^, haunted by a Devata, before the Bodhisattva 
took his seat beneath it on the eve of the Great Enlightenment®. Most of the 
Yakkhacetija so frequently referred to in Buddhist and Jaina literature as having been 
the haunt (bhavand) of such and such Yaksas, may have been sacred trees; the com- 
mentators however seem to understand sanctuaries in the sense of buildings, and 

this may be correct in some^ cases^. The existence of early images of well-known 

-- 

^ The term ‘‘gods’ houses” is popularly applied even at the present day in Southern India 
to slab-built dolmen-like hero-shrines (Longhurst, 4). It can hardly be doubted that there exists 
some connection between temples and tombs. For discussion see Simpson; Hocart. 

2 Represented already on an Indo-Sumerian seal, fig. 6. 

^ In the Sujata story the Bodhisattva is mistaken for the tree-spirit. Bloch, 2, interpreted 
the railing relief of Cunningham, 3, pi. VIII, fig. 4, as representing an earlier form of the story 
in which the tree-spirit makes the offering of food and drink. In this case the figure standing 
before the tree and receiving the gifts would be the Bodhisattva, who “stretching out his right 
hand to find the bowl, grasped the vase of water” {JatakaJ^ 685 = Niddnakatbd, Warren, Buddhism 
in Translations^ p. 73 = Rhys Davids, Buddhist Birth Stories^ P* 93)* In Gandharan art the “Approach 
to the Bodhi tree” occurs in several reliefs (A. S. I., A. R. 1921 — 22, p. 59, and pis. XXIV, c., 
and XXV, b; also nos. 787, 792 in the Peshawar Museum, referred to by Spooner, 5, pp. 15, 16, 
66, 67). But the raihng relief of Cunningham, 3, VIII, 4, alluded to above does not stand alone; 
exactly the same composition occurs at Bharhut (Cunningham, 2, pi. XL VIII, II) with an in- 
scription (Ja{m)bu nadode pavate^ ‘‘when the Jambutree-expedient is ready to hand”), which does 
not refer to the Bodhisattva or the Bodhi tree. It is possible that the two reliefs do not illustrate 
any form of the Sujata story, but some other and different story. The only other supposed early 
representation of the Bodhisattva is on the inner face of the right hand pillar of the east gate at 
Sanci (Fergusson, i, pi. XXXIII = Maisey, pL XVI). The Bodhisattva is, of course, constantly 
represented in human form when a former incarnation is illustrated. 

* In one case, explaining the Sikiloma Sutta of Samjutta Nikdja, ii, 5, a stone dais, throne 
or pliitfotm (tahkite manco) is stated to have been theYakkha’s h^xxnt (bhavanam), I am indebted 
to Dr. W. Stede for this reference; I believe that an altar like a Bodhi-manda or vajrdsana, such as 
is represented in innumerable reliefs, is intended. If Yakkha temples existed, they may have ser- 
ved as prototypes of Buddhist Bodhi-shrines like those of figs. 41 and 55. Cf. page 46, note 2. 


47 



Yaksas (Dadliikarna, Manibhadra, &c.) must indeed imply some kind of shrine, and 
such a dcva-hda is thought to have been traced in the Jamalpur mound at Mathura. 

W'hcrc, in Kdmdyana 5. 15. 15 ?icailya is described as having railings (yedikd)^ 
terraces, coral stairs and a high roof, it is clear that a temple is meant; and a caitja 
or dyatana must always be a shrine or temple when it is ‘‘erected’’ and generally when 
images are mentioned^ The “horn ofthe trident-bearer, high as heaven and spotless”, 
on seeing which the mortal knows that he has reached the city of Siva must refer to 
the tower of a temple^ ; the words recall the later “Golden Horn” of Ahkor Thom, 
which was the tower of the Baphuon temple, visible from afar (see p. 189). 

Thus it is clear from the literature that both temples and images must already 
have existed certainly in the second century B. C. and perhaps earlier. Remains 
of two or three Brahmanical and several Buddhist temples have been traced: 
an inscription at Nagari ( — Madhyamika) near Chitor, in script of 350 — 250 B. C. 
refers to a temple of Samkarsana and Vasudeva, which was doubtless a wooden 
building, and part of the stone enclosing wall, over nine feet in height, has been 
unearthed^; another inscription of the same period refers to a Vaisnava temple at 
Besnagar, where in the second centurj" Heliodora dedicated his Garuda-dhvaja- 
sta/?ibha^ and two railings, one a solid morticed slab wall, have been traced^. The 
temple at Mat, near Mathura, mentioned in two inscriptions as a devakula^ seems, 
from the occurrence of the portrait statue of Kaniska, and other royal figures, to 
have been the royal chapel of the Kusana kings; excavations have revealed a large 
rectangular plinth and some traces of a circular structure^. The foundations of 
an Asokan r^/Vy^-hall have been recognized at Sanci; the earliest excavated caitja- 
halls and vihdras afford reliable indications of corresponding structural buildings. 
The reliefs at Bharhut, Sand, Gaya and Mathura provide other valuable data 
(cf. figs, 41, 45, 45, 46, 55, 62, and 69). The only buildings represented on early 
coins arc the domed pavilions of the Audumbara coins of Pathankot and Kangta 
(figs. 1 16, 1 17) dating about the beginning of the Christian era, and the pavilion 
with a double ornamented plinth, and enshrining figures of Skanda, Visakha and 
Mahasena, represented on a coin of Huviska (rig. 126 A). Similar pavilions are 
represented on early Pandyan coins*^. The last mentioned pavilion resembles 
one on a terracotta of early Gupta date from BodhgavaC 

* Hopkins, pp. 70 — 7^ ; Chanda, i. A list of pre-Buddhist caityas is given in the P. T. S. Pali 
Dictionary, s. v. ettiya^ but the meanings of the word other than stApa arc ignored. 

^ Wixhdhharata^ 88 , 8 . 

^ Bhandarkar, D. R., 6. 

* Bhandarkar, D. R., 

" Vogel, i^. 

* Picris, pi. Xlll, 7, 8, ii, 12. 

’ Cunningham, 5, pi. XXIV, B. 


48 



Theoretically, the Hindu shrine is the imitation of a building existing in 
another world (generally Indraloka) the form of which has been revealed or 
otherwise ascertained (see p. 125). Practically, it can hardly be doubted 
that, as in other countries, the form of the god’s house is derived from that 
of human dwelUngs and tombs, the main sources leading back to the domed 
thatched hut, and the barrel vaulted types of the Todas, and to the slab-built 
dolmens. 

KUSANA AND LATER ANDHRA, CA. 50—320 A. D. 

The Yue-clii tribe originally occupied a part of N. W. China. Driven thence 
about 165 B. C. they first occupied the territories of the Scythian (Saka) nomads, 
and later took possession of Bactria, about 10 B. C. By about 50 A. D. under 
Kadphises I, the first Kusana king of N. W. India, they had occupied Gandhara, 
i. e. most of Afghanistan, and the Panjab as far as Taxila. Kadphises II (A. D. 
gcj — no) and Kaniska (ca. 120 — 160) extended the Kusana dominion certainly 
as far as Mathura and probably as far as Benares ; the eastern territories were gov- 
erned by viceroys (satraps), Kaniska’s winter capital being at Purusapura (Pesh- 
awar), and his summer capital at Kapisa in Afghanistan. The ancient University 
city of Taxila, on the Indian side of the Indus, lay within easy reach of Peshawar. 
The Kusana domiriHps included also Kasmir, and in India proper, Mathura and 
the Ganges Valley^ far as Bihar. 

It should be that the date of Kaniska has been the subject of a great 

controversy; the df given above are those now accepted by a majority of In- 
dianists, including toc late Vincent Smith (4) and Marshall (6) and in accordance 
with the results of the excavations at Taxila. Rapson, however, adheres to A. 
D. 78, the initial year of the Saka era. 

In centuries preceding the Christian era the Indo-Greek and Indo-Scythian 
kings of Gandhara and the Pan jab had already come under the influence of Indian 
religions; we have a remarkable instance of this in the pillar erected by Helio- 
dora, ambassador of Antialkidas of Taxila at the court of Vidi§a (Besnagar), 
about 126 B. C. in honour of Vasudeva (Ktsna); Heliodora calls himself a Bhaga- 
vata (V’^aisnava). Indian religious symbols appear not only as before on native 
punch-m.arkcd coins, but on various coins of Greek and Indo-Sc:}^thian kings from 
Agathocles (ca. zoo B. C.) onwards. In many cases these symlxjls had, no doubt, 
a Buddhist significance, but all are common to Buddhist and Brihmanical usage, 
and many represent the deities of the cities in which they were struck (c. g. the 
elephant deity of Kapisa, and the bull deity, probably Siva, of Puskalavati). 
Religious benefactions by Saka satraps or their queens arc recorded in the Taxila 
copper plate (ca. 72 B. C.), the Mathura lion capital inscription (ca. 50 B. C. 


4 


49 



or near the beginning of the Christian era), and a Jaina votive tablet of about 
1 6 — 17 B. C., Hkewise from Mathura. In the first century of the Christian era 
figures of Indian deities appear on the coins of Gondophares and Kadphises II, 
followed in the second century by representations of Buddha, and of Siva with 
four arms, on coins of Kaniska^. Stiipa bases of the Saka period, associated with 
coins of Azes, appear at Taxila. 

The Graeco-Buddhist art of Gandhara must now be discussed in greater de- 
tail. The whole subject is highly controversial, and even the most important 
points at issue depend upon a balance of evidence rather than upon positive data. 
It win be helpful to distinguish, as M. Foucher has done, the Indian from the 
Hellenistic elements of the iconography. The former, which predominate, include 
a part evidently of Indian origin, and another part that belongs to the common 
Indo-Ir^an inheritance of “Early Asiatic”; for present purposes these can 
be considered together. The following motifs exempHfy those current in pre- 
Gandharan Indian art (cf. figs. 85 — 95): 

Types and compositions: Jdtahas (cf. figs. 47 and 93); the Sun god; Atlantes; 
Indra, Brahma, and Yaksas as probable prototypes of Avalokitesvara, Maitreya, 
and Vajrapani^ ; “woman and tree” {Yaksiot Vrksakd) motif® ;figures of donors ; 
lotus-seat, &c. 

Architectural forms: stupaY-, the double-roofed vihdra; the caitja-\jmdom arch; 

Buddhist raihng; “Persepolitan capital”; battlements. 

Animals: Lion, elephant, bull, horse; winged Hon, centaur, and other monsters; 
hamsa, garuda, makara, &c. 

Floral: rose-lotus forms; blue-lotus derivatives (palmette and honeysuckle); 

vine (already at Sand); various trees. 

Patterns: diaper, dog’s tooth, reel and bead, checker, &c. 

Symbols: hon, elephant, bull, horse; wheel, triratna, &c. 

1 Kaniska is represented in Buddhist literature as a Buddhist emperor like Asoka. His 
eclecticism is evident, however, from the fact that the deities represented on his coins include 
Hindu, Buddhist, Zoroastrian, Elamite and other types. 

“ Spooner, i, remarks that the evolution of Indra and Brahma “was an accomplished fact 
prior to any form of the Gandhara school with which we are acquainted*'. One aspect of Vajrapani 
too, seems to derive from old Indian jaksa forms. See also Bachhofer, 2 and Griinwedel, 
Athene-Vajrapdni, Jahrb. k. PreuB. Kunstsamml., 1915. 

^ This most important characteristic of Gandhara art will be discussed after the Kusana 
art of the Mathura school has been described. 

* At least three types are now current, (i) the early hemispherical, which is becoming rare, 
except in Ceylon where it persists at least to the thirteenth century, (2) the type with high cylindri- 
cal drum and two vedika courses (e. g. Vogel, 13, pi. V) which occurs already at Bedsa and has 
been compared above with Phoenician forms, and (3) the type with a bulbous dome (Vogel, 13, 
pi. IV). A fourth type which must have differed considerably from these, was that of the pagoda- 
like wooden relic towers (see p. 5 3). Cf. Finot and Goloubew. 


50 



GDStume: Indian dhoti, &c., and jewelry, turbans, &c., 

while the leading Gandharan forms which do not occur at Safici, Bharhut, 
and Bodhgaya, &c., include: 

Types and compositions: the Buddha figure; many Jdtaka scenes and scenes 
from the life of Buddha which now appear for the first time^ (but in many 
cases the composition — e. g. the “Visit of Indra” — is practically that of 
old Indian art, with the Buddha figure inserted); Hmti (?); garland-bearing 
Erotes (fig. 89); the nimbus (see pp. 41, 57 flF.). 

Architectural: the three Greek orders, especially the Corinthian. 

Floral: acanthus. 

Costume: various classical, Iranian, and Central Asian garments and jewelry. 

The dating of Gandhara .sculptures is a matter of great uncertainty. As re- 
marked by Marshall, “Not one of the thousands of known images bears a date 
in any known era, nor do considerations of style permit us to determine their 
chronological sequence with any approach to accuracy”^. Foucher and others 
have attempted to prove that the school developed in the first century B. C., 
relying partly on the supposition that the best examples must have been the 
earhest, partly on the Bimaran reliquary and the few sculptures which are dated 
in undetermined eras. The Bimaran reliquary (fig. 88), if we can rely upon Wilson’s 
(Masson’s) account published in 1841, was associated with coins of Azes®; it is 
a golden casket, with standing figures of Buddha and worshippers in relief in 
niches of Indian form, the base engraved with an Indian lotus. This is generally 
cited as the earliest example of Graeco-Buddhist art^ ; but coins merely provide a 
terminus post quern, and Wilson himself concluded that the stupas of Afg hani stan 
“are undoubtedly all subsequent to the Christian era” (loc. cit. p. 322). A headless 

1 It is rarely safe to assume on negative evidence that a composition first met with in Gandha- 
ran art must be of Gandharan origin. Compare Figures 47 and 93; if we did not possess the 
first, we might easily have been misled to suppose that no Indian prototype existed for the 
second. What we know is only a part of what was produced in stone, and what was executed 
in stone was only a part, probably a very small part, of the total production. 

2 Marshall, 6, p. 31. For the whole problem consult Adam, Bachhofer, Burgess (8, 9), Cod- 
rington, K. deB., Foucher (1,3, 4), Griinwedel, Marshall (5,6, &c.), Rapson (2), RawUnson, Smith 
(i, 2, 4), Spooner (i — 5), Vogel (3, 7, 13), Wilson; also Goloubew, reviewing Foucher, i, in B. iS. 
F. E. O., 1923) pp.438ff-j and Coomaraswamy, do. in O. Z.,N. F. i, 1924, and Indian origin of the 
Buddha figure, J. A. O. S., 1926. Goloubew, loc. cit. remarks: “Rien n’empeche en effet, dans I’etat 
present de nos connaissances, de supposer que le buddha indo-grec du Gandhara soit une creation 
plastique posterieur de quelques armees au buddha indien de Mathura.” Smith (4, p. 255) calls 
the Lahore Pallas Athene type (Smith, 2, fig. 66) “the earliest known Indo-Greek sculpture”, 
but elsewhere points out that the type is Indianised, and may be late (Smith, 2, p. 116). 

3 Wilson, H., Ariana Antiqua, 1841. 

♦ Bachhofer; Marshall places it about the beginning of the Christian era, and this is 
possible. 



standing Buddha figure from Loriyan Tahgai in the Calcutta Museum is dated 
318, which, ^the Seleukid era is to be understood, gives 6 A. D.; another figure, 
from Hashtnagar, is dated 384, equivalent by the same reckoning, to 72 A. Dd. 
Unsculptured reliquaries and parts of buildings undoubtedly date from the latter 
part of the first century B. C., e. g. part of the Dharmarajika stilpa^, and the Jaina 
stupa base at Sirkap®. Thus, all that can be safely said is that the Gandhara school 
of Graeco-Buddhist sculpture may date from the first century B. C., probably 
antedates Kaniska, and certainly attains its greatest expansion in his reign*, and 
that it continues an abundant production in the third and fourth centuries, with 
increasing Indianisation both there and in Kasmir. Gandhara art is iconographi- 
cally in part, plastically almost altogether, a local phase of Hellenistic (not Roman 
— Roman art is cousin, not parent), descended from the art of the Greek period 
in Afghanist^ and the Panjab, but applied to themes of Indian origin. It may 
be described from one point of view as representing an eastward extension of 
Hellenistic civilization, mixed with Iranian elements, from another as a westward 
extension of Indian culture in a western garb. 

It should be observed that while the Gandharan Buddha (figs, 89, 90, 94) is 
stylistically Hellenistic, it follows Indian tradition, verbal or plastic, in every 
essential of its iconography. The whole conception of the seated and teacher 
is Indian, and foreign to western psychology, while the Indian Yaksas afford a 
prototype for the standing figures. The usrnsa is found already at Bodhgaya, 
the lotus seat at Sand; indeed, the Gandharan type of lotus, resembling a prickly 
artichoke, is far from realising the Indian idea of a firm and comfortable (sthira- 
sukha) seat, and this is really due to the misunderstanding of a purely Indian idea. 
Nor can the mudrds, abhaja and dhjdna for example, be anything but Indian. All 
that is really Hellenistic is the plasticity; the Gandharan sculptor, even supposing 
his priority in time, did not so much make an Apollo into a Buddha, as a Buddha 
into an Apollo. He may not have copied any Indian sculpture, but his Buddha 
type and that ofMathura are equally based on a common literary and oral tradition®. 

* Vogel, 3; Bachhofer, pp. 24, 25. 

^ Marshall, 6, 7. 

® Marshall, 6, p. 73, and pi. XII. 

^ “It is a point on which most authorities agree, that the palmy days of Buddhism and 
Buddhist art in Gandhara coincide with the reign of the great Kusana kings, and more especially 
with that of Kaniska. This is somewhat more than a hypothesis” (Vogel, 3, p. 258). 

^ For the Indian conception of the yogi seated in meditation see Bhagavad Gita, VI, vv. 10—21 
and the Samamaphala Sutta of the Digha ISHkaya. A seated teacher is represented at Bharhut 
“Digha instructing his disciples”, Cunningham, 2, pi. XLVIII, 4; a seated cross-legged figure’ 
occurs already on an Indo-Sumerian seal. The westward migration of the Yogi motif is traced 
by Berstl, who, unacqainted with the examples at Bharhut, nevertheless inferred its represen- 
tation in Indian art of the second or third century B. C. 



The most important remains of Gandharan art have been found or still exist 
at Jalalabad, Hadda, and Bamiyan in Afghanistan, in the Svat Valley (Udyana), 
and at or near Taxila and Peshawar. At Jelalabad (= Nagarahara, scene of the 
Dipahkara legend) is the Khaesta stiipa, with a magnificent basement; the lower 
part of the stiipa drum is adorned with niches and statues. At Hadda the Tappa 
Kalan monastery proved to be a veritable museum of Gandhara sculpture, but 
nothing that has been excavated has escaped the iconoclasm of the local Musal- 
mms. At Bamiyan are many monasteries, innumerable “caves” and some colossal 
Buddha images; nothing seems to antedate Kaniska. One of the colossal images, 
53 metres in height, is well proportioned, and slightly “swayed”. The trefoil 
niche in which it stands preserves remains of painting, more or less Indian in 
aspect. The painting at Bamiyan, however, exhibits a great variety of styles, and 
inclines more to the later Central Asian, than to Indian types, as a rule. The 
Kaniska monasteries were built in the open; later in date are the innumerable 
excavated monastic dwellings^. Sculptures from the Svat valley (Udyana) and 
many unknown sources are scattered in various collections all over the world, 
the most important series being that of the Lahore Museum, which includes the 
sculptures formerly at Peshawar The gray slate in which Gandhara sculptures 
are executed is supposed to come from an unknown site in the Svat valley. 

Excavations at Takht-i-Bahi, in the heart of the Yusufzai coimtry and centre 
of Gandhara have yielded abundant Gandhara sculptures; the only actual date 
available is an inscription of Gondophares, A. D. 46, but most of the remains 
date from the third to fourth century®. The most remarkable monument of Ka- 
niska’s reign was probably his great stupa near Peshawar. To sum up the various 
descriptions of the Chinese pilgrims, it consisted of a basement in five stages 
(150 feet), a superstructure (^'’stiipa”) of carved wood in thirteen stories (400 feet), 
surmounted by an iron column with from thirteen to twenty-five gilt copper um- 
brellas (88 feet) making a total height of 638 feet^. The monument was probably 
a transitional form between the simple stupa and the Far Eastern pagoda; a storeyed 
tower represented on a toram architrave in the Mathura Museum (fig. 69) may 
perhaps give some idea of its appearance®. The site (at Shah-ji-ki-Dheri) has been 

^ Godard; Fergusson, 2, vol. i, pp. 84fF. Good illustrations of remains in Afghanistan 
are given by Hayden. 

2 Spooner, 5; and Foucher, i. 

3 Spooner, i; A. S. L, A. R., 1912 — 13, pt. i, p. 17. 

^ Chavannes, i p. 424* 

® Vogel, 6, 1909 — 10, pi. XXVII. Some further suggestion of what such a high wooden 
tower may have been like may be gleaned from the Go-ju-no-to, Horyuji, Japan ; or from the Sem- 
butsu Ha-no-to (Hokke mandard) of the Hasedara monastery, Japan (Japanese temples and their 
treasures^ ^09)* The BuJkjo Daijiten (Japanese Buddhist Encyclopedia) explains /o as etymo- 

logically = stiipa. For Indian characteristics in Chinese architecture see also Boerschmann,//7/T/>. 


53 



identified and excavated^. The total base diameter proved to be some 286 feet, 
and the monument was thus by fat the largest of its kind in India (the base dia- 
meter of the contemporary Manikyala stiipa is less than 160 feet). In the relic 
chamber was found the famous Kaniska reliquary (fig. 89)®. This reliquary con- 
sists of a gilt copper alloy cylinder and lid, of total height 7% inches. On the 
lid are a seated nimbate Buddha and two Bodhisattvas, around the rim a series 
of hamsas with extended wings; and on the cylinder are seated Buddhas, a repre- 
sentation of Kaniska, and the sun and moon deities, with garland-bearing Erotes. 
The inscription mentions the names of Kaniska and of Agisala, the Greek or 
Eurasian craftsman by whom it was made. The inferior workmanship has 
provided an argument for regarding the Gandharan art of Kaniska’s reign as late 
in the development of the school, but it is doubtful how far this can be pressed. 

The name Taxila (Taksasila)® covers a number of neighbouring sites. The 
Bhir mound has already been referred to; the city of Sirkap is Indo-Greek, Scytho- 
Parthian and early Kusana; Sirsukh is the city of Kaniska’s reign. The area has 
yielded remains dating from the Mauryan period onwards ; Hellenistic art of the 
Scytho-Parthian period; and Buddhist art mainly of the Kaniska period and later. 
Of true Gandharan (Graeco-Buddhist) sculpture not a single fragment occurs in 
Scytho-Parthian or early Kusana strata. The remains of fifty or sixty stupas and 
many monasteries have been traced. The following are the chief monuments: 

Dharmarajika stiipa (= Chir tope): originally Scytho-Parthian, repaired and 
enlarged in the Kusana period, and partly refaced in the fourth century. In con- 
nection with the building of various periods here a succession of masonry types 
has been established as follows: rubble and kanjur work of the Scytho-Parthian 
(Ksatrapa) period, small diaper of the latter part of the first century, massive 
diaper of the second century, and semi-ashlar of the third and later. The sculp- 
tures from this site are all of the later period and include many fine specimens of 
the stucco Buddha heads of the Indianised Gandharan type. 

Chapel G 5 at the Dharmarajika site is of interest only because of the discovery 
beneathits floor of the relics of Buddha, accompanied by aninscribed silver scroll dated 
equivalent to A. D. 78. The Kusana apsidaKi7/^i7-hall 1 3 has the end octagonal instead 
of round. Chapel F i had a floor of tliick transparent glass tiles, mostly bright blue. 

In the city of Sirkap, the plan of the great palace has been made out; partly 
of Scytho-Parthian (Ksatrapa), partly of Kusana date, it shows a remarkable re- 
semblance to the planning of Assyrian palaces in Mesopotamia, a feature already 

^ Spooner, 2. 

^ Spooner, 2, 4; Foucher, i; Smith, 2. 

^ See Marshall, 6 (the great mass of information contained in this invaluable handbook 
cannot be adequately condensed in the space here available), and 7. 


34 



remarked at Pataliputra. The Jaina stiipa base in block F, probably of the Ksatrapa 
period, has a fagade with niches of three types, Greek pediment, Indian caitya- 
arch, and torana : birds are represented as perched on the arches^, amongst others 
the double-headed eagle, the oldest known example of this type in India. 
Temple D is a large structural ^^a/ya-hall. An elegant female statue in the round, 
dateable by the evidence of coins about 50 A. D. is of interest in view of the rarity 
of early dateable examples of Gandhara sculpture, and of types in the round gene- 
raUy^. Amongst the small copper ornaments found are some comma-shaped 
forms exactly like the well-known prehistoric Japanese makatamcf^. 

A remarkable temple at Jandi^ had a lofty central tower and an otherwise 
flat roof; certainly not Jaina, Buddhist or Brahmanical, it may have been a 
Zoroastrian fire temple with a ’:{igurrat hke those of Mesopotamia. 

The ancient city of PuskalavatP is probably to be identified with the site 
known as Mir Ziyarat or Bala Hisar at the junction of the Svat and Kabul rivers, 
in the Peshawar valley. Various sites in the immediate neighbourhood, such as 
Charsada ( = Hastnagar), P^atu Dheri, Ghaz Dheri, &c. have yielded remains of 
Gandharan art rather above the average quality, and it is noteworthy that at least 
five of the very few inscribed sculptures of this school, including two with dates 
in unknown eras, one however supposed to be equivalent to 6 A. D., have come 
from this area®. That Indian influence in Gandhara was not exclusively Buddhist 
is illustrated by the occurrence of a Siva image (Mahesa, a so-caUed Trimurti) 
from Charsada; the deity is three-headed, three-eyed, and six-armed, and stands 
before the bull Nandi, holding the damaru, trisiila and kamandalu. This type is 
very close to that ofVasudeva’s coin, fig. 126. The style is that of the Indianised 
Gandharan art of the third century®. The same is true of a four-armed female 
figure from the Momand frontier’. 

1 A fact of interest in connection with the resemblance and like usage of the Indian torana 
and Japanese torii, and the meaning of “bird roosting-place” assigned to the latter term. 

2 A. S. I., A. R., 1919 — 20, pi. IX. 

® A. S. I., A. R., 1919 — P^- far as I know, the related tomo-e form appears first 

on a Gupta seal (Marshall, 3, pi. XXI, 120); it is not uncommon as an architectural ornament in 
later south Indian art. 

* The site of Toucher’s classic picture of the Indian Buddhist visiting the Eurasian craftsman 
and asking him to make a Buddha. 

® Bachhofer, i; Marshall and Vogel; Stratton; Vogel, 3. In the last mentioned the plate re- 
ferences on the first page need correction. 

« Natesa Aipar, i ; and A. S. I., A. R., 1914 — 15, p. i, pi. XVI d. The type (seated), whether 
representing Siva, or as has been suggested, Lokesvara, reached Kasmir and Khotan (Kak, i, 
and Stein, 4, pi. 230). Cf. pp. 67, note i, 99, note 2, and 149. What appears to be part 
of a three-headed Visnu of the later Kulu type is illustrated by Burgess, 8, pi. 22, no. 5. Cf. 
p. 143, note 4. 

7 Smith, 2, fig. 78. 


55 



Another important group of stupas, at least fifteen in number, is found at 
Manikyala, some twenty miles south east of Rawalpindi, and several have yielded 
valuable relics. The largest, and best preserved of all the Panjab stupas, is a hemi- 
spherical dome of the ancient type, but probably dating from the s econd or third cent- 
ury and repaired, perhaps in the eighth, when the pillared basement must have been 
added. Other stupas are met with further down the valley, at Mohenjo-Daro, where 
fragments of frescoes have been recovered, and at Thul Mir Rukhan near Daulatpur^ , 
Saidpur^ and Mirpur Khas®, the latter here regarded as of early Gupta date. 

Few sites in India are of greater interest than Mathura. If all that has been 
excavated had been adequately surveyed at the time, or if all that remains could be 
made accessible, it is probable that many of the most doubtful problems of Indian 
political and artistic history might be solved, and much fight would be thrown 
on the early development of the iconography. Even the rich finds, ranging from 
the Sunga to the Gupta period, which are now preserved in the Mathura, Lucknow 
and Calcutta Museums, have not been adequately studied^. 

The pre-Kusana sculptures of the Scytho-Parthian Ksatrapa period have 
already been alluded to. Here we are chiefly concerned with those assignable to 
the reign of Kaniska which was the time of greatest production, and those of his 
immediate successors. 

Themost obvious characteristic of theKusana school inMathuraisthefact,byno 
means astonishing, that it represents in the main a direct development of the older 
Indian art of Bharhut and still older art of Besnagar. The position is nevertheless 
complicated by the development of a new iconography in which the Buddha figure 
is one of the most important elements, and by the evidence in a few of the sculptures, 
especially in certain reliefs, of the influence of the contemporary school in Gandhara. 

The early Kusana Buddha and Bodhisattva type of Mathura (figs. 79, 83 — 85)® 

^ Cousens, 8, pi. lo. 

2 Bhandarkar, D. R., 7. 

^ Cousens, 5; 8, pi. ii. 

^ These finds have been secured very largely through the indefatigable efforts of Pandit 
Radha Krishna, Honorary Curator of the Mathura Museum. The inadequate space available for the 
exhibition is by no means compensated for by the publication of Vogel’s Catalogue in 1910. No 
catalogue of any kind is available at Lucknow, and no recent or illustrated catalogue in Calcutta. 
Publications fully illustrating all that has been found in Mathura are one of the first necessities. 

5 The early inscriptions distinguish by the designations “Buddha” and “Bodhisattva” types 
which are to all appearances the same; in these cases “Bodhisattva” must refer to Gautama, 
Sakya Muni, and may be freely equated with “Buddha”. In the early Kusana period the icono- 
graphy is not yet fixed, and there is considerable variety of costume, and it would appear that 
prototypes of the later crowned Buddhas can already be recognized (fig. 87). It will be noticed 
that in some cases the right hand raised in ahhaya mudra is held sideways {yydvrttd) in others with 
the palm forward {parivrtta) as in all later types. The clenched fist should be a symbol of stability, 
as it is in dance gesture. 



is characterised by the following peculiarities: the sculpture is in the round, or 
very high rehef, and always in the mottled red sandstone of Sikri or Rup Bas; 
the head is shaven, never covered with curls; the usnlsa, wherever preserved, is 
spiral; there is no urm and no moustache; the right hand is raised in abhaya mudra, 
the left is often clenched, and rests on the thigh in seated figures, or in standing 
figures supports the folds of the robe, the elbow being always at some distance 
from the body; the breasts are curiously prominent, though the type is absolutely 
masculine, and the shoulders very broad; the robe leaves the right shoulder bare; 
the drapery moulds the flesh very closely, and is arranged in schematic folds; 
the seat is never a lotus, but always a lion throne {smhasand) without miniature 
figures, while in the case of standing figures there is often a seated Hon between 
the feet; the gesture and features are expressive of enormous energy, rather than 
of repose or sweetness, nor is there any suggestion of intended grace. The nimbus 
is plain or scalloped at the edge in low relief. All of these characteristations apply 
with equal force to the early Kusana images of Jinas (fig. 86), and the great 
majority represent the contrary of what is to be found in Gandhara. 

This is in fact the type of which Vogel remarks that it “cannot be derived 
from any known class of images in Gandhara^”. It is obviously a product of 
the Indian school, and related by continuous tradition with the type of the 
pre-Kusana Yaksas, This is especially evident in the case of the great standing 
images. 

The following list includes the more important examples of the Buddha, 
Bodhisattva and Jina type above described, all either dated in, or dateable in or 
before, the reign of Kaniska : 

Mathura (i — 6 seated, 7 — 9, standing): (i) Bodhisattva from the Katra mound, 
A I of the Mathura Museum* (fig. 84), with inscription in characters like those of 
no. 10; (2) Buddha from Any or, A 2 in the Mathura Museum, headless, with 
similar inscription*; (3) Buddha in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston (fig. 85), 
without inscription; (4) Buddhas in relief, of small size, not cult images, N i 

1 Vogel, 6, 1909 — 10, p. 66. Only for the nimbus and robe has a western origin been sug- 
gested (Sahni and Vogel, p. 19). It is hard to believe that the nimbus can have originated outside 
the classic area of sun-worship. It may be of Iranian origin, or of Indian origin as suggested on 
p. 41. The earliest examples in India are found on coins of Hermaios and Maues, thus about 
100 B. C. As regards the robe, it is true that the Gandharan craftsman makes it look like a toga, 
but the actual shape and use accord with the prescriptions in the Pali canon, and must have been 
fixed long before the first century A. D. The stylistic handling of the drapery in Indian and 
Gandharan types could hardly be more unlike; in India the fleshy form is clearly revealed, 
(“wet drapery”) and the folds of the material are formally arranged, in Gandhara the body is 
concealed and the folds of material are loosely and naturalistically treated. 

3 Vogel, 13, p. 46, and pi. VII. 

3 Vogel, 15, p. 48, and pi. VIII. 


37 



and J 24 in the Mathura Museum^; (5) Jina from the Kahkali Tila site, J 39 in the 
Lucknow Museum (fig. 86); (6) Jinas represented in relief on several djdgapatas 
from the same site, now in the Lucknow Museum^; (7) standing Buddha rehef, 
J 18 in the Mathura Museum®; (8) A 41 in the Mathura Museum, like nos. 9 — 12; 
(9) headless figure from the Gane§ra mound, like nos. 10 — 12, but with ornaments, 
now in the Lucknow Museum*. 

Sarnath: (10) colossal standing Bodhisattva, B (a) i in the Sarnath Museum 
(fig. 83) dedicated by Friar Bala in the third year of Kaniska (123 A. D.), with a 
richly carved umbrella, lion between the feet, and traces of original colouring, 
a magnificent and powerful figure, perhaps the finest of the group, and with 
no. I, the most important®; (ii) headless Bodhisattva of similar type now in the 
Indian Museum, Calcutta®. The two last similar to no. 7. 

Sravasti; (Saheth-Maheth) : (12) standing Bodhisattva from the Jetavana site, 
dedicated by Friar Bala, similar to no. 10, now in the Calcutta Museum'^; (13) 
seated figure, all above the waist now missing, but evidently like nos. 1 — 3, made 
by “Sivamitra, a sculptor of Mathura” and set up “in the Jetavana at Sravasti” 
by two brothers “with special regard to the welfare of their parents”, the inscrip- 
tion in Kusana Brahmi script®. Pataliputra: (14) Bodhisattva fragment “which 
can only have been produced by the famous school of sculpture which flourished 
at Mathura”, also referred to as “at least one large and inferentially elaborate 
Bodhisattva statue from Mathura, which is to be assigned probably to about 
the dawn of the Christian era or a httle later”®. No reason is given for this early 


' Vogel, 13, pp. 148, 166, and pis. Ill a and IV. 

Smith, I, pis. VII, XVII, CL 

® Vogel, 13, p. 146, and pi. Ill c. Other very important railing pillars with Bodhisattva 
or similar figures are numbered B 8a, B 83,6 88 in the Lucknow Museum; similar reliefs in the 
Pennsylvania University Museum (fig. 80). Cf. fig. 87. 

“ Smith, I, pi. LXXXVII. 

5 Sahni and Vogel, pp. 18, 33 — 37 and pis. VII, VIII; Oertel, pi. XXVI a, b. Cf. fig. 96 
(head in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston). The similar figure B (a) a, Sarnath Museum, in 
Chunar sandstone, is regarded by Sahni and Vogel, p. 37, as a copy of the Mathura type by a 
local sculptor. Friar Bala’s name occurs also at Sravasti and in Mathura (Sahni and Vogel, p. 36). 
As regards the tendency to colossal size, it may be noted that a detached left hand found at Ma- 
thura (Cunningham, 4, vol. i, p. 239) measured a foot across the palm, indicating a figure twenty 
four feet high. Cf. also the older statues from Parkham and Baroda. 

® Smith, 2, fig. 94. 

’ Oertel, pi. XXVI d; Ep. Ind., VIII, pp. i8off.; J. A. S. B., XLVII, i, 1898, p. 278. 

* Sahni, 4. Dedications, not necessarily of images, “for the welfare of departed relatives” 

are mentioned in the Milinda Panha. The Sanci Buddha A 83 was dedicated “for the happiness 
of the donor’s parents and of all creatures”. Dedications were generally made dtmdparahitam, 
“for the benefit of oneself and others”. ’ 

* Spooner, 7; and in A. S. L, A. R., 1912 — 13, Pt. i, p. 26. 


58 



dating. Rajagirha: (i 5) fragment of a Kusana Buddha pedestal of Mathura origin^. 
Sand: (16) Buddhas, A 82 and A 85 from Mathura, assigned to the second cen- 
tury, and a Bodhisattva fragment*. 

In addition to these sculptures the supposed figure of Buddha, but perhaps a 
king, of the early Kus^a type, seated cross-legged, broad shouldered, the left hand 
on the thigh, the elbow extended, but with some undetermined object held in 
the raised right hand, appears on certain coins (fig. 1 19) of a king Kadapha, who 
is probably to be identified with Kadphises I, and must have reigned near to the 
middle of the first century A. D.*. Certain of Kaniska’s coins bear the standing 
figure of Buddha in loose diaphanous robes, with nimbus and body-halo, and the 
legend “Boddo” (fig. 125)*; others a seated Buddha, apparently with curly hair 
and in any case of a later type than Kadapha’s, with the legend “Goboydo” 
(Go[tamo] Budo)®. Mr. Longworth Dames beheved that the much earher seated 
broad-shouldered cross-legged figure on the reverse of a coin of Maues (Smith, 6, 
p. 12, and pi. VIII, 4) was a figure of Buddha®. The type is at least as close to a 
Buddha figure as that of the Kadapha coin, and would be the earUest Buddha 
figure known; but the identity cannot be regarded as estabUshed beyond all doubt 
in either case. 

None of these examples, other than the doubtful coins of Kadapha and Maues, 
can be proved to be older than the reign of Kaniska. It would nevertheless by 
very rash to assume that none of the sculptures can be older, or that any one of 
them is necessarily the oldest of its kind ever made. In any case Mathura must 
have acquired a high reputation as the source of Buddha images before so fh^y 
colossal figures would have been exported to comparatively distant sites, and t^ 
consideration certainly involves the existence of Mathura Buddhas in the firsr 
century A. D. 

It is evident from what has been said, and from the illustrations, that a type 
of Buddha image had been created at Mathura independently of any Hellenistic 
prototype; and that this Mathura type was transported to many other sacred sites, 
for at the very beginning of Kaniska’s reign we find Mathura “sending down 


1 Vogel, 6, 1906 — 07, p. 143, note. 

2 Marshall, 12, pp. 29, 50, and pis. II, XII. A 82 SancI closelv resembles A 45 at Mathura 
(Vogel, 13, pi. X). See also A. S. I., A. R., 1912 — 13, Pt. i, pi. VIII b. 

* For this coin see Whitehead, R. B., pi. XVII, 29 ; and Smith, V. A., in J. A. S. B., LXVII, 
pt. I, 1898; also Marshall, 13, pag. 34 and pi. XXV, 18, 19. 

■* Gardner, pi. XXVI, 8; Whitehead, R. B., pi. XX, 7; enlarged reproduction, 
Adam, p. 21. 

s Zeit. fiir Num., 1879, pi. IX, i; Marshall, 13 pag. 34 and pi. XXV, 20 and Cuiming- 
ham. Coins of the Kushans, pi. XVII, 12. 

« In J. R. A. S., 1914, P- 793- 



images to the sacred sites of the Gangetic plains, thus setting examples to the sculp- 
tors of Benares and Gaya”^. 

These facts, taken into consideration with the subsequent continuity of the 
tradition, and the obvious and natural relationship of Gupta to Kusana types, 
exclude the possibihty of a “Greek origin of the Buddha image” in India. That in 
certain directions a Hellenistic element, plastic and iconographic, was absorbed 
into Indian art, and that the presence of this factor is sometimes unmistakeable, 
is all that can properly be asserted in this connection. 

All the Mathura sculptures showing traces of Hellenistic influence, taken 
together, constitute a very small fraction of the whole production of the school. 
Given the identity of theme, a greater divergence of the early Mathura Buddha, 
Bodhisattva and Jina type from that of the Buddha and Bodhisattva of Gandhara 
could hardly be imagined (cf. figs. 94, 96). The wide distribution of the Mathura 
type and the fact that it was locally copied show that it was regarded as the ortho- 
dox model. Incidentally, this has a bearing on the question of the date of 
the Gandhara school; for if the Gandharan type had been evolved and acquired 
prestige long before Buddhas were made at Mathura, the Indian sculptors, who 
had no prejudice against a foreign style, would surely have made use of it^. 
The only possible conclusion is that the Buddha figure must have been 
produced simultaneously, probably in the middle of or near the beginning 
of the first century A. D., in Gandhara and in Mathura, in response to a demand 
created by the internal development of the Buddhism which was common 
ground in both areas®; in each case by local craftsmen, working in the local 
tradition. 

Only after the local types had been established did each affect the other. 
Here, indeed, there is a legitimate field for discussion with a view to definition 
of the influence, and of the extent to which its trace can still be recognized in the 
Buddha type which is definitely established early in the Gupta period (figs. 98, 154, 
158 — 161, 164). The possibility of any further Hellenistic influence having been 
exercised at that time is of course excluded, as it is well known that the Gandhara 

1 Vogel, i3,pp. z8, 34: “There is plenty of evidence that the Mathura school greatly 
influenced Buddhist art throughout the period of its existence”. I fail to understand why Vogel 
regards this circumstance as “not a little curious”. A study of the literature also shows “que 
I’eglise de Mathura eut parmi les communautes bouddhiques une situation priviligiee et qu’elle 
eut contribue pour une large part au rayonnement du foi“ (Przyluski, p. 9). Mathura fragments 
have also been found at Taxila (Marshall, 7, p. 39). The later Kusana type has been recognized 
in Central Asia (Foucher, i, figs. 562, 563 = Griinwedel, 3, pi. IV, i, and Stein,4, II, pl.LXXXII); 
and in China (Siren, i, pp. 37, 38, 43, 66, 144). See also p. 17, and Coomaraswamy, 16. 

It should not, however, be forgotten that as Le Coq (3, p. 28) remarks “Allen Asiaten er- 
scheinen Europaergesichter (also auch die der Hellenen) sehr unschon”. Cf. Masson-Oursel. 

® The development of devotional theism, cf. Jacobi, S. B. E., vol. XXII, p. XXL 


60 



type in Gandhara and in Kasmir was then subject to Indian influence and had 
already been greatly Indianised. 

Somewhat later than the type above described is another closely related to it, 
characterised by the following peculiarities : the general treatment is rather more 
refined; the robe is often thrown over both shoulders, and in seated figures, both 
^ feet are hidden, and more voluminously rendered; figures, probably of donors, 
( appear on the pedestals; and above all, the head is covered with short curly hair, 
examples of the shaven head gradually disappearing. Amongst examples of these 
later Kus^a figures from Mathura may be cited: 

Mathura: (i) the Sitala Ghad image, A 21 in the Mathura Museum^; (2) standing 

image A 4 in the Mathura Museum^; (3) small standing image with shoulder 

flames 25. 439, in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston^; (4) Mathura relief, 

fig- 104- 

Sravasti: seated image exactly like no. i*. 

Sanci: no. 19, S^ci Museum, possibly early Gupta®. 

It is this type, though it still closely adheres to the vigorous Kaniska formula, 
with prominent breasts and full features, that shows the first signs of a rapproche- 
ment with Gandharan art, as indeed, specifically remarked by Goloubew with 
reference to no. 2®. On the other hand, a rapid Indianisation of the Hellenistic 
type begins in Gandhara, in general, though not invariably accompanying a de- 
generation of the style, and a substitution of stucco for stone. Thus, about the end 
of the second or beginning of the third century some mutual influence of the two 
styles upon each other is traceable, and it is at this stage if at all that a Hellenistic 
element can be said to have entered into the constitution of the Buddha type^. 

The exact date at which the type with curly hair appears is uncertain; Sahni®, 
restricts it to the Gupta and subsequent periods, but it certainly appears, both in 
Gandhara and Mathura before the end of the third and probably before the end 
of the second century. The source of the type is probably to be found in the tra- 
dition which first appears in the Nidanakatha to the effect that when the Bod- 

1 Vogel, 13, pi. XVI. 

2 Vogel, 13, pi. XV a. 

3 One of very few known examples, the others all Gandharan: see A. S. L, A. R., 1921 — 22, 
p. 65 ; 1922 — 23, pi. XXV ; and J. A. S. B., Ill, pi. XXVI, i. Figures of Siwa and of kings on 
Kusana coins also exhibit shoulder flames. Cf. the ‘^essence of fire and hereditary royalty” of 
the Devaraja cult (see page 197). 

^ Marshall, inT. R. A. S., 1909, p. 1065, and pi. Ill b . 

5 Marshall, 12, pL ii. 

« B. £. F. E. O., 1923, p. 452* 

’ A conclusion quite in accordance with the fact that Gandharan characters are rather more 
clearly traceable at Amaravati than at Mathura. 

8 Sahni and Vogel, p. 33, note 8, but contradicted, ibid, p. 75. 


61 


hisattva shore his locks, becoming a hermit, his hair “was reduced to two inches 
in length, and curling from the right, lay close to his head, and so remained as 
long as he lived”^. The spiral form of the early Kusana usnlsa must have a Uke 
meaning, the later type merely covering the whole head with short curls in place 
of the original single lock. This later type becomes the universal rule, ahke in 
India and the Far East, only one figure with shaven head (the Mahkuwar image 
fig. 62) being known of early Gupta date. 

If none of the Buddha images in the round found at Mathura can be said 
to be copies of Gandhara types, and only the later Kusana type exhibits a few 
Gandharan characteristics, the same cannot be said in the case of the rarer reliefs 
illustrating scenes from the Life, particulary the Eight Great Miracles. Good 
examples of such rehefs include H. i (fig. 104), H 7 and H ii of the Mathura 
Museum; here, as remarked by Vogel, the copying of Gandharan compositions 
is evident^. The same applies to the life-scenes of the Dhruv Tila r/^^-drum, 
N 2 of the Mathura Museum, described by Foucher as a “caricature lamentable- 
ment indianisee” of the r/^a-drum of the Lahore Museum from Sikri in the 
Peshawar district®. The decorative motif of garland-bearing Erotes, already in- 
dianised at Mathura (fig. 76), and much more so by the time it reaches Amaravati, 
is likewise of Gandharan origin. The only example of actual Gandharan sculp- 
ture in the well-known blue slate of the Swat valley certainly found in Mathura 
is a late image of HaritI, the “Buddliist Madonna” and consort of Kubera as 
P^cika, F 42 in the Mathura Museum*. Another group of sculptures, stylistically 
Indian, is nevertheless strongly suggestive of the West in respect of its themes; 
well-known examples include the so-called Herakles and the Nemean lion, and 
the various Bacchanalian compositions, which are really representations of the 
aforesaid Pancika and are of Buddhist significance®. 

No complete railings have been traced in Mathura, but parts of many different 
Buddhist and Jaina raihngs have been discovered at several sites. Of these the 
most important are the pillars and piUar-bases from the Jamalpur (“Jail”) mound, 
also the source of the water-nymph (fig. 74), most of the pillars and the nymph 
being now in the Lucknow Museum, the bases divided between Calcutta and 

1 Rhys Davids, Buddhist Birth Stories, p. 93. 

“ Vogel, 13, pi. VI; Vogel 6, 1909 — 10, pis. XXV, etc. 

® Smith, I, pis. CV — CVII; Foucher, in J. A., serie X, vol. ii, 1903, p. 323; Vogel, 13, 
pp. 166 — 168. Sikri near Peshawar should not be confused with Sikri, one source of the red 
sandstone used at Mathura. 

* Vogel, 13, p. 118; Burgess, 8, pis. 56, 57. For the “Buddhist Madonna” and “Tutelary 
pair” (Hariti and Pancika) see Foucher, 4, and for examples from Mathura, Vogel, 6, 1909 — 10. 

® For the Bacchanalian scenes see Smith, 4, pp. 1 34 — 139 and references there cited; Vogel, 6 , 
10, 13, 16; Coomaraswamy, 9, 2, pi. Ill; Foucher, i, vol. II, p. 151. 



Lucknow: pillar bases from the Court-house mound; pillars and cross-bars from 
the Kahkali Tlla site of the Jaina Yasa-vihara and stupa of Vasiska: pillars from 
the Bhutesar site, divided between the Calcutta, Lucknow and Mathura Museums : 
those from Jaisinghpura, and some others. 

The pillars and bases from the Jamalpur mound are of three sizes; some bear 
dedicatory inscriptions of the reigns of Kaniska and Huviska. Those from the 
Kankali Tila are associated with inscriptions ranging from the Kusana years five 
to ninety eight. Older fragments are not unknown, one from the Arjunpura site 
bearing a Mauryan inscription; but those here considered appear to belong for 
the most part to the latter half of the first, and to the first half of the second cen- 
turies A. D., with some perhaps as late as the end of the second century. It is 
unfortunate that so many of the Mathura piUars, and aydgapatas cannot indi- 
vidually be more exactly dated. The Mathura excavations were conducted solely 
with a view to collecting sculptures and without regard to scientific observation 
of the sites ; and the difficulties of study have been increased by a distribution of 
sculptures from the same site amongst at least three different museums^. 

The sculptures represented in high relief on the front sides of the pillars in- 
clude Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, Yaksis (or Vrksakas), toilet scenes and other genre 
subjects, and a few male figures; the backs of the pillars bear lotus medallions, 
or in a few examples, Jdtaka panels. Of the Bodhisattvas or Buddhas, the standing 
figure from the Jam%ur site, B 83 in the Lucknow Museum (fig. 79) is identical 
in type with the Sarnath Bodhisattva from Mathura, dated in the third year of 
Kaniska. J 18 in the Mathura Museum is of the same kind. B 82 in the Lucknow 
Museum (fig. 78) is a .crowned Bodhisattva in secular costume, holding the 
amrta vase in the left hand, and having the representation of a Dhy ani Buddha 
in the crown. This is one of the earliest examples of an Avalokitesvara thus un- 
mistakeabl y designated: for a Gandharan example see fig. 95 . B 88 in the Lucknow 

1 Fa Hsien describes about twenty Buddhist monasteries with three thousand monks as 
existing in Mathura at the beginning of the fifth century. Some of these are represented by the 
mounds from which sculptures have been extracted. Amongst the buildings for which rather more 
precise evidence exists may be mentioned the Jaina Guha-vihara founded hy the chief queen of 
the Satrap Ranjubula 'towards the end of the first century B. C.; the main Jaina establishment 
with the Vodva stupa at the Kankali Tila site, which had existed in the second century B. C. and 
survived into the twelfth A. D.; the Buddhist Yasa-vihara and stupa at the Katra site, restored 
by Vasiska, later replaced by a Brahmanical temple and finally by Aurangzeb’s mosque; the 
Buddhist monasteries and stupas at the Jamalpur and Court-House sites, with a monastery 
named for Huviska and a shrine of the Nagaraja Dadhikarna; the Brahmanical temple at Mat, 
mentioned in two inscriptions as a deva-kula, source of the royal statues, and perhaps the parti- 
cular church of the Kusana kings. For a general account of these sites, see Vogel, 13 ; for other 
details. Smith, 1, Cunningham, 4, vol. Ill, and Vogel, 6, 10, 15, 16. An inscription indicating 
the existence of a Vaisnava shrine with a torana and vedika at or near Mathura in the reign of 
Sodasa has been edited by Chanda, 4, pp. 169 — 173. 


65 


Museum is another figure in secular costume, holding a bunch of lotuses in the 
raised right hand, and probably represents a donor (fig. 77), or may be connected 
with the Dipahkara legend. 

The great majority of the remaining figures are female (figs. 75 — 75). The 
commonest and most characteristic type, indeed, is that of the nude or semi- 
nude female figures associated with trees, unmistakeable descendants of the 
Yaksis and Vrksakas of Bharhut, Bodhgaya and Sanci, and ancestors of the 
Ramesvaram verandah brackets at Elura, those of the Vaisnava cave at BadamI, 
and many later derivatives. What is the meaning of these sensuous figures, whose 
connotation and impHcations are by anything but Buddhist or Jaina? They are 
certainly not, as they used to be called, dancing girls^; they are Yaksis, Devatas 
or Vrksakas, nymphs and drj’-ads, and to be regarded as auspicious emblems of 
vegetative fertility, derived from popular beliefs^. Trees, as we have already seen, 
are closely connected with fertility, and tree-marriages have survived to the pre- 
sent day; the twining of the limbs of the dryads, as in the Bodhgaya pillar, deli- 
berately or unconsciously expresses the same idea®. It will, indeed, have been 
observed that there is scarcely a single female figure represented in early Indian 
art without erotic suggestion of some kind, implied, or explicitly expressed and 
emphasi2ed; nowhere, indeed, has the vegetative sexual motif been presented 
with greater frankness or transparency, though in certain later phases of Indian 
art, as at Khajuraho and Konarak, more specifically. The railing types are to be 
connected with and perhaps derived from the early terracottas, which in their 

^ Even Le Coq, 3, p. 82, makes the mistake of describing Mayadevl’s stance in the Nativity 
scene as “in der Tan2erinnenstellung’’; No Indian representation of a dancer in this position can 
be cited. It may be remarked further, that no sufficient reason exists for the usual description 
of the female figure on the coins of Pantaleion and Agathokles as an “Indian dancing girr\ 
For the Bharhut figures, however, cf. Mitra, K., Music and dance in the Vimdnavatthu-atthakathdy 
J. B. O. R. S., XII, 1926. 

2 The later Sarhhitas speak of trees as the homes of Gandharvas and Apsarases. Vogel, 15, 
p. 44, quotes appositely from the MahabharatUy “Who art thou, bending down the branch of the 
Kadamba tree? ADevata, a Yaksi, a Danavl, an Apsaras, a Daitya, a Nagini, or a Raksasi?’^ 
The Mbh. also speaks of dryads (Vrksaka, Varksi) as “goddesses born in trees, to be worshipped 
by those desiring children”. The female figures associated with trees in Bharhut reliefs are labelled 
as Yaksis and as Devatas. On the other hand some of the figures standing under trees are evid- 
ently human. The special adaptations of the dryad motif (i) in the case of the Buddha Nativity 
in the LumbinI garden, where Mayadevi supports herself by the Sal tree, and (2) in the poetical 
fancy of the Asoka tree, which blooms only when touched by the foot of a beautiful woman, are 
evidently secondary, though still closely connected with the idea of fertitily. For the general 
significance of fenoinine divinities worshipped through the ancient world see Glotz, J., The Aegean 
civilisation^ 1925, pp. 243 — 245. 

^ Cf. the tree-girl married by the ten Pracetas in Mahdbhdrata, I, 196, 15 ; and Hsiian Tsang’s 
story of the origin of the name Pataliputra, from the marriage of a student to the maiden of a 
PataU tree, resulting in human offspring. 

64 



turn re min d us of the nude goddess once worshipped throughout Western Asia, 
and of the gold plaque of the Earth goddess from Lauriya-Nandangarh. In the 
presence of these emblems of abundance we must not be misled by modern ideas ; 
their meaning, if not Buddhist or Jaina, is nevertheless rehgious, and reveals an 
essential purity of spirit that has at aU times preserved the East from many psycho- 
logical disasters that have overtaken the West. The two polar themes of Indian, 
indeed, of all experience, are there presented, side by side, though r^ot in oppo- 
sition; in much later, mediaeval, Vaisnava art we j&nd them unified^. 

Reference must also be made to an isolated column (fig. 74) from the Jamalpur 
site representing the almost nude figure of a woman or water-nymph, an apsaras 
in the etymological sense of the word, represented as standing on lotus flower 
springing from a globular jar^. The conception in related to that of the Maya- 
devi and Laksmi types, and might be described as the completest possible treat- 
ment of the auspicious motif of the “fuU jar” {pmm-ghatd) an auspicious symbol 
of abundance common in early Indian art 3 . If we combine this Mathura water- 
nymph with the woman and child type of J 16 (fig. 73) in the Mathura Museum, 
we have the exact components of the water-sprite of the well-known eighth 
century fresco (fig. 283) at Dand^ Uihq, Khotan, where the erotic, or rather, 
fertihty motif is even more evident*. 

The Yaksis and dryads are not the only figures found on the railing pillars. 
Some figures are evidently those of mortal women, and the themes in favour are 
generally toilet scenes. Amongst others there occurs the well-known motif of a wo- 
man wringing the water from her long tresses, which is common in Rajput p ain tings 
and has received an edifying interpretation in the Buddhist art of the Farther 
India®. In a Mathura relief a crane is drinking the drops of water that fall from 
the hair, as though they were raindrops falling from a dark cloud. Jdtaha scenes 
are found in some cases occupying square panels on the reverse sides of the pillars 
each panel complete in itself; amongst those represented being the universal 

* The subject has been ably discussed by Berstl, who traces the westward migration of both 
motifs, Vrksaka and Yogi, via Alexandria and Syria. See also an admirable article on Art and 
Ijjve, by Eric Gill, in Rupam, no. 21; and remarks by Keyserling, Travel Diary of a Philosopher, 
vol. I, p. 97- 

2 Cunningham, 4, vol. i, p. 240, and pi. XI. Now in the Lucknow Museum. 

=• Cf. the Mayadevi-Laksmi series at Sand, illustrated in Foucher, 3. 

■* For the Dandan Uiliq fresco, see p. 150 and fig. 283. For J 16, Mathura, see Vogel, 13, 
p. 146; the “dwarf, crouching at her feet” is really a child trying to grasp a rattle held in the 
woman’s hand. 

5 For the story of the Water of Merit wrung from her hair by the Earth Goddess 
Vasundhara (Burm. Wathundaya), see Duroiselle, in A. S. I., A. R., 1921 — 22; Salmony; 
Coedes in M. C. A. O., II, p. 117 — 22. The motif is also found at Amaravatl, Burgess, 7, 
pi. XI, 4. 


65 


favorite, the Vessantara Jdtaka^. A pillar of Mathura stone with a Vrksaka in 
typical Mathura style has been found at Tandwa, near Saheth-Maheth^. 

The Buddhist and Jaina sculptures above described by no means exhaust 
the productions of the Mathura workshops. The portrait statues of Kus^a kings 
are of very special interest; they include the well-known inscribed, but unfor- 
tunately headless statue of Kaniska foiind at Mat (fig. 65), several others more 
fragmentary from the same site, and the complete figure now worshipped in Ma- 
thura as Gokarnesvara^. Similar types on coins are illustrated in figure 120, 122, 
123, 124. All the figures, standing or seated, are in a purely Indian style of art, 
but the costume, consisting of a pointed cap, tunic, open coat, trousers and high 
heavy boots, is Central Asian^, The latter point is of interest in connection with 
the early Mathura images of the Sun (Surya), which are represented in a similar 
costume, especially as regards the boots ; it is by no means impossible that the 
Kus^a kings, whose attachment to the cults of Fire (whether Magian or Indian) 
is well known, and who paid special honour to the Sun, may have set up and 
popularised a form of Surya image dressed in their own fashion®. 

The early Brahmanical fragments found at Mathura have not been adequately 
studied; they include representations of Siva, various forms of Devi, a slab, D 47 
in the Mathura Museum, representing Krsna as Govardhanadhara® (fig. 102), and 
a three-headed image, E 12 in the Mathura Museum, not identified; and many 

1 The method of continuous narration is highly characteristic at Bharhut and S^ci, and it 
is curious that it is not found at Mathura, and is very rare in Gandhara, though it reappears in 
Khotan and is common in later Indian art, including Rajput painting. The method is familiar 
in late classical western art, and is supposed by Stry2gowski (I, p. 39) to have originated in the 
Hellenistic Near East. Della Setta regards both the method of continuous narration and the use 
of the three-quarter profile in early Indian art as evidences of western influence. 

* “From which it would appear that Mathura must have been the great manufactory for 
the supply of Buddhist sculpture in northern India’’ (Cunningham, 4, vol. XI, pp. 70 fi). The 
Tandwa figure is now worshipped as Sita-maL Another Mathura sculpture, found at Tusaran- 
bihar, Partabgarh District, is a group of seven or eight figures, mostly nude females, perhaps a 
Bacchanalian scene (Cunningham, loc. cit. p. 65). QLsupra^ pp. 57ff., on the export of Buddha 
images from Mathura. 

3 For the images of Kus^a kings see Vogel 15; and A. S. I., A, R., 19Z0 — 21, p. 23 and 
pi, XVIII, One of the Mat figures bears the name of the Andhra king Cas^na, who reigned 
ca. 80 — no A.D. (J. B. O. R. S., VI, 1920, pp. 51 — 53). Vogel, loc. cit, (15) quotes an inscription 
from the Mora site speaking of ‘^images of the Five Heroes” (Pandavas) and reproduces torsos 
which may have belonged to the figures in question. 

* Another common form of the Kusana coat fastens at the side and is hardly distinguishable 
from the Mughal jama, 

5 Vogel, 15, p. 127. 

* Vaisnava sculptures from the mediaeval Kesava Deva temple at the Katra site, destroyed 
by Aurangzeb, must not be confused with those of Kusatia date. Cf. D 26 in the Mathura Mu- 
seum, Vogel, 13, p. 100. 



small images of Kusana and early Gupta date. Siva is represented with or without 
the bull, two-armed and nimbate on all the coins of Wima Kadphises, Kaniska’s 
predecessor; this Kadphises was a worshipper of Siva and himself used the style 
“Mahesvara” which may indicate that he claimed to be a descent of the god. 
A great variety of deities appears on Kaniska’s coins, amongst them being Siva 
in two- and four-armed types (fig. 122, 125, 126), the Buddha above referred to 
(fig. 123), the Sun and Moon, Skanda and Visakha, a Fire-god and a Wind-god, 
r unnin g^ (fig. 128). The latter, if not to be identified with Hanuman, is certainly 
a prototype of many later representations of the “Son of the Wind” An 
early Kusana seal of fine quality also bears the figure of a two-armed Siva®. 

A Siva-Hhgam with a figure of Siva, analogous to the older GudimaUam 
figure described above, but four-armed, is certainly a Mathura work of the second 
or third century A. D. ; its present position is unknown (fig. 68). The fact is so 
curious as to be worth mentioning that an image of Ardhanarisvara (the combina- 
tion of Siva and Devi in one half-male, half-female figure) is unmistakeably 
described by a Greek author, Stobaeus (fl. ca. 500 A. D.), quoting Bardasanes, 
who reports the account of an Indian who visited Syria in the time of Antoninus 
of Emesa, i. e., Elagabalus, who reigned 218 — 222 A. D.*. 

The seated Sun images from Mathura are of great interest. The type occurs 
at Bhaja in an uncanonical form, then on a railing pillar at Bodhgaya (fig. 61) where it 
is strictly symmetrical, and evidently follows a Hterary source. Probably the 
earliest Mathura figure is that from the Saptasamudri well, D 46 in the Mathura 
Museum (fig. 103)®. Here the Sun is represented as squatting in a car drawn by 
four horses and holding some object in each hand; especially to be remarked is 
the srm-disk or nimbus behind him, quite plain except for the indication of rays 
around its edge; there are also small shoulder wings, peculiar to this example. In 
two other images, one in Boston®, and one in the Mathura Museum the car and 

1 For the development of the iconography on the coins see Macdonell, 2, 3, 4; Stein, i; 
and the coin catalogues of the Calcutta, Lahore, and British Museums. A three-headed figure 
occurring on Ujjain coins assigned to the second century B. C. has been regarded as representing 
Siva, “whose temple stood in the Mahakala forest to the north of the city” (C. H. I., p. 532, 
and pi. V, 1 19)- Strong evidence would be needed to prove the existence of a polycephalo us 
type at that time; Cunningham (5, pi. X, fig. 6), however, also dates this coin in the second 
century B. C., assigning it to Satakarni, third Andhra king. 

2 Cf. Coomaraswamy, 4, fig. 59. 

3 A. S. I., A. R., 1914—15. pi- XXIV, 51. 

* The full reference, for which I am indebted to my colleague Mr. A. Sanborn, is Stobaeus, 
Eclogarum Phjskarum et Ethicarum, ed. L. Herren, Gottingen, 1792, Bk. i, Ch. IV, Sec. 56. Fergus- 
son quotes the “Gainsford edition”, p. 54. 

^ Vogel, 13, p. 104. For the Bodhgaya Surya, see Marshall in J. R. A. S., 1908, p. 1096. 

• Coomaraswamy, 9 (2), pi. i. 


5' 


67 


horses, though the latter are still four in number, are still further reduced, and it 
can be seen that the costume consists of a cuirass and boots, while the attributes 
are a kind of club or mace and a staff or more probably a sword; in the Mathura 
example the nimbus is preserved, and is marked by curved radiating rays. The 
two last mentioned are in a cream-coloured sandstone. These images may be 
compared with two others, one in the Mathura Museum (fig. 64) representing a royal 
personage, apparently a Kusana king in tunic and boots, with the same attributes, 
but without horses, and seated on a throne flanked by lions and marked in front 
by a fire altar; the other in purely Indian costume, torso nude, and holding in the 
left hand a cup, and flanked by two small figures of women, is apparently a Baccha- 
nalian Yaksa. Standing Sun images apparently of Kusana age and the same type 
(with cuirass and boots) are numbered D i and D 3 in the Mathura Museum but 
have not been published^. 

It is evident that a cult of Yaksas and Nagas continued to flourish in the 
Kusana period, each of these classes of beings evidently partaking in some mea- 
sure of the character of a genius loci or land-wight, and receiving honour as the 
presiding genius of a city, district, or lake or well^. The Yaksa is a massive, and 
often pot-belhed(^/^/(9(5J2r^zj type, whose ancestors we have noticed above; the type 
is likewise adapted to many other purposes in this period of undeveloped and 
xinstable iconography, and gives rise not only to the Buddhist Pancika-Jambhala 
and very probably to Bodhisattva types like Friar Bala’s at Sarnath, but also to 
the later Hindu Ganesa®. The Naga is represented in human form, but with snake 
hoods attached to the shoulders and rising above the head; the finest Kusana 
example is perhaps the life-size figure, C 1 3 in the Mathura Museum, dated in the 
fortieth year of Huviska. Others in Mathura and in local stone to be seen at Sanci 
are of Gupta date and over life-size*. There is also a Bacchanalian type (C 15 in 
the Mathura Museum). The nature and importance of the old Indian cult of 
Nagas can be best realised from a study of its survivals in the Panjab Him^ayas, 
where snake-gods are still by far the most common objects of worship; the Nagas 
are genii of lakes and springs, and worshipped as powers of the waters, alike in 
their beneficent and their destructive aspects®. 

» Vogel, 13, p. 94. 

^ Chanda, i; Gangoly, O. C., in Modern Review, Oct. 1919. 

® Cf. Scherman. The pot-bellied type has something to do with the iconographic origins 
of Agastya (e. g. from Candi Banon, Java fig. 359), Durvasa Maharsi (Dhenupuresvara temple, 
Pallesvaram, Tan j ore District), and of Ganesa. 

** Marshall, 5, pp. 108, 141. 

^ Emerson, Historical aspects of some Himalayan customs ^ J. P. H. S., VIII, 2, 1921, p. 195; 
Hutchinson, J., and Vogel, J. Ph., History of Bhadratvah State^ ibid, IV, 2, 1916, p. 123; Kangra 
Gazetteer, pt. ii, 1917, p. 62. The accounts ofSung Yun and Hsiian Tsang show that the Naga 
cult was still flourishing in the Panjab and Ganges valley in the fifth and seventh centuries. 



It is noteworthy that an identical form surviving in modem art is worshipped 
as Baldeo, i. e. Balarama. Now in the Mahdbhdrata, 13, 147, 54flF., Baladeva is 
described as having a head wreathed with snakes, as carrying a club, and as being 
addicted to drink, and he is identified with Sesa-Naga from which it would appear 
not unlikely that some of the old Mathura Nagas may really have been regarded 
as images of Balarama^. 

Sacrificial posts ijupd) in stone with one of the earliest inscriptions in pure 
Sanskrit were set up at Isapur near Mathura by Vasiska, a son, viceroy and suc- 
cessor of Kaniska, in the Kusana year 24 (144 A. D. ?) ; and wooden sacrifical posts 
of like date also have been preserved^. 

For the Mathura railing pillars, many and perhaps most of which may be 
of Kusana date, see above, p. 63, 

Mathura, if the most prolific, was not of course an isolated or unique centre 
of production in the Kusana period. Every excavated site which was continuously 
occupied during the Kusana period has yielded corresponding antiquites, and of 
these Pawaya (= Padmavati), Bhita, Basarh (= Vaisali), Besnagar, Sarnath and 
Pataliputra may be mentioned. The site of the old Suratgarh fort in Bikanir 
has yielded late Kusana or early Gupta moulded bricks and terra-cottas 
showing Gandharan characteristics, and others representing Brahmanical subjects, 
including an Uma-Mahesvara group, a Krsna-Govardhanadhara and a Dm- 
Lila scene®. Kasmir was a part of Kaniska’s dominions and is discussed in 
another chapter: Kaniska’s influence extended to Khotan, “where India and 
China meet”. 

South of the Vindhyas, the powerful kingdom of the Andhras had embraced 
the whole of the Dekkhan from east to west long before the beginning of the Chris- 
tian era: the earlier caves (^v 7 //j.'i 2 -halls and have already been referred to. Of 

those of the later Andhra period the most important are the excavated fa/^a-hall 
at Kanheri, and Cave III at Nasik. The Kanheri hall is a large one, in the style 
of the older caitya-Pio^ at Karll, and like that has figures of royal donors carved 
on the outer screen (fig. 135). The roof inside was ornamented with wooden 
rafters of which the pegs are still in place; in front, as in the Nasik, there is an 
elaborately decorated railing in relief, quite suggestive of the great structural 
railing at Amaravatl. Some of the capitals bear representations of the worship of 
pdduka\ the Buddha figures carved above those of the donors on the screen are 


1 Vogel, 10; 13, pp. 45, 48; 15, p. 122. Some of the Bacchanalian Nagas hold instead 
of a cup, a flask like Maitreya’s; suggesting that the amrtaflask may once have been a bottle 
of wine. 

^ Vogel, 16, and A. S. I., A. R., 1922 — 23, p. 138. 

^ A. S. L, A. R., 1917 — 18, Pt. I, p. 22, and pi. XIII. 


69 



doubltess of later date. The hall itself and figures of donors may date about the 
end of the second century^. 

The vihara at Nasik (Gautamiputra cave, Cave III) is just fike the older Naha- 
pana vihara. Cave VIII in plan, both square halls with cells on the three inner sides, 
and a verandah in front; the one is evidently a later copy of the other, and may 
be dated about 130 A, D. A httle later is the Sri Yajna cave. No. 15, dateable 
about 180 A. D. and chiefly remarkable for the small shrine excavated at the farther 
end, probably in the Gupta period, and containing figures of Buddha, and in 
front, two richly carved pillars with horizontally ribbed brackets hke the early 
Pallava forms^. 

The monuments of theAndhras in the east, in Vengi, are more magnificent. By 
far the most important is the git^tstupa at Amaravati (figs. 1 36 — 141 and 144 — 146)®. 
A stiipa certainly existed here in the second century B. C., and some sculpture 
fragments from this period survive. But the sculptured casing slabs of the 
monument and the great railing, the most elaborate ever made : are additions of 
the late second century A. D., and the Buddha figures in the round of the same 
date or a little later. All the stone is marble, and must have been covered originally 
with thin plaster, coloured and gilt. 

More than one of the casing slabs affords a picture of the stiipa as it must have 
appeared in the height of its glory (fig. 136); others are carved with scenes of 
worship and from the life of Buddha. The slabs were apparently arranged, in 
two tiers, forming a kind of wainscot on the stupa-^rum, which was about a 
hundred and sixty feet in diameter. The single raiUng was about six hundred feet 
in circumference and thirteen or fourteen in height. Each upright {thahd) was 
decorated with one full lotus disk in the centre and a half disk above and below, 
often with crowded figure sculpture between; or the disks themselves, in place 
of the fuU lotus, may be elaborately carved. The coping bore a long wavy floral 
scroll, carried by men who are really Indianised analogues of the garland-bearing 
Erotes of Gandhara, which found their way into India via Mathura. The inner 
face of the raiUng was even more elaborately treated. It has been estimated that 
the railing alone provided a superficial area of nearly 1 7000 square feet covered 
with dehcate reliefs, while the stiipa itself, all the lower part of which was cased 
in canned stone, had a diameter of 162 feet. The various stories illustrated in- 
volve the representation of abundant arcliitectural detail; there are walled and 
moated cities, palace buildings, toranas, stupas, and at least one elaborate temple 
of the Bodhi tree. It would hardly be possible to exaggerate the luxurious beauty 

‘ Fergusson, 2, vol. i; Jouveau-Dubreuil, i, vol. i.; Burgess, 8, pis. 24, 212. 

2 Fergusson, 2, vol. i, pp. 183 fF.; Jouveau-Dubreuil, i.; Fergusson, i, 2. 

* Burgess, 7, 8 (pis. 209, 210); Rea, 4. 

70 





or the technical proficiency of the Amaravati reliefs ; this is the most voluptuous and 
the most delicate flower of Indian sculpture. Compared with such a liveliness 
and chic as this, even the lovely traceries of Mt Abu seem to be mechanical. 

In the casing reliefs we find side by side the old method of representing the 
Buddha by symbols, and the human figure of more recent introduction. The 
statues of Buddha in the round (figs. 97 and 137 — 139), which may date from the 
beginning of the third century are magnificent and powerful creations, much 
more nearly of the Anuradhapura (Ceylon) than of the Mathura type. The type 
is severe, but the features are full, the body often anything but slender, and the 
expression is at once aristocratic and benign. All have short curly hair. 

GUPTA PERIOD 320—600 A. D. 

A raja of Pataliputra, who assumed the name of Candragupta I and extended 
his dominions as far as Allahabad (Prayag), established the Gupta era, 319 — 20, 
to commemorate his coronation. Samudragupta extended the kingdom to the 
Satlaj, and made conquests in Southern India. Candragupta II, the legendary 
Vikramaditya, annexed M^wa and Ujjain, and dispossessed the Saka rulers of 
Surastra, known as the Western Satraps; he removed the capital to Ayodhya. 
The White Huns invaded northern India in the reign of Kumaragupta I, and in 
the time of Skandagupta, about 480, broke up the empire. In about 528 the Huns, 
under Mihiragula, were defeated by Baladitya, a later Gupta, aUied to a raja of 
Malwa, and those of the Huns who were not permanently settled in Rajputana 
retired to Ka^mir. As a culture period, and for the purposes of this book, the 
Gupta period is taken as covering the years 320 — 600 A. D. 

The outstanding characteristic of the art of India at this time is its classical 
quahty. In the Kus^a period the cult image is still a new and important con- 
f ception, and there we find, quite naturally, magnificent primitives, or “clumsy 
and unwieldy figures”, according to our choice of terms. In the Gupta period the^ 
( image has taken its place in architecture; becoming necessary, it loses its impor- 
► tance, and enters into the general decorative scheme, and in this integration 
acquires delicacy and repose. At the same time technique is perfected, and used as 
a language without conscious effort, it becomes the medium of conscious and explicit 
' statement of spiritual conceptions ; this is equally true of sculpture, painting, and 
the dance. With a new beauty of defimtion it estabflshes the classical phase of 
X Indian art, at once serene and energetic, spiritual and voluptuous. The formulae 
of Indian taste are now defimtely crystalhsed and universally accepted; icono- 
graphic types, and compositions, stiU variable in the Kusana period, are now 
standardised in forms whose influence extended far beyond the Ganges valley. 


71 



and of which the influence was felt, not only throughout India and Ceylon, but 
far beyond the confines of India proper, surviving to the present day. '* 

The period is often described as one of the revival of Brahmanism and of 
Sanskrit learning and literature. But actually there is no evidence of any preceding 
lack of continuity in the development of Brahmanical culture. The havja style 
is already foreshadowed in the Kdmdjana and fairly well developed in the second 
century A. D. Certainly there had never existed a “Buddhist India” that was 
not as much and at the same time and in the same areas a Hindu India. In any* 
case, an age of heightened aesthetic consciousness, of final redactions of the, 
Epics and purdnas, and of codifications and systematisation in the arts^ must', 
have been preceded by centuries, not of inactivity, but of intense and creative' 
activity. The period is thus one of culmination, of florescence, rather than ofs,^’ 
renaissance. No more than a passing allusion can be made here to the close* 
parallels that exist at this time between the development of art and Literature: 
the same abundance pervades the Sanskrit kdvya literature, the Ajanta paintings 
and the decoration of the Gupta reliefs. 

The rich decorative resources of Gupta art are to be understood in terms of 
its inheritance, indigenous. Early Asiatic, Persian and Hellenistic. The Gupta ^ 
style is tmified and national. Plastically, the style is derived from that of Mathura 
in the Kusana period, by refinement and definition, tendencies destined still later, 
in the natural course of events, to imply attenuation. Meanwhile Gupta sculpture, 
though less ponderous than the ancient types, is still distinguished by its volume;,' 
its energy proceeds from within the form, and is static rather than kinetic, a 
condition that is reversed only in the mediaeval period. In all these respects Gupta 
art marks the zenith in a perfectly normal cycle of artistic evolution. In India, 
as elsewhere, we find a succession of primitive, classical, romantic, rococo, and 
finally mechanical forms ; the evolution is continuous, and often, especially in the 
earlier periods, rapid; and wherever our knowledge is adequate, Indian works, 
like those of other countries, can be closely dated on stylistic evidence alone. 

The school of Gandhara, in the earlier part of the Gupta period, continues 
to flourish in the North West, though in more or less Indianised forms. The 
remains at Jaulian and Mohra Moradu (Taxila) afford a good illustration of its 
character. The former consist of a main and smaller stupas, chapels, and a mo- 
nastery; the latter with an assembly hall, refectory, kitchen, store-room, bath- 
room and latrine, indicating a comparatively luxurious development, and that 
the monks no longer depended upon the begging bowl for all their food. The sculp- 

* An important piece of evidence given by Hsiien Tsang proves what might in any case 
have been inferred, the existence of Silpa-sastras in the late Gupta period: he mentions five Vidjas 
or ^astras, of which the second is the Silpasthanavidya (Beal, I, p. 78). 


72 



tures date from a little before or after 400 A. D. There is no evidence that any 
appreciable production in stone took place after the third century; almost all the 
Jaulian sculpture is executed in clay or stucco, once coloured and gilt. The style 
is still fairly vigorous, freer, indeed, and more animated than that of the earlier 
work in stone; it is at once less refined, less weU-considered, and less academic. 
It is profoundly Indianised; but it cannot be equated in any aesthetic sense with 
the central productions of Gupta art, and in comparison with these is essentially 
provincial^. 

The Bhallar stiipa, of third or fourth century date, at Taxila, with an unusually 
high drum, stands on a rectangular basement approached by one flight of steps, 
illustrating the simple form from which the many-terraced types of Kasmir and 
Java and Burma were later evolved^. 

Farther to the North West, at Charsada and other old sites near Puskalavati, 
Gandharan stucco and clay figures have been found, similar to those of Jauhan, 
but of finer and more pleasing quality, though likewise dating about 400®. 

Other stupas of early Gupta date are found in the Sind valley, and of these 
the Mirpur Khas example is the most important; it is a brick structure standing 
on a square basement, and chiefly remarkable for the existence of three small 
chapels or cellas^ithin the mass of the basement on the western side, affording 
the only Indian instance of a type of structure combining stiipa and chapels in a 
way later on to be greatly elaborated in Burma. In the central chapel there is a 
true brick arch*. The decoration consists of v'arved bricks, hke those of Jamal- 
garht, Bikanir, and early Gupta sites, both Buddhist and Hindu. There 

are also terracotta Buddhas, with Gandharan affinities, ai' 1 figure of a donor, 
still preserving its original colours, the flesh wheat-coloured, the hilir or wig 
black, the waist-cloth red®. Most of the Gandhara sites seem to have been wrecK^d 


* Marshall, 6, 7. 

2 Marshall, 5, pi. XXVIII. 

^ Marshall and Vogel. 

* It may be remarked here that many isolated occurrences of a true vaulted arch are found 
in Indian architecture of pre-Muhammadan date. E. g., Piprawa, Peppe and Smith; Pataliputra, 
Maurya arch stone, A. S. I., A. R., 1921 — 22, pi. XXXVI; Bhitargaon, Cunningham, 4, vol. XI; 
Nalanda, A. S. I., E. Circle, 1916 — 17, p. 45; Bodhgaya, Cunningham, 3, pp. 85, 86, and 4, 
vol. XI, pp. 42, 43 j and Mitra, pp. 1041!.; Konch, Peppe, J. A. S. B., XXXV, pt. i, p. 54; Kafir 
Kot, A. S. I., A. R., 1920 — 21, pt. i,p. 7; Kasmir, Sahni, 3, p. 73 ; Kiyul, Cunningham, 4, vol. Ill, 
p. 157; Burma, Fergusson, p. 352; and at Polonnaruva, in Ceylon. All these represent true 
voussoirs, not merely the pointed arch form, which also occurs in monolithic and corbelled 
construction. As a rule in the Indian arches the bricks are placed sideways so that the thin edges 
are in contact. For pre-Muhammadan buttresses see A. S. I., A. R., 1922 — 23, p. 1 18; for domes, 
Fergusson, 2, vol. i, pp. 312 — 319. See also page 12 and fig. 146. 

* Cousens, 5, pi. XXXVIII; 8, pi. 14. 


75 


by the White Huns under Mihiragula in the latter part of the fifth century, and 
this practically ended the activity of the school. The original influence, nevertheless 
continues to be apparent in the architecture and sculpture of Kasmlr, and that 
of a few related monuments, such as that at Malot (fig. 274)^, dating from the 
time of Kasmiri domination in the Panjab. 

The Buddha figure in the early Gupta period is fully evolved, and this classical 
type is the main source of aU later forms both in and beyond the Indian boundaries. 
The only example of the old Kusana type with shaven head is the Mankuwar 
image, dated 448/9 A. D. (fig. 162). This figure at the same time exhibits a pe- 
culiarity rather common in the Gupta period, that of webbed fingers^. Apart 
from this exceptional figure, the Gupta type is characterised by its refinement, 
by a clear delineation and definition of the features, by curly hair, absence of 
iirnd, greater variety of mudrds^ elaborately decorated nimbus, the robe covering 
one or both shoulders and extremely diaphanous, clearly revealing the figure; 
and by a lotus or Hon pedestal, usually with figures of donors. Scarcely any 
trace of Hellenistic plasticity is apparent. 

The leading variations are exemplified in the fine fifth century image by the 
colossal standing image from Mathura (fig. 1 5 8), the beautiful but less vigorous + 
seated figure B (b) 181 at Sarnath (fig. 161) and others at the same site, the Sul- 
tanganj copper image of over Hfe-size in Birmingham (fig. 160), and the figures 
in relief at Ajanta, Cave XIX (fig. 154), and those of Karli, Kanheri (fig. 164) 
and other western caves. 

All of these are executer^ in local material, at Saiclth, for example, in C^^nor 
sandstone; it is obyious 4 hat by this time local ateliers existed at eve^y sacreu site. 
But that Mathura stiU maintained a high reputation is illustrated by the existence 
jCr- Buddha images in Sikri sandstone, e. g. at Kasia (colossal Parinirvana image 
made by Dinna of Mathura and seen by Hsiian Tsang)®, at Bodhgaya*, Prayag 
(Mankuwar, mentioned above) and S^ci. 

In view of the wide distribution of Mathura images in the second, third, fourth 
and fifth centuries, it is easy to understand the evident derivation of the Gupta 
from the Mathura type, and the fact that, as Smith remarks apropos of the Sarnath 
figure B (b) 181, the Gupta Buddha is “absolutely independent of the Gandh^a 
school”®. As Marshall too observes, “Hellenistic art never took a real and lastine " 

^ Burgess, 8, pis, 237 — 241; A. S. L, A, R., 1918 — 19, p, 5, and 1920 — 21, pi. ii. 

- Other examples, B (b) 103 and 181 at Sarnath, B 10 Lucknow Museum (from Mathura), 
and reliefs at Cave XIX, Ajanta. 

^ For Kasia ( = Kusinagara, site of the Parinirvana) see Sastri, H., i ; Vogel, 5, and 13, and in 
A. S. I., A. R., 1906 — 07, pp. 49!?.; and Sahni, 4. 

^ Cunningham, 3. 

“ Smith, 2, p. 170. 


74 



hold upon India”^, In fact “le buddha de Mathura, ce prototype d’inspiration 
et de facture indiennes et peut-etre meme I’authentique ancetre de toutes les images 
du Bienheureux, ne s’est pas eclipse au contat de I’art Gandharien et . . . a sxirvecu 
a la vogue classique sans avoir subi d’alteration essentieUe”^. 

Thus the famous theory of the Greek origin of the Buddha image, pro-> 
pounded by Foucher, and since adopted by many scholars, proves to lack all) 
solid foundation, and falls to the ground, and with it the imphed Greek inspiration' 
of other Indian images, Brahmanical and Jaina. The fact that a Hellenistic ele 4 
ment, plastic and iconographic, of some kind, enters into and is absorbed by 
Indian art, remains. Opinions may differ as to its extent and significance; its im- 
portance is slight, and perhaps rather historical than aesthetic. 

Gupta architecture may be discussed under heads as follows: (i) stupas \ (2) 
excavated caitya-\isPi% and vihdras-, (3) structural caitya-hsiYis and apsidal Hindu 
temples; (4) flat-roofed temples; (5) sikhara shrines, and exceptional types such 
as those at Gop, Bodhgaya, and the Maniy^ Matha; (6) palace and domestic 
architecture and the theatre. 

Only two structural stupas of Gupta date survive outside the Gandh^a area 
in anything like a fair state of preservation, both of the cylindrical type, the glo- 
bular dome of the monoUthic caitjas being, no doubt, difficult to reahse con- 
structively. The first is the well-known Dhamekh stupa at Sarnath, probably of 
sixth century date. The structure consists of a circular stone drum, resting on 
the groimd level without the usual rectangular basement; above this drum rises a 
cylindrical mass of brickwork to a total height of 1 28 feet. Halfway up the base are 
four niches which must have held Buddha images; immediately below these niches 
is a broad course of exquisitely carved elaborate ornament, geometrical and floral, 
in the manner of the painted ceilings at Ajanta. The other stupa is the later of the 
two Jarasandha-ka-Baithak at Rajagrha, a tower-like erection, rising from a sub- 
stantial basement, and dateable about 500. 

The caves afford numerous examples of monolithic forms; here, e. g., at 
Cave XIX, Ajanp, there is usually a high cyhndrical drum, decorated with stand- 
ing or seated Buddha figures between pilasters crowned by a makara-?a:^ch:-, 
richly ornamented, and supporting a globular dome {andd) with the usual pavflion , 
{harmika) and range of umbrellas {chatravaW). This form is directly derived from 
that of votive stupas of the Kus^a period such as N i in the Mathura Museum®. 
Outside Cave XIX, at Ajanta, on the right hand side, there is a relief apparently 
representing a pavilion with a globular dome and umbrellas; this is not 


1 Marshall, 8, p. 649. 

2 Goloubew, in B. F. E. O., 1923, p. 451. 
^ Vogel, 13, pi. IV. 


75 


really a domed pavilion but the elevation of a solid stupa like that within 
the halP. 

There exist many “caves” of the Gupta period. At Ajanta Caves, XVI and 
XVII are vihdras dating about 500 A. D., Cave XIX a caitja^'^ dateable about 
550; all of these contain paintings, referred to below. 

The two vihdras, XVI and XVII are pillared halls with the usual cells and the ad- 
dition of shrines in the back wall containing seated Buddhas in pralamhapdda dsana, 
“European fashion”, which now appears for the first time. The beauty and va- 
riety of the pillars in these vihdras is remarkable, the types in the two caves differ- 
ing, and no two of any type being exactly alike. In Cave XVI, vertically or spi- 
rally fluted piUars are characteristic, with rounded bracket capitals, sometimes 
with horizontal ribs like the early Pallava brackets of the South. In Cave XVII the 
pillars are square above and below, the centre is fluted, and the brackets are pro- 
vided with squatting figures of gams supporting the horizontal cross-beams, and 
this placed back to the roof and face downwards ; this type of gana capital becomes 
almost universal in mediaeval architecture. 

The caitya-\vi}i!i, XIX, retains the plan of the early tjqjes, but with extensive 
changes in the facade and a great development of (Mahayana) sculpture. The 
fagade (fig. 154) is a further development of the Nasik type, but in place of the 
raihng, which at Nasik extends across the whole width of the wall from side to 
side, separating the doorway from the window above it, there is a double roll 
comice decorated with caitja-'^\x\Aa^% framing heads, a form most likely of 
Andhra origin, but already common in early Gupta work. Above these cornices, 
the frame of the great window stands out in relief against a many storied screen 
of architectural reliefs; below it is the flat-roofed entrance porch supported by 
four pillars, and very shallow. The aisle pillars within are richly ornamented 
fluted columns with pot and foliage capitals, and massive, decorated, rounded 
brackets, supporting an elaborate frieze of niches with Buddha figures. The 
stiipa is of the type already described, with a range of three heavy umbrellas, far 
removed from wooden forms. Outside, right and left of the facade and on the 
walls of the excavated court in front of the cave are many more Buddha figures 
in relief; the type is full-fleshed, but gracefully hanche, and the drapery is treated 
with the greatest possible simplicity, closely moulding the body. It is these types, 
or those of Sarnath, which are as nearly as can be indicated, analogues of the pre- 
Khmer Indianesque Buddhas of Romlok, while, as remarked elsewhere, the 
Kanheri sculptured rehefs are no less closely related to the Stoclet Avalokitesvara. 
In this connection it may be remarked that the Vakataka kings to whom Caves XVI 
and XVII are due, to some extent successors of the Andhras in the Dekkhan, 
^ A structural stone domed pavilion is unmistakeably represented at Amaravatl, see fig. 146. 



76 



controlled the Telugu country almost to the mouths of the Godaveri, and by 
this route the Gupta tradition foimd easy access to the East^. 

Closely related to those of Ajanta are the vihdra and caitja caves at Bagh,-*^ 
which are likewise painted, and date about 500^. 

At Elura, the Visvakarma r<2/^’j-hall is internally like Cave XIX at Ajanta;^ 
externally, it is remarkable for its unique facade, of which the lower storey is 
a verandah with pot and foliage capitals and the upper (fig. 155) contains a divided 
window flanked by two niches in which are standing figures of Buddha. The 
superstructure of these niches is two-storied, with angle dmalakas, and is topped 
by a kdrttimukha. The excavation is Gupta or early Calukyan, dating about 600®. 

Of caves in Kathiawad, the most interesting and beautiful is the two storeyed 
pillared hall in the Uparkot at Junagarh. The varied fluted columns, capitals with’* 
elaborate figure groups like Ajanta paintings, cornices with caitya--^vaAcm ifiches 
like those at Gop, the acanthus ornament of the pillar bases like the Bhumara 
lintel, all point to a late Gupta date. The excavation includes a bath and lacks the 
ordinary cells of a monastery; it would almost seem that it may have been the 
underground summer chamber of a palace. It is in any case one of the most 
elegant of all works of the Gupta period, and fully the equal of the fittle temple, 
no. 17 at Sanci*. The important group of cave and structural temples at Udayagiri, 
Bhopal, mostly Brahmanical, is nearly related to the same Sand type and that 
of the Tigowa series®. 

Several structural apsidal temples, planned like the caitja-cayts, have survived, 
including one Brahmanical example. At Ter (= Tagara), Sholapur District, the 
structural brick caitja-hzW, of fourth century . or perhaps earlier date, seems once 
to have enshrined a stiipa, and only subsequently to have been converted to Vais- 
nava usage. Characteristic external features are the barrel-roof, rounded at the 
rear end, and terminating above the entrance in a gable-end of ^■^7//)'^- window form, 
enclosing an architectural relief; roll mouldings; and walls decorated with simple 
pilasters. The mandapam is perhaps a Httle later in date®. At Chezarla, in the Kistna 
District, the Kapotesvara temple (fig. 147) is similarly a structural caitya-haSS., 
originally Buddhist and later converted to Hindu usage. Here the gable end is 
decorated with reliefs including both architectural forms and figures; the roll 
mouldings are more developed, but the wall is plain. Near this temple is a curious 
little rectangular cella recalling Indianesque types of Hanchei; and a number of 

For Ajanta see Fergusson, 2, vol. i; Fergusson and Burgess; and Burgess, 4. 

- For Bagh see Haidar; Luard; Dey. A full publication by the India Society is announced. 

3 Fergusson, 2, vol. i, p. 159; Burgess, 8, pi. 275. 

* Burgess, i. 

® Cunningham, 4, vol. IX. 

® Cousens, i. 


77 


small monolithic votive shrines, with domed roofs decorated with single caitja- 
arches, like the rock-cut PaUava shrines at Bhairavakonda in the Guntur District, 
and the Arjuna Ratha at MamaUapuram^. 

The Brahmanical Durga temple at Aihole (fig. 1 5 2) is probably of sixth century 
date, and rather early Calukya than Gupta, but is connected with the types now 
described. Entirely of stone, it follows the plan of the apsidal caitya^'n^s, but the 
roof is flat and constructed of stone slabs, a northern sikhara rises above the 
garhha-grha, and there is a verandah, roofed with sloping slabs, supported by 
massive square columns with heavy brackets. The whole stands on a high base- 
ment of several horizontal courses, of which one is fluted, another decorated with 
and another with reliefs^. 

Small, flat-roofed shrines consisting of a ceUa with almost plain walls, gene- 
rally with a shallow verandah, and often surrounded by a pillared hall, and with- 
out any kind of sikhara are typical of the early Gupta period. The beautiful httle 
shrine at SMcI, temple 1 7 (fig. 1 5 1), is a good example. Here the verandah pillars ex- 
hibit a typical development; the capitals are square and very massive, with addorsed 
animals now separated by a tree; this form is found also at Tigowa, Eran, Gafhwa, 
and Udayagiri. It is characteristic, too, that the fine of the verandah architrave 
is carried round the wall of the otherwise plain cella as a string course®. 

At Tigowa, C. P., there is a flat-roofed Hindu shrine of identical design; 
the roof slabs are fitted together by overlapping grooves, as in the case of many 
of the flat-roofed temples at Aihole. In the case of the Pataini Devi temple near 
Uchahara the roof consists of a single slab*. Other and simpler flat-roofed shrines 
are illustrated in the Gond temples of the Lalitpur District®. 

Two extremely interesting flat-roofed temples have been found at Bhumara® 
inNagodh State and at Nachna-Kuthara’ in Ajaigarh, Bundelkhand. A description 
of the former will suffice for both. The Bhumara Siva temple consists of a masonry 
cella {garhha-grha) with a flat slab-roof and a carved doorway having represen- "i 
tations of river-goddesses on the jambs and a fine bust of Siva, with flying figures, 
on the lintel. The ceUa contained a Siva-lingam of the type of the still finer example 
existing at Khoh in the same State. Around thtgarbha-grha are the scattered remains 
of a larger chamber which surrounded it, providing a roofed pradaksina patha, 

^ Burgess, 2, vol. I, p. 126; Longhurst, 3, pi. XIII; A. S. I., Southern Circle, A. R., 1917 — 18; 
Diez, p. 29. 

® Cousens, 4. 

^ Cunningham, 4, vol. X; Marshall, 5. 

^ Cunningham, 4, vol. IX. 

^ Mukerji. 

® Baneryi, 3. 

’ A. S. I., Western Qrcle, 1919, pi. XV — XVII and pp. 53, 60. 



and of a mandapam attached to and preceding this enclosure. These remains con- 
sist of a great variety of columns which are not monolithic, of richly carved lintels 
that supported the roofing slabs, of caitja-^rlvAo'w niches from the cornice, 
of parts of the doorway, and of carved slabs which decorated the lower part 
of the outer wall like a deep wainscot. Some of the gam figures have rdksasa 
faces on their bellies. There is a tendency to unrestrained development of 
arabesque^. 

The most interesting flat-roofed temple in the Dekkhan is the Lad Khan 
at Afliole (fig. 148). This temple, dating about 450 A. D. is very low and flat, 
its walls consisting of stone slabs set between heavy square pilasters with bracket 
capitals; roU-mouldings decorated with small well-spaced caitja-'iX<dQS,% are cha- 
racteristic of the roof. On the pillars of the porch are figures of the river-goddesses, 
which are most characteristic of Gupta work and persists into the mediaeval period, 
extending also to Java. On the roof is a small square ceUa of slab construction, 
with a porch, forming an independent shrine of the Sun. The walls have central 
projecting niches with rehefs. The windows are stone slabs, perforated in a 
variety of beautiful designs. Three other temples at Aihole have either never 
possessed, or did not originally possess a sikhara, that of Kont Gudi having been 
added as late as the tenth or eleventh century®. 

There are other low, massive, flat-roofed, cave-Uke temples, not unlike the 
Lad Khm, but provided with simple Nagara sikharas above the cella ; these shrines, 
originally Vaisnava, have been later converted to Saiva usage, and it is just pos- 
sible that their sikharas, together with that of the Durga temple, are later additions. 
The best examples of this group are the Hucchimalligudi (fig. 153), which is not 
at all unlike the well-known Parasuramesvara temple at Bhuvanesvara (fig. 216), 
but much more severe, and with only two courses between successive angle- 
dmalakas', and the temple in Field 

Of these pre- and early Calukyan temples at Aihole, some (Durga, Lad Khan, 
Hucchimalligudi, and Meguti) have shrines detached from the back wall, as at 
Bhumara and Gop, providing for pradaksind with the roofed area; others (Kont 
Gudi, etc. follow the mediaeval plan, in which the cella is connected with the 
back wall, so that pradaksind is only possible outside, in the open air. Where this 

‘ For Bhumara, see Banerji, 3. The rdksasa faces are found also in the Durga temple, 
Aihole, in Cave III at Aurangabad, and at Prambanam in Java. The motif seems to have origi- 
nated in Gandhata (Spooner, I, fig. 3). 

2 For the Lad Khan and other Aihole temples see Cousens, 4. The resemblance of the slab 
cella at Hanchei to the roof shrine of the Lad Khan wUl be remarked in respect of the construc- 
tion, with Bhumara as a very possible analogy for the surrounding building, which may have 
been of wood at Hanchei. 

® Cousens, 4; Fergusson, 2. 


79 



plan is followed in a cave, of course, circumambulation is altogether precluded. 
Both in caves and structural temples the two plans appear side by side during 
several centuries; the older arrangement, for example, persists at Elephanta, but 
it is doubtful if any later instance could be cited. 

The northern sikhara, as we have already seen in the case of several temples 
where it is an accessory rather than an essential, begins to appear in the late Gupta 
period. In more characteristic examples in the Ganges vaUey the sikhara and ceUa 
together form a tower, which may be provided with a porch, but forms the main 
part of the temple. These early towers are built up of elements similar in design 
to the cella itself, and with straight or nearly straight edges, and are thus nearer 
to the type of the Dieng Candi Bhima (fig. 346) than to the fully developed cur- 
vilinear form imder which the northern sikhara is most familiar. What may be 
regarded as a prototype cf the early towers in which the reduplication of the main 
structure is still quite apparent, may be studied in a Kusana railing pillar, J 24 
in the Mathura Museum (fig. 69)^, and still better in the “Bodhgaya plaque” 
(fig. 62). 

The Bhitargaon brick temple is a good example of the kind of tower referred 
to. The plan is square, with doubly recessed corners, double cornices, and a 
recessed frieze of carved brick. Above the double cornice rises the pyramidal 
roof with tiers of caitja-mchts in horizontal courses. The walls are decorated with 
terracotta panels of Brahmanical subjects. The general effect is not far removed 
from that of the early towers in Campa^. 

Other brick and stone towers of similar character but more developed are 
found at Sona Tapan and Chinpur near Bahkura, and several others at Man- 
bhum and Dalmi, all in Bengal. In the case of the brick Kevalesi shrine at Pujari 
Pali, Bilaspur District, the tower is provided with znglt-dmalakas on each 
storey®. 

The well-known Gupta DasavatMa temple at Deogarh, near Lalitpur, dating 
about 600, is of stone, with plain walls, except that on three sides there are re- 
cessed sculptured panels, representing the Gajendramoksa episode, Visnu-anan- 
tasayin, and a scene betwen two ascetics, and on the fourth a sculptured entrance 
with river-goddesses on the door jambs. The basement was decorated with fine 
panels representing Kdmdjana scenes, an almost unique instance of an arrangement 
quite common in Java. The tower was of several stories, with caitja-ztchts and 
2LX\^e.-dmalakas^ . 

' Vogel, 13, pi. III. 

2 Burgess, 8, pis. 303, 304; Cunningham, 4, vol. XI, pis. XIV — XVII; Vogel, 8. 

“ Some of these illustrated in Burgess, 8, pis. 288 — 290, 298, 300. 

^ Burgess, 8, pis. 248, 252; Mukherji. 


80 



The great Buddhist temple (fig. 210), known to archaeologists as the Mahabodhi, 
was most likely originally designated “Gandhakuti of the Vajrasan”^; as it now 
stands it is a restoration (1880 — 1881) of the Burmese restorations of 1105 and 
1298, and still earlier mediaeval renovations and restorations. It consists of a 
high straight-edged pyramidal tower of nine storeys, with an angle dmalaka at 
each stage, surmounted by a htJ with a fluted, bulbous, dmalaka-)^& lower mem- 
ber; this tower in its lower part, over the entrance, has tall narrow lancet opening, 
admitting light to the sanctum, and a part of the construction clearly shown in 
photographs taken before the last restoration consists of true arches. There is 
a porch on the east side, later than the main part of the shrine; and the whole 
stands on a single high pradaksind terrace. On the western edge of this terrace 
the B(?^//6i-tree was stiU growing until its decay and fall in 1876. 

This temple was certainly standing when Hsiian Tsang visited Bodhgaya in 
the seventh century; he describes it rather minutely and gives its dimensions 
practically as they now are, quoting the height exactly and the width approxima- 
tely^. Fa Hsien states that there existed a temple at each of the four sites at which 
the Four Great Events of the Buddha’s fife had taken place; proving that some 
temple existed here in the fifth century. Other considerations make it probable that 
the present temple, substantially in its present form, but of course without the later 
porch, was erected in the second century A. D., at any rate not later than the very be- 
ginning of the Gupta period. These reasons include (i) the presence of a coin 
of Huviska amongst the relics deposited at the foot of the interior Vajrasan (2) a 
coping inscription in Kus^a or very early Gupta characters, referring to the 
“Great Gandhakuti temple {pdsdda) of the Vajrasana” (3) a Kusana inscription 
on the edge of the outer Vajrasana placed against the back wall of the basement, on 
the ground level. Further, the “Bodhgaya plaque” (fig. 62) found at the Kumrahar 
site, Patna (Patahputra), and the Kus^a relief reproduced in fig. 69 both show that 
temples of this kind might very well have been built as early as the second century 
A.D. In all probability then the new temple was built to enshrine a Buddha image, 
at the time when images were coming into general use; it was built, of course, as 
Hsiian Tsang expressly states that it was built, on the original site, following 
the usual rule in such cases. The building of a roofed temple, however, involved 
the removal of the Bodhi-druma to its modern position on the edge of the terrace 
at the back of the temple; there could have been no objection to this, so long as 

* The words Vajrasana “adamantine seat” and Bodhi-manda “place of enlightenment” are 
both used by Hsiian Tsang to designate the seat occupied by the Bodhisattva on the occasion of 
the Great Enlightenment (Mahasambodhi). The term Gandhakuti used to designate a Buddhist 
temple is derived from the name of a cell occupied by the Buddha in his lifetime. For descriptions 
of the temple, see Cunningham, 3, and Bloch, 2; the former seems the better account. 

2 Beal, I, vol. II, p. 118. 



the Bodhi-manda was kept in its original place, where, indeed, Hsiian Tsang saw 
it. And in fact, Cunningham discovered behind the mediaeval grey sandstone 
Vajrasana in the ceUa, another plastered throne, and behind this a polished sand- 
stone slab resting on four pilasters exactly as represented in the Bharhut relief 
(fig. 41) and undoubtedly of Asokan age. 

The one other Vajrasana referred to above as the “outer Vajrasana”, found by 
Cunningham when the late mediaeval buttress of the back wail was removed, is 
large and beautifully decorated^, on its upper surface with a simple geometrical 
design of circles and squares, on its sides with hamsas and palmettes like those of 
some of the Asokan capitals. 

The famous centre of Buddhist learning at Nalanda, South Bihar, was founded 
by Narasirfaha Baladitya (467 — 473). Hsiian Tsang describes the great brick temple 
over three hundred feet in height, erected by this king, as resembling the tower 
at Bodhgaya, and says that it was exquisitely decorated and magnificently fur- 
nished. Nothing survives but the massive basement^ ; some of the niches on this 
basement representing fully developed curvilinear Nagara sikharas may be 
later additions. Nothing at Nalanda, the most famous of mediaeval monasteries 
and centres of learning, antedates the fifth century, or postdates the twelfth. 

The temple at Gop in Kathiawad (fig. 191) is more or less unique, but evi- 
dently connected in some way with the Kasmiri school of architecture. The square 
tower which is now its conspicuous feature was once surrounded by a flat-roofed hall 
providing for pradaksim under cover, concealing half its height; it is surmounted 
by a double pent-roof of the Kasmiri type, and decorated with large^^/^a-niches 
containing figures of deities. The basement of the outer structure, decorated with a 
gam frieze, still remains. The shrine is Brahmanical, and dates about the end of 
the sixth century, and is thus early mediaeval rather than Gupta properly so-called®. 

The hollow circular building at Rajagrha, known as the Maniyar Matha is 
quite unique; traditionally known as a treasury, it is just possible that it represents 
a colossal lingam like those at Fatehpur, near Baramula, Kasmir, and Tirupara- 
kunram near Madras. All that remains is the circular basement, with a small 
portion of the superstructure. All round the base are niches, separated by pi- 
lasters, and containing stucco images of fine and sensitive workmanship repre- 
senting a lingam, Banasura, a six-armed dancing Siva, and many Nagas and Na- 
ginis (fig. 176). A date between 250 and 500 A. D. has been suggested, the fifth 
century seeming most likely^. 

Cuniungham, 3, pi. XIII. It must be of early Sunga, if not Maurya date. 

- Burgess, 8, pis. 227, 228. 

^ Burgess, 2, and 8, pi. 266. 

■* Marshall, i. 


82 



We have already had occasion to refer to Nagara and Dravida slkharas. Both 
are towers rising above the garbha-grha of a temple, the chief difference being that 
the Nagara type comes to have a curvilinear form and forms a real spire, while 
the Dravida type retains its original terraced formation, with ranges of cells at 
each level. Much discussion has been devoted to the question of the origin of the 
Nagara curvilinear spire, which has variously been derived from the stiipa, the 
simple domed cell, and the bamboo processional car^. For the most part these 
theories represent deductions drawn from appearances presented by the fully 
developed form, not taking into account what may be called the primitives of 
the type. The original view propounded by Fergusson^ I believe to be the cor- 
rect one. This is that the Nagara spire, however elaborately developed, really 
represents a piling up of many superimposed storeys or roofs, much compressed. 
The key to this origin is the dmalaka\ properly the crowning element of a tower, 
its appearance at the angles of successive courses shows that each of these cor- 
responds in nature to a roof. Thus the Nagara and Dravida towers both originate 
in the same way, but in the case of the former the storeys are so compressed and 
multiplied that at last the vertical effect completely dominates that of its hori- 
zontal components, while in the latter the storeyed principle and horizontal lines 
are never lost sight of. In the later northern towers, indeed, the suppression of 
the horizontal elements in many late examples is carried so far as to produce a 
smooth-surfaced pyramid with continuous outlines unbroken by any angle- 
dmalaha. It may be remarked that the northern tower developes convex curves, 
while in the southern gopuras the ultimate outlines are concave. 

In both cases the aspiring aspect of the mediaeval towers contrasts most 
markedly with the static character of the early low flat-roofed temples. Just in the 
same way in Burma and Siam the stupa, originally a hemispherical dome with 
one umbrella and clearly differentiated division of parts, develops into soaring 
types like those of the Shwe Dagon at Rangoon, with a continuous convex curve 
from base to pinnacle. The change from horizontal and domed to vertical and 
pointed forms is the most conspicuous tendency represented in Indian architec- 
ture, and must reflect an emotional quahfication taking place in religious psycho- 
logy not unlike that which distinguishes Gothic from Romanesque. A parallel 
tendency in India in narrative art has been traced by Foucher, contrasting the re- 
serve of the earlier Jdtaka scenes with the emotional emphasis already so marked 
at Ajanta®. The same development can be followed in the literature, and no doubt, 
if we knew enough about it, could be recognized in music and dancing. 


6 * 


* The theories are summarised in Chanda, 2, with references. 

2 Fergusson, 2, vol. II, p. 119. This view is shared by M. Parmentier (6). 
’ Foucher, 4. 


85 



Indian palace architectute, with rare exceptions, mainly in Rajputana of late 
date, has always been one of wooden construction, and for this reason no very 
ancient examples have survived. But palace architecture is very well illustrated 
in the sculptures of Amaravati and in the paintings of Ajanta, and from these it is 
evident that a palace consisted essentially of connected groups of one or two- 
storeyed pillared halls with flat or pointed roofs, the wooden pillars and capitals, 
cornices, &c., being elaborately decorated with painting and carving. It is in 
fact just this kind of palace architecture that survives in Burma (Mandalay), Siam 
(Bangkok), Cambodia (Phnom Pen), Java (Yogyakarta and Surakarta) and in 
Japan (Kyoto); from these sources a very fair idea of the planning and appearance 
of much older Indian palaces can be gathered^. 

The classical palace was always provided with a picture gallery (citra-sald) 
and a concert-hall or theatre {samgitd-sdla, or ndtya-mandapdf . The former, of 
course, was a hall specially decorated with frescoes, such as we find it described in the 
Uttar a-'Kdma Carita. The latter was an open pillared hall, with a stage raised some- 
what above the level of the ground, and visible to the spectators from three sides, 
the “head of the stage” on the fourth side being a decorated partition shutting 
off the green-room. There was no curtain separating the stage from the audience, 
but two curtained doors led from the green-room to the stage, just as in a modern 
Chinese theatre, and it is with reference to these doors that we have the common 
stage direction “Enter with a toss of the curtain”. Another constructional feature 
that survives in Far East is the low railing that runs round the edge of the stage 
platform. The outer walls were solidly built of brick, and “like a mountain cave” 
i. e. an excavated vihdra^ without angles or projection, to the end that the voices 
of the performers and the low notes of the kutapa might be adequately heard. 

The general characteristics of Gupta sculpture have already been referred to. 
In the following paragraphs some of the more important examples are listed. 

(i) Buddhas at Mathura or of Mathura origin include a magnificent standing 
Buddha from the Jamalpur (Jail) mound (fig. 158), A 5 in the Mathura Museum, 
and a similar figure in the Indian Museum, Calcutta, both of the fifth century® ; 
another with webbed fingers, from the Katra mound, B 10 in the Lucknow Mu- 
seum, dated equivalent to 549/50 A. D.*; colossal reclining Buddha of the Pari- 
nirvana shrine at Kasia (Kusinagara), with fifth century inscription mentioning 
the donor, the Abbot Haribala and the sculptor, Dinna of Mathura®; seated Buddha 


^ For palaces in Burma, see Ko, 3; in Cambodia, Groslier, 3. 

2 Bharata, Nafja-sastray Ch. 2 (ed. Grosser, Paris, 1898). Cf. Mahavamsa, Ch. LXXIII, v. 82. 

Vogel, 13, p. 49, and pi. IX; Smith, 2, fig. 117; A. S. I., A. R., 1922—23, pi. XXXIX. 
‘ A. S. I., A. R., 1911— 12, p. 132. 

® Vogel, 3 ; Cunningham, 4, vol. XVIII, p. 35, and vol. XXII, p. 16. 



with shaven head (the only Gupta example) and webbed fingers (fig. 162), 
from Mankuwar near Allahabad dated equivalent to 448/49 A. D.^; seated 
inscribed Buddha from Bodhgaya, dated equivalent to 385 A. D.^; seated Buddha 
at S^cP. The two colossal Nagas, in Mathura stone, at Sanci may also be 
mentioned^. 

(2) Other Buddhist sculptures in stone include the weUknown seated Buddha 
from Sarnath (fig. 161)®; other Sarnath Buddhas and Bodhisattvas® ; the Sarnath 
lintel, with representations of Jambhala and Jdtaka scenes’; Buddha figures in 
rehef at Ajanta, cave XIX and Nagaraja group at the same site®; Buddha figures 
of the facades at Karll, Kanheri, &c.®; Avalokitesvara litany groups at Kanheri 
fig. 164), Ajanta Cave IV^®, and Aurangabad; Bodhisattva torso from Sanci in the 
Victoria and Albert Museum, London, early Gupta or perhaps late Kusana^L 

(3) Buddhist sculpture in metal: the most remarkable figure is the colossal 
(copper) image (fig. 160) from Sultanganj, Bhagalpur District, Bengal, nowin the 
Museum and Art Gallery, Birmingham, date ca. 400 A. D.^®. Other important 
examples include the richly decorated, copper and silver inlaid, brass figure 
(fig. 163) fromFatehpur, Kangra^®; the Boston bronze Buddha, said to have been 
found in Burma (fig. 159)^®; the rather clumsy statuettes from the B^da District, 
Bengali®; ^nd the fragments from Bezwadai®; small gold Buddha in the British 
Museum!’. 

(4) Brahmanical, &c. : colossal Varaha Avat^ relief at Udayagiri, Bhop^, 
about 400 A.D. (fig. 174)1®; Pauranik and epic panels of theGupta temple, Deogarh, 

* Smith, 2, p. 173 and fig. 119; Bloch in J. A. S. B.. LXVI, p. I, p. 283. 

Cunningham, 3, pi. XXV; A. S. I., A. R., 1922—23, pi. XXXVIII a, and p. 169. 

3 Marshall, 4, 5 and 10 (pis. i, 2). 

^ Marshall, 10. 

5 Sahni and Vogel, pi. X; Smith, 2, pi. XXXVIII; A. S. I., A. R., 1904—05, p. 81. 

® Sahm and Vogel, pi. XIII b, XX, etc.; Marshall and Konow; Vogel, 2; Hargreaves, 2 
pi. LXIII. 

’ Sahni and Vogel, pis. XXV — XXIX; Marshall and Konow. 

® Burgess, 8, pL 200; Coomaraswamy, 7, pi. 72. 

* Burgess, 8, pis. 168, 212. 

^0 Burgess, 8, pi. 185. 

11 Cunningham, 4, vol. X, pi. XXI; India Society, i; Smith, 2, p.64 (misdated). 

Smith, 2, p. 1 71 and fig. 118; Rupam, no. 21. A magnificent figure, seven and a half feet 
high and weighing over a ton. 

13 Vogel, 4. The ajouree pedestal is closely related to one found at Suvarnapura in Siam, 
J. S. S., vol. XIX, pi. XV. 

14 Coomaraswamy, 9, 2, p. 61 and pi. XXI. 

1® Smith and Hoey. 

1® Sewell, R., 2. Some perhaps later: inscriptions of tenth (?) century. 

17 Smith, 2, pi. LXXIV. 

1® Cunningham, 4, vol. x, pi. XVIII; Coomaraswamy, 7, ph99; Burgess, 8, pis, 216, 217. 


85 



early Gupta (fig. 167)^; Uma-Mahesvara group from Kosam (Kau^ambi) near 
Allahabad, dated equivalent to 458/59 A. D., now in the Indian Museum, Cal- 
cutta^ ; Nativity of Mahavira or Krsna from Pathari, in the Museum at Gw^ar 
(fig. 178)®; slab with flying Gandharvas and Apsaras from Sondani, in the Gw^ar 
Museum (fig. 173); pillars from Chandimau with scenes from the Kiratarjuniya of 
the Mahdbhdrata, in the Lucknow Museum* ; river goddess from Besnagar, in the 
Boston Museum (fig. 177)®; tor am pillars at Mandor, Jodhpur State, with Krsna 
Lila scenes (fig. 1 66)® ; pillars and architrave from Garhwa, in the Lucknow Mu- 
seum^; Narasimha from Besnagar, in the Gwaliar Museum (fig. 170); stucco re- 
liefs of the Maniyar Matha, Rajagrha (fig. 176)®; Karttikeya belonging to the Bha- 
rata Kala Parisad, Benares (fig. 175)®; the Bhumara and Khoh lingams and Ganesa*®; 
sculptures of the Badami caves and early temples at Aihole**; sculptures of the 
Ramesvara cave, Elura, especially the verandah pillars (fig. 190); small bronze of 
Brahma (fig. 168) from Mirpur Khas, in the Karachi Museum; upper part of a 
bronze Siva in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; bronze-coated iron 
plummet from the River Surma, Bengal, in the British Museum (fig. 169)**: 
sacrificial pillars {jupa) of Visnuvardhana at Bijayagarh, 371 A. D.*®. 

A colossal Hanuman from Parkham, D 27 in the Mathura Museum appears 
from the style and fine modeUing of the torso to be of Gupta age**. Four colossal 
images and groups at Rup Bas, Bharatpur State include an image of Baladeva 
with cobra hoods, over twenty seven feet in height, his wife Thakur Rani, a 

1 Burgess, 8, pis. 250—252; Smith, 2, pis. XXIV, XXV. 

^ Fleet, Gupta inscriptions, p. 256; Banerji, 4, pi. LXX b. 

’ Smith, 2, pi. XXVI. Probably rather later in date. 

^ Banerji, 2. 

® Smith, 2, fig. 112; Vogel, 18. 

® Bhandarkar, 2; Marshall and Sahni. 

’’ Smith, 2, figs. 1 14, 115; Burgess, 8, pis. 242, 243; Cunningham, 4, vol. X, pis. VI, VII. 
For another lintel with Mahdhharata scenes see Banerji, i, pi. LIV. For torana pillars like those 
of Garhwa, found at Bdsar, Cunningham, 4, vol. XI, pi. 13 and pis. VI, VII. 

® Smith, 2, fig. 1 13; Marshall, i. 

® Rupam, no. 21, 1925, p. 41. 

Banerji, 3. Another fine mukha-lingam at Ataria Khera, Nagodh State. 

“ Burgess, 8, pis. 267 — 274; Cousens, 4 (the four massive roof slabs, of which three are 
from the temple in Field 270, Aihole, reproduced in Cousens, 4, pi. LXXVI, and dating about 
600 are in the Prince of Wales Museum, Bombay; the fine roof slab (fig. 165) of Cousens, 4, fig. 6, 
may be still in situ. 

Coomaraswamy, 4, fig. 100. In the same volume, p. 77, there is reproduced a rubbing 
of a handsome Gupta seal in copper; the text should be understood as “Seal of the Warden of 
the Frontier of Srivadra”. 

A. S. I., A. R., 1902 — 03, p. 207. 

“ Vogel, 13, p. 100. An earlier example is illustrated in A. S. I., A. R iqa? 24 

pi. XXXV, K. > ^ 


86 



Naxayana with Laksmi over nine feet in height, and a group supposed to represent 
Narayana standing on the head of Yudhsthira, who is surrounded by the Five 
Pandavas. No information is available as to the style or date of these evidently 
important sculptures^. 

(5) Terracottas, mostly Brahmanical: panels of Brahmanical subjects, deco- 
rating the brick temple at Bhitargaoh^; Rdm^am subjects, Saheth-Maheth (Sra- 
vastP) ; large image of Hariti, and Buddha figures, at Kasia (Kusinagara)* ; Mirpur 
Khas, Buddhas and donor®; seals and small terracottas from Basarh (Vaisali)®; 
seals and small terracottas from Bhita^; figures from Kuruksetra, Delhi®; Bikanir 
(more likely late Kusana)®; carved and moulded bricks at BilsaP®. 

Indian literature of all kinds and at all periods, at any rate after the Maurya, 
makes incidental references to painting. It may be taken for granted that from 
a very early period, not only were sculptures and architectural details covered 
with thin plaster and coloured, but that the flat walls of temples and palaces were 
decorated within and without with pictures or with painted “wreaths and creepers”. 
In the Epics we often hear of painted halls or chambers {citra-sdla) in palaces. 
A whole scene of Bhavabhuti’s Uttara-Rdma-Carita, dating from the close of the 
Gupta period, is laid in such a gallery, where Rama and Sita are represented as 
viewing newly executed paintings of scenes from their own life, which awaken 
in Sita a longing to revisit the forests, creating in her a “latent impression” 
(bhdvandf^. The Visnudharmottaram distinguishes the kinds of painting appro- 
priate to temples, palaces and private houses; and applies the theory of rasa to 
painting. Paintings are there classified as satja, vainika, ndgara and misra^ which I 
am inclined to render as true, lyrical, secular and mixed, mainly with reference 
to their themes 1®. The same text devotes considerable space to the question of 
foreshortening as applied to the features and limbs; and lays great stress on ad- 
herence^ canonical proportions. The necessity of giving expression to the move- 

1 Cunningham, 4, vol. VI, p. 21, gives only a list of the images and their dimensions. 

2 Vogel, 8 ; Cunningham, 4, vol. XI, pis. XIV — XVII. 

3 Vogel, 7. 

** Sastri, i; Vogel, 5. In the Lucknow Museum. 

5 Cousens, 5. 

® Bloch, I. 

^ Marshall, 3. 

3 Cunningham, 4, vol. XIV, pi. XXVII. 

9 A. S. i., A. R., 1917 — 18, pt. I, pi. XIII; and see page 69. 

Cunningham, 4, vol. XL 

Belvalkar, p. 26 ( = Act i, v. 39). For painting representing events in the life of a still 
living king, cf. Mahdmmsa, Ch. LXXIII, v. 83. 

12 Satya seems to mean here “true to life, realistic”, perhaps with reference to portraiture. 
Vainika suggests pictures of musical modes (cf. p. 129, note i). Ndgara perhaps = erotic; 
ndgarika (see p. 88) might be translated “man about town”. 


87 


ment of life {cetand) is emphasized; he understands painting who can represent 
the dead without life movement, the sleeping possessed of it. Finally it is said, 
with good reason inasmuch as both are occupied with the exact expression of 
emotion, that without a knowledge of dancing {nrtja-sdstrd) it is hardly possible 
to understand the true skill of painting^. 

Painting appears in all lists of the sixty-four kalds, the fine arts or accomplish- 
ments^. Portrait painting, usually from memory, and on wooden panels, is a 
device constantly employed in classical Sanskrit plays®. The Kdmasutra of Vat- 
syayana, a work essentially of the Gupta period, mentions the drawing panel, paints 
and brushes as parts of the ordinary furniture of a gentleman’s {ndgarika) chamber 
and taken in its context this throws some light on the meaning of the term ndgara 
as used to define a kind of painting. It is quite evident that, in the Gupta 
period at least, painting was not exclusively an ecclesiastical, but also a secular 
art, practised by amateurs as well as by professional members of gilds; it was 
a social acomplishment, at least among princes and ladies of the court, and 
in the “fast set”^. 

Yasodhara’s commentary on the Kdmasutra refers to the Sadafiga, the Six 
Limbs or Canons of Painting, viz. Kiipa-bheda, Pramdnam, Bhdva, LMvanya-jojanam, 
Sddrsja, and Varnika-hhanga. It is impossible to accept Tagore’s subjective inter- 
pretation of these terms® ; they can be far better understood in a purely practical 
sense as Distinction of Types, Ideal Proportion, Expression of Mood (with 
reference to the theory of rasa). Embodiment of Charm, Points of View 
(with reference to stance, sthdnam) and Preparation of Colours (grinding, leviga- 
tion, &c.). Thus understood, moreover, these subdivisions of the art are just those 
which the technical treatises, Visnudharmottaram and Silparatnam treat of at greater 
length, and they might be inserted in such works as paragraph headings. 
There cannot be traced here any parallel to the Chinese Six Canons of Hsieh 
Ho; a likeness to Chinese ideas can be much more probably recognized in 
connection with what is said about cetand, the movement of life, in the Visnu- 
dharmottaranfi . 


1 Vinatu nrtyaJastrena citrasiitram sudurvidam, Visnudharmottaram, III, II, 3. The Vistiu- 
dharmottaramises. translation, Kranirisch)is a mediaeval composition apparently embodying older, 
and probably Gupta materials. A later mediaeval text by 5 ri Kumara, the Silparatna, Ch. 64, 
deals in a similar fashion with painting; translated by Coomaraswamy, 13. Keyserling has 
remarked of Indian dancing and religious images the “identity of the spirit in both appearances”. 

Venkatasubbhiah; Schmidt, 2, p. 45. 

* Saunders. 

* Schmidt, 2, p. 61. 

® Tagore, 2. 

* For a valuable discussion of pramana, see Masson-Oursel. 


88 



A special kind of painting depicted the reward of good and evil deeds in the 
other world, and was executed on scrolls called Yamdpata which were exhibited 
with accompanying explanatory monologue. This format and presentation sur- 
vive in the Javanese Wayang Beber.^ 

Pain tin g of the Gupta period is preserved in two of the Ajanta vihdras and 
in one caitya-hsiSS. as follows:® 

Cave XVI, ca. 500 A. D.: A Buddha triad, the Sleeping Women, the Dying Prin- 
cess. The Boston Museum fragment is also from this vihdra. 

Cave XVII, ca. 500 A. D.: Wheel of Causation, Seven Buddhas, “Ceylon Battle”, 
Return to Kapha vstu, Abhisekha scenes, love scene (fig. 179), Gandharvas 
and Apsarases (fig. 1 80), and the Mahahamsa, Matyposaka, Ruru, Saddanta, Sibi 
(gift of eyes with inscription), Visvantara (fig. 182), and Nalagiri Jdtakas. 
Cave XIX, caityaAx-aB., ca. 550 A. D. : numerous Buddhas, and another Return to 
Kapilavastu. 

Another group of Buddhist waU-paintings, fewer in number and on the whole 
less well preserved is found in the excavated vihdras at Bagh, about 375 kilome- 
tres north of Ajanta, and especially in Cave IV. (fig. 183)®. 

Jaina paintings of similar character, and of great interest, have lately been 
discovered by M. Jouveau-Dubreuil at Sittana vasal, Pudukottai State, near 
Tanjore, and assigned by him to the seventh century^. 

The technique of the painting at Ajanta, and of Indian wall-painting generally 
is as follows : the surface of the hard porous rock was spread over with a layer of 
clay, cowdung and powdered rock, sometimes mixed with rice-husks, to a thick- 
' ness of from three to twenty millimetres. Over this was laid a thin coat of fine white 
lime-plaster which was kept moist while the colours were applied, and afterwards 
/ lightly burnished. It should be observed that practically all sculptures and 
sculptured surfaces were covered in the same way with a thin plaster slip and 
, coloured. The underdrawing is in red on the white plaster surface, then comes 
a thinnish terraverde monochrome showing some of the red through it, then the 
local colour, followed by a renewed outline in brown or black, with some shading, 
the latter employed rather to give some impression of roundness or relief, than to 
indicate any effect of light and shade. The bold freedom of the brush strokes 
seems to show that all the work was freehand, or if any use was made of stencils, 

1 Mudra-raksasa of Visakhadatta, act. i; Groenevelt. See also page an. 

2 Most of the Ajanta paintings have been published from photographs or copies: see 
Burgess, 4; Griffiths; India Society, i; Goloubew, i; Coomaraswamy, 10, pL 15; Dey (the 
frontispiece, representing the Return to Kapilavastu a monumental composition, should be specially 
noted); Kokka Magazine Nos. 342, 345, 374. For the earlier and later paintings see pages 39, 98. 

3 Dey; Haidar; Luard; Burgess, 4. 

* Jouveau-Dubreuil, 3. 




89 



freely redrawn. It is difficult to understand how the work can have been done in 
such dimly lighted halls^. 

The best general description of the paintings has been given by Lady Herring- 
ham^ : “The outline is in its final state firm, but modulated and reahstic, and not 
often like the calligraphic sweeping curves of the Chinese and Japanese. The 
drawing is, on the whole, hke mediaeval Itahan drawing . . . The artists had a 
complete command of posture. Their knowledge of the types and positions, 
gestures and beauties of hands is amazing. Many racial types are rendered; the 
features are often elaborately studied and of high breeding, and one might call it 
stylistic breeding. In some pictures considerable impetus of movement of different 
kinds is well suggested. Some of the schemes of colour composition are most 
remarkable and interesting, and there is great variety. There is no other really 
fine portrayal of a dark race by themselves . . . The quality of the painting varies 
from sublime to grotesque, from tender and graceful to quite rough and coarse. 
But most of it has a kind of emphatic, passionate force, a marked technical s kill 
very difficult to suggest in copies done in a slighter medium”^. Mr. Dey writes: 
“It is impossible for anyone who has not seen them with his own eyes to realise 
how great and the paintings in the caves are; how wonderful in their simpli- 
city and religious fervor”*. 

It would be an error, however, to regard this appearance of “simplicity and 
rehgious fervor” as in any sense primitive or naive; a more conscious, or, indeed, 
more sophisticated art could scarcely be imagined. Despite its invariably reli- 
gious subject matter, this is an art “of great courts charming the mind by their 
noble routine”®; adorned with alamhdras and well acquainted with bhdva-bheda. 
The famiharity with gesture is a matter of scholarship, rather than of happy in- 
spiration; and this illustrates what the author of the Vimudharmottaram has to 
say on the relationship of dancing (acting) and painting. 

The specifically rehgious element is no longer insistent, no longer antisocial; 
it is manifested in fife, and in an art that reveals life not in a mode opposition to 
spirituahty, but as an intricate ritual fitted to the consummation of every perfect 
experience. The Bodhisattva is born by divine right as a prince in a world luxu- 

1 For the technique generally see A. S. L, A. R., 1916 — 17, pt. I; India Society, 2; Dey, 
p. 237; and cf. Coomaraswamy, 12, 13. 

- India Society, 2. 

® India Society, 2, p. 18. 

^ Dey, p. 51. 

^ Bana, Harsa-carita, transl. Cowell and Thomas, 1897, p.33. The Harsa-canta, KadamharJ, 
and the works of Kalidasa and other classic Sanskrit dramatists, and the later Ajanta paintings all 
reflect the same phase of luxurious aristocratic culture. In many matters of detail the painting 
and literature supply a mutual commentary. 



riously refined. The sorrow of transience no longer poisons life itself; life has 
become an art, in which mortality inheres only as karund-rasa in a poem whose 
sthayi-hhdva is sriigdra. The ultimate meaning of life is not forgotten, witness the 
great Bodhisattva^, and the Return to Kapdavastu^; but a culmination and a per- 
fection have been attained in which the inner and outer life are indivisible; it is 
this psycho-physical identity that determines the universal quahty of Gupta 
painting. All this is apparent, not in the themes of the pictures, which are no other 
than they had been for at least five centuries preceding Ajanta, and no other than 
. they have remained to this day wherever specifically Buddhist art has survived, 

but intrinsically in the painting itself. Nor is there any stronger evidence of the 
I profundity of recognition characteristic of this golden age, than that afforded by 
its extensions in south-eastern Asia and the Far East; the Stoclet Bodhisattva 
from Funan is fully the equal of any painting at Ajanta. Far-Eastern races have 
^ developed independently elements of culture no less important than those of India ; 
T. but almost all that belongs to the common spiritual consciousness of Asia, the 
ambient in which its diversities are reconcilable, is of Indian origin in the Gupta 
period. 

^ Figure i8i. 

^ Dey, Frontispiece. 



9 ^ 



PART IV; 


EARLY MEDIAEVAL, MEDIAEVAL, RAJPUT 
PAINTING AND LATER ARTS AND CRAFTS 


EARLY MEDIAEVAL: 

HARSA OF KANAUJ; EARLY CALUKYAS; RASTRAKOTAS; 

AND PALLAVAS 

Largely as a result of the Hun invasions of the fifth century the empire of 
the Guptas become reduced; the Huns, however, were definitely repulsed in 528 
and a Later Gupta dynasty survived in Magadha, 535 — 720. Meanwhile in the 
first half of the seventh century, Harsavardhana of Thanesar (= Sthanvisvara) 
and Kanauj (606 — 647), revived the glories of the Gupta empire, ruling over the 
greater part of northern India down to the Narmada, the boundary of the Calukya 
do mini on of his great contemporary and enemy, Pulakefin II (608 — 642). From 
the standpoint of art history these two reigns have generally been included in the 
Gupta period, a position justified by the fact of the actual persistence of Gupta 
culture. The three deities of Harsa’s family were Siva, the Sun, and Buddha; 
he erected costly temples for the service of each. In later years he more particu- 
larly followed Mahayana Buddhism. 

The famous monasteries and Buddhist university of Nalanda were at the 
zenith of their glory in the seventh century. Hsiian Tsang describes their magni- 
ficence: 

“The whole establishment is surrounded by a brick waU. One gate opens 
into the great college, from which are separated eight other halls standing in the 
middle. The richly adorned towers, and the fairy-like turrets, Uke pointed hill- 
tops, are congregated together. The observatories seem to be lost in the vapours 
of the morning, and the upper rooms tower above the clouds. From the windows 
one may see how the winds and the clouds produce new forms, and above the 
soaring eaves the conjunctions of the sun and moon may be observed. And then 
we may add how the deep, translucent ponds bear on their surface the blue 
lotus, intermingled with the Kie-ni {kanaka) flower, of deep red colour, and at 
intervals the Mangroves spread over all their shade. 



All the outside courts, in which are the priests’ chambers are of four stages. 
The stages have dragon- {makard) projections and coloured eaves, the pearl-red 
pillars, carved and ornamented, the richly adorned balustrades, and the roofs 
covered with tiles that reflect the Hght in a thousand shades, these things add to 
the beauty of the scene”^. 

Idling gives another, less picturesque, but hardly more explicit description. 
Most of the monasteries thus described may have been of late Gupta date. Hsiian 
Tsang, however, also describes a mag nifi cent copper image of Buddha, eighty 
feet in height, enshrined in a temple of six storeys, as having been set up by Pur- 
navarman, early in the seventh century, and a great and much revered image of 
Tara close by. The super-colossal bronzes of Nara must have been made in imi- 
tation of some such figures as Purnavarman’s Buddha. 

Very probably the two elegantly decorated reliefs, with kimaras and lotuses, 
which form the facing slabs of a low cdbutra at the lowest level of Site I at Ndanda 
date from the early seventh century^. Site II is represented only by another plinth, 
but this is decorated with 21 1 sculptured panels of sixth or seventh century 
date; these panels represent gods, animals, mythical creatures, and geometric 
ornament®. 

Kings of the Valabhi dynasty had long been reigning in Surastra (Kathiawad), 
Sind and Gujarat. Harsa made himself master of Valabhi in 635, and in Hsiian 
Tsang’s time it was ruled by his son-in-law. Hsiian Tsang de cribes Valabhi 
and Western Malwa as centres of Buddhist learning comparable in importance 
with Nalanda. The city was overthrown by the Arabs in 770, and from that time 
Anhilavad-Patan (Gujarat) became the leading city of Western India until in the 
fifteenth century, it was succeeded by AhmadabM. 

No sharp line of division can be drawn between late Gupta art and that of 
the early seventh century. The brick temple of Laksmana at Sirpur (fig, 186), 
Raipur District*, however, one of the most beautiful in all India, may perhaps be 
assigned to the reign of Harsa; the temple is unsurpassed in the richness and re- 
finement of its ornament, and it is fairly well preserved. The cella is decorated 
with false windows (very like those of the Bayang tower in Cambodia) and caitja- 

^ Beal, 2, p. Ill- The Saiva king ^asanka of Central Bengal had destroyed the Bodhi tree 
at Bodhgaya and persecuted the Buddhists and broken up monasteries throughout Bihar (an 
example of intolerance almost umque in India), about 600. The condition of Nalanda as described 
by Hsiian Tsang must have been due in the main to the benefactions of Purnavarman and other 
local rajas of Magadha, and perhaps in part to Harsa himself. 

2 A. S. I., A. R., 1921 — 22, pi. VII. 

® A. S. L, A. R., 1915 — 16, p. 12, and A. S. I., A. R., 1915 — 16, Eastern Circle, p. }6S. 

* Longhurst, i. This temple has more recently been assigned to the ninth cen . ary in A. S. I., 
A. R., 1923, — 24 p. 28. 


93 



window niches enclosing architectural reliefs. The roof, of which the summit is 
lost, consisted of several stories, of which the lowest very exactly repeats the lines 
of the ceUa below, without curvature, while those above carry large centrally 
placed caitja-^mAo^ arches in addition to smaller niches of the same type. There 
seems to have been an angle dmalaka above each story, and no doubt a larger 
dmalaka crowned the summit. The general effect is not unlike that of Candi Bima, 
but much richer. The whole was originally covered with stucco, which may 
have been coloured. The triangular window above the entrance is characteristic 
of many other late Gupta or early Mediaeval temples, including that of Bodhgaya. 
The hntel of the stone doorway bears a representation of the Birth of Brahma. 

Certainly falling in the reign of Harsavardhana is the octagonal Mundesvari 
temple, near Bhabua in the Shahabad District^. 

The existing remains of an apsidal c'a/^a-hall (fig. 149), temple 18 at Sand, 
date from the seventh century, and may well fall within the reign of Harsa. Most 
of the monolithic columns of the nave, seventeen feet in height, with their archi- 
traves, are still standing. The roof was originally of wood, and covered with tiles. 
The apse itself was enclosed by a solid wall, broken only by windows. These 
remains stand on the site of three older floors and foundations, of which the 
lowest dates back to the Maurya period, while the uppermost is Gupta — 
illustrating the very common case in which an existing stone temple occupies the 
site of earUer wooden structures of the same type. Sixth and seventh century 
SCTilpture is represented at SmcI by detached images “infused with the same 
spirit of calm contemplation, of almost divine peace, as the images of the fourth 
and fifth centuries, but they have lost the beauty of definition which the earlier 
artists strove to preserve, and, though sdll graceful and elegant, tend to become 
stereotyped and artificial”^. 


EARLY CALUKYA 

It would be less logical to include the early Calukyan and Pallava temples in 
a “Late Gupta” classification, inasmuch as these represent a relatively independent 
development mainly of southern traditions. Of pre-Calukyan times, in which were 
built the fifth-sixth century temples of Aihole, already referred to, very little is 
known. The following are the leading events of Early Calukyan history: 

Pulakesin I (550 — 566), of Rajput origin, foimded the dynasty, with a capi- 
tal at Badami, within a few miles of Aihok and Pattakadal. Pulakesin II (608 — 642) 
had another capital at Nasik. In 61 1 he conquered the old Andhra and now Pal- 


94 


1 A. S. I., A. R., 1902 — 03, p. 42; 1923 — 24, p. 25. 
- Marshall, 4 and 5, p. 22. 




lava country of Vengi between the Godavari and Kistna, and here his brother 
founded the Eastern Calukya dynasty in 615. In 620 he repulsed Harsa. In 642 
he was defeated and presumably slain by the Pallava king Narasirhhavarman I 
at Bad^. Vikramaditya I (655 — 680) captured the Pallava capital Kancipuram, 
an exploit repeated by Vikramaditya II (733 — 746) in 740. In 733 the dynasty 
was overwhelmed by the Rastrakutas. 

Early C^ukyan structural architecture is represented by the old brick temples 
of Uttaresvara and KMesvara at Ter^, and more fuUy by the many shrines of 
Aihole, Pattakadal and Badami. Of the temples at Aihole, those which can be 
dated before 600 have already been referred to; of others, the unfinished Jaina 
Meguti temple with the shrine isolated from the outer wall, dated 634, seems 
to be the earliest. Of nearly the same date (ca. 625) is the small, exquisitely pro- 
portioned and magnificendy situated Malegitti Siv^aya at Badami (fig. 187)^. 

The most important of the temples at Pattakadal date from the first half of 
the eighth century and show the strongest possible evidences of Pallava influence. 
The great Virupaksa temple (fig. 188)®, dedicated to Siva asLokesvara by the queen 
of Vikramaditya II, and to be dated about 740, was most likely built by workmen 
brought from Kancipuram, and in direct imitation of the Kailasanatha at K^ci- 
puram, where an inscription ofVikramaditya engraved at the time of his conquest, 
ca. 740, is to be found. The main shrine is distinct from the mandapam, but has 
a pradaksind passage; the pillared mandapam has solid walls, with pierced stone 
windows. The square sikhara consists of clearly defined storeys, each of consi- 
derable elevation. Caitja-'ff 'mdow motifs are much used and there are many sculp- 
tured lintels, slabs and monolithic pillars; the sculptures include representations 
of Siva, Nagas and Naginis, and B^mdyana scenes. Like other early Dravidian 
temples, it is built of very large, closely- jointed blocks of stone without mortar. 
The architect, Gunda, received the title of Tribhuvanacarya. One of the noblgst 
structures in India, this is the only ancient temple at Pattakadal stiU in use. Very 
much in the same style, but with an open mandapam, is the neighbouring Sariigames- 
vara temple, perhaps forty years earlier in date^. 

1 Cousens, i, and for the architecture of Western India generally, Cousens, 6. 

““ Fergusson, vol. i, p. 356, and pi. VIII: Jouveau-Dubreuil, i, vol. i, p. 179, note, and 
pi. LXII (sculptures). This masterpiece of Dravidian architecture is the only structural temple 
in the style of the MamaUapuram rathas now surviving; it is of pure early Pallava type, which 
may have first affected the Calukya as a result of Pulakesin II ’s conquest of Vengi in 6ii. 

3 Fergusson, 2, vol. I, p. 3 5 3 ; Jouveau-Dubreuil, i, vol. i, p. 179, and pi. LXIII — the latter 
regards this temple as the type of the Pattakadal (early Calukyan) style combining the Dravidian 
(Pallava) exterior with northern details (particularly as regards the pillars). 

* For plans and illustrations of the seventh and eighth century temples of Badami, Aihole 
and Pattakadal above described, see Fergusson, 2; and Burgess, i. The pre-Calukyan shrines are 
illustrated and described by Cousens, 4 and 8. 


95 



The Papanatha temple, about 735, almost contempotaty with the Virupaksa 
is in a different style, with a true Aryavarta sikhara (of early type with angle 
dmalakas on every third course), and with wall niches of corresponding form; 
this temple may fairly be described as a cross between the Dravidian and Arya- 
varta styles, a feature which is really the most obvious characteristic of the Ca- 
lukya style. 

Four cave temples at Badami date from the early Calukyan period. Of these. 
Nr. 3 (Vaisnava) is of special importance, as it is exactly dated (578 A. D.), 
and contains some admirable reliefs (Visnu seated on Ananta, and a Narasimha, 
both in the verandah); the pillars of the verandah are decorated with triple 
brackets ornamented with magnificent human figures in the fuU bloom of 
Gupta abundance. This is probably the earliest of the four caves; the Jaina 
cave, like another at Aihole, contains figures of Tirthamkaras, and is probably 
the latest^. 

Most of the Buddhist caves at Aurangabad are not apsidal caitja-hs&s but 
excavated pillared mandapams with a shrine either isolated or placed in the back 
wall, and containing a Buddha seated in pralamhapdda dsana, “European fashion”. 
Caves I, n and VII may date from the end of the sixth century or the early seventh. 
In Cave III there are very vmusual groups of male and female worshipping figures 
in full round sculpture, kneeling towards the image; these layfolk doubtless re- 
present the donors. The figure sculptures in this group of caves are remarkable 
for the heavy and elaborate headdresses, in which curled and bulky wigs play an 
important part. The physical type is a little unusual, too, but in respect of the 
full drooping lower lip recalls the Mahesa of Elephanta. In Cave III there is a 
remarkable relief representing the “Litany of Avalokitesvara” the deity being 
surrounded by representations of suppliants suffering from various misfortunes; 
tl>e most hteral visual translation of a prayer imaginable. In general the pillars, 
capitals and brackets, which are of great variety and beauty, resemble those of the 
latest caves at Ajanta (I — V and XXI — XXVI). Fergusson considers that these 
caves, which both in date and place are certainly Early Calukyan rather than Gupta, 
may be as late as the seventh or eighth century; but the fact that in Caves III and 
VII we find pillar brackets with small struts adorned with human figures, lik e 
those of the Ramesvara cave at Elura and Cave III at Badami seems to indicate 
a nearly contemporary date for all these excavations^. 

The following Brahmanical caves at Elura date from the early Calukyan 
period, ranging between 630 and 730, if not, perhaps, a century earlier; Das 

^ The Badami caves are illustrated in Burgess, i and 8, vol. ii, pis. 269 — 272. 

2 The Aurangabad caves are illustrated in Burgess, 3. The type represents a survival of 
that of the Sahci torana Vrksaka brackets. 

96 



Avatira, Ravana ka Khai, Dhumar Lena, and Ramesvara. The Ramesvaram 
verandah (fig. 190) is adorned with massive pillars with pot and foliage capitals, 
and magnificently decorated with bracket figures of Devatas or Vrksakas, accom- 
panied by dwarfs, under mango-trees in full fruit; at each end of the verandah 
are river-goddesses. One of the finest sculptures within represents a four-armed 
dancing Siva. The Das Avatara, in which Saiva and Vaisnava sculptures appear 
impartially, consists of two storeys, each consisting of a large pillared hall, of 
which the walls are lined with niches containing the sculptures, amongst others, 
one of the finest of this period, the well known “Death of Hiranyakasipu”^ ; in 
this relief, Visnu appears in the Narasiriiha Avatara and lays his hand upon the 
s hrinkin g figure of the impious Icing. In front of the cave a mass of the living 
rock has been left, in the shape of a structural mandapam. 

In this connection it may be remarked that the Brahmans did not begin to 
make excavated shrines, whether underground or monolithic, much before the 
sixth century nor continue to do so much after the eighth, and that of over twelve 
hundred “cave” temples in India not many more than a hundred are Brahmanical, 
while nine hundred are Buddhist and the re mai nder Jaina. AH cave temples are 
more or less direct imitations of structural buildings. But while in the course 
of seven or eight centuries something like a Buddhist “cave style” had been 
evolved, at least so far as the pillars are concerned, the Brahmanical caves, temples 
and monohths are imitations of structural shrines of the fully evolved types 
existing in the sixth century. The inference seems to be that the evolution of 
structural temple architecture before the late Gupta period took place mainly in 
connection with the necessities of Brahmanical cults. The square-roofed cella 
with flat roof, with or without a porch, and with or without a surrounding 
chamber may have been a specifically Hindu type, the apsidal caitya may have been 
a specifically Buddhist type; but it would be very rash to assert that this must 
have been the case, or that the Hindus borrowed extensively from the Buddhists, 
in view of the fact that in all periods for which adequate evidence is available we 
find that architectural style is a function of time and place, not of sectarian differ- 
entiation. 

The square flat-roofed cella may perhaps be derived from the “prehistoric” 
dolmens which are so abundant in many parts of India; in these in any case we 
find the most primitive form of the slab construction — sometimes a single slab 
covering the roof — which is so characteristic of Hindu architecture. To judge 
from its wide distribution in the Gupta period this may at one time have been the 
nearly universal form of the Hindu temple®. 


7 


* Coomaraswamy, 7, pi. XLIII. 

* For a discussion of dolmen origins see Longhurst, 4. 


97 



The next stage (e. g. Bhumara) surrounded the cella (^garbha-grhd) with a 
pillared hall, permitting circumambulation under cover; and it is this stage which 
we find generally reproduced in caves such as the Dumar Lena at Elura and the 
great Saiva shrine at Elephanta. The next step (but all these stages overlap) is to 
place the shrine in the back wall of the temple, with the result that in a structural 
temple circumambulation can only take place in an external verandah or on a 
terrace plaform, and in a cave becomes impossible. In the meanwhile a tendency 
was developing to emphasize the importance of the cella by a duphcation of the 
roof above it (as at Gop, Aihole, &c.), and this led to the development of the 
two sikharas, Aryavarta and Dravidian. (Ndgara and Dravida) Prototypes of 
the various roof forms which were thus, by reduphcation, developed into towers, 
occur abundantly in the early rehefs. 

At this point it will also be convenient to refer to the pillars of caves and 
structural temples. In the north, in the Gupta and Early Mediaeval period we 
find two forms fuUy developed ; both square-based, but one having a ribbed cushion 
capital, the ribs divided by a plain horizontal fillet, the other characterised by 
the “pot- and-foliage” capital (fig. 190). The former bears some relation on the 
one hand to the bulbous lotus capital of Asokan pillars, and on the other to the 
dmalaka finials of Aryavarta sikharas, the latter is undoubtedly developed from 
the lotus-decorated partially chamfered square pillars familiar in early Buddhist 
railings and caves^. In Early Calukyan the tendency is to employ these forms in 
combination with a construction in other respects Dravidian (Pallava); even the 
Rastrakuta Kadasa at Elura is northern in this sense. These Northern capitals, 
as is naturally the result of their cave development, are at first extremely massive; 
in mediaeval architecture the pot-and-foliage type becomes almost universal, be- 
coming more and more slender, until we find such forms as those of the Arhai 
Din ka Jhompra at Ajmir (a mosque constructed from the remains of Hindu 
shrines), or the Surya Temple at Osia. 

At Ajanta, caves I — Y and XXI — XXVI (all vihdras with the exception of 
one caityd) date from the early seventh century. The paintings in I and II are re- 
ferred to below. Caves IV and XXIV are incomplete, but would have been the 
most richly decorated of the whole Ajanta series (figs. 156, 157); the details of 
XXIV are so hke those of Cave III at Aurangabad that they must be of similar 
date, and much the same applies to the others. There is a large Parinirvana image 
in Cave XXVI. At Nasik, Cave XVII, containing many figures of Buddha, 
including one colossal Parinirvana image, and with pillars similar to those of 
Elephanta and the Brahmanical caves at Elura, dates from about 600 or a little later. 

‘ It should be noted that the Aryavarta is a late — certainly not earlier than lateKusana 

— development, and cannot be derived from Assyrian forms. 

98 



The paintings in vihdras I and II, at Ajanta^, hardly to be distinguished in 
style from those of the Gupta period strictly defined as such, include the follow- 
ing subjects: 

Cave I, ca. 600 — 650 A. D., Great Bodhisattva (fig. 181), Mara-dharsana, Baccha- 
nalian scene (Pancika, not a “Persian embassy”) on ceiling, love scenes, Sibi 
(weighing scene) and Naga Jdtakas, and ceiling decoration (fig. 185). 

Cave II, ca. 600 — 650 A. D., Great miracle at Sravasti, Indra-loka scenes, palace 
scenes, Ksantivadin and Maitribala Jdtakas, and decorative panels on ceiling. 
Of all these, the Great Bodhisattva (to judge from the blue lotus held in the 
hand, Avalokitesvara) is perhaps the most impressive, perfectly realizing the con- 
ception of one born by right of virtue to the enjoyment of all that the world can 
offer — and in this age the world could offer great things to an Indian prince — 
and yet preoccupied with the one ruling passion of compassion. Of the ceiling 
paintings in Cave I, representing drinking scenes, and so often described as 
pictures of the Persian embassy received by Pulakesin in 625 or 626, it may be 
remarked that as with the other paintings, the subject is Buddhist. These are 
really Bacchanalian scenes of the type that recurs in Buddhist art from the early 
Kusana period onwards, the personage carousing being Pancika^. 

RASTRAKGTAS 

The Rastrakutas succeeded the Calukyas in the western Dekkhan in 75 5 and 
made their capital at Malkhed. The Kailasanatha at Elura (fig. 192) is due to 
Krsnall (ca. 757 — 783). This famous rock-cut shrine is a model of a complete 
structural temple, and may be a copy of the Papanatha at Pattakadal. The whole 
consists of a linga shrine with Dravidian sikhara, a flat-roofed manjapam supported 
by sixteen pillars, and a separate porch for the Nandi, surrounded by a court, 
entered through a low gopuram; five detached shrines are found on the edge of 
the perambulation terrace of the vimdna proper, and in one corner of the court 
there is a chapel dedicated to the three river goddesses, with their images in relief. 
There are two dhvaja-stambhas or pillars bearing emblems; these, and all the co- 
lumns are northern, everything else is Dravidian, thus exhibiting the combination 
of styles characteristic of Early Calukyan architecture, and perpetuated by the 
Rastrakutas. The same applies to the later Jaina Indra-Sabha, likewise a mono- 
lithic temple, and of even more Dravidian aspect (ca. 850). 

^ For reproductions see references on p. 89. 

2 Coloured reproduction in Kokka No. 342. Fergusson goes so far as to speak of a “por- 
trait” of Khusru Parvi2 (J. R. A. S., vol. XI, N. S., pp. 155 — 170). The error is repeated in 
Smith 2, p. 279 and 4, p.* 528. The correct interpretation is given by Foucher, i, vol. II, p. 151. 
But cf. Le Coq, 3, p. 51. 


r 


7 * 


99 



The Kailasanatha is decorated with some of the boldest and finest sculpture 
compositions to be found in India. The representation of Ravana’s attempt to 
throw down Mt. Kailasa, the mountain throne of Siva, is especially noteworthy. 
Only a part of this grandiose design is shown in figure 193. Here the quivering 
of the mountain has been felt, and Parvati turns to Siva and grasps his arm in fear, 
while her maid takes to flight : but the Great God is \mmoved, and holds all fast 
by pressing down his foot. The lower half of the composition exhibits Ravana 
exerting all the force of his twenty arms against the side of his subterranean prison. 
In no other art have geotectonic conceptions been visually realised with any such 
power as here, and in the Elevation of the Earth at Udayagiri (fig. 174). Other 
fine relief panels at Kailasa include a Gahgavatarana composition, Siva as Tri- 
purantaka, and a Visnu on Garuda. 

The Saiva shrine at Elephanta, dating probably from the second half of the 
eighth century, is on the other hand, an underground excavation; the two lihga 
shrines are detached within the halls, permitting circumambulation, the various 
back and side-waU panels being occupied with magnificent sculptures, of which 
the so-called Trimurti, really a representation of Siva as Mahesa^ (figs. 194, 195) is 
deservedly famous, as one of the finest reliefs in all India. Other sculptures in- 
clude compositions similar to many of those found at the Kailasa, Elura. Outside 
the cave there was formerly preserved a five-headed Sadasiva (not Brahma)®. 
In this cave, too, the northern pillars with ribbed cushion capitals attain their 
greatest perfection®. 

It has long been known that remains of frescoes are preserved at Elura*. The 
most important of these are found on the ceiling of the porch on the second 
storey of the upper temple, which is known locally as the Rang Mahall, probably 
from the coloured decoration which once covered the interior and perhaps the 
whole exterior of the structure. The painting is of two periods, the first contem- 
porary with the excavation, thus of late eighth century date, the second several 
centuries later; in what is now preserved, the later layer overlaps and partly con- 
ceals the earlier. The earlier painting is reminiscent of Ajanta, but rather less 
sensitive; the later is decidedly inferior. The most important composition re- 
presents Visnu and Laksmi (fig. 196) riding through the clouds, borne by Garudas, 
which are of the human type, though with very long sharp noses, bird-like lower 

^ For detailed illustrations see Rodin, Coomaraswamy and Goloubew. For the iconography 
of three-headed forms of Siva see Rao, I, vol. II, p. 3791!.; Aiyar, i; Cousens, i (Uttare^vara 
lintel); Coomaraswamy in Rupam, 18, p. 66, and Ganguly, M., 2, p. 68 (Sadasiva); and cf. p. 35, 
note 6, 67, note i, 149, and figs. 126, 283, in this work. 

“ Coomaraswamy, 7, pi. XLIII; Diez, fig. 132 (not catur- h\it paika-mukha), 

^ Burgess, 8, vol. II, pi. 236 — 239. 

* For recent accounts of the Elura frescoes, see Thompson; Coomaraswamy, 12. 



limbs, and small wings. It is of special interest to observe that, quite apart from 
the special characteristics of the Garuda faces, the features are sharply defined, and 
the long sharp nose and bulging eyes of the later Gujarati style are unmistakeable; 
in other words this is already a definitely mediaeval style, ^d considerable re- 
moved from that of Ajanta. Another composition includes a rider upon a horned 
lion {sarduld) and many pairs of Gandharvas or Vidyadharas floating amongst 
clouds. The clouds have sharply defined crenellated margins, like those of the 
contemporary reliefs, and those of Borobudur. They are practically the same in the 
painting of both periods, and survive in the Gujarati miniatures, but not later. The 
spandrils about the lotus rosettes in the centre of the ceiling are occupied by re- 
presentations of lotus pools, with elephants, fish, etc., of both periods ; while the 
main composition of the later layer consists of a procession of Saiva deities. 

A much later painting of a battle scene, with contemporary inscriptions gi- 
ving the names of the combatants (one is “Pramara Rau”) may date from a period 
not before 1200 and perhaps as late as 1500. 

PALLAVA 

Whatever their antecedents, the PaJlavas seem to have been vassals of the 
Andhras in the Godavari-Kistna deltas (Vehgi) in the second century, and to 
have succeeded them as rulers in the third and fourth. Several legends trace their 
origin to the union of a Cola prince with a Naga princess at Kaveripumpattanam^. 
Originally Buddhists, they became for the most part Saivas by the end of the sixth 
century, when Buddhism was declining in the south. From about 400 to 750 they 
were the dominant power on the east coast, and constantly at war with the Ca- 
lukyas on the other side of the Dekkhan. The following are the main events of 
Pallava history: 

Simhavarman about 457 dedicated a Buddhist image at Amaravatl. Sirhha- 
visnu (575 — 600) lost Vehgi to the Calukyas, after which the PaUavas extended 
their dominions southward to Tan j ore, with the capital at Kaiiclpuram. Mahen- 
dravarman I (600 — 625) seems to have been converted to Saivism by the Saiva 
Saint Apparsvami. In the reign of Narasirnhavarman I (625 — 645) surnamed Ma- 
malla, Hsiian Tsang visited Kanci and found there many Mahay^a shrines; 
Badami was captured in 642. Paramesvaravarman (655 — 690) won a victory at 
Peruvalanallur, but lost Kanci temporarily in 674. Rajasimhavarman (Narasim- 
havarman II) built the Kailasanatha at Kanci. Nandivarman Pallava again lost 
Kanci about 740 but ruled during the greater part of the last half of the century. 

^ For the great sea-port of Kaverlpumpattanam and early Tamil culture see Kanakasabhai. 
For the Naga story in Cambodia see p. i8o. Similar stories were current in Ka^mir and Khotan. 


lOI 



Aparajita, early ninth century, was the last of the ruling Pallavas and was appa- 
rently a vassal of the Rastrakutas, who had inherited the Calukyan enmity, and 
won victories in 775 and 805. 

The Pallava styles may be classified as follows: Mahendra style 600 — 625, 
Mamalla style, 625 — 674, Rajasimha and Nandivarman style 674 — 800, Aparajita 
style, early ninth century 

Mahendra style: the very interesting cave temple inscription of Mahendra- 
varman I at Mandagapattu, South Arcot District, together with the inscription 
containing his birudas found on an ancient pillar embodied in the later Ekam- 
baranathasvamin temple at Kanci, proves what might in any case be taken for 
granted, that structural temples of “bricks, timber, metals (stone) and mortar” 
were the rule, rather than the exception in the Pallava country, and indicates that 
Mahendravarman (whose biruda, Vicitracitta, refers to his many accomplishments) 
was personally responsible for introducing the cave style, probably from the Kistna 
district. Mahendravarman was “one of the greatest figures in the history of Ta- 
miUan civiHsation”^. In addition to the cave just mentioned, those of Dalavanur, 
Trichinopolyand many others date from Mahendra’s reign. Characteristic features 
are the square pillars, the central portion being octagonal; the brackets generally 
plain, sometimes with horizontal fluting. There are dvarapalas leaning on heavy 
clubs. There is a convex roll cornice, decorated with caitja-'^lvAo^ niches {htdii) 
enclosing heads, the crest of the arch quite plain. The Buddhist railing (rare in 
Hindu art) is sometimes seen. 

Reference may be made here to the Jaina Pallava painting recently discovered 
in a cave shrine at Sittanavasal, Pudukottai state, assigned to the reign of Mahen- 
dravarman I®. 

Mamalla style : the greater part of the work on the cave temples, the Descent 
of the Ganges, and the five ^Pathas"'" at Mamallapuram seems to have been exe- 
cuted early in the seventh century. Of the cave temples, the Trimurti, Varaha, 
Durga, and “Five Pandava” are the most important. The Varaha, like the Five 
Pandavas, has a verandah with the slender octagonal pillars supported by a 
sitting lion, characteristic of Pallava architecture after Mahendra (cf. figs. 197, 199, 
202); this is the prototype of the later jw// pillars of mediaeval Dravidian art. 
The capital is bulbous, often surmounted by a flat abacus {palagai ) ; the brackets 
as before, usually with the horizontal fluting. 

* The best account of all the Pallava monuments is given by Jouveau-Dubreuil, i and 2. 
See also Rea, 4; Longhurst, 3; Vogel, 14; and Rodin, Coomataswamy and Goloubew. 

2 Jouveau-Dubreuil, z, and Conjeevaram inscription of Mahendravarman I, Pondicherry, 1919; 
also Longhurst, 3. 

’ Jouveau-Dubreuil, 3. 


In the Varaha cave is a series of well-known and magnificent reliefs repre- 
senting the Varaha-avatara, Vamana-avatara, Surya, Durga (in Pallava art always 
with the attributes of Visnu), Gaja-LaksmI (fig. 205) and two fine groups of royal 
figures representing Sitiihavisnu and Mahendravarman with their queens (fig. 204)^. 
In the Durga shrine (Yamapuri or Mahisa mandapam) are two still better known 
reliefs representing Visnu-Anantasayin (fig. 209) and Durga-Mahisamardini 
(fig.208); the Five Pandava shrine contains rehefs representing Krsna-dudhadhari 
and Govardhanadhara. 

With these sculptures must be mentioned the open-air rock-cut tlrtham^ 
commonly known as “Arjuna’s Penance” (figs. 198, 206, 207). Here a great rock 
wall with a median fissure, has been covered on both sides with sculptured figures 
of deities, human beings, Nagas, and animals of all kinds, approaching or facing 
towards the fissure, and for the most part with hands joined in adoration. Imme- 
diately to the left of the fissure is a small sculptured shrine (the Dravidian temple 
in its simplest form) containing the standing figure of a four-armed deity, pro- 
bably Siva; before this temple is bowed an emaciated jogi (Bhagiratha, fig. 198), 
who is also represented above with raised arms {urdhva-bdhu), practising tapas. The 
fissure is occupied by the Nagas, who are beings associated with the waters ; above, 
on either side are flying figures of gods, and below are the wild creatures of the 
forests, amongst which the monumental elephants may be specially mentioned. 
If any further evidence were needed to support the suggestion of Goloubew that 
the whole scene represents the Descent of the Ganges (Gahgavatarana)® it could 
be found in the figure of the ascetic cat standing erect as a tapasvl in urdhvahahu 
pose, while trustful mice play at his feet (fig. 207) ; stories of false ascetic cats deluding 
innocent mice on the banks of the Ganges are to be found in the Hitopadesa, Mahdbhd- 
rata, and elsewhere. A detached group in the round, representing a monkey 
family, is a masterpiece of animal sculpture^. In the same style and probably of 
the same period are the Kapila and unfinished elephants of the Isurumuniya 
Vihara at Anuradhapura in Ceylon (see page 162). 

The five rathas at Mamallapuram® are all monoliths, cut from a series of 
boulder-like granulitic outcrops on the sandy shore. All are of the same period, 

* A. S. L, A. R., 1922 — 25, p. 137; Sastri, H. K., 2. 

■= Fully illustrated in Rodin, Coomaraswamy and Goloubew; some details, including the 
monkey family, in Coomaraswamy, 7; others in Vogel, 14. 

3 Goloubew, 2. Another, somewhat different treatment of the same subject appears in the 
Varaha-avatara cave (ca. 400 A. D.) at Udayagiri, Bhopal (Cunningham 4, voL X, p. 48). 

^ Coomaraswamy, 7, pi. 83. 

Fergus sor^ 2, 1 , ch. 3, and Jouveau-Dubreuil, i, the latter showing that the rathas are con- 
sidera^^ earher than the structural temples at Kahci, with which Fergusson would make them 
conteJJojury. 



the first half of the seventh century, and in the same style, though of varied form, 
evidently reproducing contemporary types of structural buildings; named after 
the Five Pandavas, they all appear to be Saiva shrines. The Sahadeva, Dharma- 
raja and Bhima rathas have characteristic pyramidal roofs of three distinct storeys, 
ornamented with the Httle pavilions called pancarams and with r^z/^ij-window 
niches ; the uppermost member of the first having the form of the older structural 
and excavated apsidal caitya-\aS}L%, that of the second being a hexagonal dome, 
that of the third an elongated barrel vault of the type so often represented on the 
Bharhut (fig. 45), Sand and Amaravati reliefs. The Arjuna ratha illustrates the 
simplest form of the Dravidian temple, like the small rock-cut shrines at Unda- 
valli^ and the shrine represented in the Gahgavatarana relief (fig. 198). The 
Draupadi ratha (fig. zoo) is a small square shrine with a square curvilinear roof 
like that of modern Bengali thatched cottages and brick temples; the form is 
without doubt derived from bamboo construction, and occurs already in the 
small shrine represented at the left end (obverse) of the Katra Mound toram 
architrave, M i, in the Mathura Museum^. Characteristic details in these temples 
include capitals without palagat, brackets plain or horizontally fluted, roll cornices 
with caitja-'^mAoysr niches enclosing heads or figures without a crowning kJrtti- 
mukha (Tam. simhamugam), and makara torana lintels. Seventh century Pallava 
sculpture, represented in and on the shrines above described, is of a very high 
order; it differs chiefly from that of the Gupta period and area in the greater 
slenderness and freer movement of the forms, the more oval face and higher cheek 
bones. The divine and human figures are infinitely gracious (figs. 204), and in 
the representation of animals this school excels all others. Deities have four 
arms, Dvarap^as two only. Lihgams are cylindrical, never fluted. 

Rajasiriiha style: the structural temples at Kancipuram®, with the “Shore 
temple” at Mamallapuram, date from the beginning of the eighth century and 
are due to Rajasiriiha, the most important of them being the famous Rajasithhes- 
vara temple, or Kailasanatha, of Kanci. The shrine (fig. 197) with its pyramidal tower 
and flat-roofed pillared mandapam is surrounded by a peristyle composed of a 
continuous series of cells resembling rathas. But here the PaUava style is further 
evolved and more elaborate; in matters of detail may be mentioned the vertical 
median band on the horizontally fluted brackets, the constant presence of the 
palagat as uppermost element of the capital, the fact that many of the lions suppor- 
ting piUars are now rampant and are sometimes provided with riders, and the appear- 


^ Longhurst, 3, pi. XIIL 
2 Vogel, 13, pi. XXV. 

^ The fullest descriptions and illustrations in Rea, 4; see also Fergusson, 2, and Jouveau- 
Dubreuil, i . 


104 



ance of kJrttmukhas, as yet in very low relief, surmounting the caitja-vfm. 6 .o\! 
niches. The lihgam is now prismatic^. Other Rajasiriiha temples dateable near 
to 700 — 720 include the structural Shore temple at M^allapuram (fig. 201), the 
great temple at Panamalai (fig. 203) and the Tiger (or rather “Lion”) cave at 
Saluvahkuppam. The Vaikuntha Perumal at K^ci may date nearer to 730, the 
Matahgesvara at K^ci from the time of Nandivarman, the apsidal temple at 
Kuram from the end of the century; but all these are still in the Rajasiriiha style, 
as developed in the time of Nandivarman. 

Aparajita style: at the beginning of the ninth century we find the Pallava 
style further evolved, and approaching the Coja. The lihgams are again cylindrical, 
the abacus {palagai) above the capital more conspicuous, the kirttimukha head now 
in full relief. There is a shrine of this type at Bahur, near Pondicherry. Much 
more important is the remarkable temple of Tiruttanesvara® built by Nambi- 
Appa in the reign of Aparajita, at Tiruttani. The temple is a small square vimdna, 
with one door, and with a mandapam, facing east; the upper portion is apsidal like 
the Sahadeva ratha at MamaUapuram. 

Characteristics of the developed style, beside those already mentioned in- 
clude the representation of dvarapalas with four arms. It is worthy of note that 
the pillar brackets are stiU curved; in the early Cola style they become angular. 


MEDIAEVAL 

FROM 900 A. D.: PALA, CALUKY/\, COLA, RAJPUT, &c. 

The history of this period is again too complex to be treated in detail here. 
The outstanding feature in the North is the rise of the Rajputs, many of whom 
were descended from earlier foreign invaders, but were now completely hinduised, 
while others could trace their descent with plausibility to far earlier times. The 
most important kingdoms in this period included that of Kanauj or Paricala ruled 
by the earlier Raja Bhoja (Parih^a) in the ninth century, and extending from 
Magadha to the Sadaj, and including Kathiawad. The later Raja Bhoja (Para- 
mara or Pa war) of Dhara, r. 1018 — 1060 A. D., was a liberal patron of literature 
and art, himself the author of works on architecture® ; in Indian tradidon his name 
marks the culminadng age af Hindu civilisation. The Candels of Bundelkhand, 
with a capital at Mahoba, were at the height of their power about 1000 A. D. In 
the lower Ganges valley the kings of the Pala dynasty ruled for four and a half 

* A feature repeated in Java, cf the Cupuvatu lihgam, Krom, 2, pi. VIII. 

® Jouveau-Dubreuil, 2, vol. II, 1918, pis. I — VIII. 

® Bhoja, I, 2. 


105 



centuries, from about 730 to 1197 A. D. fostering the later Buddhist art of Bihar. 
From about 1070 onwards the kings of the Sena dynasty, Brahmanical Hindus, 
dispossessed the Palas of a large part of their dominions, including Dacca and 
Gaur. Both were swept away by the Muhammadans at the close of the twelfth 
century, when monasteries and temples were destroyed, and Buddhism practically 
extinguished. Orissa was governed for the most part by independent princes of 
the Eastern Gahga dynasty. 

In the Dekkhan the last of the Rastrakuta kings was overthrown by the first 
representative of the Later Calukya dynasty of Kalyan, descendants of the early 
Calukyas of Badami; the kingdom was extended to include almost all the former 
possessions of his ancestors, and the dynasty lasted until about 1190. The Hoysala 
dynasty ruled in Mysore (Maisur), attaining the zenith of their power in the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries ; in 13 10 the kingdom was overrun by the Muham- 
madans. In the south, the Colas came into prominence about the middle of the 
ninth century, in succession to the Pallavas. Rajaraja-deva, the Great, r. 985 — 1018 
A.D., made himself paramount lord of the south, ruling over almost the whole of 
the present Madras Presidency including on the north the Kistna-Godaveri delta 
and part of Orissa, part of the Calukya domain on the west, the Pandya kingdom 
of Madura in the south, and a great part of Ceylon. Rajaraja was a great builder, 
constructing in particular the great temple at Tanjore. Both he and his son Ra- 
jendra maintained relations with the kings of Sumatra, and though ardent Saivas, 
made endowments to the Sumatran Buddhist shrine at Negapatam (see p. 199). 
The last Cola king died in 1287. For a short time the Pandyans of Madura reasser- 
ted themselves but in 1 3 10 the Muhammadans under Malik Kafur broke the power 
of all the southern States with the exception of Malabar. Had it not been for 
the rapid rise of the Vijayanagar kingdom about 1370, ruled by the Rayas, of 
whom the most famous was Krsna Deva, r. 1309 — 29, the southern Hindu king- 
doms would have been completely subverted. Vijayanagar broke up about 1565 ; 
its chief Hindu successors in the South were the Nayyakas of Madura, of whom 
Tirumala reigned 1623 — 1659. 

The nomenclature of the mediaeval architecture presents considerable diffi- 
culty. In any case, a sectarian classification, such as that which forms the main 
defect of Fergusson’s work, is quite misleading. For just as in the case of 
sculpture, there are no Buddhist, Jaina or Brahmanical styles of architecture, 
but only Buddhist, Jaina and Brahmanical buildings in the Indian style of 
their period. Nor can a clear distinction of Visnu and Siva temples made in the 
Mdnasdra and followed by Havell and Diez, be recognized in mediaeval practise. 
The Indian temple iyimdnd) is one; but there are provincial variations in its 
formal development, existing side by side with the secular variation in pure 

106 



/ 


"style. In respect of these, the only adequate classification is geographical. The 
three most clearly differentiated types are the Northern, marked by the curvilinear 
sikhara, the Southern, with a terraced pyramidal tower, of which only the dome is 
called the sikhara, and the Central, combining both types with peculiarities of its 
own. These three types have been designated as follows in the Silpa-Sdstras (A) 
and by Fergusson (B): 


Northern (mainly North of the Vin- 
dhyas) 

Central (Western India, Dekkhan and 

Maisur) 

Southern (Madras Presidency and nor- 
thern Ceylon) 


A 

B 

Nagara 

Indo-Aryan or 
Aryavarta 

Vesara 

Calukyan 

Dravida 

Dravidian 


The classification (A) of Sri Kumara and the Manas ar a is only unsatisfactory 
insofar as it partly involves a definition by ground plan which does not alto- 
gether fit the facts^; that of Fergusson, on account of its ethnic implications. In 
the present work both sets of terms are used, but strictly with a geographical 
connotation and without reference to plans or races. 

The great abundance of mediaeval Nagara shrines in the Panjab, Rajputana, 
Western India, the Ganges valley. Central Provinces, and Orissa makes a con- 
secutive historical treatment almost impossible in a work of the present dimensions. 
All that can be done is to describe the more important buildings, dating for the 
most part after 900 and before 1300 A. D. under the headings of the various sites 
at which they are found, and with some account of the sculpture. 

A considerable series of Nagara temples is found in the Panjab Himalayas. 
The most important of these is the eight or ninth century monolithic group at 
Masrur, Kangra®. Structural temples apparently of the ninth century are found 
at Baijnath, where the mandapam has an interesting balcony window, and the porch 
is provided with elegant columns having cylindrical shafts and pot and foliage 
capitals. Baijnath is equivalent to Vaidyanatha, a name of Siva as Lord of Physi- 
cians, and may be possibly connected with an early cult of Lokesvara®. The Visves- 
vara temple at Hat, Bajaura, Kuju has three projecting side chapels containing 
fine relief sculptures of Ganesa, Visnu and Durga; there are river-goddesses at 


‘ But see Acharya, p. 19, and Thesis V. “The technical names of the three styles of Indian 
architecture are geographical, in the same sense as those of the four Graeco-Roman orders.” 

* Hargreaves, 3; also A. S. I., A. R., 1912 — 13, pt. i, pi. XIII, and 1914 — 13, pt. i, pi. III. 
Amongst the sculptures is a representation of Varuna on a makara. 

^ Vogel, 22. 


107 



the sides of the porch; the decorative motifs include caitja-nchts enclosing heads 
and makaras almost dissolved in arabesque. Thus the ensemble presents an 
appearance analogous to that of later Javanese architecture. The shrine is unda- 
ted, but may be assigned to the tenth century^. 

In Camba there are extant in temples at Brahmaur and Chatrarhi large brass 
images of Laksana Devi (Mahisasura-mardini), Sakti-devi, Ganesa, and Nandi 
with inscriptions showing that they were to the order of a king Meruvarman by 
a craftsman {kammind) of the name of Gugga ; assigned on palaeographic grounds 
to the eighth century, the images themselves are mechanically conceived, and 
apart from the inscriptions would be assigned to a later date*. More interesting 
is the Nirmand mask of Mujuni-devi (fig. 273), queen or goddess of a Raja Hema- 
prakasa of Kulu, of runth or tenth century date®. Many temples of great interest 
are preserved in the Kumaon and Almora tracts of the Himalayas*. 

The only monolithic Nagara temple, other than that of Masrur, Kahgra, 
is the excavated Vaisnava Dharmanatha temple at Dhamnar in Rajput^a, 
dating about 800 A. D. This shrine stands in the pit in the side of the hill in 
which it was excavated. The chief peculiarity is the arrangement of six or 
seven smaller cells round the main shrine, which consists of a garbha-grha and 
mandapanf’. At the same site there is an extensive series of older Buddhist 
excavations. 

Of numerous brick towers in the Panjab and Ganges valley, the following 
are amongst the most important: the temple at K^ar, near the junction of the 
Sawan and Indus in the Jhelam District® ; smaller shrines at Amb in the Shahpur 
District: temples at Kafir Kot*; Malot (see p. 143 and fig. 274); Dalmi,Manbhum, 
Bengal®; Sona Tapan and Bahulara (fig. 213) in the Bankura District, Bengal®; 
Parauli (with a circular cella) and Sinbhua in the Cawnpore District, and Tinduli, 
Bahua, Thithaura, Kurari, &c., in the Fatehpur District*®. Most of these date be- 
tween the eighth and twelfth centuries, and continue the series represented by the 
earher Gupta and early mediaeval temples of Bhitargaon, Sirpur and Nalanda. 

^ Vogel, II. 

2 Vogel, I. 

3 Shuttleworth ; Vogel, 19. Thothe former I am indebted for the photograph reproduced in 
fig. 273 and for a manuscript copy of a note on the inscriptions by Vogel. 

^ A. S. I., A. R., 1913 — 14, pL I ; 1921 — 22, pp. 5ofF. 

^ Cousens, 7; Burgess, 8, pi. 286. 

® Talbot. 

’ Cunningham, 4, vol. XIV; A. S. I., A. R., 1914 — 15 ; pt. i, pi. Ill; Codrington, K. de B., 
pi. XLIII, c, d. 

® Burgess, 8, pi. 290; Cunningham, 4, vol. VIII. 

» Burgess, 8, pi. 298, 299; A. S. I., A. R., 1922 — 23, pp. 58, 59, 112, and pi. XII. 

Vogel 8. 

108 



Amongst the more important stone temples in Nagara style not elsewhere referred 
to may be mentioned the circular tower at Candrehe, Rewa State, where there is 
also a well preserved Brahmanical monastery; the shrine at Sohagpur, recalling 
Khajuraho, but with even finer sculptures ; columns of an eleventh century Budd- 
hist temple at Bihar, Narsinghpur State; and the Siddhesvara or Siddhanatha 
temple at Nemaw^, Indore State, the finest in Malwa^. 

The groups of Hindu and Jaina temples at the old Candela capital of Kha- 
juraho in Bundelkhand are second in importance and magnificence only to the 
mediaeval temples at Orissa®. All appear to have been erected between 950 and 
1050. Of the Hindu temples the finest is the Kandarya Mahadeva (fig. 214); the 
effect of height, actually 116 feet over all, is greatly increased by the deep base- 
ment and by the vertical lines of the reduplications of the tower upon itself. The 
pradaksind path is included in the whole mass of the structure, and is provided with 
shaded balcony windows. All parts except the tower are covered with elaborate 
figure and floral sculptures, and amongst this are some remarkable erotic friezes, 
a feature by no means usual in Saiva shrines. The Vaisnava Caturbhuja and the 
Jaina Adinatha temples are in exactly the same style, to be distinguished only by 
the details of their sculpture®. 

At Gwahar, within the area of the fort there is preserved the porch of an im- 
portant Vaisnava temple erected in 1093 and known as the Sas-Bahu. Of more 
unusual form is the Vaisnava Teli-ka-Mandir (fig. 212) which although in northern 
style, seems to have been crowned by a barrel-vaulted roof like that of the VaitM 
Deul at Puri in Ofissa. The finest and best preserved temple in Gwaliar State 
is the Nilakantha or Udayesvara at Udayapur, built by Udayaditya Paramara be- 
tween 1059 and 1080. The. sikhara is ornamented with four narrow flat bands run- 
ning from base to summit, the intervening spaces being occupied with repeated 
ornament consisting of reduplications in miniature of the main tower; the whole 
is carved with particular precision and delicacy, and both tower and mandapa are 
in perfect preservation*. 

Remains of once magnificent Vaisnava temples survive in the Lalitpur Di- 
strict at Candpur, Dudhahi, and Madanpur. Frescoes which seem to illustrate 
fables are preserved on the ceiling of the Vaisnava temple known as the Chotl 
Kacari at the latter place, and have been assigned by Mukerji to the twelfth century 
or earlier, but need reexamination®. 


^ For all these see A. S. I., A. R., 1920 — 21. 

2 A. S. L, A. R., 1922—23, pis. XXIV— XXVI. See also p. no. 

3 Fergusson, 2, vol. II, pp. 49, 140. 

^ Fergusson, 2, pp. 137, 147. 

* Mukerji, i, pis. 29, 30, 53 — 38, 45 — 48, and Diagram ii. 



As may have been gathered from the foregoing descriptions, the culture of 
the Candels in Central India was predominantly Brahmanical, and most of the 
temples and sculptures are of a corresponding character (cf. fig. 222). But a num- 
ber of fine Buddhist sculptures found at Mahoba, and now for the most part in 
the Lucknow Museum show that Buddhism was still followed. These sculptures, 
which are executed with faultless mechanical perfection and considerable grace, 
are in the local buff sandstone, and several inscribed with dedicatory inscriptions 
by various relatives of an accomplished artist {citrakdrd) of the name of Satana, 
were probably made in his workshops. The figures may be dated approximately 
in the latter part of the eleventh century, in the reign, perhaps, of Kirttivarman, 
the greatest of the Candela rajas. An image of Lokanatha (Avalokitesvara) is 
illustrated in fig. 223 ; the other images included a Buddha, a Tara, and a Sirh- 
hanada Avalokitesvara^. 

An unusual temple type, perhaps in essentials of great antiquity, is that of the 
circular colonnaded enclosures dedicated to the Cauhsat Joginis, or sixty-four 
goddesses associated with Durga. The ninth or tenth century or possibly much 
older example at Bheraghat, near Jabalpur, a hundred and sixteen feet in internal 
diameter, with eighty-one peripheral chapels, was probably provided with a main 
central shrine containing an Uma-Mahesvara groups. The temple at Mitauli, near 
Padhauli, of eleventh century date, was a hundred and twenty feet in diameter, 
with sixty-five peripheral chapels, and a central round shrine provided with a 
mandapc^. Other circular Jogini temples are found in Coimbatore, at Ranipur- 
Jharia near Sambhalpur, at Dudhahi in the Lalitpur District^, and in the Kala- 
handi District®. The Jogini temple at Khajuraho, is by exception rectangular, 
measuring a hundred and two by fifty-nine and a half feet, with sixty four small 
peripheral cells and one larger one, all surmounted by spires; like all the others, 
the court is open to the sky, only the cells having roofs®. It may be remarked that 
early examples of similar plans, based no doubt on still earlier Indian prototypes, 
can be recognized in the case of more than one Gandharan monastery shrine, e. g. 
at Jamalgarhi and Takht-i-Bahi’, and so far as the rectangular type is concerned 
can be paralleled in the cloistered courts of the Kasmiri shrines, and those of some 
Jaina temples at Girnar and Sravana Belgola {betta type, see p. 118), and of the 
Calukya Kesava temple at Somnathpur in Maisur (see p. 117). 

' A. S. I., A. R., 1915 — 16, pt. I, p. 17, and pi. Ill; Dikshit. 

“ Cunningham, 4, vol. IX, pp. 60 — 74, and pis. 12 — 15. 

® A. S. L, A. R., 1915 — 16, pt. I, p. 18. 

* Mukerji, i, pi. 39. 

® Cunningham, 4, vol. XIII, pp. 1321!., and pis. 13, 14; Indian Antiquary, vol. VII, p. 20. 

® Fergusson, 2, vol. ii, p. 51, and fig. 291. 

’ Fergusson, 2, vol. i, figs. 119, 120. 


no 



Another important group of mediaeval temples is found at Osia^. 

The old Hindu and Jaina temples of Gujarat have been almost entirely destroy- 
ed by the Muhammadans, who nevertheless in their turn employed the Indian 
architects to construct the beautiful mosques of Ahmadabad, which are in a purely 
Hindu style, only adapted to the requirements of Musalman worshippers. Pro- 
bably the greatest of the older temples is the Rudramala, at Siddhapur, a city na- 
med from the great royal builder Siddha Raj (1093 — 1143), of the kings of An- 

hillavada-Patan, and connected by marriage with the Calukyas. Another great 
shrine stood at Vadnagar; still another imposing ruin is that of the temple of the 
Sun at Mudhera. Little remains at Anhillavada-Patan, but at Somanatha-Patan 
in Kathiawad are the ruins of the famous Somanatha temple, destroyed by Mah- 
mud of Ghazna in 1025, rebuilt by Kumarapala (1143 — 1174), and later again 
sacked and converted into a mosque^. All these temples connected with the So- 
lanki (CaJukya) rulers of Gujarat are in a local variety of the Calukyan (Vesara) 
style; they are further specially characterised by the presence of kJrttistambhas 
or decorative storied “Towers of Fame”. The finest example of such a tower, 
however is that of the Chitor Fort, the capital of Mewar before Udaipur. This 
tower (fig. 251) was constructed in the eight years following 1440, and restored in 
1906, to commemorate the building of the Kumbhasvami Vaisnava temple, con- 
secrated in 1440. In the fifth storey are effigies of the architect Jaita and his two 
sons®. The similar, but smaller Jaina tower at Chitor dates probably from the 
twelfth century*. 

The Jaina temples at Mount Abu are deservedly famous®. These take their 
name of Dilvara from the adjoining village, situated at a height of 4000 feet on 
an isolated hill in Southern Rajputana; the group consists of four temples, of 
which the most important are those of Vimala Sha and Tejahpala, respectively 
ca. 1032 and 1232. They are constructed entirely of white marble, quarried in the 
plains below, and carried up the steep hill by infinite labour. These are domed 
shrines with pillared halls. As Cousens remarks “the amount of beautiful orna- 
mental detail spread over these temples in the minutely carved decoration of cei- 
lings, pillars, doorways, panels, and niches is simply marvellous; the crisp, thin, 
translucent, shell-like treatment of the marble surpasses anything seen elsewhere, 
and some of the designs are veritable dreams of beauty. The work is so delicate 
that ordinary chiselling would have been disastrous. It is said that much of it 

^ Bhandarkar, D. R., 4; Burgess, 8, pis. 307 — 310. The Surya temple is the finest. 

* Cousens, 8, pp. 3 5ff. ; Fergusson, 2. 

“ A. S. I., A. R., 1920 — 21, p. 34; Cunningham, 4, vol. XXIII. 

■* Fergusson, 2, fig. 295. 

^ Bhandarkar, D. R., 8; Cousens, 8. 


Ill 



was produced by scraping the marble away, and that the masons were paid by 
the amount of marble dust so removed”. The two great domical ceilings are the 
most remarkable feature (fig. 221); all the fretted marble is deeply undercut, and 
in the centre there hangs a great carved pendant. It must not be supposed that 
all this work is overwrought; this is rather one of those cases where exuberance 
is beauty. It will be understood, of course, that all the figure sculpture is neces- 
sarily in the same key, each individual figure being but a note in the whole scheme, 
not a profound invention to be separately studied. The same applies even to the 
images of the Jinas in this period; each is severely simple, but all are alike in re- 
presenting nothing more than the skilled realisation of a fixed formula. Just a 
millennium had passed since the setting up of Friar Bala’s Bodhisattva at Sarnath: 
not one of the mediaeval craftsmen could have created a work of like intensity, 
but had such a thing been possible, such a figure would have completely destroyed 
the unity of any mediaeval shrine. Under these circumstances it is not a fault, 
but a virtue in the craftsman that he could not, if he would, have achieved what 
have been utterly inappropriate to his design. 

There is another and even more picturesque Jaina tirtha or place of pilgri- 
mage at Tarahga, not far from Siddhapur, with a temple of Ajitnatha, built by 
Kumarapala. The most remarkable of such ttrthas however, are the great temple 
cities — cities not built for human habitation, but consisting of temples alone — 
picturesquely situated on the hills of Girnar in Kathiawad and Satrunjaya or 
PaUtana in GujaraP. At Gimar the great temple of Neminatha is certainly older 
than 1278 when it was repaired; another, built by the brothers Tejahpala and 
Vastupala, founders of the second temple at Mt. Abu above referred to, dates 
about 1230. The former stands in a colonnaded court of some seventy cells, the 
latter is a triple shrine arranged in Calukyan fashion about a central hall. At 
Satrunjaya the total number of shrines, in eleven separate enclosures, exceeds five 
hundred. Some date back to the eleventh century, the majority range from 1500 
to the present day. One of the largest is the temple of Adinatha in the Khara- 
taravasi Tuk, built by a banker of Ahmadabad in 1618; this is a shrine of two 
storeys, with a well proportioned sikhara, and with a verandah of which the pil- 
lars bear capitals richly carved with figures of musicians and dancers. A small 
sh ri ne built by the Nagar Seth, or Head of the Gilds of Ahmadabad in 1840, is a 
pillared hall of unique design, with external verandahs; the floor is divided by 
twelve piers into nine smaller squares, those of the angles having domed roofs, 
those of the centre and sides being crowned by towers; the five principal icons 
represent sacred mountains. Other picturesquely situated Jaina temple groups 


‘ For Girnar and Satrunjaya, &c., see Fergusson, 2; Cousens, 8, p. 44. 



are found at Ranpur (expecially the Gaumukha temple, A. D. 1438) in Jodhpur 
State, and Parasnath in Bengal. 

Probably the best preserved remains of any mediaeval Indian city are those 
of Dabhoi, twenty miles south east of Baroda, and Jhinjuvad in the northern angle 
of Kathiawad. Both of these cities were provided with powerful defensive walls 
in the time of the Solanki kings of Gujarat, probably about iioo. They were 
partically destroyed by the Muhammadans in the thirteenth century, but at least 
two of the great gates and parts of the massive walls are stiU preserved. The 
Jhinjuvad wall is decorated with three string courses, interrupted at intervals by 
sculptured panels with figures of gods. The gates of Dabhoi (fig. 250) are more 
elaborate; like all Hindu gates, the arch is formed of overlapping (corbelled) 
horizontal brackets, covered by a massive lintel. These gates, and those of Gw^ar 
are the finest now standing in India^. 

The development of the Pala school of architecture and sculpture, the “Eastern 
school” of T^anatha, is typically illustrated at N^anda, of which the importance 
as a centre of Buddhist learning continued undiminished by the political deca- 
dence of Magadha, until the destruction of the monasteries by the Muhammadans 
about 1197. N^anda has been the richest source of the well-known smooth black 
slate images of the P^a school, and has also yielded a very extensive series of 
Buddhist bronzes (fig. 232). It may well have been here that the famous artists 
Dhiman and Bitp^o, painters and sculptors mentioned by Taranatha, worked in 
the latter part of the ninth century^. The importance of Nalanda as a centre of 
Buddhist culture and a source of iconographic and stylistic influences throughout 
the Buddhist east is well illustrated by the close relations existing between it and 
Sumatra- Java in the ninth century, as revealed by the copper plate of Devapala- 
deva, in which reference is made to the important monastery built by Balaputra 
of Suvarnadvipa, ca. 860®. Traces have been found of what may have been a 
statue of the founder*. Nepal and Burma, too, had close connections with Nalanda. 

A general analysis of all the finds at Nalanda tends to show three stages in 
the later development of Magadhan art, first early Mahayana types, with Buddha 
and Bodhisattva images and votive stupas •, then, marking the development of the 
Tantrayana on the basis of the older Yogacara doctrines, the appearance of Saiva 
influences and images; and finally the introduction of the Kalacakra system with 
Vaisnava figures. Moreover, throughout the period of this development, the 

^ Cousens, 8. 

2 Schiefner 2. For a good discussion of Taranatha’s remarks on the history of Buddhist art 
see Smith, 2, pp. 304 — 07, Goetz, 8, 

^ Hirananda Sastri, in Epigraphica Indica, XVII, pt. VII; Bosch, 4 (with a valuable sum- 
mary of the history of Nalanda). See also p. 199. 

* A. S. L, A. R., Eastern Circle, 1917 — 18, p. 41. 




8 



later Magadhan schools exerted a powerful iconographic and to some extent a 
stylistic influence upon the arts of Nepal in the north, and of Burma, Sumatra 
and Java beyond the seas. Even in Ceylon, certain identities of design with Na- 
landa types can be recognized. 

Stone sculptures of the P^a school are found not only at Nalanda, but else- 
where in Magadha, as for example at Rajagrha, Bodhgaya, Kurkihar, Dinajpur, 
Bhagalpur, Rajshahi (fig. 227), Candimau, Kichang in Mayurabhanja, &c., and are 
represented in almost all large Museums, in India mote especially at Lucknow, 
Calcutta and Rajshahi; in Europe, London, Paris and Berlin, in America, Boston 
(fig. 228) and New York (fig. 229)^. 

Another large series of Pala “bronzes”, perhaps of Nalanda origin, has been 
found at Chittagong (Catisgaon), and appears to date from the ninth to the thir- 
teenth century^. Some others now in Kasmir are evidently of the same type 
(fig. 232)3. 

Vaisnava images in the same style, and of beautiful workmanship have been 
found at Rangpur^, and others are represented in the collection of the Bangiya 
Sahitya Parisad in Calcutta (fig. 231)3. Other Buddhist, Vaisnava and Saiva 
(fig. 230) images are in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston®. 

StyhsticaUy, the art of the P^a school is of high technical accomplishment, 
elegant and even modish in design. But even the stone sculpture approximates 
to metal work; everything is conceived in clear cut outlines, and there is no true 
modelling to be compared with that of earlier schools. 

Almost the only surviving documents of Indian painting of the Pala school 
are the illustrations in the two palm leaf Mss. Add. 1464 {Astasdhasrika-pra- 
jfidpdramitd) and 1688 (Pancaraksa) in the Cambridge University Library, the for- 
mer dating from the beginning, the latter from the middle of the eleventh century, 
and containing between them fifty-one miniatures, forming square panels of the 
height of the page^. All the illustrations represent Buddhist divinities or scenes 
from the life of Buddha; their general character is Tantrik, but not to any exagger- 
rated extent. They are very closely related to the contemporary painting of 

1 Burgess, 8, pis. 224 — 235 ; Ganguly, M., 2; Coomaraswamy, 9 (2). For related but some- 
what earlier sculpture in the Manbhum and Singhbhum Districts, Bengal, see Burgess, 8, pis. 
291 — 295. For other dated Pala sculptures from the Bodhgaya district in Bengal see A. S. I., 
A. R,, 1923 — 24, pp. 102, 103. 

^ A. S. I., A. R., 1921 — 22, p. 81. 

^ Kak, I, p. 72. 

* Spooner, 6. 

® Ganguly, M., 2, pp. i37fF. 

* Coomaraswamy, 9 (2). 

’ Bendall, 2; Foucher, 2, vol. i, pis. IX, X, and pp. 30 ff. 


114 



Nepal (see p. 146) on the one hand, and that of Burma (see p. 172) on the other. 
Like the paintings in Jaina manuscripts from Gujarat these illustrations are evi- 
dently replicas of traditional compositions ; as justly remarked by Foucher, “nous 
devons supposer derriere ces miniatures une periode de transmission vraisemble- 
ment assez longue . . . productions d’un art des longtemps stereotype”. On the 
other hand, their intrinsic quahty is essentially late mediaeval; all the features are 
defined by dehcate, somewhat tormented outhnes, with an expression at once 
nervous and sensual. The eyes and eyebrows are almost always doubly curved, 
and the nose very sharp; but there is a distinction from the Gujarati types in that 
a large part of the farther cheek is always seen in the three-quarter profile, and the 
nose never projects beyond its outline, though in some cases the further eye is 
noticeably bulging. The work is that of accompHshed craftsmen, and is marked 
by considerable facifity of execution, though it has scarcely the hghtness of touch 
of the Gujarati paintings. 

The most complete series illustrating the development of the Nagara temple 
from the eighth to the thirteenth centuries is found in Orissa, at Bhuvane^vara, Puri, 
and Konarak. The following are the approximate dates of the more important 
of the vast series of temples found in this Katak District of Orissa (at Bhuvanesvara 
except where specified): Para§uramesvara, ca. 750; Muktesvara, 950; Lihgaraja, 
1000; Rajrani, and the Jagannatha at Puri, ca. 1 1 30; Meghesvara, ca. 1200; Konarak 
Sun temple (Surya Deul), and Lingaraja ndfya man 4 apa, thirteenth century. 

The first (fig. 216) is a small, exquisitely and richly decorated Saiva shrine, 
the low double-roofed mandapa, with solid walls lighted by openings between 
the roofs forming a kind of clerestory. The Muktesvara temple has a mandapa 
already in the typical Orissan style, that is, with a pyramidal roof of many closely 
approximated cornices. The Lihgaraja is perhaps the most majestic Indian temple 
now standing, giving an impression of great height, despite the many buildings 
clustered round it. The illustration (fig. 215) shows it from the side, with the 
original mandapa on the left; in the latter the superimposed cornices are divided 
into two storeys. The effect of height of the sikhara is greatly enhanced by the 
vertical lines of the strongly emphasized ribs, of which two on each side bear 
reduced replicas of the whole. As usual, the sikhara is crowned by an immense 
ribbed dmalaka, above which there is a pot-shaped finial (kalasa). The temple of 
Jagannatha, which dominates the cathedral town of Puri and has become famous as 
“Juggernaut”^ throughout the world, is somewhat inferior in design and detail. 

^ The Jagannatha car festival is in no way different in principle from that of most other 
Hindu temples, and in any case human sacrifice would be unthinkable in connection with a 
Vaisnava shrine. It is possible that the site was once Buddhist ; the crude Vaisnava trinity which 
forms the principal icon bears a strong resemblance to a modified triratna symbol. 



Almost as famous is the much more beautiful, though sadly ruined Surya Deul (Sim 
temple, or “Black Pagoda”) atKonarak, built between 1238 and 1264. This temple 
of the Sun differs in no structural essential from those already described, the most 
remarkable feature of what now survives being the roof of the mandapUy or jaga- 
mohana as it is called in Orissa; this roof (fig. 217) is divided into three stages, 
instead of the two of the Lihgaraja, and this arrangement, combined with the re- 
duction of the number of cornices in the upper stage, at once lightens and 
ennobles the design. The sikhara is no longer standing; the base is represented 
as resting upon immense richly carved wheels and as drawn by galloping horses. 

Most of the Orissan temples are adorned with decorative sculptures, the finest 
probably those of the Muktesvara where the figures of Nagas and Naginis are (par- 
ticularycharming(fig.2i9). Larger andmoremagnificentNagas andNaginis embrace 
the pillars of the Rajrani porch. The great horse and the elephants that stand near 
the Konarak shrine are monumental and so too are the colossal human figures 
that stand on the upper stages of the jagamohana\ the sikhara, or what remains of it, 
is covered with erotic sculptures of the most explicit character, illustrating all 
the handhas known to the Kama Sdstra. Some of the last mentioned sculpture is 
very beautiful, but the figure work here, and even that of the older Rajrani has 
passed its zenith, and is often overstrained. That of the Vaital Deul at Puri has 
a decided elegance (fig. 218). 

A group of brick temples at Visnupur, Bankura District, Bengal, due to the 
Vaisnava rajas of Mallabhum, and dating between 1622 — 1758 is characterised 
by the use of a simple curved roof reproducing the form of the bamboo and 
thatch roofs of Bengal and Orissan cottages, and recalHng that of the Draupadi 
Ratha at Mamallapuram; and further, by an abundance of fine moulded brick- 
work^. 

As good examples of quite modern temples in the Nagara style may be cited 
that built by the raja of Benares at Ramnagar about 1800; the Visvesvara temple 
in Benares, rebuilt from the foundations in the eighteenth century; the temple of 
Scindia’s Mother, and others associated with the cenotaphs at Gwahar, built in 
the nineteenth century; the seventeenth century Jugal Kisor and Madan Mohan 
temples at Brndaban; the nineteenth century Dharmanatha (Jaina) temple at 
Ahmadabad; the groups of sixteenth and seventeenth century Jaina temples at 
Sonagarh in Bundelkhand and Muktagiri in Berar; and amongst the many temples, 
dharmsdlds, ghats, and wells built by Ahalya Bai (1765 — 95), the Gristanesvara 
temple at Elura. In all of these there is a tendency for the form of the sikhara to 

^ A. S. I., A. R., 1921 — 22, p. 25. Moulded bricks from this and many other localities such 
as Hughli, Dinajpur, Pandua, &c., are well represented in the Bahgiya Sahitya Parisad, Calcutta, 
see Ganguly, M., 2. Fora temple of this kind at Kantanagar, see Fergusson, 2, vol.II, p. 160. 



become smooth and straight-sided, with abundant reduplication of the main form 
on a smaller scale. 

The Golden Temple begim by the Sikhs at Amritsar in the reign of Akbar, 
and rebuilt in 1766 is a square two-storied building in an eclectic style, decorated 
largely with marbles taken from the tomb of Jahangir. Much of the interior 
woodwork is admirably ornamented with ivory inlay, in a manner still extensively 
practised at Amritsar and Hoshiarpur^. 

The temples of the Vesara or later C^ukyan style^ are widely distributed in 
Dharwh:, Maisur (Mysore) and the Dekkhan, and as their geographical position 
might lead us to expect, are to a large extent intermediate in character, combining 
Nagara and Dravida elements, and with peculiarities of their own. In the fully 
developed type the conspicuous features are the relatively low elevation and 
wide extension, star-shaped plan, the grouping of three shrines about a central 
hall, pyramidal towers not distinctively storeyed as in typical Dravida temples 
but carrying upward the indentations of the shrine below, elaborate pierced 
windows, cylindrical polished pillars, elevated basements in several richly 
decorated tiers, and very great elaboration of the sculptured decoration. 

The Vesara style developed in the Dharwar District and is there exemplified in 
the fine Saiva shrines at or near Ittagi and Gadag dating in the tenth and eleventh 
centuries. One of the latest twelfth century examples is that of Dodda Basavanna, 
consisting of a shrine and man 4 apa^ both star-shaped in plan, the rectangular pro- 
jections in the one case representing the corners of six, in the other of eight inter- 
secting squares; the architectural design is of exceptional beauty, and the carving 
the richest and most elaborate of any building in Western India®. 

The style attained its fullest development in Maisur under the Hoysalas. 
The most famous temples are those at Dodda Gadavalji, Somnathpur, Belur, and 
Halebid*. 

The Kesava temple at Somnathpur is a triple shrine attached to a central 
pillared hall, the whole enclosed in a square cloistered court. At Belur there is a 
complex of five or six temples and subordinate buildings surrounded by a high wall 
with two fine gopurams on the east. The decoration of the pierced windows of the 
main mandapa is especially rich and varied. The Kedaresvara shrines at Balagami 
and Halebid are equally richly ornamented. The extreme limit of abundant and 

^ Cole, H. H., Golden Temple at Amritsar, J. I. A., vol. 2, 1888; Ellis, T. P., Ivory carving 
in the Panjab, J. I. A., vol. 9, 1902. 

* For Ca{ukyan temples see especially Fetgusson, 2, vol I; Cousens, 6, 8, 9; HaveU, 4; 
Ya2dani; Kramrisch, 2, pis. 35 — 37; Workman, in J. R. A. S., 1904; Burgess, 8, pis. 311 to 
314; A. S. I., A. R., pt. I, 1914 — 15, p. 9. 

® A. S. I., A. R., 1914 — 15, pt. I, p. 9, and pi. VIII. 

* Narasimachar, i, 2, 3; Cousens, 8, &c. 



elaborate ornament is reached in the unfinished Hoysalesvara temple at Halebid 
where the unstinted labour expended in carving a stone that is soft when quarried 
but hardens on exposure has clothed the entire building in an almost incredibly 
abundant parure. The basement exhibits a succession of animal friezes following 
all its indentations, representing elephants, horsemen, sdrdulas or vjdlas, and scenes 
from the Kdmdjana, above this a deep frieze of gods and dpsarases in niches in 
high relief, interrupted by pierced windows and turned pillars. Yet in spite of 
all this richness of detail, the decoration does not obscure the main structural 
lines (fig. 21 1). 

Calukyan sculpture exhibits the same characteristics; most of it is in very 
high relief, deeply undercut, and most elaborately decorated (fig. 224, 225). The 
bracket figures of many temples afford typical examples ; they reproduce the ancient 
motif of the woman and tree; they are unmistakeable descendants of the oldest 
Kusana and pre-Kusana forms, with the dwarf bearer now detached to form an 
abacus support below the main figure^. The intention is sensuous, but the treat- 
ment is wiry, and lacks the true volupte of the Sand dryads. An example at 
Narayanpur is nude. At Palampet the tree-women are replaced by danseuses or 
dpsarases, in technical dance poses, in one case nude. 

The chief seat of the Jainas in Southern India, Sravana Belgola, Hasan 
District, Maisur, contains innumerable shrines, some being situated in the village 
itself, others on the two hills, the Cikka and Dotta Bettas. The term betta is 
applied to a special form of shrine consisting of a courtyard open to the sky, with 
cloisters round about and in the centre a colossal image, not of a Tirthamkara, but 
of a saint. By far the most remarkable of these is the great image of Gommates- 
vara on the Dodda-betta hill, fifty-seven feet in height, thus one of the largest 
freestanding images in the world. It was set up, or rather, carved in situ, for 
Camunda Raja about 983 A. D. The saint, who was the son of the first Tir- 
thamkara, and resigned his kingdom to become an ascetic, is represented in the 
immoveable serenity of one practising the kdyotsarga austerity, undisturbed by 
the serpents about his feet, the ant-hills rising to his thighs, or the growing creeper 
that has already reached his shoulders. Another figure at Ilivala is over twenty 
feet in height. There exist also statues to Bharatesvara, the saint’s brother. The 
treatment is very formal. 

Ordinary temples known as bastis and containing images of Jinas are like- 
wise abundant at Sravana Belgola, most of them being in Cola-Dravida style and 
dating from the eleventh or twelfth century. At least two metal images of about 
the same date are still in private possession in the village; an example from the 

' Cousens, 8, pi. 29; Yazdani; Smith, 2, fig. 156; Kramrisch, in Jahrb. as. Kunst, i, 1924, 
pi. 52. 

I18 



same district is illustrated in fig. 234. The Jaina matha or monastery in the village 
is decorated with paintings of scenes from the life of certain Tirtharhkaras and 
Jaina kings^. 

A more peculiar type of Jaina temple is represented in the Kannada (Kanara) 
country below the ghats, especially at Mudabidri near Mangalore. The style be- 
longs to the time of the kings of Vijayanagar, and is characterised by its sloping 
roofs of flat overlapping slabs, and a peculiar kind of stone screen enclosing the 
sides, recalhng a Buddhist railing. The nearest analogy for the sloping roofs is 
found in the Himalayan forms, and some authors have assumed a connection of style 
between Kannada and Nepal ; more likely similar conditions have produced similar 
forms, the Kannada roofs being well adapted to the excessive rainfall below theghats ^ . 

Figures of Gommatesvara are not found in northern India. But there is a 
series of rock cut temples, and colossal images at Gw^ar. Most of the excavated 
shrines are mere niches containing the statues, all of which represent Tirtham- 
karas, the largest being fifty-seven feet in height®. 

Strictly analogous to the mediaeval painting of Bengal and Nepal is that of 
the illustrated manuscripts of the Gujarati school. Here too we have a series of 
constantly repeated compositions, varying only in unimportant details, and clearly 
indicating a long precedent tradition. As before, the pictures form square panels 
of the height of the page, occupying spaces left for them in advance by the scribe, 
and in many cases the subjects are identified by brief legends. In accomphshment> 
and in detachment from all preoccupation with effect or with emotion, they rank 
indeed, although represented by examples of later date, above the works of the 
Eastern school. With one exception, to be referred to below, all the GujarM 
works are illustrations of Jaina texts, and in almost all cases of the Kalpa Siitra, 
a work dealing with the fife of Mahavira and certain other Tirtharhkaras, and 
another poem, the Kdlikacdrja Kathd, which is an edifying tale describing the 
faithful dealings of the holy monk Kahka with the wicked king GardabhiUa*. 

‘ For Sravana Belgola see Narasimachar, 4. The Jaina image, fig. 234 has been published 
by Hadaway in Rupam, 17, 1924. Other early Jaina bron2es include one published by Nahar 
and Ghose, Epitome of Jainism, and one in the Barton Museum, Bhavnagar, examples of later 
date are common, cf. Coomaraswamy, 9 (2), pp. 142 — 5; Hadaway, 4; Luard, in J. I. A., 
vol. XXI; Rivett-Carnac, in J. I. A., vol. IX; Hendley, T. H., in J. I. A., vol. XVII, 1916; 
Narasimachar, loc. cit., &c. The painting in the Jaina matha at Sravana Belgola is illustrated by 
Narasimachar, pi. XL VIII. Another example of a southern Jaina painting, of uncertain date is 
preserved on the ceiling of a Jaina temple at Kancipuram (fig. 256); another, ascribed to the 
eleventh century at Tirumalai, N. Arcot District (Epigraphia Indica, IX, 229). 

® Cousens, 8 (p. 34) and 9; Fergusson, 2, vol. II, pp. y^£f.;A.S. I., A. R., 1914 — i5,pt. i, d. 9. 

’ Fergusson, 2, vol. II, p. 48. 

* For full descriptions and illustration of paintings in Jaina manuscripts see Hiittemann; 
Coomaraswamy, 9 (4) ; and Glasenapp. 


II9 



Only one example of an illustrated Kalpa Sutra on palm leaf is known, dated 
equivalent to 1237 A. D. and now preserved in a hhandar at Patan^. Several exam- 
ples on paper, dated in the fifteenth century are known, others undated, and 
others of later date®. The paper manuscripts reproduce the form of the old palm 
leaves, the illustrations being arranged in the same way (fig. 255). It is indeed 
characteristic of the illustrated manuscript in India, that the picture bears no 
organic relation to the page, and merely occupies a space {alekhya sthand) left un- 
filled by the scribe for the purpose; in all probability scribe and painter were al- 
ways difierent persons. The style is one of pure draughtsmanship; the colour is 
indeed briUiant, but it is the outhne that estabhshes the facts, and this outline, 
though exceedingly facile and almost careless, is very accomplished, and very 
legible. In many cases the execution might well be called brilhant, and this applies 
as much to the tiny thumb-nail indicatory sketches in the margins as to the finished 
miniatures. The variety of scenes and circumstances represented is very conside- 
rable, and the pictures afford valuable information on contemporary, or more 
probably, considering the conservatism of the style, earlier than fifteenth century 
manners, customs and costumes. 

Another document of the same school is a manuscript of the Gujarati poem, 
Vasanta Vildsa (fig. 25 7), now in the possession of Mr.N. C. Mehta. Quite excep- 
tionally, this manuscript is in the form of a scroll, verses of the text alternating 
with the painted panels, seventy-nine in number, by which it is fuUy illustrated. 
The poem describes the pomps and glories of the Spring, and the paintings, in 
consequence are all of a lyrical character, and as such unique in the Gujarati school. 
In point of style, they are absolutely identical with those of the rehgious manu- 
scripts, and may have been executed by some of the very same artists. The 
Vasanta Vildsa was written, according to the colophon, at Ahmadabad in the 
year 1415 A. D.®. 

It may be remarked that all the Gujarati painting exhibits marked pecuUarities 
in the dehneation of the human form, the most conspicuous being those of the 
three-quarter profile position, in which the further eye protrudes unnaturally, 
and the long pointed nose projects beyond the outhne of the cheek. The expan- 
sion of the chest, moreover, is so much exaggerated, that it is often difficult to 
distinguish a man from a woman. Of these pecuharities the bulging eye and 
projecting pointed nose are met with already in the eighth century frescoes of 

^ Nahar and Ghose, pp. 696, 706. 

* Beside those in Boston, there are good examples in the India Office Library and in the 
British Museum, London, in the Museum fur Volkerkunde and the State Library, Berlin, in the 
Freer Gallery, Washington, U. S. A., and in the collections of P. C. Nahar, and A. Ghose, Cal- 
cutta, and of P. C. Manuk, Patna, as well as others in the Patan bbandars. 

^ Mehta, i; Gangoly, 3. 


120 



Elura (fig. 196); Gujarati painting is no doubt a continuation of the early western 
style, referred to by Taranatha as that of the “Ancient West”, the Rastrakuta and 
perhaps Paramara frescoes of Elura representing an intermediate stage in the 
development. The wall paintings of Sravana Belgola and K^cipuram referred to 
above, are of course, in another and southern (Dravida) style. 

In the later mediaeval period, from the fifteenth century onwards, but more 
especially in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the use of stone for pa- 
lace and domestic architecture became general in Rajputana and Bundelkhand; 
twenty or thirty royal residences in Central India, and numerous cities are remar- 
kable for their interest or beauty, nor are the traditions of civil architecture of 
this kind by any means yet altogether lost^. 

The immense palace at GwaHar (fig. 252), which extends along a great part 
of the edge of the vertical cliff of the ancient fort is due in part to Man Singh 
(i486 — 1518), his successor Vikrama Sahi, and in part to Jah^gir and Shah Ja- 
h^ in the time of Mughal occupation. Along the outer walls tall towers alter- 
nate with flat surfaces, the domes of the towers formerly covered with gilt copper, 
the walls still preserving much of their inlay of enamelled tiles representing con- 
ventional trees, men, elephants, tigers, and ducks. The two great gates, the Hin- 
dola and Hath! Paur guarding the steep road leading to the summit, the latter an 
integral part of the facade, date from the fifteenth century, and are in the same 
grand style as the palace itself; the same applies to the Gujari Mahal at the foot 
of the hill, now used as the Museum. 

The magnificent palaces at Datia (fig. 254) and Ofcha built by Bir Singh Deva 
in the seventeenth century, the former a large architectural block over a hundred 
yards square; the garden and water palace at Dig (fig. 25 3) with its great double 
cornices, built by Suraj Mall in the second quarter of the eighteenth century; 
the palace at Amber, the former capital of Jaipur State, built by another M^ 
Singh and by Jaisingh I in the seventeenth century; the imposing palace at Udai- 
pur, the capital of Mewar since ij68, of various dates (Bari Pol, 1600; Tripulia 
Gate, 1725; Rai Ahgan, 1571; Chini ki Citra Mahal, 1725 — 34; Bari Mahal or 
Amar Vilas, 1699 — Karan Vilas, 1620 — 1628, exhibiting nevertheless a 
real unity of style, and the Gul Mahal, 1640, on the Jagmandir island, and Jagni- 
vas, 1740, on another island in the lake, composing an ensemble of the most ro- 
mantic beauty); and the Jodhpur fort with its tremendous bastions, and the 
fairyhke Old Palace on its summit, dating from the seventeenth century, are the 
most important examples of Rajput civil architecture. Many of the Rajput prin- 
ces built or still possess palaces along the river edge {ghats) at Benares, and some 

* Cf. Sanderson and Begg; Growse. The best work of the present century is the Maharaja’s 
private railway station at Jaipur. For modern religious building see p. 125. 


I2I 



of these, built as late as the nineteenth century are very noble structures; the best 
is perhaps that of the Raja of Nagpur, at the Ghosla Ghap Other fine ghats are 
those of Ahalya Bai at Mahe^var on the Narmada, and those at Ujjain, 

During the last three centuries Rajput princes have erected near most of the 
great capitals beautiful pillared cenotaphs (chatri) marking the cremation sites of 
successive rulers. The most picturesque group of such buildings, with types 
ranging from little domed canopies with four pillars to large octagonal domes with 
as many as fifty six pillars. At first sight tombs of this kind have a Muhammadan 
air, but in fact all their details are Hindu, and in principal the construction does 
not differ from that of the earliest pavilion of the same type represented at Amara- 
vati (fig. 146). The best examples are those at Udaipur, of seventeenth and eigh- 
teenth century date, and those of Jodhpur, Chandor, and Jaipur. 

The later development of Dravidian art must be considered more briefly. 
We can distinguish the following styles: i. Pallava, already discussed, the only 
one in which cave temples appear, 2. Cola (850 — 1100), 3. Pandya (1100 — 1350), 
4. Vijayanagar (1350 — 1600) 5. Madura (1600 to present day). 

Cola: the classic examples are the great vimdms at Tanjore built by Rajara- 
jadeva Cola about 1000 A. D., and at Gahgaikondapuram, built by his son Ra- 
jendra Cola about 1025. The former (fig. 235) consists of the temple proper, two 
gopurams and another small shrine; everything else, and particularly the Subrah- 
maniya shrine, is later. The vimdna, is actually as well as relatively to the temple 
adjuncts, of enormous size; grandeur is achieved with very little loss of simplicity. 
The straightsided square pyramid of the tower rises in fourteen storeys, each 
decorated with pancarams, and the whole is surmounted by a dome; the lowest 
storey and the body of the temple are of almost equal elevation. All the deco- 
ration is subordinate to the outline of the main form. Another very important 
vimdna of the Cola period is the Korahganatha temple at Srinivasanalur, nearly a 
century older than the two last mentioned. 

Peculiarities characteristic of this stage in the Dravidian evolution include the 
very large abacus of the capital, the simple angular form of the bracket (no hint 
as yet of the pendent lotus), the decorative pilaster between the niches, the deve- 
lopment of the old niche- reliefs into full-round statues, and the development of 
the makara torana (the makaras still with pendent floriated tails) towards the later 
circular glory (tiruvdsi). 

Pandya: examples of the great gopuras of this period are to be found at 
Srirahgam, Cidambaram, Kumbakonam, Tiruvannamalai (fig. 237); these gate 
towers are themselves as large as the Cola vimdnas, and from this period onwards 
we find the actual shrines dwarfed by the enclosing walls and gates. The vertical 
band of the old Pallava bracket has now developed into a small pendent, without 


122 


as yet approaching the lotus in form; in the fourteenth century, however, the 
vertical face of the bracket bears a lotus in low relief. 

Vijayanagar: examples of the great pillared mandapams of this period are to 
be found at Kancipuram (Ekamranatha temple), Vijayanagar (Vitthalasvamin 
temple), Auvadaiyar Kovil (fig. 239), and Vellur (^‘Kalydna mandapaffz^'’'). The 
great city of Vijayanagar, which contains so many magnificent deserted shrines 
was founded about 1579 by Hari-hara II, who repulsed the Musalmans, who had 
invaded the south between 13 ii and 1319, and controlled the Dekkhan. In this 
way the south was for a long time protected from further inroads. The Vijayanagar 
power reached its zenith under Krsna Deva Raya (1509 — 1529) and Acyuta Raya 
(15 29 — 1542). Krsna Deva was not only a great warrior, but a man of the highest 
cultivation, an impartial and lavish patron of all sects alike, a great builder and 
patron of literature. The magnificence of Vijayanagar has been described by con- 
temporary Arab and Portuguese writers^. Abdu’r-Razzak remarks that “all the 
inhabitants of the country, whether high or low, even down to the artificers of 
the bazaar, wear jewels and gilt ornaments in their ears and around their necks, 
arms, wrists and fingers”: he describes, too, an avenue with figures of lions, 
tigers, panthers and other animals on each side “so well painted as to seem alive”. 
Paes describes a room in the palace (ca. 1522) “all of ivory, as well the chamber 
as the walls from top to bottom, and the pillars of the cross-timbers at the top had 
roses and flowers of lotuses all of ivory and all well- executed, so that there could 
not be better”. Only a few of the many Vijayanagar temples, Saiva, Vaisnava 
and Jaina, can be referred to here. The finest of all is the Vitthala or Vithoba 
begun by Krsna Deva in 1513 and still unfinished when the Vijayanagar empire 
was destroyed and the city sacked by the forces of the aUied Dakhani Sultans in 
1565. The pillared mandapas of the shrine, the Kalyana Mandapam, and the 
stone car are especially noteworthy; the latter is composed of stone blocks so 
finely wrought that it has often been regarded as a monolithic. The Kadalaikallu 
Ganesa temple is one of the most elegant in southern India; the plain walls and 
flat roof line of the cella, and the unusually tall pillars of the mandapam produce an 
efiect of simplicity and restraint rare at this time. The same plain cella walls, 
however appear in the curious oblong Anantasayin temple at Hospet, of which 
the archaic-looking vaulted roof is apsidal at both ends. The Hazara Rama temple, 
probably Krsna Deva’s private chapel, is contemporary with and similar to the 
Vitthalasvamin, and equally typical of the period. The outer enclosure walls in 
both cases are covered with reliefs; the inner walls of the Hazara Rama with 
relief scenes from the Kdmdjana. The remains of palaces and connected buildings 
consist partly of Indo-Saracenic structures, of which the Lotus Mahal is the best 

* Sewell, A.; Longhurst, 2; Smith, j (quotations from Abdu’r-Razzak and Paes). 


123 



example, combining Hindu roof and cornices with Muhammadan arches ; and the 
massive stone platforms or basements which once supported elaborate wooden 
superstructures covered with gilt copper plates. Of these basements, Krsna 
Deva’s “Dasara Dibba”, decorated with friezes representing Dasahra and Holl 
festival scenes, is the best example. Much of the stone architecture evidently 
reproduces contemporary wooden and metal forms. The great temples of the 
Vijayanagar period at Tadpatri are remarkable for most elaborate but unfinished 
gopuras (detail, fig. 247). 

The chief peculiarities of the style are as follows: the full evolution of the 
pendent lotus bracket takes place; the monohthic columns unite to the main 
straight-sided shaft a number of slender cyhndrical “columnettes” with bulbous 
capitals (fig. 239); the roll comice is doubly curved, the corners having upward 
pointing projections, the under side repeating the details of wooden constmction. 

The pillar caryatides, whether rearing lions otjdlis {gaja-simhas) are products 
of a wild phantasy; at the end of the sixteenth century rearing horses are also 
found, provided with fighting riders and groups of soldiers below (fig. 240), but 
these are more especially a feature of the Madura style. Enclosing walls and base- 
ments are decorated with continuous reliefs representing epic and festival themes. 

Madura: after the fall of Vijayanagar the Nayyaks of Madura estabhshed 
an independent kingdom, the most important king and builder being Timmala 
Nayyak (1623 — 1659). As before, and as at the present day, the temples are in 
the purely Dravidian tradition, unaffected by any outside influences, while the 
palaces are half Hindu, half Muhammadan in style. The well known Vasanta or 
Pudu Mandapam in front of the great Minaksi temple is strictly speaking neither 
a mandapam nor a “choultry’’ (travellers resting place), but a flat-roofed corridor 
with three aisles; it illustrates extremely well the most obvious feature of the style, 
appearing also in the looo-piUared mandapam of the great temple, viz. the pillar 
caryatides in full-round sculpture, representing deities, and in the case of one of 
the Pudu Mandapam pillars, Timmala Nayyak himself with his wives^. For the 
rest, the peculiar character of the style, so evident in the great temple at Madura, 
which for most tourists estabUshes the type of Dravidian architecture, is rather 
due to an exaggeration of already developed shapes than to any new develop- 
ment; it may be remarked however that the decorative pilaster has now become 
a kMmhha-pancaram i. e. it rises from a pot, and bears aloft a little pavilion, and 
that the pendent lotus bracket is so elongated as to touch the abacus of the capital. 

The Subrahmaniya shrine at Tanjore, close to the great Cola vim ana is a simple 

1 This temple is evidently a later development of the Gupta type of temple 17 at Sanci; 
note especially the continuation of the porch roof as a moulding round the ceUa -wall. The same 
applies to the little Dravidian shrine at Ridi Vihara in Ceylon. 


124 



example of the style, so far as the general form is concerned, but with charac- 
teristic and very elaborate decoration (fig. 238); it has been aptly compared to the 
work of the goldsmith executed in stone. The Dravidian tradition of temple 
building is very far from being extinct at the present day; the hereditary silpins or 
sthapatis of the Kammalar caste, who, in their own estimation, rank with Brahmans 
and are indeed the descendants of men who received great honour and high- 
sounding titles from builder kings, can still be seen at work (fig. 241), still making 
use of the silpa-sdstras, either in Sanskrit versions or vernacular abstracts. The 
craftsman’s methods and psychology survive unchanged and unmodified; for 
this reason a detailed study of the building of a modern temple, which no one has 
yet undertaken, is a very great desideratum; and indeed, it is only from the hving 
craftsman that Jouveau-Dubreuil^ who illustrates and briefly describes the 
twentieth century temple buildings at Tiruppappuliyur, was able to obtain the 
technical information which enabled him to prepare his masterly account of the 
development of Dravidian architecture. Here we can only refer briefly to the Ponam- 
balavanesvaran Kovil, still in process of construction near Colombo in Ceylon. 
The following data, for which I am indebted to my cousin. Sir Ponambalam 
Ramanathan, are of interest: “The name of the temple I am rebuilding is Pon- 
ambala-v^a-Isvaram, spoken of as “Ponambalav^esvaran Kovil”. Pon-ambalam 
in Tamil stands for the Sanskrit Kanakasabai. Since the beginning of the rebuild- 
ing, two silpis or architects have come and gone. The third one’s name is 
Sornakkalai Asari, which means “golden field artisan” (in building works). 
He is a Tamil man from South India, whose ancestors have followed the 
same profession. There are about 100 men working at the temple side and 
at the quarry side, all of them Tamil men from South India. The silpa sdstras he 
uses are Kasipam, Manusaram, Visvakarmayam and Mayamatam, but, of course, 
the traditions which every workman is bound to remember and reproduce, 
according to thedirections of the artist ( silpi ), ate the very life of the written books*. 
“It is commonly supposed that our ancient architecture is a laboured creation 
of men according to their respective fancies and abilities, but our Saiva Agamas 
teach that the architecture of our Temples is all Kailasa-bhavana, that is, of forms 
{hhdvanas) prevailing in Kailasa, which is on the summit of Mahameru far beyond 
the stratas of existence known as Bhuvar-loka and Svar-loka” (letter dated 
August 6, 1925). 

The conception last indicated recurs many times in Indian literature whenever 
the work of the architect is mentioned; either he is inspired by Visvakarma, or 

* Jouveau-Dubreuil, i, vol. II, pp. i54ff. Id architecture contemporaine. 

* For these and related books see Acharya; Coomaraswamy, i, 13; Kramrisch, i; RamRaz; 
Rao, I, 3. For printed texts, Bhoja; Kumara; Mayamuni; Visnudharmottaram. 


125 



he visits the heaven of Indra to bring back with him the design of some palace 
or temple there existing. In the same way the other arts, such as dancing, are practi- 
sed on earth after a divine modeh. 

The importation of craftsmen and labourers, including quarrymen, who have 
their own methods of obtaining the large stone beams required, is of interest in 
connection with the vexed question of the construction of Hindu temples in 
Farther India and Indonesia^. In my own view, it is far from unhkely that in 
some cases the whole of the work may have been done by workmen of Indian 
birth under the guidance of a silpin using Indian silpa-sdstras. Such workmen have 
moved from India to Ceylon in large numbers at various periods ; the Mahdvamsa 
mentioned “craftsmen and a thousand families of the eighteen gilds” sent by a 
Pandyan king from Madura to Ceylon in the time of Vijaya. Twenty-three hundred 
centuries later the same process was going on in the reign of Kirti Sri ; and these 
eighteenth century Tamil kammdlars are already indistinguishable in language and 
appearance from true Simhalese®. 

Fuller reference must be made to the later mediaeval southern school of 
bronze, more usually copper, rarely brass, foimding. This art* was already practised 
under the Andhras in the Kistna-Godaveri District (Vehgi) and the Saiva and 
Vaisnava development must have been a continuation of the same tradition. 
We know from inscriptions that (presumably metal) images of Saiva saints were 
set up in temples by Rajarajadeva Cok in 1014, and Vaisnava images at least as 
early as the thirteenth century®. The great series of metal images in South-Indian 
style found at Polonnaruva in Ceylon cannot be later than the thirteenth century®. 
A Nataraja from Belur is dated, but the reading is uncertain, either 910 or 1511’. 
The two great collections are those of the Colombo and Madras Museums, and 
there are important examples in Boston®. The main types represented are the va- 
rious forms of Siva, especially the Nataraja (fig. 242); Parvati (fig. 244); the Saiva 

* Mahdvamsa, XVII, 24, XXVII, 18, and XXXIII, 10, 18; Coomaraswamy, 2, Ch. V, and 
14, p. 79. As remarked in the Brhat Samhitd “the science of house-building has come down to us 
from the rps, who had it from Brahma”. 

2 Bosch; Schoemaker; GrosLier, 3, Ch. XIX. 

® Coomaraswamy, i, Ch. III. Cf. page 164, note 2. 

* Sewell, R.; Rea, 4, 1908 — 09. 

® Aiyangar, Essay XI. 

® Coomaraswamy, 6; Arunachalam, 2. 

’ Hadaway, 2, the latter date more probable. TheNataraja type appears in stone sculpture, 
at Tanjore and Gangaikondapuram, only in the eleventh century; cf. Jouveau-Dubreuil, i, 
vol. II, pp. 28 — 30. The still older representations of Siva dancing are of other, and usually 
six-armed types. 

“ Coomaraswamy, 6 and 9 (2); Rodin, Coomaraswamy and Goloubew. For others in Eng- 
lish collections, India Society, i. There is a fine stone fragment in the Victoria and Albert 
Museum, London. 




126 


saints, Mamkka-Vasagar, Tirujnanasambandha-Svami, Appar-Svami, and Sund- 
atamurti-Svami (fig. 243), all of whom lived before the tenth century; Visnu 
(fig. 246) and Laksmi; Krsna; Rama; the Vaisnava saints called Alvars; and 
figures of royal donors (fig. 245). The art is still practised by Kammalar sthapatis 
in the Madras Presidency, and some modern productions are very nearly as good 
as those of the seventeenth or eighteenth century. But the earlier work has full 
and rounded forms, the later is relatively attenuated and sharply outlined. 

The Nataraja type is one of the great creations of Indian art, a perfect visual 
image of Becoming adequate complement and contrast to the Buddha type of pure 
Being. As remarked by Kramrisch, its finest reahsations exhibit a “sinnlich reifste 
Korperlichkeit voll plastischer Bewegung mit geometrischer AUgemeingiiltig- 
keit verschmolzen”. The movement of the dancing figure is so admirably ba- 
lanced that while it fills all space, it seems nevertheless to be at rest, in the sense 
that a spinning top or a gyrostat is at rest; thus realising the unity and simul- 
taneity of the Five Activities {Pancakrtja, viz. Production, Maintenance, Destruc- 
tion, Embodiment and Release) which the symboHsm specifically designates^. 
Apparently the type appeared in the Cola period; it is now very widely 
distributed in the South, in innumerable examples still in pujd. 

RAJPUT PAINTING 

Rajput painting is the painting ofRajputana and Bundelkhand, and the Panjab 
Him^ayas. The known examples ranging from the latter part of the sixteenth 
into the nineteenth century fall into two main groups, a Rajasthani (Rajputana 
and Bundelkhand), and a Pahari. The latter group is again divisible into a school 
of Jammu, with reference to all the HiU States west of the Satlaj, and a school of 
Kahgra, with reference to all the Hill States of the Jalandhar group, east of the same 
river. With Kangra is included Garhwal, a Hill State east of Simla, which derived its 
style diretly from Kahgra at the end of the eighteenth century. Sikh painting, mainly 
done in Lahore and Amritsar in the time of Ran jit Singh and Sher Singh (together 
about 1790 to 1843), is also an immediate derivative of the Kahgra school.^ 

It is important to understand the relation of Rajput to Mughal painting. 
Pure types of either can be distinguished at a glance, usually by their themes, al- 
ways by fheir style. Thus Mughal painting, like the contemporary Memoirs of 

‘ For the symbolism, &c., see Coomaraswamy, 9 (2), pp. Syff., and 14; Rodin, Coomaras- 
wamy and Goloubew; Kramrisch, 2, pp. 71, 83, 87; Jouveau-Dubreuil, i, vol. II, p. 28. The 
rar/wir prescription is given in full by Rao, i. Further details in A. S. I., A. R., 1922 — 23, p. 143. 
The linear composition has been discussed by Hadaway, 5. 

2 Coomaraswamy, 8, and 9 (5), the latter with full Bibliography; Diez; Goetz, i, 2, 3, 4, 8; 
Mehta, 2 ; Gangoly, 2 ; a large work on Rajput painting is announced by Gangoly. 


127 



' the Great Mughals, reflects an interest that is exclusively in persons and events; 
is essentially an art of portraiture and chronicle. The attitude even of the painters 
to their work is personal; the names of at least a hundred Mughal painters are 
known from their signatures, while of Rajput painters it would be hard to men- 
tion the names of half a dozen, and I Icnow of only two signed and dated examples. 
* Mughal painting is academic, dramatic, objective, and eclectic; Rajput painting 
4 is essentially an aristocratic folk art, appealing to all classes alike, static, lyrical, 
and inconceivable apart from the life it reflects. After Akbar, Mughal painting is 
almost devoid of any poetical background; in the words of Jahangir (when still 
Prince Daniy^) “The old songs weary my heart . . . the love-story of Farhad 
and Shirin has grown old and lost its savour ... if we read at aU, let it be what 
we have seen and beheld ourselves”^ ; Rajput painting, on the other hand, illus- 
trates every phase of mediaeval Hindi literature, and indeed, its themes cannot 
be understood without a thorough knowledge of the Indian epics, the Kfsna 
Lila literature, music, and erotics. 

Technically and stylistically the differences are equally clear, most of all 
perhaps when Mughal painting deals with Hindu themes, as in the Ndmab 

and BuisiAaprijd. Apart from the illustration of manuscripts, in direct continuation 
^ of Persian tradition, Mughal painting is essentially an art of miniature painting, 
and when enlarged, becomes an easel picture; Indian manuscript illustrations 
f are very rare, and in a totally different tradition (see p. 120), and Rajput painting 
I enlarged, becomes a mural fresco, historically, indeed, is a reduced wall painting. 
Mughal painting uses soft tonalities and atmospheric effects; Rajput colour sug- 
gests enamel or stained glass, and while it may be used to establish the planes, 
is never blended to produce effects. Mughal outline is precise and patient, Rajput 
interrupted and allusive or fluent and definitive, but always swift and facile. 
Relief effect is sought and obtained in Mughal painting by means of shading, 
and Rembrandt-like chiaroscuro is often introduced; Rajput colour is always 
• flat, and a night scene is lighted as evenly as one in full sunlight, the conditions 
being indicated by accessories (such as candles or torches), rather than represented. 
Thus, in spirit, Mughal painting is modern, Rajput still mediaeval, . 

^ burning and Melting, being the u Gudd^ of Nadi, translated into English by Dawud and 
Coomaraswamy, London, 1912, pp. 24, 25. 

“ It is unnecessary here to discussin detail the Rajputelementspresentin true Mughal painting. 
These Indian elements are apparent in several directions, (i) the illustration of Hindu themes in 
the first quarter of the seventeenth century, (2) the adoption of Hindu costume at the courts 
of Akbar and Jahangir in the “Rajput period”, (3) the fusion of themes and styles in the eighteenth 
century, especially in Oudh, producing mixed types, and (4) the fact that more than half of the 
Mughal painters were native Hindus. All these conditions create resemblances betweenMughal and 
Rajput painting, quite superficial in the case of i and 2, more fundamental in the case of 3 and 4. 


128 



One of the oldest Rajput paintings is probably the Kfsna Lila theme illu- 
strated in fig. 258, which, in style, lyrical theme and the representation of bees, 
and in the language of the superscription shows a relation to the GujarM painting 
of the fifteenth century. 

More typical are the several series of Ragm^a pictures (figs. 259, 260), known 
as S. I., S. 2, etc.^. S. i and S. 2 may be dated in the latter part of the sixteenth 
century, certainly not later than 1600; these with four in the Ghose collection Cal- 
cutta, represent the purest Rajput style in its most vigorous form. Their most ob- 
vious features are the great vitality of the drawing and colour; the former analytic, 
or abstract, not so much representing forms as designating them with a maximum 
economy of means, the latter glowing hke enamel, and used with organised skill 
to establish the planes. The painter is not concerned to create picturesque effects, 
but to state all the facts clearly, leaving these to evoke their appropriate and ine- 
vitable emotional reactions; he knows his audience and does not need to cross 
his t’s and dot his Ps and so proceeds in the boldest and broadest manner. The 
style itself is passionate rather than sentimental. 

A little later, in another group, S. 3 (fig. 261) we can trace apparently a Mughal 
influence in the softer tonahty. More often the colour retains much of its strength, 
but loses in coordination. The old compositions are copied again and again in 
the eighteenth century; the colour is brilliant, but not so deep as before, nor is 
it used with any plastic sense of space which is partially rendered by a semi-Euro- 
pean perspective derived from Mughal art. Many popular works illustrating all 
kinds of subjects, and for the most part in a pure Rajput idiom have been pro- 
duced in Jaipur throughout the nineteenth century, and in spite of the best efforts 
made by the local “School of Art”, the old traditions still survive; even in the. 
nineteenth or twentieth century a work like the “Pig-sticking” of fig. 263 could 
be produced, in which there are recognizable at once a force and a sense of beauty 
— note especially the horses’ heads — worthy of a classic age. 

On a much larger scale, in the eighteenth or at the beginning of the nineteenth 
century there still flourished a school of design on a larger scale to which are due the 
fine Ras Lila paintings in the Jaipur Palace Library, and the cartoons from which they 
were prepared, now scattered amongst various museums (fig. 265)^. Actual mural 
decorations survive in a number of Rajput palaces (Datia, Orcha, Udaipur, Bikanir, 
and as external decoration in the case of even quite modern buildings (fig. 262). 

^ Ragmala pictures illustrate the thirty-six Ragas and Raginis, musical modes, that is to 
say they depict the situations appropriate to the various moods expressed and evoked by the 
different modes. They are usually inscribed with the Hindi poems which describe the same 
situations, often in highly poetical and graphic fashion. For the different series and fuller details 
see Coomaraswaray, 8 and 9 (5) and references there listed. 

2 Mehta, 2, assigns these to the reign of Sawai Jai Singh 11 (1693—1743). 


Portraiture is not the typical expression of Rajput art, nor on the other hand 
can its practise be ascribed wholly to Mughal influence. Such relatively early 
examples as exist (fig. z64) are of a rather more monumental character than is 
the case in even the best Mughal portraits; the Rajput maimer is more abstract 
and flatter, more “ideal” and less intensely personal. These features are well seen 
to in some of the large portrait heads from Jaipur, seen at the Lucknow Exhibi- 
tion in 1921 ; and this quality is transmitted to Mughal art when Rajput types are 
copied, of which the beautiful Head of a Girl in the Bodleian^ afibrds a good in- 
stance. 

The Rajasthani physical type and even the manner of representation are 
indeed sometimes carried over into works that must have been done under Mughal 
auspices, such as the very lovely group of girls on a terrace also in the Bodleian*. 
On the other hand, in the eighteenth century there developed at the court of 
Oudh a mixed style (“Late Mughal”) in which Rajput composition and elements 
of design are frequent, but where the treatment is generally inferior. In any case, 
when Rajput themes are taken over into Mughal art, it is for their picturesque and 
romantic character, rather than in their true significance; this is especially the case 
with the humorous Mughal treatments^ of Ragmala subjects. 

A group of paintings in a somewhat different style emanating from the 
Panjab Himalayas, and especially from the Dogra Hill States, of which Jammu 
was the wealthiest and most powerful, dates mainly from the earlier part of the 
seventeenth century. Apart from their style, many of these paintings (which are 
generally known to Amritsar dealers as “Tibati” pictures) are recognizable by 
their inscriptions in TakrE characters, the peculiar illegibility of which often baffles 
the most ardent student. Characteristic examples of the Jammu school are illus- 
trated in figs. 266, 267. The former belongs to a well-known series of unusually 
large 'Kamdjam pictures, dealing with the Siege of Lanka; here the drawing is not 
especially sensitive, but the whole design, the sense of space, and the glowing 
colour are all to be admired. An even more mural character is apparent in the 
Krsna welcoming Sudama(fig. 267). Other subjects commonly formd in works of 
this school include "^gmdld pictures with classifications and compositions different 
from those of Rajasthan, and series illustrating Ndjaka-ndjakd-bheda, or classi- 
fication of heroines in accordance with their temperament, age and circumstances, 
following the works of the rhetoricians. Miscellaneous mythological subjects, 
other themes from the Krsna cycle, and finally a series of portraits make up a 

‘ Coomaraswamy, 3, 1910, pi. XV. 

® Coomaraswamy, 8, pi. XX. 

® See Grierson, On the modern Indo- Aryan alphabets of north-western India, J. R. A. S., 1904; 

Linguistic Survey of India, Vol. IX, pt. i; and Coomaraswamy, 8, p. 19. 


130 



considerable total. The portraits are mostly of the late seventeenth and eighteenth 
century; rather splendidly composed, they present a strongly marked local 
physical type with a retreating forehead; almost always we find fresh flowers worn 
in the turbans, which is a practise confined to the hiUs. 

The other Pahari school, that of Kahgra, with its offshoot in Garhwal, and 
another derivative in the Sikh school of the Panjab, belongs essentially to the 
last quarter of the eighteenth century and earliest years of the nineteenth. A few 
of the pictures in which the colour is soft and powdery in effect may date from the 
earlier part of the eighteenth century, but the main development is due to the 
patronage of Raja Samsar Cand, the last great Katoch ruler of Kahgra (1774 
to 1825). Most of the work seems to reflect the periods of his residence at Sujan- 
pur near Nadaun on the Bias where he constructed lovely palaces and gardens, and 
spent his days in the intervals between his many wars in hstening to the recitations 
of poets and the songs of musicians. Moorcroft records that he had in his posses- 
sion many paintings of “the feats of PCrishna and Balaram, the adventures of 
Arjuna, and subjects from the Mahabharata”. 

This Kahgra, or Katoch school as it might well be called, is the third and 
latest of the three clearly defined groups of Rajput painting, and one of the most 
productive, despite its rapid development and comparatively short duration. Its 
favorite themes are the Krsm Lila, Najaka-najaka-bheda, especially sets of the 
Asta-ndjakd, Sdkta subjects, romances taken from the epics, such as Nala and 
Damajanti, and others of later origin such as the Hamir-hath, genre and portraiture; 
Rdgmdld series are altogether absent. The inscriptions are always in Nagarl 
characters and for the most part represent texts of weU-known Hindi poets, 
especially Kesava Das. The scenes are laid for the most part in the fairy palaces 
and gardens of Nadaun, with the river Bias flowing amongst low hiUs in the back- 
ground, more rarely amongst the snow-clad peaks of the Himalayas, and in one 
or two examples we find representations of the deodar. The narrative and erotic 
themes provide, incidentally, a precious picture of intimate daily fife at a Rajput 
court; this is especially the case with the Nala and 'Damajanti series, where 
marriage ceremonies, official duties, athletic exercises, daily prayers, meals, 
and love scenes are all represented. In addition to the costumes found elsewhere, 
there appears as a highly characteristic feature the jaguli, worn by women, a sort 
of empire gown fastening at neck and waist, opening between the fastenings and 
permitting a glimpse of the breasts, and with long tight wrinkled sleeves and a 
long flowing skirt. Examples of the Kangra school are illustrated in figs. 268 — 271 . 

The style has completely changed. The intention is more realistic; Mughal 
and even European influences are not wholly absent, and to these must be ascribed 
the occasional rendering of dramatic night effects, in which deep shadows are 


cast by torches, or the golden rain of fireworks stands out against a dark ground. 
But the great work of the school was to create a feminine type peculiar to itself, 
and of infinite charm; not robust, hke the Rajasth^ types, but slender, and mo- 
ving with an irresistible grace, intentionally accentuated by the long flowing 
lines of the drapery (fig. 271). Nothing, indeed, is more characteristic of the style 
than its use of flowing, unbroken lines, not ingeniously calligraphic hke late Per- 
sian, nor boldly allusive hke those of the early Rajasthani school, but creating a 
pure melody. The painter uses this flowing outline unwearyingly to define and 
repeat the forms to which he is attached; thus the aesthetic purity of the work is 
less than that of earlier schools, much less than that of the Gujarati manuscript 
ihustrations, but the charm of the result is all-compelhng and almost personal, 
hke the grace of an individual woman. The Kahgra qalm is indeed a feminine art, 
contrasted with the mascuhne force of the early K.dgmdlds\ intrinsically an art of 
sentiment, rather than of passion. The same quahty appears in the colour, which 
is pure and cool; it is used in a quite diflerent way, not to estabhsh the planes but 
to fill in the areas defined by outline, so that we have to do now with coloured 
drawings rather than with paintings. And in fact many of the most charming 
works of the school are those unfinished pictures and sketches in which the figures 
are still represented in outline, only the colouring of the background being partly 
completed (fig. 271). 

A minor provincial school of painting appears in the Hill State of Garhwal 
about the close of the eighteenth century. Here already there lived the des- 
cendants of a family of Hindu painters, who had originally worked at the Mughal 
court, but had followed Prince Salim, Aurangzib’s nephew, in his flight to the 
hiUs. Of these, Mola Ram, fifth in descent, b. 1 760 and d. 1 8 3 3 , is the best known ; 
and some signed and other attributed works, some in a late Mughal, but for the 
most part in the current style are imdoubtedly from his hand^. On the whole, 
the work of the Garhwal school bears the closest possible relation to that of 
Kahgra; we may safely assume in this connection that as conditions in Kahgra 
became more and more unsettled, Kahgra painters sought elsewhere a patronage 
that could no longer be extended to them at home, and it is highly probable that 
some accompanied the two sisters of Anirudh (son of SamsM Cand, d. 1828) who 
were married to the Raja of Garhwal. 

In the Panjab the Sildi style covers the period approximately 1775 — 1850. 
As the Sikh culture was based on personal achievement, and lacked an aristo- 
cratic tradition, and as the Sikh reUgion has no mythology and no images, it was 
natural that the Sikh paintings should be mainly portraits, representations of the 


1 Coomaraswamy, 8, p. 25; Mukandi Lai, Notes on Mola Kam, Rupam, 8, 1921; Guleri. 
The work of two other Garhwal! painters, Manaku and Caitu, has been described by Mehta (2). 



Gurus, and of chiefs and courtiers singly or in darbdr. In this respect the Sikh 
school was determined by conditions analogous to those which find expression in 
Mughal painting; but unlike Mughal art, it is derived directly from the formal, 
fluent style of the hills^. It was not an original art, but one created by selection, 
that is to say by the omission of religious and emphasis on personal motifs; it 
owes its special aspect more to the fact of its representation of Sikh types and 
costumes than to any new design. The best of the Sikh portraits are sensitively 
drawn and finely composed. 


INDIAN ARTS AND CRAFTS 

To give any adequate account of Indian arts and crafts, even as practised 
during the last three centuries, would require a volume scarcely smaller than the 
whole of the present work^. Under these circumstances it seems desirable merely 
to indicate in tabular form, with occasional comment, the leading types of tech- 
nique. For this purpose a scheme is adopted similar to that used in Sir George 
Watt’s Indian Art at Delhi, which embodies the very valuable and too Httle known 
results of Mr. Percy Brown’s researches undertaken in connection with the great 
exhibition of Indian art held at Delhi in 1903. The best detailed account of the 
crafts practised in a single area will be found in my Mediaeval Sinhalese Art. 

Metal work, (i) Iron and steel. The early knowledge of iron and steel has been 
referred to above, p. 34. The finest work in engraved steel is found in the 
weapons of Southern India®. Good work, but more like Persian is found in 
Rajputana^. There exist many elegant types of iron writing styles®. 

(2) Brass. Brass and to a less extent copper are widely used amongst Hindus 
for domestic utensils and ceremonial implements*. The commonest form is the 
small water vessel known as the lota, spouted forms of the same type likewise 

‘ Gupta, S. N., The Sikh school of painting, Rupam, 12, 1922; Coomaraswamy, 9 (5). 

* See Watt; Birdwood; Mukharji, T. N., Art manufactures of India, Calcutta, 1888; Coo- 
mataswamy, i, 2, 4; Baden-Powell, Paniab Manufactures, Lahore, 1868 — 1872; Victoria and 
Albert Museum, London, Portfolios of Industrial Art; numerous articles in the Journal of Indian 
Art; and titles listed in Coomaraswamy, Bibliographies of Indian Art, Boston 1925, pp. 34 — 41. 

® Watt, pis. 4, 66; Clarke, S. C., Dravidian {Sivagangd) swords, Burlington Mag. 29, 1916. 

■* For Indian weapons generally see Egerton, W., 111 . handbook of Indian arms,.., London, 
1880; Baden-PoweU, B. H., Indian arms and armour, J. I. A., 6, 1896. 

® Burkhill, J. H., Fashion in iron styles, J. A. S. B., N. S., VI, I (10). 

® Hadaway, S., Illustrations of metal work in brass and copper, mostly south Indian, Madras, 
1913; Coomaraswamy, 4; Ujfalvy, Tes cuivres anciens au Cachemire et au Petit-Thibet, Paris, 1883, 
and U art des cuivres ancient dans I’Himalaya occidental, Paris, 1884; Mukharji, Brass and copper 
manufactures of Bengal, Calcutta, 1894; and articles by Gait, Griffiths, Ha veil, Kipling, Rivett- 
Carnac, in J. I. A., vols. 7, 3, i, 9. 


133 



dating from the remotest antiquity; the large South Indian type used for fetching 
water, and carried on the hip is especially handsome, and often decorated with 
engraved designs. The surdhi is an elegant vessel with a very long neck used for car- 
rying Ganges water. The introduction of smoking at the beginning of the seven- 
teenth century led to the development of handsome huqqa furniture, of which the 
main forms are the globular (seventeenth century, fig. 383) and inverted bell- 
shaped (eighteenth century) bowls, and the fine copper fire-bowl covers, often 
ajouree and silver inlaid, formerly made at Purnea near Murshidabad, Bengal. 
The ceremonial vessels {pancpatr, acmani, dhupddn &c.) and lamps {dlpdan, 
artJ, See.) used in temple and personal ritual are found in an endless variety of 
fine and sometimes elaborately decorated forms^. 

(3) Gold and silver. Vessels and dishes of gold are naturally found only 
in royal use or as votive offerings; those of silver being more usual. The finest 
examples of gold known to me are the votive dalamura tatmva and ran-vataha-pata 
in the Dalada Maligawa, Kandy, Ceylon (figs. 381, 385), both decorated in ex- 
quisite taste with encrusted cabochon sapphires. 

(4) Other alloys. The most important of these is hidri, so called from Bidar 
in Haidarabad State. The colour is black, the basis of the alloy zinc, with the 
additional metals lead, tin, and copper. Boxes, huqqa bowls, and trays and basins 
are made of it, and almost invariably decorated with silver encrustation (fig. 382). 
The chief places of manufacture in the eighteenth century were in Lucknow, 
under late Mughal patronage, and in Haidarabad; and as remarked by Brown, it 
would require the production of a special treatise to give anything hke a satis- 
factory conception of the many beautiful designs met with; the poppy, which 
occurs in design throughout India, may be specially mentioned. 

(5) Apphed decoration of metal. The principal forms are inlay and overlay 
of one metal upon another. In inlay and incrustation (damascening, kojtgart) a 
groove is made, and silver or gold wire inserted, and then hammered down; 
or an area is excavated, and undercut at the edges, a thin plate of silver or gold in 
the required shape applied, and the edges hammered down, holding it fast (figs. 384, 
386). The best work was done in the Panjab in connection with the decoration 
of weapons in the Sikh period. A cheaper form of kojtgan known as devali the 
surface of the metal is not engraved, but merely roughened, and then silver or 
gold wire is beaten on in the required designs. Both forms are practised all over 
India and in Ceylon. 

Similar decoration is apphed to brass, as in the mounting of the Simhalese 
hak-gedija of fig. 390. Niello is rarely apphed to brass (fig. 384) more often to 

^ For temple lamps see especially Gangoly, O. C,y South Indian lamps y J. I. A., 17, and Bur- 
lington Mag., July 1916; Watt, pi. 12. For Nepalese incense burners, Gangoly, 5. 


silver. Enamel is applied to gold and silver objects of some size, such as scent 
sprinklers and huqqa bowls (fig. 379), and to the handles of weapons, of which 
there are superb examples in the collection of the Mah^aja of Camba^. In imi- 
tation enamel, good effects are still obtained by the craftsmen of Moradabad; the 
surface of the metal is excavated in champleve style, and filled in with hot wax and 
when the whole surface is rubbed down and polished, the design stands out in 
metal on a coloured surface. Copper, brass, gold and silver are also commonly 
decorated by repoussing or chasing. Thin objects such as trays are of course beaten, 
heavier ones are cast by the cire perdue process, and turned on the lathe. 

Jewellery'^' . Jewellery is made and worn in quantity and great variety by all 
classes throughout India and Ceylon; the materials range from real flowers, to 
base metal, silver, and gold. Many, perhaps most, of the metal forms bear the 
names of, and approximate in form to floral prototypes. Space will not permit of 
a description of the forms, and only the leading technical process can be referred 
to. No finer effects are produced than in gold enamelling®; a cream ground, with 
designs in bright red and green are usual (figs. 370, 371, 372), the metal being 
excavated {champleve) and the colour filled in and fired. The art is typically North 
Indian; it is especially associated with Jaipur, where the best work has been done, 
but seems to have originated in Lahore, still the source of the raw material. 
Cheaper work is apphed to silver, in this case the colours being usually blue and 
green. The use of enamel in Siam is presumably of Indian origin; the art is 
unknown in southern India and Ceylon, and in the Indonesian islands. Typically 
Indian is the incrustation of gold and silver with gems (fig. 376), by the process 
of gold-embedding^; each stone rests in a separate cell, and is held in place by a 
bezel of soft gold shaped and pressed into shape by a steel tool. It should be ob- 
served that all gems used in this way are cabochon cut, the object of the Indian 
jeweller being to produce, not a flashing, but a fully coloured effect; this use of 
gems as colour, rather than as light, is one of the chief virtues of Indian jewellery, 
modern facetted European jewellery always seeming vulgar by contrast. Another 
typical and very ancient technique is that of fifigree or wire and pip, the wire and tiny 
balls of gold being apphed to the surface of the object to be decorated (figs. 368, 375). 
Other objects are made in a similar way, many small shaped pieces of gold being first 
prepared, and then joined together to make an elaborate design (fig. 369). 

1 Watt, pi. 68. 

2 Birdwood; Haveil, in J. L A., vols. 3, 5 and 6; Hendley, T. H., Indian jewellery^ J. 1 . A., 
vol. 12, also in voL 4; Marshall, ii; Vinson, bijoux du pays Tamouly Pondicherry, n. d. ; 
Coomaraswamy, i, 4; Fischer, L. H., Indischer V’olksschmuck * . . Ann. K. K. Naturhist. HoF 
museum, Wien, 1890; Haberlandt, M., Volkerscbmuck . . . Leipzig, 1906. 

2 Hendley, in J. I. A., vol. i (staff of Maharaja Man Singh); Jeypore enamels \ Birdwood. 

* Method described, Coomaraswamy, in Spoiia Zeylanica, 6, 1909. 


135 



Other jewels are made in finely chased or repousse metal. A very fine example 
of a gold bead worn by a South Indian Brahman is illustrated in fig. 374; here the 
whole bead is covered with figures of deities, in minutest detail. 

The cire-perdue process is weU illustrated in the Bundi (Rajputana) method 
of casting flexible anklets {sdnf) of base metal in a single mould. A composition 
of wax, resin, and oil is prepared in a long string, and twisted spirally round a 
stick of the diameter of the proposed links. One cut along the stick separates the 
links, which are then interlaced every one into two others, and each joined up 
by the application of a hot knife edge. When sixty or seventy rings are thus uni- 
ted, the ends of the chain are joined, and the whole gently manipulated and 
flattened until it forms a perfectly flexible model of the future anklet. It is then 
dipped into a paste of clay and cowdung, and finally enclosed in an outer layer 
of clay; when dry, the mould is scraped until a small piece of each link is just 
visible, then a wax leading line is attached all round, and the whole again covered. 
Two such moulds are cast at once side by side, the two leading Lines being 
brought up into a hollow at the top of the mould; this hollow is filled with metal 
and borax, and then covered with clay, leaving only a small blow-hole. When 
this mould is placed in a furnace and fired, the wax melts and the metal takes its 
place; and when the mould is afterwards opened, it is only necessary to remove 
the leading fines and file down irregularities, to have a flexible anklet ready for use. 

Ivorj^. The use of ivory, which dates from the earliest times, must necessarily 
belong to the large group of crafts of non-Aryan origin in India. It has been 
used for an enormous range of purposes, from sacred images to dice, but never 
more successfully than in the form of carved or pierced plaques applied to archi- 
tectural and other woodwork. Good examples of inlaid doors are found in Raj- 
putana (Bikanir); at the Ridi Vihara, in Ceylon, the combination of pierced car- 
ved ivory with the ebony of the door frame is especially admirable (cf. fig. 388). 
Engraved and carved plaques applied to small two-wheeled carriages are illus- 
trated in figs, 387, 389; musical instruments, especially in Rajputana and Southern 
India are often beautifully decorated in a similar way. The turning of ivory has 
also been developed in great perfection, especially in Ceylon, where large scent 
sprays are made, so thin that the ivory container can be as easily compressed 
as a metal oil-can. 

The very early use of conch or chank (Jafikha) of which bracelets are made 
has been alluded to above^. It need only be remarked that the whole shell, used 

^ Watt, pi. 76 — 79 ; Coomaraswamy, 1,4; Kunz, G. P., Ivory and the elephant in art. New York, 
1916; Burns, Donald, Ellis, Pratt, and Stubbs in J. I. A., 9, 1902; Cole, H. H., Golden temple 
at A-mritsar, ibid., 1, 1888. 

2 Watt, pp. loi, 172; Hornell. Supra, pp. 4, 6. 


136 



as a trumpet, is often elaborately decorated with metal mountings, and may be 
decorated with engraved designs, filled with wax (fig. 390). 

Textiles. Indian textiles are deservedly famous, and have been articles of 
export to Europe since the Roman period, and probably earlier^. The following 
classification based entirely on the technical means employed in producing the 
design will give an idea of their range and interest : 

The only process by which the design is, so to speak, created before the 
weaving is begun^, is the very interesting one employed in the patola silk of 
Gujarat. Here each of the warp, and usually also of the weft threads, is separately 
dyed in various colours along its length according to precalculated measurements, 
and arranged on the loom, so that as the weaving progresses, the design 
appears, and is the same on both sides of the material. The process is most labo- 
rious, but no other can produce the same effect. The same technique (but the 
warp threads only are tie-dyed) is employed in the preparation of striped mashrus 
used mainly for paijdmas by Hindu and Sikh women ; some of the finest of these are 
made in Camba (gold and cotton thread, the former tie-dyed) ; others at Ayyampet 
in the Tanjore District. Not only is the technique thus widely distributed in India, 
but it occurs sporadically over the entire area extending from Turkest^ and 
Persia {daryat silks and velvets of Bokhara, &c.) on the one hand and on the other 
to Burma (Kachin skirts), Cambodia, Malaya (Tringannu), Sumatra (Palembang), 
Java, Bali, Sumba (fig. 400) and other islands, and in a simple form (kasuri) to Japan. 
It is unknown in Ceylon. In the islands, the double dyeing (warp and weft) is 
practised only in the case of the cotton cloths made in Tenganan (Bah); in all 
other cases only the warp threads are dyed; but Indian patola silk has also reached 
Bali by way of trade. In the islands the technique is known as ikat, as mentioned 
on p. 212. In the case of the most elaborate work (Gujarat) designs with 
flowers, elephants or birds enclosed in a geometrical treUis are produced 


* For Indian textiles, see South Kensington Museum, Illustrations of the textile manufactures 
oflndia, London, Calico paintingand printing in the east Indies . . ., London, 1921; 

Coomaraswamy, i ; Hadaway, S., Cotton painting and printing in the Madras Presidency, Madras, 1917; 
Hunter,.lS. L., Decorative textiles, Philadelphia, 1918; Jasper en Pirngadie; Lewis, A. B., Block 
prints from India, Chicago, 1924; Perera; Ray, J. C., Textile industry in ancient India, J. B. O. R. S., 
Ill, 1917; Riefstahl, R. M., Persian and Indian textiles. New York, 1923; Rouffaer en Juynboll; 
Scherman, E., Brettchen-Wehereien . . ., Miinch. Jahrb. der bild. Kunst, 1913; Watson, J. F., and 
Kaye, J. W., Textile manufactures and costumes of the people of India, London, 1886; Watt (the best 
account); also Banerji, Brandon, Das, Edwards, Enthoven, Gupta, Hailey, Hardiman, Havell, 
Kipling, Ravenshaw, Samman, Silberrad, Steel, Thurston, and Wardle, in different vols. of 
J. 1 . A. For Indian rugs, the usual books on rugs, and Andrews, F. H., in J. 1 . A., ii, 1912; 
Hendley, T. H., Asian carpets . . .from the faipur palaces, London, 1905 ; Watt. 

® Ah, A. Yusuf, Silk fabrics of the United Provinces; Watt, pp. 235 — 259. Cf. Jasper en 
Pirngadie, vol. II. 


137 



(fig. 393); extremely complex designs are found also in Cambodia and Sumatra; 
but the technique in its simplest form produces a characteristic multiple zigzag 
pattern {khaniart) or if in narrow bands, a succession of v-shaped points, the 
colour being always the same on both sides of the material, which is not the 
case in the imitation khanjart mashrus made at Azamgarh. The wide distribution 
of the technique indicates for it a high antiquity ; and it may be remarked that the 
characteristic v-forms can be unmistakeably recognized in some of the Ajanta 
paintings. 

In the second and largest group of textiles, the design is produced by the use 
of warp and weft threads of different colours and materials, suitably woven; the 
design here presenting a different appearance on the front and back of the material. 
A vast series of brocades made in Murshidabad, Benares, Gujarat, Aurangabad, 
Haidarabad, Madras and Tanjore, &c., range from the types in which gold thread 
is lavishly e.m^\aYe:d{kimkhwdb, fig.394) to the himrus made of mixed silk and cotton, 
and the all-figured musUns {jamdani) of Bengal, and heavy cotton etirili of Ceylon. 
For a detailed account of the Indian types the descriptions by Percy Brown in 
Watt’s book should be consulted. There is, of course, also an immense variety 
of goods with patterns in stripes or checks, produced by direct weaving, and not 
of brocade character. Kasmir shawls of the woven type are made of fine wool, wo- 
ven in small strips by a kind of tapestry method on small looms, and afterwards 
so skilfully joined together as to appear to consist of a single fabric. 

A third type of designed goods is produced by processes applied to the ma- 
terial after the weaving is completed. The simplest of these are dyed in one plain 
colour. Of more elaborate processes, t(ie most important are those of tie-dyeing 
and of printing or dye-painting, or a combination of the two ; and block printing. 

Tie-dyeing {cmart) extensively practised in Rajputana and at Mathura, but 
rarely elsewhere, results in patterns made up of small dots, or in designs of zigzag 
lines and larger patches of colour. In the first case, the cloth is laid over a wooden 
block having blunt nails projecting from it in the required pattern; the operator 
presses the material, usually cotton, sometimes silk, unto this, and rapidly tak- 
ing hold of each portion of the material pressed upwards by a nail, ties it tightly; 
or may dispense with the guide altogether, having the design, so to speak, at his 
or her fingers’ ends. When all the required points have been tied, the cloth is 
immersed in dye, the tied points remaining unaffected. In case several colours are 
required, the whole process must be repeated without removing the first ties. 
Zigzag patterns are produced by first folding the cloth in four, and then tieing. 
This, too is a very ancient technique, and though rare in the south and unknown 
in Ceylon, is commonly found in the Indonesian area, especially in Bali. Woven 
goods may also be decorated by means of printing and dye-painting, with or 



without the use of a wax resist^. In ordinary cotton printing wood blocks are 
employed; almost every part of India has local types, but Sanganir near Jaipur 
in Rajputana may be mentioned as the source of some of the best work. The most 
exquisite effects are obtained in the tinsel printing of floral designs on deHcate 
muslins at Nasik and in Rajputana. Very fine results in the block printing of gold 
leaf are obtained in Bali (fig. 399). 

The great centres of dye-painting, or more correctly, wax-resist drawing 
known as qalmdar, and equivalent to the Javanese batik technique, are Masuli- 
patam, Coconada, North Arcot, Kalahastri and Madura in Southern India. The 
designs are drawn with a thick pencil, dipped in hot wax, and not, as in Java, 
with a chanting. Block printings may be used in combination with the drawn 
designs. The curtains known as palampores, in which the typical design is a “tree of 
life” growing on a mountain, are the best known types. Masuhpatam worked not only 
for the local market, but in special designs for export, mainly to Persia, and also to 
Siam ; many of the so-called Persian prints on the market, with prayermat designs and 
Arabic texts are really of Indian origin, and perhaps none of them are really Persian. 

Block printing is of high antiquity in India, and may have originated there. 
No early Indian textiles have survived, but indications can be found in some 
sculptures and paintings, and Egyptian printed cottons and textiles dating from 
the Roman period seem to show Indian influence. It is rather surprising that the use 
of blocks for textile printing never led to the production of woodcut illustrations 
or block printed books, though the latter are loiown in Tibet, doubtless as a result 
of Chinese influence there. The Indian word chap, used also in Java, designating 
a wood or metal block used for textile printing, seems to be of Chinese origin. 

'Embroidery^. Only the leading types of the many fine styles of embroidery 
practised in India can be referred to. The term phulkdri is applied to the heavy 
cddars or veils worn by the Jat women of the Panjab. The work is done in darn 
stitch in silk on a coarse red cotton ground. In one type the motifs are floral, 
scattered over the whole field; in another, geometrical, covering almost the whole 
field, leaving only small areas of ground colour between the embroidered parts. 
In the latter case, to produce a perfect result, the threads of the field are used as 
guides, and must be minutely counted. 

Another fine type {sisadar) of embroidery used for large cddars, and also for 
skirts and colis, especially in Kathiawad, uses the same red cotton material, but is 
carried out in floral motifs with birds, in wide chain stitch, with small circular 
pieces of dull mirror glass bound down in suitable places, such as flower centres, 

1 For these techniques see Watt, pp. Hadaway, and Baker, loc. cit. 

‘ The only satisfactory works on this subject are Mrs. F. A. Steel’s PhiilkarJ work in the 
Panjab, J. I. A., 2, 1888; Watt; and Coomaraswamy, i. 


139 


by means of a chain stitch frame. Cddars embroidered in cross stitch in white on 
a similar ground are characteristic of central Rajputma and Central India. 

Kasmir shawl embroidery, mainly applied to cddars, is a darn stitch, carried 
out in the same designs as the woven goods, and superficially similar in effect, 
though the distinction is always evident when the back of the material is exami- 
ned, the embroidered threads running irregularly, the woven ones in straight lines 
like those of a brocade. Camba (and Kangra) rumdls (kerchiefs) are embroidered 
in double satin-stitch alike on both sides with brightly coloured flowers and animals 
and mythological groups like those of Rajput paintings, scenes from the Ras 
Lila being a favorite theme. 

The finest t3Yes of aU Indian embroidery are perhaps those of Kathiawad, 
and of Bhuj in Kach, especially those carried out in chain stitch. The work is 
chiefly applied to skirts, colls and the caps {nails') with a long back flap worn by 
children. In a well known type, the skirt is covered with peacocks and flowers in 
alternating diagonals, and there is an elaborate floral border of lotus rosettes 
alternating with brilliant parrots; the ground is often a black or dark blue satin. 
Other types (fig. 397) are striped. Small pieces of mirror glass are often worked into 
the design. In Rajputana, very exquisite embroideries in silk and gold on muslin are 
done on fine muslins intended for use as turbans (fig. 395). Admirable chain 
stitch is done on cotton in Jaipur, especially in connection with tent hangings, 
floor coverings, gaddis for shields, and gaumukhs. At Dacca, in eastern Bengal, 
centre of a weaving industry already alluded to, fine darn and satin stitch work 
{kasidd) is done in old gold and wheat coloured silk on muslin. The embroidered 
satin stitch kamarhands of Azamganj are so minutely worked as to look more like 
paintings than needlework. Cikdn is a type of embroidery done on white washing 
material, usually calico or muslin in many centres, and often for European 
use, but above all in Lucknow, where it is applied to the coats and caps worn 
by the people of the country, and may be described as the most refined form 
of purely indigenous needle-craft. A good accoimt of it is given by Brown in 
Watt. Embroidery is less widely practised in Southern India, but reappears in 
Ceylon, usually in the form of chain stitch in white and red on a blue cotton ground. 

Theatre^. The classical Sanskrit theatre scarcely survives, unless in Malabar. 
But acting and dancing are alike in principle and practise, both consisting in the 
rhythmic presentation of formal gestures, accompanied by instrumental music 
,and singing. Much of this technique survives in the religious folk plays, such as 
' xks's. jdtras of Mathura and Bengal; still more in the dramatic dances presented by 
'■devaddsis in temples and on occasions of festivity. 

1 Coomaraswamy and Duggirala; Levi, S., Le theatre indien; Keith, A. B., The Sanskrit 
drama. 



PART V: 

KASMIR, NEPAL, TIBET, CHINESE TURKIST AN, 

AND THE FAR EAST 


KASMIR 

Ka^mlf formed a part of the dominions of Asoka and of Kaniska and Huviska, 
was for a time tributary to the Guptas, but by the time of Harsa was an indepen- 
dent power controlling Taxila, much of the Sind valley, and the Panjab Hima- 
layas. The eighth and ninth centuries are the classic period of Kasmiri culture. 
In about 431 Gunavarman, a prince of Kasmir, travelled as a Buddhist mission- 
ary to Sumatra and China. Lalitaditya (733) and another king in the eighth 
century received investiture from the Emperor ofChina. Avantivarman(83 5 — 883), 
was a patron of literature and the builder of many shrines. A local Muhammadan 
dynasty came to the throne in 1339, and during the fourteenth century Islam 
spread throughout the valley, though never to the exclusion of Hinduism, before 
which the early Buddhism had long since declined. In 1 5 87 Akbar included Kasmir 
in the Mughal empire. 

At Uskur (Huviskapura) near Baramula have been found remains of a stiipa 
and terracottas and stucco fragments in the Indianised late Gandhara style, and 
on the whole superior to those of Jauli^^. Very interesting remains at Harvan 
(Sadarhadv^a) dating ca. 400 — 500 A. D. include a unique tiled cock-pit of 
considerable size^. The devices on the moulded tiles represent men seated, and in 
balconies; horseman archers in chain armour, Tatar caps and Turk! cloaks; deer; 
fighting cocks, lotuses, and a fleur-de-lys motif corresponding to the later Kas- 
miri iris. The technique of these tiles resembles that of the so-called Han but 
probably later grave-tiles of China. Not far from the same site have been found 
remains of a stiipa and of an apsidal caitya-\\2Xi. 

The old town of Vijabror has yielded a number of early sculptures amongst 
which the most interesting are those representing the goddess Laksml. A series 

1 Kak, I. 

* Kak, I and 3. In India proper, a representation of fighting cocks is found at Ajanta, 
Cave XVII (Griffiths, pi. 142). 



of types, indeed, can be traced in Kasmlr, ranging from characteristically late 
Gandharan forms, to thoroughly Indianised types of the ninth or tenth century. 

Even in the latest examples the Gandharan cornucopias and suggestions of Helle- 
nistic drapery are preserved^. 

The old capital of Pandrenthan (Puranadhisthana) near Srinagar has yielded 
Buddhist remains, chiefly sculptures, amongst which may be mentioned standing 
and seated Buddhas, Avalokitesvara, and a Lumbini garden Nativity in Sarnath 
style^. In the first half of the eighth century Lahtaditya founded a new capital at 
Parihasapura, nearly halfway between Srinagar and Baramula and raised a series 
of magnificent Buddhist and Brahmanical temples. The former include a large 
stiipa with double platform, a stairway on each side, and probably indented cor- 
ners as at Borobudur, a monastery, temple, seated Buddha figures, and two 
crowned Buddhas, or Bodhisattvas in monastic robes; the latter a Siva-lingam in 
temple E.®. Extraordinarily massive stones are employed; the floor of the Budd- 
hist temple consists of a single block approximately 14 by 12 by 6feet. 

A number of interesting Buddhist bronzes have been found in Kasmir, and 
hke many of the sculptures above described are now in the Sri Pratap Museum in 
Kasmir. A standing Buddha, which cannot be later than the sixth century is a 
clumsy figure hke that from Banda in Bengal. Much more elegant is a fine group 
representing Padmapani accompanied by two Saktis, with an inscription of the 
reign of Queen Didda (983 — 1003), showing that Buddhism survived at least 
until the eleventh century. Another in typical Pala style (C 3 in the Sri Pratap 
Museum) must be of Magadhan origin (fig. 233)^. For an inlaid brass Buddha from 
Kangra see p. 85 and fig. 163. 

When Avantivarman in the latter half of the ninth century founded a new 
capital at Avantipur, the modern Vantipor, Buddhism had already lost its 
predominant position, giving place to Hinduism; the character of the art, 
too, has changed, becoming definitely mediaeval, though still showing both 
Gandharan and Gupta reminiscences. Avantivarman’s temples are not equal in size 
to those of Lahtaditya, but yet “rank amongst the most imposing monuments 
of the ancient Kasmir architecture, and sufficiently attest the resources of their 
builder”®. ' 

^ Examples from an unknown source and from Vijabror illustrated in Foucher, 3 ; another 
from Vijabror of about the sixth century in Kak, I, p. 59; a later example, Kak, I, p. 64. Another 
evidently Kasmiri, of about the ninth century is in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston (M. F. A., 

25. 470 [unpublished]). 

“ Kak, i; Sahni, 2, 3. 

^ Sahni, 3. 

^ Kak, I. 

® Stein, 2, vol. I, p. 97. 


142 



The typical Brahmanical temple of Kasmir from about 750 — 1250 A. D. has 
a special character of its own, and in some cases a curiously European aspect, 
due in part to a Gandharan inheritance of certain elements, though all the details 
are Indian. The special forms include a double pyramidal roof; triangular pe- 
diment enclosing a trefoil niche; fluted columns with Doric or Ionic capitals; 
a wood or stone “lantern” ceiling of superimposed intersecting squares; and 
cloistered courts or colonnaded peristyles surrounding the main shrine. Temples 
of this type, in limestone with two exceptions, are found at Laduv (the earliest, 
perhaps fifth or sixth century), Martanda and Vangath (both due to Lahtaditya, 
the latter in granite), Patan, Payar, Buniar (in granite, the best preserved), Pan- 
drenthan (fig. 275), and at Panjnara in Jammu. The temple of Pandu-kund at the 
last mentioned site was once a magnificent structure, with a central shrine with 
a double basement, and a peristyle of fifty-three cells, the whole court measuring 
19 1 by 12 1 feet. But of all those mentioned, the Martanda, in size and situation, 
is by far the most imposing, even in its now ruined state*. Wooden architecture 
of the same character is found in Camba and Kulu^. In India proper, the typical 
Kasmirl roof is found only at Gop in Kathiawad; the trefoil arch as an integral 
architectural form only in parts of the Panjab which were subject to Kasmir in 
the eighth and ninth centuries, particularly at Malot (fig. 274) and Kafir Kot®. 

Amongst the numerous small sculptures from the Avantipur sites are a number of 
very interesting Visnu groups in a style peculiar to Kasmir and its then tributary States 
of Camba and Kulu. The workmanship is very accomplished, while the modelling 
preserves reminiscences both of western and of Gupta tradition. The general type 
"(fig. 272) is that of a four-armed Visnu, with elaborate jewellery, crown and dagger, 
the latter an unique feature, standing between attendants, and with the Earth goddess 
rising from the pedestal, between his feet. In some the deity is three-headed, the 
additional heads being those of a lion and a boat*. Saiva sculptures of the same type 
include an Ardhanarlsvara and more than one example of the three-headed Mahesa- 
murti form commonly but erroneously called Trimurti®. An example of the Visnu 
image in Avantipur style but in brass inlaid with silver has been found in Kahgra®. 

» For the Kasmiri temples generally see Sahni, 3 ; Kak, 4, 3 ; Cole. Fergusson, 2, is quite 
inadequate. For lantern ceilings cf. Le Coq, 3, p. 31. 

2 For Camba, see Vogel, i, pi. XXXIV; for Kulu, Longhurst, 6. 

3 For Malot see Burgess, 8, pis. 237 — 214; A. S. L, A. R., 1918 — 19, p. 5, and 1920 — 21, 
pi. III. For Kafir Kot, ibid., 1914 — 15, pt. i, pi. Ill; Codrington, K. de B., pi. XLIII. 

^ Sahni, 2 ; Kak, i . Cf. three-headed Visnu from Camba, Vogel, 20, p. 248, and pi. XXXIX a. 
For a late Gupta example in Mathura stone see Coon^raswamy, 9 (2), pi. XIX. For Visnu sta- 
tuettes probably from Avantipur, now in the Pennsylvania University Museum, see Coomara- 
swamy, 18. Also p. 5 5, note 6; and A. S. I., A. R., 1905 — 04, p. 218. 

^ For literature on this subject see pages 55, 100. 

“ Vogel, 4. 


145 



NEPAL 

The isolated and rather inaccessible Himalayan valley of Nepal was occupied 
in prehistoric times by a people of Tibetan origin, relatives of the Sino-Tibetan 
races who were at the same time finding their way into Indo-China. In the second 
century A. D, the Indian Licchavis founded a dynasty in Nepal, taking with them 
from Vaisali all the elements of Indian civilization. Manadeva in the sixth century 
erected a Garuda — crowned dhvajastamhha in the Vaisnava temple of Changu 
Narayan. A sculpture of the same reign is a bas-relief representing Visnu as 
Trivikrama dedicated to the queen-mother Rajyavati. This work, which has now 
been lost, is described by Levi as follows “one of the oldest pieces of Indian 
sculpture (but this is an exaggeration by nearly a thousand years !), properly In- 
dian; it brings us into the presence of a definitely formed art, master of its means, 
of free and sure inspiration; the sculptor utifizes the traditional methods of In- 
dian art by grouping in one frame the stages of the story ... It is a great work, 
almost a masterpiece”’^. An Uma-Mahesvara group, dated in the reign of Guna- 
kamadeva, the founder of Kathmandu in the tenth century; an image of Surya 
of the eleventh century^; images of Surya and Candra, dated in the thirteenth 
century are still extant. Chinese authors in the seventh century describe admiringly 
the splendours of Nepalese architecture: for example, “in the middle of the pa- 
lace there is a tower of seven storeys, covered with copper tiles. Railings, grilles, 
columns, beams — everything is ornamented with precious stones and jewels . . . 
On the top of the tower, water plays into basins; from the mouth of the dragons 
the water spurts out as from a fountain . . ., the houses are built of wood; the walls 
are sculptured and painted”®. The features of this account, as Levi adds, are always 
true in Nepal; the taste for wooden houses sculptured and painted has lasted under 
all the Nevari dynasties. Some idea of the style can be gathered, by the student 
who cannot visit Nepal, from the Nepalese temple in Benares. These wooden 
edifices preserve the elements of much older styles, of which the monuments are 
no longer preserved in India; they illustrate too a half-way stage between Indian 
prototjrpes and Chinese derivatives. 

Great antiquity is ascribed to the Nepalese stupas, four at Patan having been 
founded, according to tradition, by Asoka; these four are still intact, and in any 
case are of the old Indian hemispherical type. The chief characteristics of the later 
types is the exaggeration of the chatravali or range of umbrellas ; the same feature 
is characteristic of the modern Tibetan form (known as mchod-rten)\ and this de- 
velopment certainly had a share in that of the Far Eastern pagoda. The Nepalese 

* Levi, 4. For Nepal generally, see Levi, 2, 4; and Hackin. 

* BendaU, pi. 11. 

* Levi, I, 4. 


144 



temple is typically provided with a succession of sloping roofs. One of the most 
elegant is that of Bhavani at Bhatgaoh, built in 1703; it stands on a pyramidal 
basement of five stages, recalling the basements of Burmese stupas and Cambodian 
temples. The most venerated Saiva shrine in Nepal is that of Pasupatinatha, near 
Kathmandu, but here too most of the buildings date from the seventeenth century. 

It may be remarked that during the middle ages Buddhism and Brahmanism, 
or rather a Tantrik combination of the two, are equally prevalent, and images of 
Hindu deities and those of the Buddhist Tantrik pantheon occur in equal num- 
bers and side by side. For a time, in the eleventh century, Indian princes from 
Tirhut controlled the valley, and at this time very much the same religious 
conditions must have prevailed in a large area extending from Nepal through 
the Ganges valley on to Burma and Indo-China. 

Nepalese art is best known by the metal images, usually copper or brass, and 
of fine workmanship, which have found their way into India and thence into 
European and Indian museums. Many of these are often wrongly described as 
Tibetan; but there is, notwithstanding the close relation of the schools, and in 
spite of the Nepalese origin of most of the Tibetan craftsmen^, a real difference of 
style that can be easily recognized in the best examples, though it disappears in the 
inferior specimens. On the whole the Nepalese “bronzes” are more Indian in char- 
acter, and better executed, and somewhat milder in the prevailing types, than 
those of Tibet. 

Some of the best and earliest examples, which can hardly be dated later than 
the tenth century, are now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston (figs. 276 — 278)^. 
The standing Avalokitesvara (fig. 276), of copper gilt, is perhaps the best of all 
known bronzes that can be definitely classed as Nepalese; it illustrates a Nepalese 
peculiarity rarely seen in Indian works, that of inlay with precious stones, garnet 
and turquoise, but in style it is very near to Indian types, and is more suggestive 
of a late Gupta than of the contemporary Pala styles of the Ganges valley. On 
the whole the art of Nepal may be described as having retardataire tendencies, 
and thus at any given moment, likely to be superior to that of the plains. Metal 
figures of considerably later date are often of high merit, and even up to quite 
recent times good work has been done^. 

Side by side with the later and specifically Lamaistic development which Nepal 
shares with Tibet, Nepal possesses an important school of painting, which in the 

^ “Lhasa is, to a great extent, a Nepalese colony. And it was chiefly Newaris who 
built temples there, cast statues, painted images; their reputation spread all over Central Asia, 
and they were called from far away, at great expense, even in more recent times, for decorating 
religious buildings’’ (Levi, 4, p. 63. Cf. the mention of A-ni-ko, ibid., pp. 63 — 65, and in the 
present work, p. 147). 

2 For later examples cf. Havell, 2; and Rupam, nos. 7, 1921, and 19 — 20, 1924. ' 


10 


145 



same way as the bronzes reflects Indian forms, and has preserved even up to mo- 
dern times a hieratic style, comparable to that of the Pala and GujarM schools. 
In the eleventh century indeed, the distinction of style as between the Bengali 
and the Naipali illustrated manuscripts, is so shght as to be scarcely definable in 
few words. Amongst the more important Nepalese manuscripts of this date may 
be cited the palm leaf Mss. Add. 1643 and A 15, Royal Asiatic Society, Calcutta, 
both of the Astasdhasrikdprajmpdramitd, both of the eleventh century and con- 
taining respectively eighty-five and thirty-one miniatures^; a manuscript of the 
same text in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 20. 589, dated apparently 
equivalent to 1136 A. D. with eighteen miniatures and contemporary painted 
wooden panel covers^ (figs. 280, 28 1) ; a manuscript of the same text dated 1019, for- 
merly in the collection of E. Vredenberg and probably the finest known example® ; 
a manuscript of the same text, probably of twelfth or thirteenth century date, 
belonging to Professor A. N. Tagore, Calcutta, with contemporary painted covers, 
one of which bears extremely interesting representations of four episodes of the 
Vessantara Jdtaka (fig. 279) ; a manuscript of the same text and age, with eighteen 
miniatures in the possession of Mr. Jackson Higgs, New York, with later painted 
covers; and one in the possession of Professor S. Sawamura of Kyoto. 

Nepal has also been at all times productive of temple banners (tanka'). Very 
early examples have been found at Tun Huang*. Even in the eighteenth century 
the paintings of this type preserve high qualities in colour and design. A good 
example is afforded by a banner illustrating the Kapisa and Pindapdtra Avaddnas, 
dated in Nevati script equivalent to 1716 A. D.® An example of a Vaisnava 
painting of Naipali origin is afforded by theCajendra-moksa picture in thehbrary 
of the Royal Asiatic Society, London, which I formerly regarded as Rajput®. 

TIBET 

A type of animistic religion known as Bon-po originally prevailed in Tibet, 
and has left its traces on the later Buddhist developments'^. The first king of Tibet 
“who was the maker of the Tibetan nation . . . married a Nepalese princess about 

^ Fully illustrated and described in Foucher, a. 

2 Coomaraswamy, lo, pis. XXXII — XXXV. 

^ Vredenberg, E., Continuity of pictorial tradition in the art of India, Rupam, i and z, 1920. 

^ Stein, 7, pp. 1428, 1429, and pi. LXXXVII. 

® Coomaraswamy, 10, pi. XXXVI. For Nepalese and Tibetan paintings the following may 
also be consulted: Foucher, 8; Smith, 2, pp. 314 — 325; Francke; M. F. A. Bull., nos. 106, 144; 
and Hackin (Bibliography, p. 125). 

® Coomaraswamy, 8, pi. XVI. 

’’ Das, S. C., A brief sketch of the Bon religion . . . Journ. Buddhist Text Soc. India,i, 1893; 
Hackin, pp. 116, 117. 

146 



the year 630; the young bride brought with her, her Gods and priests; she con- 
verted her husband, and after her death she was given a place in the Tibetan pan- 
theon as an incarnation of the Goddess Tara”^. The same king married a daughter 
of the T’ang emperor T’ai Tsong, and she, likewise a Buddhist, was deified in the 
same way. Lying on one of the highways from India to China, through Nep^, 
Tibet was thus naturally and from the beginning open to Indian and to Chinese 
influences, and these are always recognizable in Tibetan art. In the eighth century 
the magician Padmasambhava was summoned to Tibet from Udy^a (Kafiristan)*. 
In the eleventh century the pandit Atisa, after his ten years of study in Sumatra, 
introduced reforms in what must have been strange admixture of Buddhism 
magic and animism^. Atisa died in 1058. In the meanwhile, in the ninth century 
Tibet attained the zenith of its mihtary and pohtical power, extending its rule 
even to Tun Huang, on the western Chinese border, where the oldest known 
remains of Tibetan painting have been found. By the thirteenth century, political 
power had decUned, but Buddhism was at the height of its power, the Mongols 
receiving the religion and a new script from the Tibetans. A-ni-ko worked for 
Tibetan kings on his way to the court of Kublai Khan, who bestowed various 
honours on Lamaistic priests from Tibet. With the fall of the Mongols Buddhism 
fell into disfavour in China; in the sixteenth century under the Mings, it again 
flourished, and to this period must be attributed a majority of the Sino-Tibetan 
brass images so common in various collections. In the sixteenth century the 
Dalai-Lama took up residence in the palace of the Tibetan kings on the Mar-po-ri 
(Lhasa) ; to this residence of the head of the Tibetan church, regarded as the in- 
carnation of Avalokitesvara was given the name of Potala, the mountain on which 
this Bodhisattva has his seat. The Manchu emperors gradually assumed control 
of Tibetan affairs, and the country is still partially subject to Chinese suzerainty. 

Tibetan art consists chiefly in the palace and monastery architecture and in 
the Buddhist paintings and bronzes. The palace-monastery at Lhasa is a noble 
pile of successive stages, dominating the whole city. The paintings are for the 
most part votive temple banners. Of two groups, the first, deahng with scenes 
from the life of Buddha, is devoid of Tantrik elements; this group is directly 
based on Indian tradition, derived from Bengal and Nepal, and to be connected 
with the ministry of Atisa, who exercised a direct influence on Tibetan art up to 
the end of the twelfth century. In a second group of later origin, dealing in a 
different way with the life of Buddha, the Master occupies the centre of the picture, 

^ Levi, 4, p. 63. 

Ribbach, S. H., l^ier Wilder des Padmasambhava und seiner Gefolgscha ft, ^2hth. Hamb. wiss. 
Anst., XXXIV, 1916, Hamburg, 1917; Griinwedel, 8; other references in Hacldn, pp 125 127. 

^ Das, S. C., Indian pandits in Tibet, Journ. Buddhist Text Soc. India, i, 1893. 


10* 


147 


while grouped around him are other scenes, separated from each other by winding * 

rivers, clouds or trees, these subsidiary compositions being often in a quite Chinese 
manner. Another series represents the Dhyani Buddhas, the Bodhisattvas and Taras, 
and the fierce World Guardians. Another group represents, so to say, a vast series of 
local saints and spiritual heroes, amongst whom will be found such as Padmasam- 
bhava, Mi-la-ras-pa the wandering poet, monk and magician, and sainted Lamas. 

Another series deals with Bon-po themes. In these works, the iconographic concep- 
tions range from the most peaceful Buddhas to the most violent and terrifying Tantrik 
forms of the Lokap^as; as art they maintain a satisfactory tradition of colour, 
while the drawing is generally accomphshed, though scarcely ever sensitive^. 


CHINESE TURKISTAN 

There exists some foundation in historical fact for the tradition recorded by 
Hsiian Tsang, asserting a partial occupation of Khotan by Indian immigrants 
from the region of ancient Taxila^. A Prakrit language was spoken in the oasis, 
Kharosthi and Brahmi scripts were in use, a cult of Vaisravana (Kubera) was 
widespread, and coins of Kadphises and Kaniska are met with in some quantity. 
The ruling class in Khot^ was of Indian origin and remained predominant up 
to the time of the Uigur Turkish invasions of the eighth and ninth centuries; thus, 
during the first seven centuries of the Christian era the name “Turkistan” is really 
an anachronism. Beyond Khot^, the principal remains of stupas and monasteries, 
constructional or excavated, have been met with at Miran and Endere, further 
north at Kuca and Turfan, and in the east at Tun Huang on the western border 
of Chinese territory, these various settlements representing stations on the old 
silk trade route from China to the west, and revealing a mixed culture and art 
in which Hellenistic, Indian, Iranian and Chinese elements are all more or less 
clearly to be distinguished®. A few of the more striking examples of the Indian 
forms will be noticed in the following paragraphs. 

^ Hackin, pp. yoff. For Tibetan painting and bron2es generally see also Hackin, J., 
Illustrations tihetaines d^une legende du Divyavadana, Musee Guimet, Bib. Vulg., Paris, 1914. Notes 
on Tibetan paintings^ Rupam, 7, 1921. Getty, A., The gods of Northern Buddhism , Oxford, 1914. 
Schlagintweit, E., Buddhism in Tibet, London, 1863. Francke, A. H., Antiquities of Indian Tibet y 
A. S. I., Calcutta, 1914. Roerich, Tibetan paintings. Pander, E., Das Pantheon des Tschangtscha 
Hutuktu, Berlin, 1890. Griinwedel, A., Mythologie du Bouddhisme au Tibet et en Mongolie, Paris, 
i^oOyZndPadmasambhavaundV^erwandteSy Baessler Archiv, III, I, 1912. Waddell, L. A., Buddhism 
of Tibet, or Lamaism, London, 1895. Stein, 7, pp. 719, 8i6ff., 838!?., 865, 1052, 1068. 

^ Stein, 4, Ch. VII, sec. 2. 

® The literature of Central Asian art is conveniently listed by Le Coq, 3, pp. 34, 35, and by 
Hackin, pp. 122 — 123 ; The most important works include Griinwedel, 3, 4, 5 ; Le Coq, i, 2, 3; 
Stein, 3, 4, 6, 7 (see “India”, “Indian”, in index); Stein and Binyon. 


148 


The two ruined temples at Miran are of special interest, both on account of 
their form, and for the frescoes there preserved. Temple M V is a hollow domed 
circular s hrin e containing a sohd stiipa, thus a constructional example of a form 
known in India only in rock-cut halls (see pp. 1 8, 3 8). This form, as Stein (7, p. 532, 
note 16) suggests, may have played a part in connection with the origins of 
Christian rotundas ; the dissemination of Buddliism in eastern Ir^ about the be- 
ginning of the Christian era may well have carried with it Indian architectural 
forms, with circular or apsidal plans. Equally interesting, the inner wall of the 
same shrine is decorated with a fresco frieze and dado, the former illustrating 
the famihar Vessantara Jdtaka (fig. 284) in exact accordance with the formula 
already estabUshed at Bharhut and followed in Gandhara (cf. figs. 47, 93 and 279). 
The dado consists of garland-bearing figures, and hke the winged cherubs of 
another part of the decoration, presents a much more western aspect than the frieze. 
A short inscription in Kharosthi characters states “This fresco is the work of 
Tita, who has received 3000 bhamakas for it”. As pointed out by Stein, Tita may 
represent Titus, who may have been of Western Asiatic origin, adhering to the 
Indian formulae in the definitely religious representation, and working in a more 
definitely western manner in the secular decorations. The work may be dated 
about the fourth century^. 

Of somewhat later date are the various wooden panels and a fresco found at 
Dandan Uiliq, and other panels and part of a birch bark manuscript, doubtless of 
Kasmiri origin, found at Khadaliq. These works appear to date from the seventh 
or eighth century, and afford illustrations of Indian painting of that period, sub- 
ject to Persian and Chinese influences, the Indian element predo minatin g. One 
of the panels bears on one side a representation of the three-headed Mahesa or 
Sadasiva, seated on a pair of bulls (fig. 285), a form which in this environment 
may have had a Buddlfist significance (Lokesvara?). The type, which already 
occurs in Gandhara and on coins of Vasudeva, could easily have reached Khotan 
through Kasmir in the second century; it extended later even to China (Yun 
Kang^) and appears in Japan as Dai Itoku, usually rendered as Yamantaka. The 
reverse of the same panel shows a seated four-armed figure (Bodhisattva or 
Bacchanalian Pancika?) bearded, and wearing a tight-fitting coat and boots®. 
Another panel represents two mounted saintly or princely personages, nimbate, 
holding cups ; another, a four-armed Ganesa. Of even greater interest is the well- 
known fresco representing a nymph, nude but for girdle and transparent “fig- 
leaf”, standing in a lotus tank, with a nude boy beside her, stretching out his 


1 Stein, 7, pp. 516 — 532 and figs. 134 — 138. 

2 Chavannes, 2, pi. 224. 

^ Stein, 4, pis. LX, LXI. 


149 



t 


arms (fig. 285). This group of erotic, that is to say, auspicious significance, is 
strongly reminiscent of various Indian Yaksinis or Devatas, in particular of the 
lotus lady of the Kusana pUlar, B. 89 in the Lucknow Museum (see p. 65 and 

%• 74). 

As Foucher has pointed out with vmusual perception, certain Buddha figures 
from these areas are more nearly related to Mathura Kusana t jrpes than to Gandharan ; 
examples are afforded by a stucco figure from the Rawak stiipa court (Stein 4, 
pi. LXXXII) and by a seated Buddha with shaven head from Idikucari, now in 
the Museum fur Volkerkunde, Berlin^. 

In the Kuca area, and for the most part at Ming Oi various Indian elements 
are easily recognizable amongst the vast series of paintings in the caves^. We find, 
for example, figures of Brahma, Indra, and Siva, the latter four-armed, accom- 
panied by Parvati and Nandi. An interesting and unmistakeably Indian motif is 
found in a ceiling painting in the Hippokampenhohle®, a decoration representing 
cdtakas drinking drops of water faUing from the clouds, in which flashes of light- 
ning are represented in the form of snakes: the elements of this representation 
are commonplaces of Indian rhetoric, and are well preserved in various Rajput 
paintings, particulary those of the old palace at Bikanir*. At Tun Huang, even 
more than in Kuca, we are in the domain of Chinese art properly so-called, and 
while Indian peculiarities are still traceable, and some few works of Nepalese and 
Tibetan origin are actually met with, the foreign elements are in the main confined 
to the iconography. That Chinese Buddhist works of art could not have existed 
without their Indo-Gandharan prototypes does not make them anything but 
Chinese; as Binyon justly remarks “aU that derives from Gandhara in subject 
matter and form is subdued to the creative instinct of design by which the Chinese 
genius makes them its own.” 


THE FAR EAST 

Indian influence extended to China, Korea and Japan, with Indian ideas 
generally and Buddhist forms of art specifically, by direct and indirect routes; 
overland through Khot^, and by the southern sea route and through Cambodia 
and Campa. In China, however, where an ancient civihsation had long pre- 
viously attained to a high stage of consciousness, and had found expression in a 
solemn and cultivated art dating back to the second millennium B. C., and where, 

^ Griinwedel, Idikutschari, IV, I ( = Foucher, i, fig. 363). 

* Griinwedel, 3; and 4, figs. 106, 208, 210, 241, 375, 410, 338, 343. 

® Griinwedel, 4, fig. 241. Cf. Andrae, Farbige Keratnik aus Assur, PI. 8. 

* Coomaraswamy, 8, pi. VIII, and 9 (5), p. 201. 


// 


150 



despite the settlement of Indian traders and priests, especially at Loyang, there 
was never any question of Indian social or poUtical domination, the situation 
was far other than that of Farther India and Indonesia. The Indian element in 
the art of the Far East is nevertheless a considerable one; for here there 
was not merely the acceptance of an iconography and of formulae, but the 
assimilation of a mode of thought; so that we have to take into account effects 
both of the outer form of Indian art and of an irmer emotional working of 
Indian thoughti. 

A Chinese contact with Indian Buddhism was made in the first century, 
67 A. D. and probably earher. Our knowledge of Chinese painting and sculpture 
in the third, fourth, and early fifth centuries is, however, so shght that we cannot 
seriously discuss the Indian, Ir^an, and Hellenistic influences that may have 
been exerted at this time, except to point out that aU are apparent in Central Asia^. 
Between 357 and 571, however, we read of no less than ten embassies sent from 
India to China; and amongst Indians settled in China may be mentioned the priest 
Kumarajiva (383), and Prince Gunavarman of Kasmir, who is credited with 
Buddhist converts in Sumatra, is said to have painted a Jdtaka scene in Canton, 
and to have died in Nankin in 431. In the contrary direction Fa Hsien, travelling 
in 399 — 413 across Central Asia and entering India through the Panjab, spent 
six years in Magadha and Bengal, and returned home via Ceylon and Sumatra. 
It is certain that from at least the middle of the fourth century A. D., probably a 
good deal earlier, there was constant intercourse between India and China by the 
sea route; perhaps also by a southern land route through Burma, whereby the 
Indian water-buflalo was introduced to Chinese agriculture. Taking these facts 
into consideration with the difficulty of the northern land route, we might expect 
to find unmistakeable evidences of Indian influences in Southern China, as we do 
in Campa. Unfortunately we know very httle about Chinese art in the third, 
fourth, and early fifth centuries. Some of the so-called Han tiles may date from 
this period, and it is interesting to find that while their decoration is not in general 
suggestive of India, some bear numerous representations of what would be called 
in India caitja-vrksas, not indeed railed, but rising from pedestals marked with 
diagonal fines; and still more curious, other representations of trees enclosed by 
and rising above the double roof of a surrounding building, just as in the numerous 
examples of Indian reliefs depicting temples of the Bodhi-druma^. But if these 
forms are of Indian origin, it seems probable that they can only have been 
borrowed as decoration, and not as Buddhist symbols. There are really no 
tangible evidences of Buddhist influences in Chinese art before the fifth century. 

‘ Okakura; Visser; Warner, Introduction, p. 13; Waley. Full references in Visser. 

^ Coomaraswamy, 17. 



From the period of the Six Dynasties, Southern China has yielded a few Buddhist 4 

bronxes, of which the earliest, dated equivalent to 43 5 A. D. has been described 
as quite in an Indian style^. The oldest known Chinese Buddhist stone sculpture, 
of 457 A. D., and unknown proveniance, is regarded by Siren as derived from the 
early Kusana tjqje, Mathura Museum Nos. A i and A 2 (see p. 59)’. 

According to some, too, the Chinese pagoda is nothing but a transformed 
Indian stiipa. More likely the pagoda has been developed from indigenous forms, 
though under the strong influence of Indian models of the type of Kaniska’s 
“stupa” at Peshawar, which made so great an impression on all the Chinese pil- 
grims®. 

In the meanwhile had developed the art of the Northern Wei dynasty, best 
exemplified by the well-loiown sculptured caves of Yun Kang near Ta-Tung-fu. 

This is a highly original art, Chinese mote than Indian or Gandharan in feeling, 
and no more Indian in detail than must inevitably be the case with an art repre- 
senting an Indian religion. This art and its more immediate offshoots represent 
the flower of Buddhist sculpture in the Far East. Its formal sources cannot be 
directly traced, but must be in the main Gandharan, Iranian and Indian; it is 
most nearly related to the earlier mural painting of Tun Huang^. 

In the transition period, sculptures at Then Lung Shan are compared by 
Siren with Mathura types of the fifth and sixth centuries, and he suggests that 
some may have been the work of an Indian artist “well acquainted with the pro- 
ducts of the great Mathura school”®. In the Sui period there is clear evidence of 
Indian, or perhaps rather, Indonesian design in the pedestals of Buddhist figures 
at Mien-Cheu, Sze-Chwan®. 

With the establishment of Chinese unity under the short-hved Sui dynasty, 
and their immediate successors the T’angs (618 — 906), with the development of 
a cosmopolitan capital at Loyang, where resided a considerable colony of Indian 
merchants and priests, and with the active development, from the sixth century 
onwards, of the trade route across Central Asia, there was established a closer 
connection with India and the West by land. Fa Hsien, the first Chinese pilgrim, 

‘ Ashton, introduction, p. 79. 

2 Siren, I, pp. XXXVII— XXXVIII, and pis. 116—117. 

^ Seep. 54. Also Longhurst, 6 ; Simpson, 5 ; Visser. For the Chinese forms, Boerschmann, 

1, 2; Siren, pis. 422, 423 a, 425 ; Finot and Goloubew, he Fan-Tseu T’a de Yunnanfou, B. L. F. 

E. O., 1925. 

* Mission Pelliot, Paris, 1920, 1921. Siren, i, p. XLI, describes the Yun Kang figures as 
related to Mathura types but considers the Indian element came through Tun Huang. The two 
polycephalous figures are ,,of purely Indian origin”; but the five-headed image cannot be, as 
suggested, a “Garuda-raja”, and must be derived from some form of Visnu. 

5 Siren, i, p. LXVI; 2, pi. XLIX. 

* Visser, fig. 4, after Segalen. 



132 



had reached India about 399; Sung Yiin about 518; Hsiian Tsang travelled ex- 
tensively in India between 630 and 6-44, and is recorded to have taken back with 
, him to China not only books, but also images and relics; Iching travelled in 
India and returned to China via Indonesia ca. 671 — 695. In the contrary direction, 
Gunavarman of Kasmir, ca. 431, Bodhidharma of Southern India, ca. 529 — 36, 
and Paramartha of Magadha, ca. 545, reached China and there spread the doctrines 
of Buddhism in various Mahay ana forms. In the eighth century China had direct 
political relations with Kasmir. 

It is not surprising, then, that we find in the T’ang period a more mixed and 
less purely Chinese art developing, Indian (Gupta) and late Hellenistic elements 
crossing and intercrossing with the Cliinese idioms of the Six Dynasties. 
There exist Chinese works of the T’ang period that could almost be thought to 
be Indian^; just as there exist Indian (fig. 171) and Cambodian (fig. 100) works 
of late Gupta or early mediaeval date that seem to foreshadow Far-Eastern 
types. 

Still more eclectic is the mixed Central Asian art of Tun Huang in the far 
west of China ; this Central-Asiatic-Indian art, though its actual examples are the 
work of artisans rather than of great artists, forms the foundation of Chinese 
Buddhist art in the T’ang period ; and is almost our only source of knowledge for 
T’ang painting. 

Towards the close of the T’ang period the vitality of Chinese Buddhist art is 
on the wane; specifically Buddhist art is becoming exquisite, over-refined, and 
finally lifeless. But there comes into being in the Yiian and Sung periods another 
kind of painting, philosophical and poetic, which is essentially a product of a 
fusion of Taoist and Ch’an ideas. 

In the meantime Chinese influence was extending westwards (Mongol period 
of Persian art) and in the contrary direction Tibetan Lamaism was spreading 
through Mongoha and China cariqdng with it all its apparatus of elaborate icono- 
graphy, and ritual mysteries. M. PeUiot, indeed, has remarked that “a mono- 
graph ought to be prepared, dealing with the religious art in Hindu style which 
was favoured in China from the thirteenth to the fifteenth century”. 

A specific instance of the migration of a Nepalese artist is afforded in the case 
of A-ni-ko, who became Controller of Imperial Manufactures at the court ofKublai 
Khan in 1279, and made large numbers of images and paintings for his Chinese 
patron. One Yi Yuan became his pupil, “studying under him the making of Hindu 
images”, and this Yi Yuan or Lieu Yuan in turn became the author of innumerable 
Buddhist figures set up in all the celebrated sanctuaries of the two capitals, 

^ A definitely Indian character is present in the British Museum T’ang wooden stele, 
Binyon, L., Asiatic art at the British Museum^ pL IX, 4. 


153 



Shang-tu and Pekin^. Nepalese artists, too, settled in Tibet, and there produced 
the bronzes and temple banners which are famihar to collectors. There is in fact 
a common Lamaistic art which extends, from the thirteenth century onwards, 
from Nepal through Tibet into China, of which the creations are iconographically 
similar, and only to be distinguished by the gradual change of style which cor- 
responds to the local ethnic conditions. As remarked by Hackin “La Chine reste, 
tout compte fait, nettement tributaire de Part bouddhique nepalo-tibetain. Le 
Xnie et XI Ve siecles marquent Papogee de cette influence ... si proches de Pan- 
cien tradition indienne”^. 

The North Wei types passed directly into Korea, and thence, through the 
energy of Shotoku Taishi, to Japan, to form the models of the art of the Suiko 
period in the Yamato valley (ca. 645 A. D.). No great antecedent civilisation had 
preceded these developments in Japan; Japanese culture and unity were developed 
in the seventh century under Chinese influence; Buddhism and Buddhist art 
and learning, though coming for the most part indirectly through Korea and 
China, brought Japan for the first time into contact with the outer world and 
with India; and as Okakura points out it was not merely the doctrine of the 
Buddha as an individual, but a whole new mode of thought that affected 
Japanese life. 

Chinese influence continued to predominate in the T’ang age, and is re- 
flected in the art of the Hakuho andNara periods in Japan. Long before the Northern 
Wei art had been assimilated or an adequate understanding of Buddhist thought 
reached, Japanese pilgrims or ambassadors, successors of Shotoku Taishi, came 
into contact not merely with the Chinese aspect of T’ang art, but with its remoter 
sources in India and the West (Khotan). The famous paintings on the Horyuji 
walls, assignable to the eighth century, have been much discussed; I am inclined 
to agree, hke Visser, with most of those who have seen both Horyuji and Ajanta, 
that there exists no very close connection between the two, and that the sources 
of the Japanese work are to be sought rather in Khotan than in India. But it 
seems as though the Japanese must have depended in some degree diretly upon 
Indian sources; it would be impossible otherwise to explain such remarkable 
iconographic parallels as that of the Jikoku Ten (= Dhrtarastra) of the Kondo, 
standing on a crouching demon, with the Kubera Yaksa of Bharhut®; and difficult 
to account for the great admixture of Brahmanical, especially many-armed, forms 

* Levi, I, 2, 4. The Tsao hsiang Hang tu Ching is a Japanese edition of a Tibetan canon of 
proportions for images, with diagrams. There are illustrated Chinese and Mongol Lamaist 
iconographic texts in the Musee Guimet (Hackin, pp. 114, 115). 

^ Hackin, p. 68. 

=> Cf. Warner, fig. 35 ozNara Horjuji Okagami, vol. 38, pi. 7, with Cunningham, pi. XXII 
(Kuvera). 


154 



that is so characteristic of the mixed Shinto-Buddhist pantheon. The Japanese 
torii may be related to the Indian torana. 

Japanese Buddhism on the ritualistic side elaborated the cult of Amida and 
the Western Paradise^, and on the mystical side the practise of the Ch’an Buddhists 
of China, which had been established, ca. 527 — 536, by the Indian monk Bo- 
dhidharma, and derived in the last analysis from the Indian Yoga^. Dhyana (me- 
ditation) = Jh^a = Ch’an = Zen. The external influence of Indian thought 
created a theology and forms of art resembling those of India; the more funda- 
mentally stimulating influence of a method, acting inwardly, enabled the Japa- 
nese genius to realise itself in an attitude of aesthetic appreciation of natural beauty 
and an art which bear no evident resemblance to anything Indian. 

^ Cf. Lodge, J. E., In Museum of Fine Arts Bulletin, 141, 1925. 

“ For an admirable short account of Zen Buddhism see Waley. 


155 



PART VI: 

FARTHER INDIA, INDONESIA 
AND CEYLON 


FARTHER INDIA AND INDONESIA 

The m^in element of the population of this area may be described as Malay- 
Polynesian. Probably a thousand years before the beginning of the Christian era 
northern races were moving southwards from Tibet and Yunnan and settling 
in the Irawadi, Menam and Mekong valleys and the Malay Peninsular; where they 
are afterwards known as Pyus, Mon-Khmers, and Malays. Most Hkely by 500 
B. C. they were also reaching and occupying the islands of the Indonesian archi- 
pelago, driving out and replacing the aboriginal Negritos. Previous to their 
contact with India, these northern races probably possessed a knowledge of the 
terrace-cultivation of rice, metal-work and carpentry, weaving, ship-building, 
some forms of musical and dramatic art, and locally differentiated but related 
languages. Apart from certain dolmens and other so-called Polynesian antiquities, 
these races have left no monuments; but they are nevertheless of importance as 
representing the local psychological factor in each of the great national cultures, 
Indo-Khmer, Indo- Javanese, etc. 

Indian contacts may have been made some centuries before the beginning 
of the Christian era; Suvarnabhumi (Sumatra) is mentioned in the Jdfakas, 
Epics, and Mahdvamsa and the sea-route must have been familiar, before the 
commencement of the general eastward extension of Indian culture. What is 
probably the oldest positive evidence of this Indian movement eastwards occurs 
in the remotest area, in the Sanskrit inscription of Vocanh inAnnam, dateable 
about 200 A. D. Before the fifth century the greater part of the area, so far as 
accessible by sea, had been more or less thoroughly Hinduised, and rulers with 
Indian names ending in the patronymic varman, and using an Indian alphabet, 
were established in Campa, Cambodia, Sumatra, and even Borneo. Traces of 
Indian culture have been found in the Philippines, and some scholars believe that 
the Maya culture of Central America has an Indo-Polynesian background. 

According to Ptolemy, the principal Indian port of departure for the Land 
of Gold, locus unde solvunt in Chrysen, was Guduru, undoubtedly the modern Kod- 

156 


dura at the mouth of the Godaveri, and thus on the Andhra coast, and giving 
access to the west. This agrees well with the fact that it is really the art and culture 
of the Dekkhan, rather than those of Southern India, of which the traces are most 
apparent in the earher art of Cambodia, Campa and Java. The early Cam Sanskrit 
inscription of Vocanh, for example, is in an alphabet closely resembling that of 
Rudradaman’s inscription at Girnar, and facts such as these at one time led to 
the view that the colonists of the East had sailed from western India, which is not 
likely to have been the case, nor do the facts require this explanation. In the same 
way, the Indianesque of Funan is much nearer to the Gupta art of the western 
caves and of Badami, than to anything further south, and parallels between the 
architecture of the Dieng Plateau and that of the early Calukyas have been drawn 
by Dutch scholars. That Indian immigrants in the Malay Archipelago are still 
called Orang Klitjg is a survival of the name Kalinga, by which the inhabitants of 
Orissa were once known. It cannot be doubted that long before the time of the 
Pallavas at Kahci, the Kalingas and Andhras of Orissa and Vehgi had laid the 
foundations of Indian or Indianised states “beyond the moving seas”. Ceylon 
in the same way as the more distant islands, but probably at an earlier date, recei- 
ved its Buddhist culture by sea from northern India; the later development is 
similar in principal to that of the more distant islands of the Indian archipelago, 
subject to the condition of much greater proximity to the mainland. 

Broadly speaking we can trace in each area, first of all, an Indianesque period, 
when the local art constitutes to all intents and purposes a province of Indian art, 
so that the art of Funan in the sixth and seventh century, may indeed be said to 
complete and fulfil our knowledge of Gupta and Pallava art; then a classical 
period (800 — 1 200 A. D.), in which a local national formula is evolved and crystal- 
lised; and finally a local national phase no longer in direct contact with India and 
passing into an age of folk art which has generally survived up to the present day. 

To apply the name of “Indian colonial” to the several national schools, after 
the end of the eighth century, is an injustice to the vigor and originality of the 
local cultures. There is scarcely any monument of Farther Indian or Indonesian 
art which, however nearly it may approach an Indian type, could be imagined as 
existing on Indian soil; equally in architecture, sculpture and in the drama and 
minor arts, each country developes its own formula, freely modifying, adding to, 
or rejecting older Indian forms. India ,indeed, provided the material of a higher 
culture, and perhaps a ruling aristocracy, to less developed and less conscious 
races ; but the culture of these races, plastic, musical, dramatic and fiterary, as it 
flourished in the twelfth and thirtheenth centuries and still survives in Java and 
Bah, may justly be called native. Japan, which owes more than is generally realised 
to direct Indian influences, is but a more obvious example of the same condition. 


157 



Thus the history of Indian and Indonesian art deserves in the general 
history of art a higher place than can be denoted by the term colonial. It is true 
that like much of Chinese and Japanese art it can only be understood in the 
light of Indian studies; but it derives its energy from indigenous sov^’ces. 

It is only within the last twenty years that Farther Indian and Indonesian 
art have been seriously studied. Much has already been accomplished by the 
Archaeological Survey of Ceylon, the Archaeological Survey of Burma, the Ecole 
francaise d’Extreme-Orient, at Hanoi, the Oudheidkundige Dienst in Java, and 
more recently by the Service archeologique du Siam. But only the broad 
outlines have been deciphered, and there remain to be investigated innumerable 
undescribed monuments, and unsolved problems of more than local interest. 

CEYLON 

The earliest inhabitants of Ceylon are spoken of as Yakkhas (Yaksas) and 
Nagas. Tradition^ asserts the settlement at an early date of a prince from the 
Ganges Valley, by name Vijaya, who founded a city at Tambapanni in the southern 
part of the island near Hambantota in the fifth century B. C. Vijaya allied himself 
with a native princess, Kuveni, and acquired power. About a hundred years later, 
with the foundation of Anuradhapura, the whole island was brought under one 
rule. In the reign of Dev^am-piya Tissa (247 — 207 B. C.) Asoka sent his son 
Mahinda, and later his daughter Sanghamitta to Ceylon as apostles of Buddhism; 
a branch of the Bodhi-tree of Gaya was brought to Ceylon and planted at Anu- 
radhapura^. A little later the South Indian Tamils made incursions, usurping the 
throne for several decades. Duttha-Gamani (loi — 77 B. C.) recovered the so- 
vereignty and reoccupied Anuradhapura; he holds a place in Simhalese history 
analogous to that of Asoka in Indian. In succeeding centuries and during the 
whole of the mediaeval period the Tamils and Sirhhalese were constantly at war, 
with varying success, only the south of Ceylon and the mountains remaining con- 
tinuously in Simhalese possession. In the fifth century A. D. Fa Hsien visited 
Ceylon; the Mahdvamsa chronicle was composed; and the parricide king Kassapa 
retired to Sigiriya and made a fortress of that isolated rock. In the latter part of 
the eighth century AnurMhapura was abandoned to the Tamils, but later resto- 
rations were effected on various occasions up to 1 290 by the kings of Polonnaruva, 

' For Simhalese history see Arunachalam, i (early dates uncritical); Geiger; Tumour and 
Wijcsinha; Parker, 2; Codrington; A. S. C. Reports, Epigraphia Zeylanica; C. H. I., 

Ch. XXV, and Bibliography, pp. 663, 690. 

2 A pious Simhalese Buddhist visited Bodhgaya in the second century B. C. and recorded 
a donation in the following terms “Bodhi rakhita Ta{m)hapa{ra) nakasa danam”. 

158 



to which city the seat of government was now transferred. But before long this 
city too was taken by the Tamils, and Ceylon became a viceroyalty of the Cola 
kings of Southern India. Simhalese rule was reestabUshed by degrees. In the 
twelfth century the greatest of Siriihalese kings, Parakrama Bahu I (1164 — 1197), 
the Great, recovered possession of the whole island, invaded Southern India, and 
maintained relations with the transmaritime kingdoms in Siam and Sumatra. 
Renewed Tamil invasions again wasted the country, and although in the thirteenth 
century under Vijaya Bahu IV, Bhuvaneka Bahu I, and Parakrama Bahu III Po- 
lonnaruva was again occupied, and in 1361 Ceylon was stiU in a position to re- 
spond to a Siamese request for a Buddhist mission (see p. 1 77), the capital had to 
be shifted successively to Dambadeniya, Kurunegala, Gampola, Kotte, Sitavaka, 
and finally in 1592 to Kandy, where the Simhalese maintained their independence 
until 1815. By this time the ancient seats of population in the north, at Anurad- 
hapura and Polonnaruva had long been deserted, and that once most populous 
and best irrigated part of the island reverted to forest; and Simhalese culture and 
art had acquired a provincial and “folk” character. The last great Buddhist king, 
builder and patron of religion and the arts ruled in Kandy from 1747 to 1780, 
and to him the surviving beauty of the city is largely due. 

The remains of earlier architecture in [their present aspect, though often 
of earlier foundation, date mainly from the late Kusana, Gupta and early 
mediaeval periods. The extant remains of Sirhhalese art thus fall broadly into 
three groups, a classical period (before the eighth century), a mediaeval period 
(ninth to fourteenth century) and a late mediaeval period (fifteenth century to 1 8 1 5 ) ^ . 

The earliest surviving structures -xtcstupaSyOt/idgabas as they are called in Ceylon. 
At Tissamaharama in the Southern Province, near the probable landing place of the 
first settlers at the mouth of the Kirindi River, there are remains of several which 
must have been built in the third or second century B. C. ; the Mahanaga Dagaba was 
repaired in the first and third centuries A. D. and again about 1100, and has not 
been restored since the thirteenth century. The Yatthala Dagaba da tin g from 
the third or second century B. C. was repaired in 1883, and on this occasion many 
important finds were made, amongst which the inscribed bricks, silver square 
coins without marks, crystal and amethyst relic caskets, and a very fine camelian 
seal, representing a seated king (fig. 133).^ 

^ For Simhalese art generally see A. S. C. Reports and Bell, 2 ; Coomaraswamy, i, 4, 6 and 1 5 
and in J. I. A., vol. XVI; Arunachalam; Perera; Smith, 2 and 7; Smither; Parker, 2; Cave, H. W., 
Kfiined cities of Ceylon^ Colombo, 1897 (good illustrations); Burrows, Juried cities of Ceylon^ various 
editions; an essay on Kandyan Architecture by Lewis, J. P., in Cave, H* W., The hook of Ceylon-^ 
the Ceylon National Review; the Ceylon Antiquary and Literary Register; Spolia Zeylanica; 
Ceylon Journal of Science; Kramrisch, S., Wandmalereien :(u Kelaniya^ Jahrb. as. Kunst, i, 1924. 

- For the Yatthala Dagaba see Parker, i, 2; and Mahavamsa, Ch. XXII, v. 7. 


^59 



Few of the early dagahas at Anuradhapura exist exactly in the form in which 
they were first constructed, but most of them nevertheless preserve the early 
Indian hemispherical stupa type. The typical Siihhalese dagaba consists of a 
hemispherical dome rising from three low circular courses, which rest directly 
on the ground on a single square basement approached by four stairways; 
above the dome is a small square enclosure and a railed pavilion, the Indian har- 
mihd, here called devatd kotuwa or “citadel of the gods”, and above thus rises the 
tee, in all extant examples a pointed ringed spire representing an tziYittchatravali-, 
the relic chamber was often a relatively large cell contained in the mass of the 
dome. The first dagaba to be founded was the Thuparama (244 B. C.)^, which 
stood on a circular paved basement and was surrounded by a quadruple ring of 
tall slender pillars, of which the two inner rows bore tenons, and most of which 
are stiU standing. The main purpose of these pillars was to support festoons of 
lamps. This dagaba was preserved and adorned throughout the classical period, 
the last restorations being made by Parakrama Bahu II in the thirteenth 
century. 

The third dagaba, the much larger Maha Seya, was likewise erected in the 
reign of Dev^am-piya Tissa ca. 243 B. C., at Mihintale, about eight miles from 
Anuradhapura, a place deriving its name from the apostle Mahinda, whose stone 
couch, affording a magnificent view over wide stretches of forest, then populous 
and cultivated, can still be seen. It has probably been rebuilt by Parakrama Bahu I 
after the Tamil invasion, in the twelfth century. 

The famous king Duttha-Gamani built two large ddgabas at Anuradhapura. 
One of these, the Ruanweli, was of very great importance, and we possess a much 
more complete history of it and of its construction than of any other early buil- 
ding either in Ceylon or India^. It is said to have been completed by his successor 
Sadha-Tissa (77 — 59 B. C.); its long history ends with the restorations begun in 
1873 and not yet completed. Undoubtedly the original dagaba has been enclosed 
in a later addition ; but the whole is of brick, as are all the Ceylon examples, and 
the enlargement was probably made before the beginning of the Christian era. 
According to the Mahdvamsa, the relic chamber was adorned with paintings 
(“rows of animals and hamsas), and contained a Bodhi-tree with a silver stem and 
leaves of gold, relics of Buddha, jewellery, a gold image of Buddha and a repre- 
sentation (painting) of the Vessantara jdtaka. As regards the image, some doubt 
may be entertained as to the existence of a Buddha figure in the first century 
B. C., but it is not impossible that images of precious metal were made long before 
any in stone. The dome is 254 feet in diameter, and this is but one of several 

* See Hocart, A. M., in J. R. A. S., Ceylon Branch, 1920. 

2 Mahavamsa, Chs. XXVIII— XXXI. 



Simhalese dagabas that are as large as all but the largest of the Egyptian pyramids ; 
the paved platform measures 475 by 473 feet. Facing each of the four cardinal 
points and attached to the dome there is a kind of frontispiece {wahalkadd) con- 
sisting of superimposed horizontal stone courses, flanked by piUars, decorated 
in a style recalling that of the Sanci torana posts. On the platform of the Ruanweli 
Dagaba there were formerly preserved colossal dolomite standing figures, two 
of Buddhas and one of a king (traditionally known as Duttha-Gamani) or Bo- 
dhisattva, in a severe and very grand style (figs. 293, 294), related to that of 
the Amaravati images. The probable date of these images is the latter part of the 
second century A. D.; together with the well-known seated Buddha (fig. 295) 
in the forest near the circular Road, Anuradhapura, these images were until 
lately the noblest and at the same time historically by far the most important mo- 
numents of Simhalese sculpture extant; quite recently the misplaced zeal of 
pious but ignorant and insensitive Buddhists has resulted in their ruthless 
restoration, and a complete destruction of all their original quaUties; it is 
devoutly to be hoped that the seated Buddha will escape a like fate. Two early 
heads (figs. 289, 290) and a standing image in the same style are preserved in 
the Colombo Museum; another standing image at Wat Binchamopit, Bang- 
kok, Siam. 

The description of the Ruanweh Dagaba applies in a general way to the 
second great dagaba erected by Duttha-Gamani, the Miriswetiya, Maricavatti, but 
here the decoration of the wdhalkad with processions of animals — horses, 
bulls, lions, horned lions, and elephants — is more elaborate; the flanking pillars 
have lion capitals, and are ornamented with elaborate trees, with pdduka below 
and a dhamma cakka above. On the styhstic effect of these two buildings Parker 
remarks that “Duttha-Gamani and his brother Sadha-Tissa may claim the 
credit of being the first rulers to appreciate the grandeur of the effect of an 
enormous white dome, far greater than anything of the kind previously erected 
in Ceylon or India, and admirably adapted to be an expression of stabihty, 
and permanence, and inaccessibility, such as the purpose of its construction 
demanded”^. 

The Jetavana Vihara and Dagaba were built by Mahasena (277 — 304 A.D.). 
The present dagaba, so called, seems to be wrongly identified. Wattha-Gamani 
Abhaya (ca. 100 — 76 B. C.) had meanwhile built the Abhaya-giri Dagaba, and this 
structure has since been confused with the Jetavana. The latter, properly so called 
is the largest in Ceylon, the diameter of the dome at its base, that is to say above 
the three basal cyhnders called “bracelets” (and corresponding to the Indian 
stiipa “drum”) being 323 feet, that of the lowest “bracelet” 367 feet. Beside the 

* Parker, 2, p. 296. 



Tvdhalkad of the Jetavana stand finely carved pillars (fig. 286) with figures of Na- 
gas and Naginis and decorative motifs reminiscent of Sanci^. 

The Nikawe Kande Dagaba, in the North Western Province, has yielded 
crystal and blue glass beads of very early types, ten relic cases of crystal, and two 
of green glass. 

The Loha Mahapeya, Loha-pasada or “Brazen Palace”, constructed by 
Duttha-Gamani, and so called from the gilt bronze dome with which it was once 
crowned, must have been a magnificent building^. It was a monastery, and ori- 
ginally consisted of nine storeys ; destroyed by fire in the fourth century A. D. 
it was rebuilt with five. All that now remains is the foundation, consisting of 1600 
granuUte monoliths twelve feet in height covering an area 250 feet square; the 
superstructure was always of wood. The best idea of the general appearance 
of such a building may be gained from some of the rafhas at Mamallapuram, and 
from Akbar’s five-storeyed pavilion, which is in a thoroughly Hindu style, at 
Fathpur Sikri. 

At what is now the Isurumuniya Vihara near Anuradhapura there is an outcrop 
of enormous granuUte boulders, divided by a fissure and having before them a 
partly artificial pool. This site, no doubt in the seventh century, has been treated 
very much in the manner of the Gahgavatarana tJrtham at Mamallapuram, though 
less elaborately. A niche cut in the face of the rock contains a seated figure in 
relief®, accompanied by a horse; apparently representing the sage Kapila, it is 
in pure Pallava style, and one of the finest sculptures in Ceylon; the rock surface 
below, down to the water level, is carved on each side with beautiful but unfinished 
groups of elephants amongst lotuses. The effect is to increase the apparent dimen- 
sions of the pool, in the same way that the painted scenery at the back of a modern 
stage apparently extends its actually Umited area. 

Similar in style are the groups of elephants amongst lotus and fish, carved 
in low relief on the rock slopes bordering a pokuna (tank) near the Tissawewa lake 
bund, not far from Isurumuniya. More remarkable on account of its extra- 
ordinary reahsm is the elephant carved in the full round from a boulder in the 
bed of a stream at Katupilana in the North West Province; when partly covered 
by water, this could easily be mistaken for a real elephant*. 

The natural fortress of Sigiriya (“Lion Rock”) was occupied by Kassapa I 

^ For the Abhayagiriya, see A. S. C., A. R., 1894, p. 2; Jetavanarama, 1910 — ii, p. 11, 
and both, Parker, 2, pp. 304ff. 

* The Lohapasada is described at length in Mahdvamsa, Ch. XXVII (Geiger). 

’ Coomaraswamy, 7, pi. 52; Smith, 2, pi. XXIII. The figure is certainly not, as suggested 
by Parker, 2, p. 548, a soldier in helmet and plume. 

* Smith, 7. The pokuna groups recall the spandril paintings at Elura. 



(479 — 497 D.) during a great part of his reign^. On the summit of the rock 
he constructed a palace, of which the foundations survive, and as a means of access 
built a remarkable walled gallery, with a fagade in the form of an enormous 
seated hon, which may have given its name to the rock. In the vertical wall of 
the cliff above the gallery are two sheltered rock pockets, not deep enough to 
be called caves, but in which are still preserved frescoes of the fifth century 
(fig. 184), in a style closely related to that of Ajanta, and representing celestial 
women, with their attendant maids, casting down a rain of flowers ; the fact that 
the figures are all cut off by clouds a little below the waist proves that the persons 
represented cannot have been regarded as human beings. These paintings com- 
bine a great elegance of manner with a penetrating sensuahty. The colours used 
are reds, yellow, green and black. The perfect preservation of these paintings is 
extraordinary, considering that they have been exposed to the open air for fourteen 
hundred years. It may be noted that many of the figures wear a coli, quite un- 
mistakeably indicated. 

Another painting, in the Pulligoda Galkande, Tamankaduwa, near Polon- 
naruva represents five seated male persons, all nimbate, and may date from the 
seventh century^. Many of the dagabas at Anuradhapura, wherever plastered 
surfaces are preserved, show traces of decorative colouring^. Rock paintings at 
Hindagala, near Kandy, representing Buddha in the Trayastrimsa Heavens, have 
been assigned to the seventh century, but are probably of later date^ . Those at 
the Ridi Vihara do not seem to be very old. 

All of the buildings at Polonnaruva (Pulatthipura) must date between 781 
and 1290, including the periods of Tamil (Cola) occupation from about 1049 
to 1059 and one of a few days in 1198. What survives even to the present day 
constitutes a veritable museum of mediaeval styles, but only a few of the most 
important buildings can be referred to in detail. There is a large series of dagabas^ 
of the usual hemispherical type, amongst which the Rankot Vehera or Ruanweh- 
seya, and the Kiri, and Lahkatilaka dagabas, all of the “bubble” type, are the 
largest. Of the many works ascribed to Parakrama Bahu I (1164 — 1197) may be 
mentioned the Gal Vihara, consisting of an apsidal cave shrine, containing a 
seated rock-cut Buddha and traces of ancient painting, and with a seated Buddha 
over fifteen feet in height to the right of the entrance ; and a rock-cut Parinirvana 
image over forty-six feet in length, with a standing figure of Ananda, with arms 

‘ General account in A. S. C., A. R., 1905. Further details, 1896, p. 10, and 1897, p. 14. 
There are good copies of the frescoes 4 n the Colombo Museum. 

^ Smith, 2, fig. 213. 

“ Smither, pp. 21, 27, 31 and pi. XXXII. 

* Joseph, G. A., Buddhist fresco at Hindagala near Kandj, Ceylon Administration Reports, 
1918, Colombo, 1919. A poor copy is in the Indian Museum, Calcutta. 


n* 


163 



crossed, beside it, nearly twenty-three feet in height^. The Thuparama is a rectan- 
gular brick temple in Dra vidian style®, but with vaulted arches and narrow trian- 
gular windows like those of Bodhgaya and other brick temples in the Ganges 
valley. The roof is flat, with a low pyramidal tower of successively reduced storeys ; 
the inner walls were plastered and painted, the outer decorated with architectural 
facades. The whole structure recalls the “cubic” architecture of Campa®. The 
Northern Temple, formerly but incorrectly designated Demala Maha-seya, has 
plaster covered brick relief figures in the niches of the external decoration 
(fig. 302); when the interior was cleared much of the plastered surface covered 
with paintings (fig. 291) of Jatakas, the Vessantara and Maitrihala amongst others, 
was found in a fair state of preservation, but as a result of some twenty years 
exposure and neglect, these paintings, which formed by far the most extensive 
remains of their kind anywhere in India or Ceylon, have almost disappeared. 
Both temples contained large standing Buddha figures of brick^. 

The Jetavana monastery at the other end of the city consists of a group of 
buildings, amongst which the Lankatilaka, containing a gigantic standing Buddha 
of brick, is the largest Buddhist temple in Ceylon. The roof was probably a 
storied structure like that of the Thuparama. Remains of frescoes include a 
nan lata design on the ceiling®. 

Still another building due to Parakrama Bahu I is the Potgul Vihara, the 
“delightful circular house” where he was accustomed to sit and listen to the 
reading of the Jatakas by the learned priest who dwelt there®. The building con- 
sists of a circular cella, originally painted, now roofless, with a small antardla^ 
and a mandapa added later by Candravatl, while at each angle of the outer plat- 
form are small dagabas’’. 

The colossal rock-cut statue (fig. 301), eleven and a half feet in height, carved 
in high relief from a granulite boulder to the east of the Topawewa bund, is tra- 
ditionally regarded as a representation of Parakrama Bahu himself. One of the 
finest sculptures in Ceylon, it represents a dignified bearded sage reading from 

^ For the Gal Vihara, and similar rock-cut images at Tantrimalai, see A. S. C., A. R., 1907, 
p. 34; for the painting, ihid.^ P* 34* The image of Ananda carried in procession in the reign 
of Sena II (886 — 901), Mabdvamsa, Ch. LI, v. 80, was probably of metal. 

2 The Mahdvamsa states casually that Parakrama Bahu brought “Damilo” artificers from 
India to decorate Polonnaruva. Even at the present day the Simhalese masons {galn^adunio) and 
some of the higher craftsmen are of acknowledged Tamil descent. Cf. page 126. 

^ For the Thuparama, see fig. 303, and A. S. C., A. R., 1905, pp. 3 off. 

^ For the Northern Temple frescoes see A. S. C., A. R., 1909, pis. XXV — XXVII and 
A — P: and ibid, 1922 — 23, figs. 12, 13. There are poor copies in the Colombo Museum. 

® A S. C., A. R., 1910 — II, pp. 3ofF. 

« Mahdvawsa, ch. LXXIII. 

’ A. S. C., A. R., 1906, pp. i4ff. 


164 



a palm-leaf book; the identification has been doubted, but it does not seem at 
all impossible that the pious king should have wished to be represented in this 
fashion^. 

The Sat Mahal Pasada is a solid seven storied building, more hke a traditional 
Mt. Meru than any other building in India or Ceylon. Bell has called attention 
to the Cambodian affinities of this and other buildings, calling this the “Cambo- 
dian quarter of the city” 

To Nissahka Malla (1198 — 1207) is attributed the beautiful Nissahka Lata 
Mandapaya, a railed enclosure containing eight curvilinear lotus pillars which 
once supported a roof®. Credit is given to the same king for the Wata-da-ge 
(fig. 304), a building quite unique, but for the similar circular shrine at Meda- 
giriya twenty miles distant. Bell calls it the “most beautiful specimen of Bud- 
dhistic stone architecture in Ceylon”. It consists of a circular terrace, 375 feet in 
circumference, stone faced and paved; upon this a circular pedestal, elaborately 
ornamented and supporting a low railing of stone slabs divided by octagonal 
pillars twice their height; a narrow circular passage separating this pillared railing 
from a high brick wall; and within this a small dagaba, with two circles of pillars 
round it, and seated Buddhas facing each of the four entrance stairways, which 
are provided with Naga dvdrapalas of the usual Simhalese type. Quite possibly 
this was the shrine erected by Parakrama Bahu I as a “round temple of the Tooth- 
relic”, and Nissahka Malla merely restored it^. 

Also ascribed to the twelfth century are the colossal standing Buddha 
at Seseruwa, N. W. P., 16' 2." in height, that at Awkana, 46' in height, 
and the seated Buddha protected by the Naga Mucalinda at Kon Wewa, 
N. C. P.®. 

There is also at Polonnaruwa a series of Hindu temples (devdles) built in the 
time of Cola occupation and in Cola style®. The Siva Devale, No. I, miscalled 
the Dalada Maligawa, is the finest Hindu shrine in Ceylon. The Siva Dev^e 
no. 2 is of granulite and limestone, and consists of garbha-grha, antardla, ardha- 
matidapa and mandapa, with a four-storeyed vimdna\ the exterior was originally 
plastered and painted, traces of a lattice pattern in red and white remaining on 
the fagade of the second storey. Originally known as the Vanuvanma-devi 
Isvaramudaiyar, it has inscriptions of Adhirajendra Coladeva, ca. 1070 and Ra- 

1 A. S. C., A. R., 1904, p. 4; 1907, p. 21, note. Smith, 2, p. 241. 

2 A. S. C, A. R., 1906, p. 17; 1910 — II, p. 39. 

“ A. S. C., A. R., 1910 — II, p. 38. 

‘ A. S. C., A. R., 1903, pp. 22 — 26; 1904, p. 5; Mahavamsa, ch. LXXVII, translation, 
pp. 40, 41. 

‘ Smith, 7. 

« General description, A. S. C., A. R., 1908, pp. 4—20; also 1^06, p. 17, 1907, p. 17. 


165 



jendracola I (1020 — 1042), and like most of the devdles at Polonnaruva, seems 
to have been desecrated by Parakrama Bahu II of Dambadeniya in the thirteenth 
century, a fact which affords a terminus ante quern for the date of the bronzes, found 
in the course of excavations. Five other devdles are found outside the old city 
walls, three of these being Vaisnava; with the exception of No. 2, described above, 
all are of brick, or brick and stone, and have enclosing walls {prakdra) of brick. 

Another fine temple of the Cola period, known as the Gedige, is found at 
N^anda. This temple which may be dated about 1040, has a barrel roof and 
caitya-'^mdow gable, and was of mixed Hindu and Buddhist dedication 1. Later, 
probably of sixteenth century date, is the beautiful, but unfinished Berendi Kovil 
at Sitawaka^. There is also an elegant early Hindu shrine at Ridi Vihara, consisting 
of a stone mandapam in front of a cella situated beneath an overhanging rock. 
Smaller Hindu shrines {kdvils and devdles') are numerous (e. g. Kataragama, Kandy 
and Ratnapura), and in many cases these are associated with or even form a 
part of Buddhist temples, as at the beautiful Buddhist temple of Lankatilaka, 
near Gadaladeniya, a fine building partly of stone, in a Dravidian style with 
Kandyan roofs®. 

A fair number of Simhalese bronzes, actually in most cases of copper, 
and ranging in date from about the fifth to the twelfth century A. D. have 
been recovered and published, mainly by myselH. A purely Gupta type 
is represented by the fine example from Badulla, in the Colombo Museum 
(fig. 296). Two of the finest small figures known from any site in India or 
Ceylon are the bronze Avalokitesvara (fig. 297) and Kuvera (Jambhala) 
(fig. 298), now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston; the former a spiritual 
type in style and movement like the rock-cut Siva of the Kailasanatha at 
Elura (fig. 193), the latter wonderfully realising an ideal of material well-being, 
and very like the Simhala-dvipa Jambhala of a Nepalese manuscript of the eleventh 
century®. Both of these may be assigned to the eighth century. Probably of the 
ninth century, and not quite equal in conception to these, is the Vajrapani of 
fig. 299; the pedestal shows marked analogies with early Pala and Javanese forms. 
There are other good examples of Mahay^a bronzes from Ceylon in the British 
Museum. In this connection it may be pointed out that while Simhalese Buddhism 
has remained predominantly Hinayana, there existed a Mahayana monastery of 
the eighth or ninth century at Anuradhapura, known as theVijayarama Samgharama, 

* A. S. C., A. R., 191C3 — II. 

“ Bell, 2, p. 63. 

^ Coomaraswamy, i, pi. VII, i. 

* Coomaraswamy, 6, 7, 9 (2) and 15. 

^ Foucher, i, pi. IX, 2 (Cambridge Ms. Add. 643). The manuscript illustrations, as pointed 
out by Foucher, evidendy repeat older types. 

166 



and a scroll has been found, inscribed with a hymn to Tara^. On the other hand, 
no characteristic example of Tantrik Buddhist art has been found in Ceylon. 

A standing Bodhisattva from Anuradhapura, of adequate workmanship, but 
scarcely a masterpiece, may also be assigned to the close of the classic period^. 
Much finer was the copper figure of a Bodhisattva, heavily gilt, but greatly cor- 
roded, purchased for the Boston Museum, but stolen in transit®. This figure was 
clearly related stylistically to the colossal statue known as Parakrama Bahu I at 
Polonnaruva above referred to. 

The British Museum has possessed since 1830 a very splendid brass or pale 
bronze image of nearly life size (fig. 300), from somewhere between Trincomalee 
and Batticaloa, and traditionally identified as a representation of Pattini DevP. 
The drapery, below the waist, is very sensitively realised, the material clinging 
closely to the limbs in Gupta style. It is difficult to date the figure exactly; the 
angularity of the elbows may perhaps relate it to the Polonnaruva Parakrama Bahu 
and the copper figure above referred to; but it compares well in aesthetic value 
with the Indian Sultanganj Buddha and is far superior to the twelfth century 
sculptures of the Gal Vihara, with which the figure of Parakrama Bahu is supposed 
to be contemporary. 

Another bronze of great beauty is a panel, which once formed part of a door 
jamb, from Anuradhapura, now in the Colombo Museum; the floral scroll and 
pald-peti band have all the decorative abundance of the Gupta style at its best®. 

Very different from the bronzes described above are the Hindu bronzes 
excavated at the Siva Devales in Polonnaruva®. These include copper images 
of Siva in various forms (Nataraja, etc.), Parvati, Karttikeya, Ganesa, the Saiva 
saints Sundara-murti. Svami, Manikka Vasagar, Tirujnana Sambandha Svami, 
Appar Svami; Visnu, Laksmi,Bala Krsna, Hanuman; and Surya. Someofthe Saiva 
saints, especially the Sundara-murti Svami (fig. 243) and Manikka Vasagar are 
superior to any South Indian examples, but all the figures are in Dravidian style, 
and though probably cast in Polonnaruva, must have been made by South Indian 
sthapatis. They are further of interest as being necessarily to be dated before 1300; 
it is certain that metal images were made at Tanjore in the eleventh century, but 
no positive evidence exists enabling us to date any of the known Indian examples 
so far back. 

1 A. S. C, A. R., 1891, pp. 4, 5. 

^ Coomaraswamy, 6, fig. 9. 

^ M. F. A. Bull., no. 120, fig. 13. 

* For the legend of Pattini Devi see Coomaraswamy, 15, p. 293; Parker, 2, p. 63111. The 
fuU story is related in the Tamil Silappatikdram. 

® Coomaraswamy, 6, fig. 90. 

® Coomaraswamy, 6; Arunachalam, 2. 



By the eighteenth century, Siihhalese art had become a provincial, and prac- 
tically a folk art, and as such is extraordinarily rich and varied. We possess, too, 
a more detailed account and knowledge of it than is the case with any similar area 
in India. What survives of it is to be found mainly in the Colombo and Kandy 
Museums in Ceylon and in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. It is more 
adequately represented in the architecture and painted decoration of the countless 
Buddhist temples and monasteries of Kandy (MahaNuwara) and the Kandy district^ . 
These, as they stand are mainly due to the patronage of the last great king of Cey- 
lon, Kirti Sri Raja Simha (1747 — 1780). The finest temples are the Dalada Ma- 
ligawa in Kandy, where the tooth-relic is preserved, and the Gadaladeniya, 
Lankatilaka and Ridi Vihara temples; the best preserved monastery, the Mal- 
watte Pansala in Kandy. Admirable paintings, in the formal style of the period, 
are preserved at Degaldoruwa*, executed between 1771 and 1786 in part by De- 
varagampala Silvatenna Unnanse, an “unordained” Buddhist priest who worked 
also at the Ridi Vihara; at the Danagirigala, Lankatilaka, Dodantale and 
Ganegoda temples ; and at the Kelaniya Vihara® near Colombo, though in the latter 
case affected by European influences. The paintings at the DambuUa Gal Vihara, 
and at Aluvihara, while not ancient in their present state, to a large extent preserve 
ancient designs^. A few illustrated Buddhist manuscripts on paper, of late 
eighteenth and early nineteenth century date are known. The Kandyan craftsman 
of the superior class practised several arts, as painting, ivory- and wood-carving, 
metal work and jewellery; the blacksmiths, potters, ivory-turners, and potters 
belonging to lower groups. In jewellery, two techniques are of special interest, 
the one that of decoration of surfaces with rounded grains and wire (fig. 375), 
the other that of “gold-embedding” or incrustation, in which a surface is covered 
with thin rounded stones set in soft gold shaped with a hard tool; the variety 
and beauty of the beads (fig. 373) is remarkable. Probably the finest as well as 
the largest collection of jewellery and encrusted gold plate (figs. 381, 385) and silver 
ware is that of the Dalada M^gawa in Kandy, the jewellery for the most part 
representing personal adornments dedicated by royal benefactors. Purely Kandyan 
weaving is always in cotton,'^e decoration being added while the work is 
in progress in tapestry technique; textiles of finer quality were imported from 
Southern India. In pattern almost all of the oldest Indian motifs are to be met 
with (fig. 396). Broadly speaking the Kandyan style is closely related to that of 
Southern India; many of the higher craftsmen, indeed, are of south Indian extraction, 

^ Bell, 2; Coomaraswamy, i; Lewis, J. P., in Cave, H. W., Tie hook of Ceylon. 

^ Coomaraswamy, i. 

® Coomaraswamy, in J. I. A., vol. i6,No. 128, 1914; Kramrisch, in Jahrb. as. Kunst, I, 1924. 

^ Cf. Beylie, L. de, U architecture hindoue en Extreme Orient, Paris, 1907, pp. 373 — 378. 


168 



although so completely adapted to their environment that this would never be 
guessed from their appearance, language or workmanship. Descendants of the 
higher craftsmen are still able to carry out difficult tasks with conspicuous ability, 
and suffer more from lack of patronage than lack of skill. But the taste of “educated” 
Sithhalese has degenerated beyond recovery, and some modern Buddhist construct- 
ions are not surpassed for incongruity and ugliness by any buildings in the world. 

BURMA^ 

At an early period, probably by 500 B. C., the dominant races of Burma were 
the Pyus, of Central Asian origin, in the north (Arakan and as far south as Prome), 
and the Takings in the south (Thaton, and after 573 A. D. also Pegu). The latter 
belong to the Mon-Khmer family, which embraces the Khmers in the east, and 
the Bhils and Gonds in India proper. Contact with India both by land and sea 
had been established perhaps already in the Maurya period. In all probability 
by the first century A. D., Tagaung in the north, Old Prome (Sriksetra and Pi- 
sanu Myo or City of Visnu) on the Irawadi, and Thaton on the sea coast possessed 
Indian colonies or at least were strongly subject to Indian influence. From the 
fifth century onwards Prome and Thaton were certainly important centres of 
Buddhist and Hindu culture; Vaisnava and Saiva sculptures, Buddhist stupas, 
brick buildings and terracottas in or closely related to the Gupta tradition have 
been found at Tagaung, Prome, Thaton and other places*. The Buddhism of 
Prome, source of the oldest and indeed the only Burmese Sanskrit inscription, was 
Mahayana, that of Thaton, where the inscriptions are in Pali in a South Indian 
alphabet, Hinayana. The Saka era was in use; a later Burmese era was established 
in 639. Buddhaghosa is said to have visited Thaton about 450 A. D. bringing 
with him the books of the Pali canon, and from this time onwards Burma has 
been more exlusively a Buddhist country than was the case in any other part of 
Further India or Indonesia. Northern Burmese Buddhism on the other hand at 
an early date acquired a Tantrik character and had close connections with Nep^. 

In the eighth century the Talaings of Pegu conquered Prome and a new 
northern capital was established at Old Pag^. The walled city, of which the 
southern gateway stiU survives, dates from 847. The eighth and ninth centuries 
were marked by Shan-Thai invasions from the north, bringing in a fresh influx 
of Tibeto-Burman blood, and introducing the Burmese proper who have gradually 
replaced the old Pyus and absorbed the Talaings. 

1 Duroiselle; Ko (also many shorter notes by the same authors in A. S. I., A. R.); Harvey. 

* For an early mediaeval Surya from the Akyab District, see A. S. I., A. R., j^zz — z}, 
p. IZ3; bronze Tara, ibid., 1917 — 18, pi. I, p. 27 and pl.XVII, i, 2. 


169 



Only a few of the Pagan temples and stupas date from the tenth century. The 
Vaisnava Nat Hlaung Gyaung (fig. 305), traditionally dated 931, is the 
only surviving Hindu building^. The Ngakywe Nadaung (fig. 306) is a cylin- 
drical or more accurately bulbous stiipa, recalling the Dhamekh at Sarnath. The 
Pawdawmu too has evident Indian affinities; the Pebin Gyaung is of the 
Siriihalese type. 

The unification of Burma was first accomplished by Anawrata (Aniruddha) 
of Pag^ (1040 — 1077). Anawrata invaded and conquered Thaton, and brought 
back with the Taking king (Manuha) Hinay^a books and priests toPagan ; he attemp- 
ted to drive out the Tantrik Arl; he established connections with foreign countries, 
obtained relics, and initiated a great era of building. Remains of more than 3 000 
“pagodas” can still be traced in and near Pagan. The following are the names and 
dates of some of the most important: 

eleventh century — Kyanzittha cave temple (1037 — 1039); Shwezigon 
(1039,! enlarged 1084 — 1112), Ananda, (1082 — 1090), Nanpaya, Sein- 
nyet, the two Petleik pagodas, and the library (Bidagat Taik); 
twelfth century — Sapada, Thatbinnyu and Shwegugyi pagodas; 
thirteenth century — Mahabodhi, Kondawgyi, Mingalazedi (1274) 
and Tilominlo pagodas. 

With the exception of the Kyanzittha and Nanpaya these are all brick struc- 
tures, and were decorated with carved stucco. The Nanpaya is of stone. The Nat 
Hlaung Gyaung and Ananda pagodas are remarkable for their contemporary 
sculpture (fig. 316, 317), the Kyanzittha, Kondawgyi and others for their mural 
paintings, the Shwezigon, Ananda, Petleik and some others for their glazed terra- 
cotta bricks illustrating the Jdtakas. The Tilominlo is unique in its decoration 
of green glazed sandstone. 

The architectural forms are very varied and reflect a contact with many count- 
ries. The bulbous (fig. 306) and cylindrical forms recall Sarnath and the votive 
stupas of the Pala period; the Pebin Gyaung and Sapada are of the old Siriihalese 
hemispherical type; several others are crowned by a kind of Aryavarta sikhara 
shrine; the Mingalazedi (fig. 313) and Shwesandaw have truncated pyramidal 
terraced bases with angle towers, and a central stairway on each side, recalling 
Cambodian terraced prangs and the older Borobodur; the Mahabodhi (fig. 309), 
with its high straight-edged sikhara, is modelled on the older shrine at Bodhgaya 
(fig . 210); the library (fig. 308) is surmounted by a five-fold roof with angle points 
suggesting the wooden forms of the Mandalay palace, and the prison-palace of 
King Manuha is in the same style; the decoration of the Seinnyet shows Chinese 
peculiarities. 


‘ Assigned to nth — 13th century by Duroiselle, A. S. I., A. R., 1912 — 13, p. 137. 



In the most distinctively Burmese types (Ananda, Thatbinnyu, Shwegugyi, 
Gawdawpalin, etc., and the Hindu temple of 951) one of the lower terraces is 
independently developed to a great height, giving a cubic aspect to the main part 
of the building, and chapels and galleries are opened in the sohd mass thus made 
available. An Indian parallel can be cited at Mirpur Khas, Sind, where a brick 
stiipa, which cannot be later than 400 A. D. has a deep square base containing 
within its wall mass, though only on one side, three small shrines^. 

The modern Burmese pagodas of the Shwedagon type (fig. 310), like many 
in Siam, slope almost smoothly upwards from the broad base, thus without a 
marked distinction of the separate elements, and presenting a very different 
appearance from the old Indian and Siihhalese bell and domed types, as well as 
from the mediaeval cylindrical forms of Sarnath, Pag^ and Hmawza; the later 
type is more picturesque, but architecturally over-refined, and aspiring, but un- 
substantial. Many such pagodas are built over and conceal much older structures. 

Materials for the study of Burmese sculpture are rather scanty. The older 
fragments of the seventh or eighth century reflect Gupta tradition; the typically 
Gupta bronze of figure 159 said to have been found in Burma, is probably of 
Indian origin. The Das Avatara sculptures of the Nat Hlaung Gyaung are still 
markedly Indian, so too the Nanpaya reliefs (fig. 314), and most of the small 
bronzes and stone rehefs of the eleventh century; many of the latter may be im- 
portations from Bihar or Bengal. Classical Burmese sculpture is best represented 
by the eighty-one reliefs of the Ananda pagoda* (figs. 3 16, 317), which represent 
scenes from the life of Buddha according to the Avidura-Nidma, with one panel 
perhaps referable to the l^lita-Vistara\ a figure of Kyanzittha, warrior-king 
and founder of the Ananda temple, is included in the scenes. These reliefs are 
remarkable for their clarity, animation and grace. Each is inserted in a niche of 
its own; thus there are no continuous relief surfaces hke those of Borobudur or 
Ahkor Wat. Very much in the same style, but rather nearer to old Indian terra- 
cottas and to reliefs like those of the Chandimau pillars® are the glazed Jdtaka 
bricks of the Petleik, Ananda, Shwezigon, Mingalazedi and other pagodas; the 
earliest and best are those of the western Petleik'*. 

Several ofthe Pagan pagodas contain contemporary frescoes. The paintings 
of the Kubezatpaya (i i th — 12 th century) and Kubyaukkyi consist of small square 
panels closely grouped and collectively covering a large area®. Separate figures of 

^ Cousens, 5. 

* Duroiselle, z; and Seidenstiicker. 

® Banerji, 2. 

* Duroiselle, i; Ko, i. References listed, Coomaraswamy, Burmese glared tiles, in M. F. A. 
Bulletin No. 98; and Duroiselle, i. 

® Thomann; Duroiselle, r. 



Buddhas and Bodhisattvas are on a larger scale. Other frescoes are found in the Nan- 
damannya pagoda (fig. 311). Those of the Payathonzu triple temple at Minnanthu 
near Pagan (fig. 312) illustrate the T^trik Buddhism of the Burmese Ari sects, 
a mixture of Buddhism, Hinduism and local elements, often highly erotic^. 
Frescoes in the Kyanzitthu cave temple, dateable about 1287, represent un- 
mistakeable Mongols^. Those of the small brick monastery near the Ananda temple 
are quite modern, and show European influence. A pair of carved wooden door 
panels of the Pagan period is preserved in a temple near the Shwezigon. 

The stylistic affinities of the frescoes are with Bengal and Nepal as illustrated 
in Cambridge Ms. Add. 1643 (Nepalese of 1015 A. D.), Ms. A. 15 Calcutta, 
(Nepalese of 1071 A. D.), Mss. Cambridge Add. 1464 and 1688, (Bengali of the 
eleventh century®; the Boston manuscript 20. 589, Nepalese of 1136 A. D. (figs. 
280, 281), and more remotely with Elura. The wiry nervous outline is characteristic. 
The hair line above the brow descends in a central point, the eyebrows and eyelids 
are doubly curved, the round chin clearly indicated, the whole pose has conscious 
aesthetic intention. The three-quarter face is often shown, and in this case the 
further eye is made to project; this peculiarity, in conjunction with the long very 
pointed nose presents a rather close parallel to the Gujarati (Jaina, etc.) painting 
of the i2th — 1 6th centuries. Thus from Elura, Nepal-Bengal, Gujarat, Polonna- 
ruva, and Pagan we can obtain a fairly clear idea of mediaeval Indian painting. 

Another extensive series of remains is to be found at and around Prome 
(Yathemyo and Hmawza). Urns with Pyu legends may date from the fourth 
century. Inscriptions on gold scrolls in Eastern Calukya characters date from 
the seventh century or slightly later. Of ancient cylindrical stupas the best pre- 
served is the Bawbawgyi, a hundred and fifty feet in height, and supported by 
five low receding terraces; dating perhaps from the eighth century. Sculptures 
representing the Buddha with r^m-bearers as attendants are of Kus^a-Gupta 
derivation. At Yathemyo there are very extensive remains of walled cities, burial 
grounds, sculptures and pagodas, mostly perhaps of the eleventh century. 

At Tagaung, the earliest seat of Burmese rule, and receiving its Indian 
culture rather through Assam and Manipur than from the south, nothing has 
so far been found but terracotta plaques of the Gupta period. 

Pegu, Talaing capital from 573 to 781 and again from the thirteenth to the 
sixteenth centuries, attained the zenith of its development in the latter period. The 
remains include a number of stupas, of which the Shwemawdaw has grown by 
successive additions from an original height of 75 feet to one of 288, with a base 

^ Duroiselle, 3. 

2 Duroiselle, in Rep. Arch. Surv. Burma, for 1922, pi. 1. 

3 Foucher, 2. 


172 



circumference of 13 50. On the west side of the town there is a Parinirvana Buddha 
image 181 feet in length. 

At Thaton in the south, the Shwezaya and Thagyapaya may date from the 
classical period; the latter contains terracotta panels like the glazed bricks of 
Pag^, but with Saiva subjects. 

After the twelfth century, when direct Indian influence is no longer strongly 
felt, the quality of Burmese sculpture rapidly declines; as the art grows more 
provincial the element of local colour becomes more evident. \Some of the 
postclassical lacquered wooden figures of standing Buddhas are not lacking in 
nobility and grace, and much of the older architectural woodcarving, or that 
seen on the decorated sterns of the river boats is altogether delightful. After 
the eighteenth century taste becomes increasingly rococo. The characteristic 
seated and reclining alabaster Buddhas which have often been regarded as 
typical of Burmese art are quite modern, and usually sentimental and inefficiently 
realistic. 

The great expenditure of resources during the Pagan period prepared the way 
for the northern invader — “the pagoda ready, the people destroyed”. In 1287 
Kublai Khan sacked Pag^; after this followed Shan-Thai incursions. The Sh^s 
then built a capital at Ava and pushed down the Irawadi to Prome. Later history 
has mainly to do with the struggle between the northern Shan (Burmese) kingdom, 
and the Takings of Pegu, who were finally dispersed by Alaungpaya in 1760. 
Bawdawpaya (1781 — 1819) planned the Mingun Pagoda, which was to have been 
the largest in Burma; still over a hundred and forty-three feet in height, this re- 
presents only a third of the originally intended dimension. The great beU men- 
tioned below was intended for this shrine. 

A series of painted alabaster plaques, illustrating Jdtakas, in imitation of the 
old terracottas, was made for the Pathodawgyi, Amarapura, in 1820. 

Mandalay was founded only in 1857 and occupied two years later by Mindon 
Min, the last great patron of Burmese art, to whom we owe the Mandalay palace, 
as well as innumerable beautifully illuminated Buddhist texts prepared for him 
and presented to the monasteries as an act of pious devotion. The palace buildings 
and several groups of monasteries, e. g. the Myadaung Kyaung of Queen Supa- 
layat, and the Sangyaung monasteries at Amarapura, are magnificent examples of 
richly decorated wooden architecture, and in scale and plan, afford some idea of 
the magnificence of older Indian palaces in wood of which no trace remains. The 
main features of the style are the use of immense teak columns, finely lacquered 
and gilt, the multiple roofs and spires with flamboyant crockets, and the interior 
decoration with glass mosaic inlay 

* Ko, 3, 4, and Duroiselle, in A. S. I., A. R., 1912 — 13. 


173 



Of the minor arts, Burma is famous for its lacquer^, which is applied both 
architecturally and to small objects designed for personal or monastic use; thus 
wooden columns, boxes of all skes, and book covers are typically so decorated. 
The chief centres of modern work are Nyaung-u near Pagan, Prome, and Laihka. 
In the case of small objects the framework is made of very finely plaited bamboo 
or of plaited horse-hair; the interstices are filled, and the whole varnished black. 
Other colours, red, green, and yellow are then successively applied, engraving 
of the design and polishing of the surface being necessary after each coat of 
colour is applied. A good deal of the work is restricted to black and gold, in other \ 
and coloured examples the design may be extremely elaborate, including figures 
of Buddhist divinities and illustrations of Jdtakas. Three or four months are 
required for all the stages of manufacture. The lacquer ed Buddhist ^ gxts Eluded to 
above are written in black on a surface richly decorated in red and gold. The basis 
is palm leaf of the usual form. Here as elsewhere in Indo-China a decline in the 
quality of the minor arts is apparent only after the middle of the nineteenth century. 

Repousse silver-work, niello and cloisonnee,and gold and silver jewelry have all 
been made in fine designs and with admirable technical skill ; but most of the modern 
production is designed for European buyers, and is often nothing but an imitation 
of the “swami-work” of Madras. The Burmese have always been expert founders, 
SNSspecially of images and bells, and makers of fine gongs. The great bell cast for Baw- 
^ dawpaya in 1790, thesecondlargest in the worI 3 ^ weighs eighty tons ; such works as 
this are undertaken, of course, with what would now be regarded as totally inade- 
• quate apparatu^^urmese shot silks, still made at Amarapura, are deservedly famous . 
^^^^/techniq ueis found”onI^n harrow bands of v-shaped elements in lengthwise suc- 
cession in the skirts woven by the Kachin tribes. Embroidery, too, with the except- 
ion of the well-known Burmese applique curtains, is mainly the work of hill tribes. 
■-^'^The Burmese theatre {prve) is well developed. Plays are performed at temple 
fairs, occasions of domestic celebration, dedications and as an honour paid to the 
dead. The stage is a temporary thatched or mat covered pavilion open at the sides ; 
but the Mandalay palace has a regular dancing hall, where performances took place 
for the entertainment of the royal family. The favourite the mes are drawn from 
\ the, J^akas (Zdf) and fro m romantic legends. There exists too an elaborate 
1 marionette (^otthe) theatr^the "^ppets Being worked by strings from above. 
^There appears to exist also a shadow play, in which large cut-leather scenes from 
'^he 'Kdmdjam are employed, without any moveable parts*. 


^ Lacquer dating from the 12th or 13 th century has been found at Pagan (A. S. L, A. R., 
1922—23, p. 193). 

2 Ferrars, M. and B., Burma, London, Ch. VIII. Cut leather examples in the Ethnographische 
Museum, Miinchen. 


X74 



•^SIAM^ 

Siam was by no means a unified kingdom before the fourteenth century. The 
simplest possible statement of Siamese history would be to the effect that 
at the beginning of the Christian era the greater part of the Menam valley was in 
the hands of the Mon-Khmers, whose sway extended from Cambodia to Southern 
Burma, and that gradually the Sino-Tibetan Lao-Thais, ancestors of the modern 
Siamese, pressed downwards from the north until they obtained possession of the 
whole delta, Cambodia, and the greater part of the Malay peninsular. 

An early Thai capital was established at Lamphun about 575. A little further 
south, from the combination of Lao-Thai-Khmer races developed the powerful 
kingdom of Sukhotai-Sawankalok (twin capitals also called Sukhodaya and Sajja- 
nalaya), and here Indian culture, Brahmanical and Buddhist, derived from the 
south through the Khmers, prevailed. This kingdom attained the zenith of its 
power in the eleventh century. 

Meanwhile the southern kingdom of Lopburi (Lapapuri) formed a part of 
the Cambodian hegemony known to the Chinese as Fu Nan and Kan To Li, and 
embraced, at any rate nominally, a part of Southern Burma (Thaton-Pegu) and 
the northern part of the Malay Peninsular as far as Kedah and Ligor (Sithammarat 
= Sri Nakon Thamarat = Sri Dharmaraja Nagara) in Jaiya. The chief city of 
this southern kingdom was Dvaravati, afterwards Sano, later the site of Ayuthia. 
.Indian influences were here strongly felt ; remains of the Gupta and Pallava periods 
‘ have been found at Rajaburi, Prapathom, Chantaburi, Kedah, Takua-Pa and Ligor. 
From the sixth to the thirteenth century Lopburi was politically, and culturally 
a part of Cambodia. It is therefore not at all surprising that just as in Southern 
Cambodia (Funan) so in Southern Sigm we find unmistakeable remains of an 
Indianesque art of Gupta character. Amongst the more important examples of 
this type may be mentioned the Visnu from Vieh Srah, and a Loke^vara from 
Jaiya, both in the National Library, Bangkok; a pre-Khmer Buddha of the Rom- 
lok kin d in the Museum at Ayuthia; Buddhas from Dvaravati in the Museum at 
Lopburi; a bronze ajouree pedestal in the manner of the Kahgira brass (fig. 163) 
and a Dhamma-cakka at Prapathom (fig. 3i8).2 

About 1100 the northern Lao-Thais established another capital at Pitsanulok 
in what had hitherto been Khmer territory. Sukhotai-Sawankalok maintained a 
dimini shed power for several centuries, but its cities were certainly abandoned by 

1 Aymonier, i ; Coedes, 5, 6; Dohring, 1,2; Fournereau, 2; Gerini, 1,2; Graham 1,2; Lajon- 
quiere; Salmony 1,2; Seidenfaden; Voretsch, i, 2. 

“ Some of these types are illustrated in Salmony i, 2; others in J. S. S., vol. XIX, pt. I, pis. 

IV, xm, XV. 


175 



the end of the fifteenth. Pitsanulok became the main centre of power, under 
princes of mixed Thai-Khmer blood. Meanwhile Cambodia and Pegu attempted 
with varying success to assert or maintain their supremacy. About 1280 a new 
Khmer capital was founded at Sano. 

At the beginning of the thirteenth century a new Thai invasion resulted from 
the Mongol pressure, exerted by Kublai Kh^ in Southern China. The Thais 
soon occupied the whole Menam valley, and in 1296 ravaged Cambodia. They 
gradually wrested the Peninsular provinces from Srivijaya, and about 1400, after 
a long struggle with Malacca (Malayu) reached the Straits. In the same century 
a Siamese army reached Ankor, and the Cambodians never recovered their inde- 
pendence. The building of Ayuthia on the site of Sano, taken from the Khmers, 
is dated 1350 according to the Annals, but most likely a date nearer to 1460 would 
be more correct. Siam could now at last be regarded as one country, Ayuthia 
remaining the capital for four centuries; even Chienmai in the north, which had 
replaced Lamphun as the Lao capital, owed allegiance to Ayuthia. Wars with 
Burma met with varying success. About 1600 Siam was the dominant power in 
Southern Burma, the Malay Peninsula and Cambodia, and an active trade deve- 
loped with India, China and Europe. In 1757, however, the Burmese captured and 
destroyed Ayuthia, and the capital was transferred to Bangkok. 

Little is known of the beginnings of Indo-Thai art at Lamphun and Sukhotai 
Sawankalok. Buried in the jungle and yet unstudied there may well exist some 
traces of an Indianesque period, dependent hke that of the south^ on Gupta tra- 
dition. Before the eleventh century all the northern building is in laterite, con- 
trasting with the brick of the Indo-Khmer south. Bronzes have been found that 
may have come from Ceylon®. Later, and quite definitely by the tenth and eleventh 
centuries the classical Siamese (Thai) type emerges and asserts itself. In spite 
of occasional Khmerisms recognizable even at Sukhotai, and the use of 
the Khmer language in inscriptions up to the end of the thirteenth century the 
northern Thais remained artistically independent; even in the south we find 
occasional bronzes of Thai character, and the stucco modelling in Lopburi is by 
no means so purely Khmer as the stone sculpture. The Thai type evolved in the 
north is characterised by the curved elevated eyebrows, doubly curved upward 
sloping eyelids (almond eyes), acquiline and even hooked nose, and delicate 
sharply moulded lips and a general nervous refinement contrasting strongly with 
the straight brows and level eyes, large mouth and impassable serenity of the 
classic Khmer formula. The Buddha heads referable to the classic Thai period, 
as well as the earfiest of those from Pitsanulok, dating from about 1000 A. D. 

1 Figs. 318, 319; Salmony, i, pis. i to 6. 

^ Salmony, i, PI. 10, cf. Coomaraswamy, 6, pi. XXVII, fig. 180 etc. 


are the supreme achievement of the Thai genius. Almost equally fine examples 
have been found even at Lopburi (fig. 321 and probably 322). 

In the meantime, in the south, at Lopburi (fig. 323) and Prapathom, and 
in the east (Korat), there developed a stone architecture and scxilpture in stone 
and bronze in a purely Khmer style; so much so that the early mediaeval art 
of the “Siamese provinces” belongs rather to the study of Cambodian than of 
Siamese archaeology^. 

In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries the classic type is already becoming 
a matter of routine; all the features are defined by outlines, and there is a general 
attenuation of the form and the modelling is less sensitive. Meanwhile the north, 
including Chienmai, remains superficially nearer to the Gupta tradition; but the 
curiously heavy rounded forms are not true volumes corresponding to an inner 
concentration, they are rather inflated than modelled. 

Perhaps the most pleasing work of the later period at Sukhotai is the series 
of Jdtaka (Pah canon) engravings of Wat Si Jum (fig. 320)^, dateable with some 
exactitude in the reign of Suryavamsa Mahadharmarajadhiraja (1357 — 1388), 
the script being identical with that of the inscriptions of 1357 and 1361. These 
engravings are essentially outUne drawings on stone, rather than sculpture. The 
draughtsmanship shows no Siamese peculiarities, on the other hand it exhibits 
a very close affinity with that of the Jdtaka frescoes of the Northern temple 
at Polonnaruva in Ceylon, dateable in the twelfth or thirteenth century (fig. 291). 
Intimate relations had long been maintained between Ceylon and RamaMa; and 
Mahadharmarajadhiraja’s long inscription of 1361 states that in that year a very 
learned Saihgharaja (Buddhist priest of the highest rank) came by invitation from 
Ceylon to Sukhotai, that he was received with great honour, and that in connection 
with his arrival temples were built “in the mango garden west of Sukhodaya”. 
So that there exists every possibility that the engravings, which in any case appear 
to have been executed after the completion of the building in which they are found, 
may be from the hand of a Sirhhalese artist, perhaps a priest who accompanied 
the Sariigharaja. 

Much less interesting from an artistic point of view are the large bronze sta- 
tues of Siva and Visnu, cast, according to the inscription, in 1354 and 1361 and 
erected by a later king at Kampen Phet, when Sukhotai was already in ruins®. 
Only their large size, perfect preservation, and the romantic circumstances of 
their discovery have given to these figures, now in the Museum at Bangkok, a 
fictitious value. Here too may be mentioned a Buddha figure from Grahi, in 


12 


^ Coedes, 4; Gerini; Lajonquiere; and especially Seidenfaden. 

2 Fournereau, 2. 

3 Fournereau, 2, pis. XLIX, L. 


177 



Jaiya, likewise now in Bangkok, of which the pedestal bears a Khmer msrciption 
in which it is stated that it was made by order of a Malayu king, through his Vi- 
ceroy; this inscription is dateable about 1250^. The first inscription in Siamese, 
that of Rama Khamhen, about 1292, records the Siamese advance as far as Sitham- 
marat, or Ligor. 

When the Khmers were finally expelled from Lopburi, or at least reduced to 
impotence, and a new capital at Ayuthia inaugurated the later pohtical develop- 
ment of the Thais, Siamese art was already decadent. Only occasional pieces, 
hardly to be dated after the fifteenth century reflect the former perfection. The 
general tendency is to a simplification of the formula; where art and craft were 
once indivisible, the craft now predominates. This kind of simplification, accom- 
I'panying the transition from classic to folk art must be clearly distinguished from 
i the abstraction of primitive art, whose tendency is always toward fuller expression. 
Here, the simplification is the effect of exhaustion, there of concentration; and the 
resemblance is altogether superficial. In late Ayuthia art we find not merely the 
linear definition of the features accentuated, but that the area between the eye 
and eyebrow is modelled continuously with the side of the nose, and that the 
elongated fingers become first languid, then unbending, and finally of equal length. 
On the other hand the decorative emphasis is heightened; the jewellery is over- 
wrought and the drapery is covered with restless excrescences representing heavy 
gold embroidery. Thus at the same time that the art declines it travels further and 
further from obedience to canonical prescription. Thus a formula is exhausted; 
there is nothing more to be said, because everything has been said, and only the 
phrase remains. The only possible “development” of an art in this stage is in the 
direction of a sentimental realism (Raphael), or an equally sentimental archaism 
(Pre-Raphaelites); both of these tendencies already exist in the East. Only a new 
experience can lead to another creation of living form. 

Siamese painting exists mainly in illuminated manuscripts, also on temple 
walls, and banners with figures of Buddha and Jdtaka scenes in late Ayuthia style 
Lacquer painting on wood attained a high state of perfection; it is found chiefly 
on temple doors and windows, book covers, and book chests®. 

A Siamese manufacture of porcelain attained importance at two different 
periods. At Sawankalok, where the art was introduced from China in the eleventh 
or twelfth century, monochrome crackled wares and “celadon” were made in 
considerable quantity and even exported; the fine “Siamese jars” of the Borneo 
Dyaks may be instanced. The remains of ancient kilns are extensive; the manu- 

* Coed^s, 3, pp. 33 — 36; Ferrand, p. 125. 

* Dohring, 2; Yamanaka, Exhibition catalogue, Feb. 1926. 

^ Dohring, i ; Coedes, 5 (describes also the making of books). 



facture persisted for six or seven centuries but declined in quality. A later attempt 
to imitate Chinese porcelain was less successful. 

Nearly all the later porcelain called Siamese was imported from China; the 
same is true of the fine blue, yellow, and red glazed tiles used for temple, mo- 
nastery and palace roofs. That is to say, the porcelain was made in China, but in 
Siamese designs as regards form and decoration. The period covered by these 
wares ranges from the sixteenth century to about 1868. They consist of coarse 
white porcelain in shapes designed for practical use, such as rice-bowls, enamelled 
in five vivid colours, often with a black ground. The quality of the base conti-^ 
nuously improved. Before the fall of Ayuthia the favourite decoration included 
lotus (“flame”) motifs, and very often the whole bowl represented a lotus flower; 
figures of praying devatas (tajponam) and mythical animals such as the man-lion ^ 
{nora-singh) are also characteristic. Afterwards, the figure motifs are replaced by \ 
diapers, and bird and flower designs on a gold ground come in; finally the 
latter are still more general, and at the same time the old figure motifs reappear, 
but in a thinner enamel. Most of the porcelain now in use is of modern ^ 
European or Chinese origin^. 

Weaving and embroidery have been highly developed. Beautiful shot silks 
are characteristic; ikat technique occurs only to a limited extent, and may be 
essentially Khmer. ICotton prints were especially printed in Masulipatam, and ] 
exported to Siam. The principal garment, worn by men and women alike is the / 
phd-nung,z{otmoi the Indian dhoti, but with both ends twisted together and passed 
between the legs. Country women still wear above this a breast cloth {phd-hotti) 
corresponding to the Javanese slendang and old Indian kuca-handha\ but tight and 
loose bodices are coming into general use. Silver work and jewellery of a very 
fine quality have been made until about the end of the last century. The former 
{tompai) is decorated in nieUo in lotus and arabesque forms, and often with the 
mythical lion {rachi si). The art is supposed to have originated in Ligor, and may 
have come from India, where it was certainly practised at Lucknow in the eight- 
eenth century. Excellent silver filigree is also made. All the silverwork, like the 
porcelain, appears in forms adapted to practical use. In Siam, as in India, the 
production of objects whose only use is ornament is a modern development. 

Of the jewellery, the finger-rings are perhaps the best examples ; some of those 
not older than the late nineteenth century are comparable with the best classical 
productions. A common type is enamelled in bright colours and set with ca- 
bochon rubies. The enamel resembles that of Jaipur, and here again the technique 
is probably of Indian origin, though the forms are characteristically Siamese. 
Good examples of damascening on steel are also met with. A highly developed 

^ For the porcelain of Siam see Graham, i, 2; le May; and Silice and Groslier. 


12 * 


179 



art peculiar to Siam is the making of fresh artificial flowers by recombining the 
separate parts of living blossoms^. 

The regular Siamese theatre is known as lakhon, which is the Siamese form of 
Malay Ligor (Sithammarat), and is held to indicate an indirect Indian origin of 
the drama. In form the Siamese theatre resembles the Cambodian, or rather, the 
Cambodian theatre in its modern form is essentially Siamese. The dresses are 
gorgeous; there is no scenery. The gesture is abstract. Pas seul dances of love, 
triumph, defiance, etc., are characteristic; morceaux de ballet represent the array 
of armies, flight of dpsarases or wanderings of princesses accompanied by their 
maids of honor. AH parts except those of clowns, are take by women; masks 
are worn only by divinities, demons and monkeys. There exists also an ancient 
masked play, called kho^, always representing Kdmdjana themes, in which all the 
parts are taken by men. A special form of the theatre known as Lakhon Nora 
or Lakhon Chatri is again played entirely by men, and to it attaches a miraculous 
legend recalhng the origins of drama related in the Indian Bhdratija Ndtya-s'dstra. 
In the puppet-plays, the figures are manipulated from below by means of con- 
cealed strings. In the shadow plays, Nang Talmg (from Patalung, the supposed 
place of origin) the leather figures are supported from below, and as in Java may 
be stuck in a banana stem if the scene is long and movement is not required. The 
themes are mythological, and the performances are sometimes used to exorcise 
evil spirits, and in this case the rituafistic character of the performance is strongly 
emphasized*. 


CAMBODIA® 

The Khmers, Mon-Khmers, or Kambujas (= Cambodians) are of Sino- 
Tibetan origin, and at the beginning of the Christian era had already occupied 
the Mekong and Menam deltas as well as Southern Burma (Takings). Most of 
our information about the early period is derived from Chinese sources. The 
kingdom or group of kingdoms including Cambodia, Cochin China and Southern 
Siam is spoken of as Funan. We hear of an Indian Brahman, Kaundinya, who 
probably in the first century A. D. landed in Funan from a merchant vessel, mar- 
ried a princess who had or received the name of Soma, and so became master of 
the country. The story is again referred to in a Cam inscription of 659 where the 

' For the minor arts of Siam see Gerini, 2; Graham, z. 

^ Gerini, 2; Graham, 2; Damrong, Prince R., Tamrd Fan Kdm, Bangkok, 1923; Nicolas, 
R., Fe Fakhon Nora ou Fakhon Chatri et les origines du theatre classique siamois, J. S. S., XVIII, 2, 
1924. 

^ Aymonier, i, 2; Coedes, i, 2, 4; Finot, i, 2; Foucher, 6; Fournereau, i ; Goloubew, 5, 4; 
GrosUer, i — 8; Parmentier, 4; Pelliot; Seidenfaden. 

180 



princess is called a Nagini^. The name Naga is applied in India both to certain 
actual races and to half-human, half-serpentine beings who inhabit the waters, are 
guardians of treasure, are renowned for their beauty, and are the first inhabitants 
of the country. These Nagas were long the object of a cult, which is not yet 
extinct even in India; in general, however, they have become attached as guardians 
and worshippers to the higher beings of more developed cults, e. g., to Buddha 
and Visnu. The Kaundinya-Soma story is probably of Indian origin, where the 
Pallavas are derived from the union of a Cola king with a Nagini. 

Srutavarman, under whom Cambodia (Funan) seems to have become for the 
first time fully organised on the lines of Hindu civilisation, ruled about 400 A.D. 
He was followed by other kings, direct descendants, having the same Pallava 
patronymic, -varman\ this was a Lunar dynasty^. 

The Indianesque, pre-Khmer (Indo-Khmer of some authors) art of Funan 
in the fifth, sixth and seventh centuries differs radically from the classic Khmer of 
the ninth to twelfth, chiefly in its greater concentration and more definitely Indian 
character®. Bilingual inscriptions in the South Indian (Pallava) script, revealing 
a knowledge of the Vedas, Puranas and Epics, appear; the Sanskrit is very correct, 
the lettering magnificent, fully equal to anything of the sort to be found in India 
proper. Buddhist influences seem to have predominated in the fifth, Brahmamcal 
in the sixth and seventh centuries, but neither exclusively. That wooden architec- 
ture was well developed may be taken for granted. 

At the old capital Vyadhapur there survive remains of laterite ramparts 
over a kilometre and a half along each side, and a monoHthic column with a bull 
capital* . In other localities in the delta area there are foimd numerous shrines in 
brick, one in laterite and a few in stone, of sixth and seventh century date, in a 
style that may in a general way be spoken of as Gupta. Thus at Hanchei, near 
Sarhbuor® there is an elegant rectangular cell built of slabs of sandstone, the lintel 
of the porch bearing a four-armed Visnu-Anantasayin, the roof flat and likewise 
of slab construction; there is a close resemblance to the little shrine on the roof 
of the Lad Khan temple at Aihole (p. 79 and fig. 148). The Hanchei cella may 

^ The Nagas, nevertheless, have all the appearance of being native on Cambodian soil. 
The kings of Ankor, we are told, slept with a Nagini, the guardian of the land, in the first 
watch of every night. An ancient and impressive musical composition, to be heard even 
to-day, refers to Kaundinya and Soma — “played as a part of the ritual office, and reverently 
heard, it provokes a profound emotion, which often finds expression in tears” (Aymonier, i, 
vol. I, p. 45)- 

^ It should not, however, be overlooked that the use of the patronymic -varman in India 
is by no means exclusive to the Pallavas. The word means “protector”. 

3 For the whole period see Groslier 3 (Ch. 24), 6, 7; Finot, 2; Goloubew, 3, 4; Aymonier, 2. 

* Aymonier, 2, p. 35. 

* For the remains at Hanchei see Groslier, 3, ch. 24. 

181 



well have been the garhha-grha of a Brahmanical shrine like that of Bhumara 
(p. 78), but with a surrounding wooden mandapam now lost; it certainly cannot 
have been, as Groslier suggests, the rehc chamber of a stiipa. At the same site are 
found two small shrines with pyramidal towers, one in brick, the other in laterite, 
both having stone doorways and mahara hntels, and as decorative motifs, hamsas 
with extended wings and caitja-'iXQkss.^ enclosing heads. The tower of the brick 
temple consists of successive stages repeating the form of the cella, that of the 
laterite tower by diminishing repetitions of the roll cornice; an inscription of the 
first half of the seventh century dates the former. 

Another and even more elegant rectangular sandstone cell (fig. 3 24), is found 
at Prei Kuk, Kompon Thorn but here there is no porch; there are delicately 
ornamented narrow corner pilasters, between which the wall is perfectly plain; 
the roll cornice and pedestal are decorated with the usual arches enclosing heads. 
Here too there is a group of fifty or more brick tower shrines, of which some are 
polygonal; the walls are decorated with architectural reliefs, the stone doorways 
with makara-X\rA^%. The whole group is even more conspicuously Indian than 
Hanchei, and affords a substantial addition to our knowledge of late Gupta art. 

Somewhat further south are the Bayang tower (fig. 325), of the same type, 
and the unique granite temple, Asram Maha Rosei^. The latter may have been 
dedicated to Harihara; the cella is square, the roof a blunt pyramidal tower with 
deep horizontal mouldings, in all three cornices with caitya-^'va.Ao^ ornaments, 
the lowest and projecting comice bearing the largest of these; the whole effect 
is remarkably like that of the Pallava temple on the hill at Panamalai in Southern 
India (fig. 203). Other early brick temples, of Gupta character, are found on the 
summit of Mt. Kulen, together with monolithic elephants carved in situ in the 
round®. 

The contemporary stone sculptures of deities form a group of great import- 
ance, not merely for the history of local stylistic development, but for the general 
history of art ; more than one is at least as fine as anything to be found in India 
proper at any period. A standing female figure from Phnom Da, with some 
others, may date from the fourth century^. More surely of fifth or early sixth 
centur}^ date are the characteristic standing Buddha figures from Romlok, Ta Keo®; 
in the simplicity of the form, the hanche (abhafiga) stance, and the complete trans- 
parency of the drapery they are very closely related to the rock-cut Buddhas in 
the precinct of Cave XIX at AjanH, and to some Gupta types from Sarnath. From 

‘ Groslier, 6, 7. 

- Groslier, 6. 

’ Goloubew, 3. 

* Groslier, 7. 

® Groslier, 6. 


182 



the same site is a very fine Buddha head (fig. too), of Indian character with Chinese 
affinities ; not that is shows Chinese influence, but that it may be taken as an indi- 
cation of the kind of Buddhist art that reached Southern China in the time of the 
Six Dynasties^. 

A beautiful and well preserved standing figure of Lokesvara (Avalokitesvara) 
from Rach Gia, now in private possession in Saigon, is probably of sixth or early 
seventh century date 2. A superb Lokesvara (fig. 332) now in the Stoclet col- 
lection, Brussels, exhibits the Indianesque school of Funan at its highest level 
of achievement. To judge from the costume and wig-like ringlets it cannot be a 
Buddha, as the absence of ornaments might otherwise suggest; the absence of 
ornaments, as in the case of the Harihara of Prasat Andet, must be regarded as a 
characteristic of the style and not iconographically significant. A close parallel to 
the treatment of the hair may be found at Kanheri, Cave LXVI, in the Tara of the 
Avalokitesvara htany group (fig. 164), on the right, from which it is evident that 
the projection on the head is not an usnisa. 

The Cambodian figure exhibits a miraculous concentration of energy combi- 
ned with the subtlest and most voluptuous modelling. Works of this kind are 
individual creations — not, that is to say, creations of personal genius unrelated 
to the racial imagination, but creations of a unique moment. It is as though the 
whole of fife had been focussed in one body. In classic Khmer art the situation 
is different; there the whole of life is represented in all its multiphcity, and in such 
abundance it is impossible that individual works should possess the same insistent 
and poignant intensity. The Bayon towers in terms of like concentration would 
be unthinkable. In other words, the classic art can only be compared in its cu- 
mulative effect with individual sculptures of the earlier school of Funan; and it is 
in this sense that Ahkor Wat, exhibiting a lesser profundity only in detail, should 
be regarded as an extension rather than as a decadence of Khmer art. Perfection is 
only possible where, as in the figure under discussion, the coexistence of infinite 
potentiahties is reahsed; where these potentialities are severally manifested in 
detail and infinite variety, perfection is present in every part only in so far as each 
part presupposes every other part. Pre-Khmer sculpture is complete in itself, 
and needs no architectural backgroimd. 

An almost equally impressive example of pre-Khmer Brahmanical art is 
presented in the Harihara of Prasat AndH, Kompoh Thom (fig. 333) now in the 
Musee Sarrault at Phom Pen®. Here the ornament is restricted to the narrow 

‘ For another example of Indian art anticipating the plastic qualities of Far-Eastern art, 
see the Sarnath head, fig. 171. 

2 Finot, 2; Parmentier, in B. E. F. E. O., 1923, p. 292 and pi. XVI. 

» Groslier, 7. 


183 



jewelled girdle; but the ears are pierced for the reception of earrings, a feature 
characteristic of PaUava art of the same period in India (Kailasanatha of Kahci- 
puram, ca. 700 A. D.). The cyhndrical headdress occurs Hkewise in India, in 
works of late Andhra, Gupta and Pallava date at Amaravati, Deogarh, and 
Mamallapuram. Another figure of Harihara, from Phnom Da, now in the Musee 
Guimet, is of similar type^. Both figures may be dated early in the seventh cen- 
tury; the latter should perhaps be associated with the A§ram Maha Rosei temple 
above referred to. 

After the seventh century the Chinese begin to speak of Chenla rather than 
Funan. The history of the seventh and eighth centuries is obscure. This much is 
clear, that it was a period of unrest and of continual warfare, and here hes the 
explanation of the absence of monuments and rarity of inscriptions. The name 
Khmer (Kihmieh, Kmir, Qimara, respectively in Chinese, Javanese and Arabic) 
likewise appears. At the same time Funan or Chenla was apparently subject in 
some degree to Java (Srivijaya). 

The best explanation of these facts, and of the artistic revolution revealed 
in the ninth century, is to be found in the view that Chenla was originally a northern 
kingdom centering in or near the Dangrek range, and that here lived the Kam- 
bujas, “born of Kambu”, the legendary founder (with the nymph Mera) of the 
Cambodian Solar dynasty; the wars of the eighth century resulting in the estab- 
lishment of a Khmer autonomy, the original Chenla becoming Chenla of the 
Land, and the former Funan becoming Chenla of the Sea®. 

Purely Indian art in Cambodia disappears just at the time when permanent 
building materials, which are quite exceptional before the classic period, are first 
found. Classic Khmer art is on the other hand, a unified style and fully de- 
veloped when it appears for the first time in the sandstone buildings of the Prah 
Kh^ and Banteai Chhmar; and it preserves its essential character, though with 
internal development, for at least three centuries. Classic Khmer architecture 
seems to be derived mainly from northern indigenous wooden types; there is no 
direct continuity with the older Indianesque of the south, described above, but 
only a general parallel with the evolution of the Indian sikhara by the reduphcation 
of similar elements. We must not forget too that other than Indian sources of 
culture, the Chinese above all, were always available to Cambodia as to Campa: 
the appearance of glazed tiles, and of imitations of tiles in stone construction are 
a case in point. Classic Khmer rejects the characteristic Pallava motifs the mahara 
toraria hntel, the f^z/^ij-window, and the use of hamsas with extended wings as 
abacus supports; its round and square columns are un-Indian; and new and quite 

^ Goloubew, 4. 

* See Groslier, 7, Map, fig. 37. 


184 



un-Indian elements such as the towers with human faces, Garuda caryatides and 
Naga balustrades are introduced^. In sculpture, too, a national formula is evolved 
(figs. 335, 337, 338); this type is characterised by the straight line of the hair, 
the level brows, the scarcely sloping eyes, full and wide Hps and impassible 
serenity, often, especially in the case of the beautiful faces of the apsarases, by an 
exotic smile and a peculiar sweetness. This type, again, has practically nothing in 
common with the older Indianesque sculpture of the south above referred to ; it 
persists throughout the classical period, only gradually acquiring a mechanical 
facility of execution and only after the thirteenth century modified by Siamese 
contacts (fig. 336). All that has been said applies of course equally to the classic art of 
Cambodia as now deUmited and to the old Cambodian provinces of Southern Siam. 

Mythology and cult on the other hand remained Indian in all essentials, though 
not without special local developments. Saivism at first predominates, later on 
with an increasing mixture of T^trik Mahayana Buddhism; but specific dedi- 
cations are to be fovmd in all reigns, and almost all the deities of the Hindu and 
Mahayana pantheons are represented. Two cults must be specially referred to. 
The first, the deification of royal ancestors; identified after death with the deity 
of their allegiance, under corresponding posthumous names, their images, in the 
outward form of these same deities, were set up by their descendants in memorial 
temples. The same custom existed in Java, cf. the portrait of Kin g Erlanga as 
Visnu (fig. 360). In India, royal images were indeed often set up in temples, but 
so far as we know always in human form; that temples were sometimes specially 
erected for this purpose is indicated in Bhasa’s Vratimdndtika where the scene is laid 
in a temple of royal images in Ayodhya. In Cambodia it is mainly in connection 
with temples of this ancestor cult that the old type of brick tower survives in the 
classical period, e. g. the Ruluos group near Ahkor. Still more abstract is the 
other cult, that of the Devaraja or King-god, founded by Jayavarman II at Ma- 
hendraparvata, and served by the great Brahman Sivakaivalya, the kin g’s chaplain, 
and his descendants for many generations. The King-god, always represented 
by a lingam, did not appertain to any particular king, but embodied the divine fiery 
essence incarnate in every king and essential to the welfare of the kingdom. The 
famous inscription of Sdok Kak Thom (1042) states that the Devaraja was first 
set up and the cult initiated by Jayavarman expressly to the end that Cambodian 
independence of Java (Srivijaya) should be secured. 

^ M. Groslier cites the characteristic Khmer half- vaulted galleries as un-Indian. In prin- 
ciple, however, they recall the half- vaulted aisles of Indian r^j/Zy^-halls, and wooden examples of 
these may well have existed in Cambodia in the pre-Khmer period, providing a model for stone 
building. In India a stone half-vaulted verandah appears in what is perhaps the unique case of 
the Harihara temple, No. 5, at Osia (Bhandarkar, 4 and Codrington, K. de B., XLIII, B). 
Cf. the Bhaja verandah (pp. 24^ 25). 


185 



We must now discuss in greater detail the more important monuments of 
the classic period (802 to the end or the twelfth century). Jayavarman II (802 — 869) 
who, according to the last mentioned inscription came from “Java” and at first 
ruled at Indrapura, perhaps a preexisting capital near Phnom Pen, appears to 
have founded three other capitals, Amarendrapura, Hariharalaya, and Mahen- 
draparvata. These have been identified with Banteai Chhmar in the Battambang 
district, the temple and city of Prah Kh^ near Ankor Thom, and Beng Mealea 
at the foot of Mt. Kulen; but some scholars regard the two last as of later date. 
Banteai Chhmar is a great temple and fortress city in the north-west, in the Khmer 
hills. Here the Khmers for the first time, and with extraordinary boldness, con- 
sidering their lack of experience, undertook to create a permanent fortress city 
and temple in stone. That they did this without regard to the foreign style of the 
south involved the copying of the preexisting national wooden architecture in 
the new material; and in fact, these imitations of wooden forms and tiled roofs, 
reproduced in stone, are characteristic of the classic style from first to last. The 
main features of the Khmer city and temple are already fully evolved — the 
moats crossed by causeways with Devas and Asuras supporting Naga parapets, 
triple gateways, Garuda caryatides, vaulted and half-vaulted roofs, high towers, 
ogee tympanum framed by Nagas, and long galleries covered with bas-reliefs^. 
Hariharalaya repeats the Banteai Chhmar formula on a smaller scale. The city 
lies in the fertile plains ; it was surrounded by a moat, 40 metres wide, crossed by 
superb causeways with parapets of giants supporting many-headed Nagas. Next 
came the city wall of laterite, measuring 850 by 750 metres, in which were four 
triple gates crowned by towers with human masks representing Siva or possibly 
Lokesvara; the giant Garuda caryatides are a striking feature of this wall. An 
inner enclosure surrounded the temple proper, now a ruin, overgrown with rank 
vegetation, a complicated and almost indecipherable maze of buildings, minor 
chapels, and galleries, of which the four largest lead to the central sanctuary, 
a high sandstone tower. It cannot now be determined whether or not the sanctuary 
towers had masks. East of the city and forming part of the whole plan lay an 
artificial lake, 3000 by 1000 metres in area, now dry, in the centre of which is the 
beautiful shrine called Neak Pean, laid out on a square, partly artificial island. On 
this island, at the corners, are four basins, and within these, four others surroun- 
ding a central pool, in the centre of which is the actual shrine, facing east, circular 
in plan and girt by many-headed Nagas. Some scholars find in this shrine and in 
the similar shrines of the great lakes at Banteai Chhmar and Beng Mealea, temples 
dedicated to the Nagini Soma, the legendary ancestress; more recently Goloubew 

^ An analogous situation existed in India at the close of the Kusana period : here too a fully 
developed stone architecture appears unannounced. 

186 



has plausibly suggested that these were shrines of Lokesvara, the Buddhist 
divinity of healing powers, whose cult, in Cambodia, may have been combined 
with that of the lingam. Magnificently conceived, the Prah Khan must have been 
a royal residence of the first importance, and the centre of a large population. It 
is surrounded by fertile lands. Its eastern wall lies very close to the outer boundary 
of the future capital, Ahkor Thorh ; and here, at the close of his long reign the 
first of the great Khmer builders returned to spend his last days. 

Aymonier identifies Beng Mealea with Mahendraparvata. On the other hand, 
Goloubew, mainly because of the high sense of order in the planning and the 
fineness of the workmanship, and also Parmentier, regard the city as contemporary 
with Ahkor Wat or even later. Goloubew (3) is inclined to recognize the remains 
of Jayavarman’s capital rather in some of the ruined temples on the summit of 
Mt. Kulen, and in fact, as he suggests, the great laterite stairway on the western 
ascent is evidence of the importance of the site. The question is still unresolved. 

Indravarman I (877 — 889), who married the famous Indradevi, claimed des- 
cent from an Indian Brahman named Agastya, suggestive of South Indian origins. 
Indravarman must be credited with the planning and initial construction of 
Ahkor Thoih; and with the building of the Baku temple, a shrine of six brick 
towers dedicated to his grandparents, and also of the important Saiva foundation 
of Bakong, which together with the later Lolei towers constitute what is now 
called the Ruluos group, from the village of that name. The Bakong is a con- 
struction of the prang type with a pyramidal base in five receding stages, doubtless 
originally crowned by a lingam shrine. Forty lions adorn the four median stair- 
ways, and huge stone elephants stand at the corner of the terraces. Around this 
structure and below it are eight brick towers (fig. 326); the whole is enclosed by a 
wall and moat, with bridges guarded by many-headed Nagas on two sides. A 
whole treatise^ has been devoted to the “Art of Indravarman”, regarded as a 
distinct and well-defined style : Parmentier emphasizes the stylistic succession and 
development in classic Cambodian art, while Groslier maintains its essential unity. 

The building of Ankor Thom and its central temple the Bayon belongs to 
the last quarter of the ninth century, Yasovarman removing from the Prah Khan 
and taking up his official residence in the new capital about 900. The city is waUed 
and moated, measuring over three thousand metres along each side of its square 
plan. The moat is 100 metres in width, and crossed by five bridges with parapets 
of Devas and Asuras, fifty-four an each side of each bridge, supporting the bodies 
of many-headed Nagas. The five bridges lead to as many triple gateways, sur- 
mounted by towers over twenty metres in height, with human masks, and flanked 
by three-headed elephants. The high wall encircling the city is of laterite, inter- 

1 Parmentier, 3; and B.fi.F. E. O., 23, 1923, pp. 413^ 


187 



rupted only by the five gates. From the four symmetrically placed gates straight 
paved streets lead to the Bayon, whose central tower is precisely the centre of 
the city. The fifth street, parallel to one of the four, leads directly to the main 
square in front of the palace. This palace, with the royal temple, Phimeanakas, 
must have been the main feature of the city, after the Bayon. 

The palace occupied a relatively restricted area behind the great terrace; it 
was protected on three sides by a double wall and moat, and on the fourth, the 
eastern side, next the terrace, by an elegant gateway of later date. The plan of the 
palace, which must have been of wood, is irrecoverable^, but the Phimeanakas^ 
(fig. 331), a Vaisnava foundation occupying the court between the palace and 
the terrace is stiU in a fair state of preservation. As it now stands it consists of a 
three storied pyramid with central stairways on each side, and a fenestrated stone 
gallery above ; here it was that the king slept each night with the legendary foundress 
of the race. The terrace itself, three or four metres in height, stretched before the 
palace for some three hundred and fifty metres, and was provided with five pro- 
jecting stairways leading to the street level; along its edge ran a Naga parapet. 
The long panels between the projecting stairways were treated as a continuous 
frieze representing lions, Garudas, elephants, horses, warriors mounted and on 
foot, hunting scenes, games and combats, and this long series of reliefs still 
presents a magnificent spectacle. A belvedere at the north end of the terrace pro- 
jects beyond it and rises higher; the retaining wall is richly decorated with superim- 
posed rows of high relief sculpture representing kings, queens and apsarases. This 
was perhaps a place of honour reserved for the King’s own person on state 
occasions, such as the review of armies or public festivals. On this belvedere is 
still to be found a nude male statue, traditionally known as the Leper King, who 
may have been Yasovarman himself. North east of the belvedere on the other 
side of the square are the remains of the Prah Pithu, an elegant and richly sculp- 
tured temple or monastery, perhaps of later date. 

South of the palace, but further east, and as has already been remarked, in the 
exact centre of the city, is the Bayon temple (fig. 327, 330) originally approached 
by the eastern street, but now generally from the south. Within the main eastern 
entrance we find a paved platform with Naga parapets ; inner gateways led on to 
the first galleries, about a hundred and sixty metres long on two sides and a hund- 
red and forty on the two other sides. These galleries had a vaulted roof, with 
a half-vaulted roof in addition on the outer side, supported by square pillars, an 
arrangement quite un-Indian but highly characteristic of classic Khmer design. 
Within, on the second level, is another series of galleries. The inner walls of 
both series are richly decorated with low-relief representations of divinities, epic 

’ But cf. Groslier, 3, fig. 166. — “ Sanscrit, Akasa-vimana. 


188 



legends. Brahmans, ascetics, kings, princesses, palaces, processions of soldiers and 
elephants, horses, chariots, naval combats, fisheries, markets and other scenes of 
daily life (including the transport of heavy stones), and animals and trees; as 
though the royal founders of Ankor had desired to perpetuate for ever a picture 
of their glory These rehefs are naively executed, rather drawn than modelled, 
and lack the technical assurance of the Ankor Wat series, though their vitality 
and interest are abimdant. Not only the galleries, but the whole surface of the great 
structure is decorated; apart from the galleries, mainly with fohage and with 
standing or dancing apsarases. A bronze apsaras (fig. 365) dancing on a lotus 
flower, now in Boston, is almost certainly of Bayon origin. 

The lateral porches of the great gallery entrances lead to the interior of the 
temple by narrow openings, only wide enough for the passage of men in single 
file. These narrow doors lead to a third system of smaller inner galleries surroun- 
ding the enormous base of the central tower. All the great gallery gateways and 
gallery transepts of the second stage are surmounted by towers with four human 
masks. The central tower rises from a terrace which forms the upper part of the 
base just mentioned, and on this terrace are other towers, all with masks; it is 
possible that a fifth head once crowned the central tower. In the lower part of 
the tower are a dozen small cells or chapels opening on the terrace, and beneath 
the tower itself a central chamber which probably held the Devaraja lingam, the 
smaller chapels holding the “portrait” statues of deified kings and queens. As 
regards the towers (figs. 527, 334), it is most probable that they represent four- 
faced mukha-lingams, emblems of Siva. It is just possible, however, that Lokesvara, 
whose cult is closely associated with that of the lifigam, may have been intended. 

The Bayon enshrined many other images, beside the Devaraja lingam. Thirty 
four are mentioned in inscriptions, and these fall into four classes as follows : 
(I.) Hindu deities (Siva, Visnu and Devi in various forms), (2.) Buddhas (including 
Bhaisajyaguru Vaidurya Prabharaja, the Buddha of heahng, whose cult was much 
favoured in the time of Jayavarman VI) having the character of (3.) patron deities 
of particular places, especially the chief cities of Cambodia, and (4.) the majority, 
representing deified human beings in two forms, one that of a “portrait”, the other, 
that of the deity from whom their posthumous name derived. The Bayon was 
thus a veritable gallery of historical portraits and a national pantheon. 

So far as we can tell, all the great buildings of the Ankor Thom construction 
period were Brahmanical ; the Buddhist foundations within the city are all on a much 
smaller scale. But the two cults were closely assimilated, and no doubt every great 
temple contained chapels where the image of Buddha was enshrined and worshipped, 
just as the modern Buddhist vihdras of Ceylon all contain Brahmanical images. 

1 Dufour at Carpeaux. 


189 



A little to the south of Ankor Thom lies the three-storied pyramid known 
as Phnorii Bakeh, a typical prang, with its pyramidal base consisting of three di- 
mishing stages, with a stairway in the middle of each, and angle-towers at the 
corners. The shrine can no longer be made out, but a lirigam has been found with 
an inscription speaking of “Yasodhesvara” showing, perhaps that this was Yaso- 
varman’s funeral shrine. The two large temples of Banteai Kedei and Ta Prohm, 
east of Ankor, belong to the same period. Further away, at Ruluos, not far from 
Indravarman’s two foundations, Yasovarman erected the Lolei temple, consisting 
of four brick towers with stone doorways; the inscriptions show that these to- 
wers were dedicated to Siva and Parvatl, by Yasovarman “for the well-being of 
his parents and grand-parents”, whose images, indistinguishable from those of 
the deities, doubtless once occupied the shrines y 

By this time the old South Indian script had been considerably modified. 
Yasovarman made use of one nearly identical with the Srivijayan script of Kalasan. 
The reign affords many magnificent examples of bilingual stelae. 

A new capital, Lihgapura, was built by Jayavarman V and occupied by himself 
and by his son Harsavarman II, whose combined reigns extended from 928 to 
944. The construction is referred to in an inscription of 948. The site is now 
known as Koh Ker (Kompoh Sway), and lies far from Ankor, beyond Mt. Kulen, 
in the midst of wild and inhospitable forests. The principal temple lies to the west 
of a group of lingams, which are monoliths hewn from masses of rock lying in 
situ along a line running twenty degrees south of east, and this alignment seems 
to have determined the unusual orientation of the town and all its buildings. The 
temple is moated, as usual with bridges guarded by Naga balustrades. The park 
within contains a dozen brick shrines, and beyond this is another enclosed park 
within which is a pyramidal structure of the prang type, faced with sandstone. 

Rajendravarman (944 — 968) returned with the Devaraja to Ankor Thorn, 
and restored and beautified the city. Though himself a Saiva, numerous Buddhist 
foundations were dedicated in his reign. Two important Brahmanical construc- 
tions of the reign are those of Pre Rup, and the “Mebun” or island-temple in the 
middle of the great lake excavated by Yasovarman fifty years earlier. The latter 
consisted of five brick towers dedicated to Brahma, Siva, Parvati, Visnu, and 
a Siva-lihgam. This was perhaps the latest survival of the old brick tower type. 

Jayavarman VI constructed the Baphuon, a temple of the prang type, of 
enormous bulk, situated north west of the Bay on and south of the palace. The 
present remains consist of the usual pyramid of three receding terraces (the two 

’ Cf. the dedication of an early Kusana image of Buddha set up at Sravasti by two brothers 
“with special regard to the welfare of their parents” (Sahni, 4): and Milinda Panha, IV, 8, 29 
(S. B. E., XXXVI, p. 1 31). See also p. 38, note 8. 


190 



upper with Mahdbhdrata and Kdmdjam reliefs) with steep median stairways, and 
above this a fenestrated stone gallery. The temple was approached from a triple 
gateway on the hne of the great terrace, by a causeway two hundred metres in 
length, guarded by Naga balustrades, and resting on circular pillars where it 
crosses the temple moat. It is no doubt this temple, which probably carried a 
tall sikhara shrine, that Chou Ta Kuan in the twelfth century refers to when he 
says“ about one li north of the Tower of Gold(Bayon) is a copper tower still higher, 
and its appearance is indeed impressive”^. The shrine was called, in fact, the “Horn 
of Gold”. Pyramidal shrines of this kind generally represented such mythical 
mountains as Mt. Meru, the habitation of gods; the older Phnom Bakeh had 
been called the “Resting Place of Indra”. The name of the architect of the “Horn of 
Gold” and of the Jayendragiri palace has been preserved; he was a certain Vap 
Sivabrahma (presumably he would have been called a silpin and sthapati), and he 
earned by his labour the price of seven slaves. 

In this reign the Buddhist and Brahmanical rites were assimilated so that the 
priests of the Devaraja could officiate in both rituals. All that we know of the 
next reign is that the king in the year looi dedicated to Visnu a golden statue 
“which was his own future effigy”, which proves that the deified portrait figures 
were not always posthumous. 

Suryavarman I (looz — 1050) seems to have been especially devout, to judge 
by the long list of the foundations by himself and his ministers. Buddhist and 
Hindu deities were equally favoured, but the king’s posthumous name Nirvana- 
pada indicates that he died a Buddhist. One of the largest temples of the reign is 
the Ta Keo (not to be confused with the province of the same name) lying east 
of Ankor and north of Ta Prohm; a rather severe pyramidal structure of the 
usual type, faced with sandstone and surmounted by stone towers, dedicated by 
the king’s Guru, Pandit Yogesvara, to Siva Kapalesvara, it originally held images 
of Siva and Durga. 

Thirty leagues east of Ahkor, Suryavarman constructed a temple and resi- 
dence of some importance, known as Prah Khan (Kompoh Sway), not to be con- 
fused with Jayavarman’s Hariharalaya of the ninth century. In the principal 
temple, which was provided with the usual moats, causeways, gateways, terraces 
and cells, Buddhist and Saiva deities were associated, the inscriptions honouring 
both in their ascetic aspect. It will be recalled that even in India (Elephanta) the 
figure of Siva as Mahayogi is practically indistinguishable from that of a Buddha. 

Prah Vihear, built on a spur of the Dangrek mountains, is not only nobly 
designed and soberly but exquisitely decorated, but its situation is uniquely dra- 
matic. From the north the approach is gradual, and it is quite suddenly that one 


1 Pelliot, 1. 



reaches the edge of a dizzy chflF four or five hundred metres above the low coxmtry. 
The view is magnificent; on either hand extends the escarpment of the Laos hills, 
and to the south there is an endless undulating tropical forest. The temple is 
situated at the edge of the cHff, and was dedicated to Siva Sikharesvara, the “Lord 
of the Peak”. 

Phnorh Chisor, “Ancestral Sun”, is the name of a hill near the old capital of 
Ahkor Baurei. Near the summit is a temple, whose situation, though less remar- 
kable, nevertheless recalls that of Prah Vih^r. A laterite stairway leads to the 
monumental gate of the narrow outer gallery; within is a brick sanctuary with 
a vaulted roof, which once held the figure of a seated king, perhaps Suryavarman 
himselP. The temple was built by a courtier, the Brahman Sivacarya, between 
1015 and 1019. 

Suryavarman’s successor is one of those who laid claim to having erected 
the Horn of Gold, more probably he added to or embellished it. In this reign 
a victorious general set up a golden Uhgam in which to .worship the king’s 
“invisible personafity”. 

Suryavarman II (1112 — ca. 1152) is in all hkehhood the Paramavisnuloka 
of Ankor Wat (figs. 328, 329, 339, 340), and to him must be attributed its building, 
though the work may have been begrm in a previous reign. The planning is 
spacious and generous to a degree; everything is on a huge scale, and all in pro- 
portion. The moat, a himdred and ninety metres in width and eight in depth 
requires a walk of nearly twenty kilometres to complete its perambulation. It 
is crossed on the west side by a paved bridge, guarded by Naga parapets, leading 
to the central gate of the western enclosing wall, a gate in itself to be regarded as 
one of the great monuments of Khmer art. To right and left extends a double 
gallery; the gate has triple openings surmounted by towers, and is decorated 
both within and without with richly carved porticos and pediments. The 
porches at the remote ends of the gallery, east and west, large enough to admit 
both elephants and chariots, balance the whole design of the main western 
approach. 

From within this main entrance a paved causeway, raised above the ground 
level and protected by a- Naga balustrade, leads between two small and elegant 
buildings which were probably libraries {pustakdsrdmd), to a cruciform platform 
immediately in front of the main entrance of the temple proper. This entrance 
is one of four, situated in the middle of each of the four sides of the great double 
gallery, vaulted and half- vaulted, which encloses the inner terraces. The inner 
wall of this gallery, to a height of some three metres and along a length of, in all, 

1 Formerly in the Moura collection (Foucher, 6, 1913, pi. IV, 2), now in the Chicago Art 
Institute. Aymonier, 2, pp. 154, 135. 

192 



about eight hundred metres, is covered with low reliefs illustrating Hindu epic 
mythology, as follows: 

On the west side, left, battle scenes from the Kamajam-, north side, right, 
battles of Devas and Asuras; left, legend of Garuda and Banasura; east side, right, 
apparently Visnu’s battle with the Danavas, for the rescue of N^ada; left, the 
Churning of the Ocean, perhaps the most magnificent composition of all, the 
Devas and Asuras using Sesa Naga as the churning rope and Mt. Meru as the 
churning post; south side, right, a double register, representing, above, the de- 
lights of Paradise, and below, the pains of Purgatory; left, promenade of queens 
and princesses, and a royal darbdr (here the king is named in the accompanying 
inscription as Paramavisnuloka), followed by the march past of an army (fig. 340), 
wonderfully realising Chou Ta Kuan’s descriptions^; west side, right, Mahd- 
bhdrata sc&aes. Other themes ofVaisnava and Saiva mythology are represented on 
the walls of the vestibules at the four corners, where the galleries intersect. In 
these gallery rehefs are combined a superb vitahty and a complete preoccupation 
with the heroic themes, as correlated and inseparable conditions; technically 
superior to those of the Bayon, the Ahkor Wat rehefs are thus spiritually greater 
than those of Borobudur, where the craftsman has dehberately devoted a part of 
his energies to the successful pursuit of tangible graces. 

Four entrances lead from these galleries to an inner court on a higher level, 
and this court, on the western side, encloses a smaller court of richly sculptured 
galleries (fig. 339) surrounding four shallow reservoirs; passing through this, 
we reach the outer wall of the innermost gallery, and again ascending, reach the 
innermost court, in the centre of which stands the enormous pyramidal basement 
supporting the five ultimate towers, reached by very steep stone stairways (fig. 3 28). 
The platform at the top is occupied by the five towers {sikhara shrines) and the 
rectangular and cruciform galleries connecting them together. The total height 
of the central tower above ground level is sixty-five metres. 

Thus the last and greatest of Khmer temples adheres to the already well 
known scheme of moat, outer wall, paved causeways, inner concentric galleries 
fo rmin g a terraced pyramid, and central shrine surmoimted by a high tower, 
with rich decoration of aU the wall surfaces. During a period of some three cen- 
turies the fundamental elements of the design, hke the methods of the workmen, 
have not changed. Nevertheless, a very distinct evolution has taken place: the 
towers with masks have altogether disappeared, the whole conception is clarified 
and ordered, the decoration more brilhant and more sophisticated, without any 
loss of vitality. Even though the plastic elements of twelfth century architecture 
are perhaps a httle less monumental than those of the ninth, e. g. the great terrace 

1 Pelliot, I. 


13 


193 



of Ahkor Thom, and though the sculpture in the round has by this time acquired 
a rather mechanical perfection, it is stiU true that on the whole the movement has 
been a forward one, and the last great monument of Khmer architecture may 
well be considered the finest. 

No inscription has been found that certainly dates or refers to Ahkor Wat. 
We do know, however, that a great temple of Siva Bhadresvara was in process 
of b uildin g between 1090 and 1108 and was still receiving dedications in 1146. 
This may have been Ahkor Wat; and it is not unlikely that its architect was the 
powerful and learned Divakara, Suryavarman’s Guru, and master of the coro- 
nation ceremonies for Suryavarman and two predecessors. In any case the name 
Ahkor ( = Nagara) Wat is of much later origin, and the temple can only have been 
adapted to Buddhist usages in the Siamese period; the Buddhist sculptures now 
found in the temple are all of post-fifteenth century date. 

With Ahkor Wat the history of Cambodian art is almost at an end; the very 
succession of the later twelfth century kings is doubtful. To Jayavarman IX 
(1182 — 1201) may be attributed the main sanctuary at Phimai, Korat, now a 
part of Siam; this is a Buddhist foundation, with towers hke those of Ahkor Wat. 
In 1195 the same king carried his conquests as far west as Pegu, and we find the 
Khmer language stiU in use at Jaiya about 1250. The Siamese, however, were 
growing in strength; Chou Ta Kuan describes Cambodia in 1296 as having been 
laid waste. 

To the thirteenth and fourteenth century however are to be attributed a good 
number of Buddhist sculptures which show the influence of the Thai formula in 
the now more elongated usntsa, and almond eyes. Some scholars, as we have 
mentioned, regard Beng Mealea as of later date than Ahkor Wat. 

By the fifteenth century, however, Ahkor Thorn was deserted. When another 
series of inscriptions begins at Ahkor Wat, ancient Cambodia is no more, and we 
are introduced to a comparatively modern world of Hinay^a Buddhism, the only 
survivals of the ancient Brahmanism being traceable in the sacerdotal functions 
of a group of descendants of Brahmans, still exercised at the court of Phnom Pen. 

On the other hand, the theatre (dramatic dances), music and minor art (textiles, 
metal work, jewellery) have survived almost in their former perfection up to the 
present day. The theatre^ is precariously protected by the patronage of the court 
at Phnom Pen, and a local troupe at Siem Reap presents the legends of Prince 
Prea Samuth and of Prince Chey Cheth for the benefit of visitors to Ahkor. The 
remnant of the other arts is protected and fostered at Phnoiii Pen by the Direction 

^ Groslier, i ; Leclere, A., theatre camhodgieity Rev. d’Ethnographie et de Sociologie, 
1910 , pp. 257 — 282 ; Laloy, L., principes de la danse ca/nbodgienne. Rev. musicale, III, 9, 1922 ; 
Marchal, S., Danses Cambodgiennes^ Saigon, 1926. 


194 



des Arts Cambodgiens. The silk weaving is mainly of sampots, the Cambodian 
garment corresponding to the Indian dhoti and Siamese phd-nung. Of sampot 
weaves, those of shot silk are called sampot phd-muong, those with designs produced 
by the dyeing of the warp threads before weaving, sampot hoP. The latter are 
probably the finest of all the textiles that are still actually produced anywhere in 
India, Further India and Indonesia. 


CAMPA" 

Campa,the land of the Cams and of Indo-Cam civilisation during a period of 
about a thousand years, corresponds with the modern Annam, the eastern coast 
of the Indo-Chinese peninsula. Before the beginning of the Christian era the 
country was under Chinese rule as far south as Binh-dinh; Chinese culture again 
predominated after the fourteenth century, by which time the Annamites, ad- 
vancing southwards, had made themselves masters of almost the whole country. 

The oldest Hindu monument is the Sanskrit inscription of Vo-canh, in an 
early South Indian script recording the name of a king of the Sri-Mara dynasty 
and dating from the third or second century A. D. At this time there existed in 
the Nhatrang region a Hindu kingdom known as Kauthara, succeeded a little 
later by that of Panduranga at Phanrang. Indo-Cam rulers of Cambodian, and 
ultimately of PaUava origin, gradually extended their power to the north and estab- 
lished a capital at Tra-kieu (Simhapura or Indrapura) with a citadel at Kiu-su and 
temple cities at Mi-son and Dong-duong. In the tenth century the Tonkinese 
Annamites began their advance, and the Cams were slowly but surely forced to 
retrace their steps; a new capital was set up at Binh- dinh (Vijaya), guarded by 
the great fortresses of Chamban and Bin-lam, and under Jaya Harivarman the 
country enjoyed a brief respite. Forced to retire again, they erected citadels at 
Thanh Ho and Song Luy. In the thirteenth century they were able to repulse 
the forces of Kublai Kh^, but very soon they were no longer able to build or to 
utilise fortresses; their few survivors, of whom some have been converted to 
Islam, live in isolated groups under Annamite domination, and have lost almost 
all of their ancient culture. 

The ancient art of Campa is closely related to that of Cambodia, but almost 
all the temples are isolated sikhara shrines of brick, with stone doorways, or groups 
of such towers with their related structures. Wood remained in use as a building 
material throughout the classical period, so that many buildings are known only 

* The usual sizes are 1x3 m for men, 0,95 X2,5 m for women. Sarongs are also worn. 

2 For the art of Campa see Parmentier, i, 3 and 5 ; Leuba; Bose, 2. 


13 


195 



by their foundations. The existing remains fall into two main divisions, those of 
a Classic period (Mi-son and Dong-duong, seventh to tenth century) and those 
of the Decadence (from Binh-dinh, about iioo, to the seventeenth century)^. 
The earliest sculptures, of the seventh century are magnificent, but already formu- 
lated in a local sense, and there is no trace of a pre-Cam or Indianesque style 
comparable with that of Cambodia. 

The sacred city of Mi-son was founded by Bhadravarman I about 400 A. D. 
when the Bhadresvara Ungam was set up. The great shrine now existing (fig. 341) 
was built by Bhadravarman’s second successor on the site of the original wooden 
temple, soon after 600. As Leuba remarks, this great tower “par ses nobles 
hgnes et son exquise ornamentation, pent etre consid&e comme le chef d’oeuvre 
d’architecture chame”. The main body of the temple is almost cubic, but higher 
than it is wide, and this effect of height is greatly enhanced by the narrow deco- 
rated pilasters that emphasize the perpendicular aspect of the construction, remin- 
ding us of the great shrine at Malot in the Panjab. Between the pilasters are false 
porches or niches, with figures carved in reUef in the brick surface. The pyramidal 
roof consists of three diminishing stories, repeating the main design on a smaller 
scale, and the summit was crowned by a flame-hke or lotus-bud finial. The deco- 
rative motifs included makara torana niches, hamsas with extended wings, and 
pieces d' accent such as apsarases whose outlines are silhouetted against the sky. 
These ornaments, hke the door frame, are of grey sandstone, and stand out clearly 
against the ochre red of the brick surface, which, however, would originally have 
been covered with white plaster. The interior is plain, and was separated from 
the hollow pyramidal vault of the roof, if at all, only by an awning. Later kin gs 
added successive temples of brick or wood, pilgrim shelters, and royal pavihons. 
Of these later structures, those of group D, essentially horizontal, recall the Nor- 
thern temple (fig. 302) and similar buildings at Polonnaruva in Ceylon. The latest 
Mi-son buildings, of the tenth century, have terracotta plaques in place of stone 
ornaments. 

The sculpture of Mi-son, largely of the seventh century, is now collected in 
the Museum at Tourane^; it is almost all of Saiva character, and includes represen- 
tations of Siva (fig. 344), Skanda and Ganesa. The style cannot be called primi- 
tive, but is still creative; unequal in quafity, the finest pieces are marvels of pow- 
erful modelhng or grace of conception. 

Art Primaire and Art Secondaire of Parmentier, 3, who restricts the term “Classic” to 
the art of the eleventh century. 

2 Parmentier, 5 ; Leuba; Bosch, 3. The ‘‘doctrine of the passing on from ruler to ruler and 
from saint to saint of the divine, sacerdotal, and kingly glory” is also Avestan as remarked 
by Spooner, ii, p. 445. See also pp. 61, 200. 



At Dong-duong, even nearer to Tra-kieu, has been found the important in- 
scription of Indravarman, dated 875, praising the virtues of the Sambhu-Bhadres- 
vara lifigam “filled with the essence of fire and hereditary royalty”, proving the 
existence of the Devaraja cult. The inscription identifies this lihgam with the 
original (Hatakesvara) lingam which “fell from Siva”, as related in the Indian 
Devaddru Mahdttnaja, which may be the ultimate source of the cult of the King- 
god^. We hear too of a Bhadrapatisvara lingam in the south, desecrated by (Su- 
matran) Malays in the eighth century. Incidentally we may remark that the Siirja 
Siddhdnta speaks of Yavakoti (in Sumatra) as a famous city in the land of the 
Bhadresvas, again suggestive of a Sumatro-Javanese source. 

The same king, who was an usurper and apparently a Buddhist, founded the 
great Buddhist shrine at Dong-duong, in honour of Lokesvara, about 900 ; this 
is the only Buddhist site in Campa, but it is scarcely inferior to Mi-son in richness 
and aesthetic importance. Moreover the buildings are related in accordance with 
a dominating plan, and all of one period, not as at Mi-son, independantly erected 
at various dates. A noteworthy discovery here was that of a bronze standing 
Buddha (fig. 342) in style very near that of Amaravati and Anuradhapura; this 
figure, indeed, is very probably of Indian or Simhalese origin, and may date from 
the third or fourth century. This solitary trace of purely Indian art may perhaps 
be referable to an early Hinayana period in Campa, more likely it was brought 
thither long after the date of its manufacture-. 

The Dong-duong shrines were soon ravaged by the Annamites in search of 
treasure and new sanctuaries were erected at Binh-dinh at the close of the tenth 
and in the eleventh centuries. Conditions no longer permitted the erection of 
great temple cities, and we find only separate kolans, hastily built and with inferior 
decoration, though still in large numbers. The main groups are those of Hung- 
thanh and Binh-lam, the colossal towers of Duong-long, and those known as the 
Tower of Gold, the Tower of Silver, and the Tower of Copper. 

Meanwhile, still further south, in the cradle of Cam power, the legendary 
king Vicitrasagara had erected the wooden temple of Po Nagar, the “Lady of the 
Land”, and in the eighth or ninth century followed the first brick building, near 
which stiU later temples were added. The main sanctuary contains an image of 
Bhagavati = Parvati, which has replaced an original lingam. The liiiga temple of 
Po Klaun Garai on the other hand, founded by Sirhhavarman III contains the ori- 
ginal SiriahavarmaUngesvara, still worshipped by a residue of Cams. It is not clear 
whether this mukha-lifigam is an icon of Siva, a Devaraja, or a posthumous 

* Amongst the sculptures of the Kailasa temple at Kanci (see p. 104) is one representing 
Siva as mendicant in the Taraka-danda (Jouveau-Dubreuil, i, vol. I. pi. XXVI). 

- Rougier; Leuba. Cf. the figure from E. Java reproduced in Cohn, pi. 29. 


197 


“portrait” of the king. The last remains of Cam architecture are foimd at 
Po Rome. 

Important treasures have been foimd on ancient Cam sites. That of Po Nagar, 
dating probably from the eighth century, consists of silver ritual vessels, gold 
jewellery and pearls, while at Mi-son a sealed earthen vessel contained all the 
w'rought gold ornaments (crown, collar, bracelets and girdle) belonging to an image 
of half human size. Other treasures, like that of Lovang, consisting of golden 
vessels and jewellery, ancient inlaid arms and ceremonial robes, are still in use. 


SUMATRA^ 

Scarcely anything survives of the ancient art of Sumatra, unless we define 
the art of middle Java in the Sailendra period as such; and yet the great Sumatran 
kingdom of Srivijaya, with its capital at Palembang, can by no means be left out 
of consideration in any discussion of the art of Indonesia. 

Sumatra appears to have received Indian colonists at a very early date, pro- 
bably well before the beginning of the Christian era. The Land of Gold (and this 
name is really applicable to Sumatra, and not to Java) is referred to already in the 
Jdtakas and the Rdm/^ana as Suvarnadvipa and Suvarnabhumi, and when the same 
text speaks of Yavadvtpa s twarnakaramandita, it is Sumatra that is to be under- 
stood^. Sumatra is the Zabadion of Ptolemy, the Zabag and Zabej of later Arabic 
writers. Madagascar seems to have been colonised by Hinduised Sumatran Malays 
early in the Christian era®. Fa Hsien visited Sumatra about 414 A. D. and found 
there few or no Buddhists. A few years later Gunavarman of the royal house of 
Kasmir landed in Yavadvipa; he converted first the queen, and she in turn her 
son, to (Mahayana) Buddhism, which thus became the official cult. At this time 
the land was already known to the Chinese as Cho-po = Vijaya = Srivijaya (later 
Arab Sribuza), which was the name of the Palembang kingdom ruled by the kings 
of the Sailendra dynasty, who originated in Malajui = Malaka = Minankabaw, 
and asserted their independence perhaps before the seventh century. The name 
Mo lo yeu, the aforesaid Malayu, also appears in Chinese texts. I-ching, who 
visited Sumatra about 690, states that Malayu had then become subject to Srivi- 
jaya; he studied Sanskrit grammar as well as the old Malay language, and Bud- 
dhist texts and commentaries. All this evidence of a Ifigh state of culture existing 

* Coedes, 3; Ferrand (bibliography, pp. i, 2); Krom, 3, Ch. in; Bosch, 4. 

2 Ferrand, p. 146; C. H. I., p. 213; Cowell, III, 188, and VI, 34 ff. According to the 
hlahdvamsa, Ch. XI, v. 44, Asokan missionaries reached Suvannabhumi. 

® Ferrand, pp. 150, 151. 


198 



in Sumatra in the seventh century prepares us to appreciate its secular power and 
wealth; Palembang, the most important port between India and China, must have 
been truly a cosmopolitan city. The foundations of a great maritime empire had 
already been estabhshed. 

We reach now the sure ground of inscriptions. That of Kota Kapur in Banka 
records the despatch of a mihtary force to Java, which did not at this time ac- 
knowledge Sumatran suzerainty. The inscription of Vien Srah in the Malay Pen- 
insular, 778, speaks again of Srivijaya and records the erection by its king of two 
fair brick buildings in which were honoured Vajrapani, Padmapani and the Buddha 
and of the erection of by the king’s chaplain Jayanta and his disciple. About 
this time must be placed the expedition to Cambodia, which resulted in the 
acknowledgement of Sumatran overlordship. The Sailendra power seems to 
have been established in Central Java by the middle of the eighth century. About 
the same time Sumatran Malays invaded Campa. The Kalasan inscription of 778 
suggests that at this time Prambanam may have been the virtual capital of Srivijaya, 
and as we have seen, this state of affairs lasted until about 860. The great Buddhist 
monuments of this period are described in the chapter dealing with Java. 

At the beginning of the ninth century Jayavarman II of Cambodia, “who 
came from Java”, asserted his independence. From this time onwards the power 
of Srivijaya very slowly declined. Relations with India, however, sometimes 
friendly, sometimes hostile, were long maintained. The Nalanda copper plate 
of about 860 shows King Devapala building a monastery and granting villages on 
behalf of King B^aputradeva of Suvarnadvipa, grandson of a kin g of Javabhumi^. 
The names of Srivijaya and Kataha (? = Kedah in the Malay Peninsular, more 
hkely an unknown city in Sumatra) are found in the Nepalese Ms. Camb. Add. 
1643*. The Tanjore Cola inscriptions of Rajendracola and Rajaraja Rajakesari- 
varma, 1030 and 1044 — 46, refer to a king of Kataha and Sri Visaya (sk); this 
Sailendra king Cudamanivarman endowed and supported a Buddhist temple 
at Negapatam (Nagipattanam). Rajendracola on the other hand claims to have 
conquered Kataha and Sri Visaya “beyond the moving seas”. At this time 
Kataha was evidently a part of Srivijava. In 1084, KuUotungacola dedicated a 
village to the above mentioned Buddhist temple, which is spoken of in the 
inscription as the Sailendra-cudamani-varma-vihara®. These evidences, confirmed 
by others in the Mahdvamsa, prove a comparatively late survival of Buddhism in 
Southern India; this is of interest in connection with the occurrence at KancI- 

^ A. S. I., A. R., 1920 — 21, p. 27, and A. S. L, Central circle Rep. 1920 — 21; Hirananda 
Sastri, Epigraphia Indica, XVII, pi. VII; Bosch, 4. 

2 Foucher, 2. 

^ Ferrand, pp. 44 — 48. Ruins of this vibdra seem to have survived until 1867. 


199 



puram of Buddha images of a late type, showing the flame-like projection above 
the usnisa, an iconographical peculiarity probably of Farther Indian origin. 

In the eleventh century the famous Indian monk Atisa (Dipahkarasrijnana 
of the Vikramasila monastery) spent ten years in Sumatra, completing his religious 
education in the study of the pure Sarvastivadin Buddhist doctrine^. 

In the thirteenth century the Sumatrans raided Ceylon on two occasions, 
being allied with the Tamils of Southern India in the second attack. On the 
other hand, about 1275 the East Javanese king Kertanagara sent an expedition 
against Malaya (= Sumatra, and to be distinguished from Malayu = Minan- 
kabaw = Malacca, the original home of the Malays on the Malay Peninsular) 
and brought back two princesses. A little later the kings of Majapahit established 
their suzerainty over Palembang and Pahang in Sumatra, and over Malayu from 
Singapore to Kedah and Trihgannu. After 1400 the Sailendra dynasty cannot 
be traced. 

Islam was introduced into Sumatra by Indian missionaries and traders. The 
first converted ruler, Mahku-s-Salih of Pasai in Sumatra, died in 1397. Muslim 
traders spread the faith throughout the eastern ports. Musalman Sultans in the 
Malay Peninsular threw oflF the Siamese or Javanese yoke and set up independent 
kingdoms. By the end of the fifteenth century Islam had spread all over Java, 
and the Hindus and Buddhists were forced to retire to Bali. Of the ancient civili- 
sation of Sumatra hardly any trace remains. 


JAVA" 

With the exception of certain dolmens and other so-caUed Polynesian anti- 
quities, the Malay-Polynesian (Indonesian) races of Java, who form the bulk 
of the population, have left few monuments ; nevertheless they are of great impor- 
tance as representing the Javanese element in Indo-Javanese art, a factor of in- 
creasing importance after the classical period, and, in Bali, the dominating factor. 

Early Indian settlements in Western Java probably date back to the beginning 
of the Christian era. Of the old Hindu kingdom of Taruma, and a king named 
Purnavarman we learn something from the Sanskrit inscriptions in PaUava script, 
of the fourth or fifth century A. D. Hindu rule in Western Java, however, did 
not persist much later than the sixth century, and has left few traces. Subsequently 
Western Java seems to have remained independent, under native rule, even in the 
time of the kings of Majapahit. 

^ Das, S. C., Indian 'Pandits in Tibet, Journ. Buddhist Text Soc. India, i, 1895, p. 8. 

2 Fruin-Mees; Bosch, i, j; Foucher, 4, 9; Groeneveldt; Juynboll; Yzerman; Krom, 2, 3; 
Krom and Erp; Kern; Stutterheim; Kats; Vogel, 20; Oudheidkundige Dienst. 


200 



More extensive evidences of Indian culture are found in Middle Java in the 
seventh century. This development may have been the result of long-continued 
or of renewed immigration from Southern India. The oldest dated inscription, 
that of Cahgala in Kedu, 732 A. D., refers to the original home of the Hindu 
immigrants as Kunjarakunja-desa, evidently the Kunjara of Varahamihira’s ^rhat 
Samhitd in the far south of India, and probably the source of the cult of the sage 
Agastya, which is well developed in Java^. The inscription further refers to a 
miraculous radiant lingam brought over from Kunjarakunja. The Dinaya inscrip- 
tion of 760 (Eastern Java) similarly speaks of a fiery “Putikesvara” closely con- 
nected with the ruling house. From these data has been inferred a Javanese origin 
of the Devaraja cult of Cambodia and Campa^. 

Indo- Javanese civilisation was by this time a harmonised unity; but while 
the official cults were of Indian origin, the real basis of popular belief remained, 
as it still remains, animistic. The Brahmanism of the Javanese courts was through- 
out predominantly though not exclusively Saiva. No traces remain of any early 
Hinay^a Buddhism in Java. The Mahayana as a separate and integral cult be- 
longs mainly to the period of Sumatran rule in Central Java; even at this time it 
is of a Tantrik character, later it becomes increasingly so, and as in Nepal, in Cam- 
bodia, and in Bali at the present day. Buddhism and Saiva Hinduism are inse- 
parably combined: Kertanagara received the posthumous name of Sivabuddha! 

The architectural remains and sculpture of the Dieng (Dihyang) plateau, 
where stone construction is for the first time employed in Java, date from the 
seventh or early eighth century. Whether developed from the older school of 
Western Java, of which nothing survives, or in connection with renewed immi- 
gration, the architectural forms show clear analogies with those of the Gupta, 
PaUava and early Calukya of the Indian mainland. Architecture and ornament 
are reserved, and in perfect correlation; and though we could not imagine these 
monuments in India proper, nevertheless they are more Indian than Javanese, 
and the local factor is only apparent, if at all, in a certain free development of the 
ornament itself, not in its motifs or application. 

The Dieng plateau represented, not a civil capital, but a place of pilgrimage 
comparable with the Jaina temple cities of Palitana and Girnar in Western India; 
permanently inhabited only by priests and temple servants, and for the rest pro- 
viding only temporary accommodation for pilgrims, amongst others for the king, 
who visited the plateau once a year. The temples are small and mutually indepen- 
dent. Out of a much larger number, only eight are now standing. The leading 
characteristic of the style is a generally box-like or cubic construction with ver- 


1 Gangoly, 4; Bosch, 3. 

2 Bosch, 3, and cf. p. 196. 


201 



tical and horizontal lines strongly emphasized. Each temple consists of a single 
cell, approached by a porch or vestibule projecting from one face of the outer 
wall, the three other wall surfaces being divided by pilasters into three parts occu- 
pied by projecting niches or sculptured panels. The roof repeats the form of the 
main cell; the interior is a plain hollow cube below the hollow pyramid of the 
roof, whose inner walls approach until the remaining space can be covered by 
a single stone. A grotesque klrttimukha {kdla mahara and banaspati of Dutch 
authors) crowns the doorways and niches ; the mahara itself is already developed 
into floriated ornament and scarcely recognizable. 

This description apphes to the four temples of the Arjuna group, Candis 
Arjuna, Srikandi, Puntadeva (fig. 345), and Sembhadra, and to Candi Ghatotkaca^, 
but not of course, to Candi Semar, a small and elegant rectangular building, 
perhaps originally a treasury, which forms a part of the Arjuna group. The 
isolated and unique Candi Bima (fig. 346) presents a very different appearance. 
The lower part of the building is similar to the buildings already described, but 
the roof is definitely pyramidal in effect; it consists of diminishing horizontal 
stages, of which the first repeats the form of the basement with pilasters, the others 
being decorated with ^tf/^^?-window motifs enclosing heads or symbols in high 
rehef, while the angles of the fourth and sixth stages are occupied by three- 
quarter ribbed dmalakas. In all probability a complete dmalaka crowned the sum- 
mit. Thus the roof structure corresponds exactly with that of a typical Indo- 
Aryan sikhara'^', such as that of the Parasuramesvara at Bhuvanesvara, the more 
developed form of the latter differing only in that the stages are more numerous 
and more closely compressed. 

The Dieng affords many examples of sculpture. Of that apphed to architec- 
tural surfaces the best instance is afforded by the Brahma, Siva, and Visnu panels 
of Candi Srikandi. The forms are in general slender, with the leading lines 
clearly developed. The separate heads from the caitja-\ 7 it\dLO'w niches of Candi 
Bima present a variety of interesting forms, which suggest a more or less personal 
effort on the part of the sculptor (fig. 355); exhibiting an individuahty not yet 
completely attuned to purely symbolic and decorative ends, these heads are the 
nearest to primitives that Javanese art affords. 

^ It need hardly be remarked that the nomenclature of the Dieng temples, taken from the 
Bbaratayuddha^ is of later origin, and gives no indication of their original dedication, which was 
in all cases Saiva. Stutterheim, in Djawa, V, 1925, p. 546, shows that the ‘‘wayang” names were 
probably applied to the Dieng temples by the Javanese from Kediri in the thirteenth century. 
Just in the same way the Saiva rock-cut shrines of Mamallapuram have been popularly named 
after the heroes of the Kdmdjana (see Jouveau-Dubreuil, i, pp. 75 — 77), and so also those of 
Masrur, all in India proper. 

^ Cf. Yzerman. 


202 



East and south of the Dieng plateau are to be found a number of small temples 
fundamentally in the same style, but rather more freely, and often exquisitely, 
decorated. Examples may be cited in the Saiva Candi Pringapus dateable about 
850, and Candi Selagriya near Mt. Sumbing. The most important series, however, 
is that of the temple complex of Mt. Ungaran, known as Gedong Sahga, which 
includes nine small groups of temples situated on hill-tops probably along a pil- 
grim route. 

We must now consider the many important monuments of the Sailendra 
period, i. e. under Sumatran rule in Middle Java (ca. 732 to 860). Candi Kalasan, 
dated 778, is an invaluable landmark, in which, for the first time we meet with a 
Buddhist monument on Javanese soil, and erected, as the inscription informs us, 
by a Sailendra king, and dedicated to Tara, whose image must once have occu- 
pied the central chamber. The temple is situated on the west side of the Pram- 
banam^ plain, a richly populated area and the site of an important capital or 
capitals throughout the Middle Javanese period, both before and after the resto- 
ration. Candi Kalasan is of the Dieng type, but having the lateral projecting niches 
developed into side-chapels with separate entrances. Enormous ktrttimukhas 
crown the main entrance and the niches, while the makara torana arches below are 
completely transformed into arabesque; the walls are decorated with delicate strips 
of floriated tracery between plain vertical pilasters. 

A httle to the north is another and contemporary Sailendra building known 
as Cancfi Sari, a large building of the storeyed vihdra type containing shrines and 
monastic apartments, and probably the monastery attached to Candi Kalasan. 

Further east, beyond the later Candi Loro Jongrang fies the great Buddhist 
temple complex of Candi Sewu of early ninth century date. Here there is a large 
central temple, a further development of the Kalasan design, with side chapels 
open to the exterior and lavishly decorated with arches and niches originally 
containing images ; most likely the main cell held a sedent bronze Buddha. Around 
this central temple and at some distance from it within the large area defimited 
by the enclosing wall are two double series of small independent chapels, some 
two hundred and fifty in number. The order and beauty of the whole design 
are no less apparent than the variety and beauty of the decoration. 

Candi Borobudur (figs. loi, 347, 349, 353), with the related and contemporary 
Candis Mendut and Pawon in Kedu, is the greatest and by far the most famous of 
J avanese monuments . Candi Mendut (fig. 350) follows the general plan of the temples 
already described, but there are no side chapels, and the inner walls of the large 
open vestibule are decorated with reliefs representing Hariti (fig. 354) and Pancika. 

^ It should be observed that the term ‘Trambanam group” is of wide application covering 
more than thirty temples of differing periods and types, and both Buddhist and Saiva. 


203 



The triple panels of the three other sides of the cella are richly decorated with re- 
liefs representing Bodhisattvas and Taras. The original stone images, a sedent 
Buddha (fig. 357) and two Bodhisattvas are still in place within; serenely beautiful, 
they represent the highest level of classic Indo- Javanese art. 

Borobudur^ is wonderfully situated in the Kedu plain, on an eminence com- 
manding an extensive view of green rice fields and more distant towering conical 
volcanoes, comparable in grandeur with Fujisan. Architecturally it is unlike any 
other monument of the period. A rounded hill has been terraced and clothed with 
stone; the result is a truncated terraced pyramid supporting a relatively small 
central stiipa surrounded by seventy two much smaller perforated stupas arranged 
in three concentric circles; a stairway in the middle of each side of the pyramid 
leads directly to the upper platforms with the stupas. The ground plan of the six 
lower terraces is square with reentrant corners, that of the three upper terraces 
is circular; in vertical section the whole structure fills, not a semicircle, but the 
segment of a circle. Each of the lower terraces is a perambulation gallery whose 
walls are occupied by long series of rehefs (fig. 353) illustrating the life of Buddha 
according to the l^alita Vistara, and stories from the Divjavaddna, Jdtakamdld of 
Sura, and the Ganddvjuha and other sources. The rich and gracious forms of these 
reliefs^, which if placed end to end would extend for over five kilometers, bespeak 
an infinitely luxurious rather than a profoundly spiritual or energised experience. 
There is here no nervous tension, no concentration of force to be compared with 
that which so impresses the observer at Ankor Wat. Borobudur is Uke a ripe 
fruit’ matured in breathless air ; the fullness of its forms is an expression of static 
wealth, rather than the volume that denotes the outward radiation of power. The 
Sumatran empire was now in the very height of its glory, and in intimate contact 
with the whole of the then civilised world; in the last analysis Borobudur is a 
monument of Sailendra culture, rather than of Buddhist devotion. It is only 
curious, in the light of our limited knowledge of historical details, that we should 
find such a monument in Java, and not in Sumatra; probably at this time (ythto 
8 th century) Middle Java was the real centre of the Sumatran empire, and here the 
Sailendra kings resided. 

We must, however, return to the specific architectural problem which Boro- 
budur presents. The lowest terrace is concealed beneath a heavy outer plinth, 
not part of the original plan, but added while the work was in progress to overcome 
a dangerous weakness which was only revealed as the weight of heavy masonry 
accumulated above; it is not unlikely that the same causes provoked a radical 

^ Foucher, 4; Hoenig; Krom, z, 3 ; Krom and Erp (with illustrations of aU the sculptures). 

^ The nearest Indian parallels to the Borobudur and Prambanam reliefs are to be found in 
the Gupta reliefs of the basement (Ramajana and dancing scenes) at Deogajh (fig. 167). 


204 



change in the design of the whole superstructure. For many years, in accordance 
with the suggestion of Foucher (4) the whole building as it stands has been regarded 
as a stupa. Various considerations invahdate this theory: in the first place no 
example of a segment stupa is anywhere known in India or Indo-China, and se- 
condly, a structure supporting seventy complete stupas can hardly with logic be 
called a stupa. No other stiipa of any kind, except as an architectural ornament, or 
as represented in the Borobudur reliefs, has been found in Java, and practically 
none are known in Cambodia before the Siamese period. On the other hand, the 
terraced pyramid supporting a temple is highly characteristic in Java and in Cam- 
bodia during many centuries (Candis Loro Jongrang, Jago, Jabung, and Pana- 
taran, and Phnom Bakeh and the Phimeanakas), and terraced pyramids are typi- 
cally found in Burma, though at a later period (Mingalazedi, Shwesandaw, and 
others at Pagan). Moreover, contemporary Indian parallels can be cited from 
Kasmir, which was presumably the source, through Gunavarman, of Sumatran 
Mahayana Buddhism. The large stiipa founded by Lalitaditya’s minister Cahkuna 
at Parihasapura in the first half of the eighth century rises above a double plat- 
form with recessed corners, having stairways in the centre of each side, while in 
the same way the basements of the central shrines of the Hindu temples exhibit a 
double platform, providing two pradaksina paths, one above the other^. Many 
earUer Indian stupas such as those of Bhallar (TaxUa), Shpola (Khyber) and Mirpur 
Khas (Sind), and others in Afghanistan stand on a single square or rectangular 
platform with axial approaches on one or four sides. The many-terraced pyra- 
mids of Java, Cambodia and Burma are thus merely the elaboration of a simpler 
prototype. 

The very plausible theory of Hoenig, based on such considerations, is that 
Candi Borobudur was at first intended to be a pyramid of nine stories, with a 
relatively small upper platform supporting, not a stiipa, but a temple, the existing 
design having been substituted for the original when in the course of building 
it became necessary to reduce the weight of the superincumbent masonry. And 
in the galleries as originally planned would have been continued the reliefs illus- 
trating the life of Buddha, which now for some otherwise inexpHcable reason 
end with the First Sermon. 

The date of the monument can only be inferred from the stylistic and paleo- 
graphic evidence. The latter indicates a date certainly between 760 and 878 A. D. 
probably between 760 and 847, and most likely in the latter part of the eighth 
century 2. The style of the reliefs suggests rather the eighth century. 

1 Sahni, 3, 4. Cf. seals from Ladakh, Kak, i, p. 103 ; and one of unknown origin, Coomaras- 
wamy, 9 (2), pi. XXXIX. 

2 Krom, 2, p. 237. 


205 



A Saiva temple of the Sailendra period may be instanced in Candi Banon; the 
fine images of Agastya, formerly known as Siva-Guru (fig. 3 5 9), and of Visnu, 
from this temple, are now in Batavia. 

Central Java has proved a prolific source of small Buddhist and T^trik 
Buddhistmetalimages, some of gold (figs. 361, 362) others of copper (fig. 363); the 
best examples are of admirable workmanship, many others quite crude. Later 
Brahmanical examples from Eastern Java are also known. The various types 
exhibit a relationship with those of Magadha and Ceylon^. 

The Sumatran governance seems to have ended about 860, the Javanese 
kings returning at this time from East Java to take up their residence at Pram- 
banam. While Buddhism and Hinduism continued to exist side by side in friendly 
relation, the official religion of the court was now again Saiva. Of numerous small 
temples of the restoration period (860 — 915) may be mentioned the Hindu Candi 
Asu and the Buddhist Candi Plaosan. The great Candi Loro Johgrang, the greatest 
Hindu monument in Java, and comparable in scale with Borobudur and Candi 
Sewu, must be described more fully. The complex consists of eight temples si- 
tuated on a waUed terrace surrounded by smaller chapels and two outer walls. 
The three largest of the inner temples are dedicated respectively to Brahma, 
Siva and Visnu. The largest is the central temple of Siva (fig. 348); in principle it 
resembles the prangs of Cambodia and the supposed original design of Boro- 
budur, i. e. it consists of a temple occupying the summit of a steep truncated ter- 
raced pyramid, square in plan, with stairways in the middle of each of its three 
sides, leading respectively to the main entrance and to those of the side chapels. 
The temple itself, raised above the upper terrace by a richly decorated plinth, 
contains a standing image of Siva. The terrace below is surrounded by an even 
more richly sculptured balustrade, the continuous series of reliefs (fig. 356) on 
the inner side illustrating the earlier part of the Rdmdjana, of which the conti- 
nuation was probably to be found on the corresponding terrace of the now ruined 
Brahma shrine on the right; the reliefs of the Visnu temple illustrate the Krsna 
cycle^. The Prambanam reliefs are if anything superior to those of Borobudur, and 
certainly more dramatically conceived, and the aspect of the shrines, despite their 
rich ornament, is more masculine. It is possible that the complex served as a 
royal mausoleum as well as a temple. 

These temples were no sooner completed than abandoned. About the year 
915 the whole of Middle Java was suddenly deserted, evidently as the result of 
some great natural catastrophe, whether pestilence or earthquake, and we have 
to trace the later development of Indo- Javanese art in the east. It is of great im- 

* Coomaraswamy, 15; Juynboll, 2; Krom, i, 4; Pleyte; With, i, 3; Heine-Geldern. 

^ Stutterheim, i; Krom, 4. 

206 



portance to recognize, however, that the breach in continuity is purely geogra- 
phical, and not at all stylistic. The art of Prambanam, though it adheres to the prin- 
ciples established on the Dieng plateau, and sttU shows unity of plan and harmony 
of construction and ornament, is already advanced in its conception of the inner 
relations of the fundamental elements, and any further development could only 
lead to what we actually find in East Java. On the other hand the early eastern 
monuments Gunung Gahsir (977 A. D.), the Bekhan gateways, Candi Sumber 
Nanas and Candi Sangariti are distinctly of Middle Javanese character^. 

Candi Lalatunda, tomb and bathing place, are due to Udayana, father of the 
great Erlanga. Near to Bekhan is another bathing place ascribed to Erkhga 
himself (1010 — 1042), and this site is the source of a portrait statue in which he 
is represented as Visnu riding upon Garuda (fig. 360), “een prachtstuk als kunst- 
werk, tevens bepaaldehjk een portretbeeld” * ; recalling, and yet very different 
from an Indian treatment of the same subject found near N^anda^. 

Java was now becoming a great maritime power, destined soon to occupy 
the old position of Sumatra. The eastern Javanese kings had already made their 
power felt in Palembang; the Arab and Chinese trade were flourishing, and the 
island of Bali was dependent on Java. And what is more important, a national 
Javanese culture had developed, based indeed on the old Indian tradition, but 
Indonesian in essence, idiomatic in expression, and in the truest sense of the word, 
original. The Javanese language (Kawi) had become a fitting vehicle of classic 
epic literature. Javanese versions of the Indian epics, and the classic Arjum-vivdha 
in which the shadow-play is mentioned for the first time, date from Erkhga’s 
reign. 

Unfortimately we know practically nothing of the monuments of Erkhga’s 
reign, and very little of those of the next century. Nevertheless, the twelfth 
century in Java, like the thirteenth in Europe, was the “greatest of centuries” 
and more than any other moment stands for the living past in Javanese conscious- 
ness. This was an age of chivalry and romantic love. A twelfth century king, 
Kamesvara, may be, in part, the prototype of Raden Panji, the hero of the Panji 
cycle and the most romantic figure in Javanese tradition. Much of the Panji 
literature may have been composed before the end of the century. And this de- 
velopment, which is reflected in the art of the succeeding centuries, naturally 
accompanied an immense extension of secular power; the Javanese kings now 
held Banka, over against Palembang, and their traders sailed to the eastern coast 

1 Remains of a temple, Candi Badut, near Malang in East Java, are apparently in the Dieng 
style, but have not yet been studied (Bosch, 3, p. 284). 

2 Krom, 5, p. 150. C£ Krom, i, p. 410 and pi. 42. 

2 Burgess, 8, pi. 235. 


207 



of Africa on the one hand and to China on the other. Only with the accession 
of a new dynasty, ruling in Sihgasari (1280 — 1292) and Majapahit (1294 — 1478) 
are we able to take up again the history of Javanese art. The whole period, however, 
forms from this point of view a unity, a kind of post-classical romantic style in which 
the purely Indian tradition is almost submerged, and the Indonesian factor comes 
increasingly to the fore. There is a loss of balance as between construction and 
ornament, and the ornament itself grows more exuberant. In all this embroidery, 
nevertheless, there is infinite charm. 

The chief monuments of Sihgasari ^ include Candi Kidal (Saiva), distinctively 
East Javanese in respect of its heavy pyramidal roof with conspicuous horizontal 
courses, overweighting the whole building. Even more definitely East Javanese 
is Candi Jago, with its o'ayaKg-like reliefs, illustrating the Javanese Krsndjana, 
which seems strange in a Buddhist temple; the separate images are still, however, 
of IVOddle Javanese character. Saiva-Buddhist syncretism is well seen in Candi 
Jawi, where the main cell enshrines a Siva image with a Buddha above it. Candi 
Sihgasari itself has yielded many large Saiva images, especially the well known 
Durga-Mahisamardini and Ganesa of Leiden. From another Sihgasari shrine 
come the even more famous Leiden Prajhaparamita, superficially lovely and 
exquisitely ornamented, but without vitahty, and also the more vigorous Ara- 
pacana Manjusri, dated 1343 (fig. 358). 

The remarkable Saiva temple of Candi Jabung (fig. 366)® is “relatively old”®. 
The shrine is circular (unique in Java) and must have been very high, and stands 
on the usual terraced base. This basement too is unusually high. The transition 
from the rectangular base to the circular tower is admirably managed, and the 
rich decoration is well subordinated to the main outlines. This temple may well 
be regarded as the finest example of East Javanese art. 

The power and prosperity of East Java attained their zenith under the kings 
of Majapahit. Four great rulers, including Kertanagara and Hayam Wuruk, 
occupied the throne in succession from 1294 to 1389. Western Java remained 
independent, and little is known of Central Java, but Majapahit controlled all 
the eastern islands, the coasdands of Borneo, the coasdands of Sumatra including 
Palembang, and the Malay Peninsula. Trade with China in Indian and Javanese 
products, chiefly silk and cotton goods, continued to flourish. In the Ndgarakertd- 
gama, Prapanca* presents a vivid picture of the waUed city of Majapahit with 

1 Melville, Knebel and Brandes. 

^ Fergusson, 2, pi. LII; but the temple is situated in the far east of Java, beyond Pasuruhan, 
not as Fergusson states, near Borobudur. 

“ Krom, 3, p. 154. 

* Kern and Krom. 


208 



its streets and palaces, and of the manners and customs of its inhabitants. Enter- 
tainments are mentioned, amongst others the Wajang Beber (exhibition of scroll 
paintings with spoken text, and equivalent of the old Indian Yamapata exhibition 
as described in the Mudraraksasd) and Wajang Topeng, or masked dance, in which 
the king himself took part on the occasion of a srdddha for the queen mother^. 

Amongst the numerous monuments of this golden age of East Java the finest and 
most important is the Saiva temple complex of Panataran near Blitar. Here we are far 
removed from the unity of conception and organic relation of parts characteristic 
of Middle Java; the temple complexes of East Java, like those of Bali, consist 
of groups of unrelated buildings of various dates, ranging in the case of Pana- 
taran (fig. 352) over the fourteenth and first half of the fifteenth century. Of the 
main temple only the basement remains ; it is square with recessed comers ; the lower 
of the terraces is decorated with alternate medallions and reliefs illustrating the 
Rdmdjana, the upper with a continuous frieze illustrating the Krsndyam. All these 
reliefs are designed in a heroic and grotesque wajangAihe. style and form a sort of 
popular theatre. The rehefs of the shrine walls represented Brahma, Visnu and 
Siva. The richness of aU the ornament is overwhelming; even the backs of the 
dvdrapdlas, in a style we should now call Balinese, are decorated with reliefs. 

Other Hindu monuments of the fifteenth century are mostly of laterite and 
built on terraced hiU slopes. Here the worship of Siva as a mountain god facih- 
tated a combination of Hinduism with old Indonesian terrace cults ; in the resul- 
ting mixture of Indo-Javanese and Indonesian elements and a new combination 
of both there appeared for a brief period a definite style not lacking in vitality, 
Selakehr (1434 — 1442), Penampikan, Sukul and Lewu are amongst the main 
sites. In completing the above account of Javanese architecture it may be remar- 
ked that no pier or column is found in any Javanese temple, and mortar is never 
employed. 

Nothing is known of Javanese paintings, except in manuscript illustrations, 
but there exists a Central Javanese engraved copper plate, essentially a drawing 
on copper, representing the figure of a woman with a child, in a style reminiscent 
of Ajanty^. This beautiful figure gives at least a suggestion of the style of the 
mural paintings that must have once existed. In Bah, on the other hand, very 
interesting mural paintings and tablets, as well as book illustrations and scrolls 
of seventeenth or eighteenth century date are stiU extant. Even the scrolls that 
are still made are in a style absolutely unaffected by foreign influences, and possess 
considerable distinction; the subjects are generally epic, sometimes erotic 3 . 

1 Kern and Krom, p. zoo. 

2 Stutterheim, 2; JuynboU, i, 2. 

® Bastian; Nieuwenkamp, figs. 139, 140; JuynboU, i, 2. 

14 ■^°9 



The architecture of Islam ia Java is of comparatively little importance. Amongst 
the oldest monuments are the minaret of the mosque at Kadua, really a modified 
Candi without images, and the neighbouring gateway. The situation, in fact, is 
similar to that of Gujarat at the same period: the local architectural tradition con- 
stituted a national style, of which Islam naturally made use with only such ne- 
cessary modifications as the change of faith demanded. The same is true of the 
theatre, despite its fundamentally Hindu themes. The followers of Islam were 
conscious of no hostility to the national culture; the Javanese remained Javanese. 
The decline of Javanese art is to be ascribed only to natural and inherent causes. 
The will and the power to create great works, imaginatively or dimensionally 
great, had departed, and just as in Ceylon, there remained only the rich inheritance 
of tradition embodied in the folk arts. Only in the theatre and music and in the 
field of textiles, where aristocratic influences have been continuously at work, 
the spirit of classical art has survived. 

A few words on Bali. In all probability Bali was originally directly Hinduised, 
and only came under Javanese influence and rule after the twelfth century, and 
this Javanese influence was never so overpowering as to prevent the develop- 
ment of a distinctive national civilisation. This unique culture, as it survives to 
the present day nevertheless presents us with a marvellous miniature picture of 
the conditions that prevailed in Eastern Java during the last centuries of Hindu 
rule — “ritual offerings, festivals, feudal relations, all appear in Bali stiU to cor- 
respond with the old descriptions” (of the Ndgarakerfdgamay . It is only in Bali 
that there survive that mixture of Hinduism and Buddhism which we have so 
constantly 'observed in classic and post-classic Further Indian and Indonesian 
art; and in costume, that nudity of the upper part of the body, which was 
characteristic both of India and Further India until the end of the classic 
ages. 

The only really ancient remains are those of Tampaksiring, a royal burial 
place of eleventh or twelfth century date; here niches with temple facades 
have been cut in the wall of a deep ravine. These help to bridge the gaps in our 
knowledge of East Javanese art: the form of the roof is intermediate between 
the Middle Javanese type with turrets and the later East Javanese and Balinese 
type in which the roof is formed of closely compressed horizontal courses, of 
which the turrets are suppressed. The Pura ye Ganga temple of fourteenth 
or fifteenth century date resembles Panataran. Sculptures at Pejeng date from 
the same period. The more modern temples of Sangsit, Bangli, Batur (fig. 351), 
Kesiman, etc., consist of groups of small unrelated shrines enclosed in a 
ring-wall with high roofed gateways; the decoration is wild and free, quite 

1 Krom, 3, p. 206. 


210 



without relation to the structural forms. The material generally employed is 
limestone. 

As we have remarked (p. 1 39), the ancient culture of Java and Bah has survived 
to the present day mainly in the theatre {jvajan^) and in textiles {kait^). With the 
theatre are inseparably associated music and dancing, both developed to a high 
degree of perfection. 

The theatre embraces a number of forms, of which the oldest may be the 
Wayang Beber''- already mentioned. The Wajang Purva, Wayang Gedog and 
Wayang Klitik, together embracing Javanese history beginning with the Indian 
epics and ending with the last kings of Majapahit, constitute the shadow play; 
this cannot with certainty be traced further back than the Arjmavivdha and may 
by either of local or of Chinese origin; we have no positive proof of the early 
existence of shadow plays in India 2. The Javanese shadow figures are cut in leather 
and have moveable arms, but they are not translucent hke those of China. Those 
of Burma and Siam on the other hand are combined with landscape in whole 
scenes and are not moveable. The Javanese shadow figures are handled with re- 
verence, and, indeed, the shadow play is much more than an amusement, it is 
a ritual performed in honour of the ancestors of the race, whose spirits are repre- 
sented by the leather puppets. A true puppet play (^P^ayang GoleJP) is also known, 
in which the figures are in the same way manipulated from below, unUke those of 
Burma, which have moveable legs as well as arms®. 

Finally we have plays in which living actors take part: the masked play 
(Wayang Topeng)^ of high antiquity, and the regular theatrical performances 
(Wayang Wong) in imitation of shadow plays. This human theatre is mainly 
an eighteenth century creation of aristocratic origin, but the themes are in- 
variably drawn from the ancient sources, and the noble costumes, absence of 
scenery, and traditional dances and gestures lend to the whole performance an 
air of antiquity. And this antiquity if not historically true, is certainly psycho- 
logically true; the Javanese theatre presents a living and emotionally convincing 
picture of a heroic and romantic past. Permanent troupes of actors are supported 
at the Yogyakarta and Surakarta courts, and it is by no means unknown for some 
member of the royal family to play. On great occasions hundreds of actors are 
trained for months in advance and no expense is spared. The Javanese theatre 
embodies spiritual and cultural values of deep significance; only the No-gaku of 

‘ An example illustrated in Krom, 4, pi. LIX. 

2 Jacob, G., Geschichte des Schatten-T heaters, 2. ed., Hannover, 1925; Laufer, B., . . . Chi- 
nesische Schattenspiele . . ., Abh. K. B. Akad. Wiss., Vol. 28, Miinchen, 1915. 

3 Kats, i; Serrurier; Groneman; Helsdingen, R. van B. van. The Javanese theatre: Wayang 
Turwa and Wayang Gedog, in Straits Branch R. A. S., 65, 1913. 

< For Javanese masks, see Hidenosuke; and fig. 367. 


14 


2II 



Japan can be compared with it, and even so the Javanese has a wider range of 
theme and is far more than an exquisite survival^. 

Closely connected with the theatre are the dances, especially the character 
dances of the actors, given when they first appear upon the stage. Beside these 
there are the ritualistic dances of the Bedoyo and Serimpis, who are court ladies; 
and also many court dances of a purely decorative type. The gesture shows in a 
general way reminiscences of Indian tradition, but less specifically so than in the 
case of the dances represented in the ancient sculptures*. 

The typical Javanese textile is cotton hatik (fig. 398), the material of all ordinary 
garments*. The technique of hatik, of South Indian origin, consists in painting and 
repainting the cotton ground with wax in such a manner as to reserve all those 
parts of the cloth which are not to take up colour at the next dipping in the dye 
vat. Many of the designs in use date from the earlier part of the Muhammadan 
period in Java, others, especially the medallion types, recall such decorated wall 
surfaces as those of the Candi Sewu. In Middle Java only two colours, brown and 
blue, are employed, elsewhere combined with red and green. The material as 
sold is ready to wear without tailoring : the ordinary pieces are hain panjang corres- 
ponding to the Indian dhoti, kain slendang, the long breast cloth worn by women, 
and kain kapdla the square head piece, folded like a turban. This turban is small 
and closely fitting in Java, but in Bah the ends are left loose in a more coquettish 
fashion. The sarong, a piece of material sewn up to form a skirt, is more usual 
in Western Java and the Malay Peninsular. In Bah very gorgeous materials {kain 
pradd) worn by princesses and dancers are prepared by stamping Javanese 
batiks with designs in gold (fig. 399); the technique is probably Indian, but some 
of the designs show Chinese influence. Silk is only very rarely employed] as a 
material for hatik. 

Of extraordinary interest and beauty are the that silks and cottons, the former 
in some cases combined with gold and silver, and woven in Sumatra, Java, Bah, 
Sumbawa (fig. 400) and other islands. In this technique the warp or woof threads are 
individually coloured by the tie dye process, each thread exhibiting different colours 
along its length in such a way that only when the cloth is woven on the loom 
does the pattern appear. Double ikat, in which both warp and woof threads are 
thus treated occurs only in Bah where the very handsome kain tengdnan are used 

^ For a good account of a court performance see Kats, 2. Also Coomaraswamy Notes on 
the Javanese theatre ^ in Rupam, 7, 1921. 

2 Lelyvcld; Hadiwidjojo, P. A., De Bedojo Katawang, Eerste Congress Taal, Land en Volken- 
kunde, Weltevreden, 1921; Helsdingen-Scoevers and de Kleen, De Srimpd- en Bedajadansen^ 
Weltevreden, 1925. 

® For batik see RoufiFaer and JuynboU; Loeber; for batik and all other Indonesian textiles, 
especially ikaty see Jasper and Pirngadie. 


212 



as covering for temple offerings. In Bali we also find a double silk ikat known 
as patola, but whether this is of local manufacture or an importation from Surat 
it would be hard to say. In any case the ikat technique, which is widely distri- 
buted both in Further India and Indonesia, is certainly of Indian origin and pro- 
bably of high antiquity. Needless to remark that ikat weaving requires the most 
elaborate precalculation and measurement. 

The beautiful cottons woven by the more primitive races in the Toba-batak 
lands of Sumatra, by the Dyaks of Borneo, and in other islands in briUiant geo- 
metrical designs, belong rather to the Malay-Polynesian than to the Indian tra- 
dition. 


213 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


References in the text are quoted by the author’s name only, when only one work is listed, 
and by the author’s name followed by a number, when more than one work by the same author 
is listed. For the abbreviations see page 227. 

Acharya, P. K., A summary of the Mdnasdra^ Leiden, 1918. 

Adam, L., Buddha-Statueriy Stuttgart, 1925. 

Aiyangar, M. S., Tamil studies^ Madras, 1914. 

Aiyar, V. Natesa, i. Trimurti ima^ in the Peshawar Museum, A. S. I., A. R., 1913 — 14, 

2. Shpola stupa, Khyher, A. S. I., A. R., 1915 — 16. 

Allan, J., Catalogue of the coins of the Gupta dynasties, British Museum, London, 1914. 
Annandale, N., Plant and animal designs in the mural decoration of an Uriya village, Mem. A.S.B., 
Vni, 4, 1924. 

Anonymous, i. Muse'e indo-chinois (Trocadero), Paris, n. d. 

2. Tsao hsiang Hang tu ching, Tokio, 1885. 

Arunachalam, Sir P., i. Sketches of Ceylon History, Colombo, 1906. 

2. Polonnaruva bronzes and Siva worship and symbolism, J. R, A. S., Ceylon Br., XXIV, no. 68, 
1917. 

Ashton, L., Introduction to Chinese sculpture, London, 1924. 

Aymonier, E., i. He Cambodge, Paris, 1900 — 1904. 

2. Histoire de Vancien Cambodge, Strasbourg, n. d. (1924?). 

Ayyar, P. V., South Indian shrines, Madras, 1920. 

Bachhofer, L., i. Zur Datierung der Gandhara-Plastik, Neubiberg, 1925. 

2. Tdn Pfeilerfigur aus Bodh-Gaya, Jahrbuch as. Kunst, II, 1925. 

Baker, G. P., Calico painting and printing in the Sast Indies in the \~jth and \%th centuries, London, 1921. 
Banerji, R. D., i. Three sculptures in the Tucknow Museum, A. S. I., A, R., 1909 — 10. 

2. Four sculptures from Chandimau, A. S. I., A. R., 1911 — 12. 

3. The temple of Siva at Bhumara, Mem. A. S. L, 16, 1924. 

4. Some sculptures from Kosdm, A. S. I., A. R., 1913 — 14. 

Banerji-Sastri, A., The Lomas Rsi cave facade, J. B. O. R. S., XII, 1926. 

Barnett, L. D., Antiquities of India, London, 1913. 

Bastian, A., Indonesien, VoL K, Java, Berlin, 1894. 

Beal, S., I. Buddhist records of the western world {Si-yu-kt), London (Popular ed., n. d.). 

2, Life of Hiuen Tsiang, London (1914 ed.). 

3. Travels of Fa Hian and Sung Yun . . . 400 — 518 A. D., London, 1869. 

Bell, H. C. P., I. Archaeological Survey of Ceylon, Annual Reports. 

2. Report on the Kegalla District, Colombo, 1904. 

Belvalkar, S. P., Rama's later history, (Uttara-Rama-Carita), H. O. S., Cambridge, 1915. 

Bendall, M. C., i. A journey in Nepal and Northern India, Cambridge, 1886. 

2. Cat. Buddhist Sanskrit Mss. in the University Library, Cambridge. 

Berstl, H., Indo-koptische Kunst, Jahrb. d. as. Kunst, i, 1924. 

Beylie, L. de, LI architecture hindoue en Extreme-Orient, Paris, 1907. 


214 



Bhandarkar, D. R., i. Jawa iconography^ A. S. L, A. R., 1905 — 06. 

2. Two sculptures at Mandor^ A. S. I., A. R., 1905 — 06. 

3. Lakult/ay A, S. I., A. R., 1906 — 07. 

4. The temples of Osid^ A. S. I., A. R., 1908—09. 

5. Excavations at Besnagar^ A. S. I., A. R., 1913 — 14 and 1914 — 15. 

6. The architectural remains and excavations at Nagarl, Mem, A. S. I., 4, 1920. 

7. Buddhist stupa at Saidpur^ Sindy A. S. I., A. R., 1914 — 15. 

8. Some temples in Mt, AbUj Rupam, 3, 1920. 

Bhandarkar, R. G., Vaisnavism, Saivism and minor religious systems ^ Gr. i.-a. Ph. A., Strassburg, 
1913. 

Bhattacharyya, B., i. Indian images y I., Calcutta, 1921. 

2. The Indian Buddhist Iconography y London, 1924. 

Bhavabhuti, Uttara-Rdma-Caritay trans. S. K. Belvalkar, Cambridge, 1915. 

Bhoja, King of Dhara, i. Samar ahgana Sutradharay Baroda, 1925. 

2. YuktikalpatarUy ed. N. N. Law, Calcutta, 1917. 

Bidyabinod, B. B., Varieties of the Vishnu image y Mem. A. S. I., 2, Calcutta, 1920. 

Binyon, L., i. Ees peintures radjpoutes du British Museum y Rev. des arts asiatiques. III, 2, 1926. 

2. Examples of Indian sculpture at the British Museum y London, 1910. 

Birdwood, Sir G., Industrial arts of Indiay London, 1880. 

Bloch, Th., I. Excavations at Basdrhy A. S. I., A. R., 1903—04. 

2. Notes on Bodb-Gaydy A. S. I., A. R., 1908 — 09. 

3. Excavations at Lauriyay A. S. I., A. R., 1906 — 07 (see also 1904 — 05), 

4. Conservation in Assam y A. S. L, A. R,, 1906—07. 

Bloomfield, A., Silver and copper objects found near the village of Gungeria (C. P), Proc. A. S. B., 1870. 
Boerschmann, E., i. Die Baukunst und religiose Kultur der ChineseUy Berlin, 1914. 

2. Chinesische Architektury Berlin, 1925. 

Bosch, F. D. K., I. Epigraphische en iconographische AantekeningeUy Oudh. Dienst, Weltevreden, 1920. 

2. Een hypothese omtrent der oorsprung der Hindoe-Javaansche kunst. Congress Taal, Land en 
Volkenkunde, I., Weltevreden, 1921. English translation in Rupam, 17, 1924. 

3. Het Einga-heiligdom van Dina/dy Ind. T. L. en Volkenkunde, LIV, 1924. 

4. Een Oorkonde van het Groote Klooster te Ndlanddy Ind. T. L. en Volkenkunde, LXV, 1925. 
Bose, P. N., I, The Indian Teachers in ChinUy Madras, 1925. 

2. The Indian colony of Champa y Madras 1925. 

Brown, J. C., The coins of Indiay London, 1922. 

Brown, P., Indian paintingy London and Calcutta, n. d. 

Burgess, J., i . Report on the antiquities of Belgdm and Kaladgiy A. S. I., N. I. S., vol. I, London, 1874. 

2. Report on the antiquities of Kdthidwad and Kachhy A. S. I., N. I. S., vol. II, London, 1876. 

3. RdBport on the antiquities of Bidar and Aurangdbddy A. S. I., N. L S., vol. Ill, London, 1878. 

4. Notes on the Bauddha rock temples of Ajantd . . . and . . . Ba^y Bombay, 1879. 

5. Report on the Buddhist cave templeSy A, S. L., N. I. S., vol. IV, London, 1883. 

6. Report on the Elurd cave templeSy A. S. I., N. I. S., vol. V, London, 1883. 

7. The Buddhist stupas of Amardvati and Jaggayyapetay London, 1887. 

8. The ancient monuments y temples and sculptures of Indiay 2 vols., 1897. 

9. Gandhdra sculptures y Journ. Indian Art, VIII, 1898 — 1900. 

Burgess, J., and Cousens, H., Antiquities of the town of Dabhoi in Gujarat y London, 1888. 
Chanda, R. P., i. Four ancient Yaksa statues y University of Calcutta, Journ. Dep. Letters, IV, 1921. 

2. Beginning of the sikhara of the nagara (Indo-Aryan) temple y Rupam, 17, 1924. 

3. Note on prehistoric antiquities from Mohenjo-Daro, Calcutta, 1924. 

4. Archaeology and Vaishnava traditiony Mem. A. S. I., Calcutta, 1920. 



Chanda, R. P., 5. Tie Mathura school of sculpture^ A. S. I., A. R., 1922 — 23, p. 164. 

6. Mediaeval sculpture in East India, Calcutta University, Journ. Dep. Letters, III, 1920. 
Chavannes, E., i. Voyage de SongYiin dans TUdjana et le Gandhdra 518 — 322 A, D., B. £. F. E. O., 
1903, pp. 379—441. 

2. Mission archeologique dans la Chine septentrionale, Paris, 1909. 

Codrington, K. de B., Ancient India, from the earliest times to the Guptas . . London, 1926 (to be 
completed in three volumes). 

Coedes, G., i. Catalogue . . , sculpture khmere . . . Trocadero et au Musee Guimet, B. C. A. I., 1900. 

2. Ees bas-reliefs d* Angkor Wat, B. C. A. L, 1911. 

3. Ee rqyaume de Srtvijaya, B. £. F. E. O., 1918. 

4. Bronzes khmers, Ars Asiatica, V, Paris, 1923. 

5. The Vajirandna National Library, Bangkok, 1924. 

6 . Tablettes votives bouddhiques duSiam, £tudes asiatiques, Paris 1925, Trans .inJ.S.S.,XX,i926. 
Cohn, W., I. Buddha in der Kunst des Os tens, Leipzig, 1925. 

2. Indische Tlastik, Berlin, 1921. 

Connor, J. E., Forgotten ruins of Indo-China, Geographical Magazine, XXIII, 3, Washington 1912. 
Coomaraswamy, A. K., i. Mediaeval Sinhalese Art, London and Broad Campden, 1908. 

2. The Indian craftsman, London, 1909. 

3. Indian Drawings, 2 vols, London, 1910 — 12. 

4. Arts and crafts of India and Ceylon, Edinburgh, 1913. (= Ees arts et metiers de ITnde et 
de Ceylan, Paris, 1924.) 

5. Some ancient elements in Indian decorative art, O. Z., 11 , 1913. 

6. Bronzes from Ceylon, Mem. Colombo Museum, L, Colombo, 1914. 

7. Visvakarmd, London, 1914. 

8. Rajput Painting, Oxford, 1916. 

9. Catalogue of the Indian collections in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston 

1. Introduction, 1925 (— Pour comprendre Part bindou, Paris, 1926.) 

2. Sculpture, 1925. 

4. faina paintings and Mss,, 1924. 

5. Rajput Paintings, 1926. 

10. Portfolio of Indian Art, Boston, 1923. 

11. Introduction to Indian art, Adyar, 1923. 

12. The frescoes of Elurd, O. Z., N. F., 3, 1926, 

13. Citralaksana (Sri Kumara, Silparatna, Ch. 64), Sir Ashutosh Mukerjee Memorial Vol., 
Patna, 1927. 

14. The Dance of ^iva, 2 nd ed., London, 1925 { = Lm Danse de Civa, Paris, 1922). 

15. Mahay ana Buddhist brom^es from Ceylon and Java, J. R. A. S., 1909. 

16. The Indian origin of the Buddha image, J. A. O. S., vol. 46, 1926. 

17. Six sculptures from Mathurd, M. F. A. Bull., no. 144, 1926. 

18. Statuette of Vishnu from Kashmir, Museum Journal, Philadelphia, March, 1926. 
Coomaraswamy, A. K., and Duggirala, G. K., The Mirror of gesture, Cambridge, U. S. A., 1917 
Cousens, H., i. Ter-Tagara, A. S. L, A. R., 1902 — 03. 

2. The iron pillar at Dbar, A. S. I., A. R., 1902 — 03. 

3. Temple of Brahmd at Khed-Brabmd, A. S. L, A.R., 1906 — 07. 

4. The ancient temples of Aihole {and Pattakadal), A. S, L, A. R., 1907 — 08. 

5. Buddhist stupa at Mirpur Khds, Sind, A. S. I., A. R,, 1909 — 10. 

6. Chdlukyan temples, J. I. A., vol. II, 1888. 

7. Dhamnar caves and monolithic temple of Dharmandtba, A. S. I., A. R., 1905 — 06. 

8. The architectural antiquities of Western India, London, 1926. 



Cousens, H., 9. The Chalukyan architecture of the Kanarese districts. \ 

10. The mediaeval temples of the Dakhan. \ announced. 

11. Somanatha and other mediaeval temples in Kathiawad. ' 

Cowell, E. B., fat aka: or stories of the Buddha's former births ^ Cambridge, 1895 — 1907. 
Cunningham, A., i. The Bhilsa topes ^ or Buddhist monuments of Central India, London, 1854. 

2. The stupa of Bharhut, London, 1879. 

3. Mahabodhi, or the Great Buddhist Temple at Buddhagaya, London, 1892. 

4. Archaeological Survey Keports, 1862 — 1887, vols. I — XXIII, Calcutta, 1871 — 1887. 

5. Coins of Ancient India, 1891. 

6. Coins of Mediaeval India, 1894. 

Dalton, O. M., 'East Christian art, Oxford, 1925. 

Delaporte, L., Ea Mesopotamie, Paris, 1923. 

della Setta, AL, Gene si dello S cor do neWarte greca, Rome, 1907. 

Dey, M. C., My pilgrimage to Ajanta and Bagh, London, 1925. 

Diez, E., Die Kunst Indiens, Potsdam, n, d. (1925 — 26). 

Dikshit, K. N., Six sculptures from Mahobd, Mem. A. S, I., 8, Calcutta, 1921. 

Dimand, M., Indiscbe Stilelemente in der Ornamentik der syrischen und koptischen Kunst, O. Z,, IX, 
pp. 201 — 215. 

Dohring, K., i. Kunst und Kunstgewerbe in Siam, i. Lackarbeiten in Sckvar^ und Gold, Berlin, 1925. 

2. Buddhistische Tempelanlagen in Siam, Berlin, 1920. 

3. Siam, II, Die bildende Kunst {mit Ausnahme der Plastik), Miinchen, 1923. 

Dokumente der indischen Kunst, iiMalerei, Das Citralaksana, Hrsg. und iibers. von B. Laufer, 
Leipzig, 1913. 

Dufour, H., and Carpeaux, C., Ee Bay on df Angkor Thom, Paris, 1914. 

Dupont, M., Kunstgewerbe der Hindu, Berlin, (1925). 

Durier, A., Dehor ative Kunst in Annam, Stuttgart, (1926). 

DuroiseUe, Ch., i. Pictorial representations of Jdtakas in Burma, A. S. I., A. R., 1912 — 13. 

2. The stone sculptures of the Ananda temple. Pagan, A. S. L, A. R,, 1913 — 14. 

3. The Art of Burma and Tdntric Buddhism, A. S. L, A. R., 1915 — 16. 

4. (Frescoes at Pagan), in Rep. Arch. Surv. Burma, 1921 — 22. 

Elliott, Sir H. M., Hinduism and Buddhism, 3 vols., London, 1922. 

Fergus son, J., i. Tree and serpent worship, xnd ed., London, 1873, 

2. A history of Indian and eastern architecture, 2nd ed., London, 1910. 

Fergusson, J., and Burgess, J., Cave temples of India, London, 1880. 

Ferrand, G., E' Empire sumatranais de ^rivijaya, Paris, 1922. 

Finot, L., I. Ees bas-reliefs de Bapuon, B. C. A. L, Paris, 1910. 

2. Eokesvara en Indochine, Etudes asiatiques, Paris, 1925. 

Finot, L. and Goloubew, V., Ee Fan-Tseu T^a de Yunnanfou, B. E. F. E. O., 1925* 

Finot, L., Parmentier, H., and Goloubew, V., Ee temple dTfvarapura (Banta Srei, Cambodge), Mem. 
Arch. E. F. E. O., I. 

Fleet, J. F., Seals from Harappa, J. R. A. S., 1922. 

Foote, R. B., I. The Foote collection of Indian prehistoric and protohistoric antiquities, Madras, 1914. 

2. do.. Notes on their age and distribution, Madras, 1916. 

Foucher, A., 1. H Art greco-bouddhique du Gandhara, Paris, 1900, 1918, 1923. 

2. Hlconographie bouddhique de ITnde, Paris, 1900, 1905. 

3. Ees images indiennes de la Fortune, Mem. cone. I’Asie orientale, I., 1913. 

4. The beginnings of Buddhist art, London, 1918. 

5. Ees representations de Jataka dans Part bouddhique, Mem. cone. I’Asie orientale. III, 1919. 

6. Materiaux pour servir a Vetude de Part khmere, B. C. A. I., 1912, 1913. 


217 



Foucher, A., 7. 'Preliminary report on the interpretation of the paintings and sculptures of Ajanta^ 
Journ. Hyderabad Arch. Soc. 5, 1919 — 20. 

8. Cat. des peintures nepalaises et tibetaines de la collection Brian-Hodgson^ Mem. Acad. Inscrip- 
tions, lere ser., t. XI. 

9. The influence of Indian art on Cambodia and Java, Sir Ashutosh Mookerjee Memorial Vo- 
lumes, III, I, Calcutta, 1922. 

10. On an old bas-relief in the Museum at Mathura, J. B. O. R. S., VT, 1920. 

Fournereau, L., i, l^s ruines khmeres, Paris, 1890. 

2. Siam ancien, Paris, 1908. 

Fox-Strangways, A. H., Music of Hindustan, Oxford, 1914. 

Francke, A. H., Antiquities of Indian Tibet, A. S. I., Calcutta, 1914. 

Fruin-Mees, W., Geschiedenis van Java, I. Hindoetijdperk, and. ed. Weltevreden, 1922. 

Fiihrer, A., Indo-Skythic architecture and sculpture of the Mathura school, Journ. Indian Art, V, 1894. 
Gangoly, O. C., i. South Indian bronzes, Calcutta, 1914. 

2. Editorial articles, Rupam, passim. 

3. Vasanta Vildsa, a new document of Indian painting, O, Z., N. F., 2, 1925. 

4. The cult of Agastyai and the origin of Indian Colonial art, Rupam, 25, 1926. 

5. Some Nepalese incense burners, Rupam, 7, 1921. 

6. The Mithunain Indian art, Rupam, 22 — 23, 1925. 

Ganguly, M., i. Orissa and her remains, ancient and mediaeval, Calcutta, 1912. 

2. Handbook to the sculptures in the museum of the Bangiya Sahitya Parishad, Calcutta, 1922. 

3. Indian architecture from the V'edic period, J. B. O. R. S., XII, 1926. 

Garde, M. B., The site of Padumavatt, A. S. I., A. R., 1914 — 15, pt. I. 

Gardner, P., Catalogue of the coins in the British Museum, Greek and Scythian kings of Bactria and 
India, London, 1886. 

Geiger, W., The Mahdvamsa, text, London 1908; translation, London, 1912. 

Gerini, G. E., i. Siamese archaeology, a synoptic sketch, J. R, A. S., 1904. 

2. Siam and its productions, arts and manufactures, 1912. 

Getty, A., The gods of northern Buddhism, Oxford, 1914. 

Ghose, K., A comparative study of Indian painting, Ind. liist. Qtly., June, 1926. 

Glasenapp, H. von, Der Jainismus, BerUn, 1925. 

Goetz, H,, I. Studien ^ur Kaiputen-Malerei, O. Z., X, 1922, and O, Z., N. F., I, 1924. 

2. Der Zusammenbruch des Grossmogulreiches im Dichte der Kostiimgeschichte, Zeit. fur Waffen- 
und Kostiimkunde, 1924. 

3 . Kostiim und Mode an den indischen Furstenhofen des 16. — 19. Jahrhunderts, Jahrb. as. K\mst, 1924. 

4. Die ind. Miniaturen der Sammlung W. Kothenstein, London, Jahrb. as. Kunst, II, 1925. 

5. Geschnit^te Elfenbein-Buchsen aus Siid-Indien, Jahrb. as. Kunst, II, 1925, 

6. The relations between Indian painting and culture. Bull. School of Oriental Studies, HI, 4, 
London, 1925 and Rupam, 22 — 23, 1925. 

7. Indische Buchmalereien, see Kiilinel, E., and Goetz, H. 

8 . Die Malschulen des Mittelalters und die Anfdnge der Moghul-Malerei in Indien. O. Z,, N. F. 3 , 1 927. 
Goloubew, V., I. Peintures bouddhiques aux Indes, Ann. du Musee Guimet, Bib. de Vulgarisation 40, 

Paris, 1914. 

2. La descente de la Ganga sur Terre, Ars Asiatica, HI, Paris, 1921. 

3. Le Phnom Kulen, Cahiers de la Soc. Geog., VHI, Hanoi, 1924. 

4. Le Harihara de Maha-Kosei, Etudes asiatiques, Paris, 1925. 

5 . Documents pour servir a P etude d*Ajanta. Les peintures de la premiere grotte. Ars Asiatica, X. 
Graham, W. A., i. Pottery in Siam, Journal Siam Society, XVI, Siam. 

2. Siam, London, 1924. 


218 



Griffiths, J., Th paintings in the Buddhist cave temples of Ajunta^ London, 1896 — 97. 

Groenevelt, W. P., Notes on the M.alay Archipelago and Malaca compiled from Chinese sources^ Verb. 
Bat. Kunst en Wet., Batavia, 1876. 

Groneman, J., Tjandi Parambanan na ... de ontgraving^ Leiden, 1893. 

Groslier, G., i. Danseuses cambodgiennes^ Paris, 1915. 

2. Note sur la sculpture khmere ancienne, fitudes asiatiques, 1925. 

3. Kecherches sur les Cambodgiens^ Paris, 1921. 

4. Prah Khan: Objets rituels en brom^Cy A. A. K., I, 1921, 1923. 

5. Etude sur la psychologic de Partisan cambodgien^ A. A. K., I, 1922 — 25. 

6. UArt hindou au Cambodge : Le Buddha Khmer: Asram Maha Koseiy A. A. K., II, 1925. 

7. Introduction a V etude des arts khmhsy A. A. K., U, 1925. 

8. jL^ sculpture khmere y Paris, 1925. 

9. Ea Femme dans la sculpture khmere ancienney Revue des Arts asiatiques, II, i, 1925. 

Griinwedel, A., i. Buddhist art in Indiay English edition, London, 1901. {—Buddhistische Kunst 
in IndieUy 2nd ed,, Berlin, 1919.) 

2. Mythologie des Buddhismus in Tibet und der Mongoleiy Leipzig, 1900. 

3. Bericht liber arch, Arbeiten in Idykutschari . . . 1^02 — 0^, Abh. K. bair, Ak. Wiss., Miin- 
chen, 1906. 

4. Altbuddhistische Kultstdtten in Chinesisch-Turkestan, Berlin, 1912. 

5. Alt-Kutscha . . ., Berlin, 1920. 

6. Padmasambhava und VerwandteSy Baessler Archiv, III, i, 1912. 

7. Taranathds Edelsteinminey Petrograd 1914. 

Guleri, C., A signed Moldrdmy Rupam, 2, 1920. 

Gupta, S. N., Catalogue of paintings in the Central Museum LahorCy Calcutta, 1922. 

Hackin, J., Guide Catalogue du Musee Guimety Collections bouddhiqueSy Paris, 1923. 

Hadaway, S., i. Cotton painting and printing in the Madras Presidency y Madras, 1911. 

2. Some Hindu ^‘Silpa” Shastras . . ., O. Z., Ill, 1914. 

3. Note on a dated Nataraja from BeluTy Rupam, 10, 1922. 

4. Notes on two Jaina metal images y Rupam, 17, 1924. 

5. Notes on the composition of Nataraja images y Rupam, 9, 1922. 

Haidar, A. K., i. The paintings of the Bagh caveSy Rupam, No. 8, 1921. 

2. The Buddhist caves of Baghy Burlington Magazine, 1910 — ii. 

Hargreaves, H., i. Excavations at TaMtd-Bdhly A. S. L, A. R., 1^10 — ii. 

2. Excavations at Sdrndthy A. S. I., A. R., 1914 — 15. 

3. Monolithic temples of Masrur, A. S. I., A. R., 1915 — 16. 

Harvey, G. E., History of Burma y London, 1925. 

Havell, E. B., i. Benares y the sacred city (various editions). 

2. Indian sculpture and paintingy London, 1908. 

3. Indian architecture: its psychology y structure and history y London, 1913. 

4. Ancient and mediaeval architecture of Indiay London, 1915. 

5. Handbook of Indian arty London, 1920. 

6. The Himalayas in Indian arty London, 1924. 

7. The ideals of Indian arty London, 1911. 

Hayden, H. H., Notes on some monuments in Afghanistany Mem. As. Soc. Bengal, XI, i, pp. 841 — 6, 
Calcutta, 1910. 

Heine-Geldern, R., Altjavanische Brons^en . . . , Wien, 1925. 

Herringham, Lady, see India Society, 2. 

Hoenig, H., Das Formproblem des Borobudury Batavia, 1924. 

Hopkins, E. W., Epic mythology y Gr. i-a. Ph. A., Ill, I, B, 1915. 


219 



Hornell, J., i. The sacred cbank of India ^ Madras, 1914. 

2. The origins and ethnological significance of Indian boat designs ^ Mem. A. S. B., VII, 1920. 
Hoever, O., Indische Kunst^ Breslau, 1923. 

Hiittemann, W., Miniaturen Jinacarita, Bassler-Archiv, 1914, pp. 47 — 77. 

Imperial Gazetteer of India. 

I Tsing, see Takakusu. 

India Society, i. Eleven plates . . . Indian sculpture^ London (1911). 

2. Ajanta frescoes, London, 1915, 

3. Examples of Indian sculpture at the British Museum, London (1923). 

4. The influences of Indian art, London, 1925. 

(other publications listed under author’s names.) 

Jackson, V. H., i. Notes on Old Rajagriha, A. S. I., A. R., 1913 — 1914. 

2. Notes on the Barabar hills, J. B. O. R. S., XII, 1926. 

Jasper, J. E., en Pirngadie, M., De inlandsche Kunstnijverheid in nederlandsche Indie, The Hague, 1912, 
Jayaswal, K. P., i. Statues of two Saisunaka emperors, J. B, O. R. S., V., 1919. 

2. Another Saisunaka statue, J. B. O. R. S., V, 1919. 

5. A Hindu text on painting, J. B. O. R. S., IX, 1923. 

Joseph, G. A., Buddhist fresco at Hindagala near Kandy, Ceylon Administration Reports for 1918, 
Colombo Museum Report, Colombo, 1919. 

Jouveau-Dubreuil, i. Archeologie du Sud de ITnde, 2 vols. Paris, 1914. 

2. Pallava Antiquities, Pondicherry, 1916 — 18. 

3. The Pallava Painting, Pudukottai, 1920. 

4. Vedic Antiquities, Pondicherry and London, 1922. 

5. The Pallavas, Pondicherry, 1917. 

6. Ancient history of the Deccan, Pondicherry, 1920. 

7. Ea Tholos aryenne du Malabar, J. R. A. S., 1926, p. 715. 

Juynboll, H. H., i. Earbem^eichnungen aus altjavanischen Schriften, Int. Archiv f. Ethnographic, 
XXX, I, Leiden 1925. 

2. Katalog des ethn, Keichs museums, Leiden, 17 vols., 1910 — 24. 

3, See Rouffaer and Juynboll. 

Kak, R. C., 1. Handbook of the archaeological and numismatic sections of the Sri Partap Singh Museum, 
Srinagar, London, 1923. 

2. Antitiquies of Marev-Wadhwan, Mem. A. S. Kasmir, 1924. 

3. Cock-fighting in ancient India, Illustrated London News, Dec. 12, 1925. 

4. Ancient and mediaeval architecture of Kashmir, Rupam, No. 24, 1925. 

5. Antiquities of Bhimbar and Kajauri, Mem. A. S. I., No. 14, 1923. 

Kanakasabhai, V., The Tamils eighteen hundred years ago, Madras, 1904. 

Kats, J., I. Het Javaansche Tooneel, L Waiang Poerwa, Weltevreden, 1923. 

2. Djaja Semadi and Sri Soewela, Weltevreden, (1924). 

3. Het Kdmdyana op Javaansche tempel-reliefs, Weltevreden (1925). 

Kavi, Lallu Lai, Prema-sagara, trans. P. Pincott, London, 1897. 

Kern, H., i. Manual of Indian Buddhism, Gr. i-a. Ph. A., Strassburg, 1896. 

2. Verspreide Geschriften, The Hague, 1917 — 1925 (includes the next item). 

Kern, H., and Krom, N. J., Het oud- Javaansche Eofdicht Ndgarakertdgama, The Hague, 1919. 
Kersjes, B., en Hamer, C., De Tjandi Mendoet voor de Kestauratie, Batavia, 1923. 

Kleen, T. de, Mudras : the ritual hand poses of Bali, London and New York, 1924. 

Ko, Taw Sein, i. Plaques found at the Petleik Pagoda, Pagan, A. S. I., A. R., 1906 — 07. 

2. Archaeological notes on Pagan, Rangoon, 1917. 

3, The Mandalay palace, A. S. I., A. R., 1907 — 08. 


220 



Ko, Taw Sein, 4. Tbe Sangyaung monasteries of Amarapuray A. S. I., A. R., 1914 — 15. 

5. Archaeological notes on Mandalay y Rangoon, 1924. 

Konow, S., I. Notes on the use of images in ancient India y I. A., XXXVIII, 1909. 

2. Aryan gods of the Mitani people y Kristiania, 1921, 

3. The inscription on the so-called Bodh-Gaya plaque y J, B. O. R. S., XII, 1926. 

See also Marshall and Konow. 

Kratnrisch, S., i. The Vishnudharmottaramy pt. Illy a treatise on Indian Paintingy Calcutta, 1924. 

2. Grundsfige der indischen Kunsty Hellerau, n. d. (1924). 

Krom, N. J., i. De Buddhistische hronsi^en in het Museum te Bataviay O. D. Rapp, 1912. 

2. Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunsty The Hague, 1920. 

3. Het oude Java en vfjn Kunsty Haarlem, 1923. 

4. UArt javanais dans les Muse'es de Hollande et de JavUy Ars Asiatica, VIII, 1926. 

5. The life of Buddha, on the stupa of Barahudur, The Hague, 1926, 

Krom, N. J., and Erp, T. van, Beschrijving van Barahudur, The Hague, 1920. 

Kiihnel, E., u. Goetz, H., Indische Buchmalereien, Berlin, (1924). 

Kumara, Sri, Silparatna, ed. Sastri, T. G., Trivandrum, 1922, (See Coomaraswamy, 13 and 
Jayaswal, 3). 

Lajonquiere, L. de, T.ssai d* invent aire archeologique du Siam, B. C. A. I., 1912. 

La Roche, E., Indische Baukunst, 6 Bde., Miinchen, 1921 — 22. 

Le Coq, A. von, i. Chotscho, Berlin, 1913. 

2. Die buddhistische Spdtantike von Mittelasien; I — ^IV, Berlin, 1922 — 24. 

3. Bilder atlas ^ur Kunst- und Kulturgeschichte Mittelasiens, BerHn, 1925. 

Legge, ]*yA record of Buddhistic kingdoms . , ,Fd Hien . . . travels in India and Ceylon (A. D. 339 — 414), 
Oxford, 1886. 

Lelyveld, Th. B. van, De javaansche Danskunst, Weltevreden, 1922. 
le May, R. S., A visit to Sawankalok, J. S. S., XIX, 2, 1925. 

Leuba, J. (Madame H. Parmentier), Hes Chams et leur art, Paris and Brussels, 1923. 

Levi, S., I. He theatre indien, Paris, 1890. 

2. He Nepal, Paris, 1905 — 08. 

3. Pre-aryen et pre-dravidien dans ITnde, J. A., CCIII, I, 1923. 

4. The art of Nepal, Indian art and Letters i, 2, London, 1925, 

Loeber, J. A., Das Batihen. Elne Blute indonesischen Kunstlebens, Oldenburg, 1926. 

Logan, W,, i. Find of ancient pottery in Malabar, I. A., VIII. 

2. Malabar, Madras ,1887. 

Longhurst, A. H., i. Ancient brick temples in the Central Provinces, A. S. I., A. R., 1909 — 10. 

2. Hampi ruins, Madras, 1917. 

3. Pallava architecture, L, Mem. A. S. I., 17, Calcutta, 1924. 

4. The origin of the typical Hindu temple of Southern India, A. S. I., Southern Circle, Annual 
Report 1915 — 16. 

5. Hock-cut tomb near Calicut, A. S. I., A. R., 1911 — 12. 

6. Influence of the umbrella on Indian architecture, J. I. A., vol. XVI, 1914. 

Luard, C. E., i. Tattooing in Central India, I. A., XXIII, 1904. 

2. Buddhist caves of Central India: Bagh, I. A., Aug. 1910. 

Macdonell, A. A., i. Vedic mythology, Gr. i-a. Ph. A., Ill, I, A, 1897. 

2. Farly Hindu iconography, J. R. A. S., 1917, p. 602. 

3. The development of early Hindu iconography, in Festschrift Ernst Windisch. 

4. The history of Hindu iconography, Rupam, no. 4, 1920. 

Mackay, E., Sumerian connections with ancient India, J. R. A. S., 1925. 

Maisey, F. C., Sanchi and its remains, London, 1892. 


221 



Marshall, Sir J. H., i, Rajagriha and its remains y A. S. I., A. R., 1904 — 05. 

2. Excavations at Saheth Mahethy A, S. L, A. R., 1910 — ii. 

3. Excavations at Bintdy A. S. L, A. R., 1911 — 12» 

4. The monuments of Sdnchty A. S. I., A. R., 1913 — 14. 

5. Guide to Sdnchty Calcutta, 1918. 

6. Guide to Taxila, Calcutta, 1918. 

7. Excavations at Taxila y the Stupa and Monastery at Jau/idity Mem. A. S. I., 7, 1921, 

8. The monuments of ancient India y in Cambridge History of India, vol. i, Cambridge, 1922. 

9. Eirst light on a long-forgotten civilit(ationy 111 . London News, Sept. 20, 1924. 

10. The influence of race on early Indian arty Rupam, 18, 1924. 

11. Buddhist gold jewellery y A. S. I., A. R., 1902 — 03. 

1 2 . \J nveilingthe prehistor iccivili*:(at ion of India y Illustrated London News, Feb. 27 and March 6, 1 926. 

13. Excavations at Taxiluy A. S. I., A. R., 1915 — 16. 

Marshall, Sir J, H. (editor). Catalogue of the Museum of Archaeology at Sanchiy Calcutta, 1922. 
Marshall, Sir J. H., and Konow, S., Excavations at Sarndthy A. S. I., A, R., 1907 — 08. 
Marshall, Sir J. H,, and Sahni, D. R., Excavations at Mandory A. S. I., A. R., 1909 — 10. 
Marshall, Sir J. H., and Vogel, J. Ph., Excavations at Charsaday A. S. I., A. R., 1902 — 03. 
Martin, H., art indien et Part chinoiSy Paris, 1926. 

Masson-Oursel, P., Une connexion dans PEsthetique et la Thilosophie de Plnde, La Notion de Pramdnay 
Revue des Arts asiatiques, II, i, 1925. 

Mayamuni, Mayamatamy Trivandrum Sanskrit series, no. 65. 

Mehta, N. C., i. Indian painting in the fifteenth centuryy Rupam, 22 — 23, 1925. 

2. Two Pahari painters of Tehri-Garhwah Mdnaksi and ChaitUy Rupam, 26, 1926. 

3. Studies in Indian paintingy Bombay, 1926. 

Melville, H. H. L., Knebel, J., and Brandes, J. L. A., i. Beschrijving van , . . Tjandi DJagOy Arch. 
Onderzoek op Java en Madoera, I. The Hague, 1904. 

2. Beschrijving van Tjandi Singasari en . . PanataraUy Arch. Onderaoek op Java en Madoera, II, 
The Hague, 1909. 

Mitra, P., i . Prehistoric cultures and races of Indiay Calc. Univ. Journ. Dep. Letters, 1 , 1 920, pp. 1 1 3 — 200. 

2, Prehistoric arts and crafts of Indiay ibid. Ill, 1920, pp. 159 — 224. 

Mitra, Rajendralal, Buddha Gaydy Calcutta, 1878. 

Mookerji, N. B., A history of Indian shipping and maritime activity y London, 1912. 
de Morgan, J., i. LlEgypte et PAsie aux temps antebistoriqueSy J. A.,CCIII, 1923. 

2. La prehistoire orient ale y Vols i and 2, Paris, 1925 — 26. 

Morin- Jean, Dessin des animaux en Grke d’apres les vases points y Paris, 1911. 

Mukerji, P. C., i . Report on the antiquities of the District of Lalitpufy N, P., Roorkee, 1 899. 

2. Report on the results of exploration in the Nepal Taraiy Calcutta, 1901. 

Mukharji, T. N., Art manufactures of Indiay Calcutta, 1888. 

Narasimachar, R., i. The KeJava temple at Somanathapury M. A. S., I, Bangalore, 1917. 

2. The Kesava temple at BeluTy M. A. S., II., Bangalore, 1919. 

3. The Lakshmzdevi temple at Dodda Goddavalliy M. A. S., Ill, Bangalore, 1919. 

4. Inscriptions at Sravana Belgolay Epigraphica Carnatica, II, 2nd ed.. Bangalore, 1923. 
Neogi, P., Iron in ancient India y Calcutta, 1914. 

Niedermayer, O. von, Afganistany Leipzig, 1925. 

Nieuwenkamp, W. O. J., Kunstwerke von Java . . . Bali . etc., Berlin, 1924. 

Oertel, F. O., Excavations at Sdmdthy A. S. I., A. R., 1904 — 05. 

Okakura, K., Ideals of the Easty 2nd ed., London, 1904. 

Parker, H., i. Report on archaeological discoveries at Tissamahdrdmay J. R. A. S., Ceylon Branch, 
Vol. VIII, no. 27, 1884. 


222 



Parker, H., 2. Ancient Ceylon^ London, 1909, 

Parmentier, H., i. l^s monuments du cirque de Mison, B. fi. F. E. O., 1904, 

2. Catalogue du Musee Khmere de Phnom Pen, B. fi. F. E. O., 1912. 

3. Inventaire descriptif des monuments Cams de VAnnam, Paris, 1909 and 1918. 

4. U Art dUndravarman, B. E. F. E, O., 19x9. 

5. L^s sculptures chames au Nlusee de Tourane, Ars Asiatica, IV, 1922. 

6. Architectures asiatiques. Etudes asiatiques, vol. II, Paris, 1925. 

7. Uart khmer primitif, B. E. F, E. O., XI, XXII. 

PelHot, P., I. Memoires sur les coutumes du Cambodge, B. E. F. E. O., II, 1902. 

2. Indian influences in the early Chinese art in Tun-Huang, ]omn, Ind.Art and Letters, II, 1926. 
Peppe, W.C., and Smith, V.A., The Piprahwd stupa containing relics of Buddha, J. R. A. S., 1898. 
Perera, E. W., Singhalese banners and standards, Mem. Colombo Museum, 2, Colombo, 1915. 
Pieris, P. E., NagadJpa and Budhist remains in Jaffna, J. C. B. R. A. S., XXVII, No. 72, 1919. 
Pleyte, C. M., Indonesian art. The Hague, 1901. 

Przyluski, J., legende de PEmpereur Afoka, Paris (Musee Guimet), 1923. 

PuUe, PJflessi indiani nell ^arte romaica, Atti del Congr. internat. di Scienze storiche, VII, Rome, 1903. 
Ram Raz, Essay on the architecture of the Hindus, London, 1834. 

Rao, T. A. G., i. Elements of Hindu Iconography, Madras, 1914 — 15. 

2. Buddha vestiges in Kanchipura, I. A., XLIV, 1915. 

3. Talamana, or iconometry, Mem. A. S. I., 3, Calcutta, 1920, 

Rapson, E. J., i. Indian coins, Gr. i-a. Ph., A., Strassburg, 1898. 

2. editor, Cambridge History of India, Cambridge, 1922. 

Rawlinson, H., Bactria; from the earliest times to the extinction of Bactrio-Greek rule in the Panjab, 
Bombay, 1909. 

Rea, A., I. ^ Buddhist monastery in the Sankaram hills, Vizagapatam District, A. S. I., A. R., 
1907—08. 

2. South Indian Buddhist Antiquities , . . Bhattiprolu, Gudivada and Ghantasala . . ., Madras, 1894. 

3. Chalukyan architecture, A. S. I., Madras, 1896. 

4. Excavations at Amaravati, A. S. L, A. R,, 1905 — 06 and 1908—09. 

5. Pallava architecture, A. S. I., Madras, 1909. 

6. Buddhist monasteries on the Gurubhakfakonja and Durgakonda hills at Rdmatirtham, A. S. I., 
A. R., 1910 — II. 

Rivoira, R., Architectura musulmana, Milano, 1914. 

Rodin, A., Coomaraswamy, A., and Goloubew, V., Sculptures Qivaites, Ars Asiatica, III, Paris 
and Brussels, 1921. 

Rostovtzeff, M., Iranians and Greeks in South Russia, Oxford, 1922. 

Rouffaer, G. P., and JuynboU, H. H., Die indische Batikkunst und ihre Geschichte, Haarlem, 1 901—05 . 
Rougier, V., Nouvelles decouvertes tames au Quang Nam, B. C. A. I., 1912. 

Sachs, C., Die Musikinstrumente Indiens und Indonesiens, 2nd ed., Berlin, 1923. 

Sahni, D. R., i. Excavations at Rdmpurvd, A. S. I., A. R., 1907 — 08. 

2. Excavations at Avantipura, A. S. I., A, R., 1913 — 14. 

3. Pre-Muhammadan monuments of Kashmir, A. S. I., A.R., 1915 — 16. 

4. Buddhist image inscription from Srdvastl, A. S. I., A. R., 1908 — 09. 

5. Guide to the Buddhist ruins of Sdrndth, Simla, 1923. 

Sahni, D. R., and Vogel, J. Ph., Catalogue of the Museum of Archaeology at Sdrndth, Calcutta, 1914. 
Salmony, A., i. Sculpture in Siam, London, 1925. 

2. Die Plastik des hinterindischen Kunstkreises, Jahrb. as. Kunst, I, 1924. 

Sanderson, G., and Begg, T., Types of modern Indian building, Allahabad, 1913. 

Sarkar, G., i. Notes on the history of Shikhara temples, Rupam, 10, 1922. 


225 



Sarkar, G., 2, The Barnagar temples in Murshidabad^ Rupam, 19 — 20, 1924, 

Sarre, F., Kunst des alien Persien, Berlin, 1923. 

Sastii, H., I. Excavations at Kasid^ A. S. I., A. R,, 1911 — 12. 

2. The ^‘Hamir HatP\ or the Obstinacy of Hamir . . Journ, Ind. Art., XVII, 1916. 

3. . . . recently added sculptures in the Provincial Museum, Lucknow, Mem. A. S. I., ii, 1926. 
Sastri, H. K., i. South Indian images of gods and goddes, Madras, 1916. 

2. Two statues of Pallava Kings at Mahabalipuram, Mem. A. S.I., 26, Calcutta, 1926. 
Saunders, V., Portrait painting as a dramatic device in Sanskrit plays, J. A. O. S., vol. 39 
Sayce, A. H., The Hittites, London, 1925. 

Scherman, L., Dickhauchtypen in der indisch-ostasiatischen Gotterwelt, Jahrb. as. Kunst, i, 1924. 
Schiefner, F. A. von, i , Tibetan tales derived from Indian sources, from the Kahgyur, trans. by Ralston, 
2nd. ed., London, 1882. 

2. Tdrandthals Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indien . . ., St. Petersburg, 1 869. 

Schmidt, R., i. Beitrdge v(ur indischen Erotik, 6. AufL, Berlin, 1902. 

2. Das Kdmasutram des Vatsyayana, 6. Aufl., Berlin, 1920. 

Schoemaker, C. P. W., Aesthetik en Oorsprong der Hindoe-kunst op Java, Soerabaia, 1924. 
Seidenfaden, E., Complement a Vinventaire des monuments du Cambodge pour les quatre provinces du 
Siam oriental, B. £. F. E. O., 1923. 

Seidenstiicker, K., Die Buddha-Legende in den Skulpturen des Ananda-Tempels ^u Pagan, Mitt. Mus. 

Volkerkunde, IV, Hamburg, 1916. 

Sen, D. C., History of Bengali language and literature, Calcutta, 1911. 

Serrurier, S., De Wajang-Poerwa, Leiden, 1896. 

Sewell, A., A forgotten Empire {Vijayanagar), London, 1900 
Sewell, R., i. Buddhist remains at Guntupalle, J. R. A. S., 1887. 

2. Some Buddhist bronzes and relics of Buddha, J. R. A. S., 1895. 

Shuttleworth, H. L. H., An inscribed metal mask discovered on the occassion of the Bhunda Ceremony 
at Nirmand. Acta orientalia: vol. L P. IV. pp. 224 — 229, Leiden 1923. 

Silice, A., et GrosUer, G., La ce'ramique dans Pancien Cambodge, A. A. K., 2, I, 1924. 

Simpson, W., i. Indian Architecture, Trans. Roy. Inst. British Architects, 1861 — 62, pp. 165 — 78. 

2. Buddhist Architecture : Jallalabad, Ibid. 1879 — 80, pp. 37 — 64. 

3. Origin and mutation in Indian and Eastern Architecture, Ibid. 1891, pp. 225 — 76. 

4. Classical influence in the Architecture of the Indus region and Afghanistan, Jour. Roy. Inst. 
British Architects, I, 1894, pp. 93 ff., i9iff. 

5. The Buddhist Caves of Afghanistan, J. R. A. S., 1882, pp. 319 — 331. 

6. Some suggestions of origin in Indian Architecture. Ibid. 1888, pp. 49 — 71. 

Siren, O., i. Chinese sculpture from the fifth to the fourteenth century, London 1925. 

2. Documents d* art chinois . . . , Ars asiatica, VII. 

Smith, G. E., Elephants and ethnologists. New York, 1925. 

Smith, V. A., i. The Jain stiipa and other antiquities of Mathura, Allahabad, 1901. 

2. History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon, Oxford, 1911. 

3. Oxford history of India, Oxford, 1920. 

4. Early history of India, 4th ed., Oxford, 1924. 

5. The monolithic pillars or columns of Asoka, Z. D. M. G., LXV, 1911. 

6. Catalogue of the coins in the Indian Museum, Calcutta, vol. I, London, 1906. 

7. Sculpture of Ceylon, J. I. A., 1914. 

Smith V. A., and Hoey, W., Ancient Buddhist statuettes from the Banda District, J. A. S. B., 64, 1895. 
Smith, V. A., and Peppe, see Peppe. 

Smither, J. G., Architectural remains, Anuradhapura, Ceylon, London 1894. 

Sohrmann, H., Die altindische Saule, Dresden, 1906. 


224 



Spooner, D. B., i. Excavations at Takht^i-Bdhiy A. S. I., A. R., 1907 — 08. 

2. Excavations at Shdh-jt-ks-Dherly A. S. I., A. R,, 1908 — 09. 

5. Excavations at Sdhri Bahlol^ A. S. I., A. R., 1909 — 10. 

4. Didarganj image now in Patna Museum^ Journ. Bihar and Orissa Research Soc. V, I, 1919. 

5. Handbook to the Sculptures in the Peshawar Museum^ Bombay, 1910. 

6. Vishnu images from P^angpur, A.S. I., A. R., 1911 — 12. 

7. Mr, Katan Tatars excavations at Pdtaliputra, A. S. L, A. R., 1912 — 13. 

8. Excavations at Basdrhy A, S. I., A. R., 1913 — 14. 

9. A new find of punch-marked coins, A. S. I., A. R., 1905 — 06, 

10. (Terracottas from Pdtaliputra and bronzes from Ndlandd), A. S. I., A. R., 1917 — 18, pt. i. 

11. The Zoroastrian period of Indian history, J. R. A. S., 1915. 

12. The Bodh Gayd plaque, J. B. O. R. S., I, 1916. (For further discussion and illustration by 
Smith, Spooner and Konow, see ibid. II, 1916 and XII, 1926.) 

13. Temple types in Tirhut, J. B. O. R. S., II, 1916. 

$ri Kumara, Silparatna, ed. H. Sastri, Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, 1922. 

Stein, M. A., i. Zoroastrian deities on Indo-Scythian coins, I. A., voL XVII, 1888. 

2. Pdjatarahgint of Kalhana, London, 1900. 

3. Sand-burned ruins of Khotan, London, 1903. 

4. Ancient Khotan, London, 1907. 

5. Excavations at Sahri-Bahlol, A. S. L, A. R., 1911 — 12, 

6. Pjiins of Desert Cathay, London, 1912. 

7. Serindia, London, 1921. 

Stein, M. A., and Binyon, L., Ancient Buddhist paintings from the caves of the Thousand Buddhas (Tun 
Huang) . , London, 1921. 

Strzygowski, J., i. Orient oder Rom, Leipzig, 1901. 

2. Altai-Iran und Volkerwanderung, Leipzig, 1917. 

3. Origins of Christian church art, Oxford, 1923. 

4. Perso-Indian landscape in northern art in ‘'The influences of Indian art”, India Soc., London, 
1925. 

5. Die asiatische Kunst, Jahrb. as. Kunst, 1924. 

6. The northern stream of art, from Ireland to China, and the southern stream, Yearb. Or. Art, 1925 . 
Stutterheim, W., i. Puima-Eegenden und Rama-Pjeliefs in Indonesien, Miinchen, 1924 — 25. 

2. Een belangrijke Hindoe-Javaansche Teekening op Koper, Djawa, October, 1925. 

^ukracarya, Sukra-nJti-sdra, ed. Calcutta 1890; trans. S. B. H., voL XIII (inadequate), Ch. IV, 
rec. IV. 

Swarup, B., Konarka, the Black Pagoda of Orissa, Cuttack, 1910. 

Tagore, A. N., i. H Alpona, ou les Decorations rituelles au Bengale, Paris, 1921. 

2. Sadanga, ou les six canons de la Peinture hindoue, Paris, 1922. 

Takakusu, J., ^ record of the Buddhist religion as practised in India, and the Malay Archipelago (A.D. 

671 — 695), by I-Tsing, Oxford, 1895. 

Taki, S., An example of the earliest Indian painting, Kokka, No. 355, 1919. 

Talbot, W. S., An ancient Hindu temple in the Panjab, J. R. A. S., 1903. 

Taranatha, see Schiefner, 2. 

Theobald, W., Motes on , symbols found on the punch-marked coins of Hindustan . . ., J. A. S. B., 
LIX, pt. I, 1890. 

Thomann, Th. H., Pagan, ein Jahrtausend buddhistiscber Tempelkunst, Heilbronn, 1923. 

Thomson, D. V., Preliminary notes on some early Hindu paintings, Rupam, 26, 1926. 

Tumour, G., and Wijesinha, L. C., The Mahavansa, Colombo, 1889. 

Vajhe (Vaze), K. V., Pracin Hindi Silpa-sdstra-sdra, Nasik, 1924. 


15 


225 



Venkatasubbiah, A., The Kalds^ Madras, 1914. 

Verneuil, M. P., Uart a Java, JLes temples de la periode classique Indo-Javanaise. (Announced.) 
Visnudharmottaram (text), Bombay, 1912. 

Visser, H. F. E., Indian influence on Far Eastern arty in “The influences of Indian art”, India Soc., 
London, 1925. 

Vogel, J. Ph., I. Inscriptions of Chamhd StatCy A. S. I., A. R., 1902 — 05. 

2. Buddhist sculptures from Benares, A. S. I., A. R., 1903 — 04. 

3. Inscribed Gandhara sculpture y A. S. I., A. R., 1903 — 04. 

4. Inscribed brass statuette from Fatehpur (Kdngrd), A. S. I., A. R., 1904 — 05. 

5. Notes on excavations at Kasidy A. S. I., A. R., 1904 — 05 and 1905 — 06. 

6. The Mathurd school of sculpture y A. S. I., A. R., 1906 — 07 and 1909 — 10. 

7. Excavations at Saheth-Mahetby A. S. I., A. R., 1907 — 08. 

8. The temple of BhitargaoUy A. S. I., A. R., 1908 — 09. 

9. The Garuda pillar at Besnagary A. S. I., A. R., 1908 — 09. 

10. Ndga worship in ancient Mathurdy A. S. I., A. R., 1908 — 09. 

11. The temple of Mabddeva at Baiaurdy KulUy A. S. I., A. R., 1909 — 10. 

12. Catalogue of the Bhuri Singh Museum at Chamhd y Calcutta, 1909. 

13. Catalogue of the Archaeological Museum at Mathurdy Allahabad, 1910. 

14. Iconograpbical notes on the ^^Seven Pagodas*\ A. S. I., A. R., 1910 — ii. 

15. Explorations at Mathurdy A. S. L, A. R., 19 ii — 12. 

16. The sacrificial posts of Isdpury Muttra, A. S. L, A. R., 1910 — ii. 

17. Facts and fancies about the Iron Pillar of Old Delhi, Journ. Panjab Hist. Soc., IX, 1923. 

18. Gahgd et Yamund dans V iconographie bouddhique, Etudes asiatiques, Paris, 1925. 

19. Note on the Nirmand mask inscriptions, Acta orientalia, Vol. I. 

20. The relation between the art of India and Java, in “The influences of Indian art”, India Soc., 
London, 1925. 

21. Antiquities of Chamhd, 

22. Ancient monuments of Kdngrd A. S. L, A. R., 1905 — 06. 

Vogel, J. Ph., and Sahni, D. R., Catalogue of the Museum of Archaeology at Sdrndth, Calcutta, 1914. 
Voretsch, E. A., i. Cfber althuddhistische Kunst in Siam, O, Z., V and VI, 1916 — 17. 

2. Indian art in Siam, Rupam, 1920. 

Vredenberg, E., The continuity of pictorial traction in the art of India, Rupam, 1920. 

Waddell, L. A., i. The Indian Buddhist cult of Avalokita . . . remains in Magadha, J. R. A. S., 1894, 

2. Evolution of the Buddhist cult, its gods, images and art. Imp. and Asiatic Quart. Review, 1912. 

3. Buddha* s diadem, or ^^Usnisa ** . . ., O. Z. III., 1915. 

4. Indo-Sumerian seals deciphered, London, 1925. 

5. Kiport on excavations at Pdtaliputra, Calcutta, 1903. 

Waldschmidt, G., Gandbara-Kutschd-Turfan, Leipzig (1925). 

Waley, A., Zen Buddhism, and its relation to art, London, 1922. 

Walsh, E. H. C., Indian punch-marked coins, J. R. A. S., Centenary Volume, London, 1924. 
Warner, Langdon, Japanese sculpture of the Suiko period. New Haven, 1923. 

Watt, Sir G., Indian art at Delhi, 190^, Calcutta, 1904. 

Weber, O., Ein silbemer Zeptergriff aus Syrien, Jahrb. K. preuB. Kunsts., 1915, p. 59. 

Weber, W., Der Sieges^ug des Griechentums im Orient, Die Antike I, 1925. 

Whitehead, R. B., i. The village gods of Southern India, London and Calcutta, 1916. 

2. Catalogue of the coins in the Panjab Museum, Lahore, Oxford 1914. 

With, K., I. Java: brahmaniscbe, buddhistische und eigenlebige Architektur und Plastik auf Java, Hagen, 
1920. 

2. Bildwerke Ost- und Siidasiens aus der S am m lung Yi Yuan, Basel, 1924. 


226 



With, K., 3. Javaniscbe Kleinbrofr^en^ in “Studien zur Kunst des Ostens’’ Josef Strzygowski 
gewidmet, Wien (1923). 

Yazdani, G., The temples of Pa/ampet^ Mem. A. S. I., 6, 1922. 

Yzerman, J. W,, De Cbalukyascbe houofstijl op den Dieng^ Album Kern, Leiden, 1903, pp. 287ff. 
Zimmer, H., Kunstform und Yoga im indiscben Kunsthild, Berlin, 1926. 


JOURNALS AND SERIES, WITH LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS. 

Acta orientaHa, Leiden 

Archaeological Survey of Ceylon, Annual Reports, Colombo (A. S. C., A, R.). 

— Memoirs, Colombo (Mem. A. S. C.). 

Archaeological Survey of India (A. S, I.). 

— Annual Reports (A. S. I., A. R.) Calcutta. Note that references are to Part ii unless 
otherwise stated. After the year 1919 only one part was issued. 

— Memoirs (Mem. A. S. I.). 

Archaeological Survey of Kasmir (A. S. K.). 

Ars Asiatica, Paris. 

Artibus Asiae, HeUerau-Dresden. 

Arts et Archeologie khmers, Paris (A. A. K.). 

Asia Major, Leipzig. 

Bibliotheca Indica, Calcutta. 

BuUedn of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston (M. F. A. BuU.). 

Bulletin de Tficole fran^aise d’Extreme-Orient, Hanoi (B. £. F. E. O.). 

Bulletin de la Commission archeologique de ITndo-Chine, Paris (B. C. A. I.). 

Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies, London (B. S. O. S.). 

Calcutta University, Journal of the Department of Letters. 

Cambridge History of India (C. H. I.). 

Ceylon Journal of Science (C. J. S.). 

Columbia University, Indo-Iranian Series. 

Epigraphia Indica (Ep. Ind.). 

Epigraphia Zeylanica (Ep. Zey.). 

Grundriss der indo-arischen Philologie und Altertumskunde, Strassburg and Berlin (Gr. i-a. 
Ph. A.). 

Harvard Oriental Series (H. O. S.). 

Indian Antiquary (I. A.). 

Indian Art and Letters, London (I. A. L.). 

Indian Historical Quarterly (I. H. Q.). 

Jahrbuch der asiatischen Kunst, Leipzig (Jahrb. as. Kunst). 

Journal asiatique, Paris (J. A.). 

Journal of Indian Art and Industry, London (J. I. A.). 

Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society, Patna (J. B. O. R. S.). 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, London (J. R. A. S.). 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Ceylon Branch (J. C. B. R. A. S.). 

Journal of the Asiatic Society, Bengal (J. A. S. B.); Memoirs, do. (Mem. A. S. B.). 

Journal of the Panjab Historical Society Lahore (J. P. H. S.). 

Journal of the Siam Society, Bangkok, (J. S. S.). 

Memoires archeologlques publiees par I’ficole Frangaise d’Extreme-Orient (Mem. arch, 
fi. F. E. O.). 

Memoires concernant I’Asie orientale, Paris (M. C. A. O.). 


15’ 


227 



Memoirs of the Colombo Museum (Mem. C. M). 

Mysore Archaeological Series (M. A. S.). 

Ostasiatische Zeitschrift (O. Z.). 

Oudheidkundige Dienst in Nederlandsch-Indie: Rapporten, Batavia (O. D. Rapp.). 

Revue des Arts Asiatiques, Paris (R. A. A.). 

Rupam, Calcutta. 

Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, K. Bataviaasch Genootschap van 
Kunsten en Wetenschapen, Weltevreden (Verh. Bat. Kunst en Wet.). 

Yearbook of Oriental Art and Culture, London (Yearb. Or. Art). 

Zeitschrift der Deutschen morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, Leip2ig (Z. D. M. G.). 

INDICES AND BIBLIOGRAPHIES, 

Archaeological Survey of India, Library of the Director General of Archaeology, author and 
subject indices, Calcutta, 1917. 

Bulletin de PEcole frangaise d’Extreme-Orient, Index to Tomes I — XX, in Tome XXI, fas- 
cicule 2, 1921. 

Cambridge History of India, vol. i, 1922 (C. H. I.). 

Coomaraswamy, A, K., Bibliography of Indian arty Boston, 1925. 

— Catalogue of the Indian Collections , Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, pt. V, Rajput Painting, Boston 
1926, includes an almost exhaustive Bibliography of Indian painting, other than Mughal. 
Ethnographische Museum, Leiden, Katalog, vol, 3, Katalogus der Bihliothek. 

Guerinot, A., Fssai de Bihliographie Jaina, Paris, 1906. 

Hackin, J., Guide Catalogue du Musk Guimet, Collections Bouddhiques, Paris, 1923, pp, 119 — 127. 
Indian Antiquary, Index, vols. I — L, Bombay, 1923. 

JuynboU, H. H., Katalog des etbn. Reichsmuseums, Leiden, 17 vols., 1910 — 1924, esp. vol. V, Java. 
Kaye, G. R., Index to the Annual Reports, Archaeological Survey of India, 1902 — 1916, Calcutta, 1924. 
Museum of Fine Arts Bulletin, Boston, General Index 1916 — 1925, Boston 1926 (Indian Art, 
references on p. 7). 

Royal Asiatic Society, London, Centenary Volume (author and subject indices), London, 1924. 
Smith, V. A., General Index to the Reports of the Archaeological Survey of India, vols. I — XXIII, 
Calcutta, 1887. 


228 



DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES’ 


PLATE I. 

1. Statue of a man, from Mohenjo-Daro, Limestone. Indo-Sumerian, third millennium B. C, 

• See page 3. 

PLATE 11 . 

2 — 6 : Seals or plaques with various devices and pictographic script, from Mohenjo- 
Daro. Faience. Indo-Sumerian, third millennium B. C. See page 4. 

2. with humped Indian bull; 

3. with bull; 

4. with bull or ‘‘unicorn”; 

5. with elephant; 

6. sacred tree {pippala^ Ficus religwsa\ with animal heads with long necks attached to the stem. 
See page 47 note 2. 

7. Four deer with one head, Ajanta, Cave i, capital relief in situ. Early seventh century A. D. 
but a very ancient motif. See page 1 1 . 

PLATE III. 

8. YaksI, from Besnagar, now in the Indian Museum, Calcutta. Sandstone, 6' 7”. Mauryan 
or older. See page 16. 

9. Yaksa, from Parkham, now C i in the Mathura Museum. Polished sandstone, 8' 8". 
Maurya or older. See pages 5, 16. 

PLATE IV. 

10. A banyan tree represented as a kalpa-vrksa yielding abundance, enclosed by a plaited rail 
and rising from a square railed base, and probably the capital of a monolithic pillar. From 
Besnagar, now in the Indian Museum, Calcutta. Sandstone, 5' 8". Maurya or older. 
See pages 17, 41, 47. 

11. Elephant, monolithic, forming part of the rock at Dhauh, Katak District, Orissa. The 
rock is engraved with one of Asoka’s Fourteen rock-edicts. Maurya, ca. 257 B.C. 

12. Lion-capital (originally surmounted by a Wheel of the Law [Dbamma-cakkaJ^ from 
the Asoka column at Sarnath, erected to commemorate the Preaching of the First 
Sermon, now A i in the Sarnath Museum. Polished Chunar sandstone, 7' by 2' 10". 
Maurya, between 242 and 232 B. C. See page 17. 

13. Woman reclining, a man fanning her, relief from Bhita. Sandstone. Maurya or ^uhga. 
See page 20. 

14. BuU-capital of an Asokan column, viz. one of the two erected at Rampurva, Tirhut, 
now in the Indian Musum, Calcutta. Polished Chunar sandstone. Maurya, ca. 242 B. C. 
See pages 18, 62. 

PLATE V. 

15. Fragment of a colossal male figure, Yaksa or king, from the back, from Baroda, near 
Parkham, now C 23 in the Mathura Museum. Sandstone, 4' 2” (the height of the 
complete figure would have been about twelve feet). Maurya or older. See page 17. 

^ Measurements are given in feet and inches. Where only one dimension is given, it 
represents the height of the object. 


229 


% 



1 6. Winged goddess, standing on a lotus, from Basarh. Moulded terracotta. Mauryan or 
older. Compare the pearl-fringed bracelet and 27, the triple armlet with figures 25, 58. 
See pages 12, 20, 21, 31 note 3. 

17. Caur/-bea.rer, from Didarganj, now in the Patna Museum. Polished Chunar sandstone. 
Maurya or Suhga. See page 17. 

PLATE VI. 

18. Male head from Sarnath, now in the Sarnath Museum. Polished Chunar sandstone, 8". 
Maurya or Sunga. See page 19. 

19. Male head from Sarnath, now in the Sarnath Museum. Polished Chunar sandstone, 5 
Maurya or $unga. See page 19. 

20. Male head from Mathura. Mottled red sandstone. Maurya or ^uhga. Author’s collection. 

See page 20, 

21. Male head from Mathura (fragment). Mottled red sandstone, Maurya or $unga. 
See page 20. 

22. Head of a child, from Pataliputra, Bulandi Bagh excavations. Now in the Patna Museum. 
Modelled terracotta. Mauryan. See pages 19, 21. 

23. Head of a woman or goddess, from Mathura, now 26. 34 in the Museum of Fine Arts, 
Boston. Modelled grey terracotta, 3 Maurya or older. See page 20. 

PLATE VII. 

24. Surya, relief situ^ Bhaja, west end of verandah, left of cell door. Early ^unga. Seepage 2 5 . 

25 . Guardian or royal figure, relief in sitUy Bhaja, on screen wall of verandah ; pilaster on the left. 
Early Suhga. See page 25, 

26. Frie2e with a winged horse, horse and female rider using stirrup, other figures, and 
bulls, relief in sifUy Bhaja, east end of verandah, below the pilaster, continuous with 
lower left hand portion of figure 25. Early Sunga. See page 25. 

PLATE VIII. 

27. Indra, relief in situ, Bhaja, west end of verandah, right of cell door, facing figure 24. 
Early ^uhga. See pages 23 — 28, 41. 

PLATE IX. 

28. Facade of the Lomas Rsi cave, Barabar Hills, near Bodhgaya. Maurya. See page 18. 

29. Facade of ^ai/ya-hall, Bhaja, showing the monolithic sfupa within. Suhga. See page 28, 

30. Fagade of raij^a-hall, Mtonoda, Juimar. Late first century B. C. See page 29. 

31. Fagade of w/y^-hall, Nasik. Mid-first century B. C. See page 28, 

PLATE X. 

32 — 35. Cai/ya-halls, at Bedsa and Karli: 

32. Interior of rai^a-hall, Bedsa. Sunga, ca. 175 B. c. See page 28. 

33. Fagade and great pilaster at the south end of the verandah, Bedsa. Compare the bull 
with figure 14. Suhga, ca. 175 B. C. See page 28. 

34. Interior of ^ai^a-hally Karli, showing original wooden chatta above the monolithic 
stupa. Late first century B. C. See pages 28, 29. 

35. Part of screen, and fagade in the verandah, Karli. Late first century B. C. See page 29. 

PLATE XI. 

56. Frieze in the upper storey of the Rani Gumpha, Khandagiri, Orissa. Ca. 100 B. C. 
See page 38. 

37 — 39- Torana pillar reliefs, Bharhut and Batanmara, Nagodh State. Sunga, early 
second century B. C. See pages 31, 33. 

37. Yaksi, Batanmara. 


230 



38. Kuvera Yaksa, Bharhut. 

39. Culakoka Devata, Bharhut. 

40. Indra in the form of the Brahman ^anti, railing pillar dedicated by a king Nagadeva 
or queen Nagadeva, Bodhgaya. Ca. 100 B. C. See pages 8, 32. 

PLATE XII. 

41 — 44. Reliefs, Bharhut. Now in the Indian Museum, Calcutta. §uhga, early second 
century B. C. See pages 18, 25 note 2, 29, 33, 47 note 4, 48, 82, 104. 

41. Bodhi-shrine of Sakya Muni (Gautama Buddha), with inscription in Brahmi charac- 
ters ^'‘Bhagavato Sakja Mmino Bodho^\ 

42. A stupa with a Uon pillar, worshippers, Puspdni Ditydni raining flowers, and two fan palms. 

43. The Turban-relic of the Buddha enshrined in the temple of the gods (inscription, ^^Sudhamma 
Deva-Sahhd^'*') in the heaven of Indra, beside the palace of the gods (inscription “ Vijayanta 
Pasdde’*)y with dancers in the foreground. 

44. Donors or worshippers. 

PLATE Xin. 

45 — 49. Rehefs, Bharhut, Now in the Indian Museum, Calcutta. Suhga, early second 
century B. C. See pages 18, 31, 33, 48, 50, 51 note i, 149. 

45. A two-storied dhamma-cakka shrine, 

46. Bodhi-shrine, perhaps that of the previous Buddha, Krakucanda, with an elephant 
pillar, and worshippers. 

47. Fragment of railcoping, with an episode of the Vessantara Jdtakxiy viz. the giving away 
of the sacred elephant Jettatura. 

48. Pillar with king on an elephant, with attendants, like the Indra group of figure 27. 

49. Lotus medallion enclosing a royal head, from a railing cross-bar. 

PLATE XIV. 

50. The great StupUy No. i at Sanci, as enlarged in the second and first centuries B. C., 
and now restored. See pages 34 ff. 

51. Reliefs on one of the early railing piUars oiStupa't^o. 2, second century B. C. Seep. 35. 

52. Reliefs on one of the later railing pillars of Stupa No. 2, first century B. C. See page 35. 

PLATE XV. 

53. The north toranay Sanci. Early first century B. C, See pages 34, 36. 

PLATE XVI. 

54 — 56. Sanci, details, early first century B. C. See pages 33, 36, 47 note 4, 48. 

54. The east toranay Sand, detail showing woman-and-tree bracket. 

5 5 . Bodhi-shrine, detail from toranay S^ci. With dedicatorjr inscription in Brahmi characters. 

56. Worshippers at shrines, Sanci. Part of a two-storied pavilion seen below. 

PLATE XVII. 

57. Goddess, wearing tunic and dhoti y with emblem of two fish at the side. Stated to be 
from Mathura; now 25. 448 in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. Moulded red terra- 
cotta, 6". Maurya or Suhga. See page 20. 

38. Monolithic pillar, with the figure of a Yaksi or woman wearing girdle and dhotJy at 
Rajasan, MuzafFarpur District. Suhga. See page 32. Cf. Marshall, 8, fig. 52. 

59. Monolithic railing pillar, with a figure of a Yaksi wearing girdle and dhoti, supported 
by a dwarf Yaksa, from Mathura, now J 2 in the Mathura Museum. Red sandstone, 6' 5". 
First century B. C. (?) Cf. page 63. 

60. Goddess, radiate (?), wearing tunic and dhoti. From Kosam. Terracotta, 2%". Maurya. 
or Sunga. See page 20. 


231 



61. Detail from a railing pillar, showing the Sun in a four-horsed chariot, with female 
archers dispelling the powers of darkness ; above, the lower part of a shrine, with triratna 
symbol on the altar, supported by three Yaksas (so-called Atlantes). Bodhgaya. Sand- 
stone, Ca. loo B. C. See pages 33,67, 

62. So-called ‘‘Bodhgaya plaque“, found at the Kumrahar site, Patna (Pataliputra), represent- 
ing a straight-edged sikhara temple; with Kharosthi inscription. Patna Museum. Pro- 
bably of Pahjab origin, and first or second century A. D. date. See pages 48, 62, 80, 81 ; 
and Spooner, 12; and Konow, 2. 

PLATE XVIIL 

63. Mambhadra Yaksa. From Pawaya, Gwahar State, now in the Museum at Gwaliar. 
Sandstone, life-si2e. First century B. C, See page 34. 

64. Kus^a king, seated on a lion-throne, with a fire-altar engraved on the front of the 
pedestal. From Mathura, now in the Mathura Museum. Red sandstone. Second cen- 
tury A. D. See page 68. 

65. Statue of Kaniska. From the Mat site, Mathura, now in the Mathura Museum. Red 
sandstone, 5' 4". Early second century A. D. See page 66. 

66. Parasuramesvara lingamy with two-armed representation of Siva. In pujd at Gudimallam. 
Polished stone, 5'. First century B. C. See page 39. 

67. Nandi Yaksa, from Patna, now in the Patna Museum. Polished stone, ca, 5'. Second 
century B. C. See pages 17, 34. 

68. L.itjgamy with four-armed figure of Siva. Evidently from Mathura. Formerly in pos- 
session of M. Leonce Rosenberg. Second century A. D. See page 67. 

PLATE XIX. 

69. Representation of a sikhara-ttixiplCy detail from a railing pillar. From Mathura, now J 24 
in the Mathura Museum. Red sandstone, ca. 8" by 9". First or second century A. D. 
See pages 48, 53, 80, 81. 

69 A. Representation of a woodenZ/y^ijr^-temple, detail from a architrave. From Mathura, 
now M 3 in the Mathura Museum. Red sandstone, 7 First or second century A. D. 
See pages 53, 205. 

70. Medallion of a railing cross-bar, showing a Bodhi-temple of unique type, but like the 
stupa harmihd from Bharhut, figure 42. From Mathura, now 26. 96 in the Museum of 
Fine Arts, Boston. Red sandstone, 9". Second century B. C. See page 33. 

71. Jaina dydgapatUy a stone votive plaque. In the centre a seated Jina, surrounded by four 
triratna symbola; above and below the Eight Auspicious Symbols {Astamahgalc^\ on 
the left a pillar with a dhamma-cakka capital, on the right a pillar with an elephant capital. 
Brahml inscription not dated. From the Kankali Tila, Mathura, now in the Lucknow 
Museum. Mottled red sandstone, probably first century A. D. See pages 37, 70. 

72. Jaina dydgapata dedicated by the courtesan (ganikd) Lonasobhika at the “Nigathanam 
Arahatayatana”, or shrine of the Nirgrantha Saints; with Brahmi inscription not dated. 
The slab represents a stupa with high cylindrical drum, standing on a high basement 
and approached by steps leading under a torana to the circumambulation platform. On the 
side of the basement are represented two niches enclosing a male figure with a child, 
and a female. Leaning against the drum are Yaksis, like those of the Mathura railing 
pillars. Above, two nude flying figures (siddhas?) bearing an alms-bowl and a cloth, and 
worshipping, and two suparnaSy winged, and with bird feet, offering flowers and a garland ; 
dhamma-caka and lion pillars at the sides. From Mathura, now Q 2 in the Mathura Museum. 
Mottled red sandstone, 2' 4" by i' End of the first century B. C. See pages 37, 
44 note 2. 


232 



PLATE XX. 

73. Railing pillar, woman and child, another woman peering over a curtain behind; the 
child is reaching for the rattle which the woman holds. From Mathura, now J 16 in 
the Mathura Museum. Sandstone, 2' 2". First or second century A. D. or slightly 
earlier. See pages 64, 65. 

74. Pillar, in the round, consisting of the figure of a female figure, probably representing 
Abundance standing on lotus flowers springing from a globular jar; at the back, 
sprays of lotus rise to the full height of the pillar. From the Jamalpur mound, Mathura, 
now B 89 in the Lucknow Museum. Mottled red sandstone, 5'ioy2''x 10" x 10". First 
or early second century A. D. See pages 31 note 3, 64, 63, 150. 

75. Torana bracket, YaksI, Devata or Vrksaka beneath a tree, and supported by an elephant. 
The figure wears a dbotJ^ the usual metal girdle, and sash. Compare with the figure 
inscribed with the name Culakoka Devata at Bharhut, figure 39. From the Kahkali 
Tila, Mathura, now J 593 in the Lucknow Museum. Red sandstone, 4' 3^x8' 3"xio''. 
First or second century B. C. See page 64. 

76. Relief fragment. Above, male figures carrying a heavy ornamented roll, a motif of 
Gandharan origin ; below, two scenes, probably from a Jataka^ but not identified. From 
left to right, apparently a cobra, an bearded long-haired ascetic, a man with two baskets 
attached to a yoke, a fire altar, and a water-vessel {kamandalu\ then a domed round 
ascetic’s hut {panna-sdla) of post and thatch dividing the scenes, then a group of deer 
in a rocky landscape with two trees; then another hut, and the beginning of a third 
scene, with the same or another bearded man. Probably from the basement of a small 
stupa. Now I 4 in the Mathura Museum. Red sandstone, ii" by 3'. First or second 
century A. D. See page 62. 

PLATE XXI. 

77. Railing pillar representing a lay worshipper or donor, with lotus flowers in the raised 
right hand. Mottled red sandstone. From Mathura, now B 88 in the Lucknow Mu- 
seum. First or early second century A. D. See pages 57, 64, 

78. Railing pillar. Bodhisattva (Avalokite^vara) ; the right hand in abbaya mudra^ the left 
holding the amrta vase, the Dhyani Buddha Amitabha in the headdress, probably the 
earliest known example of this iconographic feature. From Mathura, now B 82 in the 
Lucknow Museum. Mottled red sandstone. First or early second century A. D. See 
pages 37, 63 and cf. fig. 87. 2' 6" x 10" x 10". 

79. Railing pillar. Bodhisattva (Maitreya?), with shaven head and wearing a necklace and 
dbott\ scalloped halo and umbrella; the right hand in abbaya mudra^ the left holding the 
amrta vase. From Mathura, now B 83 in the Lucknow Museum. Mottled red sandstone. 
First or early second century A. D. See pages 56, 63. 

80. Pillar. Bodhisattva (Maitreya?), wearing crown, jewels, scarf and dbotJy the right hand in 
abbaya mudra^ the left resting on the hip. Defaced Brahmi inscription. From Mathura, 
now in the Pennsylvania University Museum, Philadelphia. Mottled red sandstone. 
First or second century A. D. 

81. Fragment of a railing pillar, woman under asoka tree, a child at her breast, a rattle in 
her left hand. Mathura, now F 16 in the Mathura Museum. Mottled red sandstone, 
i' 

82. Back of a part of a multiple image of a Nagini or snake goddess, carved in low relief 
with an asoka tree in flower, with a squirrel on the stem. From Mathura, now F 2 in 
the Mathura Museum. Red sandstone, 2' 3". Second century A. D. (?) 


233 



PLATE XXII. 

83. Bodhisattva (so designated in the inscription), presumably Sakya Muni, the Buddha, in 
monastic robes; shaven head, the usnlsa apparently broken away, no urnd\ fragments 
show that the right hand was raised in abhaya mudra the left as usual clenched on the hip, 
supporting but not holding the robe; a sitting lion between the feet. The head is of the 
same type as the illustrated in figures 9, 8 6, 96, and many other Mathura sculptures, including 
railing pillars and Jinas. Dedicated by Friar Bala. Mathura manufacture, set up at Sarnath 
123 A. D., now B (a) i in the Sarnath Museum. Red sandstone, 8' i Seepages 56, 58. 

PLATE XXIII. 

84. Bodhisattva (so designated in the inscription) presumably Sakya Muni, the Buddha, 
with shaven head, spiral usnJsa^ scalloped halo. Bodhi tree, puspdni divyani raining flowers, 
seated on a lion throne; two attendants with cauns\ inscription in Brahmi characters 
not dated, but similar to that of figure 8 3 . The right hand in abhaya mudra^ the left on the 
knee, not clenched. From the Katra mound, Mathura, now A i in the Mathura Museum. 
Early second century A. D, Red sandstone, z' 3 See pages 46, 36, 57. 

85. Buddha or ^‘Bodhisattva” similar to figure 83, but less perfectly preserved. The attendant 
on the proper right holds a vajra and must represent Indra. The right hand in abhaya 
mudra, the left on the knee, clenched. From Mathura, now 23. 437 in the Museum of 
Fine Arts, Boston. Mottled red sandstone, 2' 4 Early second century A. D. See 
pages 50, 56, 57. 

86. The Jaina Tirthamkara Parsvanatha protected by the Naga Dharanendra. Type the 
same as that of figures 84, 83. From the Kankali Tila, Mathura, now J 39 in the Lucknow 
Museum. Mottled red sandstone, 3 ' 4" x i ' X 8' 3 Date first or early second century 
A. D. Seepages 37, 50, 57, 38. 

87. Bodhisattva or crowned Buddha, seated, the right hand in abhaya mudra, the left on the 
knee. One of two puspdni divyani preserved above, part of a group of standing figures 
in monastic robes on the proper right, each with right hand raised and some object 
held in the left. Relief, probably from the square basement of a stiipa. Evidently from 
Mathura, at present in the possession of Messrs Yamanaka, New York. Mottled red 
sandstone, height about i' 4". Early second century A- D. Cf. pages 30, 56 note 5, 
58 note 3, and fig. 78. 

PLATE XXIV. 

88. The Bimaran reliquary. Figure of Buddha on the left, two worshippers centre and right. 
Gold, set with gems. From Bimaran, Afghanistan, now in the British Museum. Early 
first century A. D.? See pages 30, 51. 

89. The Kaniska reliquary. Seated nimbate Buddha above with two worshippers; band 
of hamsas round the flange of the Hd; Erotes bearing a garland below, with a seated 
Buddha in the centre; incised inscription. Metal, 7%". From Kaniska’s relic tower 
at Sh^-ji-ki-Dheri, now in the Indian Museum, Calcutta. Second quarter of second century 
A. D. See pages 30, 32, 54. 

90. Standing Buddha, one of the best Gandharan examples. Plain nimbus with donor’s 
inscription in Kharosthi characters, not dated. Blue slate. Unknown source, now No. 255 
in the Lahore Museum. First century A. D.? See pages 50, 52, and Vogel, 3. 

PLATE XXV. 

91. Relief slab from the base of a stupa, with scenes from the Buddha’s life. Above, niche 
representing the section of a cai^a-hzW, with the Buddha preaching the first sermon 
represented in the pediment; below, various other scenes; at the base, left, the Gift 
of Bowls, and the Parinirvana. Blue slate, Gandhara, now in the Art Institute, Detroit. 
Late first century A. D. ? See page 30. 


234 



PLATE XXVI. 

92. DJpahkara Jdfaka, On the left a youth with a purse in his right, a water vessel in his left 
hand, purchasing lotus flowers from a girl, who has a jar under her left arm; in the 
centre the same youth prepared to cast the flowers at Dipahkara Buddha; right, the 
same youth prostrate offering his hair as a carpet for the Buddha’s feet; Dipahkara 
Buddha on the right. The use of continuous narration is unusual in Gandharan art. 
Gandhara, present situation unknown. Blue slate, i' 4". Gandhara, somewhat Indianised, 
second century A. D. See pages 50 ff., cf. fig. 49. 

93. Vessantara Jdfaka, the gift of the sacred elephant of Jettatura. The elephant with an 
attendant holding an ahkusa in his left hand and raising his right in a gesture of respect, 
is emerging from the city gate. The Bodhisattva, nimbate, with thick curly hair holds 
its trunk in his left hand (as in figure 47 from Bharhut); the right hand, which should 
hold the water vessel from which water is poured in ratification of gift, is missing, and 
only the foot of the Brahman recipient appears on the extreme left. On the right a 
Corinthian pilaster with a seated Buddha. From Gandhara, unknown site, now 25. 467 
in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. Blue slate, ii". Gandharan, Indianised, second 
century A. D. See pages 50, 51 note i, 149. Cf. fig. 49. 

PLATE XXVII. 

94 — 97 Four Buddha types. 

94. Head of Buddha, wavy flowing locks, usnlsa prominent, pure Hellenistic style. Source 
unknown, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. Blue slate, 9 First century A. D. 
Cf. fig. 49. See pages 50, 52, 60 

95. Head of Bodhisattva, apparently Avalokitesvara, with Dhyani Buddha in headdress. 
Source unknown, now in the Field Museum, Chicago, Blue slate. First century A. D. 
See pages 50, 63. 

96. Head of Buddha, type of Friar Bala’s Sarnath Boddhisattva (fig. 83). From Mathura, 
now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 17. 3120. Mottled red sandstone, ii". 
Early second century A. D. See pages 58 note 5, 60. 

97. Head of Buddha, the hair in curls. From Amaravati, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, 
Boston, no. 21. 1520. White marble, 8%^^- End of second or beginning of third cen- 
tury A. D. See page 71. 

PLATE XXVin. 

98 — loi Four Buddha types. 

98. Head of Buddha, the hair in curls. From Mathura, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, 
Boston, no. 21. 2230, Mottled red sandstone, 12%", Gupta, fifth century. See page 60, 

99. Head of Boddhisattva, with elaborate crown. From Mathura, now in the possession of 
Mr. C. T. Loo, New York. Mottled red sandstone. Gupta, fifth century. 

100. Head of Buddha, the hair in curls. From Romlok, Ta Keo, Funan (Southern Cambodia). 
‘Tndianesque” or “pre-Khmer”, sixth century A. D. See pages 153, 183. 

101. Head of Buddha, the hair in curls. From Borobodur, now in the Metropolitan Museum 
of Art, New York. Basalt, i' 4". See page 203. 

PLATE XXIX. 

102. Krsna Govardhanadhara. From Mathura, now D 47 in the Mathura Museum, Mottled 
red sandstone, i' 8 Late Kusana, third century A. D. See page 66. 

103. Surya, seated in a chariot drawn by four horses; indistinct objects held in the hands, 
perhaps a lotus and a sword. The deity is provided with small shoulder wings, and a large, 
semicircular halo, radiate at the edge. From the Saptasamudri well, Mathura, now D 46 in 
the Mathura Museum. Mottled red sandstone, 2' 9". About 100 A. D.? Seepages 12,67. 


235 



104. scenes from the life of Buddha, relief, probably from a stupa base. From left to 
right in the reproduction: i. Parinirvana, 2. First Sermon, 3. Descent from the Tusita 
Heavens, 4. Mara Dharsana, 5 . Nativity. In the lower rank, below no, 4, Mara shooting 
an arrow at the Bodhisattva, the latter with right hand in bbumispars'a mudra^ calling the 
Earth to witness, the earliest instance of this mudrd\ one of the daughters of Mara at 
the Bodhisattva’s side. In the lower right hand corner, the infant Bodhisattva standing 
between the two Naga kings Nanda and Upananda, issuing from masonry wells. From 
the Raj Ghat, Mathura, now H i in the Mathura Museum. Red sandstone, 2! 2". Second 
century A. D. See page 62, 

PLATE XXX. 

105. Plaque, representing a nude goddess, probably the Earth. From the Vedic burial mound 
at Lauriya-Nandangarh, seventh or eighth century B. C. Gold. See page 10. 

106. Punch-marked coin {purdna^ dharana, kdrsdpana) unknown source, now Asiatic Society, 
Bengal. Silver, 48 gr, 85". Symbols, humped bull, fishes, taurine, sun, &c. (Reverse 
blank.) Smith, 6, p. 136 and pi. XIX, 1 . See pages 43, 45. 

107. Punch-marked coin, unknown source, now Asiatic Society, Bengal. Silver, 51.3 gr,, 
i.i" by 0.7". Symbols: two solar, square tank with fishes, one-horned rhinoceros. One 
of the solar symbols like the sun on fig. 112, the other of the “Taxfia” type, with cres- 
cents and broad arrows alternating round a central ring. Smith, 6, p. 139, and pi, XIX, 5. 
See pages 43, 45. 

108. Punch-marked coin, unknown source, now Indian Museum, Calcutta. Silver, 52.3 gr., 
0.65" by 5". Symbols: three human figures (man and two women, mountain of five 
peaks with a peacock upon it, and square. (The reverse has a mountain only.) Smith, 
6, p. 138, and pi. XIX, 3. See pages 43, 45. 

109. Coin of Apoilodotos, ca. 156 — 140 B. C., now in the Museum of Fine Arts, 
Boston, no. 22. 56. Silver, 30.8 gr. Reverse, with humped bull, probably of Saiva 
significance, and Kharosthi legend. (The obverse has an elephant and Greek legend.) 
See page 45- 

no. Coin of Pavata (Parvata) of Kosam, second century B. C., now in the Indian Museum, 
Calcutta. Copper, die-struck on cast blank, 26.3 gr., .65" by .57". Obverse with caitya- 
vrksuy mountain of three peaks, and snake, and Brahmi legend Pavatasa, (Reverse has 
a humped bull.) Smith, 6, p. 155, and pi. XX, 4. See pages 44, 45. 

111. Anonymous coin, Kosam, second century B. C., now in the Indian Museum, Calcutta. 
Copper, 102.3 gr., i.oi". Obverse with caitya-vrksa^ mountain of six peaks, eight-rayed 
wheel, svastika, cross and balls (near to “Ujjain” symbols). (Reverse has a lanky humped 
buU.) Smith, 6, p. 155, and pi. XX, 5. See pages 44, 45. 

1 12. Coin of Avanti, probably Ujjain. Asiatic Society, Bengal. Copper, 128.2 gr., .72". 
Obverse, king standing, svastlka^ taurine, “Taxila”, solar symbol, as in fig. 107, sun on 
pillar. (Reverse has “Ujjain” symbol with inner circle and dot in each orb.) Smith, 6, 
p. 153, and pi. XX, 2. See pages 44, 45. 

1 13. Coin of Taxila, fourth or third century. B. C. 145 gr., .8". Indian Museum, Calcutta. 
Obverse with mountain of three peaks, surmounted by a crescent, pyramid of balls, 
svastikay and snake, aU in incuse. (Reverse is blank.) Smith, 6, p. 1 5 6, and pi. XX, 6. 
See pages 44, 45* 

1 14. Southern India, Pandyan coin, before 300 A. D. From Kantarodai, Ceylon, now in the 
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 21. 1000. Copper, 138.1 gr. Obverse, with elephant, 
two caitja-vrksaSy mountain of three arches, raised frame. (Reverse has indistinct symbol 
within similar raised lines.) See pages 44, 45. 


236 



II 5- Coin of Amoghabhuti, Kuninda, of Kangra, &c. second century B. C. Indian Museum, 
Calcutta. Silver, 33.8 gr., .67". Obverse, woman with a lotus in r. hand, stag with symbol 
between horns, railed umbrella catty a (not a stupa^ see page 45), and circle surrounded 
by dots; Brahmi legend. (Reverse with other symbols and Kharosthi legend.) Smith, 
6, p. 167 and pi. XX, ii. See pages 44, 45 note 2. 

1 16. Audumbara coin, Pathankot or Kangra, Early first century A. D. Copper, 27 gr., 
.65". Obverse with a railed (circular?) pavilion with four piUars and domed (thatched?) 
roof with projecting eaves; indistinct Brahmi letters. Smith, V. A., in J. A. S. B., LXVI, 
pt. I, 1897. See pages 45 note 2, 48. 

1 17. Audumbara coin, Pathankot or Kangra, Early first century A. D. Copper, 34 gr., .65". 
Obverse with a railed (circular?) pavilion with five piUars and domed (thatched?) roof 
with projecting caves, and small finial; three Brahmi letters. Smith, V. A., ibid. 
See pages 45 note 2, 48. 

Another building appears on a coin of Dhara Ghosa, Audumbara. Cunningham, 5, 
p. 68, and pL IV, 2, calls it ‘'a pointed-roofed temple of two or three storeys, with pil- 
lars“. Fine square coins from Kantarodai, Ceylon, probably early Pandyan (Korkai), 
bear very clear representations of railed circular pavilions with pillars and domed roof, 
closely resembling figs. 116, 117 (Pieris, p. 50 and pi. XIII, 7, 8, ii, 12). 

1 18. Ksatrapa coin, first century A. D.? Silver, 98.5 gr., .65". Obverse, woman or goddess, 
r. hand raised, 1. hand on hip, standing under a torana^ of which the base of the right 
hand post is railed. The figure is presumably the goddess of Abundance, Ardochso- 
Laksmi. (Obverse has horse and Brahmi legend.) Smith, ibid. 

1 19. Coin of Kadaphes (Kadapha, Kadphises I, ca. 40 — 78 A. D.). Copper or bronze, 24 gr., 
.62". Reverse with seated king or Buddha cross-legged, with broad shoulders, r. hand 
raised holding some object, 1. hand on hip, the elbow extended; triangle under elbow of 
r. arm. Smith, V. A., in J. A. S. B., LXVII, pt. i, 1898, coin no. VI. Another example 
of this rare and interesting type is reproduced by Whitehead, R. B., pi. XVII, no. 29. 
Another example is in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. See page 59. 

120. Coin of Huviska, ca. 160 A. D. Gold, no gr., .8". Bust of king, nimbate, with jewelled 
pointed crown. (Reverse has goddess, Ardochso-Laksml, enthroned, a form much more 
usual in the Gupta period.) Smith, V. A., in J. A. S. B., LXVI, pt. i, 1897, coin no. IV. 
See page 66. 

1 21. Coin or token from Ceylon, first or second century A. D. Now in the Museum of Fine 
Arts, Boston, no. 21. 1040. Lead-aUoy, 94. 3gr. Obverse with standing figure of Mayadevi- 
Laksmi, nude except for girdle, holding the stems of lotuses in each hand, each lotus 
flower, at the level of the head, supporting an elephant with inverted water-jar. (The 
reverse has an elevated railed svastikxi.) The composition occurs in the oldest Indian 
Buddhist sculptures, and on the coins of AgiHses. See Codrington, H. W. 

122. Coin of Kaniska, 120 — 160 A. D. In the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 22,57. 
Gold, 23 gr. Obverse, king standing nimbate, with pointed heknet and diadem, r. hand 
dropping grains on fire altar, 1. hand with trident, flame on shoulder; reverse, Siva 
standing before the bull Nandi, r. hand with pdsa^ left with trisuluy flaming nimbus, 
Greek legend Oesho. See pages 45, 66, 67. 

123. Coin of Kaniska, British Museum. Gold, 109.2 gr., .8". Obverse, king standing as before 
but with elephant goad in r. hand over fire altar, and Greek legend better preserved, 
Shaonano Kanerkd Koshano; reverse, Buddha standing facing, nimbate, r. hand raised, 
1 . hand holding robe (not a wallet, as Gardner says), Greek legend Boddo. Gardner, 
p. 130 and pi. XXVI, 8. See pages 59, 66, 67. 



J24- Coin of Kadphises II, 78 — 120 A. D. British Museum. Gold, 244.2 gr., .95". Obverse, 
king seated on throne, flames rising from shoulders, in r. hand a branch, footstool 
under feet, Greek inscription. (Reverse has two-armed Siva with bull, flames 
rising from head, Kharosthi inscription.) Gardner, p. 124 and pi. XXV, 6. See 
page 66. 

125. Coin of Kaniska. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 22. 58. Gold, 120 gr. Reverse, 
Siva standing, four-armed, 1. r. hand with inverted vase u. r, hand with drum (?), u. 1. 
hand with trisiila^ 1. 1. hand on hip, a goat prancing in r. field, Greek legend Oesho, 
(Obverse has king standing at altar.) See pages 45, 67. 

126. Coin of Vasudeva, ca. 185 — 220 A. D. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 25.469. 
Gold, .75". Reverse, Siva, standing, three-faced, four-armed, wearing dhoti yajno- 
pavJta, 1. r. hand in ahbaja hasta, u. r. hand with pdsay u. 1. hand with triJulay 1. 1, hand 
with kamandalu (water- vessel). (Obverse has king standing at altar.) See pages 45, 55, 
67, 100 note I, 

1 26 A, Coin of Huviska. British Museum. Gold, 31 gr., .5". Skanda, Mahasena, and Visakha 
in low domed pavilion with ornamented plinth. Gardner, p. 150 and pi. XXVIII, 24. 
See pages 45 note i, 48. 

127. Coin of Kaniska. British Museum. Gold, 27.7 gr., .5". Reverse, with goddess of 
abundance (Ardochso-Laksmi) with a cornucopiae; Greek legend Ardoebso. Obverse 
has king standing at altar as usual. Gardner, p. 130 and pi. XXVI, 6. 

The Prakrit form Ardochso has been interpreted (i) as Ardha-Ugra = half of Siva = Par- 
vati, and (2) as referring to the Persian Ashis, a goddess of fortune, daughter of Ahuro, 

128. Coin of Kaniska. Reverse, representing the Wind-god running. Greek legend Oado 
(Vado). British Museum. Copper, .6". Gardner, pL XXVII, 6. See page 67. 

129. Coin of Candragupta II, 380 — 415 A. D. From a plaster cast in the British Museum. 
Obverse, king slaying lion; reverse, goddess (Laksnu-Ambika) seated on lion, holding 
lotus. Lettering in Gupta characters. Allan, p. 40 and pi. VIII, 17. 

130. Coin of Samudragupta, 530 — 380 A. D. British Museum. Gold, 119.5 gr., .85". Obverse, 
king seated nimbate, playing a harp or lyre which rests on his knees. (Reverse has 
goddess seated.) AUan, p. 19 and pi. V, 3. 

13 1. Coin of Kumaragupta I, 415 — 455 A, D. In Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 21. 2587. 
Gold, 126.3 gr. Obverse, king riding a caparisoned horse. (Reverse has goddess, Laksmi, 
seated on a wicker stool, feeding a peacock.) 

132. Coin of Candragupta II. Lucknow Museum. Gold, 120.6 gr., .85". Obverse, king 
standing nimbate, r. hand drawing an arrow from the quiver at his feet, 1. hand holding 
bow, Garuda standard in 1. field. Reverse, goddess nimbate, seated on lotus, holding 
noose (paid) in r. hand, lotus in 1. hand. Allan, p. 26 and pi. VT, 10. 

133. Carnehan seal, king on wicker throne, from the Yatthala Dagaba, Ceylon. Now in the 
Manchester Museum. Wax impression, .78''. Second century B. C.? Parker, i, pp. 81 ff., 
and 2. See page 159. 

134. Soapstone disc from Sankisa, Maurya or older, 2" diameter. Decoration in three zones, 
the innermost with fan palms, taurines, nude goddess. Cunningham, 4, vol. XI, 
pi. IX, 3. See page 20. 

PLATE XXXI. 

135. Part of the facade of the caitjaAxadl at Kanheri, with figures of donors. Evidently based 
on the Karli model. Second century A. D. See page 69. 



PLATE XXXII. 

136. Casing slab from the Amaravati stupa^ now in the Madras Museum. Marble, 6'2"; late 
second century A. D. See page 70. 

This relief affords a good idea of what must have been the appearance of the 
Amaravati stupa at the height of its glory (nothing now remains in situ). The edges of 
the frame, r. and L, represent very elaborate stamhhas carrying dhamma-cakkas. The centre 
of the frieze above represents the Assault of Mara and the Temptation by the Daughters 
of Mara ; here the Buddha is visibly represented, but in the panels to r. and 1 . he is 
represented only by an empty throne. 

PLATE XXXm. 

137. Standing figure of Buddha of a very massive type, Amaravati, now in the Madras 
Museum. Marble. End of second or very early third century A, D. See pages 70, 71. 

138. Two standing Buddhas, Amaravati, now in the Madras Museum. Marble, 6' 4". End 
of second or very early third century A. D. Seepages 70, 71. 

139. Standing Buddha. Amaravati, now in the Madras Museum, End of second or very 
early third century A, D. Marble, 5 '5". See pages 70, 71. 

140. Stele representing Four Great Events of the Buddha’s life, from Amaravati, now in 
the Madras Museum, 4'. Marble. Late second century A. D. See page 70. 

Below, the Great Renunciation; second, the Great Enlightenment, represented by the 
Temptation by the Daughters of Mara; third, the First Sermon; fourth, theParinirwaM. 

141. Slab with a scene from the Buddha’s life, from Amaravati, now in the Madras Museum. 
Late second century A. D. Marble, ca. i'. See page 70. 

PLATE XXXIV. 

142. Slab of dydgapata type with a representation of a two-storeyed shrine, like the so- 
called punja-Idlas at Bharhut. Women with offerings within, a figure probably re- 
presenting the donor standing without. A wild date palm to left. From Jaggayyapeto, 
now in the Madras Museum. Marble. First or second century B. C. See page 38. 

143. Pilaster, with lotus capital and addorsed monsters, in Bharhut style, and figure or a Yaksi 
or river goddess standing on a makara. From Jaggayyapeta, now in the Madras Museum. 
Marble. First or second century B. C. See page 38. 

144. 145. Two sides of a votive column {cetija-khabba^ according to the inscription). The 
first showing a dhamma-cakka with an empty dsana in front of it, probably represent- 
ing the First Sermon; the second a domed shrine, containing a rehquary on an 
altar. The two other sides have representations respectively of a tree and dsana 
(Great Enlightenment), and of a stupa (Parinirvana). From this it would appear as 
though the Four Great Events were represented; but the reliquary is not a usual 
symbol of the Nativity. In fig. 145 it is clearly indicated that the dome, which tends to 
the globular form, is of corbelled construction. Fergusson, 2, vol. I, p. 31 2, has a good 
discussion of Indian domes, but overlooks this important example. As he points out, 
only the horizontal, corbelled construction permits the support of a heavy dome by 
pillars alone. 

Marble, 4' 3"; probably first or second century B. C.; the column is grouped by 
Burgess (7, p. 86 and PL XLV, i — 4) amongst the older sculptures from Amaravati. 
Now in the Madras Museum. See pages 38, 70. 

146. Lower part of a pillar, with representation of a Naga stupa^ with elaborate range of um- 
brellas. Marble, ca. 5'; now in the Madras Museum. Perhaps first century B. C. See 
pages 38, 70, 73 note 4, 76 note i, 122 and Burgess, 7, page 85 and PL XLIV, 2). 



PLATE XXXV. 

147. The Kapotesvara temple, Chezarla, Kistna District. Ca, fourth century A. D. Total 
height 23' 8", See page 77. 

148. The Lad Khan temple, Aihole, Bijapur District. Ca. 450 A. D. See pages 79, 178, 181. 
PLATE XXXVI. 

149. Caitya^ha^ (temple 18) at Sanci; the foundation Asokan, the stone pillars replacing earlier 
wooden structures about the seventh century. See page 94. 

150. The iron pillar at Delhi, originally set up about A. D. 415 by Kumaragupta I in honour 
of his father Candragupta II, probably at Mathura. A statue originally crowned the 
capital. Height 23' 8". 

1 5 1. Temple 17 at Sanci. Early fifth century. See page 78. 

PLATE XXXVII. 

152. The Durga temple, Aihole, Bijapur District. Sixth century. See page 78. 

153. The Hucchimalligudi temple, Aihole. Sixth century. See page 79. 

PLATE XXXVIIL 

154. Facade of the Cave XIX at Ajanta. Sixth century. See pages 60, 74, 76. 

PLATE XXXIX. 

155. Upper part of the fagade of the Visvakarma catty Elura. Ca. 600 A. D. See page 77. 

156. Pillars and architrave, verandah of vihara. Cave II at Ajanta, Ca. 600 — 650 A. D. See 
page 98. 

157. Capital of pillar, verandah of vihardy Cave XXIV at Ajanta. Ca. 600—650 A. D. See 
page 98. 

PLATE XL. 

158. Buddha, from the Jamalpur (jail) mound, Mathura, now A 5 in the Mathura Museum. 
Fifth century. Red sandstone, 7' 2", See pages 60, 74, 84. 

159. Buddha, said to have been found in Burma, but probably made in India, now in the 
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 21. 1504. Bronze, i' 8". See pages 60, 85, 171. 

PLATE XLI. 

160. Buddha, from Sultangahj, Bengal, now in the Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery. 
Early fifth century. Copper over earthy core, 7' 6". See pages 60, 74, 85. 

The figure is cast in two layers, the inner of which was moulded on an earthy, 
cinder-like core, composed of a mixture of sand, clay, charcoal, and rice husks. The 
segments of this inner layer were held together by much corroded iron bands, originally 
three quarters of an inch thick. The outer layer of copper seems to have been cast over 
the inner one, presumably by the cire perdue process ; it was made in several sections, one 
of which consisted of the face and connected parts down to the breast. The whole weighs 
nearly a ton. Cf. Smith, 2, p. 172 and references there quoted. 

PLATE XLII. 

1 61. Buddha, from Sarnath, now B(b) 181 in the Sarnath Museum. The position of the 
hands {dharma-cakra mudra) and the wheel on the pedestal indicate the preaching of the 
First Sermon; the five figures with shaven heads on the pedestal are probably the Five 
Companions who deserted the Bodhisattva at Gaya but afterwards became his first 
followers ; the woman and child probably represent donors. Fifth century. Chunar sand- 
stone, 5' 3". See pages 60, 74, 85. 


240 



PLATE XLIIL 

162. Buddha from Mahkuwar, Allahabad District, dated 44S/9 A. D. The only Gupta 
example of the old Kusana type with shaven head; the body is nude to the waist. 
The fingers are webbed, as in several other early Gupta examples. Sandstone. See 
pages 74> 85. 

163. Buddha from Fathpur, Kahgra District, now in the Lahore Museum. Sixth century 
inscription. Brass, the eyes and iirnd and some other details in silver, other details in 
copper, n.8". Cf. Vogel, 4. See pages 85, 142, 175. 

164. Litany of Avalokitesvara, and Buddhas, &c., in situ, Kanheri, Cave LXVI. The ‘Xitany” 
on the right, shows Avalokitesvara standing between two Taras, a monastic figure at 
his feet, with four panels on either side representing persons in distress praying for 
aid. It should be noticed that the roughness of the porous rock surface was originally 
covered with a fine plaster finish, and coloured. The type and various details suggest 
a comparison with Cambodian “pre-Khmer” work. See pages 60, 74, 85, 183. 

PLATE XLIV. 

165. Ceiling slab from the old temple known as Haccappya’s at Aihole (= A. S. I., A. R., 
1907 — 08, p. 203, fig. 6), representing Visnu seated upon Ananta Naga. The deity holds 
the discus and conch in the upper right and left hands. Sixth century. Stone. 

166. Detail of tor ana pillar representing Krsna Govardhanadhara ; Mt. Govardhana is shown 
with many peaks, amongst which are seen two cobras, a lion, and a horse-headed fairy; 
Krsna, gopas and gopis, and cattle below. Mandor, Jodhpur State. Sandstone. Fifth 
century. See pages 26 note 3, 86. 

167. Kdmdjana panel; Rama, Laksmana and Sita at the hermitage of Savari, from the Gupta 
temple at Deogarh. Sandstone, 2' 10”. Ca. 600 A. D. See pages 79, 86, 204 note 2. 

PLATE XLV. 

168. Standing figure of Brahma, found near Mirpur Khas, now in the Museum at Karachi. 
Bronze. Probably sixth century. See page 86. 

169. Architect’s plummet, with a Bacchanalian dancing scene on the neck. From the river 
Surma, East Bengal, now in the British Museum. Iron, coated with bronze, 6^4". Sixth 
century. See page 86. 

170. Narasimha, from Besnagar, now in the Gwaliar Museum. Sandstone. Sixth century. 
See page 86. 

1 71. Head of Lokesvara or Siva, from an attendant figure at the vase of an image of Trailo- 
kyavijaya, Sarnath, now in the Sarnath Museum. Sandstone. Sixth or seventh century. 
See pages 153, 183 note i. 

In a remarkable way this head anticipates the characteristic appearance of many 
Far Eastern, especially Japanese, works. 

PLATE XLVI. 

172. Nagaraja and Rani, in a rock-cut niche outside Cave XIX at Ajanta. Sixth century. 

173. Detail from a group representing a Gandharva and Apsaras, fromSondani, now in the 
Gwaliar Museum. Fifth or sixth century. See page 86. 

174. The Varaha Avatar of Visnu raising the Earth from the Waters at the commencement 
of a cycle of creation. At Udayagiri, Bhop^ State. Ca. 400 A. D. See pages 85, 100. 

175. Karttikeya, seated in his peacock vdhanam. Collection of the Bharata Kala Parisad, 
Benares. Seventh century. Sandstone. See page 86. 

PLATE XL VII. 

176. Nagini, Mamyar Ma^a, Rajagrha. Fifth century. Stucco. See pages 82, 86, 


16 


241 



177* River goddess, Ganga, standing on a makara. From Besnagar, now in the Museum of 
Fine Arts, Boston no. 26.26 Sandstone. Ca. 500 A. D, See page 86. 

This panel was originally the base of a door jamb. The type appears already at 
Bharhut (Cunningham, 2, pi. XXIII, 2) where the nymph is named in the inscription 
as Sudarsana Yaksi; the name of Ganga Devi seems to be of later usage. Cf. Vogel, 18. 

178. Nativity of Mahavira or of Krsna. From Pathari, now in the Gwaliar Museum. Sand- 
stone, about life size. Seventh century or later. See page 86. 

PLATE XLVIII. 

179. A prince and a princess walking, with attendants, and a love scene, not identified. 
Ajajnta, Cave XVII, over left side door and window. Ca. 500 A. D. See page 89. 

180. Gandharva and Apsarases, in clouds. Ajanta, Cave XVII, verandah wall, left of door. 
Ca. 500 A. D. See page 89. 

1 81. Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara. Ajanta, Cave I, back wall, left of antechamber. Ca. 600 
at 650 A. D. See pages 91 note i, 99. 

PLATE XLIX. 

182. Head of a beggar, detail from the Vessantara Jdtaka. Ajanta, Cave XVII, left side of hall, 
right corner. Ca. 500 A. D. See page 89. 

PLATE L. 

183. Wall painting. Bagh. Sixth century. See page 89. 

184. Apsaras and attendant. In the rock pocket at Sigiriya, Ceylon. Ca. 479 — 497 A. D. 
See page 165. 

185. Detail of ceiling painting. Ajanta, Cave I, Ca. 600 — 650 A. D, See page 99. 

PLATE LI. 

186. Laksmana temple, Sirpur. Brick. Seventh century or later. See page 93. 

PLATE LII. 

187. Malegitti or Suvati temple, Badami. The oldest structural shrine in Dravida style. 
Ca. 625 A. D. See page 95. 

188. Virupaksa temple, Pattakadal. Ca. 740 A. D. See page 93. 

PLATE LIII. 

189. Ctf/Zy^z-hall, Cave XXVI, Ajan^, interior, showing the stupdy roof and pillars dividing 
the nave from the side-aisle. Early seventh century. 

190. Verandah of the Rame§vara cave, Elura. Seventh century. See pages 86, 97, 98. 

PLATE LIV. 

1 91. The old temple at Gop, Kathiawad. Sixth or seventh century. See page 82. 

192. The Kailasa, Elura. The tower of the main shrine is at the far end. In the middle, on 
the left, one of the two dhvaja-stamhhas^ the other in the corresponding position on the 
right. The roof of the porch in which is preserved the ceiling painting of fig. 1 96 appears 
immediately to the right of the capital of the first dhvaja-stambha. Eight century. See 
page 99. 

PLATE LV. 

193. Upper part of the Mt. Kailasa relief, Kailasa, Elura. Parvati turning to Siva, who presses 
down the mountain with his foot. Eighth century. See pages 100, 166, 193. 

194. Mahesvara-murti at Elephanta. Eighth century. See pages 96, 100. 

PLATE LVI. 

195. Mahesvara-murti, Elephanta, detail of the proper left face. Eighth century. See page 100. 



PLATE LVII. 

196. Detail of ceiling painting, porch in the upper storey, Kailasa, Elura, representing Laksmi 
riding on a Garuda. Eighth century. See pages 100, 121. 

PLATE LVIII. 

197. The Kailasanatha temple, Kahcipuram: outer fa9ade of the peristyle, entrance gopuram 
(centre) and vimdna (right). See pages 102, 104. 

198. Plain double-roofed shrine, the fundamental unit of Dravida architecture, corresponding 
to the Bharhut Sudhamma Deva-Sabha (fig. 43) but square, and with small caitya-vj\x\Ao^ 
{kudu) ornaments on the cornice and dome. Bhagiratha is represented as worshipping 
Siva, seen in relief in the open door of the shrine. Part of the Gahgavatarana, Mamalla- 
puram. Early seventh century. See pages 105, 104. 

199. Pillars at the Agastyesvara temple at Melapaluvur. Trichinopoly District. Seventh or early 
eighth century. See page 102. 

PLATE LIX. 

200. The “Draupadi Ratha”, Mamallapuram. This is a shrine of Durga, but with the attri- 
butes of Laksmi. The curved four-angled roof does not differ fundamentally from that 
of other four-, six-, or eight-angled domes, but being single and almost without dec- 
oration more clearly reveals its bent bamboo origins. Height about 18'. First half of 
seventh century. See page 104. 

201. The '‘Shore” temple, Mamallapuram. Ca. 700 — 720. See page 105. 

202. The Gane^a Ratha, Mamallapuram. First half of seventh century. See page 102. 

203. West view of central shrine, Panamalai. Ca. 700—720 A. D. See pages 105, 182. 
PLATE LX. 

204. Effigies of Mahendravarman and his two queens, in the Adi-Varaha cave, Mamalla- 
puram. First half of seventh century. See pages 103, 104, 

205. Gaja-Laksmi, in the Adi-Varaha cave, Mtoiallapuram. First half of seventh century. 
See page 103. 

206, Z07. Details from the Gahgavatarana, Mamallapuram. Pallava, early seventh 
century. See page 103. 

206. Bhagiratha at the shrine of $iva (see fig. 198). 

207. Nagas and Naginis; cat and mice. 

PLATE LXI. 

208. Durga-Mahisamardini, relief in the Yamapuri or Mahisa-mandapam at Mamallapuram. 
First half of seventh century. See page 103. 

209. Visnu-Anantasayin, relief in the Yamapuri or Mahisa-mandapam at Mamallapuram. 
First half of seventh century. See page 103. 

PLATE LXII. 

210. The great temple at Bodhgaya, commonly called Mahabodhi, as now restored. A temple 
of this type existed in the time of Hsiian Tsang, and probably already in the Kusana 
period. See pages 81, 170. Cf. figs. 62, 69, 309. 

PLATE LXIII. 

21 1. Hoysalesvara temple, Halebid. Left unfinished in 1311 A. D. See page 118. 

212. The Teli-ka-Mandir, Gwaliar Fort. The uppermost storey is a simplified restoration; 
the roof was probably like that of the Vaital Deul at Puri. Eleventh century. See page 1 09. 

213. Brick temple of Siddhesvara, Bahkura (Bahulara), Bengal. See page 108. 

PLATE LXIV. 

214. Kandarya Mahadeva temple, Khajuraho, Bundelkhand. Total height 1 16 feet. Between 
930 and 1050 A. D. See page 109. 


l6* 


245 



PLATE LXV. 

215. Lingaraja temple, Bhuvanesvara, Orissa. Ca. 1000 A. D. See page 115. 

PLATE LXVI. 

216. Parasuramesvara temple, Bhuvanesvara, Orissa. Ca. 750 A. D. See pages 79, 115. 

217. Mandapam (“Jagamohan”) of the Sun temple (Surya Deul) at Konaraka. Thirteenth cen- 
tury. See page 116. 

PLATE LXVII. 

218. Vaital Deul, Bhuvanesvara, Durga-Mahisamardini and other sculptures. Ca, 1000 A. D. 
See page 116. 

219. Muktesvara temple, Bhuvanesvara, detail from the base of the sikbara^ a Naginl. 
Ca. 950 A. D. See page 116. 

220. Surya Deul, Konaraka, detail from a spoke of one of the decorated wheels of the basement 
of the temple; representing a horseman slaying a panther. Thirteenth century. See page 1 16, 

PLATE LXVIII. 

221. Ceiling of Tejahpala’s temple, Dilwara, Mt. Abu. 1232 A. D. Marble. See page 112. 
PLATE LXIX. 

222. Visnu, from Sultanpur, now in the Lucknow Museum. Buff sandstone, 3' 5". Tenth or 
eleventh century. See page no. 

223. Padmapani (Avalokitesvara). From Mahoba, now in the Lucknow Museum. Buff sand- 
stone, 2' 2". Eleventh or twelfth century. See page no. 

224. Visnu, from the Dekkhan or Maisur, now in the Pennsylvania University Museum, 
Philadelphia. Polished granulite, 6'. Ninth or tenth century. See page 118. 

225. Brahma, from Kuruvatti in the Bellary District, Madras, now in the Pennsylvania Uni- 
versity Museum, Philadelphia. The fourth face, at the back, is bearded. Stone, 5 ' 5 
Probably eleventh century. See pages 118, 120. 

Inscription recording the maker’s name, Cavundoja of the Trailokya-mallesvara 
temple (the present MalUkarjuna) at Kuruvatti. See Rupam, no. 18, p. 66. 

PLATE LXX. 

226. Stone sculpture, worshipped as Rukmim, at Nokhas, Etah District. Sandstone, 5' 4%". 
Probably tenth century. 

PLATE LXXI. 

227. Surya, from Chapra, Rajshahi District, now F (a) i in the Rajshahi Museum. Black 
slate, Pala school of Bengal-Bihar-Orissa, eleventh century. See page 114. 

228. The Eight Great Events of the Buddha’s life, the main figure representing the Bodhi- 
sattva seated under the Bodhi tree, with right hand in bhumi-sparsa mudra ‘‘calling the 
earth to witness” on the occasion of Mara’s challenge, previous to the Great Enlighten- 
ment. As a Bodhisattva, Gautama is represented with crown and jewels, though 
otherwise in the monastic robes of a Buddha. From Bengal or Bihar, now in the Museum 
of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 21. 1835. Black slate, 17%”. Pala school of Bengal-Bihar- 
Orissa, eleventh century. See page 114. See Coomaraswamy 9(2), p. 75. 

229. Arapacana Manjusrl, from Bengal or Bihar, now in the collection of Mrs. Burnet (Miss Cora 
Timken), New York, and exhibited at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York. Black 
slate, 3' 9%". Pala school of Bengal-Bihar-Orissa, tenth or eleventh century. Seepage 114. 

230. Uma-Mahesvara group, from Bengal or Bihar, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 
no. 21. 1651. Copper, 6 14^'. Pala school of Bengal-Bihar-Orissa, eleventh or twelfth 
century. See page 114. 


244 



PLATE LXXII. 


231. Visnu (Trivikrama), from Sagardighi, Murshidabad District, now ^ — in the collec- 

tion of the Bahgiya Sahitya Parisad, Calcutta. Brass, z 1 Pala school of Bengal- 
Bihar-Orissa, eleventh or twelfth century. See page 114. 

For this and two other figures in the same style see Ganguly, M., 2, pp. 137 — 141, 
where detailed iconographic descriptions are given. For other figures in similar style 
see Spooner, 6, and Coomaraswamy 9(2), pp. 67, 78 (21. 1652 and 1653). 

232. Bodhisattva, now in the Sri Partap Singh Museum, Srinagar, Kasmir. Pala school of 
Bihar (NUanda?), ninth or tenth century. See pages 113, 142. 

253. Buddha, seated under the Bodhi tree on the occasion of the Great Enlightenment, the 
right hand in hhumi'Sparsa mudra^ “Calling the Earth to witness”. With inscription. 
From Nalanda, in the Museum at Naianda. Bronze or copper, 9". See pages 114, 142. 

234. The Tirthamkara Parsvanatha, a Jaina image from Kannada, now in the possession of 
Mr. K. Kay. With inscription in Kanarese chacters of the tenth or eleventh century 
naming the donor, “The illustrious Maldayya of Prthvi-GoUarijas, follower of Gunasena, 
pupil of Mailisena Bhattara of the Mata . . . gana”. Copper, 13 See page 119. 

PLATE LXXIII. 

235. Raj raj es vara, Tanjore, central vimdna and mukha-mandapam from the east. Ca. 1000 A. D. 
See page 122. 

236. A gopuram of the great temple of Sundaresvara and Minaksi at Madura. Masonry below, 
brick and stucco above. Seventeenth century. See page 124. 

237. The great temple at Tiruvanntoalai. All of the conspicuous tall structures are gopuras\ 
the principal shrines are small vimdnas scarcely distinguishable in the centre of the right 
hand part of the enclosure. The gopuras are of the Cola and later periods. See page 122. 

PLATE LXXIV. 

238. Detail of the Subrahraaniya temple, Tanjore. Eighteenth century. See page 124. 

239. Part of a mandapam at Auvadaiyar Kovil, Observe the elaborated corner of the roll 
i cornice, and imitation of wooden forms beneath it, also the columnettes of the corner 

pillar. Typical Vijayanagar style, fourteenth century. See pages 123, 124. 

240. Monolithic pillars of the mandapam at Srirahgam, Trichinopoly, with horsemen spearing 
leopards, &c. Seventeenth century. See page 124. 

241. A sthapati^ in charge of the erection of a temple at Auvadaiyar Kovil, 1907 A. D., with 
the elevation of a pillar and superstructure drawn on a wall according to sdstraic rules. 
See page 124. 

PLATE LXXV. 

242. Nataraja, from Southern India, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 21. 1829. 
The deity is three-eyed and four-armed, the 1 . r. hand in abbaja mudrd^ the u. r. hand 
holding the drum {damaru)^ the u. 1. hand holding a flame, the 1. 1. hand and arm in 
the danda or gaja hasta position. In his spreading locks can be seen the figures of Ganga 
and the digit of the moon. He dances on a prostrate dwarf, a survival of the old Yaksa 
vdbanam^ here representing Mala, “ignorance” or illusion. The encircling fiery halo 
(piruvdsi) is lacking. Copper, 2' 5^3^ • Seventeenth century. See page 126. 

PLATE LXXVI. 

243 . Sundara-murti Svami, ^ aiva boy-saint. From Polonnaruva, now in the Colombo Museum. 
Copper, i' z^/^\ Twelfth or thirteenth century. See pages 126, 167. 


245 



244* E)evi (Uma, Parvati, Sivakami), seated at ease, the r. hand in kataka hasta as if holding 
a flower. From Southern India, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 21. 1827. 
Copper, i' 4^/3" . Fourteenth century? See page 126. 

245 . Figures of Krsna Deva Raya of Vijayanagar, and his two queens, in the Srinivasa-Perumal 
temple at Tirumala, Tirupati. Copper. Eearly sixteenth century. See pages 123, 126. 

246. Visnu, from Southern India, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 21. 1835. 
Brass, i' i". Fourteenth century? See page 126. 

247. River “goddess or Vrksaka (the two motifs are combined, the tree proceeding from 
the mouth of the makara vdhanam^ and being prolonged into a decorative scroU). 
Door jamb, north gopuram^ Ramasvami temple, Tadpatri, Anantaput District. See 
page 124. 

248. Siva, Gajasathhara-murti, part of a monolithic pillar in the Siva temple at Perur, Coim- 
batore District. The deity is eight-armed and stands in a dance pose on the head of 
the elephant of which the skin forms the oval frame within which the figure is enclosed. 
Seventeenth century. See page 126. 

PLATE LXXVII. 

249. Horizontal makara toranay a gateway lintel, Bijapur. Ca. iioo. 

250. City wall and gateway, Dabhoi, Gujarat. Ca. iioo. See page 113. 

251. Jaina kJrttistambha at Chitor (Citaurgarh), Mewar. 1440 — 1448 A. D. See page iii. 

PLATE LXXVIII. 

252. Gwaliar fort and palace; palace of Man Singh, ca. 1500 and Hath! Pol on the left. 
See page 121. 

253. Palace and garden at Dig, Rajputana. Built by Suraj Mai, second quarter of the 
eighteenth century. See page 121. 

PLATE LXXIX. 

254. The old palace at Datia, Bundelkhand. Built by Bir Singh Dev of Orcha, early seventeenth 
century. The building is over a hundred yards square. See page 121. 

PLATE LXXX. 

255. a and b. Two leaves of a GujarM Jaina manuscript of the Kalpa Sutra. Above, left, 
the Rani Trisala (afterwards mother of Mahavira) reclining behind the pardah (hence 
the separation of the two parts of the composition) listening to, right, the Interpretation 
of Dreams, with Raja Siddhartha enthroned and a Brahman consulting a book; above, 
left, text in Jaina Nagari characters, and right, the Diksa of Mahavira, with Indra in 
attendance, in landscape. Indicatory marginal sketches in margins. Now in the Museum 
of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 17. 2276. Paper, size of leaves ii'' by 3 Fifteenth century. 
See page 119, and Coomaraswamy, 9 (4). 

256. Detail of a Digambara Jaina ceiling painting, Jaina temple, Kancipuram. With text in 
Grantha characters. Apparently scenes from the life of a Tirthariikara. Perhaps eighteenth 
century. See page 119 note i. 

PLATE LXXXI. 

257. Two pictures from Mr. N C. Mehta’s GujarM manuscript of the Vasanta Vilas a. 
Manuscript in scroll form on cotton. Width of manuscript 7 Dated equivalent to 
1451 A. D. See page 120; also Mehta, I, and Gangoly in O. Z., N. F., II, 1925. 


246 



PLATE LXXXIL 

258. Kfsna expecting Radha, southern Rajput or GujarM painting, with Gujarati text; 
^‘One of her companions is leading Radha forward, the slender Radha, branch of love, 
and many of her friends are with her, creeper and vine side by side; before them is 
a garden full of trees, and there is Krsna, expectant of her coming”. Features unusual 
or unknown in Rajput painting and of Gujarati character are the representation of the 
eye in profile as if seen from the front, and the representation of bees, here of 
special significance both as designating Radha’s lotus-face, and suggesting her glances 
making a “bee-line” for Krsna, as in Karpura-manjarJy II, 6. Now in the Museum of 
Fine Arts, Boston, no. 25.426. Paper, 7” by 9^". Sixteenth century. See page 129, 
and colour reproduction, Coomaraswamy 9 (5). 

PLATE LXXXIIL 

259. Sadh-malara Ragini, superscribed $rt Rd^a ^jogj with a vJnd seated on the roof of a 
house, feeding a peacock; clouds, rain, and lightning. Belongs to Ragmala series 2; 
reverse with a doba. Now in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York. Paper, 5 

by Late sixteenth century, or ca. 1600; pure Rajput (Rajasthani) style. Seepage 129. 

PLATE LXXXIV. 

260. Lalita Ragim, detail enlarged, a woman sleeping on a bed in a room. Costume: skirt, 
colt^ and sdri^ jewellery and large pompoms. From the same Ragmala series as fig. 258 
and by the same hand. Now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 17. 2384. Paper, 

Ly 3 Late sixteenth century, or ca. 1600; pure Rajput (Rajasthani) style. 
See page 129. 

PLATE LXXXV. 

261. Madhu-madhavi Ragini, with superscribed Hindi verses alluding to the storm clouds 
and the “sweet, sweet rumbling of thunder”, and their effect on the peacocks and on 
the lady’s heart and desires. Now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 15, 53. Paper, 
7” by 9yg”. Early seventeenth century. See page 129, and Coomaraswamy, 9 (5) and 10 
(coloured reproduction), 

PLATE LXXXVI. 

262. Wall painting, Udaipur, Mewar. Rajput, Rajasthani, late nineteenth century. See p.129. 

263. Pig-sticking. Rajput, RajasthM, from Jaipur. Collection of the author. Paper, 6" by 8”. 
Modern, about 1900. See page 129. 

264. Portrait of Maharaja Abhai Singh of Jodhpur, r. 1781 — 1806, enlarged detail. Now in 
the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. No. 25, 427. Paper, 1%" by 1%"* Late eighteenth 
century. See page 130. 

265. Head of Krsna, coloured cartoon for a Rds iJid composition. The complete work in 
the Maharaja’s Library, Jaipur; the cartoon now in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, 
New York. Paper, 18" by 26”. See page 129, and Coomaraswamy, 8, pi. IX (coloured 
reproduction). 

PLATE LXXXVII. 

266. Scene from the Rdmdyana^ Siege of Lanka; Rama, Laksmana, and Vibhisana seated with 
Hanuman and Jambavan surrounded by the army of monkeys and bears, two Raksasa 
spies being brought in. Now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 17. 2745. Rajput, 
Pahari, Jammu. Paper, 23%” by 33”. First half of nineteenth century. See page 130. 

267. Krsna welcoming Sudama. Rajput, Pahari, Jammu. Collection of the author. Paper, 
6%” by II First quarter of the seventeenth century. See page 130. 


247 



Plate LXXXVIIL 

268. Kdliya Damana^ Krsna overcoming Kaliya; Nanda, Yasoda, gopas and gopts on land, 
Krsna, Kaliya and Kaliya’s wives in the whirlpool. Rajput, Pahari, Kahgra or GarhwaL 
Collection of the author. Paper, 10" by 7' \ Late eighteenth century. See page 151, and 
Coomaraswamy, 8, pi. LIII (coloured reproduction). 

269. Gita Govinda, The scene is laid amongst low hills in the Vrndavana the Jamuna flowing 
in the foreground. On the left is Krsna dallying with a bevy of gopts\ on the right, 
Radha,with the messenger {dutika) addressing her, and pointing to Krsna. Rajput, Pahari, 
Kahgra. In the collection of the author. Paper, 1434'' by 10 14". Middle or early eigh- 
teenth century. See page 13 1. 

PLATE LXXXIX. 

270. “Cowdust” {Godhult)\ Krsna returning with the herds to Gokula at sundown, accom- 
panied by other gopas ^ and by gopts returning from Jamuna Ghat ; other gopls looking 
down from balcony windows {jharokha). Nanda seated with friends in a harddari above. 
Now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 22. 683. Rajput, Pahari, Kahgra. Paper, 
8^4" by io%". Late eighteenth century. See page 131, and Coomaraswamy, 8, pi. LI 
(colour reproduction). 

PLATE XC. 

271. Rds UId, enlarged detail, representing a chorus of gopts. Now in the Museum of Fine 
Arts, Boston, no. 17. 2618. Rajput, Pahari, Kahgra. Paper, 3 Vi" by 4". Late eighteenth 
century. See pages 15 1, 132. 

PLATE XCI. 

272. Visnu, from Ka^mir, probably Avantipur. Now in the Pennsylvania University Museum, 
Philadelphia. Greenish slate, height 8 Ninth century. See page 143, and Coomara- 
swamy in Museum Journal, Philadelphia, March, 1926. 

275. Mask of the goddess or queen Mujunidevi of a Raja Hemaprakasa with inscription 
in old Nagari and Sarada characters. From a temple treasury Nirmand, Kulu. Gilt brass. 
Ninth or tenth century. See Shuttleworth; Vogel 19; and page 108. 

274. Hindu temple at Malot, Pahjab, showing trefoil arches and elaborate pediments. The 
small structure on the top is modern. Eighth century. See pages 74, 108, 143. 

275. Meruvardhanasvamin temple at Pandrenth^, Ka^mir. Limestone. Built by the minister 
of king Partha (906 — 921). The Ka^miri style is here typically illustrated. See page 143. 

PLATE XCII. 

276 — 278. Copper images from Nepal: see page 145. 

276. Avalokitelvara (Padmapam). Now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 17. 2315. 
Copper, gilt and jewelled, 12%". Ninth century. 

277. Visnu: 1 . r. h. with fruit, u. 1 . h. with gaddy 1 . 1 . h. with Sankha, Now in the Museum 
of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 17. 2319. Copper, gilt and jewelled, 8%". Ninth or tenth 
century. Cf. B. fi. F. E. O., 1922, pi. XXV. 

278. Buddha, seated, the hands in dharma-cakra mudrd. Now in the Museum of Fine Arts, 
Boston, no. 17. 2317. Copper, gilt, 3 %"• 

PLATE XCni. 

279. Painted cover of a Nepalese manuscript, detail showing two episodes of the Vessan- 
tar a Jdtakay vi2. the Gift of the White Elephant, and Madri Devi with the two children 
in the carriage. In the collection of Professor Abanindronath Tagore, Calcutta. 
Wood, with tempera painting, length about 5 Twelfth or thirteenth century. See 
pages 146, 149, and cf. Vessanfara Jdtaka illustrations from Bharhut (fig. 47), Gandhara 
(fig. 93), Amaravati, Miran (fig. 284), Ceylon (Coomaraswamy, i, pi. I). 


248 



280. Green Tara, enlarged from a Nepalese manuscript of the As tasdhasrikd Prajndpdramitd, 
Now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 20. 589. 1136 A. D. Palm leaf, width 
shown 2%". See pages 146, 172 and M. F. A. Bull, no. 114. 

281. Painted cover of the manuscript of fig. 280, detail enlarged, showing the Bodhisattva 

Manjusri, riding on a horned lion {sdrduld), with attendants. Wood, with tempera paint- 
ing, area shown 2 by 2 1 1 36 A. D. See pages 146, 172, and M. F, A. Bull, no. 1 14. 

282. Painted cover of a Bengali manuscript, representing Krsna with the flute, under a 
kadamba tree, with gopJs, and wild deer attracted by the sound. Wood, with tempera 
painting. About 12" by 5 Eighteenth century. 

PLATE XCIV. 

283 — 285. Khotan paintings of Indian character: 

283. Water-nymph. Fresco at Dandan Uiliq. Before the eighth century. Stein, 4, pi, ii. 
See pages 65, 150. 

284. Vessantara Jdtaka, gift of the White Elephant. Fresco at Miran. About the fourth century. 
Stein, 7, fig. 137. See pages 55, 149; cf. figs. 47, 93, 279. 

285. Mahesa or Sadasiva, here perhaps Lokesvara. Panel from Dandan Uiliq, now in the 
British Museum. Wood, with tempera painting. Stein, 4, pi. LX. See pages 
100 note I, 149. 

PLATE XCV. 

286. Stele with two elaborated forms of the punna-ghata or “full- vessel” motif, and a Naga 
and Nagini. Abhayagiriya Dagaba, so-called, Anuradhapura, Ceylon. Dolomite. 
Ca. 500 A. D. See page 162. 

287. Sat Mahal Pasada. Polonnaruva, Ceylon. Brick. Twelfth century. See page 165. 

288. “Moonstone”, Irihanda-gala (doorstep of a temple or monastery). Lotus centre, floral 
borders alternating with hamsa and elephant, horse, Hon and bull bands. Anuradhapura, 
Ceylon. GranuHte. Fifth century A. D. (?) 

PLATE XCVI. 

289. Head of a Bodhisattva. From Anuradhapura, now in the Colombo Museum. Dolomite. 
Ca. 200 — 300 A. D. See page 161. 

290. Head of a Bodhisattva, perhaps Avalokitesvara. Dagaba in the headdress. From Anura- 
dhapura, now in the Colombo Museum. Dolomite. Ca. 200 — 300 A. D. See page 16 1. 

291. Detail of fresco, figures of deities. Northern temple (“Demala Maha Seya”), Polonna- 
ruva. Twelfth century. See pages 161, 164, 177. 

292. Model ddgabuy showing the basement, protected by guardian elephants, and ddgaba 
proper, consisting of “three-tier ornaments” or “bracelets” {tun-mdl pesdwa or pesd- 
walallu\ dome {geba = garbba^ “womb”), square enclosure {hatares kotuwd) and paviHon 
of the deities [devatd kotuma = harmikd\ spire (koto) consisting of a soHd condensed 
range of umbrellas {sat — chair d) and finial {kota kerelld). The form is that known as 
Bubbulu (bubble), most usual in Ceylon. On the platform of the RuanweH Dagaba, 
Anuradhapura, Ceylon. Dolomite. Second century B. C. (?). See pages 12 note 3, 
30, and Parker, 2, pp. 336ff. 

This is perhaps the actual “Httle sildthupakd^ built by Lanjatissa, 59 — 50 B. C. 
{Mahdvamsa, XXXIII, 24). 

PLATE XCVn. 

293. Standing figure of Buddha, on the RuanweH Dagaba platform (taken before 1906). 
Dolomite, over life si2e. About 200 A. D. (?). See page 161. 

294. Statue of King Duttha-Gamani, or a Bodhisattva, on the RuanweH platform (taken 
before 1906). Dolomite, over life size. Ca. 200 A. D. (?). See page 161. 



PLATE XCVIII. 

295. Buddha seated in jbdna^ the hands in dhydna mudrd, Anuradhapura, Ceylon. Dolomite, 
over life size. Fourth century A. D. (?). See page 161. 

PLATE XCIX. 

296. Buddha seated, teaching, r. hand in vydkhydna mudra^ left holding robe. Bronze, height 
3' 7". From Badulla, now in the Colombo Museum, no. 13. 118. 289. Fifth or sixth 
century A. D. See page 166. 

297. Avalokitesvara, seated, teaching, the right hand in vydkhydna mudrd, Dhyani Buddha 
Amitabha in the headdress. Bronze, height 3 Eighth century. See page 166, 
and Coomaraswamy, 6 and 9 (4). 

298. Jambhala (Kubera), seated, r. hand with a citron {jambhara)y 1 . hand holding a mongoose 

{nakuld) vomiting coins which fall into a pot; under the r. foot an overturned pot with 
more coins. Bronze, height Eighth century. See page 166, and Coomaraswamy, 

6 and 9 (4). 

299. Vajrapani, r. hand holding a vajra^ L hand on thigh, elbow extended as in the early 

Kusana images. Copper, height See page i66, and Coomaraswamy, 6 and 9 (4). 

PLATE C. 

300. Pattini Devi, or perhaps a Tara. Eastern Ceylon. Copper gilt, height 4' 9 Tenth 
century (?). See page 167, and Coomaraswamy, 6. 

301. Parakrama B^u I, or a sage, reading. Polonnaruva, Ceylon. Rock-cut in sitUy ii' 6". 
Not later than the twelfth century. See page 164, and A. S. C., A. R., 1906, p, ii 
(suggests it may be Kapila). 

PLATE Cl. 

302. Northern temple (‘'Demala Maha Seya”), Polonnaruva, Ceylon; north outer wall with 
architectural facade and figures in niches. Brick, with stucco. Twelfth century. See 
pages 164, 196. 

303. Thuparama Vihara, Polonnaruva, Ceylon. Brick, with stucco, partially restored. 
Twelfth century. See page 164 note 2. 

304. Wata-da-ge, Polonnaruva, Ceylon, Stone and brick. Twelfth century. See page 165. 
PLATE CII. 

305. Nat Hlaung Gyaung, Pagan, Burma. Brick. 931 A. D. See page 170. 

306. Ngakye Nadaun, Pagan, Burma. Brick, with green glazed tiles. Tenth century. See 
page 170. 

307. Thatbinnyu, Pagan, Burma. Brick. Twelfth century. See page 169. 

308. Bidagat Talk (library). Pagan, Burma. Brick. Eleventh century. See page 170. 

309. Mahabodhi, Pagan, Burma. Brick. 1215 A. D. See page 170. 

510. Shwe Dagon, Rangoon, Burma. Nineteenth century in present form. See page 171. 
PLATE cm. 

3 1 1 . Padmapani. Fresco in the Nanda Mannya, Minnanthu, near Pagan, Burma. Thirteenth 
century. See page 172. 

312. Devata. Fresco in the Paya Thonzu, east shrine, near Pagan, Burma. Twelfth or thirteenth 
century. See page 172. 

313. Mingalazedi, Pagan, Burma. 1274 A. D. See pages 170, 172. 

PLATE CIV. 

314. Brahma, relief, Nanpaya, Pagan, Burma. Stone. Eleventh century. See page 171. 

315. Buddha, in the Museum at Pagan. Bronze. Twelfth century. 


230 



3 1 6. Siddhartha in his five storeyed palace, before the Great Renunciation, in the Ananda 
pagoda. Pagan, Burma. Stone. End of eleventh century. See pages 170, 171. 

317. Buddha, in the Ananda temple. Pagan, Burma. Stone. End of eleventh century. See 
pages 170, 171. 

PLATE CV. 

318. Dhamma-cakka, from Prapathom, Siam. Stone. Fifth or sixth century. Seepages 175, 176 
note I. 

319. Bodhisattva, from Prapathom, Siam, now in the Samson Collection, Hamburg. Stone. 
Seventh or eighth century (?). See page 176 note i, and Salmony, p. 9. 

3Z0. Devadhamma Jdtaka, Wat Si Jum, Sukhodaya, Siam. Engraving on stone. Ca. 1361 A. D. 
See page 177 and Fournereau, 2. 

321. Head of Buddha, from Lopburi, Siam, now in the Samson Collection, Hamburg. Bronze, 

End of the twelfth century. See page 177; and Salmony, p. 22. 

PLATE CVI. 

322. Head of Buddha, from Siam, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 25. 495. 
Stone, lacquered and gilt, i' 1 Eleventh century. See page 177. 

PLATE evil. 

323. Temple at Lopburi, Siam. Stone. Eleventh or twelfth century. A. D, See page 177. 
PLATE CVIII. 

324. Sandstone cella of slab construction, Prei Kuk, Kompoh Thom, Cambodia. Indianesque 
or pre-Khmer, seventh century. See page 182, and Grosiier, 6, 7. 

325. Fa9ade of brick temple, from the souA, at Phnom Bayang, Treang, Ta Keo Province, 
Cambodia, Indianesque or pre-Khmer, seventh century. See page 182, and Grosiier, 6. 

326. Brick tower, Bakong, Cambodia. Ninth century. See page 187. 

327. A tower of the Bayon temple, Ahkor Wat, Cambodia. Stone. End of the ninth century. 
See pages 188, 189 and Dufour, and Carpeaux. 

328. Left angle tower of the upper terrace, Ankor Wat, Cambodia. Stone. First half of twelfth 
century. See pages 192, 193. 

PLATE CIX. 

329. Ankor Wat, general view from the west from the causeway, within the outer wall, 
showing the galleries, and three of the five towers of the upper terrace. Stone. First 
half of twelfth century. See page 192. 

330. The Bayon, Ankor Thom, general view from the south, showing the central and surrounding 
towers. Stone. End of the ninth century. See page 188, and Dufour and Carpeaux. 

331. Phimeanakas, Ahkor Thom, Cambodia. Stone. End of ninth century. See page 188. 

PLATE CX. 

332. Lokesvara, Cambodian, now in the Stoclet Collection, Brussels. Black stone, 3' ii". 
Indianesque or pre-Khmer, sixth or early seventh century. See page 183. 

333. Harihara, from Prasat Andet, Cambodia, now in the Museum at Phnom Pen. Stone, 
6' 3". Indianesque or pre-Khmer, early seventh century. See page 183. 

PLATE CXI. 

334. One of the four masks, probably of Siva, from a tower of the Bayon, Ahkor Thom, 
Cambodia. Masonry in situ. Late ninth century. See page 189. 

PLATE CXII. 

3 5 5 — 3 3 8 . Four Cambodian heads ; see page 185: 

335. Head of Buddha, Cambodian, now in the Sachs Collection, Cambridge, U. S. A. Sand- 
stone, 9 Ninth century. 


251 



336. Head of a Bodhisattva (?), Cambodian, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 
no. 20. 447. Stone, ^ Siamese period, fourteenth century. 

337. Head of Siva or a deified king, Cambodian, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 
no. 21. 1072. Stone, 101/2''. Ninth or tenth century. 

338. Head of a king, Cambodian, from the Moura collection, now in the Cleveland Museum 
of Art. Stone, 14%". Eleventh century. 

PLATE CXIII. 

339. Apsarases, relief, inner wall of inner court, Ahkor Wat, Cambodia. First half of twelfth 
century. See pages 192, 193. Cf. Groslier, 9. 

340. Part of the procession of an army, southern gallery, left side, Ahkor Wat, Cambodia. 
Jv'Iiddle twelfth century. See page 192. 

PLATE CXIV. 

341. Great temple at Mi-son, Campa. Brick. Early seventh century. See page 196, 

342. Buddha from Dong-duong, Campa, now in the Museum of £. F. E. O. at I/anoL 
Bronze. Third century A. D., perhaps of Indian or Ceylon origin. See page 197. 

343. Crowned Buddha sheltered by the Naga Mucalinda, from the Tours d’Argent, Binh 
Dinh, Campa. Bronze. See page 197. 

344. Siva, from Tra-Kieu, Quang-Nam, Campa, now in the Museum at Tourane. Seventh 

century. Stone, 3' See page 196. 

PLATE CXV. 

345. Candi Puntadewa, Dieng, Java, Stone. Seventh or early eighth century. See page 202. 

346. Can^ Bima, Dieng, Java. Seventh or early eighth century. Stone. See pages 80, 202. 

347. Borobodur, from the air. Stone. Probably late eight century. See page 203. 

348. Candi Loro Jongrang, Prambanam, Java; the Siva temple. Stone. Late ninth century. 
See page 206. 

PLATE CXVI. 

349. Borobodur. Probably late eighth century. See page 203. 

350. Candi Mendut. Probably late eighth century. See page 203. 

331. Temple gateway, Batur, Bali. Limestone. Eighteenth or nineteenth century. See p. 210. 

332. Panataran, Java; the main shrine (triple basement only) is in the rear. Fourteenth to 
fifteenth century. See page 209. 

PLATE CXVIL 

333. Buddha tempted by the daughters of Mara, Borobodur, Java. Probably late eighth 
century. See pages 203, 204. 

334. Hariti (“the Buddhist Madonna”), Candi Mendut. Late eighth century. See page 203. 

355. Head from Candi Bima, Dieng, Java. Stone. Seventh or early eighth century. See 
page 202. 

356. Ramdyana frieze, Siva temple, Candi Loro Jongrang, Prambanam, Java. Late ninth 
century. See page 206. 

PLATE CXVIII. 

337. Buddha, in Candi Mendut. Probably late eighth century. See page 204. 

358. Arapacana Manjusri, Java, now in the Museum fur Volkerkunde, Berlin. Basalt, 
3' 6". Dated equivalent to 1343 A. D. See page 208. 

359. Agastya, from Candi Banon, ^/c/. Magelan, Kadu, Java, now in the Museum at Batavia, 
no. 63 c. Stone. First half of ninth century. See pages 68, 206; and cf. Durvasa 
Maharsi in the Dhenupuresvara temple, Pallesvaram (A. S. I. photo D. 75). See also 
Gangoly, 4. 


252 



360. King Erlanga, in the form of Visnu, riding on Garuda, from Belahan, now in the Museum 
at Mojokerto, Java. Stone. Ca. 1043 A. D. See pages 185, 207, and Krom, 2, p. 410. 

PLATE CXIX. 

361, 362. Two Bodhisattvas, from Pesindon, afd, Wonosobo, Kedu, Java, now in the Mu- 
seum at Batavia, nos. 498 a and 499, Gold. Eighth or ninth century. See page 206. 

363. Padmapani, seated in mahdrdjatildsana on a lion throne, from Java, now in the British 
Museum. Copper. See page 206, and Coomaraswamy, 15. 

364. Hevajra, dancing, from Banteai Kedei, now in the Museum at Phnom Pen, no. E 329. 

Bron2e, Ca. tenth century. See A. A. K., i, pi. XXXV. 

365. Apsaras, dancing, probably from the Bayon, Ahkor Thom, Cambodia, now in the 
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 22. 686. Bronze, 15 Late ninth or early tenth 
century. See page 189. 

PLATE CXX. 

366. Candi Jabung, north-west side; &/. and afd, Kraksan, Pasuruwan, Java. Tenth century (?). 
See page 208. 

PLATE CXXI. 

367. Mask, used in dramatic performances. Central Java, in the possession of the author. 
Wood, painted, 7". Eighteenth or nineteenth century. See page 211 note 4. 

PLATE CXXII. 

568. Earring {jhumkd\ northern India, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 17. 831. 
Gold filigree, 2". Eighteenth century. See page 135. 

369. Earring, south Indian, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 01. 6541. Gold, 
234". Eighteenth century. See page 135. 

370. Reverse of an Rto-nomi pendant, Jaipur, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 
no. 21. 1660. The obverse has a representation of Radha, Krsna and cows in the 
Vrndavana. Enamel on gold, i Eighteenth or early nineteenth century. See page 135. 

371. Armlet, with figures of Rama, Sita and Laksmana. Formerly in the Goloubew collection. 
Enamel on gold. See page 135. 

372. Bracelet, Jaipur, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 21. 1662. Red, green 
sky blue and white enamel on gold, dia. 3 Vs". See page 135. 

373. Gold filigree beads, Kandy, Ceylon. Eighteenth century. Author’s collection. See 
page 168. 

374. Gold bead with figures of deities, attached to a Rudrdksa-mdldy worn by a Brahman 
priest in Southern India. See page 136. 

375. Clasp of a necklace, from Ceylon (Tamil or Simhalese), now in the possession of Stella 
Bloch. Gold. Eighteenth century. See pages 12 note 9, 135, 168. 

PLATE CXXIII. 

376. Pendant, known as kurulu-padakkama^ belonging to the Dambevinne family, Kandy, 
Ceylon. Gold, set with cabochon rubies, &c., width 2%". See page 135, 168. 

377. Comb f with handle composed of four deer with two heads, south Indian, nowin 

the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. Brass, SVs""* Seventeenth or eighteenth century. 

378. Part of a knife (kettd)^ Kandyan Simhalese, owned by A. R. Casse Lebbe, Kandy. Silver 
pierced and repousse, lija pafa^ lija vela^ stnamala and lerapindiya motifs. Eighteenth 
century. 

379. Huqqa bowl, Lucknow, present ownership unknown. Enamel on silver. See page 135. 

380. Bronze bell, from Gunung Rongsa, afd, Malang, res. Pasuruwan, Java. Now in the 
Museum at Batavia. 


253 



PLATE CXXIV. 

381. Dalamura tatuva^ ceremonial betel tray, in the Dalada Maligawa, Kandy, Ceylon. Gold, 
set with cabochon sapphires, dia. 1 3 Said to have been dedicated by the mother of 
Kirti Sri Raja Siihha. Eighteenth century. See pages 134, 168. 

382. Muqqa-ho^Xy North Indian, now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, 
inlaid with gold and silver (with Mughal influence or for Mughal use), 7 Seventeenth 
century. See page 134. 

383. Huqqa-ho^Xy North Indian, Brass. Seventeenth century. Author’s collection. Cf. p. 134. 

384. Spittoon, north Indian. Brass, inlaid with niello and silver, 4", Seventeenth century. 
Author’s collection. See page 134. 

385. Kan-vataha-patay ceremonial votive fan, Dalada Maligawa, Kandy, Ceylon. Gold, set 
with cabochon sapphires, 17 Vz”. Said to have been dedicated by Kirti Sri Raja Simha. 
Eighteenth century. See pages 134, 168. 

386. Killotaya (“betel-box”) for lime, from Kandy, Ceylon, now in the Colombo Museum. 
Copper, inlaid with silver, dia. 2”. See page 134. 

PLATE CXXV. 

387. Detail of a small two-wheeled carriage, Tanjore palace. Ivory veneer, engraved and 
inlaid with coloured lac. Seventeenth or eighteenth century. See page 136. 

388. Plaque from the base of a door jamb, Ridi Vihara, Ceylon. Seventeenth a eighteenth 
century. Ivory. See page 136. 

389. Detail of another small two-wheeled carriage, Tanjore palace. In centre, ivory plaque 
representing a sarja anna padfi (= Simh. sera-pendij/a). Seventeenth century. Seep. 136. 

390. Hak-gedijay a conch, engraved and inlaid with lac, brass mounting with gold and silver 
inlay, terminating in a serapendiya. Said to have been made for Narendra Siriiha and 
dedicated by him to a devale in Udanuwara, Ceylon. Collection of Leslie de Saram, Colom- 
bo. Eighteenth century. See pages 134, 137. 

391. Part of a book cover, with picca mala design, from a Kandyan library. Wood, painted. 

392. Three bead bags, Kathiawad, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston: svastikdy Laksmi, 
and elephant designs. 

PLATE CXXVI. 

393. Part of a patola silk sdriy Surat, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. Eighteenth 
or early nineteenth century. See page 138. 

394. Kim^wdby gold brocade, Benares, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. Eighteenth 
century. See page 138. 

PLATE CXXVII. 

395. Part of an embroidered turban, Rajputana, now in the Museum of Ftae Arts, Boston, 
no. 21.1734. Silk and gold on cotton. Seventeenth or eighteenth century. See p. 140. 

396. Part of a patiyay a. belt, with archaic designs; in the possession of Tibomvava Maha 
Nayaka, Malvatte, Kandy, Ceylon. Cotton, width 8 (total length 6' 3"). Eighteenth 
century. See page 168. 

397. Part of an embroidered skirt, Kathiawad, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. 
Silk. Early eighteenth century. See page 140. 

PLATE CXXVIII. 

398. Batiky Central Java, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. Twentieth century. 

399. Kain praday batik with gold design impressed, from Bali, detail, now in the Museum of 
Fine Arts, Boston. Nineteenth or twentieth century. See page 139. 

400. Sienggi kombUy garment from Sumba, now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, no. 21.1659. 
Ikat-woven cotton, 6' 3" by 3' 9^/2"'. Twentieth century. See page 137. 


254 





NORTH-INDIA 


n 



256 








V 



CAMBODIA 


17* 


259 





VII 



MALAYA • SUMATRA • JAVA 




vniA 



CENTRAL JAVA 


VIII B 



262 


EAST JAVA 





GENERAL INDEX 

As a rule names of authors have been mentioned only when they occur in the text itself, 
mere references made to them in the foot-notes being omitted. 


Abdu’r-Razzak, Arab writer iz} 
dbhahgay stance 182 
abhaja mitdrdy see mudra 
Abhayagiriya Dagaba, Anuradhapura 161; 
fig. 286 

Abhisekha scenes 89; fig. 179 
Abu, Mt. 71, III, 1 12; fig. 221 
Abundance, see Fertility 
Achaemenid influences 13, 19 
Acharya, P. K. 107 
Acynta Raya, king of Vijayanagar 125 
Adhirajendra Coiadeva, king of Ceylon 165 
Adinatha, temple, Girnar 112 
Aesthetic (I) appreciation: 
bhdvanay cetand 87, 88 

ideal form is created before it is seen 

8, 35, 88 

ideal forms supermundane 49, 125 

nature, observation 27, 35 

Vramdnam 88 

primitives 16, 27, 57 

style and content 27, 31, 32, 36, 46, 

64. 71, 72. 9° — 92, 94, III, 112, H 4 , 

115, 119, 126—133, 135, 155, 162, 

176, 177, 183, 185, 192, 193, 194, 

204, 210, 212 

theory of beauty, rasa^ rasdsvadana 36 

see also Symbols 

Aesthetic (II) methods: 

continuous narration 45, 65, 80 

frontality 16 

overrunning borders 27 

vertical projection 27 

volume, relief, attenuation 16, 27, 109, 

127, 176, 204 

Afganisthan 7, 15, 24, 49, 51, 52, 53, 203 
Agastya, South Indian rsi 68, 187, 201, 206; 
%• 359 


Agastyesvara temple, Melapaluvur 102; 
fig. 199 

Agathokles, see Coins 
Agisala, see Craftsman 
Agni; horse as symbol of 41, 42 
Agnisayana 42 

Ahalya Bai, queen, buildings 116, 122 
Ahmadabad, Western-India 93, iii, 112, 
1 16, 120 
Ahura-Mazda 8 

Aihole (Aivali), Bijapur Dist. 78, 79, 86, 87, 
94. 95 ^ 9 <^> 9 ^^ figs. 148, 152, 153^ 

165 

Airavata, elephant, vehicle of Indra, and 
equivalent of clouds 25, 26; fig. 27; see 
also Animals, elephant 
Ajanta, Buddha, see Buddha 

— early caves ii, 28; fig. 7 

— latest caves ii, 96; fig. 189 

— Gupta caves 74 — 76, 85, 98, loi; 

figs. 154, 156, 137, 172 

— early painting 8, 39 

— Gupta painting 83, 84, 89, 90, 91, 98, 99; 
%s. 179—182, 185 

— latest painting 102 

— textiles 138 
Ajatasatru, king, see Kunika 
Ajivikas 18 

Ajmir 98 

Akbar 117, 127, 162 

Akhun Dheri: winged bronze goddess 12 
Alakapuri caves 38 
dlambanay see Architecture 
Alaungpaya, Burmese king 173 
dlekhja sthdria^ see Painting 
Alexander 9, 12, 34, 42 
Aluvihara, Ceylon 168 
dmalakuy see Architecture 


263 



Amarapura, Burma 173, 174 
Amaravati 25, 33, 38, 46, 62, 65, 69 — 72, 84, 
loi, 104, 122, 161; figs. 97, 136 — 141, 
144 — 146 

Amareadrapura, Cambodia 186 

Amb, Shahpur Dist. 108 

Amber palace 121 

Amida, Japanese Buddha 155 

Amin, Karnal District, ^unga remains 32 

Amoghabhuti, Kuninda, of Kangra 44, 45 ; 

fig, 1 15; see also Coins 
Amohini 37 

Amrith (Marath), North Syria 12 

Amritsar 117, 127 

Ananda, disciple of Buddha 34 

Ananda, statues of 163, 164 

Ananda (pagoda). Pagan 170 — 172; figs. 316, 

317 

Ananta Gumpha 37 

andsah = noseless, designating Dravidians ? 5 
Anawrata (Aniruddha), Burmese king 170 
Ancestors, honoured by dedications 189 

— deification 19, 23, 30, 185 

— portrait statues 43, 185, 207 

— portrait statues of royal ancestors 48, 67, 
185, 189 

anda^ see Architecture 

Andhra period 6, ii, 15, 23, 30, 35, 38, 49, 
67, 69, 70, 76, loi, 126; figs.: Early 
Andhra 30,31, 34,^5, 5i — 5^, 63,72,75, 
142 — 146 ; Later Andhra 94 — 97, 1 3 5 
to 1 41 

Anhillava(^-Patan (Gujarat) 93, iii 
A-ni-ko, Nepalese artist in Tibetan 147, 153 

Animals, actual or mythical: 

— Avatars of Prajapati 41 

— birds 12, 42, 45, 55, 137, 139; see also 
Garuda 

— bull 4, 17, 18, 25, 26, 29, 31, 41, 44, 45, 
49, 50, 67, 103, 118, 137, 161, 162, 187, 
i88; figs. 2 — 4, 14, 26, 33, 105, 109, 122, 
288 

— cat 103 

— cdtakas 150 

— camel 45 

— centaurs ii, 50 

— chank 4, 6, 7, 136 

— cobra 45; figs. 76, 166 

— conch 4, 6, 134, 136; figs. 165, 390 


Animals, deer ii, 31, 38; fig. 7 

— dog 45 

— duck 1 21 

— eagle, see Symbols 

— elephant {hdtki, ndga, gajd) 4, 17, 18, 20, 
25, 26, 29, 31, 38, 45, 49, 50, loi, 103, 
116, 118, 121, 137, 161, 162, 182, 187, 
188, 189, 192; figs. 5, II, 27, 28, 30, 
35, 46, 47, 54, 7L 75> 95> iM, 248, 279> 
284, 288, 292, 392; see also Airavata, 
Gaja Laksmi 

— fantastic, Sumerian and Mesopotamian 
relations 4, ii 

— fish 36, 45, loi, 162; figs. 57, 106, 107 

— Garuda^ mythical bird and semi-human 
vehicle of Visnu 45, 50, 100, loi, 144, 
186, 188, 207; figs. 196, 360 

— griffons ii 

— hamsa, sacred goose or swan 18, 50, 54, 
160, 184; figs. 89, 288 

— horse 4, 7, ii, 17, 18, 25, 33, 41, 44, 43, 
50, 67, 68, 116, 124, 161, 162, 188, 189; 
figs. 26, 61, 103, 1 3 1, 220, 240, 279, 288 

— Mrttimukha^ grotesque mask 77, 104, 105, 
202, 203 

— lion {simha^ rachi si) ii, 17, 18, 29, 36, 37, 
45 , 5o> 57 , 58, 68, 102, 104, 123, 124, 
161 — 163, 179, 187, 188; figs. 12, 42, 83, 
84, 129, 166, 288, 363; see also sardula^ 
simkamugam 

— makara^ crocodile 34, 45, 50; figs. 177, 247 

— mice 103 

— monkey 31, 103 

— nora-singh, manlion 179 

— on torana 5 5 

— panther 116, 123; fig. 220 

— peacock 45, 140; figs. 108, 175, 259, 261 

— rhinoceros 3, 45 ; fig. 107 

— sdrdula^ horned Hon loi, 118, 161 ; fig. 281 

— Scythian animal style 24 

— simhamugam^ Hon-face 104 

— snake 43, 68, 69, 150; figs, no, 113; see 
also 'Ndga 

— squirrel fig. 82 

— tiger 4, 44, 121, 123 

— tritons ii 

— ydli^ vydla 102, 118, 124 

— with interlocking necks, of Sumerian 
kinship II 


264 



ahka = Symbols 
Ankor Baurei, Cambodia 192 
Ankor Thom, Cambodia 48, 187, 189, 190, 
194; figs. 330, 331 

Ankor Wat, Cambodia 183, 187, 189, 192 to 
194; figs. 328, 329, 339, 340 
Annam, see Campa 

Antialkidas, Taxila 24, 34, 49; see also Helio- 
dora 

Antoninus of Emesa, see Elagabalus 
Anuradhapura, Ceylon 33, 34, 71, 158 — 163, 
166, 167; figs. 286, 288 — 290, 292 — 295 
Anyor 57 

Aparajita, Pallava 102, 105 
apasmdra-purusa^ see Symbols 
Apparsvami, Saiva Saint loi, 127, 167 
Apsaras, 47, 65, 86, 89, 118, 163, 

180, 185, 188, 189, 192, 196; figs. 173, 
180, 184, 559, 365 

Arapacana-Manjusri, Bengal 1 14 ; figs. 229, 3 5 8 

Architecture, dlamhana^ plinth 30 

— dmalaka^ crowning stone and angle-motif 

of Nagara sikhara 79 — 81, 83, 94, 

96, 98, 202 

— anda^ see garbha 

— arch, pre-Muhammadan 6, 12, 73 (refs.) 

— dyatana^ deva-kula^ deva-grha etc. 47, 48, 63 

— barrel- vaults 6, 24, 33, 49, 123 

— bhdvana^ haunt, temple, holy stead 47 ‘ 
87, 125 

— Bodhi-tree temples 33, 81 

— buttresses, pre-Muhammadan 73 

— cdbutra^ platform 93 

— catty a-\\2dd%^ defined 19, 28 

structural 6, 18, 38, 48, 54, 55, 77, 

78, 79, 94, 141; see also ^^/^^-halls 

— catty a~vrksa 26, 30, 41, 45, 47, 151; 

figs. 10, 27, no. III, 1 14, 115; see also 
Symbols, caitya-vrksa 

— cankramay promenade 32 

— capitals: dmalaka or cushion 98 
Corinthian 5 1 

Doric 143 

gana 76, 79, 82 

Ionic 24, 143 

Magadhan 43 

Pallava types 76, 102 — 105 

“Persopolitan” ii, 13, 16, 29, 38, 50 

“pot and foliage” 76, 77, 97, 98, 107 


Architecture, “cave-styles'^ 97 

— ceilings 112; fig. 221 

— circumabulation {pradakstnd)^ provision 
for 18, 19,28,78,79,82,95,98,100,109,205 

— chapels in stiipa basement 72, 171 

— chatrJy cenotaph 122 

— citra-sdla 84, 87 

— cloistered courts, peristyles, betta type, etc. 
104, no, 117, 118 

— Cola, see Calukya 

— corbelled construction 113 

— “cubic” 164 

— dagaba 160 

— discussed 160, 205 

— dolmens 6, 47, 49, 97, 159, 200 

— dome, pre-Muhammadan 19, 29, 49, 74, 
75, 

— Dravida style defined 83, 107 

— early circular buildings 10, 19, 29, 48, 149 

— examples 25, 26, 48, 50, 51, 69, 70 

— Gandhakuti 81 

— garbhuy grba^ sanctuary, inner room of 
a temple, ctc.-y garbhay geba^ dome of a stiipa 
18, 3o> 75. 78, 83, 98, 182; fig. 292 

— Gupta, see Gupta 

— half- vaulted galleries 185, 186 

— harmikdy pavilion 30, 33,75, 160; figs. 42, 
292 

— hero-shrines 47 

— Indian elements in early Christian art 19 

— Indian influence on Far East 53 (refs.), 
152 (refs.) 

— Kaniska’s tower 30, 53, 152; fig. 89 

— Kannada (Kanara) 119; fig. 234 

— kirttistambha in; fig. 251 

— kudurru 12 

— late circular buildings 82, 108, 109, no 

— makara torana 38,40, 75, 104, 122, 196, 203 ; 

figs- 143. 249 

— mandapa, porch 19, 77, 79, 93, 97, 99, 
104, 105, 107, 115; figs. 217, 239, 240 

— Maurya, see Maurya 

— mediaeval nomenclature io6 

— monasteries (vihdray matba) 24, 27, 39; 
see also vibara 

— Nagara (Aryavarta) style defined 83, 96, 
98, 107 

— ndtya-sdlay ndtya mandapdy dancing hall, 
theatre 84 


265 



Architecture, origins and early types and 
sites 3, 5, 13, 19, 21, 34, 42, 46—48, 
63, 66, 83, 97, 98, 135, 184, 186 

— palaces 19, 54, 55, 70, 75, 84, 121 — 124, 
129, i47> 163, 188, 190; figs. 252—254 

— Pandya 122 — 123 

— pasada 33, 81, 162 

— Pillars {sthamhha^ ldt\ railing pillar 10, ii, 

i7» 29, 34, 37, 58, 65, 99; figs. 

37—40, 48, 54, 58—60, 71, 73, 74, 

77 — 81, 136, 143 — 146, i 49 > ^50. 156, 
157, 166, 189, 190, 199, 240, 241, 248 

— prakdra^ pujd-sild-prakdra^ enclosure 22, 
34, 48, 166 

— punya-sdla 38 

— Rajput, see Rajput 

— rathuy temple, car 95, 102 — 105, n6, 117, 
162; figs. 200, 202 

— Reliefs 20, 30, 35, 36, 70, 100, 204, 206; 

figs. 7, 24—27, 37— 39> 41— 49 > 52, 

76, 87, 91, 104, 136, 140, 141, 193, 208, 
209, 339 > 340, 35 3 > 354 . 356 

— reproduces wooden forms 5, 28, 117 

— sam^td-Idlay theatre 84 

— severity of early Buddhist 35, 160, 161 

— fikhara (spire, tower, temple), origins 
indicated 6, 75, 78, 79, 80, 82, 83, 95, 
96, 98, 99, 106, 109, 112, 115, 202; figs. 
62, 69, 69A, 219 

— Slabs 6, 48, 66, 70, 78, 79, 86, 97, 118; 
figs. 72, 91, 136, 141, 142, 165, 324 

— sopanuy stairs 30, 37 

— stbamhay see pillars 

— stupa defined and described 12, 30, 47, 
50, 75, 76, 83, i6o, 205; see also stiipa 

— suci 30 

— Sudhamma-Hall of Indra-loka 19, 29, 40 

— terraces {medhi) and pyramidal basements, 
prang type, etc. 30, 33, 37, 170, 190, 
204 — 206, 209 

— thaba 30, 70 

— tor ana y gateway, arch 31, 32, 34, 35, 

155; figs. 53, 54, 55 , 69A, 72, 250 

— towers 48, 53, 55, 80, 108, 185, 189, 190; 
figs. 326—529 

— Vedic 9 

— vedikdy defined 30 

— Vesara (Calukya) style defined 96, 107, 

^17 


Architecture, vihdra^ see vibdra 

— Vijayanagar 123, 124; figs. 239, 245 

— wdhalkada 161, 162 

— Yakkha-cetiya 47, 48, 125 

— jastiy a metal mast 30 
Arcot, North 139 
Ardhanarisvara, see Siva 
Ardochso, see Fertility 

Ari, Tantrik Buddhists in Burma 170, 172 
Arjuna, Candi, Java 202 
“Arjuna’s Penance” 103 
Arjuna-vivdhay see Texts 
Arjunpura site 63 
Arthasdstray see Texts 
Arts and crafts in India and Indonesia 
figs. 368 — 400 

— in India 9, 10, 133 — 168 

— in Ceylon 168 

— in Burma 174 

— in Siam 179 

— in Cambodia 195 

— in Java 212, 213 
Aryans, apparence in India 7 

— in relation to Dravidian, see Dravidian 
and Aryan 

Aryavarta style, see Architecture, Nagara 
dsanay seat, mode of sitting, should be sthira- 
sukha, firm and easy 5 2, 76; figs. 144 — 145 
dsana'y morhdy bhadrdsanuy wicker seats or 
thrones 26 

— padmasana, lotus seat in either sense, 
earlier usage 21, 41, 43, 50; fig. 16 

— pralamhapdda 76, 96 

— Gandhara 52 

Asiatic style, early 11 — 14, 48; fig. 7 
Asoka, Mauryan king 13, 16 — 19, 21 — 23, 
32—34, 48, 82, 98, 141, 144, 158 
asoka tree 64; figs. 81, 82 
Asoka vadana, see Texts 
Asrto Maha Rosei, Cambodia 182, 184 
Assamukhi 26 (refs.), 33; see also Yaksa 
Assyrian origins, palaces, design 54 
astamahgalay see Symbols 
Astasdhasrika-prajnapdramitdy see Texts 
Ataria Khera, Nagodh State 86 
Athawa Veday see Texts 
Atisa, Tibitan pandit 147, 200 
Audumbara dynasty, Pathankot 45, 48; 
figs. 1 16, 1 17; see also Coins 


266 



Aurangabad 79, 85, 96, 98, 138 
Aurangzeb 65, 66 

Auvadaiyar Kovil 123; figs. 239, 241 
Ava, Burma 173 
Avalokitesvara, see Bodhisattva 
Avantipur, Vantipor 142, 143; fig, 272 
Avantivarman, king of Kasmir 141, 142 
Avatars of Prajapati, see Animals 
Avidura^Nidana^ see Texts 
Awkana, Ceylon 165 

AjdgapataSy votive slabs 37, 58, 63; figs. 71, 
72, 142 

Ayyampet 137 

AyaSy probably copper 7, 8 9 
dyatanay see Architecture 
Aymonier, E. 175, 180, 187 
Ayodhya, Cambodia 15, 31, 185 
Ayuthia, Siam 176 — 179 
Azamganj 140 

Azes I, Greek king in Panjab 24, 50, 51; see 
also Coins 

A2es II, Greek king in Panjab 24 

Bacchanalian motifs 62, 66, 68, 69, 77, 99; 

fig. 169; see also Yaksa 
Bachhofer, L. 51 
Bactria 23, 24, 35, 49 
Badtoi 64, 86, 94 — 96, loi; fig. 187 
BaduUa, Ceylon 166; fig. 296 
Badut, Candi, Java 207 
Bagh 77, 89; fig. 183 
Bahulara 108 

Bahur, near Pondicherry 105 
Baijnath, Kahgra 107 
Bajaura, Kulu 107 
Bakong, Cambodia 187; fig. 326 
Baku, temple, Cambodia 187 
Bala, Friar 58, 68, 112; fig. 96 
Bala, Hisar, see Puskalavati 
Baiadeva, see Balarama 
Baladitya Narasimha, Raja 71, 82 
Balagami 117 
Balaputra, king 113 
Balaputradeva, Sailendra 199 
Balarama (Baiadeva, Baldeo, Sarhkarsana) 
21, 48, 69, 86, 13 1 ; see also Visnu 
Bali 137 — 139, 200, 201, 207, 209 — 213; 

fig. 399 
Baluchistan 4 
Bamiyan, Afghanistan 53 


bandhuy knot, enlacement 116 
Bangkok, Siam 84 
Bangli, Bali, temple 210 
Banka, Sumatra 199, 207 
Bahkura Dist., Bengal 108, 116; fig. 213 
Banon, Candi, Java 68, 206; fig. 359 
Banteai Chhmar, Cambodia 184, 186 
Bantd Kedei, Ahkor Thom 190; fig. 364 
Baphuon, Ankor Thom 48, 190 
Barabar hiUs, Caves 18, 38; fig. 28 
Bardasanes 67 

Baroda, colossal image 17, 58; fig. 15 
Basarh (Vaisali) 5, 10, 21, 44, 69, 87; fig. 16 
Batak 213 

Batanmara, Nagodh State, fig. 37 
Batiky see Textiles 
Batur, temple, Bali 210; fig. 351 
Bawbawgyi, Pagan 172 
Bawdawpaya, Burmese king 173 
Bay wreath ii, 19 
Bayang, Cambodia 93, 182; fig. 325 
Bayon, Ahkor Thom, Cambodia 183, 187 to 
190; figs. 327, 330, 334, 365 
Bead bags, fig. 392 
Bedoyo, Javanese court dancers 212 
Bedsa 12, 28, 29, 40, 50; figs. 32, 33 
Bejavada, see Be2wada 
Bekhan, Java 207; fig. 360 
Bell,H.C.B. 165 
Belur 1 17 

Benares sculptors 60, 86; fig. 175 

— modern temples 116, 121, 144 

— textiles 138; fig. 394 

Beng Mealea, Cambodia i86, 187, 194, 199 
Bengal 114, 119, 146; figs. 228, 229, 230, 282 
Berendi Kovil, Ceylon 166 
Berstl, H. 52, 65 

Besnagar (Vidisa) 15 — 17, 24, 32, 34, 47> 49> 
56, 69, 86; figs. 8, 10, 170, 177 
hefta-tf^ty see Architecture, cloistered courts 
Bezwada, Bejavada 85 
Bhadrapatisvara, see ^iva, lihgam 
hhadrasanay see asana 
Bhadravarman I, Campa 196 
Bhadresvara, see ^iva and ^iva, lihgam 
Bhadresvas, Canyar 196 
Bhagavad Gitdy see Texts 
Bhagavata, Bhakta, “worshipful”, “Lord”, 
designating deities generally 16, 24, 46, 50 

267 



Bhagavata, Buddha 35, 42, 44; fig. 41 

— a Naga 46 

— Visnu 49 

— a Yaksa 46 

— see also Heliodora 
Bhagiratha 103 ; figs. 198, 206 
Bhairavakonda, Pallava site 78 
Bhaisajyaguru Vaidurya Prabharaja 189, see 

also Buddha 

Bhaja 18, 24 — 28, 37, 67; figs. 24 — 27, 29; 
see also Costume 

bhakti, devotion to a deity, source of theistic 
development and imagery 5, 8, 16, 42, 6i 
Bhallar stupa ^ Taxila 73, 205 
hhandar^ Jaina hbrary 120, see also Libraries 
Bharatajuddha, see Texts 
Bharatesvara, Jaina saint 118 
Bharatiya Ndtya-sdstray see Texts 
Bharhut 8, ii, 12, 18, 19, 25 — 27, 29 — 31, 33, 
35, 56, 37, 38, 39. 42, 43> 44, 45, 46, 47, 
48, 51, 52, 56, 65, 66, 82, 104, 149, 154; 

figs- 38, 39, 41—49 

Bhatgaon, temple 145 
Bhattiprolu, early Buddhist site 23 
hhavahheday classification of moods 90 
hhdvana 47, 48, 87, 88, 125; see Aesthetic, 
Architecture, Painting, Yaksa 
Bheraghat, Jogini temple no 
Bhilsa 34, 36 
Bhima, Candi, Java 80 
Bhir mound, Taxila 5, lo, 20, 54 
Bhita 10, 20, 32, 36, 44, 69, 87; fig. 15 
Bhitargaon, Gupta brick temples 80, 87, io8 
Bhoja, Raja of Kanauj 105 
Bhuj in Kach 140 

Bhumara, Nagodh State 77, 78, 79, 86, 87, 
98, 182 

bhumi-sparsa mudrdy see mudrd 
Bhutesar site 63 

Bhuvanesvara, Orissa 79, 115, 202; figs. 215, 
216, 218, 219 
Bibliography 214 — 228 
Bidagat Taik, Burma 170; fig. 308 
Bidar {bldrj)^ Haidarabad State 134; fig. 382 
Bihar, Narsinghpur State 18, 93, 106, 109 
Bijapur fig. 249 
Bijayagarh 89 

Bikanir 69, 73, 87, 129, 136, 150 
Bilsar 87 


Bima (Bhima), Candi, Java 80, 94, 202; 
figs- 346, 555 

Bimaran, Afghanistan, reliquary 51; fig. 88 
Bimbisara 9 

Binh-dinh, Campa 195, 196, 197; fig. 543 
Binyon, L. 150 

Bir Singh Deva, Bundela 121; fig. 254 

Birds, see Animals 

biruday secondary royal title 102 

Bitpalo, see Craftsman 

Black Pagoda, see Surya Deui 

Bloch, Th. 47 

Block printing 139 

Boat designs 4, 7 

Bodhgaya 8, 18, 26, 32, 33, 48, 51, 52, 60, 
65, 67, 74, 75, 77, 80, 81, 82, 93, 94, 158, 
170; figs. 40, 61, 62, 210, 309 

— Bodhi-manda, Vajrasana 18, 81, 82; see 
also Bodhi-manda, vajrasana 

— Bodhi-tree 32, 33, 93, 158; see also 
Bodhi-tree 

— Mahabodhi temple (Gandhakud) 81, 170; 
figs. 210, 309; see also Mahabhodi temple 

— plaque 80, 81; fig. 62 

— railing pillar 32, 33, 64; fig. 61 

— Surya 67; fig. 61; see also Surya 
Bodhidharma 153, 155 
Bodhi-druma, see Bodhi-tree 

Bodhisattva ; Avalokitesvara, Lokesvara, Lo- 
kanatha, Padmapani 31, 33, 46, 47, 50, 
54 — 60, 63, 68, 76, 81, 85, 90, 91, 94, 
96, 99, 107, no, 112, 113, 119, 141, 142, 
145—147, 148, 160, 161, 166, 167, 172, 
175, 183, 187, 199, 204, 208; figs. 78 — 80, 
83, 84, 83, 87, 93, 95, 96, 99, 104, 164, 
171, i8i, 223, 228, 232, 276, 281, 289, 
290, 294, 297, 299, 311, 312, 319, 332, 
336, 361, 362, 363 

— litany 85, 96, 99; fig. 164 

— confusion with Buddha 36; figs. 83 — 85, 

87, 9*^ 

— Maitreya 161; fig. 290 

— Manjusri 146, 172, 208; fig. 281 

— Mathura types 37, 38; fig. 99 

— origins of type 46, 47, 31, 68 

— Siddhartha 33 

— Vajrapani 166; fig. 299 
Bodhi-manda, the Place of the Enlighten- 
ment 18, 31, 35, 47, 48, 81, 82 


268 



Bodhi-tree, Bodhi-druma, of Gautama Buddha 
31. 33, 34 > 41, 42,46, 47 . 81, 153 - figs. 
41, 46, 55, 70, 84, 160, 228, 233; see also 
Bodhgaya 

Bodhi-tree temples 33, 81; see also Archi- 
tecture 

Boghaz Koi 7, 12 
Bokhara 137 
BoUensen 42 

Borobudur, Can^, Java 10 1, 193, 203 — 206; 

figs. loi, 347, 349, 353 
Bosch, F. D. K. 201 

Brahma 43, 50, 86, 202, 206, 209; figs. 168, 

225, 314 

Brahma, Kuca 150 
Brdhmanas^ see Vedic literature 
Brahmaur, Camba 108 

Brahui, Dravidian language in Baluchistan 4 
Brass 133, 134, 145, 147, 167; figs. 300, 383, 
384 

Brhat Sambitdy see Texts 
Brhataratha dynasty 44 
Brndaban, temple at 116 
Brown, Percy 133, 134, 138, 140 
Bucolic deities 43 

Buddha, mentioned 8, 22, 29, 31, 33, 35 to 
37> 39> 41—46, 49 — 64, 67, 69—77, 81, 
84, B5, 87, 89, 92, 93, 98, 99, 103, no, 
113, 114, 127, 142, 145, 147, 148, 150, 

154, 161, 164—167, 170— 173, 175 — 177, 
178, 181 — 183, 185, 189, 197, 199, 203 to 
205, 208 ; figs. 41, 46, 78, 79, 83 — 85, 87 to 
98, 100, loi, 104, 119, 123, 136—141, 152, 

155, 158—164, 223, 228, 233, 278, 293, 
295, 296, 315, 317, 321, 322, 335, 542, 
343 > 353 > 557 

— Ajanta 75, 76, 85, 98, 99, 182, 183 

— Amaravati 71, 72; figs. 97, 136 — 141 

— and Boddhisattva, early confusion 56; 
figs. 83—85, 87 

— Anuradhapura, Ceylon 161; figs. 293, 
^95 

— approach to Bodhi-tree 33, 46; figs. 41, 
46 

— as patron deities 109 

— Badulla 166; fig. 296 

— at first represented by symbols 31, 35, 36, 
41, 45 

— Bamiyan 55 


Buddha, Bengal 114; fig. 228 

— Bezwada (Bejavada) 85 

— Bhagavato 33, 42, 44, 45; fig. 41 

— Bhaisajyaguru 189 

— Bimar^ 50, 51; fig. 88 

— Borobodur 203; figs. loi, 333 

— Burmen wooden and alabaster 173 

— Cambodian, early 181, 183, 185, 189; 

fig- 335 

— colossal 53, 57, 58, 14, 84, 85, 98, 161, 
164, 165, 172; fig. 160 

— crowned type 56, 63; figs. 78, 79, 87, 343 

— curls 60, 61, 71, 73 

— Dhyani, earliest in Bodhisattva headdress 
63, 148; fig. 78 

— Dong Duong 197; fig. 342 

— Elura 77; fig- 155 

— Four and eight great events of the life 

35> 51, 62, 69, 70, 81, 148, 204, 205 

— Gandharan type and examples 49 — 62, 
74, 75; figs. 85, 87—95 

— gold image, Ruanweli Dagaba 161; 

fig- 293 

— Gupta type and figures listed 8, 71, 74, 
85, 171; figs. 158 — 163 

— Iconography, see Iconography, develop- 
ment 

— Images, see Images 

— Java 204; fig. 357 

— Kancipuram 103 

— Kangra 83; fig. 163 

— Kanheri 70, 74, 83 ; fig. 164 

— Kaniska’s reliquary 53, 54; fig. 89 

— Karli 85 

— Ka^mir 142 

— Kusana type 46, 50, 52, 56, 57, 58, 60 — 63, 
71; figs. 79, 83, 84, 85, 87, 90, 91, 94, 
96, 97, 104 

— Kasia 74 

— on coins of Kaniska 59, 67; fig. 123 

— on coins of Ivlaues and Kadapha 5 9 ; fig. 1 1 9 

— origin of type 50 — 63, 75; see also Ma- 
thura, Buddha type 

— Mahoba no; fig. 223 

— Mankuwar 62, 74, 83; fig. 162 

— Mathura type 57 — 62, 64; figs. 96, 98, 
104, 158 

in Central Asia and China 39, 60, 152 

in Taxila 60 


269 



Buddha, Nalanda 113; fig. 235 

— Nara 93 

— Nasik 28, 98 

— Nepal 145 ; fig. 278 

— Pagan 170, 171; figs. 315, 317 

— Parinirvana images 74, 98, 173 

— Pataliputra 58 

— Rajagrha 59 

— Romlok, Cambodia 76, 182; fig. 100 

— Saheth'Maheth 58 

— Sand 85 

— Samath 85; fig. 161 

— shaven head 37, 61, 74, 150; fig. 162 

— Siam 177; figs. 321, 322 

— Sultanganj 74, 85, 167; fig. 160 

— supposed early anthropomorphic repre- 
sentations 33, 43, 59, 60, 161 

— with shoulder flames 22, 60 

— see also Bodhisattva, Bodhi-tree, Graeco- 
Buddhist art, Mathura, mudra^ urnd^ usntsa 

Buddhaghosa 169 

Buddha-tree, see Boddhi-tree 

Buddhisme; ‘‘Buddhist India” a fallacy 72 

— Mahayana 113 

— in relation to Saivism 113, 190 

— Tantrik 113, 114, 148 
Bull, see Animals 

Bundelkhand 121, 127 — 153; see also Raj- 
putana 

Buniar, Kasmir, temple 143 
Burgess, J. 39 

Burma 169 — 174; figs. 305 — 317 

cdhutruy see Architecture 
cddafy see Costume, Textiles 
Caitu, see Craftsman 

Caitjdy cetijUy a sanctuary, holystead or shrine 
such as a sacred tree, a tower, or stupa 
47 

caitja-hallsy mentioned 6, 12, 18, 21, 28 — 30, 
36, 38. 39> 40, 48, 69, 75— 77> 89, 96, 
104, 141, 185; figs. 29 — 35, 91, 135, 145, 
146, 149, 154, 155, 189; see Architecture 
caitja-vrksdy sacred tree 26, 30, 41, 45, 47, 
151; figs. 10, 27, no. III, 114, 115; 
see also Architecture, Symbols 

— Yakkha-cetija 47, 48, 125 
cakrUy see Symbols, dharma-cakra 
Cakravartin 41 


Calukya dynasty 94 — 99 

— early 77— 79> 94— 99> 157, 201; figs. 156 
to 157, 185 — 188; see also Costume 

— style 116, 121 

— later (Cola) 105 ff., 165, 166; figs. 233 to 

23S 237 

Camel, see Animals 

Cambodia 180 — 195; figs. 1 00, 324 — 340, 

364, 365 

Campa 195 — 198; figs. 341 — 344 
campdkdlly jasmine-bud necklace 20 
Camunda Raja, Hoysala 118 
Candela 105, 109, no 
Can(h, Javanese designation of temples 
Candragupta, Gupta king 24, 71; figs. 129, 
132; see also Coins 
Candravati, queen 164 
Candrehe, Rewa 109 
cankrama, see Architecture 
Cankuna, minister of Lalitaditya 205 
Canyalu, Java 201 
Carnelian 4, 159 

Castana, Andhra king; portrait statue 66 
Cat, see Animals 
cdtakay see Animals 
Catisgaon, see Chittagong 
Caucasus, Northern 3 
Caunsat, Jogini temples no 
^<j//rJ-bearer 17, 25, 26,46, 172; figs. 10, 17, 
24, 84 

Centaurs, see Animals 
cetand see Aesthetic, Painting 
Ceylon 156 — 169; figs. 286 — 304 
Chakdana 19 
Chalcolithic, culture 3 
Chanda, R. 34 
Chandimau 86 
Chandor tombs 122 

Changu Narayan, Vaisnava temple at 144 

Chank, see Animals 

Chapels, see Architecture 

Chapra, Rajshahi Dist. 114; fig. 227 

Charsada (Hastnagar) 12, 52, 55, 73 

chatruy chattUy see Symbols 

chatrly see Architecture 

Chatrarhi, Camba 108 

Chenla = Cambodia 184 

Chezarla, Kistna dist., caitya-\x^ 77; fig. 147 

Chiehmai, N. Siam 176, 177 


270 



China 150 — 155 

Chinput, near Bahkura 80 

Chitor (Citaurgarh), Mewar ni; fig. 251 

Chittagong (Catisg§oh), Pala bronzes 114 

Cho-po - Sumatra 198 

Chou Ta Kuan, on Cambodia 191, 193, 194 

Cidambaram, gopurams 122 

cihna = Symbols 

cikan, see Textiles 

Cikka Betta, Sravana Belgola 118 

Circular plaques^ early stone 10,20 

are-perdue process 136 

Citaurgarh, Mewar, see Chitor 

dtrakara, cittakara^ see Craftsman 

citra-sdla 84, 87; see Architecture, Painting 

Clouds, rain, lightning 25, 26, 65, 150; 

figs. 180, 259, 261; see also Airavata 
Cobra, see Animals 
Cock-fighting 141 
Coconade 139 
Coconut, Pacific origin 7 

Coins, figs. 106 — 132; see also Images 

— Agathokles 44, 49, 64 

— Andhra 67 

— Amoghabuti 45; fig. 115 

— ApoUodotos 45; fig. 109 

— Audumbara 45, 48; figs. 116, 117 

— Azes 50, 51 

— Candragupta II 24, 71; figs. 129, 132 

— of Ceylon, fig. 12 1 

— Hermaios 57 

— Huviska 22, 45, 48, 66, 81; figs. 120, 
126A 

— Indo-Greek 24, 42 

— Indo-Sumerian 4; fig. 2 

— Kadaphes = Kadphises I 59; fig. 119 

— Kadphises II 50, 67, 148; fig. 124 

— Kaniska 22, 45, 50, 59, 67, 148; figs. 122, 
123, 125, 127, 128 

— Kumaragupta 71; fig. 131 

— Kusana 61 

— Maues 57, 59 

— Pandyan 44, 45, 45; %• 114 

— Pantaieion, Satakarni 64, 66 

— punch-marked {kdrsapana, purdna^ dha- 

rana, kahdpand) 8, ii, 45, 44> 49 j 

72; figs. 106 — 108 

— Samudragupta 71; fig. 130 

— Satakarni 67 


Coins, §iva, see Siva, development of type 
on coins 

— Vasiska, Vasudeva 55; fig. 126; see also 
Buddha, Siva, Symbols 

Cola, see Calukya 
coli^ see Costume 

Colossal images and statues 16, 17, 53, 57, 
58, 59. 74, 82, 84—86, 93, 98, 118, 119, 
161, 164, 167, 172, 173; figs. 8, 9, 15, 
160, 1 61, 174; see also Baroda, Buddha, 
Siva lingam^ Yaksa 
Conch, see Animals 
Copper age 3, 6, 7 

Costume; cddar 139, 140 

— coify bodice 139, 140, 163; fig. 260 

— dhoti 21, 50, 179, 212; figs. 57 — 60, 75, 79 

— 80, 126, 13 1 

— jdma 66 

— kamarbandy belt 140 

— ndtl 140 

— paijdmUy trousers 137 

— usnisuy see usnisa 

— Bhaja 26 

— Buddha 57 

— early Calukya 96 

— pre-Gandharan 51 

— Gupta 39 

— Kusana 66, 67 
Cousens, H. in, 112 

Craftsman, architect, imager, painter, etc. : 
citrakdray cittakdra 40, no 

— devalaka 42 

— kammdra 10, 15 

— sllpi 125 — 127, 167, 191 

— sthapati 125 — 127, 167, 191; fig. 241 

— by name, Agi^ala 54 

— gUds (sreniy sent) lo, 15, 88, 112, 125 

— Nagar Seth ( — Senapati) 112 

— Bitpaio 115 

— Caitu 132 

— Devaragampala Silvatenna 168 

— Dhiman 113 

— Dinna 74, 84 

— Divakara 194 

— Gandhara 57 

— Gugga 108 

— Gunda (Tribhuvanacarya) 95 

— Jaita ni 

— Manaku 132 


271 



Craftsman, Mola R^m 132 

— Persian 13 

— Satana no 

— Sivabrahman 192 

— Sivamitra 58 

— Sornakkalai Asari 125 
Cudamamvarman, Sailendra king 199 
cunarJ, see Textiles 
Cunningham, A. 20, 33, 65, 66, 82 
Cupuvatu, Java 105 

Dabhoi, Gujarat 113; fig. 230 

Dacca, textiles 140 

Dadhikarna, see Yaksa 

dagaba = stupa^ see also Architecture, stiipa 

Dai Itoku 149 

daivata^ see Images 

Dalada MaUgawa, Kandy 134, 163, 168; figs. 

381, 385 
Dalavanur 102 

Dalmi, Manbhum, Bengal; temple at 80, 108 
damaru^ see Symbols 
Dames, Longworth 59 

Dance, dramatic and ritual, see Theatre and 
also Nataraja 

— in sculpture, etc. 26, 64, 97, 117 

— knowledge of principles necessary for 
understanding of painting 140, 210 — 212, 

Dandan Uiliq, Khotan 63, 149; figs. 283, 285 

Darius 9, 13 

daryai^ see Textiles 

Das Avatara cave, Elura 97 

Datia 129 

— palace 121; fig. 234 
Daulatpur 36 

Dedications 9, 32, 37, 49, 38, 190 
Degaldoruwa, Ceylon 26, 168 
Dekkhan 6, 7, 13, 23, 69, 76, 79, 99, loi, 106, 
107, 117, 123, 157 
Delhi, iron pillar at fig. 150 
della Setta, Al. 66 

Demala Maha-Seya, see Northern temple 
Demetrius, Bactrian king 24 
de Morgan 5 

Deogarh, Gupta 80, 85, 86, 204; fig. 167 
Devaduru Mahdtmaya^ see Texts 
deva-grbuy see Architecture, ayatana 
devakida == Temple, shrine, see Architecture, 
ayatana 


devalakuy see Craftsman 
Devanam-Piyatissa, king of Ceylon 34, 
158 — 160 

Devapala of Nalanda 199 
Devapaladeva, Paia king 1 1 3 
Devaragampala, see Craftsman 
Devaraja cult, worship of a a divine fiery 
essence incarnate in royalty, symbolised 
by a lihgam 22, 60, 185 — 191, 197, 201 

— in Cambodia 185, 189 — 191 

— in Campa 197 

— in Java 201 

— Indian or Avestan sources and parallels 22 

— see also “Fire’’, “Flame” 
devata-ayatana see Architecture, ayatana 
devata-pratimdy see Images 

Devi (Durga, Kali, Laksana, Minaksi, Par- 
vati, Uma, etc.) 66, 67, 100, 102, 103, 
no, 126, 167, 189, 191, 197; figs. 193, 
200, 244 

— Mahisa-mardini 108, 208; figs. 208, 218 
Dey, M. 39, 90 

Dh^ekh stiipa^ Sarnath 73, 170 
Dhamnar 108 

dharma-cakray dharma-cakkay see Symbols 
dharma-cakra-mudrdy see mudra 
Dharmanatha, monolithic temple 108 
Dharmarajika stupay Chire tope, Taxila 52, 54 
Dharwar, mediaeval temples 117 
Dhauli, Katak Dist., Orissa fig. ii 
Dhiman, see Craftsman 
dhotiy see Costume 
Dhritarastra 154 
Dhruv Tila 62 
Dhumar Lena, Elura 97, 98 
dhvaja-sthamhbas 29, 99; fig. 192; see also 
Architecture, pillars 
dhydna mudrdy see mudrd 
Dhyani Buddhas, see Buddha Dhyani 
Didargahj, Patna, image 17; fig. 17 
Dieng (Dihyang) Plateau, Java 1 5 7, 201 — 203 ; 

%s. 343, 346 
Diez, E. 106 

Dig, Rajputana palace 121 ; fig. 233 
Dilwara, Abu in; fig. 221 
Dinaya (Dina j a), Java 201 
Dinna, see Craftsman 
Dipahkara legend, see Texts 
Discus, see Symbols, dbarma-cakra 


272 



Divyavaddnay see Texts 
Dodda Basavaana, Dharwar Dist. 1 1 7 
Dodda Betta, ^ravana Belgola 1 1 8 
Dodda Gadavalli 117 
Dog, see Animals 
dolmens, see Architecture 
Dong-duong, Campa 196 — 197; fig. 342 
Donors; statues 19, 29, 30, 50, 61, 64, 69, 
70, 73> 74, 87, 113, 127; figs. 77, 135, 

142, 245 

Draupadi ratha, Mamallapuram 104; fig, 200 
Draviduy Southern or Dravidian style of 
architecture 95, 107, 117; fig. 187, 198 
Dravidians and Aryans 4 — 9, 16, 46, 96 
drumy see Symbols, damaru 
Dryads, see Fertility 
Dudhadi, Jogini temple at no 
Duong-long, Campa 197 
Dulvay see Texts 
Durga, see Devi 

— temple, Aihole 78, 79; fig, 152 
Durvasa Maharsi 68 

Duttha Gtoani, Ceylon, king 158, 160, 161, 
162; fig. 294 
Dvaravati, Siam 175 

Earth goddess 10, 17, 20, 21, 46, 65, 143; 
fig. 105 ; see also Vasundhara, Mother- 
goddesses, Fertility, Nude 
East, the Far 150 — 155 
Ecbatana 19 

Egypt 5 

Ekambaranathasvamin temple, Kaf> r 7 102 
Elagabalus 67 
Elam 3 

Elapatra, Naga king 31 
Elephant, see Animals 
Elephanta 8, 80, 96, 98, 100; figs. 194, 195 
Elura 64, 77, 88, 96 — 100, 116, 121; figs. 155, 
190, 192, 193, 196 

— Brahmanical caves 96, 98 

— Buddhist caves 77; fig. 155 

— Indra Sabha 99 

— Kailasanatha temple 99; fig. 192, 193 

— painting 100, 121; fig. 196 

— Ramesvara cave 88, 97; fig. 190 
Embroidery, see Textiles 
Enlightenment place, see Boddhi-manda 
Eran 78 


Erlanga, East Javanese king 185, 207; 
fig. j6o 

Erotes, garland-bearing 51, 54, 62, 70, 149; 
figs. 76, 89 

Erotic motifs 64, 65, 109, 116, 131, 150, 172, 
209; see also Earth goddess. Fertility, 
lihgamy Mother goddesses. Nude, Paficika, 
Phallus 

efirili see Textiles 
Eucratides, Bactrian king 25 
Euthydemus, Bactrian king 23 

Fa Hsien 19, 63, 81, 151 — 153, 158, 198 
Faience 3, 4; figs. 2 — 6 
Fatehpur, Kangra 85; fig. 163 
Fathpur Sikrl, Ceylon 162 
Fergusson, J. 29, 31, 32, 83, 95, 96, 99, 106, 
107 

Fertility, abundance, wealth, mother-god- 
desses, Dryads, etc. 3, 5, 20, 21, 26, 
31, 36, 41, 46, 64, 65, 108, 116, 118, 150; 
figs. 74, 118, 129, 354 

— in connection with lotus, punna-gbatUy etc. 
20, 21, 29, 31, 43, 65, 150 

— Ardochso, Laksmi, Maya-Devi 21, 25, 
26, 29, 31, 38, 43, 65, 100, 103, 121, 141; 
figs. 30, 1 1 8, 1 2 1, 127, 129, 196, 200, 205 

— see also Hariti, Jambhala, Pancika, Earth 
goddess. Nude, Erotic 

Ficus religiosa, see pippala 
Fire, flame, fire-altar, shoulder-flames 16, 22, 
41, 42, 45, 55, 60, 61, 66, 68, 185—191, 
197, 201; figs. 64, 76, 122, 123; see also 
Buddha with shoulder-flames; Devaraja 
cult; Symbols, fire-altars 
Fish, see Animals 
Flame, see Fire 

Folk-art 8, ii, 12, 16, 44, 128, 159, 168, 178 
Foucher, A. 50, 51, 55, 62, 75, 83, 115, 150, 
166, 204, 205 
Friar Bala, see Bala 
Fujisan, Japanese mountain 204 
Fu Nan, Funan 91, 157, 175, 180, 181, 183, 
184; see also Cambodia 

Gadag, Dharwar Dist. 117 
Gadaladeniya, Ceylon 166, 168 
gaddiy see Textiles 
gajuy see also Animals, elephant 


i3 


273 



Gaja-Laksmi, see Laksmi 
Gajendramoksa 8o 
Gal Vihata, DambuUa i68 
Gal Vihara, Polonnaruva 165, 167 
gana^ see Architecture, capitals 
Ganddvjuha, see Texts 

Gandhakud, Buddhist temple 8i, see also 
Architecture 

Gandharan art ir, 24, 33 » 49 — 57 > 59 — ^ 3 . 
66, 69, 70, 72—75, 79, 141, i 42 > ^ 43 , 
150 — 152; figs. 857 87—95; see also 
Graeco-Buddhist art Hellenistic influences 
Gandharvas 86, 89, loi; figs. 173, 180 
Ganesa 57, 38, 68, 86, 107, 108, 149, 167, 
196, 208; fig. 202 

— Gumphas 37, 38 

— in Khotan 149 

Ganga Devi (Sudarsana Yaksi), river goddess 
86; fig. 177 

Gangaikondapuram 122, 126 
Gangdvatarana, Mamallapuram 100, 103, 104, 
162, 165; figs. 198, 206, 207 
Ganges valley 3, 7, 13, 16, 49, 68, 71, 80, 
103, 105, 107, 108, 145, 158, 164 
garbhay grba^ see Architecture, garbha 
Gardabhilla, king 119 
Garde, M. B. 34 
Garhwa ii, 32, 78, 86 
Garhwal 127, 131, 132 
Garuda, see Animals 
Gatotkaca, Cani, Java 204 
gaumukh^ see Textiles 
Gawdawpalin. 171 
Gaya, see Bodhaya 
geba^ see Architecture, garbha 
Ge^-ge, N^nda, Ceylon 166 
Gedong Sanga, temples, Java 203 
genii, see Yaksa 

Ghantasala, early Buddhist site 23 
ghats \ mountains. Western 119 

— river bank, buildings, especially steps, on 
river bank 116, 119, 121, 122 

Ghaz Dheri 55 
ghosla Ghat 122 
Glds, see Craftsman 
Girnar, Jaina temple no, 112 
Gita Govinda, see Texts 
Glass 10, 12, 13, 162 
Gokarjnesvara, really a Kusana king 66 


Gold, granulation of 12 
Golden Horn, Ahkor Thom 48 
Golden Temple, Amritsar 117 
Goloubew, V. 51, 61, 103, 187 
Gommatesvara, Jaina saint 118, 119 
Gond temples, Lalitpur dist. 78 
Gondophares, Greek king in Panjab 24, 50, 5 3 
Gop, Kathiawad 75, 77, 79, 82, 98, 143 ; fig. 191 
Govardhana, Mt. 26; fig. 166 
Graeco-Buddhist (Gandhara, Indo-Helle-ni 
Stic) art, and problem of the Buddha 
images, see Gandharan art 
Grahi, Siam 177 

Greek kings in the Pahjab, etc, 23, 49 
Grhja 'Parisista, see Texts 
Grhya Sutra^ see Texts 
Griffiths, J. 39 
Griffon, see Animals 
Groslier, G, 182, 185, 187 
Gudimallam 32, 39, 67; fig. 66 
Guduru (Kodura), Godaveri Dist, 156 
Gugga, see Craftsman 
Gujarat 95, 137, 138 
Gujarati, see Jaina 
Gujari Mahal, Gwaliar 12 1 
Gunakamadeva, king of Nepal 144 
Gumvarman 141, 151, 153, 198, 205 
Gunda, see Craftsman 
Gungeria, copper weapons 6 
Gunpipalle 18, 23, 38 
Gunung Gansir, Java 207 
Gupta period and art 16, 22, 24, 25, 29, 39, 
43 — 45, 48, 56, 60, 61, 62, 67 — 100, 104, 
124, 143, 153, 157, 159, 166, 167, 169, 
171, 172, 175— 177, 181, 182, 184, 201; 
figs. 98, 99, 147— 155, 158 — 180, 182 
to 184, 210 

Gwaliar 109, 113, 116, 119, 121 ; figs. 212, 259 

Hackin, J. 154 

Hadda, Afgh^stan 53 

Haidarabad 134, 138 

Hakuho period, Japan 154 

Halebid, Mysore 117, 118; fig, 21 1 

Hamlr-hath^ see Texts 

Hanchei, Cambodia 77, 79, 181, 182 

Han tiles 15 1 

hamsa-y see Animals 

Hanoto, Japan 5 3 


^74 



Hanuman 67, 86, 167 
Harappa, Pan jab 3 
Haribala, Abbot 84 

Harihara, combined Siva and Visnu 1 8 2 — 1 84 ; 
fig* 333 

Harihara II, of Vijayanagar 123 
Hariharalaya, Cambodia 186, 191 
Harinegamesa, Jaina divinity 37 
Hariti, see Yaksa and Fertility 
Harivamsay see Texts 
harmikdy see Architecture 
Harsa 92 — 95, 141 
HarsacaritUy see Texts 
Harsavardhana of Kanauj 92 — 94 
Harsavarman II of Cambodia 190 
Harvan (Sadarhadvana) 141 
Hastnagar, see Charsada 
Hat, Kulu 107 
Hatakesvara, see Siva, lihgam 
hdthJy see Animals, elephant 
Hath! Bada, Nagarl 22 
Hath! Gumpha 37 
Havell, E. B. 106 
Hayam Wuruk, Java, king 208 
Hazara Rama temple 123 
HeHodora, ambassador of Antialkidas 24, 34, 
48, 49 

Hellenistic influences ii, 24, 35, 60, 61, 66, 
74, 75, 153; see also Gandharan art 
Hemaprakasa, king io8 
Herakles, Herkules 42, 62 
Hermaios, Greek king of Panjab 57, see also 
Coins 

Herringham, Lady 90 

Hertel, J. 22 

Hevajra, dancing fig. 364 

Higgs, J- 146 

Himru, see Textiles 
Hindagala, Ceylon 163 
Hindu Kush 7 

Hippokampenhohle, Turkistan 150 

Hiranyakasipu 97 

Hitopadesay see Texts 

Hittites 7, II, 12 

Hmawza, Burma 172 

Hoenig, H. 36, 205 

Hornefl, J. 7 

Horse, see Animals 

Hbryuji, Japan 53, 154 


Hospet, Vijayanagar 123 
Hoysala dynasty 106, 117 
Hoysalesvara temple, Halebid 118; fig. 21 1 
Hsieh Ho 88 

Hsiian Tsang 18, 19, 46, 64, 68, 72, 74, 81, 
82, 92, 93, loi, 148, 153 
Hucchimalligudi, temple, Aihole 79; fig. 153 
Human sacrifice 26 
Huns 71, 74, 92 

Huviska, Kusana king 22, 43, 48, 63, 68, 81, 
figs. 120, 1 26 A; see also Coins 
Hvarena 8 

I Ching 93, 153, 198 
Iconography, anthropomorphic 5 

— development 21, 41, 45, 46, 50, 56, 58, 
59, 66, 67, 71, 115; fig. 78; see also 
Buddha, Siva, Symbols, Images 

Idikucari 150 
ikaty see Textiles 
Ilivala 1 18 

Images = daivatay pratimdy pratikrtiy murti^ 
pitha, devata-pratima 7, 41, 42, 46 

— pre-Kusana 41 — 43 

— sdttvik 8 

— see also ^iva, Visnu, Buddha, etc.. Icono- 
graphy, Coins, Bbakh' 

Indo-Persian period, see Ksatrapa period 
Indo-Sumerian art 3 — 5 ; figs, i — 6 
Indra (Sakra,Sakka) 8, 25, 26, 32, 40, 41, 42, 
43 ’ 50’ 5L 99’ nO’ 19G figs. 27, 40, 85, 

255 

— Kuca area 150 

— Sabha, Elura 99 

— as Sand 8, 32; fig. 40 

— Vedic description 25 

— vehicle, see Airavata 
Indravarman I of Cambodia 187, 190 
Indravarman, Campa 197 

Indus valley 3, 5, 7, 9, zz, 23 
Inscriptions; Aramaic, TaxUa 22 

— Asoka’s 17, 18 

— Banka 199 

— Bharhut 33; figs. 41, 43 

— Bodhgaya plaque 81; fig. 62 
railing pillar 32, 33; fig. 61 

— Cam, referring to Nagini Soma 180 

— Cambodian, early 181 

— Cangala 201 



Inscriptions; Cola, referring to Sumatra 199 

— Dedications 58, 190; see also Dedications 

— Dinaya, referring to Devaraja 201 

— Dong Duong, referring to Devaraja 197 

— Javanese, oldest 201 

— Kalasan 190, 199, 205 

— Kharavela: Hathi-gumpha 57, 45 

— Kharosthi script 18, 22, 36, 148, 149; 
figs. 62, 90, 109 

— Mahendravarman I loi 

— Mancapuri (Vaikuntha, Patalapuri) 37 

— Mambhadra 34 

— Mathura 18, 37, 66; fig. 84 
lion-capital 37, 50 

— Miran 148 

— Nagari 21, 48 

— Nalanda, Bihar 199 

— Nanaghat 23, 30, 43 

— on bricks, early 18 

— Parkham image 16 

— Prome 172 

— Saka satraps 49 

— SdokKakThom, referring to Devaraja 185 

— Siamese, first 178 

— Simhalese pilgrim at Bodhgaya 158 

— Takri 130 

— Vaisnava, early 64 

— Vien Srah 199 

— Vikramaditya I, Calukya 95 

— Vocanh, earliest Cam Sanscrit 157, 195 
Irawadi valley 7 

Iron and steel 4, 6, 7, 9, 34, 133, 179 
Isapur 69 

Islam, in Gujarat iii, 113, 210 

— in Java 210 

— in Sumatra 200 

Isurumuniya Vihara, Anuradhapura 103, 162 
Isvara, supreme deity, generally Siva, in 
compounds, e. g. Parasuramesvara; see 
Siva, parasuramesvara 
Ittagi, Dharwar Dist. 117 
Ivory 4, 10, 13, 36, 117, 123, 136, 168; 

%s. 387—3^9 

Jabung, Candi, Java 205, 208; fig. 366 
Jagannatha (Juggernaut) 115 
Jaggayapeta 38; figs. 142— 143 
Jago, Candi, Java 205, 208 
jaguliy see Costume 

276 


Jahangir, king 117, 121, 128 
Jai Singh I, Kachwaha 121 
Jaina art 31, 37, 44, 54, 57, 58, 60, 62, 64—66, 
75, 89, 96, 97, 99, 106, III; fig. 71; 
see also Mathura 

— bronzes 119 

— paintings 89, loi, 115, 119 — 121, 129, 
132, 172; figs.^255— 258 

— temple at Mt. Abu 1 1 1 
at Girnar 112 

at Kaficipuram X19; fig. 256 

at Khajuraho 109 

at Ranpur 113 

at Satrunjaya (Palitana) 112 

at Tarahga 112 

at Tirumalai 119 

Jaipur 122, 129, 135, 140; figs. 263, 370—372 
Jaisihghpura 63 
Jaita, see Craftsman 
Jaiya, Old Siam 175, 194 
Jalalabad, Afghanistan 53 
Jalandhar 23 
jdma^ see Costume 
Jamalgarhi 73, no 
Jambhala, see Kuvera and Yaksa 
jamdani, see Textiles 
Jammu 127, 130; figs. 266, 267 
Jamna, south of Mathura 36 
Jandial, Taxila 55 

Japan 39, 53, 55, 84, 93, 137, 149, 154, 155, 
157, 212 

Jatakamala, see Texts 

Jatakas = v(at^ mentioned 9, 10, 15, 26, 31, 
35, 38—40, 47, 50—52, 63—65, 67, 83, 
85, 89, 99, 149, 156, 160, 164, 170, 171, 
174, 177, 198; figs. 47, 76, 92, 93, 279, 
284, 320 

— by name Dipankara 52, 64, fig. 92 
Ksantivadin 99 

Mahdhamsa 89 

Maitribala 99, 164 

Mdtrposaka 89 

Naga 99 

Nalagiri 89 

Padukusalamanava 26 

Ruru 89 

Saddanta (Chaddanta) 39, 89 

Sibi 89, 99 

Sutasoma 26 



Jatakas = ^dty by name Ummaga 40 

Vessantara (Visvantara) 31, 50, 51, 

65, 89, 146, 149, 160, 164; figs. 47, 93, 
279, 284 

— Burmese painting, lacquer and theatre 

171. 174 

— on Burmese glazed bricks 170, 171 

— Siamese engravings 177; fig. 320 
Jatthala Dagaba, Ceylon 159 
Jaulian, Taxila 72, 73, 141 

Java 200—213; figs. 101, 345 — 363, 366, 367, 
398 

Jawi, Candi, Java 208 
Jaiya, Siam 175, 178 
Jaya Harivarman, King of Campa 195 
Jayaswal, K. 16, 17, 43 
Jayavarman II of Cambodia 185, 186, 191, 
199 

Jayavarman V of Cambodia 190 
Jayavarman VI of Cambodia 189 
Jayavarman IX of Cambodia 194 
Jay a vi jaya caves 38 

Jel^abad (Nagarahara), Afghanistan 53 
Jetavana Vihara, Ceylon 161, 164 
Jewellery 3, 8, 9, 12, 26, 135, 143, 160, 168, 
174, 178, 179, 194; figs. 368—376, 378 
Jhinjuvad 113 
Jikoku Ten 154 
Jodhpur tombs 122 
Jogimara 40 

Jouveau-Dubreuil 10, 89, 125 
Juggernaut, see Jagannatha 
Junagarh, Kathiawad 77 
Junnar 18, 29, 38 

Kabul, Afghanistan 23 

Kachin, Burmese border tribe 137, 174 

Kadallaikallu, Ganesa temple, Vijayanagar 

123 

Kadambari, see Texts 

Kadphises I (Kadapha) 49, 5 9 ; see also Coins 
Kadphises II, Wima Kadphises, “Mahes- 
vara’’ 22, 50, 67, 140; fig. 124; see also 
Coins 

Kadua, Java 210 
Kafir, Kot 108, 143 

kahdpamSy punch-marked coins, see Coins, 
punch-marked 

Kailasa, Mt. 100, 125, 166, 193; fig. 193 


Kailasanatha temple, ^lurd 99, 100, 104, 166; 
figs. 192, 193, 196 

Kanci 95, 100, loi, 104, 184; fig. 197 

kairiy see Textiles 
Kalahastri 139 
Kalakacarya 23 
Kalar, temple at 108 
kalasa (corresp. to the varsasthald) 30, 115 
Kalasan, Candi, Java 190, 199, 203 
Kalesvara temple. Ter 95 
Kali, see Devi 
KaHka, holy monk 119 
Kdlikdcdrya Kathdy see Texts 
Kalinga 23, 43, 157; see also Orissa 
Kdliya Damanay see Texts 
Kalpa SutraSy see Texts 
kalpa vrksa 17; fig. 10 
Kdma Sutray Kdma-Sdstray see Texts 
kamandalu 55; figs. 76, 126 
kamarbandy see Costume 
Karnes vara Raden Panji, Java king 207 

kammarUy see Craftsman 
Kampen Phet, Siam 177 
Kan To Li 175 
Kanauj (Pancala) 92, 105 
Kancipuram, Kanci 95, loi — 105, 121, 123, 
197, 199; figs. 197, 256 
Kandarya Mahadeva, temple, Khajuraho 109 ; 
fig. 214 

Kandy, Ceylon 159, 168; figs. 373, 375, 378, 
381, 385, 386, 391 

Kahgra 48, 85, 127, 131, 132, 143, 175; 

figs. 115 — 117, 163, 268 — 271 
Kanheri, cave and ^^7/^^-hall 38, 69, 74, 
76, 85, 183; figs. 135, 164 
Kaniska, Kusana king 49, 52 — 54, 56 — 59, 
61, 63, 66, 69, 148 

— Bodhi-tree at Peshawar 34 

— coins, see Coins 

— portrait statues 48, 67; fig. 65 

— reliquary 53, 54; fig. 89 

— stupa or tower at Shah-ji-ki-Dheri, near 
Peshawar 30, 53, 152; see also Architec- 
ture 

Kannada, near Sravana Belgola 119; fig. 234 
Kantanagar 116 

Kantarodai, Ceylon 45; fig. 114 
Kanvas dynasty 23 

Kapalesvara, see Siva and Siva, lihgam 


277 



Kapila, Ceylon sage 162 

Kapilavastu 89, 91; fig. 179 

Kapisa, Afghanistan 49 

Kaptsa Avaddna, see Texts 

Kapotesvara temple, Chezarla 77; fig. 147 

Karli; caitja hallzS, 29, 69, 74, 85 ; figs. 34, 35 

kdrsdpana, see Coins, punch-marked 

Karttikeya, see Skanda 

karmd-rasa 91 

Kasia (Kusinagara) 74, 84, 87 
kasida, see Textiles 

Kasmir 15, 49, 52, 55, 61, 69, 73, 74, 82, 
141— 143, 149, 153; figs. 272, 273, 275 

— PMa bronze 114; fig. 232 
Kassapa I, Ceylon 162, 163 
Kas sites 7 

kasuriy see Textiles 
Kataha (Kidara, etc.) 199 
Kathdsarit-Sdgara, see Texts 
Kathiawad, caves 77; figs. 392, 397 

— textiles 139, 140; fig. 397 
Katoch dynasty of Kangra 13 1 
Katupilana 162 

Kaundinya 180, 181 
Kausambi, see Kosam 
Kauthara, Campa 195 
Kaveripumpattanam 44, loi 
kdyotsarga 118 
Kedah, Malayu 175, 200 
Kelamja Vihara 168 
Kerala (Malabar) 10 

Kertanagara, ‘‘Sivabuddha”, East Javanese 
king 200, 201, 208 
Kesava Das 131 

— temple, Somnathpur no, 117 
Kesiman, Bali, temple 210 
Ketu 45 

Khadaliq, Khotan 149 

Khajuraho, Bundelkhand 64,109,110; fig. 214 
Khalybes 7 

Khandagiri, Orissa 37, 38; fig. 36 
kbanjarJy see Textiles 
Kharavela, Kalinga king 23, 30, 37, 43 
Kharosthi script, see Inscriptions 
Khmer and pre-Khmer type 7, 76, 175 — 177; 
fig. 100 

Khmer, Origins 180, 184, i88 

— see Cambodia 

Khoh, Nagodh State 78, 86 


khotiy see Theatre 

Khotan 66, 69, 148, 150, 154; figs. 283 
—285 

Kidal, Can^, Java 208 
kimkhwdhy see Textiles 
Kirti Sri Rajasirhha 168 
kirttimukkhay see Animals 
klrttistambhuy Chitor in; fig. 251; see also 
Architecture 

Kirttivarman, Pala king no 
Kish, Sumerian faience seals 4 
Kistna-Godaveri delta (later Vengi) 21,23, 3^’ 
106; see also Vefigi 
Kiu-su, Campa 195 
Kiyul, arch 77 
Koh Ker, Cambodia 190 
kolan. Cam wooden temple type 197 
Kompoh Sway 191 

Konaraka 64, 79, 115, 116; figs. 217, 220 

Kon Wewa 165 

Kondahe 28 

Kondawgyi, Pagan 170 

Kondivte, Western India 18, 19, 38 

Kont Gudi, Aihole 79 

Koranganatha temple 122 

Korat, Siam 177, 194 

Korea 154 

Korkai 6 

Kosam (Kausambi) 21, 32, 37, 86; figs. 60, 
no, in 

Kramrisch, St. 127 
Krom, N. J. 207 

Krsna, mentioned 66, 69, 86, 103, 106, 123, 
124, 127 — 129, 1 3 1, Z06; figs. 102, 166, 
178, 245, 258, 265, 267 — 270, 282 

— Dan Lila 69 

— Deva Raja 106, 123, 124; figs. 245, 258 

— Dudhadhari 103 

— Govardhanadhara 66, 69, 103; figs. 102, 
166 

— incarnation of Visnu 127, 167 

— Lila 66, 69, 86, 128, 129, 13 1; figs. 265, 
267 — 270 

— nativity 86; fig. 178 

— with the flute 13 1; figs. 270, 282 

— and Radha, see Krsna Lila 

— see also Visnu 

— II, Rastrakuta king 99 
Krsndjanuy see Texts 


278 



Ksatrapa (Indo-Pexsian ox Scytho-Parthian) 
period 37, 54, 55, 56 
Kubera, see Kuvera and Yaksa 
Kube2atpaya, Pagan 171 
Kublai Khan 147, 153, 173, 195 
Kubyaukkyi, Pagan 171 
Kuca (Kutscha, Alt-Kutscha) 150 
kuca'bandha, see Textiles 
kudurru^ see Architecture 
Kulen, Mt., Cambodia 182, 186, 187, 190 
Kulottuhga-cola 199 

Kumaragupta I, Gupta king 71; fig. 131; 

see also Coins 
Kumtojiva 131 
Kumarapala king in, 117 
Kumbakonam, gopurams 122 
Kunika, Ajatasatru, Saisunaga king 9, 16, 31 
Kunjarakuhja-desa, Javanese source in South 
India 201 

Kuram, apsidal Pallava temple 105 
Kuruksetra, Delhi 87 
Kuruvatti, Bellary Dist. fig. 225 
Kusana and pre-Kusana art 3, 8, 12, 16, 21, 
25, 30, 34 > 37 , 39—43, 48—50, 54 , 56, 
57, 59—63, 66 — 69, 71, 72, 74, 75, 80, 
81, 85, 87, 99, 150, 152, 172, 190; figs. 59, 
62, 64 — 66, 69, 69 A, 71, 73, 74, 76 — 88, 

90 97, 102 104, 162 

kutapa^ musical instrument 84 
Kuvera (Jambhala) bron2es, Ceylon 166; 
fig. 298; see Yaksa 

Kyanzittha, Pagan, figure of king 170 — 172 

Lacquer, Burmese 175, 174 

— Siamese 177; fig. 322 

Lad Khan, Aihole 79, 18 1; fig. 148 
Laduv, Kasmir, temple 143 
Lahore 127, 135 
Laihka, Burma 174 
lakhoriy see Theatre 
Laksana, see Devi 
Laksmana, see Ramayana 
Laksmana temple, Sirpur 93; fig. i86 
Laksmi, Gaja-Laksmi 26, 38, 65, 87, 103, 
127, 167; fig. 205 

— mediaeval examples 100, 121 ; figs. 196, 200 
Lalatunda, Can^, Java 207 
Lalitaditya, king of Kasmir 141, 142, 143, 205 
La/Ifa Vistara^ see Texts 


Lalitpur District, Candela frescoes 109 

temple no 

Lamaism 153, 154 
Lamphun, N. Siam 175, 176 
Lahkatdaka, Polonnaruva, temple 164, 166, 
168 

Lao, Laos, Sino-Tibetan border races 176 

Idt^ see Architecture, pUlars 

Lauriya-Nandagarh 10, 42, 65; fig. 105 

Le Coq, von 60, 64 

Leper king 188, see also Yasovarman 

Levi, S. 7, 144 

Lewu, Java 209 

Lhasa 147 

Libraries {hbanddr^ pustakdsrdmd) 120, 170, 
192; fig. 308; see also Bidagat Talk 
Licchavis 22 

Lightning, clouds, rain, see Qouds 
Ligor, Old Siam, Malay Peninsular 175, 178, 

179 

Limestone figures 3, 4; fig. i 
Ungam^ see Mathura, Parasuramesvara, Siva, 
Phallus 

Lihgapura, Cambodia 190 
Lihgaraja, temple, Orissa 115, 116; fig, 215 
Lion, see Animals 
Logan, W, 10 

Lokanatha, see Boddhisattva 
Lohapasada, Anuradhapura 162 
Lokapalas, see Yaksa 
Lokesvara, see Boddhisattva, ^iva 
Lolei, Cambodia 187, 190 
Lomas Rsi cave, Barabar hills 18, 38; 
fig. 28 

Lonasobhika 37; fig. 72 
Longhurst, A. H. 10 

Lopburi, Siam 175 — 178, 181; figs. 321, 

323 

Loriyan Tahgai, Gandhara, dated figure 
from 52 

Loro Jongrang, Candi, Java 205, 206; 

figs. 348, 356 
Lotus, see Symbols 
Lotus pedestal {padmdsand)^ see dsana 
Lovang, Campa 198 
Loyang, China 151, 152 
Lucknow 134, 140, 179; figs* 379 
Lumbini garden 64, 142 
Lydian tombs 12 


279 



Madagaskar 198 

Madras, textiles 138 

Madura 124, 139; figs. 236, 242 

Magadha 9, 23, 114 

Mahabhdrata, see Texts 

Mahdhhdsja, see Texts, Patanjali 

Mahabhodi temple, Bodhgaya 81, 170; fig. 210 

— Pagan 170; fig, 309 
Mahadeva, see Siva 

Mahadharmarajadhiraja, Siamese king 177 
Mahanaga Dagaba 159 
Mahasena 22, 48, 161 
Maha Seya Dagaba 160 
Mabavamsa, see Texts 
Mahavira, Jina 9, 37, 38, 86, 119; fig. 178 
Mahayana Buddhism in Ceylon 113 
Mahayogi, see Siva 
Mahendraparvata, Cambodia 185, 187 
Mahendravarman I, Vicitracitta, Pallava king 
loi, 102 

— image 103; fig. 204 

— style 102 
Mahesa, see Siva 
Mahesvar 122 

Mahesvara (-murti), see Siva 
Mahinda, apostle in Ceylon 160 
Mahoba 105, no; fig. 223 
Maitreya: Naga as prototype of 69, see also 
Boddhisattva 
Majapahit, Java 208, 21 1 
makaruy see Animals 

— toranUy see Architecture 
Makatama 55 

Malaya ( = Malayu, Mo lo yen, Malacca, 
Minahkabaw), Malay Peninsular 176, 178, 
198, 200 

Malaya = Sumatra 200 

Malegitti Sivalaya, Badanl 95 ; fig. 187 

Maliku-S'Salih zoo 

Malot, Panjab 74, 108, 143, 196; fig. 274 

Malwa, temple in 109 

Mamallapuram 78, loi — 105, 116, 162, 202; 

figs. 198, 200 — 202, 204 — 209 
Manadeva, Nepal king 144 
Manaku, see Craftsman 
Manasa Devi, an early Yaksi, Mathura 17 
Manbhum, Bengal 80 
Mancapuri, see Inscriptions 
Mandagapattu, South Arcot Dist. 102 


Mandalay, Burma 84, 173, 174 
mandapUy see Architecture 
Mandor, Jodhpur State 26, 86; fig. 166 
Manibhadra, see Yaksa and Inscriptions 
Mamkka-Vasagar 127, 167 
Mamkyala, stupa 54, 56 
Maniyar Matha, Rajagrha 75, 82, 86; fig. 176 
Mahjusri (Boddhisattva) 146, 172, 208; 

fig. 281 

Mahkuwar, near Allahabad, Buddha figure 
62, 74, 85; fig. 162 
Manmoda, caitja^^SS. 29; fig. 30 
Man Singh, Kachwaha 121; fig. 252 
Manuha, Burmese king 170 
Maps 255 — 262 
Mdra~dharsana 99 

Marshall, Sir John 5, 20, 21, 27, 35, 36, 49, 
51, 54, 74, 94 

Martanda, Kasmir, temple 143 
mashrUy see Textiles 
Masks, see Theatre 
Masonry 3, 54, 78, 205 
Masrur, Kangra 107 
Masulipatam 139, 179 
Mat, temple and sculptures at 48, 63, 66 
Matangesvara temple, Kahci 105 
mathuy see Architecture, monasteries 
Mathura art 18 — 21, 23, 24, 32, 33, 37, 45, 
44, 46 — 48, 50, 5^—72, 74, 75 > 84, 85, 
104, 138, i49> 152; figs. 20, 21, 23, 57, 
59, 64, 65, 68, 69, 69A, 70—87, 96, 98, 
99, 102— 104, 158 

— Brahmanical fragments, Kusana 66 — 68 

— Buddha and Jina type, listed 58, 62, 64; 
figs. 96, 98, 104, 158 

— copied at Sarnath 58 

— discussed 57 — 62 

— Gupta sculptures listed 84, 85 

— importance in Buddhist history 60 

— inscriptions 18, 37, 50, 66 

— lihgam 67 

— lion capital 37, 50 

— railing pillars 46, 62 

— sites 63 

— textiles 138 

— type in Turkistan and China 60, 149, 152 

— wide distribution in N. India 58, 59, 65, 74 

— Yaksas and Nagas 68 

Maues, king 24, 57, 59; see also Coins 


280 



Maurya and pre-Maurya period 3, lo, ii, 13, 
15, 22, 23, 24, 30, 34, 43, 44 , 54 , 87, 94, 
169; figs. 8 — 23, 28, 50, 57, 60, 134 

Maya Devi 26, 29, 31, 65; figs. 30, 121; see 
also Fertility 
Mazdean art 8 
Mebun, Ankor Thom 190 
Medagiriya, Ceylon 165 
medhi^ see Architecture, terraces 
Mediaeval art : Early 1 1 ; figs. 7, 1 8 1, 1 86 — 209, 
21 1 — 237, 249 — 251, 272—275,279 — 281; 
see also Calukya, Pallava, Rastrakuta 

Late, figs. 238 — 248, 252 — 261, 266 

to 267; see also Calukya Cola, Madura, 
Rajput, Pala, Vljayanagar 
Megasthenes 15, 19 
Meghesvara temple, Orissa 115 
Meguti, Aihole 79, 95 
Mehta, N. C. 120 
Mekong valley 7 

Melapaluvur, Trichinopoly Dist. 102; fig. 199 
Menam valley 7 

Menander (Milinda), Greek king of Kabul 
23, 24 

Mendut, Cancfi, Java 203; figs. 350, 354, 357 
Meru, Mt., Ceylon 40, 165, 191, 193 
Meruvardhanasvanim temple, Pandrenthan 

145; %• 275 

Meruvarman, Pala king 108 

Mesopotamia 3, 4, 5 

Mice, mouse, see Animals 

Mihintale, Ceylon i6o 

Mihiragula 71, 74 

Mi la ra spa 148 

Milinda Panbay see Text 

Minaksi, see Devi 

Minaksi temple, Madura 124 

Minankabaw, see Malayu 

Mindon Min, Burmese king 173 

Mingalazedi, Pagan 170, 171, 205; fig. 313 

Ming Oi 150 

Mingun 173 

Miniatures, see Paintings 
Miran, Khotan 148; fig. 284 
Miriswetiya (Maricavatti) Dagaba 161 
Mirpur Khas, Sind 56, 73, 86, 87, 171, 205; 
fig. 168 

si^upa 56, 171, 205 

Mir Ziyarat, see Puskalavati 


Mi-son, Campa 195 — 197; fig. 34^ 

Mitani, Aryan gods in Cappadocia 7 

Mitauli, Jogini temple no 

mithunay amourous couples in art 21 

Modern Himalayan cult 68 

Mohenjo-Daro, Sind 5 — 6, zi, 56; figs, i — 6 

Mohra Moradu, Taxila 72 

Mola Ram, see Craftsman 

Mo lo yen, see Malayu 

Momand image, Gandhara 55 

Monkey, see Animals 

morhuy see dsana 

Morin- Jean ii 

Mother goddesses 3, 5, 21, 36, 41, 46, fig. 354 » 
see also Fertility 

Mountain, so-called stupa, see Symbols 
Mudabidri 119 
Mudhera, temple at in 
Mudrdy ‘^seal”, and hasta ‘‘hand”, significant 
positions of the hands and fingers 

— abhqya “do not fear”, commonest early 
pose 32, 52, 56, 57, 74; figs. 78—80, 
83—85, 87, 126, 242 

— dhyanUy meditation 52, 161; fig. 295 

— dharma-cakra mudrdy preaching 60, 74, 85, 
145; figs. 161, 278 

— vydkhydnuy exposition 166; figs. 296, 297 

— bhumi-sparJa 62, 1 14, 142 ; figs, 104, 228, 233 
Mudrardksasuy see Texts 

Mughal, see Painting 
Mujunidevi, queen 108; fig. 273 
Mukerij, P. C. 109 
mukha 4 ihgamy see ^W2i-lihgam 
Muktesvara, temple, Orissa ii5jii6;fig. 219 
Mundesvari temple, Shahabad Dist, 94 
Mural crown ii, 19, 37 

— decoration 8 
Mufshidabad, textiles 138 
murtiy see Images 
Myadaung Kyaung, Burma 173 
Mysore (Maisur) 106, 107, 117; fig. 224 

Nachna-Kuthara, Ajaigarh State 78 
Nadaun, Kangra 13 1 

Naga, Nagini, semi-human, semi-serpent 
being, dragon 4, 5, 29, 31, 38, 42, 43, 
46, 68, 69, 77, 82, 85, 86, 94, 95, loi, 
103, 116, 158, ^ 59 , 162, 165, 180, 181, 
185—188, 190— 193; figs. 30, 39, 86, 
146, 176, 207, 219, 286, 343 

281 



N%a, Ajanta 85; fig. 286 

— Anuradhapura 162 

— Bacchanalian 69, 77 

— Badami 94 

— may represent Balartoa 69, 86 

— ballustrades 185 — 187, 190, 191, 192, 195, 

197 

— called Bhagavata 46 

— cult 42, 68 

— by name Dharanendra 165; fig. 86 

— as guardians 31, 165, 181; fig. 39 

— Indo- Sumerian 4 

— Mahanaga Dagaba 159 

— Mamallapuram 103; fig. 207 

— Maniyar Matha 82; fig. 176 
— . Manmoda 29; fig. 30 

— Mathura 68 

— by name Mucalinda 165; fig. 343 

— Ndga-bali 43 

— by name Nalanda 46 

— Orissa 38, 116; fig. 219 

— Pallava ancestress loi, 181 

— Pattakadal 95 

— perhaps a prototype of Maitreya 69 
— • race 158, 181 

— - Sahci 85 

— • by name Sesa 69, 193 
— - by name Soma 180, iSi, 186 

— three-headed 58 

ndga, see also Animals, elephant 
Nagar Seth, see Craftsman 
Nagara = city, capital, corrupted in verna- 
culars to Ahkor, Nuwara, etc. 

— Northern or Aryavarta style of archi- 
tecture 79, 83, 107, 109, 117; see also 
Architecture 

nagara defined 87, 88 
Nagaraja 85; fig. 172 
Ndgarakertagama^ see Texts 
Nagari (= Madhyamika, Chitor) 10, 21, 24, 48 
ndgarika^ gentleman, ”man about town‘‘ 87, 88 
Nagini, see Naga 
Nahapana cave 28, 70 
Nahapana Vihara, Nasik 28; figs. 31, 34 
Nala and Dam ay anti , see Texts 
Nalanda, Bihar 82, 92, 93, 108, 113, 199, 
207; figs. 232, 233 

— Ceylon 144, 166 

— — Naga, defined 46 


Nambi Appa 105 
N^aghat 23, 30, 43 

Nanda king and dynasty 9, 10, 13, 15, 17, 22, 
43 ; fig. 104 

Nandamannya, Pagan 172; fig. 311 
Nandi, Siva’s bull 55, 99, 100; fig. 122; see 
also Animals, bull 

— bull vehicle of Siva 45 

— at Kuca 150 

— and Vardhana, see Yaksa 
nandipada, see Symbols 
Nandivardha, seal 36 
Nandivardhana, city 17 
Nandivarman, Pallava loi, 105 
Nanpaya, Pagan 170, 171; fig. 314 
Nara, Japan 93, 154 
Narasimha 86, 96, 97; fig. 170 
Narasimhavarman I, Pallava king 95, loi 
Narasithhavarman II, Rajasimhavarman, Pal- 
lava king loi 

Narayana, see Visnu 
Narayanpur 118 
Narbada 7 
Nasik 23, 38, 94 

— Caitya-h2i\\ 28, 29, 76; fig. 31 

— Cave XVII 98 

— Gautamiputra, Cave III (vihdra) 69, 70 

— Nahapana vihdra 28 

— Sri Yajha Cave 70 

— textiles 139 

Nat Hlaung Gyaung 170, 171; fig. 305 
Nataraja, see Siva 
ndtiy see Costume 
ndtya-mandapa^ see Architecture 
ndtya-sdla^ see Architecture 
ndtya-sdstra, see Texts, Bharatiya 
Nayyaks of Madura 124 
Neak Pean, Ahkor Thom 186 
Negapatam (Nagipattanam) 106, 199 
Nemawar, Indore, Siddkesvara temple 109 
Nemean lion 62 
Neminatha, temple, Girnar 112 
Nepal 144 — 146; figs. 276 — 281 
Ngakywe Nadaung, Pagan 170; fig. 306 
Niddnakathd, see Texts 
Nikawe Kande Dagaba 162 
Nimbus (siras-cakra^ prabhdmandala, tiruvdsi, 
sun-disk) 22, 41, 42, 5i,57» ^7^ 68,74, 122; 
figs. 90, 122, 123, 130, 132 



Nirmand, Kulu io8; fig. 273 
Nissanka Lata Mandapaya, Ceylon 165 
No-gaku, classic Japanese drama 21 1 
Nokhas, Etah Dist. fig. 226 
nora-singhy see Animals 
Northern temple, Polonnaruva 164, 177, 
196; fig. 261, 291, 302 
Nrtja-sdstra, see Texts, Bharatiya 
Nude, nudity 10, 21, 25, 36, 57, 64, 65, 66, 
118, 149, 188; figs. 24, 52 — 54, 66, 72 — 75, 
81, 105, 121, 164, 165, 173, 176—179, 
184, 195, 196, 204, 205, 207, 218, 219, 
226, 247, 255, 256, 257, 283, 353, 354 

see also Earth goddess. Erotic motifs. 

Fertility, Mother goddesses, Pancika 
njagrodha, banyan, ficus indica, confusion with 
pippala 47 

Ny^ng-u, Burma 174 

Nymphs 41, 62, 64, 65, 149; figs. 177, 283 

Okakura, K. 14, 154 
Orcha 129 

— palace 121 

Orissa ii, 44, 106, 107, 109 

— early caves 27 

— mediaeval temples 37 

— ports of departure for Sumatra and Java 

157 

Osia 98, III 

Padmapani, see Boddhisattva 

Padmasambhava, Tibetan saint 147, 148 

padmasanay see dsana 

pdduka-2i\t?it 51, 44; see also Symbols 

Paes, Portuguese writer 123 

Pagan, Burma 169 — 174, 205; figs. 305 — 309, 

311— 317 

Pahang, Sumatra 200 
Pahari paintings 127, 13 1 
paijamuy see Costume and Textiles 

Painting; Ajanta 8, 39, 40, 72, 75, 77, 
^ 9 — 9 L 99 > 1^3; 179 — ^85 

— dlekhja sthdna 120 

— Anuradhapura, Ceylon 160, 163 

— Bagh 89; fig. 183 

— Bali 209 

— Bamiyan 5 3 

— Bengal 119, 146; fig. 282 

— bhdvana 87 


Painting; Burma 115, 172 

— Calukya, early 98 — 99 

— Candela no 

— cetand 88 

— citra-sdla 84, 87 

— classification 87 

— Degaldoruwa 168 

— Elura, Kailasa 100, 121; fig. 196 

— Gujarati (Jaina, etc.) 89, loi, 115, 
119— IZI, 129, 132, 172; figs. 255—258 

— Gupta 39, 87 — 91 ; figs. 179, 180, 182 — 184 

— Hindagala, Ceylon 163 

— Jaina, see Gujarati 

— Javanese 209 

— Kandyan Siriihalese 26, 168 

— Khotan 66, 148, 150; figs. 283 — 285 
Kusana 56 

— Mirpur Khas 56 

— Mohenjo Daro 56 

— Mughal 127 — 133 

— Nepal 115, 119, 145, 146; figs. 279 — 281 

— Pahari 127, 13 1 

— Pala 1 14, 115 

— Pallava 102 

— Polonnaruva 163, 164, 177 

— pre-Kusana 39, 40 

— Ragmala 129, 130, 13 1; figs. 259, 260 

— Rajput 8, II, 16, 65, 66, 127 — 133, 140; 
figs. 258—271 

— Rastrakuta 100; fig. 196 

— Ridi Vihara 163 

— Siam 177, 178 

— Sigiriya, Ceylon 162; fig. 184 

— Sikh 127, 13 1 — 133 

— Sittanavasal 89 

— Sravana Belgola 12 1 

— Tamankaduwa, Ceylon 163 

— Tibetan 147 

— Turkistan 148 — 150; figs. 283 — 285 

— Vedic 42 

— Yamdpatay Wayang Beber 89 

— and dancing 71, 88, 21 1 
Pala dynasty 105, 106 

Pala school and period 113 — 115; figs. 227 
to 232 

Palaces, see Architecture, Amber p., Asoka, 
Assyrian, Dig 
Palampet, Mysore 118 
palamporey see Textiles 


283 



Palatu pherl 55 

Palembaag, Sumatra 198 — 200, 205, 207, 208 
Pali tana, Jaina temple city 112 
Pallas Athene 5 1 
Pallava dynasty 23, 39, loi — 105 

— style 70, 95, loi — 105, 157, 162, 175, 
184; figs. 197 — 209 

— Aparajita style 105 

— Mahendra style 102 

— Mamalla style 102 — 104 

— Rajasimha and Nandivarman style 104 
to 105 

— elements in pre-Khmer art 8 
Panamalai, Pallava temple 105, 182; fig. 203 
Panataran, Can^, Java 205, 209, 210; fig. 352 
pancakrtya^ see ^iva 

panca-mukha type 32 

Pancika 62, 68, 99, 149, 203; see also 
Fertility and Yaks a 
Pandavas, statues 66, 87 

— temple names 87, 102 — 104 
Pandrenthan (Puranadhisthana) near Srinagar 

142, i4j; fig. 275 
Pandu-kund, Kasmir, temple 143 
Pandurahga, CampS 195 
Pandya dynasty 6, 106 

— see also Architecture 

Panjab 9, 22, 23, 24, 34, 35, 36, 49, 52, 56, 
68, 74, 107, 108, 134; figs. 62, 274 
Paiiji, Raden 207 
Panjnara, Jammu 143 
Pankaraksa, see Texts 
Pantaleion 64, 66; see also Coins 
Panther, see Animals 
Papanatha temple, Pattakadal 95, 99 
Parakrama Bahu I, Ceylon 159, 160, 163, 164, 
165, 167; fig. 301 

Parakrama Bahu II, Ceylon 160, 166 
Paramartha, pilgrim 153 
Paramesvaravarman, Pallava 10 1 
Parasnath, Bengal 113 
parasu^ see Symbols 

Parasuramesvara ; Uhgam^ Gudimallam 39; 
fig. 66 

— temple, Bhuvanesvara 79, 115, 202; 

fig. 216 

Parauli, Cawnpore Dist. 108 
Pargiter 16 

Parihasapura, near Srinagar 142, 205 


Parker, H. 161 

Parkham, Kumka image 16, 28, 58, 86; fig. 9 
Parmentier, H, 83, 187, 195, 196, 200 
Parsvanatha, Tirthamkara, Jina 57; figs. 86, 

234 

Parthia, satraps 24 
Parvati, see Devi 
pasada^ see Architecture 
Pasupatinatha, Nepalese shrine at 145 
Pataini Devltemple, Uchahara 78 
Patalapuri, see Inscriptions 
Pataliputra (Patna) 5, 9, 10, 15 — 21, 23, 24, 
26, 52, 43, 44, 55, 58, 64, 69, 71, 75, 81; 
figs. 17, 22, 62, 67 
Patan, Anhillavada in 
Patan, Kasmir, temple 143, 144 
— Somanatha iii 
Patan jali, see Texts 
Pathankot 48; fig. 116, 117 
Pathaora, near Bharhut 25 
PathM 86; fig. 178 
Pathodawgyi, Burma 173 
Patna, see Pataliputra 
patola, see Textiles 
Pattakadal 95, 99; fig. 188 
Pattinappdlai^ see Texts 
Pattini Devi, Ceylon 167; fig. 300 
Pawaya (Padmavati), Gwaliar 34, 69; fig. 63 
Pawdawmu, Pagan 170 
Pawon, Kedu, Java 203 
Payar, Kasmir, temple 143 
Peacock, see Animals 
Pebin Gyaung 170 
Pegu, Burma 169, 172, 194 
Pejeng, Bali 210 
Peiliot, P. 153 
Penampikan, Java 209 
Persepolis 19 

Persia; bounded by Indus 9, 22 
Persian influences ii — 14, 22, 24, 57 
Perur, Coimbatore Dist. 126; fig. 248 
Peruvalanallur 101 

Peshawar (Purusapura), Afghanistan 30, 34, 
49> 53, 152 

Petleik, Pagan 170, 171 
Phallus 5, 39,41, 43, 86, 185, 187, 190, 192, 
1 97 ; figs. 66, 68 ; see zlso lingam^ ^iY?^-lingam 
Phimeanakas, Ahkor Thom, Cambodia 188, 
205; fig. 331 


284 



Phnom Bakeh, Cambodia 190, 191, 205 

— Chisor, Cambodia 192 

— Da, Cambodia 182, 184 

— Pen, Cambodia 84, 186, 194 
Phoenizian tombs 12 
phulkdri^ see Textiles 
'Pindapdtra Avaddna^ see Texts 

pippala^ asvattha^ sacred fig, ficus religiosa 

4. 31. 47; %• 6 

— see also Bodhi-tree, nyagrodha 
Piprawa 12, 75 

Pitalkhora 28, 29 

pithuy pedestal 41; see also Images 

— simhdsanay lion throne 57 
Pitsanu, see Visnu 
Pitsanulok, Siam 175, 176 
Plaosan, Candi, Java 206 

Plaques 10, 20, 21, 37, 42, 65, 80, 81, 156, 
172, 173, 196; figs. 2 — 6, 62, 71, 105, 388 
Po Klaun Garai, Campa 197 
Polonnaruva (Pulatthipura), Ceylon 73, 126, 
i59> — 167, 196; figs. 243, 287, 291, 

301—304 

Polynesian elements in Indopersian art 200, 
208, 209 

Po Nagar, Campa 197, 198 
Ponambalavanesvaran Kovil, Colombo 125 
Porcelain 178 — 179, see also Pottery 
Po Rome, Campa 198 
Porus 42 

“Pot and foliage”, see Architecture, capitals 
Potala, Mt. 147 

Pottery 4, 6, 8, 12, 15, 168; see also Faience, 
Porcelain 
Pottier, E. 14 
prahha-mandaluy see Nimbus 
pradaksindy see Architecture, circumambu- 
lation 

Prah Khan, Ankor Thom 184, 186, 187 

— Pithu, Ankor Thom 188 

— Vihear, Cambodia 191, 192 
Prajapati 45 

Prajnaparamita (Tara) 208 

prakdruy see Architecture 

pralamhapaduy see dsana 

Vrarndnaniy see Aesthetic, appreciation 

Prambanam, Java 79, 199, 203 — 207; fig. 348 

prdng-tfpCy see Architecture, terraces 

Prapathom, Siam 175, 177; figs. 318, 519 


Prasat Andet, Cambodia 185; fig. 333 

pratikrtiy see Images 

pratimdy see Images 

'Pratimdndtlkay see Texts 

Vtii Kuk, Cambodia 182; fig. 324 

Pre Rup, Cambodia 190 

Primitives 71 

Pringapus, Candi, Java 203 

Prome (Pisanu Myo, Sriksetra), Burma 169, 

172, 174 

Przyluski, J. 60 
Prthvi 42 

Pudu Mandapam, Madura 124 
pujdy ritual of devotional service 5, 17, 39, 
127; fig. 66 

pujd-sild-prakdray railed enclosure 22 ; see also 
Architecture, prakdra 
Pujari Pali, Bilaspur Dist. 80 
Pulakesin I, Calukya 94, 99 
Pulakesin II, Calukya 92, 94, 95 
puma-ghatay full vessel, fertility emblem 65; 

fig. 286; see also Fertility and Symbols 
Puntadeva, Candi, Java 202; fig. 345 
punya-saluy see Architecture 
Puppets 174, 21 1 
puvy city 5 

Pura ye Ganga, temple, Bali 210 
purdnay see Coins, punch-marked 
Puranadhisthana, see Pandrenthan 
Puri, Orissa 109, 115; fig, 218 
Puritanical aesthetic 36 
Purnavarman, West Javanese king zoo 
— of Magadha 93 

Purnea, near Murshidabad, BengH 134 
Puskalavati, Afghanistan 49, 55, 73 
pustakdsrdma, see Libraries 
Pusyamitra, Sunga 23 
Pyathonzu 172 

Pyus, Burmese proper 169, 172 

Qalmy pen, style; see Textiles 
QalmdaTy see Textiles 
Quintus Curtius 34, 42 

Rach Gia, S. Cambodia 183 
rachi siy see Animals, lion 
Raden Pafiji, see Kamesvara 
Radha and Krsna, see Krsna Lila 
Radha Krishna, Pandit 56 



Ragas and raginis, musical modes ; see 
Ragmala 

Ragmala 129 — 132; figs. 259 — 261; see also 
Texts 

Rain, clouds, lightning; see Clouds 
Raja Bhoja, Paramara, Pawar 105 
Rajagrha 9, 10, 59, 75, 82, 86; fig. 176 
Kajapasada 53 
Rajaraja 199 

Rajarajadeva Cola 106, 122, 126 
Rajasan, Sunga figure and column 32; fig. 58 
Rajasimhesvara temple, Kanci 104; fig. 197 
Rajasthani, paintings 127, 129; figs. 259—261 
Rajasuja ceremony 9 

Rajendracola I, King of Ceylon 106, 122, 
166, 199 

Rajendravarman of Cambodia 190 
Rajputana 22, 84, 107, 121, 127 133, 13^9 

138—140; fig. 395 
Rajput dynasty 105, 106, 122 
Rajput painting 8, 127— 133; figs. 254, 

258—271 

Rajrajesvara temple, Tanjore 122; fig. 235 
Ra.jrani, temple, Orissa ii5> 

Rajshahi 114 

rdksasas 79 

Rama, see Ramayana 

Rama Khamhen, Siamese king 178 

Ramanathan, Sir P. 125 

Ramatirtham 39 

^ijdtndyunci (Rama, Laksmana, Sita) 3i> 87^ ^^7^ 
135, 204; figs. 167, 266, 356, 371 
Kamajana^ see Texts 

Ramesvara cave, Elura 64, 96, 97; fig. 190 
Rtoinagar, temple at 116 
Rampurva, Tirhut fig. 14 
Rangoon, Burma 171; fig. 310 
Rani Gumpha 37; fig. 3^ 

Ranipur Jharia, Jogini temple no 

Rahjubula, Rajula, satrap 37, 63 

Rankot vehera, Polormaruva 163 

Ranpur, Jaina temples 113 

Rao, T. A. G. 39 

Rapson, E. J. 49 

rdsa^ see Aesthetic, appreciation 

rasdsvddana^ see Architecture, appreciation 

Rastrakuta, art 99 — loi, 121; figs. 193 196 

— dynasty 95 , 99 

rathay see Architecture 


Ravana ka Khai, Elura 97, 100 
Rawak, stupay Khotan 150 
Rgveda Samhita 9 
Rhinoceros, see Animals 
Ridi Vihara, Ceylon 124, 136, 163, 166, 168; 
fig. 388 

Romlok, Ta Keo, Funan 76, 153, 182; 
fig. 100 

RostovtzefF, M. 3, 13 

Ruanweli Dagaba, Anuradhhapura 161, 163; 

figs. 292 — 294 
Rugs, see Textiles 

“Rukmini”, stone sculpture, Nokhas, fig. 226 
Ruluos, Cambodia 185, 187, 190 
rumdly see Textiles 
Rup Bas, Bharatpur 86 

near Mathura 57 

riipa = Symbols 

Sacrifices (jajnd) 5, 9, 21, 23, 41, 42; s^^yupa 
Sadarhadvana, see Harvan 
Sadariva, see ^iva 

Sadha-Tissa, king of Ceylon 160, 161 
Sagardighi, Murshidabad Dist. 114; fig. 231 
Saheth Maheth ( = Sravasti) 34, 58, 61, 87, 99 
Sdbltya-DarpanUy see Texts 
Sahni, D. R. 61 
Saidpur 56 

Sailendra dynasty in Java 203 — 206 
^ailendra dynasty of Sumatra 113, 199 
Saisunaga dynasty 9, 10, 16 
^aisunaga-Nanda period (642 — 320 b. C.) 
9 — 10 

Saiva, adjective, formed from Siva 
Saiva saints, images 126, 167 
Sakas (Scythians) 23, 24, 49 
Sakka, Sakra, see Indra 
Sdkya-vardbanay see Yaksa 
Salavahkuppam, Pallava cave 105 
Samannaphala SuttUy see Texts 
Sambhu-Bhadresvara, see Siva, lihgam 
Sambuor, Cambodia 181 
Samgamesvara temple, near Pattakadal 95 
samgltd-Jdlay see Architecture 
Sariihitas 64 

Samkarsana, see Balarama 
Samsar Cand, Raja 13 1 
Samudragupta, Gupta king 71; fig. 130; see 
also Coins 



Sarhyutta Nihdya^ see Texts 
Sanborn, A. 67 

Sand 8, 18, 20, 21, 23, 24 — 27, 30, 31, 33, 

34. 37. 39. 43—45. 47. 4^. 5i. 5 2, 

59, 61, 64—66, 68, 74, 78, 85, 94, 96, 104, 
161; figs. 50 — 56, 149, 15 1 
Sanganir, textiles 139 
Sangariti, Can^, Java 207 
Sangsit, Bali, temple 210 
Sangyaung monasteries 173 
Sankara Vaidyanatha, see Siva 
Sankaram hills 39 
Sankisa, soapstone 20; fig. 134 
Sano, Siam 175 
sdnt, flexible anklets 136 
Santi, Indra as, see Indra 
Sapada 171 
Saptamudri well 67 
sarduldy see Animals 
Sari, Candi, Java 203 

Sarnath 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 36, 58, 63, 69, 
74. 7<5. 85, 112, 182; figs. 12, 18, 19, 83, 
1 61, 1 71; see also Mathura 
sdrongy see Textiles 
Sasanka, king 93 

Satakarni, third Andhra king, coin 67 

— portrait statue 23, 30, 43 

Sat Mahal Pasada, Polonnaruva 165 ; fig. 287 

Satapatba BrahmanUy see Texts 

^atrunyaya, Jaina temple city 112 

sdttviky see Images 

Sawamura, S. 146 

Sawankolok, Siam 178 

Sayce, A. H. 7 

Sdok Kak Thom 185 

Seals, Bhita 36 

— Gupta 45, 55, 86 

— Indo-Sumerian 4; figs. 2 — 6 

— Kusana, early 67 

— Nandivardha 36 

— ^iva, see Siva 

— Srivadra 86 

— Yatth^ Dagaba, Ceylon 159; fig. 133 
Seinnyet 170 

Selagriya, Candi, Java 203 
Selakelir, Java 209 
Semar, Can^, Java 202 
Sembhadra, Can^, Java 202 
Sena dynasty 106 


Sena II, king of Ceylon 164 
Senapati, see Craftsman, Nagar Seth 
senZy see Craftsman, gilds 
Serimpis, Javanese court dancers 212 
Seseruwa 165 

Sewu, Candi, Java 203, 206, 212 
Shah Jahan 121 

Shadow plays in Java 211; in Burma 174 

— in Siam 180; sources 21 1 
Sh^-ji-ki-Dheri, near Peshawar, site of 

Kaniska’s tower 30, 53, 152; fig. 89 
Shahpur 108 

Shans, Sino-Tibetan border races in Siam, 
Burma 169, 173 

Shore temple, Mamallapuram 105 ; fig. 201 

Shotoku Taishi, Japanese prince 154 

Shoulder wings 12, 20, 21, 67; figs. 16, 103 

Shpola stupUy Khyber 205 

Shwedagon, Rangoon 83, 171; fig. 310 

Shwegugyi, Pagan 170, 171 

Shwemawdaw, Pagan 172 

Shwesandaw 170, 205 

Shwezaya, Pagan 173 

Shwezigon, Pagan 170 — 172 

Siam 175 — 180; figs. 318 — 323 

Siddhapur, Rudcamala, temple at in 

Siddha Raj, Solanki in 

Siddhartha 33, 171; fig. 316 

Siddhesvara temple, Bankura 108; fig. 213 

Siem Reap, Cambodian theatre 194 

Sigirija, Ceylon 158, 162; fig. 184 

Sikh 127, 131 — 133 

sikhardy see Architecture 

Sikharesvara, see Siva 

Sikri, near Mathura 57 

— near Peshawar 62 
Szlapattikdramy see Texts 
Silparatnamy see Texts 

Silpa-JdstraSy text-book of architecture, etc. 
45, 72, 107, 125, 126 

— Mdnusdra 106, 125 

— May am at a 125 

— Silparatna 88, 115 

— Silpastbdnavidyd mentioned by Hsiien 
Tsang 72 

— V'zsnudbarmottaram 87, 88, 125 
Silpastbdnavidydy see Texts 

silpiy see Craftsman 
Stlvatenna, see Craftsman 


287 



simha^ see Animals, lion 
simhamugam, see Animals 
simhasdna — lion-pedestal, see Animals, lion 
and pitha 

Simhavarmalingesvara, see ^iva, lingam 

Simhavarman, Pallava king loi 

Simhavisnu, Pallava king loi, 105 

Simuka, Andhra king; portrait statue 23 

Sinbhua, Cawnpore Dist. 108 

Sind valley 9, 73, 93 

Sihgasari, Java 208 

Sino-Tibetan migrations 7 

siras-cakra^ see Nimbus 

Siren, O. 132 

Sirkap, Taxila 52, 54 

Sirpur, mediaeval temples 93, 108; fig, 

186 

Sirsukh, Taxila 54 

sisadar, see Textiles 

sisna^ see Siva lingam 

^ita 135; fig. 371; see also Ramayana 

^itawaka 166 

Sithammarat, Siam 178 

Sittanavasal 89, 102 

Siva (Mahesa, Mahesvara, Mahadeva, Nata- 
raja, Sadasiva, Sankara, Vaidyanatha) 
mentioned 3, 3, 8, 21, 22, 32, 39, 41 to 
45, 45, 46, 48, 49, 50, 53, 61, 66—69, 
78, 82, 86, 92, 95 — 100, 103 — 103, 107, 
no, 1 14, 126, 127, 142, 143, 144, 148 to 
130, 166, 167, 177, 186, 189 — 192, 194, 
196, 197, 201, 202, 206, 208, 209; figs. 
66, 68, 122, 125, 126, 171, 193 — 193, 
198, 230, 242, 248, 285, 334, 337, 344, 

356 

— Atdhanarisvara 67, 143 

— attributes 43, 45 

— Bhadresvara 194 

— bull deity of Puskalavati 49, see also 
Animals, bull, Nandi, Puskalavati 

— development of type on coins and seals 

45. 67, 68 

— Harihara, see Harihara 

— Iconography, see Iconography, develop- 
ment 

— images mentioned, Patanjali 43; see also 
Images 

— Kadphises II 67 

— Kapalesvara 191 


Siva lingam^ sisnuy mukba 4 ihgam^ phallic- 
symbol 3, 32, 41, 67, 78, 86, 104, 103, 
142, 189, 197; figs. 66, 68 

colossal 82 

prehistoric 5 

mentioned by name: 

Bhadrapatisvara 197 
Bhadresvara 196 
Hatakesvara 197 
Kapalesvara 191 
Parasuramesvara 39; fig. 66 
Sambhu-Bhadresvara 197 
Simhavarmalingesvara 197 
Yasodhesvara 190 

from particular sites: 

Bhita 32 
Cupuvatu 105 
Elura 99 

Gu<fimallam 39; fig. 66 
Kunjarakunja 201 
Mathura 67; fig. 68 
Pallava 104, 105 

— connected with Lokesvara 53, 95, 107, 
149, 186, 189; figs. 171, 283 

— Mahayogi 191 

— Mahesa, Sadasiva: three-headed form, 
miscalled Trimurti 

References 33, 100, 103, 143 

at Elephanta 8, 96, 100; figs. 194, 195 

in Gandhara 55 

in Kasmir 142, 143 

in Khotan and Far East 53, 148, 149 

on coins: 

at Elephanta 100 
in Gandhara 53 
in Kasmir 143 
in Khotan 55, 98 
of Satakarm, Andhra 67 
of Vasudeva 35; fig. 126 

— Nataraja, four-armed dancing image 3, 39, 
97, 126, 167; figs. 126, 242 

type described 126, 127 

— his paiicakrtja 127 

— seals 67; 

— Sikharesvara, the ‘‘Lord of the Peak” 
192 

— temples, early 48, 66 

— Uma-Mahesvata groups 21, 69, 86, no, 
114, 144; fig* 230 


288 



Siva Vaidyanatha, “Lord of Physicians’’ 107 
— with shoulder flames 61 
Siva adj. = Saiva 
Sivabuddha, see Kertanagara 
Sivacarya, Brahman 192, see also Craftsman 
Sivamitra, see Craftsman 
Six dynasties, China 152, 183 
Skanda (Karttikeya) 22, 43, 48, 67, 86, 167, 
196; fig, 175 
Skandagupta 71 
slendangy see Textiles, kain 
Smith, V. A. 49, 51, 74 
Snake, see Animals 
Sodasa, satrap 24, 37 
Sohagpur 108, 109 
Solanki (Calukya) iii — 113 
Soma, Cambodian Nagini 180, 181 
Somanatha-Patan, Kathiawad iii 
Somnathpur, Mysore no, 117 
Sonagarh, Jaina temples n6 
Sona Tapan, near Bankura, Bengal 80, 108 
Sonari 18, 21 

Sondani, Gwaliar 86; fig. 173 

Song Luy, citadel, Campa 195 

sopanuy see Architecture 

Sornakkalai Asari, see Craftsman 

Spooner, D. B. 51, 58 

Sravana Begola no, 118, 121 

Sravasti 34, 58, 61, 87, 99, 190 

sreniy see Craftsman, gilds 

Sri, Hindu goddess 31 

Sri Mara dynasty, Campa 195 

Srikandi, Can(fi, Java 202 

Srinangams, gopurams 122; fig. 240 

Srinivasanalur 122 

Srivadra, seal 86 

Srivijaya = Sumatra 198, 199 

Srutavarman of Cambodia 181 

stambhUy see Architecture, pillars 

Stede, W. 47 

Steel, see Iron and steel 

Stein M. A. 149 

stbapatiy see Craftsman 

sthayi-hhava 91 

stbira-sukhuy see dsana 

Stirrups, earliest known representation 25 
Stobaeus 67 
Stone age 3, 7, 13 
Strzygowski, J. 5, 8, 66 


stupas {dagahas) 10, 12, 15, 18, 19, 23, 25, 26, 
28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38, 39, 
44, 45, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 56, 62, 63, 70, 
72, 73> 75> l^y 77, 83, 113, 141, 142, 
144, 145, 148, 149, 152, 159—163, 169, 
170, 171, 172, 182, 199, 204, 205; figs. 29, 
32, 34, 42, 50 — 56, 72, 136, 189, 292 

— defined, see Architecture 
Subrahmamya temple, Tanjore 122, 124; 

fig. 238 

siiciy see Architecture 
Suciloma SuttUy see Texts 
Sudama cave, Barabar hills 18, 20 
Sudhamma Sabha 19, 29, 40; fig. 43; see also 
Architecture 

Suiko period, Japan 154 
Sujanpur, near Nadaun 131 
Sujata 47 

Sukhotai-Sawankalok (Sukhodaya-SaijanS- 
laya), Siam 175 — 178; fig. 320 
Sukul, Java 209 
Sultangafij 85; fig. 160 
Sultanpur no; fig. 222 
Sulva-SutraSy see Texts 
Sumatra 198 — 200, 212 
Sumba, textiles 137, 212; fig. 400 
Sumber Nanas, Candi, Java 207 
Sumbing, Mt., Java 203 
Sumeru, Mt., see Meru, Mt. 

Sun, see Surya, Symbols 
Sundara-murti-Svami 127, 167; fig. 243 
Sung period, China 153 
Sung Yiin 153 

Sunga art ii, 13, 19, 20, 31, 32, 35, 43, 44. 
56, figs. 13, 17—21, 24—27. 29, 32—33. 
36—52, 57—61, 67, 70 
Sunga dynasty 15, 23, 24 
Supalayat, Burmese queen 173 
Surajkund, Thakurji temple 32 
Suraj Mahall, Raja 121; fig. 253 
Surakarta (Soerakarta), Java 84, 21 1 
Surastra (Kathiawad) 93 
Surat 138; fig. 393 
Suratgarh 69 

Surya, Sun 25, 41, 66 — 68, 92, 103, 144, 
167, 169; figs. 24, 61, 106, 227 

— with wings 67; figs. 61, 103 

— Deul, Konaraka 115, 116; figs. 217, 220 

— temple, Osia 98, in 


19 


289 



Surya-Siddhantay see Texts 
^uryavarman I, of Cambodia 191, 192 
Suryavarman II, Paramavisnuloka of Ankor 
193, 194 
Susa 4, II, 19 
Sutras y see Vedic literature 
Suvarnabhumi, Suvarnadvipa, Suvanna- 
bhumi, Yavadvipa, Suvarnakaramandita, 
etc. = Sumatra 113, 156, 198, 199 
svastikuy see Symbols 
Svat valley (Udyana) 53, 62 

Symbols {rupUy ankuy cthnuy etc.) 8, ii, 13, 
50. 35> 36, 41, 43—45, 49, 50; see also 

Iconography, development 

— Animals, see Animals 

— apasmara-purusuy symbol of mala 39; 
fig. 242; see also Yaksa, vdhanam 

— astamahgala 44; fig. 71 

— caitya-vrksa 26, 30, 41, 45, 47, 151; 
figs. 10, 27, no. III, 1 14, 115; see also 
Caitja-Y%k.S2iy Architecture 

— chatruy chatta 20, 25, 26, 30, 31, 45; 
figs. 24, 54 

— damaru, drum 5 5 ; fig. 242 

— dharma-cakra, dhamma-cakka, cakra, wheel, 
discus 17, 18, 25, 26, 29, 31, 37, 41, 43, 
45, 50, 70, 116, 161, 175; figs. 12, 45, 
71, 72, III, 134, 136, 144, 145, 161, 165, 
220, 318 

— discus, see dharma-cakra 

— distinguishing deities, constituting an 
iconography 43, 45 

— eagle, double-headed ii, 55 

— fire-altar 41, 42, 45 ; figs. 64, 76, 122, 123; 
see also Fire 

— kamandalu 55; figs. 76, 126 

— lotus 18, 43; figs. 49, 74, 77, 92, 115, 
121, 129, 132, 143 

— ‘^mountain”, so-called stupa 20, 44 

— nandipada 45 

— padukuy Buddhapaday etc. 31, 42 — 45, 69, 
i6i 

— paraiu 39 

— punna-ghata 65 ; fig. 286 

— “shield” 38 

— spiral 13 

— Surya, sun, see Surya 

— svastika n, 13, 38, 44, 45; figs, in, 112, 
^^3 


Symbols, taurine 20, 45; figs. 106, 112 

— Taxila mark 45; fig. 112 

— trident, trisulay Saiva and royal emblem 
25, 26, 44, 48, 55; figs. 122, 125, 126 

— triratna 31, 38, 45, 50; figs. 61, 71 

— “Troy” mark n, 45 

— vajray thunderbolt 25, 41, 43; figs. 27, 85, 
299 

— wheel, see dharma-cakra 
Sze-Chwan, China 152 

Tadpatri, Anantapur Dist. 124; fig. 247 
Tagaung, Burma 169, 172 
Tagore, A. N. 88, 146 
Ta Keo, temple, Cambodia 191 
Takht-i-Bahi, Gandhara 53, no 
Taki 59 

Takings, Mon-Khmer races in Southern 
Burma 169, 173 
Tamankaduwa, Ceylon 163 
Tambapanni, Ceylon 158 
Tamil invasions in Ceylon 158 — 160, 163, 
164, 200 

Tampaksiring, burial place, Bali 210 
Tandwa, near Saheth Maheth, Mathura 
sculpture 66 

T’ang period, China 153, 154 
Tanjore loi, 106, 122, 126, 138, 167; figs. 235, 
238, 387, 389 

tankuy Tibetan painted banner 146 
Tantrimalai, Ceylon 164 
Ta Prohm, Cambodia 190 
TM, goddess 93, no, 147, 148, 167, 183, 
203, 204; figs. 164, 280, 300 
Taranatha 113, 121 
Taranga 112 

Taruma, early Javanese kingdom 200 
Taurine, see Symbols 

Taxila (Taksasik) 5, 12, 15, 20 — 22, 24, 30, 

375 49 > 5 o> 535 54 , 72, 73 ;%s. 112, 113 

*‘Taxik^’ mark, see Symbols 
Teak 4 > ^73 

Tejahpak’s temple, Dilwara ni, 112; fig. 221 
Teli-ka-Mandir, Gw^ar 109; fig. 212 
Tenganan, textiles 137, 218 
Ter (Tagara), caitya-hz}^ 77, 95 
Terracottas 3, 4, 10, 12, 19, 20, 21, 22, 28, 
3^5 43> 46, 4^5 64, 69, 73, 80, 87, 141, 
169, 172, 173, 196; figs. 16, 22,23, 575^0 


290 



Textiles at Ajanta 138 

— wax-resist pattern dyeing 16, 139, 
212; figs. 398, 399 

— brocades 138; fig. 394 

— cadar 139, 140 

— cmari 138 

— cikdn 140 

— daryai 137 

— early 9, 13, 16 

— embroidery 9, 26, 139 — 140, 174, 179, 
208; figs. 395, 397 

— etirili 138 

— gaddi^ shield cushion 140 

— gaumukhy ritual glove 140 

— ikat 137, 174, 179, 212, 213; fig. 400 

— jamdani 138 

— kain^ kapdla, -panjang^ -prada^ -slendang^ 
tengdnan 179, 212; fig. 399 

— kasida 140 

— kasuri (Japan) 137 

— khanjart, khanjarJ mashrus 138 

— kimkhwdb 138; fig. 394 

— kuca-bandha 179 

— mashrus 137 

— paijdma 137 

— palampore 139 

— patola 137, 213; fig. 393 

— phulkdri 139 

— printed 16, 138, 139 

— qalm^ qalmdar 139 

— rugs 137 

— rumdl 140 

— sarong 195 

— sisadar 139 

— sources: 

Ajanta 138 
Aurangabad 138 
Ayyampet 137 
Azamgahj 140 
Azamgarh 138 

Bali 137, 138, 212, 213; fig. 399 
Batak 213 

Benares 138; fig. 394 
Bokhara 137 
Burma 137 
Camba 137, 140 
Cambodia 194 

Ceylon 137, 138, 140, 168; fig. 396 
Dacca 140 


Textiles sources: Gujarat 137, 138 
Haidarabad 138 
Jaipur 140 

Java 137, 210 — 212; fig. 398 

Kachin 137 

Kasmir 138, 140 

Kathiawad 139, 140; fig. 397 

Lucknow 140 

Madras 138 

Masulipatam 139, 179 

Mathura 138 

Murshidabad 138 

Nasik 139 

Persia 137 

Rajputana 139; fig. 395 
Sanganir 139 
Sumatra 137, 212, 213 
Sumba 137, 212; fig. 400 
Tanjore 138 
Tenganan 137, 218 
Tringannu 137 
Turkestan 157 

— trade 137 

Texts cited or illustrated: 

— Arjunavivdha 207, 21 1 

— Arthasdstra 15 

— Asokdvaddna 33 

— Astasdhasrikd-prajndpdramitd 114, 146; 

figs. 280 — 281 

— Atharva Veda 41 

— Avidura-Niddna 171 

— Bhagavad Gltd 52 

— Bharatayuddha 202 

— BhdratJya Nd/ya-sdstra 84, 88, 180 

- — Brhat Samhitd 126, 201 

— Devaduru Mabdtmaya 197 

— Dlpahkara legend 64 
Divydvadana 30, 204 

— Dulva 46 

— • Gandavyuha 204 

— Gita Govinda 131; fig. 269 

— Grhya Parisista 43 

— Grhya Sutra 42, 43 

— Hamir-hath 13 1 

— Harivamsa 42 

— Harsacarita 90 

— Hitopadesa 103 

— Jdtakamdld 204 

— JdtakaSy see Jdtaka 


19 


291 


Texts Kddambari 90 

— Kdlikdcdrya Kathd 119 

— Kdlija Damana 131; fig. 268 

— Kalpa Sutra 119, 120; figs. 255 a and b 

— Kdma Sutra^ Kd/»a-Sdstra 88, 116 

— KaptJa Avaddna 146 

— Katbdsarit-Sdgara 26 

— 208, 209 

— Lalita Vistara lyi, 204 

— Mabdbhdrata 26, 44, 48, 64, 69, 86, 103, 
131, 191, 193 

— Mahdvamsa 26, 40, 46, 84, 87, 126, 156, 
158, 160, 164, 165, 198, 199 

— Milinda Vanba 58, 190 

— Mudrardksasa 209 

— Ndgarakertdgama 208, 210 

— Nala and Damqyanti 13 1 

— Niddnakatbd 47, 61 

— Pancar aksa 114 

— Patanjali, Mahdbbd^a 40, 43 

— Pattinappdlai 44 

— Pindapdtra Avaddna 14^ 

— PrastmdndtikxL 185 

— Kdgmdld 129, 131 

— Kdmdyana 48, 72, 80, 87, 95, 118, 123, 

130, 174, 180. ^ 93 > i 98 > 

206, 209; fig. 266 

— Sdbitya-Darpana 36 

— Samannapbala Sutta 52 

— Samyutta Wtkdja 47 

— Satapatba Brdbmana 42 

— Silapattikardm 167 

— Silparatnam 88 

— Silpastbdnavidyd 72 

— Hlpa sdstrasy see lilpa-sdstras 

— Sikiloma Sutta 47 

— Sulva-Sutras 42 

— Surya Siddbanta 197 

— Tberd-Tberi-Gdtbd 40 

— Uttara Kdma Carita 84, 87 

— Vasanta Vildsa 120; fig. 257 

— Vinaya Pitaka 40 

— Vipiudbarmottaram 88, 90 

— Visuddbimagga 44 
tbdba^ see Architecture 
Thagyapaya, Pagan 173 

Thai, Siamese race properly so-called 175 
to 177 

Thakur Rani 86 


Thanesar (Sthanvi^vara) 92 
Thanh Ho, citadel, Campa 195 
Thaton, Burma 169, 170, 173 
Thatbinnyu, Burma 170, 171; fig. 307 
Theatre in India 84, 140 

— in Bali 211, 212 

— in Burma 174 

— in Cambodia 194 

— in Java 209, 210 

— in Siam 180 

— khon^ ancient masked play in Siam i8o 

— lakhon = Siamese theatre 180 

— masks 209; fig. 367 

— pwe = Burmese theatre 174 

— wayang Beber 40, 89, 211 

— wayang types in Java and Bali 209 — 212 

— ydtraSy religious folk plays 140 

— see also Shadow plays 
Tberd’Thert-Gdthd^ see Texts 

Thul Mir Rukhan nr. Daulatpor 56 
Thunderbolt, see Symbols, vajra 
Thuparama ddgaha^ Anuradhapura 160, 164 
Thuparama Vihara, Polonnaruva 164; fig. 

303 

Tibet 146 — 148 
T’ ien Lung Shan, China 152 
Tiger, see Animals 
Tigowa, nr. Jabalpur 77, 78 
Tilominlo, Pagan 170 

Tirthaihkaras, figures and paintings 96, 118, 
119; figs. 234, 256 
ttrthas 44, 1 1 2, 162 
Tirujnasambandha-Svami 127, 167 
Tirumala Nayyak, Madura 106, 124 
Tirumalai (Tiruvannamalai), Tirupati 122; 
figs. 237, 245 

Tirupappuliyur, modern temple 125 
Tiruttanesvara, temple of 105 
Tiruttani 105 
tiruvdst^ see Nimbus 
Tissamaharama, Ceylon 18, 159 
Tissawewa lake, Ceylon 162 
Tita, Titus 149 

stupa y Japanese 53 
Toda hut 6, 49 
tomo-e form 55 
toranaSy see Architecture 
Tordher 12 

torii^ arch, gateway, like Indian tor ana 5 5 


292 



Tra-kieu ( = Simhapura, Indrapura), Campa 

195, 197; fig- 344 

Tribhuvanacarya, see Craftsman, Gun^ 
Trichinopoly 102 
Trident, see Symbols 
Trimurti, see Siva, Mahesa, three-headed 
Trihgatmu, Malaya 137, 200 
triratna^ see Symbols 
trisula^ see Symbols, trident 
Tritons, see Animals 
Trivikrama, see Visnu 
“Troy’’ mark, see Symbols 
Tun Huang 146 — 148, 150, 152 
Turkistan, Chinese 148 — 150; figs» 283 — 285 
Tusaran-Bihar, near Partabgarh, Mathura 
sculpture 66 

Uchahara 78 

Udaipur, Mewar, see Udayapur 

Udayaditya Paramara 109 

Udayagiri, Bhop^ 77, 78, 85, 100, 103; 

fig- 174 

Udayagiri, Orissa 37 
Udayana, Javanese king 207 
Udayapur, Gwaliar 109, 121, 122, 129; 
fig. 262 

Udyana 53, 62; see also Svat valley 
Uijain 15, 23, 67, 122; fig. 112 
Uma, see Devi 

Uma-Mahesvara groups, see Siva 
Undavalli 104 

Ungaran, Mt., site, Java 203 
UpanisadSy see Vedic literature 
Ur 12 

urdbva-hahUy arms raised 103 

uriMy mole, tuft of hair on the brow 57, 74; 

fig- 163 

Uskur (Huviskapura), near Baramula 141 
usnisa (i) turban 39, 194, 200 

— (2) prominence on the Buddha’s head 32, 
39> 32. 57. 62; figs. 83, 84, 94 

— (3) coping of a vedika 30 
Utfara-Kama-Caritay see Texts 
Uttaresvara temple. Ter 95 

vdbanamy vehicle of a deity 45 ; fig. 175 
vdbanamy see Yaksa 
Vaidyanatha, see Siva 
Vaikuntha, see Inscriptions 


Vaikuntha Perumal, Kahci 105 
Vai^ali, see Basarh 
Vaisnava cave, Badami 64 

— temple, Nepal 144, 146 

Besnagar, 48 

Vaisravana, see Yaksa 

Vaital Deul, Puri 109, 116; fig. 218 
vajruy see Symbols 
Vajrapani 50, 166, 199; fig. 299 
vajrdsanay adamantine throne of the Great 
Enlightenment 31, 47, 81 
Vajrasana, see Bodhgaya, Bodhi-manda 
Vakataka dynasty 76 
Valabhi 93 
Vamana-avatara 103 
Vangath, Kasmir, temple 143 
Varaha-avatara cave 85, 102, 103; fig. 174 
Vardhana, see Yaksa, Nandi and Vardhana 
varmatty patronymic 156, 1 8 1 
varsa-sihalay a rain- vase 30 
Vasanta Vilas ay see Texts 
Vasiska, Kusana king 55, 63, 69 
Vastupala 112 

Vasudeva, Kusana king; coins 55 
Vasudeva, see Visnu 

Vasundhara (Wathundaya), Earth Goddess 65 
Vedas, early culture 5, 7 

— later culture 9 

Vedic literature (firdhmanaSy U pants ads y Sutras') 
9> 4^5 see ^so Texts 

vedikdy see Architecture 
VcUur 123 , 

Vehgi (Kistna-Godaveri Dist.) 70, 95, loi, 
126, 157 

Vesaray Dekhani or Calukya style of archi- 
tecture 107 

Vicitrasagara, legendary king of Campa 197 
Vidi^a, see Besnagar 
Vidyadurrapuram 38 

ViehSrah, Old Siam, Malay Peninsular 175, 199 
vihdras 27, 28, 37, 38, 48, 50, 63, 69, 70, 
75—77. 84, 89. 96. 98. 99. 189, 199, 
203; figs. 156, 157; see also Architecture, 
monasteries 

Vijabror, town of Kasmir 141, 142 
Vijaya, first Indian settler in Ceylon 158 
Vijayanagar art 123, 124; figs. 239, 245; see 
also Architecture 
Vijayanagar dynasty 106, 119 


Vijayafama Sarhgharama monastery, Ceylon 

i66 

Vikrama Sahi, Scindia izi 

Vikramaditya I, Calukya 95 

Vikramaditya II, Calukya 95 

Vimala Sha m 

Vinaya Vitaka, see Texts 

Virupaksa temple, Pattakadal 95, 96; fig. 188 

Visakha 22, 43, 48, 67 

Visnu (Narayana, Pitsanu, Trivikrama, Va- 
sudeva), mentioned 21, 24, 34, 41, 43, 
48, 49> 5 5> 80, 86, 97, 100, 103, no, 

114, 127, 143, 144, 152, 167, 175, 181, 

185, 189, 191, 202, 206, 207, 209; figs. 

165, 174, 209, 222, 224, 231, 246, 272, 

277, 360 

— Anantasayin 80, 103, 181; fig. 209 

— attributes 43 

— early worship 21, 24, 34, 48, 49 

— three-headed type 33, 143 

— see also Balarama, Bhagavata, Harihara, 
Krsna, Varaha 

— vehicle of, see Animals, Garuda 
Visnudharmottaram^ see Texts 
Visnupur, Bankura Dist., Bengal 116 
Visser, H. F. E. 154 
Visuddhimagga^ see Texts 
Visvakarma-<r^7/^^j“haU, Elura 77; fig. 155 
VHvakarmayam 125 

Visvesvara temple. Hat 107, 116 

Vitthala (Vithoba) temple, Vijayanagar 123 

Vocanh, Campa 157, 193 

Vogel, J. Ph. 52, 57, 60, 62 

Vredenberg, E. 146 

Vfksakdy dryad, see Woman and tree 

Vyadhapur, Cambodia 181 

vydkbydna ntudrdy see mudrd 

vyala, see Animals 

wdhalkaday see Architecture 

Wat Binchamopit, Bangkok, Siam 161 

— Si Jum, Siamese wat 177; fig. 320 
Wata-da-ge, Polonnaruva 163; fig. 304 
Watt, Sir G. 135, 138, 140 
Wattha-Gamam Abhaya, king of Ceylon 161 
Wayang, see Theatre 

Wayang Beber, see Theatre 
Wealth, see Fertility 
Wei period, China 132, 134 


Wheel, see Symbols, dharmacakra 
Wilson, H. 31 

Woman and tree, vrksakd 23, 33, 46, 30, 63 to 
66, 97, 1 18; figs. 75, 247 
Writing 9, 18 

yajna^ see Sacrifices 

Yaksa, Yakkha, Yaksi^ YakkhinJ, genii 5, 16, 
17, 19, 26, 28, 51, 33, 34, 36, 39, 40, 42, 
46—48, 30—52, 57> 62—64, 68, 69, 85‘ 
99, 125, 148—150, 134, 133, 138, 166, 
203; figs. 8, 9, 15, 31, 37, 38, 33, 
54> 58, 59> 61, 63, 67, 68, 72, 75, 143, 
242 

— as Atlantes 30; fig. 61 

— as Boddhisattva and Siva prototypes 
39> 46, 47 . 50, 52, 37. 68 

— as tutelary deities 46 

— Bacchanalian 62, 68 

— by name Assamukhi 26, 33 

— by name Dadhikarna 48, 63, 64 

— by name Hariti 51, 62, 203 

— by name Manibhadra 34, 48; fig. 63 

— by name Nandi and Vardhana 17, 34; 
figs. 13, 67 

— by name Pandka 62, 99, 149, 203 

— by name Sakya-vardhana 46 

— by name Vaisravana, Kubera, Jambhala 
62, 83, 148, 154, 166; fig. 38 

— Yakkha-cetiya^ catty bbavana 47, 48, 123; 
see also Architecture 

— colossal 16; figs. 8, 9 

— cult 42 

— guardians of buildings 28, 31, 36; figs. 31, 
37 . 38, 53 . 54 

— Mathura, early Yaksi, see Mathura and 
Manasa Devi 

— pot-beUied 68 

— race 5, 17, 150, 138 

— the four great kings, Lokapalas 40 

— type reached Japan 133 

— as vdbanam^ representing Mala 3 9 ; fig. 242 
ydliy see Animals 

Yamantaka 149 
Yamapata, see Painting 
Yasodhesvara, see Siva lihgam 
Yasovarman of Cambodia 187, i88, 190 
yasti^ see Architecture 
Yathemyo, Burma 172 



ydtras^ see Theatre 
Yatthala Dagaba, Ceylon 159; fig. 133 
Yavadvipa, see Suvarnabhumi 
Yavana, ‘‘Greek’’, transmontane 23 
Yi Yuan, pupil of A-ni-ko 153 
Yogi motif 3, 32, 33, 51, 52, 58, 65 
Yogyakarta (Djokjakarta), Java 84, 211 
Yue-Chi 49 


Yuan period, China 153 
Yudhsthira 87 
Yun Kang, China 149, 152 
yupUy sacrificial post 69, 86; see Sacrifices 

see Jatakas 
Zen Buddhism 154 
^igurrat 55 



< ' 




( 












1 6. Winged godess, terra-cotta, 17. C^/^Av'-bearer, Didarganj 

Basarh. Patna Museum. 


Maurva. 


1 8. Sarnath. 


19. Sarnath, 



22. Pataliputra. 



23. Mathura. 


Stone and terra-cotta heads. 

Maurva and Sufiga. 







VIII 



" V- v-rt. 


27. Indra, relief in the verandah, Bhaja vihara. 

Late xvlaurya or Early Sunga. 






















47- Vessantara ]iUaka. 49- Railing medallion. 

Reliefs from Bharhut. Calcutta Museum. 

Suflga. 












1 

























71.. with jina, Alathura ; hr^t ccntur\' A. D 

Lucknow Museum. 


69 — 69 A. Two shrines, Mathura; 
ca. 100 — no A. D. Mathura ^[uscum. 


70. BodhLtrce shrine, Mathura; second century B. (. 
Boston. 


~ f 

^ Jt 


m‘ f- V L,- : j ) 

-Tlrnn’^'-T V-O 


f' I . 


;? rySy:; r: - ■■? 7' ■ j ! i' -A A ’ 

fe •:<■.%'• ! I ! -7^". .' ' 7' ‘ ■ 


72. . J )w;7.^/>7/c/ of Lonasobhika, Mathura; 
late first century B.C. Mathura Museum. 


.^unn-a and Itarlv Kusana. 












XXII 






83. “Bodhi^attva” (Buddha) of Friar Bala, Sarnath; 123 A.D. 
Sarnath Museum. 


Ivarlv Kusdiia. 










91 . Gandhara reliefs. Scenes from the life of Buddha 
Detroit Institute of Arts. 

Early Kusana. 





















13 5- Figurcb' of don{)rs, Kanhen, verandah 

Second centurv A. D. 


Later Andhra. 













Buddha' 
A. D.; ^ 









xxx\ 



148. Lad Khan temple, Aihojc; ca. 450 D. 


Gupta. 



1 5 3 • Hucchimalllgudi te 

G 

















































i86. Laksmana temple, brick, Sirpur; seventh century. 


Earlv Mediaeval 














192. Kailasanatha temple, Elura; eighth centurv 

Earlv Mediaeval. 













:arana, 
ith cei 













Bodhgaya temple (“Mahabodhi”); as restored 


Earlv Gupta. 

























2Z2. Visnu, Sultiinpur; 
ca, tenth century, Lucknenv Museum. 



224, Visnu, Dekkhan or Maisur, ca. ninth 
century. Philadelphia. 


223. Padmapani, Mahoba; 
ca. eleventh centurv. Lucknow Museum. 



zis, Brahma, Kuruvatti; ele\'enth 
century. Philadelphia. 


Mediaeval. 





LXXI 



227. SQrya, Chapra; eleventh 
century. Rajshahi Aluseum. 



228. Buddha, Bengal; 
tenth centurv. Boston. 





229. Arapacana - MahjusrI, Bengal; 
eleventh century. Timken Collection. 



230. L ma-AIahcA'ara group, 
bronze, Bengal, Boston. 


Mediaeval (Pala). 

















Xataruja (Siva), Southern India, copper; seventeenth century 
Boston. 

r.arc Mediaeval (Madura). 













LXXXI 



zsi. Part t)f a manuscript of the I -asanta Vihlsa, Gujarati; 14,1 A. D, 
X. C. Mehta Collection. 


Late Mediaeval. 































R;?j- iJld, 


enlarged detail, Kangra; late eigthteenth centur\ 
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. 


Late Rajput. 





277. Visnu. 



276. Padmapani. 

Copper, ninth and thenth century. 



278. Buddha. 

Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 









283. W' ater-nymph, Dandan Liliq; 
before the eighth century. 


285. Alahesa or Lokesvara, Dandan 
hiliq; before eighth centurv. 


Turkistan. 















XCIX 



296. Buddha, Badulla; fifth 
or sixth centurv. Colombo ^^useum. 



298. Jambhala; eighth century. 
Boston. 


A 


i 

j 



297. AvalokitesA^ara ; eighth 
centurv. Boston. 



299. Vajrapani; ninth centurv. 
Boston. 


Ceylon. 















cm 





313. Mingalazedi, Pagan; 1274 A. D. 


Burma 

















t:'^ 


VA\ 




318. 1 ^bammci-cukka^ P rapa to m ; 
fifth or sixth century. 

3 1 9. Bodhisattva ; Prapatom ; 
seventh century. Samson Collection, 






■ . 7 *-^ ' ^ - 

- 7 /.% 

i .^E 


320. Devadharwa JJtaka^ Wat Si Jum; 
ca. 1361 A. D. 


321. Buddha, Lopburi; twelfth 
century, Samson Collection. 



























347- Borobudur, from the air; 
late eighth century. 


348 . Candi Loro Jongrang, Prambanam 
late ninth centurv. 




CXVI 



349. Candi Borobudur; late eighth century. 






3^z. Temple ruins, Panataran; fourteenth to fifteenth century. 

Java and Bali. 






stva, Cancii Banc 
ih century. Batav: 


CXIX 



361. 562. B('>dhisatt\'a, gold, Java; 
eighth or ninth century. Batavia. 



363. Padrnapani, copper, Java; 
tenth centurv. London. 



364. Hevajra, bronze, Banteai Kedei; 
tenth century. Phnom Pen. 


36V Apsaras, bronze, Bavon; 
late ninth centurv. Boston. 


Java and Cambodia. 








CXXIII 



576. Pendant, Kandy; eightheenth 
century. Dambewinne. 


377. Comb, S. 378. Knife, Kandy 

Indian. London. i8th centurv. 



379. Huqtjci bowl, enamel on silver; 380. Bell, Java; ninth 

early eighteenth century. centurv. Batavia. 


Metal work and Jewellery. 


CXXIV 



382. Bidri huqqa bowl; seventeenth century. 
London. 







385. 384. Brass huqqa bowl and spittoon; 
seventeenth century. Author’s Collection. 


385. Votive fan, gold, Kandy; 
eighteenth century. 



386. Betel-box, silver on copper; 
eighteenth century. Colombo. 


Metal work, seventeenth and eighteenth century. 


cxxv 



587. Ivory veneer, Tanjore ; 
eighteenth centurv. 



390. Decorated conch, Cevlon; 



388. Ivory plaque, Ceylon; 392. Bead bags, Kathiawad; 

seventeenth century. nineteenth century. 


Ivorv etc. 













CXXVIII 



598. Ba/fM, Java; modern. Boston. 



399. Gold stamped baf/'k'. Bah; nineteenth centurv. Boston. 



400. cotton, Sumba; modern. Boston. 

Textiles. 








I 










Central Archaeological Library, 
Call No fCOO 









