





GORAKHNATH AND THE 
KANPHATA YOGIS 


GEORGE WESTON BRIGGS 

Laittprofessor of the History of Religions 
Drew University f Author of the Chamars 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

DELHI :: VARANASI PATNA 



©MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
Indologicai Publishers & Booksellers 
Head Office : bungalow road, jawahari^actar, dblhi -7 
Branches ; i. ghowk, varanasi*i (u. p,) 

2. A 8 HOK RAJPATH, PaTNA-4 (BIHAR ) 


By arrangement with T. M, C\ A. Publishing House 


ISBN 0-8426- 05-19— 5 


First Edition iX^alcutta 1938 


Price : Rs. 20.00 


Printed in India 

BY SHAKTILAL jAlN, AT SHRI JAlNENDRA ' PRESS, BUNGALOW ROaO, 
JAWAUARNAOAR, DELHI-7 AND PUBLISHED BY SUNDARLAL JaIN FOR 
liOTfLAL BANARSIDASS, BUNGALOW ROaD, JAWaHARNAGAR, DEUn -7 



To 

Maodeja 




EDITORIAL PREFACE 

The purpose ot this series of small volumes ou the 
leading forms which religious life has taken in India is to 
produce really reliable information for the use of all who 
are seeking the welfare of India. Editors and writers alike 
desire to work in the spirit of the best modern science, 
looking only for the truth. But, while doing so and seeking 
to bring to the interpretation of the systems under review 
mch imagination and .sympathy as characterise the best 
study in the domain of religion today, they believe they 
are able to shed on their wotk fresh light drawn from the 
close religious intercourse which they have each had with 
the people who live by the faith herein described; and their 
study , of the relevant literature has in every instance been 
largely supplemented by persistent questioning of those 
likely to be able to give information. In each case the 
religion described is brought into relation with Christian!^. 
It is believed that all readers, in India at least, will recognise 
the value of this practical method of bringing out the 
salient features of Indian religious life. 




PREFACE 


The cult of the Kanphata Yogis is a definite unit within 
Hinduism; but the ideas and practices of the sect reach a 
much wider distribution than the order. In this study of 
these Yogis what may seem like undue attention is given to 
legend and folklore in general, and to the description of 
institutions, but this has been necessary in order to create the 
proper background for the understanding of the special Yoga 
of the. sect. The study has been carried on in the mid^t of 
regular tasks, both in India and in this country, over a long 
period of time. A good deal of the data supplied by others 
has been checked as the author has met with Yogis in many 
places, and with some Gorakhnathis many times. 

The analysis of the subject-matter of this study has been 
made so that the first two sections of the book may serve to 
illustrate the third. The assumption has been maintained 
throughout, that folklore and tradition are indispensable to 
an understanding of the growth and influence of the sect; 
and that popular views concerning Yogis are as essential for 
an understanding of this phase of the religious life of India 
as are the formulated texts of the sect. 

The use of various spellings of names and places corres- 
ponds with practice in different areas. 

The Sanskrit text here presented has not been, so far as 
the author knows, heretofore translated into English. There 
are, in other works, quotations including in all practically 
every verse of the Goraksaiataka^ but the English translations 
of those verses are often in very free renderings. The 
translation here offered has been checked^with the extensive 
commentary by Laksmi Naraya^ia, attached to the ‘ Poona ^ 
copy of the Goraksaiataka, The translations of passages 
from other Sanskrit texts of the sect are also by the author. 



z 


PREFACE 


The attempt has been made to present* the whole matter 
objectively and without comment, reserving a few paragraphs 
in the last chapter for some personal opinions. When the 
study was begun, the author had little idea that it would lead 
where it has. He has had no desire to hold up to view any 
unpleasant aspects of Hinduism and can only plead that 
Hindus are much more realistic and thorough in their 
criticisms of some of the practices here described 

Special thanks are due to the mahants and gurus of the 
order, more particularly to those at Gorakhpur, Devi Patan, 
Tilla and Dhinodhar; and to a few friends in this country 
tor council and for reading certain chapters of the book. 

The Reverend Daniel Buck and Pandit Brahmarsa Jagata- 
nand deserve separate mention, the one for his companionship, 
and as an interpreter in visits to Kanphata institutions, the 
other for assistance in the reading of Yoga texts. The late 
Professor A. V. Williams Jackson of Columbia University, 
Professor Franklin Edgerton of Yale University, and the late 
Dr. George William Brown of the Kennedy School of 
Missions have given generously of time and council. To the 
late Dr, J. N. Farquhar is due the impulse which started this 
investigation. His successors, the Reverend E. C. Dewick, 
M.A. and Mr. L, A. Hogg have rendered assistance in the 
later stages of its progress. 

The pictures reproduced in the book, with the exception 
of one, were taken by the author. The cut showing the 
cave-temple of Gorakhnath was furnished by Messrs. Con- 
stable and Company, Ltd., of London, with permission of 
H.H. the Maharaja of Nepal. The picture first appeared in 
Mr. Perceval Landon’s Nepdl^ volume one, page sixty-six. 
The line drawings were made by George S. Briggs, a son of 
the author. 

Grateful acknowledgement is made to the following pub- 
lishers for permission to quote from the volumes listed below. 
All of the excerpts are noted in appropriate places in the text. 

The Secretary of the Delegates, The Clarendon Press: 

The Vedanta Sutras with Commentary of Ramanuja and The 
Vedanta Sutras with the Commentary of Shahkardchdrya. Bv 
G.Thibaut . 



PREFACE 


XI 


The Oxford University Press of New York and London: 

Hymns from the ^sg-veda. By A. A. Macdonell. 

The Sarhhhya System. By A. B. Keith. 

Popular Religion and Folklore Of Northern India. By W. Crodce. 
The Religion of the Rig-Veda. By H. D. Griswold. 

Outlines of the Religious Literature of India. By J. N. Farquhar. 
The Darvishes. By J. P. Brown. 

The Oxford University Press, New York, and Professor 
R. E, Hume, Ph.D,: 

The Thirteen Principal Upanishads. 

Macmillan and Company, New York, and Macmillan and 
Company, Ltd,, London: 

Tribes and Castes of the Central Provinces, By E. V. Russell and 
Hira Lai. 

Macmillan and Company, New York, and The Cambridge 
University Press: 

The Cambridge History of India. Vol. I. By J. E. Rapson,’ Editor. 
A History of Indian Philosophy. 2 \ ols. By S. N. Dasgupta. 

Macmillan and Company,' New York, and George Allen 
and Unwin f 

Indian Philosophy. 2 Vols. By S. Radhakrishnan. 

Arthur Probsthain, London: 

Indian Serpent Lore. By J. Vogel. 

Mohenjo~daro and the Indus River Civilization. 3 Vols. By 
Sir John Marsrhall. 

Luzac and Company, London: 

The Serpent Power and other works on T antra. By Arthur Avalon 
(Sir John Woodroffe). 

(Also for the reproduction of one of the plates from The Serpent 

Pozver. ) 

Edward Arnold and Company, London: 

Hinduism and Buddhism. By Sir Charles Eliot. 

Harvard University Press, Cambridge: 

Religion and Philosophy of the Veda, 2 Vols. By A. B. Keith. 

John Lane, The Bodley Head Limited, London: 

The Gurkhas. By Major W. Brook Northey and Captain C. G. 
Morris. 



PREFACE 


D. B. Taraporevala Sons and Company, Bombay: 

The Mysterious Kundalini. By Dr. Rele. 

The Superintendent of Government Printing, The Panjab; 

A Glossary of the Tribes and Castes of the Panjabi and of the 
North-West Frontier Province. By H. A. Rose. 

I am indebted to one of my students, the Reverend William 
L. Lancey, B.A., B.D., for the preparation of the Index. 

Of readers, especially of Indians, the author desires gener- 
ous consideration, for he has endeavoured to carry on this 
study not with bias or for controversy, but with the desire to 
understand what these Yogis themselves believe and do. 

Madison, N. y., G.W.B. 

22 June,! 938. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAP, PAGE 

Preface ... ... ... ... ... ... ix 

A. 7’HE CULT 

1. GorakhnAthIs ... ... ... ... ... 1 

11. The Order ... ... ... ... ... 26* 

III. Vows ... ... ... ... ... ... 44 

IV. Divisions OF THE Order... ... ... ... 62 

V. Sacred Places ... ... ... ... ... 78 

VI. Sacred Places { Concluded ) ... ... ... 98 

VII. Reugion and Superstition ... ... ... 125 

VIII. The Pantheon ... ... ... ... ... 150 

B. HISTORICAL 

DC. Legend ... ... ... ... ... 179 

X. The Forerunners of tbb GorakhnAtiOs... ... *208 
XL GorakhnAth ... ... ... ... ... 228 

XIL The Literature... ... ... ... ... 25t 



xiv 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAP, 


PAGE 

XIII. 

Yoga and Tantra ... ... * 

C. THE SYSTEM 

258 

XIV. 

The Gorak§a^taka 

... 284 

XV. 

More Important Physiological Concepts 

... 305 

XV J 

Chief r\iMS and Methods 

... 322 

XVII, 

Conclusion 

... 349 


Glossary 

... 356 


Bibliogkaphy 

... 360 

• 

Plates 



K nv.v 

... 369 



CHAPTER ONE 


gorakhnathis 

The followers of Gorakhnath are known as Yogi, as 
Gorakhndihi, and as Darsani, but most distinctively as Kan- 
phata. The first of these names refers to their traditional 
practice of the Hatha Yoga, the second to the name of their 
reputed founder, the third to the huge ear-rings which are 
one of their distinctive marks, and the fourth to their unit|ue 
practice of having the . cartilege of their ears split for the 
insertion of the ear-rings. In the Panjab, in the Himalay is, 
in Bombay, and elsewhere they are often called Nat ha, 
which is a general term meaning ‘ master.’ Women of the 
sect are similarly called Ndthni. In Western India they arc 
generally known as Dharamndthi (or Dhoramnathi), attti a 
famous disciple of Gorakhnath, by that name. In other pu ts 
of India the names Kanphata and Gorakhnathi are commonly 
used. 

It is said that the practice of splitting the ears originated 
with Gorakhnath, ^ and that the designation Kanphata 
(literally, ‘ Split-eared ’) was a term of disrespect applied to 
these Yogis by Musalmans.^ 

The word Yogi is a general descriptive term, applied to 
many who do not belong to the Kanphatas. It Mias many 
shades of meaning, from that of saint to that of sorcerer or 
charlatan.’ 2 It is also a general term for ascetics, particularly 

1 L4, vol. VII, p.299. 

* BRl, p. 215; RTCCP, voi. Ill; BHCS, pp. 319 ff., 402; MV, 
p. 217. 

The following quotation is from RTCP, vol. II, p. 389. In the 
Panjab the term Yogi, is used to cover a wider group, ‘ that miscel- 
laneous assortment of low caste faqirs and fortune-tellers, both Hindu 
and Musalman, but chiefly Musalraan, who are commonly known as 



2 gcrakhnAth and the kanphata yogis 

for those who are endeavouring, by restraint and discipline of 
the body, to secure union with the Brahman. From the 
generalized point of view, the Gorakhnathis constitute the 
principal group and the better class of Yogis, although some 
of the less desirable characters of ascetics bearing the name 
Yogi, may be found amongst them. They form a distinct 
order of Yogis. ^ 

Kanphata Yogis are found everywhere in India, being as 
widely scattered as any of the ascetic orders.® They are met 
with separately as mendicants and as hermits; and in groups, 
in the Northern Deccan, in the Central Provinces, in Gujarat, 
in Maharastra, in the Panjab, in the provinces of the Ganges 
basin and in Nepal.® 

It is not proper for Yogis to live alone; and they are not 
supposed to wander, but to abide in monasteries, or at 
temples, and to meditate. The books prescribe as follows, 
for Yogis: 

The practice of the Ha^ha Yoga should be carried out in a private 
cell, four cubits square, free from stones, fire and water, [situated] 
in a well-gov'^rned country, free from violence, where the law 
(dharma) is followed and where alms are abundant. [The cell] should 


Jogis. Evep^ rascally beggar who pretends to be able to tell fortunes, 
or to practice astrological and necromantic arts, in however small a 
degree, buys himself a drum and calls himself, and is called by others, 
a Jogl. Those men include all the Musalmans, and probably a part 
of the Hindus of the eastern districts, who style themselves Jogis. 
They are a thoroughly vagabond set, and wander about the country 
beatini? a drum and begging, practising surgery and physic in a 
small way, writing charms, telling fortunes, and practising exorcism 
and divination ; or, sitting in the villages, eke out their earnings from 
these occupations by the offerings made ,at the local shrines of the 
malevolent godlings of the Sayads and other Musalman saints; for 
the Jogi is so impure that he will eat the offerings made at any shrine. 
These people, or at least the Musalman section of them, are called 
Rawal in the centre of the Panjab. Raw’al corresponds to Nath. 
In Kathiawar they are said to exorcise evil spirits and to worship 
Korial. In Sialkot they pretend to avert storms from the ripening 
crops by plunging a drawn sword into the field or a knife into a 
mound, sacrificing goats and a/i^cepting suitable offerings.* 

^ See Census Report ^ North-Western Provinces and Oudh. 1891, 
pp. 225. 226; ERE, vol. XII, p. 833. 

2 FORL, p. 347; BRI, p. 213. 

* Tessitori, ERE, vol. XII, p. 834; BRI, p. 213. 



GORAKHNATHIS 3 

be neither too high*nor too low, free from cracks, hollows and holes, 
[and should have] a small door. [It] should be well plastered with 
cow-dung, clean and free from all kinds of vermin. On the outside 
[surrounding it] it should be graced with a beautiful enclosure 
[garden] with sheds, a platform and a well. These are the marks, as 
described by adepts in the practice of Hatha [Yoga], of a cell where 
the Yoga is to be practised. Having seated [himself] in such a cell, 
with his thoughts abandoned, [the Yogi] should practise Yoga in the 
manner indicated by his guru.*^ 

Yogis go on pilgrimages, visiting shrines and holy places 
all over India.^ In the rainy season of 1924, there were very 
few Yogis at Gorakhpur, most of them being away visiting 
various sacred places.^ However, they make their monasteries 
their headquarters. Some do live alone, ^ in the jungles, 


^ Hathayogapradipika, ch. i, w. 12-14. The Gorakhbodh allows 
otherwise (ERE^ voI. XII, p. 832). 

* In earlier times they may have travelled further. The following 
report, while it deals with another type of ascetic, illustrates the fact 
that Indian ascetics have known great areas in Asia. The following 
is the statement of an ‘ oordhbabu * (urdhvabdhu) who claimed to have 
travelled extensively in Asia. Setting out from Bithur, he visited 
shrines in Central, Western and Southern India. Thence he travelled 
east, and then visited the holy places of Ceylon. He then proceeded 
to Malaya, and thence returned to India. Following the west coast of 
the peninsula, he visited DwSraka, and Hihg Laj ; thence to Multan, 
Attock (Atak) and eastward to HardwSr. Retracing his steps west- 
ward, he visited K§bul, Bamian, Khurasan, Herat and Astrabad, and 
continued to the western borders of the Caspian Sea, Astrakin and 
Moscow. Thence travelling through Persia, he visited Hamadan, 
Ispahan. Siraz, KermanshSh and other cities. Sailing from Abushahr 
he visited cities, including Bahrein and Basrah. Unable to reach Bagh- 
dad, he sailed to Muscat and Surat. Then he visited Mokha and 
returned to Karachi and Sind. He then journeyed to Balk, BokharS, 
Samarqand, Badakhshan. Thence he entered Kashmir and moved on 
into, the Himalayas to Gangotri. He then travelled in Oudh and 
Nep&l, visiting Kathamandu and the mountain regions beyond. Re- 
turning to Kathamandu, he set out for Tibet, reaching Lhasa and 
Lake Manasorowara. He then returned to India and finally settled at 
Benares. This record of the sadhu’s travels was made by Jonathan 
Duncan, Esq., at Benares in 1792, and Mr. Duncan reported that the 
ascetic gave circumstantial details of things in cities as far away as 
Moscow and Astrakdn to confirm his statements. See Asiatic Reseat • 
cheSf vol. V, pp. 37 ff, 

® Holy men, in general, are not supposed to travel during the rainy 
season; but modern means of transportation are changing these 
customs. * Bombay Gazetteer^ vol, IX, p, 543. 



4 gorakhnath and the KANPHATA yogis 

practising Yoga; but hermits of this kind are exceedingly 
difficult to find. The author was able to get track of but 
two adepts, Baba Hira Nathji at Kali Mohini in Alwar, 
between Bhatinda and Bandikui, and Bawa Tejnal,at Pataftjali 
A^rama in Harow ar; and was unable to find either. Some of 
these are considered to be real adepts. 

Census figures dealing with Gorakhnathis are not satisfac- 
tory, because, in many instances, other Yogis (or * Jogis') and 
mendicants are included in the enumerations. 

The census returns for 189H shovv‘Jogis’ under ‘miscel- 
aneous and disreputable vagrants,' and enumerate 214,546 
for India. The figures for the Provinces of Agra and Oudh* 
were, Aughar, 5,319; Gorakhnathi, 28, SI 6; Jogi, including 
G orukhnathii and others, 78,387. This would indicate that the 
Gorakhnathis, including Aughars, constituted about forty- 


^ vol. (I, p. 14 (Statistics) : 

Panjah 

... 91,937 

RSjputana 

... 49,262 

Bombay ... ^ ... 

... 16,s:3 

Central India 

... 10,274 

The Report, vol. I, Part, t (191 i) i^ives the followinj? comparative 

study 

raqir(1911) 

... 979,293 

(1901) 

... 1,212,648 

(1891) 

... 830,430 

Part 2, Tables (1911) give the following distribution of Religious 

Mendicants, etc. '. 

Bengal 

... 47,666 

Bthar and Orissa 

... 16.388 

Bombay ... 

... 94,764 

Central Provinces and Berar 

... 94,933 

North-West and P'rontier Provinces ... 

... 12,848 

United Provinces ... 

... 21,405 

Rajputana Agency ... 

... 170.135 

Hyderabad 

... 33,743 

Kashmir ... 

... 31,614 

Central Indian Agency 

... 32,327 

Bombay States ... , 

... 82,568 


* Part 1, p. 225. 



GORAKHNATHIS 5 

five per cent of the Yogis.^ The same report for Agra and 
Oudh* shows that the proportion of male to female Yogis 
was about 42/35; that Aughars were 2,422 males and 1,895 
females; and Gorakhpanthis 6,955 males and 6,178 females. 
The figures are of special interest because these Yogis are 
generally supposed to be celibates.® It is to be noted that 
many female Yogis are widows. Of the 'Yogis reported in 
the Panjab, 38,137 were Musalmans.* 

The Census of 1901® shows, for India: 


Faqir, Hindu 

436,803 

Male/Female 

252/185 

3ogi, Hindu 

659,891 

do. 

385/325 

Jogi, Muhammadan ... 

43,139 

do. 

21/22 

Natha, Hindu 

45,463 

do.. 

25/21 


There were 10,947 Yogis in the Bombay Presidency.® 


* Census of India, 1891, North-Western Provinces, Part 3, p. 52: 


Division 

JOGI 

Aughar 

Gorakh- 

PANTHl • 

Male 

Female 

Male 


Male 

Fenude 

Meerut 

23,767 

19,331 





Agra . 

2,584 

2,258 





Rohilkhand 

3,500 

2,845 

In 

some 

In 

some 

Allahab§*d 

2.962 

3,109 

Div 

is ions 

Div 

isions 

Benares 

436 

430 





Gorakhpur 

5,811 

4.952 





Kumaon 

2,581 

2,180 





Total 

41,641 

35,105 

2,368 

1,870 

6,941 

6,178 

Total Oudh and 




■HI 



N.-W. Provinces 



2,422 

m 




- Part 3, p. 52. The largest number of Yogis was found in the 
Meerut Division, the Gorakhpur Division being secood* 

^ Martin{yo\, II, pp. 484, 485) reported that though they were not 
permitted to marry they were at liberty to communicate with what- 
ever women they pleased. 

* Census of Panjab, Report, 1891, pp. 113-8. 

^ Census of India, vol. I, Part 2, Tables, pp, 283, 288, 301. 

« ETCB,vo\. II, p. 103. 














6 gorakhnAth and the KANPHATA yogis 

In 1911^ there were enumerated in India 979,293 faqirs, 
814,365 Jogis and 698,036 mendicants; there being 15,000 
Kanpha^as in the Central Provinces.^ 

The enumeration for 192P was: 

Jogi, Hindu ... 629,978 Male/Female 325/305 

Jogi, Muhammadan ... 31,158 do. 16/15 

Faqir, Hindu ... 141,132 do. 80/61 

Table XVII of the Imperial Census of India for 1931 
shows under the headings of Aghori, Faqir, Jogi, Sadhu and 
Sannyasi a total of more than a million persons, not far from 
half of whom are females, but does not so return ascetics as 
to show how many Gorakhnathis there are in India. 

On the basis of the more detailed figures of 1891, the 
Gorakhnathis would still be very numerous. But no exact, 
or even approximate, statement can be made; simply, 
Kanphatas are very widely scattered and are exceedingly 
numerous. 

The distinctive marks of the sect of the Kanphatas are 
the split-ears {kdn-phata) and the huge ear-rings. In the final 
stage of their ceremony of initiation a specially chosen guruy or 
teacher, splits the central hollows of both ears with a two 
edged knife (or razor).* The slits are plugged with sticks of 
nfm-wood; and, after the wounds have healed, large rings 
{mudrd) are inserted. These are a symbol of the Yogi's 
faith. Some explain, that in splitting the ear a nodi (mystic 
channel)® in the cartilege is cut, thus assisting in the 
acquirement of yogic power.® The Yogi, wearing the mudra, 
becomes immortal.^ The rings worn in Western India are 
about seven inches in circumference and weigh two and a 
quarter ounces or more.® Weight is dependent upon the 
substance out of which the rings are made. In Kacch, wherq 
some of the wealthier Yogis wear mudras of gold, the strain 
of their weight is carried by a strine. which is passed over the 
head. 

^ Census of India ^ vol. I, Part 1, Tables^ pp. 192, 198, 309. 

» RTCCP, vol. Ill, p. 250. • 

* Census of India y vol. I, Part 2, p. 154. ^ See OMASy p. 165. 

* See ch. xv. • Aipanthis at Hardwar. 

’ RTCPy vol. II, p. 398. (See the story on p. 9, below.) 

* Bombay Gazetteer y vol. V, p. 85. 



GORAKHNATHIS 7 

Rings lire of .two general shapes, fiat and cylindrical ; the 
former called darsan, the latter kundaL The word ‘ kundal ' 
simply means ‘round/ Dar^n is a term of extreme 
respect. The use of the word is sometimes explained as a 
sign that the wearer has had a vision of the Brahman.^ The 
ring is sometimes called pdvitri, ‘holy,* ‘sacred/ 

Rings are made of various substances. The rule seems to 
be that the initiate first wears rings of clay. A legend relates 
how Gorakhnath cut holes, three inches long, in Bhartri’s ears 
and inserted ear-rings of clay. Some Yogis continue to wear 
earthen rings. But, since these are easily broken, others of 
more durable substances are usually substituted. The element 
of value also enters into the use of more substantial rings. 

Rhinoceros horn is a favourite substance for ear-rings. It is 
not easily broken. The practice goes back to an early period, 
for such rings are dug up, from time to time, in the oldest 
burial places of the sect, for example, at Tilla and in old Almora. 
The mahant (head of the monastery) at Tilla, in the Panjab, 
wore (1924) rings of rhinoceros horn covered with plates of 
gold. Rings of rhinoceros leather are not uncommon.^ 

A legend ia» available, explaining the use of rhinoceros 
horn, which accounts for the practice, not because the rings 
are not easily broken, but for the reason that the rhinoceros 
is a sacred animal. The story is as follows: As a result of 
the great war between the Pandavas and the Kauravas (the 
ancient war which is the central theme of the Mahdbhdrata) 
the Pandavas, having slain their kinsmen, a most heinous sin, 
were thereby disqualified from performing the funeral rites 
for them. They appealed to Brahma for absolution. In reply, 
the Creator commanded: ‘First make the pilgrimage to 
Badrinath and Kedarnath.’ The Pandavas straightway set off 
upon the journey. Returning from the Himalayas, they 
reported to Brahma and then again asked for permission to 
perform the funeral rites for their slain kinsmen (ancestors). 
Brahma gave instructions: ‘Kill a rhinoceros, make a vessel 
of its skin, and with that offer water to your relatives. They 


/ So explained to the author at Puri. 

• The author once saw especially fine ones at Gorakh Bansuri, 
Calcutta. 



8 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

will receive the oblation and then will be able to proceed to 
Paradise/ So the Pandavas slew a rhinoceros, made a vessel 
of its skin and from it poured out water to their kinsmen. 
The pinda was then offered (i.e. the funeral rites were per- 
formed) and the slain relatives attained Paradise. Since that 
time the rhinoceros has been considered a sacred animal, and 
that is why the Gorakhnathis make their ear-rings from its 
horn.^ 

Thin gold discs are sometimes seen. The pir (abbot) and 
some important Yogis of Dhinodhar, in Kacch, wear heavy 
rings of gold, darsan-shaped, inlaid with precious and semi- 
precious stcuies. A mahant from Delhi, in 1924, wore rings 
of crystal with inlay of gold and precious stones. Other 
substances used are copper stag’s and antelope’s horn, 
ivory agate, jade, glass (white and coloured) and wood. In 
Mewar Tuany Kanphatas use rings of conch shell. The conch 
is tlK.ir battle trumpet.^ 

The wearing of the ear-rings is of great importance. If, by 
accident, one is broken, a model in cloth, or the sing?idd^ must 
be substituted before the Yogi may partake of food, or perform 
his religious duties.^ Or, he must bathe and procure another 
before he eats with his fellow's or engages in conversation. 

A Y'ogi must protect himself from having his rings torn 
out. In the old days he, whose ears had been mutilated, did 
not survive; he either died outright or was buried alive.^ It 
is claimed in Kumaon that the practice still holds (1924). 


' This story was obtained at ^ri Nagar, Garhwal, The same 
rtason is found to explain why followers of Guru Govind Singh use 
^ar-rings made of the horn of the rhinoceros. There are many marks, 
in the lower Himalayas, showing where the Pandavas, with the dog, 
travelled in the course of their wanderings. At Deo Dhura may be 
seen great boulders said to have been thrown about in sport by the 
Pandavas; and near the temple of Devi there are two boulders cleft 
throi.!gh by a fresh-looking fissure and there is a similar rift in the 
lowei rock. The smaller, upper rock is said to be the weapon with 
w* ich Bhima cleft the great boulders. Holes in the rocks are still 
pointed out as his finger-prints. Himalayan Gazetteer^ vol. Ill, 
pp 201,202. 

The author saw fine ones at Puri in 1924. 

^ iiCh vfd. Ill, p. 198. * See RTCCP, vol. Ill, p. 250. 

*' livmhay GazetteeryVol. VIH, p. 155. 



GORAKHNATHIS 9 

Even now a Yogi with mutilated ears cannot face the world. 
He must flee from his brethren; he must never be seen 
again; he is excommunicated; no tomb is erected over his 
body when he dies;^ others will not associate with him ; and 
he is not allowed to share in religious ceremonies and he 
loses his pujdri rights. 

There is conflict of opinion concerning the origin of the 
practice of wearing the rings. As stated above, the institu- 
tion of the custom is attrilDuted to Gorakhnath. However, 
Siva is the great ascetic and he wears huge ear-rings.^ Legend 
records that ear-rings (kundal), made from dirt off her body, 
were attached to the body which Siva had left behind when 
he descended the lotus stalk in the form of an insect, by 
Sakti.® These ear-rings were later changed into mudras. 
Siva’s ears were split at that time. By this means the body 
of Siva became immortal. Some trace the practice to 
Macchendranath, the guru of Gorakhnath. The Aipanthis of 
Hardwar say that Macchendranath, when he began to preach 
the Yoga, by order of Mahadeo, saw that Siva had his ears 
split and that he (Siva) wore the great rings. Macchendra, 
thereupon, longed to have similar rings himself. He began to 
worship Siva and so pleased the god th.'t his desire was 
granted. Macchendranath was then ordered to split the ears 
of all who should become his disciples. .Another legend, 
which connects the practice with Macchendranath, states that 
when he was born as a fish, he was discovered to have had 
rings in his ears.^ At Puri, they say that the order to split 
the ears came from Macchendranath. 

But the origin of the practice of splitting the ears is traced 
,to others as well. It is said that Bhartri asked his guru, 
jalandharipa, for a distinguishing mark. So holes, three 
inches wide, w’ere made in Bhartri’s ears and rings of clay 
were inserted. Later, those rings were changed for others of 
wood, theivof crystal-gilt and finally of ivory. ^ 

Legends and traditions which refer the custom to Gorakh- 


^ RTCPyVoX. Ill, p. 250. But, at §ri Nagar, they reported to the 
author that he would have a samddh. 

^ FORL, p. 388. ® RTCP, vol. II, pp. 391, 392. 

^ 7'old to the author at Nasik. * RTCP, vol. II, p. 398. 



10 gorakhnAth and the KANPHATA yogis 

nath are numerous. It is said that Siva ordered Par- 
vatj to split Gorakhnath’s ears^ and that thus the practice 
arose. Again, Karkai and Bhuskai received consent from their 
guru, Gorakhnath, to split each other’s ears.^ The agree- 
ment was made at a place on the road to Hihg Laj, a shrine 
which every perfect Yogi must visit. Gorakhnath is said to 
have split Bhartri’s ears.^ 

Women who w^ear the niudra are numerous. They are 
chiefly widows who have become Yogis, and initiated wives 
of Yogis. However, not all women whose husbands are Yogis, 
have their ears split. Widows often take the vow^s, are 
initiated into the sect and then go on pilgrimage. Some of 
these are in charge of temples.^ Married women who are 
Yogi's and who wear the mudra are not uncommon in Kumaon 
and Garhw'al. But it is not according to rule that wives of 
householders w^ear the ear-rings.^ 

Au chars are followers of Gorakhnath who have not under- 
gone the final ceremony of having their ears split. A legend 
is current which serves to justify them in not completing 
initiation. Once tw’o siddhas (perfect Yogis) tried to split 
the ears of a candidate who had been at Hihg Laj; but they 
found that the slits closed as fast as they w^ere made. So 
they gave up the attempt. Since then Aughars have dispensed 
with the custom.^ It will be seen, further on, that w'hile 
many Aughars contemplate completing their initiation, 
there IS a division of Gorakhriathis who always remain 
Aughars 

'Fhc Gudara sometimes wears a ring, as do the Kan- 
phacas.® These mendicants are Saivites, so-cafled because 
they carry a pan of metal in which is kept a small fire for 
the burning of scented woods at the houses of persons from 
whom they beg. They cry out, " Alakh, AlakhV Their 
peculiar garb consists of a large, round cap, a long ochre- 
coloured frock, and ear-rings like those of the Kanphatas, 


1 RTCP, vol. II, p. 390. . ^ RTCP, vol. II, p. 398. 

® For example, in Almora, the author met two such women and 
saw their temples. 

* So they said in Almora. ^ RTCP, vol. II, p. 398. 

« Wi, pp. 235, 236; RTCB, vol. II, p. 22. 



GORAKHNATHIS 


11 


or cylinders of wood passed through the lobe of the ears, 
which they term khecharitnudrd^ the seal or symbol of the 
deity, ‘of him who moves in the heavens.’ The Gudara be- 
longs to the Aughar sect of Saivites founded by a Dasnami 
by the name of Bralimaglri, through the favour of Gorakhnath, 
who is said to have invested the ascetic with his ear-rings. 
The Gudara sub-sect wears the ring in one ear, and in the 
other a flat copper plate witii the footprint of Aughar or 
Gorakhnath. Other groups wear rings of copper or of pewter 
in both ears. 

From the Nizam’s Dominions it is reported that the 
various orders of Gorakhnathis are distinguished by the kind 
of materials from whicli they make their ear-rmgs.^ 

Both Aughars and Yogis of tl\e sect w^ear ajaneo, or sacred 
thread, which is made by certain members of the order, who 
are taught the art. It is not made by all Yogis nor by 
Brahmans. The thread is spun from black sheep’s wooF 
and consists of nine strands. It is worn around the 
neck. 

I'o this thread is atta.hed a ring, which may be flat or 
cylindrical, calktl pdvitri. It is made of deer’s horn, rhinoceros 
horn, of bone, of brass or (aher metal. Brass rings obtained 
from Nepal have on then* rim tliree images, that of Pasupati 
(Siva) with the trident on one side of it and the bull on the 
other. The ring represents Parvati. 

To the ring are attached, by means of a white cotton 
cord, a whistle, sin^ndd, and a smglc riidrdksa berry. The 
sihgnad is, as the name implies, a whistle made of horn, 
either of black-buck hoin, of stag liorn, or of rhinoceros 
horn. As a matter of fact, it may he inade of wood or of jade. 
It is about two inclws long, I'hal of black-buck’s binm is 
the most popular. 

The use of horn is explained in a legend about a king 
Bhartri (Bhartrhari). Onee his seventy queens urged him to 
go hunting. While he was aw^ay lie ran across a herd of 
seventy hinds and one stag; but was unable to overtake th<* 
stag. Finally, a hind asked the stag to allow' himself to be 

^ STCND, vol. r, p. 27S\ 

^ In the hills of Kumaon many Yogis use cotton for this thread. 



12 gorakhnath and the KANPHATA Yocrs 

shot, and he agreed, on certain conditions, one of which was 
that his horn should be used for the Yogi’s whistle.^ 

The sihgnad is blown before meals and before morning 
and' evening worship.- It may be blown before the Yogi 
performs his offices of nature. The mahant (abbot) at 
Dhinodhar uses his whistle in returning a salute and before 
pcriorming his duties. One of his chief privileges is to blow 
ahistle when he worships his gods. The use of the 
w histle was ordered by Siva. It has a phallic significance, as 
has the pavitri which is associated with it. 

S(iine attach a tooth pick of silver to the thread. This may 
have a protective use against evil influences. 

ikuiusc the whistle is fastened tr» it, the thread is called 
singfiad-janco.^ 

Some Yogis wear around the loins, a special rope made of 
black sheep’s wool to which they fasten the loin cloth, 
langofi. It is called drband-Un'igot-ndg. As the last word in 
this name signifies, they, except for the rope, go naked. 
This cord, which is an inch or more in diameter, is made on 
a bobbin, and is finished with a loop on one end and a button 
on the other.^ It is fastened in front. Most Yogis use a 
strip of cotton cloth instead of this rope of wool. 

A third ‘thread’ is worn by some Kanphatas. Special 
regulations go with its use. For example, while wearing this 
cord, and the other paraphernalia that go with it, the Yogi 
may neither sit nor stand still but must go rut, as soon as he 
has put it on, and beg.^ lliis cord is called hdl matangd. 
It is made of three strands, each of eight threads, plaited 
with the tw ist to the right into a bobbin cord.® One end is 
finished with five tails, and the other has a bell, like a large, 


‘ 1<TC}\ vol. II, p. 404. The whole story is told in ch. vii. 

“ RT('( 'P, vol. Ill, p. 250. " Compare BHC, p. 403. 

Com pare RTCI\ vol. 11, p. 399. The author saw an especially 
fine om* .n Devi Patan in 1924. 

^ D.isn.imis also, who are special devotees of Bhairora, wear this 
cord. One such had on his forehead a tika consisting of two curved, 
horizontal marks, both red; with a black dot between them and a 
hkit k liru' b(*)ow them. Hanuman is indicated by the red lines and 
hladr line and the dot are for Bhaiiorfi. 

' vol. II, para. 126. Sv>me say sixteen strands, some nine 

ant! surne twelve. 



gorakhnAthIs 


13 


brass sleigh-bell, attached to it. Sometimes strips of red 
cloth are woven into the cord. The ‘thread’ is reckoned of 
various lengths, nine, eleven and one-half* or twenty -three 
cubits;** and is of about the diameter of a lead pencil, although 
it may be considerably larger. 

I’hc cord may be worn as a sort of plaited net-jacket. In this 
case it is first doubled. The end, with bell atfaciied, is hung 
d()^n in front, the hell reaching to the kn. cs; the cord is 
then throw'n over the left shoulder and turned back under 
the right shoulder; then around the chest and under the le*ft 
and over the right shoulder; it is crosseri under the long 
section in front and then wound n)urKi and round tlie body, 
alternately under and over the front strands and plaited as it 
is wound about the chest. After the cord is acljusted, two 
rosaries are put on, one over each .shoulder and under the 
opposite one. Smaller rosaries are put ar<;und the neck and 
on each forearm. ‘ Handkerchiefs' are fastened to the upper 
arms. The Yogi then takes iiis howl, his bag and hi?- fire- 
tongs and goes out to beg. The wearing of the cord is a 
matter of choice rather than of regulation/^ 

An occasioiv^tl (Jorakhnalhi wears the uoual jamo, or i-'u red 
thread of the Hindu. 

Yogis are met with who do not wear tie: sacred thread, 
singnad-janeo. A Y’ogi who lias attained to unusual spiritual 
eminence may discard the use of the thread ami the ear-rings, 
saying that he wears them iiu isiblyA or that he wears them 
underneath his skin. I'his is not an uncommon dam\ in 
legends about holy men.^ 

Although Kanphata Y\)gis wear no distinctive rosaries, 
they do use some that arc ot significance and of interest. 
One of these consisting of rudraksa berries is that commonly 
w^orn by Saivites. It is hung around the neck and consists 
of thirty-two, of sixty-four, of eighty-four, of one hundred 

^ So they say at Devi Patan. ' So th( y say at Benares. 

This parauiraph is based upon exhibitions of putting’ on the hdl 
tnatanqu bv at Cavvnpore and at Benares. 

* vol. II, p. 402. 

Compare Hae Das, the Chamar, and his Brahinanicai cord. — The 
Chamdrs, p. 209. 



14 gorakhnAth and the kAnphata yogis 

and eight, or even of more berries.^ A smaller one having 
eighteen^ or twenty-eight berries,^ is worn on the wrist, or 
elbow. This is called sumaranl. The small rosary is often 
carried in the hand. Beads are used in worship and as a 
check on memory, while repeating the names of God. This 
is evident from the technical terms for rosary, japa mala, 
‘ muttering chaplet ’ and sumarani, ‘ remembrancer.* A Saivite 
has to recite the 1 ,008 names of his god.^ 

Rudraksa berries (of the tree claocarpus ganitrus^) are 
significant for the Yogi in many ways. The word ‘rudraksa* 
means ‘eye of Rudra (Siva)’ and may refer to the third, now 
invisible, eye of that god, which will be opened for the 
destruction of the w^orld.^’ There is a mark on the seed that 
is said to resemble an eye. Or, the berries may refer to the 
tears, shed by 6iva’ in rage wnen he set out to destroy the 
three cities, Tripura; for those tears became rudraksa berries. 
Again, some say that the string of 108 berries represents that 
many successive appearances of Siva on the earth.® The size 
of the berries is of importance. 

Rudraksa berries are found with faces ranging from one to 
twenty-one in number, and each kind has a special signific- 
ance. The usual number of faces is five, and some say that 
this berry is sacred to Hanuman, or to the Pandavas. It also 
represents the five-faced Siva.^ 

^ Eighty-four beads make up the proper ^aivite rosary. k is 
interesting to note that 84 7x12 and symbolizes the number ot the 

planets (7) and the signs of the Zodiac (12). 108 ~9x 12 \vhcre the 

moon is counted in its three phases as increasing, full and waning to 
make-up nine (9). ‘Consequently these Hii.au rosaries symbolize the 
whole circuit of the hosts of heaven.’ (See, in Journal of the Royal 
Society of Arts, vol. L, (1902), p. 275 f., a discussion, by Sir George 
Birdwood, of a paper on The History of the Rosary in all Countries ’ 
by the Rev. H. Thurston, S.J.) 10« ™ 2'^ x 3=* and is, therefore, an 
auspicious number. 

* So reported at Dhinodhar. •’ So reported in the ‘hills.’ 

* Santas count up to one hundred, using the finger (joints) of the 
right hand, and keep score by joints of the fingers of the left hand. 
They use dead men’s teeth and similar relics also, for beads. — ERE, 
vol. X, p. 848 f. 

® Seeds of the hadar or jujuh. PNQ, \ol. II, p. 558. 

* NCS, p. 83. ’ ERE, vol. X, p. 848. ^ So reported in Benares. 

® Bengali Religious Lyrics, Sdkta, p. 90. See Brahmanism and 

Hinduism, p. 82 f . 



GOjRAKHNATHlS 15 

The number of faces is often merely of symbolic import- 
ance; for example, that of three faces represents the trident, 
or the triad; that of four, the four Vedas, or Brahma; that 
of six, the six systems of philosophy; that of seven, the 
seven the worlds; that of eight, the eight-armed Durga; 
that of nine, the nine Nathas; that of ten, the ten avtdras 
(of Visnu); while that of eleven is sacred to IVlahadeva and 
is counted as the ‘very best’ and is worn by celibates only. 
It is referred to as askand [(?) not spilling, as of semen]. The 
two-faced berry is worn only by a Yogi who is accompanied 
by his wife.^ A much valued berry is that which is double, 
that is, two berries naturally joined. If the total number of 
faces on the two be eleven, the double is called Gaiiri-Sahkar, 
and it is sacred to Parvati (Gauri) and Siva. One-faced 
berries are very seldom found. It is said that kings only 
possess them, and that one who finds such a berry is set up 
for life in wealth, because it secures to the owner everything 
that he may w’ish. This rare type is often counterfeited.- 

There is no rule as to the number of faces for the berry 
that the guru gives to his disciple at the initiation ; and the 
one received at that time may be changed, later on, for one 
of another number of faces. 

Two rosaries made of white ‘stone’ beads (really nummu- 
lities^) ate greatly prized by Yogis. Both are obtained on 
the difficult pilgrimage to the Vamacara Sakti Temple at Hihg 
Laj.^ That made of the smaller ‘stone’ beads is called Hing 
Ldj kdthumrd; the other, made of larger beads, Asdpuri. The 
former is said to represent grains of millet {jawdr)^ the latter, 
grains of rice, or bdjra.^ The former is the more commonly 

1 RTCP, vol. II, p. 399. 

2 A seed of this kind belonged to Kharak Sing, son of IMaharaui 
Ranjit Singh, the only one of its kind ever seen ; but it ha^ been r ! 
— Crooke, Religion and Folklore, p. 289. 

^ Of the family nummulinidoe, a family of foraminift rs having a 
calcareous, symmetrical, usually lentrical or discoidal, shell composed 
of numerous chambers concentrically arranged. Especially abundant 
in eocene and oligocene deports of Eastern and Southern Asia. 

^ For the native accounts concerning fhese beads, see pp. 103 ft. 

® Jawdr, the larger millet, a common food-grain, Andro pogon, 
sorghum or sorghum vulgar e. Imperial Gazetteer of India, Index 
Volume, Glossary, p. xiv. Bdjra, bulrush millet, a common iood- 
p€n77is€tum iyphoideum (ibid., p. vi.) 



16 gorakhnAth and the KANPHATA yogis 

worn, and is evidently the more prized. It consists of 500^ 
or 1 ,000 beads. 

Necklaces made of beads of glass, of china, and of other 
materials are worn by Yogis, but, apparently, with no special 
religious significance. 

All Yogis use ashes, but the practice is not limited to 
them, tor all ascetics observe the custom, which is very old. 
Sabhasma-drja, ‘sprinkled with ashes,’ is a generic term for 
Saivite.2 Kanphatas use ashes for the tripwid {tripundra) or 
triple mark drawn across the forehead, and on other jiarts 
of the body. This mark is to represent the half-moon drawn 
three times. They also cover the body with ashes, or with 
earth mixed with ashes. Those who go naked rub the nvIioIc; 
body with ashes. The hair is also sprinkled with ashes. It 
is said that the practice serves to protect the user from 
vermin. Earth is often used instead of ashes. ^ 

Ashes ma\ be taken from the dliuniy the Yogi’s hearth fire 
Ashes of burned cow-dung arc also used. Siva, as tlie Yolu par 
excellrnce.covQts his body with ashes from the burning grounds. 

Several reasons are given for the use of ashes.’ They 
signify death to the world and, in this v ase, undoubtedly 
refer to the burning grounds; or, they may indicate that the 


^ Reported at Dhinoclhar. 

2 BRI, p. 314, n. 3. Brhat Samhitch 60, 19, p. 328. (Ed. Ketn). 

^ Compare Panjab Census Report, 1891, p. 118. 

* There are elaborate explanations of the practice it relates to 
Siva. For example: ‘The sacred body of Siva is covered with ashes 
naturally. In thi.s form it is called ‘the eternal a.shes.’ In the next 
place after he has, by a spark emitted out of his central eye, reduced 
the gods together w ith all animate and inanimate beings to ashes at 
the end of each kalpa, he rubs their ashes upon his sacred body. In 
this form it is called ‘the original ashes,' and since the god thus 
adorns his sacred body, they only can be the true servants of Siva 
who constantly wear the sacred ashes rubbed upon their person. 
The reward for so doing is declared in the Agamas to be the blotting 
out of all the greater sins. They also teach that the ashes to have 
this effect must be made of cow-dung: and that there are three 
methods of preparing them, namely, Kalpa, Anakalpa and Upakalpa ; 
and that no other a.shes but' such as are made in one of these three 
ways must be rubbed on the body.’ Quoted by Murdock in his iStva 
Bhakti, p. 17. 

- RTCP, vol. II, p. 140. 



GORAKHNATHIS 


17 


body must be reduced to ashes ultimately/ or they may be 
a sign that the Yogi has abandoned the world. 

Ashes protect from evil spirits as well. 

The common mark placed upon the forehead by the Yogi 
is the tripund, consisting of three horizontal lines, or of a 
broad band, made by the hand, with ashes, with ashes and 
clay, or with sandal-wood paste. Similar lines are drawn on 
other parts of the body, for example, on the arms and chest. ^ 
These are, strictly, Saivite marks. The tripund is sometimes 
said to represent the moon. Some Yogis put on the forehead 
a mark consisting of a black, horizontal line with a black dot 
above it, representing Bhairom; and below it a red circle 
representing Hanuman (Mahabir). A few put a single spot of 
sandal-wood paste on the forehead, when they are ‘offering’ 
the paste to Bhairom.® Still others put a black spot on the 
forehead when they are burning incense. Other forms of the 
tikd are the double square of sandal-wood paste a single 
spot of ashes on the forehead; a yellow, rounded rectangle 
with a 'red dot in the centre; a rounded rectangle of yellow 
with a single grain of rice in the middle, below a brush of 
ashes; two circles one above the other, the upper of sandal- 
wood paste, the other red;® a circle made of a mixture of 
sandal- wood paste and a red substance, for Bhairom; two 
.fipots one above the other, the upper red, the lower black; 
two elongated enclosures one above the other, in red, with a 
red dot below. In Benares it was explained that these marks 
have to do with the istadeva^ or chosen god, of the particular 
Yogi. The examples given by no means exhaust the varieties 
of tika employed. 

All Yogis who make the pilgrimage to Hihg Laj stop at 
Kote^war on their return journey and are there branded on 
the ‘front’ of their right fore arm with an image of the yoni- 
linga. The reason given for this practice will be found in 
chapter six.® The brand mark which is reproduced bears a 
phallic significance. It is generally claimed that Yogis 
receive no other brand marks.’ 

^ B, and H, p. 67, n. 1. ^ ^tsc, p. 83. ^ ^ ^ Almora. 

* E,g,^ at Kama. ® E.g., at Devi Patan. 

® See also PNQf vol. II, para. 345. 

^ So reported at Naini Tal, Tulsipur and Gorakhpur. 


2 



18 gorakhnAth and the KANPHA I a yogis 

At the time that a candidate is made a novice (Aughar), 
his head, including his scalp-lock {cutiya)^ is shaved. Aside 
from this, there seems to be no uniform practice with 
reference to the care of the hair. Apparently the hair on the 
head and face should all be shaved or none.^ If a Yogi l^s 
his moustache and his beard shaved ai d not his head, or the 
reverse, he must pay a fine of one rupee and four annas.^ 
Some allow their hair to grow long^ and it is left unkempt 
or matted. Others shave their heads. Some braid black wool 
into their hair.^ The photographs shown in this volume 
indicate a lack of uniformity in practice. It is claimed that 
those who have their heads shaved wear clothes, while others 
go scantily clothed {nanga)y or wear no clothes at all, and are 
obliged to sit on the ground.® But this assertion does not 
seem to hold good in general. 

I'here seems to be no rule about the care of the finger-nails. 
They arc trimmed in the usual w^ay. It is reported that 
some allow the nails to go unpruned.® ^But this is denied."^ 
The nails are not removed at death. 

The ‘yellow’® robe is the dkstinctive dress of the Yogi. 

The uchre-coloured dress is worn because Siva ordered it. 
The cloth of the Yogi was first dyed by Parvati who resortea 
to self-mutilation,® dyed a cloth with her blood, and gave it 
to Gorakhnath. 

In practice, the yellow robe is by no means commonly 
worn. Many dress in the ordinary garb of the Hindu, some- 


^ So reported at Dhinodhar, Devi Patan, Gorakhpur. 

- This is or 2 rupees, five being an auspicious number. 

BHCS, p. 403. 

^ RTCCPy vol. Ill, p. 251, quoting Maclagan; OMAS, p. 185. 

' At I>evi Patan, ® BHCS, p. 403. ^At Gorakhpur. 

^ Yellow (and red) is a symbol of fertility and is the marriage 
colour. It is the colour of ripe grain, is lucky, and is connected with 
vhc colt of Gauri. Turmeric as a sacred plant is used in the anoint- 
of the bride and groom. The corpse is anointed with turmeric, 
iT'.cc death is looked upon as a marriage. Yellow is also a protection 
. e^onst demons. (Crooke, Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern 
India, p. 295.) Some Rak§ases are yellow. (Keith, Religion and 
I^hilosophy of the Veda, vol. I, p. 237.) These notions may have some 
t>canng upon the question of the use of yellow. But the explanation 
i:\vc‘n m the text, below, probably has truth in it. ' 
h TCB, vol. II, p, 390. 



GORAKHNATHIS 19 

times coloured with ochre, but very often simply white. Thin 
cotton is used in the warm weather and slightly heavier 
clothing in the cold weather. In the Panjab, in the cold 
season, heavy clothes of wool are w^orn, made after the com- 
mon patterns of the people.^ However, many Yogis go 
scantily clothed, wearing only a loin cloth. Some add to this 
a scarf, or a jacket of the usual type. A girdle of wool 
{drhandf is sometimes the only clothing. At Deoprayag in 
the Himalayas there was (in 1924) a Naga, who was absolutely 
naked. He lived in a cave, alone. He never crossed the river 
(Bhagirathi) into the town. He bathed three times a day and 
then rubbed his body with ashes. He performed his evening 
worship facing the east. Occasionally one sees a long, loose 
robe of orange colour, often drawn in at the waist with a 
cord. 

The headdress varies greatly. Turbans {pagri) are com- 
mon. These are either white or ochre-coloured, as a rule. 
Many wear a simple white cap, others a cap of patch-work.® 
This last is the characteristic headdress of the Satndthis* 
while travelling. ' A conical cap of nine sections,® with ear- 
flaps, or a cap of black ribbons is worn.® Still others wear 
no head covering at all. The Aughars of Kirana wear an 
ochre-coloured turban over which is twisted a net work of 
black thread, covered with gold. The head of the monastery 
at Kama has a flat, or cylindrical, turban made of threads of 
black sheep’s wool, for special occasions. But, comnaonly, he 
wore a white skull-cap of the ordinary ‘Hindu’ pattern. 

Besides rosaries and other articles of dress and ornaments as 
already described. Yogis wear certain objects for personal 
adornment. Bracelets of brass, of precious metals and of 
rhinoceros leather may be mentioned ; brass bracelets 
obtained in Nepal, like the pdvitri of brass already described. 


* See various photographs. * See p. 12 above. 

^ ‘ In Sind, Yogis wear caps.’ (Hughes, A GazetUcr of the Protnnct 
of Sindh, p. 96). The cap is not described. 

* This was reported at Puri, see 117, p. 216; Conybeare, Statts-' 
tUal and Historical Account of the North-WesUrn Prox inas of India, 
Bareilly, p. 592, 

'' PNQ, vol. II, para 279. 

« SHTC\ p. 262; BCJ, vol II, p. 497. 



20 gorakhnAth and the kAnphata yogis 

having on the rim an image of Pasupati, with Nanda, the 
bull, on one side and the trident on the other; and armlets 
of copper from Kedarnath and of iron from Badrinath. Some 
Yogis wear anklets. KangnaSy or wristlets and armlets made 
of thread are worn, likewise charms and amulets of the usual 
types. The mahant at Gorakhpur wore on his right arm two 
cylindrical cases of gold, containing charms.^ Finger rings 
of various patterns and materials are common. 

The dress of some notables of the Kanphatas may be 
described. The pir of Dhinodhar wears very rich clothes. 
As described in 1839,^ his dress of honour consisted of a 
gold-bordered silk turban, a scanty waist band, a sacred 
woollen neck thread, a sheliy a red, or brick-coloured scarf, and 
wooden pattens. He was allowed to wear neither an angarakhd 
nor leather shoes.® Some of his ornaments w^ere very valu- 
able, and some w'ere very old. His ear-rings were of gold, very 
large, and inlaid with gems. They were so heavy that they had 
to be supported by a string passed ov^er his head. His finger 
rings were of gold, and of the ‘Kacch* pattern, and his 
bracelets were broad and heavy. On the morning of the 
author’s visit to Dhinodhar^ the pir was dressed much as 
was his predecessor in 1839. His turban was of black cloth 
and his. waist-band of heavy dark-red silk, rolled and wound 
about him. He wore in his girdle a two-handled dagger, 
finished in gold. This was a mark of distinction. He was 
dressed in white. His shawl was ochre -coloured. He wore 
the usual rosaries and had on much jewelry, including strings 
of beads, and a heavy, finely-wrought necklace of gold. His 
shoes were of the usual pattern, made of wood. The appoint- 
ments of his gaddi (his cushion, or official seat), his huqqa 
(water-pipe), his box and other articles were of silver. His 
staff was trimmed with silver. 

The mahant of Cxorakhpur wore (1924) clothes of white, like 
those of ordinary Hindus. But he had for special occasions a 
heavy coat of gold-embroidered cloth and a turban. While 
he was attired in these garments his attendants carried heavy 


1 In the spring of 1924. ^ JRASy 1839, p. 270. 

3 lA, vol. VII, p. 52. 

• The author visited the pir, on 29th March, 1924. 



GORAKHNATHIS 21 

maces of bamboo covered with sheets of silver, and waved 
over him yak-tail fans. 

The special dress which some Yogis wear when they go 
out to beg is very elaborate. The whole process of dressing, 
as the author saw it, was as follows: First, the Yogi rubbed 
ashes on his body and face. Then, after putting on a dhoti^ 
or loin-cloth, and a jacket, he proceeded to adjust his hal 
matahga.^ He then fastened karhgaS, arm bands, short 
rosaries and ‘handkerchiefs’ to his wrists and arms, slung 
threads over his shoulders, and put many rosaries around his 
neck. Then swinging his wallet (food bag) over his left 
shoulder he took up his fire tongs and his begging bowl and 
started on the round of houses from which he was accustom- 
ed to beg.^ 

Like most Indian ascetics, Kanphatas have a number of 
necessary accessories. Among these is the dhuni, or fife, 
consisting of a smouldering log of wood (or more than one), 
sometimes in a hollow pit. Whenever he takes up his abode 
he lights his fire, provided there is not one already at the 
place. At all important shrines and monasteries such fires 
are found, some of which have been kept burning for long 
periods of time. The dhuni at Dhinodhar, and those at 
Gorakhpur, Tilla and Pae Dhuni in Bombay are famous 
because of associations with Dharamnath, Gorakhnath and 
others. These have been kept burning for centuries. It is an 
interesting fact that the Forest Department of Government 
supplies two hundred and fifty bullock carts of wood annually 
for the dhuni of Bhairom at the shrine of Devi Patan. House- 
holders of the Kanphatas keep a dhuni in their houses.® 

Kanphata Yogis carry a begging bowl, a wallet, fire-tongs, 
and a staff, and use a crutch. The begging bowl {khappar) 
may be of cocoanut shell. The most prized bowls of this 
kind are of large size, made of dariya narial, the large variety 
of cocoanut found in the west. These are blackened, and arc 
without a handle. Some use a bowl with a handle, but the 

^ See p. 12 above. 

* An Aipanth Yogi donned all his clothes in the presence of the 
author one morning in November, 1923, in Ca\\Tipore, preparatory 
to begging. 

* So reported in Almora. 



22 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

regulation pattern is as just described. A bowl with a handle, 
made of gourd, is also used. This is a common type and is 
often called tomri, A bowl of this shape, made of brass is 
often seen. 

The wallet, or bag, which is made of red cloth, is square in 
shape. It is usually hung from the lef^; shoulder, and is used 
to carry utensils and the supplies collected while begging. 
There is no prescribed length for the fire-tongs {cimtd). All 
ascetics carry them. Tongs may serve as a weapon, and 
perhaps, incidentally as a protection against evil spirits'. 
Occasionally the tongs take the place of a musical instrument. 
Sometimes a pair of tweezers is attached to the tongs. These 
are used to handle coals for the cilatn, or pipe bowl. The 
tweezers may be attached to the pipe bowl by a chain. 

The sTaff of the Kanphafas is of bamboo, or of timur^ a 
stick covered with knots, or a trident of metal.^ At Puri* 
a Satnath Yogi of the monastery carried a club,® made of 
straw covered with cloth, called a sudarsan. In Bombay 
and Belgaon the trident is carried by Yogis while they 
are gut begging.* Sticks of the ordinary kinds are also 
carried. 

The crutch, dcal^ is made of a horizontal stick about six- 
teen inches long, fastened to a short perpendicular support. 
It is used as a rest for the chin, or the arms, during medita- 
tion and at certain other times. Crutches are used to support 
the body prepared for burial. 

The conch shell is used by Yogis in worship, being blown 
at the time of service. 

As a rule the hour- glass-shaped drum {dholak) is not used 
by Yogis, although Siva as Nataraja carries one. But there 
are exceptions; e.g., in Almora. In Bombay there is a class 
of Yogis who carry a drum (ddur)^ and who, therefore, are 
called Dauri Gosains.^ 


' The trident was formerly a weapon, and is well-known. It is 
connected with sun worship and with the solar race. (JR AS, 1891, 
p. 389.) Its use in India goes back at least as far as the Indus River 
Civilization. 

* In 1924. ^ Reminiscent of Lakuli4a ? 

* Bombay Gazetteer, vol. XXI, p. 185; PNQ, vol. II, para 964,. 

» ERE, vol. XI I. p. 835. 



GORAKHNATHlS 


23 


Some Yogis in Benares and elsewhere carry a fan made of 
peacock feathers {han mocal) used to keep off flies, and also 
in exorcism, to keep off evil spirits, and to relieve children 
suffering from the effects of the evil eye.^ 

Yogis have a reputation for certain habits and practices 
which are not well thought of, some of which are quite 
common amongst them, and some of which are confined to 
the few. Not aU that is said and written about Yogis applies 
to the Kanphata. But the following practices are found to a 
greater or less extent amongst the Gorakhnathis. They make 
charms for themselves, and some sell them to others they 
pronounce spells and practice palmistry and juggling,^ tell 
fortunes,^ and interpret dreams; they sell a woollen amulet 
to protect children from the evil eye;® and they pretend to 
cure disease,® muttering texts over the sick, and practising 
medicine and exorcism, and vending drugs. Russell says 
that Nandia Yogis lay claim to supernatural and magic 
powers. This is, of course, involved in their practice 
of medicine and exorcism and belief in Yoga. Some 
are reputed to have transmuted base metals into gold or 
silver. There is a legend of such transmutation in the times 
of Altamsh.'^ Others, for fraud, impersonate members ot 
families on pilgrimages.® Still others resort to gambling and 
swindling and the three card game. Some are said to be able 
to control hail storms. In Sialkot there was once a Yogi 
{rathbana) who could impose a check upon hail, or direct 
it into waste land.® There are Yogis who are engaged in 
extensive commercial enterprises;^® others, like those in 
Benares, were rich;^^ still others are enrolled in the armies 
of Hindu kings.^^ Qthers are engaged in trades; and some 
sell small wares and silk thread.^® In Almora they are to be 
found as tailors and sellers of milk. In many parts of India 
Yogis are found as weavers, and are rated as inferior Sudras, 
illegitimate and semi-legitimate descendants of Yogis of 


A Compare RTCCP, vol. Ill, p. 253, ^ ^ 0 !. X, p. 146. 

* BRI, p. 215. * I.A., vol. X, p. 146. 

» RTCCP, vol. Ill, p. 252. « Wi.y p. 217. 

’ RTCP, vol. II. p. 398. « BRr, p. 215. 

• RTCCP, vol. II, p. 398. ^ BHTC, p. 404. 

SHTC, p. 262, BHTC, p. 404. » Wi, p. 218. 



24 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

Gorakhpur.^ Some sell apron strings and hce. The author 
once found a Yogi in charge of a government rest house. 
Others are engaged in agriculture, their women helping them 
in sowing and weeding.^ 

Barth says that Yogis were degraded and despised, and that 
there are evidences of their being dangerous characters. 
Legends show that large bands moved about the country. 
They must have been feared and their arrogant demands 
were undoubtedly granted. They had a sharp struggle with 
the Sikhs in the sixteenth century.^ The walls about Dhino- 
dhar are loopholed for defence, and these means of protection 
must have been needed. Their power in Kacch was broken 
about the middle of the sixteenth century, by Atits of 
Junagad.^ Before that time they held several places and 
seized Atits and other sadhus passing on pilgrimages and 
forcibly split their ears.^ Sometimes there are struggles 
between Yogis and other ascetics over priority in bathing 
privileges at certain melas. Some lead about trained, deformed 
cattle; others train monkeys, still others carry snakes, and 
others raise buffaloes, donkeys and dogs. 

They often, especially Bhartri Yogis, play musical instru- 
ments, including the sdrarigi,^ and sing cyclic songs,’ or 
ballads, including those of Gopichand, Bhartri, Puian 
Bhagat, Raja Rasalu, Hir and Ranjha, Guga Pii, Gorakhnath, 
Macchendranath, Dharamnath, Garibnath, Rani Pihgla, Devi 
and Ganesa.® They use also religious songs® and poems 
such as The Praise of the Seven Gods {Sapta Deva Stotra)}^ 

^ HTSy p. 236. See chap ii. 

^ Bombay Gazetteer^ vol. XXI, p. 185. 

3 Mac., vol. II, pp. 139, 140, « lA, vol. VII, p. 5. 

® Atits are degraded Dasnamis who reverence Dattatreya. Wi., 
pp. 204-5. See also article, ‘The Fighting Ascetics of India,’ by 
J. N. Farquhar, Bulletin of the John Rylands Library, vol. IX, No. 2, 
July, 1925. 

® I A, vol. X, p. 146. In Almora they say ‘No.* 

’ Martin, vol. Ill, pp. 407, 408, 534. 

® Compare Crooke, vol. Ill, p. 60; Bombay Gazetteer, Nosik, 1883, 
vol. XVI, p. 74. 

JA, vol. X, p. 146. 

The author saw a copy of this book with an Aipanth Yogi at 
Cawnpore, in November, 1923. 



GORAKHNATHIS 


25 


The Nandias, who keep deformed oxen /or exhibit, sing 
songs of Zahir Pir and Hir and Rahja. 

People do homage to Yogis, touching their feet with 
fingers dipped in holy water, and receive flowers, mangoes and 
pieces of cocoanut as charms and talismans. Sometimes a 
touch works a cure. Sometimes a chili is obtained from one 
as a remedy for sickness. On the other hand, their curse is 
feared and this in turn often works as an incentive to do 
homage. 



CHAPTER TWO 


THE ORDER 

GorakhnathIs claim that they receive none but the twice- 
born into their order. ^ This position is not quite clear, 
however, for some Yogis admit that Sudras are received.^ 
(Titian reported low^ caste recruits'- and said that they 
admitted every description of people.'^ Wilson made a 
similar report/'^ In some parts of the Panjab low castes are 
admitted and menials are called ‘Camarwa.'^ And it was 
reported in 1901 that they admit anyone, that evm a 
jMusalman may become a Yogi.'^ At Dhinodhar, orphans, 
children of destitute persons, lazy and disheartened men, 
<wT*n old men, the indolent and those afflicted with domestic 
troubles are admitted;^ but recruits are chiefly from the 
Shepherd (Rabari) caste. The abbot in 1S3S was Warnath 
of that caste. ^ Formerly in Kacch Dheds were admitted to 
the order, and one pir of the monastery was Meghnath, of 
that caste; how’ever, the practice was discontinued and 
Meghwals, or Dheds, w^ere denied admitt^ince.^*^ At Gorakh- 
mandi they recruit from most Hindu castes, but ostensibly 
receive neither Christians, Musalmans nor Dheds. Kanthad- 
natliis recruit from Ahlrs, Rajputs and others. At Tilla 
candidates are drawn chiefly from KhatriSy Aroras and 
Bnlhamans}^ It is probable that caste distinctions are to 


^ RT(. Py vol. II, p. 400. * At Devi Patan and Alrnora. 

‘ OMASy p. 185. * OMASy p. 152. ^ Wi, p. 206. 

® RTCPy vol. II, p. 404. ’ Censusof the Panjaby Report^ 1891, p. 117. 
® See Khakhar, p. 10; Bombay Gazetteer y vol. V, p. 87 ; I Ay vol. VII, 
p. 53. 

» JRASy 1839, p. 270. lA, 1878, p. 51, n. 

Bombay Gazettecry vol. VIII, p. 155. Khakhar y p. 13. 

District Gazetteer , Jheluni 1904, p. 36 



THE ORDER 


27 


a great extent ignored.^ In some places they receive boys 
whom parents have promised to Yogis in fulfilment of 
vows.* 

At Gorakhpur each candidate is examined as to his family 
and caste before he is accepted. Besides, each candidate has 
to go to the police station and prove that he is not a 
criminal, and there he makes record that he is willing to 
become a Yogi, 

Yogis are casteless. Within the order there are no caste 
restrictions upon eating, drinking and smoking. But Hindu 
and Musalman Yogis do not cat together, the former refus- 
ing to eat with the latter.-'^ Theoretical equality does not, 
however, extend to women, for Yogis do not allow their 
women folk to eat with them,^ although women of all panths 
eat together.® 

Initiation is divided, roughly, into two stages:® the first, a 
probationary period, followed by ceremonies leading to 
preliminary disciplcship; the second, during which the 
ceremony of splitting the ears, which leads to full membership 
in the sect, is performed. An initiate in the first stage is 
called an Aughar; in the second stage he becomes a full- 
fledged Yogi. 

A candidate may be of almost any age. There are many 
boys, of varying ages, who are fully initiated Kanphatas.’ 
In Gorakhmandi the ride is initiation in youth.^ 

The months most auspicious for the ceremonies are Pus, 
December-January; Magh, January-Februaiy ; Phdgun, Feb- 
ruary-March ; and Cdit, March- April; and initiations are 
almost entirely confined to these months. 

Initiation usually takes place at a monastery, but it may be 


* Compare BRI, p. 213. 

* Census of the Panjah, Report, 1891, p. 118. 

® So reported at Tilla. 

* As reported to the author at Benares. 

5 RTCP, vol. II, p. 400. 

* Some insist that there are three stages ; but the distinction lies 
in a subdivision of what is set up here under the second stage, and 
deals with the rites that follow the healing of the ear-wound. See 
report of the case at Gorakhpur, below, p. 37. 

’ See pictures. 

* Bombay Gazetteer, vol. VIII, p. 155. 



28 GOR.A.KHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOpiS 

performed at a place of pilgrimage,^ or, at a temple of 
Bhairorii.' 

The candidate is first closely confined for a period ranging 
from forty days^ to from three to six months;^ that is, for 
a period of testing satisfactory to the guru. During this time 
the candidate is tried as to his resolution and ability to carry 
through his undertaking. At the same time he is dissuaded 
from becoming a Yogi, the guru pointing out to him the 
hardships that his initiation and his life as a Yogi would entail. 

When the guru is satisfied with the self-control and 
resolution shown by the candidate, a fast of two or three days 
may be prescribed. Then, on the day chosen for the initiation 
ceremony, the candidate bathes and appears before his guru, 
bringing with him a rupee and a quarter, a cocoanut, flowers, 
and sweets.^ The latter arc distributed amongst those 
present. A two-edged knife, with which the ears are to be 
split in the second stage of initiation, is presented to the 
candidate three times, and he is again dissuaded from 
proceeding with the ceremony. 

The knife is driven into the ground, or is laid down before 
him and the candidate takes the necessary vows over it, 
swearing not to engage in trade, not to take employment, not 
to keep dangerous weapons, not to become angry when 
abused, not to marry, and to protect his ears. Like all other 
ascetics he takes the vow of ahimsa (non-injury). He then 
receives the mantra,® or initiatory verse, either from his guru, 
or from some other Yogi. Ochre-coloured clothes are then 
presented to him, and he is accepted as a disciple by his guru. 
A barber now shaves his head, including the scalp-lock 
(cutiya). In some places, however, his guru cuts off the 
cutiya.’ In Almora it was stated that a special guru, not the 

^ The author saw a recently initiated Yogi at the Kumbh Mela at 
Allahabad, in 1918. 

® So reported at Benares. This applies when there is no monastery 
at the place. At Kama, it was said, that the ceremony is performed 
at a monastery. 

® BCIy vol. II, p. 497. ^ So reported at Almora. 

^ Ladduy or similar sweets.* 

® Mantras are used with each act throughout the ceremony of 
initiation — Almora. 

’ So stated in Dhinodhar, Gorakhpur and Benares. 



THE ORDER 29 

candidate’s chief* guru, cuts the scalp-lock. If the Ganges 
river is nearby, the hair is consigned to it; if not, the guru 
keeps the hair in his v^allet until he and his disciple go to the 
river, when it is taken and offered to the Ganges. Or, the 
hair may be thrown into a tank.^ A feast is then given. 

Among the Ratannath Yogis the candidate is given, by his 
guru, a razor and scissors seven times, and he is urged not to 
proceed with the initiation. The scissors suggest the cutting 
of the scalp-lock, which entails the breaking of caste; the 
razor, the painful ordeal of having the ears split. But if the 
candidate persists, his guru cuts off his scalp-lock after 
which his head is shaved by a barber. He then bathes and 
is besmeared with ashes, and a kafni or shroud, a langoti or 
loin-cloth, and a cap are given to him. The ashes and the 
shroud signify death to ^he world. After six months, or so, 
if his guru be satisfied, the candidate’s ears are split.^ 

After the ceremony the novice allows his hair to grow, or 
at least his scalp-lock, until he pays a visit to some famous 
shrine, when he has it cut, places it before the deity, with 
offerings of food, and gives a feast.^ This practice is denied 
however by the Yogis of Gorakhpur. In Almora, they say 
that the cutiya alone is allowed to grow until a pilgrimage if 
made. to some sacred place like Hardwar, when it is cut and 
offered to the Ganges. 

After the barber has finished his work and the candidate 
has bathed, he seats himself before his guru, facing north, or 
east,^ His teacher then puts around his neck the siiignad- 
janeo, or sacred thread of the order. 

The candidate’s body is then smeared with ashes. 

He is now the accepted disciple ot his guru and begins to 
serve his religious guide.*^ 

The candidate may now add to his name the sect word, 
dds.^ To this Almora Yogis agree, hut at GoraLlipur and 
at Devi Patan it was contradicted. He may at this time, 
or during the final stage of the initiation, receive (Vo n his 


» So Russell, TCCP, vol. Ill, pp, 250, 251. 

^ RTCF, vol. II, p. 401, n. 1. ^ So stated in Almora. 

< Compare CTC, vol. III,p. 157. 

" Compare OMAS, p. 85; RTCCP, vol. Ill, p. 250 



30 GORAKHNATH and the KANPHATA yogis 

guru a new name, that of some saint, or of a plant, or of an 
animal.^ 

Those who have undergone the first stage of initiation are 
usually termed Aughars. 

They wear, as a usual thing, the clothes of the ordinary 
Hindu. The one in charge of the shrine on the summit at 
Dhinodhar wore (1924) a very long, loose coat, of ochre* 
colour, reaching nearly to his ankles, and without a waist- 
band; and a turban of cotton of the same colour. 

Some Aughars wear their hair long and unkempt.® 

The Aughar serves his guru, attends his teaching, and 
performs certain duties about the establishment where he 
lives. At Dhinodhar the novice is made to repeat, twice 
daily, in the presence of his guru, the words, omkdr^ updesh, 
adesh and om through his singnful.^ In Almora it was said 
that these words need not be repeated through the whistle. 

The Aughar is not accorded equal rights with the Yogi. 
This is illustrated by the fact that at feasts and when gifts 
are distributed, the Aughar receive:: but half the portion of a 
Yogi. In Benares, however, Yogis maintain that Aughars 
would share equally \\ ith them. 

There is no stateil ]^eri(;d of service before which an 
Aughar may proceed witli the final stage of initiation which 
will constitute him a Yugi * At any time, when his guru 
is satisfied that he is ready, the disciple may proceed with 
the initiation. There are some, however, who wait for 
twelve years; and, according to Russell, the novice in 
the Central Provinces must remain such for twelve years, 
during which time he is expected to make two or three 
parikramas (that is, travel born the mouth of the river to its 
source on one bank, and return by tne other) of the Narbada 
river. During each pilgrimage, he allows his hair to grow, and, 
at the end of the journey, shaves all but the scalp-lock, and 
offers the liair to th<‘ river.^ In Benares, in Gorakhpur and 

* C Dfnpart. II, p,ara 562. * See pictures. 

‘ lUimbay ( r , vol. V, p. 87; I Ay vol. VII, p. 52. The 
updvsh nuinira . ‘ bt wise, pious and useful.’ Omkdr is Orii, 

’ shtiring poilt tl that the candidate was kept in a room under 
<• *na!)(;e for jorty davs.— .SHTC, p. 202. 

UrCi'lK voi. lil, pp. 250, 251. 



THE ORDER 31 

in the Panjab, Yogis assert that the parikrama is not obliga- 
tory. In Almora it was explained that an Aughar would make 
such a pilgrimage only as the companion of his guru, should 
the latter make the journey. 

Aughars of all panths are constantly met with, who are old 
men, and who have no intention of ever having their ears 
split. They call themselves Gorakhnathis. At Kirana, in 
Jhang, the Aughars are in good repute and are wealthy. They 
have their own pir, or abbot, who, after his induction into 
office, is never allowed to descend the hill.^ There are other 
monasteries of Aughars, for example, at Hardwar and at 
Bombay. Near the temple of Balkeswar on the sea-front at 
the latter place, is the residence of a group of Aughars who 
are followers of Balaknath. He has some followers in the 
Panjab. Rose says that he was a disciple of Gorakhnath, who 
left his guru in childhood for the jungle where he used to 
suck unmilked cows. The caran (foot-prints in marble) of 
this saint is found there. These Aughars never become 
Kanphatas. They bear a rather bad reputation. 

Aughars pretend to some magical powers, and some 
approximate the Aghori.^ Others say that they are follow^ers 
of Kanipa, pupil of Jalandhar.^ In the west, Aughars 
(Oghads) arc an inferior class.* 

When his guru is satisfied that the candidate is prepared 
to complete his initiation, the arrangements are made.^ The 
chief tests of fitness are that the pupil has kept his vows, has 
been faithful in his service to his guru and is steadfastly 
resolved to proceed, ^ First, the candidate bathes, is shaved, 
puts ashes on his body, and ties a cloth of cotton about his 
loins. Some say that he covers the upper part of his body 
with a cotton cloth dyed in ochre,® but others say not, He 
then presents himself, with two of his guru’s disciples, before 


' Rr('}\ vol. II, p. 402. 

CtnsuSy North-ivestcrn Provinces and Oudh^ 1891, Pt. 1., p. 220. 
Gospel in Gonda, p. 216. 

Census of the Panjaby Report y 1891, p. 115. 

' Bombay GaZ( titer, vo). VIH, p. 447. 

’ Cem^pare CJC\ vol. Ill, pp. 156. 157; RTCCP, voi III, 
p. 251. 

An dhchnla, kajm. 



32 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

his teacher.^ The candidate is made to sit facing north. He 
draws his knees up and clasps his hands under them. Prepara- 
tion for the splitting of the two ears is then made. A 
specially skilled Yogi is called to perform this service, for 
which he receives one and a quarter rupees.^ The fee may 
be larger, tw^o and a quarter or twenty-five and a quarter 
rupees. This guru is called Kan Guru (ear-guru) or Cira 
Guru (the guru who splits the ears). The two edged knife 
is brought, and in front of Bhairom, mantras, or sacred 
texts, are pronounced over it. Slits, about three-quarters 
of an inch long, are then made in the cartileges of 
both ears. The mantra, ^ Siva Goraksa,' being used.^ 
Some claim that the effect of the mantra is to make 
the operation painless and bloodless. Plugs of nim or of bikua 
wood are then inserted in the wounds. The gashes are 
washed daily with pure water or with nim water. Some say 
that the plugs are removed daily when the wounds are 
dressed. The care of the wounds continues for forty days. 
It is said that the plugs fail out after nine days. In some 
instances the nim sticks are covered with the soft, downy 
feathers of the peacock’s quill and the wounds are kept 
wet. 

According to one report the regular Yogi w^ho slits the 
ears inserts the knife and then asks the novice whether he be 
willing to renounce the world or not ; and if he is unwilling 
he w ithdraw^s the knife. If the novice says that he is willing 
to follow the precepts of the sect and become an ascetic, the 
ear-slitter moves the knife up and down, finishing the opera- 
tion; pieces of a twig of nim-wood, soaked in oil, are inserted 
in the w^ounds for three days, when ear-rings are inserted.^ 
One of the pictures show^s an initiate whose ears are not yet 
healed, wearing ear-rings. 


^ In some cases Yogis are initiated by their fathers; e.g., in the 
Himalayas. There the practice has been handed down from father 
to son. In this case the cutiya, or scalp-lock, is cut by another Yogi 
and the ears split by still another. 

2 RTCCP, vol. Ill, p. 250; RTCP, vol. II, p. 401 ; Census of the 
Panjab, Report, 1891, p. 115. 

" Compare FORL, p. 348. 

* Bombay Gazetteer, vol. VIII, p. 447. 



THE OJRDER 33 

By the slitting of. the ears the Aughar becomes a Yogi, and 
may add to his name the word Natha, Lord. Often he 
takes a new name to which hd-adds the word, Natha.* 
He may receive as a name that of a plant or animal; e.g. 
Nimndtha Kanahndtha^ Ndgnatha,^ Kajgithadnathls use the 
word Kati^had, instead of Natha.* 

When the wounds have healed, the Yogi resumes his sacred 
thread, smears his body with ashes, and appears , before his 
guru. From now on, he will ‘remcnaber’ his teacher twice 
daily and appear before him. Ear-rings of clay, weighing 
about one-fourth of a pound, are now pUt on^ the mantra, 
* Oth svdham,' being used.® In some parts of India the rings 
are of lacquered earthenware. After a period varying from 
fifteen to twenty, or forty days, or a year, rings of some other 
substance may be substituted for those of clay.® 

When the rings are inserted, the following exhortation is 
whispered in the Yogi’s ear; ‘Be wise, pious and useful’;^ 
or, ‘ Be wise, perform your religious duties, keep yourself 
prompt in the service of your guru.’* 

The ceremony of initiation is completed with the worship 
of the nine Nathas, the eighty-four Siddhas and Balasun- 
dari. The goddess is represented by a twisted thread wick 
fixed in a ball of dough and lighted. This is placed in a square 
made on the ground with flour or rice. In this square a jar 
(kalsa) of water also is set. The light is worshipped with 
offerings of flowers, sweets {laddu,hqlwa)y cakes and a cocoanut. 
The latter is split with a knife before being offered.* 

The duties of a Yogi are various. At Dhinodhar, for 
example, he repeats the name of Dada, referring to the founder 
of the sect,^* or Baba, referring to his guru, serves his teacher, 
and performs such other tasks as are assigned to him. The 
disciple is considered as the adopted son of his guru and 
inherits from him.^^ 


1 RTCPy vol. n, p. 401. * RTCPy vol. II, p. 399. 

* PNQt vol. II, para 51. * lA, vol. VII, p. 53. 

* SHTCy p. 14. ® See under ear-rings, above, p. 7. 

’ The updesh mantra, ® Compare Bdmbay Gazetteer y vol. V, p. 87. 

* A substitute for human sacrifice? CTCy vol. Ill, p..l57. 
Compare Bombay Gazetteer, vol. V, p, 87. 

« lA, vol. V.II, p. 52. 


3 



34 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

After initiation a Yogi may elect to become a militant Yogi, 
vowed to celibacy. In this case he would be known as 
Niga^ Nihang, or Kdnphata, On the other hand, quite con- 
trary to supposed regulations, he may become a householder, 
or gfhdsta} 

The initiate becomes a member of the sub-sect of his 
guru; consequently, in choosing his guru, he chooses his 
sub-sect. He belongs, also, to the monastery of which his 
teacher is a member.^ 

Sbnte* women receive initiation. These are either married 
women, or those who enter the sect after the death of their 
husbands. In Almora, in 1924, there was one, Sarasvati 
(Nathni), a widow whose husband had been a landlord. 
After his death, she-was initiated into the Satnath sub-sect 
at Almora. She had been on pilgrimages as far as King 
Laj. She was pujdri at a temple of Bhairom in her own 
house. On her arm was a brand mark received at Koteswar, 
and she wore the usual beads from Ring Laj. Her cocoanut 
begging-bowl (darya ndrial) was from Bhuj in Kacch. In her 
rosary of thirty- two beads she wore a tdzdz^ or amulet; black 
stones from Badrinath; and large, W’hite stones from Hihg 
Laj, set in silver. Another widow, at Kama, who had made 
the pilgrimage to Hihg Laj, was a member of the same sect. 

The Kanphatas possess many monasteries, of which there 
are a number of importance.^ Some of these occupy very old 
religious sites whose history undoubtedly long antedates the 
rise of the Gorakhnathis. There is no fixed rule of superiority 
amongst the monasteries; but that at Tilla, in the Panjab, is 
generally considered to be the chief seat of the Gorakhnathis. 
The abbot at Gorakhpur claims authority over the establish- 
ments in the United Provinces, and regions to the south look 
to this place as their chief authority. This monastery claims 
to supervise some 360 lesser establishments. However, the 

^ That he need not remain in the monastery is allowed by the 
Hathayogapradipika, 1, 12 f. See Wi, p. 216 n. and Tessitori, ERE^ 
voL XII, p. 834. 

* For the specialized functions of gums and mahants, or pirs, see 
below, pp. 38, 39. 

* Baines calls attention to the fact that those with monasteries 
have the right to be called Yogis. {Ethnology y p. 41.) 



THE ORDER 


35 


nearby monastery at Tulsipur is related to that at Sawarikot 
in Nepal and is independent of Gorakhpur. The head of the 
Gorakhpur establishment was, in 1924, of the Dharamnath 
sub-sect, while that at Tulsipur belorrged to the Ratannath 
branch of Gorakhnathis. There may be some relation between 
Gorakhpur and Dhinodhar where the Yogis are known as 
Dharamnathis. Yet, the pir at Dhinodhar belongs to the 
Santnath sect of the Panjab and Nepal. The chief monasteries 
seem to be more or less independent of each other. The 
chief seats of the Yogis exercise wide influence. 

There is an organization, called the Bhek Bar ah Panth 
which has general supervision over the monasteries, and 
which is consulted when roahants are elected, and which 
deals with disputes arising from various causes, or where the 
deposition of a mahant is desired. The Bhek is composed 
of representatives from the twelve Panths of the Gorakhna- 
this, one from each. The elections are made at the Kumbh 
Mela, held at Hardwar once in every twelve years. At this 
time thousands of Yogis from all of the mathas (monasteries) 
are assembled^. Special elections may be made to supply 
vacancies when the Bhek is convened to settle questions, at 
local monasteries, or at great melas, such as those held at 
Ujjain and Allahabad. The head of this organization is 
chosen in turn from each of the twelve panths. This is a desir- 
able office, with tenure of twelve years, for which the 
incumbent pays a fee of twelve hundred rupees. He is con- 
sidered as Joge^war and ranks as head of all the Gorakhnathis. 
The Bhek has a monastery at Hardwar. On two occasions, 
when the author visited it, there was no one in residence. It 
is reported that the committee was not re-elected at the last 
Kumbh Mela.^ 

The monasteries {matha^ asthdl^ akdrd) vary in structure 
and extent according to the wealth of the Yogis who reside 
in them, or the extent of their endowments. They com- 
prise a set of chambers, or cells, for the resident mahant, 
or abbot, his permanent pupils, and other members of the 
order. There are always in residence a number of disciples 
as well as vagrants. The older disciples usually have young 


^ See references to the trial at Gorakhpur, below, p. 37. 



36 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

followers to whom they are teaching the elements of their 
doctrine and practice.^ In connection with the monastery 
will be found a temple of Siva, of Devi, or of Bhairom, or 
temples of all these deities and others; the samadh^ or shrine, 
of the founder of the monastery, or of some other eminent 
teaciier; tombs {samddhs) of numerous other Yogis; and one 
or more dharamsdlas^ or rest-houses for the accommodation 
of the rnendicants and other travellers who are constantly 
visiting the place. Ingress and egress are free to all. 

The buildings of the Kanphatas vary from substantial halls, 
some two storeys high, like those at Dhinodhar,- to less 
pretertiv^us structures, like those at Tulsipur, and to rude, 
mud huts with roofs of thatch, like those at Puri. 

The monastery is under the control of an abbot, called 
mahant, or pii. The functions of the mahant are to direct 
the worship at the temple and elsewhere in the establishment 
and to appoint pujdris and assistants for this purpose; to 
instruct and to direct instruction in Yoga and in the duties 
of Yogis; to* administer the funds of the monastery and to 
keep the property in repair. 

The mahant at Gorakhpur nominates his successor, in- 
variably choosing a member of his own sub-sect. However, 
Sundarnathji, who was head of the monastery in»1924, died 
without naming a successor. A dispute immediately arose as 
to whetlier a brother guru (that is, a brother of the same 
pub-sect) or a cela (personal disciple) should succeed to 
the gaddi. The matter was taken to the civil courts for 
decision. Sundarnathji was of the sub-sect of Dharamnath. 
The rule as stated at Gorakhpur is that, upon the death of 
the mahant, representatives of the twelve sub-sects of the 
Gorakhnathis meet to choose a successor. They invariably 
elect the person named by the late mahant. The law suit 
referred to above shows that the election is not wholly w ithin 
the power of the residents of the monastery. 

An interesting point in the dispute at Gorakhpur was that 


^ The matha is more particularly the residence of teachers. Their 
pupils frequent the estiablishment and may become semi-residential ? 
but the inmates are not a permanent body following a fixed rule of 
life 



THE ORDER 


37 


one Nanhoo Singh, who was involved in the suit, and who 
hoped to win the gaddi, was not a Yogi at all He stated that 
if he had won his case at law, he had intended to undergo 
initiation, become a Yogi and have his ears split. ^ It seems 
that in this particular case the guru hhdi had died previously 
to the mahant and the dispute involved the question of cela. 
According to the opinion of the judge in the Gorakhpur case 
the succession would be (1) cela, (2) guru bhdiy (3) caca guru; 
e.g., disciple guru of the same panth as the mahant, and 
brother of the brother guru. 

After a mahant has been chosen, the electors proceed to the 
District Officer of Gorakhpur and announce their decision. 
,The officer takes the signature of the twelve Yogis on a 
declaration that the newly-elected mahant is their choice. 
After his election ^ it is said, the mahant is not allowed to leave 
the monastery. Sundarnathji had made the various pilgrim- 
ages from Nepal to Kacch and from Badrinath .to the south of 
the peninsula before he was elected head of the monastery. The 
mahant is inducted into office with the usual form of worship, 
the prasdd anfl a feast which includes the giving of food in 
charity to all who may come to the ceremonies, whether they 
be Yogis or not. The installation is concluded with fire^-wwks. 
Part of the services of installation fake place while the mahant 
is stated in a niche in the wall of the main shrincu The 
Yogis worship him, present him with a new garment and 
mark his forehead with the Jika. Afterwards he is seated on 
the r.a)a gaddi^ or royal seat, outside the veranda of the main 
shrine. Then the priest at the monastery gives him a garment 
and marks his forehead with the tika, and makes other 
presents. There is, of course, a large number of Yogis and 
others including prominent men of the community present. 
In connection with the ceremonies there is a protracted 
worship of Pdtar DeOy covering seven days.^ 

The abbot at Dhinodhar, in Kacch is called'pir. The head. 

* Reported by the Rev. E. C. Dcwick. M.A., in a letter to author, 
dated 27 March, 1928. Nanhoo Singh won his suit, ana is now 
mahant ot Gorakhpur, 

* See trial cited above. PatarDeo = Patel Deo (?) the spirit of the 
ancient (village) proprietor. See Sleeman, Rambles and Recollections , 
Oxford edition, p: 221. 



38 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

of that monastery, in March, 1924, was Pir Sri VII, Somnathji. 
The pir is chosen, from among the Yogis at the monastery, 
by the Rao of Kacch and holds office for life. He is not 
allowed to go outside of the bounds of the state. The pir is 
installed in office by the Rao, who invests him with a dress of 
honour, and seats him on the gaddi, or cushion of authority, as 
chief of the Kanphatas. The pir is held in high honour. He 
does not have to return the salute of anyone, not even of the 
Rao; and he need not rise when the Rao pays him a visit. ^ 
In 1924, the pir had a small boy as his much beloved cela, or 
pupil. Evidently he hoped to provide for succession through 
him. It would seem that the succession is through adoption 
and that the Rao*s choice is only nominal. This view is 
upheld by the fact that, in the west, outside of Dhinodhar, 
the pir, or baba, is allowed to marry, and, failing issue, to 
adopt one of his disciples, thus providing for the succession 
at his establishment. 

The mahant of Tulsipur (Devi Patan) is chosen by vote of 
twelve Yogis representing the twelve sub-sects of the 
Gorakhnathis. He is placed upon the gaddi, given a janeo 
and a special dress, and offerings of prasad are made before 
him. The mahant (in 1924) was Harinath. He did not 
initiate nor did he make disciples. 

The mahant at Tilla occupies the most important seat of 
the Kanphatas; in other respects he does not exercise 
peculiar functions. His establishment is in good repair, 
except for the very old remains on the site, even though the 
income of the institution has been much curtailed in recent 
times. The records show that, once inducted into office, he 
should never descend the hill. However, in 1924, the author 
met him in Amritsar under circumstances related below. 
This fact, however, might be the very important exception 
which proves the rule. 

It may now be stated that the office of mahant is either 
(1) Mdurusiy hereditary, by succession, (2) Panchayail, by 
decision of a council, or (3) Hdkimi by authority or right. 
No definition of the third case has been discovered. 

Next in order after the mahant is the guru or teacher in the 


^ JRAS, 1839, p. 270. 



THE ORDER 39 

order. He usually has a group of students about him who are 
receiving instruction preparatory to initiation, or who are 
Yogis under instruction in Yoga. 

Yogis and Aughars make up the rank and file of the order. 
As indicated above, a candidate chooses his guru in the first 
instance; but the choice may be decided finally by the 
mahant. 

Life in the monastery follows a fairly close, but not very 
exacting routine. There is the early worship at the samadhs, 
and the later offerings as well; the time given to teaching and 
to meditation ; the midday worship at the various shrines and 
the evening worship. Begging may form part of the day s 
work. There is plenty of time for conversation. Visitors are 
constantly coming and going. Every Yogi returning from a 
pilgrimage has much to report about all sorts of things. 
There is the business of administration. Each Yogi has his 
own room, where he may enjoy some privacy, but much of 
the life of the establishment is open to public view. Further 
details of activities may be noted in the accounts of the 
various establishments. 

Gorakhnathis bury their dead,^ rarely, it ever, employing 
the services of Brahmans, the rites being performed by 
fellow- Yogis.^ A legend is sometimes given which accounts 
for the practice. There was once a dispute between Hindus 
and Musalmans as to who were masters of the earth. To 
disprove the claims of the latter, Gorakhnath sat on the 
ground, placing his food and belongings beside him, and 
called upon the earth to yield to him if he had a share in 
her. The earth opened and he sank below the surface 
of the ground.^ The practice of burial is not confined 
to Klanphatas, being followed by some other ascetic 
orders. 

Thy dying Yogi, especially if he be an adept in Yoga, is 
made to sit cross-legged, as in meditation.* 

After death the body is prepared for burial. It is washed 
by Yogis, rubbed with ashes of cow-dung, or with ashes from 


1 

t 

s 


See RTCP, vol. II. pp. 399, 400. 

Compere OBTM, p. 264; Wi, p, 196; SHTC, p. 262. 
RTCP, vo!. II, p. 400. * RTCP, vol. II, pp. 399, 400. 



40 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

the dhuni,^ sometimes with sugar also, and dressed in. new 
garments of everyday life.® Or, the body may be covered 
with an ochre-coloured shroud. A new sacred thread, with 
the nad,ring and rudraksa berry, and a new rosary are hung 
around the neck. Some say that the ear-rings are removed and 
replaced by earthen^ ones. A tika of sandalwood or of red 
lead is drawn on the forehead. Five things are put into the 
mouth — gold, silver, a pearl, a charred wick from a lamp (drag) 
used in the worship of Devi, and incense {kesas kktisbhu).^ 
The body is then placed in a posture of meditation (a sitting 
posture) on a seat, and is supported by one crutch, or by 
three. Under the body sugar and sometimes earth, but not 
salt, are placed.^ Flowers also may be put on the seat. A 
potsherd is placed on the head, but for this a black silk cap or 
a turban may be substituted. 

The grave is a pit, dug deep, three and one half hands 
(hdth)^ and ciilcular. In the south w^ll a niche is cut for the 
reception of the body which is set facing north. Under the 
seat one rupee and four annas or five and one-fourth rupees 
and sugar are deposited. The platform is made of ‘wool, 
grass, etc.’ 

At the right end in front of the body is placed a gourd full of 
water; and at the left a rot (a thick loaf of unleavened bread), 
a saucer of rice and milk, and another of water. A loin cloth 
and a staff (kanak) are laid in front of the body. The begging 
bowl is filled with milk and is placed in the wallet which is 
hung from the right shoulder.® Rose says that the nails are 
removed and taken to Hardwar, but at Gorakhpur this was 
denied. Sugar and gold are put into the grave. It is then 
filled in with earth, and a mound is raised over it. Later, a 
masonry platform, or a tomb may be erected over the grave, 
in which case it will be surmounted with the yoni-linga. 


^ PNQ, vol. II, para 464. * CTC, vol. Ill, p. 158. 

* Census Report^ Berdr^ 1881, p, 60. 

* Reported by the Aipanthis at Hardwar. 

® In Bind, sugar is placed under and above the body. (Aitken, 
Gazetteer of the Province of Sindy p. 184.) See note inl^iva Samhitdy 
p. 50, where it is pointed out that after beginning the practice of the 
Hatha Yoga, a Yogi may not use salt. 

* Compare CTC, vol. Ill, p. 158. 



THE ORDER 


41 


The pdduka (caran) of the deceased may be put on the 
samadh.^ 

If the deceased had been a rich Yogi, or if he had been the 
disciple of a guru who owned land, his body would be placed 
in a chair shaped like a dolt, it would be adorned with flowers, 
and he would be carried to the grave in a procession lead by 
musicians. In Berar, according to Kitts, the body is carried 
to the grave in a large wallet.^ 

The grave is called samadh or samadhi. 

in some places, especially in Benares and in Almora, Yogis 
were formerly buried in their own houses. But municipal 
regulations have put a stop to the practice. However in the 
outlying places about Almora the practice still continues. At 
Almora their burial grounds ate at Fatal Dpvi, outside of the 
Jown. There are some, manifestly old, samadhs in Almora 
which consist of four slabs of stone making a box with a 
fifth slab -for a cover. There are now no lihgas on them. 

If the Yogi was a. poor man, or if he had been the disciple 
of a man without landed property, his body might be placed 
on two poles and sunk in a river This practice was 
acknowledged at Benares, but Gorakhpur Yogis insisted that 
all are buried. 

For ten or twelve days after tbe death offerings are made 
to the deceased, Bel leaves and flowers are placed on the 
grave and upon it a lamp is kept burning. 

After the disposal of the body, all the Yogis bathe with 
water supplied by the deceased's disciples, and then sweets 
(laddu) are distributed. There is no further ceremonial 
impurity.^ However, some say that clothes are washed on 
the tenth day after death.^ A council of all the Yogis at the 
place where death occurred is held, and in case the deceased 
had not chosen a successor, a guru, if this was his rank, is 
chosen. to take his place. The clothes of the dead are given to 
degraded Yogis or are divided among those present.- Food 
and money also are distributed. 

' This applies in the case of disciples of Marseyendranath and of 
Dattatreya’also. See Enthoven, Folklore of Bombay, p. 150. 

• Census Report, Berar, 1881, p. 60. 

* Compare CTC, vol. Ill, p. 158. 

" See CrC, vol. Ill, p. 158. " At Almora. 



42 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

On the third day cakes {rot), cooked rice, milk and curmd 
are oflFered on the grave and then are consumed by the 
worshippers. If the deceased were not well off, curma only is 
offered. Some wash their clothes on the third day, but this 
is not considered necessary. 

On the twelfth day turmeric powder is sprinkled.^ And 
worship of Bahram Deo and Mari Mai is performed on a 
kettle drum (danka). 

On the thirteenth day a conch shell is blown and the 
krya karna is completed and the spirit of the deceased 
departs. At Dhinodhar a feast is given on the thirteenth day 
and alms are distributed.^ In Berar, on the Sivratri, the 
paduka of the deceased is worshipped.^ 

After a year {bdrsi), or a year and a half, the srdddha, or 
funeral rite is performed.'^ The Yogis keep vigil all night 
and in some places the ceremony known as bharad, the 
beating of drums for Devi, is kept up. ‘ In the watch before 
dawn fish, or pakduri, or khir, or paldu or flesh is distributed. 
Six or seven thrones (gaddi) are erected; to the pir, to 
Joginis, to Sakhya (or witness), to Bir, to Dhandari (cook of 
Guru Gorakhnath), to Gorakhnath and to Neka or Ant 
(reported at Almora). Mantras are recited, clothes and coins 
of gold, silver and copper are distributed, and a cow' or some 
other gift is made to the pir. Gifts are made also to Yogis. 
The silver goes to Sakhya, copper to Bir, the eow^ to the pir, 
w^ater to Gorakhnath, 

Formerly all classes attended this ceremony, now only 
Yogis. 

Householders also are buried, and in some cases their 
families likewise. Kitts reported that ceremonies for the 
widow of a Yogi are the same as for a member of the order, 
but that her shroud would be of red or green, not of ochre 
colour.'"' 

Worship is continued at the samadhs indefinitely and is 


^ Kitts, Berar Census Report, 1S81, p. 60, 
^ Bombay Gazetteer, vol. V, p. 87. 

^ Census Report, Berar, 1S81, p. 60. 

" Compare RTCP, vol. II, pp. 399, 400. 
^ Census Report, Berar, 1881, p. 60. 



THE ORDER 


43 


performed twice a day. In the early morning/ after bathing, 
the pujari offers Ganges water, sandalwood, rice, bel leaves, 
flowers, sweets and incense at each samadh connected with 
the monastery; or at least some of these things are offered. 
The food is then thrown away. In the evening milk and 
sweets are offered, a lamp is lighted and incense is burned. 
The poor before consuming their food offer it at the samadhs. 

The buried Yogi is supposed to remain in trance 
indefinitely.^ 


' The Aipanthis at Hardwar said ‘four o’clock.’ 
® Modern India and the Indians, p. 73. 



CHAPTER THREE 


VOWS 

Yogis vow not to engage in trade and not to take employ- 
ment. So they are supposed to beg for their food. But this 
is by no means the universal practice. It is estimated that 
but one in one hundred begs; and at monasteries and at 
shrines where offerings and income are sufficient, the inmates 
do not have to go out to beg at all. Very often all that a i^ogi 
may ask for is brought at once by willing d ',vytees. Most of 
those who bring gifts are not immediau bllowers of the 
Yogis. Certain Yogis, called Darsanis, do . beg but reipain 
in definite places, in the forest, at temples, in caves dr at 
monasteries, where they are visited and worshipped.^ While 
aw^ay on pilgrimage, it may be necessary for a Yogi to beg. 
Jf food is not available, they eat fruit and roots; and in some 
instances, if food is not given them they mix ashes. f»'om the 
dhuni with water and drink it as a substitute. 

As beggars they go from house to house crying, ^^ilakhy 
Alakh^'^ hui they do not sing. Some put on special clothes 
when they go out to beg.^ In Belgaop both men and women 
beg, carrying a begging bowl, and often a trident as well,^ 
They take both money and food. 

There is a difference of opinion amongst writers on the 
question of food; and Yogis themselves do not agree about 
the matter. Sherring^ says that they accept food from all 


1 JRTCOP, vol. Ill, p. 250. 

* Compare Census of the Pcitjabj Report, 1891, p. 118. 

® See above, p. 12. 

* See Bombay Gazetteer, vol. XXI, p. 185; PNQ, vol. IJ, paras, 
404, 964, 

® SHTC, p. 262. . 



vows 


45 


houses and all caStes. Russell says that they beg only from 
Hindus.^ Crooke*,^ on the other hand, said that they would 
not take food from lower castes, from whose hands respectable 
Hindus would not take food. Sherring^ says that they eat 
flesh. Tessitori and Crooke report that Kanphatas accept‘ 
food other than beef and pork. Moshan Fani reported that 
they ate beef and pork, and that they killed and ate men.® 
The practice evidently varies. In Kathiawar® there are no 
restrictions on food and they will eat with any strangers who 
care to join them. 

Their food consists of millets, rice, vegetables, fruits, fowls, 
goat’s flesh, mutton, fish, beef and pork. But not every one 
accepts all these articles of diet. By some the cpw is con- 
sidered sacred and the pig unclean.® At Dhinodhftr the 
chief food consists of millet and pulse. And these commoner 
foods of the people in general are the usual articles of diet. 

One of the marks of the sect is the practice of charity. 
This is followed in Nepal, in the United Provinces, in the 
Panjab and at Dhinodhar and in other places in the west. It 
is said that Dharamnath began the practice at Dhinodhar in 
reaction to the neglect with which he was treated in Kacch.*^ 
Begging was undertaken to seiCure means for feeding the 
sick and the sutfering of every caste. Then, grants of land 
were made to the monasteries with this purpose in view.® 
At present their income is used in entertaining strangers of 
all castes and creeds. At Dhinodhar two meals a day are 
served to all who come. High caste visitors receive their 
food uncooked; but low caste persons are served in the 
large dining hall, and Musalmans and degraded castes in the 
garden.® Special caldrons are provided for preparing the 
food. At Gorakhmandi, in Kathiawar, when the meals are 
ready, a servant of the abbot goes out and calls twice in a low 
voice: ‘Whoever is hungry, come. The abbot’s table is 


^ RTCCP, vol. Ill, p. 252. * CTC, vol. Ill, p. 158. 

* SHTC, p. 262. 

* ere, vol. III. p, 158; ERE, vol. XII, p. 834. 

^ Dabistan, vo\. 11, p. 129. 

® Bombay Gazetteer, vol. VIII, p. 155. ^ See legend below, 

* See I A; vol. VII, p. 51, 

® Compare Bombay Gazetteer, vo\. Ill, p. 86. 



46 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

spread/^ The ordinary food served is millet and red pulse. 
On special days, in August, Gokal Atham, and at Ndurdtri^ 
in October, rice and lapsi (wheat flour and molasses cooked 
in butter), and opium are distributed. ^ Oman^ reported 
that the throngs of men, women and children going to Tilla 
to the great festivals, are supplied with accommodation, food 
and coverings there. At Tilla they pride themselves on their 
practice of charity. 

Gorakhnathis are under a vow of celibacy. At Dhinodhar 
the rule is strictly enforced. It was reported in 1 880,^ that 
women were not allowed to enter the precincts of the 
monastery. In 1924, the author saw women doing menial 
work of various kinds there; but there was no reason to 
believe that the rule of celibacy w^as broken through their 
presence. At Devi Patan and at Gorakhpur the rule is 
enforced that Aughars and Yogis are not allowed to marry. 
And probably at most monasteries of the Gorakhnathis 
celibacy is enforced. At the matha in Benares, however, the 
residents w'ere (1924) married men who had their wdves with 
them. And Kasinath, w^ho attended the temple of Kal 
Bhairorii (in Benares), lived in his owm house in the city. 

It is possible that the rule of celibacy does not require 
absolute continence for, to cite one exception. Yogis acknow- 
ledge the practice of sdkta rites. It is diflicult to state 
just how far the rule of continence is enforced. The 
reputation of Yogis is not above reproach, Buchanan reported 
that though they were not permitted to marry, they were at 
liberty to communicate with whatever woman they pleased. 
Celibates are sometimes called mathaddrh, i.e. those w^ho live 
in a monastery.® 

Reports from various areas show' that marriage is common 
amongst Kanphatas,^ and Census returns confirm this.® The 
so-called secular Yogis are numerous. In some instances 
Brahmans are employed to perform their marriage cere- 


^ Bombay Gazetteer y vol.^VIII, pp, 155, 156, 446 f. 

^ Bombay Gazetteer ^ vol, V, p. 86. ^ OMASy pp. 264, 265. 

lAy vol. VII, p. 51. ^ Martin, vol. II, pp. 484, 485. 

® Bombay Gazetteer y\o\. VIII, p. 185. 

' E g. Bombay Gazetteer, vol. XXI, p. 185, ® See pp. 4 ff. 



vows 


47 


monies. Even in monasteries of repute the practice has been 
known. Buchanan, before 1838, reported married Yogis 
living and teaching in the malha at Gorakhpurd 

At Gorakhmandi, both celibates (mathadaris) and house- 
holders (gharbdm) are fouiid.^ Married Yogis are called also 
Bindundgi, samyogi and grhasta. In the Himalayas many 
householders are found, and in some instances the pujari 
rights at their temples are kept in the family, being handed 
down from father to son. 

While the regulation that Yogis who marry are not allowed 
to live in a monastery is not universally enforced, still, in 
many places grhastas are allowed neither to live at nor to eat 
in the monastery. At Tulsipur a well-known grhasta had his 
house, where (1924) he lived with his wife, adjoining the 
grounds of the monastery at Devi Patan. Yogis who marry 
are held in contempt by others, and, in some instances have 
to pay a fine before they are permitted to smoke with 
celibates.^ Married Yogis continue to wear the car-rings, the 
sacred thread, the clothes and other articles of the sect, and 
they miay continue to practise Yoga. 

In marriage, Yogis hold to the caste from which they have 
come, in choosing a wdfe, and avoid marriage in the same 
sub-sect. 

In Almora there are householders of the Dharamnath and 
Satnath sub-sects. No rules require sons of grhastas to 
become Yogis, but this happens; and such instances were 
discovered by the author in Naini Tal and Almora. In the 
latter case a second son became a Yogi in order to secure his 
father’s rights and property in a temple and a house belong- 
ing to the family, the eldest son being a munshi in the 
Cantonment in Almora. The third son was an Aughar. 

Householders engage in secular employments. In Almora 
are to be found milkmen, tailors and agriculturalists. In 
various parts of India Yogis are engaged in weaving, culti- 
vation, in peddling, as soldiers, and as money-lenders.^ In 


^ MartirtjVoX. II, p. 484. 

* Bombay Gazetteer, \o\, VIII, p. 155. 
3 RTCP, vol. II, p. 410. 

^ See Tessitori, ERE, vol. Xll, p. 834. 



48 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

the Simla Hills, Yogis burn the dead, and for every corpse 
receive four annas in money together with a plate of brass and 
a woollen or cotton cloth. They also receive grain at each 
harvest. 

The ^iva Samhitd allows sudcess to householders. The 
last three verses of that work read: Therefore the Yo^ 
should be performed by master Yogis according to the pres- 
cribed rules. He who is satisfied with whatever he receives, 
self-controlled and unattached (to household affairs), even 
though he be an householder, is released through the practice 
of Yoga. Success for the masterful householders, who are 
attached to the practices of the Yoga, must arise by means of 
japa. Therefore, let the householder exert himself. Estab- 
lished in the house, with ample household, having renounced 
attachment and engaged in Yoga practice secretly, the house- 
holder sees (increasingly) the wonderful marks of success, 
and, having carried out my instructions, should enjoy (bliss). 

Women who have been initiated into'the ^ct are numerous.^ 
Those who are wives of Yogis are of two classes, those who 
are themselves Yoginis and those who are not. Both classes 
are common. In Kumaon and in Garhwal, in 1924, the 
author saw women of both classes. Women may be initiated 
before or after their marriage. A woman who,- before her 
marriage, has had her ears split is not married by the usual 
Hindu rites; the riiarriage in such cases being by purchase, 
a formal agreement having the sanction of the sub-sect. A 
feast is always given. On the other hand, the marriage of a 
woman, before she has been initiated, is by the usual Hindu 
ceremony {sddi). At Kama, in Kumaon, in 1924, the mahant 
said that such a woman could not be initiated. From 
Rawalpindi female Yogis are reported. 

A number of castes trace their origin to Yogis. The 
records, however, are not always clear as to whether the Yogis 
reported trace their origin to Gorakhnathis.^ 

In the Simla Hills, Yogis form a sort of occupational caste. 


^ For an account of women who have been initiated into the sect 
as widows see above, p. 34. 

“For the ori^?in of Yogi castes see J. N. Farquhar’s paper, ‘The 
Fighting Ascetics of India.’ 



vows 


49 


as just stated, burning the bodies of the dead and receiving 
certain perquisites for the service. From the fact that they 
^ke offerings made at death, Kanets and higher castes will 
not drink with them. They wear ear-rings, but rank below 
Kanphatas.^ 

The Nathas in the- higher hills, where the worship of Siva 
is pre^'^alent, correspond very closely to the Yogis of the 
plains. They practise little asceticism, but grow vegetables 
and perform certain semi -sacerdotal functions, taking the 
place of the acrdj (a class of Brahmans) of the plains in the 
funeral ceremonies of Kanets and receive the clothes of the 
dead. They consecrate new houses and purify them when 
they have been defiled. They arc a true caste. One or more 
in nearly every Natha household has his ears pierced in honour 
of §iva and is called Kanphatanath. They are unclean and 
uncanny. . ^ 

In the PanJab, secular Yogis are called Rawal. They make 
their living by Begging, fortune-telling, singing and similar 
means; they were originally, probably, Yogis. ^ The 
Sarny og of the Panjab is a true caste. In Kulu they are 
Nathas; in Ambala, Jogi Padha; in Nabha, they are teachers 
of the children of Hindus; in Laharu they are of the Jatu 
tribe, part being secularj part celibate. Among them widow 
marriage is practised. The Samyog of Ambala has twelve 
sections. (The Barahnalh sub-group.)^ In the Karnal they 
are Hindus. They receive offerings made to impure gods, 
and form the lowest of all castes; they practise witchcraft 
and divination and are musicians.^ In Kaiigra there 
are two groups, the Andarldf w^ho are both Darsanis and 
Aughars and the Bdhirld, all Aughars.^ These connect 
with Gorakhnath through a legend concerning the sons 
of Maccheirdranath. Once Gorakhnath gave the boys each 
a goat to be sacrificed at a place where no one cpuld 


" RTCP, vol. II, p. 399 n. ; vol. Ill, p. 165. 

* RTCP, vol. II, p. 389. . . 

® Some of the names are Ai, Dhaj, Sahaj, Halt, Kanthar, Pagai, 
Pa^upanthi, Rawal. The third is apparently a remnant of a Vai^navite 
movement. 

* RTCP, vol. II, p. 389. 

^ For sub-divisions see Rose, RTCP, vol. II, pp. 402, 403.^ 



50 gorakhnAth and the kAnphata yogis 

see them. One actually performed the sacrifice; but the 
other reported that he could find no place where either man 
or bird or sun or moon would not be a witness. Gorakh- 
nath praised him and placed him close to himself, while 
the first was expelled from his presence. I'hus arose the 
appellations ‘Andaria* and ‘Bahirla.* Both of these divisions 
observe the usual Hindu customs, except that at death 
ceremonies the Bahirla give Brahmans food but do not 
feast them; and at funerals blow a ndd instead of a conch. 
Of the Darsanis some go clothed; others, unclothed, use 
ashes. The Nangas eat flesh and drink liquor, while the 
others do not. 

The Yogi castes of the Central Provinces^ rank as Hindus 
of the menial group, from whom no good Hindu would 
take either food or water. They accept cooked food from 
respectable car'^cs; permit the marriage of widows, using their 
own priests^ in the ceremonies; allow divorce and follow the 
social customs of the cultivating castes of the locality. They 
are divided into sub-sects which are determined according to 
occupation or profession, as follows: Barwa or Garpagari who 
ward off hail storms from the standing crops; Manihari, 
pedlars who travel about to bazaars, selling various small 
articles such as hand mirrors, spangles and dyeing powder, 
coral beads, imitation jewelry, pens,- pencils and other 
articles, securing pearls and coral from Bombay to sell 
in the villages; Ritahikanath, who prepare and sell soap-nut; 
Patbina, who make hempen thread for gunny bags used in 
carrying grain on bullocks ; and Ladaimar, who hunt jackals 
and sell and eat their flesh,^ 

Reports on the Yogi castes of Bengal, who, as do those of 
Assam also,** trace their origin to Kanphatas, are quite 
extensive. Buchanan^ traces the origin of this group in 
Bengal to one of two causes: either they belonged to the 
priesthood of the country during the reign of Gopicand, or, 


1 RTCCP, vol. Ill, pp. 252, 253. 

* Those who are not Kanphatas employ Brahmans, 
a RTCCP, vol. Ill, pp. 252, 253. 

* District Gazetteer of Eastern Bengal and Assam, 1910, p. 41, 
® Martin, vol. Ill, p. 408. 



vows 51 

they were Sudras dedicated to the religious life, degiaded by 
Sankara, who came with the Palas from western India. 
Buchanan reports a tradition m North-eastern Bengal to the 
effect that the Yogis were formerly pupils of the great 
Sankara, and that they took to drinking and w^ere degraded. 
The legend of Gopicand“ gives evidence pointing in this 
direction. For the Yogi, Hadi bv name, who figures in that 
story was a sweeper (Dom) by caste. In Rangpur, Buchanan 
found low-caste Yogis who were itinerant bards, who sang 
songs of Gopicand, who were descendants of the priesthood 
of the time of Gopicand.^ The same writer^ reported two 
divisions of Yogis who did not intermarry One were the 
Helayas, weavers and cultivatf)rs- Their women dyed thread 
and retailed turmeric, capsicum and other seasonings. The 
other division were the Theyayas, idle beggars who burned 
shells for lime. Some of these were cultivators. Both 
groups were eaters of impure food and drunkards who 
buried their dead. They were said to have been disgraced 
by Sankara. They were illiterate. Elsew^here,^ Buchanan 
wrote that in eastern Bengal there was a caste of Yogis who 
were weavers, lime burners, unskilled labourers, beggars and 
wandering singers. Some of them are now engaged in 
agriculture, some are goldsmiths, and some are found in the 
subordinate grades of Government service. In Rangpur they 
sing the cyclic songs of Gopicand. 

According to Risley^ there are in Eastern Bengal two 
sub-castes of Yogis, the Masyas and the Ekadasis. Between 
these two sections no marriages are arranged, and they do not 
accept cooked food from each other. But they drink from 
each other’s water vessels. Their division is based upon 
differences in their funeral rites. The period of mourning 


^ Martin^ vol. Ill, pp. 408, 536. 

2 JfASBe, vol. XLVil, Pt. 1, pp. 139 ff. 

® Martin, vol. Ill, p. 408. ^ Martin, vol. Ill, pp. 535, 536. 

® Martin, vol. Ill, pp, 408, 534. cf» Hunter, Statistical Account 
of Bengal, vol. I, p. 69. 

® RTCB, vol. I, pp. 355-61. Masya Jogis belong to South 
Bikr^pur, Tipperah and Nookhale; Ekadasis to North Bikrampur 
and Dacca. Those of Tipperah number some 68,000. See also, 
District Gazetteer, Eastern Bengal, Webster, 1910, p. 26. 



52 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

for one group is thirty days (masa), for the other, eleven 
{ekadasa) days. The division is based upon the further fact 
that some live upon an island and others upon the mainland.^ 
The cultivating members of the caste form a distinct group 
called Halwa Jugl. It is said that they were out-casted for 
abandoning the traditional occupation of weaving. There 
are legends accounting for the origin of these castes. The 
Masyas were born from the unions of eight Siddhas with 
eight Saktis created by Mahadeo. Another legend makes the 
Masyas descendants of unions between Sannyasis from 
Benares and Vaisya women.' Again it is said that these Yogis 
are descendants of pupils of Nathas (Yogis) and Brahman 
widows, the latter being of the Natha group, the former of 
the Siva gotra (family, stock). 

Ekadasis are descendants .of Sannyasis from Benares and 
Brahman women, or descendants of pupils of Nathas (Yogis) 
and Brahman widows. The legends in both erses seem to 
be the same and to point to the Yogi-origin of the caste. 
Both groups bury their dead, the lips of the corpse being 
touched with fire by the son, or grandson. Both worship 
female ancestors at weddings, perform ancestral worship in 
their homes, wear the sacred thread, and read the Vedas. 
These Yogis are weavers by caste, hut are now taking up 
agriculture, lime-burning, goldsmith’s work and subordinate 
grades in Government service. 

According* to Crooke- the Masya Yogis, of the United 
Provinces, are found chietiy in I3rindahan, Mathura and 
Gokul; and their principal places of pilgnmage are Benares; 
Gaya and Sitakund in Chittagong. 

The family of Dalai Bazaar in the Koakhali district in 
Eastern Bengal, is now considered as the head of their race. 
In the middle of the eighteenth century Braja Ballabh Rai,a 
Jogiv of this family was a broker {daldl) and his brother Radha 
Ballaoh Rai was appraiser [jashanddr) of the English factory 
of Carpata on the Meghan River. The son of the former so 
proved a man of business that the Company, in -1765, 


^ The Sandip division live on the island of Sandip ; the Bhuluanath 
division on the mainland. This is a local distinction. 

* ERE, yo\. II, p. 494, article ‘Bengal.’ 



vows 


^3 


bestO'Cved on him the title and rank of Raja and gave him a 
rent-free estate still in the family.^ 

The Dhafmaghari Jugis of \yestern Bengal are looked down 
upon by others. They ‘worship Dharma, Sitala and bther 
aboriginal deities. They are beggars. They trace thejr 
origin to Siddhas. Some of their sub-caste names are 
Matsyendra, Gorksa and Brbhairab. The first two of these 
names are -significant in pointing to relationships with 
Gorakhnathis. These Jugis practise infant marriage, employ 
ing a caste member as priest; and allow neither the marriage 
of widows nor divorce. They worship Siva for the mos^ 
part, Visnu to some extent. Some are Saktas. They practise 
samadh-burial. Their social position is low. In 1881 the 
Jugis in Bengarnumhered more than 350,000. 

In the Nizam'S Dominions^ two divisions of the Gorakb- 
nathis are found, the Davre and the R§vals. Both were 
originally recruits fro-m Maratha Kunbis, but now form 
independent castes. The Davre, who are of tlie Navanath 
sect,. derive their name from the drum {dahara) which they 
use in singing the hymns of Bhairava. They are also known 
as Kumar Bharadi, from the name of a dance which they 
perform at the commencement of the marriage ceremony of 
their Kunbi (an agricultural caste) disciples. They admit 
only married Kunbis and others of higher ca.ste. The recruits 
are mostly children, dedicated by parents to Bhairava in 
fulfilment of vows. The initiation of the boy girl) takes 
place in the temple of Bhairava ut Sonari, at abo’it the ages 
of twelve. The lobes of the ears are split and brass rings are 
worn. The division consists of three exogamous sections 
Marriage is usually early, widow remarriage is allowed 
pc'lygamy is practised and 'divorce is permissible. Brah- 
mans officiate at their weddings. Their guruS are KanphaU 
Yogis, They are buried in a sitting postur«j facing east, and 
are carried to the grave in a cloth bag. The procession is 
accompanied by musicians. The body is smeared with ashes 
of cowdung; and bel leaves and flowers are offered. Water 
is poured into the mouth. Ganja, tobacco, spirit: and the 


1 RTCB, vol. I, p; 356. ^ rtCB, vol. I, p. 357. 

3 SCTND, vol. I, pp. 278 ff. 



54 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

food of the kind the deceased was fond of stre placed in the 
grave. The chief mourner first throws in earth, and offer- 
ings of bel leaves and flowers three times and the grave is 
then filled up. Upon return to the home of the deceased, the 
mourners chew nim leaves, wash their mouths and then go to 
their own homes. Davres rank just below Maratha Kunbis. 
They eat fish, fowl or mutton and drink spirits. There are 
mendicants amongst them. 

The Raval Jogi (Raul, Sivjogi, Kanialanath Raval) are very 
numerous, and like the other branch of the Gorakhnathis, 
recruit mostly from Maratha Kunbis, but from Mails, Rajputs 
and others as well. 

For the ceremony of initiation a square of limestone powder 
is traced on the ground and about it are placed nine burning 
lamps made of wheat flour. The novice, after having bathed, 
takes a seat in the square, on a low wooden stool, and has 
his head shaved. His body is then covered with ashes of 
cowdung. A sacred thread of black wool consisting of nine 
threads and a rosary of one hundred and eight rudraksa beads 
are hung about his neck. His gum gives him a trident, a 
piece of cloth and an alms bag, and whispers in his ear a 
mantra. Ear-rings of conch shells are inserted. Their social 
customs resemble closely those of the Davre. The notable 
exception is the funeral rites. While following the practices 
already described, they dress the body in ochre-coloured 
clothes and burn camphor and incense before it. Four men 
carry the body, while a fifth holds his scalp lock. At the 
grave salt is thrown over the body. After the grave is filled 
up a mound is raised. A member of the funeral party stands 
over the mound, blows a conch and recites mantras for the 
benefit of the deceased. With the last syllable of the verse, 
each member of the party throw^s a handful of earth on the 
mound and then all return home. They mark their foreheads 
with ashes of cowdung. No sraddha is performed. On the 
third and eleventh days a garland is hung from the roof of 
the house and over the water pot and a dough lamp is fed 
with ghi. A goat is killed and offered and a feast is held. 
They w’orship souls of ancestors on Nagpaficami. 

Both groups w orship Bhairorh and other Hindu gods attend 
the Hindu festivals, follow Macchendranath and Gorakhnath 



vows 


55 


and use the trjdeiit and the lihga. They keep images of 
deceased ancestors. They rank below Kunbis. Only low, 
unclean castes will accept food cooked by Ravals. l^hey accept 
kacca food from Kunbis, eat flesh, except beef and pork, 
and drink spirits. They are mendicants, but some are 
cultivators, weavers and tailors. 

In Bombay^ the Yogis, also called Nathas, have two 
divisions; the Gujarat Jogis, w’ho are ascetics; and the 
Maratha Jogis, including Karnataka and Kanara Jogis, who 
are both regular and secular. The secular groups are husband- 
men and labourers. Some breed buflPaloes and dogs, while 
others make and sell black stone vessels. The Marathas 
have twelve endogamous divisions, Balgar, Berak, Bhorpi, 
Bombari, Dawarji, Jogar, Ker, Kindri, Kurub, Mendar and 
Murad. These twelve clans are named each after one of 
the twelve orders said to have been founded by Gorakhnath, 
and no marriages between members of the sub-castes 
are permitted. Widow marriage is allowed. Polygamy is 
practised. They bury their dead, mourning for twelve days; 
othei*wise they do not differ much in customs from those 
of the surrounding cultivating castes. They eat goats, sheep, 
hares, deer, wild pig and fowls and use spirituous liquors, 
smoke gafija and eat opium. Boys are initiated at the age 
of twelve years. They are a wandering class, who carry 
their huts, made of matting set on bamboo poles, and goods 
from camp to camp on ponies and buffaloes. The men dress 
in ochre-coloured clothes, wear large, thick ear-rings of ivory, 
clay, bone, or fish-scale in the lobes of their ears and use 
rosaries of rudraksa beads. Their women wear petticoats and 
bodices and braid their hair, allow ing it to hang down their 
back. Their favourite song is the legend ot Gopieand.^ 
Their chief gods are Gorakhnath and Matsyendranath. They 
practise sorcery and witchcraft. 

Natha Gosavis of Sav^aiitvadi (Kahkan) are allied to the 
Kanphatas. They slit the ear, wear pew ter ear-rings and call 
upon Sri Gorakh in connection with the blood sacrifice at 
weddings.^ 

^ ETCB, vol. II, pp. 103 ff. 

* Bombay Gazetteer, vol. VIII, pp. 456. 457. 

® Bombay Gazetteer, vol. X, p. 419 and n. 1. 



56 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Householders of certain villages in the Poona district 
wander from place to place carrying their huts and goods on 
ponies and buffaloes. They eat fish and the flesh of sheep, 
goats, hares, deer, wild pig and fowls, drink liquor and eat 
opium. They wear large thick ivory, clay, bone or fish-^cale 
rings in the lobes of their ears, put on rudraksa rosaries, and 
sing songs of Gopicand. They bury their dead and exhibit 
other traits pointing to Gorakhnath. Their chief gods are 
Gorakhnath and Matsyendranath. 

In Belgaon, wives of Yogis wear a short-sleeved bodice 
and a cloth the corner of which is not parsed back between 
the legs, a gold nose ring, a necklace of glass or of metal 
beads, a small, central gold brooch, and three sorts of ear-rings. 
While their husbands are living with them they have red lead 
in the parting of their hair and wear glass bangles and a 
lucky necklace. They are clean but lazy.^ These Yogis are 
really a caste, bound together by a social organization through 
which disputes are settled. Besides begging, they are engaged 
in cultivation, in which they are skilled. Their w'omen help 
in sowing and weeding. They raise buffaloes and dogs.^ 

Ih BeraH^ the NMias comprise eighteen divisions, of which 
the recognized or regular sub-sects are Audhut, Kanphatiya 
and Gorakhnath. Among the heterodox are Uciasi, Kalbeli 
and Bharadi. They know seven other divisions, each identical 
with a Hindu deity, kno\yn as the nine Nathas, Navanfdhas, 
They trace their origin to Adinath through Gorakhnath and 
Matsyendranath. Gorakhnathis are considered of a higher 
order than the Kanphatiyas, for at a feast given by Gorakh- 
nath and Matsyendranath each guest w^as given what he 
desired. The chosen dishes were all produced through the 
miraculous powers of the two Y^ogis. Kanipa asked for 
cooked snakes and scorpions and was promptly hooted from 
the feast. (But Kanphatiya is not derived from Kanipa.) 
Kanphatiyas split the lobe of the ear, Gorakhnathis the 
cartilcge. The marriage ceremonies of Grhastas resemble 
those of neighbouring Hindus. The marriage dowTy is one 


^ Bombay Gazetteery vol. XXI, p. 185. 

* Bombay Gazetteer, vol. XXI, p. 155. 

* See Kitts, Census Report, Berdr, 1881, pp. 58 ff. 



vows 


57 


and one-fourth rupees. The married Yogis are called sarhjogi, 
the celibates Yogi, or Jogi. They eke out their living by weav- 
ing coarse cloth, nawdr^ and blankets. They carry a bunch of 
peacock feathers with which they make magic passes over the 
sick, and act as fortune-tellers and Uiakers of charms. Others 
keep on exhibition small performing bulls. The householders 
are followers of Gorakhnath and Matsyendranath. Their chief 
objects of worship at the Sivratri are the carans of those two 
saints. The Bharadis perform a ceremony in honour of Devi 
in which they beat drums and remain awake all night, hence 
their name. These Nathas recruit from all castes. 

Thurston^ reports as Yogis for South India, jugglers and 
beggars, mostly householders, who sell beads and keep pigs. 
'Fhey are snake charmers, w’ho have no restriction as regards 
food, and cultivators, scavengers, robbers and destroyers 
of dogs. They keep widows in concubinage. Some of their 
women are professional -tattooers. Like those in Berar, they 
wander about, carryfng on donkeys the materials for their 
rude huts which they set lip on the outskirts of the villages. 
They account for their condition as resulting from a curse 
that was imposed because of some slighting remarks made 
regarding Parvati’s breasts. These Yogis claim superiority to 
Malas and Madigas. The caste is divided into exogamous 
sects. They will eat crocodile, field rats and cats. They oarry 
a bag containing snakes. The Pamula (the word means 
‘ snake’) is a Jogi. 

In their betrothal ceremony, a small sum of money and a 
pig are given to the bride’s party. I'he pig is killed and a 
feast held, with much consumption of liquor. In the marriage 
ceremony the Kangnas, which are tied by the maternal uncles 
to the wrists of the bride and groom, are made of human hair 
and to them are attached leaves of the Alangiiim Lainarckii 
and Strychnos Nux Vomica, On the way to the bride’s hut for 
the ceremony of the marriage, the groom’s party is stopped 
by a rope or a bamboo screen, which is held by relatives of 
the bride and others. After a short struggle, money is paid 
and the company proceeds. The marriage badge, a string of 
black beads, is tied around the bride’s neck, the bride and 


1 TTCSJ, vol. II, pp. 494 ff. 



58 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

groom sometimes sitting on a pestle and ‘mortar. Rice is 
thrown ovei* them and they are carried beneath the marriage 
booth on the shoulders of their maternal uncles. 

Widows may remarry up to seven times. 

At puberty a girl is secluded in a hut made by her 
brother or her husband; and, on the last day of her isolation, 
her clothes and the hut are burned. The dead are buried, 
the corpse being carried to the grave wraj^'ed in cloth. 
Before it is lowered into the grave all thro\y rice over the 
eyes and a man of a different sect places four annas in the 
mouth. Fire is also carried to the grave by the son and food 
is left there. Some place a chicken and a small portion of 
salt in the armpit of the corpse. 

The Jog! Purusa^ is a recently formed caste that speaks 
Alarathi and Tulu. Their head monastery is at Kadiri but 
they have several other establishments. The individuals of 
the caste are disciples of the varimis mathas, and worship 
Bhairoih and Gorakhnath. There are both celibates and 
householders amongst them. The former wear rings of. 
rhinoceros horn or of clay. The housCiiolders do not split 
the ears but put pieces of clay over the cartilege where it is 
usually split in initiation. They use the sacred thread to 
which is attached a whistle of brass, or of copper, or of silver. 
The wiiistle is used when the worshipper oilers prayer to 
Bhairom. Brahmans are employed for their marriages. The 
dead are buried in a sitting posture and a funeral feast is 
held on the twelfth day, a Brahman priest officiating. Food 
is offered to crows and gifts are maiic to Brahmans. The 
purificatory rites for the deceased initiate of Bhairava 
(Bhairoih) include worship {piijd) at the grave each day 
from the third to the twelfth day. Some of these Jogis are 
mendicants, others follow menial occupations, serving as 
coolies, peons and the like. 

Bhaddar/-^ Yogis and Nandi Jogis in the west of tiie 
United Provinces, work as tailors and silk-spinners, and 
have several gotras with Rajput names (e.g. Chauhan, Kucch- 
waha, Gahlot).*^ I’herc Is also a caste known as Domjogi 

'^'^'TCSL vol. 11, p. 500. 

^ Often ]\iusulrnanh. CTC, vol. Ill, p. 59. 

CTC\ voi. Ill, p. 61. 



vows 


59 


who are beggars.* The Tharus, who live below the Nepalese 
liills, are divided into clans, one of which is known as Jogi. 

The tale goes that a Jogi once kept a Tharu woman as 
his mistress, ^heir descendants are known as Jogi-T^aru. 
They bury their dead, using a samadh. There is a group 
in Gorakhpur known as Kanphata Ratannath (Rathinath). 
Rathinath is worshipped by the Jogi-Tharus.^ 

Another interesting group of Jogis, who trace their origin 
to Gorakhnath are the Sepalas. The following description of 
them is based upon a visit to one of their camps in the rainy 
season of 1924: The Yogis, or Jogis, who were encamped on 
the open plain, were protected from the weather by very 
poor, thin tents of country-made cloth. These shelters were 
pyramidal in shape, and were erected something like 
American Indian wigwams. 7'he edges of the tents were about 
two feet from the ground, and the space below the edges was 
open on all sides. Furniture was seamy, and, altogether, 
conditions were of poverty. About the camp w'ere a large 
number of donkeys, the Sepalas deriving most of their income 
from the sale of these animals. These Jogis keep fowls and 
dogs also. 

But it is as snake charmers that they are of special interest. 
They go about in the cities and villages in the neighbourhood 
of their camps taking their snakes with them. These they 
charm whth the music of their queer, gourd pipes {bin). One 
of the lirst things that the Jogis did, when the visitors 
reached their camp, was to show their snakes. They brought 
out their round, liat baskets, took off the covers and prodded 
the snakes with their lingers to drive them out. They had a 
good iTiany black cobras, all very large and splendid speci- 
mens. One had been caught only the day before in the 
jungle. Soon after snakes are captured they are drugged and 
their fangs are removed. The men showed snakes of other 
kinds as well, one of a large variety, well marked, and another 
‘tw^o headed’ snake. This, they assert, has a head at either 
end of its body, one of which it uses one year, and the other 
the next. Some of the customs of these Jogis are of interest. 

^ Knowles, Th'j Gospel in Gorida, p. 213; CTC, vol. IV, pp. 386, 
399. 



60. gorakhnAth and the kAnphata yogis 

They wear in their ears very large rings. These ^re set in 
the lower part of the ears, contrary to the practice of the 
Gorakhnathis, and the holes for the rings are made with a 
large needle. All sorts of rings are w^orn, but the ones most 
valued are made of the bone of a certain ‘ snake found in the 
hills, ^ the sdlu samp. They make offerings to Gorakhnath at 
the time of the piercing of the ears. These Jogis w^ear all 
sorts of beads, but especially the rudraksa, and the small, 
white ones obtained at Hihg Laj, These latter they purchase 
in Hindustan, rather than undertake the long and difficult 
journey to the west. They do not wear a sacred thread; they 
allow their beards to grow long, twnst them in two coils and' 
wind the ends around their ears, much as Sikhs of the Panjab 
do; they ^war their hair in a knot and over it wind a turban 
in a peculiar w^ay, so that it looks as if it were going to topple 
over forward. They do not practise Yoga. Like other Yogis, 
they bury their dead, placing the body in a sitting posture. 
They claim to worship Gorakhnath, and are .disciples of 
Kanipa, or Kanipao, whose teacher was Jalandharipa.^ It is 
said, however, that Kanipa was the son of Kinwar, w'ho 
caught the fish from which Matsyendranath was born. They 
are, as the above description indicates, householders, keeping 
their families w ith them in camp. While Yogis of this class 
seem to be included among ‘the criminal tribes,’ who are 
under constant police surveillance, this particular group had, 
evidently, earned a good reputation; for, although they had 
many notes from officials showing that they had been under 
observation in the past, they w'ere then free to go where they 
pleased. It is claimed that these Jogis do not thieve. Their 
papers showed that they are great travellers and that they had 
been over many parts of India. Some of the gotras, family 
names, of the Sepalas are Gadaria, Tank, Phehkra, Linak, 
Cauhan, Tahliwal, Athwal, Sohtra and Bainna.- They rank 
lower than Hindu Yogis because they will take food from 
Musalmans, and eat the flesh of the jackal. At DeVi Patan it 
was said that Sepalas eat snakes. These Jogis are an unclean 
and ignorant people despised by almost every class of 


1 See RTCP, vol. II, p. t05. 

* E.jg. so the Yogis in Almora asserted. 



VQWS 61 

Indians, but feared and dreaded by many. Sepalas are some- 
times, as ‘Kanipaos,’ reckoned as ‘halfpanth* of the 
Gorakhnathis.^ 

It is of interest to compare descriptions of the Sepalas with 
those of castes of Yogis in Bombay, Berar and the Nizam's 
Dominions and in the south where many hints of relation- 
ship appear. In the account of the feast given by Gorakhnath 
and Matsyendranath, which determined the rank of sub-sect 
castes in Berar, Kanipa, whose disciples the Sepalas claim to 
be, asked, it will be remembered, for cooked snakes and 
scorpions, and was promptly hooted from the assembly. 

1 See RTCP, vol. II, p. 409. 



CHAPTER FOUR 


DIVISIONS OF THE ORDER 

The problem of the sub-sects of the Kanphatas and of the 
relation of their founders to Gorakhnath is a difficult one to 
solve. Traditionally there are twelve sub-sects, each organized 
by a disciple of Gorakhnath. But, while some of these sub- 
sects were formed soon after the death of Gorakhnath, still 
others were later brought into line with the general scheme 
of the order. One, at least, of the sub-sects is often considered 
as but a half division and in some places is denied even such 
a place of respectability. But this sub-sect claims descent from 
Gorakhnath. The whole number of sub-sects named in the 
various lists far exceeds tw^elve;^ some names, how^ever, are 
not those of major divisions, but of schools, or of individual 
gurus with a following, but belonging to some more compre- 
hensive group. 

The author, after compiling the various lists, and collecting 
names of sub-sects from all available sources, visited Tilla 
and Amritsar in December, 1924, where he discinssed the 
whole matter with the mahant, Pir Kalla Nath, of Tilla. This 
mahant, who is generally held to be at the head of all the 
Kanphatas, together with a few other Yogis, went over the 
list of names, making frequent reference to his records. The 
results of this conference are included in the following 
account of the sub-divisions of the Gorakhnathis. Reference 
to the names arranged in the tables attached to this chapter 
will show that not all of the sub-sccts of the order are 
traceable to Gorakhnath 'himself. Jalandharpa (Jalandha- 
ripa) was made by Adinath, while Kanipa and perhaps 
Bhartrhari were disciples of Jalandhar. Furthermore, Mat- 

^ See comparative Table A at the end of this chapter. 



DIVISIONS OF THE ORDER 63 

syendranath made some disciples, besides Gorakhnath, who in 
turn, made disciples and formed sub-sects; and Gorakhnath 
was associated with Matsyendranath in making others. The 
parampards show, further, that either Gorakhnath and 
Matsyendranath were closely related in the formation of the 
sect of Kanphatas, or that Gorakhnath was greater than his 
teacher; for all the tradition bears the clearer impress of the 
former. In Chart D, at the end of this chapter, the order is 
traced back to Sakti. This would agree with the teacMng of 
the Yogic doctrine of the sect and is, apparently, a matter 
of theory. 

Before making a final analysis of the lists, it may be well 
to record a tradition, reminiscent of the. earlier Saivite sects, 
which they relate at Tilla.^ There w^ere formerly eighteen 
panths of Siva and t ''elve of Gorakhnath. These two groups 
fought each other; and, as a result. t\-.elve of the former and 
six of the latter tvere destroyed. The remaining twelve 
panths of the two sects constitute the order of the Kanphatas, 
or Gorakhnathis. Those which were derived from .^iva are: 

(1) Kantharnatb of Bhuj, in Kacch; (2) Fagalnath of Peshawar 
and Rohtak; (.3) Rawal of Afghanistan; (4)Pahkh; (5) Ban of 
Marwar; (6) Gopal, or Ram ke. 

Those of Gorakhnath which survived are: (1) Hethnath; 

(2) Colinath of the Ai-panth of Devi Bimla (Bombay); (3) 
Candnath, Kaplani; (4) Bairag, Ratadhonda Marwar, Ratan- 
nath; (5) Paonath, of Jaipur, of whom Jrdandharpa, Kanipao 
and Gopicand; (6) Dhajjanath (Mahabir) whose members are 
all foreigners. This tradition most probably suggests a new^ 
alignment of Saivite sects under the influence of the great 
Gorakhnath, in which many older Saivite panths disappeared. 
The Yogi at Puri, w ith his club, is reminiscent of the Laku- 
lisas and the tradition from Tilla holds that the Satnath is 
related to the Paiik, one of the older sects of Siva. 

The principal panths, or sub-sccts of the order may be 
described as follow s : 

1. Satnath. This division is reported in nearly all of the 
lists. It is related to the Pahk, the fourth of the sects surviv- 
ing from the Siva panths. They have a gaddi at Puri and other 


^ Told to the author in December, 1924. 



64 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

establishments at Bhewa, Thanesar and Karnal. According 
to the mahant at Puri, the patch-work cap, coat and quilt 
are a mark of this sub-sect. From this line sprang the 
Dharamnathis ; and Garibnath, who accompanied Dharam- 
nath to Kacch, was of this division. This panth is said to 
follow Brahma. 

2. Rdmndth (Ram ke), sometimes wrongly identified with 
Ramcandra. This sub-sect is related to the Siva group called 
Gopal. It traces its origin to Santokhnath, who did not 
himself form a panth. Their chief gaddi is at Delhi. Das 
Gopalnathis are reported from Jodhpur. 

3. Dharamndth, This sub-division traces its origin to 
Raja Dharam who became a Yogi of the line of Satnath. 
Their headquarters are on the Godavari; and they have a 
famous and important monastery at- Dhinodhar in Kacch. 
Dharamnath is also said to have been a disciple of Matsyendra- 
nath, and is counted as one of the nine Nathas.^ But the 
previous statement is in closer accord with traditions con- 
cerning him. 

4. Lakpnanndth, Laksmannath succeeded Gorakhnath 
at Tilla. This panth has two divisions, or schools, Natesri 
and Darya. The distinctive characteristics of these tw^o are 
that the former reside on the hill at Tilla, while the latter 
live on the plains. Darya is also considered as a separate 
panth having its origin at Tilla. The other sub-sect is known 
as Natesri in Amritsar, and as Darbari Tilla Bal Gondal in 
Hoshiarpur. This is the Heth, or Hethnath, panth of the 
original Gorakhnathis. To this division belong the Haith of 
the Ambala and Jhelum districts and Baljati of the Karnal. 
Ranjha belonged to Natesri. The Jafir Pirs (see below) follow 
Rahjha. 

5. Darydndth. Although now. a separate panth, this divi- 
sion belongs to the Heth panth of the original Gorakhnathis. 
Members of this panth arc found all throug)i North India and 
the Panjab. Many are found in Sind.- Beyond the Indus 
this division has establishrnents at Makhad, Kohat and Quetta. 
Their sacred seat is at Uderolal in Sind, where is found the 


1 I A. vol. VII, p. 47. 

^ Aitken, Gazetteer of the Province of Sindy Part A, p. 164. 



DIVISIONS OF THE ORDER 


6 “^ 

tomb of an infant who transformed himself into an armed 
horseman and emerged from the Indus to rebuke the Musiini 
Mahammad Yusuf of Tatta. He is known also as Uderolai, 
Dulanlal, Amarlal, Zinda Pir and Darya Shah. He is also 
called Shekh Tahii at Uderolal and Ivhwaja Khizr at Sukkur 
At his temple in Uderolal a lamp is kept burning perpetual iv 
and at the new moon he is worshipped at the river, or at a 
canal or by water, with rice, sugar-candy, spices, fruit and 
lighted lamps. He left the world by disappeari^ng into the 
ground. There was a dispute between Hindus and Muslims 
as to the disposal of his body by cremation or burial He 
reappeared and commanded them to use the two methods. 
Consequently, there are both a tomb and a temple at the place. 
About 50,000 attend the annual religious feast at Uderolal. 

6. Gangdndth. This sub-sect was founded by Gahganath, 
who followed Kapalmuni. From this division some trace the 
Kayanathis. There is Some connection with the Ratarmath 
sub-division, reported under the next number, 

7. Bdirdg (Bhartrhari, Bairag Catri). This is the fourth 
of the original panths of Gorakhnath. It traces its origin to 
Bliartrhari who was initiated by Jalandharipa; but who is said 
to have been a disciple of Gorakhnath.^ 

He is said to have abdicated the throne of Ujjain to became 
a Yogi. One tradition makes him the son of Raja Bhoj. 
Although he was initiated by Jalandharipa, he is said to have 
btifen a disciple of Gorakhnath ; and the Aipanthis of Hard war 
say that he was initiated by Gorakhnath. His chief associates 
were of the Kaplani panth, also sprung from Jalandharipa’s 
sub-sect. Another tradition affirms that the panth is traced to 
Mainath, an orphan who was brought up by the Meos and 
who later became a disciple of Gorakhnath.^ 

An important name in this division of the Gorakhnarhis is 
that of Premnath, who is sometimes said to have fouudei a 
panth. 

Another famous disciple of Bhartrhari was Ratannath of 
Peshawar. Beyond the frontier, and in Peshawar, these 
followers of Ratannath do not wear the mudra. To account for 

^ Gazetteer of the Province of Sind, yol. II, p. S6. 

* RTCP, vol. II, p. 404. 



66 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

this it is reported that once at Tilla when Ratannath was 
taken to task for not having ear-rings he opened his breast and 
showed them in his heart. Once his rings were taken away 
from him as a punishment for some offence, and he showed 
them in his mouth, Musalmans revere him. Ratannath is 
famous for having created a boy out of the dirt of his body. 
This boy was afterwards known as Kayanath, and as Qaim ud 
Din. When Kayanath died, both Musalmans and Hindus 
claimed his body; but it disappeared, only the clothes 
remaining. Hindus built a samadh for him, and Musalmans a 
tomb. Another group of Yogis related to Ratannath is the 
Mekhla Dhari. In Ambala they wear a tardgi. In Nabha there 
are secular Yogis who trace their origin to Ratannath. They 
belong to the Puniya gotra (a Jat gotra). The founder of this 
group of householders was Mainath. After he had become a 
Yogi, the Jats compelled him to marry a girl of the juggler 
Yogis. The Bharat in Dera Gazi Khan belong to this division. 

RatannMiJs are counted as Daryanathis as well. There are 
shrines connected with the name of Ratannath in Kabul and 
Jalalabad. Even Musalmans believe in the powers of these 
Yogis. 

8. Rmval or Ndgndth, This is the third of the original 
Siva group. The Kawals,who are lbc most important of the 
Musalman Yogis, are great wanderers. In the western 
districts of the Fanjab They are ocxultists and quacks.’ 
There are two main groups of them: (1) the Madia, said to 
have been founded by Gorakhnath; and (2) the Gal who are 
referred to Siva and who are known both as Pagalpapthis 
and as Rawal Galla. Those of the second division are found 
in Peshawar, and the Bohar monastery in Rohtak belongs to 
them. The chief seat of the Rawgls is at Rawalpindi, and 
members of the panth are found in Hajaro and in Afghanistan. 
Not all recognize the Rawals as one of the twelve sects of the 
Goraklinathis, although they are widely reported as such.^ 

According to one account they form ‘half’ of one of the 
twelve orders, the other half being the Parasnathis. Rawals 
are also Kaphlain. Rawals are found in the Nizam’s 
Dominions. 


^ See Table A. 



DIVISIONS OF THE ORDER 


67 


9, Jdlandharipd. These belone to the Paonath panth, the 
fifth of the original Gorakhnath?s. But the parampar^ 
agree that Jalandharipa belongs to an earlier branch of 
the scct.^ He was the founder of the ‘Pa' panths as over 
against the ‘Nath* panths. Pa is Tibetan for wdha^ 
and illusttates Eastern intiuencc within the Kiinphatas. In 
some Gorakhnathi lists are included, within this division, 
Kanipa and Gopcand. The Papnath, also known as Panath,, 
are said to be a suh-divisiori of jalandharipa and followers of 
Mahadeo (ftiva). j aland harnuth (and Kariiphnath) are some- 
times identified with the Atighar, while Gorakhnath and 
Matsyendranath are known as Kanphatas. The sphere of 
activity of the former was Bengal and Bihar, that of the latter 
two was the United Provinces and the Panjah/'^ 

This panth has an establishment at Jaipur. 

10 . Aipanth. This panth is lelated to Colinath of the 
original Goraklinathi gifiup,^ araJ is connected with both 
Bhushtai and Karkai. disciples of ( jorakhnath. Karkainath 
is also known as Kanaknath and Kahkhnath. The Ah>llowers 
of the two Yogis last named are said to belong to schools of 
the Hethnath. The Aipanthis oi Hardwar say that they were 
followers of Fir Parasnath, and that they separated from 
them through! tin worship of .Aidevi. They trace their origin 
back to a female disciple of Gorakhnath, now known as 
Birnla Devi, d'hey explain this by saying that ‘Ai’ means 
‘IMai’ (Mother, Goddess). They used to use'ai* instead of 
‘nath’^ in their names, but five generations after Narmaiji 
they resumed the name of ‘ nath.’ Mainathis probably aprang 
from this group. Five generations after Narmaiji, who him- 
self lived several generations after Gorakhnath, came Mast- 
nath, and from his time the members of this panth have been 
called ‘Nathas.* Narmaiji was born in Khot, now in Jind 
State. As a disciple of Gorakhnath, then, Mastnath cannot 
be considered as a contemporary of the great Yogi. F'oUowers 

* See Tables B and D. 

“ Census Report, Panjab, 1891, p. 117;' CTC, vol. Ill, p. 59. 

'** Census Report, Panjab, 1891, p. 114, note 1. 

* Coli is, according to Swatmarama, member twentv-one after 
Gorakhnath. 

^ RTCP, vol. II, p. 404. 



68 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

of Mastnath are not very respectable, and only recently have 
they been recognized by the rest of the order. They carry a 
crooked stick which they use as an arm crutch.^ 

The Bawas are of the Aipanth through Mastnath. 

The Aipanth was included in the twelve when the order 
of Kanphatas was organized.^ This would suggest that the 
order of Gorakhnathis was consolidated a considerable time 
after the death of Gorakhnath. 

The story is told that once, when Mastnath was engaged 
in meditation {jog)y one of his disciples who came before 
him wearing only a loin-cloth, was cursed with the necessity 
of remaining naked forever. For this reason the followers of 
this unfortunate Yogi are called ‘Nagas.’ There are two 
divisions of the followers of Mastnath: (1) the Bari Dargah, 
who avoid flesh and liquor and (2) the Chhoti Dargah, who 
indulge in both. The latter group was founded by a Camar, 
a disciple of Mastnath. Menials of this panth are called 
Ca'marwa.^ The chief monastery of this panth, at Bohar in 
Rohtak, was founded by Narmaiji. There are no idols at this 
place. The Aipanthis have a large and important establish- 
ment at Hardwar. Other seats of the Ainathis are found at 
Ranpat, Madhata and Camar, in the Panjab. The Aipanth is 
mentioned in the Dabistan (vol, II, p. 128). 

11. Kapldni. This division, included in the Candnath 
sub-sect of the old order of Gorakhnathis, traces its origin to 
Kapalmuni, a disciple of Gorakhnath, and was founded by 
Ajaipal. This panth is also called Kapil, or Kapil Deo ke. 
A group belonging to this sub-sect is the Nimnathi, also 
called Gaphlani, or Khiskai. But see (5) below. 

The headquarters of the panth are at Gahga Sagar.^ 

12. Dhajjandth. This panth, the sixth of the old Gorakh- 
nathi list, is associated with the name of Mahabir (Hanu- 
man). At Tilla, and in two of the lists, this is counted 
as one of the twelve sub -sects. The statements that the 
members of this sub-sect carry a Hag, and that some of them 

^ Census of Punjab , Report, 1891, p. 116. 

2 So reported by the Aipanthis of Hardwar. 

^ R'FCP, vol. 11, p. 403 and note. 

^ So a Yogi at Naini Tal declared. 



piVieiONS OF THE ORDER 69 

are found at Peshawar and Ambala are not accepted at Tilla. 
It is asserted that they are to be found in Ceylon,^ 

13. Kdnipd. While Jalandharipa was confined in the 
well at Ujjain,^ from which he was finally rescued through 
the help of Gorakhnath and Matsyendranath, his disciple, 
Kanipa occupied his teacher’s place as mahant. He after- 
wards founded a panth. From this line came Gopicand 
(Candra) otherwise known as Siddh Sangari, who became 
one of the eighty-four Siddhas. Gopicand is sometimes 
given as the name of a panth; and Gopicand is considered 
also as a disciple both of Kanipa and of Jalandharipa. 

From Siddh Sangan is traced the Spadha of Bengal, 
keepers of snakes. One of this group initiated Ismael, 
founder of a panth. The Kalbeliyas are said to be his 
disciples. 

To this line belong, also, the Sepalas, who keep snakes^ 
Some of this division wear the rings as do the Kanphatas, 
others wear them in the lobes of the ears. 

Strictly speaking, the Kanipa are not considered as one of 
the twelve panths, i)ut as a half sub-sect. Even this statement 
is not universally accepted. 

A tradition traces the Bamarg sect (the ‘Left-Hand’ sect) 
to Kanipa.** It is of interest at this point to note that the 
development of erotic elements in Sakti worship was in 
Bengal and Assam. The list of names given by Sen^ is: 
Mmanath, Gorakhnath, Hadipa, Kalupa. Hadipa was the 
teacher of the mother of Gopicand. Jalandharipa is also 
known as Hadi or Hadipa. This list belongs to eastern 
Bengal. Another name apparently belonging to this cycle is 
Kalepa (Karipa, or exactly Kanipa). 

Both Jalandharipa and Kanipa are placed in the Paonath 
division brought down from the Gorakhnathis. Some identify 
the Jalandharipa and the Kanipa. 

Two of the original panths of Siva are not accounted for 
in the above enumeration, the Ban of Marwar and the 
Kantharnath of Bhuj. The latter is. mentioned in a descrip- 


^ PNQ, vol. II, para. 279. ^ See chap. nine. 

* See above, pp. 59 ff. * RTCP, vol. I, p. 329. 
® History of Bengali Language and Literaturey p. 28. 



70 gorakhnath and the kAnphai a yogis 

tion of Yogi establishments/ hut the connection of the 
Kanthamathis with recognized sub-divisions is not clear. 

A number of names remain to be considered ; but they are 
not of wide enough significance to warrant their inclusion 
in the larger divisions of the Kanphatas. In all probability 
they represent minor divisions within the more important 
groups or the names of important personages or alternate 
names of some already recorded. They are as follows: 

(1) The Hand! Pharahg (Bharahg, f^arangnath, Handi 
Bhirahg, Cand Bharahg [.^]) The explanation of this name is 
given in the following legend. Sakkarnath, disciple of 
Gorakhnath, in his wanderings, came to a land ruled by a low- 
caste raja, who seized him and ordered him to cause a rain 
of sugar, on pain of torture. .Sakkarnath performed the 
miracle and then buried the raja alive. Twelve years later 
the Yogi returned and found tlie king a skeleton, but restored 
him to life and made him his discip/le and cook. (Another 
version of the story states that the raja was struck blind, and 
that after twelve years Sakkarnath restored his sight.) The 
raja, however, was not reformed as tlie result of his punish- 
ment. One day he took out some oi the pulse he w^as cooking 
and tasted it. Bhairorii chanced to appear that day in person 
and refused the food. The reason was discovered and the 
raja was punished by having the pot {handi) hung about his 
neck. He was obliged to wander the livelong day, getting 
f<x)d out of the pot. His punishment lasted four years, after 
which he was pardoned, but his followers still bear the 
name, Hand! Bharahg.^ A most interesting version of this 
story is told at T'rirnbak. At that place Yogis show a stone 
samadh, said to be that or Aurangzeb. The legend is that 
Aurangzeb became a distiple of Gorakhnath, but that the 
other Y'ogis refused to eat with him; so he buried himself 
alive. After twelve years he came out of his tomb as 
Mjtaknath (Lord of Death). He was only a skeleton when 
he came forth, but after his reappearance flesh came upon 
his bones. Afterwards, Gorakhnath ordered him to cook 
food for the Yogis present. He did so, but, when the food 
was ready, he tasted it to see if it w^ere properly seasoned. 


^ See p. 110. 


- See RTCP . vol. II, pp. 395, 396. 



DIVISIONS OF THE ORDER 


71 


T.’he food was declared unclean and the pot was hung over his 
head. Therefore, he is called Siddba Tlandi Pharahg Nath. 
He went off to Poona, where to this day this sect reside, at 
H^di Parang Natha. 

Sakkarnath had no disciples, so, on his deathbed, he called 
a Musalmjn, Jafir by name, made him his disciple, and 
advised him to take only uncircumcised Muslims into his 
following. I’hese Yogis are employed as Hindu cooks, and 
belong to the Santnath sect.^ Ti'>e ordt today recognizer 
only Musalmans and they do not eat with other Yogis. 

At Tilla it was stated that these Yogis we not counted as 
one of the twelve panths, 

Cand Bharahgis are said to be found in the west, near 
Dwaraka. x\nd, as stated aL vt\ members of this sub-division 
are found in Poona. 

(2) The Jafir Pirs are Musalmans. They are well known 
in the Punjab. Although they are Kanphatas, Hindu Yogis 
do not eat with them. They arc followers of Rahjha and 
disciples of Balkeswarirath. These Yogis are not counted as 
one of the twelve sects. Some trace them to Santoknath, who 
is Visnu. The Pir Jogis, who are also Musalmans, perhaps of 
the same panth, will eat the food of other Yogis, but others 
will not eat their food. At Tilla it was affirmed that these 
Yogis are not found at Sialkot. 

(3) Mannath (Manmaiithi, Manathi). To this line belongs 
Arjaanaga, or Arjannafiga (Pahgalnath [.?*]) who is now in 
Kailas as a Siddha. There is an establishment belonging to 
this sub-sect at Jawalamukhi. These Yogis trace their origin 
to Raja Rasalu whose follower Mananth was. rtiey are found 
in Peshawar and Jhelum. 

(4) Aghori (Ghorl). It is possible that there are some 
Aghoris among the Yogis. There are none at Tilla, but the 
Yogis of that place said that sometimes the recent iy -buried 
corpse of a child might be dug up and eaten by jogis of this 
group. It is acknowledged tliat an occasional KanphaU be- 
longs to this panth. It was reported repeatedly by Y ogis and at 
different places, that an occasional A’ughar becomes an Aghori.*^ 

^ See RTCP, vol. II, p. 408. 

^ * Hughes, Gazetteer of the Province of Sind (187()) says that the 
Aughar is a Yogi. Henry Balfour, Jr. Anth. Inst, of Gt. Br. and 



72 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

(5) Nimnath and Parasnath. These two persons were sons 
of Matsyendranath, begat, according to one tradition, in 
Ceylon. They were slain and afterwards restored to life by 
Gorakhnath. Later, they were initiated by their father and 
then founded new sects. They are Jains. ^ However, there 
are groups under both names that are included in Yogi panths. 
The Nimnathis who are distinct from the Parasnathis, are 
also called Gaj^ain (Gaphlani) or Khiskai. The Sartoras, 
Nimnathis, always wear a cloth over the mouth and take the 
utmost precautions against the destruction of life. They are 
wanderers and receive food cooked by others. They use a 
cilam, not a huqqa. The Parasnath Puj sub-division are 
celibates, but they live in houses. The interesting legend 
concerning these two persons is as follows. After Matsyendra- 
nath left the queen in Ceylon taking with him his two sons, 
because Gorakhnath had called him to his senses, they fell un- 
der the anger of the latter, and he put them to death and hung 
their skins on a tree. Later, for the sake of their father, he 
restored them to life. Some time afterwards, the boys were 
sent to a village to beg. They were ordered by a man to drag 


Ireland, vol. XXVI (1897), pp. 340 ff., has collected data on the Aghori 
under the title, Lift History of an Aghori Fakir, in which he supplies 
the information which follows. They trace their origin to the 
Gorakhpanth and Gorakhnath. The movement was started by 
Motinath. There are three divisions of them : Oghar, Sarbhuhgi 
and Ghure. The Oghar is the branch to which the faqir (whose 
history is recorded) belonged. All persons are eligible for admission 
to the sect. Ogharnath used a fresh skull, from which he had eaten 
the flesh, as a drinking bowl. The faqir (Kallu Singh) claimed that 
some rnembers of the order ate human flesh and were then able to make 
it live again. He did not claim these and other magical powers him- 
self. Jn general the Aghori eat the flesh of all dead anirnals except 
the horse, and the food of any sect or caste. Any skull w ill do for a 
begging bow l. (But the ghoulish practices which this man describes 
were known long before the time of Gorakhnath. See chapter ten). 

^ There are other hints at Jain connections. The Jains have a 
temple near Pae Dhuni (Paidhoni) which shelters an idol of Ghoraji- 
nath, decked with gems.— S. M. Edwards, Bombay City Gazetteer, 
vol. I, p- 177. Paidhoni is the seat of the Kanphatas in old Bombay. 
The books on Bombay refer to a certain place in the old city as Pae 
Dhoni and explain the name as meaning ‘The-Place-of-Feet-Wash- 
ing.' It is correct, however, to say that the name of this locality is 
derived from that of a famous establishment of a sect of the Yogis. 



73 


DIVISIONS OF THE ORDER 

* 

away a dead calf, before he would give them alms. They did 
as he requested, and in return he gave them food. By the 
time that they had reached their teacher the food had turned 
to blood and worms. Then Matsyendranath cursed the 
village. The sons later separated and formed new panths, the 
Puj and the Sartora, with which other Yogis have no concern.^ 

In a variant to this story Gorakhnath goes vvilh the boys 
to beg alms at a merchant’s [hania) shop, and they are made 
to take away a dead calf. When Gorakhnath sees the food 
transformed, he catches them by the hand, takes them to the 
merchant’s house, and there puts them to death. I'hereupon 
all the merchants complain that he has polluted all their 
sacrifices by this murder; and he retorts that they had polluted 
his disciples. He agrees, however, to restore the two boys to 
life if the merchants will henceforth worship him and no 
other. They agree and. Gorakhnath left Parasriaih, one of the 
two boys, with the merchants, and the Jains deem him an 
incarnation of God.^ 

(6) Kantharnath (Kanthadnath). Some say tliat this group 
trace their origin to Gorakhnath, others to Ganesa. In 
Ambala they are an endogamous panth of householders.^ At 
Kanthkot they worship Ganesa and 'Kanthadnath, using the 
latter name while telling their beads. Here Kanthadnath is 
worshipped twice a day. His followers take the vow of 
celibacy. In almost all of their customs they resemble the 
Dhinodhar Kanphatas.'^ However, in the west Kanthadnathis 
often marry; but the fathers do not eat with their children 
until their ears have been split and other dedicatory rites 
have been performed.® 

Other names, for which no relationship can yet be assigned 
are, Kaiknath; Payalnath; Udainath, identified with Fasupati, 
probably one wdio preceded the founding of the order 
second of the Nine Nathas, founder of the panth of Yogis 
Arayapanthi of Bor Bosan near Kaha Pir, Thanesar; Revnath; 
Tajnath; Filnath; Sarpatmith (Carpatnath, Carpal, or Darpat- 


1 See RTCP, voJ. II, pp. 394, 395. ^ See Table D. 

3 RTCP, vol. II, p, 406. Bombay Gazetteer, voh V, p. 88. 

® Bombay Gazetteer, vol. V, p. 88, note. 

« RTCP, vol. II, p. 395, note. ’ See RTCP, vol. II, p. 393. 



74 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

nath) tenth from Gorakhnalh in Svatmarama's list; Gaimnath, 
teacher of Jftanesvar; Naranjannath ; Baranjogi; Adhnath, 
Adhmath(?); Papank; Kamdhaj; Kasyapa; Ardhanari; 
Nayari; Amaranath; Kambhidas; Tarnaknath; / bhapanthi, 
of whom Abhangnath is mentioned in the Tahqiqdti Ckisthi} 

The Palhsana of Karnal and the Palsiana of Jind are a 
school of Yogis. 

A number of ascetic movements refer their origin to 
Gorakhnath- One of these is traced to §arahgnath“ or 
Sringnath, who reached the height of his power after the 
death of the great guru. Plis panth is sometimes called the 
Bdwdji kd panth. He introduced new rules and made his 
disciples bore their ears and insert ear-rings of wood. After 
his death ten sects were founded, all growing out of his 
order. They are the (1) Girinath, (2) Purinama, (3) Samsia, 
(4) Militant Nagas, (5) Ajaipal, (6) GwMibasada, (7) Ismail 
Jogis, (8) Agamnath, (9) Nimnath and (10) Jalandharna;.h, 
There must be some confusion in this list, or there are 
duplicate names in this and the panths of the Kanphatas. 
Numbers five, six, seven, nine and ten have been discussed 
already. Of the others the auth(^r has seen members of the 
first only. At Kcdarnath, just outside of the towm of Dwara- 
hat, in Kumaon, there is a small temple of Bhairorii. This is 
situated below the gate of the main temple and the pujdri at 
the shrine was a woman of the panth. These Yogis marry. 
They do not split their ears. The famous witch, Nona 
Camarl, belonged to the panth of Ismail Jogis.^ 

Lai Padris^ are not Goraknathis, although they are often 
found in close association with them. T^ey are followers of 
Dattatreya, who was eminent in the practice of Yoga and who 
is held in high esteem by Yogis. He is considered by some to 
have been an incarnation of Krsria.^ In the Dabistan, he is 
described in a contest of Yogic power with Gorakhnath,** 
Dattatreya was probably a deified Brahman of the tenth 

^ RTCP, vol. II, p. 404. ^ See p. 70, above. 

^ See the ChamarSf pp. 26, 27, 179, 183, 185 for notes on Nona 
Chamarl. 

* This is also a general term for Yogi, or ascetic, referring to the 
‘yellow^ robe. 

5 IVi, pp. 205, 240. 


• vol. II, p. 140. 



DIVISIONS OF THE ORDER 


75 


century, to whom the famous story of the testing of the virtue 
of the wife of Atri has been attached.^ His shrines are 
scattered here and there in the districts about Poona/ and 
in one place his image has three heads to represent the Hindu 
Triad. He was an Aghori. 


CHART B 


Parampara ; as given by Pangarkar, based on Namdev : 

Adi N ATH 
(First Guru) 

i. 


TVIaochendar 

Jalandhar 

Visnu, say^ }\dts) 

{-- Siva, says Kitts) 

i 

( iOHAKilNATH 

1 1 

J-IanipA MAinvatI 

! 

(Mother of 

( kUNIN A l }! 

1 

Gopicand) 

NiyRTTiN'Am 1 
jrsIAiSESVAR ) 



^ Hindu Religious Year., pp ^^8, 163, 165, 168, 175; hfWB, p. 267, 

® His appearance to Eknalh is described in Ekndth as translated by 
Abbott, pp. 18ff. 

» MWB, D. 267. 



76 GORAKHNATH and THE KL\NPHATA YOGIS 


CHART C 

ParamparA of Bahina Bai. (See Dr. Abbott’s translation, p. 1.) 

AdinAth (Siva') (taught the Yoga to) 

ParvatT 

Matsyendra (who heard it as Siva taught it to Parvati) 
to 

GorakhnAth 

to 

Gahini 

to 

NivrttinAth (while N. was a child but yet a Yogi) 
to 

Dn yAneshvara . 
to 

SatchidAnanda 
further on 

Vishvambhara 

to 

Raghava (Chaitanya) 
to 

Keshava ChAitanya 
to 

BabAji Chaitanya 
to 

TukobA (Tukaram) 
to 

Bahina BAI (b. 1628; d. 1700) 



77 


DIVISIONS OF THE OPDER 
CHART D 
Parampara^ 

^AKTI 

^IVA 

1 

Ude 

(Second of the nine Natha*^. founder of 
the panth of the Jogis) 

i 

Rudragan 

Jalandhar 

(who was an evil spirit, restored 
to reason and initiated ) 


Matsyendra Jalandiiari (Pa)® 


Gorakh- Pangal NImnath Pahas- ; 

NATH or SiVTORA NATH'M?J : 

I Arjannanga — ■ 

I (Ra' /al)*^ sons of Matsyendra 
I and both Jains 

(MAnnAth) I 

I 1 

I BAR'l'RlNArH KANIPA 

(Bairag) son of RAja Boj’ | 

[Counts as one of the original Siddhsan- 

panths of Gorakhnath] garT^ 


I 1 1^1 I I I 

Kapal- Karkai Bhush- Sakkar- Satnath San- Lakshman- 

MUNI I TAI NATH j TOKNATH NA I H" 

I COLI- 1 DhaRM- I (NafesrI) 

NATH (HaMDoI NATH'^ i j 

' _ I Pharang) (Darya)-’ 

• Al pan Tip'’ I 

^ , 

AjAipal GanganAth*^ RAMNArH^ (Jajtr Pirs) 

I 

KaplAnP^ 

The figures refer to the order m text. The twelfth (Dhajjanath) 
is not accounted for. 

^ RTC vol. II, p. 393 with modifications. 



CHAPTER FIVE 


SACRED PLACES 

Kanphatas visit the usual places of pilgrimage such as 
Prayag (Tribeni), Benares (Kasi), Ajudhya (Ayodhya), the 
source of the (hxlavari (Trirnbak), Dwiiraka, Hardwar, 
Badrinath, Kedarnath, Rrindaban, Pushkar, Ramesvar in the 
south, Darjeeling^ in tlie north-east, Nepal and Assam, 
Arnarnath in Kasliniir, and Hihg Laj in tlie west. 'They 
visit certain shrines of Sakti and temples of Siva and 
Biiairom. Their own particular shrines and mc^nasteries are 
widely scattered over India. 

It is best to study their places of special interest by areas; 
e.g. those in the Himalayas, in the United Provini'es, m the 
Panjab, in Rajputana, in Western India and clsewlicrc. 

In a monastery at C'iiancx HiiaNo, m Sikkim, there is a 
black, complex image one of the three forms of which, the 
more gaudily robed, represents (forakhnath.^ 

At Gorkha in Western Nepal, is found tlie cave temple 
of Ciorakhnath.*^ It is ‘the sacred hearth of the Gurkha race.’ 
Laridon describes it as ‘a little, ^rude sanctuary hidden in a 
cavern to which access is almost impossible except on hands 
and knees — the shrine of Gorakhnalh. Here beneath an 
overhanging stream, housed in the natural recesses of the 
rock and with little adornment beyond the ceremonial 
tridents, flags, halberds, trumpets, and other insignia of all 
siich places of worship, is the image of the god.’^ I'he cave 

^ Kamru Kanaccha [ ?] is it Kamarupa ? 

® Temple, Hyderabad, Kashmir, Sikkim and Nepal, vol. II, p. 212. 

^ For a picture of this temple, see Landon, Nepal, vol. I, p. 66. 
It is reproduced as the frontispiece in this volume. 

* ibid., vol. II, p. 26. 



SACRED PLAC ES 


79 


and the town get their names from Gorakhnath who is said 
to have resided there Hence the national name of Gurkhas.^ 
About Kathmandu centre a number of interesting places 
and shrines associated with the names IVIatsyendranath and 
Gorakhnath. The word Kathmandu stands for ‘Kath 
Mandir/ or ‘Temple of Wood/ a shrine built about 1600 
A.D., by Laksmi in honoui of Gorakhnath." 

At BAgmati, about three miles from Paian (Kathmandu), 
there is a temple of Matsyendrana;h which is recognized by 
Gorakhnathis/"^ There is also here a temple of Siva Pasupa- 
tinath which appertains to the Kanphatas.^ It is said that 
pilgrims to this place are never again i)orn as a lower animal. 
The Nepalese Saivite temples of Samhliunath, Pasupalinath 
and others belong to the same spiiere of interest as that of 
Matsyendranath."^ At Kistipur there is a temple of BhSirab 
and at Kathmandu one for Kal Bhanah.® 

At the temple and monastery oi l(.’t..nnrith at Sawari Kot, 
‘Cangra TarVr Pahar,’ is an image, va' stone, which is sup- 
posed to contain the spirit of Goraklnullh. The Kanphatas 
of this place have an intimate relation to those of Devi Patan, 
the monastery at the latter place being under the authority 
of the former.'^ 

In tiie Kumaun and Garhwal Hills Kanphatas arc found 
at various shrines of Bhairorii. Sucii places of worship are 
often connected with the residences of particular Yogis. 

At Nagar, in Garhwal, Gorakhnath is worshipped as an 
incarnation of Siva, and there is an establishment of Kan- 


^ See article, ‘Tribes, Clans and Cistes of Nepal/ by Capt. E. 
VaoMUart, vol. LXIII (1894) pp. 213 ff. 

" The Gurkhas, p. 25. 

® See Oldfield, Sketches from Nepal, vol. II, pp. 325, 326; lA, 
vol. IX, p. 169, note. For descriptions of these temples and places see 
also Kirkpatrick, Kingdom of Nepal, chap, vi and pp. 188 ff. For 
pictures and description see also Landon, Nepal. 

* Oldfield, Sketches from Nepal, vf)L 1, p. 89., vol. II, p. 247; 
BHCS, p. 403. For description see also lA, aoI. IX, p. 166, note; 
and Levi, Le Nepal. 

^ See Asiatic Researches, vol. XVI, p. 471, note. 

® See Landon’s volumes on Nepal. His pictures of the various 
temples are most excellent. 

’ See below', p. 95. 



80 gorakhnAth and the kanphata yogis 

phatas at that place,^ At this town the author (1924) found 
nothing of consequence. There were a few grhastas scattered 
about in the neighbourhood. Below Sri Nagar there is a 
cavern dedicated to Gorakhnath, which contains his image, 
gilded. The figure is about six inches high. The yoni-lihga 
is also found in the cave, and in front is a temple of Bhairoih. 
The pujari there claims that the cave used to be an important 
temple of Gorakhnath; but that it was filled with river-sand 
during the Gohna Lake flood of 1894; and that, although it 
was dug out later, it has ceased to attract as much attention as 
formerly. The shrine consists of three recesses in the rock. 
It is evidently neglected by pilgrims. The panth is Ram ke. 

In Nain] Tal, at the temple of Nandi Devi, where there 
is also a temple of Bhairoih, Kanphatas are sometimes found. 
A Yogi there in Septeml'>er, 1924, whose name was Sing- 
harnath, was of the Kaplan i panth. He claimed to have been 
born in a family of grhastha Yogis. • 

In Almora, above the temple of Nandi Devi, is the 
residence of a grhastha Yogi of the Dharamnath panth. 
Attached to his residence is a small temple of Bhairoih. 
The Yogi, Devnath by name, who (1924) was pujari at this 
place, also served in the same capacity at the adjoining large 
temple to Mahadeo. This temple of Bhairoih is a small, 
square building with a low, flat roof, surmounted by a small 
pinnacle, such as is common in these hills. The building 
contains a number of trisules and images of Ganesa and 
Bhagavati. 

Another Yhygi, Ramnath of the Dharamnath panth, has a 
house and shop in the bazaar, to which is attached a temple 
of Bhairoih. The place is two or three hundred years old. 
The temple contains an image of Bolanath,- the head only, 

^ Aitkin^ vol. II, p. 808. 

“ * One of the rajas of Almora, in the lower Himalaya, had two 
sc na, one of whom fell into evil ways, and when he was disinherited 
his younger brother, G^ain Chand, succeeded. Many years after, the 
elder brother appeared in the guise of a religious mendicant and 
Gyan Chand procured a gardener to slay him and his pregnant 
Brahmaiii mistress. 'I'he dead man became a Bhut or evil spirit, and 
is now worshipped as Bhola ath, ‘innocent lord,’ a title of Siva, of 
whom, by and by, he will become a manifestation. His mistress and 



SACRED PLACES 


81 


with a similar image of Bhairorii by its side, and an image of 
Ganesa. These and many trisules painted red, as are the 
images, rest on a platform. Here also are a concli shell and 
the usual brass lamps. Many , flowers are offered l>ei<>ie the 
images. In the temple are found also a fan of peacock 
feathers, a yak-tail brush, several conch shells and a sdligrdm. 
In the veranda is the usual temple bell. The building, which 
is not very' large, has a flat roof and is surmounted by a 
pinnacle. By’ the side of the temple, at the right, are two 
ancientsamadhs, both square, with pyramidal tops, surmounted 
by the yoni-lihga symbol. They date fr(un the reign of the 
Chand Rajas. Behind the temple and to. the left are two very 
old, low samadhs, on which the yoni section only, of the 
symbol, remains. 

Near the Dak Bungalow, in Almora, is another private 
establishment. The temple contains small images, about a 
foot high, of Bhairom and Pa rvati, carved in a slab of stone, 
and one of similar size of Gorakhnath ; the latter exhibiting 
the large ear-rings greatly exaggerated. The temple contains 
the usual collection of oi^jects. One liiiga is arranged with a 
water jar above it so that water may fall continually upon it. 
The jar was empty. Here the father, though still alive, has 
been superseded by his son, also a Yogi, as pujari. These 
Yogis are of the Satnath sect. The endowment consists of 
one village. 

K.ama, a village not far from Dwarahat, is the seat of the 
pir of the Almora district. His name was (1924) Pir Gopi- 
nath, and he belonged to the Dharamnath panth. The village 
in which he lives is the property of the sect. The temple, 
which is in the house of the pir, is dedicated to Nagnath. 
The pujari is a brother of the pir. A section of the village is 
occupied by the families, not Yogis, who cultivate the fields. 
1'he tradition at Kama is that when the Gorkhalis conquered 
Almora they built the fort and levelled the parade grt>und at 
the town of Almora. This was done on the site occupied by 

hvr unborn child also became bhuts and arc particularly daij^crous 
to c^ardeners. A small iron trident, the -emblem of l?>iva, represents 
him, and it is placed in the corners of the peasants’ huts to ii^uard 
them aj^ainst any sudden calamity.’ — Croukc, Religion and Folklore of 
Northern India, p. 160. 


6 



82 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

the monastery and cemetery of the Gorakhnathis. In the 
process of levelling, many of the graves of the Yogis were 
destroyed and many ear-rings and other emblems of the sect 
were unearthed.^ A new cemetery was provided outside the 
town for the Yogis, and their establishment was moved to the 
royal village of Kama. 

Hardwar has a number of places belonging to the Gorakh- 
nathis. A cave, or subterranean passage, is associated with the 
Kanphatas. 

The establishment of the Aipanthis is large and, apparently, 
wealthy. 

The monastery of the Daryapanth has some ten or twelve 
Yogis in residence. In 1924, the mahant was a minor in 
charge of a guardian. The author saw a large gathering of 
many classes of ascetics at this establishment, who had come 
to a distribution of gifts and food by a rich man, on the full 
moon of December. 

The members of the IVelve-Panth organization have an 
establishment with good buildings in Hardwar. ^ 

In the jungles about Risikesh (Hj-sikesa, Lord of the Senses) 
on the Ganges, above Hardwar, where Rama underwent 
penance to wipe out the sin of having slain Ravana, adepts 
are supposed to live ac hermits. 

Among the lesser places of interest in the United Provinces 
may be mentioned the shrine of the Bhartfharis in the fort at 
ChCnar.^ 

There is a small, evidently decaying establishment of the 
Gorakhnathis at Allahabad. It consists of two temples of 
Bhairorh, one of Mahadeo, a small monastery and one samadh. 
During the rainy season of 1924 there were one Rawalpanthi 
and one Bhartrpanthi in residence. The monastery is subject 
to Gorakhpur. 

The old town of Jhausi, opposite Allahabad on the Ganges, 
preserves an old tradition concerning Gorakhnath, and Nevil 
says that Raja Harbong of that place owed his downfall to 


^ But the Gurkhas revere Gorakhnath. 

^ See chap, two for an account of this organization. 

® CTCj vol III, p. 60. It is said that the saint spends part of each 
day there and the remainder of his time at Benares. 



SACRED PLACES 


83 


the Yogi and his teacher. An older account states that the 
kingdom was in great disorder. Harbang had ordered that 
both valuable and ordinary articles should be sold at the 
same price. ‘This induced the great Gorukhnath >vhen on 
his travels to take up his abode for a time at Harbongpur, 
although his teacher, Muchhander, counselled retreat. Not 
many days after their arrival a murderer was to be executed 
but escaped, w^hereupon the raja, in a rage, ordered that the 
two largest men in the crowd should be hung in the place of 
the criminal. The two largest men happened to be Gorukh- 
nath and Muchhandernath ; who took counsel together, and, 
when brought to the gallows, quarrelled for precedence. 
The raja, struck with the strangeness of this proceeding, 
inquired the cause, and was informed by Muchhander that 
they had ascertained from books and learned pandits that 
whoever should first be hanged that day would go immedi- 
ately to Paradise, “If that be the cause, “ said the raja, “the 
fate is too good for either of you. I'll hang first, if you 
please,” and he \\:is hanged at his own request. The 
devotees, shocked at the atrocities which took place in 
Harbongpur after his death, reduced it to ruins.' 

Important monasteries and shrines of the Gorakhnathis 
are situated in Gorakhpur, Tulsipur and Benares. Those at 
the two former places are in a flourishing condition; but the 
Kanphatas of Benares seem to be losing ground. 

Three places in Benares are connected with the name of 
the Gorakhnathis; the famous Lath of Bhairorii, the temple 
of Kal Bhairorii and Gorakhnath ka Tilla. 

At the Staff, or Lath, of Bhairorii, Kanphatas used to 
officiate as priests of Siva. The Lafh is no longer in the 
possession of the Yogis, having been sold about sixty years 
ago. The report is that the mahant kept a mdlin (a woman 
of the gardener caste) and was addicted to gambling. Through 
his loss of character, and debt, he had finally to dispose of the 
shrine. Worship at the place is now in tfie hands of a widow 
who does not belong to the sect. The Lath is situated in the 
Adampura w^ard in the northern part of the city. It consists 
of a huge, copper-covered stone liriga, painted red. It is 
about eight feet high and about two and one half feet in 
diameter, is s^ituated on a large, high, stone platform and is 



84 GORj\KHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

surrounded by a wall. Eight small platforms surround the 
lihga. To the south of the main platform is a tank. On the 
west of the La^h is a small, red bull. The copper-covered 
shaft which constitutes the lihga is the portion of a broken 
Asokan pillar which remains above ground. The pillar was 
thrown dowm during the riot of 1809.^ This lihga is visited 
by Yogis, especially at the Pur an Mdsa of Badan !§udi. 

The temple of Kal Bhairoih in the city is an important 
place of meeting for Yogis, and is a famous shrine. 

The third place of interest is the old Gorakhnath ka Tilla, 
situated near the municipal gardens in the city. This place 
was built by Raja Man of Jodhpur,- and was well endowed. 
But, along with the Lath of Bhairom, the endowments were 
nearly all lost through gambling and profligacy, and there 
now belong to it but a few inferior Yogis, some married. 
The pujari in 1924 was Bastinath. The whole establishment, 
which is on a hill, or elevation, fully one story high, is reached 
by a flight of steps and is surrounded by rooms on all four 
sides. Below the level of the platform on two sides are 
houses Or rooms. The principal temple faces east. The plat- 
form is made of stone slabs. 

The temple, with its veranda, is built of red sandstone. In 
the room of the veranda there is a bell. In the temple 
veranda, which is surmounted by a dome, octagonal in shape, 
is a bell. And on each side of the veranda are four fluted 
pillars. The two next to the temple doors are painted white. 
The temple itself is square with a composite pyramidal roof 
surmounted by a trident. On the wall on both sides of the 
door are pictures, that on the left being of a woman, that on 
the right of Siva as a Yogi, with the big ear-rings. Over the 
door are an image of Gane^a and tridents painted red. In the 
inset of the wall on each side of the door is a picture of 
Bhairorh, that on the left being of White Bhairom, that on the 
right of Black Bhairorii. Both have large ear-rings. Inside of 


^ Smith, ERE, vol. II, p. 466; Crooke, ERE, vol. VI, p. 701; 
Nevill, Benares, p. 253; Wilkins, Modem Hinduism, p. 94; Mukcrji, 
Asoka, p. 85. 

* c. 1748 or 1803 (?). Or by Raja Man Sinh, of Gw alior, who died 
in 1518? 



SACRED PLACES 


85 


the temple, on the platform, are ten conch shells of various 
sizes, besides the caran of Jalandharnath. Behind this is a 
picture of Kali. The platform 4n the temple is three feet high. 
There are also on the platform a fan of peacock featheis and 
a red cushion with white beads upon it. In front of the 
platform are two tall horns of bronze and a small brass stand 
supporting brass bells, small stone lihgas and <alagramas, and 
a stone from the Narbada with a caran painted upon it. A 
peacock-feather fan is found in a niche in the wall on the 
left, and a lamp similarly on the right. There is also a lamp 
on a tall, wooden stand. 

Built against the temple on the north side is a small shrine 
containing the yoni-lihga. It is about four feet high, including 
the spire. On the south side is a somewhat larger shrine, 
about ten feet high, dedicated to Siva. 

Behind the temple are quarters in which a single grhasta 
Yogi lives. South of the temple is the well, and beyond that, 
the kitchen. In the row of rooms to the north of the temple 
is the dhuni, under a veranda. 

On the platform of the temple, at the south-east, close to 
the temple is a sthdn of Bhairorh with trisules, and a small 
image in relief on a stone slab, painted red. 

On the front, or eastern border of the platform are four 
small shrines of red sandstone. The one at the >outh-east 
corner is a samadh containing the yoni-linga. A bei! is hung 
m the roof. The next shrine contains the caran of Corakhnath. 
There is a bell in the roof. In the third is a bull and a yoni- 
lihga. There is a bell in the roof. Fourth, in the north-east 
corner, is a samadh containing a yoni-lihga and a black lihga 
on a stone slab with a snake over it. The roofs of the corner 
shrines are dome-shaped, of the other two, pyramid- 
shaped. 

North-east of the principal temple, but down a dight of 
steps, is a temple of Mahadco. It has a fiat roof. 

There is a samadh in the street outsiile the boundaries of 
the monastery. 

The whole elevated area is faced with stone slabs and is 
substantial. 

The number of Yogis in the establishments in Benares is 
decreasing. Formerly they were powerful and respected. In 



86 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

1884, they numbered 159, of whom 63 were women.^ They 
had two dHiidrdSy one at Gorakhnath ka Tilla (in Benares), 
and one at Kal Bhairorh.^ They owned the Kal Bhairoih 
temple also. Their present low estate is due to disinteg- 
rating conditions which were allowed to creep in amongst 
them.* 

The most important centre of the Kanphatas in the United 
Provinces is at Gorakhpur, ^ a city named after the shrine of 
Gorakhnath.* It was to this place, as they say, in the Tretd 
age, that Gorakhnath came from the Panjab.® 

The shrine is old. The first temple is said to have been 
built there in the Treta age and it was dedicated to Siva.’ 
Tradition has it that Gorakhnath found there an old shrine 
of Goraksa, a deity of great renown in Nepal, and made it 
famous.® Popular report puts the founding of the city by 
Gorakhnath in a.d. 1400. It is also said that when Gorakh- 
nath came to this place he found only a tank, Mdnsordwar ^ in 
a jungle with fine trees all about it. He remained there a 
long time. It is possible that both the name and the fame of 
Gorakhnath Aiay be traced to this place. 

It is claimed by some that Gorakhnath was buried in 
Gorakhpur.® Others say that he was buried in the Panjab. 
Still others insist that he never died, but that he is now living 
with Siddhas and Nathas on Mount Kailasa. 

The original shrine was converted into a mosque by Ala- 
ud-Din (1296-1316). Then a shrine was built in a nearby 
place by Gorakhnathis. Aurangzeb (1659-1707) converted 
this also into a mosque. Afterwards, on the present site, a 


^ Fisher and Hewett, Statistical, Descriptive and Historical Account 
of the North-Western Provinces of India, vol. XIV, Pt. \ {Benares), 
p. 56. 

• Nevill, District Gazetteer, Benares, p. 93. 

* Information based upon a letter from the TahsildSr of Benares, 
dated November 25, 1924. 

* Wi, p. 215; Nevill, District Gazetteer, Gorakhpur, p. 239; 
FORL,p. 347. 

® Compare, Imperial Gazetteer, vol. XII, p. 342. 

« Wi, p. 215. ’ BIC, vbl. II, p. 1,235. 

® Alexander, Statistical, Descriptive and Historical Account of the 
North-West Provinces of India, Gorakhpur, p. 371. 

• Tcssitori, ERE, vol. XII, p. 835. 



SACRED PLACES 


87 


third shrine was built by Buddhnath.^ According to tradi- 
tion, Gorakhnath himself gave the specifications. The present 
buildings were erected about a.d. 1800- The shrine has 
recently been enlarged. In the summer of 1924, the roof of 
the shrine was raised. Photographs show it both as it appear- 
ed before the alterations, and as it is today. 

The present site occupies an area of about five acres. 
There are, besides the grounds containing the shrine, two 
gardens and a cattle-shed {gdo-idla). The shrine is situated 
west of the city of Gorakhpur, in Purana Gorakhpur, north 
of the railway. 

The place of chief interest at this holy site is the shrine 
of Gorakhnath. This is a rectangular building with a 
veranda all around it. The parapet, both around the veranda 
and around the flat roof (before the alterations were made) 
of the main structure, is finished in open w^ork. The 
veranda supports are rounded, double pillars with rounded 
arches, scalloped. The whole building is whitewashed and 
is decorated in colours. The plinth, which rises about two 
feet above the ground, has a front of fifty-one and one-half 
feet and a depth of thirty-eight feet. The veranda is about 
eight and one-half feet wide. The shrine faces east. It is 
not a tomb. It contains the gaddi of Gorakhnath on which 
rests his caran. This is covered with flowers daily. Beside 
the gaddi are peacock-feathered staves wound with red and 
white cloth, and hand bells. There is generally a group of 
Thdkurs at the right of the gaddi. The lamp at the right has 
been burning for a long time, they say since Gorakhnath ’s 
day. There is no linga in the shrine. In the veranda are the 
usual temple bells. 

On the west face of the shrine is an image of Kali. 

In front of the shrine and at the right of the door is a 
linga, painted red. Stuck up in a line on each side of this 
and clustered around it are tridents, the arms of Bhairom, 
whose station, as guardian of the shrine, is here. The 
tridents are painted red. Many tfidents are buried beneath 
the platform. They were offerings to Bhairom. Behind this 


^ Wi, p. 215. 



8$ gorakhnath and the KANPHATA yogis 

armoury of tridents is the block of wood where goats are 
sacrificed^ 

Worship is conducted at the shrine three times a day. 
During the midday worship, to the beating of drums and 
the ringing of the temple bells, the pujari circumambulates 
the shrine, walking in the veranda, with his right side to- 
w^ards the inner shrine. He then opens the door and the 
worship is completed before the caran. 

There is a large number of buildings in the enclosure that 
contains the* shrine of Gorakhnath. They are all in good 
repair, attesting the prosperity of the monastery. North of 
the shrine is a temple of Mahadeo. Directly east of this is a 
thatched shed housing the dhuni of Gorakhnath. East of 
this is a temple of Pasupati containing a four-faced lihga; 
and still further east is a temple of Hanuman; and then a 
large pipal tree with a platform built around it. North-east 
of the main enclosure is a temple of Hath Devi, a sakti 
shnne, in front of which, under a tree, is a platform where 
the hair of the first shaving ceremony of infants is offered. 

Directly in front of the shrine of Gorakhnath is a covered 
samaiih with a lihga in it; and in front of this a platform, 
having three lihgas and a covered lihga, all samadhs. Still 
further east is a square building, w ith coloured pictures on its 
walls, containing three samadhs, each having a lihga. The 
pictures on the walls are of both Saivite and Vaisnavite 
significance; Krsna and the gopis and the hooded serpent 
are represented. 

At the south-east corner of the main shrine is a stone 
platform, or throne, where mahants are ‘made’; and where 
they sit in state once a year, at the time of the Dasehra 
Festival, to receive offerings. 

Further to the south-east of the shrine in another samadh, 
with a iihga^ in it; still further cast is a temple to Mahadeo; 
then comes a decorated building containing a samadh; and 
beyond this, eastward, the samadh of Gambirnath. 

South of the shrine, on jthe southern boundary of the area, 
is the monastery. 

Behind the shrine, in the south-west corner of the enclosure, 


As in each instance above this is the usual yoni-lihga. 



SACRED PLACES 


89 


is the stable. In the rear of the shrine is another samadh; 
and the whole area north-west of the shrine is taken up with 
samadhs, some of which are of masonry work, four being 
covered, but most of which are rounded mounds of earth 
covered w ith a plaster of cow -dung and clay. 

Just outside of the grounds, to the south-east, is a huge, 
recumbent figure of Bhimsen. 

West of the compound which encloses the shrine of 
Gorakhnath is a large garden with a residence in it. There 
is also on the south side of the compound a garden with 
a resident in it. During the litigation, which began in 
the summer of 1924, concerning the succession to the gaddi 
these residences were occupied by rival claimants to the 
pir jhip. 

Worship is performed on some of the samadhs m the 
evening, when lamps are lighted and incense is burnt. 

The monastery is important, since its establishment is 
traced back to Gorakhnath. Pahgarkar says that Gorakhnath 
placed his guru hhdi, a fellow^ teacher, in charge of Gorakhpurd 
There are connected with the establishment about one 
hundred Yogis and a few^ Aughars. This is the headquarters 
of the sect in the United Provinces. The mahant is chosen 
by vote after the nomination of the previous pir has been 
announced. 

At present all the residents of the monastery are celibates. 
Martin reported that several teachers living in the establish- 
ment were married and that they lived there with their 
families. In his day, the prayers of the rnahaiits were 
considered especially efficient in restoring children to health. 
This belief still prevails. The Yogis now use a large 
nummulite, obtained at Nagar 'Pliatha, in Sind, to insure 
easy delivery to women. The ‘white stones’ are washed in 
w*ater and the liquid is then given to the women to drink." 
Martin reported that inmates of the monastery acted as sages 
for a few Sudras in the worship of Siva. 

The endowment of tlie establishment at Gorakhpur consists 


* Sri Jfldnek^aramalidraja Cariia^ p. 60. 

* The mahant, in 1924, presented the author with a ‘white stone/ 
or nummulite, which he had used ior this purpo: e. 



90 gorakhnAth and the KANPHATA yogis 

of eight villages together with parts of others. Their grounds 
and their villages are held rent-free. 

There is still anothet important establishment of the 
Gorakhnathis in the United Provinces. 

The Devi Patan temple, and the monastery adjoining it, 
both under the control of the Kanphata Yogis, are situated 
on a small hill close to the town of Tulsipur, in the Balrampur 
State. It is not far from the foothills of the Himalayas and 
the borders of Nepal. 

The site of the temple of Devi Patan is one of the fifty-one^ 
pithas, or places celebrated as spots on which the dismem- 
bered limbs of Durga (Sati) were scattered.^ When Visnu 
cut her to pieces, and her dismembered body was strewn over 
the world, as Siva, distracted, carried her body about, her 
right hand fell at this place and sank into the ground. The 
word, Patan, refers to this event, for the word is derived from 
the Sanskrit pdt^ from the root pat^ meaning to fall, to sink. 
Patala, from the same derivation, is the name of the regions 
under the earth, the lower regions. TJie word also means a 
hole in the earth. Patala is the abode of the Nagas or dragons. 
The Devi Patan is also called Patale^vari. Another legend 
makes this the place where Sita disappeared into the earth. 
After Rama had rescued her from Ravana, she was accused of 
unfaithfulness. Her purity and fidelity were attested by the 


^ Some of the pithds are as follows (see Sen’s Satiy pp. 104, 105): 
DevJ Patan, where her right hand fell. 

Valley of Jawalamukhi, where her tongue fell. 

Sugandha in South Bengal, her nose fell. 

Labhpur, her lips fell, 

Janasthana in the Deccan, her cheeks fell. 

HihgLaj in the West, her forehead (crown of her head) fell. 
Benares, her ear drops fell, 

Ujjain, her elbow fell. 

Kamakhya in Assam, her organs of generation fell. 

Calcutta (Kalighat), her great toe (left foot) fell. 

Faljur (Jaintia Parganas), her left leg fell. 

Somewhere in ‘Sylhet (or Kashmir?)* her neck fell. 

Ukule Ghat (or Kalighat ?), her fingers fell. 

® For the story read Salty A Mythical Story y etc., (1916) by 
C. D. Sen. There are many accounts of this event in -the litera- 
ture of India. More exactly the members were scattered over Assam 
and Bengal. 



91 


SACRED PLACES 

ordeal of fire. She then returned to Ayodhya with Rama. 
Later, at the clamour of the crowd, Rama sent her into exile 
under the old accusation. There, in the hermitage of Valmiki, 
she bore two sons to Rama. They grew up in the forest and 
there learned the Rdmdyana, the epic of Rama’s deeds, which 
Valmiki had composed. Years after he had exiled Sita, Rama 
performed the great horse sacrifice. During the ceremonies, 
hermit youths recited this poem, over a period of twenty-five 
days, in the presence of Rama and iiis court. At last Rama 
recognized the youths as his sons. He, therefore, sent for 
Sita, asking her to re-affirm her innocence and to return to 
the palace. She came before the great assembly, where with 
clasped haiids, bending low her face, and speaking in a voice 
choked with sobs, she said: ‘As I, even in mind, have never 
thought of any other than Rama, so may Madhavi, the God- 
dess of the Earth, grant me a hiding place.’ Thereupon, 
‘suddenly cleaving the earth, a divin«* throne of marvellous 
beauty rose up, borne by resplendent dragons on their heads; 
and, seated on it, the Goddess of the Earth, raising Sita with 
her arm, said to her, “Welcome to thee!” and placed her by 
her side. And as the queen, seated on her throne, descended 
to Rasatala, a continuous shower of flowers fell down from 
heaven on her head.’^ 

The hillock on which the temple stands is a very ancient 
religious site, undoubtedly one of the oldest seats of Saivite 
worship in northern India.^ The oldest cycle of legends 
referring to the place relate to characters of the Mahdbhdrata, 
especially to Kama, A shrine to Raja Karan’ still exists on 
the slope of the hill. Another group of legends refers to the 
dishonouring of Devi at the hands of a raja of the Panjab. 
After her body had bex^n dismembered, her right hand fell at 
this spot and sank into the ground. In this story there is, 
evidently, a confusion of the older story, about the dis- 


^ Quoted in Griffith, The Rdmuydna of Valvnki^ vol. V, p. 326, 
from E. B. Cowell in Academy y No. 43, but using the word Rasatala 
(Receptacle of the Waters) for Hades. * The word rendered ‘dragon’ 
is ‘naga.’ It may be of interest to note that Janaka, father of Sita, is 
spoken of as a master Yogi and as a man intimately connected with 
the origin of Yoga. See Bhakta Maid. 

* See Gazetteer of Oudhy 1877, pp. 367-70. 



92 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

membering of the Devi’s body, and later elements, possibly 
Musalman. A temple was erected here by Ratannath, a 
disciple third in descent from Gorakhnath. The site is still 
under the authority of the monastery Ratannath at Sawarikot 
in the Nepalese Hills. 

In the time of Aurangzeb, or in the fifteenth century as 
some say, the temple was despoiled by a Musalman officer. 
The avenging of the death of this soldier is the basis of the 
legend explaining the practice of spilling the blood of 
suckling pigs on the grave of a Musalman, near the site of 
the temple of Devi Patan. It is said that two temple guards, 
Sumer Dhar and Mul Cand, brought the despoiler to his 
death. 

The site of the temple is extensive, and the elevation on 
which it stands was once occupied by a fort. Tradition 
connects this with the name of Raja Karan, Kama of the 
Mahdbhdrata. There are here also an ancient temple and a 
very old well. 

The two places of interest, both of which are objects of 
attention at the annual fair, or mela, held tow^ard the end of 
the spring season, are the temple of Devi Patan, with its 
monastery, and the grave of the Musalman referred to above. 

The present temple, is, in a general way, built around the 
older building said to have been erected by Ratannath- And 
on a block of red sandstone enclosed in the present edifice is 
an inscription containing the name of Gorakhnath.^ 

The core of the temple is of red sandstone. It is probably a 
portion of the older temple. It may be seen from the door- 
way, and at various places in the shrine. But the present 
temple which is built around the older one is white. The 
spire is of white marble, surmounted by a gilded umbrella, 
The temple faces east. It is rectangular in shape, and the 
central shrine is surrounded by a wide veranda. In front of 
the temple is a broad platform of stone. The interior is dark, 
there being no w indows and only one door, which is small 
and made of brass. Within is an image of Devi, painted 
red, before which offerings, including the heads of sacrificed 
goats, are made. 


^ See Kevill, District Gazetteer y GondOy subject ‘Devi Patan.’ 



SACRED PLACES 


93 


In the west face of the temple is an image of Bal Devi, the 
goddess who grants children. Here the hair of the first shav- 
ing of a child’s head is offered. And it was here that, in 
1924, the young prince of Balrarnpur was brought. Before 
the goddess, his bead was shaved, and the hair was then 
offered to her. On the walls about the image, as in similar 
.shrines and in other places generally, small figures resembling 
children are drawn in black. These pictures are drawn, 
ceremonially, by women desiring children ; or, in cases where 
all of a mother’s children are girls, in the hope that she may 
obtain a son. Some of the figures are ornate. 



In the veranda on either side of the door of the temple are 
the large kettle drums which are used in the daily worship. 
Several large bells are hung in the veranda. 

In front of the temple, on the stone platform, is the block 
where goats are sacrificed;^ and a pit where a /torn, or fire, is 
kept burning on special occasions. On the ecige of this plat- 
form are two large, stone lions, facing the temple. At the left, 
but behind these, is a long rack on which are hung temple 
bells, six in number, some of considerable age. Behind the 
bells, to the east, is a shed used for rest and as an eating place. 
At the north-east corner is a spot sacred to Nagnath. On it 
are a small image of a hooded serpent, a fragment only, and 
some other bits of broken images. Worship is conducted 
here, especially at the Nagpaficami festival. 

Close to the temple on the east and south, and scattered 

^ Knowles, Gospel in Gonda^ p. 116, says that the priests who 
sacrifice the goats and buffaloes are Ydgis of Thdrii origin. Tharus 
are a jungle people living in the forests on the borders of Nepal. 
They are particularly clever in using the cleaver with which the heads 
of animals for sacrifice are severed at a single stroke. 



94 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

over the site at various distances, are numerous samadhs or 
tombs of Yogis. Some are old and out of repair. Over most 
of these graves are masonry platforms surmounted by the 
yoni-lihga symbol. These very numerous graves attest the age 
and importance of the monastery. 

On the east side of the temple, beyond the shed, is a huge 
pipal tree with a platform around it. On its south side is a 
small, raised platform sacred to Kal Bhairorh, with a large 
number of tridents (triiul) beside it. Close by this shrine is 
the small, domed structure called Raja Karan's building, and 
containing an image of that ancient hero. 

Still further east is a temple of Sital Mata, the goddess of 
smallpox, of which the Yogis are pujaris. Beyond this temple 
are more samadhs. Beyond this is an old temple to Mahadeo 
or Siva. 

On the north side of the main temple is a stake where 
buffaloes are sacrificed. Towards the north, a long flight of 
steps leads down to an ancient tank. 

The monastery is situated north-east of the temple, and 
some of its buildings are close up to the temple site. There 
are between thirty-five and forty Yogis in residence as a usual 
thing. The dhuni, or Yogi's fire, is housed north-east of the 
temple, in a portion of the monastery. The Government 
Forest Department makes an annual grant of 250 wagon-loads 
of wood for this dhuni. 

South of the temple site a road leads through a bazaar to 
the grave of the Musalman.^ In front of the tomb, under a 
tree, is an oval stone on which pilgrims dash out the brains of 
suckling pigs and then carry the bleeding animals into the 
tomb to let the blood drip on the Musalman’s grave. The pigs 
for this purpose are purchased in the bazaar near the tomb. 

* Hindus of caste, even Brahmans, it is said, perform this rite. 

Near the tomb is a platform in which a broken stone is set 
erect. This is the place of Hulika Devi, the goddess of the 
Holi, The pujaris of the goddess are Yogis. In fact, in all the 
places of worship round about the temple of Devi Patan, as. 
well as in the temple itself, the pujaris are Gorakhnathis. 

There are samadhs in this neighbourhood also. 


^ His^iame was Mirza. 



SACRED PLACES 


95 


There is an approach to the. main temple from the east by 
a low flight of steps. 

Great interest at Devi Patan centers around the annual mela, 
or religious fair, which occurs early in April. Then the 
desecration of the tomb of the Musilman is carried on with 
feverish haste by many people. Suckling pigs are purchased, 
carried to the tank at the north of the temple, and dipped 
three times in the water. The worshipper then receives a iika 
or mark, from a priest, and carries the pig to the round stone 
in front of the tomb, going around the site of the temple, not 
crossing the temple area. At the round stone the act described 
above is performed, and the bleeding pig is carried into the 
tomb. However, the mela is not the only occasion when pigs 
are thus sacrificed, for it is a regular practice at the tomb. 

The mela is an occasion of special worship at the temple. 
The sides of the stairway on the east are lined with stalls in 
which are sold the sweets and flowers which make up the 
simple offerings to Devi. Besides these, offerings of cocoanuts 
goats and buffaloes are made. It was reported that in 1871, 
20 buffaloes, 250 goats and 250 pigs were sacrificed daily 
during the fair.^ 

Across the small stream to the west of the temple site is 
the large bazaar where horses and other animals are brought 
for sale. This fair is especially noted for the Nepalese ponies 
that are brought to the market. On the east of the temple 
hill is laid out a large, temporary bazaar where wares of all 
kinds, from beads and trinkets to pots and cloth, are sold. 
The usual holiday group of merry-go-rounds, ‘ ferris’ wheels, 
snake-charmers, and other entertainers is found at the fair. 

The rajas of Balrarnpur are patrons of the fair and of the 
temple. The State levies a tax on all sales in both bazaars. 
As many as 75,000, even 100,000, attend the fair.- 

The annual fair at Devi Patan opens with the arrival of 
the pir, or abbot, from the monastery of the Kanphata Yogis 

^ Gazetteer of Oudh, vol. I, p. 370. Knowles, Gospel in Gorida, 
p. 173, estimated that 22,000 a» -mals were sacrificed there in 188o. 
‘ It was calculated that one animal a minute was sacrificed from 
sunrise to sunset every day for a week.’ 

* Nevill, District Gazetteer, Gonda, p. 193; Gazetteer of Oudh, 
vol. I, p. 370. 



96 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

at Sawarikot, or Dang Cangra, in Nepal. This place is sixty 
miles from the temple.^ At the Ratannath monastery each 
year a .mahant, or pir, is chosen, who with the pir chosen the 
previous year, goes in pi*ocession in Devi Patan. The former 
goes in front, carrying a stone lihga, said to contain the spirit 
of Gorakhnath. Attendants carry a large, red umbrella, with 
a handle covered with sheet-silver, silver maces, tridents with 
flags, a kettle-drum covered with a red cloth, and yak-tail 
fans. A long peculiarly -shaped horn is also carried in the 
procession. The pir stops from time to time to receive the 
offerings that the crowd have to make. At such tiities the 
stone lihga is garlanded again and again. All along the way 
the people cast offerings of all sorts in their path, and the pirs 
are under a constant bombardment of sweets. It is considered 
fortunate to secure bits of the offerings that have been made. 
Consequently there is a great scramble for the offerings, as 
well as to make them. Chickens, sweets, flowers and other 
articles are ‘presented,* and then carried away as possessing 
special sanctity and magic powers, by those who have- 
brought them. 

On the outskirts of Tulsipur, about a mile from the 
temple, the procession is met, in the early morning of the 
first day of the mela, by a company of soldiers and a military 
band belonging to the State of Balrainpur, and a little farther 
on by a company of village watchmen, in uniform. Besides 
the escort, a large crowd follows the visiting pirs. 

At the foot of the steps leading to the temple from the 
east, the visitors are met by the local mahant, or abbot, of 
Devi Patan, and the pirs and their attendants are conducted 
to the temple and are seated on the platform on its eastern 
side. Their arrival is greeted with the blowing of horns, the 
ringing of bells and the beating of drums. The visiting 
company remains four days. Each evening of their stay 
an elaborate ceremony is performed when prasad, food offered 
to the pirs, is distributed. This exercise is preceded by 
the regular beating of drums and the ringing of bells for 
about half an hour. During this ceremony, the two pirs 
sit opposite to each other, on the eastern platform, the 


' Thes.e bits of information are based upon local statements 



SACRED PLACES 


97 


recently appointed one having charge of the stone lihga from 
Sawarikot. The umbrella, the maces, the tridents and the 
horn are in use. The constantly changing crowd casts a 
continuous shower of sweets on the carpet w here tlie pirs and 
attendants are sitting. The chief pir w^ears a Ivvo-handled 
knife in his girdle (a symbol of distinction) and carries a 
carved hainhoo staff in his hand. All about the temple are 
Kori-Camars playing musical instruments (sarann) and beat- 
ing drums. I'liese arc temple attendants. Tiiere are many 
men about, dressed as women, who carry trays and beg. 

In the veranda of the temple, worshippers make the circuit 
of the shrine, going witli tlieir right hand mwt the temple. 
Men and we*men, in the eSxitemcnt of the crowd, l^ecome 
‘possessed' by the Devi, called Bhagavati, ami dance, clap 
their hands and ‘prophesy’ what should be offered to the 
goddess. Whatever is thus sugge.sted is presented to her. 

But the temple is not without worshippers at oilier times. 

Worship is carried on with great regal irity on the temple 
site. Very early in the morning and again in the omening a 
simple servi('e is held when a visit is paid to each sarmidh in 
the place. In the morning, after batliiiig, the pujari offers 
Ganges w^ater, sandalwood, rice, bel ffowt rs and milk 

at each grave. He may add sweets and burn incciisu. Jn the 
evening milk is oifered, with incense and sweets, and a lamp 
is lighted. 

In connection with the noon-time worship of l/hairorh, the 
guardian of the temple, the pujari, goes around t ne platform 
and shrine of the god, his right hand towards it. Then after 
pouring out water, he offers to the god a plate helped with 
rice, afterwards throwing the food to dags. (Bhairurii is 
accompanied by a black dog). 

The evening worship and prasad at the temple is preceded 
by the regular beating of the kettle-drums and the ringing of 
the temple bells for about half an hour. The temple doors 
are then thrown open and the offerings arc made. 

The monastery at Devi Patan has been famous for its 
adepts in the Hatha Yoga. It owns; besides its own site, 
nine villages which arc tax-free. It has a considerable 
income from offerings. The mahant, in 1924, was Harinath 
of the Eairag Panth to which the Ratannath pirs belong. 



CHAPTER SIX 


SACRED PLACES (Concluded) 

Turning now to the north-west, the temple of Amarnath, 
in Kashmir, is to be noted. Yogis visit the shrine of their 
master which is situated in a cave. Formerly all danced before 
Siva, here, naked. Women now wear a single garment. Siva 
is here represented by a Hhga which is a block of ice. 

Besides the' important monastery .at Gorakh Tilla, there are 
a good many places in the Panjab connected with the 
Gorakhnathis. Gorakhsetra, or Gorkhatri, in Peshawar was 
once a haunt of Kanphata Yogis and is mentioned by Baber 
and Abul Fazal. Traditionally this is the place where 
Gorakhnath lived in the Satya Yuga} In the north-west the 
chief saint of the Kanphatas is Ratannath of Peshawar. 
These Yogis do not wear the rings in their ears because they 
claim to wear them in their hearts. 

There are Yogi shrines at Kohat, Jalalabad and Kabul. 

SiALKOT is famous as the home of Puran Bhagat, the well- 
known disciple of Gorakhnath. The well where Puran w^as 
found by that Yogi is situated two miles north of the Canton- 
ment.^ A legend connected with the place relates how^ a 
Khatrani woman, while bathing in the Aik river, was wooed by 
Basak Nag (the King of Serpents), and bore a son, Salavahan, 
who rose to be a man of great power and wealth, and who, 
through the assistance of the serpent (Nag) became a king. To 
Salavahan were born two sons who became Yogis, the older of 
whom was Puran Bhagat, on whose account the well is still 


1 Martin, vol. II, p. 484; BHCS, p. 403. 

* See Sialkot Gazetteer, 1904. Also Archeeolcgical Report, vol. II, 
pp. 21, 22; vol. XIV, pp. 44-47. The whole story is given in chap, 
nine. 



SACRED PLACES 


99 


famous. The well is noted for its very cold water and its healing 
qualities. Hindu women go there to bathe, in order to be 
cured of barrenness; especially on Sunday and on the new 
moon, do they come from all parts of the Panjab for this 
purpose.^ 

In Guga’s temple at Sultanpur, which belongs to the 
Chamars, Guga and his wazir are mounted on horses, Gogri 
on a mare, but Narsiriih, Kaila Bir and Gorakhnath are on 
foot.^ 

At Batra there is a comparatively new shrine to Guga, 
erected by one who had obtained a son in his old age. Beside 
it is a shrine to Gorakhnath, facing east. 

There is a shrine of Birag Lok near Palampur with a legend 
connected with Gorakhnath. The founder of the shrine, when 
a boy, once, while herding cattle, met a gosain (said to be 
Gorakhnath himself) who told him never to disclose the fact 
of their friendship, else he would no longer remain in his 
palace. Keeping the secret, however, made him ill, and so, 
at last he told his parents about the gosain. They gave him 
sattu for the holy man. But, when about to cook it, the 
boy complained tliat he had no water, whereupon the gosain 
touched the ground with his gaja (iron staff) and a spring 
appeared, w hich still exists. The gosain did not eat the food, 
saying that his hunger was satisfied by its savour. The boy 
then caught the holy man by the arm, upon which the latter 
struck him with his hand and turned him into stone, A few 
days later a Bha^ Brahman became possessed and saw all that 
had occurred. Then a temple was erected and the spot called 
Birag (Gosain) Lok (corrupted from ^dlop,' ‘disappearance’) 
As Birag Lok had been a hei'dsman, he became peculiarly the 
guru of cattle and now fulfils vows made regarding cattle. 
A fair is held at the shrine on Har the third. He-goats and 
corn are offered. An image of Gorakhnath w^as placed in tfie 
temple in Sikh times.*^ This is a Siddh temple. There are 


^ Based on a report by A. H. Daula 0une 22, 1925) which he made 
after hearing Ganga Ram Parshad, B.A.; LL.B., President of the 
Arya Samaj of Sialkot, read from an account in Hindi. Fonvarded 
to the author by Dr. H. D. Griswold. 

RTCP,, vol. 1, p. 183. 

^ 7^, 1903, p. 378 and note; RTCP, vol. I, p. 246. 



100 gorakhnAth and the kanphata yogis 

in it three images — of Guga, of Gorgi and of Guru Gorakh- 
nath — each about three feet high and mounted.^ 

The Ai-panth monastery at the Taksala Gate in Lahore is 
a rambling place. It contains a few samadhs and a temple to 
Siva, In front of this temple is a large, rounded slab of stone 
painted black*, which contains an 'image of Kal Bhairom, 
painted black, with a large trident. The mahant of this place 
is the pujari of the temple. He was the only Yogi present at 
the time of the author^s visit (December 10, 1924). The 
compound of the monastery is used as a sort of sdrdi (cara- 
vanserai). The Yogi's ear-rings v^ere of crystal. 

At Amritsar, at the temple of Bhairorh, at Durgiana, there 
is an image of Bhairom and a large cubical platform, about 
five feet high, painted red, with a cloth over it, in which is a 
niche ariB a lamp. Beside this there is a temple of Siva. It 
is a place of meeting for the group known as the twelve 
Panths- It was here that the author had his audience with 
the pir of Tilla. 

Near IAdwa, in the Ambala district, there are places 
where two shrines are found close by each other, the one on 
the right and the other on the left of that of Guga, the one 
on the left being dedicated to Gorakhniith. The explanation 
of this is that Guga was the disciple- of Gorakhnath.^ 

At Bohah, in Rohtak, there is a fine block of buildings 
which belongs to Yogis^who follow Mastnaih.* An annual 
fair of a disreputable'" character is held there.^ In the 
i'drikh-i-Sher Shdhi (date about 1579) there is mention of 
Bainath of the Yogis near the fort of Rohtas. 

There is, at Kirana, a famous monasteiy with a large 
landed endowment. The residents are Aughars, and their 
chief iS called p'ir. They wear an ochre-coloured turban 
over which is placed a network of black thread covered with 
gold. The pir, when once elected, may never again descend. 


^ RTCP. vok I, p. 188. 

® See chap, nine. 

//I. voi. XXVI (1897), p. 84, referring to Ibbetson’s Karhdl 
Settlement Report. 

* Eiiiot, History of Imita^ etc., vol. IV, p. 3(U. 

® Census Report, Panjabj 1891, p. 116. 



SACRED PLACES 


101 


the hill on which the establishment is situated^ T%i8 
monastery vfas mdved from Tilla under circumstances related 
below. 

The most famous establishment of the Kanpha^as in the 
Panjab, and in fact in all India, is at Gorakh 

Tilla, or Gorakh Tilla, ^ is situated about twenty-five miles 
north-west of Jhelum, on the highest point of an isolated 
line of hills in the Salt Range, at an elevation of 3,242 feet. 
The hill is rugged and ’difficult to ascend. There is a steep, 
almost perpendicular, cliff on one side of iL This is 
account^ for by the following legend. Lak^mannath, the Jogi 
of was once visited by Siddhvacarnath (Bhartrhari), 

and was unable at the moment to provide food for his guest. 
Sq Bhartrhari carried off part of the hill to Kirana Bar, 
threw it down, and founded a new monastery. This explains 
the steep ascent at The view from the monastery is 

a Very fine one. In ordinary weather the snows of the 
Himalayas make a splendid sight. Nearby and below are the 
remains of decaying hills; and the course of the Jhelum is 
plainly seen. 

The old buildings at Tilla were destroyed by Shah Durrani 
in 1748, and the establishment was rebuilt by Raja Man (of 
Jodhpur?) 

Tilla is one of the oldest religious sites in northern India,* 
and its use for religious purposes antedates by millenniums 
the coming of Gorakhnath.® Tradition affirms that Gorakh- 
nath settled there in the Tretd Yuga, after Ramcandra, and 
adopted Balnath as his disciple.^ The place was once known 
as Tilla Balnath, a name derived from a temple, on the sum- 
mit dedicated to the sun as Balnath.* It here that 


* Census Report^ Panjab, 1891, p. 116. 

® A good picture of TiHa i» to be found in OMAS, opposite' 
p. 266. On Tilla see Census Report, Panjab, 1891, pp. 115 ff; 
CAMS, PP.-264 ff. 

^ Also known as JogI Till®. Till® GorakhnSth. 

* Census Report, Parnai>, Wl, p. 117. 

• Jhelum District Gazetteer, 1904, p. 34.* 

® C^sus Report, Panjab, 1^1, p. 117. RTCP, vol. Lp. 389. 

• Ain-^uAkhari, vol. II, p, 315, note 1. Cunningham (Ancient 
Geography of India, p. 164) considered this name, Balnith. older tbso 
the time of Alexander ; but this may be doubted. 



102 gorakhnath and the KANPHATA yogis 

B^nath underwent his penance, and it was from him that 
Bhartrhari learned the practice of austerities. The samadh 
of Bhartrhari is at Tilla^ and the cave there is named after 
him^ The monastery is now in charge of the Laksman, or 
Daryi, or Hethnath panth of the sect, and they have dis- 
ciples beyond the Afghan frontier. 

It is undoubtedly true that Gorakh T'lW^y or Jogi Tilhy 
was one of the first centres of the Kanphata Yogis. Panjab 
legends make repeated reference to the place as one of the 
stations to which Gorakhnath often retired.^ In the story of 
the marriage of Valmik’s daughter reference is made' to TiHa* 
‘In the pond where a Brahman at the Kumbh Mela was 
cured of leprosy, Gorakhnath will bathe, who will make his 
temple on Tilla.’^ From a remote period all other centres 
of the Kanphatas in the Panjab have been under Tilla. At 
Gorakhpur, Yogis stated that Tilla is now the chief seat of the 
sect. The pir of Tilla is the head of all the Gorakhnathis. 
(But the committee of the Twelve Panths seem to have 
some superior supervisory power. See chapter two.) 

The establishment is situated on the top of the hill and is 
enclosed by a wall. One of the principal temples in the 
main enclosure is to Hanuman. The elevated portion to the 
west, within the enclosed wall, contains samadhs in three 
corners and a temple of Siva to the east of the centre of the 
platform. In front of this and at the north is the caran of 
Laksman. By itself, in the platform, north -w^est of the temple, 
is a large trident. North of the temple is a small shrine of 
Bhairom, and just to the east of this is an old tree under 
which is a niche marking the place where Gorakhnath used 
to sit. They say that Tilla will stand as long as this tree 
lives. On the lower level to the east, within the walls, are 
the storerooms and the residence of the rnahant and some 
other Yogis. Attached to the main enclosure is a cow shed, 
and to the south-west of it are a large tank and some very old 
samadhs, mostly in ruins. There is a great number of 


^ Jhelum Gazetteer y 1904, p. 35. 

2 E.g.y Templcy Nos. 13, 20; vol. II, pp. 275, 375, 429, 549, 551, 
554, 555, 557, 559. 566; Syw, p. 51. 

® I Ay 1907, pp. 23, 24. ' 



SACRED PLACES 


103 


samadhs about. A stone slab at tliis place marks the spot 
where Raftjha used to sit and where he was initiated after 
he was driven away from the home of Hir. Gorakhnath 
pierced his ears. Thirty or forty Yogis are usually in resi- 
dence. At the time of the author’s visit to Tilla (December, 
1924) the mahant and many of the Yogis were at Amritsar 
in the interests of the monastery at that place. For there had 
been a serious disturbance in the city and a number of Yogis 
were under arrest. The mahant had gone to effect a settlement. 

A special mela is held at Tilla in March. 

The monastery is in possession of a deed granted by Akbar 
confirming earlier grants.^ The endowments are now reduced 
to one village, owing to serious charges brought some time 
ago against one of the mahants.^ The Aughars of Kirana 
are more wealthy. 

At Sargoda, about four miles distant, there is a branch of 
the Tilla monastery. 

Several places in Sindh, and one shrine beyond the western 
boundary of India, are of interest in the study of the Yogis, 
although they do not belong to the Kanphatas. These are 
Nagar Thatha, Tir Arr,^ Koteswar and Hihg Laj. 

Nagar Thajha (Nangar is situated about seventy 

miles from Karachi, on a plateau in the Makli Hills, over- 
looking the Indus. The town, which covers a very large 
area, was the ancient capital of Sind. It is now aTamous 
Musalman burial ground. It was noted for its scarves and 
waist-cloths of mixed silk and cotton and of silk and gold, and 
for its famous educational institutions. The importance of the 
place for the Gorakhnathis is that beads which they greatly 
prize are obtained there. The plateau around Thatha is 
strewn thick with pebbles and nodular lumns of hard, yellow 
limestone which are sometimes quite speckled with little 


' See yhelum District Gazetteer, 1904, p. 35. 

* Census Hsport, Panjab, 1891, p. 117. 

* A note on this place will be found under the description of 
Dhinodar. See p. 118, below. 

* See Imperial Gazetteer of India, vol, XXIII, pp. 254 ff. ; Gazetteer 
the Province of Sind, Karachi District, 1919 ; Burton, Scinde, or the 

Unhappy Valley (1851); Burton, Sind Revisited (1877); Hughes, A 
Gazetteej of the Province of Sindh, 



104 gorakhnAth and the KANPHATA yogis 

nummulites. These become detached, and lie on the ground 
in such quantities that it has become a trade to collect and 
string them for sale to pilgrims on their way to Hihg Laj, 
They are called thumrd} The two rosaries of white beads 
which are made from these nummulites differ chiefly in the 
size of the ‘stones’ of which they are composed. That of the 
smaller beads is called Hiiig Laj ka thumra; the other, made 
of slightly larger beads, Asdpuri. The beads of the former 
are said to be petrified grains of the larger millet, the latter 
of the smaller millet, or of rice. The former rosary is more 
commonly worn, and is, evidently, the more prized. It consists 
of 500 or 1,000 beads. Like other pilgrims, Ybgis purchase 
these beads at Nagar Thatha, and, upon reaching Hing Laj 
offer them to the goddess. The thumra is then put on. 
When the pilgrim reaches A^apuri^ Devi’s shrine at Nagar 
Thatha on his return journey, he offers the other rosary to her 
and then puts it on. 

The Yogis explain the presence of the substance out of 
which the b^ads are made and their reason for prizing them 
by the follow ing legends. Siva and Par\^ati, on their way to 
Hihg Laj, stopped in the jungles of Asapuri. There Siva 
asked his consort to prepare him a dish of khichri, cooked 
millet and rice, while he went away into the jungle. Siva 
then drew around her and her cooking place a magic circle of 
ashes, explaining to htf that a giant (asura) would in his 
absence come to molcw. jier; but that she would be perfectly 
sadfe so long as she renltiined within the circle, since the 
demon would be burnt to ashes should he venture to 
cross the magic line. Siva then left with her his trident and 
went into the jungle. While he was away, the giant 
came and Parvati slew him with the trident. The demon’s 
blood ran all about the place, defiling everything, includ- 
ing the fire place and the food which she was preparing. 
Soon afterwards Siva returned. From his body the demon 
immediately appealed to Siva for release, or mukti. Siva 
granted the request and the demon’s spirit ascended to Kailas, 

‘ Gazetteer of the Province of Sind, Karachi District, See also 
chap. one. 

^ A^purni, *She who fulfils desires.' 



105 


SACRED PLACES 

Siva*s heaven. The giant’s body became dust and this is still 
used as incei^se powder. Seeing how everything had been 
defiled by the giant’s blood, Siva ordered Parvati to threfw 
the food away. The grains of the khichri turned into the 
‘stones’ out of which the beads for the famous rosaries are 
made. 

These nummulites are also thought of as petrified grain 
which the creator left on earth to remind him of his 
creation.^ 

The efficacy of the thumra is attested by the following tale. 
During their fourteen years’ exile, Rama and Sita wandered 
into the neighbourhood of A^puri. There Sita begged Rama 
to go to Siva and beg for a thumra. Rama’s sin of having 
killed a Brahman (Ravana) was forgiven when he offered the 
rosary to Hing Laj Devi, 

The sacredness of Asapuri is due to the fact that ^mcandra, 
on his way to Hing Laj, left his staff at her shrine. 

Another legend records that formerly at Nagar Thatha 
Musalman faqirs in large numbers persecuted the followers 
of the Hindu faith. One day the Devi appeared to the Hindus 
riding on a li^'m and slew the faqirs. She then went on to 
Hifig Laj and made that place her abode. For this reason 
Yogis visit both Nagar Thatha and Hing Laj. 

In these legends well-known elements of the Siva-Parvati 
mythology are united with the pilgrimage of the divine Yogi, 
Siva, to ancient shrines. It is noteworthy that Vaisnavite 
elements mingle freely in these stories. 

Hing Laj,* the last holy place of the Hindus towards the 
west, is visited by Gorakhnathis. They consider that a 
pilgrimage to this place is necessary for ail who wish to 
perfect themselves and to become adepts in Yoga.® 

'Hing Laj is situated on the Makran coast, about eighty 
miles from the mouth of the Indus, and some twelve miles 
from the sea. The shrine stands below a peak of the same 


^ Barnes, Traveh in BMiara^ vol. I, p. 29. 

* See RTCPf vol. II, p. 398; Barhes. Travels in Bokhara^ 1834, 
vol. Ill ; Masson, Narrative of Various Joumeyjs in Baluchistan^ Afgha- 
nistan^ the Panjab and Kohatf 1844. 

» RTCP, vol. 11, p. 398. 



106 gorakhnath and the KANPHATA yogis 

name, on the banks of the Hingol River, in the Las Bela 
State.^ The river breaks through the mountains in a gorge, 
about two hundred yards wide between cliffs, about a thousand 
feet high. Above the gorge the country is rich and wild. 
Below the gorge the river is called Aghor.^ Masson reported, 
in 1844, that he saw figures of the sun and moon hewn on the 
rocks in an inaccessible place.^ 

Hing Laj is one of the fifty-one pithas,^ or places celebrated 
as spots where the dissevered limbs of Sati were scattered. 
Here the crown® of her head fell. The shrine is dedicated to 
the terrific Agni Devi, of Hing Laj,® knowm also as the Hinj 
Laj Devi, Hinguda Devi, and the Red Goddess. She is 
known as Bibi Nani by Musalmans and as Parvati, Kali or 
Mata by Hindus.’ Bibi Nani is celebrated from the Ganges 
to the Euphrates and is probably the Chaldean Nana whd 
was very old, dating perhaps a ‘thousand years before 
Abraham.’® She is probably Nanaia of the Persians and Bac- 
trians.® Hing Laj is the best known place of pilgrimage 
in Baluchistan. The Devi is the family goddess of many 
tribes in western India. Even in Mirzapur, in the United 
Provinces, she is worshipped by Kharwars.^® She is known 
and revered throughout India. 

The shrine, which is of the vdmaedra or cakrapuja type, 
has long been in the hands of Musalmans and formerly 
the woman in charge of the place made Muslims of all 
Hindu pilgrims who went there. The attendant who did 


^ Eighty miles, Imperial Gazetteer of India y vol. XIII, p. l43; 150 
miles, Postan’s India. 

* Hart, An Account of a Journey from Karachi to Hiiig Ldjy etc., 
1840. 

" Narrative y vol. IV, p. 391. 

* See above, chap, five, under ‘Devi Patan.’ 

® Sen, Satiy Says ‘forehead.’ 

* 7W, vol. Ill, p. 1,511. 

^ Imperial Gazetteer of India, vol. XI 11, p. 82. 

® Holdich, India, p. 45 ; Holdich, The Gates of India, pp. 162-3. 
His account of the Mekran is* on pp. 295 ff. 

* Masson, Narrative, vol. IV, p. 390. At Lagash theie Was a 
Goddess Nina and her daughter Ninmar c. 3000 B.c. Baikie, The 
Life of the Ancient East, p. 200. 

Crooke, ERE, vol. VI, p. 716. 



SACRED PLACES 107 

this was Candala Mai.^ Her descendants claim to be so* 
intimate with the goddess as to play chess with her. 

Pilgrims to the shrine follow the Karachi-Miani-Hihg Laj 
road along the Makran coast. The distance is one hundred 
and fifty miles, but the way is so difficult that the journey 
occupies twenty-four dzys. Pilgrims go from Karachi in 
bands of from forty to fifty, each conducted by a Brahman 
known as agua. At Karachi he obtains a pass for the party. 
This is shown at Miani where fees are collected by a hhdrti, 
or hereditary examiner, from all except devotees and 
unmarried girls. In all, on the journey, there are fifteen places 
where offerings are made, all of which go to the agua. 

Each pilgrim takes with him a stick of oleander, sometimes 
mounted with gold or silver; and each must choose a dharam 
bhdiy or ‘brother by duty or faith.’ This relationship is made 
binding at Kharinadi where each 'akes the other’s used took- 
stick. Upon reaching Hing Laj, they offer their beads to the 
goddess and then exchange them. 

Widows, and women with their children and husbands 
make this pilgrimage.^ 

Goldsmid,^ who visited Hing Laj in 1861, while following 
the river, saw a place of sacrifice, a hollow in the hill, sacred 
to the goddess, smeared with the blood of animals offered to 
her; and rocks decorated with sectarian marks, in red. From 
this place up to the temple, about one-fourth of a mile, the 
stones under foot were smeared with blood. 

The shrine itself lies in a verdant valley surrounded by 
mountains. Far below is the abode of Nam, a castellated, 
mud edifice with a rude wooden door. A flight of steps leads 
down a deep, semi-circular cleft through which pilgrims creep 
on all fours to reach the building. To enter this is a test ot 
chastity, for the sin-laden cannot so enter. The shrine is a 
level, mud surface upon which a lamp is kept burning. 

^ This name, ‘Mother Candala,’ is very interesting. A Candala is 
the lowest of the outcaste Hindus. - 

* The author has seen, e.g. at Aimora, women belonging to the 
sect, both widows and married 'women, who had brought rosaries 
from Hing Laj and who had the brand-marks of Koteswar on their 
arms. See chap. two. 

» Crooke, EREy vol. VI, p. 715. 



108 gorakhnAth and the kanphata yogis 

There is here a dhuni of Gorakhnath, GorakhjI ki dhuni. 

Into a tank, Alail Kund, those who can swim jump from an 
overhanging rock. A cocoanut and a piece of red-cloth are 
offered. A cocoanut cast into the water will exhibit the nature 
of the pilgrim’s career. If, when the cocoanut is thrown into 
the tank, the water bubbles up, the pilgrim is assured that his 
life has been and will continue to be pure. If no bubbles 
appear, he will have to do penance to remove his sins.^ 

Close to the shrine is a well, said to be of unfathomable 
depth, from which pilgrims carry away water. Haji Abdula 
Nabi describes the well as follows. The water ‘rises up at 
times with a bubbling noise, discoloured like a river fresh 
swollen after rain, and carrying mud in suspension. The 
Hindu pilgrims, when this takes place, throw in betel-nuts, 
cloves, cardamoms and cocoanuts. Should there be delay in 
the rising, pilgririis in the most abject manner will call on 
Mata to give them a sight of herself, exhorting each other to 
reveal their sins and inwardly repent. -When the water rises, 
they salaam with both hands joined, and throw in their 
offerings, which, after some time, on a second rise, are 
brought back tigain, where they are collected and formed into 
large cakes which they bake near the spot.’^ 

Near the village of Khajuri is a pit, or hollow, where the 
brother of Hihg Laj Devi, on being pressed by Gabars and 
Zoroastrians, sanlc into the ground. A spring gushed forth, 
caused by the brother, who is called Gaib Pir (i.e. disappear- 
ed) by Musalmans and Mahadeo by Hindus. 

There is a legend which deserves record at this juncture. 
While Siva was at Asapuri, Hihg Laj Devi, in the form of a 
fly, settled in his hair. When he and Par\*ati, after wandering 
in ^arch of Devi for twelve years, could not find her, Siva, 
in rage, determined to disappear into the ground, to go to 
Patala. Thereupon the Devi came out of his hair, and, 
appearing in her proper form, said, ‘Why be angry? I am 
with you.’ The hollow in the ground marks the pit into 
which Siva was about to disappear. Here a sound, ‘Bam, 
bam,’ is frequently heard. Those pilgrims who hear it are 

* Barnes, Travels^ vol. Ill, p. 33. 

'Crooke, EREy vol. VI, p. ^6. 



SACRED PLACES 


109 


assured of being fre^ from sins ; but those who do not heart 
it, are thought to be great sinners, and are urged by atten-' 
dants and others to confess their sins, their companions even 
offering to share them. Then the sound comes againd 
Boons are often granted by ihe Devi. Ugra Prabhii, 
grandson of Nain Pal, who obtained the kingdom of Marv;ar 
ill A.D. 470, made a pilgrimage to I ling Laj. The goddess 
was so pleased with the severity of his penance that she 
caused to ascend from the foundation oi the shrine the sword 
with which he conquered the southern counfries.^ Another, 
Rena Hamir, who had a leprous spot on his hand, made the 
pilgrimage to Hifig Laj and obtained a cure/'* 

On the return journey from Hihg Laj, pilgrims stop at a 
temple of Mahadeo (Siva) at KoxtiwAR (‘Grove of Siva’). 
This is a celebrated and ancient I'lrtha, Avhich, at one time, 
lay on the borders of India, It is situated in Sind, not far 
.from Karachi, on the Lakpat Riwr, ten or t\vel\e miles irom 
its bar or entrance. At this place a peculiar stone, of the size 
ol a shilling, resembling a worn down lihga is found in vast 
numbers.'* Does this explain the meaning of ‘ Koteswar’ ? 
Here Gorakuiiathis are branded on the upper part of the 
right fore-arm wdth the yoni-lihga, emblem of Siva-Sakti. 
The reason for this practice is that on this pilgrimage Yogis 
pass beyond the confines of India, and that the shrine at 
Hihg Laj is in the keeping of Musalmans. He.nce pilgrims 
must be reconstituted Hindus when they return to India. 
In a‘ legend explaining the practice it is related that there was 
formerly at Hihg Laj a Alusalmani wtio was able to tell by 
magic when Yogis were among the pilgrims corang to the 
shrine, and that she could by the same means recognize them 
when they reached the place. She used to mark their 
foreheads with a tika, thus making them ?vkLsalfnans. Con- 
sequently, on their way back from the shrine, they stepped 


^ These accounts ruay involve some confusion concerning the 
well, the pit and the tank. 

2 Tod, vol. IL.p. 934. Todyvo]. Ill, p. 1,656. 

* See Capt. McMurdo, article, ‘Dissertation on the River Indus/ 
JRASy 1834, pp. 20-40. Koteswar was the seaport of Lakpat. See 
General G. Le Grand Jacob, C. B. in Tramaciiiws of the Bombay Geo- 
graphical Society, 1802, article nine. 



110 gowakhnAth and the kanphata yogis 

at Koteswar and received there the brand mark of Mahadeva, 
as proof that he had remade them Hindus. The practice 
continues. The brandmark is as follows: 


The stories centring around Nagar Thatha, King Laj and 
Koteswar show that Western India had its very ancient holy 
places, as old as those in the Himalayas and at Benares: and 
that early contacts were common between India and Western 
Asia, through some of them, notably Hihg Laj. They also 
make it plain that Muslims in due time took possession of the 
holy places, but that pilgrimages continue as of old. 
Gorakhnathis lost Koteswar to the Atits in the sixteenth 
century.^ 

Ibere are three sees of the Kanphatas in Kacch, in Vagad, 
at Bhuj, and at Dhinodhar.^ That at the latter place is the 
most important. 

The monastery of Kanthadnath at Manphara, near Kanth- 
kot, in Vagad,*^ traces its origin, says Khakhar^ to Kanthkot 
about A.D. 844. But the monastery is not old. Yogis at this 
place call themselves Kanthadnathis. They are celibates 
and depraved. But some of their members are allowed 
to marry.^ Their power, in Kacch was broken about three 
hundred years ago.^ Descendants of the Yogis of this place 
became herdsmen. Kanthadnathis w'orship Ganesa and Ka^i- 
thadnath, repeating the latter’s name in telling their beads. 
Kanthadnath is worshipped twdce a day. The arrangements 
at the monastery for charity are quite like those at Dhinodhar, 
but on a much reduced scale. A legend tells how Rao 
Bharmilji, with his army, was once entertained at this place, 
Udekanth, who later was made head of the monastery 
providing food for the host from one smgill dish.® Another 


^ Bombay Gazetteer ^ vol. V, p. 86. 

^ Bombay Gazetteer, vol. V, p. 85. 

® Bombay Gazetteer, vol. V, pp. 87, 88. 

« Khckhar, p. 12. * I A, vol. VII, p. 53. 

® Bombay Gazetteer, vol. V, p. 88. 



SACRED PLACES 


111 


legend tells how the angry Kanthadnath frustrated the plans 
of the Samma chiefs in their efforts to build a fortress (in 
A.D» 1300) on Kanfhkot Hill. The ascetic was in possession 
of the hill and did not care to be dispossessed. As fast as 
the chiefs built the walls he threw them down, through the 
exercise of his powers of magic. He was pacified, eventually, 
and the fort was completed and named after him.^ 

The Kanphatas of Sivaramandap, in BhCj, who are now 
independent of Dhinodhar, were established, in 1749, by Rao 
Desalji, who gave land to a Yogi of Dhinodhar. These 
monks were later replaced by Sevanath Srinagar, whose line 
still continues. They are of the sect of Saiitinath® and wor- 
shippers of Sakti. 

The monastery at Dhinodhar^ is one of the most important 
centres of the Kanphatas in Western India. Difficult of 
access, it is situated at the base of a lotty hill, surrounded by 
jungle, on the edge of the Ran, twenty-t^even miles north-west 
of Bhuj. Some of the shrines belonging to the establishment 
are found upon the top of the hill. 

Dhinodhar means ‘holder of patience’ and refers to the 
ability of the hill to bear the weight of the sin and penance 
of Dharamnath. 

In approaching the place^ from Aral, a branch of the 
monastery, the first five miles of the journey to Dhinodhar are, 
for the most part, over fairly level sand, covered sparsely with 
thorn and cactus. The last mile, leading to the summit of the 
hill, is very steep. The hill has an elevation of 1,268 feet, and 
part of the ascent is upon its almost perpendicular side. Here 
there is a flight of 638 stone steps. The ascent is unshaded. 

^ Bombay Gazetteer, voK V, p. 88; lA^ vol. VII, p. 53. 

^ Bomhov Gazetteer, vol. V, p, 87. 

3 See JRAS, 1839, pp. 268-71; I A, 1878, pp. 47 ff; Khakhar 
Report on the Architectural, and Archceological Remains in the Province 
of Kachh. 

* The author visited the pir of Dhinodhar at Aral, March 29, 1924. 
He was received in audience and was seated on the gaddi beside the 
pir. Ali his questions were courteously answered, and the Yogis were 
most friendly. A guide was sent wdth the author to Dhinodhar, and 
instructions were given to provide whatever the visitor should retjuire. 
With him w^ere the Reverend Musa Karshan of Ranpur in Kathia- 
war, and Mr. Faqir Chand Lallu Bai of Bhuj. 



112 gorakhnAth and the KANPHATA yogis 

The lop of the hill presented (in 1924) quite a different 
appearance from that described by Khakhar (1879). There 
was then upon the hill a temple, about six feet high and five 
and three-fourths feet square, with a Musalman <iome, 
dedicated to Dharamnath. The entjance was small and there 
was no door. The temple marked the spot where Dharamnath 
performed his famous penance; and within it was found the 
stone, in the hollow of which he rested his head during the 
twelve years that he stood upon his head there. This stone 
was an object of worship and was covered w ith red lead and 
ghi. The temple contained also a marble statue of the saint, 
about three feet high, wearing the car-rings of the sect. 
Besides, there were three small liugas and some brass and 
stone Mdois in the shrine. A light lias been kept burning 
there since Dharamnalh’s time. The temple faced east. Close 
by W'as a dhuni, or Yogi’s fire, which had been kept burning 
since the time of the saintd 

Since then the temple has been enlarged and a \’eraiiaa nas 
been built on the front. 7’he roof is now bordered with a 
saw-tootlied parapet. The main, large dome is over the 
temple proper. In front of this is a mediuin-sized 
dome, and in front of this, in a lint across the veranda, 
are three small domes. The plinth of the temple wnth the 
veranda measures 13 ft. by 261 ft. dliat of the veramla being 
1 3 ft. square. The inside of the temple is 8 ft. square, in 
the centre of the floor is a square of white marble upon 
which is the caran of Dharamnath. This square is bordered 
wdth black marble. At the left, in front of the caran, is an 
incense lamp. On the left of the marble square are five 

g igas, a Gauri-Sankar image and the stone on which 
haramnath rested his head. It is not covered with red lead 
and ghi. .On the right of the caran arc a bell, two drinking 
vessels of muslin pattern and a shell. Behind the caran are 
three fairly large conch shells. Over the caran in the ceiling, 
a curtain is stretched horizontally. Over the door of the 
temple and on the front pillars of the veranda large tridents 
are drawTi in red lead. 

To the left of the temple is a low building in which a 


^ Compare Bombay Gazetteer, voi. V, p, 86. 



SACRED PLACES 


113 


dhuni is kept burning perpetually. This building, too. is 
decorated with tridents painted in red lead. 

Between the temple and the shed which contains the dhuni 
is a small platform, 3 ft. 10 ins. by 3 ft. 7 ins. upon which, 
in yellow stone, is the caran of Jotnath. 

In a line in front, and to the right of the temple, extend a 
series of small one-room temples, each square with a 
saw-tooth parapet on the top and surmounted with a domed 
roof with a cone-shaped ornament on the top. All these 
temples have large red tridents painted on them. In order, 
looking east, these temples are to Bal Bhairorh, Visnu 
Bhairom, Kal Bhairorh, and Hihg Laj DevL Each con- 
tains a small slab set up at the back with the image of the 
appropriate god or goddess engraved upon it and painted 
red. Still further to the ^ast stands a slightly larger temple 
to Siva with a lihga inside, painted red. This temple also 
has a domed roof. 

Further to the east, a little in front of the temple of 
Dharamnath, but at a slightly lower level, a slab of stone is 
set up and painted red. It is for Bhairom. 

Directly in fr^nt of the temple of Dharamnath, but at a 
lower level, is a dharam^ala, or rest house. This long, narrow 
building faces north. It is decorated with Vaisnavite 
images of Krsna, Radha, the Gopis and others. In the 
middle of the front face of the dharamsala, and above the 
level of the doors, is a head , of Jogesvar, with the large 
ear-rings, painted red. 

North-east of the dharamsala is a cook house. 

All of the structures arc in good repair and are substantial. 
They are said to have been built about thirty y ears ago. 
The older temple was built in 1821.^ The buildings on the 
top of the hill were in the charge of an Aughar. The efficient 
was a native of Agra. He conducted worship at the temple 
twice a day, blowing a conch three times, and making simple 
offerings. Besides this, he attended to the dhuni. For the 
greater part of the year he had to carry water for all purpose^ 
from Aral. 


1 M,vol. VII, p. 51. 



114 gorakhnath and the KANPHATA yogis 

Just below the summit of the hill, and to the right, is a 
tank which is filled with water during the monsoon. 

The descent to the monastery leads down through a very 
narrow and precipitous gorge, full of rocks of all sizes, the 
course pf a mad mountain stream during the rains. In 
places, the rocky sides of the ravine are covered with white 
spots which give point to the story that the hill became 
leprous when a portion of it broke away under the weight 
of Dharamnath’s sins. The gorge separates the broken 
portion of the hill from that on which Dharamnath finally 
performed his penance. This ravine and the white spots are 
pointed out as evidences of the truth of the legend concern- 
ing the saint. 

An hour’s descent leads to the level of the jungle. Then 
the monastery, which lies on the eastern side of the hill, 
comes into view. The path passes close to a temple of 
Hihg Laj Devi, a place of pilgrimage for some who are not 
resolute enough to journey to her shrine on the Makran 
coast. 

At the monastery, which marks the place where Dharam- 
nath lighted his dhuni, when he came down from the hill 
after he had performed his penance, fewer changes have 
been made than at the top of the hill. The grounds of the 
monastery are enclosed by a wall, in some places in dis- 
repair. Part of the wall is loopholed after the fashion of old 
Indian forts. Most of the buildings within the wall are in 
splendid repair and give evidence of the prosperity of the 
establishment. 

Besides dharam^alas and residential quarters, the chief 
places of interest are the temple, or shrine, of Dharamnath, 
the samadhs and the kitchens. 

The temple of Dharamnath is now quite a pretentious 
building, on an elevated platform, with a surrounding wall 
and an elaborate gateway from which a stairway leads to the 
shrine. The entrance was built in 1899. The temple proper 
is rectangular in shape, with slightly sloping walls, having a 
domed roof and a saw-toothed parapet, and facing east. It 
contains a small, marble statue of the saint, about 15 ins. 
high, wearing the large ear-rings. There are a few small 
lingas, some brass idols, a trident, a bell and a lamp in 



SACRED PLACES 115 

the shrine. The platform is of white marble bordered with 
black. The walls and floors are tiled in squares of black and 
white marble with small yellow blocks at the angles of the 
black and white squares. In one corner of the shrine is a fan 
of peacock feathers. In a niche in the wall is a large lamp 
bowl, which is fed with ghi, in which, it is claimed, a wick 
has been kept burning since the time of Dharamnath. To 
the left of the image is a horse, the mount of Rawa Pir, and 
beside it another. In front of the image is a five-bowled 
lamp for worship and a box. Drums and bells are provided 
in the temple. 

There are sixteen samadhs, tombs of pirs, in the enclosure. 
Some represent two, some four pirs by as many yoni-lingas. 
These phallic symbols are painted red. The samadhs are 
rectangular in shape and have domed r )ofs. 

Among the most interesting features of the monastery are 
the kitchens, for the place is noted for its practice of charity, 
and all who come to the monastery are fed. One of the 
kitchens contains a dhuni which has been burning since 
the days of Dharamnath. On each side of this fire are 
four huge caldrons resting in stands. They are about five 
feet from the ground. They are named Ganga, Jumna, 
Sarasvati and Bhagirathi. They are very old and it is said 
that they were brought to Dhinodhar by Dharamnath. They 
are now used only once a year, for the cooking of the 
food to be given in charity at the annual mela on Nauratri, 
in October.^ The caldrons are objects of worship. In the 
kitchen opposite to this are two very large copper caldrons 
which are used on alternate days for cooking food at all other 
times. Adjoining this kitchen is the store room. It contains 
an image of Rawa Pir mounted on a horse. This image, 
w^hich is painted red, is an object of worship. I'he room 
contains three large mills for grinding grain. 

The monastery, which has about sixty Yogis and a tew 
Aughars in residence,* is presided over by a pir. The present 


^ A special feast is given on Gokal Atham in August, but it is not 
certain that these caldrons are used at that time. 

• In 1838 twelve were reported in residence. Khakhar reported 
about fifty. 



116 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

incumbent (1924) has a special disciple, a boy of about nine 
years, for whom he shows great affection. 

Life at the monastery is for the most part regular and 
uneventful. The morning and evening worship; such study 
arki teaching as may be, apparently not very much ; and the 
daily giving in charity of food to all who come, make up the 
day. 

The Yogis are strict celibates. Some of them are young. 
One boy of about seventeen (1924), a Kanphata, was very rest- 
less, and they were contemplating letting him leave the place. 

The healthy appearance of the Yogis, the good condition 
of the buildings and the general cleanliness of the place 
indicate a high state of prosperity. The monastery owns 
about twenty villages^ and has an income of about one 
hundred thousand rupees a year, of which the Rao of Kacch 
appropriates twenty-five per cent. Various members of the 
establishment spend fully eight months of the year in the 
villages looking after the revenues of the monastery. 

. There are branches of the monastery at Aril, at Ma^hal and 
at Baladhiya.^ 

Dharamnathis belong to the Satnath sect of the Panjab and 
Nepal.^ Their founder was a disciple of Gorakhnath. 

The power of the Y’ogis. of this place was broken in the 
sixteenth century, when they lost Koteswar and Ajaipal to the 
Atits 

The fame of Dhinodhar rests on the story of the penance 
of Dharamnath. The legend is as follows:^ Dharamnath 
came from Peshawar to Kathiawar, and thence to Kacch, in 
search of a suitable place to perform penance. He had with 
him a friend, Saranath and a disciple, Garibnath. He first 
lighted his dhuni and set up his abode under a tree near the 
palace of a chief at Ryaih. This palace was about two miles 
north of Mandavi, in Southern Kacch, a place called Paffan.® 
‘He Xhen‘ sent Garibnath out to beg. The people of the place 


^ Postans (1839) made a similar statement. 

* lA^ vol. VII, p. 51. ® See also I A, vol. VII, p. 50. 

« See JRAS, 1839, pp. 268-71; lA, vol. VII, pp. 48, 49. The 
account as given to the author in 1924 was substantially as reported 
by earlier visitors. ® Postans, JRASf 1839, p. 268. 



SACRED PLACES 


117 


were very hard-hearted, and no one, except an old woman of 
the carpenter caste, gave alms. Garibnath did not report the 
short-comings of the people to his master, but sold wood in 
the town and bought grain. • The old woman cooked for 
Dharamnath. Thus twelve years were passed in penance. 
Then Dharamnath discovered by accident how he had been 
treated by the people and how Garibnath and the old woman 
had suffered for him. In hot anger he upset his alms-bowl 
and cursed the people, saying, ‘Be buried all the Patman 
cities.’ So all the cities in Kacch bearing this name were 
swallowed up, with their inhabitants. Only the old w^oman 
escaped. 

On account of this rash deed Dharamnath determined 
upon a second penance. So he sought a place that would 
bear the weight of his sins. He chose Dhinodhar, but a 
portion of the hill split off under his weight, and sides oft e 
fissure became leprous in spots. He finally deckled 'that he 
could ascend Dhinodhar if he went up the hill with his back 
to it. In this way he reached the sumnrit. He then stood on 
his head there for twelve years, resting on a conical ball of 
hard stone.^ Garibnath and the woman, Caran Deval, served 
him. This penance so shook ^he seat of Indra that a council 
of the gods, Nathas and Siddhas wfts held to determine what 
should be done. It was decided tjiat they should go and ask 
Dharamnath to bring his penance to an end. He told them 
that, w'hen he stood upright, which ever way he should look 
first all things would be consumed by fire — cities and towns 
would become ruins and would be abandoned and cultivated 
lands would become barren and desolate. Garibnath, after 
consultation, asked Dharamnath to look first toward the 
north-west. He did so and the sea dried up leaving only the 
present. Ran. 

The company, with Dharamnath, then descended the hill. 
On the way dow n they decided to have bhang. As no water 
w^as to be found, Pir Pathao struck his dagger into the hillside 
and a spring burst forth. At the foot of the hill, io the east, 
Dharamnath lighted his dhuni, and there a monastery was 
established. Dharamnath then disappeared. 


1 Or, on pan leaf. JfRAS, 1839, p. 268. 



118 gorakhnAth and the kAnphata yogis 

There is a tradition which states that he was reborn from 
a blister on the hand of Caran Deval, He was then known as 
Rawal Pir. Under this name he has a temple on the coast 
east of Ma^^vi. 

But it seems that Dhinodhar was a famous place when 
Dharamnath took up his abode there. He came to Kacch 
from Peshawar about 1382.^ Still earlier it was known to Pir 
Pathao whose death is said to have taken place in 1209. 
The story is connected with the manner in which Pir Path&o 
gained possession of the cave at Pir Arr, in Sind. This he 
achieved with the assistance of Gorakhnath. A sadhu, 
Da 3 ranath, lived in this cave. The account of the amazing 
things that this man did in the presence of Gorakhnath, 
who came to the help of Pir Pathao, contains elements 
that appeared later in the story of Dharamnath. When 
Gorakhnath came to Pir Arr, in Sind, ETayanath learned 
of it by supernatural sight. He became very angry and 
threw the hill into the sky and set it on fire by a brecth. 
Then he departed to Dhinodhar Hill in Kacch. Pir Pathao 
went to Gorakhnath and reproached him, saying, ‘You are 
sitting here while Dayanath has set the hill on fire and 
bolted/ The guru looked and saw that a fire was indeed 
burning between heaven and earth. But, as he was looking, 
the fire was extinguished and the hill dropped and cracked 
in two. Guru Gorakhnath then perceived that Dayanath 
was praying on Dhinodhar Hill, standing on his head on 
a betel-nut, and knew that after twelve months of austerity 
in this position, he could by breathing thrice blast all 
Sind. Thereupon Gorakhnath extended his hand, although 
no one could observe this action, and seizing Dayanath 
by the ear, brought him back to Pir Arr. He then said to 
Dayanath, ‘Pon*t trouble the people. I promise you this 
blessing, that you and your successors shall never lack good 
horses and white clothes.* He then made him his disciple, 
split his ear, put an ivory ornament in it, and, placing a 
turban made of black thread on his head, sent him back to 
Dhinddhar.* 

1 I A, vol VII, p. 50. 

• The whole legend is recorded in chap. nine. 



SACRED PLACES 119 

Near Dhamadka there is a well which is named after the 
fkmous YogL^ 

, There are several places in Kathiawar which are associated 
with the name of GoraEhnath. 

Upon the sacred height at Girmar there are many temples 
in ruins. The hill consists of five principal peaks, the 
highest of which, with an altitude of 3,666 feet, is associated 
with the name of Gorakhnath.^ Above the shrine of Amba 
Mata there is another, three feet square, dedicated to the 
great disciple of Matsyendranath. It is said that Parvati, in 
search of Siva, dwelt at Girnar, and that she continued to 
sing the praises of her Lord, until, at this spot, he finally 
showed himself to her.^ In the Smd legends Girnar is 
represented as a noted place of resort and a favourite haunt 
of Gorakhnath. 

Nine miles east of Patan and six miles west of Prachikund, 
is Gorakhmaphi, also named after the great saint. The place 
is situated on the Sarasvati River and is one of the most 
important in the west. Here, in a cave, deep underground, 
are three images of Gorakhnath and one of Matsyendranath. 
Gorakhnath (the guru of Rukmibai, consort of Krsna) is the 
deity of the monastery at this place. In 1884, there were 
about forty monks in residence.^ All were celibates, except 
the Bawa, or pir, who is allowed to marry to keep up the 
succession. If he has no son, he may adopt from among his 
flock. He was called Nathji. Here all things arc held in 
common. Some of the monks follow secular callings, some 
are land owners, and the head of the establishment possesses 
large estates. Great licence in food, drink and women is 
allowed. Food is distributed twice a day. Monks eat with 
sannyasis and provide the food out of the revenues of the 
monastery. Many sannyasis make the pilgrimage to this 


^ Khakhar, p. 4. 

* Bombay Gazetteer^ vol. VIII, p. 441 ; Ras Mala, vol. I, pp. 7, 154. 
Tod’s Western India; JASBe, vol. VII, p. 865. Lieut. M. Kittoe, 
article, ‘Notes on a Journey to Girnar, ‘etc.’ 

* Archaological Survey, 1879. Kathiawar and Kacch, pp. 155, 
175. 

* Bombay Gazetteer , vol. VIII, pp. 154-56, 446; Khakhar, p. 3. 



120 GOR^VKHNATH and the KANPHATA yogis 

place. Atits, or Gosains, are the officients at the Siva and 
Devi temples.^ 

Traditionally, Gorakhnath lived in the neighbourhood of 
Dwaraka in the Dvapara Yuga and he is supposed to have 
lived somewhere in Kathiawar, ‘three months* journey west 
of Gorakhpur in the Kali Yuga . *2 

There are several places in Western India where Gorakh- 
nath is revered. On the top of Turanmal Hill, a tableland 
long and narrow, with an elevation of from 3,300 to 4,000 
feet, and having an area of about sixteen square mjles, 
situated in the Satpura range of hills, in the Khandesh 
District of the Bombay Presidency, are a fine artificial lake 
and the remains of many temples locally ascribed to the saint, 
Gorakhnath.^ 

About three-quarters of a mile south-east of Shirala in 
the Satara District, is a grove called Gorakhnath or more 
correctly Goraksanath after the presiding deity. The grove 
consists chiefly of fine old tamarinds. The image of the 
presiding deity of the grove is a large stone, like a mill-stone, 
placed on the north side of a gigantic old tamarind of the 
species known as Gorakhamli. The bark of this tree is 
scarred everywhere in every direction by natural lines and 
cracks. These are supposed to be characters written by the 
deity in an unknown tongue; and every Kanpha^a devotee 
who comes to worship "here gets his name written on the 
tree, whether he announces it or not. It is of interest to note 
that Gorakhnath, the patron deity of the grove, is tending to 
rank as a manifestation of Siva.^ 

There are hills north of Ahmadabad, in the Deccan, called 
Gorakhnath.^ 

In Thana, at Gane^puri, are several hot springs, in the 
bed of the river, one of which is called Gorakhmacchindar. 
The water is very hot,® And two old hill forts in Thana are 


^ Bombay Gazetteer ^ vol. V, p. 87. 

^ Martin^ vol. II, p. 484. 

® Bombay Gazetteer ^ vol. XXIV, p. 66. 

^ Bombay Gazetteer j vol. XIX, p. 587 ; also Religion and Folklore 
of Northern India (1926), p. 403. Imli, the sour tamarind. 

® Bombay Gazetteer y vol. VII, p. 5. 

® Bombay Gazetteer y vol. XIII, p. 16. 



SACRED PLACES 


121 


called Gorakhgad arid Macchindragad.^ In the neighbouring 
caves are signs of ancient residences. 

There is at Trimbak,^ eighteen miles from Nasik, a monas- 
tery of the Bairag panth of the Kanphatas. This establish- 
ment is situated at the foot of the hills and possesses some 
fields and considerable grass land. The resident monk 
claimed that the land was granted to the monastery by ‘the 
Peshwa.’ The building itself is roomy but unsubstantially 
built. On the large, stone platform, which faces the monastery, 
is a huge, three-sectioned stone, painted red and representing 
Bhairorii. ‘Eyes' of silver are inset in the figure. The place 
is decorated with trisules and flags. Red paint is everywhere. 
On three sides of the platform are samadhs one of which is 
said to have contained the body of Aurangzeb, the last great 
Moghul.® At the time of the author’s visit, ^ the establish- 
ment contained three or four Aughars, one Kanphata, 
Narbadnath, and a wandering Rawal. One of the Aughars 
was a woman. High upon the hillside, in a cave, close to the 
source of the Godavari, is a stone image of Gorakhnath, about 
fifteen inches high.® 

Rose says that the chief seat of the Dharamnathis is on the 
Godavari.® Morris (1876) said that the source of the Goda- 
vari was at Trimbak, on a hill approached by 690 stone 
steps flanked by a low stone wall. ‘At the top is a stone plat- 
form, built at the foot of the rock out of which, drop by 
drop, issues the water of the stream, and an image under a 
canopy has been so placed that the water trickles through its 
mouth into a reservoir.' This is the source’ of the Ganges as 
'svell,’ the channel being underground (But ‘Ganges' is a 
name applied to many sacred’ streams.) 

Professor A. V. Williams Jackson describes® a visit to the 
cave of Bhartrhari at old UjjAiN. In the inner cave or hall 


^ Bombay Gazetteer, vol. XIV, p. 101. 

* ‘Three-eyed.’ See Imperial Gazetteer, 1908, vol. XXIV, p. 49. 

® See p. 70. * December 21, 1924. 

^ Bombay Presidency GazeUeer, Nasik, 1883, vol. XVI, p. 654. 

« RTCP, vol II, p. 396. 

’ Henry Morris, A Descriptive and Historical At count of the 
Godavery District, pp. 2, 6. 

8 JAbS, vol. XXIII, pp. 313 ff. 



122 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

is to be found a figure, or picture, of Gorakhnath with 
Gopicand on his left. Nearby, in the underground vault, is 
the caran of Matsyendranath. An opening in the roof of the 
cavern is said to lead ultimately to Benares. 

At Pae Dhum, a very old religious centre in the city pf 
Bombay, there is a cramped establishment of the K^pha^ 
Yogis. It is used by all twelve of the panths and is one of 
the four monasteries under the Matha at Nasik. The mahant, 
in 1924, was Maharaj Bhithuti Nath of the Bairag division 
of the order. The mahants, here, are chosen at the Kuxnbh 
Mela and for twelve years. At Pae Dhuni there is a caran 
{pde)y a dhuni, and a temple of Bhairoih, all under the control 
of the Kanphata Yogis. 

The famous temple of Eklu^cajI, in Rajputana, bears im- 
portant relations both to Bappa and to the Kanphata Yogis.^ 
It is situated twelve^ or fourteen® miles north of Udaipur, in 
a narrow defile of the mountains. Across the mouth of the 
gorge, to the north of the temple, is a gateway with a crown- 
ing wall extending along the heights on either side. From 
the gateway to the temple, the walls of the gorge on both 
sides are perpendicular. To the south, and above the temple 
is a lake. The entrance to the temple, on the south, is a 
massive portal, built at the western extremity of the great 
dam which confines the waters of the lake. The shrine is 
sacred to Mahadeo (§iva), the tutelary divinity of the 
Rajputs.^ Siva is worshipped here as Eklingaji and as I^var 
Chaumukhi (the Four-faced Lord). The image of Isvar 
Chaumukhi is of black marble.'* The temple itself is of white 
marble, large, well-proportioned, open- vaulted, supported 
by columns and surmounted with a pyramidal pinacle, or 
iekhra.^ Outside of the temple and immediately in front of 
the four-faced image, is a cast bronze bull of natural size, 
well executed. Within the quadrangle are miniature shrines 
containing some of the minor deities. The high priest of the 
temple is a Gosain, celibate. The office is continued by 


1 BHCS, p. 403. Tod, vol. II, p. 299. 

» JAS By, vol. XXII, p. 151. 

* Tod., vol. I, p. xxxvi; vol. II, p. 598. 

® Imperial Gazetteer, vol. XXIV. p. 104. 

« Tod, vol. II, p. 600. 



SACRED PLACES 123 

adopting disciples.^ The Gosains wear a crescent symbol of 
Siva on thvAr forehead, braid their hair and bind it about the 
head, put ashes on their bodies and wear garments coloured 
with ochre. They live in monasteries, and are addicted to 
drugs and liquors.^ They can muster many Kanphata Yogis. 
Brahmans, Rajputs and even Gujars may belong to the order. 
Some of the Gosains follow secular employments and are 
wealthy and some are soldiers. They bury their dead in a 
sitting posture and erect a conically-formed tumuli over then. 
The Rajas of Mew^ar, Udaipur, are diwans, or vice-regents of 
Siva, and, when visiting the temple, supersede the high priest 
in his duties and perform the ceremonies.^ The Yogi at Nasik 
said that the priests of the temple are now Lihgayats. 

Two interesting shrines of the Kanphatas in Bengal are at 
Mahanad in the Hoogly District and at the Cantonment of 
Dum Dum near Calcutta.^ The latter place is called Gorakh 
Bansuri, or Gorakhbansi. The establishment at this place, 
though small, is of considerable interest. The buildings are 
not large. The grounds contain many samadhs. In the 
principal temple there is a large image of Gorakhnath, wear- 
ing yellow robes, and having the split ears and the ear-rings 
of his sect, greatly exaggerated. In the centre of the main 
site of the establishment is a large cement platform set with 
mosaics, in the south-east corner of which is a large red 
samadh. North of the platform is the temple of Gorakhnath. 
It is in shape like the ordinary temples of Bengal, with the 
characteristically arched dome. On the opposite side of the 
platform is a temple of Mahadeo. To the west is the small 
monastery with the quarters of the pir. North-west of the 
platform is the dhuni, under a shed. To the east of the 
temple of Gorakhnath is a small platform for Bhairorh, with 
a group of trisules painted red. East of the platform, and at 
the north is a small shrine to Kali; and be}'ond this is the 
‘place* of Manasa,® over which is a tall palm. To this 

1 Tod, vol. II, p. 601. 2 vol. II, p, 601. 

* Tod, vol. I, p. xxxvi; Imperial Gazetteer, vol. XXIV, p. 104. 

* BHCS, p. 403. 

* Manasd, sister of a Vasuki (Basak), the King of Serpents, is the 
Queen of Snakes and protects her devotees from reptiles. See W. J. 
Wilkins, Hindu Mythology, p. 395. 



124 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

palm are attached small bita of rag in which pebbles 
are tied. These register vows. After the completion of the 
vow, the pebbles are offered to Gorakhnath. A flight of 
steps leads down to a tank at the east. The samadhs lie in the 
cemete^ at some distance to the sbuth-west. The establish- 
ment has but little endowment, and there are but three or 
four Yogis and a varying small number of Aughars in 
residence. The mahant had travelled but little, and was not 
well informed. He was of the Kaplani sect and his name was 
Lachmannath. There was then at the place^ a Yogi of the 
Kapalmuni panth, Sahkarnath by name, from Canga Sagar. 

In the city of Puri (Jagannath Puri) is a gaddi, or seat, of 
the Satnath sect of the Kanphatas.^ The establishment shows 
some signs of age. The grounds are fairly large, but the 
buildings are small and the tdmple has a thatched roof. In 
the front of the latter is a pillar surmounted by an image of 
Garuda. Another temple, also with a thatched roof, contains 
an image of Bhairorh with three heads and one leg. There 
is a shrine also to Alaknath. There are a few samadhs, one 
with a long wooden lihga over it. The mahant wore a patch- 
work coat and cap, which he said were distinctive of the 
Satnath sect. He carried a ‘club,’ made of straw and covered 
with cloth, called sudarsan,and had wristlets and armlets of 
copper from Kedarnath and of iron from Badrinath. ' His 
ear-rings were of copper and were cylindrical. His name was 
Nardharinath. 

^ August, 1924. 

® The author visited the place in November, 1924. 



CHAPTER SEVEN 


RELIGION AND SUPERSTITION 

Not only do Gorakhnathis recognize and worship the 
greater and lesser gods of the Hindu Pantheon ; but also they 
follow the popular forms of Hindu belief, having concern for 
saints and other spirit powers, especially those, that are evil; 
practising magic, exorcism, witchcraft and some primitive 
medicine; giving attention to lucky and unlucky days^; and 
following the superstitions of the populace. 

Some Yogis do not eat fish because Matsyendranath was 
born from a fish; while others do not observe the taboo.^ 

Some hold llie red dal (mdsUr) taboo because it resembles 
drops of blood. Carrots and turnips are eschewed for prudish 
reasons.” 

An interesting device for detecting good and bad omens 
has to do with breathing. ‘To have both nostrils free and to 
be breathing through them at the same time is not good, and 
one should not begin any business in this condition. If one 
is breathing only* through the right nostril, the left being 
closed, the condition is propitious for the following actions: 
to eat and drink, for digestion will be rapid; to fight; to 
bathe; to study and read; to ride on a horse; to work at 
one*s livelihood. A sick man should take, medicine while he 
is breathing only through his right nostril. To be 
breathing through the left nostril is propitious for the 
following undertakings; to lay the foundations of a house, 
and to take up residence in a new house; to put on new 

^ Bombay Gazetteer, voLXKl, p ^^5. 

* Matsya means *fish.* The saint's other name, Mina, also means 
fish.* 

» NINQ, vol. I, para. 117. 



126 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

clothes; to sow seed; to do service or to found a village; to 
make any purchase. The Yogis practice the art of breathing 
in this manner by stopping up the right and left nostril 
alternately with cotton wool and breathing through the other. 
If a man comes to a Brahman to ask him whether some 
business or undertaking will succeed, the Brahman breathes 
through his nostrils on to his hand; if the breath comes 
through the right nostril, the omen is favourable and the 
answer is ‘yes*; if through the left nostril, the omen is 
unfavourable and the answer is ‘no’.^ 

‘There are many points in connection with regulation of 
breath which we nowadays class among superstitions, since 
we have lost the rationale. Thus it is said that one’s 
undertakings will all prove successful if he commences them 
when he respires through his right nostril. Similarly, if 
you start from your home to visit a friend, and wish to know 
whether you will find him or not at home, examine your 
breath; if it flows through the right nostril, you will see him, 
otherwise not. There are others who could tell the hour of 
the day from the motion of their breath. It is said, that in 
every healthy person the breath (technically known as sura) 
changes from one ribstril to the other at well-established 
regular intervals, and thus from its being right- or left-sided, 
those practised in it cap approximately say the hour of the 
day.’* 

Rose quotes from the ‘ Hduz-ul-Haydt (Well of Knowledge),* 
which says that, if a man closes his eyes, ears and nostrils, he 
cannot take cold; that the right nostril is called the sun, and 
the left the moon ; that from the former he breathes heat, and 
from the latter cold air.’* Here is undoubtedly an evidence 
of the influence of Yoga doctrine on Islam. 

‘It is an established custom amongst the Yogis that, when 
malady overpowers them, they bury themselves alive. They 
are wont also, with open eyes, to force their looks towards 


^ E. V, Russell and Hira Lai, The Tribes and Castes of the Central 
Provinces of India y vol. Ill, p. 247. Quoted by permision of the 
Macmillan Company, Publishers. 

* Rai Bahadur Sris Chandra Basu, The Sacred Books of the Hintha, 
vol. XV, Pt. 4, p. 44 f. * Rose, The Darvishesy p. 382. 



RELIGION AND SUPERSTITION 127 

the middle of their eyebrows, until so looking they perceive 
the figure of a man; if this should appear without hands, 
feet or any member, for each case they have determined that 
the boundaries of their existence would be within so many 
years, months or days. When they see the figure without a 
head, they know that there certainly reniains very little of 
their life; on that account, having seen the prognostic, they 
bury themselves.’^ 

For the horrible rite of divination by the use of a full-time 
fcetus see below, chapter eight. 

In the cure of disease Yogis make use of exorcism. In 
Almora, for instance, the drum, dancing and medicines are 
not used in the process; but it is performed in the name of 
Bhairom or of Gorakhnath. The cimta (firetongs), which are 
of iron; branches of the nim tree and of t\it jatela tree; and 
the han morcal, or fan of peacock feathers,^ are used, along 
with spells, to drive out disease or evd spirits. The article 
employed is moved over the body of the afflicted person so as 
to ‘sweep’ out the disease, or the spirit causing the trouble. 
The ‘sweeping’ is done from the head toward the feet. The 
practice is appii'^d to snake-bite as well as to other afflictions. 
Morning and evening are auspicious times for the practice 
of exorcism. 

Kanphatas have a considerable reputation in the practice 
of medicine. Their method is in part that of exorcism and 
in part the use of magic, of charms and of drugs. 

A certain Yogi at Almora claimed (1924) that he was 
widely employed to heal the sick, and that he had wrought 
cures where doctors, even Western doctors, had failed. He 
cited in particular a case where he claimed that he had cured 
a paralytic woman. He did not discuss his method. 

Various substances are applied or administered for medici- 
nal effect. Ashes, with a spell pronounced over them, are 
used as a fikz, made with the thumb on the forehead, to effect 
the cure of illness or barrenness, or to protect from the evil 
eye. In the legends are related many instances of the use of 
ashes for magical effects.^ Powdered rhinoceros skin is 

^ Dahistan vol. II, pp. 138, 9. 

* SHTC, p. 262. ® See chap. nine. 



128 GOiUKHNATH AND THE KANPHAT A YOGIS 

dusted into wounds as a healing substance. The use of ashes 
from the dhuni is described in the study of the legends about 
Goraknath. Yogis at Gorakhpur wash a large nummulite., 
obtained in Sind, in water and administer the solution to 
women to insure easy delivery. The Yogis at Gorakhpur 
have long had a reputation for pronouncing spells which' are 
specially efficacious in restoring children to health.^ 

Yogis make and sell charms of various kinds; some are 
given to children as a protection against the evil eye^ As the 
descriptions, especially in chapter one show, Kanphatas 
make a considerable use of amulets themselves. Many of 
these are of the usual form, box-shaped or cylindrical, made of 
copper or some other metal, often of silver, and worn on the 
arm pr hung from the neck. In the receptacle are placed a 
variety of objects. 

The ear-ring carries with it special protection and vouch- 
safes success in all undertakings.^ And the thread (kahgna), 
worn about the wrist, or on the upper arm, serves a protective 
purpose. Ornaments hung from the neck and worn on the 
fingers may perform a similar office. A silver tooth-pick 
attached to the sacred thread serves to ward off the evil eye. 

In some parts of the Konkan the swastika is used as a 
symbol of Siva.^ 

Quite in keeping with the claims to supernatural power, 
which skill the Yoga is supposed to confer, is the- popular 
belief that Yogis work in magic. And the practice is 
carried on. 

In Gujarat drought was attributed to Indra and a sorcerer 
was called in who made offerings to Mdtdji (the Mother 
Goddess), in potsherds representing human skulls out of 
which the Yoginis (female demons), her attendants, delight to 
eat. The offerings were carried outside the city and set down 
beyond the east gate, in a circle already prepared, and the 
food was then given to outcastes and to dogs.^ 

In various parts of the country Yogis have a reputation 


^ Buchanan reported this many years ago. Martin^ vol. II, p. 484. 

* E.g.y so they say at Srinagar. See section on Ear-rings. . 

® Enthoyen, FoUkore of Bombay ^ p. 45. 

* Rds Mdla^ vol. II, p. 321 (Rawlinson's Edition). 



RELIGION AND SUPERSTITION 129 

for being able* to control hailstorms artd rain. In Sialkot 
the Yogi who is able to check a hailstorm or to divert it into 
waste land is called rathband} .These ar« well known at 
filla. Ip the Central Provinces he is called gdrpagdri 
Wool being a protective, the Y^ogi uses it for his sacred 
thread, for kahgnas, and often in his head covering. When 
Gorakhnath wished to draw Puran from the w^ell in Si^kot, 
he sought a thread spun by an unmarried virgin,^ 

Instances of the practice of the black art are reported. 
Near Patankot, zari buti. z herb, is mixed w ith the ashes 
of an unmarried Hindu and given to an enemy in order to 
bewitch him. The effect of this potion can be overcome 
only by the incantations of another Yogi.^ For the phase of 
the practice of black magic covering the control of -spirits 
through ceremonies over. a corpse sec below under ‘Vama- 
cara.’ Left-hand Saktas, with the intention of killing an 
enemy, make an image of flour and clay, stick razors into 
the breast, navel and throat; and pegs into its eyes, hands and 
feet, A fire sacrilice is made with meat; and an image of 
Bhairava or of Durga holding a trident is placed so that the 
weapon pierces the breast of the image, and death is invoked 
on the person whose destruction is’ intended.^ 

The subject o£ the possession and of the exercise of super- 
natural pow ers for which Yogis are famous all over the world, 
Vvill be considered in a following chapter. 

The use of blood is evidenced on every hand, in red ochre 
smeared on images and symbols, in the tika, and in actual 
offerings. A survival of blood used magicallyi jreduced to 
blood drawn from the tongue or little finger of the worshipper, 


^ RTCPf vol. II, p. 398. See Census Report^ Berdr, 1881, p. 58. 

2 vol. ILp. 432. 

‘ The Jogis fleW'thence and weili straight to the land of Karu. 
Seeing the virgins spinning they demanded a thread. 

Spake a beldame of a hundred years: “/I tell you truth, 

The spinning wheel was made in the Golden Age; the skein and 
. ropes in the Silver Age ; 

TOe thread was drawn in the Third Age and went up into heaven.** 
If ye be the disciples of a saint, bring down the thread.* 

® RTCP, vol. I, quoting NINQ, vol. I, para. 117. 

* Cre, vol. I, p. 137. 


9 



130 gorakhnAth and the kAnphata yogis 

is suggested in the case where Gorakhnath drew watef fro. 
his finger when he restored Mahita and Sila Dai to lifc.^ 

It was believed that Saktas formerly ate portions of the 
flesh and drank the' blood of the victims sacrificed at their 
secret orgies.* Undoubtedly there is involved here the idea 
of magic. The practices described under Kamakhya, below 
suggest customs which have passed there and in Orissa by 
less than a century.* 

Bhattacharya says that Kamars, blacksmiths, are Sakti 
worshippers and that they are usually employed in slaughter- 
ing animals used in sacrifice to the blcKxithirsty gods and 
goddesses that receive the adoration of Saktas.* 

In connection with the sacrifice of the rhinoceros, most 
Gurkhas oflfer libations of blood after entering its disembowel- 
led body. On ordinary ‘ Sradh* days the libation of water and 
milk is poured from a cup carved from its horn. Its urine 
is considered antiseptic, and is hung in a vessel at the princi- 
pal door as a charm against ghosts, evil spirits and disease.^ 

Many objects are held sacred, or are regarded almost a$ 
fetishes, because of their associations, or through the sanctity 
of the substances from which they are made, or to which 
they are related. Ear-rings, made of earth® (and of other 
substances); the four ancient caldrons at Dhinodhar; and 
numerous dhunis, particularly those at Pai Dhuni, Gorakhpur 
and Dhinodhar may serve as examples. 

The Ganges, especially, and other rivers such as the 
Godavari are held sacred by them, as by all Hindus. At 
Deoprayag, in the Him^ayas, where the Bhagirathi and the 
Alalmanda join to form the Ganges, the former, the swifter 
stream, is said to be sixteen annas pure and the other but 
fifteen annas. This is an ancient important site. 

At the Sivaramshidap temple the statue of a bronze horse- 
man, Nakaland (the coming incarnation of Vi§tiu), is worship- 
ped; and at Dhinodhar the mount of Rawa Pir.’ 

^ Temp,<t vol. I, p. 362. ‘ * Modern India and the Indians^ p. 64. 

• See Modem India and the Indians^ p. 65. * HCS, p. 243. 

• Landon, Ne^l, vol. I, p. 292, quoting H, H. General Kaiser 
Sham Sher Jang Bahadar. 

• So reported atTiHa. ’ Bombay Gazetteer, vol. V, p. 87. 



religion AND SUPERSTITION 131 

An interesting incident in tree- worship is reported in the 
northwest. On the fifteenth and eleventh of Phagun, Kan- 
phatas, like villagers of the Panjab, worship the dnold tree, or 
phyllanthus emblica,^ This tree is the emblic myrobolus, a 
representation of the fruit of which is used for the finial of 
Buddhist temples. Its worship is now connected with that 
of Siva. Brahmans will not take the offerings. The people 
circumambulate the tree from left to right, pour libations, eat 
the leaves and make offerings, which are taken by Kanphaja 
Yogis.^ 

Some Nathas worship the paduka of Gorakhnath and of 
Matsyendranath on the Sivratri. Their carans are regularly 
worshipped. 

Many animals are held sacred, or are in some way given 
special attention by Goraknathis. Like all Hindus, they 
worship the cow. There are special taboos against fish.^ Of 
special interest to the Yogis are the rhinoceros, the black 
buck, dogs and snakes. 

The rhinoceros receives considerable attention. The rulers 
of Nepal and others who come to look at those held in 
captivity for example at Calcutta, always worship them. In 
their worship of the sun, Yogis wear a ring of rhinoceros 
horn on the second finger of the right hand; and in other 
forms of worship this same practice obtains. Some whd do 
not wear the cujiya, use a ring of rhinoceros horn when 
making an oblation of water. Ear-rings of rhinoceros horn 
are very much prized. One explanation why men hold the 
rhinoceros sacred is that the animal bows its head slowly like 
an elephant ; and the latter animal is sacred to Ganesa, son of 
Siva. Still another reason is that Siva ordered rings of 
rhinoceros horn to be worn. The body and legs of the 
rhinoceros are offered to Gorakhnath. It is further said that 
the Pandavas once killed a rhinoceros and used its skin as a 
vessel in which to offer water to the sun. Hence the animal is 


^ RTCPf vol. I, p. 238. The ihola {sk. dmalaka) is an object of 
worship as the Birham birich (Brahm tree): ‘He who in October eats 
beneath the ahola tree to Heaven will surely go with all his family.* 
Quoted from Fallon, Hindus tani-Englisk Dictiondryy p. 168. 

^ See above, p. 125. 



132 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

regarded as sacred.^ Moreover, Ram Candra had a shield of 
rhinoceros hide. Besides, the animal is closely associated 
with mud, and so rings of the horn of the animal are buried 
with the body of a Yogi, although rings of metal or of 
precious stones are not.^ Kirkpatrick reported the forests on 
the southern slopes of Nepal to be greatly infested with 
rhinoceroses.^ 

The black buck is revered, and its horn and skin are used 
by Yogis. A story which explains this fact is as follows: 
King Bhartrhari, while out hunting, came upon a herd of 
seventy hinds and one stag. He w^as unable to kill the stag; 
and, finally, one of the hinds asked him to kill her. But he 
said that as a man of the warrior caste he could not do so. 
She then asked the stag to receive the king’s arrow. As the stag 
fell, he said, ‘ Give my feet to the thief, that he may escape 
with his life; my horns to the Yogi, that he may use them as 
his whistle {ndd)\ my skin to the ascetic, that he may worship 
upon it; my eyes to a fair w^oman, that she may be called 
mitgandini{h.2i\'mg eyes like a deer); and eat my flesh thyself.’ 
It is said that Bhartrhari soon afterwards met Gorakhnath 
who accused him of having killed one of his disciples. 
Bhartrhari replied that if he had, then Gorakhnath could 
restore him to life. Thereupon Gorakhnath threw some earth 
upon the stag, thereby restoring him to life.^ 

Reference is made^ to legends in which the name and the 
deeds of Goraknath are associated with serpents, especially 
the rain or water-coni rolling serpents (naga) of Nepal. 
Notice is taken, also of the story of the great war for the 
extermination of serpents (naga) under the leadership of 
Janmegi. In the story of Guga, serpents and Gorakhnath 


^ This story was told at Sri Nagar, in the Himalayas. See above. 

* The rhinoceros was declared to be sacred by A^oka, in one of his 

Pillar Edicts. See Radhakumud Modkeji, Asokoy p. 181. In Manu 
(3: 271, 272) the rhinoceros is one of the animals whose meat satisfies 
the manes for an endless time when offered at the ^raddha. The 
story referred to above confirms this. It is hermits’ food universally 
On the Indian rhinoceros see EB, 13th ed., vol. II, p. 771 ; vol. XVI, 
p. 976; vol. XXIII, p. 243. The horn is a mass of hairs cemented 
together by cells. See also vol. LI (1931), pp. 276 ff. 

® An Account of the Kingdom of Nepal (1793) p: 19. 

* RTCPy vol. II, pp. 403, 404. ® See chap. nine. 



RELIGION AND SUPERSTITION 133 

both play an important part.^ Yogis celebrate the Nagpaficami 
festival. Images and pictures of serpents are found about 
their shrines and monasteries. The S- palas^ are snake- 
charmers. Besides these, there are other Kanphatas who 
exhibit snakes at melas ; and there is a group or tribe, called 
Kor Maiitar, who are Kanphatas, out who live in the jungles 
and are not often seen, who eat snakes. ^ Furthermore, there 
is the relation between Siva and serpents, which lends some 
significance to the fact that these Yogis trace their line of 
teachers back to the great god of destruction. Siva is 
represented with a cobra, or other snakes, in his hand, about 
his neck or twisted in his hair. But here the significance is 
not so much of the worship of the serpent, as that. of terror, 
or fear, aroused because of Siva’s sinister character, the 
serpent serving as a weapon.^ Associated with the linga, the 
' ignificance of the snake may be partly that of worship. In 
the wall of the steep stairway leading down to the Nag 
Kuarii, or Serpent-Well, in Benares, is a sculptured three- 
headed serpent, and on the floor a serpent is represented 
crawling towards the linga. Both Nag and the well are wor- 
shipped.^ The onfy time during the year that the wxll is 
visited for religious purposes is on the Naepancami,^ when 


^ I Ay vol. II, p, 124. See chapter dealing with legends, it is of 
interest to note that the Great Salavahana was a Naga. Tody vol. I, 
p. 82. See the legends about Puran Bhagat. 

^ Reported at Tiila* 

® See Tree and Serpent Worshipy p. 69. Compare CRy 1897, pp. 
50 ff. 

* The Sacred City of the Hindus y p. 89. 

® The Sacred City of the Hindus y p. 2?0. This weii, w'hich bears 
marks of considerable antiquity, is situated in tiie noi th-western part 
of the city, and is dedicated to the Nagaraja, Ananta or Se§a, who is 
believed to have incarnated himself in Patanjali, the famous 
grammarian and author of the Mahdbhdsha. On that account the 
grammarians of the ’city gather on the spot to discuss grammar on 
the, fifth of the bright half of the month Sravan. This is tfie date of 
the Nagapaficani or Festival of the Nagas. On this occasion common 
folk,’ too, repair to the ancient well and make their offerings, the 
average attendance being estimated at 4,000 persons. 

Four flights of steps, numbering altogether forty steps, lead 
down to a large circular .well which is considerably below the 
level of the street. There is a stone slab with a Nagari inscription 



134 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

women visit the well on one day and men on the next 
Worshippers bathe in the well. Respectable people do not 
tarry there. The well is recognized as a place of pilgrimage, 
Karkojak Nag Tirth.^ In Benares Siva is worshipped as 
Nage^war, Lord of Serpents; and in the United Provinces and 
in the Himalayas as Rikhe4var, Lord of Serpents (Nagas),^ 

Snakes are the servants of Raja Basuk, with whom Guga 
had dealings. One legend makes Guga*s bride the daughter 
of Baiaknag. The Raja has a temple at Priyag (Prayag) which 
is a place of pilgrimage, especially at the time of the Nag- 
paficamL^ A saying connected with Guga may be of interest. 

‘ It is a good thing for a Hindu to listen to the tale of Gugga 
at night during the Diwali festival as a means of preventing 
snakes entering houses.’^ 

Serpents are associated with Bhairom. Images of Devi 
and Naga are often found side by side.^ 

Nagas are beneficently inclined and are connected with water 
and the giving of. rain, or when angry with sending hail. 

‘The same idea seems to underlie the following legend 
which is current in Nepal. In the days of King Gunakam, 
so the story goes, the country of Nepal was visited by a 
terrible famine which lasted for seven years. Since all prayers 
were vain, the king had recourse to the great magician, Santi- 
kara. This master, while using the proper incantations, drew 
a magical eight-petalled lotus-flower, which he filled with 
gold and powdered pearls. Then he made therein the effigies 
of the nine great Nagas, and by his spells induced them to 
occupy their proper places. Varuna, white of complexion, 
wearing a sevenfold, jewelled naga-hood, and carrying a lotus 
and a jewel in his hands, took his position in the centre; 


let into the wall. The piijdri declares that the well gives access to 
Patala, or the nether world, the abode of snakes. A snake image is 
said to exist inside the well, below the water level. Besides, there are 
snake stones let into the well- See Indian Serpent Lore, pp. 267, 288. 

^ Ibid., p. 220. KarkotakNag was the Serpent King of Nepal who 
dwelt in the lake, Nagavasa. See also Landon, Nepal, vol. I, p. 182. 
He is of the royal house' of Kashmir. 

* ERE, article, 'Serpent Worship,* vol. XI, pp. 415, 418. But see 
above, p. 82. * lA, vol. II, p. 124. 

^ PNQ, vol. IV, para. 178. » lA, vol. II, p. 124. 



RELIGION AND SUPERSTITION 135 

khanta, dark blue, in the east; Padmaka, with his five hoods 
and of the colour of a lotus-stalk, in the south ; Takshaka 
saffron-coloured and nine-hooded, In the west; Vasjixki, 
greenish with seven serpent heads, in the north ; Sankhapala, 
yellowish, in the south-west; Kulika, white coloured and 
provided with thirty hoods, in the north-west; Mahapadma, 
gold-coloured, in the north-east. Only Karkotaka, who was 
portrayed in blue colour like a human being with a snake 
tail, remained absent, as he was ashamed of his deformity 
and would rather expose himself to the deadly influence of 
the spells than appear in person. 

‘On the advice of Santikara, the king himself went to 
secure the help of the obstinate Naga and, notwithstanding 
his remonstrances, forcibly dragged him along by the hair. 
When the nine great Nagas had thus been brought together 
Santikara worshipped them and besought them to reveal unto 
him a remedy against the drought. Then they told him that 
he should paint their images with the blood of Nagas, and 
for the purpose they offered him their own blood. As soon as 
the wizard had followed their instructions the sky darkened. 
Clouds overcast |he celestial vault, and heavy rain began to 
pour down. This is the rite known as Naga-sadhana which 
has been resorted to ever since when the country was 
threatened w ith famine. The remedy, M. Levi says, “ has lost 
nothing of its credit and is practised in Nepal up to the 
present day.’’ 

Vogel* says that worship is seldom devoted to live serpents, 
but usually to gods or saints who are considered able to give 
protection from snake bite. 

Dogs, especially black dogs, are associated with Bhairoih 
and are venerated.* 

To Yogis who haunt the jungles are attributed power over 
wild beasts and ‘you may hear in any Indian village of Yogis 
to whom the cruel beasts (e.g. tiger, leopard) are as lap-dogs ; 

^ J. P. Vogel, Indian Serpent-Lore of The Nagas in Hindu Legend 
and Art, pp. 226, 27. See description of the festwal of Matsyendra- 
nSth in Nepal, below. 

* Indian Serpent-Lore, p. 268. 

’ l^e Underhill, The Hindu Reiigious Year, p. 117. See also 
descriptions of BhSiroih, below. 



13(S gorakhnAth and the KANPHATA yogis 

and stories where a raja, out hunting, endangered by a noan 
wild elephant or a ferocious tiger is saved by the appearance 
at the critical moment of the Yogi, who orders the obedient 
beast away.* ^ It is believed that Yogis live in the jungles 
surrounded by tigers and ride on them. 

The spirits of Yogis are worshipped at the samadhs. For 
example, the Aipanthis of Rohtak offer, at noon, food on all 
samddhs and -set a lamp of ghi at each one. The food is then 
distributed. Such worship takes place over the graves of 
l^ogis at all monasteries. While making offerings of food 
and water to their sainted dead, Yogis make use .of the 
pavitfi. 

Besides, Gorakhnathis worship nine Nathas and eighty-four 
Siddhas. Nathas are religious leaders, or gurus, or guides 
who derive their names from Adinatha, or Siva. §iva himself 
is called a Natha, While the word natha is a synonym for 
Hindu Yogi,^ and while it is a sect name of the Kanphatas,^ 
still, in this connection it refers to the nine great, or deified 
and immortal' teachers of the sect, of whom Gorakhnath is 
sometimes called the chief. They now live far back* in the 
holy Himalayas. Their names are: Gorakhnatha (the chief 
Natha), Matsyendranatha, Carpatnatha, Mangalnatha, Ghiigo- 
nathji, Gopinatha, Prannatha, Suratnatha and Cambanatha.^ 
They are not related to the divisions of the order.^^ In another 
list nine Nathas are named, each of whom is identified with 
a Hindu god. These are: 1. Aumgkar Adinatha (Lord of 
Lords), Siva ; 2. Shelnatha (Lord of the Arrow Shaft), Krsna 
or Rama Candra; 3. Santoknatha (Lord oi Gratification); 
4. Acalacambhunatba (Lord of Wondrous Immortality), 
Hanuman or Laksman; 5. Gajbali Gajkanthnarha (Lord of 
the Elephant’s Strength and Neck), Gane^a Gajkarna 
(Elephant-Eared); 6. Prajnatha, or Udainatha (Lord of the 
People), Parvati; 7. Mayarupi.Macchendranatha (The Won- 
drous Form), Guru of Gorakhnatha; 8. Gathepinde Ricaya- 
kari, or Naranthar, Sambhujaiti Guru Gorakhnatha; 9. 

^ Man and Beast of India, pp. 355 ff. Sec Hunter, Statistical Account 
of Benjgal, vol. I, p. 119. 

* RTCP, vol. II, p. 389. 3 Compare OMAS, p. 185. 

* Tpnp,, vol. I,*'p. 358, note. • ^ OMAS, p. 186. BHCS^ p. 404. 

* Panjab Census, Report, 1891, p. 115. 



RELIGION AND SUPERSTITION 137 

Gyansarupe, or Purakh Siddh Cauraftjwcnatha, or Purain 
Bhagat,^ Still another list is given by Kitts^: Orhkarinath, 
Visnu*; Sarhtokanath, Visnu; Gajboli, Gajana, Hanuman; 
Acale^var, Ganpati; Udayanatha, Surya; Parvati Pcem, 
Mahadeo; Santhanatha, Brahma; Gyaniji Siddhacewarangi, 
Jaggarinath; Mayarupi, Matsya. The Nathas are also the 
guardian spirits of the Himalayan peaks. 

The Siddhas^ are famous saints, of exceptional purity of 
life, who have attained to a semi-divine existence through the 
practice of Yoga. They are supposed to be living in the 
fastnesses of the Himalayas.^ In the Nanak Sakhi an account 
is given of Nanak’s visit to their retreat. There he finds, in 
the residence of Mahadeva, Gorakhnath, Bhaftrhari and others 
in company with these perfect Yogis. ^ At another time 
Nanak met, at Gorakhhatri, eighty- four Siddhas who per- 
formed miracles and wonders before him. One made a 
deer-skin fly in the air, another caused a stone to move about, 
a third gave forth fire anc a fourth caused a wall to ‘un about.® 
Later, he and Gorakhnatha talked together there.’ Siddhas 
are referred to in Macaulilfe.® 

Besides the chief Siddhas Ihere are others ‘who are sup- 
posed to be still upon the earth. 

It is a well-known belief that the Nathas and the Siddhas 
follow Gorakhnath in his wanderings, and that the path o^ 
this journey may be traced by the small trees bearing sugar 
candy which spring up wherever they go.® 

There is, besides, a class of spirits, or bein^^s, Siddhis, 
whom legends connect with Gorakhnath. Generally they 
plague mankind. There are, however, celas who know the 
mind of their Siddhis and who can avert their anger, for a 
consideration.^^ ’ Siddhis have special worshippers whose dis- 
tinctive emblem is a silver singhi or cylindrical ornament, 


^ RTCP, vol. II, p. 3<)7. 2 Census Bcrar, Report, 18S1, p. 5P. 

2 RTCP, vol. II, pp. 3-7, 398. 

* See ERE, vol. II, p. 94. A partial list of them is given in 
IVi, p. 214, note 2. 

* Tr\, p. xl. « Tr., p. xlii.. Tr., pp. xlii, xliii, xliv. 

‘ Mac., vol. I, p. 41. 

* RTCP, vol. II, p. 396.' 

Census of the Panjab, 1891, p. 115. 



138 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

worn on a thread round the neck.^ Villagers consider 
Siddhis as demons who have received their power from 
Gorakhnith. In the 'lower Himalayas of the Panjab, in 
Ambala, and Hoshiyarpur, Siddhis are worshipped in the 
form of stones, under various names. There are several that 
are known by name: Ghazidas has a considerable reputation 
near Una; and Canu, said to have been a Camar (Camars 
feast on goats and sing songs to him on certain occasions);^ 
and Kala Pir worshipped in the low hills and throughout the 
eastern districts of the Panjab, and, more particularly as 
Kala Mahar by the Sindhu Jats as their forebear.^ Sindus 
of Khot in Jind and Khatis and Lohars worship him there. 
His samadh at Khot is in charge of an Aipanth Yogi. 

Goraksa is sometimes considered as a name of Siva, and 
Gorakhnath is often looked upon as a manifestation of the 
dread god, and as such receives worship in some Saivite 
temples. * He is worshipped also in temples of his own. At 
Gorakhpur, where his gaddi is situated, his caran occupies 
the place of worship in the temple. His caran is an object 
of w orship in Kathiawar also.^ Images of Gorakhnath are 
found in many places; for example, at Gorakhmandi,* in 
various places in the Himalayas, both in Garhwal and 
Kumaun, and at Trimbak:® and he is represented by a very 
large, realistic image in the shrine at Gorakh Bar^uri. 
Furthermore, at some shrines of Guga his images, or shrines, 
are to be found, and also in some temples of Bhairorii. Each 
year a stone lihga is carried in procession from Dang Cangra 
to Devi Patan, and is worshipped on the way and for a period 
of four days at the latter place because it is supposed to con- 
tain the spirit of Gorakhnath.® He is a household god 
among the Kanphatas of Belgaum.’ The Gurkhas of the hills 
worship him in a special place in their houses, where lamps, 
flow^ers, sweetmeats and bel leaves make up the offerings; 

^ OMASj p. 186, quoted from the Panjab Census ^ Report y 1891, 
p. 115. This is the sihgnad. 

* RTCPy vol. II, p. 397. 

* Bombay Gazetteer, vol. VIII, p. 155. 

^ Bombay Gazetteer, vol. VIII, pp. 446, 447. ® See chap. six. 

* For details of these references, see chap. five. 

’ Bombay Gazetteer, vol. XXI, p. 185. 



RELIGION AND SUPERSTITION 139 

and in the temples through pujaris of the sect. The morning 
and evening worship consists of the ringing of bells, the 
beating of drums, the circumambulation of the shrine and the 
offering of food which is then distributed in the form of 
prasad. 

The worship of Dharamnath is not so widespread as is 
that of his predecessor, his chief centre being at Dhinodhar, 
where his shrine is at the top of the hill. A temple containing 
his image is found in the compound of the monastery at the 
foot of the hill.^ The service of worship is held twice a day. 
The image is washed and worshipped and flowers and leaves 
are offered. Incense and ghi are burned and a light {arti) is 
waved amidst the sounds of bells, gongs and drums, and the 
worshippers prostrate themselves before the image. 

Other noted Yogis of the sect receive reverent attention 
and gurus and maliants are recipients of offerings, the food 
placed before them being distributed as prasad. 

The services of worship are in the hands of special officers, 
or pujaris. These persons are found at all the principal 
shrines and seats of the sect. 

Besides this, Gorakhnathis serve as pujaris, or officiants, 
at various temples, especially to those of Bhairoih and Sakti, 
and at some temples of Siva.^ In Benares they, serve as 
priests of Kal Bhairoih,^ and in the Himalayas, e.g. Almora, 
they are in possession of many temples of Bhairoih, where 
they conduct worship. Some of these places of worship, as 
already stated, are in possession of women of the sect. All of 
the temples of Bhairoih, except those where Khasiyas serve, 
are in their hands.* In the Panjab and in Northern India 
these Yogis often act as priests for the village gods.® In the 
Himalayas they serve as priests of the lower Sakti worship 
and of the village gods.® They also act as pujMs at some 
shrines of Hulika and of Sitala Mata. At Kuruksetra, in the 
south-west of Ram Rai, there is a temple of Kapila Yaksa, 

' Compare Bombay Gazetteer ^ vol. V, p. 87. 

* Wi,p. 217. 3 SHTCy p. 262; Wi, p. 217. 

* Atkinson, Himalayan Gazetteer, vol. II, p. 865. 

ERE, vol. XII, p, 835; Martin, vol. Ill, p. 336; CTC, vol. Ill, 

p. 1. 

* CTC, vol. Ill, p. 159. 



140 gorakhnAth and the KANPHATA YCXSiS 

the door-keeper of which was a Kanphata Yogi.^ Gorakh 
nathis are also in charge of the temples and shrines ai the 
centres of their organization, temples of Siva, Bhairom, Devi 
and others. Buchanan reported at Gorakhpur Kanphatas who 
wer.e serving Sudras in their worship of Siva.-^ At Dhinodhar 
the pir takes charge of the annual sacrifice at the top of the 
hill on the Nauratri (Sivratri). 

The ritual of worship is that of the ordinary type. An 
example may suffice. At Devi Patan, at the noon-day offering 
to Bhairorii, the pujari, taking in his hand a small dish heaped 
with cooked rice, walks around the shrine, or platform, his 
light hand towards it, pouring water as he goes. He next 
places the dish of rice before the platform, and then throws 
the food out for the dogs. At the same place the evening 
w^orship is begun by the beating of the kettle drums and the 
ringing of the temple bells. After this has gone on for about 
half an. hour, the temple doors are opened, and the offciings 
to the Devi are made in the usual way. 

The offerings used in worship in temples and at samadhs 
are those commonly given to §iva (Mahadeo) 5uch as flowers, 
bilva leaves, .dhatura, water, uncooked rice, sweets and cam- 
phor. Cocoanuls, cooked fooa, leaves of thick bread (rot) and 
incense are also presented to the gods and saints. Offeri’^gs 
of food are consumed by the worshippers. Before mahants 
and the chief gurus food and sw^eets are offered and consumed 
as prasad In procession at the annual mela at Tulsipur all 
rorts of things, including food, sweets, and chickens are 
presented before the pir and carried away as hoiy, or left in 
his path. Tlie Trisul, usually of iron, sometimes of bamboo, 
nearl}^ ahvays painted red, is commonly offered to Bhairorii. 
At the right of the approach to the door of the shrine at 
Gorakhpur, there is a very large collection of such weapons, 
and the space below the platform is said to be filled up with 
them. 

The blood sacrifice is common. Animal sacrifices include, 
in Nepal, bufeloes and goats, and an occasional rhinoceros. 
In many places, as in Nepal and at Devi Patan, slaughter is 


^ I Ay 1894, p. 300, Archaological Survey of Indiay vol. XIV, p. 86. 
* Mar tiny vo). II, pp. 484, 485. 



RELIGION AND. SUPERSTITION 141 

carried on on a large scale.^ At De\i Patan the sacrifice of 
suckling pigs is made close to the temple. At Dhinodhar two 
buffaloes, one of which is given by the Rao of Kacch and the 
other by the Yogis, are sacrificed to Bhairorh on the Nauratri 
of Dasehra. At Gorakhpur, at the same festival, even 
Hindu ised Musalmans sacrifice animals at the shrine.^ On 
the question of human sacrifice see the description of 
Kamakhya. Gorakhiiath and Bhimsen are said to have 
substituted the sacrifice of buffaloes for that of human beings.® 
An interesting ceremony is that in which a drop of blood 
from the little finger or from the tip of the tongue is offered 
to Bhairorh. This is done by one who does not eat flesh, or 
who does not care to offer animal sacrifice. Again, it is said 
that if no goat is provided for the worship of Bhairorh at 
Kalratri, the pujari must offer some of his owh blood, or he 
must offer what Bhairohi requests, sneaking through a 
worshipper who drinks the blood. 

In former times, at Dhinodhar, when trouble threatened. 
Yogis used to commit Ud^a^ sacrificing one of their own 
number, so tharthe guilt of his blood might fall upon the 
oppressor’s head.^ 

In the left hand worship of Sakti the sacrifice . takes the 
form x)f the five tattvas, or ‘realities’ — wine, fiesh, fish, 
parched grain and sexual intercourse.^ 

Some attention should be given to the religious festivals of 
the Hindus with special reference to Yogis. 

Besides the melas and festivals connected with special 
shrines, such as that at Devi Patan, and described above, 
and the great melas at the sacred places of Hindustan, the 
Kanphatas celebrate the sacred seasons belonging to the 
worship of Siva. Among these is the Nauratri of Dasehra. 
This is the celebration of the nine nights (and ten days) of 
the light half of the lunar month Asvina (the time of the 


^ See account in chap. five. 

* Alexander, Statistical Description and Historical Account ^of the 
North-Western Provinces of India, Gorakhpur, p. 365. 

* Martin, vol. Ill, p. 38. Or the eating of buffaloes in the place 
of human sacrifice. 

* Bombay Gazetteer, vol. V, p. 87. 

® See next chapter, under the description of Sakti. 



142 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHAJA YOGiS 

autumnal equinox). At Dhinodhar the pir takes charge of 
the annual sacrifice which is performed on the top of the 
hill. This is the only time during the year when he makes 
the ascent. During itiis festival a special offering in charity 
is made at the monastery, the food being cooked in the four 
famous caldrons that date from the time of Dharamnath.^ 
This is also an important occasion at K^akhya and at 
Gorakhpur. The great festival at Tilla takes place at this 
time, when throngs of men, women and children make the 
difficult ascent and are supplied with accommodation, food 
and coverings while there.^ For here, as at other places, the 
Yogis pride themselves on their liberality. 

Gorakhnathis recognize also the feasts of Sivratri.^ The 
thirteenth of the light half of each lunar month is sacred to 
Siva, and he is worshipped at sunset, a farA being kept until 
the stars appear. However, it is the dar.< thirteenth of each 
month that is called Sivratri and that is devoted to the 
worship of Siva the terrible. The Sivratri of Magh (some 
say Phalguna), Mahasivratri, is the chief day of the year for 
his worship. A very famous legend explains why this is so , 
why worship at this time is of absolute value. ^ A hunter, a 
man of bad character, going out to hunt one day, which 
happened to be Mdgha krsna thirteenth (the thirteenth of the 
dark half of the month of Magh), passed a Siva temple, 
and saw a number of people worshipping the lihga, sing- 
ing, calling out ‘Siva, Siva,* etc. Mockingly the hunter 
imitated their cries, and without his knowledge or desire, the 
very utterance of the god’s name on that holy day removed 
some of his sins. He killed nothing that day, and had to 
keep an involuntary fast. As night came on, through fear of 
wild beasts, he climbed into a tree, which happened to be a 


^ See p. 115 ; and lA, vol. VII, p. 51. 

* Rose, RTCPy vol. I, p. 289, says that the fair is not attended by 
many now, on account of the difficulties of the road, but that Yogis 
make an effort to visit the cave at Tiila. 

® See Murdock, Hindu and Muhammadan Festivals; Wilson, Reli^ 
gion of the Hindus ^ vol. II, pp. 201 ff, 395; Underhill, The Hindu 
Religious Year, pp. 93 ff; as well as the works of Monier -Williams, 
Mukerji and others. 

* Told by Underhill, Hindu Religious Year, p. 93, from the Skanda 
Purdna and Siva Purdna. The story has been reported many times. 



RELIGION AND SUPERSTITION 143 

bel tree (the wood-apple, sacred to Siva), but was unable to 
sleep, owing to the cold, thus keeping an involuntary vigil. 
Not only so, but, shivering and shaking, he dislodged a 
number of bel leaves, which fell, together with moisture, 
from the tree on a stone Siva lihga beneath, thereby offering, 
involuntarily, bel leaves and cool water to the god. The 
cumulative merit of all these involuntary acts not only released 
him from past sins, but caused his reception into Siva’s 
abode of Kailasa. 

According to this tradition, the celebration marks the day 
when Siva first manifested himself, as a marvellous and 
interminable lihga, to Brahma and Visnu.^ 

The establishment of the festival is attributed to Siva him- 
self. The worship of Sivratri is open to all classes, even to 
Candalas and women, the use of mantras, except Ow, being 
permitted to them. 

The fast for the Sivratri lasts for twenty-four hours. The 
worshipper abstains from food and drink during the day. At 
every third hour during the night the lihga must be worship- 
ped with offerings of flowers, dhatura, ketiki {Sk, Ketaka^ 
Pandanus odoratissimus, used only at this time), and bel leaves. 
It must be bathed in succession with milk, curds, ghi and 
honey ; and with water from the Ganges ; or water from some 
other running stream is poured over it. Gesticulations are 
prescribed and prayers are addressed to various subordinate 
divinities connected with Siva.^ On the morning of the four- 
teenth the worshipper must bathe, and after anointing 
himself with sesamum oil, worship the lihga with mantras, 
with the recitation of the 1,008 names of Siva, offering 1,000 
or 108 bel leaves. At the conclusion of worship the priest 
recites the story related on the preceding page. 

In addition, Kanphatas stay awake all night, singing songs 
in honour of Gorakhnath,^ and worship the feet both of 
Gorakhnath and Matsyendranath.^ 

On this night a flag is said to ascend the face of the cliff at 
Tilla, from the bottom to the top, by the help of an unseen 
hand.*^ 

^ Isdna Samhitd, ^ For details see Wiy vol. II, pp. 213 ff. 

® RTCCP, vol. Ill, p. 252. ** Census Report^ Berdr^ 1881, p. 60. 

® Census Report^ Panjabi 1891, p. 117. 



144 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YO 

The worship of Sakti is involved in this festival, 

Vamacaris keep, besides the Maharatri, the night of Ka1a> 
ratri (of Krisnajanmdstami)^ the Maharatri, or Kalisaturdasi, 
•of the fourteenth of the second half of Asvina, and the 
Daruniratri kept on the day before the Holi festival (the 
fifteenth day of the first half of Phalguna). Moreover, nine 
nights in each of the months, Asvina, Caitra, Pausa and 
Asadha are observed as holy. Ceremonies performed on any 
of these nights must of necessity confer superhuman power 
on the worshipper. 

The observances of Sivratri expiate all sin^ secure the 
attainment of all desires during life, and union with Siva, or 
final release, after death. The liberal Akb^r was initiated into 
the secrets of the Yogis, and on th? Sivratri ate and drank 
with them, expecting to prolong his life fourfold thereby. 
He wore his hair in their fashion, and anticipated the 
liberation of his soul by the fontanelle, as they teadh.^ 

The festival of Sivratri is a comparatively modern cele- 
bration. ^ 

Kal Bhaiforii is worshipped, as a manifi station of Siva, on 
the dark eighth of the lunar month, particularly on that of 
Karttika, which is considered his birthday. At his temple at 
Bhudargad, a mela' is held on the first ten days of the dark 
half of Magha. At Devgad he has a -temple where, it is 
believed, all sickness due to evil spirits may be cured. Fairs 
are held there on the Mahasivratri and on the eleventh to 
the fifteenth of the light half of Karttika. 

At a temple of Bhairavanath at Sonari a fair is held from 
the eighth to the fifteenth of Caitra. 

At Kathmandu in NepM there is a procession at this 
time.^ 

Connected with the name of Matsyendranath* is the. 
annual festival, the most popular of all festivals, at the capital 


1 H7, vol. II, p. 395. 

^ See Underhill, The Hindu Religious Year, pp. 96, 117, 131, ISI, 
164, 174 for further references. 

^ See chap. ‘ Legends’’ ; and Levi, Le Nepal, vol. II, pp. 44 ff. 

^ See Landon, Nepal, for description and some good pictures'. Sec 
also for these festivals, Kirkpatrick) Kingdoh^ of Nepal, pp. 192, 194, 



RELIGION AND SUPERSTITION 145 

of Nepal, '^fhis ceremony brings in .the rains of the spring. 
Matsyendraiiath came into NcpSl to release the* Nagas 
whose cofilinement by GorakhYiath had* brought on a tweive 
years* drought. It is believed that without Matsyendra’s 
influence the heavens would still withhold the rains. This 
procession of Matsyendranath’ marks the solemn opening of 
the religious year. It has become the annual fete of the land. 
The object of veneration at this festival is a small image of 
Matsyendranath, an idol about three feet high, painted red. 
It is evidently very old. During the whole period of ‘the 
celebration a company of soldiers, under the command of a 
sardaTy accompanies the idol. 

On.the first day of Vaisakhavadi,^ the Nikhus of Patan take 
the idol from the temple and carry it in procesaion to the 
south of the town, to the exact spot where, under a tree, 
Narendra Deva and his company halted on their return from 
Kapotal with the pot in which Matsyeiulranath, in the form 
of a bee, was confined. There the idol is ^ilaced upon a 
stone platform, undressed, and bathed, except the head 
which they are not permitted to touch. This is the *Bath of 
Matsyendranath.' The sword of the king, equivalent to tho 
sceptre of Nepal, is then presented to the god; and the idol 
is brought back to its temple, painted and dressed. 

On the eighth day the idol is exposed to the sun. The 
Nikhus, who are i^aivites, then make the idol over to the 
Banras? 

On the twelfth and tairteenth the Bahras perform the ten 
ceremonies, beginning with the conception of Matsyendra- 
nath, introducing the god as an infant to be born in the 
regular ranks of society, 

bn the first of Vaisakhisudi the procession of the cars 
begins. I'wo cars* arc provided; one, vco’ large; in the 
eastern outskirts of Patan, near the Caitaya of Aspka,^ the 
other, a smaller car, in Patan itself, in the court ol the temple 
of Matsyendranath. The larger car carries, on a platforfn of 

* The dark half of Vaisakha, an auspicious mo ith corresponding, 
to April-May. 

* Monks of Nepalese Buddhism, Who are not celibate. 

* London, Nepal, vol. 1, p. 209, note 2. At the northeni- stupa 
of Asoka, the wheels of the car are kept. 


10 



146 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

wood, a chapel, square, plated with gilt, which has around it 
a footpath permitting circumambulation. The roof of the 
chapel supports a pyramid of lattice work interlaced with 
rib^ns. On the top of the pyramid, twenty or twenty-five 
metres high, is set a gilded image of Vajrasattva, which is 
crowned with a bouquet of leaves. Landon says that the 
superstructure of the car is raised to some sixty feet, being 
renewed annually; that this ‘sky-piercing car* is about 
twenty-five feet broad and that in old days no house in Patan 
was allowed to be taller than the spire of the car of Mac- 
chendranath.^ The four wheels of the car have for ornaments 
eyes of Bhairava. Fastened to the axles is a long, light pole 
which is bent back to the front, and which bears on its 
extreme end a head of Bhairava. The second car is not a 
reproduction of the other, but a distinctive one on which is 
placed the small red image. It is drawn by the crowd. The 
route is divided into three stages at each of which there takes 
place a regular programme of sacrifices and offerings. The 
most important stage is the last, at the fountain of gold, the 
grove of Narendra. All the Newar population of Patan takes 
part in the fete, and the king, followed by the prime minister 
and the nobles, all mounted on elephants, joins the procession. 
The cars are turned to the right of the grove, and are kept 
there for two nights. At another station, a short distance away, 
the cars are halted for from ten to twenty days, waiting for a 
propitious time for the Gudri Ydtrd, When the astrologers 
have discovered a favourable day, the procession moves on and 
the cars are drawn to the parade grounds at the north-east of 
the village. There they remain for three nights awaiting the 
great day of the festival, the day when the idol is undressed 
before the people. All are eager to take part in this ceremony, 
TThe Banras in full dress, clothed in red robes, their heads 
freshly shaved, lean the small car against the larger one. 
They take from its sacred niche the holy image and remove, 
piece by piece, its tinsel-spangled garments. It is the shirt 
which all wish to see, and the priests show it solemnly to the 
crowd. The people bow, worship and prostrate themselves 
before it. 

1 Landon, Netdl, vol. I, p. 210. 



RELIGION AND SUPERSTITION 147 

After this ceremony, the image is free to leave Patan. The 
undressed idol is transferred, under a shower of flowers and 
offerings, to a sort of holy ark, which the Banras carry on 
their shoulders. As the procession passes Bagmati, flowers 
are strewn in the way and fireworks are set off. Bagmati is 
the old Amarapura, the place where one of the bearers of the 
pot, which contained Matsyendranath, barked like a dog, 
when the company was returning from Kapotal. 

The image is kept for about six months at Bagmati. It is 
then returned to Patan. 

On every twelfth year Matsyendra refuses to travel in the 
usual manner. Consequently, at Bagmati, a car is made, on 
which it is possible both to carry and bring back the god. 
In this instance the procession goes right across the uneven 
fields, through furrows, streams and gullies, avoiding the 
roads. 

One of the most recent descriptions of this festival, 
reported by eye-witnesses, is as follows : 

‘ The Machendrajatra is divided into three portions. Firstly, 
the bathing of the image of the god near Narendra Deva’s 
tree in Patan; secondly, the parading of the image in a car 
through the streets of Patan; and thirdly, the unrobing of 
the image and exhibition of his shirt to the people. The 
image is taken out of the temple of Macchendra at Patan and, 
in the presence of a large crowd, is bathed and carefully 
washed on the stone platform beneath the sacred tree. After 
this, he is carried back with much pomp to the temple, and 
there painted and got ready for his appearance at the princi- 
pal ceremony. Seventeen days after the bathing ceremony, 
the image is dragged through the main streets, and on this 
occasion there are two cars, each consisting of a square 
chamber, covered with copper-gilt plates in the case of the 
larger and with thatch in the case of the smaller. I'hese are 
placed on rough wagons, some six or seven feet high, and in 
the larger one is placed the image of the god. The cars are 
dragged, by means of ropes, by about one hundred and fifty 
men, and the whole circuit of about a mile and a quarter is 
performed in three stages, at the end of which a halt is made 
at some previously appointed spot, where sacrifices are 
performed and great feasting takes place. The third stage 



14« GOlUKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

includes the circuit of Narendra Deva’s tree, and at thi& 
place the cars stand for two whole nights. After this they 
proceed to an open space near the city, called Puriya Tal, 
where they remain, for another ten to twenty days, awaiting 
the auspicious day for them to be dragged to the parade 
grounds for the disrobing of the image. On the day of the 
disrobii.g about six Banras, dressed in red and with shaven 
heads, bring the small car to the side of the large one. The 
Banras then proceed to undress the image -as he sits in his 
car, taking off his clothes piece by piece yntil. they come to 
the shirt. This is then held aloft for all to see and worship, 
after which this also is packed away in a box. The Banras 
now take the unclothed image out of its shrine and place it in 
the smaller car which is now borne in triumph to Bhungmatti, 
a spot near Patan where Narendra Deva halted during his 
return from pilgrimage, where it remains for six months.’^ 
The religious year which opens with the procession of 
Matsyendranath, of Patan, closes with the festival of Little 
Matsyendra at Kathamandu. This second is quite different 
from the former festival. The image of Little Matsydendra 
is not red, but white. It does not represent Padmapani, but 
Samantabhadra.^ The origin of the fete goes back to the 
fifteenth century, and is explained as follows. Some potters, 
while digging for potter’s clay, exhumed a statue which dated 
from the reign of Gunakamadeva, and which Was none other 
than Samu Matsyendra. The king had the image repaired 
and built for it a temple. In the seventeenth century 
Partapa Malla established in honoui of this god a car festival, 
which continues down to today. Barring accidents, it lasts 
four days, from the eighth to the eleventh of Caitrasudi. 
Only Newars celebrate this festival. But the ninth is a day 
of general celebration, because on that day the Gurkhas 
observe a Hindu festival in honour of Rama.^ 

The festival of the Nagpancami, on the fifth lunar day of 


^ The Gurkhas, pp. 174-5. 

- For a full account of these festivals see Levi, Le Nepal, vol. II, 
pp, 44 if.; 59 f. and Landon, Nepal, vol. I, pp. 212 ff. 

^ The festival of Rama navarni. But, ordinarily, at least in Tibet, 
Avalokitesvara is painted white. What is the relationship? See 
Frankie, Antiquities of India and Tibet, vol. I, p. 94. 



RELIGION AND SUPERSTITION 149 

the light half of Sravana, in the rainy season, is observed by 
Kanphatas. The black cobra is venerated, and the Yogis 
engage in conversation about snakes and exhibit them, some 
even carrying tbfem about.^ Figures of serpents and birds are 
painted on the walls of houses. Seven days before the festival 
a mixture of wheat , gram and pulse is steeped in water; and 
on the morning of the Nagpancami, a wisp of grass is tied up 
in the form of a snake, dipped in the liquor, and placed with 
honey and sweetmeats before pictures of serpents. A fast is 
kept from noon on the fourth of Sravana, and the worshipper 
bathes at dawn on the fifth. Either an earthen image of a 
cobra, or a picture, must be worshipped. Saucers of milk are 
placed near known or suspected snake-holes as offerings. 
People abstain from digging, plowing, or otherwise disturbing 
the earth, whereby snakes might be injured. Women abstain 
^from grinding, pounding rice, even from slicing vegetables. 
On the fifth, feasts are held and presents are made. 

The pageant of Guga known as the Chari Mela, is celebrat- 
ed at this time.^ The chan is sometimes carried by Yogis, 
who sing songs in his honour and beg. 

At Sirala, a centre of snake worship, where there is a 
temple of Gorakhnath,^ a fair is held on Nagpancami, when 
snakes are caught and worshipped, after\vards being free. 

Where there is a special shrine {sthdn) for serpents, as at 
Pevi Patan, it is utilized for this occasion. 

Reference has already been made to the mela at the Serpent 
Well in Benares, during this festival. 


^ E.g, in Almora. Devi Patan reported this also. 

* See The Chamdrs, p. 151 f. In some places Musalnian Yogis 
carry Guga^s Chaft, lA, vol. XXVI, p. 84. 

^ Underhill, The Hindu Religious Year^ p. 174. See also above, 
under ‘Serpent-worship.’ 



CHAPTER EIGHT 


THE PANTHEON 

YoGis are essentially Saivites. The range of their interests 
and of their historical connections includes, however, other 
elements. In the first place, Visnu is not without attention. 
The images on the face of the Dharamsdla on the top of 
Dhinodhar serve as an illustration. Hanuman and Ram 
Chandra have thcir shrines at certain monasteries, such as 
that at Tilla, and both, together with aspects of Vaisnavism, 
and even Visnu himself, are assimilated to certain divisions 
of the Gorakhnathls and are constantly noted in the legends.^ 
The image of Garuda is found in the establishment at Puri. 
Hanuman is represented in certain forms of the tika. The 
rudraksa of ten faces symbolizes the ten avatdras of Visnu. 
Many of the Vaisnavite Bhaktas of Western India trace their 
doctrines through Gorakhnath. At Gorakhpur the decora- 
tions on the samddhs and shrines contain many Vaisnavite 
symbols and images. According to the ^iva Samhitd the 
chanting of the name of Visnu is necessary in Yoga practices 
when the attention is directed to the cakras.^ 

Buddhist elements and contacts are numerous. Not only 
is the Tantra-Yoga system, which the Yogis follow, a mixture 
of late Buddhism with Brahmanistic elements, but also the 
history of the Kanphatas shows many Buddhist marks. In 
Bengal, Matsye^ndranath, Gorakhnath, HSdi and others are 
claimed as Buddhist saints. According to Bengal traditions 
Gorakhnath was originally a Buddhist by the name of 


^ See chapters on ‘Sacred Places*; and also tables of the divisions 
of the Goraknathis in the appendix to chapter four, and their 
Parampards in Abbott’s books. 

* 3 . 35 . 



THE PANTHEON 


151 


Rama^iavajra belonging to the Vajrayana.^ He became a 
convert to Saivism, took the new name, and became the great 
protagonist of the latter cult. These men were related also 
to the Dharma movement. One of the Yogi castes of Bengal 
is still known as the Dharmagiri Yogi. Sakya, one of the 
godlings of the death cefemonies, mentioned on pa^ forty- 
two, points in the same direction. In Nepal, Matsyendranith 
is identified with Avalokite^vara, and his annual festival there 
swings around an ancient Buddhist image (Levi). A book in 
tenth-century character Bengali is attributed to him. It is 
not a Buddhist work. Furthermore, the struggle between 
movements, indicated at the beginning of Chapter Four may 
point to this period. Sankara was a great protagonist of 
Saivism in the east. The struggle which he inaugurated was 
continued for centuries before Buddhism was overcome, yet 
elements of it persist and continue in modern forms of 
Tantric Hinduism. Ramifications of the sect of the Kin- 
phatas in the north-west and beyond the borders of India, 
point to Buddhist influences. 

Jain contacts are not wanting; and the sons of Matsyendra- 
nath, Nimnath and Parasnathpuj are both Jain saints. A Jiin 
temple near Pae Dhuni in Bombay city shelters an idol of 
Ghorajinath, bedecked with gems. 

The Islamic contacts with the organization are evidenced 
in the modern possession of such shrines as that at Hifig 


^ Consult Sen, p. 28; Or., especially the Introduction; Taranith; 
The Art of the Pal Empire^ by French, which illustrates this period, 
especially Vajrayana. The stages of Buddhist development in 
Bengal from about the seventh century of our era were; Mantra- 
yana, which substituted invocations for Dharanis, in the use of 
short words and letters in invoking the spirits of the Buddha and 
the Bodhisats ; Vajrayana, in which was a mixture of mystical philo- 
sophy and sensuality with the worship of Niratma Devi, the Formless 
Void into whose embrace the devotee, bent on hodhi lept, there 
enjoying something like the pleasures of the senses, and finally 
disappearing; and Kalacakrayana, through which deli^'^erance from 
the wheel of destruction was achieved. These Buddhist elements 
were absorbed into the NathamSrga. This form of religion arose 
outside of Buddhism. Matsyendranatha was a Natha. Tradition 
shows him carrying his sectarianism into Nepal, and Gorakhnith as 
his disciple. Of the Great Nathas, Gorakhnath was the only heretic 
(from Buddhism). 



152 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Laj by Muslims and in the worship conducted at the tomb 
of the Muslim at Devi Patan. Here, at four o’clock in the 
morning, and at six in the evening, milk, rice, incense and a 
lamp are placed. There arc groups of Musalman Yogis. 
These notices are merely suggestive, not exhaustive.* 

The chief concern of the Yogis js, however, with Siva and 
the Saivite faith. In the symbols everywhere in evidence at 
tKeif sacred places, in the legends and in ceremony, iSiva and 
bis consort are ali^ays to the front. The festivals at numerous 
establishments of the Kanphafas are peculiarly Saivite. And 
at Dhinodar, to cite one example, the head of the monastery 
repeats a hymn in diva’s honor on the second of every 
month.^ Or, it might be said that his Sakti is paramount. 

In this accoilnt of Siva, attention is confined to such 
aspects of his history, character, and activities as are pertinent 
to the beliefs and practices of the Yogis. 

While the beneficent aspects of his character arc persistently 
emphasized, his name being the expression of his auspicious 
character^ ancj while he is an object of devotion by his follow- 
ers, still, Siva’s other and sinister aspects, in which he appears 
as extremely irascible in temper and as easily aroused to 
deeds of violence, are conspicuous; and his fierce, wild charac- 
ter never lost sight of. It is Siva Ijic destroyer, the terrible, 
at the same time reproducer, or recreator, who is constantly 
worshipped. These characteristics are brought to the fore 
in the great part that Bhairorii (Bhairava) plays in the worship 
df the Kanphatas and in the place that the yoni-linga and the 
adoration of Sakti occupy in their cult. Moreover, Siva is 
the ascetic par excellence ^ the chief of the Yogis, Yogesvar. 
{hdeed, it is Siva who revealed to Parvati jhe secret doctrine 
of the Yoga^ and it was because a certain Matsyendranath, 
in the form of a fish, overheard Siva as he expounded the 
inching, ‘ that the GorakhnatRis are now in possession of this 
scemt of Siva. (Parvati went to sleep while Siva was expoun- 
ding the doctrine.) And it is he who has taught by example 
that the attainment of bliss’ is by voluntary torture of the flesh, 
by the subjugation of the turbulent passions, and by undis- 
turbed meditation. In the cult both meditation and physical 

^ Bombay Gazetteer^ vol. V, p, S7. 



153 


THE PANTHEON 

discipline are emphasized, while even licence of every kind is 
made to serve in the attainment of satnddhi. Their Hafha 
Yoga includes the use of dhduti and certain secret practices 
as well as the practice of the inedkra and other vatnaedra rites, 
and of the use of drugs, all aiming at rappo/t with the mystic, 
superhuman, creative forces of the universe. Thus, both 
Siva and his consori. are inseparably involved in the cult and 
its traditions, 

Si\^, Mahadeva, as the great ascetic, appears quite naked, 
with one face,, with matted hair, ash'besmcared, sitting in 
profound meditation under a banyan tree, or under a canopy 
formed of hooded serpents, or in a remote mountain retreat, 
passionless, motionless, immovable, rooted to the spot for 
million : of ycars.^ In the Purdnas he is depicted as a 
mendicant dressed in a tiger’s skin, with matted locks and 
with snakes serving as ribbons and apron strings. He 
carries a trident. His half-shut eyes are watery, and his 
garb and demeanour suggest a person under the influence of 
wine and narcotics.^ Daksa’s description of Siva is as 
follows.^ He roams about in dreadful cemeteries, attended by 
hosts of goblins and spirits, like a mad man, naked, with 
dishevelled hair, laughing, weeping, bathed in the ashes of 
funeral piles, wearing a garland of skulls and ornaments of 
human bones, insane, beloved of the insane, the lord of 
beings whose nature is essentially darkness. In another pass- 
age he is described as bearing the lihga desired by devotees, 
ashes, a staff, a tuft of hair, an antelope’s skin and a digit of 
the moon, his body shining like evening cloud. He has 
great powers of concentration, and once, when disturbed, by 
the fire of his third eye he burned Kama to ashes.'* He is 
called Bolanath, Lord of Forgetfulness, and as such wanders 
about in* abstraction, drowsy with drugs, or sinks in medita- 
tion.’ ‘Bom, Bom,’ is a cry meaning ‘forgetfulness.’^ 


^ See Brahmanism and Hinduism^ chap. four. 

BCHS, p. 367. ' 

^ Quoted from the AI ahdbharota by Atkinson in The Himalayan 
Districts, vol. II, p. 722. 

* Here belongs the whole History of the site, Kamrup, and the 
goddess Kamakya. See below, pp. 166 ff. 

* Bengali Religions Lyrics, 16,42. 



154 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

In like character he appears in the Great Epic?- There we 
have the typical Yogi, intent on the attainment of ecstatic 
and magical powers through self-torture and self-induced 
vacuity, apathy and trance, accompanied by intervals of 
morbid nervous and cerebral exaltation.* Another description 
of Siva will intensify the picture. * He wears an ornament 
of serpents made of leather; has a third eye painted with 
soap-stone on his forehead; holds a trident in his fist; 
carries a cunningly designed lute; has a mass of braids piled 
like a diadem on his head; puts on a black cloth like an 
elephant’s skin; daubs his body with ashes; and has a 
garland of skulls hanging about his neck.^ With this descrip- 
tion are associated awful rites of black magic. Barth says: 
‘From the outset, and more than any other Hindu religion, 
Saivism has pandered to ascetic fanaticism. No other has 
exhibited so many horrible and revolting observances, or has 
worn with so much ostentation the badge, often singular 
enough, of devotion.’^ These descriptions lend signifi- 
cance to the study of the Saivite cults that preceded that 
of the Kanphatas and of which these later Yogis are the 
descendents. 

In besmearing his body with ashes, Siva relates himself to 
goblins and all the horrors of the cemetery. And in this 
practice the later ghastly and ghoulish aspects of asceticism 
come into view. Such sects as the Kapakika® wdiich were the 
precursors of the Gorakhnathis, and the Aghoris made much 
use of some of these elements. 

With Siva is associated the bull, and the phallic element in 
his worship is always present. The samadhs of the Yogis are 
surmounted by the yoni-lihga; these emblems are symbolized 
in the sihgnad and the pavitri of their sacred thread; the 
brand mark which Yogis receive at Kote^var is a representa- 
tion of these same hgures; and, of course, every temple of 
their sect contains these symbols. The worship of the lihga 

^ E.g., 12, 328; 8,23. 

* Compare Go\x%h, Philosophy of the Upanishads, pp. 18, 19. 

® Hemavijaya’s Kathdratndkdra, Story 133, rendered by Bloom- 
field, JfAOS, vol. XLIV, p. 209. 

* Religions of India^ p. 214. 

^ See chap. ten. 



THE PANTHEON 


155 


is very old in India and it is probable that it owes its origin 
to aboriginal sources. It is possible that this worship, like 
that of Siva himself, in some of his aspects, found its way into 
Brahmanic culture slowly at first. At any rate, early references 
to phallic worship are few. There are two in the Rig Veda 
(7, 21, 5 ; 10, 99, 3), if such be the meaning of Hina, The term 
is one of reproach and descriptive of non- Aryans. In later 
times, Sayana remarked that those who sported with the Hina 
were unchaste. The Rdmdyana does not know^ the lihga* 
but in the Didactic Epic it, like Siva himself, is fairly well- 
known.^ 

‘Siva’ is not the name of a god either in the Rig^ or in the 
Atharva-Veday but the word, which means ‘auspicious,’* is 
used to describe Rudra. As a god, Siva does not appear 
before 200 b.c. 

Rudra, of the Vedic pantlieon, is quite un-Aryan in his 
character, but he exhibits some characteristics which are of 
interest in this study, both from the point of view^ of the 
physician, of one manipulating the storms, and of his horrible 
and terrible acts. Tn the Rig Veda^ he is intelligent; bountiful; 
a healer of cattle, kine, men and children; a dispenser of heal- 
ing remedies ; a granter of prosperity. He is ruddy in colour. 
Withal, he is strong, impetuous and crooked, and he injures 
vengefully ; he is described as having braided hair and as the 
unshorn ascetic; he is fierce, purifying, rain-dispensing;® he 
is the father of the storm gods (Maruts),^ the wielder of the 
thunderbolt, the bow and arrow; he is renowmed as youthful, 
mounted on his chariot, and like a wild beast, destructive, 
fierce, a terrible and manslaying god ; he is the roaring god of 


^ Iconography y Indiany vol. II, pt. 1, p. 55 ; Muir, Sanskrit TextSy 
vol. IV, p. 345. The earliest known representations of the lihga are of 
the first century; (1) from Bhit§, now in the Lucknow museum; (2) 
at Gudimailam in North Arcot. See EREy vol. XI, p. 92. See also 
Marshally vol. I, pp. 58 ff. There seems to have been a counterpart 
of Siva in the ancient Indus civilization. 

» ORLIy p. 48. 

» E,g.y 8, 33 : 45; 7, 200-1, 93-96, 202, 203; 13, 14: 233 flf. 

* Rig Veday 1, 64: 8. 

® 1, 143: 1-11. Compare 1, 114. 

« 1, 64: 2. 

’ 1, 85 : 1, etc. 



156 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

the mons<x)n, of the lightning in its aesinctive tunction.^ In 
the Saiartidriya^ Xht god’s one hundred aspects are set forth. 
The older characteristics, already enumerated, are repeated 
and his terrible, cruel, fierce nature is emphasized. He is 
blue-necked. A sinister phase of his character is brought 
out in th?it he is a patron of robbers, rogues, pilferers arid 
murderers, and the- guardian of roads. Withal he is auspicious 
(Hva).^ . If in the Rig Veda he is malevolent, in the later 
Vedas he is more fierce and terrible.^ It is in the Yajur Veda 
that Rudra is first called Isvara and Mahiideva, and that he 
begins to appear as Sankara and Siva as ’well. In the Atharva 
Veda and in the Brdhamanas Rudra is called the Lord of 
Animals, Pasupati/’* In the Atharva Veda his wide-mouthed, 
howling dogs, who sw’allow their prey unchewed, are 
mentioned.® He gives consumption and poison and is the 
destructive lightning.’ In the Upanisads he takes on the 
characters of.creator and sage and is described pantheistically.® 
In the Atharva Stras Rudra is set forth in similar fashion; 
is identified with Gauri, Uma, Visnu, Brahma, and Mahes'vara, 
and is spoken of as immortal, imperishable, the creator, 
sustainer and destroyer. 

His epithet, Pasupati, brings to view his character as sparing cattle, 
as significant of his bencticent aspects.'^ As the Lord of the open 
hclds, he is Lord of the cattle which foam in them. Also he was the 
gdh that hejd sway over regions away from home, over fields, 
wildernesses, cemeteries, mountains, old trees and rivers. Whenever a 
man came to anything which inspired awe and terror, Kucha was the 
god thought of and prayed to to protect. ... In Rudra-.Saivism the 
sentiment of fear is at the bottom, however concealed it may have 
become in certain developments of it, and this sentiment it is that 


* The references are (besides those quoted): 1, 122: 1; 2, 33: 1-15; 
3, 2: 5; 4, 3: 1; 5, 41: 2; 5, 42: 11 ; 5, 59: 8; 5, 60: 5; 5, 28: 7; 6, 
66: 3; 6, 74: 1 if; 7, 10: 4; 7, 35: 6; 7, 40: 5; 7, 46: 1, 2; 7, 56: 1; 
7,58: 5; 8, 13: 20; 8,20: 17; 8,29: 5; 8,61: 3; 10, 64: 3; 10, 66: 3: 
10,92: 5; 10,93:7; 10, 125; 6; 10, 126: 5; 10, 126: 1; 10,169: 1. 

® Vdjasaneyi sariihiUiy 16, 1-66. 

* E.g,y verses 2, 3, 41. 

* See references in MacdoneU’s Vedic Mythology. 

® A roo't $aivite sect of the Yogis are the Pasupatas. 

« 11, 2. 11, 2: 26. ' » Avet. Up., 3,1 ff. 

^ Vai^navism, Sdivism, etc., p. 102. 



THE PANTHEON 157 

has worked itself out in the formation of the various Rudra-Saiva 
systems of later times. ^ 

In the Rdmdyana, Rudra is called IVJahadeva and Siva, as 
in the Didactic Epic. He curses ICama;^ receives Uma from 
Himavat f his cunnubial life with her is described and he 
catches Gahga as she falls from heaven.® 

With the Didactic Epic Rudra has become Mahadeva, or 
Siva; and Siva meets with growing recognition as the equal 
of Brahma and Visnu, is worshipped by Krisna® and even 
transcends the gods.’ One of his female devotees thus 
describes him (Mahadeva, Siva;^) 

He assumes many forms of gods (as Brahma, Vi§riu, Indra, Rudra) 
and of men, of goblins, demons, barbarians, tame and w'ild beasts, 
birds, reptiles, fishes, with many varieties of human disguises etc. 
He is the soul of all the worlds, all-pervading, residing in the heart 
of all creamres, knowing all desires. He carries a discus, a trident, 
a club, a sword, and an axe. He has a girdle of serpents, ear-rings of 
serpents, a sacrificial cord of serpents, an outer garment of serpents* 
skins. He laughs, sings, dances charmingly, and plays various musical 
instruments. He leaps, gapes, weeps, makes others weep; speaks like 
a mad man era drunkard, as well as in sweet tones. He laughs terri- 
fically. He is both visible and invisible, on the altar, on the sacrificial 
post, in the fire, a boy, an old man, a youth. He dallies with the 
daughters and the wives of the Ri§is, with erect hair, obscene 
appearance,® naked, with excited look. He is one-faced, two-faced, 
three -f^.ced, many-faced. . 

All through the Anuidsanaparva^ Mahadeva is exalted and 
his old character as the terrible is emphasized. Even the 
gods, at the sound of the twang of his bow, are afraid. 

Again Rudra (Siva) burns up the three cities (Tripura) of 
the Asuras,^® in the heaven of gold, in the atmosphere of- silver 
on the earth of black iron. These he destroyed with a single 
.arrow with one half of the strength of the gods.^^ He eats 

^ Vaipiavism, ^aivisniy etc., p. 106. 

M, 36:20. M, 37:5ff. M. 43: 48. 

® 1, 513-1,656; £)ro«<2/>nr^’n, 2,838 ff; 2,862 ff. 

" Anusdsanaparvay 588 ff ; 839 ff. 

® Anusdsanaparvay verses 731 ff., 742 f., 745, 746, 748, 749, 751, 742. 
Quoted from Muir, Sanskrit Texts y\o\. IV, p. 160. 

® Jfigcnti membro virili proeditus. 

Karnaparvay 1,402 ff. Compare the story of Dharamnath and 
the destruction of cities in Kacch. 

Karnaparvcy 1,433 ff. 



158 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

flesh, blood, marrow, and is fiery and fierce. He frequents 
cemeteries, performs awful rites there, and is very terrible. 
Kings offer human sacrifice to him^ and make such offerings 
as are now made in his temples. He is the chief of Bhutas 
(Demons) and he is served by Bhutas, and Pisacas, and is 
called Bhairava. 

Siva is, then, the terrible Rudra, whose qualities are thus 
preserved. 

Still, there is evidence that Siva had not fully attained to 
equality with the other gods when the Epics were being 
rewritten.^ He evidently gained his position of equality partly 
by bullying the gods. One of the most famous stories about 
him is concerned with the sacrifice of Daksa.® To this 
sacrifice Siva was the only one of the gods not invited. In 
the same epic he is represented as having a contest with 
Kfisna^ after which no difference is discernible between 
Visnu and him.® Kfisna acknowledges his greatness and 
receives eight boons from both® Mahadeva and Uma. 

In the Linga Pur ana is found the description of the famous 
appearance of the linga whose extremities neither Visnu nor 
Brahma was able to reach. 

Siva evidently owes his origin, in part at least, to the north, 
to the mountains.’ 

One or two other acts attributed to Siva need to be re- 
corded. His third eye is of great significance. The story of 
the burning of Kama has been mentioned. When Uma put 
her hand over his eyes, the whole world became dark and 
lifeless. Suddenly the gloom is dispelled by a great flame 
which burst from Mahadeva’s forehead, in which a third eye, 
luminous as the sun, was formed. By the fire of this eye the 
mountain was scorched and everything upon it consumed. 
But, when Uma stood in a submissive attitude before him he 
restored the Himalaya to its former condition.® 


^ Sahhdparvay 626. See Sabhdparva^ 653, 861 ff. 

* Rdmdyana^ V, 89 : 6 ff. 

® &dntiparva, 13,265, 10,226-58, 10,275 ff.; Rdmdyana^ I, 66, 7, ff. 

* Harivamiay 10,648. ^ Harivarhsay 10,660 ff. 

® Anuidsanaparvay 1 ,023 ff . 

’ See Gough, Philosophy of the Upamshadsy p. 18. 

® Anusdsana^rvay 6,355 ff. 



159 


THE PANTHEON 

The Epics show Siva also as the sage, the philosopher. 

Siva is often depicted wearing the ear-rings of the Kan- 
phafas^. 

Thus the descriptions of Siva (and Rudra) exhibit, both 
as to form and practice, certain beliefs of the Yogis. 

Siva now dwells on Kailasa,^ beyond the Himalayas. 
There he has in his company Parvati and a considerable 
following, including the Ganas,the Nathas and the Siddhas. 
This is his abode. 

References in other chapters show that Siva is variously 
worshipped under such names as Pasupati and Sambhunath, 
whose votaries in Nepal offer sacrifices of blood. Yogis in 
their worship give special attention however, to Bhairava, or 
Bhairoih, and to Sakti, and this worship is often both 
intemperate and licentious. It is to Bhairava, as the embodi- 
ment, in human form, of the most terrible aspect of Siva,* 
that the Kanphatas, as did the sects that preceded them, give 
special reverence. Bhairoiii is worshipped both by Yogis and 
by Saktas.^ He has from eight to twelve forms, but he is best 
known as Kal Bhairoih.^ Particularly, in North India he is 
represented with a dog; in middle India as a snake-girdled 
drummer or by a red stone. He is often pictured with eight 
arms, with a garland of skulls, with ear-rings and armlets of 

^ See €,g,y the carved lihga at the temple of Parasuramesvara in 
North Arcot. See chap, eleven. See also Wi, p. 212, note 1, 
where it is stated that images depict Siva with the great rings. 

* See Vanaparva, 15,801. 

* In his terrible form he is said to have frightened even Akbar, as 
he appeared before that great Moghul. 

* A group ox ascetics allied to the Jogis, who are special devotees 
of Bhairorh, besmear themselves with vermilion and oil, go about 
the bazaars begging and singing his praises, striking themselves with 
whips. Crooke, Popular Religion and Folklore y p. 97. 

^ The Census Report of the North-Western Provinces & Oudhy 1891, 
p. 207, gives the following names: Kal Bhairon, Bhut Bhairon, Nand 
Bhdiron (Nand — happiness), Suth Bhairon, Batuk BhSiron. (Tradi- 
tion says that Batukanaih, a Kapalika, was a follower of Sauikara). 
Dawson, Classical Dictionary of Hindu Mythology y etc., p. 45, gives 
the eight names as follows : Asitahga (black-limbed), Sanhara 
(destruction), Ruru (a dog), Kala (black), Krodha (anger), Tamra 
cuda (red-crested), Candra cuda (moon-crested), Maha (great). He is 
also known as Kapald, Rudra, Bhishapa. Un-matta, Kupati, Bal 
Bhairon (Bal == child) and Lath Bhairon (Lath = club). 



160 GORAKHNATH and tub KAKfrHATA YOGIS 

snakes, with a serpent coiled around his heaa, in his hands 
a sword snd a .bowl of blood. As worshipped by Kunbi 
cultivators of the Deccan, he is represent^ as a man stand- 
ing, in one hand strident, in the other a drum shaped like 
an hour-g)ass, while he is encircled by a serpent. He lives 
in an unhewn stone smeared wdth oil and vermilion.^ 
His name, Bhut Bhairom, * Lord-of-Malignant Ghosts, 
intensifies his aspect of terror. He is identified with 
Kapalin, who creates and destroys. His sign of authority is 
the trident. Again, Bhairom carries a club and a black 
bottle and is accompanied by a black dog, or rides on a dog. 
When he uses a dog as a vehicle he is called Sva^va (‘ He 
whom the dog serves as a horse’)- He plays a considerable 
part in legend as a great eater. Siva is approached through 
him, and he commands the demon hosts as the lieutenant of 
Siva. He is the guardian, or door-keeper, of Siva’s lemple, 
particularly as Kal (black) Bhairorii. In Benares he is the 
guardian of all the temples of Siva, and is known as the Kotwal 
(police officer) of that city. In the hills of Kumaun-- and 
Garhwal the popular worship of Bhairom is in the hands of 
the Yogis? and the principal place of worship is at Kedar*® 
In Gorakhpur his station is marked by massed tri^ules about 
a red masonry mound in front of the veranda and to the left 
of the main door of the shrine of Gorakhnath. In the 
monastery at Puri, Bhairom is represented with three heads 
and one leg and his image is protected by a roof of straw. 
Images of Bhairorh are to be found at the establishments at 
the Taksila Gate, Lahore, and at Amritsar. In Trimbak he 
is represented by huge stones painted red and having eyes of 
silver. Ip many places trisuks of bamboo or of iron, large 
and painted red, mark his station and huge pictures of 
irisules, painted red are often in evidence. 

In the Panjab he is identified (but this has been questioned) 
with the godling of the .homestead. He receives otferings of 
grain, and animals are sacrificed to him. Liquor is poured 
out to him. He wards off disease and death and protects both 

^ Crooke, in ERE, vol. V, p. 10. See p. 121, above. 

* Atkinsofi, The Himalayan Districts, vcl. II, p. 808. 

® Atkinson, The Himalayan Districts^ vol. II, p. 770. This ir the 
famous Kedar in Garhwal. 



THE PANTHEON 


161 


men and cattle. Some worship him for the gift of children.^ 
Since it is believed that .Mother Earth is his consort, he 
symbolizes fertility. Young girls of the Dhimar, or water- 
carrier caste, used to be married to him at Basdada in Rewari. 
They always died soon afterwards, so the practice was 
discontinued. The Mallah boatmen of Agra used to niarry 
their daughters to him. I’his was because the god once saved 
a sinking boat. Afterwards the family used to marry one of 
their girls to him and leave her at his shrine where she 
survived less than a year; so no\\^ a doll made of dough is 
formally wedded to him.“ 

In the Panjab every important town has a shrine of 
Bhairom. He is worshipped on Sundays and Tuesdays w ith 
olferings of urd cakes, flesh, milk, spirits, flowers and sweet- 
meats (laddu) and the olferings are consumed by the 
W'orshippers.^ At Devi Patan the noonfiay offering is a saucer 
heaped with cooked rice, which is placed before Bhairoin’s 
platform, after water has been poured all around it. The 
rice is then thrown to dogs. In Benares images of dogs, made 
of sugar candy, are oflered to him. Those wlio die at his chief 
temple at Benares believe tiiat they undergo expiatory punish- 
ment known as Bhdmwi-ydtand, and then proceed immediately 
to final bliss. These persons are known as Rudrapisdea 
(Rudra’s spirits). Other men, on dying, fall into Yama’s 
hands and feive to return to the earth in successive births. 
He has many w'orshippers in Benares and in the adjoining 
districts, llopkin’s rather final statement is that his adhenatts 
are ignorant peasants and dissolute beggars.^ Sarangiiiar 
Yogis beg in the name of Bhfiirava. 

d'Jiis god seems to be td' Dravidian, or aboriginal, origin/"* 
and If. have been inherited from the Kapalikas and otlu rs tjf 
the same sectarian strain, in the famous Rrabodhacandrodayay 
a Kapabka controls Bhairava.^ 

^ Brings, The Chaniars, p. 156. 

® Pohular Religion and Folklore^ p. 246. 

" CTi \ vol. Ill, pp. 157, 158. 

^ Hopkins, in ERE, vol. 11, pp. 538, 539. 

C’rooke in ERE, vol. I, p. 10. 

“ Crooke, Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India b'd. 
1926) contains n>uch inalenal on Dhairum, which Irrely 

used. 


11 



162 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

As worshippers of the consorts of Siva, Y’ogis are Saktas. 
A study of the sacred places of the Kanphatas and of their 
traditions makes plain this aspect of their cult. 

^akti means ‘force* and, consequently, the divine power 
or mysterious force of creation is personified in the Goddess. 
This creative energy is personified also in goddesses and 
nymphs of every order and in every woman, as well as in the 
females of every beast. All females are of the same source 
and order. 

Sakta worship is always related to the adoration of the 
phallus, which is in every instance associated with the vulva 
in symbol.^ 

It is said that since children bear neither the marks of 
Brahma (the lotus) nor of Visnu (the discus) nor of Indra 
(the thunderbolt), but are marked either with the male or the 
female organs, therefore offspring is derived from Mahadeva. 
So all are marked either with the organ of Devi (Uma) or 
that of Mahadeva.^ 

Turning then to the worship of Sakti, it is to be noted 
that Devi, in her more general character, is Amba, the 
mother-goddess, the great power of nature and mother of the 
universe (Jaganmata, Jagadamba), mighty, mysterious force. 
Sakti has two functions, (1) to direct and control the working 
of the natural app'etites and passi(;ns, whether for the support 
of the body by eating or drinking, or for the propagation of 
living organisms thfough sexual cohabitation, and (2) to 
direct and control the acquisition of supernatural faculties 
{siddhi) whether for man*s own individual exaltation, or for 
the annihilation of his opponents.^ 

Back of this conception of Sakti lies the emergence of 
self-consciousness in the One Being. In this Universal 
Reality there appears a double nature as soon as sclf-cons- 
ciousness is born, a nature partly male, partly female. As the 
word (Ardhanari) indicates, the female aspect of the duality is 
the more significant. In this duality the female aspect is 


^ Set' Sir John Marshall on Saktism in the ancient Indus civiliza- 
tion. Marshally vol.^1, pp. 52 ff. See above, pp. 154, 155. 
Anuklsanaparva^ 822 ff. 

^ Brahmanism and Hinduism f pp. 185, 186. 



THE PANTHEON 


163 


looked upon as the active energy or substance through which 
creation takes place. It is in this aspect of Reality that the 
goddess becomes the object of devotion. This is very 
old. In the Rig Veda (10, 129: 4) the statement is made: 

Desire entered the One in the beginning: 

It was the earliest seed, of thought the product. 

I’he .sages searching in their hearts wath wisdom, 

Found out the bond of being in non-being. 

« « * « 

Creative force was there, and fertile power: 

Below was energ}^ above was impulse.^ 

The notion that the universe proceeds from the female 
principle brought into union with the male is devclopeld in 
the description of the partinthood of Dyaus-Pfithivi.^ The 
Rig Veda has also its female deities, such as Aditi, mother of 
gods, and Usas. Early the idea appears that the one being, 
unhappy alone, divided itself, becoming male and female, 
and that through these, human beings and other forms of life 
arose.^ The idea appears also in Manu^ and in the Purdnas,^ 
These two, male and female, are identified with the purusa 
and prdkriti of tne Samkhya system. The goddess is tniila- 
prakriti and tndydy mother of gods and men.® In mediaeval 
Indian sculpture, Siva is represented as ardhandriy a form in 
which his left side is female and his right male.’ A present- 
day representation of this view is the yoni-linga symbol. 

In the Tantras the association of male and female functions 
is carried out in great detail. The pairs as aspects of the one 
appear in less and less subtle form as the evolution of the world 
proceeds. In each level there is both their potential and 
their actual activity. And the Sakti as the formativ^ creative 
principle is the receptacle of the seed {hindu) of Siva. So 
also in all the cakras appears this duality. Through v^iva and 
Sakti a bindu (drop) is formed which develops into a female 

^ Macdonell, Hymns from the Rig Veda, p. 19. 

» Rig Vedoy 10, 110: 9; 3, 3: 11; 1, 155: 3. 

® Sat. Brh.y 14, 4, 2, 4, ctc.\ Brh. Up., 1, 4, 3, etc.; Chand. Up., 
6, 2: 3. 1, 5, etc.; 1, 32. 

® E.g.y Visiw Parana, 1, 7 : 6 fF. 

® See Prakriti Kanda of the Brahma Vdivratha Parana. 

’ See for example, the caves of Elephanta, eighth century a.d. 



m gorakhnAth and the KANPHATA yogis 

telement, Nada (sound), containing in itself the names of all 
things to be created. With Bindu and Nada are associated 
male and female elements so that a substance Kdma-Kdla is 
formed from which creation ensues. This is their manifes- 
tation. 

The Sakta system is more closely associated with Siva, in 
practice and interest, than with either Brahma or Visnu. The 
emphasis on Sakti is strongest in the Tantras^ where force is 
personified as a female deity and where the wdves of Siva 
receive undue attention to the neglect of Siva himself. Today 
Saktism is essentially a branch of Saivism.® And this form 
of Hinduism looks to the consort of Siva for its exemplifica- 
tion. Devi is often confused with his consort, and the word 
‘Devi* must be viewed both as the name of the divine 
goddess and as that of the wife (as'Uma, Parvati, etc.), of the 
dread god. 

In Sakti all of the characteristics of Siva are intensified. 
Since he has his two colours, so she has her white half and her 
black half. And each of these aspects has its personification. 
In her milder character she is known as Uma, Gauri, Parvati, 
Jaganmata, Bhavani. In her fiercer character she is Durga, 
Kali, Syama, Candi, Bhairavi, Kalika.^ Other names are 
employed, Mahabhavani is prominent in creation, Maha- 
bhairavi in destruction. 

Uma is the graciou§ consort of Siva. She is known as 
early as the Kena Upqnisad^ and the Taittiriya AranyakaJ* 
She is often known as the daughter of Daksa^ and again as the 
daughter of Himavat (the Himalayas). As the active power, or 
energy, of Siva, she assumed a body in order that she might 


^ The Tantras, which are viewed as the direct revelation of Siva 
to P^vati, are later than the better known elements of the religious 
literature of India. They deal with esoteric and erotic elements of 
Sakta worship, opening their zvay to all persons regardless of caste 
and sect. These works are concerned with Yoga and with the coiled 
or sleeping goddess (Kundalini). They are spoken of as the Fifth 
Veda. See chap, thirt* 'jn. 

“ Brahnvinism and Hinduism, p. 181. 

® Dawson, Classical Dictionary, etc., p. 87. 

♦ 3 : 12. As early as fourth century b.c. ^ 10: 1, 150. 

* E g.. Rdmdyana 1: 66, 7ff. ; Sdntiparva, 10,226-58; Bhagavata 
Pu rdnn,^: Sections 2-7. 



THE PANTHEON 165 

be united with him in due form. In the account of 
the sacrifice of Daksa it is related how Uma died of 
mortification because Siva, her consort, was not only not 
invited, but was ridiculed. As having died then, she is called 
Sati.^ She was reborn in the family ot Himavat, and is thus 
called Parvati (Daughter-of-the-Mountain).^ Siva and Parvati 
are described as living together on Kailasa, and as either 
making love to each other or as engaged in deep philosophical 
discourse. 

Parvati was of very dark complexion, and on this account 
a quarrel arose between herself and Siva. But she took to 
severe penance the result of which was that she was changed 
to a light, golden colour, whence her name Gauri (‘white').* 
The conventionalized pattern on Indian prints is of the foot 
of Gauri.^ 

She is sometimes identified with Amba. 

Turning now to the more formidable aspects of Sakti, there 
are several names to consider. 

Durga, ‘the Unapproachable,’ is Siva’s consort in the 
aspect of warrioT-, Her name is derived from that of the 
demon whom she slew. She is sometimes identified with 


' Compare tikap/irad Purdna 4: Sections 2-7. Mention has been 
made of the dismemberment of his body by Vj?nu. The little book 
Sail by D. C. !Hen tells the «ame story. 

Thus also in the Biiogaiata and Viptu Puranm. Urna is known 
to the R(lviu\arta; e.g., 1, 3t>. In the tiariramia she is one of the 
daughters of iVTc*na and the wife of the austere Mahadeva. Also in the 
Awisdsatm, 997 ff,, Uma (and in verses 837-41 Ptlrvati) is known. 
These references are to but a few; of the passages that might be cited. 

^ Mentiont d in the Atharra Siras (age of the Didactic Epic). 

* Underhill, I'lw Hindu Religious p. 51. 



Evolution of Svmbouu Kf.freshntation of 
GAuhT’s Foot-phint 



166 GORAKHNATH and THE K-ANPHATA YOGIS 

Parvati One of Durga’s chief forms is that of the four-armed 
Kali, who thirsts for blood, preferably that of human beings, 
although in these days, she has to be satisfied with that of 
animals. She is most terrible of aspect, garlanded with heads 
of demons, gorged in blood, with skulls about her blood- 
besmeared throat, having dead bodies for ear-rings, carrying 
two dead bodies in her hands, and inhabitant of burning 
grounds (for t)ie dead). Kali is the most terrible aspect of 
Durga and Sakti, excepting perhaps that of Bhairavi. In the 
Bhiimaparva she is Kapali. By the Kapalikas and the Kala- 
mukhas her fierce spirit was appeased both by animal and by 
human sacrifices. Durga represents the destructive forces of 
the world. 

There are other forms of Sakti, essentially of her darker 
aspect, to which reference has been made. Of these the first 
to be mentioned is Kamakhya, a local name for Durga, chiefly 
because her shrine in Assam seems to have been the head- 
quarters of the Tantric worship, the place of its origin and 
that from which it spread into Nepal and Tibet. ^ She is 
especially connected with the Vajrayana. It is said that the 
Assamese shrine was the headquarters of the Vaisnava sect 
of the Mahdpuru^s? 

The following account of Kamakhya and her shrine is 
essentially that given Ky Eliot, ^ but with some additional 
notes. The chief sanctuary of Saktism is at Kamakhya (or 
Kamaksa) on a hill which stands on the banks of the 
Brahmaputra, about two miles below Gauhati, in the Kamarup 
District of Assam. The place is mentioned in the Padma 
Pur dm. The Kamarupa kingdom was of some antiquity,^ 
being mentioned in the Mahdbhdrata. Copper plates of these 

^ EREt vol. II, pp. 479-501; Wi, p. 29; Gait, History of Assam^ 
p. 57. 

* Eliot, Hinduism and Brahmanism, vol. II, pp. 280, 289. See also 
Imperial Gassettei r (1886), vol. VII, p. 349, and Gait, History of Assam. 
Mahapurusias are a Vaisnavite sect of Upper Assam; disciples of 
Sankaradeva (b. 1449), not of the Caitanya, Radha-Kri§na type, but 
of that of the Bhagavad Gita. See Social History of Kamarupa by 
N. N. Vasu, vol. II, pp. 115 ff. 

® Hinduism, and Brahmanism^ vol. II, pp. 286 ff. 

* Hiuen Tsiang visited King Bhaskara Varman in the first half of 
the seventh century. See Gait, History of Assam ^ p. 30. 



THE PANTHEON 


167 


kings, dated in the ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelth centuries 
are known. I'hc hill on which the shrine stands, also known 
as Kamagiri and as Niiacal, marks the spot where the organs 
of generation of Sati fell when her bod}^ was dismembered 
by Visnu. It is, therefore, one of the famous pithas. Besides, 
this is supposed to be in the country where Kama, who had 
been reduced to ashes- by the fierce glance of Siva, recovered 
his natural form (Kamarupa)d The temples at this place have 
been rebuilt se\eral times; and, in the eighteenth century, 
were munificently endowed by an Ahom king, and placed 
under the nianagcmem of a Brahman from Nadia in Bengal, 
with reversion to his descendants who bear the title of 
Parbatiya Gosairis. Considerable estates are still assigned 
to their upkeep. Theie are ten shrines on the hill, dedicated 
to various forms of the Sakti. The situation is magnificent, 
commanding an extensive prospect f)ver the Brahmaputra 
and the plains on either bank, but none of the buildings are 
of much architectural merit. The largest and best is that 
dedicated to Kamakhja herself, the goddess of sexual desire. 
It is of the style usual in Northern India, an unlighted shrine 
surmounted by a dome, and approached by a rather ample 
vestibule, which is also imperfectly lighted. An inscription 
has been preserved recording the restoration of the temple 
about 1550, but only the present basement dates from that 
time, most of the structure being recent. Europeans may not 
enter the shrine, but an image of the goddess ‘may be seen 
from the side door. In the depths of the shrine is said to be 
a cleft in the rock, adored as the yoni of Sakti. In front of 
the temple a^e two posts to which each day at noon a goat is 
tied, and decapitated. Below the principal shrine is a temple 
of Bhairavi. The spot attracts a considerable number of 
pilgrims from Bengal, and a wealthy devotee once built a 
villa on the hill and paid visits to it for the purpose of taking 
part in the rites. The most esteemed scriptures of the sect are 
Yoni Tantra^ Mahdnirvdna Ta?itra, and the Kdlika Purd^. 
KamaOdiya is worshipped both by love and by sacrifice. The 
rites of the five M’s^ are frequently performed here. The 
horrible side of worship is attested by the fact that Aghoris 

^ Gait, History of Assam f pp. 11, 12. ® See pp. 172 ff. 



168 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

are often found in the temple. Furthermore, Kamakhya 
requires sacrifices of blood. Human sacrifices were offered 
to her down to quite recent times. In 1832 Government 
put a stop to the practice.^ It is not denied that such 
sacrifices would be offered there nc^w if the law allowed. 
She requires the sacrifice of a man without blemish.^ At the 
dedication of the temple in 1565 the heads of 140 men were 
offered to her on salvers made of copper.^ There used to be 
a class of persons called Bhogis^ who were voluntary victims 
to the goddess. From the time that they announced that the 
goddess had called them they were treated as privileged charac- 
ters and could do whatever they desired. Every woman was 
at their command. But they were put to death and offered at 
the annual festival. The Kdlika Pur dm devotes a chapter t<) 
rules covering the performance of the human sacrifice.® It 


‘ C. J. Lyall, Jr. Soc. of Arts, vol. LI, pp. 612“3L 

* Fi?/:. vo!. 11, p. 134. 

® Gan , History of Assam, second edition, p- 58. 

* Bhogis were dedicated to Ai, a goddess at Krimarupa. Gait, 
History of Assam, p. 58. Cf Ai panthi. 

® 'rhe Ibllowing account is from Asiatic Respcrraes , vol. V, pp. 371 
flf. and IS based upon the Rudhiicldhydya (‘The Sanguinary Chapter’) 
there translated. 

Siva says that the proper sacrifices include cattle, the rhinoceros, 
men, and blood drawn frorti tlic offerer’s own body. 1 he second has 
nine months value, while that oC the third satisfies the goddess for a 
thousand years. The flesh of the rhinoceros pleases her for five 
hundred years, while the sacrifice of three nun satisfies her 
10(.',CK)U years. 'Phe goddess is Kamakhya, Candeko or Bhairavi, 
The head of the human victim goes to the second. Human blood 
should be offered irr an earthen or hi a metallic \-JSsel. Females, 
except human, are not to be offered. For human sacrifice the consent 
of the prince is nece.ssary. Human heads and blood should be 
presented on the right side with eyes averted. On the day preceding 
the sacrifice, the preparations include the use of mantras, and the 
touching of the head with the sacrificial axe. In the sacrifice the head 
of the victim should fall just right —there are good and bad omens 
connected with the facial expressions and sounds which arise. 

If the face smile, the indication is prosperity and long life. If it 
speak, wliattrver it say.s will come to pass, shouUi the sound be ‘ hoont,’ • 
the prince will die. Should phlegm issue from the mouth, the 
sacrifice! will die. Should the name of a deity be uttered, the sacri- 
ficer will obtain wealth. At the time of presenting the blood, should 
the victim void fgeces or urine, or turn about, certain death aw aits the 
sacnficer. The sacrificcr must take some of the blood between his 



THE PANTHEON 


169 


states that they should not be performed by the first three 
castes, which is perhaps a way of saying that though they may 
be performed by non-Aryans under Brahmanic auspices, they 
form no part of the Aryan religion. But they are recom- 
mended to princes and ministers and should not be performed 
without the consent of princes. The ritual bears little 
resemblance to Vedic sacrifices, and the essence of the cere- 
mony is the presentation to the goddess of the victim’s severed 
head in a vessel of gold, silver, copper, brass or wood, but 
not of iron. The axe with which the decapitation is to be 
performed is solemnly consecrated to Kali and the victim is 
worshipped before immolation. The sacrificer thinks of 
Brahma and the other gods as being present in the victim’s 
body and then prays to him directly as being all the gods in 
one. ‘ When this has been done,’ says Siva, who is represented 
as himself revealing these rules, ‘the victim is even as myself.’ 
This identification of the human victim with the god has many 
analogies elsewhere, particularly amongst the Khonds. Added 
to these horrible and aborriinahle acts of the Vamacara rites 
and the bloody sacrifice is the reported practice of divination 
by the examination of a child cut out of a pregnant woman 
at full time.^ 

Other forms of the Sakti need le.ss description here. The 
temple and the worship of Hihg Laj Devd has been referred 
to already. 

Asapura Devi, or Matii, has been me ntioned in connection 
with the white beads which pilgrims visiting Hihg Laj wear. 
She is the fulfiller of desire and is widely known. Images of 
her are found in tlie temple at Hihg Laj, at Chaul, in the 
Kolaba District of Bombay, and at Madh, about fifty miles 
north-vvest of Bhuj, and she has a temple at Kotesvar. She 
is the household goddess of the Rao of Kacch, and the image 
in th(?. temple there is a rock, about six feet high and six feet 
broad at the base, painted red. She grants children. 

thumb and third finger and discharj^c it towards the south-west, on 
the ground. The human victim must be twenty-five years old. In 
some cases an image may be substituted. And there may be magic 
substitution df a human enemy. The sacrificer s o^vn blood must be 
drawn above the navel. A burning wick on tht fiesli may be used as 
sacrifice ^ Hi^tvry of 



170 CxORAKHNATH and the KANPHATA yogis 

There was a sect knowrn as Asapuris, the sect of 
Mekhapanthis. 

The worship of a young girl is exemplified in Balasundari, 
Tipurasundarl , Tipurakumari. She is one of the Mahavidyas.^ 
llie worship of a girl of sixteen is common in Malabaf . In 
the Himalayas she is worshipped for the protection of 
children as well as to obtain them. In Almora a Yogi took 
tite author to see the temple of this goddess. Tipura Devi 
has a slirine on the top of Dunagiri, near Dw arahat, which is 
under the care of Giri Jogis, as is the temple of Kedar (in 
Pw^arahat). An old W'Oman of the Giri Jogis resided (1924) 
at the latter place, and the shrine at the top of the hill is in 
charge of a member of the same family. No flesh is offered 
there. As is sometimes done in prayer before the gods in 
India, barren women stand the whole night before Tipura, 
holding the right hand clasped over the left and a one-wncked 
lamp in the right hand. The lamp is kept burning all through 
the night. The goddess will remove their reproach. 

After a bath in the morning, persons in Almora offer 
flowers before the goddess as a protection against false 
accusation. The Yogi attempts to identify the self with 
Tipurasundari by thinking of himself as a woman. ^ Tipura- 
.sundari is the goddess in view' in the sensual worship of 
Sakti. 

Bhairavds and Nayakas are represented in Vamacto rites, 
w^here the men impersonate Bhairava. The Nayakas, eight in 
number, are mistresses, not necessarily mothers. With them is 
connected no other idea than that of illegitimate sexual love.® 
In the CJtandrodaya^ Mata Bhairavi is described as follows: 

Her aspect is horrible, her ear-rings are human skulls; thunder- 
bolts are shot ^rom her eyes; her fingers are deformed by hair which 
is the colour of pale yellow flame; and she rolls her tongue between 
her tus'ks, being lii<.e the moon in her phases. 


^ These are ten in number and are the sources of the goddess’s 
highest knowledge, i.e., knowledge which confers preternatural 
powers 

* See Vaisnavisniy Saix ism, etc., p. 146. 

® They are Balm:, Kamesvari, Vimala, Aruna, Medini, Jayini, 
Sarvesvari, Kauk si. Sec IMonier-Williams, Brahmanism and Hinduism, 
p. 188. To thii list should he added Lalatl. 

* Taylor’s translation, p. 47. 



THE PANTHEON 


171 


The Matris are also recognized. At Dhinodhar, Mata 
(Amba) has her son^ of praise {stoira) sung on the seventh of 
each month.^ Khakhar reported iliat ‘ they (i.e., at Dhinodhar) 
worship Siva, folkn^ ing the ritual of Mala.’- 

Yoginis, sometimes eight iii number, are fairies or sorcer- 
esses created by and attending on Durga. At other times 
they are looked upon as mere forms of Durga, sixty to eighty- 
five in number, and capable of increase to the number of 
10,000,000. I'hey are terrific in form, malignant in 
disposition, possessing magical powers. Like the Dakinis, 
who are fiends of most repulsive habits, and who are impish 
servants of Kal>, the Yoginis are perpetrators of all mischief. 
Botli the Sakinis and Dakinis play a considerable part in the 
symbolic repres nations of the cakras of the Hatha Yoga. 

Descriptions ot Kundalini will be found in the chapters 
expounding the Goraksasataka. She is the coiled, or sleeping, 
goddess whose awakening is the object of the Hatha Yoga 
as practised by the Kanphatas. 

Of the remaining goddesses, Bimba or Mumba, specially 
worshipped in Bombay and in the vicinity of that city, should 
be mentioned. She may be Vimala of the Nayakas (?) 

The worship of the Yogis includes both aspects of Sakti 
ritual, that of the right-hand path which follows the Piirdnas 
and does not display undue preference for the erotic ele- 
ments,^ and that of the left-hand path (Vamacara), which 
follows the Taiitras, The right-hand worship does not 
contemplate impure practice, although bloody sacrifices and 
the cruel beating of animals to death with the fists is not con- 
sidered ^impure.' Many rites connected with the Durgapilja 
border on Vamacara. Left-hand w orship is not in good repute 
and is not readily acknowledged by wT)rshipper3. All iorms 
of the Vamacara (left-hand practice) require the use of all 
or some of the five makaras. The predecessors of the Yogis, 
the Pasupatas, the Kalamukhas and the Kapalikas were 
Varnacaras.* The Durgapuja and the Cakrapiija are among 
the chief elements of the worship. Bloodv, horrible and 
erotic elements are to the front. 


* Bombay Gazetteer^ vol. VII, p. 51. p. 10, 

^ See BHCS, pp. *10011. * Sakii and Sdkta, p. 89. 



172 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Kanphajas, who worship both the lihga and the yoni, hold 
that restraint of the passions is unnecessary for the attainment 
of samadhi. They worship the female herself as the entire 
manifestation of the male.^ Consequently much attention 
is given to Vamacara rites, rituals of the left side, or female 
side, of the undivided Supreme. These rites centre around 
the cakra and are the cakrapuja, the worship of the holy 
circle. Mystic ends are sought through concentration of the 
mind on Devi as sitting in the lap of Siva in the Lotus 
Garden; by the worship of a picture of the female organ 
drawn in the centre of a figure representing nine such, the 
Sricakra of ten; or by the wwship of a living, beautiful 
woman; or in secret forms of intercourse where there are no 
distinctions of caste, in the Bhdiravicakra.^ 

This worship is much more widespread than might be 
inferred from the practice of the Yogis. While left-hand 
rites are carried out in secret, Bengal and the Himalayan 
region are greatly affected by them and their influence is felt 
much farther afield. From at least the third or fourth (‘cntury 
A.D., these horrible and obscene rites have been practised. 
In the hills the Yogis follow the 'Fantrika ritual wldcb is 
distinguished for its licentiousness, d'hey eat llesli, drink 
wine and indulge in the orgies of the left-hand sect, line 
practices are more widespread in Oarhwai thni\ in Kiunauue* 
Knowledge of the practice is admitted by Yogis, in the plains 
as well as in the mountains. In this form of Hnuhiism is 
offeretl to women the so-called homage of sexual Ifc.e and 
carnal passion and by yielding free course to all the gr^isser 
appetities, wholly regardless ot social rules arui rr'stricTions, 
the \voi*hi}>pers of the female form (Sakti) in aatnrv s.\'k to 
gratify the goddess representing tirat power, aiui ihroui !) her 
aid to acquire supernatural faculties and luitnriately 

union with the Supreme Being.^ For the initiate the union 
of male and female in worship is that of the l»i-se\uc.] form 

^ ('T(\vo\. II I. p. 159. ^ Compare the posture of V<//>- i7;/7e I >(. low. 

^ See Vaisnm i.sm, Saivism, etc., p. 1*16 f, wliere the . t is more 
fully stated. The Z^Z/dz/r/rv-and the Tattva-cukra:^ aie desn ihrd in 
Thv S^rpi ut Vo7'jn , pp. 175 if., 181 if. 

® Altkinson, The Hirnaiayaii Districts II, p. Nf.5. 

* Brahmanisiu and Hinduism^ p. 190. 



THE PANTHEON 173 

of I^vara. ‘In that aspect Siva and Sakti unite and, as 
ardhanarisvara live in the enjoyment of perfect joy in the 
body of the kulasadhaka.’ ^ 

Of this worship the cakrapuja is an essential element, and 
its description is necessary. At tlivir chief ceremony a circle 
is formed, composed of men and women, witliout respect of 
caste or relationship. Five M’s (makaras) are required — wine 
(madyd)^ flesh (indmsd)^ fish {maisyii), parched or fried grain 
^mudrd) and sexual union {mdithitna)^ The object of the 
worshippers is not merely to break tlirough the restraints of 
caste and to give themselves up to licentious practices, but, as 
just stated, to acquire magical and mystical powers and the 
sense of unison with the Supreme through the thrill sup- 
{X)sed to accrue from this sort of utter abandonment of self. 

Ward’s account of this ceremony is as follows.^ 

The person who wishes to perform this ceremony must first, in 
the night, choose a woman as the object of worship. If the person 
be a Daksinacdrl (right-hand practice), be must take his own wife; 
and if a Vdrnauln, the tlaughter of a dancer, a kupalvc^ a washerman, 
a barber, a chudalu or of a Miisulman or a prostitute; and place her 
on a seat or mat; and then bring boiled fish, fried peas, rice, 
-spirituous liqu irs, sweetmeats, flowers and other ofTerings; which, as 
well as the female, must be purified by the repeating of incantations. 
To this succeeds the worship of the guardian deity; and, after this, 
that of the female, w ho sits naked. . . . As the object of the worship 
is a living person, she partakes of the offerings, even of the spirituous 
liquors ; and of the flesh, though it be that of the cow. The refuse 
is eaten by the persons present, however different their castes; nor 
must anyone refuse to partake of the offerings. The spirituous 
liquors must be drunk by measure; and the company while eating 
must put food into each others mouths, d’he priest then -in the 
presence of all behaves toward the female in a manner which 
decency forbids to be mentioned; after which the persons present 
repeat many times the name of some god, perlonning actions utterly 
abominable; and here this most diabolical business closes. 

Wilson gives in a footnote on pages 25 S and 259 of his Reli- 
gious Sects of the Hindus^ a translation from a section ot the 

' Principles of Tantra, vol, I, pp. 51-52 

^ ‘Wine, flesh, fish, jnudrC and mdithuna, are the five-fold 
Makdra^ which takes away all sin.* MadynjH mdmsonca mntsyaiica 
mudni mdithunami^aca makdrapancakanediva nudidpdtakandsanam. 
(Quoted and translated, Wi., p. 256, n. 1.) 

^ Vierv of the History y LiU rature and Relii^ion of the Hindus, vol. I, 
pp. 247, 248. 



174 GORAKHNATH and 1 HE KANPHATA YOGIs 

Rudra Yaniala^ which corresponds to Ward's description. And 
Aitkinson^ remarks that the descriptions ^iven by Ward and 
Wilson [airly represent tlie practices in the mountains. And 
he adds that each step in the service is accompanied by its 
appropriate mantra in imitation of those used in the five-fold 
offerings of the regular sacrifice. In the great service of the 
Sricakra the worshippers, male and female, are placed in a 
circle around the officiating priest as representatives of the 
Bhairavas and Bhairavis. 'Fhe priest then brings in the 
naked woman to whom offerings are made as the living 
rej^resentative of Sakti, and the ceremony ends in orgies 
which may be better imagined than described. It is not 
therefore astonishmg that temple priests are, as a rule, a 
degraded, impure class, cloaking debauchery and the indul- 
gence in wine, women and flesh under the name of religion. 
In some instances the breast-cIotJies of the women are 
drawn as lots to determine liow the participants shall 
pair. This is known as coU-mdrif {coli - breast cloth). To 
these practices all classes are admitted and tlicy are practised 
mostly in a mixed society, (jarlmal is more frequented by 
pilgrims and wandering religious mendicants, and this is 
given as a reason for the more frequent public exhibition of 
their ceremonies there. In Kiimaun the custom exists, but 
it is generally observed in secret, and none but the initiated 
are admitted even to the public ceremonies. For the private 
ceremony the worshipper may take a dancing girl, a prostitute, 
a female devotee, a washerwoman or a barbe r wife, and 
seating her before him, go tlirough the various rites and 
partake with her of the iive-fold makara.- 

Ward stated that the practices of the i eft-hand were then 
on the increase.^ The practices arc clearly in vogue still, a? 
reported above from the author’s more recent inquiries. 

The system of the Saktas inculcates an exclusive adoration 
of Siva’s wife as the source of every kind of supernatural 
faculty and mystic craft. When the object of the ceremony 

^ The Himalayan Districts, etc., vol. II, p. 866. 

- Sovereign mistress of Kula, he* who knows Kula, the five Kula- 
tatha^ and Kula worship is liberated while yet living. (Tantra of 
the Great Liberation, VII, ill.) 

3 Vkiv of History, etc., (1817) vol. I, p. 248., 



THE PANTHEON 


175 


is to get control of impure spirits, a dead body is necessary. 
The adept who, alone, at midnight, in a cemetery , or a place 
where bodies are burnt or buried, seats himself upon a corpse, 
makes the usual offerings, without fear/ makes the Bliutas, 
the Yoginis and othex“ male and female goblins his slaves.- 
This is the Sava Sadhan. 

The relation of the Sakti worship to the Hatha Yo^a is 
very intimate. Magical powers may be acquired iluough 
discipline of Yoga or by the wwship of Sakti, or by tiu* use 
of Yoga to control Sakti. 

But there are means besides those already described by 
which the goddess may be propitiated, and which form part 
of the cult of the Yogis. These are the use of mafitnis, bijas, 
yantrasy kavachaSy nydsas and mudrds. 

Mantras, although they be texts taken from the Rig-, Yajur- 
or Atharva- Vedas y are really spells or charms which, if pi'o- 
perly uttered and repeated, possess in themselves mystical 
powers for good or ill. The gdyatrly as well as its metre, is 
employed by Yogis. They also m?ke use of syllabies and 
single sounds. Mantras find their place in initiation cere- 
monies, and in the practice of Yoga. 

Bijas are letters^ or syllables invented to denote the root 
{tnula) or essential part of mantras, or the name of some 
deity to whom they may be addressed, or some part of the 
body over w^hich the deity presides. Bijas are essentially 
mantras. Thus, the fifty letters of the alphabet are distributed 
over the petals of the lotuses or cakras of the body. The fifty 
letters are thought of as young maidens.^ The syllable 
AUjYly {pranavay omkdra) may serve to illustrate the use of 
bija (and mantra) by Yogis. 

The origin of the syllable is unknown, but it is probablv m 
some way connected with the intonation of the sacriticiu* 

^ The belief is that those who undertake but fail to cf; throu^j 
the performance to the end become insane from that monunt Con 
sequently, from this fear as well as from that aiising for the demoF* 
haunted cemetery, the ceremonv is most dreadful. See BilCS 
p. 412. 

» WLy p. 257. 

* Letters possess supernatural qualities and attributes as r^fnv- 
senting eternal sound. 

« Macdonald, CRy vol. CXV, p. 58. 



176 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

mantras.^ It is alluded to as early as the Taittiriya Samhitd. 
Its asserv.ntive use appears in the Brdkmanas; it is also connect- 
ed with the sacrifice. Its use as a mystical symbol embodying 
the essence of the Vedas and of the Universe is known as 
early as the Brdhmanas, where it is assimilated to the three 
Vedas y to tlu words Bhiih, Bhuvah and Szvar^ to Agniy Vdyti 
and Adityay and to earth, atmosphere and air. The use of the 
syllabic develops steadily. In the UpanisadSy meditation upon 
it takes ihe place of the study of the Vedas y and it becomes a 
symb(d »)f the Brahma. In later Brdhmaruis its use is 
devclo]X'd and its magical values stressed. It becomes the 
means iiy which the seeker for Brahma can attain union with 
the Bral.ma; consequently for this purpose, little value is set 
upon kn ’^\ iv dge of the scriptures, but the study of the 
syllabic takes the place of study of the Vedas. In ritual use 
it staruis 1 rtween human and divine utterance. In the Sutras 
ascetics iru i)!^I as an object of meditation, as the root of the 
tree ot th< i'ula and its essence, and by this means become 
united whh the Brahma. In the Yoga praxis it has purificatory 
powers, in forms of Yoga it is brought into connection with 
I^vara and tinder the name pranava is said to express him. 
Reflection upon OM removes obstacles and is an aid to right 
knowledge. Popularly, it is assimilated to various triads 
including that of Brahmil-Visnu-Siva.^ For instance, it is 
enjoined upon Yogis U[ repeat OM’ that, taking a suitable 
posture (dsana), they sitould repeal OM 20,736,000 times in 
silence and meditate upon it daily after deep inspirations;^ 
and that they should repeat it audibly, also, 12,000 times. 
According to the Sk'h Sufnhitdy the hlja mantra as a whole is 
oth-dim-kliriistisni 

Yantras art nivstic diagrams, often combinations of trian- 
gular figu res , sup i It*, possess occult p( )v\Tr. Each goddess 
worshipped by liu J ; ^ has a \ antra, sometimes placed in 

the centre of a Laos d ij:am. They are regarded as effective 

^ For an txpianatj.oii • i on oriv .n oi some of the mantras, see 
Bhattacharyya, .SV/V//2avif /O, lauv»cl.u uoo. p. 72 f. 

• ^ This siaterrient i.. upt>!i l\.cith s article in EREy vol. IX, 

pp. 490 ft. See Bloorolirkl m 7AOS, v<.: XIV, p. ck 

3 vok XXIkk i Jio. occ viiscussions under breathing, 

below. 



THE PANTHEON- 


177 


as mantras, and in combination with them are most powerful. 
These also are found in the drawings of the cakras. Yogis have 
mystic diagrams, representing the four elephants supporting 
the four comers of the earth, printed and painted on calico.^ 
The triangle standing on its apex represents the yoni; 
and two triangles superimposed, as in the seal of David, 
symbolize the yoni-lihga. In some of the cakras (see Chapter 
Fifteen) both the single and the double triangles are used as 
just described. Sir John Woodroffe, in his article on the 
‘ Indian Magna Mater,’ publishes a drawing in colours of the 
Sri Yantra, showing four male imposed upon five female 
triangles. The four represent evolved or limited aspects of 
conscious power; the five denote the five vital functions, the 
five senses of knowledge, the five senses of action, the five 
subtle and the five gross forms of matter. The superimposi- 
tion of the four upon the five shows the union of Siva and 
Sakti. The triangles untied make a figure with eight lotus 
petals. These are surrounded by a lotus of sixteen petals 
and in tura^by a field of yellow and a ‘fence’ with four 
‘gates.* By the intersections of the triangles nine circles 
(cakra) are described: a central point bindu-cakra of bliss; a 
white inverted triangle; eight red triangles; ten blue triangles; 
ten red triangles; fourteen blue triangles; eight red triangles; 
sixteen blue triangles; and the yellow surround. Each cakra 
has its own name, and in each are a number of lesser deities 
presiding over forms of mind, life and body and their special 
functions. The worshipper of the Yantra seeks union with the 
Mother of the Universe in her several forms, as mind and 
matter, and their devatas, as a step to Yoga union with her as 
she is in herself, the Universe. Thus, the world is lifted to the 
divine plane in the consciousness of the worshipper himself; 
and the Yantra is transformed in his consciousness from a 
material object of lines into a mental state of union with the 
Universe, its divinities and Supreme Deity. There follows 
auto-realization as Mindless-Consciousness. Thus the Sri 
Yantra is the Universe and its Causal Powers of various 
aspects ; and the worshipper realizes himself as a Sri Yantra^ 


^ Man and Beast in India^ p. 215. 

* Indian Acts and Letters, vol. II (1926). 


1 ? 



178 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Kavacas are amulets used as protection against evil 
influences or to obtain some desired end. They consist of 
stone, a piece of paper or metal leaf, with mantra and yantra 
upon them. They are worn around the neck, breast, arms or 
loins. Their special use is in time of pestilence or epidemics. 
A further use is to propitiate a goddess or to induce certain 
bodily conditions favourable to production of male offspring.^ 

Nydsa is the assignment mentally of various parts of the 
body to the protection of tutelary presiding deities, with the 
imposition of the hands, or fingers, and the repetition of texts 
and mystical words and the use of symbols.^ 

Madras are the interwinings of the fingers with occult 
meaning, and certain postures or contortions of the body or 
of parts of it. 

All of these elements of the Sakta system are found in the 
doctrines and practices of the Yogis, and are described or 
implied in their manuals.^ 

' See also under Xharms.’ 

*• In the illustrations in The Serpent Power may be found the 
graphic representation of the four devices described above. While 
these elements in the system of the Yogis might have been discussed 
among the topics in the preceding chapter, it seemed best to append 
them to the account of the gods with whose manipulation they are 
associated. Sec also other works of the author of The Serpent Power, 

* See chapters on the Hatha Yoga below, e.g,, the exposition of the 
Gorak^asataka. 



CHAPTER NINE 


LEGEND 

From medieval times onward, Gorakhnath (Gorak^a 
Natha) is the well-known wonder-worker and master Yogi of 
northern and western India; and he, and members of his 
order, are celebrated in legend and song in countless villages. 
From Nepal to Rajputana, from the Panjab to Bengal, from 
Sind to the Deccan, tradition and folklore are full of allusions 
to Gorakhnath and recount his wonderful deeds. He is the 
famous saint and worker of miracles ; the founder^ and out- 
standing teacher of the Saivite sect of ascetics, practicers of 
the Hatha Yoga, who are vulgarly called Kanphatas; the 
great teacher of the Saivite faith , the Brahmardcal opponent 
of the Vaisnava reformers of northern India of the school of 
Ramananda;^ the patron saint and tutelary of the state of 
Goraksa,^ whose royal house now rules in Nepal and, finally, 

1 BHCS, p. 403. 

^ Gr. EREt vol. VI, p. 329. ‘He appears to have been the Br3h- 
manical opponent of the free-thinking reformers of mediaeval India, 
headed by Ramananda, Kabir and others who flourished in the 
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.^ Temp.y vol. I, pp. 127 fF. This 
opinion is based upon the view that Gorakhnath was a contemporary 
of Kabir. But Gorakhnath belongs to an earlier time. See chap, 
eleven. 

^ Gr. EREy vol. VI, p. 329; Buchanan in Martin, The Hiitory^ 
AntiquitieSy Topography and Statistics of Eastern Indiay vol. Ill, pp. 
387, 535; Kirkpatrick, Kingdom of Nepdly p. 192, 

Levi, Lf Nepdly vol. 1, p, 352. Vincent Smith, Catalogue of the 
Coins in the Indian Museuniy CalcuttUy including the Cabinet of the Asiatic 
Society of Bcngaly vol. 1, pp. 289-93, records the following; A silver 
coin of Prthvi Narayana (a.d. 1768-74); date on obverse 1691 Sska; 
reverse, central circle enclosing legend, Sri Sri Bhavdnl ; marginal 
legend, each character in an ornament, Sri Sri Sri Gorakhndth, A 
silver coin of Pratapa Sirhha (a.d. 1794-97); obverse, date Saka 1697 ~ 
A.D. 1775); reverse, central circle enclosing legend Sri Sri Guheivari; 
marginal legend, Sri Sri Sri Gorakhndtha. Four silver coins of Rana 



180 GORAi'HNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOCSS 

the rival, and eventually victor over Matsyendranath, the 
ancient Buddhist^ protector of Nepal. 

BahSdar (a.d. 1777-99); coins of 1787 and 1790-=g5ka 1709 and 
1712; reverse central circle enclosing dagger with wreath, and 
the legend jSri Bhavdnt; marginal legend in ornaments Sri Sri 
Gorakhndtha. One gold and two silver coins of Girvan, Yuddha 
Vikrama (a.d. 1799-1816); obverse date, 1724 5aka — a.d. 1802, 
1730 Saka = a.d. ^808, 1737 Saka = a.d. 1815; reverse, central circle 
enclosing sword or dagger with wreath and the legend Sri Sri Sri 
Bhavdm; marginal legend in ornaments, Sri Sri Sri Gorakhndtha, 
Four silver coins of Kajendra Vikrama (a.d. 1816-47); dates on 
obverse 1738, 1742, 1745 and 1746, ~ a.d. 1816, 1820, 1823 

and 1824; reverse, central circle em'^losing dagger with wreath and 
the legend Sri Bhavdm ; marginal legend in ornaments Sri Sri Sri 
Gorakhndtha. Two gold coins, of Surendra Vikrama a.d. 1847; 
date on obverse, 1794 Saka ~ a.d. 1842; reverse central circle 
enclosing legend Sri Sri Sri Bhavdni; marginal legend in ornaments 
Sri Gorakhndtha. And six silver coins; obverse dates .^aka 1771 
1773, 1775, 1780, 1780 and 1794 - a.d. 1849, 1851, 1853, 1858, 1858, 
and 1872 ; reverse Sri Sri Sri Bhavdni and as on others Sri Sri Sri 
Gorakhndtha, One silver coin of Pjthvi Vim Vikrama; obverse, 
date 1806 ^aka ~ a.d. 1884; reverse, central circle enclosing dagger 
with wreath and legend, Sri Bhavdni^ and marginal legend in orna- 
ments, Sri Sri Sri Gorakhndtha. 

The following coins are described in The Supplementary Catalogue 
of the Coins in the Indian Museum, Calcutta, Non-Muhammadan Series, 
by Pandit B. B. Bidyabinod, pp. 75-78: a silver coin of about 1771, 
of Pfthvi NarSyana, of the Gorakhati Dynasty (a.d. 1768-74); reverse 
marginal legend Sri Sri Gorakhndtha. A silver coin of Pra^apa Sirhha 
1774-77); reverse outer legend Sri Sri Sri Gorakhndtha, A 
silver coin of Rana Bahadur (a.d. 1777-99); reverse marginal legend 
in compartments Sn Sri Sri Gorashandtha. Five silver coins of 
Girvan Yuddha Vikrama, (a.d. 1799-1816); reverse marginal legend 
in compartments Sri Sri Sri Gorashandtha, dates 1802, 1811, 1811, 
1812, 1809. Six silver coins of Rajendra Vikrama (a.d. 1816-47); 
reverse marginal legend in compartments Sri Sri Sri Gorashandtha, 
dates 1816, 1819, 1820, 1828, 1846, 1826. 

The writer has seen recent coins (Samvat 1974) of ^ri ^ri 
Tribhavani Bir Vikram vSahadeva Bahadur which have on the reverse 
the legend Sri Sri Sri Gorakhndthji enclosing the Ic^^nd Sri 
Bhavdni. The armorial bearings of the kings of Nepal include 
the pdduka (footprints) of Sri- 1 08 ^Gorakhndtli, the guardian deity 
of Gorakha whence the kings came. Gorakhnath’s name is preced- 
ed by six SrVs, those of kings and others by fewer. See Landon's 
Nepal, voi. I, p. 233 and note 1. Kirkpatrick, Kingdom of Nepal, 
n. 218 mentions a coin bearing on one side ‘ Sri Sri Sri Goorkhndtk, 
Sri BharvdnV 

^ See below. Matsyendranath is identified with Avalokfte^vara 



LEGEND 


18 t 


It is claimed that his followers, who were originally Bu- 
ddhists, became Saivites, on the fall of the Sena dynasty in 
Nepal, towards the end of the twelfth century,^ for the purple 
of gaining political power by pleasing their heretical rulers..* 
On the Other hand, it is said that he brought about the over- 
throw of the Newars by the Gorkhas; and that he gave tb^m 
the land, having proved his power by a twelve years* period 
of meditation during w^hich no rain fell * It was then that 
Matsyendra (Macchendar) was called from Sahgaldip (Ceylon) 
to break Goraksa*s long mental concentration. 

In Buddhist Tibetan tradition, he is described as a 
magician.^ 

A bit of record strangely states that he was the foster- 
father and the teacher of Muhammad;® and another fragment 
reports him as having taught Guga the Muslim creed.* In 
Sind he is knowm as Datar }^il Shah. 

Gorakhnath has long since been deified, and, in popular 
religion, is considered a representative, even an embodiment, 
of Siva.’ His name is also given to Siva. He is the creator.® 
In the dice-throwing ordeal in the Rasalu legend he is 
petitioned as a god.® In the story of Hir and Rihjbiai he is 
worshipped with a platter of milk and rice.^® And he is 
invoked elsewhere as a god.^^ 

According to some, his name implies his origin; because the 
formless creator from the sweat of his own breast created 


in Nepal. One tradition shows him entering the country from 
Assam, another from Ceylon. But both of these traditions could 
indicate non-Buddhist origins. Still, Buddhist Tintrism is older 
than the Hindu form and hails from eastern India. 

^ Gr. ERE, vol. VI, p, 329. 

« Tessitori, ERE, vol. XII, p. 834. 

• Told to the author at Gorakhpur, 14 November, 1924. 

• Levi, Le Nepal, vol. I, p. 355, 

® Dabistan, vol. II, p. 129. He is called BabS Rin HSji. 

• J'emp, vol. III, p. 299, 

" Dabistan, vol. II, p. 128; Gr. ERE. vol. VI, p. 329; also BHCS, 
p. 403; Pariah Census Report, 1891, p. 114. 

• Mac,, vol. I, pp. 173, 174. 

• Temp, vol. I, pp. 245, 314. 

Temp, vol. II, p. 508. 

^ E.g., Temp, vol. I, pp. 314, 425 ff. 



182 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

Gorakhnath. In *Ghor-nath,’ ‘ghor’ means More 

definitely, his name Gorakh^natha may mean ‘Lord of 
Cattle** or ‘Lord of Goraksa,* thus suggesting Siva on the 
one hand and Nepal on the other.^ Oldfield* says that the 
ccmntry of Gorak^ derives its name from Gorakhnath, an 
eminent saint who resided in a cave which still exists in the 
hill on which the city of Gorkha is built. According to 
another tradition, Gorakhnath found an old shrine of Gorkha, 
an ancient deity, made the place famous, took the name of 
the diety of the shrine and gave the name to the city of 
Gorakhpur. (This must really refer to Gorkha in Nepal.) 

The reference to Gorakhnath, already made, as having been 
created from thejweat of the creator’s breast, may be linked 
with other statements. In the Panjab a legend is current to 
the effect that Gorakhnath was born of dung and was found 
by Matsyendranath who made him a disciple.® From Nepal® 
comes the story that Siva after he had recited the Yoga 
dctetrine to Parvati, standing on the sea shore, ^ while Matsy- 
endra (in the form of a fish) was listening, gave something to 
a woman to eat, with a promise that she would obtain a son. 
The woman did not eat the substance, but cast it upon a 
dung-hill. Twelve years later, Matsyendra passed by the same 
spot and asked to see the child. He heard what the woman 
had done and asked her to search in the dung heap. She 
there discovered a boy of twelve years. That boy was named 
Gorakhnath. Matsyendranath became his spiritual master 
and he served as a dutiful disciple. 

There are variants of these stories. In the Tak-qiqdt-t- 
Chishti^ it is related that a devotee of 6iva, desiring offspring, 

^ See RTCPf vol. II, p. 390. But may mean ‘intense,’ 

‘terrific,’ * fearful*, and refer to his austerities. 

• Compare Pa^upati, a name of Siva. 

» Gr, ERE, vol. VI, p. 328. 

* Sketches from Nepal, vol, II, p. 189. 

* RTCP, vol. II, p. 390. 

• Levi, Le Nepal, vol. I, pp. 351, 352. 

’ It may be of interest to note that at Dah Parbatiya, in Assam, in 
a window in an old brick temple of Siva, there is a male, four-armed 
figure, holding in one left hand a daviru, the peculiar small drum of 
Siva. Below the window there is a representation of the waves of the 
*ea. The Siva is of the form Lakulisa. The work is probably of the 
fifth or sixth century. Archeological Survey of India, 1924-5, p. 99. 



LEGEND 183 

received, at Parvatf s intercession, ashes from Siva’s dhuni. 
The devotee’s wife was to swallow them. She did not, but 
threw them upon a dung-hill. Eventually a child was found 
there who was taken to Siva, and, by him, named Gorakhnath. 

Another version of this legend relates that, when Gorakh- 
nath was seeking a teacher, he offered a loaf of bread on a 
pipal leaf at the seashore. A fish swallowed the offering and, 
twelve years later, gave a child in return. Siva named this 
child Matsyendra, and he afterwards became Gorakhnath’s 
guru, or spiritual teacher. 

Another story has it that Gorakhnath was a son of Siva by 
a cow.^ 

The estimation in which the people hold the deeds and 
powers of Gorakhnath may be formed from a study of the 
more famous of the innumerable traditions and legends 
describing him and his disciples.^ 

Many of the legends, some of which have been recorded by 
Temple, of the Punjab \ by Synnerton, Romantic Tales 

of the Punjab; by Grierson, The Story of Manikchandra and in 
The Adi Granth^ are sung even today by Goraknathis, and by 
other wandering singers as well, through the villiges of the 
land. Amongst the most famous of them are those of Zahra, 
or Guga Pir, Puran Bhagat and his brother Raja Ras^u, 
Gopicand, Hir and Ranjha and Rani Pihgla. 

Guga, or Zahra Pir^ was a Rajput who finally became a 
Musalman. His birth and the wonderful deeds which he was 
able to perform were dependent upon the good offices of the 
saint, Gorakhnath, who gave him his name and whose 


^ RTCP, vol. II, p. 391. And Gorakhnath fathered Matsyendra 
by a fish. These are etymological explanations. 

* Compare Tempy vol. II, p. 21. 

• Briggs, Chamdrsy pp. 151, 152, 170, 171; Temp,, Nos. 6, 52; 
Indian Antiquary, 1895, p. 47; 1897, p. 84; OCCS, p. 67; S.P.G, 
Quarterly, 1910; Indian Witness, Feb. 21, 1911. PNQ, vol. I, para 
3; Crooke, Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India, vol. I, 
pp. 211, 213; Archcelogical Survey of India, 1878-79, vol. XIV; 
JASBe, vol. XVI, pt. 1, pp. 139 ff.; Elliot, Memoirs on the History, 
Folklore and Distribution of the Races of the North-Western Provinces 
of India, voK I, p. 255 ; Tod {Crooke), vol. II, pp. 843, 1,027; vol. Ill, 
p. 1,450. See Rose, RTCP, vol. I, pp. 171-92 for comprehensive 
review of the materials on Guga. 



184 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

disciple he finally became.' He is now worshipped as a snake 
godling, as one who has power over snakes and saves his 
followerr from snake-bite. He grants boons, especially to 
barren women. Guga finally disappeared, together with his 
horse, in the bowels of the earth. He is especially revered 
by low castes, among whom sweepers and leather workers are 
prominent. In many places in the Panjab there are shrines 
connected with his worship, and these are often adjacent to 
shrines of Gorakhnath. 

Among the most famous heroes of the Panjab are Puran 
Bhagat and his half-brother Rasalu.^ Puran, the elder, was 
betrayed by his father’s younger queen, and was cast into a 
dry well to die. He suffered also the loss of his hands and 
feet. After twelve years he was rescued and healed by 
Gorakhnath. Through powers which he obtained by auster- 
ities, Puran was able to grant his former betrayer, Queen 
Lunan, a boon and she bore a son named Rasalu. The 
exploits this latter prince form a large body of legends. 
Rasalu’s was a checkered life, full of love, adventure and 
intrigue. Puran became a Yogi, a follower of Gorakhnath.* 
Ras^u finally became a Gorakhnath! , and an ardent disciple 
of the great Yogi. Even Rasalu’s parrot considered Gora^- 
n5th as his^Mr« (teacher)!^ 

A current legend concerning Purari Bhagat is as follows: 
A Khatr^i woman, when bathing in the Aik river, was 
wooed by a serpent called Basak Nag. She conceived and bore 
a son who was named Sulivan. He rose to be a man oi great 
power and wealth, and, through the assistance of the serpent, 
was made a king. His fame became so great that even 
Vikramaditya visited him at Sialkot. Sulivan refused to go 
to meet his royal visitor and a severe battle was fought in 
consequence, in which Vikramaditya lost his life. Raja 
Sulivan had two sons, Puran and Rasalu. Puran became a 

^ Temp., vol. Ill, p. 296. 

• Puran Bhagat, Swytm, pp. 230 ff., 51* ff.; Temp., No. 34, and in 
others also; Raja Rasalu, Swynn, pp. 51-151; Temp., vol. I, pp. Iff.; 
243 ff. 

* Puran Bhagat is called also Gyan Sarupa, Purakhsiddh, Chauraft- 

jwenSth and Chauranginath. R TCP, vol. I,tp. 125. Details of the 
stories of Puran Bhagat vary greatly. Temp., vol. II, pp. 375, 403; 
Steele, Tales of the Ppif^ab, p. 235. * Temp., vol. I, p. 242. 



LEGEND 


il85 

foifir. Raja Sulivan had two queens, the older of whom was the 
mother of Puran. The other ^ueen, who was much younger, 
was barren. When Puran became a man, this younger queen 
made improper proposals to him. He refused to yield to her 
and she, consequently, brought false charges against him. 
These the king confiimed. Puran was then put to death, 
his hands and feet being cut off, and his body was thrown 
into a well in Karol, a village five miles from Sialkot. (The 
village is at present called Puran wSla.) After some days a 
Yogi, who came for water, found the body in the well. Having 
learned, upon inquiry, the story of Puran’s temptation and 
death, he pronounced a charm {mantra) over the body and 
Puran was brought back to life, and his hands and feet 
restored. Puran became a Kanphata Yogi. This well is still 
known as Puran’s well.^ 

Several stories of Gopicand are available; among them 
one from the Panjab, ^ one from Bengal,* and another from 
Sind.^ The second is told under the title ‘The Song of 
Manikcandra,* although Manikcandra's son, Gopicand, is the 
hero of the song. The stories recite the struggle and the 
difficulties that lay between Gopicand and his attainment of 
sainthood, or, in other words, tell of his renunciation of his 
throne and his choice of the life of a Yogi. 

Hir and Rafijha are the chief characters of a romantic story 
famous in the Panjab.® Raftjha, an indulged son, had to leave 
home after his father’s deatL He finally met Hir and hired 
himself out as a herdsman to her father. A long love intrigue 
led to scandal. Hir was finally married to another man. 
Raftjha then becaihe a faqir, joining the band of Gorakhnathi 
Yogis at Tilla.® 


^ The Hindu version of this account was read by L. Gahg§ Ram, 
B.A., LL.B., to Alfred M. Daula in 1925. The statement was sent to 
the author by Dr. H. D, Griswold, from Lahore. See also Sialkot 
Gazetteer, 1921, p. 14. 

* Temp., yol II, No. 18. 

» JASBe, (1887) vol. XLVII, pt. 1., pp. 135 ff. 

^ Supplied by Mr. G. E. L. Carter, Collector of Bandra, througl 
Dr. J. J. Modi. There is reference to this famous story in Buchanan, 
vol. Ill, p, 407 f. 

» lA, 1921, Supplement; Swy'fm,, No. 1; Temp., yol. II, No. 38 
OMAS, pp. 266, • Temp., vol. II, p. 546. 



186 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

R^jha discovered the residence of Hir and took up his 
abode on the river bank opposite her. He used to visit her 
taking with him savoury dishes of flesh food. On one occasion, 
unable to secure game, he prepared a portion of his own 
flesh. But Hir was suspicious of the food and the expression 
of her doubts led to his confession. Thereupon she resolved 
to meet him at his place of abode. She used to cross the 
river on a float of earthen pots. Her female attendants, 
discovering this, substituted, one night, pots of unbaked clay. 
As Hir reached mid-stream, the pots dissolved and she sank 
in the river. But Ranjha heard her cry and swam out to her. 
They disappeared together. 

The following descriptions of Gorakhnath and of Yogis of 
his order, based upon these and other familiar tales, exhibit a 
popular view of the Kanphatas. The references are sugges- 
tive, not exhaustive. 

By reason of his perfection in ascetic practices, or Yoga, 
Gorakhnath was supposed to have attained to superhuman 
powers. So great were these that he was even called a greater 
than Siva.^ In speaking of Goraknath, his disciples say to 
Puran : 

He is beloved of God and his w orship has been accepted by the 
Almighty. You can ask what you please of him.^ 

In the legend of Manikcand, Gorakhnath is described as 
a vidyddhdra (‘carrying occult knowledge’)^ a kind of 
supernatural being dw^elling in the Himalayas, attending upon 
Siva and possessing magical powers. He is not only super- 
humanly wise, but also very powerful.* In a contest with 
Rafljha over the stolen conch Gorakhnath calls himself a great 
magician, and boasts of power exceeding that of the seventy 
saints combined.'^ 

Gorakhnath exercised great powers over nature.® He gave 
Mayana (Gopicand legend) a boon that she would not sink 
in water."^ He turned the water of a well into gold and then 
into crystal.® In Mewar they still treasure a sword of the 

1 JASBe, vol. XLVII, pt. 1, p. 139. Swynn., p. 33. 

» JASBcy vol. XLVII, p. 208. ^ £.g. Temp., vol. II, No. 18, 

the Legend of Gopicand', Temp., vol. II, p. 243. 

® Temp., vol. II, p. 551. ® See also, below. 

’ JASBe, vol. XLVII, p. 210. « RTCP, vol. II, 394 note. 



LEGEND 


187 

hero, Bappa, which is said to have been presented to him by 
Gorakhnath, who pronounced over it an incarnation, thereby 
making it possible for Bappa to sever rocks with it.^ When 
Gorakhnath and his company came into the royal garden at 
Sialkot (where Puran Bhagat was imprisoned in the well) 
everything became green, “ and the lakes were filled with 
water.® And at another time when he came into a dried-up 
garden, he scattered ashes on it, and it began to bloom A 
His having caused a twelve years drought in Nepal^ has 
become famous. Again, he caused the very walls and all the 
instruments of a certain place to chant: ‘ Awake, Macchendra, 
Gorakhnath has come.’® At Sirala in the Satara District in 
the Bombay Presidency there is a gigantic tamarind tree 
whose origin was a stick which Gorakhnath stuck in the 
ground.’ In Kangra the Kumhars (potters) say that their 
wheel sprang from the earning of the saint Gorakhnath, 
w^hich he gave them.® 

Once he took the form of a fly^ in order to avoid guards 
on the border of a certain king’s country; at another time 
he changed himself into iron, and again into a frog.^® He 
transformed certain of his disciples so that half of their 
bodies became gold and the other half iron.^’^ He turned 
himself into a leper before Vachal.^® The disciples who were 
sent by Gorakhnath to Karu^® to get the thread with which to 
draw Puran from the well, were turned by magic into bullocks. 
This was reported to him and he took ashes from his bag, 
charmed them and tossed them in'.o the air. Thereupon the 

^ Crookc, Things Indian^ p. 25. 

* Steele, Tales of the Panjabi p. 235. 

» Temp., vol. II, p. 376. ^ RTCP, vol. I, pp. 179-80. 

® Wright, History of Nepal, pp. 140-4; Levi, Le Nepal, vol. I, 
p. 348, « RTCP, vol. II, p. 394. 

’ The Hindu Religions Year, p. 174. 

® NINQ, vol. Ill, p. 54. Quoted by Crookc, Religio.'i and Folklore 
of Northern India (ed. 1926), p. 331. ® RTCP, vol. II, p. 394. 

Dabistan, vol. II, pp. 139 ff. 

“ lA, 1906, p. 21. 

Cunningham, Archceological Survey of India, Reports, vol. XIV, 

p. 81. 

Temp., vol. I, p. 180, suggests that Karu may be Kamfirup. 
Chariyal (Sariyil) wife of Guga was the daughter of Sanja of 
KSmarup in Assam. She is still worshipped at a shrine near Gauhati. 



188 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

bullockd came to him and he patted them Sind changed them 
back into men. In return, being angry, he dried up all the 
wells, bringing their water into the one near himself. When 
the women came, all together, at his request to draw water, 
he took charmed ashes and, in the name of Matsyendranath, 
turned the women into asses. 

Long ears, small hoofs (had they, and) gra2eu on the dung heaps 

When their husbands came and appealed to him, he 
restored them to their human form. Reference has already 
been made to his having Puran's hands and feet restored 
after he had taken him from the well.* 

Gorakhnath left his body asleep on his mat, and descended 
to the under>world of the god of snakes and there obtained 
the magic incense for Bachal.® 

There are in the legends interesting accoimts of his restor- 
ing people to life. In the Bhmtrharimrveda of Harihara 
(Act. II) Bhapthari made test of his queen, by sending a false 
report of his death. She became sati and the king was 
distracted. He received news that Gorakhnath had power to 
relieve sorrow. The great Yogi came to visit him, and, seeing 
the situation, broke his bowl and wept over it, trdkting it 
with the same despair and sorrow that the king expressed 
over the body of the dead queen. Bhartphari offered the 
Yogi a better bowl, and Gorakhnath promised to restore the 
queen to life. When she stood before him alive, the king 
refused to embrace her, since, in his despair, he had re- 
nounced the world, and he resolved to remain faithful to his 
vow.^ A second version of the story contains other details. 
It is as follows. The last Chandravatl Raja of the Parmars 
was Hun. One day, while he was out hunting, he saw a 
Pardhi, while hunting, killed by a cobra. The wife of the 
hunter, finding him, placed his body on the funeral pyre, 
and, after feeding the fire with portions of her flesh, became 

^ T^p.t vol. II, p. 438. 

* Also see Steele, Tales of the Par^db, p. 235. 

* Cunningham, Axchcsological Survey of India, Reports, vol. XIV, 

P* 

* JAOS, vol. XXV, pp. 197-250. L. D. Gray, The Bhartrharimr* 
veda of Henrihara* 



LEGEND 


189 


sati. Impressed with this sight, Hun decided to test his 
queen, the Rani Prihgla. So he related to ^her the whole 
occurj'ence. She, the daughter of Somachandra, replied 
that even on news of the death of her consort, she would 
become sati. Later, Hun, on an expedition sent word of 
his own death. Although her Asso Pal} plant revealed to 
her that the king was alive, she decided to prove her faith- 
fulness by dying and being burned, Hun, anxious about 
his message, hastened home, arriving in time to see the 
funeral fire. He wandered around the pyre for days refusing 
to be comforted. Gorakhnath, happening at the place, asked 
the king why such mourning and received the reply that it 
was because of love, for Rani Pingla. Thereupon Gorakhnath 
dropped his begging bowl and, as it broke, began to weep in 
imitation ofiHun. The king reminded the Yogi that his loss 
was not irreparable as was the loss of the queen. Then 
Gorakhnath said that he could restore the Rani to life. He 
sprinkled water over the ashes of the funeral pyre and twenty- 
five queens exactly like^ Pingla appeared. When he sprinkled 
water over them a second time, only Pingla remained. But, 
since Hun had already decided to become a Yogi, he refused 
to receive her. More water was sprinkled and the queen, 
casting a reproachful look at Hun, disappeared. The king 
then became a Yogi.* 

It is reported that Gorakhnath destroyed the two sons of 
Matsyendranath, in the presence of a Bania and afterwards 
restored them to life.^ 

In one of the Rasalu legends, that hero is described as 
trying to seduce the wife of his prime minister, Mahita. In 
the end there was great trouble. The minister refused to 
believe his wife, Sila Dai, innocent, turned ascetic and finally 
died. Then Sila Dai became sati. Rasalu burned himself on 


' Datatreya, her gum, had given her a seed, which, as a plant, 
would tell her whether her husband were dead or alive. 

* Another version states that when King Bhart^hari declared that 
there never could be another queen such as Rani Pingla had been, 
Gorakhnath showed him a hundred like her, RTCP, vol. II, p. 404. 

* Major J. W. Watson, article, ‘The Story of Rani Pingla,’ JA, 
1873, p. 215 f. 

^ RTCPf vol. II, p. 395 note. The story has already been narrated. 



190 gorakhnAth and the KANPHATA yogis 

the pyre with both of them.^ Through the curiosity of Parvati, 
Siva was led to go into the garden, where they had been 
cremated, to see what had happened. And then Gorakhnath 
asked for the restoration of all three. Siva sprinkled the pyre 
with water drawn from his finger and they were restored to 
life.^ Then Sila Dai and Mahita were again married, 
Gorakhnath starting the marriage procession. 

Gopicand’s sister was restored to life by the saint 
Goral^nath,^ 

In another legend it is said that Gorakhnath killed the two 
sons of Macchendra, hung their skins on a tree, and then, after 
his inquiry about them, restored them to life.** 

By casting some earth on his body, Gorakhnath restored to 
life a disciple, who in the form of a stag, had been shot by 
Bhartfhari.^ 

Mayana, Manikcand’s widow, though with child, was 
forced to perform sati but was miraculously preserved 
through the intervention of Gorakhnath.® 

On the other hand, the great Yogi is represented as creating 
persons. In the contest with Jalandharnath (Gopicand legend) 
Gorakhnath turned horse dung into locusts, or dung and a 
blanket, or a bundle of grass, and then into a human body and 
infused it with life. This man, who claimed Gopicand, was 
burned to ashes seven times and to be restored by Gorakhnath.’ 

Moreover, like many other great ascetics he was able to grant 
children to barren women. Vachal (Guga legend) received a 
son, Guga by name,® and Kachal (Guga legend) two sons by 
favour of Gorakhnath,® and Mayana, widow of Manikcand, as 
a boon, obtained a son eighteen months after her husband’s 
death the explanation being that he was given as a seven 
months’ old foetus and his prolonged confinement in his 
mother’s womb was due to his exceeding glory. 

^ Temp., vol. I, p. 361. * Temp,, vol. I, p. 362, ‘The water 

of life.’ 

® }ASBe, vol. LV, p. 38. 

* * RTCP, vol. II, p. 394. This has been related above. 

RTCP, vol. II, p. 404. “ JfASBe, vol. XLVII, pp. 143, 210. 

’ RTCP, vol. II, p. 395. ® Temp., vol. I, pp. 142, 139. 

® Kanipao, a senior disciple, advised Vachel to go to Gorakhnath; 
RTCP, vol. I, p. 177. 

10 JASBe, vol. XLVII, pp. 142, 208. 



LEGEND. 


191 


Instances may be given to show Gorakhnath as a great 
healer. In his youth he was forced to resort to magic to 
restore his own hands and feet which his stepmother had 
barbarously cut off.^ He restored hands and feet to Puran 
Bhagat after the latter had lived helplessly in the dry well for 
tweve years.* This he did by the sprinkling of water and 
prayer.* He also restored Puran's sight, by going to Indra 
and obtaining help.^ 

Another evidence of Gorakhnath’s magic powers was in 
his insight. He was able to discern at a glance that Puran 
Bhagat was innocent.* Fairies {pari) visited Puran in the 
well and were sent by him to Gorakhnath with news, and 
then the Yogi took steps to save ‘my Puran.’ Still, Gorakh- 
nath’s powers of discernment were sometimes limited. In 
the Dabistan is the record of a contest of power between 
Gorakhnath and a sannyasi, Datateri, in which Gorakhnath 
disappeared in the water in the shape of a frog. But the 
sannyasi was able to find him and bring him forth. Then 
Datateri concealed himself in the water and Gorakhnath in 
spite of all his searching could not discover him, for he had 
become water, ‘and water cannot be distinguished from 
water.’* 

Again Gorakhnath exercised such power that F.ing Jewar, 
intending to slay Vachal with his sword, was unable to draw 
it from its scabbard.'^ 

An interesting aspect of the exercise of power is through 
the use of the Yogi’s name. Thus Chariyal (Guga legend) 
was liealed of snake bite.* And Guga, using the name, 
played on his flute and the sleeping king of snakes was 
awakened, and all his hosts with him. Then Tatig Nag went 
to find out who was playing. Guga told him that it was he, 


^ Steele, Tales of ike Parijab, p. 235. Taranath in his History of 
Buddhism in India, p. 323, refers to this incident. 

* Steele, Tales of the Panjab, p. 235. 

^ Sziynn., pp. 51, 230; femp.,vo\. I, pp. 2, 430 ff. 

* Temp., vol. II, No. 34. 

5 Temp., vol. II, p. 429. 

® Diahistan, vol. II, p. 140. 

^ Temp., No. 6. 

® Temp., No. 6. 



192 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

tiie son of Raja Jewar, and then summoned the snakes to help 
him to win a bride from Assam {Kamarup).^ And Guga, 
along with Tatig Nag, was conveyed to that country, miracu- 
lously, through Gorakhnath’s powers.^ And, attacked by his 
half-brothers in the forest, Guga was able to defend himself 
against their murderous assault.® 

Moreover, Gorali^nath was able to exercise power over 
long distances. Thus he helped Guga to win at dice, and 
Rasalu likewise.^ Appealed to by Guga from his mother^s 
womb, Goraknath so ordered events that Guga was born in 
his mother’s father’s palace.® 

In like manner Gorakhnath exercised such great power on 
behalf of his disciples that he proved himself superior to 
other Yogis. In the Tuhfdt-ul-Karam^ it is recorded how 
Gopicand(Pir Pathao)^ of Pir Arr, in Sind, gained possession 
of the cave in the hill there, which was held by Dayanath. 
Gopicand brought Gorakhnath from Girnar to help him. 
Dayanath was a man of superior powers. He had a stable- 
basket which used of itself to clean the stables and keep alight 
sufficient fires for the 125,000 faqirs who used to live on this 
hill. He also had a bullock which used to fetch water from the 
river filling his pakhal (water bag) himself. His beggar’s bowl 
used to collect and bring alms from Samahi, by itself, and 
from it the 125,000 faqirs maintained themselves. He had a 
rag-rope and a cudgel, and if he wanted anyone bound and 
beaten, he said to the rope, ‘ Bind that man,’ and to the cudgel, 
‘Beat him.’ As soon as he would say these words the rope 
would bind the man and the stick would beat him. But when 
Gorakhnath came into the neighbourhood, all these wonders 
ceased. Then Dayanath knew that it was because of the 
greater power of Gorakhnath. Thereupon he (Dayanath) 


^ Tenip.y vol. I, pp. 178, 179, 180. 

** Temp., vol. 1. p. 192. 

* Temp., No. 6. 

* Temp..^ vol. I, p. 243. 

^ Temp., No. 6. Otherwise his mother would have been in disgrace. 

* Reported by Mr. G. E. L. Carter, I.C.S. 

’ On the road beyond Karachi is an old building in ruins, called 
‘Peer Putta’ by Muslims and ‘Gopee Chand Raja’ by Hindus. — 
Hart, Journey, p. 136. 



LEGEND 


193 


got angry and threw the hill into the sky, and, setting it on 
fire by a breath, departed to Dhinodhar hill in Kacch. Pir 
Pathao went to Guru Gorakhnath and reproached him, saying, 

You are sitting here while Dayanath has set the hill on fire and 
cleared. 

The guru looked and saw that a fire was indeed burning 
between heaven and earth. Even while he (Gorakhnath) look- 
ed, through the power of his glance the fire was extinguished 
and the hill dropped and cracked in two. Gorakhnath then 
perceived that Dayanath w^as praying at Dhinodhar hill, 
standing on his head on a betel-nut, and knew that after 
twelve months’ prayer^ in this position he could by breathing 
thrice blast all Sind. Thereupon he extended his hand (to 
Kacch), though no one else could observe this action, and, 
seizing Dayanath by the ear, brought him back to Sind. The 
guru said to Dayanath, 

Don’t trouble the people. I promise you this blessing, that you 
and your successors shall never lack good horses and white clothes. 

He then made Dayanath his disciple, cutting his ears and 
putting ornaments in them; and placing a black thread- 
.^:-rban2 on his head, sent him back to Dhinodhar. Then 
Gorakhnath and Pir Pathao came to this hill with their murids 
(disciples). As soon as they reached it, it began to tremble, 
whereupon Gorakhnath commanded: 

Drive a tent-peg and if that goes into the ground it will show that 
we can stay here ; otherwise it must be that the hill is not intended 
for us and we must go away. 

The peg was driven into the ground (although the place 
consists of solid rock) and Pir Pathao took possession of the 
cave in the hill. 

Another incident showing Gorakhnath ’s power is that in 
which he sent an invisible army to the help of Guga against 
Prithavi Raj.® 

In the Panjab legend of Santinath, Goraknath overcomes 

^ Dayanath and the number 12 remind us of Dharmnath and that 
twelve years* penance. But this number runs through many legends. 

* Note the turban of sheeps-wool thread worn by the mahant of 
Kama. 

» RTCP, vol. I, p. 181. 


13 



194 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Jalandharanath of whom Gopicand was afraid. The story 
relates that at this time there was a great gathering of faqirs 
in Gopicand’s city (which was in Bengal) to which came 
Gorakhnath. To avoid this crowd Jalandharanath retired to 
the bottom of a well and covered himself with horse dung. 
All efforts at removing this were unavailing because the dung 
removed by day replaced itself by night. Finally Menavanti, 
Gopicand’s mother, asked that Jalandharanath be brought 
forth from the well; but Macchendranath pointed out how 
dangerous this would be for Gopicand,^ since Jalandharanath 
would kill him with the mere sound of his voice. However, 
Macchendranath said, 

Let three images (miirti) be made, one of iron, one of silver and 
one of gold, and I will so arrange that the strength of Jalandhara- 
nath’s wrath will be averted. 

'Fhe images were made and Gopicand was ordered to 
approach the well and summon Jalandharanath. At the sound 
of his voice, Jalandharanath cursed him and bade him die, 
but only the iron image was destroyed. Again Gopicand 
called to jalandharanath and this time the silver image was 
destroyed. On the third summons the gold image was 
shattered. When Gopicand called the fourth time Jalandhara- 
nath, realizing that there was a greater Y'ogi than himself 
present outside, came up out of the well. 

It is said that when Bhimsen, one of the heroes of the 
Mahdbharata,^ lay benumbed with cold on the snow-covered 
Himalayas, Gorakhnath revived him and made him king over 
the country stretching from the sources of the Ganges to 
Bhutan.^ A similar^ tradition has it that, during Yudhis- 
thara’s journey through the Himalayas to heaven, his brethren 
fell behind and perished one by one. Only Bhimsen survived. 
He was saved by Gorakhnath and made king of Nepal.® 

^ See also Temple^ vol. II, p. 23. The story of this contest with 
JSilandharanath is told in legend no. 18. 

2 Martin, The History^ Antiquities^ Topography and Statistics of 
Eastern India, vol. Ill, pp. 38, 39, suggests that this was not a 
Pandava but a contemporary of Prithvi Raj, one of Belkoth near the 
Kosi, a powerful chief. 

® Cooke, Popular Religion and Folk-Lore of Northern India, vol. I, 
p. 91. 

♦ Gr., ERE., vol, VI, p. 329. 


» JASBe., 1878, p. 138. 



LEGEND 


195 


An interesting aspect of his power over nature is found in 
legends which relate Gorakhnath with serpent powers and 
functions. The whole cycle of Guga legends illustrates the 
first; and the various stories told about his control of the 
serpents in Nepal, and the consequent failing of the rains> 
illustrate the second 

Guga received his power over serpents, through disciple- 
ship, from Gorakhnath, and he learned the art of charming 
snakes likewise from his great guru.^ Guga restored to life 
the bullocks that had been bitten by serpents while they were 
conveying his mother, Bachal (Vacal), to her royal lord’s (his 
father’s) court. ^ Guga, in the name of Gorakhnath, in the 
forest, played on his flute, and the serpents danced about him, 
although Basuk, their king, became angry. Then Tatig Nag 
(w^^ = serpent) in the form of a Brahman, was sent to 
Assam. The snake asked Gorakhnath’s aid and succeeded in 
securing Raja Saftja’s daughter, Chariyal, for Guga. She was 
bitten by a snake and healed through the power of the name 
of the Gorakhnath,^ Rahjha, another disciple, under pretence 
of curing snake bite, obtained access to Ilir.^ In the story 
of Nirmal Dai, the Naga princess who was married to Parag 
(Pariksit) and on whose account the war of extermination 
of serpents was carried on, Nag Tabg finally slew Parag.^ 
When Parag’s posthumous sSori, Janmegi, attained the age of 
tw'elve he began to reign; and, finding out the cause of his 
father’s death, sought the life of Tatig. Tatig in going to 
kill Parag besought the aid of Macchendranath (Matsyendra- 
nath) and ‘remembered Gorakhnath.’ In seeking to escape 
Janmegi, Tatig appealed for help in turn to ascetics, to J^iva, 
to Macchendranath and to Gorakhnath in vain; but lie finally 
escaped by meditation on Krisna.® 

The Nepalese legend in its various developments is of 
considerable interest. Here another example of Gorakhnath ’s 

I 'W, 1882, p. 35. 

^ Temp,^ vol. I, p. 154. 

* Temp., no. 6. 

* Temp., vol. II, pp. 560-63. 

- \Tenip., yol. I, pp. 499-500. Sec JRAS, 1899, p. 313; 1891, 
p. 378. This is a famous story ; its historical significance is not clear. 

® Temp., vol. I, p, 528. 



1% gorakhnath and the KANPHATA yogis 

power over nature is found, in his causing a twelve-years’ 
drought in Nepal. The story goes^ that Gorakhnath once 
visited Nepal. Because he was not received with sufficient 
respect, he took the clouds, fastened them in one of his 
bundles and sat on them, remaining motionless, in meditation, 
for twelve years. During that time there was no rain in 
Nepal. Finally, it chanced that Matsyendranath passed by, 
and Gorakhnath, unreflecting, arose, out of respect for his 
raru. The clouds escaped thereupon and the drought was 
broken.* 

The illumination of the story, just related, is found in the 
following, in which his wish to have an interview with 
Matsyendranath, who was in an inaccessible part of the 
mountains, supplies the motive. Gorakhnath resorted to the 
device of confining the nine serpents who gave the rain, 
tliereby causing a twelve-years* drought. At last Macchendra- 
nath was obliged to come to Gorakhnath to secure the 
release of the serpents and the return of rain.* Another 
version of the Nepalese legend* relates how Gorakhnath 
attracted the nine Nagas into a hillock, and sat down upon 
it, the twelve years* drought following. The people finally 
appealed to their king, who in turn sought Avalokite^vara 
(Matsyendranath) who lived in the Kapdtal mountain. The 
raja’s old father’s prayers were necessary for success. So he 
was called from retirement and the matter was talked over by 
the king and his father with a venerable teacher. Worship of 
a goddess (Jagimbara Gftanadakini, one of the Saktis) resulted 
in the release of one of the Nagas. Taking this serpent with 
them they made the long and terrible pilgrimage to Kapotal.® 
After a long time, Macchendranath was sufficiently aroused 
from his meditation to realize that Gorakhnath, in Nepal, 
wanted to see him. and was making trouble. Thereupon, he 

* Levi, Le Nepal, vol. I, pp. 352-57. 

* Sec also Oldfield, Sketches from Nepal, vol. II, pp, 325-26. 

* Crooke, Popular Religion and Folk-Lore of Northern India, vol. 
II, pp. 129-30. 

* Wright, History of Nepal, pp. 140-44. 

* Kapdtal lies beyond Kamarup, in the Eastern Him^yas (Levi, 
Le Nepal, vol., I,^. 353). But, the place is evidently Kamarupa itself. 
See Kirkpatri^’s account (1793), Kingdom of Nepdl, p. 190 f. 



LEGEND 


197 


decided to go in person to release the Nagas. Maccbeiidra- 
nath, in the form of a bee, was conveyed into Nepal in an 
earthen pot and the drought was brought to an end. 

Another version of the legends omits the confinement of 
the snakes and attributes the drought to Gorakhnath*s power 
of concentration.^ Gorakhnath, an eminent saint, a disciple 
of Macchendranath, visited Nepal. V/hile tliere he did not 
receive reverent enough attention. He, therefore, sat im- 
movable for tv/elve years on a mound, south of Debi Patan.* 
A long drought ensued. It was felt that the only relief 
was to get Gorakhnath to move. Consequently the king 
of Bhatgaon and an dchdrya (a teacher) made a pilgrimage 
to Kap5tal mountain where Macchendranath resided, and, 
after much trouble, persuaded him to come to Nepal. When 
Macchendranath arrived in Nepal, Gorakhnath constrained 
by reverence for his spiritual superior, abandoned his posture 
and went to pay his respects. Thereupon rain fell copiously.® 

It may be of interest to refer to the influence which 
Gorakhnath was able to exercise over divine beings. This is 
illustrated by hi*^ persuading Brahma, the ‘God of Fate,’ to 
change Vachal’s destiny in order to grant her a son (Guga 
legend).^ Previously Bhagvan had refused the request, but 
Gorakhnath hung from a tree, head downwards, swinging 
over a fire, until the smoke of his burning flesh attracted the 
notice of the god, who then granted Gorakhnath *s prayer. 

To Guga’s wedding he brought a divine company. 

The occult powers of the Yogi are further revealed in his 
use of innocence tests and ordeals. 

In one version of the story of Puran Bhagat® Gorakh- 
nath tests Puran’s innocence by drawing him from the well 
by a thread spun by an unmarried virgin, using it in the 
name of Macchendranath.® His innocence was proved by 
a further test of boiling oil. However, the king, Puran’s 

^ Oldfield, Sketches from Nepal, vol. II, pp. 325-26. 

* The Gurkhas, p. 173. 

* This account seems to combine elements of two stories related 
above. 

* ‘Legends of Guga,’ I A, 1895, p. 51. 

* Temp., vol. II, no. 34. 

* Temp., vol. II, p. 433. 



198 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

father, refused to believe this evidence and accepted the 
story told by his young queen, Lunan, claiming that Gorakh- 
nath, by magic, had saved Puran. Consequently, Puran was 
punished with the loss of hands, feet and sight, and was cast 
into a dry well. 

When Mahita accused Sila Dai, his wife, of intrigue with 
Rasalu, the name of Gorakhnath was called anil she was 
proved innocent by dice.^ In another ordeal by boiling oil she 
was likewise proved innocent. But Mrhita, insisting that 
Gorakhnath had worked a charm to save her, straightway 
became a Yogi, i.e., turned celibate. 

His superhuman powers found expression in other ways; 
for Gorakhnath was able to do terrible things, and people 
were in fear of him and his curses. He sent a terrifying 
dream to Jewar (Guga legend) who then sent for Bachal^ 
his queen, whom he had driven from his palace. When he 
found Puran Bhagat in the well, the great Yogi threatened to 
sink the well to hell should Puran turn to be a wicked man, 
or an evil spirit.^ And he threatened Ranjha that he would 
cause the earth to sink and the Chenab river to dry up, 
should the conch not be restored.'* 

Through prayer to Gorakhnath, Guga was able to shoot 
an arrow into a Brahmani’s pitcher and she was drenched. 
She had refused to give him water.® 

In the legends of Gopicand,® Gorakhnath contested the 
power and the place of his rival, Jalandharnath, and sent a 
follower to break the cooking pots of hii' opponents, to break 
their boxes and ‘to bhwv them away.* He set fire to their 
bodies. 

Allusion has already been made to the humiliation of the 
women of Karu.” 

Popular descriptions of the Yogis extend to departments 
of magic and to a knowledge of tenets of the Yoga. 


^ Temp,^ vol. I, p. 243. 

* Tetnp. vol. I, p. 158. 

* Temp-t vol. II, no. 34. 

* Temp.t vol. II, p. 551. 

* RTCP, vol. I, p. 174. Temp., %oI. I, p. 167. 

* Wright, History cj Nipdl, pp. 140-44. 

See pp 187, 188. 



LEGEND 


199 


Gorakhnath had a magic bag, or wallet, of wonderful 
potency, from which he drew gifts of various kinds. He took 
out of it the barley grains,^ or the apple,-* or the flowers,® or 
the ashes'* which conferred the gift of sons; and also the 
ashes which he transmuted Into gems, and supplies of goods 
and clothing for Guga’s betrothal.^ Similarly, he lent glory 
to the wedding in Assam.® From this bag came the wonderful 
ear-rings which Puran Bhagat receiv< d at his initiation,"^ and 
from the same sort of bag Puran Bhagat took the grapes and 
rice which Luman, In’s father^s queen, swallowed whole in 
order to obtain a son.® 

With his magic sandals he threatened Puran Bhagat, when 
he found him in the w^ell, that, should he prove to be an 
horror or some dangerous being, he would strike the dry 
well and sink it into hell.® He threatened Ranjha, who had 
hidden the conch-shell in the bank of the river Chenab, 
that he would strike the bank witli his shoe, make the earth 
sink and the river dry up.*^ 

By means of a magic handkerchief one of Gorakhnath’s 
disciples restored sight to Puran’s mother.** 

His mat, or carpet, was so sensitive that a disciple at a 
long distance, needing help, thought of Gorakhnath, and the 
carpet trembled,*® thus gaining the attention of the Yogi. 
On this same carpet Gorakhnath ascended to Bhagavan’s 
heaven.*® 

Kabir refers to Gorakhnath^s philosopher’s stone in the 
following words: 

7 he cut mango will not blossom, the slit ear cannot be reunited; 
whose loss is it, if they apply not the philosopher’s stone that 
Gorakhnath had ? 

Ashes have magic powers, and with those from Gorakh- 
nath’s sacred fire, in Patala, Visnu created the world, by 

^ I A, 1895, p. 49. » OCC5, p. 67. » Temp., no. 6. 

* RTCP, voi. I, p. 184. lA, 1895, p. 49. 

* Tevtp.y no. 6. ’ Temp,, vol. II, p. 445. 

* Temp.y vol. II, p. 454, • Temp., vol. 11, no. 34. 

Temp., vol. Hi p. 551. ** Te^np., voh II, p. 453. 

*» lA, 1895, pp. 51, 52. « I A, 1895, p. SO. 

Wi., p. 87. Quoted from the Btjak of Kabir. Philosopher’s 
stone: Sanskrit, Spar iumanii Vimdi, paras pat thar Sonic say that 
the philosopher’s stone is still being sought for m Nepal 



200 gorakhnath and the kanphata yogis 

scattering them on the primeval waters.^ Ashes were used 
in other wonderful ways, as in changing men into animals 
and back a^in, and as gifts with magical properties, as 
already mentioned. 

Many allusions to the Yoga technique are found scattered 
through the legendary materials. 

Whose breath is returning (through) the six [mystical] spheres [of 
the human body], (whose) thought is intent on vacuum.* 

Jogis meditate on God the Creator whom they call unseen, whose 
form is minute, whose name is the Bright One, and who is the image 
of their bodies.® 

They know in ecstasy the experience of music heard in the 
head and call it kiUjuri (which is the name of a stringed 
musical instrument).* 

Nanak gives a general description: 

* To remain seated without support, 

To collect and restrain the five evil passions, 

To sleep little and to take scant food, 

To keep guard over the saintly body, 

To be constant in devotion, penance, self-restraint 
and remembrance of God — 

Nanak saith, these are the marks of a Jogi.*® 

And in the Sdkhis of Kabir other aspects of Yoga are 
exhibited. 

Gorakh, enamoured as he was of Rama, is dead; his body was not 
burnt [the Jogis bury their dead], the flesh has decayed, and is 
turned to clay, and such rank as the Kauravas enjoy does he obtain 
[bodily annihilation].* 

Accounts are given of Gorakhnath and his followers and 
references are made to their modes of life and to their dress 
and equipment. 

Gorakhnath himself is described as a parmhams (an ascetic 
of the highest order, one who has subdued all his senses by 
abstract meditation), mighty and devout. 

* Cre, vol. Ill, pp. 153-^; RTCP, vol. II, p. 391. 

* Trumppf p. 472. 

® Mac., vol. I, p.,225, note 2 reads; ‘The Yogis, when in intensely 
deep meditation, cl^e their eyes. On opening them and looking up- 
ward they suppose that they behold God in their own image in the 
firmament.’ 

* Mac.,, vol. I, p. 274 and note 2. 

* Mac., vol. I, p. 160. • Wu, p. 86. 



LEGEND 


201 

He is beloved of God and his worship has been accepted of the 
Almighty. You can ask what you please of him.^ 

Thus spoke Gorakhnath’s disciples of him to Puran Bhagat: 

y®J*y great is his beauty, say all men and women; no maid in 
Indians court has greater beauty. He is like the swan of Sarwar.* 

Visnu described him as the greatest of saints, who only 
could supply patience.^ 

The Panjab legends frequently mention Sialkot and Tilla 
as favourite resorts of Gorakhnath and of his followers.^ 
Sometimes he was accompanied by four hundred disciples,^ 
at other times by five thousand, two hundred visible, and five 
thousand, two hundred invisible, disciples.® To Guga's wed- 
ding in Assam, Gorakhnath went gloriously with carriages, 
horses and palkis, a splen<.iid retinue.’ 

This i%not however, the austere picture brought out in 
the discourses that Yogis carried on vnth candidates for the 
order. 

At times his followers slept in tents;® or in huts.® 
Gorakhnath said to Ranjha, I sleep on the ground and have 
no bed coverings; and, again, 1 live among stones and pot- 
sherds.^® Yogis are penniless.^^ 

The appearance of these Yogis is incidentally described. 
They were evidently familiar persons everywhere. They wore 
very little clothing, as a rule, and covered their bodies with 
ashes. If they wore a cloak, or robe, it was coloured with 
ochre.^® Some wore a patched cloak others garments of 
deer-skins.^® Rasaiu asked for a deer-skin coat,^® They carried 

^ Stvyn?!., no. 33; Temp.y no. 34. 

* The Mansarowar Lake, the fabled dwelling of the Hamsa on 
Mount Kailas in the Himalayas. Note, p. 130 in Temp.y vol. I ; 
Szvynn.y no. 33. 

® Crooke, Popular Religion and Folk-^Lore of Northern India, vol, 11, 
p. 154. 

* lAy 1895, pp. 49, 50, 53. ^ L4, 1895, p. 53. 

* Temp.y vol. II, p. 375. ’ Temp., no. 6. 

Swynn.y no. 33. ® Trmt , vol. II, no. 18. 

Temp.y vol. II. p. 549. “ Ternp.y vol. II, p. 9. 

** Mac.y vol. VI, p. 243. 

Temp.y vol. 1, p. 60; vol III, p. 265. 

Mac.y vol. VI, pp. 60, 168, 231, 243. 

Temp.y vol. I, p. 60; vol. II, p. 375. Temp.y vol. 11, p. 548. 



202 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

a patched quilt/ wore a black necklace^ and a horn on a 
thread^ and carried a conch/ a wallet of cloth/ a club/ 
and a staff.*^ Some had their heads shaved/ while others 
wore their hair in a knot/ or matted.^® In initiating Puran 
Bhagat, Gorakhnath cut off some of his hair.^^ 

There are many references to the fact that these Yogis had 
their ears split and wore great ear-rings. Of Ranjha it is 
recorded that his right ear-ring was of baked clay and his 
left one of unbaked clay.^^ 

They practised control of the breath and were concerned 
about the nadis.^^ Some were under a vow of silence.^® 

They sat cross-legged/^ and in other postures/® and kept 
a sacred fire (dhuni).^® 

In begging they called out '^Alakh^ AlaW^ and ‘Gorakh, 
Gorakh.’2i 

They did not enter houses.^^ Some were so overbearing 
as to be described as warriors taking alms by force. Accusa- 
tions are made of hypocrisy/^ and of bad habits, such as 
drinking^® and the use of drugs. 


1 rr„ pp. xl, 475. 

® Temp.y vol. II, no. 18. 

3 Mac.y vol. VI, p. 169. Tr., p. 475. 

* Temp., vol. I (Sila Dai); vol. II, no. 34. 

® lAy 1906, p. 213 ; Temp.y vol, II, no. 34; Mac.y vol. VI, pp. 199, 
169,243; Tr.yp.xl; vol. I, p. 162; Tr, p. 475. 

® Mac.y vol. VI, p. 231. 

^ Tr.y pp. xl, 475; Mac.y vol. I, p. 162. 

" Temp.y vol. II, p. 548; Mac.y vol. p, 60; vol. VI, p. 167. 

• Temp.y vol. I, p. 336. 

Mac.y vol. VI, p. 272. Swynn.y no. 33. 

Mac.y vol. VI, pp. 168, 231, 243; Tr.y p. xl; Mac.y vol. I, pp. 60, 
162; OMASy p. 267; Wiy p. 87; Tr.y p. 475. 

Temp.y vol. II, p. 55. Mac.y vol. VI, p. 168. 

Mac.y vol. VI, p. 194. Temp.y vol. I, p. 332. 

Temp.y vol. II, no. 34, 

Mac.y vol. VI, p. 168; vol, I, p. 41. 

Temp.y vol. II, no. 34. 

Terrip.y vol. I, p. 332. Alakh, Sk. Alak§ya «= unseen, invisihl*;. 
without shape or form; ‘the Imperishable Name;’ the cry of 
mendicants, begging. Steele, Tales of the Panjaby pp. 252, 321. 
« Mac.y vol. VI, p. 263. 

** Su'vnn.y no. 33. Temp.y vol. II, p. 435. 

Mac.y vol. I, pp. 314, 315, 350-2, 356-7; Mac.y vol. VI. p. 270. 

*» Mac., vol. VI, pp. 154, 255. 



LEGEND 


203 


The initiation of Yogis attracts a good deal of attention 
and makes a deep impression. At the ceremony offerings 
were made.^ Ranjha brought five rupees and betel leaves 
when he asked Gorakhnath for initiation.^ When Gopicand 
was made a Yogi a great company was present. Gorakhnath 
came on a chariot of flowers and the whole affair was on a 
grand scale. Gopicand made handsome presents. Both 
Vaisnavites and Saivites w^ere present,^ and Balnath also.^ 
In fact, his motlier, Mayana, brought to the ceremonies 1,600 
ascetics, and 

In his chariot of flowers descended Gorakhnath the Vidyadhara 
(wizard) . . thc'-e (was) no counting the number of FIddisiddhas 
with theirs ears cut.® 

The essential parts of the ceremony were the splitting of 
the ear, tonsure, the covering the body with ashes and the 
giving of the mantra. Gorakhnath pierced Puran Bhagat’s 
ears, put the mudra (ear-rings) in them, and then whispered 
the mantra in his ear. {Kdnon men phunk lagdt, ‘blew into 
his ears.’®) 

Having shorn off some of his hair, he pierced his ears with his 
own hands and put the rings in them, and so Puran became a Yogi.’ 

Bhartrhari said to Nanak: 

The form of the J'oif is the ear-ring, the patched quilt, the wallet, 
the staff and the horn, the sound of which is emitted in the 
Universe.® 

The shaving of the head of Gopicand took one hundred 
days and the cut hair became a ‘hairy Gahgfi’ and began to 
flow away.^ In the rush to pierce the cars of Gopicand: 

They snatched tiie razor from the hands of the ndpit, and gave it 
into the hands of the car-cutter. Even as the ear-cutter took the razor 
in his hand, he cried, ‘Ram, Ram,* and cut both the ears of the king. 
They fastened to the king’s ear an ear-ring of crystal. They clothed 


1 Temp., vol. II, pp. 443, 444. 

^ Temp., vol, IL p. 547, 

® JASBe, vol. XLVII, pp. 221 ff. 

^ JASBe, vol. Xl.Vir, pp. 222, 223. 

® jfASBe, vol. XLVTI, pp. 222, 223. 

® Temp., vol. I, p. 332. 

’ Sivrnn., no. 33. ® Tr,, p. xl. 

» JASBe, vol. Xl..Vn, p. 222. 



204 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

him with a cloth covered with holy symbols. Five Vai$navas came 
and dressed the king in a lahgotL A lahgofi with a string did they 
put upon him. They placed around his neck a Rama rosary. 

The case of Gopicand illustrates the degradation and 
poverty into which men of his class descended. His guru, 
Hadi, who was a sweeper (Pom), gave him food consisting of 
the leavings of his alms, and Gopicand says as he looked at it 
in dismay : 

Rice which my dogs would turn aside from — such have I, a king, 
come to eat. 

At initiation they put into his hands a gourd platter and 
they gave him a torn quilt and a torn lahgotL^ He received 
a boon: 

Thou shalt go to the three corners of the earth, but shalt not go to 
Yama’s dwelling.* 

Gopicand, the king, was reduced to great straits. He left 
his kingdom and wandered in the jungle, living on leaves of 
trees. One day he came to his mother^s city. His mother 
recognized him and called to him. She said, ‘You are my 
son; I am grieved at seeing you in this condition. You must 
be very verminous, let me clean you.' While removing the 
vermin she pulled out a hair. The king exclaimed, ‘Are you 
removing vermin or pulling out my hair?' She said, ‘Does 
it hurt you when a hair is pulled, or what?' He said, ‘Yes.’ 
Whereupon his mother replied, ‘If you feel pain from getting 
one hair pulled, don’t you think the trees from which you 
have been picking leaves must also have felt pain?' For this 
reason he gave up picking leaves to eat.^ And Gopicand is 
reported as saying; 

When I was lord of my kingdom, O my mother, then did I eat rice 
in many a golden dish. Now I am a beggar with not a single Kaori; 

I cannot eat from a golden plate. 

He took a plantain leaf and cut it. Thereon he placed a 
little rice. He took the shell of a broken gourd and from it 
drank a little water. He washed his face and hands wuth watefif^ 

1 JASBe, vol. XLVII, p. 221. 

* JASBe, vol. XLVII, pp. 223. There are references to his not 
having died. 

® Tuhfdt^ul-Karafhy quoted by Carter. 



LEGEND 205 

Then what did he do? He uttered the words ‘ Sri Krsna* and 
ate food. One mouthful, two mouthfuls, five mouthfuls he 
ate. Then he looked towards the water which was trickling 
out of the broken gourd. He put his face to the earth and 
sipped water. ^ His lot for many years was a hard one, in 
long journeys and heavy burdens at the direction of his guru, 
and years in prison in the house of a harlot. He finally 
collapsed carrying heavy burdens.^ 

There are many passages describing the difficulties and 
the utter renunciation that initiation entailed. To Ranjha it 
was said: 

The taste of a Jogi is bitter and sour. You will have to dress as a 
Jogi, to wear dirty clothes, long hair, cropped skull, and to beg your 
way through life. You will have to meditate on your guru and hold 
your breath in your mid-most throat. You will have to give up the 
pleasures of birth, to cease to rejoice when friends come or grieve 
when they die. You will have to abstain from casting eyes on women. 
You will have to become divinely intoxicated by taking kand^ mult 
posit opium and other narcotic drugs.® 

You will have to think the world a mere vision. You will have to 
go on long pilgrimages to Jagannath, the Godavari, the Ganges, and 
the Jumna. Jog is no easy task. You Jats (i.e. luxury-loving princes) 
cannot attain jog. ^ 

Thus the novice was warned against the difficulties of the 
ascetic life and discouraged from choosing the life of a Yogi. 

1 JASBct vol. XLVII, pp. 223-4. 

* JASBct vol. XLVII, pp. 221 ff. Allison, The Sadhst quotes a 
verse attributed to Gopicand, 

® Posit postOt an infusion of opium poppy heads (Smith, Oxford 
Hislory of IndtUy p. 412). A preparation of laudanum, arrack, sugar 
and cardamoms, very evil in its effects. Bhahgy a drink made from 
hemp leaves. It is conducive to quarrelling. Gdhjay a narcotic and 
intoxicant traditionally consumed by the warrior caste. It is obtained 
from the hemp plant; the dried leaves being smoked in the form 
which is familiar to some as cannabis indica cigarettes. Another 
form is carast which is the resinous extract from the stalk of the 
plant. The harmful effects of gdhja smoking are more obvious to the 
laymen than those of opium, as it is seen to upset the mental equili- 
brium more quickly and more permanently. The alternate stages of 
^citement; and depression soon become more marked, till the 
confirmed gd^a-taker becomes useless for life’s ordinary activities. 
(See Indian Social Reformer t November 20, 1926. See also An Essay 
on Hasheesh,) 

^ lA, 1921 (Hir and Rifijha), p. 32 and also the last page of the 
article. 



206 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Renunciation was complete. 7'hese warnings are a des- 
cription of the ascetic life. Gorakhnath said to Puran Bhagat: 

Jog you must not think of. I'he performance of jog is beyond you. 
You will have to suffer hunger and thirst, to bear trials with patience, 
and to renounce the world. You will have to leave behind all the 
pleasures of sense and to enter upon a. life most difficult to pursue.^ 

To Raftjha the question was put: 

What is the good of begging if a man has no belief? Only those in 
love with death can acquire Good men subdue their passions by 
riding on the horse of patience and holding the reins of remem- 
brance. jfog means to be dead while alive. One has to sing the !==ong 
of nonentity using one’s .n. eagre body as a guitar. One’s self has to 
be entirely absorbed. It is no child’s play. You w ill never be able to 
undergo What is the use of asking for it? Child, listen, God has 
made his abode in this body of dust. He is in everything as a thread 
runs through the beads. He is the breath of life in the living. He is, 
as it were, the spirit of bhang and opium. He is in the life of the 
world as colour is in the tnethhdi (indigo). He permeates everything 
even as blood runs through all the body of men." 

Again: 

W^ho takes saiiitship renounces all the desires of his heart. The 
saintship is hard and difficult in the world. Put off the five desires 
and the twenty-five (lusts). Then canst thou be a J« gi disciple. 
Renouncing thy whole family and sons, live alone ir. the W’orld. 
The point of a sword is a vi ry difficult thing (to rest on). Imagine 
not this saintship to be easy.^ 

Gopicancl forsook harem and throne and family ties.’* The 
legend of Raja Gopicand as played at Jagadhri in the Ambala 
District contains a long account of the persuasions of queens, 
daughter, sister and mother to induce him to break his vows.^ 
He said, 

I put away rule, power, w'e^lth, goods and greed. 

And, as he was led from the palace door, he was told that 
earthly love, affections, desires and lust are as the shadow of 
a tree, the illusion of a dream. 

Bharitri had to bring alms from his queens, calling them 

^ Suyrm., p. 238. * ]Ay 1921, Supplement, p. 32. 

® Advice to Mahita in the legend of SilaDaJ. 7V?w/>., vol. I, p. 327. 

^ Tcntp.y vol. II, no. 18. 

^ See also the account by iSantinath of the Panjab. Temp.^ vol. II, 
no. 18. 



LEGEND 


207 


‘mother* and was on probation for twelve years before 
Gorakhnath would receive him.^ 

Puran Bhagat was told that he must treat every one, man 
and woman, alike.^ To Ranjha it was said: 

Call the young women ‘sister’ and the old women 'mother.’ * 

Ranjha had to put away chieftainship. Still, he was allowed 
to think of Hir and even to send his black crow^ to get news 
of her. 

Sometimes the initiate had his resolution put to the test. 
Puran Bhagat was sent back to the palace and his sincerity 
was tested under the enticements of his stepmother, the 
queen.^ He was finally sent with the queen to the palace to 
reign, but escaped.® Again he was sent to his father the king 
and his owm mother and they endeavoured to get him to 
assume the kingship, but he refused,® and went back to Tilla. 

Gorakhnath spoke of the Yogi’s vow as irrevocable: 

Whose clothes (Yogi’s) are red and whose minds are clear, return 
not from the wilds, is a Jogi every one’s friend ?’ 

There is the o^her side of the story, and the free life of the 
Yogis is often depicted, wherein asceticism is used as a means 
of access to women of the harems. One of the Rasalu stories 
may be taken as an illustration.® 

A popular ‘fling* at the ascetic may be quoted in the words 
of another faith : 

You get your ears bored and put some ashes to your body and all 
the w’orld reveres you as a saint. Without toil or labour you can be as 
eminent as Nadir Shah. The mysteries of birth and the sadness of 
death have no concern for the faqlr. He sleeps in the mosque free 
from the care of this impure world and begs and eats. He can scold 
people and incur no blame. If you call yourself as pit or a faqir 
everybody is your servant.* 

This quotation expresses the commonly held belief that 
not many who don the Yogi’s garb are sincere. 

to call his queen ‘mother’ was to renounce finally the con- 
jugal relation. RTCPt vol. II, p. 404. * Swynn., p. 3L 

* Tcmp.y vol. II, p. 553. * Temp.y vol. II, p. 441. 

* Temp,y vol. II, p. 447. * Temp.y vol. II, p. 453. 

’ Temp,y vol. 11, p. 447. 

* Tales, of thePattjaby pp. 250 ff. 

* lAy 1921, p. 31 f. 



CHAPTER TEN 

THE FORERUNNERS OF THE GORAKHNATHIS'^ 

Dissatisfactions with life arose far back in India ; and the 
ascetic^ and the mechanisms of the austere life, are in 
evidence in the earliest literature. The Diksa rite,^ for 
example, includes elements which are already in the Rig Veda 
ascetic in form. And even then the contradiction of natural 
desire, mortification of the body by unnatural inhibitions of 
all its desires (the conception of tapas) occupies a la-ge place. 
Early the term tapas, applies to ascetic practices i general. 
The efficacy of the endurance of discomforts i id of the 
difficulties of performance are recognized. The enducement 
of ecstatic states, of hysteria, of trance and of excitements 
through drugs and sex stimulation likewise are then known. 
These point toward mystic union with Reality and the 
acquisition of unusual powers. Tapas engendered strength, 
great in the extreme, involving mystic and creative power. 
Creation itself had its rise in tapas.^ In the Brdhmanas 
Prajapati practices tapas in order to acquire creative powers. 
In those writings also is found the recognition of the efficacy 
of asceticism in the pursuit of knowledge. ‘Heaven is 
established on the air, the air on the earth, the earth on the 
waters, the waters on truth, the truth on the mystic love (of 
the sacrifice) and that on tapas In the Satapata 
Brdhmana and afterwards, the gods create the worlds through 
the power of tapas.^ Further on, while some of the earlier 

^ On this and the two following sections, see ERE^ vol. II, pp* 
63 fF. 

f Keith, Religion and Philosophy of the Veda^ vol. I, p. 301. 

« Rig Veda, 10, 129, 3. 

* Ait. Br., 11, 6, 4. ® E,g., 6, 1, 13. 



THE FORERUNNERS OF THE GORAKHNATHIS 209 

Upani^ads express doubts on the matter,^ in the later (verse) 
Upanisadsy from the Kena on, its value for the attainment of 
knowledge is recognized and is often insisted upon.^ The 
Jdbdla upholds an extreme asceticism and asks that men root 
out all desires.^ Rhys Davids says that the nearer we get to 
Buddhism, the greater the importance we see attached to 
tapas (self-torture). Nowhere else in the world, he says, has 
the art of pain been so much studied as in India. 

In the Epics austerities have become longer and harder and 
self-mortification has become a permanent idea and practice 
in the religious life of India. In the Rdmdyana are to be 
found pictures of hermitage after hermitage famous for their 
ascetics who have acquired powers and privileges through 
prolonged austerities The Mahdbhdraia in like manner sets 
forth this strenuous life. 

Again, in the Upanisads, asceticism is related to special 
stages in life.^ The conception of the A^ramaSy * places of 
asceticism,’ arose coniplicating the old rules of life.^ In the 
the earliest Upani^ads the ascetic ideal is scarcely more than 
an alternative way of life beside that of the student and 
householder ; but, in the later Upanisads the four stages are 
ordered.® 

The powers of tapas and meditation, those arising from 
putting one’s self in rapport with creative force, are declared 
to be supernatural. In the old days the worshipper tried, 
through concentration on the hymns to Agni, to identify 
himself with the glowing world energy resident in all tilings. 
In tapas he expressed Agni’s eternal essence and activity, as 
illumination broke over the tapasvin, Tapas became the final 
world power out of which appeared the darkness, the prime- 
val ocean, the* creation : ‘ From fervour kindled to its height 
eternal law and truth were born.’’’^ And in Manu^ we read, 


1 Bfh, Up., 3, 8, 10; 4, 4, 22. 

* Keith, Religion and Philosophy of the Veda, vol. II, pp. 514 ff.; 

33; Prasna, 1, 10; Mund., 1, 2, 11. 

* Radhakrishnan, Indian Philosophy, vol. I, p. 510, 

* Bfh. Up., Ckand Up., I A, 1923, p. 278. 

^ Keith, Religion and Philosophy of the Veda, vol. 11, p. 587, 

E.g., Jdbdla. See Deussen, The Philosophy of the Upanishais, 
pp. 367 ff. ’ See Rig Veda, 10, 190, 1. • 1, 12. 


14 



210 gorakhnAth and the kAnphata yogis 

' Just by means of his own fixed attention (dhydndt) he splits 
the egg in two/ These attitudes, far apart in time, speaic of 
the same view of extraordinary and creative power for man, 
and the means thereto. 

In Mann the formal conditions and rules for the austere 
life are set forth. ^ Here the rights and privileges of the 
ascetic are confined to the twice-born. In the sixth lecture^ 
are set forth in detail the third and fourth stages of life 
(Asrama). While a considerable portion of the chapter is 
now obsolete, still, it exhibits the earlier ideal. In the third 
stage the individual lives a veiy strict life, but continues to 
perform certain ritualistic acts. His food is mostly wild 
stuffs, and he may restrict it greatly in well-known ways. 
Austerities such as the use of the five fires, uncomfortable 
clothes, and silence are described. In the fourth stage the 
man severs all family and social ties, takes to begging, cats 
little, meditates, is indifferent to every sort of conciition, and 
looks upon life as unattractive. 

The references given above will suffice to show how ascetic 
ideas developed and permeated the thought and life of ancient 
India. Such notions have prevailed continuously down to 
the present time. 

If it be objected that the conceptions of asceticism alluded 
to above form a one-sided picture, it must be remembered 
that this study has to do with Yogis wliose practice is that of 
the Hadia Yoga.*^ 

Not only is there very early the presence of the ideas of 
asceticism, but also the figure of the ascetic himself, almost 
as he appears today, is found in the oldest literature. The 
"mad’ rnuui is described in the following hymn:^ 

'Phe hairy one supports the fire, 

The poison-fiuiJ, and heaven and earth; 

’ And in other works on Dhartttn likewise. For refeiences 
EHE. vol. 1 1 p.. m. 

“ Manu, i-87. 

^ Sec KiuH-ar, V, J., Studies in the VedanUi, chap, eight^^and 
especially p 134. 

fiifi Veda, 10, 13h Tlie translation is from Gris\\ old’s l^eJi^ion 
of thi Rii> Vida, pp 33Sif See Marstiall, vol. 1. pp. 5317, and plates 
XI A 111 and C* lor evid« nee of posture and other elements charac- 
teristic of Indian asceticism in the Indus Civilization. 



THE FORERUNNERS OF THE GORAKHNATHIS 211 

He is all sky to look upon, 

The hairy one is called this lifi:ht. 

The Munis, girdled with the wind, 

Wear garments soiled, of yellow hue; 

After the wind’s course follow they, 

When once the gods have entered them. 

Transported with the ecstasy 
Of Munihood we mount th«- winds; 

\e, mortal men, are able now 
To see our bodies and no more. 

He flies through regions of the air. 

Beholding all the various forms, - 
The Muni, who was made a friend 
Of every god for T>unistry, 

The steed of Vata, Vayu’s friend, 

The Muni, by the gods impelled, 

In both the oceans hath his home, 

]n eastern and in western seas. 

Treading the path of sylvan beasts, 

Gandharvas and Apsarascs, 

The hairy one knows every thought, 

Sweet and most stimulating friend. 

Vayu has twirled for him; for him 
He breaketh things most hard to bend; 

When he, the hairy one, has drunk 
With Rudra from the poison-cup. 

Concerning this hymn Keith says:^ 

He differs entindy from the Brahman student or the man under- 
going consecration, for his ecstasy is not connected either with the 
sacrifice or with any of the rites ancillary to it or to the entry of the 
youth into the full life of the community. His mortal body men see, 
but he himself fan s on the path of the Apsarascs, the Gandharvas, 
the beasts of the wild, he dwells in the east and the western ocean, 
the steed of Vata, the friend of Vayu, inspired by the gods. He 
knows secret desires, he is the dearest friend, he supports Agni and 
lioth the worlds, he is the heaven and the light, and his ecstasy, it 
seems, is due to a potent draught which, with Rudra, he drinks from 
a goblet, perhaps a reference to the use of some poison to produce 
exhi^jUition or hypnosis. His hair is long, his soiled garments are of 
yellow hue. 

Hauer, in Dcr Yoga Ah Heilweg^ expresses the opinion that 
in this hymn there are materials belonging to the Rudra- 


* Religion and Philosophy of the Veda^ vol. II, p, 402. * P. 12. 



212 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Siva cycle. The hymn describes those primitive ecstatics who, 
under the intoxication of holy poisons, overcome all earthly 
difficulty, reach out to cosmic forces and become like the 
gods in possessing vision and unusual powers. They know 
file earthly fetters which bind men and know how to bring 
help to their fellows. 

The fifteenth book of the Atharva Veda appertains to the 
Vratya, a seeker after ecstatic trance, a dealer in the super- 
natural, a type of Yogi. These were Aryans outside the sphere 
of Vedic culture who were admitted into Brahman circles by 
means of ceremonial. Certain of their hymns, apparently, 
constitute such a ritual. They practised neither agriculture 
nor commerce nor did they follow the rules of the Brahma- 
charya,^ 

Hauer^ lays considerable emphasis upon the importance of 
this cult in the history of Yoga. The Vratyas had intimate 
dealings with Prajapati and were worshippers of Rudra-Siva, 
holding an early form of the theistic Sahkhya- Yoga philosophy, 
He holds that they were ascetics, possessing a ritual, who 
later found their way into Brahmanism. It is of interest to 
note that they laid emphasis upon the doctrine of the breaths, 
naming three, five, six, ten and even more, assimilating them 
to functions of the cosmic process. Among their severe 
practices (tapas) is mentioned that of standing for a year 
upright. They moved about the country in strange proces- 
sions, using song and choral ceremonial, dealing out blessings 
and curses according as they were honoured or offended. 
Their clothing and ornaments were fantastic; their turban 
was peculiar and their white garments were marked with 
black figures. The Vratya stood upon a cart drawn by horses 
and mules and carried a magic bowl and a spear. Before him 
went swift runners. 

He was accompanied by a prostitute. The Vratya repre- 
sented the god and the prostitute the goddess. Their practices 
and ceremonial suggest the later Tantric ritual in the use of 


^ Sec Vedic Index. 

• Der Yoga Ah Heilweg, pp. 8 ff . Keith, Religion and Philosophy 
the Veda, vol. II, pp. 338, 402, does not follow Hauer with reference 
to the Vratya. 



THE FORERUNNERS OF THE GORAKHNATHIS 213 

intoxicating drink, fiesh» and grain, and in the association of 
Rudra with the goddess. The Vratya seems to have known 
,the experiences of concentration, of soul expansion, of the 
f^enhancement of personality-consciousness similar to those 
described by Patahjali in connection with samadhi, experiences 
which occur when the man in trance is raised above his own 
narrow I, over time and space. He was the greatly honoured 
holy man, possessed of supernatural power, approximating 
divine personality, wandering about the country. 

Probably before 800 b.c. the Vaikhanasa^ appears, '^fhe 
Parwrdjakay BhiksUy the wandering beggar and the Vana- 
prastha, or anchorite, are familiar forms before the rise of 
Buddhism. And the Upanisads know the Sannyasi, the 
renouncer striving for the knowledge of the Brahma- Atman.* 
Realizing the Atman, men, liberated, exalted in mind, 

gave up completely the life of the family and the world and became 
wandering, homeless, celibate ascetics, without p>os8ession8, without 
responsibilities, devoted altogether to the life of the Atman.* 

Witli the story of the Buddha we meet full-fledged familiar 
asceticism. While Gautama turned aside for extremes in 
this, as in all things, still, Brahman and Jain laid emphasis 
upon such a life. The description of the company to which 
the Buddha joined himself, as set forth popularly in The 
Light of Asiaf is exact enough for illustration: 

Midway on Ratnagiri's groves of calm, 

Beyond the city, but below the caves, 
lodged such as hold the body foe to soul, 

And flesh a beast which men must chain and tame 
With bitter pains, till sense of pain is killed. 

And tortured nerves vex torturer no more : 

Yogis and Brahmacharis, Bhikshus, all 
A gaunt and mournful band, dwelling apart. 

Some day and night had stood with lifted arms. 

Till — drained of blood and withered by disease — 

Their slowly wasting joints and stiffened limbs 
Jutted from sapless shoulders like dead forks 
From forest trunks. Others had clenched their hands 
So long and with so fierce a fortitude, 


^ See also Gautama Dharma l§a5tra, vol. Ill, 26. 

See Keith, Religion and Philosophy of the Veda, vol. 11, pp. 589 ff. 
FOJRL, p. 52. * Pp. 115, 116, 117. 



214 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

The claw'like nails grew through the festered palm. 

Some walked on sandals spiked ; some with sharp flints 
Gashed breast and brow and thigh, sscarred these with fire. 
Threaded their flesh with jungle thorns and spits, 
Besmeared with mud and ashes, crouching foul 
In rags of dead men wrapped about their loins. 

Certain there were inhabited the spots 
Where death-pyres smouldered, cowering defiled 
With corpses for their company, and kites 
Screaming around them o’er the funeral-spoils ; 

Certain who cried five hundred times a day 
The names of Shiva, knit with hissing snakes 
About their sun-tanned necks and hollow flanks, 

One palsied foot drawn up against the ham. 

So gathered they, a grievous company; 

Crowns blistered by the blazing heat, eyes bleared. 

Sinews and muscles shrivelled, visages 
Haggard and wan as slain men’s, five days dead ; 

Here crouched one in the dust who noon by noon 
Meted a thousand grains of millet out, 

Ate it with famished patience, seed by seed. 

And so starved on; there one who bruised his pulse 
With bitter leaves lest palate should be pleased ; 

And next, a miserable saint self-maimed. 

Eyeless and tonguelcss, sexless, crippled, deaf; 

The body by the mind being thus stripped 
For glory of much suffering, and the bliss 
Which they shall win — say holy books — whose woe 
Shames gods that send us woe, and makes men gods 
Stronger to suffer than Hell is to harm. 

A description from the Rdmdyana^ runs as follows: 

Vaikhanasas who love the wild. 

Pure hermits Balakhiyas styled. 

Good Sarhprak§alas, saints who live 
On rays which moon and daystar give : 

Those who with leaves their lives sustain, 

And those who pound with stones their grain: 

And they who live in pools, and those 
Whose corn, save teeth, no winnow knows: 

Those who for beds the cold earth use. 

And those who -very couch rcfUvSe: 

And those condemned to ceaseless pains, 

Whose single foot their weight sustains ; 

And those who sleep neath open skies, 

Whose food the wave or air supplies, 

And hermits pure who spend their nights. 


Book 3, Canto 6. Griffith’s translation. 



THE FORERUNNERS OF THE GORAKHNATHIS 215 

On ground prepared for sacred rites : 

Those who on hills theic* vigil hold. 

On dripping clothes around them fold; 

The devotees who live for prayer. 

Or the five fires unflinching bear. , . . 

There is no need to continue to set forth the presence of 
the ascetic in ancient India but it is interesting to read about 
the ascetics whom the Greeks met during Alexander’s so- 
journ in India in 326 n.c.^ 

At Taksha^ila, so far as we know, the Greeks first noticed Indian 
ascetics. The report reached Alexander himself of a strange set of 
men who were to be seen naked somew^here near the city, ‘practis- 
ing endurance, men commanding a great reverence among the 
people. It was no use his sending for them, since they would 
certainly refuse to come ; those who wished to learn their secret 
must go to them. Alexander, however, on his side, felt he could not 
go to them consistently with his dignity: so he chose an envoy, a 
Greek officer named Onesicritus, who had been a disciple of the 
Cynic philosopher, Diogenes, a figure obviously akin to the Indian 
ascetics. Onesicritus, in the book he afterwards wrote, gave an 
account of his interesting mission, and we may still read it in 
Strabo’s version. He found fifteen ascetics some ten miles from the 
city, sitting naked and motionless in a sun so burning that one could 
not even walk over the stones with bare feet. Onesicritus could only 
communicate with them through a series of three interpreters, but 
he made them understand that the Yavana king would like to learn 
their wisdom. The ascetic to whom he first addressed himself 
answered bluntly that no one coming in the bravery of European 
clothes — cavalry cloak and broad-brimmed hat and top-boots, such 
as the Macedonians wore — could learn their wisdom. To do that, he 
must strip naked and learn to sit on the hot stones beside them. 
Another answered more mildly that it was really very creditable for 
such a man as Alexander to desire to know something of the deeper 
wisdom, but one must remember that to attempt to convey their 
teaching through three interpreters, common men incapable of 
understanding more than the mere words, would he like trying to 
make water flow clear through mud. They seem however to have 
made an attempt, and then they asked Onesicritus whether among 
the Yavanas there was any teaching of this kind, and he told them 
about Pythagoras and Socrates and his old master, Diogenes. The 
: scetics seemed pleased, but expressed regret that the wise men of 
nhe^Greeks had clung to such superfluities as clothes. One of these 
ascetics was ultimately persuaded by the raja of Taksha 9 ila to 
accompany Alexander and return to clothes and a worldly life. His 


^ The Cambridge History of India, vol. I, pp. 358 ff. Quoted by 
permission of Macmillan and Company, Publishers. 



216 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

companions considered it an apostasy, and followed him with 
reproaches. The name of this Indian, who remained a notable figure 
in Alexander’s entourage, was one which Plutarch reproduces as 
‘Sphines,* but the Greeks, catching among the Indian words of 
greeting which he exchanged wdth his fellow-countrymen, the word, 
kalydnay ‘lucky,’ came to call him Kalanos. 

Lanman points out^ that Onesicritus reported with great 
accuracy the interviews which he had with Hindu ascetics: 

That is the best doctrine, which rids the spirit not only of grief 
but also of joy ; and again, that that dwelling-place is the best, for 
which the scantiest equipment or outfit is needed. 

Alberuni describes practices of Yoga.^ 

Reference must be made to ancient notions concerning the 
aims, the powers and the privileges issuing from ascetic 
practices. In the Rdnidyana^ for example, the renowned 
superiors of hermit settlements were held in the highest 
reverence and talked of the greatnecs of the boons and 
rewards that they had won. And throughout Indian literature 
is found abundant testimony on these points. Among the 
aims of asceticism may be mentioned first the attainment of 
the ecstatic condition. Originally, perhaps, this department 
of experience was reserved for the medicine man; but, in the 
TJpanisads at least, the sage seeks such states of soul. The 
figure already exliibited from the Rig Veda is in a frenzy. 
This muni is also addicted to poisons. And it is clear that 
from ancient time drugs and sex stimulations were used for 
the same ends of ecstasy and trance. 

For the Atharva Veda Professor Radhakrishnan’s summary 
will suffice;® 

We hear of great ascetics who obtain the mastery of nature by 
tapas. They reduce the elemental forces their control by this 
asceticism. It was then well known that ecstatic conditions could be 
induced by the mortification of the body. Man can participate in 
divine power by the hidden force of magic. The professors of magic 
and witchcraft were accepted by the Vedic seers, and their calling 
was dignified, with the result that magic and mysticism soon became 
confused. We find people sitting in the midst of five fires, standing 

^ Hetrvard Theological RevieWy October, 1918, p. 358. 

* Alheruni's India y vol. I, p. 69. His date is in the eleventh century. 
Sec p. 443. 

• Indian Philosophyy by S. Radhakrishnan, vol. I, p. 121. Quoted 
by permission of Macmillan and Company, Publishers. 



THE FORERUNNERS OF THE GORAKHNATHIS 217 

on one leg, holding an arm above the head, all for the purpose of 
commanding the forces of nature and subduing the j^ods to their 
will. 

Reference has already been made to supernatural and 
creative powers engendered by asceticism. All sorts of 
marvellous things were won through protracted and extreme 
penance. And all down through India's past are to be found 
men who through asceticism have realized the impossible. 
Dhruva^ is a famous example. Visvamitra, the Ksatriya, by 
most severe and protracted austerities compelled the gods to 
grant him the birth and rights of a Brahman.^ This story 
from the Epic belongs to an earlier period. Nahusa by tapas 
won for himself the rank of Indra.^ From the other Epic two 
examples may be cited. Havana acquired, through ascetic 
practices, invulnerability to death by gods or demigods, and 
Viradha secured immunity against all kinds of weapons. The 
Ramdyana is full of mighty saints, miracle-workers. 

Mam recognizes the power of asceticism. 

Whatever is hard to be traversed, whatever is hard to be attained, 
w'hatever is hard to be reached, whatever is hard to be performed, all 
may be accomplished by austerities ; for austerity (possesses a power) 
which it is difficult to surpass.* 

Since the Yogis are a monastic order, it may be of interest 
to look for a moment at the development of the monastic idea 
in India. The institution is old. The Buddha organized 
his followers and set up his characteristic institution, the 
^ahgha. The establishments of the order flourished and 
became in later centuries great in size, importance and wealth. 
There may be a question as to w'hethcr the Buddha originat- 
ed the institution.^ Barth thinks that the organization of the 
Sahgha was perfected before the time of Asoka.® But, in the 
Jain faith, evidences seem clear that Mahavira was the last 
of a long line (twenty-four in all) of leaders. Of these his 
immediate predecessor as tirtha-kara died some 250 years 

^ Mahabhdrata^ Vtfnu parvd^ 1, 11, 12. See Dawson, Classical 
Dictionary of Hindu Mythology, p. 91. 

* Muir, Sanskrit Texts, vol. I, pp. 388 flf. 

® Muir, SawAnY Texts, \o\, I, p. 307. ^ 11, 239 ff. 

® See ERE, vol. VIII, p. 799. « Religions of India, p. 127. 



218 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

before him. Farquhar^ puts the order of Sannyasis before 
those of the Buddhists and Jains. Earlier organizations were 
probably much simpler and perhaps were only places of 
residence lor the rainy season.- The Yatis and the Carvakas 
seem to have had a simple sOrt of monastic organization. 
The major ascetic orders of the present time, of all sects, 
have their mathas, or monasteries, and many of these institu- 
tions are old. 

Since the Yogis are one of the chief divisions of the Saivite 
ascetics,^ attention will now be drawn especially to the line 
of ascetic orders out of which they have come. 

As reported in a previous chapter, Siva is the ideal ascetic. 
He exhibits both the get-up, the austerities and the powers 
arising from the pursuit of such activities. Even in the 
hymn to the ‘mad’ muni are discernible attributes such as 
the master Yogi, Siva, exhibits. 

llie Yogis are the r esidue of ancient Saivite sects w'hich 
began as philosophies and became ascetic orders.^ More 
particularly are they Pasupata Saivas. However, influences 
of decadent Buddhism are clearly indicated in the Nepalese 
traditions of the Gorakhnathis and both Buddhist and Tantric 
characteristics in the legends from Bengal. The chief of the 
Saivite sects which precede the Kanphatas were the Pasupata, 
the Lakulisa, the Kalamukha and the Kapalika (and the 
Aghori.^) all of which are Pasupata. The Kanphatas share 
many things with the earlier orders and do not differ so very 
much from them. The Pasupata sects, as such, have almost 
completely disappeared. A few Aghoris may be seen now 
and then. They are old Kapalikas and a few Aughars who 
are Kapalikas reformed under the influence of Kabir.® 

The earlier name, Mahesvara is an equivalent of Pasupata. 
Here Pasupati is represented as having used the five topics 

* ‘The Fighting? Ascetics of India,’ Bulletin of the John Rylands 

Library^ vol. IX, No. 2, July, 1925. Oldenberg traces the institution 
to the Sannyasi. {Buddha^ p. 32.) ^ 

* Sec ERE, vol. VII, p. 214. It is difficult to conceive of schools” 
or orders of ascetics without establishments of some kind. Cf Hindu 
Civilization, by R. K. Mookerji, p. 220. 

® In this section on iSaivite sects Bhandarkar’s Vdi^hnavism, uvism 
and Minor Religious Systems has been freely used. 

* Hopkins, Religions of India, p. 487. ® FORL, p. 347. 



THE FORERUNNERS OF THE GORAKHNATHIS 219 


of the sect. This makes the god their original teacher, 
much as the Gorakhnathis make Adinatha, as Siva, the original 
teacher of the Yogis. In South India Lakulin or Lakulisa is 
said to be the original teacher of the order. Lakulm 
became a name for the schools of the Pasupatas, at least after 
the eleventh century. Likewise the Kalamukhas were called 
Lakulisas. Bhandarkar concludes that these three names 
cover about the same period of time. 

Lakula was a general term by which Siva sects were called, 
another was Pasupata. Later arose out of this original 
Lakulisa-Pasupata sect the three systems, Pasupata, Kala* 
mukha and Kapalika. These sects were more extreme and 
less rational than the other fiaivites. Bhandarkar says that 
from 934 to 1285, in inscriptions, Lakula was a general name 
designating sects of Siva.^ 

One of the early references to Pasupatas- is in the Atharva 
^iras where their vow is recorded. They are enjoined to 
give up greed and anger; to realize forgiveness; to mutter 
the syllable ofh\ to practice the meditation which issues in 
perception. There the Pasupata device of besmearing the 
body with ashes is used with the words : 

The ash is fire, the ash is water, the ash is earth, everything? is ash, 
the ether is ash, the mind, the eyes and other senses are ashes. 

The Pasupata vow is enjoined for the removal of the noose 
wdth which the Pasu or indi\ 'dual soul is tied. This prac- 
tice is calculated to effect deliv^erance from the trammels of 
life. The expression, ' Pasu-paia vimoksa\ which means ‘the 
loosening of the noose tied round the neck of beings,’ is 
characteristic of the Pasupata sect. 

The Mahabhdrata knows the Pasupata^; and the sect, 
which is represented as open to all classes, is charged with 
subverting caste. Here perhaps the name is that of a new 
Saivite school of theology.'^ 

In the centuries around the Christian Era, perhaps two 

i Vdisnavism, Aaivism and Minor Religious Systems, p. 121. See 
Fleet, JRAS, 1907, pp. 419 ff. 

^ On the systems of the Nakulisa^Pdsupata see Sarva Dar^ana 
Sanghra, pp. 103 ff. 

* Hopkins, The Great Epic, p. 118. 

« E,g., 12, 285, 321-350; 13, 14-18, 160-161. 



220 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

centuries before, the school was well known and contained 
many noted men.^ 

In the Vdyu Purdna (c. fourth century a.d.) is found a 
statement concerning the peculiar Yoga of the sect with its 
various forms of physical and intellectual discipline. A sec- 
tion of the Purdna introduces the Lakuli^a as a sub-sect of the 
Pa^upatas. They are known in inscriptions of the fifth 
century.2 The sect entered Nepal in the eighth century,® 
where the cult is still popular, as it is in other parts of the 
Himalayas. Sankara (c. a.d. 850 ) criticized the teachings of 
the Pa^upatas, and in the twelfth century Rtoanuja did like- 
wise, and named four classes of them, Kapala, Kal^ukha, 
Pa^upata and Saiva.^ 

Sankara® says: 

The Mahesvaras (Saivas) maintain that the five categories, viz., 
effect, cause, union, ritual and the end of pain were taught by the 
Lord Pasupati (Siva) to the end of breaking the bonds of the animal 
(i.e., the soul): Pasupati is according to them, the Lord, the operative 
cause. 

Their famous statement is that Pasupati is the Lord (Pati) 
and man his creature {pahi) is bound by the fetter {pdia of 
the world, and requires to be set free by the Lord. In more 
expanded form, the five categories may be set forth thus: 
(1) Effect {kdrya)^ includes the evolution of pradhdna and the 
individual soul {pahi)\ (2) Cause {kdrana), I^vara or Mahe^- 
vara (Pati) and pradhana as efficient and material aspects of 
the whole creation, Pati possessing unbounded power of 
acting and knowing; (3) Union (Yoga), absorption in 
meditation or muttering the syllable om, contemplation 
embracing both action and the cessation of action ; (4) bathing 
in ashes, besmearing the body with ashes, sleeping in ashea, 
mutterings, absurd and obscene practices; (5) final deliver- 
ance {dukhdnta)y total destruction of misery and the acquire- 
ment of special powers. 

^ See Bhandarkar, p. 117. 

* Hopkins, Religions of India, p. 48z. 

* Smith, Catalogue of Coins in the Indian Museum, Calcutta, pp 
280 ff. 

* For this list see also Bhandarkar, JASBy, vol. XXII, p. 158. 

® Thibaut, The Vedanta Sutra with Sankara's Commentary, pt. 1, 
p. 453. 



THE FORERUNNERS OF THE GORAKHNATHIS 221 

Ramanuja^ says 

They maintain the general material cause to be constituted by 
Pa4upati. They further hold the wearing of the so-called *mudra* 
badges and the like to be means to accomplish the highest end of 
man. 

In Devendra’s Mahardstri Tales ^ the Pa^upata ascetic, 
really a highway robber, 

Wears a diadem of long matted hair; his limbs are strewn with 
ashes; in his hst he holds a trident; he is encircled with evil-averting 
amulets; his fingers are busy with his hermit’s token. ^ 

Bloomfield^ describes the Pasupatas as persons who practice 
deceit and violence, as robbers and wotild-be murderers. 

Even in the Great Epic* they are looked upon with disfavour. 

l^hey bear the brand of the linga on forehead, arms, breast 
and navel. Farquhar^ states that they laid emphasis on the 
worship of the linga, an aspect of Lakulisa practice. Sug- 
gestive Epic expressions as recorded by him are: urddhva- 
linga^ sthira-litiga, urddhva-retas and mahdiepo-nagno. Their 
marks are the necklace, the golden ornament, the ear-ring, the 
head-jewel, ashes and the sacred thread — ‘owning these one 
is not born again. 

The Lakulisa’ are a sub-order of the Pasupata. The word 
Lakula or Nakula, means ‘club* and the reference is to the 
Lord-of-the-Ciub or the Lord-Bearing-a-Club. Probably the 
name belongs to a great religious teacher of the school of the 
Pasupatas, who carried a club. He has been indent ified with 
Siva. There is an interesting note in the Vdyu Purdna? and 
in the Linga Purdna^, which in the form of prophecy states 
that Mahesvara in the Krsna Dvdipdyana would incarnate as 
a Brahman by the name of Lakulin, entering a dead body 
thrown into a cemetery; and that he would have four 
disciples who would be Pasupatas. Thus the movement 

^ Thibaut, Vedanta Sutras with Ramanuja's Commentary^ p. 520. 

^ Wu, p. 80. « JAOS, vol. XLIV, p. 232. 

* 12. 285, 194-195. * FORL, p. 103. 

* Thibaut, Vedanta Sutras with Ramanuja's Commentary ^ p. 521. 

’ See Archeological Report, 1906-7, pp. 179 ff. Here evidence 
shows the cult to be widespread. 

» Chap. 21, vv. 204-212. » Chap. 24, w. 124-137. 



222 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

seems to have its beginning in^Gujrat. Or, as it is otherwise 
stated, Siva through his Yogic powers* entered a dead body in 
a cemetery and became incarnated as Lakula at Kayavarohana 
in the La^a Country, Baroda. The inscription at Eklihgaji 
states that Siva was incorporated in the country of Broach 
and that he carried a club. The place is located at Karwar 
in Baroda State and there is still there a temple to Lakulisa.^ 
(The teaching of the sect can be traced to the first century of 
lour era^. The great Harsa was a disciple of the faith^. The 
sect spread also into Merwar and Rajpiitana. During the 
period, 550-900 it spread into the south as well. The 
Pa^upatas were designated by the name Lakulisa and were 
widely worshipped on the plains of India^. Lakula was 
.reincarnated in Chilluka in South India in the tenth century^, j 
This means evidently that a revival of the movement set 
)in there at that time. It af>pearcd in Mclpadi, North Arcot, 
'’about 1020 and spread to the south. The Kalamukhas, or 
P Black Friars^ were active in teaching the doctrine in the 
Uouth in the eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth centuries. 

I'cmples of the tenth century at Puranadhisthana (near 
Srinagar in Kashmir) and that ot Payar Cave have figures of 
Lakula on them.^ The Lkalingaji inscription of the tenth 
century, written in Devanagari, begins with an obeisance to 
Lakuli^. The date of the temple is a.d. 791. Temples of 
the seventh to the tenth centuries, as for example, that at 
Jharapatan (seventh century) show Siva with but two arms, 
holding a short club, mahdseponagno. 

The Nakulisa-Pasupatas are described by Madhava in his 
Sarva Darsana SangrahaP I'heir system was the doctrine 
of the Pancadhyayi, the main source of the later Siv^a 
systems. It aims at a union of the soul with iSiva by pious 
mutterings, meditation and the cessation of all action so that 
the state of mere feeling is attained. By Yoga practices they 
attained miraculous powers of assuming \arious sha]>cs and 
forms, and received messages from the dead. According to 

' FORLy p. 146. “ BhandarkaYy J ASlh\ vol. XX 1 1, p. 57. 

® EREy vol. VI, p. 7t)2. Archaoloifical Survey of India Report^ 
1915-16, p. 50. EREy vol. XI, p. 68. 

** Archaological Survey of India Report y 1915-16, p. 75. 

’ Chap. six. 



THE FORERUNNERS OF THE GORAKHNATHIS 223 

them, the religious emotions were to be excited by song and 
dance, by laughter, by simulating the acts and gestures of 
one in love, by speaking wildly, by wearing ashes and flowers 
from images in the temples and by loud uttering of the 
sacred sound, hurh^ like the sound of vasat^ an imitation of a 
sound ascribed to a bull. Some think that the obscene 
postures depicted in Hindu temples are traceable to their 
behaviour.^ All of this is very like that praxis ascribed to 
the Pasupatas and the Kalfunukhas, Texts of the Yogis are 
not ignorant of the substance of them. 

Special postures are attributed to them and bathing and 
sleeping in sand instead of ashes is mentioned. They dis- 
pensed charity to all comers at their institutions. 

The Kalamukhas are closely associated with the Lakulisas, 
in fact they were the ‘black friars’ vAio, as exponents of the 
Lakuli^a doctrines were responsible for its spread in the 
south during the eleventh and twelfth centuries. An inscrip- 
tion of the twelfth century (1177) notes Lakulisa and 
Kalamukha as one and both as Pasupata.‘^ Technically they 
were more extreme in their practices than the Kapalakas, but 
there was no popular distinction between them. 

They were distinguished by a black stieak on the forehead.^ 

The system is referred to in Ramanuja’s Commentary on 
the Vedanta Sutra. ^ The passage is as follows: 

Kalamukhas teach that the means of obtaining all desired results 
in this world as well as the next are constituted by certain practices 
— such as using a skull as a drinking vessel, smearing oneself with the 
ashes of a dead body, eating the flesh of such a body, carrying a 
heavy stick, setting up a liquor-jar and using it as a platform for 
making oflFerings to the gods, and the like. A bracelet made of 
Rudrakija-seeds on the arm, matted hair on the head, a skull, smear- 
ing oneself with ashes, etc. All this is well known from the Saivas. 
They also hold that by some special ceremonial performance men of 
different easles may become Brahmanas and reach the highest dsrama: 
by nterely entering on the initiatory ceremony {diksu) a man becomes 
a Briihinana at once; by undertaking the Kapala rile a man bccvHnes 
at once an ascetic. 

* Gopi Nath Rao, Elements of Hindu Iconography, vol, II, pt. 1, 
p. 23, note. 

* Bhandarkar, Vaiinavtsmf Sdivism, ct( , p. 120. 

® Indian Iconography , vol. fl, pt. l,p 25. 

* See Thibaui s l m SBE, p. 521. 



224 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

This sect is still active. The members seem to be 
extremely horrible in character. They worship Siva as 
Mahakala (the great destroyer) or as Kapalabh|t (skull- wearer). 
Kapalin is Bhairava, the most terrible form of Siva^. With 
these are sometimes associated the possibly more revolting 
Aghori. The latter, at least, are cannibalistic. Some modern 
sections of the cult are of recent origin. The Aghori Yogis 
of the Panjab are somehow related to these orders and that 
some Aughars were cannibals was admitted to the author 
during inquiries in that region in the winter of 1 924. These 
disgusting features of the cult are associated with tantra and 
the east of Bengal and Assam, and are supposed to be 
conducive to the acquisition of supernatural powers. These 
persons are looked upon by the populace with feelings of 
abhorrence and fear. It is a horrible and demoniacal sect. 
They seem to be a specialization within the Pa^upata cult 
rather than a true sect; and are close to Vamacara Saktas, 
for they offer licentious homage to Sakti and Bhairava. (The 
practice of making no discrimination in food is an old 
Pasupata one.) 

However, the Kapalikas (‘wearers of skulls \ they wore 
skulls around their necks) were known fairly early. They 
are mentioned in the Dasa-Kumdra-Carita (see below) of 
the sixth century, and as early as the seventh century in 
Maharasthra. Hiuen Tsang (in India 630-645) saw them 
and described them as wearers of skulls. 

One of the characters in Bhavabhuti’s (eighth century) 
Mdlati-Mddhava is a Kapalika. (See below.) Sankara, so 
Madhava says, was in controversy with Kapalikas. Anandagiri 
describes them. Ramanuja held them to be extreme in their 
practices and Moshan Fani (seventeenth century) mentions 
them. 

A general description of them would be as follows: They 
went about naked, wore a cap while travelling, smeared their 
bodies with funeral ashes, were armed with a trident or 
sword, carried a hollow skull ^or a cup or begging bowl, Were 
halfi-intoxicated with spirits which they drank from the 
hollow skull, were known to commit acts of violence; their 


* Vdif^ivism and Sdivisniy etc.^ p. 128. 



THE FOEERUNNERS OF THE GORAKHNATHlS 225 

garments (when they wore them) were of patch-work, they 
slept on the ground,^ and wore a rosary of rudraksa seeds. 
They offered human sacrifices to Camunda in order to obtain 
magic powers, and often resorted to tricks to ensnare victims.® 
Dust from their feet was supposed to cure disease and water 
from the washing of their feet drove away demons.® The 
powers which they acquired included the ability to fly 
through the air. Their wits were sharpened by the use of 
wine, eating disgusting food, and the embrace of the Sakti of 
Bhairava. They were always lewd, and on occasion carried 
off maidens.^ 

In BhavabhutiV Mdlati-Mddhava appears Aghoraghanja, a 
Kapalika, priest of Camunda and Kapala Kundala (skull-ear- 
ring), a nun, devotee of Ctounda and pupil of the ascetic, 
ractising Yoga, enjoying magic powers, Saktas, wearing 
necklaces of skulls, and carrying heavy rods from which hung 
strings of bells. The nun kidnaps the heroine of the play, 
in the dead of night, and places her before the image of 
Camunda in a temple near a cemetery, where she is to be 
killed and offered to the goddess by the ascetic. (But 
Madhava rescues her and slays Aghoraghatita). 

The description of the wizard, Kapalil^, in the Dafa- 
Kumdra Carita is as follows:® 

His body is ornamented with glittering pieces of skulls; he is 
smeared with ashes of the funeral fires; he wears braids that look like 
a streak of lightning ; with his left hand he is sacrificing steadily into 
a fierce fire crackling sesame and mustard. In front of him stands 
one of the aforementioned servants with folded hands, saying : ‘ Issue 
your command ; wherewith can I serve you ? * He is told to fetch 
the princess, Kanakalekha, and he does so. (She is rescued from 
becoming a human sacrifice in the nick of time). 

Anandagiri’s description is found in the ^ankara-vijaya ana 
shows the standard get-up of the Kapalikas. 

His body is smeared with ashes from a funeral pyre, around his 
neck hangs a string of human skulls, his forehead is streaked with 
a.blacik line, his hair is twisted into a matted braid, his loins are 
clothed with a tiger's skin, a hollow skull is in his left hand (for a 

1 JAOS, vol. XLIV, p. 208. » yAOS, vol. XLIV, p. 203. 

* JAOS, vol. XLIV, p. 213. * JAOS, vol. XLIV, p. 218. 

» yAOS, vol. XLIV, p. 212. 


15 



226 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

cup), and in his right hand he carries a bell which he rings incessant- 
ly, exclaiming aloud, ‘ Ho, iSambhu, Bhairava, — Ho, Lord of KalL* 

In the Prahodha Chandrodaya^ are found the following 
statements : 

My necklace and ornaments are of human bones; I dwell among 
the ashes of the dead and eat my food in human skulls. I look with 
eyes brightened with the antimony of Yoga, and believe that the parts 
of this world are reciprocally different, but that the whole is not 
different from God. . . . After fasting we drink liquor out of the skulls 
of Brahmans ; our sacred fires are fed with the brains and lungs of 
men mixed up with their flesh, and human victims covered with the 
fresh blood gushing from the dreadful wound in their throats, are 
the offerings by which we appease the terrible god (Maha Bhairava). 
.... I contemplate the Lord of Bhavani, the powerful god who 
creates, preserves and destroys the fourteen worlds, w hose glory is 
both revealed in the Vedas and displayed in his works. The might of 
our religion is such that I control Hari-Hara and the greatest and 
most ancient of the gods ; 1 stop the course of the planets in the 
heavens; 1 submerge the earth in water, with it mountains and 
cities, and I agdin drink up the waters in a moment . . . He who 
resembles the gods, whose crest is the lunar orb, and who with 
delight embraces women beautiful as Parvati, feci supreme bliss. 

Who has enjoyed happiness independent of visible objects? The 
soul that lives without spiritual abstraction is in a state of felicity. 
But why do you pray to become like stones? 

Accompanying the Kapalika is a Kapalini in attire similar 
to his, with heavy breasts, addicted to spirits, who with her 
companion, at the command of Bhairava, dances. It is stated 
in this connection that, 

without renouncing the pleasures derived through the organs of 
sense, the eight great siddhis may be obtained. 

Among these powers are the following: whatever a man 
desires he may obtain; the laws of nature are under liis 
control; the body’s size may be diminished or enlarged at 
will ; and he may transport himself in an instant to any part 
of the universe. 

Ramanuja in his Commentary® makes Kapalas say: 

He who knows the true nature of ihe six mudrdSf who understands 

^ JAOS, vol. XLIV, pp. 206, 207 ; and Wu, p. 264. 

2 Taylor’s Translation, pp. 38 ff. 

* Thibaut, Vedanta Sutras with Ramanuja's Commentary ^ pp. 520, 
521. 



THE FORERUNNERS OF THE GORAKHNATHIS 227 

tht highest tnudra, meditating on himself as in the position called 
bhagusatia ^ , reaches Nirvana. The necklace, the golden ornament, the 
ear-ring, the head-jewel, ashes, and the sacred thread are called the six 
mudrds. . . . He whose body is marked with these js not Oorn again. 

In the Dahistan^ is an accoant of Yogis 

who know no prohibited food. . . . They also kill and eat men 
, . . There arc some of this sect who having mixed tlK ir excretions 
and filtered them through a piece of cloth, drink them, and say that 
such an act renders a man capable of great affairs, and they pretend 
to know strange things. They call the performance of this act atileo 
and also akhon They have all originated from Gorakhnath. The 
author of this work saw a man, who singing the customary 
song, sat upon a corpse, which he kept unburied until it came into a 
state of dissolution, and then ate the flesh of it; this act they hold 
extremely meritoricus. 

More recent references to these ascetics are numerous,® 

Wilson^ states that the Kapalikas have merged into othei 
sects, particularly into the Kanphat^s, but that these must 
all have been contemporary sects for some time. 

From the foregoing accounts it is clear that the sects have 
much in common. A composite picture drawn from these 
descriptions would exhibit many traits discernible today in 
the sect of the Kanphatas. 

The question of the date of Goraknath as the founder of 
the Kanphata Yogis now arises and becomes the subject of 
the following chapter. 

^ He meditates on himself as seated in the pudendum muliehre. See 
Indian Buddhist Iconographw ttc., by B. Bhattacharya, 

2 (c. 1670) vol. II. p. 129. 

See ERE, vol. I, p. 211. 

* IF6, p. 18. 



CHAPTER ELEVEN 

GORAKHNATH 

Having considered at length the characters of the sects of 
Siva in which the Kanphatas have their origin, it becomes 
necessary to review the various data which have a bearing on 
the time of the founder of the order. 

Traditions and legends concerning Gorakhnath are as 
already shown, widespread and extensive. Nepal, the United 
Provinces, Bengal, Western India, Sind and the Panjab each 
has a large collection. 

Kanphatas say that their sect existed before the world 
came into being. Their story is that when Visnu emerged 
from the lotus at the creation of all things, Gorakhnath was 
in Patala. Visnu, terrified at the waste of waters, went to 
Patala and implored the aid of Gorakhnath, who, in pity for 
the deity, gave him a handful of ashes from his eternal fire 
(dhuni) and said to him that, if he would sprinkle the ashes 
over the waters, he would be able to create the world. It 
happened as Gorakhnath had promised, and then Brahma, 
Vi 9 t?u and Siva became the first disciples of Gorakhnath.^ 

In many places Gorakhnath is looked upon as more than a 
human teacW, outside of the ordinary laws of time, who has 
appeared on the earth in different ages {yuga). He is said to 
have lived in the Panjab at Peshawar, beyond Lahore, in the 
6atya (Kfta) Yuga; at Gorakhpur in the Treta Yuga; at 
Hurmuj, beyond Dwaraka, in the Dvapara Yuga; and 
three months journey west of Gorakhpur, at Gorakhmari 
(Gorakhmandi) in Kathiawar in the K^li Yuga.^ This is 
evidently an atten>pt not only to refer the origin of 

^ CTC, vol. Ill, pp. 153, 154. 

* See Martin, vol. II, p, 484; Gr., p. 329. 



GORAKHNATH 229 

the sect to the distant past, but to incorporate in the record 
references to widely separated places where Gorakhnath and 
his followers had headquarters and were well known. It is 
also reported that Gorakhnath appeared in the Kali Yuga 
in the form of Sesa Naga.^ 

His followers frequently refuse to give the time and place 
of his origin because they consider him as superhuman. 
Nevertheless, statements are made concerning his movements 
in this age. The Nepalese hold that he came to Kathmaticju 
from the Panjab, or at least from beyond the borders of their 
kingdom.* And he is said to have lived near the temple of 
Pa^upatinath in Kathmandu.® He is also claimed as a saint 
of Oudh.^ The monks of Gorakhpur say that he came to 
the United Provinces from the Panjab, and that their chief 
seat is at Tilla, in Jhehim. Traditions in Kacch go back to 
the Panjab; their chief, Dharamnath, a disciple of Gorakh- 
nath, having come from Peshawar. At N^ik Yogis hold, 
on the other hand, that Gorakhnath went from Nepal to the 
Panjab and from thence to other parts of India. Judging 
from the preponderance of tradition and the relation of the 
monastery at Tilla to the others in India, it would seem best 
to hold that Gorakhnath was a native of the Panjab. On the 
other hand, Bengal and Nepalese traditions point to the east. 
And, with communications as they were, it is possible that 
he came from the east into the Panjab. Moreover it seems 
that Gorakhnath was originally a Vajrayana Buddhist, 
connected to Saivism by Matsyendranath. The legends of 
Gopicand show how easily men could move from place to 
place even in those days. 

Before proceeding to the discussion of the spiritual descent 
of Gorakhnath and of his place in the history of India, it 
inay be well to refer to some less pertinent scraps of informa- 
tion about him. 

In the Dahistan there is mention of Gorakhnath and of 
Yoga j;)ractices. Both the writings of Gorakhnath and of 


^ RTCP, vol. I, p. 191. 

* See above, the story of his coming to Matsyendranath. 

* Martin, vol. II, p. 484. 

‘ BCI, p. 1,235. 



230 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

those who quote him are cited. ^ Moshan Fani, the author of 
the Dahistariy lived in the time of Har Gobind (1607-1644).* 

Another tradition connects Gorakhnath with Baba Faric. 
who visited Girnar in 1244, and who died in 1266. Gorakh- 
nath is represented by an old shrine on Girnar.^ 

The famous monastery at Dhinodhar, in Kacch, is con- 
nected with the name of Dharamnath. This famous saints 
who was a Gorakhnathi, came to Kacch in 1382.^ It is with 
reference to this event that Grierson places, provisionally, the 
date of Gorakhnath in the fourteenth century.^ The parafn-^ 
paras put at least one disciple between Dharamnath and his 
famous guru and these two Yogis might not have been 
contemporaries.® 

The spiritual descent of Gorakhnath is recorded in several 
places.’ All of these paramparas agree in placing before him 
two teachers, Adinath and Matsyendranath (Macchender- 
nath). Khakkar names five teachers preceding Adinath*; 
and Svatmarama states that six gurus intervened between 
Matsyendranath and Gorakhnath.® Of these Laksminarayana, 
commentator on the Goraksa Sataka identifies Minanatha 
with Matsyendranath.^® Current tradition makes Matsyen- 


^ Dabistarty vol. I, p. 127. 

* Sita Ram Kohila, in The Journal of Indian Historyy February, 
1922. The translators of the Dahistan place the death of Moshan 
Fani not far from 1670. (vol. I, p. 15.) 

* See above, page 119. 

* lAy vol. VII, p. 49. 

® Gr.y p. 329. For an account of Dharamnath, see pp. 116 ff. 

* See chap. four. Appendix D. 

’ Gorakhnath ki Go^thi (See Price, Hindu and Hindustani Selections^ 
vol. I, p. 141); Trump, The Adi Granthoy p. 36, note 4; The 
Hathayogapradipika of Svatmarama, verse 5; Report on the Archi- 
tectural and Archceological Remains in the Province j)f Kacch y p. 3; 
Sri Jhiincsvara-mahdrdja CaritUy Pahgarkar, p. 47; and current 
traditions. See also Wi., p. 214, note 2 and the reference to Weber. 

® Niranjan Nirakar, Adhika Somnatha, Chet Somnatha, Qsnkara- 
natha, and Achetnatha. lA, vol. VII, p. 47. 

® Nfitha, Sahara, Ananda, Bhairava, Gaurahgi, and Minanatha. 

With this Levi agrees: Le Nepdf vol. I, p. 155. Sri Nana- 
rnahar^a Josi Sakhara, Sdrtha Jiidnesvarl, 18, verse 1754, translates 
Mina as Matsyendra. Both *mina* and ‘matsya’ mean ‘fish.’ Bengal 
tradition seems to make them two different Yogis, with Matsyendra 
the Guru of Gorakhnath and Mina a follower. 



GORAKHNATH 


231 


dranath the teacher of Gorakhnath. In the Gorakhndth ki 
Go^thi of Kabir Gorakhnath speaks of himself as the son of 
Matsyendranath and the grandson of Adinath^ 

Although Adinath may have been a Yogi preceding 
Matsyendranath, he is now identified writh Siva, and the 
name is used in an attempt to trace the origin of the sect to 
the greatest of Yogis, the god Siva. 

Much human interest centres around Matsyendranath, 
who is close to Gorakhnath. He is the guardian deity of 
Nepal presiding over the destinies of the kingdom.^ He is 
considered as a Buddhist saint, ^ as an incarnation of Padma- 
pani, or as Avalokitesv.ara, the fourth divine Bodhisattva.® 
He evidently belongs to some place outside of the kingdom, 
for he is said to have come to Nepal at the command of the 
Buddha.® It is said that Ar}^avalokitesvara Padmapa^ii 
Bodhisattva taught Siva the Yoga. On his way home, 
after having received his instruction, Siva explained the 
doctrines to Parvati, at the seaside. She fell asleep 
while Siva was speaking, but Lokesvar’ heard it, disguised 

^ Wi., p. 214. Price, Hindu and Hindustani Selections t vol. I, 
p. 141. Quoted by Trump, p. 36, note 4. 

* Wright, History of Nepdl^ p. 34; Oldfield, Sketches of Nepal, 
vol. II, p. 117. 

* Levi, Le Nepal, vol. I, p. 352. 

* Matsyendranath is a much Hinduised form of Dhyani Bodhisattva 
Padmap§ni or Avalokitesvara. Temple, Hyderabad, Kashmir, Sikkim 
and Nepal, vol. II, p. 244. 

® Barth says that he belonged to Nepalese Buddhism. Rl, 
p. 213. Under the name Chen-rc-zi, Avalokita is the patron deify 
of Tibet, belonging to the Tantric Buddhist cycle. Bell, The 
Religion of Tibet, p. 30. 

® Aitkinson, The Himalayan Districts of the North-Western 
Provinces of India, vol. II, p. 808. 

’ Avalokitesvara is called Lokanath and Lokesvar. His cult 
may be traced back to the dawn of the Christian era. He is an 
ascetic and magician, demiurge and saviour. He became a great Yogi 
and possesses the great mantra, or spell, Om mani padme hum which 
means ‘Om, the jewel in the lotus.’ (Thomas, JRAS, 1906, p. 4W.) 
Tantric literature gives this sentence an obscene interpretation. 
Tibetan forms of this god are reflections of the Hindu culls as early 
as the tenth and eleventh centuries. There is a Nepalese inscription 
which reads: ‘The chiefs of the Yogis call him King of Fishes 
(Matsyendra); the devotees of the female deities call him tSakti; 



232 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

in the fonn of a fish. He is consequently known as 
Matsyendranatha.^ 

It is supposed that Matsyendranath actually came from 
Assam, from the region of the Kamarupa. In the shrine at 
Kamakhya there is a drawing under one of the windows 
representing the waves of the sea. 

Another legend tells how Matsyendra was brought into 
Nepal from Kapotal Parbat in Assam, to save the country 
from a twelve years’ drought which Gorakhnath had brought 
on.^ This story has been told above. In Patan (Kathmandu) 
in Nepal is held an annual ceremony in Matsyendra’s name, 
during which an idol is carried in procession.* The idol, 
which formerly belonged to the Buddhist cult, is very old. 
It was taken over into Saivism when Buddhism was super- 
ceded.^ Then a temple was built in honour of Matsyendra 
and the festival in his honour was introduced. The idol, 
which is very small, is painted red. The procession of 
Matsyendranath brings the rain of the spring, and without 
his effectual help the heavens would withhold their waters.* 

In the Dabistan it is stated that Matsyendranath was Jonah.® 

Buddhists call him Loke4var. All honour to this being whose true 
form is Brahman.* The date of this inscription is 1672 (792 Nepali 
Samvat), lA, p. ix, 192. Vallee Poussin, ERE^ vol. 11, pp. 256-261. 
Avalokita regulates transmigration and can produce ready entrance 
into Paradise and escape from hell. His mystical spell, Om mam 
padme hum^ wins his favour. Waddell, L. A., Article, 'Lamaism,’ 
ERE, vol. VII, pp. 784-789; Gr., ERE, vol. VI, p. 329. 

^ Wright, History of Nepal, pp. 140, 141. This story is found in 
the Jndnehjart, 18, 1752, and in the introduction to the Gorak^a- 
paddhati. 

* Oldfield, Sketches from Nepal, vol. II, pp. 325, 326; Wright, 
History of Nepal, pp. 140 ff. ; Levi, Le Nepal, vol. I, p. 349. Tradition 
is divided nevertheless, regarding the location of this mountain. 
(Waddell, JRAS, 1894, p. 54). And some place it in Ceylon, or South 
India. It seems, however, that Avalokite^vaia came to Nepal in the 
guise of a Saivite priest, a Pasupata Saivite. In either case he would 
represent Saivite faith. Dr. Singh (G. , p. 73) suggests that Sangaldvipa 
is really Sakaladvipa or Shakadvipa near Sialkot. 

* Landon, Nepal, vol. I, pp. 43, 212; vol. II, pp. 213, jU7-18, 
gives an account of the festival. See above, chap, seven. 

* Levi, Le Nepal, vol. I, p. 356. 

® Levi, Le Nepal, vol. I, p. 356. See also, Oldfield, Sketches from 
Nepal, vol. II, p. 327; and above, chap, seven. 

« Vol. II, p. 137. 



GORAKHNATH 233 

Matsyendranath fibres neither in the Brahmanical nor 
in the Buddhist pantheon in India proper. He is, however, 
well-known in the traditions of the Yogis, as one of their 
first teachers.^ Gorakhnath is represented as saying that Mats- 
yendra was his teacher^ and he is sometimes looked upon as 
the founder of the sect of Kanphatas. He is said also to have 
introduced Saivism into NepiJ.® 

There is a legend that gives Matsyendra a place in the 
Hindu social order. A Raja, Udhodhar, who lived in the 
Satya Yuga was exceedingly pious. At his death, his body 
was cremated, but his navel did not burn. This unburnt 
portion of his body was cast into a river and was devoured 
by a fish, which later gave birth to Matsyendra. By reason of 
having been a good man in his previous life, he became a 
saint.* 

In one legend Matsyendra is represented as going to 
Ceylon where he was enamoured of the queen of the land. 
When Gorakhnath heard of the fall of his master, he went to 
Ceylon in search of him. He found his teacher in the halls 
of the court and called him to account. Matsyendra then 
left the queen, but took their two sons with him. They 
afterwards became Parasnath and Nimnath, founders of the 
Jain religion.® 

In a Nepalese version of this story, Matsyendra, by means 
of his powers of Yoga, left his body in the care of his 
disciple, Gorakhnath, and entered that of a king, just dead. 
In this situation he fell into temptation. Luckily, Gorakh- 
nath, who was watching over his body, recalled him to his 
senses and the teacher returned to his own body. 

In Nasik they say that Matsyendranath came from Mukti- 
nath, which lies to the north of Nepal. These references 
testify to contacts between Gorakhnath and Matsyendranath 
and to the struggle between Buddhism and Saivism in Nepal.® 


^ Levi, Le Nepal, vol. I, p. 354. 

* X^mp., 34; Gorakhnath hi Go^thi, quoted above. 

* Wright, History of Nepal, p. 142; Wi., p. 214. 

* RTCP, vol. II, p. 393. 

* Kitts, Report, Census of Berar, 1881. p. 59. See, for variants of 
this legend, RTCP, vol, II, p. 393 and note. 

* See also Tessitori, ERE, vol. XII, pp. 833 ff. 



234 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

There is evidence from Bengal to show that Matsyendra was 
a guru of the Nathamarga who converted Gorakhnath from 
Buddhism to Saivism (Or). 

Concerning the other teachers preceding Gorakhnath, as 
named by Khakkar and Svatmarama, little can be said. Those 
listed by the latter must be nearly or quite contemporary 
with Matsyendra and Goraksa, for the weight of tradition, 
especially in the Pnnjab, Nepal and in Western India, indi- 
cates that Matsyendra was the immediate teacher of Goraksa. 

There are numerous lists of disciples of Gorakhnath.^ 
The names recorded by Svatmarama^ are : 

Gorakhnath, VirQpak§a, Bilesya, Manthana, Bhairava, Siddhi- 
buddha, Kathadi, Karantaka, Surananda, Siddhipada, Carapap, 
Kaneri, Pujyapada, Nityanatha, Niranjana, Kapali, Vindunatha, 
Kakacandcsvara, Allama, Prabhudeva, Ghoda, Coli, Tiutini, Bhanuki, 
Naradeva, Khanda, Kapalika, and others. 

These are probably the names of gurus in some particular 
establishment. They do not seem to relate themselves to 
other available lists. 

In the Jndnesvariy the poet gives the following names: 
Minanath,Goraksanath,Gaininath, Nivrttinath and Jftanesvar; 
and the author says that his Yogi discipleship runs back 
through this line. As stated above, Minanath is Matsyendra- 
nath. Nivrttinath, also a poet,^ is usually considered to be 
the brother of JftanesVar.^ 

By putting the list just given alongside that found in 
Bahind Bdi^ some light is thrown on the date of Gorakhnath. 
The account is as follows: 

(1) Adinath (Shiva) taught a mantra to Parvati (His wife) 
Matsyendra heard it from within the belly of a fish. (2) Thus through 
him the supreme mantra, that Shiva held in His mind, became 
effective through bhakti. (3) He (Matsyendra) showed his favour by 
passing the mantra on to Goraksha (Gorakhnath). Through him it 
became known to Gahini. (4) Gahini bestowed his favour or 


* For the list of sub-sects, see pp. 62 ff. 

® Hathayogapradrpikay I, 5, 6, 7, 8. 

® Underhill, The Hindu Relitiious Year, p. 147. 

® Jhdnesvariy 18, 1752-4. 7''his is in the Poona edition of 1915. See 
also V. L. Bhave, Mahdrd^Ua Sdrasvaty first edition, p. 39; R. L. 
Pangarkar, p. 47. 

^ Translati^^m by Abbott, p. 1. 



GORAKHNATH 235 

Nivrittinath, even while he was a child, but yet a Yogi. (5) From 
him Dnyaneshvara received the favour of the mantra, and ^his made 
him famous at Alandi, the home of Siddhas* (6) Dnyaneshvara gave 
his blessing to Satchidananrda, the home of bhakti, (7) Further on 
Vishvambhara, in the beauty of his Shr^a form, gave the mantra to 
Raghava (Chaitanya). (8) He gave it to Kesbava Chaitanya, and he 
to Babaji Chaitanya, who gave it to Tukoba (Tukaram). (9) Because 
Bahini placed her undivided devotion at the feet of Tukoba, she 
received (the mantra through him). 

There are evidently gaps in tliis list. The dates, so far as 
certain, in this list are: Bahina Bal, 1628-1700: Tukoba, 
1608-1649; Visvambhara (Krsna Carianya), 1485-1533. 
The usual date given for Jnane^var is c. 1290.^ 

Turning now to a study of legend and tradition, an 
attempt will be made to determine the time when Gorakh- 
nath lived. 

The richest field for legends in which Gorakhnath plays 
an important part is the Panjab.^ The several legends, con- 
cerning Guga, a disciple of Gorakhnath, are related to events 
of varying date. One version, which makes him the son of 
Jewar, a chieftuin of Bagar (about fifty mdcs from Sirsa), is 
connected with locai ballads that represent him as having 
fought with Aurangzeb (1659-1707).^ According to another,^ 
Guga was killed in battle with Firoz Shah (1351-1388) of 
Delhi. This would put the death of Guga towards the close 
of the fourteenth century, A more complete story puts him 
still earlier. Guga, who became a saint, is now considered 
as a snake godling and is well known and popular in the 
Panjab, in fact in all northern India. He is worshipped 
especially by the lower castes. Tod^ gives tiim a substantial 
place as’ a Rajput hero who fell before Mahmud of Ghazni. 
The Ambala version of the legend®, together with Wynard’s 
account of the Raipur Raos’, support Tod. The Firozpur 


^ But see below. 

vSwynn : Steele and Creoke in the lA; Trump; Tod. 
See pp. 183 ff. 

« lA, 1881, pp. 32-43. 

* Temp., vol. Ill, pp. 261 ff. 

« Tod, vol. II, p. 807. Compare Steele, lA, 1881, pp. 32 ff. 

« lA, 1881, pp. 34, 35. 

’ Amballa Settlement Report, 1859. 



236 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

version^ makes Guga a Chauhan by birth. The Bijnor 
version* places him in the reign of Prithvi Raj, Chauhan 
of Dehli, and makes him the son of a raja. These various 
legends converge upon a definite era. Mahmud of Ghazni 
made numerous raids into India, the last of which was 
in 1024.* Prithvi Raj fell before Muhammad of Ghor 
in 1192.^ Near Guga’s tomb, which is about two hundred 
miles south-west of Hissar, there is now a tribe of Muham- 
madan Chauhans*, Guga’s descendants, the Gogawats. 
They were part of the force with Abhai Singh in his 
struggle with Muzaffar.® At Mandor, the ancient seat of the 
Raos of Jodhpur"^ there is a gallery of colossi, sixteen figures, 
knights errant of the desert, hewn out of a single, natural 
rock. Some are on horseback and others are unmounted. 
Among the former is Guga, the Chauhan.® These colossi 
were erected during the reign of Abhai Singh (1720-50). 
Guga is thus placed amongst the ancient heroes of Marwar. 
Moreover, tradition says that he was a Chauhan by birth and 
that he became a Muhammadan faqir.® He is also known as 
Zahra Pir. The most likely conclusion, then, from these 
data is that Guga belonged to the time of the struggle 
between the Rajputs and their Muhammadan conquerors, 
not later than the twelfth century. 

The writings of Kabir and of the Sikhs contain many 
references to Gorakhnath.^® In the time of Amar Das (1552- 
1574) there was trouble between the Sikhs and the hitherto 
powerful Yogis, and temples of the Gorakhnathis were 
defiled.^ Gorakhnath must have lived long before this evident 
defeat of his sect, for the famous legends of the Panjab 
picture him as a very powerful leader with a large following. 
But, earlier than this, as recorded in ^the Janam Sakhis of 


» I A, 1881, p; 35. * I A, 1895, p. 49. ^ pp 11. 

* Ox, pp. 195, 197, 218-220; Duff, p. 277; HIG, vol. II, p. 312. 

« ERNP, vol. I, p. 255. 

* Tod, vol. II, p. 1,027. 

’ Tod, vol. II, p. 951. 

* Tod, vol. II, p. 848; opposite this page (848) is a good picture 

of the figure. • I A, 1882, p. 35. 

“ Tr., Gorakhnath hi Go^thi, Mac, 

“ Mac,, vol. II, pp. 139, *140. 



GORAKHNATH 


237 


Baba Nanak (1469-1538), Nanak is represented as talking 
with both Gorakhnath and Matsyendranath^ In these 
accounts Nanak is said to have visited many places. He 
is mistaken for Gorakhnath in Ceylon.^ In this third 
retirement from the world Nanak visited the northern 
region, and, in the fastnesses of the mountains, came to 
the residence of Mahadeva (Siva). There he met Siva, 
Gorakhnath, Bhartrhari, and others, all of whom were per- 
fect Yogis {Siddhas).^ Nanak’s fifth retirement was passed 
at Gorkhatari,^ a quarter in the city of Peshawar.® There 
he met eighty-four Siddhas (adepts) who performed many 
wonders for him. Later, he and Gorakhnath had a talk 
together.’ The setting of this account, and especially 
the third retirement of Nanak, shows that Gorakhnath 
belonged to a much earlier period. Nanak seems to have 
known about the Yogis of Gorakhnath’s order for, Bhartrhari 
says to him:® 

The form of the Jog is the ear-ring, the patched quilt, the wallet, 
the staff (and) the horn. 

Nanak speaks about Goraksas and Siddhas.® He talks 
with ascetics at the temple of Gorakhmata (at Pilibhit, D.P., 
now Nanakmata;^® he knows their teaching and their 
practices and he is acquainted with their hypocrisies.^*^ 
Gorakhnath pressed Nanak to become a Yogi!^® All of these 
references show familiarity with a well-established and well- 
known order, and not to a sect in the early process of its 
development. 


^ Tr., p. xxxvi. 

* Tr.y p. xxxvii; Mac., vol. I, p. 156. 

® 'Tv r» vwiv 

‘ See Mac., vo'l. I, pp. 170, 171. 

® Tr., pp. xlii, xliii. 

® Mac.t vol. I, p. 172. 

’ Tr., p. xliv. 

vol. I, pp. 133, 151, 60. 161-163; Tr., p. xl. 

* Mac., vol. I, p. 41 ; 

Mac., vol. I, pp. 59, 60, 309. 

Mac., vol. I, pp. 160, 161, 173, 174, 225, 274, 295, 338, 349, 350. 
Mac., vol. I. pp. 314, 315, 350-352, 356, 357. 

“ Mac., vol. I, p. 162. 



238 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Further, Kabir (1440-1518), to whom Nanak was largely 
indebted for his teaching^, is supposed to have been a 
contemporary of Gorakhnath. In the Gorakhndth ki Gosthi^ 
is recorded a controversy between Kabir and Gorakhnatlu 
It was on the basis of this reference that Wilson assumed 
that Gorakhnath belonged to the fifteenth century. This date 
has been followed for the most part since Wilson’s time.'"* 
But the general attitude of the Janam !§dkhis of Kabir point 
to an earlier age. Wilson^ quotes the following verse in 
translation from the Bijak of Kabir: 

Gorakhnath, enanriourcci as he was of Rama, is dead; his body was 
not burnt (the JoLds bury their dead), and the flesh has decayed, and 
is turned to clay, and such rank as the Kauravas enjoy, does he obtain 
(bodily annihilation).-' 

This verse conveys the impression tliat Gorakhnath had 
been long dead, and that his name was so well knowm in 
common tradition that Kabir could give point to his teaching 
by reference to him. The passages in the Adi Gravth bear 
out this contention. In this book Kabir speaks of himself 
as having been a Yogi in previous births® and he knows 
something of Yoga doctrine.^ 

(Whose) breath is returning? (through) the six (mystical) spheres 
(of the human body), whose thought is intent on vacuum,** 

Kabir makes references to Y^ogis;^ the nine Nathas;^® some 


^ Wi., p. 69. 

® Price, Hindi and Hindustani Selections, vol. I, p. 140. The 
Gorakhndth ki Gosthi is one of the books in the collection of The Hook 
at Chaura, the Khass Grantha. IVi., p. 76. d'his dialogue {gosthi) is 
published and translated by Dr. Singh (G.) as the Goraklibodh. 

^ Wu, p. 255. See also Alexander, Statistical, Descriptive and 
Historical A ccoimt of the North-Western Provinces of India, Gorakhpur , 
p. 371, ‘Not earlier than the fourteenth century.’ Winternitz, WGIL, 
vol. Ill, p. 258, note 1, says that he should be placed in the first half 
of the fifteenth century. See also WGIL, vol. Ill, p. 142. 

" Wi., p. 86. 

& Verse 40. 

« Tr., p. 462; Mac,, vol. I, p. 149. 

’ Mac., vol. VI, pp. 164, 167, 168, 169, 194, 199, 200, 285. 

® Tr., p. 472; Mac,,\o\. VI, pp. 168. 

* E.g., Tr., pp. 475, 654; Mac., vol. VI, pp. 142, 154, 155, 198, 
235, 240. 

Tr., p. 696. 



GORAKHNATH 239 

of the distinctive marks of the Yogi, such as the ear-rings, ^ 
the patched coat postures,^ the horn,^ ashes the wallet.® the 
club,’ matted hair,® the cry, 'Gorokh^ Gorakh,''^ and their 
faults of drinking^® and hypocrisy It is evident that in 
Kabir’s time Gorakhnath was a well -known person of the 
past."^ 

Another cycle of Panjab legends, those of Raja Rasalu and 
his half-brother, Puran Bhagat, is intimately concerned with 
Gorakhnath. Rasalu ’s name is famous from Afghanastan to 
Bengal, and Puran is one of the most famous saints of the 
Panjab. Both became followers of Gorakhnath, and Puran, 
especially, became a renowned Yogi. 'The w^ell where Puran 
was left for twelve years,^® is still shown in Sialkot. Rasalu 
was the son of the famous Salavahan of Sialkot. If the date 
of this famous raja could be fixed, much light would be 
thrown upon that of Gorakhnath. In 1884, Temple 
attempted to show’ that Rasalu belonged to the early eighth 
century. He traced Rasiilu’s ancestry through Jat families in 
the Panjab in two main stocks, the Siddhus and the Samsis. 
The former trace their line back to the Rajput prince, Jaisal, 
who founded Jaisalmeer^^ about 1156 and who died 

in 11684’ The Sarhsis go further back, practically through 
the same descent, to Raja Gaj, father of the great Salavahan.^® 

^ Mac., vol. VI, pp. 168, 231, 241. 

2 Mac., vol. VI, pp. 168, 231, 243. 

^ Mac., vol. VI, p. 168. 

^ Mac., vol. VI, p. 169, 

^ Mac., vol. VI, p. 169. 

« Mac., vol. VI, pp. 169, 243. 

’ Mac., vol. VI, p. 231. 

** Mac., vol. VI, p. 272. 

Mac., vol. VI, p. 263. 

Mac., vol. VI, pp. 154, 255. Mac., vol. VI, p. 270. 

According to the traditions of the Sadhs (Allison, Tiie Sddhs), 
Uda Das (early 17th cent.) was a disciple of Gorakliji (p. 99) and 
the Bhandhara was established by Gorakhji. (pp. 86, 116). 

See chapter on Legends, p. 199. 

OA, 1884, pp. 379-415. See Griffin, Rajas of the Panjab, p. 2. 

Tod, vol. II, pp. 1,204, 1206; Duff, p. 290; Rdjputdna Gazetteer, 

p. 171. 

” CR, 1884, p. 390; Criffin, p. 2, says that he was driven from 
Jaisalmeer in 1180. Table of descent from Jaisal is found in Griffin, 
p. 9. CR, 1884, p. 392. 



240 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

SalavShan had many sons of whom Puran was the second and 
Rasalu the third. Tod^ says that Raja Gaj opposed the king 
of Khurasan at Ghazni, with great success at first, but was 
finally slain, and was succeeded by his son.^ Salavahan re- 
treated to the Panjab which he conquered. There he founded 
Sialkot.^ Later, he recovered Ghazni. Raja Gaj is placed in 
the end of the seventh century.® This would put Rasalu 
early in the eighth century. This conclusion is confirmed by 
the account of the struggles of Hindu chiefs in Afghanastan 
from A.D. 697. Rasalu evidently had a considerable share 
in the early part of this struggle. There is reference to a very 
prominent character on the Hindu side whose name is 
variously written and who fought the Musalmans. He 
became the subject of many Arab stories in the holy wars on 
the frontiers of India and played a considerable part in events 
in the Kabul valley around the beginning of the eigth century. 
A Hindu chief by the name of Ranbal defeated Abdullah, 
governor of Seistan in 697 and played an important part in 
events that followed in 700-703.^ In 712 a treaty was made, 
in Sind, by Muhammad Qasim with a Hindu king named 
Rasil. The name of the chief referred to above has been 
variously rendered Zantil, Zanbil, Ratbil, Retpeil, Ratbal, 
Raptil, Rantal, Rattiel, Ratbyl, Ratpeil® and Ranbal.® In 
modern legends Rasalu’s name varies as Risalu, Salu, Rasal, 
and Risal."^ If Risal is Rasalu, as Temple suggests, then 
Gorakhnath must have belonged to a time not later than the 
eighth century. Some writers are inclined to place Rasalu 
still earlier. Princep® would say a.d. 400, and Mrs. Steele® 
would date Salavahan in a.d. 78. Dr. Hutchinson^® who, in 

1 Vol. II, p. 1,179. 

* Tod, vol, II, p, 1,180. 

* CR, 1884, p. 393. See table on same page. 

4 EHI, vol. II, pp. 416, 417. 

® EHI, vol. II, p. 417. 

• CR, 1884, p. 393. 

’ But, is this man Rai Sal, who was destroyed in 1205?^ In this 
case the Rasalu legend would point to and strengthen the conclusion 
drawn on p. 236. See Cambridge History of India, vol. Ill, p. 47. 

» 7.4,1884, p. r3. 

• I A, 1882, p. 347. Also Gazetteer of Sidlkot, 1883-4, p. 26. 

In a personal letter to Dr, H. D. Griswold, of L^ore, dated 
June 20, 1925. See also Sidlkot Gazetteer, 1921, p. 14. 



GORAKHNATH 241 

his revision of the Gazetteer of Sidlkot some years ago,^ went 
into the question, holds that Rasalu was a Punwar Pajput, 
belonging to the Yadubamsi race, which had its seat at 
Rawalpindi, then called Gajpur. They were expelled by 
Indu-Scythians and returned to the east of the Jhelum where 
Salavahan made Sialkot his capital. Rasalu succeeded his 
father, Salavahan, about the end of the first century a.d. 
He seems to have been succeeded by an Indu-Scythian by 
the name of Raja Hudi.^ 

These data show that there are traditions, which supersede 
those of Kabir, which point to an early date for Gorakhnath. 
Whether the stories of the relations between Gorakhnath and 
Puran Bhagat, which are very persistent, would allow a date 
as early as the eighth century a.d. for Gorakhnath, as Temple 
would suggest, or still earlier, as Dr. Hutchinson’s data would 
suggest, must depend upon corroborative evidence from other 
sources. At the lowest, the weight of the Punjab legends, 
Guga, Rasalu, Puran and Salavahana, point to the struggles 
between Musalman and Hindu on the frontiers, before the 
end of the twelfth century. 

The note maae by Jfiane^var in his famous paraphrase of 
the Bhagavad Gita is of great importance, for the author 
states that he was a Yogi, a disciple of Gorakhnath.^ 

Using tradition based on Namdev,^ R. L. Pahgarkar, in 
his ^ri Jndneh)aratnukdrdja Carita, Poona, 1912, states that 
Gorakhnath came to the home of Govindpanth, the grand- 


1 1921. 

* Sials were also Punwar Rajputs. In the time of Hiucn Tsaing 
Sialkot was called Sakala. Kot is a modem addition, J5akala became 
Sala, Sal, Sial through phonetic modifications. Raja Hudi, with 
whom Rasalu’s name is associated in the legends, Princep (lA, 1884, 
pp. 182, 183) would put about a.d. 360. 

^Slavahan is also said to have been of the Naga race of Tak^a 
(jfRAS, 1891, p. 37; Tod, vol. I, p. 82). The name of Hudi, or Udi 
is associated with the caves at Hoda in Afghanastin, the largest being 
known as the Palace of Hoda Raja. Khairabad, opposite Attock, is 
known the stronghold of Hodi, or Udi {JRAS, vol. XIV, p. 323). 
Cunningham {Archceological Survey of India, vol. XIV, pp. 44-47) 
thinks that Hodi should be placed before the Christian era. Others 
{JA, 1884, p. 78) seem to think that his date is about a.d. 200. 

® See above, pp. 311, 312. 

* Abhahgact. Gdihd, Bombay, 1894, pp. 421 ff. 


16 



242 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

father of Jfiane^var (p. 32) and that Gaininath was the guru 
of Vitthal, the father of Jfiane^var (p. 32). Bhave repeats 
the tradition to show that there was an old connection be- 
tween Gorakhnath and Jiiane^var’s grandfather, Govindpanth. 
He says also that Govindpanth *s father worked under Jaitrapal 
of Bira in 1207, and had his mind turned to religious things 
by Gorakhnath.^ The same author (Bhave)^ holds that 
similes and arguments in passages from the Goraksa-amar- 
samvdd and the Jhdneivari are sufficiently in agreement to 
belong to the same literary descent. The Goraksa-amarsamvdd 
is attributed to Gorakhnath. He, therefore, thinks that there 
were very close relations between Jflanesvar’s forebears for 
two or three generations and the Natha sect.^ Bhave also 
says that the Natha sect was widely spread throughout 
lVIaharas|:ra about the twelfth century.^ 

There is thus found in the Jndneh)an a literary reference 
to Gorakhnath, which gives him a definite place in history. 
If the usual date, 1290,® for the Jndneivari be accepted, 
Gorakhnath may be placed not later than 1225. There is, 
however, some uncertainty concerning the date of this work. 
While it may be said that the poem was written not later than 
1290, it may have been written earlier. The late Dr. Justin 
E. Abbott, in an unpublished paper, reported four manuscripts 
of the Jndnesvarl which are undated, indicating that the dates 
found in the others have been interpolated, and that there are 
manuscripts belonging to a recension which does not know 
this date, and, therefore, may be older. The language of the 
Jndnewart is sufficiently archaic, he said, to allow for argu- 
ment for an earlier date than 1290 for its composition. The 
date for Gorakhnath might, therefore, on the argument from 
the Jndnesvariy be placed as early as a.d. 1100.® Bhave would 
say the tenth or eleventh century.’ 

'I'here is another cycle of legends, centering around 
( lOpicand, Rani Pingla, and Bhartrhari (Bhartri), which is 
ri pcated from Bengal to Western India and Sind and which 
is not unknown in the Panjab. ^ 

* lihave^ vol. I, p. 30. * Bhave, vol. I, pp. 38, 39. 

® Bhave, vol. I, p. 41. * Bhave, vol. I, p. 37. 

® BVS, p. 92. ® His shrine is at Alandi. 

^ Bhave, vol. I, p. 37. 



GOKAKHNATH 243 

Gopicand is known in a famous legend of Sind as Pir 
Patao. This story goes back to the first decade of the 
thirteenth century, since the saint is said to have died in 
1209.^ Pir Patao lived in a cave, Pir Arr, in an island hill 
near Xhatha in the delta of the Indus, about twenty miles 
from the present railway station of Jungshahi. By Hind^is 
he is called Gopicand. The story of Gopicand as told in the 
East is found in The Song of Manickchandra.^ Manikcand, a 
chief who lived in the neighbourhood of Rangpur, in Eastern 
Bengal, was a brother of Dhamiapala.^ The Pala dynasty came 
to an end in Bengal in 1095.'* The Yogis rose to power under 
the Palas. Manikcandra’s wife, mother of Gopicand, was a 
disciple of a sweeper, Hadi by name, a Yogi of the sect of 
Gorakhnath. Gopicand’s mother was herself a skilled magi- 
cian. Grierson thinks that the Yogi Hadi represents the 
movement of the Kanphata Yogis eastward from Nepal. Sen** 
conceives of the movement in the other direction. The 
Kanphata Yogis of the neighbourhood of Rangpur, today, 
who siiig the song of Manikcandra, are Pa^upata Siva 
worshippers whv> consider Gorakhnath as their guru. Hadi, 
therefore, lived as early as the first half of the eleventh 
century, Gorakhnath preceded Hadi. 

Dinesh Chandra Sen^ points out that in the Dharma Man^^ 
gala there are frequent references to Minanath, Gorakhnath, 
Hadipa and Kalupa, whom he terms Buddhist saints.’ He 
says also that the ballads of the Pala kings of Bengal have the 
distinct marks of Buddhism on them and indicate the 
marvellous powers wielded by Gorakhnath and Hadisiddha. 
They were popular. Hadi was a Dom.® Sen also states that 

^ Account furnished by E. L. Carter, Esq., I.C.S., and sent to the 
author by Dr. J. J. Modi, Hon. Secreta^ of the Anthropological 
Society of Bombay. The legend is found in the Tufat ul Kiram, 

* JASBe^ 1877, 1878, articles by Grierson. 

® JASBe, 1878, p. 135. 

* Kc»viedy, Imperial Gazetteer, Indian Empire, vol. II, p. 317. 

® History of Bengali Language and Literature, p. 29. 

® History of Bengali Language and Literature, p. 29. 

’ History of Bengali Language and Literature, p. 28. 

* Sen, p. 29. Grierson held that Ha^i was not a Pom and that 
Manikcandra was a Bania by caste; JASBe, 1878, p. 138; 1877, 
p. 186; not a Pala (ibid., p. 135). But see below, p. 244. 



244 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

the Dhanna cult, to which these saints belonged, was 
expounded by Ramai Pandit who was born at the end of the 
tenth century ; that his contemporary, Dharma Pala V belong- 
ed to the early eleventh century ; and that Manikcandra Pala 
of the first half of the eleventh century is the Manikcandra 
of the song translated by Grierson.^ 

The mother of Gopicand, Manavati, is spoken of as the 
sister of Bhartphari, w^ho abdicated his throne in favour of 
his brother, Vikramaditya (Candragupta II) of Ujjain, after 
the death of his queen, Rani Pihgla. Bhartrhari (Bhartri) 
became a Gorakhnathi.^ One of the sub-sects of the 
Kanphatas is named after him. Vikramaditya ruled in Ujjain 
from 1076 to 1126.^ This would place the death of Rani 
Pihgla before the end of the eleventh century. 

Another version of the Rani Pihgla story makes her the 
queen of Raja Bhoj of Dhar (Malwa), who reigned from 1018 
to 1060.^ 

The references to Gopicand, Bhartri, Bhoja and Rani 
Pihgla all suggest a date not later than the early eleventh 
century for Gorakhnath. 

Moreover, there are historical data to support these Bengal 
traditions. The Palas were plebeians elected to kingship 
(Sdstri, p. 3), and their period runs from the eighth to the 
twelfth centuries (Ban). During the reign of the third king 


^ Sen, History of Bengali Language and Literature y pp. 407, 456. 

* See Eknath, Ananda Lahariy edition of 1912, Poona, verse 95. A 
legend describing his Acceptance of Gorakhnath is as follows : 

Bhartri happened to go into the forest where Gorakhnath was 
practising asuterities, but he knew not that the saint was there. Soon 
after the disciples of Gorakhnath met him and asked him to become 
one of them. He answered, *What do I care for Gorakhnath? If he 
wishes to learn the ways of the almighty let him come and hear from 
me.* Finally, Gorakhnath said to Bhartri, ‘ If you give me a handful 
of patience, I will become your disciple.* So Bhartri, in search of 
patience, came to the gods, but they could not supply it. At last he 
went to Visnu, who said, * I cannot supply you with patience. If you 
want it, you must go to Gorakhnath who is the greatest of saints.* 
Thus convinced, Bhartri accepted Gorakhnath as his guru. CTC, 
vol. Ill, p. 154. ® Oxy p. 202 

* See RTCPy vol. II, p. 403; Archceological Survey of Gujaraty 
p. 3; Oxy p. 189; compare HIGy vol. II, p. 249. Forbes, Rds Malay 
vol. I, p. 112, gives Bhoja Pramara the dates 1010 to 1053. 



GORAKHNATH 


245 


of the line, the worship of Dharma as a god came into 
fashion through the influence of Ramai Pandit. Devapala’s 
sister, Mayana, actively encouraged the Pandit. The next 
king but one of the line is known to have granted lands 
to P^upatas, whose temples he is said to have erected by the 
thousands {Sdstri). Conflicts with the Pratiharas would make 
possible the relationships suggested by the stories involving 
Bhoja and Bhartri. Mahipala (before 1020) saw vernacular 
literature developing and the admission of the Tantric gods 
Bhairava and Bhairavi into popular Buddhist religion. Then 
too, the Nathas were becoming objects of veneration, 
Rtoianavajra, of the Vajrayana Buddhist development, became 
a disciple of Matsyendranath (see above, p. 151 and below, 
p. 277), a Saivite belongiag to the Nathamarga, taking the 
name of Gorakhnath. {Sdstri^ P* ^nd he only among the 
great Nathas was considered as a heretic by the Buddhists 
(Or.). Govinda Chandra (Gopicand) was a contemporary of 
Mahipala and belongs to the eleventh century (Sdstri), 

There is, moreover, in Rajputana, a tradition which asso- 
ciates Gorakhnath with Bappa in the early eighth century. 
Bappa of Mewar grew up in the wilds of Udaipur. The 
story is that he met there, one day, a hermit, by name 
Gorakhnath, who gave him the two-edged sword with which 
he opened the way to the throne of Mewar. ^ Tod relates® 
how Pushpavati, daughter of a Pramar prince of Candravati* 
was returning from a pilgrimage to her own country, from 
the shrine of Amba Mata when she heard of the sack of 
Vallabhi^ at the hands of the Maitrikas.® Her lord, a prince 
of the Solar dynasty, perished. The queen took refuge in a 
cave in the hills of Malia. There she was delivered of a son. 
She gave him into the keeping of a Brahmani with instruc- 

^ Tod, vol. 1, p. 265. 

» Tod, vol. I, pp. 258-268. 

® Tod, vol. I, p. 265. This place has disappeared. It was about 
twelve miles from the foot of Abu, at the junction of the Banas and 
the Sivalan. See Archaologicid Survey of India, 1903, pp. 96-99. 

* Wala, eighteen miles north-west of Bhaunagar in KathifiwSr 
The Gahlotis took possession of this place about a.d. 470; Archao^ 
logical Survey of India, New Series, vol. II, p. 80. Compare Forhca, 
Rdr Mala, vol. I, p. 261. 

• Ox, p. 164 ; Tod, vol. I, p. 255. 



246 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

tions that he be brought up as a Brahman, but that he be 
married to a Rajputni. The queen then mounted the funeral 
pyre. The child’s foster mother named him Goha, which is 
popularly rendered as ‘Cave-born.’ The word is derived, 
however, from ‘ Guha,’ or ‘ Guhasena ’ the name of the fourth 
and probably the first great Vallabhi monarch, 559-567.^ As 
he grew up, he became the friend of the Bhils, and later, 
their king, ruling the Idar, south of Mount Abu. The ninth 
in the line from ‘Goha’ was Bappa, or Bapa, who overthrew 
the Moris of Chitor, of whom he was a chieftain, in a.d. 728^ 
and founded the dynasty of Mewar. 

The sack of Vallahbi took place in 524.® This and the 
date 728 agree sufficiently to satisfy the chronological 
requirements of the tradition. 

Tliere is additional evidence concerning this tradition of 
Bappa and the Yogis. The famous temple of Eklihgaji, north 
of Udaipur, was founded by Bappa. ^ While he was herding 
cattle in the neighbouring hills, Bappa followed, one day, 
one of the cows that was behaving strangely. In his 
Curiosity about her he stumbled upon a phallic symbol of 
Mahadcva.® On this spot the temple was built. The sage 
whom Bappa found there became his teacher, and Bappa 
was initiated into the mysteries of Siva. Siva’s consort 
invested Bappa with divine weapons and the sage niade him 
invulneiable from weapons. An inscription, found in a store- 
room of the temple, and dated a.d. 971 , and written in the 
Devanagri character of the tenth century, confirms the 
tradition and shows the earlier existence of the temple. The 
Icxation of the temple above the ruins of Nagahrada (Nagda, 
Nagendra) shows that Tod’s legends concerning Bappa have 
some historical foundation.® This inscription would place 

» Tod, vol. I, p. 259. 

• Tod, vol. I, p. 269; f//P, vol. X, p. 229, says 734; Duff,p 27B, 
says 735. See Tod, vol. I, p. 265, note. 

• Tod, vol. I, pp. 254, 251 ; Yates, Rajputana Gazetteer, vol. Ill, 
p. 15, accepts the date. FHIEA, vol. I, p. 24: * From about A.D. 500, 
Kathiawar was held by the Maitrikas*. See also Cunningham, Coins 
of Mediceval India, p. 46 ; Ox, p. 164; Archteological Survey of India, 
vol. II, p. 70, says a.d. 523, 

^ HIG, vol, XXIV, p. 104. = Tod, vol. I, pp. 263, 264. 

** Bhandarkar, JASBy, vol. XXII, pp. 151 ff. 



GORAKHNATH 247 

the time of the founding of the temple not far from that 
when Bappa took Chitor from the Moris. The store room 
was a temple of the-Nathas. The inscription confirms also 
the tradition of the Ranas of Udaipur as ministers in the 
temple. The hermit who mei. Bappa may have been Gorakh- 
nath. In that case his date would be not later than the early 
part of the eighth century. 

An interesting coin of Bappa has been found and is describ- 
ed in a recent issue of the Journal of the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal} On the obverse of this coin are found the words $ri 
Voppa, in characters of the eighth century and figures of the 
trident, the linga of Siva and the bull. Below these is the 
image of a man, prostrate, having large ears, pierced, the 
holes exaggerated. The teverse shows a cow. All of this is 
suggestive of the legend recorded above. 

It is true that the prevailing Saivite ascetics of that time in 
Rajputana are usually considered to have been of the Lakuli^a 
sect.2 But, the name of Gorakhnath is mentioned, in an 
inscription recording a consecration of five lingas at Somnath 
in 1287, along with that of the Lakuli^as.® Bhandarkar 
points out^ that Lakuli^a was a general name by which 
Saivite sects were called in inscriptions (i.e., from 943 to 
1285). It is not improbable, then, that Gorakhnath was 
known in Bappa’s time. 

Considerable attention has been given to Nepalese legends 
and the meeting of Matsyendranath and Gorakhnath at 
Patan.® 

Later traditions and coins® do not help to fix the date of 
Gorakhnath. But the main tradition concerning Matsyendra- 
nath and his disciple does. That the tradition goes back for 
some centuries is clear from an inscription cited by Vallee 


^ Numismatic Supplement, 1926-27, p. 14. 

* Fleet, JRASy 1907, p. 420, states that Eklihgaji is a temple of 
the Lakulisas. 

® In* the Cintra Prasasti of the Reign of Sarahgadeva, Epigraphia 
Indica, vol. I, pp. 271 ff. The images, a Gorak§aka, a Bhairava, an 
Anjaneya (HanumSn), a Sarasvati and a Siddhi VinSyaka (Gane^a) 
were placed in five temples. 

* Vaishnavism, Sdivism, &c., p. 120. 

® See Dp. 231, 232, 233, above. ® See p, 179, note 4. 



248 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Poussin^ which shows that Matsyendranath, in his relations 
with Yogis, as represented in the story of the fish, and as 
Loke^war, were traditional in 792; Nepali Samvat,A.D. 1672. 
Matsyendranath represents the union of Pa^upata Saivism and 
Buddhism in Nepal.* 

In the Vathidvali Pdrbatiyd it is stated that Matsyendra- 
nath came to Nepal to meet Gorakhnath in the reign of 
Bardeva (Varadevaj. This king lived not later than the 
middle of the eighth century.® According to Walsh^ coins 
of the dynasty to which Bardeva belonged,- ranging from 
635 to 751, have been identified. Chronology based upon 
tiiese coins would place Bardeva somewhere about 700, at 
least not later than the middle of the eighth century. Levi*^ 
puts Narendradeva, father of Bardeva, in the middle of 
the eighth century. The father, an old man, was living when 
Gorakhnath came to Nepal. 

Besides literary and legendary sources, there are some 
archaeological data which may help to fix the date of Gorakh- 
nath. There is a division of opinion amongst Yogis as to 
who began the practice of splitting the ears and inserting the 
huge ear-rings. At any rate, the practice is closely associated 
with Matsyendranath, and Gorakhnath, and secondarily with 
Siva.® In the Ellora Brahmanical cave temple, Kailasa, there 
is a figure of Siva as a Mahayogi with the huge ear-rings.'^ 
This temple belongs to the early part of the eighth century.® 
There is a similar figure of Siva as Joge^var on Salsette 
Island, belonging to the second half of the eighth century.® 
If this evidence be indefinite, there is other more exact. 

1 ERE, vol. II, p. 260. 

• Tibetan tradition says that Gorakhnath^s Kanphata disciples 
originally were Buddhists and that they became S^vitcs in the 
twelfth century. Levi, Le Nepal, vol. I, pp. 355 f. 

• Wright, History of Nepal, p. 313. The list contains 5. Narendra- 
deva, 8. Vara Deva, 9. Sahkaradeva. 

• JRAS, 1908, pp. 669, 760. 

« Le Nepal, vol. I, p. 347. 

® WGIL, vol. Ill, p. 258, note 1. 

’ Arcfueological Survey of Western India, 1883, plate xxi. These 
arc not, however, worn as Kanphatas wear theirs. 

• About A.D. 725. Cave Temples, pp. 400, 453. 

• Cave Temples, p* 475. Wu, p. 212, note: *In the temples of 
Salsette, Elephanta, and Ellora the principal figure is mostly Siva, 



GORAKHNATH 249 

The builder of the temple of Parasurame^vara in the North 
Arcot district, evidently had in mind the form of the lihga, 
for the structure is built on that general plan. The lihga in 
this temple is an exact phallus, and is the only one of its 
kind in South India. On ^he lihga is carved an image of 
Siva with two hands only. In his right hand he is carrying a 
ram by its hind legs, and in his left a water-bottle. He has a 
battle-axe on his left shoulder. His hair is matted and 
twisted and he is standing on a raksasa. The image shows 
the split ears and the rings characteristic of the Gorakhnathis. 
An inscription shows that the temple was rebuilt in 1126. 
T. A. Gopinath Rao, who described the temple and lihga, ^ 
insisted that the carved lihga, wbicii shows Siva with the 
split ears and the huge ear-rings, should be dated not later 
than the second or third century. The image seems to be as 
early as the twelfth century, anyway. 

The pertinent data for determining the date of Gorakhnath 
has been assembled. The evidence may be grouped around 
four periods. First of all, there is the association of the 
name with those of Kabir and Nanak ; but it has been shown 
that this evidence really points Gorakhnath to an earlier 
period. 

There is, then, the period of the eleventh and twelfth 
centuries, before a.d. 1200, the era of the early Hindu- 
Moslem conflict, principally in the north-west. For this 
period there is the cycle of the Guga legend; the literary 
evidence from the Nathas of Western India, including 
Jiiane^var; the Bengal Saivite-Buddhist tradition, including 
the Dharma cult; and the archaeological fragment from 
South India. The destruction of the shrine at Gorakhpur 
in the thirteenth century would have its bearing on this date. 
This whole body of material seems to support a date not 
later than a.d. 1200; most of it would favour a date at least a 
century earlier. 

decorated with ear-rings, such as are worn by the Kanphata Jogis; 
the walls are covered with ascetics in the various asanas ... in which 
the Yogi is to sit . . . and one of the caves of Salsette is named that 
of Jogilvra, or Siva, as the Lord of Yogis.* Quoted from Translation 
of the Literary Society of Bombay ^ vols. I and II. See note 7, p. 248. 

1 lA, vol. XL, 1911, pp. 104 ff. 



250 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Then there is the third suggestion of the seventh-eighth 
century. For this there is the Buddhist-Saivite tradition in 
Nepal going back to the Narendradeva ; Bappa of Udaipur; 
Rasalu and Hodi of the north-west; and scraps of references 
about Sankara in the east and in Nepal. While it may seem 
that this data is not clear enough to argue that Goraknath 
lived so far back, still, in considering these sources it is well 
to bear in mind that the centuries, seven to twelve, mark 
the period of the decline of Buddhism apd the rise of 
Saivism, and that the latter was at its height in the tenth and 
eleventh centuries. The Saiva movement was advancing 
powerfully in the days of Sankara (788-850). The struggle 
between Buddhism and Saivism was at its highest in South 
India in the seventh century. Saivism was introduced into 
Nepal early. In 627 there were seven Saivite shrines in 
Nepal.^ There are traditions in the east to the effect that the 
Yogis were Saivites degraded by Sankara for drunkenness. 

Finally, there are bits of opinion, based upon a reference 
here and there, pointing to still earlier times. 

Taking all of these data into consideration, it may be 
assumed that Goraknath lived not later than a.d. 1200 in 
the second of the four periods suggested above. And it is 
not unreasonable to push back his date another century, 
since, if the conjecture about the date of the Jndneivari be 
correct, Bengal literary and historical tradition would agree 
with that of Western India. This would be supported by 
the inscription at Somnath (dated 1287), for the fact that 
Gorakhnath could have a temple and an image so early 
would indicate that he had lived at least a century before. 

Until further data are discovered, the conclusion must be 
that Gorakhnath lived not later than a.d. 1200, probably 
early in the eleventh century, and that he came originally 
from Eastern Bengal,^ 


^ Journal Asiatique, vol. II (1904), p. 225. 

* Dr. Mohan Singh in his GorakJmdth and Mediaeval^ Hindu 
Mysticism, argues from data chiefly found in vernacular sources, not 
noted above, that Gorakhnath lived in the 9th“10th centuries. 



CHAPTER TWELVE 


THE LITERATURE 

There seems to be little teaching of books and a limited 
practice of Yoga amongst the Kanphatas.^ Inquiries at the 
principal centres of the Yogis elicit very little knowledge of 
their texts, even of the names of their treatises on the 
Hatha Yoga. Many of the Yogis and some of their mahants 
are quite illiterate. There is, however, some oral teaching. 
Besides the cyclic songs already mentioned, there are a 
number of works which Goraknathis use, and others which 
are attributed to them, or which deal with the Ha^ha Yoga. 
For convenienc** of record, these books are arranged in four 
groups and numbered consecutively.^ 

^ At Tilla they reported no practice and very little teaching. 
Others claim that all Yogis practise a little meditation in the night, 
at four in the morning and at nine in the evening. They fix their 
minds on Paramesuar. — The Aipanth at Hardwar. 

* The works are ninribcred for convenience, not for suggested 
chronological order. 'I’he author’s own lists are supplemented by 
references to the following writers against whom the works they cite 
are numbered. 

Gr., Numbers 13, 14, 21, 36, 43, 45, 46, 47. 

Wi., Numbers 24, 26, 31, 32, 35, 36, 41. 

Hall (An Index of the Indian Philosophical Systems), 11, 12, 14, 25, 
33, 35, 36, 45, 46, 47. 

Farquhar (FOi?L), 11, 15, 19, 22, 23, 24, 25. 26, 28, 30, 33, 34, 35, 
36, 41,42, 45, 47. 

Garbe (Sdhkhya und Yoga), 34, 35. 

Atkins (Himalayan Gazetteer, vol. II, p. 809), 26, 36, 41. 

Jnanesvara (Pangarkar), 22, 26, 36, 41. 

Aufrccht (Catalogus Catalogorum), 13, 14, 17, 20, 21, 26, 36, 37, 
38, 43, 45, 46, 47, 

Mitra, Rajendralala (Yoga Aphorisms of Patanjali, pp. 219 ff.; 
Sanskrit ManusmPts of the Raja of Bikanir, pp. 567 ff.; Sanskrit 



252 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 


I. 

1. Devi Bhqgavat, 

2. Sapta Deva Stotra. 

3. Bhagat Sugar, 

4. Sati Sugar, 

5. Durgd Pat. 

6. Bhdirom Pat, 

1. Rdmhodh. 

8. Gorakhhodh. Written in an old form of Hindi, and 
reported to date from the fourteenth century.^ 

9. Gydn Sdgar. 

10. Brdhmanda sar Gita. 

11. Hatha Yoga. Attributed to Goraksanatha. 

12. Hatha Samhitd. 

1 3 . Caturasltydsana. 

14. Yoga Cintdmaniy on Hatha Yoga by Sivananda Saras- 
vathi.2 

15. Yoga Mdhjari. 

16. Yoga Sathdhya. 

17. Goraksa Sarhhitd. Mitra says that this deals with 
details of performing Yoga Meditations. 

18. Yoga Samgraha, by M. Sukia.^ 

19. Goraksa Kdumudi. 

20. Yoga Mdrtanda , ' 

21. Vivekamdrtanda Yoga^ by Ramesvara Bhatta. 

22. Goraksa Gitd. 

23. Goraksa Pahcaya. 

Manuscripts of the Raja of Bihar y pp. 11, 14, 17, 18, 25, 33, 34, 35, 
36, 37, 39, 40, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47. 

Besides these, he lists other secondary works on the Hatha Yoga; 
Hatha Pradipika-Tikay by Ramananda Tirtha; 

Hatha- Pradipika Tippana, by Umapati; 

Jyotsndy by Brahananda; 

Hatha Rainavali; 

Hcitha Yoga Dhirdya by ^iva ; 

Hatha Yoga Dhirdya Jika by Ramananda Tirtha; 

Hatha Yoga Viveka, by Vamadeva; 

Jhdnamrta Tippaim by Sadananda; 

Jhdna Yoga Khanda. 

^ Tessitori, EREy vol. XII, p. 834. He also reports Gorakhndth ki 
vacany by BanarsT Das, a DigamSara Jain priest of the seventeenth 
century. Dr. Singh gives an English translation of this work and 
reproduces the text. * Mitra. 



THE literature 


253 


24. l§iva Gita, 

25. Hatha Sanketa Candrikd^ by Sundra Deva.^ 

26. Gorak§a Sahasrandma, Mitra states that this is a book 
on the 1,000 names of Kfsna while he was employed as 
a shepherd in Vraja. 

These books are of varying dates, some in Hindi, others 
in Sanskrit, and are not of primary significance. 

II. 

27- ^iva Purdna. 

28. Nirahjana Purdna. 

29. Vismi Sahasrandma. 

30- Visvdnanda Tantra. 

31. &iva Rahasya Ta?itra. 

32. Rudra Yamala Tantra. 

The books of this list are general Purdnic^ Tdntric and 
sectarian works. 

III. 

33. Haihayogapradlpika. This is a Tdntric -Hatha-Yoga 
treatise written by Cintarnani, who as a hermit took the 
name of Swatmarama and attained the title, yogtndra.^ He 
knows a long list of Yogis who preceded him, more than 
twenty-four in all.^ The book, therefore, is fairly late, and 
is sometimes assigned to the fifteenth century. It is cer- 
tainly not earlier. It contains 382 verses arranged in four 
chapters. The verses in the Goraksasataka are found, ver- 
batim, or in substance, scattered in the Hathayogapradipika. 
Portions of it are found in the commentary, as well as in 
the text of the Goraksa Paddhati. It may be considered, 
therefore, as an elaboration of earlier works of the school. 
The verses were translated into English in 1915 by Paftcam 
Sinh.and printed at Allahabad in the series known as ‘The 
Sacred Books of the Hindus’. Herman Walter, in 1893, at 
Miincen, published a translation of the book, with commen- 
tary.* In the same year Srinivas Jayangar published an English 
translation in Bombay, and in 1889 Brahmananda Bhaba of 
Sri Dhara, likewise published a translation at Bombay. It 
was translated by Yogi Srinivasa lyangar in 1893 and a 

^ Mitra. ® See opening verses of the work. 



254 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

second edition of this work was issued from the Theosophical 
Publishing House, Adyar, Madras, in 1933. The numbering 
of the verses in this edition does not always agree with that 
in Paftcam Sinh’s edition. 

34. The Ghcranda Samhitd is a work very similar to the 
preceding, from which it borrows;^ but it gives much 
attention to dhciuti and more details of personal hygiene. It 
was translated and an introduction was prepared for it by 
Richard Schmidt, at Berlin, second edition in 1921, under the 
title, Faqire und Faqirtum, The w^ork was edited by Bhuva- 
nana Chandra Vasaka, at Calcutta, in 1877. There are 
English translations by Sri Chandra Vasu, Bombay, 1895, and 
by Rai Bahadur Sris Chandra Vasu, Allahabad, 1914. This 
last belongs to the series entitled ‘The Sacred Books of the 
Hindus.* It was re-issued in 1933 from the Theosophical 
Publishing House at Adyar. The author was an adept named 
Gheranda, a Vaisnavite of Bengal. His pupil, to whom he 
addresses his teaching, was Canda-Kapali. This is an interest- 
ing name, in view of the origins of the sect of the Kanphatas. 

35. The 3wa Samhitd is a Tantric treatise on Yoga also, 
but much more difficult than the two preceding works and 
much longer, containing 517 verses. It is Vedantic in its philo- 
sophical outlook. Chapter Five seems to be of independent 
origin, its contents having been recited to Parvati by Siva 
himself. In 1923 a second edition of an English translation 
by Rai Bahadur Srisa Chandra Vidyarnanda was published 
in the series ‘The Sacred Books of the Hindus,* the first 
having been issued in Lahore in 1884. 

These three treatises, especially the first and the third, are 
of considerable value for this study. 

IV 

36. Goraksa Pataka. 

37. Jhdna Pataka, 

38. Jhdnaprakdia Pataka. 

39. Goraksa Pataka Tika, a commentary on No. 36 by 
Sankara.^ 


’ SBH, vol. XV, pt. 4, p. 11. 
* Mitra, 



THE LITERATURE 255 

40. Goraksa Pataka Tippana, notes on No. 36 by Mathura- 
nath Sukla.^ 

41. Goraksa Kalpa. 

42. Goraksa Paddhati. 

43. Yoga Siddhdnta Paddhati, on the practice of Yoga by 
Gorakhnath.^ 

44. Siddhdnta Paddhati, rules of praxis by Gorakh- 
nath.^ 

45. Siddhasiddhdnta Paddhati, or metaphysics according 
to Yoga doctrine, by Nityannnda Siddha4 'Siddhdnta' is 
demonstrated truth, i.e., what is proved by reason. The 
commentary on verse thirteen of P^ attributes this work to 
Gorakhnath. 

46. Yoga Mail ini (In. 

47. JhdnamrtOy poems on duties of Yogis by Gorakhnath.^ 

Of these works numbers 37, 38 are identified as the 

Goraksasataka (No. 36).^ Farquhai^ states that the Goraksa 
Kalpa (No. 41) is translated into Hindi as the Goraksa 
Paddhati (No. 42). The latter consists, however, of the 
Goraksasataka and one hundred other verses, all in Sanskrit, 
with a commentary in Hindi. This commentary contains 
quite a number of verses found in the Jlathayogapradipika 
(No, 33). 

Numbers 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 are commentaries (tika, 
tippana) and manuals, secondary or supplemental documents 
{paddhati) on the Goraksaiataka (No. 36). Mitra attributes 
numbers 43, 44, and 47 to Gorakhnath, number 39 to 
Sankara (788-850) and the others (numbers 40, and 45) to 
later writers. 

In the foregoing lists there must be many duplicatec. of 
books, with names as variations of descriptive titles; so 
p>erhaps No. 26 and No. 29. This may be illustrated further. 
In the commentary on the Goraksa Paddhati (No 42), the 


^ Mitra. 

* Hereafter P refers to the ‘Poona Text^ of the CoraksasatakcL} 
Bf to tfie ‘Benares’ manuscript; GP to the Gorcksa P(,ddhati. 

® Mitra. 

* Aufrect, Catalogus Catalogorum, p. 165; Mrlra^ AphorUniij 
p. 219. 

5 FORL, p. 384. 



256 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

first hundred verses, which are the Gorak^aiataka^ are spoken 
of as the Goraksa Rostra and on page ninety-five the second 
hundred verses are often spoken of as the Yoga Rostra, On 
pages ninety- four, ninety-five and ninety-six of the same 
work the text is referred to as Goraksa Samhitd, The 
Benares manuscript after verse 157 calls itself the Gydn 
Prakdsh and at the end speaks of the Goraksasataka and of 
the whole 198 verses as Yoga Rostra and at the very end of 
the ^Jndna Pataka composed by Gorakhnath.’ 

Moreover, in verse four of the commentary to P the 
§ataka is called Hatha Grantha and in the comment on verse 
fourteen the Yoga Sdgar; in that to verse fifty-four, Yoga 
Cintdmani (No. 14) and in that to verse forty-one. Hatha 
Yoga Chintdmani. 

.The Goraksa Paddhati^ on page four, calls itself Goraksa 
Samhitd (No. 17) where P has Goraksasataka and on page 
twenty speaks of the ^iva Yoga Sdstra, 

In the foregoing analysis of the titles of works attributed 
to the Yogis it seems clear that the Goraksasataka is a 
fundamental text of the sect.^ It has, therefore, been selected 
for translation and exposition. The copies made use of for 
this purpose are three : The Goraksasataka with commentary 
by Laksmi Narayana, copied fro^a a manuscript in the library 
of the Bhandarkar Oriental Institute in Poona, and one 
copied from a manuscript in the library of the Sanskrit 
College at Benares. Both of these were secured for the author 
by the late Dr. J, N. Farquhar. The third text is the Goraksa 


^ Gopi Nath Kaviraj says that ‘the Goraksa Sataka and the 
Goraksa Paddhati are two of the few Sanskrit works published, which 
profess to give an exposition of this teacher’s (Gorakhnath’s) instruc- 
tions. The Hapha Yoga Pradlpika also belongs to this school.’ The 
Prince of Wales Sarasvati Bhavana Studies j p. 85: Article, ‘The 
System of Chakras according to Gorakhnath.* Dr. Singh does not 
agree with this, but holds that the doctrines of Gorakhnath belong to 
a period covered by some Upant^ads^ not the earliest, and tries to 
show by the literature he uses that left-hand ^akta doctrine ^'s foreign 
to Gorakhnath’s thought. Verses 131 and 132 of the Gorakhbodhj 
which he translates, however, show knowledge of the Hatha Yoga 
framework. In his work, Dr. Singh (pp. 8 ff.) cites and translates 
quite a number of works, both in Sanskrit and in vernaculars, that 
are not listed in this chapter. 



THE LITERATURE 257 

Paddhati, a book procurable in the bazaars from Hardwar to 
Bombay. 

A word may be said concerning; each of these works. 

The ‘Poona’ text consists of one hundred and one verses 
together with a voluminous commentary called Bdlaprabodhint 
(for the use of beginners) by Laksmi Narayana. 

The ‘Benares’ manuscript consists of 157 verses with a 
supplementary series of forty-one verses, A comparison with 
the Goraksa Paddhati shows that ii is essentially identical 
with that work- 

Thc copy of the Goraksha Paddhati used in this study was 
purchased in the Bombay Bazaar. It consists of two series 
of one hundred verses each, tlie first hundred being the 
Goraksasataka. The second hundred deals with six topics, 
prdndydma (twenty-one verses), pratydhdra (tbiity verses), 
dhdrand (nine verses), dhydna (twenty- four verses), sarnddhi 
(thirteen verses) and mukti (four verses) I'hc commentary 
is in Hindi, and contains numerous quotations from the 
Ha thayogapradipika . 

It is impossible to date this material, d he Sataka is 
attributed to Goiakhnath and the traditions and literary 
references all persist in connecting his name with this body 
of literature. The only datable ntlerencc, which is nor 
modern, is that wdiich assigns the Goraksa Pataka Ttka to 
Sankara. The text of the Pataka woth the commentary of 
Laksmi Narayana is dated guna-abdkPan/ia-mahi, which may 
be rendered Samvat 1143 or 1943 and in our calendar 10S6 
or A.D. 1886. The author states that he wTote the commentary 
while living in Benares, 

There seems to be unanimous agreement that Gorakhnath 
is the author of the Pataka; and, in that case, the work must 
be as old as the twelfth century. 

The teaching contained in the Goraksasataka is a ming- 
ling of Yoga and Tantra doctrines. 


17 



CHAPTER THIRTEEN 


YOGA AND TANTRA 

Yoga is both a branch of Hindu ptiilosophy^ and a system 
of physical and mental discipline, ‘a code of disciplinary 
practices.’ 2 In this latter aspect it plays an important part 
in all the philosophical systems of India and in asceticism in 
general. Yoga was, undoubtedly, a praxis, a set-up of 
actions, long before it was a system of philosophy.® It is, 
undoubtedly, in this aspect of the Yoga that the Goraksa- 
iataka is chiefly interested, and in that text the philosophi- 
cal implications of the Yoga system, or better, its background 
of systematic thought, is assumed rather than expounded. 
Without doubt the disciplines of the system, that is, perfor- 
mance, have been the dominating interest from the earliest 
times until now. 

Even where the aim of ‘knowledge’ is to the front, the 
preparatory methods are not lost sight of. 

When the mind is once purged of all impurities, truths arrived at 
by philosophical discussions carry whole-hearted conviction. Yoga 
holds that discussions are not enough for the purpose, for in order to 
be assured that our minds would not be attracted by worldly tempta- 
tions, certain psychological exercises should be undertaken in order 
to move the mind in a direction, the reverse of ordinary experience.^ 
The (Yogi) looks to the Yoga practice for gaining a complete mastery 
over his mind.’^ 

Interest in the Yogi was not only in his knowledge but also 
in his powerSy superior powers. 

' Das G., p. 8. 

* Das G., p. 1. 

* See Edgerton, AJPy vol. XLV, ‘The Meaning of Sankhya and 
Yoga.* 

* Das G., pp. 11, 12, 

® Das G., p. 330. 



YOGA AND TANTRA 


259 


Throughout all the epochs of Indian culture we find the highest 
reverence paid to the (Yogis) who were believed not only to possess 
a superior sense, by which they could know the highest truth 
beyond the ken of ordinary vision, but also to wield the most 
wonderful miraculous powers which Patanjali has described as the 
vibhutis of Yoga, by which the (Yogi) showed Lis control not only 
over his mind and the minds of others, but also over inert external 
objects.^ 

Practices which are included in Yoga run very far back, 
and some of them may have had their origin in non-Aryan 
sources.^ They antedate all systems of philosophy. Ascetic 
practices, by which it was believed tliat men could come into 
intimate relations with the spirit-world and obtain power to 
change the natural course of things, contributed to the origin 
of the praxis. And Yoga is associated with asceticisirn and 
the acquirement of supernatural powers, and Yoga practices 
are very old,^ even though they may not be much in evidence 
in .the earliest literature.^ Brdhmanas^ 2 ind the Upanisads 
are familiar with Yoga ideas. From early times the ascetic 
has been looked upon as a wonderful magician. Fasts, 
mortifications and ascetic disciplines generally fall w’ithin 
the province of Yoga practice. Bodily discipline became a 
means to further mental control.^ Both Jains and Buddhists 
witness to the practice of Yoga, which, however antedates 
them both.’ 

I'he practices of Yoga, as found in the oldest textbook of the 
system, the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, contain much that in itself is a 
relic of very primitive conceptions of the value of psychic states of 
profound excitement.® 

The Sutras are at least 1,000 years later than the ideas. 


^ Das G., p. 347. Vivekananda insisted that ‘the Yogi propOvSes to 
himself no less a task than to master the whole universe, to control 
the whole of nature.* Quoted by Schmidt in Faqire and Faqirtum^ 

p. 60. 

2 GSY, p. 34; GPG, pp, 18, 19. See Marshall, vol. 1, pp. 53, 54; 
Hauer, p. 1. 

* ‘lire-Vedic, pre-Brahman.* WGIL, vol. Ill, p. 458. 

^ E.g,, in Rig Veda. See GSY, p. 34, and j^ig Veda, 3, 27, 11; 
4, 24, 4; 7, 67’, 8; 1, 5, 3; 1, 30, 7; 1. 34, 9; 10, 30. 

® See Sat. Brdh., 14, 7, 1, 11. 

« GSY, p. 35. 

’ WGIL, vol. Ill, p. 458; MWB, p. 228. » GSP, p. 147. 



2^ gorakhnath and the KANPHATA yogis 

There are traces of wider and wider recognition of these 
practices in each succeeding literary age, from the beginning. 
The Rig Veda knows the ‘mad muni.^ As early as Pdnini's 
time (c. 500. b.c.) ‘ Yogi’ meant a man who practised religious 
austerities; and these were much valued, and asceticism and 
the vow of celibacy and life-long study were regarded as 
great virtues and as being productive of the highest powers.® 
‘Yoga’ was applied to the control of the senses.® Yoga 
doctrines appear in the second group of Upanisads^ In its 
technical sense Yoga appears for the first in the Taittiriyay 
Kathuy Svetdivataray and Mditrdyana Upamsads.^ In the 
Kena Upam§ad it is stated that 

The self cannot be known by him who has knowledge, but only 
by him who has no knowledge. Hence comes the effort to subdue 
all the activity of the senses and the mind, to empty the intellect and 
thus to make it ready for a new apprehension.® 

Passages imply that Yoga is well known. For example ; 

When cease the five 

(Sense-) knowledges, together with the mind (manas). 

And the intellect (buddhi) stirs not — 

That, they say, is the highest course. 

This they consider as Yoga — 

The firm holding back of the senses. 

Then one becomes undistracted. 

Yoga, truly, is the origin and the end.’ 

And further: 


An intelligent man should suppress his speech and his mind. 

The latter he should suppress in the Understanding Self (jndna 
dtman). 


' See above, p. 210, and Rig Veda, 10, 136. 

» DHIP, p. 226. See Cand. Up.y 3, 17, 4; Brh. Up., 1, 2, 6; 3, 8, 10; 
Totf.. 19, 1; 3, 2, 1; 3, 3, 1; Tait, Br., 11, 2, 3; Rig Veda, 10, 129; 
Sat, Brdh.yXO, 5, 8, 1. 

» Katha Up,, 3, 4. 

* DHIP, p. 227. 

» Tait.y 2, 4; Kafha, 2, 12; 6, 11, 18; Svet,, 2, 11 ; 6, 13; Mail., 6, 
18; D.Up.y p 385. 

• KSSy p. 54. 

’ Katha Up., 4, 10, 11. Translation by Hume, Thirteen Principal 
Upanishads, pp. 359-^. Note : * The World * becomes created for 
the person who emerges from the Yoga-state, and passes away when 
he enters it. 



YOGA AND TANTRA 261 

The understanding he should suppress in the Great Self {huddhi^ 
intellect), 

That he should suppress in the Tranquil Self (idnta diman)} 

It is to be noted that here it is the Absolute Brahman 
upon which the mind is to be fixed. ^ Likewise in the 
Mditrdyana Upanisad is attention directed toward the 
Supreme Brahma.^ 

The seer sees not death. 

Nor sickness, nor any distress. 

The seer sees only the All, 

Obtains the All entirely.^ 

And again, it is by austerity that success in the knowledge 
of Brahman is won.^ 

* Brahma is! ’ says he who knows the Brahma-knowledge. 

* This is the door to Brahma ( * says he who becomes free of evil 

by austerity.*^ 

Knowledge, however, probably refers to magical power, to 
the Upanisadic 

belief in the inherent power of knozdedgc, as such . . . The reason 
why they (the Upanishads) seek the ‘ truth % any truth, is precisely this; 
that by knozvlcdge of the truth they expect to master their destiny 
w'holly or partly; and not by a course of action dedicated by know- 
ledge, but directly, immediately, and by virtue of that knowledge in 
itself ; in brief, we may say, magically.’ 

We are here in contact, not with philosophical speculation, 
but with means to practical ends. Or, it may be suggested 
that even metaphysical knowledge is viewed from the point 
of view of possessing or giving supernatural power. 

In the Mditrdyana Upaniiad mention is made of a number 
of Yoga technical terms. 

^ Katha Up.y 3, 13. Translation by Hume, Thirteen Principal 
Upanishads^ pp. 352, 353. 

* Hume, Thirit'cn Principal Upanishads, p. 360, note 2. KSS, 
p. 55. 

® pp. 4, 17, 18. 

* Mait. Up.y 7, 11, 6. Hume, Thirteen Principal Upanishads, p. 458. 

* Mait.y 4, 3. 

* Mait.y 4, 4. Translation by Hume, Thirteen Principal Vpanisads, 

p. 421. 

’ ‘The Upanishads; What do Thfv Seek, and Why,* by F, 
Edgerton, JAGS, vol. XLIX (1929), pp.'97 f. 



262 GORAICHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

The precept for affecting this (unity) is this: restraint of the 
breath {prandydma)y withdrawal of the senses {pratydhdra)^ meditation 
{dydna)y concentration {dhdn m), contemplation {tarkd)y absorption 
(samddhi). Such are said to be the six-fold Yoga.^ 

And one long passage besides, deals with Yoga.^ 

In the Svetdivatara Upanisad Yoga practice is set forth at 
considerable length.® Concerning this Upanisad Dasgupta 

says : 

Yoga has come to be regarded as a method of attaining salvation; 
here for the first time we hear of a meditative (dhydna) Yoga and 
Sahkhya-yoga by which final truth could be known, and v e find, 
with the description of Yoga, its posture, its breath-control and the 
different psychical states preceding the final illumination.'* 

And, he continues, there grew up a w'hole series of Upanisads 
which 

dealt exclusively with Yoga discipline with little or no reference 
to Sahkhya metaphysics ... all busy in describing the Yoga physio- 
logy and the practical methods of attaining concentration. In these 
the philosophical aspect has been largely subordinated to the elabo- 
rate physical processes of Yoga, which began to grow almost inde- 
pendently of Patahjali's treatment of the subject, and were accepted 
and assimilated later on by the sectarian schools of the Saktas, Saivas 
and also by some later schools of Buddhism.® 

This is an important consideration as will appear later on. 

It may be well to carry a little further the discussion of 
the meaning of the word ‘Yoga.’ The word is primarily 
a technical term with a specific general meaning. Professor 
Edgerton says® that it signifies a method or a way, a way of 
disciplined activity whereby an end is attained, usually moksay 
or, more popularly, some power or skill or experience. It is 
not the end or aim that is referred to by Yoga, but the dis- 
ciplined action or activity which leads to the end desired. 


^ Mail,, 6, 18. Translation by Hume, Thirteen Principal Upani- 
shads y p. 435. 

* MaiUy 4, 18-30. 

® Svet.y 2, 8-15. See also 1 : 8 and chap. 3; also Z>. Up.y p. 386. 

* Das G.y p. 39. 

® Das G.y pp. 40, 41. This statement assumes the early date for 
Patahjali. 

® ''The Meaning of Sankhya and Yoga,* in AJPy vol. XLV (1924), 
pp. 1 ff. 



YOGA AND TANTRA 


263 


This is its use in important parts of the Great Epic, such as the 
Bhagavad Gita and the Moksadharma section of Book XII. 

It will clarify the discussion to follow Professor Edgerton’s 
method and his argument for a moment, and study the words, 
*Sahkhya’ and ‘Yoga,* together. From earlier times (see 
Svetdivatara and later IJpanisads)^ Sahkhya and Yoga refer to 
two methods of reaching mukti^ the one the method of know- 
ledge, the other that of action. Sahkhya in the Gita means 
the way of salvation by pure knowledge, the intellectual 
method, and it is understood as implying quietism, renunci- 
ation of action (sannydsa, vdirdgyd). Yoga, on the other 
hand, is understood as disciplined, unselfish activity. This 
method of unselfish or disciplined activity, with indifference 
to results, is what the Gita always means by Yoga when it 
contrasts it with the Sahkhya, the (quietistic) way of know- 
ledge. Yoga ‘discipline,’ is synonymous with karma-yoga^ 
‘discipline of action.’ Both Sahkhya and Yoga lead to 
salvation; but since the intellectual and inactive way is hard, 
the other is to be preferred. ‘Yoga’ means discipline of 
some kind and different schools use varying systems of activity, 
as that of the Gita, for example, where the word Yoga means 
a disciplined course of procedure leading to emancipation, 
a method of salvation characterized by participation in action 
without interest in the fruits thereof. The argument which 
Krsna advances to Arjuna is that in life action is inevitable, 
but that it must be brought under a rule of conduct {dharma) 
suitable to Arjuna’s station in life, engagement in battle. 
Over against this Yoga of action is the jndna-yoga, the disci- 
pline of knowledge with the abandonment of action (sannydsa.) 
Yoga is always a way, a method of getting something, usually 
salvation, although sometimes, in popular usage, a lower goal 
is aimed at. 

The common denominator of all the epic definitions of Yoga is 
disciplined activity, earnest striving — by active (not rationalistic or 
intelleotual) means. 

The following verse from the Gitd (iii. 3), will serve as an 
illustration of this point of view: 

‘Loke ’smin dvividhS ni^tha pura prokta maya ’nagha 
Jiianayogena sankhyanam kannayogena yoginim.’ 



264 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Professor Edgerton’s rendering is : 

‘ In this world a twofold foundation (of religious salvation) 
(Sankara’s rendering is ‘two kinds of fixed rule’) has been 
expounded by me of old: by the discipline of knowledge 
of the followers of Sankhya, and by the discipline of action 
of the followers of Yoga.’ 

In this connection it may be of interest to note that 
Professor Hiriyanna^ says that the Gita would lose its entire 
significance if action were not regarded as its essential lesson. 
And he holds that the central point of the teaching is 
activitism, karma-yoga. He goes on to define karma in 
terms of duties prescribed by custom and tradition, the 
varna-dharmas (the specific customary duties of the various 
orders of society). So that, for him, karma-yoga in the Gita 
means ‘ harnessing * or ‘ applying oneself to ’ social obligations. 
The concern of the individual is solely with action, never 
with its fruits. 

Professor Dasgupta m speaking of samddhi as a state of 
release (kaivalya)^ says that what the Sankhya aims to gain 
by knowledge, the Yoga achieves through the perfected 
discipline of the will and psychological control of mental 
processes (states). ^ 

Dr. Thomas points out^ that the primary meaning of the 
word was ‘discipline,’ and that secondarily it referred to 
‘union’ as the effect or end of yoga. 

Another point of importance is that the word ‘yoga,* is not 
used for ‘union.’ As Professor Edgerton says: 

In English we may describe the goal of Yoga (or of SSnkhya 
either) as ‘ union * (with Brahman or God). But it is a striking fact 
that the word Yoga^ and its cognates are not ordinarily used of this. 
Instead, the emancipated soul ‘goes to' (adhigam) ‘attains* («/>, prdp\ 
or ‘sees' {pas) Brahman; or if he is said to attain ‘oneness, sameness' 
with Brahman, the word used is not yoga but, e.g., sdmyatd* 

Attention is called to Hopkin’s remark that the union-idea 
of the author of the Mundaka (Upanisad) is e.<pressed not 
by ‘yoga’ but by sdmya. 

Professor Edgerton points out further that Carpentier 

^ Outlines oj Indian Philosophy, p. 118. So also B. G. Tilak in his 
Gita Rahasya. See vol. I, p. 81. * DHIP, vol. I, p. 273. 

® History of Buddhist Thought, p, 43, note 2. * Op. cit. 



YOGA AND TANTRA 265 

has shown^ tlmt not only in the Epic but even later the word 
yoga, does not mean * union/ And Professor Radhakrishnan 
says^ that in Pataftjali Yoga means only effort, not union. 

Yoga finds its classical expression in the Sutras of Pataftjali, 
written somewhere between a.d. 300 and 500.^ The author 
was a compiler, a systematizer, rather than an original thinker. 
While the Sutras may be interested in speculation as such, 
still, they are based upon methods of action^ disciplined 
actions, with their concomitant supernatural powers associated 
with self-hypnotism and the like. The superior powers of the 
Yogi are simply those of attaining the highest goal, release,^ 
such powers as suck being viewed as unworthy of the struggle. 

The aims of Yoga, in Pataftjali’s sense, may be spoken of 
as controls of various kinds, a graded series of disciplines, 
directed towards steadying the mind; gradually advancing 
stages of rigid control of body and mind; the stoppage of all 
movement and all thought — that the soul be absorbed in itself, 
loosing the sense of duality, of subject and object; immediate 
perception;® ultimately, prolonged, fixed attention to the 
point where the mental processes are stopped absolutely.® 

But there is ancillary to the mental discipline, a long period 
of preparatory action, organized according to a well-developed, 
progressive plan. In the preliminary stages of the preparation 
for the fixing of the attention, there are purifying processes 
to be carried out, first with stress laid upon external means 
then, after these have been mastered, with recourse to the 
internal controls. 

These disciplines, which are eight in number, may be 
classified as five indirect and three direct means to release.® 
They are yafna, niyama, dsana, prdndyama, pratydhdra, 
dhdrand^ dhydna and samddhi. 

First, there are certain restraints whose mastery is 
necessary before essential physical discipline may begin. 


1 ZDMG. vol. LXV, pp. 846 f. 

^ Julian Philosophy y vol. II, p. 337, 

® Following? Woods (IFY^, pp. xvii, xix), Keith {SSy p. 56), Jacobi 
amS), vol. XXXI, and other^ 

* Set Edt^erton, in article referred to above. 

® WYSy p. 172. « WYS\ p. 8. ’ See D. Up.y p. 384. 

« IFKS', 2: 28, 29. 



266 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

They appear as five commands: abstinence from injuring 
anything (ahirhsa); from falsehood or deceit; from theft; from 
sexual intercourse (continence, celibacy) ; and from covetous- 
ness. The last means accepting only what is absolutely 
necessary, and refusing to accumulate objects or riches. ^ 

A second set of rules that must be mastered consists of 
observances involving necessary religious duties and self- 
restraint, and are five in number. They include purificatory 
prescriptions, for the external cleanness of the body, which 
beget attitudes of disgust for the body, discourage intercourse 
with others and lead to asceticism,^ to the subjugation of 
the senses. They conduce to inner cleanness of mind, con- 
tentment, moderation and frugality; to the habit of bearing 
all privations of cold and heat equally, keeping the body 
unmoved; silence; asceticism and restraint; to the study of 
philosophy; to the repetition of spells, words and syllables, 
amongst others that of the mystic orh; to the keeping of 
fasts and religious observances; and to meditation on Isvara 
[Isvara pranidhdna) which gives perfection of concentration, 
devotion to Cod, and resignation to his will.^ These, it will 
be seen, include tapas, mantra and bhakti. If obstacles arise 
while practising niyama (or yama) resort should be made to 
pratipaksahdray the principle of using the opposite quality^ 
and of thinking of the consequences as deterrents.^ They are: 
the setting of good over against bad in thoughts and deeds; 
thinking of all beings as friends; kindly feeling for sufferers; 
feeling of happiness for the good of all; and feeling of equani- 
mity and indifference for the vices of others, not taking note 
of vices of the vicious, conscious that nothing is worth striv- 
ing for or desirable.^ 

Yama and niyama comprise all the active and passive 
virtues. Professor Radhakrishnan says:® 

A practice of these two favours the development of vdvrdgya^ or 
passionlessness or freedom from desire, either for things of the world 
or the pleasures of heaven. « 

When these two disciplines have been mastered, the Yogi 

2: 40. 2 WYSy 2: 44, 45. ^ WYS, p.l 83. 

♦ WYS.p.nS. « WYS,\:3S. ^ , 

« Indian Philosophy, vol II, p. 354. Quoted by permission ot 
Macmillan and Company, Publishers. 



YOGA AND TANTRA 


267 


should pass in turn to other disciplines of Yo.i2:a and perfect 
them. These are asana; pranayama and pratyahara. Practice 
begins with asana. 

Postures (asana) have as their object the discipline of the 
body in stillness or rigidity. To this end the Yogi should 
choose a quiet place where, in comfort, he may carry out his 
practice. Steadiness of mind (fixed attention) is contingent, 
in the end, on bodily poise (and breath control). The ideal 
adept sits motionless as a stock or stone or as the flame of a 
lamp in a windless place. Later works, like those on Hatlia 
Yoga, state that there are an infinite number of postures, 
or eighty-four laksa, of which eighty-four are chief, while 
some reduce the essential or the most useful and all sufficient 
to two.^ The Gheranda names thirty-one; the $iva Samhitd 
considers four as chief. 

Having mastered Asana, the Yogi proceeds to the next 
discipline, the control, or the regulation, or the restraint of 
the breaths.^ Because constant respiratory action has a dis- 
turbing, or obstructing effect upon the attainment of perfect 
concentration, bfeathing should be controlled and finally 
stopped. Pranayama consists in interruptions of the natural 
alternation of out and in breathing. The expulsion of the 
held-in breath is called recaka and is to be done with thought 
on Siva ; the inhaling of the breath is called puraka^ and this 
done with the mind on Visnu. Retention of the breath is 
called kumbaka and is done with the thought of Brahma.^ 
Its central aim is in the holding of the in -breathed air.^ The 
control of breathing is said to be carried to great extremes. 
‘With practice one may retain breath steadily for hours, days, 
months, even years.’ ^ In the Hatha Yoga breath control is 
esteemed for its great efficiency in producing occult powers. 

^ Compare Goraksasataka^^, 10. * See D. Up., p. 384. 

® But see below, where the process is joined to the recitation of 
the syllable orh. * Or, holding the lungs empty. 

® DHIP, p. 272. Quoted by permission of Macmillan and Com- 
pany, Publishers. Das G., p. 334. I'he Dabistan (vol. II, pp. 1 V7, 
138) mentions several Yogis famed jn that time for the restiaito o\ 
the breath. Baliknath, who at the age of 120 years, was in full viguiu. 
was one. Serudnath could hold his breath for two days. Sahjanath, 
of the Aipanth, was seven hundred years old and not yet gray. I'he 
author of the book saw both Serudnath and Sahjanath. 



268 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

With the breathing thoroughly under control, after a 
considerable period of practice, the Yogi proceeds to the next 
discipline, described as the suppression of the organs of 
sense, ^ their subjugation or withdrawal from the objects of 
sense. The result of this practice is the limitation of the 
span of attention within the mind, the inhibition of the 
sensory systems, the serving of external contacts. It serves to 
keep the mind from wandering. 

Pratyahara is based upon the Sahkhya and Yoga theories 
of sense percept ion. ^ It may be achieved by pratiayama (and 
by the khecarimtidra). 

These, yama, niyama, asana, pranayama and pratyahara, 
constitute the five external means preliminary to the higher 
stages which issue in samadhi, or release. In yama and 
niyama are laid the foundations for the beginnings of 
concentration of mind; in asana and pranayama additional 
powers for the exercise of fixed attention are developed; and 
in pratyahara the mind cuts off external contacts thus 
completing preparation for the beginning of those inner 
exercises tl)n)ugh which the end of Yoga, release, is achieved.* 

The concluding (three) stages in the Yoga praxis deal with 
mind in its internal processes, the progressive stopping down 
of the mental activities until they cease altogether. This is 
achieved through increasing power in the fixing of the 
attention, at the same time making use of asana and pra^iayama 
and the rest. 

I'ogethcr the tliree (directed to a single object) are called 
samydma, or conquest,^ concentration, meditation, contempla- 
tive trance.' The three are dhdrandy dhydna, and samadhi. 
The first two deal with illumination, the last with ‘union.’ 
Meditation is a process of restricting mental activity. When 
samyama is directed to external or internal objects extraordin- 
ary powers arise. 

Dharana, fixed attention,^ is the establishment of the mind 
in steadfastness, using some object or position, such as the 
navel, the nose, the tip of the tongue, the space between the 

Up., p. 385. 2 See DHP, p. 25. 

® GSY, p. 44. Pratyahara is often grouped with the next three. 

^ CSV, p. 44. 5 SBH, vol. IV, pp. ix, x; TT^y5^, 2: 13. 

« WYS, 3: t. 



YOGA AND TANTRA 269 

eyebrows, I^vara, or extended space. This ‘ one-point medita- 
tion,’ made possible through the moral and physical restraints, 
is a step in the completion of all these. Dharana is directed 
to the fixing of the attention on one out of many objects in 
the mind. When the discipline is perfected Yogi can, at 
will, keep the mind from wandering away from its object. 

An extension and intensification of this principle of con- 
centration of mind is called Dhyana. It represents adeptness 
in prolonging the state of ‘one-pointed’ concentration. In 
this state one object is held in attention to the exclusion of all 
others. 

The final phase in the stoppage of the mental processes 
is called samadhi. This state of mind is variously 
described as absorption,^ concentration, fusion of knower 
and the process of knowing with the object to be know n. 
It is the more or less prolonged experience of ‘release.’ 
Having come so far in rigorous disciplim*, the Yogi 
is now able to fix his mind on any object he chooses. 
It is preferable, however, that he choose Isvara, for ‘The 
Lord’ then becomes a help to him in his final effort. He 
can, however, choose anything he likes for the ‘unifying’ 
concentration (samadhi) of his mind.- This stage may be 
described as a state where the object is fixed in attention in 
such a way that consciousness of the self or of the activity of 
the mind is lost. 

Samadhi is described in its four successively progressive 
aspects: cortcentration on objects remembering their names 
and qualities; then on the five subtle elements (tanmdtras) 
first remembering their qualities and then without any 
notion of their qualities; afterwards on the buddhi with its 
functions of the senses causing pleasure and then, leaving 
the feelings of joy behind ; and upon pure substance divested 
of all modifications. Here memory is eliminated and mind 
(subject) alone is left.^ In this w^hole process there are those 
stages called the samprajhdta^ that samadhi in wLich there is 
consciousness of objects ; and beyond these the a-samprajndta 
or nirokha samadhi, in which the mind is without an object, 


^ D. Up., p. 385. 

» WYS, p. 84; DHIP, p. 271. 


* DHIP, p. 271. 



270 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

a state of unconsciousness, al the same time that of 
isolation^ Here there is no actual mental state of any kind, 
but pure vacuity.^ This is the end of the search ; at first but 
fleeting experience of it; then, as Yoga is perfected, longer 
and longer tastes of it; and finally, in death, eternal release. 
It is isolation of soul according to the Sdnkhya or the 
experience of Brahma, or ‘union* with Brahma, according to 
the Vedanta. 

So far the point kept in view, in sketching Patafijali*s Yoga 
has been the goal, first formulated in the Upanisads^ of the 
attainment of release (mukti). On the other hand, however, 
Y^ogis, and others as well, have always evinced much interest 
in certain powers which have been associated with the 
process of samMhi (and austerities), and which precede final 
beatitude. While the books advise that men turn not aside 
to these, and even condemn them as harmful, still these super- 
normal poweis (vihhuii), both physical and mental, have been 
by no mean?- despised. The belief that such powers are 
attainable is very ancient, and has been held without a break 
down to the present day. 

Concerning the l)elit f in the powers which the Yoga may 
produce Professor Radliakrishnan says: 

They (the ancient thinkc»'s of India) tell us that we can acquire the 
power of soemjj and kne w mg without the help of the outer senses, 
and can become independent of the activity which we exercise 
through the physical senses and the brain, d'hey assume that there 
is a wider v\orld about us tiian we are normally able to apprehend. 

. . , There arc laws j^overaing the acquisition of this larger vision 
and manifestation of latent powers. ISy following the principles of 
the Yoga, such as height ning the power of concentration, arresting 
the vagaries ot the mind, by fixing one’s attention on the deepest 
sources of strength, one can master one’s soul even as an athlete 
masters his body. The Yoga helps us to reach a high level of cons- 
ciousness, through a transformation of the psychic organism, which 
enables it to get beyond the limits set to ordinary human experience. 
We discern in the Yoga those cardinal conc€‘ptions of Hindu thought, 
such as the supremacy of the psychic over the physical, the exaltation 
of silence and solitude, meditation and ecstasy, and the indifference 
to outward conditions, which make the traditional Hindu awitude to 
life appear so strange and fantastic to the modern mind.® 

p. 13. ® Das G., p. 341. 

® Indian Philosophy, vo\. II, pp. 336 f. Quoted by permission of 
Macmillan and Company, Publishers. 



YOGA AND TANTRA 


271 


These powers my be classified as physical and psychical.^ 

The Yogi possesses supernatural control over the processes 
of nature. In the evolutionary series according to the 
Sankhya (and the Yoga) the lowest level marks the limit of 
evolution, further development being merely changes at the 
moment in the arrangements of the atoms {guna). Ordinarily, 
change at this level follows a general but orderly course ; but 
it is conceivable that one who knows the laws of change, 
from sheer insight, or by magical knowledge, might be able 
to direct and control nature.^ Such is the claim of Yoga. 
Consequently the Yogi, they say, is able at will to become 
exceedingly small, or increase in size to enormous propor- 
tions; he may become very light or very heavy, he may reach 
to great distances dVer the earth, and travel through the air 
and through space at incredible speed; he may dive into the 
earth and up again as if it were water; and he may become 
very powerful, stronger than an elephant, bolder than a lion; 
and he may change the course of nature, having complete 
mastery of the elements, and authority over the states of 
existence. He is complete master of the body and of the 
inner organ. Besides, he may call up the dead and speak 
with them; he may enter the bodies of snakes, demons, men, 
women or deities, and return at will; and he may enter more 
than one body at a time, leaving his own. Simultaneously 
he may control^ these several bodies while he retains his own 
individuality in his own body. So fine are his perceptions 
that he hears peculiar and subtle sounds and has super-sensual 
powers of touch, taste, sight and smell. For example, he can 
hear the sounds that are in distant worlds. He has great 
capacity for friendliness, passions and joy. 

Since the Yogi is master of all processes in the evolution 
of prakrti, having brought all under his control by practice 
of Yoga, he possesses supernatural or intuitive insight or 
knowledge. Fie sees all things, all processes, all time as an 


^ See*G*SY, p. 46. The whole list of powers may be found in 
WYS, 3: 16-52. See also Woods in JAOS, vol. XXXIV (1915), 
pp. 1 ff.; and Lanman, Harvard Theological Review^ 1918. 

» lTy5,3:44; DHIP, p. 256. 

» WYS, 3: 43. 



272 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

inclusive, present whole without sequence.^ Such powers are 
sometimes called siddhis. He has, therefore, insight into the 
past and the future, knows the cries, or speech, of all living 
beings, has complete knowledge of all his previous births, can 
look into the mind stuff of others, knows the law of death, 
understands the subtle, the obscure, that which is concealed, 
the remote ; and both things and events even in other worlds 
are present in his mind, so that he understands all the 
mysteries of the universe,^ He knows all cosmic spaces and 
the orders of the stars and their movements; knows the 
arrangements of the body; sees all things and is familiar with 
the processes of the mind. In short, the Yogi attains to clear 
vision, or extraordinarily penetrating wisdom. He obtains 
full intuitive knowledge of whatever he concentrates upon. 

Ihen if the work of Palanjali and his commentators be 
viewed v.\s systematized philosophy, still, it maintains interest 
ill the chief emphasis of Yoga, activity, an ititerest which has 
continued from the earliest times down to the present. With 
the passage of time, specialized emphases appeared. Professor 
Dasgupta says: 

Thus, the Yonfa practices grew in accordance with the doctrines 
of the i^aivas and i^aktas and assumed a peculiar form as the Mantra- 
y(i;^a\ they gn.w in another direction as the Hatha Yoga which was 
supposed to produce wonderful bodily feats of breath-control and 
control of involuntary muscles and organs through constant practices 
of elaborate nervous, muscular and breath exercises which were also 
associated with art of healing diseases, keeping the body free from 
all kinds of diseases and supernatural powers. The Yogatattva 
Upanishad says that there are four kinds of Yoga, the Mantra- Yoga, 
Laya-Yoga, Hatha-Yoga and Raja- Yoga. In some cases we find 
that there was a great attempt to associate even Vedantism w ith these 
mystic practices. The influence of these practices on the develop- 
ment of Tdntra and other modes of worship was also very great.® 

In Raja-Yoga (and Jnana-Yoga) intellective processes are 

^ IVYS, 3; 84, 3: 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 33 and 34; 
and p. 315. 

® DHP, p. 117, For other details of powers see l§wa Sarhhitd, 
3; 41 ff. 

® DHIP, pp. 228, 229. Quoted by permission of Macmillan and 
Company, Publishers. Another know’n as Kriya-Yoga is men- 
tioned. It aims to destroy the five evils, included und^tNiyanta, i.e., 
the ‘six \yorks.* Hatha-Yoga is sometimes called Karma-Yoga. Siva- 
Yoga is called the highest, or spiritual Yoga. SBH, No. 68, p. 61. 



YOGA AND TANTRA 


273 


the predominant, even where they are net the sole means 
employed.^ It deals with the mind and psychic powers, also. 
Mantra-Yoga employs sacred texts, and syllables and con- 
sequently, enters the realm of magic. It is Yoga in the act 
of repetition. Laya-Yoga has to do with tlie quieting, 
one might almost say elimination, of the mental processes, 
issuing in trance {lay a) or unconsciousness, such as the 
‘fourth* state, finally ending in permanent quiet of mind. 
Associated with Kundal ini- Yoga, it is considered as of the 
highest form by Saktas, because, by its means, perfect 
samadi is gained by ynion with Siva of both mind and 
body. The Laya-Yoga is elucidated in the Ghetan^a 
Sathhitd, Hatha- Yoga lays emphasis upon pranayama,- the 
object of which is to produce in the body voluntary sup- 
pression of the breath. It lays most stress upon physical 
methods for the attainment of various mental states. Hatha- 
Yoga is spoken of in distinction from Laya-Yoga, but in a 
more general sense it includes the latter ; and it involves also 
some practices that are used as auxiliaries in other ‘Yoga*. 
Each Yoga employs some methods of the others and all are 
various modes of practice by which the feelings and the 
intellectual activities of the mind are brought into control 
and the Brahma, or the Purusa, realized in various ways. 

All types of Yoga have in view in general the system of 
Patahjali, but each lays emphasis upon particular phases of 
discipline and brings into play other methods as well. 

According to the Hathayogapradipikay Hajha and Raja 
Yoga should both be used, and each is necessary to the 
success of the other.^ The practicer of Hatha Yoga gets his 
knowledge or realization of the Absolute, his union {svariipa) 
with Siva in the Sahasrdra through Kundalini herself. This 
truth is illustrated in the Goraksasatakuy as the detailed study 
in the succeeding chapters will show. 

^ See Serpent Power ^ pp. 200 flF., from which the data for this 
paragraph are taken, mostly in quotation. 

* According to Gr., p. 26, the aim of this Yoga is said to be to 
transcend the lower self, which consists of the sexual power, the 
vital air and the mind, by a method in which the control of ^ the 
breath is the key to the control of the other two. 

* 2 : 76. The Siva Samhitdy 5 : 9, mentions Mantra-Yoga, Hatha- 
Yoga, Laya-Yoga and Raja-Yoga, 


18 



274 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGlS 

The Yoga of the Kanphatas is called Hatha. An interest- 
ing derivation for the word is given in the commentary to 
verse one of the Goraksa Paddhati, where it is stated that ha 
means the sun (surya) and tha the moon (candarama); and 
that their union is called Yoga. This symbolism is signi- 
ficant as will appear in later chapters. The word signifies, 
however, hard, or extreme, or strenuous discipline and the 
doctrines lay particular stress upon asana, mudra, pranayama, 
dhauti, cakra, nadi and kundalini,^ and most of these receive 
a great deal of attention in Tantric works. Laya Yoga is 
sometimes identified vrith Kundalini Yoga. Again, two main 
lines of Yoga are set forth; Dhyana, looking to ecstasy by 
mental processes (Raja-Yoga); and Kundalini Yoga, which 
requires the help of mantra. And it is pointed out that 
Kundalini is that part of Hatha-Yoga in which, though the 
intellectual is not neglected, the creative sustaining sakti of 
the whole body is actually and truly united with the Lord- 
consciousness. ^ As implied above, Yoga is one, but many 
diverse emphases are specialized in its practice. , 

The Tantric element is prominent in the teaching of the 
Gorakhnathis. Both the Buddhist and the Saivite Tantras 
have had their influence upon the beliefs and practices of the 
sect. These works have to do with the use of both magic and 
of the magic formulas and of erotic ritual in the effort to get 
into touch with super-normal existences, with cosmic powers. 
Saktism is closely allied with Tantra, the ritual for which 
includes the Pahcamakdra. In fact, sakta is one of the chief 
elenr.ents in the system of Tantra, and Sakti is, where these 
Yogis are concerned, the consort of Siva. If Sakta and Tantra 
were to be discriminated one would refer specifically to the 
worship of the goddess, the other to magical and sacramental 
ritual. One of the bases of the latter is the assumption that 
man and the universe correspond as microcosm and macro- 
cosm and that both are subject to the mysterious power of 
wo“ds and letters. Sakta as a system, as carried on in Assam 
and Bengal, is usually associated with the worship^ of the 
consort of Siva with rites prescribed in the Tantras. 


^ For the meaning of these terms see the Glossary, and the 
following chapters. ® and SaktUy p. 414. 



YOGA AND TANTRA 


275 


Bhattacharyya says^ that Tantric culture presupposes Raja 
and Hatha Yoga. He also holds that historically the Buddhist 
preceded the Hindu Tantras; and that the latter are depen- 
dent upon the former. While, on the one hand, Raja and 
Hatha Yoga give control over the mind and body, Tantric 
practices, on the other, confer various magic powers, contingent 
upon the deities worshipped and the m.antras employed. 

In recent years a good deal of attention has been given to 
both Buddhist alid Hindu Tantras. For the former the 
works of Dr. B. iShattacharyya may be mentioned. He has 
edited a number of Vajrayana works^ with valuable introduc- 
tions and has published Buddhist Esotcrism, based largely 
upon these editions ar d in which he has repeated a good 
deal from his introductions to the Sanskrit works. He has 
also written Indian Buddhist Iconography. T. G. Shastri has 
edited the Aryamahjummiilakalpa in three volumes.^ These 
writings have not been translated into English. On the 
Hindu side interest, so far as translation is concerned, centres 
around the very extensive work of Arthur Avalon. Here 
again there are valuable studies of the subject in his Serpent 
Potver (both editions) and in his Shakti and Shakta. Arthur 
Avalon has worked with WmAn pandits. 

A recent work by E. A. Payne^ contains a very useful 
study of the Hindu cult, Sakta. It gives a survey of some of 
the literature. 

Bhattacharyya says that the whole of the culture history of 
the eastern part of India from a.d. 700 to a.d. 1200 is locked 
up in the Tantras, Although the Buddhist cult disappeared 
under the Islamic advance, Hindu practice has continued 
down to the present time. 

The Buddhist Tantra is essentially Vajrayana. According 
to Bhattacharyya^ this system, a development of the Maha- 

^ Buddhist Esoterisniy p. 166. 

- Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, Numbers, 26, 41, 44, 53, 61. Other 
works on ^antra issued in this series are Numbers, 24, 56. 

* Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, Numbers, 70, 76 and 84 in the 
years 1920, 1922 and 1925. 

* The Sdktsis of Btngaly Calcutta, 1933. 

* The account which f^ollows is based primarily upon the intro- 
duction to his edition of the Sadhanamdldy Gaekvvad’s Oriental Series, 
Number 41. 



276 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

yana, contains certain elements which reach back to the 
Buddha himself. Certain concepts which found a place in 
original Buddhism, contain the seeds of Tantra. These are 
mudra, mantra, mandala, dharani, yoga and samadhi, all of 
which contributed to the attainment of happiness and 
prosperity. He holds that there was a popular side to early 
Buddhism and that within the cult there were many who 
were unhappy under the extreme severity of the discipline 
enforced. These concepts, therefore, found fertile soil in 
which to develop both liberty and license, in the search for 
supernatural power and for enjoyment. 

The immediate sources of the Vajrayana are three: the 
introduction of the theory of mahdsukha in the conception of 
the Buddhist nirvdna\ the reaction to the more strict and 
unnatural rules of discipline within the Sangha\ and the 
weakening influence of the theory which required each 
individual Bodhisattva to sacrifice everything, himself, his 
happiness, his family and children, for the emancipation of 
suffering humanity — the doctrine of Karund. In the face of 
this great vow, ‘little’ sins are comparatively nothing. The 
vow to emancipate others was reduced to a mere convention. 
Monks took shelter under its cover and found in it ‘ an excuse 
for committing acts of great sin and immorality.’ ^ Later it was 
declared that there is nothing in the world that cannot be 
done by the Bodhisattva who has taken the vow to emancipate 
the world. 

The teaching of this development was carried on for some 
three centuries in secret, through a series of gurus and 
disciples, before it came into the open as a well-established 
cult. Its questionable side is evidenced by its use of the so- 
called twilight language, a style which admitted of two 
interpretations, one refined, the other indecent. This was 
necessary because ‘much of their work appears as indecent’ 
(Bhattacharyya). 

The teachings of the Vajrayana have been handed down by 
a long line of persons, particularly in songs of the eighty-four 
Siddhas and their disciples. The greatest of these, the Maha- 
siddhas, belong to the seventh, eighth and ninth centuries. 

Gaekwad*s Oriental Series, No. 44, p. 9 



YOGA AND TANTRA 


277 


From the point of view of this study it is of interest to 
note in the lists of names that of Jalandharipa, whom 
Bhattacharya identifies with Hadipa of the Dharatnmangala 
and of the Manikcand-Gopicand stories recounted in a 
previous chapter. One of these tells how he was buried in a 
hole in the ground by Gopicand, who later became a Yogi. 
In one of the parampards attached to chapter four, it v/ill be 
remembered that he is placed before Gorakhnath. Bhatta- 
charyya assigns Jalandharipa to the eighth century. If this date 
w^ere established, it would move Gorakhnath to a somewhat 
earlier time than that suggested in chapter eleven. 

‘ The main point on which the Vajrayana conception of 
the pantheon revolves' is that of the five Dhyani Buddhas 
and the five Buddha families (kula). The deities are ail 
voluntary manifestations of Sunya, in forms dependent upon 
the Bijas uttered. They are also embodiments of the five 
Skandhas over each of which one of them presides. These 
deities are of distinctive colours, although their representations 
vary in colours, form and posture according to the rites in 
which they figur^^. Many of them are exceedingly terrific 
externally, even though they are compassionate internally 
(compassion is an essential character in the Mahayana). Maha 
Kala, however, does not show any but terrific aspects either 
externally or internally, having to do with the fate of the 
incorrigible only. Vajra-sattva is viewed as the priest of the 
Vajrayana. Most of the gods belonging to these families are 
associated with terrible and gruesome rites and are of repul- 
sive aspect. Goddesses have the same general characters as 
the gods. 

According to this system the w^orld is composed of five 
elements deified in the forms of the Dhyani Buddhas. 
VajradHara is by many considered as the highest deity, the 
Adi or primal monotheistic god from whom the five Dhyani 
Buddhas arise. Homage is paid to him in the shape of a 
flame of fire, considered as eternal, self-born and self-existent. 
He appears in two forms, single and in yah-yutn. 

In Vajrayana three elements are involved, ^unya, vijhana 
and mahasukha. The combination of these is called Vajra. 
Sunya is Ndirdtmd, a goddess in whose eternal embrace the 
individual mind (Vijfiana) is locked, and in which it remain^ 



278 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGlS 

in eternal bliss and happiness. Or, in another aspect, void- 
ness (sunyata) and compassion (karuna) together constitute 
the individual mind, and like the deities, Heruka and Prajna, 
unite as the god, advaya (non-double). This union isyab-yum. 
The doctrine of karuna gave excuse, in the end, for the grossest 
forms of immorality and lawlessness. The regulation being 
that the sddhaka should not be attached to particular foods 
or women. ^ Sunya is handled in compromise fashion under 
the assertion that ‘ it is better to take the world as real. . . . 
When the conception of unreality is abandoned, it gives rise 
to a state which is neither sarhsara nor nirvana. The realiza- 
tion of voidness (sunyata) of all phenomena, after careful 
discrimination between knowledge and the object of know- 
ledge, is what is known as the highest knowledge of the 
Prajna. . . . Compassion is of the nature of affection (rdga) 
as it removes the sufferings (ranjati) which spring up from 
numberless causes. This compassion is called Upaya or 
“means.” Because it always, like a boat, leads him towards 
the goal. The commingling of the two — Prajfta and Upaya — 
is the like commingling of water and milk whereby the duality 
is merged into one without distinction, and is called Prajho- 
paya. This ... is the creative principle of the Universe 
and everything emerges and develops from this principle. 
This Prajnopaya is called Mah^ukha because it give s eternal 
happiness. . . . Vajrayana is thunderbolt-knowledge. . . . 
It is known as mahamudra (great woman). . . The realiza- 
jtion of'this Vajrayana leads to happiness and to the highest 
goal of Nirvana or emancipation.’- 

‘By those identical actions by which mortals rot in 
hell for hundreds of crores of cycles, the Yogin is 
liberated.’^ 

While early Buddhism enforced unnatural and strict rules 
of behaviour and forbade all kinds of worldly enjoyments, such 
as wine, women, fish, meat and all kinds of exciting food, 
the Tantrics embodied all these in their practice in the form 

^ Sddhanamaldy Introduction, p. xxxii. 

* Introduction to Ttjco Vajrayana IVorks, Gaekwad’s Oriental 
Series, No. .44, by B. Bhattacharyya, pp, xiv, xv, xix, xx. 

* ^ajHopdyavrmiscayasiddhi^ 1, 15. Translation by Bhattacharyya. 



YOGA AND TANTRA 


279 


of the five makdras. The Srt-samdya is the cause of all 
happiness and divine perfection Mahdmudrd and v/ithout 
her there is no emancipation. For them, to repeat, nirvana 
is defined in terms of siinya, vijhana and piaVrasukha and the 
conditrmis of the Bodhi-mind in nirvana is as in the embrace of 
a woman. Union with their ^aktis is termed by Tantrics, 
‘Yoga.* The enjoyment of perfect truth, the Prajna, resides 
in all women, and they should be enjoyed without reservation. 
The highest class of Yoga-tantra cannot be practiced without 
the assistance of saktis. 

In his SddhanamdLa} the editor writes: ‘It is indeed a pity 
that Hindus and also the Jains, to a certain extent, could not 
throw off the worthless and immoral practices enjoined in 
the Tantras, even when Buddhism was stamped out in 
India. 

In his Indian Buddhist Iconography^ Mr. Bhattachary^a 
furnishes data from the following summary: the w^orship of 
female energy in connection with that of the male, the 
union of male and female energies, is the essence of Tantra ; 
purely Tantric gods are invariably accompanied by their 
Saktis, who are sometimes given a separate seat in represent- 
ations of them while at other times are seated in the lap of 
the gods, but they are often depicted in the actual embrace 
of the gods; while most forms of Tantra generally adopt 
the former types of illustrations, still, in the most thorough- 
going form of it the gods are worshipped in the embrace of, 
in union with, the Saktis. He refers more especiady to the 
Vajrayana.2 

Most of the Buddhist Tantras are connected with Yoga. 
Their teaching is a mixture of mysticism, sorcery, and erotics, 
accompanied by disgusting orgies. These works inculcate 
the worship of Saivite gods, of the linga, and of many female 
deities. Historically they represent the later age of the 
degeneration of Buddhism in India. Their only connection 
with Buddhism is their claim that their tenets were delivered 
by tha Buddha himself.® It is in accordance with this 
assertion that a story is told in the Brahmaydmala^ and in the 

1 Vol. II, p. 33. 

* See pp. 209, 323. * India's Pasty p. 64. 



2S0 GORAKHNATH and the KANPHATA yogis 

Riidraydmala also (both Hindu Tantric works)^ that Vasistha, 
after years of hard discipline, failing in his efforts to obtain 
success {siddhi) cursed Tara. She then appeared to him and 
pointed out that perfection did not lie along that way and 
directed him to Tibet (Mahacina), country of Buddhists and 
land of the Atharva Veda, There he found the Buddha in- 
dulging in all sorts of loathsome practices. Appalled at what 
he saw Vasistha asked for light, and for help to attain perfec- 
tion. He made inquiry of the Buddha about the use of wine 
and meat in the presence of naked women who were drinking 
blood and wine and behaving like drunkards. The Buddha’s 
reply was an exposition of the duties of the Kaulas, expla- 
nation of their mysteries and their uses, and revelation of 
their secret rites and practices. Ultimately Vasistha found 
in the unrestrained use of the five makaras the siddhi w^hich 
he sought. 

The Hindu Tantras are the fifth Veda of Hinduism, the 
satisfactory scripture for this degenerate age, the Kali Yuga? 
They are of two types, the Niyamas containing instructions 
from the Devi to Sada Siva and the Agamas in which the 
latter teaches the Devi. The Agamas are of particular 
interest in this study. Already references have been made to 
Siva teaching the Yoga to Parvati. Here the Yoga doctrine 
of the Goraldinathis is traced to Minanath (Matsyendranath) 
who obtained it from Siva by taking the form of a fish and 
listening while that god was expounding the doctrine to 
Parvati as both stood on the shore of the sea.^ Another 
version of the story declares how a fish remained immovable, 
mind concentrated, and heard all. So Adinatha (Siva) 
perceiving this, sprinkled water upon him and he became a 
Siddha and was called Matsyendranath.* The characters in 
these works are restricted almost entirely to these two divini- 
ties. These books are the texts of the Saktas, dealing with 


^ Also in Sddhanamdldy Introduction. This is the Tara Tantra, a 
secret Tantra belonging to the Yoga Tantra class which prescribes 
revolting practices. Bhairavi asks Bhairava the nature of the mantra 
by which the Buddha and Vasistha obtained Siddhi. 

2 See Geden in ERE, vol. XII, pp. 192, 193. 

2 GP, p. 1. 

« lyangar, HYP, p. 15. 



281 


YOGA AND TANTRA 

the left-hand worship of Sakti and with Kduldcdrif, They 
are based upon the Kdula Upanisad^ the most important 
being the Rudraydmola Tantru of which the Jdtimdia is an 
important section.^ 

Selections from the Sydmdrahasya and the Rudraydmala 
are hajnd in the footnotes of Wilson’s works.^ Avalon^ has 
translated a number of the Tuntras, Dr. Ewing ^ analyzed 
the Sdrada Tilaka^ pointing out that it was full of sorcery, 
both in its beneficent and in its horrible aspects, and of the 
use of yantra and mantra, the latter in cases of black magic. 
It exhibits Kundali and the cakras, and its doctrine is of the 
Pasupata type. 

As suggested above, these developed principles, associated 
with tills specialized aspect of Yoga, are a late formulation. 
Amarakosa {c. a.d. 500) does not know Tantra as literature 
and the system does not appear in the Mahdhhdrata. Sankara 
(ninth century) noted sixty-four Tantras, but few of these 
can be identified. Their traditional author is Dattatreya. 
They are found as early as the seventh sentary, and from the 
tenth century least they are well-known works. Their 
philosophy is that of the Sankhya (and Yoga), often elevated 
into Vedanta. The topics with which they deal are the 
creation and destruction of the universe; worship of gods; 
attainment of supreme power; and union with the Supreme 
Being. They are concerned with the magical and the mysteri- 
ous and the use of mystic symbols and sounds (including 
syllables and sentences), thus involving a form of YY>ga in 
which the essences of the mystical sacred syllables are 
called bija. 

It may be well to look further at the Hindu Tantric 
practice.® This is described as a short cut to ends otherwise 

1 j? and p. 207. 

* Other Tantras may be mentioned. 3akti~sayigama, Visva-sdra, 
Mahattirvana, F/r«, KulurtiavOy Sydftta-Rahasya, ^drodd'-Tilaka, 
Uddisa,Kd?ndkhydy Vtsru Ydmala, Kdlikd, Tantratattva, and Yogini. 
Lists are given by A. Avalon, Principles of Taniniy vol. I, pp. 
Ixv-lxvii. Tantra means rule, ritual. Dawson, p. 317. 

8 IFi., pp. 254 ff. ^ Sir John Woodroffe. 

® (1902), pp. 65 fi‘ 

* The summary here .set down is based upon pertinent chapters in 
The Philosophy of Hindu Sadhand, hy N. K. Brahma. 



282 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

difficult to achieve, a way which offers to its adherents easy 
and speedy attainment of enjoyment as well as final beatitude. 
In the end soul becomes identified with Siva, there remaining 
no difference in essence between them. The identity is achiev- 
ed through the Kundalini, and the disciplines are used for 
her awakening and raising. This is through psychical 
and physical exercises. 

Special emphasis is put upon mantra, an infallible means 
to liberation. Mantra is concentrated thought of great 
power. It is built upon $abda (sound), nada (sound), and 
prana (breath), synonymous of cosmic energy. In gross form 
nada supports the things of the universe as their soul, in 
subtle form it is represented by the Absolute Goddess. 
The subtle form is realized in the gross one. So, mantra, 
breathing, japa, generate vibrations of Nada as soul of the 
universe. Nada sddhand (practice of nada), all efficient, 
is the invaluable discovery of the Tantras. Nada (vibration) 
and jnana (illumination) are two parallel manifestations of 
&akti. One leads to and awakens the other. Illumination 
may be realized through breath and sound {dvani, primal, 
inaudible vibrations that cause the Universe). Nada which 
is dvani, is very powerful when joined with susumna (see 
following chapters). In this union is power, for Kutidalini 
is raised up. The gross body is harmonized through posture 
(asana), the internal, vital powers by breath control {prana- 
ydmd)^ the higher cerebral centres through regulated sounds 
(nada with susumna), the mental, with meditation. Sabda has 
fifty radical elements of vibration, on the vocal side the fifty 
letters of the alphabet. The stages of the sadhana are: (1) 
purification (by karma); (2) illumination (by bhakti); (3) 
unification (in jnana). 

There are three classes of practitioners (sadhaka): (1) Pahiy 
those seeking self-control, and desiring what adepts enjoy. 
They strive to master their passions and impulses, (2) Vtra 
(controlled), those who have attained complete self-control 
and do not forget themselves even in the most tryinig and 
tempting circumstances. They enjoy freedom. They are 
not only allow^ed but are definitely instructed to include 
such things as the five makaras in their offerings to god. 
The Pasu is not aliow^ed even to touch or to see these 



\ OGA AND TANTRA 


283 


things. Finally the method as prescribed for the Vira is 
Kaula. (3) The Divya, free from the trials of the Vha is 
allowed to take substitutes for all material things in his 
process of worship. In the highest stage of attainment, 
kaulacara, the sadhaka does away with all rules and injunc- 
tions of the Sdstras. ‘For the Kaula there is neither merit 
nor demerit, virtue nor vice.* The theory is that as poisons 
counteract poisons, so men must rise by those things through 
which they so often lose their manhood. 

In the Yoqa Tantrci and AnuttarayGga Tantra all gods are 
represented as embracing their Saktis and feeling the bliss of 
Nirvana.^ 

^ Introduction, S 'Uuwomdldyp. 147. 



CHAPTER FOURTEEN 

THE GORAKSA §ATAKA» 

Otit Hathayo^a Goraksa^ataka prarambhah 

Ofii, the beginning of the One Hundred of the Ha^ha Yoga 
of Goraksa ! 

Snguram paramanandam vande todnandav^ graham. 

Yasya mmnidhyamdtrenu ciddnanddyate tanuh. 1 . 

1. I bow down to the venerable guru^ (^^ho !s) supreme 
bliss, embodiment of his own bliss; simply by means of 
proximity to whom the body becomes nothing but know- 
ledge and bliss. 

AntarnikallitdtmadipakalikdivddhdYbandhddibhil 

Yo yogi yugakalpakdlakalandfi tvaiija jcglyate; 

Jndndmodamahodadhih samabhavadyatrddindthah yvayam 

Vyatkdiynkta gunddhikam tamanUam sri mlnandtham 
bhaje, 2. 

2. Who (— That Yogi) by reason of (his practice of) 

ddhdrbandha and the other (postures), in the rays of the inner 
steady light of his soul is hignly praised as a Yogi and as the 
essence of the reckoning of time (manifested) in the yugas 
and kalpas (or, as reality on account of his making time con- 
sisting of yugas and kalpas), in whom (= who) the primeval 
Lord himself, the ocean of the bliss of knowledge took form, 
who (“ who above) is superior to qualities both manifest 
and unmanifest {i.e., matter), him (= who, that guru) Sri 
Mina iath,^! revere continually. ^ 

^ The text used is P\ the commentary (CP), unless otherwise 
stated, is that of P. The references may be made to GP, and its 
commentary. 

^ Matsyendranath. ^ Read Kaland with B and CP. 

* Sri Minanath — Matsyendranath. 



THE GORAK$A SATAKA 285 

Namaskrtya gurum bhaktavya gorakso jndnamuttamam 
Abhistam yogindm brute paramdnandakdrakam, 3. 

3. Having saluted his guru with devotion, Goraksa des- 
cribes the supreme knowledge, desired by Yogis, bringing 
about supreme bliss. 

Goraksah iatakam vakti yogindm hitakdmyayd 
Dhruvam yasydvabodhena jdyate paramampadam. 4, 

4. With desire for the benefit of Yogis, Goraksa proclaims 
(the) One Hundred (verses) by the knowledge^ of which is 
surely brought about the highest state. ^ 

Etadvimuktisopdnametatkdlusya vancanam 
Yadvaydvrttam majiobhogdddsaktam paramdtmani. 5. 

5. This (by which) the mind is turned away from 
(sensual) enjoyments, and (is) attached to the supreme spirit, 
(is) a ladder to final release; this (is) a cheating of death. 

Dvijasezuta sdkhasya §rutikalpataroh phalam 
^amanam bhavatdpasya yogam bhajata sattamdh, 6. 

6. O excclliSnt menl^ Practice Yoga, the fruit of the- 
tree-of-wishes, the sacred word whose branches (punning 
‘schools’) are frequented by birds (punningly called Brah- 
mans, dvija), (which) brings to an end the misery of the 
world. 

Asanam prdnasamrodhah pratydhdrasca dhdrand 
Dhydnam samddhiretdni yogdhgdni vadanti sat.^ 7. 

7. Postures, control of the breath, withdrawal of the senses 
frorn their external objects, fixing of the mind upon a single 
object, abstract meditation and idcntificution of the self with 


^ B reads: ‘By the knowledge ot this surely all good fortunes are 
attained.’ 

* CP interprets this to mean jlvanmukti \ and the commentary 
attached to GP, ‘attaining knowledge of which the Yogi attains 
jivanmukti.* 

® Men of great attainment in Yoga, whose passions are ripe for 
destruction. CP. 

* These are the technical Yoga terms. Ya??ia and niyama are 
omitted; they must be mastered before the practice of Hafha Yoga 
begins. 



286 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGlS 

the object of meditation, these they say, are the six stages^ of 
the Yoga. 

Asandni ca tdvanti yavantyo jivajdtayah 
Etesamakhildnbheddnvijdndti mahesvarah, 8. 

8. (There are) as many postures as (there are) species- of 
living beings. The distinctions between them all Siva (alone) 
fully understands. 

Caturaiiti^ laksdndmekdikam samuddhrtam 
Tatah sivena pithdndm soddhnam satankrtam. 9. 

9. Every single one of the 84,00,000 (of postures) has 
been described (by Siva). From them eighty-four postures 
have been selected by Siva. 

Asamhhyoh samastebhyo dvayarmtadxiddhrtam 
Ekam siddhdsafuim tatra dvitiyam kamcddsanam. 10. 

10. From amongst all these (eighty-four) postures these 
two have been selected: the first, ‘the perfect posture^ 
{siddhdsana)) the second ‘the lotus posture’ (kamaldsana).* 

Yonisthdnakamanghrimfda ghalitayn krivd drdham vinyaset 
Medhrepddamathddianuva niyafam krtz'd samam vigraham 
Sihdnuh samycunitcyidrayd' Cidadrsd pasyanbhnivoramtara^ 
Metanmoksakapdtcdduda janakam siddhdsanam procyate, 

11 , 

11. The Yogi should press firmly the heel of the (left) foot 
against the perineum and the right foot just above the male 
organ, keeping the body fixedly erect, immovable;® the senses 
under control; and with motion gaze should look at the 
spot between the eyebrows. This (posture), which is the 
opener of the door of release," is called the perfect posture 
(siddlidsana). 


^ Or aids <'\Voods), means (M. -Williams), methods, 

® The GP readin^i would mean ‘as many as there are men, or 
living? beintfs.’ 

^ 7'he a has been shortened to agree with GP, PC says jhat a 
was lengthened for mrtre 

The.^e names will he used freely in the exposition. 

^ P and B read paiyan, 

* GP reads Ghe chin pressing on the chest.’ 

’ Mohsadzdra, the way surumnd, the channel of the spinal cord, 
closed by Kundalini, is opened. 



287 


THE GORAKSA SATAKA 

Vdmorupari daksinamca caranam samsthdpya vdmamtathd 
Daksorupari paicimena vidhind dhrtvd kardhhydm drdham 
Angusthdu hrdayenidhdya cibukam ndsdgra malokaye 
Deta dvayddhwikdra ndianakaram padmdsanam procyate. 

12. 

12. And having placed the right foot upon the left thigh, 
and likewise the left (foot) upon the right thigh, and having 
grasped fiimly the great toes with the hands crossed from 
behind (and) fixing the chin on the chest, (the Yogi) should 
gaze at the tip of the nose. This (posture), the destroyer of 
diseases and mental and physical disturbances is called the 
lotus posture (padmdsana). 

The Hathayogapradipika gives a second padmasana, which 
the commentary {GP 12) attributes to Matsyendranath. 
‘Place the feet on the thighs, with the soles upwards, and 
place the two hands on the thighs, palms upwards. Gaze on 
the tip of the nose, keeping the tongue pressed against the 
root of the teeth of the upper jaw,^ and the chin against the 
chest, and raise the air up slowly (pull the apdna vdyu gently 
upward.) This is called padnidsana, the destroyer of all 
diseases. It is ditiicult of attainment by everybody, but can 
be learned by intelligent people in this world.' 

Satacakram sodasddhdram trilaksam vyoinapahcakam 
Svadehe yenajananti katham sidhyanti yoginah. 1 3. 

13. How can Yogis, who do not know the six centres 
{cakru), the sixteen props (ddhdra)^, the 3,00,000^ (‘channels,' 
ncldt) (and) the five sheathes {vyoma) in their (own) body, 
attain perfection (in Yoga)? 

Ekastambham navaduodram grham pancddhiddivatam 
Svcdeham ye na jdnanti katham sidhyanti yoginah. 1 4. 

14. How can those Yogis who do not know their own 
body (as) a house ^ of one column (with) nine doors, and (as 

^ This is called Jihvabandha {Jihva ~ tongue), 

* The commentary on P states that Gorakhnath in his own work, 
the Siddbf Siddhdnta Paddhati, names the sixteen adhdras. 

* A note to B, verse eleven, substitutes ‘ three worlds ’ for trilaksa ; 
and the commentary to GP uses two laksOy stating that they are two 
classes of channels. 

* B writes 'three guna' for ‘house,* in which case ‘house’ is 
understood. 



288 GORAKHNATH AND THE KLANPHATA YOGIS 

presided over by) five tutelary divinities, attain perfection 
(in Yoga)? 

Caturdalam syddddhdrah svddhisthmianicu satdalam 
Ndbhdu dasadalam padmam surymankhydalam hrdi. 15. 

15. The four-leaved (lotus) should be the ddhdra, and the 
six-leaved the svddhisthdna. In the navxd (is) the ten-leaved 
(lotus) and in the heart the twelve-leaved^ (lotus). 

Kanthesydt sodasadalam hhrumadhye dvidaiavlathd 
Sahasradalamdkhydtam brahmarandhre mahdpathe. 16. 

16. The sixteen-leaved (lotus) should be in the throat; 
similarly the two-leaved (lotus) between the eyebrows; in the 
hole-in-the-skull, in the great path, the one-thousand-leaved 
/'Mtus).2 

Adhdrah prathamam cakram svddhisthdnam dvitiyakam 
Yonisthdnam dvayormadhye kdmarupam nigadyate. 17. 

17. Adhdra is the first cakra\ svddhisthdna the second; 
yonisthdna, between these two, is named kdmarupa} 

Adhdrdkhyam gudasthdnam pankajamca caturdalam, 
Tanmadhyc procyate youth kdmdksd siddhav audita. 18. 

18. And the gudasthdna (is) the four-leaved lotus called 
adhdra. In the midst of it is said to be the yoni,^ the ‘ eye 
of love,’ praised by adepts. 

Yoni rnadye tnahdlingam pascimdbhimukham sthitam 
Mastake manivad biinbam yo jdndti sa yogamt. 19. 

19. In the rtlidst of the yoni, with its face towards the 

^ Surya, twelve months (Surya=sun). 

^ The nirbdna cakra. 

^ The l^iva-Sakti, called Kdmarilpa, is in the Yonisthdna. 

^ The Yoni is situated in the middle leaf of the mfdddhdra, touch- 
ing the triangular object with its face downwards, facing into the 
sttmmnd. CP. 

gudasthdna, the anus. 

pahkaja, mud-born, a name for lotus. 

yoni, vulva. 

kdmdkyd, eye of love. 

There is a place in Kamarup (Assam) called Kdmdkhyd, See 
chap, eight. 



2S9 


THE GORAK§A SATAKA 

back, there stands the great lihga: Who knows the disk of 
light, like a luminous^ jewel, in its head,^ (is) an adept. 

Tapia cdmlkardhhdsam tadillekheva visphurat 
Trtkonam tatpuram vanheradhomedhrdtpratisthitani. 20. 

20. Flashing even like forks of lightning, looking like 
molten gold, the triangular place (yonisthana) of fire (is) 
situated below the mctnhrum virile, 

Yatsamddhdu ,param jyotir anantam vUvatomukhain 
Tasmin dr§te mahdyoge ydtdydtam na vidyate. 21. 

21. Having seen that, the supreme light unending, shining 
in all directions, in samadhi, the adept does not experience 
(any more) transient existence.^ 

Svaiabdena bhavet prdnah svddhisthdnam taddirayah 
Svddhisthdndtpadddasmdn medhram evdbhidhiyatc. 22. 

22. By means of the word sva^^ prana^ arises; the resting 
place of that prana (is) svadhisthana. For it is from this very 
place, the svadhisthana (that) the medhra is named. 

Tantund manivatproto yalrakandah smumnayd 
Tanndbhimc.ndalam cakram procyatc vianipurakam. 23. 

23. Where the kanda (uterus?) is strung on the susumna,® 
like a jewel on a thread, that region"^ of the navel is called 
manipurakam. 

Dvddasdre mahdcakrc punyapdpavivarjite 
Tdvajjivo bhramatyeva ydvattatvam na vindati. 24. 

24. The soul® wanders^ only so long as it does not find 
the Rea) in the great twelve-spoked^® cakra (where there is) 
freedom from (the fruits of) merit and demerit. 


^ Being very bright. 

“ Accor iing to GP, the head ot* the mahcllin^a is meant. 

® That is, change, birth and death, coming and going. 

^ The commentator (GP) says that hahisa has as its resting place 
the svadhi§th^a, the lihgamula. 

® Prana, the breath For more exact definition sec next chapter. 

Th(inadi or channel of the spinal cord. 

’ Circle {tna?tdala)y the ten-pctalled lotu^. 

^ Jiva, is the bound soul, wandering soul. 

® The reference is to sarhsara. 

The lotus of the heart, where the three gunas reside, and, there- 
fore, merit and dement. 


19 



290 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Crdhvam medhrddadhondbheh kandayonih khagandcwat 
Tatranddyah samutpanndh sahasrdndm dvisaptatih, 25. 

25. Below the navel and above the male organ (is) the 
kandayoni} shaped like the egg of a bird. There (are) the 
origins of the seventy-two thousand nadis. 

Tepi nddisahasrem dvisaptatiruddhrtdh 
Pradhdnam prdmvdhinyo bhuyastdsu daiasmrtak. 26. 

26. Among these thousands of nadis seventy-two have 
been specially noted. Again, among these ten carriers of the 
prana are designated as the most important. 

Idd ca pingald cdiva su^mndca trtiyikd 
Gdndhdn, hastijihvdca pusd cdiva yaiasvini, 27. 

27. Ida and pingald and also the third, susumndy gdndhdriy 
hastijihvdy pusd and also yasasvim. 

Alambusd kuhus cdiva iarhkhini daiami smrtd 
Etannddim uyam cakram jndtavyam yogibhih sadd. 28. 

28. Aimabusdy kuhus y and also sathkhini the tenth are taught 
(authoritatively as the ten chief nadis). The centres contain- 
ing these naai^ should be known always by Yogis. 

Ida vdme sthitd bhdge pingald daksine sthitd 
Susumnd madhyedese tu gdndhdri vdmacaksii^i, 29. 

29. Ida (is) situated on the left side, pihgala on the right, 
and susumna^ in the mid region (e.g.y between them); and 
gandhari in the left eye; 

Daksme hasti jihvdca pu§dkarne ca daksine 
Yaiasvini vdmakar^ hydnane cdpy alambusd. 30. 

30. And the hastijihvd in the right (eye) and pusd in the 
right ear, yasasvini in the left ear, and likewise the alambusd 
in the mouth: 

Kuhuica lihgadese tu mulasthdneca iamkhim 
Evam dvdram samdiritya tisthanti daianddtkdh. 31. 

^ Kanda= uterus ? T1 e body cosmicaily viewed containsiboth male 
and female characteristics. 

2 GP commentary says that the origin of these three is in the 
triangle of the muladhara ; and B states that they are said to be the way 
of the prana. 



291 


THE GORAK§A SATAKA 

31. And Kuhus in the region of the lihga and in the 
muladhara the samkhini. Thus are the ten^ nadis (each) 
attached to a door (of the body). 

Ida pingdlastisumnah prdnamdrge samamtdn 
Satatam prdnavdhinyah somasurydgnidevatdh, 32. 

32. Ida, pihgala f»nd susumna in tlie path of the prana are 
connected. (They are) always the conductors of the prana. 
(Their) presiding deities are the moon, the sun and fire. 

Prdnopdnah samdnakoddnavydndtica zayavah 
Ndgah kurmxiiha krkarn devadatto dhanadjayah, 33. 

33. (The breaths- are) prana (air of breathing), apana (air 
of the rectum), samana (digestive air), udana (air in the 
throat), vyana (air circulating through the body), naga (air of 
eructation), kurma (air of blinking), similarly krkara^ (air of 
sneezing), devadatta (air of yawning) (and) dhananjaya. 

Hrdiprdno va^ennityam apdno gudamandale 
Samdno ndbhidesesydd uddnah kanthamadhyagah. 34. 

34. Prana always lies in the chest (heart), apana in the 
region of the rectum, samana is in the region of the navel; 
udana moves in the midst of the throat. 

Vydno zydpi mnretu pradhdnam panca vdyavah 
Prdnddydscdtra vikhydtd ndgddydh pancavdyavah. 35. 

35. But the vyana pervades the (whole) body. The five 
airs beginning wath prana are said to be chief ; the other five 
airs are naga, etc. 

Udgdrc ndgdkhydtah kurma unmllanc smrtah 
Krkarah ksutakrjjneyo devadatto vijnnhhane. 36. 

36. Naga is said to be the air (that functions in) eructa- 
tion; kurma in winking; krkara^ (is) known as causing 
sneezing,^ (and) devadatta in yawning. 

^ The nine doors together with the hole-in-the-skull. They are 
passages for the pranas. 

2 The breaths are really the functional or vital forces of the body 
all of which arc dependent upon the prana, of the respiratory system. 
Prana is identified with jiva, the soul, which is, of course, the bound 
soul. 

® Sometimes spoken of as the digestive air. 

* B says that it arouses hunger. ^ B says involuntarily. 



292 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Na jahdti nirtam cdpi sarvavydpi dhananjayah 
Etc sarvdsu nddi^u bhramante jivarupinah. 37. 

37. Dhanafijaya, pervading the whole (body) does not quit 
even the dead (body). These (pranas), vital functions^, wander 
through all the nadis. 

Akdpto bhujadandena yathoccalati kandukah 
Prdmpdnasamdksiptastathd jivo na tisthati. 38. 

38. As a (wooden) ball struck by the hand-club flies up, 
so the jiva^ struck (in turn) by prana and apana, does not 
rest® (is kept moving). 

Prdndpdna vaiajivo hyadhascordhvam ca dhdvati 
V dmadaksinamdrgena cancalatvdn na drsyate. 39. 

39. Because the soul is under the control of prana and 
apana, it moves up and down through the left and right 
paths (Ida and Pihgala). Because of restlessness it is not 
perceived (clearly).^ 

Rajjubaddho yathdsyenogato'pydkrsyate punah 
Guna baddhastathd jivah prdndpdnena krsyate, 40. 

40. As a hawk tied with a string, even though it flies 
(aw^ay) is drawn back; so the jiva, bound by the gunas, is 
controlled by prana and upana. 

J^dnah karsati prdnam pram pdnam ca karsati 
Ordhvddhah samsthitdvetdu samyojayati yogavit. 41 . 

41. Apana pulls prana and prana pulls apana (alternately); 
an adept in Yoga causes the union^ of these two, lower and 
upper (airs).® 

Hakdrena bahirydti sakdrena viieipunah 
Hamsahathseiyamuma manttam jivo japati sarvadd. 42. 


^ Literally * forms of life,’ appearing as possessing life. Reference 
is to the doctrine of maya, avidya. 

* Jiva is the soul in bondage in sariisara. 

* Illusion is due to the moving of the prana. 

* Until one controls the prana he cannot see clearly. PJO : Jiva 
docs not understand its own realitj' because disturbed. 

* The commentary on GP calls this prdmyama * ha^ha yoga^ the 
union of sun and moon. 

* The commentator quotes Hatha Yoga Cintdmani: ^Prdndydma 
has been described by Yogis as Hatha Yoga.' 



2% 


THE GORAK§A gATAKA 

42. With the sound of ‘ ha^ jlva (in the form of prainia) goes 
out; with the sound of * sa' (in the form of apama) it enters 
(the body) again. The jiva repeats continually that mantra 
'hamsa, hamsa'^ 

Sata ^atdnitvahordtre sahasrdny ekavimiatih 

Etat samkhydnmtam 7nantram jwo japati sarvadd, 43. 

43. The jiva recites continually this mantra, twenty-one 
thousand six-hundred times in a day and a night. 

Ajapd ndma gdyatri yogtndm moksaddyini 

Asydh sarikalpamdtrena sarvapdpaih pramucyate. 44. 

44. The gayatri called ajapa^ (is) the giver of liberation 
to Yogis ; simply with the desire to recite this (gayatri) is he 
freed from all demerit, 

Anaya sadrsi vidyd anayd sadrso japah 

Anaya sadrsam jndnam na bhutam na bhavisyati. 45. 

45. Knowledge like this, repetition like this, insight like 
this neither w’as nor shall be.^ 

Kundalinydh samudbhutd gayatri prdnadhdrim 
Prdnavidyd mahdvidyd yastdm vetti sayogavii, 46. 

46. The gayatri is sprung from^ Kundalini and supports 
the prana. Knowledge of the prana is the great knowledge. 
Who knows this is an adept 

Kandordhvam kimdall saktirastadhd kundaldkrti 
Brahmadvdra^mikham nityam miikhendcchddya tisthati, 47, 

47. Above the kanda Kundali-sakti forms an eight-fold coil. 
She remains there constantly with her mouth (face) covering 
the ‘door of Brahma/® 

YcnadTdrcria gantavyarn brahmasthdnawandmayam 
Mukhendcchddya tatch dram prasuptd paranwsvari. 48. 

^ Harhsa, the chief mantra of the jiva, is gayatri. The first clause 
is according to CP. 

3 ™ Harhsa, ^the mantra consisting only of exhalation and inhala- 
tion, nof of vocal sound. 

^ The reference is to the gayatri and its efficiency. PC : It is 
Supreme Knowledge. 

* GP uses locative: Gayatri arises in Kundalini. 

^ Prana is dependent upon Kundalini. 

® The entrance into Brahma: the lower end of the susumna. 



294 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

48. Having covered with her face that door by which 
(the soul), free from disease, should go to the seat of Brahma, 
the' goddess (Kundalini) lies asleep. 

Prahuddhd vahniyogena manasd marutd saha 

Sudvad gunamdddya vrajatyurdhvam su^mnayd, 49. 

49. By the mind aroused through the union of fire 
(buddht) and prana (Kundalini) is drawn upward through the 
susumna as a needle draws a thread. 

Prasphuradbhujagdkdrd padmatantunibhdsubhd. 

Prabuddhd vahniyogena vrajaty urdhvam susumnayd, 50. 

50. Through the susumna (she), aroused through union 
with fire, gots upwards, like a serpent, auspicious, gleaming 
like a filament of a lotus. 

Udghatayetkapdtantu yathd kuncikayd hathdt 

Kundalinyd tathd yogi moksadvdram prabhedayet. 5 1 . 

51. As one might open a door by force with a key, so the 
Yogi may break open the door of release by means of 
Ku^dalini.^ 

Krtvd samputitdukardudrdhataram badhvdtu padmdsanam 

Gddham vaksasi sannidhdya dbukam dhydtvdca tat 
preksitam 

V dramvdram apdnamurdhvam anilam pr occur ay et puritam 

Muncanprdnamupditi bodharnatulam iaktiprabodhdnnarah. 

S2, 

52. Having closed the two hands firmly, having taken the 
lotus posture, having pressed down the chin on the chest, 
(and) it (Kundalini) having been looked at; he should expel 
again and again the apana breath after he (has filled) it in; 
he attains at the time of expelling the pra^ia unequalled 
knowledge through the awakening of Sakti. 

Angdndm mardanam kurydcchramajdtena vdrind 

Kddvamlalavana tydgi ksira bhojanamdcareL 53.* 

53. One should rub his limbs with the perspiration that 


* The commentary on GP says that the door here referred to is 
the mouth of the susumna, and the key the knowledge of Kuodshui, 



THE GORAKSA SATAKA 295 

results from (the above) effort. Let him drink milk and 
abstain from bitter, acid and salty (food).^ 

Bnihmacdri ntitahdri tydgiyogapardyamk 
Abdddurdhvam bhavetsiddho ndtrakdryd vtcdrand. 54. 

54. (He should be) chaste, one who eats little, an abstainer 
from worldly pleasures, a practiser of Yoga. After a year he 
will have perfected this skill. One must have no doubt 
concerning this.- 

Sumigdham madurdhdram caturthdriimvivarjitam 
Bhujyate mrasampritydi mitdhdrah sa ucyate. 55. 

55. One (by whom) very soft, sweet, good-tasting (food), 
leaving one fourth of it,^ is taken with enjoyment, is called 
mitahdra. 

Kandordhvam kundali saktirastadhd kundaldkrtih 
Bandhandya ca mudhdndm yoginam moksadd smrtd. 56. 

56. Kundalini-sakti, coiled eight times above the kanda (is) 
said to be the giver of release to Yogis^ and of bondage to 
the uninitiated." 

Mahamudrdm nabhomudhrdm uddlydnam jalandharam 
Mulabandhamcayovetti sayogi rnuktibhdjanam, 57. 

57. That Yogi is ready for release who knows makdmudrdy 
nabhomtidrd^ iiddtydna, jalandkard^ and mulahhanda, 

Sodhanam nddijdlasya cdlanam candra suryayoh 
Rasdndm iosanam ediva mahdmndrd 'bkidhtyate, 58. 

58. The purification of the collection of the naejis, the 

^ Commentary on GP says that this is the perspiration arising 
from the practice of pra^Syama ; and that it is for rousing Kuodalini. 
Thus, also, the dhdtus or secretions of the body are preserved. 

* Again the commentary to GP states that this assists in moving 
Kupdalini* 

® Two parts (fourths) of the stomach should be filled with food; 
one part with water; and one part should be left empty for the 
passinif of air. 

* To the adept in moving l%er, ® Literally ‘ fools.* 

® The commentary to GP substitutes Khecarimudra ; and statea 
that through these exercises the Kundalini is set in motion. These 
are Sakti cdlana mudrds. 

^ jedam means nectar (bindu) dropping from the-hole-in-the-skuU. 



296 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOCIS 

moving of both the moon and the sun, and also the drying up 
of the liquids of the body, is called mahamudra. 

Vaksonyasta hanuh prapt4ya sitciram yonimca vdmdrtghrina 
Hastdbhydmanvdhdrayanprasaritam pddam taihd daksinam 
Apufyaivasa7wna kuksiyugulam^ hadhvd^andirecayed 
Esd vyddhivindsini sumahati mudrd nrndm katkyate. 59. 

59. Having rested the chin on the chest, and pressing for 
a long time the yoni with the left great toe, with the two 
hands grasping the extended right foot, having filled with 
breath ioth sides of the abdomen and having held it, one 
sjiould^xpel it slowly. This is said to be the very great 
mudra, the destroyer of the diseases of men. 

Candrdngena samahhyasya siirydngendbhyasetpunah. 
Ydvattulyd bhavetsankhyd tatomudrdmvisarjayet. 60. 

60. Having practiced it first with the ida and then with 
the pihgala an equal number of times, he should discontinue 
the mudra. 2 

Nahi pathyamapathyam vd rasdh sarve *pi ntrasdk 
Apt muktani visamghoram piyusamiva jiryate,^ 61. 

61. (There is) neither wholesome nor unwholesome (food). 
All tastes (are) indeed tasteless. Even deadly poison (food) 
(when) eaten is digested as if it were nectar.^ 

Kfyakustha guddvarta gulmd jirnapurogamdh. 

Rogdstasya ksayamydnti mahdmudrdmcayo 'abhyaset. 62. 

62. His diseases, consumption, leprosy, constipation, 
enlargement of the spleen, decrepitude go to destruction who 
practices mahamudra. 

‘ P reads ^mgiulavu 

- The breathing should be done an equal number of times with 
each n 9 Stril. PC reads: 

' OKl' should be repeated twelve times in inhaling, sixteen time.s 
in holding and ten times in expelling the breath. This is called 
pranayama. 

There are. three classes of pranayama. In the lowest begin with 
tw elve times, in the middle with twenty-four times, in the^ highest 
with thirty-six times. In the lowest there is great perspiration, in the 
middle trembling, in the highest the Yogi floats in the air. 

^ P reads But P and GP read /irjate. 

^ The effect of the mahamudra is to destroy the distinction in 
sense or effect. 



THE CORAK§A SATAKA 297 

Kaihiteyam mahdmiidrd sawasiddhikarmrndm 

Gopanlyd pYaycdnena na deydyasya kasyacit. 63. 

63. This maliambdta has been described, which secures 
all kinds of success^ for men. It should be kept secret by all 
means. 1: (is) not to be re\ealcd tc all sorts of people 
(literally, ‘any one’). 

Kapdlakuharc jihed pravistd Tipai Uagd 

Bhruvoraniiiygatd drstiruuidrd hi-avau khecarl. 64. 

64. By turnini' the tongue over backwards into the hollow 
above the throat and by fivina the sight between the eye- 
bnws the khecarimudra is performed. ^ 

Na rogo mavanam tasya ua nidrd na ksndhdfrsd 

Naca murcchd^ hhavettasya yo inudydnreetti khecarvn. 65. 

65. Neither disease nor death nor sleep nor hunger nor 
fainting'* is there for him who knows the khecarimudra. 

Pidyate nasa sokena Upyate na sakarmand 

Bddhyate na sa kdhna yo mudrdm vetti khecarim. 66. 

66. He is no^ troubled by affliction; he is not besmeared 
(bound) by the fruits of deeds, he is not troubled^ by death 
who knows the khecarimudra. 

Cittarn carati khe yamdjjihvd carati khegatd 

Tendiva khecarimudra sarvasiddhdir namaskrtd. 67. 

67. The citta wanders in space {khe)^ because the tongue 
having entered khe (the hollow above the throat) moves 
about. For that very reason the khecarimudra is highly valued 
by all adepts.^ 

^ IVIaharnudnl gains all perfections. 

- This takes the place of nabho.wudra in the exposition. See 
verse 57. The commentary to GP explains that the tongue has first 
to be released from the cords which hind it to the floor of the mouth, 
and then to be elongated by repeated stretching and kneading. 

^ Better, niilrchd. 

^ Or,, delusion, 

HYP: ‘Not snared by dec^h (timeh’ 

The space between the eyenrows characterized by freedom from 
the universe. 

’ SCN, Text, p. 87. (The Serpent Pcz>jer), speaking of khecari: 
‘As by this the citta roams in the Brahman (Kha — ether and space 



298 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Bindu mulatn iariram tu Brdstatra pratisthitdh 

Bdvayanti iariram yd dpddatalaniastakam, 68. 

68. But the bindu^ is the cause of the body.^ In it {tatra) 
arise all the channels which together constitute the body, 
from head to foot. 

Khecaryd mudritam yena vivaram lambikordhvatah 

Na tasya ksarate binduh kdminydlingitasya ca. 69. 

69. By whom the hollow in the top of the throat is sealed 
by khecari, his bindu, even (though he be) embraced by a 
woman, does not fall. 

Ydvad binduh sthito dehe tdvanmrtyubhayam kntah. 

Yavad baddhd nabhomudrd^ tdvad bindur nagacchatu 1 0. 

70. While the bindu remains in the body, there is no fear 
of death.^ As long as the khecarimudra is continued, so long 
the bindu does not go down.® 

Calito 'pi yadd binduh samprdptaka hutdiayiam 

Brajaty urdhvam hrtah iaktyd niruddho yonimudrayd. 1 1 . 

71. Even if the bindu has reached the fire (yonisthanam), it 
straightway returns (goes up) arrested by Saktt, by the 
yonimudra. 

Sa punar dvwidho binduh panduro^ lohitastathd 

Pd^uram bikr amity dhurlohitam tu maharajah, 72. 

72. Further, the bindu (is) of two kinds, pale-white and 
blood-red. The pale-white they call semen virile, the blood- 
red menstrual fluid. 

Sinduradrava sahkdiam ravisthdne sthitam rajah 

Sasisthdne sthito bindustayordikyam sudurlabham. 73. 

between the eyebrows, djnd), and as the sound of unwritten words 
also roams in the ether (khe), therefore khecarimudra is honoured by 
all. Citta is khecare, what moves in the sky. This is the case where 
the citta is free from all attachments. 

^ Semen virile, Candrdmrta, nectar of the crescent moon. 

* Mula ~ root, 

® — Khecarimudra. See above. 

* Or, ‘Where (is) the fear of death?* 

® The idea is that the bindu is distilled above the soft palate and 
proceeds down through the hollow above the throat and the su^umpa. 

* The text reads pdndaro ; but following B and GP, pdnduro is used 
here. 



THE GORAKSA ^ATAKA 299 

73. Rajas (menstrual fluid) secreted’ in the place of the 
sun, resembling vermilion, and the bindu secreted in the 
place of the moon — the mingling of these two is very diflScult 
to accomplish. 

Binduh siva rajah iaktir hindtim indu^ rajo ravih 
Uhhayoh sangamddeva prdpyate paramam padam, 74. 

74. Bindu is Siva, rajas (is) Sakti, bindu (is) the moon, 
rajas the sun; fmm the mingling of these two, verily, one 
obtains the highest state. 

Vdyund sakti cdrena preritaniu makdrajah 
Bindunditi sahdikatvam hhaved divyam vapustadd. 75. 

75. Then, by moving Sakti, by vayu the rajas (is) impelled 
and united with bindu. Then (the body) becomes divine,® 
wonderful in appearance. 

^ukram candrem samyuktam rajah suryena samyutam 
Tayoh samarasdikatvam yojdndti sa yogavit, 76. 

76. §ukra (bindu) is joined* with the moon, rajas is joined 
with the sun. One who knows (the means of) uniting^ the 
two is an adept. 

TJddinam kurute yasmdd amirdntam mahdkhagah 
Uddiydnam tadevasydn mrtyumdtangakesarl. 77. 

77. Even as a great bird is able to fly® without taking 
rest; so indeed uddiydna may become the lion (which is) the 
death^ of the elephant, 

TJdardtpascimebhdge hyadho iidhhernigadyate 
Uddiydnasya handhoyam tatrd bandho vidhtyate. 78. 

78. This bandha^ at the back of the abdomen and below 
the navel is called bandha of the uddiyana; there banda 
(mudra) is to be practised. 


^ Sthitarriy sthito — ' whose natural place is,’ or ‘situated.’ 

* GPrf’eads candra. 

® E.g.f fire does not burn it, weapons do not pierce it, etc. 

* ‘Means,’ or ‘is equivalent to.’ 

® GP commentary says that the union of these two is Yoga. 

® In space, in the heavens, aka4a = khe of verse 67. 

’ E.g.y as the lion kills the elepfiant, so uddiyana destroys death. 
8 = mudra. 



300 gorakhnath and the KANPHATA yogis 

Badhnati hi HrajalamadhogamiHrojalam 
T ato Jalandhar 0 bandhah kanthaduhkhdughandianah . 79. 

79. Because the Jalandhar abandha closes the network of 
channels (all the nadis) and stops the water^ from flowing 
down from the head; therefore, it destroys the host of dis- 
orders of the throat. 

Jdlandhare krte bandhe kanthasahkocalaksane 
Piyusam na patatyagndu na ca vdyuh prakupyatL 80. 

80. The jalandharabandha, characterized by the closing of 
the throat, having been performed, the nectar^ does not fall 
into the fire, nor is the air disturbed. 

Pdrsnibhdgena sampidya yonimakuhcayed gudam 
Apdnamurdhvam dkfsya mulabandho vidhiyate. 81, 

81. Having pressed the yoni^ with the back of the left 
heel, one should contract the rectum; (and then), draw^ the 
apana upward — (thus) is the mulabandha performed. 

Apdnaprdnayordikydt ksaydnmutrapurisayoh 

Yuvd bhavati mddho pi satatam mulabandhandt. 82. 

82. From the union of prana and apana, from the decrease 
of urine and faeces, even an old man becomes young by 
much (practice) of the mulabandha. 

Padmasanam samdriihya samakdyasirodharah 
Ndsagradrstirekdnte Japedomkdramavyayam. 83. 

83. Having taken the lotus posture, holding the body and 
neck steady, fixing the sight on the tip of the nose, in a 
secluded place, one should repeat the unperishable orii. 

Bhur bhuvah svarinuiokdh somasurydgnidevatdh 
Yasyd mdlrdsu tisthanti taiparamjyotir am iti. 84. 

84. That supreme light, orh, is (that) in whose elements 
the worlds hhilh, bhavah and svah and the divinities moon, 
sun and fire exist. 


^ PC. The nectar of the moon. 

* Hindu. 

® PC. Perineum = yonisthanam. 

* Literally, having drawn. 

* In orii you can meditate on all these. 



301 


THE GORAK9A SATAKA 

Try ah kdldstrayo veddstrayo lokdstrayah sverdh 
Trayo devdh sthitd yatra iatparamjyotir om iti. 85. 

85. In which the three times, the three Vedas, the three 
worlds, the three accents, and the three gods are situated, 
that, om, is the supreme ligluA 

Kriyd cecchd tathd jhdndbrdhmtrdudrtca vdisnavi 
Tridhdsaktih sthitd yatra tatparamjotir ora iti. 86. 

86. In which action and desire and knowledge, Brahmi. 
Rdudri and Vdisnam? the threefold sakti, is contained, that, 
orh, is the supreme light. 

Akdrascatathokdrorhakdro hindu samjhakah 
Tisromdtrdh sthitdyatra tatparamjyotir om iti. 87.^ 

87. That orh, in which these three letters A, and likewise 
U and M, which has the bindu as its mark, exist, is the 
supreme light. 

Vacasd tajjayed injam vapiisd tatsambhyaset 
Manasd tatsmarennityam tatparamjyotir om iti. 88. 

88. With the voice one should repeat that bijam one 
should practice it with the body^; with the mind one should 
remember it.® That, oiii, is the supreme light. 

i^ucirvd'pyasucirvdpi yo japet pranavam sadd 
Lipyate na sa pdpena padmapatram ivdmbhasd. 89. 

89. Whether (he be) either pure or impure, one who 
recites om continually is not besmeared by sin, even as the 
leaf of the Jotus (is not wet) by water."^ 

Caievdiecalo bindur niscale iiikalo bhavet 

Yogis thdnutvain dpnoti tatovdyim nirodhayct. 90. 

^ Three times, past, present, future. Three worlds, three kinds of 
beings. Three gods, Brahma, etc. 

^ The consorts of the three gods. 

® These verses describe groups of three to include n// in orh. 

^ Literally seed; — orh. 

Usitig postures. 

“ With the mind, meditate on om. These acts should all be done 
continually. 

Water does not cling to the lotus leaf ; so sin does not cling to 
the one who recites orh. 



302 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

90. So long as the air moves, bindu^ moves; (and) it 
becomes stationary (when the air) ceases to move. The Yogi 
should, therefore, control the air (and) obtain immovability. ^ 

Yavad vayuhsthito dehe tdvajjivone^mucyate, 

Maranam tasya niskrdnthtaio vdyiim nirodhayet, 9 1 . 

91. As long as prana remains in the body, life (jiva) does 
not depart. Its departure (is) death. Therefore, one should 
become proficient in restraining the prana. 

Yavad haddho maniddehe ydvaccittam mrdmayam 
Yavad drstir bhruvor madhye tdvatkdlabhayam kutah. 92, 

92. As long as prana is held in the body^, so long 
consciousness (cittam) (is) free from disease.^ What cause is 
there for fear of death so long as the sight (remains fixed) 
between the eyebrows } 

Atak kdlabhaydd brahma prdndydmapardyanah 
Yogino munayascdiva tato vdyum mrodbayet. 93. 

93. Therefore, from the fear of death, Brahma (is) intent 
on pranayama, as are also Yogis and sages. Therefore, one 
should restrain the prana. 

Sat trifhiadahguloliamsah praydnam kuriite bahih 
V dmadaksinamdrgena tatah prdno ^bhidhiyatc, 94. 

94. The prana® goes out to a distance of thirty-six fingers’ 
through the left and right nostrils.® Therefore it is called 
prana. 

^ B gives reading cittam as does HYP, 2: 2. 

2 Immovability, indifferent to heat and cold, etc. 

^ B reads 7^0 and this has been substituted for jwa of P. 

* Held in by kumbakha. 

^ So long is the mind undisturbed. 

® Haritsa is prana -f apdna. 

The degrees of distance are as follows : 
naturally —twelve fingers ; 
sleeping — sixteen fingers; 
eating — twenty fingers; 
walking — twenty -four fingers; 
sound sleep — thirty fingers; 

cohabitation — thirty-six fingers. So the verse refers to vajrolt 
(see chap, sixteen). 

® Ida and pihgla. 



303 


THE GORAK3A SATAKA 

^uddhim eti yadd sarvam nddicakram nudakulam, 

Taddiva jay ate yogi prana samgrahane ksamah. 95. 

95. When the whole group of nadis, full of secretions, is 
purified, then indeed the Yogi becomes capable of restrain- 
ing the prana. 

Baddhapadmdsano yogi prdnam candrena purayet, 

Dhdrayitvd yathdsakti bhuyah silryena recayet, 96. 

96. Assuming the lotus posture, the Yogi should fill in the 
prana through the left nostril; then, having held it as long 
as possible, he should expel it through the right nostril. 

Amrtam dadhisankasam goksirarajatopamam 

Dkydtvd candramaso himbam prdndydmi sukhibhavet. 97. 

97. Having meditated on the circular image of the moon, 
nectar as white as curds (and) cowl’s milk, (or) of the colour of 
purest silver, one practising pranayama should find peace.^ 

Daksino hmsamdkrsy a purayet uduium sandih, 

Kimbhayitvd vidhdnena purakandrena recayet. 98. 

98. Having filled in the breath through the right nostril, 
one should fill the abdomen slowly ; having held it according 
to the rules he should expel (it slowly) through the left 
nostril. 

Prajvalajjvalanajvdldpuiijamddityamandalam 

Dhydtvd ndhhisthitam yogi prdndydmi sukhibhavet. 99. 

99. Having meditated on the circle of the sun, full of a 
mass of flame of fire burning ver> brightly in the navel, the 
Yogi who practices pranayama should find peace. 

Prdnam codidayd pibet parimitam bhuyo ^nyaydrecayet. 

Pitvd pihgalayd samiranamatho badhvd tyajet vdmayd. 

Surydeandramasoranena vidhind birnbadvayam dhydyatah. 

Buddha nddigandbhavanti y amino mdsatrayddiirdhvatah. 

100 . 

100. Meditating in turn on the two images, moon and sun, 
a (Yogi) should draw in the breath through the left nostril ; 
he should expel it again through the other, according to the 
limit (of the times already explained): then having drawn in 

^ Meditation is w’ith the breathing control outlined above. 



304 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

the breath through the right nostril, and having held it, he 
should expel it through the left nostrih After three months 
the group of uadis of the practicer becomes pureA 
Yathcstham dhdranam z'dyoranalasya pradipanam 
Ndddbhizyaktirdrogyam jdyate nddisodhandt. 101. 

101. By cleansing the nadis the prana (is) restrained as 
desired, the digestive fire (is) kindled, internal sound- is heard 
(becomes manifest), (and) one becomes diseaseless. 

Iti srigoraksa satakam sampurnam. 

Thus the completion of the one-hundred of Sri Goraksa. 


^ This process of breathing is the chief means of cleansing the 
nadis. 

2 First, various kinds of loud sounds are heard, as of hammer, 
drum, the ocean; then as the practice proceeds, minute sounds art 
heard, musical, bell, blowing conch, bird, lotus-bee, flute, small bells 
and bamboo instrument, in the body. 



CHAPTER FIFTEEN 


MORE IMPORTANT PHYSIOLOGICAL 
CONCEPTS^ 


The primary int^'rcst of the Corakcaiataka is with the 
major f>arts oi' the body, the trunk, neek and head. 

How can those Yopis vv ho do not know th*‘ir own (bodv) as a house 
of onfc* column, (with) nine doors, and (as presided over by) five 
tutelary divinities, attain perfection (in 

The nine doors are the seven in the head and the two at 
the base of the trunk. To these is added as a tenth the hole- 
in-the-skull, and it is through this that the soul, liberated, 
escapes. The divinities are Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, and 
Sadasiva, eacli of w’hom is assigned to a particular ‘centre*. 

More particularly, the system is concerned with the body 
from the standpoint of the two breaths, the six circles, the 
three channels, Sakti (Kundalini) and w^iva. 

The body is pervaded by ten^ airs which are conceived of as 
vital powers, or functions of the human organism; specifically 
and particularly of the senses* and the involuntary processes, 
moving in channels, or paths, called nadi,^ which are found 
in all parts of the body. Five of these airs are of more 
importance to the Yogi than are the others®, and of the five 
two are of special interest ; and, finally, prana, as the function 


' Many descriptions of the various physiological aspects of the 
system of tantra are to be found. The works of Arthur Avalon give 
much more detailed accounts than are here set forth. 

* P, verse 14. 

* P, verses 34-37. 

4 Edgerton, AJP, 1924, p. 41. 

^ See below. ® SS, 3: 6. 


20 



306 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

of breathing, is primary.^ Prana, vayu and maruta seem to 
mean not merely air, or breath, but also vital force, the prin- 
cipal of life, vitality, the antithesis of physical or bodily 
inertness and death. The pra^ is often identified with the 
individual soul (jiva). The airs are as follows: 

1. The prana is the breath, ^ having its chief seat in the 
region of the heart. It is always found in the mouth, the 
nose, the navel, the kanda and the great toe.® It is the most 
important of all the airs and its control (pranayama) is funda- 
mental in the Hatha Yoga. The Upanisads know a single 
vital principle (prana) which derives its existence from the 
self and which superintends the other functions.^ 

2. ApanUy the air of the lower part of the trunk, has its 
chief seat in the rectum.® It functions in the voiding of faeces 
and urine® and in other vital forces operating in the various 
functions of the lower portion of the body. It is found in 
the rectum, male organ, thighs, knees, lower abdomen, waist, 
and navel.’ 

3. Satndna {samavdyu)^ whose chief seat is the region of 
the navel, is the function of digestion. This air, or intestinal 
fire, resides, also, in all the limbs and makes the body dry.® 

4. Uddnay residing in the middle of the throat® is the 
function of speech. It is active also in the hands and feet and 
causes enlargement of the body.^® 

5. Vydna pervades^ the whole body^^ and operates in the 
ears, lips, throat, nose, mouth, cheeks and the navel (mani 
bandh)}^ 

The other airs are;^® 

Note : P. Goraksasatakay Poona text. (GS) 

PC. Commentary on P. 

SCN. Safcakra Nirupana (In The Serpent Power). 

SP. TJie Serpent Power, 

B. Benares manuscript of the Goraksaiataka. 

GP. Gorak^a Paddhati, 

CGP. Commentary in GP. 

HYP. Hathayogapradipika. 

SS. Siva Samhita. 

* See Keith, Religion and Philosophy of the Vedoy vol. TI, 453 ff. 

* P, 33. « CGPy p. 34. GPy p. 20. 

» GPy p. 20. CGPy p. 20. 11 Py 35. 

« See Das G., p. 37. » GP, p. 20. i* GP, p. 20, 

» P, 34; SSy 3:7. • P, 34. la P, 35, 36. 



MORE IMPORTANT PHYSIOLOGICAL CONCEPTS 307 


6. Ndga, which causes eructation; 

7. ATz/rwa, which functions in winking; 

8. Krkara which causes sneezing or hunger;^ 

9. Devadatta, yawning; and 

10. Dhanafjjdya; the air which remains in the body after 
death. 2 Is this the function of decay ? 

Prana and apana ‘situated above and below the 
diaphragm, are the most important and receive the most 
attention in the system. They are ‘joined' in the navel.^ To 
the Yogi the navel is the centre of the body. Apana is drawn 
up to the navel, by the prana; and is there united with it 
(the prana). Prana and apana alternately draw each other. In 
pronouncing apana expels prana; and in pronouncing 
prana drives down apana. Thus is described the breath- 
ing process and it is conceived of as an expelling and inhaling 
of the jiva, or soul, which, because of lack of clear insight, 
identifies itself with the process.^ It is said that the final 
going out of priina is the exit of jiva in death. The word, 
‘haiiisa’, derived from the process of breathing (ha+sa) 
becomes a mantra, called the ajapa gayatri, the unmuttered 
gayatri. So the^Yogi ‘repeats* this mantra, of incalculable 
power, continually, twenty -one thousand six hundred times 
in a day and a night.^ 

In Yoga practice these two, prana and apana, are to be 
joined. The knowledge of how this is done is of great 
importance to Yogis’ and belongs to the highest knowledge,® 
delivering from old age and death.® 

But the texts are more specific about the knowledge that is 
required of the body. The Yogi should add to his general 
know ledge (of the body), and of the pranas, that of the nadis, 
the six centres, and the sixteen supports (adhara). 

The vital forces function through the nadis,^® sometimes 
called channels, or arteries, or fibres. They are paths of 
power, not gross channels, but subtle lines.^^ They are 
spoken of as 72,000 in number^'* or as 3,00,000,^® or as 

1 n ^ P VI s P 4^-44 

^ sJc Brown, JAOS, vol. XXXIX, p. 108. 

"•P, 42. 42-44. ’P, 41. 

»P, 45. ^ ^®P, 26. 

5P, p. 115. P, 25; HYP, 4: 8. » P, 13. 



308 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

2,00,000.^ Among these severtty-two are of considerable 
importance but they are not named. The nadis are spoken 
of as a network pervading the body and having their otigin 
in the kanda. They all have their ..ends (outlets) in the 
openings of the body. The ten chief nadis are 
summnd, gdndhdrty hastijihvdy pu§d^ yasasvini^ alambusd, 
kdhui and iamkhim? They terminate respectively in the left 
nostril, the right nostril, the hole-in-the skull (anterior 
fontanelle), the left eye, the right eye, the right ear, the left 
car, the mouth, the male organ and the anus.^ 

Of these nadis the first three are the most important and 
receive major attention as the paths of the prana. They are 
of vital importance in pranayama and the raising of Kunda- 
lini Sakti. The first two are subordinate to the third, through 
which, by Yoga, prana is supposed to pass by way of the 
various centres out of the body through the brahmarandhra. 

Ida, pihgla and susum^ia are called respectively moon 
(candra, ^si), sun (Surya, mihra) and fire (agni);^ and Gahga, 
Jumna and Sarasvati.® Ida is feminine, pihgla is masculine. 
They both indicate Kdla (death) and susumna devours Kala.^ 
Ida was the universal mother, the mother Earth.® 

Susumna is called also brahmanddi (The Brahma-channel),® 
Sunyapadavt (path-of-non-existence, empty-path), brahma’^ 
randhra (hole-in-the-s^ull), mahdpatha (the-great-highway), 
imaidna (burial-ground), idmbhavi (Durga; sacred to Siva), 
madhyamdrga (middle-path), and iaktimdrga (path of ^akti).^® 
It is identified with the spinal cord,^ and is said to extend 
from the muladhara to the vacuum below the hole-in-the skull. 
It is the path of enjoyment, in which male and female unite. 

Ida and pihgla arising in the left and right scrotum (?) (kanda) 
ascend alternating from left to right, having thus gone around 
or through, all the centres (‘proceeding spirally they meet the 


^ GP, 13. * P, 26. For other estimates see SPj p. 130. 

Siva Samsitd speaks of fourteen as important. 

» P, 27, 28. * P, 29, 30, 31. * P, 32; SCN^p, 4. 

® HYP, 3: 51. ’ SP, p. 131. 

® JR AS (*890), p. 344. Dr. G. W. Brown pointed out that idd is 
Dravidian for ‘ left.’ « CP, HYP, 2 ; 46. 

« HYP, 3: 4; SCN, p. 145. So DHIP, vol. II, p. 354. 

SS, 5.121. 



MORE IMPORTANT PHYSIOLOGICAL CONCEPTS 309 

susumna in each cakra’) and proceed to the space between the 
eyebrows, where they form a plaited knot with susum^ia and 
thence continue to the left and right nostrils. They also form 
a plaited knot with susumna in the kanda. They are pale, 
moon-coloured, and lustrous red, sun-coloured, respectively.*^ 

Susumna, the chief channel, lies between ida and pihgla. 
It is the path of the KundaJinL- The door at the lower end 
of the susumna is called brahmadvara.® The susumna is three- 
fold in its constitution; its inner fibre, very subtle, is the pale 
nectar-giving dirinlnddi^ the brdlmdnddi. 

The channels are conceived of as full of impurities or 
secretions.^ 

The Nadis should be cleann.ed of their impurities by performing 
the mudras, etc. (which are the the practices relating to the air) 
asanas, kumbhakas and various curious mudras.^ 

Other means also are used. For special persons, those in 
whose channels is an excess of fats and phlegm a special set 
of six duties {saikarmdni) is enjoined.® In the cleaning of the 
paths pranayama is the chief agent. 

When the channels have been cleansed the body becomes 
lean and of a glowing colour, the health is good, the appetite 
is strong,^ divine sounds are heard (a most desirable state), 
and pranayama can be performed effectively, namely, Kunda- 
lini can be raised (the aim of the Hatha Yoga).® 

The lotuses, circles, wheels, centres, vital stations (padma 
cakra, adhiira) may be conceived of as positions or locations 
in the body where various aspects of vital force reside. 
They are often identified with the ganglia at various levels 
along the spinal cord; but this may not be accurate. They 
are not in the plexuses, but in the spinal column.® They are 

^ SCN, pp, 5, 6. HYP, 1 : 58. 

2 r;p, p. 19; SCN, p. 4. « HYP, 2: 21, i; 2: 22. 

3 HYP, 4: 18. See below. ’ HYP, 2: 20. 

4P, 95 . « HYP, 2: 19; 2: 20. 

® SP, p. 76. I find that Dasgupta, in the second volume of his 

History Indian Philosophy, takes this position. He says; 

‘How far the cakras can themselves be called nerve-plexuses is 
very doubtful, since the nerve-plexuses are all outside the spinal 
aperture ; but if the kiwdalini is to pass through the aperture of the 
citrinl nadi and at the same time pass through the cakras, the cakras 
or the lotuses {padma) must be inside the spinal cord. ... A nerve- 



310 gorakhnath and the KANPHATA yogis 

most complicated in their symbolism and are not easy to 
describe. Conceived of as stations along the susumna, which 
passes through them, they are viewed in relation to the 
successive positions which Kundalini reaches in her ascent to 
the place of Siva, From the standpoint of creation, each 
padma may be conceived of as a place of union of Sakti and 
Siva, each having within itself both male and female, divi- 
nities and forces. Each, except the last, may be viewed as a 
microcosm, containing all the forces of creation. Besides, 
each contains the union symbol of the yoni-lihga, in triangle 
and lihga, or letter and bindu, crescent and circle. They are 
described as lotuses (padma) with varying numbers of petals, 
each leaf having its letter, called bija with bindu, and all 
drawn with symbolic use of colour, and mythical animals. 
The various figures, triangles, squares, and the like belong to 
yantra, the letters with their bindus to mantra. The latter 
as (mantras) are to be meditated upon in turn proceeding 
from right to left. 

The circles, or lotuses, are a characteristic element in the 
Yogi’s conception of the Hatha Yoga. The lotuses, except 
the last are also called Pithas^ and are seats of Sakti. 

The names and locations of the various cakras, beginning 
with the lowest, are as follows:^ 

1. Mtdddhdra^ at the base of the spinal column. 

2. SvddhisthdnUy at the root of the male organ, or the 
male organ.^ 

3. Manipur aka ^ in the region of the navel. 

4. Andhatay the heart lotus, 

5. Visuddhay in the throat. 

6. Ajiidy between the eyebrows, within the skull. 

Related to these most intimately are two other regions of 

the body, the kanda and the brahmarandhra ; the former in 
the lower part of the abdomen, the source of all the nadis, 
the latter at the anterior fontanelle. 


physical interpretation of them as nerve-plexuses would be unfaithful 
to the texts.* P. 356. Quoted by permission of Macmillan and 
Company, Publishers. 

^ See note under Devi Patan in chap. five. 

* The descriptions are based for the most part upon P, SPy CGP 
CP and SP, ^ P, 22. 



iViURE IMPORTANT PHYSIOLOGICAL CONCEPTS 311 

The lower five are counted as centres of the five forms of 
matter — earth, water, fire, uirand ether, each with its appro- 
priate letter with its bindu, known as its bija mantra, and its 
colour. At the top of the head (brahmarandhra) is the blissful 
abode of Paraina^iva-Sakti. 

As centres of characteristic vital forces, the cakras become 
the objects of concentration of thought or of fixed attention 
and in them are to be discovered the mysteries of creation 
and the psychic energies of KundalinL Not only does each 
centre contain a special form of substance and power but 
also of bliss or of ecstatic experience. 

The muladhara,^ is also called ddhdra^gudddhra.gudasthdna, 
bhumandaldj mulacakruy and is described as located in the 
gudadvdra, 'the door of the anus,* Moreover it is attached 
to the mouth of the susumna thus being the lower doorway 
of the brahmarandra, or susumna. This adhara is the principal 
seat of the apana. It consists of a lotus with four petals, 
red in colour, upon which are the golden letters ^ 

(v, i, s and s, with their bindus), which are objects for 
meditation. 

In the centre of the lotus is a yellow square, surrounded 
by eight shining spears, the emblem of earth {Pfthwi). The 
tips of the spears are shaped like a woman*s breasts. 

In the centre of the square a red triangle resting on its 
apex, symbolizing the yoni, and called Kamarupa. It is 
described also as the triangular place of fire, looking like 
burnished gold, that by which kama is felt. In the yoni 
stands the self-existent linga, with its disc of light like a 
jewel, around which is coiled eight times, and shining like 
lightning, Kundalini. She is asleep closing with her mouth 
(head, face) the aperture of the linga. Here in particular is 
the brahmadvara where she drinks nectar, and produces 
words, or is the source of sounds. She is to be meditated 
upon, here, as a girl of sixteen in full bloom {Bdlasundari). 
Moreover, she is the support of the body as 3esd of the 
earth. On the triangle rests the bija, or seed, or charm of the 
cakra, the letter ^ (I, lang), yellow in colour, the bija-mantra 

^ mula, root; guda, anus; bhu^ earth; dvara^ door; sthdna^ place; 
manway circle 



312 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

of earth and also of Indra. The tip of the bija rests on the 
elephant of Indra. In the bindu or dot of this letter is the 
four-headed, four-armed Brahma, shining like 10,000,000 
suns, seated on a harhsa, or swan. By his side is Dakinl Sakti. 
She is a terrible form of Kali, who feeds on human flesh; 
and who casts the evil eye upon children causing them to 
pine and die, by consuming their livers. She carries in her 
four hands a spear, a staff with a human skull, a sword and 
a cup of wine. She is fierce and plump, and is clad in a 
black antelope’s skin. She is sitting on a lotus. 

Svadhisthana, is also called jalainandala, because its tattva 
6r form of matter is water (jala). It is also known as 
medhradhara} This centre is at the root of the male organ, 
some say that organ itself. The lotus consists of six petals of 
a reddish colour bordering on orange, upon which arc written 
in gold the letters 4, f, ^ (h, bh, m, y, r, and 1 each 

with its bindu). Within this cakra is a white half-moon, 
luminous as the autumn moon, and within this the watery 
region of Varuna. Scjme say that the moon has an eight- 
petalled lotus on eacn side of it. The central l)tja is q {v vang)^ 
the bija-mantra of Varuna, in white, resting on a niakara^ a 
legendary creature, a fabulous sea-monster, resend)ling an 
aligator, the vehicle of Kama. In the bindu sits the four-armed 
Visnu, luminous, blue-cploured, dressed in yellow, w\"aring the 
svasiika, a garland, and the greai jewel, both luminous. He 
holds the conch, discus, mace and lotus in his hands and is 
seated on Garuda. Within the circle of the moon, and 
associated witli Visnu, is the Goddess Sakini^ seated on a red, 
double lotus. She is a demon attendant of Kali, blue in 
colour. In her four hands she holds a trident, a lotus, a drum 
and a battle axe. She is three-eyed, ferocious in aspect, 
showing her teeth (fangs), while a streak of blood issues from 
one of her nostrils. She is a wish-granter, and is exalted 
with the nectar. Prana, which arises with the syllable sm^ 
rests in this cakra and represents the paralinga. 

Between the two cakras, the muladliara and the svadhisth^a 
is the yonisihana, spoken of as the image of desire. It is the 

^ MedhrOy the lihga. * GP, p. IS. Samhitd savs Rakini. 



MORE IMPORTANT PHYSIOLOGICAL CONCEPTS 313 

four-fingered space between the anus and the root of the 
male organ, described as two fingers -breadth from each of 
them. It is further characterized as the place of Siva-Sakti, 
the place of enjoyment, and as Kamarupa. In part, at least, 
this seems to be identified with the triangle of the muladhara.' 
Its position, as here described, must involve the idea that 
the body contains within itself both nspccts of the creative 
power, reminiscences of the thought of ardhanari. The place 
is sometimes spoken of as the GaurTpitha. 

The inanipiiraka , also called ndbhisthana^ ravisthdna, surya- 
sthdna^y is situated in the region of the navel. Jit contains 
ten blue petals, with the letters ‘4, '4, 4, 4, 

(d, dh, n, t, th, d, dh, n, p. ph,also in blue, each with its bindu). 
It is the seat of the element fire, of the sun, and of the samana. 
In the centre of the circle is a read triangle, bordered by 
three svastikas and containing the bija* mantra T (r, rang)^ also 
in red. '^rhis centre is also viewed as the seat of rajas, the 
menstrual fluid, ^ and, as the sun, the cakra is said to soak up 
the nectar (bindu) from the moon. The bija rests on a ram, 
radiant like the i ising sun. Sitting above the triangle is Maha- 
rudra, red in colour, but white wdth ashes, three-eyed, with 
hands extended to grant boons, or to dispel fear (vara- and 
abhyamudrds). He is the destroyer of creation. In one hand 
he holds a rudraksa rosary, in the other a weapon. He is 
seated on a bull. Beside him is Lakini Sakti, blue in colour, 
four-handed, seated on a red lotus. She carries in her hands 
a thunderbolt, and a weapon of fire, while the other two 
hands are in gesture as are Rudra’s. Her breasts are ruddy 
with blood and fat which drip from her mouth. She is fond 
of meat and of rice and of dal cooked and mixed with meat 
and blood. 

The circle, or lotus, of the heart is called andhata, hrdas- 
thdna} Its name suggests the sabdfia brahma (sound) which is 
heard, produced without striking two things together. It is 
the seal^of the prana, and the purusa or jivatman, and includes, 

^ PC 18 so places it. ” Ndhhi, na^’el; ravi, sun; surra, sun. 

^ Rang is the seed-inan^ra of /ire. ^ The kanda i.s conceived 

of as in the re^Jiion described as rhe- n iwl and is the place of fire 
symbolized by the yoni. " ft. art. 



314 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

according to the Upanisads^ both heart and lungs. Its element 
is air. The lotus consists of twelve petals of a golden colour, 
upon which are the letters, if, sj, 

j, j (k, kh, g, gh, c, ch, j, jh, h, t, {h, each with its bindu, and 
all painted red). The circle is bright-red in colour; within this 
is a double triangle, smoke-coloured, in the centre of which is 
a golden triangle containing a lihga, bright like shining gold, 
with a white crescent in its head, above which is a bindu. The 
bija-mantra of this cakra is ^ black, resting on an 

antelope. Above the double triangle, but within the circle sits 
Isvara with hands in gesture for granting boons and dispelling 
fear. The god is three-eyed. With him is associated Kakini 
Sakti with two hands as Isvara, her other two containing a 
noose and a skull. She is yellow in appearance, happy (that is, 
in excited mood), auspicious, three-eyed, benefactress. Her 
heart is softened from drinking the nectar. She sits on a red 
lotus and wears the skin of a black antelope. This lotus is 
the seat of desires, of the samskdras or records of deeds, and 
of the egoizing faculty. It contains also the celestial wishing- 
tree bestowing more than the suppliant desires. (But below 
the andhata is a small eight-petalled, red lotus containing the 
wishing-tree, considered also as the seat of the istha devatd 
wandering among trees laden with fruit, flowers, and birds. 
It is called the dnandakanda.y When the manas is completely 
restrained or fixed in the heart, the Yogi attains conscious- 
ness of identity with Siva. 

In the throat, or at its base, is the cakra called Vthiddha, 
kanfhadeia^ candrasthdna, jdlandharpitha^ bhdratisthdna. 
Another name, derived from the fact that the khecarimudrd is 
performed there, is vyomacakra. It is also called the ndbho- 
mai^ala. It is the residence of udana. Its element is ether. 
It is the seat of bindu. This lotus contains sixteen petals, of a 
smoky-purple colour, containing the crimson letters ^ f, 'I , 
q, H, ^1, ^ (a, a, i, u, u, I, e, 

ai, o, au, and the two breathings a, a, each with its bindu). 
These are all the vowels. Within the circle of the petals is 


^ SCN, pp. 58, 59. 

* Kanfhat throat; de/a, place; candra, moon. 



MORE IMPORTANT PHYSIOLOGICAL CONCEPTS 315 

the blue field of dkdsa, space, and within this, again, a crystal- 
white triangle, within which is a pure circle of the moon 
which contains a white elephant. Upon the beast rests the bija- 
mantra of this cakra, t (A, hang, the symbol of ether, aka^). 
In the bindu of the bija is Sada^iva,^ with body half silver, half 
gold, seated on a bull. He is five-faced, three-eyed in each, 
covered with ashes, having a tiger’s skin and a garland of 
snakes. He carries in his several hands a trident, an ?xe, a 
S'word, a vajra (thunderbolt), dahana (fire?), a bell, a goad, 
a noose, and shows auspicious gestures. With him is Gauri, 
Sadagauri, who is one-half of Siva’s body, with ten beautiful 
arms, five faces each with three eyes. She has a noose, a goad 
and a book, and is in auspicious gesture. She is seated on 
bones. (Or, he is accompanied by Sakini, in yellow raiment, 
carrying in her four hands a bow, an arrow, a noose and a 
goad.) She is ‘white.’ 

The ajna is also called the uddiyana and the jndnaAotns. 
It is situated between the eyebrows, and back of them, and 
consists of two white petals on w^hich are the letters ^ and '4 
(h,and ks variegated in colour and with their bindus). They are 
the bijas of kalas. Kald, a digit or one-sixteenth of the moon’s 
diameter, refers to Siva as bearing one-sixteenth of the moon. 
This cakra is the seat pf the buddhi, aharhkara, manas and the 
indry as (the sensory and motor functions), all in subtle state. 
It is the circle of command over movements. It is the place 
of uninterrupted bliss. The circle of this lotus is white and 
within it is a white triangle containing a white linga called 
itara linga. Here is Parama^iva.^ The bija-mantra of this cakra 
ig. (6m). As the inner atma this om is pure mind, buddhi, 
like a flame. Above it is the crescent moon, above that the 
bindu from makara (m) and still higher the half crescent 
moon. The goddess of this lotus is Hakini, six-faced, like so 
many moons, with six arms bearing a book, a skull, a drum, 
a rosary and with two hands extending in auspicious gesture. 
She i^ seated on a white lotus, drinking ambrosia. 

Each of these circles is described by Gheranda as a dharana 
and the characteristic effect of fixed attention on each is noted. 


^ Saddy eternal. 


* Parama, the highest. 



316 GORAKHNATH and THE KANPHAJA YCGJS 

Two other centres are included in the scheme, the kanda 
and the scAasrdra, 

The former, the kanda, is called also kandayoni and nadi- 
cakra. Descriptions are contradictory and do not make clear 
just what is meant and it has been suggested that it is the 
uterus, or the testes. It is spoken of as the meeting place, 
or the origin, of all the nadis,the place whence all the vital 
airs flow. It is shaped like an egg, and above it Kuru^lini 
is coiled eight times and is asleep. It lies between the anus 
and the root of the medhra (male organ). And, again, it is 
said that it is strung on the susumna in the manipuraka. It 
is clearly close to the source of creative forces. Dr. Dasgupta 
says : 

Other accounts of these nadts hold that the ida proceeds from the 
the right testicle and the pingld from the left testicle and passes on 
the left and right of the susumna in a bent form {dhanur dkdre). The 
three, however, meet at the root of the penis, which is thus regarded 
as the meeting of the three rivers. . . .* 

The final goal of the Kundalini Yoga is the top of the head, 
the brahmasthana, brahrnarandhra, known as me hole-in-the- 
skull, the nirvdnacakra (circle where release is achieved), 
makdpatha (the great path of release). It is the place of 
final bliss (brahman and a). It is situated above the end of the 
susumna. Because it is a lotus of 1,000 petals it is called 
sahasrdra. It has its head downwards, and its clustered 
filaments are tinged with the colour of the young sun. Each 
of the petals has upon it a letter of the alphabet, and they are 
recorded on the leaves and read from right to left, 50 X 20 = 
1,000, one-thousand letters in all, each with its bindu; within 
this lotus is the full moon, resplendent as the clear sky, moist 
with nectar. And within this is a triangle, and in this the 
great void shines ^unya (void) which is the subtle bi’-du, 
which \s para bindu, which is Isvara, having as its centre the 
abode of Brahma. Al)ove the bindu, in the aperture is Sarh- 
kini, the goddess who creates, maintains and destroys. Within 
this lotus is the full moon, resplendent as the clear sky, moist 


^ DHIPy voL II, p. 354. Quoted by permission of the Mac- 
millan Company, Publishers. 



MORE IMPORTANT PHYSIOLOGICAL CONCEPTS 317 

with nectar. Here is experience of finai union, unmanly 
where the bond of attachment with the world is cut and the 
bliss of release is enjoyed. Here Siva stands, free Irom all 
illusion, with Nirvana^akti. In th(' triangle in the sahasrara 
are three bindus; the % {hang), the male, the other two in 
the form of $a which is PrakritL The two bindus make up 
the third as visdrga (:) so that their union is haihsah. The 
divine form here is one-half of {^wdrdha) united with 
nada which calls or draws out biiidu. Below this level are 
the forms of creative union in cakras down to muladhara. 
But here is the undivided origin of all dual forms. This 
high place is, viewing the Kundalini as she moves upwards, 
the level of dissolution. Sakti he^e is nirvana^akti. The fruit 
of ‘knowledge’ of sahasrara is final bliss. 

The cakras which the Hindus mention are numerous, but 
those already enumerated are the principle ones. Under the 
name of ddhdras, seats of vital functions, they are objects of 
meditation. The word is said to mean ‘ container.’^ The list 
of sixteen as supplied by the commentary ^ to the Poona 
edition of the Goraksaiataka^ together whth their positions, 
which includes those already described is^ as follows: (1) 
Pddangusthddhdra (great toej; (2) Muladhara (anus); (3) 
Gudddhdra (rectum); (4) Medhrddhdra (linga); (5) Uddi- 
yanddhdra (above the navel); (6) Ndbhyddhdra (navel); (7) 
Hrdayddhdra (heart) ; Kanthddhdra (throat) ; (9) Ghantikddhdra 
(soft palate); (10) Tatvddhdra (in soft palate); (11) Jihva- 
muladhara (root of the tongue); (12) Urdhvadantamulddhdra 
(root of upper front teeth); (13) Ndsdgrddhdra (tip of the 
nose); (14) Bhrumadhyddhdra (a point between the eye- 
brows); (15) Lalatddhdra (forehead); (16) Brahmarandhrd- 
dhdra (top of head).^ 


1 SCN, p. 80. 

* To verse 13. 

* They are supplied from the Siddha-Siddhanta-Paddfiati. 

* In the detailed accounts a number of cakras are described which 
occupy the space between these. Pandit Gopi Nath Kaviraj, in The 
Princess of Wales Sarasvati Bhavana Studies (in 1923), enumerates 
and describes a number which he found illustrated in an old coloured 
chart. The list agrees only in part with the ordinary ones. 



318 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGlS 

A list with their names is given in Hathayogapradipika 
(3: 72, note), and still another list is given in the Goraksa- 
Paddhati (comment on verse 13). In general, it may be said 
that these lists refer to the same portions of the body, the 
descriptive terms varying.^ 

The books give some attention to the dhatus or secretions 
of the body, whose removal, or drying up, or conservation is 
desired. They are seven in number, the skin, blood, flesh, 
fat, bone, marrow and seed. They include the five elements 
which co-operate to uphold the body. 

The union of bindu and rajas is the aim of the Yoga; and, 
although it is difficult to achieve, its realization is the highest 
state. The place of union is of the highest importance. 
Bindu is of two kinds, pale-white and blood-red, “ and is the 
root or cause of the body.^ Its conservation is both the 
protection and the preservation of the body. Primarily 
bindu as pale-white is the semen virile,^ the circular image of 
the moon, nectar, white as cow’s milk, curds and silver. It 
is the product of the moon and is distilled to the left of the 
space between the eyebrows. Its seat is in the hollow above 
the throat, the Vyoma cakra, also described as the hole at the 
upper^ end of the susumna,^ Thence it naturally proceeds 
down through the susumna to the place of fire, in the mula- 
dhara, or in the nabhisthana, where it is consumed. For this 
reason the khecarimudra (see next chapter) is performed to 
hold the bindu in its native station; and other devices are 
used to cause it to return after it has actually gone down. 
It is Siva. The conservation and control of the bindu is of 
great importance. 

Rajas is the menstrual fluid. Its source, or station, is in 
the place of the sun, the circle of the sun full of a mass of 
flame, very bright, in the navel. It is Sakti.® It is rajas that 
drinks the soma (= bindu) falling from the moon. The 
symbolism of the descriptions represents the creative act 
according to the philosophy of the Saktas, and the energy of 
the soul in the various levels or cakras, where the two 
principles are brought together. • 


‘ See also 5CN. p. 80. ^ 72 . 3 p^ 

« P, 72. ^ HYP, 3: 51. « P, 71, 73, 74, 76, 99 



MORE IMPORTANT PHYSIOLOGICAL CONCEPTS 319 

KuHlafigi (crooked-bodied), Kundalinl (coiled), Bhuja^gt (she- 
serpent), Sakii, lizvari, Kuwait (coiled), and Arundhati — these 
words are synonymous.^ 

All the Yoga practice refers to Kundalini.^ She is described 
as coiled eight times around the iihga, like a serpent, asleep, 
with her head (mouth) closing its aperture completely: 
lyanger says three and one-half times. She is Sakti, Parame- 
^vari, the Infant Widow and Tapasviiii (female ascetic). Her 
place is between the guda and the lihga. She is in all the 
mantras, e,g.^ in all the letters, in all the lotuses, since the 
letters are her manifestations. She is the supreme Sakti 
active in both man and in the universe as prakrti. She is 
best described in connection with her functions in the 
practice of Yoga which are set forth ir the next chapter. 

Importance is attached to the knots (granthi) the chief of 
which are the plaitings of the nadis in the kanda and in the 
ajfia. The total number is fourteCii. The cakras contain 
some of them, Brahma in the anahara and Rudra in the ajna. 
The knot in the ajna is called iribeni. 

Five sheaths (vyoman) are also mentioned. They are dkdidy 
prdkdsay mahdl.diay sattvdkdiay and siiryakdia. They refer to 
realms of experience. The commentary on verse thirteen of 
the Poona edition points out that the Yogi should know and 
meditate upon these. They are described in turns as freedom 
from impurities, like great darkness, like destroying fire, one^s 
real form, and the sun shining like a thousand suns. They 
are also described from above down through the cakras to 
the muladhara. In this case the first is white, the second red, 
the third like fire, the fourth is blue and the fifth like light- 
ning. By looking at these (vyoman) one becomes like the 
sky. Aka^a in the vi^uddha is the sheath of liberation. They 
(Vyoman) are the substances of the cakras. 

In recent times efforts have been made to relate the physio- 
logy of the Hatha Yoga ta that of present-day science. 
Notably, Dr. Brajendranath Seal, in his I'he Primitive Science 
of the Ancients? has attempted, in the chapter on ‘Hindu 
Physiology and Biology,’ to identify the cakras with the 


1 HYP, 3:97. * HYP, 3 : 1. 

® London, 1915. 



320 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

plexuses of the human body. Previous to that^ Major B. D. 
Basu, worked on the same problem. A recent, 

elaborate comparison of Hatha Yoga physiology with modern 
anatomical science is found in the little book, The Mysterious 
Kundalini, by Dr. Vasant G. Rele.'^ This author, who is 
interested in explaining the effects or accomplishments of 
Yoga from the standpoint of modern physiology, identifies 
the pranas whth the nervous energies, the five chief airs being 
the five important subsidiary nerve centres in the brain and 
spinal cord; the cakras with the plexuses, involving both 
spinal and cerebro-spinal automatic nervous systems; su- 
sumna, ida and pingla with the sympathetic system; the 
nectar from the moon (bindu) with the cerebro-spinal fluid; 
the saktis of the various cakras with the fibres connecting 
them wqth the spinal nervous system; and brahmarandhra 
with the cavity in the skull. Particularly does he connect 
the plexuses with the cerebro-cranial automatic nervous 
system and the Kundal ini with the right vagus nerve.® His 
position is that by means of the Yogic methods, pranayama, 
bandha and mudra, the Yogi gains control of the automatic 
nervous system, especially that portion of it w^hich controls 
the involuntary vital activities related to the plexuses. In 
this w\ay does the author explain the voluntary control which 
the Yogi exercises over consciousness and his ability to 
produce trance and self-hybernation. Ecstatic experiences 
which occur, as plexus after plexus comes under control of the 
Yogi, are described by Dr. Rele as follows:^ 

A Yogi when he develops his automatic nervous system, becomes 
so engrossed in it that the somatic functions of his Susu?nnd midi 
and the knowledge of the relation with the eternal world are held 
in abeyance and he sees his own self which pervades the whole 
universe and becomes one with it. . . . When this Kulakundalini 
IS awakened or made active, it forces a passage through the different 


^ See Guy's Hospital Gazetteer^ London, 1889, and Foreword to 
SBH, vol. XV, pt. 4, 1915. 

® Bombay, 1927 (Third Edition, 1931). 

* Pp, 39, 47, 101, 110. Dr. Dasgupta {DHIP^ vol. II, p. 356) says: 
*Kundalini itself cannot be called a nerve and it is distinctly wrong to 
call it the vagus nerve, as Mr. Rele does.’ Quoted by permission of 
Macmillan and Company, Publishers. 

^ Pp. 39, 47, 101, no. 



more important physiological concepts 321 

cakras and excites them to action, and as it rises step by step, 
the mind becomes opened and all visions and wonderful powers 
come to the Yogi, when it reaches the brain. The Yogi then is 
perfectly detached from the body and the mind, and the soul finds 
itself free in all respects. . . . When a Yogi becomes a perfect adept 
in the control of Kundalinl . . . the soul is free to move out of the 
Brahmarandhra, in which it was kept in captivity, and occupies a 
bigger cavity surrounding the brain and the spinal cord knovm as 
AkdsQf and becomes absorbed in the infinite tritelligence from which 
it emanated. The Yogi, when in this state of Nirvikalpa-samddhi, 
identifies himself with that which he contemplates, and acquir^ 
certain supernatural powers. ... I would, therefore, define Kur^alini- 
Yoga as a science of physical and mental exercises of a particular 
form by which an individual ‘Establishes a conscious control over his 
automatic nervous system, to be in tune with the Infinite. 


21 



CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

CHIEF AIMS AND METHODS^ 

The Kundalini Yoga makes large use of the doctrine of the 
union of Siva and Sakti ; that is, it swings around the ideali- 
2ation of the experience of the ecstasy that arises in creative 
union. From the lowest centre (the milladhara) to the place 
of final bliss (in the sahasrara), each level, conceived of as a 
place of enjoyment, is symbolically the station of a god and a 
goddess; and at each of the stages in her ascent, the Sakti 
drinks the nectar ofthe crescent moon. Back and above this dual 
concept is that of the ardhanarl. The discipline of the Yoga, 
in so far as it concerns the lifting of Kundalini from her place 
in the muladhara to the region of the bindu, the nectar of the 
moon, which lies in the hollow above the throat, may be 
described as a series of manipulations of bodily functions, 
physical exercises and with accompanying mental concentra- 
tions, whose physical and psychical reactions are interpreted 
in supernatural terms as enjoyment of the Lord (Siva) by 
S^kti. The thrills, or ecstasies, engendered by excitations all 
along the susumna, are regarded as religious experiences.^ In 
this aspect of the system the female creative energy is raised 
to higher and higher levels in the body and experiences of 
union in succeeding cakras become more and more subtle. 

Since the analogy is that of the union of Sakti with Siva, 
the physical union of man and woman, when the former, at 
least, is a Yogi of advanced powers, becomes of great signi- 
ficance. The disciplines of the Hafha Yoga enable the adept 
to reverse the process of nature, so as to detain the bmdu in 

^ In this chapter descriptions of the various processes are limited 
,to the more important details, sufficient only to illustrate the method 
and the results of Hatha Yoj?a. 



CHIEF AIMS AND METHODS 323 

its original receptacle, or to draw it back, along with rajas, 
after the actual union. The former aspect of the case is 
illustrated by the following statement. 

By whom the hollow in the top of the throat is sealed by Khecari, 
his hinduy even (though he be) embraced by a woman, does not fall.^ 

And the other aspect of the discipline may be considered 
from the point of view of vajroli and similar practices as 
described below. There is here either a stoppage of the 
natural function or its ultimate reversal. 

So, while there is a discipline which concerns itself simply 
with the body of the adept, there is also the method of some 
aspect or other of the vamacara. Tue union of male and 
female may be of equal significance with the more subtle dis* 
cipline for the ends of the Yoga, and may symbolize the 
union of Siva and Sakti. But, in this case, adepts are careful 
to point out that for the truly prepared alone is this form of 
the ritual profitable for the highest experience ; for they only 
are able to retain the bindu or to draw up the bindu-rajas so 
that the act of coition becomes not a procreative act but 
an experience in the seat of Siva. As will appear later, 
special disciplines look to this reversal of nature. In other 
words, this discipline is for those only who are ripe for 
'release, for men of great attainments, useful and deserving.^ 
Furthermore, so exacting is this process, that it is in{X)88iblc 
for the Yogi to work out the whole of the discipline in a 
single incarnation. Consequently, those who are actually 
carrying out the practices are adepts who have already arrived 
at its final stages through the practice of Hatha Yoga in a 
series of lives lived under conditions favourable to ultimate 
success in Yoga.® Undisciplined, untaught men perform 
these acts to their own degradation and ultimate destruction. 

Asana, mudra and bandha may be looked upon as types of 
physical exercise whose aim is a healthful development of the 
body and the proper stimulation of the seminal (or ovarian) 

1 GSy 69. 2 PC, 9. 

^ HYPy p. ii. In the Garuda Pur ana it is stated that the stages m 
the development of the Yoga are: being born a woman; then, as a 
gudra, a Vai§ya and a Brahman devoid of mercy; then, gradual 
improvement to the stage of Yogi and jnani. — lyangar, HYP, p. 73. 



324 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

glands. Always it must be rememberd that loss of the bindu 
leads to disease, old age and death. It is claimed that these 
disciplines contribute to the retention and assimilation c>f 
bindu, yielding both vitality and victory over death itself. 

The system rests, further, upon the conception of the 
female principle, or power, as ultimately the formative, or 
creative, energy of the universe; and upon the interpretation 
of physical and psychical experiences as the realization of the 
divine creative union. The trance, or unconsciousness, which 
is the outcome of prolonged effort, is the samadhi which trans- 
cends duality. The ecstasy bordering on samadhi is often 
Sheerly sensual. In fact, there is plenty of authority for the 
statement that physical union is the way to release. 

In the accounts in the text-books of the Hatha Yoga, the 
two aspects of the discipline, that which deals wholly with 
matters within the physical frame, and that which involves 
two individuals are so interwwen, and the shifting from one 
to the other is so frequent and abrupt, that it is sometimes 
difficult to separate them. 

In the terminology of the Hatha Yoga, the two elements 
whose union is sought are the sleeping, female serpent 
(Kundalini) resting with her head in the aperture of the male 
organ and the bindu lodged in the hollow of the throat. Ske 
drinks the nectar where she is, or is to be, drawn upwards 
(by means of pranayama and other disciplines) through this, 
the brahmadvara, to higher centres, finally to the seat of 
bindu. She may enjoy the nectar at any of the stations 
along the susumna although the aim is union in the highest 
place. But, in all cases she drinks the nectar of the moon, 
In order that Kundalini may appropriate the bindu she must 
be aroused and moved, and, for this purpose, asana,, 
pranayama, mudra, bandha and the other exercises are 
employed. 

It is further to be noted that behind all this is the age- 
long Indian view of the misery of the world, involved in all 
creation, which is to be removed in the final achievement of 
samadhi.^ 


^ J. Ghosh, in A Study of Yoga, p. 330, says: ‘The Yogi seeks 
elimination of misery and that alone.’ Does he not seek bliss also? 



CHIEF AIMS AND METHODS 325 

And again, as the various levels of union are reached, as 
Kundalini is lifted, supernormal powers of differing kinds are 
attained. But the higher and more subtle forms both of 
power and of experience are the aim of the adept. 

Before proceeding with details of the discipline, it may be 
well to state in another form its aims and methods: 

A. Aims: 

(1) Immobility of body and of mental processes by 
asana, mudra, bhanda and pranayama. 

(2) Retention of the breath. 

(3) Retention of the bindu. 

(4) The ecstatic experiences of the union of rajas 
(Kundalini) and bindu (Siva) at various levels in the body. 

(5) Supernormal powers. 

(6) Final release. 

B. And to these ends: 

(1) Cleansing of the nadis. 

(2) Breath control. 

(3) Asana, mudra and bhanda. 

(4) Miscellaneous practices. 

In the first place, the strenuous (hatha) physical exercises 
of this system aim at health and vigour of body, without 
which the Yogi would be unable to carry out the whole of 
the difficult discipline and arrive at success. Consequently, 
attention is given to food and environment. Diet should be 
sparing.^ Food should be very soft, sweet, good tasting, ^ and 
the Yogi should drink milk and abstain from bitter, acid and 
salty food.^ He should limit his meal to three-fourths of a 
stomach-full, leaving one-fourth of the space for the passing 
of the prana (in the exercise of pranayama). The books 
go into considerable detail about ‘good* and ‘bad’ food. 
The former should be well-cooked with ghi, rice, wheat, 
barley, sugar, butter, white-honey, ginger-root and some 
fruits |ind vegetables. On the other hand foods to be 
avoided are those highly spiced, some green vegetables, 
fermented and oily food, those mixed with till and rape seed, 
intoxicating liquors, fish, meat, curds, chassa^ pulses, plums, 


P, 54. 


* P, 55. 


» P. 53. 



326 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHAJA Y0GI« 

oil-cake, asafoetida, garlic, onions and so forth also foods 
heated a second time, dry foods, mijior grains and vegetables 
that cause a burning sensation.^ 

The Yogi should choose a small room, in a solitary place, 
comfortable and clean, ‘in a secluded place, in a country 
governed by a dutiful raja, in a land of plenty and free from 
disturbance.* 

He must be chaste and a renouncer of worldly pleasures; 
fire, w'omen, travelling, and so forth should be shunned;® 
likewise the society of evil men.^ He should avoid also early 
rising, the cold bath, fasting and bodily exerticn;^ and he 
must have a guru, or spiritual guide. As the Sarhhitd 
puts it, only the iiistruction imparted by a guru by word of 
mouth is of use (3: 11). 

In considering the details of this Yoga it is necessary to 
note in all cases the bearing of the practices upon physical 
and mental excitements and upon the reactions to them. The 
immobility of mind and body is sought through high tension. 

’ The chief postures (asanas) are kamalasana (padmasana) and 
siddhasana. 'Fhe second is often spoken of as the best, the only 
necessary one, and is as its name implies, ‘the perfect’ asana. 
Of these the first two are described in turn as follows: 

(The [Y"ogi] should press firmly the heel of the (left) foot against 
the perineum (and) the (right) heel just above the male organ, keep- 
ing the body fixedly erect, immovable; the senses under control; 
and with motionless gaze should look at the spot between the eye- 
brows. This (posture), which is the opener of the door of release, is 
called siddhasana. 

And having placed the right foot upon the left thigh and likewise 
the left (foot) upon the right thigh, and having grasped firmly the 
great toes with the hands crossed from behind (and) fixing the chin 
on the chest (the Yogi) should gaze at the tip of his nose. This 
(posture), the destroyer of disease and mental and physical distur- 
bances, is called padmasana.^ 

This latter is described in the Hathayogapradipika as 
follows : 


' HYP, 1: 61. 3 j. 62, 63. 

2 flYP, 1: 62. « HYP, 1: 63. 

* HYP, 1: 63. Further details concerning things to use and to 
avcfid are found in &iva Samhitd, 3: 33, 35. 

GS, 11, 12. In the former, the ,$wa Samkita suggests pressure 
upon the yoni and lihga respectively. 



CHIEF AIMS AND METHODS 


327 


Having placed the feet, bottoms up, firmly upon the thighs, and 
similarly having the hands, palms upwards, between the thighs ; having 
the eyes directed to the tip of the nose, the [Yogi] should press the 
roots of the upper front teeth with the tongue; and, having rested 
the chin upon the chest, he should expel the breath slowdy. This, 
styled the padmasana, is the destroyer of all diseases. It is difficult 
to master, (but) may be perfected in (this) world by a wise man (by 
a man properly taught).^ 

An interesting list of asanas is given in the Hathdyoga.- 
prddipika,^ and there their bearing upon health and tKe erad^ 
cation of disease is recorded. One of these, because of its - 
reference to Gorakhnath, may be of special inteterest: 

[The Yogi] should place the ankles (heels) on either side of the 
seam below the scrotum, the left heel on the left, the right on the 
right. (He should) hold the feet firmly with the hands, immovable. 
This is the bhadrdsana, eradicator of all diseases. Adepts denominate 
this one Goraksdsana. By merely taking this posture, the eminent 
Yogi becomes fatigue-free.^ 

The bearing of these practices upon the awakening of 
Kundalini is perfectly plain when ancillary means are noted, 
such as that in the padmasana, where the left heel is placed 
upon the medhra, and the right upon the left.^ This is called 
the ‘thunder-bolt’ (vajra) asana,and also the ‘liberating’ and 
the ‘secret’ asana.^ Gorakhnath was, to begin with, a Vajrl- 
yana Buddhist. The word vajra has an esoteric meaning. 
And it is maintained further that other postures are of no 
use when success has been achieved in this. Elements of 
asana are found in mudra and bandha,® and are combined 
with forms of pranayama. 

There is an intimate relation between asana and pranayama. 
But, in order that the breath, which is the jiva, may be con- 
trolled, it is necessary that the prana and apana move freely 
through the ida-piiigla system, and in turn that Kundalini be 
moved Upward. Consequently, the paths of such movements, 
the nadis, which are conceived of as obstructed with impurities 


' H y;», 1 : 47, 48, 49. ^ HYP, \ : 55-57. 

* 1 : 21-34. « HYP, 1: 38. '' HYP, 1 : 39. 

® The Tantra suggests special seats for certain asanas ; skulls for 
the mundasana, the funeral pyre for the citasana, a corpse for the 
savasana, with the purpose of acquiring fearlessness and indifference. 
These asanas are not included in the lists given above. 



328 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

and secretions, must be cleansed by drying up and removing 
the substances accumulated in them. Moreover, with the 
purification of the nadis, the breath can be held for longer 
periods of time. While pranayama is a general means serving 
for this purpose, special devices, known as the six duties, or 
acts (satkartndm), are employed. They are: dhduti^ hastiy netiy 
trdtakay nduli and kapdla bhdtL Gajkarani may be added. 
These serve also for the acquisition and the preservation of 
health. 

A wetted cloth four fingers wide and fifteen cubits Jong should be 
swallowed slowly, under the direction of a teacher, and then drawn 
back. This is called dhduti karma. The novice begins by swallowing 
a cubit the first day, two the second, and so on, until he can manage 
the whole strip. After swallowing the whole of the tape, he should 
give his stomach a rotary motion from left to right and then draw 
the cloth slowly up. Without doubt cough, asthma, enlargement of 
the spleen, leprosy, and the twenty diseases are cured by the practice 
of dhauti karma.^ 

Squatting in water reaching to the navel, with a tube inserted in 
the anus, one should contract the adhara (anus). (This) washing is 
the basti karma. 

This is explained as the use of a half-inch tube about six 
inches long by means of which the bowels are flushed through 
contraction and expansion of the abdominal muscles. 

Enlargement of the spleen and dropsy and also all of the disorders 
arising from wind, bile and phlegm are brought to an end. The 
basti karma, performed with water makes calm the (these) humours, 
the sensory and motor faculties and the seat of thought and feeling ; 
gives glow and lustre (to the body) and good digestion. All accumula- 
tions of vitiated humours are destroyed.® 

A very soft cord, about nine inches long, should be drawn (up) 
through the nostril and taken out through the mouth. By adepts 
this is called neti. This is indeed the cleanser of the skull (cranial 
passages) and the giver of divine sight. The multitude of diseases 
which arise in the upper portion of the chest is quickly destroyed.® 

Having the thoughts fixed (in meditation), one should look fixedly 
at a small object (mark) until the eyes are suffused with tears. (This) 
by adepts is called trataka. It destroys the diseases of the eyes and 
also removes exhaustion. Trataka is a (door) that should be ^guarded 
(kept secret) as a goM (treasure) casket.* 


* HYPy 2: 24, 25 and note in HYPy to verse 24. 
® HYPy 2: 26-28. 

® HYPy 2: 29, 30. * HYP, 2: 31, 32. 



CHIEF AIMS AND METHODS 


329 


With shoulders bent, one should rotate the belly with an active, 
violent turning from left to right. This adepts call nauli. This nauli, 
excellent Hatha exercise, removes dyspepsia, restores digestion and 
so forth and ever causes joy. It dries up all disorders.^ 

The performance of inhalation and exhalation, agitatedly like a 
blacksmith^s bellows, is known as kapala bhati. It dries up phlegm 
disorders.® 

Lifting the lower air (apana) one vomits the contents of the 
stomach. By degrees the nadis and cakras are brought under control. 
(This act) is called gajkarni by those who know the Hatha (Yoga).^ 

The Gheranda Samhitd gives a more elaborate and 
differently analyzed account of the elements of dhauti. 

It seems clear that the physical reactions to these practices 
may be interpreted in terms of religious experience. Physi- 
cal and psychical effects of these exercises are inevitable. 

The (system) of nadis and cakras having been cleansed by the 
control of the prana according to rule (then) the air {mdrutd), having 
opened the door of the su?umna, enters (it) with ease. When the air 
moves in the middle (susumna), fixity of mind is induced. The mind 
(thus) fixed is verily in the condition of manonmani.^ 

When the whole group of nadis, full of secretions, is purified, 
certainly then, the Yogi becomes capable of constraining the prana.® 

Chief reliance for the cleansing of the channels is placed, 
however, upon pranayama ; and it is said that this is the only 
means needed.® Moreover, this control serves to arouse 
Kundalini, and to lift her from centre (cakra) to centre. By 
using ida and pihgla in the breathing process prana, jiva, 
Kundalini, may be directed inco the susumna. 

Some methods of pranayama are as follows: 

Assuming the lotus posture (padmasana), the Yogi should fill in 
the prana through the left nostril; then, having held it as long as 
possible he should expel it through the right nostril,’ 

Ida is the left nostril, pihgla the right. 

Having meditated on the circular image of the moon, nectar as 
white as curds (and) cow’s milk (or) of the colour of purest silver, one 
practising prapayama should find peace.® 

1 HYP, 2: 33, 34. ® HYP, 2: 35. ® HYP, 2: 38. 

* HYP, 2: 41, 42. A state of mind in which there is no movement 
of thought. ® P. 95. 

'HYP, 2: 37. An interesting statement about the functions of 
Ida and pihgla for prognosticati^ai may be found in The Secrets of the 
Kdula Circ/e, by Elizabeth Sharp, 1936, pp. 76 ff. P, 96. ® HYP, 97. 



330 GORAKHNATii AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Having filled in the breath through the right nostril, one should 
fill the abdomen slowly; having held it according to the rules, he 
should expel (it slowly) through the left nostril. Having meditated 
on the circle of the sun, full of a mass of flame of fire burning ver>^ 
brightly in the navel, the Yogi who practises pranayama should find 
peace d 

Meditating in turn on the two images, moon and sun, (a Yogi) 
should draw' in the breath through the left nostril; he should expel 
it again through the other, according to the limit (of the times already 
explained). Then, having drawn in the breath through the right 
nostril, and having held it, he should expel it through the left nostril. 
After three months the group of nadis of the practitioner become 
pure.® 

Naturally, the breathing process, as has been pointed out, 
involves the use ot mantra (hariisa) which adds to its own 
effectiveness. In the practice of pranayama, inhaling and 
exhaling of the breath are important, but the chief aim is the 
holding of ‘the breath filled in,’ kumbhaka. And it may be 
held for longer and longer periods. This process is regulated 
by the use of mantra also, om being recited in a triple form 
a-u-m. The commentator on verse sixty -one of the Goraksa- 
iataka says that with the drawing in of the prana {puraka) 
orh should be recited mentally twelve times, sixteen times 
while it is being held (kumbhaka) and ten times during its 
expulsion {recaka). This is the lowest class of pranayama. In 
the middle class, the times are twenty-four, thiity-two and 
twenty; and in the highest thirty-six, forty-eight and thirty. 
This is a strenuous exercise. In the lowest level there is great 
perspiration; in the middle, trembling; and in the highest 
the Yogi ‘rises up.’ Reference here is probably to the sense of 
lightness. This exercise is joined with the mahamudra.^ 

[The Yogi] should practice holdings of the breath kumhhakan 
four times a day; at dawn, in the middle of the day, at evening and 
at midnight, gradually up to eighty times (320 for the twenty-four 
hours)."* 

But there are many variations in the use of mudra, asana, 
bandha and other exercises with the pranayama.^ 

When the adept is able to deal with kumbhaka without 
infilling or expelling the air, he has reached the point of 


* GSy 98, 99. ^ 100. ® For this mudra, see below. 

* HYPt 2 : 11. ^ HYP, see chap. tw'o. 



CHIEF AIMS AND METHODS 


331 


mastery where ‘there is nothing whatsoever in the three* 
worlds difficult for him to attain, for he is able to keep the 
breath (vdyu) confined at will.^ In the process the mind is 
caused to swoon. ^ This leads to andhata ndda (certain 
internal sounds), and success may be achieved within a year.^ 
The air is directed into the susumna and steadiness of 
mind is ? result of the free movement of the prana in the 
middle path (susumna). That is the manonmani state which 
is attained when the mental processes are brought to a stand- 
still.^ Pr^a is also bindu and jiva; and its relation to 
Kundalini is referred to its origin in the svadhisthana and 
in tl^e mantra haihsa. 

The lifting of Kundalini involves the understanding of 
the functions of the various cakras; that is, a knowledge of 
the peculiar kinds of experience referred to each of them. 
Since they are all strung on the susumi;ia, they all lie in the 
path of Kundalini. The same control of the breath, praiia- 
yama, which retards the bindu, arouses Kundalini, and thus 
opens the door to release. When the skill in raising her is 
perfected and she is led to enjoy bindu, or Siva, in the brahma- 
randhra, release is achieved. Each cakra symbolizes a type 
of reality and specific experiences; and the fixation of the 
attention upon each in turn secures reaction^ which are 
interpreted in terms of degrees of the realization of union of 
the individual with the Supreme Soul. Kundalini enjoys Siva 
in each cakra in her form peculiar to that lotus, and finally 
reaches the eternal One in the sahasra. In the ajfta she is 
Sakti on the mental plane; in the sahasra, on the spiritual 
plane. From this high place she should be brought back to 
the muladhara. In fact she returns again and again in spite of 
the Yogi's efforts, and it is only after long practice that she 
takes up her more prolonged abode in the sahasra. 

It is not necessary, apparently, that the Yogi follow the whole 
course through, since short-cuts to the end are suggested. And, 
further^ he may seek such ends as are afforded by particular 
centres. In the muladhara reside physical powders, and here is 

» HYP, 2:74. ^ HYP, 2: 69. 

* HYP, 1: 59. 4 Dr. Singh (p, 51) calls the unmani, the 

state of self-transcendence. 



332 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

found the sleeping Kundalini. Here, also, is enjoyment on the 
physical plane. Knowledge and powers of experience are 
joined here. Meditation upon the svadhisthana yields power 
over the hindrances to success in Yoga, sexual feelings are 
aroused and mysterious, or divine, sounds are heard. In the 
manipuraka reside powers of destruction and r-ecreation. 
Some describe the powers here obtained as twelve-fold. The 
cakra lies on the dividing line of the body and the adept who 
is able to raise Kundalini above this centre passes into more 
subtle types of experience. Here insight arises. Anahata (the 
heart) is the seat of desire, of the egoising faculty, of manas 
(mind), and of the records of deeds. Consequently the soul 
finds freedom here. While meditating upon this lotus, with 
the use of the prdnava (orh) the mind (and the prana) is 
brought to complete rest, like unto the state of the flame of 
a wick in a windless place. There arise, also, supernormal 
powers, such as ability of the soul to enter other bodies, to 
wander, the power to identify the self with the gods (both as 
to function and power) who create, preserve and destroy. 
Mystic light arises also as Kundalini is established here. An 
illustration of the method of meditation on the cakra is to be 
found in the sdmbhdvimudrd. 

The aim (attention) inward (lyangar, HYP, says, ‘in any cakra*)y 
the sight outward without winking — this is the sambhavimudra, 
hidden in the Vedas and Sastras, When the Yogi remains with the 
prana and citta (breath and thoughts) unmoving, the attention 
inward, the gaze immovable, looking outside, below, (yet) seeing 
nothing, the sambhavimudra, learned by the favour of a guru, is 
(performed) and the state of emancipation that is without marks ol 
distinction, that which in reality is the highest Siva, bursts forth.^ 

Its result is similar to that secured by the khecarimudra 
which is performed in the vi^uddha. This last named cakra 
is the place of ambrosia and concentration here enables the 
Yogi to become a great sage, eloquent, wise, peaceful, a 
benefactor of all, free from disease, long-lived. Divine 
sounds, subtle tones, are heard. With the breath confined 
here, the Yogi, in his wrath, could move the three worlds. 
He becomes invincible. Thus, the union of bindu and raja? 


1 HYP, 4: 35-36. 



CHIEF AIMS AND METHODS 


333 


in the throat yields supernatural powers. This is the gateway 
to the great liberation, which is opened by the khecarimudra. 
Still higher, as the jiva reaches the ajna, it beholds light in 
the form of a lustrous flame, and becomes immortal. Here 
is the final approach to the highest bliss of the union in the 
sahasrara. Between ajna and sahasrara are gradations of 
subtle experience, or ecstasy, approaching more and more to 
the bliss of union in the highest or final sense. The mind 
is dissolved, unconsciousness follows. At the last, after 
repeated experiences of this bliss, final release is reached. 
The sahasrara is said to be the satya-loka^ the true, or real, 
world, and to exude the stream of nectar which has its origin 
in the blissful Uniott, Here is the fountain head of all crea- 
tion, where Kundalini enjoys Paramdtman^ both being One, 
and pain, misery, birth and death are dissolved. It is the place 
of Brahmananda, the Bliss of the Absolute. 

It is to be noted that as Kundalini moves upward, from 
cakra to cakra, the bodily regions below each successive stage 
become cold. In hypnotic trance, or in the trance of hyberna- 
tion (as induced in khecarimudra, for example), only the 
region at the top of the head remains warm; and the Yogi in 
this state has to be guarded lest he be taken for dead and be 
buried. 

Under excitation in the miiladhara simple, gross desire is 
experienced. Within the yonisthana there is union of bindu 
and rajas. The bindu descends from its place of origin ; and 
the true Yoga requires that it be returned thither. Adepts, it 
is claimed, are able to do this at will, even drawing up after 
the act of coition both rajas and bindu. This is essential to| 
the highest bliss. 

Methods for the recovery of the bindu are set forth in the 
Hathayogapradipika and in the Goraksa Paddhati, One of 
these is the vajroli. 

Even a Yogi who lives as he pleases (and) neglects the restraints 
prescribed by the Yoga, if he practises vajroli, (is) a Yogi indeed and 
fit for J>eatitude (siddhi). For this (vajroli) a couple of things 
difficult for the average man to obtain is prescribed. The first is 
milk and the second an obedient woman.. One should draw back up 
again (should practice drawing back . . . ) with the medhra slowly 
(the bindu discharged in mdithund). Whether a man or a woman, 
one should attain mastery of vajroli. Carefully, with (through) 



334 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

a proper tube') inserted) in the passage of the piedhra (the 
Yogi) should blow air very slowly. By practice the bindu fallen 
into the yoni may be drawn back. Having drawn up his own 
discharged bindu [the Yogi] can preserve (it). The adept (the one 
skilled or physically able in Yoga), who can thus save his bindu, 
conquers death. By the loss of bindu (comes) death, from its 
retention, life. Through the preservation of the bindu a pleasant 
odour arises in the body of the Yogi. Where is the fear of death so 
long as the bindu remains in the body? The bindu of man (is) 
dependent upon mind (and) life upon bindu. Therefore both bindu 
and manas are to be protected in every way. 

Sahajoli and amaroli are of one and the same kind as vajroli. 
Ashes of burnt cow-dung should be mingled with water. After vaj^ 
roli-mdithundy seated comfortably, pervaded with freedom (thoioughly 
relaxed) the pair should both rub it on their bodies. This sahajoli is 
ever proclaimed by Yogis as worthy of confidence. This fortune- 
granting practice (Yoga) gives both release (mukti) and enjoyment 
(bhoga) at the same time. This is the Yoga of merit-endowed, 
resolute, really perceiving men, who are without passion. But it can 
not be accomplished by the lust-filled. 

According to the teaching of the Kapalikas, amaroli is the enjoy- 
ment (sexually) of the passionless midstream ; the first, excessive in 
bile and the last, the water stream, neglected are rejected. He who 
drinks amaroli constantly and snuffs it daily and practises vajroli is 
said to be actually practising amaroli. 

[The Yogi] should mix with the ashes of cow-dung the bindu 
(candri) discharged in this practice. It should be rubbed on the 
most honorable parts of the body. Magic sight (seeing things divine) 
arises.^ 

Sahajoli gives both bhoga (enjoyment) and moksa (release). 

Another practice based upon the same physiological 
concepts is as follows: Two men, cela and guru, pupil and 
teacher, retire to a secret place. The guru inserts a lead wire 
into the passage of the male organ to a distance of twenty- 
three fingers. It penetrates the susumna. Great powers are 
supposed to arise through this practice. 

It may be noted that not only do the books speak of these 
matters, but also that the Yogis themselves are kmiliar with 
them. At Devi Patan these practices were described to the 
author by Y^ogis. 


' At Devi Patan they said that this tube should be of aclver and 
that milk should be used. 

® HYP, 3: 82-96. The translator of the Siva Samhitd omits the 
section on ‘ Vajrondi* as ‘ an obscene practice indulged in by low-class 
Tantrists’ ; p. 51. 



CHIEF AIMS AND METHODS 335 

The relation of pranayama to these devices is in the fact 
that the stabilizing of the bindu depends also upon the holding 
of the breath. 

There are other exercises for holding the bindu in its place 
of origin, such as the jalandharabandha and the khecari- 
mudra, which will be described below. 

If the bindu, on the one hand, is to be kept secure in its 
original position, the Kundalini, on the other, is to be aroused 
and caused to move upwards. This is called ^akticdlana. 
For the union of these two is essential to ecstatic experi- 
ence or bliss in varying degrees to final beatitude. For 
this reason the playing of one breath (prana) against the 
other (apana) is resorted to and pressure and mudra 
are enjoined. For example, from the pressure of the heels 
in padmasana and the alternate in filling of prana and 
apana for a considerable time both morning and evening, 
the Kundalini begins to move. Likewise kumbhaka, the hold- 
ing of the breath, incites her to motion. She then moves 
upwards through the channel (susumna) which extends from 
the aperture the lihga to the hollow above the throat. 

The mudrasand bandhas arc similar to asanas in their action 
and efficacy. The Gheranda names twenty-five, including 
vajroli and Sakticalana among them. 

The gazing taught in some of these induces hypnotic sleep ; and 
the bandhas, by closing all the exits of air, produce a tension within 
the system, generating thereby a sort of electric current, or force, 
called Kundalini ^akti. It is this Sakti which is the helpmate of the 
Yogis in performing their wonders.* 

The description of the mahdmudrd is as follows : 

That Yogi is ready for release who knows mahamudra, nabho- 
mudra, uddiyana, jalandhara and mulabanda. The purification of 
the collection of the nadis, the moving of both the moon and sun, 
and also the drying up of the liquids of the body, is called 
mahamudrg. Having rested the chin on the chest, and pressing for 
a long time the yoni with the left great toe, with the two hands 
grasping the extended right foot, having filled with breath both sides 
of the abdomen and having held it, [the Yogi] should expel it slowly. 
This js said to be the very great (mahamudra), the destroyer of the 
diseases qf men.* 

[The Yogi] should press the heel of the left foot against the 

1 SBH, No. 68. o. iv. * GS. 57, 59. 



336 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

yonisthanaiii, and then place the right foot upon the left thigh (and) 
having drawn in the breath (and) having pressed the chin upon the 
chest, and having held the breath, he should fix his attention in the 
middle (between the eyebrows). Having held it as long as possible, 
he should expel the breath slowly. Having been performed (thus) 
on the left side, it should be practised on the right. However, the 
opinion of some is that the closing of the throat may be neglected, 
since an excellent stoppage is made by pressing the tongue against 
the roots of the upper front teeth. Moreover, this stops the upward 
movement in all the nadis; and, further, this mahabandha (great 
stoppage) bestows magical powers. Mahabandha is a clever means 
for loosening the snares of death. Triveni-union is given and the 
mind should reach Keddr (the seat of Siva between the eyebrows).^ 

The effect of this tAercise is to remove the sense and effect 
of differences. 

(There is ) neither wholesome nor unwholesome (food). All tastes 
(are) indeed tasteless. Even deadly poison (food) (when) eaten is 
digested as if it were nectar. - 

And it removes diseases. 

His diseases, consumption, leprosy, constipation, enlargement of 
the spleen and decrepitude go to destruction, w^ho practises maha- 
mudra.® 

The Yonimudrd is described as follows. 

Place left heel against the anus; the right heel on *he left foot; 
sit erect with body, the neck and the head in a straight line. With the 
lips formed to resemble a crow ’s beak, draw' in the air and fill the 
belly. Close the ear-holes with the thumbs, the eyes wdth the index 
fingers; the nostrils with the middle fingers; the mouth with the 
remaining fingers. Hold the air, and with the senses controlled, 
meditate on the mantra liariisa.^ 

According to lyangar, yonimudra is another name for 
vajroli (p. 52), In the Srea Sariihitd^y page forty-one, it is 
described as the sacred drink of the Kaulas, the worshippers 
of Sakti according to the vamacara. 

The mula-, uddiyana- and jalandhara- bandhas find their 
completion in the simhdsana which is described as follows : 

[The Yogi] should place the heels on the sides of the seam below 
the scrotum, the left heel on the right and the right heel on the left 

HYPy 3: 19-24. Mahamudra, mahabandha and mahavedha (not 
described in this account) confer magic powders and perfection. 
HYPy 3: 30 (lyangar). * G^, 61. 

^ GjS, 62. * Based upon SCN, p. 87. 



CHIEF AIMS AND METHODS 


337 


(of it); and having placed the hands on the knees, and having 
extended one’s fingers, with the mouth open, and with the mind 
intently fixed, he should gaze at the tip of the nose. This simhasana 
should be held sacred by adepts.^ 

The mulahandha is thus described: 

Having pressed the yoni with the back of the left heel [the Yogi] 
should contract the rectum; (and thus) draw the apana upward. 
Thus is the mulabandha performed.^ 

Although its (normal) course is downward, the Yogi should draw 
the apana up forcibly by contracting (the anus). T’his Yogis call 
mulabandha. And having pressed firmly the anus with the heel [the 
Yogi] should draw the air forcibly upward. Little by little the air 
(apana) goes up. By means of the mulabandha prana and apana, nada 
and bindu becoming one, the end of the Yoga is surely attained. 
(With) the union of prana and apana (results) the diminution of 
faeces and urine. Even an old man always regains his virility bv 
practising mulabandha.^ 

This brings about the ‘union' of prana and apana as 
they enter the susurnna; it decreases certain secretions and 
invigorates the body. Minor sounds are heard. If the 
thoracic and yoni regions are simultaneously contracted prai;ia 
is forced down a^d apana upwards, and vayu enters the 
susurnna. This may become the yonimudra.^ 

Mahamudra and mahabandha (and mahavedha) confer 
magic powers. 

This most sacred triad, destroyer of old age and death, increases 
the digestive fire, and even grants magic power such as becoming 
automatically small and so forth. They should be performed eight 
times a day, watch by watch. They ever add to the store of merit 
and deplete the stock of demerit at the same time. The practice of 
the three, under instruction, should be for short intervals at first.® 

The uddiydna is a well-known bandha. 

In the abdomen, above the navel [the Yogi] should make a 
contraction toward the spinal column. This is, verily, the uddiydna, 
a lion for the elephant of death. Of all the handhas ud(Jiy5na is 
indeed the best. Stoppage (bandha) being fixed by the uddiyana, 
deliverance comes naturally (spontaneously^.*^ Even as ^ bird is able 
to fly without taking rest, so indeed may become the lion 

which is death of the elephant.^ 


' HYP, 1 : 52, 54a. • G&, 81. HYP, 3 61-64. 

® &iva Satiihitd, 4: 42. ® HYP, 3: 30, 31. ^ HYP, 3: 56, 59. 

’ 77. It overcomes death, the death-deafing elephant. Manas, 

like a wild elephant is hard to control. 


22 



338 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Again, the jdlandhara: 

Because jalandharabandha closes the network of channels (alt the 
naqiis) and stops the water from flowing down from the head, there- 
fore, it destroys the host of disorders of the throat. The jalandhara- 
bandha, characterized as the closing of the throat, having been 
performed, the nectar does not fall into the Are, nor is the air 
disturbed.^ 

Having closed the passages with the jalandhara, at the end of an 
infilling of the breath [the Yogi] should expel it slowly. This is 
called murchd because it gives joy and swoon {manomurchd)^ 

This bandha contracts the throat and prevents the nectar 
from falling into the fire, that is, bindu is restrained, and the 
air is not disturbed. The region of the heart is affected and 
the vital centres are stopped down. 

The two bandhas just described are of use in rousing 
Kupdalini and, at the same time, in stabilizing the bindu. 
Of the three bandhas just cited it is written: 

These three bandhas, the very best, have been practised by great 
adepts. These means of attaining the ends set forth in all rhe treatises 
on Hatha Yoga are known to all (real) Yogis.® 

The khecarimudrd is one of the most famous of all. And 
this is in many ways the chiefs mudra whose continued 
practice produces Yoga trance, the state resembling hyber- 
nation. Apparently this is the practice which is used in the 
exhibitions of suspended animation which have been reported 
to the West, for the practice of this mudra results in the 
suppression of the breath and in insensibility, so that the 
Yogi may be buried in the ground without air, food or drink. 

By turning the tongue over backwards into the hollow above the 
throat, and by fixing the sight oetween the eyebrows, is the khecari- 
mudra performed.® 

As fire cleaves to the wood and as a light to oil and wick, so the soul 
does not leave the body full of the drops of soma (bindu).® 

Preliminary to the practice, the fraenum of the tongue has 
to be cut. This is done a little at a time with a bamboo 
sharp edge or some other sharp instrument. Then the tongue 

79, 80. * HYP, 2 : 69. ^ HYP, 3: 75. 

* HYP, 1 : 45 : ‘There is no asana equal to the siddhasana ; no stop- 
page of the breath superior to the kevala; no mudra equal to the 
khecari; no lava (absorption) equal to the (anahata) nada.’ 

64. •HYP, 3:45. 



CHIEF AIMS AND METHODS 339 

is kneaded and stretched so as to permanently increase its 
length. Then tlie practice can be carried out. 

[The Yogi] should stretch the tongue little by little, stretching and 
cutting the franum linguee. When it (the tip of the tongue) touche;? 
the space between the eyebrows (when it is folded back against the 
soft palate), khecarimudrS is perfected. Having grasped a very sharp, 
smooth, clean instrument the shape of a srtuki (Euphorbia) leaf [the 
Yogi] should cut with it a hair's breadth (at a time). Then he should 
rub it with powdered rocksalt and myrobolan {Terminalia Cheimla), 
Again, on the seventh day, he should cut it a hair's breadth. Thus 
over a period of six months he should do this regularly. By that time 
the whole of the freenum linguse will be cut away. Having turned 
the tip of the tongue upward [the Yogi] closes the three passages 
(oesophagus, trachea and nostrils or (?) the three nadis). This is 
the khecarimudra and it is called the vyoma cakra. The Yogi, who 
remains even for a moment with his tongue turned upwards thus, 
is saved from poisons, diseases, death, old age, and so forth. He who 
knows the khecarimudra is without disease, death, lassitude, sleep, 
hunger, thirst or swooning. He who knows khecarimudra is neither 
beset by disease nor tainted by karma nor snared by death. 

This mudra, khecari by name, has been desired by adepts because, 
when it is practised, the mind goes to akasa (khe) — (when) the tongue 
reaches khe.^ 

Above the throat is the space, aka^a, or vacuum (khe), 
>vhere limitation of sense is removed. It is here that bindu 
has its native seat and that union of Siva and Sakti is on the 
subtle plane. The mudra effectively binds bindu. 

By whom the hollow in the top of the throat is sealed by khecari, his 
bindu, even (though he be) embraced by a woman, does not fall.* 

Here, then, is ecstatic experience which is beyond the 
range of the senses and which does not entail death. 

While the bindu remains in the body, there is no fear of death. 
So long as the khecarimudra is continued, so long the bindu does 
not go down.® 

Karma is inoperative in this state. Mind and tongue 
reach aka^.^ Its unusual power and value are emphasized in 
the expression, 

^ MYP, 3: 33-41. lyangar records, p. 50, tliat the Yogis are 
prohibited the use of salt. Salt can be used only before beginning 
the practice of the Hatha Yoga. Afterwards, only the burnt powder 
of the wood (cassia, hhadira = acacia catechu). Khe — Ska^a; car, to 
move. Khecari == ‘whose movement is in spjace.' 

* GS, 69. » GS, 70. • HYP, 3; 41. See just above. 



340 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

The stream flowing visibly from soma (candra) is dear to Siva. 
[The Yogi] should close (fill) the unequalled, divine su§umna in the 
back of the mouth (by means of the khecarimudra).^ 

The Sambhavimudra differs from the khecarimudra only 
in the object looked at. Siva (Sambhu) is viewed as form- 
less; i.e.jthe Yogi is really seeing nothing. 

The exercise of this (khecari) mudra enables one to enjoy. 
In- performing this mudra it is possible to neglect the othei 
cakras in the path and to lift Kundalini directly by the back 
path to the place of bindu. This mudra is prescribed with 
the vajrasana.^ 

Asana, mudra and bandha are clearly forms of exercise 
which contribute both to the increase of bodily health and to 
the stimulating and conservation of vital energy essential to 
success in Hatha Yoga. 

A further word may be written about mantra. The repeti- 
tion of sacred formulae is of great importance^ and its results 
are essentially magical; it enhances the effectiveness of 
physical practice. 

Already the place of orh in the Yoga has been repeatedly 
illustrated ; and its symbolical significance has been set forth 
in chapter eight. 

With the voice [the Yogi] should repeat that bija; he should 
practise it with the body; with the mind he should remember it. 
That, orh, is the supreme light.* 

Haiiisa is related directly to the breath and has its rise in 
the place of origin of sexual desire; it is the chief mantra of 
jiva (life, or soul). It is the ajapa gayatri. 


^ HYP, 4: 45. The Siva Samhita, 3: 57, says that prolonged hold- 
ing of the breath is pratyahara; and Srisa Chandra Vidyarnava, in 
his Introduction to this work (p. iv) insists that the trance of khecari- 
mudra is not samadhi, but pratyahara. However, the exposition 
given above agrees with the other works cited. 

^ Siva Safiihita, 4: 31. 

® From one point of view mantra is the background of Tantra. 
This derives in part from the dharani or spell, which is a shortened 
scripture-text, essentially a string of words without meaning, ih form 
designed for repetition as containing the whole of the original pass- 
age. It may be reduced to a pregnant syllable or bija. When applied 
according to rule, the bija is endowed with enormous power. 

* as. 8S, 



CHIEF AIMS AND METHODS 341 

Gayatri has a great reputation and has a very long history. 

Knowledge like this, repetition like this, insight like this neither 
was nor shall be.^ 

Even the will to recite it gives freedom from sin. It 
originates in Kundalinl and from the restraint of the breath. 
Knowing (in the magical sense) this mantra renders one an 
adept-^ Its repetition engenders hypnotic sleep. It serves to 
stop the breath. Its ajapa form is harhsa. 

The secretions of the body, controlled by the pranayama 
and bandha methods, should be preserved.^ This is clear from 
the passages dealing with bindu, vajroli, sahajoll and amaroli. 
Furthermore, the perspiration exuding from the exertion of 
the practice of pranayama should be rubbed into the body 
and not wiped off. 

Out of these various, strenuous practices come some effects 
which are noted as indicative of success in the Yoga. 
Amongst these are certain sounds and colours, some of which 
have been mentioned already. 

Great store is laid by anahata nada. or the sound (nada) in 
the heart lotus. 

Anahata nada is awakened by the exercise of pranayamj . A couple 
of week’s practice with eighty pranayamas in the morning and the 
same number in the evening will cause distinct sounds to be heard; 
and, as the practice goes on increasing, varied sounds become audible 
to the practiser. By hearing these sounds attentively (i.e., fixing the 
attention on them) one gets concentration of the mind, and thence 
sahaja samadhi. When Yoga-sleep is experienced, the student should 
give himself up to it and make no efforts to check it. By and by, 
these sounds become subtle and they become less and less intense, 
so the mind looses its waywardness and becomes calm and docile; 
and, on this practice becoming w^ell-established, samadhi becomes a 
voluntary act. This is, however, the highest stage and is the lot of 
the favoured and fortunate fe%’ only.^ 

The following is the method for inducing trance, pro- 
pounded by Goraksanatha:^ 

The Yogi, his mind single, sitting in muktasaria, having formed 
the ^mbhavimudra, ought to hear in his right ear inner sound. 
The ears, eyes, nostrils and mouth should be closed.® 


GSy 45. ^ P, 46. ® Siva Samhitdy 3: 40. 

" HYF, {SBH) Introduction, p. iv. « H YP, 4 : 66, 67a. 
» HYP, 4 : 64. 



342 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 


The effects are very definite. 

In the cleansed su^umna-path pure, clear, sound is heard. ^ 

Four states are recognized; 

Joy arises in the void (in the heart), (and) in the body various 
anahata sounds, like the beating of a drum. [In the first (stage)] the 
Yogi becomes divine of body, radiant, fragrant of body and free from 
disease; and his whole heart (becomes) a void. In the second period 
the air moves in the middle channel (su^umna), the posture becomes 
fixed and the Yogi becomes wise like a god. . From the piercing of 
the Vi§nu Knot (in the throat) in this manner, the highest bliss is 
experienced. And, in the hollow in the throat, a tumult like the 
beating of a kettle drum is heard. In the third, in the space between 
the eyebrows the sound of a drum is recognized. Then the air goes 
to the great void, the refuge of all the adepts. Then, having over- 
come the joys of the mind, without evil, mise^, old-age, disease, 
hunger or sleep, joy itself (ultimate joy) is experienced. The Rudra 
ir^iot having been pierced and the air having gone to the seat of Siva, 
a sound like that produced by a fiute, arises. Then there is the unity 
of consciousness called Raja Yoga. (And) the Yogi, equal to ^iva, 
becomes a creator and a destroyer. Whether there be release or not, 
here is indeed unbroken peace. This felicity arising from absorption 
(laya) is obtained in Raja Yoga.* 

Concerning colours it is said: 

During contemplation one sees, not with his eyes, as he does the 
objects of the world, various colours, which the writers on Yoga call 
the colours of the five elements.* Sometimes stars are seen glittering, 
and lightning flashes in the sky. But these are all fleeting in their 
nature. At first these colours are seen in greatly agitated waves 
which show the unsteady condition of the mind ; and, as the practice 
increases and the mind becomes calm, these colour-waves become 
steady and motionless and appear as one deep ocean of light. This 
is the ocean in which one should dive and forget the world and 
become one with his Lord — ^which is the condition of highest bliss.* 

It may be well, now, to quote a verse, with its note, in 
Pailcam Sinhi edition as summarizing the effects of the use 
of the mudras and as verifying what was said above, in 
chapter thirteen, about supernormal powers {diivarya). 


» HYP, 4: 67b. 

* HYP, 4: 69-77. 

* See description of the cakras in the preceding chapter. 

* HYP, {SBH) Introduction, p. iv. Fixing attention on these 
phenomena is the point. 



CHIEF AIMS AND METHODS 


343 


These* v^rliich bestow the eight magic powers, have been explained 
by Adi Natlia, and are greatly prized by all adepts. (They) are 
difficult even for MSrutas (sons of Siva) to acquire. 

The eight Ai4varyas are : Animd, becoming small, like an atom; 
Mahitndt becoming great, like aka^, by drawing in atoms of Prakfti; 
Garitndy light things, like cotton becoming very heavy like moun- 
tains; Prdptit coming within easy reach of everything, as touching 
the moon with the little finger, while standing on the earth; 
Prdkdtnya^ non-resistance to the desires, afy entering the earth like 
water; Isatdt mastery over matter and objects made of it; Vaiitvd^ 
controlling the animate and inanimate objects.^ 

The signs of (success in) Hatha Yoga are purification of the na^is, 
a lean body, tranquility in the face, manifestation of nada (anahata 
sounds), very clear eyes, freedom from disease, bindu under control 
(and) good digestion.* 

The end of the Hatha Yoga is the Raja Yoga,ecstacy and 
trance of the experience of Brahma. 

I will now describe the best course (leading up) to samadhi (that 
which) destroys death, induces peace and produces brahmananda.* 

Raja Yoga, samadhi, unmani, manonmani, amaratva, laya, tatva, 
iunya, a^unya, paramapada, amanaska^ advdita^ nirdlamba^ fdranjana, 
jivanamuktif sahajd and turiyd denote the same state of being. Just as 
with salt in water all becomes salty, so the mingling of atma and 
manas is denominated samadhi. When the breath (prana) becomes 
exhausted and the mental processes (manas) are destroyed (praliyate)^ 
then their being equal (union) is called samadhi. And this equality, 
(this) oneness of the two, the living self and the absolute self, when 
all desire (sditkalpa) is destroyed is called samadhi.* 

It is of interest to note how intimately the processes of the 
Kut)dalini Yoga are related to the attainment of bliss. 

By practice through various piostures (asana) and holdings of the 
breath, Kupdalini being aroused, the prana is dissolved (prallyate) in 
iunya (samadhi). 

(This) state of union (samadhi) of Yogis who experience the aroused 
Sakti, and all of whose actions are renounced, is achieved even of its 
own accord. When the prana moves in the su^umna and mental 
action (manasa) is absorbed in sunya (samadhi), then the adept uproots 
all effects of works. When the mind has reached tranquillity (ceases to 
act) and the breath moves in the middle channel (susumna) amaroli, 
vajroli and sahajoli arc accomplished. How can there be knowledge 
(samadhi) as long as the brain works here, as long as prana moves, 
before mental activity is dead ? He alone who can lead these two, his 
prana and manas, to dissolution (vilayam) achieves moksa (release, 
samidhi). ® 

^HYP^l'.n. »HFP,4i2. 

• HYP, 4: 3-7. ‘ HYP, 4: 10, 1UJ2, 14, 15. 



344 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

The heart of the practice is made clear, as outlined above, 
in the following verses. 

Only when the prana moves in the su§umii3 is manonmani 
perfected, but no other discipline (or efforts) of Yogis whatever (avail). 
Who has brought his breath to a stop has, at the same time, brought 
his mental activities to rest ; who has brought his mental activities to 
Vest has stopped down his breath. As mental activity is dissolved, 
the breath is stilled. As the prapa is stopped, the mind is brought 
to dissolution. As milk and water unite (and become one), likewise 
do these two, manas and prana. As (does) the breath (marutas) so 
(does) the mind (manas) behave. As the mind so the breath acts. 
From the suppression (lit. destruction) of the one that of the other 
follows. When both are active the indriyas (faculties of sense and 
volition) perform their functions; both disappearing the state (level) 
of mok$a (samadhi) is achieved. When the mind is fixed and the 
breathing ceases, the bindu is retained (unmoved); from the stabiliza- 
tion of the bindu always true fixity of the body is produced. Mind 
(manas) is the master of the faculties of sense and volition; and 
breath is* master of the mind; the master of the breath is laya 
(dissolution) and laya depends upon nada (anah^a, spund). This 
itself (laya) is what is called mok^a or, if you are of anomer opinion, 
— no matter. When mind and breath have been absorbed, a sort of 
ecstasy (ananda) is experienced. With the ceasing of respiration, 
with the destruction of the range of the senses, and with the mind 
inactive and changeless, one wins the laya of Yogis. For [the Yogi] 
all of whose effects of deeds are destroyed, and whose actions have 
ceased, laya, self-engendered and indescribable, is won.^ 

The state, induced by khecarimudra, is described at length 
and is identified with various technical expressions. 

Between the eyebrows is the seat of Siva and there the mind 
(manas) is absorbed. This condition ipadain) should be recognized 
as turiyd (samadhi). Then death is not known. One should practise 
the khecari until Yoga-nidra (sleep) (samadhi) is (induced). Under 
no circumstances is there death for [the Yogi] who has reached (is 
in) Yoga-nidra. Freeing the mind from all contacts, (the Yogi) 
should meditate on nothing at all. Like a pot in space (vyoman) 
(with ether) both without and within one should remain fixed. When 
the air outside the body is absolutely still like that within, the mind 
with the breath becomes fixed in its own place ( ? in the top of the 
skull). Consequently [the Yogi] should practise day and night in 
the way of breath-control. The breath is dissolved and the mind is 
absorbed. One. should smear the body from head to iock with 


^ HYP, 4: 20, 21, 23-25, 28-32. Laya may be rendered * dissolution ’ 
of mind or ‘absorption' in, or identity with, Being. Dr. Singh says 
that laya and Kundalini Yoga are identical (Gr., p. 14). 



CHIEF AIMS AND METHODS 345 

amita. Great stature, that is great strength, and courage are surely 
perfected.^ 

And again: 

Concentrating the mind in Sakti (Kund^^lini) and the Sakti within 
the mind, and looking upon the mind with the mind [the Yogi] 
should reach the highest state. .Hold the atman within kha (Akai5a) 
and the kha within the atman/£nd making all this kha (this is union 
above the throat), [the Yogi] should think of nothing whatsoever. 
[The Yogi] should become void within, void without, void like a pot 
in space; full within, full without, full like a pot in space. There is 
to be thought neither upon things external nor upon things internal ; 
having abandoned all thought [the Yogi] should think upon nothing 
whatsoever. (This) entire world (is) but a creation within the brain; 
(all) mental enjoyments are simply formed within the brain. Abandon 
(all) these (merely) mental creations utterly. Resolutely refusing to 
resort (to these), O Rama attain peace. As camphor in fire, (as) salt 
in water, so the mental acts commingled are absorbed in Reality. 
The mind takes delight in knowledge, all that is known and that to be 
knowm. What is known and what is to be known are equally to be 
destroyed. There is no other, no second way. All this which is seen, 
whatever moves and that which is immovable, is merely mental. He 
whose mind ceases to act (unmani bhdvat)^ knows no duality 
whatsoever.® 

Returning now to the experience of nada and its relation 
to samadhi, the following verses are of interest: 

For reaching the unmani (state) quickly concentration (of thought) 
upon the space between the eyebrows is, in my opinion, the best : for 
the gaining of the level of Raja Yoga it is an easy method for people 
of little (irresolute) minds. I'he absorption (laya) produced from nada 
wins immediately the firm assurance of union. Upon the sound of a 
drum which the Yogi hears when he closes his ears with his fingers 
(hands) the attention should be held fixedly until the state of inaction 
is reached. By the practice of this nada external sounds [gradually] 
are shut out. Within the space of half a month, having become 
completely victorious, the Yogi ought to attain peace. 

When practice first begins the nada gives a great variety of very 
loud (sounds). Then, as the discipline continues, more and more 
subtle sounds are heard. In the first (stage) the (sounds) pi;oduced 
are like the rolling (thunder-cloud sound) of kettle drums and the 
jharjhara (a drum). In the second (stage) they are like those arising 
from the shaking of small bells, the conch and the inrdaiiga (a drum). 
But, firfally, they sound like those of the (buzzing of) the black bee, 
the Vina (flute) and small bells. These various sounds are heard as 
arising within the body. Even though listening for loud (sounds) 
like the rolling sounds of kettle drums, still [the Yogi] should seek 

® HYP, 4: 53-60. 


1 HYP, 4: 47-52. 



346 GOR\KHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

(practise) (to hear) also the most subtle ones. Dispensing with the 
heavier ones for the subtle, or the subtle for the heavier, even the 
mind distracted with pleasure should not wander anywhere else. 
Anywhere where the mind first comes in contact with the nada, 
right there becoming fixed it is absorbed with it. As the black bee, 
drinking the honey, does not notice the perfume (of the flower) so 
likewise when the mind is joined with nada (is intent or listening to 
nada), other objects are desired not at all. The mind, wandering in 
the garden of the objects of sense, like a rutting elephant, can be 
brought under control by the sharp elephant goad of this (anahata) 
nada. For the mind, taken in the snare of the nada, having abandoned 
all fickleness (unsteadiness) becomes steadfast immediately, as a bird 
whose wings have been clipped. Having abandoned all anxieties 
(thoughts), with the mind collected [Yogis], who are desirous of the 
dominion of Yoga, should consider this nada worthy of investigation. 
Nada becomes a snare for binding the mind, like the spotted 
antelope; and it can also slay it, as the (snared) antelope is slain.^ 

The final state is described. 

From continuous practice of the nada, the whole store of demerit 
is wiped out, and the breath and the mind are surely absorbed in the 
Passionless Being (niranjana). [The Yogi] hears neither the conch 
nor the drum at all. Being fixed in the state of unmani (mental 
inaction) (his) body becomes a piece of wood. Free from all states, 
exempt from all anxiety, that Yogi is as one deac , verily not other 
than liberated. He is neither consumed by death nor snared by (his) 
deeds. The Yogi, lost in samadhi, is not overcome by anything. The 
Yog^, who is lost in samadhi is conscious of neither smell nor taste 
nor form (or colour), nor feeling (touch) nor sound, nor himself nor 
the Highest. [The Yog^], whose mind is neither sleeping nor waking, 
remembering nor avoiding remembering, sitting down nor rising up, 
is indeed a liberated man. The Yogi who is lost in samadhi does 
not distinguish cold from heat, misery from comfort, lionour from 
dishonour. He is verily free, who being himself really awake, appears 
like one sleeping, and who is without in- and out-breathing. The 
Yogi engaged in samadhi cannot be controlled by charms (yantra) 
and spells (mantra), is beyond the power of all corporeal beings and 
is immune from all weapons. 

Just as long as the moving air does not enter the BU^umna, just so 
long the bindu is not stable, because the prana is not stopped; as 
long as in dhyana (fixed attention) spontaneously the form of Brahma 
(tattva) does not appear, so long, he who speaks of knowledge is a 
babbler of that ‘knowledge’ which is both futile and deceptive.* 

Ecstatic experience, due to bodily manipulation, occupies 
a large place in this system, and the Hindu seems to under- 
stand fully the methods by which the ecstasy bordering on 


1 HYP, 4: 79, 81-93. 


* HYP, 4: 104-115. 



CHIEF AIMS AND METHODS 347 

trance may be induced. When certain internal sounds are 
heard, the desired end is known by the adept to be close at 
hand. 

While tapas (hard discipline, austerity) arc not without 
place in the system, most of the practice is based upon ideas 
of sex functions and experiences. There is a further method 
which induces similar ecstatic results, the use of drugs. The 
Yogis are notorious as drug addicts. Some drugs, such as 
hemp, stimulate the imagination along the line of the experi- 
ences outlined above.^ The use of drugs to induce ecstasy 
and vision plays a large part in religious experience the world 
over. Take the peyote {mescal) cult of the American Indians 
as an illustration. Another is the use of hasheesh {carnabis’- 
indka) by the ‘Assassins.* Both of these drugs produce 
hallucinations of colours as well. The Hindu knew these 
matters early. The muni in the Rig Veda is under the 
excitement of drugs. Pataftjali is aware of this method for 
inducing samadhi for he says: 

Perfections proceed from birth or frcm drugs or from spells or 
from self-castigation or from concentration.® 

And the commentator adds: 

He describes the perfection which proceeds from drugs. A human 
being, when for some cause or other he reaches the mansions of the 
demons (asura), and when he makes use of cli?tirs of life brought to 
him by the lovely damsels of the demons, attains to agelessness and 
to deathlessness and to other perfections. Or (this perfection may 
be had) by the use of an elixir-of-life in this very world. So for 
instance the sage Mandavya, who dwelt on the Vindhyas and who 
made use of potions.® 

Again and again emphasis is put upon the fact that this 
Yoga staves off death. And one of the interpretations of the 
practice of vajroli is that the woman serves to insure 
extension of life to the Yogi. On this point Miss Elizabeth 
Sharp’s book, The Secrets of the Kdula Circle may be 
consulted.^ 

i 

^ See An Essay on Hasheesh, by Victor Robinson, M.D. 

* p. 299. ® WYS, p. 300. 

® London, 1936. 



348 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 


BY THIS YOGA ^IVA APPEARS AS 
THE VAST OCEAN OF BLISS AND 
KNOWLEDGE, DESTROYING THE 
MISERY OF THE WORLD; AND 
THE END IS THE STATE OF THE 
UNMOVING FLAMES OF LIGHT 
IN THE INNER SOUL, A BODY 
OF BLISS AND KNOWLEDGE. 



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 


CONCLUSION 

The physical basis of this Yoga is apparent. And a healthy 
body is essential. The Yogi finds in his system both enjoy- 
ment (bhukti) and liberation (mukti). The essence of the 
Hatha Yoga is physical exercise and manipulation, quite 
mechanical. And the symbolism is that of the sex functions. 
If it is charged against the exposition found in the preceding 
pages that it is overburdened with interpretations on too low a 
plane, it must be said in reply that both the practice and the 
outlook of the Yogis confirm this point of view. The author 
has tried to follow their views and their explanations. Frenz>% 
or thrill, or ecstasy, seems to be the aim all the while; and 
these experiences are interpreted in terms of union with the 
divine. Divinity has to be sought within the body of the 
Sakta. Moreover, the historical background of the cult of 
Gorakhnath points in the same direction. During many 
centuries preceding the fourteenth of our era, late Buddhist 
practice, especially in Bengal, was affecting the whole religious 
outlook. Both Saivite and Vaisnavite movements were 
profoundly influenced by it. The high religious value of 
intercourse with women was more and more insisted up)on. 
Romantic love for beautiful women was viewed as a path to 
release. The post Caitanya-Sahajiya movement confirms this 
point, as does Gorakhnath*s early affiliation with the Vajra- 
yana.^ While the Vaisnavite movement emphasizes love in 
the consort of the divine, the Saivite lays stress upon her 

^ See The Post Cditanya Sahajiyd Cult in Bengal^ by M. M. Bose, 
1930. This cult is based upon the idea of the Parakiya, denounced in 
ordinary society, but in religion adopted as the symbol of intense 
love. Here bhakti lies wholly in the sphere of emotion and is 
illustrated in the life of K|'i 9 na associated with Kadha at Brindaban. 
See also Sdstri^ Or, and Bhattacharyya, 



350 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

power or energy. The Sri-cakra and the whole Sakta 83nn- 
bolism enforce this interpretation. The pandits, with whom 
the author read the literature of the Yogis, had no other 
interpretations to offer. For example, no one ever suggested 
any other meaning for bindu than that used in this work. 
Arthur Avalon protested in his work on Tantra against the 
tendency to rate the teachings of these works too realistically,^ 
but Sir John Woodroffe, in his introduction to Dr. Rele’s 
The Mysterious Kundalini^ says: 

What may be its value is another question, a matter upon which I 
am not so sure as I once was. . . . To me the Yogas of certain 
worth are those of Karma, Bhakti and Jhana. There are, however, 
apparently some to whom Kun<jalini Yoga makes special appeal and 
who receive satisfaction therefrom. In any case the test is that of 
Ayurveda, namely, results. If I deal with this matter here it is 
because, on further consideration, I am disposed to think that I 
underrated in my Serpent Power the value of some adverse criticism 
of this Yoga which I, in the volume mentioned, quoted. 

This Yoga has wide acceptance in India today.* 

Undoubtedly there is a higher interpretation of Sakti and 
of Sakta which may be given in metaphysical terms;* and 
there is as good a reason for the view that the female energy 
is the creative, formative power in the universe as there is 
for the male. But nowhere in the world has such symbolism 
been able to keep itself for long on a high plane. And, as 
elsewhere, here, emotional experiences of bhakti have given 
a large place for license and debauchery. Bhoga (enjoyment) 
as a means of liberation, of enlightenment, is here held as a 
tenet of faith. The adept acts and enjoys as manifest crea- 
tion. Alberuni, a thousand years ago, made the following 
observation on the Yoga: 

He who wants God, wants the good for the whole creation with- 
out a single exception for any reason whatever; but he who occupies 
himself exclusively with his own self, will for its benefits neither 
inhale breath nor exhale it. When a man attains to this degree, his 


* Serpent Power ^ pp. 25, 29. 

® Serpent Power, p. 24. See also The Sdktas, by E. A. Payne. 

* Dr. Singh (Gr., p. 26) says^that the aim of Gorakhnath is to 
transcend the lower self, which consists of sexual power, vital air and 
the mind. But the method, he says, is the control of the breath which 
is the key to the control of the other two. 



CONCLUSION 


351 


spiritual power prevails over his bodily power and then he is gifted 
with the faculty of doing eight different things by which detachment 
is realized; for ^ man can only dispense with that which he is able 
to do, and not with that which is outside his grasp.^ 

The foregoing remarks are not to be construed as to 
suggest that there is not a higher interpretation possible for 
the doctrines of the Sakta, but to show that so far as this 
group of Yogis is concerned, and those who believe in them 
as well, the lower is the practical interpretation. Every- 
where well-thinking Hindus express themselves unfavourably 
towards them. 

The fact need not be ignored, however, that this kind of 
interpretation of the divine, the cult of female di vinities, has 
been of world-wide distribution, and that it has found 
expression in every age.*^ Neither should it be forgotten that 
tendencies of this kind find sympathy at the present time 
outside of India; still, nowhere else is this aspect of religion 
so persistently vital. Mr. Payne has pointed out that in India 
there has been, in recent times, a tendency to lay emphasis 
upon this horrible and revolting side of awe, which represents 
itself in worship of the Devi, during periods of economic and 
political depression. And he thinks that the view of God as 
Destroyer, the worship of Force ^nd the use of a ritual 
essentially magic, portend the downfall of Sakiism. The 
history of religion in India would seem to throw doubt upon 
such expectation. 

The Yogi is not to be judged altogether adversely. Behind 
this faith is the philosophy which deserves sympathetic study 
and an impulse, the age-long search for the experience of the 
Real, Sadasiva, in this particular sect. 

Some recent Western psychology seeks to understand 
experiences which lie outside ordinary self-consciousness.^ 

There stands out in asceticism as a whole that which the 
Yogi emphasizes in particular — the great seeker after truth, 
reality, with the supreme experience of the religious life. 
And, irf the pursuit of this end, he exhibits both courage and 
persistence. Nowhere else in the world have men been 


^ Sachau’s Translation, vol. I, p. 69. 

* See K. T. Behanan, Yoga: A Scientific Evaluation, (1937). 



352 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

found who have endured more in the way of physical pain 
or who have carried tapas through so long a discipline. The 
great Gorakhnath is referred to as the embodiment of patience, 
that is, one able to carry tapasya through. He was quick 
tempered and terrible, but 2X%o patient. 

Bhartri happened to go into the forest where Gorakhnath was 
practising austerities, but he knew not that the saint was there. Soon 
after, the disciples of Gorakhnath met him and asked him to become 
one of them. He answered, ‘What do I care for Gorakhnath? If he 
wishes to learn the ways of the Almighty let him come and hear from 
me.* Finally, Goraknath said to Bhartri, ‘ If you give me a handful 
of patience, I will become your disciple.’ So Bhartri, in search of 
patience, came to the gods, but they could not supply it. At last he 
went to Vi§nu, who said, * I cannot supply you patience. If you want 
it you must go to Gorakhnath who is the greatest of the saints.* Thus 
convinced, Bhartri accepted Gorakhnath A his guru.^ 

The penances of such men as Dharamnath have become 
famous. 

Perhaps the point with reference to members of the order 
which needs most emphasis is that of their relation to society. 
The Yogi cannot live as other men do. Unless he is untrue 
to his vows, he must live apart from society, but dependent 
upon it for a living: seeking only his own religious satisfac- 
tions and those of his few disciples. He bears no social 
responsibilities towards his fellow men. 'x’he Indian’s con- 
cept of a^rama, the search for release alone at the last and for 
himself, is the fundamental error of the system. 

The element of bhakti, or emotionalism, deserves a word. 
This Yoga movement, even in its earliest manifestations, looks 
to Rudra, to Siva, the terrible; and the aspect of Sakti 
which the Yogi worships is everywhere that of Kali, of 
Bhairavi, and of fiendish female forms. With this is coupled 
realistic experiences on the plane of eroticism. Character- 
istically, horrible, abominable and revolting practices and 
license go together. It’^is be'::ause the ends achieved by 
restraint are also attainable by symbolic participation in a 
drama of divine joy where full play is given to indulgence, 
through sex stimulus and the use of drugs, that their whole 
system of religious devotion has to be revolutionized. Present 


^ See chap, eleven, p. 244, note 2. 



CONCLUSION 


353 


day attitudes of Hindus insisting upon decency ana strict 
conduct show how necessary this is. This has always been 
recognized with extreme forms of vaniacara, in vajrayana and 
in kaulacara. The illegal has been the norm of the extreme. 
But the ideals and practices of the Yogis are, consequently, 
not open to public gaze as they once were, and many are 
reluctant to admit that they indulge in them. 

Finally, it is possible to question whether the end which 
follows ecstatic experience, that is, unconsciousness, or pure 
subjectivity, or the absence of self-conscious personality, is 
any more satisfactory as the solution of the problems of 
life, or as a view of the ultimate goal of man, than is the 
anti»social character of the whole movement. As meeting 
the demands of the new day in India itself, both the experi- 
ence and the goal are insufficient. 


23 



GLOSSARY 


Adhdra. A ‘support a centre of vital power or of specia- 
lized function in the body; a cakra. A ground or support 
for meditation. 

Ahimsa, The doctrine of non-injury. 

Akhard. A monastery. 

Ardhandn. The half-male-half-female form of the Brahman. 

Asana, Posture. Sometimes involves exercises. 

Avadhuta. Liberated. Gorakhnath is often so designated. 
The word is a general term for ‘ non-Brahman ’ ascetics 
who were freed from all ties, particularly of caste, and 
who accepted Yoya or yoga and bhakti, whether they were 
Saivas (Sannyasis or Jogis), or Vaisnavas (Vaivagis). 

Bandha. A binding; a stoppage. Often involved in 
physical exercises. The Bandhas are those devices which 
serve to close all exits of air and to produce tension in the 
body. 

Caran, Footprint of a divinity, of a saint, or of some other 
person; pdduka. 

Cimtd. Fire tongs. 

Curmd, A sweetmeat made of sugar, butter and crumbled 
bread. 

Cutiya. Scalp-lock. 

Deli. The Goddess. 

Dhuni. Yogi’s sacred fire. 

Doli. A sort of chair, or palanquin for carrying people. 

Dundubhi. A mystical drum; dundy a large kettle-dnim. 

Gaddi. A cushion, a throne. 

Ganja. Hemp-plant preparation tor smoking. 



GLOSSARY 


355 


Gdurt, The Goddess. 

Gduripitha, The yoniy yonisthdna. 

Gotra. A sub-division of a caste. 

Horn, A kind of burnt offering. An offering of ghi in fire. 
Indriya. Motor or sensory function. 

Jogi. Yogi. 

Kachcha (kacca). (Food); uncooked food. 

Kafni. A garment resembling a shroud, worn by Musulman 
faqtrs. 

Kangan. A bracelet or armlet of threads. 

Kauri. A shell used as money, of very little value. 

4 kauris = 1 ganda 
20 gandas = 1 pan 
4 pan = 1 ana 

4 anas == 1 kahan (about \ rupee). 

Ketki. ‘A sweet-scented flower.’ Ketaka\ iht trtt pandonus 
odoratissimus. 

Khichrt. A dish made of pulse and rice cooked together. 
Khir. Rice boiled in milk. 

Kundal. Ear-ring; coil. 

Laddu. A ball of sweat meat. 

Langoti. A loin cloth. 

Laya. ‘Union’; unconsciousness. A state where the mind 
ceases to function. A return to the undifferentiated state. 
SamMhi. 

Linga. The Phallus of Siva (in text the word is often used 
for yoni’linga and is so intended unless otherwise specified). 
Mahant. Head of a monastery; a chief teacher. 

Makdra. The letter M, 

Manasd. A serpent goddess. 

Mandola. A circle. A cakra. A lotus. 

Manonmarn. A state in which the mind is unmoving. 
Mantra. A sacred text; a spell. An instrument of thought, 
when rightly used, embod 5 ring supernatural power. 



356 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Matha, A hut; a cottage; especially the retired hut or cell 
of an ascetic (student); cloister, college (especially for 
young Brahmans); a temple. 

Medhra, Lihga. 

Mela, A religious fair. 

Merhdhi, A plant. Myrtle, Lawsonta alba, 

Mina, Fish. 

Moksa, Release ; * salvation 
Mrdanga, A small drum. 

Mudrd, Ear-ring worn by a Yogi. 

Mudrd. A manipulation of the body, a posture, an attitude, 
a contortion. Often a kind of exercise. The word as 
applied to one of the five M's is usual rendered ‘parched 
grain,’ but ‘gesture’ or ‘attitude’ is probably correct. 
Mukti, Release, samddhi^ ‘ salvation 
Nad, A whistle worn by Yogis; more particularly, sound. 
Ndda, Sound. 

Nddi^ Nadi, A channel, or a nerve, a path for vital force; 

one of the elements in the physiological theory of the Yoga. 
Padma. Lotus; a chakra, 

Pdduka, A foot-print. Caron, 

Pakduri, A dish made of peas meal. 

Pakhal, A large leather bag such as is borne by bullocks. 
Paldo, Rice cooked with mutton. 

Pancamakdra, The five M’s. 

Panth, A sect, or a division of a sect. 

Parampard. Succession. A table of succession. 

Pildo, Rice cooked with mutton. 

Pit, A saint, a synonym for mahant, 

Pradaksina, Going around an image, a shrine, or an object, 
with the right hand towards it. 4, 

Prasad, Food that has been offered to an idol or of which 
a spiritual teacher has partaken. 

Pujdri, One who conducts worship at a temple, or a shrine. 
Rdksasa Fiend, ogre. 



GLOSSARY 357 

J^dkta. A worshipper of Sakti. 

^akti. The female power or principle, often personified ; 
the Goddess. 

^dligrdtn {Sdlagrdma). A black stone found in the Ghandaki 
river, and worshipped by Hindus; sacred to Visnu or 
Krsna. Some say that it should be an amonite. 

Samddh {Satnddhi), Tomb of a saint. As a technical term 
the final state in the Yoga process; ‘release*. 

Sathkalpa. Will, desire. 

Sati. The true wife; a name of Siva’s consort. 

Sattu, Parched grain reduced to meal and made into a paste. 

SeU. A necklace of threads, worn by mendicants. 

Siddhis. Perfections; supernormal powers. 

Siiig. Horn. 

^rdddha. Religious rites for the dead. 

^ricakra, A mystic circle of the Tantra. 

Sthdn, A plac^ or location ; a small shrine. 

^unya. Void. 

Tdntra. For Tantric. 

Thdkur. An idol, a temple. 

Tikd, A sect mark made on the forehead or between die 
eyebrows. 

Tirtha, A place of pilgrimage. 

Tripun^, A sectarian mark of; Siva made with horizontal 
lines drawn with ashes or other substance on the forehead, 
arms or trunk. 

Urd, A pulse. 

Vdmaedra. Left-hand practice, or ritual. 

Virakta, Dispassionate. 

Yalh Yum The state of union of the god and his consort. 

Yantrd, A S3rmbol or magic figure, 

Yoni. Womb, uterus, vulva, female organs of genention; 
source; origin, with the Unga a typical sjrmbol of the 
divine procreative energy. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(Since, in the body of the text, the footnotes contain very full 
references to sources, it has been decided, for economy of space, to 
list here an abridged list of the works consulted in the preparation 
of Gorakhndth and the Kdnphata Yogis. 

A. GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS AND WORKS 
OF OFFICIALS 

The Census of JndiUy both Imperial and Provincial Reports 
and Tables, 1882, 1891, 1901, 1911, 1921, 1931. 

The GazetteerSf both Imperial and Provincial Series. The 
older works are of more value for students of culture. 

Alexander, E. B., Statistical Description and Historical 
Account of the North-Western Provinces of India. 
Gorakhpur (Gazetteer, North-Western Provinces). Vol. 
IV. Allahabad, 1881. 

BCI Balfour, Edward, The Cyclopaedia of India and of 
Eastern and Southern Asia, London, 1885. 

Conybeare, H. C., Statistical and Historical Account of the 
North-Western Provinces of India. Bareilly. Allahabad, 
1879. 

CTC Crooke, William, The Tribes and Castes of the North- 
Western Provinces and Oudh. 4 Vols. Calcutta, 1896. 

ERN Elliot, Sir H. M., Memoirs on the History, Folklore and 
WP Distribution of the Races of the North-Western Provinces of 

India. 2 Vols. Revised by John Beames. London, 1869. 

Enthoven, R. E., The Tribes and Castes of Bombay. 3 
Vols. Bombay, 1920, 1922. 

Martin, Montgomery, The History, Antiquities, Topo- 
graphy and Statistics of Eastern India, 3 Vols. I,.ondon. 
1838. (Contains Dr. F. M. Buchanan’s work.) 

NCS Nesfield, J. C., Brief View of the Caste System of the 
North-Western Provinces and Oudh, Together with an 
Examination of the Names and Figures Shown in the 
Census Report of 1882, Allahabad, 1885. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 359 

RTCB Risley, H. H., The Tribes and Castes of Bengal, Ethno^ 
graphic Glossary. 2 Vols. Calcutta, 1891. 

Risley, H. H., Census of India, 1901 . Vol. I. India Ethno- 
graphic Appendix. Calcutta, 1903. 

RTCP Rose, H. A., A Glossary of the Tribes and Castes of the 
Punjab and North-^West Frontier Province. (Based on 
the Census Report for the Punjab, 1883 ; by the late Sir 
Denzil Ibbetson, K.C.S.I., and the Census Report for 
the Punjab, 1892, by The Honorable Mr. E. D. Mac- 
Legan, C.S.I., and compiled by H. A. Rose, Lahore. 
3 Vols. 1914. 

RTCCP Russell, E. V., and Rai Bahadur Hira Lal, The Tribes 
and Castes of the Central Provinces of India. 4 Vols. 
London, 1916. 

SHTC Sherring, M. A., Hindu Tribes and Castes as Represented 
in Benares. London, 1872. 

TCTSI Thurston, E. and Rangachabi, K., Castes and Tribes of 
South India, Vol II. Madras, 1909. 

Thurston, E., A Gazetteer of the Territories under the 
Government of the Viceroy of India. Revised and Edited 
by Sir Robert Lethbridge and Arthur N. Wallastan. 
London, 1886. 

B. OTHER WORKS YIELDING 
ETHNOGRAPHIC DATA 

Baines, Sir Athelstane, Ethnography, in Grundriss der 
Indo-Arischen Philologie und Altertumskunde. Vol. II, 
Pt. 5. Strassburg, 1912. 

BHCS Bhattacharva, Jocendra Nath, Hindu Castes and Sects, 
Calcutta, 1896. ^ 

Briggs, Geo. W., The Chamdrs. Calcutta and London, 
1920. 

Enthoven, R. E., Folklore of Bombay. Oxford, 1924. 

Gr Grierson, G. A., Article, ‘Goraknath’, in ERE. Vol. VI. 

Khakhar, Dalpatram Pran Jinan, Article, ‘The History 
of the Kanphatas of Kachh.* In I A. 1878. 

Northey, Major W, Brook, M.C. and Morris, Capt. J. 
C., The Gurkhas. London, 1928. 

Po^ANS, L. T., Article, ‘An Account of the Kanphatas of 
Dhinodhar in Cutch with the Legend of Dharamnath, 
their Founder.’ In JR AS. 1839. 



360 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Raghunathji, Article, ‘Bombay Beggars and Criers.’ In 
lA, Vol. X. 

Syed, Siraj ul Hassan, The Castes and Tribes of H, E, H, 
The Nijam*s Dominions. Vol. I. Bombay, 1920. 

Temple, Richard, C., Punjab Notes and Queries, 
Allahabad, London. Vol. IV. 1883-87. 


C. LITERARY SOURCES 

Abbott, J. E., The Poet Saints of Maharashtra. Series, 10 
Vols. Poona, 1926-34. 

Bhattacharyya, B., (Editor) Sddhanamdld. 2 Vols. 
Baroda, 1925, 1928. 

Bhattacharyya, B., Two Vajraydna W:^rk$. Baroda, 1929. 

Grierson, G. A., Article, ‘The Song of Manik Chandra.’ 
InJASBe. 1878. 

Grierson, G. A., Article, ‘The Versions of the Song of 
GopiChand.’ InfASBe. 1885. 

Grierson, G. A., The Modern Vernacular Literature of 
Hindustan. Calcutta, 1889. 

Hume, E. R., The Thirteen Upanishads^ Translated from 
the Sanskrit, with an Outline of the Philosophy of the 
Upanishads and an Annotated Bibliography. Oxford, 
1921, 

1y ANGER, S., Hathayogapradipika. Second Edition. Adyar, 
1933. 

Mac Macauliffe, Max Arthur, The Sikh Religion, Its Gurus, 
Sacred Writings and Authors, 6 Vols, Oxford, 1909. 

Mitra, Rajendralala, The Yoga Aphorisms of Patahjali, 
With the Commentary of Bhoja Raja and an English Trans- 
lation, Calcutta, 1883. 

Pancham Sinh, Hathayogapradlpaka. Translation into 
English, Sacred Books of the Hindus. Allahabad, 1915. 

Pangarkar, R. L., Sri Jhdnei aramahdrdja Carita. 
Poona, 1912. 

Rama Prasada, Patahjali ’ s Yoga Sutras with^the Com- 
mentary of Vydsa and the Gloss of Vdchaspati Misra. 
Allahabad, 1912. 

Sdstri Sastri, MahAmahopAdhaya HareprasAd, Editor. Rdma- 
cdrita, by Sandhyak&ra Nandi. Memoirs of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal. Vol. Ill (1915-14). Calcutta, 1914. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 361 

Smith, R., Faqire und Famrlum. Berlin. Second Edition. 
1921. 

Steelb, Mrs. F. A., Tales of the Punjab. London, 1917. 

Stoynn Swynnerton, Charles, Romantic Tales from the Punjab, 
with Indian Nights Entertainment New Edition in one 
volume. London, 1906. 

Taylor, J., Prabodha Chandrodaya, or Rise of the Moon of 
Intellect, by Krishna-Misra. Bombay, 1886. 

TniBAir , George, The Vedanta Sutras zmth the Com- 
mentury of Ramanuja. SBE. London, 1904. 

Thibaut, George, The Vedanta Sutras with the Com- 
mentary of Shahkardcdrya. SBE. 2 Vols. London, 
1904. 

Tr Trump, Ermest, The Adi Crartth. London, 1877. 

Vasu, S. C. (Translator), The Gheranda Samhitd. Adyar, 
1933. First printing, Allahabad, 1895. 

Vidhyaravasa, S. C. (Translator), Siva Sariihitd. Allaha- 
bad, 1923. 

WooDROFFE, Sir John (Arthur Avalon), Principles of 
Tantra. 2 Vols. London, 1916. 

WooDHOFFE, Sir John (Arthur Avalon), Tantra of the 
Great Liberation. London, 1913. 

WYS Woods, James Uoug^aton, The Yoga System of Patahjali. 
Cambridge, 1914. 

Bhave, V. L., Mahdrd^ra Sdrasvat. 2 Vols. New Edi- 
tion. Poona, 1925. 

FORL Farquhar, J. N., Outlines of the Religious Literature of 
India. London, 1920. 

Hodgson, B. H., Essays on the Languages, Literature and 
Religion of Nepal and Tibet. London, 1874. 

HGE Hopkins, E. W., The Great Epic of India, Its Character 
and Origin. New York, 1901. 

Macdonell, a. a., and Keith, A. B., Vedic Index of 
Names and Subjects. 2 Vols. London, 1912. 

Sen, Dinesh Chandra, History of Bengali Language and 
Literature. Calcutta, 1911, 

• Sen, Dinesh Chandra, Sati, A Mystical Storv. Calcutta. 
1916. 

CFD Shea, Davii>, and Frazer, Anthony, The Dabistan or 
School of Manners. Translated from the Original 
Persian with Notes and Illustrations. 3 Vols. Paris, 
1843 



362 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Temp Temple, Richard C., The Legends of the Punjab. 3 Vols. 
London, 1884-1900. 

WGIL WiNTERNiTZ, Dr. M., Geschichte der Indischen Literature. 
3 Vols. Leipzig, 1913, 1920. 

D. WORKS ON PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION 
INCLUDING TANTRA AND CULT 

Behanan, K. T., Yoga: A Scientific Evaluation. New 
York, 1937. 

Brahma, N. K,, The Philosophy of Hindu Sddhand. 
London, 1932. 

Brown, G. W., The Human Body in the Upanishads. 
Jubbulpore, 1921. 

Cowell, E. B., and Gough, A. E., The Sarva Dar^ana 
Samgraha or Reviezv of the Different Systems of Hindu 
Philosophy, by Madhava Acharya. Translated by 
E, B. Cowell and A. £. Gough. Second Edition. 
London, 1894. 

Eliot, Sir Charles, Hinduism and Buddhism. 3 Vols. 
London, 1921. 

DHIP Dasgupta, Surendranath, A History of Indian Philosophy. 
Vol. I, Cambridge, 1922. 

DHIP{H) Vol. II, 1932. 

Hindu Mysticism. Chicago, 1927. 

Das G. Yoga Philosophy (In relation to other systems of Indian 
Thought). Calcutta, 1930. 

DHP Davies, John, Hindu Philosophy, The Sdmkhya Kdrikd of 
lh)ara Kr^na. London, 1894. 

D.Up. Deussen, P., The Philosophy of the Upanishads. English 
Translation by A. S. Geden, Edinburgh, 1906. 

GSY Garbe, Richard, Sdmkhya und Yoga. Grundriss der 
Indo-Arischen Philologie und Altertumskunde. Strass- 
burg, 1896. 

GSP Garbe, Richard, Die Sdmkhya Philosophie. Leipzig, 1894. 
New Edition, 1917. 

Ghosh, Jajneswar, A Study of Yoga. Calcutta, 1933. 

Hall, Fitz-Edward, A Contribution Towards an tndex to 
the Bibliography of the Indian Philosophical Systems. 
Calcutta, 1859. 

Hauer, J. W., Der Yoga als Heilweg. Vol. 1. Stuttgart. 
1932. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 363 

KSS Keith, A. B., The Sdmkaya System. A History of the 
Sdtiikhya Philosophy. Calcutta, 1916. 

Keith, A. B., The Religion and Philosophy of the Veda. 

2 Vols. Cambridge, Mass., 1925. 

Radhakrishnan, S., Indian Philosophy. 2 Vols. New York, 
1922, 1927. 

SBH Rai Bahadur SrIsa Chandra Vasu, An Introduction to 
the Yoga Philosophy. Allahabad, 1915. 

Rele, Vasant G., The Mysterious Kundalinl. Bombay, 
1927 (Third Edition, 1931). 

Mohan Singh, Gorakhndth and Mediaeval Hindu 
Mysticism. Lahore, 1937. 

Thomas, E. J., The History of Buddhist Thought. New 
York, 1933. 

Arthur Avalon, The Serpent Power. London, 1919. 

Arthur Avalon, Shakti and Shakta, Essays and Addresses 
on the ShaktaTantraShastra. Second Edition. London, 
1920. 

BRI Baktu^ A. t The Religions of India., London, 1882. 

BVS Bhandarkar, R. G., Vdisnavism, Sdivism, and Minor Reli^ 
gious Systems. Grundriss der Indo-Arischen Philologie 
and Altertumskunde. Strassburg, 1913. 

Bhattacharya, B,, Introduction to Buddhist Esoterism. 
Oxford, 1932. 

BRV Bloomfield, M., The Religion of the Veda. New York, 
1908. 

Bose, M. M., The Post~Cditanyd Sahajiyd Cult of Bengal. 
Calcutta, 1930. 

Crooke, William, An Introduction to the Popular Religion 
and Folklore of Northern India. Allahabad, 1894. 
Revised and Illustrated Edition. 2 Vols. London, 1896. 
New Edition prepared for the press by R. E. Enthoven. 
Oxford, 1926. 

Davids, Mrs. Rhys, Outlines of Buddhism. London, 1934. 

Griswold, H. D., The Religion of the Big Veda. Oxford, 

, 1923. 

HRI Hopkins, E. W., The Religions of India. Boston, 1895. 

Judgment in the case of Mahant Brahm Nath vs. Baba 
Gokul Nath, Court of the Subordinate Judge of 
Gorakhpur of 1926. 



364 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHAJA YOGIS 

MVM Macdonell, A. A., Vedk Mythology (Grundriss der 
Indo-Arischen Philologie und Altertumskunde). Strass- 
burg, 1897. 

MWB Monier-Williams, M., Brahmanism and Hinduism, Lon- 
don, 1891. 

OBTM Oman, John Campbell, The Brahmans^ Theists and 
Muslims of India, Philadelphia. 

OCCS CultSy Customs and Superstitions of India. London, 1908. 
OMAS The Mystics^ Ascetics and Saints of India. London, 1903. 

Taranath, Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indien aus der,. 
Tibetischen ubersetzt von Anton Schiefner. St. Petersburg, 
1869. 

Underhill, M. M., The Hindu Religious Year. Calcutta, 

1921. 

Or Vasu, Nagendra Nath, Modern Buddhism and Its 

Followers in Orissa. Calcutta, 1911. 

Von Glasenapp, H., Der Hinduismus. Miinchen, 1922. 

Ward, W., Vieiv of the History, Literature and Religion of 
the Hindus. 4 Vols. 1817-20, 

Wilkins, Hindu Mythology. Calcutta, 1913. 

Wi Wilson, Horace Hyman, Essays and Lectures Chiefly on 

the Religion of the Hindus, A Sketch of the Religious 
Sects of the Hindus. London. Edition. 1861. Vol. I. 
Edited by Reinhold Rost. Also Vol. II. Was first 
published 1828, 1832. 

E, ICONOGRAPHY, INSCRIPTIONS, 
SCULPTURE, ETC. 

Bhattacharyya, B., The Indian Buddhist Ikonography, 
Mainly Based upon the Sadhanamdld and other Cognate 
Tantric Texts. Oxford, 1924. 

Bidyabinod, Pandit B. B., Supplementary Catalogue of the 
Coins in the Indian Museum, Calcutta, Non’-Muhammadan 
Series. Vol. I. Calcutta, 1923. 

Brown, C. J., I'he Coins of India. Calcutta and London. 

1922. 

Burgess, James, Report on the Antiquities of Kathiawar 
and Kachh (Archaeological Survey of Western India). 
London, 1876, 

Burgess, James, Archeological Survey of Western India, 
Vol. V. London, 1883. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


365 


FHIEA 


Ban 


Burgess, James, and Cousens, Henr^, tievised List of 
Antiquarian Remaws of the Bombay Presidency (Archreo- 
lof^ical Survey of India), New Imperial Series, Vcl. XVI. 
1897. 

Cunningham, Sir A., Coins of the Indu~ Scythians. Cal- 
cutta. 1892. 

Cunningham, Sir A., Coins of Mediaeval India. From the 
Seventh Century down to the Muhammadan Conquests. 
London, 1894. 

Fergusson, Jas., History of India and Eastern Architecture. 
Revised and Edited by James Burgess and R. Phene 
Spiers. 2 Vols. London, 1910. 

Francke, a. H., Antiquities of Indian Tibet. Calcutta. 
Vol. I, 1914; vol. II, 1926. 

French, J. C., The Art of the Pala Empire of Bengal. 
Oxford, 1928. 

Gopi Nath Rao, T. A., Elements of Hindu Iconography. 
4 Vols. Madras, 1914-16. 

Khakhar, D. P., Report on the Architectural and Archaeo- 
logical Remains in the Province of Kachh. With five 
papers on Kachh Antiquities, by the late SiR Alex. 
BuR^:_:s. With a Prefatory Note by J. Burgess, 
Archaeological Surveyor and Reporter to Government, 
1879. 

Rapson, E. j., Indian Coins (Grundiss der Indo-Arischen 
Philologie und Altertumskunde). Strassburg, 1897. 

Smith, Vincent A., A History of Fwc Art in India and 
Ceylon. Oxford, 1911. 

Smith, Vincent A., Catalogue of the Coins in the Indian 
Museum, Calcutta, Including the Cabinet of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal. Oxford, 1906. 

Vogel, J. Ph., Indian Serpent Lore. London, 1926. 

Walsh, E. H., Article, ‘The Coinage of Nepai.' In 
JRAS, 1908. 

F, history, DESCRIPTION 

Banerji, R. D., The Palas of Bengal. Memoirs of the 
Asiatic Society of Bengal. Vol. V. Calcutta, 1915. 

Burnes, Lieut. Alex^vnder, Travels into Bokhara. 3 Vols. 
London, 1834. 

Burton, R. F., Sciendc : or The Unhappy Valley. 2 Vols. 
London, 1851. 



366 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 

Duff Duff, C. Mabel (Mrs. W. R. Rickmers), The Chrono- 
logy of India, From the Earliest Times to the Beginnings 
of the Sixteenth Century, London, 1899. 

EHI Elliot, Sir H. M., The History of India as Told by Its 
Own Historians. The Muhammadan Period. Edited by 
Prof. John Dawson. 2 Vols. London, 1867-69. 

Forbes, A. K.. Rds Mala, Edited by H. G. Rawlinson. 
London, 1924. 

Gait, E. A., Historv of Assam, Second Edition. Calcutta, 
1926 (First Edition, 1906). 

GRP Griffin, Sir L. H., The Rajas of the Punjab. London, 
1873. 

Griffin, Sir L. H., The Panjab Chiefs. New Edition by 
C. F, Massey. 2 Vols. Lahore, 1890. 

Hamilton, F. (formerly Buchanan), An Account of the 
Kingdom of Nepal and of the Territories Annexed to this 
Dominion by the House of Gorkha. Edinburgh, 1819. 

Hart, Capt., Article, ‘Some account of a Journey from 
Kurrachee to Hinglaj in the Lus territory, descriptive 
of the intermediate country and of the port of Soume- 
anee.’ JASBe, 1840, pp. 134ff. 

Holdich, Sir Thos. H., The Gates of India, London, 
1910. 

J arret, Col. H. S., and Blochmann, H., Ain i Akbari by 
Abdul Fazl i Allami. 3 Vols. Calcutta, 1894. 

Kirkpatrick, Colonel, An AccouJit of the Kingdom of 
Nepal (in 1793). London, 1811. 

Kittoe, Lieut. M., Article, ‘ Notes on a Journey to Girnar, 
etc.’ JASBe, (1838), Vol. VII, pp. 865 flf. 

Landon, P., Nepal. 2 Vols. London, 1928. 

'L]^vi, Sylvain, Le Nepal (Annals du Mus6e Guimet). 
Paris, 1905. 

Marshall, Sir John, Mo^ewjo-Daro and the Indus Civili- 
zation. 3 Vols. London, 1931. 

Masson, Charles, Narrative of Various Journeys in 
Balochistan, Afghanistan, and the Panjab, 4 Vols. 
London, 1842-44. 

Oldfield, H. O., Sketches from Nepal. 2 Vols. London, 
1880. 

Rapson, E. J., The Cambridge History of India, Vol. I. 
Cambridge, 1922. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


367 


Sachau, Edward C., Alheruni's Indiay an Account of the 
Religions y Philosophy y Literature y Geography y Chronology y 
Astronomy y CustomSy Laivs and Astrology of India about 
A.D. 1030. An English Edition with Notes and Indices. 
2 Vols. London, 1910. 

Sherring, M. a., The Sacred City of the Hindus (Benares). 
London, 1868. 

Tod Tod, James (Lt.-Col.), Annals and Antiquities of Raja- 
sthany or The Central and Wesh rn Rajput States of India. 
Edited with an Introduction and Notes by William 
CROOfOi, C.I.E. 3 Vols. London, 1920. 

Vasu, N. N., The Social History of Kamarupa. 2 Vols. 
Calcutta. 

Wrighi , Daniel, History of Nepal y Translated from the 
Vahisavali Parbatiyd, by Munshi Shew Shunkar Singh 
and Pandit Shri Gunanandy ivith Introductory Sketch of 
the Country and People of Nepal by the Editor. Cam- 
bridge, 1877. 

G. OTHER SOURCES 

EB Encyclopcedia Britannica. 13th Edition (also 14th Edition). 

CR Calcuttii Review. 

El Epigraphia Indica. 

ERE Encyclopcedia of Religion and Ethics. 

I A Indian Antiquary. 

jfAOS Journal of the American Oriental Society. 

^^S^^Bv ^ Anthropological Society of Bombay. 

JASBe Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. 

JASBy Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bombay. 

JASJ Journal of the Asiatic Society of Japan. 

JRAS Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 

PNQ Punjab Notes and Queries. 

Archceological Survey of India. 

American Journal of Philology. 

• Journal Asiatique. 

Asiatic Researches. 




INDEX 


ADEPT, 322, 323, 328, 329, j 
^ 330, 334, 338, 352 
Adhara, 287, 288, 309, 311, 317, 
328 

Adharbandha, 284 
Adinath, 56, 62, 75, 76, 136, 230, ' 
231, 234 ] 

Aghori, 6, 31, 71, 72 n., 75, 154, 
167, 218, 224 
Agriculture, 51 f. 

Ahirhsat 266 
Aidevj, 67 

Aipanth(i), 6 n., 21 n., 24 n., 

40n.,43n.,49n.,63.65, 67, 68, 
77, 82, 100, 136, 138 
yijapa, 293,1107, 340 
Amh 310, 315, 319, 333 
Alakh, 10, 44, 202, 239 
Alberuni, 216, 352 
Alexander, 213 f. 

Allahabad, 5n., 28 n., 35, 82, 83, 
253 

Almora, 7, 10 n 17 n., 21 n., 22, 
23, 24 n.. 26 n., 28, 2^ 30, 31, 
34, 41, 42, 47, 80 f., 107n. 
Amarnath, 78, 98 
Amba, 119, 162, 165 
Ambala. 49, 66^ 69, 73, 100 
American Indian, 59, 347 
An ritsar, 38, 62, 64, 100, 103, 
160 

Amrta, 345 

Amulets,. 20, 23, 34. 128, 178 
Amihata, 310, 313, 319, 332. 341. 
343 

Ancestor, 7f., 52, 55 
Anus, 313, 317, 328 
Apdna, 291, 292, 300, 306, 307, 
311, 327, 335, 337 


Aral, 111, 114, 116 
Aryan, 155, 212 

Asana, 265, 267, 268, 274, 282, 
309, 323, 325, 326, 327, 330, 
, 340, 343 

' Asapurs 15, 104, 105, 108 
Ascetic, 1, 2, 6, 9, 16, 21»*22^ 
24, 28, 32, 39, 55, 74, 82i 
207, 208, 247, 259 
Ashes, 16, 17, 19, 21, 29, 31 
, 33, 39. 44, 53, 54, 104, 122. 

128, 187 ff., 200, 221, 334 
A4oka. 144, 145 n., 217 
Ahama, 209 f., 223 
Assam, 50, 69, 78, 166, 181 n.» 
201, 274 
104 

Atharva-Veda, ISif., 175. 2lt 
216, 280 

Attts, 24, no, M6, 120 
Aughar, 4, 5, 10, 11, 18, 19, 27, 
30, 31 , 33, 39. 46. 47, 49, 67, 7U 
89, 100, 103, 113, U5, 121,124, 
218, 224 

Aurangzeb, 70, 86, 92, 121 
Avalokite^vara, 151, 180 n., t96, 
231, 232 n. 

DABA, 33, jS 
O Baber. 98 

Badrtnidi, 7, 20, 34. 37, 78, 124 

Bi«.13, 21,53, 54, 57 

Bdirdg, 63, 65. 97. 121. 122 

B^ra, 15 

Bilakiiftth, 31 

Bilasimdari, 33 

BaldevI, 93 

Balkeswar, 31, 71 

Balnith, 101, 103 

24 



370 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 


Bdmdrg, — 69, See Vdmdrga 
Bamboo, 21, 22 

Bandha, 323, 324, 325, 327, 330, 
335, 337, 338, 340, 341 
Bappa, 122, 187, 245, 240, 247, 
250 

Barber, 28, 29 
Br sak Nag, 98, 123 
Bathing (bath, bathe) 24, 28, 29, j 
41, 42, 54, i34, 145, 147, 170 j 
Beads (See rosary) 

Beard, 18 

Beef, 45, 55 { 

Beg, Beggars, Begging, 21, 22. j 
44, 45, 51, 53, 56. 57, 59, 72. ' 
73, 97, 192, 202, 204, 206, 210 j 
Bel, 41, 43, 53, 54. 138, 143 
Benares, 3 n., 5 n., 13 n., 14 n., 17, 

23. 27 n., 28 n., 30, 41, 46, 52, 
78, 83 f., 85, 86, 110, 122, 257 

Bengal, 4 n., 51 , 53, 69, 123 f., 242, 
243, 244, 250, 274, 351 
Bhagavad Gita, 241, 263, 264 
Bhairava (Bairab, Bhairorh), 

12 n,, 17, 21, 28, 32, 34, 36, 53, 
54,58,70, 74, 78, 79, 80, 81, 83, 
84. 85, 86, 87, 93, 97, 100, 102, 
113,121, 122,123,127,129, 134, 
135, 138, 139, 140, 141, 144, 
146, 152, 158 flF., 170, 224, 225, 
226, 245, 280 n. 

Bhairavl, 245, 280 n., 354 
Bhairorh Pat, 252 
Bhakti, 235, 266, 351 n., 352, 354 
Bhartrhari, Bhartri, 7, 9, 10, II, 

24, 62, 65, 82, 101 f., 121, 132, 
137, 188, 189 n., 237, 242, 244, 
245 

Bhek Barah Panth, 35, 82, 100 
Bhuj, 34, 63. 69, 110, 111 
Blbi Nani, 106 

Bija, 175, 176, 277, 281, 301, 311, 
312, 313, 315, 340 n. 

Bija-mantrOy 313, 314, 315 
Bimla, 63, 67 

Binduy 163, 164, 298, 299, 300, 302, 
313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 320, 
322, 323, 324, 325, 331, 332, 333, 
334, 335, VHy 338, 339, 340, 341, 
344, 346, 352 


Black buck, 11. 132 
Blood, 18, 104, 107, 125, 129, 130, 
140 f., 160, 166, 168,-308 
Bolanath, 80 

Bombay, l,4n.. 5, 21, 22, 31, 50, 
55, 61, 63, 120, 122, 257 
Bowl, 13. 21. 22. 34, 40. 44 
Boys, 27, 38, 49, 53, 55 
Brahma, 7, 15, 143, 156 f.. 162. 
169, 176, 197, 228, 261 , 267, 270, 
273, 293, 294, 302, 305, 312, 316, 
319, 343, 346 
Brahmacarya, 212 
Brahman, 1, 7, 105, 123 
BiTdmian. 11. 26, 39. 46, 50, 52, 

53, 58, 74,94, 102, 123, 126, 131, 
167, 211, 213, 217, 226, 323 n. 

Brahma nas, 176, 259 
Brand, 17, 110 

Brass, U, 13, 19, 22, 48, 53, 58, 
92, 112, 114 
Brindaban, 52, 78 
Buddha, 213, 217, 231, 276, 279, 
280 

Buddhiy 260, 261 269 
Buddhism, 150, 209, 218, 232, 
248, 262, 276, 2«, 279 
Buddhist, 131, 150, 151, 180, 181, 
218, 229, 231, 232, 233, 243, 
245, 249 f., 259, 275, 280, 327, 
351 

Buffalo, 24, 55, 56, 93 n., 95, 141 
Bull, 11, 20, 57, 84, 122, 154, 247, 
313, 315 

Burial (buried, samtidh, grave), 9, 
22, 36, 39, 40, 41, 42, 51, S3, 

54, 55, 56, 58, 59, 60, 66, 70, 
80, 81, 85, 88, 89, 94, 97. 100, 
104, 115, 121, 123 f., 136, 170, 
154 

C'AKRA, 150, 163, 171,175, 177, 
274, 281, 288, 289, 309, 311, 
312, 313, 314, 315i 317, 318, 
319, 320, 321, 322, 329, 331, 
332, 333 

Cakrapujdy 106, 171, 173 
Chamar, 13 n., 68, 99, 138 
Candalas, 107, 143 
Candidate, 26 ff., 89, 116, 119 



INDEX 


371 


Cap, 19, 29, 40 

Caran, 31, 41, 57, 85, 87, 102, 
122 

Cartiltjie, 1, 32, 56, 58 
Caste, 26, 27, 29, 45, 48, 49, 50, 1 
51, 52, 53, 55, 56, 57, 58, 61, 
83,117,151 

Cave, 44, 78, 79, 80, 82, 118, 119, 
121 

Cavvnpore, 13n., 21 n., 24 n. 

Cela, 35, 36, 38 
Celibacy, 260, 266 
Celibate. 5. 34, 46, 47, 49. 57. 58, 
72, 73, 89, no, 116, 122, 198 
Charity, 37. 45, 46. 110, 115, 116 
Charm, 20, 23, 25, 57, 59, 128; 
see Amulet 

Christian, 26, 219, 241 n. 

Club, 22, 124, 160, 202, 221 f., 
239 

Cucoanut, 21, 25, 28, 33, 95, 
108 

Coin, 247, 248 

Co//. 63, 67 n., 174 

Colinath, 63, 77 

Conch, 8, 22, 42, 54, 113, 202 

Copper, 8, 11, 20, 42, 58, 124 

Corpse, 18, 48, 52, 58, 175 

Cotton, 11, 19, 31 

Cow, 31, 42, 45. 247, 318 | 

Cow Jun^, 3, 16, 3o, 53, 54, 89 | 

Crutch, 21, 22, 40 

Curse, 25, 73, 117 

Cutiya, 18, 28, 29, 32 n., 131 

r\\nA,33 

Oa^riTcr. 20, 180 n. | 

Darsan, 7, 8 
Dars.ini, 1 , 44, 49, 50 
DarvanalJi (i), ( paiith), 64, 06, 
82, 102 
Das, 29 

Dasnanus, 11, 12n., 24 n. 
Dayanath, 118. 192 f'. 

Dead, 3<f, 4S, 49, 51, 52, 55, 56, 
58, 59, 60, 123, 136 
Death, 29, 50, 92, 160, 185, 307, 
340 

Demon, 18n., 104, 138, 158, 225, 
271, 347 


Devi. 8n., 24, 36, 37, 40, 42. 57, 
63,91,92,95,97. UK). 105 106. 
108, 113, 114, 120, 134, 140, 
162, 164, 172 

' DeviPgtan,12n. ,13 n.,17n., 18n., 
26, 29, 38. 45, 47, 60, 79, 90, 
92. 94 ff., 140, 141, 149, 152, 
161, 334 

Dhajjai.r th, 63, o8, 77 
Dharamnath (Dhorainnath), 21, 
24,35.36,45 47,64,77,80,81, 
niff., 139, 142, 229, 230, 354 
Dharamnathi, 1, 35, 64. 116, 

121 

Dharam^alas, 36, 113, 150 
Dhdrand, 262, 265, 268, 269, 276, 
3a5 

Dhamw (and the cult), 53, 151, 
244. 245, 249 
Dharma Manuala^ 243 
Dhduth !53, 254, 274, 328 
Ohevjis. 26 

Dhinodbar. 8, 12, 14n., 16 n., I8n., 
20, 21, 14. 26 n... 28 n., 30. 33. 
35, 36, 37, 38, 42, 45, 46. 73, 
n0f..n5ff., 130, 139, 141. 142, 
150, 152, 171, 193, 230 
Dhoti y 21 

bhfmh 16, 21, 40, 44, 88, 94, 108, 
112 ff., 118, 123, 128, 130, 202, 
228 

Dhvdmiy 262, 265, 268, 269, 346 
Dhyani Buddhas, 277 
Divination, 2, 49, 127 
Dwyay 283 

Dop, 8n., 24. 55, 56, 57. 59, 97, 
135 

Dorn, 51, 204, 243 
Dravidian, 161 

Drugs, 23, 123, 153, 202. 205, 
347 

Drum, 2, 22, 57, 97, 115 
Durga, 15. 90. 129, 164, 165 f., 
171 

DurgSpuja, 171 
Dvaraka, 3n., 71, 78, 120 

CAR, 1, 6ff., 9, 10, n, 24, 27, 28, 
^ 29, 31, 32, 48, 49, 56, 60, 73, 
74, 98, 247, 248, 249, 306 



372 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 


Ear-rings, 1, 6 if., 9, 10, 11, 13, 
20, 32, 33, 39, 40. 47,49, 53, 54, 
55, 56. 58, 60, 66, 74. 81, 82, 
84, 100, 113,414, 123, 124, 128, 
130, 1 31 , 202, 221 . 237, 248, 249 
Ear-splitting, 1, 9, 10, 27, 28, 29, 
31, 32, 33, 37, 48, 49, 53, 55, 
56/ 58, 60. 73, 103, 118. 123, 
199, 202. 248 
Ekadasis, 51 f. 

Ekiiiigajj. 122, 222 
Election, 35, 36, 37 
Elephant, 271, 299, 312, 315, 337, 
346 

EvU eye, 22, 23, 128 
Exorcism, 2, 23, 89, 125, 127 
Eyebrows, 269, 318, 336, 342, 
344, 345 

tTAECES, 306, 337 
^ Faqir,ln.,4n., 5,6, 105, 185, 
192, 194, 207 
Fast, 28, 37, 259, 266 
Finger nail, 18 
Finger ring, 20 

Fire, 2. 10, 21, 52, 58, 91. 311, 
313. 315, .318, 319, 330, 338, 345 
Fire-tongs, 13, 21, 22 
Fish, 9, 45, 54, 56, 125, 129, 248, 
278, 280 

Food, 8, 29, 41, 43. 44, 45, 46, 
50, 51, 54. 55, 57. 58, 60, 72, 
73.110,116,136, 325, 336 
Forehead, 12 n„ 16, 17, 37. 40, 
54, m, 123, 127, 221 
Funeral, 7 f., 42, 49, 50, 51 , 54, 58 

r^ADDI, 20, 36, 37, 38, 42. 63, 
^ 64, 87, 89, llln., 124, 138 
Oiininath, 242 
Gambling, 23 

Gane^, 24, 73, 80, 81,84, 110 
Gang, 29, 43, 82, 97, 106. 121 
Gahganath, 65 
Garhwftl, 8n., 10, 48, 79 
Garibnith, 24, 64, 116f. 
Giuri-Sahkar, 15, 18 n., 112 
Giyatri, 175, 293, 307, 340, 341 
Ghermnda Samhitd^ 254, 267, 273, 
329*' 


GirnSr, 119, 192, 230 
Goat, 2, 88, 92, 93. 95, 99 
Godavari, 64. 78, 121 
Gold, 6, 7, 20, 23, 40, 42 
Gopicand, 24, 50, 51, 55, 56* 63, 
67. 69. 75, 122, 183, 18S, 190. 
194, 198, 203 f., 205 n., 266* 242, 
243, 244, 245, 277 
Gorakh Bansuri, 7n., 123 
Gorakhnath (Corak^anStha, Go- 
rakh, Goraksa), 1-25, 31, 39, 
42. 49, 50, 53 f., 55, 56, 57, 58, 

59, C>0, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 

67, 68, 69, 70, 72, 73, 74. 75, 

76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 83, 86, 

87, 88, 89, 92, 96, 98. 99. 100, 
101, 102, 106, 116, 118, 119, 

120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 127, 

128, 130, 132, 136, 137, 138, 

141, 143. 145, 149, 150, 160, 

179, 180n., 181. 182, 183, 184, 
186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 

192, 193, 194, 195, 1%, 197, 

198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 

206, 207, 227, 228-240, 241, 

242, 243, 244, 245, 247, 248, 

249, 250, 252, 255, 256, 284, 

285, 304, 327, 341 ,351, 352n., 354 
Gorakhnath! (s), 1, 4, 6, 8, 10, 11, 
13, 23, 26, 30, 34, 35, 36, 38, 39, 
46, 48, 53, 54, 56, 60, 61 , 62, 63, 
64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 79, 82, 83, 
86,90,94, 98,102, 103, 105,109, 
125,131,136, 142,150. 152,154, 
184, 185, 218, 219, 230, 236, 251, 
274, 280 

Gorakhpanthi, 5, 23, 31, 72 n., 82 
Gorakhpur, 3, 5n., 17n., 18n.. 20, 
21, 24, 26, 27n., 28n., 29, 30, 34, 
35,36, 37,40,41, 46, 47, 59, 82, 
86f., 89. 102, 120, 128, 130, 138, 
140, 142, 182, 228, 249 
Gorakhpur Lawsuit, 37 
Gomk^aitaka, 171, 230, 254, 273, 
284-304, 305, 317, 330 . 
Gorkha, 78, 138, 181 
Gourd, 22, 40, 204 
Govindpant, 241 , 242 
Grhasta, 34, 56, 80, 85, See 
Householder 



INDEX 373 


Guga (Gugi Pir), 24, 99 f., 132, 
134,138, 149, 181, 183f., 187n., 
191 f., 193, 195, 197, 198, 199, 
201, 235 f., 241 
Gujarat, 2, 222. 

Gurkha, 78, 79 

Guru, 3, 6, 9, 10, 15, 28 ff., 36, 
38, 39, 41, 53, 54, 74, 75, 89, 
139, 184, 193, 242, 276, 284, 
326, 332, 334, 354 

LlApI (HadipS), 51,69, 243, 277 
“ Hail. 23 

Hair, 16, ‘S, .9, 30, 55, 56. 57, 
60, 249 
HakinI, 33 

Halma^anga, 12, 13 n., 21 
Hatiisa^ 293, 331, 336, 340 
Hanuman, 12, 14, 17, 88, 102, 150 
Hardvar, 3n ., 4, 6n., 9, 29, 31, 
35, 40, 41, 43, 65, 67, 68, 78, 
82, 257 

Harinath, 38, 97 

HathaYoga, 1, 2, 3, 97. 171, 175, 
210, 251, 252, 267, 272, 273, 274, 
275, 284, 292, 306, 310, 319, 320, 
322, 323, 324, 329, 338, 340, 343, 
351 

Hathayagapradipikaf 3 n., 253 f., 
273, 287, 318, 326, 327, 333 
Head, 6, 18, 28 
Heart, 306, 313, 314, 317 
Hermit, 2, 4, 82 

Heth (Hethnath), 63, 64, 67, 
102 

Himalaya, 1, 3n., 7, 8n., 19, 32n., 
47, 78, 101, 110, 130, 134, 136, 
138, 139, 158, 164f., 170, 186, 
194, 201 

Hindu, 19, 20, 23, 26, 27, 30, 39. 
45, 48, 49, 50, 54, 56, 60, 66, 
71, 75, 94, 99, 105, 106, 108, 
110, 241, 258 

Hing Laj, 3n., 10, 15, 17, 34. 60, 
78, 90n., 103, 104 f., 109f., 113, 
151, 169 
Hingol, 106 

Hir, 24, 25, 103, 183, 185 f., 207 
Hiuen Tsang, 224, 241 n, 

Holi, 94 


Householder, 34, 42, 47, 48, 56, 
57, 58, 209 
Huqqa, 20, 72 

\PA 290, 291, 292, 296, 308, 320, 
* 327, 329 

Image,* 11, 20, 55, 78, 79, 80, 85, 
87, 92 f., 112 f., 122, 129, 139, 
149. 150, 194, 247, 249, 250, 330 
Incense, 17, 40, 43, 54, 97, 139 
Imira, 128, 157, 162, 191, 217 
Indrtya^ 315, 344 
Indus, 103, 105, 243 
Indus River Civilization, 22 n., 
155 n., 162 n., 210 n. 

Initiate, 7, 27, 38 
Initiation (ed), 6, 10, 15, 27, 28, 
29, 30, 33, 34, 36, 37, 39, 48, 
53, 54, 55, 58 
Iron. 20, 124 
Islam, 151, 275 
Isvara. 173, 266, 269, 314, 316 
Ivory, 8, 9 

TADE, 8, 11 
^ Jafir Pir, 64, 71 
Jam, 72, 73, 151, 213, 217 f., 259, 
279 

Jalandhar (Jalandharpa, Jalan- 
dharnath), 9, 31, 60, 62, 63, 
65, 67, 69, 75, 77, 85, 190, 194, 
198 

Jalandharbandha, 295, 300, 336, 
338 

Janeo, 11, 12, 13, 38 
Jhelum, 64, 71, 101, 241 
Jtva, 292, 293, 302, 306, 307, 327, 
329, 331, 333, 340 
Jnana-yoga, 263, 272 
Jhanesvar, 74, 241, 242, 249 
Jhanesvarl, 242 
Jog^ see Yoga 
Jogesvar, 35, 113, 248 
Jogi, see Yogi 
Juggling, 23 

179 n., 199f., 218, 231, 
^ 236, 2381’., 241, 249 
Kacch. 6, 8, 20, 24, 26, 34, 37, 38, 
45, 63. 64, 110, 116ff., 193, 229 



374 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGiS 


Kailas, 71, 86, 104 
Kalamukha. 220 fF., 223 f. 

Kali. 85, 87. 106, 123, 166, 169, 
171,312, 354 

Kama, 17 n., 19, 28 n., 81 f., 153, 
157 f. 

Kama (village), 17n., 19, 28n., 34, 
48 81 82 

Kamarupa, 167, 232, 288, 311, 313 ! 
Kanda, 290 n., 306, 308, 309, 310, ! 

316, 319 I 

Kdn-guru {Cira-guru)), 32 
Kanipa (Kiinipao), 31, 56, 60, 61, . 

62, 63, 67, 69, 75, 77 I 

Kanphata (Kanphatiya), 1, 2, 6, i 
8, 10, 13. 16, 20, 21, 22, 23, 27, 
31,34,35,36, 38, 39, 45,46, 49, 
50, 53,55,56,59, 62, 63.67, 68, 
69, 70,71,73, 74,78, 79,82. 85. 
86. 90, 95,98, 101, 102, 103, 110, 
111,116,120,121,122,123,124, 
127,131,133,136,138,140, 141, 
143,149, 150, 152, 154, 162, 171, 
172, 185. 218, 227, 228, 233 
Kanphata Yogis, 243, 241, 249 n., 
251, 254, 274 

Kanthadnathis, 26, 33, 63, 73, 
liO, 111 

Kantharnath, 63, 69, 70 
Kapala, 219, 226 
Kapalika, 224 tT. 

Kapalmuni, 65, 6S, 77, 124 
Kaplani, 63, 65, 68, 77, 80, 124 
Karachi, 3 n., 103, 107, 109, 192 n. 
Karma-yoga, 263, 264, 272 n. 
Kama (Raja Karan), 91, 92, 94 
Karund, 278 

Kashmir, 3n., 4n., 78, 98 
Kathamandu, 3n., 79, 229 
Kathiawar, 2, 45, 111 n., 116, 
119 f., 138, 228 
Krala, 283 
Kavaca, 175, 178 
Kedarnath, 7, 20, 74, 78, 124 
Kettle drum, 42, 93, 96, 97 
Khakhar, 110, 112, 116n., I19n. 
Khecarimudrdy 11, 297, 298, 333, 
338, 339, 340 n., 344 
Kirana, 19. 31, 100, 101, 103 
Kitchen, 85, 114, 115 


Knife (two-edged), 2, 6, 28, 32, 
33 

Koteswar, 17, 34, 103, 109f., 116, 
154 

Kr§na, 74, 88, 113, 157, 204, 253, 
‘263, 351 n. 

Kumaoh, 5 n., 8, 10, 11 n., 48, 
74, 79 

Kumbh Mela. 28 n.. 35, 102, 122 
Kundal, 7, 9 

Kundalinl {Kundali), 164 n., 171, 
273, 274, 281, 293, 294, 295, 
305,309,310,311,316,317,319. 
320,321, 322, 324, 325, 327,329. 
331, 332, 333, 335, 338, 340, 341, 
343, 345 

Kundalinl -Yoga, 273, 274, 282, 
316, 321, 322, 343, 344 n., 352 

I AKSMANNATH, 64, 77, 
^ 101 .102, 124 
Lakulisa, 22 n., 63, 221 f., 247 
Lamp, 54, 97, lOO, 114, 115 
Ldth (of Bhairoh), 83, 84 
Laya-Yoga, 272 f., 274 
Lepros3^ 102, 114, 117 
Life restored, 72, 73 
Linga, 40, 41, 55, 80, 81. S3, 84, 
85, 87, 88, 96 f.. 98. 109, 112, 
114, 124, 133, 142, 143, 153, 154, 
172, 221. 247, 249, 279, 310, 
311, 314, 315, 317, 319, 326 
Lihgayats, 123 
Lion, 271, 337 

Liquor (spirits) 50, 53, 54, 55, 
56, 57, 123 
Loins, 93, 105 

Loin-cloth (laiigoti), 12. 19, 21, 
29, 40 

Lokeswar, 248 

Lotus, 9, 134 f.. 162, 172, 175, 176, 
177, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 
314, 315, 316, 319 

oacchendranAth 

(Macchendra, Matsyendra- 
nath), 9, 24, 41 n., 49. 53, 54, 55, 
56, 57.60, 61,62, 63,64, 67, 69, 
72, 73,76, 77, 79, 83. 119, 120, 
121, 122, 125, 131, 143, 144f., 



INDEX 375 


146, 147. 148, 150, 151, 152, 180, 
181 f., 182, 188, 190, 194, 195 f., 
197,229,230, 231,232, 233, 237, 
247 f., 280, 284 n., 287 
Magic, 23, 31, 51, 57, 96, 104, Ul, 
125, 127, 128, 129, 154, 187, 
198 ff., 216, 259, 27^, 275 281, 
336, 340, 341, 343 
Mahabharata, 7. 91, 92, 219 
Mahdmudrdf 27 288, 295^ 296, 

297, 330, 335, 336 n., 337 
Makant, 7, 8, 12, 20 , 34 n., 35, 36 , 
37, 38, 39, 48, 62, 83, 88, 89, 96, 
97, 100, 102, 103, 122, 124, 139 
Mahdsukha. 277, 279 
Mahayana, 275, 211 
Mahadeva (Mahadco), 9, 15, 52, 
80, 82, 85, 88, 94, 108 f., 109, 
no. 122, 123, 140, 246 
Mahipala, 245 
Mdithuna, 173, 323, 334 
Maitrikas, 245 

Makdra, 173, 174, 279, 280, 282 
Makran, 105, 1^7, 114 
Manasy 260, 314, 315, 332, 334, 
337 n, 343, 344 
Manasa, 123 

Manasarovara, Lake, 3n., 86 
Mandala, 276 

Manikcand, Manikcandra Pala, 
243 244 277 

Manipuraka, 289, 310, 313 
Mantra^ 28, 32, 33, 42, 54, 168 n., 
174, 175, 176, 178, 185, 203, 
231 n., 234 f., 266, 274, 275, 276, 
281, 282, 293, 307, 310, 319, 330, 
331, 336, 340, 341, 346 
Marriage, 18 n., 28, 46, 47, 48, 49, 
.50, 51, 53 (infant), 55, 56, 57, 58 
Maruta, 306, 344 
Mata, 106, 108 
Mataji, 128 

Matha (see Monastery) 

Medicine, 23, 125, 127 
Mela, 24, 35, 95, 103, 115, 141 
Mendicant, 2, 4, 6, 10, 153 
Menstruation (See Rajas) 

Millet, 15, 104 

Minanatha (MinanSth), 69, 230, 
234, 243, 284 


Mok^a (Mukti)y 104, 262, 263, 

334, 344, 351 
Mok^adharmay 263 
Monastery {Mathay Asthal, Aka- 

ra), 3, 7', 21, 22, 26,27, 28n.,31, 
34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 43, 44, 45, 
46, 47, 58, 66, 68, 78, 79, 82, 
88 89, 94, 95, 100, 101, 103, 
no, 111, 114, 115, 116, 118, 
121, 123, 218 

Moon, 50, 274, 298, 299, 308, 
312, 313, 315, 316, 318, 320, 
322, 324, 329 
Moshan Fani, 224, 230 
MuJrdy 173, 175, 178, 203, 226 f., 
230, 234, 274, 276, 296, 309, 
320, 323, 324, 325, 327, 330, 

335, 338, 340, 342 
Mukdy 104, 263, 351 
Mudrd (ring), 6, 9, 10, 69 
MuJdbandhay 295, 300 
Mulddhdray 310, 311, 312, 313, 

317, 319, 322, 331, 333 
MusalmeUi (Muhammadan), 1 n., 
2, 5, 6, 26, 27, 39, 45, 60, 66, 
70, 71,92, 94 f., 105, 106, 108 f., 
112, 141,152,173, 183,240, 241 

ISJADA (Ndd)y 40, 50, 164, 282, 
^ ^ 337, 341, 343, 345, 346 

Nadiy 6, 262, 274, 290, 291, 292, 
295, 303, 304, 305, 307, 308, 309, 
310, 316, 319, 327, 328, 329, 

336, 33^. 343 

Naga, 19, 34, 90, 91 n.. 132ff., 145. 

195, 196, 241 n., 307 
Nagar Tbatha, 103 ff., 110 
Nagnatha, 33, 66, 81, 93 
Nagpaficami, 54, 93, 133f., 148f. 
Nainf Tal, l7 n., 21 n., 47, 80, 98 
N^ak, 249 
Nanhoo Singh, 37 
Narbada, 30, 85 
Nasik, 9n., 121, 123, 233 

f-apSig 00 

Natha (Nath), 1, 5, 15, 33, 49. 52, 
55, 56, 57, 64, 67. 73, 77, 86, 
117, 131, 136, 137, ISln., 159, 
238, 242, 245, 247, 249 
Nathi. 1 



376 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 


Nathni, 1, 34 
Nauratri, 46, 115 
Navel, 221, 306, 307, 313, 317, 
318, 328, 330, 337 
Neck, 11, 15, 21, 29 
Necklace, 16, 20 
Nectar (See Bindu) 

Nepal (Nepalese), 2, 3n., 11, 19, 
35, 37, 45, 59, 78, 86, 90, 95, 
116, 243, 245, 247, 248, 249, 250 
Nimnatha, 33, 68, 72, 151, 233 
Mm-wood, 6, 32, 54 
Nirvana, 227, 276, 278, 279 
Niyama, 265, 266, 268, 272 n., 280 
Nizam, 11, 53, 61, 66 
Nose, 306, 317 
Nose-ring, 56 
Nummulites, 104, 105 
Nydsa, 175, 178 

oblation, 8 

^ Ochre, 10, 18, 19, 20, 28, 
30 f., 40, 42, 54, 55, 100, 
123 

Oleander, 107 

Ow, 30, 33, 143, 175, 176, 219, 
220, 231 n., 266, 267n., 284, 301, 
315, 330, 332, 340 
Orkhdr, 30 
Opium, 46, 55, 56 
Order, 2, 11, 26-33, 42 
Orissa, 4 n. 

Orphans, 26 
Oudh, 3 n., 4, 5 
Oxen, 25 

PADMA, 309, 310 
^ Padmdsana, 287, 326, 327 
Pde Dhum, 21, 72 n,, 122 
Pagalnath, 63 
Pala (s), 51, 243, 244 
Palmistry, 23 
Panchayati, 38 

Pan<lava8 (Pappus), 7 f., 8 n., 14 
Panjab, In., 2, 4n., 5, 7, 19, 26, 
30, 31, 34, 35, 45, 49, 60, 64, 
67, 71, 78, 86, 91, 98, 99, 102, 
116, 241, 242 

Panthis) 27, 31, 35, 37, 63, 68, 69, 
71, 74, 77 , 


PaonSth, 63, 67, 69 
Paramparas, 67, 75, 76, 77, 1 50 n., 
1 230, 277 

1 Parasnath, 233 
' Parikrama, 30, 31 
Pan ati, 10, 11, 15, 18, 57, 76, 81, 
104 flF., 108 f., 119, 152, 159, 
164 ff,, 182f., 190, 226, 231, 234, 
280 

I Pasu, 282 

Pasupata ^iva, 243, 248 
Pasupata(s), 156, 171, 218if., 224, 
232 n., 245, 281 

Pasupati (Paiupatinath), 11, 20, 
49 n., 73, 79. 88, 218, 220 f. 
Patala, 90, 108 

Patanjali, 4, 133 n., 213, 259, 262, 
265, 270. 272, 273, 347 
Patchword, 19, 64, 124 
Piivifri, 7, 11, 12, 19 
I Peacock (feathers), 23, 32, 57, 81, 
j 85, 87, 115 
Penance, 114, 116, 117 
Peshawar, 63, 65, 69, 71, 98, 116, 
118 

PhaOic, 12, 17, 115, 154,155 
Phallus (see Linga), 246, 249 
Pig, 45, 55, 56, 57, 92, 94, 95 
Pilgrim, 79, 80, 104, 106, 107, 
108, 109 

Pilgrimage, 3, 10, 15, 23, 24, 28, 
29, 30, 31, 34, 37, 39, 41, 52, 
78, 105, 106, 107, 114, 120, 1%, 
245 

Piri^/d, 290, 291, 292, 2%, 308. 

320, 327, 329 
Pipai tree, 88 
Pipe bowl, 22 

P/r, 8, 20, 26, 31, 34 n., 35, 36, 37, 
38, 42, 81, 95, %. 100, llln., 
115, 119, 207 
Pit Arr, 243 
Pir Patao, 118, 243 
Pif/ia (s), 90, 106, 310 
Polygamy, 53, 55 
Poona, 71, 75 
Pork, 45, 55 

I Possession (spirit), 97 
Posture (see also As^?rfa) 40, 53, 
58, 6D 



INDEX 


377 


Prajapati, 208, 212 
Prajnd, 278 
Prakrti, 163, 271, 317, 319, 343 I 
Prana (breath). 282, 289. 291, 292, 
293, 300, 302, 303, 304, 305 f. 
307, 308, 312, 313, 320, 325, 
327, 329, 331, 332, 335, 337, 
343, 344 

Prdndydma, 237, 238. 262, 265, 
267, 268, 273, 274, 282, 292 n., 
302, 306, 309, 320, 324 . 325, 
329, 330, 331, 335, 341 
Prasad, 37, 38, 96, 97, 139, 140 
Pt ati jiaksdhdra, 266 
Pratydhdra, 262, 265, 267, 268, 
340 n. 

Prayapa, 78, 134 
Puberty, 58 

Pujdri, 9, 34, 43, 47, 74, 80, 84, 
88, 94, 97 , 100 

Puran Ilhagat, 24, 98, 183 ff,, 
187f., 191, 197 flf., 206, 207, 
239 f., 241 

Puri, 7n., 8, 9, 19 n., 22, 36, 63, 
64, 124 

PurusGy 273, 313 


R/ivarja, 82, 90, 105 
Rawal 2, 49, 50, 53, 54, 55, 63, 
66, 115, 118, 121 
Rawalpindi, 66, 241 
i Razor, 6, 7, 29, 129, 203 
I Rectum, 306, 317, 337 
Red, 17, 20, 22, 40, 42, 56. 108, 

1 113,115,121,123 

! Rhinot-eros (and Horn), 7 f., 8n., 

1 Vi, !9, 58,127, 130, 131f., 168 n. 

1 Rice, 15, 17, 40, 42, 43, 45, 46, 

‘ 58, 104 

Rip Veda, 155 f., 163 175, 208, 
260, 347 

Rinps (sec Ear-rinps), 11, 40 
l^isikesh, 82 

Ramanuja, 220 f., 223, 224, 226 
Rosary (See Rudraksa), 13, 14, 15, 
16, 19, 20, 21, 34, 39, 40, 54, 

55, . 6, 104, 105, 107, 225 
Rot, 40, 42 

Rudia (see i5iva), 14, 155 ff., 211, 
212 f.. 305, 319, 342, 354 
Rudraksa, 11,13 f., 39, 40, 54, 55, 

56, 6(), 225, 313 
Rupee, 32, 35, 40 


RADHAKRISHNAN,265, 266, 

^ 270 

Raja Gaddi, 37 

Raja Rasalu, 24, 7., 183 f., 189, 
192, 201, 207, 239 f. 

Rajas, 289, 299, 318, 323, 325, 332, 
333 

Rdja^Yofra, 212, 274, 275, 342, 

H3 

Rajputs, 26, 54, 122, 123, 183 
Rama, 82, 90, 91, 104, 105, 200, 
238 

Ramai Pandit, 244, 245 
Ramcandra, 64, 101, 105 
Ramesvar, 78 
Ramnath, 64, 77, 80 
Rani Pihgla, 24, 183, 189, 242, 
244 • 

R^njha, 24. 25, 64, 71. 103, 183, 
185 f., 198 ff., 203, 205, 206, 207 
Rasalu, 241, 250 

Ratannath, 29, 35, 59, 63, 65, 66, 
79, 92, 95, 96, 97, 98 


C ACRED Thread {JaHco)y 11, 
^ 12, 13, 21, 29, 33, 40, 47, 52, 

54, 58, 60 

Sacrifice, 50, 55. 88, 94, 95, 107 
Sadhii, 6, 24, 118 
Sahasrdra, 316, 317, 322, 333 
l^aivite, 10 f., 13, 14, 16, 17, 88, 
93, 150, 152, 179, 181, 203, 218, 
232 ff., 247, 249 f., 262, 272, 
^ 279, 351 

Sakkarnath, 70, 71, 77 
^aktas, 14 n., 46, 53, 129, 130, 
162, 164, 174, 176, 178, 225, 
262, 272, 273, 274, 275, 318, 
351, 352, 353 

gakti, 9, 46, 52, 63, 69, 77, 78, 88, 
109, 111, 130, 139, 141, 144, 
152, 162, 164, 166, 167, 169, 
170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 
177, 224, 225, 231 n., 278, 279, 
281, 294. 299, 305, 310, 317, 
319, 322, 323, 331, 335, 336, 
339, 343, 345, 352, 354 



378 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 


jSaligrdm, 81, 85 i 

Salt, 40, 54. 58 ! 

Sdlu Samp, 60 

Samadh (see Tomb, Burial), 9 n., 
36, 39, 41, 42, 43, 66, 81, 82, 

85, 88, 89, 93, 94, 97, 102, 103, 
114, 115, 121, 123, 124 

Samadhi, 153, 172, 213, 262, 264, 
265, 268, 269, 270, 276, 289, 
324, 340 n., 341, 343, 344, 345, 
346, 347 

Sariikhva, 163, 212, 258 n., 262, 
263, 264, 268, 270, 271, 281 
Saiikara, 51. 151, 156, 220, 224, 
250, 254, 255, 264, 281 
Satmydsa, 263 

Sannydsi, 6, 52, 119, 191, 213, 218 
Santnath, 35, 47, 63 f., 71, 77, 81, 
116, 124 
Saransi, 24, 97 

Satnathis, 19, 20, 22, 34, 47, 63, 
64, 81, 116 

Sawarikot, 35, 79, 92, 95, 96 
Scalp-lock (see Cutiya), 18, 28, 
29, 30, 54 
Scissors, 29 

Sect, 33, 34, 47, 48, 57, 58, 63 
(See Chapter IV) 

Secular employment, 23 If., 47, 
49, 50 If., 55 ff., 66, 80 
Semen (See Hindu), 15 
Sepalas, 59 ff., 69, 133 
Shave (d), 18, 28, 29.31,54, 93 
Sheep, 11, 12, 19, 56 
Shoulder, 13, 21, 22 
Shrine, 29, 30, 36, 37, 39, 44 
Shroud, 29 

Sialkot, 2, 23, 71, 98, 129, 184, 
187, 201, 239, 241 
Siddha, 10, 33, 52, 53, 64, 69, 71, 

86, 99, 117, 136f., 159, 235, 
237 

Siddhi, 137f., 226, 272 
Sikhs, 24. 60, 99, 236 
Silver, 12, 20, 21, 23, 34, 40, 42, 
43, 58 

Sind, 3 n., 19 n., 40 n., 64. 89, 103, 
109, 118, 119, 242, 243 
Singnad, 8, 11, 12, 13, 29, 30 
Singndd--janeo, 12, 13, 29 


Sirala, 120, 149, 187 
Site, 90f., lOS 
Sitalg, 53 

§iva, 9, 10. 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 18, 
22, 36, 48, 49, 52. 53, 63, 64, 
66, 67, 69, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 
81 n., 83, 84, 85, 86, 89, 90, 94, 
98, 100, 102, 104 ff., 108 f., 113, 
119, 120, 122, 123, 128, 131, 
133, 136, 139, 140, 142, 143, 
152, 153, 154. 155ff., 162, 163, 
164, 165 f., 169, 171, 172, 173, 
174, 176, 177, 181, 182f., 190, 
212, 218, 219, 222, 224, 228, 
231, 234, 237, 246, 247, 248, 
249, 267, 273, 274, 280, 282, 
286, 299, 305, 310, 314, 315, 

317, 318, 322, 323, 325, 331, 
332, 339, 340, 342, 343, 344, 
348, 354 

J^iva Samhitd, 48, 150, 176 
Sivratri, 42, 57 

Snake (serpent), 24, 57, 59, 60, 
61, 69, 85, 88, 93, 98, 123 n., 
132fr., 149, 153, 160, 184, 188. 
191, 195, 196, 271, 315 
Snake Charmer, 95 
Somnathji, 38 
Songs, 24, 25 
Sorcerer, 1 
Sorcery, 55 

Spells (See Mantra), 23, 128 
Spirits, 17, 22, 23, 137 
^raddha, 42, 54 
Sri-enkra, 352 

Sri Nagar, 8n., 9n., 79, 80, 111 
Staff, 20, 21, 22, 40, 97 
‘Stone’ beads, 15 
Sudra, 23, 26, 51, 89, 140, 323 n. 
Sumarani, 14 

Sun, 50; 101, 131, 274, 299, 316, 

318, 319, 330 
Sundarnathji, 36, 37 
Simya, 277, 278, 279, 316, 343 
Su§umna, 282, 289, 290, 294, 308, 

309. 311, 316, 318, 320. 322, 324, 
329, 331, 334, 337, 340, 342, 343, 
344 

Svddi$fhdna, 288, 289, 310, 312, 
331, 332 



INDEX 


379 


Svastika, 128, 312 

Sweets, 28, 33, 41. 43, 96, 97 

Sword, 2, 109, 145. 186, 191, 224 

XABOO, 125, 131 
Talisman, 25 
'rank, 29, 94 

Tantra, 163, 164, 171, 274, 275, 
279, 280, 281, 283, 327 n., 352 
Tantra {Tdntric), 150, 151, 166, 
212, 218, 224, 2Jlii., 257, 272, 
274, 276, 278, 274, 280 
Tapas, 208 ff, 216 f., 266, 347, 
354 

Tara, 280 
Tattoo, 57 

Temple, 10, 28, 36, 44, 47, 9?f., 
246 f., 248, 249, 250 
Tharu, 59, 93 n. 

Tha^ha (Tat^a), 65, 89, 103, 104, 
105, 110, 243 
Third eye (of Siva), 4 
Thread (see Sacred 1 'bread and 
Janeo), 11, 12, 13, 20, 21, 33, 
40, 52, 54, 58, 60, 128, 138, 
154, 221, 227 

Throat, 306, 322, 323, 333, 336, 
338, 345 
Tibet, 3n., 280 

Tika, 12 n., 17, 37, 40, 94, 109, 
127, 129, 150 

Tilla, 7, 21, 26, 27 n., 34, 38, 46, 
62, 63, 64, 66, 68, 69, 71, 83, 
84, 86, 98, 100 rt., 129, 142 n., 
143, 150, 185, 201, 207, 229, 251 
Tirthay 109 

Tomb (see Samddh)^ 9, 36, 40, 
66, 94, 95 

IVance (see Samddhi), 43 
Trident (7'mw/), 11, 15, 20, 22, 
44 , 54. 55 , 78, 81 n., 84, 85, 87, 
88, 94, 96 f., 102, 104, 112, 113, 
114, 121, 123, 129, 154, 224, 247 
Trimbak, 70, 78, 121, 138, 160 
Tripund^l6y 17 
Trunk, 305, 306 

Tulsipur, 17n.. 35. 36, 38, 47, 
83, 96 

Turban, 19, 20, 30, 60, 193 n., 212 
Turmeric. 18 n., 42, 51 


Tweezers, 22 

Twelve, 30, 35, 66, 68, 82, 100, 

102 , 122 

I JDAIPUR, 122, 123 
^ Uddiyonay 295, 299, 315, 335, 
336, 337 

Uderolil, 64, 65 
Ujjain, 35, 65, 121, 244 
UriJied Province, 34, 45, 52, 58, 
67, 78, 82, 86, 89, 90, 106 
Upmmads\ 156, 176, 209, 213, 
216, 256 n., 259, 260, 261, 262, 
_ 263, 264, 270, 272, 281, 306, 314 
Ordhvabahu, 3n. 


WAG RANT, 4, 35 

^ Vniragyay 266 

Vaisna ite', 49 n., 88, 105, 113, 
150. 179, 203, 351 
Vaisya, 52, 323 n. 

Vojyohy 333, 335, 336, 341 
VafrUy 32 

Vajroydnay 275, 276, 277, 278, 
279, 351. 355 

Vamaedra, 15. 106, 169, 170, 171, 
172, 323, 355 
P^dmdfgay 69 
Varna-dharniUy 264 
Vayu, 306, 331, 337 
Veda, 15, 52 
Vedanta, 270, 281 
Vermin, 3, J6 
VibiiuiiSy 259, 270 
VijudnUy 211 y 279 
Vikramaditya, 244 
Viray 282 f. 

Vi§nu, 15, 53, 71, 75, 90, 113, 130, 
143, 150, 156f., 162, 167, 176, 
199, 228, 267, 305, 312, 342, 354 
Vih 4 ddha, 310, 314, 319, 332 
Vow, 27, 28, 31, 44-61, 126, 207, 
260 

Vratya, 212 f. 

Vydna, 306 

^ALLET (bag), 21 , 22, 29, 40, 
Water, 2, 25, 32, 33, 40, 42, 50, 53 



380 GORAKHNATH AND THE KANPHATA YOGIS 


65,81.95,97,130,131,136,139, 

143. 204. 311. 312. 328. 338, 344, 
345 

Water-bottle, 249 
Water-pipe, 20 
Weapon, 22, 28 
Weavers, 23 
Weddings, 52, 55 
Whistle (see Siiigndd), 11, l2, 
30, 58 

Widow, 5, 10, 42, 49. 50, 52, 53, 
55, 57, 58, 107 
Witchcraft, 49, 55 
Women (also Married), 1, 10, 24, 
27, 34, 44, 45, 46, 48, 51, 52, 
55, 57, 98, 107, 121 
Wood, 8 , 9, 10, 11, 20, 21 
Wool (Black Wool), 11, 12, 18, 19, 
20, 23, 40, 48, 54 
World, 14, 15, 16, 17, 29 
Worship, 12, 22, 37 
Wrist, 14 
Wound, 32 

YAJUR-VEDA, 156, 175 
^ Yak-tail, 21,81,96 
Yama, 265, 266, 268 
Yantra, 175, 176, 177, 178, 307, 
310, 346 

Yellow robe, 18, 123 
Yoga, 3, 4, 9, 23, 36, 39, 48, 60, 
74,76,91 n.,105, 126, 128,137, 
150,175,176,198, 200, 212, 216, 
220, 222, 225, 226, 229, 231, 238, 
251, 255, 257, 258, 283, 285, 288, 
295, 307, 308, 319, 320, 322, 323, 

326. 327. 332. 333. 338, 339, 340, | 


341.342, 346,347,348, 351,352. 
354 

Yogi (s), 1-25. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 
32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41, 
42, 43, 44, 46, 47,48, 50,51,52, 
55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 61,62, 63,64, 
66 , 67, 70, 71,72, 73, 74, 76, 77, 
80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 89, 90, 
91n., 93, 94. 98, 100, 101, 102, 
103, 104, 105, 109, no. 111, 
112, 115, 116, 118, 119, 122, 
123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 
129, 131, 132, 133, 135, 136, 
138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 149, 
150, 151, 152, 154, 160, 162, 
170, 172, 175, 178, 179, 184, 
185, 188, 190, 194, 197, 198, 
199, 200, 201. 202, 203, 207, 
210, 217, 218, 223, 224, 227, 
234, 236, 238, 239, 241, 243, 
246, 248, 250, 251, 256, 258, 
259, 260, 266, 267, 268, 269, 
270, 271, 272, 277, 278, 305, 
307, 314, 319, 320, 321, 322, 
323, 325, 326 
Yogini, 10, 48 

Yoni, 167, 172, 177, 288, 310, 
311, 335 

Yom-)inga, 17, 40, 80, 81, 85, 93, 
109, 115, 154 
Yonimudrd, 298, 336 
Yonisthdna, 288, 298, 335, 373 
Yuga, 228 f. 

7 AHIR Pir, 25 
^ Zodiac, 14 n. 

I Zoroastrian, 108 



Plate I 









MAHAN! OF PLJt<I MAHANT AND DHINODHAR (1924) 

With Sudariano^ rings of copper and 
patch-work' garments 

















Plate XIT 



mOladhara CAKRA 



Platk XI \ 



TRIsOLS A'l GORAKHPUR 






