This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world’s books discoverable online.
It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover.
Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

   + Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
     personal, non-commercial purposes.
   + Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine
     translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
     use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.
   + Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
     additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.
   + Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
     because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
     countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any specific use of
     any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
     anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web
at http://books.google.com/
               TRA NSLATION


                               'OF THE




    SLTRYA-SIDDHANTA,

A. TEXT-BOOK OF HINDU ASTRONOMY;

       WITH NOTES, AND AN APPENDIX,

CONTAINING ADDITIONAL. NOTES AND TABLES, CALCULATIONS OF
          ECLIPSES, A STELLAR MAP-, AND INDEXES.




        BY REV. EBENEZER BURGESS,
          FORMERLY MISSIONARY OF THE A. B, 0. F. M, IN INDIA. ;.



                          ASSISTED BY THE


COMMITTEE OF PUBLICATION OF THE AMERICAN ORIENTAL SOCIETY.




              NEW HAVEN:
  F-OR THE AMERICAN ORIENTAL SOCIETY,
              PRINTED BY E. HAYES, PRINTER TO TALK COLLEOB.
                               KDOOOLX.




                              0 £1$.
\
HINDU ASTKONOMY.
                  TRANSLATION

                                 OF THE




     SfrRYA-SIDDHlNTA,

A TEXT-BOOK OF HINDU ASTRONOMY;

        WITH NOTES, AND AN APPENDIX,
CONTAINING ADDITIONAL NOTES AND TABLES, CALCULATIONS OF
         ECLIPSES, A STELLAR MAP, AND INDEXES.



        By REV. EBENEZER BURGESS,
           FOKMEBLY MISSIONARY OF THE A. B. C. F. Ji. IN INDIA J


                           ASSISTED BY THE


COMMITTEE OP PUBLICATION OF THE AMERICAN ORIENTAL SOCIETY.




 [FnOM THE JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN ORIENTAL SOCIETY, VOL. vi, I860.]




            NEW HAVEN:
 FOR THE AMERICAN ORIENTAL SOCIETY,
               PRINTED BY E. HAYES, PRINTER TO YALE CotLEGg.
                               MDOCCLX.

                     SOLD BY THE SOCIETY'S AGENTS I
          NEW YORK : JOHN WILEY, 56 WALKER ST. ;
       LONDON: TRUBNER & CO.; PARIS: BENJ. DUPRAT;
                LEIPZIG: F. A. BROCKHAUS.
  COMMITTEE               OF PUBLICATION
                           OF THE

AMERICAK ORIENTAL                             SOCIETY,
                 FOB THE TEAKS 1858-60.


 EDWARD E. SALISBURY,                      New Haven.
 WILLIAM D. WHITNEY,                           "
 JAMES HADLEY,                                 "
 EZRA ABBOT,                               Cambridge.
 WILLIAM W. TURNER,                        Washington.




Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1860, by the
                AMERICAN ORIENTAL SOCIETY,
   in the Cletk'a Office of the Diitrict Court of Connecticut
                       TRANSLATION
                                                              •
                                   OF THE



               SURYA-SIDDHANTA,
          WITH NOTES, AND AN APPENDIX.


[Communicated to the American Oriental Society May 17, 1858, and published in
                      the Sixth Volume of its Journal.]



                         INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
    Soon after my entrance upon the missionary field, in the Maratha
country of western India, in the year 1839, my attention was directed
to the preparation, in the Marathl language, of an astronomical text
book for schools. I was thus led to a study of the Hindu science of
astronomy, as exhibited in the native text-books, and to an examination
of what had been written respecting it by European scholars. I at
once found myself, on the one hand, highly interested by the subject
itself, and, on the other, somewhat embarrassed for want of a satisfactory
introduction to it. A comprehensive exhibition of the Hindu system had
nowhere been made. The Astronomic Indienne of Bailly, the first ex
tended work upon its subject, had long been acknowledged to be founded
upon insufficient data, to contain a greatly exaggerated estimate of the
antiquity and value of the Hindu astronomy, and to have been written
for the purpose of supporting an untenable theory. The articles in the
Asiatic Researches, by Davis, Colebrooke, and Bentley, which were the
first, as they still remain the most important, sources of knowledge re
specting the matters with which they deal, relate only to particular
points in the system, of especial prominence and interest. Bentley's
volume on Hindu astronomy is mainly occupied with an endeavor to
ascertain the age of the principal astronomical treatises, and the epochs
of astronomical discovery and progress, and is, moreover, even in these
respects, an exceedingly unsafe guide. The treatment of the subject by
Delambre, in his History of Ancient Astronomy, being founded only
npon Bailly and the earliest of the essays in the Asiatic Researches,
partakes, of course, of the incompleteness of his authorities. Works
of value have been published in India also, into which more or less of
 Hindu astronomy enters, as Warren's Kala Sankalita, Jervis's Weights
 Measures and Coins of India, Hoisington's Oriental Astronomer, and
                                   11
the like; but these, too, give, for the most part, hardly more than the
practical processes employed in parts of the system, and they are, like
many of the authorities already mentioned, only with difficulty accessi
ble. In short, there was nothing in existence which showed the world
how much and how little the Hindus know of astronomy, as also their
mode of presenting the subject in its totality, the intermixture in their
science of old ideas with new, of astronomy with astrology, of observa
tion and mathematical deduction with arbitrary theory, mythology,
cosmogony, and pure imagination. It seemed to me that nothing would
so well supply the deficiency as the translation and detailed explication
of a complete treatise of Hindu astronomy : and this work I accord
ingly undertook to execute.
   Among the different Siddhantas, or text-books of astronomy, existing
in India in the Sanskrit language, none appeared better suited to my
purpose than the Surya-Siddhanta. That it is one of the most highly
esteemed, best known, and most frequently employed, of all, must be
evident to any one who has noticed how much oftener than any other
it is referred to as authority in the various papers on the Hindu astron
omy. In fact, the science as practised in modern India is in the greater
part founded upon its data and processes. In the lists of Siddhantas
given by native authorities it is almost invariably mentioned second, the
Brahnia-Siddhanta being placed first : the latter enjoys this preminence,
perhaps, mainly on account of its name ; it is, at any rate, compara
tively rare and little known. For completeness, simplicity, and concise
ness combined, the Surya-Siddhanta is believed not to be surpassed by
any other. It is also more easily obtainable. In general, it is difficult,
without official influence or exorbitant pay, to gain possession of texts
which are rare and held in high esteem. During my stay in India, I
was able to procure copies of only three astronomical treatises besides
the Surya-Siddhanta ; the Cakalya-Sanhita of the Brahma-Siddhanta,
the Siddhanta-Ciromani of Bbaskara, and the Graha-Laghava, of which
the two latter have also been printed at Calcutta. Of the Surya-
Siddhanta I obtained three copies, two of them giving the text alone,
and the third also the commentary entitled Gudharthaprakagaka, by
Kanganatha, of which the date is unknown to me. The latter manu
script agrees in all respects with the edition of the Surya-Siddhanta,
accompanied by the same commentary, of which the publication, in the
scries entitled Bibliotheca Indica, has been commenced in India by
an American scholar, and a member of this Society, Prof. Fitz-Edward
Hall of Benares ; to this I have also had access, although not until my
work was nearly completed.
   My first rough draft of the translation and notes was made while I
was still in India, with the aid of Brahmans who were familiar with the
Sanskrit and well versed in Hindu astronomical science. In a few points
also I received help from the native Professor of Mathematics in the
Sanskrit College at Puna. But notwithstanding this, there remained
not a few obscure and difficult points, connected with the demonstration
and application of the processes taught in the text. In the solution of
these, I have received very important assistance from the Committee of
Publication of the Society. They have also—the main share of the
                                     Ill
work falling to Prof. Whitney—enriched the notes with much additional
matter of value. My whole collected material, in fact, was placed in
their hands for revision, expansion, and reduction to the form best
answering to the requirements of modern scholars, my own engrossing
occupations, and distance from the place of publication, as well as my
confidence in their ability and judgment, leading me to prefer to intrust
this work to them rather than to undertake its execution myself.
   We have also to express our acknowledgments to Mr. Hubert A.
Newton, Professor of Mathematics in Yale College, for valuable aid ren
dered us in the more difficult demonstrations, and in the comparison of
the Hindu and Greek astronomies, as well as for his constant advice and
suggestions, which add not a little to the value of the work.
    The Surya-Siddhanta, like the larger portion of the Sanskrit litera
 ture, is written in the verse commonly called the floka, or in stanzas of
 two lines, each line being composed of two halves, or padas, of eight
syllables each. With its metrical form are connected one or two pecu
liarities which call for notice. In the first place, for the terms used
there are often many synonyms, which are employed according to the
exigencies of the verse : thus, the sun has twelve different names, Mars
six, the divisions of time two or three each, radius six or eight, and so
on. Again, the method of expressing numbers, large or small, is by
naming the figures which compose them, beginning with the last and
foing backward ; using for each figure not only its own proper name,
   ut that of any object associated in the Hindu mind with the number it
 represents. Thus, the number 1,577,917,828 (i. 37) is thus given:
 Vasu (a class of deities, eight in number) -two-eight-mountain (the seven
 mythical chains of mountains) -form-figure (the nine digits) -seven-moun
tain-lunar days (of which there are fifteen in the half-month). Once
more, the style of expression of the treatise is, in general, excessively
 concise and elliptical, often to a degree that would make its meaning
entirely unintelligible without a commentary, the exposition of a native
teacher, or such a knowledge of the subject treated of as should show
what the text must be meant to say. Some striking instances are
pointed out in the notes. This over-conciseness, however, is not wholly
due to the metrical form of the treatise : it is characteristic of much of
the Hindu scientific literature, in its various branches ; its text-books are
wont to be intended as only the text for written comment or oral expli
cation, and hint, rather than fully express, the meaning they contain.
In our translation, we have not thought it worth while to indicate, by
parentheses or otherwise, the words and phrases introduced by us to
make the meaning of the text evident : such a course would occasion
the reader much more embarrassment than satisfaction. Our endeavor,
is, in all cases, to hit the true mean between unintelligibility and diffuse-
ness, altering the phraseology and construction of the original only so
far as is necessary. In both the translation and the notes, moreover,
we keep steadily in view the interests of the two classes of readers for
whose benefit the work is undertaken : those who are orientalists with
out being astronomers, and those who are astronomers without being
orientalists. For the sakeof the former, our explanations and demon
                                      iv
strations are made more elementary and full than would be necessary,
 were we addressing mathematicians only : for the sake of the latter, we
 cast the whole into a form as occidental as may be, translating every
technical term which admits of translation : since to compel all those who
 may desire to inform themselves respecting the scientific content of the
 Hindu astronomy to learn the Sanskrit technical language would be
 highly unreasonable. To furnish no ground of complaint, however, to
 those who are familiar with and attached to these terms, we insert them
 liberally in the translation, in connection with their English equivalents.
 The derivation and literal signification of the greater part of the tech
 nical terms employed in the treatise are also given in the notes, since
 such an explanation of the history of a term is often essential to its
 full comprehension, and throws valuable light upon the conceptions of
 those by whom it was originally applied.
    We adopt, as the text of our translation, the published edition of the
 Siddhanta, referred to above, following its readings and its order of ar
 rangement, wherever they differ, as they do in many places, from those
 of the manuscripts without commentary in our possession. The dis
 cordances of the two versions, when they are of sufficient consequence
 to be worth notice, are mentioned in the notes.
    As regards the transcription of Sanskrit words in Roman letters, we
 need only specify that c represents the sound of the English ch in
 " church," Italian c before e and i : that./ is the English .;' : that f is pro
 nounced like the English sh, German sch, French ch, while sh is a sound
 nearly resembling it, but uttered with the tip of the tongue turned back
 into the top of the mouth, as are the other lingual letters, t, d, n:
 finally, that the Sanskrit r used as a vowel (which value it has also in
some of the Slavonic dialects) is written with a dot underneath, as r.
    The demonstrations of principles and processes given by the native
 commentary are made without the help of figures. The figures which,
 we introduce are for the most part our own, although a few of them
 were suggested by those of a set obtained in India, from native mathe
maticians.
    For the discussion of such general questions relating to this Siddhanta
 as its age, its authorship, the alterations which it may have undergone
 before being brought into its present form, the stage which it represents
 in the progress of Hindu mathematical science, the extent and character
 of the mathematical and astronomical knowledge displayed in it, and
 the relation of the same to that of other ancient nations, especially of
 the Greeks, the reader is referred to the notes upon the text. The form
 in which our publication is made does not allow us to sum up here, in
 a preface, the final results of our investigations into these and kindred
_topics. It may perhaps be found advisable to present such a summary
 at the end of the article, in connection with the additional notes and
 other matters to be there given.
                     SURYA-SIDDHANTA.


                                CHAPTER I,
              OF THE MEAN MOTIONS OF THE PLANETS.
CONTENTS:—1, homage to the Deity; 2-9, revelation of the present treatise; 10-11,
  modes of dividing time ; 11-12, subdivisions of :i day ; 12-14, of a year ; 14-1 7,
  of the Ages ; 18-19, of an JSon ; 20-21, of Brahma's life ; 21-23, part of it
  already elapsed ; 24, time occupied in the work of creation ; 25-27, general
  account of the movements of the planets ; 28, subdivisions of the circle ; 29-33,
  number of revolutions of the planets, and of the moon's apsis and node, in an
  Age ; 34-39, number of days and months, of different kinds, in an Age ; 40, in an
  ^Eon ; 41-44, number of revolutions, in an ..-lion, of the apsides and nodes of the
  planets ; 45-47, time elapsed from the end of creation to that of the G olden Age ;
  48-51, rule for the reduction to civil days of the whole time since the creation ;
  51-52, method of finding the lords of the day, the month, and the year ; 53-54,
  rule for finding the mean place of a planet, and of its apsis and node ; 55, to find
  the current year of the cycle of Jupiter ; 56, simplification of the above calcula
  tions; 5t-58, situation of the planets, and of the moon's apsis and node, at the
  end of the Golden Age; 59-60, dimensions of the earth; 60-61, correction, for
  difference of longitude, of the mean place of a planet as found ; 62, situation of
  the principal meridian ; 63-65, ascertainment of difference of longitude by differ
  ence between observed and computed time of a lunar eclipse ; 66, difference of
  time owing to difference of longitude ; 67, to find the mean place of a planet for
  any required hour of the day ; 68-70, inclination of the orbits of the planets.

  1. To him whose shape is inconceivable and unmanifested,
who is unaffected by the qualities, whose nature is quality,
whose form is the support of the entire creation—to Brahma be
homage !
  The usual propitiatory expression of homage to some deity, with
which Hindu works are wont to commence,
   2. When but little of the Golden Age (krta yuga) was left, a
great demon (asura), named Maya, being desirous to know that
mysterious, supreme, pure, and exalted science,
   3. That chief auxiliary of the scripture (veddnga), in its en
tirety—the cause, namely, of the motion of the heavenly bodies
(jyotis), performed, in propitiation of the Sun, very severe re
ligious austerities.
                               1
2                          Surya-Siddhdnta.                           [i. 3-
   According to this, the Surya-Siddhanta was revealed more than
2,164,960 years ago, that amount of time having elapsed, according to
Hindu reckoning, since the end of the Golden Age ; see below, under
verse 48, for the computation of the period. As regards the actual
date of the treatise, it is, like all dates in Hindu history and the history
of Hindu literature, exceedingly difficult to ascertain. It is the more
difficult, because, unlike most, or all, of the astronomical treatises, the
Surya-Siddhanta attaches itself to the name of no individual as its
author, but professes to be a direct revelation from the Sun (surya). A
treatise of this name, however, is confessedly among the earliest text
books of the Indian science. It was one of the five earlier works upon
which was founded the Panca-siddhantika, Compendium of Five As
tronomies, of Varaha-mihira, one of the earliest astronomers whose works
have been, in part, preserved to us, and who is supposed to have lived
about the beginning of the sixth century of our era. A Surya-Siddhanta
is also referred to by Brahmagupta, who is assigned to the close of the
same century and the commencement of the one following. The argu
ments by which Mr. Bentley (Hindu Astronomy, p. 158, etc.) attempts
to prove Varaha-mihira to have lived in the sixteenth century, and his
professed works to be forgeries and impositions, are sufficiently refuted
by the testimony of al-Biruni (the same person as the Abu-r-Raihan, so
often quoted in the first article of this volume), who visited India under
Mahmud of Ghazna, and wrote in A. D. 1031 an account of the coun
try : he speaks of Varaha-mihira and of his Panca-siddhantika, assign
ing to both nearly the same age as is attributed to them by the modern
Hindus (see Reinaud in the Journal Asiatique for Sept.-Oct. 1844, ivme
Serie, iv. 286; and also his Memoire sur 1'Inde). He also speaks of the
Surya-Siddhanta itself, and ascribes its authorship to Lata (Memoire sur
1'Inde, pp. 331, 332), whom Weber (Vorlesungen iiber Indische Litera-
turgeschichte, p. 229) conjecturally identifies with a Ladha who is cited
by Brahmagupta. Bentley has endeavored to show by internal evi
dence that the Surya-Siddhanta belongs to the end of the eleventh
century : see below, under verses 29-34, where his method and results
are explained, and their value estimated.
   Of the six Vedangas, " limbs of the Veda," sciences auxiliary to the
sacred scriptures, astronomy is claimed to be the first and chief, as rep
resenting the eyes ; grammar being the mouth, ceremonial the hands,
prosody the feet, etc. (see Siddhanta-Qiromani, i. 12-14). The import
ance of astronomy to the system of religious observance lies in the fact
that by it are determined the proper times of sacrifice and the like.
There is a special treatise, the Jyotisha of Lagadha, or Lagata, which,
attaching itself to the Vedic texts, and representing a more primitive
phase of Hindu science, claims to be the astronomical Vedanga ; but it
is said to be of late date and of small importance.
   The word jyotis, " heavenly body," literally " light," although the
current names for astronomy and astronomers are derived from it, does
not elsewhere occur in this treatise.
  4. Gratified by these austerities, and rendered propitious, the
Sun himself delivered unto that Maya, who besought a boon,
the system of the planets.
i. 6.]                   Translation and Notes.                           3
   The blessed Sun spoke :
   5. Thine intent is known to me; I am gratified by thine aus
terities ; I will give thee the science upon which time is founded,
the grand system of the planets.
   6. No one is able to endure my brilliancy; for communication
I have no leisure ; this person, who is a part of me, shall relate
to thee the whole.
   The manuscripts without commentary insert here the following verse :
   " Go therefore to Ilomaka-city, thine own residence ; there, under
going incarnation as a barbarian, owing to a curse of Brahma, I will
impart to thee this science."
   If this verse really formed a part of the text, it would be as clear
an acknowledgment as the author could well convey indirectly, that
the science displayed in his treatise was derived from the Greeks.
Romaka-city is Rome, the great metropolis of the West ; its situation is
given in a following chapter (see xii. 39) as upon the equator, ninety
degrees to the west of India. The incarnation of the sun there as a
barbarian, for the purpose of revealing astronomy to a demon of the
Hindu Pantheon, is but a transparent artifice for referring the foreign
science, after all, to a Hindu origin. But the verse is clearly out of
place here ; it is inconsistent with the other verses among which it
occurs, which give a different version of the method of revelation.
How comes it here then ? It can hardly have been gratuitously devised
and introduced. The verse itself is found in many of the manuscripts
of this Siddh^nta ; and the incarnation of the Sun at Romaka-city,
among the Yavanas, or Greeks, and his revelation of the science of
astronomy there, are variously alluded to in later works ; as, for instance,
in the Jnana-bhaskara (see Weber's Catalogue of the Berlin Sanskrit
Manuscripts, p. 287, etc.), where he is asserted to have revealed also the
Romaka-Siddhanta. Is this verse, then, a fragment of a different, and
perhaps more ancient, account of the origin of the treatise, for which,
as conveying too ingenuous a confession of the source of the Hindu
astronomy, another has been substituted later? Such a supposition,
certainly, does not lack plausibility. There is something which looks
the same way in the selection of a demon, an Asura, to be the medium
of the sun's revelation ; as if, while the essential truth and value of the
system was acknowledged, it were sought to affix a stigma to the source
whence the Hindus derived it. Weber (Ind. Stud. ii. 243 ; Ind. Lit. p.
225), noticing that the name of the Egyptian sovereign Ptolemaios
occurs in Indian inscriptions in the form Turamaya, conjectures that
Asura Maya is an alteration of that name, and that the demon Maya ac
cordingly represents the author of the Almagest himself; and the conjec
ture is powerfully supported by the fact that al-Biruni (see Reinaud, as
above) ascribes the Paulica-Siddhanta, which the later Hindus attribute
to a Pulie,a, to Paulus al-Yunani, Paulus the Greek, and that another of the
astronomical treatises, alluded to above, is called the Romaka-Siddhanta.
   It would be premature to discuss here the relation of the Hindu
astronomy to the Greek ; we propose to sum up, at the end of this
work, the evidence upon the subject which it contains.
4                          S&rya-Siddhdnta.                           [i. 7-
   7. Thus having spoken, the god disappeared, having given
directions unto the part of himself. This latter person thus ad
dressed Maya, as he stood bowed forward, his hands suppliantly
joined before him :
   8. Listen with concentrated attention to the ancient and exalted
science, which has been spoken, in each successive Age, to the
Great Sages (maharshf), by the Sun himself.
   9. This is that very same original text-book which the Sun of
old promulgated : only, by reason of the revolution of the Ages,
there is here a difference of times.
   According to the commentary, the meaning of these last .verses is
that, in the successive Great Ages, or periods of 4,320,000 years (see
below, under vv. 15-17), there are slight differences in the motions of
the heavenly bodies, which render necessary a new revelation from time
to time on the part of the Sun, suited to the altered conditions of things ;
and that when, moreover, even during the continuance of the same Age,
differences of motion are noticed, owing to a difference of period, it is
customary to apply to the data given a correction, which is called btja.
All this is very suitable for the commentator to say, but it seems not a
little curious to find the Sun's superhuman representative himself in
sisting that this his revelation is the same one as had formerly been
made by the Sun, only with different data. We cannot help suspecting
in the ninth verse, rather, a virtual confession on the part of the promul-
gators of this treatise, that there was another, or that there were others,
in existence, claiming to be the sun's revelation, or else that the data
presented in this were different from those which had been previously
current as revealed by the Sun. We shall have more to say hereafter
(see below, under vv. 29-34) of the probable existence of more than
one version of the Surya-Siddhanta, of the correction called bija, and
of its incorporation into the text of the treatise itself. The repeated
revelation of the system in each successive Great Age, as stated in verse
8, presents no difficulty. It is the Puranic doctrine (see Wilson's Vishnu
Purana, p. 269, etc.) that during the Iron Age the sources of knowledge
become either corrupted or lost, so that a new revelation of scripture,
law, and science becomes necessary during the Age succeeding.
  10. Time is the destroyer of the worlds ; another Time has
for its nature to bring to pass. This latter, according as it is
gross or minute, is called by two names, real (m'&rta) and unreal
(amurta).
   There is in this verse a curious mingling together of the poetical, the
theoretical, and the practical. To the Hindus, as to us, Time is, in a
metaphorical sense, the great destroyer of all things; as such, he is
identified with Death, and with Yama, the ruler of the dead. Time,
again, in the ordinary acceptation of the word, has both its imaginary,
and its appreciable and practically useful divisions : the former are called
real (murta, literally " embodied "), the latter unreal (amurta, literally
" unembodied"). The following verse explains these divisions more fully.




    --
i. 12.]                     Translation and Notes.                                  6
   The epithet kalan&tmaka, applied to actual time in the first half of
the verse, is not easy of interpretation. The commentary translates it
"is an object of knowledge, is capable of being known," which does not
seem satisfactory. It evidently contains a suggested etymology (k&la,
" time," from kalana), and in translating it as above we have seen in it
also an antithesis to the epithet bestowed upon Time the divinity.
Perhaps it should be rather " has for its office enumeration."
   11. That which begins with respirations (prdna) is called real ;
that which begins with atoms (truti) is called unreal. Six respi
rations make a vinddi, sixty of these a nddi ;
   12. And sixty nadis make a sidereal day and night. . . .
   The manuscripts without commentary insert, as the first half of v. 11,
the usual definition of the length of a respiration : " the time occupied
in pronouncing ten long syllables is called a respiration."
   The table of the divisions of sidereal time is then as follows :
    i o long syllables (gurvakthara) = I respiration (prdna, period of four seconds) ;
      6 respirations                 = i yinadi (period of twenty-four seconds) ;
    60 vinadis                       = i nadi (period of twenty-four minutes) ;
    60 nadis                         = I day.
   This is the method of division usually adopted in the astronomical
text-books : it possesses the convenient property that its lowest sub
division, the respiration, is the same part of the day as the minute is of
the circle, so that a respiration of time is equivalent to a minute of
revolution of the heavenly bodies about the earth. The respiration is
much more frequently called asu, in the text both of this and of the
other Siddhantas. The vinadi is practically of small consequence, and
is only two or three times made use of in the treatise : its usual modern
name is pala, but as this term nowhere occurs in our text, we have not
felt justified in substituting it for vinadi. For nadi also, the more
common name is danda, but this, too, the Surya-Siddhanta • nowhere
employs, although it uses instead of nadi, and quite as often, nadik& and
ghatik&. We shall uniformly make use in our translation of the terms
presented above, since there are no English equivalents which admit of
being substituted for them.
   The ordinary Puranic division of the day is slightly different from the
astronomical, viz :
              1 5 twinklings (nimesha)        = i bit (kdshthd) ;
              3o bits                         = i minute (kald) ;
              3o minutes                      = i hour (muhurta) ;
              3o hours                        = i day.
   Manu (i. 64) gives the same, excepting that he makes the bit to con
sist of 18 twinklings. Other authorities assign different values to the
lesser measures of time, but all agree in the main fact of the division of
the day into thirty hours, which, being perhaps an imitation of the
division of the month into thirty days, is unquestionably the ancient and
original Hindu method of reckoning time.
   The Surya-Siddhanta, with commendable moderation, refrains from
giving the imaginary subdivisions of the respiration which make up
      6                               Sarya-Siddhdnta.                      [i. 12-
      " unreal " time. They are thus stated in Bhaskara's Siddhanta-Qiromani
      (i. 19, 20), along with the other, the astronomical, table :
                  too atoms (truti)             =   speck (tatpara) ;
                   3o specks                    = twinkling (nimetha);
                   1 8 twinklings               = bit (kdtluhd) •
                   3o bits                      = minute (kald) ;
                   3o minutes                   = half-hour (ghatikd); .
                     i half-hours               = I hour (kthana) ;
                   3o hours                     = i day.
         This makes the atom equal to s-ffTB-TJuTrrnroth of a day, or
       of a second. Some of the Puranas (see Wilson's Vish. Pur. p. 22) give
      a different division, which makes the atom about •z-sfath of a second ;
      but they carry the division three steps farther, to the subtilissima
      (param&nu), which equals a a t) o 5mnnnjth of a day, or very nearly
      TnHnnrth of .a second.
          We have introduced here a statement of these minute subdivisions,
      because they form a natural counterpart to the immense periods which we
      shall soon have to consider, and are, with the latter, curiously illustrative
      of a fundamental trait of Hindu character : a fantastic imaginativeness,
      which delights itself with arbitrary theorizings, and is unrestrained by,
      and careless of, actual realities. Thus, having no instruments by which
      they could measure even seconds with any tolerable precision, they vied
      with one another in dividing the second down to the farthest conceivable
      limit of minuteness ; thus, seeking infinity in the other direction also,
      while they were almost destitute of a chronology or a history, and could
      hardly fix with accuracy the date of any event beyond the memory of
      the living generation, they devised, and put forth as actual, a frame
      work of chronology reaching for millions of millions of years back into
      the past and forward into the future.
         12. ... Of thirty of these sidereal days is composed a month ;
      a civil (sdvana) month consists of as many sunrises ;
         13. A lunar month, of as many lunar days (tithi); a solar
      (sdura) month is determined by the entrance of the sun into a
      sign of the zodiac : twelve months make a year. . . .
         We have here described days of three different kinds, and months
      and years of four ; since, according to the commentary, the last clause
      translated means that twelve months of each denomination make up a
      year of the same denomination. Of some of these, the practical use
      and value will be made to appear later ; but as others are not elsewhere
      referred to in this treatise, and as several are merely arbitrary divisions
      of time, of which, so far as we can discover, no use has ever been made,
      it may not be amiss briefly to characterize them here.
         Of the measures of time referred to in the twelfth verse, the day is
      evidently the starting-point and standard. The sidereal day is the time
      of the earth's revolution on its axis ; data for determining its length are
      given below, in v. 34, but it does not enter as an element into the later
      processes. Nor is a sidereal month of thirty sidereal days, or a sidereal
      year of three hundred and sixty such days (being less than the true
      sidereal year by about six and a quarter sidereal days), elsewhere men-



'-.
i. 13.]                  Translation and Notes.                          7

tioned in this work, or, so far as we know, made account of in any
Hindu method of reckoning time. The civil (sdvana) day is the natural
day : it is counted, in India, from sunrise to sunrise (see below, v. 36),
and is accordingly of variable length : it is, of course, an important
element in all computations of time. A month of thirty, and a year of
three hundred and sixty, such days, are supposed to have formed the
basis of the earliest Hindu chronology, an intercalary month being added
once in five years. This method is long since out of use, however, and
the month and year referred to here in the text, of thirty and three
hundred and sixty natural days respectively, without intercalations, are
elsewhere assumed and made use of only in determining, for astrological
purposes, the lords of the month and year (see below, v. 52).
   The standard of the lunar measure of time is the lunar month, the
period of the moon's synodical revolution. It is reckoned either from
new-moon to new-moon, or from full-moon to full-moon ; generally, the
former is called mukhya, " primary," and the latter g&uTia, " secondary " :
but, according to our commentator, either of them may be denominated
primary, although in fact, in this treatise, only the first of them is so
regarded ; and the secondary lunar month is that which is reckoned
from any given lunar day to the next of the same name. This natural
month, containing about twenty-nine and a half days, mean solar time,
is then divided into thirty lunar days (titki), and this division, although
of so unnatural and arbitrary a character, the lunar days beginning and
ending at any moment of the natural day and night, is, to the Hindu,
of the most prominent practical importance, since by it are regulated
the performance of many religious ceremonies (see below, xiv. 13), and
upon it depend the chief considerations of propitious and unpropitious
times, and the like. Of the lunar year of twelve lunar months, how
ever, we know of no use made in India, either formerly or now, except
as it has been introduced and employed by the Mohammedans.
   Finally, the year last mentioned, the solar year, is that by which time
is ordinarily reckoned in India. It is, however, not the tropical solar
year, which we employ, but the sidereal, no account being made of the
precession of the equinoxes. The solar month is measured by the con
tinuance of the sun in each successive sign, and varies, according to the
rapidity of his motion, from about twenty-nine and a. third, to a little
more than thirty-one and a half, days. There is no day corresponding
to this measure of the month and of the year.
   In the ordinary reckoning of time, these elements are variously com
bined. Throughout Southern India (see Warren's Kala Sankalita,
Madras: 1825, p. 4, etc.), the year and month made use of are the
solar, and the day the civil ; the beginning of each month and year
being counted, in practice, from the sunrise nearest to the moment of
their actual commencement. In all Northern India the year is luni-
solar ; the month is lunar, and is divided into both lunar and civil days ;
the year is composed of a variable number of months, either twelve or
thirteen, beginning always with the lunar month of which the com
mencement next precedes the true commencement of the sidereal year.
But, underneath this division, the division of the actual sidereal year
into twelve solar months is likewise kept up, and to maintain the con-



                                                                              -
8                          Sunja-Siddhdnia.                        [i. 13-

currencc of the civil and lunar days, and the lunar and solar months, is
a process of great complexity, into the details of which we need not
enter here (see Warren, as above, p. 57, etc.). It will be seen later in
this chapter (w. 48-51) that the Surya-Siddhanta reckons time by this
latter system, by the combination of civil, lunar, and sidereal elements.
   13. ... This is called a day of the gods.
   14. The day and night of the gods and of the demons are
mutually opposed to one another. Six times sixty of them are
a year of the gods, and likewise of the demons.
   " This is called," etc. : that is, as the commentary explains, the year
composed of twelve solar months, as being those last mentioned ; the
sidereal year. It appears to us very questionable whether, in the first
instance, anything more was meant by calling the year a day of the
gods than to intimate that those beings of a higher order reckoned time
upon a grander scale : just as the month was said to be a day of the
Fathers, or Manes (xiv. 14), the Patriarchate (v. 18), a day of the
Patriarchs (xiv. 21), and the JEon (v. 20), a day of Brahma; all these
being familiar Puranic designations. In the astronomical reconstruction
of the Puranic system, however, a physical meaning has been given to
this day of the gods : the gods are made to reside at the north pole, and
the demons at the south ; and then, of course, during the half-year
when the sun is north of the equator, it is day to the gods and night to
the demons ; and during the other half-year, the contrary. The subject
is dwelt upon at some length in the twelfth chapter (xii. 45, etc.).
To make such a division accurate, the year ought to be the tropical, and
not the sidereal ; but the author of the Surya-Siddhanta has not yet
begun to take into account the precession. See what is said upon this
subject in the third chapter (vv. 9-10).
   The year of the gods, or the divine year, is employed only in des
cribing the immense periods of which the statement now follows.
   15. Twelve thousand of these divine years are denominated
a Quadruple Age (caturyugd) ; of ten thousand times four hun
dred and thirty-two solar years
   16. Is composed that Quadruple Age, with its dawn and twi
light. The difference of the Golden and the other Ages, as
measured by the difference in the number of the feet of Virtue
in each, is as follows :
   17. The tenth part of an Age, multiplied successively by four,
three, two, and one, gives the length of the Golden and the other
Ages, in order : the sixth part of each belongs to its dawn and
twilight.
   The period of 4,320,000 years is ordinarily styled Great Age (ma-
h&yuga), or, as above in two instances, Quadruple Age (caturyuga).
In the Surya-Siddhanta, however, the former term is not once found,
and the latter occurs only in these verses ; elsewhere, Age (yuga) alone
is employed to denote it ; and always denotes it, unless expressly limited
by the name of the Golden (krta) Age.
i. 17.]                     Translation and Notes.
  The composition of the Age, or Great Age, is then as follows :
                                           Divine years.         Solar years.
      Dawn,                                 4oo              i44,ooo
    Golden Age (krta yoga),                4ooo            1,440,000
      Twilight,                             4oo             1 44,ooo
    Total duration of the Golden Age,              4,8oo               1,728,000
      Dawn,                                 3oo              108,000
    Silver Age (tretd yuga),               3ooo            1,080,000
      Twilight,                             3oo             108,000

    Total duration of the Silver Age,              3,6oo               1,296,000
      Dawn,                                 200              72,000
    Brazen Age (dvdpara yuga),             a000             720,000
      Twilight,                             200               72,000
    Total duration of the Brazen Age,              2,400                 864,000

      Dawn,                                 loo              36,ooo
    Iron Age (kali yuga),                  1000             36o,ooo
      Twilight,                             loo              36,ooo
    Total duration of the Iron Age,               1,200                 432,000

          Total duration of a Great Age,          12,000               4,320,000

   Neither of the names of the last three ages is once mentioned in the
Surya-Siddhanta. The first and last of the four are derived from the
game of dice : krta, " made, won," is the side of the die marked with
four dots—the lucky, or winning one ; kali is the side marked with one
dot only—the unfortunate, the losing one. In the other names, of
which we do not know the original and proper meaning, the numerals
tri, "three," and dvd, "two," are plainly recognizable. The relation
of the numbers four, three, two, and one, to the length of the several
periods, as expressed in divine years, and also as compared with one
another, is not less clearly apparent. The character attached to the
different Ages by the Hindu mythological and legendary history so
closely resembles that which is attributed to the Golden, Silver, Brazen,
and Iron Ages, that we have not hesitated to transfer to them the latter
appellations. An account of this character is given in Manu i. 81-86.
During the Golden Age, Virtue stands firm upon four feet, truth and
justice abound, and the life of man is four centuries ; in each following
Age Virtue loses a foot, and the length of life is reduced by a century,
so that in the present, the Iron Age, she has but one left to hobble
upon, while the extreme age attained by mortals is but a hundred years.
See also Wilson's Vishnu Purana, p. 622, etc., for a description of the
vices of the Iron Age.
   This system of periods is not of astronomical origin, although the
fixing of the commencement of the Iron Age, the only possibly his
torical point in it, is, as we shall see hereafter, the result of astro
nomical computation. Its arbitrary and artificial character is apparent.
It is the system of the Puranas and of Manu, a part of the received
Hindu cosmogony, to which astronomy was compelled to adapt itself.
                           2


                                                                                   -
10                             S&rya-SuMhdnta,                                   [i. 17-
We ought to remark, however, that in the text itself of Manu (i. 68-71)
the duration of the Great Age, called by him Divine Age, is given as
twelve thousand years simply, and that it is his commentator who, by
asserting these to be divine years, brings Manu's cosmogony to an agree
ment with that of the Puranas. This is a strong indication that the
divine year is an afterthought, and that the period of 4,320,000 years
is an expansion of an earlier one of 12,000. Vast as this period is,
however, it is far from satisfying the Hindu craving after infinity. We
are next called upon to construct a new period by multiplying it by a
thousand.
  18. One and seventy Ages are styled here a Patriarchate
(manvantara) ; at its end is said to be a twilight which has the
number of years of a Golden Age, and which is a deluge.
  19. In an ^Eon (kalpa) are reckoned fourteen such Patriarchs
(manu) with their respective twilights ; at the commencement of
the ^Eon is a fifteenth dawn, having the length of a Golden
Age.
  The J&ov. is accordingly thus composed :
                                       Divine years.            Solar years.
 The introductory dawn,                          4,8oo                         1,728,000
   Seventy-one Great Ages,        852,ooo                 306,720,000
   A twilight,                      4,8oo                    1,728,000
     Duration of one Patriarchate, 856,8oo                3o8,448,ooo
 Fourteen Patriarchates,                     11,995,200                  4,318,272,000
  Total duration of an ^Eon,                 12,000,000                  4,320,000,000
   Why the factors fourteen and seventy-one were thus used in making
up the ^Eon is not obvious ; unless, indeed, in the division by fourteen
is to be recognized the influence of the number seven, while at the
same time such a division furnished the equal twilights, or interme
diate periods of transition, which the Hindu theory demanded. The
system, however, is still that of the Puranas (see Wilson's Vish. Pur. p.
24, etc.) ; and Manu (i. 72, 79) presents virtually the same, although he
has not the term JEon (kalpa), but states simply that a thousand Divine
Ages make up a day of Brahma, and seventy-one a Patriarchate. The
term manvantara, "patriarchate," means literally "another Manu," or,
" the interval of a Manu." Manu, a word identical in origin and mean
ing with our " man," became to the Hindus the name of a being per
sonified as son of the Sun (Vivasvant) and progenitor of the human
race. In each Patriarchate there arises a new Manu, who becomes for
his own period the progenitor of mankind (see Wilson's Vish. Pur. p.
24).
  20. The .<Eon, thus composed of a thousand Ages, and which
brings about the destruction of all that exists, is styled a day of
Brahma ; his night is of the same length.
  21. His extreme age is a hundred, according to this valuation
of a day and a night ....
i. 23.]                  Translation and Notes.                        11
    We have already found indications of an assumed destruction of
existing things at the termination of the lesser periods called the Age
and the Patriarchate, in the necessity of a new revelation of virtue and
 knowledge for every Age, and of a new father of the human race for
 every Patriarchate. These are left, it should seem, to show us how the
 system of cosmical periods grew to larger and larger dimensions. The
 full development of it, as exhibited in the Puranas and here, admits only
 two kinds of destruction : the one occurring at the end of each ^Eon,
 or day of Brahma, when all creatures, although not the substance of the
 world, undergo dissolution, and remain buried in chaos during his night,
to be created anew when his day begins again ; the other taking place
 at the end of Brahma's life, when all matter even is resolved into its
 ultimate source.
    According to the commentary, the " hundred" in verse 21 means a hun
dred years, each composed of three hundred and sixty days and nights,
and not a hundred days and nights only, as the text might be understood
to signify; since, in all statements respecting age, years are necessarily
understood to be intended. The length of Brahma's life would be,
then, 864,000,000,000 divine years, or 311,040,000,000,000 solar years.
This period is also called in the Puranas a para, " extreme period," and
its half a par&rdha (see Wilson's Vish. Pur. p. 25) ; although the latter
term has obtained also an independent use, as signifying a period still
more enormous (ibid. p. 630). It is curious that the commentator does
not seem to recognize the affinity with this period of the expression
used in the text, param &yuh, " extreme age," but gives two different
explanations of it, both of which are forced and unnatural.
    The author of the work before us is modestly content with the number
of years thus placed at his disposal, and attempts nothing farther. So
is it also with the Puranas in general"; although some of them, as the
Vishnu (Wilson, p. 637) assert that two of the greater par&rdhas con
stitute only a day of Vishnu, and others (ibid. p. 25) that Brahma's
whole life is but a twinkling of the eye of Krshna or of Qiva.
   21. ... The half of his life is past ; of the remainder, this is
the first jEon.
   22. And of this ^Eon, six Patriarchs (manu) are past, with
their respective twilights; and of the Patriarch Manu son of
Vivasvant, twenty-seven Ages are past ;
   23. Of the present, the twenty-eighth, Age, this Golden Age
is past : from this point, reckoning up the time, one should com
pute together the whole number.
   The designation of the part already elapsed of this immense period
seems to be altogether arbitrary. It agrees in general with that given
in the Puranas, and, so far as the Patriarchs and their periods are con
cerned, with Manu also. The name of the present -5Con is V&r&ha,
" that of the boar," because Brahma, in performing anew at its com
mencement the act of creation, put on the form of that animal (see
Wilson's Vish. Pur. p. 27, etc.). The one preceding is called the P&dma,
"that of the lotus." This nomenclature, however, is not universally
    12                             S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                [i. 23-
    accepted : under the word kalpa, in the Lexicon of Bohtlingk and Roth,
    may be found another system of names for these periods. Manu (i. 61,
    62) gives the names of the Patriarchs of the past Patriarchates ; the
    Puranas add other particulars respecting them, and also respecting those
    which are still to come (see Wilson's Vish. Pur. p. 259, etc.).
      The end of the Golden Age of the current Great Age is the time at
    which the Surya-Siddhanta claims to have been revealed, and the epoch
    from which its calculations profess to commence. We will, accordingly,
    as the Sun directs, compute the number of years which are supposed to
    have elapsed before that period.
                                                       Divine years.        Solar years.
    Dawn of current Man,                                      4,8oo              1,728,000
    Six Patriarchates,                                    5,i4o,8oo          i,85o,688,ooo
    Twenty-seven Great Ages,                                324,000            116,640,000
    Total till commencement of present Great Age,         5,469,600          1,969,056,000
    Golden Age of present Great Age,                          4,8oo              1,728,000
    Total time elapsed of current Mon,                    5,474,4oo           1,970,784,000
    Half Brahma's life,                             432,ooo,ooo,ooo    1 55,52o,ooo,ooo,ooo



       As the existing creation dates from the commencement of the current
    JEon, the second of the above totals is the only one with which the
    Surya-Siddhanta henceforth has any thing to do.
       We are next informed that the present order of things virtually began
    at a period less distant than the commencement of the ^Eon.
      24. One hundred times four hundred and seventy-four divine
    years passed while the All-'vwse was employed in creating the
    animate and inanimate creation, plants, stars, gods, demons, and
    the rest.
         That is to say :
                                                    Divine years.       Solar years.
            From the total above given,              5,474,4oo         1,970,784,000
            deduct the time occupied in creation,       47,4oo            17,064,000
            the remainder is                         5,427,000         1,953,720,000
    This, then, is the time elapsed from the true commencement of the ex
    isting order of things to the epoch of this work. The deduction of this
    period as spent by the Deity in the work of creation is a peculiar feature
    of the Surya-Siddhanta. We shall revert to it later (see below, under
    vv. 29-34), as its significance cannot be shown until other data are
    before us.
       25. The planets, %ioving westward with exceeding velocity,
    but constantly beaten by the asterisms, fall behind, at a rate
    precisely equal, proceeding each in its own path.
       26. Hence they have an eastward motion. From the number
    of their revolutions is derived their daily motion, which is dif
    ferent according to the size of their orbits ; in proportion to this
    daily motion they pass through the asterisms.




.
i. 27.]                  Translation and Notes.                         13
  27. One which moves swiftly passes through them in a short
time ; one which moves slowly, in a long time. By their move
ment, the revolution is accounted complete at the end of the
asterism Revati.
   We have here presented a part of the physical theory of the planetary
motions, that which accounts for the mean motions : the theory is sup
plemented by the explanation given in the next chapter of the disturbing
forces which give rise to the irregularities of movement. The earth is a
sphere, and sustained immovable in the centre of the universe (xii. 32),
while all the heavenly bodies, impelled by winds, or vortices, called pro-
vectors (ii. 3), revolve about it from east to west. In this general west
ward movement, the planets, as the commentary explains it, are, owing
to their weight and the weakness of their vortices, beaten by the aster-
isms (nakshatra or bha, the groups of stars constituting the lunar man
sions [see below, chapter viii], and used here, as in various other places,
to designate the whole firmament of fixed stars), and« accordingly fall
behind (lambante=labuntur, delabuntur), as if from shame: and this is
the explanation of their eastward motion, which is only apparent and rela
tive, although wont to be regarded as real by those who do not under
stand the true causes of things. But now a new element is introduced
into the theory, which does not seem entirely consistent with this view of
the merely relative character of the eastward motion. It is asserted that
the planets lag behind equally, or that each, moving in its own orbit,
loses an equal amount daily, as compared with the asterisms. And we
shall find farther on (xii. 73-89) that the dimensions of the planetary
orbits are constructed upon this sole principle, of making the mean daily
motion of each planet eastward to be the same in amount, namely
11,858.717 yojanas : the amount of westward motion being equal, in
each case, to the difference between this amount and the whole orbit of
the planet. Now if the Hindu idea of the symmetry and harmony of the
universe demanded that the movements of the planets should be equal, it
was certainly a very awkward and unsatisfactory way of complying with
that demand to make the relative motions alone, as compared with the
fixed stars, equal, and the real motions so vastly different from one an
other. We should rather expect that some method would have been de
vised for making the latter come out alike, and the former unlike, and the
result of differences in the weights of the planets and the forces of the
impelling currents. It looks as if this principle, and the conformity to it
of the dimensions of the orbits, might have come from those who regarded
the apparent daily motion as the real motion. But we know that Arya-
bhatta held the opinion that the earth revolved upon its axis, causing
thereby the apparent westward motion of the heavenly bodies (see Cole-
brooke's Hindu Algebra, p. xxxviii; Essays, ii. 467), and so, of tourse,
that the planets really moved eastward at an equal rate among the stars ;
and although the later astronomers are nearly unanimous against him,
we cannot help surmising that the theory of the planetary orbits ema
nated from him or his school, or from some other of like opinion. It is
not upon record, so far as we are aware, that any Hindu astronomer, of
any period, held, as did some of the Greek philosophers (see Whewell's
History of the Inductive Sciences, B. V. ch. i), a heliocentric theory.
14                          JS&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [i. 27-
   The absolute motion eastward of all the planets being equal, their
apparent motion is, of course, in the (inverse) ratio of their distance, or
of the dimensions of their orbits.
   The word translated "revolution" is bhagana, literally "troop of aster-
isms ;" the verbal root translated " pass through " is bhuj, " enjoy," from
which comes also the common term for the daily motion of a planet,
bkukti, literally " enjoyment." When a planet has " enjoyed the whole
troop of asterisms," it has made a complete revolution.
   The initial point of the fixed Hindu sphere, from which longitudes are
reckoned, and at which the planetary motions are held by all the schools
of Hindu astronomy to have commenced at the creation, is the end of
the asterism Revati, or the beginning of Acvini (see chapter viii. for a
full account of the asterisms). Its situation is most nearly marked by
that of the principal star of Revatl, which, according to the Surya-
Siddhanta, is 10' to the west of it, but according to other authorities
exactly coincides with it. That star is by all authorities identified with
£ Piscium, of which the longitude at present, as reckoned by us, from the
vernal equinox, is 17° 54'. Making due allowance for the precession, we
find that it coincided in position with the vernal equinox not far from the
middle of the sixth century, or about A. D. 570. As such coincidence
was the occasion of the point being fixed upon as the beginning of the
sphere, the time of its occurrence marks approximately the era of the
fixation of the sphere, and of the commencement of the history of modern
Hindu astronomy. We say approximately only, because, in the first
place, as will be shown in connection with the eighth chapter, the accu
racy of the Hindu observations is not to be relied upon within a degree ;
and, in the second place, the limits of the asterisms being already long
before fixed, it was necessary to take the beginning of some one of them
as that of the sphere, and the Hindus may have regarded that of Acvini
as sufficiently near to the equinox for their purpose, when it was, in fact,
two or three degrees, or yet more, remote from it, on either side ; and
each degree of removal would correspond to a difference in time of about
seventy years.
   In the most ancient recorded lists of the Hindu asterisms (in the texts
of the Black Yajur-Veda and of the Atharva-Veda), Krttika, now the
third, appears as the first. The time when the beginning of that aster-
ism coincided with the vernal equinox would be nearly two thousand
years earlier than that given above for the coincidence with it of the first
point of A9vini.
   28. Sixty seconds (vikaM) make a minute (kald) ; sixty of
these, a degree (bhdga) ; of thirty of the latter is composed a
sign (raqi) ; twelve of these are a revolution (bhagana).
   The Hindu divisions of the circle are thus seen to be the same with
the Greek and with our own, and we shall accordingly make use, in
translating, of our own familiar terms. Of the second (vikal&) very little
practical use is made ; it is not more than two or three times alluded to
in all the rest of the treatise. The minute (Isol&) is much more often
called lipt& (or liptik&) ; this is not an original Sanskrit word, but was
borrowed from the Greek tefttov. The degree is called either bh&ga or
anfa; both words, like the equivalent Greek word p«pa, mean a "part,
i. 34.]                   Translation and Notes.                         15
portion." The proper signification of r&fi, translated " sign," is simply
 " heap, quantity ;" it is doubtless applied to designate a sign as being a
 certain number, or sum, of degrees, analogous to the use of garia in
 bhagana (explained above, in the last note), and of raci itself in dinar&fi,
,"sum of days" (below, v. 53). In the Hindu description of an arc, the
 sign is as essential an element as the degree, and no arcs of greater length
 than thirty degrees are reckoned in degrees alone, as we are accustomed
 to reckon them. The Greek usage was the same. We shall hereafter
 see that the signs into which any circle of revolution is divided are named
 Aries, Taurus, etc., beginning from the point which is regarded as the
 starting point ; so that these names are applied simply to indicate the
 order of succession of the arcs of thirty degrees.
   29. In an Age (yuga), the revolutions of the sun, Mercury,
and Venus, and of the conjunctions (gighra) of Mars, Saturn,
and Jupiter, moving eastward, are four million, three hundred
and twenty thousand ;
   30. Of the moon, fifty-seven million, seven hundred and fifty-
three thousand, three hundred and thirty-six; of Mars, two
million, two hundred and ninety-six thousand, eight hundred
and thirty-two ;
   31. Of Mercury's conjunction (</lghra\ seventeen million, nine
hundred and thirty-seven thousand, and sixty ; of Jupiter, three
hundred and sixty-four thousand, two hundred and twenty ;
   32. Of Venus's conjunction (gighra), seven million, twenty-two
thousand, three hundred and seventy-six ; of Saturn, one hun
dred and forty-six thousand, five hundred and sixty-eight;
   33. Of the moon's apsis (ucca), in an Age, four hundred and
eighty-eight thousand, two hundred and three ; of its node (pdta\
in the contrary direction, two hundred and thirty-two thousand,
two hundred and thirty-eight ;
   34. Of the asterisms, one billion, five hundred and eighty-two
million, two hundred and thirty-seven thousand, eight hundred
and twenty-eight ....
   These are the fundamental and most important elements upon which
is founded the astronomical system of the Surya-Siddhanta. We present
them below in a tabular form, but must first explain the character of
some of them, especially of some of those contained in verse 29, which
we have omitted from the table.
   The revolutions of the sun, and of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, require
no remark, save the obvious one that those of the sun are in fact sidereal
revolutions of the earth about the sun. To the sidereal revolutions of
the moon we add also her synodical revolutions, anticipated from the next
following passage (see v. 35). By the moon's "apsis" is to be under
stood her apogee ; ucca is literally " height," i. e. " extreme distance :"
the commentary explains it by mandocca, " apex of slowest motion :" as
the same word is used to designate the aphelia of the planets, we were
obliged to take in translating it the indifferent term apsis, which applies
equally to both geocentric and heliocentric motion. The " node " is the
ascending node (see ii. 7) ; the dual "nodes" is never employed in this
16                         Sfirya-Siddhdnta,                        [i. 34.
work. But the apparent motions of the planets are greatly complicated
by the fact, unknown to the Greek and the Hindu, that they are revolv
ing about a centre about which the earth also is revolving. When any
planet is on the opposite side of the sun from us, and is accordingly mov
ing in space in a direction contrary to ours, the effect of our change of-
place is to increase the rate of its apparent change of place ; again, when
it is upon our side of the sun, and moving in the same direction with us,
the effect of our motion is to retard its apparent motion, and even to
cause it to seem to retrograde. This explains the " revolutions of the
conjunction" of the three superior planets : their " conjunctions" revolve
at the same rate with the earth, being always upon the opposite side of
the sun from us; and when, by the combination of its own proper
motion with that of its conjunction, the planet gets into the latter, its
rate of apparent motion is greatest, becoming less in proportion as it
removes from that position. The meaning of the word which we have
translated " conjunction " is " swift, rapid : " a literal rendering of it
would be " swift-point," or " apex of swiftest motion ;" but, after
much deliberation, and persevering trial of more than one term, we have
concluded that " conjunction " was the least exceptionable word by
which we could express it. In the case of the inferior planets, the
revolution of the conjunction takes the place of the proper motion of
the planet itself. By the definition given in verse 27, a planet must, in
order to complete a revolution, pass through the whole zodiac; this
Mercury and Venus are only able to do as they accompany the sun in
his apparent annual revolution about the earth. To the Hindus, too,
who had no idea of their proper movement about the sun, the annual
motion must have seemed the principal one ; and that by virtue of which,
in their progress through the zodiac, they moved now faster and now
slower, must have appeared only of secondary importance. The term
" conjunction," as used in reference to these planets, must be restricted,
of course, to the superior conjunction. The physical theories by which
the effect of the conjunction (fighra) is explained, are given in the next
chapter. In the table that follows we have placed opposite each planet
its own proper revolutions only.
   It is farther to be observed that all the numbers of revolutions, ex
cepting those of the moon's apsis and node, are divisible by four, so
that, properly speaking, a quarter of an Age, or 1,080,000 years, rather
than a whole Age, is their common period. This is a point of so much
importance in the system of the Surya-Siddhanta, that we have added,
in a second column, the number of revolutions in the lesser period.
   In the third column, we add the period of revolution of each planet,
as found by dividing by the number of revolutions of each the number
of civil days in an Age (which is equal to the number of sidereal days,
given in v. 34, diminished by the number of revolutions of the sun ; see
below, v. 37) ; they are expressed in days, nadis, vinadls, and respira
tions ; the latter may be converted into sexagesimals of the third order
by moving the decimal point one place farther to the right.
   In the fourth column are given the mean daily motions.
   We shall present later some comparison of these elements with those
adopted in other systems of astronomy, ancient and modern.
i. 34.]                            Translation and Notes.                                       17
                              Mean Motions of the Planets.
                       Number of       Number of
      Planet.         revolutions in revolution! in Length of a revolution   Mean daily motion.
                     4,320,000 yean. 1,080,000 yean. in mean tolar time.
                                                         d   D   v     p     •   i       "        M
 Sun,                  4,320,000       I,o8o,000       365 i5 3i 3.14          59 8 10 10.4
 Mercury,             17,937,060       4,484,2.65       87 58 10 5.57        4 5 32 20 41.9
 Venus,                7,022,376       1,755,594       224 4i 54 5.o6        i 36 7 43 37.3
 Mars,                 2,296,832         574,208       686 59 5o 5.87          3i 26 28 1 1. 1
 Jupiter,                364,220          9i,o55     4,332 19 14 2.09           4 59 8 48.6
 Saturn,                 i46,568          36,642    10,765 46 23 0.41                2   0 22 53.4
 Moon:
    eider, rev.       57,753,336      14,438,334         27 19 18 0.16       i3 10 34 52 3.8
    synod, rev.       53,433,336      13,358,334         29 3 1 5o 0.70      12 II 26 4l 53.4
    rev. of apsis,       488,203         122,o5oJ     3,232 5 37 1.36            6 4o 58 42-5
     " " node,           232,238          58,o59i     6,794 23 59 2.35           3 10 44 43.2

   The arbitrary and artificial method in which the fundamental ele
ments of the solar system are here presented is not peculiar to the
Surya-Siddhanta ; it is also adopted by all the other text-books, and is
to be regarded as a characteristic feature of the general astronomical
system of the Hindus. Instead of deducing the rate of motion of each
planet from at least two recorded observations of its place, and estab
lishing a genuine epoch, with the ascertained position of each at that
time, they start with the assumption that, at the beginning of the
present order of things, all the planets, with their apsides and nodes,
commenced their movement together at that point in the heavens (near
£ Piscium, as explained above, under verse 27) fixed upon as the initial
point of the sidereal sphere, and that they return, at certain fixed inter
vals, to a universal conjunction at the same point. As regards, however,
the time when the motion commenced, the frequency of recurrence
of the conjunction, and the date of that which last took place, there is
discordance among the different authorities. With the Surya-Sid
dhanta, and the other treatises which adopt the same general method,
the determining point of the whole system is the commencement of the
current Iron Age (kali yuga) ; at that epoch the planets are assumed to
have been in mean conjunction for the last time at the initial point of
the sphere, the former conjunctions having taken place at intervals of
1,080,000 years previous. The instant at which the Age is made to
commence is midnight on the meridian of Ujjayini (see below, under v.
62), at the end of the 588,465th and beginning of the 588,466th day
(civil reckoning) of the Julian Period, or between the 17th and 18th of
February 1612 J.P., or 3102 B. C. (see below, under vv. 45-53, for the
computation of the number of days since elapsed). Now, although no
such conjunction as that assumed by the Hindu astronomers ever did
or ever will take place, the planets were actually, at the time stated,
approximating somewhat nearly to a general conjunction in the neigh
borhood of the initial point of the Hindu sphere ; this is shown by the
next table, in which we give their actual mean positions with reference
to that point (including also those of the moon's apogee and node) ;
they have been obligingly furnished us by Prof. Winlock, Superin-
                          3



                                                                                                      x
18                             Stirya-SiddMnta.                                    [i. 34.
tendent of the American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac. The posi
tions of the primary planets are obtained by LeVerrier's times of side
real revolution, given in the Annales de 1'Observatoire, tom, ii (also in
Biotas Astronomic, 3rae Edition, tom, v, 1857), that of the moon by
Peirce's tables, and those of its apogee and node by Hanson's Tables de
la Lune. The origin of the Hindu sphere is regarded as being 18° 5'
8" east of the vernal equinox of Jan. 1, 1860, and 50° 22' 29" west of
that of Feb. 17, 3102 B. C., the precession in the interval being 68° 27'
37". We add, in a second column, the mean longitudes, as reckoned
from the vernal equinox of the given date, for the sake of comparison
with the similar data given by Bentley (Hind. Ast, p. 125) and by
Bailly(Ast. Ind. et Or., pp. Ill, 182), which we also subjoin.
Positions of the Planets, midnight, at Ujjayini, Feb. 17-18, 3102 B. C.
         Planet.    From beginning     Longitude.     Bentley.         Bailljr.
                    of Hindu sphere.

     Sun,           - 7 5i 48          3oi 45 43    3oi   1      I   3oi    5 57
     Mercury,       - 4i 3 26          268 34 5     267 35 26        2€l   I/|    21
     Venus,         + 24 58 59         334 36 3o    333 44 37        334 22 18
     Mars,          - 19 49 26         289 48 5     288 55 19        288 55 56
     Jupiter,       + 8 38 36          318 16 7     3i8 3 54         3lO 22       IO
     Saturn,        -28 i i3           281 36 18    280 i 58         293 8 21
     Moon,          - i 33 4i          3o8 3 5o     3o6 53 42        3oo 5i 16
       do. npsis,   + 95 19 21          44 56 42     61 12 26         61 i3 33
        do. node,   +198 24 45         148 2 16     144 38 32        i44 37 4'
   The want of agreement between the results of the three different in
vestigations illustrates the difficulty and uncertainty even yet attending
inquiries into the positions of the heavenly bodies at so remote an
epoch. It is very possible that the calculations of the astronomers who
were the framers of the Hindu system may have led them to suppose
the approach to a conjunction nearer than it actually was ; but, however
that may be, it seems hardly to admit of a doubt that the epoch was
arrived at by astronomical calculation carried backward, and that it was
fixed upon as the date of the last general conjunction, and made to
determine the commencement of the present Age of the world, because
the errors of the assumed positions of the planets at that time would
be so small, and the number of years since elapsed so great, as to make
the errors in the mean motions into which those positions entered as
an element only trifling in amount.
   The moon's apsis and node, however, were treated in a different
manner. Their distance from the initial point of the sphere, as shown
by the table, was too great to be disregarded. They were accordingly
ingly exempted from the general law of a conjunction once in 1,080,000
years, and such a number of revolutions was assigned to them as should
make their positions at the epoch come out, the one a quadrant, the
other a half-revolution, in advance of the initial point of the sphere.
   We can now see why the deduction spoken of above (v. 24), for time
spent in creation, needed to be made. In order to bring all the planets
to a position of mean conjunction at the epoch, the time previously



  ^
i. 34.J                Translation and Notes.                          19
elapsed must be an exact multiple of the lesser period of 1,080,000 years,
or the quartR1-Age ; in order to give its proper position to the moon's
apsis, that time must contain a certain number of whole Ages, which
are the periods of conjunction of the latter with the planets, together
with a remainder of three quarter-Ages ; for the moon's node, in like
manner, it must contain a certain number of half-Ages, with a remainder
of one quarter-Age. Now the whole number of years elapsed between the
beginning of the ^Eon and that of the current Iron Age is equal to 1826
quarter-Ages, with an odd surplus of 864,000 years : from it subtract
an amount of time which shall contain this surplus, together with three,
seven, eleven, fifteen, or the like (any number exceeding by three a mul
tiple of four), quarter-Ages, and the remainder will fulfil the conditions
of the problem. The deduction actually made is of fifteen periods -f-
the surplus.
   This deduction is a clear indication that, as remarked above (under
v. 17), the astronomical system was compelled to adapt itself to an
already established Puranic chronology. It could, indeed, fix the pre
viously undetermined epoch of the commencement of the Iron Age, but
it could not alter the arrangement of the preceding periods.
   It is evident that, with whatever accuracy the mean positions of the
planets may, at a given time, be ascertained by observation by the
Hindu astronomers, their false assumption of a conjunction at the epoch
of 3102 B. C. must introduce an element of error into their determina
tion of the planetary'motions. The annual amount of that error may
indeed be small, owing to the remoteness of the epoch, and the great
number of years among which the errors of assumed position are divi
ded, yet it must in time grow to an amount not to be ignored or neglect
ed even by observers so inaccurate, and theorists so unscrupulous, as the
Hindus. This is actually the case with the elements of the Surya-Sid-
dhanta; the positions of the planets, as calculated by them for the
present time, are in some cases nearly 9° from the true places. The
later astronomers of India, however, have known how to deal with such
difficulties without abrogating their ancient text-books. As the Surya-
Siddhanta is at present employed in astronomical calculations, there are
introduced into its planetary elements certain corrections, called bija
(more properly vija ; the word means literally " seed" ; we do not know
how it arrived at its present significations in the mathematical language).
That this was so, was known to Davis (As. Res., ii. 236), but he was
unable to state the amount of the corrections, excepting in the case of
the moon's apsis and node (ibid., p. 275). Bentley (Hind. Ast., p. 179)
gives them in full, and upon his authority we present them in the
annexed table. They are in thS form, it will be noticed, of additions to,
or subtractions from, the number of revolutions given for an Age, and
the numbers are all divisible by four, in order not to interfere with the
calculation by the lesser period of 1,080,OOQ years. We have added
the corrected number of revolutions, for both the greater and lesser
period, the corrected time of revolution, expressed in Hindu divisions of
the day, and the corrected amount of mean daily motion.
   These corrections were first applied, according to Mr. Bentley (A».
Kes., viii. 220), about the beginning of the sixteenth century ;. they are
20                                  S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                          [i. 34.
presented by several treatises of that as well as of later date, not having
been yet superseded by others intended to secure yet greater correctness.
               Mean Motions of the Planets as corrected by the blja.
                        Corrected nun her of revolti
                 Correc            tio ng                  Corrected               Corrected
     Planet.     tion. in 4,320,000 in 1,080,000       time of revolution.       daily motion.
                           year*.         years.
                                                          d    n   v    p    „     ,   ,,   ,,,   ,...
 Sun,               o 4,32o,ooo I,o8o,OOO      365 i5 3i 3.14    59 8 10 10.4
 Mercury,        -16 17,937,044 4,484,261       87 58 ii 1.26 4 5 32 19 54.5
 Venus,          - 12 7,022,364 1,755,591      224 4i 56 1.35 i 36 7 43 1.8
 Mara,              O 2,296,832    574,208     686 59 5o 5.87    3i 26 28 11. i
 Jupiter,        - 8 364,212         91,053  4,332 24 56 5.56     4 59 8 24.9
 Saturn,         + 12    i46,58o     36,645 10,764 53 3o 1. 1 1   2 0 23 28.9
 Moon,              O 57,753,336 14,438,334     27 19 18 0.16 i3 10 34 52 3.8
   « apsis,      - 4 488,199        122,049! 3,232 7 12 3.37      6 4o 58 3o.7
   " node,       + 4     232,242     58,o6oi 6,794 1 6 58 0.66    3 10 44 55.o
    We need not, however, rely on external testimony alone for informa
tion as to the period when this correction was made. If the attempt to
modify the elements in such a manner as to make them give the true
positions of the planets at the time when they were so modified was in
any tolerable degree successful, we ought to be able to discover by cal
culation the date of the alteration. If we ascertain for any given time
the positions of the planets as given by the system, and compare them
with the true positions as found by our best modern methods, and if we
then divide the differences of position by the differences in the mean
motions, we shall discover, in each separate case, when the error was or
will be reduced to nothing. The results of such a calculation, made for
Jan. 1, 1860, are given below, under v. 67. We see there that, if regard
is had only to the absolute errors in the positions of the planets, no con
 clusion of value can be arrived at ; the discrepancies between the dates
 of no error are altogether too great to allow of their being regarded as
indicating any definite epoch of correction. If, on the other hand, we
assume the place of the sun to have been the standard by which the
positions of the other planets were tested, the dates of no error are seen
to point quite distinctly to the first half of the sixteenth century as the
time of the correction, their mean being A. D. 1541. Upon this as
 sumption, also, we see why no correction of bija was applied to Mars or
to the moon: the former had, at the given time, only just passed his
 time of complete accordance with the sun, and the motion of the moon
 was also already so closely adjusted to that of the sun, that the differ
 ence between their errors of position is even now less than 10'. Nor
 is there any other supposition which will explain why the serious error
 in the position of the sun himself was overlooked at the time of the
 general correction, and why, by that correction, the absolute errors of
 position of more than one of the planets are made greater than they
 would otherwise have been, as is the case. It is, in short, clearly evident
 that the alteration of the elements of the Surya-Siddhanta which was
 effected early in the sixteenth century, was an adaptation of the errors
 of position of the other planets to that of the sun, assumed to be cor
 rect and regarded as the standard.
i. 34.]                        Translation and Notes.                                            21
   Now if it is possible by this method to arrive approximately at the
date of a correction applied to the elements of a Siddhanta, it should
be possible in like manner to arrive at the date of those elements them
selves. For, owing to the false assumption of position at the epoch,
there is but one point of time at which any of the periods of revolution
will give the true place of its planet : if, then, as is to be presumed, the
true places were nearly determined when any treatise was composed,
and were made to enter as an element into the construction of its
system, the comparison of the dates of no error will point to the epoch of
its composition. The method, indeed, as is well known to all those who
have made any studies in the history of Hindu astronomy, has already
been applied to this purpose, by Mr. Bentley. It was first originated
and put forth by him (in vol. vi. of the Asiatic Researches) at a time
when the false estimate of the age and value of the Hindu astronomy
presented by Bailly was still the prevailing one in Europe ; he strenu
ously defended it against more than one attack (As. Res., viii, and Hind.
Ast.), and finally employed it very extensively in his volume on the
History of Hindu Astronomy, as a means of determining the age of the
different Siddhantas. We present below the table from which, in the
latter work (p. 126), he deduces the age of*the Surya-Siddhanta ; the
column of approximate dates of no error we have ourselves added.
Bentley's Table of Errors in the Positions of the Planets, as calculated,
        for successive periods, according to the Stirya-Siddh&nta.
   Planet   Iron Age 0, I. A. 1000,       I. A. 2003, I. A. 3000, I. A. 3639, T. A 4192, When
             B. C. 3i02. B. 0. 2102.      B.C. 1102. B. C. 102. A. D. 538. A. D. 1091. correct
              0   ,   I,   »     ,   •,    «   1   II   0   ,   ,,   .   i   ..   0   ,   ..
                                                                                               A. D.
 Mercury, +33 25 35 +25 9 52 +16 54 9 +8 38 26 +3 21 4c -I 12 28 945
 Venus,     -32 43 36 -24 37 3 1 -16 3r 26 -8 25 21 -3 i4 45 +i i4 3 939
 Mara,      + 12 5 42 + 9 26 32 + 6 47 22 +4   8 12 +2 26 3o +o 58 29 i458
 Jupiter,   -17 2 53 -12 44 16 - 8 25 39 -472 -I 21 4" +o 4i 14 906
 Saturn,    +20 59 3 +i5 43 20 +10 27 37 +5 ii 54+i 5o 10 -i 4 25 887
 Moon,      - 5 52 4i - 3 5o 48 - 2 9 17 -o 52 33 -o 18 3o -0 0 II 1097
   " apsis, -3o ii a5 -23 9 36 -16 7 47 -9 5 58 -4 36 26 -o 43 10 ] 193
   " node, +23 37 3 1 +17 59 21 +12 3l II +7 3 i +3 33 19 +o 3i 5o 1188
   From an average of the results thus obtained, Bentley draws the con
clusion that the Surya-Siddhanta dates from the latter part of the elev
enth century; or, more exactly, A. D. 1091.
   The general soundness of Bentley's method will, we apprehend, be
denied at the present time by few, and he is certainly entitled to not a
little credit for his ingenuity in devising it, for the persevering industry
shown in its application, and for the zeal and boldness with which he
propounded and defended it. He succeeded in throwing not a little
light upon an obscure and misapprehended subject, and his investiga
tions have contributed very essentially to our present understanding of
the Hindu systems of astronomy. But the details of his work are not
to be accepted without careful testing, and his general conclusions are
often unsound, and require essential modification, or are to be rejected
altogether. This we will attempt to show in connection with his treat
ment of the Surya-Siddhanta.
22                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [i. 34.
   In the first place, Bentley has made a very serious error in that part
of his calculations which concerns the planet Mercury. As that planet
was, at the epoch, many degrees behind its assumed place, it was neces
sary, of course, to assign to it a slower than its true rate of motion.
But the rate actually given it by the text is not quite enough slower,
and, instead of exhausting the original error of position in the tenth
century of our era, as stated by Bentley, would not so dispose of it for
many hundred years yet to come. Hence the correction of the bija, as
reported by Bentley himself, instead of giving to Mercury, as to all the
rest, a more correct rate of motion, is made to have the contrary effect,
in order the sooner to run out the original error of assumed position,
and produce a coincidence between the calculated and the true places of
the planet.
   In the case of the other planets, the times of no error found by
Bentley agree pretty nearly with those which we have ourselves ob
tained, both by calculating backward from the errors of A. D. I860,
and by calculating downward from those of B. C. 3102, and which are
presented in the table given under verse 67. Upon comparing the two
tables, however, it will be seen at once that Bentley's conclusions are
drawn, not from the sidereal errors of position of the planets, but from
the errors of their positions as compared with that of the sun, and that
of the sun's own error he makes no account at all. This is a method of
procedure which certainly requires a much fuller explanation and justifi
cation than he has seen fit anywhere to give of it. The Hindu sphere
is a sidereal one, and in no wise bound to the movement of the sun.
The sun, like the other planets, was not in the position assumed for him
at the epoch of 3102 B. C., and consequently the rate of motion
assigned to him by the system is palpably different from the real one :
the sidereal year is about three minutes and a half too long. Why then
should the sun's error be ignored, and the sidereal motions of the other
 planets considered only with reference to the incorrect rate of motion
 established for him ? It is evident that Bentley ought to have taken
fully into consideration the sun's position also, and to have shown either
that it gave a like result with those obtained from the other planets, or,
if not, what was the reason of the discrepancy. By failing to do so, he
has, in our opinion, omitted the most fundamental datum of the whole
calculation, and the one which leads to the most important conclusions.
We have seen, in treating of the bija, that it has been the aim of the
modern Hindu astronomers, leaving the sun's error untouched, to amend
those of the other planets to an accordance with it. Now, as things
are wont to be managed in the Hindu literature, it would be no matter
for surprise if such corrections were incorporated into the text itself:
had not the Surya-Siddhanta been, at the beginning of the sixteenth
century, so widely distributed, and its data so universally known, and
had not the Hindu science outlived already that growing and productive
period of its history when a school of astronomy might put forth a cor
rected text of an ancient authority, and expect to see it make its way
to general acceptance, crowding out, and finally causing to disappear,
the older version—such a process of alteration might, in our view, have
passed upon it, and such a text might have been handed down to our
i. 34.]                  Translation and Notes.                        23

time as Bentley would have pronounced, upon internal evidence, to have
been composed early in the sixteenth century ; while, nevertheless, the
original error of the sun would remain, untouched and increasing, to in
dicate what was the true state of the case.
   But what is the actual position of things with regard to our Sid-
dhanta ? We find that it presents us a set of planetary elements, which,
when tested by the errors of position, in the manner already explained,
do not appear to have been constructed so as to give the true sidereal
positions at any assignable epoch, but which, on the other hand, exhibit
evidences of an attempt to bring the places of the other planets into an
accordance with that of the sun, made sometime in the tenth or eleventh
century—the precise time is very doubtful, the discrepancies of the
times of no error being far too great to give a certain result. Now it is
as certain as anything in the history of Sanskrit literature can be, that
there was a Surya-Siddhanta in existence long before that date ; there
is also evidence in the references and citations of other astronomical
works (see Colebrooke, Essays, ii. 484 ; Hind. Alg., p. 1) that there have
been more versions than one of a treatise bearing the title ; and we have
seen above, in verse 9, a not very obscure intimation that the present
work does not present precisely the same elements which had been ac
 cepted formerly as those of the Surya-Siddhanta. What can lie nearer,
 then, than to suppose that in the tenth or eleventh century a correction
 of bija was calculated for application to the elements of the Siddhanta,
 and was then incorporated into the text, by the easy alteration of four
 or five of its verses ; and accordingly, that while the comparative errors
 of the other planets betray the date of the correction, the absolute error
 of the sun indicates approximately the true date of the treatise ?
    In our table, the time of no error of the sun is given as A. D. 250.
 The correctness of this date, however, is not to be too strongly insisted
 upon, being dependent upon the correctness with which the sun's place
 was first determined, and then referred to the point assumed as the
 origin of the sphere. It was, of course, impossible to observe directly
 when the sun's centre, by his mean motion, was 10' east of £ Piscium,
 and there are grave errors in the determination by the Hindus of the
 distances from that point of the other points fixed by them in their
 zodiac. And a mistake of 1° in the determination of the sun's place
 would occasion a difference of 425 years in the resulting date of no
 error. We shall have occasion to recur to this subject in connection
 with the eighth chapter.
    There is also an alternative supposition to that which we have made
 above, respecting the conclusion from the date of no error of the sun.
 If the error in the sun's motion were a fundamental feature of the whole
 Hindu system, appearing alike in all the different text-books of the
 science, that date would point to the origin rather of the whole system
 than of any treatise which might exhibit it. But although the different
 Siddhantas nearly agree with one another respecting the length of the
 sidereal year, they do not entirely accord, as is made evident by the
 following statement, in which are included all the authorities to which
 we have access, either in the original, or as reported by Colebrooke,
 Bentley, and Warren :
                                  S&rya-Siddhdnta.                                          [i. 34-
           Authority.                   Length of sidereal year.                   Error.
       Surya-Siddhanta,                                                        -f 3m 25i.8i
       Paulifa-Siddhanta,               365    6   12    36                    + 3 25.25
       Parajara-Siddhanta,              365    6   12    31.5o                 + 3 20.75
       Arya-Siddhanta,                  365    6   12    3o.84                 + 3 20.09
       Laghu-Arya-Siddhanta,            365    6   12    3o                    + 3 19.25
       Siddhanta-Qiromani,              365    6   12     9                       =• 58.25
     The first five of these might be regarded as unimportant variations
  of the same error, but it would seem that the last is an independent de
  termination, and one of later date than the others ; while, if all are
  independent, that of the Surya-Siddhanta has the appearance of being
  the most ancient. Such questions as these, however, are not to be too
  hastily decided, nor from single indications merely ; they demand the
  most thorough investigation of each different treatise, and the careful
  collection of all the evidence which can be brought to bear upon them.
     Here lies Bentley's chief error. He relied solely upon his method of
  examining the elements, applying even that, as we have seen, only par
  tially and uncritically, and never allowing his results to be controlled
  or corrected by evidence of any other character. He had, in fact, no
  philology, and he was deficient in sound critical judgment. He thor
  oughly misapprehended the character of the Hindu astronomical litera
  ture, thinking it to be, in the main, a mass of forgeries framed for the
  purpose of deceiving the world respecting the antiquity of the Hindu
  people. Many of his most confident conclusions have already been
  overthrown by evidence of which not even he would venture to question
  the verity, and we are persuaded that but little of his work would stand
  the test of a thorough examination.
     The annexed table presents a comparison of the times of mean side
  real revolution of the planets assumed by the Hindu astronomy, as rep
  resented by two of its principal text-books, with those adopted by the
  great Greek astronomer, and those which modern science has established.
  The latter are, for the primary planets, from Le Verrier ; for the moon,
  from Nichol (Cyclopedia of the Physical Sciences, London : 1857).
  Those of Ptolemy are deduced from the mean daily rates of motion in
  longitude given by him in the Syntaxis, allowing for the movement of
  the equinox according to the false rate adopted by him, of 36" yearly.
        Comparative Table of the Sidereal Revolutions of the Planets.
   Planet.     Surya-Siddhanta. Siddhanta-Qiromani              Ptolemy.               Moderns.
                 d    h   m   B     d      h   m     >      d      h m     s       d      h   m   s
Sun,               365 6 1236.6      365 6 12 9.0      36536 948.6 365 6 9 10.8
Mercury,            87 a3 16 22.3     87 23 16 4i-5     87 23 16 42.9     87 23 1 5 43.9
Venus,             224 16 45 56.2    224 i 6 45 1.9    224 16 5r 56.8 224 16 49 80
Mars,              686 23 56 23.5    686 23 57 1.5     686 23 3 1 56.1 686 23 3o 4r.4
Jupiter,         4,332 74i44-4 4,332 5 45 43.7 4,332 18 9 io.5 4,332 i4 2 8.6
Saturn,         10,765 18 33 i3.6 10,765 19 33 56.5 io,758 17 48 i4-9 10,759 5 l6 32.2
Moon :
  eid. rev.         27 7 43 12.6      27 7 43 12. i     27 743 ja.1       27 7 43 1 1 .4
  synod, rev.       29 12 44 2.8      29 12 44 2.3      29 12 44 3.3      29 12 44 2.9
  rev. of apsis, 3,232 2 14 53.4 3,232 17 37 6.0 3,232 9 52 i3.6 3,232 1 3 48 29.6
    " " node, 6,794 93545.4 6,792 6 5 4'-9 6,799 23 18 39.4 6,798 6 4i 45.6
i. 40.]                      Translation and Notes.                                    25
  In the additional notes at the end of the work, we shall revert to the
subject of these data, and of the light thrown by them upon the origin
and age of the system.
   34      The number of risings of the asterisms, diminished by
the number of the revolutions of each planet respectively, gives
the number of risings of the planets in an Age.
   35. The number of lunar months is the difference between the
number of revolutions of the sun and of the moon. If from it
the number of solar months be subtracted, the remainder is the
number of intercalary months.
   36. Take the civil days from the lunar, the remainder is the
number of omitted lunar days (tithikshaya). From rising to
rising of the sun are reckoned terrestrial civil days ;
   37. Of these there are, in an Age, one billion, five hundred
and seventy-seven million, nine hundred and seventeen thousand,
eight hundred and twenty-eight ; of lunar days, one billion, six
hundred and three million, and eighty ;
   38. Of intercalary months, one million, five hundred and
ninety-three thousand, three hundred and thirty-six ; of omitted
lunar days, twenty-five million, eighty-two thousand, two hun
dred and fifty-two ;
   39. Of solar months, fifty-one million, eight hundred and forty
thousand. The number of risings of the asterisms, diminished
by that of the revolutions of the sun, gives the number of ter
restrial days.
   40. The intercalary months, the omitted lunar days, the side
real, lunar, and civil days—these, multiplied by a thousand, are
the number of revolutioas, etc., in an JBon.
   The data here given are combinations of, and deductions from, those
contained in the preceding passage (vv. 29-34). For convenience of
reference, we present them below in a tabular form.
                                                 In 4,320,000 years. In 1,080,000 years.
  Sidereal days,                                   1,582,237,828       395,559,457
    deduct solar revolutions,                           4,32O,OOO          1,080,000

  .Natural, or civil days,                         1,577,917,828        3o4,479,457

  Sidereal solar years,                                4,32O,OOO           I,080,OOO
    multiply by no. of solar months in a year,                12                  13

  Solar months,                                       5 1,840,000        12,960,000
  Moon's sidereal revolutions,                        57,753,336         i4.438.334
    deduct solar revolutions,                          4,320,000          1,080,000
  Synodical revolutions, lunar months,                53,433,336         i3,358,334
    deduct solar months,                              5 1 ,840,000       12,960,000
  Intercalary months,                                ~ 1,593,336             3o8,334
26                           S&rya-Siddhdnta,                           [i.40-
  Lunar months,                                   53,433,336     1 3,358,334
    multiply by no. of lunar days in a month,             3o              3o
  Lunar days,                                   I,6o3,ooo,o8o   4oo,75o,O2O
    deduct civil days,                          1,577,917,828   394,479,457
  Omitted lunar days,                             25,08a,252      6,270,563
   We add a few explanatory remarks respecting some of the terms em
ployed in this passage, or the divisions of time which they designate.
   The natural day, nycthemeron, is, for astronomical purposes, reckoned
in the Surya-Siddhanta from midnight to midnight, and is of invariable
length ; for the practical uses of life, the Hindus count it from sunrise
to sunrise ; which would cause its duration to vary, in a latitude as high
as our own, sometimes as much as two or three minutes. As above
noticed, the system of Brahmagupta and some others reckon the astro
nomical day also from sunrise.
   For the lunar day, the lunar and solar month, and the general con
stitution of the year, see above, under verse 13. The lunar month,
which is the one practically reckoned by, is named from the solar month
in which it commences. An intercalation takes place when two lunar
months begin in the same solar month : the former of the two is called
an intercalary month (adhim&sa, or adhim&saka, " extra month"), of the
same name as that which succeeds it.
   The term " omitted lunar day " (tithikshaya, " loss of a lunar day ")
is explained by the method adopted in the calendar, and in practice, of
naming the days of the month. The civil day receives the name of the
lunar day which ends in it ; but if two lunar days end in the same solar
day, the former of them is reckoned as loss (kshaya), and is omitted, the
day being named from the other.

  41. The revolutions of the sun's apsis (manda), moving east
ward, in an ^Eon, are three hundred and eighty-seven ; of that
of Mars, two hundred and four ; of that of Mercury, three hun
dred and sixty-eight ;
  42. Of that of Jupiter, nine hundred ; of that of Venus, five
hundred and thirty-five ; of the apsis of Saturn, thirty-nine.
Farther, the revolutions of the nodes, retrograde, are :
  43. Of that of Mars, two hundred and fourteen ; of that of
Mercury, four hundred and eighty-eight; of that of Jupiter, one
hundred and seventy-four ; of that of Yenus, nine hundred and
three ;
  44. Of the node of Saturn, the revolutions in an JEon are six
hundred and sixty-two : the revolutions of the moon's apsis and
node have been given here already.
  In illustration of the curious feature of the Hindu system of astronomy
presented in this passage, we first give the annexed table ; which shows
the number of revolutions in the xEon, or period of 4,320,000,000 years,
assigned by the text to the apsis and node of each planet, the resulting
time of revolution, the number of years which each would require to
i.44.]                        Translation and Notes.                                        27
pass through an arc of one minute, and the position of each, according
to the system, in 1860; the latter being reckoned in our method, from
the vernal equinox. Farther are added the actual positions for Jan. 1,
1850, as given by Biot (Trait6 d' Astronomic, tom. v. 529) ; and finally,
the errors of the positions as determined by this Siddhanta.
Table of Revolutions and Present Position of the Apsides and Nodes of
                              the Planets.
              No. of                        No. of yean Resulting        True       Error of
   Planet.    rev. in Time of revolution,     to 1' of   position,     position,     Hindu
             an JEon.     in years.           motion.   A. D. 1860.   A. D. 1850.   position.
Apsides :                                                  o     /       o 1            0   I
 •Sun,         387        11,162,790.7         5i6.8       95 4        IOO 22       - 5 16
  Mercury,     368        II,739,l3o.4         543.5      238 i5       255 7        - 16 5z
  Venus,       535         8,074,766.4         3?3.8       97 39       3o9 24       -211 45
  Mars,        204        21,176,470.6         980.4      i4? 49       i53 18       - 5 29
  Jupiter,     900         4,800,000.0         222.2      189 9        191 55       - 2 46
  Saturn,       39      1 10,769,230.8        5128.2      254 24       270 6        - i5 42
Nodes:
  Mercury,     488        8,852,459.0           409.8      38 27        46 33       -   8 6
  Venus,       903        4,784,053.2           221.5      77 26        75 19       +   27
  Mars,        "4        20,186,915.9           934.6      5749         48 23       +   9 26
  Jupiter,     i?4       24,827,586.2         1 149.4      97 "6        98 54       -   i 28
  Saturn,      662        6,525,678.2           302.1     118 7        112 22       +   5 45
   A mere inspection of this table is sufficient to show that the Hindu
astronomers did not practically recognize any motion of the apsides and
nodes of the planets ; since, even in the case of those to which they
assigned the most rapid motion, two thousand years, at the least, would
be required to produce such a change of place as they, with their im
perfect means of observation, would be able to detect.
   This will, however, be made still more clearly apparent by the next
following table, in which we give the positions of the apsides and nodes
aa determined by four different text-books of the Hindu science, for the
commencement of the Iron Age.
Positions of the Apsides and Nodes of the Planets, according to Different
     Authorities, at the Commencement of the Iron Age, 3102 B. C.
                                   Siddhanta-              Arya-               Parajara-
  Planet. Sfirya- Siddhanta.        Qiromani.            Siddhanta.           Siddhanta.
Apsides :  (rev.) ..... (rev.) i - • •• (rev.) i 0 • .. (rev.) i • . ..
 Sun,     (178) 2 17 7 48 [219) 2 17 45 36 (210) 2 17 45 36 (219} 2 17 45 36
 Mercury, ^166) 7 10 19 12 ;i5i) 7 14 47 2 (i54) 7 o i4 24 (162) 7 o 4o 19
 Venus,    242) 2 19 39 o 298) 2 21 2 IO (3oo) o 17 16 48 (240) 2 20 42 43
 Mars,     (92) 4 9 5? 36 ;i33) 4 8 18 14 (i36) 4 3 5o 24 (i 49) 4 24326
 Jupiter, 407) 5 21 o o (390) 5 22 i5 36 (378) 5 22 48 o (448) 5223524
 Saturn,   (17) 7 26 36 36 (18) 8 20 53 3i (16) 4 29 45 36 (24) 7 28 14 52
Nodet:
 Mercury, 22I-) O 2O 52 48 238-) o 21 20 53 (239-) o 20 9 36 (296-) 021 I 26
 Venus,    409-) 2 o i 48 '408-) 2 o 5 2 (432-) 2 o 28 48 (4o8-) 2 o 5 2
 Mars,     (97-) i 10 8 24 1 22-) O 21 59 46 (i36-) i 10 19 12 (112-) i 9 336
 Jupiter, (79-) 2 19 44 24 (29-) 2 22 2 38 (44-) 2 20 38 24 (87-) 2 si 43 12
 Saturn,   3oo-) 3 10 37 12 (267-) 3 i3 23 3i (283-) 3 10 48 o (288-) 3 10 26 24
28                            Sfirya-Siddhdnta,                             [i. 44-
   The data of the Arya and Para?ara Siddhantas, from which the posi
tions given in the table are calculated, are derived from Bentley (Hind.
Ast. pp. 139, 144). To each position is prefixed the number of com
pleted revolutions ; or, in the case of the nodes, of which the motion is
retrograde, the number of whole revolutions of which each falls short
by the amount expressed by its position.
   The almost universal disagreement of these four authorities with
respect to the number of whole revolutions accomplished, and their
general agreement as to the remainder, which determines the position,*
prove that the Hindus had no idea of any motion of the apsides and
nodes of the planets as an actual and observable phenomenon; but,
knowing that the moon's apsis and node moved, they fancied that the
symmetry of the universe required that those of the other planets should
move also ; and they constructed their systems accordingly. They held,
too, as will be seen at the beginning of the second chapter, that the
nodes and apsides, as well as the conjunctions (fighra), were beings,
stationed in the heavens, and exercising a physical influence over their
respective planets, and, as the conjunctions revolved, so must these also.
In framing their systems, then, they assigned to these points such a
number of revolutions in an ^Eon as should, without attributing to them
any motion which admitted of detection, make their positions what they
supposed them actually to be. The differences in respect to the number
of revolutions were in part rendered necessary by the differences of other
features of the systems ; thus, while that of the Siddhanta-Qiromani
makes the planetary motions commence at the beginning of the -<Eonr
by that of the Surya-Siddhanta they commence 17,064,000 years later
(see above, v. 24), and by that of the Arya-Siddhanta, 3,024,000 years
later (Bentley, Hind. Ast. p. 139) : in part, however, they are merely
arbitrary ; for, although the Para^ara-Siddhanta agrees with the Sid-
dhanta-Qiromani as to the time of the beginning of things, its numbers
of revolutions correspond only in two instances with those of the latter.
   It may be farther remarked, that the close accordance of the different
astronomical systems in fixing the position of points which are so difficult
of observation and deduction as the nodes and apsides, strongly indicates,
either that the Hindus were remarkably accurate observers, and all
arrived independently at a near approximation to the truth, or that some
one of them was followed as an authority by the others, or that all alike
derived their data from a common source, whether native or foreign.
We reserve to the end of this work the discussion of these different
possibilities, and the presentation of data which may tend to settle the
question between them.
  45. Now add together the time of the six Patriarchs (manu),
with their respective twilights, and with the dawn at the com
mencement of the ^Eon (kalpa) ; farther, of the Patriarch Manu,
son of Yivasvant,

   * It is altogether probable that, in the two cases where the Arya-Siddhanta seema
to disagree with the others, its data were either given incorrectly by Bentley's au
thority, or have been incorrectly reported by him.
i, 50.]                     Translation and Notes.                                29
  46. The twenty-seven Ages (yuga) that are past, and likewise
the present Golden Age (Jcrta yuga) ; from their sum subtract the
time of creation, already stated in terms of divine years,
  47. In solar years : the result is the time elapsed at the end of
the Golden Age ; namely, one billion, nine hundred and fifty-
three million, seven hundred and twenty thousand solar years.
   We have already presented this computation, in full, in the notes to
verses 23 and 24.
  48. To this, add the number of years of the time since
past, ...
   As the Surya-Siddhanta professes to have been revealed by the Sun
about the end of the Golden Age, it is of course precluded from taking
any notice of the divisions of time posterior to that period : there is
nowhere in the treatise an allusion to any of the eras -which are actually
made use of by the inhabitants of India in reckoning time, with the ex
ception of the cycle of sixty years, which, by its nature, is bound to no
date or period (see below, v. 55). The astronomical era is the com
mencement of the Iron Age, the epoch, according to this Siddhanta, of
the last general conjunction of the planets; this coincides, as stated
above (under vv. 29-34^ with Feb. 18, 1612 J. P., or 3102 B. C. From
that time will have elapsed, upon the eleventh of April, 1859, the
number of 4960 complete sidereal years of the Iron Age. The com
putation of the whole period, from the beginning of the present order
of things, is then as follows :
    From end of creation to end of last Golden Age,               1,953,720,000
       Silver Age,                                    1,296,000
       Brazen Age,                                      864,ooo
       Of Iron Age,                                       4,960       2,164,960
    Total from end of creation to April, 1859,                    1,955,884,960
   Since the Surya-Siddhanta, as will appear from the following verses,
reckons by luni-solar years, it regards as the end of I. A. 4960 not
the end of the solar sidereal year of that number, but that of the luni-
solar year, which, by Hindu reckoning, is completed upon the third of
the same month (see Ward, Kala Sankalita, Table, p. xxxii).
   48 .... Reduce the sum to months, and add the months
expired of the current year, beginning with the light half of
Caitra.
   49. Set the result down in two places; multiply it by the
number of intercalary months, and divide by that of solar
months, and add to the last result the number of intercalary
months thus found ; reduce the sum to days, and add the days
expired of the current month ;
   50. Set the result down in two places; multiply it by the
number of omitted lunar days, and divide by that of lunar days ;
subtract from the last result the number of omitted lunar days
     80                                Stirya-Siddh&nta,                                   [i.50-
     thus obtained : the remainder is, at midnight, on the meridian of
     LankS,
       51. The sum of days, in civil reckoning. . . .
       In these verses is taught the method of one of the most important
    and frequently recurring processes in Hindu Astronomy, the finding,
    namely, of the number of civil or natural days which have elapsed at
    any given date, reckoning either from the beginning of the present
    creation, or (see below, v. 56) from any required epoch since that time.
    In the modern technical language, the result is uniformly styled the
    ahargana, " sum of days ; " that precise term, however, does not once
    occur in the text of the Surya-Siddhanta : in the present passage we
    have dyugana, which means the same thing, and in verse 53 dinar&fi,
    " heap or quantity of days."
       The process will be best illustrated and explained by an example.
    Let it be required to find the sum of days to the beginning of Jan. 1,
    1860.
      It is first necessary to know what date corresponds to this in Hindu
    reckoning. We have remarked above that the 4960th year of the Iron
    Age is completed in April, 1859 ; in order to exhibit the place in the
    next following year of the date required, and, at the same time, to pre
    sent the names and succession of the months, which in this treatise are
    assumed as known, and are nowhere stated, we have constructed the
    following skeleton of a Hindu calendar for the year 4961 of the Iron
    Age.
                   Solar Year.
          mouth.                 first day.
                                                             Luni-solar Year,
      (I A. 4960.)
                                                       month.                 first day.
        12. Caitra,      Mar. i3, 1859.
      (L A. 4961.)                               (I. A. 4961.)
          r. Vaicakha, Apr. 12, do.                   I. Caitra,     Apr. 4, 1859.
          2. Jyaishtha, May i3, do.                   2. Vai9akha,   May 3, do.
         3. Ashadha,     June i4, do.                 3. Jyaishtha, June 2, do.
         4. Cravana,     July i5, do.                 4. Ashadha,    July I, do.
          5. Bhadrapada, Aug. 16, do.                 5. Cravana,    July 3i, do.
         6. Acvina,      Sept. 16, do.               6. Bhadrapada, Aug. 29, do.
         7. Karttika,    Oct. 16, do.                7. Acvina,      Sept. 28, do.
         8. Margacirsha, Nov. i5, do                 8. Karttika,    Oct. a7, do.
         9. Pausha,      Dec. i5, do.                9. Margacirsha, Nov. 26, do.
        10. Magha,       Jan. i3, 1860.             10. Pausha,      Dec. 25, do.
        I1. Phalguna,    Feb. n, do.                ii. Magha,       Jan. 24, 1860.
        12. Caitra,      Mar. 12, do.               12. Phalguna, Feb. 22, do.
                                                /T A   t~£~ ^
                                                    i. Caitra,           Mar. 23, do.
       The names of the solar months are derived from the names of the
    asterisms (see below, chap, viii.) in which, at the time of their being first
    so designated, the moon was full during their continuance. The same
    names are transferred to the lunar months. Each lunar month is divided
    into two parts; the first, called the light half (fukla, pafoha, "bright



-
i. 52.]                          Translation and Notes.                                81
side"), lasts from new moon to full moon, or while the moon is waxing ;
the other, called the dark half (krshna paksha, "black side"), lasts from
full moon to new moon, or while the moon is waning.
   The table shows that Jan. 1, 1860, is the eighth day of the tenth
month of the 4961st year of the Iron Age. The time, then, for which
we have to find the sum of days, is 1,055,884,960 y, 9 m., 7 d.
          Number of complete years elapsed,                          1,955,884,960
            multiply by number of solar months in a year,                       12
          Number of months,                                         23,470,619,520
            add months elapsed of current year,                                  9
          "Whole number of months elapsed,                          23,470,619,529
   Now a proportion is made : as the whole number of solar months
in an Age is to the number of intercalary months in the same period, so
is the number of months above found to that of the corresponding
intercalary months : or,
                  51,840,000 : 1,593,336 : : 23,470,619,529 : 721,384,703 +
          Whole number of months, as above,                         33,470,619,529
            add intercalary months,                                    72i,384,7o3
          Whole number of lunar months,                             24,192,004,232
            multiply by number of lunar days in a month,                        3o
          Number of lunar days,                                    725,760,126,960
            add lunar days elapsed of current month,                             7
          Whole number of lunar days elapsed,                      725,760,126,967
   To reduce, again, the number of lunar days thus found to the corres
ponding number of solar days, a proportion is made, as before : as the
whole number of lunar days in an Age is to the number of omitted lunar
days in the same period, so is the number of lunar days in the period
for which the sum of days is required to that of the corresponding
omitted lunar days : or,
         i,6o3,ooo,o8o : 25,082,2S2 : : 725,760,126,967 : n,356,oi 8,395 +
          Whole number of lunar days as above,                     725,760,126,967
            deduct omitted lunar days,                              1 1,356,018,395
          Totaltonumber of civil
                  beginning      davsi, from
                            of Jan.      1860,end of creation [)       / / / 108,572
                                                                   7 i4,4o4,   or

  This, then, is the required sum of days, for the beginning of the year
A.D. 1860, at midnight, upon the Hindu prime meridian.
  The first use which we are instructed to make of the result thus ob
tained is an astrological one.
  51      From this may be found the lords of the day, the
month, and the year, counting from the sun. If the number be
divided by seven, the remainder marks the lord of the day, be
ginning with the sun.
  52. Divide the same number by the number of days in a
month and in a year, multiply the one quotient by two and the
32                          S&rya-SiddMnta,                           [i.52.
other by three, add one to each product, and divide by seven ;
the remainders indicate the lords of the month and of the
year.
    These verses explain the method of ascertaining, from the sum of days
already found, the planet which is accounted to preside over the day,
 and also those under whose charge are placed the month and year in
which that day occurs.
    To find the lord of the day is to find the day of the week, since the
 latter derives its name from the former. The week, with the names and
 succession of its days, is the same in India as with us, having been
 derived to both from a common source. The principle upon which the
 assignment of the days to their respective guardians was made has been
handed down by ancient authors (see Ideler, Handbuch d. math. u. tech.
 Chronologie, i. 178, etc.), and is well known. It depends upon the
 division of the day into twenty-four hours, and the assignment of each
 of these in succession to the planets, in their natural order ; the day
being regarded as under the dominion of that planet to which its first
 hour belongs. Thus, the planets being set down in the order of their
proximity to the earth, as determined by the ancient systems of as
 tronomy (for the Hindu, see below, xii. 84-88), beginning with the
 remotest, as follows : Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, sun, Venus, Mercury, moon,
 and the first hour of the twenty-four being assigned to the Sun, as chief
 of the planets, the second to Venus, etc., it will be found that the twenty-
 fifth hour, or the first of the second day, belongs to the moon ; the forty-
 ninth, or the first of the third day, to Mars, and so on. Thus is obtained
 a new arrangement of the planets, and this is the one in which this
 Siddhanta, when referring to them, always assumes them to stand (see,
for instance, below, v. 70 ; ii. 35-37) : it has the convenient property
that by it the sun and moon are separated from the other planets, from
which they are by so many peculiarities distinguished. Upon this order
depend the rules here given for ascertaining also the lords of the month
and of the year. The latter, as appears both from \he explanation of
the commentator, and from the rules themselves, are no actual months
and years, but periods of thirty and three hundred and sixty days, fol
lowing one another in uniform succession, and supposed to be placed,
like the day, under the guardianship of the planets to whom belong
their first subdivisions : thus the lord of the day is the lord of its first
hour ; the lord of the month is the lord of its first day (and so of its
first hour) ; the lord of the year is the lord of its first month (and so
of its first day and hour). We give below this artificial arrangement
of the planets, with the order in which they are found to succeed one
another as lords of the periods of one, thirty, and three hundred and
sixty days ; we add their natural order of succession, as lords of the
hours ; and we farther prefix the ordinary names of the days, with their
English equivalents. Other of the numerous names of the planets, it
is to be remarked, may be put before the word v&ra to form the name
of the day : v&ra itself means literally " successive tune," or " turn,"
and is not used, so far as we are aware, in any other connection, to
denote a day.
i. 52.]                          Translation and Notes.                                 33
                                                             Suecenion, n Lord of
                  Name of day.           Presiding Plant!.
                                                             day, mouth, jrear, hour.
          Ravivara,         Sunday,          Sun,         I  I i    I
          Somavara,         Monday,          Moon,        5  a 6    4
          Mangalavara,      Tuesday,         Mars,        a  3 4    7
          Budhavara,        Wednesday,       Mercury,4    6    a    3
          Guruvara,         Thursday,        Jupiter,5    3    7    6
          ^ukravara,   Friday,          Venus,       6    7    5 i
          ^anivara,    Saturday,        Saturn,      7    4    3    5
   As the first day of the subsistence of the present order of things is
supposed to have been a Sunday, it is only necessary to divide the sum
of days by seven, and the remainder will be found, in the first column,
opposite the name of the planet to which the required day belongs.
Thus, taking the sum of days found above, adding to it one, for the first
of January itself, and dividing by seven, we have : *
                            7)714404,108,573
                               102,057,729,796-1
   The first of January, 1860, accordingly, falls on a Sunday by Hindu
reckoning, as by our own.
   On referring to the table, it will be seen that the lords of the months
follow one another at intervals of two places. To find, therefore, by a
summary process, the lord of the month in which occurs any given day,
first divide the sum of days by thirty ; the quotient, rejecting the re
mainder, is the number of months elapsed ; multiply this by two, that
each month may push the succession forward two steps, add one for the
current month, divide by seven in order to get rid of whole series, and
the remainder is, in the column of lords of the day, the number of the
regent of the month required. Thus :
                               30)714,404,108,574
                                    23,813,470,285+
                                                       3

                                         47,626,940,570
                                                       i
                                       7)47,626,940,571
                                          6,8o3,848,652-7
   The regent of the month in question is therefore Saturn.
   By a like process is found the lord of the year, saving that, as the
lords of the year succeed one another at intervals of three places, the
multiplication is by three instead of by two. Upon working out the
process, it will be found that the final remainder is five, which designates
Jupiter as the lord of the year at the given time.
   Excepting here and in the parallel passage xii. 77, 78, no reference is
made in the Surya-Siddhanta to the week, or to the names of its days.
Indeed, it is not correct to speak of the week at all in connection with
India, for the Hindus do not seem ever to have regarded it as a division
of time, or a period to be reckoned by ; they knew only of a certain order
of succession, in which the days were placed under the regency of the
•even planets. And since, moreover, as remarked above (under w. 11,
                               S&rya-Siddhdn to.                                    [i.52-
12), they never made that division of the day into twenty-four hours
upon which the order of regency depends, it follows that the whole sys
tem was of foreign origin, and introduced into India along with other
elements of the modern sciences of astronomy and astrology, to which
it belonged. Its proper foundation, the lordship of the successive hours,
is shown by the other passage (xii. 78) to have been also known to the
Hindus; and the name by which the hours are there called (hor&=&Qa)
indicates beyond a question the source whence they derived it.
  53. Multiply the sum of days (dinardqi) by the number of
revolutions of any planet, and divide by the number of civil
days ; the result is the position of that planet, in virtue of its
mean motion, in revolutions and parts of a revolution.
   By the number pf revolutions and of civil days is meant, of course,
their number, as stated above, in an Age. For " position of the planet,"
etc., the text has, according to its usual succinct mode of expression,
simply " is the planet, in revolutions, etc." There is no word for " po
sition" or "place" in the vocabulary of this Siddhanta.
   This verse gives the method of finding the mean place of the planets
at any given time for which the sum of days has been ascertained, by
a simple proportion : as the number of civil days in a period is to the
number of revolutions during the same period, so is the sum of days to
the number of revolutions and parts of a revolution accomplished down
to the given time. Thus, for the sun :
    ',577,917,828 : 4,3ao,ooo : : 714,404108,572 : 1,955,884,960""' 81 17° 48' 7"
   The mean longitude of the sun, therefore, Jan. 1st, 1860, at midnight
on the meridian of Ujjayini, is 257° 48' 7". We have calculated in this
manner the positions of all the planets, and of the moon's apsis and
node—availing ourselves, however, of the permission given below, in
verse 56, and reckoning only from the last epoch of conjunction, the be
ginning of the Iron Age (from which time the sum of days is 1,81 1,945),
and also employing the numbers afforded by the lesser period of
1,080,000 years—and present the results in the following table.
    Mean Places of the Planets, Jan. 1st, 1860, midnight, at Ujjayini.
              Planet.             According to the              The same
                                  Surya-Siddhanta.         corrected by the bija.
                               (rev.)  i    .   .     i,      i    •  /      >t
         Sun,                 (4.960) 8    17 48       7      «   17 48       7
         Mercury,            (a0,597) 4    1 5 i3      8      4    8 36      16
         Venus,               (8,o63) 10   21   8    59      10   if)   II   22
         Mars,                (2,637) 5    24 17     36       5   24    17   36
         Jupiter,               (4i8) 2 26       o    7       2   22    4l   4l
         Saturn,                (168) 3 20 ii 12              3   25     8   5o
         Moon,               (66,3-i8) ii 1 5 23 24          ii   15    23   24
            " apsis,            (56o) 10 9 42 26             10    8     3 i3
           " node,              (267-) 9 24 26 4              9   22    46   5i

   The positions are given as deduced both from the numbers of
revolutions stated in the text, and from tho same as corrected by the
i. 55.]                   Translation and Notes.                          85
btja : prefixed are the numbers of complete revolutions accomplished
since the epoch. In the cases of the moon's apsis and node, however,
it was necessary to employ the numbers of revolutions given for the
whole Age, these not being divisible by four, and also to add to their
ascertained amount of movement their longitude at the epoch (see below,
under vv. 57, 58).
   54. Thus also are ascertained the places of the conjunction
(fighra) and apsis (mandocca) of each planet, which have been
mentioned as moving eastward ; and in like manner of the nodes,
which have a retrograde motion, subtracting the result from a
whole circle.
   The places of the apsides and nodes have already been given above
(under vv. 41-44), both for the commencement of the Iron Age, and
for A. D. 1850. The place of the conjunctions of the three superior
planets is, of course, the mean longitude of the sun. In the case of the
inferior planets, the place of the conjunction is, in fact, the mean place of
the planet itself in its proper orbit, and it is this which we have given for
Mercury and Venus in the preceding table : while to the Hindu appre
hension, the mean place of those planets is the same with that of the sun.
  55. Multiply by twelve the past revolutions of Jupiter, add
the signs of the current revolution, and divide by sixty ; the
remainder marks the year of Jupiter's cycle, counting from
Vijaya.
   This is the rule for finding the current year of the cycle of sixty
years, which is in use throughout all India, and which is called the cycle
of Jupiter, because the length of its years is measured by the passage
of that planet, by its mean motion, through one sign of the zodiac.
According to the data given in the text of this Siddhanta, the length of
Jupiter's year is 361d Oh 38™ ; the correction of the btja makes it about
12m longer. It was doubtless on account of the near coincidence of
this period with the true solar year that it was adopted as a measure of
time ; but it has not been satisfactorily ascertained, so far as we are
aware, where the cycle originated, or what is its age, or why it was
made to consist of sixty years, including five whole revolutions of the
planet. There was, indeed, also in use a cycle of twelve of Jupiter's
years, or the time of one sidereal revolution : see below, xiv. 17. Davis
(As. Res. iii. 209, etc.) and Warren (Kala Sankalita, p. 197, etc.) have
treated at some length of the greater cycle, and of the different modes
of reckoning and naming its years usual in the different provinces of
India.
   In illustration of the rule, let us ascertain the year of the cycle cor
responding to the present year, A. D. 1859. It is not necessary to make
the calculation from the creation, as the rule contemplates ; for, since
the number of Jupiter's revolutions in the period of 1,080,000 years is
divisible by five, a certain number of whole cycles, without a remainder,
will have elapsed at the beginning of the Iron Age. The revolutions of
the planet since that time, as stated in the table last given, are 418, and
it is in the 3rd sign of the 419th revolution ; the reduction of the whole
36                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                            [i. 55-
amount of movement to signs shows us that the current year is the
5019th since the epoch : divide this by 60, to cast out whole cycles, and
the remainder, 39, is the number of the year in the current cycle. This
treatise nowhere gives the names of the years of Jupiter, but, as in the
case of the months, the signs of the zodiac, and other similar matters,
assumes them to be already familiarly known in their succession : we
accordingly present them below. We take them from Mr. Davis's paper,
alluded to above, not having access at present to any original authority
which contains them.
      1. Vijaya.           21. Pramadin.           41. (,'riumkha.
     2. Jaya.              22. Ananda.             A"'-. Bhava,
     3. Manmathn.          23. Rakshasa.           43. Yuvan.
     4. Durmukha.          24. Anala.              44. Dhatar.
     3. Hemalamba.         25. I'ingala.           45. J$vara.
       6. Vilamba.         26. Kalayukta.          46. Bahudhanya.
       7. Vikarin.         27. Siddbarthin.        47. Pramathin.
       8. garvari.         28. Raudra.             48. Vikrama.
       9. Plava.           29. Durmati.            49. Bhrcya.
     10. £ubhakrt.         3o. Dundubhi.           5o. Citrabhanu.
     n. 9ubhana.           3t. Rudhirodgarin.      5i. Subhanu.
     12. Krodhin.          32. Raktaksha.          5a. Tarana.
     t3. Vijvarasu.        33. Krodhana.           53. Parthiva.
     1 4. ParabhaVa.       34. Kshaya.             54. Vyaya.
     1 5. Plavanga.        35. Prabhava.           55. Sarvajit.
     16. Kilaka.           36. Vibhara.            56. SarvadhSrin.
     17. Saumya.           37. 9ukla.              57- Virodhin.
     16. Sadhara^ia.       38. Pramoda.            58. Vikrta.
     19. Virodhakrt.       3c;. Prajapatl          59. Khara.
     20. Paridhavin.       4o. Angiras.            60. Kandana.
   It appears, then, that the current year of Jupiter's cycle is. named
Prajapati : upon dividing by the planet's mean daily motion the part of
the current sign already passed over, it will be found that, according to
the text, that year commenced on the twenty-third of February, 1859 ;
or, if the correction of the btja be admitted, on the third of April.
   Although it is thus evident that the Surya-Siddhanta regards both
the existing order of things and the Iron Age as having begun with
VSjaya, that year is not generally accounted as the first, but as the
twenty-seventh, of the cycle, which is thus made to commence with.
Prabhava. An explanation of this discrepancy might perhaps throw
important light upon the origin or history of the cycle.
   This method of reckoning time is called (see below, xiv. 1, 2) the
b&rkaspatya m&na, "measure of Jupiter."
   56. The processes which have thus been stated in full detail,
are practically applied in an abridged form. The calculation of
the mean place of the planets may be made from any epoch
(guga) that may be fixed upon.
   57. Now, at the end of the Golden Age (Jcrta yuga\ all th0
planets, by their mean motion—excepting, however, their nodes
and apsides (mandocca)—are in conjunction in. the first of Aries..
   58. The moon's apsis (ucca) is in the first of Capricorn, an,d
ite node is in the first of Libra ; and the rest, which have been
i 58.]                     Translation and Notes.                            37
stated above to have a slow motion—their position cannot be
expressed in whole signs.
   It is curious to observe how the Surya-Siddhanta, lest it should seem
to admit a later origin than that which it claims in the second verse of
this chapter, is compelled to ignore the real astronomical epoch, the
beginning of the Iron Age ; and also how it avoids any open recog
nition of the lesser cycle of 1,080,000 years, by which its calculations
are so evidently intended to be made.
   The words at the end of verse 56 the commentator interprets to mean :
" from the beginning of the current, i. e., the Silver, Age." In this he
is only helping to keep up the pretence of the work to immemorial an
tiquity, even going therein beyond the text itself, which expressly says :
" from any desired (ishtatas) yuga." Possibly, however, we have taken
too great a liberty in rendering yuga by " epoch," and it should rather
be " Age," i. e., " beginning of an Age." The word yuga comes from
the root yuj, " to join " (Latin, jungo ; Greek, t,vtiyi>v/ji<, : the word itself
is the same with jugum, JwyoV), and seems to have been originally ap
plied to indicate a cycle, or period, by means of which the conjunction
or correspondence of discordant modes of reckoning time was kept up ;
thus it still signifies also the lustrum, or cycle of. five years, which, with
an intercalated month, anciently maintained the correspondence of the
year of 360 days with the true solar year. From such uses it was trans
ferred to designate the vaster periods of the Hindu chronology.
   As half an Age, or two of the lesser periods, are accounted to have
elapsed between the end of the Golden and the beginning of the Iron
Age, the planets, at the latter epoch, have again returned to a position
of mean conjunction : the moon's node, also, is still in the first of Libra,
but her apsis has changed its place half a revolution, to the first of
Cancer (see above, under vv. 29-34). The positions of the apsides and
nodes of the other planets at the same time have been given already,
under verses 41—44.
   The Hindu names of the signs correspond in signification with our ownr
having been brought into India from the West. There is nowhere in
this work any allusion to them as constellations, or as having any fixed
position of their own in the heavens : they are simply the names of the
successive signs (r&fi, bha) into which any circle is divided, and it is left
to be determined by the connection, in any case, from what point they
shall be counted. Here, of course, it is the initial point of the fixed
Hindu sphere (see above, under v. 27). As the signs are, in the sequel,
frequently cited by name, we present annexed, for the convenience of
reference of those to whose memory they are not familiar in the order
of their succession, their names, Latin and Sanskrit, their numbers, and
the figures generally used to represent them. Those enclosed in
brackets do not chance to occur in our text.
    i. Aries,  cp mesha, <ya.            1. Libra,       £h tvld.
    a, Taurus, B vrthan.                 8. Scorpio,     m [vrpika,] dli.
    3. Gemini, U mithuna,.               9. Sagittarius, / dhamai.
    4. Cancer,   22 karka, karkata.     10. Capricornus, \/f makara, mrga.
    5. Leo,      ft [tinha].             it. Aquarius,    •» kumbha.
    fi. Virgo,   Up kanyd.               12. Pisces,      K \mma\.
38                            S&rya-Siddhdnta,                           [i. 58-
   In the translation given above of the second half of verse 58, not a
little violence is done to the natural construction. This would seem to
require that it be rendered : " and the rest are in whole signs (have come
to a position which is without a remainder of degrees) ; they, being of
slow motion, are not stated here." But the actual condition of things
at the epoch renders necessary the former translation, which is that of
the commentator also. We cannot avoid conjecturing that the natural
rendering was perhaps the original one, and that a subsequent alteration
of the elements of the treatise compelled the other and forced interpre
tation to be put upon the passage.
   The commentary gives the positions of the apsides and nodes (those
of the nodes, however, in reverse) for the epoch of the end of the Golden
Age, but, strangely enough, both in the printed edition and in our manu
script, commits the blunder of giving the position of Saturn's node a
second time, for that of his apsis, and also of making the seconds of the
position of the node of Mars 12, instead of 24. We therefore add them
below, in their correct form.
Motion of the Apsides and Nodes of the Planets, to the End of the last
                            Golden Age.
           Planet.                    Apaii.                  Node.

                         (rev.)   •   . ,   ,, (rev.) •   „ , ,,
        Sun,             ('75)     o 7 28 12
        Mercury,         (166)     5 4 4 48 (220) 8 ii 16 48
        Venus,           (241)    ii i3 21 o (4o8) 4 17 25 48*
        Mars,             (92)     3 3 i4 24          (96)
                                                      9 ii 20 24
        Jupiter,         (4o?)     o 9 o O            (78)
                                                      8 8 56 24
        Saturn,           ('7)     7 19 35 24 (J99) 4 20 i3 12

   The method of finding the mean places of the planets for midnight
on the prime meridian having been now fully explained, the treatise
proceeds to show how they may be found for other places, and for other
times of the day. To this the first requisite is to know the dimensions
of the earth.
  59. Twice eight hundred yvjanas are the diameter of the earth :
the square root of ten times the square of that is the earth's cir
cumference.
  60. This, multiplied by the sine of the co-latitude (lambajyd)
of any place, and divided by radius (trijivd), is the corrected
(sphutd) circumference of the earth at that place
   There is the same difficulty in the way of ascertaining the exactness
of the Hindu measurement of the earth as of the Greek ; the uncer
tain value, namely, of the unit of measure employed. The yojana is
ordinarily divided into krofa, " cries " (i. e., distances to which a certain
cry may be heard) ; the krofa into dhanus, " bow-lengths," or danda,
" poles ; " and these again into hasta, " cubits." By its origin, the latter

             * The printed edition, by an error of the press, gives 4.
4. 60.]                   Translation and Notes.                          39
ought not to vary far from eighteen inches ; but the higher measures
•differ greatly in their relation to it. The usual reckoning makes the
yojana equal 32,000 cubits, but it is also sometimes regarded as com
posed of 16,000 cubits; and it is accordingly estimated by different au
thorities at from four and a half to rather more than ten miles English.
This uncertainty is no merely modern condition of things : Hiuen-Thsang,
the Chinese monk who visited India in the middle of the seventh cen
tury, reports (see Stanislas Julien's Memoires de Hiouen-Thsang, i. 59,
etc.) that in India " according to ancient tradition a yojana equals forty
li; according to the customary use of the Indian kingdoms, it is thirty
 li ; but the yojana mentioned in the sacred books contains only sixteen
•K :" this smallest yojana, according to the value of the li given by Wil
liams (Middle Kingdom, ii. 154), being equal to from five to six English
miles. At the same time, Hiuen-Thsang states the subdivisions of the
yojana in a manner to make it consist of only 16,000 cubits. Such
 oeing the condition of things, it is clearly impossible to appreciate the
value of the Hindu estimate of the earth's dimensions, or to determine
 how far the disagreement of the different astronomers on this point may
be owing to the difference of their standards of measurement. Arya-
 bhatta (see Colebrooke's Hind. Alg. p. xxxviii ; Essays, ii. 468) states the
earth's diameter to be 1050 yojanas; Bhaskara (Siddh.-Qir. vii. 1) gives
 it as 1581 : the latter author, in his Lllavati (i. 5, 6), makes the yojana
 consist of 32,000 cubits.
     The ratio of the diameter to the circumference of a circle is here
made to be 1 : ,yiO, or 1 : 3.1623, which is no very near approximation.
 It is not a little surprising to find this determination in the same treatise
 with the much more accurate one afforded by the table of sines given in
the next chapter (vv. 17-21), of 3438 : 10,800, or 1 : 3.14136 ; and then
 farther, to find the former, and not the latter, made use of in calculating
 the dimensions of the planetary orbits (see below, xii. 83). But the
 same inconsistency is found also in other astronomical and mathematical
•authorities. Thus Aryabhatta (see Colebrooke, as above) calculates the
 earth's circumference from its diameter by the ratio 7 : 22, or 1 : 3.14286,
 tut makes the ratio 1 : ,/10 the basis of his table of sines, and Brahma-
 gupta and Qridhara a]so adopt the latter. Bhaskara, in stating the
 earth's circumference at 4967 yojanas, is very near the truth, since
  1581 : 4967 : : 1 : 3.14168 : his Lllavati (v. 201) gives 7 : 22, and also,
 as more exact, 1250 : 3927, or 1 : 3.1416. This subject will be reverted
  to in connection with the table of sines.
     The greatest circumference of the earth, as calculated according to
 the data and method of the text, is 5059.556 yojanas. The astronomical
 yojana must be regarded as an independent standard of measurement,
 by which to estimate the value of the other dimensions of the solar
 system stated in this treatise. To make the earth's mean diameter cor
 rect as determined by the Surya-Siddhanta, the yojana should equal
 4.94 English miles ; to make the circumference correct, it should equal
 4.91 miles.
     The rule for finding the circumference of the earth upon a parallel of
 latitude is founded upon a simple proportion, viz., rad. : cos. latitude : :
 circ. of earth at equator : do. at the given parallel ; the cosine of the
40                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [1 60-
latitude being, in effect, the radius of the circle of latitude. Radius and
cosine of latitude are tabular numbers, derived from the table to be
given afterward (see below, ii. 17-21). This treatise is not accustomed
to employ cosines directly in its calculations, but has special names for
the complements of the different arcs which it has occasion to use.
Terrestrial latitude is styled aksha, "axle," which term, as appears from
xii. 42, is employed elliptically for akshonnati, " elevation of the axle,"
i. e., " of the pole : " lamba, co-latitude, which properly signifies " lag
ging, dependence, falling off," is accordingly the depression of the pole,
or its distance from the zenith. Directions for finding the co-latitude
are given below (iii. 13, 14).
    The latitude of Washington being 38° 54', the sine of its co-latitude
is 2675'; the proportion 3438 : 2675 : : 5059.64 : 3936.75 gives us, then,
the earth's circumference at Washington as 3936.75 yojanas.
   60. ... Multiply the daily motion of a planet by the distance
in longitude (degdntara) of any place, and divide by its corrected
circumference ;
   61. The quotient, in minutes, subtract from the mean position
of the planet as found, if the place be east of the prime meridian
(rekha) ; add, if it be west ; the result is the planet's mean po
sition at the given place.
    The rules previously stated have ascertained the mean places of the
 Elanets at a given midnight upon the prime meridian ; this teaches us
   ow to find them for the same midnight upon any other meridian, or,
 how to correct for difference of longitude the mean places already found.
 The proportion is : as the circumference of the earth at the latitude of
 the point of observation is to the part of it intercepted between that
 point and the prime meridian, so is the whole daily motion of each
 planet to the amount of its motion during the time between midnight
 on the one meridian and on the other. The distance in longitude
 (def&ntara, literally "difference of region") is estimated, it will be ob
 served, neither in time nor in arc, but in yojanas. How it is ascertained
 is taught below, in verses 63-65.
    The geographical position of the prime meridian (rekh&, literally
•" line ") is next stated.
  62. Situated upon the line which passes through the haunt of
the demons (rdhshasa) and the mountain which is the seat of the
gods, are Kohitaka and Avanti, as also the adjacent lake.
   The " haunt of the demons " is Lanka, the fabled seat of Havana, the
 chief of the Rakshasas, the abduction by whom of Rama's wife, with
the expedition to Lanka of her heroic husband for her rescue, its ac
complishment, and the destruction of Ravana and his people, form the
fiubject of the epic poem called the Ramayana. In that poem, and to
the general apprehension of the Hindus, Lanka is the island Ceylon ; in
the astronomical geography, however (see below, xii. 39), it is a city,
situated upon the equator. How far those who established the meridian
may have regarded the actual position of Ceylon as identical with that
i. 62.]                   Translation and Notes.                          41
assigned to Lanka might not be easy to determine. The " seat of the
gods" is Mount Meru, situated at the north pole (see below, xii. 34, etc.).
The meridian is usually styled that of Lanka, and "at Lanka" is the
ordinary phrase made use of in this treatise (as, for instance, above, v.
50 ; below, iii. 43) to designate a situation either of no longitude or of
no latitude.
   But the circumstance which actually fixes the position of the prime
meridian is the situation of the city of Ujjayini, the O^tjvij of the Greeks,
the modern Ojein. It is called in the text by one of its ancient names,
Avantl. It is the capital of the rich and populous province of Malava,
occupying the plateau of the Vindhya mountains just north of the
principal ridge and of the river NarmadS, (Nerbudda), and from old
time a chief seat of Hindu literature, science, and arts. Of all the cen
tres of Hindu culture, it lay nearest to the great ocean-route by which,
during the first three centuries of our era, so important a commerce was
carried on between Alexandria, as the mart of Rome, and India and the
countries lying still farther east. That the prime meridian was made
to pass through this city proves it to have been the cradle of the Hindu
science of astronomy, or its principal seat during its early history. Its
actual situation is stated by Warren (Kala Sankalita, p. 9) as lat. 23°
11' 30" NT long. 75° 53' E. from Greenwich : a later authority, Thorn
ton's Gazetteer of India (London : 1857), makes it to be in lat. 23° 10' N.,
long. 75° 47' E. ; in our farther calculations, we shall assume the latter
position to be the correct one.
   The situation of Rohitaka is not so clear ; we have not succeeded in
finding such a place mentioned in any work on the ancient geography
of India to which we have access, nor is it to be traced upon Lassen's
map of ancient India. A city called Rohtuk, however, is mentioned by
Thornton (Gazetteer, p. 836), as the chief place of a modern British
district of the same name, and its situation, a little to the north-west of
Delhi, in the midst of the ancient Kurukshetra, leads us to regard it as
identical with the Rohitaka of the text. That the meridian of Lanka
was expressly recognized as passing over the Kurukshetra, the memora
ble site of the great battle described by the Mahabharata, seems clear.
Bhaskara (Siddh.-^ir., Gan., vii. 2) describes it as follows: "the line
which, passing above Lanka and Ujjayini, and touching the region of
the Kurukshetra, etc., goes through Meru—that line is by the wise
regarded as the central meridian (madhyarekh&) of the earth." Our
own commentary also explains sannihitam sarah, which we have transla
ted "adjacent lake," as signifying Kurukshetra. Warren (as above)
takes the same expression to be the name of a city, which seems to us
highly improbable ; nor do we see that the word saras can properly be
applied to a tract of country : we have therefore thought it safest to
translate literally the words of the text, confessing that we do not know
to what they refer.
   If Rohitaka and Rohtuk signify the same place, we have here a
measure of the accuracy of the Hindu determinations of longitude ;
Thornton gives its longitude as 76° 38', or 51' to the east of Ujjayini.
   The method by which an observer is to determine his distance from
the prime meridian is next explained.
                            6
42                          S&rya-Siddhdnta,                          [i. 63-
   63. When, in a total eclipse of the moon, the emergence
(unmilana) takes place after the calculated time for its occur
rence, then the place of the observer is to the east of the central
meridian ;
   64. When it takes place before the calculated time, his place
is to the west : the same thing may be ascertained likewise from
the immersion (nimUlana). Multiply by the difference of the two
times in nadis the corrected circumference of the earth at the
place of observation,
   65. And divide by sixty: the result, in yojanas, indicates the
distance of the observer from the meridian, to the east or to the
west, upon his own parallel ; and by means of that is made the
correction for difference of longitude.
   Choice is made, of course, of a lunar eclipse, and not of a solar, for
the purpose of the determination of longitude, because its phenomena,
being unaffected by parallax, are seen everywhere at the same instant of
absolute time ; and the moments of total disappearance and first reap
pearance of the moon in a total eclipse are farther selected, because the
precise instant of their occurrence is observable with more accuracy than
that of the first and last contact of the moon with the shadow. For
the explanation of the terms here used see the chapters upon eclipses
(below, iv-vi).
   The interval between the computed and observed time being ascer
tained, the distance in longitude (def&ntara) is found by the simple
proportion : as the whole number of nadis in a day (sixty) is to the inter
val of time in nadis, so is the circumference of the earth at the latitude
of the point of observation to the distance of that point from the prime
meridian, measured cm the parallel. Thus, for instance, the distance of
TJjjayini from Greenwich, in time, being 5h 3m 8s, and that of Washing
ton from Greenwich 5h 8m 11s (Am. Naut. Almanac), that of Ujjayini
from Washington is 10h 11™ 19s, or, in Hindu time, 25n 28V 1P.8, or
25M718 : and by the proportion 60 : 25.4718 : : 3936.75 : 1671.28, we
.obtain 1671.28 yojanas as the distance in longitude (def&ntara) of
Washington from the Hindu meridian, the constant quantity to be em
ployed in finding the mean places of the planets at Washington.
   We might have expected that calculators so expert as the Hindus
 would employ the interval of time directly in making the correction for
difference of longitude, instead of reducing it first to its value in yojanas.
That they did not measure longitude in our manner, in degrees, etc., is
owing to the feet that they seem never to have thought of applying to
the globe of the earth the system of measurement by circles and divi
sions of circles which they used for the sphere of the heavens, but, even
when dividing the earth into zones (see below, xii. 59-66) reduced all
their distances laboriously to yojanas.
  ,66. The succession ,of the week-day (vdra) takes place, to the
east of the meridian, at a time after midnight equal to the differ
ence of longitude in n&iis ; to the west of the meridian, at a
corresponding time before midnight.
i. 67.]                       Translation and Notes.                               48

   This verse appears to us to be an astrological precept, asserting the
regency of the sun and the other planets, in their order, over the suc
cessive portions of time assigned to each, to begin everywhere at the
same instant of absolute time, that of their true commencement upon
the prime meridian ; so that, for instance, at Washington, Sunday, as
the day placed under the guardianship of the sun, would really begin at
eleven minutes before two on Saturday afternoon, by local time. The
commentator, however, sees in it merely an intimation of what moment
of local time, in places east and west of the meridian, corresponds to
the true beginning of the day upon the prime meridian, and he is at
much pains to defend the verse from the charge of being superfluous
and unnecessary, to which it is indeed liable, if that be its only meaning.
  The rules thus far given have directed us only how to find the mean
places of the planets at a given midnight. The following verse teaches
the method of ascertaining their position at any required hour of the
day.
   67. Multiply the mean daily motion of a planet by the number
of nadis of the time fixed upon, and divide by sixty : subtract
the quotient from the place of the planet, if the time be before
midnight ; add, if it be after : the result is its place at the given
time.
   The proportion is as follows : as the number of nadls in a day (sixty)
is to those in the interval between midnight and the time for which the
mean place of the planet is sought, so is the whole daily motion of the
planet to its motion during the interval ; and the result is additive or
subtractive, of course, according as the time fixed upon is after or before
midnight.
   In order to furnish a practical test of the accuracy of this text-book
of astronomy, and of its ability to yield correct results at the present
time, we have calculated, by the rule given in this verse, the mean longi
tudes of the planets for a time after midnight of the first of January,
1860, on the meridian of Ujjayini, which is equal to the distance in
time of the meridian of Washington, viz. 25n 28V 1^.8, or Od.42453 ; and
we present the results in the annexed table. The longitudes are given
as reckoned from the vernal equinox of that date, which we make to be
distant 18° 5' 8".25 from the point established by the S&rya-Siddhanta
as the beginning of the Hindu sidereal sphere ; this is (see below, chap,
viii) 10' east of ? Piscium. We have ascertained the mean places both
as determined by the text of our Siddhanta, and by the same with the
correction of the btja. Added are the actual mean places at the time
designated : those of the primary planets have been found from Le Ver-
rier's elements, presented in Biot's treatise, as cited above ;* those of
the moon, and of her apsis and node, were kindly furnished us from the
office of the American Nautical Almanac, at Cambridge.

   * We would warn our readers, however, of a serious error of the press in the
table as given by Biot ; as the yearly motion of the earth, read 1,295,977.38, instead
of ... 972.88.




                                                                                         -
44                                          S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                             [i. 67-

Mean Longitudes of the Planets, Jan. 1st, 1860, midnight, at Washington.
                                       According to Si rya-Siddhanta :                According to
                  Planet.                                                               moderns.
                                           text.          with bija.
                                            •       I       i '


               Sun,                      96         18      21       96 18 21         100     5     6
               Mercury,                 155          2      3o     148 25 39          i5i    28    20
               Venus,                   339 54 55                  334 57 18          336 i 3 36
               Mars,                    192 36 5                   192 36 5           197 26 32
               Jupiter,                 104             7   22     too 48 56          io3 35 17
               Saturn,                  128 17 II                  i 33 i4 49         i37 10 10
               Moon,                            949                   949              12    4l    23
                  " apsis,              327 5o 24                  326 it ii          326 47 35
                  " node,               3ia 29 5i                  3io 5o 38          3u 48 10
   In the next following table is farther given a view of the errors of the
Hindu determinations—both the absolute errors, as compared with the
actual mean place of each planet, and the relative, as compared with
the place of the sun, to which it is the aim of the Hindu astronomical
systems to adapt the elements of the other planets. Annexed to each
error is the approximate date at which it was nothing, or at which it
will hereafter disappear, ascertained by dividing the amount of present
error by the present yearly loss or gain, absolute or relative, of each
planet ; excepting in the case of the moon, where we have made allow
ance, according to the formula used by the American Nautical Almanac,
for the acceleration of her motion.
Errors of the Mean Longitudes of the Planets, as calculated according to
                        the Surya-Siddh&nta.
                           Error a accor ding to text                            The same, with 6"/0 :
     Planet.                      when                  when                         when                  when
                      absolute. correct.  rel. to sun. correct            absolute. correct. rel. to Ban. correct.
                       0   '   II
                                    A. D.
                                                0       •   II
                                                                  A. D.
                                                                           0 . M A. li.         0   '   ,,
                                                                                                            A. D.
 Sun,       -3 46 45 25o O O 0                                            -3 46 45 a5o o o o
 Mercury,   +3 34 10 2332 +7 20 55 3271                                   -3 i 4i 1817 +o44 5 1970
 Venus,     +3 4i 19 1222 +7 28 4 94 1                                    -i 16 18 2126 +2 3o 27 i5o9
 Mars,      -4 5o 27 886 -i 3 42 i455                                     -4 5o 27 886 -I 3 4s i455
 Jupiter,   +o 3a 5 i57t +4 18 5o 832                                     -2 46 21 42o3 + 1 0 24 i575
 Saturn,    -8 52 59 666 -5 6 i4 857                                      -3 55 21 I25o -o 8 36 i8s5
 Moon,      -3 37 t4 n5 +o 9 3i 1067                                      -3 37 i4 ii5 +o 9 3i 1067
   " apsis, + i 2 49 1679 +4 49 34 1252                                   -o 36 24 1969 +3 10 21 i459
   " node, -o 18 19 1976 +3 28 26 I]62                                    -I 57 32 2714 +i 49 i3 1 468


  To complete the view of the planetary motions, and the statement of
the elements requisite for ascertaining their position in the sky, it only
remains to give the movement in latitude of each, its deviation from the
general planetary path of the ecliptic. This is done in the concluding
verses of the chapter.
   68. The moon is, by its node, caused to deviate from the limit of
its declination (krdnti), northward and southward, to a distance,
when greatest, of an eightieth part of the minutes of a circle ;



      -
i. 70.]                 Translation and Notes.                        45
  69. Jupiter, to the ninth part of that multiplied by two;
Mars, to the same amount multiplied by three ; Mercury, Venus,
and Saturn are by their nodes caused to deviate to the same
amount multiplied by four.
  70. So also, twenty-seven, nine, twelve, six, twelve, and twelve,
multiplied respectively by ten, give the number of minutes of
mean latitude (vikshepa) of the moon and the rest, in their order.
  The deviation of the planets from the plane of the ecliptic is here
stated in two different ways, which give, however, the same results ;
thus:
     Moon,      -5—     = 270'      or    27' X io = 270' = 4° 3o'
                 oo
                 270'
     Mars,       —— X 3 = 90'       or     9" X io = 90' = i° 3o'

     Mercury,    —— X 4 = uo'       or     12' X io = 120' = 2°

     Jupiter,         X 2 = 60'     or     6' X 10 == 60' = 1°

     Venus,           X 4 = i>o'    or     12' x io = 120' = 2°
                  9
     Saturn,     •—- X 4 = no'      or     12' X io = 120' = 2°
                  9
   The subject of the latitude of the planets is completed in verses 6-8,
and verse 57, of the following chapter ; the former passage describes
the manner, and indicates the direction, in which the node produces its
disturbing effect ; the latter gives the rule for calculating the apparent
latitude of a planet at any point in its revolution.
   There is a little discrepancy between the two specifications presented
in these verses, as regards the description of the quantities specified :
the one states them to be the amounts of greatest (paramo) deviation
from the ecliptic ; the other, of mean (madhya) deviation. Both de
scriptions are also somewhat inaccurate. The first is correct only with
reference to the moon, and the two terms require to be combined, in
order to be made applicable to the other planets. The moon has its
greatest latitude at 90° from its node, and this latitude is obviously
equal to the inclination of its orbit to the ecliptic ; for although its
absolute distance from the ecliptic at this point of its course varies, as
does its distance from the earth, on account of the eccentricity of its
orbit, and the varying relation of the line of its apsides to that of its
nodes, its angular distance remains unchanged. So, to an observer sta
tioned at the sun, the greatest latitude of any one of the primary planets
would be the same in its successive revolutions from node to node,
and equal to the inclination of its orbit. But its greatest latitude as
seen from the earth is very different in different revolutions, both on
account of the difference of its absolute distance from the ecliptic
when at the point of greatest removal from it in the two halves of its
orbit, and, much more, on account of its varying distance from the earth.
The former of these two causes of variation was not recognized by the
46                          S&rya-Siddhdnta,                              [i. 70-
Hindus : in this treatise, at least, the distance of the node from the
apsis (mandocca) is not introduced as an element into the process for
determining a planet's latitude. The other cause of variation is duly
allowed for (see below, ii. 57). Its effect, in the case of the three supe
rior planets, is to make their greatest latitude sometimes greater, and
sometimes less, than the inclination of their orbits, according as the
planet is nearer to us than to the sun, or the contrary ; hence the values
given in the text for Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, as they represent the
mean apparent values, as latitude, of the greatest distance of each planet
from the ecliptic, should nearly equal the inclination. In the case of
Mercury and Venus, also, the quantities stated are the mean of the differ
ent apparent values of the greatest heliocentric latitude, but this mean
is of course less, and for Mercury very much less, than the inclination.
Ptolemy, in the elaborate discussion of the theory of the latitude con
tained in the thirteenth book of his Syntaxis, has deduced the actual
inclination of the orbits of the two inferior planets : this the Hindus do
not seem to have attempted.
   We present below a comparative table of the inclinations of the
orbits of the planets as determined by Ptolemy and by modern astrono
mers, with those of the Hindus, so far as given directly by the Surya-
Siddhanta.
Inclination of the Orbits of the Planets, according to Different Authorities.
            Planet.    Surya-Siddhanta.   Ptolemy.           Moderns.
                            0    1         «    '
                                           7             708
                                           3 3o          3 23 3i
        Mars,               i   3o         i             i 5i  5
        Jupiter,            i              i 3o          i 18 4o
        Saturn,             2              a 3o          2      29   28
        Moon,               4 3o           5             5      8 4o
   The verb in verses 63 and 69, which we have translated " caused to
deviate," is m kshipyate, literally " is hurled away," disjicitur ; from it is
derived the term used in this treatise to signify celestial latitude, vikshe-
pa, "disjection." The Hindus measure the latitude, however, as we
shall have occasion to notice more particularly hereafter, upon a circle
of declination, and not upon a secondary to the ecliptic. In the words
chosen to designate it is seen the influence of the theory of the node's
action, as stated in the first verses of the next chapter. The forcible
removal is from the point of declination (kranti, " gait," or apakrama,
" withdrawal," i. e., from the celestial equator) which the planet ought
at the time to occupy.
   The title given to this first chapter (adhik&ra, "subject, heading") is
madhyamadhik&ra, which we have represented in the title by " mean
motions of the planets," although it would be more accurately rendered
by "mean places of the planets;" that is to say, the data and methods
requisite for ascertaining their mean places. Now follows the spashta-
dhik&ra, " chapter of the true, or corrected, places of the planets."
ii. 5.]                       Translation and Notes.                                  47


                                CHAPTER II.
                OF THE TRUE PLACES OF THE PLANETS.
CONTENTS:—1-3, causes of the irregularities of the planetary motions ; 4-5, disturb
  ing influence of the apsis and conjunction ; 6-8, of the node ; 9-1 1 , different
  degree of irregularity of the motion of the different planets; 12-13, different
  kinds of planetary motion; 14, purpose of this chapter; 15-16, rule for con
  structing the table of sines; 17-22, table of sines; 22-27, table of versed §ines ;
  28, inclination of the ecliptic, and rule for finding the declination of any point in
  it; 29-80, to find the sine and cosine of the anomaly; 31-32, to find, by interpo
  lation, the sine or versed sine corresponding to any given arc; 33, to find, in like
  manner, the arc corresponding to a given sine or versed sine ; 34-37, dimensions
  of the epicycles of the planets ; 38, to find the true dimensions of the epicycle at
  any point in the orbit ; 39, to find the equation of the apsis, or of the centre ;
  40-42, to find the equation of the conjunction, or the annual equation ; 48-45,
  application of these equations in finding the true places of the different planets ;
  46, correction of the place of a planet for difference between mean and apparent
  solar time; 47-49, how to correct the daily motion of the planets for the effect of
  the apsis; 50-51, the same for that of the conjunction; 51-55, retrogradation of
  the lesser planets; 56, correction of the place of the node ; 57-58, to find the celes
  tial latitude of a planet, and its declination as affected by latitude ; 59, to find the
  length of the day of any planet; 60, to find the radius of the diurnal circle;
  61-63, to find the day-sine, and the respective length of the day and night ; 64,
  to find the number of asterisms traversed by a planet, and of days elapsed, since
  the commencement of the current revolution; 65, to find the yoga; 66, to find
  the current lunar day, and the time in it of a given instant ; 67-69, of the divisions
  of the lunar month called Jcarana.

   1. Forms of Time, of invisible shape, stationed in the zodiac
(phagana), called the conjunction (qigkrocca), apsis (mandocca),
and node (pdta), are causes of the motion of the planets.
   2. The planets, attached to these beings by cords of air, are
drawn away by them, with the right and left hand, forward or
backward, according to nearness, toward their own place.
  3. A wind, moreover, called provector (pravaha) impels them,
toward their own apices (ucca) ; being drawn away forward and
backward, they proceed by a varying motion.
  4. The so-called apex (ucca), when in the half-orbit in front of
the planet, draws the planet forward ; in like manner, when in
the half-orbit behind the planet, it draws it backward.
   5. When the planets, drawn away by their apices (ucca), move
forward in their orbits, the amount of the motion so caused is
called their excess (dhana) ; when they move backward, it is
called their deficiency (rna).
- In these verses is laid before us the Hindu theory of the general
nature of the forces which produce the irregularities of the apparent
48                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [ii. 5.
motions, regarded as being the real motions, of the planets. The world
wide difference between the spirit of the Hindu astronomy and that of
the Greek is not less apparent here than in the manner of presentation
of the elements in the last chapter : the one is purely scientific, devis
ing methods for representing and calculating the observed motions, and
attempting nothing farther; the other is not content without fabricating
a fantastic and absurd theory respecting the superhuman powers which
occasion the movements with which it is dealing. The Hindu method
has this convenient peculiarity, that it absolves from all necessity of
adapting the disturbing forces to one another, and making them form
one consistent system, capable of geometrical representation and mathe
matical demonstration ; it regards the planets as actually moving in
circular orbits, and the whole apparatus of epicycles, given later in
the chapter, as only a device for estimating the amount of the force,
and of its resulting motion, exerted at any given point by the disturb
ing cause.
   The commentator gives two different explanations of the provector
wind, spoken of in the third verse : one, that it is the general current,
mentioned below, in xii. 73, as impelling the whole firmament of stars,
and which, though itself moving westward, drives the planets, in some
unexplained way, towards its own apex of motion, in the east; the
other, that a separate vortex for each planet, called provector on account
of its analogy with that general current, although not moving in the
same direction, carries them around in their orbits from west to east,
leaving only the irregularities of their motion to be produced by the
disturbing forces. This latter we regard as the proper meaning of the
text : neither is very consistent with the theory of the lagging behind
of the planets, given above, in i. 25, 26, as the explanation of their
apparent eastward motion. The commentary also states more explicitly
the method of production of the disturbance : a cord of air, equal in
length to the orbit of each planet less the disk of the latter itself, is
attached to the extremities of its diameter, and passes through the two
hands of the being stationed at the point of disturbance ; and he always
draws it toward himself by the shorter of the two parts of the cord.
The term ucca, which we have translated " apex," applies both to the
apsis (manda, mandocca, " apex of slowest motion"—the apogee in the
case of the sun and moon, the aphelion, though not recognized as such,
in the case of the other planets), and to the conjunction (ftghra, ftgh-
rocca, "apex of swiftest motion"). The statement made of the like
effect of the two upon the motion of the planet is liable to cause diffi
culty, if it be not distinctly kept in mind that the Hindus understand
by the influence of the disturbing cause, not its acceleration and retarda
tion of the rate of the planet's motion, but its effect in giving to the
planet a position in advance of, or behind, its mean place. It may be
well, for the sake of aiding some of our readers to form a clearer appre
hension of the Hindu view of the planetary motions, to expand and
illustrate a little this statement of the effect upon them of the two
principal disturbing forces.
   First, as regards the apsis. This is the remoter extremity of the major
axis of the planet's proper orbit, and the point of its slowest motion.
ii. 5.]                   Translation and Notes.                         49

 Upon passing this point, the planet begins to fall behind its mean place,
 but at the same time to gain velocity, so that at the quadrature it is
 farthest behind, but is moving at its mean rate ; during the next quad
 rant it gains both in rate of motion and in place, until at the perigee, or
 perihelion, it is moving most rapidly, and has made up what it before
 lost, so that the mean and true places coincide. Upon passing that point
 again, it gains upon its mean place during the first quadrant, and loses
 what it thus gained during the second, until mean and true place again
 coincide at the apsis. Thus the equation of motion is greatest at the
 apsides, and nothing at the quadratures, while the equation of place is
 greatest at the quadratures, and nothing at the apsides ; and thus the
planet is always behind its mean place while passing from the higher to
 the lower apsis, and always in advance of it while passing from the
 lower to the higher ; that is, it is constantly drawn away from its mean
place toward the higher apsis, mandocca.
    In treating of the effect of the conjunction, the ftghrocca, we have to
distinguish two kinds of cases. With Mercury and Venus (see above,
i. 29, 31, 32), the revolution of the conjunction takes the place, in the
Hindu system as in the Greek, of that of the planet itself, the conjunc
tion being regarded as making the circuit of the zodiac in the same
time, and in the same direction, as the planet really revolves about the
sun ; while the mean place of these planets is always that of the sun
itself. While, therefore, the conjunction is making the half-tour of the
heavens eastward from the sun, the planet is making its eastward elon
gation and returning to the sun again, being all the time in advance
of its mean place, the sun ; when the conjunction reaches a point in the
heavens opposite to the sun, the planet is in its inferior conjunction, or
at its mean place ; during the other half of the revolution of the con
junction, when it is nearest the planet upon the western side, the latter
is making and losing its western elongation, or is behind its mean place.
Accordingly, as stated in the text, the planet is constantly drawn away
from its mean place, the sun, toward that side of the heavens in which
the conjunction is.
    Once more, as concerns the superior planets. The revolutions as
signed to these by the Hindus are their true revolutions ; their mean
places are their mean heliocentric longitudes ; and the place of the con
junction (fighrocca) of each is the mean place of the sun. Since they
move but slowly, as compared with the sun, it is their conjunction
which approaches, overtakes, and passes them, and not they the con
junction. Their time of slowest motion is when in opposition with the
sun ; of swiftest, when in conjunction with him : from opposition on to
conjunction, therefore, or while the sun is approaching them from be
hind, they are, with constantly increasing velocity of motion, all the
while behind their mean places, or drawn away from them in the direc
tion of the sun ; but no sooner has the sun overtaken and passed them,
than they, leaving with their most rapid motion the point of coinci
dence between mean and true place, are at once in advance, and con
tinue to be so until opposition is reached again ; that is to say, they
are still drawn away from their mean place in the direction of the
conjunction.
                            7



                                                                               -•-
50                           /Surya-Siddhdnta,                           [ii. 5-
   The words used in verse 5 for " excess " and " deficiency," or for addi
tive and subtractive equation, mean literally "wealth" (dhana) and
" debt" (rna).
   6. In like manner, also, the node, Balm, by its proper force,
causes the deviation in latitude (vikshepa) of the moon and the
other planets, northward and southward, from their point of
declination (apakrama).
   7. When in the half-orbit behind the planet, the node causes
it to deviate northward ; when in the half-orbit in front, it draws
it away southward.
   8. In the case of Mercury and Venus, however, when the
node is thus situated with regard to the conjunction (<fyrhra),
these two planets are caused to deviate in latitude, in the manner
stated, by the attraction exercised by the node upon the con
junction.
   The name Rahu, by which the ascending node is here designated, is
properly mythological, and belongs to the monster in the heavens, which,
by the ancient Hindus, as by more than one other people, was believed
to occasion the eclipses of the sun and moon by attempting to devour
them. The word which we have translated "force" is ranhas, more
properly " rapidity, violent motion : " in employing it here, the text evi
dently intends to suggest an etymology for r&hu, as coming from the root
rah or rank, " to rush on " : with this same root Weber (Ind. Stud. i.
272) has connected the group of words in which r&hu seems to belong.
For the Hindu fable respecting Rahu, see Wilson's Vishnu Purana, p. 78.
The moon's descending node was also personified in a similar way, under
the name of Ketu, but to this no reference is made in the present treatise.
   The description of the effect of the node upon the movement of the
planet is to be understood, in a manner analogous with that of the effect
of the apices in the next preceding passage, as referring to the direction
in which the planet is made to deviate from the ecliptic, and not to that
in which it is moving with reference to the ecliptic. From the ascending
node around to the descending, of course, or while the node is nearest to
the planet from behind, the latitude is northern ; in the other half of the
 revolution it is southern.
   For an explanation of some of the terms used here, see the note to the
last passage of the preceding chapter.
   As, in the case of Mercury and Venus, the revolution of the conjunc
tion takes the place of that of the planet itself in its orbit, it is necessary,
in order to give the node its proper effect, that it be made to exercise
its influence upon the planet through the conjunction. The commen
tator gives himself here not a little trouble, in the attempt to show why
Mercury and Venus should in this respect constitute an exception to the
 general rule, but without being able to make out a very plausible case.
  9. Owing to the greatness of its orb, the sun is drawn away
only a very little ; the moon, by reason of the smallness of its
orb, is drawn away much more ;
ii. 14.]                 Translation and Notes.                          51

   10. Mars and the rest, on account of their small size, are, by
the supernatural beings (tfdivata) called conjunction (gighrocca)
and apsis (mandocca), drawn away very far, being caused to
vacillate exceedingly.
   11. Hence the excess (dhand) and deficiency (rnd) of these
latter is very great, according to their rate of motion. Thus do
the planets, attracted by those beings, move in the firmament,
carried on by the wind.
   The dimensions of the sun and moon are stated below, in iv. 1 ; those
of the other planets, in vii. 13.
   We have ventured to translate ativegita, at the end of the tenth verse,
as it is given above, because that translation seemed so much better to
suit the requirements of the sense than the better-supported rendering
" caused to move with exceeding velocity." In so doing, we have assumed
that the noun vega, of which the word in question is a denominative, re
tains something of the proper meaning of the root vij, " to tremble,"
from which it comes.
  12. The motion of the planets is of eight kinds: retrograde
(vakra), somewhat retrograde (anuvakrd), transverse (kutila),
slow (manda), very slow (mandatara), even (sarnd) ; also, very
swift (</ighratara), and swift (gighrd).
  13. Of these, the very swift (atiptghra), that called swift, the
slow, the very slow, the even—all these five are forms of the
motion called direct (rju) ; the somewhat retrograde is retrograde.
   This minute classification of the phases of a planet's motion is quite
gratuitous, so far as this Siddhanta is concerned, for the terms here given
do not once occur afterward in the text, with the single exception of
vakra, which, with its derivatives, is in not infrequent use to designate
retrogradation. Nor does the commentary take the trouble to explain
the precise differences of the kinds of motion specified. According to
Mr. Hoisington (Oriental Astronomer [Tamil and English], Jaffna: 1849,
p. 133), anuvakra is applied to the motion of a planet, when, in retro
grading, it passes into a preceding sign. From the classification given ia
the second of the two verses it will be noticed that kutila is omitted : ac
cording to the commentator, it is meant to be included among the forms
of retrograde motion ; we have conjectured, however, that it might possi
bly be used to designate the motion of a planet when, being for the
moment stationary in respect to longitude, and accordingly neither ad
vancing nor retrograding, it is changing its latitude ; and we have trans
lated the word accordingly.
   14. By reason of this and that rate of motion, from day to
day, the planets thus come to an accordance with their observed
places (dry)—this, their correctioa (sphutikarana), I shall care
fully explain.
  Having now disposed of matters of general theory and preliminary
explanation, the proper subject of this chapter, the calculation of the true
(sphuta) from the mean places of the different planets, is ready to be
52                         Surya-SidcUidnta,                       [ii. 14-
taken up. And the first thing iu order is the table of sines, by means of
which all the after calculations are performed.
  15. The eighth part of the minutes of a sign is called the first
sine (jydrdhd) ; that, increased by the remainder left after sub
tracting from it the quotient arising from dividing it by itself, is
the second sine.
   16. Thus, dividing the tabular sines in succession by the first,
and adding to them, in each case, what is left after subtracting
the quotients from the first, the result is twenty-four tabular
sines (jyardkapinda), ia order, as follows:
   17. Two hundred and twenty-five; four hundred and forty-
nine ; six hundred and seventy-one ; eight hundred and ninety ;
eleven hundred and five ; thirteen hundred and fifteen ;
   18. Fifteen hundred and twenty ; seventeen hundred and nine
teen ; nineteen hundred and ten ; two thousand and ninety-three ;
   19. Two thousand two hundred and sixty-seven ; two thous
and four hundred and thirty-one ; two thousand five hundred
and eighty-five ; two thousand seven hundred and twenty-eight ;
   20. Two thousand eight hundred and fifty-nine ; two thousand
nine hundred and seventy-eight; three thousand and eighty-
four ; three thousand one hundred and seventy-seven ;
   21. Three thousand two hundred and fifty-six ; three thousand
three hundred and twenty-one ; three thousand three hundred
and seventy-two ; three thousand four hundred and nine ;
   22. Three thousand four hundred and thirty-one ; three thous
and four hundred and thirty-eight. Subtracting these, in re
versed order, from the half-diameter, gives the tabular versed-
sines (utkrama/ydrdhapindaJca) :
   23. Seven ; twenty-nine ; sixty-six ; one hundred and seven
teen; one hundred and eighty-two; two hundred and sixty-one ;
three hundred and fifty-four ;
   24. Four hundred and sixty ; five hundred and seventy-nine ;
seven hundred and ten; eight hundred and fifty-three; one
thousand and seven ; eleven hundred and seventy-one ;
   25. Thirteen hundred and forty-five; fifteen hundred and
twenty-eight ; seventeen hundred and nineteen ; nineteen hund
red and eighteen ;
   26. Two thousand one hundred and twenty-three ; two thous
and three hundred and thirty-three ; two thousand five hundred
and forty-eight ; two thousand seven hundred and sixty-seven ;
   27. Two thousand nine hundred and eighty-nine ; three thous
and two hundred and thirteen ; three thousand four hundred and
thirty-eight : these are the versed sines.
   We first present, in the following table, in a form convenient for refer
ence and use, the Hindu sines and versed sines, with the arcs to which
they belong, the latter expressed both in minutes and in degrees and
minutes. To facilitate the practical use of the table in making calcula
ii. 27.]                               Translation and Notes.                                         53
tions after the Hindu method, we have added a column of the differences
of the sines, and have farther turned the sines themselves into decimal
parts of the radius. For the purpose of illustrating the accuracy of the
table, we have also annexed the true values of the sines, in minutes, as
found by our modern tables. Comparison may also be made of the deci
mal column with the corresponding values given in our ordinary tables
of natural sines.
                             Table of Sines and Versed Sines.
                                                                                            Ver.ed
      No.               Ar Cl,                     I (indu Si 1es,            True Sinei,    Sines,
               in »    '       in '        hi '        Diff. in part« of rad.     in '        in '
           I      3° 45'      225'         225'
                                                     224'
                                                               .065445         224'.84          7'
           3      7° 3o       450'         449'      222'
                                                               .13o599         448'.72        =9'
       3       il' i5'        675'         671'      2Ttf
                                                               .195172         670'.67        66'
                                                       r                                     117'
       4        1 5"          900'         890'      2l5'
                                                               .258871          889'.76
       5       1 8° 45'      1 1 25'      no5'       2IO;
                                                               .3ai4o8        no5'.o3        182'
       6       22° 3o'       i35o'        i3i5'      io5'      .382489        i3i5'.57+      261'
           7   26° 1 5'      1 575'       1 520'
                                                     199
                                                     ' ,,nl    .442117        1 5ao'.48  354'
       8       3o°           1800'   1719'           lor'
                                                     lyi
                                                               .Sooooo       1718' .88   46o'
       9       33- 45'       2025'   1910'           i83'      .555555       ioo9'.9i    579'
      10       37° 3o'       2250'   2093'           I74>      .608784       2092'.77    710'
      ii       4i° i5'       a475'   2267'                     .659395       2266'.67    853'
                                                     1 64'
      12       45'           2700'   a43i'           1 54'     .707097       243o'.86 1007'
      i3       48° 45'       2925' 2585'             1 43'
                                                     l*t*J
                                                               .751894       2584'.64 1171'
      i4       52° 3o'       3i5o'   2728'                     •793484       272/.35- 1 345'
                                                     i3i'
      i5       56° 1 5'      3375'   2859'           no'       .83 1 588     2858'.38- i528'
      16       60°           36oo'   2978'              y      .866201       2977'.18- 1719'
                                                     1 06'
      '7       63° 45'       3825'   3o84'             o3'     .897033       3o83'.22- 1918'
      18       67° 3o'       4o5o'   3i77' '           y°      .924084       3i76'.O7- 2123'
                                                      TO'
      19       71* i5'       4275'   3256-            /y       .947062       3255'.3i- 2333'
                                                      65'
      20       75'           45oo'   332i'            5i'      .965969       332o'.6i 2548'
      21       78° 45'       4725'   3372'            3y       .980803       337i'.70 2767'
                                                      °7
      22       82' 3o'       495o'   3409'            12'      •991565       34o8'.34- 2989'
      23       86' i5'       5i75' . 343i'                     .997964       343o'.'39- 32 1 3'
                                                       7*t
      24       90'       .   54oo'   3438'                    I.OOOOOO       3437'-75 3438'

   The rule by which the sines are, in the text, directed to be found, may
be illustrated as follows. Let s, *', «", «'", «"", etc., represent the succes
sive sines. The first of the series, s, is assumed to be equal to its arc, or
225', from which quantity, as is shown in the table above, it differs only
by an amount much smaller than the table takes any account of. Then
 64                          S&rya-SiddMnta,                          [ii. 27.
 and so on, through the whole series, any fraction larger than a half being
 counted as one, and a smaller fraction being rejected. In the majority of
 cases, as'is made evident by the table, this process yields correct results :
 we have marked in the column of " true sines" with a plus or minus sign
 such modern values of the sines as differ by more than half a minute
 from those assigned by the Hindu table.
    It is not to be supposed, however, that the Hindu sines were originally
 obtained by the process described in the text. That process was, in all
 probability, suggested by observing the successive differences in the values
 of the sines as already determined by other methods. Nor is it difficult
 to discover what were those methods ; they are indicated by the limita
 tion of the table to arcs differing from one another by 3° 45', and by
 what we know in general of the trigonometrical methods of the Hindus.
^The two main principles, by the aid of which the greater portion of all
 the Hindu calculations are made, are, on the one hand, the equality of the
 square of the hypothenuse in a right-angled triangle to the sum of the
 squares of the other two sides, and, on the other hand, the proportional
 relation of the corresponding parts of similar triangles. The first of these
 principles gave the Hindus the sine of the complement of any arc of
 which the sine was already known, it being equal to the square root of
 the difference between the squares of radius and of the given sine. This
 led farther to the rule for finding the versed sine, which is given above in
 the text: it was plainly equal to the difference between the sine comple
 ment and radius. Again, the comparison of similar triangles showed that
 the chord of an arc was a mean proportional between its versed sine and
 the diameter ; and this led to a method of finding the sine of half any
 arc of which the sine was known : it was equal to half the square root
 of the product of the diameter into the versed sine. That the Hindus
 had deduced this last rule does not directly appear from the text of this
 Siddhanta, nor from the commentary of Ranganatha, which is the one
 given by our manuscript and by the published edition ; but it is distinctly
 stated in the commentary which Davis had in his hands (As. Res. ii. 247) ;
 and it might be confidently assumed to be known upon the evidence of
 the table itself; for the principles and rules which we have here stated
 would give a table just such as the one here constructed. The sine
 of 90° was obviously equal to radius, and the sine of 30° to half radius :
 from the first could be found the sines of 45°, 22° 30', and 11° 15';
  from the latter, those of 15°, 7° 30', and 3° 45'. The sines thus ob
 tained would give those of the complementary arcs, or of 86° 15', 82°
  30', 78° 45', 75°, etc. ; and the sine of 75°, again, would give those of
  37° 30' and 18° 45'. By continuing the same processes, the table of sines
  would soon be made complete for the twenty-four divisions of the quad
  rant; but these processes could yield nothing farther, unless by intro
  ducing fractions of minutes ; which was undesirable, because the symmetry
  of the table would thus be destroyed, and no corresponding advantage
  gained ; the table was already sufficiently extended to furnish, by inter
  polation, the sines intermediate between those given, with all the accu
  racy which the Hindu calculations required.
    If, now, an attempt were made to ascertain a law of progression for
 the series, and to devise an empirical rule by which its members might
.H.27.]                      Translation and Notes.                          55
be developlH, the one from the other, in order, nothing could be more
natural than to take the differences of the successive sines, and the differ
ences of those differences, as we have given them under the headings A'
and A" in the annexed table.
         Hindu Sines, with their First and Second Differences.
             No.     Sine.   A'     A"    No.   Sine.   A'     A"
                o     000                 12    243 1
                                                        1 54    10
                             225
                 I    225            i    i3    2585    i43     ii
                             224
                 2    449            2          2728            12
                3     671
                             219
                                    3     i5    2859    119     12
                4     890
                             2l5
                                    4     16    2978            13
                5    no5            5     '7    3o84            i3
                             210                         93
                6    i3i5           5     18    3177
                             205                         79
                7    1520           6           3256            i4
                             199                         65
                 8   1719           8     20    332i     5i     i4
                 9   1910           8     21    3372            i4
                             1 83                        37
                10   2093           9     22    34o9            i5
                             174
                ii   2267           10    23    343 1           i5
                             164                          7
                12   2431           10    24    3438
   With these differences before him, an acute observer could hardly fail
to notice the remarkable fact that the differences of the second order in
crease as the sines ; and that each, in fact, is about the ^^th part of the
corresponding sine. Now let the successive sines be represented by 0, «,
s', s", s'", s"", and so on ; and let q equal 2-^-5-, or | ; let the first differ
ences be d = s-Q, d'=s'-g, d"=s"-s', d'"=s'"-»", etc. The sec
ond differences will be: -sq = d'- d, - s'q=d"-d', -s".q =d'"-d",
«tc. These last expressions give
                      d' = d — sq = s — sq
                      d" = d' -s'q—s-sg- i'q
                      d'"=d"- s"q — s-sq - s'q - s"q, etc.
 Hence, also,
                      »' = » + d' =s -f- s - »g
                      „»=,' + d" —s' +s-sq-t'q
                      ,'"=,"+d'"=s"+8 -sq- s'q- s"q,
 and so on, according to the rule given in the text.
    That the second differences in the values of the sines were proportional
 to the sines themselves, was probably known to the Hindus only by ob
 servation. Had their trigonometry sufficed to demonstrate it, they might
 easily have constructed a much more complete and accurate table of
 sines. We add the demonstration given by Delambre (Histoire de 1'As-
 tronomie Ancienne, i. 458), from whom the views here expressed have
 been substantially taken.
    Let a be any arc in the series, and put 3° 45' = n. Then sin (a—n),
 sin a, sin (a -j- n), will be three successive terms in the series : sin
 a— sin (a— n), and sin (a + ri) — sin a, will be differences of the first
 order ; and their difference, sin (a + n) -f- sin (a — n) — 2 sin a, will
 be a difference of the second order. But this last expression, by virtue




                                                                                    ,,
56                          Stirya-Siddhdntat                        [IL27.
of the formula R sin (a ± ») = sin a cos n ± cos a sin 4) reduces to
2 sin a cos w — U — 2 sin a, or 2| ——        1 ) sin a. That is to say, the
                                   V Jt       I
 second difference is equal to the product of the sine of the arc a into a
 certain constant quantity, or it varies as the sine. "When n equals 3° 45',
 as in the Hindu table, it is easy to show, upon working out the last ex
 pression by means of the tables, that the constant factor is, as stated by
 Delambre, 2-577-5-, instead of being ^-j, as empirically determined by
 the Hindus.
    It deserves to be noticed, that the commentary of RanganMha recog
nizes the dependence of the rule given in th« text upon the value of the
second differences. According to him, however, it is by describing a
circle upon the ground, laying off the arcs, drawing the sines, and deter
mining their relations by inspection, that the method is obtained. The
differences of the sines, he says, will be observed to decrease, while the
differences of those differences increase ; and it will be noticed that the
last second difference is 15' 16" 48'". A proportion is then made : if at
the radius the second difference is of this value, what will it be at any
sine? or, taking the first sine as an example, 3438' : 15' 16" 48'" : : 225
: 1. Nothing can be clearer, however, than that this pretended result of
inspection is one of calculation merely. It would be utterly impossible
to estimate by the eye the value of a difference with such accuracy, and,
were it possible, that difference would be found very considerably removed
from the one here given, being actually only about 14' 45". The value
15' 16" 48'" is assumed only in order to make its ratio to the radius
exactly z^-5.
   The earliest substitution of the sines, in calculation, for the chords,
which were employed by the Greeks, is generally attributed (see Whewell's
 History of the Inductive Sciences, B. III. ch. iv. 8) to the Arab astron
 omer Albategnius (al-Battanl), who flourished in the latter part of the
ninth century of our era. It can hardly admit of question, however,
that sines had already at that time been long employed by the Hindus.
And considering the derivation by the Arabs from India of their system
of notation, and of so many of the elements of their mathematical
science, it would seem not unlikely that the first hint of this so conveni
ent and practical improvement of the methods of calculation may also
have come to them from that country. This cannot be asserted, however,
with much confidence, because the substitution of the sines for the chords
seems so natural and easy, that it may well enough have been hit upon
independently by the Arabs ; it is a matter for astonishment, as remarked
by Delambre (Histoire de 1'Astronomic du Moyen Age, p. 12), that
Ptolemy himself, who came so near it, should have failed of it. If
Albategnius got the suggestion from India, he, at any rate, got no more
than that. His table of sines, much more complete than that of the
Hindus, was made from Ptolemy's table of chords, by simply halving them.
The method, too, which in India remained comparatively barren, led to
valuable developments in the hands of the Arab mathematicians, who
went on by degrees to form also tables of tangents and co-tangents, secants
and co-secants ; while the Hindus do not seem to have distinctly appreci
ated the significance even of the cosine.
ii. 28.]                   Translation and Notes.                           57
   In this passage, the sine is called jy&rdha, " half-chord ; " hereafter,
however, that term does not once occur, but jy& "chord" (literally " bow
string") is itself employed, as are also its synonyms jtvd, m&urvikd, to
denote the sine. The usage of Albategnius is the same. The sines of the
table are called pinda, or jy&pinda, "the quantity corresponding to the
sine." The term used for versed sine, ulkramajy&, means " inverse-order
sine," the column of versed sines being found by subtracting that of
sines in inverse order from radius.
   The ratio of the diameter to the circumference involved in the expres
sion of the value of radius by 3438' is, as remarked above (under i. 59,
60), 1 : 3.14136. The commentator asserts that value to come from the
ratio 1250 : 3927, or 1 : 3.1416, and it is, in fact, the nearest whole num
ber to the result given by that ratio. If the ratio were adopted which
has been stated above (in i. 59), of 1 : «/10, the value of radius would be
only 3415'. It is to be observed with regard to this latter ratio, that it
could not possibly be the direct result of any actual process adopted for
ascertaining the value of the diameter from that of the circumference, or
the contrary. It was probably fixed upon by the Hindus because it
looked and sounded well, and was at the same time a sufficiently near
approximation to the truth to be applied in cases where exactness was
neither attainable by their methods, nor of much practical consequence ;
as in fixing the dimensions of the earth, and of the planetary orbits.
The nature of the system of notation of the Hindus, and their constantly
recurring extraction of square roots in their trigonometrical processes,
would cause the suggestion to them, much more naturally than to the
Greeks, of this artificial ratio, as not far from the truth ; and their science
was just of that character to choose for some uses a relation expressed in
a manner so simple, and of an aspect so systematical, even though known
to be inaccurate. We do not regard the ratio in question, although so
generally adopted among the Hindu astronomers, as having any higher
value and significance than this.
  28. The sine of greatest declination is thirteen hundred and
ninety-seven ; by this multiply any sine, and divide by radius ;
the arc corresponding to the result is said to be the declination.
   The greatest declination, that is to say, the inclination of the plane of
the ecliptic, is here stated to be 24°, 1397' being the sine of that angle.
The true inclination in the year 300 of our era, which we may assume
to have been not far from the time when the Hindu astronomy was
established, was a little less than 23° 40', so that the error of the Hindu
determination was then more than 20' : at present, it is 32' 34". The
value assigned by Ptolemy (Syntaxis, i) to the inclination was between
23° 50' and 23° 52' 30" ; an error, as compared with its true value in
the time of Hipparchus, of only about 7'.
   The second half of the verse gives, in the usual vague and elliptical
language of the treatise, the rule for finding the declination of any given
point in the ecliptic. We have not in this case supplied the ellipses in
our translation, because it could not be done succinctly, or without
introducing an element, that of the precession, which possibly was not
taken into account when the rule was made. See what is said upon this
                             8
58                          S&rya-Siddhdnta,                       [ii. 28-

subject under verses 9 and 10 of the next chapter. The " sine" em
ployed is, of course, the sine of the distance from the vernal equinox, or
of the longitude as corrected by the precession.
   The annexed figure will explain the rule, and the method of its
demonstration.
   Let ACE represent a quadrant of the plane of the equatorial, and
A C G a quadrant of that of the ecliptic, A C being the line of their
intersection : then A P is the equinoctial colure, P E the solstitial, G E,
or the angle GCE, the inclination of the ecliptic, or the greatest decli
nation (paramapakrama, or paramakr&nti), and GD its sine (parama-
kr&ntijy&). Let S be the position of the sun, and draw the circle of
declination P H ; S H, or the angle
S C H, is the declination of the sun                    g" 1<
at that point, and S F the sine of |
declination (kr&ntijya). From S and
F draw S B and F B at right angles
to A C ; then S B is the sine of the
arc A S, or of the sun's longitude.
But GCD and SBF are similar
right-angled triangles, having their
angles at C and B each equal to the
inclination. Therefore C G : G D : :


 , is,
that , sm
        , decl., = sin incl.X—sin long,
                                     *••
   The same result is, by our modern
methods, obtained directly from the formula in right-angled spherical
trigonometry: sinc=sina sinC; or, in the triangle ASH, right-angled
at H, sin S H = sin S A sin S A H.
   29. Subtract the longitude of a planet from that of its apsis
(mandocca) ; so also, subtract it from that of its conjunction
(gighrd) ; the remainder is its anomaly (kendra) ; from that is
found the quadrant (pada) ; from this, the base-sine (bhujajyd),
and likewise that of the perpendicular (koti).
   SO. In an odd (vishama) quadrant, the base-sine is taken from
the part past, the perpendicular from that to come ; but in an
even (yugma) quadrant, the base-sine (bdhujya) is taken from
the part to come, and the perpendicular-sine from that past.
   The distance of a planet from either of its two apices of motion, or
centres of disturbance, is called its kendra ; according to the comment
ary, its distance from the apsis (mandocca) is called mandaktndra, and
that from the conjunction (ftyhrocca) is called cighrakendra : the Surya-
Siddhanta, however, nowhere has occasion to employ these terms. The
former of the two corresponds to what in modern astronomy is called
the anomaly, the latter to what is known as the commutation. The
word kendra is not of Sanskrit origin, but is the Greek xdrifmr ; it is a
circumstance no less significant to meet with a Greek word thus at the
ii. 30.]                 Translation and Notes.                        59

very foundation of the method of calculating the true place of a planet
by means of a system of epicycles, than to find one, as noticed above
(under i. 52), at the base of the theory of planetary regency upon which
depend the names and succession of the days of the week. Both
anomaly and commutation, it will be noticed, are, according to this
treatise, to be reckoned always forward from the planet to its apsis and
conjunction respectively ; excepting that, in the case of Mercury and
Venus, owing to the exchange with regard to those planets of the place
of the planet itself with that of its conjunction, the commutation is
really reckoned the other way. The functions of any arc being the
same with those of its negative, it makes no difference, of course,
whether the distance is measured from the planet to the apex (ucca), or
from the apex to the planet.
   The quantities actually made use of in the calculations which are to
follow are the sine and cosine of the anomaly, or of the commutation.
The terms employed in the text require a little explanation. Bhnja
means " arm ;" it is constantly applied, as are its synonyms b&hu and
dos, to designate the base of a right-angled triangle ; koti is properly
"a recurved extremity," and, as used to signify the perpendicular in
such a triangle, is conceived of as being the end of the bhuja, or base,
bent up to an upright position : bhujajyd and kotijy&, then, are literally
the values, as sines, of the base and perpendicular of a right-angled
triangle of which the hypothenuse is made radius : owing to the relation
to one another of the oblique angles of such a triangle, they are re
spectively as sine and cosine. We have not been willing to employ
these latter terms in translating them, because, as before remarked, the
Hindus do not seem to have conceived of the cosine, the sine of the
complement, of an arc, as being a function of the arc itself.
   To find the sine and cosine of the planet's distance from either of its
apices (ucca) is accordingly the
object of the directions given in
verse 30 and the latter part of
the preceding verse. The rule
itself is only the awkward Hindu
method of stating the familiar
truth that the sine and cosine of
an arc and of its supplement are
equal. The accompanying figure
will, it is believed, illustrate the
Hindu manner of looking at the
subject. Let P be the place of a
planet, and divide its orbit into
the four quadrants P Q, Q R, R S,
and S P ; the first and third of
these are called the odd (vishama)
quadrants; the second and fourth,
the even (yugma) quadrants. Let A, B, C, and D, be four positions of
the apsis (or of the conjunction) ; then the arcs P A, P Q B, P Q 11 C,
PQRSD will be the values of the anomaly in each case. AM, the
base-sine, or sine of anomalv, when the apsis is in the first quadrant, is




                                                                             ,
60                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [ii. 30-
determined by the arc A P, the arc passed over in reckoning the anom
aly, while A G or E M, the perpendicular-sine, or cosine, is taken from
the arc A Q, the remaining part of the quadrant. The same is true in
the other odd quadrant, R S ; the sine C H, or E L, comes from R C,
the part of the quadrant between the planet and the apsis; the cosine
C L is from its complement. But in the even quadrants, Q R and S P,
the case is reversed ; the sines, BH, or EF, and DM, are determined by
the arcs B R and D P, the parts of the quadrant not included in the
anomaly, and the cosines, B F and K D, or E M, correspond to the other
portions of each quadrant respectively.
   This process, of finding what portion of any arc greater than a quad
rant is to be employed in determining its sine, is ordinarily called in
Hindu calculations " taking the bhuja of an arc."
   31. Divide the minutes contained in any arc by two hundred
and twenty-five ; the quotient is the number of the preceding
tabular sine (jydpindaka). Multiply the remainder by the differ
ence of the preceding and following tabular sines, and divide
by two hundred and twenty-five ;
   32. The quotient thus obtained add to the tabular sine called
the preceding ; the result is the required sine. The same method
is prescribed also with respect to the versed sines.
   33. Subtract from any given sine the next less tabular sine ;
multiply the remainder by two hundred and twenty-five, and
divide by the difference between the next less and next greater
tabular sines ; add the quotient to the product of the serial num
ber of the next less sine into two hundred and twenty-five : the
 result is the required arc.
   The table of sines and versed sines gives only those belonging to arcs
which are multiples of 3° 45' ; the first two verses of this passage state
the method of finding, by simple interpolation, the sine or versed sine
of any intermediate arc ; while the third verse gives the rule for the
contrary process, for converting any given sine or versed sine in the
same manner into the corresponding arc.
   In illustration of the first rule, let us ascertain the sine corresponding
to an arc of 24°, or 1440'. Upon dividing the latter number by 225,
we obtain the quotient 6, and the remainder 90'. This preliminary steo
is necessary, because the Hindu table is not regarded as containing any
designation of the arcs to which the sines belong, but as composed
simply of the sines themselves in their order. The sine corresponding
to the quotient obtained, or the sixth, is 1315': the difference between
it and the next following sine is 205'. Now a proportion is made : if,
at this point in the quadrant, an addition of 225' to the arc causes an
increase in the sine of 205', what increase will be caused by an addition
to the arc of 90' : that is to say, 225 : 205 : : 90 : 82. Upon adding the
result, 82', to the sixth sine, the amount, 1397', is the sine of the given
arc, as stated in verse 28. The actual value, it may be remarked, of
the sine of 24°, is 1398'.26.
   The other rule is the reverse of this, and does not require illustration.
ii. 38.]                 Translation and Notes.                         61
   The extreme conciseness aimed at in the phraseology of the text, and
not unfrequently carried by it beyond the limit of distinctness, or even
of intelligibility, is well illustrated by verse 33, which, literally trans
lated, reads thus : " having subtracted the sine, the remainder, multi
plied by 225, divided by its difference, having added to the product of
the number and 225, it is called the arc." In verse 31, also, the
important word "remainder" is not found in the text.
   The proper place for this passage would seem to be immediately after
the table of sines and versed sines : it is not easy to see why verses
28-30 should have been inserted between, or indeed, why the subject of
the inclination of the ecliptic is introduced at all in this part of the
chapter, as no use is made of it for a long time to come.
   34. The degrees of the sun's epicycle of the apsis (manda-
paridhi) are fourteen, of that of the moon, thirty-two, at the end
of the even quadrants ; and at the end of the odd quadrants,
they are twenty minutes less for both.
    35. At the end of the even quadrants, they are seventy-five,
thirty, thirty-three, twelve, forty-nine ; at the odd (oja) they are
seventy-two, twenty-eight, thirty-two, eleven, forty-eight,
    36. For Mars and the rest; farther, the degrees of the epi
cycle of the conjunction (fighra) are, at the end of the even
quadrants, two hundred and thirty-five, one hundred and thirty-
three, seventy, two hundred and sixty-two, thirty-nine ;
    37. At the end of the odd quadrants, they are stated to be
two hundred and thirty-two, one hundred and thirty-two,
 seventy-two, two hundred and sixty, and forty, as made use of
 in the calculation for the conjunction (fighrakarman).
    38. Multiply the base-sine (bhujajyd) by the difference of the
 epicycles at the odd and even quadrants, and divide by radius
 (trijyd) ; the result, applied to the even epicycle (yrtta), and
 additive (dhand) or subtractive (rna), according as this is less or
 greater than the odd, gives the corrected (sphuta) epicycle.
   The corrections of the mean longitudes of the planets for the dis
turbing effect of the apsis (niandocca) and conjunction (ftghrocca) of
each—that is to say, for the effect of the ellipticity of their orbits, and
for that of the annual parallax, or of the motion of the earth in its
orbit—are made in Hindu astronomy by the Ptolemaic method of epi
cycles, or secondary circles, upon the circumference of which the planet
is regarded as moving, while the centre of the epicycle revolves about
the general centre of motion. The details of the method, as applied by
the Hindus, will be made clear by the figures and processes to be pre
sented a little later ; in this passage we have only the dimensions of the
epicycles assumed for .each planet. For convenience of calculation, they
are measured in degrees of the orbits of the planets to which they
severally belong ; hence only their relative dimensions, as compared
with the orbits, are given us. The data of the text belong to the planets
in the order in which these succeed one another as regents of the days
62                                 S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                      [ii. 38-
of the week, viz., Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn (see
above, under i. 51, 52). The annexed table gives the dimensions of
the epicycles, both their circumferences, which are presented directly
by the text, and their radii, which we have calculated after the method
of this Siddhanta, assuming the radius of the orbit to be 3438'.
               Dimensions of the Epicycles of the Planets.
                     Epicycle of the apsi a :                E picycle of th e conjun stion :
  Planet.   at ever quadrant,    at odd q uadrant,    at even quadrant,         at odd quadrant,
             circ.    rad.       circ.        rad.     circ.       rad.        circ.       rad.
 Sun         1 4°   l33'-70      1 3° 4o'   l3o'.52
 Moon,      3a°     3o5'.6o      3i° 4o'    3o2'.42
 Mercury,   3o°     286'.5o      28°        267'.4o   1 33°    1270'. 1 5    )32°      I a6o'.6o
 Venus,      12°    n4'.6o       11°        io5'.o5   262°     2502'.IO      260°      2483'.oo
 Mars,      75°     7 1 6'. 25   72°        687'.6o   235°     2244'-25      232°      22l5'.6o
 Jupiter,   33"     3i5'.15      32°        3o5'.6o    ?o°      668' 5o       72"       687'.6o
 Saturn,    49"     46?'.95      48°        458'.4o    39"      37J'.45       4o°       38a'.oo
   A remarkable peculiarity of the Hindu system is that the epicycles
are supposed to contract their dimensions as they leave the apsis or the
conjunction respectively (excepting in the case of the epicycles of the
conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn, which expand instead of contracting),
becoming smallest at the quadrature, then again expanding till the lower
apsis, or opposition, is reached, and decreasing and increasing in like
manner in the other half of the orbit ; the rate of increase and diminu
tion being as the sine of the distance from the apsis, or conjunction.
Hence the rule in verse 38, for finding the true dimensions of the epi
cycle at any point in the orbit. It is founded upon the simple propor
tion : as radius, the sine of the distance at which the diminution (or
increase) is greatest, is to the amount of diminution (or of increase) at
that point, so is the sine of the given distance to the corresponding
diminution (or increase) ; the application of the correction thus obtained
to the dimensions of the epicycle at the apsis, or conjunction, gives the
true epicycle.
   We shall revert farther on to the subject of this change in the dimen
sions of the epicycle.
   The term employed to denote the epicycle, paridhi, means simply
" circumference," or " circle ; " it is the same which is used elsewhere in
this treatise for the circumference of the earth, etc. In a single instance,
in verse 38, we have vrtta instead of paridhi ; its signification is the
same, and its other uses are closely analogous to those of the more
usual term.                            •
  39. By the corrected epicycle multiply the base-sine (bhujajyd)
and perpendicular-sine (kotyyd) respectively, and divide by the
number of degrees in a circle : then, the arc corresponding to
the result from the base-sine (bhujajydphala) is the equation of
the apsis (mdnda phala), in minutes, etc.
  All the preliminary operations having been already performed, this is
the final process by which is ascertained the equation of the apsis, or
the amount by which a planet is, at any point in its revolution, drawn
ii. 39.]                  Translation and Notes.                          63

away from its mean place by the disturbing influence of the apsis. In
modern phraseology, it is called the first inequality, due to the ellipticity
of the orbit; or, the equation of the centre.
    Figure 3, upon the next page, will serve to illustrate the method of
the process.
    Let A MM' P represent apart of the orbit of any planet, which is
supposed to be a true circle, having E, the earth, for its centre. Along
this orbit the planet would move, in the direction indicated by the
arrow, from A through M and M' to P, and so on, with an equable
motion, were it not for the attraction of the beings situated at the apsis
(mandiKca) and conjunction (fighrocca) respectively. The general mode
of action of these beings has been explained above, under verses 1-5
of this chapter : we have now to ascertain the amount of the disturb
ance produced by them at any given point in the planet's revolution.
The method devised is that of an epicycle, upon the circumference of
which the planet revolves with an equable motion, while the centre of the
epicycle traverses the orbit with a velocity equal to that of the planet's
mean motion, having always a position coincident with the mean place
of the planet. At present, we have to do only with the epicycle which
represents the disturbing effect of the apsis (mandocca). The period of
the planet's revolution about the centre of the epicycle is the time
which it takes the latter to make the circuit of the orbit from the apsis
around to the apsis again, or the period of its anomalistic revolution.
This is almost precisely equal to the period of sidereal revolution in the
case of all the planets excepting the moon, since their apsides are re
garded by the Hindus as stationary (see above, under i. 41-44) : the
moon's apsis, however, has a forward motion of more than 40° in a
year; hence the moon's anomalistic revolution is very perceptibly
longer than its sidereal, being 27d 13h 18™. The arc of the epicycle
traversed by the planet at any mean point in its revolution is accord
ingly always equal to the arc of the orbit intercepted between that
point and the apsis, or to the mean anomaly, when the latter is reckoned,
 in the visual manner, from the apsis forward to the planet. Thus, in the
figure, suppose A to be the place of the apsis (mandocca, the apogee of
 the sun and moon, the aphelion of the other planets), and P that of the
 opposite point (perigee, or perihelion ; it has in this treatise no distinct
 ive name) ; and let M and M' be two mean positions of the planet, or
 actual positions of the centre of the epicycle ; the lesser circles drawn
 about these four points represent the epicycle : this is made, in the figure,
 of twice the size of that assumed for the moon, or a little smaller than
 that of Mars. Then, when the centre of the epicycle is at A, the
 planet's place in the epicycle is at a ; as the centre advances to M, M',
 and P, the planet moves in the opposite direction, to m, m1, and p, the
  arc aim being equal to A M, a" m! to A M', and a!"p to A P. It is as if,
 while the axis E a revolves about E, the part of it A a remained con
 stant in direction, parallel to E A, assuming the positions M m, M' m1,
  and PJO successively. The effect of this combination of motions is to
 make the planet virtually traverse the orbit indicated in the figure by
 the broken line, which is a circle of equal radius with the true orbit,
 but having ita centre removed from E, toward A, by a distance equal to
64                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [ii. 39.
                                  Fig. 3.




 A a, the radius of the epicycle. This identity of the virtual orbit with
 an eccentric circle, of -which the eccentricity is equal to the radius of
 the epicycle, was doubtless known to the Hindus, as to Ptolemy : the
latter, in the third book of his Syntaxis, demonstrates the equivalence of
 the suppositions of an epicycle and an eccentric, and chooses the latter
to represent the first inequality : the Hindus have preferred the other
supposition, as better suited to their methods of calculation, and as ad
mitting a general similarity in the processes for the apsis and the con
junction. The Hindu theory, however, as remarked above (under vv.
 1-5 of this chapter), rejects the idea of the actual motion of the planet
in the epicycle, or on the eccentric circle : the method is but a device
for ascertaining the effect of the attractive force of the being at the
apsis. Thus the planet really moves in the circle A M M' P, and if the
lines E m, Em' be drawn, meeting the orbit in o and o1, its actual place
is at o and o', when its mean place is at M and M' respectively. To
ascertain the value of the arcs o M and o' M', which are the amount of
removal from the mean place, or the equation, is the object of the pro
cess prescribed by the text.
   Suppose the planet's mean place to be M, its mean distance from the
apsis being A M : it has traversed, as above explained, an equal arc, a'm,
in the epicycle. From M draw M B and M F, and from m draw TO «,
at right angles to the lines upon which they respectively fall : then M B
is the base-sine (bhujajy&), or the sine of mean anomaly, and M F, or its
equal EB, is the perpendicular-sine (kotijy&), or cosine, and mn and
n M are corresponding sine and cosine in the epicycle. But as the rela
tion of the circumference of the orbit to that of the epicycle is known,
and as all corresponding parts of two circles are to one another as their
respective circumferences, the values of TOW and nM are found by a
proportion, as follows : as 360° is to the number of degrees in the cir
cumference of the epicycle at M, so is MB to TO n, and E B to n M.
Hence mn is called the "result from the base-sine" (bhujajy&phala, or,
more briefly, bhujaphala, or b&huphala), and n M the " result from the
perpendicular-sine" (kotijy&phala, or kot.iphala) : the latter of the two,
however, is not employed in the process for calculating the equation of
the apsis. Now, as the dimensions of the epicycle of the apsis are in
ii. 39.]                     Translation and Notes.                              65

all cases small, "in n may without any considerable error be assumed to
be equal to o q, which is the sine of the arc o M, the equation : tins
assumption is accordingly made, and the conversion of m n, as sine, into
its corresponding arc, gives the equation required.
   The same explanation applies to the position of the planet at M' : a"
m', the equivalent of A M M', is here the arc of the epicycle traversed ;
m' n', its sine, is calculated from M' B', as before, and is assumed to
equal o' g', the sine of the equation o' M'.
   To give a farther and practical illustration of the process, we will
proceed to calculate the equation of the apsis for the moon, at the time
for which her mean place has been found in the notes to the last chap
ter, viz., the 1st of January, 1860, midnight, at Washington.
Moon's mean longitude, midnight, at ITjjayini (i. 53),                ns i5° 23' 24"
  add the equation for difference of meridian (defdntaraphala), )                •
  or for her motion between midnight at Ujj. and Wash. (i. 60, 61), )              7
Moon's mean longitude at required time,                             j i 20 59    i
Longitude of moon's apsis, midnight, at Ujjayini (i. 6S),           10   9 4z 26
  add for difference of meridian, as above,                                 2 5o
Longitude of moon's apsis at required time,                         10 9 45 16
  deduct moon's mean longitude (ii. 29),                            1 1 20 59 i
Moon's mean anomaly (mandaTcendra),                                 10 18 46 i5
   The anomaly being reckoned forward on the orbit from the planet,
the position thus found for the moon relative to the apsis is, nearly
enough for purposes of illustration, represented by M in the figure. By
the rule given above, in verse 30, the base-sine (b/iujajy&)—since the
anomaly is in the fourth, an even, quadrant—is to be taken from the
part of the quadrant not included in the anomaly, or A M ; the per
pendicular-sine (kotijy&) is that corresponding to its complement, of
MD. That is to say:
From the anomaly,                                                   }o« 18° 46' i5"
  deduct three quadrants,                                            9
  remains the arc M D,                                               I 18 46 i5
  take this from a quadrant,                                         3
  remains the arc A M,                                               i n 13 45
   And by the method already illustrated under verses 31, 32, the sine
corresponding to the latter arc, which is the base-sine (bhujajyti), or the
sine of mean anomaly, M B, is found to be 2266' ; that from M D, which
is MP, or EB, the perpendicular-sine (kotjjy&), or cosine of mean
anomaly, is 2585'.
   The next point is to find the true size of the epicycle at M. By
verse 34, the contraction of its circumference amounts at D to 20';
hence, according to the rule in verse 38, we make the proportion, sin
A D : 20' : : sin A M : diminution at M ; or,
                             3438:20:: 2266: i3
Deducting from 32°, the circumference of the epicycle at A, the amount
of diminution thus ascertained, we have 31° 47' as its dimensions at M.
66                              S&rya-Siddlidnta,                              [ii. 39-
      Onoe more, by verse 39, we make the proportion, circ. of orbit : circ.
    of epicycle : : M B : m n ; or,
                             36o° : 3i° 4?': :2266 : 200
   The value, then, of mn, the result from the base-sine (bhujajy&phala),
is 200' ; which, as TO n is assumed to equal o q, is the sine of the equa
tion. Being less than 225', its arc (see the table of sines, above) is of
the same value : 3° 20', accordingly, is the moon's equation of the apsis
(m&nda phala) at the given time : the figure shows it to be subtractive
(rna), as the rule in verse 45 also declares it. Hence, from the
Moon's mean longitude,                                                    n« 20° 59'
  deduct the equation,                                                        3 20
Moon's true longitude,                                                    n 17 39
   We present below, in a briefer form, the results of a similar calcula
tion made for the sun, at the same time.
Sun's mean longitude, midnight, at Ujjayin! (i. 58),                   8» 17° 48' 7"
  add for difference of meridian (i. 60, 61),                                 25 6
Sun's mean longitude at required time,                                 8 18 i3 i3
Longitude of sun's apsis (i. 41),                                      2 17 17 24
Sun's mean anomaly (ii. 29),                                           5 29 4 n
  subtract from two quadrants (ii. 80),                                6
Arc determining base-sine,                                                     55' 49"
Base-sine (bhujajyd),                                                          56'
Dimensions of epicycle (ii. 38),                                         i4Q
Result from base-sine (bhujajydphala), or sine of equation (ii. 89),           2'
Equation (mdnda phala, ii. 45),                                             -{-2'
Sun's true longitude,                                                  8s 18° i5'
   In making these calculations, we have neglected the seconds, rejecting
the fraction of a minute, or counting it as a minute, according as it was
less or greater than a half. For, considering that this method is followed
in the table of sines, which lies at the foundation of the whole process,
and considering that the sine of the arc in the epicycle is assumed to be
equal to that of the equation, it would evidently be a waste of labor, and
an affectation of an exactness greater than the process contemplates, or
than its general method renders practicable, to carry into seconds the data
employed.
   As stated below, in verse 43, the equation thus found is the only one
required in determining the true longitude of the sun and of the moon :
in the case of the other planets, however, of which the apparent place is
affected by the motion of the earth, a much longer and more complicated
process is necessary, of which the explanation commences with the next
following passage.
   The Ptolemaic method of making the calculation of the equation of
the centre for the sun and moon is illustrated by the annexed figure
(Fig. 4). The points E, A, M, a, m, and o, correspond with those simi
larly marked in the last figure (Fig. 3). The centre of the eccentric




-
ii. 42.]                  Translation and Notes.                            67
circle is at e, and E e, which equals A a, is the eccentricity, which is given.
Join e m ; the angle me a equals M E A, the mean anomaly, and E m e
equals MEo, the equation. Extend
m e to d, where it meets E d, a per-                    F'S-
pendicular let fall upon it from E.
Then, in the right-angled triangle
Eed, the side Ee and the angles
—since Red equals me a—are
given, to find the other sides, e d
and d E. Add e d to e rn, the ra
dius; add the square of the sum
to that of Erf; the square root
of their sum is Em : then, in the
right-angled triangle mEd, all
the sides and the right angle are
given, to find the angle E m e, the
equation.
   This process is equivalent to a transfer of the epicycle from M to E ;
E d becomes the result from the base-sine (khujajy&phala), and d e that
from the perpendicular-sine (kotyy&phala), and the angle of the equation
is found in the same manner as its sine, e c, is found in the Hindu process
next to be explained ; while, in that which we have been considering, Ed
is assumed to be equal to e c.
   Ptolemy also adds to the moon's orbit an epicycle, to account for her
second inequality, the evection, the discovery of which does him so much
honor. Of this inequality the Hindus take no notice.
   40. The result from the perpendicular-sine (Jcotiphala) of the
distance from the conjunction is to be added to radius, when the
distance (kendra) is in the half-orbit beginning with Capricorn ;
but when in that beginning with Cancer, the result from the
perpendicular-sine is to be subtracted.
   41. To the square of this sum or difference add the square of
the result from the base-sine (bdhuphala) ; the square root of
their sum is the hypothenuse (karna) called variable (cala).
Multiply the result from the base-sine by radius, and divide by
the variable hypothenuse :
   42. The arc corresponding to the quotient is, in minutes, etc.,
the equation of the conjunction (ydighrya phala) ; it is emploj'ed
in the first and- in the fourth process of correction (karmari) for
Mars and the other planets.
   The process prescribed by this passage is essentially the same with that
explained and illustrated under the preceding verse, the only difference
being that here the sine of the required equation, instead of being
assumed equal to that of the arc traversed by the planet in the epicycle,
is obtained by calculation from it. The annexed figure (Fig. 5) will ex
hibit the method pursued.
   The larger circle, C M M' O, represents, as before, the orbit in which
any one of the planets, as also the being at its conjunction (fighrocca) are
                            S&rya-Siddhdnta,                           [ii. 42.




making the circuit of the heavens about E, the earth, as a centre, in the
direction indicated by the arrow, from C through M and M' to O, and so
on. But since, in every case, the conjunction moves more rapidly east
ward than the planet,' overtaking and passing it, if we suppose the con
junction stationary at C, the virtual motion of the planet relative to that
point is backward, or from O through M' and M to C, its mean rate of
approach toward C being the difference between the mean motion of the
planet and that of the sun. As before, the amount to which the planet
is drawn away from its mean place toward the conjunction is calculated
by means of an epicycle. The circles drawn in the figure to represent
the epicycle are of the relative dimensions of that assigned to Mercury,
or a little more than half that of Mars. The direction of the planet's
motion in the epicycle is the reverse of that in the epicycle of the apsis,
as regards the actual motion of the planet in its orbit, being eastward at
the conjunction ; as regards the motion of the planet relative to the con
junction, it is the same as in the former case, being in the contrary direc
tion at the conjunction : its effect, of course, is to increase the rate of the
eastward movement at that point. The time of the planet's revolution
about the centre of the epicycle is the interval between two successive
passages through the point C, the conjunction : that is to say, it is equal
to the period of synodical revolution of each planet. These periods are,
according to the elements presented in the text of this Siddhanta, as
 follows :
               Mercury,                         n5d aih 42m
               Venus,                           583 a1  3?
               Mars,                            779 22  ii
               Jupiter,                         398 21  20
               Saturn,                          3/8  2   4

  The arc of the epicycle traversed by the planet, at any point in its revo-
 \tion, is equal to its distance from the conjunction, when reckoned for-
   -d from the planet, according to the method prescribed in verse 29.
ii. 42.]                    Translation and Notes.                              69
   Suppose, now, the mean place of the planet, relative to its conjunction
(ftyhrocca) at C, to be at M : its place in the epicycle is at m, as far from
c'", in either direction, as M from C. The arc of the epicycle already
traversed is indicated in this figure, as in Fig. 3, by the heavier line.
Draw E m, cutting the orbit in o ; then o is the planet's true place, and
o M is the equation, or the amount of removal from the mean place by
the attraction of the being at C.
   The sine and cosine of the distance from the conjunction, the dimen
sions of the epicycle, and the value of the correspondents in the epicycle
to the sine and cosine, are found as in the preceding process. Add n M,
the result from the cosine (kotijyaphala), to M E, the radius : the result
is the perpendicular, En, of the triangle Enm. To the square of En
add that of the base nm, the result from the sine (bhujajy&phala) ; the
square root of the sum is the line E m, the hypothenuse : it is termed the
variable hypothenuse (cala karna) from its constantly changing its
length. We have now the two similar triangles Emn and Eog, a
comparison of the corresponding parts of which gives us the proportion
Em : mn : : E o : og ; that is to say, Og, which is the sine of the equation
oM, equals the product of Eo, the radius, into mn, the result from the
base-sine, divided by the variable hypothenuse, Em.
   When the planet's mean place is in the quadrant D O, as at M', the
result from the perpendicular-sine (kotijy&phala), or M' n', is subtracted
from radius, and the remainder, En', is employed as before to find the
value of E m', the variable hypothenuse : and the comparison of the
similar triangles Em'n' and Eo'g' gives o' g', the sine of the equation,
o'M'.
   It is obvious that when the mean distance of a planet from its conjunc
tion is less than a quadrant in either direction, as at M, the base En is
greater than radius ; when that distance is more than a quadrant, as at
M', the base Ere' is less than radius: the cosine is to be added to radius
in the one case, and subtracted from it in the other. This is the mean
ing of the rule in verse 40 : compare the notes to i. 58 and ii. 30.
   In illustration of the process, we will calculate the equation of the
conjunction of Mercury for the given time, or for midnight preceding
January 1st, 1860, at Washington.
   Since the Hindu system, like the Greek, interchanges in the case of the
two inferior planets the motion and place of the planet itself and of the
sun, giving to the former as its mean motion that which is the mean
apparent motion of the sun, and assigning to the conjunction (fighrocca)
a revolution which is actually that of the planet in its orbit, the mean
position of Mercury at the given time is that found above (under v. 39)
to be that of the sun at the same time, while to find that of its conjunc
tion we have to add the equation for difference of meridian (def&ntara-
phala, i. 60, 61), to the longitude given under i. 53 as that of the planet.
Longitude of Mercury's conjunction (fighrocca), midnight, at Ujjayini, 4* i5° i3' 8"
  add for Uill'crence of meridian,                                         I 44 1 4
Longitude of conjunction at required time,                            4 16 57 22
Mean longitude of Mercury,                                            8 18 i3 i3
Mean commutation (fighrakendra,),                                     7 28 44     9
70                                 S&rya-tSiddhdmta,                                   [ii. 42-

   The position of Mercury with reference to the conjunction is accord
ingly very nearly that of M', in Fig. 5. The arc which determines the
base-sine (bhujajy&), orOM', is 58° 44', while M'D, its complement,
from which the perpendicular-sine (kot.ijy&) is taken, is 31° 16'. The
corresponding sines, M' B' and M' G, are 2938' and 1784' respectively.
   The epicycle of Mercury is one degree less at D than at O. Hence
the proportion
                                    3438 : 60:: 2938 :5i
gives 51' as the diminution at M' : the circumference of the epicyle at M,
then, is 132° 9'. The two proportions
          36o0:i32°9'::2938:io78, and 36o° : 1 32° 9':: 1784:655,
give us the value of m' n' as 1078', and that of n'M' as 655'. The
commutation being more than three and less than nine signs, or in the
half-orbit beginning with Cancer, the fourth sign, n'M' is to be sub
tracted from EM', or radius, 3438'; the remainder, 2783', is the perpen
dicular E n'.
      To the square of En',                                                   7,745,089
        add the square of n' m',                                              1,162,084
         of their sum,                                                        8,907,173
         the square root,                                                          a984
is the variable hypothenuse (eala Icarna), E m'. The comparison of the
triangles Em'n' and Eo'^' gives the proportion Em': m'n' : :Eo': o'g', or
                            2984: 1078:: 3438: 1242
The value of o'q', the sine of the equation, is accordingly 1242': the cor
responding arc, o' M, is found by the process prescribed in verse 33 to be
21° 12'. The figure shows the equation to be subtract!ve.
   The annexed table presents the results of the calculation of the equa
tion of the conjunction (ftghrakarman) for the five planets.
Results of the First Process for finding the True Places of the Planets.
                                                            Corr.   Rfesult Result Va i-
    Planet.     Mean     Longitude of     Mean     Baie-
              Longitude. Conjunction. Commutation. aine.   E*°y«°-*™e. P.from     abl Eqnat'n
                                                                          -sine. Hyp. of Conj.

Mercury, 8 18 i3 i3 4 16 57 22 7 28 44 9 2938 i32 9 1078                     655 2984 -21 12
Venus, 8 18 i3 i3 10 21 4947 2 3 36 34 3o8o 260 i3, 2226                    i «>4 io58 +26 7
Mars,    5 24 3o 57 8 18 i3 i3 2 23 42 l6 34l6 232 I 22O2                    225 4274 +3i    i
Jupiter, 2 26 •) 1/i 8 18 i3 i3 5 22 IO 59 468 70 16   91                    665 2774 + i 53
Saturn, 3 20 12 3 8 18 i3 i3 4 28 i 10 1820 39 32 2OO                        32O 3i24 + 34o


  This is, however, only a first step in the whole operation for finding
the true longitudes of these five planets, as is laid down in the next

  43. The process of correction for the apsis (mdnda karman} is
the only one required for the sun and moon : for Mars and the
other planets are prescribed that for the conjunction ($dighrya),
that for the apsis (mdnda), again that for the apsis, and that for
the conjunction—four, in succession.



v
ii. 45.]                  Translation and Notes.                          71
  44. To the mean place of the planet apply half the equation
of the conjunction (gighraphala), likewise half the equation of the
apsis ; to the mean place of the planet apply the whole equation
of the apsis (mandaphala), and also that of the conjunction.
   45. In the case of all the planets, and both in the process of
correction for the conjunction and in that for the apsis, the equa
tion is additive (dhana) when the distance (kendra) is in the half-
orbit beginning with Aries ; subtractive (rna), when in the half-
orbit beginning with Libra.
   The rule contained in the last verse is a general one, applying to all
the processes of calculation of the equations of place, and has already
been anticipated by us above. Its meaning is, that when the anomaly,
(mandakendra), or commutation (fighrakendra), reckoned always forward
from the planet to the apsis or conjunction, is less than six signs, the
equation of place is additive ; when the former is more than six signs,
the equation is subtractive. The reason is made clear by the figures given
above, and by the explanations under verses 1-5 of this chapter.
   It should have been mentioned above, under verse 29, where the word
kendra was first introduced, that, as employed in this sense by the Hin
dus, it properly signifies the position (see note to i. 53) of the " centre "
of the epicycle—which coincides with the mean place of the planet itself
—relative to the apsis or conjunction respectively. In the text of the
Surya-Siddhanta it is used only with this signification : the commentary
employs it also to designate the centre of any circle.
   Since the sun and moon have but a single inequality, according to the
Hindu system, the calculation of their true places is simple and easy.
With the other planets the case is different, on account of the existence
of two causes of disturbance in their orbits, and the consequent necessity
both of applying two equations, and also of allowing for the effect of each
cause in determining the equation due to the other. For, to the appre
hension of the Hindu astronomer, it would not be proper to calculate the
two equations from the mean place of the planet ; nor, again, to calculate
either of the two from the mean place, and, having applied it, to take
the new position thus found as a basis from which to calculate the other ;
since the planet is virtually drawn away from its mean place by the
divinity at either apex (ucca) before it is submitted to the action of the
other. The method adopted in this SiddbAnta of balancing the two
influences, and arriving at their joint effect upon the planet, is stated in
verses 43 and 44. The phraseology of the text is not entirely explicit,
and would bear, if taken alone, a different interpretation from that which
the commentary puts upon it, and which the rules to be given later show
to be its true meaning ; this is as follows : first calculate from the mean
place of the planet the equation of the conjunction, and apply the half
of it to the mean place ; from the position thus obtained calculate the
equation of the apsis, and apply half of it to the longitude as already
once equated ; from this result find once more the equation of the apsis,
and apply it to the original mean place of the planet; and finally, calcu
late from, and apply to, this last place the whole equation of the con
junction.
72                                  S&rya-iSiddhdnta,                                                       [ii. 45.

   We have calculated by this method the true places of the five planets,
and present the results of the processes in the following tables. Those
of the first process have been already given under the preceding pas
sage : the application of half the equations there found to the mean
longitude gives us the longitude once equated as a basis for the next
process.
Results of the Second Process for finding the True Places of the Planets.
      9 Planet.        Equated       Longitude                Equated          Base- Corrected Equation
                      Longitude.      of Apsia.              Anomaly.          gine. Epicycle. of Apsi».
                      8   o     I   So      i       "        8    o      t        i    O   1      a   1
      Mercury,        8 7 37 7 10 28 20                     II        2 5l     1 568 29 5 - 2 7
      Venus,          9 i >7 2 19 52 17                      5 18 35 681                  M 48       + 0 22
      Mars,           6 10 i        4 IO 2 4o               IO O 2  2977                  72 24      -10 2
      Jupiter,        2 26 59       5 21 22 19               2 24 233420                  32 o + 5 5
      Saturn,         3 22 I        7 26 37 34               4 4 37 2829                  48 ii + 6 20
   Again, the application of half these equations to the longitudes as
once equated furnishes the data for the third process. The longitudes of
the apsides, being the same as in the second operation, are not repeated
in this table.
Results of the Third Process for finding the True Places of the Planets.
            Planet.             Equated         Equated                  Base-      [ Corrected     Equation
                               Longitude.       Anomaly.                  sine.     i Epicycle.     of Apsit.
                              i °       '       8       o         >         i         O     1         0


      Mercury,                8    6 34         ii 3 54                      l5l2     29        7   -2     2
      Venua,                  9 i 28
                              6 5 o
                                                 5 18 24                      69,
                                                                             2814
                                                                                     ii 48
                                                                                     72 33
                                                                                                    +0
                                                                                                    -9 3o
                                                                                                          23
      Mars,                                     10 5 3
      Jupiter,                2 29 3o           2       21       52          34o3    32         I   +5 4
      Saturn,                 3 25 ii           4        I       27          2932    48         9   +6 33

   The original mean longitudes are now corrected by the results of the
third process, to obtain a position from which shall be once more calcu
lated the equation of the conjunction ; and the application of this to the
position which furnished it yields, as a final result, the true place of each
planet.
Results of the fourth Process for finding the True Places of the Planets.
           Equated Equated Ba«e- Corr. Result         Result Variable Equation     True
  Planet.Longitude. Commuta
                      tion. aine. Epicycle. 11.from    from
                                                sine. P.- nine. Hypoth o? Conj. Longitude.
          8   o  •  a « •      .    0    ,       .         .        .    0    1 &   0   '

Mercury, 8 16 ii 8 o 46 3ooo i3z 8 I 101 616 3029 -21 20 7 24 5i
Venus, 8 18 36 2 3 14 3069 260 1 3 2218 1118 5o67 + 25 59 9 14 35
Mars,     5 i5 i 3 3 12 3432 232 o 2212 124 3984 +33 44 6 18 45
Jupiter, 3 i 6 5 17 7 766 70 27                                  i5o     656        2786 + 3 5 3 4 ii
Saturn, 3 26 45 4 51 28 21/fl 3937                               236     296        3i5t + 4 17 4 i 2

   We cannot furnish a comparison of the Hindu determinations of the
true places of the planets with their actual positions as ascertained by
our modern methods, until after the subject of the latitude has been dealt
with: see below, under verses 56-58.
ii. 45.]                  Translation and Notes.                         73
    The Hindu method of finding the true longitudes of the five planets
whose apparent position is affected by the parallax of the earth's motion
having thus been fully explained, we will proceed to indicate, as suc
cinctly as possible, the way in which the same problem is solved by the
great Greek astronomer. The annexed figure (Fig. 6) will illustrate his
method : it is taken from those presented in the Syntaxis, but with such
modifications of form as to make it correspond with the figures previ
ously given here : the conditions which it represents are only hypothet
ical, not according with the actual elements of any of the planetary
orbits.
   Let E be the earth's place, and let the circle A.pC, described about
E as a centre, represent the mean orbit of any planet, E A being the
direction of its line of apsides, and EC that of its conjunction (fighra),
                        pj_ 6                        called by Ptolemy the
                                                     apogee of its epicycle.
                                                     Let EX be the double
                                                     eccentricity, or the
                                                     equivalent to the ra
                                                     dius of the Hindu
                                                     epicycle of the apsis ;
                                                     and let EX be bi
                                                     sected in Q. Then,
                                                     as regards the influ
                                                     ence of the eccen
                                                     tricity of the orbit
                                                     upon the place of the
                                                     planet, the centre of
                                                     equable angular mo
tion is at X, but the centre of equal distance is at Q : the planet virtu
ally describes the circle A' P, of which Q is the centre, but at the same
rate as if it were moving equably upon the dotted circle, of which the
centre is at X. The angle of mean anomaly, accordingly, which in
creases proportionally to the time, is x X A", but P is the planet's place,
PEA the' true anomaly, and E P X the equation of place. The value
of E P X is obtained by a process analogous to that described above,
under verse 39 (pp. 66, 67) ; EB and BX, and QD and DX, are
first found ; then D P, which, by subtracting D X, gives X P ; X P
added to B X gives B P ; and from B P and B E is derived E P B, the
equation required ; subtract this from P X A, and the remainder is
RE A, the planet's true distance from the apsis. About P describe
the epicycle of the conjunction, and draw the radius PT parallel
to EC: then T is the planet's place in the epicycle, p its apparent
position in the mean orbit, and T E P the equation of the epicycle, or
of the conjunction. In order to arrive at the value of this equation,
Ptolemy first finds that of SER, the corresponding angle when the
centre of the epicycle is placed at R, at the mean distance E R, or
radius, from E : he then diminishes it by a complicated process, into
the details of which it is not necessary here to enter, and which, as
he himself acknowledges, is not strictly accurate, but yields results suffi
ciently near to the truth. The application of the equation thus obtained
                            10
74                         Stirya-Siddhdnta,                         [ii. 45.
to the place of the planet as already once equated gives the final result
sought for, its geocentric place.
    In the case of Mercury, Ptolemy introduces the additional supposition
that the centre of equal distances, instead of being fixed at Q, revolves
in a retrograde direction upon the circumference of a circle of which X .
is the centre, and X Q the radius.
    After a thorough discussion of the observations upon which his data
and his methods are founded, and a full exposition of the latter, Ptolemy
proceeds himself to construct tables, which are included in the body of
his work, from which the true places of the planets at any given time
may be found by a brief and simple process. The Hindus are also ac
customed to employ such tables, although their construction and use are
nowhere alluded to in this treatise. Hindu tables, in part professing to
be calculated according to the Surya-Siddhanta, have been published
by Bailly (Traite de 1'Astr. Ind. et Or., p. 335, etc.), by Bentley (Hind.
Ast., p. 219, etc.), by Warren (Kala Sankalita, Tables), by Mr.Hoising-
ton (Oriental Astronomer, p. 61, etc.), and, for the sun and moon, by
Davis (As. Res., ii. 255, 256).
    We are now in a condition to compare the planetary system of the
Hindus with that of the Greeks, and to take note of the principal re
semblances and differences between them. And it is evident, in the first
place, that in all their grand features the two are essentially the same.
Both alike analyze, with remarkable success, the irregularities of the
apparent motions of the planets into the two main elements of which
they are made up, and both adopt the same method of representing and
calculating those irregularities. Both alike substitute eccentric circles
for the true elliptic orbits of the planets. Both agree in assigning to
Mercury and Venus the same mean orbit and motion as to the sun, and
in giving them epicycles which in fact correspond to their heliocentric
orbits, making the centre of those epicycles, however, not the true, but
the mean place of the sun, and also applying to the latter the correction
 due to the eccentricity of the orbit. Both transfer the centre of the
orbits of the superior planets from the sun to the earth, and then assign
 to each, as an epicycle, the earth's orbit ; not, however, in the form of
 an ellipse, nor even of an eccentric, but in that of a true circle ; and
 here, too, both make the place of the centre of the epicycle to depend
 upon the mean, instead of the true, place of the sun. The key to the
 whole system of the Greeks, and the determining cause both of its nu
 merous accordances with the actual conditions of things in nature, and
 of its inaccuracies, is the principle, distinctly laid down and strictly ad
 hered to by them, that the planetary movements are to be represented
 by a combination of equable circular motions alone, none other being
 deemed suited to the dignity and perfection of the heavenly bodies. By
 the Hindus, this principle is nowhere expressly recognized, so far as we
 ara aware, as one of binding influence, and although their whole system,
 no less than that of the Greeks, seems in other respects inspired by it,
 it is in one point, as we shall note more particularly hereafter, distinctly
 abandoned and violated by them (see below, under vv. 50, 51). We
  cannot but regard with the highest admiration the acuteness and in
 dustry, the power of observation, analysis, and deduction of the Greeks,
ii. 45.]                 Translation and Notes.                         75

that, hampered by false assumptions, and imperfectly provided with
instruments, they were able to construct a science containing so much
of truth, and serving as a secure basis for the improvements of after
time : whether we pay the same tribute to the genius of the Hindu will
depend upon whether we consider him also, like all the rest of the world,
to have been the pupil of the Greek in astronomical science, or whether
we shall believe him to have arrived independently at a system so
closely the counterpart of that of the West.
   The differences between the two systems are much less fundamental
and important. The assumption of a centre of equal distance different
from that of equal angular motion—and, in the case of Mercury, itself
also movable—is unknown to the Hindus : this, however, appears to be
an innovation introduced into the Greek system by Ptolemy, and un
known before his time ; it was adopted by him, in spite of its seeming
arbitrariness, because it gave him results according more nearly with his
observations. The moon's evection, the discovery of Ptolemy, is equally
wanting in the Hindu astronomy. As regards the combined application
of the equations of the apsis and the conjunction, the two systems are
likewise at variance. Ptolemy follows the truer, as well as the simpler,
method : he applies first the whole correction for the eccentricity of the
orbit, obtaining as a result, in the case of the superior planets, the
planet's true heliocentric place ; and this he then corrects for the paral
lax of the earth's position. Here, too, ignorant as he was of the actual
relation between the two equations, we may suppose him to have been
guided by the better coincidence with observation of the results of his
processes when thus conducted. The Hindus, on the other hand, not
knowing to which of the two supernatural beings at the apsis and con
junction should be attributed the priority of influence, conceived them
to act simultaneously, and adopted the method stated above, in verse 44,
of obtaining an average place whence their joint effect should be calcu
lated. This is the only point where they forsook the geometrical method,
and suffered their theory respecting the character of the forces produ
cing the inequalities of motion to modify their processes and results.
The change of dimensions of the epicycles is also a striking peculiarity
of the Hindu system, and to us, thus far, its most enigmatical feature.
The virtual effect of the alteration upon the epicycles themselves is to
give them a form approximating to the elliptical. But, although the
epicycles of the conjunction of the inferior planets represent the proper
orbits of those planets, and those of the superior the orbit of the earth,
it is not possible to see in this alteration an unconscious recognition of
the principle of ellipticity, because the major axis of the quasi-ellipse—
or, in the case of Jupiter and Saturn, the minor axis—is constantly
pointed toward the earth. Its effect upon the orbit described by the
planet is, as concerns the epicycle of the apsis, to give to the eccentric
circle an ovoid shape, flattened in the first and fourth quadrants, bulging
in the second and third : this is, so far as it goes, an approximation to
ward Ptolemy's virtual orbit, a circle described about a centre distant
from the earth's place by only half the equivalent of the radius of the
Hindu epicycle (the circle A' P in figure 6) : but the approximation
seems too distant to furnish any hint of an explanation. A diminution
76                            S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                  [ii. 45-

of the epicycle also effects a corresponding diminution of the equation,
carrying the planet forward where the equation is subtractive, and back
ward where it is additive : but we hardly feel justified in assuming that
it is to be regarded as an empirical correction, applied to make the re
sults of calculation agree more nearly with those of observation, because
its amount and place stand in no relation which we have been able to
trace to the true elements of the planetary orbits, nor is the accuracy
of either the Hindu calculations or observations so great as to make
such slight corrections of appreciable importance. We are compelled
to leave the solution of this difficulty, if it shall prove soluble, to later
investigation, and a more extended comparison of the different text
books of Hindu astronomical science.
    As regards the numerical value of the elements adopted by the two
systems—their mutual relation, and their respective relations to the true
elements established by modern science, are exhibited in the annexed
table. The first part of it presents the comparative dimensions of the
planetary orbits, or the value of the radius of each in terms of that of
the earth s orbit. In the case of Mercury and Venus, this is represented
by the relation of the radius of the epicycle (of the conjunction) to that
 of the orbit ; in the case of the superior planets, by that of the radius
 of the orbit to the radius of the epicycle. For the Hindu system it
was necessary to give two values in every case, derived respectively from
 the greatest and least dimensions of the epicycles. Such a relative de
 termination of the moon's orbit, of course, could not be obtained : its
 absolute dimensions will be found stated later (see under iv. 3 and xii.
 84). The second part of the table gives, as the fairest practicable com
 parison of the values assigned by each system to the eccentricities, the
 greatest equations of the centre. For Mercury and Venus, however, the
 ancient and modern determinations of these equations are not at all
 comparable, the latter giving their actual heliocentric amount, the for
 mer their apparent value, as seen from the earth.
 Relative Dimensions and Eccentricities of the Planetary Orbits, according
                          to Different Authorities.
                         1 ladius of the Orbit.         .greatest Eq nation of he Centre.
     Planet.    Surya-Si hllmntn                          Surya-
               even quad. odd qund   Ptolemy.   Moderns Sidddhantn. Ptolemy. Moderns.

 Sun,           I.OOOO    I.OOOO    I.OOOO     I.OOOO  a 10 3i        2   23i 55 a?
 Moon,                                                 5 2 46         5    i6 17 i3
 Mercury,        .3694     .3667     .375o      .387 1 4 a? 35        2 52 23 4o 43
 Venus,          .7378     .7222     .7194      .7233  i 45 3         2 23  o 47 "
 Mars,          1.5i39    I.55l3    1.5190     1.5237 ii 32 3        II 32 10 4i 33
 Jupiter,       5.1429    S.oooo    5.an4      5.2028  5 5 58         5 16 5 3t i4
 Saturn,        92308     9.0000    9a308      9.5389 7 39 32         6 3s 6 26 la

    46. Multiply the daily motion (bhukti) of a planet by the sun's
 result from the base-sine (baJiuphala), and divide by the number
 of minutes in a circle (bhacakra) ; the result, in minutes, apply
 to the planet's true place, in the same direction as the equation
'•was applied to the sun.
ii. 49.]                 Translation and Notes.                         77
   By this rule, allowance is made for that part of the equation of time,
or of the difference between mean and apparent solar time, which is due
to the difference between the sun's mean and true places. The instru
ments employed by the Hindus in measuring time are described, very
briefly and insufficiently, in the thirteenth chapter of this work : in all
probability the gnomon and shadow was that most relied upon ; at any
rate, they can have had no means of keeping mean time with any accu
racy, and it appears from this passage that apparent time alone is re
garded as ascertainable directly. Now if the sun moved in the equi
noctial instead of in the ecliptic, the interval between the passage of his
mean and his true place across the meridian would be the same part of
a day, as the difference of the two places is of a circle : hence the pro
portion upon which the rule in the text is founded : as the number of
minutes in a circle is to that in the sun's equation (which is the same
with his "result from the base-sine :" see above, v. 39), so is the whole
daily motion of any planet to its motion during the interval. And
since, when the sun is in advance of his true place, he comes later to
the meridian, the planet moving on during the interval, and the reverse,
the result is additive to the planet's place, or subtractive from it, accord
ing as the sun's equation is additive or subtractive.
   The other source of difference between true and apparent time, the
difference in the daily increment of the arcs of the ecliptic, in which
the sun moves, and of those of the equinoctial, which are the measures
of time, is not taken account of in this treatise. This is the more
strange, as that difference is, for some other purposes, calculated and
allowed for.
   At the time for which we have ascertained above the true places of
the planets, the sun is so near the perigee, and his equation of place is
so small, that it renders necessary no modification of the places as
given : even the moon moves but a small fraction of a second during
 the interval between mean and apparent midnight.
   By bhukti, as used in this verse, we are to understand, of course, not
the mean, but the actual, daily motion of the planet : the commentary
also gives the word this interpretation. How the actual rate of motion
is found at any given time, is taught in the next passage.
   47. From the mean daily motion of the moon subtract the
daily motion of its apsis (manda), and, having treated the differ
ence in the manner prescribed by the next rule, apply the result,
as an additive or subtractive equation, to the daily motion.
   48. The equation of a planet's daily motion is to be calculated
like the place of the planet in the process for the apsis: multi
ply the daily motion by the difference of tabular sines corre
sponding to the base-sine (dorjyd) of anomaly, and then divide
by two hundred and twenty-five ;
   49. Multiply the result by the corresponding epicycle of the
apsis (mandaparidhi), and divide by the number of degrees in a
circle (bhagana) ; the result, in minutes, is additive when in the
half-orbit beginning with Cancer, and subtractive when in that
beginning with Capricorn.
78                          S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [ii. 49-

   Only the effect of the apsis upon the daily rate of motion is treated
of in these verses; the farther modification of it by the conjunction is
the subject of those which succeed.
   Verse 47 is a separate specification under the general rule given in
the following verse, applying to the moon alone. The rate of a planet's
motion in its epicycle being equal to its mean motion from the apsis, or
its anomalistic motion, it is necessary in the case of the moon, whose
apsis has a perceptible forward movement, to subtract the daily amount
of this movement from that of the planet in order to obtain the daily
rate of removal from the apsis.
   In the first half of verse 48 the commentary sees only an intimation
that, as regards the apsis, the equation of motion is found in the same
general method as the equations of place, a certain factor being multi
plied by the circumference of the epicycle and divided by that of the
orbit. Such a direction, however, would be altogether trifling and super
fluous, and not at all in accordance with the usual compressed style of
the treatise; and moreover, were it to be so understood, we should lack
any direction as to which of the several places found for a planet in the
process for ascertaining its true place should be assumed as that for
which this first equation of motion is to be calculated. The true mean
ing of the line, beyond all reasonable question, is, that the equation is
to be derived from the same data from which the equation of place for
the apsis was finally obtained, to be applied to the planet's mean posi
tion, as this is applied to its mean motion ; from the data, namely, of
the third process, as given above.
   The principle upon which the rule is founded may be explained as
follows. The equation of motion for any given time is evidently equal
to the amount of acceleration or of retardation effected during that time
by the influence of the apsis. Thus, in Fig. 3 (p. 64), mn, the sine of
a'm, is the equation of motion for the whole time during which the
centre of the epicycle has been traversing the arc A M. If that arc,
and the arc a! m, be supposed to be divided into any number of equal
portions, each equal to a day's motion, the equation of motion for each
successive day will be equal to the successive increments of the sines of
the increasing arcs in the epicycle ; and these will be equal to the suc
cessive increments from day to day of the sines of mean anomaly, re
duced to the dimensions of the epicycle. But the rate at which the
sine is increasing or decreasing at any point in the quadrant is approxi
mately measured by the difference of the tabular sines at that point :
and as the arcs of mean daily motion are generally quite small—being,
except in the case of the moon, much less than 3° 45', the unit of the
table—we may form this proportion : if, at the point in the orbit occu
pied by the planet, a difference of 3° 45' in arc produces an increase or
decrease of a given amount in sine, what increase or decrease of sine
will be produced by a difference of arc equal to the planet's daily
motion ? or, 225 : diff. of tab. sines : : planet's daily motion : correspond
ing diff. of sine. The reduction of the result of this proportion to the
dimensions of the epicycle gives the equation sought.
   We will calculate by this method the true daily motion of the moon
at the time for which her true longitude has been found above.
ii. 51.]                     Translation and Notes.                               79
     Moon's mean daily motion (i. 80),                     ,          790' 35"
       deduct daily motion of apsis (i. S3),                            6 4i
     Moon's mean anomalistic motion,                                  783 54
From the process of calculation of the moon's true place, given above,
we take
     Moon's mean anomaly,                                       1O" 18° 46' i5"
     Sine of anomaly (bhujajyd),                                          2266'
From the table of sines (ii. 15-27), we find
     Corresponding difference of tabular sines,                           174'
Hence the proportion
                          aa5' : 174' : : 783' 54" : 606' i3"
shows the increase of the sine of anomaly in a day at this point to be
606' 18". The dimensions of the epicycle were found to be 31° 47'.
Hence the proportion
                      36o° : 3i° 4-' : : 606' i3" : 53' 3i"
give us the desired equation of motion, as 53' 31". By verse 49 it is
subtractive, the planet being less than a quadrant from the apsis, or its
anomaly being more than nine and less than three signs. Therefore,
from the
     Moon's mean daily motion,
       subtract the equation,
     Moon'i true daily motion at given tima,                          737 4
  The roughness of the process is well illustrated by this example.
Had the sine of anomaly been but 2' greater, the difference of sines
would have been 10' less, and the equation only about 50'.
  The equation of the sun's motion, calculated in a similar manner, is
found to be +2' 18", and his true motion 61' 26".
  The corrected rate of motion of the other planets will be given under
the next following passage.
   50. Subtract the daily motion of a planet, thus corrected for
the apsis (manda), from the daily motion of its conjunction
(cjighrd) ; then multiply the remainder by the difference between
the last hypothenuse and radius,
   51. And divide by the variable hypothenuse (cola kamri) : the
result is additive to the daily motion when the hypothenuse is
greater than radius, and subtractive when this is less; if, when
eubtractive, the equation is greater than the daily motion, deduct
the latter from it, and the remainder is the daily motion in &
retrograde (vakra) direction.
  The commentary gives no demonstration of the rule by which we are
here taught to calculate the variation of the rate of motion of a planet
occasioned by the action of its conjunction : the following figure, how
ever (Fig. 7), will illustrate the principle upon which it is founded.
 80                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [ii.51.
     As in a previous figure (Fig. 5, p. 68), CMM' represents the mean
  orbit of a planet, E the earth, and M the planet's mean position, at a
  given time, relative to its conjunction, C : the circle described about M
  is the epicycle of the conjunction : it is drawn, in the figure, of the
  relative dimensions of that assumed
 for Mars. Suppose M' M to be the                         £-
 amount of motion of the centre of
 the epicycle, or the (equated) mean
 synodical motion of the planet,
 during one day ; m' m is the arc of
 the epicycle traversed by the planet
 in the same time. As the amount
 of daily synodical motion is in every
 case small, these arcs are necessarily
 greatly exaggerated in the figure,
 being made about twenty-four times
 too great for Mars. Had the planet
 remained stationary in the epicycle
 at m' while the centre of the epi
 cycle moved from M' to M, its place
 at the given time would be at a ;
 having moved to m, it is seen at t :
hence * t is the equation of daily motion, of which it is required to
 ascertain the value. Produce E m1 to n, making E n equal to E m, and
join m n ; from M draw M o at right angles to E m. Then, since the arc
mm' is very small, the angles Ewin and Enm, as also Mmm' and
M m' m, may be regarded as right angles ; M m o and nmm' are there
fore equal, each being the complement of EOT TO', and the triangles
m n m' and M m o are similar. Hence
                                      Mwi: mo :: mm': mn
But                                   EM: Mm:: MM': mm'
Hence, by combining terms,            EM:mo::MM':mn
But                                   it :E<:: mn : Em
therefore, since E M equals E t, } <*:mo::MM':Em
    by again combining,            j
and, reducing the proportion to an equation, i *, the required equation
of motion, equals MM', the equated mean synodical motion in a day,
multiplied by m o, and divided by E m, the variable hypothenuse. This,
however, is not precisely the rule given above ; for in the text of this
Siddhanta, m t, the difference between the variable hypothenuse and
radius, is substituted for m o, as if the two were virtually equivalent : a
highly inaccurate assumption, since they differ from one another by the
versed sine, ot, of the equation of the conjunction, Mi, which equation
is sometimes as much as 40° : and indeed, the commentary, contrary to
its usual habit of obsequiousness to the inspired text with which it has
to deal, rejects this assumption, and says, without even an apology for
the liberty it is taking, that by the word "radius" in verse 50 is to be
understood the cosine (kotijy&) of the second equation of the conjunction.
ii. 51.]                      Translation and Notes.                                               81
   In illustration of the rule, we will calculate the true rate of daily
motion of the planet Mars, at the same time for which the previous
calculations have been made.
   By the process already illustrated under the preceding passage, the
equation of Mars's daily motion for the effect of the apsis, as derived from
the data of the third process for ascertaining his true place, is found to
be -3' 41", the difference of tabular sines being 131'. Accordingly,
       from the mean daily motion of Mars (i. 34),                3i' 26"
      deduct the equation for the apsis,                           34'
     Mars's equated daily motion,                                                   27 45
Now, to find the equated daily synodical motion,
     from the daily motion of Mars's conjunction (the sun),                         59' 8"
     deduct his equated daily motion,                                               a7 45
     Mars's equated daily synodical motion,                                         3i 23
  The variable hypothenuse used in the last process for finding the true
place was 3984'; its excess above radius is 546'. The proportion
                         3984':546'::3i'a3":4'i8"
shows, then, that the equation of motion due to the conjunction at the'
given time .is 4' 18". Since the hypothenuse is greater than radius—
that is to say, since the planet is in the half-orbit in which the influence
of the conjunction is accelerative—the equation is additive. Therefore,
       to Mars's equated daily motion,                                              27' 45"
       add the equation for the conjunction,                                         4 18
     Mars's true daily motion at the given time,                                    32     3
   In this calculation we have followed the rule stated in the text : had
we accepted the amendment of the commentary, and, in finding the
second term of our proportion, substituted for radius the cosine of
33° 44', the resulting equation would have been more than doubled,
becoming 8' 51", instead of 4' 18"; this happening to be a case where
the difference is nearly as great as possible. We have deemed it best,
however, in making out the corresponding results for all the five planets,
as presented in the annexed table, to adhere to the directions of the
text itself. The inaccuracy, it may be observed, is greatest when the
equation of motion is least, and the contrary ; so that, although some
times very large relatively to the equation, it never comes to be of any
great importance absolutely.
Results of the Processes for finding the True Daily Motion of the Planets.
                     Diff.   Equation    Equated      Equated        Equation             True
       Planet.     of tines. of Apsii.   Motion.   Synod. Motion. of Conjunction.        Motion.

 Mercury,            205     -4    21    54   47      190 45        -25    45        +29       2
 Venus,              2I9     +i 53       6l    I       35 7         + 11   17        +72 18
 Mars,               l3l     -3 4i       27 45         3c   23      + 4 18           +32 3
 Jupiter,             37     -o 4         4 55         54 i3        -12    4l        - 7 46
 Saturn,              119    +o 8         2    8       57     0     - 5 ii           - 3 3
                                  11
82                         Stirya-Siddhdnta,                      [ii. 51-
    The final abandonment by the Hindus of the principle of equable cir
 cular motion, which lies at the foundation of the whole system of eccen
 trics and epicycles, is, as already pointed out above (under vv. 43-45),
 distinctly exhibited in this process: m'm (Fig. 7), the arc in the epi
cycle traversed by the planet during a given interval of time, is no fixed
and equal quantity, but is dependent upon the arc M' M, the value of
 which, having suffered correction by the result of a triply complicated
process, is altogether irregular and variable. This necessarily follows
from the assumption of simultaneous and mutual action on the part of
the beings at the apsis and conjunction, and the consequent impossibility
of constructing a single connected geometrical figure which shall repre
sent the joint effect of the two disturbing influences. By the Ptolemaic
method the principle is consistently preserved : the fixed axis of the
epicycle (see Fig. 6, p. 217), to the revolution of which that of the
epicycle itself is bound, is zPX; and as the angle a;PT, like «X A",
increases equably, the planet traverses the circumference of the epicycle
with an unvarying motion relative to the fixed point x; although the
equation is derived, not from the arc xT, but from eT, the equivalent of
C R, its part e x varying with the varying angle E P X.
   In case the reverse motion of the planet upon the half-circumference
of the epicycle within the mqan orbit is, when projected upon the orbit,
greater than the direct motion of the centre of the epicycle, the planet
will appear to move backward in its orbit, at 9 rate equal to the excess
of the former over the latter motion. This is, as the last table, shows,
the case with Jupiter and Saturn at the given time. The subject of the
retrogradation   of the planets is continued
                                           '' ' and completed' in the next
following passage.                              •—•"•••

  62. When at a great distance from its conjunction (fighroccg),
& planet, having its substance' drawn to the left and right by
slack cords, comes then to have a retrograde motion.
   53. Mars and the rest, when their degree? of commutation
(kfndrd), in the fourth process, are, respectively, one hundred
and sixty-four, one hundred and forty-four, one hundred and
thirty, one hundred and sixty-three, one hundred and fifteen,
   5-i. Become retrograde (vakriri) : and when their respective
commutations are equal to the number of degrees remaining
after subtracting those numbers, in each several case, from a
whole circle, they cease retrogradation.
   55. In accordance with the greatness of their epicycles of the
conjunction (ftghraparid/ii), Venus and Mars cease retrograding
in the seventh sign, Jupiter and Mercury in the eighth, Saturn
in the ninth.
   The subject of the stations and retrogradations of the planets is
rather briefly and summarily disposed of in this passage, although
treated with as much fullness, perhaps, as is consistent with the general
jnethod of the Siddhanta. Ptolemy devotes to it the greater part" of
the twelfth book of the Syntaxis.
ii. 55.]                 Translation and Notes.                        83

   The first verse gives the theory of the physical Cause of the phenome
non : it is to be compared with the opening verses of the chapter,
particularly verse 2. We note here, again, the entire disavowal of the
system of epicycles as a representation of the actual movements of the
planets. How the slackness of the cords by which each planet is
attached to, and attracted by, the supernatural being at its conjunction,
furnishes an explanation of its retrogradation which should commend
itself as satisfactory to the mind even of one who believed in the super
natural being and the cords, we find it very hard to see, in spite of the
explanation of the commentary : it might have been better to omit
verse 52 altogether, and to suffer the phenomenon to rest upon the
simple and intelligible explanation given at the end of the preceding
verse, which is a true statement of its cause, expressed in terms of the
Hindu system. The actual reason of the apparent retrogradation is,
indeed, different in the case of the inferior and of the superior planets.
As regards the former, when they are traversing the inferior portion of
their orbits, or are nearly between the sun and the earth, their helio
centric eastward motion becomes, of course, as seen from the earth,
westward, or retrograde; by the parallax of the earth's motion in the
same direction this apparent retrogradation is diminished, both in rate
and in continuance, but is not prevented, because the motion of the
 inferior planets is more rapid than that of the earth. The retrograda
 tion of the superior planets, on the other hand, is due to the parallax of
 the earth's motion in the same direction when between them and the
 sun, and is lessened by their own motion in their orbits, although not
 done away with altogether, because their motion is less rapid than that
 of the earth. But, in the Hindu system, the revolution of the planet in
 the epicycle of the conjunction represents in the one case the proper
 motion of the planet, in the other, that of the earth, reversed ; hence,
 whenever its apparent amount, in a contrary direction, exceeds that of
 the movement of the centre of the epicycle—which is, in the one case,
 that of the earth, in the other, that of the planet itself—retrogradation
 is the necessary consequence.
    Verses 53-55 contain a statement of the limits within which retro-
gradation takes place. The data of verse 53 belong to the different
planets in the order, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn (see
above, under i. 51, 52). That is to say, Mercury retrogrades, when his
equated commutation, as made use of in the fourth process for finding
his true place (see above, under vv. 43-45), is more than 144° and less
than 210°; Venus, when her commutation, in like manner, is between
163° and 197°; Mars, between 164° and 196°; Jupiter, between 130°
and 230°; Saturn, between 115° and 245°. These limits ought not,
however, even according to the theory of this Siddhanta, to be laid
down with such exactness ; for the precise point at which the subtractive
equation of motion for the conjunction will exceed the proper motion
of the planet must depend, in part, upon the varying rate of the latter
as affected by its eccentricity, and must accordingly differ a little at
different times. We have not thought it worth while to calculate the
amount of this variation, nor to draw up a comparison of the Hindu
 with the Greek and the modern determinations of the limits of retro
84                        Sfirya-Siddhdnta,                        [ii. 55-
gradation, since these are dependent for their correctness upon the accu
racy of the elements assumed, and the processes employed, both of
which have been already sufficiently illustrated.
   The last verse of the passage adds little to what had been already
said, being merely a repetition, in other and less precise terms, of the
specifications of the preceding verse, together with the assertion of a
relation between the limits of retrogradation and the dimensions of the
respective epicycles ; a relation which is only empirical, and which, as
regards Venus and Mars, does not quite hold good.
  56. To the nodes of Mars, Saturn, and Jupiter, the equation
of the conjunction is to be applied, as to the planets themselves
respectively ; to those of Mercury and Venus, the equation of
the apsis, as found by the third process, in the contrary direction.
   57. The sine of the arc found by subtracting the place of the
node from that of the planet—or, in the case of Venus and
Mercury, from that of the conjunction—being multiplied by the
extreme latitude, and divided by the last hypothenuse—or, in
the case of the moon, by radius—gives the latitude (vikshepa).
   58. When latitude and declination (apalcrama) are of like
direction, the declination (krdnti) is increased by the latitude;
when of different direction, it is diminished by it, to find the
true (spashta) declination : that of the sun remains as already
determined.
   How to find the declination of a planet at any given point in the
ecliptic, or circle of declination (kr&ntivrtta), was taught us in verse 28
above, taken in connection with verses 9 and 10 of the next chapter:
here we have stated the method of finding the actual declination of any
planet, as modified by its deviation in latitude from the ecliptic.
   The process by which the amount of a planet's deviation in latitude
from the ecliptic is here directed to be found is more correct than might
have been expected, considering how far the Hindus were from compre
hending the true relations of the solar system. The three quantities
employed as data in the process are, first, the angular distance of the
planet from its node ; second, the apparent value, as latitude, of its
greatest removal from the ecliptic, when seen from the earth at a mean
distance, equal to the radius of its mean orbit ; and lastly, its actual
distance from the earth. Of these quantities, the second is stated for
each planet in the concluding verses of the first chapter; the third is
correctly represented by the variable hypothenuse (cala karna) found in
the fourth process for determining the planet's true place (see above,
under vv. 43-45) ; the first is still to be obtained, and verse 56 with the
first part of verse 57 teach the method of ascertaining it. The princi
ple of this method is the same for all the planets, although the state
ment of it is so different ; it is, in effect, to apply to the mean place of
the planet, before taking its distance from the node, only the equation
of the apsis, found as the result of the third process. In the case of
the superior planets, this method has all the correctness which the
Hindu system admits ; for by the first three processes of correction is
ii, 58.]                 Translation and Nutes.                          85

found, as nearly as the Hindus are able to find it, the true heliocentric
place of the planet, the distance from which to the node determines, of
course, the amount of removal from the ecliptic. Instead, however, of
taking this distance directly, rejecting altogether the fourth equation,
that for the parallax of the earth's place, the Hindus apply the latter
both to the planet and to the node ; their relative position thus remains
the same as if the other method had been adopted.
    Thus, for instance, the position of Jupiter's node upon the first of
January, 1860, is found from the data already given above (see i. 41-44)
to be 2s 19° 40' ; his true heliocentric longitude, employed as a datum in
the fourth process (see p. 216), is 3« 1° 6'; Jupiter's heliocentric dis
tance from the node is, accordingly, 11° 26'. Or, by the Hindu method,
the planet's true geocentric place is 3s 4° 11', and the corrected longi
tude of its node is 2s 22° 45'; the distance remains, as before, 11° 26'.
    In the case of the inferior planets, as the assumptions of the Hindus
respecting them were farther removed from the truth of nature, so their
method of finding the distance from the node is more arbitrary and less
accurate. In their system the heliocentric position of the planet is rep
resented by the place of its conjunction (ftghra), and they had, as is
shown above (see ii. 8), recognized the fact that it was the distance of
the latter from the node which determined the amount of deviation from
the ecliptic. Now, in ascertaining the heliocentric distance of an infe
rior planet from its node, allowance needs to be made, of course, for the
 effect upon its position of the eccentricity of its orbit. But the Hindu
 equation of the apsis is no true representative of this effect : it is calcu
lated in order to be applied to the mean place of the sun, the assumed
centre of the epicycle—that is, of the true orbit ; its value, as found, is
fsocentric, and, as appears by the table on p. 220, is widely different
   om its heliocentric value ; and its sign is plus or minus according as
its influence is to carry the planet, as seen from the earth, eastward or
westward ; while, in either case, the true heliocentric effect may be at
one time to bring the planet nearer to, at another time to carry it farther
from, the node. The Hindus, however, overlooking these incongruities,
and having, apparently, no distinct views of the subject to guide them
to a correcter method, follow with regard to Venus and Mercnry what
seems to them the same rule as was employed in the case of the other
planets—they apply the equation of the apsis, the result of the third
process, to the mean place of the conjunction; only here, as before, by
an indirect process : instead of applying it to the conjunction itself, they
apply it with a contrary sign to the node, the effect upon the relative
position of the two being the same.
    Thus, for instance, the longitude of Mercury's conjunction at the
 given time is (see p. 214) 4s 16° 57'; from this subtract 2° 2', the equa
 tion of the apsis found by the third process, and its equated longitude
 is 4« 14° 55' : now deducting the longitude of the node at the same
 time, which is 20° 41', we ascertain the planet's distance from the node
 to be 33 24° 14'. Or, by the Hindu method, add the same equation to
 the mean position of the node, and its equated longitude is 22° 43';
 subtract this from the mean longitude of the conjunction, and the dis
 tance is, as before, 3a 24° 14'.
86                                        .Surya-Siddhdnta,                                   [ii. 68-
   The planet's distance from the node being determined, its latitude
Would be found by a process similar to that prescribed in verse 28 of
this chapter, if the earth were at the centre of motion ; and that rule is
accordingly applied in the case of the moon ; the proportion being, as
radius is to the sine of the distance from the node, so is the sine of ex
treme latitude (or the latitude itself, the difference between the sine and
the arc being of little account when the arc is so small) to the latitude
at the given point. In the case of the other planets, however, this pro
portion is modified by combination with another, namely : as the last
variable hypothenuse (cala karna), which is the line drawn from the
earth to the finally determined place of the planet, or its true distance,
is to radius, its mean distance, so is its apparent latitude at the mean
distance to its apparent latitude at its true distance. That is, with
                     E : sin nod. dist. : : extreme lat. : actual lat. at dist. R
combining var. hyp :            R        : : lat. at dist. R : lat. at true dist.
we have        var. hyp : sin nod. dist. : : extreme lat. : actual lat. at true dist.
which, turned into an equation, is the rule in the latter half of v. 57.
   The latitude, as thus found, is measured, of course, upon a secondary
to the ecliptic. By the rule in verse 58, however, it is treated as if
measured upon a circle of declination, and is, without modification,
added to or subtracted from the declination, according as the direction
of the two is the same or different. The commentary takes note of this
error, but explains it, as in other similar cases, as being, "for fear of
giving men trouble, and on account of the very slight inaccuracy, over
looked by the blessed Sun, moved with compassion."
   We present in the annexed table the results of the processes for calcu
lating the latitude, the declination, and the true declination as affected
by latitude, of all the planets, at the time for which their longitude has
already been found. The declination is calculated by the rule in verse
28 of this chapter, the precession at the given time being, as found
under verses 9-12 of the next chapter, 20° 24' 39". Upon the line for
the sun in the table are given the results of the process for calculating
his declination, the equinox itself being accounted as a " node" : it is, in
fact, styled, in modern Hindu astronomy, kr&ntip&ta, " node of declina
tion," although that term docs not occur in this treatise.
Results of the Process for finding the Latitude and Declination of the
                                     Planets.
   Planet        Longitude           do.      Distance     Sine.                          Corrected
                                                                   Latitude. Declinatioa Declination,
                 of Node.         corrected. from Node.
             •    0   r      IF   •   •    >   H   *   '           .   ,      •    t      •     •
             o 20 24 38                        9 8 4o      33Q7               23 4i S
                                                           2754    3 36 N      4 56 N 8 32 N
 Mercury,    o 20 4o 4 1 O 22 43 3 24 14                   3r34    2 4N.      23 10 S. 21 6 S.
 Venus,      I 29 39 22 i 29 16                8 22 34     3409    I 21 S.    20 27 S. 21 48 S.
 Mars,       r 10 3 5 2 i3 4?                  4 4 58      2816 i 4N.         i4 5a S. [3 48 *.
 Jupiter,    i 19 4o 5 a 22 45                 o n 26       682 o i5N.        21 42 N. 21 57 N.
 Saturn,     3 10 20 45 3 i4 38                o 16 24      970 o 37 N.       14 4o N i5 17 N.

   We are now able to compare the Hindu determinations of the true
places and motions of the planets with their actual positions and motions,
ii. 59.]                 Translation and Notes.                           87
as obtained by modern science. The comparison is made in the annexed
table. As the longitudes given by the Surya-Siddhanta contain a con
stant error of 2° 20', owing to the incorrect rate of precession adopted
by the treatise, and the false position thence assigned to the equinox, we
give, under the head of longitude, the distance of .each planet both from
the Hindu equinox, and from the true vernal equinox of Jan. 1, 1860.
The Hindu daily motions are reduced from longitude to right ascension
by the rule given in the next following verse (v. 59). The modern data
are taken from the American Nautical Almanac.
True Places and Motions of the Planets, Jan. 1st, 1860, midnight, at
  Washington, according to the Surya-Siddh&nta and to Modern Science.
                True Longilu de.                            Daily Motion
           Surya Siddhanta :              Declination.   in Right Ascension.
   Planet.
            from      from Moderns. Surya- Moderns. Surya- Moderns.
          Hindu eq. true eq.          Siddhanta         Siddhanta.
                                                  0 i
 Sun,      278 4o 276 20 280 5 23 4i S. »3 58. + 66 2 + 66 18
 Moon,       8 4       5 44      7 a?   8 32 N. 6 56 N. +683 5o +655 1 4
 Mercury, a55 16 252 56 25? 25 21 68. 20 42 §. + 3i i3 + 54 39
 Venus,    3o5 o 3o2 4o 3o3 25 21 48 S. 20 58 S. + 7a 69 + 78 6
 Murs,     219 10 216 5o 221 33 i3 48 S. i4 238. + 3i 58 + 36 19
 Jupiter,  n4 36 112 16 in 34 21 67 N. 22 I N. - 8 21 - 8 17
 Saturn,   141 27 i39 7 145 3a i5 17 N. i4 i5N. - 3 3 - 2 29
  The proper subject of the second chapter, the determination of the
true places, of the planets, being thus brought tQ a close, we should ez-
pect to see the chapter concluded herd, and the other matters which it
contains put off to that which follows, in which they would seem more
properly to belong. %« tre*ti«i hoover, is n^wfeere 4i»tingvjsh«d: fcr
its'orderly and consistent arrangement.
  .59. Multiply the daily, jjiptiga of a planet by the iiw of
rising of th<j sign in winch it, Ji, afcd divide ty eiebteen, 'fcuii-
dred ; the quotient add to, or subtraQt from, ths »umoer o,f respi
rations in a revolution: the result is the number of respirations
in the day and night of that planet.
   In the first half of this verse is taught the method of finding the in
crement or decrement of right ascension corresponding to the increment
or decrement of longitude made by any planet during one day. For th$
"time of rising" (udayapr&n&s, or, more commonly, uday&savas, liter*
ally "respirations of rising") of the different signs, or the time in respi
rations (see i. 11), occupied by the successive signs of the ecliptic iji
passing the meridian—or, at the equator, in rising above the horizon—-
see verses 42-44 of the next chapter. The statement upon which the
rule is founded is as follows: if the given sign, .containing 1800' of arc
(each minute of arc corresponding, as remarked above, under i. 11-J2J
t<j a respiration of sidereal time), occupies the stated number of respira
tions in passing the meridian, what number of respirations will be oceij*
pied by the arc traversed by the planet on a given day ? The result
gives the amount by which the day of each, planet, reckoned in the




                                                                               /
88                          S&rya-Siddhdnta,                       [ii. 59-

manner of this Siddhanta, or from transit to transit across the inferior
meridian, differs from a sidereal day : the difference is additive when the
motion of the planet is direct; subtractive, when this is retrograde.
   Thus, to find the length of the sun's day, or the interval between two
successive apparent transits, at the time for which his true longitude and
rate of motion have already been ascertained. The sun's longitude, as
corrected by the precession, is 9s 8° 40' ; he is accordingly in the tenth
sign, of which the time of rising (uday&savat), or the equivalent in right
ascension, is 1935P. His rate of daily motion in longitude is 61' 26".
Hence the proportion
                       1800' : I935P : : 61' 26" : 66P.r>4
shows that his day differs from the true sidereal day by 11V Oi>.04. As
his motion is direct, the difference is additive : the length of the appar
ent day is therefore 60" llv OP.04, which is equivalent to 24h Om 27S.5,
mean solar time. According to the Nautical Almanac, it is 24h Om 28s.6.
By a similar process, the length of Jupiter's day at the same time is
found to be 59n 58V 4P, or 23h 55m 30«.8 ; by the Nautical Almanac, it
is 23h 55m 30«.
   60. Calculate the sine and versed sine of declination: then
radius, diminished by the versed-sine, is the day-radius : it is
either south or north.
  The quantities made use of, and the processes prescribed, in this and
the following verses, may be explained and illustrated by means of the
annexed figure (Fig. 8).
   Let the circle ZSZ'N represent the meridian of a given place, C
                        p. g                      being the centre, the
                                                  place of the observer,
                                                  S N the section of the
                                                  planepf hishorizon—
                                                  S beingthe south, and
                                                  N the north point—Z
                                                  and Z' the zenith and
                                                  its opposite point,
                                                  the nadir, P and P
                                                  the north and south
                                                  poles, and E and E'
                                                  the points on the me
                                                  ridian cut by the
                                                  equator. Let E D be
                                                  the declination of a
                                                  planet atagiven time;
                                                  then D D' will be the
                                                  diameter of the circle
                                                  of diurnal revolution
                                                  described by the
                                                  planet, and BD the
                                                  radius of that circle :
                                                  B D is the line which
in verse 60 is called the "day-radius." Draw DF perpendicular to EC :
ii. 63.]                  Translation and Notes.                            89

then it is evident that B D is equal to E C diminished by E F, which is
the versed sine of E D, the declination.
   For " radius " we have hitherto had only the term trijy& (or its equiv
alents, trijiva, tribhajivd, tribhajy&, tribhamaurvik&), literally " the sine
of three signs," that is, of 90°. That term, however, is applicable only
to the radius of a great circle, or to tabular radius. In this verse,
accordingly, we have for "day-radius" the word dinavy&sadala, "half-
diameter of the day ;" and other expressions synonymous with this are
found used instead of it in other passages. A more frequent name for
the same quantity in modern Hindu astronomy is dyujy&, " day-sine :"
this, although employed by the commentary, is not found anywhere in
our text.
   It is a matter for surprise that we do not find the day-radius declared
equal simply to the cosine (kotijy&) of declination.
   In illustration of the rule, it will be sufficient to find the radius of the
diurnal circle described by the sun at the time for which his place has
been determined. His declination, Erf (Fig. 8) was found to be 23° 41' :
of this the versed sine, EF, is, by the table given above (ii. 22-27),
290': the difference between this and radius, EC, or 3438, is 3148',
which is the value of OF or b d, the day-radius. The declination in
this case being south, the day-radius is also south of the equator.
   61. Multiply the sine of declination by the equinoctial shadow,
and divide by twelve ; the result is the earth-sine (kshitijyd) •
this, multiplied by radius and divided by the day-radius, gives
the sine of the ascensional difference (cara): the number of
respirations due to the ascensional difference
   62. Is shown by the corresponding arc. Add these to, and
subtract them from, the fourth part of the corresponding day
and night, and the sum and remainder are, when declination is
north, the half-day and half-night;
   63. When declination is south, the reverse ; these, multiplied
by two, are the day and the night. The day and the night of
the asterisms (Ma) may be found in like manner, by means of
their declination, increased or diminished by their latitude.
   We were taught in verse 59 how to find the length of the entire day
of a planet at any given time ; this passage gives us the method of
 ascertaining the length of its day and of its night, or of that part of the
day during which the planet is above, and that during which it is below,
the horizon.
. In order to this, it is necessary to ascertain, for the planet in question,
its ascensional difference (cara), or the difference between its right and
oblique ascension, the amount of which varies with the declination of
the planet and the latitude of the observer. The method of doing this
is stated in verse 61 : it may be explained by means of the last figure
(Fig. 8). First, the value of the line AB, which is called the "earth-
sine" (kshitijy&), is found, by comparing the two triangles ABC and
CHE, which are similar, since the angles A C B and C E H are each
equal to the latitude of the observer. The triangle C H E is represented
                            12
90                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [ii. 63-
here by a triangle of which a gnomon of twelve digits is the perpen
dicular, and its equinoctial shadow, cast when the sun is in the equator
and on the meridian (see the next chapter, verse 7, etc.), is the base.
Hence the proportion EH:HC::BC:ABis equivalent—since B C
equals D F, the sine of declination—to gnom. : eq. shad. : : sin decl. :
earth-sine. But the arc of which A B is sine is the same part of the
circle of diurnal revolution as the ascensional difference is of the equa
tor ; hence the reduction of A B to the dimensions of a great circle, by
the proportion BD:AB::CE:CG, gives the value of C G, the sine
of the ascensional difference. The corresponding arc is the measure in
time of the amount by which the part of the diurnal circle intercepted
between the meridian and the horizon differs from a quadrant, or by
which the time between sun-rise or sun-set and noon or midnight differs
from a quarter of the day.
   In illustration of the process, we will calculate the respective length
of the sun's day and night at Washington at the time for which our
previous calculations have been made.
   The latitude of Washington being 38° 54', the length of the equi
noctial shadow cast there by a gnomon twelve digits long is found, by
the rule given below (iii. 17), to be 9d.68. The sine, d F or b C, of the
sun's declination at the given time, 23" 41' S, is 1380'. Hence the
proportion
                           1a:9.66:: i38o: ni3
gives us the value of the earth-sine, ab, as 1113'. This is reduced to
the dimensions of a great circle by the proportion
                           3i48:3438::ni3: 1216
The value of Gg, the sine of ascensional difference, is therefore 1216' :
the corresponding arc is 20° 44', or 1244', which, as a minute of arc
equals a respiration of time, is equivalent to 3n 27V 2P. The total
length of the day was found above (under v. 59) to be 60n llv; in
crease and diminish the quarter of this by the ascensional difference,
and double the sum and remainder, and the length of the night is found
to be 37n Ov IP, and that of the day 23n 10V 5?, which are equivalent
respectively to 14h 45™ 38S.6 and 9" 14m 489.9, mean solar time.
   Of course, the respective parts of a sidereal day during which each
of the lunar mansions, as represented by its principal star, will remain
above and below the horizon of a given latitude, may be found in the
same manner, if the declination of the star is known ; and this is stated
in the chapter (ch. viii) which treats of the asterisms.
    Why A B is called ieshitijy& is not easy to see. One is tempted
to understand the term as meaning rather "sine of situation" than
 "earth-sine," the original signification of kshiti being "abode, resi
dence": it might then indicate a sine which, for a given declination,
varies with the situation of the observer. But that kshiti in this com
pound is to be taken in its other acceptation, of " earth," is at least
strongly indicated by the other and more usual name of the sine in
question, kujy&,, which is used by the commentary, although not in the
text, and which can only mean " earth-sine." The word cara, used to
denote the ascensional difference, means simply " variable " ; we have
elsewhere carakhanda, earadala, u variable portion " ; that is to say, the
ii. 65.]                 Translation and Notes.                          91
constantly varying amount by which the apparent day and night differ
from the equatorial day and night of one half the whole day each. The
gnomon, the equinoctial shadow, etc., are treated of in the next chapter.
  64. The portion (bhoga) of an asterism (bha) is eight hundred
minutes; of a lunar day (tithi), in like manner, seven hundred
and twenty. If the longitude of a planet, in minutes, be divided
by the portion of an asterism, the result is its position in aster-
isms : by means of the daily motion are found the days, etc.
    The ecliptic is divided (see ch. viii) into 27 lunar mansions or aster-
isms, of equal amount; hence the portion of the ecliptic occupied by
each asterism is 13° 20', or 800'. In order to find, accordingly, in
which asterism, at a given time, the moon or any other of the planets
is, we have only to reduce its longitude, not corrected by the precession,
to minutes, and divide by 800 : the quotient is the number of asterisms
traversed, and the remainder the part traversed of the asterism in which
the planet is. The last clause of the verse is very elliptical and obscure ;
according to the commentary, it is to be understood thus : divide by the
planet's true daily motion the part past and the part to come of the
current asterism, and the quotients are the days and fractions of a day
which the planet has passed, and is to pass, in that asterism. This in
terpretation is supported by the analogy of the following verses, and i»
doubtless correct.
    The true longitude of the moon was found above (under v. 39) to be
11» 17° 39', or 20,859'. Dividing by 800, we find that, at the given
time, the moon is in the 27th, or last, asterism, named Revati, of which
it has traversed 59', and has 741' still to pass over. Its daily motion
being 737', it has spent 28V 4P, and has yet to continue ld On 19' 3P, in
the asterism.
    The latter part of this process proceeds upon the assumption that the
planet's rate of motion remains the same during its whole continuance
in the asterism. A similar assumption, it will be noticed, is made in all
the processes from verse 59 onward ; its inaccuracy is greatest, of course,
where the moon's motion is concerned.
    Respecting the lunar day (tithi) see below, under verse 66.
  65. From the number of minutes in the sum of the longitudes
of the sun and moon are found the yogas, by dividing that sum
by the portion (bhoga) of an asterism. Multiply the minutes
past and to come of the current yoga by sixty, and divide bj
the sum of the daily motions of the two planets: the result 13
the time in nadis.
   "What the yoga is, is evident from this rule for finding it ; it is the
period, of variable length, during which the joint motion in longitude of
the sun and moon amounts to 13° 20', the portion of a lunar mansion.
According to Colebrooke (As. Res., ix. 365 ; Essays, ii. 362, 363), the
use of the yogas is chiefly astrological ; the occurrence of certain mova
ble festivals is, however, also regulated by them, and they are so fre
quently employed that every Hindu almanac contains a column speci
92                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                           [ii. 65-
fying the yoga for each .day, with the time of its termination. The
names of the twenty-seven yogas are as follows :
     1. Vishkambha.         10. Ganda.               19. Parigha.
     2. Priti.              i1. Vrddhi.              20. Qiva.
     3. Ayushmant           12. Dhruva.              21. Siddha.
     4. Saubhagya.          i3. Vyaghata.            22. Sadhya.
     5. 5°bhana.            i4. Harsharia.           23. (,'uliha.
     6. Atiganda.           i5. Vajra.               24. fukla.
     7. Sukarman.           16. Siddhi.              2$. Brahman.
     8. Dhrti.              17. Vyatipata.           26. Indra.
     9. gula.               1 8. Variyaa.            27. Vaidhrti.
   There is also in use in India (see Colebrooke, as above) another
system of yogas, twenty-eight in number, having for the most part
different names from these, and governed by other rules in their succes
sion. Of this system the Surya-Siddhanta presents no trace.
   We will find the time in yogas corresponding to that for which the
previous calculations have been made.
   The longitude of the moon at that time is 11s 17° 39', that of the
sun is 8s 18° 15'; their sum is 8» 5° 54', or 14,754'. Dividing by 800,
we find that eighteen yogas of the series are past, and that the current
one is the nineteenth, Parigha, of which 354' are past, and 446' to
come. To ascertain the time at which the current yoga began and that
at which it is to end, we divide these parts respectively by 798'^, the
sum of the daily motions of the sun and moon at the given time, and
multiply by 60 to reduce the results to nadis : and we find that Parigha
began 26n 36V before, and will end 33" 30V 4P after the given time.
   The name yoga, by which this astrological period is called, is applied
to it, apparently, as designating the period during which the "sum"
(yoga) of the increments in longitude of the sun and moon amounts to a
given quantity. It seems an entirely arbitrary device of the astrologers,
being neither a natural period nor a subdivision of one, not being of
any use that we can discover in determining the relative position, or
aspect, of the two planets with which it deals, nor having any assignable
relation to the asterisms, with which it is attempted to be brought into
connection. Were there thirty yogas, instead of twenty-seven, the
period would seem an artificial counterpart to the lunar day, which is
the subject of the next verse; being derived from the sum, as the other
from the difference, of the longitudes of the sun and moon.
  66. From the number of minutes in the longitude of the moon
diminished by that of the sun are found the lunar days (tithi),
by dividing the difference by the portion (bhoga) of a lunar day.
Multiply the minutes past and to come of the current lunar day
by sixty, and divide by the difference of the daily motions of
the two planets : the result is the time in nadis.
   The tithi, or lunar day, is (see i. 13) one thirtieth of a lunar month,
or of the time during which the moon gains in longitude upon the sun
a whole revolution, or 360° : it is, therefore, the period during which
the difference of the increment of longitude of the two planets amounts
ii. 69.]                 Translation and Notes.                        93

to 12°, or 720', which arc, as stated in verse 64, is its portion (bhoga).
To find the current lunar day, we divide by this amount the whole ex
cess of the longitude of the moon over that of the sun at the given
time ; and to find the part past and to come of the current day, we con
vert longitude into time in a manner analogous to that employed in the
case of the yoga.
   Thus, to find the date in lunar time of the midnight preceding the
first of January, 1860, we first deduct the longitude of the sun from that
of the moon; the remainder is 2s 29° 24', or 5364': dividing by 720,
it appears that the current lunar day is the eighth, and that 324' of its
portion are traversed, leaving 396' to be traversed. Multiplying these
numbers respectively by 60, and dividing by 675' 38", the difference of
the daily motions at the time, we find that 28n 46V 2P have passed since
the beginning of the lunar day, and that it still has 35" 10V 8P to run.
   The lunar days have, for the most part, no distinctive names, but
those of each half month (paksha — see above, under i. 48-51) are
called first, second, third, fourth, etc., up to fourteenth. The last, or
fifteenth, of each half has, however, a special appellation : that which
concludes the first, the light half, ending at the moment of opposition,
is called p&urnam&si, p&rnim&, purnamd, "day of full moon;" that
which closes the month, and ends with the conjunction of the two
planets, is styled am&v&sy&, " the day of dwelling together."
   Each lunar day is farther divided into two halves, called Icarana, as
appears from the next following passage.
  67. The fixed (dhruva) karanas, namely qakuni, ndga, catush-
pada the third, and kinstughna, are counted from the latter half
of the fourteenth day of the dark half-month.
  68. After these, the karanas called movable (cara), namely
bava, etc., seven of them : each of these karanas occurs eight
times in a month.
  69. Half the portion (bhoga) of a lunar day is established as
that of the karanas ....
  Of the eleven karanas, four occur only once in the lunar month,
while the other seven are repeated each of them eight times to fill out
the remainder of the month. Their names, and the numbers of the
half lunar days to which each is applied, are presented below :
    I. Kinstuglma.   1st.
    i. Bava.         and, 9th, i6th, a3rd, 3oth, 37th, 44th, 5rst.
    3. BiUava.       3rd, joth, 17th, a4th, 3ist, 38th, 45th, 5and.
    4. Kaulava.      4th, nth, i8th, a5th, 3and, 39th, 46th, 53rd.
    5. T4itila.      5th, nth, 19*, a6th, 33rd, 4oth, 47th, 54th.
    6. Gara.         6th, i3th, aoth, a7th, 34th, 4ist, 48th, 55th.
    7. Ba^ij.        7th, i4th, aist, a8th, 35th, 4and, 49th, 56th.
    8. Vishti.       8th, i5th, aand, a9th, 36th, 43rd, 5oth, 57th.
    9. Qakiini.      58th.
   10. Naga.         59th.
   11. Catushpada.   6oth.
94:                            Stirya-Siddhdnta,                             [ii. 69-
   Most of these names are very obscure : the last three mean "hawk,"
" serpent," and " quadruped." Karana itself is, by derivation, " factor,
cause :" in what sense it is applied to denote these divisions of the
month, we do not know. Nor have we found anywhere an explanation
of the value and use of the karanas in Hindu astronomy or astrology.
   The time which we have had in view in our other calculations being,
as is shown under the preceding passage, in the first half of the eighth
lunar day, is, of course, in the fifteenth karana, which is named Vishti.
   The remaining half-verse is simply a winding-up of the chapter.
   69       Thus has been declared the corrected (sphuta) mo
tion of the sun and the other planets.
   The following chapter is styled the "chapter of the three inquiries"
(triprafnadhik&ra). According to the commentary, this means that it
is intended by the teacher as a reply to his pupil's inquiries respecting
the three subjects of direction (<%), place (defa), and time (k&la).



                              CHAPTER III.
                    OF DIRECTION, PLACE, AND TIME.
COOTENTS:—1-6, construction of the dial, and description of its parts; 7, the
  measure of amplitude ; 8, of the gnomon, hypothenuse, and shadow, any two
  being given, to find the third; 9-12, precession of the equinoxes; 12-13, the
  equinoctial shadow; 13-14, to find, from the equinoctial shadow, the latitude and
  co-latitude; 14-17, the sun's declination being known, to find, from a given
  shadow at noon, hia zenith-distance, the latitude, and its sine and cosine ; 17, lati
  tude being given, to find the equinoctial shadow; 17-20, to find, from the lati
  tude and the sun's zenith-distance at noon, his declination and his true and mean
  longitude ; 20-22, latitude and declination being given, to find the noon-shadow
  and hypothenuse ; 22-23, from the sun's declination and the equinoctial shadow,
  to find the measure of amplitude ; 23-25, to find, from the equinoctial shadow
  and the measure of amplitude at any given time, the base of the shadow ; 25-27,
  to find the hypothenuse of the shadow when the sun is upon the prime vertical ;
  27-28, the sun's declination and the latitude being given, to find the sine and the
  measure of amplitude ; 28-33, to find the sines of the altitude and zenith-distance
  of the sun, when upon the south-east and south-west vertical circles ; 33-34, to
  find the corresponding shadow and hypothenuse ; 34-36, the sun's ascensional dif
  ference and the hour-angle being given, to find the sines of his altitude and zenith-
  distance, and the corresponding shadow and hypothenuse ; 37-39, to find, by a
  contrary process, from the shadow of a given time, the sun's altitude and zenith-
   distance, and the hour-angle ; 40-41, the latitude and the sun's amplitude being
  known, to find his declination and true longitude; 41-42, to draw the path de
   scribed by the extremity of the shadow; 42-45, to find the arcs of right and
   oblique ascension corresponding to the several signs of the ecliptic; 46-48, the
   BUD'S longitude and the time being known, to find the point of the ecliptic which
  is upon the horizon ; 49, the sun's longitude and the hour-angle being known, to
  find the point of the ecliptic which is upon the meridian ; 50-51, determination
  of time by means of these data.
Hi. 5.]                 Translation and Notes.                         95
   1. On a stony surface, made water-level, or upon hard plaster,
made level, there draw an even circle, of a radius equal to any
required number of the digits (angula) of the gnomon (ganku).
   2. At its centre set up the gnomon, of twelve digits of the
measure fixed upon ; and where the extremity of its shadow
touches the circle in the former and after parts of the day,
   3. There fixing two points upon the circle, and calling them
the forenoon and afternoon points, draw midway between them,
by means of a fish-figure (timi), a north and south line.
   4. Midway between the north and south directions draw, by
a fish-figure, an east and west line : and in like manner also, by
fish-figures (matsya) between the four cardinal directions, draw
the intermediate directions.
   5. Draw a circumscribing square, by means of the lines going
out from the centre ; by the digits of its base-line (bhujasutra)
projected upon that is any given shadow reckoned.
   In this passage is described the method of construction of the Hindu
dial, if that can properly be called a dial which is without hour-lines,
and does not give the time by simple inspection. It is, as will be at
once remarked, a horizontal dial of the simplest character, with a verti
cal gnomon. This gnomon, whatever may be the length chosen for it,
is regarded as divided into twelve equal parts called digits (angula,
* finger"). The ordinary digit is one twelfth of a span (vitasti), or one
twenty-fourth of a cubit (hasta) : if made according to this measure,
then, the gnomon would be about nine inches long. Doubtless the first
gnomons were of such a length, and the rules of the gnomonic science
were constructed accordingly, "twelve" and "the gnomon" being used,
as they are used everywhere in this treatise, as convertible terms : thus
twelve digits became the unvarying conventional length of the staff, and
all measurements of the shadow and its hypothenuse were made to cor
respond. How the digit was subdivided, we have nowhere any hint.
In determining the directions, the same method was employed which is
still in use ; namely, that of marking the points at which the extremity
 of the shadow, before and after noon, crosses a circle described about
 the base of the gnomon ; these points being, if we suppose the sun's
 declination to have remained the same during the interval, at an equal
 distance upon either side from the meridian line. In order to bisect the
 line joining these points by another at right angles to it, which will be
 the meridian, the Hindus draw the figure which is called here the "fish"
 (matsya or timi) ; that is to say, from the two extremities of the line in
 question as centres, and with a radius equal to the line itself, arcs of
 circles are described, cutting one another in two points. The lenticular
 figure formed by the two arcs is the "fish;" through the points of
 intersection, which are called (in the commentary) the "mouth" and
" tail," a line is drawn, which is the one required. The meridian being
 thus determined, the east and west line, and those for the intermediate
 points of directions, are laid down from it, by a repetition of the same
 process. A square (caturasra, "having four corners") is then farther
96                           S&rya-Siddhdnta,                          [iii. 5-

described about the general centre, or about a circle drawn about that
centre, the eastern and western sides of which are divided into digits ;
its use is, to aid in ascertaining the "base" (bhuja) of any given shadow,
which is the value of the latter when projected upon a north and south
line (see below, vv. 23-25) ; the square is drawn, as explained by the
commentary, in order to insure the correctness of the projection, by a
line strictly parallel to the east and west line.
   The figure (Fig. 9) given below, under verse 7, will illustrate the form
of the Hindu dial, as described in this passage.
   The term used for " gnomon" is fanku, which means simply " staff."
For the shadow, we have the common word ch&ya, " shadow," and also,
in many places, prabh& and bh&, which properly signify the very oppo
site of shadow, namely " light, radiance :" it is difficult to see how they
should come to be used in this sense ; so far as we are aware, they are
applied to no other shadow than that of the gnomon.
   6. The east and west line is called the prime vertical (sama-
mandala)- it is likewise denominated the east and west hour
circle (unmandala) and the equinoctial circle (vishuvanmandalu).
   The line drawn east and west through the base of the gnomon may
 be regarded as the line of common intersection at that point of three
 great circles, as being a diameter to each of the three, and as thus enti
tled to represent them all. These circles are the ones which in the last
figure (Fig. 8, p. 88) are shown projected in their diameters Z Z', P P',
and E E' ; the centre C, in which the diameters intersect, is itself the
projection of the line in question here. Z Z' represents the prime verti
cal, which is styled samamandala, literally " even circle :" P P' is the
hour circle, or circle of declination, which passes through the east and
west points of the observer's horizon ; it is called unmandala, " up-cir-
cle "—that is to say, the circle which in the oblique sphere is elevated ;
EE' finally, the equator, has the name of vishuvanmandala, or vishuvad-
vrtta, "circle of the equinoxes;" the equinoctial points themselves
being denominated vishuvat, or vishuva, which may be rendered " point
of equal separation." The same line of the dial might be regarded as
the representative in like manner of a fourth circle, that of the horizon
(kshitija), projected, in the figure, in S N : hence the commentary adds
it also to the other three ; it is omitted in the text, perhaps, because it is
represented by the whole circle drawn about the base of the gnomon,
and not by this diameter alone.
   The specifications of this verse, especially of the latter half of it, are
of little practical importance in the treatise, for there hardly arises a
case, in any of its calculations, in which the east and west axis of the
dial comes to be taken as standing for these circles, or any one of them.
In drawing the base (bhuja) of the shadow, indeed, it does represent the
plane of the prime vertical (see below, under vv. 23-25) ; but this is
not distinctly stated, and the name of the prime vertical (samamandala)
occurs in only one other passage (below, v. 26) : the east and west hour-
circle (unmandala) is nowhere referred to again : and the equator, as
will be seen under the next verse, is properly represented on the dial,
not by its east and west axis, but by the line of the equinoctial shadow.
iii. 7.]                 Translation and Notes.                        97
  7. Draw likewise an east and west line through the extremity
of the equinoctial shadow (vishuvadbhd) ; the interval between
any given shadow and the line of the equinoctial shadow is de
nominated the measure of amplitude (agrti).
   The equinoctial shadow is denned in a subsequent passage (vv. 12,
13) ; it is, as we have already had occasion to notice (under ii. 61-63),
the shadow cast at mid-day when the sun is at either equinox—that is
to say, when he is in the plane of the equator. Now as the equator is
a circle of diurnal revolution, the line of intersection of its plane with
that of the horizon will be an east and west line ; and since it is also a
great circle, that line will pass through the centre, the place of the ob
server : if, therefore, we draw through the extremity of the equinoctial
shadow a line parallel to the east and west axis of the dial, it will repre
sent the intersection with the dial of an equinoctial plane passing
through the top of the gnomon, and in it will terminate the lines drawn
through that point from any point in the plane of the equator ; and
hence, it will also coincide with the path of the extremity of the shadow
on the day of the equinox. Thus, let the following figure (Fig. 9) rep
resent the plane of the dial, N S and E W being its two axes, and b the
base of the gnomon : and let the shadow cast at noon when the sun is
upon the equator be,
in a given latitude,                            =• "
be: then be is the
equinoctial shadow,
and QQ', drawn
through e and paral
lel to EW, is the
path of -the equinoc
tial shadow, being
the line in which a
ray of the sun, from
any point in the plane
of the equator, pass
ing through the top
of the gnomon, will
meet the face of the
dial. In the figure
as given, the circle
is supposed to be described about the base of the gnomon with a radius
of forty digits, and the graduation of the eastern and western sides of
the circumscribing square, used in measuring the base (bhuja) of the
shadow, is indicated : the length given to the equinoctial shadow corre
sponds to that which it has in the latitude of Washington.
   It is not, however, on account of the coincidence of Q Q' with the
path of the equinoctial shadow that it is directed to be permanently
drawn upon the dial-face : its use is to determine for any given shadow
its agr&, or measure of amplitude. Thus, let b d, b d', bk, bl, bm, be
shadows cast by the gnomon, under various conditions of time and dec
lination : then the distance from the extremity of each of them to the
                             13
98                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                           [iii. 7-

line of the equinoctial shadow, or de, d' e, ke', le", me'" respectively, is
denominated the agr& of that shadow or of that time.
   The term agr& we have translated " measure of amplitude," because
it does in fact represent the sine of the sun's amplitude—understanding
by "amplitude" the distance of the sun at rising or setting from the
cast or west point of the horizon— varying with the hypothenuse of the
shadow, and always mamtaining to that hypothenuse the fixed ratio of
the sine of amplitude to radius. That this is so, is assumed by the text
in its treatment of the agrd, but is nowhere distinctly stated, nor is the
 commentator at the pains of demonstrating the principle. Since, how
 ever, it is not an immediately obvious one, we will take the liberty of
giving the proof of it.
    In the annexed figure (Fig. 10) let C represent the top of the gnomon,
and let K be any given position of the sun in the heavens. From K
draw KB' at right angles to the plane of the prime vertical, meeting that
                                      . 10.




plane in B', and let the point of its intersection with the plane of the
equator be in E'. Join KG, E'C, and B'C. Then KC is radius, and
E' K is equal to the sine of the sun's amplitude : for if, in the sun's
daily revolution, the point K is brought to the horizon, E' B' will disap
pear, K E' C will become a right angle, K C E' will be the amplitude,
and E' K its sine ; but, with a given declination, the value of E' K re
mains always the same, since it is a line drawn in a constant direction
between two parallel planes, that of the circle of declination and that of
the equator. Now conceive the three lines intersecting in C to be pro
duced until they meet the plane of the dial in b', et, and k respectively ;
these three points will be in the same straight line, being in the line of
intersection with the horizon of the plane K B' C produced, and this
line, b' k, will be at right angles to B'6', since it is the line of intersec
tion of two planes, each of which is at right angles to the plane of the
prime vertical, in which B'6' lies. KB' and k b' are therefore parallel,
and the triangles C E' K and C ef k are similar, and e1 k : C k : : E' K : C K.
But C k is the hypothenuse of the shadow at the given time, and ef k is
the agra, or measure of amplitude, since e', by what was said above, is
in the line of the equinoctial shadow ; therefore meas. ampl. : hyp.
shad. : : sin ampl. : R. Hence, if the declination and the latitude, which
together determine the sine of amplitude, be given, the measure of
amplitude will vary with the hypothenuse of the shadow, and the
iii. 10.]                Translation and Notes.                        99
measure of amplitude of any given shadow will be to that of any other,
as the hypothenuse of the former to that of the latter.
   The lettering of the above figure is made to correspond, as nearly as
may be, with that of the one preceding, and also with that of the one
given later, under verses 13 and 14, in either of which the relations of
the problem may be farther examined.
   There are other methods of proving the constancy of the ratio borne
by the measure of amplitude to the hypothenuse of the shadow, but we
have chosen to give the one which seemed to us most likely to be that
by which the Hindus themselves deduced it. Our demonstration is in
one respect only liable to objection as representing a Hindu process—
it is founded, namely, upon the comparison of oblique-angled triangles,
which elsewhere in this treatise are hardly employed at all. Still,
although the Hindus had no methods of solving problems excepting
in right-angled trigonometry, it is hardly to be supposed that they re
frained from deriving proportions from the similarity of oblique-angled
triangles. The principle in question admits of being proved by means
of right-angled triangles alone, but these would be situated in different
planes.
   Why the line on the dial which thus measures the sun's amplitude is
called the agr&, we have been unable thus far to discover. The word,
a feminine adjective (belonging, probably, to rekh&, "line," understood),
literally means " extreme, first, chief." Possibly it may be in some way
connected with the use of antya, "final, lowest," to designate the line
Eg or EG (Fig. 8, p. 88) : see below, under v. 35. The sine of ampli
tude itself, aC or AC (Fig. 8), is called below (vv. 27-30) agrajya.
  8. The square root of the sum of the squares of the gnomon
and shadow is the hypothenuse : if from the square of the latter
the square of the gnomon be subtracted, the square root of the
remainder is the shadow: the gnomon is found by the converse
process.
   This is simply an application of the familiar rule, that in a right-
angled triangle the square of the hypothenuse is equal to the sum of
the squares of the other two sides, to the triangle produced by the
gnomon as perpendicular, the shadow as base, and the hypothenuse of
the shadow, the line drawn from the top of the gnomon to the extrem
ity of the shadow, as hypothenuse.
   The subject next considered is that of the precession of the equinoxes.
   9. In an Age (yuga), the circle of the asterisms (bha) falls
back eastward thirty score of revolutions. Of the result ob
tained after multiplying the sum of days (dyugana) by this num
ber, and dividing by the number of natural days in an Age,
   10. Take the part which determines the sine, multiply it by
three, and divide by ten ; thus are found the degrees called those
of the precession (ayana). From the longitude of a planet as
corrected by these are to be calculated the declination, shadow,
ascensional difference (caradala), etc.
100                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [iii. 11-

   11. The circle, as thus corrected, accords with its observed
place at the solstice (ayana) and at either equinox ; it has moved
eastward, when the longitude of the sun, as obtained by calcu
lation, is less than that derived from the shadow,
   12. By the number of degrees of the difference ; then, turning
back, it has moved westward by the amount of difference, when
the calculated longitude is greater. . . .
   Nothing could well be more awkward and confused than this mode of
stating the important fact of the precession of the equinoxes, of de
scribing its method and rate, and of directing how its amount at any
time is to be found. The theory which the passage, in its present form,
is actually intended to put forth is as follows : the vernal equinox librates
westward and eastward from the fixed point, near J Piscium, assumed as
the commencement of the sidereal sphere—the limits of the libratory
movement being 27° in either direction from that point, and the time
of a complete revolution of libration being the six-hundredth part of
the period called the Great Age (see above, under i. 15-17), or 7200
years ; so that the annual rate of motion of the equinox is 54". We
will examine with some care the language in which this theory is con
veyed, as important results are believed to be deducible from it.
   The first half of verse 9 professes to teach the fundamental fact of the
motion in precession. The words bh&nnm cakram, which we have ren
dered " circle of the asterisms," i. e., the fixed zodiac, would admit of
being translated " circle of the signs," i. e., the movable zodiac, as
reckoned from the actual equinox, since bha is used in this treatise in
either sense. But our interpretation is shown to be the correct one by
the directions given in verses 11 and 12, which teach that when the sun's
calculated longitude—which is his distance from the initial point of the
fixed sphere—is less than that derived from the shadow by the process
to be taught below (vv. 17-19)—which is his distance from the equinox
—the circle has moved eastward, and the contrary : it is evident, then,
that the initial point of the sphere is regarded as the movable point,
and the equinox as the fixed one. Now this is no less strange than in
consistent with the usage of the rest of the treatise. Elsewhere £ Pis
cium is treated as the one established limit, from which all motion com
menced at the creation, and by reference to which all motion is reckoned,
while here it is made secondary to a point of which the position among
the stars is constantly shifting, and which hardly has higher value than
a node, as which the Hindu astronomy in general treats it (see p. 86).
The word used to express the motion (lambate) is the same with that
employed in a former passage (i. 25) to describe the eastward motion of
the planets, and derivatives of which (as lamba, lambana, etc.) are not
infrequent in the astronomical language ; it means literally to " lag, hang
back, fall behind :" here we have it farther combined with the prefix
pari, " about, round about," which seems plainly to add the idea of a
complete revolution in the retrograde direction indicated by it, and we
have translated the line accordingly. This verse, then, contains no hint
of a libratory movement, but rather the distinct statement of a contin
uous eastward revolution. It should be noticed farther, although the
iii. 12.]                   Translation and Notes.                           101
circumstance is one of less significance, that the form in which the
number of revolutions is stated, tri.nfatkrtyas, " thirty twenties," has no
parallel in the usage of this Siddhanta elsewhere.
    We may also mention in this connection that Bhaskara, the great
Hindu astronomer of the twelfth century, declares in his Siddhanta-
Qiromani (Goladh., vi. 17) that the revolutions of the equinox are given
by the Sftrya-Siddhanta as thirty in an Age (see Colebrooke, As. Res.,
xii. 209, etc.; Essays, ii. 374, etc., for a full discussion of this passage
and its bearings) ; thus not only ignoring the theory of libration, but
giving a very different number of revolutions from that presented by our
text. As regards this latter point, however, the change of a single letter
in the modern reading (substituting trinfatkrtvas, "thirty times," for
trinfatkrtyas, "thirty twenties") would make it accord with Bhaskara's
statement. We shall return again to this subject.
   The number of revolutions, of whatever kind they may be, being 600
in an Age, the position at any given time of the initial point of the
sphere with reference to the equinox is found by a proportion, as follows:
as the number of days in an Age is to the number of revolutions in the
same period, so is the given "sum of days" (see above, under i. 48-51)
to the revolutions and parts of a revolution accomplished down to the
given time. Thus, let us find, in illustration of the process, the amount
of precession on the first of January, 1860. Since the number of years
elapsed before the beginning of the present Iron Age (kali yufla) is di
visible by 7200, it is unnecessary to make our calculation from the com
mencement of the present order of things : we may take the sum of
days since the current Age began, which is (see above, under i. 53)
1,811,945. Hence the proportion
              1,577,917,82811 : 6oote» : : 1,81 1,945* : orev 248° 2' 8"_9
gives us the portion accomplished of the current revolution. Of this
we are now directed (v. 10) to take the part which determines the sine
(dos, or bhuja—for the origin and meaning of the phrase, see above,
under ii. 29, 30). This direction determines the character of the motion
as libratory. For a motion of 91°, 92°, 93°, etc., gives, by it, a preces
sion of 89°, 88°, 87°, etc. ; so that the movable point virtually returns
upon its own track, and, after moving 180°, has reverted to its starting-
place. So its farther motion, from 180° to 270°, gives a precession in
creasing from 0° to 90° in the opposite direction ; and this, again, is
reduced to 0° by the motion from 270° to 360°. It is as if the second
and third quadrants were folded over upon the first and fourth, so that
the movable point can never, in any quadrant of its motion, be more
than 90° distant from the fixed equinox. Thus, in the instance taken,
the bhuja of 248° 2' 8".9 is its supplement, or 68° 2' 8".9 ; the first
180° having only brought the movable point back to its original posi
tion, its present distance from that position is the excess over 180°
of the arc obtained as the result of the first process. But this distance
we are now farther directed to multiply by three and divide by ten :
this is equivalent to reducing it to the measure of an arc of 27°, instead
of 90°, as the quadrant of libration, since 3 : 10 : : 27 : 90. This being
done, we find the actual distance of the initial point of the sphere from
the equinox on the first of January, 1860, to be 20° 24' 38".67.



                                                                                   -•
102                         S&rya-Siddhanta,                           [iii. 12.
   The question now arises, in which direction is the precession, thus
ascertained, to be reckoned ? And here especially is brought to light
the awkwardness and insufficiency, and even the inconsistency, of the
process as taught in the text. Not only have we no rule given which
furnishes us the direction, along with the amount, of the processional
movement, but it would even be a fair and strictly legitimate deduction
from verse 9, that that movement is taking place at the present time in
an opposite direction from the actual one. We have already remarked
above that the last complete period of libratory revolution closed with
the close of the last Brazen Age, and the process of calculation has
shown that we are now in the third quarter of a new period, and in the
third quadrant of the current revolution. Therefore, if the revolution
is an eastward one, as taught in the text, only taking place upon a folded
circle, so as to be made libratory, the present position of the movable
point, £ Piscium, ought to be to the west of the equinox, instead of to
the east, as it actually is. It was probably on account of this unfortu
nate flaw in the process, that no rule with regard to the direction was
given, excepting the experimental one contained in verses 11 and 12,
which, moreover, is not properly supplementary to the preceding rules,
but rather an independent method of determining, from observation, both
the direction and the amount of the precession. In verse 12, it may be
remarked, in the word ckvrtya, " turning back," is found the only distinct
intimation to be discovered in the passage of the character of the motion
as libratory.
   We have already above (under ii. 28) hinted our suspicions that the
phenomenon of the precession was made no account of in the original
composition of the Surya-Siddhanta, and that the notice taken of it by
the treatise as it is at present is an afterthought : we will now proceed
to expose the grounds of those suspicions.
   It is, in the first place, upon record (see Colebrooke, As. Ees., xii. 215 ;
Essays, ii. 380, etc.) that some of the earliest Hindu astronomers were
ignorant of, or ignored, the periodical motion of the equinoxes ; Brahtna-
gupta himself is mentioned among those whose systems took no account
of it ; it is, then, not at all impossible that the Surya-Siddhanta, if an
ancient work, may originally have done the same. Among the positive
evidences to that effect, we would first direct attention to the significant
fact that, if the verses at the head of this note were expunged, there
would not be found, in the whole body of the treatise besides, a single
hint of the precession. Now it is not a little difficult to suppose that a
phenomenon of so much consequence as this, and which enters as an
element into so many astronomical processes, should, had it been borne
distinctly in mind in the framing of the treatise, have been hidden away
thus in a pair of verses, and unacknowledged elsewhere—no hint being
given, in connection with any of the processes taught, as to whether
the correction for precession is to be applied or not, and only the gen
eral directions contained in the latter half of verse 10, and ending with
an " etc.," being even here presented. It has much more the aspect of
an after-thought, a correction found necessary at a date subsequent to
the original composition, and therefore inserted, with ^rders to " apply
it wherever it is required." The place where the subject is introduced




"
iii. 12.]                Translation and Notes.                         103
looks the same way : as having to do with a revolution, as entering into
the calculation of mean longitudes, it should have found a place where
such matters are treated of, in the first chapter ; and even in the second
chapter, in connection with the rule for finding the declination, it would
have been better introduced than it is here. Again, in the twelfth
chapter, where the orbits of the heavenly bodies are given, in terms
 dependent upon their times of revolution, such an orbit is assigned to
 the asterisms (v. 88) as implies a revolution once in sixty years : it is,
 indeed, very difficult to see what can have been intended by such a revo
 lution as this; but if the doctrine respecting the revolution of the
 asterisms given in verse 9 of this chapter had been in the mind of the
 author of the twelfth chapter, he would hardly have added another and
 a conflicting statement respecting the same or a kindred phenomenon.
 It appears to us even to admit of question whether the adoption by the
 Hindus of the sidereal year as the .unit of time does not imply a failure
 to recognize the fact that the equinox was variable. We should expect,
 at any rate, that if, at the outset, the ever-increasing discordance be
 tween the solar and the sidereal year had been fully taken into account
 by them, they would have more thoroughly established and defined the
 relations of the two, and made the precession a more conspicuous feature
 of their general system than they appear to have done. In the con
 struction of their cosmical periods they have reckoned by sidereal years
 only, at the same time assuming (as, for instance, above, i. 13, 14) that
 the sidereal year is composed of the two ayanas, "progresses" of the
 sun from solstice to solstice. The supposition of an after-correction
 likewise seems to furnish the most satisfactory explanation of the form
 given to the theory of the precession. The system having been first
 constructed on the assumption of the equality of the tropical and side
 real years, when it began later to appear, too plainly to be disregarded,
 that the equinox had changed its place, the question was how to intro
  duce the new element. Now to assign to the equinox a complete revo
  lution would derange the whole system, acknowledging a different num
  ber of solar from sidereal years in the chronological periods ; if, however,
  a libratory motion were assumed, the equilibrium would be maintained,
  since what the solar year lost in one part of the revolution of libration
  it would gain in another, and so the tropical and sidereal years would
  coincide, in number and in limits, in each great period. The circum
  stance which determined the limit to be assigned to the libration we
  conceive to have been, as suggested by Bentley (Hind. Ast, p. 132), that
  the earliest recorded Hindu year had been made to begin when the sun
  entered the asterism Krttika, or was 26° 40' west of the point fixed
  upon as the commencement of the sidereal sphere for all time (see
  above, under i. 27), on which account it was desirable to make the arc
  of libration include the beginning of Krttika.
     Besides these considerations, drawn from the general history of the
  Hindu astronomy, and the position of the element of the precession in
  the system of the Surya-Siddhanta, we have still to urge the blind and
  incoherent, as well as unusual, form of statement of the phenomenon,
  as fully exposed above. There is nothing to compare with it in this
  respect in any other part of the treatise, and we are unwilling to believe
101                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                        fii. 12-
that in the original composition of the Siddhanta a clearer explanation,
and one more consistent in its method and language with those of the
treatise generally, would not have been found for the subject. We even
discover evidences of more than one revision of the passage. The first
half of verse 9 so distinctly teaches, if read independently of what follows
it, a complete revolution of the equinoxes, that, especially when taken in
connection with Bhaskara's statement, as cited above, it almost amounts
to proof that the theory put forth in the Surya-Siddhanta was at one
time that of a complete revolution. The same conclusion is not a little
strengthened, farther, by the impossibility of deducing from verse 9,
through the processes prescribed in the following verses, a true expres
sion for the direction of the movement at present : we can see no reason
why, if the whole passage came from the same hand, at the same time,
this difficulty should not have been avoided ; while it is readily explain
able upon the supposition that the libratory theory of verse 10 was
added as an amendment to the theory of verse 9, while at the same
time the language of the latter was left as nearly unaltered as possible.
    There seems, accordingly, sufficient ground for suspecting that in the
Sftrya-Siddhanta, as originally constituted, no account was taken of the
precession ; that its recognition is a later interpolation, and was made
at first in the form of a theory of complete revolution, being afterward
altered to its present shape. Whether the statement of Bhaskara truly
represents the earlier theory, as displayed in the Surya-Siddhanta of his
time, we must leave an undetermined question. The very slow rate
assigned by it to the movement of the equinox—only 9" a year—throws
a doubt upon the matter : but it must be borne in mind that, so far as
we can see, the actual amount of the precession since about A. D. 570
(see above, under i. 27) might by that first theory have been distributed
over the whole duration of the present Age, since B. C. 3102.
    In his own astronomy, Bhaskara teaches the complete revolution
of the equinoxes, giving the number of revolutions in an ^Eon (of
4,320,000,000 years) as 199,669 ; this makes the time of a single revo
lution to be 21,635.8073 years, and the yearly rate of precession
59".9007. It is not to be supposed that he considered himself to have
determined the rate with such exactness as would give precisely the odd
number of 199,669 revolutions to the ^Eon ; the number doubtless
stands in Sony relation which we do not at present comprehend to the
other elements of his astronomical system. Bhaskara's own commenta
tors, however, reject his theory, and hold to that of a libration, which
has been and is altogether the prevailing doctrine throughout India, and
seems to have made its way thence into the Arabian, and even into the
early European astronomy (see Colebrooke, as above).
    Bentley, it may be remarked here, altogether denies (Hind. Ask, p.
130, etc.) that the libration of the equinoxes is taught in the Surya-
Siddhanta, maintaining, with arrogant and unbecoming depreciation of
those who venture to hold a different opinion, that its theory is that of
a continuous revolution in an epicycle, of which the circumference is
equal to 108° of the zodiac. In truth, however, Bentley's own theory
derives no color of support from the text of the Siddhanta, and is besides
in itself utterly untenable. It is not a little strange that he should not




^
iii.13.]     EU1        "Translation and Notes.                         105
have perceived that, if the precession were to be explained by a revolu
tion in an epicycle, its rate of increase would not be equable, but as the
increment of the sine of the arc in the epicycle traversed by the mova
ble point, farther varied by the varying distance at which it would be
seen from the centre in different parts of the revolution ; and also that,
the dimensions of the epicycle being 108°, the amount of precession
would never come to equal 27°, but would, when greatest, fall short of
18°, being determined by the radius of the epicycle. Bentley's whole
treatment of the passage shows a thorough misapprehension of its mean
ing and relations : he even commits the blunder of understanding the
first half of verse 9 to refer to the motion of the equinox, instead of to
that of the initial point of the sidereal sphere.
   Among the Greek astronomers, Hipparchus is regarded as the first
who discovered the precession of the equinoxes; their rate of motion,
however, seems not to have been confidently determined by him,
although he pronounces it to be at any rate not less than 36" yearly.
For a thorough discussion of the subject of the precession in Greek
astronomy see Delambre's History of Ancient Astronomy, ii. 247, etc.
From the observations reported as the data whence Hipparchus made
his discovery, Delambre deduces very nearly the true rate of the preces
sion. Ptolemy, however, was so unfortunate as to adopt for the true
rate Hipparchus's minimum, of 36" a year : the subject is treated of by
him in the seventh book of the Syntaxis. The actual motion of the
equinox at the present time is 50".25 ; its rate is slowly on the increase,
having been, at the epoch of the Greek astronomy, somewhat less than
60". How the Hindus succeeded in arriving at a determination of it so
much more accurate than was made by the great Greek astronomer, or
whether it was anything more than a lucky hit on their part, we will
not attempt here to discuss.
   The term by which the precession is designated in this passage is
ayan&nfa, " degrees of the ayana." The latter word is employed in
different senses : by derivation, it means simply " going, progress," and
it seems to have been first introduced into the astronomical language to
designate the half-revolutions of the sun, from solstice to solstice ; these
being called respectively (see xiv. 9) the uttar&yana and dakshin&yana,
" northern progress" and " southern progress." From this use the word
was transferred to denote also the solstices themselves, as we have trans
lated it in the first half of verse 11. In the latter sense we conceive
it to be employed in the compound ayan&nfa ; although why the name
of the precession should be derived from the solstice we are unable
clearly to see. The term icrantipatagati, " movement of the node of
declination," which is often met with in modern works on Hindu astron
omy, does not occur in the Surya-Siddhanta.
   12. ... In like manner, the equatorial shadow which is cast
at mid-day at one's place of observation
   13. Upon the north and south line of the dial—that is the
equinoctial shadow (yishuvatprabhft) of that place. . . .
  The equinoctial shadow has been already sufficiently explained, in
connection with a preceding passage (above, v. 7). In this treatise it is
                         14
    106                       S&rya-Siddhdnta,                       [iii. 13-
    known only by names formed by combining one of the words for
    shadow (ck&ya, bh&, prabh&), with vishuvat, "equinox" (see above,
    under v. 6). In modern Hindu astronomy it is also called akshabhd,
    "shadow of latitude"—i. e., which determines the latitude—and pala-
    bh&, of which, as used in this sense, the meaning is obscure.
      13. ... Eadius, multiplied respectively by gnomon and shadow,
    and divided by the equinoctial hypothenuse,
      14. Gives the sines of co-latitude (lamba) and of latitude
    (aksha): the corresponding arcs are co-latitude and latitude,
    always south. . . .
       The proportions upon which these rules are founded are illustrated
    by the following figure (Fig. 11), in which, as in a previous figure (Fig.
    8, p. 88), Z S represents a quadrant of the meridian, Z being the zenith
    and S the south point,                       p;g n
    C being the centre,
    and E C the projec
    tion of the plane of
    the equator. In order
    to illustrate the cor
    responding relations
    of the dial, we have
    conceived the gno
    mon, C 6, to be placed
    at the centre. Then,
    when the sun is on
    the meridian and in
    the equator, at E, the
    shadow cast, which is
    the equinoctial shad
    ow, is 6 e, while C « is the corresponding hypothemiBe. But, by simi
    larity of triangles,
                               C«:6e::CE:BE
    and                        Ce:C6::CE:CB
    and as B E is the sine of E Z, which equals the latitude, and C B the
    sine of E S, its complement, the reduction of these proportions to the
    form of equations gives the rules of the text.
       14. . . . The mid- day shadow is the base (bhuja) ; if radius be
    multiplied by that,
       15. And the product divided by the corresponding hypothe
    nuse, the result, converted to arc, is the sun's zenith-distance
    (nata), in minutes: this, when the base is south, is north, and
    when the base is north, is south. Of the sun's zenith-distance
    and his declination, in minutes,
       16. Take the sum, when their direction is different—the dif
    ference, when it is the same; the result is the latitude, in
    minutes. From this find the sine of latitude; subtract its
    square from the square of radius, and the square-root of the re
    mainder



s
iii. 20.]                Translation and Notes.                        107

   17. Is the sine of co-latitude. . . .
   This passage applies to cases in which the sun is not upon the equator,
but has a certain declination, of which the amount and direction are
known. Then, from the shadow cast at noon, may be derived his zenith-
distance when upon the meridian, and the latitude. Thus, supposing
the sun, having north declination ED (Fig. 11), to be upon the meridian,
at D : the shadow of the gnomon will be b d, and the proportion
                         Cd:db::CD:I>B""
gives DB"", the sine of the sun's zenith-distance, ZD, which is found
from it by the conversion of sine into arc by a rule previously given
(ii. 33). Z D in this case being south, and E D being north, their sum,
E Z, is the latitude : if, the declination being south, the sun were at D',
the difference of ED' and ZD' would be EZ, the latitude. The figure
does not give an illustration of north zenith-distance, being drawn for
the latitude of Washington, where that is impossible. The latitude
being thus ascertained, it is easy to find its sine and cosine : the only
thing which deserves to be noted in the process is that, to find the co
sine from the sine, resort is had to the laborious method of squares,
instead of taking from the table the sine of the complementary arc, or
the kotijyd.
    The sun's distance from the zenith when he is upon the meridian is
called nat&s, " deflected," an adjective belonging to the noun lipt&s, " min
utes," or bh&g&s, anf&s, "degrees." The same term is also employed, as
will be seen farther on (yv. 34-36), to designate the hour-angle. For
zenith-distance off the meridian another term is used (see below, v. 33).
  17. ... The sine of latitude, multiplied by twelve, and divi
ded by the sine of co-latitude, gives the equinoctial shadow. . . .
   That is (Fig. 11),
                           BC:BE::C6:Je
the value of the gnomon in digits being substituted in the rule for the
gnomon itself.
   17. ... The difference of the latitude of the place of observa
tion and the sun's meridian zenith-distance in degrees (nata-
bhdgds), if their direction be the same, or their sum,
   18. If their direction be different, is the sun's declination : if
the sine of this latter be multiplied by radius and divided by the
sine of greatest declination, the result, converted to arc, will be
the sun's longitude, if he is in the quadrant commencing with
Aries ;
   19. If in that commencing with Cancer, subtract from a half-
circle ; if in that commencing with Libra, add a half-circle ; if in
that commencing with Capricorn, subtract from a circle : the re
sult, in each case, is the true (sphuta) longitude of the sun at
mid-day.
   20. To this if the equation of the apsis (mdnda phala) be
repeatedly applied, with a contrary sign, the sun's mean longi
tude will be found. . . .



                                                                               •
108                        Stirya-Siddhdnta,                      [iii.20-
   This passage teaches how, when the latitude of the observer is
known, the sun's declination, and his true and mean longitudes, may be
found by observing his zenith-distance at noon. The several parts of
the process are all of them the converse of processes previously given,
and require no explanation. To find the sun's declination from his
meridian zenith-distance and the latitude (reckoned as south, by v. 14),
the rule given above, in verses 15 and 16, is inverted ; the true longitude
is found from the declination by the inversion of the method taught in
ii. 28, account being taken of the quadrant in which the sun may be
according to the principle of ii. 30 : and finally, the mean may be de
rived from the true longitude by a method of successive approximation,
applying in reverse the equation of the centre, as calculated by ii. 39.
    It is hardly necessary to remark that this is a very rough process for
ascertaining the sun's longitude, and could give, especially in the hands
of Hindu observers, results only distantly approaching to accuracy.
   20. ... The sum of the latitude of the place of observation
and the sun's declination, if their direction is the same, or, in the
contrary case, their difference,
   21. Is the sun's meridian zenith-distance (natdnqds) ; of that
find the base-sine (bahujyd) and the perpendicular-sine (kotijya).
If, then, the base-sine and radius be multiplied respectively by
the measure of the gnomon in digits,
   22. And divided by the perpendicular-sine, the results are the
shadow and hypothenuse at mid-day. . . .
   The problem here is to determine the length of the shadow which
will be cast at mid-day when the sun has a given declination, the latitude
of the observer being also known. First, the sun's meridian zenith-dis
tance is found, by a process the converse of that taught in verses 15 and
16 ; then, the corresponding sine and cosine having been calculated, a
simple proportion gives the desired result. Thus, let us suppose the sun
to be at D' (Fig. 11, p. 106); the sum of his south declination, ED',
and the north latitude, EZ, gives the zenith-distance, ZD': its sine
(bhujajya) is D' B'", and its cosine (kotijy&)
                                        '      is C B'". Then

and                     CB"':CD'::C6:Cd'
which proportions, reduced to equations, give the value of bd', the
shadow, and C d', its hypothenuse.
  22. ... The sine of declination, multiplied by the equinoctial
hypothenuse, and divided by the gnomon-sine (gankujwd),
  23. Gives, when farther multiplied by the hypothenuse of any
given shadow, and divided by radius (madhyakarna), the sun's
measure of amplitude (arkdgrd) corresponding to that shadow. . .
   In this passage we are taught, the declination being known, how to
find the measure of amplitude (agra) of any given shadow, as prepara
tory to determining, by the next following rule, the base (bhuja) of the
shadow, by calculation instead of measurement. The first step is to find
the sine of the sun's amplitude : in order to this, we compare the trian
iii. 25.]                Translation and Notes.                        109

gles ABC and CEH (Fig. 13, p. 110), which are similar, since the
angles A G B and C E H are each equal to the latitude of the observer.
Hence                        EH:EC::BC:AC
But the triangles CEH (Fig. 13) and Cbe (Fig. 11) are also similar;
and            '              EH:EC::C6:Ce
Hence, by equality of ratios, C6:Ce::BC:AC
and A C, the sine of the sun's amplitude, equals B C—which is the sine
of declination, being equal to D F—multiplied by C e, the equinoctial
hypothenuse, and divided by C 6, the gnomon. The remaining part of
the process depends upon the principle which we have demonstrated
above, under verse 7, that the measure of amplitude is to the hypothe
nuse of the shadow as the sine of amplitude to radius.
   Why the gnomon is in this passage called the " gnomon-sine," it is
not easy to discover. Verse 23 presents also a name for radius, madhya-
 karna, " half-diameter," which is not found again ; nor is karna often
employed in the sense of "diameter" in this treatise.
  23. ... The sum of the equinoctial shadow and the sun's
measure of amplitude (arlcdgrd), when the sun is in the southern
hemisphere, is the base, north ;
  24. When the sun is in the northern hemisphere, the base is
found, if north, by subtracting the measure of amplitude from
the equinoctial shadow ; if south, by a contrary process—accord
ing to the direction of the interval between the end of the
shadow and the east and west axis.
  25. The mid-day base is invariably the midday shadow. . . .
   We have already had occasion to notice, in connection with the first
verses of this chapter, that the base (bhuja) of the shadow is its projec
tion upon a north and south line, or the distance of its extremity from
the east and west axis of the dial. It is that line which, as shown
above (under v. 7), corresponds to and represents the perpendicular let
fall from the sun upon the plane of the prime vertical. Thus, if (Fig.
11, p. 106) K, L, IK, D be different positions of the sun—K and L
being conceived to be upon the surface of the sphere—the perpendicu
lars KB', LB", D'B"', DB"" are represented upon the dial by /cb, Ib,
d' 6, d 6, or, in Fig. 9 (p. 241), by kb>, I b", d' b, d b. Of these, the two
latter coincide with their respective shadows, the shadow cast at noon
being always itself upon a north and south line. The base of any
shadow may be found by combining its measure of amplitude (agr&)
with the equinoctial shadow. When the sun is in the southern hemis
 phere, as at D' or K (Fig. 11), the measure of amplitude, ed' or ek, is to
be added always to the equinoctial shadow, b e, in order to give the base,
 6 d' or 6 k. If, on the contrary, the sun's declination be north, a differ
 ent method of procedure will be necessary, according as he is north or
 south from the prime vertical. If he be south, as at D, the shadow, b d,
 will be thrown northward, and the base will be found by subtracting the
 measure of amplitude, d e, from the equinoctial shadow, be: if he be
 north, as at L, the extremity of the shadow, I, will be south from the
 east and west axis, and the base, b I, will be obtained by subtracting the
 equinoctial shadow, b e, from the measure of amplitude, I e.



                                                                                ,-
110                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                       [iii.25-
   25. ... Multiply the sines of co-latitude and of latitude re
spectively by the equinoctial shadow and by twelve,
   26. And divide by the sine of declination ; the results are the
hypothenuse when the sun is on the prime vertical (samaman-
dala). When north declination is less than the latitude, then
the mid-day hypothenuse (frara),
   27. Multiplied by the equinoctial shadow, and divided by the
mid-day measure of amplitude (agrd), is the hypothenuse. . . .
   Here we have two separate and independent methods of finding the
hypothenuse of the east and west shadow cast by the sun at the moment
when he is upon the prime vertical. In connection with the second of
the two are stated the circumstances under which alone a transit of the
sun across the prime vertical will take place : if his declination is south,
or if, being north, it is greater than the latitude, his diurnal revolution
will be wholly to the south, or wholly to the north, of that circle.
   The first method is illustrated by the following figures. Let V C"
(Fig. 12) be an arc of the prime ver-                  Fi 12
tical, V being the point at which the -
sun crosses it in his daily revolution ;
and let C' be the centre ; then V C'
is radius, and VC the sine of the
sun's altitude; and, C'6 being the
gnomon, 6 v will be the shadow, and
C' v its hypothenuse. But, by simi
larity of triangles,
       VC:VC'::C'6:C'v
   Again, in the other figure (Fig. 13)—of which the general relations
are those of Fig. 8
(p. 88)-AD being
the projection of the
circle of the sun's
diurnal revolution,
and the point at
which it crosses the
prime vertical being
seen projected in V,
VC is the sine of the
sun's altitude at that
point. But VCB
and ECU are simi
lar triangles, the an
gles BVC and CEH
being each equal to
the latitude ; hence
VC:EC::BC:CH
   Now the first of
these ratios is—since
E C equals V C', both
being radius—the
same with the first
iii. 31.]               Translation and Notes.                      Ill
in the former proportion ; and therefore
                              BC:CH::C'&:C'«
or             sin decl. : sin lat. : : gnom. : hyp. pr. vert. shad,
but                  sin lat. : cos. lat. : : eq. shad. : gnom.
therefore, by combining terms,
            sin. decl. : cos. lat. : : eq. shad. : hyp. pr. vert. shad,
and the reduction of the first and third of these proportions to the
form of equations gives the rules of the text.
   The other method of finding the same quantity is an application of
the principle demonstrated above, under verse 7, that, with a given dec
lination, the measure of amplitude of any shadow is to that of any other
shadow as the hypothenuse of the former to that of the latter. Now
when the sun is upon the prime vertical, the shadow falls directly
eastward or directly westward, and hence its extremity lies in the east
and west axis of the dial, and its measure of amplitude is equal to
the equinoctial shadow. The noon measure of amplitude is, accord
ingly, to the hypothenuse of the noon shadow as the equinoctial shadow
to the hypothenuse of the shadow cast when the sun is upon the prime
vertical.
   27. ... If the sine of declination of a given time be multiplied
by radius and divided by the sine of co-latitude, the result is the
sine of amplitude (agramdurvikd).
   28. And this, being farther multiplied by the hypothenusc of
a given shadow at that time, and divided by radius, gives the
measure of amplitude (agrd), in digits (angula), etc. . . .
   The sine of the sun's amplitude is found—his declination and the
latitude being known—by a comparison of the similar triangles ABC
and C E H (Fig. 13), in which
                            HE:EC::BC:CA
or                   cos. lat. : K : : sin. decl. : sin. ampl.
And the proportion upon which is founded the rule in verse 28—name
ly, that radius is to the sine of amplitude as the hypothenuse of a given
shadow to the corresponding measure of amplitude—has been demon
strated under verse 7, above.
   28. ... If from half the square of radius the square of the
sine of amplitude (agrajyd) be subtracted, and the remainder
multiplied by twelve,
   29. And again multiplied bjr twelve, and then farther divided
by the square of the equinoctial shadow increased by half the
square of the gnomon—the result obtained by the wise
   30. Is called the "surd" (karani) : this let the wise man set
down in two places. Then multiply the equinoctial shadow by
twelve, and again by the sine of amplitude,
   31. And divide as before: the result is styled the "fruit"
(phala). Add its square to the "surd," and take the square root
of their sum ; this, diminished and increased by the " fruit," for
the southern and northern hemispheres,
112                            S&rya-Siddkclnta,                         [iii. 32-
   32. Is the sine of altitude (qanku) of the southern intermediate
directions (vidig) ; and equally, whether the sun's revolution
take place to the south or to the north of the gnomon (qanku)—
only, in the latter case, the sine of altitude is that of the north
ern intermediate directions.
   33. The square root of the difference of the squares of that
and of radius is styled the sine of zenith-distance (drq.) If, then,
the sine of zenith-distance and radius be multiplied respectively
by twelve, and divided by the sine of altitude,
  34. The results are the shadow and hypothenuse at the angles
(kona), under the given circumstances of time and place. . . .
   The method taught in this passage of finding, with a given declina
tion and latitude, the sine of the sun's altitude at the moment when he
crosses the south-east and south-west vertical circles, or when the shadow
of the gnomon is thrown toward the angles (kona) of the circumscribing
square of the dial, is, when stated algebraically, as follows :
                     UR'-sin* ampl.)Xgn.s
                          i—-T-,      j-;        = 8ur"-
                          ign.'+eq. sh.!
                    eq. »h. X gn. X sin ampl. _
                          4gn.8+eq. sh.«
        v surd + fruit* -j- fruit = sin alt., declination being north.
        A/surd -}• fruit* — fruit =sin alt., declination being south.
   It is at once apparent that a problem is here presented more compli
cated and difficult of solution than any with which we have heretofore
had to do in the treatise. The commentary gives a demonstration of
it, in which, for the first time, the notation and processes of the
Hindu algebra are introduced, and with these we are not sufficiently
familiar to be able to follow the course of the demonstration. The
problem, however, admits of solution without the aid of mathematical
knowledge of a higher character than has been displayed in the pro
cesses already explained; by means, namely, of the consideration of
right-angled triangles, situated in the same plane, and capable of being
represented by a single figure. We give below such a solution, which,
we are persuaded, agrees in all its                 -p-ia. 14
main features with the process by
which the formulas of the text were
originally deduced.
   Let ZEK be the south-eastern
circle of altitude, from the zenith, Z,
to the horizon, K \ let E be its in
tersection with the equator, and D
the position of the sun ; and let
C b represent the gnomon.
   Since e is in the line of the equi
noctial shadow (see above, v. 7),
and since b e makes an angle of 45°
with either axis of the dial, we
have 6ea— 2 eq. sh.a, and Ce2 =
C 6a +6 e2 = gn.a +2 cq. sh.»
iii. 34.]            *      Translation and Notes.                          113
  In like manner, des=.2 meas. ampl.2 But the similar triangles
Cde and CDE' give Cd2 :de* : :CD2 :DE'2 ; which, by halving
the two consequents, and observing the constant relation of C d to the
measure of amplitude (see above, under v. 7), gives R2 : sin ampl.2 : :
R2 : £D E'2 : whence |D E'2= sin ampl.2, or D E'2= 2 sin ampl.2
  Now the required sine of altitude is D G, and D G=D H-|-H G=
DH+IJ. And, obviously, the triangles DHI, D IE7, EFC, IJC,
and C b e are all similar. Then, from D H I and Cbe, we derive
                           DH:DI: be:Ce
from D I E' and C if,      DI:DE': C6:C«
and, by combining terms, D H : D E'
 ,          _.„ v/2.eq. sh.Xgn.X.v/2. sin ampl. eq.sh.Xgn.Xsinampl. . .
whence      DH=             ,        r—      — = -*-s—--         r^~^ = fruit.
                       gn.* + 2 eq. eh.»            4gn.2 + eq. sh.»
   Again, from D H I and EFC, we derive
                       IHa:DI«::EFa:EC»
from IJC and EFC, IJ» : ICa : :EFa : EC"
whence, by adding the terms of the equal ratios, and observing that
IH3+IJ2=JHa, and DI»+IC!l = DC2 = ECa, we have
                       JH»:ECa::EF»:ECa
or JH»=EFa. Hence IJ»=JH»-IH»=EF»-IHJ'=EF!"-DIa+DH»
But from EFC and C b e are derived
                       C«2:C62::EC2:EF2
from DIE' and Cbe, Ce2 :C62 : :DE'2 :DI2
       .,,„, EC».C6» , and, DI»=—r^-r—
whence EF%=                 __,     .  , and. EF»-DIS=
                                              nll) 11T.
                   V C*                V C*                            t~

that is to say,
     E Fi-D V— (B»-2"°"°P'-')Xgn.« _ (iR»-sinampl.i)Xgn.» _
      '             gD.H-2eq.8h.s           ign.2+ eq. sh.2
But, as was shown above, I J2=E F2 -D I2+D H2=surd+fruit2
and Vsurd+fruit2 + fruit= IJ+ D H=D G = sine of altitude.
   When declination is south, so that the sun crosses the circle of alti
tude at I>, I H', the equivalent of D H, is to be subtracted from I J, to
give D' G7, the sine of altitude.
   The correctness of the Hindu formulas may likewise be briefly and
succinctly demonstrated by means of our modern methods. Thus, let
PZS (Fig. 15) be a spherical triangle,                  Fig. 15.
of which the three angular points are
P, the pole, Z, the zenith, and S, the
place of the sun when upon the south
east or the south-west vertical circles;
PZ, then, is the co-latitude, ZS the
zenith-distance, or co-altitude, and P S
the co-declination; and the angle PZS is 135° ; the problem is, to find
the sine of the complement of Z S, or of the sun's altitude. By spheri
cal trigonometry, cos S P=cos Z S cos Z P+sin Z S sin Z P cos Z. Di
viding by sin ZP, and observing that cos S P-^-sin ZP=sin decl.-^-cos
lat.= sine of amplitude, we have sin amp!.— sin alt. tan lat.+cos alt. cos
135°. If, now, we represent sin ampl. by a, tan lat. by 6, cos 135° by
                            15
114                        S&rya-SiddhAnta,           *           [iii. 34-

— \/£, sin alt. by x, and cos alt. by Vl —a:2, we have a2- 2a 6 z+62 Z2=
                                          2a6       -J- — a2
   — z2); and, by reduction, *2— ~ ,0*= •f , ,2- Representing,

again, , " ., by /, and?.          by «, and reducing, we have *=/+-
    __jTT"                  'zT0
V^+j. But/ is evidently the same with the "fruit," since b, or tan
          ...                  ,., ,       «6     eq.sh.Xgn.Xsin.ampl.
lat, equals eq. sh.-i-gnom., and therefore ^ =^_—-i-j— -— - :
                         ., ,         „    i-a2 aRs-sinsamp].)xgn.9
and * is also the same with the "surd, for T~rn=
                                           i+*    i"--„ ,
                                                  •Jgnom.'+eq.  .
                                                               sh.  •
   If, the latitude being north, we consider the north direction as posi
tive, 6 will be positive. The value of /, given above, will then evidently
be positive or negative as the sign of a is plus or minus. But a, the
sine of amplitude, is positive when declination is north, and negative
when declination is south. Hence f is to be added to or subtracted
.from the radical, according as the sun is north or south of the equator,
as prescribed by the Hindu rule. A minus sign before the radical would
correspond to a second passage of the sun across the south-east and
north-west vertical circle ; which, except in a high latitude, would take
 place always below the horizon.
    The construction of the last part of verse 32 is by no means clear, yet
 we cannot question that the meaning intended to be conveyed by it is
 truly represented by our translation. When declination is greater than
 north latitude, the sun's revolution is made wholly to the north of the
 prime vertical, and the vertical circles which he crosses are the north
 east and the north-west. The process prescribed in the text, however,
 gives the correct value for the sine of altitude in this case also. For,
 in the triangle SZP (Fig. 15), all the parts remain the same, excepting
 that the angle PZS becomes 45°, instead of 135° : but the cosine of
 the former is the same as that of the latter arc, with a difference only
 of sign, which disappears in the process, the cosine being squared.
    The sine of altitude being found, that of its complement, or of zenith-
 distance, is readily derived from it by the method of squares (as above,
 in vv. 16, 17). To ascertain, farther, the length of the corresponding
 shadow and of its hypothenuse, we make the proportions
                    sin alt. : sin zen. dist. : : gnom. : shad.
 and                sin alt. : R : : gnom. : hyp. shad.
    In this passage, as in those that follow, the sine of altitude is called
 by the same name, fanku, " staff," which is elsewhere given to the
 gnomon : the gnomon, in fact, representing in all cases, if the hypothe
 nuse be made radius, the sine of the sun's altitude. The word is fre
 quently used in this sense in the modern astronomical language : thus
 VC (Fig. 13, p. 110), the sine of the sun's altitude when upon the
 prime vertical, is called the samamandalafanku, "prime vertical staff,"
 and BT, the sine of altitude when the sun crosses the unmandala, or
 east and west hour-circle, is styled the unmandalafanku : of the latter
 line, however, the Surya-Siddhanta makes no account. We are sur
 prised, however, not to find a distinct name for the altitude, as for its
 complement, the zenith-distance : the sine of the latter might with very
Hi. 35.]                 Translation and Notes.                        115
nearly the same propriety be called the " shadow," as that of the former
the " gnomon." The particular sine of altitude which is the result of
the present process is commonly known as the konafanku, from the
word kona, which, signifying originally " angle," is used, in connection
with the dial, to indicate the angles of the circumscribing square (see
Fig. 9, p. 97), and then the directions in which those angles lie from
the gnomon. The word itself is doubtless borrowed from the Greek
ytarla, the form given to it being that in which it appears in the com
pounds rqiftaeov (Sanskrit trikona), etc. Lest it seem strange that the
Hindus should have derived from abroad the name jar so familiar and
elementary a quantity as an angle, we would direct attention to the
striking fact that in that stage of their mathematical science, at least,
which is represented by the Surya-Siddhanta, they appear to have made
no use whatever in their calculations of the angle : for, excepting in
this passage (v. 34) and in the term for " square " employed in a pre
vious verse (v. 5) of this chapter, no word meaning "angle" is to be
met with anywhere in the text of this treatise. The term drf, used to
signify "zenith-distance"—excepting when this is measured upon the
meridian ; see above, under vv. 14-16—means literally " sight :" in this
sense, it occurs here for the first time : we have had it more than once
above with the signification of " observed place," as distinguished from
a position obtained by calculation. In verse 32, fanku might be under
stood as used in the sense of " zenith," yet it has there, in truth, its own
proper signification of " gnomon ;" the meaning being, that the sun, in
the cases supposed, makes his revolution to the south or to the north of
the gnomon itself, or in such a manner as to cast the shadow of the
latter, at noon, northward or southward. One of the factors in the cal
culation is styled karant, "surd" (see Colebrooke's Hind. Alg., p. 145),
rather, apparently, as being a quantity of which the root is not required to
be taken, than one of which an integral root is always impossible ; or, it
may be, as being the square of a line which is not, and cannot be, drawn.
The term translated "fruit" (phala) is one of very frequent occurrence
elsewhere, as denoting " quotient, result, corrective equation," etc.
   The form of statement and of injunction employed in verses 29 and
30, in the phrases "the result obtained by the wise," and "let the wise
man set down," etc., is so little in accordance with the style of our
treatise elsewhere, while it is also frequent and familiar in other works
of a kindred character, that it furnishes ground for suspicion that this
passage, relating to the konafanku, is a later interpolation into the body
of the text ; and the suspicion is strengthened by the fact that the pro
cess prescribed here is so much more complicated than those elsewhere
presented in this chapter.
  34. ... If radius be increased by the sine of ascensional differ
ence (card) when declination is north, or diminished by the same,
when declination is south,
  35. The result is the day-measure (antyd); this, diminished
by the versed sine (utkramajyd) of the hour-angle (nata), then
multiplied by the day-radius and divided by radius, is the " di
visor (cheda) ; the latter, again, being multiplied by the sine of
co-latitude (lamba), and divided



                                                                               -
116                        Surya-SiddMnta,                         [iii. 36-
   36. By radius, gives the sine of altitude (yanku) : subtract its
sine from that of radius, and the square root of the remainder is
the sine of zenith-distance (dr$) : the shadow and its hypothe-
nuse are found as in the preceding process.
   The object of this process is, to find the sine of the sun's altitude at
any given hour of the day, when his distance from the meridian, his
declination, and the latitude, are known. The sun's angular distance
from the meridian, or the hour-angle, is found, as explained by the com
mentary, by subtracting the time elapsed since sunrise, or which is to
elapse before sunsSt, from the half day, as calculated by a rule previously
given (ii. 61-68). From the declination and the latitude the sine of
ascensional difference (carajy&) is supposed to have been already derived,
by the method taught in the same passage ; as also, from the declina
tion (by ii. 60), the radius of the diurnal circle. The successive steps
of the process of calculation will be made clear by a reference to the
annexed figure (Fig. 16), taken in connection with Fig. 13 (p. 110), with
which it corresponds in dimensions and lettering. Let G G' C' E repre
sent a portion of the plane of the equator, C being its centre, and G E
its intersection with the plane of the me-              Fig 16
ridian; and let A A' B' D represent a cor
responding portion of the plane of the
diurnal circle, as seen projected upon the
other, its centre and its line of intersection
with the meridian coinciding with those
of the latter. Let C G equal the sine of
ascensional difference, and A B its corre
spondent in the lesser circle, or the earth-
sine (kujy& or kshitijy& ; see above, ii. 61).
Now let O' be the place of the sun at a
given time; the angle O'CD, measured
by the arc of the equator Q7 E, is the
hour-angle : from Q' draw Q' Q perpendic
ular to C E ; then Q' Q is the sine, and
Q E is the versed sine, of Q' E. Add to
radius, E C, the sine of ascensional difference, C G ; their sum, E G—
which is the equivalent, in terms of a great circle, of D A, that part of
the diameter of the circle of diurnal revolution which is above the
horizon, and which consequently measures the length of the day—is
the day-measure (anty&). From E G deduct E Q, the versed sine of the
hour-angle ; the remainder, G Q, is the same quantity in terms of a great
circle which A O is in terms of the diurnal circle : hence the reduction
of G Q to the dimensions of the lesser circle, by the proportion
                          CE:BD::GQ:AO
gives us the value of A O ; to this the text gives the technical name of
"divisor" (cheda). But, by Fig. 13,
                         CE:EH::AO:OR
hence O R, which is the sine of the sun's altitude at the given time,
equals A O, the " divisor," multiplied by E H, the cosine of latitude, and
divided by C E, or radius.
Hi. 41.]                 Translation and Notes.                        117
   The processes for deriving from the sine of altitude that of zenith-
distance, and from both the length of the corresponding shadow and its
hypothenuse, are precisely the same as in the last problem.
   For the meaning of anty&—which, for lack of a better term, we have
translated "day-measure"—see above, under verse 7. The word nata,
by which the hour-angle is designated, is the same with that employed
above with the signification of " meridian zenith-distance ;" see the note
to verses 14-17.
  37. If radius be multiplied by a given shadow, and divided
by the corresponding hypothenuse, the result is the sine of
zenith-distance (drc) : the square root of the difference between
the square of that and the square of radius
   38. Is the sine of altitude (yanku); which, multiplied by
radius and divided by the sine of co-latitude (lamba), gives the
"divisor" (cheda) ; multiply the latter by radius, and divide by
the radius of the diurnal circle,
   39. And the quotient is the sine of the sun's distance from the
horizon (unnata) ; this, then, being subtracted from the day-
measure (antyd), and the remainder turned into arc by means of
the table of versed sines, the final result is the hour-angle (nata),
in respirations (asu), east or west.
   The process taught in these verses is precisely the converse of the
one described in the preceding passage. The only point which calls for
farther remark in connection with it is, that the line GQ (Fig. 16) is in
verse 39 called the " sine of the unnata" By this latter term is desig
nated the opposite of the hour-angle (nata)—that is to say, the sun's
angular distance from the horizon upon his own circle, O' A', reduced to
time, or to the measure of a great circle. Thus, when the sun is at O',
his hour-angle (nata), or the time till noon, is Q' E ; his distance from
the horizon (unnata), or the time since sunrise, is Q' G'. But G Q is
with no propriety styled the sine of G' Q' ; it is not itself a sine at all,
and the actual sine of the arc in question would have a very different
value.
  40. Multiply the sine of co-latitude by any given measure of
amplitude (agrd), and divide by the corresponding hypothenuse
in digits ; the result is the sine of declination. This, again, is
to be multiplied by radius, and divided by the sine of greatest
declination ;
  41. The quotient, converted into arc, is, in signs, etc., the sun's
place in the quadrant ; by means of the quadrants is then found
the actual longitude of the sun at that point. . . .
   By the method taught in this passage, the sun's declination, and,
through that, his true and mean longitude, may, the latitude of the ob
server being known, be found from a single observation upon the shadow
at any hour in the day. The declination is obtained from the measure
of amplitude and the hypothenuse of the shadow, in the following
118                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [iii. 41-

manner : first, as was shown in connection with verse 7 of this chapter,
                   hyp. shad. : meas. ampl. : : E C : C A (Fig. 13, p. 1 10)
but                EC:CA::EH:BC
therefore          hyp. shad. : meas. ampl. : : E H : B C
B C, the sine of declination, being thus ascertained, the longitude is de
duced from it as in a previous process (see above, vv. 17-20).
  41. ... Upon a given day, the distances of three bases, at
noon, in the forenoon, and in the afternoon, being laid off,
  42. From the point of intersection of the lines drawn between
them by means of two fish-figures, (matsya), and with a radius
touching the three points, is described the path of the shadow. . .
   This method of drawing upon the face of the dial the path which
will be described by the extremity of the shadow upon a given day pro
ceeds upon the assumption that that path will be an arc of a circle—an
erroneous assumption, since, excepting within the polar circles, the path
of the shadow is always a hyperbola, when the sun is not in the equator.
In low latitudes, however, the difference between the arc of the hyper
bola, at any point not too far from the gnomon, and the arc of a circle,
is so small, that it is not very surprising that the Hindus should have
overlooked it. The path being regarded as a true circle, of course it
can be drawn if any three points in it can be found by calculation : and
this is not difficult, since the rules above given furnish means of ascer
taining, if the sun's declination and the observer's latitude be known,
the length of the shadow and the length of its base, or the distance of
its extremity from the east and west axis of the dial, at different times
during the day. One part of the process, however, has not been provi
ded for in the rules hitherto given. Thus (Fig. 9, p. 97), supposing
rf, m, and / to be three points in the same daily path of the shadow, we
require, in order to lay down I and m, to know not only the bases / b",
mb'", but also the distances 66", 66"'. But these are readily found
when the shadow and the base corresponding to each are known, or
they may be calculated from the sines of the respective hour-angles.
    The three points being determined, the mode of describing a circle
through them is virtually the same with that which we should employ :
lines are drawn from the noon-point to each of the others, which are
then, by fish-figures (see above, under vv. 1-5), bisected by other lines at
right angles to them, and the intersection of the latter is the centre of
the required circle.
   42. ... Multiply by the day-radius of three signs, and divide
by their own respective day-radii,
   43. In succession, the sines of one, of two, and of three signs ;
the quotients, converted into arc, being subtracted, each from the
one following, give, beginning with Aries, the times of rising
(udaydsavas) at Lanka ;
   44. Namely sixteen hundred and seventy, seventeen hundred
and ninety-five, and nineteen hundred and thirty-five respira
tions. And these, diminished each by its portion of ascensional
iii. 45.]                Translation and Notes.                        119
difference (carakhanda), as calculated for a given place, are the
times of rising at that place.
   45. Invert them, and add their own portions of ascensional
difference inverted, and the sums are the three signs beginning
with Capcer : and these same six, in inverse order, are the other
six, commencing with Libra.
   The problem here is to determine the "times of rising" (uday&savas)
of the different signs of the ecliptic—that is to say, the part of the 5400
respirations (asavas) constituting a quarter of the sidereal day, which
each of the three signs making up a quadrant of the ecliptic will occupy
in rising (udaya) above the horizon. And in the first place, the times
of rising at the equator, or in the right sphere—which are the equiva
lents of the signs in right ascension—are found as follows :
   Let ZN (Fig. 17) be a quadrant of the solstitial colure, A N the pro
jection upon its plane of the equinoctial colure, A Z of the equator, and
A C of the ecliptic ; and let A, T, G, and
C be the projections upon A C of the initial
points of the first four signs; then AT is
the sine of one sign, or of 30°, AG of two
signs, or of 60°, and A C, which is radius,
the sine of three signs, or of 90°. From
T, G, and C, draw T t, Gg, Cc, perpendicu
lar to A N. Then A T t and A C c are simi
lar triangles, and, since A C equals radius,
              R:Cc::AT:T<
   But the arc of which T t is sine, is the
same part of the circle of diurnal revolu
tion of which the radius is 1 1', as the re
quired ascensional equivalent of one sign is
of the equator: hence the sine of the latter,rwhich we may call a;, 'is
found by reducing T t to the measure of a great circle, which is done by
the proportion
                            1 1' : R : : T t : sin *
Combining this with the preceding proportion, we have,
                            n':Ce::AT:sin*
   Again, to find the ascensional equivalent of two signs, which we will
call y, we have first, by comparison of the triangles A Gg and A C c,

and                         gg1 :R : : Gg : sin y
therefore, as before,       gg1 : C c : : A G : sin y
Hence, the sines of the ascensional equivalents of one and of two signs
respectively are equal to the sines of one and of two signs, A T and
A G, multiplied by the day-radius of three signs, C c, and divided each
by its own day-radius, it' and gg'; and the conversion of the sines thus
obtained into arc gives the ascensional equivalents themselves. The
rule of the text includes also the equivalent of three signs, but this is so
obviously equal to a quadrant that it is unnecessary to draw out the
process, all the terms in the proportions disappearing except radius.
120                         Surya-Siddhdrita,                        [iii. 45-
    Upon working out the process, by means of the table of sines given
in the second chapter (vv. 15-22), and assuming the inclination of the
plane of the ecliptic to be 24° (ii. 28), we find, by the rule given above
(ii. 60), that the day-radii of one, of two, and of three sines, or 1 t', gg1,
Cc, are 3366', 3216', and 3140' respectively, and that the sines of x and
y are 1604' and 2907', to which the corresponding arcs are 27° 50' and
57° 45', or 1670' and 3465'. The former is the ascensional equivalent
of the first sign ; subtracting it from the latter gives that of the second
sign, which is 1795', and subtracting 3465' from a quadrant, 5400',
gives the equivalent of the third sign, which is 1935'—all as stated in
the text.
    These, then, are the periods of sidereal time which the first three
signs of the ecliptic will occupy in rising above the horizon at the equa
tor, or in passing the meridian of any latitude. It is obvious that the
same quantities, in inverse order, will be the equivalents in right ascen
sion of the three following signs also, and that the series of six equiva
lents thus found will belong also to the six signs of the other half of the
ecliptic. In order, now, to ascertain the equivalents of the signs in
oblique ascension, or the periods of sidereal time which they will occupy
in rising above the horizon of a given latitude, it is necessary first to
calculate, for that latitude, the ascensional difference (cara) of the three
points T, G, and C (Fig. 17), which is done by the rule given in the last
chapter (vv. 61, 62). We have calculated these quantities, in the Hindu
method, for the latitude of Washington, 38° 54', and find the ascensional
difference of T to be 578', that of G 1061', and that of C 1263'. The
manner in which these are combined with the equivalents in right
ascension to produce the equivalents in oblique ascension may be ex
plained by the following figure (Fig. 18), which, although not a true
projection, is sufficient for the purpose                „.
of illustration. Let ACS be a semi
circle of the ecliptic, divided into its
successive signs, and A S a semicircle
of the equator, upon which A T', T' G',
etc., are the equivalents of those signs
in right ascension ; and let t, g, etc., be
the points which rise simultaneously
with T, G, etc. Then t T and v V, the
ascensional difference of T and V, are
578', gG' and IL' are 1061', and cC'
is 1263'. Then A t, the equivalent in
oblique ascension of AT, equals AT' -
t T', or 1092'. To find, again, the value
of tg, the second equivalent, the text
directs to subtract from T' G' the differ
ence between tT' and ^G', which is
called the carakhanda, "portion of ascensional difference"—that is to
say, the increment or decrement of ascensional difference at the point
G as compared with T. Thus
          tg = VQ'-(gG'-tT') = T!'
and       5rc = G'C'-(cC'-0G') = G'
iii. 49.]                     Translation and Notes.                              121
  Farther, to find the oblique 'equivalents in the second quadrant, we
are directed to invert the right equivalents, and to add to each its own
carakhanda, decrement of ascensional difference. Thus


and finally,      vS = VS-fa V'=2248'.
   It is obvious without particular explanation that the arcs of oblique
ascension thus found as the equivalents, in a given latitude, of the first
six signs of the ecliptic, are likewise, in inverse order, the equivalents of
the other six. We have, then, the following table of times of rising
(uday&savas), for the equator and for the latitude of Washington, of all
the divisions of the ecliptic :
Equivalents in Right and Oblique Ascension of the Signs of the Ecliptic.
            Sign.        Equivalent Lat. of Washington.                  Sign.
                               in      AscenB.   Equiv. in
N«.           Name.    Right Ascension. Diff. Obi. Ascension.       Name.          No.

                            ' or p.     ' or p.    ' or p.
 I.   Aries, mes/ia,        1670                    1092      Pisces, mina,        12.
      Taurus, vrs/ian,      1795
                                          578       l3l2      Aquarius, kumbha, II.
 3.                                      1061
 3.   Gemini, mithuna,      i935         1263       i733      Capricornus, makara, IO.
 4.   Cancer, karkata,      i935                    ai37      Sagittarius, dhanui, 9
                                         1061       2278
 5.   Leo, sinha,           1795          578                 Scorpio, dll,         8.
'6.   Virgo, kanyd,         1670'                   2248      Libra, t-uld,         7-
  For the expression " at Lanka," employed in verse 43 to designate
the equator, see above, under i. 62.
   46. From the longitude of the sun at a given time are to be
calculated the ascensional equivalents of the parts past and to
come of the sign in which he is : they are equal to the number
of degrees traversed and to be traversed, multiplied by the as
censional equivalent (udaydsavas) of the sign, and divided by
thirty;
   47. Then, from the given time, reduced to respirations, sub
tract the equivalent, in respirations, of the part of the sign to
come, and also the ascensional equivalents (lagndsavas) of the
following signs, in succession—so likewise, subtract the equiva
lents of the part past, and of the signs past, in inverse order ;
   48. If there be a remainder, multiply it by thirty and divide
by the equivalent of the unsubtracted sign ; add the quotient, in.
degrees, to the whole signs, or subtract it from them : the result
is the point of the ecliptic (lagna) which is at that time upon the
horizon (Jcshitija).
   49. So, from the east or west hour-angle (nata) of the sun, in
nadis, having made a similar calculation, by means of the equiv
alents in right ascension (lankodaydsavas), apply the result as an
additive or subtractive equation to the sun s longitude : the re
sult is the point of the ecliptic then upon the meridian (madhya-
lagna).
                         16
122                        Surya-Siddhdnta,                       [iii. 49-

   The word lagna means literally " attached to, connected with," and
hence, " corresponding, equivalent to." It is, then, most properly, and
likewise most usually, employed to designate the point or the arc of the
equator which corresponds to a given point or arc of the ecliptic. In
such a sense it occurs in this passage, in verse 47, where lagn&savas is
precisely equivalent to udayasavas, explained in connection with the
next preceding passage; also below, in verse 50, and in several other
places. In verses 48 and 49, however, it receives a different significa
tion, being taken to indicate the point of the ecliptic which, at a given
time, is upon the meridian or at the horizon ; the former being called
lagnam kshitije, " lagna at the horizon "—or, in one or two cases else
where, simply lagna—the other receiving the name of madhyalagna,
" meridian-fa^na."
   The rules by which, the sun's longitude and the hour of the day being
known, the points of the ecliptic at the horizon and upon the meridian
 are found, are very elliptically and obscurely stated in the text; our
translation itself has been necessarily made in part also a paraphrase and
explication of them. Their farther illustration may be best effected by
means of an example, with reference to the last figure (Fig. 18).
   At a given place of observation, as Washington, let the moment of
local time—reckoned in the usual Hindu manner, from sunrise—be 18n
 12» 3P, and let the longitude of the sun, as corrected by the precession,
be, by calculation, 42°, or 1s 12° : it is required to know the longitude
of the point of the ecliptic (lagna) then upon the eastern horizon.
   Let P (Fig. 1 8) be the place of the sun, and H h the line of the hori
zon, at the given time ; and let p be the point of the equator which rose
with the sun ; then the arc p h is equivalent to the time since sunrise,
18" 12V SP, or 6555P. The value of tg, the equivalent in oblique ascen
sion of the second sign TO, in which the sun is, is given in the table
presented at the end of the note upon the preceding passage as 1312P.
To find the value of the part of it p g we make the proportion

or                         30°:18°::1312P:787P
Fromph, or 6555P, we now subtract pg, 787?, and then, in succession,
the ascensional equivalents of the following signs, GO and CL—that is,
ge, or 1733?, and cl, or 2137?—until there is left a remainder, I h, or
1898P, which is less than the equivalent of the next sign. To this re
mainder of oblique ascension the corresponding arc of longitude is then
found by a proportion the reverse of that formerly made, namely

or                          2278? : 1898P : : 30° : 25°
The result thus obtained being added to A L, or 4s, the sum, 4s 25°, or
145°, is the longitude of H.
   The arc pg is called in the text bhogyasavai, "the equivalent in respi
rations of the part of the sign to be traversed," while tp is styled bhuk-
tasavas, " the respirations of the part traversed."
   If, on the other hand, it were desired to arrive at the same result by
reckoning in the opposite direction from the sun to the horizon, either
on account of the greater proximity of the two in that direction, or for
iii. 51.]                Translation and Notes.                        123
any other reason, the manner of proceeding would be somewhat differ
ent. Thus, if A H (Fig. 18) were the sun's longitude, and/>P the line
 of the eastern horizon, we should first find hp, by subtracting the part
 of the day already elapsed from the calculated length of the day (this
 step is, in the text, omitted to be specified^ ; from it we should then
 subtract the bhuTct&savas, I h, and then the equivalents of the signs
 through which the sun has already passed, in inverse order, until there
 remained only the part of an equivalent, pg, which would be converted
 into the corresponding arc of longitude, P G, in the same manner as
before : and the subtraction of P G from A G would give A P, the
 longitude of the point P.
    But again, if it be required to determine the point of the ecliptic
which is at any given time upon the meridian, the general process is the
same as already explained, excepting that for the time from sunrise is
substituted the time until or since noon, and also for the equivalents in
oblique ascension those in right ascension, or, in the language of the
text, the "times of rising at Lanka" (lankod&yasavas) ; since the me
ridian, like the equatorial horizon, cuts the equator at right angles.
    It will be observed that all these calculations assume the increments
longitude of to be proportional to those of ascension throughout each
sign : in a process of greater pretensions to accuracy, this would lead to
errors of some consequence.
    The use and value of the methods here taught, and of the quantities
found as their results, will appear in the sequel (see ch. v. 1-9 ; vii. 7 ;
ix. 5-11; x. 2).
    The term kshitija, by which the horizon is designated, may be under
stood, according to the meaning attributed to kshiti (see above, under
ii. 61—63), either as the "circle of situation"—that is, the one which is
dependent upon the situation of the observer, varying with every change
of place on his part—or as the "earth-circle," the one produced by the
intervention of the earth below the observer, or drawn by the earth
upon the sky. Probably the latter is its true interpretation.
   50. Add together the ascensional equivalents, in respirations,
of the part of the sign to be traversed by the point having less
longitude, of the part traversed by that having greater longitude,
and of the intervening signs—thus is made the ascertainment of
time (kdlasddhana).
   51. When the longitude of the point of the ecliptic upon the
horizon (lagna) is less than that of the sun, the time is in the
latter part of the night; when greater, it is in the day-time;
when greater than the longitude of the sun increased by half a
revolution, it is after sunset.
  The process taught in these verses is, in a manner, the converse of
that which is explained in the preceding passage, its object being to find
the instant of local time when a given point of the ecliptic will be upon
the horizon, the longitude of the sun being also known. Thus (Fig. 18),
supposing the sun's longitude, A P, to be, at a given time, 1s 12° ; it is
required to know at what time the point H, of which the longitude i&
124                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                       [iii. 51-
4s 25°, will rise. The problem, is, virtually, to ascertain the arc of the
equator intercepted between p, the point which rose with the sun, and
A, which will rise with H, since that arc determines the time elapsed
between sunrise and the rise of H, or the time in the day at which the
latter will take place. In .order to this, we ascertain, by a process simi
lar to that illustrated iii connection with the last passage, the bhogya-
savas, " ascensional equivalent of the part of the sign to be traversed,"
of the point having less longitude—or pg—and the bhukt&savas, "as
censional equivalent of the part traversed," belonging to H, the point
having greater longitude—or I h—and add the sum of both to that of
the ascensional equivalents of the intervening whole signs, g c and c I,
which the text calls antaralagn&savas, " equivalent respirations of the
interval ;" the total is, in respirations of time, corresponding to minutes
of arc, the interval of time required : it will be found to be 6555p, or
18" 12" 3P; and this, in the case assumed, is the time in the day at
which the rise of H takes place : were H, on the other hand, the posi
tion of the sun, 18n 12V 3? would be the time before sunrise of the same
event, and would require to be subtracted from the calculated length of
the day to give the instant of local time.
    It is evident that the main use of this process must be to determine
the hour at which a given planet, or a star of which the longitude is
known, will pass the horizon, or at which its "day" (see above, ii. 59-
63) will commence. A like method — substituting only the equiva
lents in right for those in oblique ascension—might be employed in
determining at what instant of local time the complete day, ahor&tra,
of any of the heavenly bodies, reckoned from transit to transit across
the lower meridian, would commence : and this is perhaps to be re
garded as included also in the terms of verse 50 ; even though the
following verse plainly has reference to the time of rising, and the word
lagna, as used in it, means only the point upon the horizon.
    The last verse we take to be simply an obvious and convenient rule
for determining at a glance in which part of the civil day will take
place the rising of any given point of the ecliptic, or of a planet occu
pying that point. If the longitude of a planet be less than that of the
sun, while at the same time they are not more than three signs apart—
this and the other corresponding restrictions in point of distance are
plainly implied in the different specifications of the verse as compared
with one another, and are accordingly explicitly stated by the commen
tator—the hour when that planet comes to assume the position called
in the text lagna, or to pass the eastern horizon, will evidently be
between midnight and sunrise, or in the after part (fesha, literally " re
 mainder") of the night : if, again, it be more than three and less than
 six signs behind the sun, or, which is the same thing, more than six and
 less than nine signs in advance of him, its time of rising will be between
 sunset and midnight : if, once more, it be in advance of the sun by less
 than six signs, it will rise while the sun is above the horizon.

   The next three chapters treat of the eclipses of the sun and moon, the
fourth being devoted to lunar eclipses, and the fifth to solar, and the
sixth containing directions for projecting an eclipse.
iv. l.J                     Translation and Notes.                              125


                            CHAPTER IV.
          OF ECLIPSES, AND ESPECIALLY OF LUNAR ECLIPSES.

CONTENTS:—1, dimensions of the sun and moon ; 2-3, measurement of their apparent
  dimensions ; 4-5, measurement of the earth's shadow ; 6, conditions of the occur
  rence of an eclipse ; 7-8, ascertainment of longitude at the time of conjunction of
  of opposition; 9, causes of eclipses; 10-11, to determine whether there will be
  an eclipse, and the amount of obscuration ; 12-15, to find half the time of dura
  tion of the eclipse, and half that of total obscuration; 16-17, to ascertain the
  times of contact and of separation, and, in a total eclipse, of immersion and
  emergence; 18-21, to determine the amount of obscuration at a given time;
  22-23, to find the time corresponding to a given amount of obscuration ; 24-25,
  measurement of the deflection of the ecliptic, at the point occupied by the
  eclipsed body, from an east and west line ; 26, correction of the scale of projec
  tion for difference of altitude.

  1. The diameter of the sun's disk is six thousand five hun
dred yojanas; of the moon's, four hundred and eighty.
   We shall see, in connection with the next passage, that the diameters
of the sun and moon, as thus stated, are subject to a curious modifica
tion, dependent upon and representing the greater or less distance of
those bodies from the earth ; so that, in a certain sense, we have here
only their mean diameters. These represent, however, in the Hindu
theory—which affects to reject the supposition of other orbits than such
as are circular, and described at equal distances about the earth—the
true absolute dimensions of the sun and moon.
   Of the two, only that for the moon is obtained by a legitimate pro
cess, or presents any near approximation to the truth. The diameter of
the earth being, as stated above (L 59), 1600 yojanas, that of the moon,
480 yojanas, is .3 of it : while the true value of the moon's diameter in
terms of the earth's is .2716, or only about a tenth less. An estimate
so nearly correct supposes, of course, an equally correct determination
of the moon's horizontal parallax, distance from the earth, and mean
apparent diameter. The Hindu valuation of the parallax may be de*
duced from the value given just below (v. 3), of a minute on the moon's
orbit, as 15 yojanas. Since the moon's horizontal parallax is equal to
the angle subtended at her centre by the earth's radius, and since, at
the moon's mean distance, 1' of arc equals 15 yojanas, and the earth's
radius, 800 yojanas, would accordingly subtend an angle of 53' 20"—the
latter angle, 53' 20", is, according to the system of the Surya-Siddhanta,
the moon's parallax, when in the horizon and at her mean distance.
This is considerably less than the actual value of the quantity, as deter
mined by modern science, namely 57" 1'; and it is practically, in the
calculation of solar eclipses, still farther lessened by 3' 51", the excess
of the value assigned to the sun's horizontal parallax, as we shall see
farther on. Of the variation in the parallax, due to the varying distance
of the moon, the Hindu system makes no account : the variation is actu-
                           17



                                                                                        -
126                         Stirya-Siddhdnta,                       [iv. 1-

ally nearly 8', being from 53' 48", at the apogee, to 61' 24", at the
perigee.
   How the amount of the parallax was determined by the Hindus—if,
indeed, they had the instruments and the skill in observation requisite
for making themselves an independent determination of it—we are not
informed. It is not to be supposed, however, that an actual estimate of
the mean horizontal parallax as precisely 53' 20" lies at the foundation
of the other elements which seem to rest upon it; for, in the making
up of the artificial Hindu system, all these elements have been modified
and adapted to one another in such a manner as to produce certain
 whole numbers as their results, and so to be of more convenient use.
   From this parallax the moon's distance may be deduced by the pro
portion
                  sin 53' 20" : R : : earth's rad. : moon's dist.
or                       53'i:3438': :8ooy:5[,57oy
The radius of the moon's orbit, then, is 51,570 yojanas, or, in terms of
the earth's radius, 64.47. The true value of the moon's mean distance
is 59.96 radii of the earth.
   The farther proportion
                         3438' : 54oo' : : S7.S7oy : 8i,oooy
would give, as the value of a quadrant of the moon's orbit, 81,000 yoja
nas, and, as the whole orbit, 324,000 yojanas. This is, in fact, the cir
cumference of the orbit assumed by the system, and stated in another
place (xii. 85). Since, however, the moon's distance is nowhere assumed
as an element in any of the processes of the system, and is even directed.
(xii. 84) to be found from the circumference of the orbit by the false
ratio of 1 : */10, it is probable that it was also made no account of in
constructing the system, and that the relations of the moon's parallax
and orbit were fixed by some such proportion as
                         53' 20" : 36o° : : 8ooy : 3a4,oooy
   The moon's orbit being 324,000 yojanas, the assignment of 480 yoja
nas as her diameter implies a determination of her apparent diameter
at her mean distance as 32'; since
                          36o° : 3a' : : 324,0007 : 48oy
The moon's mean apparent diameter is actually 31' 7".
   In order to understand, farther, how the dimensions of the sun's orbit
and of the sun himself are determined by the Hindus, we have to notice
that, the moon's orbit being 324,000 yojanas, and her time of sidereal
revolution 27d.32167416, the amount of her mean daily motion is
Il,858y.7l7. The Hindu system now assumes that this is the precise
amount of the actual mean daily motion, in space, of all the planets,
and ascertains the dimensions of their several orbits by multiplying it
by the periodic time of revolution of each (see below, xii. 80-90). The
length of the sidereal year being 365d.25875648, the sun's orbit is, as
stated elsewhere (xii. 86), 4,331,500 yojanas. From a quadrant of this,
by the ratio 5400' : 3438', we derive the sun's distance from the earth,
689,430 yojanas, or 861.8 radii of the earth. This is vastly less than
his true distance, which is about 24,000 radii. His horizontal parallax
iv. 3.]                  Translation and Notes.                        127
is, of course, proportionally over-estimated, being made to be nearly 4'
(more exactly, 3' 59".4), instead of 8".6, its true value, an amount so
small that it should properly have been neglected as inappreciable.
    It is an important property of the parallaxes of the sun and moon,
resulting from the manner in which the relative distances of the latter
from the earth are determined, that they are to one another as the mean
daily motions of the planets respectively : that is to say,
                      53' 20" : 3' 59" : : 790' 35" : 59' 8"
Each is likewise very nearly one fifteenth of the whole mean daily
motion, or equivalent to the amount of arc traversed by each planet in
4nadis; the difference being, for the moon, about 38", for the sun,
about 3". We shall see that, in the calculations of the next chapter,
these differences are neglected, and the parallax taken as equal, in each
case, to the mean motion during 4 nadts.
   The circumference of the sun's orbit being 4,331,500 yojanas, the
assignment of 6500 yojanas as his diameter implies that his mean appar
ent diameter was considered to be 32' 24".8 ; for
                      36o° : 3a' a4".8 : : 4,33i,5ooy : 65o&
The true value of the sun's apparent diameter at his mean distance is
32' 3".6.
   The results arrived at by the Greek astronomers relative to the paral
lax, distance, and magnitude of the sun and moon are not greatly dis
cordant with those here presented. Hipparchus found the moon's hori
zontal parallax to be 57' : Aristarchus had previously, by observation
upon the angular distance of the sun and moon when the latter is half-
illuminated, made their relative distances to be as 19 to 1 ; this gave
Hipparchus 3' as the sun's parallax. Ptolemy makes the mean dis
tances of the sun and moon from the earth equal to 1210 and 59 radii
of the earth, and their parallaxes 2' 51" and 58' 14" respectively : he
also states the diameter of the moon, earth, and sun to be as l,3f, 184f,
while the Hindus make them as 1,3^, and 13££, and their true values,
as determined by modern science, are as 1,3$> and 412J, nearly.
  2. These diameters, each multiplied by the true motion, and
divided by the mean motion, of its own planet, give the cor
rected (sphuta) diameters. If that of the sun be multiplied by
the number of the sun's revolutions in an Age, and divided by
that of the moon's,
  3. Or if it be multiplied by the moon's orbit (kakshd), and
divided by the sun's orbit, the result will be its diameter upon
the moon's orbit : all these, divided by fifteen, give the measures
of the diameters in minutes.
   The absolute values of the diameters of the sun and moon being
stated in yojanas, it is required to find their apparent values, in minutes
of arc. In order to this, they are projected upon the moon's orbit, or
upon a circle described about the earth at the moon's mean distance, of
which circle—since 324,000 -f- 21,600=15—one minute is equivalent
to fifteen, yojanas.
 128                         Sbrya-Siddhdnta,                         [iv. 3-
    TLe method of the process will be made clear by tLe annexed figure
 (Fig. 19). Let E be the earth's place, EM or Km the mean distance of
                                   Fig. 19.




  the moon, and ES the mean distance of the sun. Let TU equal the
  sun's diameter, 6 5007. But now let the sun be at the greater distance
  E S' : the part of his mean orbit which his disk will cover will no longer
  be TU, but a less quantity, tu, and tu will be to TU, or T'U', as ES
 to E S'. But the text is not willing to acknowledge here, any more
 than in the second chapter, an actual inequality in the distance of the
 sun from the earth at different times, even though that inequality be
 most unequivocally implied in the processes it prescribes : so, instead of
 calculating E S' as well as E S, which the method of epicycles affords
 full facilities for doing, it substitutes, for the ratio of E S to E S', the
 inverse ratio of the daily motion at the mean distance E S to that at the
 true distance E S'. The ratios, however, are not precisely equal. The
 arc am (Fig. 4, p. 67) of the eccentric circle is supposed to be trav
 ersed by the sun or moon with a uniform velocity. If, then, the motion
 at any given point, as m, were perpendicular to E m, the apparent mo
 tion would be inversely as the distance. But the motion at m is per
 pendicular to e m instead of E m. The resulting error, it is true, and
 especially in the case of the sun, is not very great. It may be added
 that the eccentric circle which best represents the apparent motions of
 the sun and moon in their elliptic orbits, gives much more imperfectly
 the distances and apparent diameters of those bodies. The value of t v,
 however, being thus at least approximately determined, t' u', the arc of
the moon's mean orbit subtended by it, is then found by the proportion
 ES : EOT (or EM) : : tu: t'u'—excepting that here, again, for the ratio
 of the distances, ES and EM, is substituted either that of the whole
 circumferences of which they are respectively the radii, or the inverse
 ratio of the number of revolutions in a given time of the two planets,
 which, as shown in the note to the preceding passage, is the same
thing. Having thus ascertained the value of t' u' in yojanas, division
by 15 gives us the number of minutes in the arc t' u', or in the angle
t'Eu'.
    In like manner, if the moon be at less than her mean distance from
the earth, as E M', she will subtend an arc of her mean orbit n o, greater
than N O, her true diameter ; the value of n o, in yojanas and in minutes,
is found by a method precisely similar to that already described.
    There is hardly in the whole treatise a more curious instance than
this of the mingling together of true theory and false assumption in the
same process, and of the concealment of the real character of a process
by substituting other and equivalent data for its true elements.
iv. 5.]                  Translation and Notes.                        129

   We meet for the first time, in this passage, the term employed in the
treatise to designate a planetary orbit, namely kaksh&, literally " border,
girdle, periphery." The value finally obtained for the apparent diame
ter of the sun or moon, as later of the shadow, is styled its m&na,
" measure."
   In order to furnish a practical illustration of the processes taught in
this chapter, we have calculated in full, by the methods and elements of
the Surya-Siddhanta, the lunar eclipse of Feb. 6th, 1860. Rather, how
ever, than present the calculation piecemeal, and with its different pro
cesses severed from their natural connection, and arranged under the
passages to which they severally belong, we have preferred to give it
entire in the Appendix, whither the reader is referred for it.
   4. Multiply the earth's diameter by the true daily motion of
the moon, and divide by her mean motion : the result is the
earth's corrected diameter (suci). The difference between the
earth's diameter and the corrected diameter of the sun
   5. Is to be multiplied by the moon's mean diameter, and divi
ded by the sun's mean diameter : subtract the result from the
earth's corrected diameter (suci), and the remainder is the diam
eter of the shadow ; which is reduced to minutes as before.
   The method employed in this process for finding the diameter of the
earth's shadow upon the moon's mean orbit may be explained by the
aid of the following figure (Fig. 20).
   As in the last figure, let E represent the earth's place, S and M points
in the mean orbits of the sun and moon, and M' the moon's actual
place. Let t u be the sun's corrected diameter, or the part of his mean
orbit which his disk at its actual distance covers, ascertained as directed
in the preceding passage, and let F G be the earth's diameter. Through
                                  Fig. 20.




F and G draw v F/ and w Gg parallel to S M, and also t F h and « G k :
then hk will be the diameter of the shadow where the moon actually
enters it. The value of h k evidently equals fg (or F G) — (fh-\-g k) ;
and the value of fh-}-g k may be found by the proportion
     Fv (or ES) : tv+wu (or tu-FG) : :F/(or EM') -.fh+gk
But the Hindu system provides no method of measuring the angular
value of quantities at the distance E M', nor does it ascertain the value
of EM' itself: and as, in the last process, the diameter of the moon
130                         S&rya-SiddMnta,                            [iv. 5-
was reduced, for measurement, to its value at the distance E M', so, to
be made commensurate -with it, all the data of this process must be
similarly modified. That is to say, the proportion
                           EM':EM::/y:/y
—substituting, as before, the ratio of the moon's mean to her true
motion for that of EM' to EM—gives f g', which the text calls the
suci : the word means literally " needle, pyramid ; we do not see pre
cisely how it comes to be employed to designate the quantity f g1, and
have translated it, for lack of a better term, and in analogy with the
language of the text respecting the diameters of the sun and moon,
" corrected diameter of the earth." It is also evident that
                     E M' :fh+g k : : E M :/ h'+g' k'
hence, substituting the latter of these ratios for the former in our first
proportion, and inverting the middle terms, we have

Once more, now, we have a substitution of ratios, E S : E M being re
placed by the ratio of the sun's mean diameter to that of the moon.
In this there is a slight inaccuracy. The substitution proceeds upon the
assumption that the mean apparent values of the diameters of the sun
and moon are precisely equal, in which case, of course, their absolute
diameters would be as their distances ; but we have seen, in the note to
the first verse of this chapter, that the moon's mean angular diameter is
made a little less than the sun's, the former being 32', the latter 32' 24".8.
The error is evidently neglected as being too small to impair sensibly the
correctness of the result obtained : it is not easy to see, however, why we
do not have the ratio of the mean distances represented here, as in verses
2 and 3, by that of the orbits, or by that of the revolutions in an Age
taken inversely. The substitution being made, we have the final propor
tion on which the rule in the text is based, viz., the sun's mean diameter
is to the moon's mean diameter as the excess of the sun's corrected
diameter over the actual diameter of the earth is to a quantity which,
being subtracted from the suci, or corrected diameter of the earth, leaves
as a remainder the diameter of the shadow as projected upon the moon's
mean orbit : it is expressed in yojanas, but is reduced to minutes, as
before, by dividing by fifteen. The earth's penumbra is not taken into
account in the Hindu process of calculation of an eclipse.
   The lines fg,fg', etc., are treated here as if they were straight lines,
instead of arcs of the moon's orbit : but the inaccuracy never comes to
be of any account practically, since the value of these lines always falls
inside of the limits within which the Hindu methods of calculation
recognize no difference between an arc and its sine.
  6. The earth's shadow is distant half the signs from the sun :
when the longitude of the moon's node is the same with that of
the shadow, or with that of the sun, or when it is a few degrees
greater or less, there will be an eclipse.
  To the specifications of this verse we need to add, of course, " at the
time of conjunction or of opposition."
iv. 8.]                  Translation and Notes.                        131

   It will be noticed that no attempt is made here to define the lunar
and solar ecliptic limits, or the distances from the moon's node within
which eclipses are possible. Those limits are, for the moon, nearly 12° ;
for the sun, more than 17°.
   The word used to designate "eclipse," grahana, means literally
" seizure" : it, with other kindred terms, to be noticed later, exhibits the
influence of the primitive theory of eclipses, as seizures of the heavenly
bodies by the monster Rahu. In verses 17 and 19, below, instead of
ffrahana we have graha, another derivative from the same root grah or
grabh, " grasp, seize." Elsewhere graha never occurs except as signifying
" planet, and it is the only word which the Surya-Siddhanta employs
with that signification : as so used, it is an active instead of a passive
derivative, meaning " seizer," and its application to the planets is due
to the astrological conception of them, as powers which " lay hold upon"
the fates of men with their supernatural influences.
   7. The longitudes of the sun and moon, at the moment of
the end of the day of new moon (amdvdsyd), are equal, in signs,
etc. ; at the end of the day of full moon (paurnamdsi) they are
equal in degrees, etc., at a distance of half the signs.
   8. When diminished or increased by the proper equation of
motion for the time, past or to come, of opposition or conjunc
tion, they are made to agree, to minutes : the place of the node
at the same time is treated in the contrary manner.
   The very general directions and explanations contained in verses 6, 7,
and 9 seem out of place here in the middle of the chapter, and would
have more properly constituted its introduction. The process prescribed
in verse 8, also, which has for its object the determination of the longi
tudes of the sun, moon, and moon's node, at the moment of opposition
or conjunction, ought no less, it would appear, to precede the ascertain
ment of the true motions, and of the measures of the disks and shadow,
already explained. Verse 8, indeed, by the lack of connection in which
it stands, and by the obscurity of its language, furnishes a striking in
stance of the want of precision and intelligibility so often characteristic
of the treatise. The subject of the verse, which requires to be supplied,
is, " the longitudes of the sun and moon at the instant of midnight next
preceding or following the given opposition or conjunction" ; that being
the time for which the true longitudes and motions are first calculated,
in order to test the question of the probability of an eclipse. If there
 appears to be such a probability, the next step is to ascertain the inter
val between midnight and the moment of opposition or conjunction,
past or to come : this is done by the method taught in ii. 66, or by some
other analogous process : the instant of the occurrence of opposition or
conjunction, in local time, counted from sunrise of the place of observa
tion, must also be determined, by ascertaining the interval between mean
and apparent midnight (ii. 46), the length of the complete day (ii. 59),
and of its parts (ii. 60-63), etc. ; the whole process is sufficiently illus
trated by the two examples of the calculation of eclipses given in the
Appendix. When we have thus found the interval between midnight
132                        S&rya-Siddhdnta.                         [iv. 8-
and the moment of opposition or conjunction, verse 8 teaches us how to
ascertain the true longitudes for that moment : it is by calculating—in
the manner taught in i. 67, but with the true daily motions—the
amount of motion of the sun, moon, and node during the interval, and
applying it as a corrective equation to the longitude of each at mid
night, subtracting in the case of the sun and moon, and adding in the
case of the node, if the moment was then already past ; and the con
trary, if it was still to come. Then, if the process has been correctly
performed, the longitudes of the sun and moon will be found to corres
pond, in the manner required by verse 7.
   For the days of new and full moon, and their appellations, see the
note to ii. 66, above. The technical expression employed here, as in
one or two other passages, to designate the "moment of opposition or
conjunction" is parvanadyas, "nadis of the parvan," or "time of the
parvan in nadis, etc. : " parvan means literally " knob, joint," and is fre
quently applied, as in this term, to denote a conjuncture, the moment
that distinguishes and separates two intervals, and especially one that is
of prominence and importance.
   9. The moon is the eclipser of the sun, coming to stand under
neath it, like a cloud : the moon, moving eastward, enters the
earth's shadow, and the latter becomes its eclipser.
  The names given to the eclipsed and eclipsing bodies are either ch&dya
and, as here, ch&daka, "the body to be obscured" and "the obscurer,"
or gr&hya and grahaka, "the body to be seized" and "the seizer."
The latter terms are akin with grahana and graha, spoken of above
(note to v. 6), and represent the ancient theory of the phenomena, while
the others are derived from their modern and scientific explanation, as
given in this verse.
   10. Subtract the moon's latitude at the time of opposition or
conjunction from half the sum of the measures of the eclipsed
and eclipsing bodies : whatever the remainder is, that is said to
be the amount obscured.
   11. When that remainder is greater than the eclipsed body,
the eclipse is total ; when the contrary, it is partial ; when the
latitude is greater than the half sum, there takes place no obscu
ration (grdsa).
   It is sufficiently evident that when, at the moment of opposition, the
moon's latitude—which is the distance of her centre from the ecliptic,
where is the centre of the shadow—is equal to the sum of the radii of
her disk and of the shadow, the disk and the shadow will just touch one
another ; and that, on the other hand, the moon will, at the moment of
opposition, be so far immersed in the shadow as her latitude is less than
the sum of the radii : and so in like manner for the sun, with due allow
ance for parallax. The Hindu mode of reckoning the amount eclipsed
is not by digits, or twelfths of the diameter of the eclipsed body, which
method we have inherited from the Greeks, but by minutes.
iv. 13.]                 Translation and Notes.                      133
   The word gr&sa, used in verse 11 for obscuration or eclipse, means
literally " eating, devouring," and so speaks more distinctly than any
other term we have had of the old theory of the physical cause of
eclipses.
   12. Divide by two the sum and difference respectively of the
eclipsed and eclipsing bodies : from the square of each of the
resulting quantities subtract the square of the latitude, and take
the square roots of the two remainders.
   13. These, multiplied by sixty and divided by the difference
of the daily motions of the sun and moon, give, in nadis, etc.,
half the duration (sthiti) of the eclipse, and half the time of total
obscuration.
   These rules for finding the intervals of time between the moment
of opposition or conjunction in longitude, which is regarded as the
middle of the eclipse, and the moments of first and last contact, and, in
a total eclipse, of the beginning and end of total obscuration, may be
illustrated by help of the annexed figure (Fig. 21).
   Let E C L represent the ecliptic, the point C being the centre of the
shadow, and let C D be the moon's latitude at the moment of opposi-
                                 Fig. 21.




tion ; which, for the present, we will suppose to remain unchanged
through the whole continuance of the eclipse. It is evident that the
first contact of the moon with the shadow will take place when, in the
triangle C A M, A C equals the moon's distance in longitude from the
centre of the shadow, A M her latitude, and C M the sum of her radius
and that of the shadow. In like manner, the moon will disappear en
tirely within the shadow when B C equals her distance in longitude from
the centre of the shadow, B N her latitude, and C N the difference of
the two radii. Upon subtracting, then, the square of A M or B N from
those of C M and C N respectively, and taking the square roots of the
remainders, we shall have the values of AC and BC in minutes. These
may be reduced to time by the following proportion : as the excess at
                        i8"


                                                                            "
134                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [iv. 13-
the given time of the moon's true motion in a day over that of the sun
is to a clay, or sixty nadis, so are A C and B C, the amounts which the
moon has to gain in longitude upon the sun between the moments of
contact and immersion respectively and the moment of opposition, to
the corresponding intervals of time.
   But the process, as thus conducted, involves a serious error : the
moon's latitude, instead of remaining constant during the eclipse, is con
stantly and sensibly changing. Thus, in the figure above, of which the
 conditions are those found by the Hindu processes for the eclipse of Feb.
 6th, 1860, the moon's path, instead of being upon the line HK, parallel
 to the ecliptic, is really upon QR. The object of the process next
taught is to get rid of this error.
  14. Multiply the daily motions by the half-duration, in nadis,
and divide by sixty : the result, in minutes, subtract for the time
of contact (pragraha), and add for that of separation (mofaha),
respectively ;
  15. By the latitudes thence derived, the half-duration, and
likewise the half-time of total obscuration, are to be calculated
anew, and the process repeated. In the case of the node, the
proper correction, in minutes, etc., is to be applied in the con
trary manner.
   This method of eliminating the error involved in the supposition of
a constant latitude, and of obtaining another and more accurate deter
mination of the intervals between the moment of opposition and those
of first and last contact, and of immersion and emergence, is by a series
of successive approximations. For instance : A C, as already determined,
being assumed as the interval between opposition and first contact, a
new calculation of the moon's longitude is made for the moment A, and,
with this and the sum of the radii, a new value is found for AC. But
now, as the position of A is changed, the former determination of its
latitude is vitiated and must be made anew, and made to furnish anew
a corrected value of A C ; and so on, until the position of A is fixed
with the degree of accuracy required. The process must be conducted
separately, of course, for each of the four quantities affected ; since, where
latitude is increasing, as in the case illustrated, the true values of A C
and BC will be greater than their mean values, while GO and FC, the
true intervals in the after part of the eclipse, will be less than A C and
B C : and the contrary when latitude is decreasing.
   We have illustrated these processes by reference only to a lunar
eclipse : their application to the conditions of a solar eclipse requires
the introduction of another element, that of the parallax, and will be
explained in the notes upon the next chapter.
   The first contact of the eclipsed and eclipsing bodies is styled in this
passage pragraha, "seizing upon, laying hold of;" elsewhere it is also
called gr&sa, " devouring," and sparfa, " touching :" the last contact, or
separation, is named moksha, " release, letting go." The whole duration
of the eclipse, from contact to separation, is the sthiti, " stay, continu
ance ; " total obscuration is vimarda, " crushing out, entire destruction."
iv. 21.]                 Translation and Notes.                         135
   16. The middle of the eclipse is to be regarded as occurring
at the true close of the lunar day : if from that time the time of
half-duration, be subtracted, the moment of contact (grdsa) is
found ; if the same be added, the moment of separation.
   17. In like manner also, if from and to it there be subtracted
and added, in the case of a total eclipse, the half-time of total
obscuration, the results will be the moments called those of im
mersion and emergence.
   The instant of true opposition, or of apparent conjunction (see below,
under ch. v. 9), in longitude, of the sun and moon, is to be taken as the
middle of the eclipse, even though, owing to the motion of the moon in
latitude, and also, in a solar eclipse, to parallax, that instant is not mid
way between those of contact and separation, or of immersion and
emergence. To ascertain the moment of local time of each of these
phases of the eclipse, we subtract and add, from and to the local time
of opposition or conjunction, the true intervals found by the processes
described in verses 12 to 15.
   The total disappearance of the eclipsed body within, or behind, the
eclipsing body, is called nimilana, literally the " closure of the eyelids,
as in winking : " its first commencement of reappearance is styled unmi-
lana, " parting of the eyelids, peeping." We translate the terms by
"immersion" and "emergence" respectively.
   18. If from half the duration of the eclipse any given interval
be subtracted, and the remainder multiplied by the difference of
the daily molktns of the sun and moon, and divided by sixty, the
result will be the perpendicular (koti) in minutes.
   19. In the case of an eclipse (graha) of the sun, the perpen
dicular in minutes is to be multiplied by the mean half-duration,
and divided by the true (sphuta) half-duration, to give the true
perpendicular in minutes.
   20. The latitude is the base (bhuja) : the square root of the
sum of their squares is the hypothenuse (gravd) : subtract this
from half the sum of the measures, and the remainder is the
amount of obscuration (grdsa) at the given time.
   21. If that time be after the middle of the eclipse, subtract
the interval from the half-duration on the side of separation, and
treat the remainder as before : the result is the amount remaining
obscured on the side of separation.
  The object of the process taught in this passage is to determine the
amount of obscuration of the eclipsed body at any given moment during
the continuance of the eclipse. It, as well as that prescribed in the
following passage, is a variation of that which forms the subject of verses
12 and 13 above, being founded, like the latter, upon a consideration of
the right-angled triangle formed by the line joining the centres of the
eclipsed and eclipsing bodies as hypothenuse, the difference of their
longitudes as perpendicular, and the moon's latitude as base. And
whereas, in the former problem, we had the base and hypothenuse given
136                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [iv.21-
to find the perpendicular, here we have the base and perpendicular given
to find the hypothenuse. The perpendicular is furnished us in time,
and the rule supposes it to be stated in the form of the interval between
the given moment and that of contact or of separation : a form to
 which, of course, it may readily be reduced from any other mode of
 statement. The interval of time is reduced to its equivalent as differ
 ence of longitude by a proportion the reverse of that given in verse 13,
 by which difference of longitude was converted into time ; the moon's
 latitude is then calculated ; from the two the hypothenuse is deduced ;
 and the comparison of this with the sum of the radii gives the measure
 of the amount of obscuration.
   Verse 21 seems altogether superfluous : it merely states the method of
proceeding in case the time given falls anywhere between the middle and
the end of the eclipse, as if the specifications of the preceding verses ap
plied only to a time occurring before the middle : whereas they are gen
eral in their character, and include the former case no less than the latter.
   When the eclipse is one of the sun, allowance needs to be made for
the variation of parallax during its continuance ; this is done by the
process described in verse 19, of which the explanation will be given in
the notes to the next chapter (vv. 14-17).
   In verse 20, for the first and only time, we have latitude called kshepa,
instead of vikshepa, as elsewhere. In the same verse, the term employed
for "hypothenuse" is frava, "hearing, organ of hearing;" this, as well
as the kindred fravana, which is also once or twice employed, is a syno
nym of the ordinary term karna, which means literally " ear." It is
difficult to see upon what conception their employment in this significa
tion is founded.                                            ""
   22. From half the sum of the eclipsed and eclipsing bodies
subtract any given amount of obscuration, in minutes : from the
square of the remainder subtract the square of the latitude at
the time, and take the square root of their difference.
   23. The result is the perpendicular (koti) in minutes—which,
in an eclipse of the sun, is to be multiplied by the true, and
divided by the mean, half-duration—and this, converted into
time by the same manner as when rinding the duration of the
eclipse, gives the time of the given amount of obscuration (grdsa).
   The conditions of this problem are precisely the same with those of
the problem stated above, in verses 12-15, excepting that here, instead
of requiring the instant of time when obscuration commences, or becomes
total, we desire to know when it will be of a certain given amount.
The solution must be, as before, by a succession of approximative steps,
since, the time not being fixed, the corresponding latitude of the moon
cannot be otherwise determined.
   24. Multiply the sine of the hour-angle (natd) by the sine of
the latitude (aksha), and divide by radius : the arc correspond
ing to the result is the degrees of deflection (valandngds), which
are north and south in the eastern and western hemispheres
(kqpdla) respectively.
 iv. 25.]                 Translation and Notes.                        137
    25. From the position of the eclipsed body increased by three
 signs calculate the degrees of declination : add them to the de
 grees of deflection, if of like direction ; take their difference, if of
 different direction: the corresponding sine is the deflection (va-
 lana)—in digits, when divided by seventy.
     This process requires to be performed only when it is desired to pro
 ject an eclipse. lu making a projection according to the Hindu method,
 as will be seen in connection with the sixth chapter, the eclipsed body
 is represented as fixed in the centre of the figure, with a north and
 south line, and an east and west line, drawn through it. The absolute
 position of these lines upon the disk of the eclipsed body is, of course,
 all the time changing : but the change is, in the case of the sun, not
 observable, and in the case of the moon it is disregarded : the Surya-
 Siddhanta takes no notice of the figure visible in the moon's face as
 determining any fixed and natural directions upon her disk. It is de-
^sired to represent to the eye, by the figure drawn, where, with reference
   i the north, south, east, and west points of the moment, the contact, im
 mersion, emergence, separation, or other phases of the eclipse, will take
 place. In order to this, it is necessary to know what is, at each given
 moment, the direction of the ecliptic, in which the motions of both
 eclipsed and eclipsing bodies are made. The east and west direction is
 represented by a small circle drawn through the eclipsed body, parallel
 to the prime vertical ; the north and south direction, by a great circle
 passing through the body and through the north and south points of
 the horizon : and the direction of the ecliptic is determined by ascer-
 certaining the angular                          ri 22
 amount of its deflection
 from the small east and
 west circle at the point
 occupied by the eclipsed
 body. Thus, in the an
 nexed figure (Fig. 22),
 if M be the place of
 the eclipsed body upon
 the ecliptic, C L, and if
 EW be the small east
 and west circle drawn
 through M parallel with
 E' Z, the prime vertical, then the deflection will be the angle made at M
 by C M and E M, which is equal to P' M N, the angle made by perpen
 diculars to the two circles drawn from their respective poles. In order
 to find the value of this angle, a double process is adopted : first, the
 angle made at M by the two small circles E M and D M, which is equiv
 alent to P M N, is approximately determined : as this depends for its
 amount upon the observer's latitude, being nothing in a right sphere, it
 is called by the commentary aksha valana, "the deflection due to lati
 tude :" the text calls it simply valan&nf&s, " degrees of deflection," since
 it does not, like the net result of the whole operation, require to be ex
 pressed in terms of its sine. Next, the angle made at M by the ecliptic,
    138                        Surya-Siddhdnta,                        [iv. 25.
    C L, and the circle of daily revolution, D R, which angle is equal to
    P M P', is also measured : this the commentary calls &yana valana, "the
    deflection due to the deviation of the ecliptic from the equator ;" the
    text has no special name for it. The sum of these two results, or their
    difference, as the case may be, is the valana, or the deflection of the
    ecliptic from the small east and west circle at M, or the angle P' M N.
       In explaining the method and value of these processes, we will com
    mence with the second one, or with that by which P M P', the &yana
    valana, is found. In the following figure (Fig. 23), let O Q be the
    equator, and M L the ecliptic, P and P' being their respective poles.
    Let M be the point at which the amount of deflection of M L from the
    circle of diurnal revolution, D R, is sought. Let M L equal a quadrant ;
    draw P' L, cutting the equator at Q ;
    as also P L, cutting it at B ; then draw                F'S- 23-
    P M and Q M. Now P' M L is a tri-
    quadrantal triangle, and hence M Q is
    a quadrant ; and therefore Q is a pole
    of the circle P O M, and Q O is also a
    quadrant, and Q M O is a right angle.
    But D R also makes right angles at M
    with P M ; hence Q M and D R are
    tangents to one another at M, and the
    spherical angle Q M L is equal to that
    which the ecliptic makes at M with the
    circle of declination, or to P M P' : and
    Q M L is measured by Q L. The rule
    given in the text produces a result which
    is a near approach to this, although not
    entirely accordant with it excepting at the solstice and equinox, the
    points where the deflection is greatest and where it is nothing. We
    are directed to reckon forward a quadrant from the position of the
    eclipsed body—that is, from M to L, in the figure—and then to calcu
    late the declination at that point, which will be the amount of deflection.
    But the declination at L is B L, and since L B Q is a right-angled
    triangle, having a right angle at B, and since L Q and L B are always
    less than quadrants, L B must be less than L Q. The difference between
    them, however, can never be of more than trifling amount ; for, as the
    angle Q L B increases, Q L diminishes ; and the contrary.
       In order to show how the Hindus have arrived at a determination of
    this part of the deflection so nearly correct, and yet not quite correct,
    we will cite the commentator's explanation of the process. He says :
    "The 'east' (pr&ci) of the equator [i.e., apparently, the point of the
    equator eastward toward which the small circle must be considered as
    pointing at M] is a point 90° distant from that where a circle drawn
    from the pole (dhruva) through the planet cuts the equator :" that is to
    say, it is the point Q (Fig. 23), a quadrant from O : " and the interval
    by which this is separated from the ' east' of the ecliptic at 90° from the
    planet, that is the &yana valana." This is entirely correct, and would
    give us Q L, the true measure of the deflection. But the commentator
    goes on farther to say that since this interval, when the planet is at the




,
iv. 25.]                 Translation and Notes.                        139
solstice, is nothing, and when at the equinox is equal to the greatest
declination, it is therefore always equal to the declination at a quadrant's
distance from the planet. This is, as we have seen, a false conclusion,
and leads to an erroneous result : whether they who made the rule were
aware of this, but deemed the process a convenient one, and its result a
.sufficiently near approximation to the truth, we will not venture to say.
    The other part of the operation, to determine the amount of deflec-
1 ion of the circle of declination from the east and west small circle, is
considerably more difficult, and the Hindu process correspondingly
defective. We will first present the explanation of it which the com
mentator gives. He states the problem thus : " by whatever interval
the directions of the equator are deflected from directions correspond
ing to those of the prime vertical, northward or southward, that is the
deflection due to latitude (&ksha valana). Now then : if a movable
circle be drawn through the pole of the prime vertical (sama) and the
point occupied by the planet [i. e., the circle NMS, Fig. 22], then the
interval of the ' easts,' at the distance of a quadrant upon each of the
two circles, the equator and the prime vertical, from the points where
they are respectively cut by that circle [i. e., from T and V] will be the
deflection. . . . Now when the planet is at the horizon [as at D, referred
to E'], then that interval is equal to the latitude [Z Q] ; when the planet
is upon the meridian (y&myottaravrtta, " south and north circle") [i. e.,
when it is at R, referred to Q and Z], there is no interval [as at E'].
Hence, by the following proportion — with a sine of the hour-angle
which is equal to radius the sine of deflection for latitude is equal to
the sine of latitude ; then with any given sine of the hour-angle what
is it ?—a sine of latitude is found, of which the arc is the required de
flection for latitude." This is, in the Hindu form of statement, the
proportion represented by the rule in verse 24, viz. R : sin lat. : : sin
hour-angle : sin deflection.
    It seems to us very questionable, at least, whether the Hindus had
 any more rigorous demonstration than this of the process they adopted,
 or knew wherein lay the inaccuracies of the latter. These we will now
 proceed to point out. In the first place, instead of measuring the angle
 made at the point in question, M, by the two small circles, the east and
 west circle and that of daily revolution—which would be the angle
 P M N—they refer the body to the equator by a circle passing through
 the north and south points of the horizon, and measure the deflection
 of the equator from a small east and west circle at its intersection with
 that circle—which is the angle P T N. Or, if we suppose that, in the
 process formerly explained, no regard was had to the circle of daily
 revolution, D R, the intention being to measure the difference in direc
 tion of the ecliptic at M and the equator at O, then the two parts of
 the process are mconsistent in this, that the one takes as its equatorial
  point of measurement O, and the other T, at which two points the
 direction of the equator is different. But neither is the value of P T N
  correctly found. For, in the spherical triangle P N T, to find the angle
  at T, we should make the proportion
               sinPT (or R) : sin PN : : sin PNT: sin PTN
 But, as the third term in this proportion, the Hindus introduce the sine




                                                                               -
140                         S&rya-SiddMnta.                         [iv. 25-
of the hour-angle, Z P M or M P N, although with a certain modifica
tion which the commentary prescribes, and which makes of it some
thing very near the angle T P N. The text says simply natajy&, " the
sine of the hour-angle" (for nata, see notes to iii. 34-36, and 14—16),
but the commentary specifies that, to find the desired angle in degrees,
we must multiply the hour-angle in time by 90, and divide by the half-
day of the planet. This is equivalent to making a quadrant of that
part of the circle of diurnal revolution which is between the horizon
and the meridian, or to measuring distances upon D R as if they were
proportional parts of E' Q. To make the Hindu process correct, the
product of this modification should be the angle P N T, with which,
however, it only coincides at the horizon, where both T P N and T N P
become right-angles, and at the meridian, where both are reduced to
nullity. The error is closely analogous to that involved in the former
process, and is of slight account when latitude is small, as is also the
error in substituting T for O or M when neither the latitude nor the
declination is great.
   The direction of the ecliptic deflection (&yana valand) is the same,
evidently, with that of the declination a quadrant eastward from the
point in question ; thus, in the case illustrated by the figure, it is south.
The direction of the equatorial deflection (dksha valana) depends upon
the position of the point considered with reference to the meridian,
being—in northern latitudes, which alone the Hindu system contem
plates—north when that point is east of the meridian, and south when
west of it, as specified in verse 24 : since, for instance, E' being the
east point of the horizon, the equator at any point between E' and Q
points, eastward, toward a point north of the prime vertical. In the
case for which the figure is drawn, then, the difference of the two would
be the finally resulting deflection. Since, in making the projection of
the eclipse, it is laid off as a straight line (see the illustration given in
connection with chapter vi), it must be reduced to its value as a sine ;
and moreover, since it is laid down in a circle of which the radius is
49 digits (see below, vi. 2), or in which one digit equals 70'— for
3438'-;-49 = 70', nearly—that sine is reduced to its value in digits by
dividing it by 70.
   The general subject of this passage, the determination of directions
during an eclipse, for the purpose of establishing the positions, upon the
disk of the eclipsed body, of the points of contact, immersion, emerg
ence, and separation, also engaged the attention of the Greeks ; Ptolemy
devotes to it the eleventh and twelfth chapters of the sixth book of his
Syntaxis : his representation of directions, however, and consequently
his method of calculation also, are different from those here exposed.
   26. To the altitude in time (unnata) add a day and a half, and
divide by a half-day ; by the quotient divide the latitudes and
the disks ; the results are the measures of those quantities in
digits (angula).
  By this process due account is taken, in the projection of an eclipse,
of the apparent increase in magnitude of the heavenly bodies when
near the horizon. The theory lying at the foundation of the rale is this :
v. 1.]                       Translation and Notes.                                141
that three minutes of arc at the horizon, and four at the zenith, are
equal to a digit, the difference between the two, or the excess above
three minutes of the equivalent of a digit at the zenith, being one
minute. To ascertain, then, what will be, at any given altitude, the
excess above three minutes of the equivalent of a digit, we ought prop
erly, according to the commentary, to make the proportion •
                   R : 1 ' : : sin altitude : corresp. excess
Since, however, it would be a long and tedious process to find the alti
tude and its sine, another and approximative proportion is substituted
for this " by the blessed Sun," as the commentary phrases it, " through
compassion for mankind, and out of regard to the very slight difference
between the two." It is assumed that the scale of four minutes to the
digit will be always the true one at the noon of the planet in question,
or whenever it crosses the meridian, although not at the zenith ; and so
likewise, that the relation of the altitude to 90° may be measured by
that of the time since rising or until setting (unnata—see above, iii.
37-39) to a half-day. Hence the proportion becomes
             half-day : 1 ' : : altitude in time : corresp. excess
and the excess of the digital equivalent above 3' equals —'--- .
Adding, now, the three minutes, and bringing them into the fractional
expression, we have
         equiv. of digit in minutes at given time =

   The title of the fourth chapter is candragrahan&dhik&ra, " chapter of
lunar eclipses," as that of the fifth is suryagrahan&dhik&ra, " chapter of
solar eclipses." In truth, however, the processes and explanations of
this chapter apply not less to solar than to lunar eclipses, while the next
treats only of parallax, as entering into the calculation of a solar eclipse.
We have taken the liberty, therefore, of modifying accordingly the
headings which we have prefixed to the chapters.




                              CHAPTER V.
                  OF PARALLAX IN A SOLAR ECLIPSE.
COKTKSTB:—1, when there i8 no parallax in longitude, or no parallax in latitude ;
  2, causes of parallax; S, to find the orient-sine ; 4-5, the meridian-sine; 5-7, and
  the sines of celiptic zenith-distance and altitude ; 7-8, to find the amount, in time,
  of the parallax in longitude ; 9, its application in determining the moment of
  apparent conjunction; 10-11, to find the amount, in arc, of the parallax in lati
  tude ; 12-18, its application in calculating an eclipse; 14-17, application of the
  parallax in longitude in determining the moments of contact, of separation, etc.
   1. "When the sun's place is coincident with the meridian
ecliptic-point (madhyalagna), there takes place no parallax in
                     19
142                         Surya-SiddMnta.                              [V.I,

longitude (harija) : farther, when terrestrial latitude (aksha) and
north declination of the meridian ecliptic-point (madhyabha) are
the same, there takes place no parallax in latitude (avanati).
    The latter of these specifications is entirely accurate : when the north
declination of that point of the ecliptic which is at the moment upon
the meridian (madhyalagna ; see iii. 49) is equal to the observer's lati
tude—regarded by the Hindus as always north—the ecliptic itself
passes through the zenith, and becomes a vertical circle ; of course, then,
the effect of parallax would be only to depress the body in that circle,
not to throw it out of it. The other is less exact : when the sun is
upon the meridian, there is, indeed, no parallax in right ascension, but
there is parallax in longitude, unless the ecliptic is also bisected by the
meridian. Here, as below, in verses 8 and 9, the text commits the
inaccuracy of substituting the meridian ecliptic-point (L in Fig. 26) for
the central or highest point of the ecliptic (B in the same figure). The
latter point, although we are taught below (vv. 5-7) to calculate the sine
and cosine of its zenith-distance, is not once distinctly mentioned in the
text ; the commentary calls it tribhonalagna, " the orient ecliptic-point
(lagna—see above, iii. 46-48 : it is the point C in Fig. 26) less three
signs." The commentary points out this inaccuracy on the part of the text.
    In order to illustrate the Hindu method of looking at the subject of
parallax, we make the following citation from the general exposition of
it given by the commentator under this verse : "At the end of the day
of new moon (am&v&sya) the sun and moon have the same longitude ;
if, now, the moon has no latitude, then a line drawn from the earth's
                                            centre [C in the accompanying
                    e' 24-                  figure] to the sun's place [S] just
                                            touches the moon [M] : hence,
                                            at the centre, the moon becomes
                                            an eclipsing, and the sun an
                                            eclipsed, body. Since, however,
                                            men are not at the earth's centre,
                                            (garlha, " womb ") but upon the
                                            earth's surface (prshtha, " back"),
                                            a line drawn from the earth's
                                            surface [B] up to the sun does
                                            not just touch the moon ; but it
                                            cuts the moon's sphere above the
                                            point occupied by the moon [at
                                            m], and when the moon arrives
                                            at this point, then is she at the
                                            earth's surface the eclipser of
                                            the sun. But when the sun is at
                                            the zenith (khamadhya, "mid-
heaven"), then the lines drawn up to the sun from the earth's centre
and surface, being one and the same, touch the moon, and so the moon
becomes an eclipsing body at the end of the day of new moon. Hence,
too, the interval [J\l m\ of the lines from the earth's centre and surface
is the pnrnllnx (lambmin}."
v. 1.]                   Translation and Notes.                        143
   It is evident from this explication Low far the Hindu view of parallax
is coincident with our own. The principle is the same, but its applica
tion is somewhat different. Instead of taking the parallax absolutely,
determining that for the sun, which is BSC, and that for the moon,
which is B M C, the Hindus look at the subject practically, as it must be
taken account of in the calculation of an eclipse, and calculate only tho
difference of the two parallaxes, which is mBM, or, what is virtually
the same thing, M C m. The Surya-Siddlmnta, however, as we shall see
hereafter more plainly, takes no account of any case in which the line
C S would not pass through M, that is to say, the moon's latitude is
neglected, and her parallax calculated as if she were in the ecliptic.
   We cite farther from the commentary, in illustration of the resolution
of the parallax into parallax in longitude and parallax in latitude.
   "Now by how many degrees, measured on the moon's sphere (golo),
the line drawn from the earth's surface up to the sun cuts the moon's
vertical circle (drgvrtto) above the point occupied by the moon—this is,
when the vertical circle and the ecliptic coincide, the moon's parallax in
longitude (lambano). But when tie ecliptic deviates from a vertical
circle, then, to the point where the flne from the earth's surface cuts the
moon's sphere on the moon's vertical circle above the moon [i. e., to m,
                                           Fig- 25], draw through the pole
                                           of the ecliptic (kadamba) a cir
                                           cle [P'wira'J north and south to
                                           the ecliptic on the moon's sphere
                                           [M «'] : and then the east and
                                           west interval [M »'] on the eclip
                                           tic between the point occupied
                                           by the moon [M] and the point
                                           where the circle as drawn cuts
                                           the ecliptic on the moon's sphere
                                           [«'] is the moon's true (sphuta)
parallax in longitude, in minutes, and is the perpendicular (leoti). And
since the moon moves along with the ecliptic, the north and south inter
val, upon the circle we have drawn, between the ecliptic and the vertical
circle [m n'] is, in minutes, the parallax in latitude (nati) ; which is the
base (tjhuja). The interval, in minutes, on the vertical circle [Z A],
between the lines from the earth's centre and surface [m M], is the ver
tical parallax (drglambanu), and the hypothenuse."
   The conception here presented, it will be noticed, is that the moon's
path, or the " ecliptic on the moon's sphere," is depressed away from
C L, which might be called the " ecliptic on the sun's sphere," to an
amount measured as latitude by m n', and as longitude by n1 M. To
our apprehension, mnM., rather than m n' M, would be the triangle of
resolution : the two are virtually equal.
   The commentary then goes on farther to explain that when the ver
tical circle and the secondary to the ecliptic coincide, the parallax in
longitude disappears, the whole vertical parallax becoming parallax in
latitude : and again, when the vertical circle and the ecliptic coincide,
the parallax in latitude disappears, the whole vertical parallax becoming
parallax in longitude.
    144                       S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [v. 1-
       The term uniformly employed by the commentary, and more usually
    by the text, to express parallax in longitude, namely lambana, is from
    the same root which we have already more than once had occasion to
    notice (see above, under i. 25, 60), and means literally "hanging down
    ward." In this verse, as once or twice later (vv. 14, 16), the text uses
    harija, which the commentary explains as equivalent to kshitija, " pro
    duced by the earth :" this does not seem very plausible, but we have
    nothing better to suggest. For parallax in latitude the text presents
    only the term avanati, " bending downward, depression :" the commen
    tary always substitutes for it nati, which has nearly the same sense, and
    is the customary modern term.
      2. How parallax in latitude arises by reason of the difference
    of place (deya) and time (Mia), and also parallax in longitude
    (lambana) from direction (ofi'f) eastward or the contrary—that is
    now to be explained.
       This distribution of the three elements of direction, place, and time,
    as causes respectively of parallax i£ longitude and in latitude, is some
    what arbitrary. The verse is to be taken, however, rather as a general
    introduction to the subject of the chapter, than as a systematic state
    ment of the causes of parallax.
       3. Calculate, by the equivalents in oblique ascension (udayd-
    savas) of the observer's place, the orient ecliptic-point (lagna) for
    the moment of conjunction (parvavinddyas) : multiply the sine
    of its longitude by the sine of greatest declination, and divide
    by the sine of co-latitude (lamba) : the result is the quantity
    known as the orient-sine (udaya).
       The object of this first step in the rather tedious operation of calcu
    lating the parallax is to find for a given moment—here the moment of
    true conjunction—the sine of amplitude of that point of the ecliptic
    which is then upon the eastern horizon. In the first place the longitude
    of that point (lagna) is determined, by the data and methods taught
    above, in iii. 46-48, and which are sufficiently explained in the note to
    that passage : then its sine of amplitude is found, by a process which is
    a combination of that for finding the declination from the longitude,
    and that for finding the amplitude from the declination. Thus, by ii. 28,
                        R : sin gr. decl. : : sin long. : sin decl.
    and, by iii. 22-23,
                         sin co-lat. : E : : sin decl. : sin ampl.
    Hence, by combining terms, we have
                   sin co-lat. : sin gr. decl. : : sin long. : sin ampl.
      This sine of amplitude receives the technical name of udaya, or
    udayajy& : the literal meaning of udaya is simply " rising."
      4. Then, by means of the equivalents in right ascension
    (lankodaydsavas), find the ecliptic-point (lagna) called that of the
    meridian (madhya) : of the declination of that point and the lati-



-
v.6.]                    Translation and Notes.                        145
tu.de of the observer take the sum, when their direction is the
same ; otherwise, take their difference.
   5. The result is the meridian zenith-distance, in degrees (natdn-
       its sine is denominated the meridian-sine (madhyajyd). . . .
   The accompanying figure (Fig. 26) will assist the comprehension of
this and the following processes. Let N E S W be a horizontal plane,
                                           N S the projection upon it of
                    Fig. 26.               the meridian, and E W that
                                           of the prime vertical, Z being
                                           the zenith. Let C L T be the
                                           ecliptic. Then C is the orient
                                           ecliptic-point (lagna), and C
                                           D the sine of its amplitude
                                           (udayajya), found by the last
                                           process. The meridian ecliptic
                                           point (madhyalagna) is L : it
                                           is ascertained by the method
                                           prescribed in iii. 49, above.
                                           Its distance from the zenith
                                           is found from its declination
                                           and the latitude of the place
                                           of observation, as taught in
                                           iii. 20-22 ; and the sine of
                                           that distance, by which, in
                                           the figure, it is seen projected,
is Z L : it is called by the technical name madhyajya, which we have
translated "meridian-sine."
   5. ... Multiply the meridian-sine by the orient-sine, and divide
by radius : square the result,
   6. And subtract it from the square of the meridian-sine : the
square root of the remainder is the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance
(drkkshepa) ; the square root of the difference of the squares of
that and radius is the sine of ecliptic-altitude (drggati).
   Here we are taught how to find the sines of the zenith-distance and
altitude respectively of that point of the ecliptic which has greatest alti
tude, or is nearest to the zenith, and which is also the central point
of the portion of the ecliptic above the horizon : it is called by the
commentary, as already noticed (see note to v. 1), tribhonalagna. Thus,
in the last figure, if QR be the vertical circle passing through the pole
of the ecliptic, P', and cutting the ecliptic, C T, in 13, B is the central
ecliptic-point (tribhonalagna), and the arcs seen projected in ZB and
B R are its zenith-distance and altitude respectively. In order, now, to
find the sine of ZB, we first find that of BL, and by the following pro
cess. C D is the orient-sine, already found. But since C Z and C P'
are quadrants, C is a pole of the vertical circle Q R, and C R is a quad
rant. E S is also a quadrant : take away their common part C S, and
C E remains equal to S R, and the sine of the latter, S O, is equal to
that of the former, C D, the " orient-sine." Now, then, Z B L is treated
146                         S&rya-Sidd/idnta,                         [v. 6-
 as if it were a plane horizontal triangle, and similar to Z 0 S, and the
 proportion is made
                               ZS:SO:ZL:BL
or                       11 : or.-sine : : mer.-sine : B L
    This is so far a correct process, that it gives the true sine of the arc
BL: for, by spherical trigonometry, in the spherical triangle ZBL,
right-angled at B,
               sin Z B L : sin B Z L : : sin arc Z L : sin arc B L
or                         li : S O : : Z L : sin B L
   But the third side of a plane right-angled triangle of which the sines
of the arcs ZB and ZL are hypothenuse and perpendicular, is not the
sine of B L. If we conceive the two former sines to be drawn from Z,
meeting in b and I respectively the lines drawn from B and L to the
centre, then the line joining 4 / will be the third side, being plainly less
than sin BL. Hence, on subtracting sinaBL from sinaZL, and taking
the square root of the remainder, we obtain, not sinZB, but a less quan
tity, which may readily be shown, by spherical trigonometry, to be
sin Z B cos B L. The value, then, of the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance
(drkkshejM) as determined by this process, is always less than the truth,
and as the corresponding cosine (drr/gati) is found by subtracting the
square of the sine from that of radius, and taking the square root of the
remainder, its value is always proportionally greater than the truth. This
inaccuracy is noticed by the commentator, who points out correctly its
reason and nature : probably it was also known to those who framed the
rule, but disregarded, as not sufficient to vitiate the general character of
the process : and it may, indeed, well enough pass unnoticed among
all the other inaccuracies involved in the Hindu calculations of the
parallax.
   As regards the terms employed to express the sines of ecliptic zenith-
distance and altitude, we have already met with the first member of each
compound, drf, literally " sight," in other connected uses : as in dryjy&,
"sine of zenith-distance" (see above, iii. 33), drgvrtttt, "vertical-circle"
(commentary to the first verse of this chapter) : here it is combined
with words which seem to be rather arbitrarily chosen, to form techni
cal appellations for quantities used only iu this process: the literal
meaning of kshtpa is " throwing, hurling ;" of gati, " gait, motion."
  7. The sine and cosine of meridian zenith-distance (natdncds)
are the approximate (asphuta) sines of ecliptic zenith-distance
and altitude (drJc/cshepa, drygati). . . .
   This is intended as an allowable simplification of the above process
for finding the sines of ecliptic zenith-distance and altitude, by substi
tuting for them other quantities to which they are nearly equivalent,
and which are easier of calculation. These arc the sines of zenith-
distance and altitude of the meridian ecliptic-point (madhyalagna.—L in
Fig. 26) the former of which has already been made an element in the
other process, under the name of "meridian-sine" (madhyajy&). It
might, indeed, from the terms of the text, be doubtful of what point the
altitude and zenith-distance were to be taken ; a passage cited by the
v. 8.]                    Translation and Notes.                        147
commentator from Bhaskara's Siddhanta-^iromani (found on page 221
of the published edition of the Ganitadhyaya) directs the sines of zenith-
distance and altitude of B (tribkonalagna) when upon the meridian—
that is to say, the sine and cosine of the arc Z F—to be substituted for
those of ZB in a hasty process: but the value of the sine would in
this case be too small, as in the other it was too great: and as the text
nowhere directly recognizes the point B, and as directions have been
fiven in verse 5 for finding the meridian zenith-distance of L, it seems
  ardly to admit of a doubt that the latter is the point to which the text
here intends to refer.
   Probably the permission to make this substitution is only meant to
apply to cases where Z L is of small amount, or where C has but little
amplitude.
   7. ... Divide the square of the sine of one sign by the' sine
called that of ecliptic-altitude (drggatijivd) ; the quotient is the
"divisor " (cheda).
   8. By this " divisor " divide the sine of the interval between
the meridian ecliptic-point (madhyalagna) and the sun's place :
the quotient is to be regarded as the parallax in longitude (lam-
bana) of the sun and moon, eastward or westward, in nMis, etc.
   The true nature of the process by which this final rule for finding the
parallax in longitude is obtained is altogether hidden from sight under
the form in which the rule is stated. Its method is as follows :
   We have seen, in connection with the first verse of the preceding
chapter, that the greatest parallaxes of the sun and moon are quite
nearly equivalent to the mean motion of each during 4 nadis. Hence,
were both bodies in the horizon, and the ecliptic a vertical circle, the
moon would be depressed in her orbit below the sun to an amount equal
to her excess in motion during 4 nadis. This, then, is the moon's
greatest horizontal parallax in longitude. To find what it would be at
any other point in the ecliptic, still considered as a vertical circle, we
make the proportion
              R : 4 (hor. par.) : : sin zen.-dist. : vert, parallax
   This proportion is entirely correct, and in accordance with our modern
rule that, with a given distance, the parallax of a body varies as the sine
of its zenith-distance : whether the Hindus had made a rigorous de
monstration of its truth, or whether, as in so many other cases, seeing
that the parallax was greatest when the sine of zenith-distance was
greatest, and nothing when this was nothing, they assumed it to vary
in the interval as the sine of zenith-distance, saying " if, with a sine
of zenith-distance which is equal to radius, the parallax is four nadis,
with a given sine of zenith-distance what is it?"—this we will not ven
ture to determine.
   But now is to be considered the farther case in which the ecliptic is
not a vertical circle, but is depressed below the zenith a certain distance,
measured by the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance (drkkskepa), already
found. Here again, noting that the parallax is all to be reckoned as
parallax in longitude when the ecliptic is a vertical circle, or when the
148                               S&rya-Siddhdnta,                      [v. 8-
sine of ecliptic-altitude is greatest, and that it would be only parallax
in latitude when the ecliptic should be a horizontal circle, or when the
sine of ecliptic-altitude should be reduced to nothing, the Hindus assume
it to vary in the interval as that sine, and accordingly make the propor
tion : " if, with a sine of ecliptic-altitude that is equal to radius, the par
allax in longitude is equal to the vertical parallax, with any given sine
of ecliptic-altitude what is it ?"—or, inverting the middle terms,
              R : sin ecl.-alt. : : vert, parallax : parallax in long.
But we had before
              R:        4        : : sin zen.-dist. : vert, parallax
hence, by combining terms,
             Ra : 4 sin eel.-alt.: : sin zen.-dist. : parallax in long.
For the third term of this proportion, now, is substituted the sine of the
distance of the given point from the central ecliptic-point : that is to say,
Bw (Fig. 26) is substituted for Zm; the two are in fact of equal value
only when they coincide, or else at the horizon, when each becomes a
quadrant ; but the error involved in the substitution is greatly lessened
by the circumstance that, as it increases in proportional amount, the
parallax in longitude itself decreases, until at B the latter is reduced to
nullity, as is the vertical parallax at Z. The text, indeed, as in verses
1 and 9, puts madhyalagna, L, for tribhonalagna, B, in reckoning this
distance : but the commentary, without ceremony or apology, reads the
latter for the former. These substitutions being made, and the propor
tion being reduced to the form of an equation, we have
                          . ,       sin dist.X 4 sin ecl.-alt.
                     par. m long. =           —
which reduces to
                      sin disf.                       gin <list.
                                         or
                R« -:- 4 sin ecl.-alt.           iR*-r- sin ecl.-alt.
and since £R2= (£R)2, and £R = sin 30°, we have finally
                          . ,          sin dist.
                     pur. m long. = .30
which is the rule given in the text. To the denominator of the fraction,
in its final form, is given the technical name of cheda, " divisor," which
word we have had before similarly used, to designate one of the factors
in a complicated operation (see above, iii. 35, 38).
   We will now examine the correctness of the second principal propor
tion from which the rule is deduced. It is, in terms of the last figure
(Fig. 26),
                       R : sin Z P (—B R) : : m M : m n
Assuming the equality of the little triangles M m n and M m n', and
accordingly that of the angles wiMn and Mwn', which latter equals
Z m P', we have, by spherical trigonometry, as a true proportion,
                     sin m n' M : sin M m n' : : m M : m n'
or                         R : sin Z m P' : : m M : m n
Hence the former proportion is correct only when sin Z P' and sin
Z m P' are equal ; that is to say, when Z P' measures the angle Z m P' ;
v. 10.]                   Translation and Notes.                         149
and this can be the case only when Z m, as well as P' m, is a quadrant,
or when m is on the horizon. Here again, however, precisely as in the
case last noticed, the importance of the error is kept within very narrow
limits by the fact that, as its relative consequence increases, the amount
of the parallax in longitude affected by it diminishes.
  9. When the sun's longitude is greater than that of the meri
dian ecliptic-point (madhyalagria), subtract the parallax in longi
tude from the end of the lunar day ; when less, add the same :
repeat the process until all is fixed.
   The text so pertinaciously reads " meridian ecliptic-point " (madhya-
lagna) where we should expect, and ought to have, " central ecliptic-
point" (tribhonalagna), that we are almost ready to suspect it of mean
ing to designate the latter point by the former name. It is sufficiently
clear that, whenever the sun and moon are to the eastward of the cen
tral ecliptic-point, the effect of the parallax in longitude will be to throw
the moon forward on her orbit beyond the sun, and so to cause the time
of apparent to precede that of real conjunction ; and the contrary.
Hence, in the eastern hemisphere, the parallax, in time, is subtractive,
while in the western it is additive. But a single calculation and appli
cation of the correction for parallax is not enough ; the moment of ap
parent conjunction must be found by a series of successive approxima
tions : since if, for instance, the moment of true conjunction is 25n 2',
and the calculated parallax in longitude for that moment is 2n 21V, the
apparent end of the lunar day will not be at 27n 23V, because at the
latter time the parallax will be greater than 2n 21V, deferring accordingly
still farther the time of conjunction ; and so on. The commentary ex
plains the method of procedure more fully, as follows: for the moment
of true conjunction in longitude calculate the parallax in longitude, and
apply it to that moment : for the time thus found calculate the parallax
anew, and apply it to the moment of true conjunction : again, for the
time found as the result of this process, calculate the parallax, and ap
ply it as before ; and so proceed, until a moment is arrived at, at which
the difference in actual longitude, according to the motions of the two
planets, will just equal and counterbalance the parallax in longitude.
   The accuracy of this approximative process cannot but be somewhat
impaired by the circumstance that, while the parallax is reckoned in
difference of mean motions, the corrections of longitude must be made
in true motions. Indeed, the reckoning of tne horizontal parallax in
time as 4 nadis, whatever be the rate of motion of the sun and moon, is
one of the most palpable among the many errors which the Hindu pro
cess involves.
   To ascertain the moment of apparent conjunction in longitude, only
the parallax in longitude requires to be known ; but to determine the
time of occurrence of the other phases of the eclipse, it is necessary to
take into account the parallax in latitude, the ascertainment of which is
accordingly made the subject of the next rule.
  10. If the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance (drkkshepd) be multi
plied by the difference of the mean motions of the sun and
                  20


                                                                                -
150                             S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                [v. 10-
moon, and divided by fifteen times radius, the result will be the
parallax in latitude (avanati).
   As the sun's greatest parallax is equal to the fifteenth part of his
mean daily motion, and that of the moon to the fifteenth part of hers
 (see note to iv. 1, above), the excess of the moon's parallax over that of
the sun is equal, when greatest, to^one fifteenth of the difference of
their respective mean daily motions. This will be the value of the
parallax in latitude when the ecliptic coincides with the horizon, or
when the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance becomes equal to radius. ' On
the other hand, the parallax in latitude disappears when this same sine
is reduced to nullity. Hence it is to be regarded as varying with the
sine of ecliptic zenith-distance, and. in order to find its value at any
given point, wp say " if, with a sine of ecliptic zenith-distance which is
equal to radius, the parallax in latitude is one fifteenth of the difference
of mean daily motions, with a given sine of ecliptic zenith-distance
what is it?" or
       R : diff. of mean m.r^-15 : ; sin eel, zen.-dist. : parallax in lat.
   This proportion, it is evident, would give with entire correctness the
parallax at the central ecliptic^point (B in Fig. 26), where the whole
vertical parallax is to be reckoned as parallax in latitude. But the rule
given in the text also assumes that, with a given position of the ecliptic,
the parallax in latitude is the same at any point in the ecliptic. Of this
the commentary offers no demonstration, but it is essentially true. For,
regarding the little triangle Nmn as a plane triangle, right-angled at n,
and with its angle n m M equal to the angle Z m B, we have
                          R : sin Z m B : : M m : M n
But, in the spherical triangle Z m B, right-angled at B,
                       R : sin Z m B : ; sin Z m : sin Z B
Hence, by equality of ratios,
                        sin Z m : sin Z B t : M m : M n
But, as before shown,
                       R : sin Z m : : gr, parallax : M m
Hence, by combining terms,
                       R : sin Z B : : gr. parallax : M n
   That is to say, whatever ba the position of m, the point for which the
parallax in latitude is sought, this will be equal to the product of the
greatest parallax into the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance, divided by
radius : or, as the greatest parallax equals the difference of mean mo^
tions divided by fifteen,
     .        sin eel. zen.-dist. X diff. of m.m.-rlS    sin ecl.zcn.-dist.Xdiff. of m.m,
par. m lat. =                                         or                   -•           -
                                  K                                   KX15
  The next verse teaches more summary methods of arriving at the
same quantity.
  11. Or, the parallax in latitude is the quotient arising from
dividing the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance (drkkshepa) by sev
v. 13.]                   Translation and Notes.                        161
enty, or, from multiplying it by forty-nine, and dividing it by
radius.
   In the expression given above for the value of the parallax in latitude,
all the terms are constant excepting the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance.
The difference of the mean daily motions is 731' 27", and fifteen times
radius is 51,570'. Now 781' 27//-J-Sl,5'70' equals y,^ or 48.77-^R;
to which the expressions given in the text are sufficiently near approxi
mations.
   12. The parallax in latitude is to be regarded as south or
north according to the direction of the meridian-sine (madhyajyd}.
When it and the moon's latitude are of like direction, take their
sum ; otherwise, their difference :
   13. With this calculate the half-duration (sffiiti), half total ob
scuration (vimardct), amount of obscuration (grdsa), etc., in the
manner already taught ; likewise the scale of projection (pra<
mdna), the deflection (valana), the required amount of obscura
tion, etc., as in the case of a lunar eclipse.
   In ascertaining the true time of occurrence of the various phases of
a solar eclipse, as determined by the parallax of the given point of ob
servation, we are taught first to make the whole correction for parallax
in latitude, and then afterward to apply that for parallax in longitude.
The former part of the process is succinctly taught in verses 12 and 13 :
the rules for the other follow in the next passage. The language of the
text, as usual, is by no means so clear and explicit as could be wished.
Thus, in the case before us, we are not taught whether, as the first step
in this process of correction, we are to calculate the moon's parallax in,
latitude for the time of true conjunction (tithyanta, " end of the lunar
day"), or for that of apparent conjunction (madhyagrahana, "middle of
the eclipse"). It might be supposed that, as we have thus far only had
in the text directions for finding the sine and cosine of ecliptic zenith-
distance at the moment of true conjunction, the former of them was to
be used in the calculations of verses 10 and 11, and the result from it,
which would be the parallax at the moment of true conjunction, applied
here as the correction needed. Nor, so far as we have been able to
discover, does the commentator expound what is the true meaning of
the text upon this point. It is sufficiently evident, however, that the
moment of apparent conjunction is the time required. We have found,
by a process of successive approximation, at what time (see Fig. 25), the
moon (her latitude being neglected) being at m and the sun at n, the
parallax in longitude and the difference of true longitude will both be
the same quantity, mn, and so, when apparent conjunction will take
place. Now, to know the distance of the two centres at that moment,
we require to ascertain the parallax in latitude, «M, for the moon at m,
and to apply it to the moon's latitude when in the same position, taking
their sum when their direction is the same, and their difference when
their direction is different, as prescribed by the text ; the net result will
be the distance required. The commentary,- it may be remarked, ex
pressly states that the moon's latitude is to bef calculated in this opera
152                        S&rya-Stddhdnta,                        [v. 13-
tion for the time of apparent conjunction (madhyagrahana). The dis
tance thus found will determine the amount of greatest obscuration, and
the character of the eclipse, as taught in verse 10 of the preceding chap
ter. It is then farther to be taken as the foundation of precisely such a
process as that described in verses 12-15 of the same chapter, in order
to ascertain the half-time of duration, or of total obscuration : that is to
 say, the distance in latitude of the two centres being first assumed as
invariable through the whole duration of the eclipse, the half-time of
 duration, and the resulting moments of contact and separation are to be
 ascertained : for these moments the latitude and parallax in latitude are
 to be calculated anew, and by them a new determination of the times of
 contact and separation is to be made, and so on, until these are fixed
 with the degree of accuracy required. If the eclipse be total, a similar
 operation must be gone through with to ascertain the moments of im
 mersion and emergence. No account is made, it will be noticed, of the
 possible occurrence of an annular eclipse.
    The intervals thus found, after correction for parallax in latitude
 only, between the middle of the eclipse and the moments of contact and
 separation respectively, are those which are called in the last chapter
 (vv. 19, 23), the "mean half-duration" (madhyaslhityardhd).
    In this process for finding the net result, as apparent latitude, of the
 actual latitude and the parallax in latitude, is brought out with dis
 tinctness the inaccuracy already alluded to ; that, whatever be the
 moon's actual latitude, her parallax is always calculated as if she were
 in the ecliptic. In an eclipse, however, to which case alone the Hindu
 processes are intended to be applied, the moon's latitude can never be
 of any considerable amount.
    The propriety of determining the direction of the parallax in latitude
  by means of that of the meridian-sine (ZL in Fig. 26), of which the
  direction is established as south or north by the process of its calcula
 tion, is too evident to call for remark.
     In verse 13 is given a somewhat confused specification of matters
  which are, indeed, affected by the parallax in latitude, but in different
  modes and degrees. The amount of greatest obscuration, and the
  (mean) half-times of duration and total obscuration, are the quantities
  directly dependent upon the calculation of that parallax, as here pre
  sented : to find the amount of obscuration at a given moment—as also
  the time corresponding to a given amount of obscuration—we require
  to know also the true half-duration, as found by the rules stated in the
  following passage : while the scale of projection and the deflection are
  affected by parallax only so far as this alters the time of occurrence of
  the phases of the eclipse.
    14. For the end of the lunar day, diminished and increased by
 the half-duration, as formerly, calculate again the parallax in
 longitude for the times of contact (grdsa) and of separation (mok-
 sha), and find the difference between these and the parallax in
 longitude (harija) for the middle of the eclipse.
    15. If, in the eastern hemisphere, the parallax in longitude
 for the contact is greater than that for the middle, and that for
v. 17.]                  Translation and Notes.                        153
the separation less ; and if, in 4he western hemisphere, the con
trary is the case—
   16. Then the difference of parallax in longitude is to be added
to the half-duration on the side of separation, and likewise on
that of contact (pragrahana) ; when the contrary is true, it is to
be subtracted.
   17. These rules are given for cases where the two parallaxes
are in the same hemisphere : where they are in different hemi
spheres, the sum of the parallaxes in longitude is to be added to
the corresponding half-duration. The principles here stated ap
ply also to the half-time of total obscuration.
   We are supposed to have ascertained, by the preceding process, the
true amount of apparent latitude at the moments of first and last con
tact of the eclipsed and eclipsing bodies, and consequently to have de
termined the dimensions of the triangle—corresponding, in a solar
eclipse, to CGP, Fig. 21, in a lunar—made up of the latitude, the dis
tance in longitude, and the sum of the two radii. The question now is
how the duration of the eclipse will be affected by the parallax in longi
tude. If this parallax remained constant during the continuance of the
eclipse, its effect would be nothing ; and, having once determined by it
the time of apparent conjunction, we should not need to take it farther
into account. But it varies from moment to moment, and the effect of
its variation is to prolong the duration of every part of a visible eclipse.
For, to the east of the central ecliptic-point, it throws the moon's disk
forward upon that of the sun, thus hastening the occurrence of all the
phases of the eclipse, but by an amount which is all the time decreasing,
so that it hastens the beginning of the eclipse more than the middle,
 and the middle more than the close : to the west of that same point, on
the other hand, it depresses the moon's disk away from the sun's, but by
 an amount constantly increasing, so that it retards the end of the eclipse
 more than its middle, and its middle more than its beginning. The
 effect of the parallax in longitude, then, upon each half-duration of the
 eclipse, will be measured by the difference between its retarding and ac
 celerating effects upon contact and conjunction, and upon conjunction
 and separation, respectively : and the amount of this difference will
 always be additive to the time of half-duration as otherwise determined.
 If, however, contact and conjunction, or conjunction and separation,
 take place upon opposite sides of the point of no parallax in longitude,
 then the sum of the two parallactic effects, instead of their difference,
 will be to be added to the corresponding half-duration : since the one,
 on the east, will hasten the occurrence of the former phase, while the
 other, on the west, will defer the occurrence of the latter phase. The
 amount of the parallax in longitude for the middle of the eclipse has
 already been found ; if, now, we farther determine its amount—reckoned,
 it will be remembered, always in time—for the moments of contact and
 separation, and add the difference or the sum of each of these and the
 parallax for the moment of conjunction to the corresponding half-
 duration as previously determined, we shall have the true times of half-
 duration. In order to find the parallax for contact and separation, we




                                                                               ,-
154                         S&rya-Siddkdnta,                         [v. 1T-
 rcpeat the same process (see above, v: 9) by which that for conjunction
 was found : as we then started from the moment of true conjunction,
 and, by a seiies of successive approximations, ascertained the time when
 the difference of longitude would equal the parallax in longitude, so now
 we start from two moments removed from that of true conjunction by
 the equivalents in time of the two distances in longitude obtained by the
last process, and, by a similar series of successive approximations, ascer
tain the times when the differences of longitude, together with the par
 allax, will equal those distances in longitude.
    In the process, as thus conducted, there is an evident inaccuracy. It
is not enough to apply the whole correction for parallax in latitude, and
then that for parallax in longitude, since, by reason of the change effected
by the latter in the times of contact and separation, a new calculation of
the former becomes necessary, and then again a new calculation of the
latter, and so on, until, by a series of doubly compounded approxima
tions, the true value of each is determined. This was doubtless known
to the framers of the system, but passed over by them, on account of
the excessively laborious character of the complete calculation, and be
cause the accuracy of such results as they could obtain was not sensibly
affected by its neglect.                                   ,
    The question naturally arises, why the specifications of verse 15 are
made hypothetical instead of positive, and why, in the latter half of
verse 16, a case is supposed which never arises. The commentator an
ticipates this objection, and takes much pains to remove it : it is not
worth while to follow his different pleas, which amount to no real expla
nation, saving to notice his last suggestion, that, in case an eclipse begins
before sunrise, the parallax for its earlier phase or phases, as calculated
according to the distance in time from the lower meridian, may be less
than for its later phases—and the contrary, when the eclipse ends after
sunset. This may possibly be the true explanation, although we are
justly surprised at finding a case of so little practical consequence, and
to which no allusion has been made in the previous processes, here
taken into account.
    The text, it may be remarked, by its use of the terms " eastern and
western hemispheres" (kapala, literally "cup, vessel"), repeats once more
its substitution of the meridian ecliptic-point (madhyalagna) for the
central ecliptic'point (tribhonalagna), as that of no parallax in longitude ;
the meridian forming the only proper and recognized division of the
heavens into an eastern and a western hemisphere.
    We are now prepared to see the reason of the special directions given
in verses 19 and 23 of the last chapter, respecting the reduction, in a
solar e«lipse, of distance in time from the middle of the eclipse to dis
tance in longitude of the two centres. The "mean half-duration"
(madhyaslhityardha) of the eclipse is the time during which the true dis
tance of the centres at the moments of contact or separation, as found
by the process prescribed in verses 12 and 13 of this chapter, would be
gained by the moon with her actual excess of motion, leaving out of ac
count the variation of parallax in longitude : the " true half-duration "
(sphutasthityardhd) is the increased time in which, owing to that varia
tion, the same distance in longitude is actually gained by the moon ;
vi. 1.]                      Translation and Notes.                              155
 the effect of the parallax being equivalent either to a diminution of the
 moon's excess of motion, or to a protraction of the distance of the two
 centers—both of them in the ratio of the true to the mean half-duration.
 If then, for instance, it be required to know what will be the amount of
 obscuration of the sun half an hour after the first contact, we shall first
 subtract this interval from the true half-duration before conjunction ; the
 remainder will be the actual interval to the middle of the eclipse : this
 interval, then, we shall reduce to its value as distance in longitude by
  diminishing it, either before or after its reduction to minutes of arc, in
 the ratio of the true to the mean half-duration. The rest of the process
 will be performed precisely as in the case of an eclipse of the moon.
    Notwithstanding the ingenuity and approximate correctness of many
 of the rules and methods of calculation taught in this chapter, the whole
 process for the ascertainment of parallax contains so many elements of
 error that it hardly deserves to be called otherwise than cumbrous and
 bungling. The false estimate of the difference between the sun's and
 moon's horizontal parallax—the neglect, in determining it, of the varia
 tion of the moon's distance—the estimation of its value in time made
 always according to mean motions, whatever be the true motions of the
 planets at the moment—the neglect, in calculating the amount of par
 allax, of the moon's latitude—these, with all the other inaccuracies of
 the processes of calculation which have been pointed out in the notes,
 render it impossible that the results obtained should ever be more than
*a rude approximation to the truth.
    In farther illustration of the subject of solar eclipses, as exposed in
 this and the preceding chapters, we present, in the Appendix, a full cal
 culation of the eclipse of May 26th, 1854, mainly as made for the trans-
 lator, during his residence in India, by a native astronomer.




                             CHAPTER VI.
                    OP THE PROJECTION OF ECLIPSES.

 CONTENTS :—l , value of a projection ; 2-4, general directions ; 5-6, how to lay off
   the deflection and latitude for the beginning and end of the eclipse ; 7, to exhibit
   the points of contact and separation ; 8-10, how to lay off the deflection and lati
   tude for the middle of the eclipse; 11, to show the amount of greatest obscura
   tion ; 12, reversal of directions in the western hemisphere; 13, least amount of
   obscuration observable; 14-16, to draw the path of the eclipsing body; 17-19, to
   show the amount of obscuration at a given time ; 20-22, to exhibit the points of
   immersion and emergence in a total eclipse; 23, color of the part of the moon
   .obscured ; 24, caution as to communicating a knowledge of these matters,

   1. Since, without a projection (chedyalca), the precise (sphuta)
 differences of the two eclipses are not understood, I shall proceed
 to explain the exalted doctrine of the projection.
156                         Surya-Siddh&nta,                          [v. 1-
   The term chedyaka is from the root chid, " split, divide, sunder," and
indicates, as here applied, the instrumentality by which distinctive dif
ferences are rendered evident. The name of the chapter, parilekh&dhi-
kara, is not taken from this word, but from purihkha, " delineation,
figure," which occurs once below, in the eighth verse.
   2. Having fixed, upon a well prepared surface, a point, de
scribe from it, in the first place, with a radius of forty-nine digits
(angula), a circle for the deflection (valana):
   3. Then a second circle, with a radius equal to half the sum of
the eclipsed and eclipsing bodies ; this is called the aggregate-
circle (samdsa) ; then a third, with- a radius equal to half the
eclipsed body.
   4. The determination of the directions, north, south, east, and
west, is as formerly. In a lunar eclipse, contact (grahana) takes
place on the east, and separation (moksha) on the west ; in a so
lar eclipse, the contrary.
   The larger circle, drawn with a radius of about three feet, is used solely
in laying off the deflection (valana) of the ecliptic from an east and
west circle. We have seen above (iv. 24, 25) that the sine of this de
flection was reduced to its value in a circle of forty-nine digits' radius,
by dividing by seventy its value in minutes. The second circle is em
ployed (see below, vv. 6, 7) in determining the points of contact and*
separation. The third represents the eclipsed body itself, always main
taining a fixed position in the centre of the figure, even though, in a
lunar eclipse, it is the body which itself moves, relatively to the eclipsing
shadow. For the scale by which the measures of the eclipsed and
eclipsing bodies, the latitudes, etc., are determined, see above, iv. 26.
   The method of laying down the cardinal directions is the same with
that used in constructing a dial ; it is described in the first passage of
the third chapter (iii. 1-4).
   The specifications of the latter half of verse 4 apply to the eclipsed
body, designating upon which side of it obscuration will commence and
terminate.
   5. In a lunar eclipse, the deflection (valana) for the contact is
to be laid off in its own proper direction, but that for the separa
tion in reverse ; in an eclipse of the sun, the contrary is the case.
  The accompanying figure (Fig. 27) will illustrate the Hindu method
of exhibiting, by a projection, the various phases of an eclipse. Its
conditions are those of the lunar eclipse of Feb. 6th, 1860, as deter
mined by the data and methods of this treatise : for the calculation see
the Appendix. Let M be the centre of the figure and the place of the
moon, and let N S and E W be the circles of direction drawn through
the moon's centre ; the former representing (see above, under iv. 24, 25)
a great circle drawn through the north and south points of the horizon,
the latter a small circle parallel to the prime vertical. In explanation
of the manner in which these directions are presented by the figure, we
would remark that we have adapted it to a supposed position of the
vi. 5.]                  Translation and Notes.                       157
observer on the north side of his projection, as at N, and looking south
ward—a position which, in our latitude, he would naturally assume, for
                                 Fig. 27.




the purpose of comparing the actual phases of the eclipse, as they oc
curred, with his delineation of them. The heavier circle, II', is that
drawn with the sum of the semi-diameters, or the " aggregate-circle ;"
while the outer one, N E S W, is that for the deflection. This, in order
to reduce the size of the whole figure, we have drawn upon a scale very
much smaller than that prescribed ; its relative dimensions being a mat
ter of no consequence whatever, provided the sine of the deflection be
made commensurate with its radius. In our own, or the Greek, method
of laying off an arc, by its angular value, the radius of the circle of de
flection would also be a matter of indifference : the Hindus, ignoring
angular measurements, adopt the more awkward and bungling method
of laying off the arc by means of its sine. Let v v> equal the deflection,
calculated for the moment of contact, expressed as a sine, and in terms
of a circle in which E M is radius. Now, as the moon's contact with
the shadow takes place upon her eastern limb, the deflection for the
contact must be laid off from the east point of the circle ; and, as the
calculated direction of the deflection indicates in what way the ecliptic
is pointing eastwardly, it must be laid off from E in its own proper di
                         21
158                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [vi. 5-
rection. In the case illustrated, the deflection for the contact is north :
hence we lay it off northward from E, and then the line drawn from M
to v, its extremity—which line represents the direction of the ecliptic
at the moment—points northward. Again, upon the side of separation
—which, for the moon, is the western side—we lay off the deflection for
the moment of separation : but we lay it off from W in the reverse of
its true direction, in order that the line from its extremity to the centre
may truly represent the direction of the ecliptic. Thus, in the eclipse
figured, the deflection for separation is south ; we lay it off northward
from W, and then the line v1 M points, toward M, southward. In a solar
eclipse, in which, since the sun's western limb is the first eclipsed, the
deflection for contact must be laid off from W, and that for separation
from E, the direction of the former requires to be reversed, and that of
the latter to be maintained as calculated.
   6. From the extremity of either deflection draw a line to the
centre: from the point where that cuts the aggregate-circle
(samdsa) are to be laid off the latitudes of contact and of separa
tion.
   7. From the extremity of the latitude, again, draw a line to
the central point : where that, in either case, touches the eclipsed
body, there point out the contact and separation.
   8. Always, in a solar eclipse, the latitudes are to be drawn in
the figure (parilekha) in their proper direction; in a lunar
eclipse, in the opposite direction. . . .
    The lines v M and v1 M, drawn from v and v1, the extremities of the
sines or arcs which measure the deflection, to the centre of the figure,
represent, as already noticed, the direction of the ecliptic with reference
to an east and west line at the moments of contact and separation.
From them, accordingly, and at right angles to them, are to be laid off
the values of the moon's latitude at those moments. Owing, however,
to the principle adopted in the projection, of regarding the eclipsed
body as fixed in the centre of the figure, and the eclipsing body as pass
ing over it, the lines v M and v' M do not, in the case of a lunar eclipse,
represent the ecliptic itself, in which is the centre of the shadow, but the
 small circle of latitude, in which is the moon's centre : hence, in laying
 off the moon's latitude to determine the centre of the shadow, we re
 verse its direction. Thus, in the case illustrated, the moon's latitude is
 always south : we lay off, then, the lines k I and k' I', representing its
 value at the moments of contact and separation, northward : they are,
 like .the deflection, drawn as sines, and in such manner that their ex
 tremities, I and I', are in the aggregate-circle : then, since I M and I' M
 are each equal to the sum of the two semi-diameters, and I k and I' k'
 to the latitudes, k M and k' M will represent the distances of the centres
 in longitude, and I and V the places of the centre of the shadow, at con
 tact and separation : and upon describing circles from I and Z', with radii
 equal to the semi-diameter of the shadow, the points c and s, where
 these touch the disk of the moon, will be the points of first and last con
 tact : c and s being also, as stated in the text, the points where I M and
 /' M meet the circumference of the disk of the eclipsed body.
vi. 11.]                  Translation and Notes.                       159

   8. ... In accordance with this, then, for the middle of the
eclipse,
   9. The deflection is to be laid off—eastward, when it and the
latitude are of the same direction ; when they are of different
directions, it is to be laid off westward: this is for a lunar
eclipse ; in a solar, the contrary is the case.
   10. From, the end of the deflection, again, draw a line to the
central point, and upon this line of the middle lay off the lati
tude, in the direction of the deflection.
   11. From the extremity of the latitude describe a circle with
a radius equal to half the measure of the eclipsing body : what
ever of the disk of the eclipsed body is enclosed within that
circle, so much is swallowed up by the darkness (tamas).
    The phraseology of the text in this passage is somewhat intricate and
obscure ; it is fully explained by the commentary, as, indeed, its mean
ing is also deducible with sufficient clearness from the conditions of the
problem sought to be solved. It is required to represent the deflection
 of the ecliptic from an east and west line at the moment of greatest
obscuration, and to fix the position of the centre of the eclipsing body
at that moment. The deflection is this time to be determined by a
secondary to the ecliptic, drawn from near the north or south point of
the figure. The first question is, from which of these two points shall
the deflection be laid off, and the line to the centre drawn. Now since,
according to verse 10, the latitude itself is to be measured upon the line
of deflection, the latter must be drawn southward or northward accord
ing to the direction in which the latitude is to be laid off. And this is
 the meaning of the last part of verse 8 ; "in accordance," namely, with
 the direction in which, according to the previous part of the verse, the
 latitude is to be drawn. But again, in which direction from the north
 or south point, as thus determined, shall the deflection be measured ?
 This must, of course, be determined by the direction of the deflection
 itself: if south, it must obviously be measured east from the north point
 and west from the south point ; if north, the contrary. The rules of
 the text are in accordance with this, although the determining circum
 stance is made to be the agreement or non-agreement, in respect to
 direction, of the deflection with the moon's latitude—the latter being
 this time reckoned in its own proper direction, and not, in a lunar
 eclipse, reversed. Thus, in the case for which the figure is drawn, as
 the moon's latitude is south, and must be laid off northward from M,
 the deflection, v" w". is measured from the north point ; as deflection
-and latitude are both south, it is measured east from N. In an eclipse
 of the sun, on the other hand, the moon's latitude would, if north, be
 laid off northward, as in the figure, and hence also, the deflection would
be measured from the north point : but it would be measured eastward,
 if its own direction were south, or disagreed with that of the latitude.
    The line of deflection, which is M v" in the figure, being drawn, and
having the direction of a perpendicular to the ecliptic at the moment of
 opposition, the moon's latitude for that moment, M I", is laid off directly
160                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [vi. 11-
upon it. The point I" is, accordingly, the position of the centre of the
shadow at the middle of the eclipse, and if from that centre, with a
radius equal to the semi-diameter of the eclipsing body, a circle be drawn,
it will include so much of the disk of the eclipsed body as is covered
when the obscuration is greatest. In the figure the eclipse is shown as
total, the Hindu calculations making it so, although, in fact, it is only a
partial eclipse.
  12. By the wise man who draws the projection (chedyaka),
upon the ground or upon a board, a reversal of directions is to
be made in the eastern and western hemispheres.
   This verse is inserted here in order to remove the objection that, in
the eastern hemisphere, indeed, all takes place as stated, but, if the
eclipse occurs west of the meridian, the stated directions require to be
all of them reversed. In order to understand this objection, we must
take notice of the origin and literal meaning of the Sanskrit words
which designate the cardinal directions. The face of the observer is
supposed always to be eastward : then " east" is pr&nc, " forward, toward
the front"; " west" is pafcdt, "backward, toward the rear" : "south" is
dakshina, " on the right" ; " north" is uttara, " upward" (i. e., probably,
toward the mountains, or up the course of the rivers in north-western
India). These words apply, then, in etymological strictness, only when
one is looking eastward—and so, in the present case, only when the
eclipse is taking place in the eastern hemisphere, and the projector is
watching it from the west side of his projection, with the latter before
him : if, on the other hand, he removes to E, turning his face westward,
and comparing the phenomena as they occur in the western hemisphere
with his delineation of them, then " forward" (pr&nc) is no longer east,
but west ; " right " (dakshina) is no longer south, but north, etc.
   It is unnecessary to point out that this objection is one of the most
frivolous and hair-splitting character, and its removal by the text a waste
of trouble : the terms in question have fully acquired in the language an
absolute meaning, as indicating directions in space, without regard to the
position of the observer.
   13. Owing to her clearness, even the twelfth part of the moon,
when eclipsed (grasta), is observable ; but, owing to his piercing
brilliancy, even three minutes of the sun, when eclipsed, are not
observable.
   The commentator regards the negative which is expressed in the lat
ter half of this verse as also implied in the former, the meaning being
that an obscuration of the moon's disk extending over only the twelfth
part of it does not make itself apparent. We have preferred the inter
pretation given above, as being better accordant both with the plain and
simple construction of the text and with fact.
  14. At the extremities of the latitudes make three points, of
corresponding names ; then, between that of the contact and
vi. 22.]                 Translation and Notes.                        161
that of the middle, and likewise between that of the separation
and that of the middle,
   15. Describe two fish-figures (malsya) : from the middle of
these having drawn out two lines projecting through the mouth
and tail, wherever their intersection takes place,
   16. There, with a line touching the three points, describe an
arc : that is called the path of the eclipsing body, upon which
the latter will move forward.
   The deflection and the latitude of three points in the continuance of
the eclipse having heen determined and laid down upon the projection,
it is deemed unnecessary to take the same trouble with regard to any
other points, these three heing sufficient to determine the path of the
eclipsing body : accordingly, an arc of a circle is drawn through them,
and is regarded as representing that path. The method of describing
the arc is the same with that which has already been more than once
employed (see above, iii. 1-4, 41-42) : it is explained here with some
what more fullness than before. Thus, in the figure, I, I", and Z' are the
three extremities of the moon's latitude, at the moments of contact,
opposition, and separation, respectively : we join 1 1", I" I', and upon
these lines describe fish-figures (see note to iii. 1-5) ; their two extremi
ties (" mouth" and " tail ") are indicated by the intersecting dotted lines
in the figure : then, at the point, not included in the figure, where the
lines drawn through them meet one another, is the centre of a circle
passing through I, I", and I'.

   17. From half the sum of the eclipsed and eclipsing bodies
subtract the amount of obscuration, as calculated for any given
time : take a little stick equal to the remainder, in digits, and,
from the central point,
   18. Lay it off toward the path upon either side—when the
time is before that of greatest obscuration, toward the side of
contact ; when the obscuration is decreasing, in the direction of
separation—and where the stick and the path of the eclipsing
body
   19. Meet one another, from that point describe a circle with a
radius equal to half the eclipsing body : whatever of the eclipsed
body is included within it, that point out as swallowed up by
the darkness (tamas).
   20. Take a little stick equal to half the difference of the
measures (mdna), and lay it off in the direction of contact, calling
it the stick of immersion (nimilana) : where it touches the path,
   21. From that point, with a radius equal to half the eclipsing
body, draw a circle, as in the former case : where this meets the
circle of the eclipsed body, there immersion takes place.
   22. So also for the emergence (unmilana), lay it off in the
direction of separation, and describe a circle, as before : it will
show the point of emergence in the manner explained.
162                            S&rya-Slddhdnta,                              [vi. 22-

   The method of these processes is so clear as to call for no detailed
explanation. The centre of the eclipsing body being supposed to be
always in the arc 1 1" I', drawn as directed in the last passage, we have
only to fix a point in this arc which shall be at a distance from M cor
responding to the calculated distance of the centres at the given time,
and from that point to describe a circle of the dimensions of the eclipsed
body, and the result will be a representation of the then phase of the
eclipse. If the point thus fixed be distant from M by the difference of
the two semi-diameters, as M i', M e', the circles described will touch the
disk of the eclipsed body at the points of immersion and emergence,
i and e.
   23. The part obscured, when less than half, will be dusky
(sadhtimra) • when more than half, it will be black ; when emerg
ing, it is dark copper-color (krshiiatdmra) ; when the obscuration
is total, it is tawny (kapila).
   The commentary adds the important circumstance, omitted in the
text, that the moon alone is here spoken of; no specification being
added with reference to the sun, because, in a solar eclipse, the part
obscured is always black.
   A more suitable place might have been found for this verse in the
fourth chapter, as it has nothing to do with the projection of an eclipse.
   24. This mystery of the gods is not to be imparted indiscrim
inately : it is to be made known to the well-tried pupil, who
remains a year under instruction.
   The commentary understands by this mystery, which is to be kept
with so jealous care, the knowledge of the subject of this chapter, the
delineation of an eclipse, and not the general subject of eclipses, as
treated in the past three chapters. It seems a little curious to find a
matter of so subordinate consequence heralded so pompously in the
first verse of the chapter, and guarded so cautiously at its close.




                           CHAPTEK VII.
                     OF PLANETARY CONJUNCTIONS.
CONTENTS :—1, general classification of planetary conjunctions ; 2-6, method of de
  termining at what point on the ecliptic, and at what time, two planets will come
  to have the same longitude ; 7-10, how to find the point on the ecliptic to which
  a planet, having latitude, will be referred by a circle passing through the north
  and south points of the horizon ; 11, when a planet must be so referred ; 12, how
  to ascertain the interval between two planets when in conjunction upon such a
  north and south line; 13-14, dimensions of the lesser planets; 15-18, modes of
  exhibiting the coincidence between the calculated and actual places of the planets ;
  18-20, definition of different kinds of conjunction ; 20-21, when a planet, in con
vii. 6.]                    Translation, and Notes.                              163
  junction, is vanquished or victor; 22, farther definition of different kinds of con
  junction; 23, usual prevalence of Venus in a conjunction; 23, planetary conjunc
  tions with the moon ; 24, conjunctions apparent only ; why calculated.

  1. Of the star-planets there take place, with one another,
encounter (yuddha) and conjunction (samdgama) ; with the moon,
conjunction (samdgama) ; with the sun, heliacal setting (astamana).
   The "star-planets" (t&r&graha) are, of course, the five lesser planets,
exclusive of the sun and moon. Their conjunctions with one another
and with the moon, with the asterisms (nakshatra), and with the sun,
are the subjects of this and the two following chapters.
   For the general idea of " conjunction" various terms are indifferently
employed in this chapter, as sam&gama, " coming together", samyoga,
"conjunction," yoga, "junction" (in viii. 14, also, melaka, "meeting") :
the word yuti, " union," which is constantly used in the same sense by
the commentary, and which enters into the title of the chapter, graha-
yutyadhik&ra, does not occur anywhere in the text. The word which
we translate " encounter," yuddha, means literally " war, conflict."
Verses 18-20, and verse 22, below, give distinctive definitions of some
of the different kinds of encounter and conjunction.
  2. When the longitude of the swift-moving planet is greater
than that of the slow one, the conjunction (samyoga) is past ; oth
erwise, it is to come : this is the case when the two are moving
eastward; if, however, they are retrograding (vaJcrin), the con
trary is true.
   8. When the longitude of the one moving eastward is greater,
the conjunction (samdgama) is past; but when that of the one
that is retrograding is greater, it is to come. Multiply the dis
tance in longitude of the planets, in minutes, by the minutes of
daily motion of each,
   4. And divide the products by the difference of daily motions,
if both are moving with direct, or both with retrograde, motion :
if one is retrograding, divide by the sum of daily motions.
   5. The quotient, in minutes, etc., is to be subtracted when the
conjunction is past, and added when it is to come : if the two are
retrograding, the contrary : if one is retrograding, the quotients
are additive and subtractive respectively.
   6. Thus the two planets, situated in the zodiac, are made to be
of equal longitude, to minutes. Divide in like manner the dis
tance in longitude, and a quotient is obtained which is the time,
in days, etc.
    The object of this process is to determine where and when the two
 planets of which it is desired to calculate the conjunction will have the
 same longitude. The directions given in the text are in the main so
 clear as .hardly to require explication. The longitude and the rate of
 motion of the two planets in question is supposed to have been found for
 some time not far removed from that of their conjunction. Then, in
     164                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                          [vii. 6-
     determining whether the conjunction is past or to come, and at what dis
     tance, in arc and in time, three separate cases require to be taken into
     account—when both are advancing, when both are retrograding, and
     when one is advancing and the other retrograding. In the two former
     cases, the planets are approaching or receding from one another by the
     difference of their daily motions ; in the latter, by the sum of their daily
     motions. The point of conjunction will be found by the following pro
     portion : as the daily rate at which the two are approaching or receding
     from each other is to their distance in longitude, so is the daily motion
     of each one to the distance which it will have to move before, or which
     it has moved since, the conjunction in longitude. The time, again,
     elapsed or to elapse between the given moment and that of the conjunc
     tion, will be found by dividing the distance in longitude by the same divi
     sor as was used in the other part of the process, namely the daily rate
     of approach or separation of the two planets.
        The only other matter which seems to call for more special explana
     tion than is to be found in the text is, at what moment the process of
     calculation, as thus conducted, shall commence. If a time be fixed
     upon which is too far removed—as, for instance, by an interval of sev
     eral days—from the moment of actual conjunction, the rate of motion
     of the two planets will be liable to change in the mean time so much as
     altogether to vitiate the correctness of the calculation. It is probable
     that, as in the calculation of an eclipse (see above, note to iv. 7-8), we arc
     supposed, before entering upon the particular process which is the sub
     ject of this passage, to have ascertained, by previous tentative calcula
     tions, the midnight next preceding or following the conjunction, and to
     have determined for that time the longitudes and rates of motion of the
     two planets. If so, the operation will give, without farther repetition,
     results having the desired degree of accuracy. The commentary, it may
     be remarked, gives us no light upon this point, as it gave us none in the
     case of the eclipse.
        We have not, however, thus ascertained the time and place of the
     conjunction. This, to the Hindu apprehension, takes place, not when
     the two planets are upon the same secondary to the ecliptic, but when
     they are upon the same secondary to the prime vertical, or upon the
     same circle passing through the north and south points of the horizon.
     Upon such a circle two stars rise and set simultaneously ; upon such a
     one they together pass the meridian : such a line, then, determines
     approximately their relative height above the horizon, each upon its own
     circle of daily revolution. We have also seen above, when considering
     the deflection (valana—see iv. 24-25), that a secondary to the prime ver
     tical is regarded as determining the north and south directions upon the
     starry concave. To ascertain what will be the place of each planet upon
     the ecliptic when referred to it by such a circle is the object of the fol
     lowing processes.
       7. Having calculated the measure of the day and night, and
     likewise the latitude (vikshepa), in minutes ; having determined
     the meridian-distance (nata) and altitude (unnata), in time, accord
     ing to the corresponding orient ecliptic-point (lagna)—



-.
vii. 12.]                Translation and Notes.                        165
   8. Multiply the latitude by the equinoctial shadow, and divide
by twelve ; the quotient multiply by the meridian-distance in
nadis, and divide by the corresponding half-day :
   9. The result, when latitude is north, is subtractive in the
eastern hemisphere, and additive in the western ; when latitude
is south, on the other hand, it is additive in the eastern hemi
sphere, and likewise subtractive in the western.
   10. Multiply the minutes of latitude by the degrees of declin
ation of the position of the planet increased by three signs : the
result, in seconds (vikald), is additive or subtractive, according as
declination and latitude are of unlike or like direction.
   11. In calculating the conjunction (yocja) of a planet and an
asterism (nakshatra), in determining the setting and rising of a
planet, and in finding the elevation of the moon's cusps, this ope
ration for apparent longitude (drkkarman) is first prescribed.
   12. Calculate again the longitudes of the two planets for the
determined time, and from these their latitudes : when the latter
are of the same direction, take their difference ; otherwise, their
sum : the result is the interval of the planets.
   The whole operation for determining the point on the ecliptic to
which a planet, having a given latitude, will be referred by a secondary
to the prime vertical, is called its drkkarman. Both parts of this com
pound we have had before—the latter, signifying " operation, process of
calculation," in ii. 37, 42, etc.—for the former, see the notes to iii. 28-
34, and v. 5-6 : here we are to understand it as signifying the " appar
ent longitude" of a planet, when referred to the ecliptic in the manner
stated, as distinguished from its true or actual longitude, reckoned in the
usual way : we accordingly translate the whole term, as in verse 11,
" operation for apparent longitude." The operation, like the somewhat
analogous one by which the ecliptic-deflection (valana) is determined
(see above, iv. 24-25), consists of two separate processes, which receive
in the commentary distinct names, corresponding with those applied to
the two parts of the process for calculating the deflection. The whole
subject may be illustrated by reference to the next figure (Fig. 28). This
represents the projection of a part of the sphere upon a horizontal plane,
N and E being the north and east points of the horizon, and Z the
zenith. Let C L be the position of the ecliptic at the moment of con
junction in longitude, C being the orient ecliptic-point (lagna) ; and let
M be the point at which the conjunction in longitude of the two planets
S and V, each upon its parallel of celestial latitude, cl and c'l1, and hav
ing latitude equal to SM and VM respectively, will take place. Through
V and S draw secondaries to the prime vertical, N V and N S, meeting
the ecliptic in v and s : these latter are the points of apparent longitude
of the two planets, which are still removed from a true conjunction by
the distance v s : in order to the ascertainment of the time of that true
conjunction, it is desired to know the positions of v and *, or their re
spective distances from M. From P, the pole of the equator, draw also
circles through the two planets, meeting the ecliptic in s' and v' : then,
                          22
16G                           Surya-Siddhdn la,                           [vii. i 2.
 in order to find M ,«, we ascertain the values of s *' and M .«' ; and, in
like manner, to find M r, we ascertain the values of vv' and Mr'. Now
                                                     at the equator, or in a right
                      Fi-r. 28.                      sphere, the cil-cles N S and
                                                     P S would coincide, and
                                                     the distance »*' disappear :
                                                     hence, the amount of * *'
                                                     being dependent upon the
                                                     latitude (aIctho) of the ob-
                                                     server, N 1', the process by
                                                     which it is calculated is
                                                     called the " operation for
                                                     latitude" (<ikslwdrkkarman,
                                                     or el e ftkika drkkarmaii).
                                                     Again, if P and P' were the
                                                     same point, or if the eclip
                                                     tic and equator coincided,
                                                     P S and r" S would coin
                                                     cide, and M *' would disap
                                                     pear : hence the process of
                                                     calculation of M «' is called
                                                     the " operation for ecliptic-
                                                     deviation" (ayanadrkkar-
                                                     man, or &yana drkkurman).
                                                     The latter of the two pro
                                                     cesses, although stated after
                                                     the other in the text, is the
                                                     one first explained by the
                                                     commentary : we will also,
                                                     as in the case of the deflec
                                                     tion (note to iv. 24-25),
                                                     give to it our first attention.
    The point s', to which the planet is referred by a circle passing through
the pole P, is styled by the commentary ayanagraha, " the planet's lon
gitude as corrected for eclipt'c-deviation," and the distance M s', which
 it is desired to ascertain, is called ayanakalas, " the correction, in min
 utes, for ecliptic-deviation." Instead, however, of finding M*', the pro
 cess taught in the text finds M t, the corresponding distance on the .cir
 cle of daily revolution, D R, of the point M—which is then assumed
equal to M s'. The proportion upon which the rule, as stated in verse
 10, is ultimately founded, is
                            B : sin M S t '. : M S : M t
the triangle M S t, which is always very small, being treated as if it
were a plane triangle, right-angled at t. But now also, as the latitude
M S is always a small quantity, the angle P S P' may be treated as if
equal to PMP' (not drawn in the figure); and this angle is, as was
shown in connection with iv. 24-25, the deflection of the ecliptic from
the equator (&yana valana) at M, which is regarded as equal to the
declination of the point 90° in advance of M : this point, for conven
ience's sake, we will call M'. Our proportion becomes, then
vii. 12.]                Translation and Notes.                       167

                          R : sin decl. M' : : M S : M I
all the quantities which it contains being in terms of minutes. To bring
this proportion, now, to the form in which it appears in the text, it is
made to undergo a most fantastic and unscientific series of alterations.
The greatest declination (ii. 28) being 24°, and its sine 1397', which is
nearly fifty-eight times twenty-four—since 58X24=1392—it is assumed
that fifty-eight times the number of degrees in any given arc of declina
tion will be equal to the number of minutes in the sine of that arc.
Again, the value of radius, 3438', admits of being roughly divided into
the two factors fifty-eight and sixty—since 58X60=3480. Substitut
ing, then, these values in the proportion as stated, we have
          58X60 : 58 X decl. M' in degr. : : latitude in min. : M t
Cancelling, again, the common factor in the first two terms, and trans
ferring the factor 60 to the fourth term, we obtain finally
              1 : decl. M' in degr. : : latitude in min. : M <X60
that is to say, if the latitude of the planet, in minutes, be multiplied by
the declination, in degrees, of a point 90° in advance of the planet, the
result will be a quantity which, after being divided by sixtv, or reduced
from seconds to minutes, is to be accepted as the required" interval on
the ecliptic between the real place of the planet and the point to which
it is referred by a secondary to the equator.
    This explanation of the rule is the one given by the commentator,
nor are we able to see that it admits of any other. The reduction of
the original proportion to its final form is a process to which we have,
heretofore found no parallel, and which appears equally absurd and
uncalled for. That M t is taken as equivalent to M »' has, as will appear
from a consideration of the next process, a certain propriety.
   The value of the arc M »' being thus found, the question arises, in
which direction it shall be measured from M. This depends upon the
position of M with reference to the solstitial colure. At the colure, the
lines PS and P'S coincide, so that, whatever be the latitude of a planet,
it will, by a secondary to the equator, be referred to the ecliptic at its
true point of longitude. From the winter solstice onward to the summer
solstice, or when the point M is upon the sun's northward path (uttar&-
yana), a planet having north latitude will be referred backward on the
ecliptic by a circle from the pole, and a planet having south latitude will
be referred forward. If M, on the other hand, be upon the sun's south
ward path (dakshin&yana), a planet having north latitude at that point
 will be referred forward, and one having south latitude backward : thia
is the case illustrated by the figure. The statement of the text virtually
agrees with this, it being evident that, when M is on the northward
path, the declination of the point 90° in advance of it will be north ; and
the contrary.
    We come now to consider the other part of the operation, or the
&ksha drkkarman, which forms the subject of verses 7-9. As the first
step, we are directed to ascertain the day and the night respectively of
the point of the ecliptic at which the two planets are in conjunction in
longitude, for the purpose of determining also its distance in time from
the horizon and from the meridian. This is accomplished as follows.



                                                                              ,
168                          Stirya-Siddhdnta,                         [vii. i2.
Having the longitude of the point in question (M in the last figure),
we calculate (by ii. 28) its declination, which gives us (by ii. 60) the
radius of its diurnal circle, and (by ii. 61) its ascensional difference;
whence, again, is derived (by ii. 62-63) the length of its day and night.
Again, having the time of conjunction at M, we easily calculate the
sun's longitude at the moment, and this and the time together give us
(by iii. 46-48) the longitude of C, the orient ecliptic-point : then (by
iii. 50) we ascertain directly the difference between the time when M rose
and that when C rises, which is the altitude in time (itnnala) of M : the
difference between this aud the half-day is the meridian-distance in time
(nata) of the same point. If the conjunction takes place when M is
below the horizon, or during its night, its distance from the horizon and
from the inferior meridian is determined in like manner.
    The direct object of this part of the general process being to find the
value of s s', we note first that that distance is evidently greatest at the
horizon ; farther, that it disappears at the meridian, where the lines P S
and N S coincide. If, then, it is argued, its value at the horizon can be
ascertained, we may assume it to vary as the distance from the meridian.
The accompanying figure (Fig. 29) will illustrate the method by which
it is attempted to calculate s s' at the horizon. Suppose the planet S,
                g. 09               being removed in latitude to the distance
                                    M S from M, the point of the ecliptic
                                    which determines its longitude, to be upon
                                    the horizon, and let *', as before, be the
                                    point to which it is referred by a circle
                                    from the north pole : it is desired to deter
                                    mine the value of s s'. Let D R be the
                                    circle of diurnal revolution of the point
                                    M, meeting S s' in #, and the horizon in w :
S t w may be regarded as a plane right-angled triangle, having its angles
at S and w respectively equal to the observer's latitude and co-latitude.
In that triangle, to find the value of t w, we should make the proportion
                        cos t S w : sin t S w : : t S : t w
Now the first of these ratios, that of the cosine to the sine of latitude,
is (see above, iii. 17) the same with that of the gnomon to the equinoc
tial shadow: again, as the difference of Mi and M*' was in the pre
ceding process neglected, so here the difference of S M and S t ; and
finally, t jp, the true result of the process, is accepted as the equivalent
of s1 s, the distance sought. The proportion then becomes
            gnom. : eq. shad. : : latitude : required dist. at horizon
The value of the required distance at the horizon having been thus
ascertained, its value at any given altitude is, as pointed out above, deter
mined by a proportion, as follows : as the planet's distance in time from
the meridian when upon the horizon is to the value of this correction at
the horizon, so is any given distance from the meridian (nata) to the
value at that distance ; or
 half-day : mer.-dist. in time : : result of last proportion : required distance
The direction in which the distance thus found is to be reckoned, start
ing in each case from the ayana graha, or place of the planet on the
                                                                          •
vii. 12.]                Translation and Notes.                        169

ecliptic as determined by a secondary to the equator, which was ascer
tained by the preceding process, is evidently as the text states it in verse
9. In the eastern hemisphere, which is the case illustrated by the figure,
*'.t is additive to the longitude of *', while v1 v is subtractive from the
longitude of v1 : in the western hemisphere, the contrary would be the
case. The final result thus arrived at is the longitude of the two points
s and v, to which S and V are referred by the circles N S and N V,
drawn through them from the north and south points of the horizon.
    The many inaccuracies involved in these calculations are too palpable
to require pointing out in detail. The whole operation is a roughly
approximative one, of which the errors are kept within limits, and the
result rendered sufficiently correct, only by the general minuteness of
the quantity entering into it as its main element—namely, the latitude
of a planet—and by the absence of any severe practical test of its accu
racy. It may be remarked that the commentary is well aware of, and
points out, most of the errors of the processes, excusing them by its
stereotyped plea of their insignificance, and the merciful disposition of
the divine author of the treatise.
    Having thus obtained « and v, the apparent longitudes of the two
planets at the time when their true longitude is M, the question arises,
how we shall determine the time of apparent conjunction. Upon this
point the text gives us no light at all : according to the commentary, we
are to repeat the process prescribed in verses 2-6 above, determining,
from a consideration of the rate and direction of motion of the planets
in connection with their new places, whether the conjunction sought for
is past or to come, and then ascertaining, by dividing the distance v s
by their daily rate of approach or recession, the time of the conjunction.
It is evident, however, that one of the elements of the process of correc
tion for latitude (akshadrkkarmari), namely the meridian-distance, is
changing so rapidly, as compared with the slow motion of the planets in
their orbits, that such a process could not yield results at all approaching
to accuracy : it also appears that two slow-moving planets might have
more than one, and even several apparent conjunctions on successive
days, at different times in the day, being found to stand together upon
the same secondary to the prime vertical at different altitudes. We
do not see how this difficulty is met by anything in the text or in
the commentary. The text, assuming the moment of apparent conjunc
tion to have been, by whatever method, already determined, goes on to
direct us, in verse 12, to calculate anew, for that moment, the latitudes
of the two planets, in order to obtain their distance from one another.
Here, again, is a slight inaccuracy : the interval between the two, meas
ured upon a secondary to the prime vertical, is not precisely equal to
the sum or difference of their latitudes, which are measured upon second
aries to the ecliptic. The ascertainment of this interval is necessary, in
order to determine the name and character of the conjunction, as will
appear farther on (vv. 18-20, 22).
    The cases mentioned in verse 11, in which, as well as in calculating
the conjunctions of two planets with one another, this operation for
apparent longitude (drkkarman) needs to be performed, are the subjects
of the three following chapters.
170                          S&rya-Siddlidnla,                        [vii. 13-

    13. The diameters upon the moon's orbit of Mars, Saturn,
Mercury, and Jupiter, are declared to be thirty, increased suc
cessively by half the half; that of Venus is sixty.
    14. These, divided by the sum of radius and the fourth hypoth-
enusc, multiplied by two, and again multiplied by radius, are the
respective corrected (sphut.a) diameters : divided by fifteen, they
are the measures (rndna) in minutes.
   We have seen above, in connection with the calculation of eclipses
(iv. 2-5), that the diameters of the sun, moon, and shadow had to be
reduced, for measurement in minutes, to the moon's mean distance, at
which fifteen yojanas make a minute of arc. Here we find the dimen
sions of the five lesser planets, when at their mean distances from the
earth, stated only in the form of the portion of the moon's mean orbit
covered by them, their absolute size being left undetermined. We add
them below, in a tabular form, both in yojanas and as reduced to min
utes, appending also the corresponding estimates of Tycho Brahe (which
we take from Delambre), and the true apparent diameters of the plan
ets, as seen from the earth at their greatest and least distances.
Apparent Diameters of the Planets, according to the Surya-Siddh&nta,
              to Tycho Brahe, and to Modern Science.
                     Surya-Siddhanta :      Tycho        Moderns :
        Planet.
                   in yojanas.    in arc.   Brahe.    least.   greatest.

      Mars,            3o        2'         i 4o"      4"          a7'
      Sntum,           3?i       2' 3o"     I 5o"     15"          21'
      Mercury,         45        3'         2   10"    4"          12'
      Jupiter,         5a}       3' 3o"     3 45"     3o"         49'
      Venus,           60        4'         3 i5"      9"      i' i4'

   This table shows how greatly exaggerated are wont to be any deter
minations of the magnitude of the planetary orbs made by the unas
sisted eye alone. This effect is due to the well-known phenomenon of
the irradiation, which increases the apparent size of a brilliant body
when seen at some distance. It will be noticed that the Hindu esti
mates do not greatly exceed those of Tycho, the most noted and accu
rate of astronomical observers prior to the invention of the telescope.
In respect to order of magnitude they entirely agree, and both accord
with the relative apparent size of the planets, except that to Mercury
and Venus, whose proportional brilliancy, from their nearness to the
sun, is greater, is assigned too high a rank. Tycho also established a
scale of apparent diameters for the fixed stars, varying from 2', for the
first magnitude, down to 20", for the sixth. We do not find that
Ptolemy made any similar estimates, either for planets or for fixed stars.
   The Hindus, however, push their empiricism one step farther, gravely
laying down a rule by which, from these mean values, the true values
of the apparent diameters at any given time may be found. The funda
mental proportion is, of course,
        true dist. : mean dist. : : mean app. diam. : true app. diam.
vii. 15.]                Translation and Notes.                       .171
The second term of this proportion is represented by radius : for the
first we have, according to the translation given, one half the sum of
radius and the fourth hypothenuse, by which is meant the " variable
hypothenuse" (cala karna) found in the course of the fourth, or last,
process for finding the true place of the planet (see above, ii. 43-45).
 rhe term, however (tricattthkanta), which is translated " radius and the
fourth hypothenuse" is much more naturally rendered "third and fourth
hypothenuses" ; and the latter interpretation is also mentioned by the
commentator as one handed down by tradition (sampradayika) : but,
lie adds, owing to the fact that the length of the hypothenuse is not
calculated in the third process, that for finding finally the equation of
 the centre (mandukarman), and that that hypothenuse cannot therefore
be referred to here as known, modern interpreters understand the first
member of the compound (tri) as an abbreviation for " radius" (trijy&),
and translate it accordingly. "We must confess that the other interpre
tation seems to us to be powerfully supported by both the letter of the
text and the reason of the matter. The substitution of tri for trijya in
such a connection is quite too violent to be borne, nor do we see why
half the sum of radius and the fourth hypothenuse should be taken as
representing the planet's true distance, rather than the fourth hypothe
nuse alone, which was employed (see above, ii. 56-58) in calculating the
latitude of the planets. On the other hand, there is reason for adopt
ing, as the relative value of a planet's true distance, the average, or half
the sum, of the third hypothenuse, or the planet's distance as affected
by the eccentricity of its orbit, and the fourth, or its distance as affected
by the motion of the earth in her orbit. There seems to us good
reason, therefore, to suspect that verse 14—and with it, probably, also
verse 13—is an intrusion into the Surya-Siddhanta from some other sys
tem, which did not make the grossly erroneous assumption, pointed out
under ii. 39, of the equality of the sine of anomaly in the epicycle
(bhujajyaphala) with the sine of the equation, but in which the hypoth
enuse and the sine of the equation were duly calculated in the process
for finding the equation of the apsis (mandakarmari), as well as in that
for finding the equation of the conjunction (fighrakarman).
  15. Exhibit, upon the shadow-ground, the planet at the ex
tremity of its shadow reversed : it is viewed at the apex of the
gnomon in its mirror.
   As a practical test of the accuracy of his calculations, or as a con
vincing proof to the pupil or other person of his knowledge and skill,
the teacher is here directed to set up a gnomon upon ground properly
prepared for exhibiting the shadow, and to calculate and lay off from the
base of the gnomon, but in the opposite to the true direction, the shad
ow which a planet would cast at a given time ; upon placing, then, a
horizontal mirror at the extremity of the shadow, the reflected image of
the planet's disk will be seen in it at the given time by an eye placed at
the apex of the gnomon. The principle of the experiment is clearly
correct, and the rules and processes taught in the second and third chap
ters afford the means of carrying it out, since from them the shadow
which any star would cast, had it light enough, may be as readily deter
172                         Surya-Siddhdnta,                      [vii. 15-

mincd as that which the sun actually casts. As no case of precisely this
character has hitherto been presented, we will briefly indicate the course
of the calculation. The day and night of the planet, and its distance
from the meridian, or its hour-angle, are found in the same manner as in
the process previously explained (p. 168, above), excepting that here the
planet's latitude, and its declination as affected by latitude, must be cal
culated, by ii. 56-58 ; and then the hour-angle and the ascensional differ
ence, by iii. 34-36, give the length of the shadow at the given time,
together with that of its hypothenuse. The question would next be in
what direction to lay off the shadow from the base of the gnomon.
This is accomplished by means of the base (bhuja) of the shadow, or its
value when projected on a north and south line. From the declination
is found, by iii. 20-22, the length of the noon-shadow and its hypothe
nuse, and from the latter, with the declination, comes, by iii. 22-23, the
measure of amplitude (agr&) of the given shadow ; whence, by iii. 23-
25, is derived its base. Having thus both its length and the distance
of its extremity from an east and west line running through the base of
the gnomon, we lay it off without difficulty.
   16. Take two gnomons, five cubits (hasta) in height, stationed
according to the variation of direction, separated by the inter
val of the two planets, and buried at the base one cubit.
   17. Then fix the two hypothenuses of the shadow, passing
from the extremity of the shadow through the apex of each
gnomon : and, to a person situated at the point of union of the
extremities of the shadow and hypothenuse, exhibit
   18. The two planets in the sky, situated at the apex each of
its own gnomon, and arrived at a coincidence of observed place

   This is a proceeding of much the same character with that which
forms the subject of the preceding passage. In order to make appre
hensible, by observation, the conjunction of two planets, as calculated by
the methods of this chapter, two gnomons, of about the height of a
man, are set up. At what distance and direction from one another they
are to be fixed is not clearly shown. The commentator interprets the
expression "interval of the two planets" (v. 16). to mean their distance in
minutes on the secondary to the prime vertical, as ascertained according
to verse 12, above, reduced to digits by the method taught in iv. 26 ;
while, by " according to the variation of direction," he would understand
merely, in the direction from the observer of the hemisphere in which the
planets at the moment of conjunction are situated. The latter phrase,
however, as thus explained, seems utterly nugatory ; nor do we see of
what use it would be to make the north and south interval of the bases of
the gnomons, in digits, correspond with that of the planets in minutes.
We do not think it would be difficult to understand the directions given
in the text as meaning, in effect, that the two gnomons should be so sta
tioned as to cast their shadows to the same point : it would be easy to
do this, since, at the time in question, the extremities of two shadows
cast from one gnomon by the two stars would be in the same north and
vii. 23.]                 Translation and Notes.                          173
south line, and it would only be necessary to set the second gnomon as
far south of the first as the end of the shadow cast by the southern star
was north of that cast by the other. Then, if a hole were sunk in the
ground at the point of intersection of the two shadows, and a person
enabled to place his eye there, he would, at the proper moment, see both
the planets with the same glance, and each at the apex of its own gnomon.
   In the eighteenth verse also we have ventured to disregard the author
ity of the commentator : he translates the words drktulyat&m itas
" come within the sphere of sight," while we understand by drktulyat&t
as in other cases (ii. 14, iii. 11), the coincidence between observed and
computed position.
   Such passages as this and the preceding are not without interest and
value, as exhibiting the rudeness of the Hindu methods of observation,
and also as showing the unimportant and merely illustrative part which
observation was meant to play in their developed system of astronomy.
   18. ... When there is contact of the stars, it is styled " de
piction" (ulkJchd) ; when there is separation, " division" (bheda) ;
   19. An encounter (yuddha) is called "ray-obliteration" (an$u-
vimarda) when there is mutual mingling of rays : when the inter
val is less than a degree, the encounter is named " dexter" (apa~
savya)—if, in this case, one be faint (anu).
   20. If the interval be more than a degree, it is "conjunction"
(samdgama), if both are endued with power (bala). One that is
vanquished (jita) in a dexter encounter (apasavya yuddha), one
that is covered, faint (anu), destitute of brilliancy,
   21. One that is rough, colorless, struck down (vidhvasta), situ
ated to the south, is utterly vanquished (vijita). One situated to
the north, having brilliancy, large, is victor (jayiri)—and even in
the south, if powerful (baliri).
   22. Even when closely approached, if both are brilliant, it is
" conjunction" (samdgama) : if the two are very small, and struck
down, it is "front" (Jcuta) and "conflict" (vigraha), respectively.
   23. Venus is generally victor, whether situated to the north or
to the south. . . .
   In this passage, as later in a whole chapter (chap, xi), we quit the
proper domain of astronomy, and trench upon that of astrology. How
ever intimately connected the two sciences may be in practice, they are,
in general, kept distinct in treatment—the Siddhantas, or astronomical
text-books, furnishing, as in the present instance, only the scientific basis,
the data and methods of calculation of the positions of the heavenly
bodies, their eclipses, conjunctions, risings and settings, and the like,
while the Sanhit&s, Jatakas, Tajikas, etc., the astrological treatises, make
the superstitious applications of the science to the explanation of the
planetary influences, and their determination of human fates. Thus the
celebrated astronomer, Varaha-mihira, besides his astronomies, com
posed separate astrological works, which are still extant, while the for
mer have become lost. It is by no means impossible that these verses
may be an interpolation into the original text of the Surya-Siddhanta.
They form only a disconnected fragment : it is not to be supposed that
                         23
17-i                       Surya-Siddhdnta,                        [vii. 23-
thcy contain a complete statement and definition of ail the different
kinds of conjunction recognized and distinguished by technical appella
tions ; nor do they fully set forth the circumstances which determine the
result of a hostile " encounter" between two planets: while a detailed
explanation of some of the distinctions indicated—as, for instance, when
a planet is " powerful" or the contrary—could not be given without enter
ing quite deeply into the subject of the Hindu astrology. This we do
not regard,ourselves as called upon to do here : indeed, it would not be
possible to accomplish it satisfactorily without aid from original sources
which are not accessible to us. We shall content ourselves with follow
ing the example of the commentator, who explains simply the sense and
connection of the verses, as given in our translation, citing one or two
parallel passages from works of kindred subject. We would only point
out farther that it has been shown in the most satisfactory manner (as by
Whish, iu Trans. Lit. Soc. Madras, 1827; Weber, in his Indische Studien,
ii. 236 etc.) that the older Hindu science of astrology, as represented by
Varaha-mihira and others, reposes entirely upon the Greek, as its later
forms depend also, in part, upon the Arab ; the latter connection being
indicated even in the common title of the more modern treatises, t&jika,
which comes from the Persian iazi, "Arab." Weber gives (Ind. Stud,
ii. 277 etc.) a translation of a passage from Varaha-mihira's lesser treat
ise, which states in part the circumstances determining the "power" of a
planet in different situations, absolute or relative : partial explanations
upon the same subject furnished to the translator in India by his native
assistant, agree with these, and both accord closely with the teachings
of the Tetrabiblos, the astrological work attributed to Ptolemy.
   23. . . . Perform in like manner the calculation of the con
junction (samyoga) of the planets with the moon.
    This is all that the treatise says respecting the conjunction of the
moon with the lesser planets : of the phenomenon, sometimes so striking,
of the occultation of the latter by the former, it takes no especial notice.
The commentator cites an additional half-verse as sometimes included in
the chapter, to the effect that, in calculating a conjunction, the moon's
latitude is to be reckoned as corrected by her parallax in latitude (ava-
nati), but rejects it, as making the chapter over-full, and as being super
fluous, since the nature of the case determines the application here of
the general rules for parallax presented in the fifth chapter. Of any
Earallax of the planets themselves nothing is said : of course, to calcu-
  ite the moon's parallax by the methods as already given is, in effect, to
attribute to them all a horizontal parallax of the same value with that
assigned to the sun, or about 4'.
    The final verse of the chapter is a caveat against the supposition that,
when a " conjunction" of two planets is spoken of, anything more is
meant than that they appear to approach one another ; while neverthe
less, this apparent approach requires to be treated of, on account of its
influence upon human fates.
  24. Unto the good and evil fortune of men is this system set
forth : the planets move ou upon their own paths, approaching
one another at a distance.                «
viii. 1.]                    Translation and Notes.                               175


                          CHAP TEE VIII.
                              OF THE ASTERISKS.
CONTENTS :—1-9, positions of the asteristns ; 10-12, of certain fixed stars ; 12, direc
  tion to test by observation the accuracy of these positions; 13, splitting of
  Rohini's wain ; 14-15, how to determine the conjunction of :i planet with fin
  asterism ; 16-19, which is the junction-star in each nsterism ; 20-21, positions of
  other fixed stars.

  1. Now are set forth the positions of the asterisms (lha\ ia
minutes. If the share of each one, then, be multiplied by ten,
and increased by the minutes in the portions (bhoga) of the past
asterisms (dhishnya), the result will be the polar longitudes
(dhruva).
   The proper title of this chapter is nakshatragrahayulijadldk&ra, " chap
ter of the conjunction of asterisms and planets," but the subject of con
junction occupies but a small space in it, being limited to a direction
(vv. 14-15) to apply, with the necessary modifications, the methods
taught in the preceding chapter. The chapter is mainly occupied with
such a definition of the positions of the asterisms—to which are added
also those of a few of the more prominent among the fixed stars—as is
necessary in order to render their conjunctions capable of being calculated.
   Before proceeding to give the passage which states the positions of
the asterisms, we will explain the manner in which these are defined. In
the accompanying figure (Fig. 30), let E L represent the equator, and C
                                 L the ecliptic, 1* and P' being their respec
            Fig. 30.
                                 tive poles. Let S lie the position of any
                                 given star, and through it draw the circle
                                 of declination P S a. Then a is the point
                                 on the ecliptic of which the distance from
                                 the first of Aries and from the star respec
                                 tively are here given as its longitude and
                                 latitude. So fur as the latitude is con
                                 cerned, this is not uiuiccordant with the
                                 usage of the treatise hitherto. Latitude
                                 (vikshepa, "direction") is the amount by
                                 which any body is removed from the
                                 declination which it ought to have—that
                                 is, from the point of the ecliptic which it
                                 ought to occupy—declination (kr&nli,apa-
                                 krama) being always, according to the
                                 Hindu understanding of the term, in the
                                 ecliptic itself. In the case of a planet,
                                 whose proper path is in the ecliptic, the
                                 point of that circle which it ought to occu
                                 py is determined by its calculated longi
tude : in the case of a fixed star, whose only motion is about the pole of
the heavens, its point of declination is that to which it is referred by a
176                       S&ryarSiddhdnta,                       [viii. 1-
circle through that pole. Thus, in the figure, the declination (kr&nti) of
S would be c a, or the distance of a from the equator at e : its latitude
(vikshepa) is a B, or its distance from o. We have, accordingly, the
same term used here as before. To designate the position in longitude
of a, on the other hand, we have a new termv dhruva, or, as below, (vv.
12, 15), dhruvaka. This comes from the adjective dhruva, "fixed, im
movable," by which the poles of the heaven (see below, xii. 43) are desig
nated ; and, if we do not mistake its application, it indicates, as here
employed, the longitude of a star as referred to the ecliptic by a circle
from the pole. We venture, then, to translate it by " polar longitude,"
as we also render vikshepa, in this connection, by " polar latitude," it
being desirable to have for these quantities distinctive names, akin
with one another. Colebrooke employs " apparent longitude and lati
tude," which are objectionable, as being more properly applied to the
results of the process taught in the last chapter (vv. 7-10).
   The mode of statement of the polar longitudes is highly artificial and
arbitrary : a number is mentioned which, when multiplied by ten, will
give the position of each aeterism, in minutes, in its own " portion"
(bhoga), or arc of 13° 20' in the ecliptic (see ii. 64).
   This passage presents a name for the asterisms, dhishnya, which has
not occurred before ; it is found once more below, in xi. 21.
    2. Forty-eight, forty, sixty-five, fifty-seven, fifty-eight, four,
seventy-eight, seventy-six, fourteen,
    3. Fifty-four, sixty-four, fifty, sixty, forty, seventy-four, sev
enty-eight, sixty-four.
    4. Fourteen, six, four : Uttara-Ashadha, (vdiqva) is at the
middle of the portion (bhoga) of Purva-Ashadha (dpya) ; Abhi-
jit, likewise, is at the end of Purva-Ashadha; the position of
Qravana is at the end of Uttara-Ashadha ;
    5. Qravishtha, on the other hand, is at the point of connec
tion of the third and fourth quarters (pada) of Qravana : then,
in their own portions, eighty, thirty-six, twenty-two,
    6. Seventy-nine. Now their respective latitudes, reckoned
from, the point of declination (apakrama) of each : ten, twelve,
five, north ; south, five, ten, nine ;
    7. North, six ; nothing ; south, seven ; north, nothing, twelve,
thirteen ; , south, eleven, two ; then thirty-seven, north ;
    8. South, one and a half, three, four, nine, five and a half, five ;
north, also, sixty, thirty, and also thirty-six ;
    9. South, half a degree; twenty-four, north, twenty-six degrees;
nothing—for A9vini (dasra), etc., in succession.
   The text here assumes that the names of the asterisms, and the order
of their succession, are so familiarly known as to render it unnecessary
to rehearse them. It has been already noticed (see above, i. 48-51, 55,
56-58, etc,) that a similar assumption was made as regards the names
and succession of the months, signs of the zodiac, years of Jupiter's
cycle, and the like. Many of the asterisms have more than one appel
lation ; we present in the annexed table those by which they are more
viii. 9.]                   Translation and Notes.                                      177
generally and familiarly known ; the others will be stated farther on.
Nearly all these titles are to be found in our text, occurring here and
there; a few of the asterisms, however, (the 5th, 6th, 9th, and 17th),
are mentioned only by appellations derived from the names of the dei
ties to whom they are regarded as belonging, and one (the 25th) chances
not to be once distinctively spoken of. We append to the names, in a
tabular form, the data presented in this passage ; namely, the position
of each asterism (nakshatra) in the arc of the ecliptic to which it gives
name, and which is styled its "portion" (bhoga), the resulting polar lon
gitudes, and the polar latitudes. And since it is probable (see note to
the latter half of v. 12, below) that the latter were actually derived by
calculation from true declinations and right ascensions, ascertained by
observation, we have endeavored to restore those more original data by
calculating them back again, according to the data and methods of this
Siddhanta—the declinations by ii. 28, the right ascensions by iii. 44-48
—and we insert our results in the table, rejecting odd minutes less than
ten.
             Positions of the Junction-Stars of the Asterisms.
                    Positinn Polar         Polar     Right       True       Interval Interval
 No.        Name.     in it*                                                   in       in
                    Portion. ..ongitude. Latitude. \sceiisioa declination. Longitude. R. A.
                       o /      o ' o          /      0    /   o    /       0     1   O    1
  I AcvinJ,            8 o      8 o IO oN. 73o i3 20 N.                    12    O   II    O
  2   Bharam,       6 4o 20 o 12 O " 18 3o 20 o " 17                            3o 1 6 5o
  3 Krttika,       10 5o 37 3o 5 o" 35 20 19 20 " 12                             O   12     O
  4 Rohinl,         9 3o 49 3o 5 08. 47 20 i3 o " i3                            3o   i3 4o
  5 tfrgaglrsba,    9 40 63 o 10 0" 61 o ii 20 " 4                              20    4 4o
  6 Ardra,          o 4o 67 20 9 o" 65 4o i3 o " 25                             4o   •*27/ **w
                                                                                           3o
  7 Punarvasu,     i3 o 93 o 6 oN. 93 10 3o o " i3                               o 14 o
  8 Pushya,        ra 4o 106 o 0 0      107 10 23 0 "    3                       o   3 20
  9 Aflesha,        2 2O 109 o   708. no 3o i5 4o " 20                           o 20 4o
 10 Magha,          9 o 129 o o o i3i 10 18 20 " i5                              o i5 o
 ii P.-Phalguni,   10 4o 144 o 12 ON. i46 10 25 5o " II                          O 10 4o
 12 U.-Phalguni,    8 a0 i55 o i3 o" 1 56 5o 22 50 "
                                                        i5                       o i3 5o
 t3 Ilasta,        IO 0 170 o it 08. 170 4o     70S.
                                                                                     920
                                                        IO                       O     *w
 i4 Citra,          6 4o 180 o   20"    180 o   20"
                                                        19                       o _17 40
                                                                                       /_
 i5 Svati,         12 a0 199 o 3? oN. 197 4o 29 20 N.
                                                        i4                       o i3 lo
 ifi Vicakha,      l3 0 2l3 O    i 3o8. 210 5o l4 20 S. II                       O    II    O
 17 Anuradha,      10 4o 224 o 3 o" 221 5O 19 20 "       5                       o     5 o
 18 Jyeshtha,       2 20 229 o   4 o" 226 5o 21 50 " 12                          O    12    O
 '9   Mfila,        I 0 241 o    90"    238 5o 29 5o " i3                        o i4 o
 ao P.-Ashadha,     o 4o 254 o 5 3o" 252 5o 28 3o " 6                            o 6 3o
 ai U.-Ashadha,     .... 260 o 5 o" 259 20 28 4o " 6                            4o 7 o
 aa Abhijit,             266 4o 60 oN 266 20 36 o N. 1.3                        20 i4 3o
   a3 (Jravana,          280 o 3o o" 280 5o 6 20 «' IO                           0 10 4o
 a4 9ravishtha,     .... 290 o 36 o" 291 3o i3 3o " 3o                           o 3o 40
 aS patabhishaj,   l3 20 320 O   o 3o8 322 10 i5 4o 8. 6                         o 6 o
 a6 P.-Bhadrapada, 6 o 326 0 24 oN 328 10 10 5o N. 11                            O 10 3o
 a? U.-Bhadrapada, 3 4o 33? 0 26 o" 338 4o 16 5o " 22                           50    21 IO
 a8 RevatJ,        i3 10 359 5o o o 359 5o o o           8                      10     7 4o




                                                                                                 ,"
       178                         S&rya-Siddhdnla,                              [viii. 9.

                   0°                    Fig. si.                         300°
                                                        a8. Eevati—1
     1.                                                            28.1                  57.
  Ayvini.                                                          E.                  Rtvati.


     2.
  Bharant
                         :
                         —2. Bharani.                        U.-Bh.
                                                                   37
                                                                                        26.
                                                                                    U.-Bhiidrap.
                        JBh.                   27. U.-Bhudrapada— ,
                                                                 26.1
                        I3'                                  P.-Bh.                      25.
    3.
 Krttika.
               J        lie.                   26. P.-Bhiidrapadfi—                 P.-Bhiidrap.
                        j-3. Krttika.
                                                 2 5. fatabhishaj—

    4.
  Rohini.
                        k
                        1—4. Rohini.
                                                                   •as.                  24-
                                                                                    fatabhishnj.

                        I 5.
                                                                                         23.
    5.                  JM.
                                                                                    CravishthA.
Mrga^irsha.             1—5. Mrgacirsha.
                        1-6. Ardni.
                                                  24.
    6.
  Ardra.                                                                             Cravaija.
                                                     23.
                                                                   2-2.
Punarvasu.
                         'P.                                       A
                                                                                         21.
                                                                                    U.-AshadhS.
                        1—7. Punaryasu.              22. Abhiiit—
                                                             J 21 1.
     8.                 Is.                                   U.-A.                      20.
  Pushya.                 P.                     21. U.-Aslmdha-                    P.-Ashadhfi.

                        j—8. Pushya.             20. P.-Ashadha-
                        1-9. Aylesha.                              20.1
    9.                                                                                   '9-
                          A.                                    P.-AJ                   Mula.
 Ajlesha.
                                                           19. Mula— I
                                                                   19.[                  18.
    10.
  Mngha.                r
                        I — 10. Maghi.
                                                                   il
                                                     1 8. Jycshtha—I
                                                                                     Jyeshthil.

                        111.                                    ' 18.1
                                                    17. AnurAdhii—I                     17.
     i1.                  P.-Ph.
P.-Phalguni.                                                                         Anuradha^
                        I— 1 1. P.-Phalguni.
                                                     1 6. Vijakha—I
    I a.                I U.-Ph.                                A.                      16.
U.-Phalguni.             — i a. U.-Phalguni.                                         Yifakha.
                                                                   16.J
                        I 13.
                                                           1 5. Svati—|
                          H.
                                                                    V,                  1 5.
     1 3.
   Hasta.                                                                              SvatL
                        I— 13. Hasta.                              "•I
     1 4.
                        I 14.                                       s.                   1 4.
                        Jc.                                                            Citra.
                        I— 14. Citrl
                                                                          180°
viii. 9.]                 Translation and Notes.                         179
   Our calculations, it should be remarked, are founded upon the as
sumption that, at the time when the observations were made of which
our text records the results, the vernal equinox coincided wim the
initial point of the Hindu sidereal sphere, or with the beginning of
the portion of the asterism AgvinS, a point 10' eastward on the ecliptic
from the star £ Piscium : this was actually the case (see above, under i.
27) about A. D. 560. The question how far this assumption is sup
ported by evidence contained in the data themselves will be considered
later. To fill out the table, we have also added the intervals in right
ascension and in polar longitude.
   The stars of which the text thus accurately defines the positions do
not, in most cases, by themselves alone, constitute the asterisms (nak-
shatra) ; they are only the principal members of the several groups of
stars—each, in the calculation of conjunctions (yoga) between the plan
ets and the asterisms (see below, vv. 14-15), representing its group, and
therefore called (see below, vv. 16-19) the "junction-star" (yogat&ra) of
the asterism.
   It will be at once noticed that while, in a former passage (ii. 64), the
ecliptic was divided into twenty-seven equal arcs, as portions for the aster
isms, we have here presented to us twenty-eight asterisms, very unequally
distributed along the ecliptic, and at greatly varying distances from it.
And it is a point of so much consequence, in order to the right under
standing of the character and history of the whole system, to apprehend
clearly the relation of the groups of stars to the arcs allotted to them,
that we have prepared the accompanying diagram (Fig. 31) in illustra
tion of that relation. The figure represents, in two parts, the circle of
the ecliptic : along the central lines is marked its division into arcs of
ten and five degrees : upon the outside of these lines it is farther divided
into equal twenty-sevenths, or arcs of 13° 20', and upon the inside into
equal twenty-eighths, or arcs of 12° 51f ; these being the portions
(bhoga) of two systems of asterisms, twenty-seven and twenty-eight in
number respectively. The starred lines which run across all the divisions
mark the polar longitudes, as stated in the text, of the junction-stars of
the asterisms. The names of the latter are set over against them, in the
inner columns : the names of the portions in the system of twenty-seven
are given in full in the outer, columns, and those in the system of twenty-
eight are also placed opposite the portions, upon the inside, in an abbre
viated form.
   The text nowhere expressly states which one of the twenty-eight aster
isms which it recognizes is, in its division of the ecliptic into only twenty-
seven portions, left without a portion. That Abhijit, the twenty-second
of the series, is the one thus omitted, however, is clearly implied in the
statements of the fourth and fifth verses. Those statements, which have
caused difficulty to more than one expounder of the passage, and have
been variously misinterpreted, are made entirely clear by supplying the
words " asterism" and " portion" throughout, where they are to be under
stood, thus : " the asterism Uttara-Ashadha is at the middle of the por
tion styled Purva-Ashadha ; the asterism Abhijit, likewise, is at the end
of the portion Purva-Ashadha ; the position of the asterism Qravana is
at the end of the portion receiving its name from Uttara-Ashadha ; while
180                        S&rya-SiddMnta,                          [viii. 9.
the asterism Cravishtha is between the third and fourth quarters of the
porti<jp named for Cravana." After this interruption to the regularity of
correspondence of the two systems—the asterism Abhijit being left with
out a portion, and the portion Cravishtha containing no asterism—they
go on again harmoniously together to the close. The figure illustrates
clearly this condition of things, and shows that, if Abhijit be left out of
account, the two systems agree so far as this—that twenty-six asterisms
fall within the limits of portions bearing the same name, while all the
discordances are confined to one portion of the ecliptic, that comprising
the 20th to the 23d portions. If, on the other hand, the ecliptic be divi
ded into twenty-eighths, and if these be assigned as portions to the
twenty-eight asterisms, it is seen from the figure that the discordances
between the two systems will be very great ; that only in twelve instan
ces will a portion be occupied by the asterism bearing its own name, and
by that alone ; that in sixteen cases asterisms will be found to fall within
the limits of portions of different name ; that four portions will be left
without any asterism at all, while four others will contain two each.
   These discordances are enough of themselves to set the whole sub
ject of the asterisms in a new light. Whereas it might have seemed,
from what we have seen of it heretofore, that the system was founded
upon a division of the ecliptic into twenty-seven equal portions, and the
selection of a star or a constellation to mark each portion, and to be, as
it were, its ruler, it now appears that the series of twenty-eight aster
isms may be something independent of, and anterior to, any division of
the ecliptic into equal arcs, and that the one may have been only arti
ficially brought into connection with the other, complete harmony
between them being altogether impossible. And this view is fully sus
tained by evidence derivable from outside the Hindu science of astron
omy, and beyond the borders of India. The Parsls, the Arabs, and the
Chinese, are found also to be in possession of a similar system of divi
sion of the heavens into twenty-eight portions, marked or separated by
as many single stars or constellations. Of the Parsl system little or
nothing is known excepting the number and names of the divisions,
which are given in the second chapter of the Bundehesh (see Anquetil
du Perron's Zendavesta, etc., ii. 349). The Arab divisions are styled
manazil al-kamar, " lunar mansions, stations of the moon," being brought
into special connection with the moon's revolution ; they are marked,
like the Hindu " portions," by groups of stars. The first extended com
parison of the Hindu asterisms and the Arab mansions was made by Sir
William Jones, in the second volume of the Asiatic Researches, for 1790 :
it was, however, only a rude and imperfect sketch, and led its author to
no valuable or trustworthy conclusions. The same comparison was taken
up later, with vastly more learning and acuteness, by Colebrooke, whose
valuable article, published also in the Asiatic Researches, for 1807 (ix.
323, etc. ; Essays ii. 321, etc.), has ever since remained the chief source
of knowledge respecting the Hindu asterisms and their relation to the
lunar mansions of the Arabs. To Anquetil (as above) is due the credit
of the first suggestion of a coincidence between the Parsl, Hindu, and
Chinese systems : but he did nothing more than suggest it : the origin,
character, and use of the Chinese divisions were first established, and
via. 9.]                     Translation and Notes.                               181
their primitive identity with the Hindu asterisms demonstrated, by Biot,
in a series of articles published in the Journal des Savants for 1840 : and
he has more recently, in the volume of the same Journal for 1859, re
viewed and restated his former exposition and conclusions. These we
shall present more fully hereafter : at present it will be enough to say
that the Chinese divisions are equatorial, not zodiacal ; that they are
named sieu, " mansions" ; and that they are the intervals in right ascen
sion between certain single stars, which arc also called sieu, and have the
same title with the divisions which they introduce. We propose to pre
sent here a summary comparison of the Hindu, Arab, and Chinese sys
tems, in connection with an identification of tho stars and groups of
stars forming the Hindu asterisms, and with the statement of such
information respecting the latter, beyond that given in our text, as will
best contribute to a full understanding of their character.
    The identification of the asterisms is founded upon the positions of
their principal or junction-stars, as stated in the astronomical text-books,
upon the relative places of these stars in the groups of which they form
a part, and upon the number of stars composing each group, and the
figure by which their arrangement is represented : in a few eases, too,
the names themselves of the asterisms are distinctive, and assist the iden
tification. The number and configuration of the stars forming the groups
are not stated in our text ; we derive them mainly from Colebrooke,
although ourselves also having had access to, and compared, most of his
authorities, namely the Cakalya-Sanhita, the Muhurta-Cintamani, and
the Ratnamala (as cited by Jones, As. Res., ii. 294). Sir William Jones,
it may be remarked, furnishes (As. Res., ii. 293, plate) an engraved copy
of drawings made by a native artist of the figures assigned to the aster
isms. For the number of stars in each group we have an additional
authority in al-Birunl, the Arab savant of the eleventh century, who
travelled in India, and studied with especial care the Hindu astronomy.
The information furnished by him with regard to the asterisms we derive
from Biot, in the Journal des Savants for 1845 (pp. 39-54) ; it professes
to be founded upon the Khanda-Kataka* of Brahmagupta. Al-Birunl
also gives an identification of the asterisms, so far as the Hindu astrono
mers of his day were able to furnish it to him, which was only in part :
 he is obliged to mark seven or eight of the series as unknown or doubt
 ful. He speaks very slightingly of the practical acquaintance with the
 heavens possessed by the Hindus of his time, and they certainly have
 not since improved in this respect ; the modern investigators of the
 same subject, as Jones and Colebrooke, also complain of the impossi
 bility of obtaining from the native astronomers of India satisfactory
 identifications of the asterisms and their junction-stars. The translator,
 in like manner, spent much time and effort in the attempt to derive
 such information from his native assistant, but was able to arrive at no
 results which could constitute any valuable addition to those of Cole
 brooke. It is evident that for centuries past, as at present, the native

  * The true form of the name is not altogether certain, it being known only
through its Arabic transcription : it seems to designate rather a chapter in a treatise
than a complete work of its author.
                            24
    182                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [viii. 9.
    tradition has been of no decisive authority as regards the position and
    composition of the groups of stars constituting the asterisms : these
    must be determined upon the evidence of the more ancient data handed
    down in the astronomical treatises.
       In order to an exact comparison of the positions of the junction-stars
    as defined by the Hindus with those of stars contained in our cata
    logues, we have reduced the polar longitudes and latitudes to true longi
    tudes and latitudes, by the following formulas (see Fig. 30) :
                       (1-r-cos Aa) cot ELC = tan Sab
                               Bin Kab sin Sa = sin Si
                               tan Sb cot Sab= sin ab
     A a, being the polar longitude as stated in the text (= La -{- 180°), Sa
     the polar latitude, ELC the inclination of the ecliptic, 8 b the true lati
     tude, and a b a quantity to be added to or subtracted from the polar lon
    gitude to give the true longitude. The true positions of the stars com
    pared we take from Flamsteed's Catalogus Brittanicus, subtracting in
     each case 15° 42' from the longitudes there given, in order to reduce
    them to distances from the vernal equinox of A. D. 560, assumed to
     coincide with the initial point of the Hindu sphere. There is some
     discordance among the different Hindu authorities, as regards the stated
    positions of the junction-stars of the asterisms. The Cakalya-Sanhita,
     indeed, agrees in every point precisely with the Surya-Siddhanta. But
    the SiddhAnta-Ciromani often gives a somewhat different value to the
    polar longitude or latitude, or both. With it, so far as the longitude is
    concerned, exactly accord the Brahma-Siddhanta, as reported by Cole-
    brooke, and the Khanda-Kataka, as reported by al-Blruni. The lati
    tudes of the Brahma-Siddhanta also are virtually the same with those of
    the Siddhanta-Ciromani, their differences never amounting, save in a
    single instance, to more than 3' : but the latitudes of the Khanda-Kataka
    often vary considerably from both. The Graha-Laghava, the only other
    authority accessible to us, presents a series of variations of its own, inde
    pendent of those of either of the other treatises. All these differences
    are reported by us below, in treating of each separate asterism. The
    presiding divinities of the asterisms we give upon the authority of the
    Taittiriya-Sanhit& (iv. 4. 10. 1-3), the Taittiriya-Brahmana (iii. 1. 1,2, as
    cited by Weber, Zeitscb, f. d. K. d. Morg., vii. 266 etc., and Ind. Stud.,
    i. 90 etc.), the Muhurta-Cintamani, and Colebrooke : those of about
    half the asterisms are also indirectly given in our text, in the form of
    appellations for the asterisms derived from them.
       The names and situations of the Arab lunar stations are taken from
    Ideler's Untersuchungen iiber die Sternnamen : for the Chinese man
    sions and their determining stars we rely solely upon the articles of
    Biot, to which we have already referred.
        It has seemed to us advisable, notwithstanding the prior treatment by
    Colebrooke of the same subject, to enter into a careful re-examination
    and identification of the Hindu asterisms, because we could not accept
    in the bulk, and without modification, the conclusions at which he arrived.
    The identifications by Ideler of the Arab mansions, more thorough and
    correct than any which had been previously made, and Biot's compari
    son of the Chinese sieu, have placed new and valuable materials in our




-
Tiii. 9.]                     Translation and Notes.                      183
hands : and these—together with a more exact comparison than was
attempted by Colebrooke of the positions given by the Hindus to their
junction-stars with the data of the modern catalogues, and a new and
independent combination of the various materials which he himself fur
nishes—while they have led us to accept the greater number of his iden
tifications, often establishing them more confidently than he was able to
do, have also enabled us in many cases to alter and amend his results.
Such a re-examination was necessary, in order to furnish safe ground for
a more detailed comparison of the three systems, which, as will be seen
hereafter, leads to important conclusions respecting their historical rela
tions to one another.
   1. Afvint ; this treatise exhibits the form afvini ; in the older lists,
as also often elsewhere, we have the dual afvin&u, afvayujau, " the two
horsemen, or A$vins." The Agvins are personages in the ancient Hindu
mythology somewhat nearly corresponding to the Castor and Pollux of
the Greeks. They are the divinities of the asterism, which is named
from them. The group is figured as a horse's head, doubtless in allusion
to its presiding deities, and not from any imagined resemblance. The
dual name leads us to expect to find it composed of two stars, and that
is the number allotted to the asterism by the Cakalya and Khanda-
Kataka. The Surya-Siddhanta (below, v. 16) designates the northern
member of the group as its junction-star : that this is the star (S Arietis
(magn. 8.2), and not « Arietis (magn. 2), as assumed by Colebrooke, is
shown by the following comparison of positions :
            Acvini .... long., A.D. 560, n° 59' .... lat. 9° 11' N".
            |3 Arietis ...      do.      i3° 56' .... do. 8° 28' N.
            oArietia ...        do.      17° 3?' . . . . do. 9° 57' N".
   Colebrooke was misled in this instance by adopting, for the number
of stars in the asterism, three, as stated by the later authorities, and then
applying to the group as thus composed the designation given by our
text of the relative position of the junction-star as the northern, and he
accordingly overlooked the very serious error in the determination of
the longitude thence resulting. Indeed, throughout his comparison, he
gives too great weight to the determination of latitude, and too little to
that of longitude : we shall see farther on that the accuracy of the lat
ter is, upon the whole, much more to be depended upon than that of the
former.
   Considered as a group of two stars, A§vini is composed of § and f
Arietis (magn. 4.3) ; as a group of three,, it comprises also « in the same
constellation.
   There is no discordance among- the different authorities examined by
us as regards the position of the junction-star of A$vini, either in lati
tude or in longitude. The case is the same with the 8th, 10th, 12th,
and 13th asterisms, and with them alone.
   The first Arab manzil is likewise composed of £ and f Arietis, to
which some add o : it is called ash-Sharatan, " the two tokens"—that is
to say, of the opening year.
   The Chinese series of sieu commences, as did anciently the Hindu
system of asterisms, with that which is later the third asterism. The
184                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [viii. 9.
twenty-seventh sieu, named Leu (M. Biot has omitted to give us the
signification of these titles), is @ Arietis, the Hindu junction-star.
   2. Bharani ; also, as plural, bharanyas; from the root bhar, "carry":
in the Taittiriya lists the form apabharam, "bearer away," in singular
and plural, is also found. Its divinity is Yama, the ruler of the world
of departed spirits ; it is figured as the yoni, or pudendum muliebre.
All authorities agree in assigning it three stars, and the southernmost is
pointed out below (v. 18) as its junction-star. The group is unquestion
ably to be identified with the triangle of faint stars lying north of the
back of the Ram, or 35, 39, and 41 Arietis : they are figured by some as
a distinct constellation, under the name of Musca Borealis. The desig
nation of the southern as the junction-star is not altogether unambigu
ous, as 35 and 41 were, in A. D. 560, very nearly equidistant from the
equator ; the latter would seem more likely to be the one intended,
since it is nearer the ecliptic, and the brightest of the group—being of
the third magnitude, while the other two are of the fourth : the defined
position, however, agrees better with 35, and the error in longitude, as
compared with 41, is greater than that of any other star in the series :
            Bharani                  24° 35' . . . . 11° 6' N.
            35 Arietis (a Muso-e) .. 26° 54' .... n°i7'N.
            41 Arietis (c Muse*) . . 28° 10' . . . . 10° 26' N.
   The Graha-Laghava gives Bharani 1° more of polar longitude : this
would reduce by the same amount the error in the determination of its
longitude by the other authorities.
   The second Arab manzil, al-Butain, " the little belly"—i. e., of the
Ram—is by most authorities defined as comprising the three stars in the
haunch of the Ram, or e, <?, and Q3 (or else £) Arietis. Some, however,
have regarded it as the same with Musca ; and we cannot but think that
al-BirunJ, in identifying, as he does, Bharani with al-Butain, meant to
indicate by the latter name the group of which the Hindu asterism is
actually composed.
   The last Chinese sieu, Oei, is the star 35 Arietis, or a Muscse.
   3. Krltikfr; or, as plural, krttik&s : the appellative meaning of the
word is doubtful. The regent of the asterism is Agni, the god of fire.
The group, composed of six stars, is that known to us as the Pleiades.
It is figured by some as a flame, doubtless in allusion to its presiding
divinity : the more usual representation of it is a razor, and in the choice
of this symbol is to be recognized the influence of the etymology of the
name, which may be derived from the root kart, " cut ;" in the configur
ation of the group, too, may be seen, by a sufficiently prosaic eye, a
broad-bladed knife, with a short handle. If the designation given below
(v. 18) of the southern member of the group as its junction-star, be
strictly true, this is not Alcyone, or 17 Tauri (magn. 3), the brightest of
the six, but either Atlas (27 Tauri : magn. 4) or Merope (23 Tauri :
magn. 5) : the two latter were very nearly equally distant from the
equator of A. D. 560, but Atlas is a little nearer to the ecliptic. The
defined position agrees best with Alcyone, nor can we hesitate to regard
this as actually the junction-star of the asterism. We compare the posi
tions below :
viii. 9.]      ,          Translation and Notes,                        185
               Krttiki          39° 8'             4° 44' N.
               Alcyone .... 39° 58'                4° i' N.
               27 Tauri . . . . 4o° 20'            3° 53' N.
               23 Tauri .... 39° 4i'               3° 55' S.
   The Siddhanta-Qiromani etc. give Krttika 2' less of polar longitude
than the Surya-Siddhanta, and the Graha-Laghava, on the other hand,
30' more : the latter, with the Khanda-Kataka, agree with our text as
regards the polar latitude, which the others reckon at 4° 30', instead of 5°.
   The Pleiades constitute the third mamil of the Arabs, which is de
nominated ath-Thuraiya, " the little thick-set group," or an-Najm, " the
constellation." Alcyone is likewise the first Chinese sieur which is
styled Mao.
   4. Hohini, " ruddy" ; so named from the hue of its principal star.
Prajapati, " the lord of created being^p is the divinity of the asterism.
It contains five stars, in the grouping of which Hindu fancy has seen the
figure of a wain (compare v. 13, below) ; some, however, figure it as a
temple. The constellation is the well-known one in the face of Taurus
to which we give the name of the Hyades, containing e, S, y, &, a Tauri ;
the latter, the most easterly (v. 19) and the brightest of the group—
being the brilliant star of the first magnitude known as Aldebaran—is
the junction-star, as is shown by the annexed comparison of positions r
                   Rohini        48° 9' .... 4° 49' S.
                   Aldebaran ... 49° 45' .... 5° 3of S.
  The Siddhanta-Ciromani etc. here again present the insignificant vari
ation from the polar longitude of our text, of 2' less : the former also
makes its polar latitude 4° 30' : the Graha-Laghava reads, for the polar
longitude, 49°. All these variations add to the error of defined position.
   The fourth Arab manzil is composed of the Hyades : its name is ad-
Dabaran, "the follower"—i. e., of the Pleiades. We would suggest the
inquiry whether this name may not be taken as an indication that the
Arab system of mansions once began, like the Chinese, and like the
Hindu system originally, with the Pleiades. There is, certainly, no very
obvious propriety in naming any but the second of a series the " follow
ing" (sequens or secundus). Modern astronomy lias retained the title as
that of the principal star in the group, to which alone it was often also
applied by the Arabs.
   The second Chinese sieu, Pi, is the northernmost member of the same
group, or £ Tauri, a star of the third to fourth magnitude.
   5. Mrgafirsha, or mrgafiras, " antelope's head" : with this name the
figure assigned to the asterism corresponds : the reason for the designa
tion we have not been able to discover. Its divinity is Soma, or the
moon. It contains three stars, of which the northern (v. 16) is the
determinative. These three can be no other than the faint cluster in the
head of Orion, or i, qo1, <p2 Orionis, although the Hindu measurement
of the position of the junction-star, A (inagn. 4), is far from accurate,
especially as regards its latitude :
               Mrgacirslm . . . . 61° 3' .... 9° 49' S.
               \ Orionia .... 63° 4o' .... i3° a5' S.
     186                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [viii. 9.
        In this erroneous determination of the latitude all authorities agree :
     the Graha-Laghava adds 1° to the error in polar longitude, reading 62°
     instead of 63°.
        Here again there is an entire harmony among the three systems com
     pared. The Arab manzil, al-Hak'ah, is composed of the same stars
     which make up the Hindu asterism : the third sieu, named Tse, is the
     Hindujunction-star, ). Orionis.
        6. Ardra, " moist :" the appellation very probably has some meteoro
     logical ground, which we have not traced out : this is indicated also by
     the choice of Rudra, the storm-god, as regent of the asterism. It com
     prises a single star only, and is figured as a gem. It is impossible not to
     regard the bright star of the first magnitude in Orion's right shoulder,
     or « Orionis, as the one here meant to be designated, notwithstanding
     the very grave errors in the deflation of its position given by our text :
     the only visible star of which the situation at all nearly answers to that
     definition is 135 Tauri, of the sixth magnitude; we add its position
     below, with that of « Orionis :
                     Ardra          65° 5o' .... 8° 53' S.
                     o Orionis .... 68° 43' .... 16° 4' S.
                     135 Tauri ... 67° 38' .... 9° 10' S.
        The distance from the sun at which the heliacal rising and setting of
     Ardrft, is stated below (ix. 14) to take place would indicate a star of about
     the third magnitude ; this adds to the difficulty of its identification with
     either of the two stars compared. We confess ourselves unable to
     account for the confusion existing with regard to this asterism, of which
     al-Biruni also could obtain no intelligible account from his Indian
     teachers. But it is to be observed that all the authorities, excepting our
     text and the Gakalya-Sanhita, give Ardra 11° of polar latitude instead
     of 9°, which would reduce the error of latitude, as compared with a
     Orionis, to an amount very little greater than will be met with in one or
     two other cases below, where the star is situated south of the ecliptic ;
     and it is contrary to all the analogies of the system that a faint star
     should have been selected to form by itself an asterism. The Siddhanta-
     Qiromani etc. make the polar longitude of the asterism 20' less than that
     given by the Surya-Siddhanta, and the Graha-Laghava 1° 20' less : these
     would add so much to the error of longitude.
         Here, for the first time, the three systems which we are comparing
     disagree with one another entirely. The Chinese have adopted for the
      determinative of their fourth sieu, which is styled Tsan, the upper star
     in Orion's belt, or S Orionis (2)—a strange and arbitrary selection, for
     which M. Biot is unable to find any explanation. The Arabs have estab
     lished their sixth station close to the ecliptic, in the feet of Pollux, nam
      ing it al-Han'ah, "the pile" : it comprises the two stars f (2.3) and £
      (4.3) Geminorum : some authorities, however, extend the limits of the
     mansion so far as to include also the stars in the foot of the other twin,
      or 17, v, p Geminorum ; of which the latter is the next Chinese sieu.
         7. Punarvasu ; in all the more ancient lists the name appears as a
      dual, punarvasA : it is derived from punar, " again," and vasu, " good,
      brilliant" : the reason of the designation is not apparent. The regent




-,
viii. 9.]                Translation and Notes.                         187
of the asterism is Aditi, the mother of the Adityas. Its dual title indi
cates that it is composed of two stars, of nearly equal brilliancy, and
two is the number allotted to it by the Qakalya and Khanda-Kataka, the
eastern being pointed out below (v. 19) as the junction-star. The pair
are the two bright stars in the heads of the Twins, or a and @ Gemino-
rum, and the latter (1.2) is the junction-star. The comparison of posi
tions is as follows :
               Punarvasu .... 92° 5a' .... 6° o' N.
               pGeminorum. . . 93° i4' . . . . 6° 3y' N.
   The Graha-Laghava adds 1° to the polar longitude of Punarvasu as
stated by the other authorities.
   Four stars are by some assigned to this asterism, and with that num
ber corresponds the representation of its arrangement by the figure of
a house : it is quite uncertain which of the neighboring stars of the same
constellation are to be added to those above mentioned to form the group
of four, bnt we think t (magn. 4) and v (5) those most likely to have
been chosen : Colebrooke suggests •&• (3.4) and i (5.4).
   The determinative of the fifth sieu, Tsing, is p Geminorum (3), which,
as we have seen, is reckoned among the stars composing the sixth
manzil : the seventh manzil includes, like the Hindu asterism, a and j?
Geminorum : it is named adh-Dhira', " the paw"—i. e., of the Lion ; the
figure of Leo (see Ideler, p. 152 etc.) being by the Arabs so stretched
out as to cover parts of Gemini, Cancer, Canis Minor, and other neigh
boring constellations.
   8. Pushya ; from the root push, " nourish, thrive" ; another frequent
name, which is the one employed by our treatise, is tishya, which is
translated " auspicious" ; Amara gives also sidhya, " prosperous." Its
divinity is Brhaspati, the priest and teacher of the gods. It comprises
three stars—the Khanda-Kataka alone seems to give it but one—of which
the middle one is the junction-star of the asterism. This is shown by
the position assigned to it to be S Cancri (4) :
                 Pushya .... 106° o' . . . . o° o'
                 S Cancri .... 108° 42' .... o° 4' N.
   The other two are doubtless f (4.5) and •& (6) of the same constellation :
the asterism is figured as a crescent and as an arrow, and the arrange
ment of the group admits of being regarded as representing a crescent,
or the barbed head of an arrow. Were the arrow the only figure given,
it might be possible to regard the group as composed of y, #, and ^ (4),
the latter representing the head of the arrow, and the nebulous cluster,
Praesepe, between f and •#, the feathering of its shaft: •& (105° 43'—
0° 48' S.) would then be the junction-star.
   The Arab manzil, an-Nathrah, " the nose-gap"—i. e., of the Lion—
comprises y and S Cancri, together with Prsesepe ; or, according to some
authorities, Prsesepe alone. The sixth sieu, Kuei, is & Cancri, a star
which is, at present, only with difinculty distinguished by the naked eye.
Ptolemy rates it as of the fourth magnitude, like "j and S : perhaps it is
one of the stars of which the brilliancy has sensibly diminished during
the past two or three thousand years, or else a variable star of very
long period. The possibility of such changes requires to be taken into
account, in comparing our heavens with those of so remote a past.
188                         Sfirya-Siddhdnta,                         [viii. 9.
   9. Aflesh& ; or, as plural, aflesh&s; the word is also written &freska:
its appellative meaning is " entwiner, embracer." With the name accord
the divinities to whom the regency of the asterism is assigned, which
are sarp&s, the serpents. The number of stars in the group is stated as
five by all the authorities excepting the Khanda-Kataka, which reads six :
their configuration is represented by a wheel. The^tar « Cancri (4) is
pointed out by Colebrooke as the junction-star of Aclesha, apparently
from the near correspondence of its latitude with that assigned to the
latter, for he says nothing in connection with it of his native helpers :
but a Cancri is not the eastern (v. 19) member of any group of five stars ;
nor, indeed, is it a member of any distinct group at all. Now the name,
figure, and divinity of A^esha are all distinctive, and point to a constel
lation of a bent or circular form : and if we go a little farther south
ward from the ecliptic, we find precisely such a constellation, and one
containing, moreover, the corresponding Chinese determinative. The
group is that in the head of Hydra, or >7, a, S, e, Q Hydra, a and g being
of the fifth magnitude, and the rest of the fourth: their arrangement is
conspicuously circular. There can be no doubt, therefore, that the
situation of the asterism is in the head of Hydra, and E Hydrse, its
brightest star (being rated in the Greenw. Cat. as of magnitude 3.4,
while S is 4.5), is the junction-star :
                Afleshil .... 109° 59' .... 6° 56' S.
                £ Hydne . . . . 112° 20' .... 11° 8' S.
                o Cancri .... ii3° 5' .... 5° 3i' S.
   The error of the Hindu determination of the latitude is, indeed, very
considerable, yet not greater than we are compelled to accept in one or
two other cases. The Khanda-Kataka increases it 1°, giving the aster
ism 6° instead of 7° of polar latitude. The Siddhanta-Ciromani etc.
deduct 1° from the polar longitude of the Surya-Siddhanta, and the
Graha-Laghava deducts 2° : both variations would add to the error in
longitude.
   The Arab manzil is, in this instance, far removed from the Hindu aster
ism, being composed of I Cancri (5) and * Leonis (5.4), and called at-
Tarf, " the look"—i. e., of the Lion. The seventh Chinese sieu, Lieu, is,
as already noticed, included in the Hindu group, being S Hydras.
   10. Maghh ; or, as plural, magh&s ; " mighty." The pitaras, Fathers,
or manes of the departed, are the regents of the asterism, which is fig
ured as a house. It is, according to most authorities, composed of five
stars, of which the southern (v. 18) is the junction-star. Four of these
must be the bright stars in the neck and side of the Lion, or £, y, i], and
a Leonis, of magnitudes 4.5, 2, 3.4, and 1.2 respectively; but which
should be the fifth is not easy to determine, for there is no other single
star which seems to form naturally a member of the same group with
these: v (5), n (5), or Q (4) might be forced into a connection with
them. This difficulty would be removed by adopting, with the Khanda-
Kataka, six as the number of stars included in the asterism : it would
then be composed of all the stars forming the conspicuous constellation
familiarly known as " the Sickle." The star a Leonis, or Regulus, the
most brilliant of the group, is the junction-star, and its position is defined
with unusual precision :
viii. 9.]                 Translation and Notes.                        189
                 Hagba .... 129° o' .... o° o'
                 Regulus .... 129° 49' .... o° 27' N.
   The tenth manzil, aj-Jabhah, " the forehead"—i. e., of the Lion—is
also composed of £, y, >?, a Leonis.
   The eighth, ninth, and tenth sieu of the Chinese system altogether
disagree in position with the groups marking the Hindu and Arab man
sions, being situated far to the southward of the ecliptic, in proximity,
according to Biot, to the equator of the period when they were estab
lished. The eighth, Sing, is « Hydrse (2), having longitude (A. D. 560)
127° 16', latitude 22° 25' S.
   11, 12. Phalguni ; or, as plural, phalgunyas ; the dual, phalgunyau,
is also found : this treatise presents the derivative form ph&lguni, which
is not infrequently employed elsewhere. The word is likewise used to
designate a species of fig-tree : its derivation, and its meaning, as applied
to the asterisms, is unknown to us. Here, as in two other instances,
later (the 20th and 21st, and the 26th and 27th asterisms), we have
two groups called by the same name, and distinguished from one another
a&purva and uttara, "former" and "latter"—that is to say, coming ear
lier and later to their meridian-transit. The true original character and
composition of these three double asterisms has been, if we are not mis
taken, not a little altered and obscured in the description of them fur
nished to us ; owing, apparently, to the ignorance or carelessness of the
describers, and especially to their not having clearly distinguished the
characteristics of the combined constellation from those of its separate
parts. In each case, a couch or bedstead (fayy&, manca, paryanka) is
given as the figure of one or both of the parts, and we recognize in
them all the common characteristic of a constellation of four stars, form
ing together a regular oblong figure, which admits of being represent
ed—not unsuitably, if rather prosaically—by a bed. This figure, in the
case of the Phalgunis, is composed of St •#, (?, and 93 Leonis, a very
distinct and well-marked constellation, containing two stars, <J and /?, of
the second to third magnitude, one, #, of the third, and one, 93, of the
fourth. The symbol of a bed, properly belonging to the whole constel
lation, is given by all the authorities to both the two parts into which it
is divided. Each of these latter has two stars assigned to it, and the
junction-stars are said (v. 18) to be the northern. The first group is,
then, clearly identifiable as S and # Leonis, the former and brighter
being the distinctive star :
              Ptirva-Phalguni . . . 189° 58' .... 11° 19' N.
              S Leonis              i4i° i5' . . . . 14° 19' N.
              3 Leonis              i43° 24' .... 9° 4o' N.
  The Siddhanta-Qiromani etc., and the Graha-Laghava, give Purva-
Phalguni respectively 3° and 4° more of polar longitude than the Surya-
Siddhanta. These are more notable variations than are found in any
other case, and they appear to us to indicate that these treatises intend to
designate •#, the southern member of the group, as its junction-star : we
have accordingly added its position also above.
  In the latter group, the junction-star is evidently (? Leonis :
             TJttara-Phalgunl . . . i5o° 10' . . . . 12° 5' If.
            (3 Leonis              i5i° 3-' .... 12° if N.
                         25


                                                                                s
 190                           S&rya-Siddhdnta,                            [viii. 9.
    This star, however, is not the northern, but the southern, of the two
 composing the asterism : its description as the southern we cannot but
 regard as simply an error, founded on a misapprehension of the compo
 sition of the double group. To al-Birunl, (1 Leonis and another star to
 the northward, in the Arab constellation Coma Berenices, were pointed
 out as forming the asterism Uttara-Phalguni. The Qakalya gives it five
 stars, probably adding to 0 Leonis the four small stars in the head of the
 Virgin, £ ', », n, and o, of magnitudes four to five and five.
    The regents of Purva and TTttara-Phalgunl are Bhaga and Aryaman,
 or Aryaman and Bhaga, two of the Adityas.
    The two corresponding Arab mansions are called az-Zubrah, "the
mane"—i. e., of the Lion—and as-Sarfah, " the turn" : they agree as
 nearly as possible with the Hindu asterisms, the former being composed
 of <5 and # Leonis, the latter of (? Leonis alone. The Chinese sieu, named
respectively Chang and Y, are w1 Hydrse (5)* and a Crateris (4).
    18. llnstu, " hand." Savitar, the sun, is regent of the asterism, which,
in accordance with its name, is figured as a hand, and contains five stars,
corresponding to the five fingers. These are the five principal stars in
the constellation Corvus, a well-marked group, which bears, however,
no very conspicuous resemblance to a hand. The stars are named—
counting from the thumb around to the little finger, according to our
apprehension of the figure—(?, «, e, y, and S Corvi. The text gives be
low (v. 17) a very special description of the situation of the junction-
star in the group, but one which is unfortunately quite hard to under
stand and apply : we regard it as most probable, however (see note to
v. 17), that f (3) is the star intended : the defined position, in which all
the authorities agree, would point rather to S (3) :
                  Hasta        174° 22' .... 10° 6' S.
                  y Corvi .... 170° 44' .... i4° 29' S.
                  S Corvi .... 173° 27' .... 12° 10' S.
   The Hindu and Chinese systems return, in this asterism, to an accord
ance with one another : the eleventh sieu, Chin, is the star Y Corvi. The
Arab system holds its own independent course one point farther : its
thirteenth mansion comprises the five bright stars ft q, y, S, s Virginis,
which form two sides, measuring about 15° each, of a great triangle:
the mansion is named al-Auw&', " the barking dog."
   14. Citr&, "brilliant." This is the beautiful star of the first magni
tude a Virginis, or Spica, constituting an asterism by itself, and figured
as a pearl or as a lamp. Its divinity is Tvashtar, " the shaper, artificer."
Its longitude is very erroneously defined by the Surya-Siddhanta :
                  Citr& .... 180° 48' .... i° 5o' S.
                  Spica .... i83° 49' .... 2° 2' S.
   All the other authorities, however, saving the Cakalya, remove this
error, by giving Citra 183° of polar longitude, instead of 180°. The
only variation from the definition of latitude made by our text is offered
by the Siddhanta-Ciromani, which, varying for once from the Brahma-
Siddhanta, reads 1' 45' instead of 2°.
   * It is, apparently, by ao original error of the press, that M. Biot, in all his
tables, calls this star »'.
viii. 9.]                 Translation and Notes.                        191

   Spica is likewise the fourteenth manzil of the Arabs, styled by them
as-Simak, and the twelfth sieu of the Chinese, who call it Kio.
   15. Svdti, or sv&ti ; the word is said to mean "sword." The Tait-
tiriya-Brahmana calls the asterism nishty&, " outcast," possibly from its
remote northern situation. It is, like the last, an asterism comprising
but a single brilliant star, which is figured as a coral bead, gem, or pearl.
In the definition of its latitude all authorities agree ; the Graha-Laghava
makes its polar longitude 198° only, instead of 199°. The star intended
is plainly « Bootis, or Arcturus :
                 Svatt           i83° 2' .... 33° 5o' K.
                Aroturus. . . • 184° 12' .... 3o° 5f K.
   In this instance, the Hindus hate gone far beyond the limits of the
zodiac, in order to bring into their series of asterisms a brilliant star
from the northern heavens : the other two systems agree in remaining
near the ecliptic. The fourteenth Chinese sieu, Kang, is * Virginia
(4.5) : the Arab manzil, al-Ghafr, " the covering," includes the same
star, together with t, and either ^ or <f Virginis,
   16. Vif&Md, " having spreading branches" : in all the earlier lists the
name appears as a dual, vifakhe. The asterism is also placed under the
regency of a dual divinity, indr&gni, Indra and Agni, We should ex
pect, then, to find it composed, like the other two dual asterisms, the 1st
and 7th, of two stars, nearly equal in brilliancy, and two is actually the
number assigned to the group by the Cakalya and the Kbanda-Kataka.
Now the only two stars in this region of the zodiac forming a conspicu
ous pair are « and (5 Librae, both of the second magnitude, and as these
two compose the corresponding Arab mansion, while the former of them
is the Chinese sieu, we have the strongest reasons for supposing them to
constitute the Hindu asterism also. There are, however, difficulties in
the way of this assumption. The later authorities give Vic.akha four
stars, and the defined position of the junction-star identifies it neither
with a nor ^, but with the faint star t (4.3) in the the same constella
tion. Colebrooke, overlooking this star, suggests « or x Librae (5) : the
following comparison of positions will show that neither of them can be
the one meant to be pointed out :
                 VigSkha .... 2i3° 3i' . . . . i° a5' S.
                 (Libras .... 211° o' . . . . i°48'S,
                 a Libra .... 205° 5' . . . . o° 23' TS,
                 x Libra .... 217° 45' .... o° a' N.
    The group is figured as a torana : this word Jones and Colebrooke
translate " festoon," but its more proper meaning is " an outer door or
gate, a decorated gateway." And if we change the designation of situ
ation of the junction-star in its group, given below (v. 16), from " north
ern" to " southern," we find without difficulty a quadrangle of stars, viz.
*> «, ft 1 (4-5) Libras, which admits very well of being figured as a gate
way. Nor is it, in our opinion, taking an unwarrantable liberty to make
such an alteration. The whole scheme of designations we regard as
of inferior authenticity, and as partaking of the confusion and uncer
tainty of the later knowledge of the Hindus respecting their system of
asterisms. That they were long ago doubtful of the position of Vic,akh&
192                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [viii. 9.
is shown by the fact that al-I31runi was obliged to mark it in his list as
" unknown." Very probably the Surya-Siddhanta, in calling t the north
ern member of the group, intended to include with it only the star 20
Libra? (3.4), situated about 6° to the south of it. Upon the whole, then,
while we regard the identification of Vigakha as in some respects more
doubtful than that of any other asterism in the series, we yet believe
that it was originally composed of the two stars a and {3 Librae, and that
later the group was extended to include also t and y, and, as so extended,
was figured as a gateway. The selection, contrary to general usage, of
the faintest star in the group as its junction-star, may have been made
in order to insure against the reversion of the asterism to its original
dual form.
   The variations of the other authorities from the position as stated in
our text are of small importance : the Siddhanta-Ciromani etc. give
Vic,akha 55' less of polar longitude, and the Graha-Laghava 1° less; of
polar latitude, the Siddhanta-Ciromani gives it 10', the Graha-Laghava
30' less ; the Khanda-Kataka agrees here, as also in the two following
asterisms, with the Surya-Siddhanta.
   The sixteenth Arab manzil, comprising, as already noticed, « and @
Librre, is styled az-Zubanan, "the two claws"—i. e., of the Scorpion :
the name of the corresponding Chinese mansion, having for its deter
minative <* Librae, is Ti.
   17. Anuradh& ; or, as plural, anur&dh&s : the word means "success."
The divinity is Mitra, "friend," one of the Adityas. According to the
Cakalya, the asterism is composed of three stars, and with this our text
plainly agrees, by designating (v. ] 8) the middle as the junction-star:
all the other authorities give it four stars. As a group of three, it com
prises @, <J, Tt Scorpionis, S (2.3) being the junction-star ; as the fourth
member we are doubtless to add <> Scorpionis (5.4). It is figured as a
ball or vali ; this Colebrooke translates " a row of oblations" ; we do
not find, however, that the word, although it means both " oblation,
ottering," and " a row, fold, ridge," is used to designate the two com
bined : perhaps it may better be taken as simply " a row ;" the stars
of the asterism, whether considered as three or four, being disposed in
nearly a straight line. The comparison of positions is as- follows :
               Anm-adM .... 224° 44' .... 2° 5a' S.
               S Scorpionis . . . 222° 34' .... i° 57' S.
   The Siddhanta-Ciromani and Graha-Laghava estimate the latitude of
Anuradha somewhat more accurately, deducting from the polar latitude,
as given by our text, 1° 15' and 1° respectively : the Siddhanta-Ciromani
etc. also add the insignificant amount of 5' to the polar longitude of the
Surya-Siddhanta.
   The corresponding Arab manzil, named al-Iklil, " the crown," con
tains also the three stars {!, S, n Scorpionis, some authorities adding Q to
the group. The Chinese sieu, Fang, is n (3), the southernmost and the
faintest of the three.
   18. Jyeththd, " oldest." The Taittiriya-Sanhita, in its list of aster-
isms, repeats here the name rohini, " ruddy," which we have had above
as that of the 4th asterism: the appellation has the same ground in this
viii. 9.]                Translation and Notes.                        193
as in the other case, .the junction-star of Jyeshtha being also one of those
which shine with a reddish light. The regent is Indra, the god of the
clear sky. The group contains, according to all the authorities, three
stars, and the central one (v. 18) is the junction-star. This is the bril
liant star of the first magnitude a Scorpionis, or Antares ; its two com
panions are <r (3.4) and i (3.4) in the same constellation :
               Jyeshtha .... a3o° 7' . . . . 3° 5o' S.
               Antares .... 229° 44' .... 4° 3i' S.
   The constellation is figured as a ring, or ear-ring ; by this may be un
derstood, perhaps, a pendent ear-jewel, as the three stars of Jyeshtha,
form nearly a straight line, with the brightest in the middle.
   The Siddhanta-Ciromani and Graha-Laghava add to the polar longi
tude of the junction-star of the asterism, as stated in our text, 5' and 1°
respectively, and they deduct from its polar latitude 30' and 1° respect
ively, making the definition of its position in both respects less accurate.
   Antares forms the eighteenth mangil, and is styled al-Kalb, "the
heart"—i. e., of the Scorpion : a and i are called an-Niyat, " the prce-
cordiay The Chinese sieu, Sin, is the westernmost of the three, or a.
   19. Mula, "root." The presiding divinity of the asterism is nirrti,
" calamity," who is also regent of the south-western quarter. It com
prises, according to the Qakalya, nine stars; their configuration is rep
resented by a lion's tail. The stars intended are those in the tail of the
Scorpion, or e, p, £, % &, i>, x, v, I Scorpionis, all of them of the third,
or third to fourth, magnitude. Other authorities count eleven stars in
the group, probably reckoning /t and £ as four stars ; each being, in fact,
a group of two closely approximate stars, named in our catalogues p1
(3), /t2 (4), ?* (4.5), £2 (3). The Khanda-Kataka alone gives Mula only
two stars, which are identified by al-Biruni with the Arab mamil ash-
Shaulah, or i and « Scorpionis. The Taittiriya-Sanhita, too, gives the
nama of the asterism as vicrt&u, " the two releasers" : the Vicrtau are
several times spoken of in the Atharva-Veda as two stars of which the
rising promotes relief from lingering disease (kshetriya) : it is accord
ingly probable that these are the two stars in the sting of the Scorpion,
and that they alone have been regarded by some as composing the aster
ism : their healing virtue would doubtless be connected with the meteor
ological conditions of the time at which their heliacal rising takes place.
Our text (v. 19) designates the eastern member of the group as its junc
tion-star : it is uncertain whether the direction is meant to apply to the
group of two, or to that of nine stars : if, as seems probable, ^ is the
star pointed out by the definition of position, it is sti'ictly true only of
the pair i- and v, since t, x, and •& are all farther eastward than i :
                Mula               242° 52' .... 8° 48' S.
                3i Scorpionis . . . 244° 53' . . . . i3° 44' S.
  The Graha-Laghava gives a more accurate statement of the longitude,
adding 1° to the polar longitude as defined by all the other authorities :
but it increases the error in latitude, by deducting 1° from that presented
by our text : the Siddhanta-Qiromani, in like manner, deducts 30', while
the Khanda-Kataka adds the same amount.
194                         8&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [viii. 9.
   The Taittiriya-SanhM makes pitaras, the Fathers, the presiding divin
ities of this asterism, as well as of the tenth.
   Bentley states (Hind. Astr., p. 5) that Mula was originally reckoned as
the first of the asterisms, and was therefore so named, as being their root
or origin ; also that, at another time, or in a different system, the series
was made to begin with Jyeshtha, which thence received its title of
" eldest." These statements are put forth with characteristic reckless
ness, and apparently, like a great many others in his pretended history
 of Hindu astronomy, upon the unsupported authority of his own conjec
ture. It is, in many cases, by no means easy to discover reasons for the
particular appellations by which the asterisms are designated : but we
would suggest that Mula may perhaps have been so named from its be
ing considerably the lowest, or farthest to the southward, of the whole
series of asterisms, and hence capable of being looked upon as the root
out of which they had grown up the heavens. It would even be possi
ble to trace the same conception farther, and to regard Jyeshtha as so
styled because it was the first, or " oldest," outgrowth from this root,
while the Vigakhe, "the two diverging branches," were the stars in
which the series broke into two lines, the one proceeding northward, to
Svatl or Arcturus, the other westward, to Citra or Spica. We throw
out the conjecture for what it may be worth, not being ourselves at all
confident of its accordance with the truth.
   The nineteenth Arab manzil is styled ash-Shaulah, "the sting"—i. e.,
of the Scorpion—and comprises, as already noticed, v and I Scorpionis.
The determinative of the seventeenth sieu, Uei, is included in the Hindu
asterism, being p2 Scorpionis.
   20, 21. Ash&dkd; or, as plural, ash&dh&s ; this treatise presents the
derivative form &sh&dhd, which is not infrequent elsewhere : the word
means " unsubdued." Here, again, we have a double group, divided
into two asterisms, which are distinguished as pdrva and uttara, " former
and latter." Their respective divinities are &pas, " the waters," and#>tpTe
dev&s, " the collective gods." Two stars are ordinarily allotted to each
asterism, and in each case the northern is designated (v. 16) as the junc
tion-star. By some authorities each group is figured as a bed or couch ;
by others, the one as a bed and the other as an elephant's tusk ; and
here, again, there is a difference of opinion as to which is the bed and
which the tusk. The true solution of this confusion is, as we conceive,
that the two asterisms taken together are figured as a bed, while either
of them alone is represented by an elephant's tusk. The former group
must comprise 8 (3.4) and e (3.2) Sagittarii, the former being the junc
tion-star ; this is shown by the following comparison of positions :
            Purva-Ashadha .... 254° 3<)' . . . . 5° 28' S.
            S Sagittarii       a54° 3s' .... 6° a5' S.
   The Graha-Laghava gives Purva-Ashadha 1° more of polar longitude,
and 30' less of polar latitude, than the Surya-Siddhanta : the Siddhanta-
Qiromani etc. give it 10' less of the latter.
   The latter of the two groups contains, as its southern star, ? Sagittarii
(3.4), and its northern and junction-star can be no other than a (2.3) in
the same constellation, notwithstanding the error in the Hindu determi
viii. 9.]                 Translation and Notes.                        195
nation of its latitude, which led Colebrooke to regard T (4.3) as the
star intended : we subjoin the positions :
             Uttara-Ashadha .... 260" 23' .... 4° ty S.
             a Sagittarii        262° ai' .... 3° 24' S.
             * Sagittarii             264° 48' .... 5° 1' S.
   The only variation from the position of the junction-star of this aster-
ism as stated in our text is presented by the Graha-Laghava, which
makes its polar longitude 261° instead of 260°.
   The Cakalya (according to Colebrooke : our MS. is defective at this
point) and the Khanda-Kataka assign four stars to each of the Ashadhas,
and the former represents each as a bed. It would not be difficult to
establish two four-sided figures in this region of the constellation Sagit
tarius, each including the stars above mentioned, with two others : the
one would be composed of f2 (4.3), 5, e, tj (4—the star is also called j?
Telescopii), the other of g> (4.3), a, T, and £ : such is unquestionably the
constitution of the two asterisms, considered as groups of four stars ;
they are thus identified also, it may be remarked, by al-Blrunl. The
junction-stars would still be S and or, which are the northernmost in their
respective constellations ; nor is there any question as to which four
among the eight are selected to make up the double asterism, since S, s,
£, and a both form the most regular quadrangular figure, and are the
brightest stars.
   The determinatives of the eighteenth and nineteenth mansions of the
Chinese, Ki and Teu, are y2 and <p Sagittarii, which are included in the
two quadruple groups as stated above. The twentieth manzil compre
hends all the eight stars which we have mentioned, and is styled an-
Na'aim, " the pasturing cattle" : some also understand each group of
four as representing an ostrich, na'am. The twenty-first manzil, on the
other hand, al-Baldah, " the town," is described as a vacant space above
the head of Sagittarius, bounded by faint stars, among which the most
conspicuous is i Sagittarii (4.5).
   22. Abhijit, " conquering." The regent of the asterism is Brahma.
The position assigned to its junction-star, which is described as the
brightest (v. 19) in a group of three, identifies it with a Lyrae, or Vega,
a star which is exceeded in brilliancy by only one or two others in the
heavens :
                Abhijit .... 264° 10' . . . . 59° 58' N.
                Vega .... 265° i5' . . . . 61° 46' N.
   The other authorities compared (excepting the Cakalya) define the
position in latitude of Abhijit more accurately, adding 2° to the polar
latitude given by the Surya-Siddhanta : the Graha-Laghava also improves
the position in longitude by adding 1° 20', while the Siddhanta-Ciromani
etc. increase the error by deducting 1° 40'.
   The Taittiriya-Sanhita (iv. 4. 10) omits Abhijit from its list of the as
terisms : the probable reason of its omission in some authorities, or in
certain connections, and its retention in others, we shall discuss far
ther on.
   Abhijit is figured as a triangle, or as the triangular nut of the frng&ta,
an aquatic plant ; this very distinctly represents the grouping of « Lyraa
196                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                           [viii. 9.
with the two other fainter stars of the same constellation, s and t, both
of the fifth magnitude.
   In this and the two following asterisms—as once before, in the fifteenth
of the series—the Hindus have gone far from the zodiac, in order to
bring into their system brilliant stars from the northern heavens, while
the Chinese and the Arab systems agree in remaining in the immediate
neighborhood of the ecliptic. The twentieth sieu is named Nieu, and
is the star (? Capricorni (3), situated in the head of the Goat : the twen
ty-second manzil, Sa'd adh-Dhabih, " felicity of the sacrificer," contains
the same star, the group being « (composed of two stars, each of mag
nitude 3.4) and (? Capricorni.
   23. Qravana, " hearing, ear" ; from the root fru, " hear" : another
name for the asterism, fron&, found occurring in the Taittiriya lists, is
perhaps from the same root, but the word means also " lame." Cravana
comprises three stars, of which the middle one (v. 18) is the junction-
star : they are to be found in the back and neck of the Eagle, namely
as y, ce, and (? Aquilffi ; a, the determinative, is a star of the first to sec
ond magnitude, while y and (? are of the third and fourth respectively :
               Qrarana .... 282° 29' .... 29° 54' N.
               o Aquilte . . . 281° 41' .... 29°u'K.
    All the authorities agree as to the polar latitude of Cravana : the
Siddhanta-Qiromani etc. give it 2° less of polar longitude than our trea
tise, and the Graha-Laghava even as much as 5° less.
   The regent of the asterism is Vishnu, and its figure or symbol corres
ponds therewith, being three footsteps, representatives of the three steps
by which Vishnu is said, in the early Hindu mythology, to have strode
through heaven. The Qakalya, however, gives a trident as the figure
belonging to Cravana. Possibly the name is to be regarded as indica
ting that it was originally figured as an ear.
   The Chinese sieu corresponding in rank with Cravana is called Nu,
and is the faint star s Aquarii (4.3). The Arab manzil Sa'd Bula',
"felicity of a devourer," or al-Bula', "the devourer," etc., includes the
same star, being composed of e, p (4.5), v (5) Aquarii, or, according to
others, of e and 7 (6) Aquarii, or of p and v.
   24. yravisht.h& ; the word is a superlative formation from the same
root from which came the name of the preceding asterism, and means,
probably, " most famous." Another and hardly less frequent appella
tion is dhanishth&, an irregular superlative from dlianin, " wealthy." The
class of deities known as the vasus, " bright, good," are the regents of
the asterism. It comprises four stars, or, according to the Cakalya and
Khanda-Kataka, five : the former, which is given by so early a list as
that of the Taittiriya-Brahmana, is doubtless the original number. The
group is the conspicuous one in the head of the Dolphin, composed of
p, «, y, S Delphini, all of them stars of the third, or third to fourth, mag
nitude, and closely disposed in diamond or lozenge-form: they are fig
ured by the Hindus as a drum or tabor. The junction-star, which is the
western (v. IT), is @ :
                gravishtha .... 296° 5' .... 35° 33' S.
               (3 Delphini .... 296° 19' .... 3i° 5?' S.
riii. 9.]                Translation and Notes.                         197
   The only variation from the position assigned in our text to the junc
tion-star of Cravishtha is presented by the Graha-lAghava, which gives
it 286°, instead of 290°, of polar longitude. Perhaps its intention is to
point out 'C (5) as the junction-star: this is doubtless the one added to
the other four, on account of its close proximity to them, to make up the
group of five ; it lies only about half a degree westward from fi.
   The name of the twenty-fourth manzil, Sa'd as-Sn'ud, " felicity of
felicities"—i. e., " most felicitous"—exhibits an accordance with that of
the Hindu asterism which possibly is not accidental. The two are, how
ever, as already noticed, far removed in position from one another, the
Arab mansion being composed of the two stars (? (3) and I (5.4), in the
left shoulder of Aquarius, to which some add also 4G, or e1, Capricorn!
(6). The corresponding sieu, Hiii, is the first of thein^or f? Aquavii.
   25. Qatabhishoj, "bavins; a hundred physicians": the form fatabhishd,
which seems to be merely a corruption of the other, also occurs in later
writings. It is, as we should expect from the title, said to be composed
of a hundred stars, of which the brightest (v. 19) is the junction-star.
This, from its defined position, can only be )• Aquarii (4) :
                      jaj .... 319° 5i' . . . . o° 29' S.
              X Aquarii        32i° 33' .... o° 23' S.
The rest of the asterism is to be sought among the yet fainter stars in
the knee of Aquarius, and the stream from his jar : of course, the num
ber one hundred is not to be taken as an exact one, nor are we to sup
pose it possible to trace out with any distinctness the figure assigned
to the group, which is a circle. The Khanda-Kataka, according to al-
Biruni, gives Catabhishaj only a single star, but this is probably an error
of the Arab traveller : he is unable to point out which of the stars in
Aquarius is to be regarded as constituting the asterism.
   The regent of the 25th asterism, according to nearly all the authori
ties, is Varuna, the chief of the Adityas, but later the god of the waters :
the Taittiriya-Sanhita, alone gives to it and to the 14th asterism, as well
as to the 18th, Indra as presiding divinity : this is perhaps mere blun
dering.
   The Graha-Laghava places the junction-star of Catablnshaj precisely
on the ecliptic : the Siddhanta-Ciromani etc. give it 20', instead of 30',
of polar latitude south.
   The corresponding lunar mansion of the Arabs, Sa'd al-Akhbivah,
" the felicity of tents," comprises the three stars in the right wrist and
hand of the Water-bearer, or j (3), £ (4), )/ (4) Aquarii, together with a
fourth, which Ideler supposes to be n (o). Since, however, the twenty-
third Chinese determinative, Goei, is « Aquarii (3), a star so near as
readily to be brought into the same group with the other three, we are
inclined to regard it as altogether probable that the mansion was, at
least originally, composed of «, y, t, and >/•
   26, 27. Bhadrapada ; as plural, bhadrapadas: also bhadrapada ; from
bhadra, " beautiful, happy," and pada, "foot." Another frequent appel
lation is prosltt.hapada : proshtha is said to mean " carp" and " ox" ; the
latter signification might perhaps apply here. We have here, once more,
a double asterism, divided into two parts, which arc distinguished from
                           20
    198                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [viii. 9.
    one another as purva and utlara, "former'' and "latter." All authori
    ties agree in assigning two stars to each of the two groups; but there is
    not the same accordance'as regards the figures by which they are rep
    resented : by some the one, by others the other, is called a conch or bed,
    the alternate one, in either case, being pronounced a bi-faced figure : the
    Muhurta-Cintamani calls the first a bed, and the second twins. It ad
    mits, we apprehend, of little or no question that the Bhadrapadas are
    properly the four bright stars j?, «, t Pegasi, and « Andromeda}—all of
    them commonly reckoned as of the second magnitude—which form
    together a nearly perfect square, with sides measuring about 15° : the
    constellation, a very conspicuous one, is familiarly known as the "Square
    of Pegasus." The figure of a couch or bed, then, belongs, as in the
    case of the otheCtwo double asterisms, already explained, to the whole
    constellation, and not to either of the two separate asterisms into which
    it is divided, while, on the other hand, either of these latter is properly
    enough symbolized by a pair of twins, or by a figure with a double
    face. The appropriateness of the designation " feet," found as a part of
    both the names of the whole constellation, is also sufficiently evident, if
    we regard the group as thus composed. The junction-star of the former
    half-asterism is, by its defined position, clearly shown to be « Pegasi :
              Pilrva-Bhadrapada .... 334° 25' . . . . 22° 3o' N.
              a Pegasi               333° 27' .... 19° 25' N.
       The Graha-Laghava gives the junction-star 1° less of polar longitude,
    which would bring its position to a yet closer accordance, in respect to
    longitude, with a Pegasi : the error in latitude, which is common to all
    the authorities, is not greater than we have met with several times else
    where. But we are told below (v. i6) that the principal star of each of
    these asterisms is the northern, and this would exclude ft Pegasi alto
    gether, bringing in as the other member of the first pair some more
    southern star, perhaps £ Pegasi (3.4). The confusion is not less marked,
    although of another character, in the case of the second asterism : in
    the definition of position of its junction-star we find a longitude given
    which is that of one member of the group, and a latitude which is that
    of the other, as is shown by the following comparison :
              TJttara-Bhadrapada .... 347° 16' . . . .24° i' N.
              y Pegasi                349° 8' .... 12° 35' N.
              o Anclromedas           354° 17' .... 25° 4i' N.
       If we accept either of these two stars as the one of which the posi
    tion is meant to be defined, we shall be obliged to admit an error in the
    determination either of its longitude or of its latitude considerably
    greater than we have met with elsewhere. Nor is the matter mended
    by any of the other authorities : the only variation from the data of our
    text is presented by the Graha-Laghava, which reads, as the polar lati
    tude of TJttara-Bhadrapada, 27° instead of 26°. There can be no
    doubt that the two stars recognized as composing the asterism are y Pe
    gasi and a Andromedae, but there has evidently been a blundering con
    fusion of the two in making out the definition of position of the junc
    tion-star. We would suggest the following as a possible explanation of




.
viii. 9.]                Translation and Notes.                         199
this confusion : that originally « and •( Pegasi were designated and de
scribed as junction-stars of the two half-groups, of which they were
respectively the southern members ; that afterward, for some reason—
perhaps owing to the astrological theory (see above, vii. 21) of the supe
riority of a northern star—the rank of junction-star was sought to be
transferred from the southern to the northern stars of both asterisms :
that, in making the transfer, the original constitution of the former
group was neglected, while in the latter the attempt was made to define
the real position of the northern star, but by simply adding to the polar
latitude already stated for f Pegasi, without altering its polar longitude
also. Al-Biruni, it should be remarked, was unable to obtain from his
Hindu informants any satisfactory identification of either of these aster-
isms, and marks both in his catalogue as " unknown."
   The view we have taken of the true character of the two Bhadrapa-
das is powerfully supported by their comparison with the corresponding
members of the other two systems. The twenty-sixth and twenty-
seventh manzilf, al-Fargh al-Mukdim and al-Fargh al-Mukhir, "the fore
and hind spouts of the water-jar," comprise respectively a and (9 Pegasi,
and y Pegasi and « Andromeda; ; the determinatives of the twenty-
fourth and twenty-fifth sieu, Che and Pi, are a and y Pegasi.
   The regents of these two asterisms are aja ekapat and a.M budhnya,
the "one-footed goat" and the "bottom-snake," two mythical figures, of
obscure significance, from the Vedic pantheon.
   28. Revati, " wealthy, abundant." Its presiding divinity is Pushan,
" the prosperer," one of the Adityas. It is said to contain thirty-two
stars, which are figured, like those of Qravishthil, by a drum or tabor;
but it would be in vain to attempt to point out precisely the thirty-two
which are intended, or to discover in their arrangement any resemblance
to the figure chosen to represent it. The junction-star of the group is
said (v. 18) to be its southernmost member : all authorities agree iu
placing it upon the ecliptic, and all excepting our treatise and the
Cakalya make its position exactly mark the initial point of the fixed
sidereal sphere. The star intended is, as we have already often had
occasion to notice, the faint star £ Piscium, of about the fifth magnitude,
situated in the band which connects the two Fishes. It is indeed very
near to the ecliptic, having only 13' of south latitude. It coincided in
longitude with the vernal equinox in the year 572 of our era.
   At the time of al-Blruni's visit to India, the Hindus seem to have
been already unable to point out distinctly and with confidence the sit
uation in the heavens of that most important point from which they
held that the motions of the planets commenced at the creation, and at
which, at successive intervals, their universal conjunction would again
take place ; for he is obliged to mark the asterism as not certainly iden
tifiable. He also assigns to it, as to Catabhishaj, only a single star.
   The twenty-sixth Chinese sieu. Koei, is marked by 'C, Andromedae (4),
which is situated only 35' east in longitude from i; Piscium, but which
has 17° 36' of north latitude. The last mcmzil, Batu al-Hut, " the fish's
belly," or ar-Risha, " the band," seems intended to include the stars com
posing the northern Fish, and with them probably the Chinese deter
minative also : but it is extended so far northward as to take in the bright
200                               Surya-Siddhd n la,                               [viii. 9.

star j? Androtnedffl (2), and to this star alone the name of the mansion
is sometimes applied, although its situation, so far from the ecliptic (in
lat. 25° 50' N.), renders it by no means suited to become the distinctive
star of one of the series of lunar stations.
    We present, in the annexed table, a general conspectus of the corres
pondences of the three systems ; and, in order to bring out those corres
pondences in the fullest manner possible, we have made the comparison
in three different ways : noting, in the first place, the cases in which the
three agree with one another ; then those in which each agrees with one
 of the others; and finally, those in which each agrees with either the
 one or the other of the remaining two.
Correspondences of the Hindu, Arab, and Chinese Systems of Asterisms.
                        Hindu                                   Hindu    Arab      Chinese
         Hindu           with      Hindu    Hindu    Arab        with     with       with
 No.                     Arab      with      with    with       Arab     Hindu      Hindu
         Name.            and                                     or        or        or
                                   Arab    Chinese. Chinese.                        Arab.
                       Chinese.                                Chinese. Chinese.
   I Acvim,               I          I         I        I         I        I          I
  a   Bharani,            2*         2*        2        2*        2        2*         2
   3 Krttika,             3          3        3         3         3        3          3
   4 Kohini,              4          4        4         4         4         4         4
   5 Mrgacirsha,          5          5        5         5         5         5         5
   6 Ai-dra,             ..                             t                  ..
   7 Punarvasu,                      6                  t         6        6         't
   8 Pushya,              6*         7        6                   7        7          6
   9 Aclesha,                                 7                   8                   7
 IO Magha,                           8                            9        8
 1 1 P.-Phalguni,                    9        ..                 10        9
 12 U.-Phalguni,                    10                           ii       10
 1 3 Hasta,                                    8                 12                   8
 i4 Citra,                 7        ii         9        6        i3       ii          9
 i5 Sv-ati,                                             7                 12         10
 i6| Vicakha,             8         12       10         8        i4        i3        it
 17 Anuradha,             9         i3       ii         9        i5        i4        12
 18 Jyeshtha,            10         i4       12        10        16        i5        i3
 "9 Mula,                "t         i5       i3                  17        16        i4
 20 P.-Ashadha,           12        16       i4        n         18        i?        i5
 a1 U.-Ashadha,                              i5                  '9                  16
 22 Abhijit, '                                         12        ..        18        17
 a3 (Jravana,                                          i3                  '9        18
 24 , (Jravisiitha,                                    i4                  20
                                                                                     '9
 25 (JatabhUhaj,                                       i5                  21        20
 a6   P.-Bhadrapada,      J3        17       16        16        20        22        21
 37 U.-Bhadrapada,        i4        18       J7        17        21        23        22
 26 Revati,               ••        ••                 i8§                *4§        "3§
   * This supposes the second manzil to be composed of the stars in JIusca, as
defined by some authorities, f The sixth manzil includes, according to many
authorities, the fifth siett, but as there is, at any rate, a discordance in the order of
succession, we have not reckoned this among the correspondences. £ We reckon
these two as cases of general coincidence, because, nlthou^h the Chinese xieu is not
contained in the Arab mansion, the Hindu nsterism includes them both, and tho
virtual correspondence of the three systems is beyond dispute. § Here we assurno
the Chinese sieu to be comprised among the stars forming the last manzil, which is
altogether probable, although nowhere distinctly stated.
viii.9.]                 Translation and Notes.                        201

    Owing to the different constitution of the systems, their correspond
ences are somewhat diverse in character : we account the Hindu aster-
isms and the Arab mansions to agree, when the groups which mark the
two are composed, in -whole or in part, of the same stars : we account
the Chinese system to agree with the others, when the determinative of
a sieu is to be found among the stars composing their groups. We
have prefixed to the whole the numbers and titles of the Hindu aster-
isms, for the sake of easy reference back to the preceding detailed iden
tifications and comparisons.
    After this exhibition of the concordances existing among the three
systems, it can, we apprehend, enter into the mind of no one to doubt
that all have a common origin, and are but different forms of one and
the same system. The questions next arise—is either of the three the
original from which the others have been derived ? and if so, which of
them. is entitled to the honor of being so regarded ? and are the other
two independent and direct derivatives from it, or does either of them
come from the other, or must both acknowledge an intermediate source ?
In endeavoring to answer these questions, we will first exhibit the views
of M. Biot respecting the origin and character of the Chinese sieu, as
stated in the volumes for 1840 and 1859 of the Journal des Savants.
    According to Biot, the sieu form an organic and integral part of that
system by which the Chinese, from an almost immemorial antiquity,
have been accustomed to make their careful and industrious observations
of celestial phenomena. Their instruments, and their methods of ob
servation, have been closely analogous with those in use among modern
astronomers in the West: they have employed a meridian-circle and a
measure of time, the clepsydra, and have observed meridian-transits, ob
taining right ascensions and declinations of the bodies observed. To
reduce the errors of their imperfect time-keepers, they long ago selected
certain stars near the equator, of which they determined with great care
the intervals in time, and to these they referred the positions of stars or
 planets coming to the meridian between them. The stars thus chosen
 are the sieu. Twenty-four of them were fixed upon more than two
 thousand years before our era (M. Biot says, about B. C. 2357 : but it is
 obviously impossible to fix the date, by internal evidence, within a cen
 tury or two, nor is the external evidence of a more definite character) ;
 the considerations which governed their selection were three : proximity
 to the equator of that period, distinct visibility—conspicuous brilliancy
 not being demanded for them—and near agreement in respect to time
 of transit with the upper and lower meridian-passages of the bright stars
 near the pole, within the circle of perpetual apparition : M. Biot finds
 reason to believe that these circumpolar stars had been earlier observed
 with special care, and made standards of comparison, and that, when
 it was afterward seen to be desirable to have stations near the equator,
 such stars were adopted as most nearly agreed with them in right ascen
 sion. The other four, being the 8th, 14th, 21st, and 28th, the accession
 of which completed the system of twenty-eight, were added in the time
 of Cheu-Kong, about B.C. 1100, because they marked very nearly the
 positions of the equinoxes and solstices at that epoch : the bright star of
 the Pleiades, however, which had originally been made the first of the
 202                        Sfirya-Siddhdnta,                       [viii. 9.
  series, from its near approach to the vernal equinox of that remoter era,
  still maintained, as it has ever since maintained, its rank as the first.
  Since the time of Cheu-Kong the system has undergone no farther modi
  fication, but has been preserved unaltered and unimproved, with the
  obstinate persistency so characteristic of the Chinese, although many of
  the determinative stars have, under the influence of the precession, be
  come far removed from the equator, one of them even having retro
  graded into the preceding mansion.
     If the history of the Chinese sieu, as thus drawn out, is well-founded
  and true, the question of origin is already solved : the system of twenty-
  eight celestial mansions is proved to be of native Chinese institution—
 just as the system of representation of the planetary movements by epi
  cycles is proved to be Greek by the fact that we can trace in the history
 of Greek science the successive steps of its gradual elaboration. That
 history rests, at present, upon the authority of M. Biot alone : we are
 not aware, at least, that any other investigator has gone independently
 over the same ground ; and he has not himself laid before us, in their
 original form, the passages from Chinese texts which furnish the basis
 of his conclusions. But we regard them as entitled to be received,
 upon his authority, with no slight measure of confidence : his own dis
 tinguished eminence as a physicist and astronomer, his familiarity with
 researches into the history and archaeology of science, his access to the
 abundant material for the history of Chinese astronomy collected and
 worked up by the French missionaries at Pekin, and the zealous assist
 ance of his son, M. Edouard Biot, the eminent Sinologist, whose prema
 ture death, in 1850, has been so deeply deplored as a severe loss to Chi
 nese studies—all these advantages, rarely united in such fullness in the
 person of any one student of such a subject, give very great weight to
views arrived at by him as the results of laborious and long-continued
investigation. Nor do we see that any general considerations of import
ance can be brought forward in opposition to those views. It is, in the
first place, by no means inconsistent with what we know in other res
pects of the age and character of the culture of the Chinese, that they
should have devised such a system at so early a date. They have, from
the beginning, been as much distinguished by a tendency to observe and
record as the Hindus by the lack of such a tendency : they have always
attached extreme importance to astronomical labors, and to the construc
tion and rectification of the calendar ; and the industry and accuracy
of their observations is attested by the use made of them by modern
astronomers—thus, to take a single instance, of the cometary orbits
which have been calculated, the first twenty-five rest upon Chinese ob
servations alone : and once more, it is altogether in accordance with the
clever empiricism and practical shrewdness of the Chinese character that
they should have originated at the very start a system of observation
exceedingly well adapted to its purpose, stopping with that, working in
dustriously on thenceforth in the same beaten track, and never develop
ing out of so promising a commencement anything deserving the name
of a science, never devising a theory of the planetary motions, never
even recognizing and defining the true character of the cardinal phe
nomenon of the precession.
viii. 9.]                Translation and Notes.                        203
   Again, although it might seem beforehand highly improbable that a
system of Chinese invention should have found its way into the West,
and have been extensively accepted there, many centuries before the
Christian era, there are no so insuperable difficulties in the way as should
destroy the force of strong presumptive evidence of the truth of such a
communication. It is well known that in very ancient times the pro
ducts of the soil and industry of China were sought as objects of lux
ury in the West, and mercantile intercourse opened and maintained
across the deserts of Central Asia ; it even appears that, as early as
about B. C. 600 (Isaiah xlix. 12), some knowledge of the Sinim, as a far-
off eastern nation, had penetrated to Babylon and Judea. On the other
hand, we do not know how much, if at all, earlier than this it may be
 necessary to acknowledge the system of asterisms to have made its ap
pearance in India. The literary memorials of the earliest period, the
Vedic period proper, present no evidence of the existence of the system :
indeed, it is remarkable how little notice is taken of the stars by the
 Vedic poets; even the recognition of some of them as planets does not
appear to have taken place until considerably later. In the more recent
portions of the Vedic texts—as in the nineteenth book of the Atharva-
Veda, a modern appendage to that modern collection, and in parts of
the Yajur-Veda, of which there is reason to believe that the canon was
not closed until a comparatively late period—full lists of the asterisms
arc found. The most unequivocal evidence of the early date of the sys
tem in India is furnished by the character of the divinities under whose
regency the several asterisms are placed : these are all from the Vedic
pantheon ; the popular divinities of later times are not to be found among
them ; but, on the other hand, more than one whose. consequence is lost,
and whose names almost are forgotten, even in the epic period of Hindu
history, appear in the list. Neither this, however, nor any other evi
dence known to us, is sufficient to prove, or even to render strongly prob
able, the existence of the asterisms in India at so remote a period that
the system might not be believed to have been introduced, in its fully
developed form, from China.
   If, now, we make the attempt to determine, upon internal evidence,
which of the three systems is the primitive one, a detailed examination
of their correspondences and differences will lead us first to the import
ant negative conclusion that no one among them can be regarded as the
immediate source from which either of the other two has been derived.
It is evident that the Hindu asterisms and the Arab man&zil constitute,
in many respects, one and the same system : both present to us constel
lations or groups of stars, in place of the single determinatives of the
Chinese sieu ; and not only are those groups composed in general of the
same stars, but in several cases—as the 7th, 10th, llth, and 12th mem
bers of the series—where they differ widely in situation from the Chi
nese determinatives, they exhibit an accordance with one another which
is too close to be plausibly looked upon as accidental. But if it is thus
made to appear that neither can have come independently of the other
from a Chinese original, it is no less certain that neither can have come
through the other from such an original ; for each has its own points of
screement with the sieu, which the other does not share—the Hindu in
204                        S&i-ya-Siddhdnta,                        [viii. 9.

the 9th, 13th, and 21st asterisms, the Arab in the 15th, 22nd, 23rd,
24th, and 25th mansions. The same considerations show, inversely, that
the Chinese system cannot be traced to either of the others as its source,
since it agrees in several points with each one of them where that one
differs from the third. It becomes necessary, then, to introduce an addi
tional term into the comparison ; to assume the existence of a fourth
system, differing in some particulars from each of the others, in whi,ch
all shall find their common point of union. Such an assumption is not
to be looked upon as either gratuitous or arbitrary. Not only do the
mutual relations of the three systems point distinctly toward it, but it is
also supported by general considerations, and will, we think, be found to
remove many of the difficulties which' have embarrassed the history of
the general system. It has been urged as a powerful objection to the
Chinese origin of the twenty-eight-fold division of the heavens, that we
find traces of its existence in so many of the countries of the West,
geographically remote from China, and in which Chinese influence can
hardly be supposed to have been directly felt. And it is undoubtedly
true that neither India nor Arabia has stood in ancient times in such
relations to China as should fit it to become the immediate recipient
of Chinese learning, and the means of its communication to surround
ing peoples. The great route, of intercourse between China and the
West led over the table-land of Central Asia, and into the north
 eastern territory of Iran, the seat of the Zoroastrian religion and cul
ture : thence the roads diverged, the one leading westward, the other
 south-eastward into India, through the valley of the Cabul, the true
 gate of the Indian peninsula. Within or upon the limits of this central
 land of Iran we conceive the system of mansions to have received that
 form of which the Hindu naTashatras and the Arab manazil are the
 somewhat altered representatives: precisely where, and whether in the
 hands of Semitic or of Aryan races, we would not at present attempt
 to say. There are, as has been noticed above, traces of an Iranian sys
 tem to be found in the Bundehesh ; but this is a work which, although
probably not later than the times of Persia's independence under her
 Sassanian rulers, can pretend to no high antiquity, and no like traces have
 as yet been pointed out in the earliest Iranian memorial, the Zendavcsta.
Weber (Ind. Literaturgeschichte, p. 221), on the other hand, sees in the
mazzalot/i and mazzaroth of the Scriptures (Job xxxviii. 32 ; II Kings
 xxiii. 5)—words radically akin with the Arabic manzil—indications of
 the early existence of the system in question among the western Semites,
 and suspects for it a Chaldaic origin : but the allusions appear to us too
obscure and equivocal to be relied upon as proof of this, nor is it easy
to believe that such a method of division of the heavens should have
prevailed so far to the west, and from so ancient a time, without our
 hearing of it from the Greeks ; and especially, if it formed a part of the
 Cbaldaic astronomy. This point, however, may fairly be passed over,
 as one to be determined, perhaps, by future investigations, and not of
 essential importance to the present inquiry. The question of originality
 is at least definitely settled adversely to the claims of both the Hindu
 and the Arab systems, and can only lie between the Chinese and that
 fourth svstem from which the other two have together descended. And
  viii. 9.]                    Translation and Notes.                              205

  as concerns these, we are willing to accept the solution which is fur
  nished us by the researches of M. Biot, supported as we conceive it to be
 by the general probabilities of the case. Any one who will trace out,
 by the help of a celestial globe or map,* the positions of the Chinese
  determinatives, cannot fail to perceive their general approach to a great
  circle of the sphere which is independent of the ecliptic, and which
 accords more nearly with the equator of B. C. 2350 than with any other
 later one. The full explanations and tables of positions given by Biot
  (Journ. d. Sav., 1840, pp. 243-254) also furnish evidence, of a kind ap
 preciable by all, that the system may have had the origin which ho
  attributes to it, and that, allowing for the limitations imposed upon it by
 its history, it is consistent with itself, and well enough adapted to the
  purposes for which it was designed. With the positions of its determin
 ative stars seem to have agreed those of the constellations adopted by
 the common parent of the Hindu and Arab systems, excepting in five or
 six points : those points being where the Chinese make their one unac
 countable leap from the head to the belt of Orion, and again, where the
 sieu are drawn off far to the southward, in the constellations Hydra and
 Crater : and this, in our view, looks much more as if the series of the
 tint were the original, whose guidance had been closely followed except
 ing in a few cases, than as if the asterisms composing the other systems
 had been independently selected from the groups of stars situated along
 the zodiac, with the intention of forming a zodiacal series. It is easy to
 see, farther, how the single determinatives of the sieu should have become
 the nuclei for constellations such ES are presented by the other systems ;
 but if, on the contrary, the sieu had been selected by the Chinese, in
 each case, from groups previously constituted, there appears no reason
 why their brightest stars should not have been chosen, as they were cho
 sen later by the Hindus, in the establishment of junction-stars for the
 asterisms.
     We would suggest, then, as the theory best supported by all the evi
 dence thus far elicited, that a knowledge of the Chinese astronomy, and
 with it the Chinese system of division of the heavens into twenty-eight
 mansions, was carried into Western Asia at a period not much later
 than B. C. 1100, and was there adopted by some western people, either
 Semitic or Iranian. That in their hands it received a new form, such as
 adapted it to a ruder and less scientific method of observation, the limit
 ing stars of the mansions being converted into zodiacal groups or con
 stellations, and in some instances altered in position, so as to be brought
 nearer to the general planetary path of the ecliptic. That in this
 changed form, having become a means of roughly determining and de
 scribing the places and movements of the planets, it passed into the
 keeping of the Hindus—very probably along with the first knowledge
 of the planets themselves—and entered upon an independent career of
 history in India. That it still maintained itself in its old seat, leaving its
 traces later in the Bundehesh ; and that it made its way so far westward
 as finally to become known to, and adopted by, the Arabs. The farther
     * We propose to furnish at the close of this publication, in connection with the
I additional notes, such a map of the zodiacal zone of the heavens as will sufficiently
  illustrate the character and mutual relations of the three systems compared'.
                               27
206                        Sfoya-lSiddhdnta,                       [viii. 0.
modifications introduced into it by the latter people all have in view a
single purpose, that of establishing its stations in the immediate neigh
borhood of the ecliptic : to this purpose the whole Arab system is not
less constantly faithful than is the Chinese to its own guiding principle.
The Hindu sustains in this respect but an unfavorable comparison with
the others : the arbitrary introduction, in the 15th, 22nd, 23rd, and 24th
asterisms, of remote northern stars, greatly impairs its unity, and also
furnishes an additional argument of no slight force against its original
ity ; for, on the one hand, the derivation of the others from it becomes
thereby vastly more difficult, and, on the other, we can hardly believe
that a system of organic Indian growth could have become disfigured in
India by such inconsistencies ; they wear the aspect, rather, of arbitrary
alterations made, at the time of its adoption, in an institution imported
from abroad.
   It might, at first sight, appear that the adoption by the Arabs of the
mnnzil corresponding to Ac,vint as the first of their series indicated that
they had derived it from India posterior to the transfer by the Hindus
of the first rank from Krttika, the first of the sieu, to Agvini : but the
circumstance seems readily to admit of another interpretation. The
names of many of the Arab mansions show the influence of the Greek
astronomy, being derived from the Greek constellations : the same influ
ence would fully explain an arrangement which made the series begin
with the group coinciding most nearly with the beginning of the Greek
zodiac. The transfer on the part of the Hindus, likewise, was unques
tionably made at the time of the general reconstruction of their astro
nomical system under the influence of western science. The two series
are thus to be regarded as having been brought into accordance in this
respect by the separate and independent working of the same cause.
    M. Biot insists strongly, as a proof of the non-originality of the sys
tem of asterisms among the Hindus, upon its gross and palpable lack
 of adaptedness to the purpose for which they used it ; he compares it
to a gimlet out of which they have tried to make a saw. In this view
we can by no means agree with him : we would rather liken it to a
hatchet, which, with its edge dulled and broken, has been turned and
made to do duty as a hammer, and which is not ill suited to its new and
coarser office. Indeed, taking the Hindu system in its more perfect
 and consistent form, as applied by the Arabs, and comparing it with the
Chinese sieu at any time within the past two thousand years, we are by
no means sure that the advantage in respect to adaptation would not be
generally pronounced to be upon the side of the former. The distance
of many of the sieu during that period from the equator, the faintness
of some among them, the great irregularity of their intervals, render
them anything but a model system for measuring distances in right
ascension. On the other hand, to adopt a series of conspicuous constel
lations along the zodiac, by their proximity to which the movements of
the planets shall be marked, is no unmotived proceeding : just such a
 division of the ecliptic among twelve constellations preceded and led the
 way to the Greek method of measuring by signs, having exact limits,
 and independent of the groups of stars which originally gave name to
them. M. Eiot's error lies in his misapprehension, in two important
viii. 9.]                Translation and Notes.                       207
respects, of the character of the Hindu asterisms : in the first place, he
constantly treats them as if they were, like the sieu, single stars, the in
tervals between whose circles of declination constituted the accepted
divisions of the zodiac ; and in the second place, he assumes them to
have been established for the purpose of marking the moon's daily prb-
gress from point to point along the ecliptic. Now, as regards the first
of these points, we have already shown above that the conversion of the
Chinese determinatives into constellations took place, in all probability,
before their introduction to the knowledge of the Hindus : there is, in
deed, an entire unanimity of evidence to the effect that the Hindu sys
tem is from its inception one of groups of stars : this is conclusively
shown by the original dual and plural names of the asterisms, or by their
otherwise significant titles—compare especially those of the 13th and
25th of the series. The selection of a "junction-star" to represent the
asterism appears to be something comparatively modern : we regard it
as posterior to the reconstruction of the Hindu astronomy upon a truly
scientific basis, and the determination, by calculation, of the precise pla
ces of the planets : this would naturally awaken a desire for, and lead
to, a similarly exact determination of the position of some star repre
senting each asterism, which might be employed in the calculation of
conjunctions, for astrological purposes ; the astronomical uses of the
system being no longer of much account after the division of the ecliptic
into signs. And the choice of the junction-star has fallen, in the ma
jority of cases, not upon the Chinese determinative itself, but upon some
other and more conspicuous member of the group originally formed
about the latter. Again, there is an entire absence of evidence that the
" portions" of the asterisms, or the arcs of the ecliptic named from them,
were ever measured from junction-star to junction-star : whatever may
be the discordance among the different authorities respecting their extent
and limits, they are always freely, and often arbitrarily, taken from parts
of the ecliptic adjacent to, or not far removed from, the successive con
stellations.
   As regards the other point noticed, it is, indeed, not at all to be won
dered at that M. Biot should treat the Hindu nakshatras as a system
bearing special relations to the moon, since, by those who have treated
of them, they have always been styled "houses of the moon," "moon-
stations," " lunar asterisms," and the like. Nevertheless, these designa
tions seem to be founded only in carelessness, or in misapprehension.
In the Surya-Siddhanta, certainly, there is no hint to be discovered of
any particular connection between them and the moon, and for this rea
son we have been careful never to translate the term nakshatra by any
other word than simply " asterism." Nor does the case appear to have
been otherwise from the beginning. No one of the general names for
the asterisms (nakshatra, bha, dhishnya) means literally anything more
than " star" or " constellation" : their most ancient and usual appella
tion, nakshatra, is a word of doubtful etymology (it may be radically
akin with nakta, nox, »ijf, "night"), but it is not infrequently met with
in the Vedic writings, with the general signification of " star," or
" group of stars" : the moon is several times designated as " sovereign
of the nakshatras" but evidently in no other sense than that in which
208                        Sdrya-SiddMnta,                         [viii. 9.
we style her "queen of night"; for the same title is in other passages
given to the sun, and even also to the Milky Way. "When the name
came to be especially applied to the system of zodiacal asterisms, we
have seen above that a single one of the series, the 5th, was placed un
der the regency of the moon, as another, the 13th, under that of the
sun : this, too. by no means looks as if the whole design of the system
was to mark the moon's daily motions. Naturally enough, since the
moon is the most conspicuous of the nightly luminaries, and her revolu
tions more rapid and far more important than those of the others, the
asterisms would practically be brought into much more frequent use in
connection with her movements : their number, likewise, being nearly
accordant with the number of days of her sidereal revolution, could not
but tempt those who thus employed them to set up an artificial relation
between the two. Hence the Arabs distinctly call their divisions of the
zodiac, and the constellations which mark them, " houses of the moon,"
and, until the researches of M. Biot, no one, so far as we are aware, had
ever questioned that the number of the asterisms or mansions, wherever
found, was derived from and dependent on that of the days in the
moon's revolution. It was most natural, then, that Western scholars,
having first made acquaintance with the Arab system, should, on finding
the same in India, call it by the game name : nor is it very strange, even,
that Ideler should have gone a step farther, and applied the familiar title
of "lunar stations" to the Chinese sieu also; an error for which he is
sharply criticised by M. Biot (Journ. d. Sav., 1859, p. 480). The latter
cites from al-BMni (Journ. d. Sav. 1845, p. 49; 1859, pp. 487-8) two
passages derived by him from Varaha-mihira and Brahmagupta respect
ively, in which are recorded attempts to establish a systematic relation
between the asterisms and the moon's true and mean daily motions.
One of these passages is exceedingly obscure, and both are irreconcila
ble with one another, and with what we know of the system of aster
isms from other sources : two conclusions, however, bearing upon the
present matter, arc clearly derivable from them : first, that, as the "por
tions" assigned to the asterisms had no natural and fixed limits, it was
possible for any Hindu system-maker so to define them as to bring them
into a connection with the moon's daily motions : and secondly, that
such a connection was never deemed an essential feature of the system,
and hence no one form of it was generally recognized and accepted.
The considerations adduced by us above are, we think, fully sufficient to
account for any such isolated attempts at the establishment of a con
nection as al-Birunl, who naturally sought to find in the Hindu naksha-
tras the correlatives of his own man&zil al-kamar, was able to discover
among the works of Hindu astronomers : there is no good reason why
we should deprive the former of their true character, which is that of
zodiacal constellations, rudely marking out divisions of the ecliptic, and
employable for all the purposes for which such a division is demanded.
   The reason of the variation in the number of the asterisms, which are
reckoned now as twenty-eight and now as twenty-seven, is a point of no
small difficulty in the history of the system. M. Biot makes the acute
suggestion that the omission of Abhijit from the series took place be
cause the mansion belonging to that asterism was on the point of becom
viii. 9.]                Translation and Notes.                         209
ing extinguished, the circle of declination of its junction-star being
brought by the precession to a coincidence with that of the junction-star
of the preceding asterism about A. D. 972. But it has been shown
above that M. Biot's view of the nature of a nakshatra—that it is,
namely, the arc of the ecliptic intercepted between the circles of declina
tion of two successive junction-stars—is altogether erroneous : however
nearly those circles might approach one another, there would still be no
difficulty in assigning to each asterism its " portion" from the neighbor
ing region of the ecliptic. Again, this explanation would not account
for the early date of the omission of Abhijit, which, as already noticed,
is found wanting in one of the most ancient lists, that of the Taittiriya-
Sanhita. It is to be observed, moreover, that M. Biot, in calculating the
period of Abhijit's disappearance, has adopted t Sagittarii as the junc
tion-star of Uttara-Ashadha, while we have shown above that a, and
not i, is to be so regarded : and this substitution would defer until sev
eral centuries later the date of coincidence of the two circles of declina
tion. According to the Hindu measurements, indeed (see the table of
positions of the junction-stars, near the beginning of this note), Abhijit
 is farther removed from the preceding asterism, both in polar longitude
 and in right ascension, than are five of the other asterisms from their
 respective predecessors: nor does the Hindu astronomical system ac
 knowledge or make allowance for the alteration of position of the circles
 of declination under the influence of the precession : their places, as
 data for the calculation of conjunctions, are ostensibly laid down for all
 future time. For these various reasons, M. Biot's explanation is to be
 rejected as insufficient. A more satisfactory one, in our opinion, may
 be found in the fact, illustrated above (see Fig. 31, beginning of this
 note), that the asterisms are in general so distributed as to accord quite
 well with a division of the ecliptic into twenty-seven equal portions,
 but not with a division into twenty-eight equal portions ; that the
 region where they are too much crowded together is that from the 20th
 to the 23rd asterism, and that, among those situated in this crowded
 quarter, Abhijit is farthest removed from the ecliptic, and so is more
 easily left out than any of the others, in dividing the ecliptic into por
 tions. We cannot consider it at all doubtful that Abhijit is as originally
  and truly a part of the system of asterisms as any other constellation
  in the series, which is properly composed of twenty-eight members, and
  not of twenty-seven : the analogy of the other systems, and the fact
  that treatises like this Siddhanta, which reckon only twenty-seven divi
  sions of the ecliptic, are yet obliged, in treating of the asterisms as con-
  stelfetions, to regard them as twenty-eight, are conclusive upon this
  point. The whole difficulty and source of discordance seems to lie in
  this—how shall there, in any systematic method of division of the eclip
  tic, be found a place and a portion for a twenty-eighth asterism ? The
  Khanda-Kataka, as cited by al-Biruni—in making out, by a method
  which is altogether irrespective of the actual positions of the asterisms
  with reference to the zodiac, the accordance already referred to between
  their portions and the moon's daily motions—allots to Abhijit so much
  of the ecliptic as is equivalent to the mean motion of the moon during
  the part of a day by which her revolution exceeds twenty-seven days.
 210                        8&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [viii. 9.
 Others allow it a share in the proper portions of the two neighboring
 asterisms : thus the Muhurta-Mala, a late work, of date unknown to us,
 says : " the last quarter of Uttara-Ashadha and the first fifteenth of
 Ciavana together constitute Abhijit : it is so to be accounted when
 twenty-eight asterisms are reckoned ; not otherwise." Ordinarily, how
 ever, the division of the ecliptic into twenty-seven equal " portions" is
 made, and Abhijit is simply passed by in their distribution. After the
 introduction of the modern method of dividing the circle into degrees
 and minutes, this last way of settling the difficulty would obviously re
 ceive a powerful support, and an increased currency, from the fact that
 a division by twenty-seven gave each portion an even number of min
 utes, 800, while a division by twenty-eight yielded the awkward and
 unmanageable quotient 77lf .
    Much yet remains to be done, before the history and use of the sys
 tem of asterisms, as a part of the ancient Hindu astronomy and astrol
 ogy, shall be fully understood. There is in existence an abundant liter
 ature, ancient and modern, upon the subject, which will doubtless at
 some time provoke laborious investigation, and repay it with interesting
 results. To us hardly any of that literature is accessible, and only the
 final results of wide-extended and long-continued studies upon it could
 be in place here. We have already allotted to the nakuhatras more
 space than to some may seem advisable : our excuse must be the in
 terest of the history of the system, as part of the ancient history of
 the rise and spread of astronomical science ; the importance attaching
 to the researches of M. Biot, the inadequate attention hitherto paid
 them, and the recent renewal of their discussion in the Journal des Sa
 vants ; and finally and especially, the fact that in and with the asterisms
 is bound up the whole history of Hindu astronomy, prior to its trans
 formation under the overpowering influence of western science. In the
 modern astronomy of India, the nakshatras are of subordinate conse
 quence only, and appear as hardly more than reminiscences of a former
 order of things : from the Surya-Siddhanta might be struck out every
 line referring to them, without serious alteration of the character of the
 treatise.
    Before bringing this note to a close, we present, in the annexed table,
 a comparison of the true longitudes and latitudes of the junction-stars
 of the twenty-eight asterisms, as derived by calculation from the posi
 tions stated in our text, with the actual longitudes and latitudes of the
 stars with which they are probably to be identified. In a single case,
 (the 27th asterism), we compare the longitude of one star and the lati
 tude of another ; the reason of this is explained above, in connexion
 with the identification of the asterism. We add columns giving the
  errors of the Hindu determinations of position : in that for the latitude
  north direction is regarded as positive, and south direction as negative.
    Upon examining the column of errors of latitude presented in this
 table, it will be seen that they are too considerable, and too irregular,
 both in amount and in direction, to be plausibly accounted for other
 wise than as direct errors of observation and calculation. The grossest
  of them, as has already been pointed out, are committed in the measure
  ment of southern latitudes, when of considerable amount, and they are



-,
 riii. 9.]                    Translation and Notes.                              211
 Positions, and Errors of Position, of the Junction-Stars of the Asterisms.
                    Longitude, A. D. 560.         Latitude.
No.       Name.                                                   Star compared.
                    Hindu. True. Hindu
                                 error. Hindu.  True. Hindu
                                                        error.
                     o / O '      o / O 1      0 /        o /
 I    A9vint,        II 59 i3 56 -i 57 9 ii N. 8 28 N. + 043 f3 Arietig.
 3 Bharani,         24 35 26 54 -2 19 ii 6 " U 17 " - 0 II 35 Arietis, oMuscse.
 3 Krttika,         39 8 39 58 -o5o 444" 4 i " + o43 r; Tauri, Alcyone,
 4 Rohiui,          48 9 49 45 -i 36 4498. 53oS. + o4i a Tauri, Aldebaran.
 5 Mrgafireha,      61 3 63 4o -2 37 949" i3 25 " + 336 X, Orionis.
 6 Ardrd,           65 5o 68 43 -253 853 " 16 4" + 7 " a Orionis.
 7 Punarvasu,       92 52 93 i4 - O 22 6 oN. 639N. -o 39 3 Gemin., Pollux.
 8 Pushya,         106 o 108 42 - 2 42 o o      o 4" -o 4 S Cancri.
 9 Aflesha,        109 59 112 2O - 2 21 656 8. ii 88. + 4 12 f Hydras.
10 Maghi,         129 o 129 49 -049 0 0         o 27 N. -o 27 a Leonis, Regulus.
ti P.-Phalguni, 1 39 58 r4i i5 -I I7 u I9N. 14 19 " -3 o S Leonis.
12 U.-Phalgunl, i5o 10 i5i 37 - i 27 12 5 " 12 I7" - O 12 J Leonis.
l3 Hasta,         174 11 173 27 +o 55 10 6 S. 12 IO S- + 2 4 8 Corvi.
i4 Citra,         1 80 48 i83 49-3 i i 5o" 22" + O 12 a Virginis, Spica.
i5 Svatt,         i83 2 184 12 - I IO 335oN. 3o57N. + a53 o Bootis, Arcturus.
16 Vicakha,       ai3 3i 211 O + 2 3l i 25 S. i 48 S. + 0 23 i Librze.
I? Anuradha,      224 44 222 34 + 2 10 2 52 ' i 57 " -o55 S Scorpionia.
18 Jyeshtha,      23o 7 229 44 + o a3 35o ' 43i " + o4i a Scorp., Antares.
'9 Mula,          242 52 244 33 -Mi 848 ' i3 44 " + 456 \ Scorpionis.
20 P.-Ashadha,    254 39 254 32 + o 7 528 ' 6 25 " + 057 S Sagittarii.
31 U.-Ashadha,    260 23 262 21 -i 58 459 ' 3 24 " - I 25 a Sagittarii.
aa Abhijit,       264 10 265 1 5 -i 559 58N. 61 46 N. -i 48 a Lyrse, Vega.
2,3 yravana.      282 29 ?.8r 4i + o48 29 54 " 29 19 " + o35 a Aquilee, Atair.
a4 fravishtha,    296 5 296 19 - o i4 35 33 " 3i 57 " + 336 i3 Delphini.
a5 Qatabhishaj, 319 5o 32i 33 -i 43 o 28 S. 023S. -o 5 X Aquarii.
a6 P.-Bhadrapada, 334 25 333 27 + o58 22 3oN. I925N. + 3 5 a Pegasi.
»7 U.-Bhadrapada, 347 16 349 8 -I 52 24 I" 25 4i " - i 4o y Peg. & a Androm.
a8 Revati,        359 5o 359 5o 0 O o o         o i3S. + o i3 j Piscium.
all in the same direction, giving the star a place too far to the north.
The column of errors in longitude, on the other hand, shows a very
marked preponderance of minus errors, their sum being 33° 54', while
the sum of plus errors is only 7° 52'. Upon taking the difference of
these sums, and dividing it by twenty-eight, we find the average error
of longitude to be - 56', the greatest deviation from it in either direction
being - 2° 4' and + 3° 27'.* So far as this goes, it would indicate that
the Hindu measurements of position were made from a vernal equinox
situated about 1° to the eastward of that of A. D. 560, and so at a time
sevfjjjty years previous to the date we have assumed for them, or about
A. D. 490. In our present ignorance of the methods of observation

   * In a comparison in which a high degree of exactness was desired, and was not,
in the nature of the case, unattainable, it would of course be necessary to take into
account the proper motions of the stars compared. This we have not thought it
worth while, in the present instance, to do. We may remark, however, that the
junction-star of the 15th asterism, Arcturus, has a much greater proper motion than
any other in the series ; and that, if this were allowed for, according to its value as
determined by Main (Mem. Roy. Astr. Soc., vol. xix, 4to, 1851), the Hindu error of
longitude would be diminished about 22', but that of latitude increased about 35'.




                                                                                          .
 212                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [viii. 9.
  employed by the Hindus for this purpose, such a determination of date
  cannot, indeed, be relied upon as exact or conclusive, yet it is the best
 and surest that we can attain. The general conclusion, at any rate,
 stands fast, that the positions of the junction-stars of the asterisms were
 fixed not far from the time when the vernal equinox coincided with the
 initial point of the Hindu sidereal sphere, or during the sixth century
 of our era.
     Since, according to the Hindu theory, the initial point of the sidereal
 sphere is also, for all time, the mean place of the vernal equinox, which
 always reverts to it after a libration of 27° in either direction (see above,
 iii. 9-12), we are not surprised to find the positions of the asterisms pri
 marily defined upon the supposition of their coincidence. But it is not
 a little strange that the effect of the precession in altering the direction
 of the circles of declination drawn through the junction-stars, and so the
 polar longitudes and latitudes of the latter, should be made no account
 of (see, however, the latter half of v. 12, below, and the note upon it),
and that directions for calculating the conjunctions of the planets with
the asterisms according to their positions as thus stated should be given
 (vv. 14-15), unaccompanied by any hint that a modification of the data
 of the process would ever be found necessary. This carelessness is per
haps to be regarded as an additional evidence of the small importance
attached, after the reconstruction of the Hindu astronomy, to calcula
tions in which the asterisms were concerned; although it also tends
strongly to prove what we have suggested above (note to iii. 9-12), that
in the construction of the Hindu astronomical system the precession was
ignored altogether. It is to be noticed that the two systems of yogas (see
above, ii. 65, and additional note upon that passage), originally founded
upon actual conjunctions with the asterisms, have been divorced from
any real connection with them. A like consideration might restrain us
from accepting the determinations of position here presented as the best
results which Hindu observers and instruments were capable of attaining ;
yet, in the absence of other tests of their powers, we cannot well help
drawing the conclusion that the accuracy of a Hindu observation is not
to be relied on within a degree or two.
   10. Agastya is at the end of Gemini, and eighty degrees south ;
and Mrgavyadha is situated in the twentieth degree of Gemini ;
   11. His latitude (vikshepa), reckoned from his point of declina
tion (apakrama), is forty degrees south : Agni (hutabhuj) and Brah-
mahrdaya are in Taurus, the twenty-second degree ;
   12. And they are removed in latitude (vilcshipta), northward,
eight and thirty degrees respectively. . . .
   In connection with the more proper subject of this chapter we also
have laid before us, here and in a subsequent passage (vv. 20-21), the
defined positions of a few fixed stars which are not included in the sys
tem of zodiacal asterisms. The definition is made in the same manner
as before, by polar longitudes and latitudes. It is not at all difficult to
identify the stars referred to in these verses ; they were correctly pointed
out by Colebrooke, in his article already cited (As. Res., vol. ix). Agas
tya is a Navis, or Canopus, a star of the first magnitude, and one of the
viii. 12.]                Translation and Notes.                         213
most brilliant in the southern heavens. Its remote southern position,
only 37° from the pole, renders it invisible to an observer stationed much
to the northward of the Tropic of Cancer. Its Hindu name is that of
one of the old Vedic rshis, or inspired sages. The comparison of its
true position with that assigned it by our text—which, in this instance,
does not require to be reduced to true longitude and latitude—is as
follows :
                  Agastya .... 90° o' .... 80° o' S.
                  Canopus .... 85° 4' .... ?5° 5o' S.
   The error of position is here very considerable, and the variations of
the other authorities from the data of our text are correspondingly great.
The Siddhanta-Ciromani and (according to Colebrooke) the Brahma-
Siddhanta give Agastya 87° of polar longitude, and 77° of latitude,
which is a fair approximation to the truth : the Graha-Laghava also
places it correctly in lat. 76° S., but makes its longitude only 80°, which
is as gross an error as that of the Surya-Siddhanta, but in the opposite
direction. The Cakalya-Sanhita agrees precisely with our treatise as
respects the positions of these four stars, as it does generally in the
numerical data of its astronomical system.
   Mrgavyadha, " deer-hunter"—it is also called Lubdhaka, " hunter"—
is o Canis Majoris, or Sirius, the brightest of the fixed stars :
               Mrgavyadha .... 76° 23' .... 39° 5s' S.
               Sirius          84° 7' . . . . 39° 3a' S.
    Here, while all authorities agree with the correct determination of tho
 latitude of Sirius presented by our text, the Siddhanta-Qiromani etc.
 greatly reduce its error of longitude, by giving the star 86°, instead of
'80°, of polar longitude : the Graha-Laghava reads 81°.
    The star named after the god of fire, Agni, and called in the text by
 one of his frequent epithets, hutabk.uj, " devourer of the sacrifice," is the
 one which is situated at the extremity of the northern horn of the Bull,
 or j? Tauri : it alone of the four is of the second magnitude only :
                   Agni            54° 5' .... 7° 44' N.
                  (3 Tauri . ... 62° 3a' .... 5° 22' N.
   The very gross error in the determination of the longitude of this star
is but slightly reduced by the Graha-Laghava, which gives it 53°, instead
of 52°, of polar longitude. The Siddhanta-Ciromani and Brahma-Sid-
dhanta omit all notice of any of the fixed stars excepting Canopus and
Sirius.
   Brahmahrdaya, " Brahma's heart," is a Aurigas, or Capella :
               Brahmabrdaya .... 60° 29' .... 28° 53' N.
               Capella               61° 5o' . . . . aa8 52' N.
   The Graha-Laghava, leaving this erroneous determination of latitude
unamended, adds a greater error of longitude, in the opposite direction
to that of our text, by giving the star 4° more 6f polar longitude.
   WQ shall present these comparisons in a tabular form at the end of the
chapter, in connection with the other passage of similar import.
  12. . . . Having constructed a sphere, one may examine the
corrected (sphuta) latitude and polar longitude (dhruvaka).
                      28


                                                                                 .-
      214                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                       [viii. 12-
          What is the true meaning and scope of this passage, is a question with
       regard to which there may be some difference of opinion. The com
       mentator explains it as intended to satisfy the inquiry whether the polar
       longitudes and latitudes, as stated in the text, are constant, or whether
       they are subject to variation. Now although, he says, owing to the
       precession, the values of these quantities are not unalterably fixed, yet
       they are given by the text as they were at its period, and as if they were
       constant, while the astronomer is directed to determine them for his own
       time by actual observation. For this purpose he is to take such a sphere
       as is described below (chap, xiii)—of which the principal parts, and the
       only ones which would be brought into use in this process, are hoops or
       circles representing the colures, the equator, and the ecliptic—and is to
       suspend upon its poles an additional movable circle, graduated to de
       grees : this would be, of course, a revolving circle of declination. The
       sphere is next to be adjusted in such manner that its axis shall point to
      the pole, and that its horizon shall be water-level. Then, in the night,
      the junction-star of Revati (£ Piscium) is to be looked at through a hole
      in the centre of the instrument, and the corresponding point of the
      ecliptic, which is 10' east of the end of the constellation Pisces, is to be
      brought over it ; after that, it will be necessary only to bring the revolv
      ing circle of declination, as observed through the hole in the centre of
      the instrument, over any other star of which it is desired to determine
      the position, and its polar longitude and latitude may be read off directly
      upon the ecliptic and the movable circle respectively.
          Colebrooke (As. Res., ix. 326 ; Essays, ii. 324) found this passage
      similarly explained in other commentaries upon the Surya-Siddhanta to
      which he had access, and also met with like directions in the commen- .
      taries on the Siddhanta-Qiromani.
         There are, however, very serious objections to such an interpretation
      of the brief direction contained in the text. It is altogether inconsist
      ent with the whole plan and method of a Hindu astronomical treatise to
      leave, and even to order, matters of this character to be determined by
      observation. Observation has no such important place assigned to it in
      the astronomical system : with the exception of terrestrial longitude and
      latitude, which, in the nature of things, are beyond the reach of a trea
      tise, it is intended that the astronomer should find in his textbook every
      thing which he needs for the determination of celestial phenomena, and
      should resort to instruments and observation only by way of illustration.
     The sphere of which the construction is prescribed in the thirteenth
      chapter is not an instrument for observation : it is expressly stated to be
      " for the instruction of the pupil," and it is encumbered with such a
     number and variety of different circles, including parallels of declination
     for all the asterisms and for the observed fixed stars, that it could not
     be used for any other purpose : it will be noticed, too, that the com
     mentary is itself obliged, to order here the addition of the only appli
     ances—the revolving circle of declination and the hole through the cen
     tre—which make of it an instrument for observation. The simple and
     original meaning of the passage seems to be that, having constructed a
     sphere in the manner to be hereafter described, one may examine the
     places of the asterisms as marked upoa it, and note their coincidence




•,
viii. 13.]               Translation and Notes.                         215

with the actual positions of the stars in the heavens. And we would
regard the other interpretation as forced upon the passage by the com
mentators, in order to avoid the difficulty pointed out by us above (near
the end of the note on the last passage but one) and to free the Sid-
dhanta from the imputation of having neglected the precessional varia
tion of the circles of declination. M. Biot pronounces the method of
observation explained by the commentators "almost impracticable,"
and it can, accordingly, hardly be that by which the positions of the as-
terisms were at first laid down, or by which they could be made to un
dergo the necessary corrections. Another method, more in accordance
with the rules and processes of the third chapter, and which appears to
 us to be more authentic and of higher value, is described by Colebrooke
 (as above) from the Siddhanta-Sarvabhauma, being there cited from the
Siddhanta-Sundara ; it is as follows :
   " A tube, adapted to the summit of the gnomon, is directed toward
the star on the meridian : and the line of the tube, pointed to the star,
is prolonged by a thread to the ground. The line from the summit of
the gnomon to the base is the hypothenuse ; the height of the gnomon
is the perpendicular ; and its distance from the extremity of the thread
is the base of the triangle. Therefore, as the hypothenuse is to its base,
so is the radius to a base, from which the sine of the angle, and conse
quently the angle itself, are known. If it exceed the latitude [of the
place of observation], the declination is south ; or, if the contrary, it is
north. The right ascension of the star is calculated from the hour of
night, and from the right ascension of the sun for that time. The decli
nation of the corresponding point of the ecliptic being found, the sum
or difference of the declinations, according as they are of the same or of
different denominations, is the distance of the star from the ecliptic. The
longitude of the same point is computed ; and from these elements, with
the actual precession of the equinox, may be calculated the true longi
tude of the star ; as also its latitude on a circle passing through the poles
of the ecliptic."
   The Siddhanta-Sarvabhauma also gives the true longitudes and lati
tudes of the asterisms, professedly as thus obtained by observation and
calculation, and they are reported by Colebrooke in his general table of
data respecting the asterisms.
   If we are not mistaken, the amount and character of the errors in the
stated latitudes of the asterisms tend to prove that this, or some kindred
process, was that by which their positions were actually determined.
   13. In Taurus, the seventeenth degree, a planet of which the
latitude is a little more than two degrees, south, will split the
wain of Eohini.
   The asterism Rohini, as has been seen above, is composed of the five
principal stars in the head of Taurus, in the constellation of which is
seen the figure of a wain. The divinity is Prajapati. The distances of
its stars in longitude from the initial point of the sphere vary from 45°
46' (y) to 49° 45' («): hence the seventeenth degree of the second
sign—the reckoning commencing at the initial point of the sphere, taken
as coinciding also with the vernal equinox—is very nearly the middle of
216                           S&rya-Siddhdnta,                            [viii. 18-
the wain. The latitude of its stars, again, varies from 2° 36' (E) to 5°
47' (#•) S. ; hence, to come into collision with, or to enter, the wain, a
planet must have more than two degrees of south latitude. The Sid-
dhanta does not inform us what would be the consequences of such an
occurrence ; that belongs rather to the domain of astrology than of as
tronomy. We cite from the Pancatantra (vv. 238-241) the following
description of these consequences, derived from the astrological writings
of Varaha-mihira :*
   " When Saturn splits the wain of Rchini here in the world, then
Madhava rains not upon the earth for twelve years.
   "When the wain of Prajapati's asterism is split, the earth, having
as it were committed a sin, performs, in a manner, her surface being
strewn with ashes and bones, the k&palika penance.
   " If Saturn, Mars, or the descending node splits the wain of Rohini,
why need I say that, in a sea of misfortune, destruction befalls the world?
   " When the moon is stationed in the midst of Rohini's wain, then
men wander recklessly about, deprived of shelter, eating the cooked
flesh of children, drinking water from vessels burnt by the sun."
   Upon what conception this curious feature of the ancient Hindu as
trology is founded, we are entirely ignorant.
   14. Calculate, as in the case of the planets, the day and night
of the asterisms, and perform the operation for apparent longi
tude (drkkarmari), as before : the rest is by the rules for the con
junction (melaka) of planets, using the daily motion of the planet
as a divisor : the same is the case as regards the time.
   15. When the longitude of the planet is less than the polar
longitude (dhruvaka) of the asterism, the conjunction (yoga) is to
come ; when greater, it is past : when the planet is retrograding
(vaJcragati), the contrary is to be recognized as true of the con
junction (samdgama).
   The rules given in the preceding chapter for calculating the conjunc
tion of two planets with one another apply, of course, with certain mod
ifications, to the calculation of the conjunctions of the planets with the
asterisms. The text, however, omits to specify the most important of
these modifications—that, namely, in determining the apparent longi
tude of an asterism, one part of the process prescribed in the case of a
planet, the ayanadrkkarman, or correction for ecliptic deviation, is to be
omitted altogether ; since the polar longitude of the asterism, which is
given, corresponds in character with the &yana graha, or longitude of
the planet as affected by ecliptic deviation, which must be ascertained
by the ayanadrkkarman. The commentary notices the omission, but
offers neither explanation nor excuse for it. The other essential modifi
cation—that, the asterism being fixed, the motion of the planet alone is
   * Our translation represents the verses as amended in their readings by Benfey
(Pantschatantra etc., 2r Theil, nn. 284-237). In the third of the verses, however,
the reading of the published text, paft, " moon," would seem decidedly preferable to
fikhi, " descending node" ; since the node, being always necessarily in the ecliptic,
can never come into collision with Rohini's wain.
viii. 19.]              Translation and Notes.                        217
to be used as divisor in determining the place and time of the conjunc
tion—is duly noticed.
   The inaccuracies in the Hindu process for determining apparent lon
gitudes, which, as above noticed, are kept within bounds, where the
planets alone are concerned, by the small amount of their latitudes,
would be liable in the case of many of the asterisms to lead to grave er
rors of result.
  16. Of the two Phalgunis, the two Bhadrapadas, and likewise
the two Ashadhas, of Vigakha, Ac.vinJ, and Mrga9irsha (sdumya),
the junction-star (yogatdrd) is stated to be the northern (uttara) :
   17. That which is the western northern star, being the second
situated westward, that is the junction-star of Hasta ; of Cra-
vishtha it is the western :
  18. Of Jyeshtha, Cravana, Anuradha (maiira), and Pushya
(bdrhaspatya), it is the middle star : of Bharani, Krttika1 (dgneya),
and Magha (pitrya), and likewise of Eevati, it is the southern:
   19. Of Rohini, Punarvasu (dditya), and Mula, it is the eastern,
and so also of Aclesha (sdrpa) : in the case of each of the others,
the junction-star (yogatdrakd) is the great (sthula) one.
   We have had occasion above, in treating of the identification of the
asterisms, to question the accuracy of some of these designations of the
relative position of the junction-stars in the groups containing them.
We do not regard the passage as having the same authenticity and
authority with that in which the determinations of the polar longitudes
and latitudes are given ; and indeed, we are inclined to suspect that all
which follows the fifteenth verse in the chapter may be a later addition
to its original content. It is difficult to see otherwise why the state
ments given in verses 20 and 21 of the positions of certain stars should
be separated from those presented above, in verses 10-12. A designa
tion of the relative position of the junction-star in each group ought also
properly to be connected with a definition of the number of stars com
posing each, and a description of its configuration—such as are presented
along with it by other treatises, as the Qakalya-Sanhita. The first is even
in some points ambiguous unless accompanied by the others, since there
are cases in which the same star has a different position in its asterism
according as the latter is to be regarded as including a less or a greater
number of stars. In this respect also, then, the passage looks like a dis
connected fragment. Nor is the method of designation so clear and
systematic as to inspire us with confidence in its accuracy. Upon a
consideration of the whole series of asterisms, it is obvious that the
brightest member of each group is generally selected as its junction-star.
Hence we should expect to find a general rule to that effect laid down,
and then the exceptions to it specially noted, together with the cases in
which such a designation would be equivocal. Instead of this, we have
the junction-stars of only two asterisms containing more than one star,
namely Abhijit and Qatabhishaj, described by their superior brilliancy,
while that of the former is not less capable of being pointed out by its
position than are any of the others in the series. Again, there are cases



                                                                              -
    218                          S&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [viii. 19-
     in which it is questionable which star is meant to be pointed out in a
     group of which the constitution is not doubtful, owing to the very near
     correspondence of more than one star with the position as defined. And
     once more, where, in a single instance, a special effort has apparently
     been made to fix the position of the junction-star beyond all doubt or
     cavil, the result is a failure ; for it still remains a matter of dispute how
     the description is to be understood, and which member of the group is
     intended. The case referred to is that of Hasta, which occupies nearly
     all of verse 17. That Colebrooke was not satisfied as to the meaning of
     the description is clear from the fact that he specifies, as the star referred
     to, " Y or S Corvi." His translation of the verse, " 2nd W. of 1st N. W.",
     conveys to us no intelligible meaning whatever, as applied to the actual
     group. He evidently understood pafcimottaratdr&y& as a single word,
     standing by euphony for -tar&y&s, ablative of -tdr&. Our own render
     ing supposes it divided into the two independent words pafdmotta-
     ratdr& y&, or the three pafcimd uttarat&r& y&. This interpretation is, in
     the first place, supported by the corresponding passage in the Qakalya-
     Sanhita, which reads, " of Hasta, the north-western (v&yavi) : it is also
     the second western." Again, it applies without difficulty to one of the
     stars in the group, namely to 7, which we think most likely to be the
     one pointed out—and mainly, because either of the others would admit
    of being more simply and briefly designated, S as the northern, @ as the
    eastern, a as the southern, and £ as the western star. We should, then,
    regard the description as unambiguous, were it not for what is farther
    added, " being the second situated westward ;" for •( is the first or most
    westerly of the five in longitude, and the third in right ascension, while
    the second in longitude and in right ascension respectively are the two
    faint stars s and «. We confess that we do not see how the difficulty is
     to be solved without some emendation of the text.
        We conceive ourselves to be justified, then, in regarding this passage
    as of doubtful authenticity and inferior authority : as already partaking,
    in short, of that ignorance and carelessness which has rendered the
    Hindu astronomers unable, at any time during the past thousand years,
    to point out in the heavens the complete series of the groups of stars
    composing their system of asterisms. None of the other authorities
    accessible to us gives a description of the relative places of the junction-
    stars, excepting the Qakalya-Sanhita, and our manuscript of its text is
    so defective and corrupt at this point that we are able to derive from it
    with confidence the positions of only about a third of the stars. So
    far, it accords with the Surya-Siddhanta, save that it points out as the
    junction-star of Purva-Ashadha the brightest, instead of the northern
    most, member of the group ; and here there is a difference in the mode of
    designation only, and not a disagreement as regards the star designated.
       20. Situated five degrees eastward from Brahmahrdaya is Pra-
    japati : it is at the end of Taurus, and thirty-eight degrees north.
       21. Apamvatsa is five degrees north from Citra: somewhat
    greater than it, as also six degrees to the north of it, is Apas.
       The three stars whose positions are defined in this passage are not
    mentioned in the Qakalya-Sanhita, nor in the Siddhanta-Qiromani and



-
viii. 21.]                Translation and Notes.                        219
 (according to Colebrooke) the Brahma-Siddhanta ; only the latter of
them, Apas, is omitted by the Graha-Lasfhava, being noticed in the
 Surya-Siddhanta alone. It may fairly be questioned, for the reason re
 marked above, whether the original text of our treatise itself contained
 the last two verses of this chapter : moreover, at the end of the next
 chapter (ix. 18), where those stars are spoken of which never set heli-
 acally, on account of their high northern situation, Prajapati is not
mentioned among them, as it ought to be, if its position had been pre
viously stated in the treatise. Still farther on (xiii. 9), in the descrip
tion of the armillary sphere, it is referred to by the name of Brahma,
which, according to the commentary on this passage, and to Colebrooke,
it also customarily bears. Perhaps another evidence of the unauthen-
ticity of the passage is to be seen in the fact that the two definitions of
the polar longitude of Prajapati do not, if taken in connection with verse
11, appear to agree with one another: a star which is 5° east from the
position of Brahmahrdaya, as there stated, is not " at the end of Taurus,"
but at its twenty-seventh degree : this may, however, be merely an inac
curate expression, intended to mean that the star is in the latter part, or
near the end, of Taurus. The Graha-Laghava, which defines the posi
tions of all these stars directly, by degrees of polar longitude and lati
tude, and not by reference either to the signs or to other stars, gives Pra
japati 61° of polar longitude, or 5° more than it assigned to Brahmahr
daya : it also adds 1° to the polar latitude as stated in our text. The
star referred to can hardly be any other than that in the head of the
Wagoner, or S Aurigss (4) :
              Prajapati . . . . 67° n' . . . . 36° 49' N.
              8 Aurigas .... 69° 54' .... 3o° 49' N.
   The error of latitude is about the same with that which was commit
ted with reference to Brahmahrdaya, or Capella. Why so faint and in
conspicuous a star should be found among the few of which the Hindu
astronomers have taken particular notice is not easy to discover.
   The position of the star named Apamvatsa, " Waters' Child," is de
scribed in our text by reference to Citra, or Spica Virginis : it is said to
be in the same longitude, 180°, and 5° farther north; and this, since
Citra itself is in lat. 2° S., would make the latitude of Apamvatsa 3° N.
The Graha-Laghava gives it this latitude directly, and also makes its lon
gitude agree with that of Spica, which, as already noticed, it places at
the distance of 183° from the origin of the sphere. Apas, "Waters"
(the commentary, however, treats the word as a singular masculine, Apa),
is put 6° north of Apamvatsa, or in lat. 9° N. It is identified by Cole
brooke with S Virginis (3), and doubtless correctly :
              Apas            176° a3' .... 8° i5' N.
              S Virginis .... 171° 28' .... 8° 38' N.
  Colebrooke pronounces Apamvatsa to comprise " the nebulous stars
marked b 1, 2, 3" in Virgo. We can find, however, no such stars upon
any map, or in any catalogue, accessible to us, and hence presume that
Colebrooke must have been misled here by some error of the authority
on which he relied. There is, on the other hand, a star, & Virginis (4),
220                                S&rya-Siddhdnta,                               [viii. 21-

situated directly between Spica and S, and at such a distance from each
as shows almost beyond question that it is the star intended :
                 Apamvatsa .... 178° 48' .... 2° 45' N.
                 SVirginis .... 178° 12' .... i°45'N.
   It is not less difficult in this than in the former case to account for the
selection of these stars, among the hundreds equalling or excelling them
in brilliancy, as objects of special attention to the astronomical observers
of ancient India. Perhaps we have here only the scattered and discon
nected fragments of a more complete and shapely system of stellar as
tronomy, which flourished in India before the scientific reconstruction of
the Hindu astronomy transferred the field of labor of the astronomer
from the skies to his text-books and his tables of calculation.
   The annexed table gives a comparative view of the positions of the
seven stars spoken of in this and a preceding passage (vv. 10-12) as'
defined by our text and as determined by modern observers :
                          Positions of certain Fixed Stars.
                          Hindu p osition                Truep osition :
      Name.                                                                Star compared.
               pol. long. pol. lat.   long.       lat.    long.   lat.
                 0    1    O   '      0   ,   o    /      0   /   o   /
Agaetya,        90 O 80 o S. 90 o 80 o S. 85 4 75 5o S. a Argils, Canopus.
Mrgavyfidha,    80 o 4o o 8. 76 23 39 52 S. 84 7 39 32 S. aCanisMaj.,Sirius.
Agni,           5a o 8 oN. 54 5 7 44 N. 6232 5 22 N. $ Tauri.
Brahmahrdaya, 52 O 3o oN. 60 29 28 53 N. 61 5o 22 52N. a Aurigse, Capella.
Prajapati,      57 o 38 oN. 67 i, 36 49 N. 69 54 3o 49 N. 8 Auriga?.
Apamvatsa,    180 o 3 oN. I-rS 48 2 45 N. 17812 i 45 N. J Virginia.
Apa3,         I tii> 0 9 oN. I76 23 8 i5N. 171 28 8 38 N. S Virginia.
    The gross errors in the determinations of position of these stars give
us a yet lower idea of the character of Hindu observations than we
derived from our examination of the junction-stars of the asterisms.
    The essay of Colebrooke in the ninth volume of the Asiatic Re
searches, to which we have already so often referred, gives farther infor
mation of much interest respecting such matters connected with the Hindu
astronomy of the fixed stars as are passed without notice in our treatise.
He states the rules laid down by different authorities for calculating the
time of heliacal rising of Agastya, or Canopus, upon which depends the
performance of certain religious ceremonies. He also presents a view of
the Hindu doctrine of the Seven Sages, or rshis, by which name are
known the bright stars in Ursa Major forming the well-known constella
tion of the Wain, or Dipper. To these stars the ancient astronomers of
India, and many of the modern upon their authority, have attributed an
independent motion about the pole of the heavens, at the rate of 8' yearly,
or of a complete revolution in 2700 years. The Surya-Siddhanta alludes
in a later passage (xiii. 9) to the Seven Sages, but it evidently is to be
understood as rejecting the theory of their proper motion, which is also
ignored by the Siddhanta-Qiromani. That so absurd a dogma should
have originated and gained a general currency in India, and that it should
still maintain itself in many of the astronomical text-books, is, however,
too striking and significant a circumstance to be left out of sight in esti
mating the character of the anuient and native Hindu astronomy.
ix. 5.]                      Translation and Notes.                             221

                             CHAPTER IX.
                 OF HELIACAL RISINGS AND SETTINGS.
CONTENTS:—I, subject of the chapter; 2-3, under what circumstances, and at which
  horizon, tlm planets rise and set heliacally ; 4-5, method of calculating their dis
  tances in oblique ascension from the sun ; 6-9, distances from the sun at which-,
  they disappear and re-appear; 10-11, how to find the time of heliacal Betting or
  rising, past or to come ; 12-15, distances from the sun at which the asterisms and
  fixed stars disappear and re-appear; 16-17, mode of determining their times of
  rising and setting; 18, what asterisms and stars never set heliacally.
   1. Now is set forth the knowledge of the risings (udaya) and
settings (astamaya) of the heavenly bodies of inferior brilliancy,
whose orbs are overwhelmed by the rays of the sun.
   The terms used for the heliacal settings and risings of the heavenly
bodies, or their disappearance in the sun's neighborhood and their return
to visibility, are precisely the same with those employed to denote their
rising (udaya) and setting (asta, astamaya, astamana) above and below
the horizon. The title of the chapter, uday&st&dhik&ra, is literally
translated in our heading.
   2. Jupiter, Mars, and Saturn, when their longitude is greater
than that of the sun, go to their setting in the west ; when it is
less, to their rising in the east : so likewise Venus and Mercury,
when retrograding.
   3. The moon, Mercury, and Venus, having a swifter motion,
go to their setting in the east when of less longitude than the
sun ; when of greater, to their rising in the west.
  These specifications are of obvious meaning and evident correctness.
The planets which have a slower motion than the sun, and so are over
taken by him, make their last appearance in the west, after sunset, and
emerge again into visibility in the east, before sunrise : of those which
move more rapidly than the sun, the contrary is true : Venus and Mer
cury belong to either class, according as their apparent motion is retro
grade or direct.
  4. Calculate the longitudes of the sun and of the planet—in
the west, for the time of sunset ; in the east, for that of sunrise—•
and then make also the calculation of apparent longitude (drkkar-
man) of the planet.
  5. Then the ascensional equivalent, in respirations, of the in
terval between the two (lagndntaraprdnds) will give, when divid
ed by sixty, the degrees of time (Mldnqds) • or, in the west, the
ascensional equivalent, in respirations, of the interval between
the two when increased each by six signs.
  Whether a planet will or will not be visible in the west after sunset,
or in the east before sunrise, ia in this treatise made to depend solely
                         29
222                        Sarya-Siddhdnta,                         [ix. 5-
upon the interval of time by which its setting follows, or its rising pre
 cedes, that of the sun, or upon its distance from the sun in oblique
 ascension ; to the neglect of those other circumstances—as the declina
 tion of the two bodies, and the distance and direction of the planet
 from the ecliptic—which variously modify the limit of visibility as thus
 defined. The ascertainment of the distance in oblique ascension, then,
 is the object of the rules given in these verses. In explaining the
 method of the process, we will consider first the case of a calculation
 made for the eastern horizon. The time of sunrise having been deter
 mined, the true longitudes and rates of motion of the sun and the planet
 in question are found for that moment, as also the latitude of the planet.
 Owing to the latters removal in latitude from the ecliptic, it will not
 pass the horizon at the same moment with the point of the ecliptic
 which determines its longitude, and the point with which it does actu
 ally rise must be found by a separate process. This is accomplished
 by calculating the apparent longitude of the planet, according to the
 method taught in the seventh chapter. There is nothing in the lan
 guage of the text which indicates that the calculation is not to be made
 in full, as there prescribed, and for the given moment of sunrise ; as so
 conducted, however, it would evidently yield an erroneous result; for,
 the planet being above the horizon, the point of the ecliptic to which
 it is then referred by a circle through the north and south points of the
 horizon is not the one to which it was referred by the horizon itself at
 the moment of its own rising. The commentary removes this difficulty,
 by specifying that the akshadrkkarman, or that part of the process
 which gives the correction for latitude, is to be performed "only as
taught in the first half-verse"—that is, according to the former part of
vii. 8, which contains the rule for determining the amount of the correc
 tion at the horizon—omitting the after process, by which its value is
made to correspond to the altitude of the planet at the given time.
 Having thus ascertained the points of the ecliptic which rise with the
 sun and with the planet respectively, the corresponding equatorial inter
val, or the distance of the planets in oblique ascension, is found by a
 rule already given (iii. 50). The result is expressed in respirations of
sidereal time, which are equivalent to minutes of the equator (see above,
i. 11-12)', they are reduced to degrees by dividing by sixty: and the
degrees thus found receive the technical name of "time-degrees"
 (k&l&nfas, k&labh&gas); they are also called below "degrees of setting"
 (ast&nf&s), and " degrees of visibility" (drfy&nf&s).
    If the planet for which the calculation is made has greater longitude
than the sun, the process, being adapted to the time of sunset, and to the
western horizon, requires a slight modification, owing to the fact that the
equivalents of the signs in oblique ascension (iji. 42-45) are given only
as measured at the eastern horizon. Since 180 degrees of the ecliptic
are always above the horizon, any given point of the ecliptic will set at
the same moment that another 180° distant from it rises; by adding,
then, six signs to the calculated positions of the sun and the planet, and
ascertaining, by iii. 50, the ascensional difference of the two points so
found, the interval between the setting of the sun and that of the planet
wjll be determined.
ix. 11.]                 Trcmdation and Notes.                         223

   Before going on to explain how, from the result thus obtained, the
time of the planet's disappearance or re-appearance may be derived, the
text defines the distances from the sun, in oblique ascension or " degrees
of time," at which each planet is visible.
   6. The degrees of setting (astdn$ds) are, for Jupiter, eleven ;
for Saturn, fifteen ; for Mars, moreover, they are seventeen ;
   7. Of Venus, the setting in the west and the rising in the east
take place, by reason of her greatness, at eight degrees ; the
setting in the east and the rising in the west occur, owing to her
inferior size, at ten degrees :
   8. So also Mercury makes his setting and rising at a distance
from the sun of twelve or fourteen degrees, according as he is
retrograding or rapidly advancing.
   9. At distances, in degrees of time (Jcdlabhdgds), greater than
these, the planets become visible to men ; at less distances they
become invisible, their forms being swallowed up (grasta) by the
brightness of the sun.
   The moon, it will be noticed, is omitted here ; her heliacal rising and
setting are treated of at the beginning of the next following chapter.
   In the case of Mercury and Venus, the limit of visibility is at a greater
or less distance from the sun according as the planet is approaching its
inferior or superior conjunction, the diminution of the illuminated por
tion of the disk being more than compensated by the enlargement of
the disk itself when seen so much nearer to the earth.
   Ptolemy treats, in the last three chapters (xiii. 7-9) of his work, of
the disappearance and reappearance of the planets in the neighborhood
of the sun, and defines the limits of visibility of each planet when in
the sign Cancer, or where the equator and ecliptic are nearly parallel.
His limits are considerably different from those defined in our text, being,
for Saturn, 14° ; for Jupiter, 12° 45'; for Mars, 14° 30' ; for Venus and
Mercury, in the west, 5° 40' and 11° 30' respectively.
   10. The difference, in minutes, between the numbers thus sta
ted and the planet's degrees of time (kdldngds), when divided by
the difference of daily motions—or, if the planet be retrograding,
by the sum of daily motions—gives a result which is the time, in
days etc.
   11. The daily motions, multiplied by the corresponding ascen
sional equivalents (tallagndsavas), and divided by eighteen hun-
dred, give the daily motions in time (Mlagati) ; by means of these
is found the distance, in days etc., of the time past or to come.
   Of these two verses, the second prescribes so essential a modification
of the process taught in the first, that their arrangement might have
been more properly reversed. If we have ascertained, by the previous
rules, the distance of a planet in oblique ascension from the sun, and if
we know the distance in oblique ascension at which it will disappear or
re-appear, the interval between the given moment and that at which dis
appearance or re-appearance will take place may be readily found by
    224                        Stirya-Siddhdnta,                       [ix. 11-
    dividing by the rate of approach or separation of the two bodies the dif
    ference between their actual distance and that of apparition and dispari-
    tion : but the divisor must, of course, be the rate of approach in oblique
    ascension, and not in longitude. The former is derived from the latter
    by the following proportion : as a sign of the ecliptic, or 1800', is to its
    equivalent in oblique ascension, as found by iii. 42-45, so is the arc of
    the ecliptic traversed by each planet in a day to the equatorial equiva
    lent of that arc. The daily rates of motion in oblique ascension thus
    ascertained are styled the "time-motions" (k&lagati), as being commen
    surate with the " time-degrees" (k&l&nf&t).
       12. Svati, Agastya, Mrgavyadha, Citra, JyeshthS, Punarvasu,
    Abhijit, and Brahtnahrdaya rise and set at thirteen degrees.
       13. Hasta, (Jravana, the Phalgunis, Qravishtha, Kohini, and
    Magha become visible at fourteen degrees ; also Vig£ikha" and
    Ayvini.
       14. Krttika, Anuradha (mditra), and Mula, and likewise Aqle-
    sha and Ardra (rdudrarksha), are seen at fifteen degrees ; so, too,
    the pair of AshadhSs.
       15. Bharam, Pushya, and Mrgasfrsha, owing to their faintness,
    are seen at twenty-one degrees ; the rest of the asterisms become
    visible and invisible at seventeen degrees.
       These are specifications of the distances from the sun in oblique as
    cension (k&l&nf&s) at which the asterisms, and those other of the fixed
    stars whose positions were defined in the preceding chapter, make their
    heliacal risings and settings. The asterisms we are doubtless to regard
    as represented by their junction-stars (yogat&r&). The classification
    here made of the stars in question, according to their comparative mag
    nitude and brilliancy, is in many points a very strange and unaccount
    able one, and by no means calculated to give us a high idea of the
    intelligence and care of those by whom it was drawn up. The first
    class, comprising such as are visible at a distance of 13° from the sun,
    is, indeed, almost wholly composed of stars of the first magnitude ; one
    only, Punarvasu ((? Geminorum), being of the first to second, and hav
    ing for its fellow one of the first (« Geminorum). But the second
    class, that of the stars visible at 14°, also contains four which are of the
    first magnitude, or the first to second ; namely, Aldebaran (Rohini),
    Ilegulus (Magha), Deneb or /? Leonis (Uttara-Phalguni), and Atair or
    a Aqnila? (Qravana) ; and, along with these, one of the second to third
    magnitude, S Leonis (Purva-Phalguni), three of the third, and one,
    » Librae (Vi<jakha), of the fourth. In this last case, however, it might
    be possible to regard a Librae, of the second magnitude, as the star
    which is made to determine the visibility of the asterism. Among
    the stars of^the third class, again, which are visible at 15°, is one,
    o Orionis (Ardra), which, though a variable star, does not fall below
    the first to second magnitude ; while with it are found ranked six stars
    of the third magnitude, or of the third to fourth. The class of those
    which are visible at 17°, and which are left unspecified, contains two
    stars of the fourth magnitude, but also two of the second, one of which,




,
ix. 17.]                  Translation and Notes.                        225
a Andromedee or •( Pegasi (Uttara-Bhadrapada), is mentioned below
(v. 18) among those which are never obscured by the too near approach
of the sun. The stars forming the class which are not to be seen
within 21° of the sun are all of the fourth magnitude, but they are no
less distinctly visible than two of those in the preceding class ; and in
deed, Bharani is palpably more so, since it contains a star of the third
magnitude, which is perhaps (see above) to be regarded as its junction-
star. Since Agni, Brahma, Apamvatsa, and Apas are not specially men
tioned, it is to be assumed that they all belong in the class of those
visible at 17°, and they are so treated by the commentator : the first of
them ((? Tauri) is a star of the second magnitude ; for the rest, see the
last note to the preceding chapter.
   Some of the apparent anomalies of this classification are mitigated or
removed by making due allowance for the various circumstances by
which, apart from its absolute brilliancy, the visibility of a star in the
sun's neighborhood is favored or the contrary—such as its distance and
direction from the equator and ecliptic, and the part of the ecliptic in
which the sun is situated during its disappearance. Many of them,
however, do not admit of such explanation, and we cannot avoid regard
ing the whole scheme of classification as one not founded on careful
and long-continued observation, but hastily and roughly drawn up in
the beginning, and perhaps corrupted later by unintelligent imitators
and copyists.
  16. The degrees of visibility (drgydngds), if multiplied by
eighteen hundred and divided by the corresponding ascensional
equivalent (udaydsavas), give, as a result, the corresponding de
grees on the ecliptic (kshetrdngds) ; by means of them, likewise,
the time of visibility and of invisibility may be ascertained.
  This verse belongs, in the natural order of sequence, not after the pas
sage next preceding, with which it has no special connection, but after
verse 11. Instead of reducing, as taught in that verse, the motions up
on the ecliptic to motions in oblique ascension, the " degrees of time"
(k&l&nf&s) may themselves be reduced to their equivalent upon the cor
responding part of the ecliptic, and then the time of disappearance or
of re-appearance calculated as before, using as a divisor the sum or dif
ference of daily motions along the ecliptic. The proportion by which
the reduction is made is the converse of that before given ; namely, as
the ascensional equivalent of the sign in which are the sun and the
planet is to that sign itself, or ] 800', so are the " degrees of visibility"
(drfy&nf&s, or k&l&nf&s) of the planet to the equivalent distance upon
that part of the ecliptic in which it is then situated. The technical
name given to the result of the proportion is kshetr&nf&s : kshetra is lit
erally " field, territory," and the meaning of the compound may be thus
paraphrased : " the limit of visibility, in degrees, measured upon that
part of the ecliptic which is, at the time, the territory occupied by the
planets in question, or their proper sphere."
  17. Their rising takes place in the east, and their setting in
the west ; the calculation of their apparent longitude (drkkarmari)
226                            S&rya-Siddhdnta,                            [ix. 17-
is to be made according to previous rules ; the ascertainment of
the time, in days etc., is always by the daily motion of the sun
alone.
   This verse should follow immediately after verse 15, to which it at
taches itself in the closest manner. The dislocation of arrangement in
the latter part of this chapter is quite striking, and is calculated to sug
gest a suspicion of interpolations.
   The directions given in the verse require no explanation : they are
just such an adaptation of the processes already prescribed to the case
of the fixed stars as that made in verse 14 of the last chapter. The
commentary points out again that the calculation of the correction for
latitude (akshadrkkarman) is to be made only for the horizon, or as
stated in the first half-verse of the rule.
   18. Abhijit, Brahmahrdaya, Svati, Qravana (vdis/inava), Qra-
vishtha (vdsava), and Uttara-Bhadrapada (ahirbudhnya), owing to
their northern situation, are not extinguished by the sun's rays.
    It may seem that it would have been a more orderly proceeding to
omit the stars here mentioned from the specifications of verses 12-15
above ; but there is, at least, no inconsistency or inaccuracy in the double
statement of the text, since some of the stars may never attain that dis
tance in oblique ascension from the sun which is there pointed out as
their limit of visibility. We have not thought it worth the trouble to
go through with the calculations, and ascertain- whether, according to
the data and methods of this treatise, these six stars, and these alone,
of those which the treatise notices, would never become invisible at
TJjjayini. It is evident, however, as has already been noticed above
(viii. 20-21), that the star called Brahma or Prajapati (<5 Aurig«) is not
here taken into account, since it is 8° north, of Brahmahrdaya, and con
sequently can not become invisible where the latter does not.



                             CHAPTER X.
OF THE MOON'S RISING AND SETTING, AND OF THE ELEVATION
                     OF HER CUSPS.
CONTENTS :— 1, of the heliacal rising and setting of the moon ; 2-5, how to find the
  interval from sunset to the setting or rising of the moon ; 6-8, method of deter
  mining the moon's relative altitude and distance from the sun at sunset ; 9, to as
  certain the measure of the illuminated part of her disk ; 10-14, method of de'lin-
  eating the moon's appearance at sunset ; 15, how to make the sume calculation
  and delineation for sunrise.
   1. The calculation of the heliacal rising (udaya) and setting
(asta) of the moon, too, is to be made by the rales already given.
At twelve degrees' distance from the sun she becomes visible in
the west, or invisible in the east.
x. 5.]                   Translation and Notes.                       227
   In determining the time of the moon's disappearance in the neighbor
hood of the sun, or of her emergence into visibility again beyond the
sphere of his rays, no new rules are required; the same methods being
employed as were made use of in ascertaining the time of heliacal set
ting and rising of the other planets : they were stated in the preceding
chapter. The definition of the moon's limit of visibility would have
been equally in order in the other chapter, but is deferred to this in
order that the several processes in which the moon is concerned may
be brought together. The title of the chapter, frngonnatyadhik&ra,
" chapter of the elevation of the moon's cusps" (frnga, literally " horn"),
properly applies only to that part of it which follows the fifth verse.
   The degrees spoken of in this verse are, of course, " degrees of time"
(Jc&lanf&s), or in oblique ascension.
   2. Add six signs to the longitudes of the sun and moon re
spectively, and find, as in former processes, the ascensional equiv
alent, in respirations, of their interval (lagndntardsavas) : if the
sun and moon be in the same sign, ascertain their interval in
minutes.
   3. Multiply the daily motions of the sun and moon by the re
sult, in nadis, and divide by sixty ; add to the longitude of each
the correction for its motion, thus found, and find anew their in
terval, in respirations;
   4. And so on, until the interval, in respirations, of the sun
and moon is fixed : by so many respirations does the moon, in
the light half-month (yukfa), go to her setting after the sun.
   5. Add half a revolution to the sun's longitude, and calculate
the corresponding interval, in respirations : by so many respira
tions does the moon, in the dark half-month (krshnapaksha), come
to her rising after sunset.
   The question here sought to be solved is, how long after sunset upon
any given day will take place the setting of the moon in the crescent
half-month, or from new to full moon, and the rising of the moon in
the waning half-month, or from full to new moon. The general process
is the same with that taught in the last chapter, for obtaining a like
result as regards the other planets or fixed stars : we ascertain, by the
rules of the seventh chapter—applying the correction for the latitude
according to its value at the horizon, as determined by the first part of
vii. 8—the point of the ecliptic which sets with the moon ; and then the
distance in oblique ascension between this and the point at which the
sun set will measure the required interval of time. An additional cor
rection, however, needs to be applied to the result of this process in the
case of the moon, owing to her rapid motion, and her consequent per
ceptible change of place between the time of sunset and that of her own
setting or rising : this is done by calculating the amount of her motion
during the interval as first determined, and adding its equivalent in ob
lique ascension to that interval ; then calculating her motion anew for
the increased interval and adding its ascensional equivalent—and so on,
until the desired degree of accuracy is attained.




                                                                              '.
228                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [x. 5-
   The process thus explained, however, is not precisely that which is
prescribed in the text. We are there directed to calculate the amount
of motion both of the sun and moon during the interval between the
setting of the sun and that of the moon, and, having applied them to
the longitudes of the two bodies, to take the ascensional equivalent of
the distance between them in longitude, as thus doubly corrected, for
the precise time of the setting of the moon after sunset. In one point
of view this is false and absurd ; for when the sun has once passed the
horizon, the interval to the setting of the moon will be affected only by
her motion, and not at all by his. In another light, the process does not
lack reason : the allowance for the sun's motion is equivalent to a reduc
tion of the interval from sidereal (nakshatra) time to civil, or true solar
{s&vana) time, or from respirations which are thirty-six-hundreths of the
earth's revolution on its axis to such as are like parts of the time from
actual sunrise to actual sunrise. But such a mode of measuring time is
unknown elsewhere in this treatise, which defines (i. 11-12) and employs
sidereal time alone, adding (ii. 50) to the sixty nadis which constitute a
sidereal day so much sidereal time as is needed to make out the length
of a day that is reckoned by any other method. It seems necessary,
then, either to suppose a notable blunder in this passage, or to recognize
in it such a departure from the usual methods of the treatise as would
show it to be an interpolation. Probably the latter is the alternative to
be chosen : it is, at any rate, that which the commentator prefers : he
pronounces the two verses beginning with the second half of verse 2,
and ending at the middle of verse 4, to be spurious, and the true text of
the Siddhanta to comprise only the first half of verse 2 and the second
of verse 4 ; these would form together a verse closely analogous in its
method and expression with verse 5, which teaches the like process for
moon-rise, in the waning half-month. Fortified by the authority of the
commentator, we are justified in assuming that the Surya-Siddhanta
originally neglected, in its process for calculating the time of the moon's
setting, her motion during the interval between that time and sunset,
and that the omission was later supplied b}7 another hand, from some
other treatise, which reckoned by solar time instead of sidereal. This
does not, however, explain and account for the second half of the second
verse ; which, if it has any meaning at all, different from that conveyed
in the former part of the same verse, seems to signify that when the sun
and moon are so near one another as to be in the same sign, the discord
ance between distances on the ecliptic and their equivalents upon the
equator may be neglected, and the difference of longitude in minutes
taken for the interval of time in respirations.
   If the time is between new and full moon, the object of the process is
to obtain the interval from sunset to the setting of the moon ; as both
take place at the western horizon, the two planets are transferred to the
eastern horizon, in order to the measurement of their distance in ascen
sion : if, on the other hand, the moon has passed her full, the time of
moonrise is sought; here the sun alone is transferred, by the addition of
180° to his longitude, to the eastern horizon, as taught in verse 5. The
equation to be applied to the longitude of both planets is found by the
familiar proportion—as sixty nadis are to the given interval in nadis, so
x. 8.]                    Translation and Notes.                         229
is the true daily motion of the planet to its actual motion during that
interval.
   6. Of the declinations of the sun and moon, if their direction
be the same, take the difference ; in the contrary case, take ffie
sum : the corresponding sine is to be regarded as south or north,
according tp the direction of the moon from the sun.
    7. Multiply this by the hypothenuse of the moon's mid-day
shadow, and, when it is north, subtract it from the sine of lati
tude (alcsha) multiplied by twelve ; when it is south, add it to
the same.
   8. The result, divided by the sine of co-latitude (lamba), gives
the base (bhuja), in its own direction; the gnomon is the perpen
dicular (koti) ; the square root of the sum of their squares is the
hypothenuse.
   In explaining the method of this process, we shall follow the guidance
of the commentator, pointing out afterwards wherein he varies from
the strict letter of the text : for illustration we refer to the accompany
ing: figure (Fig. 32).
   The figure represents the south-western quarter of the visible sphere,
                   •p- 32                    seen as projected upon thu
                                             plane of the meridian; Z being
                                             the zenith, Y the south point,
                                              W Y the intersection of the
                                             horizontal and meridian planes,
                                              and W the projection of the
                                              west point. Let Z Q equal the
                                              latitude of the place of obser
                                              vation, and let Q T and Q O be
                                              the declinations of the sun and
                                             inoon respectively, at the given
                                             time: then WQ,"ST, and NO
                                              will be the projections of the
                                             equator and of the diurnal cir
                                             cles of the sun and moon. Sup
                                             pose, now, the sun to be upon
                                             the horizon, at S, and the moon
to have a certain altitude, being at M : draw from M the perpendicular
to the plane of the horizon M L, and join MS: it is required to know
the relation to one another of the three sides of the triangle S L M, in
order to the delineation of the moon's appearance when at M, or at the
moment of sunset.
   Now M L is evidently the sine of the moon's altitude at the given
time, which may be found by methods already more than once described
and illustrated. And S L is composed of the two parts S N and N L, of
which the former depends upon the distance of the moon in declination
from the sun, and the latter upon the moon's altitude. But SN is one
of the sides of a right-angled triangle, in which the angle N S b is equal
to the observer's co-latitude, and N 6 to the sum of the sine of declina
tion of the sun, c 6 or W o, and that of the moon, N c. Hence
                          30
    230                            Surya-Siddhdnta,                           [x. 8-
                      iin 6 S N : 4 N : : R : S N
    or                sin co-lat. : sum of sines of dec]. : : R : S NT
    and S N = (R X sum of sines of decl.) — am co-lat.
     iln like manner, since, in the triangle M N L, the angles at M and N
    are respectively equal to the observer's latitude and co-latitude,
                          sinHNL:6inLMN::ML:NL
    or                    ein co-lat. : sin. lat. : : sin alt. : N L
    and N L = (sin alt. X sin lat.) — sin co-lat.
       We have thus found the values of M L and the two parts of S L in
    terms of the general sphere, or of a circle whose radius is tabular radius :
    it is desired farther to reduce them to terms of a circle in which M L
    shall equal the gnomon, or twelve digits. And since the gnomon is
    equal to the sine of altitude in a circle of which the hypothenuse of the
    corresponding shadow is radius (compare above, iii. 25-27 etc.), this re
    duction may be effected by multiplying the quantities in question by the
    hypothenuse of the shadow and dividing by radius. That is to say, rep
    resenting the reduced values of S N and N L by * » and n I respectively,
                          R : hyp. shud. : : M L : gnom.
                          R:hyp. shad.: : SIT : *n
                          R : hyp. shad. : : N L : n I
    Substituting, now, in the second arid third of these proportions the val
    ues of S N and N L found for them above, and substituting also in the
    third the value of the hypothenuse of the shadow derived from the first,
    we have
      „ ,       . , R X sum sin decl.         ,     K X gnom. sin alt. X sin lat. ,
      R : hyp. shad.: :  :     ;      : tn, and R : —^-—,      ::  -r-^-h        :*l
                        Ein co-lat.                   sin alt.    sin co-lat.
    which reduce to
                  hyp. shad. X sum sin decl.      , , sin lat. X gnom.
             tn = -**      ;     =—          , and nl =    :
                          sin co-lat.                     ein co-lat.
    Hence, if the perpendicular M L be assumed of the constant value of th»
    gnomon, or twelve digits, we have
                 „,     (hyp, shad. X sum sin decl.) -f (sin lat. X gnom.)
                 ,_.                      sin co-lat.
    In the case thus far considered the sun and moon have been supposed
    upon opposite sides of the equator. If they are upon the same side,
    the sun setting at S', or if their sines of declination, S'd and Nc, are of
    the same direction, the value of S' N, the corresponding part of the
    base S' L, will be found by treating in the same manner as before the
    difference of the sines, S'e, instead of their sum. In this case, too, the
    value of S'e being north, S'N will have to be subtracted from NL to
    give the base S' L. Other positions of the two luminaries with respect
    to one another are supposable, but those which we have taken are suffi
    cient to illustrate all the conditions of the problem, and the method of
    its solution.
       It is evident that, in two points, the process as thus explained by tho
    commentator is discordant with that which the text prescribes. The
    latter, in the first place, tells us to take, not the sum or difference of th»




.
x. 9.]                    Translation and Notes.                         23i
sines of declination, but the sine of the sum or difference of declinations,
as the side 6 N of the triangle S N 6. This seems to be a mere inaccu
racy on the part of the text, the difference between the two quantities,
which could never be of any great amount, being neglected : it is, how
ever, very hard to see why the less accurate of the two valuations of the
quantity in question should have been selected by the text ; for it is, if
anything, rather less easy of determination than the other. The other
discordance is one of much more magnitude and importance : the text
speaks of the "hypothenuse of the moon's mid-day shadow" (madhy&h-
nenduprabh&karna), for which the commentary substitutes that of the
shadow cast by the moon at the given moment of sunset. The com
mentator attempts to reconcile the discrepancy by saying that the text
means here the moon's shadow as calculated after the method of a noon-
shadow ; or again, that the time of sunset is, in effect, the middle of the
day, since the civil day is reckoned from sunrise to sunrise : but neither
of these explanations can be regarded as satisfactory. The commenta
tor farther urges in support of his understanding of the term, that we
are expressly taught above (vii. 11) that the calculation of apparent
longitude (drkkarman) is to be made in the process for finding the ele
vation of the moon's cusps ; while, if the hypothenuse of the moon's
meridian-shadow be the one found, there arises no occasion for making
that calculation. It seems clear that, unless the commentator's under
standing of the true scope and method of the whole process be errone
ous, the substitution which he makes must necessarily be admitted. This
is a point to which we shall recur later.
  9. The number of minutes in the longitude of the moon di
minished by that of the sun gives, when divided by nine hun
dred, her illuminated part (qukla) : this, multiplied by the num
ber of digits (angula) of the moon's disk, and divided by twelve,
gives the same corrected (sphuta).
   The rule laid down in this verse, for determining the measure of the
illuminated part of the moon, applies only to the time between new
moon and fall moon, when the moon is less than 180° from the sun:
when her excess of longitude is more than 1 80°, the rule is to be ap
plied as stated below, in verse 15. As the whole diameter of the moon
is illuminated when she is half a revolution from the sun, one half
her diameter at a quarter of a revolution's distance, and no part of it at
the time of conjunction, it is assumed that the illuminated portion of her
diameter will vary as the part of 180° by which she is distant from the
sun ; and hence that, assuming the measure of the diameter of her
disk to be twelve digits, the number of digits illuminated may be found
by the following proportion : as half a revolution, or 10,800', is to
twelve digits, so is the moon's distance from the sun in minutes to the
corresponding part of the diameter illuminated : the substitution, in the
first ratio, of 900 : 1 for 10,800 : 12, gives the rule as stated in the text.
Here, it will be noticed, we have for the first and only time the Greek
method of measuring the moon's diameter, by equal twelfths, or digits :
from this scale a farther reduction is made to the proper Hindu scale, as
determined by the methods of the fourth chapter (see above, iv. 2-3, 26),
232                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [x. 9-
by another proportion : as twelve is to the true diameter in digits, so is
the result already found to the true measure of the part of the diameter
illuminated.
   It is not to be wondered at that the Hindus did not recognize the el-
lipticity of the line forming the inner boundary of the moon's illumina
ted part : it is more strange that they ignored the obvious fact that,
while the illuminated portion of the moon's spherical surface visible from
the earth varies very nearly as her distance from the sun, the apparent
breadth of the bright part of her disk, in which that surface is seen pro
jected, must vary rather as the versed sine ef her distance.
   10. Fix a point, calling it the sun : from that lay off the base,
in its own proper direction ; then the perpendicular, toward the
west ; and also the hypothenuse, passing through the extremity
of the perpendicular and the central point.
   11. From the point of intersection of the perpendicular and
the hypothenuse describe the moon's disk, according to its di
mensions at the given time. Then, by means of the hypothe
nuse, first make a determination of directions ;
   12. And lay off upon the hypothenuse, from the point of its
intersection with the disk, in an inward direction, the measure of
the illuminated part : between the limit of the illuminated part
and the north and south points draw two fish-figures (matsya) •
   13. From the point of intersection of the lines passing through
their midst describe an arc touching the three points : as the disk
already drawn appears, such is the moon upon that day.
   14. After making a determination of directions by means of
the perpendicular, point out the elevated (unnata) cusp at the
extremity of the cross-line : having made the perpendicular
(koti) to be erect (unnata), that is the appearance of the moon.
   15. In the dark half-month subtract the longitude of the sun
increased by six signs from that of the moon, and calculate, in
the same manner as before, her dark part. In this case lay off
the base in a reverse direction, and the circle of the moon on the
west.                                          •
   Having made the calculations prescribed in the preceding passages,
we are now to project their results, and to exhibit a representation of
the moon as she will appear at the given time. The annexed figure
(Fig. 33) will illustrate the method of the projection.
   We first fix upon a point, as S, which shall represent the position of
the sun's centre upon the western horizon at the moment of sunset, and
we determine, in the manner taught at the beginning of the third chap
ter, the lines of cardinal direction of which it is the centre. From this
point we then lay off the base (bhuja) S L, according to its value in dig
its as ascertained by the previous process, and northward or southward,
according to its true direction as determined by the same process. From
L, its extremity, is laid off the perpendicular (koti), which has the fixed
value of twelve digits. This, being a line perpendicular to the plane of
the horizon, may be regarded as having no proper direction of its own
x. 15.]                   Translation and Notes.                          233
upon the surface of projection : but the text directs us to lay it off west-
                •pin. 33               ward from L, apparently in order that
                                       the observer, standing upon the east
                                       ern side of his base 8 L, and looking
                                       westward toward the setting sun,
                                       may have his figure duly before him.
                                       The western extremity of the perpen
                                       dicular, M, represents the moon's
                                       place, and from that as a centre, and
                                       with a radius equal to the semi-diam
                                       eter of the moon in digits, as ascer
                                       tained by calculation for the given
                                       moment, a circle is described, repre
                                       senting the moon's disk. Next we
are to prolong the hypothenuse, S M, to e, and to draw, by the usual
means, the line s n at right angles to it : the directions upon the disk
thus determined by the hypothenuse, as the text phrases it, are called by
the commentary " moon-directions" (candradifas). The sun being at S,
the illuminated half of the moon's circumference will be * w n, the cusps
will be at * and n, and w will be the extremity of the diameter of great
est illumination. From w, then, lay off upon the hypothenuse an amount,
w x, equal to the measure in digits of the illuminated part of the diam
eter, and through s, x, and n describe an arc of a circle, in the manner
already more than once explained (see above, vi. 14-16) ; the crescent
s w n x will represent the amount and direction of the moon's illumina
ted part at the given time. Now we once more make a determination
of directions upon the disk according to the perpendicular L M ; that is
to say, we prolong L M to e', and draw s' n' at right angles to it : the
directions thus established are styled in the commentary " sun-directions"
(s&ryadifas), although without obvious propriety : they might rather be
called " apparent directions," or " directions on the sphere," since *' »'
should represent a line parallel with the horizon, and w' e' one perpendicu
lar to it. The line s'ri is called in the text the " cross-line" (tiryaksutra),
and whichever of the moon's cusps is found upon that line is, we are told, to
be regarded as the elevated (unnata) cusp, the other being the depressed
one (nata). Whenever there is any base (bhuja), as S L, or whenever
the moon and sun are not upon the same vertical line M L, there will
take place, of course, a tilting of the moon's disk, by which one of her
cusps will be raised higher above the horizon than the other ; the rela
tive value of the base to the perpendicular will determine the amount of
the tilting, and of the deflection of the points of direction nesw from
n'e' s'w'; and the elevated cusp will always be that upon the same side
of the perpendicular on which the base lies. What is meant by the
latter half of verse 14 is not altogether clear. The commentator explains
it in quite a different manner from that in which we have translated it :
he understands koti as meaning in this instance " cusp," which signifi
cation it is by derivation well adapted to bear, and does actually receive,
although not in any other passage of this treatise : and he explains the
verb Jcrtva, "having made," by drshtva, "having seen": the phrase
would then read "beholding the elevated cusp." We cannot accept
    234                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [x. 15-
    this explanation as a plausible one : to us the meaning seems rather to
    be that whereas, in the projection, the perpendicular (kott) LM is drawn
    on a horizontal surface, we are, in judging of the projection as an actual
    representation of the moon's position, to conceive of that line as
    erected, set up perpendicularly.
        We have thus far only supposed a case in which the calculations are
    made for the moment of sunset, the situation of the moon being in the
    western hemisphere of the heavens. In the text, however, there is noth
    ing whatever to limit or determine the time of calculation, and it is evi
    dent that the process of finding the base and perpendicular will be pre
    cisely the same, if S (Fig. 32) be taken upon the eastern horizon, and
    the triangle S L M in the eastern hemisphere. The last verse supposes
    these to be the conditions of the problem, and lays down rules for de
    termining in such a case the amount of illumination, and for drawing the
    projection. As regards the measure of the illuminated part, we are to
    follow the same general method as before, only substituting for tho
    moon's distance in longitude from the sun her distance from the point
    of opposition, and regarding the result obtained as the measure of that
    part of the diameter which is obscured (asita, " black") ; since, during
    the waning half-month, darkness grows gradually over the moon's face
    in the same manner as illumination had done during the crescent half-
    month. But why the base (bhuja) is now to be laid off in the opposite
    to its calculated direction, we find it very hard to see. The commenta
    tor says it is because all the conditions of the problem are reversed by
    our having to calculate and lay off the obscured, instead of the illumina
    ted, part of the moon's disk : but the force of this reason is not apparent.
    The establishment in the projection of a point representing the position
    of the sun is, in effect, the one condition which sufficiently determines
     all the rest : if we are to make a projection corresponding to that
     drawn in illustration of the other case, we ought, it should seem, to
     draw the base in its true direction, and, stationing the observer upon the
     western side of it, looking eastward, to lay off the perpendicular away
    from him, toward the east ; and then to proceed as before, only measur
     ing the obscured part of the diameter from its remoter extremity, in
     stead of from that next the sun. This latter direction is regarded by
     the commentator as actually conveyed in the final clause of verse 15 : he
     interprets " the circle (mandala) of the moon" to mean the dark part of
     the moon's disk, or that which is to be pointed out as increasing during
     the waning half-month, and " on the west" to mean on the western side
     of the complete disk, which is the side now turned away from the sun.
     It seems to us exceedingly questionable whether the passage fairly admits
     of this interpretation, but we have no other explanation of it to offer—
     unless, indeed, it is to be looked upon as a virtual repetition of the for
     mer direction to lay off the perpendicular, which determines the posi
     tion of the moon's disk, towards the west.
        We must confess that we feel less satisfied with our comprehension of
     the scope and methods of this chapter than of any that precedes it. We
     are disappointed at finding the result arrived at one of so indefinite a
     character, and of so little significance. The whole laborious calculation
     seems to be made simply for the sake of delineating the appearance of




.
xi.]                        Translation and Notes.                             235
the moon at a given moment, and pointing out which of her two horns
has the greater altitude. No determination is made of the amount of
angular deflection, upon which any consequences, meteorological, astro
logical, or of any other character, could be founded ; nor is any hint
given of the way in which the results of the process are to be turned to
account. Moreover, while the object aimed at seems thus to be merely
a projection, a time is selected at which the moon is not ordinarily visi
ble, so that she can not be seen to exhibit an accordance with her deline
ated appearance ! Once more, the whole process is an extremely faulty
one : it is, in fact, only when the moon is herself at the horizon that her
visible disk can be regarded as in the same plane with lines parallel with
and perpendicular to the horizon, or that e' w' and n' s' (Fig. 33) repre-
•ent actual directions upon her face : anywhere else, the relations of the
moon's disk at M in the first figure (Fig. 32) and at M in the other fig
ure (Fig. 33) are so different that the latter cannot fairly represent the
former. It would seem, indeed, as if the moment of the moon's own
setting or rising were the one for which such a calculation and projec
tion as this would have most significance : at that time, the disappear
ance or appearance of one of her horns before the other would be such
a phenomenon as might seem to a Hindu astronomer worth the trouble
of delineating, as a decisive proof of the accuracy of his scientific
knowledge. We have not found it possible, however, to make the rules
of the text apply to such a case, and the commentary is explicit in its
definition of the time of the calculation, as sunset or sunrise alone, to
the exclusion of any other moment. But the discordance existing at
more than one point in the chapter between the text and the commen
tary suggests the conjecture that the original design of the one and the
traditional interpretation of it represented by the other may be at vari
ance, and we are not without suspicions that the text may have been
altered, so as not now fairly and accurately to represent any one consist
ent process. A better understanding of the general object of the calcu
lation and the use made of its results, and an acquaintance with the so
lutions of the problem presented by other astronomical treatises, might
throw additional light upon these points ; but we are not able at present
fully to avail ourselves of such assistance, nor is the importance of the
subject such as to render incumbent upon us its fuller elucidation.



                            CHAPTER XI.
  OF CERTAIN MALIGNANT ASPECTS OF THE SUN AND MOON.
CONTENTS:—1-5, definition and description of the malignant aspects of the sun and
  moon, when of equal declination; 8-11, to find the longitude of the sun and
  moon when their declinations are equal; 12-13, to ascertain the corresponding
  time ; 14-15, to determine the duration of the aspect, and the moment of its be
  ginning and end; 16-18, its continuance and its influences; 19, when such an as
  pect may occur more than once, or not at all ; 20, occurrence of the yoga of like
  name and character; 21, of unlucky points in the circle of asterisms; 22, caution
  as to these unlucky aspects and points; 23, introductory to the following chapters.
236                          S&rya-Siddhdnta,                           [xi. 1-
   1. When the sun and moon are upon the same side of either
solstice, and when, the sum of their longitudes being a circle,
the}r are of equal declination, it is styled vdidhrta.
   2. When the moon and sun are upon opposite sides of either
solstice, and their minutes of declination are the same, it is
vyalipdta, the sum of their longitudes being a half-circle.
   3. Owing to the mingling of the nets of their equal rays, the
fire arising from the wrathfulness of their gaze, being driven on
by the provector (pravaha), is originated unto the calamity of
mortals.
   4. Since a fault (pdta) at this time often causes the destruction
of mortals, it is known as vyatipdta, or, by a difference of title,
vdidhrti.
   5. Being black, of frightful shape, bloody-eyed, big-bellied, the
source of misfortune to all, it is produced again and again.
   Of all the chapters in the treatise, this is the one which has least in
terest and value. It is styled p&t&dhik&ra, " chapter of the patas," and
concerns itself with giving a description of the malignant character of
the times when the sun and moon have equal declination, upon the same
or opposite sides of the equator, and with laying down rules by which
the time of occurrence of those malignant aspects may be calculated.
The latter part alone properly falls within the province of an astronom
ical treatise like the present : the other would better have been left to
works of a professedly astrological character. The term pata, applied to
the aspects in question, means literally "fall," and hence also either
"fault, transgression," or " calamity." We have often met with it above,
in the sense of " node of a planet's orbit" ; as so used, it was probably first
applied to the moon's nodes, because they were the points of danger in
her revolution, near which the sun or herself was liable to fall into the
jaws of Rahu (see above, iv. 6) ; and it was then transferred also, though
without the same reason, to the nodes of the other planets. As it is
employed in this chapter, we translate it simply " aspect." Why the
time when the sun and moon are equally distant from the equator should
he looked upon as so especially unfortunate is not easy to discover, not
withstanding the lucid explanation furnished in the third verse. For the
" provector" (pravaha), the wind which carries the planets forward in
their orbits, see above, ii. 3. When the equal declinations are of oppo
site direction, the aspect is denominated vaidhrta, or v&idhrti. This
word is a secondary derivative from vidhrti, " holding apart, withhold
ing," or from vidhrta : it has been noted above (under ii. 65) as the
name of the last yoga; and its use here is not discordant with that,
since the twenty-seventh yoga also occurs when the sum of the longi
tudes of the sun and moon is 360°. The title of the other aspect (pata),
which occurs when the sun and moon are equally removed from the
equator upon the same side of it, is vyatipata, which may be rendered
" very excessive sin or calamity." This, too, is the name of one of the
yogas, but not of that one which occurs when the sum of longitudes of
the sun and moon is 1 80° : the discordance gives occasion for the ex
xi. 8.]                  Translation and Notes.                      287
planation contained in verse 20, below. The specification of the text,
that the aspects take place when the sum of longitudes equals a circle
or a half-circle respectively, or when the two luminaries are equally dis
tant from either solstice, or either equinox, is not to be understood as
exact : this would be the case if the moon had no motion in latitude ;
but owing to that motion, the equality of declinations, which is the main
thing, occurs at a time somewhat removed from that of equality of dis
tance from the equinoxes : the latter is called in the commentary ma-
dhyapdta, "the mean occurrence of the aspect." The terms translated,
by us "upon the same and upon the opposite sides of either solstice"
are ek&yanagata and viparit&yanagata, literally "situated in the same
and in contrary ayanas"; ayana being, as already pointed out (end of
note to iii. 9—12), the name of the halves into which the ecliptic is
divided by the solstices.
   6. When the longitudes of the sun and moon, being increased
by the degrees etc. found for the coincidence of the solstice with
its observed place, are together nearly a circle or nearly a half-
circle, calculate the corresponding declinations.
   7. Then, if the declination of the moon, she being in an odd
quadrant, is, when corrected by her latitude (vikshepa), greater
than the declination of the sun, the aspect (pdta) is already past ;
   8. If less, it is still to come : in an even quadrant, the contrary
is the case. If the moon's declination is to be subtracted from
her latitude, the rules as to the quadrant are to be reversed.
   As in other processes of a similar character (see above, iv. 7-8 ; vii.
2-6), we are supposed to have found by trial, for the starting-point of
the present calculation, the midnight next preceding or following the
occurrence of the aspect in question, and to have determined for that
moment the longitudes and rates of motion of both bodies, and the
moon's latitude. In finding the longitudes, we are to apply the correc
tion for precession ; this is the meaning of the expression in verse 6,
drktulyas&dhit&nf&di, which may be literally translated " degrees etc.
calculated for accordance with observed place"; the reference is to the
similar expression for the precession contained in iii. 11. Next the de
clinations are to be found, and that of the moon as corrected for her lat
itude. And since, in the odd quadrants—that is to say, the first and
third, counting from the actual vernal equinox—declination is increasing,
while in the others it is decreasing, if the declination in an odd quad
rant of the moon, the swifter moving body, is already greater than that
of the sun, the time of equality of declination is evidently already past,
and the converse. But if, on the other hand, the moon's declination
(using that term in its Hindu sense) is so small, and her latitude so
great, being of opposite directions, that her actual distance from the
equator is measured by the excess of the latter above the former, and so
is of direction contrary to that of her declination, then, as declination
increases, distance from the equator diminishes, or the contrary, and the
conditions as formerly stated are reversed throughout.
                          31
238                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [xi. 9-
   9. Multiply the sines of the two declinations by radius, and di
vide by the sine of greatest declination : the difference of the
arcs corresponding to the results, or half that difference, is to be
added to the moon's longitude when the aspect (pdta) is to come ;
   10. And is to be subtracted from the moon's longitude when
the aspect is past. If the same quantity be multiplied by the
sun's motion and divided by the moon's motion, the result is an
equation, in minutes, which is to be applied to the sun's place,
in the same direction as the other to the moon's.
   11. So also is to be applied, in the contrary direction, a like
equation to the place of the moon's node. This operation is to
be repeated, until the declinations of the two bodies come to be
the same.
    By this process are ascertained the longitudes of the sun and moon
at the time when their declinations are equal. Its method may be briefly
explained as follows. At the midnight assumed as the starting-point of
the whole calculation there is found to be a certain difference in the
two declinations : we desire to determine how far the paths of the two
luminaries must be traced forward or backward, in order that that differ
ence may be removed ; and this must be effected by means of a series
of approximations. We commence our calculation with the moon, as
being the body of more rapid motion. By a proportion the inverse of
that upon which the rule for deriving the declination from the longitude
(ii. 28) is founded, we ascertain at what longitude the moon would have
the sun's actual declination, and at what longitude she would have
her own actual declination, as corrected by her latitude : the difference
between the two results is a measure of the amount of motion in longi
tude, forward or backward, by which she would gain or lose the differ
ence of declination, if the sun remained stationary and her own latitude
unchanged. Since, however, that is not the case, we are compelled to
calculate the corresponding motion of the sun, and also the moon's lati
tude in her new position ; and in order to the latter, we must correct the
place of the node also for its retrograde motion during the interval.
The motions of the sun and node are found by the following proportion :
as the moon's daily motion is to that of the sun, or to that of the node,
so is the correction applied to the moon's place to that which must be
applied to the place of the sun, or to that of the node. A new set of
positions in longitude having thus been found, the declinations are again
to be calculated, and the same approximative process repeated—and so
on, until the desired degree of accuracy is attained.
   The text permits us to apply, as the correction for the place of the
moon, either the whole or the half of the difference of longitude found
as the result of the first proportion : it is unessential, of course, in a
process of this tentative character, what amount we assume as that of
the first correction, provided those which we apply to the places of the
sun and node be made to correspond with it : and there may be cases
in which we should be conducted more directly to the final result of the
process by taking only half of th« difference.
xi. 16.]                   Translation and Notes.                        239
    12. The aspect (pdta) is at the time of equality of declinations ;
if, then, the moon's longitude, as thus increased or diminished,
be less than her longitude at midnight, the aspect is past ; if
greater, it is to come.
    13. The minutes of interval between the moon's longitude as
finally established and that at midnight give, when multiplied
by sixty and divided by the moon's daily motion, the time of the
aspect, in nadis.
   We had thus far found only the longitudes of the sun and moon at
the time of equality of declination, and not that time itself: the latter
is now derived from the former by this proportion : as the moon's daily
motion is to a day, or sixty nadis, so is the difference between the
moon's longitude at midnight and at the time of the aspect to the inter
val between the latter time and midnight.
  14. Multiply the half-sum of the dimensions (mdna) of the sun
and moon by sixty, and divide by the difference of their daily
motions : the result is half the duration (sthiti), in nadis etc.
  15. The corrected (sphuta) time of the aspect (pdta) is the mid
dle : if that be diminished by the half-duration, the result is the
time of the commencement ; if increased by the same, it is the
time of the end.
  16. The time intervening between the moments of the begin
ning and end is to be looked upon as exceedingly terrible, hav
ing the likeness of a consuming fire, forbidden for all works.
   The continuance of the centres of the sun and moon at the point of
equality of declination is, of course, only momentary ; but the aspect
and its malignant influences are to be regarded as lasting as long as there
is virtual contact of the two disks at that point, or as long as & central
eclipse of the sun would last if it took place there. Its half-duration,
then, or the interval from its middle to- its beginning or end respectively,
is found by a proportion, as follows : if in a day, or sixty nadis, the two
centres of the sun and moon become separated by a distance which is
equal to the difference of their daily motions, in how many nadis will
they become separated by a distance which is equal to the sum of their
semi-diameters? or
              diff. d. motions : 60 : : sum semi-diam. : half-duration
And if this amount be subtracted from and added to the time of equal
ity of declination, the results will be the moments at which the aspect
will begin and end respectively.
   Such is the plain and obvious meaning of the text in this passage.
The commentator, however, in accordance with his interpretation of the
next following verse (see below), declares that the aspect actually lasts
as long as any portion of the moon's disk has the same declination with
any portion of that of the sun ; and that, accordingly, it commences—
the moon's declination being supposed to be increasing—whenever her
remoter limb comes to have the same declination with the neater limb
of the sun, and ends when her nearer limb comes to have the same d«>
240                        Stirya-Siddhdnta,                       [xi. 16-

clination with the remoter limb of the sun—the contrary being the case
when her declination is decreasing. He acknowledges that the text
does not seem to teach this, but puts in the plea which is usual with him
when excusing a palpable inaccuracy in the statements or processes of
the treatise ; namely, that the blessed author of the work, moved by pity
for mankind, permitted here the substitution of difference of longitude
for difference of declination, in view of the greater ease of its calcula-.
tion, and the insignificance of the error involved. That error, however,
is quite the reverse of insignificant ; it is, indeed, so very gross and pal
pable that we cannot possibly suppose it to have been committed inten
tionally by the text ; we regard it as the easier assumption that the con
ditions of the continuance of the aspect are differently estimated in the
text and in the commentary, being by the former taken to be as we have
stated them above, in our explanation of the process. The view of the
matter taken by the commentator, it is true, is decidedly the more nat
ural and plausible one : there seems no good reason why an aspect
which depends upon equality of declination should be determined as to
continuance by motion in longitude, or why the aspect should only oc
cur at all when the two centres are equally distant from the equator ;
why, in short, there should not be partial aspects, like partial eclipses of
the sun. If the doctrine of the commentary is a later development, or
an independent form, of that which the text appears to represent, it is a
naturally suggested one, and such as might have been expected to arise.
   17. While any parts of the disks of the sun and moon have
the same declination, so long is there a continuance of this aspect,
causing the destruction of all works.
   18. So, from a knowledge of the time of its occurrence, very
great advantage is obtained, by means of bathing, giving, prayer,
ancestral offerings, vows, oblations, and other like acts.
   We have translated verse 17 in strict accordance with the interpreta
tion of it presented in the commentary, although we must acknowledge
that we do not see how that interpretation is to be reconciled with the
actual form of the text. The term ek&yanagata, which the commenta
tor renders " having equal declination," is the same with that which in
the first verse signified " situated in the same ayana" ; mandala, although
it is sometimes used with the meaning " disk," here attributed to it by
him, is the word employed in that same verse for a " circle," or " 360°" ;
and antara, which he explains by ekadefa, " any part," never, so far as
we know, is properly used in that sense, while it is of frequent occur
rence elsewhere in this treatise with the meaning " interval." The nat
ural rendering of the line would seem to be " when there is between the
sun and moon the interval of a circle, situated in the same ayana."
This, however, yields no useful meaning, since such a description could
only apply to an actual conjunction of the sun and moon. We do not
see how the difficulty is to be solved, unless it be allowed us, in view of
the discordance already pointed out as existing between the plain mean
ing of the previous passage and that attributed to it by the commenta
tor, to assume that the text has been tampered with in this verse, and
made to furnish a different sense from that it originally had, partly by a
xi. 23.]                 Translation and Notes. •                      241
forced interpretation, but partly also by such an alteration of its readings
as disables it from yielding any other intelligible meaning.
   19. When the equality of declinations of the sun and moon
takes place in the neighborhood of the equator, the aspect may
then again occur a second time : in the contrary case, it may fail
to occur.
  Near the equinox, where declination changes rapidly, the moon, as
the swifter moving body, may come to have twice, in rapid succession,
the same declination with the sun, and upon the opposite sides of the
equator. Near the solstice, on the other hand, where the ecliptic and
equator are nearly parallel, the moon—if she happens to be nearer the
equator than the sun is, owing to her latitude—may pass the region in
which the aspect would otherwise be liable to occur, without having had
a declination equal in amount to that of the sun.
   20. If the sum of the longitudes of the sun and moon, in min
utes, on being divided by the portion (bhoga) of an asterism
(bha), yields a quotient between sixteen and seventeen, there is
another, a third, vyatipdta.
   This is simply a special application of the rule formerly given (ii. 65),
for finding, for any given time, the current period named yoga. • The sev
enteenth of the series, as is shown by the list there given, has the same
name, vyattpdta, with one of the aspects treated of in this chapter :
judging from verse 22, below, it is also regarded as possessing a like por
tentous and malignant character.
   21. Of the asterisms (dhishnya) Aclesha; (sdrpa), Jyeshtha (din-
dra), and Revati (paushnya), the last quarters are junctions of
the asterisms (bhasandhi) ; the first quarter in the asterisms fol
lowing these respectively is styled ganddnta.
   22. In all works, one must avoid the terrible trio of vyatipdtas,
as also the trio of ganddntas, and this trio of junctions of as
terisms.
   The division of the ecliptic into twenty-sevenths, or asterisms, coin
cides with its division into twelfths, or signs, at the ends of the ninth,
eighteenth, and twenty-seventh asterisms, which are also those of the
fourth, eighth, and twelfth signs respectively. To this innocent circum
stance it seems to be owing that those points, and the quarters of por
tions, or arcs of 200', on either side of them, are regarded and stigma
tized as unlucky and ominous. Hence the title bhasandhi; sandhi is
literally " putting together, joint," and bha is, as has been noticed else
where (note to iii. 9-12), a name both of the asterisms and of the signs.
In which of its various senses the word ganda is used in the compound
gand&nta, we do not know.
   23. Thus hath been related that supreme, pure, excellent, mys
terious, and grand system of the heavenly bodies : what else dost
thou desire to know ?
242                           S&rya-Siddkdnta,                             [xL 23-
   In this verse re-appears the personality of the revealer of the treatise,
the incarnation of a portion of the sun, which has been lost sight of
since near the beginning of the work (i. 7). The questions addressed
to him, in answer to this appeal, by Maya, the recipient of the revela
tion, introduce the next chapter, which, with the two that follow it, con
tains the additional explanations and instructions vouchsafed in reply.
The last three chapters confessedly constitute a separate portion of the
work, which is here divided into a pbrva khanda and an uttara khanda,
or a "former Part" and a "latter Part." It is by no means impossible
that the whole second Part is an appendix to the text of the Siddhanta
as originally constituted.
   The title of the next following chapter is bhugol&dhy&ya, " chapter of
the earth-globe" : in the second part of the treatise the chapters are
styled adhy&ya, " lection," instead of, as hitherto, adhik&ra, " heading."



                           CHAPTER XII.
   COSMOGONY, GEOGRAPHY, DIMENSIONS OF THE CREATION.
CONTENTS :—1-9, inquiries ; 10-28, development of the creative agencies, of the ele
  ments, and of the existing creation ; 29-31, form and disposition of the stellar
  and planetary systems ; 32-44, situation, form, structure, and divisions of the
  earth; 45-72, varying phenomena of night and day in different latitudes and
  zones ; 73-77, revolutions of the stars and planets ; 78-79, regents of the differ
  ent divisions of time ; 80-90, dimensions of the planetary, stellar, and ethereal
  orbits.
   1. Then the demon Maya, prostrating himself with hands sup-
pliantly joined before him who derived his being from the part
of the Sun, and revering him with exceeding devotion, inquired
as follows :
   2. 0 blessed one ! of what measure is the earth ? of what
form? how supported? how divided? and how are there in it
seven interterranean (pdtdla) earths ?
   3. And how does the sun cause the varying distinction of day
and night? how does he revolve about the earth, enlightening
all creatures ?
   4. For what reason are the day and night of the gods and of
the demons opposed to one another? or how does that take place
by means of the sun's completion of his revolution ?
   5. Why does the day of the Fathers consist of a month, but
that of mortals of sixty nadis ? for what reason is not this latter
everywhere the case ?
   6. Whence is it that the regents of the days, years, months,
and hours (hard) are not the same? How does the circle of as-
terisms (bhagana) revolve ? what is the support of it with the
planets ?
xii. 17.]               Translation and Notes.                       243
  7. The orbits of the planets and stars, uplifted from the earth
one above another—what are their heights ? what their inter
vals ? what their dimensions ? and what the order in which they
are fixed ?
   8. Why are the rays of the sun hot in the summer, and not
so in the winter? how far do his rays penetrate? How many
modes of measuring time (mdna) are there ? and how are they
employed ?
   9. Eesolve these my difficulties, 0 blessed one, creator of crea
tures ! for there is not found besides thee another resolver, who
beholdeth all things.
   The proper answers to these inquiries commence at about the twenty-
seventh verse of the chapter, the preceding philosophical history of the
development of the existing creation being apparently volunteered by
the revelator. All the questions then find their answers in this chapter,
excepting that as to the methods of measuring time, which is disposed
of in the fourteenth and concluding chapter. The subject of the thir
teenth chapter also seems not to be contemplated in the laying out, in
this passage, of the scheme of subjects to be treated of in the remain
der of the treatise.
   10. Having heard the words thus uttered with devotion by
Maya, he then again promulgated this mysterious and supreme
Book (adhydya) :
   11. Listen with concentrated attention : I will proclaim the
secret doctrine called the transcendental (adhydtmd) : there is
nothing which may not be bestowed on those who are exceed
ingly devoted to me.
   12. Vasudeva, the supreme principle of divinity (brahman),
whose form is all that is (tat), the supreme Person (purusha), un-
manifested", free from qualities, superior to the twenty-five prin
ciples, imperishable,
   13. Contained within matter (praJcrti), divine, pervading every
thing, without and within, the attractor—he, having in the first
place created the waters, deposited in them energy.
   14. That became a golden egg, on all sides enveloped in dark
ness : in it first became manifested the unrestrained, the everlast
ing one.
   15. He in the scripture (cJiandas) is denominated the golden-
wombed (hiranyagarbha), the blessed ; as being the first (ddi) ex
istence, he is called Aditya ; as being generator, the sun.
   16. This sun, likewise named Savitar, the supreme source of
light (jyotis) upon the border of darkness—he revolves, bringing
beings into being, the creator of creatures.
   17. He is extolled as natural illuminator, destroyer of dark
ness, great. The Hymns (rcas) are his disk, the Songs (s&mdni)
 his beams, the Liturgy (yajtinshi) his form.
244                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                      [xii. 18-
   18. He, the blessed one, is composed of the trio of sacred
scriptures, the soul of time, the producer of time, mighty, the
soul of the universe, all-penetrating, subtle : in him is the uni
verse established.
   19. Having made for his chariot, which is composed of the
universe, a wheel consisting of the year, and having yoked the
seven metres as his steeds, he revolves continually.
   20. Three quarters are immortal, secret ; this one quarter hath
become manifest. In order to the production of the animated
creation, he, the mighty one, produced Brahma, the principle of
consciousness (ahdnkara).
   21. Bestowing upon him the Scriptures (vedd) as gifts, and es
tablishing him within the egg as grandfather of all worlds, he
himself then revolves, causing existence.
   22. Then Brahma, wearing the form of the principle of con
sciousness (ahankdra), produced mind in the creation : from mind
was born the moon ; from the eyes, the sun, the repository of
light;
   23. From mind, the ether ; thence, in succession, wind, fire,
waters, earth—these five elements (mahdbh'&tti) were produced
by the successive addition of one quality.
   24. Agni and Soma, the sun and moon : then Mars etc. were
produced, in succession, from light, earth, ether, water, wind.
   25. Again, dividing himself twelve-fold, he, the mighty one,
produced what is known as the signs ; and yet farther, what has
the form of the asterisms (nakshatra), twenty-seven-fold.
   26. Then he wrought out the whole animate and inanimate
creation, from the gods downward, producing forms of matter
(prakrti) from the upper, middle, and lower currents (srotas).
   27. Having produced them in succession, as stated,, by a dif
ference of quality and function, he fashioned the distinctive char
acter of each, according to the showing of the Scripture (veda)—
   28. That is, of the planets, asterisms, and stars, of the earth,
and of the universe, he the mighty one ; of gods, demons, and
mortals, and of the Perfected (siddha), in their order.
   We do not regard ourselves as called upon to enter into any detailed
examination of this metaphysical scheme of development of the crea
tion, or to compare it critically with the similar schemes presented in
other Hindu works, as Manu (chap, i), the Puranas (see Wilson's Vishnu
Purana, Book I), etc. We will merely explain a few of its expressions,
and of the allusions it contains. Vasudeva is an ordinary epithet of
Vishnu, and its use in the signification here given it seems indicative of
Vaishnava tendencies on the part of the author of the scheme. The
twenty-five principles referred to in verse 12 are those established by
the Sankhya philosophy. The reference in verse 15, first half, is to Rig-
Veda x. 121. In the second half of the same verse we have a couple of
false etymologies : dditya comes, not from &di, " first," but from aditi,
xii. 32.]                Translation and Notes.                       245
" eternity" ; and to derive surya, " sun," from the root *$, " generate"
(from which savitar actually comes), is beyond the usual measure of
Hindu theologico-philosophical etymologizing. The Hymns, Songs, and
Liturgy are the three bodies of scripture commonly known as the Rig-
Veda, Sama-Veda, and Yajur-Veda. The "seven metres" (v. 19) are
those which are most often employed in the construction of the Vedic
hymns : in parts of the Veda itself they are personified, and marvellous
qualities and powers are ascribed to them. The obscure statement con
tained in the first half of verse 20 comes from verses 3 and 4 of the
purusha-hymn (Rig-Veda x. 90 : the hymn is also found in others of
the Vedic texts). The second half of verse 22 also nearly coincides
with a passage (v. 13) in the same hymn. Of the five elements assumed
by the Hindu philosophers, the first, ether, is said to be endowed only
with the quality of audibleness ; the second, air, has that of tangibility
also ; the third, fire, has both, along with color ; to these qualities the
fourth element, water, adds that of savor ; the last, earth, possesses audi
bility, tangibility, color, savor, and odor : this is according to the doc
trines of the Sankhya philosophy. In verses 24 and 25 we have speci
fications introduced out of consideration for the general character and
object of this treatise : as also, in the part assigned to the sun in the
history of development, we may perhaps recognize homage paid to its
asserted author. For the beings called in verse 28 the " perfected" (sid-
dha), see below, verses 31 and 40.
   29. This Brahma-egg is hollow ; within it is the universe, con
sisting of earth, sky, etc. ; it has the form of a sphere, like a
receptacle made of a pair of caldrons.
   30. A circle within the Brahma-egg is styled the orbit of the
ether (vyoman) : within that is the reyolution of the asterisms
(bha) ; and likewise, in order, one below the other,
  31. Eevolve Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the sun, Venus, Mercury,
and the moon ; below, in succession, the Perfected (siddha), the
Possessors of Knowledge (vidyadhard), and the clouds.
   The order of proximity to the earth in which the seven planets are
here arranged is, as noticed above (i. 51—52), that upon which depends
the succession of their regency over the days of the week, and so also
the names of the latter. So far as the first three and the last are con
cerned, it is a naturally suggested arrangement, which could hardly fail
to be hit upon by any nation having sufficient skill to form an order of
succession at all : the order in which the sun, Mercury, and Venus are
made to follow one another is, on the other hand, a matter of more ar
bitrary determination, and might have been with equal propriety, for
aught we can see, reversed or otherwise varied. Of the supernatural
beings called the "possessors of knowledge" (vidy&dhara) we read only
in this verse : the "perfected" we find again below, in verse 40, as inhab
itants of a city on the earth's surface.
   82. Quite in the middle of the egg, the earth-globe (bhugola)
stands in the ether, bearing the supreme might of Brahma, which
is of the nature of self-supporting force,
                       32
24:6                      S&rya-Siddhdnta,                      [xii. 33-
   33. Seven cavities within it, the abodes of serpents (ndga) and
demons (asura), endowed with the savor of heavenly plants, de
lightful, are the interterranean (pdtdla) earths.
   341 A collection of manifold jewels, a mountain of gold, is
Meru, passing through the middle of the earth-globe, and pro
truding on either side.
   35. At its upper end are stationed, along with Indra, the gods,
and the Great Sages (maharshi) ; at its lower end, in like man
ner, the demons (asura) have their place—each the enemy of the
other.
   36. Surrounding it on every side is fixed next this great ocean,
like a girdle about the earth, dividing the two hemispheres of
the gods and of the demons.
   37. And on all sides of the midst of Meru, in equal divisions
of the ocean, upon islands (dvipa), in the different directions, are
the eastern and other cities, fashioned by the gods.
   38. At a quadrant of the earth's circumference eastward, in
the clime (varsha) Bhadragva, is the city famed as Yamakoti,
having walls and gateways of gold.
   39. To the southward, in the clime Bharata, is in like manner
the great city Lanka" : to the west, in the clime called Ketumala,
is declared to be the city named Komaka.
   40. Northward, in the clime Kuru, is declared to be the city
called that of the Perfected (siddha) ; in it dwell the magnani
mous Perfected, free from trouble.
   41. These are situated also at a distance from one another of
a quadrant of the earth's circumference ; to the north of them,
at the same distance, is Meru, the abode of the gods (sura).
   42. Above them goes the sun when situated at the equinoxes ;
they have neither equinoctial shadow nor elevation of the pole
(akshonnati).
   43. In both directions from Meru are two pole-stars (dhruva-
tdrd), fixed in the midst of the sky : to those who are situated in
places of no latitude (niraksha), both these have their place in
the horizon.
   44. Hence there is in those cities no elevation of the pole, the
two pole-stars being situated in their horizon ; but their degrees
of co-latitude (lambaka) are ninety : at Meru the degrees of lati
tude (alcsha) are of the same number.
   In these verses we have so much of geography as the author of the
chapter has seen fit to connect with his astronomical explanations. For
a Hindu account of the earth, it is wonderfully moderate, and free from
falsehood. The absurd fictions which the Puranas put forth as geogra
phy are here for the most part ignored, only two or three of the features
of their descriptions being retained, and those in an altered form. To
the Puranas (see especially Wilson's Vishnu Purana, Book II., chap,
ii-vi), the earth is a plain, of immense dimensions. Precisely in the
xii. 44.]                 Translation and Notes.                        247
middle of it rises Mount Meru, itself of a size compared with which the
earth, as measured by the astronomers, is as nothing : it is said to be
84,000 yojanas high, and buried at the base 16,000 yojanas; it has the
shape of an inverted cone, being 32,000 yojanas in diameter at its up
per extremity, and only 16,000 at the earth's surface. Out of this moun
tain the astronomical system makes the axis of the earth, protruding at
either extremity, indeed, but of dimensions wholly undefined. As the
Puranas declare the summit of Meru, and the mountains immediately
supporting it, to be the site of the cities inhabited by the different divin
ities, so also we have here the gods placed upon the.northern extremity
of the earth's axis, while their foes, the spirits of darkness, have their
seat at the southern. The central circular continent, more than 100,000
yojanas in diameter, in the midst of which Meru lies, is named Jambu-
dvlpa, " the island of the rose-apple tree " : it is intersected by six paral
lel ranges of mountains, running east and west, and connected together
by short cross-ranges: the countries lying between these ranges are
styled varshas, " climes," and are all fully named and described in the
Puranas, as are the mountain-ranges themselves. The half-moon-shaped
strips lying at the bases of the mountains on the eastern, southern, west
ern, and northern edges of the continent, are called by the same names
that are given by our text to the four insular climes which it sets up.
Bharata is a real historical name, appearing variously in the early Hindu
traditions ; Kuru, or Uttara-Kuru, is a title applied in Hindu geography
of a less fictitious character to the country or people situated beyond the
range of the Himalaya ; the other two names appear to be altogether
imaginary. The Puranas say nothing of cities in these four climes.
Lank&, as noticed above (i. 62), is properly an appellation of the island
Ceylon ; and Romaka undoubtedly comes from the name of the great
city which was the mistress of the western world at the period of lively
commercial intercourse between India and the Mediterranean : the other
two cities are pure figments of the imagination. Our treatise, it will be
observed, ignores the system of continents, or dvtpas, and simply sur
rounds the earth with an ocean in the midst, like a girdle : the Puranas
 encompass Jambudvipa about with six other dvipas, or insular ring-
 shaped continents, each twice as vast as that which it encloses, and each
 separated from the next by an ocean of the same extent with itself. Of
 these seven oceans, the first, which washes the shores of Jambudvipa, is
 naturally enough acknowledged to be composed of salt water : but the
 second is of syrup, the third of wine, the fourth of clarified butter, the
 fifth of whey, the sixth of milk, and the last of sweet water. Outside
 the latter is an uninhabited land of gold, and on its border, as the out
 most verge of creation, is the monstrous wall of the Lokaloka mountains,
 beyond which is only nothingness and darkness.
    The author of the Siddhanta-fJiromani, more submissive than the
writer of our chapter to the authority of tradition, accepts (Goladhy.,
chap, ii) the series of concentric continents and oceans, but gives them
all a place in the unknown southern hemisphere, while he regards Jam
budvipa as occupying the whole of the northern.
    The pat&las, or interterranean cavities, spoken of in verse 33, are also
an important feature of the Puranic geography. If our author has not
248                       SCLrya-Siddhdnta,                      [xii. 44-
had the good sense to reject them, along with the insular continents, he
at least passes them by with the briefest possible notice. In the Pur&nas
they are declared to be each of them 10,000 yojanas in depth, and
their divisions, inhabitants, and productions are described with the same
ridiculous detail as those of the continents on the earth's surface.
   It will be observed that the text, although exhibiting in verse 41 a
distinct apprehension of tie fact that the pole is situated to the north
ward of all points of the equator alike, yet, in describing the position
of the four great cities, speaks as if there were a north direction from
Meru, in the continuation of the line drawn to the latter from Lanka,
and an east and west direction at right angles with this.
   For the terrestrial equator, considered as a line or circle upon the
earth's surface, there is no distinctive name; it is referred to simply as
the place "of no latitude" (niraksha, vyaksha).
   45. In the half-revolution beginning with Aries, the sun, be
ing in the hemisphere of the gods, is visible to the gods : but
while in that beginning with Libra, he is visible to the demons,
moving in their hemisphere.
   46. Hence, owing to his exceeding nearness, the rays of the
sun are hot in the hemisphere of the gods in summer, but in
that of the demons in winter : in the contrary season, they are
sluggish,
   47. At the equinox, both gods and demons see the sun in the
horizon ; their day and night are mutually opposed to each other.
   48. The sun, rising at the first of Aries, while moving on
northward for three signs, completes the former half-day of the
dwellers upon Meru ;
   49. In like manner, while moving through the three signs be
ginning with Cancer, he completes the latter half of their day :
he accomplishes the same for the enemies of the gods while
moving through the three signs beginning with Libra and the
three beginning with Capricorn, respectively.
   50. Hence are their night and day mutually opposed to one
another ; and the measure of the day and night is by the com
pletion of the sun's revolution.
   51. Their mid-day and midnight, which are opposed to one
another, are at the end of each half-revolution from solstice to
solstice (ayana). The gods and demons each suppose themselves
to be uppermost,
   52. Others, too, who are situated upon the same diameter
(samas&trastha), think one another underneath—as the dwellers
in Bhadra9va and in Ketumala, and the inhabitants of Lanka
and of the city of the Perfected, respectively.
   53. And everywhere upon the globe of the earth, men think
their own place to be uppermost : but since it is a globe in the
ether, where should there be an upper, or where an under side
of it ?
xii. 65.]             Translation and Notes.                  249
    54. Owing to the littleness of their own bodies, men, looking
in every direction from the position they occupy, behold this
earth, although it is globular, as having the form of a wheel.
    55. To the gods, this sphere of asterisms revolves toward the
right ; to the enemies of the gods, toward the left ; in a situa
tion of no latitude, directly overhead—always in a westerly di
rection.
    55. Hence, in the latter situation, the day is of thirty nadis,
and the night likewise : in the two hemispheres of the gods and
demons there take place a deficiency and an excess, always op
posed to one another.
    57. During the half-revolution beginning with Aries, there is
always an excess of the day to the north, in the hemisphere of
the gods—greater according to distance north—and a correspond
ing deficiency of the night; in the hemisphere of the demons,
the reverse.
    58. In the half-revolution beginning with Libra, both the de
ficiency and excess of day and night in the two hemispheres are
the opposite of this : the method of determining them, which is
always dependent upon situation (deqd) and declination, has been
before explained.
    59. Multiply the earth's circumference by the sun's declination
 in degrees, and divide by the number of degrees in a circle : the
 result, in yojanas, is the distance from the place of no latitude
 where the sun is passing overhead.
    60. Subtract from a quarter of the earth's circumference the
 number of yojanas thus derived from the greatest declination :
 at the distance of the remaining number of yojanas
     61. There occurs once, at the end of the sun's half-revolution
 from solstice to solstice, a day of sixty nMis, and a night of the
 same length, mutually opposed to one another, in the two hemi
 spheres of the gods and of the demons.
     62. In the intermediate region, the deficiency and excess of
 day and night are within the limit of sixty nadis ; beyond, this
 sphere of asterisms (bha) revolves perversely.
     63. Subtract from a quarter of the earth's circumference the
 number of yojanas derived from the declination found by the
 sine of two signs : at that distance from the equator • the sun is
 not seen, in the hemisphere of the gods, when in Sagittarius and
 Capricorn ;
     64. So also, in the hemisphere of the demons, when in Gemi
 ni and Cancer: in the quarter of the earth's circumference where
 her shadow is lost, the sun may be shown to be visible.
     65. Subtract from the fourth part of the earth's periphery
  (kakshd) the number of yojanas derived from the declination
 found by the sine of one sign : at the distance from the place of
 no latitude of the remaining number of yojanas,
250                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                       [xii. 66-
   66. The sun, when situated in Sagittarius, Capricorn, Scorpio,
and Aquarius, is not seen in the hemisphere of the gods ; in
that of the demons, on the other hand, when in the four signs
commencing with Taurus.
   67. At Meru, the gods behold the sun, after but a single rising,
during the half of his revolution beginning with Aries ; the de
mons, in like manner, during that beginning with Libra.
   68. The sun, during his northern and southern progresses
(ayana) revolves directly over a fifteenth part of the earth's cir
cumference, on the side both of the gods and of the demons.
   69. Between those limits, the shadow is cast both southward
and northward ; beyond them, it falls toward the Meru of either
hemisphere respectively.
   70. When passing overhead at Bhadra/jva, the sun is rising in
Bharata ; it is, moreover, at that time, midnight in Ketumala,
and sunset in Kuru.
   71. In like manner also he produces, by his revolution, in
BhSrata and the other climes, noon, sunrise, midnight, and sun
set, reckoning from east to west.
   72. To one going toward Meru, there take place an elevation
of the pole (dhruva) and a depression of the circle of asterisms ;
to one going toward the place of no latitude, on the contrary, a
depression of the former and an elevation of the latter.
   This detailed exposition of the varying relations of day and night in
different parts of the globe is quite creditable to the ingenuity, and the
distinctness of apprehension, of those by whom it was drawn out. It
is for the most part so clearly expressed as to need no additional expla
nations : we shall append to it only a few brief remarks.
   How far, in verse 46, a true statement is given of the cause of the
heat of summer and the cold of winter, may be made a matter of some
question : the word which we have translated " nearness" (&sannat&) has
no right to mean " directness, perpendicularity," and yet, when taken in
connection with the preceding verse, it may perhaps admit that signifi
cation. The second chapter shows that the Hindus knew very well
that the sun is actually nearer to the whole earth in winter, or when
near his perigee, than in summer.
   The expression ayan&nta, "at the end of an ayana" employed in
verses 51 and 61, and which we have rendered by a paraphrase, might
perhaps have been as well translated, briefly and simply, "at either
solstice." Probably ayana, as used in the sense of " solstice" (see above,
end of note to iii. 9-12), is an abbreviated form of ayan&nta, like ./yd for
jy&rdha (ii. 15-21), and aksha for akshonnati (i. 60).
   In verse 55, we have translated by " toward the right" and "toward
the left" the adverbs savyam and apasavyam, which mean literally " left-
wise" and " right-wise" ; that is to say, in such a manner that the left
side or the right side respectively of the thing making the revolution is
turned toward that about which the revolution is made, this being the
Hindu mode of de»cribing the passing of one person about another per
xii. 77.]                Translation and Notes.                       251
son or thing, especially in respectful salutation and in religious cere
monial.
   The natural measure of the day and of the night is assumed in verse
56 etc. to be the half of a whole day, or thirty nadis, and any deviation
from that norm is regarded as an excess (dhana, vrddhi) or a deficiency
(rna, h&ni, kshaya). The former processes referred to at the end of
verse 58 are those taught in ii. 60-62.
   We have already above (note to i. 63-65) called attention to the fact
that all the Hindu measurements of longitude and latitude upon the
earth's surface are made in yojanas, and not in degrees.
   The expression "perversely" (viparita) in verse 62 is explained by
the commentator to mean " in such manner that the rules as already
given cannot be applied" ; since the sine of the ascensional difference
(cara—see ii. 61) as found by them would be greater than radius.
   The latter half of verse 64 is obscure : its meaning seems to be, as
explained by the commentator, that over a corresponding portion of the
earth's surface in the contrary hemisphere the sun is continuously visible
during the same period, the shadow of the earth, which is the cause of
night, not covering that portion.
   73. The circle of asterisms, bound at the two poles, impelled
by the provector (pravaha) winds, revolves eternally : attached
to that are the orbits of the planets, in their order.
   74. The gods and demons behold the sun, after it is once risen',
for half a year ; the Fathers (pitaras), who have their station in
the moon, for a half-month (paJcsha) ; and men upon the earth,
during their own day.
   75. The orbit (kakshd) of one that is situated higher up is
large ; that of one situated lower down is small. Upon a great
orbit the degrees are great ; so also, upon a small one, they are
small.
   76. A planet situated upon a small circuit (bhramana) traverses
the circle of constellations (bhagana) in a little time ; one revolv
ing on a large circle (mandala), in a long time.
   77. The moon, upon a very small orbit, makes many revolu
tions : Saturn, moving upon a great orbit, makes, as compared
with her, a much less number of revolutions.
   The connection and orderly succession of subjects is by no means
strictly maintained in this part of the chapter. The seventy-fourth verse
is palpably out of place, and is, moreover, in great part superfluous ; for
the statement contained in its first half has already twice been made, in
verses 45 and 67, and in the latter passage in nearly the same terms as
here : its last specification, too, is of a matter too obvious to call for
notice. Nevertheless, the verse cannot well be spared from the chapter,
since it contains the only answer which is vouchsafed to the question of
verse 5, above, respecting the day and night of the Fathers. In the
assignment of the different divisions of time, as single days, to different
orders of beings, the month has been given to the pitaras, " Fathers," or
manes of the departed, and they are accordingly located in the moon,
252                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [xii. 77-
each portion of whose surface enjoys a recurrence of day and night
once in each lunar month. The next following verses, 75 to 77, are a
rather unnecessary amplification of the idea already expressed in i. 26-
27 ; but they answer well enough here as special introduction to the de
tailed exhibition of the measurements of the planetary orbits which is
to follow. Before that is brought in, however, we hava the connection
again broken, by the intrusion of the two following verses, respecting
the regents of years, months, days, and hours.
   78. Counting downward from Saturn, the fourth successively
is regent of the day ; and the third, in like manner, is declared
to be the regent of the year ;
   79. Beckoning upward from the moon are found, in succession,
the regents of the months ; the regents of the hours (hard), also,
occur in downward order from Saturn.
   This passage appears to be introduced here as answer to the inquiry
propounded in verse 6, above. Instead, however, of explaining why the
different divisions of time are placed under the superintendence and pro
tection of different planets, the text contents itself with reiterating, in a
different form, what had already been said before (i. 51-52) respecting
the order of succession of the regents of the successive periods ; but
adding also the important and significant specification respecting the
hours, or twenty-fourths of the day. We have sufficiently illustrated
the subject, in connection with the other passage ; we will only repeat
here that, the planets being regarded as standing in the order in which
they are mentioned in verse 31, above, their successive regency over the
hours is the one fundamental fact upon which all the rest depend, each
planet being constituted lord also of the day whose first hour is placed
under his charge, and so likewise of the month and of the year over
whose first hour and day he is regent—neither the month nor the year,
any more than the hour itself, being divisions of time which are known
to the Hindus in any other uses, and the name of the hour, hord, which
is the Greek &§a, betraying the source whence the whole system was
introduced into India.
   80. The orbit (kakshd) ,of the asterisms (bha) is the circuit
(bhramana) of the sun multiplied by sixty : by so many yojanas
does the circle of the asterisms revolve above all.
   81. If the stated number of revolutions of the moon in an
^Eon (Icalpa) be multiplied by the moon's orbit, the result is to
be known as the orbit of the ether : so far do the rays of the sun
penetrate.
   82. If this be divided by the number of revolutions of any
planet in an ^Eon (kalpa), the result will be the orbit of that
planet : divide this by the number of terrestrial days, and the
result is the daily eastward motion of them all.
   83. Multiply this number of yojanas of daily motion by the
orbit of the moon, and divide by a planet's own orbit ; the re
sult is, when divided by fifteen, its daily motion in minutes.



 ^
xii. 90.]                 Translation and Notes.                         253
   84. Any orbit, multiplied by the earth's diameter and divided
by the earth's circumference, gives the diameter of that orbit;
aud this, being diminished by the earth's diameter and halved,
gives the distance of the planet. .
   85. The orbit of .the moon is three hundred and twenty-four
thousand yojanas : that of Mercury's conjunction (<fighra) is one
million and forty-three thousand, two hundred and nine :
   86. That of Venus's conjunction ($ghra) is two million, six
hundred and sixty-four thousand, six hundred and thirty-seven : •
next, that of the sun, Mercury, and Venus is four million, three
hundred and thirty-one thousand, five hundred :
   87. That of Mars, too, is eight million, one hundred and forty-
six thousand, nine hundred and nine ; that of the moon's apsis
(ucca) is thirty-eight million, three hundred and twenty-eight
thousand, four hundred and eighty-four :
   88. That of Jupiter, fifty-one million, three hundred and sev
enty-five thousand, seven hundred and sixty-four : of the moon's
node, eighty million, five hundred and seventy-two thousand,
eight hundred and sixty-four:
   89. Next, of Saturn, one hundred and twenty-seven million,
six hundred and sixty-eight thousand, two hundred and fifty-five :
of the asterisms, two hundred and fifty-nine million, eight hun
dred and ninety thousand, and twelve :
   90. The entire circumference of the sphere of the Brahma-egg
is eighteen quadrillion, seven hundred and twelve trillion, eighty
billion, eight hundred and sixty-four million : within this is the
pervasion of the sun's rays.
   We present below the numerical data given in these verses, in a form
easier of reference and of comparison with the like data of other
treatises :
                Planet etc.                         Orbit, in yojanai.
            Moon,                                          324,ooo
               " apsis,                                38,3a8,484
              " node,                                  80,572,864
            Mercury (conjunction),                       1,043,209
            Venus (conjunction),                         3,664,637
            Sun,                                         4,33 1,5oo
            Mars,                                        8,146,909
            Jupiter,                                    51,375,764
            Saturn,                                   127,668,255
            Asterisms,                  •             259,890,01*
            Universe,                     t8,7i 2,080,864,000,000
   We have already more than once (see above, notes to i. 25-27, and
iv. 1) had occasion to notice upon what principles the orbits of the plan
ets, as here stated, were constructed by the Hindus. That of the moon
(see note to iv. 1) was obtained by a true process of calculation, from
genuine data, and is a tolerable approximation to the truth : all the
                         33
254                             S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                    [xii. 90-
others are manufactured out of this, upon the arbitrary and false assump
tion that the mean motion of all the planets, each upon its own orbit, is
of equal absolute amount, and hence, that its apparent value in each
case, as seen by us, is inversely as the planet's distance, or that the di
mensions of the orbit are directly as the time employed in traversing
it, or as the period of sidereal revolution. These dimensions, then, may
be found by various methods : upon dividing the circumference of the
moon's orbit by her time of sidereal revolution, we obtain as the
amount of her daily motion in yojanas 11,858.717 nearly (more exactly
11,858.71093-)-); and multiplying this by the time of sidereal revolu
tion of any planet, we obtain that planet's orbit. This is equivalent to
making the proportion
          moon's eid. rev. : planet's sid. rev. : : moon's orbit : planet's orbit
And since the times of sidereal revolution of the planets are inversely
as the number of revolutions made by them in any given period, this
proportion, again, is equivalent to
      planet's no. of rev. in an /Him : moon's do. : : moon's orbit : planet's orbit
This is the form of the proportion from which is derived the rule as
stated in the text, only the latter designates the product of the multi
plication of the moon's orbit by her number of revolutions as the orbit
of the ether (ak&fa), or the circumference of the Brahma-egg, within
which the whole creation, as above taught, is enclosed. This is the same
thing with attributing to the outermost shell of the universe one com
plete revolution in an ^Eon (kalpa), of 4,320,000,000 years.
   There is one feature of the system exposed in this passage which to
us is hitherto quite inexplicable : it is the assignment to the asterisms
of an orbit sixty times as great as that of the sun. This, according to
all the analogies of the system, should imply a revolution of the aster-
isms eastward about the earth once in each period of sixty sidereal years.
The same orbit is found allotted to them in the Siddhanta-Qiromani
(Ganitadhy., iv. 5), and it is to be looked upon, accordingly, as an es
sential part of the general Hindu astronomical system. We do not see
how it is to be brought into connection with the other doctrines of the
system, or what can be its origin and import—unless, indeed, it be
merely an application to the asterisms, in an entirely arbitrary way, of
the general law that everything must be made to revolve about the
earth as a centre. We have noticed above (note to iii. 9-12) its incon
sistency with the doctrine of the precession adopted in this treatise.
   The dimensions of the several orbits stated in the text are for the most
part correct, being such as are derived by the processes above explained
from the numbers of sidereal revolutions given in a former passage (i. 29
-34). There is, however, one exception : the orbit of Mercury, as so
derived, is 1,043,207.8, and the number adopted by the text—which re
jects fractions throughout, taking the nearest whole number—should be,
accordingly, —208, and not —209. If we took as divisor the number of
Mercury's revolutions in an JEon as corrected by the bija (see note to
i. 29-34), we should actually obtain for his orbit the value given it by
the text ; the exact quotient being 1,043,208.73. But as none of the
other orbits given are such as would be found by admitting the several
xiii. 3.]                   Translation and Notes.                             255

corrections of the bija, it seems preferable to assume that the text has at
this point become corrupt, or else that the author of the chapter made
a blunder in one of his calculations.*
   The value of a minute of arc upon the moon's orbit being fifteen yo-
janas (see note to iv. 2-3), the value, in minutes, of any planet's mean
daily motion may be readily found from its orbit by the proportion of
which the rule given in verse 83 is a statement, as follows : as the dis
tance, or the orbit, of the planet in question is to that of the moon, so
is the moon's mean motion in minutes, or 11,858.717 -^ 15, to that of
the planet.
   In verse 84 we are taught to calculate the distance of any planet from
the earth's surface : in order to this, we are first to find the diameter of
the planet's orbit, adopting, as the ratio of the diameter to the circum
ference, that of the diameter to the circumference of the earth—the for
mer, of course, as calculated (i. 59) by the false ratio of 1 : \/10. After
being guilty of so gross an inaccuracy, it is quite superfluous, and a mere
affectation of exactness, to take into account so trivial a quantity as the
radius of the earth, in estimating the planet's distance from the earth.
   In the doctrine of the orbits of the planets, as here laid down, we
have once more a total negation of the reality of their epicyclical mo
tions, and of their consequently varying distances from the earth in dif
ferent parts of their revolutions.




                          CHAPTER               XIII.
     OF THE ARMILLARY SPHERE, AND OTHER INSTRUMENTS.
CONTENTS:—1-13, construction and equipment of the armillary sphere; 13-16, po
  sition of certain points and sines upon it ; 15-16, its adjustment and revolution;
  17-25, other instruments, especially for the determination of time.

   1. Then, having bathed in a secret and pure place, being pure,
adorned, having worshipped with devotion the sun, the planets,
the asterisms (blia), and the elves (guhyakd),
   2. Let the teacher, in order to the instruction of the pupil—
himself beholding everything clearly, in accordance with the
knowledge handed down by successive communication, and
learned from the mouth of the master (guru) —
   3. Prepare the wonder-working fabric of the terrestrial and
stellar sphere (bhubhagola) ....
    * The last six verses of the chapter, which contain then numerical data, may very
possibly be a later addition to its original content: the Ayin-Akbari (as translated
by Ghuhvin), in its account of the astronomy of the Hindus, which it professedly
bases upon the Surya-Siddhanta, gives these orbits (8vo. edition, London, 1800,
ii. 306), but with the fractional parts of yojanas, as if independently derived from
the data and by the rules of the text : the orbit of Mercury it states correctly, as
1,043,207J yojanas.
256                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [xiii. 3-
     We have already remarked above (note to xii. 1-9) that the subject
 of this chapter is one respecting which no inquiries were addressed at
 the beginning of the preceding chapter by the recipient to the commu
 nicator of the revelation, and that the chapter accordingly wears in some
 measure the aspect of an interpolation. It comes in here as furnishing
 a means of illustrating to the pupil the mutual relations of the earth
 and the heavens as explained in the last chapter—and yet not precisely
 as there explained ; for it gives a representation only of the earth and
 of the one starry concave upon which the apparent movements of all
 the heavenly bodies are to be traced, and not of the concentric spheres
 and orbits out of which the universe has been declared to be constructed.
 The chapter has a peculiar title, unlike that of any other in the treatise :
 it is styled jyotishopanishadadhyaya, "lection of the astronomical Upa-
 nishad." Upanishad is the name ordinarily given to such brief treatises,
 of the later Vedic period, or of times yet more modern, as are regarded
 as inspired sources of philosophical and theological knowledge, and are
 looked upon with peculiar reverence : its application to this chapter is
 equivalent to an assumption for it of especial sanctity and authority. It
may possibly also indicate that the chapter is originally an independent
treatise, incorporated into the text of the Surya-Siddhftnta.
    The word 4Aa, in verse 1, may mean either the asterisms proper
(nakshatra), or the signs (r&fi), and is explained by the commentator as
intended to include both. The guhyakas, " secret ones," are a class of
demigods who attend upon Kuvera, the god of wealth, and are the
keepers of his treasures : why they are mentioned here, as objects of
especial reverence to the astronomical teacher, is not obvious. The com
mentator explains the word by " Yakshas etc., lesser divinities." In our
translation of verse 3 we have followed the reading of the published
text, which Colebrooke also appears to have had before him : our own
manuscripts read, instead of bhubhagola, bhumigola and bh&mer gola,
" sphere of the earth" simply.
    Colebrooke, in his essay On the Indian and Arabian Divisions of the
Zodiac (As. Ree., ix. 323 etc. ; Essays, ii. 321 etc.) to which we have
already so often had occasion to refer, gives a translation of part of this
chapter, from the beginning of the third to the middle of the thirteenth
verse, as also a brief sketch of the armillary sphere of which the con
struction is taught in the Siddhanta-Qiromani. He farther furnishes a
description, and a comparison with these, of the somewhat similar in
struments employed by the Greeks, the Arabs, and the early European
astronomers. It has not seemed to us worth while to extract these de
scriptions and comparisons, or to draw up others from independent and
original sources: the object of the Hindu instrument is altogether. differ
ent from that of the others, since it is intended merely as an illustration
of the positions and motions of the heavenly bodies, while those are
meant to subserve the purposes of astronomical observation ; and its
relation to them is determined by this circumstance : while it, of course,
possesses some of the circles which enter into the construction of the
others, it is, upon the whole, a very different and much more complicated
and cumbersome structure. There is nothing in the way of supposing
that the first hint of its construction may have been borrowed from the
xiii. 8.]                Translation and Notes.                        257
instruments of western nations : but, on the other hand, it may possi
bly admit also of being regarded as an independent Hindu device.
   3. ... Having fashioned an earth-globe of wood, of the de
sired size,
   4. Fix a staff, passing through the midst of it and protruding
at either side, for Meru ; and likewise a couple of sustaining
hoops (kakshd), and the equinoctial hoop ;
   5. These are to be made with graduated divisions (angula) of
degrees of the circle (bhagana). . . .
   The fixing of a solid globe of wood, representing the earth, in" the
midst of this instrument, is of itself enough to render impracticable its
application to purposes of astronomical observation. For Meru, the
axis and poles of the earth, see verse 34 of the preceding chapter. We
are not informed of what relative size the globe and the encompassing
hoops are to be made ; probably their relation is to be such that the
globe will be a small one, contained within an ample sphere. The two
" supporting hoops," to which are to be attached all the numerous par
allels of declination hereafter described, are, of course, to be fastened to
the axis at right angles to one another, and to represent the equinoctial
and solstitial colures. The commentary directly prescribes this, and the
text also assumes it in a later passage (v. 10).
   Colebrooke, following the guidance of the commentators, treats the
former half of verse 5 as belonging to the following passage, instead of
the preceding. It can, however, admit of no reasonable question that
the connection as established in our translation is the true one : it is de
manded by the natural construction of the verses, and also yields a de
cidedly preferable sense.
   5. ... Farther—by means of the several day-radii, as adapted
to the scale established for those other circles,
   6. And by means of the degrees of declination and latitude
(vikshepa) marked off upon the latter—at their own respective
distances in declination, according to the declination of Aries
etc., three
   7. Hoops are to be prepared and fastened : these answer also
inversely for Cancer etc. In the same manner, three for Libra
etc., answering also inversely for Capricorn etc.,
   8. And situated in the southern hemisphere, are to be made
and fastened to the two hoop-supporters. . . .
   The grammatical construction of this passage is excessively cumbrous
and intricate, and we can hardly hope that the version which we have
given of it will be clearly understood without farther explanations. Its
meaning, however, is free from ambiguity. We have thus far only three
of the circles out of which our instrument is to be constructed, namely
those intended to represent the two colures and the equator : we are
next to add hoops for the diurnal circles described by the sun when at
the points of connection between the different signs of the zodiac. Of
these there will be, of course, three north of the equator, one for the
258                         Surya-Siddhdnta,                         [xiii. 8-
sun at the end of Aries and at the beginning of Virgo, one for the sun
at the end of Taurus and at the beginning of Leo, and one for the sun
at the end of Gemini and the beginning of Cancer, or at the solstice :
also, in the southern hemisphere, three others corresponding to these.
The dimensions of which they must be made are to be determined by
their several radii (which are called day-radii—see above, ii. 60), as
ascertained by calculation and reduced to the same scale upon which the
colures and equator were constructed. They are then to be attached to
the two general supporting hoops, or colures, each at its proper distance
from the equator ; this distance is ascertained by calculating the decli
nation of the sun when at the points in question, and is determined
upon the instrument by the graduation of the two supporting hoops.
This graduation is in the text called that for declination (kr&nti) and
latitude (yikshepa) : it will be remembered that, according to Hindu
usage, the latter means distance from the ecliptic as measured upon a
circle of declination.
   8. ... Those likewise of the asterisms (bha) situated in the
southern and northern hemispheres, of Abhijit,
   9. Of the Seven Sages (saptarshayas), of Agastya, of Brahma
etc., are to be fixed ....
   If the orders given in these verses are to be strictly followed, our instru
ment must now be burdened with forty-two additional, circles of diurnal
revolution, namely those of the twenty-seven junction-stars (yogat&ra)
of the asterisms and of that of Abhijit—which is here especially men
tioned, as not being always ranked among the asterisms (see above,
p. 208 etc.)—those of the seven other fixed stars of which the positions
were stated in the eighth chapter (vv. 10-12 and 20-21), and also those
of the Seven Sages, or the conspicuous stars in Ursa Major (see end of
the last note to the eighth chapter). Such impracticable directions,
however, cannot but inspire the suspicion that the instrument may never
have been constructed except upon paper.
  9. ... Just in the midst of all, the equinoctial (vdishuvati)
hoop is fixed.
  10. Above the points of intersection of that and the support
ing hoops are the two solstices (ayana) and the two equinoxes
(vishuval) ....
   We have already noticed (note to iii. 6) that the celestial equator de
rives its name from the equinoxes through which it passes. It seems a
little strange that the adjustment of the hoop representing it to the two
supporting hoops, which we should naturally regard as the first step in
the construction of the instrument, is here assumed to be deferred until
after all the other circles of declination are fixed in their places.
   The word translated " above" (urdhuam) in verse 10 requires to be
understood in two very different senses, as is pointed out by the com
mentator, to make the definitions of position of the solstices and of the
equinoxes both correct : the latter are situated precisely at the intersec
tion of the equinoctial colure with the equator ; the former at a distance
of 24° above and below the intersection of the equator with the other
xiii. 14.]               Translation and Notes.                       259
colure, or at the intersection of the colure with the third parallel of the
sun's declination, on either side of the equator.
   We are next taught how to fix in its proper position the hoop which
is to represent the ecliptic.
   10. . . . From the place of the equinox, with the exact num
ber of degrees, as proportioned to the whole circle,
 . 11. Fix, by oblique chords, the spaces (kshetrv) of Aries and
the rest ; and so likewise another hoop, running obliquely from
solstice (ayana) to solstice,
   12. And called the circle of declination (krdnti): upon that
the sun constantly revolves, giving light : the moon and the other
planets also, by their own nodes, which are situated in the eclip
tic (apamandala),
   IB. Being drawn away from it, are beheld at the limit of their
removal in latitude (yikshepa) from the corresponding point of
declination. . . .
   Instead of simply directing that a circle or hoop, of the same dimen
sions as those of the equator and colures, be constructed to represent the
ecliptic, and then attached to the others at the equinoxes and solstices,
the text regards it as necessary to fix, upon the six diurnal circles of
the sun of which the construction and adjustment were taught above,
in verses 5-8, the points of division of all the twelve signs, before
the ecliptic hoop can be added to the instrument. In the compound
tiryaajy&, in verse 1 1, which we have rendered " oblique chords," we
conceive jy& to have its own more proper meaning of " chord," instead of
that of " sine," which, by substitution for jy&rdha (see note to ii. 15-27,
near the end), it has hitherto uniformly borne. We are to ascertain by
calculation the measure of the chord of 30°, to reduce it to the scale of
dimensions adopted for the other great circles of the instrument, and
then, commencing from either equinox, to lay it off, in an oblique direc
tion, to the successive diurnal circles, northward and southward, thus
fixing the positions upon them of the initial and final points of the
twelve signs ; and through all these points the ecliptic hoop is to be
made to pass.
   It does not appear that separate hoops for the orbits of the other
planets, attached to the ecliptic at their respective nodes, are to be ad
ded to the instrument.
   In verse 12 we have a name for the ecliptic, apamandala, which does
not occur elsewhere in the treatise. The word might be literally trans
lated " off-circle," and regarded as designating the circle which deviates
in direction from the neighboring equator ; but it is more probably an
abbreviation for apakramamandala, which would mean, like the ordinary
terms kr&ntimandala, krantivrtta, " circle of declination."
  13. . . . The orient ecliptic-point (lagnd) is that at the orient
horizon ; the Occident point (astamgachat) is similarty determined.
  14. The meridian ecliptic-point (madhyama) is as calculated by
the equivalents in right ascension (lankodayds), for mid-heaven
(khamadhya) above. The sine which is between the meridian
260                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                      [xiii. 15-
{madhya) and the horizon (kshitijd) is styled the day-measure
(antyd).
   15. And the sine of the sun's ascensional difference (caradala)
is to be recognized as the interval between the equator (vishuvat)
and the horizon. . . .
    These verses contain an unnecessary and fragmentary, as also a con
 fused and blundering, definition of the positions upon the sphere of a
 few among the points and lines which have been used in the calculations
 of the earlier parts of the treatise. We are unwilling to believe that
 the passage is anything but a late interpolation, made by an awkward
 hand. For the point of the ecliptic termed lagna, or that one which is
 at any given moment passing the eastern horizon, or rising, see iii. 46-
 48, and note upon that passage. The like point at the western horizon,
 which the commentator* here calls astalagna, " lagna of setting," and
which the text directs us to find " in a corresponding manner," has never
 been named or taken into account anywhere in the treatise : we have
 seen above (as for instance, in ix. 4-5) that all its processes into which
distance in ascension enters as an element are transferred for calculation
from the Occident to the orient horizon. For madhyalagna, the point
of the ecliptic situated upon the meridian, see above, iii. 49 and note.
Although we have ordinarily translated the term by " meridian ecliptic-
point," this being a convenient and exact definition of the point actually
referred to, we do not regard the word rnadhya, occurring in it, as mean
ing "meridian" in the sense in which it is used in modern astronomy,
namely the great circle passing through the observer's zenith and the
north and south points of his horizon. For it deserves to be noted that
the text has no distinctive name for the meridian, and nowhere makes
any reference to it as a circle on the sphere : it will be seen just below
that, while the position of the horizon is defined, the meridian is not
contemplated as a circle of sufficient consequence to require to be rep
resented upon the illustrative armillary sphere. The commentator not
very infrequently has occasion to speak of the meridian, and styles it
y&myottaravrtta, "south and north circle," or firdhuay&myottaravrtta,
"uppermost south and north circle." In the latter half of verse 14,
where we have translated madhya by " meridian," it would have been
more exact to say " mid-heaven," or " the sun at the middle of his visi
ble revolution," or " the sun when at the point called madhyalagna."
For the " day-measure" (antya), see above, iii. 34-36. Its definition
given here is as bad as it could well be : for, passing over the fact that
the line in question is not properly a sine, and moreover that the te"xt
does not tell us in which of the numberless possible directions it is to be
drawn from the meridian to the horizon, the line which it is attempted
to describe is not the one which the treatise regards as the antya, but
the correspondent of the latter in the small circle described by the sun.
That is to say, the text here substitutes the line DA in Fig. 8, above
(p. 88), for the line EG. A similar blunder is made in defining the
sine of the sun's ascensional difference (carajya) : the line A B in the
same figure, which is the " earth-sine" (kujy&, kshil'jy&), is taken, in
stead of its equivalent in terms of a great circle, C G. Moreover, the
xiii. 19.]              Translation and Notes.                    .   261
text reads " equator" (vishuvat—E C in the figure) here for " east and
west hour-circle" (unmandala—CP): the commentator restores the
latter, and excuses the substitution by a false translation of the latter
half of iii. 6, making it mean "the east and west hour-circle is likewise
denominated the equinoctial circle."
   In verse 14, lan/coday&s is substituted for the more usual term lanJco-
day&savas (see above, iii. 49, and note), in the sense of " equivalents of
the signs in right ascension," literally, " at Lanka."
   15. ... Having turned upward one's own place, the circle of
the horizon is midway of the sphere.
   16. As covered with a casing (vaslra) and as left uncovered,
it is the sphere surrounded by Lokaloka. . . .
   The simple direction to turn upward one's own situation upon the
central wooden globe which represents the earth does not, it is evident,
contemplate any very careful or exact adjustment of the instrument.
   Verse 16 is very elliptical and obscure in its expressions, but their
general meaning is plain, and is that which is attributed to them by the
commentator. The proper elevation having been given to the pole of
the sphere, a circle is by some means or other to be fixed about its
midst, or equally distant from its zenith and nadir, to represent the
horizon. Then the part below is to be encased in a cloth covering, the
upper hemisphere alone being left open. As thus arranged, the sphere
is, as it were, girt about by the Lokaloka mountains. Lokaloka is, as we
have seen above (note to xii. 32-44), the name of the giant mountain-
range which, in the Puranic geography, is made the boundary of the
universe : it is apparently so called because it separates the world (loka)
from the non-world (aloka) ; and as out of the Puranic Meru the new
astronomical geography makes the axis and poles of the earth, so out of
these mountains it makes the visible horizon.
   The " wonder-working fabric of the terrestrial and stellar sphere" is
now fully constructed, and only requires farther, in order to its comple
tion as an edifying and instructive illustration of the relations of the
heavens to the earth, to be set in motion about its fixed axis.
  16. ... By the application of water is made ascertainment of
the revolution of time.
   17. One may construct a sphere-instrument combined with
quicksilver : this is a mystery ; if plainly described, it would be
generally intelligible in the world.
   18. Therefore let the supreme sphere be constructed according
to the instruction of the preceptor (guru). In each successive
age (yuga), this construction, having become lost, is, by the Sun's
   19. Favor, again revealed to some one or other, at his
pleasure. . . .
   Here we have another silly mystification of a simple and compara
tively insignificant matter, like that already noticed at the end of the
sixth chapter. The revolution of the machine of which the construc
tion has now been explained, in imitation of the actual motion of the
                          34
262                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                        [xiii. 19-

heavcng about the earth, is something so calculated to strike the minds
of the uninitiated with wonder, that the means by which it is to be
accomplished must not be fully explained even in this treatise, lest they
should become too generally known;' they must be learned by each
pupal directly from his teacher, as the latter has received them by suc
cessive tradition, from the original and superhuman source whence they
came. It is perfectly evident that such a fabric could only be made to
revolve in a rude and imperfect way; that it should have marked time,
and continued for any period to correspond in position with the actual
sphere, is impossible.
   The word which, upon the authority of the commentator, we have
rendered "water," in veme 16, is amrtasr&va, literally "having an im
mortal flW'i perhaps the phrase should be translated rather, "by
managing a constant current of water."
  19. ... So also1 one should construct instruments (yantra) in
order to the ascertainment of time.
  20. When quite alone, one should apply quicksilver to the
wonder-causing instrument. By the gnomon (ganku), staff (yashti),
arc (dhanus), wheel (cakra), instruments for taking the shadow,
of various kinds,
  21. According to the instruction of the preceptor (guru), is to
be gained a knowledge of time by the diligent. . . ,
    The commentator interprets the first part of verse 20 in correspond-
.ence with the sense of the preceding passage : the application of mer
cury to a revolving machine, in order to give it the appearance of auto
matic motion, must be made privately, lest people, understanding the
method too well, should cease to wonder at it. The instruments men
tioned in the latter half of the same verse are explained in the com
mentary simply by citations from the yantr&dhy&ya, " chapter of instru
ments," of the Siddhanta-Qiromani (Goladhy., pp. 111-136, published
edition). We will state, as briefly as may be, their character :
    The gnomon (fanku) needs no explanation : its construction and the
method of using it have been fully exhibited in the third chapter of our
.treatise. The " staff-instrument" (yashiiyantra) is described as follows.
A circle is described upon a level surface with a radius proportioned to
that of the sphere, or to tabular radius. Its cardinal points are ascer
tained, and its east and west and north and south diameters are drawn.
From the .former, at either extremity,"is laid off the sine of amplitude
(agr&) ascertained by calculation for the given day : the points thus de
termined upon the circumference of the circle represent the points on
the horizon at which the sun rises and sets. Another circle, with a ra
dius proportioned to that of the calculated diurnal circle of the day
(dyujy&), is also described about the centre of the other, and is divided
into sixty equal parts, representing the division of the sun's daily revolu
tion into sixty nadis. Into a depression at the centre, the foot of a
 staff (yashti), equal in length to the radius of the'larger circle, is loosely
 inserted. When it is desired to ascertain the time of the day, this staff
 is pointed directly toward the sun, or in such manner that it casts no
shadowy its .extremity then represents the place of the sun at the
siii. 22.]               Translation and Notes.                      263
moment upon the sphere. Measure, by a stick, the distance of that
extremity from the point of sunrise or of sunset : this will be the chord
of that part of the diurnal circle which is intercepted between the sun's
actual position and the point at which he rose, or will set : the value of
the corresponding arc in nadis may be ascertained by applying the stick
to the lesser graduated circle. The result is the time since sunrise, or
till sunset.
    The " wheel " (cakra) is a very simple instrument for obtaining, by
observation, the sun's altitude and zenith-distance. It is simply a wheel,
suspended by a string, graduated to degrees, having its lowest point
and the extremities of its horizontal diameter distinctly marked, and
with a projecting peg at the centre. When used, its edge is turned to
ward the sun, so that the shadow of the peg falls upon the graduated
periphery, and the distances of the point where it meets the latter from
the horizontal and lowest points of the wheel respectively are the
required altitude and zenith-distance of the sun. From these, by the
methods of the third chapter (iii. 37-39)' the time may be derived.
    The "arc" (dhanus) is the lower half of the instrument just described
—or, we may also suppose, a quadrant of it ; since only a quadrant is
required for making the observations for which the instrument is.em-
ployed.
   21. By water-instruments, the vessel (Jcapdla) etc., by the pea
cock, man, monkey, and by stringed sand-receptacles, one may
determine time accurately.
   22. Quicksilver-holes, water, and cords, ropes (gulba), and oil
and water, mercury, and sand are used in these : these applica
tions, too, are difficult.
   The instruments and methods hinted at in these verses are only par
tially and obscurely explained by the commentator. The kap&la, " crip"
or "hemisphere," is doubtless the instrument which is particularly
described below, in verse 23. The nara, " man," is also spoken of be
low, in verse 24, and is simply a gnomon ; it is perhaps one of a partic
ular construction and size, and so named from having about the height
of a man. The peacock and monkey are obscure. The " sand-vessels"
(renugiirbha), which are " provided with cords" (sas&tra), are probably
suspended instruments, of the general character of our hour-glasses.
The commentator conneots them also with the " peacock," as if the
latter were a figure of the bird having such a vessel in his interior, and
letting the sand pour out of his mouth. In illustration of the "quick
silver-holes" (parad&ra) a passage is cited from the Siddhanta-Qiromani
 (as above), giving the description of an instrument in which they are
applied. It is a wheel, having on its outer edge a number of holes, of
equal size, and at equal distances from one another, but upon a zig-zag
line : these holes are filled half full of mercury, and stopped at the ori
fice : and it is claimed that the wheel will then, if supported upon an
axis by a couple of props, revolve of itself. -The application of this
method may well enough be styled " difficult" : if a machine so con
 structed would work, the Hindus would be entitled to the credit of
having solved the problem of perpetual motion. Ths description* of
264                        Stirya-Siddhdnta,
one or two other somewhat similar machines are also cited in the com
mentary from the Siddhanta-Qiromani : the only new feature worthy of
notice which they contain is the application of the siphon, or bent tube,
in emptying a vessel of the water it contains.
   It will have been noticed that, throughout the whole of this chapter,
the different parts or passages end in the middle of a verse. In the
twenty-first verse the coincidence between the end of a passage and the
end of a verse is re-established, but it is at the cost of such an irregular
ity as is nowhere else committed in the treatise : the verse is made to
consist of three half-c,lokas, instead of two, the whole chapter being
thus allowed to contain an uneven number of lines. There are two or
three very superfluous half-verses at the beginning of the chapter, the
omission of any one of which would seem an easier and preferable
method of restoring the regular and connected construction of the text.
  23. A copper vessel, with a hole in the bottom, set in a basin
of pure water, sinks sixty times in a day and night, and is an
accurate hemispherical instrument,.
   This instrument appears to have been the one most generally and fre
quently in use among the Hindus for the measurement of time : it is the
only one described in the Ayin-Akbari (ii. 302). One of the common
names for the sixtieth part of the day, ghati or ghatik&, literally " ves
sel," is evidently derived from it : the other, nctdt or nadik&, " reed,"
probably designated in the first place, and more properly, a measure of
length, and not of time. A verse cited in the commentary to this pas
sage gives the form and dimensions of the vessel used : it is to be of ten
palas1 weight of copper, six digits (angula) high, and of twice that width
at the mouth, and is to contain sixty palas of water : the hole in the
bottom through which it is to fill itself is to be such as will just admit
a gold pin four digits long, and weighing three and a third m&shas.
The description of the Ayin-Akbari does not precisely agree with this ;
and it is, indeed, sufficiently evident that an instrument intended for
such a purpose could not be accurately constructed by Hindu workmen
from measurements alone, but would have to be tested by comparison
with some recognized standard, or by actual use.
   24. So also, the man-instrument (narayantra) is good in the
day-time, and when the sun is clear. The best determination of
time by means of determinations of the shadow has been ex
plained.
  We have already noticed above, under verse 21, that the nara was a
simple gnomon. The explanations here referred to are, of course, those
which are presented in the third chapter.
  The concluding verse of the chapter is an encouragement held out to
the astronomical student.
   25. He who thoroughly knows the system of the planets and
asterisms, and the sphere, attains the world of the planets in the
succession of births, his own possessor.
xiv. 3.]                     Translation and Notes.                               265


                           CHA'PTER XIV.
           OF THE DIFFERENT MODES OF RECKONING TIME.

CONTEXTS:— 1-2, enumeration of the modes of measuring time, and general explan
  ation of their uses; 3, solar time; 4-6, of the periods of eighty-six days; 7-11,
  of points and divisions in the sun's revolution ; 12-13, lunar time ; 14, time of the
  Fathers ; 15, sidereal time ; 15-16, of the months and their asterisms ; 17, of the
  twelve-year cycle of Jupiter ; 18-19, civil, or mean solar, time ; 20-21, time of
  the gods,-Prajflpati, and Brahma ; 22-26, conclusion of the work.

   1. The modes of measuring time (mdnd) are nine, namely those
of Brahma, of the gods, of the Fathers, of Praj&pati, of Jupiter,
and solar (sdura), civil (sdvana), lunar, and sidereal time.
   2. Of four modes, namely solar, lunar, sidereal, and civil time,
practical use is made among men ; by that of Jupiter is to be de
termined the year of the cycle of sixty years ; of the rest, no
use is ever made.
  This chapter contains the reply of the sun's incarnation to the last of
the questions addressed to him by the original recipient of his revela
tion (see above, xii. 8). The word m&na, which gives it its title of md-
n&dhy&ya, and which we have translated " mode of measuring or reck
oning time," literally means simply " measure" : it is the same term
which we have already (iv. 2-3) seen applied to designate the measured
disks of the sun and moon.
  3. By solar (sdura) time are determined the measure ,of the
day and night, the shadayitimuJchas, the solstice (ayana), the equi
nox (vishuvat), and the propitious period of the sun's entrance
into a sign (sankrdnti).
   The adjective saura, which we translate " solar," is a secondary de
rivative from surya, " sun." It is applied to those divisions of time
which are dependent on and determined by the sun's actual motion
along the ecliptic. The "day and night" measured by it are probably
those of. the gods and demons respectively; see above, xii. 48-50. The
solar year, as already noticed (note to i. 12-13), is sidereal, not tropical ;
it commences whenever the sun enters the first sign of the immovable
sidereal zodiac, or when he is 10 minutes east in longitude from the
star £ Piscium. The solar month is the time during which he continues
in each successive sign, or arc of 30°, reckoning from that point. The
length of the solar year and month is subject only to an infinitesimal
variation, due to the slow motion, of 1'in 517 years, assumed for the
sun's line of apsides (see above, i. 41-44) ; but it is, as has been shown
above (note to i. 89-34, near the end), somewhat differently estimated
by different authorities. The precise length of the solar months, as
reckoned according to the Sfirya-Siddhanta, is thus stated by Warren
(Kala Sankalita, p. 69) :
266                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                          [xiv. 3-

                   Duration of the several Solar Months.
                                                  •
       No.       Namo.           Duration.                   Sum of duration.
                            d    n    Y    "'    MM    d       n     v    M.    •"•
        I    Vaifakha,      3o 55     3i     a   39     3o     55   32     2    39
        2    Jyaishtha,     3l   24   12     2   4l     62     19   44     5    20
        3    Ashfidha,      3i   36 38       2   44     93     56   22     8     4
        4    rrSvana,       3r   28 12       2   4>   125      24   34    10    46
        5    Bhadrapada,    3l    2   10     2   40   1 56     26   44    i3    26
        6    Afvina,        3o   27   22     2   38   186      54    6    16     4
        7    Karttikii,     29 54      72 35          216      48   13    18    39
        8    Margafirsha,   29   3o 24 2         33   246      l8   37    21    12

        9    Pausha,        29   20 53 2         3i   275 39 3o 23 43
       10    Magha,         29   27 16 2         32   3o5 6 46 26 i5
       II    Phalguna,      29   48 24 2         33   334 55 10 28 48
       12    Caitra,        3o   20   21     2   36   365 i5 3i 3i 24
    The former passage (i. 12-13) took no note of any solar day ; in this
chapter, however, such a division of time is distinctly contemplated : it
is also recognized by the Siddhanta-Qiromani (Ganitadhy., ii. 8), and
seems to be, for certain uses, generally accepted. The solar day is the
time during which the sun traverses each successive degree of the eclip
tic, with his true motion, and its length accordingly varies with the rap
idity of his motion : three hundred and sixty such days compose the
sidereal year. In order to determine the solar day corresponding to any
given moment, it is, of course, only necessary to calculate, by the meth
ods of the second chapter, the sun's true longitude for that moment.
Hence it is a matter of very little practical account : all the periods re
garded as determined by it may be as well derived directly from the
sun's longitude, without going through the form of calling its degrees
days. It is thus with the equinoxes, solstices, and entrances of the sun
into a sign (snnkrunti, " entrance upon connection with") : for the latter,
and for the continuance of the propitious influences which are believed
to attend upon it, see below, verse 11. The shadafitimukhas form the
subject of the next following passage.
    The manuscript without commentary inserts here the following verse :
" the day and night of the gods and demons, which is determined by
the sun's revolution through the circle of asterisms (bhacakra), and the
number of the Golden (krta) and other Ages, as already stated, is to
be known."
  4. Beginning with Libra, the shadafitimukha is at the end of
the periods of eighty-six (shada/jiti) days, in succession : there are
four of them, occurring in the signs of double character (dvisva-
bhdva) ;
   5. Namely, at the twenty-sixth degree of Sagittarius, at the
twenty-second of Pisces, at the eighteenth degree of Gemini, and
at the fourteenth of Virgo.
   6. From the latter point, the sixteen days of Virgo which re
main are suitable for sacrifices : anything given to the Fathers
(pitaras) in them is inexhaustible.
rir. 10.]               Translation and Notes.                       267
  We have not been able to find anywhere any explanation of this ca
rious division of the sun's path into arcs of 86°, commencing from the
autumnal equinox, and leaving an odd remnant of 16° at the end of
Virgo. The commentary offers nothing whatever in elucidation of their
character and significance. The epithet " of double character" (dvisva-
bh&va) belongs to the four signs mentioned in verse 5 ; judging from the
connection in which it is applied to them by Varaha-Mihira (Laghu-
jataka, i. 8, in Weber's Indische Studien, ii. 278), it designates them as
either variable (caret) or fixed (sthira), in some astrological sense. The
term shadafitimukha is composed of shadafili, " eighty-six," and mukha,
" mouth, face, beginning." We do not understand the meaning of the
compound well enough to venture to translate it.
   7. In the midst of the zodiac (bhacakra) are the two equinoxes
(vishuvat), situated upon the same diameter (samasulraga), and
likewise the two solstices (ayana) ; these four are well known.
   8. Between these are, in each case, two entrances (sanJcrdnti) ;
from the imrnediateness of the entrance are to be known the two
feet of Vishnu.
   9. From the sun's entrance (sanJcrdnti) into Capricorn, six
months are his northern progress (uttardyana) ; so likewise, from
the beginning of Cancer, six months are his southern progress
(dak.sh.indyana).
   10. Thence also are reckoned the seasons (rtu), the cool season
(qigira) and the rest, each prevailing through two signs. These
twelve, commencing with Aries, are the months ; of them is
made up the year.
   The commentator explains samasutraga, like samas&trastha above
(xii. 52), to mean situated at opposite extremities of the same diameter
of the earth, or antipodal to one another.
   The technical term for the sun's entrance into a sign of the zodiac is,
as noticed already, sankr&nti (the commentary also presents the equiva
lent word sankramana) ; of these there take place two between each
equinox and the preceding or following solstice. The latter half of
verse 8 is quite obscure. The commentator appears to understand it as
signifying that, in each quadrant, the entrance (sankr&nti) immediately
following the solstice or equinox is styled " Vishnu's feet." In the ear
liest Hindu mythology, Vishnu is the sun, especially considered as occu
pying successively the three stations of the orient horizon, the meridian,
and the Occident horizon ; and the three steps by which he strides
through the sky are his only distinctive characteristic. These three
steps, then, appear under various forms in the later Vaishnava mythol
ogy, and there is plainly some reference to them in this designation of
the sun's entrances into the signs. It would seem easiest and most nat
ural to recognize in the three signs intervening between each equinox
and solstice Vishnu's three steps, and to regard the two intermediate
entrances as the marks of his feet ; this may possibly be the figure in
tended to be conveyed by the language of the text.
   The word rtu means originally and literally any determined period of
time, a " season" in the most general sense of the term ; but it has also
268                        Sttrya-Siddhdnta,                      [xiv. 10-
been employed from very early times to designate the various divisions
of the year. They were anciently reckoned as three, five, six, or seven ;
but the prevailing division, and the only one in use in later times, is that
into six seasons, named Qigira, Vasanta, Grishma, Varsha, Qarad, and
Hemanta, which may be represented by cool season, spring, summer,
rainy season, autumn, and winter. Qicjra begins with the month Magha,
or about the middle of January (see note to i. 48-51, and the table
given below, under vv. 15-16), and each season in succession includes
two solar months.
   11. Multiply the number of minutes in the sun's measure
(mdna) by sixty, and divide by his daily motion : a time equal
to half the result, in nadis, is propitious before the sun's entrance
into a sign (sankrdnti), and likewise after it.
   The propitious influences referred to above, in verse 3, as attending
upon the sun's entrance into a sign, are regarded as enduring so long as
any part of his disk is upon the point of separation between the two
signs. This time is found by the following proportion : as the sun's ac
tual daily motion, in minutes, is to a day, or sixty nadis, so is the meas
ure of his disk, in minutes, to the time which it will occupy in passing
the point referred to.
   12. As the moon, setting out from the sun, moves from day to
day eastward, that is the lunar method of reckoning time (mdna) :
& lunar day (tithi) is to be regarded as corresponding to twelve
degrees of motion.
   13. The lunar day (tithi), the karana, the general ceremonies,
marriage, shaving, and the performance of vows, fastings, and
pilgrimages, are determined by lunar time.
   14. Of thirty lunar days is composed the lunar month, which
is declared to be a day and a night of the Fathers : the end of
the month and of the half-month (paksha) are at their mid-day
and midnight respectively.
    For the tithi, or lunar day, see above, ii. 66 : for the karana, see
ii. 67-69. For the month considered as the day of the pitaras, or manes
of the departed, see note to xii. 73-77. Manu (i. 66) pronounces the
day of the Fathers to be the dark half-month, or the fortnight from full
moon to new moon, and their night to be the light half-month, or the
fortnight from new moon to full moon. With this mode of division
might be made to accord that stated in the latter part of verse 14, by
rendering madhye " between," instead of " at the middle point of" : we
have translated according to the directions of the commentator.
   15. The constant revolution of the circle of asterisms (bhaca-
Jcra) is called a sidereal day. The months are to be known by
the names of the asterisms (naJcshatrd), according to the conjunc
tion (yoga) at the end of a lunar period (parvan).
   16. To the months KaTttika etc. belong, as concerns the con
junction (samayoga), the asterisms Krttika etc., two by two: but
xiv. 16.]                 Translation and Notes.                       269
three months, namely the last, the next to the last, and the fifth,
have triple asterisms.
    The subject of sidereal time, although one of prominent importance
 in the present treatise, since the subdivision of the day is regulated
 entirely by it, is here very summarily dismissed with half a verse, while
 we find appended to it in the same passage matters with which it has
 nothing properly to do.
    We have already (note to i. 48-51) had occasion to notice that the
 months are regarded as having received their names from the asterisms
 (nakshatra) in which the moon became full during their continuance.
'According to Sir William Jones (As. Ees., ii. 296), it is asserted by the
 Hindus " that, when their lunar year was arranged by former astrono
 mers, the moon was at the full in each month on the very day when it
 entered the nakshatra, from which that month is denominated." Wheth
 er this assertion is strictly true admits of much doubt. Our text does
 not imply any such claim : it only declares that the month is to be
 called by the name of that asterism with which the moon is in conjunc
 tion (yoga) at the end of the parvan : this latter word might mean either
 half of a lunar month, but is evidently to be understood here, as ex
 plained by the commentary, of the light half (fukla paksha) alone, so
 that the end of the parvan (parvanta) is equivalent to the end of
 the day of full moon (p&rnim&nta), or to the moment of opposition in
 longitude. Now it is evident that, owing to the incommensurability of
 the times of revolution of the sun and moon, as also to the revolution
 of the moon's line of apsides, full moon is liable to occur in succession
 in all the asterisms, and at all points of the zodiac ; so that although,
 at the time when the system of names for the months originated and
 established itself, they were doubtless strictly applicable, they would not
 long continue to be so. Instead, however, of being compelled to alter
 continually the nomenclature of the year, we are allowed, by verse 16,
 to call a month Karttika in which the full of the moon takes place either
 in Krttika or in Rohini, and so on ; the twenty-seven asterisms being
 distributed among the twelve months as evenly as the nature of the case
 admits.
    At what period these names were first introduced into use is unknown.
 It must have been, of course, posterior to the establishment of the sys
 tem of asterisms, but it was probably not much later, as the names are
 found in some of the earlier texts which contain those of the nakshatras
 themselves. We can hardly suppose that they were not originally ap
 plied independently to the lunar months ; and certainly, no more suita
 ble derivation could be found for the name of a lunar period than from
 the asterism in which the moon attained during its continuance her full
 beauty and perfection. In later times, as we have already seen (note to
 i. 48-51), the true lunar months are entirely dependent for their nomen
 clature upon the solar months, according to the determination of the
 latter, as regards their commencement and duration, by the data and
 methods of the modern astronomical science. There has been handed
 down another system of names for the months (see Colebrooke in As.
 Res., vii. 284 ; Essays, i. 201), which have nothing to do with the aster
 isms : whether they are to be regarded as more ancient than the others
                            35
270                       S&rya-Siddhdnta,                            [xiv. 16-
we do not know. They are—commencing with the first month of the
season Vasanta, or with that one which in the other system is called
Caitra—as follows : Madhu, Madhava, Cukra, Cuci, Nabhas, Nabhasya,
Isha, Drja, Sahas, Sahasya, Tapas, Tapasya.
   For the sake of a clearer understanding of the relations of the aster-
isms, months, and seasons, we present their correspondences below in ,a
tabular form :
                               Month.
                                                Aiteriimi in which
            Benson,                            full moon may occur.
            £arad.        "i Karttika.          ( Kfttika.
                           I (Oct. -Nov.)       ( Rohini.
                           f Marga$irsha,         Ardra.
                          J (Nov. -Dec.)
            Hemanta,                           ( Punarvasu.
                           j PAusba.           ( Pushya.
                           L (Dec.-Jan.)
                                               ( Ajlesha.
                             MSgha.             (Mngba.
                             (Jan.-Feb.)
            Cifira.                             f P.-Phalgunt
                             Phalguna.         -J U.-PbalgunS.
                             (Feb.- Mar.)       ( Hasta.
                           f Caitra.            ( Citra.
                           j (Mar.-Apr.)       ^Svati.
            Vasanta.                            ( Visakha.
                           I Vaifakha.
                            I- (Apr.-May.)     \ Anuradha.
                           fjyaishtha.          ( Jyeshtha.
                           f (May-June.)        (Mala.'
            Grisbma.                            ( P. -Ashadha.
                          I Ashadha.
                           I (June-July.)       ( U.-Ashadha.
                           (Cravana.           j Cravana.
                             (July-Aug.)        ( gravishtha.
            Varsha.
                             Bhadrapada.           P.-Bhadrapada.
                             (Aug.-Sept.)J      ( U.-Bhadrapada.
                                                ( Bevati.
                           f Acvina.           •< Acvint
            Carad,         J (Sept.-0ct.)       ( Bharani.
   Davis (As. Res., iii. 218) notices that some of the ancient astrono
mers have divided the asterisms somewhat differently, giving to (J/ravana
the three beginning with Qravana,^to Bhadrapada the three beginning
with Pftrva-Bhadrapada, and to Ac,vina only Agvinl and Bharani. It
seems, indeed, that the selection of the three months to which three
asterisms, instead of two, were assigned, must have been made somewhat
arbitrarily.
   It will be noticed that in this passage Karttika is treated as the first
of the series of months, while above (v. 10) Qigira was mentioned as the
first season, and while in practice (see note to i. 48-51) Vai<jakha is
treated as the first of the solar months, and Caitra of the lunar. Another
name for Margaglrsha, also, is Agrahayana, which appears to mean
" commencement of the year." How much significance these varia
tions of usage may have, and what is their reason, is not known to us.




"
xiv. 17.]                Translation and Notes.                       271
As regards Vaigakha and Caitra, indeed, the case is clear, and we may
also regard the rank assigned to Karttika as due to the ancient position
of Krttika, as first among the lunar mansions.
   17. In Vaigakha etc., a conjunction (yoga) in the dark half-
month (Jcrshna), on the fifteenth lunar day (tithi), determines in
like manner the years Karttika etc. of Jupiter, from his heliacal
setting (asta) and rising (udaya).
   We have already, in an early part of the treatise (i. 55), made acquaint
ance with a cycle of the planet Jupiter, composed of sixty years ; in
this verse we have introduced to our notice a second one, containing
twelve years, or corresponding to a single sidereal revolution of the
planet. The principle upon which its nomenclature is based is very evi
dent. Jupiter's revolution is treated as if, like that of the sun, it deter
mined a year, and the twelve parts, each quite nearly equalling a solar
year (see note to i. 55), into which it is divided, are, by the same anal
ogy, accounted as months, and accordingly receive the names of the /
solar months. The appellations thus applied to the years, in their order,
we are directed to determine by the asterism (nakshatra) in which the
planet is found to be at the time of its disappearance in the sun's rays,
and its disengagement from them : for it would, of course, set and rise
heliacally twelve times in each revolution, and each time about a month
later than before. The name of the year, however, will not agree with
that of the month in which the rising and setting occur, but will be the
opposite of it, or six months farther forward or backward, since the
month is named from the asterism with which the sun is in opposition,
but the year of the cycle from that with which he is in conjunction.
The terms in which the rule of the text is stated are not altogether un
ambiguous : there is no expressed grammatical connection between the
two halves of the verse, and we are compelled to add in our translation
the important word " determines," which links them together. The
meaning, however, we take to be as follows : if, in any given year, the
heliacal setting of Jupiter takes place in the month Vaig&kha, then the
asterism with which the moon is found to be in conjunction at the end
of that month—which will be, of course, the asterism in which the sun
is at the same time situated—will determine the name of the year, which
will be Karttika : and so on, from year to year. The expression " in
like manner," in the second half of the verse, is interpreted as implying
that to the years of this cycle is made the same distribution of the as-
terisms as to the months in the preceding passage : the second and third
columns of the last table, then, will apply to the cycle, if we alter their
headings respectively, from " month" to " year of the cycle," and from
" asterisms in which full moon may occur" to " asterisms in which Ju
piter's heliacal setting and rising may occur."
   There is one untoward circumstance connected with this arrangement
 which is not taken into account by the text, and which appears to op
pose a practical difficulty to the application of its rule. The amount of
Jupiter's motion during a solar year is not precisely one sign, but per
 ceptibly more than that, so that the mean interval between two succes
 sive heliacal settings is a little more than a solar month ; and this dif
272                        S&rya-Siddhdnia,                      [liv. 17-
 ference accumulates so rapidly that the thirteenth setting would take
 place about four degrees farther eastward than the first, so that, without
 some system of periodical omissions of a month, the correspondence
  between the names of the years, if applied in regular succession, and
  the asterisms in which the planet disappeared would, after a few revolu
  tions, be altogether dislocated and broken up. If the cycle were of
  more practical consequence, or if it were contemplated as one of the
  proper subjects of this treatise, we might expect to find some method
  of obviating this difficulty prescribed. Warren, however, in his brief
  account of the cycle of twelve years (Kala Sankalita, p. 212 etc.), states
  that he knows of no nation or tribe making any use of it, but only finds
  it mentioned in the books. According to both him and Davis (As. Res.,
  iii. 217 etc.), the cycle of twelve years is subordinate to that of sixty,
  the latter being divided into five such cycles, to which special names are
  applied, and of each of which the successive years receive in order the
. titles of the solar months. The appellations of the cycles themselves
  are those which properly belong to the years of the lustrum (yuga), or
  cycle of five years, by which, as already noticed (note to i. 56-58), the
  Hindus appear first to have regulated time, and effected by intercala
  tion the coincidence of the solar and lunar years : they are Samvatsara,
  Parivatsara, Idavatsara, Idvatsara, (or Anuvatsara), and Vatsara (or
  Idvatsara, or Udravatsara). It would appear, then, either that the cycle
  of sixty years was derived from and founded upon the ancient lustrum,
  being an imitation of its construction in time of the planet Jupiter,
  of which a month equals a solar year, or else that the already existing
  cycle had been later fancifully compared with the lustrum, and subdivi
  ded after its model into sub-cycles for years, and years for months : of
  these two suppositions we are inclined to regard the latter as decidedly -
  the more probable.
   18. From rising to rising of the sun, that is called civil (sdvana)
reckoning. By that are determined the civil days (sdvana), and
by these is the regulation of the time of sacrifice ;
   19. Likewise the removal of uncleanness from child-bearing
etc., and the regents of days, months, and years : the mean mo
tion of the planets, too, is computed by civil time.
    The term s&vana we have translated " civil," as being a convenient
 way of distinguishing this from the other kinds of time, and as being
 very properly applicable to the day as reckoned in practical use from
 sunrise to sunrise : in the more general sense, as denoting the mode of
 reckoning the mean motions of the planets, and the regency of succes
 sive periods, s&vana corresponds to what we call " mean solar" time.
 The word itself seems to be a derivative from savana, " libation," the
 three daily savanas, or the sunrise, noon, and sunset libations, being
 determined by this reckoning.
   20. The mutually opposed day and night of the gods (sura)
 and demons (asura), which has been already explained, is time
 of the gods, being measured by the completion of the sun's
 revolution.
xiv. 27.]                Translation and Notes.                       273
  21. The space of a Patriarchate (manvantara) -is styled time
of Prajapati : in it is no distinction of day from night. An ^rEon
(kalpa) is called time of Brahma.
   It may well be said that the mode of reckoning by time of the gods
has been already explained : the length of a day of the gods, with the
method of its determination, has been stated and dwelt upon, in almost
identical language, over and over again (see i. 13-14 ; xii. 45-50, 67,
74 ; and the interpolated verse after xiv. 3), almost as if it were so new
and striking an idea as to demand and bear repeated inculcation. For
the Patriarchate (manvantara), or period of 308,448,000 years, see
above, i. 18 : this is the only allusion to it as a unit of time which the
treatise contains. For the JEon (kalpa), of 4,320,000,000 years, as
constituting a day of Brahma, see above, i. 20.
   The remaining verses are simply the conclusion of the treatise.
   22. Thus hath, been told thee that supreme mystery, lofty and
wonderful, that sacred knowledge (brahman), most exalted, pure,
all guilt destroying ;
   23. And the highest knowledge of the heaven, the stars, and
the planets hath been exhibited : he who knoweth it thoroughly
obtaineth in the worlds of the sun etc. an everlasting place.
   24. With these words, taking leave of Maya, and being suit
ably worshipped by him, the part of the sun ascended to heaven,
and entered his own disk.
   25. So then Maya, having personally learned from the sun
that divine knowledge, regarded himself as having attained his
desire, and as purified from sin.
   26. Then, too, the sages (rshi), learning that Maya had received
from the sun this gift, drew near and surrounded him, and rev
erently asked the knowledge.
   27. And he graciously bestowed upon them the grand system
of the planets, of mysteries in the world the most wonderful,
and equal to the Scripture (brahman).
   The Surya-Siddhanta, in the form in which it is here presented, as ac
cepted by Rangan&tha and fixed by his commentary, contains exactly
five hundred verses. This number, of course, cannot plausibly be looked
upon as altogether accidental : no one will question that the treatise has
been intentionally wrought into its present compass. We have often
found occasion above to point out indications, more or less distinct and
unequivocal, of alterations and interpolations ; and although in some
cases our suspicions may not prove well-fonnded, there can be no reason
able doubt that the text of the treatise has undergone since its origin
not unimportant extension and modification. Any farther consideration
of this point we reserve for the general historical summary to be pre
sented at the end of the Appendix.
      274                           S&rya-Siddhdnta,                            [introd.



                              APPENDIX:
      CONTAINING ADDITIONAL NOTES AND TABLES, CALCULATIONS OF
                    ECLIPSES, A STELLAR MAP, ETC.


         1. p. ii. The name siddh&nta, by which the astronomical text
      books are generally called, has, by derivation and original meaning,
      nothing to do with astronomy, but signifies simply " established conclu
      sion ;" and it is variously applied to other uses in the Sanskrit literature.
         It may not be uninteresting to present here a summary view of the
      existing astronomical literature of the Hindus, as derived from such
      sources of information upon the subject as are accessible to us, even
      though such a view must necessarily be imperfect and incomplete. We
      commence by giving a list of works furnished to the translator, at his
      request, by the native Professor of Mathematics in the Sanskrit College
      at Puna, and which may be taken as representing the knowledge pos
      sessed, and the opinions held, by the learned of Western India at the
      present time. Along with it is offered the list of nine treatises given in
      the modern Sanskrit Encyclopedia, the Qabdakalpadruma, as entitled to
      the name of Siddhanta. The longer list was intended to be arranged
      chronologically ; the remarks appended to the names of treatises are
      those of its compiler.
          i. Brahma-Siddhanta.                    1. Brahma-Siddhanta.
          i. Surya-Siddhanta.                     2. Surya-Siddhanta.
          3. Soma-Siddhanta.                     3. Soma-Siddhanta.
          4. Vasishtha-Siddhanta.                 4- Brhaspati-Siddhanta.
          5. Romaka-Siddhanta.                    5. Garga-Siddhanta.
          6. Paulastya-Siddhanta.                 6. Nfirada-Siddhanta.
          7. Brhaspati-Siddhanta.                 7. Parajara-Siddhanta.
          8. Garga-Siddhanta.                     8. Paulastya-Siddhanta.
          9. Vyasa-Siddhanta.                     9. Vasishtha-Siddhanta.
        10. Paracara-SiddhAnta.
        n. Bhoja-Siddhflnta; earlier than the Ciromani.
        1a. Varaha-Siddhanta ; earlier than the Ciromani.
        1 3. Brahmagupta-SiddMnta ; earlier than the Ciromani.
        14. SiddhAnta-9iromani ; fake 1072 [A.D. 1150].
        15. Sundara-Siddhanta : about 400 years ago.                          [years ago.
        1 6. Tattva-Viveka-Siddhanta ; in the time of the reign of Jaya Sinha, about 250
        17. Sarvabhauma-Siddhanta ; in the time of the reign of Jaya Sinha.
        18. Laghu-Arya-Siddhanta )      ,. ,,     ,
        19. Brhad-Arya-Siddhanta }earher than the V™"*-

         It is obvious that these lists are uncritically constructed, and that
      neither of them is of a nature to yield valuable information without ad
      ditional explanations. The one is most unreasonably curt, and seems
      founded on the principle of allowing the title of Siddhanta to no work




•-.
note.]                   Additional Notes, etc.                       275

which is -the acknowledged composition of a merely human author,
while the other contains treatises of very heterogeneous character and
value : and neither list distinguishes works now actually in existence from
those which have become lost, and those of which the existence at any
period is questionable. A more satisfactory account of the Siddhanta
literature may be drawn up from the notices contained in the writings of
Western scholars, and especially from the various essays of Colebrooke.
For what we shall here offer, he is our main authority.
    In the present imperfect state of our knowledge of the subject, there
is perhaps no better method of classifying the Hindu astronomical trea
tises than by dividing them into four classes, as follows : first, those
which profess to be a revelation on the part of some superhuman being ;
second, those which are attributed to ancient and renowned sages, or to
 other supposititious or impersonal authors ; third, those regarded as the
 works of actual authors, astronomers of an early and uncertain period ;
fourth, later texts, of known date and authorship, and mostly of a less
independent and original character.
    I. The first class comprises the Brahma, Surya, Soma, Brhaspati, and
 Narada Siddhantas.
    1. Brahma-Siddh&nta. The earliest treatise bearing this name is
said to have formed a part of the Vishnudharmottara Purana, a work
which seems to be long since lost, and scarcely remembered except in
 connection with the Siddhanta. The latter, too, is only known by a few
 citations in astronomical writings, and by the treatise of Brahmagupta
 (see below, third class) founded upon it. Another work laying claim to
 the same title is that which we have many times cited above as the
 C&kalya-Sanhita. Sanhita, " text, comprehensive work," is a term em
ployed to denote a complete course of astronomy, astrology, horoscopy,
 etc. : this treatise, according to the manuscript in our possession, forms
 the second division (prafna) of such a course. It professes to be re
 vealed by Brahma to the semi-divine personage Narada. Of its relation
to the Surya-Siddhanta we have spoken above (note to viii. 10—12). It
 does not appear to be referred to as an independent work in either of
 the native lists we have given.
    2. Surya- Siddh&nta. This is the treatise of which the translation
 has been given above, and of which, accordingly, we do not need to
 speak here more particularly.
    3. Soma-Siddh&nta. Judging from its title, this work must profess
 to derive its origin from the moon (soma), as the preceding from the
 sun (s&rya). Bentley speaks of it as following in the main the system
 of the Surya-Siddhanta. There is a manuscript of it in the Berlin
 Library (Weber's Catalogue, No. 840), and Colebrooke seems also to
 have had it in his hands.
    4. Brhaspati-Siddh&nta. Brhaspati is the name of a divine person
 age, priest and teacher of the gods, as also of the planet Jupiter. No
 work bearing this name is mentioned, so far as we can ascertain, by any
 European scholar, although Brhaspati is not infrequently referred to in
 native writings as an authority in astronomical matters.
    5. Narada-Siddh&nta. A Naradi-Sanhita, or course of astrology, in
 the Berlin Library (Weber, No. 862), and an occasional reference to




                                                                              •••
276                       Stirya-Siddhdnta,                       [introd.
Narada, among other divine or mythical personages, as an astronomical
authority, are all the indications we find justifying the introduction of
this name into the list of the Cabdakalpadrurua.
   II. In the second class we include the Garga, Vyasa, Para^ara, Pau-
liga, Paulastya, and Vasishtha Siddhantas. Garga, Paragara, Vyasa,
Pulastya, and Vasishtha are prominent among the sages of the ancient
period of Hindu history : the two latter are of the number of those who
give name to the stars in Ursa Major (they are (? and ? respectively).
They cannot possibly have been the veritable authors of Siddhantas, or
works presenting the modern astronomical system of the Hindus : but—
and this seems to be especially the case with regard to Garga and Para-
<;ara—one and another of them may have distinguished themselves in
connection with the older science, and so have furnished some ground
for the part attributed to them by the later tradition, and for the father
ing of astronomical works upon them.
    1. Oarga-Siddh&nta. Astronomical treatises and commentaries upon
them occasionally offer citations from Garga (see, for instance, Cole-
brooke's Essays, ii. 356 ; Sir William Jones in As. Res., ii. 397), but of
a Siddhanta, or text-book of astronomy, bearing his name, we find
nowhere any mention excepting in these lists.
    2. Vy&sa-Siddh&nta. This name, too, is known to us only from the
list above given.
    3. Par&fara- Siddh&nta. According to Bentley, the second chapter
of the Arya-Siddhanta contains an extract from this work, in which are
stated the elements of the mean motions of the planets adopted by it.
The work itself appears to be lost ; unless, indeed, it may have been
contained in a manuscript of the Mackenzie Collection, which in Wil
son's Catalogue (i. 120) is called Vriddha-Parasara, and said to be "a
system of astrology, attributed to Parasara, the father of Vyasa."
    4. P&ulifa- Siddh&nta. The planetary elements of this treatise also
are preserved in later commentaries, and are stated by Bentley and
Colebrooke. We have noticed above (note to i. 4-6) that al-Biruni at
tributes it to Paulus the Greek ; whence Weber (Ind. Lit., p. 226) con
jectures that it was founded upon the •Eiffer/wyrj of Paulus Alexandrinus.
If this account of its origin be correct, the Puliga to whom the later
Hindus attribute it is a fictitious personage, whose name is manufactured
out of Paulina. The work, it will be seen, is not mentioned in either of
the lists we have given, its place appearing to be taken by the Pulastya-
Siddhanta. According to the Hindu tradition, the school represented
by the Pauliga-Siddhanta was the rival of that of Aryabhatta.
    5. Pulastya- Siddh&nta. Of this Siddhanta we find mention only in
such native lists as omit the preceding. Hence we are led to conjecture
that the two names may indicate the same work ; an attempt, founded
upon the similarity of the names, having been made by some to attribute
the Pauliga-Siddhanta to a known and acknowledged Hindu sage.
    6. Vasishtha- Siddh&nta. This work is spoken of as actually, in ex
istence by both Colebrooke and Bentley, and the latter states its sys
tem to correspond with that of the Surya-Siddhanta. More than one
treatise bearing the name is referred to, the older one being of unknown
authorship, and the other a later compilation founded upon this, by
note.]                    Additional Notes, etc.                           277

Vishnu-candra, who is said also to have derived his material in part from
Aryabhatta. A copy of a Vrddha-Vasishtha-Siddhanta formed a part of
the Mackenzie Collection (Wilson's Catalogue, i. 121).
    III. To the third class may be assigned the Siddhantas of Aryabhat
ta, Varaha-mihira, and Brahmagupta, and the Romaka-Siddhanta, as
well as the later version of the Vasishtha-Siddhanta, last spoken of.
The first three names are those of greatest prominence and highest im
portance in the history of Hindu astronomical science, and there is
every reason to believe that the sages who bore them lived about the
time when the modern system may be supposed to have received its
final and fully developed form, or during the fifth and sixth centuries of
our era.
    1. Arya-Siddh&nta. The two principal works of Aryabhatta appear
to have been originally entitled the Aryasb.tac.ata, " work of eight hun
dred verses," and Dagagitika, " work of ten cantos." Colebrooke knew
neither of them excepting by citations in other astronomical text-books
and commentaries. Bentley had in his hands two treatises which he
calls the Arya-Siddhanta and the Laghu-Arya-Siddhanta, which are pos
sibly identical with those above named.* The Berlin Library also con
tains (Weber, No. 834) a work which professes to be a commentary on
the Dagagitika.
    2. Var&ha-Siddhfynta. The only distinctively astronomical work of
Varaha-mihira appears to have been his Panca-siddhantika, or Compen
 dium of Five Astronomies, of which we have already spoken (note to
 i. 2-3), and which was founded upon the Brahma, Surya, Pauliga, Va-
 sishtha, and Romaka Siddhantas. It is supposed to be no longer in
 existence, although the astrological works of the same author have been
 carefully preserved, and are without difficulty accessible.
     3. Brahma- Siddh&nta. The proper title of the work composed by
 Brahmagupta, upon the foundation of an earlier treatise bearing this
 name, is Brahma-sphuta-Siddhanta, " corrected Brahma-Siddhanta," but
 the word sphuta, " corrected," is frequently omitted in citing it, as has
 been our own usage in the notes to the Surya-Siddhanta. Colebrooke
 possessed an imperfect copy of it, and it was also in Bentley's posses
 sion. Upon it was professedly founded, in the main, the Siddhanta-Ci-
 romani of Bhaskara.
     4. Romaka-Siddh&nta. Of the name of this treatise, the only one
 we have thus far met with which is not derived from a real or supposed
 author, we have spoken in the note to i. 4-6. It is said by Colebrooke
 to be by Crishena, and to have been founded in part upon the original
 Vasishtha-Siddhanta ; its early date is proved by its being one of those
 treated as authorities by Varaha-mihira. No copy of it seems to have
 have been discovered in later times.
     Our list also mentions a Bhoja-Siddhanta, probably referring to some
 astronomical work published during the reign, and under the patronage,
 of Raja Bhoja Deva, of Dhara, in the tenth or eleventh century of
 our era.

  * See an article by Fitz-Edward Hall, Esq., On the Arya-SiddhSnta, in the Jour
nal of the American Oriental Society, vol. vi, 1860.
                          36
278                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,                 [introd. note-
    IV. Our fourth class is headed \>j the Siddhanta-Qiromani, written in
 the twelfth century by Bhaskara Acarya, and founded upon the Brahma-
 Siddhanta of Brahmagupta. Our numerous references to it and cita
 tions from it indicate the prominent and important position which it
 occupies in the modern astronomical literature of India. For a descrip
 tion of the numerous commentaries upon it, see Colebrooke's Hindu
 Algebra, note A (Essays, ii. 450 etc.).
    The longer of the lists given above mentions two or three other
 works of yet later date. Among them the Siddhanta-Sundara is the
 most ancient, having been composed by Jnana-raja at the beginning of
 the sixteenth century. The Graha-Laghava is a treatise of the same
 class, and is highly considered and much used throughout India, although
 omitted from the Puna list. It is of nearly the same date with the
work last spoken of, being the composition of Ganega, and dated fake
 1442 (A.D. 1520). The Siddhanta Tattva-Viveka, more usually styled
the Tattva-Viveka simply, is a century later : it was written by Kama-
lakara, about A. D. 1620. The Siddhanta-Sarvabhauma dates from very
 nearly the same period, and is the work of Munigvara, who is also the
 author of a commentary on the Ciromani, and the son of Ranganatha,
the commentator on the Surya-Siddhanta.
    This class of astronomical writings might be almost indefinitely ex
tended, but the works which have been mentioned appear to be the
most authoritative and important.
    Of all the treatises whose names we have cited, we know of but three
which have as yet been published—the Surya-Siddhanta, the Siddhanta-
Qiromani, and the Graha-Laghava ; the two latter under the auspices of
the School-Book Society of Calcutta. Prof. Hall's edition of the Surya-
Siddhanta, to which reference is made in our Introductory Note, has
been completed by the addition of a fourth Fasciculus since our own
publication was commenced, so that we have been able to avail ourselves
of its valuable assistance throughout.
    2. p. ii. Ranganatha, in the verses with which he closes his com
mentary, states it to have been completed on the same day with the
birth of his son Munigvara, in the f&ka year 1525, or A. D. 1603. For
his relationship to other well-known authors or commentators of astro
nomical treatises, see Colebrooke's Essays, ii. 452 etc. Other commenta
tors on the Surya-Siddhanta mentioned by Colebrooke are Nrsinha, who
wrote but a few years later than Ranganatha, and Bhudhara and Dada
Bhai, whose age is not stated. The Mackenzie collection (see Wilson's
Catalogue, p. 118 etc.) contained commentaries on the whole or parts of
the same text by Mallikarjuna, Yellaya, an Aryabhatta, Mammabhatta,
and Tammaya.
    3. p. iii. As no especially suitable opportunity has hitherto offered
itself for giving in our notes the synonymy of the names of the planets,
we present here all the appellations by which they are known in the text
of the Surya-Siddhanta.
   The sun is called by the following names derived from roots signify
ing " to shine" : arka, bh&nu, ravi, vivasvant, surya ; also savitar, liter
ally " enlivener, generator" ; bhdskara, " light-maker" ; dinakara and
i. 34.]                  Additional Notesi etc.                       279

 divakara, " day-maker" ; and tigm&nfu and ttkshnanfu, " having hot or
 piercing rays."
    The moon, besides her ordinary names indu, candra, vidhu, is styled
 nif&kara, " night-maker" ; nif&p'ati, " lord of night" ; anushnagu, fita-
gu, fit&nfu, fltadldhiti, Mmarafmi, himanfu, himadtdhiti, " having cool
 rays" ; and fafin and fafanka, " marked with a hare" : the Hindu fancy
 sees the figure of this animal in the spots on the moon's disk. The
 name soma nowhere directly occurs, but it is implied in the title s&umya
 given to Mercury.
    Mercury is styled jna and bitdha, " wise, knowing" ; also fafija and
 s&umya, " son of the moon." The reason of neither appellation is ob
vious. It will be seen below that the moon, the sun, and the earth have
 each of them one of the lesser planets assigned to it as its son : why
 Mercury, Saturn, and Mars were selected, and on what grounds their
 respective parentage was given them, is hitherto entirely unknown.
    Venus has one name, fukra, " brilliant," which is derived from her
actual character : she is also known as bhrgu, which is the name of one
 of the most noted of the ancient sages, or as bhrguja or bh&rgava,
 " son of Bhrgu."
    Mars has likewise a single appellation, angaraka, " coal," which is
given him on account of his fiery burning light : all his other titles,
namely kuja, bhuputra, bhumiputra, bhusuta, bh&uma, mark him as " son
 of the earth."
    Jupiter is known as brhaspati, which is, as already more than once
noticed, the name of a divine personage, priest and teacher among the
gods ; the word means originally " lord of worship." The planet also
receives some of his titles, namely guru, "preceptor," and amarejya,
" teacher of the immortals." The only other name given to it, jiva,
" living," is of doubtful origin.
    Saturn has two appellations, each represented by several forms;
namely " son of the sun," or arkaja, &rki, suryatanaya ; and " the slow-
moving," or manda, fani, fan&ifcara.
   All these names, it will be noticed, are of native Hindu origin, and
have nothing to do with the appellations given by other nations to the
planets. In the Hindu astrological writings, however, even those of a
very early period (see Weber's Ind. Stud., ii. 261), appear, along with
these, other titles which are evidently derived from those of the
Greeks.
   4. p. 2. We have everywhere cited Bentley's work on Hindu as
tronomy according to the London edition of it (8vo., 1825), the only
one to which we have had access.
   In a few instances, where we have not specified the part of Bhaskara's
Siddhanta-Qiromani to which we refer, the Ganitadhyaya, or properly
astronomical portion of it, is intended.
   5. p. 1 7. For the convenience of any who may desire to make a
more detailed examination of the elements of the mean motions of the
planets adopted in this treatise, and to work out the results deducible
from them, we present them in the following table in a more exact form.
We give the mean time of sidereal revolution, in mean solar days, and
280                            S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                       [i. 34.

the amount of mean motion, in seconds, during a day, and also during
a Julian year, of 365^ mean solar days.
                        Mean Motions of the Planett.
           Planet.            Time of
                        •idereal revolution. Mean daily motion. Mean yearly motion.
                             d                     "                   '•
      Sun,                 365.25875648        3,548.16956         1,295,968.931
      Mercury,              87.96970228       14,732.34496         5,380,988.996
      Venus,               224.69856755        5,767.72702         2,106,662.295
      Mars,                686.99749394        1,886.46976           689,o33.o8l
      J.upiter,          4,332.32065235          299.14683           109,263.381
      Saturn,           10,765.77307461          iao.38i5i            43,969.346
      Moon,
         aider, rev.,       27.32167416       47,434.86773       17,325,585.437
         eynod. rev.,       29.53058795       43,886.69817       16,029,616.507
         apsis,          3,232.09367415          400.97848           i46,457.389
         node,           6,794.39983121          190.74532            69,669.730

    6. p. 17. The system of the Surya-Siddhanta, so far as concerns
 the mean motions of the planets, the date of the last general conjunc
 tion, and the frequency of its recurrence, is also that of the Qakalya-
 Sanhita. It is likewise presented, according to Bentley (Hind. Astr., p.
 116), by the Soma and Vasishtha Siddhantas. Sojar as can be gath
 ered from the elements of the Paulina and Laghu-Arya Siddhantas, as
reported by Colebrooke and Bentley, these treatises, too, followed a simi
lar system ; the revolutions of the planets in an Age, as stated by them,
where they differ from those of the Surya-Siddhanta, always differ by a
number which is a multiple of four. Some of the astronomical text
books, however, have constructed their systems in a somewhat different
manner. Thus the Siddhanta-Qiromani, following the authority of
Brahmagupta and of the earlier Brahma-Siddhanta, makes the planets
commence their motions together at the star £ Piscium at the very com
mencement of the JEon, and return to a general conjunction at the same
point only after the lapse of the whole period of 4,320,000,000 years.
The same is the case with the Arya and Paragara Siddhantas : they too,
as reported by Bentley (Hind. Astr., pp. 148, 150), state the revolutions
of the planets for the whole ^Eon only, and in numbers which have no
common divisor, so that they assume no briefer cycle of conjunction.
But they all, at the same time, take special notice of the commence
ment of the Iron Age, which they make to begin at the moment of mean
sunrise at Lanka, and manage to effect very nearly a general conjunc
tion at the time of its occurrence, as is shown by the table at the end
of this note, in which are presented the positions of all the planets, and
of the moon's apsis and node, as stated by them for that moment.
    We insert these data here, because they seem to us to furnish ground
for important conclusions respecting the comparative antiquity of the
two systems. The commencement of the Iron Age, which to the one
is of cardinal importance as an astronomical epoch, is to the other
simply a chronological era, having no astronomical significance. Now
if, as has been shown in our notes to be altogether probable, that epoch
i. 34.]                               Additional Notes, etc.                                             281
is in fact of astronomical origin, being arrived at by retrospective calcu
lation of the planetary motions, we can hardly avoid the conclusion that
the system which presents it in its true character is the more ancient
and original. This conclusion is strengthened by the notice taken of
the epoch by the Siddhanta-Qiromani and its kindred treatises. We do
not see how their treatment of it is to be explained, excepting upon the
supposition that a general conjunction at that time was already so firmly
established as a fundamental dogma of the Hindu astronomy, that they
were compelled, even while rejecting the theory of brief cycles and re
curring conjunctions, to pay it homage by so constructing their elements
that these should exhibit at least a very near approach to a conjunction
at the moment. We are clearly of opinion, therefore, that, apart from
all consideration of the relative age of the separate treatises, the system
represented by the Surya-SiddhAnta is the more ancient.
Mean Places of the Planets, 6 o'c A.M. at Ujjayint, Feb. 18th, B. C. 3102.
          Planet.      Siddhanta-^iromani.            Arya-Siddhanta.          ParScara-Siddhanta.
                          •      «   " "          1    •     •    '       "       »,'"
  Sun,                     o      o o o                0000                        o    o    o       o
  Mercury,               ii      27 24 29             II 21 21 36                II    21   17    17
  Venus,                 ii      a8 42 i4             ii     27   7       12     ii    26 58 34
  Mars,                  ii      29 3 5o               o      o   o        o     ii    29 14 38
  Jupiter,               ii      29 27 36             ii     27   7       12     ii    27  2 53
  Saturn,                ii 28 46 34                   0000                      II    28   57    22
  Moon,                   o       o     o   o          o      o       o   o        o    o 10 48
     " apsis,             4       5 29 46              4      3 5o 24              4    5 12 29
     " node,              5       3 12 58              5      2 38 24              5    2 49 12
  7. p. 20. We present in the annexed table, in the same form as
above (note 5), the elements of the mean motions of the planets as cor
rected by the bija.
              Mean Motions of the Planets, as corrected by the bija.

             Planet.             Time of              Mean daily motion.       Mean yearly motion.
                           sidereal revolution.                                                      1
                                  d
      Mercury,                    87.96978075              l4,732.33l82         '5,380,984.196
      Venus,                     224-69895152               5,767.71717          2,106,658.695
      Jupiter,                  4,332.4i 581277               299.14026            109,260.981
      Saturn ,                 10,764.89171783                I20.39I36             43,972.946
      Moon's apsis,             3,232.12015592             . 400.97519             146,456. 189
         "     node,            6,79428280845                 190.74861             69,670.930
   §. p. 22. At the time when we wrote our note, we had not observed
that Bentley himself explains, in a foot-note to page 117 of his work,
this apparent error. In the case of Mercury, since the number of revo
lutions as stated by the text of our treatise did not yield him the result
which he desired, he has quietly taken the liberty of altering it from
17,937,060 to 17,937,024, assuming, as his justification, an error of the
copyists which has not the slightest plausibility, and ignoring the fact
282                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,                         [i. 34.
 tnat the correctness of the former number is avouched by its occurrence
 in other treatises. It is highly characteristic of Bentley, that he has
 thus arbitrarily amended one of the data upon which he rests the most
 important of his general conclusions, a conclusion which, but for suck
 emendation, would be not a little weakened or modified. Any one can
 see for himself, upon referring to our table given on page 44, with how
 much plausibility Bentley is able to deduce, from the dates of its fourth
 column, the year A.D. 1091 as that of the composition of the Surya-
 Siddhanta. We have been solicitous to allow Bentley all the credit we
 possibly could for his labors upon the Hindu astronomy, but we cannot
 avoid expressing here our settled conviction that, as an authority upon
 the subject, he is hardly more to be trusted than Bailly himself, that his
 work must be used with the extremest caution, and that his determina
 tion of the successive epochs in the history of astronomical science in
 India is from beginning to end utterly worthless.
    9. p. 23. We have not fulfilled our promise to recur in the eighth
 chapter to the subject of the sun's error of position, because we felt our
 selves incompetent to cast at present any valuable light upon it. Noth
 ing but a careful and thorough sifting and comparison of all the earliest
 treatises, together with the traditions preserved by the commentators,
 and the practical methods of construction of the calendar, is likely to
 settle the question as to the manner in which the elements of the plan
 etary orbits were originally made up.
    10. p. 24. In making out our comparative table of sidereal revolu
 tions, we have calculated the column for Ptolemy as we conceive that
 he would himself have calculated it, had he been called upon to do so.
 M. Biot, having in view an object different from ours, has carefully re
vised Ptolemy's processes (see his Trait6 Elementaire d'Astronomic
Physique, 3me ed., v. 37-71), and has deduced from the lattcr's original
data what he regards as the true times of sidereal revolution of the pri
mary planets furnished by them ; his periods are accordingly slightly
different from those presented in our table.
    Colebrooke (As. Res., xii. 246 ; Essays, ii. 412) has also given a com
parative table of the daily motions of the planets, but has committed in
it the gross error of setting side by side the sidereal rates of motion of
the Hindu text-books and the tropical rates of Ptolemy and Lalande.
Of course, his data being incommensurable, the conclusions he draws
from their comparison are erroneous.
   11. p. 27. We add, in the following table, a comparison of the po
sitions of the apsides and nodes of the planets as stated in our treatise—
being those which are adopted, with unimportant variations, by all the
schools of Hindu astronomy—with those laid down by Ptolemy in his
Syntaxis. The latter we give as stated by Ptolemy for his own period,
without reducing them to their value in distances from the initial point
of the Hindu sphere. The actual distance of that point, or. of the
vernal equinox of A.D. 560, from the vernal equinox of Ptolemy's time,
is about 5£°. We should remark also that Ptolemy does not state
expressly and distinctly the positions of the nodes : we derive them from
the rules given by him, in the sixth chapter of his thirteenth Book, for
i. 48.]                    Additional Notes, etc.                     283
calculating the latitude of the planets : not being, however, altogether
confident of our correct understanding and interpretation of those rules.
          Positions of the Apsides and Nodes of the Planets.
                                 Surya-            i
                 Planet.       Siddhanta. Ptolemy. Difference.
              Apsides :          °     /    o     t        0     '


                Sun,             77    i5    65 3o        + n 45
                Mercury,        22.0   26   190 o         + 3o 26
                Venus,           79 49       55 o         + 24 49
                Mars,           i3o i       n5 3o         + i4 3i
                Jupiter,        171 16      161       o   + 10   16
                Saturn,         a36 38      a33       o   + 3    38
              Nodes :
                Mercury,         so 44       10       0   + 10   44
                Venus,           59 45       55       o   + 4    45
                Mars,            4o 4        25   3o      + i4   34
                Jupiter,         79 4t       5i       o   + 28   4i
                Saturn,         IOO    25   i83       o   -82    35
   It will be perceived that the differences here are not so great as to ex
clude the supposition of a connected origin. We do not ourselves be
lieve that the Hindus were ever sufficiently skilled in observation, or in
the discussion of the results of observation, to be able to derive such
data for themselves, or even intelligently to modify and improve them,
when obtained from other sources. In order, however, fully to under
stand the relation of the Hindu to the Greek science in this part, we re
quire to know, first, what were the positions assigned to the apsides and
nodes by Greek astronomers prior to Ptolemy, and secondly, what were
their actual positions at the periods in question. Upon the first point
no information appears to have been handed down to our times ; and as
regards the other, we have not found any modern determination of the
desired data, and are not ourselves at present in a situation to undertake
so intricate and laborious a calculation.
   12. p. 29. The era of the kali yuga, or Iron Age, is not in prac
tical use among the Hindus of the present day : two others, of a less
remote date, are ordinarily employed by them in the giving of dates.
These are styled the eras of Qalivahana and of Vikramaditya respect
ively, from two sovereigns so named : their origin and historical signifi
cance are matters of much doubt and controversy. The years of the
era of Qalivahana are, according to Warren (Kala Sankalita, p. 381 and
elsewhere), solar years : their reckoning commences after the lapse of
3179 complete years of the Iron Age, or early in April, A. D. 78 : the
1782nd year, accordingly, coinciding with the 4961st of the Iron Age,
commenced, as is shown by the table on p. 30, April 12th, 1859, and
ended April llth, 1860. The years of this era are generally cited as
yaka or faka years. In the other era, the luni-solar reckoning is followed
(Warren, as above, p. 391 and elsewhere) ; and its first year began with
the 3045th of the Iron Age, or early in 58 B. C. : its 1962nd year, coin
ciding with the 4961st of the remoter era, commenced (see table on p.
284                         Surya-Siddhdnta,                         [i. 48-
 30) April 4th, 1859, and ended March 22nd, 1860. The years of this
 era are called and quoted as samvatsara years, or, by abbreviation, sim
 ply samvat.
    13. p. 39. M. Vivien de St. Martin (in Julien's Memoires de Hiouen-
 Thsang, ii. 258) supposes the value of the li in use in China during the
 seventh century to have been about 329 metres, or 1080 English feet.
This would make the values of the three kinds of yojana mentioned by
 the Buddhist traveller to be 8£, 6^-, and 3$ English miles respectively.
    14. p. 44. In the first table upon this page, we have, by an over
 sight, given the earth's heliocentric longitude, instead of the sun's geo
 centric longitude. To the sun's place as stated, accordingly, should be
 added 180°.
    15. p. 52. M.Biot (Journal des Savants, 1859, p. 409) suggests that
the Hindus, like Albategnius, obtained their sines directly from the
chords of Hipparchus or Ptolemy. This may not be an altogether im
possible supposition, but it is at least an unnecessary one, for they cer
tainly had geometry enough, at the time of the elaboration of their
astronomical system, to construct their table independently. Our notes
have presented Delambre's view of the method of its construction and
the reason of its limitation to arcs which are multiples of 3° 45'. We
cannot but feel, however, upon maturer consideration, that the correct
ness of that view is very questionable ; that the Hindus could probably
have made out a more complete table if they had chosen to do so ; and
that a sufficient reason is found for their selection of the arc of 3° 45'
in the fact that it is a natural subdivision of a recognized unit, the arc of
30°, while the series of twenty-four sines was sufficiently full and accu
rate for their uses. We have been at the pains to calculate the complete
series of Hindu sines from Ptolemy's table of chords, assuming the value
of radius to be 3438', in order to test the question whether there were
any correspondence of errors between them which should prove the one
to be derived from the other : our results are as follows. In five of the
instances (the 14th, 15th, 19th, 22nd, and 23rd sines of the table) in
which the value of the Hindu sine exceeds the truth, Ptolemy supports
the error; in the other three cases (the 16th, 17th, and 18th sines),
Ptolemy affords the correct value ; to the 6th sine, also, which by the
 Hindus is made too small, Ptolemy's table gives its true value, but the
next following sine he makes too great (namely 1520.59, which would
give 1521, instead of 1520); this is his only independent error. The
evidence yielded by the comparison may be regarded as not altogether
unequivocal.
    For the Tsenefit of any who may desire to make practical use of the
Hindu sines, in calculations conducted according to the processes of the
Surya-Siddhanta, we give, upon the opposite page, a more detailed table
of them than has been presented hitherto, with such sets of differences
annexed as will enable the calculator readily to find the sine of any
fiven arc, or the reverse, without resorting to the laborious proportions
  y which the text contemplates that they should in each case be deter
mined. Such a table we have ourselves found highly useful, and even
almost indispensable, in connection with our own calculations.
ii. 27.]                            Additional Notes, «fc.                                              285

                          Table of Hindu Sines, with Differences.
 Arc.        Sine.         Diff.         Arc.       Sine.         Diff.    Arc.      Sine.          Dim

 o    /         /     t     i         0      /            /   t    i      o    /            /   /   /
  o            o                     3o              0.849 60
                                                   1719       I                    2978    I 0.471
  I           60                     3i    1769.93 2 1.698 61                      3006.27 2 0.942
  2          120      I    1 .000    32    1820.87 3
                                                     2.547 62                      3o34.58 3 1.4i3
                                                   4 3.3o6                                          1.884
 3           l8o                     33    1871.80      7
                                                   5 4-244 63                      3062.80 45 2.356
 3 45        225                     33 45 1910            63 45                   3o84
 4           289.93   0.996
                      I              34    1922.20 i o.8i3 64                      3090.20 I o.4i3
 5           299.67
                      1.991
                      2
                                     35    1971    2 1.627 65                      3n5       2 0.827
                    3 2.987                        3 2.440                                   3 1.240
 6           359.4o                  36    2019.80         66                      3139.80
                    4 3.982                        4 3.253                                   4 1.653
 7           4i9-i3 5 4.978          37    2068.60
                                                   S 4.067 67                      3 1 64.60 5 2.067
 7/ k**-'
    3o       ^qy
             44g                     37 3o 2Oo3            67 3o                   3 117T
                                                                                   01 //

 8           478.60 i 0.987          38    21)6.20 i o.773 68                      3i87.53 i o.35i
  9       537.8o 2 1.973             39    2I62.6O
                                                   2 1.547
                                                           69                      3208.60 2 0.702
                  3 2.960                          3 2.32O                                 3 1.o53
10        597                        4o    22O9            70                      3229.67
                  4 3.947                          4 3.093                                 4 1.404
ii        656.20 5 4.933             4i    2255.40 5 3.867 71                      325o-74 5 1.756
JITI 1J
     lri  fi-ir
          071      i 0.973           ./t
                                      'i i ii*;j   22O7                   _. . r
                                                                          71 ID
                                                                                   TiCe
                                                                                   02 jo
12        714.80 2 1.947             43            2299.80
                                                              i   0.7a9                  i 0.289
                                                                          72       3269
                                                              2   1.458                    0.5782
i3        773.20 3 2.920             43            2343.52 3      2.187   73    3286.33 3 0.867
i4        83 1.60 4 3.893            44            2387.27 4      2.916   74    33o3.67 4 1.i56
                  5 4.867                                  5      3.644                  5 1.444
i5        890                        45
                                     LI-*          243 r                  /J
                                                                          75    332i
                   i 0.956                                 i      0.684
16        947-33 2 1.911             46            2472.07 2      1.369   76    3334.60 i 0.227
                                                                                         2 o.453
17       1004.67 3 2.867             47            25i3.14 3      2.o53   77    3348.20 3 0.680
18       1062     4 3.822            48            2554.21 4 2.738        78    3361.8o 4 0.907
                  5 4.778                                  5 3.422                       5 1.i33
18 45 i io5                          /R  /flJ iis';
                                     *JU 4    2 JO J                         XI 3372
                                                                          nR 4J
                                                                          7°
'9          1119  a
                   i o.933
                      1.867
                                     49       2594.53 i           0.636
                                                                  1.271
                                                                          79    3374.47 i 0.164
20       ii75                        5o       2632.67
                                                      2
                                                                          80    3384.33 2 0.329
                  3 2.800                             3           1.907                    0.493
21       123l                        5i       2670.80
                                                                  2.542   81
                  4 3.733                             4                         3394.20 \l 0.658
22       1287     •'. 4.667          52       27O8.93 5           3.178   82    3404.07
                                                                                         5 0.822
22 3O i3i5                           52 3o 2728                           82 3o 3400
23       i342.33 i 0.911
                  •i 1.822
                                     53       2745.47 i           0.582   83       3411.93
                                                                                         i 0.098
24       i397
                  3 2.733
                                     54            278O.4O
                                                           3
                                                              2   i.i64   84       3417.80
                                                                                         2 0.196
                                                                                         3 0.293
25       M5i 67
                  .; 3.644           55            28l5.33
                                                           4
                                                                  1-747
                                                                  2.329   85       3423.67
                                                                                         4 0.391
26       i5o6.33 5 4.556             56            i85o.27 5      2.911   86       3429535 0.489
26 i5 1 520                          56 i5         2859                   86 i5 343 1
27       1559.80 i 0.884             57            2882.80 i      0.529
                                                                          87    3432.4o i o.o3i
                                                           :      1.o58                  2 o 062
28       1612.87 3 1.769             58            2914.53 3              88    3434.27
                  3 2.653                                         1.5S7                  3 0.093
29       1665.94 .1 3.538            59            2946.26 4      2.116   89    3436.13 4 0.124
3o       '7'9     5 4.4"             60            2978    5      2.644   9^    3438     5 o.i 56
                                    37
286                        Stoya-Siddh&nta,                        [ii. 27-
    In explaining how the Hindus may have arrived at their empirical
r.ile, as laid down in verses 15 and 1C, for the development of the series
of sines, we have also, as mentioned in our note, followed the guidance
of Delambre. Prof. Newton, however, is of opinion that the rule in
question was probably obtained by direct geometrical demonstration, in
some such method as the following, which is much more in accordance
with the mathematical processes exhibited or implied in .other parts of
the Surya-Siddhanta.
     In the quadrant AB (Fig. 34), let B F, BD, and BE be three arcs, of
                                       which each exceeds its predecessor
                    **•                by the equal increment D F or D E ;
                                       and let F TO, T> I, and E k be their
                                       sines, increasing by the unequal dif
                                       ferences DA and E#. Now as E D
                                       and D F are small arcs (they are
                                       shown in the figure of three times
                                       the proportional length of the arcs
                                       of difference of the Hindu table),
                                       ED^r and D F A may be regarded as
                                       plane triangles, and the angles made
                                       by C D at D as right angles : hence
                                       the angles EDg and C D / are equal,
                                       the triangles EDg and GDI are
                                       similar, and ED :£#: : C D: C/; or
                                       Eg=ED.C I—CD. In like man
                                       ner, DA=ED.Cwi-i-CD. There
 fore Dh — E«7=ED.Jm-j-CD ; and E^, which is the amount by
 which E/fc exceeds D I, equals D A — (ED.J»n-~CD). But, by simi
 larity of the triangles CD I and DFA, FA, or Im, equals ED.D/-^
 CD; and hence ED.Jm-vCD = (ED2-;-CD2) Dl, or (ED-=-
 0 D)2 D /. Now when E D equals 225' and C D 3438', E D •+ C D =
 -jij nearly (or exactly -j-j^), and (ED-j-CD)2=24T nearly (more
 exactly, y^j.fs). Hence E fe£D I -J- D A — 7fa D /, which is equiva
 lent to the Hindu rule.
     When we wrote the note to the passage of the text relating to the
 sines, we assumed that the rule as there stated would give the series of
 sines, having found upon trial that it held good for the first few terms of
 the series. But, it having been pointed out to us by Prof. Newton that
 the adoption of ^ as the value of E D -7- C D could not but lead to
 palpably erroneous results, we carried our calculations farther, and found
 that only five of the sines following the first one can be deduced from
 it by the processes prescribed j that with the seventh sine begins a dis
 cordance between the table and the result of calculation by the rule,
 which goes on increasing to the end, where it amounts to as much as
 70' in the value obtained for radius.
     This untoward circumstance, which may be regarded as a trait highly
 characteristic of a Hindu astronomical treatise, seems to us rather to
 favor the opinion that the rule is the result of construction and demon
 stration, and not empirically deduced from a consideration of the actual
 second differences. In the latter case we should more naturally suppose
ii. 45.]                  Additional Notes, etc.                       287

that it would have been tested throughout by actual trial ; while, if it
had been arrived at in the manner above explained, an application of it
to the first few members only of the series might more easily have been
accepted as a sufficient test of its correctness.
    16. p. 59, We are not sure that the name bhuja may not origin
ally and properly belong rather to the arc than to its chord or sine. It
comes from a root bhuj, " bend," and signifies primarily " a bend, curve,"
being applied also to designate the arm on account of the latter's sup
pleness or flexibility. The word /coti also most frequently means " the
end or horn of a bow." We might, then, look upon the relations of the
arc (dhanus, capa, k'armuka) and its parts and appurtenances as follows.
The whole arc taken into account is- (Fig. 2, p. 59) QRSr of this, BUG
is the bhuja, curve or bow proper, while B Q and C S are its two kotis
or horns : B C is the chord or bow-string (jy& etc.), or, more distinct
ively, the bhujajya; which name,, by substitution forjy&rdha, is also ap
plied to either of its halves, BH or HC: BF or CL is in like manner
the kntijy&, ; R H, finally, the versed sine, is the " arrow" (pare, ishu) ;
by this name it is often known in other treatises, although not once so
styled in this Siddhanta. If this view be correct, the terms bhuja and
koti as applied to the base and perpendicular of a right-angled triangle,
are given them on account of their relation to one another as sine and
 cosine, while the synonyms of bhuja, namely b&/m, and dos, are employed
on account only of their agreement with it in the signification " arm,"
and not in that which gives it its- true application. For k'oti the treatise
affords no synonyms.
    IT. p. 63. M. Delambre, in his History of Ancient Astronomy (i.
462 etc)., has subjected to a detailed examination the rules-of the Surya-
Siddhanta for th« calculation of the equations of the centre for the sun
and moon, has reduced them to' a single formula, and has calculated for
each degree of a quadrant the values of the equations, comparing them
with those furnished by the Hindu tables, as reported by Davis (As. Res.,
ii. 255-256). M. Bk>t has more recently, in the Journal des Savants
for 1859 (p. 384 etc.), taken up the same subject anew, especially point
ing out, and illustrating by figures and calculations, the error of the
Hindus in assuming the variation of the equation to be the same in all
the four quadrants of mean revolution.
    1§. p. 76. Neither Delambre nor Biot (both as above cited), nor
any other western savant who has treated of the Hindu astronomy, has
found any means of accounting for the variation of dimensions of the
planetary epicycles. In its present form' and extent, indeed, it seems to
defy explanation : we can only conjecture that it may be an unintelli
gent and reasonless extension to all the planets, and to both classes of
epicycles, of a correction originally devised and applied only in one or
two special cases. According to Colebrooke (As. Res., xii. 235 etc. ;
Essays, ii. 400 etc.), there isjiiscordance among the different Hindu au
thorities upon this point. Aryabhatta agrees with the Surya-Siddhanta
throughout ; Brahmagupta and Bhaskara make the epicycles only of
 Venus and Mars variable ; Munl^vara, in the Siddbanta-Sarvabhaurna,
regards all the epicycles as invariable.
288                       Stirya-Siddhdnta,                       [ii. 65-
   19. p. 92. Our suggestion of a possible derivation of the term yoga
from the "sum" of the longitudes of the sun and moon is unquestion
ably erroneous. That term is to be understood here in the sense of
"junction, conjunction," and the conception upon which is founded its
application to the periods in question is that of a conjunction (yoga) of
the moon with the twenty-seven asterisms (nakshalra) in their order, or
her successive continuance in their respective portions. Only the sys
tem is divorced from any actual connection with the asterisms ; for while
the latter are stellar groups, having fixed positions in the heavens, they
are here treated as if the twenty-seven-fold division of the ecliptic found
ed upon them had no natural limits, but was to be reckoned from the
actual position of the sun at any given moment.
   According to Warren (Kala Sankalita, p. 74), the names of the twenty-
seven yogas, as given by us on page 92, are also applied by the Hin
dus to the junction-stars (yogat&ra) of the asterisms (with the omission,
of course, of Abhijit) : for which see the notes to the eighth chapter.
This fact we do not find noticed elsewhere ; possibly the usage is a local
one only.
   Of the twenty-eight yogas of the other system, to which the Surya-
Siddhanta makes no reference, the names are given by Colebrooke as
follows :
      1. Ananda.             10. Mudgara.            19. Siddhi.
      2. Kaladanda.          n. Chattra.             20. Qubha.
      3. Dhdmra.             12. Maitra.             21. Amrta.
      4. Prajapati.          i3. Hanasa.             22. Musala.
      5. Saumya.             i4. Padma.              23. Gada.
      6. Dhvanksha.          i5. Lambaka.            24. Matanga.
      7. Dhvaja.             16. Utpata.             25. Rakshasa.
      8. (Jiivatsa.          '7. Mrtyu.              26. Cara.
      9. Vajra.              18. Kaija.              27. Sthira.
                                                     28. Prayardha.
   Colebrooke says farther : " The foregoing list is extracted from the
Ratnamala of Qripati. He adds the rule by which the yogas are reg
ulated. On a Sunday, the nakshatras answer to the yogas in their
natural order ; viz. Acjvini to Ananda, Bharanl to Kaladanda, etc. But,
on a Monday, the first yoga (Ananda) corresponds to Mrgagiras, the
second to Ardra, and so forth. On a Tuesday, the nakshatra which
answers to the first yoga is Aglesha ; on Wednesday, Hasta ; on Thurs
day, Anuradha ; on Friday, Uttara-Ashadha ; and on Saturday, Cata-
bh'ishaj."
   This is by no means a clear and sufficient explanation of the charac
ter and use of the system, yet we seem to see distinctly from it that this,
no less than the other system, is cut off from any actual connection with
the twenty-eight asterisms, since the succession of the yogas is made to
depend upon the day of the week, while the week stands in no constant
and definable relation to the motion of the moon.
   20. p. 102. In stating that the Surya-Siddhanta furnished no hint of
the precession excepting in this passage, we failed to notice that in one
other place, namely in connection with the rules for finding the time
iv.]                Calculation of a Lunar Eclipse.                    289

when the declinations of the sun and moon are equal (xi. 6), the pre
cession is distinctly ordered to be calculated, and in terms which con
tain an evident reference to those in which the fact of the precession is
here stated. The exception, however, is one which goes to prove, rather
than overthrow, the general rule : the process in which we are for once
favored with explicit directions upon the point in question is the one of
all others in the work the most trivial, and the chapter which contains it
furnishes, as pointed out by us in the notes, good reason to suspect late
alterations and interpolations. We do not, then, regard the statement
 made in our note as requiring to be either retracted or seriously modi
 fied. Nor do we, although fully appreciating the difficulty of assuming
 that the original elaborators of the general Hindu system can have been
 ignorant of, or ignored, the precession, regret the force and distinctness
 with which we have stated the circumstances which appear to favor that
 assumption. Whether it be true or false, there is much in connection
 with the subject which is strange, and demands explanation : and that
 can only be satisfactorily given when there shall have been attained a
 more thorough comprehension of the early history and the varying forms
 of the science in India.
    21. p. 114. The commentary frequently styles the sine of altitude
mah&fanku, " great gnomon," to distinguish it from the fanku, " gno
 mon."
    22. p. 131. Our statement that the Surya-Siddhanta employs only
 the term graha to designate the planets requires a slight modification.
 In one instance (ii. 69) they are called khac&rin, and in one other (ix. 9)
khacara, both words signifying "moving in the ether" (see xii. 23, 81).
    23. p. 138. This use of the word pract, " east, east point," appears
 to be taken from the projections of eclipses, as directed to be drawn in
the sixth chapter. Thus, in the figure there given (Fig. 27, p. 157),
 E M and v M represent the directions of the equator and ecliptic with
 reference to one another at the moment of first contact, and E and v
 are the east-points (praci) of those lines respectively: the arc Ev, or
 the " interval of the two east-points," is the measure of the angle which
 the two lines make with one another at the given time.
    24. p. 141. As promised above, we present here, by way of appen
 dix to the fourth chapter of our translation and notes, a
CALCULATION, ACCORDING TO THE DATA AND METHODS OF THE SuRYA-
       SlDDHANTA, OF THE LuNAR ECLIPSE OF FEBRUARY 6TH, 1860,
             FOB THE LATITUDE AND LONGITUDE OF WASHINGTON.
   Bailly, in his work on the Hindu astronomy (p. 355 etc.), presents
several calculations of eclipses by Hindu methods, namely of the lunar
eclipse of July 29th, 1730, of the lunar eclipse of June 17th, 1704, and
of the solar eclipse of Nov. 29th, 1704. But, owing to his imperfect
comprehension of the character and meaning of many of the processes,
and owing to his incessant use of Hindu terms in the most barbarous
transcriptions, without explanations, his intended illustrations are only
with difficulty intelligible, and are exceedingly irksome to study. Davis,




                                                                               •
290                           Surya-Siddhdnta,                                     [iv.

in his first valuable article in the Asiatic Researches (ii. 273 etc.), has
also furnished a calculation of a lunar eclipse, as made by native astron
omers, comparing their results, obtained by several different methods,'
with the actual elements of the eclipse, as given by the Nautical Alma
nac. As it seemed desirable to give a like practical illustration of the
Hindu methods of calculation, in connection with this fuller exposition
of their foundation and meaning, and by way of an additional test of the
accuracy of the results which the system is in condition to furnish, we
have selected for the purpose the partial eclipse of the moon which oc
curred on the evening of Feb. 6th, 1860. Our calculations are made
according to the elements of our text alone, without adding, like Davis,
the correction of the bija, since our object is to illustrate the text itself,
and not the modern system as altered from it. The course of the suc
cessive steps of our processes may not everywhere strictly accord with
that which would be pursued by a native astronomer, as we take the
rules of the text and apply them according to our own conception of
their connection.
   We omit the preliminary tentative processes, and conceive ourselves
to have ascertained that, at the time of full moon in the month Magha,
I. A. 4961 (see page 30), or samvat 1917 (see add. note 12), the moon
will be eclipsed.
   I. To find the sum of days (ahargana, dinar&ft) for mean midnight
next preceding full moon.
   The sixth day of February, 1860, being the day of full moon (purni-
m&), is the fifteenth day of the first, or light, half of the lunar month
Magha, the eleventh month of the year, as is shown by the table on
page 30. The time, then, for which we are to find the sum of days, is
4960? 10m 14d, reckoning (i. 56) only from the commencement of the
Iron Age. For this period the sum of days, as found by the processes
already sufficiently illustrated in the notes to i. 48-51, is 1,811,981 days.
   II. To find the mean longitude of the sun and moon, and of the
moon's apsis.
   The proportions (i. 53)
                                     r 4,3 20,000 :496orev 95 23° 17' i"
         1,577,917,828: 1,811,981 : J 57,753,336 :66,32orev 3« 9° 44' 19"
                                     ( 488,203: 56i'« i« i3° 43' i"
give us—rejecting whole revolutions, and deducting 3« from the motion
of the moon's apsis, for its position at the epoch (see note to i. 56-58)—
the mean longitudes required. These are for the time of mean midnight
at Ujjayinl : to find them for mean midnight at Washington, which is
distant from Ujjayini 16717.28, upon a parallel of latitude 3936J.75 in
circumference (note to i. 63-65), we add to the position of each if££;f•§
or .42453 of its mean motion during a sidereal day. This correction is
styled the def&ntaraphala. We have, then,
                        Long. atUjjny.         Correction.      Long, at Wash'n.
  Sun,                  99 a3° 17' i " +   25' 2" = 9. 23° 42' 3"
  Moon,                 3« 9° 44' 19' + 5° 34' 43" = 3^ i5° 19' 2"
  Moon's apsis,        ios i3° 43' i" +      2' 5o" = io»i3°45'5i"
iv.]                 Calculation of a Lunar Eclipse.                        291

  The place of the sun's apsis remains as already found for Jan. 1st
(note to ii. 39) :
        Longitude of sun's apsis,                          as 17° 17' 24"
   In applying here the correction for difference of meridian, as well as
in all other processes of the whole 'calculation into which the amounts
of motion of the planets etc. during fractions of a day enter as elements,
we have derived those amounts from the motions during a sidereal day,
and not, as in the illustrative processes of our notes, during a mean so
lar day. The divisions of the day given in the text (i. 11-12) are dis
tinctly stated to be those of sidereal time, and all the rules of the treat
ise are constructed accordingly (see, for instance, ii. 59). It is evident,
then, that in making any proportion in which is involved the amount of
motion during 60 nadis, that amount is to be regarded as the motion
during a sidereal day only. In overlooking in our notes the difference
between the two, we have followed the example of all the illustrations of
Hindu methods of calculation known to us. The difference is, indeed,
in a Hindu process, of very small account ; but we have preferred, in
making this calculation, to follow what we conceive to be the exacter
method. The mean motions during a sidereal day of the bodies con
cerned in a lunar eclipse are as follows :
           Sun,                                58' 58" 28'" 55""
           Moon,                                  i3° 8' 25" 21'" 21""
           Moon's apsis,                              6' 39" 53'" i""
           Moon's node,                               3' 10" i3'" 28""
   III. To find the true longitudes and motions of the sun and moon :
   1. To find the sun's true longitude (note to ii. 39) :
       Longitude of sun's apsis,                              2" 17° 17' 24"
         deduct sun's mean longitude (ii. 29),                9* 23° 42' 3"
       Sun's mean anomaly (kendra),                           4* 23° 35' 21"
       Arc determining the sine (bhnja—ii. 30),                  36° 25'
       Sine of sun's mean anomaly 'blmjnjyd),                      ao4o'
       Corrected epicycle (ii. 38),                              i3° 48'
       Equation (bhujajydphala—n. 89),                        + i° 18'
         add to sun's mean longitude,                         9« 23° 4a'
       Sun's true longitude,                                  9s 25° o'

   2. To find the moon's true longitude (note to ii. 39) :
       Longitude of moon's apsis,                             ios i3° 45' 5i"
         deduct moon's mean longitude,                         3i i5° 19' 2"
       Moon's mean anomaly,                                    6» 28° 26' 49"
       Arc determining the sine,                                  28° 27'
       Sine of moon's mean anomaly,                                 1637'
       Corrected epicycle,                                        3i° 5o'
       Equation,                                               - 2° »5'
         deduct from moon's mean longitude,                    3' 15° 19'
       Moon's true longitude,                                  3« is0 54'
292                             Stirya-Siddhdnta,                                fiv.
    3. To find the sun's true rate of motion (ii. 48-49) :
       Sun's mean motion in 60 nadis,                                 58' 58"
       Sine of sun's mean anomaly,                                  ao4o'
       Difference of sines,                                          i83'
       Daily increase of sine of anomaly,                             4?' 58"
       Equation of motion,                                        +    i' 5o"
          add to sun's mean motion,                                   58' 58"
       Sun's true motion,                                              60' 48"
    4. To find the moon's true rate of motion (ii. 47—49) :
       Moon's mean motion in 60 nadis,                                788' 25"
         deduct motion of apsis (ii. 47),                               6' 4o"
       Daily increase of moon's mean anomaly,                         781' 45"
       Sine of moon's mean anomaly,                                  i637'
       Difference of sines,                                           199'
       Daily increase of sine of anomaly,                             691' a5"
       Equation of motion,                                        -|- 61' 8"
         add to moon's mean motion,                                   788' 25"
       Moon's true motion,                                            849' 33"
   IV. To find the interval between the given instant of midnight and
the end of the half-month, or the moment of opposition in longitude of
the sun and moon, which is the middle of the eclipse.
   At the instant of mean midnight preceding full moon, we have found
the true longitudes of the sun and moon, and their distance in longitude,
to be as follows :
       Sun's true longitude,                                    9« a5° o'
       Moon's       do.,                                        3« 12° 54'
       Distance in longitude,                                   6' 12° 6'
Hence wo see that the moon has still 12° 6' to gain upon the sun. We
have also found their true rates of motion, and the difference of those
rates, to be as follows :
       Moon's true motion,                                           849' 33"
       Sun's      do.,                                                60' 48"
       Moon's daily gain,                                            788' 45"
   Now we make the proportion : if the moon in 60 nadis gains upon
the sun 788' 45", in how many nadis will she gain her present distance
in longitude from the sun ? or
                         788' 45" : 6on : : 726' : 55n i3* 3p
   It thus appears that the time of opposition is 55n 13» 3P after mean
midnight of Feb. 5-6. This result, however, requires correction, for
the moon's motion has become sensibly accelerated during so long an
interval, and we find, upon calculation, that she is then 2' past the point
of opposition. A repetition of the same process shows that it is neces
sary to deduct 10V 3P from the time stated. Then, at 55n 3V after mean
midnight, we have as follows :



^
iv.]                    Calculation of a Lunar Eclipse.                      293
       Sun's mean longitude,                                    9« 24° 36'
       Equation of place,                                   +       i° 20"
       Sun's true longitude,                                  9» 25° 56'
       Moon's mean longitude,                                 3« 27° 22'
       Longitude of apsis,                                   io« i3° 52'
       Equation of moon's place,                            —     i° 26'
       Moon's true longitude,                                   3, 25° 56'
   By the same process as before, the true motions of the two planets
at the moment of opposition are found to be :
       Sun's true motion,                                         60' 48"
       Moon's do.                                                854' 36"
   It would have been better to adopt, as the starting-point of our cal
culations, the mean midnight following, instead of that preceding, the
opposition of the sun and moon, because in that case, the interval to
the moment of opposition being so much less, it might have been found
by a single process, not requiring farther correction. The same change
would have enabled us to follow strictly the rule given in ii. 66 for find
ing the end of the lunar day ; which rule we were obliged above to ap
ply in a somewhat modified form, because a little more than one whole
lunar day was found to intervene between the given midnight and the
moment of opposition.
   V. To determine the instant of local time corresponding to the mid
dle of the eclipse.
   What we have thus far found is the interval between mean midnight
and the moment of opposition. But since Hindu time is practically
reckoned from true sunrise to true sunrise, we have now, in order to de
termine at what time the eclipse will take place, to ascertain the inter
val between mean midnight and true sunrise.
   In order to this, we require first to know the equation of time, or the
difference between mean midnight and true or apparent midnight, which
is the moment when the sun actually crosses the inferior meridian. As
concerns this correction, we have deviated somewhat from the method
contemplated by the text. It is there prescribed (ii. 46) that, so soon
as the sun's equation of the centre has been determined, there should
at once be calculated from it, and applied to the longitude of the two
planets, a correction representing, in terms of their motion, the equation
of time ; so that the distance of the moment of opposition from mean
midnight does not directly enter into account at all. We have preferred
to follow the course we have taken, in order to bring out and illustrate
more fully the utter inadequacy of the prescribed method of making al
lowance for the equation of time, to which we have already briefly re
ferred in the note to ii. 46. The method in question is virtually as fol
lows : the sun being found at the given midnight to be 1° 18', or 78',
in advance of his mean place, the equation of time may be ascertained
by this proportion : as a whole circle is to a sidereal day, so is the sun's
equation of place to the time by which his true transit will precede or
follow his mean transit ; or, in the present case,
                           2i,6oo':6on::78':ou i3v
294                           S&rya-Siddhdnta,                               [ir.
 which gives us 13 vinadis, or 5-J- minutes, as the value of the equation.
But this is assuming that the sun's motion takes place along the equator,
 instead of along the ecliptic, which is so grossly and palpably erroneous
that we wonder how the Hindus could have tolerated a process which
 implied it. Their own methods furnish the means of making a vastly
 more correct determination of the equation in question. The mean lon
gitude of the sun at the given midnight is—after adding to it the amount
 of the precession, as determined farther on—10s 14° 7': hence, if the
sun were 10« 14° 7' distant upon the equator from the vernal equinox,
or if he had that amount of right ascension, mean and true midnight
would coincide. But he is actually at 10s 15° 25' of longitude. If,
then, we ascertain what point on the equator will pass the meridian at
the same time with that point of the ecliptic, its distance from the sun's
mean place in right ascension will be the equation of time required.
This may be accomplished as follows. The sun is in the eleventh sign,
of which the equivalent in right ascension (iii. 42-45) is 1795P : his
distance from its commencement is 15° 25', or 925'. Hence the pro
portion (ii. 46)
                           1800' : 1795p : : 925' : 922?
gives us 922P as the ascensional equivalent of the part of the eleventh
sign traversed by the sun (bhukt&savas). Now add together the
  Ascensional equivalents of three quadrants,                           i6,2oop
             do.          of the tenth sign,                             i,935p
             do.          of the part of the eleventh sign traversed,     922?
         their sum is                                                     i9,o57P
which is equal to 10s 17° 37' ; this, then, is the sun's true right ascen
sion. The difference between it and his mean right ascension, 10s 14° 7',
is 3° 30', of which the equivalent in sidereal time is 210P or 35V, or 14
minutes. This, which is more than two and a half times as much as
the value formerly found for the equation, is quite nearly correct ; its
actual amount for Feb. 6th being given by the Nautical Almanac as
14m 20s.
   There is not, among all the processes taught in the Surya-Siddhanta,
another one of so inexcusably bungling a character as this, while the
means lay so ready at hand for making it tolerably exact.
   In going on to calculate the local time of the eclipse, we shall adopt
the valuation of the equation of time given by the Hindu method, or
13V, but we shall reserve the distance of the phases of the eclipse from
midnight, free from this constant error of about 10m, for final compari
son with the like data given by our modern tables.
   To find the local time, we must first ascertain (ii. 59) the length of
the sun's day, from midnight to midnight, and in order to this we need
to know in what sign the sun is. Hence we require
   1. To determine the amount of precession for the given date.
   By iii. 9-12, the proportion
              I,577,9i7,828<1 : 6oo«V : : 1,811,9814 : o«» 8« 8° 2' i4".6
gives us 248° 2' 14".6 as the part of a revolution accomplished by the
iv.]                 Calculation of a Lunar Eclipse.                             295
movable point. Of this, the part determining the sine is 68° 2' 14".6.
Then the farther proportion
                       10 : 3 : : 68° 2' i4".6 : 20° 24' 44"
gives us 20° 24' 44" as the amount of the precession.                Now, then, to
the •
           Sun's true longitude,                                9s 25° 56'
             add the precession,                                   20° 25'
           Sun's distance from vernal equinox,                 io« 16° 21'
This quantity is often called s&yana v&rya ; that is to say, " the sun's
longitude with the precession (ayana) added."
  The sun is accordingly in the eleventh sign, of which the ascensional
equivalent is 1795?. His daily motion has been found to be 60' 48".
Hence the proportion (ii. 59)
                         1800' : 1795? : : 60' 48" : 6op.64
gives us 61P, or 10V IP, as the excess of the sun's day over a true side
real day of 60 nadis : its length is accordingly 60n 10V IP, or 21,661P.
   Next we desire to know how much of this day passed between mid
night and sunrise, and for this purpose we have
   2. To find the sun's ascensional difference (cara).
   a. To ascertain the sun's declination, and its sine and versed sine.
  The sun's longitude, with precession added (sdyana t&rya\             io« 16° 21'
  Arc determining the sine (bhuja),                                         43° 39'
  Sine,                                                                       2372'
   Now, then, the proportion (ii. 28)
                           3438' : 1397' : : 237a' : 964'
gives us 964' as the sine of declination (Jcr&ntijy&) ; the corresponding
arc (ii. 33) is 16° 17' S ; its versed sine (ii. 31-32) is 139'.
   b. To find the radius of the sun's diurnal circle (ii. 60).
        From radius,                                                  3438'
          deduct versed sine of declination,                           139'
        Radius of diurnal circle (dinavydsadala, dyujyd),             3299'
    c. To find the earth-sine (ii. 61).
    The measure of the equinoctial shadow at Washington is (see note to
ii. 61-63) 9d.68. The proportion, then,

shows the value of the earth-sine (Jcshit>jy&, kujy&) to be 778'.
  d. To find the sun's ascensional difference (ii. 61-62).
  The proportion                                           .
                          3299' : 3438' ::778':8n'
gives the sine of ascensional difference (carajy&), which is 811'. The
corresponding arc, or the sun's ascensional difference (cara, caradala), is
13° 39', or 819P.
296                              S&ryct-Siddhdnta,                             [iv.
  3. To find the time from midnight to sunrise.
  The sun's declination being south, the ascensional difference is to be
added (ii. 62-63) to the quarter of the sun's complete day, to give the
length of the half-night. That is to say,
      Quarter of sun's complete day (2i,66ip---4),                  5,4i5p
      Sun's ascensional difference,                                   8 1 gp
      Sun's half-night,                                             6,234?
   The interval between true midnight and true sunrise is therefore
6,234p, or l7n 19V. That from sunrise till noon (a quantity required in
later processes) is found in like manner by subtracting the ascensional
difference from the quarter-day: it is 4596P.
   Now then, finally,
      Time of opposition, reckoned from mean midnight,              55n 3»
                     deduct equation of time,                          i3v
             do.          reckoned from true midnight,             54" 5o»
                      deduct interval till sunrise,                170 iyr
             do.            reckoned from sunrise,                 3?" 3i»
   The time at which the opposition of the sun and moon in longitude
takes place, or the middle of the eclipse, is accordingly, by civil reckon
ing at Washington, 37n 31'.
   VI. To determine the diameters of the sun, moon, and shadow.
   1. To find the sun's apparent diameter.
  The sun's mean motion in a sidereal day being 58' 58", his true mo
tion at the time of the eclipse being 60' 48", and his mean diameter
6500 yojanas, we find, by the proportion (iv. 2)
                          58' 58" : 60' 48" : : 65ooy : 67027.81
that the sun covers of his mean orbit, at the time of the eclipse, 6702.81
yojanas. This is reduced to its value upon the moon's mean orbit by
the proportion (iv. 2)
                   57,753,336 : 4,32o,ooo : : 67027.81 : 5oiy.37
And upon dividing the result, 501.37 yojanas, by 15 (iv. 3), we find the
sun's apparent diameter to be 33' 25".
   2. To find the moon's apparent diameter.
   In like manner as before, the proportion (iv. 2)
                       788' 25" : 854' 36 : : 48oy : 520y.3
shows us that the moon's corrected diameter is 520.3 yojanas. This also,
divided by 1 5 (iv. 3), gives the value of the moon's apparent diameter in
arc: it is 34' 41".
   3. To find the diameter of the earth's shadow.
   The following proportion (iv. 4),
                     788' 25" : 854' 36" : : 16007 : 1734y.3
determines the value of the earth's corrected diameter (*<Jrf) to be 1734.3
yojanas.
iv.]                    Calculation of a Lunar Eclipse.                            297

   Again, from the
           Sun's corrected diameter,                               67027.81
             deduct the earth's diameter (iy. 4),                  1600
             remains                                               5ioay.8i
and this remainder, when reduced by the following proportion (iv. 5),
                       65ooy : 48oy : : 5ioay.8i :
gives us the excess of the earth's corrected diameter (s&d) over the di
ameter of the shadow on the moon's mean orbit. Hence, from the
           Earth's corrected diameter,                               i?34y.3
             deduct last result,                                      376y.8
           Diameter of shadow,                                       i357y.5
             divide by                                                  i5
           Diameter of shadow in arc,                               90' 3o"
  VII. To determine the moon's latitude at the middle of the eclipse,
and the amount of greatest obscuration.
  The proportion (i. 53)
               1,577,917,828 : 232,238 : : 1,811,981 : 266«v8« 7° 28' a5"
gives us the amount of retrograde motion -of the moon's node since the
commencement of the Iron Age. Deducting from this 6s, for the posi
tion of the node at that time (note to i. 56-58), and taking the comple
ment to a whole circle, we have
       Longitude of moon's node, mean midnight, at Ujj.,          9s 22° 3i' 35"
         deduct for difference of meridian,                               i' 21"
       Longitude of moon's node, mean midnight, at "Wash'n,       9« 22° 3o' 14"
         deduct motion during 55" 3v,                                     2' 55"
       Longitude of moon's node at moment of opposition,          9» 22° 27' 19"
         subtract from moon's longitude (ii. 57),                 3« 25° 56'
       Moon's distance from node,                                 6s 3° 29'
       Arc determining the sine (bhuja),                              3° 29'
       Sine,                                                            209'
Hence the proportion
                              3438' : 270' : : 209' : 16' a5"
gives us, as the moon's latitude at the moment of opposition, 16' 25" S.
   Now, then, by iv. 10-11,
       Semi-diameter of eclipsed body (34' 41"-H 2),                        17' 22"
           do.       of eclipsing body (90' 80"-r 2),                       45' 1 5"
         their sum,                                                         62' 37"
         deduct moon's latitude,                                            1 6' 25"
       Amount of greatest obscuration (grdsa),                              46' 12"
and since this amount is greater than the diameter of the eclipsed body,
it is evident that the eclipse is a total one.
298                             S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                    [iv.
   This is a most unfortunate result for the Hindu calculation to yield ;
for, in point of fact, the eclipse in question is only a partial one, obscur
ing about four-fifths of the diameter of the moon's disk. The source of
the error lies mainly in the misplacement, relatively to the sun and moon,
of the moon's node, and the consequent false value found for the moon's
latitude. The latter quantity actually amounts, at the time of opposi
tion, to 35' 42", or more than twice the value given it by the Hindu
processes. And it will be seen, on referring to the table on p. 44, that
the relative error in the place of the moon's node, having been accumu
lating for seven centuries, is now about 3|-°, and so reduces, by more
than half, the true distance of the moon from her node. We have tried
whether the admission of the correction of the bija would better the re
sult, but that is not the case : the error of position is still (see the table)
nearly 2°, and the moon's latitude is increased only to 24' 11", so that
the eclipse still appears to be total. It is evidently high time that a new
correction of bija be applied by the Hindu astronomers to their elements,
at least to such as enter into the calculation of eclipses.
   VIII. To find the duration of the eclipse, and of total obscuration,
and the times of contact, immersion, emergence, and separation.
  Diameter of the eclipsing body, the shadow,                 90' 3o"       90' 3o"
        do.       eclipsed body, the moon,                    34' 4i"       34' 4i"
  Sum and difference,                                         125' 11"      55' 49"
  Half-sum and half-difference (C M and C K, Fig. 21, p. 133), 62' 35"      27' 55"
  Squares of do,                                               3919'        724'
    deduct square of latitude,                                  269'        269'
    remain,                                                    365o'        455'
  Square roots of remainders (C A and C B),                  60' 25"        21/19"
  In order to reduce these quantities to time, we need first to ascertain
the difference of the true daily motions of the sun and moon at the
given moment :
    Moon's true daily motion,                                            854' 36"
    Sun's        do..                                                     60' 48"
    Moon's gain in a day,                                                793' 48"
  Hence the proportions (iv. 13)
                793' 48"- 600 •• \w 25": 4° 34v
                '> '          •' ( 21' 19": i" 36* 4P
give us the half-duration of the eclipse as 4n 34V, and the half-time of
total obscuration as ln 367 4?,- supposing the moon's latitude to remain
constant through the whole continuance of the eclipse. We now pro
ceed to correct these results for the moon's motion in latitude. And
first, as regards the half-duration. We calculate the amount of motion
of the moon and of her node during the mean half-duration by the fol
lowing proportions (iv. 14) :
                      6on : 854' 36" : : 4" 34' : i° 5' 2"
                      60": 3' io"::4n34v:              i4"
ir.]                      Calculation of a Lunar Eclipse,                             299
Farther,
    To and from moon's long, at opposition,       3» 25° 56'     3» 25° 56'
    add and subtract motion during half-duration,     i° 5'          i° 5'
  Moon's long, at end and beginning of eclipse, 3s 27° i'        3s 24° 5i'
    From and to long, of node at opposition,      93 22° 27' 21" 9» 22° 27' 21"
    subtract and add motion during half-duration,            i4"            i4"
  Long, of node at end and beginning of eclipse, 9* 22° 27'        9« 22° 28'
  Moon's distance from node,                      6s 4° 34'        6s 2° 23'
  Arc determining sine,                              4° 34'            2° a3'
  Sine,                                                274'              i43'
  Moon's latitude at end and beginning of eclipse,       ai' 3i" S.        n' i4" S.
  From these valuations of the latitude we now proceed to calculate
anew, in the same manner as before, the half-durations, as follows :
       Square of half-sum of diameters,                     3919"         3919'
         deduct squares of latitudte,                        463'          126'
         remain,                                            3456'         3793'
       Square roots of remainders,                             58' 4?"      61' 35"
   And the proportions
                                              > 47" : 4" 26v 3P

give us the' corrected values of the intervals between opposition and con
tact and separation respectively, or the former and latter half-durations,
as 4n 39V 2P and 4n 26V 3P.
   The text contemplates the repetition of this corrective process, if still
greater accuracy be required in the results attained : we have not thought
it worth while to carry the calculation any farther, as a second correc
tion would be of altogether insignificant amount.
   By a like process, the former and latter half-times of total obscura
tion, and the moon's latitude at immersion and emergence, are found to
be as follows :
       Moon's latitude at immersion and emergence,       i4' 36"         18' i3"
       Half-times of total obscuration,                   I" 4^v 3p       IB 29? 4p
   By adding the two halves we obtain
           Duration of the eclipse (sthiti),                          9n 5" 5p
              do. of total obscuration (vimarda),                     3n I2v IP
   And by subtracting and adding the half-times of duration and of
total obscuration from and to the time of opposition (iv. 16-17), we
obtain the following scheme for the successive phases of the eclipse :
             ph
             r s •                                    Time of occurrence
                                          after mean midnight,      after: sunrise.
         First contact,                       5o" 23v 4P              32n 5iv 4p
         Immersion,                           53» 2ov 3p              35n 48* 3p
         Middle of eclipse,                   55« 3» op               3jn 3i* OP
         Emergence,                           56n 32v 4p              3jn o" 4p
         Last contact,                        5y> 29* 3p              4m 57* 3p
300                        .       S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                [iv.
   The proper calculation of the eclipse is now completed. If, however,
we desire to project it, we have still to determine the valana, or deflec
tion of the ecliptic from an east and west line, for its different phases,
as also the scale of projection. We will therefore proceed to calculate
them, deferring to the end of the whole process any comparison of the
results we have obtained with those given by modern astronomical
science.
   IX. To calculate the deflection of the ecliptic from an east and west
line (valana) for the middle, beginning, and end of the eclipse.
   1. For the middle of the eclipse.
   a. To find the length of the moon's day and night respectively at the
given time.
      Moon's longitude at opposition,                                 3» 25° 56'
      Precession,                                                        20° a5'
      Moon's distance from vernal equinox,
      Arc determining sine,
      Sine,
   The moon's declination is then found by the following proportion
(ii. 28) :
                       3438' : i3y;' : : *$7*' : 964' = sin i6» 17'
Now, from
      Moon's declination,                                             16° 17' N.
        deduct her latitude (ii 58),                                      16' S.
      Moon's true declination,                                        16° i' N.
      Sine of do,                                                        948'
      Versed sine of do.,                                                i35'
        deduct from radius (ii. 60),                                    3438'
      Moon's day-radius,                                                33o3'
Again, to find the earth-sine, we say (ii. 61),
                    I2d : 9<1.68 : : 948' : 765' = earth-sine,
and to find the ascensional difference (ii. 61-62),
               33o3' : 3438' : : 765' : 796'=™ i3° 24' or 8o4'.
The excess of the moon's complete revolution over a sidereal day is found
by the proportion (ii. 59)
                               t8oo' : 1795? : : 849' 33" : 848P
Adding this to a sidereal day, or 21,600?, we find that the moon's day
is of 22,448?, of which one quarter is 5612P. Increase and diminish
this by the moon's ascensional difference (ii. 62), and the half-day and
half-night are found to be 6416P and 4808p respectively.
   All this laborious process of ascertaining the length of the moon's
half-day, or the time which, with the given declination, she would oc
cupy in rising from the horizon to the meridian, is rendered necessary
by the correction which the commentary applies to the rule of the text
in which the moon's hour-angle is involved, as pointed out in the note
to iv. 24-25 (p. 140, above). We now proceed
iv.]                    Calculation of a Lunar Eclipse.                              301
  b. To find the hour-angle, and the corrected hour-angle.
  At the moment of opposition, the moon's hour-angle is evidently the
same with that of the sun. Hence it may be found as follows :
       Time of opposition reckoned from sunrise, 37" 3 1", or             i3,5o6p
         deduct the whole day,                                             9,192?
         remains                                                           4,3 i4?
         deduct from the half-night,                                       6,a35P
       Sun's distance in time from inferior meridian,                      1,921?
   The moon's distance eastward from the upper meridian is accordingly
192 IP. This is corrected, or reduced to its proportional value as a part
of the moon's arc of revolution from the horizon to the meridian, by the
following proportion :
                              64i6p : 90° : : 1921? : 26° 5j'
The moon's corrected hour-angle, then, is 26° 57' : its sine is 1557'.
  c. To determine the amount of deflection for latitude (valan&nf&s, or
aksha valana—iv. 24).
   The sine of the latitude of Washington, 38° 54', is 2158'. Hence
the proportion
                        3438' : i55?' : : 2i58' : 977'=sin 16° 3t'
gives us 16° 31' as the value of the quantity sought. The moon being
in the eastern hemisphere, it is to be reckoned as north in direction.
   d. To determine the amount of deflection for ecliptic-deviation (&yana
valana—iv. 25).
       Moon's distance from vernal equinox,                            4s 16° ai'
         add a. quadrant,                                              3»
         their sum,                                                    7« 16° 21'
         arc determining sine,                                            46° ai'
         sine,                                                              2486'
Hence, by ii. 28, the proportion
                       3438' : 1397' : : 2486' : ioio'=sin 17° 6'
gives us 17° 6' as the amount of declination of the point of the ecliptic
which is a quadrant in advance of 'the moon, and this is the deflection
required. Its direction is south. We are now ready for the final process.
   e. To ascertain the net amount of deflection (valana), in digits.
           From the ecliptic-deflection,                             17° 6' S.
           deduct the deflection for latitude,                       16° 3i'JST.
            remains the net deflection, in are,                          35' S.
            divide (iv. 25) by                                            70
         Deflection in digits,                                         oj.5o S.
   It thus appears that, at the moment of opposition, the part of the
ecliptic in which the moon is situated very nearly coincides in direction
with an east and west circle. The amount of deflection is so small that
                    39
802                             S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                   [iv.
in our projection, given in connection with the sixth chapter, -we were
obliged to exaggerate it somewhat, in order to make it perceptible.
   2. For the beginning of the eclipse.
   As, owing to the moon's motion in latitude and longitude, her decli
nation, and so also her ascensional difference, are not precisely the same
at the beginning and end of the eclipse as at the moment of opposition,
we ought in strictness to repeat the first part of the preceding calcula
tion, determining anew the length of the moon's half-day, as it would
be if she made her whole revolution about the earth with those declina
tions respectively. This we take the liberty of omitting to do, as the
modification thus introduced into the process would be of very small im
portance.
   a. To find the moon's corrected hour-angle.
And first, for the sun's hour-angle :
      Time of first contact, reckoned from sunrise, 3m 5iv 4p, or      ii,83o?
        deduct the whole day,                                           9, 192?
        remain                                                          2,638P
        deduct from the half-night,                                     6.235P
      Sun's distance in time from inferior meridian,                    3,597?
   This, then, is the hour-angle of the centre of the shadow at the time
of contact. The distance of the centre of the moon in longitude from
that of the shadow was found above (under VIII) to be 61' 35". This
is reduced to its value in right ascension by the proportion
                        1800' : I795P : ; 61' 35" : 6iP.4
Now, then,
     from the hour-angle of the shadow,                                 3,597?
     deduct the difference of the moon's right ascension,                  6iP
      Moon's hour-angle at beginning of eclipse,                        3,536p
This is virtually an application of the process taught in iii. 50.
  The moon's hour-angle is now corrected, as before, by the proportion
                             64i6p : 90° : : 3536p : 49° 36'
The sine of 49° 36' is 2617'.
  b. To find the deflection for latitude.
  The proportion
                  3438' : ai58' : : 2617' : i643'= sin 28° 34'
gives us the deflection for latitude as 28° 34', which is north, as before.
  c. To find the ecliptic-deflection.
      Moon's distance from vernal equinox at opposition,            41 16° 21'
                deduct motion during 4n 39* 2P,                          i° 6'
           do.       at time of contact,                            4« i5° i5'
                 add a quadrant,                                    3'
                 sum,                                               7« 1 5° 1 5'
                 arc determining sine,                                 45° 1 5'
                 sine,                                                    2441'
iv.]                    Calculation of a Lunar Eclipse.                              308
   Next, the proportion
                       3438' : 1397' : : a44i' : 992' = sin 16° 47'
shows us that the ecliptic-deflection is 16° 47' ; it is, as in the former
case, south.
   d. To find the deflection, in digits.
         From the deflection for latitude,                            a8° 34' N.
         deduct the ecliptic-deflection,                              16° 4?' S.
         remains the net deflection, in arc,                          11° 47' W.           ,
         its sine is                                                     702'
         divide by                                                        70
       Deflection, in digits,                                          icd.o3 N.
   3. For the end of the eclipse.
   Of this process, which is throughout closely analogous to the last, WQ
shall present only a brief statement of the results.
       Hour-angle of the centre of the shadow,                               322PE.
       Distance of the centre of the moon in right ascension,                 59? E.
       Moon's hour angle,                                                    38 1 p E.
            do.            corrected,                                      5° 20'
       Sine,                                                                 320'
       Deflection for latitude,                                           3° 21' N.
       Moon's distance from vernal equinox + 3',                      7« 17° 24'
       Arc determining sine,                                             4?" 24'
       Sine,                                                                a53o'
       Ecliptic-deflection,                                               17° 24' S.
       Net deflection, in arc,                                            i4° 3' S.
            do.         in digits,                                         nd.93 S.
   The mode of application of these quantities in making a projection
of an eclipse is sufficiently explained in the notes to the sixth chapter,
and illustrated by the figure there given, -which is adapted to the condi
tions of the eclipse here calculated. All the quantities entering into the
projection, however, of which the value has been stated in minutes, re
quire also to be reduced to digits, according to a scale determined by the
following process.
   X. To determine the scale of projection of the disks and latitudes
(iv. 26).
   This process we will perform only for the moment of opposition, or
for the middle of the eclipse. At this time, as has been seen above, we
have
            Moon's half-day,                                             64i6p
              do. hour-angle (nata),                                     1921?
              do. altitude in time (unnatd),
              add 64i6P X 3                                            !9,s48P
              the sum is                                                23.743P
              divide by                                                  6,4 i6p
              the quotient ii                                                3.7
804                           Sfirya-SiddMnta,                                  [ir.
   At the elevation, then, which the moon has when in opposition, 3'.7
make a digit, and by this amount the values of the disk of the moon,
the shadow, and the latitudes, are to be divided, in order to reduce them
to a scale upon which they may be plotted. It is evident that, in strict
ness, the same calculation requires to be made also for the time of con
tact and the time of separation, or the time of any other phase of which
the projection is to serve as an illustration : but it is evident also that
this is wellnigh impracticable, since one projection could then be used
to illustrate only a single phase, unless several different scales should
be employed in the same figure.
   It now only remains for us to present a comparison of the elements
of the eclipse, as thus calculated, with their true values as determined
by modern astronomical science. This is done in the annexed table.
The true elements we take from the American Nautical Almanac for
1860. In comparing the time of the middle of the eclipse, we take, as
already mentioned, the value of it given by the Hindu process as calcu
lated from mean midnight.
                             Surya-SiddhSnta. Am. Naut. Almanac. Hindu error.
Time of opposition in long., 9!" 57m 35s p. M. 9'" a7m io»8p. M. + 3om 24«
Moon's long, at opposition,     i36° 21'           i3j° 35' 53".7    - i° i5'
       lat. at       "                16' 25" S.        35' 42".! S. -       19' 17'
  "    hourly motion in long,        35' 3j"            38' o".6 -            2' 24
Semi-diameter of sun,                16' 42"            16' i5".2 -(-            27'
     do.       of moon,              17' 20"            16' 42".6 +              3?'
     do.       of shadow,            45' i5"            45' 16"      -            i'
Amount of obscuration,             1.33              0.812           -f-      o.5i8
Whole duration of eclipse, 31> 3701 44'          ah 52m 24s          -f 45"> 2o»

   25. p. 155. Our next note is a
CALCULATION, ACCORDING TO HINDU DATA AND METHODS, OF THE
              SOLAR ECLIPSE OF MAY 26iH, 1854,
FOB THE LATITUDE AND LONGITUDE OP WILLIAMS' COLLEGE, WILLIAMSTOWN, MASS.

   As has been already mentioned in the closing note to the fifth chap
ter, the following calculation of a solar eclipse was mainly made for the
translator, while in India, by his native assistant. Some additional cal
culations have been appended here by us, in order to render the whole
process a more complete illustration of the rules as given in the text of
our treatise ; and we have also had to reject and replace certain parts
of the work actually done, on account of their inaccuracy. For the
most part, we present the work as it was made, although involving some
repetitions which might be regarded as superfluous, after the explana
tions and illustrations already given in the notes and in the preceding
calculation of a lunar eclipse. The eclipse selected is the one calculated
and delineated in Prof. James H. Coffin's useful work, entitled " Solar
and Lunar Eclipses familiarly illustrated and explained, with the method
of calculating them, according to the theory of Astronomy as taught in
New-England Colleges" (New York, 1845).
v.]                     Calculation of a Solar Eclipse.                                 805
   I. To find the sum of days (ahargana) from the commencement of
the planetary motions to the time of calculation.
   The eclipse in question occurs at the close of the month Vaigakha,
the second month of the luni-solar year, in the 1 777th year of the era
of Qalivahana (see add. note 12). To compute, then, the number of
whole years, and to reduce them, with the remaining part of a year, to
mean solar days, we proceed as follows :
      Sandhi at the beginning of the ka/pa,       •                       1,728,000
      Six manvanlaras,                                               i,85o.688,ooo
      Twenty-seven mahdyugai of the seventh Harm,                       1 16,640.000
                                                                     i ,969 o56.ooo
        deduct the time spent in creation,                                1 7,064.000
      From creation to beginning of 28th mahdyuga,                   1,951 992,000
      Krta yuga of 28th or current mahdyuga,                             1,728,000
      Tretdyugaol              "                                         1,296,000
      Dvdpara ynga of          "                                           864,ooo
      Kali yuga, to era of (^alivahana,                                      3,179
      Complete years elapsed of the era,                                     1,776
      From the-creation to end of March, 1854, complete years,       1,955,884,955
        to reduce to solar months, multiply by                                  12
      Solar months,                                                 23,470,619,460
        add month of current year elapsed,                                       I
      Whole number of solar months,                                 23,470,619,461
Now, to find the intercalary months, we make the proportion
               5i,84o,ooo : 1,593,336 :: 23,470,619,461 : 721,384,701
Then, to
    Solar months elapsed,                                          23,470,619,461
      add intercalary months,                                         721,384,701
      Lunar months elapsed,                                         24,192,004,162
        to reduce to lunar days, multiply by                                    3o
      Lunar days,                                                  725,760,1 24,860
        add for current month,                                                 ' 29
      Whole number of lunar days,                                 725,760,124,889
Farther, to find the number of tithikshayas, or omitted lunar days, in
this period, we say
           I,6o3,ooo,o8o : 25,082,252 : : 725,760,124,889 : u,356,oi8,362
Next, from
    Lunar days elapsed,                                          725,760,124,889
      deduct omitted lunar days,                                   i i,356,oi 8,362
      Mean solar days elapsed,                                     714,404,106,527
  This, then, is the required ahargana, or sum of days from the com
mencement of the planetary motions to about the time of new moon,
May, 1854. The processes by which it is found are in all respects the
    S06                            S&rya-Siddhdnta,
    same with those illustrated by us in the notes to i. 21-23, 24, 48, 48-51,
    above. It will be noticed that the Hindu astronomer, at least when
    working out an illustrative process, like the one in hand, scorns to make
    use of any of the means for reducing the labor of computation which
    the text directly or impliedly permits, and of which, in our own calcu
    lations, we have been glad to avail ourselves.
       II. To ascertain the mean longitudes of the sun, the moon, the sun's
    apsis, the moon's apsis, and the moon's node, for mean midnight on the
    Hindu meridian, at the given interval from the creation.
       The amount of motion, since the creation, of the bodies named, in
    their order, is found by the following series of proportions :
         1,577,917,828 : 714,404,106,527 :: 4,320,000 :                     I' 12° 14' 14
         1,577,917,828 : 714,404,106,527 :: 57,753,336 : 26,147,889,1 i8rev is 9° 44' 29"
     1,577,917,828,000 : 714,404,106,527 :         387:             I75rey 2s 17° 17' 23"
         1,577,917,828 : 714,404,106,527 :    488,203 :     22,l34,467rev 2S ji<> 56' 9"
         1,577,917,828 : 714,404106,527 ;      232,238 : io5,i46,o2orev io« 17° n' 5o"

       Rejecting whole revolutions, and, in the case of the moon's node,
    subtracting the fraction from a whole revolution, we have, as the mean
    longitudes required :
          Sun,                                           i« 12° i4' i4"
          Moon,                                          i« 9° 44' 29"
          Sun's apogee,                                               2s 17° 17' 23"
          Moon's apogee,                                              2« 21° 56' 9"
          Moon's node,                                                11 12° 48' 10"
       The Hindu calculator has taken, in the case of the moon's apsis
    and node, the numbers of revolutions given by the text, omitting the
    correction of the btja. We have not, in order to test the accuracy of
    his arithmetical operations, worked over again the proportions, except
    ing in two instances, the first and last : our results differ but slightly
    from those above given (we find the seconds of the sun's place to be 40",
    and the minutes and seconds of the node's motion to be 12' 43")—not
    enough to render any modification necessary.
       III. To ascertain the values of the same quantities at mean sunrise
    on the equator, or 6 o'clock.
       In order to this, we must add to each planet's longitude one fourth
    the amount of its mean motion in a day. We require, then, the mean
    daily motions. They are found as follows, taking the sun as an example :
                   1,577,917,8281! : 4,320,ooorev ; ; id : 59' 8" 10'" io"".4
    We omit the other proportions and their results, as the latter have been
    fully stated in the table of mean motions of the planets (note to i. 29-34).
    Adding a quarter of the daily motion, we have as follows :
                               Long, at midnight.       Correction.        Long, nt sunrise.
      Sun,                      I« 1a° i4' 1 4" +          14' 47"    SB   I 12 O  a9' i'
      Moon,                     It 9° 44' 39" +        3° 17' 39" =        I i3 o 2' 8'
      Sun's apogee,             a» 17° 17' a?" +       o              =    a 17 o 17' 23'
      Moon's apogee,           a* *i° 56' 9" +              «' 4o"    ss   n
                                                                             2t 0 s?7 4</
      Moon's node,             »• i*° 48' 10" —                48"    =c   J 12° 4y aa*




-
r.]                    Calculation of a Solar Eclipse.                             807
   IV. To ascertain the values of the same quantities at mean sunrise
upon the equator, on the meridian of the given place.
   Adopting 75° 50' as the longitude of the Hindu meridian east from
Greenwich, we have, as the interval in longitude of Williams' College
from it, 149° 2' 30", which is equal to 24" 50" 2P. The latitude is
42° 42' 51". We have, then, first, to determine the distance of the
place in question, upon its own parallel of latitude, from the Hindu
meridian.
   The equatorial circumference of the earth has been found above (note
to i. 59-60) to be 5059.64 yojanas. Its circumference upon the paral
lel of latitude of Williams' College is found (i. 60) by the following
proportion :
           3438' (=R): 2525' (= cos 42° 42' 5i") : : 5o59y.64: 37i5y.97
   The def&ntara, or difference of longitude in yojanas, is then deter
mined thus :
                        6on : 24" 5ov 2P : : 37157.97 : i538y.4i
   And the def&ntaraphala, or correction for difference of longitude, is
calculated from the daily motion of each body, by such a proportion as
the one subjoined, which gives the sun's correction :
                      37157.97 : i538y.4i :: 59' 8" : 24' 27"
   We omit the other proportions, and merely present their results in
the following table :
                           Sunrise at .1 ,:mk;"i. Correction.      Sunrise on giv. merid.
  Sun,                       is 12° 29' i" +         24' 27"       = is 12° 53' 28''
  Moon,                      I« i3° 2' 8" + 5 27 12                = is 18° 29' 20"
  Sun's apogee,              28 17° 17' 23" -f- o                  = 2» 17° 17' 23"
  Moon's apogee,             2s 210 57*49" .j.         2' 45"      = 2822° o' 34"
  Moon's node,               i« 12° 47' 22" -          i' 19"      = is 12° 46' 3"
   We have already (note to i. 63-65) called attention to the excessively
awkward and cumbrous character of this process for making the correc
tion for difference of meridian.
   V. To find the sun's true longitude.
        From the longitude of the sun's apsis,                       2s 17° 17' 23"
        deduct sun's mean longitude (ii. 29),                        Is 12° 53' 28"
      Sun's mean anomaly,                                            i» 4° 23' 55"
    Sine,                                                      I927'
The diminution of the sun's epicycle is now found by the following pro
portion (ii. 38) :
                       3438': 20':: 1927': ii' 12"
The dimensions of the epicycle are, then (ii. 34), 14° — 11' 12", or
13° 48' 48". Next, the proportion (ii. 39)
                         36o° : i3° 48' 48" : : 1927': 74' n"
gives us the sun's equation of the centre, which, by ii. 45, is additive.
Hence to the
      Sun's mean longitude,                                           Is 12° 53' 28"
        add the equation,                                                 i° i4' u"
      Sun's true longitude,                                           i« i4° 7' 39"
 308                           S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                      [v.

    This calculation exhibits a rather serious error : the sine of 34° 24',
 the anomaly, is 1942', not 1927'. The final result, however, is not per
 ceptibly modified by it : the equation ought to be 1° 14' 30", and the
 true longitude 1s 14° 7' 58".
    VI. To find the moon's true longitude.
       From the longitude of the moon'a npsis,                    as 22° o' 34"
       deduct moon's mean longitude,                              i» 18° 29' 20"
     Moon's mean anomaly,                                           in 3° 3i' i4"
     Sine,                                                                   1898'
     Diminution of epicycle,                                              u' 2"
     Dimensions of epicycle,                                          3i° 48' 58"
     Equation of the centre,                                     -f-   2° 4v'
 Hence, to the
     Moon's mean longitude,                                       Is 18° 29' 20"
       add the equation,                                              2° 47'
     Moon's true longitude,                                       is 21° 16' 20"
   VII. To calculate the true daily motions of the sun and moon.
   The equations of motion for the sun and moon have been found by
the calculator of the eclipse by the following proportion : as the whole
orbit of either planet is to its epicycle, so is its mean daily motion to
the required equation. That is to say, for the sun,
                      36o° : i3° 48' 48" : : 59' 8" : 2' 16"
which, by ii. 49, is subtractive. Hence the sun's true motion is 59' 8"
— 2' 16' , or 56' 52".
  Again, for the moon,
                     36o° : 3i° 48' 58" : : 790' 35" : 69' 36"
And the moon's true motion is 790' 35"— 69' 36", or 720' 59".
   These calculations are exceedingly incomplete and erroneous, as may
readily be seen by referring to the corresponding process in the other
eclipse, or to that given as an illustration in the note to ii. 47-49. The
actual value of the sun's equation of motion, as fully calculated by the
method of our treatise, is only 1' 51" ; that of the moon is only 58' 49" :
whence the true motions are 57' 17" and 731' 46" respectively. These
 are elements of so much importance, and they enter so variously into
the after operations, that we have hesitated as to whether it would not
be better to cancel the whole work of the Hindu calculator from this
point onward, and to perform it anew in a more exact manner ; but we
have finally concluded to present the whole as it is, as a specimen—
although, we hope, not a favorable one—of native work ; pointing out,
at the same time, its deficiences, and cautioning against its results being
accepted as the best that the system is capable of affording.
   We have thus far found the true longitudes of the sun and moon for
the moment of mean sunrise at the equator, upon the meridian of the
given place. We desire now farther to find the same data for the mo
ment of sunrise upon the same meridian in latitude 42° 42' 51" N.
   VIII. To find the longitudes of the sun and moon at sunrise in long.
149° 2' 30", lat. 42° 42' 51" N.
v.]                       Calculation of a Solar Eclipse.                                  809

     1. To calculate the precession of the equinoxes (iii. 9-12).
     The proportion
           1,577,91 7,828^ : 6oo«V : : 714,404,106,527 : 27i,65o"V 8» 7° 45' 22"
gives us the amount of the motion of the equinox in its own circle of
libratory revolution, since the beginning of things. Rejecting complete
revolutions, and deducting 6s from the fraction of a revolution, we have
the distance of the equinox from the origin of the sidereal sphere, in
terms of its own revolution, as 67° 45' 22" : three tenths of this, or
20° 19' 36", is the amount of the precession.
   2. To calculate the sun's declination.
       Sun's longitude,                                                i« i4° 7' 39"
       Precession,                                                        20° 19' 36"
       Sun's distance from vernal equinox,                              a« 4° 27' i5"
       Sine,                                                                     3 1 01'
  Then, by ii. 28,
                 3438' :i397'::3ioi': 1260'= sin 21° 3i' 3"
the sun's declination is therefore 21° 31' 3".
  3. To calculate the sun's ascensional difference.
  The radius of the sun's diurnal circle (dyujy&—ii. 60) is 3199'.
  The equinoctial shadow in the given latitude is lld.07, being found
by the proportion (iii. 17)
                           cos lat. : sin Int. : : gnom. : eq. shad.
or                             2525': 233o'::i2d:nd.o7
      Again, to find the earth-sine (kwjya—ii. 61),
                                 j2d : iiS.o7 : : 1260' : 1162'
   And, to find the sine of ascensional difference,
                         3199': 3438':: 1162': 1249'
   The corresponding arc is 21° 19', or 1279'; and since a minute of
arc is equivalent to a respiration of time, the sun's ascensional difference
in time is 1279?, or 213V, or 3" 33V, rejecting the odd respiration.
   4. To calculate the length of the sun's day.
   The sun being in the third sign, of which the equivalent in right as
cension (iii. 42-45) is 1935P, the excess of his day over 60 nadls is found
by the proportion
                                 1800' : 1935? : : 59' 8" : 63p
whence the length of his day is 21,663P.
   In this calculation of the length of the sun's day, the operator has ta
ken the mean, instead of the true, motion of the sun, which is obviously
less accurate, and which is contrary to the meaning of the rule of the
text (ii. 59), as explained by the commentator.
   Now, in order to find the difference between the snn's longitude at
sunrise on the equator and sunrise on the given parallel of north latitude,
we make a proportion, as follows : if in his whole day the sun moves
an amount equal to his daily motion, how much will he move during an
interval corresponding to his ascensional difference ? or
                               2i,663i>: 59' 8" :: 1279?; 3' 29"
                          40
810                              S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                       [v.
   The sun's declination being north, sunrise on the given parallel pre
cedes sunrise on the equator, and hence this result—which is called the
carakal&s, "minutes (kal&) of longitude corresponding to the ascensional
difference (cara)"—is to be subtracted from the sun's longitude as for
merly found. That is to say,
       Sun's longitude at equatorial sunrise,                         i» i4° ?' 39"
         deduct the correction (carakaldt),                                  3' 29"
      Sun's longitude at sunrise, lat. 42° 42' 5i" N., )               g ,0 ., „
             long. 149° 2' 3o" W. from Lanka,          )              " '! ' ""
   In finding the corresponding value of the moon's longitude we apply
first a correction for the sun's equation of place ; it is, in fact, the equa
tion of time, calculated after the entirely insufficient method which we
have already fully exposed, in connection with part V of the preceding
process. The proportion is (ii. 46) as follows :
                        21,600': 790' 35":: i° i4' n": 2' 43"
   Here, again, bad is made worse by taking as the second term of the
proportion the moon's mean, instead of her true, rate of motion. It is
to be noticed that a like correction should have been applied also to the
sun's longitude, but was omitted by the calculator. We have, then,
      Moon's longitude, mean equatorial sunrise,                     i« 21° 16' 20"
        add the correction for the equation of time,                         2' 43"
      Moon's longitude, true equatorial sunrise,                     i« 21° 19' 3"
  Now we apply farther the correction for the sun's ascensional differ
ence (carasansk&ra) ; it is calculated in the same manner with that of
the sun, and its amount is found to be 4V 51".
      Moon's longitude, true equatorial sunrise,                      i» 21' 19' 3"
        deduct the correction for the sun's asc. diff.,                      4?' 5i"
      Moon's longitude at sunrise, lat. 42° 42' 5i"N. 1V              !• If)' ^1' To"
             long. 1 49° 2' 3o" W. from Lanka,          )
  On comparing the longitudes of the sun and moon, as thus deter
mined, it is seen that the time of conjunction is already past. Hence
the calculation is carried a day backward, by subtracting from the lon
gitude of each body its motion during a day. That is to say,
                       sunrise Longitude,
                               following eclipse.   . , motion.
                                                    aay    t.     Bunrjse Longitude,
                                                                          preceding eclipse.
      Sun,                  i» i4° 4' 10" -            56' 52" = n i3° 7' 18"
      Moon,                 i»20°3i'i2" -           12° o' 59" = i« 8° 3o' i3"
      Moon's node,          i« 12° 46' 3" +              3' n" = !• 13° ty i4"
  This is an entirely uncalled-for, and a highly inaccurate proceeding.
By the rule given in our text (ii. 66), it is just as easy and regular a
process to find from any given time the interval to the beginning of the
current lunar day by reckoning backward, as that to the end of the day
by reckoning forward. And to assume that the whole calculation may
be transferred from one sunrise back to the preceding by simply deduct
ing the amount of motion in a day as determined for the former time is
to take a most unwarrantable liberty, and to ignore the change during
v.]                      Calculation of a Solar Eclipse.                         311
the interval of many of the elements of the calculation, as the sun's and
moon's rates of motion, the sun's declination and ascensional difference,
etc. In making the transfer, moreover, the longitude of the moon's
node has been taken as found for mean equatorial sunrise, without any
correction for the equation of time, or for the sun's ascensional difference.
   IX. To find the time of true conjunction, and the longitudes of the
sun, moon, and moon's node at that time. By ii. 66, from the
      Moon's true longitude,                                   i« 8° 3o' i3"
        deduct the sun's do.,                                  is i3° 7' 18"
        remains •                                             us 250 22' 55-
        divide by the portion of a lunar day,                        720'
         the quotient is                                     294 and 44a' 55"
         deduct the remainder from a -whole portion,                 720'
         remains                                                    277- 5"
  This process shows us that the moon has still 277' 5" to gain upon
the sun, in order to arrive at the end of the thirtieth or last day of the
lunar month, or at conjunction with the sun.
  Next, from the
      Moon's true daily motion,                                     720' 59"
        deduct the sun's do.,                                        56' 52"
      Moon's daily gain in longitude,                               664' 7"
Hence the proportion
                       664' 7" : 6on : : 277' 5" : aSn 2»
gives us the time of conjunction, reckoned from sunrise, as 25" 2V.
   Now, by iv. 8, we proceed to find the longitudes for that time. The
amounts of motion during 25° 2V are found by the following proportions :
                                     [ 56' 52": a3' 43"
                   6on ; 25" 2" : : •) 720' 59" : 3oo' 48"
                                     ( 3' n": i' 19"
Then, to the
    Sun's longitude at sunrise,                               . i* i3° 7' 18"
      add the correction,                                              23' 43"
   Sun's longitude at conjunction,                              i« i3° 3i' i"
    Moon's longitude at sunrise,                                H 8° 3o' i3"
      add the correction,                     ,                     50 o; ^g//
   Moon's longitude at conjunction,                             is 13° 3!' ±n
   Node's longitude at sunrise,                                 i« I2° 49' 14"
      deduct the correction,                                            i' 19"
   Node's longitude at conjunction,                             n I2o 47' 55"
   The mode of proceeding adopted by us above, in the lunar eclipse,
for finding the time of the middle of the eclipse, and the longitudes of
the sun and moon at that time, is, as will not fail to be observed, quite
different from that of the native calculator of this eclipse. That fol
lowed by Davis, or his native assistants (As. Res., ii. 273 etc.), varies
312                              S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                           [v.
considerably from both. Our own method, though varying in some
respects from that contemplated by the text, is a not less legitimate ap
plication of its general methods than either of the others, and it pos
sesses this important advantage over both, that we were able to verify
it, and to show, by calculating the mean and true places for the given
instant, that the latter was actually the one at which the system made
the opposition of the sun and moon to take place : while, on the con
trary, in the process now in hand, so many errors have been involved,
that, were the same test to be applied, we should find the centres of the
sun and moon many minutes apart at the moment fixed upon as that of
conjunction, and the place of conjunction as far removed from the point
of longitude above determined for it.
   X. To find the apparent diameters of the sun and moon.
   These quantities are determined by means of the following propor
tion : as the mean daily motion in yojanas is to the mean diameter in
yojanas, so is the true motion in minutes to the true diameter in min
utes. That is to say, for the sun and moon respectively,
                        n,858Jy :65ooy : : 56' 52" : 3i' 10"
                    n,858fy : 48oy : : 720' 59" : 29' 2"
  This method is in appearance quite different from that which is pre
scribed by our text (iv. 2-3), but it is in fact only a simplification, or
reduction, of the rules there given. Thus, for the moon, the text gives
   in. mot. in minutes : true mot. inmin. : : in. diam. in yoj. : true diam. in min. X 15
Transposing, now, the middle terms, transferring the factor 15 from the
fourth term to the first, and noting that the mean motion in minutes,
when multiplied by 15, gives the value of the same in yojanas, we have
the former proportion, namely,
      m. mot. in yoj. : m. diam. in yoj. : : true mot. in min. : true diam. in min.
   Again, in the case of the sun, the rules of the text give
      m. mot. in min. : true mot. in min : : m. diam. in yoj. : true diam. in yoj.
and true diam. in yoj. = true diam. in min. X 1 5 X (sun's orbit -f- moon's orbit)
   Now transposing the second and third terms of the proportion, sub
stituting for the fourth its equivalent as here stated, and transferring to
the first term the last two factors of that equivalent, we have
m.mot.m min.XISX sun's•, orbitr^~ : m. d., in
                                           . y. : : true mot. in
                                                              . mm. : true diam.
                                                                            .... in mm.
                 moons orbit
But the first term, as thus constructed, is, by the method of determina
tion of the planetary orbits (see xii. 81-83), equal to the sun's mean
daily motion upon his orbit reckoned in yojanas : hence the proportion
becomes for the sun, as for the moon,
      m. mot. in yoj. : m. diam. in yoj. : : true mot. in min. : true diam. in min.
   XL To calculate the parallax in longitude (lambana), and the time
of apparent conjunction (v. 3-9).
   1. To find the orient ecliptic-point (lagna) at the moment of true
conjunction (iii. 46-48).
   In order to this, we require to have first the equivalents in oblique as
cension (uday&savas) of the several signs of the zodiac for the latitude
v.]                    Calculation of a Solar Eclipse.                                 318

of Williams' College, 42° 42' 51" N. We present annexed their values
as employed by the calculator of the eclipse, and also as calculated by
ourselves according to the method taught in our text (iii. 42-45). It
will be noticed that the differences are not inconsiderable, and evince
much carelessness on the part of the native astronomer ; who, moreover,
employs vinadis only in his processes, rejecting the odd respirations,
which is an inaccuracy not countenanced by the Surya-Siddhanta.
                            Equivalent in oblique ascension :
                         ace. to calculator.          ace. to us.
      ist sign            .........                      jooSp           I2thsign
      and "               .........                      I238P           nth "
      3rd "               287" or 1722?                  i&99p           loth "
      4th "               359vor2i54P                   2171?             9th   "
      5th "               38?v or 2322P                 235aP             8th   "
      6th "               388? or 2328P                 233ap             7th   "
   The equivalents assigned by the Hindu calculator to the 3rd and 4th
signs are moreover, it may be remarked, inconsistent with one another,
since the one ought to fall short of 1935P by as much as the other ex
ceeds that quantity.
   Now, then, to the
        Sun's longitude at conjunction,                             i' i3° 3i' i"
          add the precession,                                          20° 19' 36"
        Sun's distance from the equinox,                            2« 3° 5o' 37"
  It appears, accordingly, that the sun is in the 3rd sign, and 26° 9' 23"
from the beginning of the fourth. Hence the proportion (iii. 46)
                       3o° : 28?v : : 26° 9' 23" : 250"
give us 250V as the ascensional equivalent of the part of a sign to be
traversed (bhogy&savas). The time of the day, or the sun's distance in
time from the eastern horizon, is 25" 2V, or 1502V. Then, from the
      Time of conjunction,                   '
        deduct asc. equiv. of part of 3rd sign,                                 25ov
        remains                                                                 I252»
        deduct asc. equiv. of 4th, 5th, and 6th signs,                          n34v
        remains                                                                  n8V
  This remainder of time, or of ascension, is reduced to its value in arc
of the ecliptic by the proportion (iii. 49)
                              388v:3o°::ii8v:9° 7' 25"
   Add this result to the whole signs preceding, and the longitude of the
orient ecliptic-point (lagna) is found to be 6« 9° 7' 25" : its sine is 544'
(more correctly, 545').
   2. To find the orient-sine (udayajy&—v. 3).
   This is found by the proportion
                               2525': i397'::544':3oi'
2525' being the cosine of the latitude, and 139?' the sine of the inclina
tion of the ecliptic (ii. 28).
   3. To find the meridian ecliptic-point (madhyalagna,—iii. 49).
314                             S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                     [v.
   In order to this, we must first know the sun's hour-angle (nata), or
distance in time from the meridian ; it is determined as follows :
      A quarter of the complete day,                                      i5" ov
        add the sun's ascensional difference,                              3n 33v
      The sun's half-day,                                                 18" 33?
        deduct from time of conjunction,                                  25" a'
      Sun's hour-angle, west,                                              6n zy
   The sun's distance from the beginning of the fourth sign was found
above to be 26° 9' 23". Its equivalent in right ascension (lankoday&-
savas) is found by the following proportion (iii. 49) :
                       3o° : 3a3v ; ; a6° 9' a3" : a85v
Now, from the
      Sun's hour-angle, 6n a9v, or                                           389*
        deduct the result of the last proportion,                            a85"
        remains                                                              io4v
and this remainder, being less than the equivalent of a sign, is reduced
to its value as longitude by the proportion (iii. 48)
                         3a3" : 3o° : : io4» : 9° 3' 5?"
   The longitude of the meridian ecliptic-point is accordingly 3' 9° 3' 57" :
its sine is 3393'.
   In criticism of the process as thus conducted, we would only remark
that the quarter of the sun's day should have been called 15" 2V 4P (see
above, VIII. 4), and that to take 323V as the equivalent in right ascen
sion of the third and fourth signs is inaccurate, the value given it by
our treatise being 1935P, or 322£".
   4. To find the meridian-sine (madhyajy&—v. 4-5).
   First, the declination of the meridian ecliptic-point is determined by
the proportion (ii. 28)
                    3438' : 1397' : : 3393' : i378'= sin a3° 39' 3?"
Its value being north, it is deducted from the latitude of the place for
which the, calculation is made, since this, though by us reckoned as
north, is to the Hindu apprehension (iii. 14) always south, being meas
ured south from the zenith to the equator. That is to say,
        From the given latitude,                                       4?° 42' 5i"
        deduct dec1. of merid. ecliptic-point,                         a3° 39' 3j"
      Meridian zenith-distance (natdnfdi),                             19° 3' ;4"
The sine of this arc, which is 1117', is the meridian-sine.
   Here is another blunder of the calculator : the sine of 19° 3' 14" is
actually 1122'.
   5. To find the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance (drkkshepa), and the
sine of ecliptic-altitude (drggati).
   First, by v. 5,
                         3438' :3oi' :: 1117' :97' 48"
v.]                     Calculation of a Solar Eclipse.                         315

  Now, then, by v. 6,
      Square of last result,                                        9,564'
        deduct from square of mer.-sine,                        1,247,689'
        remains                                                 1,238,125'
      Square-root,                                                   1 1 1 3'
   This, then, is the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance. The sine of eclip
tic-altitude is found by subtracting its square from that of radius, and
taking the square-root of the remainder; it is found to be 3253'.
   6. To find the divisor (cheda), and the sun's parallax in longitude
(lambana).
   The sine of one sign, or 30°, is 1'719'.
            Square of sin 80°,                            2,954,961
              diride by                                       3,a53
            Divisor (cheda),                                    908
  Next, to find the interval on the ecliptic between the sun's place and
the meridian :
      Longitude of meridian ecliptic-point,                 3» 9° 3' 5j"
           do. of sun,                                      2» 3° 5o' 37"
      Interval in longitude,                                i* 5° i3' 20"
   Of this the sine is 1950', and, upon dividing it by 908, the divisor
(cheda) above found, the value of the parallax in longitude (lambana) is
ascertained to be 2n 21V.
   Here is some of the worst blundering which we have yet met with.
The sine of 35° 13' is actually 1982', not 1950'; and upon dividing it
by 908, we find the quotient to be only 2" 11V.
   The calculator assumes the time of apparent conjunction to be deter
mined by this single correction. As the text, however (v. 9), directs
that the process be repeated, to insure a higher degree of accuracy, we
shall finally quit at this point the guidance of his computations, and go
on to apply in full the rules of the Surya-Siddhanta.
   The sun being west of the meridian, or his longitude being less than
that of the meridian ecliptic-point (v. 9), the correction for parallax is
additive to the time of true conjunction. Hence, to the
          Time of true conjunction,                           25" 2v
            add the correction,                                2n nr
          Time of conjunction once equated,                   2711 i3"
  For the time thus found, we now proceed to calculate again the value
of the parallax. The results of the calculation are briefly presented
below :
      Sun's longitude at corrected time of conjunction,    2« 3° 52' 4i"
      Orient ecliptic-point (lagna),                       6» 18° 5o'
      Its sine,                                                 mo'
      Orient-sine (ndayajyd),                                    6i4'
      Sun's hour-angle,                                        3io3p
316                            S&rya-Sicldkdnta,                                      [v.
      Meridian ecliptic-point (madhyalayna),                        3* ?i° 89'
      Its pine,                                                          3i88'
      Its declination,                                                 22° 9' N.
      Its zenith-distance,                                             20° 34' S.
      Meridian-sine (madhyajyd),                                         1207'
      Sine of ecliptic zenith-distance (drJcJcthepd),                    1188'
      Sine of ecliptic-altitude (drggati),                               3226'
      Divisor (cheda),                                                    9'6'
      Sine of sun's dist. in long, from meridian,                        2558'
      Parallax in longitude (lambana),                                  2" 48'
         add to time of true conjunction,                              a5n v
      Time of conjunction twice equated,                               270 5ov
   Once more, we repeat the same calculation ; its principal results are
as follows :
      Orient ecliptic-point,                                        6- 2 1 ° 4 1 '
      Orient-sine,                                                          7o2'
      Meridian ecliptic-point,                                      3» 25° 26'
      Meridian-sine,                                                       I24'
      Sine of ecliptic zenith-distance,                                    1 2 1 5'
      Sine of ecliptic-altitude,                                          3ai6'
      Divisor,                                                              9'9'
      Parallax in longitude,                                            2" 55»
         add to time of true conjunction,                              25" i"
      Time of apparent conjunction,                                     270 5?"
   A farther repetition of the process would still yield an appreciable
correction, but as so many errors have been involved in the preceding
parts of the calculation as to render any exactness of result unattaina
ble, and as enough has been done to illustrate the method of correction
by successive approximation and the comparative value of the results it
yields, we stop here, and rest content with the last time obtained, as that
of the apparent conjunction of the sun and moon, or of the middle of
the eclipse, at Williams' College.
   XII. To calculate the parallax in latitude (nali) for the middle of the
eclipse.
   This is given us by the proportion (v. 10)
                     3438' : 73i' 27"^- i5 : : I2i5' : 17' i4" S.
in which 1215' is the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance, as found in the last
process.
 rocess.
   XIII. To calculate the moon's latitude, and her apparent latitude,
for the middle of the eclipse.
   We require first to find the longitude of the moon, and that of her
node, for the moment of apparent conjunction, by adding to their lon
gitudes, as already found (above, IX) for the time of true conjunction,
their motion during 2n 55V. The amount of motion is found by the pro
portions
v.]                     Cakulatim of a Solar Eclipse.                      317
  Now, then, to the
      Moon's longitude at true conjunction,                i« i3° 3i' i"
        add the correction,                                       35' 3"
      Moon's longitude at apparent conjunction ,           i« i4° 6' 4"
  Farther, from the
      Node's longitude at true conjunction,               i« 12° 4?' 55"
        deduct the correction,                                        9"
      Node's longitude at apparent conjunction,           i» 12° 47' 46"
        deduct from moon's longitude,                     is 14° 6' 4"
      Moon's distance from node,                             i° 18' 18"
      Sine,                                                     78'
Hence the proportion (ii. 57)
                        3438' : 270' : : 78' : 6' 8"
gives us the
        Moon's true latitude,                               6' 8" N.
          deduct from parallax in latitude (v. 12),        17' i4" S.
        Moon's apparent latitude,                          u' 6" S.
  XIV. To find the amount of obscuration (gr&sa) at the moment of
apparent conjunction.
  By iv. 10, we add to the
      Diameter of the eclipsing body, the moon,                 29' 2'
      Diameter of the eclipsed body, the sun,                   3i' 10'
      Sum of diameters,                                         60' 12'
      Half-sum of diameters,                                    3o' 6'
        deduct moon's apparent latitude,                        n' 6
      Amount of greatest obscuration,                            19' o"
This remainder being less than the sun's diameter, the eclipse (iv. 11) is
partial only.
   XV. To determine the times of the beginning and end of the eclipse
respectively.
   As the eclipse is a partial one- only, we have not to calculate the times
of the beginning and end of total obscuration ; and indeed, we may well
suppose that the Hindus would never venture to calculate those times
in a solar eclipse : it is even questionable whether the accuracy of their
methods would justify them in ever predicting with confidence that an
eclipse would be total.
   In the first place, we assume that the moon's apparent latitude, as cal
culated for the moment of conjunction, remains unchanged during the
whole duration of the eclipse, and calculate, by iv. 12-13, what would
be, upon that assumption, the interval between the middle of the eclipse
and either contactor separation of the disks. That is to say (iv. 12),
from the
                      41
818                          Surya-Siddhanta,                                   [v.
       Square of sum of semi-diameters (30' 6"),                  906' i"
         deduct square of moon's latitude (11' 6"),               123' i3"
         remains                                                  782'
       Square root of remainder,                                   27' 59"
   This result represents the distance, as rudely determined, of the two
 centres at the moments of contact and separation. To ascertain the
 corresponding interval of time, we say (iv. 13)
                    664' 7" : 600 : : 27' 59" : an 3av
   Now, then, from and to the
       Time of apparent conjunction,                               270 57"
         subtract and add the half duration,          •             2" 3av
       Beginning of eclipse,                                       250 25V
       End of eclipse,                                             3o" 29^
   This is as far as the operation was carried by the native calculator,
and with data and results somewhat different from those here given,
owing to his neglect to repeat the process of determination of the par
allax in longitude in finding the time of apparent conjunction. Tin-
fortunately, however, the text (iv. 14-15 ; v. 13-17) prescribes a long
and tedious series of modifications and corrections of the results so far
obtained, of which we shall proceed to perform at least enough to illus
trate the method, of the process, and the comparative importance of the
corrections which it furnishes.
   We have first to find the longitude of the sun, moon, and node, at
the momeMs thus determined as those of contact and separation ; they
are as follows:
    Sun's long, at true conj. (25n 2v),      is i3° 3i' i"    i« i3° 3i' i"
      add for his motion                                22"           5' 10"
    Sun's long, at beg. and end of eclipse, i« i3° 3i' 23"    is i3° 36' ii'<
      add the precession,                       20° 19' 36"      20° 19' 36''
    Sun's distance from the^ vernal equinox, 2s 3° 5o' 59"    2s 3° 55' 47"
    Moon's long, at app. conj.               i« i4° 6' 4"     i> i4° 6' 4"
      subtract and add motion in 2" 32v,            3o' 26"          3o' 26"
    Moon's long, at beg. and end of eclipse, is i3° 35' 38"   is 14° 36' 3o"
    Node's long, at app. conj.,              is 12° 4j' 46"   is 12° 47' 46"
      add and subtract                                   8"               8"
    Node's long, at beg. and end of eclipse, is 12° 4j' 54"   is 12° 47' 38"
  To find, then, the moon's true latitude at contact and separation, we
have
    Moon's distance from node,                   47' 44"       i° 48' 52"
    Sine,                                        48'              109'
    Moon's latitude,                              3' 46" N.         8' 34" If.
   Next are calculated the moon's parallax in latitude, and her apparent
latitude, at the beginning and end of the eclipse, by a process of which
the main results are the following :
v.]                      Calculation of a Solar Eclipse.                         319
      Orient ecliptic-point,                      &» 10° 28'         78 3° 59'
      Sine,                                              625'            1921'
      Orient-sine,                                      345'             io63'
      Sun's hour-angle,                                 2455P            4a?9P
      Meridian ecliptic-point,                    3« n° 54'          4s it0 7'
      Sine of do.,                                     3363'             2590'
      Zenith-distance of do,                         19° 16'          a4° 53'
      Meridian-sine,                                   u34'              i445'
      Sine of ecliptic zenith-distance,                1128'             i374'
      Parallax in latitude,                               16' o" S.        19' 29" S.
         deduct true latitude,                             3' 46" N.        8' 34" N.
      Moon's apparent lat. at beg. and end of eclipse,   12' i4" S.       10' 55" S.

   Finally, from the
      Square of sum of semi-diameters,                   906' i"        906' i"
        deduct squares of app. latitude,                 i5o' 39"       119' n"
        remain                                         755' 22"         786' 5o"
      Distance of centres in longitude,                 27' 29"          28' 3"
      Corresponding interval,                            20 29^           an 3av
      Corrected times of beginning and end of eclipse, 25"» 28v          3on 29*
    It is evidently unnecessary to carry any farther this part of the pro
 cess ; at the time of the eclipse, the increase of the moon's latitude north
ward, and the increase of her parallax southward, so nearly balance one
 another, that the additional correction yielded by a new computation
would be quite inappreciable—as, indeed, has been, in one of the two
cases, that already obtained. In making this corrective calculation we
have not followed with exactness the directions given in the commentary
under v. 14-17. It is there taught that, after making the first rough
determination of the half-duration, based upon the moon's apparent lati
tude at apparent conjunction, we must turn back to the true conjunction,
find the positions of the planets and node at intervals of the half-dura
tion from that point, and make these positions the data of our farther
approximative processes. The text itself, as already remarked by us
in the notes, shows an utter and provoking want of explicitness with
regard to the whole matter, and may be regarded as favoring equally
the method of the commentary, our own, or any other that might be
devised. We have taken our own course, then, because we were
unable to see any sufficient reason for reverting from apparent to true
conjunction, as directed by the commentator.
   With regard to the next steps, the language of the text is less ambigu
ous : it distinctly orders us to deduct from and add to the time of true
conjunction (tithyanta) the intervals found as the former and latter half-
duration, and from the moments thus determined to compute anew, by
a repeated process, the parallax in longitude. This is a very laborious
operation, and not altogether accurate, although perhaps as much so
as any which the Hindu methods admit. As we are supposed to have
already ascertained how far apart the two centres must be at the mo
ments of contact and separation, the problem is, evidently, to determine
320                               S&rya-Siddhdnta,                                   [v.
at what moment of time they will, allowing for the parallax in longi
tude, be at that distance from one another. Now as formerly, to find the
time of apparent conjunction, we started from that of true conjunction,
and arrived at the desired result by a series of approximative calcula
tions of the parallax in longitude, so now, starting from points removed
from true conjunction by the given intervals, we shall ascertain, by a
similar series of approximations, the times when the distances repre
sented by those intervals will be apparent, or the moments to which
contact and separation of the disks will be deferred by parallax in lon
gitude. The results of the calculations, as made by us, are as follows :
      Time of true conjunction,                       a5n av             a5o V
        subtract and add,                              an 29?             an 3 2'
      Times of true contact and separation,          aan 33v               a7n 34v
      Sun's longitude, with precession,        as 3° 48' 16"        as 3° 53' i"
      Orient ecliptic-point,                      5s 27° 9'            6s 20° 27'
      Orient-sine,                                       95'                  664'
      Meridian ecliptic-point,                    as 25° 5a'            3s 23° 56'
      Meridian-sine,                                   1107'                 iaa6'
      Sine of ecliptic zenith-distance,                1106'                 iao3'
      Sine of ecliptic-altitude,                       3255'                 3219'
      Divisor,                                          908                   918
      Moon's longitude,                            as 3° 21'             as 4° 21'
      Distance from meridian ecliptic-point,         22° 3i'            is 19° 35'
      Sine,                                            i3i6'                 2617'
      Parallax in longitude,                          in 27?                an 5i'
  Again, we go on to correct these results by repeated calculations of
the parallax, in the mode which has already been sufficiently illustrated.
Annexed are the results only :
      Times of contact and separation,                    aan 33v        27n 34V
        add correction for parallax,                       in 27'         an 5iv
    Times of contact and separation, once equated,        a4n ov         3on a5'
    Corresponding parallax,                                in 54V         3n 20'
      add to times first obtained,                        aan 33'        27n 34'
   Times of contact and separation, twice equated,        a4n 27V        3on 54"
   Corresponding parallax,                                 an av          3n 24'
  Without taking the trouble to carry the calculations any farther, we
may accept these as the finally determined values of the parallax in
longitude at the times of apparent contact and separation. Then,
by v. 16,
   Parallax in longitude at contact and separation,        2n av          3» a4'
            do.       at apparent conjunction,             an 55'         an 55'
   Difference of parallaxes,                                  53'            29'
     add to former and latter mean half-duration,          2n jov         2n 32v
   True former And latter half-duration,               3n 22'             3n iv
     subtract and add from and to time of app. conj., 27n 5-jV           zjn 57v
   Times of apparent contact and separation,              240 35'        3on 58'
v.]                      Calculation of a Solar Eclipse.                     321
   The calculation of the elements of the eclipse is thus completed.
For the purpose, however, of illustrating the rules of the text (iv. 18-21)
for determining, in the case of a solar eclipse, the amount of obscura
tion at any given moment during the continuance of the eclipse, we add
also the following process :
   XVI. To find the amount of obscuration of the sun, 2n 38V after
first contact.
   We make choice of this time, which is equivalent to 27n 13V after sun
rise, because the data for finding the parallax in latitude at the moment
have already been calculated (see above, XI). By iv. 18, from the
     True former half-duration (sphuta sparfasthityardha),          3» a2v
         deduct the given interval,                                  an 38v
      Jnterval to apparent conjunction (madhyagrahana),                 44r
  To reduce this interval in time to distance in longitude of the centres,
we say (iv. 18)
                                6on:664' 7" :: 44ff:8' 7"
   This, then, would be the interval in longitude between the two centres
at the given moment, if there were no change of the moon's parallax
in longitude during the eclipse, or if the moon actually gained in
2n 29V, instead of in 3n 22V, the distance intervening between her centre
and the sun's at the moment of first contact. That, however, being
not the case, we must reduce the result thus found in the ratio of
3n 22V to 2° 29V, or of the true to the mean half-duration. That is to
say (iv. 19),
                            30 22v : 2n 29? : : 8' 7" : 5' 59"
and this result, 5' 59", is the true distance of the two centres in longi
tude, 27n13v after sunrise.
   A briefer and more obvious method of obtaining the quantity in
question would have been to make a proportion as follows : if, at the
time of the eclipse, the moon gains upon the sun 27' 29" in 3n 22V,
what will she gain during 44V 1 or
                              3n 22V : 27' 29" : : 44V : 5' 59"
      Upon computation, we find the
       Moon's parallax in latitude, 2"7n 13V after sunrise,       16' 5i" S.
       Moon's true latitude,                                       5' a5" N".
       Moon's apparent latitude,                                   n' 26"
       Its square,                                                i3o' 43"
       Square of distance in longitude (5' 59"),                   35' 59"
       Their sum (iv. 20),                                        166' 34"
       Actual distance of centres,                                 12' 54"
         deduct from sum of semi-diameters,                        3o' 6"
       Amount of obscuration at given time,                        17' 12"
   If it were desired to project the eclipse, we should now have to cal
culate (by iv. 24-25) the deflection (valana) for the moments of contact,
conjunction, and separation, and likewise (by iv. 26) the scale of projec
tion. As we do not, however, intend to present here a projection, and as




                                                                                   /
322                           Surya-Siddhdnia,                                [v-
the subject of the deflection has been sufficiently illustrated already, in
the notes upon the text and in the calculation of the lunar eclipse, we re
gard it as unnecessary to go through with the labor required for making
the computations in question. Finally, we annex, as in the case of the
lunar eclipse formerly calculated, a summary comparison of the princi
pal results of the Hindu processes with the elements of the eclipse in
question as determined by Prof. Coffin, in his work referred to above.
It must be borne in mind, however, that, owing to the faulty manner in
which many of the computations of the native astronomer have been
made, the comparison is not entirely trustworthy ; a more careful adhe
rence to the methods of the Siddhanta would have given somewhat
different results : in the case of the daily motions of the sun and moon,
the true calculations, as performed by us (see p. 308), give more correct
values ; in other instances, the contrary might perhaps have been»the
case.
                                      Surya-Siddhanta, Prof. Coffin. Hindu error.
Time of true conjunction in longitude,      ah 3om      3h 56m       _ jh 26""
Sun's and moon's longitude,               63° 5o' 37" 65° 12' 37" - 1° 22'
Moon's distance from node,                     43' 6" 4° 12' 22" - 3° 29' 16"
Sun's daily motion in longitude,               56' 52"      57' 45" -          53"
Moon's    do.       do.                   12° o' 59" 12° 7' 12" -           6' i3"
Sun's apparent diameter,                       3i' 10"      3i' 3j" —          27"
Moon's    do.    do.                           29' 2"       29' 45" -          43"
Time of apparent conjunction,             3h 4on"      5'' 32m      — ih 5am
Parallax in longitude, in time,           ih iom       ih 36m      _     2601
Amount of greatest obscuration,              19'           3o' 59" —      n'5j"
Time of first contact,                    2h 2om       4h i5m      _ jh 55m
Time of separation,                       4h 5om       6h 38m      — ib 48m
Duration of eclipse,                      2h 3om        2h 23m     -f.    7m

    26. pp. 183-200. Prof. Weber, of Berlin, has favored us in a pri
vate communication with a number of additional synonyms of the names
of the asterisms, derived from the literature of the Brahmana period.
   Mrgagiras, the fifth of the series, is also styled andhak&, " the blind,"
apparently from its dimness ; aryik&, " honorable, worthy ;" invak&, of
doubtful meaning : this latter epithet is also found in some manuscripts
 of the Amarakoga, as various reading for ilvald, which is there ex
pressly declared (I. i. 2. 25) to designate the stars in the head of the
 antelope.
   Ardra, the sixth asterism, is called bahu, " arm." Taking this name
in connection with that of the preceding group, it seems probable that
the Hindus figured to themselves the conspicuous constellation Orion
as a running antelope, of which a, y, (?, and x mark the feet : «, then, is
the left fore-foot, or arm. Perhaps the name Mrgavyadha, " antelope-
hunter," given to the neighboring Sirius (viii. 10), is connected with the
same fancy.
   The Maghas are called in a hymn of the last book of the Eig-Veda
(x. 85. 13) aclh&s: the word means literally "evil, base, sinful," and its
application to one of the asterisms is so strange that, if not found else
where, we should be inclined to conjecture a corrupted reading.
viii. 9.]                 Additional Notes, etc.                         323

   Phalgunl, or the Phalgunls, forming the eleventh and twelfth groups,
are styled also arjunt, "bright, shining."
   Cravana, the twenty-third asterism, receives the name afvattha, which.
is properly that of a tree, the Ficus religiosa ; the reason of the appella
tion is altogether obscure.
   Bhadrapada, the last double asterism, is called pratishth&na, " stand,
support," in evident allusion to the disposition of the four bright stars
which compose it, like the four feet of a stand, table, bedstead, or the like.
   27. p. 200. We offer herewith the stellar chart to which reference
was made in the note on p. 205, and which is intended to illustrate the
positions and mutual relations of the Hindu nakshatras, the Ari^b
man&zil al-kamar, and the Chinese sieu. We add a brief explanation
of the manner in which it has been constructed, and the form in which
it is presented.
   The form of the map is that of a plane projection, having the ecliptic
as its central line. It would have better illustrated the Hindu method
of defining the positions of the junction-stars, and the errors of the po
sitions as defined by them, if the equator of A. D. 560, instead of the
ecliptic, had been made the central line of the projection. This, how
ever, would have involved the necessity of calculating the right ascen
sion and declination of every star laid down, a labor which we were not
willing to undertake. Moreover, the ecliptic is, in fact, the proper cen
tral line along which the groups of the Hindu and Arab systems, at
least, are arranged, and the form given to the chart also facilitates the
laying down of the equator of B. C. 2350, which we desired to add, for
the purpose of enabling our readers to judge in a more enlightened
manner of the plausibility of M. Biot's views respecting the origin of
the Chinese system : it is drawn with a broken line, while the equator
of A. D. 560 is also represented, by an entire line. As the zone of the
heavens represented is, in the main, that bordering the ecliptic, the dis
tances and the configuration of the stars are 'altered and distorted by
the plane projection to only a very slight degree, not enough to be of any
account in a merely illustrative chart, such as this is. As a general rule,
we have laid down all the stars of the first four magnitudes which are
situated near the ecliptic, or in that part of the heavens through which
the line of the asterisms passes; stars of the fourth to fifth magnitude
are also in many cases added ; smaller ones are noted only when they
enter into the groups of the several systems, or when there were other
special reasons for introducing them. The positipns are in all cases
taken from Flamsteed's Catalogue, and the magnitudes are also for the
most part from the same authority : in many individual cases, however,
we have followed other authorities. We have endeavored so to mark
the members of the three different series that these may readily be
traced across the map ; but, to assure and facilitate the comparison, we
also place upon the page opposite it a conspectus of the nomenclature,
constitution, and correspondence of the three systems, referring to
pages 183-200 for a fuller discussion of these matters, and an exposition
of what is certain, and what more or less hypothetical, or exposed to
doubt, with regard to them.
324                                      SGrya-Siddhdnta,                                               [viii. 9.
       Hindu aiteiiitn.                            Arab mamil.                                Chine«e sieu.
  I. Acvini.                                   I. ash-Sharatan.                             *7- Leu.
       P and 7 Arietis.                              P and 7 Arietis.                                P Arietis.
   a. l!!i!ir:ii.ii.                           a. al-Butain.                                a8. Oei.
          35, 39, and 41 Arietis.                    35, 39 and 41 Arietis.                         35 Arietis.
  3. Krttika.                                 3. ath-Thuraiya.                               I. Mao.
          T, Tauri, etc. (Pleiades).                 TI Tauri etc. (Pleiades).                      TI Tauri.
  4. Rohini.                                  4- ad-Dabaran.                                 a. Pi.
          a, j, 7, 1, c Tauri.                       o, 5, 7, J, E Tauri.                           £ Tauri.
  5. Mrgaciras.                               5. al-Hak'ah.                                  3. Tse.
         x, <pi, <pi Orionis.                       x, ipi, ipz Orionis.                            X Orionis.
  6. Ardra.                                   6. al-Han'ah.                                  4- Tsan.
   / a Orionis.                                     ", m vi 7i ? Geminorum.                         6 Orionis.
  7- Punarvasu.                               7- adh-Dbira'.                                 5. Tsing.
         (3, a Geminorum.                           P, a Geminorum.                                ji Geminorum.
  8. Pushya.                                  8. an-Nathrah.                                 6. Kuei.
         5, d, 7 CancrL                             7, 6 Cancri, andPrassepe.                       S Cancri.
  9- Ajlesha.                                 9- at-Tarf-                                    7- Lieu.
         £, 5, o-, ri, } Hydra.                     ? Cancri, K Leonis.                            a Hydra.
10. Magha.                                  10. aj-Jabhah.                                   8. Sing.
         ai "i 7i £i Mi * Lconis.                   a, T], 7, f Lconis.                             a Hydra.
n. Parva-Phalguni                           it. az-Zubrah.                                   9- Chang.
         3, 5 Leonis.                               S, 3 Leonis.                                   ui Hydra.
la. Uttara-Phalguni.                         1a. as-Sarfah.                                 10. Y.
         P, 93 Leonia.                              p Leonis.                                      a Crateris.
i3. Hasta.                                  i3. al-Auwa*.                                  n. Chin.
         5, 7, t, o, (3 Corvi.                      Pi "i 7> *i £ Virginis.                        7 Corvi.
i4. Citra.                                  i4- as-SimAk.                                  1a. Kio.
         o Virginis.                                a Virginis.                                    a Virginis.
1 5. Svati.                                 1 5. al-Ghafr.                                 i3. Hang.
         a Bootia.                                  i, «, X Virginis.                              « Virginis.
16. Vi^kha.                                 16. az-ZubanSn.                                i4- Ti.
         i, 7, P, a Libra.                          o, p Libne.                                     a2 Librae.
 »7- Anuradha.                              «7- al-IklU.                                   1 5. Fang.
         i, p, ir Scorpionis.                       P, J, ir Scorpionis.                           jr Scorpionis.
18. Jyeshtha.                               1 8. al-Kalb.                                  16. Sin.
         o, tr, ^ Scorpionis.                       a Scorpionis.                                   o- Scorpionis.
*9- Mala.                                   19. ash-Shanlah.                               '7- Uei.
         x, v, », i, 3, TI, {, 11, i Scorp.          xr u Scorpionis.                               ti2 Scorpionis.
20. Purva-Ashadha.                          20. an-Na'aim.                                 18. Ki.
         J, £ Sagitta'rii.                          72, 5, E, TI, ip, o-, T, { Sagittarii.          72 Sagittarii.
ai. Uttara-Ashadha.                         2r. al-Baldah.                                 19. Teu.
         o-, ^ Sagitta'rii.                         N. of IT Saglttarii.                           <f Sagittarii.
aa. Abhijit.                                aa. Sa'd adh-Dhabih.                           20. Nieu.
         a, (, i Lyra.                              a, p Capricorn!.                               P Capricorn!.
23. (Jravana.                               33. Sa'd Bula'.                               a1. Nii.
         a, P, 7 Aquilse.                           E, MI » Aquarii.                               £ Aquarii.
24- ^ravishtha.                             *4. Sa'd as-Su'ud.                             aa. Hiii.
        P, a, 7', } Delphini.                       P, ? Aquarii.                                  P Aquarii.
a5. ^latabhishaj.                           a5. Sa'd al-Akhbiyah.                          a3. Goei.
        A. Aquarii etc.                             a, 7, {, TI Aquarii.                           o Aquarii.
26.  Pflrva-BhadrapadS.                     a& al-Fargh al-Mukdim.                         »4. Che.
         a, P Pegasi.                               a, p Pegasi. '                                  a Pegasi.
27. Uttara-Bhadrapada.                      a7- al-Fargh al-Mukhir.                        a5. Pi.
        7 Pegasi, a Audromedse.                     7 Pegasi, a Androinedse.                       7 Pegasi.
a8.   Revati.                               a8. Batn al-Hat.                               26. Eoei.
        J Piscium, etc.                             P Androniedse, etc.                          £ Andronicdic.
                    Longitude A D 560
        if _   '0




   ANDROMED A




                             *,   XXVH*


                     X- 't
*1\     %
 «i« „.-*•

                    •cr] p




                                                     *pr
   P*




                                          B_T—   ,w--.»-m-l <




                                                                ^
\
viii. 9.]               Additional Notes, etc.                       825
   28. p. 207. We have perhaps expressed ourselves in a manner liable
to misconstruction as to the want of reason or authority for giving to
the asterisms the name of " lunar mansions," " houses of the moon," and
the like. We would by no means be understood as denying that in the
Hindu science, especially its older forms, and in the Hindu mythology,
they are brought into particular and conspicuous relations with the
moon. Indeed, whether they were originally selected and established with
reference to the moon's daily progress along the ecliptic, as has been,
until lately, the universal opinion, or whether we are to believe with M.
Biot that they had in the first instance nothing to do with the moon,
and only came by chance to coincide in number with the days of her
sidereal revolution—it is at any rate altogether probable that to the
Hindu apprehension this coincidence formed the basis of the system.
We may even, conclude, from the fact that the asterisms are so fre
quently spoken of in the early literature of the Brahmana period,
while nevertheless there is no distinct mention of the planets until later
(Weber, Ind. Lit., p. 222), that for a long time the Hindus must havo
confined their attention and observations to the sun and moon, paying
no heed to the lesser planets : and yet we cannot regard it as in any
degree probable—hardly as possible, even—that any nation or people
could establish a system of zodiacal asterisms without discovering and
taking note of the planets; or that such a system could have been com
municated to, and applied by, the Hindus, without a recognition on
their part of those conspicuous and ever-moving stars. It may fairly le
claimed, then, that the asterisms, as a Hindu institution, are an origin
ally lunar division of the zodiac ; but we object none the less to their
being styled " lunar mansions," or called by any equivalent name ; be
cause, in the first place, the Hindus themselves have given them no name
denoting a special relation to the moon, and no name signifying "house,
mansion, station," or anything of the kind ; and because, in the second
place, as soon and as far as the Hindu astronomy extended itself beyond
its limitation to observations of the moon, just so far and so soon did
it employ the system of asterisms as a general method of division of
the ecliptic ; so that finally, as pointed out by us above, the asterisms
have come to be divested, in the properly astronomical literature of
India, of all special connection with the moon. With almost the same
propriety might we call the Hindu signs "luni-solar mansions"—since
they are, by origin, the parts of the ecliptic occupied by the sun during
each successive synodical revolution of the moon—as denominate the
nakxhatras of the Siddhantas " lunar mansions."
   29. p. 209. We should have mentioned farther, that an additional
inducement—and one, probably, of no small weight—to the reduction of
the number of astemms from twenty-eight to twenty-seven, is to be
recognized in the fact that the time of the moon's sidereal revolution in
days, though intermediate between the two numbers, is yet decidedly
nearer to twenty-ssven, exceeding it by less than a third. M. Biot
might even claim with some reason that the choice of the number
twenty-eight tended to prove the whole system not a lunar one by
origin : yet it might be replied that, the time of revolution being dis
tinctly more than twenty-seven days, the larger number was fully adrnis
                        42
       826                       S&rya-Siddhdnta,
       sible, and that it was also in some respects preferable, as being one ttat
       could be halved and quartered.
          3O. p. 273. In bringing this work to a close, we deem it advisable
       to present, in a summary manner, but more distinctly and connectedly
       than could properly be done in the notes upon the text, our conclusions
       as to certain points in the history of the Surya-Siddhanta, and of the
       astronomical science which it represents.
          In the first place, Bentley's determination of the age of the treatise
       we conceive to be altogether set aside by the considerations which we
       have adduced against it (note to i. 29-34) ; there is no reasonable
       ground for questioning that the Surya-Siddhanta is, as the Hindus have
       long believed it to be, one of the most ancient and original of the works
       which present their modern astronomical science. How far the text of
       which the translation has been given above is identical in substance and
        extent with that of the original Surya-Siddhanta, is another question,
       and one not easy to solve. That it is not precisely the same is evident
        enough. Even the modern manuscripts differ from one another in sin
       gle readings, in details of arrangement, in added or omitted verses. A
        comparison of the texts adopted and established by the different com
       mentators would be highly interesting, as carrying the history of the
       treatise a step farther back : but to us only one commentary is accessi
       ble, nor do we find anywhere any notices respecting the versions given
       by the others : in the absence of such, we may conclude that all pre
       sent substantially the same text, and so are alike posterior to the model
       ling of the work into its present form and with its present contents.
       But the indications of addition and interpolation, which we have had in
       so many cases to point out in our notes, are sometimes too telling to be
       misinterpreted. Farther than this we may not at present go : any de
        tailed discussion of the subject must remain unsatisfactory, until a fuller
       acquaintance with other of the ancient treatises, and a more careful
       .comparison of them with one another, shall throw upon it new light.
        A point of special interest connected with it is, whether the elements of
        mean motions of the planets do actually date from about the time
        pointed out by Bentley's calculations. With regard to this we are far
        from being confident ; but we do not regard it as impossible, or even as
        very improbable, that those elements, as presented by our text, have
        been the same from the beginning, never having undergone correction,
        until the application of the bija, about A. D. 1 500 (p. ] 9 etc.). And
        the date of that correction is calculated at least to suggest the suspicion
        that Muslim science may have had something to do with it. That
        observation, and the improvement of their system by deductions from
        observation, were ever matters of such serious earnest with the Hindus
        that they should have been led to make such amendments independ
        ently, is yet to be proved. The most important alteration of which
       anything like direct proof is furnished is that which concerns the pre
       cession of the equinoxes (note to iii, 9-12) ; and even here we would
       not undertake to say confidently what is the conclusion to be drawn.
       All such inquiries must remain conjectural, mere gropings in the twi
       light, until the position of the Surya-Siddhanta in the Siddhanta litera
       ture sJaall be better understood. What has given it so much greater



•-..
                          Additional Notes, etc.                       327
prominence and popularity than are enjoyed by the other works of its
class, or from what period its preeminence dates, is unknown. There
are treatises, like the Qakalya-SanhitA (add. note 1), which agree with
it in all essential features ; there are yet others, like the Soma and Va-
sishtha Siddhantas, which are said (add. note 6) to vary little from it :
whether any one among them all is original—and if any, which—
whether in each case the relation is one of co-ordination or of subordi
nation—we must be content for the time to be ignorant.
   One thing, however, is certain : underneath whatever variety may
characterize the separate treatises, there exists a fundamental unity ;
their differences are of secondary importance as compared with their
resemblances ; they all represent essentially a single system. And this
by no means in the same sense in which all modern astronomical works
may be said to represent a single system. For the Hindu system is not
one of nature ; it is not even a peculiar method of viewing and inter
preting nature, from which, after it had once been devised by some con
trolling intellect, others had not the force and originality to deviate : it
is a thoroughly artificial structure, full of arbitrary assumptions, of ab
surdities even, which have no foundation in nature, and could be in
vented by one as well as another. We need only to refer, as instances,
to the frame-work of monstrous chronological periods (i. 14-23)—to
the common epoch of the commencement of the Iron Age (note to i.
29-34), with its exact or nearly exact (add. note 6) conjunction of all
the planets—to the form of statement of the mean motions, yielding
recurring conjunctions, at longer or shorter intervals—to the assump
tion of a starting-point for the planets from at or near £ Piscinm (note
to i. 27)—to the revolutions of the apsides and nodes of the planets
(i. 41-44)—to the double system of epicycles (ii. 34-38)—to the deter
mination of the planetary orbits (xii. 80-90), etc., etc. These are plain
indications that the Hindu science emanated from one centre ; that it
 was the elaboration of a period and of a school, if not of a single mas
ter, who had power enough to impose his idiosyncracy upon the science
 of a whole nation. The question, then, of the comparative antiquity
 of single treatises is lost in the higher interest of the inquiry—when,
 where, and under what influence originated the system which they all
 agree in representing?
    What our opinions are upon these points will not be a matter of
doubt with any one who may have carefully looked through the preced
ing pages, although they have nowhere been explicitly stated. We re
gard the Hindu science as an offshoot from the Greek, planted not far
from the commencement of the Christian era, and attaining its fully de
veloped form in the course of the fifth and sixth centuries. The grounds
of this opinion we will proceed briefly to state. "
   In considering such a question, it is fair to take first into account the
general probabilities of the case. And there can be no question that,
from what we know in other respects of the character and tendencies
of the Hindu mind, we should not at all look to find the Hindus in pos
session of an astronomical science containing so much of truth. They
have been from the beginning distinguished by a remarkable inaptitude
and disinclination to observe, to collect facts, to record, to make indue-



                                                                               -
328                       Surya-Siddhdnta,
tive investigations. The old belief under the influence of which Bailly
could form his strange theories—the belief in the immense antiquity of
the Indian people, and its immemorial possession of a highly developed
civilization—the belief that India was the cradle of language, myth
ology, arts, sciences, and religions—lias long since been proved an error.
It is now well known that Hindu culture cannot pretend to a remoter
origin than 2000 B. C., and that, though marked by striking and emi
nent traits of intellect and character, the Hindus have ever been weak
in positive science; metaphysics and grammar—with, perhaps, algebra
and arithmetic, to them the mechanical part of mathematical science—
being the only branches of knowledge in which they have independently
won honorable distinction. That astronomy would come to constitute
an exception to the general rule in this respect, there is no antecedent
ground for supposing. The infrequency of references to the stars in
the early Sanskrit literature, the late date of the earliest mention of the
planets, prove that there was no special impulse leading the nation to
devote itself to studying the movements of the heavenly bodies. All
evidence goes to show that the Hindus, even after they ItaM derived
from abroad (p. 204) a systematic division of the ecliptic, limited their
attention to the two chief luminaries, the sun and moon, and contented
themselves with establishing a method of maintaining the concordance
 of the solar year with the order of the lunar months. If, then, at a later
period, we find them in possession of a full astronomy of the solar sys
tem, our first impulse is to inquire, whence did they obtain it? A
 closer inspection does not tend to inspire us with confidence in it as of
 Hindu origin. We find it, to be sure, thoroughly Hindu in its external
form, wearing many strange and fantastic features which are to be at
once recognized as of native Indian growth ; but we find it also to con
tain much true science, which could only be derived from a profound
and long-continued study of nature. The whole, system, in short, may
be divided into two portions, whereof the one contains truth so success
fully deduced that only the Greeks, among all other ancient nations, can
 show anything worthy to be compared with it; the other, the frame
work in which that truth is set, composed of arbitrary assumptions and
 absurd imaginings, which betray a close connection with the fictitious
 cosmogonies and geographies of the philosophical and Puranic literature
 of India. The question presses itself, then, strongly upon us, whether
 these two portions can possibly have the same origin : whether the sci
 entific habit of mind which could lead to the discovery of the one is
 compatible with those traits which would permit its admixture with the
 other. But most especially, could a system founded—as this, if origi
 nal, must have been —upon sagacious, accurate, and protracted observa
 tion of the heavenly bodies, so entirely ignore the ground-work upon
 which it rested, and refuse and deny all possibility of future improve
 ment by like means, as does this Hindu system, in whose text-books
 appears no record of an observation, and no confessed deduction from
 observations ; in which the astronomer is remanded to his text-book as
 the sole and sufficient source of knowledge, nor ever taught or coun
 selled to study the heavens except for the purpose of determining his
 longitude, his latitude, and the local time ? Surely, we have a right to
                         Additional Notes, etc.                         329
say that the system, in its form as laid before us, must come from an
other people or another generation than that which laid its scientific
foundation ; that it must be the work of a race which either had never
known, or had had time to forget, the observing habits and the induc
tive methods of those who gave it origin. But the hypothesis that an
earlier generation in India itself performed the labors of which the later
system-makers reaped the fruit, is well-nigh excluded by the absence,
already referred to, of all evidence in the more ancient literature of
deep astronomical investigation : the other alternative, of derivation
from a foreign source, remains, if not the only possible, at least the only
probable one. We come, then, next to consider the direct evidences of
a Greek origin.
    First in importance among these is the system of epicycles for repre
senting the movement, and calculating the positions, of the planets.
This, the cardinal feature in both systems, is (ii. 34-45) essentially alike
and the same in both. Now, notwithstanding the fact that such second
ary circles do in fact represent, to a certain degree, true quantities in
nature, there is yet too much that is strange and arbitrary in them to
leave any probability to the supposition that two nations could have de
vised them independently. But there are sufficient grounds for believ
ing the Greeks to have actually created their own system, bringing it
by successive steps of elaboration to the form in which Ptolemy finally
presents it. In the history of the science among the Greeks, everything
 is clear and open ; they tell us what they owed to the Egyptians, what
to the Chaldeans : we trace the conceptions which were the germs of
 their scheme of epicycles, the observations on which it was based, the
 inductive and deductive methods by which it was worked out and estab
 lished. In the Hindu astronomy, on the other hand, all is groundless
 assumption and absurd pretense : we find, as basis for the system, neither
 the conceptions—for these are directly or impliedly denied or ignored
 —nor the observations—for not a mention of an actual observation is
 anywhere to be discovered—nor the methods : the whole is gravely put
 forth as a complete and perfect fabric, of divine origin and immemorial
 antiquity. On the agreement of the two sciences in point of numerical
 data we will not lay any stress, since it might well enough be supposed
 that two nations, if once set upon the same track toward the discovery
 of truth, would arrive independently at so near an accordance with na
 ture and with one another. We will look for other evidences, of a less
 ambiguous character, to sustain our main argument. The division of
 the circle, into signs, degrees, minutes, and seconds, is the same in both
 systems, and, being the foundation on which all numerical measurements
 and calculations are made, is an essential and integral part of both.
 Now the names of the first subdivisions, the signs, are the same in
 Greece and in India (see note to i. 58) : but with the Greeks they belong
 to certain fixed arcs of the ecliptic, being derived from the constellations
 occupying those arcs ; with the Hindus they are applied to successive
 arcs of 30°, counted from any point that may be chosen : this is an un
 ambiguous indication that the latter have borrowed them, and forgotten
 or neglected their original significance. But farther, the ordinary Hindu
 name of that division of the circle which is in most frequent use, the
830                        SiLrya-Siddhdnta,
minute, is no Sanskrit word, but taken directly from the Greek, being
lipt&, which is Iexr6i>. Again, the planets are ordinarily named in the
 Siddhantas in the order in which they succeed one another as regents
 of the days of the week ; and not only has it been shown above that
 the week is no original Hindu institution, but it has even appeared that,
on tracing it to its very foundation, we find there another Greek word,
 &t/a, represented by hor&. Once more, in the cardinal operation of find
 ing by means of the system of epicycles the true place of a planet, we
 see that one of the most important data, the mean anomaly, is called
 by another name of Greek origin, namely ktndra, which is xlvT<x>v.
 These three words, occurring where they do, not upon the outskirts of
 the Hindu science, but in its very centre and citadel, amount of them
 selves almost to full proof of its Greek origin : taken in connection with
 the other concurrent evidences, they form an argument which can nei
 ther be set aside nor refuted. Of those other evidences, we will only
 mention farther here that Hindu treatises and commentaries of an early
 date often refer to the yavanas, "Greeks" or "westerners," and to ya-
 van&cary&s. " the Greek (or western) teachers," as authorities on astro
 nomical subjects—that astronomical treatises are found bearing names
which come more or less distinctly from the West (note to i. 4-6) —and
that floating traditions are met with, to the effect that some of the
Siddhantas were revealed to their human promulgators in Romaka-city,
that is to say, at Rome. Farther witness to the same truth, deducible
from other coincidences of the two systems, we pass .unnoticed here,
since it is not our object to discuss the question exhaustively, but only
to bring forward the main grounds of our opinions.
    The question next arises, when, and in what manner the knowledge of
astronomy was communicated from Greece to India. In reply to this,
only probabilities offer themselves, yet in some points the indications
are pretty distinct. It is, in onr own view, altogether likely that the
science came in connection with the lively commerce which, during the
first centuries of our era, was carried on by sea between Alexandria, as
the port and mart of Rome, and the western coast of India. Two con
siderations especially favor this supposition : first, that the chief site of
the Hindu science is found to be the city which lay nearest to the route
of that commerce (note to i. 62) : secondly, that Rome is the only west
ern city or country which is distinctly mentioned in the astronomical
geography (xii. 39), and the one with which, as above noticed, the astro
nomical traditions connect themselves. Had the Hindus derived their
knowledge overland, through the Syrian, Persian, and Bactrian king
doms which stood under Greek government, or in which Greek influence
was predominant, and Greek culture known and prized, the name of
Rome would have been vastly less likely to stand forth with such promi
nence, and the capitals of Hindustan proper would more probably have
been the cradles of the new science. The absence from the Hindu
system of any of the improvements introduced by Ptolemy into that of
the Greeks (note to ii. 43-45) tends strongly to prove that the transmis
sion of the principal groundwork of the former took place before his
time : nor can we think it likely that the numerical elements adopted
by the Hindus would vary so much as in many cases they are found to
                           Additional Notes, etc.                           381
do from those of the Syntaxis, if the latter had been already in existence,
and acknowledged as the principal and most authoritative exponent of
Greek astronomy. Whether the information was transmitted through
the medium of Hindus who visited the Mediterranean, or of learned
Greeks who made the voyage to India, or by the translation of Greek
treatises, or by what other methods, we would not at present even offer
a conjecture ; and the point is one of only subordinate consequence.
   Whatever may have been the date of the first communication of the
elements out of which the Hindu system was elaborated, there is good
reason to suppose that its final reduction to its present form did not
take place until some time during the fifth and sixth centuries. That
period is distinctly pointed out by the choice of the equinox of A. D.
570 as the initial and principal point of the fixed sphere (note to i. 27),
by the definition of position of the junction-stars of the asterisms (p. 2 1 1 ),
and by the Hindu traditions which refer to that time the names of
greatest prominence and authority in the early history of the science.
It is evident that the elaboration of the system must have been a work
of time, probably of many generations : what were the forms which it
wore in the interval we do not know ; here, as in many other depart
ments of the Hindu literature, all record of the steps of development
appears to be lost, only the final and fully formed product being pre
served and transmitted to us : yet more light upon this point may still
be hoped for, from the careful examination of all documents now ac
cessible, or of such as may hereafter be discovered. The process of
assimilation and adaptation to Hindu conceptions and Hindu methods
was thoroughly and completely performed. Among the changes of
method introduced, the most useful and important was the substitution
of sines for chords (p. 66) ; the general substitution of an arithmetical
for a geometrical form also deserves particular notice. That no great
amount of geometrical science is implied in any part of the system, is
very evident : it is distinguished by the constant and dexterous applica
tion of a few simple principles : the equality of the square of the hy-
pothenuse to the sum of the squares of the base and perpendicular—the
comparison of similar right-angled triangles—the formation and com
bination of proportions, the rule of three—are the characteristic features
of the early Hindu mathematical knowledge, as displayed in the Surya-
 Siddhanta. Of other treatises, of an earlier or later period, as those of
Brahmagupta and Bhaskara, which (see Colebrooke's Hindu Algebra)
 give evidence of knowledge more profound in arithmetic and algebra,
 we cannot at present speak ; but we hope at some future time to be able
 to revert to the subject of the Hindu astronomy, in connection with
 these or other of the text-books by which it is represented.
   Rev. Mr. Burgess, having placed his translation and notes in the
hands of the Committee of Publication for farther elaboration, has very
liberally allowed them entire freedom in their work, even where their
deductions, and the views they expressed, did not accord with his own
opinions. The most important point at issue between us is that dis
cussed in the next preceding pages, or the originality of the Hindu
astronomy ; upon this, then, he is desirous of expressing independently
his dissenting views, as in the following note.
332                        S&rya-Siddhdnia,

               CONCLUDING NOTE BY THE TRANSLATOR.
   It may not be improper for me to state, in a closing note, that I bad
prepared a somewhat extended and elaborate essay on the history of
astronomy among the Hindus, to be published in connection with the
preceding translation. But the length of this essay is such—the subject
matter of it not being material to the illustration of the Siddhanta, and
the translation and notes having already occupied so much space—that
it was not thought advisable to insert it here.
   Yet as my investigations have led me to adopt opinions on some
points differing from those advanced by Prof. Whitney in his very valu
able additions to the notes upon the translation, truth and consistency
seem to require me to present at least a brief summary of the results at
which I arrived in that essay in reference to the points in question. By
so doing, I free myself from any embarrassment under which I should
labor, if hereafter—as I now intend—I shall wish to express the
grounds for my opinions on these points, in this Journal or elsewhere.
   The points to which I allude bear upon the claims of the Hindus to
the honor of original invention and discovery in astronomical science—
especially, their claims to such an honor in comparison with the Greeks.
   Prof. Whitney seems to hold the opinion, that the Hindus derived
their astronomy and astrology almost bodily from the Greeks—and
that what they did not borrow from the Greeks, they derived from other
people, as the Arabians, Chaldeans and Chinese (see pp. 34, 204, 206,
et al.). I think he does not give the Hindus the credit due to them,
and awards to the Greeks more credit than they are justly entitled to.
In>advancing this opinion, however, I admit that the Greeks, at a later
period, were the more successful cultivators of astronomical science.
There is nothing among the Hindu treatises that can compare with the
great Syntaxis of Ptolemy. And yet, from the light I now have, I
must think the Hindus original in regard to most of the elementary
facts and principles of astronomy as found in their systems, and for the
most part also in their cultivation of the science ; and that the Greeks
borrowed from them, or from an intermediate secondary source, to
which these facts and principles had come from India. I might perhaps
so far modify this statement as to admit the supposition that neither
Greeks nor Hindus borrowed the one from the other, but both from a
common source. But with my present knowledge, I cannot concur in
the opinion that the Hindus are, to any great extent, indebted to the
Greeks for their astronomy, or that the latter have any well grounded
claims to the honor of originality in regard to those elementary facts
and principles of astronomical science which are common to their own
and other ancient systems, and which are of such a nature as indicates
for them a single origin, and a transmission from one system to another.
For the sake of clearness, it is well that I should state more specifically
a few of the more important facts and principles that come under the
class above referred to. They are as follows :
   1. The lunar division of the zodiac into twenty-seven or twenty-eight
asterisms (see transl., ch. viii). This division is common, with slight
modifications, to the Hindu, Arabian, and Chinese systems.
                             Concluding Note.                            383

    2. The solar division of the zodiac into twelve signs, with the names
of the latter. These names are, in their import, precisely the same in
the Hindu and Greek systems. The coincidence is such that the theory
of the division and the names of the parts having proceeded from one
original source is unquestionably the correct one.
    3. The theory of epicycles in accounting for the motions of the plan
ets, and in calculating their true places. This is common to the Hindu
and Greek astronomies. At least, there is such a coincidence in the two
systems in reference to the epicycles as almost to preclude the idea of
independent origin or invention.
   4. Coincidences, and even a sameness in some parts, between the
systems of astrology received among the Hindus, Greeks, and Arabians,
strongly indicate for those systems, in their primitive and essential ele
ments, a common origin.
   5. The names of the five planets known to the ancients, and the ap
plication of these names to the days of the week (see notes, i. 52).
   In regard to these specifications I remark in general :
   First, in referefce to no one of them do the claims of any people to
the honor of having been the original inventors or discoverers appear to
be better founded than those of the Hindus.
   Secondly, in reference to most of them, the evidence of originality I
regard as clearly in favor of the Hindus ; and in regard to some, and
those the more important, this evidence appears to me nearly or quite
conclusive.
   I have not space for detail, nor is it the design of this note to enter
into the details of argument on any point whatever. A brief remark,
however, for the sake of clearness, seems called for in reference to each
of the above five specifications of facts and principles common to some
or all of the ancient systems of astronomy and astrology.
   1. As to the lunar division of the zodiac into twenty-seven or twenty-
eight asterisms. The undoubted antiquity of this division, even in its
elaborated form, among the Hindus, in connection with the absence or
paucity of such evidence among any other people, incline me decidedly
to the. opinion that the division is of a purely Hindu origin. This is
still my opinion, notwithstanding the views advanced by M. Biot and
others in favor of another origin.
    2. As toHhe solar division of the zodiac into twelve parts, and the
names of those parts. The use of this division, and the present names
of the signs, can be proved to have existed in India at as early a period
as in any other country ; and there is evidence less clear and satisfac
tory, it is true, yet of such a character as to create a high degree of
probability, that this division was known to the Hindus centuries before
any traces can be found in existence among any other people.
    As corroborative of this position in part, or at least as strongly favor
ing the idea of an eastern origin of the division of the ecliptic in question,
I may be allowed to adduce the opinions of Ideler and Lepsius, as quoted
by Humboldt (Cosmos, Harper's ed., iii. 120, note): "Ideler is inclined
to believe that the Orientals had names, but not constellations, for the
Dodecatomeria, and Lepsius regards it as a natural assumption ' that
the Greeks, at the period when their sphere was for the most part
                            43


                                                                                 .
834     •                  Sdrya-Siddhdnta,

unfilled, should have added to their own the Chaldean constellations
from which the twelve divisions were named.' " Whether Ideler meant
by "Orientals" the Chaldeans, or some other eastern people, the appli
cation of the term in this connection to the Hindus exactly suits the
supposition of the Indian origin of the division in question, since in
Indian astronomy the names of the signs are merely names of the
twelfth parts of the ecliptic, and are never applied to constellations.
Humboldt's opinion is, that the solar divisions of the ecliptic, with the
names of the signs, came to the Greeks from Chaldea. I think the evi
dence preponderates in favor of a more eastern, if not a Hindu, origin.
   3. The theory of epicycles. The difference in the development of
this theory in the Greek and Hindu systems of astronomy precludes
the idea that one of these people derived more than a hint respecting it
from the other. And so far as this point alone is concerned, we have as
much reason to suppose the Greeks to have been the borrowers as the
contrary ; but other considerations seem to favor the supposition that
the Hindus were the original inventors of this theory.
   4. As regards astrology, there is not much honor, £1 any estimation,
connected with its invention and culture. The coincidences that exist
between the Hindu and Greek systems are too remarkable to admit of
the supposition of an independent origin for them. But the honor of
original invention, such as it is, lies, I think, between the Hindus and the
Chaldeans. The evidence of priority of invention and culture seems, on
the whole, to be in favor of the former ; the existence of three or four
Arabic and Greek terms in the Hindu system being accounted for on
the supposition that they were introduced at a comparatively recent
period. In reference, however, to the word hor&, Greek &t>a (see notes
to i. 62 ; xii. 78-79), it may not be inappropriate to introduce the tes
timony of Herodotus (B. II, ch. 109): "The sun-dial and the gnomon,
with the division of the day into twelve parts, were received by the
Greeks from the Babylonians." There is abundant testimony to the
fact that the division of the day into twenty-four hours existed in the
East, if not actually in India, before it did in Greece. In reference,
farther, to the so-called Greek words found in Hindu astronomical treat
ises, I would remark that we may with entire propriety refer them to
that numerous class of words common to the Greek and Sanskrit lan
guages, which either came to both from a common source, or passed
from the Sanskrit to the Greek at a period of high antiquity ; for no
one maintains, so far as I am aware, that the Greek is the parent of the
Sanskrit, to the extent indicated by this numerous class of words, and
by the similarity of grammatical inflections in the two languages.
   5. As to the names of the planets, I remark that the identity of all
of them in the Hindu and Greek systems is not to my mind clearly
made out. However this may be, I think the present names of the
planets in Greek astronomy originated at least as far east as Chaldea.
Herodotus says (B. II, ch. 52) ..." the names of the gods came into
Greece from Egypt." The names of the planets are names of gods.
Herodotus's opinion indicates the belief of the Greeks in reference to
the origin of these names. Other considerations show for them, almost
beyond a question, an origin as far east, to say the least, as Chaldea.
                          , Concluding Note.                              335
    As to the application of the names of the. planets to the days of the
week, it is impossible to determine definitely where it originated. Re
specting this matter, Prof. H. H. Wilson expresses his opinion—in which
I concur—in the following language : " The origin of this arrangement
is not very precisely ascertained, as it was unknown to the Greeks, and
not adopted by the Romans until a late period. It is commonly
ascribed to the Egyptians and Babylonians, but upon no very sufficient
authority, and the Hindus appear to have at least as good a title to the
invention as any other people" (Jour. Roy. As. Soc., ix. 84).
    One word on the claims of the Arabians to the honor of original in
vention in astronomical science. And first, they themselves claim no
such honor. They confess to having received their astronomy from
India and Greece. They had at an early period some two or three of
the first Hindu treatises of astronomy. " In the reign of the second
Abbasside Khalif Almansur . . . (A. DV773), as is related in the preface
to the astronomical tables of Ben-Al-Adami, published . . . A. D. 920,
an Indian astronomer, well versed in the science which he professed,
visited the court%f the Khalif, bringing with him tables of the equa
tions of planets according to the mean motions, with observations rela
tive to both solar and lunar eclipses, and the ascension of the signs ;
taken, as he affirmed, from tables computed by an Indian prince, whose
name, as the Arabian author writes it, was PHIGHAR" (Colebrooke's
Hindu Algebra, p. Ixiv). That the Arabians were thoroughly imbued
with a knowledge of the Hindu astronomy before they became ac
quainted with that of the Greeks, is evident from their translation of
Ptolemy's Syntaxis. It is known that this great work of the Greek
astronomer first became known in Europe through the Arabic version.
In the Latin translation of this version, the ascending node (Greek &v«-
(Sifi&tfav a6vSea/*os) is called nodus capitis, "node of the head," and the
descending node (Greek xaiafiiB&'Cfav ativSea/to;), nodus caudce, " node of
the tail "—which are pure Hindu appellations (see Latin Translation of
Almagest, B. iv, ch. 4 ; B. vi, ch. 7, et al.). This fact, with other evidence,
clearly shows the influence of Hindu astronomy on that of the Arabians.
In fact, this latter people seem to have done little more in this science
than work over the materials derived from their eastern and western
neighbors.
   Another fact showing the belief of the Arabians themselves respect
ing their indebtedness, in matters of science, to the Hindus, should be
mentioned here. They ascribe the invention of the numerals, the nine
digits (the credit of whose invention is quite generally awarded to the
Arabians), to the Hindus. "All the Arabic and Persian books of arith
metic ascribe the invention to the Indians" (Strachey, on the Early
History of Algebra, As. Res., xii. 184 ; see likewise Colebrooke's Hindu
Algebra, pp. lii-liii, where the same is shown from a different authority.
Strachey's article was published subsequently to the work of Colebrooke).
   The above facts and considerations, showing the indebtedness of the
Arabians to the Hindus in regard to mathematical and astronomical
science, clearly have an important bearing on the question of priority
of invention in regard to the lunar division of the zodiac into twenty-
eight asterisms, at least so far as the Arabians are concerned. Taking
836                         S&rya-Siddhdnta,
 all the facts into account, the supposition that this people were tho
 inventors is altogether untenable.
    I close this note—already longer than I intended—with a quotation
 from that distinguished orientalist, H. T. Colebrooke. In a very valu
 able essay entitled " On the Notions of the Hindu Astronomers concern
 ing the Precession of the Equinoxes and Motions of the Planets," having
 stated with some detail some of the more striking peculiarities of the
 Hindu systems, and likewise coincidences existing between them and that
 of the Greeks, with the evidence of communication from one people to
 the other, he says: "If these circumstances, joined to a resemblance
 hardly to be supposed casual, which the Hindu astronomy, with its ap
 paratus of eccentrics and epicycles, bears in many respects to that of
 the Greeks, be thought to authorize a belief, that the Hindus received
from the Greeks that knowledge which enabled them to correct and im
prove their own imperfect astronomy, I shall not be inclined to dissent
 from the opinion" (As. Res., xii. 245-6; Essays, ii.411).
    This is all that so learned and cautious a writer could say in favor of
the opinion that the Hindus derived astronomical kifewledge from the
Greeks. More than this I certainly could not say. After the solar
division of the zodiac, with the names of its parts, it is evident, I think,
that only hints could have passed from one people to the other, and that
at an early period ; for on the supposition that the Hindus borrowed
from the Greeks at a later period, we find it difficult to see precisely
what it was that they borrowed ; since in no case do numerical data and
results in the systems of the two peoples exactly correspond. And in
regard to the more important of such data and results—as for instance,
the amount of the annual precession of the equinoxes, the relative size
of the sun and moon as compared with the earth, the greatest equation
of the centre for the sun—the Hindus are more nearly correct than the
Greeks, and in regard to the times of the revolutions of the planets
they are very nearly as correct : it appearing from a comparative view
of the sidereal revolutions of the planets (p. 24), that the Hindus are
most nearly correct in four items, and Ptolemy in six. There has evi
dently been very little astronomical borrowing between the Hindus and
the Greeks. And in relation to points that prove a communication from
one people to the other, with my present knowledge on the subject, I
am inclined to think that the course of derivation was the opposite to
that supposed by Colebrooke—from east to west rather than from west
to east; and I would express my opinion in relation to astronomy, in
the language which this eminent scholar uses in relation to some coinci
dences in speculative philosophy and religious dogmas, especially the
doctrine of metempsychosis, found in the Greek and Hindu systems,
which indicate a communication from one people to the other: "I
should be disposed to conclude that the Indians were in this instance
teachers rather than learners" (Transactions of the Roy. As. Soc., i. 579).
This opinion is expressed in the last essay on oriental philosophy that
came from the pen of Colebrooke.                                   E. B.
 Boston, May, 1860.
                       SANSKRIT INDEX.

  THE following Index contains all the Sanskrit words, excepting proper names,
which have been cited in the text and notes, in connection with their translation or
more detailed explanation. It includes many terms of trivial importance, but we
prefer to err upon the side of fullness, if upon either. All the cases of occurrence
of each word are not given, but it is referred to a characteristic passage, or to the
note where it is explained. The references by Roman and Arabic figures are to
chapter and verse, and an added » denotes the note next following the verse given :
Arabic figures when used alone refer to pages.


  anfa, i. 28 n.                             ayanakalds, vii. 1 2 n.
  anfuvimarda, vii. 19.                      ayanagraha, vii. 12 n.
  akxha, i. 60 n.                            ayanadrkkarman, vii. 12n.
  aki/iadrkkarman, vii. 12 n, ix. 5 n.       aynndnfa, 105.
  akshabhd, iii. 13 n.                       ayandnta, xii. 72 n.
  akshonnati, i. 60 n.                       arka, add. n. 3.
  agrajyd, iii. 7 n.                         arknja, add. n. 3.
  agramduraikd, iii. 27.                     arkdgrd, iii. 23.
  agrd, iii. 7 n.                            arjuni, add. n. 26.
  aghds, add. n. 26.                         <ittil.<i. xiii. 16 n.
  angdraka, add. n. 3.                       ami mil i, v. 1 n.
  nnt/u/n, iii. 5 n, x. 9.                   afvattha, add. n. 26.
  nja, i. 58 n.                              afoayujdu, 183.
  aja ekapdd, 199.                           aprini, afvini, afvindu, 188.
  aim, vii. 19.                              ashddhd, 194.
  ativegita, ii. 1 1 n.                      ftxn.nl>:, iii. 45 n.
  atifighra, ii. 13.                         astto, x. Ion.
  aditi, xii. 28 n.                          asu, i. 12 n : and see asavat.
  adkikdra, i. 70 n, xi. 23 n.               asura, i. 2, xii. 33.
  adhimdsa, adhimdsaka, i. 40 n.             asta, ix. 1 n.
  adhydtma, xii. 11.                         astamgachant, xiii. 18.
  adhydya, xi. 23n, xii. 10.                 it::!niii,i>iii, astamaya, ix. 1 n.
  anurddhd, 192.                             astalagna, xiii. 1 5 n.
  anuvakra, ii. 12.                          nxi 'in ftis, ix. 5 n.
  anuxknagu, add. n. 3.                      axphuta, v. 7.
  untu nt. xi. IS n.                         ahankdra, xii. 20.
  antaralagndsavas, iii. 50 n.               ahargana, i. 5 In.
  itini/'i, iii. 7 n.                        aAi budhnya, 199, ix. 18.
  andhakd, arid. n. 26.                      u!1,1., fii I iv, iii. 51 n.
  apakrama, i. 70 n.
  apakramamandala, xiii. 13 n.                          xii. 90 n.
  apahharani, 184.                           aksha drkkarman, vii. 12 n.
   apamandala, xiii. 13 n.                   dksha valana, iv. 25 n.
   apatavya, vii. 19.                        agneya, viii. 18.
   apasavyam, xii. 72 n.                     &fi, xii. 15.
   apdmvatsa, viii. 21 n.                    dditya, viii. 19, xii. 28 n.
  abhijit, 195.                              apa, djoas, 194, viii. 21 n.
  amarcjya, add. n. 3.                       dpya, viii. 4.
  amdvdsyd, ii. 66 n, iv. 7.                 ayana gratia, vii. 12 n.
  • i mini a, \. 10.                         ayana drkkarman, vii. 1 2 n.
  amrtasrdva, xiii. 19 n.                    ayana valana, iv. 25 n.
  ayana, iii. 10, 249, xii. 72 n.            xr/.-i , add. n. 3 .
838                                S&rya-Siddhdnta,
  drdrd, 186.                                 kdpdlika, viii. ISn.
  dryikd. add. n. 26.                         kdrmuka. add. D. 16.
  dli, i. 58 n.                              £d/a, i 10 D, ii. 69 n.
  a '-r I ii:i, iii. l'2n.                   kdlagati, ix. 1 1 n.
  dfrethd. 188.                              kdlabhdgdi, ix. 5 n.
  dflcthd, 188.                              kdlasddkana, iii. 50.
  dsannatd, xii. 72 n.                       kdldnfdi, ix. 5 n.
                                             kdxhthd, i. 12 n.
 indit, add. n. 3.                           ^u/'a, add. n. 3.
 i.»'iil,,i. add. n. 2$.                     Au/yd, ii. 63 n.
 ilfilii, add. n. 26.                        kutila, ii. 12.
 iViu, add. n. 16.                           kumbha, i. 58 0.
 iskta, i. 58 n.                             A'iifa, vii. 22.
                                                   , i. 17n.
 •ueea, i. 33, 84 u, ii. 5 n.                       .vujru, i. 17 n.
 utkramajyd, ii. 27 n.                         r«f*d, 184.
 utkramajydrd/iapindaka, ii. 22.            krxhna, xiv. 17.
 uttajvi, vi. 12 n, 189.                    krxhnatdmra, vi. 23.
 vttnra khanda, xi. 23 n.                   krxhna paksha, i. 51 n.
 uttardyana, iii. 12 n.                     kendra, ii. 30 n, 45 n.
 udaya, v. 3 n, ix. 1 n.                    koti, ii. 30 n, x. 15n, add. D.
 vdayajyd, v. 3 n.                          koiijyd, ii. 30 n, add. n. 18.
 udayaprdndt, ii. 59 n.                     kotijydphala, ii. 39 n.
 udaydsava*, ii. 59 n, iii. 43 n.           kotiphala, ii. 39 n.
 udaydstddhikdra, ix. 1 a.                  ^ona, iii. 34 n.
 imnate, iii. 39 n, iv. 26.                 konafanku, iii. 34 n.
 unmandala, iii. 6 n.                       krdnti, i. 70 n.
 unmandalafanku, iii. 34 n.                 krdntijyd, ii. 28 n.
 unmilana, iv. 17 n.                        krdntipdta, 86.
 vllekha, vii. 18.                          krdntipdtagati, iii. 12 n.
                                            krdntimandala, xiii. 1 8 D.
 iirdhvam, xiii. lOn.                       krdntivrtta, xiii, 13 n.
 urdhva ydmyoltaravrtta, xiii. 15n.         irofa, i. 60 n.
                                            kshana, i. 12n.
rcas, xii. 17.                              kihaya, i. 40 n, xii. 72 n.
jy'u, ii. 13.                               foAi<«, ii. 63 n.
rna, ii. 5 n.                               kshitija, iii. 49 n, T. 1 n.
r<K, xiv. 10 n.                             kshitijyd, ii. 68 n.
rshi, yiii. 21 n, xiv. 2&.                  kshtp, i. 70 n.
                                            kihetra, ix. 16n, xiii. 11.
ekadefa, xi. I8n.                           kshetrdnfds, ix. 16n.
ekdyanagata, xi. 5 n, 18 ».                 kshetriya, 199.
                                            kshepa, iv. 2 In, v. 6n.
 fiindra, xi. 21.
                                            khacara, add. n. 22.
 o/a, ii. 35.                               khacdrin, add. n. 22.
                                            khamadhya, v. 1 n, xiii. 14.
Jca/cshd, iv. 3 n, xii. 85 n, xiii. 4.
kadamba, v. 1 n.                            gana, i. 28 n.
k/mifii, i. 53 n.                           ganda, xi. 22 n.
kapdla, v. 17 n, xiii. 22 n.                ganddnta, xi. 21, 22.
kapila, vi. 23.                             ^a<i, v. 6 n.
karana, ii. 67, 69 n.                       garbha, v. 1 n.
karani, iii. 30, 34 n.                      guru, xiii. 2, add. n. S-,
karka, karkata, i. 58 D.                    gurvakthara, i. 12n.
karna, ii. 41, iii. 23 n, iv. 21 n.         guhyaka, xiii. 3 n.
karman, ii. 42, vii. 1 2 n.                 gala, v. 1 n.
kalana, i. lOn.                             jrd«»a, i. 13n.
i-oM, i. 12 n, 28.                          grasta, vi. 13, ix. 9.
kali., i. 17 n.                             graha, iv. 6 n, add. n. 22.
kali yuga, i. 17 n.                         grahana, iv. 6 n, vi. 4.
kalpa, i. 19.                               grahayutyadhikdra, vii. 1 n.
                                  Sanskrit Index.                                         339
grdsa, iv. 11 n, 15 n, 20.                     teW, i. 58 n.
grdhaka, iv. 9 n.                              torana, 191.
grdhya, iv. 9 D.                               trinfatkrtyas, iii. 12n.
                                               trinfatkrtvax, iii. 12 n.
ghati, xiii. 23 D.                             trikona, iii. 34 n.
ghdtikd, i. 12 n, xiii. 23 D.                  tricatuhkarna, vii. 14 n.
                                               trijivd, ii. 60 n.
ctikra, iii. 12 n, xiii. 21 n.                 fryyd, ii. 60 n.
caturasra, iii. 5 n.                           triprafnddhikdra, ii. 69 n.
caturyuga, i. 15, 17 n.                        tribhajivd, -jyd, -mdurvikd, ii. 60 n.
catushpada, ii. 69 n.                          tribhonalagna, v. 1 n.
candra, add. n. 3.                             <nrfi, i. 12 n.
candragrahanddkik&ra, iv. 88 n.                              i. 17n.
candradifax, x. 15n.
cara, ii. 63 n, 68, xiv. 6n.                   dakshina, vi. 12n.
carakalds, 310.                                dakshindyana, iii. 12 n.
carakhanda, iii. 44 n.                         danda, i. 12n, 60 n.
carajyd, iii. 36 n.                            dasra, viii. 9.
caradala, ii. 63 n.                            dinakara, add. n. 8.
ca/a, ii. 40.                              ,   dinardfi, i. 28 n, 51 n.
cii/n karna, ii. 42 D.                         dinavydsadala, ii. 60 n.
cdpa, add. n. 16.                              divdkara, add. n. 3.
citrd, 190.                                    <fc'p, ii. 69 n, v. 2.
                                               drkkarman, vii. 12 n.
chandat, xii. 15.                              drkk*hepa, v. 6n.
chddaka, iv. 9 n.                              drktulyatd, vii. 18n.
chddya, iv. 9 n.                               drktulya etc., xi. 8 n.
cluiiiti, iii. 5 a                             drggati, v. 6 n.
chedn, iii. 35, v. 7.                          drggatijivd, v. 7.
ckedyaka, vi. In.                              drtijyd, v. 6 n.
                                               drglambana, v. 1 n.
jamb&dvipa, xii. 44 n.                         drgnrtta, v. 1 n.
jayin, vii. 21.                                rfrf, ii. 14, iii. 34 n, v. 6n.
_;'i<a, vii. 20.                               drfydnfdx. ix. 5 n.
Jim, add. D. 3.                                depa, ii. 69 n, v. 2.
^'Jud, ii. 27 n.                               defdntara, i. 61 n.
jna, add. n. 3.                                defdntaraphala, ii. 89 n, 290.
jyd, ii. 27 n, add. n. 18.                     ddinata, ii. 10.
jydpinda, if. 27 n.                            dorjyd, ii. 48.
jydpindaka, ii. 81.                            rfo.i, ii 30 n, add. n. 16.
jydrd/ta, ii. 27 n.                            dyngana, i. 51 n.
jydrdhapinda, ii. 16.                          dyujyd, ii. 60 n.
jytshtkd, 192.                                 dodpara yuga, i. 17 n.
jyotiskopanuhadadliydya, xiii. 3 n.            dvimab/idva, xiv. 4.
jyotii, i. 3 n.                                       a, xii. 44 n.
/<rf, xii. 12.                                 dhana, ii. 5 n.
tatpara, i. 12n.                               dhanin, 196.
tamos, vi. 11.                                 dhaniahthd, 196.
tallagndsavas, ix. 11.                         dim a us, i.TiSii, 60 n, xiii. 21 n, add. n. 16.
<d;'i'&a, vii. 23.                             dldshnya, viii. 1 n, xi. 21.
tdra&d, Wrd, vii. 1 n, viii. 16, 19, xii. 43   dhruva, ii. 67, viii. 1 n.
tdrdgraha, vii. 1 n.                           dhruvaka, viii. 1 n.
tigmdnfu, add. n. 8.                           dhruvatdrd, xii. 43.
tit/u, i. 13, ii. 66 n.
tithikthaya, i. 4 On.                          nakshatra, 207.
tithyanta, v. 13n.                             nakshatragrahayutyadhiJtdra, viii. In.
ton j, iii. 5 n.                               «a<a, iii. 15, 17 n.
tiryaksutra, x. 1 5 n.                         natajyd, iv. 25 n.
tiri/actjiia, xiii. 13n.                       natabhdgds, iii. 17.
tiihya, 187.                                   •iiututii,-/ix, iii. 21.
tikshnuncu. add. n. 8.                         natt, v. 1 ii.



                                                                                                  -
340                              S&rya-Siddhdnta,
 nara, xiii. 22 n.                         prdfic, vi. 1 2 n.
 narai/antra, xiii. 24.                    prdna, i. 12 n.
 ndkshatra, x. 5 n.                        pro'-htha, 197.
 ndga, ii. 67, 69 n, xii. 33.              proshthapadd, 197.
 nd'tti, i. 12n, xiii. 23 n.
 nditikd, i. 12n, xiii. 23 n.              phala, iii. 34 n.
 nti/u/ana, iv. 17 n.                      phalyuni, 189.
 9iimexha, \. 12n.                         pltdlguni, 189.
 nirakxha, xii. 41 n.
 ni?T(i, 198.                              6a/a, vii. 20.
 nifrid'ara, adj. n. 3.                    6aH, 192.
 nifdpati, add. n. 8.                      balin, vii. 21.
 nislUyd, 191.                             bdrhaspatya, viii. 18.
                                           bdrltattpatya mdna, i. 55 n.
 paksha, ii. 66 n.                         6a/iw, ii. 3D n, add. n. 16, 26.
 pada, ii. 29, viii. 5, 197.               bdhvjyd, ii. 30.
 para, i. 21 n.                            bdhuphala, ii. 39 n.
 parama, i. 70 n.                          6y'ffl, i. 9 n. 34 n.
 parumakrdnti, -jyd, ii. 28 n.             budha, add. n. 3.
 paramdnu, i. 12n.                         brha'pati, add. n. 3.
 paramdpakraina, ii. 28 n.                 brahman, xii. 12.
 param dyus, i. 2 1 n.                     brahmahrdaya, viii. 12 n.
 pardrdha, i. 21 n.
 paridhi, ii. 38 n.                        i/Ki, i. 27 n, iii. 12n.
 parifekha, vi. 1 n.                       bhiigana, i. 27 n, ii. 1, xii. 6.
 parilikhadhikdra, vi. 1 n.                bhacakra, ii. 46.
 paryanka. 189.                            lkadra, 197.
 paroan, iv. 8 n, xiv. 16 n.               bhadrapadd, 197.
 parvanddyax, iv. 8 n.                     bharani, 184.
 parvavinddyas, v. 3.                      bhasandki, xi. 21 n.
 parvdnta, xiv. 1 6 n.                     6A<i, iii. 5 n.
 j>a/a. i. 1 2 n, xiii. 23 n.              bhdga, i. 28 n.
 palabhd, iii. 13 n.                       bltddi-apadd, 197.
 pafcdt, vi. 12n.                          bhdnu, add. n. 3.
 j>d<a, i. 33, xi. 5 n.                    bhdryara, add. n. 8.
 pdtddhikdra, xi. 5 n.                     bhdikara, add. n. 3.
 pdtdla. xii. 33.                          bltiikldsavas, iii. 49 n.
 pddma, i. 23 n.                           bhukli, i. 27 n.
 pdraddrd, xiii. 22 n.                     6Aa/, i. 27 n.
 pinda, ii. 27 n.                          bhuja, ii. 30 n, iii. 5 n, add. n. 16.
 pitaras, 188.                             bhujajyd, ii. 30 n, add. n. 16.
 pitrya, viii. 18.                         bhujaji/dphala, ii. 39 n.
 ^jMnaroasM, 186.                          bhujaphala, ii. 39 n.
 purutha, xii. 12.                         bhujaxutra, iii. 5.
 pushya, 187.                              bhugola, xii. 32.
 purnamd, purnimd, ii. 66 n.               bhugolddhydya, xi. 23 n.
 purnimdnta, xiv. 16 n.                    bhuputra, add. n. 3.
 purra, 189.                               bhiibhagola, xiii. 3 n.
 puroa khanda, xi. 23 n.                   bhumigola, xiii. 3 n.
 pushan, 199.                              bhumiputra, add n. 8.
 prxhtha, v. 1 n.                          bhumta, add. n. 3.
 pdurnamdsi, ii 66 n.                      bhryu, add. n. 3.
 pduxltnya, xi. 21.                        bhryuja, add. n. 8.
 prakrii, xii. 13.                         Wieda, vii. 18.
 pragraha, iv. 15n.                        bhoga, ii. 64.
 prai/rahana, v. 16.                       bhogydzavas, iii. 49 n.
 pratixltthdna, add. u. 26.                bhatima, add. n. 3.
 prabhd, iii. 5 n.                         bhramana, xii. 76.
 pramdna, v. 13.
 pravaha, ii. 3.                           makara, i. 58 n.
 prapna, 275.                              maghd, 188.
       , iv. 25 n, add. n. 23.                  «, 189.
                                 Sanskrit Index.                          341
mandala, I. 15 n, xi. 18 n, xii. 76.      ranhas, ii. 8 n'.
matsya, iii. 5 n.                         raui, add. n. 3.
madhya, i. 70 n, xiii. 15 B.              rdkshasa, i. 62.
madhyakarnn, iii. 28 n.                   rdfi, i. 28 n.
madkyagrahana, v. 13n.                            ii. 8 n.
madliyojyd, v. 5 n.                              , i. 61 n.
madhyapdta, xi. 5 n.                      renuf/ar/jha, xiii. 22 n.
madJiyabha, v. 1.                         revati, 199.
madhyama, xiii. 14.                       roAini, 185.
madliyamddhikdra, i. 70 n.                rdudrarki>/ia, ix. 14.
madhyarekhd, i. &2 n.
madhyalagna, iii. 49 n, xiii. IS'B.       lagna, iii. 48, 49 n.
madhyastlrityardha, v. 13 n.              lagnolntaraprdnds, ix. 5.
madhydlma, x. 8 n.                        lagndntardsava*. X. 2.
mad/iye, xiv. 14 n.                       lagndxavas, iii. 47.
•nianu, i. 19 n.                          lamkodayds, xiii. 14.
mandn, ii. 5 n, 12, add. n. 3.            lankodaydxavan, iii. 49 n.
mandakarman, vii. 15 n.                   lamb,\. 27 n, iii. lin.
mandakendra, ii. 30 n.                    lamba, i. 60 n.
mandatara, ii. 12.                        lambajyd, i. 60.
mandaparidhi, ii. 34.                     lambana, v. 1 n.
mandnphala, ii. 44.                       %><d, i. 28 n.
mandvcctt. i. 34 n.                       liplikd, i. 28 n.
manvantiirit, i. 19n.                     lubdhaka, viii. 12 tt.
mahnrxJii. i. 8. xii. 35.                 /uA-a, xiii. 16 tt.
mahdbhuta, xii. 23.
mahdyuga, i. I7i».                        vakrn, ii. 12.
ma/idfankit, add. n. 21.                  vakragati, viii. 15.
m<4«a, iv. 3 n, xiv. 2 n.                 vakrin, ii. 54.
mdnddhydya, xiv. 2 n.                     vars/i", xii. 44 n.
mdndii karrnan, ii. 48.                   valcma, iv. 25 n.
mdit d11 phala, ii. 39.                   valandrifds, iv. 25 n.
mdsha, xiii. 23 n.                        tia/t, 192.
mifra, 192.                               tiaim, 186.
mithuna, i. 58 n.                         vaxtra, xiii. 16.
 mini. i. 5S n.                           vat/ana, viii. 19 n:
 mukha. xiv. G n.                         vara, i. 52 n.
 mukhya, i. 13n.                          vtinifia. i. 23 n,
 muhurla, i. 12n.                         «>(i»'M'a, ix. 1 8.
 wiiirta, i. lOn.                         uiMa, i. 28, vii. 10.
 m«/a, 193.                               viMip, i. 70 n, viii. 12.
 mrga, i. 58 n. '                         vikxhfpa, i. 70 n.
 mrgavyddha, viii. l?n.                   vigraha, vii. 22.
 mrgafira*, 185.                          virf/du, 193.
 mrgafinha, 185.                          vijita, vii. 21.
 melaka, vii. 1 n.                         vitaxti, iii. 5 n.
 t/ieaha, i. 58 n.                        wirftf, iii. 32.
 mdiVra, viii. 18.                        vidyddhara, xii. 81 n.
 moksha, iv. 1 5 n.                       mdhu, add. n. 3.
 mduroikd, ii. 27 n.                       vidhrta, vidtirti, xi. 5 n.
                                          vidhi'nstii, vii. 21.
yaj&nxhi, xii. 17.                        vinddi, i. 1 2 n.
yantra, xiii. 19.                         viparita, xi. 5 n, xii. 73 D.
yaxhti, xiii. 21 n.                        vitnarda, iv. 15 D.
ydmyottaraarttn, iv. 25 n, xiii. 15 n.    vivasvant, add. n. 3.
yujra, i. 17 n, 58 n.                     mfdkhd. 191. 194.
yugma, ii. 30.                            vz^'e devds, 194.
y«<j, vii. 1 n.                           vixharna, ii. 30.
yacWAo.vii. 1 n.                          vishitva, viihuvat, iii. 6 n.
2/<«/«, ii. 65 n, vii. 1 n, add. n. 19.    vixhimitfirahhu, iii. 13.
yogaidrd, 179.                             vi.shMoatVihii, iii. 7.
yogatdrakd, viii. 19.                      vMiuvadortta, iii. 6 n.
yojana, i. 60 n.                           vishuvanmandala, iii. 6 D.
                                    44

                                                                                ^
342                                        S&rya-Siddhdnta,
 vijn, \. 34 n.                                      tan/iitd, vii. 23 n, add. n. 1.
 vrtta, ii. 33 n.                                    «an£ramana, xiv. 10 n.
 vrdMi, xii. 72 n.                                   Smikriiiiti, Xiv. 3 D.
 vrfcika, i. 58 n.                                   ladhumra, vi. 23.
 vrnhan, i. 58 n.                                    tandiii, xi. 22 n.
 vtga, ii. 1 1 n.                                    tannihitam taras, i. 62 n.
 tvc/'i, xii. 27.                                    taptar*hayas, xiii. 9.
 veddnga, i. 3 n.                                    sinna, ii. 12, iv. 25 D.
 >'n iilfi r in. i;i iilli rti, xi. 5 n.             tamamandala, iii. 6 n.
 vdifva, viii. 4.                                    tamamandalafankti, iii. 34 n.
 riiii-tiiimii, xiii. 9.                             MMiii.viii-ii, xiv. 7 n.
 rii'o-hil'ii;:, ix. 18.                             samdgama, vii. 1 n, 20, 22.
 vyakiha, xii. 44 n.                        •        <amd»a, vi. 3.
 vyatipdta, xi. 5 n.                                 saras, i. 62 n.
 vyoman, xii. 30.                                    larpds, 188.
                                                     <atiana, xiv. 19 n.
 fa/ti, add. n. 12.                                  Mi-iiiif, xii. 28 n, add. u. S.
 fakuni, ii. 69 n.                                   tavyam, xii. 72 n.
 ••'1/>/,</, iii. 5 n, 34 n.                         sdmdni, xii. 17.
 fankujivd, iii. 22.                                 sdtnpraddyika, vii. 14 n.
 fatabhixhaj, -shd, 197.                             tdyana, 295.
  font, add. n. 3.                                   tdrpa, viii. 19.
 fandifcara, add. n. 3.                              idvana, i. 12, xiv. 19 n.
 fayyd, 189.                                         sinha, i. 58 n.
  para, add. n. 16.                                  »;<W/m, xii. 28.
  fafdnka, add. n. 3.                                siddhdnta, add. n. 1.
  fafija, add. n. 3.                                 «t(tt.ya. 187.
  fafin, add. n. 3.                                  tura, xii. 41.
  pdAvi, add. n. 12.                                 swct, iv. 5 n.
  fikhin, 216 note.                                  9ii<ra, xiii. 22 n.
  fig/ira, i. 34 n, ii. 12.                          surifa, add. n. 3.
  fiyhrakarman, ii. 37.                              suryagrahan&diiiTcdra, iv. 26 n.
  figbrakcndra, ii. 30 n.                            siiryatfinaya, add. D. 3.
  fighratara, ii. 12.                                suryadifas, x. 1 5 n.
  fighraparidhi, ii. 55.                             »omo, add. n. 3.
  fighraphala, ii. 44.                               sdmnya, viii. 16, add. n. 3.
  fighrocca, ii. 5 n.                                siiiini, i. 13, xiv. 3 n.
  fitagu, fitadid/titi, fitdnfu, add. n. 8.          sMt(», iv. 15n.
  fu*ra, add. n. 3.                                  sthira, xiv. 6 n.
  fujMa, x. 4, 9.                                    athula, viii. 19.
  fukla pak*ha, i. 51 n.                             tparfa, iv. 15 n.
  fulba, xiii. 22.                                    tpashta, ii. 58.
  frn^ra, x. 1 n.                                     tpashtddhikdra, i. 70 n.
  frng&ta, 195.                                       tphuta, i. 60.
  frngormatyadhikdra, z. 1 o.                         sphuiasthityardha, v. 17 n.
  fe«/ui, iii. 5 1 n.                                 sphutiktirana, ii. 14.
  fdighrya, ii. 42, 43.                               arotas, xii. 26.
  frava, iii. 26, iv. 21 n.                           «,'<!</, «<.'<!? 1, 191.
  fravana, iv. 21 n, 196.
  franis/ithd, 196.                                   harija, v. 1 n.
  frond, 196.                                         Aa»<a. i. 60 n, 190.
                                                      Adnt, xii. 72 n.
  thadafitimuHia, xiv. 6 n.                           himadidhiti, himarafmi, himannt, add.
                                                         n. 3.
  tamyoga, vii. 1 n.                                  hiranyagarbha, xii. 15.
  samvat, snmvatiara, add. n. 12.                     hvtdbhiy, viii. 12n.
  •orejidro, 310.                                     Aord, xii. 79 n.
                     GENERAL INDEX.

                   The references are as in the preceding Index.


Abhijit, 22nd asterism—identification etc., Anuradha, 17th asterism—identification
   195 ; omission from the series, 208-10.         etc., 192.
Abu-r-Raihin, see al-Biruui.                    Anuvatsara, 4th year of lustrum, xiv. 17 n.
Aclesha, 9th asterism—identification etc., Apamvatsa, name of star (J Virginis), viii.
   188 ; its last quarter unlucky, xi. 21.         21.
Acvina, 6th or 7th month—i. 51 n, xiv. 3 n, Apas, name of star (S Virginis), viii. 21.
   16 n.                                        Aphelion, p. 15—see Apsis.
Acvini, 1st asterism—identification etc., Apogee, p. 15 —see Apsis.
   183.                                         Apparent longitude, vii. 12n^, term how
Asvins, divinities of 1st asterism, 183.           used by Colebrooke, viii. 1 n.
Acliti, divinity of 7th asterism, 187.          Apsis—term how employed in this work,
Aditya, 187 etc., xii. 28 n.                       p. 15: apsides of the planets, mode of
jEon, i. 19 ; day of Brahma, i. 20 ; names action, ii. 1-5 ; revolutions, i. 4 1-42; how
   of past and current, i. 23 n.                   devised, i. 44 n; positions, ace. to dif
Agastya, name of star (Canopus), viii. 10. ferent authorities, i. 44 n; compared
Age—Great Age, or Quadruple Age, bow               with   Ptolemy's, add. n. 11.
   composed, i. 15-17; Golden, Silver, Bra         For moon's apsis, see Moon.
   zen, and Iron Ages, i. 17 n ; quarter- Age, Arab astrology, connection with Hindu,
   proper period of this treatise, p. 16.          vii. 23 n.
Agni—divinity of 3d asterism, 1S4 ; with Arab use of sines, later than Hindu, p. 56.
   Indra, divinity of 16th asterism, 191 ; Arab lunar mansions, 180; identified and
   nnme of star (3 Tauri), viii. 11.               compared with Hindu and Chinese, 183—
Albategnius, Arab inventor of sines, p. 56. 200; character and origin of system,
al-Biruni—visit to India, and notices of 203 etc. ; stellar chart illustrating, add.
   Hindu astronomy, i. 3n, 6 n; identifica         n. 27.
   tion and description of the asterisms, Arc—names of, and of its functions, add.
   181 etc., 208.                                  n. 16: part of arc. determining sine, ii.
   [For other Arabic names commencing               30 ; to find arc of a given sine, ii. 88.
   with the article, see the initial letter of Ardra, 6th asterism—identification etc.,
   the word following the article.]                 186, add. n. 26.
Altitude, sine of—name, 114, add. n. 21 ; Armillary sphere — construction, equip
   how calculated, iii. 28-34, 34-36, 37-38 : ment, and revolution of, xiii. 1-20; its
   instrument for taking altitude, xiii. 21 n. use, and comparison with those of other
Altitude in time, iii. 39, iv. 26.                 nations, xiii. 3 n ; its adaptation to ob
Amplitude, sun's at horizon —sine of, iii. serving polar longitude and latitude,
   27 : measure of, on the dial, iii. 7 ; its viii. 1 2 n.
   constant ratio to hypoth. of shadow, iii. Aryabhatta—his period and writings, add.
   7 n; how calculated, iii. 22-23, 27-28. n. 1 ; references to his doctrines, i. 27 n,
Amrta, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.                 i. 60 n, add. n.18—see Arva-Sid<lhanta,
Anala, 24th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. 55 n. Laghu-Arya-Siddhanta, Aryashtacata,
Ananda— 22nd year of Jupiter's cycle, i.            Dafagitika.
   55 n ; name of a yoga, add. n. 19.           Aryabbatta, commentator on the Surya-
Angiras, 40th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. 55 n.     yiddlnnta, add. n. 2.
Angle, a quantity not employed in Hindu Aryaman, divinity of llth or 12th aster-
   astronomy, 1 1 5.                             A ism, 190.
Anomalistic revolutions of planets, p. 63 Aryashtafata, treatise by Aryabhatta, add.
Anomaly, mean—name, ii. 29; how reck , n 1. '
   oned, ii. 29 n.                              Arya-Siddhanta, add. n. 1 : citations of its
 Anquetil du Perron, notice of the Parsi teachings, p. 24, i. 44 n, add. n. 6.
    asterisms etc., 180.                        Ascension—see Right ascension and Ob
 Antipodes, Hindu view of, xii. 51-58.              lique ascension.
344                               S&rya-Siddhdnta,
Ascensional difference, how calculated, ii. Atiganda, 6th yoga, ii. 65 n.
   61r62.                                        al-Auwa', 13th manzil, 190.
Ascensional equivalents—see Right ascen Avanti, name of Ujjayini, i. 62.
  sion and Oblique a=cension.                    Ayin-Akbari—orbits of the planets, as
Ashadha, 20th and 21st asterisms—identi            given by, 255 note ; description of in-
   fication etc., 194.                           _ strurnent for measuring time, xiii. 23 n.
Ashadha, 3rd or 4th month, i. 51 n, xiv. Ayushmant, 3rd yoga, ii. 65 u.
   3 u, I ii n.
Aspects, unfavorable, of sun and moon, Bahudhanya, 46th year of Jupiter's cycle,
  when of like declination, xi.                    i. 55 n.
Asterisms— Hindu name for, 207 ; how to Bailly—his views of Hindu astronomy,
  be translated, 207, add. n. 28 : their por       introd. n,, 3'28 ; mean positions of the
   tit ins, or divisions of the ecliptic belong    planets at beg, of Iron Age, p. 1 8 : other
  ing to them, ii. 64, 179, 207 : their junc       references to his works, p. 74, 289.
  tion-stars, 179; time and motive of se BAlaya, 3rd etc. karana, ii. 69 n.
  lection, 207; names, add. n. 19: situa nl-lialdah, 21st manzil, 195.
   tion in each group, viii. 1 6-19 ; mode oi Banij, 7th etc. karana, ii 69 n.
   ilffiiiiiimi of position, viii. 1 n ; defines Base of a right-angled triangle, ii. 30 n,
   positions; viii. 2-9 ; illustrative figure      add. u.l 6.
   178; discordance of authorities, 182- Base-eine = sine, ii. 30 n, add. n. 16.
   errors of position examined, and time ol Base of the gnomon-shadow, iii. 5n, 23—
   definition deduced, 211; mode of ob              25.
   servation of positions, viii. 12 n; detnilec Batn al-Hut, 28th mannl, 199.
  identification of the groups and their Bava, 2nd etc. karana, ii. 69 n.
  junction-stare, with statement of names Bentley, introd. note ; his views of Hindu
  symbols, divinities, defined positions            astronomical literature, i. 3 n, p. 24 ;
   etc., comparison with Arab mandzil method of determining the age of a Sid-
   alkamar and Chinese sieu, 183-200               dhunta, p. 20; applied to buryn-SiUdhan-
  additional synonyms of names, add. n             ta, and conclusion drawn, p. 21 ; criti
   26; inability of later Hindus to point cism of his method and results, p. 22 etc. ;
   them out, 181 ; al-Biruni'g information general estimate of his labors, p. 24, add.
  respecting them, 181 etc., 208, 209              n. 8 : his view of Hindu precession, 1 04 ;
  conspectus of correspondences of the of asterisms, 194 ; oiher citations from
  three systems, 200 ; stellar map illus           and references to his works, p. 18, ) 9, 28,
  trating their relations, add. n. 27; Bi- 74, 103, add. n. 1, 4, 6,8, 3--'6,
  ot's views of their origin and connec Bhadrftjvn. name of a clime, xii. 38,
  tion, 201 etc.; age of the system in In Bhadrapada, 26th and 27th asterisma—
  dia, 203; discusbion of its character, identification etc., 197, add. n. 26.
  connections, and origin, 203 etc. ; trans Bhadnipada, 5th or 6th month, i. 51 n, xiv.
   fer of first rank from Krttika to Ajvini, 3n, 16n.
   206 ; relation to the moon, 208, add. n Bhaga, divinity of llth or 12th osterigm,
   28 ; variation in number, and omission 190.
  of Abhijit, 208.                               Bharani, 2nd asterism—identification etc.,
  conjunction of planets with asterisms, 184.
   viii. 14, 15; systems of yogas founded Bharata, name of a clime, containing In
  upon, 212, add. n. 19; heliacal settings, dia, xii. 39,
  ii 12-15, 17-18; orbit and revolution, Bhaskara, add, n. 1—see Siddhanta-^iro-
  xii. 73, 80, 90 n.                               maui.
Astrology—generally treated in distinct Bhavn, 42nd year of Jupiter's cycle, i. 6i D.
  worKs, vii. 23 n ; titles of astrological Bhoja-Siddhanta, add. n. 1.
  works, vii. 23 n ; connection of Hindu Uhf$ya ( ? Vfshya ? ) 49th year of Jupi
  with Greek and Arab, vii. 23 n: astro            ter's cycle, i. 55 n.
  logical import of conjunctions of plan Bhudhara, commentator on Surya-Sid-
  ets, vii. 18-28 ; of splitting of RohiniV        dhanta, add. n. 2.
  wain, viii. 13n; of equality of declina Bija, correction of mean motions of plan
  tion of sun and moon, xi ; of sun's en           ets, p. 19 etc., i. 9n ; table of mean mo
  trance into a sign, xiv. 11.                     tions as so corrected, p. 20, add. n. 7.
Astronomy—see Greek astronomy, Hindu Biot—his views of origin and history of
  astronomy.                                       Chinese situ, 181,201 etc.; of Hindu as
Astronomical literature of Hindus, sum             terisms, 206 etc. ; of omission of Abhijit,
  mary view of, add. n. 1.                         208; of Hindu sines, add. n. 15 ; other
                                      General Index.                                         345
   references to and citations from his Jlloka, common Hindu verse, introd. n.
   •works, i. 44 n, i. 67 n, 115, add. n. 10, Jobhana—llth year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
   17, 18, 27, 28, 29.                              55 n ; 5th yoga, ii. 65 n.
Brahma—day of, i. 20 ; length of his life, Do-latitude, terrestrial—name, i. 60 n ; how
   i. 21 ; time of, xiv. 21 : divinity of 22nd found, iii. 13-14, 14-17.
   aeterism, 195 : name of star (5 Auriga)), Colebrooke, introd. n.: his statement of
   viii. 21 n: 25th yoga, ii. 65 n.                 the systems of yogas, ii. 65, add. n. 19 ;
Brahmagupta, i. 8 n, add. n. 1 —see Brahrna- identification etc. of the asterisms, ] 80
   sphuta-Siddhanta and Khanda Kataka.              etc. ; information as to astronomical lit
Brahmahrdaya, uame of star (Capella),               erature, add. n. 1 : other references to
   viii. 11-12.                                     and citations from his works, i. 27 n,
Brnhma-Siddhanta, add. n. 1, 6.                     p. 23, 39, 101 etc., viii. 1 n, 10-1 2 n, 12 n,
Brahma-sphuta-Siddhanta, add. n. 1 ; its            19 n, 21 n, xiii. 3 n, 5 n, xiv. 16 n, add.
   system, how different from Surya-Sid             n. 2, 6, 10, 18.
   dhanta, add. n. 6 : references to its doc Color of moon when eclipsed, vi. 23.
   trines, i. 3n, 40 n, 60 n, 102, 182 etc. Commutation, mean—name, ii. 29 n; how
   viii. 12n, add. n. 18.                           reckoned, ii. 29 n.
Brhaspati, divinity of 8th asterism, 187. 'onjunction of a planet—term how em
Brhaspati-Siddhaiita, add. n. 1.                    ployed in this work, p. 24 ; mode of ac
Budhavara, Wednesday, i. 52 n.                      tion on the planet, ii. 1-5; revolutions,
nl-Hula', 23rd manzil, 196.                         i. 29-32 ; orbits, xii. 85-86.
al-Butain, 2nd manzil, 184.                      Conjunction and opposition of sun and
                                                    moon, common name of, iv. 8 n : true and
9abdakalpadruma—its list of Siddhantas, apparent conjunction, names of, v. 13 n.
   add. n. 1.                                    Conjunction of planets with one another,
Caitra, 12th or 1st month, i. 51 n, xiv. 3 n,       vii; with asterisms, viii. 14-15; name,
   16 n.                                            general, vii. 1 n ; particular, astrological,
Cakalya-Sanhita, add. n. 1 : references to,         vii. 18-20, 22: conjunction viewed as
    181, 182 etc., 213, 217, 218, add. n. 6, taking place on secondary to prime
   etc.                                             vertical, vii. 6n: time and place how
Qakuni, 58th karana, i. 69 n.                       calculated, vii. 2-11; illustrative ob
Calendar, sketch of a Hindu, for the year servations of conjunctions, vii. 15-18.
    1889-60, i. 5 In.                            Contact of disks, or disk and shadow, in
Calivalmna, era of, add. n. 12.                     eclipses, iv. 15 n; time of first and last
yanivara, Saturday, i. 52 n.                        contact how determined, iv. 16.
Cara, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.                 'osine—not distinctly recognized, p. 86, ii,
Carad, autumn, xiv. 10 n, 16 n.                     3O n ; term corresponding to, ii. 30 n,
Cardinal directions, names of, vi. 12 n.             add. n. 16 ; part of arc determining co
(JJarvari, 8th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. 55 n.     sine, ii. 30.
yatabhishaj, 25th asterism—identification iosmogony, development of creation, xii,
   etc., 197.                                        10-28.
Catushpada, 60th karana, ii. 69 n.               Cravana, 23rd asterism—identification etc.,
Central ecliptic-point, v. 1 n ; sines of its        196, add. n. 26,
   altitude and zenith-distance, v. 5-6.           rAvana, 4th or 5th month, i. 51 D, xiv,
Chang, gth sieu, 190.                               3 n, 16n.
Chittra, name of a yoga, add. u. 19.             Qravishtha, 24th asterism—identification
Che, 24th sieu, 199.                                etc., 196.
Chin, llth sieu, 190.                            Creation, time spent by the Deity" in, i.
Chinese astronomy and division of the                24 ; as given by other treatises, i. 44 n ;
    heavens—see Sieu.                                reason of this allowance, p, 18.
Chord of an arc, p. 57, xiii.lSn.add.n. 16 (^ridhara, ratio of diam. to circumf, accord
Chronological cycles, i. 15-21 ; eras, add.          ing to, i. 6(1 n.
   n. 12.                                        Crimukha, 41st year of Jupiter's cycle, J,
Cicira, cool season, xiv, lOn, 16n.                  55 n.
Circle—name, ii. 38 n ; divisions of, i. 28 : (^rishena, author of Romaka-Siddhanta,
   ratio of diam. to circumf., i. 60 n, p. 67,       add. n. 1.
Citra. 14th asterism—identification etc.. Crivatsa, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.
    190.                                         Cnbhfi—23rd yoga, ii. 65 n; name of a
Citrabhanu, 50th year of Jupiter's cycle             yoga, add. n. 19.
    i. 55 n.                                     Cubhakrt, 10th year of Jupiter's cycle, i,
 Civa, 2oth yoga, ii. 65 n.                          55 n.
 Civil time, day —see Time, Day.                 Cubit, i. 60 D, iii. 6 n.



                                                                                                      r-
S46                                Sfirya-Siddhdnta,
','ukla — 37th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. Degree of a circle, i. 28.
    55 n; 24th yoga, ii. 65 n.                   Delambre, references to and citations from
Cukravara, Friday, i. 52 n.                        his works, introd. n., p. 55, 56, 105, vii.
(Jilla, 9th yoga, ii. 65 n.                         14n,add. n. 1fi, 17, 18.
Cusps of the moon—name, x. In, 15 n; Dhatar, 44th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
   their elevation calculated, x. 6-8 ; de          55 n.
   lineated, x. 10-15.                           adh-Dhira', 7th manzil, 187.
Cycle—of five years, i. 58 n ; names of its Dhrti, 8th yoga, ii. 65 n.
   years, xiv. 17 n : of sixty years of Jupi Dhruva, 12th yoga, ii. 65 n.
   ter, i. 55 : of twelve years of Jupiter, Dlmnmi. name of a yoga, add. n. 19.
   xiv. 17 : their relation, xiv. 17 n : vaster Dhvaja, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.
   chronological cycles,!. 15-21.                Dhvankshti, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.
                                                 Dial, construction of, iii. 1-7.
ad-Dabaran, 4th mantil, 186.                     Diameter, relation of to circumference, i.
Ducagitika, treatise by Aryabhatta, add.            60 n, p. 57.
    n. 1.                                        Digit, iii. 5 n ; measure of the gnomon in,
Djil.'i Bhai, commentator on Surya-Sid             iii. 5n; equivalent in minutes, in pro
    <lh inla, add. n. 2.                           jecting an eclipse, iv. 26; measure of
Daily motions of planets etc., i. 25-27 ; of the moon's disk in, iv. 1 1 n, x. 9 n.
   equal absolute amount on each orbit, Directions on the sphere, how reckoned,
   xii. 90 n : tables of mean daily motions,        137, vii. 6n: cardinal directions, vi.
   j>. 17, 20, add. n. 5, 7 ; mean motions in       12 n.
    sidereal day, 291 : true daily motions, Diurnal circle, radius of, how calculated,
   how calculated, ii. 47-51 ; comparative ii. 60.
    table of, for Jan. 1, I860, p. 87.           Dundubhi, 30th year of Jupiter's cycle,
Davis, references to and citations from his i. 55 n.
    essays in Asiatic Researches, introd. n., Duration of an eclipse, name of, iv. 1 5 n ;
   p. 19, i. 55 n, p. 54, 74, xiv. 16 n, 17 n,     how determined, iv. 12-15, v. 13-17.
   add. n. 17, 289, 290, 811.                    Durmati, 29th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
Day—civil day, how reckoned, i. 36, xiv.            55 n.
    18 ; number of in an Age, i. 37 ; varying Durmukha, 4th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
   length in different seasons, xii. 45-71 :        65 n.
   lunar day, i. 13; number of in an Age,
   i. 37 ; its portion, ii. 64 ; current one how Earth—form, position, and support, xii.
   determined, ii. 66 : omitted lunar days, 32; apparent form, xii. 54; its revolu
    i. 36 ; number of in an Age, i. 38 ; how tion taught by Aryabhatta. i. 27 n ; di
   calculated for a given period, i. 50 : sid      mensions, i. 59 ; centre and surface,
   ereal day, xiv. 15 ; its divisions, i. 1 1- terms for, 142; poles, xii. 34-35 ; geo
    12; number of in an Age, i. 34: solar graphical divisions, xii. 36-40; zones,
   day, xiv. 3 n : day of the gods, i. 1 3-14, xii. 59-69; cavities within it, xii. 33;
   xii. 45, 47-51, 74, xiv. 20; day of the measurement by circles and arcs not ap
   Fathers, xii. 77 n, xiv. 14 ; day of Pra- plied to, i. C5 n.
   jApati, xiv. 21; day of Brahma, i. 20, Earth's shadow, diameter how calculated,
   iiv. 21.                                        iv. 4-5.
Day of a planet, i. 34, ii. 59 ; its divisions, Earth-sine, ii. 61.
    ii. 62-63.                                   East and west direction on the sphere, 137.
Day-measure, iii. 35 n.                          East and west hour-circle, iii. 6, xiii. 15 n.
Day-railius, ii. 60.                             East point, 138, add. n. 23.
Day sine, ii. 60 n.                              Eccentric circle, equivalent to Hindu epi
Declination —name, p. 46 ; reckoned as in cycle of apsis, p. 64.
   the ecliptic, p. 46, viii. 1 n ; how calcu Eccentricities of planetary orbits, compar
   lated, ii. 28 ; how combined with lati          ative table of, p. 76.
   tude, ii. 58 ; comparative table of, for Eclipses—name, iv. 6 n ; rules, applying
   Jan. 1. 1860, p. 87 : how found by ob           to solar and lunar, iv ; rules for paral
   servation, iii. 17-1 8.                         lax, applying to solar, v ; projections of
Declination, equal, of the sun and moon—           eclipses, vi : primi'ive theory of cause
   time how calculated, and astrological           of eclipse, iv. 6 n, 1 1 n : true theory, iv.
   in8uence, xi.                                   9 : occurrence of annular eclipse not
Deflection of ecliptic from an east and contemplated, v. 13 n: calculation of a
    west direction—how calculated, for use lunar eclipse, add. n. 24 ; of a solar
    in projection of eclipses, iv, 24-25; how      eclipse, add. n. 25 ; projection of a lu
   projected, vi. 2-9.                             nar eclipse, 157.
                                     General Index.                                     347
Ecliptic—name, xiii. 18 n; pole, 143; di Jeography, xii. 34-42 ; of Puranas, xii.
   visions, i. 28 ; their equatorial equiva         44 n.
   lents, iii. 42-45 : inclination, ii. 28 : ori il-Ghafr, 15th manzil, 191.
   ent and meridian points, iii. 46-49 ; cen 3nomon, iii. 1, 5 n.
   tral point, V. 1 n : deflection from east 3oei, 23rd »ieu, 197.
   and west direction at a given point, iv. Graha-Laghava, add. n. 1 ; its definition of
   24-25.                                           position of the asteriems, 182-198; of
Elements, five, xii. 23.                            fixed stars, viii. 12 n, 21 n.
Entrance of the sun into a sign, astrolog Greek astronomy, relation of, to Hindu,
   ical character, xiv. 3, 11.                      327 etc.—see Ptolemy.
Epicycle—name, ii. 38 n : dimensions, for Greek words in Hindu technical language,
   all the planets, ii. 84-37 ; change of di        i. 28 n, 52 n, ii. 30 n, iii 34 n, 330.
   mensions, ii. 38 n, p. 75, add.n. 18; epi rrishma, summer, xiv. 10 n, 16 n.
   cycle of apsis equivalent to eccentric Gudharthaprakacaka, name of Rangana-
   orbit, p. 64 : relative dimensions of orbits tha's commentary on the Surya-Sid-
   deduced from epicycles of conjunction, dhanta, introd. n.
   p. 76 ; comparison of Greek and Hindu GuruvSra, Thursday, i. 52 n.
    systems, p. 74 ; Greek origin of the
   method, 329.                                  al-Hak'ah, 5th manzil, 186.
Equation of the centre—how calculated, Hall, F.E.—his edition of Surya-Siddhan-
   ii. 39 ; Ptolemy's method, for sun and ta, introd. n, add. n 1.
   moon, p. 67 ; for other planets, p. 73 : al-Han'ah, 6th manzil, 186.
   how applied, with annual equation, in EJarshana, 14th yoga, ii. 65 n.
   finding true places of lesser planets, ii. Hasta, 13th asterism—identification etc.,
   43-45 ; comparative table of value when           190.
    greatest, p. 76.                              Elemalamba, 5th year of Jupiter's cycle,
Equation of the orb, or annual equation— i. 55 n.
   how found, ii. 40-42 : Ptolemy's meth Hemanta, winter, xiv. lOn, 16 n.
    od, p. 73 : how applied, with equation Hemisphere—name, v. 17 n; eastern and
    of centre, ii. 43-45.                           western, of heavens, v. 17 n; northern
Equation of time, correction for, ii. 46; and southern, of earth, xii. 45, 46.
   its insufficiency, ii. 46 n. 293.              Heliacal settings and risings—of planets,
Equation of motion of a planet, ii. 47-51. ix. 1-1 1; distance from sun of occur
Equator, celestial, iii. 6.                         rence, ix. 6-9 ; calculation of time, ix.
Equator, terrestrial, 248.                           10-11, 16: of asterisms, ix. 12-17; as-
Equinoctial shadow, iii. 7, 12-13; how terisms which never set heliacally, ix.
    found from latitude, iii. 17.                    18: of moon, x. 1.
Equinox, iii. 6n: precession of—see Pre Hindu astronomy, discussion of its origin,
    cession.                                         age, and relation to the Greek, add
Eras in practical use among Hindus, add. n. 30.
    n. 12.                                        Hiu, 22nd aim, 197.
Ether, fifth element, xii. 23 ; orbit of, xii. Hoisington, H. R.—his Oriental Astrono
    30, 81, 90.                                      mer cited, introd. n., ii. 13 n, p. 74.
 Evection, not noticed by Hindus, p. 67. Horizon, iii. 49 n.
                                                 Hour—name, i. 52 n ; succession of regents
Fang, \5t\itieu, 192.                                of, xii. 79.
 al-Fargh al-Mukdim, 26th manzil, 199.           Hour-angle, distance in time from meridi
 al-Fargh al-Mukhir, 27th manzil, 199.               an, iii. 34-36; corrected hour-angle, 140;
 Fathers, or Manes—divinities of 10th as- sun's hour an^le how determined from
    terism, 1 88 ; their station and day, xii.       observation, iii. 37-39.
    74. xiv. 14.                                 Hypothenuse—name, iv. 21 n : hypoth. of
 Fixed stars—names and defined positions shadow of gnomon, iii. 8 ; constant re
    of certain, viii. 10-12, 20-21 ; their iden      lation to measure of amplitude, iii. 7 n.
    tification, viii. 12 n, 21 n.
 Full moon, day of, ii. 66 n.                    Igvara, 45th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
                                                     55 n.
 Gada, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.               Idavatsara, 3rd year of lustrum, xiv. 17 n.
 Ganda, 10th yoga, ii. 65 n.                     Ideler—identifications of Arab mandzil,
 Gane§a, author of Graha-Laghava, add.               182 etc.
    n. 1.                                        Idvatsara, 4th or 5th year of lustrum,
 Gara, 6th etc. karana, ii. 69 n.                    xiv. 1 7 n.
 Garga, Garga-Siddh'anta, add. n. 1.              al-Iklil, 17th manzil, 192.
348                                Surya-Siddhdnta,
 Inclination—of planetary orbits to ecliptic, Krodhana, 83rd year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
    i. 68-70; comparative table of, i. 70 n : 55 n.
   of ecliptic to equator, ii. 28.              Krodhin, 12th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
Iiulni—26th yoga, ii, 65 n : divinity of 55 n.
    18th asterism, 193; of others, 197 ; with Krttika, Srd asterism—identification etc.,
    Agni, of 16th, 191.                            184 ; formerly first of the series, i. 27 n,
Inequalities of planetary motions—how             206.
   produced, ii. 1-8 ; why of different de- Kshaya, 34th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
   gives, ii. 9-11.                               55 n.
Instruments—armillary sphere, xiii. 1-20, Kuei,6th rieu, 187.
   viii. 12 n; other instruments for meas Kuril, a clime, xii. 40.
   uring time, xiii. 20-24; for taking alti- Kurukshetra, region in India, i. 62 n.
   tuile, xiii. 2ln; for taking zenith-dis
   tance at meridian transit, viii. 12 n.       LAdha, astronomical authority, i. 3 n.
Iron Age, i. 1 7 n ; its commencement, p. 1 7 ; Lagadha or Lagata, author of Jyotisha, i.
   how determined, p. 18.                         8 n.
                                                Laghu-Arya-Siddhanta, add. n. 1 ; cita
aj-Jabhah, 10th manzil, 189.                      tions and references, p. 24, add. n. 6.
Jambuilvipa, central continent in Puranic Lambaka, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.
   geography, xii. 44 n.                        Lanka, i. 62 n, xii. 39.
Jaya, 2nd year of Jupiter's cycle, i. 55 n. Lata, called by al-Biruni author of Stirya-
Jervis, his Weights, Measures, and Coins Siddhanta, i. 3 n.
   of India, introd. n.                         Latitude, celestial—name, i. 70 n, iv. 21 n ;
Jfi-\na-Bhaskara, reference to, i. 6 n.           how measured, i. 70 n, viii. 1 n; mean
JnJna-raja, author of Siddhanta-Sundara, greatest latitude of planets, i. 68-70:
   add. n. 1.                                     latitude of planets how calculated, ii.
Jones, Sir W., references to and citations 56-57 ; how combined with declination,
   from his works), 180, 181, xiv. 16 n, add. ii. 58.
   n. 1.                                        Latitude, terrestrial—name, i. 60 n ; how
Jupiter—names, revolutions, etc., etc., see ascertained by observation of shadow,
   Planets—Jupiter's cycle of sixty years, iii. 13-14, 14-16 : circumf. of earth on a
   i. fi5; of twelve years, xiv. 17; their parallel of latitude, how found, i. 60.
   relation, xiv. 17 n.                         Leu, 27th tieu, 184.
Jyaishtha, 2nd or 3rd month, i. 51 n, xiv. Li, Chinese measure of distance, i. 60 n,
   3 n, 16 n.                                     add. n. 1 3.
Jyeshtha, 1 8th asterism—identification etc, Lieu, 7th sieu, 1 88.
   192 ; its last quarter unlucky, xi. 21.      Lokaloka, boundary of the earth, xii. 44 n,
Jyotisha, astronomical treatise, i. 3 n.          xiii. 16 n.
                                                Longitude, apparent—term how employed,
Kaladanda, name of a yoga, add. n. 1 9.           vii. 12 n ; how found, vii. 7-11.
Kalnyuktu, 26th year of Jupiter's cycle.i. Longitude, celestial, of a planet—no name
   55 n.                                          for, i. 53 n; mean longitude how found,
al-Kalb, 18th manzil, 193.                        i. 53, 54, 60-61, 67; true longitude
Kamalakara, author of Tattva-Viveka, how found, ii. 39-45 : sun's true and
   add. n. 1.                                     mean longitude how determined from
Kana, name of a yoga, add. n. 1 9.                observation, iii. 17-20, 40-41.
Kaiig, 13th siev, 191.                          Longitude,   polar—term how employed in
Karana, half a lunar day, ii. 67-69.              this work, viii. 1 n ; polar longitudes of
Karttika, 7th or 8th month, i. 51 n, xiv.         asterisms, viii. 2-6 ; of certain fixed
   3n, 16 n.                                      stars, viii. 10-11, 20-21.
Kftulava, 4th etc. karana, ii. 69 n.            Longitude, terrestrial — name, i. 61 n;
Ketu, moon's descending node, ii. 8 n.            whence measured, i. 62 ; how deter
KetumJla, a clime, xii. 39.                       mined, i. 63-65 ; measured in yojanas,
Khanda-Kataka, treatise, or chapter of one, i. 65 n.
   by Brahmagupta—cited by al-Biriiiii re Lunar time, day, month—see Time, Day,
   specting asterisms, 181 etc., 208. 209. , Month.
Khara, 59th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. 55 n. Lustrum, cycle of five years, i. 58 n ;
Ki, 18th sieu, 195.                               names of its years, xiv. 17 n.
Kilaka, 1 6th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. 55 n.
Kinstughna, 1st karana, ii. 69 n.               Mackenzie collection—see Wilson.
Kio, 12th lieu, 191.                            Magha, 1 Oth asterism—identification etc,,
Koei, 26th sieu, 199.                             188, add. n. 26.
                                      General Index.                                      349
       ha, 10th or llth month, i. 51 n, xiv          85 ; apparent diameter how calculated,
     Jin, 16 n.                                      iv. 2-3 ; conciser method, 312 : moon's
 Maitra, nfftne of a yoga, add. n. 19.               heliacal setting and rising, x. 1 ; time of
 Mallikiirjuna, commentator on Surya-Sic             rising and setting, how calculated, x. 2-
     dhanta, add. n. 2.                              5 ; elevation of cusps, x. 6-8 ; to deter
 Mammabhatta, commentator on Surya                   mine illuminated part of disk, x. 9 ; to
     SiddhantaV add. n. 2.                           delineate illuminated part, and elevation
 Manasa, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.                 of cusps, x 10-15: moon the divinity of
 Manazil al-kamar— see Arab lunar man                5th asterism, 1 85 ; relation to system
    sions.                                          of asterisms, 207, add. n. 28 ; equality of
 MangalavAra, Tuesday, i. 52 n.                     declination with sun nnpropitious, xi. 1
 Manmatha, 3rd year of Jupiter's cycle, i           etc. ; station of the Fathers, xii. 74.
    55 n.                                        Motions of planets—see Daily motions,
 Mann, citations and references, i. 12 n            Inequalities.
    17 n, 19 n, 23 n, xii. 28 n, xiv. 14 n.      Mrgacirsha, 5th asterism— identification
 Mao, 1st tieu, 185.                                etc., 185, add. n. 26.
Marga$irsha, 8th or 9th month, i. 51 n tfrgavyadha, name of star (Sirius), viii.
    xiv. 3 n, l(i n.                                10-11, add. n. 26.
Mars, names, revolutions, etc., etc.— see Slrtyu, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.
    Planets.                                     Mudgara, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.
 MiUanga, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.            Muhurta-Cintamani, cited respecting as
Maya, recipient of revelation of Surya              terisms, 181 etc.
    Siddhauta, i. 2, 4, 6 n, 7, xii. 1, 10, xiv VIuhurta-Mala, cited respecting Abhijit,
    24-27 ; conjectured identity of his nam<        210.
    with that of Ptolemy, i. 6 n.                tfula, 19th asterism—identi6cationetc.,l 83.
Mean motions of planets—see Daily mo Uunicvara, author of Siddhanta-Sarva-
    tions etc.                                      bhauma, add. n. 1, 2.
Mean places of planets—see Longitude. Husala, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.
Measure of amplitude. Hi. 7.
Mercury, names, revolutions, etc., eta- an-Na'aim, 20th manzil, 195.
    see Planets.                                 fadi, sixtieth part of sidereal day, i. 11.
Meridian—no distinct name for in text, xiii Naga, 59th karana, ii. 67, 69 n.
    15 n; name in commentary, 139, xiii in-Nnjm, 3rd manzil, 185.
    15 n.                                        tfandana, 60th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
Meridian ecliptic point, iii. 49, v. 4-5, 9 n,      55 n.
Meridian, prime—situation of, i. 62 ; why tfftrada, Narada-Siddhanta, add. n. 1.
   chosen, i. 62 n.                              Varadi-Sanhita, add. n. 1.
Meridian-sine, v. 5.                            an-Nathrah, 8th manzil, 187.
Meru—poles of the earth, xii. 34-35 ; in few moon, day of, ii. 66 n.
   Puranic geography, xii. 44 n.                Nieu, 20th sieu, 196.
Minute of arc, i. 28.                           an-Niyat, stars in Scorpio, 193.
Mitra, divinity of 17th asterism, 192,          Vode of a planetary orbit—name, i. 84 n,
Month—civil, i. 12: lunar, i. 18; number xi. 5 n ; only ascending node spoken of,
   in an Age, i. 35; names of those com            i. 34 n ; names of ascending and de
   posing the year, i. 51 n, xiv. 16 n; how scending nodes, ii. 8 n, 216; mode of
   derived, xiv. 16 n; divisions of lunar action on the planet, ii. 6-8 ; revolu
   month, i. 51 n: intercalary months, i. tions, i. 42-44 ; how devised, i. 44 n ; po
   88 ; number in a given period how cal           sitions, ace. to different authorities, i.
   culated, i. 49 : lunar month a day of the 44 n; compared with Ptolemy's, add. n.
   Fathers, xii. 74, xiv. 14 : sidereal month, 11 ; corrections applied to places of, in
   i. 12 : solar month, i. 13 ; number in an calculating latitude, ii. 56.
   Age, i. 39 ; names, i. 51 n, xiv. 16 n ; pre    For moon's node, see Moon.
  cise length of the several solar months, Trsinha, commentator on Surya-Siddhan-
  xiv. 3 n ; division into seasons, xiv. 16 n. ta, add. n. 2.
Moon—names, revolutions, etc., etc., see fii, 21st sieu, 196.
  Planets—Moon's apsides and nodes, revo STumbers, how expressed in the text, in-
  lutions in an Age, i. 33 ; mean daily mo        trod. n.
  tions of, p. 17, 20, add. n. 5, 7 ; in side
  real day, 291 ; positions at beginning of )blique ascension, equivalents in, of signs
  Iron Age, p. 18, add. n. 6; orbits, xii. 87- of ecliptic, iii. 44-45 ; table of equiva
  88 : moon's dimensions, iv. 1 ; mean ap         lents as calculated for Washington,
  parent diameter, distance, and horizon          121 ; for Williams' College, 318: de
  tal parallax, iv. 1 n ; orbit, iv. 1 n, xii. grees of oblique ascension, ix. 5 n.
                                   45
850                              S&rya-Siddhdnta,
Observations—how far contemplated in Perigee, perihelion, no name for, p. 63.
   Hindu system, vii. 18 n, viii. 12 n, 328 ; Perpendicular of a right-angled triangle, ii.
   accuracy of Hindu observations, 212, SOn, add. n. 16.
   220.                                        Perpendicular-sine = cosine, ii. 30 n, add.
Oei, 28th sieu, 184.                             n. 16.
Orbit—name, iv. 8, xii. 76 : orbits of the Phalguna, llth or 12th month, i. 51 n,
   planets, i. 26, .xii. 73-77 ; their absolute xiv. 3n, 16n.
   dimensions, xii. 80-90 ; how determined, Phalguni, llth and 12th asterisms—iden
   i. 27 n, iv. 1 n, xii. 90 n ; their relative tification etc., 189, add. n. 26.
   dimensions deduced from epicycles, and Phases of an eclipse, contact, immersion,
   compared, p. 76.                              emergence, separation, greatest obscu
Orient ecliptic-point, iii. 46-48.               ration, etc.—names, iv. 15 n, 17 n.
Orient-sine, or sine of amplitude of orient Pi, 2nd sieu, 185 ; 25th sieu, 199.
   ecliptic-point, v. 8.                       Pingala, 25th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
                                                 55 n.
Pada, quarter of a cloka, introd. n.           Planet, name, iv. 6 n, add. n. 22.
Padma, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.             Planets—names, add. n. 3 ; creation, xii.
Padma, name of last . Kmi. i. 23 n.              22-24; general explanation of motions,
Panca-SiddhantikA, i. 8 n, add. n. 1.            i. 25-27, xii. 73-77 ; point of commence
Parabhava, 14th year of Jupiter's cycle, ment of motion, i. 27, p. 1 8 ; time of com
   i. 55 n.                                      mencement, i. 24, p. 17, 18, i. 44 n ; sid
Paracara, add. n. 1.                             ereal revolutions in an Age, i. 29-32 ;
Paracara or PAracara Siddhanta, add. n.          tables of periods of sidereal revolution,
   1 ; its system, add. n. 6 ; length of year, p. 17, 20, 24, add. n. 5, 7 ; mean daily-
   p. 24 ; positions of apsides and nodes, i. motions, i. 26, xii. 83 ; tables of do., i.
   44 n.                                          34 n, add. n. 5, 7 ; mean positions, end
Parallax—general exposition of Hindu of last Golden Age, i. 57 ; do. beginning
   view of, v. 1 n ; horizontal parallax of of Iron Age, i. 58 n, add. n. 6 ; actual
   moon and sun, iv. 1 n ; the same ace. mean positions, beg. of Iron Age, p. 18 :
   to Ptolemy, iv. In: vertical parallax to find mean longitude for any given
   and its resolution, v. 1 n ; parallax in time, i. 53-67; mean longitude as found
   longitude, name of, 144 ; mode of cal         for Jan. 1, 1860, and errors, i. 67 n:
   culating, in time, v. 3-8 ; parallax in causes of irregular motion, ii. 1-11 ;
   latitude, name of, 144 ; mode of calcu        kinds of motion, ii. 12-13 ; how to cal
   lating, v. 10-12: method of applying culate true longitudes, ii. 29-45; di
   parallax in determining phases of eclipse, mensions of epicycles, ii. 34-38 ; equa
   v. 9, 13-17, 319; general criticism oi        tion of centre, ii. 39 ; annual equation,
   methods of calculation, 155: parallax ii. 40-42 ; calculation of true rates of
   of other planets neglected, vii. 23 n.         motion, ii. 47-51 ; of declination, ii. 28 ;
Paridhavin, 20th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.      data for finding latitude, i. 68-70 ; mode
    55 n.                                         of calculation, ii. 56-57 ; combination of
Parigha, 19th yoga, ii. 65 n.                     latitude and declination, ii. 58 : com
Parivatsara, 2nd year of lustrum, xiv             parative table of true longitudes, daily
    17 n.                                         motions, and declinations, for Jan. 1,
Parsi asterisms, or 28-fold division ol           1860, p. 87 ; apparent diameters, iv. 1 n,
    ecliptic, 180, 205.                           vii. 13-14: orbits, how determined, iv.
 Parthiva, 53rd year of Jupiter's cycle, i        1 n, xii. 90 n ; absolute dimensions, xii.
    55 n.                                         80-90 ; relative dimensions, deduced
Path of extremity of shadow, how drawn from epicycles, p. 76 ; distances from
   on the dial, iii. 41-42.                       earth, xii. 84 ; order in respect to dis
Path of eclipsing body, how drawn in pro          tance, xii. 31 ; order in which referred
   jection of eclipses, vi. 14-16.                to in this work, i. 52 n : synodical revo
Patriarchate, great chronological period— lutions, ii. 42 n: conjunctions of planets
   how composed, i. 1 8 : reckoned as day with each other, vii ; with asterisms,
   of Prajapati, xiv. 21.                         viii. 14-15 : heliacal settings and risings,
Paulastya or Pulastya Siddhanta, add. n. 1 .      ix. 1-11: regency over days, months,
Paulica or Puh'ya Siddhanta, i. 6 n, add          etc.,  i. 51-52, xii. 78-79 : day of a plan
   n. 1, 6 : its length of year, p. 24.           et, ii. 59.
Pausha, 9th or 10th month, i. 51 n. xiv. Plava, 9th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
    3 n, 16 n.                                    55 n.
Perfected, the, a race of supernatural Plavanga, 15th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
   bsings, xii. 28, 81,40.                        55 n.
                                    General Index.                                       851
Polar longitude and latitude, terms how ting of planets, ix. 9 n ; positions of ap
   employed in this work, viii. 1 n.               sides and nodes of planets, add. n. 11.
Pole—of earth, xii. 34-85 ; of ecliptic, Pulica, author of Paulica-Siddhanta, add.
   143; of prime vertical, 1S9.                    n. 1 ; identical with Paulus Alexandri-
Polestars, xii. 43.                                nus ? i. 6 n, add. n. 1.
Portion of an asterism, ii. 64, 179, 207-10.     Punarvasu,    7th asterism — identification
Possessors of Knowledge, supernatural etc., 186.
   beings, xii. 31.                              Purva-ashadha, 20th asterism—identifica
Prablmva, 35th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. tion etc., 194.
   55 n.                                         Purva-Bhadrapada, 26th asterism—iden
Prajapati—39th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. tification etc., 197.
   55 n: divinity of 4th asterism, 185, viii. Purva-Phalguni, llth asterism—identifi
   1 3 n : the patriarchate a day of, xiv. cation etc., 189.
   21 : name of a star (8 Aurigse), viii. 20 : Pushan, divinity of 28th asterism, 199.
   name of a yoga, add. n. 19.                   Pushya, 8th asterism—identification etc.,
Pramadin, 21st year of Jupiter's cycle, i.         187.
   55 n.
Pramathin, 47th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. Quadrants, odd and even, ii. 29-30.
   55 n.
Pratnoda, 38th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. Radius—names, ii. 60 n ; value in min
   55 n.                                           utes, ii. 22.
Pravardha, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.           Rahu, ii. 6 ; cause of eclipses, ii. 8 n, iv.
Precession of the equinoxes, iii. 9-12 ; 6n.
   name, 105; statement of, iii. 9; form Rakshasa—23rd year of Jupiter's cycle,
   of theory, a libration, iii. 12 n; possible i. 55 n ; name of a yoga, add. n. 19.
   reason, 103 ; Bentley's view refuted, Raktaksha, 32nd year of Jupiter's cycle,
   104; theory of Siddhanta-Ciromani, not i. 55 n.
   a libration, 104; whether precession Ranganatha, commentator on Surya-Sid-
   taken account of in construction of Hin         dhSnta, introd. n., add. n. 2.
   du system, 103, add. n. 20; position and Ratnamala, authority respecting aster-
   history in this treatise, 102 etc., add. n. isms, 181.
   20 ; rule for calculating, iii. 9-10 ; for Raudra, 28th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
   determining by observation, iii. 11-12: 55 n.
   Greek view of precession, 105.                Ravivara, Sunday, i. 52 n.
Prime meridian, i. 62.                           Regents of years, months, days, and hours,
Prime vertical, iii. 6 ; its pole, 139 ; to find i. 51-52, xii. 78-79.
   hypoth. of shadow, when sun is on the, Respiration, measure of time, i. 11.
   iii. 25-27.                                   Retrogradation of the planets—name, ii.
Priti, 2nd yoga, ii. 65 n.                         12-13; explanation, and definition of
Progresses of the sun, from solstice to limits, ii. 51-55.
   solstice, xiv. 9.                             Revati, 28th "asterism—identification etc.,
Projection of an eclipse, vi ; name, vi. 1, 8 ; 199 ; its last quarter unlucky, xi. 21.
   scale of, iv. 26 ; figure illustrating pro Revolution of a planet, i. 25-27 ; numbers
   jection of lunar eclipse, 157.                  of revolutions in an Age, i. 29-34.
Ptolemy—possible traces of his name in Right ascension, equivalents of the differ
   Hindu astronomy, i. 6 n ; his times of ent signs of the ecliptic in, iii. 42—14.
   sidereal revolution of the planets, p. 24, ar-Risha, 28th manzil, 199.
   add. n. 10 ; inclination of planetary or Rohim, (4th asterism—identification etc.,
   bits, i. 70 n ; of ecliptic, ii. 28 n ; use of 185; astrological consequences of col
   chords, p, 56 ; relation of his chords to lision of the planets with, viii. 13.
   Hindu sines, add. n. 15 ; mode of cal Rohitaka, place situated on prime merid
    culating equation of centre of sun and ian, i. 62.
    moon, p. 66 ; of other planets, together Romaka, name of Rome, i. 6 n, xii. 89.
    with annual equation, p.73 ; his improve Romaka-Siddhanta, add n. 1 , i. 6 n.
    ments of Greek astronomy, not found in Rudhirodgarin, 31st year of Jupiter's cy
    Hindu system, p. 75, 330; relative di          cle, i. 55 n.
   mensions and eccentricities of planetary Rudra, divinity of 6th asterism, 186.
   orbits, p. 76 ; retrogradation of planets,
   p. 82 ; precession, 105 ; distances, paral [For words often spelt with Sh, S', 'S, or
   lax, and dimensions of sun and moon, S, see 9. under the letter C.]
    127 ; direction of ecliptic in eclipses. Sa'd adh-Uhabih, 22nd manz.il, 196.
    140 ; astrology, vii. 23 n ; heliacal Bet Sa'd al-Akhbiyah, 25th mamil, 197.




                                                                                                 -
352                               S&rya-Siddhdnta,
Sa'd as-Su'ud, 24th manzil, 197.                 Siddhanta-Sarvabhauma, add. n. 1 : meth
Sa'd Buta', 23rd manzil, 196.                       od of observing positions of asterisms,
Sadharana, 18th year of Jupiter's cycle, viii. 1 2 n ; epicycles, add. n. 1 8.
   i. && a.                                        •iddhanta-Sundara, add. n. 1 ; cited by
Sadhya, 22nd yoga, ii. 65 n.                        Siddhanta-Sarvabhauma, viii. 1 2 n.
Samvatsara—1 st y ear of lustrum, xiv. 1 1 n ; Siddharthin, 27th year of Jupiter's cycle,
   year of era of Vikramaditya, add. n. 12          i. 55 n.
Sanskrit words, transcription and pronun Siddhi— 16th yoga, ii. 65 n; name of a
   ciation of, introd. n.                           yoga, add. n. 19.
asSarfah, 12th manzil, 190.                        idereal time, day, year—see Time, Day,
Sarvadharin, 56th year of Jupiter's cycle, Tear.
   i. 55 n.                                      Sieu, 28-fold division of heavens by Chi
Sarvajit, 55th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. nese, 181; comparison with Hindu
   55 n.                                            asterisms and Arab lunar mansions,
Saturn, names, revolutions, etc., etc.—see           183-200 ; map illustrating position and
   Planets.                                         relations, add. n. 27 ; origin of system,
Saubhagya, 4th yoga, ii. 65 n.                       ace. to Biot, 201.
Saumya— 17th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. ign, twelfth part of ecliptic, i. 28 ; reck
   55 n ; name of a yoga, add. n. 19.                oned from any given starting-point, i.
Scale of projection of an eclipse, iv. 26.           28 n, 58 n ; table of names and symbols,
Seasons—number and names, xiv. 10 n; i. 58 n.                                        .
   months and asterisms belonging to as-Simak, 14th manzil, 191.
    them, xiv. 16 n; reason of varying Sin, 16th sieu, 195.
   temperature, xii. 46, 72 n.                   Sine—name, p. 57, add. n. 16 ; series of
 Second of arc, i. 28.                               sines, in minutes, ii. 17-22 ; comparative
 Serpents, divinities of 9th asterism, 188.          table of, p. 53 ; table of sines for every
Seven Sages, stars in Ursa Major, xiii. 9 ; degree, with differences, 285 ; rule for
   their independent revolution, viii. 21 n. developing the series, ii. 15-16; how
Shadacitimukha, solar period, xiv. 3-6.              derived, p. 54-5, add. n. 15 ; its falsity,
Shadow of earth — diameter on moon's add. n. 15 ; Hindu use of sines earlier
    orbit, iv. 4-5 ; no account taken of pe          than Arab, p. 56 ; Arab sines from Greek
   numbra, iv. 5 n.                                  chords, p. 56 ; whether Hindu sines like
 Shadow of gnomon—names, iii. 5 n; base,             wise ? add. D. 15 ; Hindu series how
    or north and south projection of, iii. 23- obtained, p. 54, add. n. 15.
    25 ; path of its extrfinity, iii. 41-42          part of an arc determining the sine, ii.
    equinoctial shadow, iii. 7, 12-13 : noon 29-30 ; to find the sine of a given arc,
    shadow, how calculated, iii. 20-22 ; oth         or arc of a given sine, ii. 31-33.
    er shadows, iii. 28-34, 34-36 ; shadow Sing, 8th sieu, 189.
    cast by any planet or star, how deter Solar time, day, month, year, etc.—see
    mined and laid down, 168. 172.                   Time, Day, Month, Year.
 ash-Sharatan, 1st manzil, 183.                   Solstice, name of, 105, xii. 72 n.
 ash-Shaulah, 19th manzil, 194.                   Soma-Siddhanta, add n. 1,6.
 Siddha, 21st yoga, ii. 65 n.                     Somavara, Monday, i. 52 n.
 8iddhanta-<J!iromani—date, authorship, and Sphere, 143.
    derivation, add. n. 1 ; account of Vedan- Square, iii. 5 n.
    gas, i. 3 n ; planetary system, add. n. 6 ; Sthira, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.
    division of the day, i. 12 n ; length of Subhanu, 51st year of Jupiter's cycle,!.
    year, and mean sidereal revolutions of 55 n.
    planets, p. 24 ; positions of apsides and Sukarman, 7th yoga, ii. 65 n.
    nodes, i. 44 n ; dinmeter and circumfer Sum of days—names, i. 51 D ; how found,
    enoe of earth, i. 60 n ; prime meridian, i. 45-51.
     i. 62 n; prtcession, 104 ; statement re Sun—names, revolutions, etc., etc., see
    specting precession as taught by Siirya-          Planet*-—dimensions, iv. 1 ; mean ap
    Siddhanta, 101 ; sines of zenith-distance parent diameter, horizontal parallax,
    and altitude of ecliptic, v. 7 n ; defini        and distance, iv. In; to find true ap
    tion of position of asterisms, 182-200; parent diameter, iv. 2-8 ; briefer meth
    of fixed stars, viii. 1 '2 n ; geography of od, 312; solar eclipses, iv, v ; calcu
     southern hemisphere, xii. 44 n ; orbit of lation of a solar eclipse, add. n. 25 ;
    asterisms, xii. 90 n ; armillary sphere, error of sun's motion and position bv
    xiii. 3n; descriptions of instruments,           Hindu system, p 22 ; adaptation of those
    xiii 2 1 n, 22 n ; solar day, xiv. 3 n ; epi     of other planets to it, p. 20-3 : sun's
    cycles, add. n. 18.                              revelation of present treatise, i. 2-9, xiv.
                                     General Index.                                       353
   24-25 : bis part in the creation, xii. 15- ttara-Bhadrapada, 27th asterism—iden
   21 : divinity of 13th asterism, 190.             tification etc., 198.
Surd, 115.                                        Jttara-l'halguni, 12th asterism—identifi
Surya-Siddhanta—professedly revealed by             cation etc., 189.
   the Sun to Maya, i. 2-9 ; ascribed by
   al-Birflnl to Lata, i. 3n; referred by                     , 1st or 2nd month, i. 51 n, xiv.
   Bentley to llth century, p. 21 ; refuta          3 n, 16 n.
   tion of this conclusion, i. 3 n, p. 23, 326 ; ^aidhrta, or Vaidhrti, name of a hostile
   position in astronomical literature of aspect of sun and moon, xi. 2, 4.
   India, introd. n., add. n. 1, 326 ; its sys Vaidhrti, 27th yoga, ii. 65 n.
   tem compared with those of other trea Vajra— 15th yoga, ii. 65 n; name of a
   tises, add. n. 6 ; present extent, xiv. 27 n ;   yoga, add. n. 19.
   division into two portions, xi. 23 n ; raraha, name of current JSon, i. 23 n.
   commentaries on, add. n. 2 ; published Varaha-mihira, astronomical and astro
   edition, introd. n., add. n. 1 . .               logical authority, i. 3n, vii. 23 n, 208,
Svati, 15th asterism—identification etc.,           viii. 18 n, xiv. 6 n, add. n. 1.
    191.                                           faraha-Siddhanta, add. n. 1.
Synodical revolutions of the planets, p. 68. fariyas, 18th yoga, ii. 65 n.
                                                   farsha, rainy season, xiv. lOn, 16 n.
 Tables for finding true places of planets faruna, divinity of 25th asterism, 197.
    •where given, p. 74.                           fasanta, spring, xiv. lOn, 16 n.
 Taitila, 5th etc. karana, ii. 69 n.              Vasishtha or Vasishtha Siddhanta, add.
 Taittiriya-Sanhita and TMttiriya-Brah               n. 1, 6.
    niiiiiii, names and divinities of the aste fasudeva, xii. 12.
    risms according to, 182 etc.                   ^asus, divinities of 24th asterism, 196.
 Tammaya, commentator on Surya-Sid fatsara, 5th year of lustrum, xiv. 17 n.
    dhanta, add. n. 2.                             fedas, xii. 17.
 Tarana, 52nd year of Jupiter's cycle, i Vedangas, i. 8 n.
    55 'n.                                        Venus — names, revolutions, etc., etc.,
 at-Tarf, 9th manzil, 188.                           see Planets—in conjunction with other
 Tattva-Viveka, add. n. 1.                           planets, vii. 23.
 ath-Thuraiya, 3rd manzil, 185.                   Versed sine—name, p. 57 ; how found, ii.
 Ti, 14th siev, 192.                                 22 ; series of, for the quadrant, ii. 23-27.
 Time—real and unreal, i. 10; differen Vertical circle, 143.
    modes of measuring and reckoning, xiv Vertical parallax, resolution of, 143.
    civil time and its uses, xiv. 18-19; lu Vibhava, 36th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
    nar time, i. 13 n, xiv. 12-14; siderea           55 n.
    time, xiv. 15 ; solar time, xiv. 3, 10 Vicakha, 1 6th asterism—identification
    time of gods, Prajapati, and Brahma              etc., 191.
    xiv. 20-21 : mode of reckoning timt Vicrtau, name of stars in sting of Scor
    practically employed, i. 13 n: instru            pio, 193.
    merits for measuring time, xiii. 16, 19- Vijvavasu, 13th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
     24 : to determine the time by observa            55 n.
    tion of shadow of gnomon, iii. 87-39— Vijaya, 1st year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
     see Day, Month, Year, etc.                       55 n.
  Times of rising, see Ascensional equiva Vikarin, 7th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
     lento.                                           55 n.
  Tsan, 4th neu, 186.                             Vikrama, 48th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
  Tse, 3rd xieu, 186.                                 5511.
  Tsing, 5th sieu, 187.                           Vikramaditva, era of. add. n. 12.
  Tvashtar, divinity of 14th asterism, 190 Vikrta, 58th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
  Tycho Brahe's determination of apparen              55 n.
     diameter of planets, vii. 14 u.               Vilamba, 6th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
                                                      55 n.
  TJdravatsara, 5th year of lustrum, xiv. 17 n Vinadi, measure of time, i. 11.
  Uei, 17th nieu, 194.                             Virodhakrt, 19th year of Jupiter's cycle,
  Ujjayini, city determining position                 i. 55 n.
     prime meridian, i. 62 n.                      Virodhin, 57th year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
  TTpnnishad, xiii. 3 n.                              55 n.
  Utpata, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.              Vishkambha, 1st yoga, ii. 65 n.
  Uttara Ashadha, 21st asterism—identif Vishnu—divinity of 23rd asterism, 196 ;
     cation etc.,' 194.                               original character, xiv. 10 n.
354                               S&rya-Siddhdnta.
 Vishnu-candra, author of Vasishtha-Sid Yavanas, Greeks or westerners, referred
    dhanta, add. n. 1.                             to in Hindu astronctnical traditions, i.
Vishnudharmottara-Purana, add. n. 1.           I 6 n, 830.
Vishnu- Purfina, citations from and refer Year—civil, lunar, sidereal, and solar, i.
    ences to, i. 9 n, 12 n, 17 n, 19 n, 21 n       13 n ; year of the gods, i. 14 ; years in
    23 n, ii. 8 n, xii. 28 n, 44 n.               practical use in India, i. 13 n ; sketch of
Vishti, 8th etc. karana, ii. 69 n.                solar and luni-solar calendar, for year
Vortices, or propelling currents, of the           1859-60, i. 51 n : length of sidereal solar
   plnneta, ii. 8, xii. 73.                       year, ace. to different authorities, p. 24 :
Vrddhi, 1 1th yoga, ii. 65 n.                     years of eras of yaliv&hana and Vlkra-
VyAghata, 13th yoga, ii. 65 n.                    maditya, character and names of, add.
Vyasa-Siddhanta, add. n. 1.                       n. 12; years of Jupiter's cycle, names
Vyatipata— 17th yoga, ii. 65 n, xi. 20            of, i. 55 n ; years of lustrum, names of,
   name of a hostile aspect of sun and xiv. 17 n.
   moon, xi. 2, 4.                              Yellaya, commentator on Sdrya-Siddhan-
Vyaya, 54th year of Jupiter's cycle, i            ta.add. n. 2.
   55 n.                                        Yoga, period of time—name whence de-
                                                  rivea, add. n. 19 ; two systems, names
Warren's Kala Sankalita, references to            and character of, ii. 65 n, add. n. 19.
   and citations from, introd. n., i. 13 n, Yojana, measure of length, its subdivision
   84 n, 48 n, 55n, 62 n, p.74,xiv. 3n, 17 fi,    and value, i. 60 n, add. n. 13.
   add. n. 12, 19.                              Yuvan, 43rd year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
Weber, references to and extracts from            55 n.
   his works and essays, i. 3 n, 6 n, ii. 8 n
   vii. 23 n, 204, xiv. "6 n, add. n. 1, 3, 26 Zenith, name of, v. 1 n.
   28.                                          Zenith-distance—on the meridian, iii. 14—
Week—not an original or ancient Hindu              15 ; elsewhere, iii. 33; sun's zenith-dis
   institution, i. 52 n, xii. 79 n; whence tance on circles of intermediate direc
   brought to India, i. 52 n ; names of its tion, how found, iii. 28-34 ; to find the
   days, i. 52 n ; how determined, i. 52 n ; same elsewhere, iii. 34-36 ; how found
   when they begin, i. 66.                        from shadow, iii. 14-15, 37 : instrument
Wilson —his catalogue of Mackenzie Col            for obtaining sun's zenith-distance by
   lection referred to, add. n. 1 , 2 ; his observation, xiii. 21 n.
   Vishnu-Purana, see Vishnu-Purana.            Zodiac—name, iii. 12 n ; signs of, see
                                                  Signs.
Y, 10th sieu, 190.                             Zones of the earth, xii. 59-69.
Yama, divinity of 2nd asterism, 184.           az-Zubanan, l&thmanzil, 192.
Yamakoti, city, xii. 38.                       az-Zubrah, llth manzil, 190.
                                 ERRATA.


  p. 4, 11. 2, 8 from below—exchange the words former and latter.
  p. 12, 1. 28—lor plants read planets.
  p. 13, 1. 25—for 73-89 read 80-90.            h      h
  p. 24, table, 3rd column (Ptolemy), 1. 1—for 36 read 6.
  p. 29, 1. 34—for Ward read Warren.
  p. 32, 1. 20—for 84-88 read 31.
  p. 89, 1. 41—for 5059.556 read 5059.64.
  p. 47, 1. 22—for day-sine read earth-tine.
  p. 120, 1. 4—for lines read signs.
  p. 123, 1. 20—for longitude of read of longitude.
  p. 190,1. 12—for as-Sarfah read as-Sarfan.
  p. 191, 1. 15—tor fourteenth read thirteenth.
  p. 283, 1. 2 from below—for 1962nd read 1917th.
  References made in the notes on the earlier chapters to the latter portion of
chapter xii are in several instances wrong by one verse, owing to an error of the
manuscript consulted.
