& 


aya 


OOS) 


. 
*~ 


6 


aM ie 


a 


& 
° 
AY 


© 


. 
° 
> 


ane) 


Te. 
(q) 

Fea 

dean age 
' 


te -0f 


“IN THE MANTRA-SHASTRA 
“SIR. JOHN WOODROFFE Price Rs. 15, 


with 


“@hy PUBLISHERS: GANESH & CO.(MADRAS) LTD, 


\ fi ) od ‘ 


? 


> ere 


THE 
GARLAND 
OF 
LETTERS 


—_—_—_—— 


WOODROFFE 


3RD EDITION 
Rs. 15/- 


GANESH & COL, 
(MADRAS) LTD. 


ae 


i's one tel Heke wiki AOR ibaa 


} re ' vitveity Hocaiongnnart te eR rap rata 
stad ah aaa Saas 


geawien Cure? Wh vaeker'sth os chee 


+6 ie Myf He 
1 hh iy a ALE ame fh 
betsy tae ‘hy raha ALY 
i ce \ tel te 


id . ; F 
Dah 


cad 


¥. 


* 
* 
a 
24 ae «it 
. 
A ne 
7 
= te 


\ 4, 
“ ey 
yd 
ttn 
tien ie! 


_— 
= 


ie es nee a 

¥- 

a 

a 

. 

Mie 

- 
9 


t 4 
q . 
evita gy ' 
ae t 7 ane et 
1 b: " 4 ' 4 it 
i La ; f ‘ 
F (ayeag 
, ' ! es He . 
th ? 
. | i! 7 
F ty «4,2 Md ¥, 
, Z { eye eee : 
' Arc 47 
“et ; ¥ tek me As cs 4 
cee St ee” Pied © 
; ‘ rat it 
' oh) oor Vdd teh te teh 
: - ’ ‘ "s 
' f] OLR ae 
er 
; yj “+ 4 
, 4 ‘ it~ ¢ x 
* ‘ Amat © Pawaty ar 
. + ‘ 1" Be Na, NY 
( : ‘) 
> | o , An 
. % i { ‘ : 
A p * é 4 te Hig) Aft #4 ih; ‘ r i* 
f HA Palys : 
ee ; ; eA CR ey bes erty “So 
Ane ay ie hat hy " A} try esa hee ig eat 
F } ’ 209 ‘ , st eh ede ‘ ' Ny 
3 ‘ \ 1 " A t Wat hie) « * 
‘ ‘ f 
hs an y N cay 
‘ ‘ F A Tu a ee wht 
i eat a ‘ ? 4 
' . ‘ abe b ' 
; } a eigje tides ol ‘ 
‘ ; rae ee Wie Yq adh Vibe gia FM aad , 
s ‘ - ' A arty “ 
a a Ait oy r 
‘t Tate; F ‘, {340 Twa 
\ ’ 4 { 
ts ‘ ty ' + ee ' Fates t 
Vit. we 
. ’ ‘ ad any ~ ¢ " 
, » ‘ . rhs MH ‘ ' ty" ; in 
isbye Fi ‘ 4 4\4 4 > 


OP Sw U Nye 


Aris iy 
ech "hs Bh be 


“lds nei 


a Wildy AY 
eh 4a) ie 


Jat 


be ee ee tp tos fis ed ely 0 a BT use| hack . 
\ ! \t vt gsi! rane d ‘ i (th nue wl) i eta is ¥ ‘ j 
; RiGee i tii te ay ple tee stirs ‘ 
figtel cua cat ie Rise ; at te Mi 
» J n 


sth 


oye ah rhe ‘arent 
tua ne mestieaithe ete Hct be 


sath rid vive tay ES Wear te te 


ne tee 


ry ah 


ai Ve 4 Ba bl Ven) 


Wa 
vate f ¥S 
ais vias ikl a 


arias rd 


, ered! web a 


poi ies u a ‘at he hin hat 


£8 A 


‘ 
wins 


| SRD enti 
| Rs. 15/- 


nding 


hy 
Linc 


: 
hie 


f 
ri 


Ms 
# 


| THE 
GARLAND OF LETTERS 


(VARNAMALA) 


STUDIES IN THE MANTRA-SASTRA 


BY 


SIR JOHN WOODROFFE 


WITH A FOREWORD BY 


Pror. T. M. P. MAHADEVAN, M.A., PH.D. 
Prof. of Philosophy, University of Madras 


Third Edition 


PUBLISHERS : 
GANESH & Co., (MADRAS) Ltp., MADRAS—17 
1955 


Printed by D. V. Syamala Rau, at the Vasanta Press, 
The Theosophical Society, Adyar, Madras, India. 


FOREWORD 


Sir JoHN Wooprorre (Arthur Avalon) was instrumental 
in removing many of the cobwebs of ignorance that had 
come to cluster round the Sakta philosophy and practice. 
The decent Indian mind that had developed a deep-seated 
prejudice against the Tantras became awake to their 
excellence after the pioneering work of this great foreigner. 
By editing the original Sanskrit texts, as also by publish- 
ing essays on the different aspects of Saktism, he showed 
that this cult had a profound philosophy behind it, and 
that there was nothing irrational or obscurantist about the 
technique of worship it recommends, 

The philosophy of S'aktism is 
(advaita), similar to that of Kashmir 
systems, the highest Reality is styled | 
Sakti are not different; they are one. Sliva ig conscious- 
ness as stasis (cz); Sakti ig consciousness ag dynamis (cid- 
rupint). Siva is pure awareness, which igs the ground of 
all existence. Through his Parg S'akti, he effects the 
manifestation of the universe. He is the sole and whole 
cause of the world. Only, he becomes the cause, not in his 
aspect as stasis, but through his dynamic aspect which is 
spoken of as his feminine part. The main difference between 
Kashmir Saivism and Saktism is that while the former 
lays relatively greater stress on the Siva-aspect, the latter 
emphasizes more the Slakti. Between the Slaiva and 
Siakta philosophy on the one hand, and Advaita-Vedanta 


& kind of non-dualism 
Saivism. In both the 
Siva- Sakti. Siva and 


iv THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


on the other, there is close kinship. Advaita too teaches 
that the ultimate Reality is non-dual, and that it is of the 
nature of pure consciousness. But, for it the world-process 
is not real. The world, according to Advaita, is mdyika, 
illusory appearance. The theory of world-appearance is 
here called wvarta-vdda. The corresponding doctrine of 
the S’aiva and Sakta schools is known as dbhdsa-vada. 
According to this view, the universe consists of appearances 
which are all real in the sense that they are aspects of the 
ultimate Reality. 

Fivolution, we are told, is the result of self-movement 
(spanda) on the part of Siva-Sakti. It is the movement 
of God that brings about the distinctions of word (s‘abda), 
object (artha), and cognition (pratyaya). These three are, 
in fact, aspects of God’s primal energy. It is the causal 
impetus of the Divine that makes them emerge out of 
itself. The world of sounds, things, and thoughts, is the: 
self-manifestation of the non-dual Spirit. 

The line of evolution is from the subtle to the gross. 
The Reality in itselfi—Para Siiva—is transcendent; it is 
beyond the levels of Matter, Life, and Mind. It is without 
parts (niskala), without activity (niskriya), and beyond the 
reach of word (asabda) and mind (amanaska). The same: 
Reality as the cause of the world-process is called Para- 
mesvara (the Supreme Lord). From Paramegvara arise at. 
first the five categories of pure (s'wddha) creation ; and then: 
begins the course of finitization consisting in the emergence 
of the thirty-one categories composing impure (asuddha) 
creation. 

The five categories (fattvas) of the pure creation are : 
(1) Stva-tattva, (2) S'akti-tattva, (8) Sadasiva or Sddakhya- 
tattva, (4) Is'vara-tattva. and (5) Suddhavidya-tattva. The 
first, Siva-tattva, is the first in the order of world-evyolution. 
Here the predominant aspect of power is Consciousness. 


FOREWORD ; v 


(cit). The second, S'akti-tativa, is not a subordinate of the 
first; it is more properly to be regarded as its co-ordinate, 
manifesting mainly the aspect of bliss (@nanda). The third, 
Saddasiva-tattva, is the stage where the experience of being 
(sat) begins. Here, it is the power of will (éccha), that is 
dominant. At the next stage which is Js’vara-tattva, the 
power of knowledge (j#idna) figures prominently; and at 
the final stage, suddhavidyd-tattva, it is the power of 
action (kriya) that functions as the dominating influence. 
Interpreted philosophically, these five stages or categories 
represent the gradual differentiation in the pure Experience, 
which subsequently serves as the basis of the evolution of 
the pluralistic universe. At first, there is only the distinc- 
tionless experience. Into this the condition of distinction 
is introduced by S'akti. When we reach the Sadasiva- 
tattva, the experience of the form ‘I am this’ arises, with 
the emphasis on J. At the next level of Isvara-tattva, the 
stress is on the this: ‘this am I.’ In order that the uni- 
verse of minds and objects may emerge, there should be a 
balance between this and I. This igs what is obtained at 
the stage of swddhavidyd. Here, in the experience ‘I am 
this’ the two get equalized. It is in such an experience 
that there is activity and movement of thought. 

Up to Suddhavidya what we have is only ideal creation. 
It is after this, and with Maya, that there commences 
actual creation—the creation that is called impure. Maya, 
which is the first of the thirty-one categories of impure 
creation, is the power of obscuration. It obscures the infinite 
spirit, and makes possible the rise of a plurality of souls 
and things. The limitless Experience gets limited as 
regards both the experiencer and the experienced, the ‘I’ 
and the ‘this’. The next five categories called kavcukas 
(constrictors) constitute the ways in which the limitation 
is brought about. Kdla is temporal limitation. Niyati is °, 


vi THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


restriction in regard to space. Raga is attachment to 
particular things. Vidya is limited knowledge. Kala is 
limited agency. As enveloped in these kavicukas, the soul 
(purusa) arises. This is the seventh category. The eighth 
is prakrtt which is the corresponding limitation on the 
objective side. From this, the rest of the evolution appears, 
almost as in the Sankhya scheme. Buddhi (intellect), 
ahamkadra (individuation or egoity), and manas (mind) 
come into manifestation in sequence. From ahamkara, 
there are evolved, besides manas, the five organs of sense 
( jnanendriyas), the five organs of action (karmendriyas), 
and the five essences of elements (tanmdtras). Out of the 
last five emerge the five gross elements which are ether, air, 
fire, water, and earth. | 

So far we have been speaking of the evolution of 
the world of things (artha-prapanca). It should be noted 
that there is a similar evolution of the world of sounds 
(sabda-prapafica). In this context Parames'vara is Sabda- 
Brahman. The entire world is said to be born of S’abda 
(vabda-prabhava). Here also the line of evolution is 
from the subtle to the gross. Corresponding to the five 
categories of pure creation there are five stages of the 
emanation of sound. The first is Parad which igs abso- 
lutely supreme and subtle. The second is Pasyantt 
which is less subtle but still undifferentiated. The third is 
Madhyama which is grosser and differentiated, though not 
articulate. Articulate sound is called Vaikhari. \ This is 
of two forms: subtle and gross. It ig from Vaikhari that 
all the letters (varna), syllables (pada) and sentences. 
(vdkya) are manifested. 

Parad which resides in the S‘va-tattva represents the: 
first movement of S’abda. This is also called Ndda-tattva. 
Pasyanti stands for S'akti-tattva which is known ag Bindu- 
tattva. Ndda and Bindu are the complements of the 


FOREWORD Vii 


ultimate potency of creation. From these arise what is 
known as the Tribindwu or Kamakala which is the root of 
all mantras. The three Bindus are the white (sita), red 
(sona), and mixed (misraz). These are the effect-Bindus in 
relation to the original Mahd-bindu. They are also referred 
to as Bindu, Ndda,’ and Bija, and represent respectively 
the Prakasa (effulgence), Vimarsa (distinction), and Pra- 
kas'a-vimars'a (combination of both) aspects of the Lord’s: 
Power. In Tantrika ritual they are designated Carana- 
tritaya (the three Feet). A host of correspondences are 
made with the three Bindus: e.g., (1) Moon, Fire, and Sun; 
(2) iccha, jfridna, and kriya; (8) Vama, Jyestha, and Raudri ; 
(4) Brahma, Visnu, and Rudra. The three Bindus constitute 
symbolically the points of a triangle. It is the wcha 
(desire), jana (knowledge), and kriya@ (action) of the uni- 
versal Being, represented by Moon, Fire, and Sun, that 
are responsible for world-creation. The Sun is technically 
spoken of as Kama, and the Moon and Fire together 
as Jtald. So, the great triangle is Kadmakala. From 
Kama-kala arise the subtle sabdas called Matrkds (the 
little Mothers); and from them the gross sabdas, viz., 
letters (varna), words (pada), and sentences (vakya). 

The three lines constituting the Kdadma-kala triangle 
are named after Brahma, Visnu, and Rudra. The letters of 
the Sanskrit alphabet are distributed thus: 16 letters from 
a to the Brahma line; 16 letters from ka to the Visnu line; 
16 letters from tha to the Rudra line; and the remaining 
three letters, Ja, ha, and ksa to the three corners. 

S'abda is said to be of the nature of varna (letters) and 
adhvani (sounds). The latter may be regarded as the mani- 
fester of the former. FEach element or category of the) 
universe has its own natural sound which is called its bia, 
(seed). For example, the sounds of the five elements, ether, 

Here Nada is the effect-Nada. 


viii THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


air, fire, water, and earth, are ham, yam, ram, vam, and lar, 
respectively. The typal sounds are said to be eternal, as 
also the relation between them and their objects. These 
sounds may themselves constitute mantras, or by mutual 
combination. A mantra is so called because it saves one 
who meditates on its significance. Each mantra has its 
devata ; and each devata has its mantra. For instance, the 
mantra of Mother Kali is krim, and of I aya or Sakti, hrim. 
The significance of hrim, e.g., is that it is composed of the 
letters ha, ra, 7, and ma, representing respectively akds'a 
(ether), agni (fire), ardhanaris'vara, and nddabindu. TWiven 
the word aham is a mantra: a=Siva; ha = Sakti; a+ha 
(with nadabindu, viz.) =aham=1. The breathing-process 
consisting of inspiration and expiration constitutes the 
mantra, ham-+sa. The queen of all mantras, and their 
source as well, is Om composed of the letters a, u,m. There 
is a whole literature on the significance of Om, and on the 
technique of meditation thereon. And, there is the grand 
conception of the World-Mother wearing the garland of 
letters. 

Manitra-sadhana is an essential part of spiritual dis- 
cipline. The most potent way of realizing a devata is with 
the help of the bija-mantra. And when an aspirant gets 
devoted to the highest of all mantras, viz. On (Pranava), 
and meditates thereon, he reaches eventually the goal of 
life which is moksa. 


Madras i 


March 18, 1955 ) I. M. P. ManaDEVAN 


PREFACE 


Tats book is an attempt, now made for the first time, to 


explain to an English-knowing reader an undoubtedly 
difficult subject. I am therefore forcibly reminded of the 
saying, “Veda fears the man of little knowledge, since 
injury may be received from him” (Bibhetyalpasrutad- 
Vedo mam-ayam praharis'yate). It is natural, given this 


difficulty and the mystery which surrounds the subject, 


that strangers to India should have failed to understand 
Mantra. They need not, however, have then (as some have 
done) jumped to the conclusion that it was “ meaningless 
superstition.” This is the familiar argument of the lower 
mind which says “ what I cannot understand can have no 
sense at all.” Mantra és, it is true, meaningless to those 
who do not know its meaning. But there are others who 
do, and to them it is not “superstition.” It is because 
some English-educated Indians are as uninstructed in the 
matter as that rather common type of Western to whose 
mental outlook and opinions they mould their own, that 
it was possible to find a distinguished member of this class 
‘describing Mantra as “ meaningless jabber.” . Indian doc- 
trines and practice have been so long and so greatly mis- 
understood and misrepresented by foreigners, that it has 
always seemed to me a pity that those who are of this 
Punyabhimi should, through misapprehension, malign 
without reason anything which is their own. This does not 
mean that they must accept what is in fact without worth 


> x THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


because it is Indian, but they should at least first under- 
stand what they condemn as worthless. 

When I first entered on a study of this Sastra I did 
so in the belief that India did not contain more fools 
than exist amongst other peoples, but had on the contrary 
produced intelligences which (to say the least) were the 
equal of any elsewhere found. Behind the unintelligent 
practice, which doubtless to some extent exists amongst the 
multitude of every faith, I felt sure there must be a rational 
principle, since men on the whole do not continue through- 
out the ages to do that which is in itself meaningless and 
is therefore without result. I was not disappointed. The 
Mantra-Siastra, so far from being rightly described as 
“meaningless superstition’’ or “jabber,” is worthy of a 
close study which when undertaken, will disclose elements 
of value to minds free from superstition, of metaphysical 
bent and _ subtle-seeing (Saksmadarsin). A profound 
doctrine, ingeniously though guardedly set forth, is con- 
tained in the Tantras of the Mantra-Sistra or Agama. 
This is an auspicious time in which to open out the secrets: 
of this Adhyaimika science. For here in this .country 
there has been a turn in the tide. The class of Indian 
who was wont to unite with the Fiuropean critic of his: 
Motherland in misunderstanding and misrepresenting Her 
thoughts and institutions, is, to Her good fortune, gradual- 
ly disappearing. Those who are recovering from the dazzle 
produced on its first entrance by an alien civilization 
are able to judge aright both its merits and defects as 
also to perceive the truth of the saying of Schiller, “‘ Hold 
to your dear and precious native land; there are the 
strong roots of your strength (Ans Vaterland ans teure 
schliess dich an. Da sind die starken Wurzeln deiner 
Kraft.)’ Again in the West there is a movement away from 
the Materialism which regarded that alone as “ real ’” which 


PREFACE xi 


is gross sensible matter; and towards that standpoint 
whence it is seen that thought itself is a thing which is 
every whit as real as any external object. Hach is but 
an aspect of the one conscious Self whence both Mind and 
Matter proceed. This Self or Cit is the Soul of the Uni- 
verse, and the universe is Cité which has become its own 
object. Every being therein is Consciousness, that is, Cit 
manifesting as the multiple forms of Mind and Matter 
which constitute the universe. This Western movement is 
called by its adherents “New Thought,” but its basal 
principles are as old as the Upanisads which proclaimed 
that all was Feeling-Consciousness (Cit), and therefore 
what a man thought, that he became. In fact thought 
counts for more than any material means whatever. I am 
not however here entering upon a general defence of so im- 
mense a subject, for this cannot be compassed in a work 
such as this. In any case—and this is what I am concerned 
to show—the Mantra Sastra is not the mere senseless 
rubbish it has been supposed to be. 

This book is, as the sub-title states, a Collection of 
Studies in, or Essays upon, particular subjects in the 
Mantra-Sastra, a term which is commonly applied to the 
Tantra-Sastra. It is practically composed of two parts. 
After Chapter I, which deals with the “Word,” Chapters II-IX 
treat of the Principles of the general doctrine of Sabda. I 
am much indebted in the preparation of these Chapters 
to my friend, Professor Pramathanatha-Mukhopadhyaya. 
Chapters X-XXI are elucidations of some subjects in the 
Tantra-Sastra which adopts the Mimamgsa doctrine of 
Shabda with some modifications to meet its doctrine of Sakti. 
Chapters XXII, XXVIII and XXIX deal with the Mantras | 
_ “Oth” and the Gayatri. An understanding of such terms 
as Sakti, Nada, Bindu, the Causal S’aktis of the Pranava, 
Bija-mantras and so forth, is essential for those who would 


xii THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


understand the S'astra in which they appear. Hitherto 
knowledge of these matters has been confined (where it 
exists at all) to the Gurus and Sadhakas. This does not 
mean that my information has been gathered from oral 
sources only. On the contrary the substance of it may be 
found in the Tantras. These are however generally un- 
known. The definitions must be sought for in many 
Sastras. When found they must be explained by the aid of 
general Sastric knowledge and of Updsakas who possess 
the tradition. As regards technical terms I refer my 
readers to other books which I have published, in parti- 
cular to “Sakti and Sakta,” “Serpent Power,” and the 
volumes of the series called “The World as Power” 
describing the chief concepts of Indian Philosophy and 
Religion. 

Chapters X-XXI and XXIV are reprinted from the Jour- 
nal the Veddnta-Kesari. Chapters XXII-XXIII on “ On” 
and the “Necklace of Kali” appeared in Hast and West, and 
Chapters XXVIII-XXIX on Mantrasadhana and the 
“Gayatri” in the Introduction to my edition of the Maha- 
nirvana Tantra, which is now superseded, as regards the 
Introduction, by the fuller account of the Tantras and 
Tantrik ritual given in my volume, “Sakti and S‘akta”’, 
and as regards the Text, by another and more correct edition 
which I have in preparation. Chapter XXX on the “ Gayatri 
as an Exercise of Reasoning” is a reprint of a paper read 
by me before the Indian Rationalistic Society at Calcutta, 
and has been previously published in its Bulletin. Ten of 
the papers dealing with general principles were delivered 
by me in 1919 as Extension Lectures at the instance of 
the National Council of Education, Bengal. 

As I write the concluding lines of this preface hard 
by the ancient and desolate Temple to the Sun-Lord at 
Konaraka in Northern Orissa, a continuous rolling sound 


PREFACE Xilt 


like that of the Mahamantra is borne to me from afar. 
I heard the same sound many years ago at the Pemiong- 
chi monastery when some hundred Buddhist monks rolled 
out from the depth of their bodies the mantra Om. Their 
chant then suggested the sea, as the sea now suggests the 
Mantra. Here where the sound is heard are green woods, 
bushes of jasmine, cactus in bloom and the rose and yellow 
of the Karavira and Kalika flowers. Travelling however 
whence it comes some two miles seaward, the eye surveys 
a wide wild waste of land, with here and there sparse 
clumps of Ketaki, stretching from the world-famous Temple 
of the “Lord of the Universe” in the south to the Golra 
jungle on the North. On the Hastern edge the surf of the 
Bengal Ocean in great waves, marbled with foam with 
creaming crests, whipped into filmy vapour by the wind, 
ceaselessly beats upon a lonely shore. The waves as all else 
are Mantra, for Mantra in its most basal sense is the World 


viewed as—and in its aspect of—sound. But as I have 


explained in the Text we must distinguish between Natural 
Name in its pure sense as the sound of the constituent. 
forces of a thing and the sounds made by the thing when 
so produced. All sounds and therefore movements form 


the “Garland of Letters,” which is worn by the Divine 


Mother, from whose aspects as Or or the General Sound 
(Samanya-spanda) of the first creative movement all parti- 
cular sounds and things come. For all things may be 
rendered in terms of sound. The Universe is movement. 
The Letters are the sound of particular movements. These 
are audible as the gross letters which Kali, the Source of 
movement, wears as a garland round Her neck. I record 
this note on a scene which I have known and enjoyed for 
many years, since I may now be seeing it for the last 
time. If (as I hope not) this be so, then I bid farewell 
to my old friend the Sadhu Jagannatha-Dasa and to this. 


XIV THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


place set in an air of magic of which the Kapila-Samhita 
(Ch. VI) says: 


Maitreyakhye vane punye rathaydtramahotsave 
Ye pas'yanti nara bhaktya te pas'yanti tanu raveh. 


d. W. 
KoNARAKA 


22nd April, 1922 


CHAPTER 


CONTENTS 


Foreword 

Preface 

Vak or the Word » 

Artha, Pratyaya sat Sfabda 
Asgabda and Parasabda - 
Parasabda, Causal S’abda ~: 

S’akti as Stress ~ 

Eternality of S’abda ~ 

Sabda as language 

Natural Name 

Vaidika-S’abda 

The Tattvas . 
S’akti—Potency to Grane : 
Nada—the First Produced Maren eae 
Bindu or S’akti—Ready to Create 
Maya-Tattva : : 

The Kancukas 

Harhsa 

Kamakala 


The Gross Tattvas ze their mond 
Causal S’aktis of the Pranava 
The Kalas - 


The Geanea. of Letters or Varhaniere ~ 


Or ” 

The NédElace of Kali 
Dhvani 

Sun, Moon and Fire w 
Bija-Mantra 
Sadadhvas .~ 
Mantra-Sadhana 
Gayatri-Mantra, 


241 
250 
258 
265 


The Gayatri-Mantra as an mek of Heocouin es 268 


Atma-Sadhana 


° 


- 290 


BY THE SAME AUTHOR 


Introduction to Tantra Shastra 
(Key to Tantrik literature) 
Principles of Tantra 
(Tantra Tattva) 
The Serpent Power 
(Kundalini Sakti) 
Shakti and Shakta 
(Essays on the S'akta Tantra) 
The World as Power 
(Maha S‘akti in various aspects) 
The Great Liberation 
(Mahdadnirvana Tantra) 
Wave of Bliss 
(Anandalaharz) 
Greatness of Shiva 
(Mahimnastava) 
Isopanisad 
(A Tantrik interpretation) 


Hymns to the Goddess 
(Stotras of Sankaracharya etc.) 


Hymn to Kali 
(Karpiradistotra) 


Kamakalavilasa 


(An «mportant work in Sri-vidya) 


Tantraraja Tantra 
(4 Short Analysis) 


THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 
(VARNAMALA) 
CHAPTER I 


VAK OR THE WORD 


“THE word Vak (in Latin Vox) comes from the root Vach 
which means “to speak”. The feminine noun Vak therefore 
means literally both voice and the word it utters, as also 
the sound of inanimate objects. It hag the same sense 
therefore as Sabda. Artha is meaning or object. Pratyaya 
is mental apprehension. All things have a threefold sense, 
supreme (Para), subtle (Suksma), gross (Sthala). Para- 
Vak is the Causal Stress which, in terms of Pratyaya, is 
the Cosmic Ideation (Srsti-kalpana) of Isvara. This is 
the Divine “Word.” But Vak is also an effect, either 
subtle or gross. Pas'yanti-Vak is Vak actually going forth 
as Iksana (Seeing), producing or manifesting, as Sukgma 
Madhyama-Vak, or Hiranyagarbha S'abda which is the 
Matrka state of Slabda as it exists in man prior to its 
gross manifestation as the Varnas in spoken speech 
Waikhari-vak), In the Rgveda, Sarasvati (V. 48-11) is 
called Pavirayi or daughter of the Lightning, that is, of 
the reat Vajra which sustains the worlds, which according 
to Sayana ig Madhyamikivak. (See Muir O. 8. T.—V. 
337 ff.) Spoken speech (Vaikhari) is manifested to the ear 


2 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


by the gross physical sound or Dhvani produced by the 
contact of the vocal organs on the surrounding air by the 
effort (Prayatna) to speak. In the transcendental quiescent 
Brahman (Paramatma) or Paramas'iva there is neither 
S'abda (Asabda), Artha (Nirvisaya) nor Pratyaya. There 
ig therefore neither name (Nama) nor form (Rupa). In 
this Infinite Calm there arises a metaphysical Point of 
Stress or Bindu or Ghanibhitta-Sakti, which stirs forth 
(Prasarati) as the multiple forces of the universe. This 
energising is the cause of, and as Jivatma is, the World- 
experience with its duality of subject and object. This 
play of Sakti takes play in the Ether of Consciousness 
(Cidakas'a) in such a way that the latter is neither 
effaced nor affected when the second condition appears, 
which last is that of both Transcendence and Immanence. 
This is creation (Srsti) or, more properly, seeming develop- 
ment (Parinama), since the English word “creation” 
does not truly express the process. Creation, in the Christ- 
ian sense, excludes the notion that God is a material 
cause, creation being neither out of pre-existing matter 
nor out of God’s own substance. Creation also involves 
an absolutely first appearance. With this reservation the 
term “creation” is used. More accurately the Brahman 
Itself, in the form of Its Power (Sakti), goes forth (Pra- 
sarati). This Srsti endures a while (Sthiti) that is for a 
day of Brahma, upon which there is, according to some, a 
complete dissolution (Mahapralaya). Others say that there 
is no such Mahapralaya, but that there is always existing 
some universe, though one or another may disappear. In 
Mahapralaya the second state is potentially contained 
in the undifferentiated unmanifest Maya-Sakti. Sabda- 
brahman as an Ullasa of Siva sinks as it were into the 
eternally existing Calm, just as the rising wave breaks itself 
and sinks upon the ocean, OF as the spray of a fountain 


VAK OR THE WORD 3 


falls again into the waters which feed it. This notion of 
the “ Word” is very ancient. God “ speaks” the word and 
the Thing appears. Thus the Hebrew word for Light is 
“Aur.” Genesis says, “ God said: let there be Light (Aur) 
and there was Light (Aur).” The Divine word is conceived 
of in the Hebrew Scriptures as having creative power. A 
further stage of thought presents to us the concept of an 
aspect of the Supreme or Person who creates. Thus we 
have the Supreme and the Logos, Brahman and S‘abda- 
brahman. In Greek, Logos means (as does Aparasabda) 
thought, and the word which denotes the object of thought. 
To Heraclitus, Logos was the principle underlying the 
universe. (See J. N. Heinze, Die Lehre vom Logos in der 
Griech. Philosophie). To the Stoics it was the “ World- 
soul” the uniting principle of all rational forces working 
in the world. According to Plato, the Logoi were super- 
sensual primal images or patterns (Jati) of visible things. 
The Alexandrian Philo, influenced by Platonism and other 
philosophies of Hellenism, combined the two conceptions 
and read into the Old Testament and Jewish Theology a 

Being intermediate between It (that is ho om) and the 
manifold universe. This intermediate Being was the 
Logos. According to Philo, Ideas moulded Matter. God 
first produced the intelligible world of Ideas which are 
types (Aparajati) of the physical world. Though in Itself 
nothing but the Logos, the latter is the author of the ideal 
world. Just as an architect projects in his mind a plan of 
a town (Polis) and thus produces the real town according 
to the ideal, so God acted when He created the world, this 
Megalopolis (Brahmanda). The Author of the Fourth 
Gospel took up these ideas but gave them expression in 

such @ way as to serve Christian theological needs. (See 

J. Réville, La Doctrine du Logos dans la quatriéme 

Evangile et dans les Mluvres de Philon). It has thus been 


4 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


said that John’s adoption of the notion was not a mere 
copy, but a free adaptation of the Philonian Logos and a 
Christianising of it. According to the Evangelist the Logos 
is a Person who was before creation and Himself God. It 
is the Potency of the Eternal Wisdom proceeding from the 
unmanifest Godhead for the purpose of world-activity, and 
in the world It is the Logos Endiathetos or immanent 
divine wisdom (See Moeller, Hist. Ch. Church I, 92°222). 
The Logos through whom the world was created became 
flesh (Avatara), that it was manifested in man (Verbum 
caro factum est). He is the Son who is Jesus Christ, He 
who in the heavenly pre-existence is called the Logos and 
after His incarnation the man Jesus who is the Christ, 
who is neither prophet nor superman but Ptrnavatara of 
God. The Logos is the perfect self-presentation of God in 
the Son. In Jesus there was identity of being with God. 
The fourth Gospel opens grandly, “In the beginning was 
the Word and the Word was with God and the Word was 
God.’ These are the very words of Veda. Prajapatir vai 
idam asit: In the beginning was Brahman. Tasya vag 
dvitiya astt; with whom was Vak or the Word; (She is 
spoken of as second to Him because She is first potentially 
in, and then as Sakti issues from Him); Vag vai paramam 
Brahma; and the word is Brahman. Vak is thus a Sakti 
or Power of the Brahman which is one with the Possegsgor 
of Power (Saktiman). This Sakti which was in Him is 
at the creation with Him, and evolves into the form of the 
Universe whilst still remaining what It is—the Supreme 
Sakti. 

It is always possible that human thought may 
develop similarly and yet independently. It is not im- 
probable also, seeing the influence of India on the West, 
that the Philonic and Neo-platonic and Johannean 
conceptions were, in part at least, indebted for their 


VAK OR THE WORD 5 


origin to India. Nevertheless there are, with general 
points of similarity, others of difference, for which accuracy 
demands attention. Thus the Brahman is the material 
cause of the World which the Christian Logos is not. For 
Christianity is dualism. Vak is no Person in a Trinity. 
Vak is Herself the Mother of the Trimirthi who are Brahma, 
Visnu and Rudra. For She is the Supreme Sakti, one 
with Brahman. The full incarnation is a concept of Hindu- 
ism, yet, in the form of Jiva, Vak is incarnated not in one 
historic person only but in all men, beings, and things. The 
Word as Vak became flesh, not on one particular date in 
one particular place and in one particular historic person. 
It appeared and now appears in the flesh and other forms of 
matter of all limited beings or Jivas, each of whom may 
through Veda directly realise the Brahman whose S‘akti is 
the word of Vak. Jesus alone was God in human form. 
Others were not, are not and never can become God. Vak 
manifests Herself in every man and is knowable and known 
as She is in Herself—that is Brahman, in that spiritual 
experience which is Veda. 

The universe is the outcome of the Divine Desire 
(Kama) or Will (Iccha). Kama on the physical plane de- 
notes among other things, sexual desire. In the highest 
sense it is the first creative impulse of the One to be many, 
whereby It begets Itself as all creatures. Karthly desire 
and self-reproduction are but limited manifestations of that 
first impulse. The Divine Will is continually and present- 
ly working through the individual sexual desire for the 
continued creation of the universe. This Divine Kama is 
eternal and the origin of all things, And so Parmenides 
speaking of Eros or Love, said Protiston mén érota theon 
nétisata panton. (“He devised Eros the first of all the 
Gods’). This is the Divine Eros through whom things are 
(See Plato Symp. 6-6). The Daughter of Kama is Vak. The 


6 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


latter as the Divine Will speaks the Divine Word upon 
which the Thing is. In the Atharvaveda (IX-2) Kama is 
celebrated as a great Power superior to all the Devas. The 
Daughter of Kama is named “The Cow which sages call 
Vak-virat,” that is Vak in the form of the universe. 

In the “beginning” there was Brahman and with It 
was Vak. In the Veda (S/atapatha-Brahmana VI. 1-1-8) it 
is said, “ this Being (Purusa) Prajapati willed ‘May I be 
many’ “May I be propagated.’ He energised (So’s'ramyat 
sa tapo'tapyata). Vak was His. She was produced from 
Him (Vag eva sya sa srjyata) and pervaded all which 
exists.’’ Then on the issue of Vak, “ By his mind he united 
with Vak (Sa. P. Br. X. 6-5-4; Brih. Ar. Up. Roer p. 50) 
and thus (Sa. P. Br. VI. 1-2 ff) became pregnant (Garbhi 
abhavat).” In the Kathaka it is said (XII-5 and XXVII-1) 
“Prajapati only was then this (Prajdpatir vai idam asit). 
Vak was a second to Him (Tasya vag dvitiyad asit). He 
united with Her (Tam mithunam samabhavat) and She 
became pregnant (S&@ garbham Gdhatta). She went out 
from Him and produced these creatures (S&@ asmad 
apakramat sa imah prajah asrjata) and again re-entered 
Him (Sa Prajapatim eva punah pravisiat).” 

Again in the Paficavirhnya Br. (XX-14-2) it is similarly 
said: “ Prajapati alone was this universe. He had Vak too 
as His own, as a Second to Him. He thought, ‘let me now 
put forth this Vak. She will traverse and pervade all this. 
That is the Brahman or Siva first willed to be many and 
His Sakti, which was one with Him, issued as His Word.”’ 
The Union of Will and Word was the potency of creation, 
all things being held in undifferentiated mass in the Great 
Womb (Mahayoni) of the Mother of aj] (Ambika). Thig 
Potency became actual as the manifested universe, and at 
its dissolution S'akti, as such universe, re-entered Brahman 
and remained one with It (Cit) as Cidrapini. Meanwhile 


rs 


VAK OR THE WORD ae 


She pervades, as immanent Spirit, both Mind and Matter 
which are Its temporal forms. For as the Brhadaranyaka- 
Upanisad says (pp. 50-53, Ed. Roer): “By that Vak and 
that Atma He created all things whatsoever, the Vedas, 
Metres, Sacrifices and all Creatures” (S@ tayad vaca tena 
Gimana idan sarvam asrjata yad idam kimca reco 
yajums, samanst chandarisi yajian prajah pastin). 
“First was produced the sacred Vaidik science” (S. P. Br. 
VI. 1-1-8). In the Mahabharata, Sarasvati as Vak is called 
the “Mother of the Vedas” (Santiparva, V. 12, 920) and 
the same is said’ of Vak in the Taittirlya-Brihmana (II. 8-8- 
5) where (and in the preceding par. 4) She is also said to 
contain within Herself all worlds and to have been sought 
with Tapas by the Rsis who put forth the Vedic Hymns 
(Rsayo mantrakriah). In the Bhismaparva of the 
Mahabharata (v. 3019) Acyuta (Krsna) is said to have 
produced Sarasvati and the Vedas from His mind; and in 
the Vanaparva (v. 13,482) the Gayatri is called the Mother 
of the Vedas, for Gayatri Devi is a form of Vak. Vak is the 
Mother of the Vedas and of all things which their words 
denote. Wak in the form of Veda is Vedatmika Vak (See 
Sayana and other citations given in Muir O.S.T. I-325ff 
where, as in other volumes, some of the Texts concerning 
Vak are collected). The substance of the whole world is 
Vak (Jagat Varimaya), for as previously stated the world 
(Jagat) is Sabdaprabhava. 

The Reveda (X. 125-5) says: “I (Vak) make him whom 
I love formidable, him a Brahmana, him a Rsi, him a 
Sage.” It is this Vak which entered the Rsis and has 
thus made Herself known to men. “ By sacrifice they follow- 
ved the path of Vak and found Her entered into the Rsis”’ 
(Rgveda, X. 71-3). The Rsis called their Hymns by 
various names, amongst others Vak, for they are mani- 
festations of Vak. Vak is one with Brahman for Siva and 


8 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Sakti are one. In the Brhadaranyaka-Upanisad it is 
said (Hid. Roer, 688). “By Vak, O Monarch, the Brahman 
is known. Vak is the Supreme Brahman” (Vdchaiva 
samrad Brahma jnayate vag vai sanvrat paranam Brahma). 
The Mahabharata (Santiparva v. 12,920), says: “Behold 
Sarasvati Mother of the Vedas abiding in me (Vedanam 
matram pas'ya matstham devim Sarasvatim). She, this 
great Sakti, is one with Mahesvara. And so in the 
Mangalacarana prefixed to the Commentaries on the Rk 
Samhita and Taittirlya-Samhita by both Sayana and 
Madhava it is said: ‘“‘I reverence Mahesvara the hallowed 
abode of sacred knowledge, of whom the Vedas are the 
breathings and who from the Vedas formed the whole 
universe” (Yasya nisvastiam vedah yo vedebhyo ’ khilam 
jgagat, Nirmame tam aham vande vidyatirtham Mahes- 
varam). The Taittirlya-Brahmana (III-39-1) says that Vak 
is imperishable, the first born of Rta, Mother of the Vedas 
and centre-point of immortality (Vag aksaram prathama- 
ja rtasya vedanan mata amritasya nabhih). The Sata- 
patha-Brahmana says (VII. 5-2-21): “ Vak is the unborn.” 
It was from Vak that the Maker of the Universe (Vis'va- 
karma) produced creatures (Vag vai ajo vdco vat pragah 
visvakarmad jajana.) Various texts associate the Lord of 
creatures (Prajapati); called Pas'upati in the Saiva- 
Sastra, with His Sakti Vak, as to which see Weber 
Indische Studien, IX. 477 ff. and Muir’s Original Sanskrit 
Texts, V. 391. 

Sarhkaracarya (Sutra I-38, 28) quoting ‘By His 
mind He united with Vak,’ says that by this and other 
Texts the Veda in various places declares that creation 
was preceded by the Word from which the whole uni-< 
verse of Devas and organic and inorganic earth-life 
are produced. But it is said that the world was pro- 
duced from Brahman, How then was it produced from 


VAK OR THE WORD 9 


the Word? Creation was preceded by the Word. He says 
that when any man is occupied with any end which he 
wishes to accomplish, he first calls to mind the word which 
expresses it and then proceeds to effect his purpose. Using 
this as analogy he says that before creation the words of 
Veda were manifested in His mind and afterwards he creat- 
ed the objects which resulted from them. Thus the Vaidik 
text which says “ Uttering Bhth (earth) he created the 
earth (Bhimi)”’ and so forth, means that the different 
worlds and the beings therein were manifested or created 
from the word “ Bhth” and so forth manifested in His 
mind. These distinctions of “ before” and afterwards and 
so forth are Vyavaharika. Human analogies are necessarily 
imperfect. In Isvara as causal body what (as manifested) 
is called Pratyaya, S'abda, Artha are one and identical 
(and therefore, as manifested, co-ordinate) though for the 
purposes of exposition we may say that His Srsti-kalpana 
is a fraction of the Pratyaya which He has of his own 
Anandamaya causal body, and included therein the subtle 
and gross bodies. His Parasabda involves as effects all 
Aparasabdas, and His Artha is the first stressing mass 
of Prakrtisyakti in which are experienced all elements 
(Vikrti) and things which are compounded of them. For 
Isvara has direct and immediate apprehension of the 
three bodies, Hiranyagarbha of the second and third, and 
Virat of the third. Para-Vak is therefore what has been 
previously spoken of as Parasabda; and Vak (simply) as 
Sabda in its subtle form as Matrka (Madhyama-Vak) and 
gross form (Vaikhari-Vak). The latter is that of the spoken 
letters (Varna) of which the Mantras are made. There is 
but one Cause of speech, as also of all the things in the 
universe which it denotes and also, of the mental apprehen- 
sion (Pratyaya) or “ going towards ” the object of the mind. 
That cause is the Supreme Devi Sarasvati, Mother of the 


10 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Vedas and of the Worlds, manifesting as the name (Nama) 
and form (Ripa) which is the Universe. She is thus the 
Supreme Sakti to whom a title is given, taken from one 
of Her productions, the manifested word or speech. The 
musical instrument (Vina), which Sarasvati holds, denotes 
all sounds (Sabda) of which She is the Mother. White 
are Her garments and transparent whiteness is the colour 
of both Akasa and Buddhi. Her name denotes “flow” 
or “motion” (Saras). She is such, in the Supreme sense, 
as being the activity (Sakti) of the unmoving Siva or 
Brahman. She is again such as the play in the manifested 
World of the dynamic Saktis in and around the rigid 
Ether, which appeared at creation with the roaring sound 
“Hah” and then stood still as the steady framework on, 
and in, which the whole universe flows or moves. Accord- 
ing to Science, Ether has no such imperfections as we 
associate with matter. It is the property of the latter to 
grow old, to decay, to wear out. But such energy as exists 
in the Ether remains unchanged. It is this rigid, unwast- 
ing, enduring Ether which is Vajra, the hard, stable, lasting 
unwasting Vajra, the static manifestation of the static 
Brahman, in which the Dynamic Brahman as Sarasvati 
flows or moves. The former is Stnya, the void of space, 
in which all movement takes place. Just as in Brahmanism 
Akasa is transferred to the Brahman-idea ag Cidakasa: 
so this Ethereal Sanya in Northern Buddhist Monism as 
sTongpa-nyid (Stnyata) stands for the Ultimate beyond 
all categories (See the Demchog-Tantra published as the 
seventh Volume of my “ Tantrik Texts.)” Sarasvati, the 
Dynamic Brahman with Her “consort” the static Brahman 
as Brahma, is borne upon the Hangsa which is no material 
“bird” but the natural name of the vital function manifest- 
ing as the expiring (Ham) and inspiring (Sah) breath or 
Pranabija in all breathing creatures (Prani). She again is 


VAK OR THE WORD ji 


the Divine in the aspect as Wisdom and Learning, for She 
is the Mother of Veda, that is of all knowledge touching 
Brahman and the Universe. She is the Word of which it 
was born and She exists in that which is the issue of Her 
great womb (Mahayoni). Not therefore idly have men 
worshipped Vak or Sarasvati as the Supreme Power. 


CHAPTER II 


ARTHA, PRATYAYA AND SABDA 


THE one supreme Consciousness (Cit) which is the Change- 
less Principle of all experience evolves by, and from out of, 
its Power (Sakti), which is both Cit-S'akti and Maya- 
sakti—the duality of subject and object, mind and matter. 
In Parasamvit or Saccidananda the experience is unitary 
and devoid of every species of duality. I have dealt in my 
book “ Sakti and S'akta”’ with the various possible English 
renderings of the untranslatable word Cit which, subject 
to the reservations there made, may be called Feeling-Con- 
sciousness or with less liability to misunderstanding the 
Changeless Principle of all changing experience. Through 
the operation of Sakti the homogeneous Unity becomes 
' the Many or universe of subject and object, mind and 
matter. The Perfect Experience, without ceasing to be 
such, involves Itself in mind and matter and thus becomes 
the imperfect or limited experience. As all is the one Self, 
this apparent dichotomy means that the Self which mani- 
fests as a limited subject sees (though it is unaware of it) 
itself as object. 

Cit is without motion (Nispanda), without action 
(Niskriya), without mind (Amanah) and without S‘abda 
(Asabda). It is neither subject nor knows any object 
other than Itself as Cidripini-Sakti. Creation-commences 
by an initial movement or vibration (Spandana) in the 
Cosmic Stuff, as some Western writers call it, and which 


ARTHA, PRATYAYA AND SABDA 138 


in Indian parlance is Saspanda Prakrti-Sakti. Just as 
the nature of Cit or the Siva aspect of Brahman is 
rest, quiescence, so that of Prakrti is movement. Prior 
however to manifestation, that is during dissolution 
(Pralaya) of the universe, Prakrti exists in a state of equili- 
brated energy (Samyavastha) in which there is Sarapapa- 
rinama. It then moves (Virupaparinima). This is the first 
cosmic vibration (Spandana) in which the equilibrated 
energy is released. 

The approximate sound of this movement is the 
Mantra Orh. Dualism with all its varieties is thus produc- 
ed. There is thus a bifurcation of Consciousness into 
Mind and Matter which therefore constitute a parallelism 
of common origin. The mind as subject has apprehension 
(Pratyaya) of objects (Artha), and names those objects by 
word (Sabda) or language. In man S/abda, Artha, and 
Pratyaya are connected but distinct. Like everything else 
they are three effectual manifestations of the movement 
(Spanda) which is the common Causal Stress. At the 
stage of Causal S'’akti however the three are one ; so that 
then Sabda=Artha=Pratyaya=Spanda, the latter being 
not, as in manifestation, a common denominator but the 
equivalent of Sabda, Artha, Pratyaya. The state is one 
of logical unity. Isvara’s Spanda is His Sabda, is His 
Artha, is His Pratyaya. Doubtless in projecting our stand- 
point as existence into Divine Being we cannot help using 
the analogy of aspects. And so we speak of Cit and the 
Causal Stress (Sakti), of Siva and S‘akti as two aspects 
and so on. Nevertheless we must not understand that 
there is any distinctness in the midst of relationship or 
even of unity which expresses our idea of aspects. Ulti- 
mately the relation of Sabda, Artha, and Pratyaya isan 
identical equation and not a ratio, that is fraction with a 
numerator and denominator, ‘Whilst on the absolute plane 


14 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


which is the Cosmic Causal body the three are one, there 
is, on and with the manifestation of the subtle body, a 
divergent descent of the three, retaining as they always do 
their mutual connection. The causal aspect is Sabdabrah- 
man, the Stress or Creative Sakti giving rise to motion 
and bodies produced by it which are forms of the subtle 
and gross Sakti. What was a simple stress in quiescent 
and unaffected consciousness with unitary experience 
becomes bifurcated as mind and matter. It is here most 
important to remember (for it is the key to that which 
follows) that the nature of a process in which the One 
becomes Many involves this:—the essential substance 
(Spirit) of both Mind and Matter remains the same, and 
the Sakti elements and the motion of both are similar. 
Hence they are mutually connected with a natural relation. 
Feeling and object of feeling are correlated. Thus sensa- 
tion through the eye and Manas, and colour as an object 
which is perceived, are at base the one Atma thus dually 
manifested. The sensation of sight and the colour are 
both again products of Tejas-Tanmatra. The Indriya 
is Sattvikarmsa of the Apafcikrta-Tanmatra, and the 
object seen is the Tamasikarmsa of the same. In 
Samkhya, and commonly in the Sakta-Tantras, both are 
products of the same Ahamkara. Sensation and its object 
are two aspects of one and the same thing. The vibration 
of the object (Artha) and of the Vrtti or modification of 
mind by which apprehension (Pratyaya) is had of it are the 
same, and the natural name (S'abda) of an object (Artha) 
is the sound produced by the forces which constitute it. 
There exists all this parallelism because our postulate is 
that mind and matter are but twin aspects of the one 
undivided Self. So when an object (Visaya, Artha) affects 
the senses (Indriya), being attended to by that function of 
mind which is called Manas, there arises in the mind a 


ARTHA, PRATYAYA AND S‘ABDA 15 


modification (Vrtti) of its substance which is an exact 
counterpart of the external object. In passing I may 
observe that this is a fundamental principle on which all 
Tantrik-Sadhana by way of Upasana rests. By worship 
and meditation or Japa of Mantras the mind is actually 
Shaped into the form of the object of worship and is made 
pure for the time being through the purity of the object 
(namely Istadevatai), which is its content. By continual 
practice (Abhyasa) the mind becomes full of the object to 
the exclusion of all else, steady in its purity, and does not 
stray into impurity. So long as mind exists it must have 
an object and the object of Sadhana is to present it with 
a pure one. 

Before proceeding further it is necessary to have clear 
notions as to the meaning of Mind, Matter, Pratyaya, 
Sabda and Artha. Everything is “ material ” according 
to the Vedanta which is not Pure Transcendent Spirit 
(Anupahita-Cit), Immanent or Upahita-Cit is that 
which is associated with mind and matter. This Cit 
with Upadhi is either Para=S'uddha-satitiva-pradhana = 
Utkrstopadhi = Samasti, or Apara = Malina-sattva-pradhana 
= Nikrstopadhi=Vyasti. In each of these there are the 
three bodies causal (Karana), subtle (Siksma) and gross 
(Sthala). This Upadhi is Sakti as Maya or Prakrti- 
Sakti as that term is used in Advaitavada. As Prakrti- 
Sakti is “material” not as being scientific “matter” 
but as the subtle material cause of all things, all its effects 
(Vikrti) are necessarily of the same character as their 
cause and are material. These Vikrtis may be divided into 
the two parallel groups of Mind (Antahkarana) and its outer 
instruments or senses (Indriya), and Matter or Pafica- 
bhita derived from the more rudimentary forms of infra- 
sensible “matter” which are the Pafica-Tanmatras. These 
are beyond the threshold of sensation of the ordinary Jiva. 


16 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


What then is Mind? It follows from the above that 
it is a manifestation of Sakti or Power in the form of 
force, which is Power translated to the material plane, and 
is as much a material (Bhautika) substance as is matter 
(Bhita) itself. Thought (for except in Samadhi mind is 
never free of thought) is from the creative standpoint a 
passing thought and matter a lasting thought. Matter 
is a dense and gross form of the more subtle and tenuous 
form of the common Prakrti-S'akti. Mind is Bhautika 
because it is according to Vedanta composed of the Sattvik 
part (Sattvikarnya) of the Tanmatra. According to 
Sathkhya it is Aharhkari. According to Vedanta Mind is 
not Vibhu that is all-spreading, unlimited and indivisible 
into parts: nor is it Anu or atomic that is limited and 
indivisible into parts. It is Madhyama-Parimana, that 
is limited and divisible into parts and thus takes the form 
of its objects. Mind has parts in the sense that it is 
divisible into parts, that is one part of the mind can attend 
to one thing and to another at one and the same time. 
As it also takes the shape of the object perceived, it spreads 
or shrinks with it. It pervades the whole body whether 
in the waking (Jagrat) or dreaming state (Svapna), but 
in deep sleep (Susupti) it is withdrawn as all else into 
the causal body and according to one account is then 
absorbed in the Nadi. 

What then is the nature of knowing by the mind? 
According to the Naiyayikas who hold that the mind is 
atomic (Anu), it does not go forth, or transform itself 
into the shape of the object. Jfiana is a Guna of Atma 
which is produced by the association of Mind (Manas) 
and Atma. According to Vedanta, Jaana is a transforma- 
tion (Parinaima) of the Antahkarana or Mind which is 
a Tattva of Madhyama-Parinadma. Jfana is of two 
kinds, viz., Jhana Svaripa and Jfana Vrtti, The former 


ARTHA, PRATYAYA AND S'ABDA 17 


is Brahmasvaripa or Perfect Experience or Cit. The 
latter is knowledge of objects or the ordinary worldly 
imperfect experience. Opinion varies as to the mode of 
operation in the case of the Mind and Jianayrtti. According 
to some, light from the eye goes forth. Hence the eye is 
called Tejas. Mind going forth with the light of the eye 
impinges upon and takes the shape of the object. Mind is 
called ‘‘transparent’’ (Svaccha) because it can take the 
shape of any object presented to it. Atma is ever illuminat- 
ing the mind and when there is a particular Vrtti, Atma 
illuminates it so that it is present to the limited con- 
sciousness. 

Knowledge is true or false (Mithya). Right knowledge 
or Prama is defined as Tadvati tat-prakarakajfanarh which 
means apprehension of an object according to its true 
nature, that is, in its own class or Jati. The mind not only 
perceives a particular thing (Vyakti) but also the genus or 
class (Jati) to which it belongs; for this Jati is not merely 
a subjective thing but is inherent in the Vyakti as its 
nature (Prakéra) and both are perceived in right knowing, 
as when in the case of Ghata (jar) its Jati or Ghatatva 
(jar-ness) is perceived. Where however a rope is mistaken 
for a snake there is Mithya-Jiana. The particular rope 
excites knowledge, but it is false knowledge, because 
through a defect (Dosa) in the percipient subject, the rope 
is not perceived under its Jati but under that of a serpent. 
In short in right perception there is true conformity of 
thought with its object. To perceive on the other hand a 
rope where there is Ghatatva is false perception. 

What then is Artha or object (Visaya) ? This is the 
object which constitutes the mind’s content. Object is 
manifold as the various forms (Ripa) which make the 
universe. It is the “other” which the Self as mind 
ae: These forms are constituted of the five Bhatas— 


18 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Akasa, Vayu, Tejas, Ap, Prthivi representing various 
densities or Prakrtic substance. Just as the mind is a 
form of motion (Spandana) of that substance, so the five 
Bhutas are five forms of motion of the same Prakrti 
which in the Tantras are symbolised by figures denoting 
the forms of the vibration namely a circle with openings 
(Chidra) shown as points on it denoting the interstitial 
character of Akasa; a circle denoting Vayu; and a triangle, 
crescent and cube square denoting Tejas, Ap, and. Prthivi 
respectively. The direction of the vibration also varies as 
being in all directions, at an acute angle to the line of the 
wave (Tiryag-gamanasila) upwards, downwards and “in 
the middle’ where the forces are equilibrated and matter 
becomes stationary. These again are space-giving, general 
movement (Calanapara), expansion, contraction, cohesion, 
stimulating the sense of hearing, touch and feel, (not all 
forms of contact), sight or colour and form, taste, and smell 
respectively, the centres of which in the Pindanda are the 
Cakras from Vistuddha to Muladhara. The Bija Mantras 
of these are Harh, Yarh, Rarh, Varn, Lath, the meaning of 
which is later explained when dealing with natural name. 
They seem like gibberish to the uninitiated. Hence even 
the common Bengali expression “ What Hayaralava is 
this?” These Bhitas derive from the Tanmatra com- 
mencing with Sabda-Tanmatra or infra-sensible sound, 
which by addition of mass becomes Akasa, the Guna of 
which is sensible sound, which generates Vayu-Tanmatra 
from which comes Vayu Bhita and go on with the rest, 
though the mode of derivation is not always given in the 
same terms. The substance of it is that Bhtta or gross 
sensible matter is derived from a subtle form of the same 
which is not sensible by the gross ear but mentally appre- 
hensible by the Yogi. Hence it ig said Tani vastani tan- 
matradint pratyaksa-visayam (that is to Yogis), Object 


a 


ARTHA, PRATYAYA AND S'ABDA 19 


(Visaya) is thus not limited to the gross objects.seen by 
the senses of ordinary men. There are also subtle objects 
which may be perceived through the senses or the mind by 
the possessor of “ Powers” (Siddhi) which are merely ex- 
tensions of natural faculty. These are hidden from ordinary 
men whose powers vary. Some can perceive more than 
others. By scientific instruments we can see (microscope) 
and hear (microphone) things beyond the capacity of the 
highest natural power of the senses. Is that the end? No, 
because as we perfect these auxiliaries of natural instru- 
ments we see and hear more. Once the microscope gave 
only a magnification of a few diameters. Now it is of thou- 


_ sands. At each stage more is known. A point however 


is reached at which “ seeing” takes place not through the 
gross senses but by the mind. Everything may be an object 
which is not the Asangabrahman or Brahmasvartpa that 
is the Supreme Self or Spirit as It is in Itself. This is not 
known by either sense or mind or by any Pramana or in- 
strument of knowledge. Even Sabda-Pramana or Veda 
here fails. Because Brahman as It is in Itself (Svartpa) 
is never an object, being the true nature of the cognising 
Self. As such it is beyond mind and speech. The latter 
can only give an indication (Laksana) of it. Higher objects 
beyond the reach of the senses (Atindriya) are only perceived 
by the heightened powers of the mind of Yogis. Mind, for 
instance, is Atindriya for it cannot be sensed. Yet Yogis 
can “see,” that is, mentally apprehend the mind of another 
which becomes an object for their apprehension. In such 
cases his mind takes the form of that other, when every- 
thing which was in the latter mind namely its modification 
(Vrittis) or thoughts are known to him. And go the 

experience of objects becomes more and more subtle and 

inclusive until the state of Supreme Experience Itself is 

attained when there is neither subject nor object. This is 


20 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Brahma-svartipa. This apprehension or image which one 
has of an object (Artha) evoked by a word (Sabda) is 
called Pratyaya. The third form of divergent descent of 
the Sabda-brahman, namely Sabda, will be the subject of a 
following chapter. ! 


CHAPTER III 
ASABDA AND PARASABDA 


INDIAN doctrine revolves round the two concepts of Change- 
lessness and Change. As these propositions, cannot be 
logically predicated of the same substance, recourse is had 
to the doctrine of aspects. According to this, Brahman as 
It is in Itself (Brahmasvaripa) or Sliva does not change, 
but Brahman as the Power (Sakti) from which the world 
evolves does, as Maya, change. It is perhaps more simple 
to say that Brahman produces and exists as the world 
without derogation to Its own unchanging unity. How 
this can be is like other ultimates inconceivable. But its 
truth is said to rest on two established facts, namely the 
daily experience of the world of the many on the one hand, 
and the ecstatic (Samadhi) experience of the One on the 
other. Both are facts of experience though how they can 
be so is a mystery. 

When we come to deal with the Mantra-S’astra the 
8ame doctrines are expressed in the language of the subject 
with which it is occupied, namely S'abda, of which Mantras 
are forms. Sabda or sound exists only where there is 
motion or Spanda. If there is no Spanda there is no 
S'abda. If there is S’abda there is Spanda. But the 
transcendent Brahman or Cit (Brahmasvartpa) is quiescent 
and changeless. Therefore it is said to be without motion 
(Nispanda) and without Sabda (Asabda). From out of this 
Cit (for there is but one) but without affecting its own 


22, THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


changelessness, there arises a creative stir or Stress which 
evolves into the universe. This is the work of the active 
Brahman or Isvara. Just as the Parabrahman is As‘abda, 
Isvara is S’abdabrahman or Parasabda. As the former 
is Nis‘iabda, the latter, as Maya Sakti, is with motion 
(Saspanda). Paras‘abda, Para Vak or Sabdabrahman are 
each names for the Brahman as the cause of the manifested 
S'abda. Paras’abda is the causal body of sound. Sabda- 
tanmatra is the subtle body of sound, and Akasa is the 
gross body of sound which (though a Guna of it) is only 
apprehended through the medium of air, the sound waves 
in which strike the ear. Through the latter and mind the 
sensation of sound is experienced. Sabdatanmatra is pure 
natural sound as apprehended by Hiranyagarbha or Yogis 
_who share his experience. Gross sound is of two kinds, 
namely Vaidik sound (Srauta sabda) or approximate 
natural sound either primary or secondary, and Laukika 
Sabda, the speech of the ordinary average mortals other 
than Vaidika Slabda. Taking “cognizance” to mean 
“direct apprehension,” Is'vara has cognizance of all kinds 
of Sabda, (Parasabda, Sabda Tanmatra, Srauta S‘abda, 
Laukika S'abda), Hiranyagarbha or Sutratma of the last 
three, Rsis of the last two and ordinary men of the last 
only. From Parasabda or Para-Vak therefore proceed in 
their order Sabda-tanmatra, Srauta Sabda, and Laukika 
S'abda. 


Dealing nextly with Pratyaya, Artha and Sabda in © 


their cosmic and individual aspects,—in the Isvara stage 
(i.e. in so far as there is the cosmic causal body) Pratyaya 
is the Isvara consciousness of His own body of Bliss 
(Anandamaya) and the cosmic ideation (Srsti-kalpana) 
whereby He projects the world. This Srsti-kalpana 
again is the stressing mass of Prakrti or Maya and Avidya 
gakti, and this is the Parasabda or Para-Vak, involving 


Beta 


ASABDA AND PARAS'ABDA 23 


(as the cause involves its effects\ the various kinds 
of Apara-Sabda including the Matrkas, Varnas and 
Mantras. The approximate representation of the causal 
(Para) S'abda as a whole to the Rsi-ear is “Om.” It 
is however to be, noted that Isvara’s whole Pratyaya is 
not Srsti-kalpana. His Artha is the stressing mass 
of Prakrti. It is further to be noted that, in Isvara, 
Pratyaya, S'abda, and Artha are one and not distinct 
though co-related, as in Hiranyagarbha, Virat and the 
individual Jiva. What we may call the elements of the 
universe namely the Apafichikrta Bhitas or Tanmatras, 
the Indriyas, Pranas, Antahkarana and Sthila Bhitas are 
evolved directly by Isvara as Isvara. This is Bhitasrsti. 

He then, as Hiranyagarbha, evolves Bhautika-Srsti. 
The elements themselves must be traced directly to the 
causal body, but as Hiranyagarbha he compounds them. 
Hence Hiranyagarbha’s Srsti-kalpana refers to Bhautika 
Srsti, that is the compounding of the elements which 
have been already provided by Isvara as Isvara. Sabda 
in the Hiranyagarbha aspect is S'abda-tanmatra involving 
the lower or derivative forms. His Artha is everything 
except the Samasti causal body. 

Bhautika-Srsti may relate either to Saksma or Sthila 
elements, the former being everything except the latter; 
so that theoretically the creative operation may be divid- 
ed between Sitratma and Viradt. But the Sastra does 
not in fact contemplate such a division. Virat is Cit 
associated with the created whole—a natura naturata as it 
were, to borrow Spinoza’s term. Causal activity does not 
appear to be extended to this. However, if we provision- 
ally leave the compounding of the Sthila elements to Virat, 
then its Pratyaya too may be called Systi-kalpana. His 
Sabda is various grades of sound, gross and subtle, 
extending to, but not including, Sabda-tanmatra. His 


94 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Artha is everything except the Samasti causal and subtle 
body. 

Siksma and Sthila are relative terms and admit of 
grades; hence between the limits of S'abda-tanmatra and 
average gross sounds there will be more and more subtle 
sounds—all apprehended by Hiranyagarbha; all save the 
Tanmatra being apprehended by Virat as Virat. If we define 
Stksma as what is of the order of the Tanmatra, then 
Sthila is a graded series with Tanmatra as the superior 
limit. Then Cit associated with this whole series of 
Sthila is Virat. The latter identifies Himself with Samasti 
Sthila-Deha. It is however a long way from the Annamaya 
Kos’a of average perception to the Pranamaya Kos'a which 
comes “next” in order of fineness and which is a modifica- 
tion (Rajasika) of the Tanmatras. What the Sastra calls 
Annamaya-kosa is therefore really a graded series. The 
gross body is made up of visible cells: those of microscopic 
granules; those of still finer corpuscles; and soon. The 
five Kosas are therefore only five broad landmarks in a 
series consisting of innumerable gradations as are the seven 
colours of the rainbow. Hiranyagarbha and Virat are also 
the types corresponding cosmically to our experiences of 
certain distinctive forms, in a really innumerable series of 
forms. So that instead of three we may say that there are 
innumerable creative Cit-saktis. If the numbers are given 
differently there is no essential discrepancy. Is’vara, Hira- 
nyagarbha, and Virat are three forms of creative manifestation 
corresponding cosmically to the Susupti, Svapna and Jagrat:- 
But the truth-seers, as compared with the system-makers, 
salute Him as the Many-formed (Namaste bahurwpaya). 
Isvara has direct apprehension of all three collectively, 
causal, subtle, and gross. The cause involves the effects. As 
Hiranyagarbha, He apprehends directly the second and third 
(Svapna Jagrat), and as Virat he apprehends the third(Jagrat). 


AS'ABDA AND PARAS'ABDA 25 


We pass now ‘to the individual (Vyasti) aspect. 
Corresponding with Isvara and with Maya-we have Prajna 
with Avidya. The Pratyaya of Prajia is the Vyasti 
counterpart in S'usupti of the Anandamaya consciousness 
which Is'vara has of His own causal body. Some English 
writers misunderstand the statement in the Upanisad 
that the Jiva in dreamless sleep is Brahman to mean that 
the experience in slumber is that of Isvara, or of the 
Supreme Brahman. Of course this is not so, for the 
Prajiia’s experience then is associated with Avidya whereas 
Isvara’s is free of all -Avidya. The comparison is made 
by way of analogy. For just as in Susupti the Jiva loses 
the sense of duality, since all objects as separate things 
disappear in slumber, so in Isvara there is no sense of 
separateness. All things are conceived as in and as Him- 
self. The Sabda of Prajia is Parasabda-Visesa. This 
is no sound to him but that “part” of the causal stress 
which is the causal body of the particular Jiva. His Artha 
is the Vyasti causal body, that is, the temporary equilibrium 
in Susupti of the Stress which makes the Jiva. As in the 
Samasti experience, Pratyaya, Artha and S‘abda are one. 
Sangskaras are latent and all Vrittis are withdrawn into the 
Karana-Deha. The forces of all subsequent J lva-processes are 
there. Hence the experience of this fund of causal energy 
corresponds to Isvara Pratyaya of His causal body. Srsti- 
kalpana of Isvara is not the whole Pratyaya of Is'vara. For 
though in Pralaya the former is not there, Is'vara has Prat- 
yaya still, namely the Anandamaya consciousness of His 
own causal body. The Prajia Pratyaya corresponds to this. 
The Siabdic counterpart of this is Para-sabdavis'esa 
while in Isvara it is the Para-sabda whole involving all 
Visesas. The Parasabda in Jiva is no sound. Artha 
here is, as stated, the Vyasti causal body which is the 
temporary equilibrium of the Stress constituting the Jiva. 


26 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Passing to Taijasa, corresponding to Hiranyagarbha 
as Prajfiia does to Isvara, his Pratyaya is experience of 
Sikgma-Deha or subtle body in sleep (Svapna). His 
Sabda is that which is not expressed by the vocal origin, 
being the mental image of articulate or inarticulate sound 
pushing up in Yoga to the Tanmatras. His Artha is the 
Vyasti Sukgsma-Deha. The Pratyaya of the Stuksma 
Deha is either pleasurable or painful. Hiranyagarbha’s 
Pratyaya includes two parts, viz., (a) experience of cosmic 
(Samastirapa) Suksma elements as well as Sthula ele- 
ments and (0) Srsti-kalpana referring to the compound- 
ing of these elements already evolved by Isvara. In 
Taijasa there is (aa) experience of the Jagrat-vasanartpa 
Svapna or Vyasti Stiksma-Deha but not quite of the 
Jagrat or Vyasti Sthila-Deha, (0b) Srsti-kalpana mani- 
festing as a compounding activity as regards various dream 


forms. 

On comparison it is found that the parallelism bet- 
ween Hiranya and Taijasa is not complete, a fact due 
to an important distinction between the two. Is’vara, 
Hiranyagarbha and Virat are Para or Utkrstopadhi; the 
Upadhi (i.ec., Maya-sakti) is preponderatingly Sattvika, 
Hence as regards the relative scope of Sabda, Artha, 
Pratyaya, the three aspects may be represented by three 
concentric circles of which Isvara is the outermost 
and Virat the innermost. Hence Isvara’s Pratyaya, 
Artha, and Sabda include those of Hiranyagarbha; 
those of Hiranyagarbha include those of Virat. It must 
not be thought that the Sabda, Artha, and Pratyaya 
of Isvara, Hiranyagarbha, and Virat are exclusive or 
ejective. The Sattvika character of their limitations 
implies the concentric arrangement of the three cir- 
cles. But Prajfiia, Taijasa, Visa have Upadhis which, 
though Sattvika, are impure and coarse (Malina). Hence 


ii at gts ema ail 


AS'ABDA AND PARASABDA 27 


practically as regards Sabda, Artha and Pratyaya we have 


in lieu of 


{shvarg 


In other words they are practically ejective circles. Hence 
the first Pratyaya is practically confined to Susupti, his 
Artha to the Vyasti causal body and S‘abda to Parasabda 
section. Taijasa experiences Svapna and Suksmadeha, 
but is practically ignorant of Prajiia’s state and Vis'va’s 
state. So with Visva. But though their experiences 
apparently exclude one another, the causal unity between 
them is not in fact wanting. 

_ Taijasa’s Artha is Saksma-deha-vyasti which con- 
tains the seeds of Jagrat. His Sabda is the subtle form 
of the gross sound. The mental image of a sound becomes 
apparent or Pratibhasika sound during the dream-state 


28 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


(Svapna); higher sounds even may be heard during this. 
The Yogic state is a voluntary refining and deepening 
of this state; and hence Dhyana is called Yoga-nidra. 
With the perfecting of the Yogic state one may rise to 
Sabda-tanmatra; or even in Samadhi to Para-s'abda 
and Asabda. The former is the cosmic Susupti and the 
latter the Turiya state from which, when regarded as the 
supreme state, there is no return. 

Of the individual Vis'va, corresponding to the cosmic 
or collective Virat, Pratyaya is the experience of Vyasti 
Sthila-Deha; S'abda is the gross sound articulate (Varna) 
or inarticulate (Dhvani) emitted by men, animals and 
natural objects. The Artha is the gross body (Sthtla 
Deha) and its processes and the gross environment and 
its processes. The Jagrat-Srstikalpanaé here manifestg 
as feelings of bodily movements caused by Sarhskara, 
and Iccha S‘akti. But as Virat is rather the created 
(Karya) than the creative (Karana) aspect of the whole, 
so is Vis'va the Karya aspect rather than the Karana 
aspect of the section, that is the finitized centre of con- 
sciousness or Jiva. The Artha is the gross body and its 
processes together with the environment of that body and 
its processes. The S'abdas are the sounds emitted by the 
vocal organs of men and animals or otherwise produced by 
natural objects. This is Vaikhari sound which isa develop- 
ment from Paras‘abda, through Pasyanti and Madhyama 
sound. fParasabda or Paravak is Bindu. Pasyanti ig 
Iksana or creative thought and action by that Bindu 
which is the causal body of Sabda. From this arises the 
subtle body of Sabda which is Tanmatra and Matrika 
which evolves into the gross body of sound, which is the 
letters (Varna) uttered by the vocal organs which are made 
up into syllables and words (Pada) and then in senten- 
ces (Vakya). Mantra, so uttered, is a form of the gross 


AS'ABDA AND PARAS'ABDA 29 


body of S'abda. And this applies both to Bijas and other 
Mantras. 

Sabda-Tanmatra or Apafici-krta Akas’a is Apaiici-krta- 
Tanmatra. This is sound as such, that is, ideal sound or 
the cognition of sound apart from conditions such as ear, 
brain and other material conditions such as air, water, 
earth, whereby sound is transmitted. In the case of S’abda- 
Tanmatra, sound is known as an object of the higher mind 
apart from these conditions. Therefore S’abda-Tanmatra 
is Sabda not conditional to varying perceptive faculties. 
It is not sound which is heard by this individual or that, 
on this plane or that; but it is sound as heard by the 
Absolute Har and as uttered by the Absolute Tongue. 
It is invariable and Apaurusheya. Similarly Rupa Tanmatra 
is form unconditional, as seen by the Absolute Hye. By 
“Absolute Ear” is meant the power (S‘akti) of apprehend- 
ing sound in itself or as such without subjection to the 
varying conditions of Time, Place, (i.e. Plane) and person. 
The Stress by which a thing is generated and sustained is 
the basis of all the five Tanmatras. It is Sabda-Tanmatra 
as apprehended by the Absolute Ear, Ripa Tanmatra as 
apprehended by the Absolute Hye, and soon. From the 
gross standpoint Sabda is not the Guna of Akaga alone. 
In order to be manifested to the human mind and ear 
sound requires not only gross Akasa but Vayu and the 
other Bhitas. For the transmission of sound to the limited 
ear there must be a material medium for its transmission 
whether as air, water or solid bady. Virat sound in short 
assumes the existence of the whole material universe. 

To sum up—There is the unmanifest Lord (Avyakta 
Is'vara) and the manifest Lord (is'vara). Both are S'iva- 
Sakti because there is never Siva without Sakti nor 
S'akti without Sliva, whether in creation or dissolution. 
Only in the latter there is nothing but Consciousness 


830 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


(Sakti being Cidripini,) and in the former She as- 
sumes the form of the universe. For this reason the 
supreme state may be called Siva-S’akti and the mani- 
fest state S'akti-Sliva to denote the preponderance of 
the Cit and Maya aspects respectively. One state is 
motionless (Nispanda), the other with motion (Saspanda). 
One is soundless (As‘abda), the other manifests as sound 
(Sabda). In one is the Unmani-S'akti, in the other the 
Samani Sakti. The manifest Isvara displays itself in 
three forms—causal, subtle, gross. The causal form is 
Parasabda, Paravak, or S'abda-brahman. This is Is’vara. 
The rest is Aparavak. The subtle form is Madhyama vak, 
which is Hiranyagarbha sound, which develops into Virat 
S'abda or Waikhari vak. The sound is accompanied by move- 
ment. That of the causal body first projecting the manifold 
universe from out of itself is general movement or Samanya 
Spanda, the Sabda of which is the Pranava or ‘ Om.” 
From Om all other Mantras are derived. Hiranyagarbha 
S'abda is accompanied by special motion (Vis‘esa Spanda) 
and Virat S'abda is clearly defined movement (Spastatara 
Spanda) manifesting in man as articulate speech, and 
therefore as the gross or uttered form of Mantra. 


oe eee 


_ 
P 


a 
* 


a we 


CHAPTER IV 
PARAS'ABDA, CAUSAL S'ABDA 


S’aspa which comes from the root S‘abd “to make 
sound” ordinarily means sound in general including that 
of the voice, word, speech and language. It is either letter- 
ed sound (Varnatmaka sabda) and has a meaning (Artha), 
that is, it either denotes a thing or connotes the attributes 
and relations of things; or it is unlettered sound and 
meaningless (at any rate to us) and is mere Dhvani 
(Dhvanyatmaka-S'abda) such as the sound of a rushing 
torrent, a clap of thunder and so forth. I say “to us” 
because every sound may have a meaning for Isvara. 
This Dhvani arises from the contact of two things striking 
one another. So lettered sound is manifested through the 
contact of the vocal organs with the outer air. Ag else- 
where more fully explained, S'abda is, and exists as, four 
Saktis namely Para, Pashyanti, Madhyama and Vaikhari. 
These are referred to in connection with Vak or Devi 

| Sarasvati, another synonym for S'abda. 
S'abda again is either immanent in its manifestation 
a8 sound, or transcendent. The first is threefold: (a) From 
an average point of view it means sound of either of these 
classes as heard by ears and sounds whose capacity (S'akti) 
is that of the normal or average plane. (6) From the Yogio 
| point of view it means subtle sound, that is, subtle sound 
| as apprehended by ears and minds which are supernormal 
-and therefore whose Saktis rise above the average plane. 
But these capacities can be greater or less and therefore 


= 


82, THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


admit of grades, one person’s capacity being greater than 
that of another, just as is the case with individuals in the 
ordinary plane, some of whom can hear better than others. 
(c) From the standpoint of the “Absolute Har” that is a 
capacity to apprehend sound unconditionally such as exists 
in the case of the perfect Yogi it means pure sound or 
Sabda-tanmatra. This is apprehended by the perfect Yogi 
in its purity. All these are effects (Karya). Transcendent 
Slabda means creative movement or Causal Stress itself, 
that is, it is not, the effect or manifestation (z.e. sound) 
to either the relative ear (a and b) or the “absolute ear” 
(c) but the cause (Karana) or Manifesting Fact itself. This 
in the Sastra is S’abda-brahman, that is, the source of 
all Slabda or name (Nama) and of all form (Ripa), the 
universe being “Name and form” (Namartipatmaka). 
Thus we rise step by step starting from average experience 
to supreme experience ; from projections and manifestations 
to the Thing Itself which is Causal Stress or S’abda-brah- 
man. The term Sabda is throughout retained, though 
the connotations enlarge and deepen as we proceed upwards, 
This is in conformity with the concrete way in which Hindu 
thought has developed and by which the all-pervading and 
all-manifesting power of the Divine Sakti is shown. In 
teaching, it is the Arundhatidarsananyaya, according to 
which a husband shows (or rather used to show—for, is 
Arundhati sought now?) his newly-wedded wife the tiny 
star Arundhati, emblem of constant chastity, by drawing 
her attention first to some neighbouring big star. “You 
see this, now look to the left you see this, well next to it 
you see Arundhati.” So a Guru deals with his disciple 
(Siisya) in a way suitable to the latter’s intelligence. He 
cannot learn what is the highest all at once. He must make 

his way upward to it. “Brahman is this; no it is that; no 
* it is this;” and so on until the highest notion of It is 


@q 


PARASABDA, CAUSAL SABDA 33 


capable of being given. Thus the Guru in Sruti says 
“ Annam Brahma,” that is Brahman is the food which the 
disciple eats as also matter generally. Then as the latter’s 
knowledge deepens, the Guru changes the connotation 
of the word Brahman but retains the term itself. The 
disciple then consecutively learns that Life is Brahman 
(Pranaih Brahma). Intelligence is Brahman (Vijhanarh 
Brahma) and finally Bliss is Brahman (Anandarm Brahma) 
where at last experience rests. Here there are five con- 
notations of “ Brahman,” each more comprehensive and 
deeper than the foregoing, gradually evolved as the spiritual 
life .of the Sisya unfolds and perfects itself. The con- 
notations of most of the important philosophical terms 
have been evolved in this way. Thus there are different 
meanings of Prana, Akasa, Vayu and so forth. Sabda 
also has the four meanings stated which thought progres- 
sively evolves in the manner above stated. Some may 
think that from the standpoint of pure logic this state of 
things is unacceptable. We have however to deal with 
the matter practically. And what life wants is generally 
not that which pure logic demands. But apart from that 
the method and the statements are true. For Brahman 
is all things as Sakti, though the Brahman in itself 
(Brahmasvartpa) is beyond them all. If those, before whom 
all connotations of Brahman are at once placed, complain 
of ambiguity, this is due to the fact that they have not 
mastered their subject. And because the subject must 
be gradually mastered the Guru takes his Sisya gradually 
upwards to the point where all aspects are seen in relation 
to the whole (Parna) whose aspects they are. 

For the present Chapter I will start at the begin- 
ning namely Causal S'abda or Sabdabrahman. Siva has 
two aspects namely Niskala (without parts), Nirguna 
(without attribute) and Sakala (with parts) Saguna (with 

3 


34 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


attribute). The first is the unmanifested transcendent 
Supreme and the second the manifested and immanent 
creative Lord (Is'vara) or Ruling Mother (Isvari). The 
first is Nispanda, without movement, for it is the eternal 
changeless Brahman. It is Asabda which here means 
the same thing, for being unmanifsst there is neither 
S'abda as effect nor S'abda as cause. The latter means 
that there is then no Causal Stress. The other aspect is 
called S'abdabrahman which appears at creation from 
out of Brahman which is the equilibrated condition of 
‘akti. From the S'abdabrahman all particular S‘abdas 
as Mantras or otherwise appear. Sabdabrahman is in 
Itself Avyakta (unmanifest) Sabda which is the cause 
of manifested (Vyakta) Sabda, Artha and Pratyaya and 
which uprises from the form of Bindu on the differentiation 
of the Supreme Bindu due to the prevalence of Kriya- 
Sakti in Prakrti, 
Kriyasakti pradhanadyah sabda s'abdartha kéranam 
Prakrterbindurtpinyah s'abdabrahmabhavat param 
Sarada-Tilaka 1-12. 
In other words the unmanifest potentiality of power which 
subsequently appears as S'abda and therefore as Artha and 
Pratyaya becomes manifest through its activity, manifesting 
in Prakriti in the form of Bindu which is the undifferentiated 
Siva Sakti. With such activity Bindu becomes threefold 
as Sabda, Artha, Pratyaya. Avyakta-Rava is the Principle 
of sound as such (Nada Matra) that is undifferentiated 
sound not specialised in the form of letters but which is 
through creative activity the cause of manifested S'abda 
and Artha which are Its forms. 
Tena s'abdartha--ripa-visishtasya sabda-brahmatvamn 
avadharitam—(Pranatosini 13). 
It is the Brahman considered as well-pervading S‘abda, 
undivided and unmanifested whose substance is Nada and 


PARAS‘ABDA, CAUSAL S’ABDA 35 


Bindu, the proximate creative impulse in Parasiva and 
proximate cause of manifested Sabda and Artha. Srstywn- 
mukha-paramasiva-prathamolldsamatram akhandovyakto 
nadabindumaya eva vydpako brahmdtmaka sabdah 
(See Pranatosint 10. Rdghava Bhatta Com. on v. 12, 
Ch. I, Sarada-Tilaka). 

The creative Brahman is called Sabdabrahman. It 
may be asked why is this so, since the Saguna-Siiva 
(which Sabdabrahman is) is the cause not only of all 
Sabdas but of all Artha (Rtipa) and Pratyaya. This is 
so but the Sastra uses the term S'abdabrahman because 
it is here considering the origin of Sabda. But Svruti 
in explaining creation is impartial as between Sabda, 
Artha or Pratyaya. Now it says “creation is out of 
S'abda” (S'abda-prabhaya) regarding the universe as con- 
stituted of Sabda (Vanmava) in its causal sense. Now it 
says that creation is out of Pratyaya using that term in 
the sense of creative ideation (Srstikalpana). Now it says 
“Creation is out of Artha” that is the supreme Artha the 
cosmic “ Stuff’. or cosmic “ Matter” which is Prakrti-gsakti. 
What is done in such a case is to take an effect (Karya) 
known to us, and to refer it to the one cause of all effects, 
giving that cause however the name of the particular effect 
which is the subject of consideration. Moreover the S'abda 
aspect of Brahman is of the highest importance for it is in 
this aspect that It is Veda. 

But what is the sense in which S'abda is used in the 
term Sabda-Brahman? This has been already indicated 
in the quotations above cited. S’abda here does not mean 
either gross or subtle sound. To begin with these are 
both effects (Karya) and we are dealing with their cause 
(Karana). Manifested sound is a Guna of Akasa. But 
in what sense? It is not merely a quality of Ether and 
thus not anything else; that is the term Sabda is not 


86 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


limited to the Guna of Akasa. If it were it would not 
be possible to explain the well-known scientific experiment 
(which in early days was supposed to “demolish” all 
Hindu theories) in which a ringing bell ceases to be heard 
in a closed vessel from which the Air has been pumped 
out, but in which Ether still remains. If S'abda were the 
Guna of Akasa only and unconnected with anything else 
it could not be said that sound increases and decreases, 
appears and disappears with Vayu. Hence the term 
S’abda is not limited to sound gross or subtle. It is the 
Causal Stress or Spanda which inheres in the stressed 
condition of Cit-Sakti and Maya-sakti which manifests 
first as the Sabda Tanmatra to the absolute “Far,” ag 
more or less subtle sound to a Yogic (though not per- 
fect) ear according as the fundamental Akasa Spanda ig 
adapted to its relative capacity through other more or lesg 
dense media; and which finally appears as average human 
sound when the fundamental Spanda is adapted to the 
capacity of the human ear through a medium of such den- 
sity as the common air. The air therefore like the ear is one 
of the factors of the manifestation of the fundamental 
Spanda which is Sabda as the original creative causal Stress 
or agitation in the body of Prakrti-S'iabda. S'abda is the 
Cosmic Stress itself which takes place in the Primary Ether 
or Saspanda-Sakti which produces the Slabda Tan- 
matra which evolves into Akasa Bhita and then into 
the Vayu and other Tanmatras and Bhitas. These 
according to Vedanta are Pancikrta that is each Tat- 
tva has four parts of its own element and one of each 
of the four others. Through the Bhautika-Srsti or in- 
direct causation of Hiranyagarbha there takes place the 
combination of the Tattvas produced by the Bhiata- 
srgti in direct causation (Sakgat-kartrtvath) of Tgvara 
producing the gross world of the human senses which is 


PARAS'ABDA, CAUSAL S'ABDA 37 


Virat. Thus the one initial Stress is communicated as and 
throughout the chain of its effects. To distinguish this 
S'abda it is called Para-Sabda and the manifested Sabda 
is Apara-Sabda or commonly Sabda simply. The latter 
is subtle and gross sound, the first being supersensible to 
the normal mind and senses and the latter sensible or what 
we call in its compounds discrete matter. Paras'abda is 
thus not sound but a state of agitation in the Cosmic Sakti 
when on the ripening of the Sarhskaras the hitherto exist- 
ing equilibrium (Samyavastha) of Prakrti is broken. There 
is then a disturbance (Ksobha) or general movement 
(Samanyaspanda) in S'akti and this Cosmic Stress which 
is Parasabda or Paravak reveals itself in manifested Sabda 
(Apara). This one stress, which is the potency of all in 
which it reveals itself, manifests in man as Artha, Prat- 
yaya, Sabda, in the objects (Prameya) of which he as 
knower (Pramatri) has apprehension (Pratyaya) and in the 
names by which he thinks of them as an “after construo- 
tion in relation to the intuitive experiences of life” as 
Professor Pramathanatha Mukhopadhyaya has well put it. 
The primordial Sabda or Paravak (corresponding in some 
ways to the Logos) is the cosmic predisposition to and pre- 
condition -of creative evolution. The agitation in the 
primary Substance projecting itself into the Sensuous plane 
becomes audible as Dhvani or sound but is itself only the 
possibility and substratum of Sound. Creation is said to 
be S/abda-prabhava, that is it proceeds from, and is a 
manifestation, of, the Stress or Cosmic Sakti. In this sense 
every movement or process in the universe is Paras/abda. 
Asabda. Jagat is a contradiction in terms. Whilst the 
stress or constituting force is one, It manifests Itself 
differently to the different senge organs. The Causal Stress 
when striking the ear and mind produces sound, when 
striking the eye and mind it produces colour and form, and 


88 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


when striking other sense organs it produces other kinds of 
sensation. It is to be noted that of the five Bhitas, Akasa 
and Vayu belong to the formless (Amirtta) division and the 
remaining three to the form division (Muartta). The first 
is sensed by hearing. S/abda as lettered sound is vibration 
for the ear as name. Tejas the head of the second division 
is sensed as form (Rupa). Artha is thus vibration to the 
eye (mental or physical) as form. It is because the one 
Power rays itself forth in threefold form that S'abda, Artha 
and Pratyaya as such have a natural and inseparable 
relation to one another. It is again because the Vaidika- 
Sabda is assumed (a matter which I will later discuss) to 
constitute the natural name of, and therefore to be in com- 
plete correspondence with, the Arthas denoted, that it ig 
held to be eternal. Sruti says that the world is born of 
Sabda (S'abda-prabhava) and that creation (Srsti) is S’abda- 
purvaka, that is Sabda is the antecedent condition of 
creative process, which cannot be if S’abda be taken to be 
only that manifestation to the ear and mind (natural or 
Yogic) which is sound (gross or subtle). This manifesta- 
tion is a subsequent and consequent fact and is to be 
distinguished from the antecedent and primordial condition 
of creation as such. The primordial conditibn is Causal 
Stress; that is in the finite ether of consciousness, homo- 
geneous, quiescent, there is a moving—a stir. Paras/abda 
is the name for that causal stress as it arises and before it 
manifests as the universe. 

To sum up: In the creative process three stages are 
to be noted: (1) the transcendental quiescent condition 
immanent in the others, though veiled, which is Asabdash, 
Asparsatmn, Aruparh and so forth as S'ruti negatively 
describes it, (2) the condition of cosmic stress which 
is Sabdabrahman. The stress is a play of Sakti in the 
Cidakasa in such a way that the first condition is not 


=e Se eee 
= A tm EOE SC OE OE ie i al ca Seen ee ee eee ee 
Tanne meer” 


PARASABDA, CAUSAL S'ABDA 89 


effaced when the second appears. The Sabdabrahman 
is Veda. After manifestation and at the conclusion 
of the cycle it is wrapped up as potential Maya-sakti, 
when according to some, in Mahapralaya the trans- 
cendental condition alone is. The human parallel is Susupti. 
(8) Sabdabraman reproduces itself gradually and partially 
as countless finite centres of varied finite experiences of 
Nama and Rupa. Hence forms together with sounds sights 
and so forth vary as do the Sabdas. The sound which 
represents the above mentioned primordial functioning of 
the Brahmasakti is the Mahabija “Om” or Pranava— 
Omityeckarang brahma tasya vadchakah pranavah. The 
nature of this great Bija which is the source of all other 
Mantras will be the subject of a future chapter after we 
have discussed what is meant by “natural name” which I 
have more fully dealt with in the Essay bearing that title. 


CHAPTER V 
S'AKTI AS STRESS 


THE cosmic states of Srsti, Sthiti and Laya, together 
with the transcendental Parama-S'iva state as also Turiya 
and the Vyasti states of Jagrat, Svapna, Susupti, must 
all be ultimately explained (so far as this can be) by the 
dynamical theory of Sakti as Stress giving rise to moving 
forms of Herself. For this purpose it is necessary to in- 
vestigate conditions of equilibrium and movement. 

What is Stress ? Let us suppose that two things A and 
B are attracting each other. The name for the total 
mutual action is “stress” of which the respective actions 
of A and B are the elements, partials, or components. Thus 
there may be Stress for three or four things and so on. 
Ultimately we reach Universal Stress which is an infinite 
system of correlated forces. A particular thing may be 
defined as a partial experience of this infinite system. Pro- 
fessor Pramathanatha Mukhopadhyadya to whom I am in- 
debted in the preparation of this and some of the following 
papers has given it the appropriate name of “ Fact-section.” 
The infinite system is however never really finitized by 
these partials. When the Stress between one such partial 
and another touches the normal of consciousness in either 
or both, we may have, under circumstances and within 
certain limits, sensation of sound in either or both, The 
stress is Sabda and the sound is Dhvani. There may 
be several stages from the one to the other. It ig Stress or 


SAKTI AS STRESS 41 


S'abda which constitutes a thing. Whether this Sabda is 
followed or accompanied by a certain Dhvani or not will 
depend firstly upon the magnitude of its action in relation 
to a percipient, and secondly upon the conditions of the 
percipient’s perceptive organs. Hence in order that a sound 
may. be heard the rates of vibration of the air must be 
such and such, the ears and brain must be such and such, 
and so'on. Beyond these limits there are no sounds. Thus 
most objects of experience though influencing us do not 
express themselves in sounds to us such as the earth, sun, 
moon, stars and so forth. In the transcendental Parama- 
shiva or Turlya state which is Nirvana, all Stress is dis- 
solved and Sakti is then nothing but Cit, Cidrapini. 
Cinmatraripini. This may be _ illustrated by the case 
where causal stress being constituted by a number of forces 
all these severally vanish and are each therefore separately 
zero so that the resultant is zero. This is the Transcendent 
Niskala state in which there is no Srsti-Kalpana, no 
Artha, and no Sabda (As'abda). In the case of Cosmic 
Susupti we need not take into consideration any external 
system, for nothing is external to the Cosmos. In this 
case we have the only static condition where each term is 
not separately zero, but where each of the forces constitut- 
ing the Stress balances one another with the result that 
there is a state of equilibrated energy. This is the state 
of the Gunas in Sartipa-parinama which, with loss of equili- 
brium in creation, is Viraipa-parindma. Vyasti Susupti may 
be due to two sets of facts. Hither the forces constituting 
this state, without each being separately zero, yet have that 
resultant, in which case there is equilibrium in the Vyasti 
causal body provided the external cosmic system does not 
disturb this internal equilibrium of the Vyasti system; or 
these forces result in something, but this resultant is exactly 


_ counterbalanced by the action of the external system. Thus 


42, THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


this something which would otherwise be the Vyasti 
stress system practically vanishes and equilibrium is esta- 
blished in this last mentioned system. In the first case 
the external system has no actions on the given internal 
system but it has action on other Vyasti systems. Thus 
the world is not asleep because the individual is so. In 
the second case the external system has action on the given 
internal system but this action is just negatived by the reac- 
tion of the internal on the external. In both cases the 
external system is an actual stressing attitude. In Svapna 
and Jagrat Avastha the equilibrium of the Samasti and 
Vyasti Susupti or causal body is lost, and in Srsti there 
is a system of kinetic stresses which again in Laya lapse 
into a state of potential stresses. The world process is thus 
divided into the three stages of Srsti (creation), Sthiti 
(maintenance), and Laya (dissolution) which is a passing 
from a state of homogeneity (Laya) to one of heterogeneity 
(Srsti and Sthiti) and back to homogeneity again in an 
unending series of evolution and involution with periods of 
rest between. The growth of the universe is thus a pulsing 
forth of the Bindu holding potentially within Itself, as 
massive (Ghanibhita) Sakti, all into which it subsequently 
evolves. This great Universe dies down again into that 
from which it sprang. Though we thus speak of three 
stages it cannot be properly said that there ig Srsti, 
that when it stops there is Sthiti, and then ultimately 
there is Laya. Evolution (Srsti) and involution (Laya) 
are going on even during Sthiti. There is always, for 
instance, molecular birth and death. Each of these 
terms is employed according as one aspect or the other 
is emphasised. During Laya the stresses are potential. 
That is actual movements cease, so that the stresses are 
due simply to the configuration of relative positions of the 
units determined by their Karmas up to the time of Laya. 


S'AKTI AS STRESS 43 


There is for instance, stress in a stringed bow though the 
string may not be in actual movement. The nature of 
Isvara experience as the ultimate Fact is as such logical 
and therefore human categories if stretched to the fact will 
inevitably lead into paralogisms and antinomies. In the 
same way creation is an unresolved riddle. Why should 
the spell of cosmic Susupti be broken and in what way 
does the Will of God influence it? Ultimately these ques- 
tions are unanswerable in all faiths. We may say that 
Isvara during Laya has experience of the causal body. 
The absolute “ear’’, “tongue,” “eye” which God possesses 
are reabsorbed into a massive consciousness of Bliss 
(Ananda) as is partially the case with the Jiva in Susupti 
for these are differentiations of His infinite Jhana-S/akti. 
These are veiled during Laya, that is the kinetic stresses 
(Sakti Vis'varipa) become potential (Sakti Cidripini). 
What is patent becomes latent. The world becomes 
“Memory” which at the next creation is “remembered ” 
just as in the individual the world is lost to him in dream- 
less sleep, and when waking he sees and recalls the events 
of a past day. Yet here the world exists during our 
sleep for others. But when Isvara goes to sleep things 
do not remain as they are. Things return to their causal 
form or seeds. During Laya, Isvara has a massive experi- 
ence of the totality of these “seeds,” for as S'ruti says 
“I am one, I will now be many.” 

To the question whether this creative act is instan- 
taneous or successive it may be replied probably neither the 
one nor the other. That is the category of time is inappli- 
cable to creation as such or creation as a whole. Creation 
considered as an instantaneous flash or a successive flow is 
Vyavaharika and not Paramarthika. On this basis however 
there is a difference of opinion between Drsti-srsti-vada 
and Karma-srsti-vada. According to the first, and to me 


44. ; THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


preferable, view, as Isvara thought, so at once the whole 
world appeared in its stages as subtle and gross. At every 
moment also creation is taking place. It is not something 
wholly in the past. According to the second or more com- 
monly accepted doctrine, the Tattvas came out gradually 
the one after the other in a specified order (Krama) though 
such Krama is not referable to time as we know it and 
which appeared at a lower stage. This latter time is the 
Janmakala of the Kalavadins according to whom all is Kala. 
The Supreme Time or Mahakala is Nirguna, Nirvis‘esa, 
Nirvikara or Brahman. 

As regards the cosmic cycle it is claimed to be proved 
by (a) induction from observed facts of experience which, 
all giving signs of periodicity, afford a basis for generaliza- 
tion; and (5) the alleged actual remembrance by Rsis and 
other super-souls such as Jaigisavya of Caturyuga, 
Manvantara, Kalpa and so forth. Apart therefore from 
S'ruti the proof is inductive and experimental and not 
deductive. 

Creation proceeds from the generic to the specific. When 
Laya as a state of potential stresses passes into Srsti 
which is a system of kinetic stresses we have first the most 
generic condition of the latter namely Samanya-Spanda, 
that is general undifferentiated movement. It is the mani- 
festation of the tendency of Laya to pass into Srsti. From 
the standpoint of Consciousness it is the first stage of 
“Seeing” (Iksana) that is cosmic ideation on the Part of 
Isvara. In the individual it is the borderland between 
Sugupti and Svapna, the moment that Susupti is breaking 
and Svapna is drawing to pass into J agrat. The inertia of 
the first has passed but the specialised movements of the 
second and third are not yet in evidence. Itisa kind of 
massive undifferentiated state containing potentially all 
specialities. The S'abda or acoustic aspect of this tendency 


S'AKTI AS STRESS AB 


of potential stress to pass into kinetic stress is the Pranava 
or Mantra “ Or.” 

This tendency realises itself in the first place in Bhtita- 
srsti by Is’vara. Isvara has consciousness of his Ananda- 
maya Body and Causal Body. The latter means the 
experience “I am all” (Sarvatmakatva). He experiences 
Himself as all whether as a whole, as generals or particulars. 
As Knower of all He is Sarvajia, as Knower of its varieties 
He is Sarvavit. They are to Him, Himself, for the Maya 
with which He is associated does not govern Him and 
therefore His knowledge does not bind Him. The state of 
Isvara though not governed by, is yet associated with, 
Maya and is therefore not that of Supreme Moksa. Isvara 
wills to be many and the Bhitas issue from him. As Isvara 
He does not think Himself to be their creator. The crea- 
tion of the Bhitas (Bhita-srsti) according to the Vedantic 
order means the evolving of (a) the Apaicikrta Bhitas or 
Tanmatras and (b) their primary compounds which are 
again (aa) Stksma that ig Antahkarana, Indriya and 
Pranas and (bb) Sthula that is the Paiicikrta’ Bhitas. 
Broadly speaking these are the elements of creation ; the 
creation of which implies also their natural names or Bijas. 
Thus from Om are evolved the Bijas of the Bhatas Harm, 
Yarh, Rath, Vath, Lar and other Bijas such as Hrim the 
Maya Bija or Pranava of the differentiating Sakti. These 
elements are special (Visesa) in relation to the tendency 
and general movement ( Samanya-spanda) above mentioned, 
but are general (Samanya) in relation to the derivatives 
which follow. 

There than follows Bhautika-Srsti by Hiranyagarbha 
that is the creation of the secondary compounds; that 
is again the mixing up of the “ elements” into diverse 
forms, first the typal and then the variational. This is done 
by Isvara in His aspect ag Hiranyagarbha. These too 


46 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


have their natural names (S'abda). Hiranyagarbha who 
is the Lord of Brahmaloka thinks himself to be a creator. 
This is a state of duality in which He thinks that all things 
are His. Hence Hiranyagarbha as affected by Maya is a Jiva. 

Lastly coming to the completed Sthiti we have the 
actions and reactions of the Bhttas and Bhautikas such 
that they continue as a system of the kinetic stresses. 
These actions and reactions have their natural names which 
may be called phenomenal S‘abdas. Some of these namely 
those which fall between our limits of sensibility are sensi- 
ble to us. So much as to S'abdas classified with reference 
to aspects of creation. 

Sabdas may be either directly or indirectly appre- 
hended. In the latter case they are received. The ordinary 
individual does not hear the natural name or sound of Agni 
or “ Rath” directly. He is told that it is so having received 
it from those who have heard that sound. It is “received” 
(Apta) and not directly apprehended (Saksatkrta). For, 
from the point of view of apprehension, S‘abdas are 
of two kinds, Saksatkrta and Apta. The S'abda range 
of Isvara, Hiranyagarbha, and Virat may be thus re- 
presented. 

Thus Isvara has no Apta or received (indirect) S'abdas: 
but all S’abdas are directly apprehended (Sakgatkrta) by 
Him. Hiranyagarbha, as Hiranyagarbha, that is a parti- 
cualr aspect of Isvara has direct apprehension of Bhautika- 
srsti Sabdas and Sthiti S'iabdas and indirect of Bhita- 
srsti and Laya Sabdas, Virat as Virat has direct ap- 
prehension only of Sthiti S'abdas and indirect apprehension 
of the rest. This deals with the Samasti or collective 
aspects of Experience. 

Coming to the individual or Vyasti aspects we 
have the corresponding states of Prajiia, Taijasa and 
Vis'va. These unlike the collective states are mutually 


SAKTI AS STRESS 47 


exclusive, the one of the other, and may thus be figured. ¥ 


Pra jna Taijasa Vishva 
Karana Sukshma Sthula ° 


Praja has direct but veiled or partial apprehension of his 
own Vyasti causal (Laya) S'abda but not of others. This 
Sabda is however not sound as language for himself. 
Taijasa has both direct and indirect experience of Vyasti 
(i.e., some) subtle Sabda. And Virat has the same of 
cross Sabdas. 

Here in these two cases there is gradation. The gross 
ear has capacities of varying degree. A scientist may by 
means of a delicately constructed apparatus hear ‘sounds 
which are not sensible to the natural ear. A Yogi may 
hear still more. Thus if either were to hear the rise of sap 
in a tree that sound would be the direct approximate 
natural name of that vegetable function. A Yogi in S'at- 
cakrabheda or piercing of the six centres by Kundalini- 
Sakti may, it is said, directly apprehend the Bijas Om, 
Harh, Yarn and the rest, as the passage of sakti gradually 
vitalises the six centres. A Yogi by mounting to a higher 
or the highest plane of existence can have direct experience 
(Saksatkara) of any or all kinds of S'abdas. The Absolute 
Kar hears the Sabda Tanmatra in Akasa, not through 
the impact of undulations, but it hears movement as 
movement. 

In Brahmajfiana the Yogi becomes the Brahman Itself 
when all Stress ceases and there is Peace. 


CHAPTER IV 


ETERNALITY OF SABDA 


THE term “eternal” may mean “always is” (a) without 
change or (6) with change. The former is existence un- 
contradicted in the three times. Change again may be 
either immanent (Svagata) or its reverse (Taditara). Thus 
if there be only one circle (A) any change going on within 
it is Svagata change or distinction (Bheda). But if there 
be two circles A and B of which the latter added a part of 
itself to the former with the result that A is changed, this 
is not Svagata. Thus Svagata change is Advaita whilst 
Non-Svagata change presupposes Dvaita. 

Applying then these observations to the Brahman and 
Jiva, the former has three aspects (a) Brahman as Pure 
Cit (Brahma svartipa) (6) Brahman as Cit-Sakti (ce) 
Brahman as Maya Sakti or Prakrti. In the first or 
transcendent sense Brahman is Pure Cit and this always 
is as such. From the finite point of view we may either 
ignore (veil) it or accept it, but it is ever given. It is the 
changeless background of all change; but Itself has no kind 
of change. This is the Niskala Paramasiiva to whose 
powers or Saktis we next proceed. 

Cit-sakti is Cit as Sakti, that is Cit immanent 
in the world the forms of which as Mind and Matter are 
productions of Maya-sakti. This immanent Brahman 
(Cit-sakti) in the sense of the All (which Professor 
Pp. N. Mukhopadhyaya aptly calls “ Fact” as opposed to 


ETERNALITY OF S'ABDA 49 


“Fact-section”) always is as such. For the All (Purna) 
never ceases to be all. All isall. Sruti says that Pirna 
remains Pairna though Putrna be taken from it. Brab- 
man as Cit-sakti is inseparably associated with Maya-sakti 
and has only Svagata change or movement. Brahman 
as Maya-s'akti—what the author cited calls Stress as distin- 
guished from the background of Cit—is Brahman as 
Prakrti. This is eternal in the sense that it always is, 
though either as latent or as patent, as a kinetic force or 
as a tendency. Here eternity does not exclude change 
of condition. Brahman as Prakrti has Svagata change. 
We must not then confound the terms Real and Eternal. 
According to Advaita-Vedanta the transcendent Brahma- 
svaripa is both real and eternal, for “real” is here used 
in the sense of that which does not change (Kutastha) 
whereas Maya with its changes is neither real nor unreal. 
“ Hiternal” therefore includes “change of condition.” Non- 
eternal or finitized being is, pragmatically considered, 
marked by three kinds of change and distinction (Bheda), 
viz. Intrinsic (Svagata) such as the distinction which exists 
between the leaves and branches of the same tree, and 
extrinsic which is again of two kinds, viz., Sajatiya such as 
the distinction which exists between one kind of tree and 
another kind of tree, and Vijatiya such as the distinction 
which exists between a tree and the earth and rocks which 


surround it. 


The eternal Sabdabrahman manifests at creation 
(Srsti) and lapses into its quiescent ground in dissolution 
(Laya). The Sabda of its first creative movement is the 
Nada or Dhvani “Om.” Brom this issue all particular 
S'abdas both Varnatmaka and Dhvanyatmaka. A given 
particular ig obviously not the same for ever. But are 
particulars as such eternal? The creation of particulars 
is recurrently eternal in the sense that during each 

4 


50 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Srsti particulars appear. But are the particulars them- 
selves eternal? The question may mean either of two 
things. In the first sense the obvious answer is, as stated, 
in the negative. Then are particulars as such eternal ? 
In other words are there particulars in all times, in Srsti 
as well as in Laya? This given particular (say the pen 
with which I am writing) may not be in all times, but will 
not some particulars (though different from those now 
given) exist always? There is a genus or type (Jati) with 
its particulars (Vyakti). The Jati never exists without its 
Vyaktis. Some Vyaktis (though different from those now 
given) will be associated with the Jatis in all times; 
though both may be either latent or patent. In Laya for 
instance the Jatis associated with their Vyaktis become 
latent. Associated with what Vyaktis? Not the present 
ones; but the Vyaktis immediatly antecedent to the state 
of Prakrti equilibrium. A given Vyakti is Vyakti-vigesa. 
Any Vyakti or some Vyakti is Vyaktisamanya. The former 
is not, but the latter is, eternal though it may be either 
veiled or unveiled. The Jatis are eternal and manifested 
in every creation and their S’abdas are eternal. The 
Vyaktis are only eternal in the sense above explained. 
Hach creation is not an exact copy of the previous crea- 
tion in every particular. Particulars through revolving 
round certain fixed Jatis (latent or patent) change. Thus 
a given Jiva may be now a Brahmana. Through Karma 
he changes and after death he may change his Jati 
and become a Sadra or a Devatad. And so he may go 
on until he reaches the antecedent state of Mahapralaya. 
Let it be supposed that at that moment he is a Devata 
again. He is a Devata-vyakti associated with Jati. In 
Pralaya he will be veiled as such together with his Jati, 
and together with all bis Sarhskaras active (Prarabdha) 
as well as nascent (Sarcita). It is the resultant of these 


cee a sees 


A er AR 


ETERNALITY OF S'ABDA 51 


Sarmskaras that will determine his condition of birth after 
the expiry of Prakrti’s equilibrium. The end of this journey 
is reached only in Liberation (Mukti). 

Then is the Vyakti S'abda eternal? If by this term 
is meant a Sabda denoting a given Vyakti (Vyakti-visesa) 
then this is a proper name (non-connotating) and is not 
eternal. But with the exception of a few proper names 
(those which are attached as arbitrary signs to this Vyakti 
or that) all names or words represent Jatis that is groups 
or classes of things. A Vyakti-vis'esa is represented by 
either a proper name or a specific combination of class 
names, such as, ‘this paper I am writing on;’ all these 
being class names the combination of which makes or 
denotes a Vyakti-vis‘esa. 
| Only such S'abdas as are approximate natural names 

(either simple or in combination) are eternal and the rest 
are not. The Veda claims to give the names of class 
things and class functions which are approximately na- 
- tural. Hence (granting this claim) these S’abdas are 
eternal (Nitya). By Veda is here meant Vaidik language 
and by natural name Vaidika-S’abda. Thus assuming that 
the word ‘ Gauh” is an approximate natural name, it has 
existed in every universe and has there meant the animal 
cow. If the word “Cow” as a variation of this has originat- 
ed in some time, in some place and in some persons, then 
outside this limitation of time, place, and person the word 
has not existed and has not represented the Artha or animal 
cow. The ultimate test of a natural name is of course ex- 
perimental verification. WVaidik language involves different 
strata. Natural names are of different kinds and degrees. 
Whether other S'abdas and their combinations are eternal 
depends on whether those words and their combinations 
are or are not approximate natural names. Apart from 
tradition the proof is experimental verification by Yoga. 


52, THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


If they are variations of natural names (Vaidika-Sabda) 
the extent to which they vary, and the conditions of 
time, place, and person to which they are subject, must 
determine the nature of their bond with their Arthas. 
No a@ priori answer is possible. Sabdabrahman thinks 
creatively, his Pratyaya being cosmic ideation (S'rsti-kal- 
pana). The S'abda of this is Om and the Artha is the 
totality of the universe denoted by, and potentially inher- 
ing in, the creative impulse of which Om is the sound-ex- 
pression. From this Orh was derived all the letters (Varnas) 
and sounds (Dhvanis). These Vaidik-Varnas are eternal 
and represent in themselves and their variations all the 
possibilities of articulate speech in all languages. In Veda 
the Karma of these Varnas is eternal and therefore the 
Vaidik words are also, it is claimed, eternal. The vowels 
are continuous sounds formed by varying the size of the 
mouth cavity. The vowel sounds produced by the voice are 
due (See Catchpool’s “ Text-book of Sound,” p. 290) to the 
vibrations of two. cartilaginous plates, the “ vocal chords ” 
placed at the top of the windpipe, edge to edge with a 
narrow slit between them; air blown through this slit from 
the lungs keeps the plate vibrating. The apparatus is 
really a free reed. The vocal chords have muscles attached 
to them which can vary the frequency of the vibration and 
the pitch of the sound produced. The different vowel 
sounds are produced by varying the size and shape of the 
mouth cavity. The consonants are particular interruptions 
of those sounds. They cut short the vowel sound but can- 
not themselves be sounded without vowels. And for this 
reason the vowels are known as the Slaktis of the 
consonants. 

This subject of the Varnas occupies an important place 
in the Tantra-Sastras in which it is sought to give a 
practical application to the very ancient doctrine concerning 


ETERNALITY OF S'ABDA 53 


S'abda. The letters are classified according to their place 
of pronunciation (Uccarana) such as gutturals, labials» 
dentals and so forth. The lips, mouth, and throat form a 
pipe or musical instrument which being formed in various 
ways and by the aid of the circumambient air produces the 
various sounds which are the letters of the Alphabet: 
Panini (see Part I of Siddhanta Kaumudi) and Patanjali’s 
Mahabhashya deal with the effort or Prayatna in speech, 
dividing it into inner (Antaraprayatna) and outer effort 
(Bahyaprayatna). The former is of four kinds Sprsta, 
Isati Sprsta, Vivritta, Samvritta according as the effort 
fully or slightly touches the place of origin of the sound 
and according as the mouth is open or closed. Bahyapra- 
yatna is of eleven kinds namely Vivara, Samvara, Svasa, 
Nada, Ghosga, Aghosa, Alpaprana, Mahaprana, Udatta, 
Anudatta, Svarita. Vivara pronunciation is with the 
mouth open, Samvara when it is closed. In Svasa there 
is a predominant use of the breathing, in Nada there is 
a humming sound, in Ghosa ringing sound, Aghosa being 
the opposite of this. In Alpaprana the sound is quickly 
pronounced, little demand being made on the Prana, Maha- 
prana being the opposite of this. In Udatta the sound is 
given with a loud voice, in Anudatta with a low voice, and 
Svarita is a mixture of these two. In Panini various letters 
are assigned to each of these classes of Prayatna. Thus 
the consonants from Ka to Ma belong to Sprsta Antara- 
Prayatna; Ya, Ra, La, Va to Isat Sprsta Antara-Prayatna 
and so on. 

The Tantra-Sastra in its doctrine and practice of 
Satcakrabheda indicates various parts of the body which 
are “touched ” in the pronunciation of various letters. By 
this is meant that in the sounding of certain letters various 
parts of the body take a part. Thus the letter Va is pro- 
nounced from that part of the body wherein is the Muladhara, 


f 


54 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


and the letter Ha from between the eyebrows in the Ajna- 
Cakra. The sound produced by the body in motion (for 
the external cause of sound is something in a state of vibra- 
tion) is propagated by sound-waves in the circumambient 
air. The rise and fall of pressure which occur as sound- 
waves arrive at the ear, produce by their effect on its 
structures the sensation of sound and the nature of this 
sensation depends on the nature of the rise and fall of 
pressure ; in other words on the character of the sound waves. 

According to Indian doctrine, God evolved man after 
having evolved most (if not all) other species of living 
beings so that language (as also intelligence, moral sense, 
and many other things which had been less perfectly 
developed in the lower animals) became more developed 
in man. The lower animals were “ approaches ”’ to man, 
the difference between man and animal being according 
to this doctrine a difference of degree and not of kind. It 
is possible then that there may be an inchoate Varnatmaka- 
S'abda in the higher animals, though it is to be noted that 
the proposition (which is dealt with elsewhere) that “ there 
is no thinking without language” is true only if by think- 
ing is. meant some kinds only of cognitive processes. 
Apart from these, man gets on without language and 
therefore also the animals. It is only the after-construc- 
tion on perceptive processes which call for language and 
this we find mainly if not wholly in man alone. Patanjala- 
Dars‘ana also discusses the question of transmigration into 
an animal body. In this case there ig a soul which had 
been in a human body or even in a Devata body before and 
has therefore the Sarhskaras (linguistic and others) of those 
births implicitly given amongst its animal Sarhskaras. Its 
instinct therefore may be (partly if not wholly) “lapsed 
intelligence” and its Dhvanydtmaka language a partly 
veiled Varnatmaka or human language. 


& 


ETERNALITY OF S'ABDA 55 


What is eternal then is Sabda in its aspect as Causal 
Stress or Slabdabrahman, the letters (Vaidika-Varna) 
evolved from the primordial Dhvani the Pranava or “Om”, 
and the combinations of these letters which constitute 
approximately natural names. These according to Hinduism 
are the Vaidika-S’abdas. Whether that claim is well-founded 
is another question which is not here discussed. | 


CHAPTER VII 
SABDA AS LANGUAGE 


It has been said that there is no thought without language. 
This proposition requires examination both from the Brah- 
man and Jiva standpoint. If it be assumed that there is 
no thinking without language this merely establishes the 
necessary connection of thought and language and nota 
law that words or names must come to the mind first and 
then thoughts. They may be inseparably connected as 
aspects of one and the same concrete, that is actual, process 
but between aspects there is no sequence. Whena gun is 
fired the explosion of the cartridge is the causal stress. 
This manifests to the ear as a report, to the eye as a flash 
and also it may be by the movement of the object hit. But 
the last three are co-effects of the first that is the explosion. 
In the same way when there is a centre of Causal stress in 
Cit we may have several lines of effectual manifestation. 
But it cannot be said that one line of effectual manifestation 
causes another. Now Sruti as already mentioned calls 
creation Sabda-prabhava and S'abda-parva, both terms 
implying sequence as between a cause and its consequence. 
When again Sruti says “Brahma created Devatas with 
the Sabda ‘ Hie,’” what is meant is that the causal stress 
of that special creation manifests to His absolute “Far” 
as a sound which is the pure form of what we can approxt- 
mately utter and hear as the sound “ Hte.” We may, as 
stated, have several lines of effectual manifestation on there 


S'ABDA AS LANGUAGE 57 


arising a ‘centre of causal stress in Cit, one of which is 
(say) the sound “ Hite”, and another the appearance of the 
Devatis. But we cannot say that one line of effectual 
manifestation causes another. Therefore when Sruti says 
that S’abda underlies, precedes and enters Jagat, Sabda 
is not used in the sense of sound but as the causal stress or 
initial Spanda which from the subjective aspect is Icca- 
sakti. The universe is creative ideation (Srstikalpana). 
To use the terms of human speech this ideation is intuitive 
and not inferential and therefore does not involve language 
which is one of Its products. The proposition that there is 
no thought without language is correct only in a Vyava- 
harika sense and is then only true if by “thinking” is 
meant the formation of concepts or general notions, judg- 
ments and drawing inferences. For even in us, intuitive 
processes, such as perception and ideation, are done without 
language. To use the apt language of Professor Prama- 
thanatha Mukhopadhyaya, words are an “after-thought or 
, after-construction in relation to the intuitive experiences 
of life.” (See as to the principles from which this statement 
follows ‘‘ Approaches to Truth”, “ Patent Wonder”). To 
begin with experience is had without language (Apara- 
sabda) both in the Turiyaé (Asabda condition) and the 
Susupti (Paras'abda or Causal Stress) states. Coming 
down to Svapna and J agrat it is to be recognised that there 
are some ways in which language may be associated with 
thinking processes. On the other hand some processes 
may go on without language. In Svapna and Jagrat 
Avastha, Arthas and Pratyayas necessarily imply the 
possibility of sound manifestation, that is, vocal language, 
but do not always actually suggest their acoustic counter- 
parts. In some cases they do go on apparently without 
language, though there ig always the possibility of their 
being expressed in language. A child sees, hears and 


58 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


so forth almost without language, so does the animal 
and we ourselves in part. Most of the particular objects 
of perception have during such perception no specific 
names for us; still we perceive them and may afterwards 
recall the class names. Absence of language occurs primarily 
in two cases, namely in intuitive perception and intuitive 
ideation. Much seeing and hearing is done intuitively and 
without language. By intuitive ideation is meant the 
forming of a mental image of an object. Thus I seea tree: 
close my eyes and see it again in mentalimage. Many 
such sights and sounds pass through our mental range 
from time to time which do not always call up their names. 
But though these intuitive processes may actually go on 
without language, there is the possibility of their being 
vehicled in language, and in description, analysis, classifica- 
tion, judgment and other mental elaborations such linguistio 
vehicle is indispensable. For the moment it is required 
to describe, analyse, classify perceptions, recourse must be 
had to language. Looking, I see a thing and very well see 
it. But this seeing is often done without actually remem- 
bering the name “tree” or “mangoe tree.” To describe, 
classify and otherwise to elaborate this seeing I must re- 
member the name. In this sense language is called an 
“after-construction.” Language again is a system of signs 
either natural or arbitrary, either vocal or non-vocal, by 
which we describe things and consider the attributes and 
relations of things. In this definition four marks are em- 
ployed, namely, natural, arbitrary, vocal and non-vocal. 
Taking two at a time there are six combinations namely 
natural-vocal, natural non-vocal, arbitrary-vocal, arbitrary 
non-vocal, natural arbitrary, vocal non-vocal. The last two 
may be at once rejected as the marks in them are contradio- 
tory. The first four give us four kinds of signs which exhaust 
possible language. Of the first the example is Vaidika-S'abda 


SABDA AS LANGUAGE 59 


including Bija Mantras uttered by the vocal organs and of 
the second we may instance “ expressive” signs made to a 
man (who does not understand the spoken language) by 
means of the hand or other bodily organ in order to indicate 
a particular object. The third and fourth classes refer to 
arbitrary forms of the first two. Arbitrary-vocal is an arbit- 
rary combination of natural vocal signs, each separately 
being vocal and natural but their combinations being 
arbitrary as where two or more natural words are taken and 
an arbitrary meaning is given to the whole group, é.g. code 
words. In the same way it may be possible to combine 
two or more non-vocal natural signs and give the whole 
thing an arbitrary meaning. A particular name attached 
to a thought or thing may be arbitrary as in the case of some 
Proper names, but names as such are necessary to higher 
mental processes directly and also to intuitive processes 
implicitly. All proper names however are not arbitrary. 
Those that are, are attached as signs to objects to denote 
them or mark them off from other objects. They do not 
connote any attributes or relations of the things to which 
they may be attached. Our perceptions and ideations often 
go on without language. Many rapid automatic inferences 
are drawn and habitual actions are performed without lan- 
guage. But sometimes these processes are with their lan- 
guage accompaniment and the moment we want to review, 
describe, classify, and judge these processes, their language 
accompaniment appears in consciousness. 

Now Sabda according to previously given definitions 
is either Para or Apara. The former is Movement or Stress 
considered in itself, that is, apart from conditions of its 
manifestation to specialised sense Organs or sense capa- 
cities. One of these sense capacities is the ear which 
is subject to degrees, since the capacity of one indivi- 
dual is greater than that of another. This gradation 


60 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


points to a highest or absolute capacity which may be 
called the Absolute Ear. The appearance or manifesta- 
tion of Paras‘abda or causal Stress to the highest capacity 
(wherever that be) is Sabda-Tanmatra. This last is still a 
manifestation and not the Stress itself. It is the Stress- 
in-itself appearing to an ideal ear. It is this stress in 
itself regarded from a special standpoint. Just as we con- 
ceive an absolute ear, so we may conceive an absolute eye, 
tongue and so forth. Hach means the Ideal limit (a mathe- 
matical term) of certain capacities of specialised feeling 
which are exercised in us in varying degree. S'abda Tan- 
matra therefore means not sound in general or undiffern- 
tiated pure sound only, but Samanya (general) sounds in- 
cluding the highest, the Pranava or Mantra “Orn,” as well 
as Vis‘esa (special) sounds. In the Tanmatra form they 
are both of them sounds as apprehended by the highest 
capacity and therefore not subject to the conditions of 
variability. ‘Sound in itself” or “sound as such” there- 
fore does not necessarily mean “undifferentiated sound.” 
Thus a dove is cooing in a grove of mangoe trees hard by. 
I hear it. You may hear it better. By a scientific instru- 
ment (megaphone, microphone) it may be heard better still 
and so on. But what is that sound as apprehended by a 
perfect capacity of hearing? What is this cooing sound in 
itself or the standard of this cooing sound of which you, 
I, the Yogi hear so many variations? The answer to this 
will give us the Tanmatra of a Visesa sound. 

Now Paras‘abda is not language. Aparas’abda includ- 
ing Sabda-Tanmatra is. In the individual (Vyasti) con- 
sciousness there is intuitive consciousness (which answers 
to Pratyaya) of veiled Ananda. The Artha is the tempor- 
arily equilibrated causal body. But this Artha does not 
manifest itself to the sleeper at that time in language. In 
‘Susupti the individual is without language though he 


SABDA AS LANGUAGE 61 


has an intuitive experience of his Vyasti Anandamaya 
causal body. But the Artha in Susupti, though wanting 
language, must have its Paragabda. 

The individual is a centre correlated to other centres 
in a cosmic system. For a while he is in equilibrium in 
Susupti. Dynamically this means that the algebraic sum 
of the forces of the other centres exerted upon the indi- 
vidual and of the forces of his own causal body exerted 
upon the other centres is zero. It follows therefore that 
the whole cosmic system need not be in equilibrium whilst 
the individual (that is, his causal body) is in equilibrium. 
His slumber does not mean the slumber of the universe. 
The question is not here discussed as to the forces con- 
stituting the individual causal stress during Susupti. 
This I deal with elsewhere. To explain equilibrium in 
Susupti we require only to assume that the resultant 
action of the universe on the individual causal body and 
the resultant reaction of the individual causal body on the 
universe annul each other during Susupti or dreamless 
sleep. They (at the former) need not be separately nil. 
Hence the going by the individual into slumber means an 
actual stressing attitude of the cosmic system which is 
Parasabda. But for a certain attitude of the external 
system there would be no equilibrium in the i 


nternal system. 
Nay more: this Parag 


abda may manifest itself as sound 
(.e., as language) to other centres such as S'abda-Tanmatra 
to the Absolute Har, Saksma-S'abda of varying degree to 
the Yogic ear, or as the self-produced physical sounds 
of the sleeper to the gross ear. Just as a Devata has a Bija 
mantra or Primary Natural Name, so has each other 
individual Jiva, corresponding to their respective causal 
bodies, and these may be heard in varying degree by finer 
ears and fully by the Absolute Ear. But the individual 
does the sleeping without language just as he may make 


62 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


sounds in his sleep without being conscious of it whilst a 
person sitting by him hears them. Laya or Cosmic Susupti 
is the dreamless slumber of Bhagavan or Isvara. If our 
own analogy can be pushed up to this, then this Cosmic 
Susupti is also without language, though it is an intuitive 
experience by God of His own causal body. Since there are 
no other centres here and no absolute ear other than that 
of Isvara (who is ex hypothesit in Susupti), this intuitive 
experience is absolutely without language (Mauna). It is 
silence itself. But Paras‘abda is there still, namely equili- 
brated Samasti (Causal Stress). Hence language or no 
language, the correlation of Sabda and Artha persists. 
Thus language is not the whole of Sabda. 

Sabda, Artha and Pratyaya are the three poles of a 
polar triangle. In all planes of consciousness below the 
pure or transcendent plane this polar triangle necessarily 
holds. In Is‘vara experience the three poles meet together 
at a point so that Sabda=Artha=Pratyaya. In the 
individual Susupti experience also they are not clearly 
distinguishable. Language can be put for Sabda (causal 
movement or stress) only when there arises the possibility 
of its being apprehended as sound by some hearing capacity 
(either absolute or relative). A name or a word ceases to 
be such when the apprehension by the appropriate cognitive 
capacity is not there. A name is a manifestation to such 
cognitive capacity and when the conditions of manifestations 
are not there the manifestation disappears. But the causal 
stress (Paras’abda) of the name remains. Hence in Vyasti 
Susupti actual names or words (or vocal language) lapse 
back into their causal stress. The operation is essentially 
the same in Samasti Susupti or Laya. So that S'abda is 
(that is, equals) language, actual or possible, in all cases. In 
the lower planes (Svapna, Jagrat), however, language may 
be put for Sabda but subject to this provision that the 


SABDA AS LANGUAGE 63 


language-pole may be regarded as being sometimes above 
and sometimes below the threshold line of normal or prag- 
matic consciousness. Thus in the case of the intuitive 
processes afore-mentioned we may save the polar triangle 
by assuming that the language pole though not apparent 
is still there below the threshold line ready to be called 
up whenever occasion should arise. Thus the development 
from infancy may be shown by the following diagram in 
which A=Artha, P=Pratyaya and S=Sabda as langu- 
age, shown as{ being above or below the line which is the 


threshold— 
1OGO°C 


a 


In this diagram, showing the child’s development, the 
five diagrams do not represent definite stages but only 
the gradual separation of A and P and the rising of S above 
the line. First no language or more strictly speaking only 
simple rudimentary sounds—Artha and Pratyaya merge 
into one, there being no discrimination. Then Artha and 
Pratyaya are more and more discriminated and their 
language correlate is more and more developed and brought 
above the threshold line. Animals probably remain in the 
first two stages of the child. 

In Jagrat and Svapna, Artha and Pratyaya are all 
necessarily associated not merely with S’abda but with 
that condition of Sabda which we call language. But 
the association may be either manifest or unmanifest. 


64 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


In the latter case whilst Artha and Pratyaya are above 
the threshold line of normal consciousness, Language is 
below it, so that in the intuitive processes above described 
Artha and Pratyaya alone seem to appear, though their 
normal associates are waiting for them below the thresh- 
old line. The moment it is desired to review, describe, 
classify Artha and Pratyaya, then the Sabdas as words 


appear. 
Thus : 
Judging, inferring, classi- Some intuitive Processes 
fying etc. 
, ey 
A P 


Threshold Line 


The above account, whilst saving psychology, would 
imply that Sabda, Artha, and Pratyaya being involved 
(though as identities) in Isvara consciousness must be 
involved in all downward experience also. It is how- 
ever necessary to clearly understand that S‘’abda is not 
necessarily language in all cases, and that language may 
pe either consciously or subconsciously given. Accord- 
ing to the scheme suggested the correlation of Artha, 
Pratyaya and Sabda as Language is essential in the 


Oe Oe 


ee See eee 


SABDA AS LANGUAGE 65 


planes of Jagrat and Svapna, but they may be latent as 
regards the third partner in some intuitive processes, but 
patent in others as well as in conceiving, judging, inferring 
and so forth. The conclusion therefore is: (1) The Turiya 
state is undifferentiated. Hence in it there is no Artha, 
Sabda, Pratyaya. A, S and P severally vanish. (2) The 
Susupti state (Samasti or Vyasti) is temporarily equili- 
brated Consciousness in which there are A, S and P, but 
their resultant is ineffectual. In the Vyasti consciousness 
there are Artha, S'abda, Pratyaya. But these three seem 
to blend into one and are not clearly distinguishable. Here 
Sabda is not language to the subject himself. (3) The 
Svapna and Jagrat states in which the temporarily equili- 
brated consciousness ceases are actually stirring Vyasti or 
Samasgti consciousness. In them there is S'abda, Artha, 
Pratyaya, but in some intuitive processes (perceptional and 
ideational) Sabda as language is below the threshold line 
of the normal Consciousness. 

Thus the cosmic and individual states must all be 
ultimately explained (so far as this can be) by the dynamical 
theory of Stress or Sakti in which an investigation is made 
as to the conditions of equilibrium and movement. 


CHAPTER VIII 


NATURAL NAME 


WuarT is a natural name? Every thing is composed of 
moving material forces. Even what seems stable is in 
movement, for all its parts are in movement, though 
they are some time held together as a whole until by 
design or in the course of nature they are disrupted and 
dissolved. Matter itself igs only a relatively stable form of 
cosmic energy. Because all is in movement, the world is 
called Jagat or that which moves. Everything is moving 
which is not the unmoving (Nispanda) Brahman. This 
movement, which is the world, is apprehended by man ag 
sound, touch and feel, form and colour, taste and smell. 


This is its effect on the sense organs (Indriyas) and mind — 


(Manas), which are again themselves in movement, being 
ultimately composed of the same Tanmatras which are the 
components of the mind’s object or matter. All movement 
is accompanied by sound. In other words, movements 
presented to a subject is apprehended by the ear and mind 
as sound, just as it is apprehended by the eye as form and 
colour, or by the tongue as taste. We say “ear and mind,’ 
for it is to be remembered that according to Indian notions 
the Indriya or sense is not the physical organ ear, eye and so 
forth, but the faculty of mind operating through that organ 
as its instrument. The physical organs are the usual means 
whereby on the physical plane the functions of hearing and 
so forth are accomplished. But as they are mere instruments 
and their power is derived from the mind, a Yogi may ac- 
complish by the mind only all that may be done by these 


NATURAL NAME 67 


physical organs, and indeed more, without the use of the 
latter. So also a hypnotised subject can perceive things, 
even when no use of the special physical organs ordinarily 
necessary for the purpose is made. The paramountcy of 
mind is shown by the fact that an object is not perceived 
unless the mind gives its attention. So in the Brhadara- 
nyaka-Upanisad it is said, ‘“‘ My mind was elsewhere: I did 
not hear.’ Now movement being accompanied by sound, 
let us suppose we could hear (which we cannot do through 
the individual natural ear) the sound produced by the 
generating stress or constituting forces of (say) the house- 
hold fire, then the sound so heard would be the natural 
name of that fire. Again the sap rises in the trees. Could 
we hear the forces constituting this rising sap, then the 
sound heard would be the natural name of that vegetable 
function, and so on. Natural name in its purest sense may 
therefore be defined as the sound produced by the generat- 
ing stress (Sakti) or constituting forces of a thing, not as 
apprehended by this ear or that (which apprehends within 
limits and subject to conditions) but by what may be 
called the Supreme and Infinite Ear which apprehends un- 
conditionally a sound, which is sound as it is. By Supreme 
Kar is meant the power (S'akti) of apprehending sound 
in itself or as such, without subjection to the varying con- 
ditions of Time, Place (z.e., Plane) and Person. It is that 
which hears causal stress of a thing as such or uncondition- 
ally. Then the natural name of a thing is that sound 
which the Supreme Ear hears. Natural language in its 
highest sense is a language of natural names only. In this 
sense no language below the absolute plane can be such. 
In this sense even the Vedic language and its Mahamantra 
“Om” is not natural language. 

The relative ear does not hear such stress uncondi- 
tionally. To it therefore a thing has no natural name. 


68 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


In this connection we must distinguish between the sound 
accompanying causal stress and the sound which a thing 
gives forth under the action of stimuli. The latter may be 
heard, but the former not. Fire or heat acting upon various 
things may produce various sounds which the ordinary 
relative ear hears, but its causal stress is experienced as a 
sound which a Yogi alone hears. 

Nevertheless there may be according to the S‘astra 
what is called an approximate natural name, that is the 
sound of the causal stress heard by a Yogi and transmitted 
imperfectly by him. We say ‘imperfectly’, because it is 
transmitted by an imperfect agent as a sound which can be 
heard by the gross ear. Prajapati hears the causal sound 
by His Supreme Ear (not gross or physical) and utters it by 
His Supreme Tongue to His Sadhaka who, not yet himself 
possessing the Supreme Har, hears it a little imperfectly. 
In him the primordial sound is somewhat veiled. By 
Sadhana he either attains the Supreme Har or stops short 
of it. In the former case he is like Prajapati himself. In 
the latter case he communicates by his relative “ tongue ” 
the imperfectly heard primeval sound to his disciple 
(Sisya) who can by Yoga either verify the archetypal 
sound, or falls short of it. In this way the primordial sounds 
descend down to our relative planes, where the natural 
sounds, that is, causal sounds of many objects, are not 
represented at all, and those that are represented are 
represented suitably to conditions of relative ears and 
relative tongues. According to the Mantra-Sastra the 
Bija Mantras represent approximately natural names, 
Thus the causal stress of fire is a sound heard by the 
Yogi which is said to be represented for the ordinary 
relative ear as the sound or Bija “Ram” (@®. Vital 
function under different stimuli produces various sounds, 
some of which the ordinary ear hears, but the causal 


, NATURAL NAME 69 


sound of vital function as breathing is represented by 
the Prana-Bija “ Harnsa” and soon. If attention is paid 
to breathing it will be found that the outward breath is in 
the form of the letter Ha and the indrawn breath of Sa. It 
is not possible to indraw the breath and say the letter Ha, 
but it is pushed forth by the outward breath. And so with 
“Om.” The creative energising out of which this world 
evolves is Sabda and it is an immense sound (Nada) to the 
Supreme Har as uttered by the Supreme Tongue which is 
also Nada. But no finite ear can hear it perfectly and no 
finite tongue can utter it perfectly. The sound which has 
descended to us as “Om” cannot therefore be a natural 
name of the creative process in the full sense; but having 
descended through the Manasaputras and a line of Gurus 
each of whom more or less closely approximated to the 
pure sound in his personal experience, it is practically taken 
as an approximate natural name of the initial creative 
action. It is an open continuous sound, uninterrupted by 
any consonant which clips it, vanishing as it were upward 
in the Nadabindu which is placed on the vowel. The same 
observations apply to Harh (&), Yarh (4), Barn (0), Harhsah 
(&&:), and other Bijas. 

So much for “natural name” in the pure sense and 
approximate sense of the term. 

The term “ natural” in this connection can however be 
interpreted in five different senses : 

(1) Sound as produced by causal stress. S’abda is 
stress which may or may not reach the normal of conscious- 
ness. If two things are affecting one another, then the 
name for the total mutual action is stress, of which the 
respective actions of each of those things are the elements 
or partials or components. Thus we have stress for three 
things, for four things, and so on. Ultimately we reach 
universal stress which is an infinite system of correlated 


70 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


forces. A particular thing may be defined as a partial 
experience of this infinite system which has been well 
called by Professor P. N. Mukhyopadhyaya (to whom I 
am indebted in the matter here discussed) “fact section.” 
This experience is Jiva. The infinite system is however 
never really finitized by these partials. When the stress 
between one such partial and another touches the normal of 
consciousness in either or both, we may have under cir- 
cumstances and within certain limits sensation of sound in 
either or both. The stress is Sabda and the sound is 
Dhyani. It is stress or S'abda which constitutes a thing. 
Whether this Sabda is followed or accompanied by a 
certain Dhyvani or not will depend upon (a) the magnitude 
of its action in relation to a percipient subject, and (0) upon 
the condition of the percipient’s perceptive organs. Hence 
in order that the sound of a thing’s constituent stress may 
be heard, the rates of vibration of the air must be such 
and such, the ears and brain must be such and such and so 
forth. Thus most objects of experience, though influencing 
the individual, do not express themselves in sound to him 
such as the earth, rocks, sun, moon, and stars. Sound as 
produced by causal stress and apprehended by the Supreme 
Har and uttered by the Supreme Tongue is natural name in 
its pure sense and in this sense none of our sounds are 
natural. If by this approximate ‘natural name’ of a thing 
we mean its sound (that is, the sound produced in us by its 
causal stress) as apprehended by the relative ear to which 
it is revealed, then most things have no natural names to 
us, though they may have to other beings with different 
perceptive conditions. A being who has an experience of 
the causal stress itself and whose ears (gross or subtle) can 
respond to it in any form (i.e., whatever be the rates of 
vibration of air and ether) knows the natural names 
of all things. Such a Being ig Prajapati Himself and 


— — 


NATURAL NAME 71 


Souls that resemble Him. Hence the natural names of 


such things are revealed through Vakya which, though 
the Jiva may not completely verify now, he may pro- 
gressively verify by personal experience, and ultimately 
completely verify by personal experience too. In this 
sense only do Sruti and Agama, that is, the Tantra 
Sastras, give the natural names of Artha, sensuous or 
supersensuous. The test of a natural name is this—lIf 
“Supreme or Absolute Ear” be defined as that which 
hears causal stress of a thing as such unconditionally, 
then the natural name of a thing is that sound the Supreme 
Kar hears. The relative ear does not hear this and there- 
fore to it this has no natural name. 

(2) Sound as produced by causal stress as projected on 
to our planes, with necessary limitations, through Manasa- 
putras and others. This is approximate natural language, 
and as the Mantras Om, Hath, Ram, and the like; it con- 
stitutes one stratum of the Vedic language. In this case 
the pure sound is represented by a sound capable of being 
heard by the relative ear. The Yogi who hears the Mantra 
“Om” does not hear it as the sound “Om,” but as a sound 
which the relative ear can hear as “Om.” “Om” is thus 
only a gross sound which approximates to the real sound 
only so far as the gross relative ear permits. The pure 
sound is thus represented by its nearest gross equivalent. 

(3) A thing, such as a conch shell or an animal, may 
under the action of external forces give forth variable 
sounds of certain kinds. This may be perceived by us and 
we ordinarily call it its natural sound, and sometimes 
name it after it as “cuckoo,” “crow.” But it is not the 
sound produced by the “causal stress” (which may be 
reduced to the motions of the electrons and therefore un- 
perceived except to the Yogi). Hence we must distinguish 
between the sound produced by causal stress, and the 


72 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


sound which a thing gives forth under the action of stimuli 
such as the crackle (another onomatopoeic name) of fire 
when wood is thrown on it. The latter may be heard but 
the former not. These names, “cuckoo” and so forth, are 
practically regarded as natural names, though according 
to the definition they are not. Such names enter into all 
languages, Vaidik and others. Fire or heat acting upon 
various things may produce various sounds which the 
relative gross ear hears. But its causal stress produces, it 
is said, the sound Rar (®), which Bija Mantra a Yogi alone 
hears. Vital function under different stimuli is producing 
various sounds in the body, some of which may be heard, 
but the causal stress in the form of vital function is repre- 
sented by the Mantra “Harhnsa”’ and so on. Prajapati (as 
above stated) hears the causal sound or Pure Natural Name 
by His Supreme Ear (not gross or physical) and utters it by 
His Supreme Tongue to His Sadhaka, who, not yet possess- 
ing the absolute ear, hears it only imperfectly. This, as 
pointed out before, is the approximate natural name. The 
Primordial Sound is thus somewhat veiled in him. By 
Sadhana he either attains the Absolute Ear or stops short 
of it. In the former case he is like Prajapati Himself. In 
the latter case he communicates by his relative tongue the 
imperfectly heard Primeval sound to his S'isya, who can 
either by Yoga himself verify the archetypal sound, or falls 
Short of it. In this way the Primordial Sounds descend 
down to our relative planes where (a) the natural or causal 
sounds of many objects are not represented at all, and (6) 
those that are represented are so represented suitably to 
conditions of relative ears and relative tongues. But these 
approximate natural names must be distinguished from 
what are popularly called natural names (in the third class), 
which are not sounds of the causal stress but are due to 
the action of external forces on a particular object which is 


a 


NATURAL NAME 13 


constituted of the causal stress, the sound of which is the 
true natural name, pure or approximate. 

(4) There is then a class of secondary natural names, 
that is, those which are not, in the primary sense, purely or 
approximately natural, as sound of causal stress, nor 
natural in the onomatopoeic sense, but which are secondarily 
natural in that they are evolved out of elements of sounds - 
which are primarily (though approximately) natural. 

The Causal Stress when striking the ear produces 
sound, when striking the eye produces light and colour ; 
and when striking other sense organs produces other kinds 
of sensation. The stress or constituting force is one and 
this is S'abda: but it manifests itself differently to the 
different sense organs. If then, instead of calling a thing 
in terms of its sound, it is desired to express it in terms of 
its other manifestations (sensations) to us, we want to 
state its relations to other perceptive faculties, how in such 
cases can this be expressed? The “natural sound” in its 


' primary sense cannot do this; the thing as a whole may be 


best represented by the natural sound, but not its touch, 
colour, taste and smell specifically: yet this latter repre- 
sentation is also important and useful. The sound or Bija 
Rarh ®, for example, may be the approximate natural 
name of Agni, but unless we can grip the causal stress of 
Agni itself, it tells nothing about the attributes and rela- 
tions of the thing with avhith we are practically concerned. 
Ordinarily Rath (%), Hrim (gi), Aim (&), Orn (4) are 
unmeaning. For this reason we hear talk of Mantra being 
“Jabber,” as if any body of men in the world’s history deliber- 
ately occupied themselves with what was in fact meaningless 
jabber. That is not necessarily to say that the theory is 
correct, but that it is not absurd and without sense as sup- 
posed. Now-a-days when the Sistra is nearly lost, it may 
be so in those cases where the Mantras are said without 


74 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


understanding. These Bijas may be made to denote things or 
processes, but ordinarily (unless it is possible to penetrate 
into the kernel itself) they do not connote qualities or attri- 
butes of things; and hence are what J. §. Mill calls non- 
connotative terms. They are however according to S'astra 
really connotative. Hence in the average plane man 
requires other terms besides Ram (x) to represent Agni. 
Suppose we take the quality “ burning” (Dahika-S'akti). 
Then in order to express Agni in terms of this quality we 
may do (or it might have been done for us by linguistic 
tradition) either of two things: (a) Taking the letters 
(Varnas) and remembering that each represents the natural 
sound of a certain thing or process, it is possible to make 
such a permutation and combination of them (taken two 
or more at a time) that “ burning” may be represented by 
the combination thus formed. Here a compound term is 
formed (either by ourselves or by tradition) by the colloca- 
tion in due order of elementary approximate natural sounds 
(viz., the letters). To express the same attribute more 
than one such combination may be possible. (6) Or there 
may exist already simple roots (Dhatu) formed in their turn 
either by the combination of elementary natural sounds or 
in the onomatopoeic fashion (see 8 ante), which with proper 
affixes and suffixes can be made to connote “ burning ” 
and thus evolve the term Agni. Here again, to express the 
same quality or relation, different words may be evolved by 
ourselves or by tradition. Thus there are synonyms or 
Paryaya. These secondary names may be arranged in 
grades in accordance with the degree of their closeness to 
primary names. Hindu philologists distinguish between 
Saktyartha and Laksyartha, that is, Abhidasakti and 
Laksanasakti and classify each. 

This in itself is a vast subject. It is sufficient to say 
here that words have two Vrttis, namely, Abhidha and 


NATURAL NAME 75 


Laksané. The first is Sakti in the sense that it compels 
the understanding of the thing denoted by aword. The 
object “cow” is described by and is the Vakyartha of the 
word or S'abda “cow”. The second only approximately 
denotes the object (Artha). It so to speak leads the hearer 
to the door but does not enter. Laksya is that denoted 
by Lakgana, which means a sign, that is, object denoted 
by a sign. Thus the word Brahman is not Vakyartha of 
the Supreme Brahman (Nirguna-Parabrahma), but it is 
Vakyartha of the Saguna-Brahman. The word Brahman 
is only Laksyartha of the Supreme Brahman. 

We may say that these secondary names are not in- 
different as to their expressiveness of the qualities and 
relations of things. Some do it better and more closely 
than others. Agni, Vahni, Hutasana, and other names 
of Fire are connected with the Bija Mantra Rar (%) in this 
sense, that while the latter approximately represents the 
natural name of the thing as a whole, the former express 
the attributes and relations of the thing specifically regard- 
ed. Hence whilst “ Rath” (%) is apparently non-connota- 
tive, the former are connotative. 

(5) Primary and secondary names may be combined in 
such order (Krama) and metre or harmony (Chandah) that 
by vitalizing one another, these in combination may appear 
as an approximate name ofa thing or process. In this man- 
ner a Vaidik or Tantrik Mantra (consisting of several words) 
may, it is said, naturally denote a Devata or a function. 

Beside these five senses of natural sound of which the 
pure and absolute sense ig that first given, there.is non- 
natural or artificial sound or name, which means an arbit- 
rary name taken at random to denote a thing, such as some 
proper names. 

The test of natural names is, it is said, twofold and 
capable of experimental yerification: (1) Whether the 


76 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


causal stress of a thing makes a sound (say the Bija Yarh) 
may be verified by Yoga. The thing being given, a sound 
evolves. (2) This sound repeatedly and harmonically 
uttered, that is in Japa of Mantra, must create or project 
into perception the corresponding thing. This too is cap- 
able of experimental verification. In this case the sound 
being given, a thing evolves. 


CHAPTER IX 


VAIDIKA-SABDA 


THE Vedas communicate the natural names of some things, 
subject to the necessary limitations involved in their re- 
presentation suitably to conditions of relative ears and 
tongues. No Vedic word is an absolute natural name. 
This cannot be. Just as in the Tantra Sastra we find 
Bija mantras, which are said to represent approximately 
natural names, scattered here and there in a varied mass 
of ordinary Sanskrit which remotely represent natural 
sounds, so is the case in Sruti. There are, it is said, 
closely approximate natural names, combined according 
to natural laws of harmony (Chandah), forming Mantras 
which are irresistibly connected with their esoteric Arthas 
 (Devatiis); but these are commented upon, explained, 
applied and so forth in passages which do not express 
natural names in this sense. On analyzing these Mantras 
themselves, both Vaidik and Tantrik, there are found some 
sounds which are not and others which are in natural use. 
Here each word in the Mantra does not necessarily stand 
for an approximate natural sound (that is produced by 
causal stress). These tendencies to the archetypal forms 
may be varying. But in the Mantra it is their order of 
combination and rhythm that mainly counts. Thus as 
a whole the Mantra may be the approximate natural name - 
of a Devata or function, Its creative and projecting power 


78 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


lies in the two things: (a) The mutual aiding and in- 
hibiting of the sounds in the Chandah; the veils of the 
individual sounds are removed by the order of their colloca- 
tion. Here the “Curves” of sound are constructive and 
not destructive. (b) The cumulative effect of the repetition 
of sounds and strings of sounds also may produce the 
aforesaid result. By repetition is there summation of 
stimuli. 

So that by analyzing the Vaidik language we get 
this: , 

(1) Certain approximate natural names, standing alone 
or in groups, such as Or, Harn, Harhsah, Svaha and go on. 
These are fundamental sounds or primaries. 

(2) Certain combinations of sounds which, though 
not natural distributively, naturalize each other in and 
by the order and harmony of the combinations. Thus arise 
Mantras which become approximate natural names of 
objects and processes. These may gather creative mo- 
mentum by repetition. 

(3) A large mass of sounds or names used to explain 
the meanings and applications and results of the above 
which need not be natural names in the above sense. 

Hence it follows that the Veda which is heard by the 
gross ear and spoken by the gross tongue is not a system 
of natural names. It is however claimed to bea system 
of approximate natural names in varying degreé.. The 
Veda of the Absolute Ear and Tongue is a system of abgo- 
lute natural names. 

Then is the relative and approximate Veda the pri- 
mordial, universal, unitary language? The answer must 
be in the negative, but in the case of the first class of names 
it is amongst all languages most nearly so upon the basis 
of the theory here dealt with. In the second class of names 
it is less so and in the third it is least so, 


VAIDIKA S'ABDA 79 


There are four different strata in Vaidik experience. 
First there is the nameless Supreme Experience; then the 
three above described. Sabda, Artha and Pratyaya are 
absolutely connected in the absolute plane but progres- 
sively less so in the lower strata. The natural connection 
of Sabda and Artha means that the latter being given, 
the former is there whether audible by us or not; the 
former being given, the latter is created or projected. But 
we must distinguish between what is here called natural 
name and what often receives that term. Thus a conch 
shell is blown. What is the natural name here? Not the 
sound which we may make it give forth, for these are 
produced by our effort and vary, but the sound of the 
causal stress which generates and keeps together the shell. 
The blowing sound is only practically natural. What is the 
basis of the Vaidik theory ? In the final resort experimental 
verification is the test of Ayurveda. 

Besides the division of name into natural and arbi- 
trary, of the former into absolute and relative, and of the 
latter into primary and secondary, name may be classified 
according as it is (a) typal or (0) variational, as for exam- 
ple of the first the Sanskrit word “Gauh” and of the 
second the English word “Cow”. Language according 
to Indian notions is not something arbitrary and invented. 
No man ever invented a language. Volapuk, Esperanto 
and the like are mere combinations of the sounds of pre- 
existing language. The Vaidik Language was revealed by 
Isvara to the Manasaputras and others and through them 
to men. This itself as ordinary worldly (Laukika) speech 
became corrupted and when rectified was called Sanskrit, 
that which has been purified, A distinction must therefore 
be made between the original Vaidik language and current 
Sanskrit in which however there are words which also 
occur in the Vedas. Now the ordinary orthodox view is 


{ 


80 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


that there is a typal or standard language and that this is 
the universal language of which all others are variations. 

Whenever a typal or standard name has a variation, 
the following questions arise: (@) When does that varia- 
tion appear and for how long does it last? (b) In what 
places or planes does that variation arise? (c) In what 
persons or groups of persons does that variation appear or 
for whom does it arise ? 

Briefly stated a variation is always subject to condi- 
tions of time, place and person. Then a variation may 
be (a) common (Samanya), or (0) special (Vis‘esa). The 
former is what comprises a whole class of objects. Thus 
“Cow” is a sound yariation appearing in a whole class of 
persons; Gai or Gabhi with another class of persons name- 
ly Bengalis. The special variation is one appearing in an 
individual object. Thus one individual pronounces the 
word “Cow” slightly differently from what another does. 
Every person in fact has his own way of pronunciation. 

Again a variation may be (c) voluntary, or (d) involun- 
tary. The former is due to the free will of a person ora 
group of persons; the latter is not so. 

The typal sounds are eternal. They are latent how- 
ever during cosmic sleep (Susupti). The Samanya varia- 
tions of the typal sounds are not eternal in the sense and 
to the extent that the types are; they appear when the 
conditions of their expressions appear, and disappear when 


these go. 


If we take these four divisions two at a time, we get 
six possible combinations—(1) Common and special varia- 
tion, (2) Common and voluntary variation, (8) Common 
and involuntary variation, (4) Special and voluntary varia- 
tion, (5) Special and involuntary variation, (6) Voluntary 
and ‘involuntary variation. Of these, the first and last 
are impossible, being self-contradictory. Of the remaining 


ral 


VAIDIKA SABDA 81 


four, the second is not eternal. In so far as a common 
variation is due to the free will of a person or persons 
it has an absolute beginning; for if it be simply the 
repetition of a previous cosmic order, then it is not a free 
act but pre-determined. The third class are eternal but 
not to the extent the types are. Comparing them with the 
latter we can say that they are passing, though recurrently. 
Types too are recurrently passing during creation (Srsti) 
and dissolution (Laya), but their cycles of recurrence are 
larger. They are eternal in the full sense in so far as they 
approximate to their type. For the same reasons given as 
regards the second class, the fourth class is not eternal. 
The fifth class is not eternal in so far as it is brought about 
by the part volitions of persons. The whole question is 
however of so great difficulty, that it is difficult to fully 
unravel the tangle in which we find it. How and where are 
we to draw the line between voluntary and non-voluntary, 
between absolute will and finite will? Is again the cosmic 
cycle exactly recurrent or not? From a practical point of 
view we may perhaps not greatly err if we say (1) that the 
general plan and the types are recurrent and eternal; (2) 
that the common variations are recurrent and eternal gsub- 
ject to more conditions; and (3) that the special variations 
are practically not eternal. 

It is claimed for the Veda that it is a system of 
standard and typal and therefore natural names. But 
natural name has, as already explained, various meanings. 
There are therefore different strata of natural name -in 
Veda. Name may be either (a) natural or (b) conventional, 
that is, arbitrary. With the latter we are not here concerned. 
Natural name may be (c) Absolute, that is, as apprehended 
unconditionally, or (d) Relative, that is, as apprehended 
subjected to varying conditions. Veda as a manifesta- 


tion is not the first. Absolute name is only heard on the 
6 


82, THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


unconditioned plane. We are therefore concerned with 
the relative natural name. This may be either (e) primary, 
or (f) secondary. The first is the causal stress, thing or 
functioning as a whole, as represented approximately to the 
relative ear and is again twofold as (g) the elementary 
sounds or letters (Varna), and (h) as compound sounds, 
such as are found in Bijas and roots (Dhatu). In the 
Yoga Bhasya, that is, Vyasa’s commentary on the Patai- 
jala-Darsana (8, 17), it is said: Tatra vagvarnesvartha- 
vatitt. According to this, each letter is intrinsically Sar- 
vabhidhana-sakti-prachita, that is, possessing the power 
(Sakti) to denote and connote all object (Artha). For, 
as the Vis’vasara-Tantra says: ‘‘ What is not here is no- 
where” (Yannehasti na tat kvacit). A letter (Varna) is 
the whole cosmos in miniature. One Varna differs from 
another in the relative latency of the universe of Artha 
involved in it, the universe being the same in both. They 
come to denote special Arthas by virtue of the order 
(Krama) of their collocation (Kramdnuro’vhinorthasam- 
ketenadvacchinnah.) Their particular meanings or Sarketa 
are thus due not to intrinsic difference but to order 
(Krama) in grouping. 

In the relative secondary natural name, functioning 
is specifically represented. The specific attributes and 
relations are given. These again may (i) appeal directly 
to the ear, and be either (7) self-produced, or (%) induced or 
excited; or (4) they may appeal to other senses and either 
(m) consist of single words which are combinations of Var- 
nas themselves, or Dhatus, or (m) of combinations of words 
which may be either (0) harmonic, or (py) non-harmonic 
but Kramic. 

The first and main division of this scheme is into 
natural and arbitrary. As to this it is to be observed that 
all names are made up of elements of sounds or letterg 


VAIDIKA S'ABDA 83 


(Varna). But to naturally connote an Artha, the Varnas 
cannot be arbitrarily selected and arranged. To natur- 
ally represent a given Artha, certain Varnas which are in 
some way connected with that Artha must be chosen and 
arranged according to a certain order (Krama). A word 
in which such selection and order are not in evidence is a 
conventional name, e.g., a telegraphic code (though even 
in this there is a designed Krama), many proper names, 
and algebraical symbols. The Krama of the Vaidika-S'ab- 
das is said to be eternal. To explain this further, let it 
be supposed that it is desired to evolve a certain Artha, 
say an atom of hydrogen. A certain number of moving 
electrons arranged in a certain order must be chosen. The 
number and order being different we have a different kind 
of atom. Suppose again it is desired to evolve water. 
Two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen must be 
taken and so arranged by electric or other influence that a 
molecule H,O is evolved. So also is the case of any com- 
pound material substance. The Varnas are in relation to 
ordinary sounds, what the atoms are in relation to material 
substances. The atoms can be aggregated into molecules 
and things only in certain definite proportions and not 
arbitrarily ; so with the Varnas and natural words. 

Further as radio-activity and other facts prove, an 
atom is a system of moving electrons. It is not therefore 
absolutely simple and elementary. Similarly what we re- 
cognise as the Varnas may not be absolutely simple or 
elementary sounds; they are however so for all practical 
purposes, as the atoms are for all chemical purposes. 
There are about 75° different atoms but the electrons which 
make them up are of the same kind; their number and 
arrangement account for the differences of Oxygen, Hyd- 
rogen, Carbon and other atoms. In the same way the 


1 & : 
19 other atoms have been discovered since. 


LS 


84 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


garland or rosary of letters (Varnamala) may be evolved 
out of the same kind of elementary sound by differential 
aggregation. It may be that the basic elementary sound 
is the uninterrupted Anahata Dhvani finitised into various 
points (Sabdabindu) or atoms (S‘abdaparamanu) of sound. 

So again taking any curve, say a circle-—its circum- 
ference may be regarded as the sum of an infinite number 
of small bits of straight lines: these are the elements. Any 
ritualistic diagram, such as, say, the Sarvatobhadramandala, 
or a Yajna or Homa may be similarly regarded. Hence 
a natural word may be compared to, and in the case of 
a Bija Mantra can be represented by, a diagram (Yantra) 
which in that case, becomes the graph of the Bija in 
question, or of causal stress of which that Bija is the 
acoustic manifestation and counterpart. Lastly an electron 
is an unit charge of electricity, which after all may be only 
an element cf ether in stress. This element of ether in 
stress is Parasabda Paramanu according to the definition 
given; and as heard by the relative ear it is S'abda 
Paramanu. So that this last and the electron are naturally 
connected. Hence Sabdas (aggregates of S'abda paramanus) 
and Arthas (aggregates of electrons) are connected. But as 
electrons aggregated at random will not make a natural 
Artha, so S'abda-Paramanus aggregated at random do not 
make a natural name. 

Physically the vibrations represented by a Varna can 
be resolved into component vibrations which are harmonic 
motions. As Fourier’s theorem gives it, a complex harmonia 
motion may be analysed into simple harmonic motions, 
All the ordinary letters are complex harmonic motions; 
and physically speaking a simple harmonic motion is 
Sabda-paramanu. Physiologically each single vibration 
acting on the ear, nerves and brain centres, produces a 
single pulse of cerebral agitation, a single “ nerve-shock,” 


VAIDIKA S'ABDA 85 


just as a single tap on the door produces a single shock and 
this again a single sound. This single pulse of brain excite- 
ment ought to produce a single pulse of feeling, a feeling- 
atom or a “feeling element,” as W. K. Clifford called it in 
developing his theory “ mind-dust,’” which was controverted 


_by W. James (See Professor P. N. Mukhyopadhyaya’s “ Ap- 


proaches to Truth’). The view of the last mentioned 
author is as follows—lIt is difficult to say in the absence of 
direct Yogic testimony whether these feeling-dusts actually 
exist. Ordinarily we do apprehend the Varnas as being 
themselves elementary or simple sounds; perceptually or 
presentatively they are simple. But they can certainly be 
represented as made up of feeling-dusts, or-what the author 
cited calls Sabda-Paramanus (Sound atoms) each answering 
to a single nerve-shock and to a single external vibration ; 
and for aught we know the feeling-dusts may themselves be 
actually apprehended by the Yogic ears. 

A secondary natural name means this: Take Fire. 
The stress or functioning as a whole which constitutes 
the thing has an acoustic equivalent which is said to be 
approximately Rarh (%). But if we wish to consider and 
speak of the various attributes and relations of the thing 
* Fire” specifically ; if for instance we wish to denote the 
virtue of winding movement which marks tle activity of 
fire (e.g. the vortex of heated gas and the curling up of 
smoke), this specific virtue and relation is not connoted by 
the causal or Bija name (Rar) in particular. Hence taking 
the root “ Ag’ which signifies tortuous movement by 
reason of that particular collocation of these two particular 
Varnas (in fact the unheard causal stress of tortuous move- 
ment itself may have for its approximate acoustic equivalent 
the sound ‘ Ag’) and selecting the proper prefix and suffix, 
we get Agni. Tradition might have -done this, but it is 
possible to coin a new word to connote a particular property 


86 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


of a thing by the process above outlined. Should we wish 
to connote the relation of fire that it purifies, there is the 
root Pu. If it is wanted to connote the relation that it 
consumes all things, there are the two roots “ Hu” and 
“Ash” and the word Hutasana is formed. And so on. 
The Bija name gives the whole-thing-view ; other names 
give side views, specific-relations-views. Agni is called 
Vais'vanara because it is present in Vis’vanara or all 
living beings as the heat of oxidization or combustion ; 
it is called Vahni because it carries (root Vah) offerings 
to the gods; Anala because it pervades (root An—to be) all 
things and so forth. 

The words~ “smooth”, “rough”, “horrible”, “ tre- 
mendous” and so forth are secondary natural names falling 
under the class (2) as appealing to other senses than the ear. 
“Smooth”, “rough” and so forth in utterance produce 
organic sensations (that is, sensations of the organism as 
distinguished from those of the special sense organs) which 
are closely connected with, and suggest, the actual sensa- 
tions of smooth and rough objects. 

Class (¢) directly appealing to the ear refers to ono- 
matopoeic words, which are evidently of two kinds. A cuckoo 
or @ crow itself naturally produces a sound and this directly 
appeals to the ear. On the other hand a flute gives out a 
certain kind of sound, if it is acted upon by a certain 
stimulus. Sometimes a thing may be called after a sound 
which it accidentally produces. Under class (n) we have 
two forms. The Krama in a combination of words may 
be rhythmic or non-rhythmic. The former is Chando- 

baddhavakya. 

When it is said that Veda claims to give the approxi- 
mate natural names of class things and class functions, 
there is thereby practically included the whole scheme 
of natural names. “ Approximate” or dynamical name 


VAIDIKA SABDA 87 


admits of ‘‘ more or less,’ so that the primary group gives 
approximate natural names par ewcellence, and the secon- 
dary group gives in varying degree approximate natural 
names. | Within the secondary group the class (0), that is 
Mantras, represent the closest approximation to natural 
names. 

The test of a natural name is ultimately experimental, 
that is the sound (Sabda) being given, the object (Artha) 
is evolved: the object being given, the sound is evolved. 
In absolute natural names these relations are at- once 
established. In relative names they are established in 
varying measure through Krama and Japa. Ultimately 
the question whether Veda is a system of approximate 
natural names is thus a question of fact. 

This leads to a consideration of the claim made by 
Veda that it is the standard language, an eternal system 
of natural names of which all others are variations. Hitherto 
we have dealt with the matter philosophically. We now 
approach the historical and philological question. The two 
must be kept apart. Much may be said in favour of the 
philosophical theory, namely, that the relation between 
Sabda and Artha is eternal, that there is some Sabda 
which is the natural name of the Artha, that this natural 
language is the standard language, that all others area 
straying away from and variation of the true norm and so 
on. But the point now arises as a question of fact, v22., 
assuming all that is said in theory, is the Vaidika language, 
that is the language in which the Vedas are as they exist 
to-day, the eternal standard language ? The orthodox affirm ~ 
that it is, and that the sound “ Gauh ”’ is the natural name 
and standard representation in speech of the object “ Cow” 
for all eternity. That the relation of Sabda and Artha 
is eternal and that some Sabdas may be natural names of 
objects are philosophically probable. It is however an 


88 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


entirely different matter when it is affirmed that the Vaidika 
speech, as existing to-day is that language. Philologists 
and historians will deny this, for they will point out changes 
in that speech and make claim as regards priority in age 
for the language of other peoples. Assuming that there was, 
as the Biblical tradition runs, once, a universal language, 
it will be denied that the Vaidika language as known to us 
to-day is that. It will moreover be shown that even in 
Veda itself there is evidence to the contrary. Thus it has 
been argued that according to the S'atapatha-Brahmana 
the original language was monosyllabic. With this question 
of philology and history I am not here concerned. But the 
ultimate philosophical question is, ‘‘ Who, if any one, first 
said that this sound meant that thing?” The Indian answer 
is that the relation of the word and the object denoted are 
eternal and not a conventional thing, that there isa system 
of Natural Names, whatever in fact that system may be. 
This stands clear of the claim made for the Vedic language, 
as it exists to-day, that it is that system. 


CHAPTER X 
THE TATTVAS 


A KNOWLEDGE of the Mantra S‘istra involves an under- 
standing of the thirty-six S’aiva-Sakta-Tattvas. Thus 
it is said that Sakti is in Sakti-tattva, Nada in Sadaikhya 
Tattva, Bindu in Is'vara-Tattva. What then are these 
Tattvas to which reference is made both in the Saiva and 
Sakta-Tantras ? Unless these be fully understood, no pro- 
gress in knowledge of the Mantra Science as here described 
may be expected. 


by the term Vimarss. Experience has two elements—the 
“JT” (Aha) and the “ This” (Idarh), the subjective-know- 
ing aspect (Grahaka) of the Self and the objective or known 
(Grahya) aspect of the Self. For it must be remembered 
that an object is nothing but the one Self appearing through 
Maya as non-Self to Itself as subject. At base the ex- 
perienced is nothing but the experiencer : though this is not 
realised until the bonds of Maya which make, subject 


and object appear to be different are loosened. The “I” 


Side of experience is that in which the Self rests in the 
light of one’s own Self without looking towards another 
Ananyonmukhah aham-pratyayah) ; just as the experience 
(Vimars‘a) which looks towards another is called—Idam 
(Yastu anyonmukhah sa idam itt pratyayah). But this 
“Other” can only be the Self, for there is in reality nothing 
but the one Self. It is experienced, however, differently. 


4° 


The Saiva-S'akta Siastra calls experience as Slakti > 


90 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


‘In the Supreme state it exists with the ‘Aham’ in a 
mingled union; in the pure experience between this state 
and Maya the “Other” is recognised to be an aspect of the 
Self; in impure experience governed by Maya the object 
appears to be different from the limited self. 

~Hixperience again is, at its two poles, Perfect Ex- 
perience of the Perfect Universe and the limited experience 
of the three worlds of reincarnation. Between these two 
extremes there are intermediate experiences marking the 
stages whereby the one pure Spirit or Consciousness in- 

volves itself in matter. , 

/The Hermetic maxim says: ‘‘ As above so below.” Si- 
milarly the Vis'‘vasara-Tantra says: “ What is here is there, 
what is not here is nowhere.” Yad thasti tadanyatra, yan 
nehasti na tat kvacit). S'aiva doctrine says: “ That which 
appears without, only so appears because it exists within.” 
(Vartamdndvabhasandm bhadvanam avabhasanam antah- 
sthitavatam eva ghatate bahiradtmana). “The manifesta- 
tion of those things which presently appear, happen in the 
form of external things because they exist within.” “ There- 
fore what exists in our experience, evolved from the Supreme 
also exists in the Supreme experience though in another 
way.’ The Supreme experience called Parasarhvit-is not a 
mere abstract objectless knowing (Jnana). It is the coale- 
scence into one undivided unity of the “I” and the “ This,” 
that is, of Siva and the supreme unmanifested S‘akti. 
The former is the illuminating (Prakasa), knowing aspect, 
and the latter that Vimars’a aspect which is “ the known.” 
But here the two are undistinguishably one. This supreme 
experience has the immediacy of feeling. It is Bliss (Ananda) 
which is defined as ‘‘ Resting in the Self ” (Svarupavis'ranti). 
In the Mayika world the Self concerns itself with what it 


takes to be the non-Self. Here the Universe which is the ; 
object of Sliva’s experience is the Perfect Universe, that ; 


THE TATTVAS 91 


is, Supreme Sakti which is but another aspect of Himself | 
as consciousness. She is beautifully called in the Para- 
pravesika: “The Heart of the Supreme Lord” (H?- 
dayam paramesituh). For the Mayika experiencer (Maya 
pramdatr) the universe is the manifested world of ob- 
jects seen as different from himself. Supreme Siva and’ 
Sakti exist in mutual embrace and love. “Bliss is su- 
preme love” (Niratisayapremdspadatvam danandatvam). 
The Supreme state is described by the Brhadaranyaka- 
Upanisad in the words, “ He indeed was just as man and 
woman in embrace” (S@ ha etaévan asa yatha stripumam- 
sau samparisvaktau); when there is neither within nor 
without, when all thought of lover, loving and loved are 
forgotten in the joy of blissful unity. The experience is 
spaceless, timeless, full, all-knowing, almighty. This is the 
state of Siva without Kala (Niskala) or Paramasiiva. 
This is Parasarhvit which is beyond all Tattvas (Tattvatita). 
As the Perfect Universe it is called Paranada (Supreme 
“Sound”’) and Para-vak (Supreme “ Speech”). Parama- 
siiva is an experience of the Perfect Universe, that is, of 
Paranada (Amarsa paranddagarbhah). Such universe is 
pure Sakti (Sakti-svartipa). 

Our worldly experience is as it were an inverted re- 
flexion of all this seen in the causal waters of Maya. 
Maya-S'akti is the sense of difference (Bhedabuddhi) which 
makes the Purusa, who is subject to it, see the Universe 
in the form of an observing self with a multitude of ob- 
jects conceived of as being outside of and separate from 
it. In the Mayika world each self excludes the other 
selves. In the Supreme experience there is one Self experi- 
encing Itself. The Purugsa igs Consciousness, subject to 
Maya and the five Kantcukas which are limiting forces 
contracting the natural perfections of the Self. Thus the 
Perfect state is formless, the world state is with form : the 


oneew 


92, THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


first is spaceless, timeless, all-pervading, the latter is the 
reverse and so forth. Kala produces limitations of time. 
Niyati destroys independence (Svatantrata), regulating the 
Purusa as to what he should or should not do at any 
given moment of time. The Supreme experience is full 
and in want of nothing (Parna). Raga Kancuka creates 
interest in objects as something other than the self and 
therefore desire for them. The all-knowingness (Sarva- 
jniata) and all-mightiness (Sarvakartrta) of the Supreme 
Siiva are circumscribed through the action of Vidya and 
Kala, and the Purusa becomes a “little knower” and 
“little doer ”’. 

The intermediate Tattvas next described explain the 
process how from the creative aspect of the Perfect Ex- 
perience the imperfect World-experience comes into being. 
Siva has two aspects in one of which He ig Transcendent 
and in the other Creative and Immanent. The creative 
(Sakala) aspect of the Supreme Siva (Niskala-Parama-. 
siva) is called Siva-tattva, wherein is the S’akti called 
Unmani. Through operation in His creative aspect Siva. 
becomes His own object as the Manifested Universe. For 
in truth there is nothing else than Paramasgiiva, Siva: : 
tattva is the first creative movement (Prathama spanda) 
of the Unmoving Paramasiva. Sakti-tattva is only the 
negative aspect of, or in, the Siva-tattva. The function 
of Sakti is to negate (Nishedhavayapararupa s'aktih). 
She who is Consciousness negates Herself, that is, deprives 
experience of the element of objectivity which is Itself as 
Para-Sakti. There is thus left only the other side of 
experience which is Prakas‘amiatra, that is, what we should 
call the “I” (Aharh) side of experience when regarded as 
consisting of an “I” and “ This” (Idarh). Because in this 
experience there is no trace of objectivity whatsoever, 
either of such objectivity latent or expressed as exists in 


THE TATTVAS 98 


the Supreme or other lower and derived form of experience, 
the Siva Tattva is called “ the very void” (Sitinyatisiinya). 
It is the experience in which the Self is not looking 
towards any other (Ananyonmukhah aharmpratyayah). 
The objective content, so to speak, of Consciousness is a 
mere negation. It is Siinya because it is empty of objec- 
tive content. Slakti-tattva is also spoken of as the Will 
(Iccha) of Siva as yet Unmanifest and inseparable from 
Him (Santatasamavayini). 

This account of Sakti’s operation is extraordinarily 
subtle, explaining as it does how the supreme unitary 
experience is also the first source of dual experience. Such 
latter experience and the stages whereby the latter is fully 
developed can only be produced by positing an aspect in 
which there is a breaking up of the unitary experience. This 
is done by first blotting out from the Perfect experience its 
object or the Perfect Universe (Para Sakti, Paranada) 
thus leaving a mere subjectivity. To the subjectivity thus 
disengaged there is again gradually unveiled the universe 
at first as unmanifested and then (through Maya) as mani- 
fested Sakti. In Para Samvit the “I” and the “ This ”’ 
existed as one undistinguishable unity. In Stiva Tattva 
through the operation of the associated Sakti Tattva, the 
“This ” (Idam) is withdrawn from experience go that the 
“T-experience” (Ahari-vimarsa) alone remains. To this 
the ‘Idamn”’ or Universe is again by degrees presented, 
when there is no longer an undistinguishable unity of “I” 
and “This,” but an “I—Thigs” in which both, though 
distinguishable, are yet part of the Self which eventually 
through Maya-Sakti becomes an “I” and “This,” in 
which the two are severed the one from the other. How 
this occurs, the description of the remaining Tattvas ex- 
plains. The Siva-Sakti Tattva is not an emanation, 


_ because it ever remains the same whether in Creation 


94 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


or Dissolution. It is the seed and womb of the whole 
universe. 

The first emanation or manifestation (Abhasa) of and 
by Consciousness is called the Sadakhya or Sadas'iva Tattva. 
Here it is to be observed that the cause ever remains the 
same and what it was, though appearing differently in the 
effect. The Supreme Experience changelessly endures 
even though in its creative aspect it gives birth to the 
Universe. This Abhasa is like the Vivartta of Maya-vada, 
the difference between the two lying in the fact that accor- 
ding to the former the effect is real, and according to 
Sarhkara, unreal. This difference again depends on the 
definition given of “ reality.” 

Real evolution (Parinaima), in which when one thing is 
evolved into another it ceases to be what it was, exists only 
in the compounded products of the material world. 

In Sadasiva-Tattva there is the commencement of the 
first subjective formation of ideas. It is called Nimesa 
(closing of the eyes) as contrasted with Unmesa (opening 
of the eyes) of the next stage of experience. In the former 
the Universe as Sakti is seen only faintly. The Self hazily 
experiences Itself as object. It is the first step in evolution 
and the last in involution. Unmesa is the distinct blos- 
soming (Sphutatvarh) and externalization (Bahyatvam) of 
the Universe. The “ This” (Idarh) is faintly perceived by 
the “I” (Ahan) as part of the one Self, the emphasis being 
therefore on the “I” side of experience, Sadasiiva, is He 
whom the Vaisnavas call Mahavisnu, and the Buddhists, 
Avalokites’vara who sheds compassion on all. According to 
tradition, this is the source whence the Avataras come. It 
is in this Tattva that there is what the Mantra-S‘astra calls 
Nada-Sakti. 

The third stage of the developing consciousness is 
Isvara Tattva, the externalization of the last. The 


THE TATTVAS 95 


Universe (Idarh) is experienced by the “1” (Aham) dis- 
tinctly and yet as part of, and not separate from, the one 
Self. As in the last experience the emphasis was on the 
“ Aham,” here it is on the “Idam.” This Tattva is called 
Bindu in Mantra-S'astra, and is so called because Con- 
sciousness here completely identifies itself with the Universe 
as unmanifested [darh, and thus subjectifies it and be- 
comes with it a Point (Bindu) of Consciousness. Thus by 
way of example the mind is completely subjectified and 
exists for each of us as a mathematical point, though the 
body, to the extent to which it is not subjectified, appears 
as an object or extended thing. 

/Tbe fourth Tattva is known as Vidya, Sadvidya or 
Suddhavidya. In the experience of this stage, emphasis 
is equal on the “I” and the “ This” (Samanddhikaranya). 
In Siva-Tattva there is the I-experience (Aharmm Vimarsa) ; 
in Sadasiva the I-This experience (Aharn-idarn Vimars’a) ; 
‘in Isvara-Tattva the This-I experience (Idamaharn Vimar- 
sia). In each case the stress is laid on the first term. In 
Vidya-Tattva there is an equality of either term in an 
experience which is that of the true relation of the Aham 
and the Idarm, consisting of a synthesis (Sathgamana) of 
the two on asingle “ basis” (Adhikarana) and not on two 
different “ bases” according to the experience of those under 
the influence of Maya (Mayapramatvr), thus eliminating the 
duality which exists in the latter experience. 

“By equality of the “I” andthe “This”, experience 
is in the state of readiness for the next stage in which 
the two are to be severed. Sadvidya as being the inter/ 
mediate stage between the pure (S'uddha) and impure) 
(Asuddha) Creation is called Pardparadasa. It is also. 
spoken of as experience of difference in the form of Mantra 
(Bhedabheda-vimarsanatmaka-mantrarupa). It is experi- 
ence of difference because the Idarm ig separated from 


P=) 


96 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


the Aharn. It is the experience of non-difference because 
they are still regarded as part of one Self. The experience 
is compared to that of the Isvara of the Dvaitavadins, 
who sees the Universe as different from Himself and yet as 
part of and in connection therewith. “ All this is my mani- 
festation” (Sarvo mamdyam vibhavah). The experience 
is said to be in the nature of Mantra, because here we 
are in the region of pure spiritual ideation. As yet there 
is no objective manifestation such as exists in our world. 
Below this Tattva it is said that there were created 
eight Pudgalas, that is, Jivas in the form of knowledge 
(Vijiana-ripa) and then seven crores of Mantras and their 
Mandalas. 

At this point Maya-S’akti intervenes and divides the 
Aham and Idarh, and the Kaficukas or limitations of the 
natural perfections of Consciousness make It subject to 
time and space, birth and death, limitation, and desire for 
object, which It now conceives of as persons and things 
other than Itself. This is the Purusa-Prakrti-Tattva. 
Purusa in S'aiva-Sakta philosophy is the Atma or Siiva 
subject to Maya and the Kaficukas which are limiting 
forces whereby the Self as Pure Consciousness loses Its 
natural perfections. 

Prakrti is the Santa Sakti of Siva in contracted 
form existing as the equilibrium of the Gunas which are 
themselves a gross form of the Saktis of Will (Iccha), 
Action (Kriyé) and Knowledge (Jiiana). All things exist 
in Her who is of the nature of feeling in a homogeneous 
mass. Purusa is enjoyer (Bhokta) and Prakrti the enjoyed 
(Bhogya). The latter is at first the barest objectivity 
seen as different from the experiencing Self as Purusa.. 
Prakrti then differentiates into the Tattvas of Mind 
(Antahkarana), senses (Indriya), and matter (Bhtta) which 
constitute our universe, 


THE TATTVAS 97 


Purusa does not merely mean man nor indeed any ani- 
mal. Hvery single thing in the Universe is Purusa. Thus 
an atom of sand is a Purusa or consciousness, identifying it- 
self with solidity (Prthivi), manifesting its limited Conscious- 
ness as atomic memory and other ways. What Conscious- 
ness thinks, that is, identifies itself with, that it becomes. 

To sum up, the Supreme Experience (Para-sarnvit) 
has a creative aspect (Siva-Sakti-Tattva), which is a 
Consciousness of “I” (Aharh-vimarsa) which gradually 
experiences the Universe (Idarh) as part of Itself, at first 
faintly with predominant ‘I”’, then clearly with predomi- 
nant “This”, and then as equal ‘I and This”, ready for 
severance by Maya. The latter then cleaves consciousness 
in twain, thus setting up a dichotomy of Subject and 
Object, though in truth the object is nothing but the Self 
as its own object. Lastly Sakti, as Prakrti, differentiates 
into the multitudinous beings which make the universe. 
But throughout it is the one and only Siva whether as the 
Supreme Experience or as the Consciousness embodied in 
solid matter. S’akti, Nada, Bindu mentioned in previous arti- 
cles are Sakti-Tattva, Sadakhya-Tattva and Isvara-Tattva 
(here described),considered from the standpoint of the Mantra 
Sastra which treats of the origin of Sabda or Sound. 

With the Tattvas, the Kalas are associated. These 
are the forms of activity (Kriya) of the Tattvas as S‘akti. 
Thus Srsti (Creation) is a Kala of Brahma. Palana (Pro- 
tection) is a Kala of Visnu and Mrtyu (Death) is a Kala of 
Rudra. It is, however, not always as easy to see the appro- 
priateness of the Kalas as in the simple examples given. 
The Sakta Tantras speak of 94 Kalas, namely, 19 Kalas of 
Sadasiva, 6 of Isvara, 11 of Rudra, 10 of Visnu, 10 of 
Brahma, 10 of Fire, 12 of Sun, and 16 of Moon. 

According to Saubhagya-ratnakara the 19 Kalas of 


Sadasiva are Nivrtti, Pratistha, Vidya, Santi, Indhika, 
E , ; 


98 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Dipika, Recika, Mocika, Para, Suksmamrta, Jnanamrta, 
Amrta, Apydyani, Vyapini, Vyomaripa, Miulavidyaman- 
trakala, Mahamantrakala, Jyotiskala. 

The 6 of Isvara are Pita, Seta, Nitya, Aruna, Asita, 
Ananta. . 

The 11 Rudra Kalas are Tiksna, Raudri, Bhaya, Nidra, 
Tandra, Ksudha, Krodhini, Kriya, Utkari, Amaya, Mrtyu. 

The 10 of Visnu are Jada, Palini, Santi, Isvari, Rati, 
Kamika, Varada, Hladini, Priti, Diksa. 

The 10 of Brahma are Srsti, Rddhi, Smrti, Medha, 
Kanti, Laksmi, Dyuti, Sthira, Sthiti, Siddhi. 

The 10 of Fire are Dhamrarci, Usma, Jvalini, Jvalini, 
Visphulingini, Susri, Surapa, Kapila, Havyavaha, Kavyavaha. 

The 12 of Sun are Tapini, Tapini, Dhismra, Marici, Jvalini, 
Ruci, Susumna, Bhogada, Vis’va, Bodhini, Dharini, Ksama. 

The 16 of Moon are Amrta, Manada, Pasa, Tusti, Pusti, 
Rati, Dhrti, Sasini, Candrika, Kanti, Jyotsna, Srih, Priti, 
Angada, Purna, Paurnamrta. 

Out of these 50 are Matrka-Kalas which manifest through 
the Pasyanti, Madhyama, and Vaikhari stages (Bhava) as 
the gross letters (Varna). The 50 Matrka-Kalas are given 
in the same account as follows: Nivrtti, Pratistha, Vidya, 
Santi, Indhika, Dipika, Recika, Mocika, Para, Suksma, 
Sakgmamrta, Jianamrta, Apyayani, Vyapini, Vyomarupa, 
Ananta, Srsti, Rddhi, Smrti, Medha, Kanti, Laksmi, Dyuti, 
Sthira, Sthiti, Siddhi, Jada, Palini, Santi, Aiyvarya, Rati, 
Kamika, Varada, Ahladini, Pritih, Dirgha, Tiksna, Raudri, 
Bhaya, Nidra, Tandra, Ksudha, Krodhini, Kriya, Utkari, 
Mrtyurupa, Pita, Sveta, Asita, Ananta. These 94 Kalas are 
worshipped in the Wine Jar which holds Tara dravamayi, 
or the Saviour-Mother in liquid form. She Herself, is called 
Sarhvit-Kala and so the Yoginihrdaya-Tantra pays— 

Desakalapadarthatma yad yad vastu yatha yatha. 

Tat-tadripend ya bhati tam sraye Samvidam Kalam. 


CHAPTER XI 
SAKTI—POTENCY TO CREATE 


In the previous chapter I have referred to Sakti, Nada, 
Bindu. In this and the two next I will deal in greater 
detail with each of these three concepts of Sakti. One 
of the clearest accounts known to me of the evolution of 
Sakti is that given in the authoritative Tantrika-Prakarana 
called Srada (also spelt Sarada) Tilaka by Laksmana- 
carya. This work was formerly of great authority in 
Bengal. Its value is much increased by the commentary of 
Raghava-Bhatta. As this work with its commentary is of 
prime importance, and is cited throughout the following 
chapters, I may here note the following account which 
Laksmanacarya gives of himself at its close. Maha- 
bala a great sage was succeeded by his son Acaryapandita, 
a Desika (Tantrik-Guru). His son S'rikrsna-Desika had 
a son Lakgmana-Desika who wrote the S‘arada-Tilaka. 
Raghava, in his commentary called Padarthadarsa, says 
that Lakshmana was the disciple of Utpalacarya, who 
was the disciple of Somananda, who was the disciple of 
Vasugupta, who was the disciple of Srikantha. This is the 
-Gurupangkti of Laksmana. His disciple was the great 
Kasmirian Abhinava-Gupta, the author of Paramartha- 
sara. The latter’s disciple was Ksemaraja, the author of 
the Sivasttra-Vimarsini. The date generally assigned 
to Abhinava-Gupta is the eleventh century. Therefore 
9j. Aksaya Kumara Maitra, Director of the Varendra Anu- 
sarndhana-Samiti, who has supplied me with these details 


100 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


of the Gurus and Sisyas of the author, concludes that 
the Sarada was written at the end of the tenth or begin- 
ning of the eleventh century. Raghava mentions 1510 as 
the age of his commentary. Taking this to be the Vikrama 
Sathvat we get 1454 a.p. as its date. These details serve 
another purpose. There are persons who insist on a total 
disconnection between the Saiva and Slakta-Tantras. 
Laksmanacarya was a member of the Kasmirian S‘aiva 
School, and his work was, as I have stated, of great 
authority among the Bengal Saktas. 

The Sarada (Chapter, I, verse 7) says: “ From Sakala- 
Paramesvara vested with the wealth of Sat, Cit, Ananda 
issued Sakti; from Sakti came Nada; and from Nada 
issued Bindu.” 


Saccidananda-vibhavat sakalaét paramesvarat 
Asic-chaktis tato nado naddd bindu-samudbhavah. 


Parames'vara is here Siva-Tattva. He is Sakala, because 
He is with the creative Kala or Sakti. As already 
explained Sakti, when Vyastiraipa, that is individualised, is 
called Kala. Siva is always with Sakti. But in the 
supreme state, S’akti is unmanifest and exists in Her own 
(Svaripa) form ag Being-Consciousness-Bliss (Sacchida- 
nandamayi, Cidrdapini), undistinguishable from Siva. 
Sakala-Siva is thus Saguna-Brahman. He is said to be 
vested with the wealth of Sat, Cit, Ananda or Being, 
Consciousness and Bliss to show that His association with 
Avidya does not deprive Him of, or affect, His own true 
nature (Svartipa). Siva has two aspects. In one of these 
He is the Supreme Changeless One who is Saccidananda 
and Saccidanandamaya. This ig Para-sarhvit. In the 
other He changes ag the Universe; change being the 
experience of the Jiva so created. The cause of such change 
is Siva-Tattva inseparably associated with S‘akti-Tattva, 


S'AKTI—POTENCY- TO CREATE 101 


“There issued Sakti.” This is S'akti-Tattva of the 
Thirty-six Tattvas. S'akti evolves Nada, and Nada, Bindu. 
These are aspects of Sakti preparing to create the Uni- 
verse and are dealt with in future chapters. Here I am 
concerned with Sakti-Tattva only: that is, with that form 
of Sakti which is specifically so called; since Nada, Bindu 
and the rest are all but names for different aspects of S'akti. 

It may be asked how Sakti can be said to issue from 
that which was already with Sakti. Raghava-Bhatta 
' explains that the author here follows the Samkhya principle 
of the appearance of realities from realities (Sadutpattivada) 
and speaks of the condition of readiness (Ucchinavastha) 
of Her who being without beginning or end existed in a sub- 
tle state identified with Caitanya in Dissolution (Y@ anadi- 
riupa carttanyd-dhyasena Mahdpralaye stiksma sthitd). 
Adhyasa is the attribution of the nature of one thing to 
another according to which something is considered to be 
what it is not. In other words during Dissolution there is 
some potential principle in the Brahman which, as manifest, 
appears not to be Consciousness (Cit), but which owing 
to the absence of operation during the dissolved (Laya) 
state is identified with Cit. The distinction ig very subtly 
marked by the Sanskrit word Cit for Siva and Cidra- 
pini for Sakti. Cit is there in either case, for ultimately 
there is nothing but Consciousness. But that principle 
which in creation manifests as seeming Achit is in itself 
Cidrapini. One is Consciousness and the other is a 
principle in the form of Consciousness. I prefer to look at 
Sakti from the Consciousness aspect which is Her own 
form (Svartipa) and to say that S'akti in Dissolution is 
what She really is, namely, Cit. In creation Conscious- 
ness, a8 Sakti, has power to veil Its own true nature, and 
when we are ourselves subject to this power we attribute 
unconsciousness to It. The substance in either case is 


102 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


this: In Dissolution, Consciousness and Bliss alone is. 
Then without derogation to the changelessness of Con- 
sciousness there is an apparent dichotomy into subject 
and object, that is, Consciousness and Unconsciousness. 
Sakti is conceived as ready to create the Universe com- 
posed of Gunas as its effect (Karya). In other words, 
pure Consciousness becomes the world-experience. The 
Prayogasara says: “She, who is eternal and all-pervading, 
the Genetrix of the Universe, issues from Him.” Vayaviya- 
Samhité says: “By the will of Siva, Para-S'akti is united 
with Siva-tattva and at the beginning of Creation appears 
from It just as oil from sesamum seed when pressed.” The 
Pancaratra is also cited by Raghava-Bhatta as saying, 
“The Parama Puruga at the beginning of Creation, seeing 
that She who is Saccidanandaripini is the source 
(Adhisthana) of the manifestation of all Tattvas makes 
manifest eternal Prakrti.”’ These statements, like all our 
accounts in such matters, are pictorial thinking, being 
necessarily imperfect attempts to explain the manifestation 
of activity of Consciousness. 

Cause and effect are really one, but appear different. 
The first aspect of Slakti is its causal (Karana) aspect. 
But this again may be analysed into the various stages 
of its capacity and preparedness to create. These stages 
are marked by certain names which again are mere labels 
denoting states of Sakti. Thus Nada and Bindu are 
names for those aspects of Sakti which are more and more 
prone to Creation (Ucchinavastha). Nada and Bindu 
are but two states of Her Creation (Srstyupayogya- 
vastharupau). Sakti-Tattva is the first kinetic aspect of 
Brahman. Sakti then becomes more and more kinetic 
until, as Bindu, Sakti is Isvara-Tattva. This Bindu 
differentiates into the Triangle of Divine Desire called the 
Kamakala upon which there ig that Brahman Sound 


S'AKTI—POTENCY TO CREATE 103 


(Sabda-brahman), which bifurcating into Sabda and 
Artha, is Sakti in its aspect as effect (Karya) or the 
manifested Universe of Mind and Matter. This “ Tantrik”’ 
account gives firstly an apparent “development” in the 
causal body of Sakti being in the nature of a resolution 
of like to like; and then a real development (Parinama) of 
the effects (Karya) produced from the causal body. The 
whole is necessarily described after the manner of a gradual | 
process stated in terms of our own psychological experience. 
But such a process exists only in time which first. appears 
with the Sun and Moon. Bhaskararaya in his commentary: 
on the Lalita Sahasranaima (Verse 117) cites Goraksanatha 
as saying in his Maharthamajjari, “ In a moment the world i 
is created and in a moment it is destroyed.” 
Sakti-Tattva and Siva-Tattva are inseparable (San- 
tata-Samavayini), the former being only the negative as- 
pect of the latter. Both exist even in Dissolution, the 
first emanation proper being Sadakhya which corresponds 
with Nada in the above mentioned verse. Siva-Tattva is i 
defined in the Tattva-Sandoha 1, as follows: ‘ That, beyond \ 
which there is none other, moved of His own will in order | 
to create the whole world. The first movement (Spanda 
prathama) is called the S'iva-Tattva by those who know.” | 


Yad ayam anuttaramurtir 
nijgecchyakhilam idam jagat srastum 
Paspande sah spandah 
prathamah S‘iva-tativam ucyate tajjnaih. 

As the Vimarsini on the Pratyabhijna says—lIt is the 
“T-experience not looking towards another” (Ananyon- 
mukhah ahampratyayah). Itiis the self-side of experience, 
Prakasa or Jianamatra, which is such, because of the nega- 
tion of all objectivity or not-self by Sakti-Tattva. For this 
Jnhanamatra, She, as Vimarsa-Sakti, provides through 
gradual stages the objects of its experience. Her function is 


104 THR GARLAND OF LETTERS 


negation (Nisedha-vyadpara-rapa S‘aktih) of all objectivity 
80 as to produce the mere subjective knowing (Prakas’a- 
matra) which is the S‘inyatistinya. She then evolves from 
Herself the objective world in order that it may be the con- 
tent of the Siva consciousness. She ig pure Will ever asso- 
ciated with Siva. She is the seed of the whole Universe of 
moving and unmoying things then absorbed in Herself. 
LIccha saiva svaccha 
santatasamavayini sati s'aktih. 
Sacardcarasya jagato 
bijam nikhilasya nijanilinasya. 
(Tattva-Sandoha, 2.) 

She is thus called the Womb (Yoni), or Seed-state 
(Bijavastha), and by the Paradpravesika, “Heart of the 
Supreme Lord” (Hrdayarn Paramesituh). The Yogini- 
hrdaya-Tantra says that men speak of the heart of Yogini; 
She is Yogini because She is connected with all things 
both as Cause and Effect. This Yogini is knower of Herself 
(Yogini svavid). She is called the Heart: for from the 
Heart all issues. She is the Heart of the Universe: the 
pulsing movements of which are Herself as Sakti. What 
more can be said than the words of the Yoginihrdaya, 
“What man knows the heart of a woman, only Siva knows 
the heart of Yogini.” 

In the Pratyabhijia-Hrdaya (Su 4) itis said, “The auspi- 
cious supreme S‘iva desiring to make manifest the Universe 
which is one with Himself first of all shines forth as the one 
Cit as the Very Void detached from Maya (that is, there is 
no objectivity) and as undifferentiated Illumination (that is, 
Prakasa or Jfiana). He then next appears in the form of 
diverse experiencers consisting of an infinite endless number 
of Tattvas, words and beings which are in the nature of a 
blooming forth of Consciousness and Bliss.” (Sv t-parama- 
sivah svdimaikyena sthitam visvam avabibhadsayisuh 


— 
=< “ag 


SAKTI—POTENCY TO CREATE 105 


pirvam cidaikyakhyati maydnasritasiva-paryayastinyati- 
stinydtmataya prakas'abhedena prakas'amdanataya sphuratt ; 
tatah cid-rasas'yanataripdasesa-tativa-bhuvanabhava-tattat- 
pramatiradyadtmataya pi prathate). 

The substance of the matter may be stated thus: 
whilst from the static transcendental aspect (Paras'iva, 
Paras’akti) Consciousness changelessly endures, there is 
from the kinetic creative aspect (Siiva-Sakti) a polarisa- 
tion in consciousness, the poles of which are Siva and 
Sakti representing the Aharh and Idatm aspects of experi- 
ence. Owing to this polarisation there is in lieu of the 
unitary experience a division into the knower, knowing 
and known, Matr, Mana, Meya, as it is called. Conscious- 
ness then identifies itself with the products of its own 
kinetic Sakti, that is, with mind as the subject of experi- 
ence and with matter as its object. This polarisation is 
explained in the Sakta-Tantras by the illustration of the 
grain of gram (Canaka). Under the sheath of the grain 
of gram two seeds are found in such close union that they 
appear when held together as one. With, however, the 
tearing of the outer sheath the two halves of the seeds 
fall apart. These two seeds are said to be S'iva and S'akti 
and the encircling sheath is Maya. Like all attempts to 
explain the unexplainable, the illustration is to some extent 
defective, for in the gram there are two separate seeds 
—but Sliva-S'akti are an undistinguishable unity. The 
commentator on the Sat-cakraniripana (Serpent Power) 
cites the following: (vy. 49): “In the Satyaloka is 
the formless and lustrous One. She is like a grain of 
gram devoid of hands, feet or the like. She has sur- 
rounded Herself by Maya. She is Sun, Moon and Fire. 
When casting off (Utsrjya) the covering She divides in 
two (Dvidha bhittva) and becomes intent on (Unmukhi) 
creation, then by differentiation of Siva and Sakti arises 


106 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


creative ideation (Srsti-kalpana).’ By “ differentiation” 

is meant the polarisation of Consciousness into subjective 
| (Prakaya) and objective (Vimarsa) aspects. The Self 
Sees another. The same commentator cites the Prapanca- 

sara Tantra as saying that the Parabindu divides into two 
parts, of which the right is Bindu, the male, Purusa or 

Hath, and the left is Visargah, the female Prakrti or Sah. 

Harhsah is the Union of Prakrti and Purusa and the 

Universe ig Harmsa. In, however, the MSS. on which 

my edition of this Tantra is based it is said that 

Parabindu divided by Kala becomes threefold—Bindu, 

Nada, Bija. The difference is of no moment for this 

Bindu (Karya) is Siva and Bija is Sakti, and Nada 

is merely the relation (Mithah-samavayah) of the two. 

The combined Hamsah indicates the same relation as 

is expressed by Nada. In the Kulactidamani Nigama 

(Chap. I, vv. 16-24), the Devi says of the first stage: 

“I, though in the form of Prakrti, lie hidden in Being- 

consciousnegs-bliss (Aham prakrtirapad cet saccidananda- 

i Parayana). Then in the initial creative stage when Karma 
i “pens the Deyi in the words of the Nigama “ becomes 
desirous of creation and covers Herself with Her own 
Maya.” This ig the appearance of the kinetic Sakti. The 
Same doctrine ig stated with greater or legs detail in 
various ways, Unitary experience, without ceasing to be 
such, is yet, as Jiva polarised into the dual experience 
of the Mayika world. Consciousness ag GCit-Sakti and 
Maya-Sakti Projects from itself, in a manner conformable 
with our own psychological experience, the object of its 
experience. The Mayika experiencer (Maya-pramatri) takes 
what is one to be dual or many. This is the division of 
Siva and Sakti Which are yet eternally one. All action 
implies duality, Duality is manifestation. Manifestation is 
nothing but an appearance to consciousness. As there is 


S'AKTI—POTENCY TO CREATE 107 


ultimately but one Self, the Self appears to itself; that is, 
consciousness is polarised. ‘hese two poles are the con- 
tinuity of the “I’’ (Aham) and its ever changing content 
which is “ This’ (Idarh). 

Just as there is absolute rest and a world movement, 
so Sakti or Creative Consciousness is itself of twofold 
aspect, static and dynamic. Cosmic energy in its physi- 
cal aspect is potential or kinetic, the first being that state 
in which the equilibrated elements of Power hold each 
other in check. It is not possible to have one without the 
other. In any sphere of activity, according to these views, 
there must be a static background. If one Spiritual Reality 
be assumed it cannot be actually divided into two. It is 
possible, however, that there should be a polarisation in 
your experience whereby what is indivisibly one and the 
self, appears as many and the not-self. How? The answer 
is Maya, that Power of Her whereby what is impossible to 
us becomes possible. Maya is Sakti, but Sakti is not to 
be identified only with this form of It. In the thirty-six 
Tattvas, Maya is a particular and comparatively gross 
form of Sakti which appears after the evolution of the 
Sadvidya-Tattva. It is defined as that Sakti which is 
the sense of difference (Bhedabuddhi) ; that is, the power 
whereby the individual consciousness, distinguishing itself 
from others, considers itself separate from them. Sakti 
is understood differently in the Sakta Tantra and in 
Sarmkara’s Mayavada; a matter of primary importance 
from the point of view of Sadhana and with which I will 
deal on some future occasion. Whatever be the description 
given, all accounts must end in the inconceivable Sakti 
(Acintya). She the One, the Primordial Sakti (Adya- 
Sakti) appears as many; and so the S/akta Sadhaka 
saying, “ Aham Devt na canyosmi” (I am the Devi and 
none other), thinks to himself “ Sa’harn”’ (She am I). 


CHAPTER XII 
NADA—THE FIRST PRODUCED MOVEMENT 


S'AKTI-TATTVA dealj with in the preceding chapter is 
really the negative aspect of the S‘iva-tattva. Though 
spoken of separately the two are indissolubly one. Sakti- 
tattva, as the Tattva-sandoha says, is the Will of Siva as 
yet unmanifest : 

Iccha saiva svaccha santatasamavayini satt s'aktih. 

Sacaracarasya jagato bijam nikhilasya nuanilinasya. 

These two principles (S'iiva-S'akti-Tattva) are the 
ultimate Potency of creation, and as and when they (con- 
sidered as one Tattva) commence to act, the first movement 
towards manifestation takes place. After the previous 
restful state of Siva-Sakti there follows the union for 
the purpose of creation of the two principles which are 
Sivatattva and Slaktitattva. So it is said in the Sakta- 
Tantra, “Siiva-Sakti-samayogat jayate srstikalpana” (From 
the union of Siva and Sakti arises creative ideation). 
This union and mutual relation is called Nada. As the 
relation is not some substantial thing apart from Sjiva 
or Sakti, Nada ig really Siva-Sakti ; passing from the 
state of mere potency into that of the first ideating 
movement, from which at length, when finally perfected, 
the whole universe is evolved. The Sakta-Tantras frequently 
employ erotic symbolism to explain the creative pro- 
cess. This has led a missionary author to the conclusion 
that “throughout its symbolism and pseudo-philosophisings 


NADA—THE FIRST PRODUCED MOVEMENT 109 


there lies at the basis of the whole system ... the con- 
ception of the sexual relationship as the ultimate ex- . 
planation of the universe.” An American author reviewing 
one of my works has called it “a doctrine for suffragette 
monists ’’—“ religious feminism run mad.” Both statements 
are examples of those depreciative misunderstandings 
which are so common in Western descriptions of Eastern 
belief and which seem so absurd to anyone who has under- 
stood the subject. How can “sexual relationship” which 
exists on the gross plane of matter be the ultimate explana- 
tion of That which has manifested not only this but all 
other relations and subjects. As for “feminism” and the 
supposed priority of the feminine principle, the doctrine 
has no more to do with either than with old age pensions 
or any other social question. We are not dealing with the 
biological question whether the female antedates the male 
principle, of the social question of the rights of Woman, 
but with those ultimate dual principles, aspects of the one 
active Consciousness, which projects from Itself both man 
and woman and all other dualities on the universe. Siva 
and Sakti are one and neither is higher than the other. 
But how are Huropean writers to be blamed when we find 
a distinguished Indian Sanskritist affirming that according 
to Sakta doctrine “God ts a woman” (the italics are mine). 

Sakti is spoken of as female, that is, as Mother, be- 
cause that is the aspect of the Supreme in which It is 
thought of as the Genetrix and Nourisher of the universe. 


But God is neither male nor female. As the Yamala says 


for the benefit of all such ignorance, “ Neyam yosit na 
ca pumdn na sando na jadah smrtah.” These are all 
symbolisms borrowed from the only world which we ordi- 
narily know—that around us. As for the charge of pseudo- 
philosophy, if it be that, then same criticism must apply 
to the Advaitavada Vedanta. For the Sakta-Tantra is 


110 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


the Sadhana-s’astra of Advaitavada presenting the teachings 
of Vedanta in its own manner and in terms of its own 
ritual symbolism. Thus it is said that Nada is the Maithuna 
of Siva and Sakti and that when Mahakala was in Vipa- 
rita Maithuna with Mahakali (a form of Maithuna again 
which is symbolical of the fact that Siiva is Niskrya and 
Sakti Sakrya) there issued Bindu. For Maithuna, others 
substitute the logical term Mitha-samavayah as a descrip- 
tion of Nada, which is Kriyasakti. Before the appearance 
of Sabda there must be two. Unity is necessarily action- 
less. Two involves a third—which is the relation of both; 
a Trinity of Power which is reflected in the Trimirti of the 
Mayika world as Brahma, Visnu, Rudra. 

From Nada came Mahabindu and this latter differenti- 
ated into the Tribindu which is Kamakala, the Mula of 
all Mantras. In Pralaya, Siva and Sakti exist as the 
“two in one”; Siva as Cit, Sakti as Cidrapini; the Para 
Sakti—not being different or separated from Siiva (Avina- 
bhavasambandha) and being undivided supreme Cit-S’akti 
(Akhanda-paracicchakti). } 

The Sarada-Tilaka (1-7) then says: From the Sakala- 
Paramesvara vested with the wealth of Saccidananda 
(Saccidadnandavibhavat) appeared Slakti (S'akti-Tattva) ; 
from S'akti, Nada and from Nada, Bindu (Mahabindu). 
Sakala means with Kala; that is, the Brahman with what 
the Sarhkhya calls Milaprakrti, that which the Vedanta 
calls Avidy& and the Sakta-Tantras or Agamas call Sakti. 
On the other hand Niskala Sliva ig Nirguna Siva or that 
aspect of the Brahman which is unconnected with the 
creative Sakti; just as Sakala-Siva is the Brahman 
so associated. Siva in either aspect is always with 
Sakti; for Sakti is but Himself; but whereas the Sakti 
associated with Paramasiva is Cidrapini and Visvot- 
tirna or beyond the Universe, the Sakti which is associated 


NADA—THE FIRST PRODUCED MOVEMENT 111 


with the creative Siva is that which appears as Uni- 
verse (Vis'vatmika). The Parasakti is one with Caitanya 
at rest. The other aspect which ripens into Nada and 
Bindu denotes the “swollen” condition of readiness 
(Ucchinadvastha) of Her who existed in a subtle state 
in the great dissolution (Mahapralaya). These two Saktis 
(Nada, Bindu) are stages in the movement towards the 
manifestation of the Self as object, that is, as the 
Universe. 

In these, the mere readiness or potency of S'aktitattva 
to act develops into action. In Nada-S'akti therefore Kriya 
predominates. When we speak of stages, development and 
so forth, we are using language borrowed from the mani- 
fested world which, in the sense there understood, are 
not appropriate to a state prior to manifestation;. for 
such manifestation does not take place until after the 
appearance of the Purusa-Prakrti-Tattva and the deve- 
lopment from the latter of the impure Tattvas from 
Buddhi to Prthivi. But a Sadhana S/stra, even if it had 
the power to do otherwise, could not usefully use terms 
and symbols other than those borrowed from the world of 
the Sadhaka. The Prayogasira says that the Sakti who 
is “turned towards” the state of Liberation (Niramaya-pa- 
donmukhi) awakes as Nada and is turned to Siva (Stivon- 
mukhi) at which time She is said to be male (Pumrtipa). 
For then She becomes Hath in Harhsah. She who was 
one with Parasiva in Pralaya as the coalesced “I” (Aharh) 
and “ This” (Idarn), now in Her creative aspect as Sakti- 
tattva transforms Herself into Nada. Nada is action 
(Kriyasaktiripa). In simple language, potency and readi- 
ness to create, (Saktitattva), becomes for the first time 
active as Nada, and then more so as Bindu, which is a 
further development of Kriya S/akti dealt with in the next 
chapter. 


Soot ect 


112 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


According to Raghava-Bhatta in his Commentary on 
the Sarad&é some writers do not speak of Nada, though 
the author of the Sarada does so in order to indicate the 
sevenfold character of Tara. The Nada state is however 
indicated by those Acaryas who speak of Kala. So itis 


said, “in the Kalatattva which is Sound” (Ravdimani-— 


kalatattve). In the Hymn to Bhuvanesi also it is said, 
“Obeisance to Thee who art called Tattva in the charac- 
ter of sound” (Namaste ravatvena tattvabhidha me). 

Nada occupies the same place in the Mantra scheme as 
the Sadakhya-Tattva of the 36 Tattvas, for Bindu is Is'vara 
Tattva. They are each transcendent aspects of S'abda in 
the respective Tattvas. As Consciousness reaches forth to 
enjoyment and the “I” is separated from the “ This,” what 
was mere diffusive consciousness as Sadakhya-Tattva is 
objectified into the all embracing Akaga, the Guna of 
which is gross Sabda; that is some thing experienced as 
an object apparently different from and other than ourselves. 

Nada which etymologically means “Sound” is a 
technical term of the Mantrasdstra. The latter S‘astra 
is concerned with Mantravidya, and Mantra is manifested 
S'abda which also literally means “ Sound.” By “ Sound ” 
of course is not meant gross sound which is heard by the 
ear and which is the property of the Karyakasa developed 
as a Vikrti from the Prakrti-Tattva which, with the 
Purusa-Tattva, occupies the place (though without its 
dualities) of the Purusa and Prakrti of the Sarhkhya. 
Gross sound belongs to the impure creation as Guna of 
Akasa, or the ether which fills Space. To avoid miscon- 
ception, it is better to use the word S'abda which with 
Artha is manifested in the “Garland (or Rosary) of Letters” 
(Varnamala) with which I will later deal. 

Nada is the most subtle aspect of Sabda, as the 
first putting forth of Kriyasakti, Paranada and Para 


NADA—THE FIRST PRODUCED MOVEMENT 118 


Vak are Parasakti. Nada into which it evolves in the 
unmanifested (Avyaktatma) seed or essence (Nadamatra) 
of that which is latter manifested as Sabda, devoid of 
particularities such as letters and the like (Varnddivt- 
sesa-rahitah). It develops into Bindu which is of the 
same character. From the Mantra aspect, as the source 
of S'abda, this Mahabindu as it differentiates to “create” 
is called the Sabda-brahman. Bindu when differentiated 
is also the source of the Vikrtis or Tattvas and of their 
Lords (Tattves‘a). In its character as S'abda-brahman 
it is the source of the manifested Sabda and Artha (S'ab- 
dasabdarthakaranam). S'abda-brahman is thus a name 
of Brahman as the immediate creative source of the 
manifold Sabda and Artha. 

What S'abda-brahman is, has been the subject of con- 
tention, as Raghava-Bhatta’s Commentary shows. It is 
sufficient to say here (where we are only concerned with 
Sabda-brahmatmaka Bindu go far as it is necessary to 
explain Nada) that Raghava-Bhatta says the Slabda- 
brahman is the Caitanya in all beings (Caitanyam sarva- 
bhitanam). This cosmic Sakti exists in the individual 
bodies of all breathing creatures (Prani) in the form of 
Kundalini (Kundalirtiipa). Nada therefore which assumes 
the aspect of Bindu is also Caitanya and S'akti. Nada 
is thus the first emanative stage in the production of 
Mantra. The second is Bindu, or S'abda-brahman; the 
third is Tribindu (Bindu, Nada, and Bija) or Kamakala; 
the fourth is the production of S’abda as the Matrkas 
which are the subtle state of the subsequently manifested 
gross letters (Varna); and the last is these gross letters 
(Sthilasabda), which compose the manifested S’abda or 
Mantra composed of letters (Varna), syllables (Pada) 
and sentences (Vakya). Thus Mantra ultimately derives 
from Nada which is itself the Kriya-yaktirupa aspect of 

8 


114 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Siva-Sakti who are the Supreme Nada (Paranada) and 
Supreme Speech (Para-vak). The Prayogasara says: “ Oh 
Devi! that Antaratma in the form of Nada (Nadatma) itself 
makes sound (Nadate svayar),” that is, displays activity. 
“Urged on by Vayu (that is, the Prana-vayu in Jivas) it 
assumes the form of letters.’ Nada again is itself divided 
into several stages, namely, Mahanada or Nadanta, the 
first movement forth of the Sabda-brahman; Nada, when 
Sakti fills up the whole Universe with Nadanta, in other 
words, the completed movement of which Nadanta is the 
commencement; and Nirodhini, which is that aspect of 
Nada in which its universal operation having been com- 
pleted, it operates in a particular manner and is trans- 
formed into Bindu, which is the completion of the first 
movement of Sakti, in which She assumes the character 
of the Creative Lord of the Universe (Iyvara-Tattva). 
Nadanta considered as the end and not the commencement 
of the series is that in which there ig dissolution of Nada 
(Nddasya antah layah). Above Bindu, the S'aktis which 
have been already given in! previous articles become more 
and more subtle until Niskala Unmani is reached which, 
as the Yoginihrdaya says, is uncreate motionless speech 
(Anutpannanispanda-vak), the twin aspects of which are 
Sarhvit or the Void (Sanya-Sarhvit) and Samvit as tendency 
to manifestation in a subtle state (Utpatsuh samvid utpat- 
tyavastha suksma@). Unmani is beyond Karanartpa-S'akti ; 
where there is no experience (Bhinam) or Kala or Kala 
nor of Devata or Tattva, in the sense of category, as that 
Which distinguishes one thing from another. It is Svanir- 
vanam parath padam, the Nirvikalpa-nirafijana-siva-vakti 
which is Guruvaktra. 

Nada and Bindu exist in al] Bija Mantras which are 
generally written with the Bindu above and the Nada 
below, for this is the form of the written Candrabindu, 


NADA—-THE FIRST PRODUCED MOVEMENT 115 


In however some of the old pictorial representations of 
Omkara the real position of Nada is shown as being over 
Bindu as an inverted crescent. Thus the great Bija, 
Hrith (gf) is composed of Ha, Ra, I and Ma. Of these 
Ha—Akas'a, Ra—Agni, I—Ardhanaris'vara and M—Nada- 
bindu. The five Bhitas ‘are divided into two groups 
Amiurtta (formless) and Miartta (with form). Both Akaga 
and Vayu belong to the first group, because until the 
appearance of Agni aS Rupa, there is no colour and form. 
Agni therefore heads the second division. When Akavya is 
with Agni there is form; for Ra is the first manifestation 
of Rupa. This form is in Ardhanaris'vara, the combined 
Siva-Sakti, who hold all in themselves. The first three 
letters represent the Akara or form aspect. The Mantra 
receives its complete form by the addition of the Mahatmya 
which is Nada-bindu which are Nirakara (formless) and the 
Karana (cause) of the other three in which they are impli- 
citly and potentially contained; being in technical phrase 
Antargata of, or held within, Bindu, which again is 
Antargata of all the previously evolving S'aktis mentioned. 
The meaning of the Bija-Mantra then is that the Cidakaya 
is associated (Yukta) with Rapa. It is thus the S'abda 
statement of the birth of General Form ; that is, Form as 
such of which all particular forms are a derivation, Hrim is, 
as pronounced, the gross-body as sound of the ideation of 
Form as such in the Cosmic Mind. 

The degree of subtlety of the Saktis preceding and 
- following Nada is in the Mantra-S/astra indicated by what is 
called “the utterance time” (Ucciranakala). Thus taking 
Bindu as the unit, Unmani ig Nirakara and Niruccara, 
formless and without utterance, undefined by any adjective: 
being beyond mind and speech and the universe (Vis‘vot- 
tia). The Uccaranakala of Samani (so named Manahsahi- 
tatvat, On account ofits association with mind; the preceding 


116 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Sakti Unmani being Tadrahita or devoid of that), is 
1i—256, of Vyapika 1—128 and so on to Nadanta 1—82, 
Nada 1—16, to Ardha-candra which is 1—2 of Bindu and 
to Bindu itself. 

Nada is thus, in the Mantra-Sastra, that aspect of Sakti 
which evolves into Bindu, which later as differentiating into 
the Tribindu is called the S’abda-brahman, who is the 
creative source of Sabda and Artha and thus of the reveal- 
ed S'abda which Mantra is. 

I would in conclusion meet an objection, which I have 
heard urged, namely that the Mantra-Sistra treats its 
subject with unnecessary complexity of detail. It is 
undoubtedly difficult and requires careful study. Simple 
minds may be satisfied with the statement that God created 
the world. Veda too gives an explanation of the cosmic 
problem in two words “ He saw” (sa atksata). But who saw, 
and what, and how did He see? How also if there be only 
One came there to be anything to see? And what is “to 
see”? (Iksana)? For the process is not like looking out of 
a window and seeing aman passing. “He” is Consciousness 
which is in Itself (Svaripa) actionless. How then did “I” 
see and thus become active? Because It has two aspects one 
(Niskala-siva) in which It is actionless and the other 
(Sakala-siva) in which It ig Activity as the embodiment of 
all the Sarhskaras. In this last aspect it is called Sakti. 
The latter term denotes Active Consciousness. How can 
one and the same thing have two contradictory aspects ; 
We cannot say, otherwise than by affirming Svabhava. By 
way of analogy we can refer to what psychology calls dual 
and multiple personalities. The ultimate Reality is alogical 
and unexplainable (Anirvacaniya). That it is one and not 
two is, it is said, proved by Veda and the actual experience 
(Svanubhava) had in Yoga. What is “seeing”? It is not the 
observing of something outside which was there before it was 


NADA—THE FIRST PRODUCED MOVEMENT 117 


observed. “ Secing”’ is the rising into consciousness (void of 
objects) of the memory of past universes existing in the form 
of the Sarmskaras. Before this can occur, Consciousness 
must obscure to Itself Its nature and (though in truth an 
unity) must experience itself as an “I” observing a “ This” 
which it has through Maya Sakti projected outside Itself. 
There is no answer again to the question how this is possi- 
ble except inscrutable Sakti (Acintya-S’akti). But just as 
& man rising from deep sleep has first a more or less bare 
awareness which is gradually filled out with the thought 
of self and particular objects; consciousness coming to 
itself, so that in the waking state it again recognises the 
world which had vanished utterly in dreamless slumber ; 
so it is with the Cosmic Consciousness. Just as man does 
not pass at once from dreamless slumber to the fullest 
waking perception; so neither does the Cosmic Conscious- 
ness. It passes gradually from its dreamless slumber 
(Susupti) state which is the general dissolution (Mahapra- 
laya) to the waking state (Jagrat) which is consciousness 
of the gross universe. The degrees in this emanative process 
are the Tattvas described in the last article. Manifestation, 
which is nothing but presentation of apparently external 
objects to the inner consciousness, is, as experienced by the 
limited consciousness, gradual. The seeds of the “I” and 
“This” are first formed and then grown. The first principal 
stage is that before and in Ivvara Tattva of Bindu and 
which therefore includes Nada. The second is that of the 
World-consciousness arising through the agency of Maya- 
sakti. These two stages are marked by two principal 
differences, In the first the “ This ” (Idarh) is seen as part 
of the self, the two not being differentiated in the sense of 
inner and outer. In the second the object is externalised 
and seen as different from the self. In the first, when the 
Self experiences itself as object, the latter is held as a 


118 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


vague undefined generality. There ia, as it were, an aware- 
ness of self-scission in which the self as subject knows 
itself as object. and nothing more. The degrees in this 
process have been already explained. In the second not 
only is the object defined as something which appears to 
be not the self, but there are a multiplicity of objects each 
marked by its own differences; for Maya, has intervened. 
The whole world-process is thus a re-awakening of the 
Cosmic Consciousness from sleep to the world, into which 
at Dissolution it had fallen; and the Tattvas mark the 
gradual stages of re-awakening, that is re-awakening to 
the world, but a falling into sleep so far as true Conscious- 
ness is concerned. So in Kundaliyoga when Kundalini 
sleeps in the Muladhara, man is awake to the world; and 
when She awakes, the world vanishes from Consciousness 
which then regains its own state (Svartipa). There is no 
reason to suppose that, judged in the terms of our present 
experience, the change is other than gradual. But how, it 
may be asked, is this known or what the stages are ; for 
were we there? As individuals we were not; for we speak 
of that which preceded the formation of the Sakala Jiva | 
Consciousness. But Jiva was there as the plant is in the 
seed. It is the one Siva who displays himself in all the 
Tattvas. Those who fall back into the seed have experience 
of it. There are, however, two bases on which these affirma- 
tions rest. In the first place there is correspondence between 
all planes. “ What is without, is so manifested because it is 
within”; not of course in the exact form in whick it exists 
without, but in the corresponding form of its own plane. 
We may therefore look for instruction to our daily life and 
its psychological states to discover both the elements and 
the working of the cosmic Process. ‘These algo disclose 
a gradual unfolding of consciousness from something in 
the nature uf mere awareness to the definite perception 


| 


eo 


NADA—THE FIRST PRODUCED MOVEMENT 119 


of a variety of multiple objects. But the normal experience 
is by its nature limited. That normal experience is, 
however, transcended in Yoga-states, when conscious- 
ness becomes Niralathbapuri, that is, detached from 
worldly objects: the experience wherein is (in part ati 
least) available for the instruction of others. Secondly 
the Sastras are records of truth beyond the senses 
(Atindriya-Tattva). The Tattvas are not put forth as 
mere speculative guesses or imaginings of what might 
have been. When, however, supersensual truth is describ- 
ed in language it is necessarily expressed in terms, and 
with the use of symbols, of present experience. That ex- 
perience is had under conditions of time and space and 
others. We know and speak of mere potency ripening 
into actuality, of potential energy becoming more and more 
kinetic, of shifting states of consciousness, and so forth. 
These are matters the knowledge of which is drawn from 
the world around us.. But this does not necessarily make 
them wholly untrue or unreal as applied to higher planes. 
One of the commonest errors is to raise false partitions 
between things. The experience is real for it is S‘iva’s 
and His experience is never unreal. It is according to its 
degree (that is on its plane) real; an expression (limited 
though it be) of the ultimate Reality Itself. We can think 
in no other terms. But it is also true that these terms and 
symbols, having only complete validity on our plane, are 
no longer wholly true for Consciousness as it rises from it. 
But other forms of Consciousness must take their place 
until the Formless is reached. The Tattvas explain 
(limited though such explanation be by the bounds of our 
thought and language) the modes through which the return- 
ing Consciousness passes until it rests in Itself (Svarapa- 
visranti) and has Peace. And so the Buddhist Mantra- 
yana aptly defines Yoga (Which in Tibetan is called 


120 THR GARLAND OF LETTERS 


rNal-rByor) in the sense of result, as the “ Finding rest or 
peace.” This final state, as also those intermediate ones 
which lie between it and the normal individual world-con- 
sciousness, are only actually realised in Jiana-Yoga (by 
whatsoever method Jiiana is attained) when the mind has 
been wholly withdrawn from without and faces the opera- 
tive power of Consciousness behind it (Niramaya-padon- 
mukhi). 

But here we are dealing with Mantra-yoga when the 
mind is thinking the states which Jfiana, in whatever 
degree, realises as Consciousness. The Mantra-Sastra 
looks at the matter, of which we write, from the stand- 
point of Mantra that is of manifested S'abda its object. 
Kundalini is both Jyotirmayi, Her Suksmartpa; and 
Mantramayi, Her Sthilaripa. We begin with the latter. 
All things are then defined in terms of Sabdartha and 
of the various causal forms which precede it. The first 
of such produced forms is Nada which becomes Bindu 
and then on the differentiation of the Tattyas the “ hidden 
sound” (Avyakta-rava), the Logos or Cosmic Word utters 
“the Garland of Letters ” (Varnamala) of which all Mantras 
are formed.’ It traces the degrees in which the ideating 
Cosmic Consciousness becomes, as Supreme Speech (Para- 
vak), the Genetrix of the subtle and gross Sabda which are 
the Matrkas and Varnas respectively. That Supreme Speech 
(Para-vak) is without idea or language, but ig represented 
as gradually assuming the state in which it utters both 
and projects from Itgelf into the sensual world the objects 
(Artha). which they denote. The actual manifestation of 
these from Para-yabda through Pasyanti, Madhyama and 
Vaikhari, will be described in another Chapter. 

The practice of Mantra-Yoga not only gives, from a 
merely intellectual standpoint, an understanding of Vedanta 
which cannot ordinarily be had by the mere reading of 


NADA—THE FIRST PRODUCED MOVEMENT 121 


philosophical texts; but also produces a pure Bhava 
ripening into Mahabhava through the purification of mind 
(Citta-s'uddhi) which such practice (according to the 
rules of Sadhana laid down in the Tantras or Mantra- 
sastra) gives, as one of its Siddhis. What the Western, 
and sometimes the English educated Indian, does not 
understand or recognise, is the fact that the mere reading 
of Vedantic texts without Citta-suddhi will neither bring 
true understanding or other fruitful result. The experi- 
enced will find that this apparent complexity and wealth of 
detail is not useless and is, from an extra-ritual standpoint, 
to a considerable extent, and from that of Sadhana wholly, 
necessary. A friend of mine was once asked by a man ina 
somewhat testy manner “ to give him a plain exposition of 
the Vedanta in five minutes.” It takes years to understand 
perfectly any science or profession. How can that, which 
claims to explain all, be mastered in a short talk ? But 
more than this; however prolonged the intellectual study 
may be, it must, to be fruitful, be accompanied by some 
form of Sadhana. The Tantra-Sstras contain this for the 
Hindu, though it is open to him or any other to devise a 


better if he can. Forms ever change with the ages, while 
the Truth which they express, remains. 


CHAPTER XIII 
BINDU OR SAKTI—READY TO CREATE 


From Nada, previously described, evolved Bindu (Nadad 
bindu-samudbhavah). What then is Bindu? Literally the 
term means a “ Drop” or a “ Point” such as the Anusvara 
breathing. But in the Mantra-Sastra it has a technical 
meaning. It is not, as a distinguished Indian Sanskritist 
called it, merely a “Drop.” It is not that “red drops ”’ 
mix with “ white drops” and so forth, a description of his, 
which reminds one more of the pharmacy or sweet shop 
than the Sastra. This and other statements betray an 
ignorance of Indian tradition and a mental attitude alien 
to Indian thinking which distinguishes so many of those 
whose souls have been captured in the net of an English 
education. Those who speak another’s language and think 
another’s thought must see to it that their own Indian self 
is not, through the dangers to which it is thus exposed, 
lost. But even an educated Western, ignorant of the 
Sastra, but with a knowledge of the history of religious 
thought would have perceived the significance of the term 
Bindu when he had learnt that one of its literal meanings 
was a “ Point.” 


In an anonymous Mystical Work published in the 
eighteenth century by one of the “French Protestants of 
the Desert” called Le Mystere de la Croix, it is said 
(p. 9), “Ante omnia Punctum exstitit; non to atomon, 
aut mathematicum sed diffusivum. Monas erat explicite : 


be 
—_—  ~- 


- BINDU OR SAKTI—READY TO CREATE 128 


implicite Myrias. Lux erat, erant et Tenebrae; Principium 
et Finis Principii. Omnia et nihil: Est et non.” 

“Before all things were, there was a Point (Punctum : 
Bindu) not the Atom or mathematical point (which though 
it-is without magnitude has position) but the diffusive 
(neither with magnitude nor position). In the One (Monas) 
there was implicitly contained the Many (Myrias). There 
was Light and Darkness: Beginning and End: Everything 
and Nothing: Being and Non-being (that is, the state was 
neither Sat nor Asat).” The author says that the All is 
engendered from the central indivisible Point of the double 
triangle (that is, what is called in the Tantras, Satkona- 
Yantra) regarded as the symbol of creation. ‘ Le Tout est 
engendré du point central indivisible du double triangle.” 
This “ Point’’ is one of the world’s religious.symbols and 
is set in the centre of a Satkona as above or in a Gir- 
cular Mandala or sphere. On this symbol St. Clement of 
Alexandria in the second century a.D. says that if ab- 
straction be made from a body of its properties, its depth, 
breadth, and then length, “the point which remains is a 
unit, so to speak, having position ; from which if we abstract 
position there is the notion of unity” (Stromata V. 2. Ante 
Nicene Library, Vol. IV). Again Shelley in his “ Prom- 
theus’’ says: “plunge into eternity where recorded time 
seems but a point.” 

Where does the Extended universe go at the Great 
Dissolution (Mahapralaya) ? It collapses so to speak into a 
Point. This point may be regarded as a mathematical 
point in so far as it is without any magnitude whatever, 
but as distinguished from it, in that it has in fact no posi- 
tion. For there is then no notion of space. It need hardly 
be said that this is a symbol, and a symbol borrowed from 
our present experience cannot adequately represent any state 
beyond it. We only conceive of it as a point, a8 something 


124 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


infinitesimally subtle, which is in contrast with the extend- 
ed manifested universe which is withdrawn into it. This 
point is Bindu. But this again is to make use of material 
images borrowed from the world of objective form. Bindu 
is an aspect of S'akti or Consciousness; therefore it is 
interpreted also in terms of our present consciousness. AS 
s0 interpreted and as Isvara-Tattva, in which it is, Sakti 
is called Bindu; because here consciousness completely 
identifies itself with the universe as unmanifested [dam 
and thus subjectifies it and becomes with it a point of 
consciousness. Thus by way of example the individual 
mind is completely subjectified and exists for each of us as 
a mathematical point (and so it is spoken of by some as 
being of atomic dimension) though the body to the extent 
to which it is not subjectified appears as an object or 
extended thing. We do not conceive of our own minds as 
extended because of this complete subjectification. In the 
same way the consciousness of Isvara completely sub- 
jectifies the universe. He does not of course see the 
universe as a multiplicity of objects outside and different 
from Himself; for if He did, He would be Jiva and not 
Isvara. He sees it as an object which is a whole and 
which whole is Himself. In Sadakhya-Tattva “ Otherness” 
(Idarh) is presented to Consciousness by Sakti. This Idan 
is then faintly perceived (to use the language of. the 
Vimarsini on Isvara-Pratyabhijfia III. 1, 2) “in a hazy 
fashion (Dhyamalaprayam) like a picture just forming 
itself (Unmilita-matra-citra-kalpam) ; Seen by the mind 
only and not as something seen outside by the senses 
(Antahkaranaikavedyam).” The object thus vaguely surges 
up into the field of consciousness in which the emphasis is 
on the cognitive aspect or “I” (Aham). This however is 
not the “I” or “This” of our experience, for it is had in 
the realms beyond Maya, The “This” is then experienced 


BINDU OR SAKTI—READY TO CREATE 125 


as part of the Self. In Isvara Tattva all haziness gives 
place to clarity of the “ This” which is thus seen com- 
pletely as part of the Self; the emphasis being on the 
“This.” After equal emphasis on the “I” and “This”, 
the two are in Suddhavidya-Tattva wholly separated by 
Maya. When therefore the Yogi passes beyond the Mayik 
world his first higher experience is in this Tattva. 

Nada and Bindu are states of S'akti in which the 
germ of action (Kriya-sakti) so to speak increasingly 
sprouts with a view to manifestation producing a state 
of compactness of energy and readiness to create. Raghava- 
Bhatta (Comm. Sarada I. 7) speaks of them as two states 
of Sakti which are the proper conditions (Upayogyavastha) 
for creation. They are, like all else, aspects of Sakti, but 
are names of those aspects which are prone to and ready 
for creation (Ucctindvasthad). Bindu is said to be the 
massive or Ghandvastha state of Sakti. The Prapaficasara- 
Tantra says that S’akti is seized with the desire to create 
and becomes Ghanibhuta (Vicikirsur ghanibhita). Thus 
milk becomes Ghanibhaita when it turns into cream or 
curd. In other words, Sakti is conceived as passing 
gradually from its subtle state through Sakti-tattva and 
Nada (in its three-stages) and becomes what is relatively 
gross or massive as Power which is fully equipped to pass 
from the stage of potency into that of active manifestation. 
That stage is Bindu which is called Mahabindu or Para- 
bindu to distinguish it from the other Bindus into which 
it subsequently differentiates. 

The commentary of Kalicarana on the Satoakra- 
nirapana (see Serpent Power, V. 4) citing Todala-Tantra 
(Ch. VI) says that the Supreme Light is formless; but 
Bindu implies both the Void (Stnya) and Guna, also. 
Bindu is the Void in so far ag it is the Supreme Brahman. 
It implies Gupa as being the creative or Sakti aspect of 


126 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


the Brahman which subsequently evolves into the Purusa 
and Prakrti-Tattvas of which the latter is with Guna. 
The commentary to V. 49 states that this Bindu is the 
Lord (Is'vara) whom some Pauranikas call Mahavisnu and 
others the Brahmapurusa: and (V. 87) that Para-bindu 
is the state of “Ma” before manifestation; being Siva- 
Sakti enveloped by Maya. As to this it may be observed 
that the letter M is male, and Bindu which is the nasal 
breathing, sounded as M, is the unmanifested S'iva-S'akti 
or Ma which is revealed upon its subsequent differentiation 
into the three Saktis from which the universe proceeds. 


Bindu as the Cause is Cidghana or massive Consciousness 


and Power in which lie potentially in a mass (Ghana), 
though undistinguishable the one from other, all the worlds 
and beings about to be created. This ig Parama-Siva 
and in Him are all the Devatas. It is thus this Bindu 
which is worshipped in secret by all Devas (V. 41) and 
which is indicated in its different phases in the Candra- 
bindu (Nada-Bindu) S'akti and Santa of the Orn and other 
Bija mantras. 

This Bindu is in Satyaloka which, within the human 
body, exists in the pericarp of the thousand-petalled Lotus 
(Sahasrara) in the highest cerebral centre. It is, as I 
have already said, compared to a grain of gram (Canaka) 
which under its outer sheath (which is Maya) contains the 
two seeds (Siva and Sakti) in close and undivided union. 

Kalicarana (V.' 49) thus cites the following : “In the 
Satyaloka is the formless and lustrous one. She is like a 
grain of gram devoid of hands, feet and the like. She has 
surrounded Herself. by Maya (that is She is about to 
create by the agency of this Power of Hers). She is Sun, 
Fire and Moon. She being intent on creation (Unmukhi) 
becomes twofold (Dvidha bhitvd) and then, by differen- 
tiation of Siva and Sakti, arises creative ideation 


BINDU OR S'AKTI—READY TO CREATE 127 


(Srstikalpand). Siva and S'akti are of course not actually 
divided for they are not like a chapatti or some other 
material thing. It might seem unnecessary to make 
such obvious remarks, did not experience tell me of the 
absurd misunderstandings which exist of the Scripture. 
When we read that God “zs a woman,” that the Sakta 
Tantra is “ Feminism” with a doctrine similar to that 
of Prof. Lester Ward’s primacy of the female sex, that 
“the conception of the sexual relationship is the ultimate 
explanation of the universe’’ and so forth, no caveats, 
however obvious, are unnecessary. What of course is 
meant is that, whereas in Pralaya, Siva and Sakti existed 
as one unity of consciousness, They in creation, whilst 
still remaining in themselves what They always were, 
project the universe which is Sakti; and then we have 
the Paramatma and Jivatma consciousness which seem 
to the latter to be different. 

Although Parabindu and all which evolves from It 
are nothing but aspects of Sakti and in no wise different 
from it, yet as representing that state of Sakti which 
immediately precedes creation, it is this state of Sakti 
which is said to be the cause of the universe of name and 
form (Namarapa); concepts and concepts objectified; or 
S'abda the word and Artha its meaning. The states of 
Sakti preceding Bindu are those in which the Bindu 
state is in process of being “evolved” according to what 
we may call an Avikrta-Parinama and when evolved 
it is the cause of the universe. Really they are merely 
aspects of one and the same pure Sakti. This is not 
an evolution in time. As Plotinus says, the universe “ was 
formed according to intellect (here the Cosmic Power 
or Prapafica-Siakti which manifests as Mahat) and in- 
tellect not preceding in time but prior” (in the sense 
that cause precedes effect). This again, as all descriptions, 


128 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


(in so far as they are applicable to the transcendent 
Sakti) is imperfect, for sequence of cause and effect in- 
volves to our minds the notion of time. This Supreme 
Bindu as containing in Himself all Devatas is the ultimate 
object of adoration by all classes of worshippers (V. 44) 
under the name of Sjiva, or Mahavisnu or the Devi as 
those call it “ who are filled with a passion for Her Lotus 
Feet.” The sectarianism of the lower mind, still existent 
in both Hast and West, is here shown to be a matter of 
words (the fight for which is of such interest to many) 
and is reduced to its real common denominator. As the 
Lord says in the Gita, Whomever men may worship all 
such worship comes eventually to Him. 

Para-bindu is thus the Head of every line of creation ; 
of the Tattvas or Vikrtis from Buddhi to Prthivi and 
their Lords (Tattvesa) and of the Sabda or Mantra 
creations; all belonging to the Vikara-Srsti or Parinama- 
Srsti. The development after the manifestation of Prakrti 
is a real evolution (Parinama), for Consciousness has then 
been divided into subject and object in time and space. 
What is spoken of in terms of a development in the 
Isvara, body is not that. There Sakti assumes various 
aspects with a view to create but without manifestation. 
Sakti-tattva, whilst remaining such, assumes the aspects 
of Nada and Bindu. 


The next stage is thus described in the S'arada-Tilaka 
(Ch. 1-8, 9) as follows: 


Parasaktimayah saksat tridha say bhidyate punah. 
Bindur nado bijamiti tasya bhedah samiritah. 
Binduh sivatmako byam saktir nadas tayor mithah. 
Samavayah samakhydtah sarvagamavis'aradaih. 


(That which is supreme Sakti again divides Itself 
into three, such divisions being known as Bindu, Nada, 


| 


BINDU OR SAKTI—READY TO CREATE 129 


Bija. Bindu is said to be of the nature of Siva and Bija 
of Sakti, and Nada is the mutual relation between these 
two, by those who are learned in the Agamas). 

One Ms. I have seen has ‘ Bindur nadatmako’, but the 
commentary of the Satcakra (V. 40) explains this as Sivat- 
maka. These form the three Bindus (Tribindu). Nada 
here again is Trait d’Union, the Yoga of the other two 
Bindus as the Prayogasira calls it. (See Raghava’s Comm. 
to V. 8 of Ch. I S'aérada). These are Siva, S'iva-S'akti, Sakti. 
By this it is not to be understood that Siva or Sakti are 
ever altogether dissociated but the aspects may be regarded 
as Sliiva or Sakti-pradhana respectively. Bhaskararaya in 
his valuable commentary on the Lalita&-Sahasranima says 
“From the causal (Karana) Bindu proceeds the effect 
(Karya) Bindu, Nada and Bija. Thus these three which 
are known as supreme, subtle and gross arose.” (Asmac- 
ca karanabindoh saksat kramena karyabindus tato nadas- 
tato byam ite trayam utpannan tadidam parasuksmasthala- 
padair apy ucyate, V. 182). 

One text of the Prapaficasara-Tantra says that the 
Parabindu divides into two parts, of which the right is 
Bindu, the Male, Purusa or Harh, and the left Visarga 
the Female, Prakrti or Sah making the combined Hatsah. 
Harhsah is the union of Prakrti and Purusa and the 
universe is Harhsah. In however the Ms. on which my 
edition of that Tantra is based it is said that the Bindu 
(Para) divided by Kala becomes threefold as Bindu, Nada, 
Bija. Substantially the matter seems one of nomenclature, 
for the two Bindus which make Visarga become three by 
the addition of the Siva-Bindu. Moreover as Hare is 
Siva and Sah is Sakti, the combined Harhsah implies the 
relation which in the S’aérada account ig called Nada. So 
it 18 also said from the first vowel issued “ Hrith,” from 


the second Harnsah, and from the third the Mantra “ Hrim, 
9 


1380 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Sri, Klirh,” the first indicative of general form ; the second 
being a more Sthila form of Akasa and Agni (Sa= Akasa; 
Ra=Agni) held as it were within the “skin” (Carma) of 
the enveloping Ardhanaris'vara: the third commencing with 
the first and last letters including all the 24 Tattvas and 
all the fifty letters into which the general Form parti- 
cularises itself. 

Para-bindu is Siva-Sakti considered as undivided, 
undifferentiated principles. On the “bursting” of the 
seed which is the Parabindu the latter assumes a threefold 
aspect as Sliiva or Bindu, Sakti or Bija and Nada the 
Siva-Sakti aspect which, considered as the result, is 
the combination, and from the point of view of cause, 
the inter-relation of the two (Sarada I. 9) the one acting 
as excitant (Ksobhaka) and the other being the excited 
(Ksobhya). The commentary on V. 40 of the Sat- 
cakranirapana speaks of Nada as the union of Siva and 
Sakti; as the connection between the two and as being - 
in the nature of the Sakti of action (Kriya-vakti-svarapa). 
It is also said to be that, the substance of which is Kundali 
(Kundalinimaya). All three are but different phases of 
Sakti in creation (Comm. I. 39) being different aspects 


of Parabindu which is itself the Ghanavastha aspect 
of Sakti. 


Thus 


in the first division of Sakti, Nada, Bindu, 
Nada igs + 


he Maithuna or Yoga of Siva and Slakti to 
Produce the Para-bindu which again differentiates into 
threefold aspects as the Saktis, though in grosser form, 
which produced: it. Though the Gunas are factors of the 
gross Sakti Prakrti, they are in subtle form contained 
within the higher Saktis. This Sakti as the first poten- 
tially kinetic aspect about to display itself is the Cit 
aspect of Sakti and Cit Sakti is, when seen from the 
lower level of the Gunas, Sattvik; Nada is in the same 


BINDU OR SAKTI—READY TO CREATE 131 


sense Rajasik, for S’akti becomes more and more kinetic 
gathering together Its powers, as it were from the previous 
state of barely stirring potency, for the state of complete 
readiness to create which is Bindu, ‘and which in the 
aforesaid sense as Ghanibhita foreshadows that Tamas 
Guna which at a lower stage is the chief factor which 
creates the world, for the latter is largely the product of 
Tamas. Each aspect of the Tribindu again is associated 
with one or other of the Gunas. These divisions of aspect 
from the Guna stand-point are not to be understood as 
though they were separate and exclusively concerned with 
only one of the Gunas. The Gunas themselves never exist 
separately. Where there is Sattva there is also Rajas and 
Tamas. In the same way in the case of the three Saktis 
Iccha, Jhana, Kriya, from which the Gunas develop, one 
neyer stands by itself, though it may be predominant. 
Where there is Iccha there is Jiana and so forth. And 
so again Sakti, Nada and Bindu are not to be severed like 
different objects in the Mayik world. In each there is 
implicitly or explicitly contained the other. Parames'vara 
assumes (for the Jiva) successively the triple aspects of 
Sakti, Nada Bindu, Karya Bindu, Bija, Nada, thus com- 
pleting by this differentiation of Sakti the sevenfold 
causal sound-forms of the Pranava or Omkara; namely, 
Sakala Parames'vara [which is Saccidananda, for even when 
the Brahman is associated with Avidya its own true na- 
ture (Svartipa) is not affected,] Sakti (S'akti-Tattva) Nada 
(Sadakhya-Tattva) Parabindu (Isvara-Tattva) Bindu (Karya) 

Nada and Bija. It is not clear to me where (if at all) the 

Suddha-vidya-Tattva comes in according to this scheme, 

unless it be involved in Nada the Mithah-samavaya; but 

the Purusa-Prakrti-Tattvas appear to take birth on the 

division of the Para-bindu into Siva and S‘akti or Har and 

Sah ; Hathsah being the Purusa-Prakrti Mantra, 


132 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


The first impulse to creation comes from the ripening 
of the Adrsta of Jivas, on which Sakala Paramesvara puts 
forth His Sakti (which means Himself as Sakti) to pro- 
duce the Universe wherein the fruits of Karma may be 
suffered and enjoyed. All the above seven stages are in- 
cluded in, and constitute, the first stage of Lksana or 
“Seeing” and is that stage in which Sabda exists in 
its supreme or Para form (Para-s‘abdasrsti). She who is 
eternal (Anadiripa) existing subtly as Cidraipini in Maha- 
pralaya becomes on the ripening of Adrsta inclined 
(Utsuka) towards the life of form and enjoyment, and 
reveals Herself on the disturbance of the equilibrium of 
the Gunas. As the Vayaviya-Samhita says “ Para-Sakti 
through the will of Siva is revealed with Siva-Tattva 
(for the purpose of creation). Then She manifests as the 
oil which is latent in, and exudes from, the sesamum 
seed.” Paramesvara is Saguna-Siva or the Isvara of 
Vedanta Philosophy with Maya as His Upadhi. He is Sat, 
Cit, Ananda in Maya body and endowed with all Saktig 
(Sarva-vedanta-siddanta-sara-sammgraha 312, 318, 315). There 
is, as the Paficadasi says, (8-88), a Sakti of Siva which 
is in and controls all things which have their origin in 
Ananda or Isvara. When Isvara is moved to create, this 
Isvara-sakti or Maya which is the aggregate of, and which 
yet transcends, all individual Saktis issues from Him 
and from this Maya issue all the particular Saktis by 
which the universe is evolved and is maintained. The same 
substance is, to a large extent, to be found in all accounts 
under a variety of presentment or Symbols; even where 
there are real differences due to the diversity of doctrine of 
different Vedantic schools. This is not the case here: for 
the account given is a Sadhana presentment of Advaita- 
vada. The Sakta-Tantra teaches the unity of Paramatma 
and Jiva, though its presentation of some subjects as Sakti, 


4 


BINDU OR S'AKTI—-READY TO CREATE 1838 


Maya, Cidabhasa is different (owing to its practical view 
point) from S‘arnkara’s Mayavada. On this matter I may 
refer my readers to the article which I recently wrote 
on Sakti and Maya in the second number of the Indian 
Philosophical Review (Baroda) since incorporated in my 
“Sakti and S'akta.”’ 

The three Bindus constitute the great Triangle of 
World-Desire which is the Kamakala; an intricate subject 
which I must leave for a future chapter. The three Bindus 
are Sun, Moon and Fire and three Saktis Iccha, Jnana, Kriya 
associated with the three Gunas Sattva, Rajas, Tamas. I 
do not here deal with the order or correspondence which 
requires discussion. From them issued the Devis Raudri, 
Jyestha, Vama and the Trimutrtis Rudra, Brahma, Visnu. 

The three Bindus are also known as the white Bindu 
(Sita-bindu), the red Bindu (Sona-bindu) and the mixed 
Bindu (Misra-bindu). These represent the Prakasa, Vimars'a 
and Prakdsa-Vimars’a aspects of the Brahman which are 
called in the ritual Carana-tritaya (The Three Feet). The 
Gurupaduka-Mantra in which initiation is given in the 
last or Sadamnaya-Diksa represents a state beyond the 
Sukla, Rakta and Misra-Caranas. So it is said in Sruti 
that there are four Brahmapadas, three here and one the 
Supreme which is beyond. 

As is the case in many other systems the One for the 
purpose of creation is presented in twofold aspect, for 
Unity is actionless, and their relation involves a third 
aspect which makes the Trinity. But this apparent differ- 
entiation does not derogate from the substantial unity 
of the Brahman. As the ancient Rudrayamala (II: 22) 
says: “The three Devas Brahma, Visnu, Mahes'vara are 
but one and formed out of My body.” 

Eka mirtis trayo devaé brahmavisnumahesvarah. 

Mama vigrahasamklptah srjaty avati hanti ca. 


184 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


From the differentiating Bindu are evolved the Tattvas 
from Buddhi to Prthivi and the six Lords of the Tattvas 
(preceding Parasiva the seventh) who are the presiding 
Devatas of mind and of the five forms of matter. Here on 
the diremption or dichotomy of Consciousness, Mind and 
Matter are produced. That is, Consciousness functions in 
and through the self-created limitations of mind and 
matter. It was on this division also that there arose the 
Cosmic Sound (S'abda-brahman) which manifests as S'abda 
and Artha. This ig the S’abda-brahman ; so called by those 
who know the Agamas. 

Bhidyamanat parad bindor avyaktatma ravo’bhavat. 

S'abdabrahmeti tam prahuh sarvagamavisaradan. 

(S'‘arada-Tilaka I-I1) 

It will be observed that in this verse the first Bindu is 
called Para and to make this clear the author of the 
Pranatosini adds the following note: “By Para-bindu is 
meant the first Bindu which is a state of Sakti (Pardad- 
bindority anena saktyavastharipo yah prathamabindus 
tasmat). Siabda-brahman is the Brahman in Its aspect as 
the immediate undifferentiated Cause of the manifested 
and differentiated Slabda, or language in prose or verse; 
and of Artha or the subtle or gross objects which thought 
and language denote. It is thus the causal state of the 
manifested S'abda or Mantra. 


CHAPTER XIV 
MAYA-TATTVA 


féWuat Matter is in itself the senses do not tell us. All that 
can be predicated of it is its effect upon these senses./ The 
experiencer is affected in five different ways giving rise in 
him to the sensations of hearing (S’abda); feel by which 
is experienced the thermal quality of things (S’pars’a) 5 
colour and form (Ripa); taste (Rasa); and smell (Gandha). 
The cause of these are the five Bhuitas which, in the general 
cosmic evolution, are derived from the Tanmatras or general 
elements of the particulars of sense perception. These again 
together with the senses (Indriyas) or faculties of mind 
operating through a particular physical organ as their 
instrument and Manas the mental faculty of attention, 
selection and synthesis of the discrete manifold, derive 
from the still more general aspects of the Cosmic Mind or 
Antabkarana which are the personal forms of limited ex- 
perience respectively called Ahathkara and Buddhi. ( These 
again are evolutes from that form of Sakti which is 
Prakrti-Tattva and which in the 36 Tattvas scheme comes 
into being through the instrumentality of Maya-S'akti from 
the preceding Tattvas of the pure creation extending from 
Suddha-vidya to Siva-sakti-Tattva;) the Svartipa of the 
last being Saccidananda or Pure spirit. (Matter is thus a 
manifestation or aspect of Spirit. The two are ultimately . 
one. They seem to be two because the fundamental Feel- 
ing (Cit) is able, as Sakti, to experience itself as object. As 
Professor Haeckel says, in conformity with Sakta Monism, 


136 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Spirit and Matter are not two distinct entities but two 


forms or aspects of one single fundamental Substance) 


(which is here the Brahman). The one entity with dual 
aspect is the gole Reality which presents itself to view as 
the infinitely varied picture of the universe. The two are 
inseparably combined in every atom which, itself and its 
forces, possess the elements not only of vitality but of 
further development in all degress of consciousness and will. 
‘The ultimate substance is. S'akti, which is of dual aspect 
as Cit-Sakti which represents the spiritual, and Maya- 
Sakti which Tepresents the material aspect.\/ These are 
not separable. In the universe the former is the Spirit- 
matter and the latter Matter-spirit.) The two exist in in- 
Separable connection (Avinabhava-sathbandha) as insepara- 
ble (to use a simile of the Slaiva-Sastra) as the winds of 
the heaven from the ether in which they blow. Manifested 
Sakti or Maya is the universe. Unmanifest S'akti is feeling- 
consciousness (Cidrapa). ‘Maya-S'akti appears as subtle 
mind and as gross matter and as the life-force and is in 
Herself (Svarupa) consciousness.) There is and can be 
nothing absolutely lifeless or unconscious because Sakti 
18 in itself Being—Feeling—Consciousness—Bliss (Cid- 
rupini, Anandamayi) beyond all worlds (Visvottirna) ; and 
appears ag *pparently unconscious, or partly conscious and 
partly unconscious, material forms in the universe (Vis'vat- 
maka). The universe is Sakti. Therefore it is commingled 
Spirit-Matter. Sakti beyond all worlds is Consciousness. 
The one Consciousness exists throughout ; when changeless 
it receives the name of Sliva; when the source of, and as 
all moving objects it ig called S’akti, 

(The universe ariges through a Negation or Veiling of 
true Consciousness. Ag the Spanda-karika says “ By 
veiling the own true form its Slaktis ever arise” (Svara- 
pavarane casya saktayah satatotthitah). This is a 


| ei 


MAYA-TATTVA 137 


common doctrine of the three schools here discussed. The 
difference lies in this, that in Sarhkhya it is a second 
independent principle (Prakrti) which veils; in Mayavada 
Vedanta it is the non-Brahman unexplainable mystery 
(Maya) which veils, and in S/akta-Advaitavada it is 
Consciousness which, without ceasing to be such, yet 
veils itself. This statement shortly describes the differ- 
ence in the three concepts which may however be more 
fully elaborated. ) 

The Mahanirvana-Tantra says that the Vakya “ All 
this verily is Brahman” (Sarvam khalvidam Brahma) 
is the basis of Kulacira. But Brahman is Conscious- 
ness; and it cannot be denied that there is an element 
of apparent unconsciousness in things. Samkhya says 
that this is due to another Principle independent of the 
Puruga-consciousness, namely, the unconscious Prakrti, 
which is real, notwithstanding its changes. But accord- 
ing to Advaitavada Vedanta there is only one Reality. 
It therefore denies the existence of any second independ- 
ent principle. Sarnkara attributes unconsciousness to 
the unexplainable (Anirvacaniyaé) wonder (Maya), which 
is neither real (Sat) nor unreal (Asat) nor partly real 
and partly unreal (Sadasat), and which though not form- 
ing part of Brahman, and therefore not Brahman, is yet, 
though not a second reality, inseparately associated and 
sheltering with Brahman (Maya Brahmasrita) in one of 
its aspects (Isvara); owing what false appearance of 
reality it has to the Brahman with which it is so 
associated. It is an eternal falsity (Mithyabhita sana- 
tant) unthinkable, alogical, unexplainable (Anirvacaniyd). 
The reflection of Purusa on Prakrti gives the appear- 
ance of consciousness to the latter. So also the reflec- 
tion (Cidabhasa) of Brahman on unconscious Maya is 
Igvara and on unconscious Avidya ig Jiva. Though 


= na 


188 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


(Maya is thus not a second reality, the fact of positing it ' 


at all gives to Sathkara’s doctrine a tinge of dualism 
from which the Sakta doctrine (which has yet a weak- 
ness of its own) is free.}/ The Sakta doctrine has no need 
of Cidabhasa. It says that Maya is a S'akti of Brahman 
and being Sakti, which is not different from the possessor 


of Sakti (Saktiman), it is, in its Svarapa, consciousness.) 


It is then consciousness which veils itself ; not unconscious 
Maya which veils consciousness. According to Sarh- 
kara, man ig the Spirit (Atma) vestured in the Mayik 
falsities of mind and matter. He accordingly can only 
establish the unity of Jiva and Isvara by eliminating 
from the first Avidya and from the second Maya, both 
being essentially—and from the transcendent standpoint— 
nothing. Brahman is thus left as common denominator. 
The Sakta has need to eliminate nothing. Man’s spirit 
or Atma is Siva. His mind and body are Sakti. Sliva 
and Sakti are one. The Jivatma is Siva-S'akti, the 
latter being understood as in its world-aspect. So is 
the Paramatmai ; though here Sikti,. being uncreating, 


is in the form of Consciousness (Cidrapini). (The supreme: 


Siva-Sakti exists as one. Siva-Slakti ag the world is 
the Manifold. 


Brahman falsity but Spirit covering itself with its own Power 


of Sakti. As the Kaulacarya Satyananda says in his 
Commentary (which I have published) on the 4th Mantra 
of the Isopanisad—* The changeless Brahman which is 
consciousness appears in creation as Maya which is Brah- 
man (Brahmamayi) Consciousness (Cidrapini) holding in 
Herself unbeginning (Anadi) Karmik tendencies (Karma- 
sainskara) in the form of the three Gunas. Hence She 
is Gunamayi (Her gubstance is Guna) despite being 
Cinmayi (Consciousness). As there is no second prin- 


ciple these Gunas are Cit-S'akti.” Hence, in the 


) Man is thus not the Spirit covered by a non- 


ILLES OLNEY I oe 


MAYA-TATTVA 139 


words of the Yogini-hrdaya-Tantra, the Devi is Prakas‘a- 
vimarsiasamarasyaripint. There is thus truly no uncon- 
scious Maya and no Cidabhasa. All which exists is Con- 
sciousness as Sakti. “ Aham strz”’ as the Advaitabhava 
Upanisad exclaims. And so the grand doctrine “ All is 
Consciousness’”’ is boldly and vigorously affirmed. Those 
who worship the Mother, worship nothing unconscious but 
a Supreme Consciousness which is Love, the body of which 
Love is all forms of consciousness-unconsciousness pro- 
duced by, and which is, Her as Siva’s Power. (In short, 
- Sarnkara says that there is unconsciousness which appears 
to be conscious through Cidabhasa. S'akta doctrine says 
Consciousness appears to be unconsciousness or more truly 
to have an element of unconsciousness in it (for nothing 
even empirically is absolutely unconscious) owing to the 
veiling play of Consciousness itself as Maya-Siakti. The ° 
result is in the end the same—* All is Consciousness ”’— 
but the method by which this conclusion is attained and 
the presentment of the matter is reversed. 

/This presentment again is in conformity with Bicone: 
fic esearch which has shown that even so-called “ brute 
matter’ exhibits the elements of that sentiency which, 
when evolved in man, is the full self-consciousness.} It 
has been well said that sentiency is an integrant cons- 
tituent of all existence, physical as well as metaphysical, 
and its manifestation can be traced throughout the mineral 
and chemical as well as the vegetable and animal worlds. 
It essentially comprises the functions of relation to environ- 
ment, response to stimuli and atomic memory in the lower 
or inorganic plane, whilst in the higher or organic plane 
it includes all the psychic functions such as conscious- 
ness, perception, thought, reason, volition and individual 
memory. Throughout it is the one Mother who works, now 
veiling Her Bliss in inorganic matter, now more fully 


140 THE GARLAND .OF LETTERS 


revealing Herself by gradual stages as the vitivity (which 
She is) displays itself in the evolving forms of worldly life. 
As Haeckel says, sentiency, is, like movement, found in all 
matter. To reach this conclusion we must assume (as the 
Siiva-Sakta schools do) that Kriya and Iccha, its preli- 
minary, are functions of Consciousness. Abhinayva-Gupta 
in his Commentary on the Pratyabhijia-Karika says, “ The 
characteristic of action is the manifestation of all objects. 
These objects again characterised by consciousness-uncon- 
sciousness are in the nature of a shining forth (Abhasa).” 
The universe is thus described as a“ going forth” (Prasara) 
of Sliva,. 

The ultimate reality is Saccidananda which, as the 
Source of appearances, is called Sakti. The latter in its 
Sat (Being) aspect is omnipresent-indestructible (eternal) 
Source and Basis both of the Cosmic Breath or Prana as 
also of all vital phenomena displayed as the individual 

rana in separate and concrete bodies. Sakti is Life 
which, in its phenomenal sense as manifested in individual 
bodies, issues from, and rests upon, and at basisis, Sat. In 
this aspect. manifested Sakti is vitality which is the one 
fixed unalterable potential in the universe of which all 
other forms of energy are particular effects. Life is the 
phenomenal aspect of Spirit in which, as its Cause, it is 
at the great dissolution merged. There is no absolute end 
of life but only to certain structures of life. As it had 
no end it has no absolute beginning. It appears only in 
creation from the depths of Being which is its unmanifest- 
ed ground. The search for the “ origin of life’ is futile ; 
for it issues from Brahman who, in a supreme sense, is 
Infinite Life. Life is throughout the Universe. E:very 
atom of dust is quivering with it, as are the most sensitive 
organic structures. In the latter case it is obvious; in the 
former it is not so, but is yet traced. { The existence and 


bed 


MAYA-TATTVA 141 


functions of life cannot be explained on exclusively mechan- 
ical principles. What is called mechanical energy is the 
effect and not the cause of vitality or vitivity or Sakti as 
the Mother of all.’ The purpose of evolution is to take up 
the living potential from some lower grade, develop it and 
hand it over to a higher grade of forms. 

Slakti as Cidananda is, as Iccha-S’akti, the source 
of all forms of will-power and, in matter, of mechanical 
energy; and as Jiiana-S'akti, of all forms of mentality and 
feeling, and as Kriya, of all forms of activity (Kartrtva), 
being in itself all-mighty. 

The ultimate changeless Reality, in its aspect as 
Sakti, veils and contracts in various degrees its power of 
will, knowledge and action. This veiling, negation, limita- 
tion or contraction is seen at its fullest in so-called “ dead 
inert brute” matter. This allegation of lifeless inertia is 
however the result of superficial observation. It is true that 
in gross matter (Bhiita) the light of consciousness is turned 
down to its utmost. It is nowhere however even empiri- 
cally extinguished. Cit is faintly manifested by scientific 
experiment in gross matter; more clearly in the micro- 
organisms between such matter and the vegetable world, 
in which, as in the animal world evolved from it, vitality 
is so obvious that we have been wont to call these alone — 
“alive.” S'akta doctrine starts with the Full (Parna) and 
deals with the creation of things as a cutting down thereof. 
From a scientific point of view we may commence with 
the world as it is, taking inorganic matter as the starting 
point. From such a standpoint we may speak (See “ Veda’s 
vital molecule” and “Notes on the radical vitality of all 
concrete matter” by G. Dubern) of a Radical Vital Potential 
in all matter, universal, omnipresent, indestructible, all- 
powerful; the source as will-power of mechanical energy; 
and as rudimentary sentiency of all mentality. From the 


142, THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Sastric standpoint the process is one of veiling and unveil- 
ing. Sakti veils itself down to and in Prthivi-Tattva of 
gross matter (Bhita); and thereafter gradually unveils 


‘Herself up to and in man who in Samadhi realises his 


Svaripa as pure, unveiled, Consciousness. 

This veiling by S‘’akti takes place first in Siva-S'akti- 
Tattva by the complete negation of the “Idam” of experi- 
ence; and then through the action of the “ Ida” on the 
subjective aspect of the consciousness of the pure creation, 
in which subject and object exist as part of the One Self; 
and then through that form of Sakti which is Maya which 
effects a severance of subject and object which are then 
experienced no longer as part of the one Self butas separate. 
The point of junction between Pure and Impure experience 
is the Tattva variously called Vidya Sad-vidya, or S'uddha- 
vidya, the first truly realistic stage of the Yogi. Because 
it is in the intermediate state, it is called Parapara-dasa 
(Is. Prat. III, 1-5) and, as the Svacchanda-Tantra (IV, 
95) says, the “Experience in the form of Mantra of 
both difference and non-difference.” After this Tattva, 
Maya, intervenes. 

In the Tattva-Samhdoha (v. 5) it is said, “ Maya is the 
sense of difference (Bheda-buddhi) in all Jivas which are 
parts of Her. Just as the shore holds in the sea, so She 


ever obstructs the manifestation (Vibhava) of Atma which 
but for Her is otherwise unobstructed.” 


Maya vibheda-buddhir 
nijamsa-jatesu nikhilajwwesu. 
Nityam tasya nirankusa- 
vibhavan veleve varidhe rundhe. 
So also in the Isvara-Pratyabhijaa it is said, “ That 


which is nothing but the notion of difference (Bheda-dhi) 
in things entertained by the Doer (Karta), though in 


—E 


MAYA-TATTVA 148 


Himself of the nature of consciousness, is Maya-S’akti, 
whom others, as in the case of Vidyes’varas, call Vidya ”’. 
Bhedadhir eva bhavesu kartur bodhadtmano’ pi ya. 
Maya saktyeva sa vidyetyanye vidyes'vara yatha. 
(IIT, ii, 6) 
“She is Vidya-S’akti when She reveals in the Payu 
state of the Atma whose true nature is Lordship (Ai- 
s'varya), but when She veils (Tirodhanakari) then She is 
called Maya.” : 
Tasyaisvaryasvabhavasya pasu-bhave prakasika. 
Vidya-s'aktis tirodhanakart mayabhidha punah. (ib. 7) 
Siva has two functions namely Tirodhana, that by 
which He veils Himself to His worshipper, and Anugraha 
whereby He, through His grace, reveals Himself by the 
“descent of Sakti’? or grace (Saktipata). She is both 
Madhumati ‘‘Honey” and Maya (Lalita-sahasranama, 
y. 189). .)She is that saving (Taraka) knowledge by which 
the ocean of the Sarhsara is crossed. The Citkala or 
- Arsa of the great Consciousness enveloped by mind and 
matter is the S'akti which, as the Padma-Purana says 
resides as the core of the “inner working” of all Jivas and 
the Anandakalika or Germ of Bliss therein; (She again as 
the Lalitasahasranama says (v. 142) is basis of the false 
(in the sense of impermanent) universe (Mithya jagada- 
dhisthanda) created by, and which is Her Maya, the power 
of the Lord (Sandilya-Stitra, 86) which obscures and 
which, as the Sakta Devi-Purana says, is called Maya, 
because it is the marvellous instrument whereby unheard eet 
of results are produced like those of dreams or Magic.) She rere pee 
is in all systems, whether as Prakrti, Maya or Maya- 
sakti, the finitising principle whereby forms are created in 
the formless Consciousness. (This She effects by causing 
that duality of feeling of the self and not-self in the grand 
experience which is Mahasatta.) Under Her influence the 


144 ‘THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Self experiences Itself as object in all the forms of the 
universe, which when completed is objectively seen as an 
evolution from Prakrti-Tattva, that state of S'akti which 
is evolved by the action of Maya and the five Katicukas 
developed from Her. These are specific aspects of the great 
general limiting Power (Sakti) which Maya is. With this 
Prakrti is associated Purusa-Tattva, the two combined 
being Harhsa. Purusa-Tattva is Atma enveloped by the 
Kaficukas derived from Maya and specific of its operation. 
Sakti as Prakrti, subject to the influence of the Kaficukas, 
develops on the dis-equilibrium of Her Gunas from Her- 
self, as Virkrtis, the impure Tattvas (As'uddha-Tattva) 
extending to Prthivi. At this point conscious vital energy 
materialises, forming, what has been called by the author 
cited “the crust of the vital molecule” of all forms of solid 
matter. { Subjectively therefore the Maya process is the 
establishment of a dichotomy of subject and object in what 
would otherwise be an unitary experience; and objectively 
it is the creation of the various psychical and physical forms 
into which the Universal Substance projects; becoming’ 
in the course of such emanation more and more gross.) 
Bindu as the Mantra designation of Isvara-Tattva is Ghani- 
bhita; that is, the first Ghanavastha aspect of Sakti be- 
coming (through Maya) Prakrti-Tattva and its evolutes 
which are more and more gross (Sthila); until passing the 
first four states of decreasing subtlety of matter, Substance 
emerges as the solid atoms of matter of which the physical 
universe is composed. These compounds being the subject 
of the senses are the materials of physical science which 
seeks to work the process backwards. At a point, search 
on the path of objectivity is closed. If it would know 
more, the mind must turn in on itself and release itself 
from all objectivity which Maya is and fall back into 
that ground of Consciousness (Mayatita) whence it has 


MAYA-TATTVA : 145 


emerged. From the Mantra aspect dealing with the origin ° 
of language the undifferentiated Sabda which arises on the 
differentiation of the Bindu into Purusa-Prakrti or Harisa 
develops, with the creation of mind and matter, into the 
manifested S'abda and Artha which are the Varnas or letters 
(springing from the subtle Matrkas) expressed in Vaikhari 
speech made up of letters (Varna) syllables (Pada) and. 
sentences (Vakya or the uttered Mantra). Mantra again 
is the thought (Man) which saves (Tra, Trayate): Saves 
from what? From firstly the evil which man, subject to 
Maya, commits; and then, by the thorough purification of 
the mind (Citta-suddhi), from Maya Herself who is trans- 
formed in the Sadhaka into Vidya-Sakti. Mantra is thus 
here a pure thought-form; a pure Vrtti or modification of 
the Antahkarana which is Devata The senses and mind 
are also Devatas being operations of the one Divine Sakti. 
Through Mantra the mind is divinely transformed. Con- 
templating, filled by, and identified with, Divinity in 
Mantra form, which is a Sthula (gross) aspect of Devi, it 
passes into Her subtle (Suksma) Light form (Jyotirmayi 
Devi) which is the Consciousness beyond the world of 
Mayik forms; the Isvara and Is'vari who as S'abda- 
brahman are the source ef, and appear as, that Maya which 
is the Creatrix both of the objective world of Mind and 
Matter and of the manifested Sabda and Artha; the . 
Word and its Meaning derived from the Mother in Her 
aspect as Supreme Nada (Para-nada) and Supreme Speech 
(Para-vak). 


10 


CHAPTER XV 
THE KANCUKAS 


‘Tur six Kaficukas including Maya which may be regarded 
as the root of the other five are Kala, Niyati, Raga, Vidya, 
Kala. The term Kajicuka means sheath er envelope. The 
same Tattvas are also called contractions (Sarhkoca), for 
creation is the contracted (Sarhkucadrapa) form of infinite 
Sakti. It is to be observed that Maya, Niyati and Kala, 
occupy in the philosophy of the Paficaratra-Agama the 
very place which is held in the Siva-Siakta system by the 
Kaficukas (See as to this Dr. Otto Schrader’s Ahirbudhnya- 
Samhita 68, 64, 90). The author cited opines that the six 
Kajficukas are only an elaboration of the older doctrine of 
the three powers of limitation (Sathkoca) of the Paiica- 
ratra which are Maya, Kala, Niyati.’ The same idea is 
expressed by these two terms, namely limitations by which 
_ the Atma, in its form as the finite experiencer, is deprived 

of the specific attributes which It, as the Perfect Experi- 
ence, possessed. Consciousness reaching forth to the World 
of enjoyment becomes subject to the Kaficukas and thus 
becomes the impure, finite worldly experience where sub- 
ject and object are completely different ; which experience 
is, as it were, the inversion by the contraction and negation 
of Sakti of the perfect Experience from whose Siva-S'akti- 
Tattva aspect it proceeds. (Infinite Consciousness whilst 
still transcendentally retaining its Svaripa is, as Sakti, 


THE KANCUKAS 147 


narrowed to the degree which constitutes our experience 
on the material plane., The process may be represented 
in Diagram by an inverted triangle representing the Yoni 
or Sakti, in the form of the Pure Tattvas, resting 
on the point of an upright triangle. The point of inter- 
section is Maya from which proceeds the second triangle 
representing the impure Tattvas, which constitute world- 
ly experience. Seen in the waters of Maya all is reversed. 
Through the operation of Maya and the Kaiicukas, S'akti 
assumes the gross contracted form of Prakrti-Tattva which 
in association with Purusa-Tattva is Harhsa. Siva and 
Sakti are the Bird Harmsa. MHarhsa is both male (Pur or 
Purusa) and female (Prakrti). Hath is Siva and Sah is 
Sakti. This Harhsa-dvandva are in their gross form the 
universe (Pum-prakriyatmako hamsas tadatmakam idam 
jagat). (Purusa is the Atma enveloped by the Kavicukas 
which are the contractions of Consciousness and Its Powers. 
Maya is the root and cause of all limitations of the powers 
(Vibhava) of consciousness (Atma); for Maya is the sense 


of difference (Bhedabuddhi) between all persons and things, q 


Each Puruga, (and they are innumerable) being, as the 
Svacchanda-Tantra says, an universe of his own. Each 
Puruga creates under Maya his or its own universe. The 
Kaficukas are thus the delimitations of the Supreme in 
Its form as Sakti.) 1t was Eternity (Nityata) but is now 
orderly .and delimitation (Pariccheda) productive of appear- 
ance and disappearance (that is life and death). This 
is the operation of the Time-power or Kala which is defined 
as follows in the Tattva-Sarndoha (V. 11) “That Sakti of 
His which is Hternity (Nityata) descending and producing 
appearance and disappearance (birth and death) ; and which | 
ever in regulated manner performs the function of division 
or delimitation (Pariccheda) should be regarded as in the 
form of Kala-Tattva,’” 


, 148 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Sa nityatdsya sakti nikrsya nidhanodaya-pradanena 
Niyataparicchedakartkipta syat Kala-tativa-riupena. Kala 
is the power which urges on and matures things. ‘It 
is not in itself subjective or empirical time, though 
it gives rise to it. It is transcendental Time without 
sections (Akhanda-Kala) giving birth to time as effect 
(Karya-kala). This gross time with parts (Sakala-Kala) 
only comes in with the creation of the gross Tattvas, 
So it is said “Time leads me in time” (See Ahirbudhnya) 
64-67. See also the same Author's Ueber den stand der 
Indischen Philosophie zur zeit Mahaviras und Buddhas 
17-80). “Consciousness as Sakti is contracted into the 
mode of temporal thinking. It was freedom and indepen- 
dence (Svatantrata). This is now contracted and the 
Purusa is forcibly subjected to guidance and regulation 
in what he must or must not do in any moment of time. 
This is Niyati, which is defined in the Tattva-Sarhdoha 
(v. 12) as follows: “ That which constitutes that Sakti 
of His which is called Independence or Freedom (Svatan- 
trata); this same S'akti, and none other, becoming con- 
tracted and subjecting Him perforce to guidance and regu- 
lation (Niyamayanti) in a definitely ordered and restricted 
manner (Niyatath) ag regards what is to be done or not 
done (that is, what he must not do at any given moment of 
time) is Niyati.” 

Yasya svatantratakhya 
Saktih samkocasalini saiva. 
Kriyakrtyesvasam y 
niyatam amum niyamayan-tyabhan Niyatih. 
‘Niyati is spoken of in the Paficaratra Agama as the 
subtle regulator of everything (Stksma-sarva-niyamakah. 
Ahirbudhnya VI. 46) and is said by Dr. Schrader to include 
in that system the functions of the three Saiva-Slakta 


Kanicukas, Vidya, Raga and Kala (Ahirbudhnya 64-65).) It. 


ee 


THE KANCUKAS , ) 149 


was completely satisfied with Itself for there was then no 
other. It was the Full (Parna) and there was nothing else 
for it to interest Itself in and thus want. © This Sakti, 
becoming limited, makes the Purusa interested in objects 
and thus attaches them to enjoyment.) This is Raga which 
is defined in the Tattva-Sarhdoha (v. 10) as follows: 

“There is another Sakti of His which is eternal 
complete satisfaction ; the same becoming limited and at- 
taching him ever to enjoyment, this Sakti is reduced to 
the condition of Raga-tatitva.” 

Nitya-paripurnatrptih 

saktis tasyaiva parimita nu satt. 
Bhogesu ranrjayantt 

satatam amum Raga-tativatam yata. 

The Brahman is, as the Isa-Upanisad says, Parna the 
Full, the All which wants nothing; for there is nothing 
to the All which It can want. But when the one Experi- 
ence becomes dual, and, subject and object are separate, 
then the self as subject becomes interested in objects that 
is in things other than itself. Iccha in the sense of 
desire implies a want of the fullness which is that of the 
Supreme perfect experience. In the supreme creative sense 
Iccha is the direction of Consciousness towards activity. 
The term Raga is commonly translated desire. It is how- 
ever properly that interest in objects which precedes desire. 
Raga is thus that interest in objects, seen as other than 
the self, which ripens into desire (Iccha) for them. Such 
(Iccha, is thus a limitation of the all-satisfied fullness of 
the Supreme. > 

‘The power of the Supreme was to know or experience 
all things and so it is Sarvajiata. This is limited and 
the Puruga thereby becomes a “little knower.”) This ~ 
Kaiicuka is called Vidya which is ‘defined in the Tattva- 
Saridoha (V. 9) as follows : “ His power of all-knowingness 


150 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


becoming limited and capable of knowing only a few things 
and producing knowledge (of a limited character) is called 
Vidya by the wise of old ” 
Sarvajiatasya s'aktih 
parimitatanur alpa-vedya-matrapara. 
Jndnam utpadayanti 
Vidyeti nigadyate budhair adyath. 


The supreme is all powerful, mighty to do all things 
(Sarvakartrta). This power is contracted so that the 
Purusa can accomplish few things and becomes a “ little 
doer.” This is Kala which is defined in the Tattva-Sarndoha 
(v. 8) as follows— 

“That which was His power of all-doing-ness, the 
Same being contracted and capable of accomplishing but 
a few things and reducing him to the state of a little doer 
is called Kala.” 

Tat-sarvakartrta sa 

samkucita katipayartha-matrapara. 
Kimeit-kartaram amum 

kalayanti kirtyate Kala nama. 


Kala is thus nothing but Kartrttva or infinite activity, 
agency, and mightiness cut down to the limits of the 
Jiva’s power ; that is lowered to the possibilities of finite 
action. 

(Thus the Saktis of the Supreme which are many 
become contracted.) Consciousness thus limited in six- 
fold manner by its own Sakti is the Purusa associated 
with Prakrti. Kala (in its more generic sense) is said 
in the Saiva-Tantrasara (Ahnika 8) to be “the cause of 
the manifestation of Vidya and the root when She is 
operating on that Kartrtva which is qualified by the 
qualifying conditions of littleness ; this limited power of 
agency having been itself the work of Maya.’ Now the 


THE KANCUKAS 151 


moment that Kala separates from herself what consti- 
tutes this qualifying aspect spoken of above as Kirhcit 
(little) at that very moment there is the creation of the 
Prakrti Tattva which is in the nature of a generality 
(Samanya-matra) unmarked by any specific form of object 
of enjoyment, such as happiness, sorrow and delusion; 
and of which another name is the equalisation of the 
Gunas. Thus the creation under the influence of the 
Kala-tattva of the limited experiencer (Bhoktr) that is 
of the Purusa and of the experienced (Bhogya) or Prakrti 
is quite simultaneous that is without any succession what- 
ever in the process. Thus being simultaneous they are 
ever associated.” 

“The eighth Ahnika of the Tantrasara (the Saiva and 
not the. Sakta ritual work of Krsnananda-Agamavagis'a 
says: Thus it has been already shown that Kala is the 
cause of manifestation of Vidya and the rest (i.e., the 
other four Kaficukas leaving out Maya) when She (Kala) 
is operating on that agency or doer-ness (Kartrtva) which 
is qualified (Visesya) by the qualifying (Visesana) condition 
of littleness; this limited power of agency (Kirncitkartrtva — 
as opposed to Sarva-kartrtva) having been itself the work 
of Maya. Now the moment that Kala separates from 
Herself that which constitutes this qualifying aspect 
(Visesana-bhaga) spoken of above as Kirmcit and is an 
“object of knowledge and action, that very moment there 
is the creation (Sarga) of the Prakrti-Tattva which is 
of the nature of a generality only (Samanya-matra) un- 
marked by any specific forms of the enjoyable (Bhogya) 
such as happiness, sorrow, and delusion (which are there- 
fore as yet undifferentiated) and of which another name is 
the equalisation of their Gunas (i.¢., of Sukha, Duhkha and 
Moha or of the Gunas of Her). Thus the creation under 
the influence of the Kala-Tattva of the Enjoyer (Bhoktr ot 


152 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


limited experiencer) and Enjoyable (Bhogya or experienced) 
is quite simultaneous, that is without any succession 


whatever in the process and being simultaneous they are » 


conjoined. 

(Huan kimeit-kartrtvam yan mayakaryam, tatra kimeit- 
tva-visistam yat kartrtvam, visesyam tatra vyapriyamana 
kala vidyddiprasavacetur iti mripitam. Idanim vis'esa- 
nabhigo yah kirmcid ityukto jneyah karyas' ca tam ydavat 
sd Kala svatmanah prithah kurute tavad esa eva sukha- 
duhkha-mohatmaka-bhogyavisesanusyttasya samdanya-ma- 
trasya tad-guna-samya-para-namnah prakrti-tattvasya sar- 
gah—iti bhoktrbhogya-yugalasya samam eva kald-tattva- 
yatta srstih.) 

7 Again in the Tantraloka (Ahnika 9) it is said “So far 
it has been shown how Agency (Kartrtva) which-is always 
accompanied by the power to enjoy (Bhoktrtva) is (to be 
found) in that qualified aspect (that is Kartrtva) of the 
Tattva called Kala which (aspect) is characterised by a 
limited agency (little-doerness).” 

f Here may be interposed a note of explanation: Kartrtva 
is creative activity, ideation and formation as contrasted 
with a merely induced and passively accepted experience 
which is Jaatrtva, Kartrtva is the power of modifying 
the Idarh. The Sathkhyas say that the Purusa is Bhokta 
but not Karta. But the Saiva-S'aktas hold that there is 
no Kartrtva without Bhoktrtva. In Para-sarnvit there is 
the potential germ of (1) JHiatrtva, (2) Bhoktrtva, (8) 
Kartrtva held iin undistinguishable unity.) In Siva-Sakti- 
Tattva the first exists and the second and third are, 
through S‘akti, suppressed. In Sadakhya there are the 
first and the incipiency of. the second and third; and in 
Is'vara-Tattva all three are developed but as yet undiffe- 
rentiated. The Isvara. consciousness. directed to the 
“Idath” produces equality. of attention on “Aharn” and 


>. 


= Fe eee 
oe | 


THE KANCUKAS 153 


“TIdam”’ which is Sadvidya-Tattva whence arise Maya and 
the Kaficukas evolving Purusa-Prakrti. Para-samvit is 
the pure changeless aspect of Cit. Isvara is the fully 
risen creative consciousness wherein is the undifferentiated 
S'akti which functions as Iccha, Jiana, Kriya, Jiatrtva 


‘ or Jana. Sakti in Is'vara does not involve limited modifi- 


cation, for the whole universe as the Self is present to 
the Self. ‘But in Purusa there is such modification ; the 
Jnatrtva functioning through Buddhi, the Vrttis of which 
are expressions of the changing, limited, and partial charac- 
teristics of the knowledge had through this instrument and 
its derivatives. 

The citation continues, “ But in what constitutes there- 
in the part “ Kirmcit” as a qualifying aspect, Kala gives 
birth to the Pradhana which arises from that (Kircit as- 


pect) as a clear but general objectivity which is separate or 


distinct from (the Purusga),”’ 


Evan kalakhya-tativasya kimeit-kartrtva-laksane. 
Visesyabhage kartrtvam carcitam bhoktr-pirvakam 
Visesanataya yo tra kimcit bhagas-tadihitam. 
Vedyamatram sphutam bhinnam pradhanam sayate kala. 


That is Kartrtva is that aspect of Kala which is 
characterised by Kimcit-Kartrtva. From the qualifying 
(Visegana, that is, Kirhcit) aspect Kala produces Prakrti 
which is distinct from Kala as Purusa, which Prakrti 
exists as a mere general objectivity which becomes parti- 
cular when owing to disequilibrium in the Gunas the 
Vikrtis are produced. » te 

(Again it is said (ibéd.): “ Kala produces the Bhogya 
(Prakrti) and the Bhokta (Purusa) simultaneously by the 
notion of, or by seeking for, a distinction (that is by 
seeking to establish a difference between the two aspects 
in Herself, namely, Kartrtva and Kirmecit; by working 


164 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


on Kartrtva alone,) (yet), the Bhokta and Bhogya are in- 
Separate from one another. And because what is thus 
the barest objectivity (Sarhvedya-matra) is known (or ex- 
perienced) later as (or in the form of) happiness (Sukha) 
Sorrow (Duhkha) and delusion (Vimoha) it is therefore 
called the equalisation of these (three) in the beginning.” 
(Samameva hi bhogyam ca bhoktaram ca prastiiyate kala 
bhedabhisamdhanad aviyuktam parasparam. Evai sam- 
vedyamdatram yat sukhaduhkha-vimohatah, bhotsyate yat 
tatah proktatn tatsamyatmakam dditah). © 

When Maya-S’akti first severs the “ Aham”’ and “ Idarm”’ 
this latter is still experienced as an unlimited whole. The 
next step is that in which the whole is limited and 
broken up into parts, for our experience is not of an 
all-pervading homogeneous whole but of a heterogeneous 
universe. Kala, as a development of Maya-S’akti, belittles 
the Purusa’s hitherto unlimited Agency which thus be- 
comes Kirhcit-Kartrtva. Agency which exists both as to 
the Knowable (Jvieya) and object of action (Karya) has 


two aspects, namely the qualified power of action (Visesya- — 


Kartrtva) on the part of the Purusa and the object or 
“little” in respect of which Kartrtva operates, namely the 
“little” or universe (Kirhcit or Visesana) which is the 
“Idarh” as viewed by Purusa after the operation of Kala 
Sakti. Kala operates on agency (Kartrtva) and not on 
the “this” which ig by such operation necessarily Kirhcit. 
For if the power and experience of the Self ig limited, the 
object is experienced as limited ; for the object is nothing 
but the Self as object. In other words the production of 
Purusa is a positive operation of Kala whereas the produc- 
tion of Prakrti is a negative operation due to the limitation 
of the Purusa which, as so limited, experiences the uni- 
verse as Kircit. Prakrti is thug nothing but the object 
of Kartrtva as it exists when the latter has been whittled 


THE KANCUKAS 155 


down by Kala. Purusa and Prakrti thus both emerge as 
the result of the action by Kala on the Purusa. For this 
reason Purusa and Prakrti are simultaneously produced and 
are also inseparable. 

The following chapters deal with Purusa and Prakrti 
or Harhsa; the Kamakala or three Bindus arising on the 
differentiation of the Para-bindu which differentiation wit- 
nesses the birth of the Harnsa; and then with the creation 
of the impure Tattvas (Asuddha-Tattva) from Prakrti 
and the Varnamala or the Garland or Rosary of Letters the 
evolution of which denotes the origin of speech and of 
Mantra. 


CHAPTER XVI 
HAMSA 


Hawsa is Puruga-Prakrti-Tattva. Hath is “ Male” or Siva; 
Sah is “Female” and Sakti. Siva-S'akti are therefore 
Hathsa, which combined mean the “Bird” Harhsa, the 
Material shape of which is variously said to be that of the 
S00se, flamingo, brahmini duck and rightly by others to be 
legendary. The universe is made of, and informed by this 
Hathsa Pair (Harhsa-dvandva) who are Purusa and Pra- 
krti and in all the latter’s varied forms (Pumprakrtyatmako 
hamsas tadatmakam idarm Jagat). Of these the Ananda- 
lahari says (39) “In Thy Anahata Lotus I salute the 
Wondrous Pair who are Ham and Sah, swimming in the 
mind of the Great who ever delight in the honey of the 
blooming lotus of knowledge.” That is, they manifest in 
the mind of the Great delighting in the honey of Conscious- 
ness. This Harhsah reversed ig the Vedantic ‘ So’harn ” 
of which the Sammohana-Tantra (Ch. VIII) says “ Hakara 
is one wing. Sakara is the other. When stripped of both 
wings then Tara is Kamakala,” Jiva is Harhsa. The same 
Tantra says that the Sadhaka of Tara is the Lord of both 
Kadi and Hadi Mata. The Harhsatara-Mahavidya is the 
sovereign mistress of Yoga whom the Kadis call Kali, the 
Hadis Srisundari and the Ka-Hadis Harhsah. 

The Jfanarnaya-Tantra (xxi-22) speaking of the Cit- 
kunda as the Mandala in the Muladhara where Homa is done, 
defines as follows the four Atmas, viz, Paramatma, Antar- 
atma, Jhanatma and Atma which form the Cit-kunda and by 


HAMSA ; 157 


the knowledge whereof there is no rebirth. Atma is Prana- 
rupi that is the Atma which is in all beings as their Prana. 
It is Harhsa-Svartpi or Jivitma manifested by outer and 
inner breathing (S'vasa, Ucchvasa). It is compared to the 
ether in a pot, which the potter’s wheel separates from the 
surrounding Akasa but from which there is no distinc- 
tion when the pot is broken. The individual breath is the 
Cosmic Breath from which it seems to be different by the 
forms which the latter vitalises. JnHanatma is Saksat-saksi- 
rupaka. It is that which witnesses all and by which the 
unity of all is known. It is reflected in Buddhi and the 
rest, and is yet in its own form distinguishable therefrom, 
just as the rays of the moon are reflected on water and 
seem to be, and are yet not, one withit. It is thus the 
substratum of Buddhi and of all the subjective or mental 
Tattvas derivable/ therefrom. By “Antar” in the term 
Antaratma is meant the subtle (Rahasya-sikgmarapaka) 
Atma which pervades all things; the spark of Paramatma 
which indwells all bodies (Antargata). It is the Harmsa 
nown only by Yogis. Its beak is Tara (Pranava or 
“Om” Mantra). Nigama and Agama are its two wings. 
Siva and S'akti its two feet. The three Bindus are its 
three eyes. This is the Paramahatnsa; that is Harhsa 
in its supreme aspect as the Consciousness-ground of the 
manifested Harnsa or Jiva. When this Parama-harsa 
is spread (Vyapta), that is, displayed, then all forms of 
matter (Bhuita), viz., Akasa, Pavana and the rest spring 
up in their order. Of these five the root ig Citta. This 
Harhsa disports itself in the World-lotus sprung from the | 
Mud of Delusion (Mohapanka) in the Lake of Ignorance 
(Avidya), When this Hathsa becomes unworldly (Nispra- 
pafica) and in dissolving form (Sarmhararupi) then it 
makes visible the Atma or Self (Atmanam pradarsayet). 
Then its “ Birdness” (Paksitva) disappears and the 


158 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


So’ham Atma is established. “ Know this” says the 
Jianarnava “to be the Paramatma,” 

Puruga is Atma subject to Maya-Sakti and the other 
limiting ‘Saktis called the Kajicukas. Prakrti is that 
state of Sakti which arises as the result of the colleo- 
tive operation of Maya and the Kaficukas; a transforma- 
tion of Sakti existing as a homogeneity and general 
objectivity which develops of its own power, which is the 
summation of the Saktis producing it, into the hetero- 
geneous universe. The Purusa-Prakrti-Tattvas arise as 
a bifurcation in Consciousness on the differentiation of 
the Para-bindu into the three Bindus which form the 
Kamakala, which again may be pictured as the triangular 
base of the pyramidal (Srmgataka) figure in the Sri- 
Yantra at whose apex is the Baindava-Cakra and Para- 
bindu. The three Bindus represent the Siva aspect and 
the Slakti aspect of the one Consciousness, and the third 
the mutual relation or Sliva-Sakti aspect of the two. 
From this differentiation arises in the Mantra line of 
creation Para-sabda and manifested Sabda and Artha ; 
in the Tattva line Buddhi and the rest ; and in the line 
of the Lords of the Tattvas (Tattvesa) Sarhbhu and the 
rest. In its most general and philosophical sense Purusa- 
Prakrti represent that stage in the evolving Consciousness 
(Sakti) in which, after passing from the mere I-experience 
(Aharpratyaya-vimarsa), and the “T-this” or “Ahard- 
Idarh,” experience, in which the object or Idarn is still 
experienced as part of the self (the completed type of such 
experiencer being Isvara), Consciougness emerges as the 
experience of duality in which the object is seen as outside 
of, and separate from, the self. This however is a state of 
mere general objectivity. The final state has yet to be 
described when undifferentiated objectivity and supreme 


Sound (Parasabda) evolve, the first into the differentiated 


HAMSA 159 


objects of the universe (As'uddha-Tattva) and the second 
into the differentiated word (S'abda) and its meaning (Artha) 
which is the birth of Mantra consisting of letters (Varna), 
syllables (Pada) and sentences (Vakya). With the differen- 
tiation of Prakrti appear multitudinous Purusas of vary- 
ing experience, each living in a universe of its own. 

Purusa is not merely confined to man but is appli- 
cable to every Jiva who is the Enjoyer (Bhokta) or Purusa 
of the enjoyable (Bhogya) or Prakrti. Purusa again is 
not limited to the organic life of animals and plants or the 
micro-organisms which hover between organic and inorganic 
matter. The term includes the latter also. For whatever 
may be the popular signification of the term Jiva as living 
organic bodies, in its philosophical sense all is Jivatma 
which is not Paramatma. And in this, modern science 
bears. out the notions here described. The former arbitrary 
partitions made between the living and non-living are being 
broken down. We may for practical purposes call that 
“living”? which obviously displays certain characteristics 
which we call “ life’”’ such as the so-called vital phenomena 
manifested by plants, animals and men. But the life and 
consciousness displayed in organic bodies is not something 
wholly new which had no place in the inorganic material 
of which they are composed. All such vital phenomena 
exist in subdued or potential form in every kind of matter 
which contains the potentiality of all life. Life as we 
know it is the phenomenal aspect of Being-Itself (Sat). 
Feeling-Consciousness as we know it is the limited mani- 
festation (manifestation being limitation) of the un- 
differentiated Feeling-Consciousness which is Cit, Sat 
and Ananda. All which is manifested exists potentially 
in its ground. Hach of such manifestations is such 
ground (Bhumi) veiled in varying degrees; now more, 
now less fully displaying the nature of Spirit, the source 


160 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


of all life, feeling, will, and consciousness. Superficial 
notions based on appearances have given rise to the 
notion of “dead” matter. But science has given new 
instruments for, and extended the range of our observation 
and has shown that life and consciousness, though 
in a subdued or veiled form, exist throughout the 
universe. Vedanta in its Sakta version says that all 
forms are the operation of Consciousness as Maya-S‘akti. 
As the ancient Upanisad says and modern so-called “‘ New 
thought” repeats “What one thinks that one becomes.” 
All recognise this principle to a certain point. If man 
thinks inhuman thoughts he dehumanises himself. Vedanta 
carries the application of this principle to its logical con- 
clusion and affirms that not only does thought operate 
modifications in and within the limits of particular types 
or species, but actually evolves such and all other types 
through the cosmic or collective Thought of which the 
universe is a material expression. Thus every unit or 
atom of matter is a Puruga identifying itself with the 
Solid (Parthiva) “crust” of matter, which is the gross 
expression on the sensual plane of more subtle forces 
emanating from that Ground Substance, which is the source 
both of the experiencing subject and the object experi- 
enced. If the operation of gross matter gives the appear- 
ance of rigid mechanism, this does not imply that such 
operation is wholly unconscious and lifeless, but that life 
and consciousness are veiled by the Tamas Guna, of Prakrti 
in which Kala, Niyati and other Kajicukas are operating 
to their fullest extent. But however intense may be their 
operation, life and consciousness can never be destroyed, 
for being Sakti Herself they are indestructible. Thus 
every molecule of mineral substance is a Purusa or Con- 
sciousness identifying itself with matter in its solid and 
apparently unconscious inert state. For Consciousness 


pee 


HAMSA 161 


becomes that with which it identifies itself. When it com- 
pletely identifies itself with mineral matter it becomes that 
matter. What we think that we become. Nothing how- 
ever is absolutely unconscious or inert. Hvery single atom 
in the universe is in constant movement and hence the 
world is called Jagat or that which moves. This scientific 
doctrine is in India an ancient inheritance. And so the 
Mantra runs “Hrim. The Supreme Harhsa dwells in the 
brilliant Heaven.’’ The word Harhsa is here said to be 
derived from the word Hanti which means Gati or motion. 
Sayana says that it is called Aditya because it is in perpetual 
motion. The Tattva-Sarhdoha (vv. 18, 14) says: 

“She is considered to be Prakrti who is the collectivity 
of all the Saktis, (Will, Knowledge and Action) who is 
the peaceful, that is, quiescent (Santa) S'akti of Him in 
coutracted form (Sarhkucadrupa); who is in the form of 
the equilibrium of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas Gunas which 
again are Will, Knowledge and Action gathered together 
(Sarhkalita) ; who is in the nature of general unparticularised 
feeling (Citta) which is in the form of the undifferen- 
tiated Buddhi (and other Tattvas).” 

Icchadi-tri-samastth 
saktih sant@ sya samkucadriupa. 
Sankalitechadydadtmaka- 
sattvadika-samya-riipini saiva. 
Buddhyddi-samarasya- 
svarupacitiatmika mataprakrtih. 

“Hath” or the male (Puman) or Purusa is again in 
the same work (v. 6) described as: 

“He who having by Her become of limited form with 
all His powers contracted is this Male (Puman or Purusa) 
like the sun which becoming red at eventide and His Power 
(of shining) contracted can scarce reveal Himself (by shin- 
ing abroad) ”’. 

11 


162 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Sa tay@ parimitamartih 
samkucita-samastasiaktir esah puman. 
Raviriva samdhyd-raktah 
samhrta-saktih svabhasane’py apatuh. 


Again in the same work (v. 7) it is said: 

“His Saktis are many consisting of complete Kar- 
trtva (power of action) and others, but on His becoming 
contracted (that is, limited) they also become contracted 
in the forms of Kala and the rest and make him thus 
manifest (as Purusa) ”. 


Samnpirna-kartrtvadya 

bahvyah santyasya saktayas tasya. 
Samkocdat samkucitah 

kaladiripena rudhayanty evam. 


Again in the Isvara-Pratyabhijia it is said : 

“He who is Experiencer commencing with Sinya 
(Sivatattva) and the rest, He being clothed by the five 
Kaficukas, Kala and the rest, and becoming object to Him- 
self, is then the Experiencer of objects as separate from 
Him”, 

Yas' ca pramata stinyadih prameye vyatirekini 

Mata as meyah san kaladika-pancaka-vestitah. 
(III-ii 9) 
That is, object is the Self appearing as such. He retains 
His own Self-hood and becomes at the same time the 
object of His own experience. Maya is not something 
apart from Brahman, for it is Brahman who through 
Maya, an aspect of Brahman, Himself becomes His own 
object. In the first act of Creation He commences to 
become His own object, but it ig only when the subject 
as Purusa is clothed, that is limited, by the Kaficukas, 
that the latter sees objects ag other than and outside 


HAMSA 168 


Himself. At this stage duality is established and exfoliates 
in the Vikrtis of Prakrtis as the multiple experience of the 
World of Mind and Matter. 

The Gunas of Prakrti are inadequately translated as 
“qualities”, because the latter word involves some Sub- 
stance of which they are the qualities. But Prakrti Sakti 
is, as Prakrti, the Gunas and nothing else, though Her 
Svartpa, as that of all Saktis, is Sat-Cit-Ananda. The 
Gunas Sattva, Rajas, Tamas are properly factors or con- 
stituents of Prakrti. Of these it is commonly said that 
Tamas Guna is the veiling principle of Prakrti. This is 
80. But nevertheless it is to be remembered that all the 
factors of Prakrti in one way or another veil ; the difference 
being that whereas Sattva to some degree veils (for Sattva- 
guna is not as such the same as absolute Sat) it is in its 
highest degree of potency, that is, predominance, the least 
degree of veiling, and therefore it represents the tendency 
to unveil, that is, to reveal and manifest Being (Sat) and 
Consciousness (Cit); whereas Tamas is in its highest 
potency the greatest degree of veiling and therefore speci- 
fically represents the tendency to veil. Rajas is the opera- 
tive power in both cases. In all bodies there are the three 
Gunas (for these cannot separately exist though one or 
other may predominate), and it is because of this and there- 
fore of the presence of Sattva-Guna in organic matter 
that it exhibits the rudiments of sentiency and conscious- 
ness. But in inorganic matter Tamas Guna prevails. Ag 
bodies evolve, the strength of the operation of Tamas gradu- 
ally diminishes and that of Sattva increageg until in man it 
becomes predominant. The whole object of Sadhana is to 
increase Sattva-Guna until, on man becoming wholly Sat- 
tvika, his body passes from the state of predominant Sattva- 
Guna into Sat Itself. These Gunas represent in the Jiva 
or Pasu the Iccha, Kriya, Jiana and Maya-S'aktis of 


164 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


the Lord. As regards Maya, the Lord (Mayin), as the 
Kularnava-Tantra says, wields and controls and is free of 
it; Jiva is controlled by it. So the Isvara-Pratyabijia 
(IV, 1, 4) says, “ What are Jiana and Kriya (on the part) 
of the Lord (Pati) in all beings and things (Bhavesu) 
which (to Him) are really of the nature of His own body 
(or limbs)—it is these two (that is Jiana and Kriya) and 
nothing else (eva) which together with Maya as the third 
are the Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas (Gunas in respect) of 
the Pasu”’, 

Svdiga-ripesu bhavesu patyurjnanam kriya ca ya. 

Maya trtiyad taé eva pasoh sattvam.rajas tamah. 

Siva-sakti has a threefold aspect as Iccha, Jiana, 
Kriya, which are inseparably associated, just as the Gunas 
are, though, as in the latter case, one or other may be 
predominant. Of these again Iccha and Kriya may be 
considered together; for as resolve is directed to action 
it is the preliminary of it. Iccha in the S’aiva-Sastra 
is described as state of wonder (Sa camatkara Iccha- 
saktth) in the Purusa. But Kriya considered (for the 
purpose of analysis only) as apart from Jiana is blind. 
For this reason Kriya has been associated with Tamas. 
It is very clearly explained by Ksemaraja in his Tattva- 
Sandoha (vv. 18-15), that Iccha or resolve to action 
becomes at a lower stage Rajas Guna, the principle of 
activity in Prakrti; Jnana becomes Sattva or the principle 
of manifestation in the same; and Kriya becomes Tamas 
Guna or the specific veiling principle of the same form of 
Sakti. He says, “His Will (Iccha) assumed the form 
of Rajas and became Aharhkara which produces the notion 
of ‘I’ (Aha). His knowledge (Jiiana) likewise became 
Sattvartpa and Buddhi which igs the determining form of 
experience. His Kriya being in the nature of Tamas and 
productive of Vikalpa (and Sathkalpa), 7.e., rejection (and 


HAMSA 165 


selection) is called Manas” (Icchasya rajo-ripadhamkrti- 
rasid aham-pratitikart jrandpi sattvariipa nirnayabodhasya 
karanam buddhith, Tasya kriya tamomaya-mirtir mana 
ucyate vikalpakar?). 

The evolution of these Tattvas (Asuddha) is the 
subject of a future chapter. But before dealing with 
these it is necessary, in the creative order, to further describe 
the Kamakala in which the Harhsa arises and the Rosary 
or Garland of letters (Varnamala) which is the Mantra 
aspect of the Tattvika evolution will come later. 


CHAPTER XVII 
KAMAKALA 


In the previous chapters it has been shown that the Para- 
bindu or Is'vara Tattva assumes in creation a threefold 
aspect as the three Bindus,—Bindu (Karya), Nada, Bija. 
These three Points constitute symbolically a Triangle which 
is known as the Kamakala. Kama is of course not here 
used in the gross sense of desire, sexual or otherwise, but of 
Iccha, the Divine creative Will towards the life of form, 
which is here explicated from Bindu, the aspect previously 
assumed by Sakti through Nada (Bindutam abhyett). The 
undivided supreme Cit-sakti (Akhanda-paracicchakti) be- 
coming desirous of appearing as all the Tattvas (Samas- 
ta-tativabhavena vivarttecchasamanvitd) assumes the Bindu 
aspect (Bindubhavang parycti) characterised by @ pre- 
dominance of activity (Kriyd-pradhdanya-laksand). Here 
it may be observed that Iccha or Will is a form of Kriya 
(action): in the sense that it is the preliminary to action 
and sets the Self in motion. Sakti passes from potency 
through Will to action, which through Para Bindu mani- 
fests. Bindu-bhava is that state (Isvara-tattva) in which it 
is fully equipped to work and does so. Its threefold aspect 
as it works are Bindu Sivatmaka, Bija Saktyatmaka and 
Nada. Nada is Samavaya that is relationship or connection 
(Sarhbandha) as exciter (Ksobhaka) and that which is 
exited (Ksobhya), which relation is the cause of creation 
(Srstihetu). The Sarada (I. 10) then proceeds to deal 


KAMAKALA 167 


with the appearance of the three Devis and three Devas 
which are in the nature of the three Saktis. (Iocha, etc.) 
and Fire, Moon and Sun. Having then dealt with S'abda- 
srsti it proceeds to describe Artha-srsti (I. 15), giving first 
the line of Devas from S'iambhu who are the Lords of 
the Tattvas (Tattves'a) and then that part of Artha-srsti 
which is Tattva-srsti or the evolution of the Tattvas of 
mind and matter from Buddhi to Prthivi. 

It is not easy in all cases to discover and set forth an 
accurate summary of the Devis, Devas, Saktis and so forth 
in S'abda-srsti: because the Texts being in verse are not 
always to be read as they stand, the order of words being 
in some cases regulated by the metre. As the author 
of the Pranatosini says in dealing with a citation from 
the Goraksa-Samhita, the texts must not be read “ Prati- 
sabdarh ’, that is, according to the order of the words, but 
“ Vathasambhavam ”, according to the facts. But this does 
not relieve us from the difficulty of ascertaining what is the 
fact; that is, the real order. Other elements may also 
enter into the calculation: for instance, as Raghava-Bhatta 
points out, the order of Saktis varies in Is’vara and Jiva. 
In the former it is Iccha, Jiana, Kriya and in Jiva, Jaana, 
Iccha, Kriya. In Isvara’s ideation (Pratyabhijiia) when 


- He desires to do anything, an act of volition proceeds from 


Him (Svecchaya kriya) to know or to do it (Taj jnatum 
kartum va); next there is the capacity for cognising such 
acts (Tat karya-jndna-darsana-saktitaé) which is Jiana- 
sakti; thirdly the gross effort (Sthalah samudyamah) is 
the Kriya-sakti (Kriyasaktita) from which the whole 
world proceeds (Latah sarvam jagat param). Raghava 
also points out that there is a difference of order in S'abda- 
‘srsti and Artha-srsti. Thus in dealing with the Pranava 
it is said, “A (the letter) which is Sun is Brahma: “ but 
here in the Sarada verse, “Visnu is Sun.” I will first 


| 


168 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


give the order as it is given in the Sarada Text (y. 10): 
“From .Bindu came Raudri; from Nada Jyestha, from 
Bija, Vama. From these came Rudra. Brahma, Rama- 
dhipa (Visnu) ”, 

Raudri bindos tato naddj jyesththa byad ajayata 

Vama, tabhyah samutpanna rudrabrahmaramadhipah. 

It then continues, “Who are in the nature of Jiana, 
Iccha, Kriya and Fire, Moon and Sun (vy. 11) (Samjra- 
necchakriyatmano vahnindvarkasvaripinan), who are in 
the form (Rupa) of Nirodhika, Arddhendu and Bindu.” 
These are all different states of Sakti (S'akterevavastha- 
visesah), for it is owing to their arising from Sakti 
(Saktitah utpannaivat), that they are identified with the 
S'aktis Iecha and go forth. 

According to the Yogini-hrdaya-Tantra (1) the order is 
(a) Iccha, Vama, Pasyanti; (b) Jiana, Jyestha, Madh- 
yama; (c) Kriya, Raudri, Vaikhari. It says that when 
Iccha-S'akti in the form of a goad (Armnkusakara, that is, 
the bent line Vakrarekha) is about to display the universe 
which is in seed (Bija) form, She is Vama and in the form 


of Pasyanti Slabda. Pasyanti “She who sees,” Iksana. 


ama is so called because this Sakti vomits forth the 
universe (Vamanat Vama). Jyestha which is in the 
form of a Straight line (Rjurekha) attaining the state of 
Matrka (Matrkatuam Upapanna) is Madhyama vak. Raudri 
is Kriya in triangular or pyramidal (S'rngataka), that 
is, three-dimensional form, and is the manifested Vaikhari- 
S'abdha. According to the Kamakalavilasa (Comm. v. 22), 
Yoginihrdaya-Tantra, (Sathketa 1), and the Saubhagyasud- 
hodaya (cited in Sarhketa (2) of the last S'astra), the 
order would appear to be (¢) Iccha Rajas Vama Brahma 
Pas'yanti-Sabda; (b) Jnana, Sattva Jyestha Visnu Mad- 
hyama-S'abda; (c) Kriya Tamas Raudri Rudra Vaikhari- 
S'abda. 12 : ? 


ee eee | 


— 


KAMAKALA 169 


I will not however here attempt a discussion, which 
-would be both lengthy and technical, of the texts on this 
point. For present practical purposes it is sufficient to 
know that the three Bindus are Siva, S'akti, Sivasakti ; 
Prakasa, Vimars’a, Prakas’a-Vimars'a; White, Red. and 
Mixed; Bindu, Nada, Bija; Supreme, Subtle, Gross; the 
three Devis, the three Devas, and the three S'aktis of Will, 
Knowledge and Action. The Supreme at this point thus 
becomes a Trinity of Energy. 

The division of the Mahabindu may be memorised by 
writing in Sanskrit the “Fire” Bija or “ Ratm”’, that is 
Ra with Candra-bindu (®). Then invert the Nada sign 
which will thus represent the Moon (Indu), the Bindu, the 
Sun (Ravi), and the Ra, Fire (Agni). The Triangle may 
be formed by drawing two sides or a bent line and then 
completing it with a straight line. At the apex place the 
Ravi-bindu (Sun) and at the left and right hand corners 
Vahni-bindu (Fire) and Moon (Candra-bindu). | Between 
Sun and Moon place Vama Vakrarekha and Brahma; — 
between Fire and Moon, Jyestha and Visnu; and between 
Moon and Sun, Raudri, Rjurekha and Rudra. Between 
each of the points are lines formed by all the letters 
(Matrka-varna) of the alphabet called the A-Ka-Tha 


triangle. The Padukapaficaka, a Hymn attributed to Siva, 


(See Serpent Power) speaks of A-Ka-Tha in the second 
verse on which Kalicarana comments as follows: Here 
Sakti is Kamakala in form and the three S'aktis (Vama, 
Jyestha, Raudri) emanating from the three Bindus are the 
three. lines. The sixteen vowels beginning with A form 
the. line Vama, the sixteen letters beginning with Ka form 
the line Jyestha and the sixteen letters beginning with 
Tha form the line Raudri. The abode of Sakti (Abalalaya) 
is formed by these three lines. The other three letters Ha, La, 
Ksa are in the corners of the Triangle. Kalyaradhvatnnaya 


170 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


says, “The Tribindu is the Supreme Tattva and em- 
bodies in Itself Brahma, Visnu, Siva (Brahma-visnu- 
swwatmakam). The Triangle composed of the Letters has 
emanated from the Bindu; ” also “ The letters A to Visarga 
make the line Brahma, the letters Ka to Tha the line Visnu, 
and the letters Tha to Sa the Rudra. The three lines 
emanate from the three Bindus. The Gunas, as aspects of 
Sakti, are also represented by this threefold division. The 
Tantrojivana says: “The lines Rajas, Sattva, Tamas sur- 
tound the Yonimandala.” Also “above is the line of 
Sattva, the line of Rajas is on its left and the line of 
Tamas on its right,” 

The Slabda-brahman in its threefold aspect and 
Energies is represented in the Tantras by this triangular 
Kamakala which is the abode of Sakti (Abalalaya). The 
Triangle is in every way an apposite symbol, for on the 
material plane if there are three forms there is no other 
way in which they can be brought to interact except in the 
form of a triangle in which whilst they are each, as aspects, 
Separate and distinct from one another, they are yet related 
to each other and form part of one whole. In the Agama- 
kalpadruma, it is said that the Bindu is Harh (one point) 
and Visargah (two points) is Sah or Sakti. The Yamala 
thus speaks of this abode, “I now speak of Kamakala,” 
and proceeding says, “She is the Eternal One who is the 
three Bindus, the three Saktis and the three forms (Tri- 
murtti)”. The Mahesvari-Samhita says: ‘Sun, Moon and 
Fire are the three Bindus and Brahma, Visnu, Rudra the 
three lines.” The Lalita-sahasranama calls the Devi, Kima- 
kalarapa, Bhaskararaya in his commentary thereon (v. 73) 
says that Kama or creative will (Iccha) is both Siva 
and Devi and Kala is their manifestation. Hence it is called 
Kamakala. This is explained in the Tripura-siddhanta: “Oh 
Parvati, Kala is the manifestation of Kamesvara and 


KAMAKALA 171 


Kamesvari. Hence She is known as Kamakala. Or, She 
is the manifestation (Kala) of Desire (Kama), that is, of 
Iccha-Sakti. The Devi is the great Tripurasundari. Bhas- 
kararaya’s Guru Nrsimhanandanatha wrote the following 
verse on which the disciple comments : 

“T hymn Tripura, the treasure of Kula, who is red of 
beauty; Her limbs like unto those of Kamaraja who is 
adored by the three Devatas of the three Gunas; who is 
the desire or Will of Siva (according to the Anekartha- 
dhvani-manjari lexicon I= Manmatha = Kama=Iccha) who 
dwells in the Bindu and who manifests the Universe.” 
She is red because She is the Vimarsa-sakti. She is 
called (says the Commentator cited) Tripura as She has 
three (Tri) Puras (literally cities or abodes), here meaning 
three Bindus, lines, angles, syllables and so forth. She 
has three angles (in the triangular Yoni the source of the 
universe) as well as three circles (the three Bindus) and the 
Bhupura of Her Yantra has three lines. Yoni does not 
here mean generative organ, but Karana—the Cause of the 
universe. She has three aspects and creates the three 
Devatas through the three Saktis, Vama and others, and 
manifests as Will, Knowledge and Action. Thus since 
She the Supreme Energy is everywhere triple, She is 
called Tripurasundazi. The three syllables of Her Mantra 
are the three divisions of the Paficadasi, namely Vag- 
bhava, Kamaraja and Sakti-Katas, which according to 
the Vamakes'vara-Tantra are the Jiana and other S'aktis. 
The Kama-bija is Klim and Klirh-kara is S'ivakama. Here 
“I” is gaid to denote the Kamakala in the Turiya 
state through which Moksa is gained, and hence the 
meaning of the saying that “he who hears the Bija 
without Ka and La does not reach the place of good 
actions ’—that is he does not go to the region attain- 
able by good actions but to that (Moksa) attainable by 


172 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Jfiana alone. The Bhava-cudamani says: “ Meditate on 
the face in the form of Bindu, and below on the twin 
breasts. (the two other Bindus) and below them the beaute- 
ous form of the Hakararddha. The commentator on the 
Anandalahari says: “In the fifth sacrifice (Yajiia) let the 
Sadhaka think of his Atma as in no wise different from, 
but as the one and only Siva; and of the subtle thread, 
like Kundalini who is all Saktis extending from the 
Adhara Lotus to Paramasiva. Let him think of the 
three Bindus as being in Her body indicating Iccha, 
Jfana, Kriya; Moon, Sun, Fire; Rajas, Sattva, Tamas; 
Brahma, Visnu, Rudra; and then let him meditate upon 
the Cit-kala who is Sakti below it.’ The Bindu which 
is the “Face” indicates Virifici (Brahma) associated with 
the Rajas Guna. The two Bindus which are the “ Breasts” 
and upon which meditation should be done in the heart 
indicate Hari (Visnu) and Hara (Rudra) associated with 
the Sattva and Tamas Gunas. Below these meditate upon 
the subtle Cit-kala which indicates all three Gunas and 
which is all these three Devatas. Similar meditation is 
given in Yogini (and other) Tantras winding up with the 
direction, “and then let the Sadhaka think of his own body 
as such Kamakala, 

As regards this it ig to be observed that in the Mula- 
dhara there is a Traipura-Trikona, so-called because of the 
presence of the Devi Tripura within the Ka inside the 
triangle. This Ka is the chief letter of the Kama-Bija and 
Kam is the Bija of Kamini, the aspect of Tripurasundari 
inthe Maladhara. Here also are the three lines, Vama, 


Iccha and so forth. Thus the Traipura Trikona is the. 


Sthala aspect of the ‘Suksma-S’akti in the region of the 
upper Sahasrara called Kamakala. It is to this Kamini 
that in worship the essence of Japa (Tejo-ripa-japa) is 
offered, the external Japa being given to the Devata 


KAMAKALA “173 


worshipped in order that the Sadhaka may retain the fruits 
of his Japa. (Nityapiijapaddhati 8). Man physically and 
psychically is a limited manifestation of this threefold 
Sakti which resides within himself and is the object of 
worship. Such worship leads to identification and so the 
Sritattvarnava says: “Those glorious men who worship 
that Body in Samarasya are freed from the waves of 
poison in the untraversable sea of the universe (Sarhsara).” 
Samarasya, I may here observe, is a term which is ordi- 
narily applied to the bliss of sexual union (Strtpwryogat 
yat saukhyam tat sdmarasyam). For the benefit however 
of those who are always reading gross meanings into parts 
of the Gastra alien to them it is necessary to explain that 
Samarasya is both gross (Sthtila) and subtle (Stuksma), 
Here the latter is meant. An erotic symbol is employed 
to denote the merger of the Jiva and Supreme Consciousnegg 
in Eostasy (Samadhi). The Tantras largely employ such 
imagery which is to be found in the Upanisads and in 
non-Indian scriptures. Thus the highly sensual imagery 
of the Biblical “Song of Songs” is said (whether rightly 
or not, I will not here inquire) to symbolise Christ’s love 
for His Bride, the Church. Spiritual union is symbolised 
by terms borrowed from the world of man. By Mantra-yoga 
is sought that perfection and unity of Bhava which leads 
to Jhanayoga Samadhi. 

“On the division of the Supreme Bindu (into the 
threefold Kama-kalai) there was the Unmanifested Sound ” 
(Bhidyamanat paradd bindor avyaktatma ravo bhavat, 
Sfarada-I-11). This is the Sabda-brahman or the Brahman 
as hthe: eausevol manifested Sabda and Artha and there- 
fore of Mantra. This causal “Sound” is the unmanifesteq 
(Avyaktatma), undifferentiated (Akhanda) principle of 
Slabda (Nadamatra), composed of Nada and Bindu (Nada- 
bindumaya), devoid of all particularity such as letters and 


174 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


the like (Varnadivigesa-rahita). Some, as the Sarada 
says (V. 12), have thought that the S’abda-brahman was 
Sabda and others Sabdartha, but this cannot be, for 
both are unconscious (Jadatvat). “In my opinion,” its 
author says (y. 18), “ Sabda-brahman is the Consciousness 
in all beings” (Caitanyam sarvabhatanam sabda-brah- 
mett me matih). For if Sabdartha or Slabda be called 
Sabda-brahman then the meaning of the term Brahman 
is lost (Brahmapadavacyatvam nopapadyate) ; for the mean- 
ing of the term Brahman (Brahmapadartha) is Sat-Cit- 
Ananda (Saccidanandartpa), whilst these are unconsci- 
ous (Jada). Raghava-Bhatta says that Sabda-brahman is 
Nadabindumaya Brahman (Brahmatmaka) Sound (S/abda) 
unmanifested (Avyakta), undifferentiated (Akhanda), all 


pervading (Vyapaka), which is the first manifestation of 
Paramasiva in creative m 


ood (Srstyunmukha-paramasiva- 
prathamollasamatram). 


He also cites a passage from some 
work unnamed which says that out of Prakrti in Bindu 
form in whom Kriya-Sakti prevails (Kriyas'aktipradha- 
nayah prakrter bindu-ripinyah) arose the Supreme S‘abda- 
brahman the cause of S'abda and S'abdartha (S’abda-s‘abdartha- 
karanath). The Sound (Rava) here spoken of is in the form 
of Bindu (Bindu-rapa), which later appears in all bodies as 
the Matrkas and Varnas in their respective places. The 
Sarada (I. 14) having thus dealt with Paras‘abdasrsti con- 
cludes in a general way, “ Consciousness which is the 
Svarupa of, and appears as, Kundali-Sakti in the bodies of 
all living beings manifests as Letters in prose and verse, 


having obtained the instruments for utterance which are 
the throat and so forth,” 


Tat prapya kundaliripam pramnam dehamadhyagam. 

Varnatmandavirbhavati gadyapadyadibhedatah. 

The subsequent Sabdasrsti ig derived from Kunda- 
lini. The Kamakala igs thus called the root (Mala) of all 


KAMAKALA 175 


Mantras, for it is the threefold aspect of the S'abda-brahman, 
the cause of all manifested Sabda and Artha and there- 
fore Mantra. In a future article I will continue the account 
of the creative process, namely, the Artha-srsti in which 
are included the Tattvas from Buddhi to Prthiyi and 
the Lords (Tattvesa) or forms of Consciousness which 
preside over them. These are necessarily dealt with in 
connection with the Tattvas over which they preside. In 
the same way Pasyanti, Madhyama, and Vaikhari states 
of sound are also dealt with, because Pasyanti and the 
others only exist in the created body. Para-sabda is un- 
manifested Caitanya, but the other Three Feet of the 
One Brahman are set in the manifested world of Mind 
and Matter. 


CHAPTER XVIII 


THE GROSS TATTVAS AND THEIR LORDS 


THE Sarada-Tilaka (Chapter I) having first dealt with 
S'abda-srsti on account of its priority (Pradhanyadyota- 
naya prathamoddistam) commences with the fifteenth 
verse to speak of the creation of objects (Artha-srsti), for 
Pas'yanti and the other Bhavas assume the existence of 
the manifested body. It says that from S'arhbhu who is 
in the nature of Kala (Kalatmanah) and Bindu (Bindvat- 
manah) and friend of Kala (Kalabandhu), issued (Ajayata) 
the “ Witness of the World ” (Jagatsaksi), the all pervading 
(Sarvavyapi) Sadas‘iva. Raghava says Kala is here either 
used generally, or as referring to the Nivrtti and other 
Kalas which S/arhbhu produces. By “friend of Kala” ig 
meant that Sarhbhu is in the nature of Nada (Nadatma), 
because in unbeginning and unending Time He is the 
helper of Kala which ig Srsti (Anddyanante kale srsti- 
ripakdlasahayat). The connection again is one between 
cause and its possessor. Again “friend” indicates the 
causality (Nimittatvath) of Kala. For it has been said : 
“Tt has its beginning in Lava and ends in Pralaya and is 
full of Tamas Sakti.” Lava ig the time taken to pierce 
. With a needle a lotus-petal. Thirty Lavas=one Truti. This 

Kala is Apara, for there is also Para Kala. Kala or Maya 
is the cause of the occurrence of birth and destruction. 
Raghava concludes that Prakrti,and Kala exist in even 
Mahapralaya. But their permanence (Nityata) is a dependent 


THE GROSS TATTVAS AND THEIR LORDS 177 


one (Apeksaka-nityata). For the permanence of the Purusa 
in which all things have their goal is alone independent 
(Svaton-ityatvarh). 

From S'arhbhu emanated the Sadas'iiva who is the 
Doer of the five forms of work, namely Creation, Preserva- 
tion and Destruction, Favour (Anugraha) and Disfavour 
(Nigraha). From Sadasiva comes Isia, from Him Rudra, 
from Rudra Visnu, from Visnu Brahma (v. 16). On this 
verse Raghava says: “It has been said before how they 
arise in S'abda-srsti. Here they arise in Artha-srsti.” 

The five Sivas are known in the Tantras as the “ Five 
great corpses” (Pafica-mahapreta). Siva is constantly 
represented in corpse-like (S'avaripa) form. This sym- 
bolises that Consciousness in Itself (Svartipa) is actionless 
and inert. All action is by S'akti. Hence the Devi is in 
pictures imaged as standing on the inert corpse-life body 
of Siva. The same notion is represented by Viparita- 
matthuna, a. prominent example: of the use of erotic 
symbolism in the Sakta-Sastra. These Pafica-mahapreta 
form the couch on which the Devi, Wave of Conscious- 
ness and Bliss, rests in the house of Cintamani adorned 
with a garden of Nipa trees, which is in the Island of 
Gems, surrounded with a grove of celestial trees, in the 
midst of the ocean of nectar (Anandalahati), This ig 
the well-known Tantrika meditation on the Heart-lotus of 
worship below the Anahata-cakra. The Bahurapastaka 
and Bhairava-yamala say: “There is the supreme abode 
(Mandira) of Devi full of Cintamani stones (which grant 
all desires). The great couch is Sliva, the cushion or 
mattress (Kas'ipu) is Sadas'iva, the pillow the great Is’ana. 
The four supports (Pada) are Isana, Rudra, Hari, and 
Brahma. On that Bed reclines the supreme Tripura- 
sundari.” Hence the Devi in the Lalitasahasranama (v. 73) 


is called Pafica-brahmasanasthita. The “ Jewelled Island” 
12 


178 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


is a high state of Consciousness in that Ocean of Nectar 
which is the infinite all-pervading Consciousness Itself. 
The Devi is united with Paramasiiva in the Pranava; the 
Nada over the Orhkara being the couch on which is resting 
Parasiva in His Bindu form. A,U,M, Nada, Bindu the 
five component parts of Om and the Sri-cakra-Yantra are 
here referred to. 

The supreme Paramasiva abides in Satyaloka beyond 
mind and matter. Sarhbhu presides over mind and His 
abode is Maharloka. Ether, air, fire, water, earth are presid- 
ed over by Sadasiva, Iva, Rudra, Visnu, Brahma whose 
abodes are Tapoloka, Janaloka, Svarloka, Bhuvarloka, 
Bhirloka; and their centres in the human body are in the 
Ajfia, Visuddha, Anahata, Maniptira, Svadhisthana, and 
Muladhara-Cakras, respectively. Kundali-S'akti manifests 
as the six. But notwithstanding all Her subtle and gross 
manifestations She remains ever the same Cit and Ananda; 
for the Atma in its own nature (Svariipa) as distinguished 
from its Powers and their products is the same in all times 
and places. 

Turning then to the Tattvas the Sarada says (v. 17) 
that from the unmanifest Mulabhtta (Prakrti or root of 
all creation) of the Supreme (Paravastu—Bindu) when 
subject to change (Vikrti) issued, through inequality of 
the Gunas, the Sattvika-Tattva Mahat in the form of the 
Antahkarana and Gunas. 

Mahat is the cosmic Buddhi which ig said to be in the 
form of the Antahkarana (Buddhi, Aharmkara, Manas) 
for all three are implicitly contained in the first (Upacara- 
dubhayatmakah), as also the Gunags which here mean 
the Tanmatras of sound, touch, sight, taste and smell, 
According to Nyaya the Gunas appertain each to each 
(Tattadvisesagunah) ; or according to Sarhkhya Ether 


has one Guna, Air has two, Fire three and so forth. 


THE GROSS TATTVAS AND THEIR LORDS 179 


From Mahat was derived Ahamkara which is threefold 
as Vaikarika, Taijasa, and Bhutadi or the Sattvika, Rajasa, 
and Tamasa-Ahamkaras (vy. 18), Raghava says that it 
is called Vaikarika because it issues from Paramesvara 
when His Samarasya with Sakti becomes Vikrta or 
disturbed. The Devas also are Vaikarika because pro- 
duced from it. According to Samkhya the Vaikarika nature 
is due to its generation from Pradhana when Vikrta. The 
Vaikarika Devas are Dik, Vata, Arka, Praceta (Varuna) 
Asvins (two As’vinikumaras) Vahni, Indra, Upendra (Visno- 
reka-murtih) Mitra (the third sun) and Ka (Candra). 
These are the Presiding Devatas of the senses (Indriyas). 
From the Taijasa-Ahamkara were evolved the Indriyas. 
The five Tanmatras and the derived Bhitas came from 
Bhuatadi-Ahamkara. 

The Text and Commentary speak of the derivation of 
Akasa from S/abda-tanmatra, Vayu from Spars‘a-tanmatra 
and so forth. But as the word Ptrva occurs, others read 
this as meaning that each becomes cause of what follows 
in association with what had gone before. Thus S’abda- 
tanmatra produces Akasa. From S‘abda-tanmatra together 
with Sparsa-tanmatra come Vayu. From these two and 
Rupa-tanmatra come Agni and so forth. 

The Sarada then gives the colours of the Bhutas 
namely transparent (Svaccha) ether, black air, red fire, 
white water, and yellow earth, the Adharas of which are 
the Tanmatra and the Gunas of which are sound, touch, 
sight, taste and smell. Raghava-Bhatta says that it is for 
the purpose of worship (Upasana-sthanarh) in pursuance 
of Sjastra (Svasastranurodhena) that certain invisible 
things are here said to have colours Atrg kesamett arupi- 
dravyanam varnakathanam), This might perhaps seem to 
suggest to some that the colours are not real. But if this 
be so is it correct ? Hther is transparent which is no colour, 


180 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


black is the absence of colour. With Ripa there must be 
colour. For what is colourless is formless. Form is only 
perceived by means of colour: and the last three Bhttas 
are with form. Their colours are widely adopted. Thus in 
China also yellow is the colour of earth, and red and white 
are generally assigned to fire and water, respectively. Pos- 
sibly what is meant is that the colours are here mentioned 
for the purpose of worship: that is, the mentioning is for 
such purpose. Else how could the Yogi perceive them ? 
For it is said: “Tani vastini tinmatradini pratyaksa-visa- 
yani” (that is to Yogis). Elsewhere it is said that ether is 
hollow or pitted (Susiracinam) air is moving (Calana- 
parah) fire is digesting (Paripakavan) water is tasteful 
(Rasavat) earth is solid (Ghana). All the universe is com- 
posed of the four Bhitas entering into one another Paras- 
paranupravistaih mahabhitais' caturvidhaih) pervaded by 
ether (Vyaptakasaih). 

Thus Consciousness as Sakti evolves mind and matter. 
The principles (Tattvas) of these are not always clearly 
understood. They may, and indeed must be, considered 
from the point of view of evolution—that is according to 
the sequence in which the limited experience of the Jiva is 
evolved—or from that in which they are regarded after 
creation when the experience of concrete sense objects has 
been had. According to the former aspect, Buddhi is the 
state of mere presentation; consciousness of being only, 
without thought of “I” (Ahamkara) and unaffected by 
sensations (Manas, Indriya) of particular objects which ex 
hypothesi do not yet exist. It is thus a state of impersonal 
Jiva consciousness. Aharhkadra of which Buddhi is the 
basis is the personal Consciousness which realises itself asa 
particular “I” the experiencer, The Jiva wakes to world 
experience under the influence of Maya-Sakti. In the order 
of awakening he first experiences in a vague general way 


———— 


THE GROSS TATTVAS AND THEIR LORDS 181 


without consciousness of the limited self, like the experience 
which is had immediately on waking after sleep. It then 
refers this experience to the limited self and has the con- 
sciousness “JI am so and so.’ Manas is the desire which 
follows on such experience, and the senses and their objects 
are the means whereby that enjoyment is had which is the 
end of all will to life. The Cosmic mind projects its content 
as ideas and desires on to the gross sensual plane and there 
the individual mind enjoys them as such. 

I may here observe that the same scheme exists in 
Buddhism where the root is given as Avidya, from which 
‘ arises Sarhskara. This gives birth to Vijfiana (which is 
Buddhi) and then to Namaripa that is an external world 
at first vaguely perceived. The desire to take cognisance 
of this gives rise to the six sense organs (Sadayatana) 
namely Manas and the Indriyas. From this follows contact 
(Spars'a) of the sense organs with the external world giving 
rise to feeling (Vedana) called forth by such contact in the 
form of pleasure and pain. This experience produces Desire 
(Trsna,) which a recent work on the Unconscious calls 
Libido, for pleasant sensations resulting in attachment and 
enjoyment (Upadana), and then the individual Jiva con- 
sciousness (Bhava) is born (Jata), ages and dies and is 
again reborn until Nirvana is attained. Throughout it is 
the will to life, the root of which is in Avidya which 
produces the instruments namely the mind and senses 
whereby enjoyment is to be had and which creatively. 
imagines the content of its experience from out of the store 
of past lives in past universes. True experience there- 
fore can only be had by destroying the root which is 
Avidya. One of the tasks which yet remains to be 
done is to show the essential similarities of Buddhism and 
Hinduism instead of dwelling, as is usually done, on their 
differences, alleged or real. When it is fully realised that 


182 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Buddhism took its birth in India and the implications 
necessary therein truer notions will be entertained of it 
than generally prevails. ‘ 

An example from science has been given which illus- 
trates the process stated. In some animals there are no 
Specialised sense organs but when stimulus is often given 
to a particular part of a body that part gets specially 
sensitive to it and a particular organ is developed. The 
illustration of course assumes that objects have been 
already created. But in the evolution of the world similar 
principles come into play as those which exist after it has 
been evolved. The effect exists in its cause. Conscious- 
ness awakening to world-experiences reaches forth and 
forth and as it seeks to come by recollection to its limited 
self, its desire evolves the instruments of enjoyment and 
projects the objects of enjoyment into the sensual world. 
This is the action of the Sarnskara operating in and upon 
consciousness. 

_ Whilst however in the order of evolution Buddhi is 
the first principle, in the actual working of the Antah- 
karana after creation has taken place it comes last. It is 
more convenient therefore for ordinary exposition to com- 
mence with the sense objects and the sensations they 
evoke. Matter as the objective cause of perception is not, 
in its character, as such, under the cognisance of the 
senses. All that can be predicated of it is its effect upon 
these senses which is realised by the instrumentality of 
mind in its character as Manas. In science the notion of 
indestructible matter in atomic form is no longer held, 
for all matter it is now shown can be dissociated and the 
atom is dematerialised. The old duality of Force and 
Matter disappears, these two being held to be differing 
forms of the same thing. The ultimate basis is now re- 
cognised as Maya or Prakrti-Sakti. Matter is a stable form 


f 


THE GROSS TATTVAS AND THEIR LORDS 1838 


of force into which on disturbance of its equilibrium it 
disappears. Sensible matter (Bhitta) affects the experiencer 
in five different ways giving rise to the sensations of hear- 
ing (Akasa), touch and feel (Vayu: not in the sense of all 
forms of contact, for form and solidity are not yet developed) 
colour and form and sight (Rtpa) taste (Rasa) and smell 
(Gandha). Sensible perception however exists only in re- 
spect of particular objects. But there exist also general 
elements of the particulars of sense-perception. There is 
an abstract quality by which sensible matter (Mahabhita) 
is perceived. This abstract quality is Tanmatra the “mere 
thatness”’ or abstract quality of an object. These are the 
general elements of sense perception which necessarily come 
into existence when the senses (Indriyas) are produced. This 
is supersensible (Atindriya) matter, the existence of which 
is ordinarily only mediately perceived through the gross 
particular objects of which they are the generals and which 
proceed from them. Sensations aroused by sense objects 
are experienced by the outer instruments (Bahya-karana) or 
senses (Indriyas) whether of cognition (Jianendriya) or ac- 
tion (Karmendriya) which are the afferent and efferent 
impulses respectively. The Indriyas are not however suf- 
ficient in themselves. In the first place unless attention 
co-operates there is no sensation (Alocana) at all. Nextly 
as the experiencer is at every moment besieged by count- 
less sensations from all sides; if any of these is to be 
brought into the field of consciousness it must be selected 
to the exclusion of others. Lastly the manifold of sense 
or “points of sensation ”’ must be gathered together and 
made into a whole. These three functions are those of 
Manas the function of which is said to be Sarnkalpa-vikalpa 
that is selection and rejection of material provided by the 
Jianendriya. These sensations, to affect the experiencer, 
must be made his own and this is done by Aharhkara or 


184 THR GARLAND OF LETTERS 


“Self-arrogation.” It is then passed on to Buddhi which 
determines either by way of forming percepts and concepts 
or resolutions (Kartavyam ctat maya). Thus all the 
Tattvas work for the enjoyment of the Self or Puruga. 
They are not to be regarded as things existing independently 
by themselves but as endowments of the Spirit (Atma). 
They do not work arbitrarily as they will but represent an 
organised co-operative effort in the service of the Enjoyer, 
the Experiencer or Purusa. 

The Tantras speak of three Tattvas namely of Atma, 
Vidya, S‘iva. The first includes those Tattvas of the Thirty- 
six which are called impure (As'uddha) namely Prthivi 
to Prakrti; the second the pure-impure (S’uddha-As'uddha) 
or Maya, the Kaficukas and Purusa; and the third the 
pure Tattvas (Suddha) from S'uddha-vidya to Siva-Tattva. 
I have dealt with the last two in previous Chapters 
and deal with, the first in the present one. It is also 
said (see Jianarnava-Tantra XXIJ-1-22) that there are four 
Atmas constituting the Citkunda or Mandala in the 
Muladhara where the inner Homa is made. By knowledge 
thereof there is no rebirth. These are Atma, Jnhanatma, 
Antaratma and Paramatma, 

The Atma (Praénartpi) which is in all creatures (Jantu) 
as the basis of their Prana or vital principle is their Atma. 
It is Hathsasvarapi and is manifested in individual bodies 
by inspiration and expiration (S'vasa, Ucchvasa). This 
is Jivatma. It is like the Akasa separated in a pot which 
when broken becomes mingled with the total Akasa. Jian- 
atma is said to be Saksat-sakgirapaka. That is, it ig 
that aspect of Atma which Witnesses all and by which 
the unity of all is known. It ig thus the basis of Buddhi 
and all mental Tattvag derived therefrom. By “ Antar”. in 
Antaratma is meant the subtle Atma of atomic dimension 
(Rahasya-siksma-ripaka-paramanu) which pervades every 


THE GROSS TATTVAS AND THEIR LORDS 185 


object. It is the “inner bodiness ” (Antarangata) the spark 
of Paramatma. It is Harhsa known only by Yogis. Its 
beak is Tara (Mantra Om); Its two wings are Agama and 
Nigama. Its two feet are Sliva and Sakti. The three 
Bindus are Its three eyes. When this Paramaharhsa is 
spread (Vyapta throughout Creation then all Bhutas spring 
up in their order Akasa, ‘Pavana, etc.). Of these five the 
root is Citta. This Harhsa Bird disports Itself in the Lake 
of Ignorance (Avidya) in the mud of illusion and infatua- 
tion (Mohapangka) which is the world. When this Harhsa 
becomes other-worldly (Nisprapaiica) and dissolving (Sarh- 
harariipi) then It reveals the Self (Atmanamn pradarsayet). 
Then Its “ Birdness” (Paksitva) ceases. Then the S’oha- 
matma is established which is the Supreme Hixperience or 
Paramatma. 

To complete the creative process it is now necessary 
to resume the creation of S'abda ( S'abda-srsti) from its 
supreme state (Para-s'abda or Parabrahman) through its 
three Bhavas, Pas'yanti, Madhyama and Vaikhari mani- 
festing in bodies composed of the Tattvas above described ; 
for in this way the birth of the letters composing Mantras 
is shown. I will deal with this in Chapter XxT under 
the title “Garland of Letters” (Varnamala), a subject of 
primary importance in the Tantras, after 9 description of 
the Causal Siaktis of the Pranava or Mantra Om and an 
explanation of the Kalas. 


CHAPTER XIX 
CAUSAL SAKTIS OF THE PRANAVA 


THE present Chapter is but a short summary of the result 
of some enquiries recently pursued in Kashmir with a view 
to ascertain the notions of the Northern Saiva school on 
several matters which I have been studying in connection 
with my work on the wakening of the spiraline energy or 
Serpent Power. I was already aware, as the Kularnava- 
Tantra (one of the foremost Tantras of the “ Bengal” 
school) indicates, that the Saiva-Sakta-Darsana and not 
Sarhkara’s exposition of Vedanta is the original philosophi- 
cal basis of the Sakta faith, though some who call them- 
selves Saktas seem now-a-days to have forgotten, if they 
were ever aware of, that fact. In Kashmir, Kula-Sastra 
is, I believe, another name for the Trika. But amongst 
several other objects in view I wished to link up the con- 
nection of certain Saktis mentioned in the Kriya portion of 
the Sastras with the thirty-six Tattvas of the S'aiva-Sakta 
school, their position in the scheme not being in all cases 
clear to me according to the information previously at my 
disposal. I have worked the matter out in more detail and 
the present Chapter will summarise conclusions on cer- 
tain points. 

Being (Satta) is of two kinds, formless (Arapa) and 
with form (Ripa). In the first the “1” (Aham) and the 
“This” (Idam) or universe representing the Prakas’a and 
Vimarsa aspects of experience are one. Siva and S‘akti 
exist in all the planes. But they are here undistinguishably 


CAUSAL S'‘AKTIS OF THE PRANAVA 187 


one in the embrace of the Lord (Siva) and “the Heart of 
the Lord” (Sakti). Siva is Cit. Sakti is Cidrupini. 
He is Para and She, Para. This is the Perfect Experience 
which is Ananda or “Resting in the Self” (Svaripa- 
vis'ranti). S'iva then experiences the universe as Para- 
yakti, that is, Paranada and Para-vak. This is the Love of 
the Self for the Self. The Supreme experience is the bliss 
of unalloyed Love. The Idam then exists as Para-s'akti. 
‘The two aspects are as it were one (Hkam tattvam iva), to 
use a phrase in the Ahirbudhnya-Samhita of the Paficaratra- 
Agama. The “Supreme Sound” and “ Supreme Speech ” 
are thus the perfect Universe which is the supreme Kailasa. 
This is the supreme unitary experience in which, though 
the “I” and the “This” do ‘not cease to exist, they are 
both in their Svaripa and thus mysteriously coalesce in 
one unity of Being which is the “ Two in one.” The whole 
process then of creation, that is, the rise of imperfect or 
dual experience, is the establishment through the negation 
of Sakti (Nisedha-vyadpara-ripa-S'aktt) of a diremption 
in the one unitary consciousness whereby the Aham and 
the Idarh, which had then existed, coalesced in one, diverge 
in consciousness, until in our own experience the “I” ig 
separated from the “This” seen as objects outside 
ourselves. 

The process of manifestation of Mantra is that of 
cosmic ideation (Srsti-kalpand) in which Jihana-Sakti first 
merely formulates as thought the outlines of the limit- 
ed universe which is about to emerge from, and for, 
consciousness, and which is called the “ thinkable ” (Man- 
tavya), which through Nada which ig Kriyasakti-rapa 
moves towards the “speakable” (Vacya), with which 
again consciousness identifies itself as Bindu which is 
characterised by a predominance of activity (Kriyapra- 
dhanyalaksana). Diversity (Prthagbhava) is then produced 


188 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


by Bindu as Ma-kara in the Maya-Tattva. Sakti as 
U-kara creates objects (Prameya) as separate exis- 
tences and by the completion of the Tattvas objectivity 
is completely revealed as A-kara. To describe however 
adequately this grand system of Abhasa, as it is called, 
would require a full exposition of the Northern or monistic 
S'aiva and the allied Sakta-Darsana on which the Sakta 
doctrine and practice of the Agamas is based. I can here 
only indicate shortly the S’aktis of the Miula-Mantra or 
Pranava, which are the correspondences from the Sakti 
aspect of the Saiva-S'akta-Tattvas. The accounts of 
the Saktis vary, but such variance is rather due to the 
fact that some accounts are fuller than others than to any 
substantial difference in principle. 

The gist of the matter may be shortly stated as fol- 
lows: In creation, the three Saktis, Jaana, Iccha, Kriya, 
manifest. These are manifested powers of the supreme 
Bindu. “What is here is there,” and these Saktis of 
the Lord (Pati) appear as the Gunas of Prakrti in the 
.Pasu; or as it has also been said, Jiana and Kriya with 
Maya as the third appear as Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas 
of the Purusa-Prakrti stage which is the immediate source 
of the consciousness of the Pagu. 


Svanga-ripesu bhavesu patyur jnanam kriya cha ya 
Maya tritiya ta eva pasoh sattvan rajas tamah. 
(Is'vara-Pratyabhijna, IV 1; 4) 


The creative consciousness (Sakti) projects the uni- 
verse as all-diffusive Consciousness (Sadakya-Tattva), 
which considered from the Mantra aspect is all-diffusive 
“Sound,” that is movement or Nada. Here the emphasis 
is on the Ahath, which is yet coloured by the Idam as 
the universe faintly rises into the field of the changeless 


aN 


CAUSAL S'‘AKTIS OF THE PRANAVA 189 


consciousness. Consciousness then identifies itself with 
the clearly perceived Idarn and becomes Bindu. Here 
the emphasis is on the Idarh with which consciousness 
becomes a point (Bindu). Then the evolving conscious- 
ness holds the “I” and the “This” in equal balance 
(Samanddhikarana), at which point Maya S'akti, which 


is the sense of difference (Bhedabuddhi), intervenes to 


separate the Aham (as Purusa) and Idarh (as Prakrti) 
hitherto held as parts of the one Consciousness, and the 
divisive power of Kala-Sakti breaks up the universe go 
separated from the Self into that plurality of objects which 
is our ordinary worldly experience. The universe which in 
the Purusa Prakrti stage was seen as a whole, though 
different from the Self, is now also seen as separate but as 
a multitude of mutually exclusive beings. 

There is first a fivefold division of the ‘five rays’ of 
Orh, namely, A, U, M, Nada Bindu, Santa. The Prapaiica- 
sara-Tantra says that Jagrat is Bija, Svapna is Bindu, 
Susupti is Nada, Turlya is Sakti and the Laya beyond is 
Santa. This is the simplest form of statement setting 
forth one S‘akti for each of the Varnas, and the Candra- 
Bindu. In other words from Sliva-S'akti (which includes 
all the Tattvas down to the appearance of the three Devatas) 
these latter are produced. There is next a sevenfold division. 
Para-sarnvit or Paramasiiva is not technically accounted a 
Tattva, for the Supreme Experience is Tattvatita. But if 
we include it as the transcendental aspect of the Siaiva- 
tattva from which the Abhasa proceeds, we get the number 
seven counting Purusa and Prakrti as two. The number 
seven is of frequent occurrence ; as in the case of the seven 
Sivas, namely, Parasiva, Sarhbhu and the five Maha- 
pretas; the seven Saktis of the Omkara as given in 
the S‘arada-Tilaka; the seven Saktis Unmani and the 
rest as given in the Commentary of Kalicarana on the 


190 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Satcakra-niripana chapter of Parnananda-Svami’s work 
entitled Sritattva-cintamani (The Serpent Power); and the 
three and a half coils of Kundalini of which the Kubjika- 
Tantra speaks, namely Purusa, Prakrti, Vikrti, which it 
may be observed when uncoiled and divided by its diameter 
gives seven divisions. 

The Sarada speaks of six Saktis which with Para- 
mesvara who is Saccidananda make seven namely : Siva, 
Sakti, Nada, Bindu (Karana) Bindu (Karya), Nada (Karya) 
and Bija. The other seven S'aktis above mentioned are 
Unmani (or Unmana), Samani (or Samana), Afiji, Maha- 
nada (or Nadanta), Nada, Ardhacandra and Bindu. If in 
the first series we take Karya-Nada which is described as 
the Mithah-samavaya (mutual relation) of Sivaraipa-karya- 
Bindu and Bija, which is S'aktiraipa, as the correspondence 
in this scheme of the Saiva Suddhavidya-Tattva with its 
Samanadhikarana, then this series represents all the Saiva 
Tattvas up to and including Purusa-Prakrti. The same 
remarks apply to the second series of S'aktis or causal 
forms (Karanartpa). The first is described by. Kalicarana 
as the state in which all mindness (Manastva), that is, 
ideation ceases. Here there is neither Kala nor Kala, for it 
is “the sweet pure mouth of Rudra” Sivapada. The 
second is the cause of all causes (Sarvakaranakaranam), 
The third which is also called by him Vyapika-S'akti 
appears in the beginning of creation. Mahanada is the 
Karana-Nada which ig Kriya-S'akti and the first appearance 
of Nada. S'akti as Nada is a development of the latter 
which is transformed into Ardhacandra and then Bindu. 

These Saktis (as well ag tyo others with AUM, 
making together twelve) are explained according to S'aiva 
views in an account extracted from the Netra-Tantra with 
Ksemaraja’s Commentary and from the Tantraloka. There 
the S'aktis are given as Unmana, Samana, Vyapika (or 


CAUSAL S'‘AKTIS OF THE PRANAVA 191 


Vyapini), Afijani, Mahanada, Nada, Nirodhini, Ardhacandra, 
Bindu, Ma-kara, U-kara, A-kara. The Sanskrit passages 
here given are the summary in his own language made 
for me by the Kashmirian Pandit Harabhatta Sastri of 
Srinagar. 

“When the Supreme Siva beyond whom there is 
nought, who is in the nature of unchanged and unchange- 
able illumination moves forth by His will, such (willing 
Movement as) Sakti though in fact, inseparable from Him, 
is called Unmana; Her place is the Siva-Tattva’’ (Anzé- 
tara-paramasiva avicalaprakas'atma yada& svecchaya@ pra- 
sarati sa saktih sivad abhinnaiva Unmana ityucyate ; tat- 
sthanamn siiva-tattvam iti). 

“When the Unmana-Sakti displays Herself in the 
form of the universe beginning with the Stinya and ending 
with Dhara, formulates as mere thought the thinkable, 
then She is called Samana as well as S/akti-tattva ” 
(Yada unmana-saktir dtmanam ksobhayati stinyadina dha- 
rantena jagad-dimana sphurati mantavyam mananama- 
trena asutrayati, tada Samana ityucyate S'akti-tattvam 
itt ca). “This Samana-S'akti Herself is called Vyapini 
when She operates as the Power which withdraws into © 
Herself all thinkables which are Her creation. She resides 
in the Gakti-tattva’ (Samana saktir eva svamantavye 
samharapradhanatvena Vyapint ityucyate, esa S'akti- 
tattve-tisthati), “It is again the Same Samana Herself 
who is called Sakti when Her operation ig chiefly creative 
in regard to her own thinkables. She resides in the S‘akti- 
tattva and is also called Afijani because of Her being 
associated with the thinkable” (Samanaiva svamantavye 
sristipradhanatvena saktirityucyate esa S‘akti-tattve ti- 
sthati mantavyoparaktatvac ca Arvijani wtyapt ucyate). 
“When Sabda-brahman moves forth with great strength 
form Its Siva form then the very first sound (produced 


192, THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


_ thereby) like the vibration produced by a sounding bell is 
called Nadanta (i.e, Mahanada). It resides in the Sada- 
Siva-tattva.” (Yada sabdabrahma siva-ripdd ativegena 
prasaratt tad& prathamataram ghantanuranadtma s'abdo 
Ndddnta ityucyate, sa Sadda-siva-tattve tisthati). When 
Sakti fills up the whole universe with Nadanta then She is 
called Nada. And this also is the Sadagiva-Tattva because 
of the equality therein of the “I” and the “This” (Nadan- 
tena yada vis'vam adptirayati tada Nada ityucyate, sa ca 
aharte-darmntayoh samanddhiharanyena Sadasiva-tativa- 
muti)”. Samanadhikarana in its technical sense is the 
function of the later developed S’uddhavidya-Tattva. Ap- 
parently its original is here represented to be the function 
of the earlier Sadasiva-Tattva in which the duality of the 
Aharh and Idarh first manifests. 

“When Nada, after having ceased to operate in its 
universal scope, does so limitedly (or particularly), then it 
is called Nirodhini. This S’akti rests in the Sadasiva- 
Tattva” (Naddo yada asesavyaptim nimajjyya adharan 
vyaptim unmajjayati tada Nirodhini ityucyate sad Sada- 
sivatattvam dlambate). ‘When Nada is slightly operative 
towards the creation of the “speakable,” it is called Ardha- 
candra which is Isvara-Tattva.” (Nado yada tsadvacyon- 
mesam srayati tada Ardhacandra ityucate Is'vara-tattve), 
Then “ Para-Sakti Herself is called Bindu when She is in 
the nature of inseparate illumination in regard to the whole 
range of the speakable”’ Pargivg saktih yada samastavacye 
abheda-pragas'a-ripatam grhnati tada Bindur ityucyate, 
sa Isvaratative tisthati). 

Ma-kara or Rudra-Devata igs defined: ‘When Bindu 
causes diversity to manifest it ig called Ma-kara and It 
moves in Maya-Tattva” (Yada binduh prthag-bhavam 
abhdsayati tada Ma-kara ityucyate, sa ca MayGtattve) 
“When Sakti creates objects ag separate existences then 


CAUSAL S'AKTIS OF THE PRANAVA 193 


She is called U-kara. It resides in the Prakrti-Tattva ” 
(Yada prameyam prthag-bhavena-unmesayati, tada U-kara - 
ityucyate, sa ca.Prakrti-tattve tisthati). ‘ When the crea- 
tion of the Tattvas has come to an end, then because 
objectivity is completely revealed, (Sakti as) Mantri-Kala, 
(that is the creative art or process considered as “ Sound ” 
or Mantra) is called A-kara” (Lativa-sargasya nivrttir yada 
jayate, tada prameyasya ptirnataya prakdasanat A-kara iti 
Mantri-kala ucyate). 

The extra five Saktis enumerated in this account are 
due firstly to the inclusion of A U M; secondly to counting 
Vyapini and Afijani separately instead of as being the 
Nimesa and Unmesa aspect of one Sakti; and thirdly the 
sevenfold series would appear to include Nirodhini, also 
called Nirodhika, in Nada of which it is a more parti- 
cularised development. Nada would appear in the fuller 
series to represent Samanya-spanda of the sound emanation. 
For just as in the region of ideation the evolution is from 
infinite consciousness to the general and thence to parti- 
cular ideas; so from the corresponding objective or Mantra, 
aspect, which is that of Saktopayayoga, motion commences 
from the unextended point first as general, then as parti- 
cular movement, at length developing into the clearly 
defined particularity of speech and of the objects which 
speech denotes. The rhythmic vibration of objects is the 
same as that of the mind which perceives them, since both 
are aspects of the one Sakti which thus divides itself. 

Namaste ravatvena tattvabhidhdane 


13 


CHAPTER XX 
THE KALAS 


KaLa is a common term in Tantrik literature for which 
it is difficult to find an appropriate English rendering, 
Siva has two aspects Niskala (N irguna) and Sakala (Saguna). 
The former is therefore without Kala. The latter is with 
Kala. Siva is never without Sakti, for the two are 
one and the same, and Sakti in Herself, according to 
Her proper nature (Sakti-Svaripa), is Consciousness or 
Caitanya (Caitanyartpini). Thus there are said to be 
no Kalas in Unmani which is in the S'iva-Tattva. There- 
after with Samani in Slakti-Tattva the Kalas appear, 
Thus in Sri-Netra-Tantra (Ch. 22) seven Kalas are assigned 


to Samani. The Sakti of a Devata is divided into six- 


teen Kalas or “ parts’ of Power. That aspect of the 
Devata which has full power is called Parna-Kalamirti. 
One sixteenth of that or any part of the whole (Pirna) ig 
Kalamirti. A fraction again of that is Amsamutrti and 
a fraction of Athsyamirti is Amsamga-murti. Siva is part- 
less. Sakti has parts (Kala). But parts as we know 
them do not exist until after the universe has evolved 
from Prakrti: that is, parts in the literal sense of the 
Mayik world. When therefore mention is made of Kala 
in connectin with so high a Sakti as Samani or any other 
S’akti which precedes Prakrti, what is meant is some- 
thing which may be best expressed by modes or aspects of 


THE KALAS 195 


Sakti. Kala, in short, is a particular display of Power or 
Vibhuti. Kala is also one of the Kaficukas which go to the 
making of the Purusa consciousness and is the product of 
higher S'aktis and Kalas. The Karficukas or enveloping 
Saktis cut down the natural perfections as they exist 
in the Supreme Self and thus constitute the evolved Self 
or Purusa. The four Kalas called Nivrtti, Pratistha, Vidya, 
Santi are specific modes of Sakti well defined. These 
are explained later. As regards the other Kalas there 
is greater difficulty. In the first place the texts are not 
consonant. This may be either due to inaccuracy in the 
MSS. or real variances or to both. Then explanations 
of the terms are in general wanting, though sometimes 
they are given by the commentators. The Sanskritist will 
however perceive that these latter Kalas are variant aspects 
(like Avarana-Devatas of worship), descriptive of the nature 
and functions of the Sakti whose Kalas they are and ag 
such may have been set forth for Upasana; the lengthy 
lists being in conformity with the taste of the age in which 
these Sastras were promulgated. Thus Kalas have been 
called Jyotsna (moonlight) and the like on account of their 
Sarvajniata-dharma, that is, Prakavsa-ripata-dharma; that 
which being in the nature of manifestation is white and 
brilliant as moonlight. So again Indhika (kindling) Kala 
is so called because it is Jianaripa or in the nature of 
knowledge ; and Rundhani is so called because of its oppos- 
ing or staying quality as explained later. This great 
elaboration of S'aktis is also in conformity with a psycho- 
logical principle on which Tantrik Upasana is based into 
which I cannot enter here. 

The above remarks are illustrated by the lengthy list of 
Kalas of the Varnas and Pranava given in Ch. III of the 
Prapaficasara-Tantra. The Kalas of Nada, Bindu, A U M are 
there given and I will not repeat them here ; but I will relate 


196 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


instead an account obtained from the Kashmirian Pandit 
Hara-Bhatta-Sastri and taken by him from S'ri-Netra-Tantra 
which has not been published. The reader of the Pra- 
paficasara will observe that the accounts vary both as to 
the names and numbers of the Kalas. In Sri-Netra-Tantra 
seven Kalas are given of Samani-Siakti, viz., Sarvajfa, 
Sarvaga, Durga, Savarna, Sprhana, Dhrti, Samana; five 
of Afijani, viz., Stiksma, Susikgma, Amrta, Amrta-sarh- 
bhava, Vyapini; one of Mahanada viz., Urddhva-gamini ; 
four of Nada, viz., Indhika, Dipika, Rocika, Mocika. Some 
texts speak of Recika. Nirodhini-Sakti has five Kalas 
called Rundhini, Rodhini, Raudri, Jianabodha, Tamo’- 
paha. The Satcakra-nirtipana (V. 88) speaks of Bandhati, 
Bodhini, Bodha. Rodhini and Rundhani, which mean 
“ opposing,” indicate the opposition encountered by lower 
Eixperiencers such as Brahma and other Devas attempt- 


ing to enter into the higher state of Nada. These Saktis 


(like the “Dwellers on the threshold” of Western occult 
literature) oppose all those to whom they do not extend 
their grace (Anugraha) by the Kalas Jiana-bodha (Wisdom) 
and Tamo’paha (Dispeller of darkness). These Kalas are 
therefore called Sarvadeva-nirodhika, that is, they op- 
pose entrance into the higher state of consciousness and 
they oppose the fall therefrom of such Devas as have 
attained thereto. Of Ardha-candra there are five Kalas, 
viz., Joytsna, Jyotsnavati, Kanti, Suprabha, and Vimala, 
which are said to be Sarvajfiia-pada-samsthita. For She is 
Knower of all. If one can remain in Ardha-candrapada 
then all things are known—past, present and future. I am 
informed that according to Sri-Netra-Tantra (Ch. 22) and 
Svacchanda-Tantra (Ch. 20), the four Kalas of Bindu 
are the very important ones Nivrtti, Pratistha, Vidya, 
Santi; which however are said in Prapaticasara to be 
Kalas of Nada, the four Kalas of Bindu being there given 


THE KALAS .. 197 


as Pita, S’veta, Aruna and Asita. These five modes of 
Sakti are described later. The number and names of the 
Kalas of A U M differ in these several texts. According to 
the former the Kalas of the Destructive Rudra are Tamo- 
moha, Ksudha, Nidra, Mrityu, Maya, Bhaya, Jada; of 
the Protective Visnu the Kalas are Rajas, Raksa, Rati, 
Palyaé, Kamya, Buddhi, Maya, Nadi, Bhramani, Mohini, 
Trsna, Mati, Kriya; and of the Creative Brahma there are 
Siddhi, Rddhi, Dyuti, aksmi, Medha, Kanti, Dhrti, 
Sudha. The three Bindus of the differentiating Parabindu 
form the Kamakala. The Kalas Nivrtti and the rest are the 
generalities (Samanya) of the Tattvas issuing from Prakrti ; 
that is the Tattvas are sub-divisions or differentiations of 
these four Kalas. Nivrtti-Kala is the working force and 
essential element in the Prthivi-Tattva or Solidity; and is 
so called because here the stream of tendency is stopped 
and: the manifesting energy turned upwards. When Prthivi 
has been reached by process of evolution, Sakti becomes 
Kundali (coiled; at rest). Her next movement which is 
that of Yoga is upwards by involution retracing the steps 
of descent. The Prthivi Anw or point of solidity is in- 
exhaustible potentiality in, and as a physical, that is, 
sensible manifestation of, the Spiraline Power welling up 
from and coiling round the Siva-bindu. This aspect of 
the Power supplies (as a friend learned in S/aiva literature 
informs me) the curving and circular motion which mani- 
fests as the rounding and spherical skin and flesh with 
which all Pranis are supplied. According to the same 
view Pratistha which is the same force in all the Tattvags 
from Ap-to Prakrti (Tantraloka Ahn, 10) is so called, 
because whilst Nivytti supplies the outer covering, Pra- 
tista, as its name indicates supplies the basis and inner 
framework on which the outer physical universe ig laid. 
Vidya-Kala, which is 80 called because it ig limited 


198 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


knowledge, is the dominant Kala in the Tattvas from 
Purusa upwards together with, five Kaficukas to Maya. 
These are related to the Saktis Vama, Jyestha and Raudzi, 
which manifest as the three motions which go to make the 
universe, which in terms of consciousness are the move- 
ments of the Antahkarana towards the objects (Visaya) 
of its experience ; such objects being the combination of 
lines on various planes, in curves and circles. The 
three dimensional framework affords the basis (Pratistha) 
for the outer solid covering (Nivrtti) supplied by the 
spiraline S'akti as the manifested sensible and physical. 
Beyond Maya there is the consciousness which is peace 
(Santi), for it is free of the duality which is the source of 
Sorrow. The last Kala is therefore called Santa and is 
dominant in the glorious experience of the Tattvas from 
Sadvidya to Sakti-Tattva. Thus the Tattvas are only the 
manifestations of Sakti as three typical forms of move- 
ment starting from the kinetic state. It is these moving 
forces as the Kalas which are the inner life and secret of 
them. The Kalas are not dead forces; for the universe 
does not proceed from such. They are realised in direct 
€xperience as Devatas in and beyond all natural manifesta- 
tions and may be made to serve the purpose of Sadhana. 
As Divine Beings they are modes of the one Divine Mother 
worshipped diagrammatically in Yantras. As the inner forces 
in the Tattvas the Kalas group together the latter into 
four great “ Hggs” (Anda), that is, Spheroids comprising 
those Tattvas only of which a Kala is the common domi- 
nant feature and inner force. These are the Brahmanda 
comprising Prthivi-Tattva in which a]l others are involved, 
the bounding principle or envelope of which is ether 
(Akas’a) ; Prakrtyanda or Malinda; Mayanda; and S/akt- 
yanda of which the envelopes are Prakrti, Maya and S'akti 
respectively. Beyond all these in the centre thereof and 


" ca 


THE KALAS 199 


™ pervading all is the Siiva-Tattva in regard to which the 
Divine S'akti as a Kala is an utter negation (Sanyati-stinya), 
an empty space-giving or vacuity-producing power (Avaka- 
sada), which is the negative pole of the conjoint Siva-S'akti- 
Tattvas. The Siva-Tattva is thus the Paramasiva or Para- 
samvit, the great Bhairava experience with its supreme 
experience of the universe negatived. 

Regarding then this ultimate Sakti also, in so far as 
it is a manifestation, as a Kala or moving Power, the thirty- 
six Tattvas of which the universe consists are but mani- 
festations of five forces (Sakti) or Kalas into which the 
one partless Divine S'akti differentiates Herself in an in- 
finite variety of permutations so as to produce the universe 
with parts: namely, Santatita or Avakasada, Santa, Vidya, 
Pratistha, Nivrtti. 

According to the account given in the Satcakra-ni- 
rupana (Serpent Power) and the Commentaries of Kali- 
carana and Visvanatha, there is a S'akti called Nir- 
vana-Slakti with two Kalas, which are Nirvana-Kala 
and Ama-Kalda, known as the seventeenth and sixteenth 
Kalas respectively. Unmani is Sivapada which is beyond 
Kala and Kala. In Sakti-Tattva these have their source. 
The highest Sakti in this Tattva is Samani; Nirvana-S'akti 
is, according to Visvanatha, Samanapada or Samani, the 
life and origin of all being (Sarvegarh yonirtipini). Accord- 
ing to Kalicarana, Nirvana-Sakti is Unmani. Sakti as 
seventeenth Kala is Cinmatra and is called Nirvana-Kala. 
Visvanatha identifies it with Vyapini-Tattya which is 
Sjakti-svarapa and above (Paratpara) the sixteenth Kala. 
It is Antargata of, that is, included within, Amakala, just 
as Nirvana-Sakti is Antargata of Nirvana-Kala. Kalicarana 
identifies it with Samanapada. Ama is the sixteenth 
Kala. She is the receptacle of the nectar which flows from 
the union of Para (Binduripa Siva) and Para (Sakti). 


200 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Visvanatha cites the Yoginihrdaya-Tantra to show that 
Ama is Vyapika-S'akti. Kalicarana agrees as to this. But it 
has been said by Visvanatha that Nirvana-Kala is Vyapini- 
Tattva. We must take it then that according to this view 
Nirvana-Kala and Ama-Kala are the two aspects, supreme 
and creative, of Vyapini-Tattva as Vyapika and Afijani. 
Beyond or more excellent than Ama-Kala is Nirvana-Kala, 
and then this last, Nirvana-Sakti or Samani in Sakti- 
Tattva wherein ig bondage (Pas’ajala). Thus Nirvana- 
Kala is the Cinmatra-svabhava or pure consciousness as- 
pect of what in the creative aspect is called Ama, the 


receptacle of nectar, that is, the blissful current which 


flows from the union of Siva and Sakti. This is the 
rapture of creation which is known to us also. The same 
Sakti is in differing aspect Amrtakara-ripini as the seven- 
teenth and the receptacle of Amrta as the sixteenth Kala. 
Ama is both Srstyunmukhi (looking towards creation) and 
Urddhva-saktirapa (looking upwards, that is, towards Libera- 
tion.) The former is the meaning of the expression 
“ downward-turned-mouth ” (Adhomukhi.) This is the posi- 
tion of the Petals before Kundalini ascends. 

This is my reading of Texts which are not devoid of 
discussion. Thug apart from difficulties in the Texts cited 
I was informed in Kashmir that S'akti is called the seven- 
teenth Kala or Ama when Cinmatrasvabhava ; and Amrta- 
Kala when Purusa is with the sixteen Kalas, which in 
this case are said to be the Jfianendriya, Karmendriya, 
Tanmatra and Manas (which includes Ahamkara and Bud- 
dhi). This may be a difference of terminology only. What 
seems clear is that in Sakti-Tattva (of the thirty-six 
Tattvas) there are two Kalas which represent the supreme 
and creative modes of Sakti, whether we call them Nirvana 
and Ama or Amrtakara and Amrta-Kala. The sixteenth 
is the creative Sakti and the Kala which is in the nature 


is 


THE KALAS 201 


of ever existent changeless Cit (Cinmatrasvabhava) is the 
seventeenth. 

To sum up. Paramasiva (Para-sarhvit) in His aspects 
as Sliva-Tattvas is the Stnyati-siinya, so called because in 
His experience there is not the slightest trace of objectivi- 
ty whatever. Both these aspects are S'antatita. Sakti 
then gradually unveils again the universe for the conscious- 
ness of Siva who is Prakasa or the Illuminating Con- 
sciousness which is the subjective aspect of things; and 
the experience which is summed up as Santa-Kala arises, 
extending from Sakti-Tattva to Sadvidya, with the 
S'aktis, Samini, Vyapini, Anjani and their Kalas; and the 
Saktis of the Nada and Bindu groups with their Kalas. 
This is the Spheroid of Sakti (S‘'aktyanda) which is the 
abode of those glorious Beings who are called Mantra- 
mahesvara, Mantres’vara, Mantra and Vidyesvara. The 
Vijfiana-kalas who are below Suddha-vidya are also above 
Maya. From the unfolding of Bindu the other Spheroids 
emanate, which manifest the three principal forms of move- 
ment which go to the making of the universe. Next, 
in concentric circles arise the Spheroid of (Mayanda), the 
field of operation of Vidya-kala, which is the Sakti pro- 
ducing the limited dual consciousness of all experiencers 
(Pralayakala, Sakala) below Sad-vidya and in or below Maya. 
Lastly, the Spheroids of Prakrti and Brahma provide the 
vehicles in which the Experiencer called Sakala functions. 
These Experiencers comprise all things from Brahma down- 
wards who are not liberated. Brahma, Visnu and Rudra 
are the Lords of the spheres from Prthivi to Maya; Iga 
and Anasrta Siva of higher Tattvas; and lastly, Sliva of 
Siiva-Tattva, which is the ultimate source of, but is Itself 
beyond, all Kalas. 


CHAPTER XXI 
THE GARLAND OF LETTERS OR VARNAMALA 


WE now speak of “ Vak ”—‘ The Word ”—a great concept 
of the Sastras. S'ruti says: “‘ Four are the steps measured 
by Vak. The wise Brahmana knows them. Three being 
hidden in the cave do not issue. The fourth is spoken by 
men in their speech.” 

The Para-bindu is the Sabda-brahman: for on its 
differentiation arises the “ unmanifest sound” (Avyakta- 
tava), the Hidden Word from which all manifested speech 
and the objects which it denotes are derived. This is the 
State of Supreme S‘abda (Para-sabda), the evolution of 
which (Para-sabda-srsti) has been shown in the previous 
Chapters. In its further development the existence of 
mind and body is assumed. This has been discussed in 
the account of the evolution of the objects (Artha-srsti) 
which man thinks and in uttered speech names. This 
S'abdabrahman ag appearing in bodies is Kundalini-S'akti 


(Kundalini sabdabrahmamayi). The Garada-Tilaka says 
(1-108, 109) : 


Sa prasite Kundalini sabdabrahmamayi vibhuh. 
Saktim tato dhvanis tasman nadas tasman nirodhika. 
Lato’ rdhendus tato bindus tasmad dsit para tatah. 


“She who is Kundalini, all pervading S'abdabrahman, 
produces Sakti. From this came Dhyani; from Dhyani, 


& 
THE GARLAND OF LETTERS OR VARNAMALA 203 


Nada; from Nada, Nirodhika; from Nirodhika, Ardhendu ; 
from Ardhendu, Bindu; and then comes Para.” 

It will be observed that just as there is a sevenfold 
cosmic development, it is repeated here in the case of indi- 
vidual bodies. Kundalini is S'’abdabrahman, an aspect 
of Caitanya or Consciousness (Cit). By S'akti is here 
meant Cit entered into by Sattva (Sattva-pravista), 
which is the Paramakasavastha. By Dhvani is meant 
that same Cit when entered into by Sattva (Sattvapra- 
vista), penetrated by Rajas (Rajo’nuviddha), which is 
Aksaravastha. By Nada is meant the same Cit pene- 
trated by Tamas (Tamo’nuviddha) or Avyaktavastha. By 
Nirodhika is denoted that same Cit with abundance of 
Tamas (Tamah-pracurya); by Ardhendu the same with 
abundance of Sattva (Sattva-pracurya). By the term Bindu 
is denoted that same Cit when in it there is a combi- 
nation of the two (Tadubhaya-sarhyogat). This develop- 
ment appears to indicate the gradual process whereby Sakti 
passes through subtle to more gross forms of potency until 
it reaches that full potency for manifestation which is the 
Ghanavastha State or Bindu in which Kriya exists in 
full creative perfection. So it is said, ‘ Moved by the 
strength of Iccha-sakti (Iccha-sakti-balakrstah), illumined 
by Jfiana-s’akti (Jnanas‘akti-pradipitah),” that Sakti (Sa 
saktih) in male form (Purhripini) who ‘is the Lord 
(Prabhu) puts forth Her who is called Action (Kriyakhya), 
that is, Kriya-sakti. 

The Sarada then continues: 


Pasyantt madhyama vaci vaikhart sabda-janmabhih. 
Techajnanakriyatma'sau tejoripa gunatmika. 
Kramenanena sryjatt Kundalt varnamalikam. 


“(Then Para) and then came Pagyanti, Madhyama 
and Vaikhari-Sabda. In this order Kundali who igs Will 


204. THR GARLAND OF LETTERS 


(Iccha), Knowledge (Jana) and Action (Kriya), who is both 
Light (Tejoraipa, and Cidripa; in Herself consciousness) 
and in the form of the Gunas (Gunatmika, that is, Prakrti) 
creates the Garland of Letters.” 

Para is Sabda as Para-bindu and is motionless (Nis- 
panda). This as already explained becomes threefold and 
the threefold aspects from the Slabda standpoint are 
Pasyanti, Madhyama, Vaikhari. Each of these are 
manifested forms of the Unmanifested Para-bindu or 
Siabdabrahman. It is, as Raghava says, by shifting to an- 
other place in Her (Asyam eva binduh sthandntaragatah) 
that Bindu which is Paraé when unmanifested and motion- 
less is called Pasyanti, Madhyama and Vaikhari speech 
(Vak). Pari is in the Muladhara cakra, Pas'yanti in 
Svadhisthana (and upwards), Madhyama in Anahata (and 
upwards), and Vaikhari in the throat. In Kundali, Sakti 
is subtle (Suksma) and in the form of mere Light (Jyotir- 
matratmaripi) and not an object of hearing (Asrotra- 
visaya). Thence She goes upward (Urddhva-gamini) and 
becomes Pagyanti, self-manifesting (Svayathprakasa) in 
the Susurnna-Nadi (Susurnnam asrita). She again becomes 
Madhyama as a form of Nada (Nadartipini) when reach- 
ing the Heart Lotus (Anahata). Then She goes upward 
as a mere undifferentiated “hum” (Sanjalpamatra avi- 
bhakta). It is She who appearing at the chest, throat, teeth, 
nose, palate and head assumes the form of all letters 
(Varna) issuing from the root of the tongue and lips, and 
thus becomes Vaikhari, the Mother of all sounds, audible 
to the sense of hearing (Raghava-Bhatta). The same Com- 
mentator then says, citing the Kadimata section of Tantra- 
raja, “Under the influence of one’s own will (Svadtmeccha- 
saktighatena) a high (Uttama) form of the Nada called Para 
generates in the Muladhara ag Pranavayu (Prdnavayu- 
svarupatah), This when carried up by will (Iecha) and 


| 


THE GARLAND OF LETTERS OR VARNAMALA 205 


made to appear in the Svadhisthana is called Pasyanti 
associated with Manas. Gradually led up by Her it is called 
Madhyama associated with Buddhi in the Anahata. Carried 
still further upward it is called Vaikhari in the Vis'uddha 
in the region of the throat. Thence it is generated as the 
Letters from A to Ksa through its presence at the head, 
throat, palate, lips, teeth, tongue (root, tip and back), nose, 
palate and throat (together), lips and teeth (together), and 
throat and lips (together). Their letter-hood (Aksaratva) 
is said to be due to their being divided into different parts 
beginning with the letter A and ending with Ksa.” 

It is Cit-S'akti which is called Para, that is to say, it 
is Para-Vak not moved to vibration by the Maya which 
reveals (Pardprakasika Maya nispandd) on account of 
its bearing the reflection of Caitanya (Caitanyabhasa- 
visistataya). The vibratory states are Pasyanti and the 
other two (Saspandavasthah pas'yantyadyah). Pas'yanti 
which is in the nature of Bindu (Bindu-tattvaimika) is the 
form of a general (that is, not particularised) motion 
(Samanya-praspanda-prakasarupini), which is manifested 
in the region between the Muladhara and the Navel (Maia- 
dharadi-nabhyantara-vyaktisthana). It is called Pagyanti 
because of its being Jiana (Jnadnaimakatvat). It is asgo- 
ciated with Manas. Madhyama is in the form of the 
internal and external instruments (Bahydntahkaranatmika) 
and manifests as Nadabindu (Nddabindumayi). Hiranya- 
garbha sound (Hiranyagarbharipini) is in the region ex- 
tending from the navel to the heart (Nabhyddi-hrdayanta- 
bhivyaktisthand). It is associated with the Tattvas of 
specific ideation and so forth (Visesasamkalpadisatattva.) 
She is Madhyama when Buddhi is Madhyama. Madhyama 
is middle, that is, “in the midst” between Pasyanti which 
is “Seeing” (Iksana) and Vaikhari which is utterance. 
She is neither like Pas'yanti nor does She proceed outward. 


we 


206 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


like Vaikhari with articulation fully developed. But She is 
in the middle between these two. Vaikhari is a form of 
Bija (Bijadtmika) as Madhyama is of Nada (Nddarupint), 
and as Pas’yanti is of Bindu (Bindvatmika). Vaikhari is 
manifested in the region from the heart to the mouth 
(Hrdayddyasyantabhivyaktisthana). It is called Vaikhari 
according to Raghava on account of its particular 
(Visesa) hardness (Kharatva). Bhaskararaya (Lalita v. 81) 
derives it from Vi=very; Khara=hard. According to 
the Saubhagya-Sudhodaya, Vai=certainly ; Kha=cavity 
(of the ear): Ra=to go or enter. But according to the 
Yogasastras the Devi who is in the form of Vaikhari 
(Vaikharirapa) is so called because She was produced by 
the Prana called Vikhara. This is Virat-sabda, that is, the 
manifested letters which singly, or in combination, make 
certain sounds which are called Mantras. Strictly speaking 
all uttered sounds are Mantras, all uttered speech having 
& common origin or development: but in the more usual 
sense, Mantra means those letters or combination of letters 
which are used in Updsana and Mantrayoga and are the 
Mantras of the Devatas of Slastrik worship. The Artha- 
srsti of Kundalini are the Kalas which arise from the letters 
such as the Rudra and Visnu Mirtis, their Saktis and 
so forth. 

The root “Man” means “to think” and the suffix 
“tra” indicates the saving character of Mantra. I have 
elsewhere spoken of Mantra as “ thought-movement vehicled 
by and expressed in speech” and ag being a “ power in 
the form of idea clothed with sound.” I find that this has 
led to misunderstanding. I will therefore make my mean- 
ing clearer. The one supreme Sakti appears in dual 
aspect as the Word, the Sense by which as uttered sound 
it is heard, and as the Object or Artha which the word 
denotes. The child is taught the meaning of words. Such 


THE GARLAND OF LETTERS OR VARNAMALA 207 


and such an object is pointed out as being indicated by 
a word. But a Mantra is the Devata. The Sadhaka is 
taught who that Devata is. He does not however at once 
see that Devata. At this stage the Devata exists for him 
clothed with or as an audible sound, which evokes a, parti- 
cular thought-movement or transformation of mental sub- 
stance. The next stage is by Mantra-Sadhana to realise 
that Devata; to know it not only as a word and its mental 
counterpart, but as a form of that Power of which they 
are but a faint reflection in the world of mind and matter. 
That Power is infinitely greater than either, and the Mantra 
is a particular form of Devataé vehicled as all else in the 
world by mind and matter. The power by which the 
Devata& is realised is also Sakti, that is, Sadhana-S'akti, 
that is again the power of the individual Sadhaka to realise 
by Sadhana. The Devata whom he is taught to realise ig 
infinitely greater than that. All is Sakti, but what is 
sought to be realised is Sakti Herself presented to the 
Sadhaka in the Mantra form. Brahman 7s of course in 
all things as their substance and all forms of becoming 
are without exception Sakti. But these forms are only 
Sakti as such. As such limited forms we realise them at 
once. For this we require mind, senses, and attention ‘only 
in their functioning. But the Devata, which the Mantra 
is, cannot be realised in this way only, since in Itself (that 
is other than as the sound heard, and the idea it evokes) 
it is not an object in the ordinary material universe. The 
Sadhaka has to pierce through the vehicle of the audible 
Sabda and realise the Devata whose form the Mantra igs, 
He is enabled to do this by the co-operation of the Mantra- 
Sakti with his own Sadhana-Sakti. The latter gives to 
those who exert their own power (Sadhana-S'akti) the 
ability to achieve. At length and by striving, the Con- 
sciousness which manifests as Sadhana-S'akti unites both, 


208 — THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


and the Consciousness, which is the Devata, is thus realis- 
ed and in this sense appears to the Sadhaka. This is the 
Saguna or Vacaka form of Devata, and this when realised 
at length procures for the Sadhaka a realisation of the 
Vacya-Sakti which the Saguna-Devata indicates. In short 
the Devi or Supreme Sakti has two: “forms,” Her gross 
(Sthila) Saguna form as Mantra (Mantramayi) and Her 
subtle (Stksma) from as “light” (Jyotirmayi). Realisation is 
the passage from that indirect knowing, through word and 
its mental counterpart, to that direct knowledge which is 
union with the Devata whose form a particular Mantra is. 

Sabdabrahman is all-pervading, undifferentiated Sakti, 
and Mantra is Its particular manifestation. It is Varnat- 
maka-sabda (Lettered sound) manifested by Akas’a caused 
by the contact of the surrounding air with the vocal 
organs, the formation of which in speech is in response 
to the mental movement or idea, which by the will thus 
seeks outward expression as audible sound. All S’abda 
has its corresponding Artha, for neither can be dissociated 
from the other. The word “Artha” comes from the root 
“Ri” which means to get, to know, to enjoy. Artha is that 
which is denoted by S'abda and ig that which is known 
and enjoyed. This Artha is either subtle (Saksma) or gross 
(Sthala). The latter is the outer physical. object which 
speech denotes and the former ig the Vrtti (modification) 
of the mind which corresponds to the gross Artha: for as 
an object is perceived the mind forms itself into a Vrtti 
which is the exact mental counterpart of the object perceived. 
The mind has thus two aspects, in one of which it is the per- 
ceiver (Grahaka) and in the other the perceived (Grahya) in 
the shape of the mental impression. That aspect of the mind 
which cognises is called S'abda or Nama (name) and that 
aspect in which it is its own object or cognised is called 
Artha or Rupa (Form), Sabda being associated with all 


monte: 


ae 


THE GARLAND OF LETTERS OR VARNAMALA 209 


mental operation. In the evolution of the universe the 
undifferentiated Sabda divides itself into subtle Sabda and 
subtle Artha which then evolve into gross S'abda and gross 
Artha. For the Cosmic Mind projects its subtle Artha on 
to the sensuous plane which is then a physical gross Artha 
named in spoken speech. Thus the subtle S'abda associated 
with cognition is called Matrka and the subtle Artha is 
the mental impression; whilst the gross S'abdas are the 
uttered letters (Varna) denoting the gross outer physical 
object (Sthila-Artha). 

Just as the body is causal, subtle, gross, and as there 
are three cosmic and individual states, dreamless sleep, 
dreaming, waking ; Prajiia, Taijasa, Vis'‘va; Isvara, Hiranya- 
garbha, Vais’vanara or Virat; and a fourth transcendent 
state or Turiya; so there are three states (Bhava) of sound 
Pasyanti, Madhyama, Vaikhari developed from a fourth 
supreme and undifferentiated state (Para). This last and 
Pas'yanti represent the causal aspect of S'abda, for Pas'yanti 
is the actual moving aspect of the unmoving Para. 
Madhyama is Hiranyagarbhasabda. This Stksma-sabda 
and its corresponding Artha belong to the subtle body 
(Linga-S/arira). In creation the Cosmic Mind first develops 
Pasyanti-sabda and Artha, and then projects this subtle 
Artha into the world of sensuous experience and names it 
in spoken speech developed in the throat and issuing from 
the mouth. Vaikhari is Virat-sabda belonging, as well as 
the physical objects it denotes, to the gross body (Sthila- 
Sarira). This last Gross Sabda is language, that is, sen- 
tences (Vakya), words (Pada) and letters (Varna) which 
are the expressions of ideas and Mantra. Pagyanti is charac- 
terised by non-particular general movement (Samanya- 
spanda), the first undefined push of the Vayu towards 
manifestation; Madhyama is specific movement (Vigesa- 


spanda), the Vayu commencing to differentiate; and Vaikhari . 
14 


it 


210 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


is Spastatara-spanda, that is, the clear separate movements 
of articulate speech. Mental Artha is a Sarhskara, an im- 
pression left on the subtle body by previous experience and 
which is recalled when the Jiva re-awakes to world-experi- 
ence and re-collects the experience temporarily lost in 
the cosmic dreamless state (Susupti) which is dissolution 
(Pralaya). The Cause (Karana) which arouses this Sarhs- 
kara is the Siabda or Nama, subtle or gross, corresponding 
to that particular Artha. There is thus a double line of 
creation from the S'abda-brahman, namely, language expres- 
sive of ideas and the objects which these denote. Uttered 
Speech is a manifestation of the inner “naming” or thought 
which is similar in men of all races. Possibly for this 
reason a thought-reader whose cerebral centre is en rapport 
with that of another may read the hidden “ speech,” that is, 
the thought of one whose spoken speech he cannot under- 
stand. Vaikhari-vabda however differs in various races 
owing to racial and climatic conditions, the physical for- 
mation of the vocal organs and so forth. But for each 
particular man speaking any particular language, the uttered 
name of any object is the gross expression of his inner 
thought movement. It evokes that movement and again 
expresses it. It evokes the idea and that idea is conscious- 
ness as mental operation. That operation can be so in- 
tensified as to make itself creative. This is Mantra-caitanya 
when thought is not only in the outer husk but is vitalised 
through its conscious centre. 

The above is but the Mantra way of saying that the 
homogeneous Consciousness differentiates as Sakti and ap- 
pears as subject (Sabda) and object (Artha), at first in 
the subtle form of mind and its contents generated by the 
Sarhskara and then in the gross form of language as the 
expression of ideas and of physical objects (Artha), which 
the creative or Cosmic Mind projects into the world of 


| 


THE GARLAND OF LETTERS OR VARNAMALA 211 


sensuous experience to be the source of impressions to the 
individual experiencer therein. The natural name of any 
thing is the sound which is produced by the action of the 
moving forces which constitute it. He therefore, it is said, 
who mentally or vocally utters with creative force the 
natural name of anything brings into being the thing which 
bears that name. Thus “Ram” is the Bija of fire; and 
is said to be the expression in gross sound (Vaikhari-s'abda) 
of the subtle sound produced by the activity of, and which 
is, the subtle fire-force. The mere utterance however of 
“'Rarh’”’ or any other Mantra is nothing but a movement 
of the two lips. When however the Mantra is awakened 
(Prabuddha), that is, when there is Mantra-caitanya, then 
the Sadhaka can make the Mantra work. However this 
may be, in all cases it is the creative thought which ensouls 
the uttered sound which works now in man’s small magic, 
just as it first worked in the grand magica] display of the 
World-Creator. His thought was the aggregate, with crea- 
tive power, of all thought. Hach man is Siva and can 
attain His power to the degree of his ability to consciously 
realise himself as such. Mantra and Devata are one and 
the same. By Japa the presence of the latter is invoked. 
Japa or repetition of Mantra is compared to the action 
of a man shaking a sleeper to wake him up. The two 
lips are Siva and Sakti. Their movement is the coition 
(Maithuna) of the two. Sabda which issues herefrom ig 
in the nature of Bindu. The Devata thus produced ig ag 
it were the son of the Sadhaka. It is not the Supreme 
Devata (who is actionless) who appears, but in all cages 
an emanation produced by the Sadhaka for his benefit only. 
The Boy-Siva (Bala-Siva) who thus appears is then made 
strong by the nurture which the Sadhaka gives to hig crea- 
tion. The occultist will understand all such symboligm to 
mean that the Devata is a form of the consciougnegs of 


212 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


the pure Sadhaka, which the latter arouses and strengthens 
and gains good thereby. It is his consciousness which 
becomes Bala-S'iva and which when strengthened is the 
full-grown Divine Power Itself. All Mantras are in the 
body as forms of consciousness (Vijianarupa). When the 
Mantra is fully practised, it enlivens the Sarnskara and 
the Artha appears to the mind. Mantras are thus a form 
of the Saraskaras of Jivas—the Artha of which appears 
to the consciousness which is pure. The essence of all 
this is—concentrate and vitalise thought and will-power. 
But for such a purpose a method is necessary, namely, 
language and determined varieties of practice according 
to the end sought. These Mantra-vidya. (which explains 
what Mantra is) also enjoins. For thought in the sense 
previously stated, words (gross or subtle) are necessary.’ 
Mantra-vidya is the science of thought and of its expres- 
sion in language as evolved from the Logos or Sabda- 
brahman Itself.: 

It is in this sense that the universe is said to be com- 
posed of the Letters. It is the fifty (or as some count 
them fifty-one) Letters of the Sanskrit alphabet which are 
denoted by the Garland of severed heads which the naked 
Mother Kali, dark like a threatening rain cloud, wears 
as She stands amidst bones and carrion, beasts and birds, 
in the burning ground, on the white corpse-like (S'avariipa) 
body of Siiva. For it is She who “ slaughters,” that is, 
withdraws all speech and its objects into Herself at 
the time of the dissolution of all things (Maha-pralaya). 
From Her in Her aspect of Maha-kundali coiled round 
the Siva-bindu they are derived. Maha-kundali when with 
one coil is Bindu; with two Prakrti-Purusa; with three 
the three S‘aktis (Iccha, Jiiina, Kriya and the three 
Gunas, Rajas, Sattva, Tamas); with three and a half She 
is then actually creative (Srstyunmukhi) with Vikrti. 


THE GARLAND OF LETTERS OR VARNAMALA 213 - 


Then with four coils and so on to 51. She is according 
to the Sakti-sarhgama-Tantra (Utpatti-Khanda, Ullasa 1) 
Kkajata, Ugratara, Siddhakali, Kalasundari, Bhivanes'vari, 
Candikes'vari, Das'amahavidya (ten coils), Smas‘ana-kalika, 
Candabhairavi, Kamatara, Vasikaranakalika, Paficadasi, 
Sodasi, Chinnamasta, Mahamadhumati, Mahapadmavati, 
Rama, Kamasundari, Daksinakalika, Vidyesi, Gayatri (24 
coils), Paficami, Sasthi, Maharatnes’vari, Mbtlasafijivani, 
Paramakala, Mahanilasarasvati, Vasudhara, Trailokya- 
mohini, Trailokyavijayaé, Mahakamatarini, Aghora, Samita- 
mohini, Bagala, Arundhati, Annapurna, Nakuli, Trikan- 
taki, Rajes’vari, Trailokyakarsini, Rajarajesvari, Kukkutt, 
Siddhavidya, Mrtyuharini, Mahabhagavati, Vasavi, Phet- 
kari, Mahasrimatrsundari, and Srimatrkotpattisundari 
{coils 51) respectively. Each coil is said to represent — 
the Matrkz or subtle form of each of the letters (Varna) 
and to denote the number of Kutas or divisions in the 
Mantras of each of these Devatas. Mahakundali coiled 
round the Siva-bindu, as it were a mathematical line 
without magnitude, makes with it one point. When 
the time for creation comes She uncoils Herself and 
creates the whole universe in the form of the Letters 
and the objects which they denote. Having so created 
it, She again rests as Kundali in the root centre of the 
body (Maladhara) of all living creatures from which She 
issues as Pas'yanti, Madhyama, and Vaikhari Sabda. Man’s 
body is called in the Tantras a microcosm (Ksudra-brah- 
manda), containing within itself all which is in the uni- 
verse (Maha-brahmanda) of which it isa part. The Yogini- 
hrdaya-Tantra (Chap. I. 36) says that, when Sakti 
first “sees” (that is, ideates), She is Parama-Kala, in the 
Mother form (Armbikartipa) which is both supreme Peace 
(Parama-Santa) and Supreme Speech (Para-vak), She 
sees the manifested Sabda from Pas'yanti to Vaikhari. 


214 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


The Pasyanti state is that in which Will (Iccha-s’akti) 
is about to display the universe then in seed (Bija) form. 
This is the Sakti-Vama. Madhyama-Vak which is know- 
ledge (Jnana) is J yestha. Here there is the first assumption 
of form as the Matrka (Matrkatvam-adpanna), for here is 
particular motion (Visesa-spanda). The Vaikhari state 
is that of Kriya-S’akti (action) whose form is that of the 
8toss universe. As the former Sakti produces the subtle 
letters or Matrka which are the Vasana, so the latter is 
the Sakti of the gross letters (Varna) of words and their 
objects. These letters form the Garland of the Mother 
(Varnamala), issuing from Her as Kundali and absorbed by 
Her in the Yoga which bears Her name. 

As the Yoga-kundali-Upanisad says: “That Vak 
(Power of speech or Logos) which sprouts in Para, gives 
forth leaves in Pasyanti, buds in Madhyama, and blossoms 
in Vaikhari. By reversing the above order sound is 
absorbed. Whoever realises the great Lord of Vak, the 
undifferentiated illumining Self is unaffected by any word 
(Sabda), be it what it may.’ As the Hatha-yoga-pradipika 
(IV. 101-102) concisely says: “ Whatever is heard in the 
form of sound is Sakti. The absorbed state (Liaya) of 
the Tattvas (Prakrti’s evolutes) is that in which no sound 
exists. So long as there is the notion of Hither, so long 
is the sound (that is, vibration) heard. The soundless is 
called Parabrahman or Paramatma.” Sabda-brahman is 
thus the Brahman in its aspect as the cause of the mani- 
fested S/abdartha. It is the ideating kinetic aspect of 
the undifferentiated Ether of Consciousness, the Cidakasa 
of Philosophy and the Saguna-Brahman of worship. It is 
Cit-Siakti vehicled by undifferentiated Maya-S'akti or 
the manifesting Godhead uncreated, unborn, eternal, evoly- 
ing the changing worlds of name and form (Naima-raipa) by 
its wondrous and unscrutable Maya. Therefore, as Candi 


.THE GARLAND OF LETTERS OR VARNAMALA — 215 


says, ‘“‘Reverence to Her Who is eternal, Raudri, Gauri, 
Dhatri, reverence and again reverence; to Her who is 
the Consciousness in all beings, ‘reverence and again 
reverence.” 


CHAPTER XXII 
OM 


THE ancient Hindus had an aptitude, much to be appre- 
ciated in these often verbose days, of saying a great deal 
in a few words. The Mantra “Om” is an instance. For 
this short syllable contains a whole philosophy which many 
volumes would not suffice to state—an Eastern philosophy 
I may add which is gaining increased support from Western 
science. These two will be before long reconciled when 
the latter has cast aside what a friend calls its “ habit 
blinkers.” The beneficial result ‘will, it is hoped, be a 
Science which is religious, and a religion which is scientific. 

The Mantra “Om” is composed of three letters— 
A, U, M,—of which the first two vowels coalesce into O. 
Over the Om is written the sign Candra-bindu or Nada 
and Bindu, shown as a crescent with a dot or point over 
it. Nada and Bindu are two of many aspects of That which 
in India is called the Mother, or great Power, (Mahas‘akti), 
as it was by the near Hast called Magna Mater and by the 
Gnostics Megale Dunamis. This ig both the efficient and 
material Cause of the universe which is Its form or body. 
Nada, is the Mantra name for the first going forth of Power 
which gathers itself together in massive strength (Ghani- 
bhita) as Bindu to create the universe, and which Bindu, 
as sO creating, differentiates into a, Trinity of Energies which 
are symbolised by A, U, M. Nada and Bindu thus repre- 
sent the unmanifested “ fourth ” (Turiya) state, immediately 


OM 217 


before the manifestation of the world, in which animate 
life exists in the three conditions of dreamless sleep, dream, 
and waking. Man always anthropomorphises. In the West 
he calls the Creator the Father. More aptly Supreme Crea- 
tive Being in the Hast and by the Saktas is called the 
Mother, for this Power conceives in Its Womb, which is 
Consciousness, gives birth to and nourishes, the Universe. 
The first Mantra into which a child is initiated is Ma or 
Mother, for that is its first word, and Mother is often the 
last word on the lips of the dying. Reverence to the natural 
Mother is reverence to the Mother of all and they who in 
life and at death drink the milk of that Mother attain 
to Her. Moreover in the world the Mother- aspect of Her 
who is Brahman is alone fully manifested. What She 
is in Herself (Svaripa) is not known to mind or senses. 
The Yogini-hrdaya-Tantra says: “ What man knows the 
heart of a woman ? Only Siva knows the Heart of Yogini.” 
This is the Cosmic Heart of the universe whose systole 
and diastole is the going forth and return of millions of 
worlds. This process Brahmanism calls Pravrtti and Nivrtti 
and. Taoism (which is perhaps a Chinese adaptation of the 
doctrine of the Upanisads) names it Yang and Yinn. Rela- 
tively to man’s knowledge the Supreme Power is said 
to be in Itself Being (Sat), Consciousness (Cit) and Bliss 
(Ananda). The Primordial Power or Adya Sakti is incon- 
ceivably beyond manifested personality, for this is limited 
experience hedged in by mind and matter. Though not 
in Itself a Person as we understand that term, It is ever 
personalizing in the form of all individual (Vyasti) things 
in the world. It is also a Person as the aggregate 
(Samasti) of all such personalities. Whilst infinite, it con- 
tains in Itself the sum of all human and other experience. 
Whilst the Power (Maha-sakti) is in Itself beyond mind 
and senses in that darkness (as man thinks if to be) 


218 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


which is the body of Mahakali, its manifestations are seen. 
It is with reference to such manifestation. inferred to be 
the Radical Vital Potential which is, as it were, the thread 
(Satratma) of the whole series of beings, which form one 
Vital Continuity, a principle on which Indian Monistic 
philosophy is based. Nothing has an absolute commence- 
ment or end. All is transformed. Birth and death are 
modes thereof. Hach existence is as it were a knot tied 
in an infinite rope which knot is made at birth and untied 
at death. Something does not come from nothing, and 
something never becomes nothing. An absolute beginning 
or end is inconceivable. Particular universes come into 
being and go. Birth, life and death are modes of the 
universal transformation governing all organic life “from 
a blade of grass to Brahma Himself.” The divine infini- 
tude is ever such, but appears as limited function and its 
effects, and as apparently discontinuous, because of the 
limitation of the senses which perceive its workings. The 
whole Fact is never present to consciousness, but only 
that section to which pragmatic attention is for the 
Moment given, and which therefore appears localised and 
in succession of time, Nevertheless there is an infinite 
Vital Continuity stretching from the Radical Potential to 
its actualisation as the crust of matter, which is but an 
infinitesimal portion of the effect produced by the function 


of Substance relative to the whole universal efficiency, 


For ether (Akasa) is more continuous than matter which 


is but the outer crust of the Central Power. Ether ig 


continuous and all pervading and ig said to be more than 
a thousand times denser than gross ponderable matter. The 
visible earth is therefore but a microscopic point evolved 
by the Vital Power (S'akti) of substance (Siva) in the 
midst of the invisible, perpetually active, but in its own 
nature (Svarapa) unaffected Divine Substance pervading all 


wil eee = ———— tC 
Paella 
Re ESS ee 


OM 219 


space. Therein nothing truly exists independently of an- 
other, but all are transformations of the one Power. And 
as that Power is Itself vital and creative, its products or 
rather transformations of Itself are that. As It is Being with 
the potentialities of all life in form, none of its manifestations 
are “dead,” though in common parlance we concede “‘ life”’ 
only to that which displays evolutionary growth. The 
search therefore for the origin of life is futile, since life is 
eternal and had no beginning. 

All things are part of the one Mother who is Life itself. 
It displays itself in innumerable forms, but the vastest 
generalisation of Its working discloses three movements of 
creative upbuilding, of destructive disintegration and the 
holding of these two opposing forces in equilibrium. Nada- 
bindu differentiates into the Trinity of Will (Iccha), 
Knowledge (Jnana) and Action (Kriya), “Sun,” “ Moon,” 
and “Fire,” and this self-explicating Power manifests in 
matter in the threefold manner described. These three 
Powers are A. U.M. or the Devatas Brahma, Visnu, Rudra. 
These are not “Gods.” There is only one God. They are 
Devas or “ Shining ones,” being aspects and specific mani- 
festations of the One Divine Power whose Feet (in the 
words of S‘astra) even Brahma, Visnu and Rudra worship. 
They are scientific concepts deified, and rightly so, for their 
content refers to aspects of the Supreme Power which is 
God. Scientifically they stand for the three functions of 
Vital Substance. It is incorrect to suppose that God in 
His aspect as Brahma created the world some millions of 
years ago and has since done nothing, or that He in His 
form as Rudra has as yet had no opportunity of displaying 
His power of dissolution. Brahma is always creating and 
recreating the elements of manifested substance which 
Rudra is ever breaking down. Throughout Nature there 
are these twin forces upbuilding and destroying forms, 


22.0. THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


integrating and disintegrating, anabolism and catabolism 
tending to change and conservation of tissues and so on. 
The three aspects A, U, M, of the Primordial Power (Nada- 
bindu) are always operating. Whilst Rudra is, by chemical 
destruction, breaking down the combinations of matter and 
thus working towards the final dissolution of things, that is 
the disintegration of forms into either its more general 
elements (Mahabhita) or into the formless substance 
(Prakrti) the material Cause of all, Brahma creates it anew 
by His ever rejuvenescent molecular activity, thus rescuing 
organised vitality from the processes which are ever at work 
to consume its forms. Visnu again is the power which 
stabilises matter in the midst of these conflicting forces 
and ‘thus maintains all Existences. Things only possess 
relative stability. So it is that the Power of Rudra works 
its purpose at the end. Matter itself is only a relatively 
stable form of Energy from which as Supreme Will it 
appears and into which, on the attainment of its terminal 
state, it again merges. It is Visnu who holds it together 
in equilibrium. Again leaving individual existences and 
looking at the sum total of manifested Energy, Visnu, the 
Maintainer, throughout Space and Time, is a theological 
statement of the general Conservation of Energy. To these 
intuited laws and truths objective science is giving increas- 
ing support. In this sense “ Orn” is the Pratika or repre- 
sentative of the Radical Vital Potential of the Universe and 
of the Trinity of Energies by which It actualises and 
materialises Itself as the five forms of “matter” (though 
Hither is not ponderable matter), namely ethereal (Akasa), 
aerial (Vayu), fiery (Agni), liquid (Ap) and solid (Prthivi), 
Through worship of and meditation on this Pratika, with all 
its implications, man, according to Advaita-Vedanta, realises 
himself as the one vital S'akti who ig the Mother of all, 


CHAPTER XXIII 
THE NECKLACE OF KALI 


THE world has never been altogether without the Wisdom— 
the Mula Veda nor its Teachers. The degree and manner 
in which it has been imparted have, however, necessarily 
varied according to the capacities of men to receive it. So 
also have the symbols by which it has been conveyed. 
These symbols further have varying significance according 
to the spiritual advancement of the worshipper. This 
question of degree and variety of presentation have led to 
the superficial view that difference in beliefs negatives the 
existence of any commonly established Truth. But if the 
matter be regarded more deeply, it will be seen that whilst 
there is one essential Wisdom its revelation has been more 
or less complete according to symbols evolved by, and, 
therefore, fitting to, particular racial temperaments and 
characters. Symbols are naturally misunderstood by those 
to whom the beliefs they typify are unfamiliar, and who 
differ in temperament from those who have evolved them. 
To the ordinary Western mind the symbols of Hinduism 
are often repulsive and absurd. It must not, however, be 
forgotten that some of the symbols of Western Faiths have 
the same effect on the Hindu. From the picture of the 
“Slain Lamb,” and other symbols in terms of blood and 
death, he naturally shrinks in disgust. The same effect on 
the other hand is not seldom produced in the Western at 
the sight of the terrible forms in which India has embodied 


92,2, THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Her vision of the undoubted Terrors which exist in and 
around us. All is not smiling in this world. Even amongst 
persons of the same race and indeed of the same faith we 
. may observe such differences. Before the Catholic Cultus 
of the “Sacred Heart ’’ had overcome the opposition which 
it at first encountered, and for a considerable time after, its 
imagery was regarded with aversion by some who spoke of 
it in terms which would be to-day counted as shocking 
irreverence. These differences are likely to exist so long ag 
men vary in mental attitude and temperament, and until 
they reach the stage in which, having discovered the essen- 
tial truths, they become indifferent to the mode in which 
they are presented. We must also in such matters distin- 
guish between what a symbol may have meant and what it 
now means. Until quite recent times the English peasant 
folk and others danced around the flower-wreathed Maypole, 
That the pole originally (like other similar forms) repre- 
sented the great Linga admits of as little doubt as that 
these folk, who in recent ages danced around it, were 
ignorant of that fact. The Bishop’s mitre is said to be the 
head of a fish worn by ancient near-eastern hierophants. 
But what of that? It has no such associations now. 

Let us illustrate these general remarks by a short study 
of one portion of the Kali symbolism which affects so many, 
who are not Hindus, with disgust or horror. Kali is the 
Deity in that aspect in which It withdraws all things which 
it had created into Itself. Kali is so called because She 
devours Kala (Time) and then resumes Her own dark 
formlessness. 

The Mahanirvana-Tantra says (IV. 80-34) of the 
Supreme Mother: “Thou the supreme Yogini moved by 
His mere will doth create, maintain and withdraw the 
world with all that moves and ig motionless therein. 
Maha-kala (Great Time) the Disgolver of the universe is 


THE NECKLACE OF KALI 923 


Thy form. At the dissolution of things it is Kala (Time) 
who will devour all and by reason of this He is called 
Mahia-kala and since Thou devourest Maha-kala Himself it 
is Thou who art called the Supreme Primordial Kalika. 

“Because Thou devourest Kala, Thou art called Kali 
and because Thou art the origin of and devourest all 
things Thou art called the Adya-Kali. Resuming after 
Dissolution Thine own nature dark and formless, Thou 
alone yremainest as One, Ineffable, and Inconceivable. 
Though appearing in form Thou art yet formless ; though 
Thyself without beginning, multiform by the Power of 
Maya, Thou art the beginning of all, Creatrix. Protec- 
tress and Destructress that Thou art”. From Her then, in 
Her nature one with Sliva—the state which is Asabda, 
issue all letters and words (S'abda) and the world of 
things (Artha) which they denote. Into Her as Kali they 
are dissolved. 

The scene is laid in the cremation ground (Smasana) 
amidst white sun-dried bones and fragments of flesh, 
gnawed and pecked at by carrion beasts and birds. Here 
the “heroic” (Vira) worshipper (Sadhaka) performs at 
dead of night his awe-inspiring rituals. Kali is set in 
such a scene for She is that aspect of the Great Power 
which withdraws all things into Herself at, and by, the 
dissolution of the universe. He alone worships without 
fear, who has abandoned all worldly desires, and seeks 
union with Her as the One Blissful and Perfect Experience. 
On the burning ground all worldly desires are burnt away. 
She is naked and dark like a threatening rain-cloud. She 
is dark, for She who is Herself beyond mind and speech, 
reduces all things into that worldly “ nothingness,” which 
as the Void (Sanya) of all which we now know, is at the 
same time the All (Purna) which is Light and Peace. She 
is naked, being clothed in space alone (Digathbari), because 


224 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


the Great Power is unlimited; further She is in Herself 
beyond Maya (Mayatita) ; that Power of Herself with which 
She covers Her own nature and so creates all universes. 
She stands upon the white corpse-like (Savaripa) body of 
Siva. He is white, because He is the illuminating (Pra- 
kasa) transcendental aspect of Consciousness. He is inert 
because He is the changeless aspect of the Supreme, and 
She the apparently changing aspect of the same. In truth 
She and He are one and the same, being twin aspects of 
the One who is changelessness in, and exists as, change. 
Much might be said in explanation of these and other 
symbols such as Her loosened hair, the lolling tongue, the 
- thin stream of blood which trickles from the corners of the 
mouth, the position of Her feet, the apron of dead men’s 
hands around Her waist, Her implements and so forth. 
Here I take only the garland of freshly-severed heads which 
hangs like a Varnamala low from Her neck. . 

Some have conjectured that Kali was originally the 
Goddess of the dark-skinned inhabitants of the Vindhya 
Hills taken over by the Brahmanas into their worship. 

One of them has thought that She was a deified Prin- 
cess of these folk, who fought against the white incoming 
Aryans. He pointed to the significant fact that the severed 
heads are those of white men. The Western may say that 
Kali was an objectification of the Indian mind, making a, 
Divinity of the Power of Death. An Eastern may reply 
that She is the Sarhketa (symbol) which is the effect of the 
impress of a Spiritual Power on. the Indian mind. Ido 
not pause to consider these matters here. 

The question before us is, what does this imagery 
mean now, and what has it meant for centuries past to 
the initiate in Her symbolism? An esoteric explanation 
describes this Garland as made up of the heads of Demons, 
which She as a power of righteousness, has conquered, 


ee 


THE NECKLACE OF KALI 22.5 


According to an inner explanation given in the Indian 
Tantra-S'astra this string of heads is the Garland of 
Letters (Varnamala), that is the fifty, and as some count 
it, fifty-one letters, of the Sanskrit Alphabet. The same 
interpretation is given in the Buddhist Demchog Tantra 
in respect of the Garland worn by the great Heruka. (See 
Sri Cakra Sambhara—A Buddhist Tantra). These letters 
represent the universe of names and forms (Nama-rupa) 
that is Speech (Sabda) and its meaning or object (Artha). 
She, the Devourer of all, “ slaughters,” that is, withdraws, 
both into Her undivided Consciousness at the Great dis- 
solution of the Universe. She wears the letters which She 
as Creatrix, bore. She wears the Letters which, She, 
as the Dissolving Power, takes to Herself again. A very 
profound doctrine is connected with these Letters, which 
Space prevents me from fully entering into here. I have 
set it out elsewhere in greater detail. The movements of 
Her creative projection are indicated by the Letters subtile 
and gross which exist on the Petals of the inner bodily 
centres or Lotuses. 

Very shortly stated, S'abda which literally means 
Sound—here lettered sound—is in its causal state (Para- 
siabda) known as “ Supreme Speech” (Para-Vak). This 
is the Sl'abda-brahman or Logos; that aspect of Reality 
or Consciousness (Cit) in which It is the immediate 
cause of creation; that is of the dichotomy in Conscious- 
ness which is “I” and “This,” subject and object, mind 
and matter. This condition of causal S'abda is the Cosmic 
Dreamless State (Susupti). This Logos awakening from 
Its Causal Sleep “sees” that is, creatively ideates the 
universe, and is then known as Pas'yanti-S'abda. Ag 
Consciousness “sees” or ideates, forms arise in the Crea- 
tive Mind, which are themselves impressions (Sarhskara) 


carried over from previous worlds, which ceased to exist 
15 


22.6 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


as such when the universe entered the state of causal 
dreamless sleep on the previous dissolution. These rearise 
as the formless Consciousness awakes to enjoy once again 
sensuous life in the world of forms. 

The Cosmic Mind is at first itself both cognising sub- 
ject (Grahaka) and cognised object (Grahya); for it has 
not yet projected its thought into the plane of Matter: 
the mind as subject-cogniser is Siabda and the mind as 
the object cognised, that is the mind in the form of ob- 
ject is subtle Artha. This Sabda called Madhyama-Sabda 
is an “Inner Naming” or “Hidden Speech.” At thig 
stage, that which answers to the spoken letters (Varna) 
are the “ Little Mothers” or Matrika, the subtle forms of 
gross speech. There is at this stage a differentiation of 
Consciousness into subject and object but the latter ig 
now within and forms part of the self. This is the state 
of Cosmic Dreaming (Svapna). The Cosmic Mind then 
projects these mental images on to the material plane and 
there they become materialised as gross physical objects 
(Sthala Artha) which make impressions from without on 
the mind of the created consciousness. This is the cosmic 
waking stage (Jagrat). At this last stage the thought- 
movement expresses itself through the vocal organs in con- 
tact with the air as uttered speech (Vaikhari-Sabda) 
made up of letters, syllables and sentences. This lettered 
sound is manifested Sabda or Name (Nama) and the 
physical objects denoted by speech are the gross Artha or 
Form (Ripa). 

This manifested speech varies in men, for their indi- 
vidual and racial characteristics and the conditions, such 
a8 country and climate in which they live differ. There 
is a tradition that there was once a universal speech before 
the building of the Tower of Babel, signifying the con- 
fusion of tongues. Of these letters and names and their 


ry 


THE NECKLACE OF KALI 22:7 


meaning or objects, that is concepts and concepts objecti- 
fied the whole Universe is composed. When Kali withdraws 
the world, that is the names and forms which the Letters 
signify, the dualism in consciousness, which is creation, 
vanishes. There is neither “I” (Aharh) nor “ This ” (Idam) 
but the one non-dual Perfect Experience which Kali in 
Her own true nature (Svaripa) is. In this way Her Garland 
is understood. 

“ Surely ” I hear it said “not by all. Does every Hindu 
worshipper think such profundities when he sees the figure 
of Mother Kali?” Of course not, no more than, (say) an 
ordinary Italian peasant knows of, or can understand, the 
subtleties of either the Catholic mystics or Doctors of 
theology. When, however, the Western undertakes to 
depict and explain Indian symbolism, he should, in the 
interest both of knowledge and fairness, understand what 
it means both to the high as well as to the humble wor- 
shipper. Salutation is thus made to Her from whom the 
mind and its thoughts proceed and the language (Vak) 
in which they are expressed. Vak is Prakas’a, the illu- 
minating consciousness, and Artha is Vimars’a its object. 
Vak is in the form of Varna (letters), Pada (syllables) 
Mantra. Artha is Kala, Tattva, and Bhuvana the other 
so called Adhvas. (See Ch. XXVII). Out of Vak and Artha 
the whole world, consisting of six Adhvas (Sadadhvat- 
maka) originated. Round the neck of Kali the Letters 
(Varna) which make the syllables (Pada) and Mantra are 
hung. In Her they are dissolved in the fiery ending of 


‘the worlds. 


CHAPTER XXIV 
DHVANI 


Motion may be either produced or unproduced. The latter 
is the causal stress itself, and the former the effect of it. 
In the world, sound is produced by the contact of one thing 
with another—of (say) the hand and the drum in case of 
unlettered sound and the vocal organs and air in the case 
of uttered Speech. Causal stress itself is uncreate, is self- 
produced and not caused by the striking of one thing against 
another. For this reason it is called Anahata. This Anadhata- 
Sabda which ig Brahman-movement is heard in the heart 
which It has produced and which It causes to pulse, a 
movement which we can feel and hear. 

This uncreated self-existing S'abda as causal stress 
manifests in double form as unlettered sound or Dhvani 
and is thus called Dhvanyatmaka-Siabda and as lettered 
sound or Varna which is Varnatmaka-S'abda. And so the 
Bhasapariccheda, says (164, 165): 

‘abdo dhvanisca varna 


sca mrdangadibhavo dhvanih., 
Kantha-samyoga 


Janmano varnaste kadayo matah. 


That is Sabda ig of two kinds—Dhvyani and Varna. 
The first is illustrated in the sound given forth by a drum 
and the like. In the production of the second the throat 
organ is exercised and it is manifested as Ka, Kha and the 
other ‘letters of the Alphabet. That is in certain sounds 
such as the beating of a drum, the roar of thunder, the 


DHVANI 929 


sounds of laughing, crying and so forth no letters appear to 
be manifested (Varnavisesanabhivyanjaka) but that in 
certain others, letters or Varnas are manifested as in the 
case of sounds of articulate speech. The former class are 
called Dhvanis and the latter Varnas. 

In both cases it is to be observed that sound is produced 
by the clashing (Abhigata) of two created things, vez., the 
drum and the hand or drumstick and the vocal organs in 
contact with the circumambient air. 

The distinction therefore between the two classes does 
not depend upon this—(1) that whilst Varnas are produced 
by the mutual impact of the throat, air, and the ear, the 
Dhyanis are produced by an assemblage of conditions of 
which the throat is not one. In other words the Vyapara 
or functioning of the vocal organ does not constitute the 
distinction between Dhvanyatmaka and Varnatmaka-Sabda. 
For the vocal organ is exercised in laughing, crying and so 
forth and also in the cries of animals, but in them we hear 
no Varnatmaka-Sabda or articulate speech. Thus Dhvanis 
may be produced by the vocal organs. . (2) Nor can it be 
said that the exercise of the vocal organs is the sine qua 
non of the Varnatmaka-S'abda. Thus when we hear arti- 
culate sounds over the telephone or from the gramophone, 
the immediate cause of the sound is not the Vyapara of the 
vocal organ; though the non-immediate cause may be so. 
(8) Nor again can we say that the Varnatmaka-S'abdas are 


in all cases significant or expressive of meanings and that 


the Dhvanyatmakas are in all cases insignificant. In a 
general sense this is so, and thus, in common parlance, we 
speak of Varnatmaka-Sabda as having a meaning and 
Dhvani as being without it, But this is not necessarily 
and always so. Doubtless to Is'vara every Dhvani has a 
meaning, and even to us unlettered sound may express a 
meaning. Again some Varnatmaka-Sabdas may not, For 


230 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


even to a man who knows a particular language any combi- 
nation of letters or any combinations of words will not be 
expressive language—but only letters in certain order and 
combination. Thus the sound of laughter or crying is 
Dhvanyatmaka yet the sound may express a meaning in the 
sense that it is recognised at once from the sound that a 
particular person is happy or in trouble. Many of the 
Dhvanis of animals may be significant in this sense. The 
sound of a bell, bugle, -or drum may be suggestive of mean- 
ing as in the case of the midday gun. On the other hand 
many Varndtmakas may not express a meaning. Thus the 
combination M, A, N hasa meaning and spells “man” in 
English but M, N, A and other combinations (except 
N, A, M which may have some sort of meaning) do not 
express meaning. Hach letter separately may have a mean- 
Ing. According to the Vyasa-Bhasya on Yoga, each Varna 
18 Capable of expressing all Arthas or meanings. But any 
arbitrary combination of separate letters will not give a 
Meaning. A special combination of Varnas is necessary to 
express a special meaning. Hlectricity may be latent in all 
material objects but we require to make special combi- 
nations of such objects (e.g., zinc, copper and sulphuric acid 
mm @ cell) to make such electricity patent. Any arbitrary 
combinations (e.g., of wood, water, and oil) will not effect 
this. In an Unsuitable combination of Varnas, their Saktis 
check the one the other. 

The distinction between the two classes is therefore a 
nection between sounds which manifest themselves as 
ts and others which do not. The former are usually 
produced by the throat (Kantha-samyoga-janmanah) but 
not invariably. On the other hand, as we have seen, Dhvanis 
too may be go produced. Both Varnas and Dhvanis again are 
momentary (Ksanika), Both therefore are produced by the 
contact (Abhighata) of two or more created things. Let the 


disti 
lette 


DHVANI 231 


letter ‘Ka’ be uttered a hundred times. Hach time it is a 
different sound which is uttered. Again one person says ‘ Ka’ 
and then another say Ka. The sounds again are different. 
The sounds produced and heard in these cases are indeed 
different. Nevertheless we may still recognise that one 
Varna sound, e.g., ‘Ka’ is being uttered by oneself all 
those hundred times and by oneself and the other person. 
We recognise here oneness in the midst of all differences 
of the individual sounds produced and heard. The recogni- 
tion (Pratyabhijiana) takes this form: 

“Tt is the same ‘Ka’ that I utter now and that | 
uttered a moment before. It is the same Ka that you 
have uttered and I have uttered.” Western psychology 
may attempt an explanation of this recognition of Varna- 
identity by comparison, abstraction and assimilation. Thus 
if Ka is uttered by one person ten times, actually different 
sounds are produced varying in pitch, softness, harshness 
and so on. If another person utters the same letter ten 
times, then each of them is a different sound and the 
sounds are also, different from the sounds produced by the 
first person. But though all these Dhvanis are different 
in pitch, timbre and the like, it will be admitted that both 
persons have uttered the same letter. Western psychology 
would explain this as follows: 

The Dhvanis are different but. we make a rapid com- 
parison of them and find that though they have differences 
in pitch, timbre, etc., still they have a great deal of sami- 
larity. The differences are then thought away or abstract- 
ed and then the twenty sounds are assimilated so as to 
give us a generic sound which we recognise as the Varna 
sound “Ka,” It is in this way also we form the generic 
notion of “Man” or “Book.” The generic sound Ka is 
not something that actually exists apart from the twenty 
variations which either of the two persons mentioned have 


232, THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


heard. On the “contrary the variations are the actual 
phenomena. The type (the generic sound) is simply our 
mental construction through comparison, abstraction and 
assimilation. To a mind which cannot compare, abstract 
and assimilate, the sounds are different sounds and it cannot 
recognise any typal sound in their midst. The Indian 
theory on the subject is, on the other hand, as follows: 

The Varnas or letters have imperishable and invariable 
(Nitya) forms. Ag the Paramanus or prime “atoms” of 
matter are imperishable so are the Varna-sabdas. “ Nitya” 
however here’ means “ imperishable” so long as the cosmic 
order itself lasts. (Natu madhye varnanam, utpatti-vina- 
sau.” —Vedanta-Paribhasa). That is in the period of 
cosmic life beginning with Creation (Srsti) and ending with 
Dissolution (Laya) the Varna sounds persist. They are 
compared to a jar in a dark room which cannot by reason 
of darkness be seen. (Andhakarastha-ghatanupalambha- 
vat—Vedanta-Paribhasa). Just as the jar existing in the 
dark may not be seen with the eyes, so the prime S‘abdas 
or Varnas, though always given, may not be always mani- 
fested as acoustic phenomena. To be thus manifested they 
require a manifestor (Abhivyafijaka) or vehicle of expres- 
Sion. This vehicle (Abhivyafijaka) through which an eternal 
existing letter becomes an acoustic phenomenon now and 
then is called Dhvanj. The period of cosmic life (Madhye) 
1s a 100 years of Brahma when the world dissolves (aya). 
The Varnas persist during all these years of Brahma—a time 
which is called Kalpa. In Laya they enter the germinal 
state as seeds of potency. This view is thus essentially 
different from that of ordinary western psychology. Plato’s 
doctrine of ideal archetypes and their sensible variations 
comes nearer the Vedanta, doctrine, 

According to this the Varna-sabdas are always (i.c., 
during a Kalpa) actually going on (Nitya and Anahata 


DHYVANI 9338 


i.¢., continuous and uninterrupted.)—produced by artificial 
means. But they are often unmanifest (Avyakta) to the 
gross perceptive organs. They become manifest (Vyakta) 


to gross sensibility through certain manifestors (Abhivyan- — 


jaka) which are the Dhvanis. Thus the S’abda “Om” is 
uninterruptedly going on, but this it is said, one can only 
hear in certain stages of Sadhana, or in a quiet place 
particularly during night time when there is little promis- 
cuous interference of the sound-waves. The Kali-Marti 
is an eternal symbol of the world-process (involving Cit 
and the play of S’akti) and the Garland of Letters (Matri- 
kas) on the breast of the Mother is also an eternal posses- 
sion. Whether the Varnas are uttered and heard or not, 
they are Anahata sound-forms and according to Indian 
ideas they are more real and more actual than the variations 
(differing in pitch, timbre and so forth) which are uttered 
and heard. Thus the variations alone are not the actual 
phenomena as the ordinary western empiricist would hold. 

Therefore a Dhvani as an acoustic manifestation of a 
Nitya S’abda is subject to all conditions of place, time 
and circumstance and is non-permanent (Anitya) and 
variable (Vikari). This variableness and transitoriness 
which really pertain to the Abhivyafijaka-Dhvani are 
transferred by us (through association) to the manifested 
letter (Varna). Thus we say “Ka is now produced and is 
no more.” But really that which comes to be or ceases to 
be is the vehicle (Dhvani) and not the Varna-Sabda. Ag 
the Vedanta-Paribhasa (Ch. IV) says: 

Utpanno gakdra ityadipratyaksaiu so'yam gakara 
ityadipratyabhijna-virodhad apramanam. Varndbhivyan- 
jaka-dhvanigatotpatti-nirapita-parampara-sambandha- 
vishayatvena pramanam va. “ The apprehension (Pratyaksa) 
that “Ga” is now produced is not right apprehension 
because it conflicts with the recognition (Pratyabhijaa) 


234 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


of the present ‘Ga’ (i.c., at present uttered and heard by 
me) being identical with all other ‘Ga’, (i.c., those uttered 
and heard in the past). Or we may take it as a correct 
apprehension if we ascribe the idea of production to the 
Varnas (which are manifested but not produced) seeing 
that the Dhvanis which manifest them are produced and 
using a characteristic which really belongs to the manifestor 
for the manifested.” 

Sarhkaracarya discusses the theory of Varna and Sphota 
in his Sarivaka-Bhasya (1-3-28). He describes Dhvani in 
these words: 

“ Kah punarayam dhvanir nama, yo durad Gkarnayato 
varnavivekam apratipadyamanasya karnapatham avata- 
rati, pratyasidatasca mandatvapatutvddibhedam varnes- 
vasanjayati, tannibandhanascodattadayo visiesad Na varna- 
Svarupanibandhanah. Varndnam pratyuccadranam pratya- 
bhijnayamanatvat, ete.” By Dhvani is to be understood 
that which is heard by a person listening from a distance 
without distinguishing the separate letters and which in 
the case of a person standing near by affects the letters 
with its own distinctions of high and low pitch and so 
forth. It ig in this Dhvani that all the distinctions of 
Udatta, Anudatta, and the like depend and not on the 
intrinsic nature of the letters which are recognised to be 
the same whenever pronounced. 

When a man is heard shouting from a great distance 
we do not catch his actual words and yet we can hear 
the pitch, modulation and go forth of his voice. When 
he speaks cloge to us we catch his words as well as the 
modulation, pitch, sweetness or otherwise and so forth of 
his voice. In both cases the pitch, etc., of the sound 
constitute its Dhvani, These qualities of pitch, sweetness 
and the like do not inhere in the Varnas themselves but 
belong to their acoustic expression, the Dhvanis. Thus 


a 


DHVANI 235 


Dhvanis are (1) gross embodiments (Anitya, Vikari) of 
Nitya, Avikari Varna-S'abdas ; (2) other gross sounds (either 
produced in nature such as the sound of the storm or 
produced by ourselves such as laughter or the sound of 
musical instruments) which do not appear to us as em- 
bodying Varna-S'iabdas. Those who believe (such as the 
Grammarians) in Sphota regard Dhvani as its Abhivyai- 
jaka. Sarnkara however contests the necessity of assum- 
ing Sphota or that which causes the apprehension of the 
sense of a word. 

Dhvani however is used also in a sense different from 
that in which it is defined in Nyaya or Vedanta as ex 
pounded by S‘arhkara and different from Dhvani as con- 
ceived by those Grammarians who regard Dhvani as the 
manifestor (Vyafijaka) of the ideal sound called ‘ Sphota.’ 

In the Tantras Dhvani is a form of Causal Sabda. Thus 
we hear of the “sweet murmuring Dhvani of Kundalini,” 
the Creatrix of all Sabdas and Arthas. 

The Qarida-Tilaka to which I have repeatedly referred 
(I, 108-109) says: 

Sa prasite Kundalini sabda-brahmamay?t vibhuh. 

S'aktirh tato Dhvanis tasman Nadas tasman Nirodhika. 

Tato’rdhendus tato bindus tarmadasté paratatah. 

Pas'yantt Madhyama vac Vaikhari sabdajanmabhih. 


The words in roman type are various form of Sakti, 
producing one another in the order in which they are 
mentioned in the verse. From Kundalini issued S'akti, 
from Sakti, Dhvani and so on. From the order of evolu- 
tion it will appear that Dhvani in such Sastra is a subtle 
causal principle and not a gross manifestation of Sabda 
which is its ordinary sense. It is Vaikhari which is 
the gross manifestation of S'abda. Here the Sabda mani- 
fests from its subtle state as Madhyama, which issued 


236 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


from the causal state as Para, Pasyanti, through the 
Dhvani caused by the contact of the vocal organs and air. 
Para and the rest are located in various Cakras and tracts 
of the bodily organism. Raghava-Bhatta quoted by (page 
60) Vacaspatya says— 


Saivorah-hantha-talustha svro-ghrana-radasthita. 
Jihva-miulostha-nisyita-sarva-Varna-parigrahd. 
S'abda-prapatica-janant srotra-grahya tu vaikhari. 


“She (Kundalini) being in the heart, throat and palate 
and going through the passages of the head and nose 
and teeth and coming out from the base of the tongue and 
the lips becomes audible Vaikhari—the Kundalini who has 
invested Herself with the Varnas and is the Mother of all 
varieties of Sabda.” 

Sakti, Dhvani, Nada and the rest are described as 
various aspects of Cit due to its varied association with 
the Gunas—Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. Thus Sakti is 
defined as the Sattva-predominant (Sattvika) condition of 
Cit; Dhvani as the Rajasik-Sattvik condition (Rajo’nu- 
viddha Sattvika) of Cit, that is, a Sattvik condition in 
Which there is also a trace of Rajas; and Nada a state 
of Causal Sabda in which there is a trace of Tamas 
(Tamo’nuviddha), These are called Paramakasavastha, 


_ Aksaravastha, Avyaktavastha. Whether then we have 


to deal with Dhvani in the sense of a form of causal 


Sabda or as a Stoss manifestation of S'abda depends upon 
the context, 


CHAPTER XXV 
SUN, MOON AND FIRE 


THESE words do not refer to the heavenly luminaries or 
Fire in the three worlds of Birth and Death, but are 
technical terms of the Mantra-sastra denoting the creative 
Trinity. 

In the Brahmasvaripa is merged Vimars’a (Antar- 
lina-vimars'a). S'ruti says that there was first merely 


One without a second or Brahman. It became inclined © 


towards creation (Srsti-mukha). The material cause out 
of which the world is made is, according to the Vaidik 
Text, “May I be many.” Vimarsa is that which is the 
object of experience as “This” (Idarn) and this Idarh is 
the Universe. The ‘Idath’ is thus the world as object 
of experience (Prapatica-paramarsa). Vimars'a-Sakti is 
thus the Power which produces and exists in the form 
of the universe. Before the world existed it was in the 
Brahman in the form of Brahma-Sakti. Then alone was 
the Light which is beyond Sun, Moon and Stars which in 
the Agama is known as the imperishable Supreme Word 
(Anapayini, Pard-Vak). 

She the supreme Vimarsa-Sakti is our Supreme 
Lady (Para-bhattarika) Maha-tripura-Sundari, in whom are 
all the 86 Tattvas beginning with Siva and ending with 
Ksiti, who is in the form of all worlds (Sarva-prapaticatmika) 


and also transcends them (Taduttirna). She-is beyond ~ 


238 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


the three Saktis who are Sun, Moon and Fire. She is the 
causal seed of all, with whom Siva unseparately is. For 
Siva cannot create without Sakti nor S'akti without 
Siva. As between moon and moonbeam there is no 
difference so there is none between Siva and Sakti. The 
Svaripa of Siva is “I” (Ahamh), for it is said in the 
Kama-kala-vilasa from which this account is, in general, taken 
(Sivasya Svaripam aham-ityevamakaram). The Vimars'a 
of that is the experience of “I-ness.” She the primordial 
Vimarga-Sakti is the pure mirror which manifests that 
Experience (Tasya prakasane nirmaladarsiah). The work 
cited illustrates this as follows: 

A handsome King looking at his reflection in a mirror 
which is before him knows “I am he who is thus reflected.” 
So the Supreme Lord looking at His own Power within 
Himself knows His own Self as “T am all (Pariparno’ham) ”, 
that is, the whole or Perfect “I.” This is the union of 
A=Sliva and Ha=Sakti. A+Ha=Aham or “I.” Siva 
indicates Jiiana-Sakti, and Sakti, Kriya-S’akti—Know- 
ledge and Action. Siva is Illumination (Prakaya). The 
Vimarga mirror is composed of a mass of His rays and 
Vimarsa-Sakti ig impulse (Visphurana-Sakti) maturing in 
action. The Rays being reflected back on the foundation 
of Consciousness there is the Mahabindu. So when the 
Supreme Lord who is Illumination (Prakasa) is connected 
with the mirror-like Vimarga there shines forth the Para- 
mesvara as Purno’hath (The Lord Hixperience as “I am 
all.”) The Supreme “I” ig thus the massing together of 
Siva and Sakti. This “ I-negs ” (Aharhbhava) arises upon 
the gaze of Siva upon His own luminous S’akti or Power, 
So it has been said that in the notion of ‘I’ Illumination 
rests in itgelf (Atma-vigranti). So Sruti (Svet. 4-1) says, 
“That which ig letterlegg (Avar 


na) generates many letters 
(Varna).” This supreme “1” 


is Cittamaya. 


SUN, MOON AND FIRE 239 


We have spoken of the Aham or “I” and Idam or 
“This.” The first is known as the white (Sita) Bindu or 
“Moon” and represents the Siva aspect of this supreme 
“T,” and the second is the red (Sona) Bindu or “ Fire”, 
the S'akti aspect. They are in conjunction known as 
the Divine Husband and Wife (Kames'vara and Kame- 
Svari). The union of both is the Mixed (Misra) Bindu 
or “Sun”. The “Sun” is Kama and Kala is “Moon” 
and ‘“ Fire,” the three Bindus being known as the 
Kamakala. This mixed Bindu becomes creative and is 
the cause of the manifested Word (Vak) and its meaning 
(Artha). From this Bindu issues Nada-S'akti in seed form. 
The Bindu is the union of the letters A and Ha, which 
denote the union of Prakasa and Vimars’‘a, that is, white 
and red Bindus. 

Kama is that which is desired (Kamyate) by the great 
Yogis who knew the Paramartha as their self. Maha-tri- 
pura-sundari, inseparable from Kames'vara, is the collecti- 
vity of the Bindus and Kamakala. The Bindu above is Her 
Face (Sun) and the two Bindus below are Her two breasts 
(Moon and Fire) and the Kala below it, which is half of 
Ha, is Her womb (Yoni). Nada which comes forth is the 
cause of the origin of all sounds. This Nada is eventually 
divided into all the particular letters and words, their com- 
pounds and the subtle elements and: all objects, their 
compounds. For both the world of speech and of objects 
have ultimately the same origin. A letter or word is the 
Brahman as such, just as an object denoted by the word 
is the Brahman as such object. The two Bindus are in- 
separate, that is, Prakaga and Vimars’a. For this reason 
it is said that S'iva and Sakti are one Tattva. In the same 
way there is no difference between Vidya or Mantra as in- 
dicator (Vedaka, Vacaka) and the Devata thereby denoted 
(Vedya, Vacya). Vak and Artha are always united. This 


core —— 


‘upright and some inverte 


240 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


is realised in Sadhana when the Devata, the Artha of the 
Mantra, appears and leads the Sadhaka to a realization of 
the Vacya-S'akti, the Brahma-Svartipa. So Natanananda- 
natha in his Commentary on Punyaénanda’s Kama-kala-vilasa 
(VV. 6, 7) says that great Yogis worship the Mother Maha- 
tripura-sundari, who is Kamakala, the collectivity of the 
three Bindus. (For “ Pura” here means Bindu ; the three 
(Tri) which are Sun, Moon and Fire, which are Illumina- 
tion and Bliss: within whom is the Power (Virya), which 
is the endless mass of letters (Anantaksararasi) and great 
Mantras. In the worship of the great Sricakra-Yantra 
(figured in my Edition of the Kama-kala-vilasa) the gross 
letters, in Vaikhari form, are in the outer Mandalas, and 
passing through the subtler forms of S'abda, the S'abda- 
brahman and the Siinya are attained. He therefore cites 
the Vijiana-bhattaraka as saying: “ By passing through 
the different Mandalas (of the Sricakra) where the gross 
(Sthula) letters (Varna) are, and rising up to Ardhendu, 
Bindu, Nadanta and to the Sinya in the Bindurtpacakra, 
one becomes Sjiva.” This is the worship which a Mission- 
ary author describes as worship of the puderndum muliebre, 
The Yantra is composed of intersecting triangles, some 
d. The latter only are symbolic 
of the Yoni, which is here not the Yoni of any woman. 
Here it is the womb of the Divine Mother of the world. 
Here is the seat of the secret play of Siva and Sakti ag 

Moon,” “ Fire ” and as the “Sun” which is the union of 
Tani pone Energy, whence proceeds the world of 

ama =S'abda) and Forms (Rapa = Artha). 


: 
’ 


CHAPTER XXVI 


BIJA-MANTRA 


ACTION necessarily implies movement. Whenever there- 
fore, there is action, there is Spanda or movement and 
therefore what to the perceiving subject (when heard) is 
called Sound. This may or may not be heard. One person 
may have a sharpened natural faculty of hearing; so that 
he may hear what escapes the ear of another. There is 
Sound, though the latter may not hear it. Similarly, there 
is Sound which is not heard by any natural ear until 
assisted by the extension of faculty procured by a material 
scientific instrument. Similarly again, there is Sound 
which cannot be heard by any material instrument, but 


which is apprehended by the Yogic Mind as part of its. 


experience. In the beginning of things the natural Princi- 
pal (Prakrti) was in a state of equilibrium (Samyavastha). 
Then there was no Sound, for there was no movement of 
the objective world. The first Vibration which took place 
at the commencement of creation, that is, on the distur- 


bance of equilibrium (Vaisamyavastha) was a general move- 


ment (Samanya-Spanda) in the whole mass of Prakrti. 
This was the Pranava-Dhvani of Or Sound. It is not 
that the Sound is represented as it is by the Sound of 
the letters Om. Orth is only the approximate representa- 
tion or gross utterance to gross ear of the Subtle Sound 
which is heard in Yoga experience of the first movement 
which is continually taking place, for at each moment the 


creative movement is present, From out of this general 
16 ; 


9.42, THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


movement and Sound special movements (Vis’esa-Spanda) 
and Sounds arise. The following apt illustration has been 
given (see “World’s Eternal Religion”). If a vessel of 
water is shaken, there is first a general movement of the 
whole water in the vessel. Next, there are particular 
movements in every part of the water, now this way, 
now that. So the evenly balanced Gunas or factors of 
Prakrti equally vibrate throughout their whole mass, and 
as the movement continues, the equilibrium is disturbed 
and the Gunas act and re-act on one another as in the 
Second state of the water in the illustration. Diverse 
vibratory conditions being set up, diverse Sounds are given 
forth. The first equally distributed motion throughout the 
mass is Orn, which is the great seed-mantra (Maha-bija), 
for it is the source of all others and of all compounded 
Sounds. Just as Om is the general Sound, the other 
Bija-Mantras are the particular Sounds which are the 
letters of the alphabet, These are evolved out of the 
general Sound which underlies all particular Sounds. 
Both the Omkara or Pranava and the Bija-Mantras as 
Pronounced by the mouth are thus the articulate equiva- 
lents of the inarticulate primal Dhvani. They become 
articulate at the last stage called Vaikhari or Spastatara- 
Spanda of the four Stages, known as Para (Rest passing 
into movement), Pagyanti (general movement), Madhyama 
or special movement of subtle character heard by the 
Subtle ear, and Vaikhari or special movement which ag 
Speech is the fully articulated Sound heard by the gross 
ear. The Pranava-Mantra is thus the Sound Equivalent 
of Brahman and the Bija-Mantras are the various forms 
with attribute (Sagunaripa) of the Devas and Devis. Ik is 
true that the approximate Sound Orh is said to be constitu- 
ted of the letters a, u,m. This is not to say that the primor- 
dial Dhvani was these letters or their combination. For 


BIJA-MANTRA 243 


these letters are the product of the primordial Dhvani which 
precedes them. What is meant is that Or as a gross 
Sound heard by the gross ear is the Sarhdhi or combina- 
tion of these letters. A European Sanskritist told a friend 
of mine that Om said before a Mantra is simply the “ clear- 
ing of the throat” before utterance; and I suppose he 
would have said—the clearing of the throat after utterance, 
for Or both precedes and follows a Mantra. Why however 
should one clear the throat then? Om has nothing to do 
with hawking sounds, or the throat. Om is, according to 
Indian belief, a sound actually heard by Yogis as above 
described. If, moreover, the learned man had ever, heard the 
Mantra On recited he would have felt that it could not be 
explained in so shallow and materialistic a way. For Om 
is sounded as from the navel with a deep rolling and con- 
tinuous Sound ending at the upper part of the nostrils 
where the Candra-bindu is sounded. Moreover, how are we 
to account for the other Bija Sounds on this hypothesis, such 
as Am, Arh, Erm and so forth, except by supposing that the 
unpleasant and unmannerly act of clearing the throat had 
undergone an unaccountably varied development ? Be the 
doctrine true or false, it is more profound than that. 
Mantras are given various names according to the 
number of their syllables. A Bija or Seed-mantra, is strictly 
speaking, a Mantra of a single letter such as Karn, which 
is composed of the letter K (Ka) together with Candra- 
bindu (©) which terminates all Mantras. Even here there 
is in a sense another letter. The reason is that the vowel 
cannot be interminably pronounced and is therefore termi- 
nated by a consonant. In fact, as Panini says, the function 
of a consonant is to interrupt a vowel sound. The consonant 
cannot be pronounced without a vowel, which is hence 
known as the Slakti of a consonant. Here the termina- 
tion is M in the form of the nasal breathing called 


244 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Candrabindu (») which is Nada and Bindu. The M which 
ends the Bija is sounded nasally, high up in the bridge of 
the nose, and never reaches the lips. In all the other letters 
one or other of the five Bhitas or forms of sensible matter 
(Akasa, Vayu, Agni, Ap, Prthivi) predominates. For this 
reason, in the selection by the Guru of the Mantra for his 
disciple the letters are chosen according as an examination 
shows that there is an excess or deficiency of any particular 
Bhuta. Where there is excess of a Bhita, the letter in 
which it is predominant is said with the outbreathing. 
Where there is deficiency it is said with the inbreathing. 
M is chosen to end the Bija because here the Bhttas are 
said to be in equipoise. Though strictly the Bija is of 
one letter as the seed from which the Mantra springs, 
popularly other ghort unetymological vocables such as 
Hrith, Stith, Krim, Him, Airh, Phat are called Bijas. In 
these there are two or more letters, such as in the first 
H, R, I and Candra-bindu. Thus a Mantra may, or may 
not, convey on its face its meaning. Bijas have no meaning 
according to the ordinary use of language and for this 
reason they have formed the subject of ridicule to those 
‘enorant of the Mantra-sastra. The initiated however 
know that their meaning is the own form (Svaripa) 
of the particular Devatas whose Mantra they are, and 
that they are a form of the Subtle Power as creative 
Dhvani which makes all letters sound and which exists 
in all that we Say or hear. Each Devata has His or 
Her Bija. Thus the Devataés of Krirh, Hrirn and Rarh 
are Kali, Maya and Agni respectively. The primary Mantra 
in the worship of any Deva or Devi is known as- the 
Root Mantra (Mulamantra), Every letter, syllable and 
Mantra is then a form (Rapa) of the Brahman, and so is 
the image and are the lines of the Yantra and all objects 
in the universe, And go the Sastra says that they 


BIJA-MANTRA 945 


go to Hell who think. that the image is merely stone 
and that the Mantra is merely a letter of the alphabet. 
All letters are forms of Sakti as Sound-powers. The Sakti, 
of which they are a manifestation, is the living Hnergy 
which projects itself into the form of the universe. The 
Mantra of a Devatia is the Devata. The rhythmical vib- 
rations of its sounds not merely regulate the unsteady vib- 
rations of the sheaths of the worshipper, thus transforming 
him, but through the power of striving (Sadhana-sakti) 
of the worshipper, there arises the form of the Devata 
which it is. And thus the Brhad-gandharva-Tantra 
(Ch. V) says: 

Srnu devi pravaksyami bijanan deva-rupatam. 

Mantroccaranamatrena deva-ripamn prajayatte. 

The Bijas thus have a meaning. They indicate the 
Artha or Devata which they are. What that Devata is, 
is taught to the Sadhaka, just as the child learns that 
rose means a particular flower, and that rice and milk are 
the names for particular forms of food and drink which 
he takes. 

The Bijas of the five Bhutas, that is, of the Devatas 
of the four forms of sensible matter, are Ha, Ya, Ra, La, 
Va with Candra-bindu. Where there is more than one 
letter, each has its meaning, As examples I here select 
twelve Bija-mantras (in their popular sense), the meanings 


of which are given in the 6th Chapter of the Varada-Tantra 


as quoted in the well known Bengali compendium known 
as the Pranatosini. I may here observe that the meaning 
of individual letters is given in the Bijakosas, such as the 
Tantrabhidhana. The Varada-Tantra, Ch. 6, says: 


Haurh (@) 
Sivavaci hakarastu avkarah gyat Sadas'iivah. 
Sanyam dubhkhaharartharh tu tasmattena Sivarh yajet. 


246 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


That is, 


Ha means Siiva. Aw is Sadasiva. The S'inya () is 


i ‘i Id 
that which dispels sorrow. Hence with that Siva shou 
be worshipped. 


Dut (2) 
Da durgavacakath devi ukarascapi raksane. 


Visvamata nadaripa kurvartho bindurupakah. 


Tenaiva Kalikadevitn pujayedduhkhasantaye. 
That is, 


5 to save. 
Da, O Devi, means Durga. U also means 


Nada is the mother of the Universe. Bindw means 
(pray) do. 


Krirh (at) 


Ka Kali brahma rg proktarn Mahamayarthakas‘a 7. 


Visvamatarthako nado bindurduhkhahararthakah. 
That is, * if 

Ka is Kali. fia is said to be Brahma. J means Maha 
maya. 


Nada means Mother of the universe. Bindu means 


=|; b 
Dispeller of sorrow, With that Devi Kalika should be 
worshipped for cessation of sorrow. 


Hrirh (éf) 


ivavaci syad rephah prakrtirucyate. 


artha 2-sabdo nado vis'vaprasuh panties, 
Duhkhahararthako bindurbhuvanarn tena pujayet. 
That is, 


Hakarah y 
Mahamay 


Ha means Sjiya. 
Mahamaya, 
Bindu means 
should be wor 


Ra is said to be Prakrti. I means 
Nada is gaid to be the mother of the universe: 
dispeller of sorrow. With that Bhuvanes'vari 
shipped, 

Stith (ff) 
Mahalakgmyarthakah S'ah syad dhanartho repha ucyate. 


BIJA-MANTRA 947 


I tustyartho’ paronddo bindurdubkhahararthakah. 

Laksmidevya bijam etat tena devith prapijayet. 
That is, 

S'a means Mahalaksmi. Ra is said to mean wealth. 
I means satisfaction. Nada is Apara (which may mean 
Aparabrahma or Is'vara). Bindu means Dispeller of sorrow. 
This is the Bija of Devi Laksmi. With it the Devi should 
be worshipped. 


Aim (@) 
Sarasvatyartha ai-sabdo bindurdubkhahararthakah. 
Sarasvatya bijam etat tena Vanirh prapujayet. 
That is, 
Ai means Sarasvati. Bindu means Dispeller of sorrow. 


This is the Bija of Sarasvati. With it Vani or Sarasvati 
should be worshipped. 


Klim i) 


Kah Kamadeva uddisto’ pyathava Krsna ucyate. 
La Indra 7 tustivaci sukhaduhkhaprada ca am. 
Kamabijartha uktaste tava snehan mahes'varl. 


That is, 
Ka refers to Kamadeva, or according to some to 


Krsna. La means Indra. J means contentment. Am 
is that which grants happiness and sorrow. Thus, O 
Mahesvari, the meaning of Kamabija is spoken unto Thee 


out of my love for Thee. 


Hari () 
Ha vivah kathito devi @ Bhairava ihooyate. 


Parartho ndda s'abdastu Bindurdubkhahararthakah. 
Varmabijatrayo hyatra kathitas tava yatnatah, 


248 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


ie O Devi, is said to be Siiva. U is. oe a 
Bhairava. Nada means Para, Supreme. me 
Dispeller of sorrow. Here the three composing t : ae 
bija (armour-bija) are spoken unto Thee owing 
solicitation. 
Gah (7) 

Ganesarthe ga uktas te a en ae 

Gathbijartharh tu kathitath tava snehan mahesvari. 
That is, | | 

: Ga, I speak unto Thee, means Ganesa. Bindu ma 

Dispeller. of sorrow. Thus, O Mahes’vari, the meaning 
Garh-bija is spoken unto Thee out of love for Thee. 


Glauth (zf) 


0 vyapakartho lakarasteja au matah. ; 
ararthako bindurganegath tena pijayet. 


Ga Ganey 
Duhkhah 
That is, - 
Ga ig Ganesa, La me 
tejas. Bindw means 


Should be worshipped. 


ans what pervades. Au meats 
Dispeller of sorrow. With it Ganesa 


Ksrautrh (a) 


Nrsithho Brahma ragea, Voip tiene du. 
khahararthako bindurNysithharh tena pajayet. 


Ksa, 

Duh 
That is, 

Ksa is Nysithha and 
pointing upwards, 
it Nrsitnha should 


Ra is Brahma. Aw means teeth 


Bindu means Dispeller of sorrow. With 
be worshipped, 


Strim (Fait) 


yah sa tarakarthastakarakah. ; 
uktyartho repha ukto’tra mahamayarthakasca 7. 


Durgottaranavac 


M 


BIJA-MANTRA 249 


Visvamatarthako na@do Bindurduhkhahararthakah. 
Vadhtbijartha ukto’tra tava snehan mahes'vari. 


That is, 

Sa@ means deliverance from difficulties. Za means 
Saviour. Ra here means salvation or liberation. J means 
Mahamaya. Ndda means Mother of the universe. Bindu 
means Dispeller of -sorrow. Thus the meaning of Vadhubija 
is spoken unto Thee, O Mahesvari, out of love for Thee. 

A close examination of the above may raise some 
difficulties, but must, in connection with what is else- 
where written, remove the charge that the Bija is a mean- 
ingless saying to the worshipper. It is full of meaning 
to him. 


CHAPTER XXVII 
SADADHVAS 


ADHVA means a path, and Mantradhva is all knowledge 
relating to Mantra. The Six (Sat) Adhvas are, on the 
S'abda side, the three Varna (letter) Pada (syllable) and 
Mantra (combination of syllables), each being dependent on 
one another, Pada on Varna, and Mantra on Pada, which are 
said, in the work from which I take the following table, to 
be 51, 81, 11 respectively. On the Artha side the three other 
Adhvas are Kala (5), Tattva (86) and Bhuvana (224), each 
Similarly dependent. The science of the Sadadhvas is referred 
to in both S‘aiva and S'akta works, but seems peculiarly 
characteristic of the S'arhbhava-Darsana in which Saiva 
and Sakta Darsanas are synthetised. The S'akta doubt- 
less worships Siva as well as Sakti with emphasis on the 
latter aspect. The ordinary Saiva worships Sakti as well 
as Siva with emphasis on the latter aspect. In Sambhava 
Darsana both are raised into a higher synthesis. In the 
Same way Kula=Sakti and Akula=Siiva, and therefore 
Kulina means one who worships the two in one. 

Kala means Sakti either generally in its higher aspect, 
and more commonly some specific aspect and function of 
Sakti. The five chief Kalas which sum up in themselves 
groups of Tattvas are Santyatita-kala, Santikala, Vidya- 
kala, Pratista-kala, Nivrtti-kala. These have been already 
referred to. These are the Powers of certain Tattvas or 
Principles, and two stages in the emanative process. They 


1 @ 


SADADHVAS 251 


(the Tattvas) are 86 in number and are divided into 3 
classes, viz., Pure (S'uddha-tattva), Pure-Impure (Suddha 
suddha-tattva) and Impure (Asuddha-tattva). Three groups 
of Tattvas are also called Siva, Vidya, Atma Tattvas. The 
first as stated in the Siddanta-Saravali and other works 
comprise the Siiva-Tattva and Sakti Tattva; the second 
the Tattvas from Sadasiva-Tattva to Suddhavidya-Tattva ; 
and the third the Tattvas from Maya to Prthivi. 

The Word Bhuvana means world or region. Bhuvana= 
Asmat bhavati iti bhuvanam, or “ what comes from this,” 
that is, “what is produced” is Bhuvana. These Bhuvana 
or Regional Bodies are also Pure, Pure-Impure, and Impure. 
These are shown with the corresponding Kala and Tattva 
in the accompanying table which I have extracted with the 
permission of the owner of the copyright from pp. 392-397 
of Part II, Vol. II, of the late T. A. Gopinatha Rao’s 
“Hilements of Hindu Iconography” where they are con- 
veniently tabulated. I have made one oF two verbal 
corrections. 


252 


THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


KALis 


Sy 0s (eer cE HEE 
Ler 
3 
rh 
3 
a 
end 
J 
ies 
ica] 
7 
=| 
aS 
mR 
= 
iS} 
za 


(0) S'anta-kala, 


(a) Pratistha-kala. 


(c) Vidya-kala. 


TATTVAS PD AUUS Suni iint | BRoeaNas | NAMES OF ane NAMES OF THE BHUVANAS 
i. Suddha-tattvas, Anasgrita, Andtha, Ananta, Vyomari- 

pini. Vyapini, Urdhvagamini, Maci- 

1. Siva-tattva ka, Rocika, Dipika and Indhika— 
(Five of these are sakta-bhuvanas 
and the remaining five Nadorddhva- 
bhuvanas), 

2. Sakti-tattva 


Santyatita, Santi, Vidya, Pratistha 


and Nivrtti—(These are called the 


Total tian Baindavapuras). 
3. Sadasiva-tattva. | Sadasivabhuvana. 
4. Iyvara-tattva .. -| 5 Sikhandi, Srikantha, Trimirti, 
Ekanétra, Sivottama, Siksma and 
| Ananta. 
5. peony a al 
tattva 9 Manonmani, Sarvabhita-damani, Bala- 
pramathani, Balavikarani, Kalavyl- 
Total... nee ae karani, Kali, Raudri, Jyestha and 
ii, Suddhaguddha- Vama. 
tattvas, 
6. Maya 8 Anyusthamatra, Isana, Ekeksna, 
Ekapingala, Udbhava, Bhava, Vama.- 
7. Kal deva and Mahadyuti. 
8. Kala ae 2 Sikhega and Ekavira. 
9. Vides . 2 Pancantka and Sira. 
10. Ni ya : 2 Pinga and Jyoti. 
fe Bee 3 2 Samvarta and Krodha. 
piakage : 5 Ekasva, Amanta, Aja, Umapati and 
Pracanda. 
12. Puruga 6 Ekavira, Ivana, Bhava, Iva, Ugra, 
—_—_——- Bhima and Vama, 
Total ... 27 
iii. Asuddha-tattvas, 
13. : 
(15. Prakyti 8 . |Srikantha, Auma, Kaumara, Vais- 
nava, Brahma, Bhairava, Krta and 
14. B ; Akrta. 
| uddhi 8 Brahma, Prajesa, Saumya, Aindra, 
Gandharva, Yaksa, Raksasa and 
15. Ahathkar Pis‘aca,. 
16. Manse ss ‘i Sthalegvara. 
4 ee Srotra 
. Tvak 
19, Calesud 1 Sthileyvara, 
20. Jihva 
21, Nasa 
1 22, Vak 
me Pani 
e P uu 
25, Tiga 1 Yankukurna. 
26. Upastha 


rear pes ee eer ee 


aS eee 


SADADHVAS 253 


ee 7, Nv) ened) ene Ween 
2 
KALAS TATTVAS | Boge He) a | NAMES OF THE BHUVANAS 


27. Sabda 
28, S’parga 
29. Ripa 5 Kalaijara, Mandalesvara, Makota, 
30. Rasa Dravinda and Chakalanda, 
31. Gandha 
ies 32. Akaga Se 8 Sthanu, Svarnaksa, Bhadrakarna, 
pal Gokarna, Mahalaya, Avimukta, 
4 Rudrakoti and Vastrapada. 
tos 
S 33, Vayu vis 8 Bhimesvara, Mahendra, Attahasa, 
S Vimalesya, Nala, Nakala, Kuruk- 
E setra and Gaya. 
cy 34. Tejas eon 8 Bhairava, Kedara, Mahakala, Madhya- 
. mesa, Amrataka, Jalpesa, Sri- 
gaila and Haris‘candra. 
35. Jala ot 8 Lakulisya, Parabhiti, Dindi, Mundi, 
Vidhi, Puskara, Naimisa, Prabhasa, 
and Amarega. 
bs Total 56 
a 
= {36. Prthivi a 108 | From Bhadrakali to Kalagni, 
zi | Grand Total. ... 224 
<c 


Thus to take the first and highest or Siva-tattva and 
the associated Sakti-tattva, the Bhuvanas are Anasrita, 
the Region or Bhuvana without support and self-sustaining, 
Anatha or Lordless because there is no higher Lord here, 
Ananta or endless, Vyomartpini in the form of the all- 
spreading Ether, Vyapini all-spreading, Urddhva-gamini 
upward going, Mocika freed of all bonds, Rocika Beautiful 
or source of Beauty, Dipika illuminating, Indhika destroyer 
of all impurity. Such are the Bhuvanas of the Kala S’ant- 
yatita) (Beyond even the high abode of Peace) and the 
conjoined Siva and Sakti-Tattvas. Five of these are 
called S'akta and the remaining five Nadorddhva (above 
Nada) Bhuvanas. The rest are various other divine bodies 
named after their divine residents. All these regions have 
been created by Paramarsiva for the enjoyment of the 


254 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


Beings therein; there being an immense variety of beings 
in an ascending hierarchy from man up to the supreme 
Lord and Lady of all. The beings in the Pure Regions are 
wholly Pure and the others Pure-Impure or Impure. Im- 
purity or Mala is ignorance and is of three kinds, namely, 
Mala, Mayé and Karma. There are thus three classes of 
Pasus or created beings, namely, Vijfiana-kalas enveloped 
by that ignorance which is called Mala, Pralaya-kalas enve- 
loped in both Malaand Maya, and Sakala or those surrounded 
by the three forms of ignorance Mala, Maya and Karma. 
Above the Vijiana-kala are the beings called Mantras. The 
Mala envelope when in the stage at which it is about to 
leave the being is said to have undergone Paripaka. The 
Vijfiana-kalas, whose Mala is in a high state of Paripaka, 
are the eight Vidyesvaras. They are eight in number and 
are variously coloured as in the following table, for which 
I am indebted to the same work. 


No. NAME CoLouR 
1. Anantes’a Blood-red 
2. Saksma White 
3. S‘ivottama Blue 
4, Kkanetra Yellow 
5. Kkarudra Black 
6. Trimirti Crimson 
7. Srikantha Red 
8, Sikhandi Dark-brown 


eee 


The author cited refers to several southern Agamas, 
such as Purva-Karana, Ams'umad-bhedagama, Kamika and 
other works for their Dhyana. From these it would appear 


SADADHYVAS 255 


PARASAMVIT 


q 
> 
F. " 
G OHIVA TATTVA 
- 
¢ (UBMANL SHAKTD SHAKTITATTYA 
z SAMANI SHAKTI) 
BHUCDMA TATIVA 
SaDaAcMVaA TATTVA 
MANTRAMAHESHY AQAA enada SHAETI) 
» qsHvaRa Fartva 
> 
tas MANTRESN¥ ARS GINnGY SHAKTI 
< 
ke 
< 
> 
Q 
> 
MANTRAS & 
EIGHIPYIDY GSUVARAS J gadwOova TATTVA 
WIINANAKALO 
BRLOW BADVIOTA 
& ABOVE MAYA, 
FUERA MAYA @ TRE KANCHUKAS quvdona 
, INTEAVENE TO PROOUCE AINUDGHA Tattysa 
PRALAYAKALA fs 
S IN MAYA 
+ 
3 AHAM 
y SAKALA 
sf aALt BEINaS PROM 
F ASHUDOHA 
TatTva 


AMMA DOWNY AR ' 
VUO ASE MOT MUKT TNE TATTVAS PROM 
BUDO TO-RRITH ¥I 


| 
| 
| 


256 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


that the colours and so forth are not always given in the 
same way. 

These Vidyes'varas are higher spiritual Entities, by 
whose aid the lower orders of beings attain the higher 
stages of spiritual evolution. Next to the Vidyesvaras 
come the Mantresvaras. Having been given pure bodies 
(Tanu), instrument (Karana), regions (Bhuvana) and enjoy- 
ment (Bhoga), these gradually get rid of all Mala. Above 
the Mantres'varas are the Mantra-mahes’varas and beyond 
these are the Eternal and unproduced Siva-Tattva and 
Sakti-Tattva. 

In the Vimarsini on Isvara-pratyabhijiia (III) Sada- 
Siva-Tattva is described as that particular specialisation 
(Cid-vigesatvarn) which consists in the experience of that 
Bhavarasi or mass of ideation belonging to the collecti- 
vity (Varga) of Caitanya called Mantra-mahes'vara. Of 
the Vidyesvaras it is said (cf. III, 1-6) that whilst the 
Kgo-side is pure, yet unlike the experience of higher states 
they perceive the object as different from themselves in the 
Same way as the Isvaras, as recognised by the Dvaitava- 
dins, perceive theirs. The various locations of the Jivas 
in the various Tattvas is given as follows: Mantramaheg- 
vara in Sadakhya-Tattva, Mahesvara in Is'vara-Tattva, 
Mantras in Suddhavidya-Tattva (the eight Vidyes'varas 
Ananta and the rest are different from the Mantras), Vijia- 
nakalas below Suddhavidya but above Maya, Pralaya-kalas 
in Maya, and Sakalas include all other beings from Brahma 
downwards who are not Mukta. 

The whole of the Sarhbhava-Dargana rests on a 
Principle of the specialisation of Consciousness, stages of 
descent from Pure Cit to the consciousness of the gross 
material world. Each stage is more bound in ignorance 
than the former until gross Matter is reached. The Sastra 
speaks of the eight called Cit, Citi, Citta, Caitanya, 


SADADHVAS 257 


Cetana, Indriya-karma, Deha and Kala. ‘The first is con- 
sciousness in the pointed or Bindu state, the second out 
spreading (Vyapini,) the third with inward and outward 
activity, the fourth the Bodha or experience which is from 
outwards inwards, the fifth is the retention (Dharana) of 
that Bodha, the sixth is experience through action of the 
senses, and the seventh and eighth are the Body and its 
inherent: subtle moving forces such as the 38 Kalas of 
Moon, Sun and Fire. In moon Sattva is dominant and in 
Fire Tamas. The Rajasik activity of the Sun mediates 
between these opposites. The Lords of the Tattvas proceed- 
ing from “ Earth” (Prthivi) upwards are Brahma from 
Prthivi to Pradhana (Prakrti), Visnu from Purusa to 
Kala, Rudra in Maya, Isa in the regions extending to 
Sadakhya-Tattva. Then follow Anasrita siva and Parasiva. 


17 


| 
| 
| 


————————— CC 


CHAPTER XXVIII 


MANTRA-SADHANA 


In the Gayatri-Tantra it is said—* that is called Mantra, 
by the meditation (Manana) on which the Jiva acquires 
freedom from sin, enjoyment of heaven and Liberation and 
by the aid of which he attains in full the four-fold fruit 
(Caturvarga).” Elsewhere it is said “ Mantra is so called 
because it is achieved by mental process”. “Man” of 
“Mantra” comes from the first syllable of Manana or 
thinking and “tra” from Trana or liberation from the 
bondage of the Sarhsara or phenomenal world. By the 
Combination of “man” and “tra” that is called Mantra 
which “calls forth ” (Amantrana) the four aims of being 
(Caturvarga). 

A Mantra is composed of letters. Letters and their 
combinations ag syllables and words are all forms of mani- 
fested Sabda, that is, Brahman-forms. They are each 
and all forms of the Creative Stress, as uttered by the 
mouth, heard by the ear, and apprehended by the mind; 
but what are ordinarily called Mantras are those particular 
sounds which are used in worship and practice (Sadhana) 
which consist of certain letters, or letters arranged ina 
definite sequence of sounds of which the letters are the 
representative signs. The relations of Varna, Nada, Bindu, 
vowel and consonant in a Mantra constitute the Devata 
In varying forms. Certain Vibhati or aspects of the Devata 
are inherent in certain Varnas. The Mantra of a Devata 


\ 


MANTRA-SADHANA 259 


is that letter or combination of letters which reveals the 
Devata to the consciousness of the Sadhaka, who has 
evoked it by Sadhana-sakti. The form of a particular 
Devata therefore appears out of the particular Mantra of 
which that Devata is the Adhisthatri-Devata. This Mantra 
is intoned in the proper way according to letter (Varna) 
and rhythm (Svara). For these reasons a Mantra, when 
translated ceases to be a Mantra, that is, the sounds heard 
and uttered in the translation are not the body of, and 
do not evoke, the Devata. We are then not dealing with 
the same sound, but with a translation in another lan- 
guage, with other sounds giving the meaning to the in- 
tellect of the Sanskrit Mantra. This shows that Mantra is 
not mere individual thinking but a particular sound-body 
of consciousness. 

A particular Mantra therefore (such as the Gayatri) 
is not a mere collocation of words. Though to a non- 
believer it may seem but a string of mere letters bearing 
on their face a particular meaning or in the case of Bija 
Mantras apparently no meaning at all, to the Sadhaka it 
is a very mass of radiant Tejas or energy. An ordinary 
collection of words is something gross. These, as all else, 
are forms of Sakti. But the Mantra of which we speak 
is the Devata Himself or Herself in Mantra-body. Mantra 
is thus a mass of radiant Energy. Sayings give informa- 
tion and advice to men of the world, whilst Mantras 
awaken superhuman power or Sakti. A mere saying is 
therefore, like a Jiva, subject to birth and death, whilst a 
Mantra is directly Brahman in sound-body, unwasting and 
undecaying. A Mantra again is not the same thing as 
prayer or self-dedication (Atma-nivedana). Prayer is con- 
veyed in what words the worshipper chooses and bears its 
meaning on its face. It is only ignorance of Sastrik prin- 
ciples (See Arthur Avalon’s “ Tantra-Tattva or Principles 


$i 
t| 


260 THE GARLAND. OF LETTERS 


of Tantra” as to what precedes and follows) which sup- 
poses that Mantra is merely the name for the words in 
which one expresses what one has to say to the Divinity. 
If it were, the Sadhaka might choose his own language 
without recourse to the eternal and determined sounds 
of S'astra. 

Sabda is Sakti. The Visvasara-Tantra (Ch. II) says 
that S'abda-brahman which is Mantra (Mantramaya) exists 
in the body of Jiva and is the subtle aspect of the 
Jiva’s vital Slakti. As the Prapafcasara-Tantra states, 
the Brahmanda or Spheroid (universe) is pervaded by 
Sakti as Dhvani, called Nada, Prana and the like. The 
manifestation of the gross (Sthila) form of Sabda would 
not be possible, unless S’abda existed also in a subtle 
(Stksma) form. 

Sabda is the Guna of Akasa, but is not produced by 
it. It manifests in it; and S'abda-svaripa is the Brah- 
man. In the same way however as in outer space waves of 
sound are produced by movements of air (Vayu), so in the 
Space within the Jiva’s body, waves of sound are produced 
according to the movements of the vital air (Pranavayu) 
and the process of inhalation and exhalation. The Sabda 
which first appears in the Mualadhara (See A. Avalon’s 
“Serpent Power ”) is in fact the Sakti which gives life. to 
the Jiva. The Jiva who inbreathes and outbreathes utters 
a great Mantra. This ig the Ajapa-Mantra or Harhsah, 
called “ Ajapa”, because it repeats itself naturally without 
any effort on the part of the Jiva. It is the heaving of 
the Dhvani which causes alternate inspiration and expira- 
tion. Sakti it is who is the Cause of the sweet, indistinct 
and murmuring Dhvani (See Ch. XXIV) which sounds like 
the humming of black bees. This sound is Para, and then 
Pas'yanti, which becomes subtle as Madhyama and gross as 
Vaikhari. Kundalini, who is Varnamayi and Dhvanimayi, 


— 


MANTRA-SADHANA 261 


is the manifestation in bodies of the Paramatma. So the 
substance of all Mantra is Cit, manifested as letters, sylla- 
bles, words and their sentences. In fact the letters of the 
alphabet which are known as Aksara are nothing but the 
Yantra of the Aksara or imperishable Brahman. It is the 


gross or Sthila form of Kundalini, appearing in different ~~ 


aspects as different Devatas, which is the presiding Devata 
(Adhisthatri) of all Mantra, though it is the subtle (Suk- 
sma) form at which all Sadhakas aim. For in every 
Mantra there are two Saktis. The Vacya-Sakti and the 
Vacaka-S'akti. The Devata who is indicated (Pratipadya- 
Devata) as the ultimate Svartipa is the Vacya-Sakti, and 
the Devata who is that Mantra (Mantramayi-Devata) is the 
Vacaka-S'akti. Thus if Durga is the Devata of a Mantra, 
then Mahamaya is the Vacya-Siakti. The latter is without 
attribute and Vacaka-S'akti with attribute. The latter is 
the object of worship and is a support and means whereby 
the Vacya-S'akti is realised. For worship assumes as its 
object some form. When the Sakti with attribute, resident 
in and as the Mantra, is by dint of Sadhana awakened, 
then She opens the gate of monistic truth, revealing the 
true nature and essence of the universe. 

There are thus two Saktis, viz., the Mantra-S’akti 
and the Sadhana-Sakti, that is the Sakti of the Sadhaka 
generated by Sadhand. It is the uniting of these two 
S'aktis which accomplishes the fruit of Mantra-sadhana. 
How? The Saguna-Sakti is awakened by Sadhana and 
worshipped. This Saguna-Devata is the Presiding Deity 
(Adhisthatri-Devata) of the Mantra as the Nirguna (form- 
less) Is'vara or Is'vari is the Vacya-Sakti. Both are one; 
but the Jiva by the laws of his nature and its three 


gunas must first meditate on the gross (Sthila) form 


before he can realise the subtle (Siksma) form which is 
liberation. 


262, THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


The utterance of a Mantra without knowledge of its 
meaning or of the Mantra method is a mere movement 
of the lips and nothing more. The Mantra sleeps. There 
vare various processes preliminary to, and involved in, its 
right utterance, which processes again consist of purification 
of the mouth (Mukha-sodhana), (See Chapter X, Sarada- 
Tilaka. Japa of pranava or the mantra Or varies with the 
Devata—e.g., Orn Hsau for Bhairava), purification of the 
tongue, Jihva-sodhana, (seven Japa of one-lettered Bia 
triplicated, Pranava triplicated, then one-lettered Bia tripli- 
cated) and of As‘auca-bhanga, Japa of Mala-mantra pre- 
ceded and followed by Pranava. As to the “birth” and 
“death” defilements of a mantra, see Tantra-sara 75, et 
seq., Kulluka, see Sarada, loc. cit. Thus Kulluka, which is 
done over the head, of Kalika is Maya, see Puras'carana- 
Bodhini, p. 48, and Tantra-sara; Nirvana (Japa of Mala- 
and Matrka-bija in the Manipira), Setu (Generally the 
Mahamantra Ori or Mayabija Hrimh, but it also varies. 
Thus Setu of Kali is her own Biyja Krim, of Tara, Kurca, 
cic.), Nidrd-bhaiga, awakening of mantra (Japa of the 
Mantra preceded and followed by Im seven times), Manitra- 
cattanya, or giving of life or vitality to the mantra 
(apa of Mulamantra in Mani-pira preceded and followed 
by Matrka-baja, Meditating on the Muala-mantra in the 
Sahasrara, Anahdata, Muladhara, with Ham, and again in 
Sahasrara. The Mala is the principal mantra, such as the 
Paricadasi), mantrartha-bhavana, forming of a mental image 
of the Divinity (Lit., thinking of meaning of mantra or 
thinking of the matrka in the mantra which constitutes 
the Devata from foot to head). There are also ten Sams- 
karas of the mantra (See Tantra-sara, p. 90). Dipani is 
seven Japa of the bija, preceded and followed by Om. 
Where Hrin ig employed instead of Or it is Prana-yoga. 
Yoni-mudra is meditation on the Guru in the head and on 


MANTRA-SADHANA 263 


the Ista-devata in the heart, and then on the Yont-rupa 
Bhagavati from the head to the Muladhara, and from the 
Maladhara to the head, making japa of the Yont Bija (Em) 
ten times (See Purohitadarpanam.) 

The Mantra itself is Devata, that is, the Supreme 
Consciousness (Cit-sakti) manifesting in that form. The 
Mantra is awakened from its sleep (Mantra-caitanya) 
through the Sadhana Sakti of the mantrin. It is at base 
one and the same Sakti which appears as Sadhana-Sakti 
and Mantra-sakti, the latter however being the more power- 
ful manifestation. The consciousness of the Sadhaka be- 
comes en rapport and in union with the Consciousness in 
the form of the Mantra; and the Devata who is the Artha 
of the Mantra appears to the Sadhaka, whose mind has 
been cleansed and illumined by devotion. Though the 
substance of the Mantra is Consciousness, that fact is not 
realised without the union of the Sadhaka’s Sakti derived 
from Sadhana with Mantra-sakti. The Devata is then 
revealed. In the case of Puja, Dhyana and other Sadhanas, 
it is only the Sadhaka’s Sadhana-S'akti which operates, 
whilst in the case of Mantra-sadhana, Sadhana-s'akti works 
in conjunction with Mantra-sakti which is all powerful 
and re-inforces Sadhana-sakti which is imperfect and meets 
with obstacles. The individual Sakti is like fire. Just 
as waves of air, when struck and restruck by flames of 
fire, set up a blaze with redoubled force, so the Sadhaka’s 
individual Slakti when struck by Mantra-s‘akti is rapidly 
developed, and then a strong active individual S'akti unites 
with Mantra-sakti to make the latter doubly powerful. It 
is because Mantra possesses this wonderful power that a 
Jiva can, it is said accomplish that which appears im- 
possible. Otherwise a Jiva could not achieve by his 
own effort the treasure which is worshipped even by Siva. 
The Jaivi-Sakti or Sakti of a Jiva (as such) is transformed 


264. THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


by the aid of Mantra into the Daivi-S'akti or the Sakti of 
a Deva (as such). With this Sakti he can accomplish 
that which a Deva can. Mantra is thus an aspect of the 
Divine Mother appearing through Mantra-sadhana with 
devotion to Her. It has been thus said (Tantra-Tattva IT, 
45): “The string of fifty letters from A to Ksa which are 
the Matrkas is Eternal, unbeginning and unending and 
Brahman itself.” This great saying is the first of all 
Tantras. The realization of this Mantra-consciousness is 
Mantra-siddhi. If a Sadhaka attains perfect Siddhi in 
even a single Mantra he becomes possessed of the spiritual 
knowledge which is acquired by learning all Vedas. For 
Veda is the Parinama or evolution of the Dhvani of Kula- 
Kundalini in the body of Isvara, and the Parinama of the 
same in the body of the Jiva is Sabda. For Veda is Dhvani 
uttered by Brahma and S'abda is Dhvani uttered by the 
Jiva. In that Sabda is every form of Mantra which is 
that which gives vitality to the Jiva. It is this Dhvani 
too which evolves into gross Sabda as uttered sound, the 
body of the Devata. Siddhi in such Mantra is not gained 
80 long as such Mantra is not awakened. It may be that 
the appearance of the Devata is a fact or it is not a fact. 
But it cannot be said that the mere utterance of a Mantra 
is superstitiously supposed to effect any result, or that 
Japa of the Mantra is done with no other object than a 
mere vain and senseless repetition. The particular Mantra 


suitable for a Sadhaka is a matter determined by Cakra 
and other calculations, 


CHAPTER XXIX 


THE GAYATRI-MANTRA 


THE Gayatri is the most sacred of all Vaidika mantras. - 


In it the Veda lies embodied as in its seed. It runs: Om. 
Bhar bhuvah svah: tat savitur varenyam bhargo devasya 
dhimahi: dhiyo yo nah pracodayat. Om. “Om. The 
earthly, atmospheric and celestial spheres. Let us con- 
template the wondrous Solar Spirit of the Divine Creator 
(Savitri). May He direct our minds (that is, towards the 
attainment of Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksa). Orn.” 
The Gayatri-Vyakarana of Yogi Yajiavalkhya thus ex- 
plains the following words: Tat, means that. (Tat is ap- 
parently here treated as in the objective case, agreeing 
with varenyam, etc., but others holding that the vydhrts 
—Bhar bhuvah svah—forms part of, and should be linked 
with, the rest of the Gayatri treat that as part of a genitive 
compound connected with the previous vydhrti, in which 
case it is tesham). The word yat, “ which,” is to be under- 
stood. (It may, however, be said that yat is there in Yo 
nah). Savituh is the possessive case of Sdvitri, derived 
from the root saz, “to bring forth.” Savitri is, therefore, 


the Bringer-forth of all that exists. The Sun (Saryq) is: 


the cause of all that exists, and of the state in which 
it exists. Bringing forth and creating all things, it is 
called Savitri. The Bhavisya-Purana says: “Surya is 
the visible Devata. He is the eye of the world and the 
Maker of the day. There is no other Devata eternal 


266 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


like unto Him. This universe has emanated from, and 
will be again absorbed into Him. Time is of and in 
Him. The planets, stars, the Vasus, Rudras, Vayu, Agni, 
and the rest are but parts of Him.” By Bhargah is 
meant the Aditya-devata, dwelling in the region of the Sun 
(Sarya-mandala) in all His might and glory. He is to 
the Sun what our spirit (Atma) is to our body. Though 
He is in the region of the Sun, in the outer or material 
Sphere, He also dwells in our inner selves. He is the light 
of the light in the solar circle, and is the light of the lives 
of all beings. As He is in the outer ether, so also is He 
in the ethereal region of the heart. In the outer ether He 
is the Sun (Sirya), and in the inner ether He is the 
wonderful Light which is the Smokeless Fire. In short, 
that Being whom the Sadhaka realizes in the region of his 
heart is the Aditya in the heavenly firmament. The two 
are one. The word is derived in two ways: (1) from the 
root Bhrij, “to ripen, mature, destroy, reveal, shine.” In 
this derivation Sarya is He who matures and transforms 
all things. He Himself shines and reveals all things by 
His Light. And it is He who at the final Dissolution 
(Pralaya) will in His form of destructive Fire (Kalagnt) 
destroy all things. (2) From bha= dividing all things into 
different classes ; ra=colour, for He produces the colour of 
all created objects ; ga=constantly going and returning. 
The Sun divides al] things, produces the different colours 
of all things and ig constantly going and returning. : As 
the Brahmana-sarvasva, says: “The Bharga is the Atma of 
all that exists, whether moving or motionless, in the three 
Lokas (Bhar Bhuvah Svah).. There is nothing which exists 
apart from it.” : 
Devasya is the genitive of Deva, agreeing with Savituh. 
Deva is the radiant and playful (Lilamaya) one. Siarya 
is in constant play with creation (Srsti), existence (Sthitz), 


THE GAYATRI-MANTRA 267 


and destruction (Pralaya), and by His radiance pleases all. 


' (Lila, as applied to the Brahman, is the equivalent of Maya). 


Varenyam =varantyam or adorable. He should be mediated 
upon and adored that we may be relieved of the misery of 
birth and death. Those who fear rebirth, who desire freedom 
from death and seek Liberation, and who strive to escape 
the three kinds of pain (¢apa-traya), which are Adhyatmika, 
Adhidaivika, and Adhibhautika meditate upon and adore 
the Bharga, who, dwelling in the region of the Sun, has in 
Himself the three regions called Bhur-loka, Bhuvar-loka 
and Svar-loka. Dhimahi = dhydayema (from the root dhyat), 
we meditate upon, or let us meditate upon. 

Pracodayat=may He direct. The Gayatri does not 
so expressly state, but it is understood that such direction 
is along the Catur-varga, or four-fold path, which is 
Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksa (piety, wealth, desire 
and its fulfilment, and Liberation). The Bhargah is 
ever directing our inner faculties (Buddhi-vrttt) along 
these paths. 

The above is the Vaidikt-Gayatri, which, according 
to the Vaidika system, none but the twice-born may utter. 
To the Sadra, whether man or woman, and to women 
of all other castes it is forbidden. The Tantra-Sastra, 
which has a Gayatri-Mantra of its own, shows no such 
exclusiveness; Chapter III, verses 109-111, of the Maha- 
nirvana-Tantra gives the Brahma-gayatri for worshippers 
of the Brahman: “ Paramesvaraya vidmahe-para-tativaya 
dhimahi : tan no Brahma pracodayati”” (May we know the 
the Supreme Lord. Let us contemplate the Supreme Reality. 


‘And may that Brahman direct us.) 


CHAPTER XXX 


THE GAYATRI-MANTRA 
As AN EXERCISE oF REASONING 


THE Society? is called “ Rationalistic.” If its formation 
was meant to be merely a homage to one form of modern 
western thought, the title may be fairly correct. I think 
however that you had no intention of adding to the volume 
of imitativeness in this country, but by your action you 
wished to affirm the necessity of such reasonable thinking 
and practice as is characteristic of the Arya,Dharma, 
rightly understood and cleansed of all bad and useless accre- 
tion. There is always a difficulty, when English verbal 
labels are used to describe Indian philosophical and religious 
theories and practices. In fact such labels are a fertile 
Source of confusion. I hear of a good suggestion to call it 
Satyajndna-Sabha or a similar name. 

Rationalism, in the sense of its technical opposition 
to Sensationalism, has no meaning in this country for 
those who believe that a child is born with his Samskaras. 

“Rationalism” in its more general sense involves, it 
has been said, the following beliefs: (1) Reason is the 
chief source and final criterion of knowledge. (2) Hach 
individual must investigate and gain knowledge for himself, 
and must not merely submit himself to external authority. 
In other words he must do his own thinking. (8) As a 


—— ss 


é This Chapter reproduces a lecture given to the Rationalistic 
Society, Calcutta, 


THE GAYATRI-MANTRA 269 


result of this it is said that a rationalist must reject any 
alleged knowledge, the truth of which cannot be rationally 
demonstrated. | 
Upon such a statement a Vedantist (I speak through- 
out of the Advaita-Vedanta) would ask, what is the “ know- 
ledge’’ here mentioned ? If worldly (Laukika) knowledge is 
meant, then the Rationalist and Vedantist are at one. 
Worldly knowledge is apprehended through the senses 
(Indriya). In its own sphere, reason is the chief source 
‘ of knowledge and final criterion. So much is this so, that 
Samkaracarya says that if even Veda were to contradict 
what is the subject of worldly proof (Laukika-Pramana) 
it would not be Veda. In this sphere it is not a Pramana, 
which overrides the testimony of the senses and inferences 
therefrom. The Yoga-Vasistha (Bk. 2—Ch. 18, wv. 2-8) 
says : 
Api paurusam ddeyam s‘astram ced yuktibodhakam. 
Anyat tvarsam apt tyayyam bhavyam nydyyaikasevina. 
Vuktiyuktam upadeyam vacanam balakad apt. 
Anyat trnam iva tyajyam apyuktam Padmajanmanda. 


That is, “Even a Sastra of purely human author- 
ship should be accepted if conformable to reason. Any- 
thing else (which is unreasonable), even though it be the 
word of a Rsi, should be rejected by one who follows 
reason. The word of a boy if reasonable should be accept- 
ed. Anything unreasonable should be rejected as of no 
more count than a blade of grass, even if it be uttered by 
the Lotus-born (Brahma) Himself.” On this subject read 
the whole of the 14th Chapter of Book II of the Mumuksu- 
Khanda of this work which is a glorification of Vicara 
or reasoning. 

But there is more than what is seen with the eyes, The 
mind admittedly exists, but it is not seen by the senses 


270 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


(Atindriya). Again as to objects, scientific instruments 
enable the sense to perceive more than is presented to them 
in their natural state. These instruments thus effect a 
material extension of natural faculty. Then there are 
Psychic Powers (Siddhi), the subject of much study to-day 
in the West, but matters of long familiar practice in this 
country. Here the mind may operate independently of the 
toss bodily organs of sense, as also occurs in some cases 
of Hypnosis. Thege psychic powers are again extensions 
of natural faculty. They are not supernatural, except in 
the sense that they are supernormal. They may, in any 
one individual, be natural or produced, but we do not 
reason ourselves into them. We can reason only upon 
whether they exist, and what they are and indicate. That 
is, we reason about them. In themselves they are peculiar 
mental faculties, by which the mind sees things or imposes 
itself upon and controls, or affects, others, such as Clair- 
voyance, Clairaudience, Hypnosis, Thought-reading, Tele- 
pathy and so forth. There is nothing unreasonable in all 
this. On the contrary an affirmation of their existence is 
reasonable and in accordance with the Vedantic theory of 
Being upon which this paper proceeds. The only question 
about them is one of fact or proof. Do they exist or not? 
Nothing is more unscientific than to pronounce a priort 
against them and without investigation into the facts. 
Notwithstanding scientific bigotry (for there is a bigotry of 
science as of religion) psychical research is coming to be 
recognised as a useful form of enquiry. 

Lastly there is what is called spiritual or religious 
experience, which is of varying degrees and kinds, and 
is a knowledge of the nature (through an actual participa- 
tion in Its Being) of the excelling and infinite Principle 
which lies behind and manifests all Phenomena. Professor 
James’s celebrated work “ Varieties of Experience ” ig one 


THE GAYATRI-MANTRA 271 — 


of the first essays in a field, which is only now commencing 
to be cultivated extensively. The possibility or fact of 
such experience cannot be said to be unreasonable. Such 
experience has been affirmed by all the great Religions, and 
by some of the great Philosophies. If it is unreasonable, 
then the bulk of Humanity have been lacking in reason 
in all the past and in the present times. The question 
again here is one of fact and proof. Have such experiences 
taken place in fact? Are they real experiences or mere 
hallucinations ? In the latter case why should they occur ? 
The only direct and certain proof is the having of such an 
experience oneself. Probable proof may be had in various 
ways, such as the persistence and universality of such 
experiences, the nature of the truths said to be revealed 
by them, and, in particular, the extraordinary effect which 
they have produced on the individuals who have had such 
experience, and (in the case of the greater experiences) the 
effect that they have produced on the world at large. To 
my mind it is a very shallow view which regards the effect 
produced on millions of past and present Humanity, by the 
Rsis and Sakya-Muni of India, by Laotze, Jesus and 
Mahommed, as the outcome of the hallucination of the 
Mahatmds named and others. Which of these experiences, 
it may be asked, is true, or which one is truer than the 
others? This is too vast a question to be answered here. 
Let me however say this, that those who read these experi- 
ences with knowledge will find elements common to all 
together with some elements which seem to vary. As to 
these last let it be noted that just as in our ordinary life 
one man sees and knows more than another, so it is with 
spiritual experience, of which there are many grades. If 
two men are approaching a mountain, is the experience 
which one man has of it 50 miles distant untrue, because 
it differs from the experience of the other man who sees 


972, THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


it at its foot? Do we not say that both are true, consider- 
ing the position of each experiencer ? 

In India spiritual experience is called Veda, from the 
root “Vid” to know. It is experience in the limit, of 
which all others are gradual and partial reproductions. 
This may be primary, that is, an individual may himself 
have the experience, or he may accept the authority of 
those who have had such experience, for reasons I have 
slightly indicated but cannot develop here. 

The Vedanta says that Reason is supreme in worldly 
(Laukika) matters open to our senses. By reasoning we 
may establish Laukika truth, but as regards what is not 
Seen, such as the being of one Supreme Cause of which 
the Universe is an effect, unaided reason can only establish 
probabilities and not certainty. Thus one may, with 
reasonableness, argue for or against Monism, Dualism, 

Pluralism and go forth. In this way mere reasoning may 
lead to contrary conclusions. And in fact what is more ~ 
contradictory than the conclusions of Western philo- 
Sophy with Realism (old style and new as propounded by 
Mr. Bertrand Russell), Idealism (objective and subjective), 
Monism, Pluralism, Pan-psychism, Humanism, Pragmat- 
ism and the many other systems which jostle for men’s 
custom in this Philosophical Fair? It is a matter of doubt 
whether modern metaphysic is any real advance on that 
of the greater among the ancients. In my opinion none 
is better constructed than the Six Darsanas. The 
advance has been made in Science. But even here there 
is dispute, both as to the facts observed, and the theories 
based on them. For me, their greatest importance just 
lies in the fact, that the latest scientific inferences corro- 
borate the intuitively derived teaching of the ancient sages. 
Thus present scientific conceptions of the constitution of 
matter, and notably the break-down of the Atomic Theory, 


THE GAYATRI-MANTRA 273 


support the notions of Maya, a single material basis of the 
Universe, and the existence of Ether which, as Akasa, 
was accepted in India when Europe had not passed beyond 
the so-called “four elements.” Both science and Indian 
beliefs posit an evolution of beings from the inorganic to 
the organic, and, in the latter division, from plant to animal 
and animal to man. In India it has always been held that 
there are no partitions or gulfs between the various forms 
of existence, and that, for instance, the difference between 
man and animal is not a difference of kind but of degree. 
Again from the new Psychology and Psychical Research, 
Vedanta gains support, as from theories touching the 
nature of mind as a material force (as Herbert Spencer 
teaches) and as a power (the predominant idea in “ New 
Thought ” literature), the extension of the field of Con- 
sciousness, dual personalities and various forms of psychi- 
cal phenomena. 

Nevertheless, so far as ultimates are concerned, neither 
Metaphysics nor Science can establish more than a high 
degree of probability; they may lead to the door of the 
shrine, but they do not directly and unaided place the en- 
quirer within. The Brahman or All-Pervader cannot be 
established by reason, because it is never an object of 
knowledge. The Sastra says, one can only know Brahman 
by being Brahman and that is by spiritual experience. Its 
being and nature are taught by revelation. Revelation is 
not the speaking of any voice, divine or otherwise, from 
without. It is self-knowledge in its deepest sense and 
nothing more. The Vedantist affirms that we can know 
ourselves, not only in our gross or physical aspect as being 
fair or dark, short or tall and so on, or in our subtle or 
mental aspect as perceiving and reasoning beings, but in 
our innermost essence as that of which both body and 
mind are manifestations, It may be the fact, or it may 

18 


274 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


not be the fact, but there is nothing unreasonable in the 
proposition as such. It is this Self-knowledge, attained 
by oneself in varying degrees, or accepted as the experience 
of others (Sruti), whose testimony we may, for reasons 
Satisfying to ourselves, accept, which renders certain that 
which to reason is only probable. Once S'ruti is accepted, 
Reason can follow its teaching without violence to its 
Own principles. What was before reasonable and probable 
is now both reasonable and certain. This must be s0, 
unless we assume what is impossible, namely a divorce 
between rational and spiritual truth. Truth however is 
one and what is unreasonable must be rejected, whoever 
Says it, “‘even if He be the Lotus-born,” 

It is not India who has denied the rights of Reason. 
It is Europe who in the past has done so. But Europe 
has now, after fierce contest against Church tyranny and 
Oppression (aided by the State) with its imprisonment, 
torture and burning at the stake, largely achieved in the 
present the right of free thinking. Had India been so 
Opposed’She might have been to-day more intellectually 
active. In the same way the political activity of Hurope 
has been stimulated by the oppressive governance of its 
peoples. We westerners have had to fight for all the things 
of worth we have won. 

Nowhere however hag intellectual liberty been so au- 
thoritatively, and for such a length of time, recognised as 
in India. The word “Man” ig derived from the root 
Man, which in Sanskrit means “to think”. Man is 
Manu. Therefore man ig “ The Thinker.’ He is thus 
distinguished from the rest of the world by his thinking. 
What greater definition than this. of our Aryan fore- 
fathers can be found? In no country in the whole world 
has there been more thinking than in India, which has 
been indeed a very hot-bed of Speculation and divergent 


THE GAYATRI-MANTRA 275 


beliefs and practices: such as the Materialism of Char- 
vaka and the Lokayatas, true atheists, men of the type 
of Ajitakes'akambali, the opponent of Sakya-Muni, who 
denied that any Brahmana, or any one else, had dis- 
covered any truth concerning any other life than this, 
who said that man was made of the four elements and 
dissolved into the elements at death and had gone for 
ever; such again as the Sankhyas, dualists and realists, 
affirming the existence of Spirit, but holding a God as 
Governor of the universe unproved (Niris’‘vara-Dars/ana) ; 
the Nyayavaises'iikas, pluralists, realists affirming the 
existence of the Supreme Lord; Buddhist idealism (Vijna- 
navada) and so called “ Nihilists” (Stunyavadins) ; Vedantic 
Monism, qualified Monism, and Dualism in various theistic 
forms, Mimarhsakas, Jainas and every shade of thought 
imaginable. 

In Vedantic Sadhana, Reasoning or Manana occupies, 
with Sravana and Nididhyasana, a principal place. All 
the Darsianas, particularly perhaps the Nyaya, are written 
to serve Manana or reasoning, and the Brahmasttras, which 
the Vedantic systems expound, are known as Vaiyasikanya- 
yamala. 

As regards science, India has had its own great 
achievements which you will find recorded in part in 
Professors Brojendranath Seal’s and Binay-kumar Sirkar’s 
works on the subject. Up to the modern period India 
was more than the equal in this field of any other country. 
But undoubtedly, since that period, the palm for scientific 
thinking and experiment must be given to the West. 
Those who however imagine, that reasoning and freedom 
of thought are a distinctive appanage of the West, are 
very ignorant of the history of their country. If one 
had to make the comparison, and one did make it over 
a period, extending from say (to go no further) 2000 B.c., 


1 
| 


276 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


the statement must be reversed in favour of India. No 
country has honoured Reason more, or given it greater 
freedom than India. The cultural restrictions in this 
country have been of a different kind, consisting in the 
social ordering of life, and in later times exclusion from 
knowledge by reason of artificial distinctions of caste. 
But those, to whom the book of knowledge was open, 
have always been able to think freely enough. When 
Europe was under ecclesiastical domination, the attempt 
was made to make every one think the same way in the 
manner laid down by Church authority. It is against this 
that European Rationalism protested. 

1 at first found a difficulty in choosing a subject to 
address to you out of the many which presented themselves, 
and I had practically written a paper, with which I was not 
satisfied, because I could not put before you (as indeed I 


_ cannot even now) what I wished to say within the limits 


available to me, when, by something more than chance, I 
found amongst my old papers a note sent me some years ago 
on the Gayatri-Mantra, the holiest expression of the thought 
of India. I therefore restate its argument more summarily 
in words, and with some further additions of my own. 

The Mantra opens and ends with the Pranava or Om. 
This refers in the first place to the threefold aspect 
of the World-Cause in manifestation. That there is a 
cause (Maha-sakti) which, as the Universal Self, contains 
the universe within Itself, is dealt with in the meditation 
which follows. Here both the Cause and Its manifesta- 
tion are the object of thought. The Nadabindu indicates 
that causal state of the World-Power, prior to its three- 
fold differentiation as represented by the letters A, U, M, 
which coalesce into Om. Thege letters stand for its 
working which is observable by all. For the first and 
second refer to present activities, as well as those in the 


THE GAYATRI-MANTRA 277 


past and future, of the Mahdsakti, as the Radical Vital 
Potential. M or Rudra as so observed is chemical action 
breaking down the combinations of matter. This is the 
disintegration of form. A (Brahma) is the force which 
creates it anew by its ever rejuvenescent molecular activity, 
thus rescuing organised vitality from the processes which 
are ever at work to consume (as “ M ”) its forms. U (Visnu) 
is the maintaining power which stabilizes matter, which is 
only a relatively stable condition of energy, from which 
it appears, and into which it, at length, merges. Looking 
at the sum total of manifested energy, Visnu as Maintainer, 
through space and time, is a theological statement of the 
doctrine of the general conservation of energy. The Maha- 
sakti, in Herself Perfect: Consciousness (Cidrtpini), is the 
threefold Powers of Will, Knowledge and Action, and mani- 
fests in the building up, maintenance and disintegration of 
forms. What follows, as all else, is contained in Om, but 
some of its implications are developed in the rest of the 
Gayatri-Mantra. Om considered as a sound (Dhvani) is the 
approximate natural name of the first undifferentiated 
movement (Samanya-Spanda) of the stressing material 
cause (Prakrti) of the universe. The primordial “Sound” 
or Stress is the primordial functioning of the Brahma- 
Sakti. 
Then follow the three Vyahrtis—Bhih, Bhuvah, Svah, 
which are Laksana of, that is, stand for, all the fourteen 
Lokas, though now in the (Vyavaharika) world we are only 
concerned with the first three; Bhuh for Bhuh and the 
seven nether Talas, Bhuvah for itself, and Svah for Svah 
and the remaining upper regions up to Satya. The Lokas 
represent states of consciousness. Bhurloka or earth is 
the state of normal experience. The Lokas above it are 
states of supernormal consciousness, and the Talas_be- 
low are conditions of sub-normal experience. Objectively 


278 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


considered matter becomes more and more dense as one 
descends from the highest to the lowest Loka and thence to 
the Talas; and as the veil of matter is more or less dense, 
80 the state of consciousness varies. The first five Lokas, 
from and including Earth, are those of the five forms of 
sensible matter, the sixth is that of Mind ; and the seventh 
is the causal state of both Mind and Matter. Earth and the 
nether states are the gross body, the Lokas from Bhuvah 
to Tapah are the subtle body, and Satya is the causal body 
of the great Puruga referred to in the Gayatri and wor- 
shipped in the Sun-circle (Aditya-mandala). The Vyahrtis 
indicate that the Great Self which is indicated in Om per- 
vades all the regions of the universe. How then do we get 
the notion of that Self and then experience it ? 

In our ordinary condition of consciousness, the outer 
world is completely objective and stable and independent 
of it. It lies “over there” in the outer space entirely 
external to us, having apparently its existence in itself and 
of itself. This state of consciousness is indicated by the 
first Vyahrti “ Bhah.” This is our normal state. Our mind 
is here. It is one thing—Aham or I. The object, the Idam 
or “This,” the Vimarsa-Sakti, is there. It igs another. 
But a little reflection reveals that these seemingly indepen- 
dent objects are for us bundles of certain qualities, which 
are so, only because they are sensed by the Senses which 
are constituted in a particular way. It is obvious that if 
our senses were not there, or if they were not seizing the 
object, there would be no sensation and no object. Again 
if the senses themselves were modified, the sense perceptions 
would also change. In that case the objects, which at first 
sight exist independently of our perceptions, would become 
something different from what they formerly were, as they 
would exhibit a different set of qualities. Thus the objective 
world is not really independent ag we first thought, and the 


THE GAYATRI-MANTRA 279 


form it presents to us is due to the action of some objective 
force acting upon the subjectively sensuous character of the 
beings who perceive it. With such reflections the notion of 
objective stability wears off, and the world first assumes a 
mobile condition, in so far as it is seen that the objects, 
which at first seem to possess the qualities which charac- 
terise them, do so not only of themselves but also of our- 
selves. The condition of mind in which this notion is 
firmly held is the second of the seven divisions or stages of 
the Parthiva consciousness. All materially-minded think- 
ers, who look upon the objective world as independent of a 
subjective perceiver, are in the Bharloka. 

The second condition of consciousness in which the 
subjectivity of the self first asserts itself, and the objective 
world loses its absolute and independent character and 
appears as dependent upon, influenced and modified by the 
subjective factor, is expressed in some forms of idealism. 
In such cases though the subjective element is recognised, 
it is not ideal in the sense that it has its root wholly in 
itself, but it is objectively actual in the sense that it has its 
existence at least mainly in the external. The seer, seeing, 
and seen, are localised in the outer space. As we proceed 
upwards, whilst the seen (Jneya) remains external to us, 
the seeing (Jana) is localised internally, until at length 
the seer (Jndta), seeing (Jidna), and seen (Jeya) are all 
internalised, subjectified and unified. This Jidna-svarupa 
of the Supreme Consciousness is opposed to Jnadnavrite or 
the limited and differentiated consciousness. 

After the attainment of this second stage we pass to 
the third. We then ask, what lies behind the senses, where- 
in to a great extent the appearance of the external world 
depends? We then perceive that the senses do not 
apprehend objects unless attention, in the form of Manas is 


bestowed upon them. The whole world, open at any moment 
\ 


280 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


to the senses, is impinging on them at every moment, but 
only that is perceived to which we pay attention. The 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad gives good psychology when it 
says, “I did not hear. My mind was elsewhere.” But 
attention must be directed and willed. We learn then that 
behind the Senses there is some Self which directs its 
attention to a particular object, and so perceives it by the 
medium of the senses. ‘There is thus no sense-perception 
without the co-operation of the attention of the Self. There- 
fore the world (considered apart from what it may possibly 
be in itself) ig dependent both upon the senses and attentive 
mind of the self which is behind them. The attainment 


and habit of this thought is the third ascending stage of the 


Parthiva consciousness. 


We have thus attained a knowledge of the self. We 
next reflect upon its nature. To the ordinary consciousness 
of the first two states, the self either did not appear import- 
ant, or seemed to be limited to the body and restricted within 
its scope. But reflection has now shown that not only is it 
unconditioned by the senses, but actually conditions them, 
giving them effective operation through its power of atten- 
tion. The self then appears uncontrolled by the physical 
body, self-luminous and overlapping the bounds of the 
physical senses. When this notion is reached the fourth 
stage of consciousness is attained. 

The next question is—what is the relation of the self, 
the senses and the objects? Are they each independent 


_ in their origin the one of the other, or is one the cause 


of the other two? They cannot be independent of each 
other, for this would mean that either they had no 
relation to each other, or if there igs any relation, it is 
due to some fourth thing external to the others, which 
is the basis of their relation and apart from which they 
cannot be in relation. It ig obvious that they are in 


THE GAYATRI-MANTRA 281 


relation to each other, and, as such, the eround of their 

relation must be either in, or outside, themselves. It is 

sufficient to say here that no fourth principle capable of 

holding them together and bringing them into relation is 

perceived. But logically the same result can be established, 

for if a fourth principle bringing them into relation were 

assumed, which was dependent on some one or other of 

them, the causal element would be still to seek, whereas 

if it were independent and still in relation to the three, then 

the ground of this relation would have to be sought for in 

some fifth element, and so on with a regressio ad infinitum. 

We must then confine ourselves to the three and examine 

the nature of this relation. 

The relation can be grounded only in that element 

out of the three which is independent of the others, for a 
dependent entity cannot have the ground of its relation to 
others within itself. The perceived objects are not inde. 
pendent. For they require the senses to be perceived as 
objects of that character according to which we perceive 
them. The senses are not independent, for sense-percep- 
tion requires attention of the Self, Objects in order to be 
objects must be perceived by the senses. Without the 
senses they are not objects: for us. The Senses are not 
operative senses without the attention of the Self behind 
them. On the other hand the Self does not cease to be the. 
Self, when it is not attentively perceiving objects through 
the senses, as we see in the case of dream. The Self in 
dream is cut off from the senses. Indeed it evolves both 
objects and senses. The Self in dream is cut off from the 
objective world, having nothing in it but ideas thereto, 
Yet it transforms for itself those ideas into outer objects - 
and the senses which perceive them. What we see in 
dream is real while it lasts, Thus the Self is independent 

of the other two and has within itself the ground of the 


282, THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


causal relation by which it evolves them. The firm and 
lasting consciousness which realises this is the fifth step in 
the ascending consciousness. 

What then is the nature of the relation between the 
cause producing the objective world and the effect 80 pro- 
duced? Ig it a cause material in its nature, producing an 
effect external to itself, or an ideal cause working ideally 
upon itself to produce an effect ? The cause cannot produce 
an effect which is really external to itself. Were this so, 
the dream-world of which we are creators would be external 
to the self which produces it. In that case it would not 
vanish with that state of consciousness which lies at the 
root of it. The objective world can only be ideally con- 
nected with its cause. Gradually the notion that the 
objective world is produced by a cause external to it is 
rejected, and the notion is accepted that the cause has 
the effect lying ideally within it, which is projected and 
externalised in the course of cosmic evolution. For when 
mind and matter are evolved, each has equal reality and 
(in the sense of impermanence) unreality. In its highest 
Sense Reality = Persistence = Deathlessness (Amrtatva) = 
Ananda which ig living unimpeded in the fullest measure, 
which is Atma. And so Herbert Spencer on biological 
principles defines “ pleasure” as the index of the unimpeded 
flow of vitality. What fully persists and is therefore fully 
“real” is the self. The firm establishment of this experi- 
ence is the sixth consciousness. Just ag the dream-world 
lies within the consciousness of the dreamer, who projects 
it into fancied objectivity, so the objective world of common 
(Vyavaharika) experience 
the Consciousness of the so-called World-dreamer, who 
sums up in Himself all experiences, Ig the world or its 
cause necessarily thus by virtue of the nature of the cause 
itself, or on account of some external fact ? There is no 


lies within, and is projected by, 


THE GAYATRI-MANTRA 283 


material other than itself outside the cause which it takes 
within, works upon, and puts forth. It might be thought 
that there was ideal connection with the objective world 
on the causal side, but that the root of the objective world 
upon which it operates was something lying elsewhere 
than in its inner being. But this is not so, as the effect, 
the objective world, must necessarily be within the cause, 
otherwise it is not possible that it should be ideally con- 
nected with it. If the connection with the cause were 
something other than the constitution of the cause itself, 
there must be an indication of what that something is and 
the nature of its connection with the cause. Moreover if 
that something lies outside the cause, we must suppose 
some medium connecting that something with the cause 
itself. And again the question would arise whether this 
connection was natural and necessary, or adventitious. If 
the latter, then what is it which brings about the connec- 
tion ? In this way we have a regressio ad infinitum unless 
we suppose the connection to be natural and necessary. It 
is reasonable then to hold that the objective world lies 
necessarily in its root the cause. Moreover having arrived 
at the consciousness that the effect is ideally connected 
with the cause, it is more reasonable to hold that this 
connection is due to the constitution of the cause itself. 
When the entire objective world is viewed as necessarily 
lying within the cause, the seventh, or what we may call 
the Satya stage of the Parthiva consciousness, is attained. 

Up to this we have only dealt with the subdivisions 
of the Pdarthiva or earth consciousness, that is, experience 
as beings in the Parthiva state elaborated by reflection to 
its highest point. By such reflection we reach the stand- 
point from which the whole universe is viewed as lying in 
a seed (Bija) form, ideally and potentially within its cause 
which is nothing but the Self, 


| 284 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 
| 


i Thus one aspect of the grandeur of the Self as the 
| potential cause of the entire universe is revealed. The 
\| Sddhaka has thus passed through higher and higher stages 
| of the Parthiva consciousness to the indwelling Spirit 
within it. His thus expanded consciousness brings forth 
the exclamation which is the Gayatri-Mantra, in which 
homage is made to the Supreme Power, which manifests in 
this and all other forms of experience and its objects in the 
Universe. Hence the word by which the Sadhaka denotes 
this indwelling Spirit is Savita, or the Projector of the 
Universe from out of Its own thought, without external 
material or aid. It is however to be remembered that the 
Strength of the force of the externality-notion which com- 
menced at the stage of Ether (Akasa) reached its greatest 
power in the earth-principle (Prithivi-Tattva) of solid, 
ponderable, three dimensioned matter and in the Parthwa 
consciousness. Therefore it is that Savita the Producer, 
though really the Inner Self, is itself, externalised as some- 
| thing placed out in space and hence we find it designated 
| by Tat or That. This “Thatness” will, as we proceed, 
| meet in one unity the Supremeness of the last stage. But 
| it is the characteristic of the Parthiva consciousness that 
i it always tends to locate both the Seer and the Seen in out- 
er space. The devotee to whose mental gaze the indwelling 
Spirit reveals itself, bursts forth into the Mantra: “ Let 
us meditate on the adorable darkness-dispelling Spirit of 
the self-luminous all-producing Savita,” with the prayer 
| that It may inspire and illumine our inward Reason. It 
is through this illumination of the Reason by the source 
of Reason, that the inner Reason which is our inner being 
sees and understands the entire universe and its principles. 
This Savitaé produces the universe in accordance with the 
principles of Reason which are at base His own inner being 
(Vicadracamatkritih paramatmamayi), and this production 


THE GAYATRI-MANTRA 285 


of His is revealed to us and realised by us in participation 
with the Divine Reason of His being. As we are, in our 
deepest ground, the Spirit which, in its outer aspect, is our 
limited selves and what is not ourselves; as our reason is 
an efflorescence of Its own eternal all-knowingness, so our 
outer reasoning is in conformity with the truth in its own 
sphere, and is illumined to pass beyond reasoning upon the 
objective world to an understanding of the rational vesture 
of the Spirit, and then to the intuitive realisation of the 
Spirit Itself. This union of ours with the universal is 
shown by the fact that we, as so many individuals, if we 
were to remain confined within our individuality, could 
never perceive the universe as common to us all. This 
common perception of the universe could not be achieved 
by us as individuals, but only as being one with the uni- 
versal. And therefore in so far as we are the common 
perceivers of the universe, we are not individual but uni- 
versal. Our individuality consists in our perception of the 
universe in so far as it differs from that of others. Thus 
difference of perception, which individualises us, is not 
based upon any inherent differentiating condition in our 
essential being, but upon the externalising limitations, the 
result of particular Karma, which make it impossible for 
all to perceive everything at the same time to the same 
extent. This perception of the difference of the many, due 
to limitation, differentiates each individual from the other, 
put it does not, and cannot, differentiate him from the 
Indwelling Universal (here Parthiva) which is the common 
ground ofall. Thus the Sadhaka says that it is this Savita 
or Indwelling Universal, which inspires the Reason of ug 
all, both as individual and as universal, and it is through 
the Self-luminous Consciousness of this Most Glorious 
Self (known not only in Samadhi, but in and through 
every act of reasoning, its mental embodiment) that we 


286 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


are enabled to learn and understand the Truth (Satyam). 
For it is Satya or the Persistent Self Itself. The relation 
between the individual and the universal being thus grasp- 
ed, and it being realised that the individuality of the in- 
dividual ig only through the universal, we should then 
proceed to see what is the nature of this Universal which 
makes it project the universe as we see it around us. 

Here we pass beyond the Gayatri Sadhana into the 
subtle Atma-sadhana. The Vedantist says that to such 
as truly see, whether with the eye of reason or intuition, 
the whole universe is perceived as originating from its 
Source, as the Ganga from the Himalayas, and at length 
returning thereto. Its source is in the Power of the Per- 
fect Consciousness which is Siva, which means the Auspi- 
cious and Good, the Brahman or all Pervading. All which 
exists are Its varying forms, existing in happiness so long 
as they are in Harmony with Him who is Bliss (Ananda) 
itself. Power and Harmony—let us repeat these words 
day by day. Think continuously the Thought of Power 
and be powerful. Individual Power is a small thing, but 
when it links itself to, or identifies itself with, the Supreme 
Power, it shows its mightiness according to the degree of 
such harmony and union. Power however does not merely 
mean material force. The latter is only Power translated 
to the material plane. Power is also mental, moral, spiritual. 
Love is Power—the greatest of Powers. Everything in 
fact which exists ig Power, which is the Mother (Arhbika). 

We may intellectually conceive this. But how to 
realise it? Here the Vedantic practice (Sadhana) is as 
profound as its theory. It says that man as body, mind 
and spirit is one whole. If one would understand and 
realise the Pure, one must be that, both in body and mind 
(S'uddhadtma). In the West it ig commonly supposed that 
a man may arrive at, or at any rate is competent to seek 


THE GAYATRI-MANTRA 987 


for, the truth by reason alone. Mere reason however is 
insufficient. A man may be deemed a philosopher in the 
West, and yet lack in character and morals. This is not 
so in Vedanta which says that its doctrine cannot be per- 
fectly understood, much less realised, unless the body and 
mind are made pure enough to approach the Purity which 
that doctrine teaches. The whole being must be brought 
in harmony, so far as may be, withit. Thus is it under- 
stood and at length realised. The pure mind and body 
naturally think the thoughts which link man’s mind with 
the Universal Mind and the Universal Self of which it is 
the subtle form. Sadhana varies according to the stages 
of development and therefore competency (Adhikara) of 
man. But the highest of Sadhands is Karuna or compas- 
sion. I took up recently an English novel, curiously enough 
called “The Rationalist.’”” There I found the phrase “ this 
new thing appearing on the horizon—the phenomenon of 
Compassion which is now beginning to express itself in 
action.” This “new thing” is as old here as the Vedas and 
the Buddha Gotama who ceaselessly taught it. Avoid 
giving pain. Allay it where itis. Yet the application of 
this principle is not so simple as is sometimes thought. 
The truly great of our race need no other power nor effort 
than to be themselves. By the mere fact of their own self- 
redemption, they redeem others. Others must at least 
strive to hold in view the ideal in the midst of the struggles 
into which their nature and circumstances may lead them. 
Mere apathy however is not Yoga. Yoga is unity with the 
Lord in the forms of His Power as one’s family, friends, 
people and the world at large. He is Jagadbandhu, that is, 
Friend of the World. We can each make effort to follow 
this Supreme Law and to extricate ourselves from the 
morass of merely selfish Struggle. And as we successfully, 
according to our varying opportunity and capacity, do so, 


288 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


we will find that we make individual advance, and that the 
power to impose our will on others increases. If each will, 
according to his capacity, so order his life that he does not 
cause pain to, and relieves the suffering of this great Body 
of the Lord which is the Universe, of which each is an in- 
finitesimal part, then they will commence to really wnder- 
stand. The greatest cloud upon understanding is selfish- 
ness. The mass of men are still mere candidates for 
Humanity and must raise themselves to it. The meaning 
of Evolution is the liberation of the Spirit or Inner Self 
from all which obscures its essential freedom. This libera- 
tion is taking place in the gradual ascent from inorganic to 
organic being and the advance of organism culminating, 
for the present, in man as we know him. The highest 
humanity is that in which it and Divinity meet. In man 
the I principle ig still being developed in present humanity. 
The end is the perfection of the present “I,” and then by 
stages its identification with the Universal “ I,” the Par- 
naham which is the Infinite Self. The Sadhaka thinks 
of this ascending or return movement repeatedly, for Japa 
on the Gayatri is necessary to correct the natural objective 
tendencies of thought. This is the true performance of 
Sandhya, which literally means perfect Dhyana or medita- 
tion, of which the Gayatri-Mantra is the soul. 

Those who have not learnt the goal of evolution do 
not realise the necessity of Sandhya. They have before 
their eyes only the present powers and capacities of map 
and think that his present possibilities on the lower plane 
should alone be realised. They think only of the fulfilment 
of desires, shutting their eyes to the purpose for which 
man exists in the world, namely, first harmony with the 
active (Vis'vatma-Sakti) and then union with the U2- 
changing Brahman (Cidrapini-S’akti). They fail to realise 
that the Reality, which underlies all phenomena, must also 


THE GAYATRI-MANTRA 289 


be in the deepest nature of man, and unless that Reality 
is known the deepest aspirations of Humanity cannot be 
fulfilled. From the earliest beginnings all earnest minds 
have sought the solution of the riddle of the universe. All 
types of thinkers whether materialists, idealists, or spiri- 
tualists, have supposed that there is some Reality, call 
it Matter, Mind, Spirit, Brahman, God, Allah, what they 
will, which, whilst eluding their mental grasp, is all the 
same there, though it cannot be comprehended by the 
mind in its fullness. It cannot only be there, but it must 
be here within the inmost nature of all, as one with the 
deepest inmost self. If so, man must not only study the 
objective universe, which he should do to gain knowledge 
of the external S'akti-aspect of this reality, but he must 
plunge deep into his own nature, for he can only realise 
It within and not without the self. Man’s present existence 
is a mode of consciousness, ordinarily in the Spiritual Bhah 
Consciousness, or in the forms of a! Tala Consciousnegs, 
The search is to find out the universal principle. Beings 
in the lower order of evolution have not the “[” principle 
evolved to the level of Vijnana or Buddhi, and therefore 
the reason and understanding must be developed. The 
greater portion of the work of evolution must be done by 
the individual himself, under the guidance of the divine 
Principle of Reason, and if we do not wish to be left behind 
fra general progressive movement, we must give up all 

gy and the contentment which the animal (whether 
as beast or man) has with his present powers and capacities 
and their external environment. Man must seek to under- 
stand the meaning of life and its end, and looking beyond 
by the Hye of Divine Wisdom (Jndna-caksu) endeavour 
ue first intellectually grasp, and then to realise, that which 
* is the Beginning, the Maintainer and the End of all—the 


Vacya-sakti of the Gayatri-Mantra. 
19 


— 


19 
| 


| 


CHAPTER XXXI 
ATMA-SADHANA 
(Yoea By REASONING) 


I Have in the previous article shortly indicated a form of 
Gayatri-Sadhana given to me some years ago. Here follows 
the Atma-Sadhana which is taken up at the point at which 
the Gayatri-Sadhana ends. 

Duality is inherent in the constitution of all mani- 
fested being. Therefore until man realises the whole (Parna- 
brahman), that is, the Universe as one with its both imma- 
nent and transcending Root, there is an object whether 
the same ig apparently wholly outside, and different from, 
and independent of the Self, or whether it is experienced 
internally as a mode of the latter’s subjective existence. 
But the experience is of varying grades. For just as matter, 
objectively considered, becomes more and more gross from 
its first ethereal (Akasa) form to scientific, that is, ponder- 
able matter, so when in the upward ascent of consciousness 
Matter has been withdrawn into itself and exists there as 
@ mode of being, that mode becomes a more and more 
subtle expression of the principle whence all objectivity, 
whether externally sensed or internally experienced, is 
derived. At the stage of complete manifestation, that is, 
ordinary Bhih experience, the object or “ This” (Idarh) 
is wholly outside, and independent of, the Self, the two 
being mutually exclusive the one of the other. Matter 
is then in the form in which we ordinarily sense it. We 
may remain at this stage which ig that of objective science — 
or go within and to the Root of all experience. If that 
Root is within, then introspection can alone discover it. 


ATMA-SADHANA 297 


How ? That which carries us upwards or inwards is the 
will-to-know of a nature ever more and more purifying 
itself and thus gaining strength by its approach to the 
Almighty Savita of all. This is Prayer in its highest form. 
At each moment of attainment and advance we naturally 
render homage to the glory of the All-pervading Being, who 
gradually reveals His infinite Self, just as Linnaeus the 
great botanist fell on his knees when he first saw Its objec- 
tive expression in the form of the golden beauty of the 
flower of the wild Gorse. But the object, though it persists 
in experience until the attainment of the perfect Conscious- 
ness (Brahma-Svaripa), is yet diversely realised as we pro- 
ceed innerwards. In the first place it is brought from 
without to within the Self, and there experienced not as 
something different from the Self but as a mode of its own 
existence. Next as such it becomes less and less pointed 
and more diffused and is brought into closer and closer 
touch with the subjective being. This is effected by an 
intense and penetrating meditation at each stage of advance 
with a view to realise the subjective root of that stage. 
When the objective tendencies of thought are held in check, 
Consciousness of Itself more and more purely manifests. 

In the Parthiva consciousness, matter ig in a fully 
pointed condition outside the Self until the Satya stage is 
reached. Even the Self appears as a concentrated objective 
point in space. At the Satya stage the notion is gained 
through reasoning that the entire universe must lie within 
the Self as its cause. Acting on this suggestion of the 
Reason, the Parthiva consciousness turns back into itself, 
and for the first time as Antarmukhi is conscious of some-" 
thing within itself lying there in a pointed form. The 
pointedness remains, but the world is carried within the 
Self, where it is grasped as a mode of its own existence. 
This peculiar consciousness is Rasa, which is the subjective 


999, THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


root of what objectively appears to the Parthiva conscious- 
ness a8 Ap. The external particularised location disappears. 
If the point is located outside, there is Gandha—experi- 
ence of matter in its Prithivi condition. Gandha, Rasa, 
Rupa, Spars’a, Slabda are the various kinds of conscious- 
ness, which in the evolutionary process are the subjective 
toot of sensible matter and which on the full externalisation 
of such matter are the five different ways in which ib affects 
the senses as smell, taste, sight, touch, and hearing. 

In Rasa experience the object is brought in closer 
relation with the Self, both by reason of its being placed 
therein, and of a lessened intensity of its pointedness to 
the Self as compared with Gandha or Bhiah experience. 
With a lessening intensity of the Rasa experience, the latter 
is shifted from the inner to the outer and seems to be 
coming from outside less in the form of feeling than of 
intellection in the shape of general unqualitative and un- 
differentiated form. There is then the idea of something 
there all round the Self, affecting the subjective being by 
way of a superficially, instead of interiorly, felt experience. 
This is Rapa experience, the subjective root of Agni who 
is the builder of forms. This is the last of the form (Martta) 
division of Tattvas. The lessened intensity of the pointed- 
ness of the Rasa-feeling has necessarily the effect of setting 
consciousness on the surface of subjective being, and as 
the idea of space or co-existing externality-points is already 
there, this weakened Rasa experience, being externally 
localised, spreads itself over the Space and becomes the sub- 
jective root of the Rapa consciousness. This Ripa experi- 
ence, when closely looked into and allowed to come very 
close to the subjective being, is experienced as Touch 
or Sparsia, the subjective root ag Vayu. This is not the 
touch produced by specialised form, for this is a sensation 
had only after the production of Agni. The experience 


ATMA-SADHANA 993 


may be compared to the perception in ordinary life of the 
thermal quality of objects. The subjective intensification 
of Rupa, with its surface expansion, when concentrated 
into a point of the inner subjective being, produced the 
Rasa feeling, which when located outwards was, as Gandha, 
the subjective root of the externalised objectivity of daily 
life. Rupa affects the surface subjective being, whilst 
Spars’a again shifts experience into the inner, as the whole 
subjective being then responds to Sparsa as a whole. 
This Spars’‘a Consciousness, which is objectively Vayu, is 
when closely examined found to consist of externality idea- 
points spread over the surface of the subjective being, 
receding away as mere hints of outsideness, as compared 
with the something which is outside of Rupa experience. 
This is Sabda experience, the subjective root of Akaya, 
the seed of all externalised or externally located world- 
phenomena. It persists as the deathless basis (Amrta) of 
all manifestation downwards or outwards, into which all 
phenomena are resolved in their upward or inward course. 
The realisation of this is the S'abda consciousness. 

This root of externality-consciousness refers back to 
its origin the inner mind (which projects the idea of mere 
outerness and which is its counterpart), the root from 
which the notion of externality arises as the tree from its 
seed. This internal-root which grows into Akasa is the 
Brahma-consciousness as the internal root-will (correspond- 
ing on the Parthiva plane to the Manas) which lies at the 
root of all manifestation. Behind this is the “Iam my- 
self,” which subjectifying itself as the “I am myself I” be- 
comes the Cosmic Will. The former is Cit as the objecti- 
fied self-consciousness. And from the fact that it is the 
starting point and internal correspondence of the objective 
world it may be called the Bhuh Consciousness of the 
internal, ideal, the subjective region as distinguished from 


294 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


the Bhih consciousness of the external, actual objective 
region, the first Vyahrti in the ascending scale. But this 
Supreme Bhuh, being the terminating point of objectivity 
in the form of the Self as Universe cannot stand by itself. 
It must be the result of some assertion of consciousness 
which is not that of any other than Self-Being, as all other 
assertions or Vyahrtis of the external world are here 
transcended. Thus this assertion as “J am” may be called 
the Bhuvah of the supreme objective region as distinguished 
from the Bhuvah of the objective region lower down. And 
behind this assertion of self-existence as its root is the 
eternal subjective “I” (Aharh) of the supreme Svah as 
distinguished from the external objective “I” or indi- 
viduality in the Svah lower down, This completes the 
field of assertion of self-consciousness behind which lies 
the entire Consciousness (Cit) Itself, that is, Conscious- 
ness (Cit) per se, which, whilst itself ever unchanged and 
unconditioned, is the source of All the changing forms 
of experience mentioned which again merge into it. This 
is Bliss itself (Ananda) or Joy, of which the world is an 
expression in time and space, the Joy by which it is main- 
tained and the Joy into which the world re-enters, the 
Universal Mother (like the earthly mother) clasping the 
child which She has produced to Her breast. 

The “I” or Aharn here spoken of is not the limited “I” 
of Ahangkara which is only a gross and particularised re- 
flection of the former. In the Kamakalavilasa the Supreme 
I (Ahath) is very beautifully explained as the union (Sama- 
tasya) of its own infinite Self as Prakasa with itself as 
Vimarsa-Sakti, which is a pure mirror (Darpana) made 
of a mass of the Prakasa Sliva’s own rays. These are 
reflected back and the Purnahambhava or the experience 
of the “I” ag being all arises. That is the notion of Self 
had by reference to the Self which is then the Hinjoyer of 


ATMA-SADHANA 295 


Bliss. There is no other but the Self in the fullest purity 
and unlimitedness of both and is thus the supreme Aham. 
From this root “I”, which is Kama, the will to create and 
the collectivity (Samasti) of all the powers which consti- 
tute all manifested things, there burgeons forth the trunk, 
the branches, the leaves, and fruit of the great Asvattha 
tree which is the universe. 

It is only when this Supreme Universal “1” ig reached 
that it is possible to realise its eternal inwardness as the 
Mahastnya, which is the. Great Void in the sense that 
it is nothing which thought can conceive or words utter. 
None of the higher stages can be realised until the next 
lower one is grasped. Before the universal “1” is reached, 
it is not possible to realise the “I-less” Cit or conscious- 
ness, as the veil of matter covers (though with decreasing 
thickness as we ascend) its Glorious Face, It requires a 
strong effort of subjective penetration to pass through 
this covering, dense as ponderable matter at its lowest 
end, and to reach the Consciousness which lies behind, 
of which all forms are Its assertions. At the time of 
meditation, the entire thick veil of material (Parthiva) 
existence must be gradually thinned by moving inwards 
according to the stages described ; by reducing the crude 
and thicker form of consciousness into the subtle and 
more refined, till by gradual inner progress the subtlest 
point of the universal “I” which is the Lord (Is'vara) of 
Vedanta is reached. After this That which is the eternal 
and changeless ground of even this ig realised and then 
there is Kaivaiya Moksa, the ultimate Basis of all the 
Forms which have arisen out of Its self-assertion,—the 
Will to be many of which the Veda speaks. This is the 
great Self of the Vedanta. This is the Perfect Hixperience 


which is called the Supreme Love (Niratisaya-premas- 
padatvam dnandatvam). 


296 THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 


These forms of the Self can be broadly classified into 
the actual, objective or external which is the waking state 
(Jagrat avastha); the ideal, the subjective or internal, the 
assertional or the state of dream (Svapna) ; and the third 
the state of dreamless slumber (Susupti) which is the bare 
subjective standing by, itself not yet in active assertion, 
but having passed the equilibrium point about to assert 
itself, but for the time being having the assertion latent 
In it, lying there unperceived, but ready to shoot forth 
into assertion, at first qualitative, and then into perception, 
by reason of both qualitative and external manifestation. 
Herein all ideas become merged and latent and thence 
project themselves into the Ideal and thence again into 
the Actual in the course of the involution of the Self into 
the Mayik covering which is the universe. The Perfect 
Consciousness, as realising all these three stages with all 
their differences and similarities, lies beyond them all, 
though it is one with all, supporting them by Its own 
essential Being and Power (S‘akti). They are Its forms— 
the forms of that Consciousness which It is. It runs | 
through all (Sttratma) and unifies them all, but remains a 
in Itself unlimited and unconditioned, giving them both | 
their separate existence, yet summing them up into Its 
own hife and Being, which comprehending all yet tran- 
scends them from the standpoint of its own Being in itself 
or Svartipa. It is beyond all because it is infinite. It 
comprehends all in its supremely rich experience because 
It is the whole (Parna). It is Love because It is the Love 
of the Self for the Self. It is Joy because all Love is 
that; but it is perfect also. It is the Perfect Experience 
(Jianasvaripa) which thought achieves by a pure mind 


in a pure body. It is thus the Supreme Siddhi of all 
Sadhana and Yoga. 


Om Tat Sat 


$a 
a 
, a ee 
‘ » , 
eae 
ys 
- ie 
ay 
4 tie 
Q . 
i's 
* : 
i r 
\ 
Agta te | 
. lt 
AY > y 
i we ss th iy 
vy h ee us Vee 
7 ni 
, r= > ME 
y i eit 
ar . 
( f 


sd i v 
. p ies 
‘ ATS ytt 
. Vf. 

- Py i. > oy 

3 he ; 

3 "4 " of 

Mee. v4 Fos 

: ; dens , 

; 


vane teas 


x is 1 
Atte g tee ee 
Patani ty ah 


ae 


= SA ee 


a 


- 
x 
€ 
a 
ee 


as 


BOOKS BY 
Sir John Woodroffe (Arthur Avalon) 
Some Press Notices 


Sir John Woodroffe's works are absolutely indispen- 


sable for all students of this very mixed but widespread and 
™Portant phase of non-Vedic Hinduism, 
(G..R: S, Mead in Occult Review) 


These books, dealing with the secret mysticism and 
magic of India, are the most interesting which have been 
Published in recent years, 

tigi (Neae Metaphysische Rundschau) 

In Mr. Ayalon these mystic writings have found an 
enthusiastic exponent and a daring investigator who is 
determined to disentangle the lofty conceptions of earlier 
and purer beliefs from much of the misconceptions and mis- 


Understandings which have grown around them by the . 


debasing and sensual rites practised in the name of Tantra. 
(The Madras Mail) 
The present translation (The Great Liberation : Maha- 
nirvanatantra) is distinguished by its elegance and by the 
Profound’ and comprehensive knowledge by which it is 
backed. We heartily congratulate Mr.. Avalon on’ the 
Publication of this fine book and look forward with pleasure 
ta the books he is Preparing... 5 
Hymns to Goddess occupies a prominent place among 
the documents so far published of his history of religions’: 
for no book has yet been published: in any European 
language which gives us ‘such a deep insight into the mind 
of the Devi worshipper as this. 
(Prof. F. O. Schrader in The Theosophist) 


Our first impression. was one of amazement and delight 


As all students of the Shastras are aware, the Mahanirvana 
is ‘one of the most important of Hindu philosophical works 
combined with ‘elaborate ritualism, and its translation, 


| therefore, “by 'a, European involved certainly ‘a ‘prodigions 


amount of study, sympathy and real understanding. Of the 


_ jIntroduction alone it may be said that for its lucidity, con- 


 ciseness, directness and for its depth of penetration and 


“insight, it may itself claim to be a standard work on the | 


He ei abused ae Was (Prasuddha Bharata) 


Se Sphere 


. 
foal) 


wire gh 


: eptrieeny 


‘ 


4 vay Rete ‘ } 
, vos * : ’ ' 
i t Saket r ! 
Ha seue otetaed portray ie gene ies ena 
Ive ' ! ‘ i Hi y a " lias ' aa 
Tid Aho ALAC GE SAP A NS NRIRI SAL oh ALAC GS SAE “isin os “IES een 
a 


i*52 
iit 


aku 


: + oe ie 
Hav vied geelth deb y] sis Wedd Ip obi rgd 8 ret 7M 
a vt telat Stead ME 1h Pha 
; ey 
{ts Beth, ¢ * eer) 
Trae ty ty by 
RUT} GORI LTCe 
btdeye rhe, 4 
c ‘ ‘ 
ui PNG EN io eet: 
‘ ' hued dati ees 
’ : , 
Me 7 Lins | ‘ \ 
a ‘ t ‘< 
f gtih ited ge ty lays, ica 
; wie a 4 at 
ete gy CP al a ig Ta ON SEP aa 
eat Da SRA nF tay glean “3 ; 
4 4 
Batic rea ; 
* ‘ - “* ‘ i Oa ee a, eed 
7 Patt; . ACR RAN 
, te Nh EM sa “3 
; p SG Siok eS RRP Bp 
\ 
4 3 % 
, ey 
u 
. . . " , 
‘ : q 
| 
iP ase sate bok] 
- . 
* 1 
5 
| 
\ 
‘ 
v 
| 
4 
' 
\ ; ‘ “ue | 
i 7 ‘ 
\ 
f 4 
4 . ‘ 
" . 
| Pus : 
r i . a ‘ 
, 
0 ‘ ( 
c ut 
i ; 
A - lh 
: Ards 7 4 : ny | 
f oa } 


Ae ey mh 


Veaneaerploer): ty 


Ay 4 
Ey 


jt 
ah 


‘| 


r hi 
sae 
Poke naval ; 
Wey uate Te 


