/ 








ESSAY 


OX THK 

ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


Bv RAM RAZ, 


NATIJ'K .^UDOE AND MA018TRATR AT B A NfJ A I.ORK ; CORRESPONDINO MEMBER BF THE ROYAD 
ASIATIC SOCIETY OK GREAT BRITAIN AND IRKl.AND. 


WITH FORTY-EIGHT PLATES. 



LONDON: 


PUBLISHED FOR TJHE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND, 
By JOHN WILLIAM PARKER, West Sthand; 


TO BE HAD AIAO OF 

MESSRS. DE BURE, BROTHERS; and MESSRS. DONDEY DUPRE and SON, PARIS, 



M.DCCC.XXXIV. 


Aco, ^ 




j V 

•?2C?.9yv^| 

/I AM 




PREFACE. 


The introduction to the European public of an “ Essay on 
Hindu Architecture,” and by a Hindu, would seem to mark an 
epoch not only in the history of the science but also in that of the 
Hindus themselves. 

Their palaces, their temples, the stupendous pyramidal gate- 
ways leading to the latter, the colonnades and porticoes with 
which they are surrounded ; some of “ a thousand pillars,” others 
equally remarkable for their elevations, richness, and grandeur of 
design, have for ages been the objects of admiration to the 
traveller in the East ; and, though it had long been known, pro- 
verbially, that the Hindus possessed treatises on architecture of 
a very ancient date, pescribing the rules by which these edifices 
were constructed, it remained for the author of this essay to 
overcome the many, and almost insurmountable obstacles to the 
substantiation of the fact, and to the communication of it to the 
European world in a well known language of Europe.* 

* The Royal Asiatic Society is chiefly indebted to one of its members, Richard Clarke, 
Esq., for the accomplishment of this important and desirable object. This gentleman, then 
recently returned from India, suggested to Ram R.az to undertake some work which should 

b 



IV 


PREFACE. 


As of most other sciences among the Hindds, the rules and pre- 
cepts of architecture and sculpture had been, with some solitary 
exceptions, locked up in the Sanscrit language ; and, as the study of 
this language was limited, in general, to the higher classes ; the only 
means of improvement left to the artist, who in all cases would be 
of a subordinate class, were the verbal instructions delivered to him 
by these superiors, when they might happen to require his assist- 
ance; together with the impress on his mind resulting from practical 
experience. To reduce the knowledge thus acquired to a system, 
and to promulgate it in a language comprehensible by the vulgar, 
would, in most cases, have been thought an encroachment on the 
privileges of the higher orders ; and being, therefore, handed 
down unavoidably from father to son by tradition only, it must, in 
the natural course of events, have been often obscured or totally 
lost. Moreover, the study of this, as well as of other sciences, has 
been very generally laid aside by the higher classes for acquire- 
ments more in unison with the tone and feelings of the times ; 
while the treatises themselves, scattered and neglected, became 
nearly valueless to all but the humble artisan, who gathered up 
here and there a fragment, and hoarded the occult lore, sometime 
to be learnt by stealth, or as best might suit the purpose of his 
lordly and priestly master. 


impart to the European world, through the Royal Asiatic Society, information not yet before 
them; and he recommended the ‘^Architecture of the Hindus" as a topic worthy of the 
abilities and talents of liis native friend. The circumstances under win’cli he acceded to the 
proposition, though already brought to tlie notice of the public in ‘‘ Rickards's India," merit 
and indeed claim insertion in an introduction to his work. They are detailed in two letters 
from the author to Mr. Clarke, extracts from which will be found in a subsequent page. 



To collect these remains from far and near; to read, collate, and 
comprehend them, with the terms and phraseology of the science, 
was no ordinary undertaking : the assistance of the artist on the 
one hand, of philologists on the other ; corroboration by reference 
to existing edifices, and the ability to exhibit the results at length 
deduced, in the technical and scientific language of a foreign 
people, were all equally necessary to the completion of the task. 

It must, however, be understood that the author docs not pro- 
fess to give the whole system of architecture as known to the 
Hindiis at any particular period, or indeed, a complete translation 
of such portions of those treatises as he was able to collect ; but, 
from his deductions and illustrations, such an exposition as might 
enable the European reader to form an opinion of what that system 
may once have been. 

Such was the attempt of Ram Raz. * How far he has been suc- 
cessful the public must decide. Men,f whose authority will, it is 
believed, be readily acknowledged, have spoken of his work in 
terms of the highest commendation ; and if it shall appear that he 
has established the claim of his countrymen to the possession, in 
an eminent degree, of a knowledge in the art, — and this at a period 
when its principles were but little understood among Europeans, 
he will have accomplished a task which he fondly looked forward 
to with every confidence of success ; and one, it is hoped, which 


* It is painful to state, that ere the result of his labours has pased through the press, 
accounts from India have announced the decease of this most worthy member of the Hoyal 
Asiatic Society, 

f Messrs. William Wilkins, R.A*, William Duniell, 11. A., and Charles Cockerell, F. S. A.— 
( Vide the Tenth Annual Report of the Royal Asiatic Societyy p. 29.) 

b2 



VI 


PREFACE. 


cannot be uninteresting, or devoid of utility, to the followers and 
promoters of science in general. 

The present may not be an improper occasion, as the author of 
the accompanying essay is no more, to offer a few brief notices 
of his life. They are, however, merely such as the recollections 
of the writer to whom the subject of these notices was intimately 
known for several years, can supply, yet they may, perhaps, as a 
tribute to his memoi’y, be received with indulgence. 

Ram Raz was born at Tanjore, in the Carnatic, about the year 
1790. He was small of stature, of a delicate frame, of a fair coin- 
-plexion for an Asiatic, and had a remarkably brilliant and piercing 
eye. On public occasions there was in his manner, though on the 
whole graceful and easy, a diffidence which might lead the cursory 
observer to undervalue his abilities; but by those to whom he was 
known in private, it was more justly attributed to innate mo- 
desty and humility. His name implies that he was of a superior 
caste ; and he used to boast of being a collateral descendant of 
Ram Raj, or Ram Raz,* the last of the kings of Vijayanagar ; 
and as the name is often met with in the genealogy of those 
princes, it is not improbable that it may have thus descended to 
him. 

His parents, it would seem, were poor ; and that he was partly 
indebted to fortuitous circumstances for the little education which 
he received when a boy ; a portion of this, however, fortunately 
for him, consisted in learning to read and write the English Ian- 


♦ Raj or Rajat according to the Sanscrit pronunciation : Rdz or Rdza, according to the 
pronunciation of the same term in the vernacular languages of the South of India. 



PREFACE. 


vii 

guage. He was first attached to one of the Native Regiments of 
Infantry, as a clerk, it is believed, to the Adjutant ; and, subse- 
quently, as Vakil, or native agent to the regiment. While in 
these situations he prosecuted the study of the English language ; 
and by acquiring a more grammatical knowledge of the several* 
vernacular dialects which he had been taught in early life, he 
added to a character for natural quickness of intellect and correct- 
ness of conduct, that of an accomplished interpreter. How long 
he remained in this situation, or whether leaving it at this period 
he obtained any other, is not known ; but in the year 1815, we 
find him employed as a clerk in the office of the Military Auditor • 
General. While in this employment a circumstance accidently 
brought him to the notice of the gentleman before mentioned. 
He had undertaken to translate from the Mahratta into the Eng- 
lish language a code of Regulations drawn up by order of the late 
Tippu Sultan, the sovereign of Mys6r, for the guidance of his 
revenue officers. Such a work, it will be readily conceived, could 
not form a part of his duties as clerk in a military audit office, and 
it must therefore have been a voluntary task. 

His translation was in every respect so correct, and the notes 
and illustrations accompanying it exhibited so eminent a degree 
of knowledge in the several languages from which the terms and 
phrases used in the original were generally borrowed, as well as 
of the Mahratta and English, and at the same time displayed so 
much talent in the elucidation of the vjvrious parts of the subject 


* It is not uncommon that in the same town or village two, lliree, or more vernacular lan- 
guages will equally prevail ; and that boys are taught, though very imperfectly, to read and 
write in the whole of them. 



Vlll 


Preface:. 


by comparisoli and by contrast with the English system of revenue, 
as at that period to give rise to considerable doubt of its being the 
unassisted performance of a land'd. Satisfied that it was so, this 
gentleman, his early patron, who besides the several offices which 
he held in the civil department of the Madras Government, was 
also Senior Member of the College of Fort St. George, gladly 
availed himself of so fair an opportunity to countenance and 
encourage talents and conduct such as he observed in our author ; 
and procured for him, first, the appointment of Head of the Col- 
lege Office, and afterwards that of Head English Master to the 
©native classes of that institution. 

It was while in the latter situation that he was, for upwards of 
five years, intimately known to the writer of these remarks, who, 
shortly before his quitting India, had the satisfaction of recom- 
mending him to the First Commissioner in Mysor, by which means 
ho was placed in a sphere of action where talents such as his could 
not long remain unknown, and which soon raised him to the 
responsible and highly honourable post of Judge and Magistrate. 

By a regular course of private study while at Madras, he had 
added to his other accomplishments, not only a knowledge of the 
Sanscrit language, but also of algebra, geometry, the higher 
branches of mathematics, and of geography and astronomy ; and 
at one time he had classes in these branches of science, the scho- 
lars of which were an honour to his industry and talents 5 by many 
of whom his assiduity, ability, and zeal, will be long held in grate- 
ful remembrance. 

Of his death no particular accounts have yet been received. 
It is said that the climate of Mysdr was not congenial to him; 



PREFACE. 


IV 


and perhaps the duties of his situation there were too arduous 
for his weakly frame. He had no family, but he had adopted a 
daughter whom, together with his widow, an aged mother, and a 
brother who was in some mercantile profession at Madras, he has, 
it is supposed, left to enjoy the little wealth which his frugality, 
rather than any adequate return actually awarded to his merits, 
enabled him to realise. But however this may have been, his 
loss as a man of talents and of science, as well as a highly valu- 
able servant of the British Government, is deeply to be regretted. 

The writer* of these remarks has the pleasure to announce that 
he expects shortly to receive from the friends of the deceased, * 
ample materials whence a full and authentic view of the author’s 
life may be drawn, should such a record be thought sufficiently 
interesting to the public, to induce its acceptance by the Royal 
Asiatic Society. 


* After the volume was sent to press, he received from the widow of the deceased 
a letter, from which the following is an extract : 

To Captam Hark ness. 

“ Bangalore, Kast-Indies, 22d May 18^3^3 

* * # ♦ 

“ As my late husband in Ids lifetime had mentioned to me tlie existence of a 
friendship between yourself and him, and which, by Ictteis found after his decease, 1 feel 
convinced existed in your mind towards him, I have taken the liberty to address you on 
the subject of my misfortune, not only in the loss of one st> dear, bo amiable, but also in 
being subjected to the mercenary and a^arlcious views of his brother. 

“ I beg to call to your remembrance the number of years my late husband was 
in the Honourable Company’s service; first, as Vakeel to tlie Second Battalion of the 



Xll 


PREFACE. 


^vhom our ancient legislators have ranked amongst the lower orders of society. This 
class, j)erlia])s, jealous of the Brdhmcnis^ wliose sacerdotal authority the^ have always 
opposed with a spirit of indepcaidence, or more naturally, apprehensive of competition in 
their trade, took jiarticular care to conceal the sacred volumes which have descendetl to 
them, from the rest of the people; but as they have on their own part been long denied 
the benefit of Sanskrit literature, these treatises could be but of little use to themselves; 
and tlie consequence has Iwen, that while the practical ])ait of the seience continued to 
be followed up amongst them as a kind of inheritance from generation to generation, the 
theoiy became gradually lost to the whole nation, if not to tlie whole workl. E\en the 
tew scattered fragments whicli have escaped the hand which either jealousy or the fear of 
(ompetition has raisc'd to conceal or rather destioy the science, an* nosv (juite unavailable 
to those who kept them to themscUes and to the piiests 'The former being comiiellcd 
to lefer to the latter for the interpretation of the sujKiior dialect, and the latter to sei k 
from the foinier foi definitions of technical leinis, which neither the one noi the otiui 
seem to ha\e been able to explain or understand accurately. Tins ciicumstance, moie 
than any other, has cost me considerable time and e\])ense, without any adcxpiate advan- 
tage. Our best dictionaiies, at least the best that 1 have been able to procuie, do not 
(ontain a single architectural term, and the best of oin workmen have been so long 
disused to their own ancient style of building durable public edilices, that it is not to be 
wondered at they should now ascribe their ignorance of the art as levealed from hcavv n 
to the w'ant of encouragement, which appeals indeed to have ceased on the decline ot 
native lule. Such is the state of knowledge among those to whom wi* could look for any 
illustration respecting an art, the study of whicli has been so long neglected in this 
country , and the few manusiripts too, which liave escaped tlie corroding hand of time 
inevitably contain numerous errors and defects which it requires no small labour and 
time to correct and supply. 

“ These difficulties, c'oinbined with want of time on my own part to sen mount 
them, discouraged me for a long while, and it is but lately I commenced to translate and 
to take down extracts and notes of some paits which I have hueii enabled to make out. 
There still remains a great deal to be done; nevertheless, great reason liave 1 to think 
that what I have already executed will facilitate my future progress. At all events, if n 
please heaven, I hope to be able to send you at least n pait of the woik by an early 
opivoitunity ; and though I cannot promise that my performance will be such as to meet 
with the approbation of the Royal Asiatic Society, yet I trust it may not prove altogether 



P R E F A C E. 


\iii 


unacceptable to tliat learned body of men, inasmueli it may tend to draw attention to 
this important subject, conneetetl as it is with the state ot .11 ts ami sciences in India 111 
early days 

“ The subject itself is curious, and higlily deserving the attention of the anti- 
(juai ian and the philosojiher. A correct account and accurate elucidation ol the ait ot 
Iniildinff practised by the nm^i thiow eonsideiabU* light on the eaily piogie^s ot 

.uchitectuie m general Some of tlie western authors have tiaeed a eeilain lesemhlaiue in 
the leading features of the buildings in Egypt anti India, and ha\e theme (onehuh'd that 
theie has very early been a communication of auhiteclural kiunvledge between tiu' tw(» 
(ountiios But It is not altogether impioh.dile (hat this 1 estinhlance may he nu uly 
owing to accident , inasmucIi as in aithiteitine as well as in e\eiv othei ait imhspensal)! y 
lU'iessary to the eomfort of mankind, two 01 more nations may jiossess something ns 
iommon, without having any inteuonise with each other, for the wants felt hy man 
being the same, it is not siirpiising tli it the leniedies resorteil to foi ^np]dying them 
should he also siniilai or nearly so If, on the other hand, howevei, both these eoimtiies 
had atlually any eommiinieation m eaily ages, it is hard to iletermine which of tluni may 
ha\e been indebted to the other. Tlie western writeis on antiijuilies ha\e not ])Lued thi^ 
matter iieyond a doubt. And fur mv own pait, 1 will not \iMiture to alHim any thing 
with eeitainty, until I ha^e eolleeted sullitient infoiniation to foim an opinion as to this 
alleged allinity in the ari hitecture of Egypt and India I hnmhiy jiresnme, theiefou, 
that until the Stipa Sdsfra of the Ilnidds is loireillv dlustiated and laid befoie tiu 
publu, the tjuestion as to whether the ait owes its oiigin to the one 01 the othei ot tlu 
two countries must remain problematKal. 

‘‘ Whilst the subject of my present lescareh opens upon me such a wide held ot 
delightful prospect notw ithstandmg the dillieulties I aheady anticipated, 1 cannot but 
acknowledge, witli painful sensations, my own ineom])eteney foi tlie task which >om 
kindness has assigned to me, and legret most sineeiely that it has not fallen into abler 
hands Diligence and fidelity, howe\ei,in the exetution of the work entiusted to me 
shall not he wanting on my part ; but the result of my lahouis can be only commensui ate 
to the ability I ]x)ssess compared with the difKeiilty of the subjoet 

‘‘ I hope what I ha\e already said will give >ou some notion of the nature ot 
the undei taking in wlncli I am engagc*<l, and of the hi lie piogiess w hich I ha\e hitheitu 
been enabled to make in consequence of unavoidable delays aiising partly from the clifli- 
eulty of the subject, and partly from the want of leisure. You are too well aci[uainted 



XIV 


PREFACE 


\Mtli niy triHing acciuireiiients to entertain high expectations in the performance of the 
task assigned to me. I only propose to write a short but compreliensive Essay on Indian 
Aiclntecturc from the matciials I may be able to collect ; to which I shall perhaps add 
some descriptions of a few temple's and ])orticoes, principally taken from the Carnatic, 
\Mth corrcsjxmding designs 

“ Wislnng you and >our family every success and prospeiity m life, 

“ I 1 email!, 

“ Sir, 

“ Vour most obedient and faithful ser\ant, 

(Signed) “ Ram Ra//' 



ESSAY 


ON TIIF 


ARCHITECTURE OE THE HINDUS. 


It is true that the Hindus were in possession of numerous treatises on 
architecture, sculpture, &c,, whieli collectively arc called the Silpa 
hut unlortunately few traces of them nunain. There a])pears to have been, 
according to some, thir(y-two, an<l accord inji,* to others sixty-four, standard 
treatises on the above-mentioned arts, but of tliese, excepting* a few scat- 
tered frag'ments whieli are occasionally to be met with amono- the artists 
themselves, nothin<>; but the titles of the Morks are now n;enerally knoun to 
the learned. Speakinn; of these treatises, Sir Wdhnrn Jones expresses it 
as his oj)inion that they contained useful information on sixty-four different 
arts and manufactures; but Mhile I admire his extraordinary talents and 
extensive knowledne of Asiatic literature, T cannot but think that he was 
misinformed as to the numher of subjects comjirised in the Stlpa Su.stra^ as 
from the similarity of the contents of the remains of several of these 
treatises, and which will be hereafter noticed, there is reason to think that 


♦ Fioni manual artj and a, science. This term, tliou^di in its general signification 
It comprehends the whole of the mechanical arts, is applied commonly, and perhaps by way 
of pre-eminence, to arcliitecture. 

B 



2 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


tlie whole thirty-two, or sixty-four, if there did exist so many, must have 
treated principally, if not entirely, of sacred architecture and sculpture. 

In a series of memorial verses preserved among the artists, arc recorded 
the names of the authors or titles of the above-mentioned sixty-four treatises. 
Of these, thirty-two are called Miichya^ or principal, and thirty-two Upa or 
sul)ordinatc. I have not been able to ascertain who was the author of these 
verses, but they contain little more than the titles of the works in (piestion, 
and which arc 2)af}'0)iy)nics of the deities who were believed to have 

revealed the particular art or arts on v\hich each work treated, or of the 
authors of the treatises themselves, the renov\ned IDsJus or holy men, v\ho 
are said to have flourished in the earlier ages. 

Many works of acknowledged antiquity attest the existence of a number 
of treatises on Silpa Sdstra ; and every artist ])roverl)ially knows that there 
have been thirty-two principal, and as many subordinate works on this 
subject. In a Tamil controversial woik entitled Tru-^amayn’-villacamy or 
“ the illustration of the two systems,'' (i. e. of Vishnu and Siva), supposed to 
have been written in the fifteenth century by a Vaishnava,^ in refutation of 
the doctrines of his opponents, or rather in commendation of his ow n, a 
work v\hich is held in high estimation, especially among the Vaishnavas in 
Southern India, the author, in the course of his arguments to prove the 
supremacy of Vishnu over Swa, has been led incidentally to cite certain 
passages from the Silpa Sdstra, which describe the sites to be assigned for 
the erection of temples for Vishnu and Stva: the former to be in the middle 
of tlic town or village, as the most acceptable place for a deity whose cha- 
racteristic attributes are benignity, mercy, and preservation ; and the latter 
without the village, as proper for one possessed of opposite qualities. This 
work recognizes a great number of the treatises abovementioned, and 
enumerates twenty-nine of them by their titles, concluding the list with the 


* A follower of Vibhiiu. 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


3 


words “ and others;” but which of these works it was that he consulted 
on the point of discussion, the autlior does not inform us : there is reason, 
however, to believe that many of them had been lost loiif? prior to the pe- 
riod at which he wrote. 

Some shattered remains of the treatises entitled Alauasara, Moyumatet, 
Canyaj^a, Viiiigh/inaxa, S((C((l(idlncar(i, Vtucttciinn/i/tJ, Samdciim/ird, S<'iras~ 
milijdw, P/incfuirdfrnin, aiwl others included in both the lists, arc still 
occasionally, thou'^'h rarely, to be met with in Southern India; and not- 
withstanding’ that I have been able to procure considerable portions ol 
the four woiks first named, and a few detached chapters or sections of 
each of the rest, it was with considerable difiicultj ; and imfortimatcly, the 
manuscripts which I have collected, are not of a very useful ilcscnption- 
Mutilated as they invariably are in many important jiarts, almost every 
line of them is not only disfi<;ured by *rross errors, perpetuated by a suc- 
cession of i;>uorant transcriliers, but tbe technical term-, and memorial 
versos with which the whole abounds, are so little understood either by the 
artists or the pundits of the present day, that it requires no ordinary 
exertion to comprehend and explain the exact import of even a siiifrle 
section. 

The first ^^()rk, entitled ]\T/niasara^ is the most perfect I hnve seen, and 
jierhaps the most perfect on the subject that now exists. It is stated to he 
the production of a sa^c named Mihiasura^ and is <d‘ L!;reat celebrity in the 
south of India, as airording copious information on every brancli of tlic art 
on Avhich he treats, but particularly on that ot buildin^’ sacred edifices; 
and it is often consulted by the artists as the highest authority for the 
solution of contested points in architecture. This work appears, accordinf]^ 
to an enumeration of the contents given in the preface, to consist of fifty- 
eight or chapters,* each of which is de\oted to a jiarticiilar topic , 


* In Older that a more accurate idea may be fonnetl of tlie subjects contained m this 'work, 
a particular description is given of the contents of each adhydya as taken from the preface 

B 2 


The 



4 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


but the portion I have in my possession contains no more than Ibrty-one 
chapters, in which are described the measures used in architecture, sculp- 


The first chapter treats of the measures used in architecture, seulptiiie, carpentry, (S.c ; the 
second describes the qualification of a Silpi, and gives a brief account C)f the origin of the five 
different classes of artists, said to have been descended from Visvcacarma, and to have followed 
respectively the occupations of sculptors, joiners, braziers, jewellers, and blacksmitlis. Tlie 
third, fourth, and fifth chapters explain the nature and qualities of the soil on wliich buildings 
should be elected — sucJi as temples palaces, and private dwelling-houses for the several classes 
of people The sixth contains rules and directions for constructing a gnomon, for the pin pose 
of determining tlie several points of the compass. The seventh treats of the parts into which 
the ground-plan of the cities, towns, temples, palaces and houses should be divided The 
eighth chapt(*r gives a minute deserijition of sacrifices and other devotional rites, to be performed 
on Vvinous occasions in the budding of temples, houses, hv, Tlie nmtli ch.ipter ticats of villages 
and towns, and presciibes rules for the formation of streets, and the allotment of fit places for tlic 
election of temples, and tor the residence of the ditfercnt classes of people. The tenth contains 
a description of the dilferent suits of cities, the eleventh tieats of tlie dimensions of the soncimI 
sorts of edifice^ , tlie twelfth of the Gaihhavinydsa, or l.i}ing the foundation-stone in the centre 
of the intended building , the tliirteenth of UpapiYhas or pedestals , tin* fourteenth of Adhu- 
td7in or basement; the fifteenth of tlie several species of pillais, witli their respective dimen- 
sions , the sixteenth of PiObinras or entablature, the seventeenth of the junction of the several 
parts of timber work, vMth reference to their jioints . the eigliteentli of I nndnas, temples, or 
p.ilaces m gencial. Twelve successive chapters, fiom the ninetetntli to the tn nity-eiglitli, con- 
tain descriptions of temph’s surmounted by pyramidal domes, consisting of fiom one to twelve 
stories, VMth tluir respective dimensions The twenty-ninth chapter tieats of Puicdias or 
outer courts of temples ; the thirtieth of the attendant elelties, and tlie paits respectively 
.issigned to e.ich within the v\alls of the temple , tlie thirly-fiist of Gdpinas or pyramidal huild- 
Ings, or turrets raised over tlie gateways leading into the tenqdcs ; the thii ty-second of Man- 
iapdb or poitu'oes, or resting-places for the deity , the thirty-third of Salas or li.ills , the thirty- 
fouith of cities , the Unity -fifth of piivate dw'elling-houses , the thii ty-sixth and thirty-seventh 
of gates and dooiways, with their dimensions; the tliirty-eightli and thirty-ninth of tlie 
palaces and their appendages; the fortieth of princes with their titles, the forty-fiist of the 
building of cars and other vehicles of the gods ; the forty-second of couches, cushions, and 
the like; the forty -third of the thrones for the gods and for piinees ; the forty-fourth of orna- 
mental arches, the furty-fiftli of the Calpatani or the all-pioductive tree, which is supposed 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


turc, &c. ; the diftercnt sites to be selected for buiding teni])lcs and 
houses ; the mode of determining the different points of the compass ; 
the several sorts of villages, towns, and cities, ^\ith directions tor build- 
ing them; the diftcrent parts of an edifice, its ornaments, pedestals, bases, 
pillars, entablatures, &c ; the various sorts of temples, consisting of trom 
one to twelve stories high , the construction of mauiagas or porticoes, 
gates, and doorways, palaces, &c. &c. The remainder ot the work 
appears to contain ample information respecting the whole process in the 
construction of images, and of ears and other vehicles in which the 
gods are carried in procession; but these subjects are more immediately 
connected with sculpture and carpentry than with architecture. Tt may 
1)0 proj)er to notice, however, that a c()nsiderable portion of the* whole is 
occupied with a minute description of the rnj stories, rites, and sacrifices 
to be performed on various occasions, in the building of temples, houses, 
villages, towns, and cities; the ceremonies attending the consecration of 
images ; the mode of determining the propitious monieiit for commencing 
to lay the foundation of an edifice, as well as rules for predicting (he future 
prosperity of linn who causes the edifice to be raised, by the aspect ol 
the stars, the situation of the building w ith respect to (he cardinal points, 
and other astrological devices. 


to be* planted in India\ heaven, and to supply all tlie wants ot* those who liavc tlic happine''^. 
of tiking shelter undei it 'I'Jie foity-sixtli chapter treats oi' A bhishi'cas or i\h\nt\on.\vy rites, 
by which ima_i;es are sanctified, tlie foity-seventh of jew els and ornaments worn by the 
and moitals , the foi ty-ei^lith of statues of lirahma and c)ther <Ieities , tJic forty-ninth of the Lin- 
gr/m the emblem of Siva, the fiftieth of .se<its and foims laised for the reception of images , 
the fifty- first of the form of the goddess of nature, the fitty-seeond and fifty-tlnrd of* 

the images worshipped by the and Jamas y the fifl^ -fourtli desciibes the statues ol 

Yeeshas, VuhjddhaTns, and otlier ehoi isteis , the fifty -fd'th those of tlie saints or holy men , tlie 
fifty-sixth <ind fifly-sevenlh those of the Dvras or gods, with their lespeetive vehicles, and the 
fifty-eighth concludes with rules foi chiselling tlie eyes of tlie statue, and the ceremonies to be 
performed on the occasion. 



r> 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


The second work, entitled Mayiimata, is ascribed to Maya* probably tlic 
author or compiler of the Suryasuldh/nita , a work on astronomy of the greatest 
repute, and who is stated in the Rdmdyami of Vahnic to have prepared 
the altar for the sacrifice performed by Dasdratha the King of Ayodhya 
(Oude), and father of Rama. It differs little from the Mdmtsdra in the 
main arrangement of the subjects. It opens with the mystical rites per- 
formed in honour of the Vdstii^ or the spirit presiding over the ground on 
which buildings are erected, and proceeds to give rules for the evaminatiori 
of the soil, the preparation of it for buildings in general, the construction 
of a gnomon for the purpose of determining the cardinal points, the divi- 
sion of the ground-plan into several parts for religious as well as domestic 
purposes, and the performance of sacrifices previous to the commencement 
of the work ; after which it describes the several sorts of villages, cities, 
and fortresses, upapithas or pedestals, the adhisth/oias or bases, the pddas 
or pillars, the prastaras or entablatures, the ornaments used in cavettos 
under tlie cupola, the seats raised for the reception of idols, the sicharas 
or the domes of temples, the ceremonies observed in laying the first and 
the last stone of an edifice, the several sorts of temples, the courts by 
which they are surrounded, the pyramidal gateways, the 7uaatapas or 
porticoes, the altars to be raised in the front of temples, and concludes with 
instructions for tlie carving of images, <S:c. 

The third work, entitled Cd.syapa, is attrilmted to the sage wliosc name 
it bears, a personage celebrated in sacred writings of great antiipiity. He 
is considered as one of the progenitors of mankind, and ranked the first 
amongst the seven holy men who were preserved from the universal deluge, 

* M(iya is also st'itccl in the Mahdbhdrata to have erected a splendid palace lor the 
residence of the five sons of Panda, a poetical description of which occupies a whole book of 
that celebrated work. He is supposed to be one and the same person with him who ererted 
the altar for Dasdratha, imd the seeming inconsistency of his being contemporary with Rama 
and Chrhhna, in two such remote periods as the Creta and Dwapara Vugas, mythological 
writers reconcile by assigning a supernatural term to the life of the personage in question. 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


7 


and who peopled the earth soon after tliat great event. This treatise, 
though more succinct than the two former, contains sufficient information 
on the subject of sacred architecture and sculpture ; the wliolc is composed 
in a dramatic form, and is stated in the preface to have been revealed to 
the author personally by Siva ; and in consequence, the former is frequently 
addressed throughout the book by the appellation of T>wij6ltama^ “ tiie 
best of the twice-born,” and the like. The subjects contained in this work 
are nearly the same as those contained in the ^lanasara^ but the arrange- 
ment is somewhat different. It commences with the description of the 
several sorts of soil which are considered proper for buildings, and pro- 
ceeds to the preparatory rites and sacrifices to be performed in honour of 
the Vdstapiinisha, or the spirit presiding over the ground appropriate for 
the erecting of temples and houses ; thence to the mode of constructing 
a sanc'hu or gnomon for the purpose of ascertaining the points of the 
compass, and thence to the laying of the foundation-stone, and the cere- 
monies to be observed on this occasion. It afterwards descrilies the pe- 
destals, the bases, the gates of the temples, and doorways of houses, pil- 
lars, capitals, and other ornaments ; the seats raised on the pavements of 
tcinples, and niches for the reception of images; aipieducts or water- 
courses ; the several sorts of i tnidnds or shrines wifb the pyramidal towers, 
consisting of from one to sixteen stories ; the or ornameiifal arches 

erected over gateways and jnllars ; doors anti their dimensions ; statues t)f 
the gods, saints, and holy men, tVc. 

The fourth treatise, called Vayghdnasa^ is the work of a sage so name<l, 
and who was the founder of a sect of Vaishanva priests. It is wiitten in 
a sort of metrical prose, and is rather ritual than architectural ; and as 
the author in the latter jiart of the woik frequently cites the authority of 
Cdsyapa, and as the w ork itself is included among tlie subordinate treatises 
enumerated in the list, it appears to be comparatively a modern per- 
formance. It opens with an encomium on the land of Ji/idrata,"* as being 


* Iiidja. 



8 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS, 


peculiarly sacred, and adapted for the performance of holy rites and sa- 
crifices; and thence proceeds to describe the various sacrifices ordained in 
the VccUu to be performed when the purpose is to obtain special boons or 
favours, either temporal or spiritiuil, such as progeny, riches, wisdom, 
absolution from sin, purification, &c. It next treats of the mystical rites 
[)ractised in honour of Vastu^ preparatory to the building of sacred edifices, 
or of altars for sacrifices ; of villages, towns, and cities, the fruits to be 
derived from building and peopling them with Brahmans ; the construction of 
temples dedicated to Vishnu^ with rules for carving the images of that 
deity and his attendants, on whose attributes the author occasionally dwells 
nith that devotion and zeal which charficterize all his followers. 

The work entitled Sacaladhtcara, an excellent but rather voluminous 
performance, is attributed to Agastya^ a sage whose history occupies a 
conspicuous place in the Pardnas. Some few' sections only of this woik 
are to be now met with ; and the portion which has as yet come under iny 
own ol)servation, is exclusively on the subject of sculpture as connected 
with the formation of statues; but it is so diffuse, that if we suppose the 
whole work to be written in a similar st}le, it must considerably exceed 
the volume of Mdnasdra^ the largest at present of my collection. 

As I have but a Jew detached pieces of the other works mentioned 
above, they do not appear to call for any distinct notice. Sonic of these 
pieces are descriptive of the construction of temples, some of the towers 
over gateways, some contain directions for laying the foundation of a 
building, some treat of the auspicious and inauspicious seasons for the com- 
mencement of an edifice, and others of the manufacture of images and so 
forth. How ever, as the rules contained in these fragments differ very little 
in substance iroin those laid down in the Aldnasdra and other treatises on 
the same subject, I shall seldom have occasion to refer to them in the 
course of this essay. 

The exact age of each of these treatises it is very difficult to ascertain. 
Tradition gives to most of them an antiquity altogether extravagant; and 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


9 


however diligent the endeavour to obtain authentic information on this 
point, success can hardly be expected to attend it, when we consider in 
what obscurity and oblivion the ancient history and chronology of the 
Hindus are involved. Of Alanasaniy’^ the sage to whom the first treatise is 
attributed, I have not been able to procure any distinct historical notice , 
but, as has already been mentioned, the supposed authors of the other 
treatises, entitled C(hijap(t and Maif/imaUty are, under these names, greatly 
celebrated in the Puranas and other sacred w ritings of antiquity. That all 
these treatises w ere composed in the South of India, there appears indeed no 
reason to doubt, for they seem to have been the standards by w hich the exist- 
ing religious structures were reared throughout this part of the peninsula. 

The most interesting circumstance connected with these treatises, is then* 
toleration of the worship of the Jamas and Baud' (Iha.s , the authors of them 
having carefully {minted out distinct sites to be set apart in villages and 
towns for the erecting of their temples, and having likew ise prescribed rules 
for constructing images of the objects of adoration by these sects. This jire- 
scription marks, though indefinitely, the age of these compositions to have 
been posterior to the great schism which took place between the Hindus and 
Jains, and which terminated in the overthrow of the latter. I'hc contentment, 
too, ot this latter sect with the inferior situation assigned them by tbeir con- 
querors for their divine worship, in a place contiguous to that which, among 
Hindus, is usually appropriated to the shrines of inl’erior deities and malig- 
nant spirits, evinces their comjilete subordination at the period alluded to. 

Another circumstance in that portion of the foregoing treatises which 
has fallen into iny hands is worthy of notice. They prove by internal 
evidence, that they were written at a period subse([uent to the canonization 


* Some s.iy is not the narno of the author but tlic title oi‘ tho work itM-it, mit- 

nifying the ossence of proportion/' and which, from this ctyinolo^ry, I arn iiuliiu'd to 
believe , but whatever may be the real name of the autlior, I shall make use of the wa»rd botli 
as the name of the author and the title of the work throughout this essaj . 


C 



10 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


of Apper, Suml(trc)\ Sammander, Atcnncyavdsarcr, and other holy men, 
several of whom are supposed to have lived between the third and filth 
century of Sahvahn, Tlie oroimd on which this proof rests is, that in the 
chapters which prescribe rules for carving* statues, directions are likewise 
given for carving those of the personages here mentioned, who have been 
admitted among the inferior divinities, and assumed their places around 
the temple of Sn^a, particularly in the South of India. But some learned 
men to whom I mentioned this circumstance, rather tlian concur in an 
opinion which detracts from the antiejuity of these works, are inclined to 
think that the passages in (piestion are modern interpolations. 

The small portion which has come under my observation of the work 
called Sacdl/ulhicardy ‘‘ the universal authority,’' does not furnish sulficicnt 
data to form any opinion of the precise time at which it was composed; 
and in the section which gives rules for carving statues, that is, in the only 
part I have seen of it, I find no mention of the saints above referred to. 
It is generally believed to have been composed by Aouslija^ under the 
auspices of the founder of the Pamh/a government, a circumstance v\hich, 
if admitted, would give to this work a very high antiquity. It is, however, 
difficult to trace the exact period when the Pdmlifa principality was ori- 
ginally established. Mr. Wilson, in his prefatory remarks to his catalogue 
of the McKenzie collection, places this event three or four centuries licfore 
the Christian fera, although in another place he fixes the date of the civi- 
lization of the South of India, ten centuries before Christ ; but the data on 
A\hieh tliis conjecture is formed is imperfect, being derived from a source 
which can be no authority in matters of this nature.* There exists indeed 
a long list of tlie princes of the Pmuli/n, and their contemporary Chola 
and Chh'ii dynasties, many of whom appear to have reigned long anterior 


^ The author^ it would appear, identifies the civilization of the South of India with the 
establishment of the Pandija principality ; events which Profe!?8or Wilson conjectures, on the 
autliority of the traditional records of the South, to be distinct, and of different eras. 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


11 


to the Christian lera, and their celebrity to have attracted the notice ot 
Ptolemy. The few facts, it is trne, that liavc been recorded of these 
dynasties, or preserved by tradition, are unfortunately inadequate to the 
formation of a connected sketch of their liistory, or to trace their chronology 
with precision ; but the various accounts which lire obtainable ol these 
ancient monarchies, though they usually commence with the Ciirliest ages, 
and arc blended with marvellous and extravagant fictions, would still afford 
ample historical proofs of the ei!>tablislunent of these principalities at an 
earlier period than what has been hitherto assigned them by western anti- 
cjuarians. And as the IMahubiiuvut^ which is believed to have been composed 
l)y Vifai^Oy in the beginning of the CaUifUif;^ makes mention of the PinnUfd 
and Chbla governments, we must give them credit for a higher antiquity. 

That the religion and literature, as well as the political constitution of the 
South, were derived from the North, the earliest seat of tlie Hindu empire as 
well as of arts and sciences, and that the southern peninsula was before 
that period a vast uncultivated forest, inhabited by small insulated tribes, 
speaking a jargon which hardly furnished them witli terms e\])ressivc ot 
their immediate and natural wants, there is scarcely any doubt. \\ hile iii 
this state of society, the sage A^^asUfa^ to whom the treatise under exami- 
nation is attributed, appears to have brought hither the first colony ot 
Brahmans and other classes from the north, and with them the Hindu religion 
and literature, in form the same as at the present day. He is believed to 
have been the inventor of the letters now in use in tlie Tamil, and the first 
who refined that language on the principles of the Sanscrit or northern 
dialect; and as this personage is stated also to have olficiatcd both as 
minister and spiritual teacher to the founder of the principality, it is 

not unlikely, that the usefulness of the art of building to such an infant state, 
should have induced him to write a treatise on the subject. 

The foregoing notice of the contents of the several treatises, or fragments 
of treatises, may seem to promise a good deal of useful information on the 
arts of which they treat; but, in truth, the architectural portions of them, if 

c 2 



]2 


ON THE ARCHtTECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


divested of all the extraneous matter with which they abound, contain little 
more than a dry detail of the technical names, and of the proportions of the 
several members of a sacred edifice. It has already been stated that con- 
siderable portions of the works above-mentioned, are replete with minute 
descriptions of religious rites, to be performed on various occasions from 
the commencement, to the completion of a building, as well as rules and 
aphorisms drawn from its situation, aspect, &c. for predicting the future 
destiny of the builder. The latter, however, form no part of the present 
inquiry, and they are interesting so far only as being descriptive of the 
customs of the ancient Hindus, with regard to their belief in divinations, 
omens, prodigies, &c., a belief which is still fondly adhered to by their 
posterity. With respect to other branches of the art on which information 
is w'anting, it is stated by good authorities, and there is reason to believe the 
statement, that military architecture is treated of at length in some of the 
ancient treatises on Arthasdstra, or political science, and particularly in 
one attributed to Chanacya^ the well-known minister of Chandragupta.* 
The same authorities also state, that ample instruction for the building of 
private dwelling-houses, is contained in other works, professedly written on 
civil architecture :f but as these books are not at present to be met with, it 
has been thought advisable to restrict this research to religious architecture. 

I now proceed to a more detailed consideration of the portions of the 
treatises in my possession, trusting that it may serve to elucidate both the 
theory and practice of the art. In doing this, I purpose occasionally to 
introduce extracts from the authorities which I may consult, and to make 


* A celebrated prince who reigned in Pataliputrfi when Alexander visited the upper Hindus- 
tan ; the same who is known to the Greek writers by the name of Sandracottus. 

f Since writing the above, a respectable friend of mine had the kindness to procure me, from 
Travancore, a copy of a work entitled Mdnushydluya Chandrica, which, as its name implies, 
treats of that branch of the art which applies to private houses, but of the description built in 
that kingdom. 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


13 


my own observations regarding any affinity which to me may seem to exist 
between the Indian and European systems. 

The first chapter of the Manasara treats of the several measurements used 
in architecture, sculpture, &c. In measuring space, the Hindus commonly 
take their reckoning from the most minute quantity or extent; and Manasara^ 
like others who have treated on the subject, begins his measure from fara- 
mhitiy which he defines to be the particle perceptible only to the eyes of the 
sages, perhaps thereby importing the atoms spoken of in the writings of 
philosophers, while others have identified it with one of those subtile par- 
ticles of substance which arc seen floating in the reflected light of a sun- 
beam. “ Eight” of these pai'am/tmis make one ratharhiu^ or grain of dust 
raised up by the wheels of carriages; eight ratharhms one valagra, the point 
of a hair; eight valagras are equal in size to a louse ; eight lice to a grain of 
yava\ three, three and a half, and four yavas make one a/fgula, or finger of 
the inferior, middle, and superior sorts respectively. Twelve arigulcis make 
one vitasti or span; two vitastis one hastha or cubit, which is equal to twenty- 
four angiilasy and is sometimes called cishcu hastha, lesser cubit, in contra- 
distinction to prAjapatya hastha, which is equal to twenty-five aagulas 
Twenty-six angulas make one dharmrmusti or the grasp of a bow ; twenty- 
seven angidas, one dhaniirgraha or the handle of a bow. Thus the hastha.s 
are fourfold ; the first or cishcii is employed in the construction of couches, 
vehicles, and the like ; the second ov prajapatija is used in building temples, 
pyramids, &c. ; the third or dhanurmusti in constructing houses ; and the 
fourth or dha?iurg?^aha, in the measurement of villages, towns, and cities. 
According to some, however, the cishcii hastha is adopted for all these pur- 
poses indiscriminately. Again, four hasthas make one danda or staft*, which 
is called sometimes and sometimes dhanus; and eight dandas are equal 
to one ryjn, a cord which is employed in measuring all sorts of land. In 
raising sacrificial altars, a particular sort of a7igula is used, equal in size to 
the intermediate space between the two middle joints of the middle fhiger of 
'the carta y or master, and which is thence called m/drangala. 



14 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS, 


The second chapter of the Manashva treats of the qualities of an architect 
{H'llf i lacshanam) ; and as preliminary thereto, of the origin of artists of the 
several kinds, and which is traced to Viswacarma the heavenly architect. 
This personage is stated to have had four heads, probably in allusion to the 
supernatural talents with which he was endowed, and to his invention of so 
many useful arts. Another Viswacarma, Twasta, Maya, and Manu are 
named as his sons, and said to have left four other otfspring, whose names, 
however, are not mentioned in any of the works under examination, but of 
\\ horn the first is affirmed to have been by profession a sthapati, architect ; 
the second sutragrAhi, the measurer ; the third vardhaci, the joiner ; and the 
last tacshaca, the carpenter; and all of whom are considered as indispensably 
necessary to the building of an edifice. Their intermarriage, also, with the 
families of some noted persons of the llindd mythology, is adverted to as a 
further proof of the divine origin of the artists ; and the whole concludes 
with a short notice of their requisite qualifications, of which the following 
passages from the Manushy&laya Chandrica* will convey some idea. 

“ An architect (sthapati) should be conversant in all sciences; ever atten- 
tive to bis avocations; of an unblemished character; generous, sincere, and 
devoid of enmity or jealousy.” 

“ Of nearly equal qualification with him should be the sdtragrahi; he may 
be either the son or disciple of the sthapati; he should be particularly skilled 
in mathematics, and be strictly obedient to the will ot tlie sthapati ” 

“ A tacshaca, who is thus called from part of his avocation being to pare 
the rough wood, should be of a cheerful temper, and well versed in all 
mechanical arts.” 

“ A vardhaci is he who is dexterous in joining wood, and uniting other 
materials one with another ; he should be of a calm disposition, and ac- 
quainted with drawing and perspective,” 

“ As it is impossible to build houses and the like without the aid of the 


* A treatise on civil architecture referred to in tlie preceding note, 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


15 


four descriptions of artisans, sthapati and so forth, let the enlightened twice- 
born* gratify them in every respect, so that buildings may be erected.” 

“ Woe to them who dwell in a house not built according to the propor- 
tions of symmetry. In building an edifice, therefore, let all its parts, from 
the basement to the roof, be duly considered.” 

The word sthapati is from that which is fixed or formed, and;)</h 
lord or master, and consequently, like the Greek A(>xtTSKTuy, signifies a 
person who presides over the erecting of an edifice, the formation of a 
statue, and the construction of a chariot, &e. The principal qualifications 
of an architect consist in a knowledge of various branches of learning, 
such as arithmetic, geometry, drawing, sculpture, mythology, astrology, 
&c., the usefulness of all of which to a master-builder is too obvious to 
require any comment, Nor arc these qualifications altogether unlike those 
which Vitruvius and other western architects have prescribed as indis- 
pensable to their profession, if we except the knowledge of medicine, 
music, and even anatomy, which the latter have thought proper to add to 
the qualifications of an architect. It is curious to observe, that among 
other moral qualities enumerated in the texts above cited, as requisite in 
the Hindu architect, is included “ sincerity,” a virtue, the want of which 
in the artists of India is proverbial. 

The third chapter of the Manasdra professes to treat of tire nature and 
qualities of the ground on which buildings are to be erected. It opens with 
the definition of vdstu, a term used to express the ground on which any 
superstructure is raised, as signifying that which is inhabitable, and directs 
a careful examination of the site to be selected for building, as to its 
fitness for tlie purpose from its colour, smell, taste, form, and touch. It 
then goes on to divide the soil into four sorts, and to point out in tlie 
order of superiority what is considered auspicious for the residence of 
each of the four classes, with reference to the five qualities abovc- 


* Brolimans, C'shetriyas, Vais'yas, or men of the first, second, or third claasea. 




IG 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


mentioned. Nay, some have gone even so far as to forbid the lower 
class from occupying the ground suited to the higher, and vice versd., on 
pain of incurring the severest vengeance of heaven ; but the principle on 
which these distinctions are founded is altogether nugatory. It signifies 
little whether the ground designed for the residence of a Brahman be 
stjuare or oblong, white or red, sweet or sour, provided that the situation 
is convenient, and that it furnishes a firm bottom for laying the founda- 
tion ; nor is it possible to find a place possessing all the qualities required 
by this prescription for the residence of any one of the classes; and, in 
order perhaps to obviate this difficulty, another more general classification 
of the soil into three sorts is added, with a declaration that the two first 
will answer the purposes of all classes of men without exception. 

“ The best sort of ground should abound with milky* trees, full of fruits 
and flowers ; its boundary should be of a quadrangular form, level and 
smooth, with a sloping declivity towards the east, producing a hard sound, 
M’ith a stream running from left to right, of an agreeable odour, fertile, of 
an uniform colour, containing a great quantity of soil, producing water 
when dug to the height of a man’s arm raised above his head, and situated 
in a climate of moderate temperature. The ground possessed of qualities 
directly opposite to those mentioned above is the worst, and that which 
has a mixed nature is the middling,” 

The ground to be avoided is described in a special manner as • follows : 
“ That which has the form of a circle, a semicircle, containing three, five, 
or six angles, resembling a trident or a winnow, shaped like the hinder 
part of a fish, or the back of an elephant, or a turtle, or the face of a cow, 
and the like ; situated opposite to any of the intermediate quarters north- 
west, and the like ; abounding with human sculls, stones, worms, ant-hills. 


* Chndira {memosa of Linn ), cadumba (nasecUa), nimba (margota), champaca (michelea), 
iniimaga (mesua of Linn.), amlaca (emblica of Linn.), pdtala (bigtionia), saptapharna (echites 
of Linn.), and aome othera, belong to this species of trees. 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


17 


bones, slimy earth, decayed woods, coals, dilapidated wells, subterraneous 
pits, fragments of tiles, lime-stones, ashes, husks of corn ; and exposed to 
the wafted effluvia of curds, oil, honey, dead bodies, fishes, &c. : such a spot 
should be avoided on every account.” 

The following rule is laid down in the first section of the Cusyapa, for 
the purpose of ascertaining the solidity of the ground on which the foun- 
dation is to be laid. “ Having dug a pit a hosUi in depth, in the middle of 
the ground, return the earth into it, and according to the space which the 
latter may now take up w'ith reference to that which it occupied before the 
digging of the pit, whether more, less, or the same, the ground should be 
considered as good, bad, or indifferent ; the good and indifferent sorts are 
acceptable, but the bad should by all means be avoided.” 

After the ground has been chosen with due regard to its qualities, the 
sthapati, in an auspicious moment, must cause the rites of purification to be 
performed, the prescribed oblations made, and consecrated water to be 
sprinkled on all sides, accompanied with invocations for the prosperity of 
the builder. The soil is then ploughed, certain ceremonies prescribed for 
this occasion also being observed. 

The fourth chapter of the M/ntasara contains rules for the construction 
of the plough, and directions for ploughing the ground, preparatory to 
erecting temples, eSre. “ A plough,” says the author, “ must be made of the 
chadira* or of the wood of any other milky tree. It must be from 

one to one and a half hasta in length, with a tapering point resembling the 
leaf of a bainhu, furnished with a share of three, five, or six ati^tdas long 
and two thick, and with a beam of three yards m length. This machine 
is to be yoked to a pair of oxen of equal size and of the same colour, 
either white, black, red, or gray. The oxen should be strong, and such as 
have not exceeded the middle age. Oxen with horns bent down, maimed, 
weak, meagre, toothless, or lame, should be rejected ; those with a white 


* Afewwa of’Linn. 


D 


t Margosa. 



18 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


spot on their legs and foreheads, with eyes resembling the petals of the 
lotus, are to be preferred. They should be decorated with fillets and the 
like, and their horns and hoofs with gold or silver rings. The sthapati, 
clad in fresh garments, and adorned with garlands of flowers, waits the 
auspicious moment to present his offerings to the deity, and then, guiding 
the oxen, draws the first furrow. After this, sudras,* hired for the purpose, 
complete the ploughing of the whole ground. A minuter description of 
the plough is contained in the first section of the Cdsyapa, the insertion of 
which may not be irrelevant in this place, as affording some proof that, how 
rude soever this useful implement of the Hindu husbandmen of the present 
day may appear, it has been originally constructed on principles derived 
from no slight knowledge of mechanical laws. The author says, “ the 
plough should be made from the wood of any species of milky trees, such 
as arc used in sacrifices, and according to the prescribed form; let the 
beam be three hastaa long, with a projection of seven anguUts from the 
yoke, and its bottom six atigulas broad, four thick, tapering gradually from 
the lower to the higher end, with a slight indenture about the middle. 
The inverted piece at the lower end of the stilt or handle should be nine 
angulas long, two broad, and one and a half thick. The mould-board 
should be twenty-four aiigulas long, and its height above the beam, five. 
Let a head be fashioned in the bosom of the mould-board, of fourteen 
in length, and the remainder of the inverted piece may be*said to be 
taken up by the hole in which the beam and the handle are joined together. 
Let the mould-board be six angiilas broad and four thick, with a point shaped 
like a pin, and gradually diminished towards the front; three times five 
aiigulas are said to be the interval between the beam and the fore end of the 
mould-board, to which the coulter should be fixed. The yoke pole is equal 
in length to the beam, with holes at both ends, and a leathern strap attached 
to each, of two /lastas in length, and of the thickness of the little finger.” 


* 3Ien of the fourth class. 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


19 


“ Having yoked the oxen,” continues the same author, “ a little more to 
the right than to the left of the pole, or towards the right hand of the 
driver, and having recited the appropriate prayers, let furrows be drawn 
towards the east or west, the grass being plucked out in the first instance. 
Let sesainum seeds, pulse, and kidney-beans be sown, with incantations 
pronounced over them, and let due reverence be paid to the spiritual 
teacher, and the oxen and the plough to which they are attached presented 
to him. When the crops are matured, and the flowers in bloom, let them 
be grazed on by cattle, and let cows remain on them for one or two nights. 
The ground will become purified by the froth flowing from the months of 
the cows, and by their ordure, after which you may commence building in 
the centre thereof.” 

The next thing of seeming importance treated of by Hindu architects, is 
the mode of ascertaining the cardinal points by means of a gnomon. It is 
indispensably necessary that all the quarters should be distinctly and precisely 
marked on the spot on which buildings are to be erected, for the purpose of 
giving them an auspicious aspect, and of preventing their being opposite 
to any of the intermediate points, which are declared to be inaus])icious. 
The sixth chapter of the M&nasara is exclusively devoted to this subject, 
the fifth containing directions for performing certain religious rites to pro- 
pitiate the presiding deities of the soil. The first section of the Casijapa 
combines* both these topics, and the fifth of the Muyamala corresponds 
with the sixth of the Manasara ; but the portions of the manuscripts which 
are in my possession arc so imperfect from the causes before noticed, that 
the whole taken together, conveys but a very imperfect idea of the sul»jcct 
treated on, and recourse has therefore been had to other sources to suj)ply 
the defect. 

The mode of ascertaining the points of the compass by the shadow of a 
gnomon is extremely simple. “ On a smooth level piece of ground is 
erected a gnomon,” which according to some, “ should be of sixteen «//« 
gulas in height, and of the same diameter at the bottom ; the whole should 

o 2 



20 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


be shaped like the leaf of an opening bud, tapering gradually from the 



bottom to the top.” “ Around this a circle is drawn with a cord of twice 
the height of the gnomon, by fixing one end of it to its base and carrying 
the other around it. Points are marked in the circumference where the 
shadow of the gnomon projects, both in the forenoon and afternoon, that is 
at any given hour after sun-rise, and at the same time before sun-set ; and 
between these points a right line is drawn so as to join them ; the point 
marked by the morning shadow will shew the east, and that marked by 
the evening shadow the west. Then, from each of these two points, and 
with a radius equal to the distance between them, describe two more circles 
cutting each other, and resembling (in their points of intersection) the 
head and tail of a fish, between which draw a right line, which will point 
to the south and north. Again, from the southern and northern points, 
which touch the circumference of the inner circle respectively, and with 
the same radius, describe two more circles, and the points of intersection 
on the two other sides will indicate the east and west.” The text goes on 
with repeating a similar process for ascertaining the intermediate points. 
Some treatises require the first circle to be described around the gnomon. 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


21 


not previous to making the morning and afternoon shadows, but afterwards; 
and in this case, the shadow being marked in the first instance, the circle is 
described from the centre of the gnomon, with a radius equal to the length 
of the shadow, plus half the diameter of the gnomon.” 

Various rules have been laid down for the purpose of rectifying the varia- 
tion of the shadow owing to the irregularity of the sun’s motion in the 
ecliptic, the simplest of which seems to be as follows : The place where 
the shadow of the gnomon projects, on two successive days at the same hour, 
being marked, the difference between those two days, is taken as the varia- 
tion of the shadow for sixty ghatkas or twenty-four hours. The interval 
between the times at which the western and eastern points were marked on 
the preceding day is multiplied by the difference of the shadow measured 
for one day, and the product being divided by sixty ghatican^ the result will 
give the difference of the shadow for the given time ; it will then be only 
necessary to remove the eastern or western point so far tou ards the south 
or north, according as the difference of the shadow on the second day may 
be in cither of those directions, or as the sun is in the southern or northern 
solstice. 

Another rule for finding the true points is given in the Siinja SUrdhantu. 
“ But, in consequence of the processional variation of the times of the sha- 
dow marked in the east and west of the circle, the difference in the sine of 
the declination between those times, being multiplied by the hypothenuse of 
the shadow at either of those times, and the product divided by the cosine 
of the latitude, the quotient will give the angiilas ; remove the western point 
so many aiigulas in the opposite quarter of the sun’s declination, and the 
eastern point will become due east ; or else, according ns the sun is in the 
northern or southern solstice, the eastern point may be removed the same 
distance in that direction.” 

“ Having marked,” says the commentary, “ a point in the middle of a 
level piece of ground, from that point, and with a radius equal to the length 
of the shadow projected at the third ghatica after the sun’s rise, plus half of 

3357 ’) 

^ 

THE F AMAkR '^HNA • l‘ SK jN 
INSTlTll Of ulTUHE 




22 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


the diameter of the gnomon (because the shadow is measured from the cir- 
cumference of the gnomon), let a circle be described, and in the centre of it 
let a sanc'hu be erected, of twelve angulas in height and of the same dia- 
meter ; mark points where the shadow falls before and after noon on the 
east and west of the circumference ; then having computed the sines of the 
declination three ghaticas after sun-rise, and three ghaticos before sun-set, 
multiply the difference between these two sines by the hypothenuse of the 
shadow at the third ghatica after sun-rise, and the product being divided by 
the cosine of the latitude of the place, the quotient will give the angulas or 
their integral parts. Then remove the eastern point so many angulas, &c. 
according as the sun is in the south or north latitude ; by this means all the 
points of the compass may be rectified.” 

Passing over several sections of the A/dnasaru which are not immediately 
connected with the main purpose of this essay, and reserving one or two of 
them for future consideration, we now come to the thirteenth and fourteenth, 
which treat of pedestals and bases. 

The Hindu orders may be said to consist of four principal parts, namely, 
the upapitha or pedestal, the athisthdna or base, the sthamha or pillar, and 
prastdra or entablature. Western architects consider the base, not as a 
distinct member, but as a constituent part of the column ; and this is not 
altogether at variance with the practice of the Hindu architects, for they 
likewise include the base and capital in taking the height of the pillar, and 
even consider the pedestal as a necessary part of the order. However, the 
latter invariably treat of a pedestal and base as separate bodies, as they are 
sometimes employed without pillars. These several members of the order 
have also been subdivided into various inferior parts, and the whole are 
curiousl-y compared to the several parts of the human body, in all which 
particulars a striking similarity may be perceived between the Indian and 
European systems. 

The two first members now under consideration derive their names as 
upapitha and athisthdna — the former from upa, under, and pitha, a seat or 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


23 


bench, and the latter from athi, upon, and stha, to stand. Both are for the 
most part composed of the same mouldings ; but the most remarkable 
feature in which they diifer is the square dye, which is peculiar to the 
former. The pedestal is not only placed under the base of a column or 
pilaster, but frequently employed, both singly and together with the latter, 
as a pavement for temples and porticoes, over cornices of edifices consisting 
of several stories in height, and also as a platform for thrones, and as seats 
for statues. In the latter situations especially, their decorations will be 
found to have employed much of the skill of the Hindu artists, and the most 
finished specimens of them may be justly said to surpass any thing of the 
kind in the Grecian or Roman orders, both in the beauty of their propor- 
tions and richness of their ornaments. 

The several mouldings which enter into the composition of pedestals and 
bases are, 1. upana , 2. raiiipa ; d.gafa, anit'hn, gnva, or candhara ; 4. 
nttara ; 5. vdjinu ; G. prativ/ijina ; 7 . pat’tica ; %. dltnga ; and 9. antunta ; 
all which arc of a quadrangular form : and 10. cumuda ; W.padma; 12. cu- 
pula, &c., which are circular. And as these mouldings frequently occur in 
the description of the several sorts of pedestals and bases which will be 
presently exhibited, a brief notice of their respective forms and uses, as 
well as of their correspondence with the mouldings of similar members in 
western architecture, may not be a usele.ss preliminary, especially, ns it 
may tend to the disclosure of any mistakes into which I may have fallen, in 
identifying the mouldings described in books, with those found in the existing 
models of the art, the technical terms above-mentioned being no longer in 
use. (See Plate I.) 

To begin, then, with the circular mouldings: the section of that which 
is called cumuda {\0), literally nympheca csculcnta, is a semicircle pro- 
jecting from a vertical diameter, and corresponds with the astragal, bead, or 
torus of the Grecian orders. It is chiefly employed in bases and eornices. 

The moulding called ( 1 1 j literally lotus, is supposed to resemble 

a petal ot that flower. It is a sort of compound figure, partly convex and 



24 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


partly concave ; and its section is composed of two opposite curves, meeting 
at the bisecting point of a line drawn between the points of recess and 
projection, and very much resembling the cma recta and reversa of the 
western architects. This moulding is distinguished into greater and less, 
and forms the principal ornaments of Indian architectui’e. It is gene- 
rally employed in detached pairs, in bases and cornices, one facing the 
other in opposite directions, and is formed upright or the reverse according 
to its situation, cither as a crowning member of the former or the support- 
ing ornament of the latter. The concave part of it, when placed with its 
bottom reversed, is often so designed as to project forward or rise up, after 
having touched, as it were, the fillet below, with a small perpendicular 
curvature, resembling in shape the petal of the lotus, with its pointed 
head somewhat inclined toviards tlie top. In some specimens, this moulding 
is placed at the base of columns, and looks very much like an apophygc 
or ogre of the lonick and Corinthian orders, being formed cither with a 
curved line having more or less convexity at the top, or with an tipright 
tangent to the concave part below. It is sometimes made exactly in the 
form of an ovolo of the western architects. 

A cap6tam{\2) is a section of moulding made in the form of a pigeon’s 
head, from which it takes its name. It is a crowning member of cornices, 
pedestals, and entablatures. When employed in the latter, it often connects 
utility with beauty, in as much as the beak of the bird is so placed as to 
serve the purpose of a spout to throw off the water falling on the cornice. 
In this office it resembles, in some measure, the corona of the Grecian order. 

The square members above-mentioned are nothing more than rectangular 
figures or parallelograms, differing from one another only in their degrees 
of altitude and projection. Of all the rectangular mouldings, a campa(2) 
has the least height, audits projection, though generally equal to its altitude, 
frequently varies according to the position of the principal members which 
it is employed to connect or to separate ; and it answers in every respect, 
to the fillet or Ustel of the western architects. 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


26 


An upAtia{\) corresponds exactly with the plinth, both in the import of 
the term and the purpose to which it is applied. 

A carttha, gala or griva, &c. (3) literally means the neck ; and when 
employed in pedestals, it is made very high, and resembles the dado, but 
every where else it serves as a sort of neutral member, from which the pro- 
jections of the rest of the mouldings are measured. 

A vdjim (6) is distinguished from the campa, by the former having a 
greater projection than the latter. 

A prativdjina (6) is the same thing made in pedestals to answer to the 
vajina ; its form, though generally rectangular, is sometimes, when placed 
in cornices, found to be externally a little more inclined to one side than 
to the other ; and in this situation it very much resembles the cavetto. 

Kpot'td or pat' tica (7) signifes a band. ^ It is often confounded with the 
moulding called vdjina, especially in pedestals and bases, as it appears to 
be of the same form, to be used in the same situation, and to have the 
same height and projection with the latter ; but when employed in archi- 
traves and friezes, its height and projection increase considerably. 

An ntlara (4) is used sometimes to signify the whole architrave, and 
sometimes to denote a particular menibcr of the pedestal and entablature, 
called by the western architects corona. 

An dlinga (8) generally has the same altitude with the fillet, but a greater 
projection than it ; and. 

An antarita (9) has the same height with the dlinga, but as much recession 
as the latter has projection. Both these members are placed alternately 
together, and when used, are always thus inseparably connected. 

OF PEDESTALS. 

Hiudfi architects have invariably taken the dimensions of their pedes- 
tals from those of the bases to which they are attached; but as to the 
number of parts to bo given to the height of pedestals, with reference 
to the number of parts contained in the base, there exists a multiplicity 

E 



26 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


of contradictory rules. On this subject ][Ianas6ra, our principal guide, 
expresses himself in so obscure a manner, that I must acknowledge my 
inability to understand him thoroughly. He, however, appears to pre- 
scribe a greater variety of heights and projections to pedestals than any 
other aiithor. He divides the pedestals into three sorts, according to the 
magnitude of the edifices in which they are to be employed, and makes 
their height, if I understand him rightly, to consist of from one-quarter to 
six times the height of the base, and their projections as far as one-third of 
their own respective heights. But such a loose manner of prescribing rules 
for the dimensions of architectural members must be considered objec- 
tionable, and bnt little compatible with science and taste. 

In a Tamil fragment of a manuscript, purj)orting to be a translation of 
Alayarndlo, it is said — “ The height of the shaft or pillar is to be divided 
into four parts, and one to be given to the base, which may or may not be 
accompanied by a pedestal ; and in the case where a pedestal is joined 
to the base, the height of the pedestal may be either equal to that of the 
base, or twice or three times as much.” Here, the greatest height given to 
a pedestal, namely, “ three times ” that of the base, is equal to a little 
more than a third part of the highest column, which is not perhaps a bad 
proportion. 

According to Jlftmasara, there are three kinds of pedestals ; of which 
the first is called vcdihluidra, the second prutibhndra, and the third /«««- 
chuldiadru. Each of these arc again divided into four sorts, making in all 
twelve, and each differing from the other in formation and in its ornaments, 
whatever may be its height in regard to the base with which it is connected. 
The remainder of this chapter is taken up with a detailed enumeration of 
the parts composing the different sorts of pedestals, but as I have marked 
the proportions in the designs themselves (Plate I.), it would be superfluous 
to specify them in this place. To enable the reader, however, to form a 
judgment on the original rules from which the drawings are made, the fol- 
lowing extracts respecting the three principal kinds of pedestals are submitted. 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS 


27 


‘‘ The heiglit of the npapitha (pedestal) being divided into twenty-fonr 
parts, let five be given to the upana^^ one to the c(inipa,’\ twelve to the 
cantha^\ one to the campa again, four to the pat'tica,^ and one to the campa 
above/' This refers to the fii'st sort of pedestal of the kind called imlhi- 
hluu^ra. Fig, 1 . 

** Divide the height of the upapitha into twenty-six parts, and let three 
be given to the npana^ one to the campa^ two to the padm(i,\\ one to tlic 
campa, eleven to the cantha, one to the campa, two to tlie padma,%^ three to 
the capota, one to the dlniga, and one to the aniaritay This refers to the 
first sort of the pedestal called pratihhadra. Fig. 5. 

“ Let the height of the upapUha he divided into thirty equal parts, give 
three to the updna, a half to the campa, three to the mahambuja, a half to 
the campa, two to the ca^ulhara, a half to.the campa, a half to the csbadra- 
padma, two and a half to the capota, two to the prativdjina, eight to the 
^^ala, one to the uttira, a half to the campa, a half to the padma, three to 
the upper capida, and two and a half to the dlinga,'' &c* This refers to tlie 
first sort of the pedestal called manchabhadra. Fig, 9. 

This chapter closes with rules respecting the projection of the highest and 
of the most prominent parts of the pedestal, iVe, ike. in these words : “ The 
projection of the base or apaua is equal to its height, or two, three, or four 
times as much more than its height ; that ot the padma is also equal to or 
twice as much as its height ; and that of the ciunada or the capota is 
always equal to, or something less than its own height. The padma should 
be ornamented with the petals of the lotus, the square fillets with forms of 
gems, blossoms, foliages, &c., and the cantha with figures of vifalas,"*^* 
sinha}>,'\'\ or of leaves, flowers, and the like.” 


* Plinth t Fillet. 
H Ciina lecta. 


J Dado. § Platland. || Cima reversa. 
** A fabulous animal. ] f Lion. 

E 2 



28 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS, 


OF BASES. 

The height of a base is equal to either a half, three-quarters, or a whole 
diameter of the shaft. When placed under pillars of an inferior sort, in 
porticoes and the like, and without a pedestal, its height is stated to be 
one-fourth, or one-third of that of the whole pillar. To bases, or rather 
basements, raised under pilasters in vim^ms, &c., Manaslira gives twelve 
different heights, to be used in so many different stories one above another; 
the first height consisting of thirty angulas, and the last of four hastas, each 
of the intermediate ones being increased in the proportion of six angulas. 
The same author also prescribes the heights of pedestals to be constructed 
in the houses of the several classes, as follows : Brahmans should have them 
of four hastas; C'shetri^as, of three; Vaisi/as, of two; and Sudras, of one 
hasta. The remaining parts of this chapter enumerate, at much length, the 
proportions of the component parts of no less than sixty-four different sorts 
of bases, under various denominations, as prati bandha, ccabandha., prati- 
crama pushpapushacala, sribandha,manchabatidka, srSnibandha, &c. &c.; but 
as it would be extremely tetlious to repeat in detail the measures of the 
different members of each sort, I pass them over here, referring the reader 
to Plates II. and III., Avhich contain designs of twenty-eight sorts of bases, 
with the heights and projections of all their parts therein notified. 

OF PILLARS. 

The fifteenth chapter of the Aldnasora treats of the several sorts of 
pillars, their various dimensions, forms, and ornaments, as does likewise 
the ninth section of the Casyapa : the two together seem to afford all 
the requisite information on this head. “ The height of a pillar,” says 
Aldtiasdra, “ when placerl on a base only, or both on a base and pedestal, is 
measured from the plinth (of the former) up to the lowest part of the enta- 
blature,” that is, from the base to the capital inclusive. A passage in the 
Cdsyapa states, that the measurement may also be taken from the cinibia 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


29 


of the shaft, exclusive of the base. “ Let the height of the pillar,” continues 
the first-mentioned author, “ be divided into twelve, eleven, ten, nine, or 
eight parts, and one be taken for the breadth of the foot of the shaft ; and 
the same being divided again by the number of parts of which the height of 
the pillar may consist, let the upper extremity of it be diminished by one 
of those parts respectively.” “The height of the pillar,” SQ.y s Cdst/upa, 
“ may be three times that of the base, or six or eight times that of the 
pedestal ; the breadth of the pillar may be a sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, or 
tenth part of its height ; if it be made of wood or stone, one-third, or one- 
fourth, or one-sixth of the height if it be a pilaster joined to a wall, 
(cudyastamb/ia).” 

Various names are given to pillars, by way of distinction, with regard to 
their forms: “A square pillar is called bruhmacdnta; an octangular one, 
viyshmiciinta ; that which is circular or has sixteen sides, rudracdiita / that 
which has five sides, sivaednta ; and that which has six sides, dchamla^ 
ednta.” The whole shaft may be of the same form, or in pillars of other 
forms, than scpiare ; the bottom, middle, and top may be quadrangular, 
ami the intermediate spaces of other forms. “ If the whole shaft from 
bottom to top be uniformly cylindrical and devoid of ornament, it is called 
chandraaiuta. 

A minute technical description is here given by the two authors above- 
mentioned, of the various ornaments with which the several sorts of pillars 
are adorned, but as an accurate idea can be formed of them only by ocular 
observation of these decorations, it has been deemed unnecessary to follow 
our text too closely on this subject. It may, however, be useful to take a 
general view of the different kinds of pillars and their ornaments as de- 
scribed by Alanasdnt, illustrating them by designs, partly taken from his 
descriptions, and partly from the models found in temples and porticoes of a 
pure Hindu style. 

Pillars of Indian architecture may, with respect to the dimensions, be 
divided into seven sorts. 



30 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS, 


The first sort* is a column six diameters high ; it is rarely made but upon 
a high base and pedestal. The entablature is more than half the altitude 
of the column ; and the intercolumniation generally four diameters. The 
pedestal is of the second sort of ihe pratibandha kind, see Plate I. ; and its 
height is equal to that of the base, which is one-third of that of the column 
itself, or two diameters. The base is called manchabandha, and is divisible 
into thirty parts. The capital is equal in height to the upper diameter of 
the shaft, and its projection is equal to its height. The form of the capital 
is called pushpabandha. “ The height of the capital,” says Munasdra, “ may 
be either equal to the breadth of the shaft, or one-half or three-quarters of 
it, according as it may appear proportionate to the size of the column.” Let 
the breadth of it be either one, one and a-quarter, half, or three-quarters of 
the diameter.” I cannot find in any of the authors a description of this 
capital, and it is only mentioned by name by Mdnasdra and others. I have 
given the design of it from the specimens found in buildings in the vicinity 
of Madras; and the artists call iiinl^VLmiX putalcibodicai, literally “flower- 
headed capital.” 93571 

The entablature placed on this column does not differ from that placed on 
other pillars, except, perhaps, in the height, which I have already stated to 
be very great. On this subject Mdnasdra observes generally, “ The whole 
height of the entablature may be either three-quarters, one, one and 
a-quarter, one and a-half, one and three-quarters, or twice that of the base,” 
“ The height of the entablature may be a half, one-fourth, or three-quarters 
of that of the shaft.” “ Or the height of the pillar being divided into eight 
parts, six, five, three, or two may be given to that of the entablature.” 
“ The height of the entablature is measured from the architrave up to the 
corona,” Its form will be described in another place. 


* In the following description of pillars every member belonging to an order is considered, 
and particularly the entablature, which is made the subject of a distinct chapter in the 

Mdnasdra, 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


31 


The second sort of column is seven diameters in height ; it is placed in 
most examples upon a base and pedestal ; the base is two diameters high ; it 
belongs to the species called cumbhandha. (See Plate IT.) 

The pedestal is equal in height to three-fourths of the base, and is of the 
kind called vidibadhra (Plate I.) The column is also placed, as may be seen 
in another design (Plate IV.), only on a pedestal which is equal to half the 
height of the pillar, and which is one of the sorts called munchabhadra. The 
capital given to the first design of this pillar is taken from a model found at 
Tiruvattiir, near Madras ; it is the same which Mdnasdra and others call 
tnrangabodhica, and is one diameter high and projects equal to its height. 
Speaking of this sort of capital, Mdmtslira says, “ it should be decorated 
with tinumgas* and other appropriate ornaments ; the height of the capital 
being divided into twelve parts, let the form of tarangas occupy three of 
them, let the bodhica (capital), which should resemble the cobra de capello, 
occupy six, and adorned with flowers and the like, and let one part above 
this be given to * * * ♦,•!• one to the cima, and one to the listel. The pro- 
jecting part of the bodhica should bo fashioned like the stalk of a plantain 
flower. At the upper extremity are the tarangas, of equal height or some- 
thing more. The lower part of the head of the bbdhica is one-third of the 
upper in breadth, and a third of the former being divided into five parts, one 
of them is given to the cavetto, one to the fillet, two to the cima, and one to 
the Intel: and the whole should be decorated with foliages, rows of gems, 
and the like,” In another place the same author says, “ Let the capital 
{bbdhica') be made to consist of one, two, three, four, five, or six faces, 
according to the situation in which it is placed.” 

The other form of capital given to the column in the second design, is 
taken from a inantbpa at Maylapdr. It is to bo met with in many other 


• Literally waves, a term applied to denote the projecting moulding employed in capitals, 
terminating by a number of undulating lines. See Plate IV. fig. 2. 
f Here a word in the original manuscript is not legible. 



32 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


ancient buildings, and is what the artists call in Tamil surul-bddhica, roll 
capital. I cannot find any particular description of it, except a passage 
in the MdnasAra^ which says, “ the projecting ornaments on the sides of 
the capital are made either in the form of an inverted apex or of a chacra, 
wheel, or circle.” It is one diameter in height, and projects but three- 
quarters of the diameter. 

There is not any particular rule respecting the intercolumniation of 
these or any other sorts of pillars ; but in porticoes, where these pillars 
are found, the space between one column and another exceeds throe 
diameters. The general rule laid down in the Mdnas&ra is this : “ The 
intercolumniation may be either two, three, four, or five diameters ; it is 
measured in three ways, 1st. from the inner extremity of the base of one 
pillar to that of another ; 2dly. from the centre of the two pillars ; and, 
3dly. from the outer extremities of the pillars including the two bases.” The 
latter method of measuring the intercolumniations is, I am inclined to 
believe, applicable to tlie pilasters in gateways or temples only, not to 
simple colonnades. 

The third sort of column, with its base and capital, is eight diameters 
high, with a diminution of the shaft at the top of tlio eighth part of the 
thickness at its bottom. The base occupies half a diameter, and this height 
is to be divided into ten parts ; two to be given to the plinth, one to the 
fillet ; three to the cimacia and its fillet, one and a half to tlie cavetto, the 
same to the torus, and one to the cimbia. The whole projection of the base 
is lialf of its height. The following passage from the Mdms&ra refers to 
this kind of base ; “ Let a base ornamented with the lotus be made under 
the foot of the pillar, one or two diameters in height, and let it be adorned 
with figures of demons, lions, and the like.” 

The height of the capital, which is made after the manner of the 
p'haluca* is three-quarters of the lower diameter of the column, and is 


* The forms of this ornament may be seen in Plate VI. 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


33 


divided into thirteen parts ; two are given to the abacus, one to the fillet, 
two to the madana^^ seven to the cimarecta, and one to the cimbia. The 
upper part of the shaft, about one and a half diameters below the capital, 
being divided into twenty-four parts, three are given to the collarino with 

I 

its fillet, three to the ovolo, three to the lower collarino, five to the lower 
torus with its cimacia, and ten below to the strings of pearls 
The projection of the capital is one diameter, or about an eighth part 
beyond that of the lowest part of the base ; the fillets project the full, and 
the torus three-quarters of their respective heights. 

The height of the entablature is one-fourth of that of the column. It 
is to be divided into twenty-one parts, eight are given to the architrave, 
seven to the cornice, and six to the vyMam.\ Of the eight parts of the 
architrave, one is to be given to the cavetto, three to the tema or benda 
(uttara) with its listels, two to the cimarecta, and two to the upper facia 
(v('{jin(iy Of the seven parts of the cornice, one occupies the fillet, and 
the remainder the ovolo (prastara) ; and of the six parts of the cornice* 
three to be given to the cavetto, two to the prativ/ijina, and one to the fillet. 
The projection of the vitjtna\ of the architrave is equal to that of the capital, 
that of the prastara is twice as much, and that of the cornice equal to its 
own height. After making a similar division of the entablature, our author 
lays down the following rule respecting the projection of the members. 
“ The height of the architrave being divided into four, five, six, seven, or 
eight parts, one should be given to its projection beyond the pillars. The 
capota § projects equal to its height, or to three-fourths of it, and the v&jina 
one-fourth.” “ The atinga recedes about one diameter, and the antarila 
projects equal to its own height, and the same may be said of theprafi.” 


* The forms of this ornament may jbe seen in Plate VI. 

f A moulding used above the comice, and which takes its name from being generally orna<- 
mented with the figures of the animal called v^d/a. 

X A square moulding so called. § The projecting member of the cornice. 


F 




34 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


The fourth sort of column is nine diameters high. The base is one of 
those called pratib'hadra, and is one diameter in height. It is without a 
pedestal. 

The base is to be divided into eighteen equal parts, two to be given to 
the plinth, one to its fillet, three to the ciinarecta, three to the cavetto 
with its listel, three to the torus, three to the upper cavetto, two to the 
platbaud, and one to the cimbra. The projection of the plinth is one* 
third of the height of the whole base ; the torus and the platband project 
equal to their respective heights. 

The upper ornaments of this column occupy two diameters, and the 
capital takes three-quarters of the diameter, which is to be divided into 
ten parts ; two to be given to the abacus, which projects half a diameter, 
one to the strings of pearls, one to the fillet, four to the cimacia, and one 
to the circular cimbia. The ornaments under the capital are to be divided 
into sixteen parts : of which give two to the cavetto or collarino, one-and- 
a-half to the cima, four to the torus, which projects perpendicular to the 
plinth, or three-quarters part of its height; one and a-half to the lower cima, 
three to the lower collarino, two to the astragal, which projects equal to its 
own height, and two to the third cima and its fillet, below which a space 
equal to* three diameters is taken up by strings of pearls, but which are 
omitted in some columns of a similar description. 

The fifth sort of column is ten diameters high, including the base, which 
ought to be three-quarters of the diameter. It should be divided into twelve 
parts : two for the plinth, whose projection is a fourth part of the diameter, 
one for the fillet, four for the cima, and one-and-a-half for the cavetto, one 
for the lesser cima, one-and-a-half for the torus, and one for the cimbia. 
The projection of the cima and torus is equal to their respective heights. 
This column is sometimes erected on a high pedestal, which is about a third 
part of the height of the pillar. 

The height of the capital, which is called pushpaband' ha, is equal to the 
upper diameter of the column : its projection on the sides is equal to its 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


35 


height, and the middlemost square is ornamented with the petals of a 
lotus. “ The altitude of the capital,” says Casyapa^ “ may be equal to 
the higher, lower, or the middle diameter of the column. Its breadth 
may be equal to its height, or four or five diameters.” “ A capital the 
height of which is from one to two diameters, and the breadth twice its 
height, is of the superior sort; and that which in height is half the diameter, 
and in breadth from one to three diameters, is of the inferior sort.” 

In colonnades of porticoes, the intercolumniations are found to bo from 
one diameter and a half to two diameters. 

The sixth sort of pillar is eleven diameters high. The design made to 
illustrate this is selected from among the pillars found at Canjeveram ; it 
represents a square pillar of the same height, exclusive of the base, which is 
composed of a plinth, a cimarecta, and torus, with their fillets, and is one 
diameter high. The same pillar, including the base, may be taken as an 
example also of the seventh sort, which ought to be twelve diameters in 
height.* “ When the pillar,” says Casyapa, “ is measured in height from 
the upper fillet of the base it is called mgatd-stamb’ hn^ but when it is measured 

from the plinth below it, is termed nichata'Stamb’ha.” 

« 

At the foot of the shaft, a space equal in height to tho hypothenuse of 
the lower diameter is made quadrangular, around which are sculptured 
images of the deities, and the like, in bas-relief. In about half a diameter 
above this, is made the ornament called mtgaband' ha Tho remainder of 
the shaft, about three diameters and a half, is made to consist of eight sides, 
including the strings of pearls, which occupy three-quarters of a diameter, 
and appear to be suspended from tho fillet of the upper ornament called 
padmaband’ ha,\ which takes up half a diameter. Next above this is the 
calasa or water-pot, about ^three-quarters of a diameter ; and above this 


* See Plate VI. 

f A sort of moulding made in the form of a serpent, 
t A moulding made in the form of a lotus. 



36 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


are made, with the same height given to them, three other mouldings, called 
in the language of architecture, herica^ asya, and tatica, which last projects 
a fourth part of the diameter. Above these again is the lower collarino, 
in height about a quarter of a diameter, then the ornament called cumb’ha, 
which is half a diameter high and projects as much ; next the upper colla- 
riuo, a little less than the lower one ; next the moulding called p'halaca, 
which is one diameter high, and projects equal to its height; next the 
third collarino, about three-fourths of a diameter ; and last of all, the capital 
of the kind called pitshpaband’ ha, which has already been described.* 

This pillar may, according to the definition of its form, be called vishnu- 
vunta, and appears in most of its ornaments, though not in their propor- 
tions, to agree with the description given by Mdnashra of that which he 
called piiliclistambha. He says, “ the height of the collarino (viracant’ha) 
should be one diameter of the column ; that of the p’halaca, one, three- 
quarters, or two or three diameters, and its projection one-fourth of its 
height. The height of the cumb'ha below the collarino may be half, one- 
and-a-half, or two diameters, and its breadth equal to the upper or lower 
collarino. The height of the tdticasya\ is half, or three-quarters of the 
diameter. Let the lower cima be equal to its height, and let its breadth 
be oue-and-a-quarter diameter. Below that comes the hericaf of half that 
height. The height and breadth of the tdtica are equally one diameter. 
Below that let a calasa (water-pot) be made about two diameters in breadth, 
and let the upper part of it be shaped in the form of a durdhura flower, 
and in such a manner as may appear graceful. Below this, about three- 
quarters of the diameter should be decorated with strings of pearls. 

Besides the model referred to in the above description, Plate XVI. con- 
tains three more designs of pillars, which may also serve as specimens of 
those of the seventh sort, so far at least as their dimensions are concerned. 
The pillars which they represent are to be seen in a portico at llrtwana- 


* See page 30, and Plate VI. 


t See Plate VI. 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


37 


malei, but I cannot find any thing in the description of pillars contained in 
the books under examination, like the works sculptured on the shafts of 
these models. They are probably modern improvements, and their work- 
manship, like that which adorns the pillars at Madura, may be attributed to 
the skill of the artists of the day. The same may be said of the double 
pillars which support a beautiful portico at Canjeveram, and on which are 
sculptured, in alto relief, lions and horses standing upright the full length of 
the columns; the former treading on elephants, and the latter mounted by 
armed knights. See Plates XVII. and XVIII. 

The pillars at Tiruvanamalei are estimated to be about thirty feet high, 
with proportionate thickness, diminished at the top by a twelfth part of the 
lower diameter. There arc three kinds of them. The first is placed on a 
high pedestal and base : the whole shaft is divided into ten compartments, 
each being equal in height to the hypothenuse of the diameter of the pillar; 
and on all the four sides of these compartments are sculptured, in relief, 
four small pillars or pilasters supporting an entablature. The second pillar 
differs from the first in having two, instead of four, small ornamental pilas- 
ters in relief, on each side of the ten compartments into which the shaft is 
divided, with an ornamented niche in the middle, which in the third speci- 
men is flanked by two small pancharas or ornamented cages on both sides of 
it. The second sort of pillar is placed on a base without a pedestal, and 
the third on a pedestal without a base. Sec Plate XVI. 

Having taken the preceding general survey of the several members con- 
nected with the orders of Indian architecture, it was my intention to submit 
a few remarks on such of the orders now in use in modern Europe, as have 
any correspondence with those of India ; but being destitute of European 
books which treat directly on this subject, I confine myself to the Egyptian, 
Grecian, and Roman, and to them only with regard to a few leading 
particulars. 

The difference in the Indian orders, consists chiefly in the proportion be- 
tw'een the thickness and height of pillars; while that of the Grecian and 



38 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


Roman orders depends, not only on the dimensions of columns, but &Iso on 
the form of the other parts belonging to them. 

Concerning the proportions of columns, the second sort of column in the 
Hindti architecture may be compared with the Tuscan, the third with the 
Doric, the fourth with the Ionic, and the fifth with the Corinthian or Com- 
posite pillar. This affinity between the columns of India and of Rome and 
Greece is so striking, that one would be apt to ascribe it to something more 
than mere chance, but there arc other columns in the Indian architecture, 
not only one diameter lower than the Tuscan, but from ohe to two diame- 
ters higher than the Composite. 

The Egyptian columns appear to have no fixed proportion in regard to 
thickness and height. In some of the specimens of the ruins of Upper 
Egypt, the height of the columns consists of from four to six times the lower 
diameter, which last proportion coincides with that of the first sort of the 
Indian pillar. 

The orders of India, and of Greece and Rome, are remarkable for the 
beautiful effect of their proportions, a circumstance to which little regard 
has been paid by the Egyptians. 

Both the Indian and Grecian columns are diminished gradually in their 
diameter from the base to the summit of the shaft, a practice which has 
never been observed in the Egyptian ; on the contrary, a diametrically op- 
posite rule has been observed in their shafts, which are made narrower at 
the bottom than at the top, and placed upon a square or round plinth. 

The proportion in which the diminution at the top of the columns of 
the two former is made, seems to have been regulated by the same prin- 
ciple, though not by the same rule. The general rule adopted by the 
Hindu architects in this respect, is, that the thickness at the bottom, being 
divided into as many parts as there are diameters in the whole height of the 
column, one of these parts is invariably diminished at the top ; but in the 
Grecian and Roman architecture, the diameter of the upper part of the 
shaft, in a column of fifteen feet in height, is made one-sixth less than its 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


39 


thickness at the base ; and in a column of fifty feet, the diminution is one- 
eighth. The higher the columns are, the less they diminish, because the 
apparent diminution of the diameter in columns of the same proportion, is 
always greater according to their height, and this principle is supposed to 
have been discovered with great scientific skill, and is adduced as one ot 
the proofs of the highly refined taste of the Greeks; but we observe, that 
precepts derived from the same principle have been taught and practised in 
India from time immemorial. 

The plan of the Grecian and Roman columns is always round ; but the 
plan of the Hindu columns admits of every shape, and is frequently found 
in the quadrangular and octangular form, and richly adorned with sculptured 
ornaments. The form of the Egyptian pillars too, is circular, and their shafts 
are often fluted like the Corinthian, but the fluting of the Indian columns 
resembles neither the one nor the other. The decorations of the Egyptian 
columns often consist in representations of a bundle of reeds” tied up with 
a cord on the top, having a square stone placed over it; in some specimens 
are also found bindings or fillets in various parts ot the shaft, and in the 
interval between them, reeds and hieroglyphics are represented. But there 
is nothing like these ornaments in the Indian orders, except in the columns 
found in the excavated temple of Elephanta, and some other places, and 
which differ materially from those employed in other situations in Hin- 
dustan. 

There are no fixed intercolumniations in the Hindu architecture, as are 
found in the Grecian, but the spaces allowed between pillar and pillar in 
different Hindd buildings, are found nearly to coincide with the Grecian 
mode of intercolumniations, though in too many instances they differ widely 
from it, and the same may perhaps be said of the Egyptian colonnades. 

The Indian pedestals and bases are made more systematically, and afford 
by far a greater variety of proportions and ornaments, than the Grecian and 
Roman. In the European architecture, the forms and dimensions of the 
pedestals and bases are fixed by invariable rules, with respect to the orders 



40 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


in which they are employed ; but in the Indiad, the choice is left to the 
option of the artists. 

The capitals of the Grecian columns invariably mark the distinction of 
the several orders : those of the Indian are varied at pleasure, though not 
without regard to the diameter and length of the shaft ; and the forms of the 
plainest of them, though they have in reality notliing in common with the 
Grecian order, are found at a distant view to bear some resemblance to the 
Doric and Ionic capitals; but those of a more elaborate kind are sometimes 
so overloaded with a sort of filligrce ornaments, as to destroy the elfect of 
the beautiful proportions of the whole. The Egyptian capitals, on the other 
hand, are formed into elegant vase shapes, decorated with the stalks, leaves, 
and blossoms of the lotus, and occasionally with palm leaves, which latter 
ornaments are supposed to have given the first idea of the Corinthian 
capitals. And in some specimens, the Egyptian capital is composed of the 
representation of the head of the goddess Isis. 

The entablature of the Indian order admits of little variety, as well in its 
composition, as in its relative proportions, whereas the same member in the 
Grecian and Roman architecture, is varied for each order both in form and 
magnitude. The massiveness of the Indian entablature offers a striking 
contrast to the lightness of the Grecian ; but the richness of the former may 
be said to be unrivalled. 

In the existing treatises on Hindu architecture, no mention is made of 
any thing like a substitution of human figures for columns to support the 
entablature, but the shaft is directed to be adorned with the figures of 
demons and animals ; yet various examples are to be met with in which 
human figures, as well as representations of animals, are employed in bold 
relief in the sides of pillars in temples and porticoes, but by no means like 
those found in Egyptian architecture. The antiquity of this invention in 
India is not determined, but the Grecian architects refer the origin of their 
caryatides to the commemoration of their captivity of the Caryan women, 
while others assert that it was derived from an Egyptian source. 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


41 


We now return to the ninth cliapter of the M&nasara^ which treats of 
villages and towns, and this being made to appear as belonging to archi- 
tecture, inasmuch as it regards the formation of streets and the allotment 
of suitable sites for the building of temples, piazzas, &c., I beg leave to 
subjoin a few extracts from it, trusting that the rules which they contain 
will serve to trace out the principles upon which a Hindu village or town 
is built, and that they will not be altogether uninteresting to those who 
delight in Indian antiquities. 

‘‘ The extent df villages or towns is declared to admit of forty varieties, 
consisting of from five hundred to twenty thousand dandets square, each sort 
exceeding the one immediately below it by five hundred d(wdas. The whole 
area of a village, with the lands thereunto belonging, being divided into 
twenty equal parts, one is assigned for the occupation of Brahmans, six or 
more for that of the three other classes, and the remainder for agriculture."' 
“ A street that goes round the village or town is called mangalavW hi, which 
should be from one to five dandds in width. That which runs from east to 
west is called rdjapaVha ; that which has gates on both sides rdjaviVhi ; that 
which has sand' his or angles, sand'hivit^hi ; and that which is in a southerly 
direction, rnahdcala or vdmana,'' 

“ Previously to building villages, towns, &c., let the sVhapati trace upon 
the ground selected for the purpose, any of the mystical figures described in 
the seventh chapter, and particularly that which is called paramasayica,'^ 


* The seventh chapter of the Mdndsara describes certain mystical figures which ore traced 
on the ground plan of villages, &c. for the purpose, not only of ottering oblations and sacrifices 
to the divinities who are supposed to preside over their various parts, but also of dividing the 
area into several compartments, to be appliixl, according to their supposed fitness, to the build- 
ing of temples, and the formation of high roads, streets, &c ; to each of which purposes the 
part over which a certain deity presides is considered more adapted than any other. An enume- 
ration of the several figures, and of the deities presiding over their various parts, would how- 
ever be little interesting or instructive to the European reader. 


G 




42 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


and after offering the prescribed sacrifices to the deities presiding over its 
various parts, let him proceed to arrange the streets, and mark out sites for 
building temples, &c., according to the rules laid down in the Sdstras" 

“ There are eight sorts of villages or towns, namely, 1. danddea (that 
which resembles a staff); 2. sarvatoh'hadra (in every respect happy); 
3. nandydvartta (the abode of happiness) ; 4. padmaca (that which has 
the form of a lotus flower) ; 6 . sivastica (that which resembles the mystical 
figure so named); 6 . prastara (that which has the shape of a conch); 7. 
cdrmuca (that which resembles a bow) ; and 8. chaturmuc’ha (that which 
has four faces). 

“ The village called danddea is quadrangular, and surrounded by a square 
wall. It consists of from one to five parallel streets, running in one direc- 
tion, generally from east to west, and of two more streets forming right 
angles at both the extremities of the five parallel streets, and also of a third 
crossing the middle of them. The breadth of the streets is from one to five 
dandds, and the middlemost may be made broader than the rest. The 
streets at the extremities or near the walls have a single row of houses ; the 
centre streets a double row, or one on each side. The space occupied by 
each house should be from three to five dandds broad, and from two to four 
dandds long. There should be four large gates, one on each side of the 
enclosing wall of the village, and as many smaller ones at the several angles. 
In the part presided over by Varuna or Maytra, should be erected a temple 
for Vishnu ; and in that presided over by Adita^ at the north-east angle, one 
dedicated to Siva ; a shrine, for Chamunda* should be built near the north 
gate without the wall. There should be two tanks f or reservoirs, one 
towards the south-west and the other towards the north-east. This village 


* The goddess of destruction, a form of Bhavani. 

t The south of India is famous for the beautiful workmanship of its reservoirs, which are 
generally very spacious, and completely lined with stone, furnished with steps, and ornamented 
with pavilions, &c. 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


43 


is particularly intended for the residence of Brahmans. It may contain 
twelve, twenty-four, fifty, one hundred and eight, three hundred or more 
houses. The smallest, or that which contains twelve houses, is called dsrama^ 
hermitage, and ought to be situated near mountains and forests, for the 
habitation of hermits. The village containing twenty-four houses is to be 
situated on the banks of a river, and inhabited by yatis or holy mendicants : 
it is called puram. That which contains fifty houses should be occupied by 
those who have performed holy sacrifices, or by householders in general : 
in the former case, it is called puram, and in the latter mangdlam. The 
village containing a hundred and eight houses is commonly called Co5‘ 
t'ham.” 

“ The village called Sarvatbbhadra is also of a quadrangular form, con- 
taining in the middle a temple dedicated to any one of the triad, Brahma,* 
Vishnu, or Mahiswara. It has four streets of equal length on the four 
sides within the wall, meeting one another at right angles, and two more 
crossing each other in the middle. Between these may be formed three, 
four, five, or as many more streets as the extent of the village will admit on 
each side parallel to the middlemost street.” 

Here several verses in the original bear allusion to the projections of 
some of the streets described above, but they are not sufficiently clear to 
be translated. 

“ Without the walls,” continues our text, “ should be placed the shrines 
of the deities who preside over and defend the several quarters of the 
village ; at the angular points should be erected halls, porticos, colleges, 
and other public edifices ; and towards the quarter of agni (south-east), a 
water-shod for the accommodation of travellers and passengers. The whole 
village should be secured by a ’quadrangular wall, and a ditch around it, 
with four largo and as many small gates, in the middle of the sides and at 
the angular points. Without the northern gate should be erected a temple 


* The worship of the representation of Jirahma is very rare. 

G 2 



44 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


for the ’worship of Mah& C&U, and the huts of the chand'/tlas or outcasts 
should be a crosa* distant from the village. A tank or reservoir should be 
constructed either on the south or north side, or near either of these two 
points, for ablutionary and culinary purposes.” 

“ The village called Nandy&vartta^ is either square or oblong. It is 
divisible into as many parts as are contained in the (mystic) figure called 
Chandita or Paramasdyica. The Ckandita contains sixty-four equal parts, 
being the square of eight, of which the middle four parts are called 
Brdhmya" or those which belong to Brahma, and they should be entirely 
appropriated to sacred purposes. Around these are twelve parts called 
Divya, or those belonging to the Ddvas ; around these twenty parts called 
Mdnushya, or those belonging to mortals ; and around these again twenty- 
eight called Paysdcha, or those belonging to demons. These several 
rounds should be occupied by different classes in the order of their supe- 
riority, that is Brahmans f should have the Brahmya, and so with the rest. 
The figure called Paramasdyica contains eighty-one equal parts, being the 
square of nine, of which the middle nine are Brahmya ; sixteen around 
these are Divya ; twenty-four around these Aldnushya, and the outermost 
thirty-two Paysdcha. This village has four large streets along the inside 
of the wall by which it is surrounded, running in each direction at right 
angles ; namely, one near the north-west quarter, passing towards the 
north-cast, projects at a small distance beyond the cross street which 
intersects it ; another opening from a little way within the projection runs 
forward in a south-east direction, and projects in the same manner beyond 
the intersecting street on that side, and the same may be said of the streets 
at the two other angular points. The number of streets in the outer 
compartment should be determined according to its extent, and in the 


■* A CTOta is equal to four thousand yards. 

f This is a contradiction of the preceding passage, which directs the middle parts called 
Brahmya to be appropriated to religious structures. 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


45 


compartments called Divya and M&nushya three or four more*parallel 
streets may be made from east to west, with as many cross ones from north 
to south, forming as it were so many courts or enclosures. Two broad 
streets run through the middle of the village, from east to west and from 
north to south, cutting one another in the middle, where there should be 
erected either “ a temple for Brahma, or a mantapa for general meetings.” 
At each of the angles of the outermost streets there should be a gateway 
ornamented with arches and the like. This village is of two sorts, which 
are also called the one Mangalam and the other Puram. The former is 
inhabited only by Brahmans, and the latter by all classes indiscriminately.” 

In this manner the author goes on describing the forms and arrangements 
of the remaining sorts of villages ; but as the accompanying designs 
(Plates XLIIl to XLVI) will, it is hoped, render the subject more 
intelligible, I shall close this article with one or two more extracts only, 
respecting the sites and aspects of temples, and regarding some other 
matters treated of in this chapter. 

“ The temples of Vishnu^ in whatever form that deity may be worshipped, 
should be erected within the village facing towards the cast, except in the 
incarnation of Narasinha (the Man»lion), whose temple should be built 
without the wall with its face turned from the village or town. That 
part of the figure which belongs to Alitni^* Bhallata* Arya^^ or SatiniyOy^ 
should be invariably assigned to the temple of Vislmu^ but the shrine 
of Siva should be built in the compartments presided over by Indra^^ 
Indraja^^ Rudra,^ Rudraga^^ &c. If the emblem of Siva (Linga) is to 
be consecrated according to the SukVhanta A'gamayf it may be placed 


* Denoting certain compartments in the mystic figure before mentioned, 
t The title of a religious book held in high reverence by the followers of Siva, and which 
treats, 1st. of several species of charities, such as the building of a caravanserai, and digging 
of tanks and wells for the accommodation of travellers ; 2dly. of religious duties diurnal anil 
periodical, of the various kinds of sacraments, and of ceremonies propitious or expiative, in 

which 



4G 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


within tfie village ; if otherwise, it should remain without. In the case of 
Vtshnu too, if the idol is to be consecrated according to the system of 
Vayghanasa* it may bo admitted within, but if according to the doctrines 
of P Anchor &tr should be placed without the village. The shrines of 
DurgA, Sha7mucha^\ and the objects worshipped by Jainas and Baudd’h<u, 
should be erected without the village.” 

“ Private houses or mansions may consist of from one to nine stories, but 
this is to be determined according to the rank of the persons for whom they 
are built. The lower classes of people must on no account construct their 
houses of more than a single story or ground floor ; and the height of the 
buildings should correspond in every street, as far as practicable, and in 
all structures of the same number of stories.” 

“ The front, middle, and back-door of a private dwelling-house should be 
so contrived as to be on the same level, and in the same straight line one 
with another. Let the outer door be placed, not exactly in the middle of 
the facade, but a little more to one side than to the other. The general 
practice is this: if the front of the house be ten paces in length, the 
entrance should be between five on the right and four on the left. The same 
rule is to be observed with regard to the gates of temples. In the front of 
the houses should be erected a vAdica, or raised seat or pedestal on each 
side of the door.” 

“ The gates and doorways of temples and houses of all classes of people 
should bo from one hasta\ and a half to seven hastas in height; the smaller 
doors, from one to five hastas •, and the windows, from twelve angulas to one 


which are included the holy incantations wherewith ’temples are sanctified, and images of 
deities deified and adorned ; and lastly, of the nature of the godhead and his attributes, of 
souls, elements, and other principles, and of contemplation, &c. 

♦ Two rival systems of religious rites and prayers observed among the followers of Fishnu, 
f The wife of 8iva, an avenging goddess, and her son Cartic^yd, 

X This perhaps alludes to the height of a window, which follows. 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


47 


hasta and a half. The breadth of large gates should be equdl to, or 
a little less than half of their height; or, the height of the door being 
divided into nine parts, five may be given to its breadth. The height 
of the door-frame being divided into seven, eight, nine, or ten equal parts, 
that of the void space should be equal to that of the door-frame, minus 
one part; a strict conformity to these rules will insure prosperity and 
happiness.” 

A whole page after this is employed in enumerating the various sorts of 
gifts and donations to be made to the artists on the completion of an edifice, 
and finally in denouncing dire misfortunes to those who withhold such 
presents from them. 

The next chapter professes to describe nagaras or cities ; but as it contains 
nothing farther than an enumeration of several sorts of cities and the 
various titles of particular princes who are qualified to reside in them, 1 
shall omit it altogether. In order, however, that some idea may be formed 
of an ancient Hindu city, I subjoin the following extract from tlic first book 
of the R&tnAyana. 

“ On the banks of the Sarayu is a vast, fertile, and delightful country 
called Cds’aUt, abounding in corn and wealth.” “ In that country is a city 
called Ayddhya, greatly famed in this world, and built by Manu himself, the 
lord of men. This great and prosperous city was twelve ybjanas* in length 
and three in breadth, and stored with all conveniences. The streets and 
lanes were admirably disposed, and the high-roads were well sprinkled with 
water. In this city lived Dasarat' ha, the most potent of monarchs, even as 
Indra lived in Amaravati.-\ It is adorned with arched g^VrA’^'t'and beautiful 
ranges of shops; it is fortified with numerous defences and warlike machines, 
and inhabited by all sorts of skilful artists. It was crowded with bards and 
musicians, filled with riches, and shone forth with unrivalled glory ; it had 


♦ A y6jana is equal to nine miles. 


t The capital of Indra, the regent of heaven. 



48 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


lofty towers stored with fire-arms and adorned with banners. It was con- 
stantly filled with female stage players ; it was beautiful with gardens and 
groves of mango-trees, and enclosed with high walls. It was surrounded by 
impassable ditches, and secured by fortifications difficult of assault by 
foreign kings ; it was full of horses, elephants, cattle, camels, and mules. 
It was ornamented with palaces of exquisite workmanship, lofty as moun- 
tains, and enriched with jewels, abounding with beautiful houses consisting 
of several stories, and it shone like Indra's heaven. It was crowded with 
tributary princes, purified with sacrificial rites, and filled with merchants of 
foreign countries. Its aspect had an enchanting effect ; and the whole city 
was diversified with various colours, and decorated with regular avenues of 
sweet-scented trees. It was full of precious stones, and resplendent with 
stately edifices and beautiful apartments. It was filled with buildings 
erected close to one another, and without intermediate voids, and situated 
on a smooth level ground. It abounded in delicious rice, and water sweet 
as the juice of sugar-cane. It incessantly echoed wilh the sounds of 
kettle-drums, tabors, cymbals, and lutes; this city truly surpassed any 
that was ever beheld on earth. The houses which it contained resembled 
the celestial mansions which the Sidd’ has obtain through the virtue of their 
austerity.” 

Of the remaining portion of the Mdndsara, twelve successive chapters, 
from the eighteenth to the twenty-ninth, are entirely taken up with rules 
respecting the measurements, &c. of as many sorts of vimdnas or pyramidal 
temples. The same subject is also treated of in several sections of the 
Cdsyapa, 

“ A vimdna con.sists, according to the former, ‘ of from one to twelve 
stories;’ and according to the latter, ‘of from one to sixteen stories;’ and 
‘ is made round, quadrangular, or of six or eight sides.’ The form of the 
edifice may be uniformly the same from the basement up to the spire, 
whether it be square, oblong, circular, oval, or the like ; or it may be of a 
mixed nature, composed partly of one and partly of another form.’ ” “ A 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


49 


quadrangular temple is called ti/tgara, an octangular dr/ivid’ha, and a cir- 
cular visara.” 

“ Vim/tnas are of three sorts, distinguished one from another by the prin- 
cipal materials of which they are formed, assud’ha, pure; inisra, mixed ; and 
sancivna, anomalous. An edifice is called siid’fm which is composed of but 
one kind of material, as stone, brick, &c., and this is considered the best of 
all. Misra is that which is composed of two kinds of materials, as brick 
and stone, or stone and metals ; and sanciriia is that which is composed of 
three or more kinds of materials, as timber, stone, brick, metal, &c.” 

“ Vimdnas are further distinguished into three kinds, namely, st'hdnaca, 
dsann, and sayana ; the first having reference to the height, the second to 
the breadth, the third to the length. Moreover, the idol to be placed in 
the vimdna, called st’h/inaca, should be in an erect posture ; that to bo placed 
in the dsana, in a sitting ; and that to be placed in the sayana, in a recumbent 
posture.” 

“ V'm&nas are again divided into five sorts, with respect to their magni- 
tude. They are called smtica* p(nistic(i,\ j(tyad(i,% atbhuta,^ and sarvac<ima.'\ 
The breadths of these five kinds of temples being divided into seven, six, 
five, four, and three parts in due order; ten, nine, eight, and seven of those 
parts are given to their respective heights.” 

“ Temples consist of the garb'hagriha (the womb of the house), the 
antar/tla (the anti-temple), and the ard'ha mantaiiu {i\\G front portico). The 
diameter of the whole length of the building, including the walls, is to be 
divided into four and a-half or six parts ; and the garh'hagriha to take up 
two, two and a half, or three ; the antarula, one and a-half or two ; and the 
ard’ha mantapa^ one or one and a-half.1[ 


• The moderate. t The bulky, 

t The victorious. § The admirable. 

II The universally beloved. 

IT Sometimes a portico is made round the garl’hagnha and antardla together, the whole being 

H closed 



50 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


“ Temples on a large scale have three or four successive porticoes 
attached to them iu the front, which are called ard' ha-mantapa, mahiiman- 
tapa, st'hapana mantapa, urittya mantapa, &c. Ard’ hamantapas are some- 
times made broader than the garb’hagriha, in which case the width of the 
former is either once and a-half or twice that of the latter. In the event of 
the three compartments being of the same breadth, the length of the whole 
should bo two and a-half the breadth.” 

“ The breadth of the garb'hagriha being divided into three, four, five, 
seven, nine, eleven, thirteen, or fifteen parts, let two, three, four, five, six, 
seven, or eight be allowed to the interior space, and the remainder take up 
the thickness of the walls on all sides.” 

“ The thickness of the wall being divided into twelve equal parts, let five 
or six be given to the door-frames or posts without, and seven or eight to 
the inside of the door. The door-frames or posts may be placed either in 
the middle or at the extremity of the point of the division before men- 
tioned.” 

“ The height of the pillars of the vhn/ma is to be divided into ten or eight 
equal parts ; and nine, eight, or seven of them are given to that of the 
doorway, the breadth of which is to be half its height.” 

“ In temples, and houses of Brahmans and others, two-leafed doors may be 
used. The doors arc turned either by means of a perpendicular cylinder, 
one end of which rests on the ground, or by hinges. The outside of the 
door-frames arc ornamented with foliages, &c., and on the architrave of 
the door, and on both sides of it, are carved the images of the gods and 
goddesses presiding over gates and door-ways.” 


closed by walls on all the sides but the front, in which are the doors for entrance, approached 
by the front portico, which is generally a peristyle, and it serves as the innermost court around 
which people perform their circumambulations ; 1 say tlie innermost court, because there are 
other courts around the whole temple. 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


51 


“ Let a water-spout be made over the base on the back wall of the 
^arb' hagriha, on the left side of the idol, cither towards the cast or the 
north, according as the temple may face towanls the south or the east. The 
thickness of the spout should be cither eight, ten, twelve, fourteen, or six- 
teen angulas. Its length should be equal to the ad’hist’haiia, which length 
being divided into three equal parts, one is given to the projection below {lam- 
bana). The breadth of the bottom of the spout is to be divided into five 
parts, and three to be given to the breadth of the sloping extremity below. 
The whole spout being divided into five parts, three to be given to the 
cugmala* one to the and one to the vajina or fillet. On the sur- 

face of the spout a cavity is to be made for discharging the water, from one 
to five angulas broad. The breadth of the cavity at the end should be 
three-fifths of that at the bottom. The spout may be made to spring from 
the head of a lion, &c., and the whole so devised as to project like a plan- 
tain flower.” 

To these observations succeeds a detailed enumeration of the proportions 
of the different sorts of vimdnas^ consisting of from one to twelve stories ; 
but as it would be extremely tiresome to specify the whole, even in the most 
abridged form, I shall insert the measurements of a few sorts only, which, 
with the assistance of the designs that accompany this essay, will, it is 
hoped, serve as a standard by which to determine the proportions of the 
rest of this class of buildings. 

A VIMANA CONSISTING OF A SINGLE STORY 
(See Plate XXI.) 

The breadth of this vhm'ma, which is measured between the two angular 
pillars, is divided into six parts : two are given to the mtic’hb’hadra (or the 


* An ornament made in the form of a bud. 
f Lotus, or ciraa recta. 

H 2 



52 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


middle niche), and two to the space on each side of it. The height of 
vimdnas is measured from the base to the apex, exclusive of the pedestal 
below, and is equal to one and a-half of its breadth. Let the whole height 
be divided into eight equal parts ; give one to the ad'hist’hdna (base), two to 
i\\G p&da (pillar), one to the p/v/iiara (entablature), one to the^rlva(the 
neck of the dome), two to the sic' ham (cupola), and one to the st'hdpi 
(pinnacle). The ad’ hist' hdna (base) is divisible into twenty-six parts. The 
height of the grtva being divided into three parts, one is given to the vid’hica 
or basement, one to the grtva,* and one to the uttira (entablature). The 
wc’Aam (cupola) being divided into thirty-two parts, three to be given to the 
tupa two to the ad’hopudma (the lower cima recta), one to the mdld- 

hadd'ha (the fillet ornamented with a wreath), two to the urdiThvapadma (the 
upper cima), sixteen to the sic’hara (dome), one to the mdlltbadd' ha, two to 
the chatidrahnila,X five to the mahdpadma (the great lotus). The breadth of 
the pavement being divided into six parts, one of which is diminished for 
the breadth of the vtd'hica (or base) on the first story, which being divided 
into four parts, three of them are given to the breadth of the grtva. The 
projection of the pendents is equal to the breadth of the vM’hica below. 

“ The breadth of the sic’hara being divided into five parts, three are to be 
given to that of the pattica,% which being divided into five parts, three and 
a-half are given to the breadth of the padma above, one-third of it to the 


■* Griva is here used lo signify that hollow space which supports an entablature under the 
cupola, though the term is generally applied to denote the whole ornament, consisting of the 
base, the hollow space, and the entablature before-mentioned. 

t A sloping and projecting member of the entablature, representing a continued pent roof. 
It is made below the cupola, and its ends are placed as it were suspended from the architrave, 
and reaching the stalk of the lotus below. 

^ A horizontal moulding over the sic’hara and below the base of the pinnacle. 

§ A round ornament at the bottom of the pinnacle. 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


cumb'ha, and one-third of the latter to the cudmala (the bud). Or divide 
the crown of the cupola into five equal parts ; give three to the breadth of 
the p’haldea, which divide into five equal parts, make the breadth of the 
padina take up four parts ; which divide again into three equal parts, give 
one to the breadth of the cant’ha, and three to the breadth of the cumb’lui. 
Divide the breadth of the latter into nine equal parts, and give one to that 
of the dandd or pinnacle, or three times the breadth of the pinnacle may be 
taken for the breadth of the p'haldca^ and one-third of the breadth of the 
latter for that of the cudmala (bud).” 

“ The great pudma or lotus under the pinnacle should be made to consist 
of eight petals, and the rest of the ornaments made in such a manner as to 
give a graceful appearance to the whole.” 

A VIMANA CONSISTING OF TWO STORIES. 

(See Plate XX IT.) 

“ The height is twice the breadth, which latter is divided into six parts ; 
one to be given to the carnacdt’ha,* one to the hurdntara^\ two to the mii- 
chub’hadra,\ and two to the carnacuVha and h/mintara on the other side of 
the facade. The height of the edifice is divided into twenty-eight parts, 
of which three are given to the ad’hist’hdna (base), six to the pillars, three 
to the entablature, five to the pillars above ; two to the entablature, one to 
the base, two to the neck or cant’ha, four to the cupola, and two to the 
pinnacle.” 

“ The pedestal at the bottom is not included in the height of the temple, 
but it is equal in height to the base over it.” 

Under this head may be noticed the designs in Plates XXHI. and XXIV. 


The side niches t The flank orn.iinents. 

t The front tabernacle. 



54 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


«4iich represent the plan and the front and side elevations of the vim&na at 
Sri Rangam, one of the earliest speeimens of sacred architecture which 
the ancients have left us in the South of India. The cupola or dome is 
crowned with four pinnacles over the front portico, and four more across 
the former over the principal cell; and in the tabernacle immediately 
below the cupola, stands the statue of Paravdsuddva, a form of Vishnu, 
The plan of the cell or sanctuary, where the idol of Rangan&t'ha is sden in 
a recumbent posture, is oval, but that of the front portico square, and the 
outside of the vault is adorned with a sort of tracery-work. The front 
portico, which extends to a considerable distance from the main cell, is 
supported by rows of lofty columns ; and the whole temple is enclosed by 
seven square courts, each of them havinf^ four pyramidal gateways, one in 
the middle of each side of the wall. Several of these courts contain private 
dwelling-houses of Brahmans and other classes. The designs have been 
taken by an artist on the spot, and the proportions of the different parts 
of which the temple is composed are, according to his account, as follows : 
“ The whole height of the vimuna is divided into thirty-two parts, four arc 
given to the base, three to the pillars, four to the entablature, five to the 
upper pillars, two to the upper entablature, one to the upper base, two to 
the can’tha, four to the cupola, and two to the pinnacle.” 

A VIMANA CONSISTING OP THREE STORIES. 

(See Plates XXVI. and XXX.) 

“ The height is twice the breadth, and being divided into forty-eight 
parts, tour are given to the base, eight to the pillar, four to the entabla- 
ture, seven and a-half to the pillar above, three and a-half to the entabla- 
ture, seven to the pillars, three to the entablature, one to the upper base, 
two to the cant' ha, six to the cupola, and two to the pinnacle.” 

The first design is made from the foregoing measurement given 
l)y Mdnasdra, and the second is taken from the vimdna of Vaicunt’ha 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


55 


NAt’ha * at C&nchipuratn (Canjeveram). In the lower story is placed the 
statue of the god whose name the temple bears ; in the upper that of llun- 
gan/it’ha* recumbently, and in the third that of Parav/tsuMvo ,* sitting 
under the canopy of a cobra do capello. This temj)le has been selected for 
a specimen on account of the singularity of the plan, and of the three 
different deities being worshipped one above another, in as many stories, ot 
which it is composed. 

“ The height of this temple is divided into twelve parts, one to the base, 
two to the pillar, one to the entablature, three-quarters to the pedestal, 
three-quarters to the base, one and a-half to the pillar, three-{[uarters to tlie 
entablature, a half to the base, one to the pillar, a half to the entabla- 
ture, a quarter to the upper base, a half to the catiCha, one to the 
cupola, and a half to the pinnacle. 

A VIMANA CONSISTING OF FOUR STORIES. 

(See Plate XXXI.) 

“ The height of the v'mAm being divided into nineteen parts, one and 
a-half is given to the base, three to the pillar, one and a-half to the 
entablature of the first story, two and a-half to the pillar, one to the enta- 
blature of the second story, two to the pillar, three-quarters to the enta- 
blature of tho third story, one and a-half to the pillar, thrce-(juarters to the 
entablature of the fourth story, a half to the upper base, one to the 
cant’ ha, two to the cupola, and one to the pinnacle.” 

“ Tho pedestal at the bottom is independent of the rest of the parts, 
and is equal in height to the base,” 

“ The inner pillar of the caniacut’ha (the side niches) of the lower story, 
should be placed directly under the outer pillar of the same ornament, in 
the story immediately above.” 


• yishnu under different forms. 



5G 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


A VIMANA CONSISTING OF FIVE STORIES. 

(See Plate XXXII.) 

“ The height is to be divided into twenty-four parts : one and a-half to 
be given to the base, three to the pillar, one and a-half to the entablature 
of the first story ; two and a-half to the pillar, one and a-quarter to the 
entablature of the seeond ; two and a-quartcr to the pillar, one to the 
entablature of the third ; two to the pillar, one to the entablature of the 
fourth ; one and three-quarters to the pillar, one to the entablature of the 
fifth ; a half to the upper base, one to the ca?it’ha, two and a-half to the 
eupola, and one and a-half to the pinnacle. The pedestal below is equal 
in height to the base.” 

Temples of five stories are found in various parts of southern India ; and 
the design whieh accompanies, represents one at Rajarayhwaram, in the 
province of Tanjore. 

A VIMANA CONSISTING OF SeIeN STORIES 
(See Plate XXXIII.) 

“ The height is divided into thirty-six parts ; two to be given to the base, 
four to the pillar, two to the entablature of the first story ; three and a-half 
to the pillar, one and three-quarters to the entablature of the second ; three 
to the pillar, one and a-half to the entablature of the third ; two and a-half 
to the pillar, one and a-half to the entablature of the fourth ; two to the 
pillar, one to the entablature of the fifth ; one and a-half to the pillar, three- 
quarters to the entablature of the sixth ; one and a-quarter to the pillar, 
five-eighths to the entablature of the seventh ; one to the base, one and 
a-half to the cant’ ha, two and a-half to the cupola, and five-eighths to the 
pinnacle. 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


57 


A VIMANA CONSISTING OF TWELVE STORIES. 

(See Plate XXXIV.) 

“ The whole height is to he divided into eighty-seven parts, four to he given 
to the base, eight to the pillar, four to the entablature of the first story ; 
seven to the pillar, three and a-half to the entablature of the second ; six to 
the pillar, three to the entablature of the third ; five to the pillar, two and 
a-half to the entablature of the fourth ; four and a-half to the pillar, two and 
a-half to the entablature of the fifth; four to the pillar, tno to the entabla- 
ture of the sixth ; three and a-half to the pillar, two to the entablature of 
the seventh ; three to the pillar, one and a-half to the entablature of the 
eighth ; two and a-half to the pillar, one and a-qnartcr to the entablature 
ol the ninth; two and a-half to the pillar, one to the entablature of the 
tenth ; two to the pillar, one to the entablature of the eleventh ; one to the 
upper base, two to the cdiit’ha, three to the cupola, one and a-half to the 
pinnacle.” 

A VIMANA -CONSISTING OF FIFTEEN STORIES. 

(See Plate XXXV.) 

” The height being divided into one hundred and ninety-four parts, seven 
to be given to the base ; thirteen to the pillar, six and a-half to the enta- 
blature of the first story ; twelve to the pillar, six to the entablature of the 
sccontl ; eleven to the pillar, five and a-half to the entablature of the third ; 
ten to the pillar, and five to the entablature of the fourth ; nine to the pillar, 
four anil a-half to the entablature of the fifth ; eight to the pillar, four to 
the entablature of the sixth, and so on up to the fifteenth story ; the pillars 
being diminished by half a part regularly, and the entablatures half the 
height of the pillars over which they are placed ; after which one part is 
given to the upper base, two to the cant’ ha, four and a-half to the cupola, 
and one and a-quarter to the pinnacle.” 


I 



58 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


The thirty-first chapter of the ManasAra^ as well as the twenty-fourth 
of the MAy&mata, treat of gdpuras, or towers on the gateways of temples ; 
from both which works a few extracts will be given below. 

“ There are five sorts of gateways, namely, dwArasob’ka (the gate of splen- 
dour), dw&rasala (the gate of the mansion), divaraprasada (the propitious 
gate), dwaraharmya (the gate of the palace), and dwaragopura (the turreted 
gate). The breadth of the principal temple being divided into seven, 
eight, nine, tea, or eleven parts, six, seven, eight, nine, or ten arc to be 
given to that of the five sorts of gbpuras respectively. ‘ These five sorts 
are to be employed in as many courts, by which the temple is to be sur- 
rounded.” 

“ AdwArasdb’ha consists of one or two stories; a dwarasala of from two to 
four ; a dwaraprasuda, of from three to five ; a divorahamya^ of from five to 
seven ; and a dwaragopura, of from seven to sixteen stories.” 

“ And the breadth of gdpuras, of the superior sort, may be made twice that 
of the principal temple, or one and three-quarters, one and a-half, or one 
and a-quartcr of it: or in gdpuras oi the inferior sort, the breadth of the prin- 
cipal temple being divided into four, five, six, or seven parts, one of these 
parts should be taken away, and the remainder given to the breadth of the 
former.” 

“ The breadth of the gdpura at the bottom being divided into three parts ; 
let one of them be given to the void space of the gate in the middle. ‘ The 
height of the door-frame being divided into four parts, let one be given to 
the pedestal, one to the base, and two to the pillars, around the first story. 
Or, the same height being divided into seventeen parts, let five be given to 
the pedestal, four to the base, and eight to the pillars.’ The height of the 
door-frame should be twice its breadth.” 

“ The diameter of the gdpura of a single story being divided into six 
parts, three to be given to the interior space, and three to the thickness of 
the walls.” 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


59 


“ The (hanietcr of the gdpura of two stories being divided into seven 
parts, four to be given to the interior space, and three to the thickness of 
the walls.” 

“ The diameter of the g6pura of three stories being divided into nine 
parts, four to be given to the interior space, three to the thickness of the 
walls, and the remainder to the terrace around (alindni).” 

“ The diameter of the "dpura of four stories being divided into ten parts, 
five to be given to the space inside, four to the thickness of the walls, and 
one to the terrace around.” 

“ The diameter of the gopura consisting of seven stories being divided 
into thirteen parts, eight to be given to the space inside, three to the thick- 
ness of the walls, and two to the terrace around,” and so with the rest. 

Various denominations are next given to gupuros, such as AVictf/v/, ravi~ 
cuniu, smvmya, vijai/a, vis/iiaaf, &c., and their characteristic ornaments 
described with too much ininutencsss to be here detailed ; and to these 
succeeds a no less minute enumeration of the various parts which compose 
gdpuras of the several heights before-mentioned, of which I shall subjoin 
the divisions and proportions of those only which consist of one, two, five, 
six, and twelve stories, the designs of which accompany this essay. 

A DWARASODllA CONSISTING OF ONE STORY. 

(See Plate XXXVI.) 

“ The height of the principal pillars of the gate should be three-quarters 
of the breadth of the pyramid at the bottom, and being divided into four 
parts, one to be given to the pedestal, one to the base, and two to the 
pillars, and the whole height of the ornaments over this, is equal to the 
breadth of the ground-plan ; and the same height being divided into four 
parts, one is to be given to the entablature, one to the cant' ha, two to the 
cupola, and one to the pinnacles.” 



60 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


A DWARASALA CONSISTING OF TWO STORIES. 

(See Plate XXXVII.) 

“ The height of the principal pillars of tlie gate, which should be three- 
quarters of the breadtli of the ground-plan, being divided into three and 
three-quarters parts, three-quarters to be given to the pedestal, one to the 
base, two to the pillars, and one to the entablature. iThe height of the pillars 
in the second story is one-eighth less than that of the pillars in the first or 
lower story, half of which is given to the entablature, half of that to the 
upper base, twice tliat to the cavetto above, twice that to the cupola, 
which should be surmounted by five pinnacles equal in height to half of 
the cupola.” 


A GOPURA CONSISTING OF FIVE STORIES. 

(Sec Plates XXXVIII. and XXXIX.) 

“ The height of the gate-pillars being divided into twenty-one parts, nine 
to be given to the pedestal, four to the base, and eight to the pillar, and 
the remainder of the pyramid, from the entablature up to the pinnacle, is 
in height equal to one and a-quarter part of the breadth of the ground- 
plan : and being divided into twenty-three parts, two to be given to the 
entablature of the first story ; three and a-half to the pillar, one and three- 
(juarters to the entablature of the second; three to the pillar, one and a-half 
to the entablature of the third; two and a-half to the pillar, one and 
a-quarter to the entablature of the fourth; two to the pillar, one to the 
entablature of the fifth ; one to the cavetto, two and a-half to the dome, and 
one to the pinnacle.” 

A GOPURA CONSISTING OF SIX STORIES. 

(See Plate XL.) 

“ The height of the gate-pillars, which is three-quarters of the breadth of 
the ground-plan, being divided into four and a-half parts, one and a-half 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


61 


to be given to the pedestal, one to the base, and two to the pillars; and 
the upper part of the pyramid, which is equal in height to the breadth of 
the ground-plan, being divided into twenty-nine parts, two are to be given to 
the entablature of the first story ; four to the pillar, one and three-quarters 
to the entablature of the second ; three and a-hulf to the pillar, one and 
three-quarters to the entablature of the third ; three to the pillar, one and 
a-half to the entablature of the fourth ; two and a-half to the pillar, one and 
a-half to the entablature of the fifth; two to the pillar, one to the enta- 
blature of the sixth ; one to the cavetto, two and a-half to the dome, and 
one and a-half to the pinnacle.’' 

A GfiPURA CONSISTING OF TWELVE STORIES. 

(See Plates XLI. and XLII.) 

“ The height of the gate-pillars is three-quarters of the breadth of the 
plan, and it being divided into five parts, two to be given to the pedestal, 
one to the base, and tw'o to the pillar. The upper part is equal in height 
to twice the breadth of the ground-plan ; and the same being divided into 
eighty-five parts, three and a-half to be given to the entablature of the 
first story ; seven to the pillar, three and a-half to the entablature of the 
second ; six and a-halt to the pillar, three and a-half to the entablature of 
the third ; six to the pillar, three to the entablature of the fourth ; five and 
a-half to the pillar, two and three-quarters to the entablature of the fifth ; 
five to the pillar, two and a-half to the entablature of the sixth ; four and 
a-half to the pillar, two and a-half to the entablature of the seventh ; four 
to the pillar, two to the entablature of the eighth ; three and a-half to the 
pillar, one and three-quarters to the entablature of the ninth ; three to the 
pillar, one and a-half to the entablature of the tenth ; two and a-half to the 
pillar, one and a-quarter to the entablature of the eleventh ; two to the 
pillar, one to the entablature of the twelfth; one to the upper pedestal, one 
and three quarters to the cavetto, three and a-half to the dome, and one 
aud a-half to the pinnacles/' 



62 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE HINDUS. 


Having given the proportions of the different parts of pyramidal temples 
and gateways, we may be permitted to indulge in a few words relative to 
their general appearance, and to the ideas which this is calculated to 
im])ress on the mind. 

An eminent author makes the architectural sublime to consist “ in 
magnitude, height of the buildings, and solidity of the materials;” another 
author, “in splendour, magnificence, and an imposing appearance,” These 
characteristics of the sublime, most of the Indian temples possess in an 
eminent degree, independently of that sort of light betwixt gloom and glare 
nhich increases the sublimity in architecture; and in beholding these 
majestic and stupendous works, we are struck with admiration and respect, 
and animated with emotions of piety, virtue, and religion. 

If we enter into the ininutia; of the art, which solely depend on scientific 
proportion, and on the skilful application of mechanic powers, we are 
led to wonder at the success of the artist in his attempts at the sublime, 
and to express our astonishment at the physical powers employed in the 
superstructure. 

Of all the modes of building invented by man, the pyramid seems to bo 
best calculated to produce these impressions. It must be acknowledged, 
however, that the pyramidal buildings of India arc of much less dimen- 
sions than those of Egypt, and that the former have too great a profusion 
of ornaments. If we examine the exterior of these temples, we should 
discover with what skill the bulk of the edifice is shewn to advantage, and 
how admirably the parts arc formed for the eye to embrace the whole, at 
the same time that the sight is bewildered with the infinite variety of deco- 
rations. The interior, also, is so constructed as to cast over it a visible 
oblivion, that indispensable requisite of the sublime. 

I shall now close this essay, with the following short account of the mode 
of preparing chunom, or cement, as practised by the artists in India. 

Chunam is prepared in the interior of India from a gravelly sort of lime- 
stone dug out of quarries, and along the coast from shells washed out of 



ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


63 


salt»water marshes. Of the two, the shell chunom is generally considered 
the strongest and most durable. The following is the mode of preparing stone 
chttnarn : The pebbles or gravel stones are first beat with wooden pestles, 
to separate the alluminous clay which adheres to them ; after they arc thus 
cleaned, they are sorted, as of a white or brown quality. In some places 
the stone is burnt by simply laying alternate layers of stone and charcoal 
on the ground, in the proportion of two parts of charcoal to one of stone, 
and thus allowed to burn out. The stone, after being burnt, is slacked by 
laying small quantities in heaps and throwing water on them ; and as soon 
as the heat begins, the whole is mixed up together and stirred about till it 
is reduced to a dry powder. The lime is now considered fit for the use ot 
the builder. Shell chunam is manufactured much in the same way, excepting 
that it is again cleansed by the manufacturer in a dry state, by strewing it 
down against the wind, after the manner that corn is winnowed to separate 
the chaff. The burning, also, is differently performed : the charcoal is mixed 
up with the shells, and burnt in large open kilns, with a grated bottom and 
longitudinal flue, communicating with four or more lateral openings. The 
stone chunam forms a coarse sandy powder, and the shell a very fine 
impalpable one. From these two substances all the mortar for building 
throughout India is prepared; they are mixed with clean sharp river sand in 
various proportions, according to the use for which they arc intended. For 
brick work, from one part and a-half to three of sand is mixed, with one or 
two of the fine slacked lime ; for the coarse undercoat plastering, from one to 
two of sand with two of lime ; and for the last and fine upper coating, two 
to three of sand with one of lime. When the mortar is prepared for the 
brick work in rough plastering, it is simply beat up with pure water in 
long stone troughs, with wooden pestles about a yard and a-half long and 
shod with iron hoops. Chunam intended for fine plastering and ornamental 
works is ground by women, on an oblong granite stone and a cylindrical 
upper stone about four inches in diameter; the mixture is sometimes ground 
two, three, and four times, to bring it to the required fineness and purity. 



G4 


ON THE ARCHITECTURE OP THE HINDUS. 


In all the operations of chunam work, jaggery water, i. c. a solution of 
molasses or coarse sugar, is invariably added by the builders, and its use 
appears to have prevailed from the remotest ages. There are various 
opinions among the modern practitioners regarding its usefulness, but those 
who have had the most extensive practice in building, hold it as an indis- 
pensable ingredient in the formation of a durable and hard cement ; and it is 
stated that the operator evidently perceives the dissolvent property of the 
jaggery water, on its being tempered with the prepared mortar. It is sup- 
posed that it tends very much to the intimate union of the coarse particles 
of the lime with the sharp sand, on account of the saccharine acid in the 
molasses, and the gaseous principle of its earthy parts, causing a tjuickcr 
chemical induration of the mortar than would be cftected by mere appli- 
cation of pure water conjoined with the absorption of the hardening 
substance of the atmospheric air. 


FINIS. 


LONDON; 

Printed by J. L. Cox and Son, 7fl, Great Queen Street, 
Lincoln's- Inn Fields. 



ERRATA. 


Page 30, hne \^for pratibandha read pratibhadra 
— 34, — li, — pratib’hadra — pratibandha 


For Vaygliiinasa 

read 

vaikh^nasa 

— Pdncharatram 

— 

panchar^tram 

— Adhi^tana 

— 

adhisht'h^na 

— Mantap^s 

— 

mandapUA 

— Yec-ibaa 

— 

Yaoshaa 

— Sicharafl 

— 

sic’haras 

— Pandii 

— 

Pandu 

— Chrlshna 

— 

Cl iahna 

— Dwapara 

— 

Dwapara 

— » liaatha 

— 

haHtu 

— (Ihanurmuflti 

— 

dhnnurnmshti 

— ryju 

— 


— carta 

— 

cai ta 

— Twaata 


TwaahtJi 

— JVfanufthya 

— 

nidnuahya 

— Chadira 

— 

C’hadira 

— mcraoea 

— 

mimosa 

— michelea 

— 

iiiichclia 

— saptapharnu 

— 

suptapanid 


For athi 

rend 

ad hi 

— stha 

— 

st'hrt 

— pat’tfon 

— 

patticd 

— pat'ti 

— 

putti 

— \edhi 

— 

vedi 

— prati bandha 

— 

pratibandha 

•— pushpapushacalo 

— 

pushpapu'ihcala 

— cumbhanda 

— 

combhabandbu 

— pancharas 

— 

panjarus 

•— sivaatioa 

— 

swosiliLa 

— sud'ha 

— 

suddha 

— utbbuta 

— 

adbhuta 

— cugmaia 

— 

c'udmala 

— muo'libiiadia 

— 

inup'habhudra 

— dwaraliainya 

— 

dwaraharmya 

— Paiuvasudiva 

— 

Paravasud^^a 

— Kariiakut'ha 

— 

Carnacuta 

— imic'hubhadra 

— 

iiiuc’habhadru 

_ Caitict^a 

— 

Cartikeya 

— Vedibadhia 



vedilihailra 




Yffil hh if dj ff 


Li p.^ pi t or LVdesL* 

/V fifib/>tfdra 



Anti* n fit 

Atm^n 

Cn^oftt 

( i»tnpa 

f oftf 


f {ttHfifl 
I'fnf ft, ,, 


MiUK b/tr>iYr<i 'f 

0 



Aft niicf 

O/pi'/it 
/‘(fitma 
riiJtfpit 
1 1ft t (I 

tntfn 

/> (tf/*i /fiftt 

( itpcfit 
/ \hf*ff/ fipft 
( fittipt* 

tj 

f nmfiit 
Afahntn htiji 
f fttn/i/K 

fy/ftmt 


f P Ittri 











































































' ^ iMff S /im^k^, ivl^* Atfty ir«> •> MiAv/m.i in* 


















PI m\ 











77/< Tf/Hcufr( ff/ SfY 

a -yfr/eAy^a/r'rn 























•f^Sr»flt<ifpr b/u.Jl^tUj!iitaAe Jocu^. ^ ^ 











iyi Pt^££m^Ju . rjt^yvU»lf A iral€ , V ^ /MW(fU' ->W AjW- 




i’l \XXl 

























FI 

















































































soolooooou coyocoi^woct'o 
&oooooi>^C‘-' uocoecoooooo 
sCoOoSoooo jOoooc»oooOO« 
icocoooooo ocooooc^iiOOP® 
aOOOOQOOOC' ooc s;rOOL»Of 
So&oOoOoeo octtocaoj 

ooooocofoc e€'®®®®*“K 2 Sfe£Bocaopa»b oodoflou rj 

O&OtOOOQdO 0®C®OOOphflgg^O JJJpgyQOOUflOOUO D 


)&OtOOOQPO oooooowooo*>®o®**“ 

ia P 0 OOPO 0 O 0 OOQ^O^OVVVQ f!?“_„"2;jlK#»HnnnoflCr 
JCjOOOCCOO OOOOOPddOOvOp Ij 
Siooopcooojp^^oooogcocbo 

JOOCQOPOOO 

)OOOPCOCOO OOOOQ00090<90 
iovvv AO oadO 0 o 



















