780*954 F79m 

Fox 

The music of Hindostan 



66-12464 




Kansas city public library 



Books will be issued only 

on presentation of library card. 
Please report lost cards and 

change of residence promptly. 
Card holders are responsible for 

all books, records, films, pictures 
irary materials 
checked out on their cr" 1 




00276 8851 



DATE DUE 



MAI ftPR 



4 1975 



OCT 1 



5 



fab 



3 1375 



: r,^ 19 1377 



MA MARli-,.8 



-UtH- 



1 



R1AI 



DECi6 1983 




OCT 2 5 1993T\ 



THE MUSIC OF HINDOSTAtf 



THE MUSIC OF 
HINDOSTAN 



BY 



A. H. FOX STRANGWAYS 



OXFORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 



Oxford University Press, Amen House, London E.C.4 

GLASGOW NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE WELLINGTON 

BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS KARACHI LAHORE DACCA 

CAPE TOWN SALISBURY NAIROBI IBADAN ACCRA 

KUALA LUMPUR HONG KONG 



FIRST PUBLISHED 

REPRINTED LITHOGRAPHICALLY 

AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, OXFORD 

FROM SHEETS OF THE FIRST EDITION 

1965 

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 



PREFACE 

HINDOSTAN is, technically, the Indus and Granges basins; 
and it is with the music of that part of India that this book 
primarily deals. It contains reference also to the system of 
the Carnatic, though that has been more fully treated of in 
C. E. Day s Music of Southern India and the Deccan. 

The study of Indian music is of interest to all who care for 
song, and of special interest to those who have studied the 
early stages of song in mediaeval Europe or ancient Greece. 
For here is the living language of which in those we have 
only dead examples. It is hardly possible in the case of 
modern European Folk-song to study melody pure and simple, 
for we have no large body of such song of which we can 
certainly say that it was not influenced at all by the current 
conception of harmony. But here is melody absolutely un 
touched by harmony, which has developed through many 
centuries tendencies which have the force of laws ; and the 
examination of these enables us to some extent to separate the 
respective contributions of melody and harmony to the final 
effect in our own music. Those to whom, this aspect of the 
subject appeals are recommended after glancing at Chapters 
I and II to look at Chapters VI, VII, VIII, and XIL 

Others may be more interested in that technical side of the 
art which tabulates the facts of song, and their taste has been 
consulted in Chapters IV and V ; others, again, to whom the 
main charm of the music lies in the memories of India which 
it revives, may find more of what they would care to read in 
the Introduction and the first three chapters. 

In the hope of being useful to those who may wish to make 
further investigation into the subject a large number of 
technical terms has been admitted into the text. These have 
almost always i&gt;een, translated wh^re t&ey opcur. and they 

1C t\ 1U ^ 4 V* I * 1 i V / *\*1 1 \ * i T t I fi t K /t W*$&M ** 



vi PREFACE 

appear also in the Index. It would, however, take more than 
one volume to do justice to all the details, and they have not 
as a rule been elaborated except to illustrate some principle. 

Two branches of the music have been left untouched the 
instruments and the notation. About the latter there is very 
little to say except that it is a Tonic Sol-fa notation of which 
the various local scripts and special signs are easily mastered. 
The typical instruments have been admirably described and 
illustrated by Day ; the more interesting part, the technique, 
can, of course, be communicated only orally, with the instru 
ment in hand. But India is now, instrumentally, at the same 
stage as mediaeval Europe, with a great variety of means of 
supporting the voice but absolutely no sense of orchestration ; 
and though a close study of its instruments would probably 
reveal more than one ancestor of those which our orchestra 
employs, it would hardly throw much light on any principle 
of art, and has therefore been omitted. Exception has, how 
ever, been made in favour of the drum, the treatment of which 
is possibly unique. 

The India Society have done this book the honour of pur 
chasing copies for distribution to their members for the year 
1913. If Indian readers should open it and should be sur 
prised to find the facts given differently from the way to which 
they are accustomed, they are asked to remember that as there 
is no one system which is applicable to the whole country, so 
the circumstance that one set of facts is quoted rather than 
another need not vitiate the argument ; and it is hoped that 
they will look with a lenient eye upon many solecisms in 
spelling which are due to sheer ignorance. 

The author offers his sincere thanks to many who have 
helped him in all sorts of ways to gather materials for this book. 
It would be impossible to make a complete list of them, and he 
hesitates to give an imperfect list. He hopes that the dozens 
of English men and women who offered so much hospitality 
and so many facilities in the winters of 1904 and 1910, the 
ruling princes and their court officials who arranged oppor 
tunities,, the private gentlemen who organized concerts and 



PREFACE vii 

who were ready to discuss their music technically or generally, 
the numerous musicians who answered with patience and 
courtesy many questions or who played and sang for many 
hours, down to his various bearers * who knew what he was 
going to wear before he knew what he was going to do, who 
caught his trains before he had decided by which one to go, 
who produced food and transport under the most unlikely 
and a smiling face under all circumstances, will believe that 
he has not forgotten their kindness; and that some of his 
benefactors may even find in these pages enough to make them 
think it was not wholly wasted. 

It would be sanguine to hope that the book could be free 
from errors both of fact and of proportion. To sift discrepant 
statements and to get the main features into the proper per 
spective would have demanded a longer sojourn than twelve 
months. If it is comparatively free from minor blemishes this 
is due to the kindness of several who have read the proofs to 
Dr. Coomaraswamy for Chapters I and II, also for several 
illustrations; to Mr. Abdy Williams for Chapter VIII; to 
Mr. Walter Ford and Mr. E. D. Kendall for some musical 
illustrations and suggestions; to Dr. A. A. Macdonell, Dr. 
L. D. Barnett, Mr. F. W. Thomas, Dr. Felber of Vienna, and 
Dr. Simon of Munich for Chapter X; and to the readers of 
the Clarendon Press for their very careful supervision of 
the whole. Grateful acknowledgement is also made to Mr. 
William Kothenstein for the loan of the copyright of his 
portrait of Eabindranath Tagore (see p. 92). It was decided 
to include this portrait before the poet s name was known to 
Europe ; and now, although the need of making it known no 
longer exists, the portrait is still retained as the frontispiece. 
The appearance there of one who, more than any other, may 
be said to personify Indian music in its broadest sense, may 
serve to remind us of what is surely the truth, that music does 
not reside in those designs and devices which can be imprisoned 
in symbols and committed to paper, but that it comes and goes 
only upon the lips or the fingers of men who are able to feel, it 
or to create it. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



INTRODUCTION 

The understanding of music as affected by national characteristics, 1,2; 
by an antiquated system, 3 ; by the absence of harmony, 4, 5 ; by difference of 
content, 6, 7. Causes of the particular form taken by Indian music due to 
the conservatism of India, 7 ; to its size, 8 ; to its climate, 9, 10. A concert, 
11-13. The future of Indian music, 14-16. 

CHAPTER I 
A MUSICAL DIARY 

Conditions under which these songs were collected and caution with 
which they should be received, 17, 18. Chanties and labour songs, 19-21. 
Occupation songs, 20-7. Nagpur, Central Provinces, 29-31. West coast, 
32-8. Travancore, 39-45. Maratha bards, 46, 47. Conclusions, 48, 49. 

CHAPTER II 

A MUSICAL DIARY (continued) 

Garh walls, 50-6. Gurkhas, 57, 58. Panjabis, Cuttack dance, 59. 
Bhavnagar, 60, 61. Lullabies, 62-7. Children s songs, 68. Conclusions, 
69-72. 

CHAPTER III 

LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 

Absence of the historical sense, 73, 74. Legend, 75-82. History, 83-5. 
The present day, 86-90. Subbanna and Seshanna of Mysore, 86. Rama- 
chandra of Trivandrum, 88, 89. Sourendro Banerji of Calcutta, 88. Chandra 
Prabhu of Bhavnagar, 90. Rabindranath Tagore, 92-9. 

CHAPTER IV 

THE SCALE 

The facts of folk-song and folk-instruments, 100-4. List of Sanskrit 
authorities, 105. Technical terms, 106-8. The gramas, 109-12. Bharata, 
113. Date of his system, 114. His twenty-two &rutis, 115-18. South India, 
119, 120. Transilient scales, 122-6. The &uti in practical music, 127-9; 
and in European music, 130-3. 



TABLE OP CONTENTS ix 

CHAPTER V 

MODE 

Scale and mode, 134-6. Indian conception of mode, 137-9. The Greek 
parallel, 140-3. Mode in actual practice, 144, 145. Appoggiatura, 146, 147. 
Absolute pitch, 148. Grama and Rug, 149. Ancient and modern mode, 150. 

CHAPTER VI 
RAGA 

The table of Rdgs, 151, 152. Appropriate times and seasons, 153. Sources 
of Raga, 154, 155. Tessitura, 156. A Rag is not a tune, 157 ; but it conforms 
to law, 158, 159. Conjunct motion, 160-2. Harmony and harmonization, 
163, 164. Instances of Rag, 165-9. Re-entrant Rags, 170. The drone, 
171-3. Comparison with European melody, 174-6; and with the ecclesi 
astical modes, 177, 178. Imitation, 179. The intervals chosen in melody 
have no basis in harmony, 180. 

CHAPTER VII 

GRACE 

Grace is inherent in the note, not an appendage to it, 181, 182. Two 
main kinds of grace, 183. Comparison with Scotch graces, 184, 185; and 
Hungarian, 186. Grace in the Sanskrit theory, 187. The Mohammedan 
Tappa, 188, 189. Grace may be traced to Sanskrit pronunciation, 190 

CHAPTER VIII 

TALA 

Stress and quantity, 191, 192. Sanskrit metres, 193-200. The transition 
from poetical to musical metre, 201-3. Metre in music, 204-8. The Carnatic 
system of Time, 209-14. The Hindostani system, 215, 216. Comparison 
with the European system, 217-24. 

CHAPTER IX 

DRUMMING 

Indian and European drumming, 225, 226. Drums, 227. Drum-words, 
228, 229; drum-phrases, 230; and drum-variants, 231, 232. Instances, 
233-40. Augmentation and diminution, 241 ; and convergence and 
* cumulation , 242. The drum used ornamentally not structurally, 243-5. 



x TABLE OF CONTENTS 

CHAPTER X 

THE SAMAN CHANT 

The Rgveda accent, 246-8. The Samaveda, 249-52. Its form , 253, 
254 ; its rhythm, 255, 256 ; its scale, 257-9 ; its original nucleus, 260. 
Consonance, 261, 262. The G-andhdra grama, 263. The Saman scale as 
transilient, 264. The musical hand, 264, 265. The early Greek scale, 266. 
Instances of Saman chant, 266-73. Notation, 273. Some technical terms, 
274-6. A vocal scale, 276-9. 

CHAPTER XI 

FORM 

Am$a and drone take the place of our dominant and tonic as the basis of 
form, 280, 281, The Kirfliavam, 282-5. Other forms, 286. The Khyal, 
287-99. Subsidiary forms, 299, 300. Specimens of Rags, 301-16. The 
cycle of Rags, 317-19. 

CHAPTER XII 

MELODY 

Melody is homogeneous, 320-2. Conjunct and disjunct motion, 322-8. 
Climax, 328-30. Tessitura, 330-4. Rhythm, cross-metre, 334-6. Analysis 
of a European, 337, and of an Indian melody, 338. Their characteristics 
contrasted, 338-42. 

PAGE 

APPENDIX I 343 

APPENDIX II 345 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 346 

GLOSSARY AND INDEX 353 



LIST OF ILLUSTKATIOSTS 



Rabindranath Tagore. From a drawing by W. Rothenstein Frontispiece 
PLATE 1. Music party. Detail from a picture (seventeenth 

century) in the collection of G. N. Tagore . To face p. 14 
PLATE 2. Maria Gonds. Circular dance 

Gonds and Kan wars. Slow dance, with anklets 
Malyas dancing 

Malayan women dancing To face p. 30 

PLATE 3. Kashmiri bin-player 

Nagasaram-players, Tanjore .... To face p. 46 
PLATE 4. Ragi-grinding 
Panans 

Schoolmistress, Tanjore To face p. 63 

PLATE 5. Musicians. Detail from an eighteenth-century 
Rajput cartoon in the collection of A. K. 

Coomaraswamy To face p. 73 

PLATE 6. Detail from a picture of the Surrender of Kan 
dahar in the collection of Sitaram Lai of 

Benares. Seventeenth century . . . To face p. 77 
PLATE 7. Mughal drawing, seventeenth century, of a bin- 
player, from an original in the collection of 

G. N. Tagore To face p. 78 

PLATE 8. Dancing girl, South India To face p. 80 

PLATE 9. Portrait of Numa Khan Katawant, a musician of 
the court of Jahangir, from a picture in the 

collection of A. K. Coomaraswamy . . . To face p. 83 
PLATE 10. Seshanna, vina-player, Mysore 

Aiknath Vishnu Pandit, vina-player, Poona . To face p. 86 

PLATE 11. Ranganna, drummer, Mysore .... To face p. 225 

PLATE 12. Bhai Santu, drummer, Amritsar .... To face p. 227 
PLATE 13. Group of instruments. From the collection in 

the Museum, Bangalore To face p. 228 

PLATE 14. Samagah, Madras 

Samagah, Bangalore To face p. 264 

TABLE 1. Hindostani Rags To face p. 151 

TABLE 2. Folk-song variants To face p. 154 



Absolutely there is progress, but relatively there is 
none. Things are better, perhaps; but man is not 
positively better : he is only different. His virtues 
and vices undergo change, bat on the balance of the 
account there is no profit. A thousand things move 
on, and nine hundred and ninety-eight go back : that 
is progress. And in that there is not much to be 
proud of, but plenty to take comfort in. 

AMIEL. 



INTRODUCTION 



PEOPLE who have lived in India have often asked, with various 
inflexions of voice,, e Do you like or, Do you really like Indian 
music ? The more one thinks what the answer to this should be, 
the more it seems to resolve itself into another Do you really 
understand it ? to which there can, of course, be no final answer. 
Indeed, it would be difficult with regard to our own music to reply 
satisfactorily to the question, or to do more than put down a few of 
the points that need to be understood. 

History crystallized at any given moment into convention, or 
summed up popularly as association, plays a large part in all that 
we hear. When we are listening to music and think we are 
{ understanding it, we are often making no great intellectual effort 
at all ; our mind is really working in well-worn grooves and exer 
cising little judgment. We listen to a sonata of Beethoven or 
Brahms which is new to us, as a boy reads a new specimen of his 
well-known and accredited brand of Weyman or Kipling and finds 
much what he expected. But when we are confronted with a new 
composer, and these conventions seem for the moment to be dis 
regarded, when an addition to the orchestra, a new treatment of 
the voicq, an unfamiliar harmony, unconventional counterpoint, or 
a recast of structure distract our attention from the main issue, 
there is a great deal to understand and we are apt to flounder. We 
do not ( like 3 the music becau.se we do not altogether understand 
it. It is sometimes thought that understanding is not necessary 
to liking : that music is like a peach a thing to be enjoyed, not 
understood. Without denying that the senses can convey to us 
things of which the mind can give no account, it may be asked 
whether there is not a point of view from which even a peach 
requires to be understood. Do we not like it more, that is, under 
stand more by it, amongst the associations of a sunny garden, or 
with a pleasant companion, and could a man like it understand it 
at all if only peaches stood between him and starvation, or if he 



2 INTRODUCTION 

were under sentence of death ? A piece of scenery is truly enjoyed 
only in proportion as a man knows what he is looking for and 
realizes what he has found. It is a synthesis, but it is analysable, 
even if we do not consciously analyse. It is the same with music. 

Another difficulty in hearing music consists not in the departure 
from the old-established methods so much as in the substitution of 
new and strange conventions and associations. Cosmopolitan as 
the music of Europe is, we still feel the distinction of nationality. 
In a song by a foreign composer, whether the words are translations 
from his language or are originals in our own, we are conscious of 
passages in the music itself which to us, do not seem, to be quite 
the natural expression of the sentiment of the song. A German 
hardly seems to get at the conciseness nor a Frenchman at the 
dignity of what we feel. And it is a true instinct which leads 
singers to employ the language of the foreign composer rather 
than a translation, even when it is by Paul England at his best, or 
than the original English, even when the words are by Scott or 
Burns. Again, it is difficult for us to seize the point of thought 
of a Moussorgsky or a Ravel, not merely because they are new, but 
because they select and develop special aspects of our common 
heritage of European music. We might summarize such distinc 
tions by saying that music which is to move the listener must be 
for a German solid and profound, for a Frenchman pungent and 
antithetical, for a Russian poignant and elemental, while we our 
selves find our account best perhaps in humour verging on irony. 
At the same time the modifications of the general trend of European 
musical thought, as it is taken up into this or that national mind 
are slight, and the differences of idiom hardly more than dialectical 
we are still travelling in the mother country, but, for the moment, 
in an unfamiliar part of it. But when we look beyond the intense 
cultivation of Western democracies, away from the spirit of com 
petition, the method of science, and the claims of c efficiency , to the 
calm of the East, where a man s life is his own or at most his 
family s concern, rather than the State s, where there is time to 
live it, where truth is found neither in analysis nor compromise, 
and spiritual food is not contained in tabloids, we do not know 
what to make of music which is dilatory without being sentimental 
and utters passion without vehemence. 

Another kind of music which has for us an unfamiliar convention 



INTRODUCTION 3 

is the polyphony of the Middle Ages. Here it is not the place hut 
the time that is unfamiliar; we have suddenly thought away four 
centuries of our civilization. We step aside from the hattle of the 
styles to contemplate achieved beauty. We wonder where now 
there are such workmen as those who huilt these melodies, what 
their secret was, and what the life of which these were the expres 
sion. They move us like forlorn hopes and lost joys, like the places 
we knew when we were children, like the land to which Blake 
hurried home from Santa Cruz. They appeal hy their freslmess 
and strangeness, hut still more by an intimate familiarity. As 
an Englishman who happened to see for the first time the slope of 
a Sussex down would feel, apart from its intrinsic beauty, that it 
was the most English thing that he ever saw, so from, these, apart 
from their intrinsic beauty of tone, the man of religion gets best 
at that truth which is beyond all limit and condition. Here the 
different convention helps rather than hinders him; just as his 
deepest intimations of those thoughts which are beyond words are 
conveyed to him more easily in Elizabethan language and in Hebrew 
phraseology than in any other form. It is this strange familiarity, 
which we are conscious of in Indian melody, that makes us sure 
that " though our language is different and our habits are dissimilar, 
at the bottom our hearts are one ". 

But more imagination is needed to place ourselves at the point 
of view from which we may enjoy the method of early folk-song, 
that is, of melody conceived apart from harmony ; and it is very 
difficult for those who have thought all melody with an under 
lying harmony, tacit or explicit, to accept it without harmony, 
except after long practice. Consequently they are seldom asked so 
to accept it ; except for specialists, no folk-song is published with 
out accompaniment. The problem is a difficult one, for if a 
harmonized folk-song, like a restored cathedral, is a persistent lie, 
yet a folk-song without harmony seems, at any rate for most of us, 
to fall to pieces, like a picture without perspective. There is 
another connexion between harmony and melody more intimate 
still, whereby harmony is no longer a mere adornment to melody 
which can be added or not, at will, but a vital factor influencing 
the actual structure of the melody itself. We may harmonize, if we 
please, Green Sleeves* or c Walsingham or the Agincourt Song- 1 
without doing them much harm ; but if harmony, as we understand 



4 INTRODUCTION 

it, had been in the air these tunes could never have come to birth. 
A tune is just a musical sentence, paragraph, or chapter. And 
a sentence consists of important and unimportant words, and is 
not a string of dictionary words. In the same way a tune consists 
of important and unimportant notes, and depends for its convincing 
ness upon a judicious management of these. But the principles 
upon which this * importance depends are different for melody and 
for harmony. 

The most obvious thing about harmony is that certain combina 
tions are more euphonious than others; the more euphonious are 
dwelt upon, and the less euphonious skimmed lightly over. The 
essence of harmony lies in substantive y and passing } notes, and 
its progress consists in a training of the ear by which more and 
more passing ; notes become substantive . The very various 
c chords * that arise in this process give a distinct colour, i. e. im 
portance, to the note to which for the moment they are applied. 

On the other hand, the most obvious thing about melody, a 
succession of single notes, is that the tune lies high or low, that 
it has, as we say, a high tessitura or the reverse. This implies a 
level on which as a whole the song rests, and in comparison with 
which its salient passages are high or low. c Laws } of melody 
spring into existence as the distance between these two levels, and 
the manner of passing from one to the other, come to be established 
and, later, stereotyped as, for instance, in the ( Final and c Recit 
ing 9 notes of Ecclesiastical music. In the process the intervening 
notes, and others beyond these two salient points, acquire varying 
importance subsidiary to that of the two principal notes; and 
the whole of unharmonized song is laid out with reference to this 
variety of importance. 

But since harmony gives importance, at will, to this or that note 
of the tune, the ( harmonic tune will in its turn tend to travel 
along the most telling points of the harmony and to reinforce its 
crises ; and the significance of such music will be the result of the 
conflict between melodic idiosyncrasy and harmonic necessity. The 
compromise between these two impulses will lead to closeness of 
structure and make for unity, because each checks the tendency in 
the other to free improvisation. Melodic tune, on the other 
hand, contains its law in itself, and it has merely to display that law, 
not to conflict with some other. Provided the laws of melody 



INTRODUCTION 5 

are not transgressed, one particular structure seems no more desir 
able than another ; and this leads easily to a variety and elaboration 
of detail, which blunts the sharp outline of tune and throws the 
weight rather upon definition of mood. The beauty of harmonic 
music is that of tilth and culture; of melodic music, that of the 
briony and the gossamer. 

In Europe the conventions of folk-song do not land us in any 
great difficulties. There is nothing in them which a good artist 
who is content to eschew conceits and lay aside all preciosity 
cannot as a matter of fact sing. There are few unsingable intervals 
because, with the exception of a few people, like the Greeks and 
Hungarians, the scales in use are the common property of the 
whole continent. There are few melodic ornaments or eccentric 
rhythms ; they do not thrive when voices are much used in concert. 
But beyond Europe, at any rate in India, with which we are now 
concerned, it is very different. An enormous amount of convention, 
the growth of centuries, stands between us and the reproduction 
and therefore the appreciation of their melodies, for we understand 
little of any music we can take no part in. And yet no true 
musician would turn his back on it if he were convinced that the 
conventions were interesting in themselves ; still less if he felt that 
there was real art behind the conventions. 

Music in India, as elsewhere, is of varying excellence ; and it is as 
rare perhaps to hear the best there as it is in Europe. If we look 
away, however, from the less worthy kind, which is apt to deal in 
cheap contrast and to indulge in personal display, to the noblest which 
is to be found there, our chief difficulty is to feel the religious element 
in it which an Indian feels. To hold any intelligible language 
about the emotional content of music is difficult; it is still more 
difficult when the content is that subject which every sensible man 
keeps to himself . The range and depth of religious feeling varies 
in different countries, in one land it rides close, in another it sits 
loosely, to ethics, and the manifestations of it look different as they 
proceed from the intellectual or animal extremes of our nature 
from the Vedantists or the Tantriks, from the Fourth Gospel 
or the Song of Solomon. Without questioning the spirituality 
of the religion of Europe or India, we may call the former 
practical and the latter contemplative; though it is difficult to 
say even as much as that without seeming to assert that the 

816113 B 



6 INTRODUCTION 

converse is never true, which would be absurd. But Europe, 
certainly England; thinks poorly of a religion that does not result 
in a good life : while India fixes its attention on the quality of the 
religion ; the amount of realization and of vision it contains, and 
leaves the good life to follow as a natural consequence. India is 
still living the age of Faith. It is no accident; therefore, that the 
nearest analogue we can find to its music is that which culminated 
in the work of the Cinquecentists. Why it is that the Gregorian 
Tones portray a self -surrendering faith we can no more explain 
than we can say why it is that we agree with Heine s description 
of Em* feste Burg as the Marseillaise of the Reformation, or that 
we recognize an undemonstrative pietism in Charles Wesley s tunes 
and an undeniable suitability for their purpose in the hymns of the 
Salvation Army; but we easily feel that none of these can be 
divorced from their age or occasion. And though we may be 
unable to point to definite characteristics in Indian music which 
are due to its impregnation with a most spiritual form of religion, 
yet its extraordinary correspondence in detail both of time and tune 
with the music of Ecclesiastical Europe justifies the view that 
a peculiar outlook on the world, such for instance as the specifically 
religious outlook, does bring as a result a peculiar form of music. 
The best Indian feels towards his music, as perhaps the best of us 
do towards ours, like the Devout Lover : 

Wheresoever my fancy would begin 
Still her perfection lets religion in. 
I touch her, like my beads, with devout care, 
And come unto my courtship as my prayer. 

Of this song, given me by S. M. Maitra, the tune is one 
commonly sung by boatmen in Bengal ; the Bengali words are by 
Indu Bhusan Ray, the translation by Maitra. The mad woman 
wandering about hugging a bundle of rags she has collected, with 
village urchins snatching at them, is a common sight; what is not 
common is the poet s use of such an image to portray the soul s 
close communion with God. 

Thou art my tiny bundle of old torn rags, my dearest lord: and I am 
thine own little mad woman holding thee always on my heart. 

When I am tired I lay myself down under the tree by the river-side, and 
sleep in peace, resting my head on thy bosom. 

In the streets men point the finger of scorn at me ; they laugh at me, 
they throw dust on me. 



INTRODUCTION 7 

Some try to pluck thee from my heart, some tell me to cast thee away. 
Ah ! but how could thy mad woman live without thee, my love ! 

Pressing thee to my breast I go on my way, and neither fear nor falter ; 
this mad mind of mine cannot be touched by any troubled thoughts. 

Long, long years have come and gone, but thou art still the one sweet 
thing that never grows old. With what talisman boldest thou this mad, 
mad soul of mine, my love ! 

My translator said ee Men weep when they hear this song ". 



(Bengali Words) 



BHATIAL (BOATMAN S SONG) 

Andante. J = 72. 
Ex. 
1. 



Sran-ta ho - le no-di tir . .to - ru tal pai tor bu-fce 





ma-tha re - kha . . ni-schin-ta ghu . . mai ... re . . Che-ra 



. krar pu - tu - li . . tu - i 




Che-ra na - krar pu - tu - li tu - i 



mor, &c. 



There is, it is said, no statement which will apply to the whole 
of India except the geographical one that it is east of Suez. But 
three statements can be made about it which no one will be dis 
posed to deny that it is old and large and hot. India has had 
time to forget more melody than. Europe has had time to learn. 
The elements of tone and rhythm have been combined and recom- 
bined, and have left the theory a tangled mass of forgotten systems 
and the practice an ineradicable instinct. The veneration for the 
past because of its remoteness, the mental attitude which looks 
away from the categories of time and space and turns its attention 
upon the essence of the thing itself, the faith which links the 
present closely with the time when the gods walked the earth and 
still points to the visible imprints of their feet all these have 
united to personify every element of their music, and piously to 

1 The reason for this way of writing grace-notes is explained in Chapter VII. 



8 INTRODUCTION 

preserve names and attributes which have long lost their meaning 
so that much of the theory is clear only to those who can read myth. 
Nor on the practical side has extemporization, as it is there under- 
stoodj heen learned in a day, nor even in the lifetime of any 
individual ; it is, just as much as their fluent public speaking, an 
inherited instinct of the race. This is, of course, bound up with 
another peculiarity, the disinclination to spoil a good memory by 
reliance on the written word or note. The writer heard two girl 
violinists at Tanjore play by heart in unison for five minutes, and 
they never once betrayed by a wrong note or by false intonation the 
fact that they were two and not one. But it is age-long practice 
rather than memory which has placed at the command of the 
best singers that inexhaustible wealth of variation with which they 
make a melody their own, that gift of improvisation which takes on 
an epic quality, as all crafts do that are handed down from father to 
son. To walk on the Old Trunk Road is, it has been said, to step 
into a chapter of Genesis ; and in the same way we catch, in these 
immemorial cadences, the very spirit of the rhapsodists of Homer. 
Their music is old, but with an age like the eternal youth of 
Greece, not with a second childhood like the stereotyped formulas 
of the Troubadours. 

The size of a country is to be reckoned not in square miles but 
by its travelling facilities or their absence. The Norwegian valleys 
of Helgedal and Lejra Elv are ten miles distant at their nearest 
point ; but as far apart practically, and as different linguistically, as 
Devon and York. Indian dialects have been variously computed at 
141 and 183 ; it is probably within the mark to say that India 
comprises 50 peoples, each ranging from thousands to millions, who 
are mutually unintelligible. If it cannot at present be shown that 
music and language follow geographically the same lines, it is patent 
that in each the means of expression is based upon the same general 
principles of phonetic decay, antithesis, exegesis, and so on, and that 
both deepen in secluded communities and broaden upon the stream of 
a universal currency. And the hundreds of names of Indian Rags, 
and many more if we count all the variants which, coming from 
different parts of the country, are included under the same name, are 
there to show that mood behaves in all respects like dialect. This 
isolation of the village or the tribe has been repeated in the isolation 
of the court. The method of Gwalior has been firmly marked off from 



INTRODUCTION 9 

that of Lueknow or Indore, and these from the methods of Mysore 
and Tanjore and Trivandrum. Such places formed centres in 
which local usages were summed up and tabulated ; and music that 
was born in secluded valleys and in trackless deserts was there 
nursed by royal patronage. If it is too soon to say that the 
patronage is withdrawn, there are signs that it is rapidly diminish 
ing; and, as for the seclusion upon which this reflective music has 
so largely thriven, there can be little pride in his profession left to 
a singer when gramophone records of his best songs can be bought 
in any large town. In spite of all this it is difficult to believe that 
Music will lose heart and depart from the earth, least of all from so 
poetical a race. Alter erit turn Tiphys, et altera qiiae vehat Argo 
Delectos heroas. 

Lastly there is the climate, the effect of which is twofold. Since 
life is lived tinder the simplest conditions and much in the open air, 
day being turned into night and night into day, all times of the 
twenty-four hours are available, to somebody, for making music. 
And the character of the music is felt, far more than in Europe 
where the conditions are more formal, to depend closely upon the 
hour and season of its performance. It is difficult to gauge the 
strength of this feeling, since those who believe that the beauty 
of the music depends on its being heard at the appropriate time are 
about equal in number to those who do not. The belief is strongest 
where the music is purest, where it is performed for its own sake 
rather than for display, and, like every other musical belief, is very 
old. Another result of the climatic conditions is seen in the sim 
plicity of the instruments. The Vina, the most elaborate and the 
oldest, has not a tithe of the complication of the piano ; for the 
tension of the strings being low, the framework can be simple, 
and the fingers being on the string, all mechanism is dispensed 
with. Nor are the gradations between the best and the worst 
specimens so subtle as in the violin; for the tone is not exposed 
so much to criticism on plucked as on bowed strings. Neither, 
of course, is there any comparison in the cost ; ten pounds will buy 
a good instrument for the player s purpose, and the many tens more 
that may be spent on it are lavished, though not wasted, upon its 
ornamentation. Meanwhile, for simpler requirements, nature pro 
vides the bamboo, out of which an hour s work will fashion a service 
able flute, and man provides the water-pot (cJiatti) over which 



10 INTRODUCTION 

a skin may be stretched to furnish a quite sufficient drum. 1 It is 
not the great heat that matters the difference between midsummer 
and midwinter is no greater than in Europe but the all-pervading 
damp of the rains after the searching heat of June. This swells 
the wood and softens the glue and so breaks down the tone of 
elaborately constructed instruments such as we employ. 

We have spoken of some difficulties of understanding music 
which are due to an unfamiliar convention of time or place, or to 
the absence of a convention to which we are accustomed, or to the 
presence of a content which appeals less forcibly to us ; we have also 
considered the effect on the particular music which is under dis 
cussion, of the conservatism, the broad expanse, and the climate of 
India. One more cause of the particular form which this music has 
taken is to be found in the language of the country ; for speech is 
logically, if not also historically, prior to song. Sanskrit, with an 
infusion of Persian in the north, and in the south incorporating 
relics of still older tongues, is the basis of all Indian languages. 
Its pure resonant vowels and clear-cut consonants present the least 
possible obstacles to good vocalization. The fact that quantity 
counts for more than accent in its pronunciation has made metre 
rather than rhythm the decisive element of musical time. The com 
bination of resonant vowels and a metrical language has led to the 
development of vocal rather than instrumental music. And since the 
voice employs equable force of tone rather than violent dynamic 
changes, its deficiency in this respect has -been made good on the drum. 

That is perhaps as far as the printed page can go in presenting 
to the eye what can only be apprehended by the ear. To suggest 
the effect of that which even musical notation only faintly shows, 
we may borrow a device from the poets. When Homer wanted 
his reader to feel that Helen s beauty was worth all the ten years 1 
agony of Troy, he made him listen to the old men on the walls 
talking about her ways as she had moved amongst them in their 
youth. In that spirit we may read the diary of Pierre Loti in 
the fifth chapter of his Elude; and those who have never heard 
what he speaks of may divine what he means, while those who 
have heard it may take pleasure in his accuracy of observation and 
truth of feeling. 

1 Mrdanga, the general word for drum, means * clay-body . 



INTRODUCTION 11 

" About four o clock in the afternoon., when the midday heat has 
passed, the musicians of the Maharajah s orchestra, who have been, 
placed at my disposal for a few hours, enter with noiseless steps, 
bow ceremoniously, and take their seats on the carpet which has 
been spread for them in the verandah. 

" In the clear-cut profile and dainty features you recognize at once 
the artist. Gold tinselled turbans are on their heads, and diamonds 
in their ears. A fold of silk, touched here and there with gold leaf 
and disposed in the classic style, is thrown over the shoulder and 
leaves free one side of the body and an arm covered with bangles. 
From their light drapery steals a faint scent of rose-water. 

" They have brought large instruments with brass strings ; giant 
mandolins and overgrown guitars with the scroll of the finger 
board ending in the head of some monster. These guitars differ con 
siderably from one another and are intended to produce very 
different effects ; but they have all of them large sound-boards, and 
occasionally, at the ends of the finger-board, hollow globes looking 
like fruit on a branch. They are painted, gilded, inlaid with ivory ; 
they are old, well seasoned, and valuable. The mere sight of these 
queer shapes awakes in me a feeling of mystery the mystery of 
India. The musicians smile as they show me them. This one is 
to be caressed by the finger, that to be stroked by the bow, a third 
to be plucked with a mother of pearl plectrum, and there is one 
which is to be played actually by rolling along the strings a little 
oval piece of ebony. Refinements, these, such as our Western 
musicians have never known. Then there are drums tuned to 
different notes and child singers sumptuously dressed. A pro 
gramme specially printed for me is put into my hand containing 
the melodious polysyllables of the performers names. 

" By five o clock they are all there, a score of them, seated on 
the carpet in the growing twilight while the punkah swings 
languidly overhead. And now the monster at the end of each 
guitar has reared its head and the concert is going to begin. 
What devastating sounds will issue, doubtless, from instruments of 
such a build, and what a din from the drums ! I wait, nerving 
myself for much noise. Behind the players is an archway standing 
out against a white porch through which a group of the Maharajah s 
soldiers are seen standing in the rays of the setting sun, their tur 
bans glowing in the red light to a deeper red, while the musicians 



12 INTRODUCTION 

form a dim cluster in deep shadow. The sight of their serious faces, 
and the fixed look with which they regard each other rather than 
any actual sound, tells you that the concert has begun. 

" A note is held on pianissimo, almost too high for the ear to 
distinguish, like the opening phrase of Lohengrin, and then through 
several and various developments passes into a rhythmic move 
ment without any increase in the body of sound. Astonishing it is, 
this almost silent music issuing from such powerful strings ! It is 
like the buzzing of a fly imprisoned in your hand, or the rustle of 
a moth s wing against a window-pane, or the death struggle of a 
dragon-fly. One of the players holds in his mouth a little steel im 
plement, and by the vibration of his cheeks produces the sound of 
a whispering fountain. Another, on one of the largest of the 
guitars, coaxed by the hand as if the player were afraid o it, keeps 
up on the same notes a prolonged Tuwhoo ! like the blurred note of 
an owl, whilst a third instrument, muted, gives the sound of the surf 
on a distant beach. Then there are taps on the edge of the drum 
head with the finger tips which your ear can hardly detect. Sud 
denly jerks and jolts, utterly unexpected, introduce a mad fit of two 
seconds duration ; the strings vibrate at their full length, and these 
same drums, struck differently, utter deep, dull sounds like the lum 
bering stampede of elephants over hollow ground, or the rumbling of 
a subterranean torrent in some boiling chasm. Then in a moment all 
grows quiet again, and relapses at last into the whisper with which 
it began. 

" Seated cross-legged on the ground a young Brahman with 
wonderful eyes holds between his knees an object whose lack of 
finish contrasts strangely with the refinement of the rest. It is 
a rough earthenware jar containing pebbles, and its large opening 
fits closely to the convex of his bared chest. The volume of tone 
increases or diminishes according as he leaves the jar open or closes 
it by pressing it to his body. His extraordinarily agile fingers draw 
from it sounds now twittering, now booming, or again, when the 
pebbles rattle inside, hard and dry like pattering hail. 

" When the melody of one of these guitars makes itself felt above 
this clamorous silence, it is with a sort of wail by which the sound 
is dragged from one note to the next, an intense and passionate 
moan of rising grief, and the sobbing melody instead of being 
drowned is reinforced by the tumult of the unearthly drumming. 



INTRODUCTION 13 

All this brings the listener into closer touch with the poignancy of 
human suffering than the supremest moments o Western music 
ever do. . . . The melodies do not, however, speak to us of sorrows 
so remote or so unintelligible as those of a Mongol or a Chinaman. 
If not at home in them, we seem at least to understand them. 
They depict the pain of a highly wrought nature which, though it 
has travelled down the centuries by another path, is yet not radically 
different from our own. And the gipsies, though through the 
medium of a less civilized music, have made us to some extent 
familiar with these forlorn and feverish accents. 

" The human voice had, I found, been kept for the end. One 
after another tiny fragile-looking boys in rich attire, with eyes 
almond-shaped and over-large, executed bravura passages with 
bewildering rapidity. The voices they once had were now broken 
already dying, as it were. A man in a gold turban conducted 
them, to the sound of a truly awe-inspiring prelude, by holding 
them with his eyes, his head lowered like that of a snake fascinating 
a bird; and you knew that he was mesmerizing them and could, if 
he pleased, force to breaking point the delicate structure of their 
frail organs. The words they articulated to their minor cadences 
were a prayer to appease an angered goddess. 

" Last of all came the turn of the priwo uomo, a handsome man 
in the prime of life. He sings and acts for me the laments of 
a young girl deserted by her lover. Seated like the rest on the 
ground he is at first buried in thought ; his brow puckers ; his eye 
darkens. Then his voice breaks out with the incisive wail of an 
Eastern bagpipe. In his extreme high notes you are still aware, by 
its harshness, that the voice is a man s ; but in the heart-broken tones 
I tear and it is a revelation to me the very song of anguish ; 
and his play of feature and the tense motions of his tapering 
fingers accentuate the agony of his despair. 

" These players and singers are the servants of the Maharajah. 
They are to be heard every day within the guarded stillness of his 
palace walls, while menials pass to and fro with a cat s footfall, or 
stand with hands joined in supplication. How far other than ours 
must be the thoughts of this Monarch s heart ; how different his 
outlook upon the sorrow of life, and of love, and of death ! But 
music like this, uncommon in character and distinguished in per 
formance, reveals to me one little corner of his soul better than did 



14 INTEODUCTION 

our short and formal interview, spoiled by its tiresome punctilio and 
by the constraint of a language not my own/ 

Not all Indian music is at this level ; and one who determines to 
hear the real thing must be content to pass hours of boredom and 
traverse tracts of philistinism, ignorance, and want of skill before 
he has his reward as, indeed, may be the case nearer home. But 
when it comes there is no mistaking it. No doubt there is often 
that added charm which we get, for instance, in reading poetry in 
a foreign language, in which the unfamiliar words contain a poetry 
of their own apart from the poetic use of them ; the very naivete 
of the melody and the old-worldliness and other- worldliness of the 
setting in which it is heard often compel our feeling for beauty 
even in very humble specimens of the art. We lose, perhaps, by not 
understanding the words, but less than we might expect. All their 
burden is the simplest desires and the simplest fears the unwearied 
iteration of Miserere Domine, and the unwearying tale of human love. 

Causes have been here assigned for this music being what it is ; 
and it would seem that the music will not change until the causes 
change. Of these the language and the climate are two constant 
factors. It is shown in Chapter VIII that language, especially 
verse, has had a determining effect upon the rhythm of the music ; 
and the climate, besides affecting the question of instruments, 
diminishes the enterprise which is necessary for concerted music. 
So far, then, it may be predicted that the music will remain metrical 
rather than rhythmical, vocal rather than instrumental, and in 
dividual rather than concerted. The other two factors were the 
conservatism and the large area of the country. This large area 
has already been somewhat contracted, and is likely to be still more 
contracted in the future, by easier and cheaper means of communi 
cation ; the effect of this, musically, should be to reduce the variety 
of Rag and Tdl, and to make the dialects conform to some 
common standard. The conservatism will, no doubt, die hard. It 
seems to many as if all hope for music lay in recovering the tradi 
tions and the knowledge which made it so fine in the past. They 
believe that art can only prosper under munificent patronage, and 
that when that is removed art must die. In that they may be 
right ; but when they go on to say, or to imply, that the materia 
tecJimca of the art, its precise formularies as they existed in those 



PLATE 1 




INTBODUCTION 15 

days, must be sought out and quickened into life, as the only means 
o awakening an interest which has fallen asleep, they are on more 
debatable ground. Music cannot stand still. Its whole essence 
consists in finding short cuts to old routes. In the process it does 
many things that are afterwards seen to be regrettable ; they die 
off, that is all, and the art lives on. The whole of our musical 
history is full of instances of this. We can appreciate the pope s 
prohibition of the sharp leading note or Mendelssohn s annoyance 
at the methods of Berlioz by considering the sort of reception we 
gave to "Wagner s substantive sevenths and chromatic harmony, 
now become commonplaces, and are giving to French whole-tones 
and to German pure dissonance. Life is too short to spend wholly 
in living in the past, and human needs are too imperative to be 
satisfied by proxy. It is inevitable that the multiple means of 
expression which Indian music has at its command will be reduced 
in number, that the fine edges of them will be worn down, and that 
the real needs will be expressed more simply. For, after all, a man 
sings because it is a splendid thing to do, and because he cannot 
help it; and when that is really the case he is not going to be 
fettered by obsolescent rules. 

The process of simplification has already begun. The Carnatic 
system frankly ignores the niceties (examined in Chapter IV) of 
intonation. In northern India a number of songs are described as 
in a mixed Rag* or not in a Rag* and yet are accepted and 
enjoyed. The preponderance of common time (Adi, Tlntdl) and of 
| (Eupak) over all the other kinds put together can hardly have 
been as great in the days when the system of thirty-five Tdls was 
invented. The new style } of drumming ignores the drum-words 
and tends to simplify the elaboration of cross-rhythm. 

It is all very sad ; but there can be only one remedy to accept 
the conditions and to make music first in spite of them, and after 
wards on the strength of them. Music which is not built upon the 
immediate instincts and needs of the people is no music at all; 
they must make the formal details of their music just as they 
make their language by actually singing and speaking. It is as 
far from the truth to say that modes and times } must remain 
in their primitive condition as to say that poetry of the twentieth 
century must be in Chaucer s English, or a Bengali love-song in 
Vedic Sanskrit. 



16 INTRODUCTION 

But there are other conditions which need not be accepted. If 
the rulers of native states realized what a death-blow they were 
dealing at their own art by supporting or even allowing a brass 
band, if the clerk in a government office understood the indignity 
he was putting on a song by buying the gramophone which 
grinds it out to him after his day s labour, if the Mohammedan 
star singer knew that the harmonium with which he accom 
panies himself was ruining his chief asset, his musical ear, and if 
the girl who learns the pianoforte could see that all the progress 
she made was as sure a step towards her own denationalization as 
if she crossed the black water and never returned they would 
pause before they laid such sacrilegious hands on SaraswatL 
Excuses may be made for such practices, but there is one objection 
fatal to them all ; the instruments are borrowed. We do not hear 
much about Roman music because it was so easy for them to get 
Greek slaves; and the importation of the gavotte and the minuet 
killed the English morris-dancers. To dismiss from India these 
foreign instruments would not be to check the natural, but to 
prune away an unnatural growth. 



CHAPTER I 
A MUSICAL DIARY 

THE following pages give an account . of musical experiences 
during a tour through India extending over half a dozen months 
of 1910-11. The route, determined by other than musical reasons, 
lay through the Central Provinces, Madras, Bangalore, Mysore, 
Trichur (exhibition), Travancore, Tanjore, Calcutta, Allahabad 
(exhibition), Dehra Dun, Lahore, Jhelum, Bhavnagar, Poona. It 
is hoped that the reader will excuse the use of the first personal 
pronoun to distinguish a traveller s actual experience from infor 
mation otherwise obtained. 

It must be understood that though many of these melodies were 
in queer scales, no attempt has been made, beyond an occasional 
superscript $, b, or Q, 1 where the effect was characteristic, to 
represent niceties of intonation. Where such signs are not ap 
pended it does not necessarily mean that the songs were in the 
normal scale ; perhaps the singers were finding their voice and the 
initial vagaries were not worth recording, or the tune only came 
once or twice though generally it came a great many times or 
perhaps I was not attending. It would have been good to have 
been able to note the exact pitch in each case ; but the absence of 
the proper means made this, except in a few instances, impossible. 
A phonograph cannot be carried on the person or unlimbered and 
brought into action in half a minute, like a camera ; there are also 
conditions, such as distance of the sound, or movement of the 
producer (e. g. in dancing) with attendant dust, which preclude its 
employment altogether. Secondly, as it is impossible for the 
European reader to reproduce the local colour which is imparted 
by curiosities of grace-note or of intonation, it is unnecessary to 
trouble him with them at this stage. And, lastly in attacking 

1 They mean in each case an alteration of less than a semitone, and they are 
in force, like ordinary accidentals, only till the end of the bar. 



18 A MUSICAL DIARY 

a new subject, as for Europeans,, in spite o Captain Day s excellent 
book, this must be called, it is better to treat intonation by itself 
(see Chapter IV). It is but little, in any case, of language, whether 
spoken or chanted, that symbols can recreate for us ; and when, as 
here, the choice lies between symbols which falsify but are under 
stood and symbols which tell the truth but are not readily intelligible, 
there is no doubt which must be adopted to convey a first general 
impression. 

The very simple melodies here recorded may seem to some too 
trivial to have been worth while. But if art is ( doing common 
things in an uncommon way , it seems clear that we must be 
familiar with the common things before we can appreciate the 
uncommon way of doing them. It is just for lack of this, of 
familiarity with such simple things as nursery rhymes and games, 
that we often fail to understand the poetry of a foreign country. 
It does not, however, occur to us that the same is true of music, 
because European music, which is all that most of us know, is 
cosmopolitan, and to understand a foreign composer it is seldom 
necessary to study the Folk-song of his country. He is using 
a familiar language^ but doing unfamiliar things with it. But 
as soon as we leave Europe the language of music is not familiar 
to us, and our first object must be to learn it. We have to be 
humble, and begin with a f simple exercise book. 

One caution with regard to these tunes. It would be a mistake 
to play them on a keyed instrument : they should be played on the 
violin, or sung, or whistled, or merely thought. Not only because 
there is then a hope of their being rendered in natural intonation 
and of getting the sharp edges of the tones rounded by some sort 
of portamento, but also because the temperament of a keyed instru 
ment, in Europe the piano, in India the harmonium, has a unique 
power of making an unharmonized melody sound invincibly com 
monplace. 

In all the melodies the tonic is C unless otherwise stated. It 
may be asked what decided in each case which note was the tonic. 
At the time of hearing the song there was seldom any doubt about 
it, and the doubtful cases are those for which no special note of the 
tonic was made at the time. What exactly decided the point at 
the time is a little difficult to particularize : it was something 
almost personal just as when we read a book written by a man 



A MUSICAL DIAKY 19 

whom we actually know we get a better idea of his meaning than 
others would who do not know him. Tonality depends upon such 
things as the particular turn of phrase, the repetitions, the accom 
panying words, and these may, of course, be reproduced on paper. 
But it is, further, suggested in the extent to which particular notes 
are made essential or accidental, the exact amount of strength given 
to a leading note or to an appoggiatura, the emphasis in the accom 
panying percussion, minute retardations and anticipations, grace- 
notes at particular places, even the mere expression of face and 
hand and most of these defy notation. The sum total of all these 
guides us, without our quite knowing how, to the general plan of 
the music, and thereby to its tonic. For a tonic is a tendency rather 
than a fact. All we could say of our own music is that in propor 
tion as it exists for its own sake, and not for the sake of some other 
thing words, or situation, or programme it has a tendency to 
centre round some one note. Harmony can mark this note with 
exceptional precision ; and we are apt therefore in looking for the 
tonic in an unharmonized melody to supply those harmonies mentally, 
and so to bring what we hope to find. In the Arab tunes, Nos. 
52-4, for instance, it is impossible to say without having heard a 
good deal of Arabian music what they would regard as the tonic. 

Except in street cries and sailors chanties the former in order 
to make the voice carry and to secure prompt recognition, the latter 
to ensure precision of movement we hardly know in Europe that 
melodic impulse which finds vent in the occupation songs l of the 
East. The contrast of the two worlds is epitomized for us even 
before we actually land at Bombay. The A.B. seaman jolts out in 
a gruff practical voice his 

Lights are bright and all s well ! 
and the Lascar follows with a smooth, dreamy 




Khub dekh-ta hai 
(Good watch is kept) 

It is an allegory. On the one hand, the essentials in the fewest- 
possible words r with stress and energy, in matter of fact tones ; on 

1 See Karl Btieher, Arbeit und Rhythmus, Teubner, Leipzig, 1909. 



20 A MUSICAL DLAKY 

the other, pitch substituted for stress, a generalization for a state 
ment of fact, and through it all a suggestion that Time has no 
meaning as opposed to Eternity, with the implication that we are 
in Eternity all the time, though we are apt to forget it. 

Neither street cries nor chanties are common in India in the 
sense in which we understand them. The typical mode of selling 
wares is not to take them to the customer, but to let him come to 
them, sit down, and open an interminable bargain. A small amount 
of coolie labour requires concerted action it is true, and that some 
times necessitates rhythmical motion : but the typical method of 
work is individual innumerable baskets, buckets, bamboo poles, 
contribute their quota, but severally; many shoulders lift the 
dhooly (palanquin) or many heads the grand piano, but the feet 
break step ; many hundreds of hands tnan the ropes of the god s car, 
but the effort, at the instigation of voice or even whip of perambu 
lating priests, is spasmodic. 

At any rate, I heard very few songs intended as rhythmical 
accompaniment to effort, and seem only to have recorded one. Six 
men were on a roof lifting a block of building stone. The foreman 
sang the solo. 

Solo. Chorus. 

Ex.: "" 



3. ffi 3 J -J-^TJ- 



Ar ju - re ja-na-wa-ra ja Ar ju - re ja-na-wa-ra ja 1 

The pull was on the last note of the chorus. 

A common use of song is to give words of command to 
domesticated animals. At a well at Poona the water was drawn by 
a skin let down by two ropes. When the skin reached the water 
one rope was slacked and the mouth of the skin opened. The cattle 
marched slowly down an incline, pulling on the ropes, and, as soon 
as the contents of the skin had been emptied into the trough which 
carried the water out over a neighbouring field, backed again up 
the incline a little slower still. When the well-man started them 
down he sang 



1 The spelling is phonetic. 

a When the superscript accidental is in brackets it means that the note was 
bung sometimes one way, sometimes the other. 



A MUSICAL DIARY 21 

and when, after a minute s interval he backed them up again, 
he sang 

This process went on to my knowledge for three hours, and probably 
many more. 

In the neighbourhood of Madras the wells are worked by the 
picotta. A bamboo pole is balanced crosswise on another ; at one 
end is a weight, at the other a bucket. A man stands at the 
junction of the poles and throws his weight against the full bucket. 
Here there is no rhythmic motion to emphasize,, and there are no 
animals to direct ; it is merely a question of half a dozen hours and 
hundreds of bucketfuls. I was unable in a short stay to find a man 
actually working and singing ; so one was persuaded to come to me 
and sing, a very different thing. This was his melody. The C was 
slightly sharp; the intervals C-B and B-A seemed to be about 
equal. 



6. 






- 



i^ 




Get up on the picotta, Pillaiyar 1 made of cow dung, Pillaiyar made of mud. 
I offer rice, cocoanut, cake, wheat, grain. 

(counts buckets) . . 9, 10, 11 . . 

Have I come here, maiden, only to sleep ? 
The fields all wet are ready to receive seedlings. 
Get bullocks ready to plough, 
Reddish brown, with white horns, 
The central bullock black, with white horns. 
Harness four together, 
Drive them over the wet fields ; 
After the ground is prepared 
The seedlings will grow on the bank of the lake. 

(counts) . . 27, 28 . . 

The river is dammed, 
There are vegetables in the gardens 
And mangoes on the trees ; 

1 Pillaiyar = Ganesh, the belly god. 
816113 C 



22 A MUSICAL DIARY 

I mix these with wheat and curd. 
I have a long distance to go, 
But I am happy with you here my dear. 
Where is your husband ? 

(counts) . . 63, 64 . . 
He is not to be found here. 
He married me and went on board ship. 
If I am a chaste woman, 
The ship will return with my husband. 

(counts) . . 101, 102 . . 
My beloved had sore eyes, 
He was jealous and avaricious, 

(counts) . . 116, 117, &c., &c. 

Melodies like these are appropriate to particular occupations, and 
new words are fitted to them frohi time to time. For the tradi 
tional occupations a new tune is seldom invented. The tune for 
each occupation has a special name. la Behar, every mill-song is 
&jdtsdr y every cowherd s song a ckdchar, and so on. 1 

But one comes across tunes in the making from beggars, fakirs, 
reciters. Some boy acrobats at Bombay gradually formed their 
petitions into 



Ex.: 

7. 



^H^=^^j J ^ U , i J^^i 

We have played and sung to you; let our words be heard. 

On tour with an Indian civilian we inspected a village school. 
After the boys had gone through their gymnastics, the monkey- 
leap , the crocodile crawl ^ and the like, we received the pungent 
and in my case vicarious tribute of marigold wreaths, and the school 
master recited a Sanskrit poem of his own composition in honour 
of the presiding dignitary. Beginning with a mere rise and fall 
of the voice it settled gradually into a set melody. 
Tonic G. ? 



- ^-^=ggfl 



Fakirs at the annual fair at Allahabad, the junction of the two 
rivers, evolved: 

1 See an article by G. A. Grierson in the J. R. A. S., vol. xviii, p. 210. 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



23 



e)=60. Solo. 



EX.2 

9. : 



Gan-ga Ja-mu-na ti - ra - the ka- ra - le Ram-ghata aa-an- an Ha-ri 
Chorus. 



JJ.fr 



Ra -ma mi - la Ram-ghata as -an -an Ha- ri Ra -ma mi -la. 

To the Ganges and Jumna pilgrimage make ; at the Ramghat bathing the 
name of the god Rama you have got (i.e. if you bathe you will get). 

A beggar woman one hundred yards off had a variant of this : 



10. 



53B 



A little further on some boy beggars sang : 



This turned out however to be, apparently, a rendering of 
which was being sung at the time by a celebrated singer 
exhibition, of which two versions were : 
(l) d-56. 



a song 

at the 



Ex. 

12. fflS 



1r_T J J 



fe 



*. 



(2) J=150. 






and further developments : 

(3) d-=48. 

J? ii r M I 



so that it does not do to be too sure that every beggar is a composer 
also. 

1 The italicized a s are inorganic ; they are freely inserted for vocalization. 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



Half a mile away two beggar girls were singing words of which 
I only made out Sdnnd, at the beginning and end : 
J-100. 



Ex. 




Sa 



| 1 



Sa - rl - nS 

Two coolies at Mussouri, driving ponies up the hill with loads, 
answered each other with 



90. 



Ex.2 
14* : 



fiJM= 


j-fl- 


"^h 


1 ! H~~] 


n T^ T^ i 
-E-p * - * 


=={ 



15. _ 

There is a slight resemblance in these, as regards melodic figure, to 
a tune sung by some boys coming home from their work across the 
Maidan at Calcutta though that was rather a song from lack of 
occupation : 

d=75. ^ 

PB-g. fry | J "~^ 

16. **-" J7 ^ 




At Bangalore men and women were pulling a roller over a new 
made road. The voices were rough; the solo enthusiastic but of 
poor tone, and the chorus consequently took some time to settle 
down to the tune. Several of the men punctuated the first of the 
songs with boos and poohs to represent the drum at the places 
marked * ; they were started by the man who scraped the mud off 
the roller. (Alternate four and six-bar sections.) 

J- = 60. Solo. 



Ex.2 






i 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



25 



^m 



Chorus. 




Ex. 



Women. 



* 








Men. 



Chorus. 



ife 



= 



f^J^ITj^ 



\*- r 1 I 



Solo. 



(b) 



Chorus. 



19. 



=&= 



The words of No. 19 were i 

Draupadi, wife of the Pandava king, disguised herself as a beggar to get 
paddy seed for her race to plant in the wilderness. She was afraid of her 
enemies and cousins, the Kauravas. If she was caught her race would have 
to spend another twelve years in the wilderness. If gods fare so, what shall 
we poor mortals do ? 

The next day, after much searching and delay, I found a woman 
who was famous for her songs at n^-grinding. She sat with 
a friend on the ground before a large mortar, and each stirred with 
her pestle sometimes in time with the song, sometimes not. 1 



(Tamil.) Think of Rama. Do not waste time. It is short. Always sing 
of Rama. 

1 See illustration, p. 62. 



26 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



Ex.: 



About Krishna. He used to plague the girls. They complained to his 
mother. His mother told him to be better behaved. 



. a J JTj.rj.ji 



Sin not ; or you will go to hell (Naraka). 

EX. ) v&gt; ^ i r 




(Sanskrit.) Rama is the only true God whom every one thinks of. 



Ex.: 



jj" 



(Canarese.) We have several avatars. This is a world of pain, there is 
no happiness here. Therefore do meritorious deeds. 



Ex.: 
25 J 






A Rajah s son sees a beauty in the street and offers her a lakh of rupees. 






About a wicked Brahman who married a Pariah girl. 

With the last dozen songs or so we have begun to cross the 
rather shadowy line which divides Occupation Songs from ordinary 
Folk-song. 

It was not till I had been some months in India that I found the 
opportunity I had been waiting for of overhearing a folk-melody. 
I awoke at Madras,, about 5.30 a.m., to the sound of singing; it 
was next door, and seemed to come from a woman about her house 
hold duties. In the dim light I scribbled down the following : 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



27 



Ex.: 




Most of the phrases were repeated many times, as many as ten; 
a few only once or twice. The variations were introduced piece 
meal; both sections were seldom varied at the same time, though 
they are shown so here for brevity. The flattening of the D 
appeared to take place only when there was no mordent, and not 
always then. I don t know how long she had been going on; 
what is given took about half an hour to sing. 

This humble melody, improvised without shyness on the one hand 
or any idea of showing off on the other, may serve as an introduction 
to the tribal songs which follow. It shows the way in which they 
were varied and expanded, or would have been if there had been 
time; and the bare themes which are set down in the following 
pages must be imagined as having been so treated. The rapid 
succession of variations made it often difficult to note the tune at 
all, especially as regards that very elusive point, rhythm. The 
earlier melodies may, like eldest sons, be to some extent experi 
ments ; but nothing has been given that I did not satisfy myself 
was substantially correct. The question of quarter-tones will be 
dealt with later; any conclusions that may be drawn from these 
examples as to the general structure of folk-melody will not be 



28 A MUSICAL DIARY 

vitiated by assuming them all to have been as they are written^ and 
as in fact many of them appeared to be sung, in the (untempered) 
tones and semitones of the European just scale. 

From Nagpur, where my tour began, I went to Warsa, a few 
hours distant by train, where a party of Maria Goncls were to march 
in from Moholi, a couple of dozen miles away. Owing to some 
misunderstanding they failed to appear that day at all, and arrived 
only at nine the next morning at the station, our train, the only one 
in the day, being due at ten. 1 We found there a crowd of twenty- 
two under Rainu Patel of Chingli (east of Moholi), a man of fifty, 
with a striking face full of humour and character, the flat nose and 
thick lips of the Gond, and a thick-set figure on bow legs. He 
marshalled his pupils and divided them for singing into two parties 
of ten and twelve. These songs, being the first of the kind I had 
heard, could not be noted with any accuracy. The words of three 
of them were : 

1. The bird is crying. Why is the bird crying ? It is crying with grief 
for its mate. Nowhere can she find her mate. The friend is in grief for the 
friend. She does not find the friend here. In this country he is not found. 
She must go to the lower country and seek him. If she will go far then she 
will find him. 

2. Quickly, sister, make the pej (gruel). 

For twenty or thirty years you have not asked me to make the pej ; why 
do you ask me now ? Where are you going ? 

I am taking the black bullock to the bazar. 

If you go I will go too. 

No, you must not go. If you go they will say See, the brother and sister 
go together . It is like a man and wife going together, and that will be 
a scandal. No, you must not come. 

3. The clouds look like rain. There are big drops falling. Rain has 
fallen in the upper country ; the nalas are full. Everywhere there is ram. 
Dhtmar (boatman), bring quickly your boat. 

What pay will you give me ? 
I will give you the bracelet on my arm. 
I am not married ; what use is a bracelet to me ? 

I have no money in my hand. I will go with (i. e. marry) you. Launch 
your boat. 

They next arranged themselves in a close packed circle for 

1 I mention this not to reproach them or the Malguzar (village headman) 
who organized the meeting and no doubt did his best, but to show by a typical 
instance the sort of difficulties, over and above the mistakes one made oneselt, 
which have rendered these records necessarily imperfect. 



A MUSICAL DIARY 29 

dancing, with Rainu sometimes in the middle, sometimes prowling 
round outside and exhorting individuals. In the second dance they 
linked hands behind each others hacks; in the third they broke 
from their circular into a serpentine movement, and looked like 
a section of a giant centipede crawling about. Most of the dancing 
consisted, here as elsewhere, merely in revolving slowly * widdershins 
with a shuffling gait, bending their bodies towards the centre and 
clapping their hands in rhythm. The interesting point in the 
dancing was the treatment of the blank beat (AAdli). Thus, putting 
R for right foot, L for left, F for forwards, and B for backwards, 
the ordinary rhythms were danced thus : 

Three time 1 2 (3), 1 2 (3), 
RE L F RB, LF RF LB 

Four time 1 2 (3) 4, 1 2 (3) 4, 
RFLFRB LF, RFLFRB LF 

Five time 

1 2 (3) 4 (5), 1 2 (3) 4 (5), 
RFLF RB LF RB, LFRF LB RF LB 

And similarly with 

Six time 1 (2) 3 (4) 5 6 (our |, not f ) 

Seven time 1 2 (3) 4 (5) 6 (7) - 

Another dance of which I was too busy noting the tune to watch 
the feet was in slow tripleted seven rhythm. 




It was full of grace notes of course, but as most of the performers 
chose their own graces, and their own moments to apply them, it 
was impossible to distinguish more than two which enjoyed a 
consensus of opinion. 

Then followed an interval for putting rice on their (Wiols. These 
are barrel-shaped drums with terminal diameters of seven and eight 
inches respectively. Boiled rice mixed with wood-ash was applied 
to the larger end, 1 thereby giving more resonance to the tone and 
lowering the pitch by anything up to an octave. They did not 
tune the dhols to the same note by tightening the braces, nor did 
they aim at any definite interval between the two ends of the dkol, 

1 The lump so affixed is generally made of flour (aa), and goes by that name. 
Iron filings are added when obtainable, for greater resonance. 



30 A MUSICAL DIARY 

by the application of the rice. They brought no wind or strings ; 
they would have played the bamboo flute, but c would have had to 
make one , and there was no time. 

They then formed in a large circle, each with his drum slung, 
with two peacock feathers rising straight up from his pagri, and 
a bunch that looked like grass with beans or pods at the end 
hanging down behind. Between man and man was a distance of 
two feet, which each kept accurate by touching his right-hand 
neighbour during the silent beats of the rhythm, beating In fact 
the silent beat on him. Rainu now danced amongst his men, 
shouting directions every now and then. He was distinguished not 
only by his absence of ornament, but by his abundant good humour 
and zest. The dance began with a wild prolonged shriek ; this was 
followed by a steady monotonous beat on the drums as they walked 
round, apparently to settle themselves at their proper distances. 
Next they adopted a stealthy crouching step, all eyeing the centre, 
to a four-rhythm. The next dance, in three-rhythm, six beats, 
with the fifth and later on the sixth also omitted, or rather supplied 
only on a single drum, showed a limping gait. These were wedding 
dances, and without singing : the only sound beyond the pattering 
and shuffling of feet in the deep sand being an occasional whoop 
after the manner of Scotch reels. Then there was a funeral dance : 
nine men facing another row of nine and advancing as they 
retreated, and vice versa, with linked arms. This should have been 
at night; and they protested that it was f a foolish dance in the 
garishness of day. They chanted, without drums. 

At Raipur a Gond played the bamboo flute (bdnm), an instrument 
with the tone of the clarinet, and blown at the end but without reed : 
it had six holes covered by the left finger tips and right knuckle 
joints. A characteristic of these tunes was the very long crescendoed 
tonic. Assuming the C to be in tune the higher notes were all 
a little flat, the F most so, and the lower one a little sharp ; the C 
itself sharpened a good deal under the overblowing of the crescendo. 



Phonogram. Mlegro. 
29 .3 



f 



PLATE 2 





A MUSICAL DIARY 

b 



31 





=F= 


=F= 






r^ 






=^= 


==3 










Ir r. r r .ir-^g^g^ 



^ 



P 



A Kanwar also played the singara, a sort of attenuated kit. It had 
two strings which the player tuned to C and FJf, and then began 
to play. I asked if they were right, and he altered them with a 
smile to C and G and said they were right now-. The G was used 
as drone, so that the tune was below it ; each section closed on two 
G s. They had also a slow dance with bells fastened below the knee 
like morris-dancers. (See illustration, preceding page.) 

At Trichur (west coast) there was an exhibition of local indus 
tries, and tribal musicians had been brought in. The Mafyas, from 
the spurs of the neighbouring hills, sang : 







; l^u^ , |- n , ^^ 




"^ 3 


^ J^ j i j-^j jr&lt; 

1 1 =B 




1* J J j J 


^ri -L^=t=i 



A handtsome girl makes her appearance with joy/ 
and two of them alternately : 



.^-T, ,- 

82. 



* A handsome maiden became a mother and had a son. She had a dream 
but it appeared to pass the wit of my interpreter to say what manner of 
dream it was. 

In this there was one short passage in fourths which however only 
occurred once, and was gone before I could note it. It is impossible 



32 A MUSICAL DIARY 

of course to get any particular passage repeated unless you know 
and can ask for the words of it : they repeated the whole song by 
request, but the passage did not recur. 

In their dance the left foot, slightly advanced, came on the beat, 
and the weight of fche body, a little bowed, was placed on it. Then 
the leg, and with a serpentine movement the whole body, straightened 
again. 1 



33. 



Towards the end there was more action ; the feet flung higher, the 
right foot turned out, the body facing alternately right and left, and 
so on. Then a, pas sent. The dancer could not get his accompaniment 
(a single singer) to his satisfaction for a long time, and they 
wrangled as to how the tune went. The Kadars who were to sing 
next were sitting by; and one of these broke in with a wildly 
different tune as a suggestion ; but the Malya, was not in the least 
put out, and got his way in the end, which was this, 



34. 



3E 



sung alternately by himself and his accompanist. 

It was now the Kadari turn. One played the kuzlial? He had 
great trouble in getting his reed to speak the tonic (C) properly, 
and cut several before he was satisfied; the Malya dancer did not 
fail to note his distress. It is curious how hard it was to arrive at 
the scale of this instrument. The player had no notion of playing 
a single note by itself, he invariably played a grace with it, showing 
how inseparable grace is from even the simplest phrase. It was 
achieved at last by my holding down his fingers in succession. A 
phrase which frequently occurred in his playing was : 



Ex.: 






1 See illustration, p. 30. 

2 Pronounce, kural Kurdl is the name in Tamil for the first note of the scale 
(Sa). 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



33 



Two Kadars sang : 






36. 



A maiden chewed betel nut, and walked gaily round the streets of 
Coimbatore. 



Ex. 

37. 



Maddale. J[ 



A wedding song : the drum was the maddale of p. 42. 

Next came the Boatmen of Ernakulam, called Felans. 1 First 
a long song with six variations c seven ways ; of singing, he called it, 
L 



Ex.: 
38. 

II. 



j i j 



- n r 

T 7 



j j j j 



III. 




i 




VII. 



"Tpr 



TTTJTTTfl 



IT 



the first four minor, the last three major. No. VII got faster at 
each repetition. The general sense was : Invocation to a deity to 
inspire the singer ; description of a town ; of a palace ; of a temple ; 

1 Vd- rhymes with ( pale . 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



in praise of the Rajah of Cochin (who had opened the exhibition); 
rowing in a boat. Fragments of other boatmen s songs were : 



Ex.: 



89. ift-^ 



4O. : 



Two Pdnans now appeared. This tribe formed in old days the 
band of the Rajah, but has sunk now into the position of an inferior 
caste. They are recognized magicians. An astrologer settles what 
is the form (murti) of the demon, and the Pdnans are called in to 
exorcise it. They perform the exorcism (teydttam) with drum and 
pipe ; occasionally they wear masks. Their pollution distance, that, 
namely, within which they may not approach a Brahman, is 36 feet. 
The usual time of year for exorcism is July and August, when 
demons are apt to be specially prevalent and malicious, when in 
fact the rains have developed a certain amount of malaria. 

A man and his wife sang alternately with a cJiakravddya 1 - and 
a triangle, which divided the eight quavers respectively as 3 -f 2 + 3 
and 2 + 2 + 4, thus: 



EX. 

41. 



Drum. 
Triangle. 

Two other of their tunes are these: 
(Phonogram.) 

~mtf f ~~tt*i 



Two Panan men. 

Tdla.Lp_ 



Chorus. 



Ex.2 
42. : 



Solo. 



g-,|-,|- t [-p-. 
U* k U l 









Dr. L^ 



J?l 



1 * Circular tambourine*, inches diameter, 2 inches deep ; the laces cross the 
lack, and are held in the left hand j see illustration, p. 42. 



Chorus. 



A MUSICAL DIARY 

Solo. 



35 



J ifr U\- 




Panan woman. (Phonogram.) 
Ex. 



, , i P | (Phonogram ends.) 




^ &gt;i ^Tn5** &lt; ^^ 



?E&J 









36 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



They are quite different from the neighbouring tunes ; both have 
a large compass, ten or eleven notes, and both oscillate from tonic 
to dominant, each section closing on the tonic. The woman also 
definitely closed her tune on the tonic, making a pause, which an 
Indian seldom does ; and it is rare to find instances of such disjunct 
motion as in bar 4, where the dominant chord is distinctly formed 
twice. Lastly the^ arrangement of bars in Ex. 43 is elaborate 4 + 
34-4 + 2 + 3 + 3 + 3 + 3; and the quick tripleted rhythm unusual. 

Next day I started for Paddikad, ten uncomfortable miles by 
ekka. Malayans (different from Malyas) were to come in to the 
Traveller s Bungalow and receive their annual present from the 
Sirkar of cloth, rice, coco-nuts, coco-nut oil, chilis, and tobacco. 
They sang, with drum. First a boy of ten as solo with a chorus of 
men and women : 



Ex. : 



3E 



^ 



Ex. 




Ex. 



Ex. 



Then the men alone : 



Ex. jpn 


rrr 


-4 j 


^1 JP 






J""5 J J -I 1 


\ P p p 


~m - 




M~" 


-4F-|/ * ={| 


Maddale, 
Ex.Z57fp 
















F^* 




-. - 1 


1 




1 


T r r r r 
.j*i j^ _ _ 


r r 


r r r 


49.^ 


-t- 


LL-UU rj 









Lastly the women danced. Alternate feet were placed behind, the 
body inclined to that side, and the corresponding hand made a 
motion as if sowing paddy 



meanwhile the men sang 



60. 



Of course all these skeleton themes were considerably varied. As to 

the thirds, though they oscillated a good deal between major and 

1 See illustration, p. 30. 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



37 



minor, there was little doubt by the time the tune was finished as to 
which was intended. Most of the tunes quickened towards the end. 
The performers clapped the time; but as they differed from one 
another it was not easy, on one or two occasions, to make out 
whether they were beating 2 + 2, 2 + 3, or 3 + 3. Probably Ex. 44 
was intended for 2 + 3, but the drag of the chorus soon settled it 
into a 3 + 3, 

At Alleppey, further down the coast, there were Hindu boatmen 
landing Arabs at the pier. The boatmen sang : 



EX.2 

51. : 



The 

Ex. 

52. 


Arabs 

Tonic ? b 

A-p s H \rm -j i, J H- 


_ -j b _j J^ , 







Ex.; 
53. : 



Tonic ? 



gb * J J-f 


^ J HB- 








H r 


. u II J p- 


f-^ ^i 


-^ ? g-~j - * il = 

Tonic ? Chorus. 

Ex fe -IlLf ^ - L -~ 






* r 


r ii ^ r 

Solo. 


^^ J II 

Chorus. 

















quite a different scale. These were short phrases between the strokes. 
Prom Quilon to Trivandrum is a series of lakes and canals formed 
by the silting, in early times, of the alluvium of five rivers. 
Alleppey is about half way ; and the method of cultivation there is 
this. The fields, surrounded by low banks, are, during the rains, 
inundated, and coated with fresh soil. The water is then pumped 
out, and paddy sown. Practically a large part of the country is 
most of the year under water of shallow depth, and locomotion is 
almost entirely by boat. This lends itself to singing. I had two 
opportunities. Once, in an open boat with four men. I was innocent 
of their language and had no interpreter, so that I was unable to 
tell what view they were taking of their passenger, who is usually 
the topic of their song. I had merely armed myself with the 
Malay dlam for c sing * and repeat \ 



816113 



38 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



Ex -ss 



fiS. ^ 4 



T31*-re 









EX.2 

56. : 



PS 



b b 



b b 



57. 



^ 



Most of these began with a short colloquy in monotone between 
a soloist and a chorus. The abrupt ending of Ex. 58 was character- 
Ex. 

58. 

istie. Sometimes, not always, the chorus would come in with the 
last phrase, snapped out with emphasis. In Ex, 59 the B and E 




were distinctly flat, the D appreciably so. The whole gave the 
impression of three approximately | tones, with tonic C. Other 
tunes were : 



60. 



i^ 



^^ 



x ZE 






^ 



Ex. j 



s 



1 



^ 



The other opportunity was on a night journey by valam l from 
Trivandrum to Quilon. A valam is a covered boat in which you 
may balance yourself during the day on a semicircular roof and 
watch a slowly moving panorama of palms, Chinese fishing nets, 
wheel pumps, and naked children, and at night recline inside making 
such account as you may with heat, smells, and mosquitos, or other 
inmates. There were two boatmen, punting ; one in the bows with 
a bass, the other in the stern with a tenor voice. Each kept his 
own pitch accurately : their tonics were a fourth apart, though for 
readiness of comparison all are given here with the same tonic. 
1 Pronounce, wullum. 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



39 



Ex. 

63. 






Ex.; 
64. : 



Ex. ~7 






J.J.J. 



Ex. ~ft~ 
66. 



* J * 






67. : 

Ex. 

68.: 



^a 









69.: 



Ex.; 



SE 



70. Si 

Ex.rfc 



The songs were difficult to catch as they were seldom repeated, and 
were apt to be broken off suddenly and frequently with an f ilia ! as 
a boat loomed ahead in the darkness, or an irava ! as it glided past. 
In Ex. 66 the three D% so marked, and these only, were distinctly 
sharp every time. The songs are given in the order in which they 
were scribbled down by candle light, the different voices being 
shown by the clefs. 

Later on I heard two Negapatam boatmen. As I had succumbed 
to the climate I was obliged to have them to my bedside, in a 
railway waiting-room ; the novelty of the place acted unfavourably 
on the singers, and the whistling and shunting on the listener. 



A MUSICAL DIAKY 



Solo. 




Coda (in unison.) 



When the sails are spread we pray to Allah and Mahomet. 

There is an interest attaching to this. In Bourgault Ducoudray s 
Melodies de jBasse-Bretagne on p. 21 is a tune Le Sabotier . 



Solo. 



Chorus. Solo. 



Chorus. 



Ex.: 



It seems possible that, since French sailors are chiefly Bretons, these 
boatmen may have heard this tune at the French port of Pondicherry 
which is not far from Negapatam; if so, their treatment of it is 
interesting; they have smoothed out the articuktions of its rhythm, 
and bridged the leaps of the melody. 






Ex. 

74. 









Lifting by derrick. 



Carrying passengers through the surf. 



m 



Ex. 

76. 






A MUSICAL DIARY 



41 



Unloading cargo. The superfluous fifth bar in No. 76 which dislocates the 
rhythm was really there. 





R^ ^ ir^ ^~~f r~~i 


ff-r r r | 


_* p _i 


Ex. 

77. 


ggztS HI T^ I 

Lt^ II; 




r LT r r 1 



fr====t =*= c i r r r i p r = 

^ r & 1 " " 1 r Lf ^ 


1" ~ i 

Mf CfT* :| 



Sung in honour of the captain when he comes to Singapore. The streets 
of the town have been cleared for him. 

Trivandrum. A caste of Trivandrum, the Pdudarans, sang the 
following, called Kavidaehindii, in praise of the god Subrahmanya^ 
otherwise called Skanda or Murga. 



Allegro. 




!| 2nd. 



The two versions of Ex. 81, of which the first is like the overture to 
Zampa, were from the same lips. The three omitted bars ; thirteen 



42 



A MUSICAL DIAEY 



1st version. 




instead of sixteen, gave a lift to the melody of Ex. 82. The two 



Ex. 



fcfc 






1st version. 



Ex.=^ 


9ft 


1 




i -JL -J. -JL -Jl * ^ -&- 


_ _j _ __ *~j! 




9 J JJbJ J J J~JJ * aJ * aJ J _^JL 


=\ r "p P=J =| 



2nd version. 



tr V-W J J ^g. v m ^^, *-*-*-& m +-^, 

versions of Ex. 83 were from different singers. They are probably 
in seven-rhythm, but in the absence of any clear indication only 
what appeared to be the time values of the notes has been given. 
The Atj sounded more piquant than the Ab ; as the flattening is 
obviously only a case of Mnsica ficta it does not appear in the 
signature. 

Two Pulaiyar women, shy and tearful, sang 

















Ex. 
84. 


&lt;fo4 n n 
J J-J-J- 


" ^ [ " 


j.j~ 


j.. ^ t j 


s= 


te 

















The second woman began invariably by skipping a beat. This was 
the only song they knew. It was what they sang when they were 
tilling paddy, to this effect : * We were once slaves. There was 
a fire on the estate and the landlord stopped it with a spear. The 
fire got into the fort, and the landlord s men stopped it with their 



A MUSICAL DIAEY 



43 



pistols and shields. His women came out and stopped it with their 
broomsticks/ 
Next two Sudras l from the Maharajah s brass band sang 




* in the Pulaiyar style , whatever that may have meant (the scale 
is tonal). . They spoke English, and one o them gave me some 
information about c two-four and six-eight time. They also sang 
some Sopdnam songs, i. e. those sung on the steps of the temple : 



Voice. 






Udukkm, 



^ 



m 



m 



Tslam. 
6 - 

8~1T~ 



TT^l 






Ex. 
87. 



i 



The udukku is a small drum, shaped like an hour-glass, held in the 
right hand so that the squeeze of the fingers tightens the braces 
and sharpens the tone within the limits of about a sixth. A pea 
at the end of a string swings from the middle and strikes either 
drum-head. The tdlam, lit. time-instrument, was a pair of shallow 
cups of bell metal, about three inches in diameter. This song 
bears marks of genuineness, and the three rhythms and the sug 
gestion of harmony are interesting; but the other is not very 
distantly related, except perhaps for its seven-bar rhythm, to the 
strains of the Salvation Army, which I heard that evening outside 
in the bazar. 

A regular Sopdnam singer also came. He sang in some of the 
five Rdgams peculiar to Travancore : 

1 The fourth of the four castes of India Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, 
Sudras. 



44 A MUSICAL DIARY 

Padi. Puranlva. 



ss. m 



u -*-~^? " +" + v 

Indisha. Indulam. 



m 



Kanakurinchi. 
o 



As far as the mere notes go, there is nothing in these that might 
not be heard elsewhere in the peninsula, except that, whether 
intentionally or not, he sang the P, G, and upper C (especially the 
F) decidedly flat. The predominant notes (see Chap. IV) are 
distinguished by semibreves. The two commonest were said to 
be Indisha and Padi. This group of modes special to one place is 
interesting as proving, what the names of many Rags also bear 
witness of, the strictly local origin of all Rag^ just as the harmonic 
minor is very common in Swedish songs, the Lydian in Icelandic, 
and the Aeolian and Mixolydian in Irish songs. 

The most primitive tribe I came across were the Kanikas. A 
company of fifteen or so had marched in over night from two 
villages twenty miles away in the Ghats. Small, wiry, pictures 
of men. They had had no food since the previous morning, as the 
shops were all closed when they arrived late at night. They brought 
with them bows and arrows and kokkams. This is a flat piece of 
metal, eight inches by six, with serrated edges, rolled into a cylinder 
with the edges turned up. Along these a tenpenny nail is rubbed 
furiously. I offered one of them four annas if he would hit a tree 
twenty-five yards off; he missed it by a yard. Apparently they 
shoot hares, not at such distances, but by lying in wait near the 
hare s form. They told me, we live among tigers and elephants. 
We are not afraid. We say " shoo " to a tiger, and he goes away. 
We speak the truth, there is no need to tell a lie/ They are loyal 
subjects of the Maharajah. They address him as * thou , and would 
do anything for him. They live clean lives and treat their women 
well : there was not a degraded face amongst them. 

After they had been fed they gave their performance. Seven of 
them took part, each provided with a kokkara. On this the tunes 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



45 



Ex.: 



were accompanied in trochees. The headman of the village picked 
up his kokkara, bowed his head over it, and murmured a prayer. 
Another, likewise, and another followed, scraping them up and 
down with growing excitement. The leader recited a list of twenty 
or thirty divinities, 1 in no particular order, repeating some more 
than others. After five minutes or so one of the men began to tremble 
violently, and holding his kokkara with both hands straight out in 
front of him tapped it rhythmically on the ground. The leader 
was the next to tremble, and his access was more violent. He 
flung himself about, his pagn fell off and his hair fell down. A 
third leapt, when the fit was on him, from his sitting posture about 
three feet into the air, and dropped again into his original cross- 
legged position. The whole service was interspersed with shouts 
and yells from individual performers. When it was over the 
mantizomenoi bent forward sobbing vehemently, and took a minute 
to recover. One felt ashamed to have been merely an interested 
spectator amongst so much sincerity. 

At Tan jore I heard some c bandy 2 men. They sing at night, 
as they drive along, to let the dacoits, of which there are plenty 
there, know that they are awake (and in a position therefore to 
return blow for blow). One of them had been beaten, and showed 
a mark on his forehead in proof of it : the other said he had been 
stoned. The feature of their tunes (Exs. 90, 91) was the long note 






3E 






fe : ^J 




J 1 




= 


-I t- 


_L CL_ 


=P5^= 


=^P 


-J. 


^--^-| 





1* p*- : 


91. ^4 h- J U*^ 




^ - =t 









-1 1 



of indefinite length ; the words were not given, as unfit for pub 
lication. In the temple at Madura I heard the ndgasdram (N. 

1 Some of the names were Rama, Hari, Harichandra, Shiva; and local 
deities, Sasthan, Amman, Amcala. 2 Covered cart. 



46 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



India zJiaJinaty, a kind of oboe with a very loud tone; it was 
unbearable close, but sounded majestic and rather awe-inspiring 
at a little distance in the long galleries, as it did blown on the 
breezes from the top of the Trichinopoly rock. The illustration is 
of two players at Tanjore; they took it in turns to play chanter 
and drone. "When the second was asked to surcease from droning, 
the first said he felt like a ship without a rudder \ 

At Calcutta I heard a Maratha gipsy, from the Circus. He 
belonged to Tasgaon in the Kolhapur district. These gipsies are 
the bards of the Maratha empire, now thrown out of employ. 
This man was an acrobat. He sang two Povddas : 

PovdJa (chivalric song of 1795). 

(In tempo and style of Bonnie Dundee.) 



Ex. 

92. ! 



By his fate the Ni-zam of Hy-der - a - bad Be-thought him to march a-gainst 



Poon - a. His wives and his cour-ti - ers fa - ces were glad, They said, * You will con-quer it 



soon - a So he sum-moned his gen - er . als all 




count-ed, His gen- er- als came at his call . . 



And his cam-elswere ve -ry well 

=XJ^ 



mount-ed. And he said * Be-fore this year is old . . If it may not well be 



m=^=f 
















soon-er, 


W 


Sal U U- 

ith our guns, men 


=S=g=g4tBE= 

and hors-es and gold 


We shall march and cap-ture 






Poon -a. With his guns and his gold his hors - es and men did their du -ty. 



^^^^ 



The ti - ger - Ma - ra - tha can kill at a blow, And man and horse lay 
yv 2 rail en tan . do. &_* 



low. And his guns and his gold were our boot - y. 



PLATE 3 




Kashmiri bin-player 
(Taken by Ananda K. Coomaraswamy) 




Nagasaram-players, Tanjore 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



Povdda. 

Tonic C. 



Ex. 




Tonic C. 



Concerning the expedition of Pendreh, military officer of Kolhapur, who 
marched against Pasgaon and was defeated by a Brahman, Patwardhan. 

This should be compared with Ex. 99. The change of key is 
most unusual, and does not appear to be recognized at all in the 
art-music. It is possible to suppose the tonic is the same through 
out Eb in Ex. 93 and C in Ex. 99. But against this is the very 
definite close in C of Ex. 93, and the exact correspondence of the 
two sections of Ex. 99. They must stand, therefore, as rare 
instances of a change of tonic ; in which case the mode also changes 
in Ex. 93 from Doric to Lydic/ but remains the same in Ex, 99. 

1 The terminations -ic and -ian are used here to denote the Greek and 
Ecclesiastical modes respectively. Appended is a list of them with their 
Carnatic and Hindostani equivalents. 



As on 
the white 
notes of 
the piano 


From C, 
with 


Greek 
mode. 


Ecclesiastical 
mode. 


Carnatic Mela- 
karta (mode). 


Hindostani 
Thai (mode). 


B-b 


5 flats 


[Mixolydic 


Locrian] 


(Saman chant) 




E-e 


4 


Doric 


Phrygian 


Hanumatodi 


Bhairavi 


A a 


3 


Hypodoric 


Aeolian 


Natabhairavl 


Sindhubhairavl 


D d 


2 


Phrygic 


Dorian 


Karaharapnya 


Kafi 


G-g 

C c 


1 



Hypophrygic 
Lydic 


Mixolydian 
Ionian 


Harikambogi 
Dehrasankara- 


Jhinjoti 
Bilaval 










bharana 




F f 


1 sharp 


Hypolydic 


Lydian 


Kalyam 


Imankalian 



The Saman chant is discussed in Chapter XI. The Saman may be sung in 
Hindostan too, but I could hear of no Samagas (singers) there. The place of 
other much more elaborate modes is discussed in subsequent chapters. 



48 A MUSICAL DIARY 

I got the singer to clap his hands a thing it was generally im 
possible to persuade him to do, though he would sometimes do it of 
his own accord so that there was no doubt about the changes of 
rhythm in both these songs. 

On these seven dozen melodies some generalizations are 
possible. 

1. The further we get from civilization the more limited the 
compass. In cities, seaports, and the like, the compass is anything 
up to, or even beyond, the octave. Among the Oonds and the 
west coast tribes it is not more than four or five notes; among 
the Malayans and the Travancore boatmen, and the Todas, 1 
not more than three or four; among the remote Kdnikas only 
two or three. 2 

2. The tonic is sometimes locally as well as logically central, 
i.e. the tune f takes off" from some note below the tonic, and 
ranges through some two or three notes above it. Cf. Exs. 29, 
44, 45, 47, 62, 66, &c. 

3. But a larger number have the lowest note for tonic. Cf. 
Exs. 27, 31, 33, 36, 38, 80, &c. 

4. There is a tendency for the melody to begin in the upper part 
of the voice, reaching it perhaps by a leap, and to settle down 
upon a tonic. Cf. Exs. 27, 28, 36, 38, 63. 

5. A small number of the tunes employ conjunct motion ex 
clusively. Cf. Exs. 17, 37, 56, 59. 

6. In others, when two notes are taken by leap they have some 
times previously appeared as taken by step, Cf. Exs. 39, 48, 
58, 61. 

7. Real transilient scales are not found here ; see, however, Exs. 
44, 45, 46. 

8. The pivot on which the melodies turn is the interval of 
a fourth with the lower note as tonic (see passi m). 

9. Imitation at different levels is rare. Cf. Exs. 47, 63, 66, 81. 

10. Two-time is common, three-time rare. 

1 Collected by Mr. Thurston, whose phonograph records are at present in the 
hands of Dr. Myers of Cambridge. 

2 See Chapter XIII (by Dr. C. S. Myers) of Dr. Seligmann s Veddahs of Ceylon, 
where the melodies of two or three notes are classed as more aichaic 7 than 
othe-rs of four or five. 



A MUSICAL DIARY 49 

11. A mixture of these takes three forms : 

(a) Two counted as three, or three as two. Cf. Exs. 27, 37, 
38 n-v, 92. 

(6) Two and three, or three and four are alternated. Cf. 
Exs. 21, 24, 28, 36, 63, 67, &c. 

(&lt;?) Cross rhythm of song (Exs. 58, 66) and drumming 
(Exs. 42, 48). 



CHAPTER II 
A MUSICAL DIARY (continued) 

AT Allahabad I came across some Garhwalis who had been got 
down from Mussouri in the Himalaya for the Exhibition as riksJia- 
wdlds because they would be in good training, and because they 
were cheerful and honest. They said they could not sing in the day 
time because they were thinking about their work, so we had a very 
merry evening in a hot tent from nine o clock to past midnight. 
There was great competition to sing into the phonograph and have 
their performance given back to them; but unfortunately only one 
phonogram has survived the railway journey. The subjects of 
their songs are given for what they are worth ; I was able to get 
them only at fourth hand. The men sang in Ball ; this was 
translated by one of them into bad Hindostani, retranslated into 
good Hindostani by a bystander, and from that a version was 
given me by a (most patient) English boy of fourteen who spoke 
Hindostani like a native ; his actual words are given here. 

5E 



(He and she on opposite banks of a river). 

She, If God gave me wings I d fly to you. 

He. If God made me into a bullet I d reach you so. 

She. Are your father and mother well ? 

He. How are all the village people, &c. 



Make me the best instrument in the world. 

What will you give ? 

I will give you four annas a day and as much dot (maize) as you like. 



96.: 



A man had a daughter and sold her in marriage to an old man (aetat. 36) 
She protests: 

* Why did you marry me to such an old man ? 

An old woman says : It was your fate ; don t be sad about it. 1 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



51 



Still, I m not happy. I ll go away and get married to a young man. 
for she had many lovers. 

But they say * You have chosen an old, old man and now we won t have 
you . 



Tonic G. 






(He). give me those pret - ty eyes, And I ll 

(She ). And if I give you my pret - ty eyes, Oth - er 

(He). Then O let me bor - row them And 

(She). For six months you shall bor - row them ; Pro - mise 

(He). What word is this of a bar - gain-ing ! I will 



make you the gift 
lov - ers 11 laugh 
keep them safe 
tru - ly you ll give 
keep your eyes 



in re - turn of my own, dear. 

and 11 leave me a - lone, dear 

till you need them a - gain, dear. 

me them back then a - gain, dear. 

and your heart and your soul, dear. 



IF 

-- 



A Gurkha song. He deserts his sweetheart. 



Tonic B. 



99. 



1. Mo-ther, send to the dho - In to bring back my li - nen* 

2. Nev-er mind where I m go - ing if you ll send to the dho - bi. 

3. Oh I m go - ing to get me 



Oh I m wea - ry of Chhai - la 



a new wife, pret-ty Hi - ra. 
as you know, lit-tle mo - ther. 

5. For the love of your son, moth - er, my Hi - rawillleave him, 

6. For five hun - dred ru - pees I can make good the de-ceiv - ing. 

7. He shall cease from his griev - ing for I ll dou - ble the ran - som. 

8. Some new ear - rings of pearl and a long neck-lace of ru - by. 



Tonic G. 



PJ, n i j fe j . t . fe . i 




i b J J 1 J J J / J" .F -p 1 

/ -^ 

1. where will you go If I get 
2. You must say where you go be - fore I 
3. Lit - tie Chhai - la is yours and will you 
4. But her hus - band J ll kill you if you 
5. He will fol - low with fif - ty if you 
6. For five hun - dred ru - pees he will not 
7. And what gems will you get to a - dorn 
8. You have said where you re go - ing and I ll 


back your li - nen? 
send to the dho - 6e". 
mar - ry an - o - ther? 
get pret-ty Hi - ra ! 
dare to de-ceive him. 
cease from his griev - ing. 
Hi - ra thehand-some? 
send to the dho - fo*. 



52 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



I have spent all my 



A postman and his sweetheart. 

* Since we were at school we have loved each other. 
money on you ; and didn t you love some one else ? 

* Up to now you haven t married me ! 

* I m so busy all day ; I ve no time to speak to you. 

If you loved me you d find time ; you d leave all your work. 
I m being transferred to another village ; I hope you ll be well. 1 

* You re going ? I feel lonely. 

Tonic F. 



101. 















^=\ 




















































L=J 



Jagali wanted to go to a flour mill. Her uncles and brothers said, Don t 
go, else the police will catch you, and pinch you, and kiss you, &c. But 
she, Never mind, I want to be caught, and pinched, and kissed, &c. 
1st version. - v (tO ^, 



Ex. 
102. 



2nd version. 







S 



^ 



^ 



=8 



Called Jonu s song : I could make no story out of the words. It 
was accompanied by a graceful two step, with a drag on the second. 

Phonogram. 



Ex.: 

toa: 






Two pret - ty boys there were 
One day the Ea - jah came, 
Indaysthatarenow no more 
Their moth-er, Con-sl-la fair, 
The names of the chil-dren are 
Forth they were cast from home, 
Mes- sen - gers came, but they 
But when they grew to men 
9. Marched to the Ra-jah s throne, 
10. Now by high God s de - cree, 



1. 
2. 
3. 

4. 
5. 
6. 

7. 
8. 



Un - der a gu - m s care. 
Asked of their house and name. 
They sojourned in Ab - bot-pur. 
To Das-rat their fa - ther bare. 
Ka - ma and Laksh - ma - na. 
Far in the woods to roam. 
Would not the word o - bey. 
Home they re - turned a - gain, 
Slew him that sat there -on. 
At their re - turn, I see. 



J- 



1-9. O God, hear me in Thy great kind-ness, All - 

10. Thou God hear - est me in Thy kind-ness, Thou 

=T:j. J J 






- see - ing God 
God hast 



light - en 
light - ened 



my 
my 



blind - ness. 
blind - ness. 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



53 



Ex. 2 
104.: 



No words available. 



EX.2 

105.: 



Bachhi married Devali ; but she only bore him a daughter ; so he expelled 
the former, and exposed the latter. 

There was also a recitative song from Bhotan : 

ffrriui rrJJ=^ 



r r r 



1O6. 



3E 



The long note was of indefinite length as long as the breath lasted. 
These Garhwalis had come from the hills : I went next to Dehra 
Dun, a few miles below Mussouri, and met with some more of the 
same tribe. Their songs follow below. Most of the words were, I was 
told, mere snatches of sentences, often in the wrong order, learnt 
by heart without understanding, interspersed with tags for the sake 
of the rhyme. The first half dozen were sung by a small boy. 
The intervals between the verses he occasionally filled up by a com 
bined smack of the lips and clack of the tongue to represent the 
thud, or rather the squeeze (see Chap. IX) of the drum, which would 
at that place have a solo, in order to give the singer time to recover 
his breath. The other songs were given by men soli, or by women 
in chorus. 

Tdra Padhdne. 

to ^^ 



Ex. 



h 



(0) 



^J^I7 



~ + v 



SovJcin Biwdri. 



13= 



Tr c_T E-i " 



SE 



816113 



54 



Ex. 

109. 



A MUSICAL DIARY 

ji Dhanpuria. 



Tanko. 



CMaila. 



If Cjl 



in. 



Must you go, my Chhai-la, now, Leav-ing me a -lone, my 
Shall I live, my Chhai-la, say, Like a wa - ter-mill, my 



J J- l 






dar - ling ! Tell me, Chhai-la, how I shall live when you are gone ? 
dar - ling i Stand-ing all the day des - o - late up - on a hill ? 

In this song two bars are taken as the unit, and the rhythm is 
2 + 3 + 3 -h 2 ; it would have been more correct to write it *, but 
more difficult to read. No method of writing it will reproduce the 
charm of the original. (CMaila= darling.) 

Hyun Pdrio Gad. 











Ranwain Sdja. 






Biglitar. 

J "J r -=\ 


*- =i ff CH 


In the moui 
And on Sim 
A long the hills 
In the horn 


i - tains of Ne - p 
L - la s high h 
, near and f 
a of the tall p 


+- 3 j* _] 

al Lives a 
ill Is the 
ar On ma - ny 
me Is the 



A MUSICAL DIAEY 



55 



might - y king ; And his peo - pie one . . and 

Lat Sahib s I camp ; And when mount Me - ru . . is 

poles hang wires ; Is not that a fair . . Dar - 

Lat Sahib seen ; But in Mat - tra s ho - ly 




To his feet horn - age bring. 

You may hear his Si - pa - his tramp. 

Lit by a thou - sand fires 1 

Is Ne - pa - li - ya queen. 

CJihaila. 

3+2 



Ij JJJ 



115. 



Men. 



Women, 



D.C. 






.(The spelling of the titles in Exs. 107115 is merely phonetic.) 



Ex.: 

116 J 



D.C. 



Tonic C ? 



Ex. 
117. 















1 ~~ ^ "^- """ 




JTJ" 









Esc.: 



Ex. ~ 
119." 



u 



Ex* i 



J J. 



Ex. 






Viceroy s. 



56 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



These were sung by women, tile-layers. They clattered their 
wooden trowels on the floor, in an approximate rhythm, and { felt 
shame * because there was no actual roof to work on. 



Women. 



Men. 















122.^4 ^-W.-|.J ^JJ| 


LSJ 











gj" af Cj- 



3E 



Ex. 

124. 



3^ 



tft 



?F 



This came from Dharmsala 1 ; and the "Rag was 1 given me as 
Behag. That its singer knew so much about it as that, not to 
mention its carefully balanced sections (the same as in our National 
Anthem), removes it from the category of folk-song proper. 

In many of these Garhwali songs, and still more in the Gurkha 
songs which follow, I noticed, instead of the usual slide or vibrato 
on the emphatic notes, a sort of luscious squeeze, a glutinous warble 
quite incommunicable. 

1 An officer of the 1st Goorkha s at Dharmsala gave me these two tunes that 
his men sung on the march. 

Zakmi Dil (the wounded heart). 



Ex.2 



lst 



M2nd. 



1! 



nrcjrcr 



D.C. 



m 






Sadhu. /TN 



Ex.2 
126.: 



K.B. The tonic of this is probably C, but may be F. The third bar begins 
with what may be the * warble noticed below. 



A MUSICAL- DIARY 



57 



To such tunes as 

i 2 




four men, A, B, C, D, danced, lifting the foot to the level of the 
knee,, their movements corresponding to the four beats of the bar 
[0 stands for the silent beat]. 

(1) All clap hands. 

(2) B, D touch right palm to A, C s left palm, the fingers 
pointing upwards. 

(3) Clap hands. 

(0) D, B touch left palm to A, (7s right palm. All step back 
wards (instead of forwards) on this beat. 

One night during my stay a sing-song was kindly organized for 
my benefit among the men of the 2nd Goorkhas. They were in 
more than their usual good spirits over a successful hockey match 
with the 9th. There was no gene in the presence of their officers, 
and the performance was in no sense to order . The songs followed 
in such quick succession that there was no time to get down any 
words : most of them were danced to. One man, or perhaps two, 
stood out in the midst of an admiring crowd, and whirled round 
and round ; bent knees and elbows, palms of the hands upturned, 
arms extended. At regular intervals a couple o bars, or four, were 
danced in a crouching position. At the end of a chorus there was 
occasionally a grunted Ha ! Ha ! 



129. 



^ 



=& 



Eight. 6 J 
J&gt; rum - Left. 8 

Solo. 



Chorus. 



Drum as before. 
1st version. 



130. i 



m 



.2nd version. 

/&~n 



r ir 



-^Erri 



J J Jz 



58 A MUSICAL DIARY 

A 3rd version. 



3^ 



4th version. 



:* J ^3 



Ex. 



1st version. 



2nd version. 



Ex. 

132 J 



1st version. 






2nd version. 







!x. " 



135. 



1st version. 



2nd version. 




The following two melodies were given me by an officer of the 
regiment. 

Andante. J. = 100. 



Ex.: 

138.3 






A MUSICAL DIARY 



59 

D.C. 

























^ ^-t" 






























^^ 



presto. 



6 r r icgc^flr r 



This is a Chitrali dance (the regiment spends its time between 
Dehra Dun and Chitral). It is played loud, soft, staccato, and 
staccatissimo. The final notes are blown with all the fingers off 
the holes, the acciaccatura being got by overblowing. 






tr 



-^ n ^T 



A Kafir song. The three-crotchet cross-rhythm of bars 2, 3, 4 is 
noteworthy. 

At " Jhelum the station was entertained one evening by the 20th 
Punjabis with a Cuttack dance. About one hundred men grouped 
themselves in a double circle round a bonfire, which shot up into 
bright flame at intervals in response to libations of kerosene. They 
advanced towards and retreated from the fire with swoopings, 
punctuated by sudden crouchings, twirlings, and pirouettings ; 
waving their arms, with handkerchiefs in their hands ; sometimes 
pausing suddenly by bringing one leg sharply down on the ground. 
Later on some picked dancers substituted swords for handkerchiefs. 
Then two swords, one in each hand ; and one man dangling a third 
sword held in his teeth by the sword knot. The surnai (or sAaAnai), 
a sort of oboe, or bagpipe chanter, and the dJiol were employed. 
The dance tunes were : 



Ex. 
140. 



60 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



Surnai. J=92. 



Xft* 



Ex. 

142, 



Surnai. Ul65. 

fTTPTFJ 







3 

*=f=\ 




r r rr 


FS 1 ^ 


r= 








^ 


* 


r=^3 


&lt;fy f-r- 










i *^w 


***) 


^ 






:i : H 



At Achilgarh^ near Mount Abu, women climbing up to the temple, 
with waterpots, stopped by request and sang, 






148. 



g 2 J. J. J. ^L -g~^ - W ^ e) J. V " 

At Bhavnagar (Kathiawar) some kkawas (maidservants in the 
royal household) sang : 



Ex. 
144. i 

EX.= 






^ 



Ex. 

146. 

Ex.: 

147 J 






Ex.: 



A MUSICAL DIAEY 



61 



149. 



J. 



150 J 



J. J. 






-IjQ J^ 1 !^^ 

tb* 


UiiU: 


"^.^ 1 " 


rft rri 3 


.J~3 J J~3 Ij j~j 


J. "T^ 1 




&^nl J J^ 









The first eight of these were danced to, the silent beat (the Mall) 
being marked by a retrograde step. 

The last, Sltajl na wahina, is a well-known and popular song, 
describing the twelve sorrows 1 of Slta, one for each, month. 2 

Dasrat, king of Ayodhya, had two sons, Rama and Bharata, by two wives. 
Bharata s mother had a promise from Dasrat that he would give her anything 
she liked. She demanded nothing till Dasrat was on the point of abdicating, 
when she asked that Bharata should succeed, and Rama go into retirement 
in the jungle with his father for fourteen years. Bharata was away at the 
time ; the claim was honoured, and Rama retired, Bharata on his return 
refused to accept the situation, and tried to induce Rama to return ; but he 

1 For other (Bihar?) forms of the Twelve Sorrows see J. E. A. , xvi, New 
Series, pp. 203, 207, 213, 216, 218. 

2 The Indian months are : 

Nov. 

Dec. 
f Jan. 
JFeb. 



Kartik 

Magashir 

Posh 

Megh 

Phalguna 

Chaitra 



March 

April 

May 



Vaishak 

Jeth 

Asha i 

Shravan 

Bhadarva 



May 

June 

july 

Aug. 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 



62 A MUSICAL DIAKY 

said he was bound by his promise. Bharata then placed his paduka (wooden 
shoes) on the gqddi (throne) and dressed like his half-brother in jungle clothes 
to show sympathy. Meanwhile Sita, Rama s wife, was carried off by Ravana, 
with a view to marriage. In her captivity she laments to her friend. 

* girl, with the month of KartiTc my beloved went away. This month is 
the harbinger of winter, when cold is fierce like lightning. My beloved has 
left me, and the night which is my enemy begins to increase in length. 
I wonder why my soul does not leave my body. Magashir is full of emotion. 
It is difficult for a woman to pass her days apart from him who loves her ; 
so her condition is very unhappy. The rooms of the house look empty, and 
Sita is grieving with tears in her eyes. Will any one bring a letter from my 
beloved, or carry one to him ? In Posh, here in the court of Ravana, my 
home comes to my mind : this Sita says with tears. In Megh the wind from 
the Himalaya blows, and my body trembles. To whom can I open my heart, 
friend, that heart which is attached to Rama alone ? In Fhalgima the 
flowers bloom ; but what are these to her who has not her lover. The Rag 
Basant is being sung, but how can she care for such songs. In Chaitra my 
mind has become anxious and confused, and the absence of a letter from 
him pains me. All the leaves return to the trees, but not my lover to me. 
In Vaishak grapes and mangoes are ripe, and the hot wind is blowing, and 
the body of one who has not her husband breathes fire. In Jeth it is the 
custom to go to the tanks with friends to bathe ; but he is not here, and my 
heart does not permit me to do so. Why bathe, or dress, or put on orna 
ments ; I will none of them. In Ashed when the rains have begun, and 
birds are singing in the trees, I envy them. In Shravan the tanks are 
full and the rain falls in streams. My gay clothes are wet with rain and 
tears. One who has once loved can never change ; but for all this I must 
not lose heart. In BJiadarva all kinds of corn are ripe, but they please 
me not. It is now Aso, and I have heard, friend, that Rama has con 
structed a bridge to carry an army from India to Ceylon. 

[Rama brought his army of monkeys from Ramesvaram across Adam s 
bridge , Ravana was killed, Sita was brought back to Ayodhya (Oudh) to 
the great joy of her people, and Rama embraced Bharata.] 

1 1 Ramayya, the poet, and whoever will sing my song, shall obtain heaven, 
and all his desires will be fulfilled by God, and all his accumulated Karmas 
will be exhausted. 7 

Cradle Songs. 

There is one special class of song, lullabies, 1 of great interest and 
beauty. They seem not to be much known in the Punjab,, where 
Mahommedan mothers croon only The Name, Illdh-il-illdh, over 
their babies. But in any part of the peninsula they may lurk 

1 Is it too daring to offer Lali , I rock, or cradle (&lt; Lalo in Kashmir), and 
&lt;Bai 7 , baby, as an alternative to Skeat s not very convincing derivations of 
Lullaby brought from India possibly by gipsies ? 



PLATE 4 




Ragi-grinding 




Panans 




Schoolmistress, Tanjore 



A MUSICAL DIARY 63 

unsuspected ^ as the difficulty of persuading a woman, except of the 
lowest class, to sing 1 before a man, and especially "before a European, 
is almost insuperable. Those I got were chiefly in the south, and 
from enlightened women. 

At Trivandrum I obtained l the song with which His Highness 
the present Maharajah of Travancore is said to have been put to 
sleep as a child. 
J=50. 

Ex.: 
153. i! 



j iJV JV rr C/ln;M ^ICBgS 



t 

Is this sweet babe 

The bright crescent moon, or the charming flower of the lotus, 

The honey in a flower, or the lustre of the full moon, 

A pure coral gem, or the pleasant chatter of parrots, 

A dancing peacock, or a sweet singing bird, 

A bounding young deer, or a bright shining swan, 

A treasure from God, or the pet parrot in the hands of IsVari, 

The tender leaf of the Jcalpa tree, or the fruit of my tree of fortune, 

A golden casket to enclose the jewel of my love, 

Nectar in my sight, or a light to dispel darkness, 

The seed of nry climbing fame, or a never-fading bright pearl, 

The brilliance of the sun to dispel all the gloom of misery, 

The Yedas in a casket, or the melodious vina, 

The lovely blossom put forth by the stout branch of my tree of enjoyment, 

A cluster ofpicMka buds, or sugar-candy sweet on the tongue, 

The fragrance of musk, the best of all good, 

A breeze laden with the scent of flowers, or the essence of purest gold, 

A bowl of fresh milk,. or of sweet smelling rose-water, 

The field of all virtue, or an abode of all duty, 

A cup of thirst-quenching cold water, or a sheltering shade, 

A never-failing mallika flower, or my own stored up wealth, 

The auspicious object of my gaze, or my most precious jewel, 

A stream of virtuous beauty, or an image of the youthful Krishna, 

The bright forehead mark of the goddess Lakshml, 

Or, by the mercy of Padmanabha, is it the source of my future happiness, 

Is it, in this beautiful form, an Avatar of Krishna Himself? 

The next five examples were obtained from a schoolmistress in 
Tanjore. 

1 The songstress wanted to accompany herself on the inevitable harmonium, 
until I pointed out that it would be much in her way when she pulled the string 
of the cradle, and that the sound of it might prevent the baby from going to sleep. 



64 A MUSICAL DIARY 

Kararo. J 90. Phonogram. 




Lalishrlta. Phonogram. 
Adagio. J = 70. 



Ex. 




Ba - - by mine, light . . 
Sri - ran -gam is - land ri 
The gol - den nails no lorx 

rail. 



my 
ses 
ger 



eyes, Here 
fair Where 
move On 




in thy era - - die 

the di - vi - - ded 

which my ba - - by s 
raU. 



bright . . with flowers T?irough 
Ka - ve - ris meet I 

era - - die swung ; The 



9 s s I* 


p ^J?q 


/r\ 

! 1 1 


c ^ k F - 


b~i&gt;~ &gt; ^ *i 

sun - ny hours 
lay thee there 
song is sung 


j-j J &lt;r y ^ ^ j i j 

3 3 

I bring thee sleep, 
down at His feet, 
my ship is borne B 


ip J p i^ 

I rock thee and 
At Sri - ran - ga 
Safe home, my 


p zz. _ ^ 






n 




^ * ^ ^i 






3=t=^== 





sing thee to sleep 
ra - ja s feet 
ship is borne 



On the wings of my me - lo - dies. 
Full sure of His ten - der care. 
Safe . . on the o - ceanof love. 



The rhythm of the first of these is ohscure even on the phonograph; 
it was probably some \ rhythm, but the melody floated away so 
easily on a tempo rulato that it seems better to leave it barless. It 
is evidently a variant of Ex. 155. 

Lali Keshavuda. J=100. Phonogram. 
Ex. 
156. 



La - H Kesh - a - vu - da la - li 




Mad - ha vu - da la - li 



la - li A- 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



65 



chu-ta la - li . . Ha-ri Ha-ri Ra-mu-di-ki Ra-ma la - li 

Lali pardare. Phonogram. 

Allegretto. J*. = 80. 



La - li Ba - la-krish-na la - li la-li 



la - li 



La - li Go - pa - la-krish-na la - li la - li. 




AGan-dhar-va wove thy era -die And a white Ap -sa-ras sang, And the 
For my hand that rocks is wea- ry , And my voice that sings is dry, And my 



J 

tf 



J 

j 



courts and the halls of In - dra at thy birth with wel - come rang : la - 
work waits till my ba - by falls a sleep by and by. 















V^ J Jj 


ij jH 






i nj ^j =i 





!i . . Ba - la -krish-na la 



li. 



1ft - li la- 



li. La - li Go - pa - la-krish-na la - li. 

The words are borrowed from Ex. 162. 



Ex. ~ 



ciJ 7 ? -ni.n 



158. fi 



The next two examples 

Andante. ^=90. 
Ex.: 
159. 



66 A MUSICAL DIARY 

Adagio. J=*80. 




were gathered from an unmusical ayah on board the steamer ; she 
lost her key a good deal, and the songs were difficult to piece 
together. My interpreter could make nothing o her particular 
dialect (of Hindostani). Ex. 159 is evidently a distant variant of 
Ex. 156. The slide gave a wonderful f value * to the close and the 
half -close of Ex. 160. 

The three following are Maratha songs ; the first two, lullabies, 
and the third, an epithalamium. They were kindly sung to me by 
a Hindu lady in Calcutta. 



Edmas lullaby. 



Adagio. 



Ex.: 

161 J 



^ 



In A - yo - dhya, the land of kings, 
For the era - die is wrought of gold, 
In the hand-hold of Kail - shal - ya 



It was Vish - nu s 

And a Child there- 

Is the era - die - 



And the De - vis l are strew - ing flowers From the high - est 



























self 




That 


w&lt; 


a,s born 




on 


the 


lap 


of 


- in, 


Of 


the whole 


world 


the 


Lord 


and 


cord, 


And 


the cord 


is 


the 


thread 


of 


heaven, 


And 


with each 


flower 


a 


bless - 


ing 


K 


au - 


shal 


J- 
-ya. 


Lit- 


tie 


1 j 

babe sleep 


f 

up - on 


my 


knee! 




Mas- 


ter, 


sleeps. 


Lit- 


tie 


babe sle 


ep 


up - on 


my 


knee! 




Bod - 


ha - na. a 


Lit- 


tie 


babe sleep 


up - on 


my 


knee ! 




on 


the Child. 


Lit- 


tie 


babe sleep 


up - on 


my 


knee ! 





Nirguna s* lullaby. 



Ex.z= 



jj. 



3 Goddesses. 2 Knowledge. 

3 The supreme being &lt; without qualification . 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



67 



**t- 



Celestial carpenters have fashioned thy cradle. My hand is tired of pulling 
the string. My throat is dry with singing. I cannot go about my work because 
my baby is not yet asleep. The cradle is covered with flowers, &c. 



Andante. J. = 92. 



EpMalamium. 



Ex.: 

163.! 






daugh-ter of Bhl - ma, queen Da-ma -ya-ntl, The 
rail. a tempo. 



hour is come; biide of Na-la, the hour of your wooding, The 
w rail. ^ a tempo. 



= 

W 



hour of your choice, daugh-ter of kings. For ma-ny 



i 



j 



kings are come to the ce-re-mo-ny And here a - wait your voice, Topro- 

raU. 

S J^] 






nounce their mak - ing or un - do - ing, Their sal-va - tion or their 

w a tempo. . /f ~~. 



doom. daugh-ter of Bhl - ma, queen Da-ma-ya - nti, The 
^w raXL ^ ^ a tempo. 



tr 



hour is come, daugh-ter of kings. Up-on those lus-trous eyes put 



an-ti-mo-ny Lay on these jew - els rare Min-gle the 



68 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



P 



scent of the pan with the scent of the flowers in your 



^ 



^ 



hair daugh-ter of BhI - ma, queen Da-ma-ya - ntl, The 



3 



^ 



^^= 



zfifc 



hour is come, O daugh - ter of kings. 

In another class, not exactly Folk-song because conscious nor Art- 
song because unsophisticated, are children s songs. The following 
were sung to me at schools at Jhelum in the Panjab. The boys 
ranged from ten to eighteen, and one of those who sang was 
married. 

Boys songs. 



3S 



164. 1 



j -j . ^ | j- 



*=f*3r-f-+i 



There is no place like one s own country. If you would know, ask the 
inhabitants. The Bulbul knows. The wind blows purer there ; the water 
is clearer ; the very dust is an elixir. The name of our country refreshes 
us. Its mountains are higher than heaven. It is a garden of Eden. Every 
corner has deeds to tell. 



Ex */b f U 


1 








HI 






s j 








i p-^-fl 


165. ^Wf 

Tfrr-rr 


=py=^ 

i ta 1 


H-I 
















* 


d. / 


[= ^ ^\ 


&lt;fy ply Jl 
























=g- ^ n i 



Children must not wear ornaments. There is a fear of losing person or 
property. [Boys as well as girls wear ornaments, and are not infrequently 
kidnapped and robbed, possibly even murdered to prevent detection.] How 
can parents be at ease when their eyes are constantly riveted on their 
children, watching their necks or wrists. 

d == 100. 

i66.wMhj- * I J"J** IJjLLjd i r~il^ nN"~^ffi 



A 


MUSICAL 


DIARY 


69 


fy C r E 1 w 








-L-J J 1 

! nr^ n 


^ -N J s| J. J.-^ 






U JL |J " 


J :ll J --II 



No words obtainable. 

The following is a love song, which the boy would not have 
sung before his father or elder brother for fear of being beaten ; 

e)=100. 
Ex. 1,7 
IGT.W^ft 1= 



I 



My love_^ is gone a - way, A - lack - a - day J 



Where can I find . . one so con - stant and so kind I 



My lone - ly heart is throb - bing and ach - ing with 




fear ; Wher - e er 



weep to know she 



is not here ; May Shi - va s power de - fend my dear 1 
Girls song. 









n r 



i 



The song that women sing at marriage, speaking of the deterioration of 
women nowadays, how that they know nothing of the housewifely duties 
which made the name of Sita famous. 

In two particulars the Garhwali and Gurkha songs here given 
(Exs. 94-128 and 129-139) stand out from the rest. They were 
in true intonation ; the salient intervals, the Thirds and Fourths, 
unmistakably c just \ And they are in transilient scales ; even if 
the scale is complete the notes follow each other in such a way as 
clearly to show that the melodies have a pentatonic basis (cp. Exs, 
117 and 139), and it is probably correct to regard such hesatonic 
(sMclava) and heptatonic (sampurna) scales as spoiled * forms of the 
pentatonic (odava), as in the more familiar Scotch songs. 

816113 F 



70 



A MUSICAL DIARY 



The Gurkhas are Mongolians of Nepal, and the Garh walls one 
of many Indian tribes of the Himalaya, and their use of this 
odava scale differs. The typical Gurkha form is GA ODE (Exs. 
129, 130, 137, plagal; and Ex. 135 authentic). The typical 
Garhwall form is GA CDE (Exs. 94-7, 103, 107-9, &c.), though 
there are instances also with C (Exs. 110, 127), D (Ex. 103), 
and E (Exs. 99, 123) for tonic. The Gurkha use is what the books 
represent as the typical Chinese scale ; and it seems not impossible 
that the Garhwall melodies present the form which that scale took 
on Indian lips, and that the transilient element of Indian song comes 
from the East (see Chapter IV). 

The harmonic basis of this scale is of course the Fourth, and 
a melody is a succession of partly filled Fourths; the backbone 
of the song, what gives it its strength, is this leap of a Fourth 
through a passage note. In the Gurkha songs this passage note is 
adjacent to the lower note of the tetrachord, 



in the Garhwall to the upper 



and this makes their general character very different. The passage 
note cleaves to the sound which is being left, not to the one which 
is being approached. We may see this in the melodic figure so 
common in the Cinquecentists 






for instance, in the close of Palestrina s Motet, Trilus Miraculis : 







I I 



A MUSICAL DIARY 

b b \&gt; 



71 



S 2 e 


- ^ 


-r r- rf 


si; 


." 



That it should do so is natural because the leap of a Fourth is 
a leap to the known through the unknown, and the c unknown is 
taken primarily as a melodic, i. e. an adjacent interval. Hence 
the Garhwall figure, even though taken in ascent ; is essentially 
a falling figure, and the Gurkha, even in descent, essentially a 
rising one; and the character of the latter is accordingly more 
jovial and exhilarating. Added to this there is in the Gurkha 
songs a strong rhythm, recalling the Scotch jerk , and an ab 
sence of complicated cross-rhythm. 

As we are upon the subject, another very common way of filling 
the tetrachord may be mentioned 



g 



r- 



There do not happen to be any instances of it in these chapters, but 
the scale which is taught to children as the * easiest * is composed 
of two such phrases, and there is no doubt that it is a favourite and 
most characteristic locution. It has the appearance of being a 
transilient passage from G to C, but the origin is probably a different 
one ; it will be discussed in Chapter IV. 

A natural result of transilience is the tendency to build harmonic 
phrases 

Ex. 115. Ex. 117. 






:p 






Ex. 94. 



Ex. 111. 



Ex. 103. 




otherwise rare in Indian song; Exs. 115 and 99, indeed, get very 
near to implying a definite change of harmony, which would be 
quite foreign to the spirit of the music as a whole (cp. also Ex. 43). 



72 A MUSICAL DIARY 

Imitation at different levels may be seen in Exs. 117, 140, 141, 
142, 163. Cross-rhythm occurs in Ex. 161 where the third line 
wavers between two bars of f which suits the words of the first and 
third stanzas, and three bars of | which suits those of the others : 
a device of frequent employment in the cadences of HandePs time. 
Another instance is in Ex. 167 where the throbbing and aching 
is to be accented as triplets, but in strict time, not e three in the 
time of two , giving a pleasurable shock analogous to that fe.lt at 
the beginning of Brahms s third Symphony. 

The Indian may be disposed to think these melodies too trivial 
to be dignified by the name of song; he will say his art begins 
where these stop, and will hardly recognize in them any of the 
real spirit of his music. The European may protest that they 
are too fragmentary to be of real use, and that there are too many 
gaps in the information about the occasion and the subject of each. 
Both charges are justified ; but the object has been not so much to 
present complete and finished specimens, as to get close down upon 
those natural instincts of song-makers which, when followed out in 
the domain of art, cause their music to take one form rather than 
another; to get behind the conventions, of which all art is full, to 
the things themselves of which those conventions are the outcome. 



PLATE 5 




Musicians. Detail from an eighteenth- century Rajput cartoon 
in the collection of A. K. Coomaraswamy 



CHAPTER III 

LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 

1 It is the most distant course that comes 
nearest to Thyself; and that training is the 
most intricate which leads to the utter sim 
plicity of a tune. 1 Tagore. 

THE Indian does not make or read histories, and does not appre 
ciate the value of chronological record. It is the custom to smile 
at this ; but it would be well to understand his point of view first. 
A whole people is not generally mistaken about its real needs. 

In the first place, Brahman philosophy draws no real distinction 
between what a thing f is and what it c signifies- 7 . Time and 
place, so integral a part for the Western of what a thing is, are 
for the Hindu accidents, not essentials. It is not that he cannot 
conceive or manipulate their divisions ; astronomy, for instance, has 
been one of his strong points ; but that they do not, for him, add 
to the significance nor therefore to the nature of the phenomenon. 

Secondly, whereas chronologically ordered history enables us to 
compare the present of a nation with its past and so to predict its 
future, and to compare one nation at a given moment with another, 
neither of these motives appeals to the Hindu. His past is like his 
present and throws little light upon it. If we look at the sculpture 
of a thousand years ago from Ellora, or the painting from Ajanta, 
or the carvings of Amravati and Sanchi another thousand years 
earlier, we see the same mothers carrying babies on their hips, the 
same graceful little movements of the hands, the same methods of 
grinding corn, the same kinds and shapes of musical instruments, 
the same antimony for the same almond-shaped eyes, the same 
dress, the same symbols of rank. Life in Europe during such 
space of time has been subject to gusts of fashion or revolution, 
and we have looked up between the whirlwinds and gratefully 
murmured e pur si muove . We thank God that we look before 
and after; the Indian contemns mushroom growths, and thinks 



74 LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 

methods of such recent origin and subject to such constant change 
hardly worth the trouble of acquiring. 

And it does not interest him to compare one nation with another, 
or to take a side in or strike a balance between competing activities. 
His life is in the family rather than the state, in idea rather than 
fact, in the soul rather than the mind. His knowledge is of revela 
tion more than of science; his truth contemplative rather than 
practical. Compromise is for him not so much the media via which 
emerges from the battle of two forces, as the philosophic calm which 
without despair can hold in solution two diametrically opposed 
statements. 

Lastly, he is like Macaulay s Puritan, the man of a book. That 
he believes in his &a$tms may be argued from the surprising 
number of cases in which he is prepared to undergo incon 
venience and unpleasantness in deference to them. That, further, 
he believes them may be seen from the way in which the typically 
Indian mind turns, courteously but peremptorily, from any attempt 
to impugn them. 

For such reasons as these, and possibly others, the one conspicuous 
gap in an Indian library is the history shelf. We find it natural, 
therefore, in the Hindu to ascribe remote antiquity in point of fact, 
eternity to his earliest memories. He does not know any author 
for his Vedas, but speaks of such and such a Rishi as being allowed 
to hear them the last time they were revealed. He does not 
discriminate between one antiquity and another, or take much 
interest in the development of ideas, for all development is poten 
tially included in the original revelation, which was either c heard 
(xruti) or * remembered (smrti) by the human agency to whom its 
record was entrusted. Thus he holds that four Vedas have existed 
from all time, although the Buddhist Jdtakas l never speak of more 
than three. And what concerns us more particularly here, the 
Natyamstra (circ. A. T&gt;. 500), the RatndJcara (1220?), the Rdgavi- 
boclha (1609), the Sangtta Darpana (1625 ?), and Parijdta (early 
eighteenth century) are all quoted as * scriptures of practically equal 
value ; while the undated Ndradatiksd, whose system shows a con 
siderable advance on that of the Natyaxdstra, is held, apparently on 
the strength of its name alone, to have been put forth by that 
mythical sage himself. 

1 Circ. 300 B. c. Stories of the former incarnations of the Buddha. 



LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 75 

LEGEND 

On the shore of this eternal past lie fragments of the living rock 
rounded into pebbles. History s sic ibat, sic sedebat is denied us ; 
but in the legends we may gather some impression of what the 
reflective mind made of the daily happenings of the life around it. 

Once upon a time the great anchorite Narada thought within himself 
he had mastered the whole art and science of music. To curb his pride the 
all-knowing Yishnu took him to visit the abode of the gods. They entered 
a spacious building the inmates of which were numerous men and women, 
who were all weeping over their broken limbs. Vishnu stopped short and 
inquired of them the reason of their lamentation. They answered that they 
were the Rags and Raginis of music, created by Mahadeva ; but as one 
anchorite of the name of Narada, ignorant of the true knowledge of music 
and unskilful in performance, had sung them recklessly, their features were 
distorted and their limbs broken, and that unless Mahadeva or some other 
discreet and skilful person would sing them properly, there was slender 
hope of their ever being restored to their former state of body. Narada, 
ashamed, kneeled down before Vishnu and asked to be forgiven/ 

So an unnamed Indian treating of undatable personages writes 
history and criticism in one. Believe, he says, in the divinity of 
the elements of your art, and know that your carelessness and 
ignorance will maim them, and you will not murder a song ; and 
it may be doubted whether the well-weighed epithets and refined 
distinctions of musical c appreciations do the thing any better, or 
indeed achieve their object so well. 

With Narada, the Eishi who first heard the laws of music, are 
associated Tumburu, the first singer, and Bharata, the first to draw 
up rules for the drama, of which music formed a large part. Of 
Tumburu it is said that he increased the scale in which the Sdma- 
veda was chanted from five notes to six or seven. The treatise 
which purports to record the doctrines of Narada, the Ndrada&ksd, 
is probably of late date l and gives no clue whatever to the achieve 
ment of the Narada of legend. The treatise which bears the name 
of Bharata, the Natyamstm, is similarly an eponym. One or other 
of these three names appears probably in every book on music that 
has been written, and the existence of the authors is held, though 
in complete absence of any specific doctrine attributed to them, as 
a pious belief; the belief is equal to that which the Greeks pro- 

1 The stage of the art which it describes is identical with that referred to in 
the Pancatantra, the text of which may be dated circ. A.D. 1000 (see p. 82). 



76 LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 

fessed in Olympos and Thamyris, the latter of whom some greatly- 
daring philologist has connected with Tumburu, and the piety is 
something more than that which we accord to Jubal. The locus 
classicus for this posthumous fame is in Dandin s Mrcckakatikd (sixth 
century A. D.), where a servant says : 

*I wish every one to take notice that the harder it rains the more 
thoroughly do I get ducked, and the colder the wind blows down my back 
the more do my limbs shiver. A pretty situation for a man of my talents 
for one who can play the flute with seven holes and the v"i,ia with seven 
strings, can sing like a jackass, and who acknowledges no musical superior 
except perhaps Tumburu and Narada. 

The musical inhabitants of Indra s heaven were Gandharvas, 1 
Apsarasas, Kinnaras, and Naras. The original Gandharva, in the 
singular, dwelt in the fathomless space of air and stood erect on the 
vault of heaven. He was the guardian of the nectar of the gods 
(sowa). In later Vedic books the Gandharvas 2 are many, and 
espouse the Apsarasas, whose name describes them as moving in 
the waters (sc. of the clouds). In still later Vedas these frequent 
the earth, and inhabit especially trees ; their mission from Indra is 
to blunt the edge of human virtue which else, through abstinence 
and prayer, had grown too overweening and one of them, Urvasi, 
who hovers thus between earth and heaven, is the heroine of 
Kalidasa s Vikramorvaw (fifth century). The Kinnaras and Naras, 
possibly the same, are classed with the Gandharvas as celestial 
musicians. Their name 3 implies a superhuman form, said to have 
been a man s body with a horse s head. In company with them 
appear, in the Gandhara sculptures and elsewhere, Nagas (snakes) 
with musical instruments, whose melodies are represented as coiling 
themselves about the hearts of men. 

But music in its highest, most emblematic form moves to the 
sound of Krishna s flute (murall) and dances to the pulsations of 
Shiva s drum (clamant).* With Shiva, who enters the celestial 

1 An etymological connexion between Gandharvas (who, besides being 
musicians, had to do with horses) and Centaurs (of whom Cheiron is said to 
have been a musician) is not impossible. 

2 In the second book of the Bamayana there are summoned to Bharadvaja s 
feast the Gandharvas, Haha, Huhu, and the sweet YiSvavasu, and the Apsa 
rasas Alambusa, Ghrtachi, ViSvachi, Hema, Bhima, and Nagadanta, with 
Tumburu Ho lead the strain . Alambusa is the Apsarasa chosen out of 
25,000,000 handmaids to make a breach in the virtue of a Brahman of Kas i. 

3 Kim-nara, what sort of man? * See Chap. IX, UdukJcai. 



PLATE 6 




LEGEND, HISTOKY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 77 

hierarchy in the Brahmanas and wrests the supremacy from Indra 
and Brahma, enters too the eternal becoming and ceasing to be of 
evolution, and to the woven rhythms of his dance the whole creation 
moves. And in the Ramayana it is Krishna sporting with his 
Gopis e qui fait le monde & la ronde . 

In Hindu legend other instruments can scarcely be heard for the 
din of the drum. It beats the night watches, heralds proclamations, 
and preludes the sentence of death. Porus (Purusha) posts the 
drummers with the infantry and archers behind the elephants, who 
are accustomed to the sound and not in the least alarmed by it x ; 
and Dionysos in his turn uses cymbals and drums instead of 
trumpets in making signals, in order to deceive the Indians. 2 A 
king of Kanauj progresses accompanied by several hundred men 
with golden drums, called music-pace-drums % beating one stroke 
to each step. 3 Of another it is said When king Devanampriya 
practises righteousness the call of his drum (bheri) has become 
a summons not to war but to righteousness" 7 . 4 There are many 
allusions to the five great sounds (panca maha xabda), an- honour 
conferred by kings on the greatest of their servants, in which the 
drum (nagara, tammata, damaruJca) is associated with various forms 
of horn, gong ; and cymbal. These were sounded in front of a chariot 
which is occupied, but behind one which contains no occupant. 
The car went solemnly round the palace and up the kettledrum 
road. They sounded the hundreds of instruments it was like the 
noise of the sea/ 5 Brahmadatta finds a mountain hermit who is 
annoyed by elephants, and presents him with a drum : { if you beat 
upon this side your enemies will run away, if upon that they will 
become your firm friends/ 6 The following remunerations are 
interesting : ( One mattar for the sacrificial vessel, two to the horn- 
blower, four to each of the five courtesans of the temple, t,welve to 
the skilful Pollama who built the temple, and fourteen to the 
drummer, 7 

In the Tamil Pura-Ndnnuru (first centuries A. D.) the drum, kept 

1 Quintus Curtius, 1st cent. A. D. 2 Polyainos, 2nd cent, A. D. 

3 Hiouen Tsang, A.D. 629. 

4 ASokan inscription (circ. 250 B. c.), Western India. 

5 Mahajanaka Jataka. 

6 Jataka, bk. ii. 7 Canarese inscription, A. D. 975. 



78 LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 

in every chieftain s palace, was treated almost as a lesser divinity. 1 
It reposed on a luxurious couch, was constantly cleaned, rubbed 
with perfumed earth, and garlanded. When used as the prelude 
to one of the ruler s proclamations it was carried on an elephant. 
The poet, Nosikaranar, relates how one day he had wandered into 
the courtyard of the palace and saw the ornamented and cushioned 
couch on which the royal drums were usually placed. The drums 
had gone to be cleaned and anointed, and he threw himself on the 
unoccupied couch and fell fast asleep. The king came by with his 
courtiers who expected to see the intruder meet with condign 
punishment. But the king took up a fan and cooled the sleeper s 
forehead with it till he awoke ; and the poet s comment is : 

Surely twas not to win applause from earthly bards 
But that the deed might echo loud in higher worlds. 

With the drum (dundnlM) of the Yedas are mentioned the flute 
(vana), which is heard in the abode of Yama (death), the lute (mna)&gt; 
often called c seven-stringed (saptatantri)? which, in the Sutras, is 
played at* the sacrifice to the Manes, and the cymbals (aghata, lit. 
something struck), to accompany the dance. 

In spite of the fame conferred upon it by Krishna s performance 
among his Gopis, the flute seems to fade out of Indian music ; at 
least there are few references to it, and it is seldom to be heard 
nowadays. Perhaps its mellow tone is not of the kind which 
appeals to Indian ears ; at any rate the shahnai and nagasdram 
(both reeds) which have ousted it are stridently nasal ; and the 
buzzing of the tamlura strings, effected by the insertion of a piece 
of silk (jivala), the jingling of the fifth string of the satdr, called 
laraz, and made, for this very purpose, of twisted brass, and most 
of all the nasal tone of voice which is deliberately cultivated for 
singing, seem to show that so mild a sound as that of the flute- 
tribe is not thought to be piquant enough. 

To the vlnd, the national instrument, there are so many references, 
both direct and allusive, that it is difficult to choose. Perhaps one 
story, from the Jatakas, will be enough. A feeble musician, 
Musila of U j jain, whose music on the mnd was like scratching on 
a mat , came to learn of Guttila of Banaras (the Bodhisatta in an 

1 See also Macdonell, Sanskrit Literature, p. 200. 

2 Cf. Pindar s Twptatonos phorminx. The modern instrument also has seven, four 
on the fingerboard, three as the drone. 



PLATE 7 




Mughal drawing, seventeenth century, of a bin-player, from 
an original in the collection of G. N. Tagore 



LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 79 

earlier birth). Guttila s parents when they heard him said, Shoo ! 
Shoo ! the rats are gnawing the mm to pieces/* Guttila who, as 
Bodhisatta, was skilled in discerning from the lineaments of the 
body said, Go ; my son, this art is not for you/ But Musila got 
his way; and Guttila Bodhisatta, who Mid not stint his know 
ledge \ at last pronounced his pupil perfect. Musila pressed to be 
taken into the king s service. This was done ; but the king 
awarded Guttila twice as much as his pupil. Musila protested, and 
forced matters to a contest, of which proclamation was made to 
tuck of drum. The Bodhisatta reflected that he was old, and that 
c if he beats me, death in the woods is better than the shame which 
will be my portion . So to the woods he went ; but kept returning 
through fear of death, and going back to the wood for fear of 
shame ; , so that f the grass died as he walked and his feet wore 
away a path . In his trouble Sakka, the king of the gods, appeared. 
Guttila was to break, in the contest, one string after another, 
beginning at the beestring , and the music should be as good as 
before. Then you shall go on playing with nothing but the body ; 
and from the ends of the broken strings the sound shall go forth 
and fill all the land of Banaras for the space of twelve leagues/ 
All happened as was foretold, and the scholar, beaten out of the 
field, was stoned and torn in pieces by the populace. 

The rest of the picture is filled with horns (sringa), conchs (fankfia), 
gongs (jayaghanta, lit. bell of victory), cymbals (jallali), pipes 
(kural), and various other instruments not identified. We get 
a glimpse of the scale on which ecclesiastical music was planned 
from an inscription (A.D. 1051) on the Rajarajesvara temple at 
Tanjore : 

* Apart from the priests the following musicians and attendants are to 
have a daily allowance for the recitation of the Tiruppadiyam (a form of 
service) calculated in shares of 3 karuni of paddy, as follows : 

Number Shares Me 

employed. each. 

ORCHESTRA. 

66 -5 Men engaged in drumming 1 . 

32 -75 Musicians. 

1 1-0 Large drum. 

1 1-0 Small drum. 

2 1-0 Large drums (kotti mattalayn). 
48 1-0 Musicians. 

2 1*5 Small drums (udukkai). 

3 1*5 Pipe players (vangiyam). 
2 1-75 Vina players. 



80 LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 

Number Shares _.. 

employed, each. 

CHOIR. 

4 1-0 Singers (Tamil). 

3 1-5 Singers (Sanskrit). 

5 1-5 Singers (male). 

OTHERS. 
10 -4 Parasol holders. 

7 -5 Lamplighters. 

8 1-0 Clerks. 

5 1-0 Heralds. 

400 1-0 Dancing girls. 

6 1-5 Dancing masters. 

2 2*0 Female superintendents. 

4 2-0 Accountants. 

NOT ASCERTAIN ABLE. 

4 1-5 ? 

2 1-5 ? 

4 2-0 ? 

About music and dancing there are two views, the puritan and 
the utilitarian. In the Anuglta, among the actions of the quality of 
passion and ranked with the sins prohibited in the Ten Command 
ments are devotion to dancing, and instrumental or vocal music . 
And in the laws of Manu, 1 c a student of the Veda must . . . avoid 
ointments, collyrium for the eyes, shoes, carrying an umbrella; 
lust, anger, and greed, dancing, and music : and again, c the sound 
of the Samaveda, which is said to belong to the ManeSj 2 is impure/ 
In Canakya s Arthamstra ( Politics ), 3 on the other hand, f song, 
instrumental music, recitation, dancing, acting, writing, playing on 
the vlndy flute (venu), and drum (mrdanga), knowing the mind of 
others, making scents, and garlands, shampooing, employing alluring 
W0 rds those who know all these and can teach them to courtesans 
and actors should be provided with livelihood by the state/ 

The power of song is a favourite theme ; here is the story of the 
Indian Arion. The minstrel Sagga in search of Queen Sussondl 
came across certain merchants of Bharukachha (Broach) who were 
setting sail for the golden land. He said, I am a minstrel (magadka). 
If you will remit my passage money I will be your minstrel/ They 
agreed. When the ship had set sail they called to him to make 
music for them. C I would make music/ he said, f but the fish 
would be so excited" that your vessel would be wrecked/ &lt; Fish , 

1 Circ. A. D. 200. 

2 A strict Brahman purifies hirhself after seeing a dead body. 

3 Circ. 400 B. q. 



PLATE 8 




Dancing girl, South India 



LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 81 

tliey said,, will not be disturbed by what mortals do. Play on. 
Then tuning his lute and keeping- perfect harmony between the 
words of his song and the accompaniment of the lute-string he 
made music for them. The fish were maddened^ and a certain sea- 
monster leaping up upon the ship broke it in two. 

And again, purity of singing. A hunter of Banaras captured in 
the Himalaya a brace of fairies (kinnara). He presented them to 
the king, who said, Hunter, what kind of creatures (kim-nara) 
are these ? i My lord, these can sing with a honey voice, they 
dance delightfully ; no man can dance or sing as they can/ The 
king bestowed great reward on the hunter and commanded the 
fairies to sing and dance. But they thought,, If we are not able to 
convey the full sense of our song, the song will be a f ailure^ they 
will abuse and hurt us ; and then, again, those who speak much, 
speak falsely/ So for fear of some falsehood or other they neither 
sang nor danced. Then the king said, Kill these creatures and 
cook them and serve them up to me, one for supper and the other 
for breakfast/ Then the fairy dame thought within herself, Now 
the king is angry, without doubt he will kill us. Now is the time 
to speak * ; and she sang : 

A hundred thousand ditties sung all wrong 
All are not worth a tithe of one good song. 
To sing ill is a crime; and this is why 
The seeming-foolish fairy would not try. 

Then the king commanded to let her go, but to have the other one 
cooked for to-morrow s breakfast. But the other fairy thought, 
e If I hold my tongue surely the king will kill me ; now is the time 
to speak and he recited a couple of stanzas to make it clear that 
they had been silent not from unwillingness to obey the king s 
word, but because they saw that speaking would be a mistake. And 
the king said, c He speaks the truth ; His a sapient fairy/ And he 
had the two fairies put in a golden cage, and sending for the hunts 
man made him set them free in the same place where he had caught 
them. 1 

A fine appreciation of good singing is to be found in the MrccJia- 
catika (sixth century). Two friends have just come from a concert; 
Excellent, excellent indeed; Rebhila sang most excellently. 

1 This and other stories from the Jataka are taken from Prof. E. B. Cowoll s 
translations. Cambridge University Press, 1905. 



82 LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PEESENT DAY 

Smooth and sweet were the tones, articulate,, full of emotion, 
delicate and mind-pleasing. What do I say ? Some girl seemed 
to be hidden in the sounds. I can hear him still; his notes are 
well-ordered, 1 his song is soft, and the sound of the strings of the 
mnd is in tune with the voice. The upper notes which are intro 
duced into the middle of the rise and fall of the Aria have a soft 
close. 2 He sings it as easily as a child plays with a toy. Although 
the music is finished, I seem still to hear it as I move/ 

And this scene is relieved by one in Kalidasa s MdlaviJcdgnimitra 
(fifth century) of a mediocre performance, where two musicians are 
rivals, and one brings forward a pupil who performs a great feat in 
singing a piece in four-time (caturpada vastu) and Andante (madJiya 
laya) the c young lady of Eio , in fact, fifteen centuries ago. 

Pedants are dealt with in the Pancatantra (fifth century) in the 
story of the musical ass, who gets out at night into the cucumber 
fields and joins the jackal in hedge breaking and other delights. 
Waxing fat and kicking, his joy takes a vocal form, and he asks 
the jackal in what Bag he shall sing. Why sing at all ? * said the 
jackal ; f people with coughs don t steal. Besides, your voice is about 

as good as . e What ? I don t know how to sing ? Listen 

to the theory of it. There are seven notes (svara), three scales 
(grama), twenty- one modes (murc/iana), forty-nine melodic figures 
(tana), three time units (mdtrd), three tempi (laya), three voice 
registers (stMna), six ways of singing (aw/ani, lit. mouths), nine 
emotions (ram), thirty-six rags (yarsma), forty languages (6Ad$a). 
This sort of singing when well performed embraces all the 185 (?) 
parts of song/ My friend/ said the jackal, if you must have 
your way I will take up my position at the gate and look out for 
the farmer and his boy/ They were not long in coming, and the 
musician learnt what it was to be an ass. 

The mass of legend relating to music,, of which this is a mere 
handful, does not perhaps prove anything very definite about the 
state of the art in past times. But we get, in reading, an im 
pression that wherever we look the attitude of the writers and the 
storytellers towards song and instrument, towards the purpose of 
music and the general practice of musicians, has for a long time 

1 Sankrama ; calculated to display the Eaga. 

2 He is speaking of the return from the Antara to the Astai" ; see chapter on 
Form. 



PLATE 9 




Portrait of Numa Khan Katawant, a musician of the court of Jahangir, 
from a picture in the collection of A. K. Coomaraswamy 



P. 83 



LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 83 

past been much what it is now : and if datable documents were to 
come to light showing that music, in the form in which we read o 
it in Bharata, existed many centuries before his time we should not 
be at all surprised. 

HISTORY 

And now, leaving legend, the first musician we meet with who 
is anything more than a name is Jayadeva (circ. A. D. 1100) the 
author of the Gita Govinda. He was a native of Kindavilva in 
Bengal. He assigns to each of his poems a definite Rag and Tdl* 
which are named after the Bengali fashion. There is no musical 
notation ; and it is open to any musician, now as then, to make or 
mar them by his treatment. In a poem of such delicate texture 
as the Gita Govinda the musical scheme could hardly fail to be 
a thoughtful one. The names of Rag and Tdl which would be full 
of association to a Bengali may connote little to us; but we may 
see from the mere titles how they have been used as an element in 
the; design. The song of one of Radha s maidens in praise of 
love with which the Gita begins is echoed by the Hymen o 
Hymenaee at the close; both are in Rag Vasanta and Tdl Jati. 
The voice of one f fair ? but not so fair as Radha consoles and 
breathes hope which finds its fulfilment in Radha s triumphant 
song of reconciliation (Ramagiri ; 7ati). The slighted Radha and 
the flouted Krishna utter their sorrows in the same accents, and 
in these accents they afterwards forget them (Gurjjari ; Yati). 
Krishna s assuring message is met by Radha s jealousy; and the 
messenger,, who is persuading her to relent, draws forth only a 
pitiful plaint over his neglect, to which the chorus gives a new 
turn after Krishna s home coming (DesJiivardfli ; Rupaka). Again, 
Radha rebukes Krishna in the moving tones of Bhairavi, and his 
answer, when she has yielded, is in the ecstasy of Bibhds. 

Akbar, late sixteenth century, is reported to have loved music as 
much as Aurungzeb, late seventeenth, hated it. He is said to have 
been a good player on the Naqqdrah (a drum, used in pairs) and to 
have composed more than two hundred melodies. He invited Miyan 
Tansen the pupil of Haridas Swami from the court of Rajah Ram 

1 The Rags are Gurjjari, Deshivaradi, Malava, Bhairavi, Ramagiri, Malava- 
ganda, Karnata, Deshaga, Gondakiri, Vasanta, Varadi; and the Tals Yati, 
Rupaka, EkataK, and Astatali, They are given here in the order of frequency 
of occurrence for the seventeen songs. 



84 LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 

of Baghelkhand, and loaded him witli honours and gold. The 
Mohammedan Ain-i-Aklari says of Tansen, a singer like him has 
not been in India for the last thousand years/ The Hindus, how 
ever, hold him principally responsible for the deterioration of Hindu 
music. He is said to have falsified the rags, and two, Hindol and 
Megh, of the original six have disappeared since his time. 

Of Tyagayyar or Tyagaraja or Thiaga lyar of Tan j ore (early 
nineteenth century) more is known. He was revered by his con 
temporaries as a perfectly sincere and selfless man; he was an 
ascetic in the original sense of the word, one who f prepared his 
heart for the reception of truth. In Mudaliar Chinnaswami s 
Oriental Music sixty of his songs (Kritis) are printed in staff 
notation, accompanied by adequate indications of scale, time, and 
tempo. There is a list also of eight hundred more, and this is 
probably not exhaustive. They are all in Telugu, the most musical 
language of the south, as Bengali is of the northt They exhibit 
considerable sense of balance, as may be seen from the structure of 
the song, Ex. 379. They refrain from abusing the ear with ex 
cessive compass, and eschew cheap contrasts, both of which are to 
be found in the compositions of less able musicians. He signs his 
songs ; that is to say, he ends them with words such as * This is the 
last counsel of Tyagaraja or You who are the treasure of Tyaga- 
rarjVs heart 9 . 

This is a common practice in the mediaeval songs of Germany, 
and may be compared with Dufay s signature Karissime Dufay 

vous en prye * or occasionally c DuM _ ==y , and with Palestrina s 
incorporation of the titles of the 119th Psalm (Aleph, Beth, &c.) 
into his Lamentations. Two of the syllables of Tyagaraja^ s name 
(ga-ra) would have admitted of the same treatment; but there is 
no instance of his adopting it. It was also a practice of his time 
to set the syllables of the song to the notes which they name, 1 as 
as in the example quoted by Day, p. 72 : 

Ex. 

171. 



So, - la-sa sa-rna-muk-ha Pa-ra Jfa-va Ma, Sac. 

and the Indian form of Ut queant laxis is (putting Ha, Ri, Ru 
for Db&gt; D, Dft and Ga, Gi, Gu for Ebb, Eb, E, and so on) : 

1 These are called Svarakshartfs (note-syllables). 













4 r i * * 









LEGEND, HISTOKY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 85 

Ragam Dhlra^ankarabharajjLa, 
Talam Matya. (4 + 2 + 4.) 





^ s r*i &gt; k ^-i 




=H 


7g ^-^ / j j _i ^ g ^ j i 
JBi - pu-ba - la khan-da-nu - re 


1 ^ J^ J" .J JT^J J *r J =J 

GU-ru-gu-na . . ka-ru-re 

K J J ^ J j* p- iJ 


Ma yS. pa - ra ta - ru - re Pa 

p j is h r ^ -I s h i ii J" 


J w * J * J 1 JHI 
ri pa - li - ta bhu - va - nu - re 


H ; J ^ 









Dhl - ja - na - ra ksha-nu - re Nu - ta - cha ri . . trure 




CSigixature.) 



pa - ri - pa - la - ya mam. 

But the practice does not appear to have attractions for Tyaga- 
raja ; he resists them at any rate in a song beginning Nidasanu, 
a word which would have suggested four notes of the scale. 1 Neither 
does he seem to be particularly in love with Svaras. Svara in the 
South, Sdrgam (i.e. Sa, Bi, Ga, Ma) in the North, means a rapid 
passage in which the notes are sung to the sol-fa names instead of 
to words as an amusing feat of skill. It takes the place of our 
cadenza,, and like that was occasionally added by another hand. 
Svaras occur in only four of his sixty songs. 

There is a pretty story about TyagarajVs meeting with Shatkala 
Govinda Marar, a fine musician of Travancore. Shatk&la means 
six-time , and time is here used in the sense of diminutions , 
i. e. that a piece that had been in crotchets was now sung in quavers ; 
and the point is that he could c diminish six times over, i. e. begin 
with his theme in semibreves and end with it in semi-demi-semi- 
quavers. He used to sing to a Tdmlura with seven strings the 
ordinary %dmbura has only four; and this instrument seems to 
have been a sort of bow of Ulysses to inferior singers ; in token of 
which, apparently, it was adorned with a flag. They met at Tya- 
garaja s house at Tiruvaiyyar near Tanjore in 1843, where the 

1 B, A, C, H, to be accurate. 



816113 



86 LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 

great man was sitting with his disciples. Marar, after listening to 
the disciples, expressed a wish to hear Tyagaraja himself. Who is 
the man , said Tyagaraja in Telugu, e that can ask me to sing ? 
Apparently the audience were to hear him only when he sang of 
his own accord. He asked who was the man, pointing to Marar, 
who sat with a flagged Tdmbura in his hand ; and was told that 
Marar could sing a little. A Pallavi was then sung round, and 
when it came to Govinda Marar s turn the other instruments had 
to be laid aside and his Tdmbura only used, so high was the pitch of 
the music. He sang it in SJiatkdla, and Tyagaraja, after remon 
strating with the understatement of Marar s powers, improvised on 
the spot a song in the n Rdgam, which is the Ragam sung at the 
close of performances, of which the burden was, There are many 
great men in the world, and I respect them all. This contrasts 
well with the many stories there are of professional jealousy, which 
are too unlovely to repeat here. 

THE PRESENT DAY 

A few notes may be added upon so much of the present-day 
music as a hurried traveller might hope to hear. In a land not 
blessed with concert advertisements or concert notices, it is difficult 
for a stranger in the first place to find the best music, and in the 
second to know what the inhabitants themselves think of it. He 
can only remember with gratitude some of the good things it was 
his fortune to hear. There was some beautiful ma-playing at 
Mysore, where the general standard is high. The crisp and 
expressive touch and imaginative improvisation of Subbanna con 
trasted well with the smooth tones and solid technique and exact 
intonation of Seshanna, of whom it was said that he could put 
Sabbanna in his pocket and shake him about , a criticism the truth of 
which I was not in a position to gauge. They got by heart at my 
dictation Ye banks and braes , selected because it is in the 
MoJianna Rdgam, and were to improvise upon it next day, when 
a concourse assembled to hear the result. They quite entered into 
the spirit of the thing ; Subbanna played the tune more as if he 
cared for it; Seshanna produced the more ingenious variations. 
Afterwards they played the following in unison with the utmost 
accuracy : 



PLATE 10 




Seshanna, vlna-player, Mysore 




Aiknath Vishnu Pandit, vma-player, Poona 



LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 87 

Ragara Mohanna (Rag Bhupkalian). Talam Adi. 
J = 120. Allegretto cantabile. 








83 LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 




nY. . . . 






Ramachandra of Trivandrum, who was suffering from rheumatism, 
could not play for long together. He had the expressiveness of 
Subbanna without his invention, and the smoothness of Seshanna 
without his execution. He used the lower strings more than either 
of them; his fingers went down firmly on the strings and gave 
a clear and precise tone. His favourite ( grace was the Slide , 
whereas Seshanna s was the Deflect J . 1 

Next to the expressive mnd comes the dignified surlahar, which 
I heard only in Calcutta, where it was played by Sourendro Banerji. 
Its lower strings, which are freely used, have to be struck hard in 
order to produce the after effect of gamak 



EX. ZE 



which .is a favourite opening ; and this gave it a rather ponderous 
sound. Its frets are but slightly, it at all, moved ; and there are 
no settings (that) for the different modes as on the satdr. Con 
sequently much more is left to be done by gamak, especially the 
c Deflect * (mmd, called in Bengal mwK), and this contributes to its 
grave and dignified tone. There is also a mandolin stroke, double, 
with the forefinger and little finger each armed with a plectrum 
(mismb), which, though no less irritating as a continuance than the 
mandolin itself, provides a good occasional contrast. Banerji was 
fond of contrasting his gamakked and his fretted note, as a violinist 
likes to contrast his open and his stopped E. The chanterelle is 
away from the player s body, i. e. nearest his fingers (it is the other 
way on the vlnd), and this seemed to give better opportunity for the 
Deflect. Altogether there was much more mystery in the sound 
of this instrument than in that of the rather commonplace satdr or 

1 See Chapter VII. 



LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 89 

the thin-toned North Indian lm } although I certainly did not hear 
these so well handled. 

Good drumming is commoner, perhaps, than any other form o 
music. It is said to take a lifetime to become a good drummer, 
but the comparative failures manage to give much pleasure. The 
most interesting exponents of this art I heard at Trivandrum. One 
was a boy of seven who had won a medal at Ernakulam for his skill, 
and who played on a drum bound with silver. He played with great 
solemnity, with funny little poses of the head to right or left as if 
he were thinking of anything else but what he was giving his whole 
attention to. His drumming was in the c new style ; , which 
seemed to consist of flurry, silence, flurry, silence. After his per 
formance he went to sleep during the rest of the music, and was 
ordered off to go and play in the verandah. The other was a man 
of sixty, Somaji Bhagavatar, who ranks with Ramachandra as 
a foremost musician. He was most careful about the tuning of his 
Mrdangam (in two F s like the Scherzo of the Ninth Symphony, 
but an octave higher). The upper P (right hand end) was adjusted 
by wedge and hammer, and gave the most trouble ; the Jower, on 
the left, by application of more or less flour and water to form the 
karane (Hindostani dta). There were no antics ; it was all pure 
drumming. A good deal of it was a quiet tapping of the time 
with the forefinger of the left hand; then little points appeared, 
and a climax, and a solo or two, and the general effect was that of 
reserve power. 

The difference between Mohammedan and Hindu singing is more 
easily felt than described. One s general impression, which a longer 
stay would no doubt have corrected in detail, is that the Moham 
medan prefers the more cheerful Rags Jf&amdj, Kofi, and the 
Kalians- and the simpler rhythms, such as Titdla and Dddra; and 
the Rondo to the Variation form. With these he takes a consider 
able amount of liberty, concealing the rhythm, especially, by inter 
spersed rests, and broken phrases that run counter to it, so that it 
would be unintelligible sometimes without the drummer. He has 
the performer s instinct ; he rivets the attention of the audience as 
a whole, and the less able singer is apt to tear a passion to pieces 
rather than not challenge their admiration. The performance of 
the best musicians (Ustdds) has a wonderful fascination in spite of 
the language difficulty. The phrases are finished off and fit so well 



90 LEGEND, HISTOEY, AND THE PEESENT DAY 

into their place, there is so much variety and so much telling 
gesture, that the time goes quickly by, although you may find that, 
with the help of another singer perhaps, he has sung for at least 
half an hour continuously. All this the Hindu can do too, but he 
does it in a less vivacious way. He is at his best in the quieter 
Hags like Bhairam, or the more characteristic such as Fasant 
or BiLhds or Todi, and in the more irregular rhythms such as 
SurphaMa or AdacJiantdla, His singing is less broken up with 
rests, and he luxuriates in cross-rhythm. His song gives much 
more the impression of coming from the heart, and of reaching out 
for sympathy rather than for applause. You can more easily fancy 
him singing over his work, or her over her household duties ; and, 
as has been mentioned, the Mohammedans have no cradle songs. 
There are some fine Mohammedan religious songs ; they seem to 
treat religion more deeply and less imaginatively than the Hindus, 
and to produce it on occasions rather than as the natural expression 
of their daily life : the two songs, e Hadi e illah and Cheraravade- 
mira , Exs. 268, 379, seem typical of the two peoples, 

The singing that appealed to me most was that of Chandra 
Prabhu at Bhavnagav. She compelled respect at once by refusing 
on any account to be phonographed ; perhaps she thought, amongst 
other things, that if she committed her soul to a mere piece of wax 
it might get broken in the train and my subsequent experience 
showed that this was only too likely, She sang for an hour, three 
songs. The most striking of them was in c a sort of Bhairail, 
upon a theme of the Maharajah s : 

BX JLrr 



(with the drum at E, of course, all the time). The others were in 
Imankalian, to which the descending FJf gives an indescribably 
light-hearted touch, and in Bageshri (a Dorian). She used gamak 
sparingly, and therefore effectively; she detached the notes cleanly 
without making them too staccato. There was something most 
satisfying in the sweep of the periods, apparently haphazard but 
really conforming to strict law. A voice with good tone, as we 
understand tone, is a rarity in India ; but Chandra Prabhu sang 
with full round notes and variety of quality in addition to the 
extraordinary flexibility of all her nation. But the musicianship 
of her song was the most notable thing about it. She never 
seemed to come across technical difficulties as that friend of 



LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 91 

Assheton Smith s never could e think where the young men found 
all these big things Jie never met with them *. 

It is impossible to measure this sort of song by any European 
standards, the problem is so entirely different. With us, as with 
them, a singer concentrates into a single song all his knowledge and 
past experience, and has taken years to learn what it takes a few 
minutes to sing ; but he is only interpreting. It seems a fresher 
and more convincing thing when, after an equal or perhaps larger 
number of years training, the song is created there and then ; when 
its message has never been given in quite the same terms before 
and never will be again. The greatest European singers are apt 
to be voice-producers first and musicians afterwards ; the Indian 
singer is before all things a musician, who may happen to have 
a good voice, but seldom has a good tone. And it seems possible 
to overrate good tone ; at any rate&gt; it is surprising how much art 
can be heard behind a poor one. Then, too, in the absence of 
orchestration and of counterpoint except such as the drum pro 
vides, and of harmony and, with that, of a certain terseness of 
structure, the voice has unaided to supply all the interest and to 
spread it over a certain lapse of time. 

To maintain this interest recourse is had to all those things of 
which a description has been attempted in the chapters on Rdga 
and Grace. The result is a kind of full-throated utterance quite 
unlike the elaborate tremolos of our singers, which often seem to 
resolve themselves into a battle between the voice and the accom 
paniment. The nearest analogy we have is perhaps Mr. Henschel 
playing his own accompaniment, where the whole is under the 
direction of one mind and it is difficult to say whether voice or 
instrument is contributing most to the result. Again, the form of 
the song is wholly diverse : we can hardly imagine a composition 
without a main climax and perhaps a coda : an Indian simply stops 
when he has sung enough. It seems as if climax too can be over 
rated as it certainly is sometimes overdone. Still, though there are 
plenty of minor crises in the course of the music, this absence of any 
convincing close remains a difficulty for us. 

A different kind of interest and a still greater pleasure was 
afforded by a visit to Rabindranath Tagore, the Bengali poet. In 
accordance with the best Indian tradition he is poet and musician 
in one. His poetry is beginning to speak to us for itself : even in 
a few scattered translations it is possible to hear the voice of a man. 



92 LEGEND, HISTOBY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 

who thinks deeply and truly, who sees things as they really are, 
making- invisible things visible as florescence does in optics, and 
touching them with tenderness and reverence. To hear him recite 
his poems is to be reminded of the way in which Tennyson is said 
by his biographer to have recited Maud ; and indeed such a line as 
* Laborious orient ivory sphere in sphere 9 has something of the ring 
of Bengali verse about it, while the terseness, the inheritance of the 
Sutras, of a language which is the descendant of that compact 
wonder, Sanskrit, we could hardly parallel short of Horace. To 
hear him sing them is to realize the music in a way that it is seldom 
given to a foreigner to do. The notes of the song are no longer 
their mere selves, but the vehicle of a personality, and as such they 
go behind this or that system of music to that beauty o sound 
which all systems put out their hands to seize. These melodies are 
such as would have satisfied Plato. I do not know the modes/ 
said Socrates, but leave me one that will imitate the tones and 
accents of a brave man enduring danger or distress, fighting with 
constancy against fortune ; and also one fitted for the work of peace, 
for prayer heard by the gods, and for the successful persuasion or 
exhortation of men/ 

The portrait of Mr. Tagore which forms the frontispiece is by 
Mr. William Kothenstein, who has most generously lent the copy 
right of it for this book. It was drawn one afternoon while the 
words and the songs were being transcribed; and perhaps the 
sympathy and fidelity of it may be taken as some compensation for 
the limitations imposed by a foreign language and for the inability 
of musical notation to convey the tones of the living voice. 

Mr. Tag-ore s translations of his own poems are given in Examples 176-180. 

Bag Bhairavi, Tal Tevra (3 + 2 + 2). 

^-100. AcLagietto. 



p 

176. SijElEiEE 



Ji - ba - ne ja - ta pu - ja ha - la - na sa - 



Ja-ni he ja - ni ta - o ha - i - ni ha - ra Je phul na phu-ti - te 



jho-re-chhe dha-ra-ni-te Je na - di mo-ru pa - the ha-ra - lo dha - ra . , 



LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 03 



P 



tr 



I J^ " J J J J J J-./ 



Ja - ni lie ja - ni la - o ha - i ni ha - ra Ji - ba - ne a - jo ja - ra 



ra - ye-chhe pi - che . . Ja-ni he ja - ni ta - o ha - i - ni mi - ce 

(^ S fr N fr ^ NI i J I I I I I ^ J ** ^J J 

Ji - ba - ne a - jo ja - ra ra - ye-chhe pi - che Ja-ni he ja - ni tao . . 

vtf 



ha - i - ni mi - che A - mar a - na-ga-ta a - ma-r(a) a - na - ha-ta 

P^^ p . 



3 



To-ma-r(a) bi-na ta - re ba-ji-chheta - ra . . Ja-ni he ja-ni ta - o 



ha - i - ni - ba - ra" Ji - ba-ne ja - ta pu - ja ha- la- na sa - ra 



Ja-ni he ja-ni ta - o ha - i - ni ha - ra 

Jibane jata. 

The pujas that have not been finished in this life I know that they are not 
altogether lost. The flowers that have shed their petals on the dust before 
being full blown, and the rivers that hid their streams in the desert sand, 
I know, I know they have not been altogether lost Those that lag 
behind in this life I know, I know that even they have not lived uselessly. 
All my unformed thoughts and all my unstruck melodies are still 
sounding on the strings of thy mna, and I know that they have not been 
altogether lost. 

Ba?ul tune, 

Tal Dadra, J 90. Andantino. 
mp 



Ja-ditor dak su-neke u na a - se Ta-be 




a -klacha-lo re 



a-klacha-lo, a -klacha-lo, a-klaeha-lo. 



94 LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 



a - kla cha - lo re Ja - di ke u ka-tha na kai 



re, o . . re . . 



- bha-ga ke u ka-tha na iai 



Ja-di sa-ba i tha-ke mukh phi-ra - ye Sa-ba i kft-re . 



Jf u b 


-==S 1 


l 


r T^ 


| pr: 


f* ( ~ 




- n r r 7n 


y 




LV 






K |J-J 







bhai ta - be pa-ran khu-le . O tui mukh phu-te tor 

D.C. alFine. 



ma-ner ka - tha a - kla ba - lo re. 

Jadi tor dak. 

If no one responds to your call then go on alone. And if there is no one 
to speak out, and if they turn their face and are afraid, then open your 
heart and speak only you. Speak alone, speak alone. 

If every one goes back and none accompanies you in the difficult path, 
then tread the thorns with bloody feet alone. Tread alone, tread alone. 

If there is no one to light the lamp, and if every one shuts his door in the 
stormy dark night, then burn the ribs of your heart with the thunder fire 
and burn alone, burn alone. 

Rag Khambaj, Tfil EktSla. 
J = 60. Andante. 

178. ^W^^^E 






^ 






A-ma-r(a) ka-ra to ma-r(a) bi - na la-ha go la-ha tu- 



\ 


\ -Jr 


* Ja \ J j T*n 


(* IK - k 


HI 


J2 X _^ 
le. . . . 


- y^J ^^^* ^ J J J^- -J-* 

A-ma-r(a) ka-ra to-ma-r(a) bi - na. 


^,^ 7 1 

=ri M 


k list. |[ 2nd. 




r 

U-thi-be 

^JT^j 


ba - ji taa - tri tan - tri . ra - ji Mo-ha - na 

" J 1 J J J* J5.-1 ^ fe ^-^-^ 


au - gu- 

/-&gt; 

f j 


u^_V 


^.&lt; 






^7^-1 



le. 



A - ma - r(a) ka-ra to - ma - r(a) bi 



na. 



LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 95 



J s j j fr--^ 5 I 


1 INI 1* 1* 1% 1 1 


aa 


4 : ^" ^ J C-J^ r f ^ 


U" P f &gt;? *^ * : n 



Ko-ma-la ta-ba ka-ma-Ia ka-re pa-ra-sa ka-ro pa-ra-na pa-re. 



U-tHi-be hi-ya gun-ja - rt - ya ta - ba sra-va - na mu-Ie 




A - ma - r(a) ka - ra to - ma - r(a) bi 



na. . . 



Ka-kha-na su-khe ka-kha-na . . du-khe kan-di-be 



cha-hi to-ma-ri mu-khe Cha-ra-na pa-rlii ra-beni.. ra-be 



ra - hi - be ja - be bhu - lo 



Ke - bo na 



a 



ja - ne ki na-ba ta . . ne TJ-thi-be gi - ta shu - nya pa - ne 






A-*ian- de - ra ba-ra-ta ja-be a nan - te - ra ku - le . . . 

Amar kara tomdra Una. 

Make me thy mna ; lift me in thine arms. All the strings of my heart 
will break out at thy finger-touch. With thy tender hands touch my life, 
and my heart will murmur her secrets in thine ears. In happiness and in 
sorrow she wiU gaze on thy face, and cry; and shouldst thou neglect her 
she will remain silent at thy feet. None knows in what new strains her 
songs will rise up to the heavens and send a message of joy to the shore of 
the infinite. 

Rag Jhijhit, Tal Ektala. 
J.=60. Andante. 




. mi chi-nigo chi-ni to-ma-re O go 



bi-de shi- 



96 LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 



ni Tu - mi tha - ko sin - dhu pa - re go bi - de - shi- 



^ f f 






- ni To-ma-ye de-khe-cchi sha-ra-da pra - te to-may de-khe-cchi ma-dha-vi 



r r 



r ^ J^-^F"! ji 3S: 



ra - te to - may de - khe - cchi , . . hri - di ma - jha 



- re hri-di ma - jha re go bi - de - shi - 



^ 



- ni A-mi a - ka-she pa - ti - ya kan su-ne-cchi su - ne - cchi to-ma - ri 




gan. a - mi to - ma-re sam-pe-chhi pran . . . go bi - de - shi- 



ni . Bhu-ba-nabrah-mi-ya se-she A-mi e se - chi nu- ta-na 

-K 



de - she A-mi a - ti-thi to - mare dwa - re, go bi - de - shi-ni. 



Ami chini go chini. 

I know, I know thee, thou Bideshini 1 ; tbou dwellest on the other shore 
of the ocean. I have seen thee in the autumn, I have felt thee in the spring 
night. I have found thee in the midst of my heart, thou Bideshini. 
Putting rny ear to the sky 2 1 have heard thy music, and I have offered to 
thee my life, thou Bideshini. I have roamed all through the world and 
have come at last into the strange country. Here I am a guest at thy door, 

thou Bideshini. 3 

1 thou stranger lady ; perhaps, Intellectual Beauty. 

2 Akafa, space ; the source of all sound and speech. 

3 Mr. Tagore writes: *I heard -when I was very young the song "Who 
dressed you like a foreigner?" and that one line of the song painted such 
a strange picture in my mind that even now it is sounding in my memory. 

1 once tried to compose a song myself under the spell of that line. As I hummed 
the tune I wrote the first line of the song " I know thee, thou stranger", and, 



LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 97 

Rag Kan. Tal Ektala. 
J = 80. Andante. 



Ex.: 
ISO.: 



* 



HJ5-J J .Tj 



Ma-ma jau - ba - na ni - kun - je ga - he pa - kbi Sa-kii 



ja - go, ja - go, j& - go Ma-ma jau-ba - na ni - kun - je ga - he 

. )S | |S h N N b . i ]S h h 

? J^!~j ^ J" p l p - * * l g * r j p l p -- T&gt; p I 

pa - khi Me-li ra - ga a - la - sa an - khi Me-li ra - ga a - la - sa, 




J: 



an - khi Sa-khi ja - go, j 



Ma-ma jau- ba - na ni - 



-kun-je ga-he pa - khi A-ji chan-cha-la 6 nih-shi - te* ja-go 



pha-gu-na gu - na g! - te % a - yi pra-tha-ma pra-na-ya bhi - te Ma-ma 



nan-da-na a - ta - bi - te Pi-ka mu-hu-mu - hu u-tthe da - ki Sa-khi 



if there were no tune to it, I don t know what would be left of the song. But 
under the spell (mantra) of the tune the mysterious figure of that stranger was 
evoked in my mind. My heart began to say, " There is a stranger going to and 
fro in this world of ours ; her house is on the further shore of an ocean of 
mystery. Sometimes she is to be seen in the autumn morning, sometimes in 
the flowery midnight ; sometimes we receive an intimation, of her in the depths 
of our heart, sometimes I hear her voice when I turn my ear to the sky. ... 
One day, long afterwards, some one went along the road singing, * How does 
that unknown bird go to and away from the cage ? Could I but catch it, I would 
put the chain of my mind about its feet ! " I saw that that BauL song too said 
the very same thing. Sometimes the unknown bird comes to the closed cage 
and speaks a word of the limitless Unknown. Then the mind would keep it 
for ever, but cannot. What but the tune of a song could report the coming and 
going of this unknown bird? Because of this I always feel hesitation in pub 
lishing a book of songs, for in such a book the main thing is left out. To set 
forth the music s vehicle and leave out the music itself is just like keeping the 
mouse and leaving out Ganapati himself. 



98 LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 



s 



ja - go, ja - go Ma-ma jau - ba - na ni - kun - je ga - he 






\ fr n&gt; n-, |S | " fr 

t-^r-J: JW--1 * 



pa - khi Ja-go na - bi - na gau - ra - be Na - ba ba - ku-la sau - ra- 

fe ij i -TIL jt-J-J J j J1 JJ^r ^| J ^~/ j jl 

- bh3 Mri-du ma-la-ya bi - ja - n6 . . ja - go ni-bhri-ta nir - ja- 



- no Ja-go a - ku - la phu-la sa - j6 ja - go mri-du kam-pi - ta 






la - je Ma-mahri-da-yasha-ya-na ma-jhe shu-nama-dhu-ramu-ra-ia 
ba - je* . Ma-ma an - ta - re tha-ki tha - ki Sa-khi ja - go ja 

Eg=r^rrTr- PJ-J ji/ff^ ff^i-T;; J^H 

go Ma-ma jau - ba - na ni - kun - je ga - h6 pa - khe. 

Mama jaubana nikunje. 

In the bower of my youth a bird sings, Wake, my love, wake ! Open thy 
love-languid eyes, my love, and awake. There is a tremor in the midnight 
darkness to-night, and the air is resonant with the praise song of spring. 
timorous maiden, thrilling with the mysteries of first love, listen ; in my 
grove of paradise a bird sings in a repeated rapture, Wake my love, wake ! 
Wake in the first fullness of thy youth, wake in the lonely stillness of starry 
night, fanned by the ardent breath of spring drunk with the perfume of 
bakula. Wake in my arms my love, a-tremble with a tender shyness, decked 
in a wreath of blushing rose. listen to the sweet piping in my heart, 
Wake, my sweet love, wake. 

The rhythm of Indian song is more fluid than that of European. 
It seems to cost us more^ so to say, to be perpetually altering the 
accent ; it produces a certain instability which has to be made up 
for in other ways. But there is no feeling of instability in these 
songs. Such a line as ; 



LEGEND, HISTORY, AND THE PRESENT DAY 99 






Ja-go a - ku - la phu-la &a - j6 ja - go mri-du kam - pi-ta 



: &c. 



la . . J4 Ma - ma hri-da - ya sha-ya - na ma - jhe 

flows quite as naturally as the close of Brahms s Minnelled : 

ggfez^H-E 1 y=g- h r- ~f i-J 1 CF-^ 

Dass mein Herz. gleich die - ser Au, m&lt;3g in Won - ne 






Won 



ne blu 



hen. 



blu - hen, m6g* in 

These, and some others o his, show a securer halance and a 
stronger sense of rhythmical proportion than many Hindostani songs, 
and, without doing violence to the principles of the music, bind it 
in a closer grip. 



CHAPTER IV 
THE SCALE 

You can work it out by Fractions or by simple Rule of Three, 
But the way of Tweedledum is not the way of Tweedledee. 

The Jungle Booh. 

THE subject now to be discussed is complex. To do justice to the 
problems which it involves would require a large book ; all that 
is attempted here is to state them, and to give a possible reading of 
the available data. 

Scales are a tabulation of the facts of song. In a country of the 
size of India these facts are very various, and that there should be 
one parent scale is hardly to be expected. From the facts given in 
Chapter I for the south, and in Chapter II for the east of that 
country, we should perhaps draw the following conclusions : 

(1) that the compass increases with the state of civilization ; 

(2) that there are two broad tendencies in scale-building: to step 
melodically to the next door note, and to leap harmonically to one which 
is not next door ; 

(8) that the * steps are of various sizes, viz. anything up to, not as a rule 
beyond, a whole tone although the means of defining the exact intervals 
was not at hand ; 

(4) that the leap from a given note is to a note which is consonant to 
it for instance, an upward leap through F would generally be to A if the 
preceding note was E, to Ab if the preceding note was Eb ; 

(5) that the steps seem to prevail in the south, the leaps in the east ; 

(6) that whether step or leap is in use, the melody pivots on two 
notes which are a Fourth apart, much more rarely a Fifth. 

It may be observed in passing that this distinction between step 
and leap, between a c melodic and f harmonic * scale, lies at the 
bottom of all music. It appears in our music in the form of 
passing and c substantive 9 notes; in two successive chords 1 the 
constituent notes of the second of them can be, and can only be, 
justified as melodic steps or as harmonic leaps from those of the 
first, however much the current conception of what is melody and 
what is harmony may grow. But, just as in our music the two 

1 Chords are compressed arpeggios, and arpeggios are, or may be, skeleton 
scales. 



THE SCALE 101 

ideas were held apart to some extent and ticketed as Counterpoint 
and Thoroughbass respectively, but afterwards fused in Harmony, so, 

(7) together with the melodic and * harmonic * scales, we find every 
where in India the complete scale a scale, that is, which extends beyond 
the small gamut of adjacent notes, or which fills up the gaps left by the 
sparse notes. 

No melodies have been noted in India until quite modern times, 
so that we have no -direct means of determining what those songs 
were of which the scales were later tabulations. But we may 
perhaps take remoteness of local origin to be an efficient substitute 
for antiquity of record ; and these seven conclusions * may therefore 
not be without value as a guide to the constitution of the early 
forms of scale. At any rate no reading of the theory would be 
satisfactory if it did serious violence to the practice. 

Another guide is to be found in the tunings of local instruments. 
These are,, if we can interpret them, a record of the essential notes 
of the melodies of the district to which the instrument belongs. 
Essential, because other subsidiary notes are got, or are always there 
to be got, by special fingerings and by varying pressure .of lip or 
finger. We will examine some of these Ludwig Riemann 1 has given, 
from observations made on Indian stringed and wind instruments, 
with the help of an Appunn s Tonwesser scales correct to an eighth of 
a tone. His results for stringed instruments may be neglected because 
the Lets undoubtedly shift by lapse of time, by handling, and by the 
shaking of the journey, and also because such instruments as those 
of the vlna aud satdr tribes, from which his examples are mainly 
taken, belong to civilized, i. e. modern, music. There is more help 
to be got from the wind instruments, because niceties of intonation 
obtained by fingering and overblowing belong rather to a fully 
developed art, whereas these rustic flutes would tend to be pierced 
in accordance with the accepted local scale, so as to save trouble in 
performance. 

The following table divides the Semitone into four parts. It will 
be useful to remember that the Tone 2 is here 8 of such parts, the 
minor Third 12, the major Third 16, the Fourth 20, the Tritone 
24, the Fifth 28, and the Octave 48 : 

1 VTber eigentumliche lei Natur- und orientalischen KulturwUtern vorTtommende Ton- 
teihen.. Essen, 1889, pp. 3, 27-30. 

2 The true relations of major Tone, minor Tone, and Semitone would be best 
expressed (in single figure integers) as 9, 8, and 5. 

816113 H 



102 

Approxi- 


THE SCALE 

Mute scales. 
8 1620 28 36 4448 


,00 




European 
Just scale. 


8 8 4 8 8 8 i 1 
C DEFGABC 


J s 


Name and 
origin of 
instrument. 




/ * II II J 1 


77a 


Flute, Lahore. 




2 * ! 4 s 1 5 1 8 


74 


Flute, Lahore. 


Fourth. J 


3. 1 I || 1 1 
46466 


77& 


Flute, Lahore. 












M i 111 1 
6 6447 

V _^ 


78a 


Flute, Lahore. 












v, ^ 


76 


Oboe, Ceylon. 












6 " 4 4*4 6 4* 


75 


Double flute, 
Ludhiana. 




VA s e 1 


66 


Flute, Jaipur. 




8 " 18 e s 10 9 4 1 

Fourth Tritone 


81 


Keed flute, 
South India. 


Tritone. - 


6 8 10 

-, 


676 


Bansri flute, 
Mathura. 




I 1 * 1 18 8 9 15 
Fourth 


80 


Flute, Kandha. 












8788 


67a 


Bansri flute, 
Mathura. 




10 1 7 8 


76& 


Bansri flute, 
Ludhiana. 


Fifth. . 


^8- il 1 1 1 111 
1 9 8 10 12 10 4 


95 


Bansri flute, 
Sovala. 


1 





76a 


Bansri flute, 
Ludhiana. 




15-1 1 1 1 1 II 
8 8 848$ /\ 8 


65 


Flute, East 
Bengal. 


















Fourth 


1M 8 88 * M 8 10 

S^ ^/ 


73 


Thumri double 
flute, Lahore. 


VI-TJ.U 








Jb utu. 


17 1 1 1 1 1 11 1 

8 848 8 (A) 8 10 


70& 


K Nai flutes, 






17 r\ 


i Kashmir. 




^ 8 4 8 8 8 (A) 8 9 


70a 





THE SCALE 103 

We have no hint as to which note is to be regarded as the 
tonic, though it would be a reasonable guess to consider the 
lowest note to be so as a rule, because the large majority of Indian 
melodies are authentic, not plagal. Ignoring any suggestion of 
that sort, the arrangement adopted here is to group together those 
scales which respectively make (1) the Fourth, (2) the Tritone, 
(3) the Fifth, or (4) the Fourth and the Fifth, their basis., placing 
between the groups those which show approximations to these 
intervals. Where there might be doubt as to which interval was 
intended,, a slur, or if an approximation a dotted slur, has been added. 

We must not argue from these eighteen scales to any preference 
for a particular size of interval, for neither do we know how repre 
sentative this list, a mere handful of the flutes of India, may be, 
nor can we hope to base anything upon the sporadic list of f origins *. 
But a given scale tends to consist, on the whole, of one size o 
interval, showing that there was an average feeling, varying of 
course locally, of the sort of distance it was to the next door * note. 
We see, however, that in no scale is this distance uniform. The 
scale is conceived ( diatonically , that is to say, mixing up l#rge and 
small intervals. This throws light incidentally on a statement of 
Aristoxenus that it is impossible to hear three next door notes in 
succession &gt; . 1 

The interest of this table centres in the basic intervals (Fourth, 
Fifth, &c.) and the way they are filled up. So far as this small 
list may be considered to be representative, we find in it the largest 
group based on the Fourth, the next largest on the Fourth and 
Fifth together. This corroborates the conclusions from the Folk 
songs given above. But more interesting is the appearance of the 
Tritone as a base, and of the various approximations to it. There 
was a fairly large number of songs which employed this interval 
in Chapters I and II; so that it must be taken as an important 
factor of scale* 

1 His name for them is passage-note* (diesis). Gevaert (Musique de I Antiquite, 
vol. i, p. 285) thinks that there is a tinge of exaggeration in this statement ; but 
it is possible to believe that Aristoxenus meant what he said. He always sub 
scribes to the musical not the acoustical view, and his words must be taken to 
mean not that the mind cannot think these intervals in the abstract, but that 
the voice will not sing them in the concrete; that they are what we should 
call unvocar. This may be observed whenever a village choir wrestles with 
three or four semitones in succession. 



104 THE SCALE 

Also, in no case (until the last four examples, where the scale is 
thoroughly established) is the basic interval filled in in exactly the 
same way. There are signs, indeed (especially in Nos. 1, 3, 4, 7, 8, 
9, and 12), that the process was to supplement a chosen melodic 
interval by a residue. In No. 1, for instance, the general scheme 
involves large semitones (5, 5, 5). But the tetrachord begins with 
a quarter-tone (2), and to this there is a residue in a larger quarter- 
tone (3). 

There are also signs of a practice which is familiar to us, 1 of 
sharpening the higher intervals. In No. 7 the semitones get larger 
as they ascend ; in No. 13 the tones. In Nos. 8 and 13 the octave 
is sharp ; in Nos. 16, 17, 18 the eighth note is considerably sharp on 
the octave. In No. 10 the octave is the first harmonic. In no other 
case is the octave true. This shows that the octave was not con 
sidered a basic interval in the sense in which the Fourth, Tritone, and 
Fifth were ; and this again accords with what we find in the songs. 

There is no accounting for this Tritone : it must be accepted as 
a fact. 2 It may have been arrived at by a series of Tones, as 
Nos. 9-12 would seem to suggest ; or it may be the result of a 
shift of tonic e. g. B-E becoming C-F, with a resultant interval 
B-F in support of which view some arguments will be adduced 
later. But in any case it is a fundamental fact of Indian music. 
The Carnatic system classifies the Ragams into those which employ 
the Fourth and those which employ the Tritone as basic interval 
(Suddhamadhyama and Pratimaclhyama), and it will be seen that the 
same principle underlies the Hags of Hindostan. It might be 
supposed that FJf (in C-FJ G) was felt as a leading note to G 
merely, were it not that it is used in many Rags with obvious 
pleasure in descent also ; and we must conclude that Indians value 
the Tritone for its own sake. 

We turn now to the theory. There are in all about three dozen 
Sanskrit musical works which may be dated with varying degrees 
of confidence ; they are, with the exception of half a dozen (marked 
with an asterisk), as yet unpublished, and the MSS. are scattered 

1 Pianoforte tuners have found by experience that the English public likes 
to have the upper octaves tuned sharp, as being more brilliant. The rise in 
pitch since Handel s time is said to be due to the desire to secure greater 
brilliance by tuning brass instruments sharper than normal,, 

2 Cp. the Kanwar s tuning on p. 81, and the progression of the bass in Debu.ssy 
and Stravinsky. 



THE SCALE 



105 



about in various Indian and a few European libraries. A list, 
extracted from Aufrecht s and otber catalogues, is here given, in 
case it should be of use to future students of the subject : 

LIST OF SANSKRIT AUTHORITIES 

Title. Author. Date. 

Natyasastra* Bharata First seven centuries of 

our era ; there is a 
slight probability that 
it belongs to the late 
5th cent. 
. Sarngadeva 1210-1247. 

[ SudhakalaSa 1324. 



Sangitaratnakara* . 
Sangltopanishad . . 
Sangitopanibhadsara 
Kasikapriya . . . 
Sangitamlmansa . . 
Sangitaraja .... 
Sangitaratnakaratlka* 

Sangitasara Harinayaka (?) 

Anandabanjivana . . , 

Kagamala 

Svaramelakalanidhi* . 
Sangitaratnakara . . . 
Nartananirnaya . . . 
Kagamanjari .... 
Cighrabodhininamamala 
Sadragacandi odaya . . 

Kagamala 

Sangltavrttaratnakara . 

Ragavibodha* Somanatha 

Hrdayaprakasa . . . Hrdayanarayaiia . . 

Sangltanupankuga 

Sangltaclarpana* . 

Sangl tasarasa n graha 

Sangltabhaskara . 

AnupasungltavilaSa 

Muraliprakasa . . . . 

Nastoddisfcaprabhodaka- 

dhraupadatlka 
Sangitamakaranda 
Sangitadam odara 



Ran a Kumbhakama Mahi- circ. 1450. 
mendra 

Kallinatha 1460 (or 1560). 

... 1500, or earlier. 

Madanapaladeva .... 1528. 

Kshemakarna 1570. 

Timamatya 

Bhanuraka 



w Pandar ikavittala 



Bhavabhatta 
Damodara Mi^ra 



Second half of 16th cent. 



1609. 

Early 17th cent. 

circ. 1640. 

1560-1647. 



- Rajah Jagajjyotirmalla . circ. 1650. 



- Bhavabhatta circ. 1680. 



Sangltanarayana 
Sangltanarayana 
Sangl taparijata* 
Sangltasaramrita 



Veda End of 17th cent. 

Subhankara Before 1700. 

Purushottama Mishra . 1730, or before. 

Narayanadeva .... Before 1765. 

Ahobala Pandit .... 18th cent. 

Rajah Tulaji " circ. 1770. 



These catalogues contain references also to thirty-eight more of 
which the author and the locale of the MS., but not the date, is 
known ; fourteen of which the author only is known ; and seventeen 
of which the locale of the MS. only is known. Total 103. The 
twenty-eighth adhyaya, of Bharata which is concerned with music 
(the subject of the work being the drama) has been translated into 
French by Jean Grosset. Mr. Clements s Introduction to the Study 
of Indian Music, 1913, gives extracts from Bharata and Sarngadeva. 



106 THE SCALE 

The RdgamlofLJia of Somanatha is in course of translation in the 
Indian Musical Journal, Mysore. 

It will not be possible to speak with confidence about Indian 
theory until all the important books have been adequately translated. 
What is here said is taken from Grosset s translation of Bharata. 

We begin with the explanation of a few technical terms. 

Grama, lit. village , as opposed to jungle (aranya), means a 
civilized as opposed to an unsophisticated scale. 1 The name has been 
applied specifically only to three scales the Sa-grama, our major 
with a sharpened Sixth, the Ma-grama, our major C-c, but intended 
presumably to be used as an F-f scale with a sharpened Sixth, and 
the Ga-grdma, possibly intermediate between these two, long obsolete. 

That, lit. array , is used in Hindostanfor the setting of the frets 
of a string instrument (especially the satdr or surbahar) for the 
purpose of playing in a given mode. But, as one setting will do 
for several modes, That, which takes the name of one typical mode 
e.g. JBAairavl That, or Kofi That has a classifying sense. The 
South Indian term for this classificatory sense is Melakarta, lit. 
( group maker , because it groups together several Ragams ; though 
it does not seem to be applied to e setting , and, indeed, I never met 
with a Satdr in the south. 

Mftrcfiana (Sanskrit), murchJiana (Hindostani), from a root mtircJi, 
to increase , means primarily the f swelling of sound and seems to 
have been applied originally to high and low pitch and to have meant 
the rise and fall of the voice in song. Then it came to have the 
technical sense of (1) a rise and fall from and to a particular note 
of a specific scale, and in this sense is accurately translated by 
mode . (It may be worth mentioning that the nurchanas are 
always given as a descending series.) But since the note on which 
they started was the most important and was generally ornamented 
with a grace note, murchhana has come to mean (2) grace note as 
applied to a particular Rag. When grace is otherwise applied, i. e. 
not to single out the predominant note of a Rag, it has either the 
general name Gamak or the particular names Mind or GJiastt. These 
are treated of in a later chapter. In the old sense of the word the 
mode consisted of seven notes, i.e. two tetrachords, so that 

1 The usual explanation is that the notes are ariaiiged in a scale as mankind 
are in a village, which gives rather a poor sense. 



THE SCALE 107 

murchana may (3) be held also to translate the Greek harmonid 
(heptachord). 

Rdga, from a root ranj, c to be dyed, to glow , means c colour f 
hence colour of mind, i.e. emotion. Its European analogue will 
therefore be whatever gives colour to a piece of music ; and since 
this may be according to circumstances melody, harmony, counter 
point, or instrumentation, but most of all harmony, we have no real 
equivalent for a word which applies technically only to melody. 
Rdga is connected with Rakti, c affection \ Rdga is Sanskrit, and 
is used in this book when the general sense is intended ; Rag is 
North Indian, and Rdgam South Indian. The same is the case for 
Tdla 3 Tdl, and Tdlam (time). Its usual translation is c melody-type , 
or f melody-mould , or even e tune . If it must be translated, perhaps 
f Mood would convey as much as is compressible into one word. 
Its definition is rather long, and will not mean much until the 
chapter on Rdga has been read: An arbitrary series of notes 
characterized as far as possible as individuals, by proximity to or 
remoteness from the note which marks the tessitura, by a special 
order in which they are usually taken, by the frequency or the 
reverse with which they occur, by grace or the absence of it^ and 
by relation to a tonic usually reinforced by a drone. Although 
Indians never confuse the masculine Rag with the feminine Rdginl 1 
the attributes of these are indistinguishable. 

Saptaka, a e set of seven , takes the place of our word octave * ; 
the saptaka contains seven svaras, i. e. not notes, but intervals 
between them; and all Indian notations assume three saptakas, 
a higher (tdra), middle (madhya), and lower (mandra), arrived at as 
the average compass of the human voice (in their art songs). 

Svara, from root svri, &lt; hear , is also a degree of the scale, or a dia 
tonic note. It may be natural (suddha) or chromatic (vikrta). 
c Natural means not a c white note, but f proper to the scale , 
whatever the scale may be. Vikrta notes are sharp (twra) or flat 
komala), very sharp (atifavra) or very flat (atikomala). F is the 
only note which is sharpened 3 and it has three degrees of sharpness 

F (ma favra), F# (ma tlvratar), F# (ma frvratam).* F being 

1 * Rag J means strictly one of the Six Original EUgs ; all others are considered 
to be descendants of these, and are called Eoiginls. 

2 -tar and -tarn are the Greek -teros and the Latin -timus (e.g. finitimus, 
opfcimus, c.). 



108 THE SCALE 

rarely used the names are more often moved on one place, so 

jj 

that F$ is ma tlvra and FJf ma tlvralar. Three degrees of flat 
tening are sometimes wanted for D, E, A, B : Db is Ei atikomal 

i ^ 

Db Ri komal, and D is sometimes called Ei macUiya (middle). 1 

Tlvra and komal are, literally, strong and tender . Divine 

attributes are assigned to all the svaras. Their full names are 

C, *a(jja\ D, rsabha; E, gandhara\ F, madhya-ma; G, pancama; 
A, d&aivata; B, ntidda; and their abbreviations Sa, Ei y Ga, Ma, 
Pa, Ma, Ni. In South India Db, D, DJ are called Ea, Ei, Eu (as 
the Tonic Sol-fa system names them Ea, Ray, and Ee) and the others 
analogously. In old music the svara names the interval ; when it 
names the note it names the note above the interval; thus, Ga 
means the interval E-F, and in old books the note F, in modern 
parlance the note E. 

Sruti, from root Sru, hear , is the (smallest) audible sound . 
Like the svara it names both the interval and the note. The twenty- 
two &ruti& have special names, and specific attributions of divine 
qualities lie no doubt concealed in these. The first of them, i. e. 

C-Dbj is called Tlvra (sharp) ; the other names are obscure. 

Tdd\ samvddl, anuvddl, mvadl (translated &lt; sonant y } consonant , 
assonant , dissonant ) are survivals of a theory of consonance 
(samvdditva) now forgotten. Samvddl definitely means the con 
sonance of Fourth or Fifth, as we should say &lt; Perfect consonance . 
Vddl is the note to which it is so related. Vivddl is applied by 
Bharata to the Semitone. He speaks (verse 24) of notes being 
vivddl to one another when they are at the distance of twenty $mtia. 
This is the same thing as two fruti* (22-20), which reading actually 
appears in another manuscript. Anuvdcfa is the name for all other 
relations which are not vddl, samvadl, and vivddl 3 . These three 
relationships belong to the tetrachord, and presumably anuvddl does 
too. Current tradition makes anuvddl the major Third. But 
Bharata says all other (&*Aa), as if more than one relationship 
was anuvddl. If it is possible to suppose that in the term anuvddl 
he included the major and minor Tone (which together make up 
the major Third) all the determining elements of Bharata s scale 
(see below) would be accounted for. 

In discussing the scale (grama) the first difficulty which confronts 
1 Intermediate between Ei tuddha and Hi komal, D and Db. 



THE SCALE 109 

us lies in the double meaning of svara, note and e interval . 1 
Does the Sa-grama, for instance, begin with the Sa-interval, or on 
the S-note ? In the former case it will begin on what we should 
call C (the Indian N), in the latter on our D (the Indian S). 
Bharata gives some colour to the latter view in verse 25, where he 
says the "arrangement of the srutis in the Sa-grama is 3, 2, 4, 4, 3, 
2, 4 i. e. that they begin with the svara Ri, which is of three Srutis, 
and therefore on the S-note (our D). 

But if we reflect that the scale is always spoken of as a f set of 
seven (sc. intervals), whereas it consists actually of eight notes, 
that these seven are always given as beginning with Sa, and that 
a scale so taken (from N-note or Sa-interval) satisfies the demands 
of the practice (in Chapters I and II), we shall not* be disposed to 
attach too much importance to this obiter dictum, of verse 25, even 
supposing that were the only way in which it could be interpreted. 
We assume, therefore, that the Sa-grdma begins with the Sa-interval, 
on the N-note (our C). 

But there is a second difficulty, which Mr. Clements s recent book 
raises. Was the grama a scale beginning on a definite note at all, 
or was it not rather a gamut, a continuous series, which might be 
started at any point, but which differed from some other grama by- 
having one place where the series diverged? But there is the 
difficulty of the names. Why were they called Sa-grama, Ma-grama, 
unless they had some obvious connexion with Sa and Ma? And 
what could that connexion be except that they began there ? The 
distinction between grama (scale) and murcJiana (mode) may well be, 
essentially, that between genos and harmonia (scale and mode), only 
that the Indian grama did and the Greek gems did not begin on 
a particular note. 

In assigning the xrutis thus, for the Sa-grama, 

Sa Ri Ga Ma Pa Dha Ni 
43244 32 

Indian theory is indicating the relative sizes of the major Tone (4), 
the minor Tone (3), and the Semitone (2) with accuracy sufficient 
for its purpose. Complete accuracy would demand 4-08, 3-64, and 

1 Bharata speaks of two smras (notes) being samradl when they are nine ifrutis 
(a Fourth) or thirteen tfrutis (a Fifth) apart. Again, he speaks of Sa (one of the 
svaras) as * of four tfrufis, meaning the interval from the note N to tho note S. 
j Sa is hereinafter used for the interval, S for the note.] 



110 THE SCALE 

2-24 respectively, 1 The Ma-grama is formed from this by the 

interchange of the sn^ -values of Pa and Dha ; Dha takes one 

sruti from Pa ; thus : 

,, . Sa Ei Ga Ma Pa Dha Ni 

Ma-grama 43243 42 

But the Ma-grama is so called^ we must think, because it begins on 
the note Ma. Hence the scale intended is : 

Ma Pa Dha Ni Sa Ei Ga 
43424 32 

Eut there is a third scale, the Ga-grama, which is not mentioned 
by Bharata. It is said by Sarngadeva to have retired to Indra- 
loka ; (heaven). In spite of this, however, he knows how it was 
formed. 

When (a) Ga takes one $ruti from Ri and one from Ma, 
(&) Dha takes one &ruti from Pa, 
(c) Ni takes one &ruti from Dha and one from Sa, 
then this arrangement is what Narada taught us as the Ga-grama. 

The process is as follows : 

Sa Ei Ga Ma Pa Dha Ni 

Sa-grdma 432443 2 

(a) 4 2 4 3 4 3 2 

(}) 4 2 4 3 3 4 2 

(c) 3 2 4 3 3 3 4 

Ga-grama \ 

beginning 1433343 2 
on Ga } 

The three gramas, put for comparison together, are : 
Sa-grama 432443 2 
Ga-grama 433343 2 
Ma-grama 434243 2 

and the notes of which these are composed may be represented b&gt; : 
Sa-grdma CDEFGABC 
Ga-grama CDEFGABC 
Ma-grama CDEFftGABC 

1 That the numbers 4, 3, and 2 do represent these intervals is usually taken 
for granted. It appears to defend ultimately on the current tradition that 
anuvadi means the major Third ; that is to say, that early theory recognized the 
major Third and not the Ditone, i.e. the major and minor Tone and not two 
major Tones. 



THE SCALE 111 

In favour of this explanation; which is in principle that adopted 
in Mr. Clements s book, it may be said (1) that the Ga-grama is thus 
made a true grama and differs from the Ma-grama (as that did from the 
Sa-grdma] by the alteration of one &ruti only; and (2) the difference 
between .the three gramas lies in the treatment of the F, and this is 
just the difference we were led to expect by the Folk-songs,, and still 
more by the flute tunings. 

Against it, however, it must be said (1) that this explanation is 
based on a solitary passage of a thirteenth-century writer, and that 
the scheme of the other two gramas, given in full by a writer of the 
fifth century A. D., the principle of which can be traced to the fifth 
century B.C.,, makes no mention of a third grama; and (2) it is 
difficult to imagine so much prestige l as belongs to the gandJidra 
scale attaching- to a series of notes which makes the principal 
interval (the Fourth) break the law of consonance by consisting of 
ten rutis instead of nine. The Ga-grwma must, one would think, 
have been some series of notes which is as fundamental a part of 
Indian music as the other two gramas are. 

But the directions of the Ratndkara may be taken in another way. 
The Ga-grama may be intended there to be derived not from the 
Sa-grdwa, but from the Ma-grdwa. Thus : 



Ma-grdma 


4 


3 


2 


4 


3 


4 


2 


(a) 


4 


2 


4 


3 


3 


4 


2 


(*) 


4 


2 


4 


3 


2 


5 


2 


(A 


3 


2 


4 


3 


2 


4 


4 



This is the scale ABCDEFGA, which is open also to the 

objection of ha.ving the Fifth A~E consisting of twelve instead of 
thirteen xrutis. But in an early, i. e. a vocal, scale the Fifth is not 
nearly so important as the Fourth ; and that is perfect (3 + 2 + 4 = 
9). We notice also that, though derived here from the McHjrama, it 
is a mode of the Sa-grdma (and not a distinct grama), and with that 
we leave it for further discussion in Chapter X. 

1 The Hcnwaanff& (fourth century A.D.) speaks with enthusiasm of music com 
posed in the dgandhciragramaraga, the scale which comes down to gandhara, i.e. 
which, if taken upwards, begins on Ga. The Mahabharata speaks of the sweft 
Gdndhdta^ and this implies a mode or scale, since no note is sweeter than 
another until it has a context. 



112 THE SCALE 

The A of the Sa-grdma and Ma-grama differed from A by the 

r, o-rv-T .Major Tone 81 rt0 /-, j. \ -m 

Comma of Didymus (^ ^ = = 22 Cents). Bharata calls 
J v Mmor Tone 80 

this comma the indicative (pramdna) xruti. He uses it for the 
tuning of the una&gt; 

Take two vlnti*, he says, alike in all respects, and tune them 
both in the Sa-grama. On one of them dimmish Pa [i. e. lower the 

note P so as to form our AQ instead of A] by this pramdna foidi, 
but in such a way that the Pa of the Sa-grama can be put back 
again. This is the diminution pf one Sruti. By a second dimi 
nution G-a [on one vlna\ becomes Hi [on the other], and, similarly, 
ETi becomes Dha. [The second srnti, then,, is the difference between 
the prawdna Sruti and the Semitone,, and the mitis were therefore 
not equal in size.] By a third diminution D and B of one xlnd 
coincide with P and S of the other \ and by a fourth diminution 
P, M, and S coincide with M, Or, and N. This scheme shows 
the twenty-two Srutis of the two gramas. 

The only thing this establishes is that the Snitis were not equal in 
size. They are of three sizes: (1) the difference between the major 
and minor Tone, the pramdna fruti, twenty-two Cents; (2) the 
difference between the minor Tone and the Semitone, seventy 
Cents; and (3) the difference between the Semitone and the pra- 
mdna xruti, ninety Cents. He does not tell us in what order these 
diminutions are to be made; and if we took him literally, and made 
them successively downwards from each note we should get quite 
a wrong idea of his scale. 

What that scale is we discover from his account of the jdtis. 
There are seven modes (murchana) of each of the two gramas y i. e. 
fourteen in all; but only seven of these fourteen are in practical 
use under the name of jdtis, species. In the following table each 
mode is given as from a common tonic. The constituent units of 
the Sa-grama (4324432) are successively added, and each 
murcJiana begins on a different one of these notes. The same is done 
for the Ma-grama, giving another set of seven murcfianas, each of 
which differs in one note, and only one, from some mode of the 
Sa-grdma. 



1 3 






1* 



CM CM CM G* 04 

CM CM &lt;M C4 C* 



o 

c 



S 2 



W eo co co 



CM CM 04 CV W CM CM 
CM CM C4 C4 04 CM CM 



o 
c 



W O 2 ; CO CO O 

: **^ : &lt;*! : : - 



: \ 3 : 1 3 : ^:::3:^^ 
: q ::::: ** fo :::::. o : 










&lt;1 

W 

pq 



ooooooo O 00 ooo 



D m 



5 a 












PQ 



a" i* ej 

flit 

iT f3 J-l Vt 

i ^ r*l eS 

it 3 B -i 






S 5 1 



s 3 

" 



114 THE SCALE 

We will now digress for a moment to record an important date 
in this connexion. 

The scheme as a whole is much earlier than Bharata. The 
theory of consonance (sarnvaclitva), or at least the terminology 
which that theory uses (samvddl, anuvddl, vivddi), is alluded to in 
the Mahdbharata (14, 14,, 19). The date of the Mahdlhdrata is 
generally considered to be 400 B. C.-200 A. D., and the fourteenth is 
a late book. The author gives as the c ten elements of sound the 
seven notes of the scale (Sa, R-i, Ga-, &c.), and three others, ista, 
anista, and mmfiata (lit. agreeable , disagreeable , and struck to 
gether ). These last are described as classificatory (pravilMgavdn) ; 
and it is tempting, therefore, to see in them the terms ( assonant , 
dissonant , and consonant with which we are familiar. 

But a much more important passage is to be found in the 
TLkprattiakhya,) which is probably not later than 400 B. c. It is 
there said that there are twenty-one notes in all, seven for each voice 
register (sthdna) the lower (manclra), the middle (macLJiyd)^ and the 
upper (uttama)^ These seven notes (of the octave, or of course 
twenty-one of the three octaves of the gamut) are described as twins 
(yama). Each twin is separated from its fellow by such a small 
distinction that from one point of view the difference is hardly 
perceptible ; yet., from another, the two are distinct things/ The 
metaphor of twins describes so accurately the pairs of scales we 
have been discussing, which are identical in six notes and differ 
in the seventh by an almost imperceptible interval, and puts the 
finger so unerringly upon the salient point of the system, that there 
can be little doubt as to the reference. This highly elaborate 
system may, then, be dated back beyond the time of Aristoxenus, 
to the fifth century B. c., and, like his, points to a long antecedent 
period of development. 2 

It appears from the table of murchanas that all the twenty-two 
Grutis except the first and twenty-first are accounted for. These 
two are inserted, by analogy, in the next diagram in square brackets 
as consonant notes from the eighth and tenth Srutis respectively. 
If we take account of the jdtls only, we find that these two, the 
eighth and the tenth, are not in use; they are accordingly placed in 

1 The modern name for the upper register is tara. 

3 See Weber s Indische Studien, the eighth volume of the Beitrtige fur die Kunde 
des indischen Altertums, pp. 262 and 271. 



THE SCALE 115 

*ound brackets. No. 1 1 is arrived at in two ways, with different 
results. 

In the following diagram column I gives the constituent elements 
:&gt; each note in terms of the major Tone (a = f), the minor Tone 
(5 = *), and the Semitone (c = ). Columns IV and V give 
the representative f ractions, distributed into quintal (those derived 
from the Fifth (|) alone), and f tertian (those derived jointly from 
the Fifth and the Third (f)). Column II gives the equivalent of 
these in cents/ and Column III their differences (or, speaking- 

1 Cents are a set of slightly modified logarithms of fractional ratios between 
1 and 2, and represent musical intervals within the compass of an octave (f ) 
correct to the hundredth part of a semitone. The system is explained in 
Appendix XX of the second edition of Ellis s Translation of Helmholtz s Sensation* 
of Tone. (This appendix is not in the first edition ) 

For the following statement of the theory, and of practical rules for finding 
cents, the writer is indebted to the kindness of Mr. T. B, W. Spencer, of 
Wellington College : 

The number of cents corresponding to any musical interval must satisfy two 
conditions, namely, that the addition and subtraction of cents should correspond 
to the product and quotient of the intervals they represent j and also that 1200 
cents should correspond to the interval f , that is the interval between a note 
and its octave. 

The first condition is satisfied by representing any interval by its logarithm 
to any base ; the second, by multiplying these logarithms by some factor. 

Using common logarithms, the logarithm of | is -8010300. As the number 
of cents corresponding to this interval is 1200, the factor that the logarithms 

1200 

must be multiplied by is OA ^ AQAA that is by S986. 
oOiUoOO 

The rule, then, to find the number of cents corresponding to any interval is 
as follows : Find the common logarithm of the ratio, and multiply the result 
by 3986. 

Example. If the ratio is f, the logarithm of f is .0511525. Multiply this by 
3986, and the result is 204 to the nearest whole number. 

The above is the only accurate rule, but as it is intelligible only to those who 
are acquainted with logarithms, we proceed to obtain a rule for calculating 
cents by means of elementary arithmetic. 

The common logarithm of any fraction (~) is given by the formula 

*w , ( mn 1 /w -w\ 3 1 /w n\s ) 

log- =2x-43429 ) + -( )+?( ) + f 

n ( m + n 3 \m + n) 5 \m + nj } 

which is proved in every book on Higher Algebra. The number of cents is 3986 
times this expression, that is, number of cents corresponding to is 

3986x2x43429 



3. . . -p - . J . . , 
\m + n) 5 \m + n / 

that is, 3462 x ^^ + 1154 x /m ~ n ^ /m ~ /A 
wi-f n 



116 THE SCALE 

in ratios, their quotients). Columns VI and VII are adjust 
ments proposed by Mr. Clements on the strength of observations 
taken by Mr. Deval of Poona on a dichord : his two tertian intervals 
are a Fourth apart, and his two septimal, a Fifth. [Septimal inter 
vals are derived from the septimal seventh ; | = 969 cents.] 

If we take - less than -5, ^^ is less than - and 692 

n o m + n i 



04; therefore this term and all those after it may be neglected. Also 

1154 x (^^} is less than 1154 x -, , that is. less than 3-4 ; hence to the nearest 
\m + n/ ^ r 

whole number this term is either 0, 1, 2, or 3. 
It is therefore simpler to calculate the number of cents, corresponding to -, 

from the formula 3462 x - , and add 1, 2, or 8 as required. 



No simple rule can be given which will always give the correct result. The 
following, although slightly more complicated than that given by Ellis in his 
article on * The musical scales of various nations in the Journal of the Society of 
Arts for March 27, 1885, has the advantage of being more accurate. 

(a) If the ratio is less than f , multiply 8462 by the difference of the numerator 
and denominator, and divide by their sum, obtaining the quotient to the nearest 
whole number. If this quotient is 

over 262 add 1, 
,, 37 8 2, 
448 3. 

(&) If the ratio is greater than $ and less than |, multiply the larger number 
by 3 and the smaller by 4 and proceed as before, and finally add 498 to the 
result. 

(c) If the ratio exceeds f, multiply the larger number by 2 and the smaller by 
3 and proceed as in (a), and add 702 to the result. 

Examples : 

(a) The ratio is ^. Multiply 3462 by 1 and divide by 19. Result, 182. 

(6) The ratio is f f . Multiply 45 by 3 and 32 by 4, giving Jff , difference 7, 

sum 263. Then 3462 x 7 

- = 92 
263 

Add 498 and the result (in cents) is 59&lt;X 

(c) The ratio is J. Multiply 7 by 2 and 4 by 3, giving if, i. e. j. Then 

3462 ftrt 

-w = 266 - 

Since 266 is more than 262, add 1 as well as 702. The result is 

266 + 1 + 702=969, 
the cents required. 



THE SCALE 



117 



^cpio 

10 00 



IS O 



OiT 

T-t r-l oo 



. _ ^. 

M * * 



t* "COCO 






cqoo ocq o cq o cqo cq o o w 
cqi&gt;cq t&gt;co cscqt- cqoi cqt 



O COCO 

iH CO rH 
TH OO 



0^*^H (M 
O 00 i-&lt; OS 
OiOOOO O 



O O O CO OOOeO jK^K Cq C&lt;l &lt;jq 
rH Oi OS O&gt; O CO rH OJ O CO rH CM 

&lt;&gt;1Q 1O -^ -rUCOCO Cq&lt;M THTH i i 




816113 



118 THE SCALE 

It may be noticed that since the Ma-grcima (4324342), which is 
identical with our major scale, can be treated an the same way, it 
would have been open to Europeans to divide the octave similarly 
into twenty parts. Having a different object in view we have 
preferred to do two things. First,, we have e merged nearly iden 
tical intervals; that is, we have made one note do duty for two. 
Thus, Eb is 204 + 112 = 316, and DJf is 386-112 = 274; and 
we have made 316 do duty for both notes. And secondly, since 
we wished to have all the relations of the successive notes of the key 
the same, on whatever note the. key began, we have tempered ; 
that is, we have made the major Tone, minor Tone, and Semitone 
expressible in terms of each other by adopting a compromise. Thus 
204, 182, and 112 have been altered to 200, 200, and 100. With 
these particular intervals the falsity of intonation does not seriously 
matter ; but since it involves reducing the Fifth, 702, to 700, and 
increasing the major Third, 1 386, to 400, the falsity on some 
instruments and in certain connexions is very apparent. There are 
purists who regret this, and others who do not appreciate the reason 
for it that we have an ample compensation in Harmony,, which 
it alone makes possible. If India were ever to adopt Harmony it 
would be driven eventually to the same or a similar device ; there 
is not, permanently, any half-way house. 2 

Bharata s is the North Indian theory of grama, though, as we 
have seen, it touches the South Indian theory also in one point, the 
division of Saga into two classes, those which have the Fourth and 
the Tritone respectively for basic interval. But in other points the 
South Indian theory diverges. 

First, the Carnatic system merges ; it recognizes not twenty- 
two, but only sixteen nominal and twelve real sub-divisions of the 
scale : 

MODERN CARNATIC SCALE. 
C Sa (Buddha) 

B Ni kakali 

Af B|? Dha shatsruti Ni kaisiki 

A Bbb Dha catuhsruti Ni suddha 

Ab Dha suddha 

J The ear perceives these relations immediately, but those of the Tone, &c., 
mediately. 

2 See Appendix. 



THE SCALE 119 

G Pa (suddha) 

FJf Prati-madhyama 

P Suddha-madhyama 

E Ga sadharana 

D$ Eb Ri shatsruti Ga antara 

D Eb? Ri catuhsruti Ga suddha 

Db Ri Buddha 

C Sa (suddha) 

N.B. Buddha, natural, normal. 
Catuhsruti, of four h*utis. 
Shatsruti, of six Srutis. 
Antara, interval. 
Sadharana, twilight. 
Prati-, mock-, counter-. 
Kaisiki, hairVbreadth. 
Kakali, low, quiet. 

The Hindostani system ran : 

Srutia 4567 

b 
D Et&gt; Et7 E 

204 294 316 386 

The Carnatic system, by calling the DJf-Eb note thattrutl 1 
(Q-6ruti), selects the 316 rather than the 294. 

The second point which is peculiar to the Carnatic, or Dravidiau, 
system is the designation Suddha, as here applied. It will be seen 
that the suddha, notes taken by themselves form the scale 

C Db D-F G Ab A-C 

whereby each tetrachord is filled by two semitones and a e residue . 
This is identical in form with the ancient Greek chromatic. Not 
only is this chromatic scale apparent in the nomenclature, but 
Ragams in this mode (or scale) were once popular, though now 
somewhat neglected. In the scheme of Gramaragas in the Ratna- 
Jkara and the Svaramela-kaldnidki (both of the sixteenth century) 
the first on the list, by name Mukhdrl, is in this scale, and is plenti 
fully filled with Rdgams, showing that it was popular and was 

1 The nomenclature of this scale has a long history behind it, much of which 
will be found in Mr. Clements s book. Some of the names are transferred from 
the Hindostani system, e. g. Ktikdli, Kai&ki, Sadharanaj Antara, where they had 
a precise meaning which they have here lost. 



120 THE SCALE 

considered the natural one to put first. 1 \Gramardga is an early 
name for melakarta^ Popular favour has now, however, been 
transferred to another scale, Mdya-Mdlavagaula : 

C Db-E P G Ab~B C 

It looks as if the second of these two scales had developed from the 
first by way of modal shift of tonic. These five notes 

Mayamalavagaula. 



183. 




Mukharl. 

show the characteristic tetrachord of each chromatic scale. The 
two complete scales compare thus : 

Authentic Mayamalavagaula. 
Ex.: 

184- L 

& 

Plagal Mukhari. 

This would sound too ingenious to be true were it not that a strictly 
analogous thing has happened with Greek music. The modern 
form of Greek chromatic is : 

C Db E F Gb A Bb 2 

and the two, ancient and modern, complete scales are therefore 

Modern Greek (plagal). 



Ex. : 
t85. : 



Ancient Q-reek (authentic). 

The Carnatic scale has, then, a chromatic basis; and the Greeks 
held that the chromatic preceded the diatonic. 3 The latter we 
found in Hindostan taking shape in three, according to one explana 
tion, but at any rate in two gramas which differed from each other 
by one Sruti, precisely as the hard* and soft 7 varieties of the 
Greek diatonic differed by one diesis. Here we have analogues, 

1 It is still put first in the modern system under the fancy name of Kdnakangi 
(part of an elaborate memona technica, see Mudaliar s Oriental Music, p. 17). 

2 See the examples in Pachtikos, Msmata Hdlenica, Athens, 1905, passim. 

3 South Indians claim that the Dravidian system (that of the Carnatic) is 
older than the HindostanL It may be remembered also that Tamil (the 
prevalent language of southern India) has the oldest datable literature of any 
Prakrit. 



THE SCALE 121 

therefore, for two of the Greek genera. We may even trace the 

third genus, the enharmonic, in Rags like Todi, Multani, and others. 

The Greek enharmonic scale, expressed in srutis, appears thus 

b P 

By-: " 



186. E 



p 



1174 117 (=22) 

The scale of Todi is : 

Todi 

b fl b b ft 1? y 

187.4 " ^ b^ bg ^ J ^ ^ ^ 

C/ tr=T 27" ~ |S&gt; " N- * ^^ 



1]) 



They meet, like the old and new South Indian chromatic scales, 
in two overlapping tetrachords : 

Greek enharmonic. 



Ex. 



Todi .... 

b 
Eb G At? Al? C 1 

The Greeks called the three notes which are separated by one diesis 
(Sruti) the cluster (pyknon), and recognized three forms of tetrachord 
according as the lower note (barypyknoii), middle note (mesopyknon), or 
upper note (oxypyknon) 2 of the cluster was made the tonic, i. e. the 
terminal of the tetrachord. If this ever formed a part of Indian 
theory, no trace of it has as yet been discovered ; but the fact is here 
the Greek enharmonic with the larypyknon and the enharmonic 
Todi with the oxypyknon. Further, Todi and its congeners are really 
distinct from other Rags, because, as has been seen, there is no 
place for them in Bharata*s/^u, which do not provide for the first 
and twenty-first Grutis which Todi involves. They may therefore 
point to a different basic principle of scale. 

It is not suggested that the three genera, to borrow the term, are 
confined respectively to different parts of India, although the en 
harmonic seems to be opposed in principle to the Carnatic system. 

1 These notes are given for the sake of clearness one quarter tone higher than 
they stand in Ex. 187. 

2 Aristoxenus did not recognize the latter two ; he held that the pyknon 
must always be at the lower end of the tetrachord. 



122 THE SCALE 

The diatonic is ubiquitous (though the sharp Sixth is not found in 
the South), and the chromatic is quite as popular in the North under 
the name of Bhairau as it is in the South as Mdyamdlavac/aula. 

Neither is there any suggestion that Greece borrowed from 
India, or vice versa; their musical systems, like their languages, 
were no doubt part of their common Aryan inheritance with 
enough likeness and unlikeness to make the comparison convincing. 

We turn now to the other class of scale, the transilient, which 
proceeds by leap to the Fourth, with a bridge note. It might 
seem at first glance as if these were not very different from the 
chromatic scales, since in both there is as a rule a leap of a minor 
Third. But there is a great difference in the melodies which 
embody them. A chromatic melody tends to centre in the 
cluster of semitones, and to treat the leap as an occasional excur 
sion. A f transilient melody moves more freely, and the leap is 
the most important material of the song. 

We found a hint in the Gurkha and Garhwall songs that these 
transilient scales had their home in the east of India. Although 
they are to be found everywhere, they seem to be especial favourites 
in Bengal; and the Bengali system especially insists on heptatonic 
(sampurna), hexatonic (sMdava), and pentatonic (odava) as a primary 
division of Rdga, whereas the other systems, while recognizing 
these, draw no special attention to them. Of these names there is 
something to be said about odava. It is always understood to mean 
a set of five ; but the word is neither Sanskrit nor Prakrit. 
What the connexion is, if any, with Auclam (an unlocated place- 
name) or the OcJras (who inhabited Orissa = Odra-deslia) or with 
odrapusfipa (the Chinese rose) must be left to others to determine. 
No Indian language owns odava, and, if the name is foreign, the 
scale may have been imported. That it is foreign is further sug 
gested by the form slddava, a set of six/ formed on analogy, for 
which the proper Sanskrit would have been shashtaka. 

Indian theory, which is nothing if not complete, has names 
also for scales of fewer notes. Scales of one note, which seems 
a little Irish, are called ArciJca (i. e. belonging to the Rigveda). 
This is curious since the Rk was by common consent chanted to 
three notes. Of two notes, Gdthika; Gdthas were religious non- 
Yedic songs. Of three notes, Sdmika, belonging to the Sdmaveda. 



THE SCALE 123 

(Incidentally, the Sdman chant involved from five to seven notes.) 
Of four notes, Svardntara (= hiatus) ; this seems to be a con 
fession that the tabulation had broken down. Still, the list as 
a whole may be read to mean that a small compass connotes 
antiquity, as we found it connoted also remoteness of locality. No 
one doubts, either, that pentatonic scales precede, what indeed may 
be considered spoiled forms of them, hexatonic and heptatonic. 
They are, logically, older because they are innocent of the Semitone, 
which comes into the scale only when the ear can appreciate the 

major Third. (^/r-~. rp , j = Semitone). Melodies in these scales 
jyLaj or J. Jtiiroi 

have extraordinary strength and sweetness, but not much variety. 

It remains to bring these different scale formations into relation 
with acoustical fact, on the one hand, and with musical fact on 
the other. 

When primitive man and he is to be heard in London streets 
as well as in Otahiti or in the glacial epoch begins to articulate 
his upward whoop or downward wail, he uses his f musical ear . It 
is this ear which is in a low state of development when he loses 
his key or f sings out of tune *. What is it, then, to sing in tune ? 
It is to be able to hear, with a given note, certain other notes which 
are present in it at various pitches and intensities. e The note is 
known as the c fundamental , and the c other notes as upper 
partials : the latter diminish in intensity as they rise in pitch. 
Intensity of sound has not yet been measured, and the amount of 
average diminution is not known. The following series omits 
octaves (as mere replicas), and hints at the average diminution by 
time-values : 

b * 



-S~ 

1 3 5 7 9 11 &c. 

The 2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th upper partials are omitted as duplicates. 
The Bb is f tone flat, the F is i tone sharp on notes of the same 
name which are derived from lower partials, and which therefore in 
certain connexions have precedence. Human powers of hearing 
vary a good deal, and still more the power of defining and naming 
what is heard; so that individuals and tribes may be classified 
according as their powers extend to the 3rd, 5th, or even 7th upper 



124 THE SCALE 

partial; there is no certain record of powers that have exceeded 
that. These upper partials are present on all sound-producers ; 
poorest on the tuning- fork and flute, richest in the human voice. 
But they are present in different intensities/ and this fact gives its 
* character to each sound-producer. 

But, secondly, it seems to be a law of music (not of acoustics) that 
no tonal fact can be realized at all without its entering at once 
into all the relationships of which it is capable ; and we must now 
consider this series in another way : 

12 3 456789 10 



"*&gt; 4 9g? 



B *- J r/ i jbJ-r^g & 

*on ^ i * KU I J * :s=; 



? I f f i f I &c - 

Each partial forms with its neighbour in the series an interval 
represented by a * super-particular 2 fraction, and these intervals 
are the ultimate facts of music. They immediately combine to form 
new intervals as quotients : thus, f - f = f , that is, the power of 
hearing the Octave and Fifth carries with it the power to hear the 
Fourth as well. Further, f -7- f = f ; that is, the hearing of the 
Fourth and Fifth involves the appreciation of the major Tone. 
This means that in order to discriminate the major Tone it is not 
necessary to have an ear fine enough to hear the 8th and 9th partials, 
which also give it (because they are partials of the 2nd and 3rd 
partials), but it can be apprehended directly as the c difference 
between (strictly, quotient of) an Octave and two Fifths, 

The power of hearing up to the 3rd partial provides a scheme of 
notes which is known as quintal * harmony; and since this is 
infinite, it would be possible to plot a scale in this harmony alone 
of twenty-two or any other desired number of degrees in the 
octave. But the relationships would begin soon, after the first 
half-dozen or so, to be remote and practically unintelligible. For 
instance, the obvious relationship of C to Bb is that Bb is a minor 
Third (316 cents) from G, and G is a Fifth (702) from C; total 
1018. It is possible in quintal harmony also to reach Bb- from C, 

1 The 2nd partial is prominent in the flute, the 3rd in the clarinet, the 3rd 
and 5th in the human voice, the 7th in bells, the llth in the trumpet. Piano 
forte makers cause the hammer to strike the string at a place which eliminates 
the 7th, which is not wanted. 

3 Of the form . 



THE SCALE 125 

&gt;ut only by calculating upwards in major Tones (5 x 204 = 1020), 
md this process confuses the ear. It does not matter that 1020 is 
lot the same as 1018; for the difference is only - of a semitone, 
md it requires a good ear to distinguish even tenths of Semitones 
n an interval which, like C-Bj?, is derived, and not a matter of im- 
nediate perception like, for instance, C-G, or C E. What matters is 
bhat the ear cannot make so elaborate a calculation as five successive 
major Tones as, indeed, Aristoxenus, quoted above, suggested. 

The ear, therefore, takes by preference the intervals derived from 
the 5th partial, the major Third, which form f tertian 3 harmony. 
As quintal* 7 harmony was derived from the Octave and Fifth, so 
tertian harmony is derived from the Octave, Fifth, and Third ; and 
f septimal harmony, if it is ever used, is derived from these three 
and the 7th partial. In tertian harmony the series is again infinite, 
as indeed any of these series must be, since no basic interval is an 
exact power (or root) of another basic interval. But since there 
are three basic intervals instead of, as before, two, it is found 
by experience that a larger number of derived intervals, about 
eight, are easily intelligible in tertian harmony. We have no 
experience of septimal harmony, and it is impossible to say 
what intervals the ear would here. accept. And this is important. 
With the acoustical material available, many and diverse scales 
might be constructed, and they would all look equally well or 
ill on paper. Whether Indians have modified the ancient Hindu 
theory of strictly quintal and tertian intervals by the introduction 
(due, Mr. Clements suggests, to Mohammedan influence) of sep 
timal intervals, can only be established on evidence. If any people 
hears septimal intervals, the Indians and Greeks, with the fine ear 
which practised and the fine discrimination which recorded the 
niceties of the genera and the gramas, would have been among the 
first to do it; but to establish the fact it requires, in the complete 
absence in their theoretical works of any hint that they did so, 
a broader basis of observation than is provided by the performance 
of a single singer. 

With regard to the transilient scales, I received from the melodies 
sung in them a strong impression that they were in just intonation 
that a major and minor Tone made a major Third, that the Sixth 
was just and not sharp. There is no reason, however, why tertian 
intervals (which this implies) should not have been accepted in 



126 THE SCALE 

pentatonic scales later, and yet the origin of these have lain origi 
nally in pure quintal harmony. An argument may be found to 
support this. 

Quintal pentatonic scales are based on a series of five Fifths 
say, C-Gr-D-A-E. Reducing these within the limits of an Octave, 
and relating them to a common tonic, we get the following scheme 
for the five pent atonies : 

CENTS. RATIOS. ( Scale on * white notes, as from 

( G D A E 

C 1200 2 C C C C C 

b b b b 

Bb 996 16:9 Bb Bb Bb 

$ it 

A 906 27:16 A A 

b b 

Ab 792 128:81 .,. Ab 

G 702 3:2 G G G G 

F 498 4:3 ... P F F F 

$ 8 

E 408 81:64 E 

b b b 

Eb 294 32:27 Eb Eb 

D 204 9:8 D D D 

C 1 C C C C C 

The worst scales the least euphonious, those which involve the 
more abstruse fractions are those of C and E ; that of D is the 

best. This D scale 

fr 

Ex... 



D E G A C D 
is the type, which goes under the name of Sdrang, of a favourite 
form of pentatonic Hag. We saw also (p. 70) that there was a 
decided preference in the Garhwali songs for the A scale : 

* & 



192. p: 



A C D E G A 

though not to the exclusion of the C and E scales. 1 

1 In the Journal of the English Folksong Society (vol. xvi), Miss Gilchrist records 
her belief that the typical Scotch pentatonic is the G scale. A cursory glance 
at the first hundred or so in Petri s collection suggests that the Irish favourites 
are the G and A scales. (A song may be in a pentatonic scale although more 
than five distinct notes are touched in it, if it has only five substantive notes and 
the other one or two are used as passing notes.) 



THE SCALE 127 

But the D and A scales (and G) are the best of the five only if 
jhe intervals are taken as strictly quintal ; if tertian intervals are 
substituted^ i. e. if { merging 3 takes place, the five scales are equally 
: good . If 5 therefore, these particular scales are found to be the 
Favourites in a country, it is an argument that all the pentatonics 
were in that country taken as strictly quintal, at any rate origi- 
aally, though tertian intervals may have crept in later. 

The Sruti enters into music as one of three definite intervals. 
Just as there are three diatonic intervals (war as), so there are three 
enharmonic intervals (xrutis). The diatonic intervals we have seen 

to be 

Major Tone, ; 4 rutis 
Minor Tone, ^, 3 fruti* 
Semitone, f, 2 srutis 

and the enharmonic intervals are such intervals as correspond to 
a difference of one between the Srutis of the svaras (or are the 
various quotients of the fractions which answer to those svaras). 
The numbers 4, 3, and 2 may be handled in three ways so as to 
produce a difference of one ; thus : 
(a) 4-3 = 1 ifuti 

I *T 9 s = f = 22 cents. 

This is the * indicative sruti, the { Comma of Didymus \ 
(1) 3-2 = Ifruti 

3-Jf =25-70 cents ( s t r ictly, 70-6). 
This is the c small semitone . 

(c) 3 + 2-4 = 1 sruti 

* if- f = Iff = 90 cents. 
This is the c Pythagorean Limma \ 

But these intervals as such remain theoretical. They are actually 
sung only as increments of other larger intervals. 1 There is no case 
in any Sag where two notes are separated, for instance, by the 

Comma of Didymus. That interval represents the difference 

$ 
between the two major Sixths (A and A), or between the major and 

k $ 

minor Tone (D and D). But both notes (A and A, &c.) do not 

appear in the same Hag ; the Rag contains the one or the other. 

1 * Heterotone J would be a better name for 4mtti than the usual translation 
microtone . 



128 



THE SCALE 



We may notice in passing that this principle extends to the 
svaras also. A Rag, Pilu for instance, has an E and an E[? with 
a D and a F on either side of them ; but in a given passage either 
E or E|? will occur, but not both as a rule. And the principle, 
though not so strictly carried out, may be traced with tones as 
well as semitones. It is not at all uncommon for a Rag, especially 
in southern India, to omit a note in ascent, but its next door 
neighbour in descent. Two notes, A and Bfcr, being c m } the 
scale an ascending passage will employ by preference G A-C, 
a descending C Bb-Gr ; though quite possibly both notes will be 
used occasionally. The same thing is common enough in our own 
Folk-song : 



Ex. 

193. 



Abroad as I was walking. 1 

I 2 3 



^m 



10 



m 



12 



13 



14 



15 



16 






Here the salient notes are clearly C, F, and Bb, 2 and it is interest 
ing to see how the tetrachords C-F, F-BI; are filled. In bars 1 and 
13 we have the equivalent of 



i94.ff^~~rjp 

though both notes (D and Eb) are present in ascent and descent in 
bars 2 and 3. In bar 7 occurs 



Ex." 



and in bars 9 and 11 




EX* 

196. M 



1 From the Journal of the Folksong Society, vol. iii, p. 124, No. 40. 

The reader may wish to add G. But &lt; modes are tetrachordal ; the tetra- 
chord hangs about them like the l shame of the swaddling-clothes ; and the 
tetrachords are certainly not D-G-, G-C. 



THE SCALE 129 

In these instances a non-modal writer would T&gt;e more likely to have 
employed 

7 11 



and he would probably have sharpened the F s. The principle is, 
then, broadly that between two salient notes modal melody tends to 
employ only one of two alternatives, and, for choice, that alternative 
which is nearest to the note which is being left, not to that which 
is being approached. 

It is difficult to show this convincingly with regard to the wuti; 
but it may be seen in the grace-notes which occur like enclitics in 
many Indian melodies, i.e. they belong to the note which is being 
quitted, not to that which is being approached : 
Ex. - JLm M.I 



. 

J 



They are on the principle of the violinist s slide. In passing from 
C to G he does not use all the intermediate notes, but only the 
first few : 

Ex.: 

2oa i^i= 




Hence comes no doubt the statement that for southern India the 
quarter-tones (Srutf) are confined to grace (Day, p. 30). But that 
is not the usual acceptation of the word in the South. &ruti there 
means keynote. A singer has c lost his xruti when he sings out of 
tune ; the drone strings of the mnd are called the arafo", and so on. 
This is clearly a transference of meaning from a nice distinction 
of pitch to that which determines the pitch *. 

But in the North fruti has retained its original meaning, nice 
distinction of pitch. There, however, its nature has been sometimes 
misapprehended. Stress has been laid on there being twenty-two 
of them, and the scale has come to be regarded as an octave with 
twenty-two stopping places. Consequently theoretical musicians 
are to be found who are prepared to sing from C to C, stopping at 
twenty-one places on the way. We have seen that this is wrong 
artistically, because melodies rarely use two of these, and never 
three, in succession. But it is wrong scientifically also. For the 
$ruti did not arise as a division, equal or unequal, of the semitone. 
It has no independent existence. It is only a difference between 



130 



THE SCALE 



two intervals considerably larger than itself. Thus the A which 
we reach from C through D, and the A reached through P or E 

differ by the interval A-A (f x f =f) the Comma of Didymus . 




So also with. 



Small 
Semitone. 



Pythagorean 

Limma. 
tf * 



Ex. 




the xruti is not an independent interval, but an increment of, or 
a defalcation from, some larger one. , We get in this a suggestion 
which will reconcile the North and South Indian connotations of 
the word. A Sruti is not, as it has hitherto been understood to be, 
the smallest audible sound, but the accurately audible sound that 
which is c heard in accurate relationship to some other. This 
position throws some doubt on Helmholtz s x account of the Greek 
quarter-tone (following Plutarch 2 ) as a division (ff. x f ) of the 
semitone (f). It seems possible, at least, that as the Greek and 
Indian systems were alike in so many other respects, they were 
alike also in deriving their enharmonic tones from a persistence 
in just intonation and a refusal to compromise, i. e. to temper. 

It is hard for Europeans to realize the state of things here de 
scribed; but we have occasional glimpses of it. The major Sixth, 




for instance, tends to be sung as a larger interval (since the B is 
forced up by the harmony to be a major tone from A) than that in 

* Sensations of Tone, English translation, 1875, p. 407. 

2 De Musicctj chap. viii. He says the old players took the semitone as simple 

(A-Bb), not a compound interval (A A Bb). Later the semitone was divided. 



THE SCALE 



131 



Ex. 

204. 



.( ...1 



=*^ 



Nor did at Thou suf-fer 



where the interval E-FJ is a minor tone. The first of these is, in 

fact, what we have been speaking of as the interval CA, the 
second the interval C A. The distinction between these two is 
also made use of in Sehuberfs Ganymed for a particular effect : 

Ganymed. SCHUBERT. 

Ex. 
205. 



Hin - auf strebt s, hin- 



Sr 









- 



^P b ^ 



hin - auf strebt s, hin-auf ! 




schwe - ben die Wol - ken ab - warts 




Here the harmonies of the third and fourth bars wrench the melody 



132 THE SCALE 

up a major tone/ whereas the scale would demand in the third 
bar a minor tone ; so that for two whole bars the words strebt s 
hinauf ! hinauf } the voice is travelling at a pitch a fraction higher 
than normal, and admirably illustrates the meaning of the text, 
while at es schweben it drops back (again owing to the har 
monies) to normal pitch. 

This example shows also the other two wutis. The Comma of 
Didymus and the Pythagorean Limma are correlatives; the two 
together make up the diatonic semitone (22 -f- 90= 112). The latter 
occurs, therefore, in the fifth bar of Ex. 205. The small semitone 
appears also in the accompaniment of the next bar. The locus 
classicus for this interval is the Elizabethan madrigal, in which 
a minor Third is frequently, and with beautiful effect, substituted 
for a major Third, as a deliberate False. Relation J : 

WEELKES, 1598. 
Phil - lis hath sworn she loves the man, 



Ex. 
206. 



f ift * --- 

^ T * f- 

Phil - lis hath sworn, . . Phil - lis hath 
Phil - lis hath sworn 

r ; J. J- J j_ 

Phil - lis hath sworn she loves the man, 









r 


- m ^ , ^^ 













aworn, Phil - lis hath sworn, Phil - lis hath sworn she loves the man, 



&lt;g; L & 



. . she loves the man, 

or, by the reverse process, constitutes the peculiar charm of the 
Tierce de Picardie . 

There are also other xrutis* in European employ. (1) The 
difference between an Octave and three major Thirds (1200-386 

1 C, the sixth of the scale, is normally a minor tone from Bb, the fifth. But 
the basses Eb and F in the third and fourth bars are a major tone apart. And 
therefore the melody which they bear (the Bb and C) must here be separated 
by a major tone. Similarly, in the fourth and fifth bars, where we have modu 
lated to F minor, the F and the G (and therefore the C and the D) are a major 
tone apart. 



THE SCALE, 



133 



x 3 = 42 cents). It is present wherever, for instance, GJ is 
baken as Ab. A fine example of this forms the climax of the 
introductory bars to the second Act of the WalMre. (2) The 
lifferenee between four minor Thirds and an Octave (316 x 4 1200 
=64), of which a rather wooden example is to be found leading 
up to an entry of the C major subject in the overture to Smetana s 
Bartered Bride. (3) The difference between twelve Fifths and seven 
Octaves (702x12-1200x7 = 24). This occurs in a descending 
Eorm in the six bars which follow Wotan s words So kiisst er 
lie Gottheit von dir at the end of the Walkure, and, ascending, 
in the five bars which close the first of Vaughan Williams s Five 
Mystical Songs : 

poco raU. 



Ex. 

207. 



J"5 



-I- 

LA 








And the same fact is present, of course, whenever the whole tone 
scale is played (204 X 6-1200=24), the musical effect of which is 
closely comparable to that of the Pratimadhyama scales of India. 
Then there is that magnificent mounting bass which compasses 
a Fifth in seven semitones (112x7-702 = 82) towards the close 
of the Finale of Schubert s C major Symphony; and there are no 
doubt instances of other such intervals. The point is that we use 
enharmonic intervals for precisely the same reason as the Indians 
for their jubilant or pathetic effect; only we do it in a different 
way. Equal temperament has nothing to do with this matter we 
hear the effect in the orchestra and imagine it on the piano ; though 
it has a great deal to do with the vocalization of a melody. 



816113 



CHAPTER Y 
MODE 

THE terms scale and c mode are frequently used as synony 
mous, because it is often unimportant to insist on the distinction 
between them. But in their essence they name two primary 
musical instincts. Scale is the expression of the melodic impulse, 
mode is ultimately the outcome of the rhythmic impulse. They 
are relative, not absolute terms; and in two ways. First, any 
given series of notes may be in a scale, or it may be in a mode, 
according to the moments of it which we are taking to be impor 
tant. And, secondly, it can seldom be said that at any given 
point in a melody a change of mode or scale has taken place ; the 
change requires to be established , and that is a matter of degree. 
There is a sense also in which scale is established mode. We 
propose shortly to discuss these points. 

A change of scale is a change in a prescribed order of notes 
brought about by the melodic impulse. It is a more or less violent 
change in pitch of some one note which results in musical effect , 
exhilarating, pathetic, &c. In the following Song of Somerset, 
c Sovay, Sovay/ the pathetic flattening at (a) is a purely melodic 

Sovay, Sovay. 



J UJ 



(a) 



f 5 ( 

1 f 



effect. It causes the melody to droop a little at that point, and so 
to give value to the Pfl when it is restored later on. The ear has 
been cheated for the moment of the major scale it expected, and 
has been presented with another, the major scale with the flat 
seventh. It is owing to this species of deception which they 
involve that such devices are known as Musica fief a, feigned music. 
They come in the first place as vocal accommodations, but they 
stay as musical effects. They do not establish, they only suggest 
a new scale. If in this song the Ftfs had been the rule and the 



MODE 135 

?$ s the exception, we should have said the melody was in another 
icale (of G) or in a mode (of C). For our present purpose, since 
ve are discussing G not C, it is a change of scale. 

A change of mode is a change in the relative importance not of 
me note, but of all, brought about by a shift of the rhythmic 
jentre of gravity. The following Folk-song/ A sailor s life/ shows 
n its three versions a change both of scale and of mode. We may 
:ake the germ of the song to be contained in the pentatonic form 
marked I, which is placed for comparison between two derivatives, 

[I and III. 

A sailor $ life. 



JT J 



Ex. 

209. 



.^uua 





ihJ^tr- 












v 3 -* 1 - ^ -4F- ^ 



-jtj r f u * ^^gj- 



I is a pentatonic Dor-aeolian &gt; on D. II and III are only slightly 
veiled pentatonics, but two important changes have taken place. In 
II the notes of the scale have not been altered, but, by the rhythmical 
stress which is thrown upon it, G has become the tonic, and the 
mode is now a Mixolydian on G. In III, though the rhythmic 
points are not quite the same as in I yet they are not vitally 
different ; but the addition of an F# implies a change of scale, 
which is now a Miocolydian on D? 

It is the custom to consider the C-c scale to be the primary 

1 From the Journal of the Folksong Society. 

A really beautiful instance of the musical process here involved is a shifting 
Ground of Purcell s quoted on p. 176 of E. Walker s History of Music in 
England, 1907. 



136 MODE 

series of notes from which others (D-d, E-e, &c.) are derived, and 
of which they are modes. But it would be logically as defensible, 
and historically more correct to consider C-c as a mode of the D-d 
scale. The fact is that a mode when it is thoroughly established 
anywhere becomes the scale of that country, or countryside ; thus, 
some of England sings by preference in the Mixolydian, some of it 
in the Dorian, and so on, Ireland in the Mixolydian and Aeolian. 
There can be little doubt that the difference between the Sa-grama 
and the Ma-grdma 3 though it figures as a difference of scale, 

Sa. CDEFGABC) CDEFGABC) 

f or r 

Ma. C D E F G A B C ) C D E Ffl G A B C) 

was originally a difference of mode 

Sa. CDEFGABC \ 

Ma. F G A B C D E Fj 

Thus when mode is thoroughly established it comes to be regarded 
as scale. 

This distinction between mode and scale is commonly thought to 
apply only to an antiquated style of music. But the thing is per 
fectly well known to us in modern music whenever modulation 1 takes 
place, as a familiar melody from Brahms s First Symphony shows : 

Andante sostenuto. 

i , *^ PP (&lt;*) 



j 



The modulation comes at (a) in the form of a pathetic flattening of 
the obvious note, and at (i) as a heightening of the meaning by 
a shift of the melodic centre of gravity. Every musician feels the 
effect at (a) to be quite different from that at (6) ; the first is 
a difference of scale, the second of mode, and both involve a tem 
porary change of key; the first is like a mechanical, the second 
like a chemical change. Without some such connecting link as 
this with our own music we are apt to look on unusual scales and 
modes, especially wlien they display such intricacy as the Indian 
scale (grama) and mode (murchana) and individualized mode (rdga), 
1 i e. modification, taking another { mode 1 , or way of doing things. 



MODE 137 

as merely weird and fanciful. They are, however, formulas which 
are doing all they can to express the facts of unharmonized melody, 
if we will let them ; and we should approach them in that spirit if 
we were not hindered by our harmonic preconceptions. For we 
have to forget a good deal before we hear the beauty in such as 
this : 

Allegro. W=92. 
Ex.: 

211.: 

/ 

A-la-ka-la - lla la-da-ga-ga-ni A - la - ka-la - lla la-da-ga-ga-ni 



A - la- ka-la - lla la - da-ga-ga-ni Ya - ra - mu-ni ri. 

My heart rejoiced, seeing the locks on the forehead of Rama wave, when 
he with ease and grace put down the pride of the giant, Maricha, and broke 
the bow of &va at the beck of the sage, Yisvamitra. 

If we could treat it as in D minor, with a mere D drone without 
harmonies, we should be happier; the last bar would then have 
finality. But the drone is G, and for us this leaves the tune in the 
air. It takes a long time before we become accustomed to this 
queer way of looking at things, and can take it as it presents itself. 
TVe keep wishing to accommodate the tune by appropriate har 
monies at this or that point, and do not easily realize that these 
introduce subsidiary modes (which we can, however, in virtue of 
those harmonies, subsume under the main one), but that a change 
of drone (without harmonies), by introducing a subsidiary mode, 
merely destroys the principal mode. 

As a preliminary to the consideration of Indian modes we may 
review our own (omitting the F-f and B b modes as obsolete) : 



Ex.: 



They all consist of similar tetrachords ; those on C, D, and E being 
arranged as disjunct to one another, those on G and A as conjunct. 1 

1 This is not a mere piece of theory. It will be found that melodies in the Gl 
and A modes (the Mixolydian and Aeolian) throw much emphasis on the seventh 
note, the terminal of the second tetrachord, which those in the other modes do 
not, at any rate to the same extent. 



138 MODE 

The mode of D was, we said, the historically prior of all these 
modes. Its tetrachords are disjunct and similar. We may keep 
them disjunct, but make them dissimilar ; in which case we get, 
for instance, the A mode transposed down to D : 



Ex.: 



Also in these two forms of the D scale we may sharpen the leading 
note, in which case we get respectively the c ascending } minor : 



Ex. 



214. i 



and the harmonic * minor : 



Ex.: 
215 .3 



By these three methods, (1) similar tetrachords, (2) dissimilar tetra 
chords, and (3) scalar alteration, we can account for all the modes 
we know. There are of course other ways of accounting for them, 
but this is the plan on which the Indians have worked ; only they 
have carried it further and included every practicable combination, 
of both tetrachords. 

With them modes are pure (xuddJia), or ( mixed"* (mishra, san- 
kirna), or altered (cMydlaga, sdlanka). 

They are pure when the two tetrachords of which they are 
composed are similar. In theory every note of a Rag should be 
consonant (samvddi) to some other, and the effect of this would be 
to make the tetrachords similar, as we have seen that they are 
in the European modes. But they are similar in others also, such as 
Bhairau. 



Ex. 
216. 



where every note is consonant to some other, and C doubly con 
sonant; and 

Todi. _ * 1 ^ 



Ex. 
217. 



b 

in which not C, but Afr is doubly consonant. Modes are mixed 
when the tetrachords are dissimilar, as in 



MODE 139 

Bilaskhani Todi. 



Ex. 

** 



in which C and Ab are doubly consonant, but B has no consonant. 
The Greeks also knew these modes, called them by the same name, 
fonoi miktoi, and defined them in the same way. 

Altered modes. The words chdydlaga and mlanka mean different 
things. Chdydlaga, lit. shadowy , is used in the Panjab, and prob 
ably elsewhere, to mean a mode in which the B has been flattened 
(or the Bb sharpened). Sdlan&a is not a Sanskrit word at all. It 
is a piece of wemoria tecfinica. 1 The seventy-two melakartas are 
divided into thirty-six with Fij, Suddhawadhyama, and thirty-six 
with Fjf, Pratimadhyama -, and Sdlanka is the first melakarta of the 
Pratimadhyamas. It therefore came to be used as a general term 
for any Rag that had the F sharpened. At present Chdydlaga seems 
to be used in Hindostan for both the adventitious Bb and F$, and 
Sdlanka similarly in the Carnatic. Simple instances would be : 

Jhinjoti. 

ajfe===L-_ , -r T =fe g =te=^=j 



Behag. 



in these the Bb and F$ are alternative, not additional. The 
principle is extended to other notes, E b, for instance, in 



Desh. 
9 



221.5 



This does not account, however, for all the varieties, and the 
subject needs more investigation ; still it carries us some way. 
All three kinds ( pure , mixed , and altered ) are known to 
Bharata, though he names them differently. The mixture 3 of 
dissimilar tetrachords he calls the twilight of the Rag (jdfa- 
sddhdrana). For the altered Rdg he gives no name, but he 

1 The high-sounding names of the seventy- two South Indian melakartas are 
arranged on a plan so that those who know the key of it can tell at once from 
the name what the constitution of the particular melakarta is. 



140 MODE 

explains l that the Ma-grama can be formed directly , as we should 
say c modally , from the Sa-grdma 



C D E 



F G A B C 

FGABC&EF 



and also ly reckoning (samkhyena), as we should say by scale , 

CDEF G A B C 

CDEFftGABC 

He speaks also of the lower tetrachord (mandragati, lit. low-going) 
and upper tetrachord (tdragati, high-going), but he does not explain, 
apparently, how the ( twilight J jdt ts were put together. He tells us, 
for instance, that the compound (vikrta) jail, sacljakaisifa, is made 
up of 



and 

Gandhari. 
Ex.: 



I 






but he does not explain which elements of the simple jdtfo were 
taken to form the compound. A knowledge of this would con 
tribute a good deal to the history of Rdga. 

Students of ancient Greek music agree in this, that there came 
a time when the Harmomd was replaced by the Tonos. The change 
may have taken centuries ; it was placed on record by Ptolemy 
(A.D. 150). The Harmonid* (lit. joint, union, apposition), which 
was a section of the gamut consisting of two conjunct tetrachords, 
was not associated with any definite pitch, but adaptable according 
to the singer s needs. The Tonos (lit. tension, pitch) was likewise 
a section of the gamut, but consisted of two tetrachords plus the 
disjunctive tone (which might be between them or beyond them) 
and formed a complete octave, each Tonos being calculated from the 
same pitch. There seems to be no record in the ancient writers of 
the Tonoi having been sung upon a drone-note ; Gevaert makes no 

1 Ndtyatastra, adh. 28, gl. 35. 

3 Monro explains this as adjustment in the sense of * tuning . It seems 
not impossible that it names the joining* of two tetrachords to form a hepta 
chord. 



MODE 141 

mention o it, and to ison, the modern word for drone, is not in 
Liddell & Scott. But Pachtikos 1 speaks of the drone as being 
an indisputable relic of the original musical system } . And 
though the silence of so observant a people as the Greeks is diffi 
cult to get over, it is just possible that they took so obvious a thing 
for granted. 2 In the Harmonid the notes were related according to 
their unctions 3 (kata dunamiri); the extremes of the tetrachord 
were * fixed (kestekotes), the intermediate notes were movable 
(klneisthai pephukotes, or klnoumenoi) and were distributed within 
a certain prescribed &lt; locus of variation" 1 (topos fes kineseos). The 
( functions of the intermediate notes meant therefore, apparently, . 
their relations to the extreme notes (of the tetrachord). In the 
Tono*, on the other hand, we see a segment of a stereotyped scale 
(of two octaves) in which the functions of notes within the 
tetrachord are, though they still exist, no longer of importance, 
but the individual notes of the scale are related according to their 
{ position (kata thesin) with regard to some one of the notes of this 
scale taken as tonic and, in India certainly in Greece perhaps 
supplied with a drone. 

Unfortunately it is not possible at present to give such a detailed 
account of the Indian Murchana (the equivalent of Harmonid) ; 
more will perhaps be possible when Bharata s NatyaSdttra has been 
adequately translated. He speaks of the Predominant (amsa) as 
the foundation and source of musical charm (raga), as determining 
the tetrachord (ahga) above (tdra) and below (mandra), as distinctly 
perceptible in a combination of different notes, as a prominent 
(balm) note provided with consonances (samvddl] and assonances 
(anuvacfa), and as giving birth to the initial (graha) and final 
(nydsa) and to three other notes of which the meaning is not given 3 
(vinydsa^ apanydsa, and samnydsa), but which help in some way to 
constitute the tetrachord. The initial and final are definitely said 
to begin and end the tetrachord, and the initial is always a Pre 
dominant. Finally, the Predominant may, according to the par 
ticular mpde, be any one of five notes ; and this seems to fix the 
meaning of Predominant definitely as c the note of conjunction of 

1 Aismata He#5raca, Athens, 1905, Introd., Iviii. To ison touto, hoper ananlir- 
r$tos einai bebaion leipsanon prohyparchouses harmonik$s mousiJtfSj $cheitai, &e. 

2 There is no mention of the drone in the Sanskrit theorists either. 

3 But at least it is clear that they named relationships to the terminal (nyasa), 
and are therefore analogues to the Greek kinovmenot. 



142 MODE 

two tetrachords : for if modern Indian ragas are analysed they 
will be found ; if pure or mixed , to contain from one to five 
possible points of conjunction ; if c altered , more. 

So that the amxa l seems to take exactly the place of the mese in 
Greek music, and has the same sort of satellites round it. Mad- 
hyama, middle/ accurately translates meae, and it is on the face of 
it likely that they named originally the same musical fact. We 
must digress for a moment to discuss madhyama. 

It is noticeable that only two notes of the scale have names with 
an assignable meaning ma&hyama, middle, and paficama, fifth. 
Sarfja ( born of six ) might make a similar claim ; but the ex 
planations of it have hitherto been fanciful. 2 Madfyama and 
pancama are next door neighbours, and of these wadkyama appears 
to be the older name, i.e. to be applicable to an earlier state of the 
scale; for (1) they can hardly be contemporaries, otherwise they 
would have been called caturtha (fourth) and pancama, and (2) since 
no other note is named by an ordinal number this particular note 
pancama appears to be so named for distinction, possibly from the 
madJiyama (with which it constantly disputed the hegemony). 
From the earliest times the scale is quoted as consisting of seven 
notes, the eighth being a repetition; and the madJiyama divides 
these seven, in the same way as the mese, into two tetrachords. 
It may be added that as the other four notes of the scale (Rsabka, 
Gdndfidra, Dliawata, and Nishdda) are all apparently place names, 
they may have been adopted into the scale as the local way of 
passing from one end of the tetrachord to the other, and hence are 
of the same nature as the Greek fcinoumenoi and this survives 
also in the modern scale, for it is these notes, and no others, which 
are liable to be made flat (komal) and very flat (atikomal). 

But by Bharata s time all the eight notes are clearly defined; 
they are, as we should write them, (0) D E F G A B C, because the 
old theory names the upper extremity of the svara. The madJiyama 
is the note G in a scale C-C, not, as before, in a heptachord D-C , 
and he has a great deal to say about it. It is the eldest (pravara), 
the imperishable (and$in) 9 the c note fixed by the singers of the 
Sdmaveda in the GancHiarvalcalpa (musical treatise), the { note 

1 The word means a part of a whole. Since it appears in manuscripts 
indifferently with anga ( part 1 ), which is a name for the tetrachord, am fa may 
originally have meant tetrachord (i.e. part of the whole mmcJiana], and later 
the note on which the tetrachord started. 2 See Chapter X. 



MODE 143 

which would still subsist though all the other notes of the mode 
should disappear . This last delightful hyperbole could not have 
been applied to the amxa, which, though it regulated the notes in 
its tetrachords, was itself liable to be shifted, and the tetrachords 
with it. 

In modern music Pa is the imperishable * note, i.e. it is never 
sharpened or flattened as are the other notes, with the exception of 
Sa. So that we see here perhaps the transition from the hepta 
chord consisting of two conjunct tetrachords meeting at the ma- 
dkyama, to an octachord based on the Fifth-relationship of Sa and 
Pa (the new madhyama) with the movable amxa doing the work of 
the old fixed madhyama. In other words we have the transition 
from the Harmonid to the Tonos. 

An instance will make this clearer : 

Ex, 

((\) II ^_ _ & - 

Ma. 

is a murchana with two similar tetrachords and with its madhyawta 
at A. A, then, is the note of greatest emphasis. Songs sung in 
this mode came to have a certain character whatever it might be ; 
let us say, sombre. They would then lie on the whole in the upper 
part of the compass of the mode not necessarily in the upper 
register of the voice, for the mode might be taken at any pitch 
and the Predominant note (early madftyama, later amfa) would con 
sequently lie low in the song. In order that the low position of 
the A, on which the character of the song depended, should be 
effectively felt, a note about the position of P, let us say, assumed 
the character of fundamental note the murchana had of course, as 
such, no fundamental and if instruments were used, this funda 
mental was furnished with a drone. Thus the murchana (Harmonid) 
passes into the Rag (Tonos) : 




Ex.: 

225.1 



Dr. Am. 



and the madfyama (A) of the murcJiana, the meeting point of two 
similar tetrachords, becomes the amfa of the Rag, the central note 
of the tessitura, while a new note, C, is now the imperishable , &c., 
madhyama of the Rag. But in the new Rag there was no need to 



144 



MODE 



have the tessitura always in one place, since the character of songs 
that might be sung in it varied ; and it might be moved, without 
doing much violence to the Rdg&gt; to any note except B|? and E (of 
this particular Rag), because at neither of these points could the 
amsa be the meeting point of two tetrachords. If it was moved to 
either of these points, B|? for instance, there was a tendency to 
flatten the E and so to develop a different Rag. 
Let us try to realize this in a melody : 

Shardula-vikridita. 1 
BX.H?- 
22B.1 



1 



Hi 



3E 



^ 



m 



m 






^ 




If we put away all thoughts of a tonic as we understand it and 
simply pick out the most prominent notes of this tune, we should 
probably say that in the first eight bars they were : 



227.E 



in the next six : 



and in the last six : 



Ex. 

228. 






Ex. 

229.M 



f 



i. e. G and A twice, and D, E, F, and high and low C once each. 
The scale therefore might be written : 



Ex. 



230. i 



PPP 



It is difficult for us not to attach more importance to the low C 
than is here shown; both because the tune appears to end there, and 

1 Shardula-mkridita is the name of a Sanskrit metre ; and the rhythmical aspect 
of this melody is discussed in Chapter VIII. 



MODE 145 

because, if we emphasize that note, the tune is in our major mode, 
i. e. in one of the only two that we know. But the tune is, like 
most Folk-song, circular ; after the end it goes back to the begin 
ning and finishes there in this case probably with the phrase, 



Ex. 

231. 



though the D is not thereby made the tonic either ; in fact, there 
is no tonic exactly in our sense. Also, we do not easily put our 
selves into the frame of mind of a person who knows not two 
modes, but from 62 to 162, and are not so easily content to leave 
off up in the air, so to say. 

But though there is no tonic as we understand it, there is a Pre 
dominant (G at the beginning, A in the middle, and either G or 
A at the end of the song). So that the song is conceived as in 
one of two modes (murckana). 



Ex. 



i 



282. gy ^ 



Ma. 
or 

II 



. 

r- Ml 

Now Indian songs, and probably other non-harmonic songs, are 
seldom sung twice in the same way, however small the variation 
each time. Some singers would tend to give prominence to the 
G of I, some to the A of II. There would also be many songs 
similar to this one which might be considered to be in mode I or 
mode II according to the particular singer. These would form 
a class ; and the class would depend largely on the character of the 
words sad songs in one class, merry in another, and so on. The 
words of this particular song are of a reflective nature. And 
reflection is associated with a low 6 lie of the voice. So that songs 
in these modes might well keep the G, or the A, for their Pre 
dominant if jubilant, but if reflective might drag it down to the 
consonant (samvddi) note D, or E. 

Next, if we suppose that with the progress of music this general 
tendency to have a high Predominant for some songs and a low 



146 MODE 

one for others becomes more defined and scientific,, the need would 
arise to determine -precisely how high or how low; and a note 
would be taken and enforced from which to measure the height of 
the Predominant. This would be done solely for the musical 
reason of giving more decided character to the tune, of making 
explicit what was before implicit. If then a low lie , such as D 
or E, was required by the character of the song, and C was chosen 
as the measuring note or drone, its c mode would now become 
a Rag (particularized mode) of the form 



Ex. 



234, 



Am. 

or 

Ex. 9 : 



235. l 



Am. 



The Ray of this particular song is stated to be Mand, a Rag used 
in the late evening (a possible time for reflection), and it will be 
seen on turning to the list on p. 151, No. 12,, that the Predominant of 
Hand is given in one part of India as D and in another as E. 

A musical purpose of importance is served by this Predominant 
and its consonant. One of the most effective resources of melody 
is appoggiatura, i. e. the delaying of a note, the raising of pleasing 
expectations. This melody from Tristan, for instance, 



Ex 


0B 9 pp 






p. 




O* ^ ^ 













owes almost its whole force to the enhancement by appoggiatura of 
some simple scheme such as : 



By, ""PSJfy I [ iii .ii.it .1 

*T.ip* J j.l, JP=3 U J U J j J j ^ 



The essential condition of appoggiatura is that the delaying 
note should be felt to be only transitory and the delayed note 
to be relatively final or permanent. This is effected in our music 
by the harmony, expressed or implied, which moves on from sub- 



MODE 



147 



stantive to passing chord and forces the delaying note to yield. 
Thus (substantive chords (a) and passing chords ()) : 



a fc a 



6 a 



Ex. 

238. 



8 



r 



* 1 



J 



And the same is true when the harmonies are only implied,, as in 
the first four bars of this passage from the Ninth Symphony : 





H 1 f ] T p j, p-pf= 




39.^4 


K ""^ K "^ ! 


-^i^ r r r .4 


\y g ~X ^P 


^ ^ ^~ 
& a 5 a 


1 -J 


r ^ fi- v 


J ^ j Jj3- ^:W.5J.JE.^J i^ 


& a 

4_f*n 6 a 









Here the harmonies, implied in the first five bars and expressed 
in the last five, are : 



24O.= 




and at every place marked b the melody gets a purchase on one of 
the constituent notes of these. 

But when there are no chords at all in question the substantive 
nature of the delayed note has to be established in some other way. 
In Indian, as no doubt in ancient Greek and probably (see Chapter 
VI) in the ecclesiastical melodies, this is done by the Predominant 
(amxa, me&e, reciting note] notes receive the force of appoggiaturas 
as they delay this. Thus, in the melody with which we are 
dealing, D being Predominant and G its consonant (both estab 
lished by long association) and C the drone (generally expressed), 
we have appoggiaturas (b) 



148 



MODE 




leading to a substantive note (a) which is either the amsa (D), or its 
consonant (G), or the drone (C). This is a particularly easy Rag 
for us, because C, G, and D are notes we should have no difficulty 
in feeling to be important ; but when, in other Rags, D and A, or 
Eb and Ab, are ama and wmvadl it is not so easy to feel the 
musical impulse, though it is not hard to understand the principle. 
As we have been tracing points in common between Indian and 
Greek music, we may notice two more. One, that the salient 
distinction between the two gramas is found in the four notes, 
F G A B of the Sa-grama and P G A Bt| of the Ma-grama ; and 
this was precisely the distinction between the Greek &lt; lesser 
complete and greater complete systems. Onty the problem 
presented itself differently. In Greece the scales were : 



242. 



and 



o "? 



243.1 



and in India 



Ex. z 
244.: 



and 



245. : 



The other point of resemblance lies in an apparent recognition 
of absolute pitch. The lowest note of the Greek systems "(the 
proslambanomenon) was of the pitch. 



and the lowest note of the vlnd, the oldest instrument of India, is 
that same A. It is difficult to say how far Indians were ever, or ire 



MODE 149 

now, conscious of absolute pitch. There is an interesting com 
parison of the notes of the scale to the cries of animals. Sa is the 
note of the peacock. Ri 9 of the ch&taka, the bird of the rainy 
season. Ga, of the goat. Ma, of the crane. Pa, of the kott, 
generally translated cuckoo, but bearing no resemblance in its vocal 
achievement to our bird ; it hammers out a single note when 
making love in the spring, and its mate joins in, invariably at the 
distance of a tone, and perhaps a rival lover at the distance of 
a semitone. Dha, of the frog. Ni 9 of the elephant. This has 
been quoted as showing that the scale was conceived as a matter 
of absolute pitch; and there is some evidence that the cries of 
animals always keep the same pitch. It may be so : it would 
require special knowledge to decide this point. On the other handV, 
the musicians of to-day have no name for and no means of deter 
mining absolute pitch; and they are not usually backward in 
coining names for, or in devising simple methods of putting into 
operation, any ideas they may possess. 

The theory of grama has remained barren, just because it was 
a mere scientific tabulation and did not sufficiently take account of 
the whole musical fact. It is true that the system of the Carnatic 
is arranged in accordance with it, and that the musicians of Hin- 
dostan hold it as a pious belief. Bat the musical science of South 
India is sadly over elaborated ; and that of the North has followed 
quite another classification (see Chapter VI), The essence of the 
modern music lies in its numerous and intricate Rags, which, being 
modes calculated from one tonic and having the compass of an octave, 
correspond in so far to the Tonoi ; but which again are very unlike 
them on account of their being sections not of one scale common to 
all, but of a variety of scales which practically refuse to be co 
ordinated in Northern India, though not so much so in the South, 
Indian music has in fact retained in full force what, after the 
introduction of the Tonoi, Greek musicians only faintly felt, that 
distinctive ethos of which Plato and Aristotle spoke so enthusi 
astically. 1 _ 

Broadly speaking this transition from the heptachord (murcJiana^ 

1 This may explain why, even to a foreigner, the Rags in the North seem to 
have more individuality, and why the tone of voice in which natives of Hin- 
dostan speak of Carnatic music sounds a little apathetic, whereas Southerners, 
though for the sake of association they like their own Ragams best, always 
seem interested in a Hindostani singer. 



150 MODE 

Jtarmonia) to the octachord (rag^ tonos) is the passage from the 
domination of the Fourth to that of the Fifth, from vocal to 
instrumental music. The voice discovers the consonance of the 
Fourth before that of the Fifth. Its upper notes are the more 
powerful^ and the overtones accordingly more audible. Conse 
quently it is in singing the upper notes that the desire to reach 
a consonant note chiefly makes itself felt. A bass voice, for 

instance, is singing & The E above it sounds clearly 

in his ear : but it is beyond his compass ; he therefore takes the 
lower E as the most obvious consonance. With instruments, how 
ever, the case is reversed. It is the lower notes that are the most 
powerful and yield the clearest overtones; and with these the 
Fifth comes to be appreciated more than the Fourth. In this 
respect, besides that mentioned above, the music of the Carnatic 
shows signs of greater age of having begun earlier that is, and 
lived longer, and reached a further, not necessarily a higher, point 
of development. The amsa is there less a vital element of Edgam ; 
musicians often cannot tell you which note is am$a, and the songs 
make little account of it. This shows that the consonance of the 
Fourth, which the principle of amxa emphasizes, is less keenly felt 
there. And again the songs tend to close on the tonic or the 
Fifth, whereas in the North there is no such preference ; they may 
end anywhere, but do, for choice, on the first note or with the first 
phrase of the song, on whatever note it may bring them to rest. 
Here, for instance, is a typical Carnatic phrase (cp. Ex. 379) : 



with the tune ranging down and up and down again over a Fifth 
and closing with some pomp on the drone note; as against this 
Hindostani phrase (cp. Ex. 380) : 



v 



&c - 



which closes, it is true, on the same drone, but seems to pretend 
that it has reached it by an accident, and strongly emphasizes the 
Fourth (C) of the mode which is in this Rag (Mdlkos) the Pre 
dominant. 



CHAPTER VI 
RAGA 

I ll take my pipe and try 
The Phrygian melody; 
Which he that hears 
Lets through his ears 
A madness to distemper all the brain ; 
Then I another pipe will take 
And Doric music make 
To civilize with graver notes our wits again. 

RANDOLPH. 

THE Rags of Hindostan vary l so much with the locality (those 
of the Carnatic less so) that there seemed to be no better way of 
showing them than to place in parallel columns the Rag as given 
by different authorities (see the Table of Rags, opposite). In the 
first column appear sixty -three Rags as given me by Ashreka Ganga 
Ram, whose teacher was Balwant Eao of Gwalior, a state which 
has a high reputation for music. Ashreka seemed to be particularly 
sure of his knowledge; and from no one else was I fortunate 
enough to get any certain information about the Rags which employ 
quarter-tones (see Nos. 2, 26, 33, 35, 36, 40, 41, 49 in App. II). 
The second column is taken from the Bdlsanglt-bodk (Juvenile 
Singing Tutor) of T. B. Sahasrabuddhe, of the Poona Gayan Samaj 
(singing school). The third column is extracted from a list of 
eighty-three Rags in B. A. Pingle^s Indian Music (Bombay, 1898) ; 

1 All the same, a Hag is one thing, not several. It is, as will be seen, so 
sharply characterized that although in this or that respect one Rag trenches on 
the domain of another, yet it never does so in all respects, and therefore a change 
of one of its constituent notes does not obscure its individuality ; just as a man 
through all sorts of not easily definable varieties of vocabulary or pronunciation, 
or even grammar, may yet be speaking pure English. This is what an Indian 
believes, although he will tell you in the same breath that the Rags are to be 
found in their purity only in the school of music to which he belongs. The 
true Rag, of which all those with which the traveller meets are manifestations, 
is stored up in the heavens or in the bosom of the most educated musician, 
whoever he may be. 



152 RAGA 

the mordents show where he places the murckhanas (grace notes), 
and the murctihana comes as a rule on the amm* as these 
murcJihaiias are generally a Fourth or a Fifth apart the list 
confirms the view that the amfa was placed at the limits of the 
tetrachords. The list in the fourth column was given me, in 
response to a request for the thirty commonest and most popular 
RdgS) by Upendrakisor Ray of Calcutta ; and of these he named 
Nos. 2, 10, 11, 14, 32, and 60 as quite the commonest of all. 
c This list ) he writes, c was obtained by analysing a collection of 
more than one thousand songs. But its value is somewhat im 
paired by the fact that most of these songs were popular, not 
classical. Writers of popular songs are not always good musicians, 
so their opinion as to the ragas has to be accepted with some 
reserve ; the " popular " Behag, for instance, is C D E F G A Bb C, 
popular Lalit is C Db E F G Ab B C, popular Multan is C D Eb 
EH F G Ab At] Bb Btl C (as compared with Nos. 60, 42, and 
41). With regard to the descriptive epithets, which are interesting 
to compare, and which on the whole agree with those of the second 
column, he says e I give them with a good deal of diffidence; in 
fact I am not very sure about the majority of them. The quality 
of restraint is a predominating feature, of Indian music, and this 
precludes any free exhibition of the emotions. Our gaiety and 
sadness often merge into each other : our most impassioned passages 
fail to stir anybody up. There is any amount of enjoyment of the 
deepest kind, but it is undemonstrative and reposeful; it leads not 
to action but to abstraction/ 

In these lists the notes shown by a crotchet head are those which 
are comparatively lightly touched; which are (1) used in ascent 
only or descent only, as the Bt] and Bb in No. 11, or (2) are more 
or less optional, as the F and F# in No. 63. In this Rag the 
usage is E F E and G F# G, never, as a rule, E Fft E or G F G ; 
while in the passage from E to G, or the reverse, either an F or an 
F$ may be used, but Fjf more commonly is used. This is very much 
the same as the mediaeval Musica ficta. And (3) some Edgs are on 
their way from being transilient to being complete ; though all the 
notes are potentially there, some of them are as a rule jumped. 
This is the case in No. 60, where the D and the A are occasionally 
heard, but never dwelt upon. It did not seem worth while to go 
into the details of each Rag in this matter, even if sufficient and 



RAGA 153 

accurate knowledge had been forthcoming; but these three principles 
throw a good deal of light on the conception of Edg. 

The b or over a note means the lowering or raising by some 
kind of $ruti, see p. 117. 

The mark [=] under a note shows the Predominant (amsa). 

Graha [Gr] and Nydsa [Ny] are respectively the notes on which 
a melody is supposed to begin or end ; this rule seems not always 
to be obeyed. 1 The final note has nothing like the importance it 
has in harmonized music. 

Suddha [Shud] means pure ; Chdydlaga [Chaya] means tran 
sitional } (from Chdyd shadow) ; Sankirna [Sank] means ( mixed * ; 
and vakra [vakr] is literally crooked and means that the notes 
are taken not in direct order from Sa to Sa, but that the Edg has 
certain melodic figures as characteristics. 

The twenty-four hours are divided into eight watches, beginning 
at 6 a.m. The Hindus attach much importance to, and are 
wonderfully unanimous as to, the ascription of a* Rag to a particular 
hour of the day or season of the year/ although advanced 
musicians may be found among them who say it has no meaning. 
A musical distinction, however, may be extracted from the Rags 
themselves, independently of the melodies sung in them or of the 
words to which these are set.. Taking column *4, an analysis shows 
that if we may divide the Rags into ( sad * and { merry , the c sad * 
have an average of three flats to an average of two flats in those 
which are merry . Again, if we divide them into morning and 
evening Edgs, the morning have an aip&a ranging about G, the 
evening about E. And the same thing, though in a less marked 
degree, may be deduced independently from the second column. 

1 And this makes it probable that it is not the true explanation. There is 
another, quite different. The Graha is the note which an individual singer 
chooses for his Sa. Thus if a bass voice chooses C, a tenor would take F, and 
a soprano Bb. The Graha is therefore the clef *. And this seems to be in com 
plete agreement with the statement in Bharata that the Graha is identical with 
the amtfa. It seems probable that graha originally meant the upper and nyasa 
the lower extremity of the tetrachord (anga)j and that these meanings have 
been forgotten. 

2 The first thing, sometimes the only thing, that an Indian who is not very 
familiar with the science of music can tell you about a particular Rag which is 
being performed is that it is a morning, or that it is an evening R&g though this 
perhaps does not prove more than that the Rags are as a matter of fact confined 
in their performance to the appropriate time of day. 



154 RAGA 

So that there is a real musical basis for this ascription of time of 
day and of ethos. The ascription of time of year is possibly more 
fanciful. 

But the truer explanation of this deep-seated feeling is more 
likely to lie in the history of Rdga, as far as we may hope to know 
it. What is antecedently probable, and, indeed, is evident from 
the data in the first two chapters of this book, is that songs were 
sung long before Rdga as such was formulated. The Hindu account 
is that there were four sources of Hag : (1) local tribal song, (2) 
poetical creations, (3) the devotional songs of the mystics, and (4) 
the labours of the scientific musicians. The principal ground for 
this belief is, no doubt, that all four causes are in full operation in 
India to-day, and are evolving the Rags of the next thousand years ; 
a secondary reason for thinking it to be the case is to be found in 
the names of Rags such as (1) Kdnadd&gt; the Carnatic ; (2) Hindol, 
a swing; (3) Jogi, a mystic; (4) Sdrang, from Sarangadeva, a musician 
of the thirteenth century. The most important of these sources, 
because the most constant and widespread and unconscious, is the 
first tribal song. Unfortunately, we do not yet possess nearly 
sufficient data to enable us to trace the actual formation of Rdga 
from this source, for India ; but we may get an idea of it from our 
own Folk-song. 

The fourteen versions of a song variously called e The seeds of 
love , * The sprig of thyme , &c., given in the annexed example, 
have been taken from the volumes of the English Folk-song Society s 
Journal, and one of them from Sharp s Folk-songs of Somerset, 
When the English counties have been thoroughly explored, there 
will prove to be not fourteen, but very likely forty or four hundred 
of such versions. The first seven of these are, however, enough to 
show how a melody may take various shapes and yet centre in 
a common mode ; and also how by a slight shift of the centre of 
gravity, brought about by the battle of its several phrases for 
supremacy, the melody slips from one mode to another. At the 
end of each melody is set the scale in which it appears to lie, with 
the strong (balin) and weak (alpa) notes marked, and after these 
the name of the Rdg to which in principle, though not, of course, in 
detail, this scale corresponds. 

Supposing a variety of scales to have been brought into use by 
tribal song from various sources, next comes the poet and weaves 



H.288(2) 



Border Melody 



TKe garden well perfumed 



FOLKSON 



^ S 



m 



- *y -*O" 



ar *; 



1.86 



ii.24 



K5.5. 



il 288(1) 






1 sowed my seeds of 



v^: *; .- - J3 



1 ,5owed tKe seeds of love- 









I sowed. rhe. 5eecU of love 






5ovay .Sovay 



tnc soldier was sc&n alone 



^ ^^o* 4j..iv& k^i^i^^ia^oi wcuo ofc: 

tJ * -J-W- * ^ 



1 once haoL a sprig of jhyme 



Ji i 

TIN i" ^ 









Q . The 5ecoU of love. 

i. 209 ft) 



T C/ I J " 



seeds of love 



J. J 



-n 



1.209(1) 

1.210(1) 


tH 


"k 


a 


&gt;a 


iliff i c 


Au^lr 


iter of Islln^t 

1 h 1 


on 
















y ji"*w u i-- ^ 5 

^ ,L Come you laoLs and las^e^ 

-^.(* J" J 1 r J^V-1 N * 


4 


ay 


=fc 





/^\ 

ZTI 


IT 


" JJ^ 


aL^L 
F rf 


^^ 

-a fi 




N 


^ 


-\&lt;^)- Vj &lt;jt ^ } -^ 4^ l^g y 

-^ * 
v * i i . r 


\ 


j 












U^L 


^-u-+ 


MBB- 


5 J * 




b 








1 

, ^ 




Ex. 24O. Tu face p. 154. 



N. B K So-uay Sovay^, the i of ihese variants, haus in tKe * FUkscngs 

of Som^se^ 9 a pquant mi&gt; t of 1 wo- lime and ilirce-limc, which is 
ne^lecled here for lira, porpo: f compari5cm (cp. p 1 34 1 



RAGA 155 

his mythology round them. He speaks of six original Rags 
which were xudd&a (pure). The six are variously given. The 
six o the Rdgambodha^ as authoritative as any, are, though under 
other names, Nos. 13, 26, 37, 47, 49, 51. Of these, modes were 
taken, sometimes called murchana (rise and fall), sometimes jail 
(species). The next step was to cross the jails and produce hybrids * 
(Chdydlaga, Sankirna, Sdlanka^ Mi&ra, &c.). The poet speaks also 
of the six original Rags having wives (bhdryd) and sons (putra), and 
it seems hardly worth while to translate these into the plain prose 
of f mode and hybrid *. The exact pedigree of the puiraz seems 
to be irrecoverable : their names are all there (though no two lists 
give them alike), but not a trace of form or feature. 

Meanwhile the philosopher has been at work upon the psychology 
of the music, and, without any special theories as to the emotional 
value or the mental effect * of this or that note or combination, 
determines on general grounds the ethos of the Rag, its appropriate 
ness to occasion or to circumstance, or its effect upon the body, or 
its affinities with the various affections of the spirit or aspirations 
of the soul. These views linger in some of the names of the Rag* : 
Dln-ka-(puria), c of. the day 7 , Shdm-(kalian) 3 * evening , Ba&anf, 
c spring*, (Gawft-^mano-hdri, f pleasing to the mind ; or in the 
legends about them, as of Dlpafc (=Mdmvd, No. 49), which en- 
flamed not only the mind, but the body of the singer so that even 
the Jumna could not put out the fire. Descriptive names of this 
kind were commoner and more elaborate in old days. The famous 
Mahd-ryut-patti (Sanskrit-Tibetan vocabulary, seventh century or 
later) has a list of sixty Rdgs } the translations of a few of which 
are * with a voice lik e the thunder-cloud *, * like the trumpeting of 
the elephant , &lt; like a sparrow , like the serpent king*, e like Indra 7 , 
or again, e smooth *, c refined , c making fully to comprehend *, not 
puffed up \ c delighting every organ , having the chief voice in all 
sorts of sounds , and so forth. 

Last of all, when by these three processes the number of Rag* 
had reached hundreds or thousands, came the mathematically- 
minded musician who tabulated the scales as deviations from 
a normal scale (/r&ma), calculated the departures in quarter-tones 
(Srvti), and rung the 13678 changes (prastdra) on the seven notes 

1 I hare been unable^ howerer, to find any explanation of tli way in wMoh 
this was dona 



156 RAGA 

(svara) ; reduced the 108 traditional ways of counting time by 
syllable (aksara), i.e. a development from the longs and shorts of 
poetry, to thirty-five ways of counting it by time-unit (matrd, 1 lit. 
syllable) which are rhythms (tala) ; and provided both Rag and 
Tdl with an intricate memona technica to which not every one 
possesses the key. 2 This kind of musician is commoner in the 
Carnatic than in Hindostan, where theory has reared a less 
imposing edifice. 

The aesthetic effect of the amm is important. Whatever may 
have been its origin and there is every probability that it was the 
tonic in the same sense as the Greek mese its present function is 
to define the tessitura. With harmonized melody we are not 
accustomed to think much about this until perhaps we have to 
consider what sort of song we shall.be able to sing when we are 
tired. 8 But in unharmonizcd music very much, more than any 
thing else, depends on the general level in which the song lies. 
A song with a high tessitura has quite a different character from 
a song with a low one. It was in this very point that in Greece 
the * plaintive* modes (e.g. the Mixolydic) were distinguished from 
the * soft and convivial* (e.g. the Lydic), according to Dr. Macran 
(Harmonics of Aristoxenus, 1902, pp. 39-81), An example of the 
plaintive kind of Greek song with a high tessitura (and the Mixo 
lydic fifth) may be seen in Pachtikos (Aismata Hellenica, Athens, 
1905, No. 133), a funeral dirge circling about B, Bb, and A, and 
descending to a tonic E. There is no doubt also of the low position 
of the am&a in the convivial Kalidm (Nos. 59-59), or of its high 
position in the serious Bhairam (32) and Bkairav (37). Similarly, 
the theme of Mozart s Clavier Sonata in A major owes perhaps 
some of its alertness to its high, and that of the Choral Symphony 
something of its restraint to its middle tessitura ; but we can hardly 
be said to have erected this into a principle of our art. 

An English-speaking Indian habitually chooses the word * tune * 
to translate Mag. And the fact is he does not attach much impor 
tance to ike tune of a song. A song may be sung in many ways 
the more the better, as a rule so long as it is within the well- 

* It i uotewortliy that both w&tr& and ofcmra are terms of prosody. Cp. the 
eariy reckoning o-f musical time in Europe, Oxford History of Music, vol i 
p. 168 sq. 

Se ChimnaBwanai Hndaliar, Oriental Music, pp. 16 and 25. 

8 Aristotle spoke of modes with a low mat as old men s scales . 



RIGA 157 

defined limits of the Rag ; on the other hand, the least departure 
from the prescribed notes surprises us, not always pleasnrably. 
This has one advantage, at any rate, that it is unnecessary to record 
Indian tunes in notation. The names of the Rags to which the 
(Jlta-Govinda (eleventh century) was sung have been preserved, and 
even in the absence of a notation it is open to any musieiaii of 
to-day of sufficient skill to sing them as expressively as Jayadeva 
himself. 

On the other hand, the absence of definite melody precludes 
concerted music. Several rehearsals are necessary in order to get 
a dozen people to sing a hymn in unison, and to overcome the lust 
for * grace and contrappunlo alia wienie. When some years ago 
Bande Mdtaram was being sung there were probably six different 
versions at half a dozen different street corners of Calcutta, of 
which the following, taken down from the lips of a blind man in 
Dalhousie Square, and sung at the top of his voice without causing 
a single passer by even to turn his head so little did the mere 
tune convey anything is one : 



.wt a r i r-^--* i r c c IT^TIT^ - E i u c p ^ 

Ban-de ma-ta-ram su-ja-lam su-fa-lam Ma la - ya-ja-shi-ta- 



- lam Sho-shya shy a-mala khe - tram Ban-de ma-ta-ram 





^ c c c c 


cl r r 


h c i* 


=gM 



Ko - ti ko - ti kan-the Ela-la ka-la ni - na - de Di sap - ta 



p--g 



ko - ti Bhu-je shob-he ka-ra - ba - le 

I bow before thee, mother, who art washed clean by rivers, by rain 
drops, by oceans. By the help of thy life-giving waters and the free breezes 
born in the Malaya mountains thy crops yield and thy fruit-trees bear. 
A thousand thousand nurtured on thy lap are making prayer to the 
Almighty Father and to thee. mother Durga, in your ten hands you 
have as many weapons always ready to protect your children. But because 
we have lost our devotion therefore you have no sympathy for us. 

We have seen nothing in the facts of Edga so far with which to 
meet a possible suggestion of the frivolous, that if you were to put 



158 RAGA 

the phonogram of an Indian melody on to the cylinder fore part 
behind and hear the tune backwards it would sound just as well. 
One answer to this would be that in that case all the ascending 
passages would come out as descending and vice versa, and that 
many (not all) Rags have a distinct form for ascent and descent. 
And this in two ways, or at least as two manifestations of the 
same instinct. The pentatonie (oclava) and hexatonic (sMdava) 
modes are often pure (as in Nos. 1 and 24), but sometimes mixed 
(as in Nos. 4 and 11) : in the pure mode the leap * is taken abso 
lutely; in the mixed mode it is taken with a subsidiary grace- 
note, or in a sort of tentative way. In descent the leap* is 
bridged by a passing note ; 

Ex. 

261. 

in ascent, if it is not taken absolutely, the voice climbs up to it, as 
it were 

Ex.: 



If we refer back to Ex. 226 (Sardula-vikridita) for a moment we 
shall find an example of this. The scale is 



Ex. 

258. 



and the weak note is B ; the gap A-C has to be negotiated, and 
this is done thus : 



Ex. 

254.5 






(No* 60), for instance, is divided into tetrachord (B C-E) and 
pentachord (E F G-B) with the gaps occasionally filled. We will 
take the tetrachord 

Ex. i 



The B usually, but sometimes the E, is given as amSa ; they are 
at any rate about equally prominent notes. Next in importance is 
the C, and least important the D. In effecting the passage from 
B to E such phrases will occur as 



r r i i|* r r r i rr r=t=&=t 



BAGA 159 

while the descent from E to B may be by leap, but will generally 
be by step : 

S.^ r r r~t^" r r r I 

In most EdgSy even if heptatonic (sampurna), there is still a feeling 
that some notes are strong (baliri) and others weak (alpa), arid these 
weak spots tend to be negotiated in this crooked* (vakm) way. 
And if the Bags are actually transilient (varja) they are apt to be 
rakra in ascent, and to have the gap filled in descent rather than 
the other way. So that to turn ascent (drofiana) into descent 
(avarohana), or vice versa, would be completely to falsify the Rag. 
Other answers to the c frivolous* person could be made on the 
grounds of Time and of Form (see Chapters VIII and XI). 
Similarly other Rags have typical phrases : 



58. Kalian, 



ft3,yp FH-3 
57 -J- " fi 

54. Jaman-kalidn. 

Ex.:* 



j 



55. Eamod-kalian. 



59. llamir-lcalian. 



^3^F 



57. SMm-kalmn is not 

But it must not be thought that every melody necessarily contains 
the typical phrase of the Rdg* In India, as in Europe, the rules 
are * the obedient humble servants* of the composer ; he obeys them, 
of course, but in the spirit, not the letter, just as the best sculptor s 
work approximates most nearly to, but never exactly coincides with, 
the nine-unit or ten-unit or other system which the case may 
require ; or, as we ourselves should maintain, while a given chord 
has its typical resolution, yet that music is chiefly to be prized 
which in obeying this t rule manages still to say something new 
that, when closely examined, really disobeys it. 



160 



BAGA 



"What surprises us most in this music is its predominantly con 
junct motion. 1 Leaps of all sorts are taken, including those which 
do not appeal so much to us the tritone and the augmented second. 
But if small they still have the character of being a, if not the, next 
door note; if large, they seem to be merely a means of getting 
quickly to some other contrasting register. They do not seem to 
be used for the pure pleasure of the interval itself, as in many 
examples we might quote from our music : 

f HANDEL. mf 








3^ 



B. STKAUSS. 








&c. 



Contrast with these such a melody as the following : 

Brahma Samaj hymns. Dhrupad, JhiL 1 Surphakt. 

_ JS.no. 
Ex- 



-ti-di-na ta-ba ga - th& 




Tit-mi de - ha mo - re ka - tha tu - mi de - ha mo-re sur 






Tu-mi ja-di tha-ka ma - ne bi-ka-cha ka-ma-la - sa - ne 
1 So little is there any idea of the possibility of disjunct motion that there 
seems to be no distinctive name for it. The leap of a Third is called Abhyucchraya, 
* pressed together ; of a Fourth, Prast&ra, extension ; and of a Fifth, himkara 
(making the sound Him or Om, the syllable of the sacred name ; the application 
is obcnre). A singing exerci&e in mixed leaps is also called tarida (?). The old 
words n^m&i, * subduing* (se. suppressing the intermediate note), and pravetfa, 
binding together (sc. the neighbouring notes) disjunct and conjunct motion 
ae&m now to be forgotten. 

8 A Jk& is a R&g without grace-notes. 



RAGA 



161 



Tu - mi ja - di ka - ra prfin ta - ba pre-me pa - ri - pur 




Tu-mi de - ha mo-re ka - tha tu-mi de-ha mo-re sur 



Tu - mi-sho-na ja-di gan a-ma-ra sa-mu-khe th& - ki 






3E 



Su-dha ja-di ka-re dan to-ma-ra ii-da-ra an - ki 



Tu-mi ja-di du-kha-pa - re ra-khaka-ra sne-ha - bha - re 






Tu-mi ja - di su - klia ha - te dam - bha ka-ra-ha dur 



&.CM, 



Tu - mi de - ha mo - re ka - tha tu-mi de-ha mo - re stir. 

Upendrakisor Ray s translation. Bay by day shall I sing thy sweet 
song. Give thou me the words, give thou me the tune. If thou abidest in 
ray heart in the full-blown lotus seed, 1 if thou makest my soul overflow with 
thy love, if thou hearest my song, seated in my heart, if thy noble and 
beautiful eyes lend me the nectar of their glance, if thou on my sorrows 
placest thy hand pitifully, if thou from my happiness chasest away pride 
give thou me the words, give thou me the tune. 

It is true this is a Folk-song, to which words have been added 
by Rabindranath Tagore, and a Jhil (i.e. without grace-notes); 
but it will do as well as one in a formal Bag to show the general 
preference for step over leap. 

Another thing which completely baffles our ears is the way even 
the conjunct motion is taken. The following hymn of the 
Brahma Samaj : 

1 God abides in the innermost recesses of the heart in the form of a lotras 
seed. The lotus is the type of purity j it may be offered, even when not fre&h 
(as other flowers may not) unless previously offered to another. Heitce * lotus 
lips , lotus feet , Jbe. 



162 



EAGA 



Brahma SamSj hymns. Bfig Sohani ; Tal Surphakta. 
Prathama fidit&la. ^=180. Music and words by 

Astal KABIHDBANA.TH TAI&OKE. 



Ex. 






Aniara. 



i=^gr r i LT n=s^n 




Sanchari. 




N.B. Crotchets or minims would have been more appropriate ; quavers are 
m&d in order to suggest the rhythm better. 

Upendrakisor Ray s translation. Thy power is from all time ; from all 
time is thy supreme radiance in the skies. Thine is the first word. Thy 
joy lives in each new year afresh in the heart. In the firmament of thy 
naind glisten the sun and the moon and the stars. The wave of life vibrates 
in the atmosphere. Thou art the first poet ; the master of poems art thou. 
Thy deep-voiced utterances find voice in praise and prayer which ascends 
from all the world. 

sung as I heard it on their anniversary (January 25) with a choir 
of twelve voices supported, in unison, by a small organ and two 
violins, with drum, was extremely impressive. In particular the 
phrase marked (a) at the end of each section seemed to give it that 
sort of sublimity which we recognize in those chords that smote on 
Samuel Butler s ear on his entrance into Erewhon. 

Both these peculiarities, a preference for conjunct over disjunct 
motion, and unusual sequences in conjunct motion, are made 
possible and almost demanded by the absence of harmony. They 
are demanded as a means of contrast. Motion through the notes 
&lt;rf a chord, when there is no idea of forming chords at all, does not 
give enough contrast; E and G say more or less the same thing as 
C. And again, when the ear has become accustomed to the sound 



BAGA 163 

of FJf G Ab a note with an upward and downward leading note 
to pass direct from FJ to Afc is a very striking divagation from 
the normal, and gets a high value from the consciousness of the 
norm behind it. 

The claim is occasionally made that this music has harmony, or 
a * sort of harmony, in it. Such feeling for harmony as is involved 
in the construction of a scale at all, especially of such an elaborate 
and "balanced scale, or in the appreciation of the greater sonority of 
C G C over the simple C in the drone, it has. But of harmony, in 
the sense either (1) of the sequent intervals in melody being chosen 
for their consonance, or (2) of two notes being sounded simul 
taneously for the sake of the consonance, there is none; there is 
less even than among the North American Indians whose music, 1 as 
far as at present investigated, is at a very early stage. And it seems 
impossible that there should be any. Hindu music, though it has 
enormously refined the detail, has not advanced beyond the principles 
of Greek music. This may not seem an inducement to deny them 
harmony to those who still think that the Greeks had harmony. But 
at least this is true that harmony in the sense of the Organum and 
of Dufay did not become possible till the Greek modes had long lost 
any feeling of the mete (amia) and of the functions (dnnameu) of 
the other notes. 2 And the first thing that harmony would do, if 
now applied even tentatively to Indian music, as some advocate, 
would be to get rid of that feeling and those functions, and with 
them of the grace-notes and all that makes Rag worth having. As 
the Hag now is, its notes are like the pieces on the chess-board ; 
harmony, by investing them all equally with powers of its own, 
would make them like the pawns. Hence the serious menace to 
Indian music of the harmonium, which has penetrated already to 
the remotest parts of India. 3 It dominates the theatre, and 
desolates the hearth ; and before long it will, if it does not already, 
desecrate the temple. Besides its deadening effect on a living art, 

1 There is one curious point of contact, the more curious that any direct con 
nexion is unthinkable : the Chippewas draw a picture of a tune, by the help 
of which another man can sing it, and the Hindus set store by their Ragm&la8 y 
sets of paintings of gods or men affected by the passion which the particular 
Rag expresses. See also Ex. 457. 

2 That in virtue of -which they took their part in the mode as v&dt, samv&di, &e. 
s I was present for an hour at a concert in Trivandrum at which this appalling 

instrument never ceased, and I found in the Salt Bange (Northern Panj&b) 
a * Teacher of Song and Harmonium . 



164 RAGA 

it falsifies it by being out of tune with itself. This is a grave 
defect, though its gravity can be exaggerated ; it could also be 
lessened by a revised tuning, A worse fault is that it is a borrowed 
instrument, constructed originally to minister to the less noble 
kind of music of other lands. It has taken a century to invent 
and perfect the pianoforte; if she must have the fatal facility of 
a keyed instrument, India could well spare a century or two for 
inventing something that should do justice to her music. 

The question as to. what foreigners are to make of this music is 
still more difficult To add harmony to it is to kill it ; and yet it 
is impossible for Europe to understand melody except in terms of 
harmony. Harmony has been successfully added to songs whose 
musical thought is nearer our own in Stanford s Irish Songs or 
Bourgault Ducoudray s Chansons de la Basse Bretagne. But are 
the Chanson* de la Grece ei de 1? Orient a complete success? And 
is the problem quite so simple as Herr Polak 1 supposes; though 
he exhibits the curiosities of Indian music, does he convey the art ? 
It is quite possible to select, as Lady Wilson 2 and others have done, 
those songs which have definite cadences and there are a few or 
even to invent cadences for those which have none, to give them 
a frankly European dress, and to suggest the kind of mood in which 
a foreigner listens to Indian music. That is a definite thing well 
worth doing; but it does not bring one any nearer to an under 
standing of the indigenous art. The best authorities on Bengali say 
that it is untranslatable, and one has heard the same of Sanskrit; 
and there seems to be no way of understanding the music except 
to set to work and learn its language. 

We now examine a Edg in practice, and for this purpose take one 
of the commonest Jamankalian. Of the three instances here.given : 
Y aman kalifin 



. 



s 



1 DU Hmrm&twnmd inett&cher, turkischtr und japaniscfier Mekdien, Leipzig, 1905. 
3 Ffoe Indian Song*, Paterson & Son*. 



KAGA 



165 






=5= 







the first is a Svaravarta, an exercise sung to the /Smra* (Sa, Ei, Ga, 
&e.) used as a teacher s model of the Rag; the other two are simple 
songs for children. We learn that the E is made prominent by the 
melody circling about it, or stopping there ; that the passage E-G 
or G-E may be taken as a leap, but that if the movement is slow 
an Eft is inserted as a grace -note {not an Efi) ; on the other hand, 
an P between two E s is always made natural. Of the following 
songs, Dukhera beshe is a hymn of the Brahma Samaj ; I do not 
know why the mode is called mishra (mixed). He mora debata 
is a poem. Both are Kttydte, and by Rabindranath Tagore. 
* Hadi e illah * is a Tkumri from Benares. It was sung to me by 
a Mohammedan in Bombay with very genuine feeling. The words 
are Hindostani. The Rag Kalydnl does not differ much in this 
particular melody from Iman&alidn, except that occasion might 
arise, but does not, for Rfs. 

Brahma Samaj. V. 40. Mishra ImankalULn. Jhampa. 
Tonic D. (3+2.) ^ N ~ 125. 



Ex. 

see. 



r i- I* 



Du-khe-ra be-she e-s^-chhaba-le to-ma-re 



da-ri-ba he. 



Ye-klia-ne bya-kha to- mi-re se- 
816113 M 



i - bi - ra 3ca-ri klia - ri - ba lie 



166 



BAGA 



* i : -C e e c 



c 



JLn-dha-re rnftkh dha-ki - le swa-ml to-ma-re ta-bu ehi -ni-ba ft - nu 



-K- 






Ma-ra-na ru-pe a - si - le pra-bhu cha-ra-na kha-ri ma-ri-ba he 

w v D.C.al, 



1M! clE I! 



Ye man ka-re dao - na de-kh& to-ma-re na-hi da-ri-ba he 



Ha-ya-ne a-ji jha-bi-ocha ja- la ja-ni-ka ja-la na-ya-ne he 



ba-ji-cchabu-ke ba-jfik - ta-ba ka-thi-na bal- ri bau-kha-ne he 



Tu-mis a-chhaba-kshekha-re ba-da-na t^-hS, ja- nak mo -re 



J 



ki-ochfika-ba-na ka-khfi cha-hi-ya ra-ba ba-da-ne he 



_c i_e a 



Na-ya-ne ta-ji jha-ri-cche ja-la jha-ru-ka ja- la na-ya-ne he, 

(The translation of Dukhera beshe , by Upendrakisor Ray.) Though thou 
oomet in the garb of war, yet shall I not fear thee ; rather shall I hold 
thee tight to the place where it hurts. Though thou hidest thy face in 
darkness, yet shall I know thee. If thon comest as Death I shall clasp thy 
feet and die. In whatever manner thou showest thyself to me, I shall not 
fear thee. Tears fall from my eyes to-day : let the tears fall from my eyes* 
My hart aches in thy hard embrace : let it ache. Let that pain tell me 
thou hast me held to thy breast. Nothing shall I want, nothing shall I say, 
Imt aiimply keep my gaze fixed on thy face. Tears fall from my eyes to-day : 
let the tears Ml from my eyes. 

iAJi (Tonic F), Ektala. J * TOl 
JUfeat _ 

9 



287.1 



Henw-r(a}de - ba-tft . . . bha-ry-a e de-ha 



pran 



RAGA 



167 



Ki am - ri - ta tu - mi . . 



cha-ha ka-ri-ba-re pan 
Antara. 



he mo - ra de - ba - ta . . . 



A - ma - ra na - ya - ne 



to-ma-ra bl - sa chha - M De-khy-a la - i - te . . . . 



t-* f r e 

ay" _^ ^ 






*=? 



sadh jai ta - ba ka - bi A - ma - ra mu - gdha . . * 

jp^=^-^ 

ara-va-ne ni-ra-be ra - hi Su-ni-ya la-f- te cha - ha 



a - pa-na - ri gan 
Sanchari. 



He mo-r(a) de ba - 1& . . . 



J J 






A-ma-r(a) chi - tte to-ma-ra sri - shti kha - ni 



Ea-chy-a tu - li-chhe bi - chi - tra e - ka ba - ni 



mi - li - ya to - mar pri - ti 




Ja-ga-ye tu - li - chhe 



-mar sa - kal-(a) gl - ti 



-^ 



- pa-na - re tu - mi 



de-khi-ccha ma-dhu-ra ra - se 



168 



RIGA 




He mo-r(a) de - ba-tfi. 

(The poet s, and composer s, own translation.) What divine drink 
wouldst thou have, my God, from this overflowing cup of my life ! My poet, 
is it thy delight to see thy creation through my eyes, and to stand at the 
portals of my enchanted ears silently to lihten to thine own eternal harmony ? 
Thy world is weaving words in my mind, and thy joy is adding music to 
them. Thou givest thyself to me in love, and then feelest thine own entire 
sweetness in me. (GMnjalL No. 65.) 

JS^lyanL d = 40. 

p Motto adagio. 



di e il - lah 



Ha 



JL. 



di e il - lah 



- hi-ba Sa 



hin se 







ra-ka Bi - ma 



xa-hl 



li-man Pa - ka bi - 



- kl 



h& - 



ha 



- n a - je pa - ka la - ti - - fa pa 




fct par-de po - sa dft . . . na bi - na. 

Mighty is God the Lord. Lord God, from thee cometh salvation. 
Mighty, Almighty, All-knowing, All-loving ! Day by day thy holy presence 
in nearer to us : in the darkness thou art near us. 

The melodies f Dukhera beslie and &lt; Hadi e illah do not lose so 
much as some others in notation : if they are sung with a little faith 



RAGA 169 

and goodwill some impression at least will be conveyed of their sin 
cerity and quiet fervour. c He mora debata *is perhaps more difficult ; 
the melody will strike a European at first as running up hill only in 
order to run down again. There is a great temptation to regard 
the close as in A minor and to supply a G barmony to the fourth 
bar ; and these temptations must be firmly resisted. The fourth 
bar rises to the tonic (not the seventh of G) through tbe c strong 1 * 
notes A and E (not C) ; and an P pedal must be held on in order 
to get the plaintive character of the close 



Kx. 

aea 



-7 - 

ffi " 



. ta - 

(not at all unlike that of the Sixth Ecclesiastical Tone) which is on 
the strong * note and therefore in a sense a full close, but which 
is not the tonic,, and therefore points away, as it were, to something 
beyond it. Also the rhythm of the ninth bar is difficult. The 
eighth and ninth bars are taken as one sweep of melody and in strict 
time, but with the prosody of the words crossing this time in the 
ninth bar, as if it were 












Sadh jai ta-ba ka . bi A-ma-ra 
It offers just that sort of pleasure which we get in lines of blank verse 

Duncan is in his grave ; 
After life s fitful fever he sleeps .well ; 
Treason has done his w&lt;5rst ; nor steel, nor poison, 
Malice domestic, foreign levy, n6thing 
Can touch him further. 

where the assertiveness of the individual words fights against and 
yields to the compelling calm of the metre. 

The next thing is to consider the list of Rags as a whole. We 
notice that they are re-entrant: that is, they return upon them 
selves after making the full circle as, by an accepted adjustment, 
our keys do, but as our modes do not. 1 The order here adopted is 
to show this ; it is not the order of the native treatises. Any point 
might have been, and the simplest form of our major scale is, taken 
as the point of departure. Nos, 15 are transilient, and modes of 

1 These refuse to admit the Locrian, so that there is a gap between the Lydiaa 
at one end and the Phrygian at the other. 



170 RAGA 

each other. Nos. 6-8 transitional. No. 9, the major scale. Nos. 
10-14 substitute Bb for Bfl. Nos. 15-21 flatten the E as well. 
Nos. 22-5, the Bb and Eb are fully established. No. 26, anoma 
lous. Nos. 27, 28, A flattened. Nos. 29-31, though they seem to 
show a good deal of licence, are really transitional between the two- 
flat and the four-flat scale. 1 Nos. 32, 33, Db (of some sort) 
established. At this point the European circle of modes stops, 
because the next modal shift would flatten the G. This mode with 
a flat Fifth will be discussed later under Sdman chant. The Rd&lt;/# 
proceed, after reaching four flats, by sharpening the leading note 
to the tonic and then the leading note to the Fourth as well. 2 
No. 34, Bt Nos, 35-8, Bfl, Eft No. 39, a tentative sharpen 
ing of F, as the leading note to the Fifth. Nos. 40, 41, the F 
sharpened instead of the Eb. Nos. 42-8, all three leading notes 
sharpened. Nos. 49-52, after a little remaining hesitation over 
the Ab and Db we get back in Nos. 52-63, through the Kalian*, 
to the place we started from. These sixty-three are only the best 
known oat of some hundreds of Rags ; but to have shown them all 
would only have taken the principle of re-entrance to another place 
of decimals, as it were. 

The Ha$& have been arranged in this way not merely to obtain 
a symmetrical system, but also to bring out an essential point. 
They fall, in the first instance, into nine or ten groups, of which 
the centres are perhaps : 

1. BMpkalidn. 32. Bhairavi. 

9. Sk&nkardbkarana. 37. Bkairav. 

14, JUtgofi. 44. Basant. 

23. KajL 50. Puriakalidn. 

28. Ammrt. 53. Kalian. 

But secondly, each group consists of an average of seven Rags (out 
of a total of sixty-three ; out of a total of 500, an average of fifty 
or sixty). And a Rag gets its special flavour not so much from its 
being just what it is, as from its not being something else, closely 
affiad to it, which is ptesent all the time in the musician s con- 

1 TlHsre is the same sort of hesitation about our Aeolian mode which frequently 
*&cm Dorian sixth and a Phrygian second. 

* What has hitherto been described as successive flattening mighty of course, 
have Imu taken in reverse order and described as sharpening. The two are 
the same thiag looked at from different points of view. 



RAGA 171 

sciousness. Any one can hear the difference between, say, Jhinjofi 
and Bhairav ; but the more of a musician a man is the more he 
can hear and enjoy the subtler distinction between, for instance, 
Jhinjoti and Desk, or the still subtler between Jkinjoti and Tdang. 
It might appear that as a given Rag is taken so differently (see 
,Nos. 27-9, 46) in different parts of the country these distinctions 
do not much matter ; but it must be remembered that the distinc 
tions are accurately adhered to in any one district, or by any 
particular school; and that it is of no use to test the songs of 
Bengal, for instance, by the system of Gujarat. And some of 
these characteristics are so strikingly beautiful as not easily to be 
missed, or to be forgotten, even by a foreigner : the strong legato 
from $ to E in Imankalldn, for instance, or the pentatonic sug 
gestion of JBehag, or the plaintive alternation of the two B s in 
Khamaj, or of the two E s in Kdf, or the old-world sound of the 
scale of Kdnacja. 

In No. 59, Bamirkalian, the sharp Sixth (A) appears. It is 
sounded very likely in others, but I could get no certain information. 
Similarly, the eight Rdg$ with exceptional intonation given in 
Appendix II is probably not a complete list ; they are merely those 
of which the true intonation has been preserved in one part of the 
country, Gwalior; at Calcutta, for instance, I heard of Asdvart 
(No. 28) as being of exceptional tuning, but of none of these; 
and Mr. Clements gives other instances from the Deccan. 

Express mention is seldom if ever made in the books of the Drone. 
It is taken for granted of course ; though, to those who have never 
heard it, it is not at .all an obvious concomitant of melody. 

In fact, at first it is a little confusing, even irritating; but one 
gets to discount it as readily as one does the hammering of the 
pianoforte keys or the scraping of the violin bow. It is there not 
only because without it, especially with quarter- tone scales, the singer 
would feel, as a Benares musician said, f like a ship without a rudder/ 
but in order to consolidate the melody. Not that a song cannot be 
sung without it; a ryot returning from his work, or a mother 
nursing her baby, does not have first to go and fetch a iambnra ; 
but, as the boy said when asked why he had godfathers and god 
mother at his baptism e because, I suppose, it makes it a sweller 
thing *. The drone may be a drum, carefully tuned, or two drums, 
in unison or at the octave, or the drone strings of the ifina ; but is 



172 



BAGA 



as a rule, and with the best singers, a tamfatra, a large t*t##-shaped 
instrument, with one gourd (sound-board) instead of two,, and with 
open strings two or three Sa s and one Pa. The drone strings of 
the mnd and tatdr or of the ur&afiar, a large mtdr common in 
Bengal, often have amongst them one tuned to Ma, and there is, 
curiously, no objection to the Pa and the Ma sounding together. 
The effect of this may be heard in the * wilderness part of Granville 
BantocVs Omar Khayydm. 



Turkoman! melody. 
Chorus. Tenors and Basses. 



BAHTOCK. 




.M -- 



to j ^ ^ 










-*3 7!=| "I 


f fr%rt~3 










-3 3 \ 



r r r r r 
J*S Ji J^^D ^J5 



r r 



^ 




-r r 




KAGA 173 

But they avoid putting 1 either of these notes on the drone if 
the Ttdg which is being sung omits it. Thus, for Bibhfa they would 
tune the Ma to Ga, in spite of the thick * effect of a major Third 

so low in the compass ; for Malko*, in which there is no Pa and the 

j? 
Ga is an E, and neither this nor E would be available on the drone 

(which must be as consonant as possible), the Pa string would be 
tuned in unison with the Ma string; and it is only for the Euro 
pean that the re-inforced Fourth of the scale upsets the tonality. 
The strings of the tamfmra are long and sonorous, and the Fifth 
overtone (Ga) comes out very clearly from the fundamental what 
ever the other strings may be; and this still further adds to the 
dissonance of the Fourth. It is curious, too, that the Bt) and Df? 

-i ^ 
of Bhairav, and the B and Db of Todi should be sung, and evidently 

with special pleasure, against a C drone J ; it recalls the cadence of 
the Organum : 

__ _^_^ _ ^ _ _ " U 

*** ~ J " * 

(except that it is the C which is stationary, and the D comes down 
to it) ; and the dissonance upon a strong beat of Descant : 



Ex. 



273. PTr ir =s 






** 

(except that it is much more common than that apparently was). 
Thus the drone is of considerable use too in forcing a strong appog- 
giatura, which is the peculiar, perhaps the only, melodic point of the 
snake-charmer s pipe : 




About the simultaneous presence of Ma and Pa in the drone 
a word more may be said. It is interesting that the consonance of 
the- whole tone which appeals to the Hindus was one which the 
Greeks recognized too, 2 and we see that it is the logical outcome of 
quintal harmony. That the appreciation of the whole tone is 
historically prior to that of the major Third may also be gathered 
from the form of the pentatonic scale which may be pronounced 
typical. This is not 

1 Cp. the last chord of the Jfixtftao Passion. 

See Gevaert, La Musigue de fmtiguMt, voL i, p. 98, and WestphaTs edition 
of Plutarch s & Jfustco, p. 46. 



174 RAGA 

JBMpAalidn 



276. 

but Sdrang B** : 

276.1 

or Arabkl 



and these entail no harmony except that of the Fourth and its 
derivatives, among which the whole Tone. Indeed the construction 
of the S&-grdma and Ma-grdma (see pp. 109 foil.) point to a stage 
of Indian music when the Pythagorean Third (derived from the 
Fifth) was being exchanged for the harmonic Third (heard directly) 
which has left its impress in this and other ways on the national 
art. There is of course no hesitation about this interval (the 
harmonic major Third) nowadays. A singer when preluding often 
touches the common chord of the key note, and will do this even 
when the Third of the Rag he is about to sing is minor. 

What, then, are the main differences, if we consider melody alone 
without rhythm for the moment, between this music and ours? 
First of all the song is cast in one definite mood throughout. This 
mood calls up associations, unnameable, but yet distinct, of similar 
song heard under similar circumstance ; so much so that to tell an 
Indian what Rag a singer chose on such and such an occasion is to 
tell him a good deal about the song. We have no similar classifi 
cation. We have plenty of mood in our music, but we use it to 
articulate the balance of the song, not to differentiate one song 
from another. 

Secondly, in the chosen mood (Rag) the notes stand out from 
each other as clearly as the faces of our friends do to the mind s 
eye. One of our systems describes the Third of the scale as the 

* restful * note, the Fourth as awe-inspiring , another note as 

* desolate *, another as enterprising . But in this music any given 

1 Miss Oilehrist also (Folk-song Society Journal for 1911) makes out the original 
Scotch pentatome to be 



jfl) , l 
7 5 



On the other hand, Frances Densmore (Chippewa Music, Bureau of American 
Ethnology, 1010, p. 9) shows the typical North American Indian scale to he 
what is her called Bhupkalian, and next to that Miss Gilchrist s form. (These 
two are Hftboholtz s 4 Fourth and * Second form of the pentatonic,) 



RAGA 175 

note of the scale may be any or all of these according to the e mood 
in which it occurs. Its character depends not on its pitch relation 
to a tonic only, though it does so depend partly, and on its relation 
to the tessitura of the song, which we also feel to be part of its essence 
(though the, to us, more important distinctions of harmony largely 
cut across this), but also on the extent to which it is e% officio a sub 
stantive or a passing note. The whole scale is made up of a hier 
archy of notes ; so that the passage from G to Ab, let us say, is 
not merely an exaltation of pitch, nor merely an exchange of the 
perfect consonance C-G for the imperfect C-Afr, but a passage 
from a stable to an unstable note of the scale (for A^ may under 
certain circumstances become Atj) and from a permanent to a tem 
porary (for the A[j may be altogether omitted, or omitted in certain 
conditions), or from a note of universal application to one which 
requires special treatment (for the Ab may be used in descent, but 
not in ascent). 

An instance, Rag Keddra, 



Ex* : 
278J 



as used in the following melodies, slightly different from the version 
given in the list of Rag*. The A is lightly touched, the E still 
more so. The P is predominant (ainta), the !$ is used in Nuxica 
ficto, i. e. between two G s. In the first melody the B[&gt;, in the 
second the BjJ, is adopted. In both the E has a special treatment ; 
it is used only as a pendant to the F. The scale is seen to be a 
filled up Sarong, 



Ex. 

270. 



i 



but with the am&a at F instead of D. 

B5g Kedara. Metre, Vasantatilaka 

TO, Mant. --v^-^w^^^w-^ 

Andantino. J = 92. 
Ex. _ 
280.3= _ 

Ha chan-dra m& u-ga-rala ga-ga-na pra-dl-pa. 




TTr r r r E , r ir r=^ 

A * he ta shn - kta, gu - ru, man - ga - la jya sa - mi - pa 



176 



RAGA 



f 



C C C 



Tya - cha pra-ka- sha bha-ra-ta ga-ga-no da ra - nta 

SSE-VS, !( \ r *3-^^^l 



To aa - dha ka - ra la- pa la gi - ri - ga - vha - ra - nta. 
Rag Kedara. RABINDBANATH TAGOKE, 



28L 



di-la a - bar a -ghat A 



ma-ra du- 



- r- 



di - la a bar a - ghat 



E ni-ahi-tta ka - le Ke a - si dar - i""""- le Khan-ji - te a - 



J- 



- si - le ka-ha - re . . . Ke di - la a - bar a -ghat 

I i i ^^J ** r* I 



Ba-hu tal ha - la ba-san - ta di - na e-se thi-Ia 



& - ka pa - thi - ka na - bl - na A - ku - la ji - ba - na 



Ka ri - na ma - ga - na A - ku - la pu - la - ka pa - 



^& 



fflE 



T^^-g" 
thfi - - re ... Ke di - la a - bar a -ghat. 



A-ji e ba-ra-sha ni-bi-ra ti-mi-ra Jha-rajha-re 



la - jir . . na (ye) ku - ti ra Ba - da - le - ra 



RAGA 



177 



- 






ba . . ye , . pra - di - pa - ni ba . . ye Je - ge bo - ahe 



^ 



=fc 



3 



a - chhi 



a - ka - re . , 



A - ti - thi a - ja - na 



ta - ta gi - ta su - ra la - gi - te - chh ka - ne . . 






i 



"L_~*.B 



bhi - sha - na ma - dim - ra Bha - bi - te - clihi ma - ne 



=E^ 



# 



ja - bo ta - ba && - ne 



A - che - na 



- si - ma 



m 



Ke di - la a 



bar 



- gbafc. 



N.B. Basanta spring ; Megha = the rains. 



It seems passible that closer investigation may one day discover 
in the European mediaeval modes, i. e in the melodies which were 
sung in them, the counterpart of this distinction between strong 
and weak notes. When Luther, discussing the Church tones, 
said Christ is a gentle Lord and His words are lovely ; therefore 
let us take the sixth Tone for the Gospel ; and since St. Paul is 
a grave apostle, we will set the Epistle to the eighth Tone , we can 
hardly believe that the peculiar flavour which he was conscious o 
in these tones proceeded merely from the substitution of the notes 



BJx. 

282. 



for 



Ex. 
283. 



i 



Each tone, or mode, must have had its individual notes charac 
terized far more than appears from the mere formal statement of 
them. In this statement the relation of the am&t (Reciting note), 
marked (=), to the drone note (KnaJ), marked (x), is the only 



178 RAGA 

discernible characteristic. But the other notes must have had felt 
relationships analogous to those of Indian Rdga. Amongst these one 
or two may be mentioned. It is common to find Dorian melodies 
with the sixth of the mode flattened ; a common beginning was 



Ex. 2 
284*,: 



This is, of course, Musica fcta, a B flattened between two A s. 
But why did Musica ficta confine itself to one or two special 
positions of the scale like this ? We should not find, for instance, 



286.: 

or 



Ex. 2g 
286.-^ 



It can only have been because in the Dorian the B was felt as a 
4 weak note, one which was touched lightly, or was alterable, or 
alterable under certain conditions. Again, modal melodies will be 
found to slip easily into the C major triad, making C a * strong* 
note. Many Dorian melodies drop accordingly one place below the 
tonic at a close : 



Ex. : 



287.^ 



* 

or Aeolian melodies begin naturally with a minor third : 



* 

and Phrygian substitute a C for a B as the dominant : 



289.: 



* 

Of course the theoretical rules about Dominants and Participants 
state all this, but they do not make the point clear that the under 
lying feeling of the mode proceeds from the fact that each indi 
vidual note has a character of its own and that a melody takes 
a certain tinge or flavour from the cumulative effect of these. 

We can see also, why the C major mode was out of favour : it did 
not supply what was most valued in a mode, the antithesis of the 
Final (in this case C) with the s strong * note (which was, in all the 
modes, C). It is interesting to find that in India the major mode 



KAGA 



179 



pure and simple is at a similar discount. Still the Indian Ba$# are not 
so closely parallel to the Ecclesiastical modes as to the Greek ; for 
the former lay much more stress on the Fifth, whereas in the latter 
the Fourth is the principal factor of consonance : in the Ecclesiastical 
a rather firm line is drawn also between authentic and plagal modes, 
a distinction which is on the whole foreign to Indian music. 

Thirdly, as a result of this individualizing of the several notes of 
the scale to form a Rag, repetition at different levels, &lt; imitation , 
is rare. Exact imitation can only take place in similar tetraehords. 
And though the majority of Rags are composed of tetraehords of 
which the constituent notes are similar in pitch both are of the 
form tone, semitone, tone, or both of the form semitone, tone and 
a half, semitone, and so on the two tetraehords are seldom identical 
in the character of their constituents. In the instance just given, 
Ex. 281, if the A is touched lightly its corresponding note, E, is 
touched still more lightly ; the F is a substantive note and the F| 
a passing note, whereas the Bj? and Bi] which correspond to them 
are equipollent alternatives. A piece of imitation, therefore, in the 
two corresponding parts of the scale would not really be co rrespon- 
dent ; hence we meet with only a very limited use of imitation at 
different levels. 

Again, our melodies tend to circle round the notes which are 
harmonically related to a tonic, as we see if we take melodies which 
have more or less the same motive here, a downward passage 
through the scale : 

Andante. S. S. WESLEY. 



Ex. : 
290. 3 



Andante moderate. 



BRAHMS. 



ffi: 



Adagio. 



BEETHOVEN. 



AUegro. 



tr- 



BEETHOVEN. 



J \f J 






Moderate. 



* Hey boys, np go we/ 



180 



BAGA 



Allegretto ma won troppo. 



BEETHOVEIT. 



Andante con moto. 




flst. I [2nd. 



SCHTTBEBT. 



.Largo tna nontanto. 



BACH. 



Adagio. 



THOM& 






P 






Allegro. 



MEKDELSSOHW. 





1 f* 
























L W 


,.. fl_ 











An Indian melody sets no store whatever by any progress through 
notes which suggest harmony ; on the contrary, it moves as far as 
possible by step, and notes which are harmonically related come quite 
indifferently upon the strong and the weak places of the rhythm. 

Another point in which the tunes just given would be un-Indian 
is the progression through the whole octave. An Indian melody 
confines itself to one part of the scale, and establishes that 
generally the lower part first, and follows this by a passage in the 
upper part of the scale. Ex. 12 (1 and 2) is exceptional enough to 
prove the rule. 

On the whole, then, Indian Rag and mediaeval mode are inter 
esting, as human beings are who consist of f strong and c weak 9 
points, so that we often do not know which we like them best for, 
or whether it is not rather for the interplay of both. 



CHAPTER VII 
GRACE 

Sot. That will ask some tears in the true performing 
of it : if I do it let the audience look to their eyes. 

Midsummer Night s Dream. 

Music has been called a universal language, and no doubt, in 
the deepest sense, it is. But just as no one language can really be 
common to all peoples because it will be pronounced differently in 
different mouths, so the very same notes will be sung by different 
throats in such a way as to be unrecognisable to us. This is con 
spicuously the case with Indian singing, in which all the distinctions 
of colour which we should get from notes in simultaneity has to be 
extracted from notes in succession, A note, G, has for us hundreds 
of different colours according to its harmony, such as, for instance : 




not to mention the cases where E[&gt; is not the bass, or G not the 
treble, or the parts are more or less than four; while the passage 
from G to F admits of only a few variations, 



Kx. 



and the like, singly or in combination. In Hindu, and probably 
in all purely melodic music, the single note as such is itself and 
nothing else, while the passage from one note to the next has 
a number of possibilities by way of grace- note. 

We think of grace-notes as something which may but need not 
be added to the note, not as something actually inherent in it. If 
cultivated for their own sake or used at all in excess they are 
regarded by us as meretricious. We remember with a smile 
Mendelssohn s trombone-player who announced the theme of the 
Lobgesang Overture as 

81611S K 



182 GRACE 

-M^L 



Ex. 
293. 



or we laugh with Spohr at his Italian horn-players who supplied 
obvious omissions in his score by their contrappunto alia mente, or 
on our own account at an occasional festival singer who ornaments 
penultimate notes into consecutive Fifths with the bass. The trills 
of the voice leave us cold, the turn * in Rienzi s prayer spoils 
a rather dignified tune, and the family of double appoggiaturas in 
harpsichord music enjoys at best a sort of mccea d estime. 

Indian f grace is different in kind. There is never the least 
suggestion of anything having been added to the note which is 
graced. The note with its grace makes one utterance. The object 
of g,-ace is, of course, to add importance to the particular note ; but 
there are such varying degrees in which this may be done that the 
whole system of gamak^ the general term for the thing, becomes 
an elaborate vehicle of light and shade. It brings the notes of 
a melody, as surely as the various light and shade of a picture 
brings the contours of the face, from the flat into the round; 
which again is. precisely what harmony does for them, by assigning 
to the successive notes varying degrees of consonance. 

There are nineteen 2 forms of gamak, or, omitting minor dis 
tinctions, a dozen. For practical purposes these may be referred 
to two main types, on stringed instruments. 

The first sort is formed by sliding (ghanana/ rubbing ) the finger 
along the string, in either or perhaps in both directions. It differs 
from what we are accustomed to on the violin only in being more 
frequent and more spontaneous. The other sort is unknown to us 
and is not possible nowadays on our instruments. 3 We set store 
by a rich, full-bodied tone ; and for that and other reasons we 
prefer a comparatively thick string at a high tension to produce 
a note which in India is produced on a thin (and longer) string at 
a low tension.* A lateral deflexion of any appreciable extent 
would set one of our strings out of tune by forcing the tuning peg 

1 Pronounce &lt;gajnmuck . 

* See the Ragavibodha in R. Simon s Notations des Somandtha, Munich, 1903. 

* Except an A small scale on the practically obsolete clavichord. 

4 A long thin string is divisible into a large number of nodes, and the corre 
sponding upper partials give, incidentally, to a note which is somewhat deficient 
in body a peculiar glitter and brilliancy. 



GRACE 183 

from its position ; indeed, we often see a violinist taking advantage 
o this fact when tuning his instrument. But an Indian string 
can be deflected a good deal without disturbing the peg. The 
stopping finger of the left hand * makes * the note, which the right 
hand then plucks; and while it is still vibrating the left hand 
deflects it and, of course, sharpens the note. If the note is stopped 
near the nut, only a slight sharpening, a semitone or two, is possible ; 
but if it is stopped in the middle of the string, a sharpening of as 
much as four or five or even seven semitones may be got. A good 
rlttfl-player prefers to get his notes in this way, much as a violinist 
would rather play in the third position than in the first. To get 
an E, for instance, he will c stop at the B or the C or the C fret 
and instantly deflect the string, so quickly, in fact, as almost to 
deceive both the eye and the ear of the listener. The * deflect as 
we may christen it (the Sanskrit word is dolana, * swinging ) imparts a 
wonderful flexibility to the execution, and demands, of course, an accu 
rate ear for its successful performance. The f slide and the deflect * 
are known in Hindostan as Ghaslt and Hind, in Bengal as Ask and 
Mirk, in the Carnatic as Dhara and 7arek } and by other local names. 

But the rftna, with its congeners the satar and surbahar, is only 
a younger brother of the ( mm of the body * } the voice. It cannot 
rival the voice in one notable respect, the passage at will from 
loud to soft or from soft to loud. It is true that Indian singers 
do not make so much use of this advantage as they might, or 
rather they do it in a different way from what we might have 
expected. Crescendo* are but seldom spread over several bars so as 
to lead to a climax ; they are used rather to assist the grace-notes 
in their work of rounding the edges of the notes of the melody. 
In this, as in other ways not confined to music, Indian art aims 
rather at elaborating detail than at corroborating the lines of 
structure. 

It is in the grace-note that the unusual intonations, which were 
once no doubt commoner in the Rags than they now are, still 
survive. A grace seldom consists of the diatonic notes of the Rag, 
as is obvious from the description just given. Consequently it is 
impossible without a very elaborate notation to give a true picture 
of it. There is the less need to do so since, even if it were faithfully 
presented, it would be impossible for European throats or fingers to 
perform it. Still an attempt has been made to hint at it In the 



184 



GRACE 



following 1 example the crotchet heads representing the grace are 
attached to the substantive note by a slur. They are, indeed, placed 
upon a definite space or line } but must be taken only to suggest the 
place where the auxiliary notes begin and the sort of course they 
take. The heads without the tails of the notes are given because 
the time is variable and entirely at the will of the singer, which is 
influenced by the context in which they occur ; but also in order 
to remind the reader that they are subordinate in a special sense to 
the substantive note. They occur after the note as well as before it : 

R%. Bhairafi. Tal. Tevra. (Seven crotchets, 3+2 + 2.) 

KABINDRANATH TAGOBE. 
Lento. J70. (Hymn.) 



E%. 




jfe-rt &gt;OT. .^ -SiJ-3 j.jfri/f^feJ^J^^a 



P 



^a 



fci hu ffi^* * i J ^ *y^ j i ^^ 



7JT^: : ihF^ J I^JJ^J^i 



3 



The music of the Scotch bagpipe^ the general effect of which is 
not at all unlike Indian pipe tunes, is, however, graced on a radi 
cally different principle from that of Indian gamak. The scale of 
the bagpipe has preserved an unusual intonation, similar to, but 
not the same as, the Indian. This scale is described in Grove s 
Dictionary as : 

Scotch Bagpipe scale. 



Ex. 

295. 



i.e- as, practically, a three-quarter tone scale (which is decidedly 
rare in India, and as Ellis l points out is very nearly the same as, 

1 * Musical scales of radons nations/ Journal of the Society of Arts, March 27, 1885. 



GRACE 



185 



and is probably intended for, the Arabian ZalzaFs scale, 
But its grace-notes are entirely diatonic ; and, what is more signifi 
cant, they are used not to soften the transition from note to note 
of the melody, but, principally, to intensify them by a rudimentary 
harmony. This may be seen in the Cock o y the North , taken 
from M c Kinnon s Collection of Pipe-music : 

The Cock o* the North. 



Ex. 




V r~fr 


m, ** w f 


fL~ 


_. * 


&gt; * JJ - 


=te 


$-Z^T 










^T J J 


j l 






j_ J T 

y . &gt; * r 



A 



JILUl 



5 
-^gi- 



More accurately, for those who are interested In such matters, the bagpipe scale 
may be given in cents (i. e. T J^ths of a semitone). 

C C| P F| 

Just scale 304 386 498,590 702 884 996,1088 1200 

iBagp. scale 191 388 5S2 686 894 
GAB C 1&gt;E 

19? 341 495 703 



From G 



From A 



(Bagp. scale 

] 

(Just scale 



204 816, 3S6 498 702 
C Cf 




186 GRACE 






The true representative of the Indian instinct is found, in 
Europe, amongst the Magyars, as we should expect, of course, 
from the close connexion between the Romany and Hindostani 
languages. And if the Magyar grace-notes have, in their native 
purity, the microtome intonation, some of their figures 



Ex. 



might, with a little less insistence on the rhythm, pass for Indian ; 
and their favourite metre, l* w* S I* , is quite in the Indian style, 
and an example of it is to be seen in the song c Akla chalo on 
p. 93, Ex. 177. 

At the end of the Bagavibodha are given fifty examples of the 
use of gamak in fifty separate Rag*, and with the help of Herr 
Simon s book (p. 182, note) and a knowledge of the Hindostani 
Rags it is possible to decipher these. The time, however, presents 
difficulty. The indication, and the only indication, for all the 
examples is the word dinmdtrd^ which means c general time , and 
refers, no doubt, to the Aldpa or c preluding in the Rag . But time 
less music is unappetizing and difficult to read ; so bars have here been 
added, and the crotchets and quavers arranged on the assumption 
that a graced note is longer than one ungraced. It must be clearly 
understood, however, that these time-values have no warrant in 
the original. The example chosen is in the Rag Vasanta (= spring). 
This Rag is endeared by its associations, which, whether they arise 
from it or not, are those of its name. It has also a strongly 
marked character. It is the F-f scale with the G flattened : the 
C is lightly touched, and the salient notes are A and E, which 
it will be noticed alone bear the trill; the D of this Rdg is 
generally held to be natural, but is sometimes given as flat (see 
the list of Rag* on p. 151, though it differs in some particular 
from each of the versions there given). Perhaps it may be pos 
sible to realize some of its strange beauty by playing over the 
notes without the graces three or four times till they are familiar, 



GRACE 



187 



and then singing or whistling it with the graces but until it is 
heard in its native land the strangeness will probably remain more 
credible than the beauty : 



Vasanta. (i.) 
Tonic F. 



Ex. 







c/r t - r .1 




*z, r -r 3 


^ 


*| 



m 




The example of Vasanta was selected mainly because this par 
ticular one was curiously misinterpreted in Sir "William Jones s 
article in Asiatic Researches, and has been so reprinted by others. 
It was written out in an ordinary major key (A major) ; no hint 
was given of a gamak from beginning to end ; and on the strength 
of its rhythm (as not given in a book of 1609) it was suggested as 
the melody of three of the songs in the Glta Govmda of the eleventh 
century (whose musical rhythm was not established by the poetic 
metre). Thus ; 

(Pseudo-) Vasanta (u). 













J 


La-li - 


ta la- van -ga la-ta pe-ri-sl-la- 


xia 


&te 






\ j j f J* 


^=tt 


$= 




g M w 2 ^ -~ " &gt; $ v " "- 



p^rp t-g- 









ir g e- 




F^ 




^ u 


C=i=l 




S:: 













. ram - bi - te ko - ki - la iu - ji - ta kun - ja ku - tl 



188 



GEACE 



vi-lia-ra-ti he-ri-ri ha sa-ra-sa va-san-te nrt-ya-ti yu-va-ti ja- 

/ / r C g_g I G~T~r e f , I / T^-n-U 

ne - na sa-iuan sa-ci vi-ra-hi ja-na - sya du-ra - nte. 

The typical form of composition which exhibits * grace in all its 
glory is the Mohammedan Tappa, in which melodic flow and rhyth 
mical structure are so veiled that it has seemed worth while to give 
them in a simpler statement in the stave below : 



Tappa. Rag Khamaj. TSl Tlntal. 
AndanU con mofo. J = 70. 



Ex. 

soa 








GRACE 

"~ 6 



189 




n 






Dol&alFint. 



tr- 



301. 



Tappa. Rag Kif L Tintal. 
^# 











s 2 








The numbers over the bars of the skeleton tune represent the beats 
(see Tdl). The graces axe here written out in full, because abbre- 



190 GRACE 

viations would Have been confusing, and on the diatonic notes so 
as the better to be taken in at a glance. But if the grace of bar 3, 
for instance, were put, as it were, under an aural microscope the 
real sounds would appear something like this : 




with other passage notes in between which can be mentally supplied. 

Grace is so natural an accompaniment of any non-harmonic music 
that it may seem idle to search for a reason for it. Yet in the 
music of India it is so elaborate and so integral a part of song that 
it is tempting to try to account for it in some way. It seems as if 
the language may have been at least a contributory cause. When 
two vowels meet in Sanskrit, except in a few special cases they 
coalesce ; and the compound thus formed was marked in the Rigveda 
with the circumflex accent called Svarita ( sounded ), which had 
half a dozen or more names according to the particular vowels 
which were in question. When the Rigveda accents (there were two 
others) were employed in the Sdmaveda, that is, in the chants to 
wliieh the Rigveda was sung, they took the form of musical notes; 
and the Svarita in particular was a high note with grace * attached 
to it. It is natural to conclude, therefore, that the deflect *, as we 
have called it when it appears in instrumental music, represents 
that f grace* and is traceable to this peculiar treatment of the 
vowels. 

When two consonants meet one is assimilated to the other so as 
to slide into it almost imperceptibly. Accommodations such as 
those in ortko&ok-#y and dog-ma, younk-ster and blag-guard, Sut-ton 
and Srnd-bwy, eh-ira and egz-awple, and the like, have their counter 
parts in Sanskrit, not only in the interior of one word, but quite 
as commonly between the end of one and the beginning of the next. 
It is the tendency to weld words together in these and other ways 
that gives perhaps its importance, as between notes, to that other 
class of grace, the e slide *. 



CHAPTER VIII 
TALA 

LANGUAGE, VERSE, MUSICAL TIME 

From Helicon s harmonious springs 

A thousand rills their mazy progress take: 
The laughing flowers that round them blow, 
Drink life and fragrance as they flow. 

GRAY. 

MUSICAL time is in India, more obviously than elsewhere, 
a development from the prosody and metres of poetry. The insis 
tent demands of language and the idiosyncrasies of highly charac 
teristic verse haunt the music like a Presence which is not to be 
put by*. The time-relations of music are affected both by the 
structure of the language, and by the method of versification which 
ultimately derives from it. Without pretension to any minute 
acquaintance with these, a sketch of their bearings upon musical 
time is here attempted. 

I. LANGUAGE 

Those who spoke and speak Sanskrit have shown the delicate 
appreciation they had of minute phonetic changes. They have 
introduced modifications of the word to suit every emergency 
of context, and have recorded these with a precision to which 
Europe is a stranger. We may acquaint ourselves theoretically 
with the characteristics of the language, but it requires an effort to 
feel their effect and therefore to realize the force of the music which 
suits it. What we find difficult is to make a syllable long without 
putting a stress on it, or to put a stress at will on any short syllable ; 
we do not easily imagine the effect of a language which is quanti 
tative and not (or only slightly) accentual. In setting such a word 
as AlaMldlla^ an Englishman would certainly put the fourth syllable 
on the musical accent, because he would think at once of A&r&cadafirct, 
confusing duration with stress. It has been set in an Indian song : 



192 TALA 

T&I Rfcpak. 



A-la-ka-U- lla li - &lt;3a- 

and could no doubt have been set in other ways provided the fourtli 
syllable were longer than the others ; and we notice that it does not 
disturb the singer that the first syllable, which is short, comes on 
the accent, while the two long- syllables (Id) come one o them 
off and the other on the accent; but both are kept long-, and 
all the short syllables are kept short in the music. It is moreover 
set not in |, as the sound of the word would have suggested 
to us that it should be, but in J, which further throws a slight 
emphasis on the syllable ia- 9 because, as we shall see, the beat 
comes there. Not that a long syllabje invariably has a long note, 
especially if two or three of them come together ; but it does as 
a rule. 

In our poetry we do not know long and short, only stressed and 
unstressed syllables. When Keats writes : 

Upon the sodden ground 

His old right hand lay nerveless, listless, dead, 
Ungceptred ; 

there is hardly a syllable that we can call longer than the others, 
unless perhaps ground But there are several places where we 
pause between the words, making up a kind of imaginary musical 
time. We lengthen out the last syllable of sodden because of 
the next word. I that word had been * earth*, sodden would 
have gone quicker. As it is, a little more emphasis is laid on 
c sadden ground 5 than would be the case in sodden earth ; and the 
same thing happens with nerveless, listless , where the difficulty 
of pronouncing one word after the other makes us pause a little at 
the termination and so throw a slightly greater emphasis on the 
root of the word. 

All this is unlike Sanskrit. I we could imagine these syllables 
to occur in their poetry they would all be long by position 
sodd&i ground. Nerveless, listless, dead would be altered to 
( nerveleh, listleb, dead *, the whole idea of the line being to run 
smoothly on as if it were one word, and not to aim at what 
we prize, the variety imported into it by the irregular stresses. 
Consequently rests are seldom written (except in order to break up 



TALA 193 

the metre intentionally in a dramatic way) in any of their 
at any rate not, as we should,, on account of the words : 
Tal Idl 

Ex.- JP tt . I . ,1 \ 



En-tamud-d6 . . en - ta-so-ga-s5 . . En-ia- 

A European would prohably have put a rest at the end of each 
word. They appear to take breath when they want it, not at the 
end of words ; but it would require an intimate knowledge of the 
various languages to be sure of this. 

II. VEESE. 

Sanskrit metres fall into two main classes : (1) those which 
consist of quarter-verses (pdda) of a given number of syllables, and 
(2) those which consist of verses of a given number of feet, each 
foot having a given time-length which is reached by equivalence. 
The first are called c syllable- fixed (varnuvrtta), the second time- 
unit-fixed (mdtrdvrtta). 

In the first class (varnarrita\ when the pada does not exceed 
eight syllables most of them are of optional quantity ; when it 
exceeds eight the quantity of every syllable is fixed. The typical 
metre of this class with an eight syllable pdda is the xloka, the 
c flowing measure. The following lines constitute the first two 
tiokas of Bharata s Netty ad$tram (28th aflftyayd) : 

ttam caivavanaddham c& | gh^ntim &u,siram eva ca 
caturvidham tu vljneyilm | atodyam laksSnanvitam (1) 
tatam tantrikftam jneyam ] avanaddham tu pauskaram 
ghanam talas tu vljneyah | ^usiro vam^a ev& c^ (2) 

The first two lines make a verse marked off into quarter- verses. 
Though the normal verse is a distich, an occasional tristich or 
three-line unity is, as in Scott s ballad metre, not excluded. The 
sense ends with the couplet, which includes, as in Pope s heroic 
metre, both the subject and the predicate of the sentence. Out of 
the sixteen syllables in the line only four are fixed by rule as regards 
quantity. These are marked below the words in the example ; the 
quantity of the other syllables is optional ; and the two lines of the 
floka are independent of one another as regards this distribution. 

But it is difficult to realize the prosody of a language which is 
not familiar. The scansion may therefore be illustrated in any 



194 TALA 

language which, like Latin, distinguishes quantity. The quantity 
of these particular lines is accordingly reproduced in the following 
rule for the versification of the iloka. : 

Habent permcltatemqug pldum modumque carmlna. 

Modis brfrresquS longique ; miscentur versipelllbus. 

BreVIs qumtus locus, summo in pede duplex Iambus est. 

Brevi longave moments, sonantur voce caetera. 1 

Even this, however, is not quite satisfactory, as Latin does not 
convey the sonority of the ubiquitous a sound in the Sanskrit, or 
the final thud of such a word as lahananvito,^ which is more 
heavily stressed than the final of, for instance, pedum* 

The $loka, or anuztubJi (&lt; with regular stops ) is the most famous 
of all Sanskrit metres. There are two other typical examples of 
a pa/la with 8, or less, syllables thegdyatri ( singing ) of 3 x 8=24 
syllables, and the u$ntk ( hymn ) of 4 x 7=28, which like the xloka 
have a large number of optional quantities and only a few fixed. 

"When the pdda is of more than 8 syllables as in the tnstubh 
( with three stops ) and thejoffati ( lively ), of 11 and 12 syllables 
respectively, and various others up to 21 or more syllables all the 
quantities are fixed. Couplets of these greater lengths are usually 
written in stanzas of four lines, and the lines are in modern poetry 
rhymed. Here is an instance of the trhtubh genus (11 syllabled) ; 
it has the poetical name of f the thunderbolt of Indra* (Upendravajra); 
and is in Marathi (rhymed) : 

Na-hen nabho-mandala, vari-rasi, 
Na tar&ka, phensaci ha* tayasl, 
Na candraha, navaci calatahe, 
Na anka to, tlvara ^ida ahe. 
Metre, Upend ravajra. 



Not this the sky - vault,; but 


a li - quid o - cean 


i 


Not stars we see 


span -?gle, but flecks 


of 


sea -foam 


t 


No moon 


a - loft 


glides,: but a 


ship ; and those spots 


Masts, ti 


at the wind 


b 

Nn 


ends ; 


as si 


ie runs 


be 


- foi 


re it. 




" 
Ha 


^ 
hen na- 


bho- 


man - 


^ 


5 C ^ 

Ja-la va 


-^ 


ri 


- ra - I 


r 



1 The TOrses eontain feet which are at once measured and flowing. Longs 
and shorts are mingled by chameleon-like measures. The fifth place is short ; 
there is a di-iambus in the last foot. The other syllables are sounded either 
long or short 

* When sung, the note to which it is set is hummed on the m and not vocal 
ized on theo. 



TALA 



195 



_ ^ -! {j "\Y 




n -f- jji- * | A 


.. i =i_ fl 


M 1 ^ - - 7 - 

Ka ta . ra - ka, phen 

?&gt; ^ 3* r---. -... -l-g ..fg. ; ,-f 


J J 4i -L4-W- 
sa-ci ha ta - yS 

f- * ^ ^ ^ 


^ J -Ml 


} 
Ka 

fcfcj^: 


~i fcri-tfc=^ - &lt; U L^ == -fl 
can - dra lia, na - va - ci ca - la - ttk - fee . 






^ i r 




^ rJ 



Ka an - ka to tl - va - ra 61 - da a - he. 

It will be noticed that the line is composed of the first half of an 

Alcaic (u w ) and the second half of a Sapphic (u w w w). 

And there is a pretty story of Alcaeus having 1 sent Sappho a line 
which began, similarly, in his metre and ended in hers : 

Alcaic. 

I-o-plok ag-na mel-K-cho-mei-de Sap-phoi 1 



which, but for the fifth syllable, is exactly the metre Upendravajra. 
It does not spoil the grace of the valentine if we fancy that its metre 
was one of many Aryan memories that lingered on in the Hellenic 
consciousness. 

Upendravajra is read thus : 

N&-hen nabho- j mandala | vari-ra$f 

as the arrangement of the words in the four lines of Marathi shows 
This is of the form a -f b -f c! &gt; in which of is a taken backwards, and 
I is a well-contrasted member of the line. This suggests an 
interesting reading of the scansion of Alcaic and Sapphic stanzas, 
both of them forms about which it is difficult to make up one s mind : 
Sapphic. 

lam satis ter | ns ulvls | atque dime 

Grandinis mi [ sit Piter, ( et rubente 

Deztera sa | eras iacu | latus arces, 



a-f &-f a 



Terrult | nrbein. 

Alcaic. 

Yides ut alta j stet nive candtdum 
Soracte, nee iam | sustineant onus 
Silvae laboran [ 

I antes, geluqne 
FlumlnaconstEeJ 

|stiterint acuto. 
1 Bark tress d, chaste, dimpli Sapplw&gt; ! 



j overlapping 
id + c 
(overlapping 



196 TALA 

where the masculine element, as it were (in the Sapphic w } 

in the Alcaic w ), balances the feminine (in the Sapphic 

one dactyl, in the Alcaic two). The caesura, shown in the Sapphic 
by the dotted line, and coinciding with the other division in the 
Alcaic, is at the corresponding place after the fifth syllable in the 
true Sanskrit form of Upendravajra, 



and it is this clash between the formal and the free manner of 
reading it that gives it much of its charm. 

Meanwhile, Indians themselves scan the lines on a different plan. 
They have a useful memoria technics : 

Ya -maM;a-ra-j-bha-na -sa-la-gam, 

Taking these syllables in threes they arrive at names for all feet of 
three syllables composed of longs and shorts : 



Y&mata 


baccbic. 


Matara 


molossus. 


Taraja 


antibacchlc. 


Rajabha 


cretic. 


J&blmna 


amphibrach. 


Bhanasa 


dactyl. 


N&sala 


tribrach. 


S&lagam 


anapaest. 



The first syllable of each word is all that is generally used. The 
last two syllables of the line (not necessary for that purpose) repre 
sent the words laglm (short) and guru (long). Accordingly four 
more feet of two syllables can be named : 

Lal pyrrhic. 

Laga iambus. 

GalS, trochee. 

Gaga spondee. 
and the line 

Na-hen nabho-mandaia, varira^T, 
is scanned 

Jabhana\ Taraja, Jabhana, Gaga. 
or, for short, 

jatajagau 1 

1 Gktu is the dual of go. There is a similar memoria technica for the 2* = 16 
vamtiea of four-syllable feet, , , &c ., ^d in the Ooka and else 
where. 



TALA 



197 



There are many dozens of metres with fixed length of syllable 
like Ujpendravajra. Here are two or three more which are in 
common use : 



Vasanta-ttLaka. 14 syllables. 
(ta-bha-ja-ja-gal a) 



Caesura not given. 



\s 



Ha chandra ma ugavala gagana pradlpa 
A - he - ta shukta, guru, mangala jya samipa 
Tya eta prakasa bharata gagano daranta 
To andha kara lapala giriga - bharanta. 

(Cp. Ex. 280.) 

SikharinL 17 syllables, 
(ya-ma-narsa-bha-laga) 



^f _ _ 

Bhalyacya sangenen 
Khalyacya sangenen 
Jasen kharen pani 
Phani dugdha tenci 



avaguna ase toguna dise 
suguna tari to lopata ase 
piuni ganaten goda kariti 
piuni garala tend vamati. 



Metre, Sikharini. 



1 A 

2 A 

3 For 

4 And 



good man s our firm friend, 
bad man s our false friend, 
so clouds drink salt brine 
so snakes drink sweet milk, 



1 and ev - *ry lit - tie fault soon will be for - got; 

2 and ev - *ry bud - ding vir - tue will droop and die. 

3 from ev - ry lit - tie wave -crest, and make it sweet; 

4 and ev - ry drop be - comes poi - son at the last. 



Rag Bhup. Til Tevra, (3 + 2 +2.) 



gy 



J j i n 



3E 



306. 



Blia-Iya - chya san - gH - nen 



a -va-gu-na a - se to 



^ 



-V^U= 



^=f 



gu-na di se. 



- cny& san - ga - 



^ 



. . su-gu-nata -ri to 



lo - - 



- pa-ta a - se 






Ja-seiji 
816113 



jp3L 



pi -u - ni glia-na-te^i ga - - 



198 



TALA 



w 



da ka-ri-tL . . . Fha-nl du-gdha-ten - hi. . , 



/ JN- J 



pi - u - ni ga-ra - in - ten 



- chi va-ma-tl. 



Sardula-vikridito. 19 syllables. 



Dolyannin baghaton dhvani parisaton 
Jivhenen rasa cbakaton madbura hi 
Ha tannin bahusala kama kariton 
Gheton jhompa sukhen phiromi uthaton 

Metre, Sardula-Yikiidita. 



kanin padon calaton 
vace ambi bolaton 
visranti hi dhyavaja 
hi isvara cadaya. 



1. D6 - lyan - nin ba - gha - ton dhva - ni pa - ri - sa - ton 
Sweet these sounds in our ears, and sweet the ma - ny sights 

1. ka - nin pa - don ca - la - ton 

that greet our eyes voy - a - ging. 
Ex. 807. (Cp. Ex*. 226, 253, 254.) 

1*2. 




-r- -,-^. - nm . 

Hft tin - nin 



ba-gha-tCu dhva-n! pa-ri-sa- 
ba-hu-sa - la kH - maka-xi 



^ 



sounds in . . our ears, and sweet the ma-ny 



Sweet 



z y * 

"^-- _ 

Sweet these 



863 . . of hands and feet and ev y -ry 



1*2. 



1 J? j p^l 


[ J M J&lt;^ 


j -m j 


- t6a ka - n 
- to^o. vi - s! 


In pa - d5n 
bran - ti hi*. 

J [J J 


chft - - la- 
. . dhya - - va- 


sights that greet 


our . . . 

i i j[J*3 


-t ^l^j* p r C4 

eyes voy 


fgy-V" -: , J IvJ,, 1 - 




-" Tc/C ^" C-l 



limb, and sweet 



to lie down to 



TALA 



199 



14 2. 



Wn . Ji - v"ho, - nen 

yfi" , &gt; Gk tori - jhdm 



H 



;iiLjg; Swb this taste 



on the 



rcab . - A1B tbese gifts ....... are oar 






ra-sa chsi ka. tOa 
pa su-khSn phi -no" 



ma-dhu-ra 
mi u-tha 



P 



aind sweat the rea-dy power . . 




^ 



ov7n, a.znd Hia , . . wto, in our souls, dw&lt; 



142. 



va cfa^ 
hi i3 



am - hi bo - la - t6n. 
va - r& - ch& - da - ya. 



N J j 



=^3= 

Io - quy 



. . of so 



ci-able ool - 



HS~^ 



giv-i 



The characteristic of t,he! other great class of Sanskrit metres, 
those measured bj time-unlit (mdlrdvrtta), lies in the principle of 
equivalency tliai k* in the feet which we are familiar with in the 
hexameter, thafe two shorts take the time of one long. MMr& 
means instant, or onifc; wlustt the Greeks called * Chronos protos*, 



200 TALA 

the first * or smallest c duration * from which you start reckoning. 
Each foot contains four mdtras, and its prosodial possibilities are : 

Proceleusmatieus v^ w v o 

Amphibrach w w 

Dactyl w w 

Anapaest o ^ 

Spondee 

The general effect of the dryd, which is the typical metre of this 
class, is much that of hexameters or elegiacs, though the details 
are very different. 

Poetry, then, bases the verse on the unit of (1) the syllable 
(ak&ara 1 ), less or more fixed, and (2) the time-length (mdtrd) treated 
as the basis of equivalent combinations. Music similarly has two 
clearly defined stages, when time was reckoned (1) by akmra and 
(2) by mdtrd. 

Reckoning by aksara, that is, by the number of notes in a period 
(parvan). Theparran, as we shall see in the chapter on the Saman 
chant, is the amount that can be conveniently sung in a breath, 
and the aharas which fill it are there of two kinds long (dwghd) 
and short (kra$va) and occasionally the long note is intensified or 
lengthened, or both of these, in which case it is called vrddhd 
(increased). Secular music similarly starts from a long (guru) and 
a short (laghu) note, and adds on one side the prolate note (pluta) 
and on the other the quick note (druta, from dru, to run). The 
laghu is then taken as the unit (matra)&gt; and the four notes have 
relative value, thus : 



o 
I 



Druta \ matra 

Laghu 1 matra J 

Guru 2 matras J 

Pluta 3 matras J. 



To these is added the rest (virdma), which is the equivalent of the 
and is marked thus: 5, and ?. It does not occur with 
the /urn (fy or the pluta 



1 lit imperishable*, in the sense perhaps of the Irreducible minimum ; 
Sanskrit syllables are, of course, one consonant (simple or compound) plus one 
vowel (simple or diphthong). Of. Aristot. Met. xiii. 1. 7, p. 1087 b, Basis U 
$&&. Anstoxenas knows nothing of the syllable as a unit of rhythm. 

* Bay says that its Taliie was not definitely siated by his authority. It seems 



TALA 



201 



The Ratndlara gives 120 examples of such periods as may be 
formed by combinations of these four values, varying in length 
from one note to nineteen notes. Another authority gives 108. 
It is clear that this list is not meant to be exhaustive, for it does 
not reach a millionth part of the possibilities ; and it is also clear 
that the four measurements of music (or five including the mrdma) 
cannot directly represent the two dimensions (long and short) of 
poetry. So that not all of these can represent poetical metres 
(though some may) and that for others there must he some other 
explanation. A list of forty-two specimens is given in Day; but 
as that book is now scarce a few typical ones taken at haphazard 
are given here : 



No. of 

syllables 
or notes. 


Name. 


Indian and European notations. 


1 


Ekatali 





3 


Pratap &lt;H.i; 


"i oo 

J. AN 


5 


Bangapradlpakah 


J J J J J. 


10 


Layah 


i l"5 *i ^ vJ""J OOO 

J J J. J. J. J J. /// 


19 


Mi^ravarnah 


ooo8ooo6ooo5"J ^ oo $ i ^ 

JIj^-iJTO-iJIUDnJ- J J3J J J 



(An instance of I is not included here because its value is not certain.) 

The names do not help us. They are often merely picturesque 
appellations. Where they have a recognizable meaning it is some 
times refuted by the accompanying signs ; thus Jhampa tola and Marnt 
tola both occur, but the signs show them to be quite different from the 
modern Tdl* of those names. Possibly the explanation, but it can 
only be a guess, may be that the longer t&las represent the rhythm 
of good recitation, of well-known verses or mantra*. It is clear that 
in our own poetry, for instance, longs and shorts do not represent 

to be defined in the Batn&kara where (adhy. 5 A. 258) a tinda followed by a rest 
is a detached m&iy& (i e* lagku) ; though if this can be held to imply that m 
laghu followed by a rest is a detached gwru the value of the rest is relative k&gt; 
that of the note which it follows. 



202 



TALA 



all the distinctions we make in good reading. When we read 
aloud : 

1. Of man s first disobedience, and the fruit 

2. Of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste 

3. Brought death into the world and all our woes 

4. With loss of Eden, till one greater man 

5. Restore us and regain the blissful seats, 

6. Sing heavenly Muse. 

our voice travels somewhat as follows : 

1. J J. J J3 J J r J -N 

2. JJJJJJrJJJJ 

3. J J. JJJJJJJJ 

4. J J J J J. r J J- J J J 



5. J J J- J3 J 

6. J. J J J- 



J J J J 



and such clusters of notes have a sort of family resemblance to 
those we are discussing. 

This may account for the longer groups given in our list, but not 
for the short ones; it may account for layah, for instance, which is 
much like the cadence of a Saman (or of one of our mediaeval hymns), 
but not for ekaidlL We will examine some of these shorter ones. 
The first five in the list given in the Ratndkara, and these alone, 
are named by the first five ordinal numbers Adi, dmtlyah, Mlyak, 
etnrtkah) pancamak just as the notes of the Saman chant were 
named pratkamah, dviftyat, trftyah, caiurthaL It is possible that 
they were felt to represent more fundamental distinctions than those 
tdlas yrhieh have what we may call a fancy name. They are : 



tfowt*. 


Indian symbol 


European symbol. 


aditfilah 


[ 


J 


1 dvitiyah 


O O | 

OO6 


j^is 


itturthah 


1 I 


j j / 


pancarnah 


O 


.^ 



1 These are given differently by Day. But the Ralnakara is a good authority, 
aad tliere Is no doubt as to the meaning of the text. 



TALA 203 

If the explanation of the longer groups as typical examples of 
recitation was correct, the time-values of the several notes may well 
have been somewhat indefinite; we do not feel in the example 
from Milton that the musical notes present our style of reading 
more than approximately, nor that we should invariably read it so. 
In reciting a whole sentence the structure of one word reacts 
imperceptibly on the pronunciation of the next and interferes with 
the time- value. But these short groups cannot be sentences ; they 
can at most be single words, and there is every probability that 
they represent exact time-values. And in passing from those to 
these we may be passing from the Cola, Commata, Membra, 
Incisiones, Distinctiones, &c., of the tenth century in Europe to the 
Modi, Proprietates, Perfectiones, and so forth of the fourteenth 
from music which regulated its time-values by the words, to music 
which evolved its own values. 

What makes these five groups interesting is that they offer 
a connecting link between the prosodial feet given on p. 196 (ya-ma- 
fa-ra, &c.) and some of the fundamental principles of Indian 
musical time. In the second, third, and fourth of them we have 
all the eight three-syllable feet. Dmtlyah represents, according to 
the note you begin upon, three of them, w w , ^ o, w w ; 

trtlyah two more, ^ w w and ; and cuturtkah the remaining 

three, w, w , and w . Pancamah similarly represents 

w u and ; and, according as one or other note is dwelt upon, 

w or w also. That this is the true view is made more likely 
by the position of pancamak after the others ; for the two-syllable 
feet follow the three-syllable in the memoria technica. Adtidlak is 
placed first, as much -as to say { this laghu (crotchet) you are to take 
as your unit (mdtra) throughout the list . We see also the genesis 
of the rest (*) : for, stress-accent being foreign to this versification, 
there would, without it, be nothing in a series of Miyai* to mark 
that they were to be taken in sets of three* This is borne out also 
by the comparative rarity of genuine Hindu songs which are in three 
time (it is commoner with Mohammedan); what we should call 
| and | are not unknown, but they are not favourite rhythms, 

But catwrtkak introduces us suddenly to a five rhythm, instead 
of, as we should have expected, a three rhythm. It is interesting 
to see how this comes about. Since the earliest, and by far the 
most prevalent metre is the Hok&^ which primarily counted iie 



204 TALA 

syllables and only secondarily weighed them also, the number of 
syllables in a unity of any sort came to have a greater importance 
than we should naturally have attached to it. Hence, when only 
three syllables were taken together (leaving aside w w w and --- 
which we have already disposed of), the trisyllabic forms w v 
and -- ^, for instance (of four and five matron), seemed to be more 
nearly related to each other than the trisyllabic w w and disyllabic 
-- (each of four mdtrdz). Similarly, it being possible to proceed 
from v \j (four matras) to -- w (five mdtrds) or to w (three 
mdtra*}, the former step which kept the number of syllables seemed 
more natural than the latter which changed it. This may give a hint 
as to the hitherto unexplained delight of the Greeks in five rhythm ; 
but it would be going too far to assert that it is the origin of five 
rhythm in general ; for this appears quite independently in places 
as remote, in more than a geographical sense, as Finland and the 
Malay Archipelago, and others. 

Reckoning by matra, that is, by the time unit and its multiples, 
or the principle of e equivalence , launches us into the domain of 

III. MUSICAL TIME. 

The simplest unity after the solitary beat (ddildlah) is, as we saw, 
dviffiyak (v w -, w - w, - \j J). This gives us the three ordinary 
distributions of the longs and shorts (crotchets and quavers) within 
the four-unit foot (beat), a certain number of which, generally four, 
make up the bar (avarff) or section of common time. The name 
Adi is used for common time (transferred from the solitary beat). 
Further development within the beat takes place by resolving any 
long or short into any one of these feet. Thus : 

j j j 



and similarly with 

J J J 

and 

j j j 

So that such a combination of notes as 

1 2 _ 3 _ 

B j n I w 3^j I w j-sj% 5 



TALA 



205 



the look of which frightens us and the sound of which does not 
particularly appeal to us, appears to an Indian as quite an ordinary 
distribution of his accepted metrical units 

It 1 I 2 I 8 I 4 !. 

w|i -w!vis--vwlw-w|v-vll 

II I 1 * 1 v if 

in an dvard l of Adi tdla. In fact, the main difficulty of realizing 
and enjoying the nice distinctions of Indian rhythm is that we have 
not acquired the habit of resolving mentally every unit into any 
distribution of its constituent elements so that we could sing them 
at a moment s notice or that they would instantly appeal to us 
when we heard them sung. 

Here are some instances of Adi : 



Tala Idi. Hag Jhinjoti. 
(1) 



Ex, 
80S. 



p 



m 



m 



@@ 




du-rfi, 



Ma-ri -ya 



da ga - 



1 This word is translated by * bar * or * section as the context seems to require : 
its literal meaning is * enclosure . The smaller unit, or bar or half-bar, is 
a tibh&g (lit dmsion). Sanskrit, dwsrta and mbMga. 



206 

(8) 



TALA 

Rag BhTrai&nkarabharana, 



Bo-ru-kn-na yi-fu van - ti ie - va Bo-ru-ku-na 




Ban-ga && - yi . 



Talam Adi This Ragam has E and A omitted in descent. 
(5) d - 72. Vivace. 



- yi . 









Nin 



. bha-ja - na - 



yfl . . vS - da - rm Nin 



nfi 






T bha-ja - na 



jfi 







vl - da-nn Kin 



bha-ja - 



But the section (dvard) need not synchronize with the bar 
(mbkag) ; it may begin in the middle of the rnbhag, though, as with 
vs, it seldom does. A more nsual place for it to begin is on the 
kst unit of the four. This kind is called Desadi (foreign Adi) : 



DS&di T&lam. 
(1) 



Ex, J.^ 










K 


L: b. 






pfS^- 












** 


















^ 




&gt; 





Be - va - d! Be - va sa-da - gi - va . . Be - va - di 









-&&amp;lt;-.. 



D . . . T* sa-da-4i-Ta . . di-na-nST- tha su - dha 







Che - ra - ri va - de 



mi - r& . . Ra - ma - yya che - 



TALA 207 

2nd half. 

,VL_i&gt;. JL ft , 1 aj ^-4 ^ -H 3 3 4 -a J- C | f . C i 


W J -" p H 5 W 1 ^ IH* * * i ** i * 
- ra-ra va-de - mi-ra Me-ra-ga - du - ra i - ka ma 

~Jt$P Br 1* ~^-|^-ff- -g- -f- r g -^ .. 


^ h T..LJ ^T 







ha - - Me-ra-ga du-ra 

Or it may begin on the second unit of the four, and is then called 
Madhyadi ( e middle * Adi). As the Avard of De$ddi beginning on 
the fourth unit ended on the third, so here beginning on the second 
it will end on the first : 
Madhyadi Talam. 



310, 



1 



Vi-du-la-ku mrok-ke-da . . vi du -la-ku mrok - ke-da . 



5E^ 



=S 



. vi-du-Ia-ku mrok-ke-da 



(2) 



m 



Ka-li - na-ru - la - ku ma-lu 

J 1 .TJ J I T~? J 1 ^ : r^* 8 - 

pe - mi . Ka-li - na-ru 



ma - lu de - li - 




En - na - du zu - tu - no , 



in a - ku - la 



bJ^ liJ 



l&c. 



ti - la - ka . . . . En - na-du 

These are South Indian nam^ ; the things are common enough in 
Hindostani song and probably have specific names, though I was 
unable to make sure of them. 

A different interest attaches to the trilyah^ t. This is also 
common time. But this peculiar form has left its mark, not in 
any special metrical form, but in the way a bar of common time is 
counted, in whatever metre. A short explanation is necessary first. 



208 TALA 

When three notes of neighbouring* pitch and no more are sung 
without any particular emphasis on any one of them, the voice 
tends of itself to emphasize and the musical consciousness to give 
pre-eminence to the middle one. Thus in the scale of the Andaman 
islands, which (in some parts at least) consists only of three notes 
separated by some very small interval, it is recorded that the middle 
note is made the tonic. Again, in the snake-charmer s pipe (see 
Ex, 274) the middle note of three is made the drone. Similarly, 
if three equal units of time are repeated and an accent is put on one 
of them, it will gradually determine to the middle one of the three : 
w w w, w vi o (or, if the commas between them represent rests : 



It is difficult to prove this, because it is so hard to make the experi 
ment fairly. But, for some reason best known to the builders, the 
wheels of railway carriages commonly beat out a tripleted rhythm, 
and the reader may have noticed that if he is not particularly 
attending to them (and so making the experiment a fair one) these 
take the form u vi w, and not i w ^ nor ^ \-&gt; w. However that 
may be, here is Indian verse on the one hand employing three equal 
syllables in succession followed by a rest J* J* J* n, and Indian music 
on the other counting a bar of common time with three equal beats 
(tdl) and a blank, or empty (kkdli) beat ; and the curious fact that 
this blank beat comes invariably on the third of the bar which 
gives the exact effect of prosodical feet : \ ^ vi w | w ^ ^ | 1 
Common time is, accordingly, called in the North invariably &lt; three- 
beat (tlntal), the fourth beat being empty . The first of the 
bar, which bears the musical accent, is called sam* ( complete , or 
* total ), because at that point the two independent rhythms of 

1 Cp. the first four bars of Tristan, of which the main accent is on the second 
fear and the fourth is blank. 

4 Pronounced like, and accidentally having the same meaning as, our word 
*.sm f . It is important to be clear about this conception. The sam has no such 
stress as we place on the first of the bar. It gets its pre-eminence over the other 
tMa (beats) owing to the cross-rhythm (either with some other instrument or in 
tlie melody itself) being adjusted at that point Or if there is no cross-rhythm, 
still the sam is pointed out by its distance from some typical or recurrent phrase 
elsewhere in the &var& (or vibkOg) ; as the quaver triplet of Tsehaikowsky s Scherzo 
tells us how far we have got each tim in the series of crotchets. It is true that 
when singer and drummer coincide at that point their united triumph at having 
got it right after all does result in a little more tone, i.e. in stress, but this in 
no way necessary to the rhythm of the music. 



TALA 



209 



singer and drummer from time to time coincide. Time is ordinarily 
beaten with the hand upon the thigh (the singer is invariably seated), 
emphasizing the sam slightly, and beating in the air with upturned 
palm for the kMtl. This method of beating is also applied to other 
times besides common time in a way which will appear presently. 

These other times, various forms of three, five, and seven rhythm 
for the most part, are often regarded as intricate and unaccountable ; 
but in the light of prosody they have a simple explanation. They 
are best summarized in the Carnatic system, which enumerates 
thirty-five different kinds as typical; but the principle which 
underlies them is of indefinite application, and as a fact I saw 
a book at Bhavnagar which enumerated some hundreds of them- 
It will be unnecessary to give the names of these thirty-five 
rhythms, because their names are only a piece of memoria technical 
or the picturesque ruins of titles whose meaning is long forgotten, 
and would only confuse us. It will be enough to arrange them in 
seven ranks and five files, lettering the ranks and numbering the 
files. 

Counting ly matra (Carnatic). 
I. II. III. IV. V. 



3 


Eka. 

4 


5 


7 





3 2 


Kupaka. 
4 2 


5 2 


7 2 


9 2 


3 1 2 


412 


512 


Jhampa. 
712 


912 


Tnputa. 
322 


(Adi). 
422 


522 


722 


922 


323 


Matya. 
424 


525 


727 


929 


3233 


Dhruva. 
4244 


5255 


7277 


9299 


3322 


4422 


At*. 
5522 


7722 


9922 



A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 



N.B. Rank A is usually given in the order 4, 3, 7, 5, 9 ; the point being that 
4 and 3 make 7, and 4 and 5 make 9 (9 is sever treated as $ x8). 6, 8, and 
10 are obviously omitted as being multiples of three numbers which are already 
there, and 9 is, as we saw, not considered to be a multiple. Those in heavy 
type are in common use. The names refer to the whole rank (Sfco, for instance, 
to the whole of rank A, Trijwia to D, &c.) but are confined in practice to ttwaee 
files to which they are liere assigned. 

1 See Mudaiiar s Oriental Jfwstc, p, 25. 



210 TALA 

In rank A are the different values (in matron) given to the bar 
(vibhag) when it is counted as a complete whole, that is, when it 
is not composed of various beats (tdl). 1 This merry little tune is 
an instance of the five-unit bar* Four bars make a section, as 
usual i 



dajfttJ Laghu. B&gain Moh&na { * Rfig Bhupkalifin). 




^ 



A common way of counting the uneven numbers is by continuous 
syncopation : 

8j&gt;J I/J lie. 

5^J J I^J J !&c. 

7/J J J K 

The name of this is Ciapu Tola. File V is rarely used. 

Bank B has two heats to the bar, C, D, and E three beats, and 
F and G four. It is not difficult to see in these the two, three, and 
four-syllable feet of poetry. B gives various forms of the trochee 
( w) and iamb (w ), according to the beat with which the rhythm 
begins. The five files allow for different proportions between the 
long* and the short beat "We may arrange the ten possibilities of 
iambs and trochees in a graduated proportion to a scale of 100, and 
it will be seen that a large number of ways of dividing a bar into 
two beats has been reached by very simple means : 

1 In thin copier T& is used for &lt;fcime&gt; and t$l for beat * 



TALA 



211 



RANK B. 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 

i I I 1 I I i i I I I 

2 18 o 



iambs 



trochees - 



V 
IV 

III 

II 

I 

I 

II 
III 

IV 

V 



2 22 



28 



33 



40 



60 



66 



72 



78 2 



82 2 



We see from this diagram that just as the scales took account of 
frutis of different sizes, so here the rhythms take account of different 
sized units (mdtrd) and embody them in a system ; and it is charac 
teristic of Hindu practice to tabulate ten species of a thing and to 
make practical use only of one of them. The other ranks may be 
taken in the same way, and these thirty-five are seen to include by 
implication one hundred varieties of Tdl: 

A B C D E F G 

5-f 10-f- 15 + 15 + 154-20 + 20= 100 

To continue : C and D give five varieties of dactyl, amphibrach., 
and anapaest ( w \J 3 \j \j, w \~&gt; ). D. II is the normal dactyl, 
&e, ; the rest of D lessens or increases the proportion of the long to 
the two shorts. C is our old friend the * cyclical* dactyl 1 which 
modern theory has criticized out of existence, for Greece at any rate, 
but which made a considerable stir in its day. Here at any rate 
it has five separate values of its own. E gives the cretic (- w -), 
bacchic (^ ), and antibacchic ( w). 

Of the four-syllable feet (four beats in the bar F and G) there 
are sixteen possibilities (for two things taken four together). Only 
eight appear here. Thus : P. I gives 3233, and implies 2333, 
3 3 3 2, and 3 3 2 3. G. I, similarly, four more. 

1 The cyclical dactyl is one in which the middle syllable is shorter than tfe 
last. 



212 



TALA 



rare in the Sloka. 



IV is used if wanted. 






The other possibilities are : 
2223 
2232 
2322 
3222 
2323 
3232 
3333 
2 2 2 2 J 

So that ranks F and G fairly represent the chief possibilities of the 
Ooka. 

But it will be more interesting- to see how the most characteristic 
of these work out in practice. We will take : 
B. II. 2 + 4 Bupaka (iamb). 
D.I. 3 + 2 + 2 Triputa (dactyl). 
C. IV. 7 + 1 + 2 Jkampa (cyclical dactyl). 
and as a curiosity 

G. III. 5 + 5+2 + 2 Ata (ionicus a majore). 
KHpaka TEIam. (2 + 4.) 
W ^,^ 



Ex. 

312. 






J J | J * ~ m 



Yi-na-Te ma-na-&a vi-na-ve . . ma-na-sa 



vi-va-ram-bu-ga ne . . del - pe da vi-va-ram-bu- 



- 11* la - &lt;& ga-ga-ni A - la - ka - la - lla 




li -d*-g-ga-ni A-la-ka-li 



Is - 



(8) 



i 



- na-mu-le - - jep-pu kon - ti sun - da-ra ra-ghu 



R& - ma - Su-gu- 



TALA 



213 



Jtupaka is in idea Saraband rhythm. It is quite one of the com 
monest Tals, and presents no difficulty, as, in practice, it is a simple J. 

Triputa is harder. The secret of all these Tdh is that the units 
are taken as sums, not multiples. And though seven is not 
a multiple of anything-, yet the European having counted three, 
finds it very difficult not to expect another three. The only way 
is to take a fresh lease of counting with each beat. It will be 
found quite easy to realize all these TaU if one does as a native 
d oes count out each beat 1, 2, 3, &e., and tap at every c 1 &gt; . 



Triputa Talam. (3 + 2 + 2.) 
Adagio. J^IOO. 



(Telugu words.) 



Ex. 
813. H 



En - du - ku - da - ya - r& - - du - ra . . firi 



- ma-chan-dra ni - ken-dn . . ku - da-ya r& - 



- sxl . . zft - ma - chan - dra ni - kefc-du 




- da 



JhampaTalam. The *bar* (Avard) is frora one double bar line to the next 
The single bar lines show the beats. Though it is counted 
7 + 1 -f 2, it is thought as2-t-3-i-2 + 3 quavers. 




Am -ma ra - vain - ma Am -ma ra - vam - ina 



Am - ma r& - vam - ma 



Am - ma ra - vam - ma tu - la - 



sam - ma na-nu pa - lim - pa - ram-ma sa - ta - ta - mu pa - da-mu 



is - 

816113 



-ma rft - vam - ma. 



214 TALA 



Ata Tftla. 5 -i- 5 4- 2 4-2. (The Efig omits E and A in ascent). 

Mclto mvace. J 160. 



Bx. 315. 




is one of the more difficult rhythms. This particular example 
seems to us almost impossible. We lose our bearings in the course 
of fourteen crotchets divided into semiquavers, especially at such 
a tempo as this, and with all sorts of cross-rhythms in the bowing . 
The slurs really represent the syllables of words ; and this tune is 
actually sung, and sounds very puzzling but very interesting. 
The Avard is divided into four groups (marked I, II, III, IV), and 
the phrase, which is the same length as the Avard but does not 
coincide with it, begins and ends at the third beat of the first group. 
(Mind the flat !} 

Later on in the Svaraf of this song another sort of rhythm is in 
duced upon this. Every second crotchet of the melody ends on the 
note &, which occurs in the words at the same moment. This 
would have the effect of combining 



Ttipvta 123 



Ata 



12345 12345 12 12 



But the last two Sas come one unit late. The original tune began, 
we saw, on the third beat, and the Swra* begin on the first beat ; as 
there is a Da Capo at the end of them back to the tune, there will 
be two beats to make up ; and this is the ingenious and effective 
way in which it is done. 



TALA 



215 



IV. 
1 




N.B. The slurs represent the syllables of the words. The Svard finishes at the 
ml of each line. The phrase begins on the third of the fourteen beats. 



Svaras (patter words). 



I. 



316, 



IL 



2 



f 



A -lu-ka-va la-du-sa ma- ja-ga-ma-na-ku-sa ti-la ta-ga 
2345 



-ft - 



la-du-sa ra-sa-sa-ru-du-nu-i 



ha - sa - mu - na - su - ma - sa 



in. 




ya-ka- mu-lu ha -ra-pa - ga - sa ra - sa - kshi be - da 



The Hindostani T&U axe very much the same in practice as those 
of the Carnatic. The usage in different parts of Hindostan varies 
a good deal, as it does with the Rags^ and it is difficult to be at 
all sure of more than the commonest. But as these are remark 
ably like those described as the commonest in the Carnatic, there 
is little doubt that the underlying idea is the same in both the 
poetical metre. The following table gives them as corresponding to 
the Carnatic list ; 



216 



TALA 



I. 



Counting ty matra (Hindostanj. 
II. III. IV. 



V. 





4 
Ekka ) 

Ektal \ 






243 
[MadhyamaTatn 
234 

[Matta] 
423 
[Khatt tal] 


O Q 

[Rfipak] 


2 4 
Hupak 














2323 

Jhampa 
or Jap 




322 
Tevra 


422 
Titala ) 
Tlnfcal L 
Tritala j 










244) 
4 2 4 j 
Surphakta ) 
Sulaphakata \ 
Haiti j 










4244) 
_2 4 4 4f 
Ada-chautSla 








3322 

[Jhampa] 


4422 
Chautala 
2244 
[Farodast] 


5522 

Bhamar 







c. 



E. 



G. 



Amongst these the only Tal which is commoner than in the 
Camatic is G. II CJiautala (i.e. C&ar-tdia, c four-beat ). It is used 
especially for Dhr&pad* (see Chapter XI). The three names of 
Titdla (D, II) all mean ( three-beat . Some of the other names are 
descriptive Jhampa, e jumping ; Surphakta, zigzag *; Ada-chautdla, 
* crooked four-beat ; Dhamdr (for dka-matra), having a high number 
of time-units . 

But there is one Tal peculiar to Hindostan which entered it 
apparently with the Mohammedans Dddra&gt; f. It is the only 
rhythm which is treated as a multiple (and therefore cannot be 
Hindu), and it is in very common use. 

Most of these Tals which give the rhythm of one bar (vibMg) can 
be taken in pairs of md&d$#, and are then counted as one bar of 
common time (Rntdl), thus : 



TALA 217 

3 + 2+2 3 + 2+2] 

two bars of Tevra | J. J J | J. J J | 

counted 12 03 like Tfotdl. 

Or even a single Tdl is so counted : 

2+3 + 2 + 3 
Jkampa | J J. J J. | 
counted 1203 
Surpkakta, however, has two blank beats (Tchdti) : 

4 + 2+4 
SurphaJcia J^J J J^J j 

counted 10230 
and Chantdla has four beats (kdl) and two blanks (khdU) : 

4 + 4 + 2+2 
Chautdla J_J J^J J J 

counted 102034 
Ada-cJiautdla, again, four beats and three blanks r 

2 + 4 + 4 + 4 
Ada-chautMa J J^J J^J J^J 
counted 1203040 

Indian rhythm, then, moves in dvardx broken up iKboviiAagt, each of 
which contains one or more &Z&, 1 We can equally say of ours that 
it moves in sections broken up into bars each of which contains one 
or more beats. In what does the difference between the two systems 
consist ? 

It may be answered that theirs is derived from song, ours from 
the dance or the march. That both are based on the numbers 
2 and 3, but that they add and we multiply in order to form com 
binations of these. But the answer which goes deepest is that 
their music is in modes of time (as we saw also that it was in modes 
of tune), and that ours changes that mode at will by means princi 
pally of the harmony. 

In order that rhythm, an articulation of the infinite variety of 
sounds, may be upon some regular plan, the plan must have some 
recognizable unit of measurement. India takes the short note and 
gives it for a particular rhythm a certain value as opposed to the 

1 It is unfortunate that the word is also used in the sense of vibfo&g to mean 
the * time of the music. 



218 



TALA 



long- ; Europe takes the stressed note and gives it in a particular 
rhythm a certain frequency as against the unstressed, and graduates 
its force. We find the unity of the rhythm in the recurrent bar 
(which is always in duple or triple time, just as our two melodic 
modes are either major or minor), and have to look elsewhere for the 
variety; they find variety in the vibhag whose constitution is, as 
we have seen, extremely various, and must look elsewhere for unity. 
Both of us find what we want in the larger spaces of time ; they 
find unity in the dvard, we find variety in the sections. 

The dmrd is a constant. In slow time there may be only two 
vibMg* in it, in quick time there will certainly be four. And this 
series of four is unbroken, except at the end of the verse or the 
song, that is, where the singer breaks off temporarily or altogether. 
We can see why this must be so. Suppose the song is in Rupak 
J I J J l&gt; &&) Unless there were some accepted number 
of Mhags to the dvard it would be impossible to know that the 
music was not in the larger dvard (i.e. in fewer vibhdgz) of 
Tevra (j. J J | J. J J |, &c.) or of JAampa (j J. J J. | 
J J. J J. 



Rupak ( 






Jh&xnpa (2 #t*ord). 



i 



Terra ($ Stxarfj. 



a 



If the length of the &lt;mzn# were not certain, the rhythmical 
mode , which has a connotation of its own just as the melodic 
( mode* has, would not be clear, and all cross-rhythm, a corner-stone 
of this music, would become impossible; for this presupposes 
& constant against which something else is inconstant. 

The * section * in Europe is often, too often, also of four bars ; it 
is tiiis fact that makes much of our church services musically un 
attractive. But the section can have, and in the best music it has, 
a varying number of bars. Its length is altered, either really or 
apparently; it is either actually shortened or lengthened, or else 



TALA 



219 



two equal sections are made to overlap so that one seems shorter 
than the other. Any work on large lines will supply examples of 
this ; here, for instance, in the passage for flute and bassoon out of 
Leonora, No. 3: 



Ex. 

318. 



A A 



FL 



Bn. 



Passage begins. 



T r r r 



& 



** Overlap ;b- 



3-bar section. 



soon scale suppressed. 



J7JH 

- .^C_ -0U ^) ^) 



3-bar section. 



J =" 



Overlap; last bar of 
previous flute 

phrase suppressed. 



shj fi A- 



220 TALA 



JLL, , -, , . , , U -m 1 


{&- f~ 


9* [ 

8tr. 

SF ^ T~ 


pu f. 


. f? f- 


^_^ ! 

r r r i " 

PI* 


~tH 











1 Passage ends. 

in which the sections are twice shortened from four bars to two, 
and the phrases twice overlap so as to produce the effect of two 
three-bar sections. It would be clearer if our music were printed 
as Handel wrote (though not consistently) his Messiah, with bar- 
lines running all through the staves at each new section, and between 
these places only through the single staves; it would have the 
effect which punctuation has upon the written word (and would be 
as difficult to get right). An instance of the judgement he exercised 
in this matter may be seen in the two versions, given in the auto 
graph score, of the opening symphony of * But who may abide . 

There is one case, however, which puts the thing in a nutshell. 
In 1893, when | rhythm was less familiar to Europe than it now 
is, Tschaikowsky felt it necessary in his Sixth Symphony to do two 
things. He kept the metre free from complications; the Scherzo 
is almost entirely based on the crotchet, and the Trio on the minim. 
He also kept the sections uniform; they are in four-bar rhythm 
throughout except in two places at the return from the Trio to 
the Scherzo, and at the Coda the very places in which, as we saw, 
liberty* was allowed in the dvard. It was only there, in fact, that 
he felt his rhythm so securely established that he could play with 
it. But now that it no longer piques our curiosity to see how J is 
i beaten *, and that the problem of counting it accurately no longer 
provides us with a painful pleasure, the monotony of the sections 
comes back upon us with fatal force. But the four-bar section 
would not have this effect if, like the Hindus, we had a large 
assortment of variously characterized rhythms to fill it. 

It is harmony which puts it in our power to prevent this fre 
quently changing length of the phrase or section from upsetting 
the unity of the rhythm. In this Adagio from Haydn s First 
Quartet: 



TALA 



221 



Adagio. 



"*LE 1 JU J j Jl 


IJ] J &gt;l 


Jl. jJ J 


1 J 1 Nl_ 


319. 


&lt;J -y l" 

J 


JJ 

- r r 


r p1. 


j i f~ 

J^~ J 

.i-j C SL. 


&gt; W 

j ji *L 


j* *: , 
J &C. 

I.I - 



the phrases are made to stand out from each other by means of the 
harmony ; a and d taper towards the end, c steals in unawares, and 
h contrasts firmly with its neighbours a and c ; and that such 
insistence upon the rhythm was necessary is shown by the base 
form into which the melody has relapsed by the constant use which 
has ignored it. 

In the Menuetto which follows it : 

Hfenuetto. 



Ex. 


i-p ^ J i 




i j J 




fn 












...- \" 


320. 








^?- 






r-i 


f 


bn: 


I- 

IL A 

JjL ff ii_: 


4" 



the harmonies by their postponement to the second bar clearly mark 
the beginning of a section there, and tell us that the phrase of the 
first bar is to be regarded as extra sententiam. Then by entering at 
the normal place in the sixth bar they proclaim that that phrase is 
now taken into the sentence. They are not responsible for the 
assertion that bars 6, 7 and 8, 9 each make a section ; that is made 
clear by the balance of the phrases they contain the phrase of 8, 9 
is an inversion of that in 6, 7. But the harmonies again compel 
us to take bar 10 as a section all to itself, for they exactly repeat 
those of bar 9, only a place higher. This somewhat intricate 
arrangement of sections would be confusing but for the fact that 
they make up in all a period of twelve bars that i% the time 



222 



TALA 



length of three normal sections and so their excessive variety is 
unified. 

Very similarly in Chopin s Sixth Nocturne a twelve-bar unity is 
reached by a different distribution : 

.L 2 s *^ s e 7 

Ex. 



821. 




10 



11 12 






4b- 



4; 



4c. 



221 

and this is the work of the harmony, more especially of the tenor 
part: 

^234 5 6 7^ 8 ^_9^ 10 ^_U 12 

- f 2 -* ipQ* 

rl II I ^t- 



1 



overlap witfa 
new j 



Preliminary. 

But these two examples are the opening phrases of two several 
compositions where a certain clearness of balance is necessary and 
some general unity (here twelve bars) is indispensable: in the 
course of a composition (as we may conclude from Ex. 318) no 
such higher unity need be or is aimed at ; the sections may be as 
various as the composer pleases. 

It is needless to give instances where the harmony graduates the 
stress of the rhythm, as every page of music is full of them. This 
is a distinction which Indian music is also fully alive to, as we 
shall see in the next chapter. 

It is sometimes thought that these uneven times 5, 7, 10, 14, 
and so OB- are full of suggestion for European composers. This 
on the whole may be doubted, because duration is not the same 
thing as stress. All these Indian rhythms have their rauon &lt;Stre 
in the contrast of long and short duration, and to identify these 
with much and little stress is to vulgarize the rhythms. The only 



TALA 



223 



genuine instance we have of their method is Saraband rhythm, and 
we see instantly how in 



323. 



La-scia ch iopian-ga mia cru - da nor - te 



the effect is lost if the second minim in addition to being lengthened 
is also emphasized. Stress pulses, and demands regularity ; duration 
is complementary, and revels in irregularity. In order to get the 
true sense of duration we have to get rid of stress, and this would 
mean that we must find some other means (as the Hindus do) of 
marking the beginning of the bar than by accenting it. Tschai- 
kowsky s Scherzo and Trio do this. The Scherzo is in elongated 
trochees (7 + 3 instead of 6 + 3) : 



instead of 



Both these phrases are characterized ; the first by crotchets with 
an incidental triplet, the second by the dotted minim. This rhythm 
pervades the whole, although the units are afterwards slightly varied. 
The Trio is a truncated Saraband, and by its figuration appears as 
a contracted iamb (2 + 3 instead of 2 + 4) : 




Ex. 
326. 




instead of 



The way the composer has defeated the stress is by a variety of 
devices ; in the Scherzo by the cross-bowing, running quavers, and 
syncopation of the accompaniment, in the Trio by the crotchet drone 
bass. And if the conductor would now lay down his stick for this 
passage there would be nothing to distinguish it from Indian rhythm. 

But the fact remains that we feel these things as elongations and 

1 The two movements (Exg. 824 and 826) eorreepond pnuitically to C. IV 
(7 4- 1 +2) and B. I 



224 TALA 

truncations of rhythms which are familiar to us, and they could 
hardly be naturalized. Perhaps this is why in his variations on 
a Hungarian air in J (Tevrd) Brahms drops in the fourth variation 
into common time beginning on an off-beat, in the fifth and sixth into 
| beginning on an off-beat, in the seventh into overlapping phrases, 
and continues from the ninth onwards frankly in | and f . Perhaps 
he felt that he could best explain the nature of this rhythm by 
showing that it was like all these things which we have, but was 
not the same as any one of them. 

But considered as forms of our rhythms gone mad they have 
a definite use, as, for instance, in Tristan s delirium (Act in, se. ii), 
where fragments of melodies, his whole past in fact, come thronging 
disjointedly into his mind. Only these are not Indian rhythms. 
They are European rhythms distorted to suit the state of his bodily 
pulse ; it is precisely the pulsation of them that is insisted upon. 

The modem use of these unusual rhythms is again different. The 
constant changes of time some half dozen perhaps, f , f , f , |, -, f 9 
&c., occurring in not more than twice six bars are part of the 
striving of the last twenty years after realism and away from 
formalism. Composers aim at substituting the rhetorical accent 
of prose for the metrical accent of verse, at imitating in instru 
mental music the broken accents of the speaking voice. As such 
tbeir music has nothing 1 in common with the systems we have been 
discussing where metrical law prevails. They appear to defy law ; 
and they are justified, but only by success in the particular instance. 
Thus, of two such instances, we may say that Cyril Scott s Sonata, 
Op. 66, is less convincing rhythmically than Stravinsky s Petrouchka. 
For the latter has large tracts of uniform time which enable the 
vagaries to be felt as contrast, whereas in the former there is no 
such contrast because it is all contrast. 



PLATE 11 




Tin . The second finger 

rises as the first falls 




ty$$ijjjj$ f f/" \ \ 

4 - V 

^M^&^ltt&gt;vWtt& *" 




A..k 




Ghe 
Ranganna, Mysore 



P. 225 



CHAPTER IX 
DRUMMING 

Monsieur le Grand knew only a little broken German, only the 
really important wordsBread, Kiss, Honour but be could always 
make his meaning clear on the drum. If I wanted to know, for in 
stance, what was meant by * Liberty he would dram the Marseillaise 
and I understood. If I did not know the meaning of i lilgalite" 
he would drum fa ira, $a ira . . . Us aristocrats a la lanteme and 
I understood him. If I did not know what betise was he would 
drum the Dessau march which we Germans, as Goethe records, 
used to drum in the Champagne and 1 understood him. He 
wanted once to explain to me the word L Allemagne , and he 
drummed that old, old tune, simplicity itself, the tone that yon 
can hear on fair days outside the booth where the dancing dogs 
are Dumb, dumb, dumb. It made me very angry, but I understood 
him. HEINE. 

THE drum is used not, as with us, to assert the accent at special 
moments, or to reinforce a crisis, but to articulate the metre of the 
singer s melody, or to add variety to it by means of a cross-metre. 
There are four main elements in drumming : the quality, the inten 
sity, the pitch of the sounds, and the time-intervals between them. 
We do not, on the whole, use percussion much. When we do, we 
value it, perhaps, chiefly for the graduated intensity with which it 
points tbe rhythm. We look a little askance at varieties of quality ; 
we recognize the drums (gro&se came or tympani)&gt; the cymbals, and 
the triangle; but we are not quite sure how far the tambourine, 
castanets, and Berlioz s flannel-headed drumsticks are legitimate 
music. Of the pitch we only demand that it should not clash 
with the pitch of other sounds, it is in no way a vital constituent 
of the harmony, which is almost invariably complete without it. 
The time-intervals of the drum-notes reinforce as a whole those of 
the other instruments; they seldom cross them, and only produce 
a certain amount of confusion when they do, which, however, may 
be a useful resource upon occasion* 



226 DRUMMING 

la Hindu music the graduated intensity of the sound is very 
little regarded, either in singing or playing or drumming, because 
their whole scheme is not accentual, but quantitative. It is true 
that the first of the bar (the tarn) is louder than the rest often, 
not always ; but this is not in order that it may, as with us, stand 
out against other accents, but because two quantitative schemes are 
apt to coincide there, and two sounds are louder than one. The 
time-intervals are with them all-important, and show great variety ; 
it is seldom that more than a few bars, out of hundreds, are 
drummed in exactly the same way. And the drumming is practi 
cally continuous ; it is only occasionally silenced for special contrast. 
The pitch, again, is all-important, for it is invariably the keynote, 
and frequently the drum is the singer s only accompaniment. 
Lastly, a maximum of variety is got into the quality; and this 
not mainly by the variety of the instruments. For though there 
are scores of shapes for drums, tambourines, cymbals, triangles, and 
so forth, they are not usually assembled together, because concerted 
music is the exception, not the rule. The variety is got out of the 
drum, or the pair of drams themselves. They are played with the 
full hand and the fingers, rarely with sticks; there are half a dozen 
strokes for the right hand and three or four for the left. Of these 
Lady Wilson s 1 drummer said, The beat (with the left hand) is 
like the seam of my coat that must be there; the other notes 
(with the right hand) are like the embroidery I may put according 
to my own fancy over the seam/ These notes are differentiated 
not by pitch, but quality. They are also articulated by great 
intricacy of time-interval. For neither of these two things has 
our music any real analogues; and the Bengalis do not overstate 
the case in their saying &lt; Yantrapatir mrcldnga* (the dram is the 
father of instruments). It is proposed now to examine Indian 
drumming under these two aspects : quality and metre. 

TONE-QUALITY. Under a multitude of names there are two main 
types of drum. The mrddnga played at both ends with the hands 
(or if with sticks, called dkol)^ and the pair of drums, tabla, the 
right hand daina and the left hand bayatt. Both kinds are tuned 
in the ordinary way by braces (diwal), between which and the wall 
of the dram (dattn) tuning blocks (gotta) are wedged. In the 
1 A S&wt 4&gt;&lt;*tm* qftte Hindu %*fcm of Music, by A. C. Wilson, 1904. 



PLATE 12 




, ,, ,, 

; 



k Ta "Na (borrowed from the 

right-hand strokes) 




Both hands, Dha ; Ghe -f Ghe 




Bhai Santu, Amritsar 



DEUMMING 227 

mrddnga the driving in of these wedges sharpens both ends simul 
taneously. "When, as in the better class music, it; is desired to have 
both drumheads (warka) in tune with each other, another device is 
adopted. A mixture of flour (dta) and water is worked on to the 
middle of the larger drumhead to lower the tone to the desired 
amount. - The two heads are commonly tuned an octave apart. 
The plaster also adds to the resonance, and seems to be valued for 
that reason. It is therefore retained in the tabla, although it was 
not necessary here for the tuning, because each drum has only 
one head, and the braces do all that is wanted. On the mrddnga 
the plaster is fresh made whenever the drum is used ; on the tabla 
it is applied once for all, and has frequently been mixed with iron 
filings to add to the resonance, and is then black. It is called tfyah t 
(blackness) or dk (eye) ; the rim of the drum-wall over which the 
skin is passed is called kanar, and the drumhead, which is visible 
between that and the ak, is known as warka (lit. leaf of a book). 
On the left drum the eye is in the middle; on the right it is 
eccentric, in the { north-west y corner, lying under the tip of the 
forefinger. 1 The different tone qualities are obtained by striking 
with the full hand, or the several fingers at different places, and by 
damping or releasing. They are distinguished by names (&?/}. The 
tabla are generally tuned in unison, occasionally at a Fifth from each 
other ; but there is no idea whatever of * dominant-tonic * in this 
tuning. The alternation of sound between the two drums is incessan t 
and instantaneous, so that the two notes merge; and they are ob 
viously there for the same reason as they are upon the drone strings 
of the rind or tambura, only as an enrichment of the tone. The note 
of the drum is also altered by way of grace . There is a special 
hour-glass-shaped drum, especially in South India, small enough to 
be held in the hand, which can then squeeze the braces and sharpy 
the note. On the tabla too there is a special stroke (called gfa) 
which can be made with either hand ; after a blow from the full 
hand the ball of the thumb is slid forward across the drumhead. 
This raises the pitch slightly and produces a sound like a galosh 
leaving the mud, curious, and by no means unattractive. 

The wrddnga and ikd are respectively .barrel-shaped and cylin 
drical. The tabla, left and right, are of the shape of a giant tea-cup 
and coffee-cup respectively ; the left is tucked into the crook of 
i Sometimes the * eye of the right dram is called tf^oM and tlmfc of th left A*. 



228 DKUMMING 

the knee, the right is propped against a cloth. For the other 
varieties of percussion, any one who has not access to Captain Day s 
excellent illustrations may get a rough idea of them from the 
photograph opposite of some South Indian specimens. The kara- 
dwadya,) udukkai, and ludubudike are three sizes of the same make, 
the smallest being squeezed in the hand, the longest under the arm. 
The karadwa&ya is beaten with a padded drumstick. Against it 
leans a kokkara, a metal tube with serrated edges, which are rubbed, 
to produce a grating sound, with the metal pin on a chain, which 
hangs down over the tambourine (kanjari) below it : it is used by 
pariahs, especially by the Pulaiyars of Travancore, for casting out 
devils. The goblet-shaped udupe is used by Lingayets in temple 
worship. Below are the ndgari, seventeen inches in height and 
diameter, for use on an elephant and in the temple, with seventy 
turns of lacing : the maddale (wrdanga-dcwpz) hollowed out of a tree, 
and the Mohammedan dolu, (dhol) of copper. The clhol is played 
with hands or sticks ; if open at one end, as occasionally, it is 
played with sticks at the other end. In a Panjabi regiment 
a drummer (Miranbaksh, see p. 237) was pointed out to me who 
sometimes wielded his sticks till his hands bled. 

Confining ourselves now to the talla the wrddnga, is played in 
the same way we will examine the different strokes (bols) given 
with either hand or both hands; singly, successively, or simul 
taneously ; with one or more fingers or with the whole hand ; upon 
the black , or the rim , or upon the * white } between them; 
damped, or partly damped, or undamped. Indian fingers are 
extraordinarily supple. The forefinger, as pianoforte players know, 
is one of the weakest ; but its stroke as it comes down flat with 
a whang on different parts of the drum is curiously powerful, and 
inimitable by Westerns. It is said to take half a lifetime to make 
a good drummer, and it will be seen in the following pages that 
there is much to learn. 

There is considerable difficulty, short of the only true way by 

learning to drum oneself in finding out what these strokes really 
are. Not only do both strokes and names vary in the North and 
the names differ entirely in the South, but the drummer regards 
his strokes as a synthesis, and is not accustomed to analyse them. 
Also if too many questions are asked, the victim begins at last in 
sheer desperation to say the first thing that comes into his head. 



PLATE 13 




DRUMMING 



229 





i o 
^0 r4 

2 


S* 




It 




Si 03 
&gt; O 


5 




J3 




oS g 


^^ g 1 


o 


i"i 




- J3 


o " *S 


d 


"ao * 




*& fe 










I I 


l s 


^ 


is 
















|H H 




O 8 


w 

7^ 

S 


j* i i i 
i r ! f 

OQ O OS -^ ^ 


* 3 If I 

s I^i-s ^ 

^3 S ^&gt; 3 


JS 

-M 
O 


a &gt;, 

*! ^ 


ft; 


-CJ &, &lt;D 

III 11 

III, ! ! 

13 JS - * g g J3 

g 00,2 of OS ^ 

i :lfj| 11 

o g B ? -S o S 

g 1 3 1 g w 


The normal left-hand s 

Struck lightly; dully r 

The ball of the thum 
pressing and sharp 
used by the right ha 
The hand rests on the a 


* Ta + Ta. The 1st foil 
- Ghe + Di. 
Ghe + Na, 


= Ghe + Ta, or Ghe + Ghe. 
hands. It occurs ge 
not exclusively. 

Ga + Di. 
Dhi -f- Na ffa,+ Dt -f h 




to 


* X 









S* S 1 ,2 1 a 


tj w T3 O TJ *3&gt; t5 

Ji* ** o jS o 
A,^3 g ^ cu 


t? 




| 


2 S -S -eg S 8 

^ *o J3 T3^ 1$ 

t? ?; r^ jj T3 tj JL 


S-g&gt; J ,| S "aS 


1 






^ co a 


^ S 








CC 








rt struck. 


7|i i 1 11 

a ^q r ^t 2 *3 3 


1 111 li 


|^ 




&lt; 















S & s 


fl 






O " "Jo "to "w ^ 


^ * A A 




rC -k 














s; 


&gt; 1 O CO 


"o g&gt; *B *o 






o 1 ^* 







1 


If - - 


I l 


CQ 




s 


S * * 

si 








00 




^ 


^ 


^ 


** &lt;- 

-=} 5 




e 


^0. * S ~ * 


- ~ s 


60 "0 S 


~ ~ i 


ai 


tt 




g W 




t 


S- 

t 1 s ^ 

^ &lt;5 fe, ^ 


fl 51 4 


CIJ 


i *i, 




5 









M 



816113 



230 DRUMMING 

Nor is much help to be got from the books ; the author takes for 
granted that a thing which he sees and hears every day will be 
familiar to his reader, and accordingly omits to differentiate the 
strokes in words, and he does not always state their duration, which 
is of vital importance for the normal drum-phrases (theka) and their 
variants (parawl) which we shall examine later. The list on p. 231 
was obtained from the court drummer, Nanne Khan, at Bhavnagar 
(Gujarat), and is supplemented by statements of various others at 
Calcutta, Bombay, Allahabad, Lahore, Jhelum, and other places, 
and checked by the list in T. B. Sahasrabuddhe s book (in Marathi) 
and A. B. Pingle s Indian Music, the only full account of the 
matter in English. 

The list is not complete, although the most important loh are 
probably there. Those of the right hand begin with dentals, those 
of the left with gutturals, 1 and those of both hands simultaneously 
with aspirated dentals. There are a variety of other successive 
and * simultaneous strokes. A few of the c single * bolt are shown 
in the photographs of two drummers (at Mysore and Lahore) 
facing pp. 225, 227. 

TIME-INTERVAL. These drum-words (6oZ) are distributed in 
drum-phrases (theka), which constitute the drummer s memoria 
technica for the particular Tdl, and in drum- variants (par and) 2 ; the 
former s duty is to * keep up the tal^ the latter s to * swell it 
(Pingle). In the next diagram are exhibited thekas of tlntdl from 
different localities. 

The first six of these are genuine thekas : the alteration of d to t 
in the first thekas and the trikara in the sixth is intended to 
distinguish the blank (khtifa) section of the bar (marked 0} from 
the others. The eighth (from Jhelum) is an instance of four bars of 
Surphakta treated as one of TintdL The seventh (from Calcutta) 
is of the nature of a parand, that is, the drumming of the various 
beats is contrasted. 

The six pamnds from Bombay are continuous. At the end of 
the fourth line, at * ta ta ghinna * begins a new rhythm in three 
time, which comes to an end just as the singer, going on in four 
time, reaches his gam at the beginning of the seventh line. This 
is a simple instance of a thing which is often enormously complex, 

1 We use A and t for double tonguing on brass instruments similarly, because 
of their distinctness. * Pronounce purrund \ 



o S i 



&lt;51 5 







2 -S 3 J5; 

g o 



, 

* 5 e &lt;S &lt;S rt rt 

g c a a c c 



a . a c c ,-, 



J!t_ sSa 

- 1 - BtJ- 3 -! 



au. a 



-|sssss 



a ^ a a a 



!b!b 



*-*-- 



b 



lib 



fiiS^^t 

3 OB*! 



232 



DRUMMING 



which is very common, and which gives great pleasure to an Indian 
audience, who invariably greet it with appreciative aeckchas 
( good ), It is rare in our music, though instances are to be 
found, as of most things, in Bach ; here, for instance, is one from 
the first movement of the Violin Concerto in E major : 




in which the violin breaking into three bars of | arrives at the 
reprise of the theme simultaneously with the piano, which continues 
in common time. Another instance is the common Handelian close : 



Ex. 
329. 


2 3 


1 2 




3 


1 


2 3 


^^= 


J J *!""" 




^J 


=p 


1 




W M r f - 




P 1 







Sweet is plea-sure af 



ter pain 



DRUMMING 



233 



which, though a still simpler device, is used for the same purpose 
of clinching the final note. (Cp. Int. Mus. NontMy Journal^ Oct. 
1913, pp. 3-7.) 

What appear in the parands given above to be a number of 
new loU) are really those we have already met with subjected to 
phonetic decay. Thus (in alphabetical order) : 

dene = dhi + na 
det =dhi-fta 
dhag(e) = dha-f ghe 
dhan = dha + na 
dhikita = dhi + ka -f ta 
gadi = ga -f di 
gidi = ghe -f di 
gina ghe+na 
ghitira = gh e + ti + ta 
greden = ghe 4- ta -f dhi -f na 
kiridha =ka + ti-fdha 
krita =ka-fti-fta 
tnka = ta 4- ti -I- ka 
trtkara = ta+ti + ka-fta 
tutu? 

The time- value of the stroke is not implied in its name, though 
the compound boh naturally take longer than the simple. These 
values have to be learned by watching and noting performance; 
and those given here have no more authority behind them than 
a few mornings devoted to that rather tedious occupation. 

But without inducing a climax, par and* in a different rhythm are 
often introduced just for fun. The singer and drummer like to play 
hide and seek with each other ; and the audience watch the contest 
with amusement. The drummer is worsted in the contest in the 
following (phonographed) passage : 



Efig SHrang. 

T&I Adachautala. Phonogram, 
J - 110. 



a tempo. 



Ex. 




J J J J J J 



A J-1SO. 



J J J3J3J J J 



J J J 



234 



DRUMMING 






B J 150. 






.n n _n 



si 






J3 ^ 



170. 



n 



E 






J51 






DRUMMING 




J=m 




J - 230. 





The la&t few notes are 
inaudible because the 
player took his reed 
out to titter the #n. 



in A&achautala^ between shaJinai (oboe) and ^^z. They were 
asked to begin with four tkeka* and go on with paran&s. The 
section (award) is marked off by the double bar. Down to the first 
double bar, however, is ad libitum. It is the AUp (prelude) with 
which the music always begins, in order to establish the Hag, and 
it is not in strict time. But the drummer is trying over his Tdl 
too, and though he gets the same number of beats as the singer 
they did not, as a matter of fact, exactly synchronize. Prom A 
onwards iiris in strict time, and after the four fiotar, the jMtnurf* 
begin at B, Here tike drummer breaks into an eight-rhythm 
(instead of seven) for variety. The oboist also varies. His phrase 
should have ended at C, but it ends a bar before. He ends $*& 

1 Properl j on bar of 14 crx&gt;tch*s ; Iiere given to oaveieai&lt;se as fcw& bars of 7. 



236 DRUMMING 

next one, however, correctly at D. Then he has a short one of two 
bars ; and then, at J = 170, a long one of six bars and an extra 
minim. At this point the pace becomes furious, and, shortening 
his phrase by that extra minim, he ends it up with Han (yes) at G. 
Meanwhile the drummer, about D, has dropped his cross-rhythm, 
and seems to be plotting something a little more interesting. 
When the oboist begins his six-bar phrase, the drummer varies the 
little figure with which he started at B ; thus : 



J J S3J J J J-3J J J 

JTT \ B 



-TJ 
t t 

I T"J3 J"3353n -TT3 J JJJ J J"!S? i / T ^ 
* * *** ***** * * * *** *^* ^S" 1 j a s 



fi ? ure is dislocated to give 
ubsidiary cioss ifcythm. 



which now becomes three- quaver rhythm : 



and so through an orgy of triplets, accented on the middle note, to 
the end. 

Whatever the reader may think of the melody, he will not deny 
the oboist a firm grip of a difficult rhythm. (His name was Panna, 
and he was said, incidentally, very likely with truth, to be the 
best Shahnai player in Hindostan ; the axis of the earth sticks 
up, however, in every city of India just as visibly as Heine said it 
did in Germany.) It is probably not accidental that the tempo ends 
up at J = 260, exactly twice as fast as it began, and the phono 
graph leaves no doubt about the fact The drummer is not so 
strong. He drums throughout in Tintdl ; and there is nothing in his 
p&rwtd* which shows that he feels the rhythm of Adackantdla at 
all He ought to arrange to meet the player at one or other of 
the $am* (A, B, C, Ac.), and he does not do so in any case, although 
he manages to get a general sense of climax towards the end. 



DRUMMING 



237 



The next is a Panjabi gfiazal^ on two Shahnau (Havildar Eashu 
and Naik Nawab) and dhol (SipaH Miranbaksh) : 



Ghazal (Dorian). 
Tal Dhamar, 5 + 5 + 2 + 2 quavers. 
Two Shahnais in unison. J=140. 



Phonogram. 



83rd Punjabis. 























1 1st time. J 


J 


r- 


j 


r r- 


j 


j 


&lt; 
r- 


J 


f 

r r- 




j 


Dhol. \ 2nd time. J 


J 


r* 


j 


r r* 


j 


j 


r* 


j 


r r- 


j 


j 


Urdtime. J 


J 


r- 


j 


r r- 


j 


J r 


^J 


r r 


J3J 


r 



r q^ 


J r r- 


j j 


p- J P 


r- J J 


- J Mill 
p- J r- p- 


j J 


p* 


J P P- 


j j 


p. J P p. J J 


p- J p r- J J 


p J3 


J P P- 


j j 


p- J p p- J J 


p- J r p- 


j J 







EE 







r ^nw f- 

J3J / 

J r 



r- J J 

/T33J -T3 
p. J J 



p- J p r- J J 

JT33J Jl JT33J J3 
P- J p P- J J 

Phonogram ends. 



^ 



p J J 
J733J J" 






J J 

J-3 



^ 



^ 



J P 
JT33J / 



r- 



J J 



J J 
J J 



J r r- J J 

JTT3J J"3 J J &gt;d J J"3 


r r r 

p. j p P- j 
j p - P- J 


j 
j 



: =l 



r J5+ r r 
r- J P r- 



r- J J p J3J J 
p- p J p- J J 



238 



DRUMMING 



The two oboes, always nearly and never quite in tune with one 
another, produced beats* which in. the phonograph are heart-r 
rending. Afterwards the Havildar played alone these two bars 
of Chautdl, which the drummer ornamented at different places : 

Rag Sindora (Dorian, hexatonic). 
T&i Chautal. (4 T 4 + 2 + 2 quavers.) d= 80. Phonogram. 




^ (ijiaudible ; probably regular crdxihet beats, pp.} 



(3+3+2) 



These give but a slight idea of the intricacy which is sometimes 
attained by a really good drummer. They are given because the 
phonograph guarantees their accuracy. Unfortunately it is difficult 
to get both player and drummer into the phonograph, and I could 
only manage it when both, as in these eases, were very loud. In 
the case of song and drum, the song, and in the case of find and 
drum, the drum alone is audible. In this last specimen at the 
places marked * inaudible the drum was quietly tapping the regular 
beats of Chautal. 

Drumming of this kind is in fact the substitute for counterpoint ; 
it serves the same purpose as that does of carrying on the interest 
of the music over the &lt; dead points, or of converging on a crisis. 
We are familiar with just such cross-rhythms in fugues; in the 
following example the voices are never all in the same rhythm, and 
throughout bars 80 and 81 they are all in different rhythms : 



Ex. 
835. 



Ste 



DRUMMING 239 

The 46th of the forty-eight Fugues. 



p 



78 



80 



^c 



== 



81 



T~ r r r r 



N.B. The numbers are placed at the end of the bar to which they refer. 

A few tfakas of other fdh than T%ntal may be added in order 
to give an idea of the kind of thing ; the one or two new 
contain will not offer any difficulty : 



240 DRUMMING 



BJx. Rupak. 2 + 3 = 5 units. 

1 2 (no khdTt ) 

Tin trikaddhi nana 

J J~3 J J J 



2 + 4 = 6 units. 
120 120 

Bhlga nana tunna | dhinna nana tunna 

J-3 



3 + 2 + 2=7 units. 

1 23 1 23 ( 

Kadhina dhina dha j katina tina ta 



Gajata. 4+5 = 9 units. 
1 2 (no khan) 

Tin taka dhin nana 

J J~7 J J-J 

Surphakta. 4 + 2 + 4=10 units. 
10230 
Bhagi tita dhagi dhagi tita 

J-3 



Jltampa {Jhap). 2 + 3+2+3=10 units, 
1203 
Bhin dhatuna katta dhatuna 



4 + 4 + 2 + 2 = 12 units. 
102 03 4 

Bhadhadhinta kitadhadhinta titakita gadigina 



AdachauUU. 2 + 4 + 4 +4 = 14 units. 

1 2 B 4 

Bhitrik dhinatuna kattadhindhin nadhindhinna 



Dham&r. 5 + 5 + 4 = 14 units. 
12 8 

Tadhe dhe dha takita kitataka 

/j j -j 



The above is the method, or it would be better to say a method, 
at Poona. The last two contain a cross-rhythm. They end 
respectively 

dhindhinna dhlndhinna 

JT3 J-n 

and 

taka takita taka 



DRUMMING 241 

PACE (%a) AND { SPEED 3 (Mia). There are three degrees of 
tempo, slow (velamlif)^ moderate (madhya), and fast (dmta). In 
whatever tempo, the music has a normal speed-unit, i. e, it is in 
crotchets, as we should say, or else in quavers, and so on. Doub 
ling s and halvings of this unit (mdtrd) as we say, augmentation 
and diminution are common, and have names. The normal speed 
is called the s time of the time * (bdrobdfl), or it is named d&d from 
the average length of the principal drum-beat of that name. The 
alterations of this speed are, taking the crotchet as the unit : 

J TM (lit. a loud sound). 
J Dhd, or BdroMri (the time of the time). 
J* Dviguni (Duni, Digan)&gt; twofold*. 
^fe Caturguni (Gkaugan), fourfold *. 

A ( sixfold * speed is known ; but this generally not the J5&gt; but the 
triplet-semiquaver as in f* . We need only concern ourselves 
with Duni (twofold). This principle of. doubling the speed is at 
the root of the curious form the ikekas have assumed ; it results in 
convergence of the Tal 9 either (1) in itself, or (2) with some 
other Tdl. 

CONVERGENCE of one TdL A bar of a Tdl is beaten with one hand 
while two bars of its Duni are beaten with the other. Using Ta 
for the right-hand stroke, Ka for the left, a for the empty beat, 
and Dhd for both hands, Tintdl may be converged : 



1 
1 

Dha 


2 

ta 



2 

ka 


3 

ta 


1 


ta 


2 

ta 



3 

ka 


3 

ta 


Right, 
Left, 


Ta 




or Surphakta. 


1 





2 


3 





1 





2 


3 





Ta 




1 









2 




3 









Ka 




Dha 


a 


ta 


ta 


ka 


ta 


ka 


ta 


ta 


a 






or Chautal. 


1 





2 





3 


4 


1 





2 





3 4 




1 









2 









3 




4 




Dha 


a 


ta 


a 


dha 


ta 


ta 


a 


dha 


a 


dha ta 




or Tevra 


1 








2 





8 





1 








2 


$ 


1 














2 









3 





Dha 


a 


a 


ta 


a 


ta 


ka 


ta 


a 


a 


dha a~ 


ta 



(J- J J-3IJ. 



242 DRUMMING 

Similarly one Tdl may be c converged with another : 

1203|1203|1208 
102034 
Dha ta a ta dha ta a ta dha ta ka ta 



Chaut&l 



Right 
Left 



Tints* jl203|12031120S|1203|1203 

Surphakta 3 0280)1 0230|10230|1 0230 

Dha ta ka dha ta dha a dha dha ta ka ta dha dha a dha ta dha ka ta 

We have confined ourselves to three boh ta, ka, and dha. But 
when all the lot* are used we see that the application of this principle 
of convergence might, if we happened to know the details of the 
process, result in the concrete examples of the thekax already given. 
We see, at any rate, that dha comes to be a long beat (dha) because it 
is generally succeeded by a ; and the prevalence of tirakira (trikara, 
trikad, trika, trik) in the theka* is accounted for there by the 
prevalence of such forms as taJcaia and tatakata here. 

CUMULATION. There is one other principle of disposing the beats 
and silences which accounts for a few out of the way fait, and 
which must be mentioned for the sake of completeness. It consists 
of cumulating the beats and punctuating these by blanks. Thus : 

one one two two four 
(a) 10|201340|560|789IOOI 

one one two three four 

(6) 10|20|340|5670[8910110| 

one two three four five 

(c) 1 | 2 3 | 4 5 6 | 7 8 9 10 | 11 12 13 14 15 1 

In all these the cumulative element tends to throw stress upon 
the final beat (in a, 10; in i, 11 ; in c, 15), This, accordingly, 
becomes the first of the bar, and these three Tdls are received into 
music, with special names, as follows : 

[ 10] one one two two four 
(a) Mri I0|20|30]450|670|8910..| 

[=11] one one two three four 

(6) Bmhma 10|20|SO|450|6780|910I1..| 

[15] one two three four five 

(c) Jftwto | 2 | 3 4 1 5 6 7 | 8 9 10 11 | 12 13 14 15 . . J 



DRUMMING 



243 



The striking tiling about these Tah is their length : 15, 16, 
and 20 units respectively. There may be a reason for this. It 
will be noticed that a is in geometrical, c in arithmetical pro 
gression. (On those principles the cumulations might have been 
variously arranged, but it will be found on trial that other arrange 
ments are not so satisfactory.) We are told that Savari (a), 15 units, 
in this its true form, is no longer in use, and that in its modern 
form it is simply taken as Tlntill (16 units) ; and we can see that 
fifteen units is difficult to count, and that Brakmatdla (b) of sixteen 
units is an adulteration of it and a substitute for it. It was clearly 
necessary in these progressions to take a reasonable number of 
cumulations in order to display the principle; but there are other 
reasons for not taking a lower number of them than has been taken. 

In (a) * one, one, two * would not have shown the progression, and 
one, one, two, two would have been too symmetrical, and Hindu 
Ttil loves variety. 

In (c) one, two, three 3 produces nine units, which is seldom 
wanted ; and one, two, three, four produces fourteen units, which 
there are quite half a dozen other ways of counting. However, 
no doubt both these could be used, and probably are somewhere, 
and under some name or other. 

Indian drumming, then, varies the quality rather than the 
quantity of the tone. It practically ignores accent for its own 
sake. Such accent as there is on the first of the bar is due to 
the fact that two rhythms diverge from that point and converge 
at the beginning of the next or a later bar. It is the accent 
induced by the juxtaposition of opposing metres, as in the Rondo 
of Beethoven, Op. 22 




that pleases the Indian; not the accent which is sought for its 
own sake as a means of contrast, as, in the same movement, between 
the subject and the episode : 



244 



DRUMMING 



Ex. 



f , r f 



feS 






Here is a piece o rhythm that he would delight in (Brahms, 
Second Symphony) : 



Bx. 






J U 



3 2 







*. r 

* 



^ N.B. The small numbers refer 
to crotchets, the large to bars. 



He would not have devised it exactly in this way, since, in the 



DRUMMING 245 

absence of harmony (which he does not mentally supply, as we do) 
and in the disregard (44-4 + 5 + 4 + 5) of the fixed section (4 + 4, 
&c., or 5 + 5, &c., which he demands), there is nothing to hold it 
together. But he would be in sympathy with the metrical scheme : 



= 12 crotchets (4 bars). 
2+2+3+3+2 



2 + 2 * , Q , Q , o = 15 crotchets (5 bars). 



It is this kind of variety which he gets from his drumming 
(dardara). 1 He uses the drum ornamentally, and not as we do 
(with the exception of certain dramatic passages) structurally. 

1 Dardara&gt;=da-d(L~da-da t a word formed from the name of the principal dram- 
beat, dha. d and r have practically the same sound. 



CHAPTER X 

THE SAMAN CHANT 

It is a bemoanable pity to consider how few there 
are who know, but fewer who consider, what toonderfid- 
powerful-efficacious Virtues and Operations Musick has 
upon the Souls and Spirits of Men Divinely-bent. 

THOMAS MACE. 

AH inquiry into the ethos and structure of some of the oldest music 
of which there is any record is not a mere piece of antiquarianism ; 
it throws that sort of light on the music of modern India which 
a knowledge of the geology of a country throws upon its scenery. 

Before coming to the Sdmaveda itself it will be necessary to 
glance at the recitation of the other Vedas, especially the Rgveda. 
For the Sdmaveda has borrowed the large majority of its text from 
the Rgveda, only altering or expanding the actual words so as to 
make them suitable for chanting; and much of the grammatical 
and prosodical determinations of the Rgveda has been given in the 
Sdmaveda a musical meaning. 

The Ttgwda is recited now, as it has always been, to three tones ; 
for the accent was originally a mark of musical pitch, and became 
a mark of stress only after the beginning of our era. The * raised * 
(udaUa) and not raised * (anuddtta) sounds represent the two main 
pitches of the speaking voice; this is the prose accent of the 
Brahmanas ; and there is nothing to show whether these two prose 
accents had any musical relationship. In addition to these two 
there was, for the reciting voice, the e sounded * tone (gvarita), which 
is shown on philological grounds to have been originally between the 
two others in pitch, but which is in the Rgveda, above the nddtta. 
No explanation is given as to what is exactly meant by c sounded V 
although it seems clear from the treatment of svarita that it means 
graced . The svartta is in effect ( a falling accent of a dependent 
nature, marking the transition from an accented to a toneless 

1 Haug (Ueber das Wesm, &e., p. 74) appears to accept the view that sportto 
from Swa (like geffini from Ton) means &lt; accentuated . But (1) this looks like 
a false analogy from the double meaning of Ton, and (2) svarita must surely be 
connected with smro, which meant, technically, a downward slide through the 
, Le. the murtta was that note to which this slide was attached. 



THE SAMAN CHANT 



247 



syllable. It regularly follows the uddtta, to the rise of which its 
fall corresponds in pitch. 1 But also, * the first part of the smrita 
sounds higher than the uddUa (ibid,), so that the warita is practi 
cally an ornamented uddtia falling to an indefinite pitch below it. 
This indefinite pitch is called pracaya (* throng ), in allusion to the 
number of unaccented syllables which occur there in succession; 
the pracaya is toneless, as distinguished from the uddtia and anu- 
ddtta, which are toned. 2 Before the rise from the pracaya to the 
next uddfta or wartta, the voice descends to a * lower (sannatara) 
or e more lowered (anitddttatara) note, which is below the anwddtia. 
That is the original theory of the recitation; it will be seen, 
however, that it is modified in practice. This example, from Haug, 
p. 52, shows the svarita marked with a perpendicular line over the 
syllable, the anuddUa with a horizontal beneath 3 ; the uddtta and 
pracaya are unmarked : 

US A XT A XT S AUS 









& 


P_= [ 5 
am no . . de - vlr a - b. 

P A U S P 


! f 
ai - sta - ya fi -.po . . 

AUS P 




r f- r r f (- 





bha-van - tu pi - ta - ye . . Sam yor a - bhi sra - van - tu nah 

This is the Poona form of recitation taken down by Haug from 
the lips of Maratha Brahmans.* Only one form of the warita, the 

1 A. A. Macdonell r Vedic Grammar, p. 77. 

8 It is tempting to see in the pracaya the counterpart of the pyftnon. The 
pyknon was the cluster of three notes at intervals of a diesis (quarter-tone) which 
occurred in the Enharmonic genus (or of a semitone in the Chromatic). Thenee 
there was a leap to the mess just as there was a leap from the amtda&a, or 
pracayaj to the udatia. But the pyknon was not an amorphous cluster ; one of 
its three notes stood out from the other two, was in fact of the nature of a tonic. 
This is closely analogous to the toneless pracaya in which the toned anuddHa 
stood out. And this toneless tone may, further, be in principle the forerunner 
of the drone, frequently relegated to the drum, which might be called from one 
point of view toneless, from another, toned. The formation of the stxtHta tells 
us that the interval which was taken as a leap in ascent was bridged in descent ; 
and this is borne out by the practice of modern R&tya, which prefers on the whole 
disjunct motion in ascent and conjunct in descent, 

5 Devandgari letters are surmounted by a continuous horizontal line. A per 
pendicular line stands out well against this, and a horizontal line against the 
tails of the letters below. 

4 Haug (loc. cil) gives four more of these stanzas. 



248 



THE SAMAN CHANT 



appoggiatura FI&lt;!, is here employed. But the noticeable thing is 
that the pracaya (marked P) is the same note as the uda,Ua&gt; not as 
the anuddtta ; if in a chant of only three notes it Is to be distin 
guished from the dnuddtta^ it could not well have any other place ; 
still, this change appears to await explanation. 

In the following specimens I from Madras the svarita appears 
as a single note (F) and as an upward appoggiatura, E F. 
s s s 



f~r c r T-rErr -g-^^ 

pu - ro - hi-tam ya - jna - sya e - va-mrt - vi 



a - gni-ml - le pu 



Co-da-yi - trl su - nr-ta - naip ce - tan - 




I su - ma-tl - nam 



In the second of these examples the syllables Co-da obey a rule 
that * when more than one aimddtta precedes an uddtta, all but the 
last are sounded lower . Dr. Erwin Felber s book, which has lately 
appeared, Die induche Nusik der vedischen uncl der fcla&sischen Zeit, 
contains (p. 106, No, 433) an example of recitation of the Egreda 
&lt; in the style of the old ~R$u , which is more florid and of larger 
compass than any of these. 

The Yffjurveda is also recited on the notes D, E, F ; although in 
the half dozen times I heard it D, E, FJ 2 was quite as common. 
The following is from a Mysore singer : 



^ 



Ka - yft na-^ci-tra a hhu - vad u - ti sa-di -vr-dhah sa- 



- kha la-yft & - ci-stha-yi vr-tft 

1 See M. ^esagiri Sastri, Descrtpoe Catalogue of the Government Oriental MSS+ tn the 
Madras Zt*frrry, vol. i, pt. 1, pp. 8, 4. 

* Noted here for convenience as C, D, E j I made no note of the absolute pitch. 



THE SAMAN CHANT 249 

but the passage is too short to show the compass. At any rate, 
Dr. Felber 1 gives two specimens of Yajurr-eda on pp. 108, 116, 
which show a compass of a Fourth and a Fifh respectively; his 
example (p. 106) of the Rgveda reaches a Sixth. This is perhaps 
only one more instance of what is so common in music, the c official * 
rules lagging decades or centuries behind the practice. His three 
examples (of both Vedas) show a foundation scale D, E, F, though 
one of them begins in E, F$, G, and continues in E, F, G. 1 

The Atlianaxeda does not appear to be recited, at least not in 
accordance with rules. But all reading of the $d#tra$ is recitation. 
Students read, i. e. recite, in the same room. Children are taught 
to read so. A boy read rne some o the Rgveda^ employing the 
accents correctly, but stopped when he reached a certain page 
* because he had not learned any further \ 

It will be noticed in these examples that with the exception of 
an occasional grace-note or appoggiatura and a great many more 
grace-notes are put in than appears in the text, for seldom is a note 
ever sung, as we should say, clean the syllables are allotted one 
note each; there are no melodic figures like the ligatures of Gre- 
gorians. For these we turn to the 

Sdmaveda. The symbol round which the elaborate ritual o the 
Sdmaveda gathers is that sacrifice of which the drinking of the 
juice of the Soma plant was the central point. The virtues of 
this juice are recapitulated in the ninth book of the Rgmda, from 
which mainly the words for the Sdman chants are taken. 2 Soma 
is translated moon-plant * ; and the Sumaveda is specially connected 
with the worship of ancestors, whose abode was the moon. Great 
care was taken not to deviate from the original melody-types and 
rhythms, and the religious efficacy of the hymns was held to 
depend largely on the right application of directions contained -in 
the Brahmanic explanations (Emkmana, not later than the sixth 
century B. c.) of the Vedic text (Samkitd). The expense of the full 

1 The names of the notes throughout this chapter indicate relative pitch only. 
They are chosen at any absolute pitch which is suitable, as fragments of tlie 
Saman scale, which is explained, or at any rate discussed, later. 

3 There is nothing to show that the chants are later than the words ; in foot, 
since S&mans are often mentioned in the Rgveda there is a probability, Iteyond 
the intrinsic likelihood, that they are older. 



250 THE SAMAN CHANT 

ceremonial was not small; the Soma sacrifice involved days in perform 
ance and months in preparation. A full description of its elaborate 
and gorgeous ritual is to be found in the Aitareyabrahmana of the 
Mgveda, translated into English by Martin Haug, 1863, and its close 
connexion with the fire-worship of the Zoroastrians is there detailed. 
Other creeds have now swept across India and buried that of the 
Yedas in oblivion. The memory of the words and chants, and 
possibly of parts of the ritual, lingers chiefly in the South. Even 
there the true AZ^z-singers are few, and impostors are beginning 
to flourish. 

The body of hymns is divided into two sections, which may be 
centuries apart the early, according to the latest authority, 1 the 
Uttardrcika, and the late, the Purvdrcika. The early hymns are 
divided into (1) the * investigated (Uha), and (2) those which are 
*to be investigated (Uhya) or which are c secret (Rahasya). The 
later hymns are in three divisions, addressed to Fire (Agnf) &gt; the 
Bain-god (Indra\ and Soma Pavamdna? These are arranged inter 
nally according to their metres, and according to the e jubilations 9 
(stolha) and the doxologies (the parts of the hymn which are genuine 
Sdman). Only seventy-five verses, out of many hundreds, are not 
borrowed from the Rgveda or other source; such borrowings are 
known technically as yoni (womb). A distinction is also made 
between those verses of the Rgveda which have one melody (eka- 
wmf) or many (ba&ugdmi), showing that Sdman is, properly speaking, 
music, not music and words, nor words for music. In fact the 
conception is the reverse of ours. We speak of setting words, that 
is, putting music to them ; but the Sdman is a melody for which 
words were found (chiefly in the Rgveda). This is the case too with 
modem poets; Rabindranath Tagore says that when the general 
idea of the poem comes into his mind, he first thinks of the 
melody (generally his own) and then writes words to it. We are 
reminded of Burns s two manful attempts to find words for that 
crinkurn-crankum tune, Eobin Adair*, with its c cursed, cramp, 
out of the way measure , and of his better success with Duncan 
Gray, * in Scots verse . 

The rhythm is, as in Plain-song, determined by the words, which 

decide where it will be appropriate to take breath. The two versions 

of the first hymn of theSdMaveda which follow are from A. C. Bumell 

(Ar&eyabrtikmana, Introd., p. rlv) and Sesagiri Sastrl (loc. cit.) ; and 

1 C&Jand, Jiminlya,-8&mhm&gt; p. 4. * Paromana, clarifying. 



THE SAMAN CHANT 



251 



the notation is in accordance with the directions of the G&na* (the 
Sdmaveda text as actually sung) as they understood them, checked 
in the first case by the verification of a musician, and in the second 
hy the usage as the writer knew it : 
Burnell, Arseyabr&hmana, p. xlv. 



Ex. 

844. 


jg 1-7- 








^ ^. fr=^E 




O-gna-i a - ya hi vo - i - to - ya - i gr-na-no ha- 
Sesagiri ^fcstrl, Cat. Sanskr. MSS., Madras. 






h- 


1 $ 


-&lt;-=H t tr- 


-. - 1" 



O-gna-i a yft-hi I ye - i - to ya a i gr-na-no ha- 



gr jr-p" -ISP 7^ ^ 1 jy (9-r m m \~& fr= 1 




1 1 


w r i i i r r i r u p_p_i 1_ .= 

- vya-da - to - ya - i to - ya - i nS - i ho - 


r -p E==| 

1A si 


& 


- vya-da to ya a i to-ya-a-I na-iho-1 

[a-pTf.plj J j j j j j |j j- 


j, sa a 


B, 


- ts5 - i ba - - - - au ho hi - rhl 


- sh 


I 


tb& - 3, - I ba - a a a au ho bft - rhl - i 


-f .^^ 

- i - r - sh 


dl 

[ 



Here, and elsewhere, a long mark over a vowel sometimes represents musical, 
not prosodic, length. 

The actual words of the hymn are : 

Agna ayahi vitaye grnino havyadataye | 

Ni hota satsi barhisi || * 

The bar-lines (given by Burnell only) are breath marks. The last 
note of each * bar * (parmn} is accented (vr&Mia)* 

The next two examples have no such authority. They are merely 
the versions of two gwru*, whom I heard in Mysore and Bangalore, 
of an identical verse, and represent possibly two different sects 

1 Translation : * Come, Agiii, praised with song, to feast and sacrificial 
offering ; be seated as Hotar on the holy Kutia grass. 

3 Lit. augmented. It appears to be occasionally augmented in time-length 
also, counting 8 to the 2 of the long (&r&k&) and the 1 of the ahort (kmsm). 
Later theory (see p. 256) has added lengths between these. We are reminded of 
the Greek time-unit (ekrmos prS&s), two-time long (&lt;&siB*as) and *t 
long 1 (iria^wtos). 



252 



THE SAMAN CHANT 



(mkka). The tonic is D in both cases; that of Mysore f closes J by 
means of an unusual leap (C, E, C, D), and that of Bangalore by 
the device of an f Alleluia * (stobka) : 

Mysore. 
Ex. 
8*6. 



i^f --j.., ^ ,.A j J J 


f r j "I J "J i 1 "" 


IJ L 


x * 
Ka - y& na-$ca - 


_ -** "** 

- i tra - a blind 


ti 


Bangalore. 




. ~- . . ... r^ m p_ 


i M 



- yi. 



na* d ca - ay - tra - bhuvad u 









- ti - sa - da - yr-dhah sa-kha au - u - ho - o - hai ka-ya . . 









- ti - sa-da - vr-dlia sa-kha - au - ho - hai ka-ya . . 



^ 



- ci - stha - yo ha 




lia him x - & 



vr - to 



hai 



- ci - f tha-yo . 

There was, not unnaturally, great difficulty in inducing priests 
to sing these chants^ and one man, at Bangalore, offered in lieu 
thereof * Sanskrit in the style of Sdman . But the unusual content 
of the words shows its influence in the more or less rhythmical 
phrases induced by the prosody, which take the place of those vocal 
phrases and melodic figures which flow naturally from the liturgical 
use of the words in the Sdmaveda : 



Bangalore. Sanskrit in the style of Saman. 



Wx. j 
846.: 



He jih-ve 



ra-sa-sS - ra-jfie 



sar - va-da 



- mardhu-ra-joi - ye 



n& - ra - ya-nJL 



khya pi - yti 



sam pi - ba. ji 



ni-ra - nta - ram 



THE SAMAN CHANT 



253 



On the other hand, at Tanjore a man got up of his own motion 
and sang Sdman before a roomful of people, and, what was more 
surprising, before a European in their presence. It appeared that 
he had a theory of his own as to how Sdman should be sung, and 
was seeking converts. He has evidently taken the scale of the 
NvradaxiJcsa (see below, p. 259) as if it were in the modern notation, 
P-G, instead of the ancient, G-A, and the mode is therefore changed. 
Further, the essence of the Sdman chant is that it circles about one 
note, F (or E, or D), and only leaves that to form a downward 
cadence. His version draws attention away from the E to the A 
below, which in the true Sdman is quite a subsidiary note, and it 
begins, therefore, to be in a regular Rtlg, which Sdmagaz assert 
positively that their chants are not. Moreover, he has forgotten 
after the first line to put in those characteristic prolongations of 
notes by vocalizing syllables which add so much to the solemnity 
of the chant : 



Tanjore. 



Ex. 
347. 



In - dra . . ho vai - va - sya ra - ja - ti ho va - 






S 



;^E^zf=^ 



^ 



- ho - - - i - 



Kr - 



sa -mu-drarp su - mu-kliarp, 



tri - ne - train ja - ta . . dha - ram par - va - ti . . va - ma - bhar-yam. 



sa - da - & - vam ru-dram a - na - nta - ru - 



pain ci-dam- 



ba-re - sam hr-di bha - - va - ya - mi 

The words are spelled phonetically j his original text is not available. 



Form. The Saman is divided into five parts ; 
(i) Praztdva, introductory ascription of praise, preceded by the 
syllable hum, sung by the prat&otri, or assistant priest. 

(ii) Vdgitha, preceded by cm, sung by the mdgtttri, or priest. 



254 THE SAMAN CHANT 

(iii) Pratihdra, the joining in, preceded by hum, sung by the 
pratihartri, who c joined In at the last syllable of the udgltha. 
Sometimes the pratikara is divided into two, in which case there is 

(iv) Upadram, the recession, formed out of the last few syllables 
of the pratihdra, sung by the udgatri. 

(v) Nid/iana, the coda, consisting of one or at the most two 
syllables, sung by all three priests, followed in some cases by om} 

The following are the first two sections of the first hymn of the 
Sdmaveda : 

Burnell, Arseyabr&Hmana, p. xlv. 
I. 1. 1. P rastava. Udgltha. 



346. 



- gna - I a ya - hi . . va - i - to - ya 

I. 1. 2. 



& J jTF=ir J 



A-gna fi. ya - hi vi - ta-ya i gr - na - no ha-vya-da- 



-n& - no ha-vya-dS, -to-ya - i to - yfi 



C? f r FT^-f^ 



. td - - ya - i 

Pratiliara. Upadrava. 



=p=g 



ho - ta sa tsa 



niho-ta sa-t&i M- rM - - i - si ba-rha - i 

Kidhana. 



^ 






vft - - - au ho ba - rhl - - - s! 



^ 



au ho va ba-rhl si 



1 The fire &&o&& (see p. 255) are tlie subject of Dr. Simon s latest work, 
Das Pa&cavidkasittra, Breslau, 1913. 



THE SAMAN CHANT 255 

The verse, dgna dydki (^gmda VI, 16. 10), is snug three times 
over to form a stoma (group) ; Burnell only gives two of the three, 
and they are arranged here under one another for comparison. 
Of the remaining nine verses of this particular hymn, eight are 
from the Ilgveda, and the last, which forms a doxology, belongs 
exclusively to the Samaveda. Besides the first verse, the fourth 
and fifth also form stomas ; the sixth, seventh, and eighth are sung 
twice, and the other four only once 1 ; in all, nineteen sections (bhakti)~ 
The usual number was fifteen. Mention is also made of nine and 
twenty-one Ikakti ; so that a basis of three or five or seven &t&lt;&gt;ma& 
is implied, varied probably in any particular case. 

The practical directions for the singing of these hymns are given 
in the Gdnas. These give the text of the Sdmaveda (which has 
been culled, with modification, from the Rgveda chiefly) with the 
syllables vocalized (i.e. with prolongation and modification of 
vowels) and farsed (i. e. with insertion of vocal syllables between 
those of the text). . These insertions (tiobka, praises) are the exact 
counterpart of the jubila interpolated in Plain-song in the ninth 
and tenth centuries, out of which tropes* were developed in the 
eleventh, 2 as the bkakti of the Sdmaveda are also of the ( strophes 
of Plain-song, which, like them, were of indefinite number; the 
idea, too, of singing the hymn in &totra* (stanzas) and stoma$ 
(groups) is reproduced in the sometimes single, sometimes repeated 
performance of the strophe. 

Rhythm. The metres of the hymns are six (later eight) chief 
ones, in which the governing factor is the number of syllables, 
varying from twenty-four to forty-four for the stanza. Quantity 
of vowel is taken no account of except at the cadence. These need 
not detain us now, as the rhythm of the chants ignores the poetical 
metre entirely. In the true Sdman there are only three time-units : 
a short (hrasva) note for a quantitatively short syllable, a long 
(dlrgJici) for a quantitatively long ; syllables made long * by position * 
count as short An occasional important syllable still further 
lengthened or, especially at the end of a phrase (joamm), stressed, 
or both lengthened and stressed, is called augmented (vrddM) or 
prolate (plnta). This also finds its analogue in Plain-song. 

1 These are called sto&ras. 

2 See W. H, Frere, Winchester Troper, Introduction, p, Trrii eq. 



256 



THE SAMAN CHANT 



The system o the Matralafaana (date ?) is an advance upon this, 
and is placed here for comparison beside the modern South Indian 
scheme of time-values : 



1. 


J* 


2. 
3. 


j 
j. 


4. 
5. 


j 
4/ 


6. 


J~ 


7. 


J-- 


8. 





10. 


o 


11. 


&lt;s&gt; J J* 


12. 


&lt;s^^ 


13. 


p^JI_J* 


14. 


^.. 


15. 


^- 


16. 


*ss* 



MATEALAKSANA. 
Anumatra, under -matra 
Ardhamatra, half-matra 

HRASVA short, or MATRA, unit 

Adhyardha, additional half 2 

(sc. matra) 

DlRGHA, long 
Ardhatisrab, third halt 

PLUTA, prolate, or VRDDHA, 
augmented. 

Ardhacatasrah, fourth half 



MODERN SYSTEM (S. India). 

ANUDRUTA, under -quick. 

DRCJTA, quick. 

Druta virama. 1 

LAGHU, light. 

Laghu virama. 

Laghu druta. 

Laghu druta virama. 
GURU, heavy. 
Guru virama. 
Guru druta. 
Guru druta virama, 
PLUTA, prolate. 

Pluta virama. 
Pluta druta. 
Pluta druta virama. 
KAKAPADA, crow s foot. 



These interminable theorizers also subdivided the anudruta. The 
anndruta, is the equivalent of: 

2x2= 4 Kala syllabic instant.* 

4 x 8 = 32 Nimesha moment. 

8 x 32 = 256 Kastha ^ of an hour. 

16 x 108 = 1728 Lava ^^ of an hour. 

32 x 512 = 16384 Kana atom. 

The use of astronomical subdivisions is interesting, though hardly 
illuminating (there are other explanations of the Jcastha and lava). 
The only one of these terms in practical use is the kald, which 
properly means ^ The kald is ^ of the Laghu (their unit) as 
the semiquaver is T ^ of the semibreve (our unit). Cp. the German 
Sechzekntel and the American * sixteenth note . 

1 VirSma appears to be used indifferently for a rest or a dot with the time- 
Tahie of an amufcuta. The word means in general stop * (of punctuation) ; and 
is used in particular to show that a consonant is not followed by the a which is 
inherent in it. 

8 Cp. German anderihaZb = 1|, dritihdEb -* 2^, &c 

8 The sign in one modern notation for the longest note is x . 

4 The syllable &* has two * instants k and a. 



THE SAMAN CHANT 257 

Scale. In the accompanying list of authorities for the Sdman 
scale the first six are ancient, the last four modern; the two sets 
are separated by something" like twenty centuries. The list is 
probably not complete; there is no indication of place of origin. 
They are collated on two assumptions: (1) that the words kruzta, 
prathama, &c., name the same note wherever they occur, that is, 
that krwta, for instance, was not at different periods applied to two 
different notes, and (2) that the two identifications of the &lman 
names with the notes of the secular scale by authorities III, VII, 
VIII, and X are to be trusted. If either of these assumptions 
should be shown to be wrong the evidence would have to be recon 
sidered. 

Names of the Banian notes. As extensions of a nucleus pratkama, 
diitiya, frfiya, caturtha (first, second, third, fourth) occur three 
others kruxta, mandra, atisvdrya. 

Krusta, In more than one of these authorities the order in the 
original text is prathama, dmilga, trtlya, caturtha, mandra, krmta, 
atiwarya. Kruxta is used of the highest note ; and as the sixth in 
a downward series this word has given trouble. Burnell proposed 
to read krxta, that to which karxana has been applied/ He did 
not, however, explain why karxana should be applied in the sixth 
place especially, and it appears now that it is typically applied to 
the highest note. But there is nothing to show that the order of the 
names is the melodic order ; and it is at least possible that in the 
order given above the first five name the ordinary notes of the scale 
(see p. 258, L 12) and the last two the extraordinary ones (which 
happen to be at either end of the five). Meanwhile, if order does 
matter, that of No. Ill, in which foxta actually occurs, is the order 
of the original. Moreover, No. V alludes to the seven tvara* as 
krustadi) beginning on Jkrvsta ; so there is little doubt that the 
kru*ta is above the prathama, and that another statement of Burnell s 
that kru$ ta and prathama are the same note is not universally true. 

There is another interest attaching to the word kruxta, e highest/ 
It shows us, as do also the ordinals prathama, cafurt^ that the 
Hindus regarded the treble as high and the bass as low ; as we do, 
and as the Greeks, who named the lowest note hypate (highest), did 
not. This reminds us that high and low in music are merely a 
metaphor, though a very natural one. In a somewhat similar way 
Europeans regard the harmony of a song as { underneath the 



258 



1-4 CQ co ^ 



I 



O 

OQ 



CQ 







ZQ 

s 
s 

O 

w 







and 
chest 



S 2 



IS 



cw 



S 



s|s 



. 
J2: 



J 



ndra 
cama 









S 

d 
*5b 



series 



wh 








II II S*J III 



I 



. 

ll 



r~ 00 O* 



259 








03 




2 tl c 


cS &gt; t3 ^ 




*&gt;,3 &gt;3 *r 


2 =3 &S* 






KS S pq. -43 




*- | & 
g 


^ S o .-a 

ttfg 5 

eS v_x "^ 


jslf if 


|f ?l 
i A C * 

i| ^ i ( 

"55 


-3 S 8 

ST 

i::;i 


/ N ^N 

"o qj o 
^, $, 

*f 13 
II l 


| S 1 ^ 

^ ri O* 5 

sg -1 s 


J . . . ! 
i . . . * 


OS 


. 


. 


i^ rt g ^ 


-3 -2 


-3 gl OS OS 


oj S fa fa 






M |i I-S 


1 l 


5 -^ -^s- 


&gt; 

ee &lt;s fl 


e 5 




-1-4 ."t^ -^ ^"^ 


2* B S S 


54 ^* ^* ^"* 


CO 


f2 5 -3 

s 


*&gt; *&gt; *&gt;J 


^ 1 If 


* *3 

1*^1 11. 

g, ^ 5^2 


111 

j 03 4 eS 
} cfl ,C ^S ^5 

J 2 2 g 


* ft | 


fc S P.J 




o. 

If 


! 
fill Iff 

-3 fl g K J -t 


ft 



ej " . ""&gt; 

c-c i 



ins ! 

^ & 5d 



X 

K&radalikfa 
Quite modern 
(A, C, B.) 



260 THE SAMAN CHANT 

melody; whereas the Maoris think of the song as here,, down 
below % and the harmony as going 1 up to the roof under which they 
are singing and coming down 9 to them. 

Mavdra, low. This is the usual name for the sixth note ; it is 
once (No. IV) called jmficama, in continuation of the ordinals. That 
it was a substantive note of the scale we see perhaps in No. I, where 
it appears even though the Irllya is omitted. But that it was on 
a different footing from the five notes above it is indicated in line 4, 
where they are all head-notes as opposed to the mandra, a chest-note. 
It gave its name also to the lower octave in the secular scale as 
opposed to the middle octave (mad7iyct&gt; y or macUiyama) and the upper 
(ttlra, or uttama). 

Athvarya, extremity of the cadence. This is a curious name for 
the lowest note of the full scale, to which we should naturally have 
attached some idea of a tonic. But it is obvious that it is not 
a substantive note of the scale at all. In line 4 it only exists by 
permission of the manclra ; in line 10 there is an uncertainty about 
the pronunciation of its name (atisvarya, atisvdra, anuxvdra), and 
alternatives are suggested wxtha (sixth) and antya (last) ; in lines 
17, 19, and 25 the e musical hand } does not provide for it, and line 4 
does not appropriate to it an organ of the body. It is clearly an 
* extra note; and it may be observed that the Greeks similarly 
regarded their scale as stopping normally at the B, while they called 
the note A below it c extra y (proslambanomenos). 

Tetrachords* There are indications that the nucleus of the scale 
was, successively perhaps, the tetrachords : 



Ex. ; 



and 



The tetrachord E-B. In line 9 this is the usm of the 
confirmed by line 29. In line 16 these same notes are appropriated 
to the four Rgveda accents. Lines 1 and 2 are ,very difficult 
because we do not know how to place the three notes of line 2. 
Aztama (eighth) in a scale of seven notes is surprising. But it will 
be seen at the foot of the diagram that the scale actually contains 
eight notes, and it is just conceivable that astama, which is obviously 
extra to the accepted seven, names the F$, which is alternative to 
the F& This leaves tama (level) and futra (bright) to fill three 
places ; and all that can be said is that atisvdiya, the c additional 



THE SAMAN CHANT 261 

note, is the most likely of the three to have been left unfilled. In 
line 1, where we can place the notes, it is remarkable that trtlya 
should be omitted in the series of four ; and this may be an indi 
cation that the D was not on the same footing with the others, and 
that in this treatise, at any rate, the real nucleus of the scale was 
held to be P E-C B, i. e. composed of the Fourths F-C and E~B. 

The tetrachord F-C. On the other hand, the fact that the four 
ordinals (first to fourth) are assigned in every treatise to the notes 
F, E, D, C, and that in line 6 the Rgveda accents are appropriated 
to these notes, makes it clear that the tetrachord F-C has an equal 
claim with that of E B to be considered the foundation of the scale. 

The hesitation between these tetrachords is reflected in the 
musical hand * of line 17, where F and E are both assigned to the 
first finger, and C and B both to the fourth ; and the hesitation 
remains, in respect of C and B, in lines 19 and 25. 

It is clear also that the scale consisted normally of only five notes 
for a considerable time. In the Pn#pawtra (9. 26) we find that 
the Kauthumas sing the majority of their chants to five tones, 
a few to six, and two of them to seven tones *, In line 12 we find 
Sol-fa names for five notes only. That no more than five were con 
templated may be seen from the choice of consonants. They are 
the medials of the five classes ,of consonant (guttural, palatal, 
cerebral, dental, and labial) proceeding in regular order from throat 
to lips. Lines 17 and 25 are a further indication that the normal 
scale consisted of five notes. All this lends some support to the 
interpretation given above of line 1. 

The scale was increased to six by the addition of kruzta. That 
this was an afterthought is seen in the fact that it is independent 
of the nomenclature by ordinals, in the hesitation as to kru&ta or 
krxta, and in the confusion introduced into the musical hand (lines 
19 and 25). Finally, a seventh note was tentatively admitted in 
the ati&carya. 

Consonance (samvdclitva). The consonance which was suggested 
by two tetrachords, F-C and E-B, is carried out further in line 
23, where the seven notes are divided into two similar tetraehords. 
This consonance holds whatever the intervals may be between the 
notes within the tetrachord. For the intonation of these we depend 
on the identifications in lines 14 and 21 of the S&man note witii 

816113 ft 



262 THE SAMAN CHANT 

those of the secular scale, which, as we saw (p. 114), was at least 
as old as the oldest o these treatises. 

In lines 6 ; 15, and 21 Sa is identified with Miya, and this gives 
the Sa-$rdma in a plagal form from N(i). In line 14 Sa is identified 
with atisvarya, and this gives the Ma-grdma in a plagal form from 
N(i), or the Sa-grdma in an authentic form from M(a). But S(a) and 

P(a) are samvadt; therefore the notes are D and A (not D and A). 
The two scales are therefore 

Sa-grSLnia. 
B3C fe * * - m 

SKQ.^ ; - 

and 

Ma-grfima. 

Bx * fc% *+- * 9 

853Lr ** m 



We saw in Chapter IV that the Gandhara-gmma was, according to 
one explanation, 

* * 



Bx. j 
352.: 



and it is possible that the Sdman scale may throw some light upon 
it. That scale is reckoned downwards, and therefore the note E 
is called E(i); hut i\iz gmma* are reckoned upwards, and therefore 
E is G(a). If the Ga-grama begins on E, it has for its upward 
tetrachord E, F, G, A, that is, a semitone and two major tones. 
These make more than a Fourth, therefore either the semitone is 
the Pythagorean comma (f f f , 90 cents), or one of the tones is 
a minor tone, as in the lower tetrachord, E, D, C, B. The upper 
tetrachord would in the first case be the same as the early Greek 
Doric, and would contain the ditone, instead of the major Third. 
It seems likely that in some way of which we cannot now trace 
the history, the gandk&ra-grdma is a relic of this old tuning. The 
Comma of Didymus (fj) has to be negotiated somewhere in the 
scale. We, in Europe, put it between the A and the D (major 
tone, semitone, major tone), the Indians between the E and the A 
(semitone, major tone, major tone). In so placing it, it is possible 
that they reduced an original I f||, F f , G f , I to a later E if, 



THE SAMAN CHANT 263 

We have other hints which point to a correspondence between 
the Greek and Indian scale. The Aryans came into India from 
the North. Gdndhdra is the same word as Kandahar, which as late 
as Alexander s time (fourth century B. c.) included Afghanistan and 
the Pan jab, with a capital near Peshawar. The GdndMra-grdma is 
the oldest of the three grdma$, and may preserve an early Aryan 
tradition. The Aryans spoke Sanskrit, which is closely allied to 
Greek. Evidence o the correspondence of the Greek and Indian 
systems has been accumulating in these pages; and that the 
fundamental scale of Greece, the Doric tetrachord, should be iden 
tical in form with the oldest form of Indian tetrachord would be 
more striking evidence than any. But it is unfortunately not more 
than circumstantial. 

The GdncUtara scale gave its name no doubt to the Gditdhdra note. 
The names Madkyama and Pancama have been discussed in Chapter 
V. Of Rtabka, Dhawaia^ and Nisdda nothing is known; they 
may be place-names, like GdndMra, or fancy names, like the 
majority of the ruti$. Of Sadja there is something more to be 
said. Referring once more to the list above we find in line 4 the 
seventh note left without an assigned organ of the body.- In line 
14 that same note is called Sa. We remember also that the 
atisrdrya is not a regular note of the scale, but is introduced into 
it as an extension of the other six. Elsewhere, in the SangUa-mra- 
mngraha, for instance, sadja, which undoubtedly means born of 
six , is said to be produced from six organs of the body, viz. nose, 
throat, chest, palate, tongue, and teeth. Putting these together 
we see that the name xculja is merely the mythological expression 
of the musical fact that the atiswrya was an * extra * note on 
a different footing from the others. 

There is, however, another tradition as to the intonation of the 
Sdman scale. M. Sesagiri Sastrf (Descriptive Catalogue^ pp. 3, 4) 
gives the scale as Ma, Ga, Hi, Sa, Dha, and says that the sound 
is that of the Rag Abkogi. That Rag is : 



Ex. : 



Drone D * (which does not matter here, the drone being a later 
1 Tlie European note (not t& *tor*). 



264 THE SAMAN CHANT 

invention), am&a E, omitted notes C and A. This is an old tradition,, 
as may be seen from three passages : (1) in an early book of the 
MahabJidraia the notes of the secular scale are given as Sa, Hi, Ga, 
Ma, Dha, Pa, Ni ; (2) in the KdradaSiM (L 2. 16) the order is Ma 
Ga, Hi, Sa, Dha, Ni, Pa; and (3) in I.V. 4 it is Ma, Ga, Ri, Sa, 
Dha, Ni (Pa omitted). In all three passages the first five notes are 
the same, and the last two are out of order ; this looks as if the 
first five were substantive and the last two optional, thus : 

8 B G M D P K 



Ex. 7 
854.: 



and this is the scale of Sesagiri Sastrl and of the Rag Alfiogi*, 
and since the am$a of Alhogi is at E, it divides thus : 



and its lower tetrachord is similar to the usus of the Ahvaraka* given 
in line 26 of the list. We must accept this transilient scale, there 
fore, as a collateral form of the Sdman. 

The musical hand. The basis of numeration is in some countries 
five, in others a dozen (England) or a score (France) ; in India it is 
four. Rupees, for instance, are frequently counted by placing one 
finger on each and sweeping them into the hand. Bearing this in 
mind, it may be possible to introduce some method into these dis 
crepant accounts of the musical hand. The root idea of this 
cheironomy* is that the thumb touches successively the tips of the 
four fingers. This is seen in the svdra, or cadence, where the hand 
is held *in the shape of a cow s ear (see the second of the two 
illustrations opposite), and the thumb passes over the four fingers 
in succession. Line 17 may accordingly represent two systems of 
counting : 

Ga Ri Sa Ni Dha 

W 1st [2nd] [3rd] 4th 

(*) 1st [2nd] 3rd 4th 

(line 17] 1st 1st 3rd 4th 4fch 

Similarly line 19 : 

Ma Ga Ri Sa Ni 
(*) [1st] 2nd 3rd 4th 

(c) thumb [1st] 2nd 3rd 4th (pentachord) 

(line 19) thumb thumb 2nd 3rd 4th 



PLATE 14 




Sarnagah, Madras 




Samagah, Bangalore 



THE SAMAN CHANT 265 

Lines 24 and 25 combine these. We have therefore : 

Ma Ga Ri Sa Ni Dha 

(a) E D C B (tetrachord) 

(I) F E D C (tetrachord) 

(c) G F(Ff) EDO (pentachord) 

as bases, perhaps successive bases, of the Sdman scale. 

The accents. 

Ma Ga Ri Sa Ni Dha Pa 



(i) line 6 
(ii) 16 
(iii) 23 



U S P A 

S A U P 



S U A S U A S 

There was a doubt, as we saw, about the relative position of 
uddtta and svarita : in the Rgveda the svarita is above,, but there is 
reason to think it may originally have been below the uddtta. This 
doubt, reflected in (i) and (iii) above, is natural if we consider the 
nature of the svarita, which started on the uddtta y rose a little above 
it, and fell much below it. It was natural that in recitation, where 
the question of exact pitch did not come up, the. fall should be the 
conspicuous thing, and in its general effect the svarita come to be 
considered below the uddtta; but that, when the pitch came to be 
defined in chanting, the rise should rather attract attention, since 
a fall or cadential phrase took place for other reasons than the fact 
that the syllable had a svarita accent, whereas the rise was peculiar 
to the svarita note, and therefore in its particular effect the svarifa 
was above the uddtta. 

That in (i) the pracaya is above the anudutta and in (ii) below it 
need cause no trouble, since, as the pracaya is c toneless , there is 
really no sense in assigning it to any particular tone. 

The position of the anuddtta above the udatta in (ii) is more 
difficult. Perhaps we are justified in calling Ga (in ii) nddtta on 
the analogy of (i) and (iii). This would fulfil all that is required 
of the pracaya and anuddtta^ that they should be somewhere below 
the svarita (and the tipper nddtta). The lower uddtta then appears 
as the other terminal of the tetrachord, with the smrika above it. 

In (iii) the accents appear to lose their grammatical meaning 
entirely and to be given a musical meaning. The uddtta is BOW 
the terminal of the tetrachord, at Ga and Ni, with the smrita above 
it and the annddtia below it. The uAatio, is raised* above the 
others not in pitch, but in musical eminence. The imrU loees its 



266 



THE SAMAN CHANT 



lichanos 

parhypate 

hypate 

lichanos 

parhypate 

hypate 

proslarabanoinenos ] 



sense of e graced note, and becomes a note of certain relative pitch. 
The anudatta is no longer of indefinite c low pitch, forced under 
certain conditions f lower 9 (anwldttatara), but becomes definite* 

The theory of consonance thus determined has its counterpart in 
Greek music : 

svarita G- 

rudatta F 

anudatta E 

svarita D 

udatta C 

anudatta B 

[ atisvarya A 

These are quite different from Hucbald ; s excelkntex, tuperiore*, 
finales, grave*, with which Burnell compares them, and which 
involved a series of disjunct, not conjunct, tetraehords. 

An example of the chant as sung by a Samagah in Madras shows 
the general musical effect. The breve at the beginning shows the 
actual pitch of the first note (a Fifth higher) ; the chant itself is 
given at the pitch which suits the scale just discussed. The 
fragmentary syllables are merely phonetic spellings of the apparent 
sounds of the phonograph, with gaps where the words are inaudible. 
It was extremely difficult to get even this short specimen. 
Sfiinan chant. Madras. (Phonogram.) 



* BF 


















r r r 



















Au - di - ba 



in-dra 



da-ve-ba 























"- ** 








K 


! *- r 






{* 



da-ve-ba yan de 



ra 



drl . . 




- y&-d& a a i-ya-da a a 



ma 



rva a 




ri-i-I 



THE SAMAN CHANT 267 

Herr Felix Exner was far more successful in 1904. His results 
have now been worked out by Dr. Erwin Felber, provided with text 
and translation by Herr Bernhard Geiger, and were published in 1913 
under the title Die inducfie Hunk der veduchen und der Uam&cJten 
Zeit as a contribution to the history of recitation. Dr. Felber has 
very kindly given permission for their transcription here. The 
actual pitch is given, as before, by the breve at the beginning of 
each example. The Sdmaveda notation with which each of his 
examples is supplied is omitted here, because it is probably the 
notation of a different sect from that to which the singer belonged, 
who has, at any rate, taken no account of it except in a very 
general way. Felber s numbers are given for reference. He 
discusses the melodic structure of these chants in his third chapter 
(pp. 38-43). 

No. 427. Sung by a Brahman priest in Calcutta, forty-two 
years old, born in Jodhpur. Original text : 

Mahi tnnam avar astu dyuksam mitrasyaryaranalj | 
duradharsam varu[nasya] | 

Translation : 

May the mighty aid of the three gods "be ours the help of Mitra and 
Aryaman and the Invincible Yaruna. 

Felber. N&lt;x 427. 
J*= 79. Sempre glissando, piano. 




nia-hfi - i - tr& 



ra-stu dyuk-sam 



f-f r f grtfc ^i r &V M ^ 



i - tr& . . 



du-r-a - - dhfi r - s& 



va - raa-bo 



268 



THE SAMAN CHANT 

2fdto allegro. 



EE 



ha - - i ma -hi t-ri - mam a-va-ra-stu- 



dyuk-sam-mi-tra-sya - rya - m - nah 



r r LF r 



m 



du-r - a - dha 



r - &a 



This example (No. 427), and three others (Nos. 428-30) which 
it has seemed unnecessary to transcribe,, shows, like the Madras 
example just given, little more than the scale of the Rgveda (see 
line 28 of the diagram on p. 259) : 



35& 



the F being, on the whole, the most prominent note. 

Pelber 443. Sung by two Brahmans of Tanjore aged forty and 
seventeen a priest and a student in Madras. 

Original text : 

punanah soma dharayapo vasano arsasi | 

a ratnadha yonim rtasya sidasy utso devo hiranyaya^ || 

Translation : 

Purified, Soma, by drops, thou movest concealed in the waters ; rich in 
treasure thou residest in the womb of the sacrifice, a golden fount divine. 

Felber. No. 443. 

J 106. Agitato. 







\ 


J 


** - na - h so . . ma dha - r 


a . . ya 









& - po 



vasa 



na-a 



sa 



si 




nimr-ta . . . 



THE SAMAN CHANT 269 



sya sa . . - da . . si ut-sa - h da-i-vo 




. . ya - h. 



Felber, No. 444. Another version of 443, sung by the Madras 
priest alone. 

Original text o the second verse : 

duhana udhar divyam madhu priyam pratnam sadhastham asadat j 
aprchyam dharunam vajy arsasi nrbhir dhauto vicaksanalj H 

Translation : 

Milking the honey he loves from heavenly udders, Soma took his seat on 
his ancient throne. Mightily thy stream empties itself into a vessel of 
honour, and purified from the touch of men thine eyes behold what is far 
away. 

Felber. Xo. 444. 

J 116-149. Agitato. _ 





pu-na-nah so . . ma - dha - ra . , . . ya . . 

accfl 



po-sa-no a-r-sa- syi ra-tna-dha yo 
a tempo. 






* 



ni - mr ta - sya sa.... i-da-sa-i 

&gt; &gt; ,^&gt; t&gt; f p ^ &gt;^ . 

^ r r c c f r r r gof r r r^ 

o - hfi - n - Til ut-so de - vo hi - rS .... h& - i 



ha - u - va nya - ya . . . an - ho - va 



J J 

* &lt;r 



ut-M&gt; de - vo ha - i - ra. nya - - - ya - h 



270 



THE SAMAN CHANT 



a tempo. 



?rr~ 








p i 







&gt;_ 


_&gt; 


&gt;_ 






" ~i 
























1 



tit- so de-vo hi-ra-nya-yo du-hS-na unihardi-vi-yam ma-dhu - - pri-yam 



ha - u - va prat-unfft sa-dha-stha-ma - ha, i 



t au 



ho 



- va prat-jaai& sa-dha-stham. a- -sa - - da-t 
acceL 



prat - nafii sa-dM-stham a - sa- da -da pr- cchya-ndha-ru-nain 
a tempo. 









j. ~ ^-K^: 










-* 








^ C * = 1 




r r r c c r 



- ji ya 



r-sa-sa-i o- -ha 



u -va 






nr-bhir dhau-to vi-ca 



ha - i o 



ha 



u - va 



T 



ksa-na - - au - - ho - va . . 
The scale of these two (Nos. 443 and 444) is the same : 



Ex. ; 
36L ; 



the melodies pivot on F and D. The chromatic beginning of 
No. 444 is quite common in secular singing, from which it seems to 
have been imported here, in order to establish a tonic. 
The two which follow show a different scale ; 



No. 426. 



Ex. 



No. 425. 



Ex. 
368. 



THE SAMAN CHANT 



271 



The Fg is essential in No. 425 and accidental in No. 426; in both 
it is used chromatically, which is on the whole unlike secular song. 
I heard something like it in Madras, but was unable to note it. Two 
chants were sung: one distinctly chromatic, described as neca 
(high); the other as distinctly diatonic, described as nlca (low). 
I was more than once asked by the singer whether lie should sing 
in the ucca or the nica voice ; and it seems possible that he may 
have been referring to a difference of scale rather than of pitch 
ucca G F# Ffi E, &c., nlca (G) FED, &c. 

No. 426. Sung by a boy of fifteen in the Sanskrit College, 
Calcutta. 

The text is not from the Rgveda, but a ttobha, i.e. composed not 
of verges but of jubilations consisting of sentences and alleluias. 
(ho-i 9 &c.). In the Pada form : 

ut nayami adityam adityam prancam yantam ut nayami ahorEtrani ahah 
ratrani aritrani dyauh nauh tasyam asau adityah adityah lyate tasmin 
vayam fyamane lyamahe [. . .]. 

Translation : 

I bear aloft the advancing sun, I bear it aloft ; days and nights are the 
oars, the sky is the ship. On this fares forth the sun ; and with it we are 
borne to that well-loved spot whose name consists of three letters, 

Note. That which is named in the adoration of om (spelled a + u-fm), 
which is an image of the world of Brahma. 



Pelber. No. 426. 

J = 88. Sempre accd. 



Ex. 
364. 



un - na - ya - mi lio - i tin - na - y& - mi ho - i 






un - na-ya - mi ho - i 



- di - tyam prafi-cain tarn un - 



- ya-mi ho - 1 a- di-tyam-praii-&lt;aun tarn un - na-ya - ml iio - i 



a-ho-ra-trfi-kfc-nya-ri ho -i a-lx&gt; - ift-trt - tra-^y-ri lio - I 



272 THE SAMAN CHANT 

r pic P r~J~ N 



dyaur-na-ru ha - u dyaur-na-ra-ha - u dyaur -na-ru-ha - u 



tas-yam - a - sJ,v - a - di-tya . . I - ya - te ha - u 

er J- J -T-r^r r J r v^T-^=f=^^ 



tas-yam - a - sav - & - di - tya I - ya - te - ha - u 

-Pfr-F 



tas-inin va-yam I - ya - ma - na I - ya - ma - he ha - u 



r. z r g e_r. 

i, * u- & g I.T 



tas-min va-yam I-ya-ma-na i - ya - ma-he ha - u 
J-I20. 



& 


-. L^- 


r c g G o^i_-r r r L-=^ 



I - ya - ma - he ha- u I - ya ma -he ha - u. 

No. 425. Sung by a boy of twelve, a Brahman, In the Sanskrit 
College, Calcutta. 

The original text is: 

murdhanam divo aratim prthivya vaisvanaram rta a jatam agnim | 
kavifh samrajam atithim jananam asan nah patram janayamta devah || 

The translation : 

The chief of heaven, the lord of the earth, Agni Vaisvanara born of the 
sacred truth, wise, almighty, the guest of man him it was whom the gods 
created as our chalice for their use. 

Note. The sacrificial ghee is poured into the fire (Agni) which bears the 
gift up to the gods, that is, the fire is the vessel which conveys it to the 
mouth of the gods. 

Felber. No. 425. 

_~ Jm l?r 

ht - u h& - u ha - u a - jya - do - ham - ma 



a - jya- do -ham-ma & - jya - do-ham - ma mur - dlxa-nan-da - i 



THE SAMAN CHANT 273 



va. - a - ra - tim pf - thiv - ya - h vaU - ra-na - ra - ma 



r - ta - a ja - ta - ma - gm - ma ka - vi - m sam-rft - 



- ja - ma - ti - thin - ja - na - n& - ma & - san aalj p& - 



F - t . . ..I... . | f P ^ ai ^ j ^J ^-Z^^- , &lt; j, l ^^ . 

I ^Tl.^ " a^ - ^~ 

tra - an - ja - na-yan -ta de-va-h ha-u ha-u M-u 



a - jya - do-ham-ma a - jya - do-ham-ma a - jya - do hfi -u - va 



e a - jya - do - ham - ma e a - jya - do - ham - ma 



T r 



a - jya - do 



NOTATION. The various systems are all modern of the last few 
centuries, perhaps; and that followed in one MS. would not help to 
the elucidation of another. The signs employed are sometimes 
letters which appear to be abbreviations of technical terms, some 
times numerals which bear some as yet unexplained relation to the 
ordinals of the Sdman scale. They are written over the syllables of 
the text to indicate the substantive (prakrfa) notes, between them 
to indicate grace-notes (mkrti), practically the * ligatures of Plain- 
song. Secular music has also till quite lately, the last century, 
dispensed with notation ; and it must be remembered that a written 
notation would be a hindrance rather than a help when everything 
was learned by heart l or extemporized. 

The form of the chant is recalled in its proper order by the M of 

1 I saw in Mysore a guru who had received 10 for his life s work of eocar 
mitting to memory the text and the Baelodis of the wltole SMmemda. 



274 



THE SAMAN CHANT 



half a dozen sticks a span long, arranged much as we might arrange 
matches to mark whist-points. 1 

TECHNICAL TERMS (taken from R. Simon s Puxpastitra) : 
atikrama (transilience), disjunct motion, i.e. Thirds, Fourths, and 
Fifths in ascent and descent. The actual intervals prescribed by 
the Sdma-paribM$a (quoted by Simon, p. 516) are shown in white 
note-heads; those actually employed in Exner^s examples in black. 

S&maparibhasa (S. Indian notation). 



JEX. 

266. 

Accent 


@ =; o- fc--g=a= j 
Calcutta examples. 




Madras examples. 




$3 ^ , ft-& H 


fcfc 1_ * - - H * H 

g___- : _.__ : H : H 


Descent 


r- T-* H H 
SamaparibhasS. 

^C & + 1- S ^ 4. S 1 -JI 


w_ fi^-j 1 1 1 1 ^ H 

Calcutta. 

B= 1 - -^ e- - 1 =*-*- =^| 



Madras (none). 

K.B. It will be noticed that leaps are commoner in ascent than in descent 
and in tb Calcutta chant than in the Madras. 

^dnHa (upper completion) is the name for the upper consonant 
(mmvddfy 

1 See Ha tig, Ait, Br., voL ii, p 185, note, and p. 238, notej also Burnell, Ais. 
Bn, pp. xxviii and 105. 



THE SAMAN CHANT 275 

r oka is a general name for ascent of one or more notes. The modern 
term for an ascending- passage is drohana, for a descending, avdrohana. 

svdra (lit. relating to sound), the cadence, used whenever the last 
syllable of the final section (nidhana) has the $varita accent. 
Examples : 



367.: 



karzana (lit. dragging, rubbing), the lengthening of a syllable by 
interpolated notes, is applied only to long or augmented (vriddhied) 
syllables. The most usual forms, though there are other varieties, 
are ; 



alhiglta (approaching note). Usual form : 

Ex. 



udgMta (elevation). A downward appoggiatura, e.g. 

Ex. 



(crooked), a special case of abhiglta, 



Ex. ; 



or karsana S 



pratyutkrama (attack, initial step) is a progression to the next note 
above. Eight cases are given : 

1 234 5678 



The definition does not appear to state, what seems evident, that in 
this progression one syllable is sung to two notes, that it is, in fact, 
the podatua of Plainsong. 2 No. 8 of these plays a great part in 
Rvga (see p. 158). These examples clearly presuppose the tetrachord 
E D C B, not F E D C. 

gati (gait, passage). The lengthening of a syllable by the rowels 
i or u, e.g. ho hoi hoyL 

i We recognize in this semifconal elevation or depression the law of tlw* 
mediaeval Musica ficto, which substituted a rising and falling niifee W 
a rising and falling tone. 

8 A good many of these figures find, of course, their analogues in th Hsw*, 
a list of which is given on p. 24 of H. B. Briggs s ffiemem$s qfPto$m&r 



276 THE SAMAN CHANT 

atikara (extremely long syllable, prosodial tenn). The carrying 
over of a syllable by means of a jubtium (ttod&a), e.g. ba 
(auh ova) rhlsl. 

parmn (division). The smallest unity of a verse; practically, 
what can be sung in one breath, hence, musically, a phrase. 

rirdma. The ca&ura at the end of a phrase. 

MELODIC FIGURES. Mention should also be made of a method of 
handing down the traditional manner of singing. Melodic figures 
which constantly recur are directed to be sung after a certain well- 
known pattern. For instance, the cadence to the first line of the 
first hymn (given above) is : 



874.: 



ba-rhl si 

Other syllables, then, which have this particular cadence are said to 
be done like to* *. Thus : 



Jk^ JPZ1 


1 


j* 

a 

bha 


* r f ^ ^ 

yi 
yi 



Herr Simon gives about 100 examples; but until the Sdmaveda 
notation has been exactly interpreted it would be misleading to 
transcribe them. 

If the cumulative effect of this evidence, chiefly circumstantial, 
may be said to have established any conclusion as to the original 
scale of India, we have found there, as in Greece, a starting point 
in a tetrachord of the form : 



E 3&gt; C B 
(A G F E) 



It is interesting to ask what is the musical justification of this 
particular series of notes, and of their development. 

The music is purely vocal ; no instrument is employed : and vocal 
scales are conceived downwards. They are so conceived because the 
telling notes of the voice are in its upper register, and this presents 



THE SAMAN CHANT 277 

itself therefore as the starting point 1 for a vocal scale. In its 
search for consonance the ear hears in the first instance only quintal, 
not tertian, harmony, as was explained on pp. 123 foil. Quintal 
harmony provides only Fifths, Fourths, and major Tones. It has 
been shown on p. 150 that in looting for harmony to a given 
note the Fifth occurs first in an upward series,, but the Fourth in 
a downward. A vocal scale, conceived downwards, establishes 
therefore the Fourth before the Fifth, the tetrachord before the 
pentachord. The intermediate notes can only be filled up by major 
Tones, for no other interval is as yet present to the ear. As soon 
as the major Third is heard it corrects no doubt one of these major 
Tones into a minor Tone. 

In proceeding beyond this tetrachord there is nothing, apparently, 
in the nature of things to decide whether the F above should be 
first added, as consonant to C, or the A below as consonant to D. 
The F was, as a fact, added first. This is seen to be a result of the 
circumstance that the E was a graced note. It was, if we may 
judge from the modern secular usage (see Chapter VII), seldom sung 
pure ; an upper note was, so to say, inherent in it ; and this deter 
mined to an F rather than an F$ owing to the C below. The A 
was added also ; but, as the interest of the chant lay at the other 
end of the tetrachord, this A became more or less atrophied, and 
a G was never added below it. Meanwhile the F inherited the 
musical importance which had attached to the E, and the tetrachord 
F-C competed with the tetrachord E B for supremacy. 

It was here that the Greeks parted company ; and the reason for 
their doing so is instructive. They continued their tetrachord A~~E 
upwards through a Bb and downwards through a D, but we do not 
make out that the tetrachord Bb-F ever attained any sort of 
eminence in their song. The Bb did not come into their scale as 
a graced * A, as the Hindu F was a graced E. For they aimed at 
singing their notes pure, as Aristoxenus tells us. 2 They regarded 

1 The Hindus named the upper terminal of the tetrachord gntM (beginning) 
and the lower ny&sa (end). 

3 He is contrasting (.Harm., ch. 10) the continuous (yc*l) motion of th 
speaking voice and the motion-by-interval (dfastema&k*) of tfe singing wice, 
and says, * In speaking we avoid bringing the voice to a standstill (te. a pwre 
note) unless we force it to that in moments of feeling. But in singing w do 
the opposite j we avoid continuous motion, and aim at making the voice, as far 
as possible, stationary ie. we sing our notes not * graced * bai * clean . 

8U113 T 



278 THE SAMAN CHANT 

their Bb therefore merely as a consonant to the F below, not also as 
a kind of heightened A. 

To return to the Hindus. The F, having inherited the prestige 
of the E, took on grace in its turn. But here a difficulty arose : 
should the grace-note have the same relation to the F as the F had 
to the E, and determine to a Gb (Fft), or should it be consonant to 
the D below, and appear as a G ? Both notes were taken in ; and 
the scale had now two distinct sections : that from E downwards 
which was formed diatonieally, and that from E upwards which 
was formed by grace, i. e. chromatically. These had distinct 
characters, and were distinguished as we saw by the names nlca 
and ucca (p. 271, and Exs. 362, 363). Moreover, the chromatic 
(ncca) style of singing is peculiar to the Sdmaveda, where it had, 
as we see, an efficient cause, and is not found in Rdga, where that 
cause is absent 

A purely vocal scale is so foreign to our music that, though we 
may understand it, we have difficulty in feeling its musical force. 
The following melody from the Fitzwilliam Virginal Book (i. 144) 
appears to be in such a scale; and its constituent notes happen, 
curiously, to be exactly those of the Sdman scale : 



The woods BO wilde. 



Ex. 
377. 



p 



Those writers on the modes who insist that the last note of 
a song must be the tonic would be delighted to find in this a rare 
probably the only instance of a Locrian (Mixolydic). But a tonic 
F gives a much better sense ; and indeed Orlando Gibbons has 
harmonized it, if it was he, like a bagpipe tune on F and G pedals, 
though it must be confessed that harmony of any kind sadly 
impairs its delicious inconsequence and irresponsibility, and a calcu 
lated dose on B does much to clip the wings of its fancy. 

There is an abundance of tunes, too, which seem to have no 
definite tonality and to be divided in their allegiance to different 
tonics. Here is one from Btfhme s Attdeuteches Liedertwch, p. 729 : 



THE SAMAN CHANT 279 

St. Ursula, Kdnigssiockter von England. 






The essence of the melody is that E is the predominant note ; 
that it closes in A minor rather than C major is of the nature of 
an accident. In both these melodies we see the marks of a vocal 
scale not only in the high tessitura and the indefinite tonic, but in 
the way they tend to ascend by leap and descend by step. 



CHAPTER XI 
FORM 

THAT principle of balance by which the several parts of a song, 
whether it lasts half a minute or half an hour, stand out from one 
another in strong contrast and yet help, each of them in its way, 
to build up the general sense of unity that ordered disposition of 
its component parts by which music travels to an inevitable climax, 
neither postponing it nor anticipating it, and thence to a close 
that variety which gives flesh and blood to the bare bones of struc 
ture all this is Form . Form is, however, rather an instinct 
than a principle, and it is dangerous to follow it too much into detail, 
because a composer may at any moment wrap his principle in new 
detail and justify it by success, and then analysis is apt to boggle. 

Still, even instinct must work in elements of design which make 
on the whole either for variety or for unity, or which can be so 
used as to do the one or the other. The primal unity of our system 
is the tonic chord, and in a larger scheme the tonic key ; and the 
sense of contrast reposes primarily in the dominant and subdominant 
chords and keys. These again can become unifying forces with 
related keys supplying contrast. It would be impossible for our 
music to get away from this as long as it continues to be harmonic, 
since all these chords are by implication in the triad itself (major 
or minor), and, by extension of its meaning, many others. The 
primal unity of the Hindu system is similarly the tonic note, or 
drone ; and the sense of contrast is supplied primarily by the amfa, 
that note in which the lie of the song, its tessitura, centres, and 
the notes which are related to this (1) as consonants, tamvdfa, (2) 
as passage notes (mnmd\ vivddl) between the consonants. But 
whereas the dominant was implied in the tonic, and while con 
trasting with it still made for unity, the amm stands out against 
the drone (kk&raj 1 ) as a matter of choice, and so makes for contrast ; 
and yet since the varying relationship (in the different Rags) of the 
1 Kk&rqj is a vernacular form, through 4ad(a)j, ofsadja (Skr.). 



FORM 



281 



amfa to the JcJiaraj, its relative distance from it, is what gives its 
special character to the song, this very contrast may be said also 
to impart unity, the unity, namely, of that particular Rag ; and 
thus the general unity of the song proceeds not from intrinsic 
necessity, but from freedom of choice. 

The first thing in a song is to put this relationship of the amia 
and kfutraj beyond doubt This is done by the Aldp (prelude). 
The notes of the Jtig are sung not in strict time, but in a loose 
kind of rhythm regulated by the convenience of the breath and 
by the amount of work ; that is to be got on to the notes, and 
sung not to words, but to vocalizing syllables Na, Ma, Ta, Ra, 
La, &c. The work consists in elaborate graces, calculated to 
make the most of the important notes of the Rag ; and in order 
that these may be given with due impressiveness the Aldp is taken 
at a slow or a moderate pace. Grace thus used to put the important 
notes in inverted commas is called m&rchhana. It is obvious that 
the Aldp is a real necessity both for performer andlistener ; without 
it the listener would spend his time for some part of the^ song in 
ignorance of its tonal centres, and the melody would be for him an 
aimless running up and down hill, while the performer would s with 
out a little preliminary practice, very likely play a note or two 
which was out of the Rag, and that would upset the { unity * 
altogether. 

The scheme of the song proper, in its full shape, is as follows : 



S. INDIA. 

1. Pallavi, *genn , sprout*. First 

subject, focussed on the ama. 

2. Anupallavi, * after-germ*. Second 

subject, focussed on the * con 
sonant , generally the upper 
consonant. 

3. Caranam, * moving about . 

Phrases taken from the PaUavi 
and Anupallam to which the 
extra stanzas, if any, are sung. 

4. Return to the Pcdlam and close on 

the tonic (irwti) or Fifth above. 



N, IHDIA. 
L Astai or Sthayi, * at home . 

2. Antara, interval \ meaning per 
haps change of voice-register. 



3. Sancarv, alternation J ; our c de 
velopment . 



4. Return to the AMoi, and close 
with the first note or phrase of 
the song, and for chaise on tfee 
tonic (Jcharaj) or amfa. This re 
turn is sometimes called 



282 FORM 

This is the form in South India for the full-fledged Klrtanam 
(*/kr, celebrate)* The Kriti (perhaps from the same root) has no 
caranam, and this seems to be the more usual form in North 
India. The theme of the following is a repeated three-bar 
passage (Cherardvademird) with a link phrase (Ramayya). In No. 3 
variation the first bar of this is expanded to four, and in No. 4 to 
eight bars. The original theme is then dropped, and taken np 
again in No. 9. In Nos. 11, 12 comes a suggestion of the theme 
of the anupallam, which follows at No. 13 at the upper consonant 
Bb, thejpallavi having circled round the ama, Eb- 

Indian theory would not of course allow that the Afi of the 
anupaUavi involved a change of Riig. That note is introduced only 
to form the * strong ; tetrachord (see Chapter XII), but the effect is 
indistinguishable from what we should call a key contrast. The 
caranam begins with phrases of the pallavi and ends with those 
of the annpallavi, and is preceded and followed by the cadenza. 

Words. A girl is singing :PaZlavi. Why do you not come to me, Rama. 
AnupaUavi. infinite God, strong as Mount Meru, I can no longer bear (to 
be without you). Caranam. A fatherless and motherless child I pray to 
thee, I call on thee, I beseech thee, my own Lord. Again and again I cry 
in my sorrow to thee, my own dear Lord. Ah ! with what yearning I gaze 
upon thy face, fair as the lotus. I send my petition to thee in strains that 
Tyagarija has made. 

Cherarayademira, by Tyagarfija (words and music), 
Ragam Rltigaula. (Aeolo-dorian.) 
T&lam Dedadi (2, beginning on the up beat). 
IteootameMe. J - 72. 












Che-ra-ra- va- de - mi-ra. . Ra-ma-yya Che-ra-ra - 











w^ 

ft 4 


de - mi - ra^~I I 


^ &lt;&gt; N J jgl^J J^r 

Che-ra-ra - va - de 


mi 


3 
-1 


|$i) p l 


} J"J. 4 _^1 J?. *" 


jg|J JN y J a i 


^- 


U 



- X* . . &C. 






FORM 



283 




i 



m 



a? 



:*=*: 



^3; 




rjj^ju. 



284 



FORM 









^=* 

jy-V 



Aimpallavi. 



14 



Me-ru-gH. -du-rS, i - ka ma -ha 




ga-ma pa-da-ma pa-ga maga-ri-sani sa-ni 



ga - ri-sa^ , . , ga-ga ma-ma ni-da-ma ga-ma ni-ni - sa ni-sa ga-ga- 



ma ga-ri ga-ga-ri-sa ri - sa ni da-ma-ga-ri . ni sa-ga ga-ma Che - 



ra - rft - va - de - mi ra . . 



. Ra-ma-vya Che-ra-ra - va 



iai-ra . . Ta-lli tan-dri le 




FORM 



285 







ga-ma pa - da-ma pa-ga 




xna-ga-ri-sa ni-sa-nx ga-ri-sa . . . ga-ga ma-ma ni da-ma-ga-ma 



ni-ni- sa m-sa-ga-ga ma-ga-ri ga- ga-ri-sa ri-&a -ni da-ma -ga-rT 



,ni-sa-ga ga-ma Che - ra - m 




- ra , . Ea-ma-yya die-ra-ra - va-de - . mi - ra . . 



A few particukrs of the different styles of song, collected 
from books J are here given. The distinction between them seems 



1 Tingle s Indian Jft&fec, Rajah S. 1C. Tagore s Reprints from v&r^$ Authors and 
Untie f sal Hist&ry tf Music, 



286 FORM 

to rest principally on the words, secondly on the time, hardly at 
all on the tune, hut a good deal on the general form. 

The oldest forms of Hindu song are the Pada and Bhajana. The 
Pada is generally some pithy saying taken from Sanskrit verse and 
enlarged upon. The jBAajana, adoration , is connected with Bhakti, 
faith in a personal God , Move for him as for a human being, 
the dedication of everything to his service, and the attainment 
of mok&a (emancipation) by this means rather than by knowledge. 
or sacrifice, or works \ l The Bhajana specialized in the Krishna 
literature ; and as the Bengali Klrtana does the same they may be 
classed together. The former is a religious recital in which the 
congregation sing all the time under a leader, Bovd ( man of piety *), 
and takes place between sunset and sunrise. In the latter the 
leader has a long story to tell, of a dramatic nature, and the con 
gregation act as chorus. Its invention is ascribed to Chandidas, 
a native of Birbhaum, the birthplace of Jayadeva ; it is mentioned 
in the Ain-i-AJk6ari. With it is associated the mystery play, Jdttrd, 
which circled round the love of Krishna and Eadha. 

The typical form of Hindu song, a development of the Pada 
and Bhajana, untouched by Mohammedan influence, is the Dhrupad 
(BAntm-pdda dhruva, ( firm , enduring ; pada, quarter- verse * ; 
Dkruva is a name also for the * constantly recurring verse * or 
burden * of a song). The Dhrupad has a free masculine character ; 
its words are religious, but not exclusively so. It is in slow time, 
and in selected TttkSurjpAatta, Cfiautdl, and Dhamilr the ionic 
and anapaestic metres in fact; and since to perform it requires 
a good command of the breath, there is a saying c The man who 
has the strength of five buffaloes, let that man sing Dhrupad 9 * 
When there is any doubt about the exact form of a particular Rag, 
appeal is made not to the Sanskrit authorities, but to the traditional 
form of Dhrujtad. In that the Rag is to be found in its purity 
with its murcftkanas (the consonant* notes ornamented); a Hag 
without these is called Jhil or DAun. But the Dhrupad is free 
from other grace-notes ; and since these are considered essential to 
Hindu song, the Dhrupad is somewhat at a discount ; it is considered, 
for instance, unsuitable for public performance. Further, since 
most songs demand a compass of two and a half octaves, and since 
this can only be attained by faUetio, this kind of voice is prized 

1 L J. Sedgwick, in the Journal tfifa B. B. 7?. A. Society far 1911. 



FORM 



287 



for its liveliness , and the natural (d&rma) voice neglected; so 
that DJtrupad singers are apt to form a special class. The great 
representative of the style was Rajah Man of Gwalior (died 1518). 

Another old form is the Katkd, or sermon in song. A text from 
the Rdmayana or the Mahabharata is intoned (in about an octave 
of notes) and then expounded in the speaking voice and in the 
vernacular by a KdthaJca. 

Another is the Kali, a song of question and answer, such as the 
Garhwali songs, pp. 50, 51. It is a popular form in the villages, 
and became in the eighteenth century a favourite in higher circles, 
when question and answer were elaborately prepared instead of 
being impromptu. 

The commonest type is the Khydl, a later form of DArupad t 
supposed to emanate from Mahmud Sharqi of Jaunpur (1401-40). 
It is a song (Chija) or an instrumental piece (Gafi) constructed of 
variations on, or rather episodes relieving, a short phrase ; a Rondo 
in fact. The KJtydl ranges from a very simple little song to the 
following, which with its compass of three octaves probably repre 
sents the extreme of elaboration. Its highest development belongs 
to the Mohammedan period ; this, Kaba ho kapl, is from the Panjab, 
where there are few but Mohammedan singers. The theme is 
variously treated on its three or four dozen appearances, and is not 
so monotonous to listen to as it is to write or to read, and the 
playful sweep of the episodes (fdna, f divisions * in our eighteenth- 
century sense of the word) has nothing clumsy about it. The 
Kkyal is generally a love-tale and supposed to be sung by a 
woman; the procedure of love-making is in India, as so many 
other things are, the reverse of ours. It is the typically pathetic 
form of song. 

Malkos. Velambit Tlnti,!, 



Ex. 




288 



FORM 




ka & - SI mu-kha . . 



kha - na - - a 






^ ^jgrjr "^4yj^ 

wen - - ge Ka-ba ho . . ka-pl . 



A ... A 



Bla-ba ho . - ka-pl 



- 



Ka-ba bo . . ka -p! 



j j 




A . . 



Ka-ba ho .. ka-pl 



A , , . 






A . 



Ka-ba ho . . ka-pl . . 



Ka-ba ho . * ka-pl . 



7 ] ^J* J. tj 



A . . A 



FOEM 



289 



Ka-ba ho . . ka-pl . . A 






Ka-ba ho . . ka-pt . . A. 



Ka-ba ho . . ka - pi 



-tr--n 










^=5 


&lt; ^ J-^ 7 ^- L ^ 


J J" 


$ 


^ ^ 



yy^^-j 



j. j^ j=& 

Ka-ba ho , . ka-pl 






J j JJ gi 




Ka-ba ho . . ka-pl .... A 



290 



FORM 



. A 



= H 






I.PJ m **T b,r "Mri MfeJ fe-f 



Ka-ba ho . . 



Ka-baho 



. ka-pl . , . rS, - gho . . . a - wen 




Kaba ho . 



ka-pl ra - gho a - wen - ge . 



. . . Ka-ba ho . . ka-pl . . . . Ka-ba ho 




I . . . r& - gho a - wen - ge . Ka-ba ho . ka-pl 



Hr- 






FORM 



291 




Ka-ba ho . . ka-pi . . . . 



3=5^^ 



Ka-ba ho . . ka-pi 

r^ 



A . . 



Ka-ba ho . . ka-pi . 



i^T I ". r^ . Ka-ba ho . . ka-pi . . A I I ". ~. I 




Ka-ba ho . . ka - pi A . 



. Ka-ba ho . . ka-pi 




=1 



. Ka-ba ho . . ka-pi . . me-re nai . . na . . A . . 




nai . . na . . A . 









me - re nai . 



I.I H. 1 " 1 "!! 1 if - M 

-^ &rf 




ni - 



292 



fli 



FOEM 






me-re . nai 



na . . cha-ko - ra pi - 



* 



ti - ba se . , ra 






Kfl. - ba ho . . ka - pi 



I^ 
J j 



* 1 







Ka-ba ho . . ka - pi . 



Ka-ba ho . . ka-pl 



Ka-ba ho ka-pi ra - gho a - wen - ge 



FORM 



293 






m 4 *m-3* 






Ka-ba ho ka-pi ra-gho a 



wen-ge . . ELa-baho . . ka-pl 



Ka-ba ho ka-pl ra - gno a - wen- ge 



iLP^ffl^J 



Lf~jnr^ 



Ka-ba lio ka-pl ra-gho a - wen-ra- ge 




Ka-ba ho . . ka-pl . 






Ka - ba ho ka-pl ra - gho a - wen - ge 



Ka-ba ho ka-pl ra-gho a-wen-ge Ka-ba ho ka-pl rfi-gho & - wen - ge 



Ka-ba ho * . ka - pi . 



Ka-ba ho 



ka-pl 






ra 



gho 



wen - ge 



rft - gho a - wen - ge . . . 



. . ge- Ka-ba ho ka-pl 




. . ka-pl 



816113 



294 



FOEM 










Ka-ba ho . ka-pl 



f.b L jm FU 



Ka-baho . . ka-pl . 



Kn-baho .... 



FORM 



295 




ge Ka-ba ho . . ka-pl rft , . gho a - 



Ka-ba ho . . ka-pi . . . . 




Ka-ba ho ka-pl rS, - ghoa-wen-ge . . Ka-ba hoka-pl rft - gho a - wen - 



_ 

Ka-ba ho . . ka - pi 



Ka-ba ho 



m 



s 



ka-pl 



- gho a - wen-ge 



Ka-ba ho ka-pi . . ra - gho a - wen-ge . . Ka-ba ho . . ka-pl 




Ka-ba ho . . ka-pl . 



296 



FORM 




Ka-ba ho 



Ka-pl . 



m 



ra 



gho a - wen-ge Ka-ba ho ka- pi ra- 



- gho a - wen - ge Kaba ho kapl ragho awengeKaba ho kapl ra - gho Swen- 



ge Ka-ba ho ka-pl ka-pl . ra - gho 




a wen - ge Ka-ba hoka-pi ra-gho a - wen- 



0-t 










1 Rn 1 




=B3 - 1 




g-" 1 ^ 


UJ 


1 m I""-H 


* r~-* 


* ^ J J 


^ "JL. 


_^ ^ 





ge Ka-ba ho ka-pl ra-gho a - wen-ge Ka-ba ho ka-pl ra-gho a-wen 



- ge . . Kabaho kapx ra-gho a - wen - ge A 



333 



Ka-ba ho. . ka-pl . . . A 



M M M 



+ ^ ^+ 

s 



FORM 



297 




Ka-baho . . ka-pl 






gho & 



wen-ge 




Ka-ba . . lio ta-pi . . ri-gho . . 









Ka-ba ho . . ka- I. 






I 



U " J JV=ab 








298 



FORM 












ka-pl 



POEM 



299 





Ka-ba ho . . ka - pi 



Ka-ba ho . , ka - pi . 






Ka-ba ho . . ka - pi . 









Ka-baho . . ka-pl 







Ela-ba ho . . ka - pi. 



Three other Hindu forms are the Bargain (for^Sa, Ki, Ga, Ma), 
called also svardTarta, or surdmrta, and in the South 5rara, a passs^e 
sung to the Sol-fa names instead of to words, taking the place of 
our cadenza; the Tardna (Tittdua), the same thing with drum-words 
instead of Sol-fa syllables, and the Trwa\a y the same thing to 
nonsense- words ; and lastly the Caturunga ( in four sections *) con 
sisting of Kkydl, Tardna, Sargam, and Trimta* 

The Thumri, love-song, is of Hindu origin. It is in the Vraj 
bM*a. Vraj is the district round Agra and Mathuri, the scene of 
Krishna s juvenile adventures. The music is lively Mid adapted ta 



300 FORM 

pantomime or dancing. The subjects of Thumri s are : (1) beseech 
ing the lover to be propitious, (2) lamentation over his absence, 
(8) imprecation of rivals, (4) laments over the watchfulness of the 
mother-in-law and sisters-in-law who prevent meetings with the 
lover, and over the tinkling bells of anklets imposed by jealous 
husbands to prevent clandestine visits, (5) appeals to female friends 
(Sakkte) for help to secure an interview, (6) Sakkls reminding their 
friend of the appointment and exhorting her to persevere. 

The typical Mohammedan song is the Tttppa, see pp. 188, 189. 
The trill (Kindest, miirki; Urdu, zamzamd), considered to be suitable 
to the female voice, of which the Tappa is full, and the marked 
rhythm are the Mohammedan contribution. The Mohammedan 
invasions did for India what the dissolution of the monasteries and 
the Civil War did for English music (see p. 84). The Tappa is 
exclusively in Hindi and PanjSbi. It recites the loves of Hir and 
Ranjha, It was brought to perfection by the songstress Shori (reign 
of Mahmud Shah, cire. 1700). It consists, like most Hindostani 
songs, of two movements (tU) 9 the Axtai and Antara. The Rekhtu, 
another form of it, contains up to a dozen couplets. Other 
Mohammedan songs are the Gftazal (words Urdu and Persian) and 
the Dddra (confined to the lower classes). Both are in f time, but 
commonly syncopated, J J^J* J . In the Ghazal the lover makes 
a woful ballad to his mistress s eyebrow : 

Why not praise your molee more than the stars ! 
Those SUB the ornaments of the cheeks of my beloved. 
The white of early dawn radiates from your cheek ; 
Hie darkness of the night is a part of your waving hair. 
Since I waa fated to moan in separation, God, 
Why did I fall in love with one so beautiful ? 
Your eyes with their long lashes were quite enough, 
Their side glances were not necessary for my annihilation. 
Bo you not understand that you will be alone after killing me ? 
Yet even the dust of my grave will cleave to you in my stead. 

The times are such that, in spite of all that I have said and sung 
there is no justice in this world. 

There are also songs of local fame such as the AlUnga*&gt; Qmvis, 
sad Pomdm of the Maratha Tuka Earn, the first two religious* the 
last warlike ; and the Karkkfa, the war-songs of the Rajputs. 

Tha Klrt&wm and the Kkytil that have been given above represent 
the higliast lights of the professional musicians (U*tdd*). Ordinary 



FORM 



301 



singers are content with humbler songs ; and the following have 
been selected., out of twice their number in the books of the Poona 
Gayan Samaj (singing school), many of them for their beauty, 
others in order to give an idea of the principal Edg% and Tafa. 



SPECIMENS OF BAGS. 

Lyclian. Eypvlydic. 
Hindol. Eupak. 2 + 4. 



Ex. 
381. 



PL H . 

w J 



Astal 






Antara. 



-J-4J3-1- 






KalySna. Tevra. 3 + 2+2. 



p ^ ^ 
r r r _ J 



Ast, 




Bhup[kaliin]. Eupak. 



Ast. 



i i i 

JL J. J _r 

s-*^ -^ 



J- 



Ant. 






302 



FORM 



Hamirkallfcn. RGpak. 



384J 



Ast 



r c 



Ant 



Ast. 



Ex. 

385. i 



Ionian* Li/dic. 
Shankar&bharaija, Tevra, 



Ast, 



Ant. 



Ast 



Nftrftya^I. Terra. 



Ex. ; 









Ast. 



^ 



i 



i 



u 



4-u-l* 



=g=j= 



Ant 






M J J jij 






FORM 



303 



^^ 



-J J Jrf 



^^ 



fl.C. 



Bilavala. Titai. 



Ex. 
887. 



( The girl I left behind me.) 






c 



Kedara. Eka Trisra, f . 



Ex. : 

888.] 



i 



Ast. 

Kedara. Tintal. 



Ex. : 

889 J 



rn i K j 



Ast. 



g 



Anfc. 



KedarE. Eka Trisra. 



Ex. 



JJL 



1st. 



Ast. 



(2nd. 



Ant. 



304 



JPOEM 



Kedara. Dhamar. 



Ex. 

391. 




Ast, 






Ant 



Jf L I S. I 



Ked&ra. Rupak. 



Ex. : 



j &gt; 

^ - L 



Ast 



Ant 



1M 






Mixolydian. HypopJirygic. 
Jhinjoti. Eka Trisra. 



Ex. 




Bosh. Eka Trisra. 






1st. 



394. 



AsL 




Aat, 



FORM 



305 






Desh. Eka Trisra. Slow. 



Ex. 



TvTfr .. i I IFm* i* . 
895. JT J J* J J 1^ g 






Ast. 






Ant. 



Sorat. Tital. 



Ex. 



J J 



Ast. 



=3= 



, j ^ 



Ant. 

Sarang. Eupak. 



Ex. 
397. 






Ast. 



tr 



Ant 



Khamaj. Adi. 



Ex. 






Ast. 






Ant. 



306 



K&fi. DhaznSr. 



FORM 

Dorian. Phrygic. 



Ex. 



Ask 



. 



Ant. 






Ex- 






KM. Kupak. 



4oaM-frM 






Ast 

* rt n I r3 



Ant 












r r rieref 



Ant. 



J-lJlr r": 



402. i 



AJ^. 



Ant 



FORM 



307 



MyachS Malhar. Chautal. 4 + 4 -f 2 + 2. 



Ex. 




Ast. 









Ant. 



Malhar. Tevra. 



Ex. 



404.^ Jj 



JJ. 



Ast. 



n 







J J 



Ant. 



J 







308 FORM 

Bhicapal&si. ChautaL 



-* 3? 






AsL 






Ant. 



Bhimpalasi. TintaL 



Ex. 







Ant. 

Aeolian. Hypodonc. 
Malkos. Eka Trisra. Slow. 



hi i j *| "f 

*! 1^^ ^ * I f |j I 



Ant 



Bhan&shri. Rupak. 



Ex. 

4oa 



FOEM 



809 



Ant. 



Dhanasliri. Tital. 

Ex - /Jf. ~^&gt; I sTT~t I P 
4Q9.ffi g:i2= 3 : ^V ^ - J33=^ * 






p |- r 



Ant. 



Xsavari. Kupak. 



Ex, 

41O. 



Ant. 



fcft ! 


^ h . qq 


i r r j j "] 


*^ i 


I j*J j -Jg^q 


i P^ 


1 1 


f * ^ ^ J 






&gt;- 





Asavari. Eka Trisra. Slow. 



Ex. 

411. 



Ant. 







1 


y=- 


















Lj=d 




k?* 



i. Dhamftr. 







Jj J^J 



Ant. 



310 



FOKM 



r r; r c c&gt; 



=5= 



Darbirl RanadS. Chautal. 



Kr. 
413. 






DarbSri Kanada. RQpak. 



Er. ; 



j. 






Ant. 



Darbari Kanada. Eka Trisra. Slow. 



i 



Ant. 



C [ r P~ r P l *-- j lj 

^^ ^^ 



Kinad^u Eka Trisra. SZow. 



. 









FORM 



311 



Pilu. Eupak. 



Ex. 

417. 







Ant. 






Pilu. Rupak. 



Ex. 
418. 




Ant. 



Phrygian-Doric. 



Bhairavi. Eka Trisra. 



Ex. 
419. 



tr -^^ 



Ant. 






Bbalravi. Rfipak. 






Ast. 



Ant. 















Ast. 



312 



FORM 



Bhairavi. Eupak. 



Ex. 



m 



-j - 



Ant. 



j j. j^u 



Special Indian modes. 



l. Tit&l. 



Q r 



T. Rupai. 



Bx. 



^ 



J* j J 



Kalangada. Tital. 

BX.-A. n ^ . r 



44.^^ 



l^ -31 

^ 




Jogi. Jhamra. 



Ex,: 



Jj 






FORM 



313 






Bhairau. Chautal. 



Ex.: 



Jj J- JJ3 









Todi. Eflpak. 



Ex. 

427.W^-| 



J^UJH- 



Todi. Chautal. 






iJ J J 










314 FORM 

MultanL Jhamra. 



jpy j Jjj-Ji J J- j - -TClr^f 



Ex. 



ShrfrSg. Rupak. 



=3= 



Shrlrfig. Surphakta. 






Ex.: 

481. w ir rr 



r c ir 






PurvL Eupak. 



mt.-j .b i ^= 










FORM 



315 



Sohani. Tital. 







Paraja. Rtipak. 



EX. f b r I &lt;=m 

485. wr-3 & I f E 



- 









Lalat. Dhamar. 



Ex. 
436.: 















?5= 






~~N 1 i I 


^ r 
















t-T 





316 



POEM 



Lalat. Rupak. 



H*. : 
487 J 












J L 



Marava. Rupak. 



Ex, 

438. 








Sx. 

440. 



Pariakaliaii. Triput 



=3^ 



i ,|j i ij 






FORM 



317 



A European has great difficulty in giving himself account o 
these queer modes, because o the enormous difference between 
having the tonality condensed into a few contrasted chords and 
having it spread over a melody in successive notes which are epi 
tomized as a scale. There is, however, a step between chord and 
scale in the arpeggio, as we may observe when immature pianoforte 
players sound the left hand before the right. It is useful some 
times to consider chords as scales, and scales as chords. Our 
harmony has gone through three chief moments in its history: 
the diminished seventh, the augmented triad, and now the whole 
tone scale, or chord, 1 have successively been regarded as the limit 
of permissible dissonance. Their double nature, scale and chord, 
becomes clear if we write them out as arpeggios : 



Diminished Seventh. 



Augmented 
Triad. 



441. 



Whole tone chord. 



From this point of view the modes too may be considered. The 
three chords just mentioned are practically statements that new 
notes are taken into the major scale (of C) : the diminished seventh 
introduces A|j, the augmented triad Djf, and the whole tone chord 
Eb and Cjt. Other chords have, as they have appeared, introduced 
these or other notes. 2 The tonality of a scale may be quickly 
shown by taking all the constituent notes which are not part of 
the tonic chord, putting them upon the dominant note, and resolving 
them into the tonic. We will treat the principal modes thus m 
succession : 

1 The writer is indebted for this word to Dr. Walford Davies. 
* The first eleven bars of Tristan introduce into C minor F$, Of, Gf ; A8, BB ; BP, 
and Cb. 



318 



FORM 



Kalian. Alahiya. iJ^ Jhinjoti. 

J_ 



^ 



A 



Ex. 

442. 



+J- 



Khamaj. 



Kafi. Malhar. Dorian 

^: 1 J 










AsSvari. 



Pilu. Aeolian, Bhairavi. 



~n/* vjb 

J-i. &lt;P i| ^ac 



Phrygkn Non-European 
(Bhairavi). (Eamkali) 



i^J 



m 



^ 



e=^ 



Shri. _^ Gauri. 

* K^ 



Purvi. 



i 



Lal&t. 




H 



1 hen Kali&n again. 



FORM 319 

In this kinematograph o the modes they are seen to be each 
an isolated moment in the whole musical experience ; or, to reverse 
the picture and the metaphor, the modes make a kind of stellar 
photograph of our harmony. The notes that give us difficulty are 
the F$ and the Db; the former yields freely, the latter persists 
surprisingly. In our scales we know two leading notes, upward to 
the tonic (Bfi) and downward to the dominant (Afr). These modes 
show the other two, downward to the tonic (Db) and upward to 
the dominant (F$). But the whole of our harmony is based, of 
course, on the fact, which the ear, however, only gradually endorses, 
that any note may be treated as a leading note in either direction. 
It is in the same way that the ear endorses these extreme modes ; 
to plunge suddenly into one of them is to be completely baffled. 
We have to take them as the native ear does, as extensions of some 
other more familiar mode, as accentuations of its poignancy, or as 
heightenings of its exhilaration. 



CHAPTER XII 



MELODY 

He will put a girdle round the earth in forty minutes and 
forget to mention the fact, but he may weep at the breaking 
of a pencil point. And as his poems come he knows not 
whence, so he is content to let them fly he knows not whither. 
You ask for yesterday s masterpiece, and it is not to be found. 
* Did I write that, 1 he asks with Shakespearian negligence, * and 
was it really good ? Never mind, I ll do you another. 

The Perse Playbooks. 

AND now if some one should assert, and we were inclined to humour 
him, that the Hindus, having worked at the laws of melody for at 
least 3,000 years, must have something to teach us, what could 
we say in his support ? 

1. First that melody, both time and tune, is in a mode ; that is, 
that it must be homogeneous, and that nothing can be allowed in 
it which would destroy that homogeneity. We also recognize this 
in our tunes, though it would not in every case he easy to say how 
or why. We realize that a melody is good in proportion as every 
thing in it is in keeping ; we at least feel that something is wrong 
if we patch two melodies together, thus : 

BKETHOVHK. 
Ex. 




Here the second half seems to defeat rather than to supplement 
the first, because the descending thirds, though they balance, do not 
develop the ascending, and the repeated quaver motion is mono- 
toBous, Or, if we reverse the process, 



Ex. 



^ 



-rr-f 



MELODY 321 

the one note we do not desire after the first section is the high Eb ; 
but we get it three times, and the climax consequently drags. Also 
the sixth har going over exactly the same ground as the third at half 
the pace forms an anticlimax. 

The homogeneity of a melody is based differently with them and 
with us. The musical sentence is in both cases made up of salient 
and abeyant notes, just as the verbal sentence is made up of nouns 
and verbs in prominence, and the other parts of speech in subordi 
nation. But with them the salient notes are fixed by long associa 
tion; with us they are made such by the momentary impulse of 
the harmony or counterpoint. The distinction is not unlike that 
between verse and prose as the chosen vehicle of a people s litera 
ture ; poetry fills a form which is brought to it, and the words 
assert their value by fighting against it, though they yield to it ; 
prose creates its own form in the process of uttering itself, and this 
form emerges from the conflict and balance of phrases rather than, 
of words. In the same sort of way individual notes have in modal 
music their value as filling out with detail a form already supplied, 
while for harmonized music points of structure, such as melodic 
figures, have value as creating and articulating form as the music 
proceeds. In the first it is tlje note, in the second the cluster of 
notes that is to be true to f mode . 

Still, phrases after all are made of notes ; and just as the notes 
of Hindu melodies must be in an assigned mode (of tune or 
time), so must the notes of ours, if they are to ha strong, have 
a firm diatonic and rhythmic basis. Chromatic notes easily become 
sentimental become weak forms of strong things when they 
are unduly dwelt upon and distract attention from the big words 
of the sentence (as in the march of the Persian soldiers in the 
Fall of Babylon), not when they are there only to make intelli 
gible the big words which without them would be too startling 
(as in O du mein holder Abendstern J. 1 Diatonic is, of course, 
an expansive word. The diatonic scale is not the same to one 
generation as to the next, any more than modes are stereotyped 

1 But we may fancy how, when later on these startling words had become 
commonplaces to him, Wagner may have smiled contemptuously at the greasy 
effect of the chromatics, as perhaps the mature Browning may have ragrei*d 
the false note struck by the first word in the prefer jingle of * Hemce mir haari 
ere we master his own *. 



322 MELODY 

for every time and place. But inside the accepted diatonic the 
notes must move as a compact whole, or the melody become hetero 
geneous. 

Again, they must have a firm tread along some high road of 
rhythm whatever flowers they may stay to gather by the wayside or 
whatever excursions they may make to points of interest. Rhythm i&lt; 
strength lies in subordinating the attractive figures to the steady 
march of the whole, not in pursuing them for their own sweet sake 
(as in some of the more dreamy episodes of Mendelssohn s Fugues), 
nor in hunting them to death (in the various forms of Rosalia). 

These principles, which we recognize as the foundations of our 
melody, we find more naively formulated in the systems of Hag and 
Taly much as we read in Plato simple statements of the eternal 
problems of ethics and politics. These systems lay it down that 
chromatic alterations can only take place on the weak (alpa) notes 
of the scale, that is, in unessential places; and that, though any 
amount of cross-rhythm is permissible, it must justify itself by 
resolution at a particular point (the #am). 

2. Melody proceeds by step (conjunct) or by leap (disjunct). In 
Indian melodies the disjunct intervals amount to 10 per cent, and 
the conjunct to 90 per cent. We will deal first with the 10 per cent. 

The surprising thing in Indian melodies is their frequent use of 
intervals which appear difficult to us. We consider, for instance, 
such intervals as : 

Augmented Diminished Augmented 

Second, Third. Fourth. 



to be unvocal, but they employ them quite commonly. What 
makes intervals vocal is the fact that the note to which the leap is 
made is familiar. For us, it is made familiar chiefly by its forming 
some intelligible harmony with the note which is quitted. We can 
idealize this in the phrase at the end of Brahms s Mainacht: 
Ex. 




- ser die Wang . . I I". her - ab 



MELODY 



323 



The leap e die Wang" is peculiarly dissonant; it consists of two 
diatonic semitones, which are greater than a whole tone by 20 
cents ; but it is made intelligible for us because it is a passage from 
the Neapolitan Sixth to the dominant chord, which is a perfectly 
familiar sequence. The other leaps are all justified to our ear as 
harmony notes. 

But if we look at an Indian melody, one in JBkairavij for instance : 

Bhairavi. 















of which the sixth of the scale (A|?) is am^a, with Eb for its con 
sonant^ we see that the leaps are mainly to those notes, or round 
them, but not anywhere else. The tune swings between these two, 
generally in conjunct motion but with an occasional leap to one or 
other of them, and comes to rest between whiles on the tonic. 
Intervals as constituent parts of chords hardly ever occur, because 
chords form, for an Indian, no intelligible relationship. 

The explanation of the augmented Second and diminished Third 
is that they are felt as conjunct intervals, not disjunct. The 
augmented Second is familiar to us in this sense in the harmonic * 
minor scale : 



K eh -met hin mei-nen Leib, Neh-met liin mein Blut . 




, . . auf dass ihr naem ge-clenkt. 



The Bt] has here a melodic appropriateness after the AJ? which 
the harmony immediately seizes upon and justifies ; the harmony 
by itself (on double basses and drum) forms but a weak link- In 
Indian melodies the augmented second occurs also wbai tke note 



324 



MELODY 



between is transilient, that is to say, omitted not merely on that 
occasion but as a regular thing. The following instance in Sohani : 

SohanL 
Ex. 
449. 




- - m& - dha-va ma - na - si - ja vi - & - kha bha-ya 



di - va 



3= 



bha - va - na - ya 
Scale. 



tva - yi 11 



na 



consists almost entirely of conjunct motion. The G is transilient, 
and the F$ optionally Ft). (This is the Poona form ; elsewhere the 
Ab is also At}. Cp. Ex. 264.) It contains therefore, as conjunct 
intervals, one diminished Third (Fj-Afr) and two augmented Seconds 
(Db-E and A^-B) ; there is also a disjunct interval, the diminished 
Third, B-Dfr. The ama is E, the consonant B, and the melody 
swings between these two, making a pause on or otherwise empha 
sizing the tonic, C, on occasion. Hindus have said to me more than 
once that they like Wagner best of our music, and one sees perhaps 
in these two melodies a point of contact. 

The augmented Fourth and diminished Fifth, which we avoid, 
are common with them. Although any sequence may be justiHed 
by its context, yet we consider on the whole the first interval 
slightly vulgar, and the second a little mawkish as melodic pro 
gressions, perhaps because they emphasize unduly the notes of a 
rather trite harmony. Where harmony is non-existent there can be 
no such feeling, and they are freely used in the following melody 
Between the &m$a, Db, and the Fifth of the scale, G : 



G&ola. 



B3C. : 
460J 



MELODY 



325 



3-JJIC L.j 



^ 



^ 



j. 



3 



No less surprising than the presence of intervals which seem to 
us unvocal is the comparative absence of what we should call vocal 
intervals the Thirds, Perfect Fourth and Fifth, and the Sixths. 
All these occur, but again are limited, as a rule, to leaps which* 
approach a salient note. Such a passage as : 

ScHtTBBBT. 



Ex. : 
451. : . 



Hfcfrr 



4: 



T^J U i Ttz3 



Das "V7 an "^ ern ist des Mul - lers Lost, das Wan - dera. 

would be very unlikely to occur in their music. There would be no 
way of hitting the diminished Fifth ( ist des ) unless the D were 
the am&a ; and if it were, it would be impossible that so important 
a note should occur only once, and at such an insignificant point of 
the phrase. The intervals at Miillers Lust would be practicable 
if Cft were amsa, but they would not be at all typical, as the Third 
is which immediately follows (&lt; Wandern ). A Third, in fact, is 
habitually taken as a changing note : 



Ex. 

452. 



or a grace-note : 



Ex. 

453. 



or, especially in ascent, in a sort of tentative way : 



Ex. 

454,; 



indeed, in any way but as a harmonic interval ; 



816113 



326 MELODY 

To continue Schubert s tune : 

Bx.:*fc 



&ro* *j: ri= 



Das muss ein schlech-ter Mul - ler sein, Dem 



^~ 



nle-znals fiel das Wan-dern ein. 

Here there is nothing unvocal from an Indian point of view, but 
the phrase repeated totidem verbi* at different levels is not in their 
manner. A reason for this may be that their melodies swing from 
salient note to salient note, and that if the salient notes were in the 
important places in the first phrase they would not be so in the 
second, and vice versa, so that the point of the contrast would be 
lost ; it would be like reading poetry thus : 

The yonng men march before him in all their strength and pride, 
The tender UtiU infants they totter by his side. 

It is conjunct motion that Hindu practice, rather than theory, 
accounts the stronger. It has been maintained * that melody tends 
to be developed along the line of the common chord. This appears 
to be the ease in some parts of the world, among the Chippewas, for 
instance: 



p..r, jF ("p., 1 ;|| &lt; j*.|;a_f^ 

i -j M ^ ; i i i = ^q 






J 






but it is emphatically not the case in India. The reason may be 
that there is more real contrast to be got out of step than leap ; 
because the step must often be to a consonant interval, and in that 
citse the second note repeats to some extent what has already been 
f*aid by tte first. It has often been noticed that Beethoven s 
melodies are full of conjunct motion the great tune of the Choral 
Symphony, for instance, which matured during half a century with 
Goe4be*s fanrf ; and perhaps this motion was what he admired in 
our national anthem when he undertook to show the English * 

1 Sae Oakmr Fleischer, Sin %&$&& &lt;for v&rgtetetendm Musikwissenschaftj in the first 
Tolame of the International Music Society, p. 17, 



MELODY 327 

what a fine tune they had though they have hardly been as 
grateful as they should have been; perhaps, too, the injudicious 
use of disjunct motion accounts for some of the insipidity of the 
tunes of Shield, Henry Bishop, and T. H. Bayly, and the judicious 
admixture of both kinds of motion for the virility of Arne and 
Purcell. 

Conjunct motion, too, is eminently suited to the speaking voice, 
which makes small changes in pitch; moreover small intervals seem 
to be more effective than large against a drone, as may be seen in 
Schubert s Leiermann. The song has contained plenty of disjunct 
motion, but in the last line : 



Ex. |J.hn * -J* J 

l^ii P tJ! W 4P 

458. 



Und sein klei - ner Tel - lor bleibt ihm im - mer leer. 

S 



where the maximum of effect is to be produced, it becomes suddenly 
conjunct. 

Before we leave this point there is one thing that their songb 
have in common with our Folk-songs which seems worth mention. 
When a rising or falling Fourth is bridged by a passage note, thif- 
is usually nearer to the note which is being quitted than to that, 
which is being approached. Thus : 



are commoner than 

Ex. P 



The fact that the former kind is preferred suggests that such 
motion is really the stronger melodically of the two; and this seems 
to be borne out also in our music. We realize how much is lost by 
the not infrequent substitution of an A for the second note (G) in 
c The bonny banks of Loch Lomond *. -//* 

Ex. db 

P 



46L fl*- V^t^-^T r CjTr r^ 



328 MELODY 

"We feel also that Beethoven s 

is better suited to a reflective Andante con moto&gt; but Brahms s 



- f y^ 

to an austere * first movement*, and Mozart s 




to a robust Allegro molto. 

3. This leads to another point. The typical forms of ascent and 
of descent are apt to differ in one and the same Rag, which is then 
called ( crooked 3 (vakra). The Hindus are most strict about the 
observance of the type. Its origin probably lies in this tendency 
which we have been discussing the tendency to choose, between 
two consonant notes, the note of passage next to that which is 
being quitted, thus : 



Ex. : 
465. &lt; 



Its effect certainly is the avoidance of tautology and anticlimax. 
There are plenty of instances in our melody where this principle of 
contrast is not employed, because the harmony can supply all the 

contrast which is required : 

Eirffeste Burg. 



"Upper tetrachord 
of tonic. 



Lower tetrachord 
of dominant. 



BEETHOVEN. Quartet, Op. 18, No. 5. 



To dominant. To tonic. 

But there are others in which a different form is adopted for ascent 
and descent, and consequently the contrast which harmony offers 
can be dispensed with : 



MELODY 



829 

StTLLIVAJr. 



Ex. 

468J 



Take a pair of spark-ling eyes 



The whole o this departs but little from tonic harmony, and the 
main contrast lies in the scale : 



Ex. 
469. 



But a large number of these f crooked forms of Hindu Rags con 
sisted in creating gaps in ascent to be filled up in descent, or vice 
versa. This not only avoids anticlimax, but induces climax. To 
pass over a note immediately creates a desire for it, and it then 
becomes a fit note to bear the climax : 



BACH. 



Ex. 



470.1 






BACH. 



Ex. 

471. 



Ex. 



BACH. 



472. 1 



BACH. 



Ex. 



In the first three cases the notes marked (*) have only been heard 
as passing notes, and now they are made substantive ; in the last 
case three of them have not yet been heard at all. There are special 
reasons, no doubt, for constructing the theme of a fugue in this 
way, but incidentally it has great melodic point. Two notes sn 
similarly kept in reserve in the tune of Sullivan just given, and 
they (F and Ab) are the making of it Similarly also in the 
* Swanee River the 7th and 4th of the scale are kept in reserve, in 
Come lasses and lads* the 4th, in * Farewell Manchester* the /ft; 
whereas the Vicar of Bray" and the Bay of Biscay" pit I1 



330 MELODY 

their goods in the shop window. The last line of Schubert s 
f Wandern , again, 

_ _nm &gt;- _ 

Ex. -3ft f ...IT- _ , J2 



das Wan - dern, das Wan - dcrn. 

where the D, hardly heard previously, now comes by its full rights, 
is a peculiarly grateful instance of this, and gains by the repetition 
of the phrase. 

4. What gives its peculiar flavour to a melody, what defines more 
than anything else the character of a particular Rag, is the position 
of the ama. Bound it, and round its consonant or correlative 
(mmvddi) a note at the distance of a Fourth or a Fifth from it 
are grouped the phrases of the song. They derive their meaning, 
their point, from their relation to it. It is easy to see that the 
character of a phrase would completely alter according as the aipfa, 
the salient note of the scale, were made the salient note of the 
phrase, or not. The amxa may be at any place in the scale, not 
excluding the keynote or drone note. The first section \astai) of 
the tune usually circles round the amsa and the second (antara) 
round its consonant. The aesthetic effect of a high and a low amw 
is quite different, and in this respect the am&a and all that it implies 
may be compared with what we know as tessitura, though that is 
rather a * range * of notes, whereas the am#a is a single note. Over 
against the amSa stands the drone note, or keynote (kharaj). These 
two notes divide between them the functions of our tonic. Hindostani 
music is apt to begin on the amfa, and to end, if not there too, on 
whatever was the first note, or the end of the first phrase, of the 
song. This leaves the melody, to our ears, in the air. In the 
Carnatic music it is the rule, rather than the exception, for the 
melody to end on the drone note, or its Fifth. Yet, even so, the 
drone note has not the finality of our tonic. When the amxa is at 
F, for instance, any meaning that we could attach to a tonic is 
utterly driven out of C. The purpose of the drone is rather to 
maintain a steady level by comparison with which the a*ma appears 
as high (^id the tune spirited) or low (and the tune reflective). 

This is a conception which is and must remain foreign to our 
music as a whole; it is impossible for us to put any note besides 
the toaie in this position of * central * except the Third or the Fifth ; 
aad to build tunes only on that principle would limit the possibilities 



MELODY 



331 



enormously. Still we may realize the idea of this centre in those of 
our tunes in which the Third or the Fifth is so treated. Many of 
Mozart s circle round the Fifth and gain their sprightly character 
from that fact : 

Andante. Sonata. 




Andante. 



Eb Symphony. 



Atea- 

476. W^* 



AUegro. 



Quartet. 




1 



All our composers have been fond of the Third as c centre % in slow 
movements especially ; it will be enough to look at the melody of 
the Finale of the Choral Symphony : 

AUegro assai. 



BEETHOVKH. 



Ex. 



J J i 












JJ 



The central note is Eg; and there is a skill in the way in which 
it is made central without heing monotonous. It is central both 



332 MELODY 

because of the frequency of its use, and because, though the tune 
lies mainly above them, this is balanced by the dramatic drop to A 
at the climax. But it is not monotonous because (leaving aside 
repetitions of phrase, which are not strictly repetitions of note) it is 
never treated twice exactly in the same way although it occurs 
eight times ; either the note is on a different beat of the bar, or of 
a different length, or it is an ascending instead of a descending 
phrase. And these are exactly the principles position of central 
note, variety of metre, and contrast of ascent and descent which 
India says are at the bottom of good melody. 

The am-fa need not, and frequently does not, occur in a melody 
any oftener than other notes; nor indeed need any of the other 
salient notes. But their presence is felt in the appoggiatura, which 
they render possible. It is difficult to imagine any system of music 
which did not give an important place to this the most emotional 
element of tune ; the Chinese tunes seem, indeed, to show small 
trace of it ; but we have not yet, perhaps, very trustworthy records 
of them. The Hindu tune to be quoted presently shows half a 
dozen instances of appoggiatura, and the poignancy of 

Actogto wo&o. BEETHOVEK, Rasoumoffsky QucsHet 

^_ ir 




the tender grace of 

BRAHMS, Aeolsharfe. 



Ihr kom - met, Win - de, fern her - ft - ber, ach, von des 
Jib. i . :h=xz 



der mir so lieb war, frisch grfl 1 nen-dem Hu - gel. 

and the impetus of 

BRAHMS, Magdane Lied. 

** 



ae 



^^ 



Wie soil ich die Freu - de, die Won - ne denn tra - gen? 

are cloeely bound up with this device. 

We may learn of this possibility in an Indian tune too, but we 
oaanot kstindively feel it, because the Rag is not ringing in our 



MELODY 



333 



ears. We do not know, we have to be told, that in BehSg, for 
instance, B and E are strong and A and D weak notes, before we 
feel the force of the appoggiatura in : 



Ex. 




But if we cannot select any other than these two notes (the Third 
and the Fifth) for central note, because to do so would upset our 
tonality, and if to confine it to these two notes and insist upon it in 
every tune would cramp our harmony without securing for our 
melody any compensating variety, yet, on the other hand, harmony 
can establish a f centre * anywhere and everywhere in a tune at will, 
and some of the most exciting tunes are built entirely on this 
change of centre (not of tonic) ; as, for instance, Briinnhilde s 
apostrophe to Grane at the end of the Gotterdammerung, 



Espressivo. 



Gotterdamtnencng. 



Ex. 



, 






* &lt; * -^ 




f p 



^5a 



. . _ . 

where, though the tonic, E, is clearly felt throughout, the centre * 
moves upwards to a climax, 



484. S 



and in so doing forms a broad ( inner * melody of its own, upon 
which an identical figure is carried up, and by its identity gives to 
the tune its unity. 

This cannot be done in Indian melodies because each no&e has 
a fixed meaning, not, as with us, one assignable by tie harmony l 
will In them an identical figure, when it is transferral to anotier 



334 



MELODY 



part of the scale, takes on a new meaning, because its relationship 
to the amxa has been altered. Consequently a principle of structure 
is then lost to Indian music. The Hindu melody has to get what 
symmetry of structure it can -and it will be seen presently that 
this may be a good deal in spite of the fixity of the note values. 
As a result their melodies have, apart from the fact that they are of 
an extempore nature, less cohesion than ours. 

5. With regard to rhythm Hindu melodies tell us two things. 
First, that variety of metre is more important than variety of 
accent, and secondly that cross-metre greatly enhances the interest. 

With us, too, variety of metre is a sure mark of a strong tune. 
There is the often cited violoncello sonata of Beethoven : 



Ex. 
485. 






AUsgro ma twn tanio. 
P 



BEETHOVEN, Op. 69. 



in which no two bars have the same metre. An even better instance 
perhaps is : 

SCHUBEBT, Wanderers Nachttied. 

3^-.N J.-J^ 



U - beral -Ian Gip-feln 1st Bah. 



i 






^ 



Other themes attain the variety by syncopation : 

BACH, Wohltemperirtes Clavier, No. 43. 




Ex. 

467. 

But the truth is that we have not attached much importance to 
the breaking up of metre. One reason for this may be that, both 
for^the sake of clinching the tonality and also because of the variety 
which is thereby obtained, we love to contrast different levels of 
pitch ; and the best way of making this difference of level felt is to 



MELODY 



335 



keep the melodic figure constant. This may easily degenerate into 
a mannerism. 1 

But the most infallible and effective way of lending interest to 
a theme is by cross-metre. 

PUECELL, * I attempt from love s sickness to fly/ 
Ex. ^_* ^ I ^ 






488.M 



The pairs of phrases overlap. In each case the ictus of the 
phrase is shifted, thus : 

() 0) 00 




At (a) and (c) the reply arrives a beat late, at (6) half a beat 
early, and at (d) it is prolonged ; and the result of it all is a flowing 
five-bar rhythm, a wonderful instance of art concealing art. 

1 The greatest sinner in this respect is Tsehaikowsky who, in examples too 
numerous to need quotation, works some poor little rhythmical figure literally 
to death ; and the same is also ferae of a large number of Franz s songs, of JPlr 
Jtfwsifc, for instance : 

FBAHZ, Op^ 10, No. 1. 

-J-.^-J j 1 ^ J T-J- J : ? T"7^j--,,i, .t.iaTT^^pTi 



1 



Nun die Schat-ten dun - kl, Stem an Stern er - 



g g 



Welch ein Hauch der Seta - audit fln-tei durtdi 



336 MELODY 

In the Andante of Brahms s 3rd Symphony the whole theme is 

built on a subtle cross-rhythm : 

BBAHMS. 3rd Symphony. 
Andante. (Expanded.) 



Ex. 



/H i" I* r J IJ J J J*1 

&f l/ r IT r &gt; i * j * g^? 



(Expanded.) 



^^ 



(Contracted.) (Expanded.) 



j r Lr r j .I.-LJ r J I c~ E r- ^* g r i jz= 



=&, 






(Still more expanded.) 

The slow movement of Beethoven s seventh violin sonata may be 
simplified thus : 

Adagio cantob&e. 



Ex. 





m TJ 

U jl 








r _^ m m 


\f*m | 




=?= 



The four phrases marked a, h, c, d have this in common, that 
all^make the high or the low F the climax of the rhythmical figure 
(it might almost be called the ama). They also increase in sweep 
and complexity. But the point here is that they are c strettoed* 
that the F in c and d increasingly antedates its arrival, and that the 
cross-metre which this involves does much to heighten the interest. 

We will now put side by side a good specimen of each system, for 
comparison of method, not of merit. For it must be remembered 
that the Indians do not make ( tunes * in our sense ; all they do is 
to display Mdg and TdL Still, most of those given in the last 
chapter axe tunes with a beginning, middle, and end, though it may 
be doubted whether a Hindu would consider them to be typical of 
his music at its best, Florestan s air from Fidelia compresses the 



MELODY 



337 



maximum of point and balance into four bars, and a singularly 
beautiful tune In Rag Kdnadd attains with curious felicity a more 
ornate symmetry in sixteen : 




Following the skeleton given below the tune, the four sections 
are of equal length (practically three crotchets) but iii begins one 
quaver late, and iii and iv overlap. The A in iv is an appoggiatura 
for G, and is to be considered as a long GL The semiquaver in III 
corresponds to the acciaccatura in II. Then, ii repeats i in double 
time, at a higher level, preceded by a link note; iii reverses ii; 
iv repeats ii at the level of i, doubling the time of ii (quadrupling 
the time of i) and lengthening out the link note. Again, I is 
unadorned, II adds a semiquaver (acciaccatura), in III this becomes 
two semiquavers, and in IV three semiquavers. There is not a 
single note which is not doing duty. What makes this closeness of 
structure possible is that harmony allows of any note being taken at 
any interval ; in an Indian tune, for instance, if the leap in II were 
possible that in IV would be less possible, and vice versa, and that 
in III would be impossible in any case; or again, if the downward 
progression in II were possible the upward in III would very likely 
not be so in that particular Rag. 

Now we will take this tune in Rag Kdnad^ which is obviously 
well balanced ; but before it is dissected and its beauty explained 
away the reader is recommended to turn back to p. 310, Ex. 416, and 
enjoy it. It is set to a delicately constructed Omfr (a Maratha form 
of verse), of which the English is unfortunately not forthcoming. 
The words are: 

Mago sanlgitalen f laks&aen 
MfirkM a^lgiij e&tfi]ry& blue 
Aten e[k5 s&hl|ni &- 

n& markka 



338 

and the scansion : 



MELODY 



Ma Ea Ba 

Ma Ta Ta 

Ma Ra Ra 

[Ma Ta] Ya (see p. 196.) 

The bars in the music follow this scansion roughly,, the first and 
second lines being farsed with a f jubilation (see p. 255} ; but beyond 
this the music pays, as far as its structure is concerned, no attention, 
as indeed our best melodies do not, to the poetical form; it only 
sees that a long syllable is provided with a long note as ours see 
that a stressed syllable comes on the musical accent. 

The tune has 16 bars; 5 + 5 in the a$ai, and 6 in the antara. 
There is thus a suggestion of cross-metre (4 time and 5 time) in the 
general plan. The astai ascends to a climax for three bars and 
descends for two (twice over) ; the antara does the same for three 
and three bars, enlarging the intervals for its downward sweep from 
the second (the higher) climax. The am$a of Kdnadd is E(^, with 
consonant note B^ above and below ; and at these places the most 
conspicuous figure (marked ^i^-*) *s introduced. The astai is con 
cerned only with the lower tetrachord, the antara (until the final 
cadence) only with the upper, according to rule. Kanada, is one of 
the Rcigs with a queer intonation (see App. II) ; but though that 
makes it more difficult (and more beautiful) it does not affect the 
question of structure : 



Asia!. 



Ex. 
403 



san - gl - ta - lln la - kla - nen . . . . 



Mur - klia . . an - gin ea - tu - rya 




kLj j J j j 






gpfe 


J J. 






^3^1 



A - tan e - fcfi . . . sa- 
B 



MELODY 339 




na miir - tha. 



The main interest here centres in the metrical plan. This is 
based on a contrast of what we may irreverently call pot-hooks and 
hangers. They are marked a throughout, placed for the former 
below the stave and for the latter above. A succession of these 
makes up a section which is understood to be A in contrast to B. 
B is itself an expansion of a; it is a trisyllable as against a 
disyllable, an opposition which we saw to be important in verse. 
But for fear the a s and s should become monotonous they vary 
in length ; the a s are of 2, 3, or 4 quavers, the J5 s of 6, 7, or 8. 
The c pot-hooks have on the whole the best of it in the a$tai } but 
the e hangers ; drive them off the field in the anfara ; B acts as an 
impartial umpire, giving decisions in favour now of one side now of 
the other. The ingenious way in which in the first five bars the 
last note of the ascending metre is made the first note of the 
descending melody is worth notice. It will be seen here too that, 
though on quite different principles, not a note is idle, 

It is true no doubt that these tunes could be analysed in quite 
other ways, and equally true that their respective composers never 
thought for a moment of this or any other analysis. But it is only 
by analysis that those of us who are not composers can realize such 
a complex thing as the act of composition. The point is that a 
tune is not a tune at all until it has something that we must call 
closeness of structure. It might seem as if nothing could be less 
fettered or more impulsive than melody ; beauty is there wherever 
it is that tunes come from and the composer has only to stretch 
out his hand and seize it. Man s will is free, no doubt ; but he is 
bound by his own past in a tune, as in anything else; his tune 
must be a related whole, just as his life must be a consistent one* 
That is what is meant by structure. The closer the structure, the 
more lasting the pleasure which the tune gives ; and to caake m& 
tunes is art, through whatever conventions. 

These two tunes epitomize for us the music of West and Bat 
On the one side a repression of what is petty, a rejection df wfaai m 
transient, a soberness in gaiety, an endorseee in grief. On tlie 



340 MELODY 

other a vivid insight, the eager quest after wayside beauty, the 
dexterous touch that turns it to account. The one seems to say 
Life is puzzling, its claims are many, its enthusiasms hardly come 
by ; but we will hammer out a solution not by turning away from 
ugliness but by compelling it to serve the ends of beauty. The 
other Life is simple, and beauty close at hand at every moment 
whenever we look or listen or wherever we go ; the mistake is in 
ourselves if we do not train our eyes and ears and hearts to find it. 

Who would wish to decide which way was the best ? Both are 
human. There is no need to decry one in favour of, or to exalt one 
at the expense of the other. Are those Europeans who smile at 
1 tomtoms * sure that they understand the grounds of their faith in 
their own music? And are those Indians who scoff at Equal 
Temperament, at the dullness of European song and the screaming 
tones of the European voice, able to reach the governing principles 
of their own art through the mass of tradition and imagery in 
which it has become involved ? 

Art expresses. It finds words or tones for what was hitherto 
unnamed ; it actually calls into being an experience which has not 
previously existed ; it does not communicate to us, or acquaint us 
with, an antecedent experience. And what it expresses is the fact 
of emotion, not particular feelings. It is not that words or tones 
cannot indicate these, but that directly they do so the result ceases 
in. so far to be a work of art. That music can, as most would 
agree, express emotion more immediately than other arts, depends 
on the fact that in its ideal, consummate moments, the end is not 
distinct from the means, the form from the matter, the subject from 
the expression ; they inhere in and completely saturate each other ; 
and to it, therefore, to the condition of its perfect moments, all the 
arts may be supposed constantly to tend and aspire V 

But if music at its best obliterates those distinctions, it will be at 
something less than its best when it maintains them. Thus both 
the e popular * music which exalts matter at the expense of form, 
and extreme e absolutism in which the form dwarfs the matter, 
depart, to some extent, from the ideal. Indian music knows perhaps 
less than ours of this falsehood of extremes. It seldom descends to 
the merely popular because it refuses to compress itself into a 
square tune, something that you can carry away with you like an 
1 Pater, Th* Renaissance, 1904, p. 139. 



MELODY 841 

umbrella, and,, as Cornej Grain used to add, it doesn t mach 
matter if you never bring it back . Nor has it the deadly insistence 
of the cook s song in the We re Here, which was c like something 
ever so bad but sure to happen whatever you did*, because it is 
never sung twice in the same way. Nor is the tune a mere adjunct 
to the words, as rhyme or alliteration are to an advertisement, for 
the words are set to the tune, not the tune to the words. 

On the other hand, it seldom runs riot in absolutism. Since it is 
vocal rather than instrumental, melodic and not harmonic, it seldom 
travels far from those broad human requirements which gave, in 
song, the first impulse to musical expression, and which, through 
whatever subsequent developments, still form its ultimate justifies^ 
tion. 1 Since concerted song is rare the personal element is not pat 
in commission, and the appeal of the music is therefore more 
immediate. At the same time it never ceases to be a purely 
musical appeal. For whereas in our songs development has pro 
ceeded increasingly on other lines than those of pure melody, 2 in 
India the singer s tones can still carry all the artistry which his 
mind can conceive. And while in England, especially, concerted 
music has always been highly prized, and rightly so, for its social 
element, 3 it is apt to fall short of the highest ideals, since it is 
never so easy to find an artistic crowd as an artistic individual. 

Again, the fact that in India the composer and executant are one 
and the same person, brings it about that he sets, as composer, no 
problems which he cannot, as executant, himself solve, and that 
mere academicism is non-existent and that his songs * come off ". 

1 A string quartet, for instance, which may be taken as oar highest achieve 
ment in absolute musifc, still finds its final justification in the fact that tfee 
instruments individually or collectively *sing% that is, are employed upon 
phrases which are thoroughly &lt; vocal* in all but the grace of words. Modern 
composers seem increasingly to ignore this fundamental of their art and t@ 
forget to * sing *. If they will not take warning by the fate of Spohr s saeeharii** 
harmonies and of Berlioz s evasion of the main issue, they an expeefe n 
immortality. 

3 Since Schubert the centre of interest has been more and more iruuritmd 
from the voice part to the accompaniment. To bear the aeo|nimaat m^* 
would give a- better idea of the composer s thought than t hear &* v*ie fftrt 
alone. The latter would, in &ct, be wholly unintelligible in ft large number ^ 
modern songs, especially in those which aim at creating ateKwgjfo^ or at 
elaborating niceties of declamation. 

* And there is something, therefore, to be said even for tte 0ry*l*l 
and other monster concerts. 

816113 Z 



342 MELODY 

When all composition is improvisational, and when notation is 
rarely employed for recording music and never for performing it, 
there can be no such thing as e visual * music music which makes 
a pretty pattern to the eye but disappoints the ear; and of this we 
have a surprising number of examples in the madrigal period, and 
it is by no means unknown in later times. 1 The Indian practice, 
described on page 85, of setting the syllables of the words to notes 
which bear the same Sol-fa syllable, is quite as childish; but it 
appeals, at any rate, to the ear, not the eye. 

Are there not singers amongst us who have felt a desire to break 
loose, if it were possible, from the trammels of our tonality f rom 
its closes * and * half closes , its conceded modulations % its unity 
of design % its rhythmical rigidities and its fussy logic and to let 
the melody bear them along on light wings of fancy ; to find, in 
fact, a music which is free like that of the woods in spring-time, 
where, without rule, the uncouthest tones like the crudest colours 
all harmonize, where, unguided and unthwarted, sound and silence 
answer one another, where the inchoate and incomplete are made 
good by the motherly bounties of Nature, and c unbroken perfection 
is over ail ? Something of this is in the careless profusion and 
the unstudied rapture of Indian song : 

Singing hymns unbidden, 

Till the world is wrought 
To sympathy with hopes and fears it heeded not. 



1 See an article by Alfred Einstein, Monthly Journal of the International Musical 
Society for October, 1912. 



APPENDIX I 

THE scale of twelve notes, as given on p. 86 of the Introduction to the 
Study of Indian Music, is here written out, distinguishing the notes derived 
from quintal harmony by capital letters and those from tertian harmony 
by small letters, and placing above them the available common chords : 

G ab C d b D eb } , r . 

e F a Bb b C J Major 

G b C e 1 v . 

eb G ab C I Mmor 

C dbDebeF gb G ab a Bb b C 

This scale is the plagal form of the Sa-grdma beginning on F; hence the 
notes are $?, a, and b, instead of (as from C)/f -4 an ^ & & w& chosen 
as a more convenient starting point than C because then all the * black* 
notes can be called flat, instead of one of them being an /$. Taking the 
scale as it appears above, it will be observed that no chord but a first or 
second inversion can stand on D, eb, -Bb, or & ; so that none of these notes 
could, if harmonized, be used in a prominent or a final sense. The writer 
suggests, however, that these * natural harmonies would be sufficient for the 
harmonization of Indian melodies. 

With regard to this suggestion, attractive as it sounds, there are several 
difficulties. 

In the first place, there is no such thing as natural harmony. Nature 
gives a note, with its Fifth a good deal fainter, and its Third much 
fainter still. We make the three notes of equal loudness, and call them 
a chord. But Guido d Arezzo did not get so far as that. Adam de la Hale 
did not hear the Third as a satisfactory note. Josquin des Pres could not 
endure the minor chord as final. Palestrina inserted the minor chord at 
that place, but surreptitiously altered it to major. Bach, in the first part 
of the forty-eight Fugues, prefers on the whole the Tierce de Picardie. 
Beethoven s favourite ending is in the unison like Guide s which, indeed, 
is all that can truly be called * natural * j and that is not a * chord . With 
out wishing to press the word * natural too far, the argument goes to show 
that the employment of the very first chord is the knell of modal melody. 

Secondly, the modes (JB^) all have an am&x, and this aqda is seldom the 
drone note. In the many B&gs in which ihe am&i is at e t or a t the melody 
would have to close on a minor chord ; when it is at & the final no4e wktdt 
the ama as a rule is, could only bear a second inversion j when afc & (as m 
Behag) it could have no chord at alL It would not be possible to end tiie 
melody (in this last case) on with an e minor chord below it, for thai would 
make the e really final instead of the b, and BO falsify the B$. 



344 APPENDIX I 

Again, is there not at the bottom of this suggestion a misunderstanding 
of the nature of harmony ? That was not a fortuitous thing, but directly 
necessitated by what went before it. There had been melody, with some 
notes salient and others in abeyance, upon a drone (explicit or implicit). 
To support the salient notes better the drone took other positions, and so, 
breaking up, became an independent part, long before any * chord* was 
invented. To these two parts another drone was added, to form what was 
called the Triplum, which similarly broke up ; and another, to form the 
Quadruplum. There is no thought of chords in all this ; only of concurrent 
melodies, of whose successive moments chords were later generalizations. 
A chord cannot be used in music for its own sake, any more than can a word 
in language ; it has a before and after, and that is its only reason for existing. 

It would be a rash thing to say that the European method of harmony is 
the only possible one. All that can be said is that it is perfectly logical. 
This breaking up of the drone is, at bottom, the moment when the desire 
arises to contrast not one note with another, but one whole passage of the 
song with another passage, and that is the way in which music has always 
advanced. We saw something that looked very like this in Exs. 93 and 99. 
All that really happens in the second of these examples is that the mother 
and son sing the same tune at different pitches. But it reminds us of 
a stage in our own art when, as in the times before Tye and Tallis, in whose 
music there are still traces of it, the soprano and tenor parts had a flat less 
in the signature than the other two parts. 

And, lastly, would not this suggestion defeat its own end the preserva 
tion of just tuning and lead after all straight to the accursed thing, 
Equal Temperament ? For as soon as harmony came to be valued for its 
own sake it would be impossible not to feel an enormous difference between, 
say, a major and a minor chord. If then, closing on a (in Imankalian), the 
composer had nothing but an a minor triad and a second inversion at his 
disposal, could he resist the forbidden a db e t which is so near and yet so 
far? And if the db would not do, would it be long before he altered it 
and then chaos ? 

Still, it is conceivable that a step in the argument could be jumped, and 
that a nation should go straight to harmony without first having felt the 
impulse which led to it, just as it is possible thafc Esperanto will become 
a living language although it is based on a different motive from that of 
all other languages on earth. The possibility dejjtends on the actual 
achievements of composers in one case and of authors in the other, and it 
is vain to attempt to prophesy. 

Bat this question of harmony is only a side issue in a book whose main 
purpose is to establish the true principles of Indian intonation a purpose 
which it excellently fulfils. And every one who is interested in the music 
of India will look forward eagerly to another by the same hand, which is 
perh&pa hinted at on p. 4, containing a * census of Indian Eagas^ grouped 
* according to tlte principles of correct intonation \ If such a book appeared, 
written with authority, it would supersede all the books on the subject 



APPENDIX II 

IT was not noticed until after the plate containing the Table of JZ&g* had 
been set up that of the eight scales, which according to Ashreka (see p. 151) 
exhibit quarter-tones, the intonation had been correctly giiren onlj for the 
first two. The intonation for all the eight is as follows : 









b 








b 






2. 


Bibhas 


C 


D 


E 




G 


A 




C 










b 


b 




b 


b 




26. 


Malkos 


C 




E 


F 






Bb 


C 








b 


b 






b 






33. 


Kanada 


C 


D 


E 


F 


G 


A 


a? 


C 








b 








b 






35. 


Jogi 


C 


D 


Kb 


F 


G 


A 


B 


C 








b 








b 






36. 


Ramkali 


C 


D 


E 


F 


G 


A 


B 


C 


40. 
41. 


Tcxji . 
Multani ) 


c 


b 
B? 

b 


b 


fc 


G 


b 
Ab 

b 


B 


C 


49, 


Marava 


C 


D 


E 


Fs 




A 


B 


C 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 
OP WORKS IN EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 

GENBEAL. 

1. C, E. Day, The music and musicalinstruments of Southern India 

and the Deccan, London, 1891, pp. xvi, 173 ; 17 coloured 
plates, 

gives a good general introduction to the subject as regards 
S.India. 

2. A. M. Chinnaswami Mudaliyar, Oriental Music in European 

Notation, Madras, 1892, 36 pages of Introduction, 106 pages 
of musical examples. 

The Introduction contains much useful information. The ex 
amples are carefully done, provided with marks of tempo and 
expression, and with words (Tamil, Telugu, and Sanskrit, which are 
often transliterated). Relates to S. India. 

3. Bhavanrav A. Pingle (of Wadhwan, Ksthiawar), Indian Muzic, 

Byculla, 1898, pp. xviii, 341, Index xxii ; 2nd edition, 
is a mine of information on many details of performance ; it 

suffers from obscurities of style, and the few musical examples are 

not altogether intelligible ; it is the only good account in English 

of the muaic of N. India. 

Nos. 1 and 3 have long been out of print : a few copies of No. 

are possibly procurable. 
See also Nos. 5, 9, 13, 14, 15, 50, 52. 

DESCRIPTIVE. 

4. A. K. Coomaraswamy, Essays in National Idealism, Colombo, 

1909, 

has twenty pages on music. 

5. Mrs. Maud Mann, Some Indian Conceptions ofMusic&gt; Proceedings 

oftke Musical Association, 1911-12, p. 41, 
gives an account of the S. Indian, system. 

6. Pierre Loti, Ulnde (sans left Anglais)* Paris, n. d. 38th edition. 

Chapter v describes a concert (See p. 11 of this book.) 

7. Anne (X Wilson, A SAort Account of the Hindu System ofMmic. 

London, 1904. pp. 48. 
See also Nos. 1, 3, 16, 44, 53, 54. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 347 

SANSKRIT THEOEY. 

8. J. Grosset (Lyon), Contribution, a Fttude de la musiqne hindoue, 

place and date not given, 

gives the Sanskrit text of the twenty-eighth atihyayo, of Bharata s 
Natya$a$tra, with translation and notes. The date of Bharata is 
probably the fifth century A.D. 

9. The Indian Music Journal (monthly), editor^ H. P. Krishna Rao, 

Mysore, 

of which ten numbers have appeared, is translating SomanatMx 
Eagambodha (A.D. 1609). 

See also Nos. 20, 22, 23, 27, 41, 42-46. 

MUSICAL EXAMPLES. 

10. Max Wertheimer, Mwik der Fedda, Journal of the International 

Mmic Society, Year XI, pt. 2, p. 300. 1910. 
Phonograms of songs of the Ceylon Yeddas, closely analysed, 

11. Charles S. Myers, Vedda Music, chap, xiii (pp. 341-65) of 

The Vedda* by C. G. and B. Z. Seligmann. pp. xx, 463. 
Cambridge, 1911. 
Phonograms, closely analysed. 

12. 0. Abraham und Erich M. von Hornbostel, Pkonoffraphirie 

indische Melodien, Journal of the International Mnnc Sod$/y, 
1903-4, pp. 348-401, 

ignoring Indian theory, treats twenty-eight tunes simply its musical 
phenomena. 

13. Ratan Devi, Thirty Indian tong*, with text* and translations by 

A. K. Coomarawarny. London, 1913. 7 illustrations. 

From the Panjab and Kashmir. This with its excellent transla 
tions gives a better idea of the song as a whole than any other 
collection. 

14. Rajah Sourindro Mohun Tagore : 

(a) The seven principal musical note* of the Hindu*, with their 
presiding deities. Calcutta, 1892. pp. 51, 

15. (b) Six principal Eaga* with a brief view of Hindu music, pp. 88, 

App. xvi. 6 plates. Calcutta, 1877. 

16. (c) The eight principal Earn* of He Hindus, mtk tableau and 

dramatic piece* iUugtratmg their character, pp. 161. 8 plates. 
Calcutta, 1880. 

17. (d) The mn*ical tcale* of the Hmdm* Calcutta, 1884. pp. 118. 

N.B. There are thoi^inds of specimens (words ae&lt;l we) I fee 
found in books in the vernacular ; and, BO doubt, banters eo^M be 
transcribed by any musician who possessed a working knw4%e f 
Urdu, Panjabi, Hindi, Gujaraii, Tamil, Canarese, or Miilay^*i% bit 
more especially of Marathi, BengiK, or TelttfftL Tk&m wMA tore 
been drawn upon for the present work are Yi&Mn B$gate:*s fe**te 



348 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

(Panjabi), the books of the Ppona G-ayan Samaj (Marathi), and the 
hymns of the Brahma Samaj (Bengali), although it has not been 
thought worth while to print more than a few dozens of them. 
Even a smattering of Indian languages helps; it is useful to be 
able to recognize under the forms Dhol, Dholka, Dholaka, and Dolu 
the same instrument, and under Saurashtra, Surati, and Sorat the 
same Rag, and to be able to check to some extent the vagaries of 
proof readers. A great number of songs are contained in Sanglta 
Prakdiika, vols. i-viii, in progress. Calcutta (in Bengali notation). 

See also Noa. 1, 2, 9, 22, 40. 



SCALE. 

18. Alexander J. Ellis, On the musical scales of various nations, 

Journal of the Society of Arts, March 27, 1885, pp. 485-527. 

The results for India are based on insufficient data, but the article 
is valuable as a conspectm of scale in general. 

19. Ludwig Riemann, Uber eigentumlicJie lei Natur- mid orientali- 

schen K.uUurvolkerti vorkommende Tonreihen t unrl ihre Bezieh- 
ungrn zu den Gesetzen der Harmonie. Essen, 1899. pp. 133. 

Gives full particulars as to the apparent scales of various instru 
ments found in European museums, pp. 27-41 relate to India. 

20. Krishnaji Ballal Deval, The Hindu musical scale and the twenty- 

two ihrutees** Poona, 1910. pp. viii, 49. 

A careful study of intonation, based on the Sanskrit prescription 
and the practice of living musicians. 

2 1 . E Clements, Introduction to the Study of Indian Music. London, 

1913. pp. ix, 104. 
See also Nos. 1, 8, 11, 34, 42, 50, 52. 



GRACE. 

22. Riclmrd Simon, The Musical Compositions of Somanatha critically 

edited with a table of notations [Lithographed MS. in Nsgarij. 
Leipzig, 1904 pp. ii, 33. 

23. Richard Simon, Die Notationen des Sovtanatha. A reprint from 

the Bitzun$$berichte d. KbnigL Bayer. Akad* der Wusen^laften^ 
1903. Heftlll. 2 plates [facsimile]. Munich. 

Tfeese give the system of grace-notes adopted in the RagamboShn, 
with Ml explanations. The great authority on this subject (and 
on much else) is said to be a book in Telugu by Subrama Dikshitar 
of Mttyapuram, Tinneo&ty] and there is a work in Bengali by S. M. 
Tagore, Y&ntrokMtmdipika, Calcutta, 1872, on grace as performed 
on the Sat&r, 317 pages with many musical examples. See also 
H, P. Krishna R&Q, First steps in Hindu music. 1906. Weekes & Co. 
pp.52. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 349 

NOTATION. 

24. O. Abraham und Erieh M. v. Hornbostel, Forschlage fur die 

Transcription eocotucher Melodien^ Journal of the International 
Musical Society y Year XI, pt. I, p. 1. Leipzig, 1909. 24 
pages. 

25. Charles S. Myers, The Ethnological Study ofifnnc, in Anthropo 

logical Essays presented to E. S. Tylor, pp. 235-54. Oxford 
1907. 

These two contain useful suggestions for investigators and col 
lectors of songs in extra-European systems. 

26. S. M. Tasrore, Victoria-Sdmrajyan. Sanskrit stanzas on various 

dependencies of Her Most Gracious Majesty the Empress of 
India. Calcutta, 1887 [30 plates of unnamed instruments]. 

The melodies purport to belong to the various countries, and they 
are noted according to the Beng&i system, in Nagari characters and 
also in staff notation. 

See also Nos. 23, 42, 43, 46. 



POETICAL METRE. 

27. Albrecht Weber, Inditche Stidien, the eighth volume of the 

Beitragefur die Kunde des indischen Altertuw, Berlin, 1863. 
pp. xii, 468, and index. 

A critical study of the earliest authorities, contains quotations, 
from Sanskrit works relating to the earliest forms of the scale. 

28. Rudolf Westphal, Allgemeine Mefrik der indogermanuchm und 

semitischen Volker. Berlin, 1893. pp. x, 502, and index. 

29. Monier Williams, A practical grammar of the Sanskrit language, 

pp. 392-7. 4th edition. Oxford, 1877. 

30. H. T. Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays. 1st edition. London, 

1837. 2nd edition. Madras, 1872. 2 vols. I, pp. x, 419, 
23. II, pp. 531, 31. 

31. S. H. Kellogg, A grammar of the Hindi language. 2nd edition. 

pp. xxxi, 584. London, 1893. 

An account of Hindi metre at the end of the book gives examples 
(in Ncigari) of the Hhriipad, Thumrij and others. 



32. Hermann Oldenbergv Znr Gesc&wkte der vedischm 

Zeitschrift d. d. morg. GetelkcAaft. Vol. 54 pp. 181-94* 



33. Josef Zubaty, Der Ban der TrutM- nnd J&gaii-ZeUe im 

ohdrata. Zeitschrift d. d. morg. GeseUsckafl. Vol.43, pp. 619- 
52. 



A a 



350 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

34. Hermann Jacobi, Uber die Entwickelung der indischen Metrik in 

nachveducher Zeit. Zeitschriftd.d.morg.Gesellschaft. Vol.38, 
pp. 590-619. Leipzig, 1884. 

35. Hermann Jacobi, Zur Kenntnm der Arya. Zeitechrift d. d. 

mora. Getelbchaft. Vol. 40. pp. 336-42. 

36. Charles S. Myers, A $twly of rhythm in primitive wuzic. Re 

print from the Journal of Psychology, vol. i, pt. 4. pp. 10. 
Cambridge, 1905. 

37. Hermann Oldenberg, Die Hymnen des Rigveda. Berlin, 1888. 

Bd. I. pp. vii, 545. 
Chap, i (pp. 1-190) deals with Vedic metres. 



HARMONIZATION. 

38. A. J. Polak, Die Harmonmemng indischer . . . Melodien. Leipzig, 

1905. pp. 107. 
The first forty pages deal with India. 

39. Abraham and Hornbostel, Uber die Harmonwerlarkeit exotischer 

Mdodien. Journal of the International Musical Society, vol. iii, 
p. 138. Leipzig, 1*905-6. 3 pages. 
An answer to No. 38. 

40. A. C. Macleod (Lady Wilson), Five Indian xongs. Edinburgh 

[1912]. 

The accompaniments have atmosphere. 
See also No. 17. 



SAMAVBBA. 

41. Martin Hang, Ueler das Weaen nnd den Werth des wedizcJien 

Accents. Munich, 1874. pp. 107. 
Gives particulars about accents, notation, and the musical hand. 

42. A. C. Burnell : 

(a) The Ar&eyalrahm&na (being the fourth Brdhmana) of the 
S&maveda. Mangalore, 1876. pp. li. 
The introd action of fifty-one pages is in English. 

43. (4) The S&mMtopanuhadbm/wana (being the seventh Brdhmana) 

&lt;f ihe S&mtmda. Mangalore, 1877. pp. xx. 
Introduction in English. 

44 Friedridb Chrysander, Uber die altindmhe Opfermunk^ Fiertel- 
r. Wimnschaft. Leip2ig, 1885 [14 pages], 
and form. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 351 



45. Oskar Fleischer, Neumen-Studien,, Al handlungen uher 

liche Gesanf/tionschriften. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1895. pp. 128 
H- 136. Index to each volume. 

Details of musical hand. 
See also No. 3. 

46. Richard Simon, Da* Puxpasutra. Abhandluftgen d. JT, Bayer. 

AkacL der Wm. 3 l. KL, XXIII. Ed., Ill Abfc., pp. 484-779. 
Munich, 1909. 

Pages 510-526 give lists of the various forms of ligature (Tontypen) 
and of technical terms. This is the latest and most authoritative 
work. 

47. A. A. Macdonell, Vedic Grammar, being vol. i, pt. 4, of the 

Grundrus d. indo-arischen Philologie. Strassburg, 1910. 

Pages 76-9 give a succinct account of the musical character of 
accent, and its marking in the Samcweda. 

48. Martin Haug, Altareyabrahinana of tie Rgveda. 

A full account of the Soma ritual. 

49. M. Sesagiri Sastri, Descriptive Catalogue of ike Government 

Oriental MSS. in the Madras Library, vol. i ; pt i, pp. 3, 4. 
The only account by an Indian. In English. 

50. Erwin Felber, Die indische Miwik der vedi&chen und der clam- 

schen Zeit. Bitzung&benchte der Kau. Akademie der Wi*en- 
schaften in Wien, philowpkisck-hutorucbe Klam y 170. Band, 
7. Abhandlung. 1912. pp. 189. 

Indian recitation and chant. Contains forty-six Phonograms 
taken by Felix Exner in 1904, of which eight are Saman chants, 
provided withJS^mfo text and Samaveda text and notation critically 
edited. 

See also No. 27. 

51. E. Simon, Da* Paneavidbatftira. Bresku, 1913. pp. 83. 



INSTETJMEKTS, 

52. Victor-Charles Mahillon, CMalogwe descriptif et amMupte dm 
Mi&see intrumemial dn Conservatoire de mwsiqm de jBrvx$ff&*. 
Gand, 1893. pp. 535. Indices. 2nd edition, 

Pa^es 99-158 (about one illustration to a pag), togeitarwith the 
description and illosferatiops in Day s book (No. 1), give a iairly 
complete idm of the principal instruments. 

See also No. 54. 



352 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

MUSICIANS AND STYLES. 

53. S. M. Tagore, Universal History of Music. Calcutta., 1896. 

pp. 345, xxxiv. 

Has a good deal of Information about Bengali musicians and 
styles. 

54. S, M. Tagore, Hindu music from various authors. Calcutta 

1882. pp.423. 

Keprints of articles by Sir W. Jones, Captain Willard, and others. 
See also No. 9. 

MUSICAL ANALOGIES. 
(a) Religion. See No. 5. 
(S) Colours and Castes. See No. 53 App. and No. 17. 

(c) Pictures. See Nos. 15, 16. 

(d) Medicine, Astrology, &c. See No. 53 App. 

(e) Drama. See No. 16. 



GLOSSARY AND INDEX 

NOTE. Individual Rags and Tals, Tribes, Localities, and Indian and 
European Musicians are indexed under those heads. The spelling of the 
Index is to be preferred whenever it differs from that in the body of the book. 



dbhanga, Maratha song, 300. 

dbliigata, upward appoggiatura, 275. 

abhog, section of song, 281. 

* Abroad as I was walking , 128. 

absolute music, 341 and note. 

absolute pitch, 148, 149, 249 note. 

accelerando, Ex. 330. 

accent and quantity, 191, 192. 

accidentals, loosely used, 17, 27. 

ada ** crooked, 216. 

adi or tmtal, common time, 15, 204- 

17, 231. 

aditalah, 202, 203. 
aeolian, 136, 178. 
aeolo-dorian (change of mode), 

Ex 379 

Ahvarakas, 258, 259, 264. 
Ainri-Aklari, 84, 286. 
ak, eye, see siyahl. 
Akbar, 83. 

aksara, syllable, 156, 200-4. 
alSpfa), prelude, 186, 235, 281. 
alcaic, 195, 196. 
alpa, weak (note), see faUn. 
am&a, predominant note, 150, 177, 
App. I. 

central note of tessitura, 330 seq. 

in Bharata, 141. 

graced, 152. 

aesthetic effect, 156. 

contrast to drone, 280. 

= mese, 142. 

see graha. 

Andaman islands, 208. 
anga, tetrachord, 141. 

= amia, 142 note, 
animals, sense of pitch, 149. 
anista, disagreeable ; identified with 

vivadf, 114. 
antarct) interval, 119. 

section of song, 281. 



anticlimax avoided, 328. 

anudatta&gt; not-raised* sound, 246, 

258, 259, 264. 
anudattatara, comparative of anu- 

datta, 247, 266. 

anudruta (quaver), and its subdi 
visions, 256, 

anupaUam, section of song, 281. 
anustubh, l$4c. See &&amp;lt;&a. 
anuvadi, imperfect consonance, in 

particular the major third, 108, 

114. 
appoggiatura, 146-8, 248, 275, 332 ; 

Ex. 274. 
double, 182. 

Appunn s Tonmesser, 101. 
Apsaras, nymph, 76 and note. 
Arab music, 19, 37, 185. 
arcika, of the Rgveda&gt; 122. 
Aristoxenus, 103, 114, 121 note, 125, 

200 note, 277 note. 
arohana, ascending passage, 159, 275. 
arpeggios as chords, 317. 
arya, a metre, 200. 
ascending minor, 138. 
ash, the slide ,183. 
association, its part in music, 1-3. 
astai, section of song, 281. 
astama (eighth), a note of the Sdman 

scale, 260. 
ata, or dhamar, a rhythm (5 + 542 

42), see T5L 
ata, flour, used for tuning dram, 29, 

227. 

Afhanxweda, 249. 
atiham, fersed syllable, 276. 
atikomcd, very fiat, 107, 142. 
atikrama, transilience, 274. 
atismrya*, seventh note of 

scale, 260. 
attiivra, very sharp, 1^7. 



354 



GLOSSARY AND INDEX 



augmentation and diminution, 241. 

Aurangzeb, 83. 

fttard [avarta], section, aggregate of 

bars, 205 note, 218. 
avarohana, descending passage, 159. 

bagpipe, see Scotch. 

bahuwmi, having many melodies, 250. 

balin, strong (note), 154, 159, 177, 178. 

Bande Mat a mm, Ex. 250. 

bansri, bamboo flute, 30, 102. 

bdrobdri, normal time, 241. 

barypyknon, lower note of a cluster, 

121. 

bayan, left hand (drum), 226. 
beating time, 209. 
bee-string , or drone, 79. 
beggars, &e., 22-4. 
Behdr, its folk-song, 22. 
Bengal, language, 84, 92. 

musical system, 122. 

tune, Ex. 1. 

see Tagore. 

hhajan(a), kind of song, 286. 
bhakti, faith, 286. 
lhakti, section of Sdman, 255. 
bhci$a, dialect, 82, 299. 
bfaatictl, boatmen s song, 7. 
bin. North Indian t?m^, 89. 
boatmen, S3, 37-il. 
bout-songs, Ex. 1, 51-77. 
Bourne, Altdeuteches Liederbuch, Ex. 

378. 

W, drum-stroke, 227, 229, 233. 
braces of drum, 226, 227. 
br&hmana, 246, 249. 
Brahma samaj, 162, 
Breton song, Ex, 73. 
brhaddevata, treatise, 258. 
trudubudike, hand drum, 228. 
Burnell, A. 0, 250, 251, 254, 257, 266. 
Burns, Robert, 250. 
Butler, Samuel, 162. 

C major mode, 178. 
cadence, see close. 
cadenza (*wr), 282. 
caranam, section of song, 281. 
Garoatic system, the, 15, 47 note, 139, 

149 and note, 150, 209. 
catvMruti, of four *&, 118, 119. 
c&tumnga, form of song, 299. 
caturguni, double diminution, 241. 
catwrtka, note of Saman scale, 257 seq. 

of time, 203. 
cents, 115, lie note, 185. 

a, tambourine, 34; cp.228. 



Chandidas, Bengali poet, 286. 

chanterelle, 88. 

chanties, 19, 39-41. 

chapUy syncopated, 210. 

character of sound, 124. 

chartala, * four-beat (six unit) time, 

216. 

chattu, wall of drum, 226. 
chaugan, see caturguni. 
chaidalcti see chartdla. 
chayalaga, * altered , 138, 139, 153, 155. 
cheironomy, see musical hand, 
children s songs, 68, 69. 
Chippewas, 163, 174 note; Ex. 457. 
chords, 100 and note, 317, 318. 
chorus, see solo and chorus, 
chromatic scale, 119, 120. 

notes, 271, 278, 321. 
Clements, Mr. E., 105, 111, 116, 119 

note, 125, 171, App. I. 
climate, its effect on music, 9, 10, 14. 
climax, 329. 

and anticlimax, 320. 
close, 36, 57, 342. 
cluster, see Greek. 
Cock o the North, The, Ex. 296. 
comma of Didymus, 127, 132, 263. 
compass of songs, 123, 286. 

of Rgveda, 249. 

of Samawda, 257 seq. 

of Yajurcedoy 249. 
concerted music, 14, 341. 
conjunct motion, 48, 160-2, 322-7; 

Ex. 72, 

consonance, 108, 141, 261. 
consonants, 280. 
convention, its part in music, 1-3, 5. 

* convergence *, 241. 
counterpoint, 101, 238. 
cradle songs, 62-7, 90. 
crescendo, 183. 

cross-rhythm, 72, 99, 169, 236, 240 y 
334 seq. ; Ex. 41, 42, 48, 86, 129, 
139, 333, 334, 336. 

* cumulation * (of time), 242. 
Cuttach dance, 59. 

4 cyclical dactyl, see Greek, 
cymbals, aghofa (Vedic), 78. 
see also talam. 

dadra, form of song, 300; Ex, 177. 
daina, right hand (drum), 226. 
dancing, 17, 29-32, 36, 52, 57, 59, 

61, 80. 

dardam, drumming f 245. 
Day, Captain, v, vi, 18, 200 note, 201, 

202 note, 228, 346, 351. 



GLOSSARY AND INDEX 



355 



day, periods of, 153. 

deflect , 88, 183, 190. See dtfana. 

descant, Ex. 273, 

Deval, Mr., 116, 348. 

devanagari, accents in, 247 note. 

dha, drum-beat, see l&gt;ol. 

dhfi, (of time), see Mrotxlri. 

dhaivata, note of the scale, 142, 263. 

dhara, the * slide , 183. 

dharanalaksana, musical treatise, 259. 

dhol, drum," 29, 59, 226-8; Ex. 141, 

142, 333, 334. 
dhriipad, old Hindu form of song, 160, 

286. 
diatonic intervals, 103, 321. 

scale, see Greek, nica. 
Didymus, see comma. 
digan, see duni. 
diminution, see augmentation. 
dinmatra, general, i.e. indefinite 

time, 186. 
dlrgha. long (prosody) , 200, 251 note, 

255, 256. 
disjunct motion, 35, 36, 158, 322. 

tetraehords, 266. 
dissimilar tetrachords, 138. 
diwal, braces (drum), 226. 
dolana,ihe deflect &gt;, 182, 183. 
dolu, see dhoL 
dominant, 178, 317. 
f dor-aeolian , pentatonic, 135. 
dorian, 136, 178 ; Ex. 333. 
done, 47 note. See Greek tetrachord. 
Dravidian, see Carnatic. 
drone, 31, 79, 137, 141 note 2, 171-4, 

" 208,263,330,344. 
drum and drumming, 10, 15, 24, 53, 
76-9, 83, 89, 228, 230; Ex. 380-5. 
dtitta, quick note, 200. 

quick tempo, 241, 
dum, diminution, 241. 
duration, see stress, 
dvitfuni, see duni 

dvittya, note of Sdmetn scale, 257 seq. 
of time, 203. 

ecclesiastical music, 3, 4, 6, 70, 147, 
169, 179, 255, 266, 275 note. 

ekasami, having one melody, 250. 

Ellis, A. J., 115 note, 184 note, 

emotional content of music, 5, 6, 155. 
340. See ethos. 

English verse, reading of&gt; 202. 

epithalamium, Ex. 163. 

equal temperament, 118, S44. 

equivalence, 190, 200. 

Erewhon, 162. 



Ptkos, 20, 15S-6, 
European drumming, 225. 
European folk-song, 128, 184, 135, 154 
and Table opposite ; Ex. 193, 208, 
209,461. 

European mediaeval songs, 84. 
European modes, 47 note, 137, 188, 

169 and note, 177, 178. 
European music, 2, 18, 339, 340, 
European musicians: 

Adam de la Hale, 343. 

Bach, 173 note; Ex. 290, 328, 335, 
470-3, 487. 

Bantock, Ex. 271. 

Beethoven, 343 ; Ex. 239, 240, 262, 
290, 318, 337, S38, 443, 444, 462, 
467, 478, 479, 485, 491, 492. 

Berlioz, 341 note. 

Brahms, 136, 224; Ex. 182, 290, 
339, 446, 463, 480, 481, 490. 

Chopin, Ex. 321. 

Ducoudray, 164. 

Dufay, 84. 

Franz, 335 note. 

Gevaert, 108 note, 173 note, 

Guido d Arezzo, 348. 

Handel, 220; Ex. 262, 323, 829. 

Haydn, Ex. 319, 320. 

Henschel, 91. 

Hucbald, 266. 

Joaquin des PreX 843. 

Luther, 177; Ex.466. 

Mendelssohn, 322 ; Ex. 290, 293. 

Mozart, Ex. 443, 444, 464, 475-7. 

Orlando Gibbons, 278. 

Palestrina, 84 ; Ex. 169, 

Purcell, Ex. 488. 

Schubert, 138, 841 note; Ex. 290, 
451, 456, 458, 474, 486. 

Scott, Cyril, 224. 

Smetana, 138. 

Spohr, 182, 321, 341 note. 

Stanford, 164. 

Strause, Ex. 262. 

Stravinsky, 224. 

Sullivan, Ex. 468. 

Tallis,348. 

Thom4, Ex. 290. 

Tsehaikowsky, 908 note, 220, S3, 
8S5ao6e; Ux.324, ^5. 

Tye,S4i. 

Vaaghan Williams, Kx. ^$7. 

Wa^er, 12, 138, 188, 206, m, IS! 
aid note ; Ex, 286-8, i8% 448, 



Wesley, Ir, 



356 



GLOSSARY ANT) INDEX 



European rhythm, 218 seq. 
European songs and gingers, 340. 
evening, see day. 
Exner, Herr P., 267. 

/oHr, a begging- ascetic, 22, 23. 
false relation, 132. 
falsetto, 286. 

feet in Indian versification, 196. 
Felber, Dr. E., 248, 267, 
Fifth, see Fourth. 
Finland, 204. 

Fitzwlliam Virginal Book, Ex. 377. 
five-rhythm, 203, 204, 222 seq. j Ex. 

OOQ 
OO7. 

flnte, bamboo, 9, 78. See bansri, 

scales, 101-4. 
folk-song, see European, 
form (in melody), 337, 338, 339. 
four-bar section, 218-20 ; Kx. 339. 
Fourth (the interval), 25, 31, 48, 69, 
70, 103, 124, 150, 173, 277, 

ffa-ffnnna, 106, 110, 111 ; Ex. 352. 
&lt;/amak, see grace. 

two kinds, 182, 183. 
flwwa, text of Samateda as sung, 251, 

255. 

note, scale, locality. 142, 

262, 263. 

s, 76 and note. 
(fttthika, non-Vedic, 122. 
gat I, farsed syllable, 275. 
gotta, tuning blocks (drum), 226. 
gfiyatrt, a metre, 194. 
gesture, see singing. 
yharsana, the slide , 182. 
l&arfjf, the slide 1 , 183. 
ghazal, form of song, 300 ; Ex. 333. 
yke, one of the drum-stroke^ 227. 
Gilehrist, Miss, xee Scotch music, 
gipsies, 13, 46, 62 note. See Magyars. 
Gtta-Govinda, by Jayadeva, 157, 187. 
(Rtihvali, by Tagore, Ex. 267. 
Goorkha regiment, first, 56 note. 

second, 57-9. 

Gopiti, Krishna s houris, 78. 
grace, 17, 19, 22, 27, 32, 56, 59, 90, 

181-90, 227, 281. 
graduated scale of trochees, 211. 

initial (note), 141 , 153 and 

note, 277 and note. 
t, 82, 106, 109, 148. See sa- 

gmma, ma-gr&ma, ffa-ffv5ma. 
gramarfiga (see melakarta), 119. 120. 
gramophone, 16. 
Greece. 8. 122. 



Gieek absolute pitch, 148, 260. 

chromatic scale, 120 note. 

chronos protos, 199, 251 note. 

consonance, 266. 

cyclical dactyl, 211. 

diatonic scale, 120. 

diesis, 1 03 note. 

drone, 140, 141. 

enharmonic scale, 121. 

harmonid, 140, 141. 

hypfite, 257. 

mese, 142, 

modes, 47 note, 179. 

musicians, see Aristoxenus, JDidy- 
mus, Olympos, Plutarch, Ptole 
my, Pythagoras, Thamyris. 

pyTcnon, 121, 247 note. 

rhythm, 204. 

singing, 277 and note. 

tetrachord, 140, 262, 263, 266, 276. 

tonoi miktoi, 139. 

tonoSj 140 seq. 
Gurkhas, tribe in the Himalaya, 

Ex. 94-124, 127, 128. 
guru, long note, 196, 200, 256. 

priest, 251. 

han, yes, 235 ; cp. 57. 

hand clapping, 33, 48. 

harmonia, see Greeks. 

harmonic minor, 138. 

harmonium, 16, 18, 63 note, 163 and 

note. 

harmonization, 3, 4, 31, 164, App. I. 
harmony, 4, 19, 101, 163, 180, App. I. 
Haug, 246 note, 247, 250. 
Hindustani music, 47 note, 139, 149 

and note, 150, 216. 
history, Indian, see India. 
hrasva, short (prosody), 200, 251 note, 

255, 256. 
Hungarians, 5. See Magyars. 

iambs and trochees, 21 L 

imitation, 48, 72, 179. 

India, climate, effect of, 9. 

Indian history, 73, 74. 

Indian instruments, 9-13, 77-80, 88, 

89, 101, 228. 

Indian music, 11-13, 75-86, 340-3. 
Indian musicians : 

Ashreka Ganga Ram, 151, 345. 

Balwant Rao, 151. , 

Banerji, Spurendro, 88. 

Bhagavatar of Trivandrurn, 89. 

Bharata, 105, 112-17, 139, 347. 

Deval, Krishnaji Ballal, 116, 348. 



GLOSSARY AND INDEX 



Indian musicians (continued): 
Jayadeva, 83, 157, 286. 
Man, Rajah, 287. 
Marar, 85, 86. 
Miranbaksh, 228, 237. 
Mudaliar, Chiimaawami, 156, 346. 
Nanne Khan, 230. 
Narada, 75. 
Panna, 236. 

Pingle, 151, 230, 285 note, 346. 
Prabhu, Chandra, 90. 
Ramachandra of Trivandrum, 89, 
Ray, Upendrakisor, 152, 161, 162, 

166. 

Sahasrabuddhe. Trimbak Balwant, 
, 151. 

8ar(a)ngadeva, 105 ? 154. 
Sesnanna of Mysore, 86, 87. 
Sharqi of Jauupur, Mahmud, 287. 
Shori (songstress), 300. 
Somanath, 105, 347. 
Subbanna of Mysore, 86, 87. 
Tagore, Rabindranath, vide sub voce. 
Tagore, Rajah S. M., 285, 347 seq. 
Tansen, Miyan, 83, 84. 
Tiagaraja, 84-6 ; Ex. 379. 
Tuka Ram, 300. 
Tumburu, 75, 76. 
Indian mythology, 76. 
rhythms in European music, 223, 

224. 

singing, 13. 
infinite series, 125. 
instrumental, see vocal, 
instruments, see Indian, 
intensity of sound, 123. 
intervals, the Fourth, 31, 44, 327. 
mediately and immediately per 
ceived by the ear, 125. 
quarter-tone, 108, 113, 117 seq. 
septimal, 125. 
sharpened, 104. 
the Third, 36, 325. 
three-quarter tone, 21, 38, 39, 184. 
tone and semitone, 101 and note, 

109, 110 note, 
vocal and un vocal, 322 seq, 
intonation, 17, 18, 27, 100-33. 
Irish pentatonic, 126 note. 
ixta, agreeable, identified with anu- 
vadi, 114. 

jagatt, a metre, 194. 

jataha stories, 74 and note, 78, 80, 81. 

jdtij species, Bharata s name for Rctg, 

112,113,140, 155. 
jattra, mystery play, 286, 



357 

Jayadeva, author of OiiarGtmnda, 88, 

157, 286. 

jayaghanta, gong, 79. 
jhil or dhun, ungraced melodr 

160, 286. 
juttlum, jubilation* of 

250, 255, 276. 

kabt, song of question and answer, 

287. 

katiiki, bair s-breadth, 119. 
kakali, flat, 119. 
kola, $ ofanudtitta, 256. 
kala, speed-unit, 241. 
kanar, rim of drum-wall, 227. 
kanjari, tambourine, 228. 
karadimdya, arm-drum, 22S. 
karane, see dta (of drum). 
karkha, Rajput song, 300. 
karsana, ligature, 257, 275. 
katha, form of song, 287. 
Kauihumas, a sect, 261. 
Keats, 192. 
khalT, the blank beat, 29, 30, 57, 61, 

208, 209, 230. 
kharaj, drone, 280. 
khyal, a kind of song, 165, 287. 
kinnara, stringed instrument, 76 and 

note, 81. 

kirtana, song (Bengali), 286. 
kirtanam, song (South India), 282. 
kokkam, instrument of percussion. 

44, 45, 228. 

komal, flat, 107, 108, 142. 
Krishna, 26; 76, 83, 286. 
krsta, graced \ supplied with ligature 

(kaj-sana), 257. 

krti, song (South India), 84, 282. 
krusta, first note of Sdman scale, 257, 

"261. 

krustadi, krusta, &c.\ 257. 
kusshal (kurol), South Indian pipe, 32 

and note. 



short (note), 196, 200, 256. 
laraz, fifth string of setter, 78. 
lascar, sailor, 19. 
%, tempo, 82, 241. 
legend, aee India. 
Hmma of Pythagoras, 127, 182. 
Localities: 

Achilgarh, 60. 

Allahabad, 231 ; Ex. 9^-13. 

Alleppey, Ex. 51-4. 

Amritsar, 231. 

Bangalore, 251, 252; fa. 17-36. 

Bhavmgar, 60, 90, ^ 2^. 



358 



GLOSSARY AND INDEX 



Localities (continued) : 

Bombay, 231 ; Ex. 3, 7. 

Calcutta, 24, 88, 91-9, 231, 267, 
271,272; Ex.16. 

Dehra Dun, 53-9. 

Dharmsala, 56. 

Gandhara, 262. 

Gwalior, 8, 151, 287. 

Jaunpur, 287. 

Jhelum, 59, 60, 68, 69, 281. 

Lahore, 230, 231. 

Madras, 86, 87, 248, 251 , 266, 269 ; 
Ex. 6, 27. 

Maratha songs, Ex. 92, 98, 161-3. 

Mussouri, Ex. 14, 15. 

Mysore,9, 86,230, 251,252, 273 note. 

Nagpur, Ex. 28. 

Negapatain, Ex. 72, 74-7. 

Peshawar, 262. 

Find DMan Khan, 231. 

Poona, 247, 324, 340; Ex. 4, 5. 

Baipur (C. P.), Ex. 29, 30. 

Tanjore, 8, 9, 46, 84, 85, 253, 268 ; 
Ex. 90, 91. 

Tiichur, and neighbourhood, Ex. 
31-50. 

Trivandrura, 88, 89 ; Ex. 78-89. 

Vraj, 299. 

locrian (mrxolydic) mode, 278. 
long by position (syllables), 255. 
Loti, see Pierre. 

lotus, its connotation, 161 and note. 
lullabies, see cradle songs. 

derivation, 62 note. 



, cylindrical drum, 228 ; Ex. 
37,48. 

a, middle (octave), 107, 114. 
middle (bmti}, 108 and note. 
oftempO) moderate, 241. 
madh&ctdi, a form of common time, 

207. 

madkyama, 142 seq. 
mar$mma,m, 110, 136, 140; Ex. 351. 
Magyars, 186. 
MahmMmta, 114, 264, 287. 
maka&yufyatti, dictionary, 155. 
Mahommedan music, 16, 62, 89, 90, 

125, 203, 287, 300. 
Maitra, Mr. & M., 6, 7. 
maior Thiri, sot interval. 
major Tone, ee interval. 
m&mMiffw&gt;w&w t play, fifth cent, 82. 
Malay Archipelago, 204. 
mamdra, low, 114. 
bwer octave, 107. 
note of Sfowm scale, 260. 



mandivgati, lower tetrachord, 140. 
mandfikUiksa, treatise, 259. 
mantras (spells), recitation of, 201. 
Maoris, 260. 

Maratha songs, see localities. 
matra, time-unit, 82, 156, 211, 256. 
iniitralaksana, treatise, 256. 
tndtriicrtia, time-unit-fixed , 193. 
mediaeval Europe, 203. 
welakarta, group of Rrtgams, 47 note, 

106, 120 note, 189. 
melodic figure, 70&gt; 158, 159, 276. 
melody, 4, 48, 49, 69-72, 100, 174, 

Chap. XII. 

memoria technica, 120 note, 139, 209. 
&lt; merging \ 118, 119, 127. 
mese, see Greek. 
mesopyknon* 121. 
middle note of three, 121, 208. 
Milton, 202, 203. 
mind, the deflect , 1H3. 
mirh = mind. 
mi$ra, * mixed , 138, 153. 
misrab, plectrum, 88. 
mixolydian (hypophrygic) mode, 1-^5, 

136. 

mixolydic, see locrian. 
mode, see scale and mode, European 

modes, and 217 ( of time). 
modulation, 136, 137. 
Mohammedan, see Mahommedan. 
mood, 5, 8, 107, 174. 
mordent, see grace and 152. 
morning 1 , see day. 
morris dancers, 16, 31. 
mrcchakatika^l&y, sixth cent., 76,81. 
wnfon^,*drum, 10, 89, 226, 227. 
mut-chana, mode, 82, 107, 113, 141. 
miirchhana, grace note. 106, 152, 281, 

286. 

murki, trill, 300. 
musica ficta, 42, 134, 152, 175, 178, 

275 note. 

musical Ass, the, 82. 
musical hand, the, 260, 261, 264. 
Myers, Dr. C. S. f 48 note. 

nagari, kettle-drum, 228. 
nagasaram (South India) or sJiahnai 

or surnai (North India), oboe of 

strident tone, 46, 59, 78, 236, 2B7. 
nagqarah, see drum. 
Narada, patron saint of music, 74, 75, 

76. 
naradaiiksa,, treatise on music, 74, 75, 

259, 264. 
nasal tone, see singing. 



GLOSSARY AND INDEX 



359 



itatyasastra of Bharata, 74, 75, 105 

193. 

nlca, low, diatonic, 271, 278. 
nidhana, coda of Saman, 254, 275. 
nisada, note of scale, 142, 263. 
North American Indians, see Chippe- 

was. 

notation, vi, 83, 157, 267, 273. 
notes kept in reserve, 329. 
nyasa, final (note), 141, 153, 277 note. 

* occupation * songs, 19-26. 

Olympos, 76. 

omm, Maratha song, 300, 337. 

organ, 162. 

Organum, 163 ; Ex. 272. 

oxi/pyknon, 121. 

Pachtikos, 141, 156. 
pada, song, 286. 
pada, quarter-verse, 193, 286. 
imttavi, section of song, 86, 2&1. 
pancama, fifth note of secular scale, 
142. 

fifth note tfSaman scale, 260. 

of time, 203. 
Panc&tantra, fables about the fifth 

cent., 82. 

parand, drum-variant, 230, 231. 
partials, see upper parfcials. 
participant, 178. 
parvan, what can be sung in one 

breath, 200, 251, 255, 276. 
passing notes, see substantive. 
Pater, Renaissance, 340. 
pentatonic scales, 122, 123, 126 and 

note, 135 ; Ex. 353. 
perfect consonance, see samtiidltva. 
Petrie, 126 note, 
phonograph, 17, 50, 90. 
phonographed tunes. Ex* 42, 43, 103, 



154-7, 331), 338, 334, 356, 357, 

359, 360, 364, 365. ^ pp. 48 

note and 348. 

Phrygian (done) mode, 178, 276-8. 
pianoforte, 16, 18. 

gicotto,vater"rasingappajrattis 5 21, 22. 
Pierre Loti s Ulnde, 10-14. 
plagal tunes, rare, 48. 
Plain-song and Saman, 250, 255, 275 

note. 

pluta, prolate (prosody), 200, 255, 256. 
Plutarch, 130, 173 note. 
Polak, Herr, 164. 
popular 1 music, 152, 340, 341. 
povada, chivalric song, Maratha 

country, 46, 300. 
pracaya, l drone note of Sfinmth 247, 

258, 265. 

prakrti, substantive (notes), 273. 
pi\tmana, indicative, determining 

(jfntf/;, viz. the comma of Didy- 

mus, 112 seq. 
pmstara, changes (as in bell- ringing % 

155. 

prastava, introduction, 253. 
prttikama, note of S&man eale,257seq. 
prcttiTulra, section of Sdman, 254. 
prati-madkyama, false 1 madky&ma, 

119, 133, 139. 

pjrtiyuikrama, acciaecatura, 275, 
prosody, 196, 203. 
Ptolemy, 140. 

purmrc&a of the Samaveda, 250. 
pu$pawtm, treatise, 258, 261, 274. 
pyJcnon.} ee Greek. 
Pythagoras, $ee limma. 

quantitative language, 191. 
quarter-tones, 1^, 130, 151, 345. 
quintal harmony, 124, 173, 277. 
quintuple, see five-rhythm. 



Rag 


Instances 


Di8em#fo& 




Examples 


Pages 


Alahiya 




318, 


Asayari 


410-12 


170, 171, 318. 


Bageshri (Bageshvari) 


402 


90. 


Bahar 


401 




Behag (Bibag) 
Bhairau (Bhairo,Bbai- 


220,482 
216, 2S4, 426 


SJSfii! 1 !^ 


rav) 






Bhairavi 


175, 176, 419-21, 447 


S&, 90, 156, in, SIS, 


Bhimpalas(i) 


405,406 




Bhup(kalian) (=Mo- 


$06,383 j 


170, 174, m 


hanna Ragam) 






Bibhas(a) 




S3, 90, 17$, ^f It 



360 GLOSSARY AND INDEX 


Eag 


Instances 


Disciission 


Bilaskhani Todi 


Examples 
218 


Pages 


Bilavala 


387 




Darbari K*anada 


413-15 




Desh 


221, 394, 395 


171. 


Dhanashri 


408, 409 




Dinkapuria 




155. 


Dtpak ( = Marava) 




155. 


G-aula 


450 




Grauri 


433 


318. 


Hamir (kalian) 


384 


159, 171. 


Hindol(a) 


381 


154. 


Jhinjoti (Jhijhit) 


179, 219, 308, 393 


170, 171, 318. 


Jogi 


425 


154, App. II. 


KafI 


180, 301, 399, 400 


89, 170, 318. 


Kalangadii 


424 . 




Kalian(i) 


268, 382 


89, 156, 159, 170, 318. 


Kamod(kalianj 




159. 


Kanada 


416, 493 


154, 171, App. II. 


Kedara 


278-81, 38S-&! 


175. 


Khamaj (Khambaz) 


178, 300, 398 


89, 171, 318. 


Lalat(a) 


436, 437 


318. 


Lalit(a) 




152, 


Malkos (Malavakauns) 
Mallar(a) (Malhar(a)) 


380, 407 
404 


150, 173, App. 11. 
318 


Mand 


226, 307 




Mara va 


438, 439 


App. If. 


Multan(i) 


429 


121, 152, App. II. 


Myacha Mallar 


403 




Paraj(a) 


435 


318. 


Pilu 


417, 418 


128, 318. 


Puria(kalian) 


440 


170. 


Ptirvi 


432 


318. 


Ramkali 


422, 423 


318, App. 11. 


Barang 


330, 397 


126, 154, 174, 175. 


Shatn (kalian \ 




155, 159. 


Sindora 


334 




SohanI 


264, 434, 449 




Sorat 


396 




Sri-(rSg(a)) 


430, 431 


318. 


Tilang{a) (Tilak) 




171. 


Todi 


217, 427, 428 


121, 173, 318, App. IF. 


Vasafcfc(a) (Basant) 
YamanfkaliEn) (Iman- 


298, 299 
265-7 


83, 90, 155, 170, 186. 
90, 159, 171, App. I. 


kali&n) 






R&aam (see p. 107) 


bistances 


Discussion 


Abhogi 


353 




ArafeM 




174. 


Grauri-manoliarr 




155. 


Mayamalavagaula 
Mohanna 


173 


120. 
86, 210. 


Makhari 




119, 120. 


NarayanT 


386 




Bitigaula 


379 




Sankarabhaiuna 


308,385 




bri(ragam) 




86. 



GLOSSARY AND INDEX 



861 



ruga, particularization of mode, 8 t 
14, 15, 44, 56, 82-4, 89, 90, 107 
and note, 112, 282, and Chap. 
VI. 

rugavibodlia, treatise by Somanatha, 
74, 105, 106, 155, 182 note, 186. 

rdgmala, i picture of a Rag&gt; 163 note. 

Eamayana, the, 287. 

ratnakara, treatise by Sarngadeva, 
74, 105, 110, 111, 119, 201 and 
note, 202 note. 

Ray, Indu Bhusan, poet, 6. 

recitation, 201, 267. 

reckoning by aksara, 200, 201. 
by matra, 204 seq. 

rekhtu, form of song, 300. 

religious basis of music, 5, 6. 

resonance of drum, 29, 227. 

rests, 192, 193, 200. 

ligveda accent, 246 seq., 260, 265. 
recitation, Ex. 340. 

rhythm, 27, 29, 49, 72, 98 ; Ex. 34, 
42, 72, 129, 141 ; see Chap. VIII. 

rkprtti&aTchya, treatise, 114, 258. 

roha (= arohana), 275. 

route through India, 17. 

rxdbJia, 142, 263. 

mdja, born of six (note of the scale), 

142,263. 
sa-gmma. the, 106, 109, 136, 140, 

343 ; Ex. 350. 
sailor s life, A , 135. 
salarika, altered , 138, 139, 155. 
Salvation Army, 6, 43. 
.sv/w, the first of the bar, 208 and note, 

226, 230, 231, 322. 
sama, applied to a note of the Saman 

scale, 260. 
siiman, hymn melody, Chap. X. 

scale, 258, 259, 263. 

chants, see Ex. 344-8, 36, 357, 

359, 360, 364, 365. 
sama*paribhdsa, 258, 274. 
Samaveda, 80, 142, 190, and Chap. X. 
samhata, struck together = samtddl, 

114. 

satnkitu, text of Veda, 249. 
samika, of the Samaveda, 122. 
sampurna, heptatonic, 122. 
samwldi, perfect consonance, 108, 1 14, 

" 138, 145, 266. 
samvaditw, theory of consonance, 

111, 261 seq. 

$a%cari&gt; section of song, 281. 
fankha, conch, 79. 
*fr7nw*, mixed , 138, 153, 155. 



sann&titnt, lower than anud&tta, 247, 
Sanskrit language, 10, 190-3. 
poems recited, Ex. 8, 346. 
authorities, 74, 80, 105. 
sapphic, 195. 
sctptaka, octave, 107. 
saraband rhythm, 213, 223. 
Saraswati, goddess of music, 16. 
6ardiUa vi&ridita, a metre, Ex. 307. 
sargam^ see svara. 
satar, musical instrument, 78, 106 f 

172. 
scale, Chap. IV. See Greek and 

Saman. 

scansion, 193-200, 338, 
schools of music, 9. 
Scotch music, 71, 126 note, 174 note, 

184, 185. 

Scott s ballad metre, 193. 
4 Seeds of Love *, the, 154. 
Seligmann, Dr., 48 note. 
semitone, see interval. 
septimal interval, see interval. 
&e*ag%m astn, 2^8 note, 250, 263. 
sMdavctj hexatonic, 122. 
shahnai or surnai, see nag&mmw* 
Shakespeare, 169. 
sharp and flat, 107, 108. 
sharp Sixth, 122, 125, 127. 

Mla, six-fold speed (treble 4imi- 
* nution), 85, 86, 241. 

u*/ y of six &*&, 118, 119. 
gikharini, a metre, 197. 
similar* tetrachords, 138. 
singara, stringed instrument, SI. 
singing, 89-91. 
Sir w2liam Jones, 187. 
siifahf, black plaster on drum, 227. 
4 slide , 66, 88, 190. See gkttt*antt. 
Moka, &lt; flowing metre, 193, 194. 
snake-charmer, 208; Ex. 274. 
solmization, 84,149; cp.the mtmical 

hand. 

solo and chorus, Ex. S, 9 t 17, 18, 42, 
54, 58, 72, 73, 74, 76, 77, 11&, 
122, 129. 

soma, plant, 249, 250. 
song, 78, 80-4, 341. 
samnam. temple songs, Somtfe 



South Indisan scale, 
4 Sovay, Sovay , 134. 



r ,, 

J;u*, enliarmonic iBtemi OJT u^e ? 1 1 A 
IIS, 117, 127 wd noie, 13$, lk 
2 T 114 



362 



GLOSSARY AND INDEX 



atobha, jubilation, 250, 255, 276, 338. 

stoma, group, 255. 

stotra, stanza, 255. 

stress and duration, 192, 223. 

* strong \ see batin. 

structure, 337-9. 

substantive* and l passing notes, 

4, 100; seeUl. 
4uddha f pure, natural diatonic, 107, 

118, 119, 138, 153, 155. 
ukra, applied to a note of the Saman 

scale, 260. 

super-particular* fractions, 124. 
superscript accidentals, 17, 108, 109. 
suramrta, see svara. 
surbahar, instrument, 88, 172. 
surnai, see nagasaram. 
$ur^haJct(a) (sulafakata), * zigzag * 

time, 216, 241 ; Ex. 111. See 

TdL 
svara, diatonic or chromatic interval 

or note, 8*2, 107, 109 note, 142. 



svarii (sargam, svarcivartu, suravarta), 
sol-fa syllables to form cadenza, 
84 and note, 85, 299, 314, 315, 
342. 

svara, cadence, 264, 275. 

svaranwla- kalanidhi, treatise, 105, 
119. 

svarantara, of four notes, 123. 

svarita, Rgveda accent, 190, 246. 
sounded or graced note of Saman. 
258, 259, 265, 275. 

symbols of notation, 18, 200, 2011 

tabla, pair of drums, 226, 227. 
Tagore, Babindranath, of Calcutta, 

91-9. 

his melodies, 92, 99. 
his songs, Ex. 176-80, 263, 264,266. 
his portrait (frontispiece), 92. 
his method, 96 note, 250. 
Tagore, Eajah S". M., 285 note, 347, 
348, 351. 



Tal 


Instances 


jSiscussion 




Examples 


Pages 


A&lt;Jarchautal(a) 


330 


216, 217. 


(=Dhruva) 






Adi (=Tintal) 


173, 308, 398 


209. 


Ata (=Dhamar) 


315, 316 


209. 


Brahma 




242. 


Chaut^l(a), or Char- 


334, 403, 405, 413, 426, 


216, 217. 


til(a) 


428 




Badra(=EkaTrisra) 


177 




Be^di 


309, 379 




Dhamar 


333,391,399,412,436 


216. 


Dhrura 




209. 


Eka (Ekka, Ektal(a), 


178-80, 267 


209, 216. 


Ekatali) 






Eka Trisra 


3#8, 390, 393-5, 407, 






411, 415, 416, 419, 






433 




Jhampa (Jhap, Jap) 


266, 314 


201,209,216,217,218. 


Jhamra 


425, 429 




Khandajati Laghu 


311 




Ehaft 




216. 


Madii yadi 


310 




Madhyamavati 




216. 


Mant (=Matya, ;ind 


280 


201. 


Surphakta) 






Mattel 




216. 


Malya 


172 


209. 


Rudra 




242. 


KSpak 


312, 381, 383, 384, 392, 


209, 216, 218. 




397, 400, 401, 402, 






408, 410, 414, 417, 






418, 420, 421, 423, 






427, 430, 432, 435, 






437^438 





GLOSSARY AND INDEX 



363 



Tal 

Savari 
Surphak(a)t(a) (Sula- 

fakata) 
Tevra (Teora) (=Tri- 

puta) 
Tints! (Titai(a), Tri- 

tala, Trivata) 

Triputa 



Instances 


Discussion 


Examples 


Pages 




242. 


263, 264, 431 


216, 217. 


176,294,306,382,385, 


216-18. 


386, 404 




300,301,387,389,396, 


208, 216. 


406, 409, 422, 424, 




434, 439 




313, 440 


209. 



tal, beat, 208, 217 note. 
tala, time, 14, 83, 89, 90. 
tala(m), cymbal, Ex. 42, 86. 
tambura, stringed instrument to 

accompany voice, 78, 85, 171, 

173, 227. 
Tamil, 120 note. 
tana, fioriture, melodic figuration, 82, 

287. 

tappa, form of song, 188, 300. 
tara, high (octave), 106, 114. 
taragati, upper tetrachord, 140. 
tarana (tillana), form, of song, 299. 
Telugu, 84. 
tempering, 118. 
tempo, see druta, madhya, mlambita, 

Tcala. 

tertian harmony, 125, 277. 
tessitura, 4, 107, 143, 279, 280. 
tetrachord, 70, 71, 121 note, 128 and 

note, 141, 260. See Greek. 
teyattam, exorcism, 34. 
tha, augmentation, 241. 
Thamyris, 76. 
that, setting, 106. 

iheka, drum-phrase, 230, 231; Ex. 
* 330, 336, 
Third, see interval. 
thumri, form of song, 165, 299 ; Ex. 

268. 

Thurston, Mr. E., 48 note. 
4 tierce de Picardie , 132, App. I. 
tillana, see tarana. 
time, see Tal, Tola, tdL 
time of day, see day. 
tivra, sharp, 107, 108. 
ttvratar, twratam, sharper and 

sharpest, 107. 
tonality, 19, 

tonic, 18, 19, 36, 48, 144, 145. 
tonos, see Greek, 
transient scales, 48, 122-7, 128, 152, 

158,263. 
tribal song, 154, 



Tribes: 

Arabs, 37. 

ChitrSli, Ex. 138. 

Garhwali, 50-7. 

Gond, 28-31. 

Gurkha, 56-9. 

Kadar, 31. 

Kafir, Ex. 139. 

Kanika, 44, 45. 

Kanwar, 31. 

Malayan, 36. 

Malya, 31, 32, 

Panan, 34. 

Pandaran, 41. 

Polaiyar, 42. 

Velan, 33- 

tristubh, a class of metre, 194. 
tritone, 103, 104. 
trivata, form of song, 299. 
Troubadours, 8. 
trtiya(h) - third, of time, 203, 207. 

note of Saman scale, 257 seq. 
tuk, movement (of song), 300. 
tuning of drum, 227. 
twelve sorrows, the, 61, 62. 



uoca, high, chromatic, 271, 278. 
ttdatta, * raised sound, 246, 258, 259, 

265, 266. 

downward appoggiatura, 

275. 

ha, section of Saman, 253. 
t^jbb* or udu&bai drum, shaped like 

hour-glass, 43, 228, 
udupe, gofolekshaped drmm, ^8. 
upadrmwt, seciion of S&mm, 254, 



i 

upper partiak, 123, 124. 
unik, a metre, 194, 
^oi, profe^onal 
w# gwwnt Zcm, 84, 85. 
vttama, sev tara, 

of the Stimwai*, 



364 



GLOSSARY AND INDEX 



vadi, unison, i.e. starting point of 

consonance, 108. 
vakra, crooked, 153, 328. 
valam, covered boat, Travancore, 38, 

39. 

varek, the deflect , 183. 
variation form, Ex. 12, 27, 38, 42, 43. 
varja, transilient (q.v.). 
varnavrtta, syllable-fixed 1 , 193. 
vasanta-tilaka, a metre, 197 ; Ex. 

280. 

vibhag, see avard. 
vikrta, chromatic, 107. 

passing-note, 273. 
vilatnbtta, adagio, 241. 
mna, stringed instrument, 9, 78, 79, 

88, 112, 148, 171, 172, 183, 227. 
vinata, lengthened appoggiatura, 275. 
violin, 8, 162. 
virSma, rest (in music), 200 and note, 

256, 276. 

1 visual music, 342. 
vivadi, dissonance, in particular the 

semitone, 108. 



vocal and instrumental, 150. 
vocalizing syllables, 23, 280. 
vocal scale, 276-9. 

vrddJut, increased (prosody), 251. 255. 
256. 

w-trka, drumhead, 227. 

watch, see day. 

1 weak , see alpa. 

whole tone consonance, 173. 

Wilson, Lady, 164, 226. 

woods so wilde, the , Ex. 377. 

words of songs, 14, 50, 53. 

Yajurveda, 248. 
yama, twins, 114. 
Ydma, death, 78. 

yoni, a borrowing fro the Rgveda, 
250. 

Zdkmi IHl, JEx. 123. 
Zalzaly Arabian musician, 185. 
zamzama, see murki. 
Zoroastrians, 250. 



FEINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, OXFORD 

BY VIVIAN RIDLER 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 



fc&lt; 

5 CD 

i 13 




100558 



