Introduction to 


ja ntra~S 


astra 


Sir John Woodrotte 


(Arthur Avalon) 


INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


SIR JOHN WOODROFFE 


(At the Konarak Temple of Sun-god in Orissa) 


Courtesy: Mr. P. K. DUTTA 


INTRODUCTION 
TO 


TANTRA SASTRA 


SIR JOHN WOODROFFE 


Celephais Press 


(lthar - Sarkomand ~ Inquanok _ Leeds 
2008 


Originally published as the Introduction to Mahdnirvana 
Tantra (Tantra of the Great Liberation), 1913. First is- 
sued as an independent work, Madras: Ganesh & 
co., 1952, many later printings. This electronic 
text produced by Celephais Press, Leeds, 
in the year 2008 of the common 
error. 


This work is in the public domain. 


Release 1.01.: 04.04.2009. May require further proof reading. 
Please report errors to dancingstar3agmail-com 
citing revision number or release date. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
Mount Kailasa gs ig I 
Siva and Sakti be sos 4 
Guna me 5 43 18 
The Worlds (Lokas) bts ios 24 
Inhabitants of the Worlds a are 26 
Varna nis 25 31 
Aérama _ a 32 
Macrocosm and Microcosm box 243 34 
The Ages a su 36 
The Scriptures of the Ages eat om 40 
The Human Body vee ae 42 
The Three Temperaments so boy 58 
Guru and Sisya = Gis 65 
Initiation: Diksa a a 68 
Abhiseka ws 3 a 70 
Sadhana = =" 72 
Worship ink slg 73 
Yoga go so 125 
Sin and Virtue—Karma _ ar 142 


Four aims of Being (Dharma, Artha, Kama, 
Moksa) _ sos 147 
Siddhi nae ae 154 


MOUNT KAILASA 


THE scene of the revelation of Mahanirvana-Tantra is 
laid in Himalaya, the “Abode of Snow,” a holy land 
weighted with the traditions of the Aryan race. Here in 
these lofty uplands, encircled with everlasting snows, 
rose the great mountain of the north, the Sapta-Kula- 
Parvata. Hence the race itself came, and there its early 
legends have their setting. There are still shown at 
Bhimudiyar the caves where the sons of Pandu and 
Draupadi rested, as did Rama and his faithful wife at 
the point where the Kosi joins the Sita in the grove of 
Asoka trees. In these mountains Munis and Rsis lived. 
Here also is the Ksetra of Siva Mahadeva, where his 
spouse Parvati, the daughter of the Mountain King, was 
born, and where Mother Ganges also has her source. 
From time immemorial pilgrims have toiled through 
these mountains to visit the three great shrines at 
Gangotri,! Kedarnath? and Badrinath.? At Kangri, fur- 
ther north, the pilgrims make the parikrama of Mount 
Kailasa (Kang Rinpoche), where Siva is said to dwell. 
This nobly towering peak rises to the north-west of the 


1 Source of the Ganges. 


2 A matha and temple dedicated to Sri SadaSiva in charge of the Saiva 
ascetics called Jangama. The Devata is also worshipped at four other places 
along the Himalayan chain—Tungnath, Rudranath, Madhmaheswar, and 
Kalpegvar. These and the first-named form the “Panchkedar.” 


3 A celebrated temple dedicated to an incarnation of the Deva Visnu, who 
from Kutrmacala is said to have descended in his Kurma form. As to 
Badarika see Mahabharata c. 92 Aranya-Parvan. 


2 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


sacred Manasarowar Lake (Mapham Yum-tso) from 
amidst the purple ranges of the lower Kangri 
Mountains. The paradise of Siva is a summerland of 
both lasting sunshine and cool shade, musical with the 
song of birds and bright with undying flowers. The air, 
scented with the sweet fragrance of Mandhara chaplets, 
resounds with the music and song of celestial singers 
and players. The Mount is Gana-parvata, thronged 
with trains of Spirits (devayoni), of which the opening 
chapter of Mahanirvana-Tantra speaks. 


And in the regions beyond rises Mount Meru, centre 
of the world-lotus. Its heights, peopled with spirits, are 
hung with clusters of stars as with wreaths of Malati 
flowers. In short, it is written:! “He who thinks of 
Himacala, though he should not behold him, is greater 
than he who performs all worship in Kasi (Benares). In 
a hundred ages of the Devas I could not tell thee of the 
glories of Himacala. As the dew is dried up by the 
morning sun, so are the sins of mankind by the sight of 
Himacala.” 


It is not, however, necessary to go to the Himalayan 
Kailaga to find Siva. He dwells wheresoever his 
worshippers, versed in Kula-tattva, abide,? and His 
mystic mount is to be sought in the thousand-petalled 
lotus? (sahasrarapadma) in the body of every human 
jiva, hence called Siva-sthana, to which all, wheresoever 
situate, may repair when they have learned how to 
achieve the way thither. 


1 Skanda-Purana. 

2 Kularnava-Tantra (chap. IX). 

3 See Tripurasara, cited in Bhaskarayas Commentary on Lalita-sahas- 
ranama, verse 17. Goroh sthanam hi Kaliasam as the Yogini-Tantra (chap. i) 
says. 


MOUNT KAILASA 3 


Siva promulgates His teaching in the world below 
in the works known as Yamala, Damara, Siva-Sitra,! 
and in the Tantras which exist in the form of dialogues 
between the Devata and his Sakti, the Devi in Her form 
as Parvati. According to the Gayatri-Tantra,? the Deva 
GaneSa first preached the Tantra to the Devayoni on 
Mount Kailasa, after he had himself received them from 
the mouth of Siva. 


After a description of the mountain, the dialogue 
opens with a question from Parvati? in answer to which 
and those which succeed it, S’iva unfolds His doctrine on 
the subjects with which Maha-nirvana-Tantra deals. 


1 Of which the Siva-Sitra-Vimaréini is a Commentary. 
2 Chapter X. 


3 As the Devi is here the gisya, this Tantra is in the form called Agama. 


SIVA AND SAKTI 


THAT eternal immutable existence which transcends the 
turiya and all other states in the unconditioned 
Absolute, the supreme Brahman or Para-brahman, 
without Prakrti (niskala) or Her attributes (nir-guna), 
which, as being the inner self and knowing subject, can 
never be the object of cognition, and is to be appre- 
hended only through yoga by the realization of the Self 
(atma-jnana), which it is. For, as it is said, “Spirit can 
alone know Spirit.” Being beyond mind, speech, and 
without name, the Brahman was called “Tat,” “That,” 
and then “Tat Sat,” “That which is.” For the sun, moon, 
and stars, and all visible things, what are they but a 
glimpse of light caught from “That” (Tat)? 


Brahman is both niskala and sakala. Kala is 
Prakrti. The niskala-Brahman or Para-brahman is the 
Tat when thought of as without Prakrti (Prakrteranya). 
It is called sakala when with Prakrti.! As the substance 
of Prakrti is the three gunas It is then sa-guna, as in the 
previous state It was nir-guna. Though in the latter 
state It is thought of as without Sakti, yet (making 
accommodation to human speech) in It potentially exists 
Sakti, Its power and the whole universe produced by It. 
To say, however, that the Sakti exists in the Brahman is 
but a form of speech, since It and Sakti are, in fact, one, 


1 Sarada-tilaka (chap. i), and chap. i. of Saktananda-tarangini (“Waves of 
Bliss of Saktas), both Tantrika works of great authority. 


SIVA AND SAKTI 5 


and Sakti is eternal (Anadi-rupa).! She is Brahma-rupa 
and both viguna (nir-guna) and sa-guna; the Caitanya- 
rapini-Devi, who Manifests all bhitta. She is the Anan- 
darupini Devi, by whom the Brahman manifests Itself,? 
and who, to use the words of the Sarada, pervades the 
universe as does oil the sesamum seed. 


In the beginning the Niskala-Brahman alone 
existed. In the beginning there was the One. It willed 
and became many. Aham-bahu-syam—‘“may I be 
many.” In such manifestation of Sakti the Brahman is 
known as the lower (apara) or manifested Brahman, 
who, as, the subject of worship, is meditated upon with 
attributes. And, in fact, to the mind and sense of the 
embodied spirit (jiva) the Brahman has body and form. 
It is embodied in the forms of all Devas and Devis, and 
in the worshipper himself. Its form is that of the uni- 
verse, and of all things and beings therein. 


As Sruti says: “He saw” (Sa aiksata, aham bahu 
syam prajayeya). He thought to Himself “May I be 
many.” “Sa aiksata” was itself a manifestation of Sakti, 
the Paramapurva-nirvana-sakti of Brahman as Sakti.3 
From the Brahman, with Sakti (Parahaktimaya) issued 
Nada (Siva-Sakti as the “Word” or “Sound”), and from 
Nada, Bindu appeared. Kalicharana in his commentary 
on the Satcakra-nirupana‘ says that Siva and Nirvana- 
Sakti bound by a mayik bond and covering, should be 
thought of as existing in the form of Param Bindu. 


1 Pranamya prakrtim nityam paramatma-svartpinim (loc. cit. Sakta- 
nanda-tarangini). 

2 Kubjika-Tantra, 1st Patala. 

3 Sat-cakra-nirupana. Commentary on verse 49, “The Serpent Power.” 


4 Tbid., verse 37. 


6 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


The Sarada! says: Saccidananda-vibhavat sakalat 
paramegvarat asicchaktistato nado, nadad_ bindu- 
samudbhavah. (“From Paramesgvara vested with the 
wealth of Saccidananda and with Prakrti (sakala) 
issued Sakti; from Sakti came Nada and from Nada was 
born Bindu”). The state of subtle body which is known 
as Kama-kala is the mula of mantra. The term mula- 
mantratmika, when applied to the Devi, refers to this 
subtle body of Hers known as the Kama-kala.? The 
Tantra also speaks of three Bindus, namely, Siva-maya, 
Sakti-maya, and Siva-Sakti maya.? 


The param-bindu is represented as a circle, the 
centre of which is the brahma-pada, or place of Brahman, 
wherein are Prakrti-Purusa, the circumference of which 
is encircling maya.‘ It is on the crescent of nirvana-kala 
the seventeenth, which is again in that of ama-kala, the 
sixteenth digit (referred to in the text) of the moon-circle 
(Candra-mandala), which circle is situate above the 
Sun-Circle (Surya-mandala), the Guru and the Hamsah, 
which are in the pericarp of the thousand-petalled lotus 
(sahararapadrna). Next to the Bindu is the fiery 
Bodhini, or Nibodhika (v. post). The Bindu, with the 
Nirvana-kala, Nibodhika, and Ama-kala, are situated in 
the lightning-like inverted triangle’ known as “A, Ka, 


1 Sarada-tilaka (chap. i). 

2 See Bhaskararaya’s Commentary on the Lalitasahasranama, verse 36. 

° Prana-tosini (p. 8). 

4 Mayabandhanacchaditaprakr tipurusa-param binduh. Commentary to 
verse 49 of the Sat-cakra-nirupana. 


5 The Devi-Purana says that Kundalini is so called because She has the 
Srngataka or triangle form, the three angles being the iccha, jiana and 
kriya-Saktis (see also Yogini-hrdaya). 


SIVA AND SAKTI 7 


Tha” and which is so called because at its apex is A; at 
its right base is Ka; and at its left base Tha. It is made 
up of forty-eight letters (matrka); the sixteen vowels 
running from A to Ka; sixteen consonants of the ka- 
varga and other groups running from Ka to Tha; and 
the remaining sixteen from Tha to A. Inside are the 
remaining letters (matrka), ha, la (second), and ksa.! As 
the substance of Devi is matrka (matrkamayi) the 
triangle represents the “Word” of all that exists. The 
triangle is itself encircled by the Candra-mandala. The 
Bindu is symbolically described as being like a grain of 
gram (canaka), which under its encircling sheath 
contains a divided seed. This Param-bindu is prakrti- 
Purusa, Siva-Sakti.2 It is known as the Sabda-Brahman 
(the Sound Brahman), or Apara-brahman.? A polar- 
ization of the two Siva and Sakti-Tattvas then takes 
place in Parasakti-maya. The Devi becomes Unmukhi. 
Her face turns towards Siva. There is an unfolding 
which bursts the encircling shell of Maya, and creation 
then takes place by division of Siva and Sakti or of 
“Ham” and “Sah.”4 The Sarada says: “The Devata- 
parasakti-maya is again Itself divided, such divisions 
being known as Bindu, Bija, and Nada.® Bindu is of the 
nature of Nada of Siva, and Biya of Sakti, and Nada has 


1 Sat-cakra-nirupana. 

2 Sat-cakra-nirupana, Commentary, verse 49. 

3 Sarada-tilaka, (Chap. i): 
Bhidyamant parad bindoravyaktatmaravo bhavat 
Sabda-brahmeti tam prahuh. 


“From the unfolding Parambindu arose an indistinct sound. This bindu is 
called the Sabdu-brahman.” 


4 Sat-cakra-nirupana, verse 49. 


5 That is, tese are three different aspects of It. 


8 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


been said to be the relation of these two by those who 
are verse in all the Agamas.”! The Sarada says that 
before the bursting of the shell enclosing the Brahma- 
pada, which, together with its defining circumference, 
constitutes the Sabda-brahman, an indistinct sound 
arose (avyaktatma-ravo’ bhavat). This avyaktanada is 
both the first and the last state of Nada, according as it 
is viewed from the standpoint of evolution or involution. 
For Nada, as Raghava-bhatta? says, exists in three 
states. In Nada are the gunas (sattva, rajas, and 
tamas), which form the substance of Prakrti, which with 
Siva It is. When tamo-guna predominates Nada is 
merely an indistinct or unmanifested (dhvanyatmako’- 
vyaktanadah?) sound in the nature of dhvani. In this 
state, in which it is a phase of Avyakta-nada, it is called 
Nibodhika, or Bodhini. It is Nada when rajo-guna is in 
the ascendant, when there is a sound in which there is 
something like a connected or combined disposition of 
the letters.4 When the sattva-guna preponderates Nada 
assumes the form of Bindu.® The action of rajas on 
tamas is to veil. Its own independent action effects an 
arrangement which is only perfected by the emergence 
of the essentially manifesting sattvika-guna set into 
play by it. Nada, Bindu, and Nibodhika, and the Sakti, 


1 Chapter 1: 
Parasaktimayah saksat tridhasau bhidyate punah. 
Bindurnado bijam iti tasya bhedah samiritah. 
Binduh Sivatmako bijarn Saktirnddastayormithah. 
Samavayah samakhyatah sarvaga-mavisaradaih. 
2 See Commentary on verse 48 of the Sat-cakra-nirupana. 
3 Tamo-gunadhikyena kevala-dhvanyatmako’vyakta-nadah. Avyakta is 
lit. unspoken, hidden, unmanifest, etc. 
4 Raja’adhikyena kimcidvarna-nyasatmakah. 


5 Sattvadhikyena binduritpah. 


SIVA AND SAKTI 9 


of which they are the specific manifestations, are said to 
be in the form of Sun, Moon and Fire respectively. ! 
Jnana (spiritual wisdom?) is spoken of as fire as it burns 
up all actions, and the tamo-guna is associated with it. 
For when the effect of cause and effect of action are 
really known, then action ceases. Iccha is the Moon. 
The moon contains the sixteenth digit, the Ama-kala 
with its nectar, which neither increases nor decays, and 
Iccha or will is the eternal precursor of creation. Kriya 
is like Sun for as the Sun by its light makes all things 
visible, so unless there is action and striving there 
cannot be realization or manifestation. As the Gita 
says: “As one Sun makes manifest all the lokas.” 


The Sabda-Brahman manifests Itself in a triad of 
energies—knowledge (jfanasakti), will (iccha-sakti), and 
action (kriya-Sakti), associated with the three gunas of 
Prakrti, tamas, sattva, and rajas. From the Param 
Bindu who is both bindvatmaka and kalatma—z.e., 
Sakti—issued Raudri, Rudra and his Sakti, whose forms 
are Fire (vahni), and whose activity is knowledge 
(jfana); Vama and Visnu and his Sakti, whose form is 
the Sun and whose activity is Kriya (action): and 
Jyestha and Brahma and his Sakti, whose form is the 
Moon and whose activity is desire. The Vamakeévara- 
Tantra says that Tri-pura is three-fold, as Brahma, 
Visnu and Iga; and as the energies desire, wisdom and 


1 Tatasca nada-bindu-nibodhikah arkenduvahnirupah (Satcakra, verse 
49, note). See also the Sarada (chap. i), which says te (that is, Raudri, 
Jyestha, and Vama) jnanecchakriyatmano vahnindvarka-svarupinah. 

2 Jhana is the knowledge which gives liberation. All other knowledge is 
called vijnana. 


10 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


action;! the energy of will when Brahman would create; 
the energy of wisdom when She reminds Him, saying 
“Let this be thus,” and when, thus knowing, He acts, 
She becomes the energy of action. The Devi is thus 
Iccha-Sakti-jnana-sakti-kriya-sakti svarupini.? 


Para-Siva exists as a septenary under the form, 
firstly, of Sambhu, who is the associate of time (Kala- 
bandhu). From Him issues Sada-Siva, Who pervades 
and manifests all things, and then come Isana and the 
triad, Rudra, Visnu and Brahma, each with His respec- 
tive Sakti (without whom they avail nothing?) separ- 
ately and particularly associated with the gunas, tamas, 
sattva and rajas. Of these Devas, the last triad, 
together with Isana and Sada-Siva, are the five Sivas 
who are collectively known as the Maha-preta, whose 
bya is “Hsauh.” Of the Maha-preta, it is said that the 
last four form the support and the fifth the seat, of the 
bed on which the Devi is united with Parama-siva, in 
the room of cintamani stone;‘ on the jewelled island clad 
with clumps of kadamba and heavenly trees set in the 
ocean of Ambrosia.° 


1 See Prana-tosini (pp. 8, 9). Goraksha Sanmita and Bhuta-shuddhi- 
Tantra. See also Yogini-Tantra, Part I, chap x. 

2 Lalita, verse 130 (see Bhaskararaya’s Commentary). 

® And so the Kubjika Tantra (chap. 1) says: '" Not Brahma, Visnu, Rudra 
create, maintain or destroy; but Brahmi, Vais navi, Rudrani. Their husbands 
are as but dead bodies.” 

4The “stone which grants all desires” is described in the Rudrayamala 
and Brahmanda-Purana. It is the place of origin of all those Mantras which 
bestow all desired objects (cintita). 

5 See Anandalahari of Sarnkaracarya, (verse 8), and Rudrayamala. Ac- 
cording to the Bahurpastaka and Bhairavayamala, the bed is Siva, the pillow 
Mahegana, the matting Sadaégiva, and the four supports Brahma, Hari, 
Rudra and Isana. Hence Devi is called Pancha-preta-mancadhisayini (verse 
174, Lalitasahasran ama). 


SIVA AND SARTI II 


Siva is variously addressed in this work as Sambhu, 
Sada-siva, Samkara, Mahe§gvara, etc., names which 
indicate particular states, qualities and manifestation of 
the One in its descent towards the many; for there are 
many Rudras. Thus Sada-Siva indicates the predomi- 
nance of the sattva-guna. His names are many, 1,008 
being given in the sixty-ninth chapter of the Siva-Pur- 
ana and in the seventeenth chapter of the Anusasana- 
Parvan of the Mahabharata.! 


Sakti is both maya, that by which the Brahman 
creating the universe is able to make Itself appear to be 
different from what It really is,2 and mula-prakrti, or 
the unmanifested (avyakta) state of that which, when 
manifest, is the universe of name and form. It is the 
primary so-called “material cause,” consisting of the 
equipoise of the triad of guna or “qualities” which are 
sattva (that which manifests), rajas (that which acts), 
tamas (that which veils and produces inertia). The 
three gunas represent Nature as the revelation of spirit, 
Nature as the passage of descent from spirit to matter, 
or of ascent from matter to spirit and nature as the 
dense veil of spirit.? The Devi is thus guna-nidhi‘ (trea- 
sure-house of guna). Mula-prakrti is the womb into 


1 See also the Agni, Padma, Bhavisyottara, Varaha, Kurma, Vamana 
Puranas, and in particular, the Linga and the Kasikhanda of the Skanda 
Purana. 

2The Devi Purana (chap. xiv), speaking of this power of the Supreme, 
says: “That which is of various cause and effect; the giver of unthought-of 
fruit which in this world seems like magic or a dream; that is called maya”; 

Vicitra-karyakaranacintitaphalaprada 
Svapnedrajalavalloke maya tena prakirtita. 

3 See post, sub voce “Guna.” 

4 Lalita-sahasra-nama, (verse 121). For though the Gunas are specifically 
three they have endless modifications. 


12 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


which Brahman casts the seed from which all things are 
born.! The womb thrills to the movement of the essen- 
tially active rajo-guna. The equilibrium of the triad is 
destroyed and the guna, now in varied combinations, 
evolves under the illumination of Siva (cit), the universe 
which is ruled by Mahesvara and Mahesvari. The dual 
principles of Siva and Sakti, which are in such dual 
form the product of the polarity manifested in Para- 
Sakti-maya, pervade the whole universe and are present 
in man in the Svayambhu-Linga of the muladhara and 
the Devi Kundalini, who, in serpent form, encircles it. 
The Sabda-Brahman assumes in the body of man the 
form of the Devi Kundalini, and as such is in all pranis 
(breathing creatures) and in the shape of letters appears 
in prose and verse. Kundala means coiled. Hence 
Kundalini, whose form is that of a coiled serpent, means 
that which is coiled. She is the luminous vital energy 
(jiva-sakti) which manifests as prana, She sleeps in the 
muladhara and has three and a half coils corresponding 
in number with the three and a half bindus of which the 
Kubjika-Tantra speaks. When after closing the ears the 
sound of Her hissing is not heard death approaches. 


From the first avyakta creation issued the second 
mahat, with its three gunas distinctly manifested. 
Thence sprung the third creation ahamkara (selfhood), 
which is of threefold form—vaikarika, or pure sattvika 
ahamkara; the taijasa or rajasika ahamkara; and the 
tamasika or bhutadika ahamkara. The latter is the 
origin of the subtle essences (tanmatra) of the Tattvas, 
ether, air, fire, water, earth, associated with sound, 
touch, sight, taste, and smell, and with the colours— 


1 Bhagavad-gita (Chap. xiv). 


SIVA AND SARKTI 13 


pure transparency, Ssyama, red, white, and yellow. 
There is some difference in the schools as to that which 
each of the three forms produces but from such threefold 
form of Ahamkara issue the indriyas (“senses,” and the 
Devas Dik, Vata, Arka, Pracetas, Vahni, Indra, Upen- 
dra, Mitra, and the Asvins. The vaikarika, tailjasa, and 
bhutadika are the fourth, fifth, and sixth creations, 
which are known as prakrita, or appertaining to Pra- 
krti. The rest, which are products of these, such as the 
vegetable world with its upward life current, animals 
with horizontal life current and bhuta, preta and the 
like, whose life current tends downward, constitute the 
vaikrta creation, the two being known as the kaumara 
creation. 


The Goddess (Devi) is the great Sakti. She is Maya 
for of Her the maya which produces the samsara is. As 
Lord of maya She is Mahamaya.! Devi is avidya (nesci- 
ence) because She binds and vidya (knowledge) because 
She liberates and destroys the sarnsara.2 She is Pra 
krti,? and as existing before creation is the Adya (pri- 
mordial) Sakti. Devi is the vacaka-sakti, the manifest- 
ation of Cit in Prakrti, and the vachya-Sakti, or Cit 
itself. The Atma should be contemplated as Devi.4 Sakti 
or Devi is thus the Brahman revealed in Its mother 
aspect (Sri-mata) 5 as Creatrix and Nourisher of the 
worlds. Kali says of Herself in Yogini-Tantra:® “Saccid- 


1 Mahamaya without maya is nir-guna; and with maya Sa-guna; Sakta- 
nanda tarangini, Chap. 1. 

2 Saktananda-tarangini (chap. i). 

3 Brahma-vaivarta Purana (chap. 1). Pakrtikhanda. Naradidya Purana. 

4 See chap. ii. of Devi-bhagavata. 

5 Devi is worshipped on account of Her soft heart: (komalantahkaranam). 
Saktananda-tarangini (chap. iii.) 

6 Part I, Chapter X. 


14 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


ananda-rupaham brahmai-vaham_ sphurat-prabham.” 
So the Devi is described with attributes both of the 
qualified! Brahman and (since that Brahman is but the 
manifestation of the Absolute) She is also addressed 
with epithets, which denote the unconditioned Brah- 
man.2 She is the great Mother (Ambika) sprung from 
the sacrificial hearth of the fire of the Grand conscious- 
ness (cit); decked with the Sun and Moon; Lalita, “She 
who plays”; whose play is world-play; whose eyes playing 
like fish in the beauteous waters of her Divine face, 
open and shut with the appearance and disappearance 
of countless worlds now illuminated by her light, now 
wrapped in her terrible darkness.? 


The Devi, as Para-brahman, is beyond all form and 
guna. The forms of the Mother of the Universe are three- 
fold. There is first the Supreme (para) form, of which, 
as the Visnu-yamala says,‘ “none knows.” There is next 
her subtle (Suksma) form, which consists of mantra. But 
as the mind cannot easily settle itself upon that which is 
formless,> She appears as the subject of contemplation 
in Her third, or gross (Sthula), or physical form, with 
hands and feet and the like as celebrated in the Devi- 
stotra of the Puranas and Tantras. Devi, who as Prakrti 
is the source of Brahma, Visnu, and Maheégvara,® has 


1 Such as Mukunda, an aspect of Visnu. Lalita-sahasra-nama, verse 838. 

2Tbid, verse 153, and Commentator’s note to Chapter II where Devi is 
addressed as Supreme Light (param-jyotih) Supreme Abode (paramdhama) 
Supreme of Supreme (paratpara). 

3 See the Lalita-sahasra-nama. 

4 Matatsvat-param-rupam tanna janati kaschan (see chap. iii of Sakta- 
nanda-tarangini). 

5 Amurtaucit-sthrio na syat tato murttim vicintayet (ibid. chap. 1, as was 
explained to Himavat by Devi in the Ktrma Purana). 

6 Tbid., and as such is called Tripura (see Bhaskararayas Commentary on 


Lalita, verse 125. 


SIVA AND SARTI 15 


both male and female forms.! But it is in Her female 
forms that she is chiefly contemplated. For though exis- 
ting in all things, in a peculiar sense female beings are 
parts of Her.2 The Great Mother, who exists in the form 
of all Tantras and all Yantras,* is, as the Lalita says, 
the “unsullied treasure-house of beauty”; the Sapphire 
Devi, whose slender waist,° bending beneath the burden 
of the ripe fruit of her breasts,° wells into jewelled hips 
heavy’ with the promise of infinite maternities.® 


As the Mahadevi® She exists in all forms as 
Sarasvati, Laksmi, Gayatri, Durga, Tripura-sundari, 


1 Tbid., chap. iii, which also says that there is no eunuch form of God. 
2 So in the Candi (Markandeya-Purana) it is said: 
Vidyah samastastava devi bhedah 
Striyah samastah sakala jagatsu. 
See author’s “Hymns to the Goddess.” The Tantrika more than all men, re- 
cognises the divinity of woman, as was observed centuries past by the Author 
of the Dabistan. The Linga-Purana also after describing Arundhati, Ana- 
suya, and Shachi to be each the manifestation of Devi, concludes: “All things 
indicated by words in the feminine gender are manifestations of Devi.” 

3 Sarva-tantra-rupa; Sarva-yantratmika (see Lalita, verses 205-6). 

4 Padma-purana says, “Visnu ever worships the Sapphire Devi.” 

5 Apivara-stana-tating tanuvrittamadhyam (Bhuvaneévaristotra), “tanu- 
madhya (Lalita, verse 79) Krisodar (Adyakalisvaripa stotra, Maha-nirvana- 
Tantra, seventh Ullasa). 

6 Pina-stanadye in Karptradistotra, pinonnata-payodharam in Durga- 
dhyana of Devi Purana: Vaksho-kumbhantari in Annapurnastava, apivara- 
stana-tatim in Bhuvaneévaristotra; which weight her limbs, hucha-bhara- 
namitangim in Sarasvati-dhyana; annapradana-niratang-stana-bhara-nam- 
ram in Anna-purnastava. 

7So it is said in the tenth sloka of the Karpurakhyastava—samantada 
pinastana jaghanadhrikyauvanavati. Samkaracarya, in his Tripura-sundari- 
stotra speaks of her nitamba (nitamba-jita-bhudharam) as excelling the 
mountains in greatness. 

8 The physical characteristics of the Devi in Her swelling breasts and hips 
are emblematic of Her great Motherhood for She is Srimata (see as to Her 
litanies, “Hymns to the Goddess.” 

9 She whose body is, as the Devi Purana says, immeasurable. 


16 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


Annapurna, and all the Devis who are avataras of the 
Brahman.! 


Devi, as Sati, Uma, Parvati, and Gauri, is spouse of 
Siva. It was as Sati prior to Daksa’s sacrifice (daksa- 
yajna) that the Devi manifested Herself to Siva? in the 
ten celebrated forms known as the dasa-mahavidya 
referred to in the text—Kali, Bagala, Chinnamasta, 
Bhuvanesvari, Matangini, Shodasi, Dhumavati, Tri- 
purasundari, Tara, and Bhairavi. When, at the Daksa- 
yajna She yielded up her life in shame and sorrow at the 
treatment accorded by her father to Her Husband, Siva 
took away the body, and, ever bearing it with Him, 
remained wholly distraught and spent with grief. To 
save the world from the forces of evil which arose and 
grew with the withdrawal of His Divine control, Visnu 
with His discus (cakra) cut the dead body of Sati, which 
Siva bore, into fifty?-one fragments, which fell to earth 
at the places thereafter known as the fifty-one 
mahapitha-sthana (referred to in the text), where Devi, 
with Her Bhairava, is worshipped under various names. 


Besides the forms of the Devi in the Brahmanda, 
there is Her subtle form Kundalini in the body (pin- 
danda). These are but some only of Her endless forms. 
She is seen as one and as many, as it were, but one 
moon reflected in countless waters. She exists, too, in 


1 Saktananda-tarangini (chap. iii). 

2 In order to display Her power to Her husband, who had not granted at 
her request, His permission that she might attend at Daksa’s sacrifice. See 
my edition of the “Tantra-tattva” (Principles of Tantra), and for an account of 
the dasa-mahavidya—their yantra and mantra—the dasa-mahavidya- 
upasana-rahasya of Prasanna Kumara Sastri. 

3 The number is variously given as 50, 51 and 52. 


4 Brahma-bindu Upanisad, 12. 


SIVA AND SARTI 17 


all animals and inorganic things, the universe with all 
its beauties is, as the Devi Purana says but a part of 
Her. All this diversity of form is but the infinite mani- 
festation of the flowering beauty of the One Supreme 
Life,! a doctrine which is nowhere else taught with 
greater wealth of illustration than in the Sakta-Sastras 
and Tantras. The great Bharga in the bright Sun and 
all devatas, and indeed, all life and being, are wonder- 
ful, and are worshipful but only as Her manifestations. 
And he who worships them otherwise is, in the words of 
the great Devi-bhagavata,? “like unto a man who, with 
the light of a clear lamp in his hands, yet falls into some 
waterless and terrible well.” The highest worship for 
which the sadhaka is qualified (adhikari) only after 
external worship? and that internal form known as sad- 
hara,‘ is described as niradhara. Therein Pure Intelli- 
gence is the Supreme Sakti who is worshipped as the 
very Self, the Witness freed of the glamour of the mani- 
fold Universe. By one’s own direct experience of Mahe- 
Svari as the Self She is with reverence made the object 
of that worship which leads to liberation.® 


1See the Third Chapter of the Saktananda-tarangini, where it is said 
“The Para-brahman, Devi, Siva, and all other Deva and Devi are but one, and 
he who thinks them different from one another goes to Hell.” 

2 Hymn to Jagad-ambika in Chapter XIX. 

3 Suta-samhita, i.5.3, which divides such worship into Vedic and Tantrik 
(see Bhaskararaya’s Commentary on Lalita, verse 43). 

4JIn which Devi is worshipped in the form made up of sacred syllables 
according to the instructions of the Guru. 

5 See Introduction to Author’s “Hymns to the Goddess.” 


GUNA 


IT cannot be said that current explanations give a clear 
understanding of this subject. Yet such is necessary, 
both as affording one of the chief keys to Indian philo- 
sophy and to the principles which govern Sadhana. The 
term guna is generally translated “quality,” a word which 
is only accepted for default of a better. For it must not 
be overlooked that the three gunas (Sattva, rajas, and 
tamas) which are of Prakrti constitute Her very sub- 
stance. This being so, all Nature which issues from Her, 
the Mahakaranasvarupa, is called trigunatmaka, and is 
composed of the same guna in different states of relation 
to one another. The functions of sattva, rajas, and 
tamas are to reveal, to make active, and to suppress 
respectively. Rajas is the dynamic, as sattva and tamas 
are static principles. That is to say, sattva and tamas 
can neither reveal nor suppress without being first 
rendered active by rajas. These gunas work by mutual 
suppression. 


The unrevealed Prakrti (avyakta-prakrti) or Devi is 
the state of stable equilibrium of these three gunas. 
When this state is disturbed the manifested universe 
appears, in every object of which one or other of the 
three gunas is in the ascendant. Thus in Devas as in 
those who approach the divya state, sattva predomi- 
nates, and rajas and tamas are very much reduced. That 
is, their independent manifestation is reduced. They 
are in one sense still there, for where rajas is not inde- 
pendently active it is operating on sattva to suppress 


GUNA 19 


tamas, which appears or disappears to the extent to 
which it is, or is not, subject to suppression by the reveal- 
ing principle. In the ordinary human jiva considered as 
a class, tamas is less reduced than in the case of the 
Deva but very much reduced when comparison is made 
with the animal jiva. Rajas has great independent 
activity, and sattva is also considerably active. In the 
animal creation sattva has considerably less activity. 
Rajas has less independent activity than in man, but is 
much more active than in the vegetable world. Tamas 
is greatly less preponderant than in the latter. In the 
vegetable kingdom tamas is more preponderant than in 
the case of animals and both rajas and sattva less so. In 
the inorganic creation rajas makes tamas active to 
suppress both sattva and its own independent activity. 
It will thus be seen that the “upward” or revealing 
movement from the predominance of tamas to that of 
sattva represents the spiritual progress of the jivatma. 


Again, as between each member of these classes one 
or other of three gunas may be more or less in the 
ascendant. 


Thus, in one man as compared with another, the 
sattva guna may predominate, in which case his tem- 
perament is sattvik, or, as the Tantra calls it, divya- 
bhava. In another the rajoguna may prevail, and in the 
third the tamoguna, in which case the individual is 
described as rajasik, or tamasik, or, to use Tantrik phra- 
seology, he is said to belong to virabhava, or is a pasu 
respectively. Again the vegetable creation is obviously 
less tamasik and more rajasik and sattvik than the 
mineral, and even amongst these last there may be 
possibly some which are less tamasik than others. 


20 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


Etymologically, sattva is derived from “sat,” that 
which is eternally existent. The eternally existent is 
also Cit, pure Intelligence or spirit, and Ananda or 
Bliss. In a secondary sense, sat is also used to denote 
the “good.” And commonly (though such use obscures 
the original meaning), the word sattva guna is rendered 
“good quality.” It is, however, “good” in the sense that it 
is productive of good and happiness. In such a case, 
however, stress is laid rather on a necessary quality or 
effect (in the ethical sense) of ‘sat’ than upon its original 
meaning. In the primary sense sat is that which 
reveals. Nature is a revelation of spirit (sat). Where 
Nature is such a revelation of spirit there it manifests 
as sattva guna. It is the shining forth from under the 
veil of the hidden spiritual substance (sat). And that 
quality in things which reveals this is sattva guna. So 
of a pregnant woman it is said that she is antahsattva, 
or instinct with sattva; she in whom sattva as Jiva 
(whose characteristic guna is sattva) is living in a 
hidden state. 


But Nature not only reveals, but is also a dense 
covering or veil of spirit, at times so dense that the 
ignorant fail to discern the spirit which it veils. Where 
Nature is a veil of spirit there it appears in its quality of 
tamoguna. 


In this case the tamoguna is currently spoken of as 
representative of inertia, because that is the effect of the 
nature which veils. This quality, again, when transla- 
ted into the moral sphere, becomes ignorance, sloth, etc. 


In a third sense nature is a bridge between spirit 
which reveals and matter which veils. Where Nature is 
a bridge of descent from spirit to matter, or of ascent 


GUNA 21 


from matter to spirit there it manifests itself as 
rajoguna. This is generally referred to as the quality of 
activity, and when transferred to the sphere of feeling it 
shows itself as passion. Each thing in nature then 
contains that in which spirit is manifested or reflected 
as in a mirror or sattvaguna; that by which spirit is 
covered, as it were, by a veil of darkness or tamoguna, 
and that which is the vehicle for the descent into matter 
or the return to spirit or rajoguna. Thus sattva is the 
light of Nature, as tamas is its shade. Rajas is, as it 
were, a blended tint oscillating between each of the 
extremes constituted by the other gunas. 


The object of Tantrik sadhana is to bring out and 
make preponderant the sattva guna by the aid of rajas, 
which operates to make the former guna active. The 
subtle body (lingaSarira) of the jivatma comprises in it 
buddhi, ahamkara, manas, and the ten senses. This 
subtle body creates for itself gross bodies suited to the 
spiritual state of the jivatma. Under the influence of 
prarabdha karma, buddhi becomes tamasik, rajasik, or 
sattvik. In the first case the jivatma assumes inanimate 
bodies; in the second, active passionate bodies; and in 
the third, sattvik bodies of varying degress of spiritual 
excellence, ranging from man to the Deva. The gross 
body is also trigunatmaka. This body conveys impres- 
sions to the jivatma through the subtle body and the 
buddhi in particular. When sattva is made active 
impressions of happiness result, and when rajas or 
tamas are active the impressions are those of sorrow 
and delusion. These impressions are the result of the 
predominance of these respective gunas. The acting of 
rajas on sattva produces happiness, as its own indepen- 


22 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


dent activity or operation on tamas produces sorrow and 
delusion respectively. Where sattva or happiness is 
predominant, there sorrow and delusion are suppressed. 
Where rajas or sorrow is predominant, there happiness 
and delusion are suppressed. And where tamas or 
delusion predominates there, as in the case of the inor- 
ganic world, both happiness and sorrow are suppressed. 
All objects share these three states in different propor- 
tions. There is, however, always in the jivatma an ad- 
mixture of sorrow with happiness, due to the operation 
of rajas. For happiness, which is the fruit of righteous 
acts done to attain happiness, is after all only a vikara. 
The natural state of the jivatma—that is, the state of its 
own true nature—is that bliss (ananda) which arises 
from the pure knowledge of the Self, in which both 
happiness and sorrow are equally objects of indifference. 
The worldly enjoyment of a person involves pain to self 
or others. This is the result of the pursuit of happiness, 
whether by righteous or unrighteous acts. As spiritual 
progress is made, the gross body becomes more and 
more refined. In inanimate bodies, karma operates to 
the production of pure delusion. On the exhaustion of 
such karma, the jivatma assumes animate bodies for the 
operation of such forms of karma as lead to sorrow and 
happiness mixed with delusion. In the vegetable world, 
sattva is but little active, with a corresponding lack of 
discrimination, for discrimination is the effect of sattva 
in buddhi, and from discrimination arises the recogni- 
tion of pleasure and pain, conceptions of right and 
wrong, of the transitory and intransitory, and so forth, 
which are the fruit of a high degree of discrimination, or 
of activity of sattva. In the lower animal, sattva in 
buddhi is not suficiently active to lead to any degree of 


GUNA 23 


development of these conceptions. In man, however, the 
sattva in buddhi is considerably active, and in conse- 
quence these conceptions are natural in him. For this 
reason the human birth is, for spiritual purposes, so 
important. All men, however, are not capable of 
forming such conceptions in an equal degree. The 
degree of activity in an individual’s buddhi depends on 
his prarabdha karma. However bad such karma may be 
in any particular case, the individual is yet gifted with 
that amount! of discrimination which, if properly 
aroused and aided, will enable him to better his spiri- 
tual condition by inducing the rajoguna in him to give 
more and more activity to the sattva guna in his buddhi. 


On this account proper guidance and spiritual direc- 
tion are necessary. A good guru, by reason of his own 
nature and spiritual attainment and disinterested wis- 
dom, will both mark out for the Sisya the path which is 
proper for him, and aid him to follow it by the infusion 
of the tejas which is in the Guru himself. Whilst 
sadhana is, as stated, a process for the stimulation of 
the sattva guna, it is evident that one form of it is not 
suitable to all. It must be adapted to the spiritual 
condition of the Sisya, otherwise it will cause injury 
instead of good. Therefore it is that the adoption of 
certain forms of sadhana by persons who are not 
competent (adhikari), may not only be fruitless of any 
good result, but may even lead to evils which sadhana 
as a general principle is designed to prevent. Therefore 
also is it said that is it better to follow one’s own 
dharma than that, however exalted it be, of another. 


1 Corresponding to the theological doctrine of “sufficiency of grace.” 


THE WORLDS (LOKAS) 


THIS earth, which is the object of the physical senses 
and of the knowledge based thereon, is but one of four- 
teen worlds or regions placed “above” and “below” it, of 
which (as the sutra says!) knowledge may be obtained 
by meditation on the solar “nerve” (nadi) susumna in 
the merudanda. On this nadi six of the upper worlds 
are threaded, the seventh and highest overhanging it in 
the Sahasrara-Padma, the thousand-petalled lotus. The 
sphere of earth (Bhurloka), with its continents, their 
mountains and rivers, and with its oceans, is the 
seventh or lowest of the upper worlds. Beneath it are 
the Hells and Nether World, the names of which are 
given below. Above the terrestrial sphere is Bhuvar- 
loka, or the atmospheric sphere known as the antariksa, 
extending “from the earth to the sun,” in which the 
Siddhas and other celestial beings (devayoni) of the 
upper air dwell. “From the sun to the pole star” 
(dhruva) is svarloka, or the heavenly sphere. Heaven 
(svarga) is that which delights the mind, as hell 
(naraka) is that which gives it pain.? In the former is 
the abode of the Deva and the blest. 


These three spheres are the regions of the conse- 
quences of work, and are termed transitory as compared 


1 Bhuvanajnanam strye samyamat, Patanjali Yoga-Sutra (chap. iii, 26). 
An account of the lokas is given in Vyasa’s commentary on the sutra, in the 
Visnu-Purana (Bk. II, chaps. v-vii): and in the Bhagavata, Vayu, and other 
Puranas. 

2 Visnu-Purana (Bk. II; chap. vi). Virtue is heaven and vice is hell, ibid, 
Narakaminati = klesam prapayati, or giving pain. 


THE WORLDS (LOKAS) 25 


with the three highest spheres, and the fourth, which is 
of a mixed character. When the jiva has received his 
reward he is reborn again on earth. For it is not good 
action, but the knowledge of the Atma which procures 
Liberation (moksa). Above Svarloka is Maharloka, and 
above it the three ascending regions known as the 
janaloka, tapoloka, and satyaloka, each inhabited by 
various forms of celestial intelligence of higher and 
higher degree. Below the earth (Bhah) and above the 
nether worlds are the Hells! (commencing with Avichi), 
and of which, according to popular theology, there are 
thirty-four? though it is elsewhere said? there are as 
many hells as there are offences for which particular 
punishments are meted out. Of these six are known as 
the great hells. Hinduism, however, even when popular, 
knows nothing of a hell of eternal torment. To it 
nothing is eternal but the Brahman. Issuing from the 
Hells the jiva is again reborn to make its future. Below 
the Hells are the seven nether worlds, Sutala, Vitala, 
Talatala, Mahatala, Rasatala, Atala, and Patala, where, 
according to the Puranas, dwell the Naga serpent divin- 
ities, brilliant with jewels, and Danavas wander, fasci- 
nating even the most austere. Yet below Patala is the 
form of Visnu proceeding from the dark quality (tamo- 
gunah), known as the Sesa serpent or Ananta bearing 
the entire world as a diadem, attended by his Sakti 
Varuni,* his own embodied radiance. 


1 Ganabheda of Vahni-Purana. 

2 Devi-Purana. 

3 Visnu-Purana 

4 Not “the Goddess of Wine,” as Wilson (Visnu-Purana) has it. 


INHABITANTS OF THE WORLDS 


THE worlds are inhabited by countless grades of beings, 
ranging from the highest Devas (of whom there are 
many classes and degrees) to the lowest animal life. 
The scale of beings runs from the shining manifesta- 
tions to the spirit of those in which it is so veiled that it 
would seem almost to have disappeared in its material 
covering. There is but one Light, one Spirit, whose mani- 
festations are many. A flame enclosed in a clear glass 
loses but little of its brilliancy. If we substitute for the 
glass, paper, or some other more opaque yet transparent 
substance, the light is dimmer. A covering of metal may 
be so dense as to exclude from sight the rays of light 
which yet burns within with an equal brilliancy. As a 
fact, all such veiling forms are maya. They are none the 
less true for those who live in and are themselves part of 
the mayik world. Deva, or “heavenly and shining one”— 
for spirit is light and self-manifestation—is applicable to 
those descending yet high manifestations of the Brah- 
man, such as the seven Sivas, including the Trinity (tri- 
murti), Brahma, Visnu, and Rudra. Devi again, is the 
title of the Supreme Mother Herself, and is again 
applied to the manifold forms assumed by the one only 
Maya, such as Kali, Sarasvati, Laksmi, Gauri, Gayatri, 
Sarmdhya, and others. In the sense also in which it is 
said,! “Verily, in the beginning there was the Brahman. 
It created the Devas”; the latter term also includes lofty 
intelligences belonging to the created world inter- 


1 Brhadaranyaka Up. (ix. 2-3-2). 


INHABITANTS OF THE WORLDS 27 


mediate between Isvara (Himself a Purusa) and man, 
who in the person of the Brahmana is known as Earth- 
deva (bhudeva).! These spirits are of varying degrees. 
For there are no breaks in the creation which represents 
an apparent descent of the Brahman in gradually 
lowered forms. Throughout these forms play the divine 
currents of pravrtti and nivrtti, the latter drawing to 
Itself that which the former has sent forth.? 


Deva, jiva and jada (inorganic matter) are, in their 
real, as opposed to their phenomenal and illusory being, 
the one Brahman, which appears thus to be other than 
Itself through its connection with the upadhi or limiting 
conditions with which ignorance (avidya) invests it. 
Therefore all being which are the object of worship are 
each of them but the Brahman seen though the veil of 
avidya. Though the worshippers of Devas may not know 
it, their worship is in reality the worship of the Brah- 
man, and hence the Mahanirvana-Tantra says? that, “as 
all streams flow to the ocean, so the worship given to 
any Deva is received by the Brahman.” On the other 
hand, those who, knowing this, worship the Devas, do so 
as manifestations, of Brahman, and thus worship It 


1In like manner, the priest of the Church on earth is called by Malachi 
(ii. 7) “angel,” which is as Pseudo-Dionysius Areopagite says: “From his 
announcement of the truth and from his desire and office of purifying, 
illuminating, and perfecting those committed to his charge”; the brahmanical 
office, in fact, when properly understood and given effect to. 

2The hierarchies have also their reason and uses in Christian theology: 
“Totus conatus omnium spirituum est referee Deum. Deus in primis potenter 
assimilat quod vicina sunt ei; assimilata deinceps assimilant. Ita pergit 
derivatis deitatis ab ordine in ordinem et ab hierarchia in hierarchiam et a 
melioribus creaturis in deteriores pro capacitate cujusque in deificationem 
omnium.” (“Coletus de Coelesti Hierarchia Dionysii Areopagite,” chap, iii). 

3 Chapter 11, verse 50, a common statement which appears in the 
Bhagavadgita and elsewhere. 


28 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


mediately. The sun, the most glorious symbol in the 
physical world, is the mayik vesture of Her who is 
“clothed with the sun.” 


In the lower ranks of the celestial hierarchy are the 
Devayonis, some of whom are mentioned in the opening 
verses of the first chapter of the text. The Devas are of 
two classes: “unborn” (ajata)—that is, those which have 
not, and those which have (sadhya) evolved from 
humanity as in the case of King Nahusa, who became 
Indra. Opposed to the divine hosts are the Asura, Da- 
nava, Daitya, Raksasa, who, with other spirits, repre- 
sent the tamasik or demonic element in creation. All 
Devas, from the highest downwards, are subordinate to 
both time and karma. So it is said, “Salutation to 
Karma, over which not even Vidhi (Brahma), prevails” 
(Namastat karmabhyovidhirapi na _ yebhyah _prab- 
havati).!. The rendering of the term “Deva” as “God”? 
has led to a misapprehension of Hindu thought. The 
use of the term “angel” may also mislead, for though the 
world of Devas has in some respects analogy to the 
angelic choirs,’ the Christian conception of these Beings, 


1 And again: 


Ye samasta jagatsrstisthitisamhara karinah 
Te’pi kalesu liyante kalo hi balavattarah. 


((Even all those who are the cause of the creation, maintenance, and destruc- 
tion of the world disappear in time because time is more strong than they). 


2 Though, also, as Coletus says (“De Coelesta Dionysii Hierarchia,” chap. 
xii. 8) the Angels have been called " Gods”; “Quod autem angeli Dii vocantur 
testatur iliud geneseos dictum Jacob a viro luctatore,” etc. 


3 Particularly, as I have elsewhere shown, with such conception of the 
celestial hierarchies as is presented by the work of the Pseudo-Dionysius on 
that subject writtell under the influence of Eastern thought (Stephen Bar 
Sudaili and others). As to the Christian doctrine on the Angels, see Suarez, 
“De Angelis.” The patristic doctrine is summarised by Petavius “De Angelis,” 


INHABITANTS OF THE WORLDS 29 


their origin and functions, does not include, but in fact 
excludes, other ideas connoted by the Sanskrit term. 


The pitrs, or “Fathers,” are a creation (according to 
some) separate from the predecessors of humanity, and 
are, according to others, the lunar ancestry who are 
addressed in prayer with the Devas. From Brahma, who 
is known as the “Grandfather,” Pita Maha of the human 
race, issued Marichi, Atri, and others, his “mental sons”: 
the Agnisvattah, Saumsaya, Havismantah, Usmapah, 
and other classes of Pitrs, numbering, according to the 
Markandeya Purana, thirty-one. Tarpanam, or oblation, 
is daily offered to these pitrs. The term is also applied 
to the human ancestors of the worshipper generally up 
to the seventh generation to whom in Sraddha (the 
obsequial rites) pinda and water are offered with the 
mantra “svadha.” 


The Rsis are seers who know, and by their know- 
ledge are the makers of Sastra and “see” all mantras. 
The word comes from the root rs;! Rsati-prapnoti sar- 
vam mantram jnanena pasyati sangsaraparangva, etc. 
The seven great Rsis or saptarsis of the first manvan- 
tara are Marici, Atri, Angiras, Pulaha, Kratu, Pulastya, 
and Vasistha. In other manvantaras there are other 
saptarsis. In the present manvantara the seven are 
Kasyapa, Atri, Vasistha, ViSvamitra, Gautama, Jama- 
dagni, Bharadvaja. To the Rsis the Vedas were 
revealed. Vyasa taught the Rgveda so revealed to Paila, 
the Yajurveda to Vaisampayana, the Samaveda to 
Jaimini, Atharvaveda to Sumantu, and Itihasa and 


Dogm, tom. III. The cabalistic names of the nine orders as given by Arch- 
angelus at p. 728 of his “Interpretationes in artis Cabalistice scriptores“ 1587). 
A Sabdakalpadruma. 


30 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


Purana to Suta. The three chief classes of Rsis are the 
Brahmarsi, born of the mind of Brahma, the Devarsi of 
lower rank, and Rajarsi or Kings who became Rsis 
through their knowledge and austerities, such as 
Janaka, Rtaparna, etc. The Srutarsi are makers of 
Sastras, as Sugruta. The Kandarsi are of the Karma- 
kanda, such as Jaimini. 


The Muni, who may be a Rsi, is a sage. Muni is so 
called on account of his mananam (mananat muni- 
rucyate). Mananam is that thought, investigation, and 
discussion which marks the independent thinking mind. 
First there is Sravanam, listening; then Mananam, 
which is the thinking or understanding, discussion 
upon, and testing of what is heard as opposed to the 
mere acceptance on trust of the lower intelligence. 
These two are followed by Nididhyasanam, which is 
attention and profound meditation on the conclusions 
(siddhanta) drawn from what is so heard and reasoned 
upon. As the Mahabharata says, “The Vedas differ, and 
so do the Smrtis. No one is a muni who has no inde- 
pendent opinion of his own (nasau muniryasya matam 
na bhinnam).” 


The human being is called jiva!—that is, the embo- 
died Atma possessed by egoism and of the notion that it 
directs the puryastaka, namely, the five organs of action 
(karmendriya), the five organs of perception (jnanen- 
driya), the fourfold antahkarana or mental self (Manas, 
Buddhi, Ahamkara, Citta), the five vital airs (Prana), 
the five elements, Kama (desire), Karma (action and its 
results), and Avidya (illusion). When these false notions 


1That is specially so as all embodiments, whether human or not, of the 
Paramatma are jiva. 


INHABITANTS OF THE WORLDS 31 


are destroyed, the embodiment is destroyed, and the 
wearer of the mayik garment attains nirvana. When 
the jiva is absorbed in Brahman, there is no longer any 
jiva remaining as such. 


VARNA 


ORDINARILY there are four chief divisions or castes 
(varna) of Hindu society—viz.: Brahmana (priesthood; 
teaching); Ksattriya (warrior); Vaisya (merchant); Sadra 
(servile) said to have sprung respectively from the 
mouth, arm, thigh, and foot of Brahma. A man of the 
first three classes becomes on investiture, during the 
upanayana ceremony of the sacred thread, twice-born 
(dvija). It is said that by birth one is sudra, by 
samskara (upanayana) dvija (twice born); by study of 
the Vedas one attains the state of a vipra; and that he 
who has knowledge of the Brahman is a Brahmana.! 
The present Tantra, however, speaks of a fifth or hybrid 
class (samanya), resulting from intermixture between 
the others. It is a peculiarity of Tantra that its worship 
is largely free of Vaidik exclusiveness, whether based on 
caste, sex or otherwise. As the Gautamiya-Tantra says, 
“The Tantra is for all men, of whatever caste, and for all 
women” (Sarvavarnadhikarasca narinam yogya eva Ca). 


1 Janmana jayate Siidrah 
Samskarad dvija ucyate 
Veda-pathat bhavet viprah 
Brahma jnanati brahmanah. 


ASRAMA 

THE four stages, conditions, or periods in the life of a 
Brahmana are: first, that of the chaste student, or brah- 
macari; second, the period of secular life as a married 
house-holder or grhastha; third, that of the recluse, or 
vanaprastha, when there is retirement from the world; 
and lastly, that of the beggar, or bhiksu, who begs his 
single daily meal, and meditates upon the Supreme 
Spirit to which he is about to return. For the Ksattriya 
there are the first three ASramas; for the Vaisya, the 
first two; and for the Sadra, the grhastha Agrama only.! 
This Tantra? states that in the Kali age there are only 
two Asramas. The second grhasthya and the last bhik- 
suka or avadhuta. Neither the conditions of life, nor the 
character, capacity, and powers of the people of this age 
allow of the first and third. The two asramas prescribed 
for Kali age are open to all castes indicriminately.* 


There are, it is now commonly said, two main divi- 
sions of avadhiita—namely, Saivavadhita and Brahm- 
avadhuta—of each of which there are, again, three 
divisions.‘ Of the first class the divisions are firstly, 
Saivavadhita, who is apurna (imperfect). Though an 


1Yoga Yajnavalkya (chap. 1). 

2 Chapter VIII, verse 8. 

3 Ibid., verse 12. 

4Mahanirvana Tantra deals with the avadhuta (those who have relin- 
quished the world) in Chapter XIV, verse 142, et. seq. The Bhairavadamara 
classes the avadhita into (1) Kulavadita, (2) Saivavadiita, (3) Brahmava- 
dhita, and (4) Harnsadvadhita, following in the main, distinctions made in 
this Tantra. 


ASRAMA 33 
ascetic, he is also a householder and like Siva. Hence 
his name. The second is the wandering stage of the 
Saiva (or the parivrajaka), who has now left the world, 
and passes his time doing puja, japa, etc., visiting the 
tirtha and pitha, or places of pilgrimage. In this stage, 
which though higher, is still imperfect, the avadhuta is 
competent for ordinary sadhana with a Sakti. The third 
is the perfect stage of a Saiva. Wearing only the 
kaupina,! he renounces all things and all rites, though 
within certain limits he may practise some yoga, and is 
permitted to meet the request of a woman who makes it 
of him.? Of the second class the three divisions are, 
firstly, the Brahmavadhita, who, like the Saivavadhita, 
is imperfect (apurna) and householder. He is not per- 
mitted, however, to have a Saiva Sakti, and is restricted 
to sviyasakti. The second class Brahmaparivrajaka is 
similar to the Saiva of the same class except that ordi- 
narily he is not permitted to have anything to do with 
any woman, though he may, under the guidance of his 
Guru, practise yoga accompanied by Sakti. The third or 
highest class—Hamsavadhata—is similar to the third 
Saiva degree, except that he must under no circum- 
stances touch a woman or metals, nor may he practise 
any rites or keep any observances. 


1The exiguous loin cloth of ascetics covering only the genitals. See the 
kaupinapancakam of Sarkaracarya, where the Kaupinaran is described as 
the fortunate one living on the handful of rice got by begging; ever pondering 
upon the words of the Vedanta, whose senses are in repose, who ever enjoys 
the Brahman in the thought Ahambrahmasmi. 

2 This is not, however, as some may suppose, a peculiarly “Tantrik” 
precept, for it is said in Sruti “talpagatam na pariharet” (she who comes to 
your bed is not to be refused), for the rule of chastity which is binding on him 
yields to such an advance on the part of woman. Samkaracarya says that 
talpagatam is samagamarthinim, adding that this is the doctrine of Rsi 
Vamadeva. 


MACROCOSM AND MICROCOSM 


THE universe consists of a Mahabrahmanda, or grand 
Cosmos, and of numerous Brhatbrahmanda, or macro- 
cosms evolved from it. As is said by the Nirvana- 
Tantra, all which is in the first is in the second. In the 
latter are heavenly bodies and beings, which are micro- 
cosms reflecting on a minor scale the greater worlds 
which evolve them. “As above, so below.” The mystical 
maxim of the West is stated in the Visvasara-Tantra as 
follows: “What is here is elsewhere; what is not here is 
nowhere” (yadhihasti tadanyatra yannehasti na tatkva- 
cit). The macrocosm has its meru, or vertebral column, 
extending from top to bottom. There are fourteen regions 
descending from Satyaloka, the highest. These are the 
seven upper and the seven nether worlds (vide ante). 
The meru of human body is the spinal column, and 
within it are the cakras, in which the worlds are said to 
dwell. In the words of the Saktananda-Tarangini, they 
are pindamadhyesthita. Satya has been said to be in 
the sahasrara, and Tapah, Janah, Mahah, Svah, Bhu- 
vah, Bhuh in the ajna, visuddhi, anahata, manipura, 
svadhisthana, and muladhara lotuses respectively. 
Below muladhara and in the joints, sides, anus, and 
organs of generation are the nether worlds. The bones 
near the spinal column are the kulaparvata.! Such are 
the correspondences as to earth. Then as to water. The 
nadis are the rivers. The seven substances of the body 


1 The seven main chains of mountains in Bharata (see Visnu-Purana, Bk. 
II, chap. iii). 


MACROCOSM AND MICROCOSM 35 


(dhatu)! are the seven islands. Sweat, tears, and the 
like are the oceans. Fire exists in the muladhara, 
susumna, navel and elsewhere.? As the worlds are 
supported by the prana and other vayus (“airs”), so is 
the body supported by the ten vayus, prana, etc. There 
is the same akaéa (ether) in both.2? The witness within 
is the purusa without, for the personal soul of the 
microcosm corresponds to the cosmic soul (hiranya- 
garbha) in the macrocosm. 


1 Skin, blood, muscle, tendon, bone, fat, semen. 


2The kamagni in muladhara, badala in the bones; in susumna the fire of 
lightning, and in the navel earthly fire. 


3 As to distribution of elements in the cakras, see chap. iv, Bhutasuddhi- 
Tantra. 


THE AGES 


THE passage of time within a mah a-yuga influences for 
the worse man and the world in which he lives. This 
passage is marked by the four ages (yuga), called Satya, 
Treta, Dvapara, and Kali-yuga, the last being that in 
which it is generally supposed the world now is. The 
yuga!is a fraction of a kalpa, or day of Brahma of 
4,320,000,000 years. The kalpa, is divided into fourteen 
manvantaras, which are again subdivided into seventy- 
one maha yuga; the length of each of which is 4,320,000 
human years. The maha-yuga (great age) is itself 
composed of four yuga (ages)—(a) Satya, (b) Treta, 
(c) Dvapara, (d) Kali. Official science teaches that man 
appeared on the earth in an imperfect state, from which 
he has since been gradually, though continually, raising 
himself. Such teaching is, however, in conflict with the 
traditions of all peoples—Jew, Babylonian, Egyptian, 
Hindu, Greek, Roman, and Christian—which speak of 
an age when man was both innocent and happy. From 
this state of primal perfection he fell, continuing his 
descent until such time as the great Avataras, Christ 
and others, descended to save his race and enable it to 
regain the righteous path. The Garden of Eden is the 
emblem of the paradisiacal body of man. There man 
was one with Nature. He was himself paradise, a 
privileged enclosure in a garden of delight?—-gan be 
Eden. Et eruditus est Moyse omni sapientia Afgyptiorum. 


1 See Bentley, “Hindu Astronomy” (1823), p. 10. 
2 Genesis ii. 8. Paradise is commonly confused with Eden, but the two are 
different. Paradise is in Eden. 


THE AGES 37 


The Satya Yuga is, according to Hindu belief, the 
Golden Age of righteousness, free of sin, marked by 
longevity, physical strength, beauty, and stature. “There 
were giants in those days” whose moral, mental, and 
physical strength enabled them to undergo long brah- 
macarya (continence) and tapas (austerities). Longevity 
permitted lengthy spiritual exercises. Life then depen- 
ded on the marrow, and lasted a lakh of years,! men 
dying when they willed. Their stature was 21 cubits. To 
this age belong the Avataras or incarnations of Visnu, 
Matsya, Kurma, Varaha, Nr-simha, and Vamana. Its 
duration is computed to be 4,800 Divine years, which, 
when multiplied by 360 (a year of the Devas being equal 
to 360 human years) are the equivalent of 1,728,000 of the 
years of man. 


The second age, or Treta (three-fourth) Yuga, is that 
in which righteousness (dharma) decreased by one- 
fourth. The duration was 3,600 Divine years, or 1,296,000 
human years. Longevity, strength, and stature de- 
creased. Life was in the bone, and lasted 10,000 years. 
Man's stature was 14 cubits. Of sin there appeared one- 
quarter, and of virtue there remained three-quarters. 
Men were still attached to pious and charitable acts, 
penances, sacrifice and pilgrimage, of which the chief 
was that to Naimisaranya. In this period appeared the 
avataras of Visnu as Parasurama and Rama. 


The third, or Dvapara (one-half) yuga, is that in 
which righteousness decreased by one-half, and the 


1 Cf. the Biblical account of the long-lived patriarchs, Methuselah and 
others: and for more favourable modern estimate of the “Primitives,” see M. 
A. Leblond, “L’Ideal du dixneuviéme siécle,” and Elie Reclus’ celebrated work 
on the Primitives (1888). 


38 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


duration was 2,400 Divine, or 864,000 human years. A 
further decrease in longevity and strength, and increase 
of weakness and disease mark this age. Life which 
lasted 1,000 years was centred in the blood. Stature was 
7 cubits. Sin and virtue were of equal force. Men 
became restless, and though eager to acquire know- 
ledge, were deceitful, and followed both good and evil 
pursuits. The principal place of pilgrimage was Kuru- 
ksetra. To this age belongs (according to Vyasa, 
Anustubhacarya and Jaya-deva) the avatara of Visnu as 
Bala-rama, the elder brother of Krsna, who, according to 
other accounts, takes his place. In the samdhya, or 
intervening period of 1,000 years between this and the 
next yuga the Tantra was revealed, as it will be 
revealed at the dawn of every Kali-yuga. 


Kali-yuga is the alleged present age, in which right- 
eousness exists to the extent of one-fourth only, the 
duration of which is 1,200 Divine, or 432,000 human years. 
According to some, this age commenced in 3120 B. C. on 
the date of Visnu’s return to heaven after the eighth 
incarnation. This is the period which, according to the 
Puranas and Tantras, is characterized by the prevalence 
of viciousness, weakness, disease, and the general 
decline of all that is good. Human life, which lasts at 
most 120, or, aS some say, 100, years, is dependent on 
food. Stature is 3% cubits. The chief pilgrimage is now 
to the Ganges. In this age has appeared the Buddha 
Avatara. 


The last, or Kalki Avatara, the Destroyer of sin, has 
yet to come. It is He who will destroy iniquity and 
restore the age of righteousness. The Kalki-Purana 
speaks of Him as one whose body is blue like that of the 


THE AGES 39 


rain-charged cloud, who with sword in hand rides, as 
does the rider of the Apocalypse, a white horse swift as 
the wind, the Cherisher of the people, Destroyer of the 
race of the Kali-yuga, the source of true religion. And 
Jayadeva, in his Ode to the Incarnations, addresses 
Him thus: For the destruction of all the impure thou 
drawest thy scimitar like a blazing comet. O how 
tremendous! Oh, KeSava, assuming the body of Kalki; 
Be victorious, O Hari, Lord of the Universe!” With the 
satya-yuga a new maha-yuga will commence and the 
ages will continue to revolve with their rising and 
descending races until the close of the kalpa or day of 
Brahma. Then a night of dissolution (pralaya) of equal 
duration follows, the Lord reposing in yoganidra (yoga 
sleep in pralaya) on the Serpent Sesa, the Endless One, 
till day-break, when the universe is created and the 
next kalpa follows. 


THE SCRIPTURES OF THE AGES 


EACH of the Ages has its appropriate Sastra or Scripture, 
designed to meet the characteristics and needs of the 
men who live in them.’ The Hindu Sastras are classed 
into: (1) Sruti, which commonly includes the four Vedas 
(Rg, Yajur, Sama, Atharva) and the Upanisads, the doc- 
trine of which is philosophically exposed in the Vedanta 
Darsana. (2) Smrti, such as the Dharma Sastra of Manu 
and other works on family and social duty prescribing 
for pravrttidharma. (3) The Puranas,? of which, accor- 
ding to the Brahma-vaivarta Purana, there were origi- 
nally four lakhs, and of which eighteen are now 
regarded as the principal. (4) The Tantra. 


For each of these ages a suitable Sastra is given. 
The Veda is the root of all Sastras (mila-sastra). All 
others are based on it. The Tantra is spoken of as a fifth 
Veda. Kulluka-Bhatta, the celebrated commentator on 
Manu, says that Sruti is of two kinds, Vaidik and Tantrik 
(vaidiki-tantriki caiva dvi-vidha érutihkirtita). The 
various Sastras, however, are different presentments of 
Sruti appropriate to the humanity of the age for which 
they are given. Thus the Tantra is that presentment of 
Sruti which is modelled as regards its ritual to meet the 
characteristics and infirmities of the Kali-yuga. As men 


1On the subject matter of this paragraph see my Introduction to “The 
Principles of Tantra” (Tantra-tattva), where it is dealt with in greater detail. 

2 These are referred to as samhita (collection), which term includes 
amongst other things Dharma-Sastra, Smrti, Srutijivika, Purana, Upa- 
puranas, Itihasa (history), the books of Vasistha, Valmiki, and others. See 
Sabda-ratnavali, and Brahmavaivartta Purana, Jnana-Kanda, chap cxxxil. 


THE SCRIPTURES OF THE AGES 41 


have no longer the capacity, longevity, and moral 
strength necessary for the application of the Vaidika 
Karma-kanda, the Tantra prescribes a special sadhana, 
or means or practice of its own, for the attainment of 
that which is the ultimate and common end of all 
Sastras. The Kularnava-Tantra says! that in the Satya 
or Krta age the Sastra is Sruti (in the sense of the 
Upanisads); in Treta-yuga, Smrti (in the sense of the 
Dharma-Sastra and Srutijivika, etc.); in the Dvapara 
Yuga, the Purana; and in the last or Kali-yuga, the 
Tantra, which should now be followed by all orthodox 
Hindu worshippers. The Mahanirvana? and other 
Tantras and Tantrik works? lay down the same rule. 
The Tantra is also said to contain the very core of the 
Veda to which, it is described to bear the relation of the 
Paramatma to the Jivatma. In a similar way, Kulacara 
is the central informing life of the gross body called 
vedacara, each of the acara which follow it up to kaul- 
acara, being more and more subtle sheaths. 


1 Krte srutyukta acaras Tretayam smrti-sambhavah, Dvapare tu pura- 
noktam Kalau agama kevalam. 

2 Chapter I, verse 23 et seq. 

3So the Tara-Pradipa (chap. i) says that in the Kali-yuga the Tantrika 
and not the Vaidika-Dharma is to be followed (see as to the Sastras, my 
Introduction to “Principles of Tantra”). 


THE HUMAN BODY 


THE human body is Brahma-pura, the city of Brahman. 
Iévara Himself enters into the universe as jiva. Where- 
fore the maha-vakya “That thou art” means that the ego 
(which is regarded as jiva only from the standpoint of an 
upadhi)! is Brahman. 


THE FIVE SHEATHS 


In the body there are five kogas or sheaths—anna- 
maya, prana-maya, mano-maya, vijnana-maya, ananda- 
maya, or the physical and vital bodies, the two mental 
bodies, and the body of bliss.? In the first the Lord is 
self-conscious as being dark or fair, short or tall, old or 
youthful. In the vital body He feels alive, hungry, and 
thirsty. In the mental bodies He thinks and under- 
stands. And in the body of bliss He resides in happi- 
ness. Thus garmented with the five garments, the Lord, 
though all-pervading, appears as though He were 
limited by them.? 


ANNA-MAYA KOSA 


In the material body, which is called the “sheath of 
food” (anna-maya ko§a), reign the elements earth, water, 


1 An apparently conditioning limitation of the absolute. 

2 According to “Theosophic” teaching, the first two sheaths are apparently 
the physical body in its dense (Anna-Maya) and etheric (Prana-maya) forms. 
Mano-maya represents the astral (Kama) and lower mental body; Vijnana- 
maya the higher mental or (theosophical) causal body, and the highest the 
Atmik body. 

3 Manasollasa of Suresvaracarya, Commentary on third loka of the Daks 
ina-murti-stotra. 


THE HUMAN BODY 43 


and fire, which are those presiding in the lower Cakras, 
the Muladhara, Svadhisthana and Mani-pura centres. 
The two former produce food and drink, which is assimi- 
lated by the fire of digestion, and converted into the 
body of food. The indriyas are both the faculty and 
organs of sense. There are in this body the material 
organs, as distinguished from the faculty of sense. 

In the gross body (Sarira-koga) there are six external 
kogas—viz., hair, blood, flesh,! which come from the 
mother, and bone, muscle, marrow, from the father. 

The organs of sense (indriya) are of two kinds—viz.: 
jnanendriyas or organs of sensation, through which 
knowledge of the external world is obtained (ear, skin, 
eyes, tongue, nose); and karmendriya or organs of action, 
mouth, arms, legs, anus, penis, the functions of which 
are speech, holding, walking, excretion, and procreation. 


PRANA-MAYA KOSA 


The second sheath is the prana-maya-koga, or 
sheath of “breath” (prana), which manifests itself in air 
and ether, the presiding elements in the Anahata and 
Visuddha-cakras. 

There are ten vayus (airs) or inner vital forces of 
which the first five? are the principal—namely, the 
sapphire prana; apana the colour of an evening cloud; 
the silver vyana; udana, the colour of fire; and the milky 
samana. These are all aspects of the action of the one 
Prana-devata. Kundalini is the Mother of prana, which 


1 The Prapanca-Sara (chap. ii) gives Sukla (semen) instead of mamsa 
(flesh). 

2 See Sarada-tilaka. The Minor vayus are naga, kurma, krkara, deva- 
datta, dhanamjaya, producing hiccup, closing and opening eyes, assistance to 
digestion, yawning, and distension, “which leaves not even the corpse.” 


44 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


She, the Mula-Prakrti, illumined by the light of the 
Supreme Atma generates. Prana is vayu, or the univer- 
sal force of activity, divided on entering each individual 
into five-fold function. Specifically considered, prana is 
inspiration, which with expiration is from and to a 
distance of eight and twelve inches respectively. Udana 
is the ascending vayu. Apana is the downward vayu, 
expelling wind, excrement, urine, and semen. The 
samana, or collective vayu, kindles the bodily fire, 
“conducting equally the food, etc., throughout the body.” 
Vyana is the separate vayu, effecting division and 
diffusion. These forces cause respiration, excretion, 
digestion, circulation. 
MANO-MAYA, VIJ NANA AND 
ANANDA-MAYA KOSAS 

The next two sheaths are the mano-maya and 
vijnana kohas. These coustitute the antah-karana, 
which is four-fold-namely, the mind in its two-fold 
aspect of buddhi and manas, self-hood (ahamkara), and 
citta.!_ The function of the first is doubt, samkalpa- 
vikalpatmaka, (uncertainty, certainty); of the second, 
determination (niscaya-karini); of the third (egoity), of 
the fourth consciousness (abhimana). Manas automati- 
cally registers the facts which the senses perceive. 
Buddhi, on attending to such registration, discrimi- 
nates, determines, and cognizes the object registered, 
which is set over and against the subjective self by 
Ahamkara. The function of citta is contemplation 
(cinta), the faculty? whereby the mind in its widest 


1 According to Samkhya, citta is included in buddhi. The above is the 
Vedantic classification. 
2The most important from the point of view of worship on account of 


mantra-smarana, devata-smarana, etc. 


THE HUMAN BODY 45 


sense raises for itself the subject of its thought and 
dwells thereon. For whilst buddhi has but three 
moments in which it is born, exists, and dies, citta 
endures. 


The antah-karana is master of the ten senses, 
which are the outer doors through which it looks forth 
upon the external world. The faculties, as opposed to 
the organs or instruments of sense, reside here. The 
centres of the powers inherent in the last two sheaths 
are in the Ajna Cakra and the region above this and 
below the sahasrara lotus. In the latter the Atma of the 
last sheath of bliss resides. The physical or gross body 
is called sthula-Sarira. The subtle body (suksmaSarira 
also called linga sarira and karana-Sarira) comprises 
the ten indriyas, manas, aharmmkara, buddhi, and the five 
functions of prana. This subtle body contains in itself 
the cause of rebirth into the gross body when the period 
of reincarnation arrives. 


The atma, by its association with the upadhis, has 
three states of consciousness—namely, the jagrat, or 
waking state, when through the sense organs are per- 
ceived objects of sense through the operation of manas 
and buddhi. It is explained in the ISvara-pratya-bhijna 
as follows—“the waking state dear to all is the source of 
external action through the activity of the senses.” The 
Jiva is called jagari—that is, he who takes upon himself 
the gross body called Visva. The second is svapna, the 
dream state, when the sense organs being withdrawn, 
Atma is conscious of mental images generated by the 
impressions of jagrat experience. Here manas ceases to 
record fresh sense impressions, and it and buddhi work 
on that which manas has registered in the waking state. 


46 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


The explanation of this state is also given in the work 
last cited. “The state of svapna is the objectification of 
visions perceived in the mind, due to the perception of 
idea there latent.” Jiva in the state of svapna is termed 
taijasa. Its individuality is merged in the subtle body. 
Hiranya-garbha is the collective form of these jivas, as 
Vaisvanara is such form of the jiva in the waking state. 
The third state is that of susupti, or dreamless sleep, 
when manas itself is withdrawn, and buddhi, dominated 
by tamas, preserves only the notion: “Happily I slept; I 
was not conscious of anything” (Patanjala-yoga-sutra). 
In the macrocosm the upadhi of these states are also 
called Virat, Hiranyagarbha, and Avyakta. The descrip- 
tion of the state of sleep is given in the Siva-sitra as 
that in which there is incapacity of discrimination or 
illusion. By the saying cited from the Patanjala-sutra 
three modifications of avidya are indicated—viz., ignor- 
ance, egoism, and happiness. Sound sleep is that in 
which these three exist. The person in that state is 
termed prajna, his individuality being merged in the 
causal body (karana). Since in the sleeping state the 
prajna becomes Brahman, he is no longer jiva as before; 
but the jiva is then not the supreme one (Paramatma), 
because the state is associated with avidya. Hence, 
because the vehicle in the jiva in the sleeping state is 
Karana, the vehicle of the jiva in the fourth is declared 
to be maha-karana. Iévara is the collective form of the 
prajna jiva. 


Beyond susupti is the turlya, and beyond turiya the 
transcendent fifth state without name. In the fourth 
state Suddha-vidya is required, and this is the only real- 
istic one for the yogi which he attains through samadhi- 


THE HUMAN BODY 47 


yoga. Jiva in turlya is merged in the great causal body 
(maha-karana). The fifth state arises from firmness in 
the fourth. He who is in this state becomes equal to 
Siva, or, more strictly tends to a close equality; for it is 
only beyond that, that “the spotless one attains the 
highest equality,” which is unity. Hence even in the 
fourth and fifth states there is an absence of full per- 
fection which constitutes the Supreme. Bhaskararaya, 
in his Commentary on the Lalita, when pointing out 
that the Tantrik theory adds the fourth and fifth states 
to the first three adopted by the followers of the 
Upanisads, says that the latter states are not separately 
enumerated by them owing to the absence in those two 
states of the full perfection of Jiva or of Siva. 
NADI 

It is said! that there are 3% crores of nadis in the 
human body, of which some are gross and some are sub- 
tle. Nadi means a nerve or artery in the ordinary sense; 
but all the nadis of which the books on Yoga? speak are 
not of this physical character, but are subtle channels of 
energy. Of these nadis, the principal are fourteen; and 
of these fourteen, ida, pingala and susumna are the chief; 
and again, of these three, susumna is the greatest, and 
to it all others are subordinate. Susumna is in the 
hollow of the meru in the cerebro-spinal axis.? It 


1 Nadi-vijnana (chap. 1, verses 4 and 5). 

2 Sat-cakra-niripana (commentary on verse 1), quoting from Bhita 
suddhi-Tantra, speaks of 72000 nadis (see also Niruttara-Tantra, Pranatosini, 
p. 35), and the Siva-samhita (2, 13) of three lacs and 50,000. 

3 It has been thought, on the authority of the Tantra-cuda-mani, that 
susumna is outside meru; but this is not so, as the Author of the Sat-cakra- 
nirupana points out (verse 2). Ida and Pingala are outside the meru; the 
quoted passage in Nigama-tattva-sara referring to susumna, vajra and citrini. 


48 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


extends from the Muladhara lotus, the Tattvik earth 
centre,! to the cerebral region. Susumna is in the form 
of Fire (vahni-svarupa), and has within it the vajrini- 
nadi in the form of the sun (strya-svarupa). Within the 
latter is the pale nectar-dropping citra or citrini nadi, 
which is also called Brahma-nadi, in the form of the 
moon (candra-svarupa). Susumna is thus triguna. The 
various lotuses in the different Cakras of the body (vide 
post) are all suspended from the citra-nadi, the cakras 
being described as knots in the nadi, which is as thin as 
the thousandth part of a hair. Outside the meru and on 
each side of susumna are the nadis ida and pingala. Ida 
is on the left side, and coiling round susumna, has its 
exit in the left nostril. Pingala is on the right, and 
similarly coiling, enters the right nostril. The susumna, 
interlacing ida and pingala and the ajna-cakra round 
which they pass, thus form a representation of the 
caduceus of Mercury. Ida is of a pale colour, is moon- 
like (candra-svarupa), and contains nectar. Pingala is 
red, and is sun-like (surya-svarupa), containing “venom,” 
the fluid of mortality. These three “rivers,” which are 
united at the ajna-cakra, flow separately from that 
point, and for this reason the ajna-cakra is called mukta 
triveni. The muladhara is called Yukta (united) triveni, 
since it is the meeting-place of the three nadis which are 
also called Ganga (Ida), Yamuna (Pingala), and 
Sarasvati (susumna), after the three sacred rivers of 
India. The opening at the end of the susumna in the 
muladhara is called brahma-dvara, which is closed by 
the coils of the sleeping Devi Kundalini. 


1The Tattvas of “earth,” “water,” “fire,” “air,” and “ether,” are not to be 
identified with the so-called popular “elements” of those names. 


THE HUMAN BODY 49 


CAKRAS 


There are six cakras, or dynamic Tattvik centres, in 
the body—viz., the muladhara, svadhisthana, mani- 
pura, anahata, visuddha, and ajfia—which are described 
in the following notes. Over all these is the thousand- 
petalled lotus (sahasrara-padma). 

MULADHARA 

Muladhara! is a triangular space in the midmost 
portion of the body, with the apex turned downwards 
like a young girl’s yoni. It is described as a red lotus of 
four petals, situate between the base of the sexual organ 
and the anus. “Earth” evolved from “water” is the 
Tattva of the cakra. On the four petals are the four 


99 667% 


golden varnas—“vam,” “Sam, 


99 66 


sam” and “sam.”? In the 
four petals pointed towards the four directions (Isana, 
etc.) are the four forms of bliss—yogananda (yoga bliss), 
paramananda (supreme bliss), sahajananda (natural 
bliss), and virananda (vira bliss). In the centre of this 
lotus is Svayambhu-linga, ruddy brown, like the colour 
of a young leaf. Citrini-nadi is figured as a tube, and 
the opening at its end at the base of the linga is called 
the door of Brahman (Brahma-dvara), through which 
the Devi ascends.? The lotus, linga and brahma-dvara, 
hang downwards. The Devi Kundalini, more subtle 


1 Mula, the root; adhara, support; for the muladhara is the root of 
Susumna and that on which Kundalini rests. 

2Tt need hardly be said that it is not supposed that there are any actual 
lotuses or letters engraved thereon. These and other terms are employed to 
represent realities of yoga experience. Thus the lotus is a plexus of nadis, the 
disposition of the latter at the particular cakra in question determining the 
number of the petals. 

3 Hence She is called in the Lalita-sahasra-nama (verse 106) Mula- 
dharam-bujarudh. 


50 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


than the fibre of the lotus, and luminous as lightning, 
lies asleep coiled like a serpent around the linga, and 
closes with Her body the door of Brahman. The Devi has 
forms in the brahmanda. Her subtlest form in the 
pindanda, or body, is called Kundalini, a form of Prakrti 
pervading, supporting, and expressed in the form of the 
whole universe; “the Glittering Dancer” (as the Sarada- 
tilaka calls Her) “in the lotus-like head of the yogi.” 
When awakened, it is She who gives birth to the world 
made of mantra.! A red fiery triangle surrounds 
svayambhu-linga, and within the triangle is the red 
Kandarpa-vayu, or air, of Kama, or form of the apana 
vayu, for here is the seat of creative desire. Outside the 
triangle is a yellow square, called the prthivi-(earth) 
mandala, to which is attached the “eight thunders” 
(asta-vajra). Here is the bija “lam” and with it prthivi 
on the back of an elephant. Here also are Brahma and 
Savitri,? and the red four-handed Sakti Dakini.? 


SVADHISTHANA 


Svadhisthana is a six-petalled lotus at the base of 
the sexual organ, above muladhara and below the navel. 
Its pericarp is red, and its petals are like lightning. 
“Water” evolved from “fire” is the Tattva of this cakra. 


99 66 299 


The varnas on the petals are “bam,” “bham,” “mam, 


99 66. 


“yam,” “ram,” and “lam.” In the six petals are also the 
vrttis (states, qualities, functions or inclinations)— 
namely, prasraya (credulity) a-visvasa (suspicion, mis- 


trust), avajna (disdain), murchcha (delusion, or, as some 


1 See Prana-tosini, p. 45. 

2 The Devi is Savitri as wife of the Creator, who is called Savita because 
He creates beings. 

3 Who according to the Sammohana-Tantra (chap. ii), acts as keeper of 
the door. 


THE HUMAN BODY 51 


say, disinclination), sarva-nasa (false knowledge),! and 
krurata (pitilessness). Within a semicircular space in 
the pericarp are the Devata, the dark blue Mahavisnu, 
Mahalaksmi, and Saraswati. In front is the blue four- 
handed Rakini Sakti, and the bia of Varuna, Lord of 
water or “vam.” Inside the bija there is the region of 
Varuna, of the shape of an half-moon, and in it is 
Varuna himself seated on a white alligator (makara). 


MANI-PURA 


Mani-pura-cakra? is a ten-petalled golden lotus, 
situate above the last in the region of the navel. “Fire” 
evolved from “air” is the Tattva of the cakra. The ten 
petals are of the colours of a cloud, and on them are the 
blue varnas—“dam,” “dham,” “nam,” “tam,” “tham,” 
esl pham” and the ten vrttis 


99 66. 


“dam,” “dham,” “nam,” “parh, 
(vide ante), namely, lajja (shame), pisunata (fickleness), 
irsa (jealousy), trsna (desire), susupti (laziness),? visada 
(sadness), kasaya (dullness), moha (ignorance), ghrna 
(aversion, disgust), bhaya (fear). Within the pericarp is 
the bija “ram,” and a triangular figure (mandala) of Agni, 
Lord of Fire, to each side of which figure are attached 
three auspicious signs or svastikas. Agni, red, four- 
handed, and seated on a ram, is within the figure. In 
front of him are Rudra and his Sakti Bhadra-kali. 
Rudra is of the colour of vermilion, and is old. His body 
is smeared with ashes. He has three eyes and two 
hands. With one of these he makes the sign which grants 


1 Lit. “destruction of everything,” which false knowledge leads to. 

2 So-called, it is said by some, because during samaya worship the Devi is 
(Pura) with gems (mani): see Bhaskara-raya’s Commentary on Lalita- 
sahasra-nama, verses 37 and 38. By others it is so called because (due to the 
presence of fire) it is like a gem. 


3 Deeply so, with complete disinclination to action: absence of all energy. 


52 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


boons and blessings, and with the other that which 
dispels fear. Near him is the four-armed Lakini-Sakti of 
the colour of molten gold (tapta-kancana), wearing 
yellow raiments and ornaments. Her mind is maddened 
with passion (mada-matta-citta). Above the lotus is the 
abode and region of Surya. The solar region drinks the 
nectar which drops from the region of the Moon. 


ANAHATA 


Anahata-cakra is a deep red lotus of twelve petals, 
situate above the last and in the region of the heart, 
which is to be distinguished from the heart-lotus facing 
upwards of eight petals, spoken of in the text, where the 
patron deity (Ista-devata) is meditated upon. “Air” 
evolved from “ether” is the Tattva of the former lotus. 
On the twelve petals are the vermilion varnas—“Kam,” 
“Kham,” “Gam,” “Gham,” “Nam,” “Cam,” “Cham,” "Jar", 
“Jham,” “Nam,” “Tam,” “Tham,” and the twelve vrttis 
(vide ante)—namely, aga (hope), cinta (care, anxiety), 
cesta (endeavour), mamata (sense of mineness),! dambha 
(arrogance or hypocrisy), vikalata (langour), ahamkara 
(conceit), viveka (discrimination), lolata (covetousness), 
kapatata (duplicity), vitarka (indecision), anutapa 
(regret). A triangular mandala within the pericarp of 
this lotus of the lustre of lightning is known as the Tri- 
kona Sakti. Within this mandala is a red banalinga 
called Narayana or Hiranyagarbha, and near it Iévara 
and his Sakti Bhuvaneévari. Iévara, who is the Over- 
lord of the first three cakras is of the colour of molten 
gold, and with His two hands grants blessings and 
dispels fear. Near him is the three-eyed Kakini-Sakti, 
lustrous as lightning, with four hands holding the noose 


1 Resulting in attachment. 


THE HUMAN BODY 53 


and drinking-cup, and making the sign of blessing, and 
that which dispels fear. She wears a garland of human 
bones. She is excited, and her heart is softened with 
wine.! Here, also, are several other Saktis, such as 
Kala-ratri, as also the bija of air (vayu) or “yam.” Inside 
the lotus is a six-cornered smoke-coloured mandala and 
the circular region of smoke-coloured Vayu, who is 
seated on a black antelope. Here, too, is the embodied 
atma (jivatma), like the tapering flame of a lamp. 


VISUDDHA 


Visuddha-cakra or Bharatisthana, abode of the Devi 
of speech, is above the last and at the lower end of the 
throat (kantha-mala). The Tattva of this cakra is 
“ether.” The lotus is of a smoky colour, or the colour of 
fire seen through smoke. It has sixteen petals, which 


+ | Sa Da | SO PT Sa 99 66. *. 99 66 1% 99 


carry the red vowels—“am,” “am,” “im,” “tm,” “um,” “am, 
“rm,” “rr,” “lm,” “lm,” “ern,” “aim,” “om,” “ar,” “ah”;? the 
seven musical notes (nisada, rsabha, gandhara, sadja, 
madhyama, dhaivata and paficama): “venom” (in the 
eighth petal); the bijas “hum,” “phat,” “vausat,” “ 


“svadha,” “svaha, 


vasat,” 
namah,” and in the sixteenth petal, 
nectar (amrta). In the pericarp is a triangular region, 
within which is the androgyne Siva, known as Ardha- 
narigvara. There also are the regions of the full moon 
and ether, with its bya “ham.” The akasa-mandala is 


99 66. 


1[*... more than a little drunk, and more than a little mad.”] 


2 [The last two are the anusvard and visarga, not strictly vowels but 
marks which modify vowel sounds, traditionally counted with the vowels in 
the alphabet. The former is romanized as “m” or “m.” In the symbolic repre- 
sentation of the letters on the lotuses, (see, e.g., plates in The Serpent Power) 
they are written with the anusvara dot above, whereas the anusvara and 
vigarga are attached to the first vowel, & (a), so both the a and anusvara 


appear the same both in the Devanagari script (%) and romanized form.] 


54 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


transparent and round in shape. Akaéa himself is here 
dressed in white, and mounted on a white elephant. He 
has four hands, which hold the noose! (paia), the ele- 
phant-hook? (ankusga), and with the other he makes the 
mudras which grant blessing and dispel fear. Siva is 
white, with five faces, three eyes, ten arms, and is 
dressed in tiger skins. Near Him is the white Sakti 
Sakini, dressed in yellow raiments, holding in Her four 
hands the bow, the arrow, the noose, and the hook. 


Above the cakra, at the root of the palate (talumula) 
is a concealed cakra, called Lalana and, in some Tantras, 
Kala-cakra. It is a red lotus with twelve petals, bearing 
the following vrttis:—sraddha (faith), santosha (content- 
ment), aparadha (sense of error), dama (self-command), 
mana® (anger), sneha (affection),* Soka (sorrow, grief), 
kheda (dejection), Suddhata (purity), arati (detachment), 
sambhrama (agitation),® Urmi (appetite, desire). 

AJNA 

Ajiia-cakra is also called parama-kula and mukta- 
tri-veni, since it is from here that the three nadis—Ida, 
Pingala and Susumna—go their separate ways. It isa 
two petalled lotus, situate between the two eyebrows. In 
this cakra there is no gross Tattva, but the subtle 


1The Devi herself holds the noose of desire. Desire is the vasana form 
and the noose is the gross form (see next note). 


2The Vamakeévara-Tantra says: “The noose and the elephant-hook of Her 
are spoken of as desire and anger.” But the Yogini-hrdaya i. 53 says: “The noose 
is icchagiakti, the goad jnana-Sakti, and the bow and arrows kriya-sakti.” 


3 Generally applied to the case of anger between two persons who are 
attached to one another, as in the case of man and wife. 


4 Towards those younger or lower than oneself. 


5 Through respect. 


THE HUMAN BODY 55 


Tattva mind! is here. Hakarardha, or half the letter Ha, 
is also there. On its petals are the red varnas “ham” 
and “ksam.” In the pericarp is concealed the bija “om.” 
In the two petals and the pericarp there are the three 
gunas—sattva, rajas and tamas. Within the triangular 
mandala in the pericarp there is the lustrous (tejo- 
maya) linga in the form of the pranava (pranavakrti), 
which is called Itara. Para-Siva in the form of hamsa 
(ham sa-rupa) is also there with his Sakti—Siddha-Kali. 
In the three corners of the triangle are Brahma, Visnu, 
and Maheégvara, respectively. In this cakra there is the 
white Hakini-Sakti, with six heads and four hands, in 
which are jnhana-mudra,? a skull, a drum (damaru), and 
a rosary. 


SAHASRARA PADMA 


Above the ajna-cakra there is another secret cakra 
called manas-cakra. It is a lotus of six petals, on which 
are Sabda-jnana, sparsga-jhana, rupa-jhana, aghranopa- 
labhi, rasopabhoga, and svapna, or the faculties of 
hearing, touch, sight, smell, taste, and sleep, or the 
absence of these. Above this, again, there is another 
secret cakra, called Soma-cakra. It is a lotus of sixteen 
petals, which are also called sixteen Kalas.? These 
Kalas are called krpa (mercy), myduta, (gentleness), 
dhairya (patience, composure), vairagya (dispassion), 
dhrti (constancy), sampat (prosperity),4 hasya (cheer- 
fulness), romanca (rapture, thrill), vinaya (sense of 


1 [Specifically (as far as I can tell from The Serpent Power), buddhi (as 
opposed to manas or the various other subtle tattvas which may be 
summarized in the English “mind”).] 

2 The gesture in which the first finger is uplifted and the others closed. 

3 Kala—a part, also a digit of the moon. 


4 That is, spiritual prosperity. 


56 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


propriety, humility), dhyana (meditation), susthirata 
(quietitude, restfulness), gambhirya (gravity),! udyama 
(enterprise, effort), aksobha (emotionlessness),? audarya 
(magnanimity) and ekagrata (concentration). 


Above this last cakra is “the house without support” 
(niralamba-puri), where yogis see the radiant Iévara. 
Above this is the pranava shining like a flame and 
above pranava the white crescent Nada, and above this 
last the point Bindu. There is then a white lotus of 
twelve petals with its head upwards, and over this lotus 
there is the ocean of nectar (sudha-sagara), the island of 
gems (manidvipa), the altar of gems (mani-pitha), the 
forked lightning-like lines a, ka, tha, and therein Nada 
and Bindu. On Nada and Bindu, as an altar, there is 
the Paramahamsa, and the latter serves as an altar for 
the feet of the Guru; there the Guru of all should be 
meditated. The body of the Hamsa on which the feet of 
the Guru rest is jiana maya, the wings Agama and 
Nigama, the two feet Siva and Sakti, the beak Pranava, 
the eyes and throat Kama-Kala. 


Close to the thousand-petalled lotus is the sixteenth 
digit of the moon, which is called ama kala, which is 
pure red and lustrous like lightning, as fine as a fibre of 
the lotus, hanging downwards, receptacle of the lunar 
nectar. In it is the crescent nirvana-kala, luminous as 
the Sun, and finer than the thousandth part of a hair. 
This is the Ista-devata of all. Near nirvana-kala is 
parama- nirvana-Sakti, infinitely subtle, lustrous as the 
Sun, creatrix of tattva-jfiana. Above it are Bindu and 
Visarga-Sakti, root and abode of all bliss. 


1 Of demeanour evidencing a grave nature. 


2 The State of being undisturbed by one’s emotions. 


THE HUMAN BODY 57 


Sahasrara-padma—or thousand-petalled lotus of all 
colours—hangs with its head downwards from the 
brahma-randhra above all the cakras. This is the region 
of the first cause (Brahma-loka), the cause of the six 
preceding causes. It is the great Sun both cosmically 
and individually, in whose effulgence Parama-Siva and 
Adya-Sakti reside. The power is the vacaka-Sakti or 
saguna brahman, holding potentially within itself the 
gunas, powers and planes. Parama-Siva is in the form 
of the Great Ether (paramakasa-rupi), the Supreme 
Spirit (paramatma), the Sun of the darkness of ignor- 
ance. In each of the petals of the lotus are placed all the 
letters of the alphabet; and whatever there is in the 
lower cakra or in the universe (brahmanda) exists here 
in potential state (avyakta-bhava). Saivas call this place 
Sivasthana, Vaisnavas, Parama-purusa, Saktas, Devi- 
sthana, the Samkhya-sages, Prakrti-purusa-sthana. 
Others call it by other names, such as Hari-hara-sthana, 
Sakti-sthana, Parama-Brahma, Parama-hamsa, Para- 
ma-jyotih, Kula-sthana, and Parama-Siva-Akula. But 
whatever the name, all speak of the same. 


THE THREE TEMPERAMENTS 


THE Tantras speak of three temperaments, dispositions, 
characters (bhava), or classes of men—namely, the 
pasu-bhava (animal), vira-bhava (heroic), and divya- 
bhava (deva-like or divine). These divisions are based 
on various modifications of the gunas (v. ante) as they 
manifest in man (jiva). It has been pointed out! that the 
analogous Gnostic classification of men as material, 
psychical and spiritual, correspond to the three gunas of 
the Samkhya-darsgana. In the pasu the rajo-guna oper- 
ates chiefly on tamas, producing such dark character- 
istics as error (bhranti), drowsiness (tandra), and sloth 
(alasya). It is however, an error to suppose that the 
pasu is as such a bad man; on the contrary, a jiva of this 
class may prove superior to a jiva of the next. If the 
former, who is greatly bound by matter, lacks enlighten- 
ment, the latter may abuse the greater freedom he has 
won. There are also numerous kinds of pasu, some more, 
some less tamasik than others. Some there are at the 
lowest end of the scale, which marks the first advance 
upon the higher forms of animal life. Others approach 
and gradually merge into the vira class. The term pasu 
comes from the root pas, “to bind.” The pasgu is in fact 
the man who is bound by the bonds (pasa), of which the 
Kularnava-Tantra enumerates eight—namely, pity 
(daya), ignorance and delusion (moha), fear (bhaya), 
shame (lajja), disgust (ghrna), family (kula), custom 


1 Richard Garbe, “Philosophy of Ancient India,” p. 48, as also before him, 
Baur. 


THE THREE TEMPERAMENTS 59 


(Sila), and caste (varna). Other enumerations are given 
of the afflictions which, according to some, are sixty-two, 
but all such larger divisions are merely elaborations of 
the simpler enumerations. The pasu is also the worldly 
man, in ignorance and bondage, as opposed to the yogi, 
and the tattva-jnani. Three divisions of pasu are also 
spoken of—namely, sakala, who are bound by the three 
pasas, called anu (want of knowledge or erroneous know- 
ledge of the self), bheda (the division also induced by 
maya of the one self into many), and karma (action and 
its product). These are the three impurities (mala) 
called anava-mala, maya-mala, and Karma-mala. Pra- 
tayakala are those bound by the first and last, and 
Vijnana-kevala are those bound by anava-mala only. 
He who frees himself of the remaining impurity of anu 
becomes Siva Himself. The Devi bears the paga, and is 
the cause of them, but She too, is pasupasa-vimocini,! 
Liberatrix of the pasu from his bondage. 


What has been stated gives the root notion of the 
term pasu. Men of this class are also described in Tantra 
by exterior traits, which are manifestations of the inter- 
lor disposition. So the Kubjika-Tantra? says: “Those 
who belong to pasu-bhava are simply pasus. A pasu 
does not touch a yantra, nor make japa of mantra at 
night. He entertains doubt about sacrifices and Tantra; 
regards a mantra as being merely letters only.? He 
lacks faith in the guru, and thinks that the image is but 
a block of stone. He distinguishes one deva from ano- 


1 Lalita-sahasra-nama (verse 78). 

2 Chapter VII. 

3 Instead of being Devata. Similarly the Nitya-Tantra (see Prana-tosini, 
547 et seq.). 


60 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


ther,! and worships without flesh and fish. He is always 
bathing, owing to his ignorance,’ and talks ill of others.? 
Such an one is called pasu and he is the worst kind of 
man.”4 Similarly the Nitya-Tantra® describes the pasu 
as—“He who doe not worship at night nor in the 
evening, nor in the latter part of the day,® who avoids 
sexual intercourse, except on the fifth day after the 
appearance of the courses 7 (rtukalam vina devi 
vamanam parivarjayet); who does not eat meat etc., even 
on the five auspicious days (parvana)”; in short, those 
who, following Vedacara, Vaisnavacara, and Saivacara, 
are bound by the Vaidik rules which govern all pasus. 


In the case of vira-bhava, rajas more largely works 
on sattva, yet also largely (though in lessening degrees, 
until the highest stage of divya-bhava is reached) works 
independently towards the production of acts in which 
sorrow inheres. There are several classess of vira. 


The third, or highest, class of man is he of the divya- 
bhava (of which, again, there are several degrees—some 


1 Not recognising that all are but plural manifestations of the One. 

2 That is, he only thinks of external and ceremonial purity, not of internal 
purity of mind, etc, 

3 That is, decrying as sectarian-minded Vaisnavas do, all other forms of 
worship than their own, a common fault of the pasu the world over. In fact, 
the Picchila-Tantra (chap. XX) says that the Vais nava must worship 
Paramesgvara like a pasu. 

4 All the Tantras describe the pagu as the lowest form of the three 
temperaments. Nitya-Tantra, and chap. X. of Picchila Tantra, where pasu- 
bhava is described. 

5 See Prana-tosini, p. 547. 

6 As Tantrika vira do. 

7 Taking their usual duration to be four days. This is a Vaidik injunction, 
as to which see post. The Vira and Divya are not so bound to maithuna on 
the fifth day only; that is as to maithuna as a part of viracara. 


THE THREE TEMPERAMENTS 61 


but a stage in advance of the highest form of vira-bhava, 
others completely realizing the deva-nature), in which 
rajas operates on sattva-guna to the confirmed prepon- 
derance of the latter. 


The Nitya-Tantra! says that of the bhava the divya 
is the best, the vira the next best, and the pasu the low- 
est; and that devata-bhava must be awakened through 
vira-bhava. The Picchila-Tantra? says that the only 
differenee between the vira and divya men is that the 
former are very uddhata, by which is probably meant 
excitable, through the greater prevalence of the inde- 
pendent working of the rajoguna in them than in the 
calmer sattvik temperament. It is obvious that such 
statements must not be read with legal accuracy. There 
may be, in fact, a considerable difference between a low 
type of vira and the highest type of divya, though it 
seems to be true that this quality of wddhata which is 
referred to is the cause of such differences, whether 
great or small. 


The Kubjika-Tantra* describes the marks of the 
divya as he “who daily does ablutions, sarndhya; and 
wearing clean cloth, the trpundara mark in ashes or red 
sandal, and ornaments of rudraksa-beads, performs 
japa and arcana. He gives charity daily also. His faith 
is strong in Veda, Sastra, Guru, and Deva. He worships 
the Pitri and Deva, performs all the daily rites. He has 
a great knowledge of mantra. He avoids all food, except 
that which his guru offers him, and all cruelty and other 


1 Loe. cit. 

2 Chapter X, and so also Utpatti-Tantra (chap. lxiv). See Prana-tosini, p. 
570, where also bhava is described as the dharma of the manas. 

3 Chapter VII. 


62 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


bad actions, regarding both friend and foe as one and 
the same. He himself ever speaks the truth, and avoids 
the company of those who decry the Devata. He worships 
thrice daily, and meditates upon his guru daily, and, as 
a Bhairava, worships Paramesvari with divya-bhava. 
All Devas he regards as beneficial.!. He bows down at 
the feet of women regarding them as his guru? (strinam 
pada-talam drstva guru-vad bhavayet sada). He 
worships the Devi at night,? and makes japa at night 
with his mouth full of pan, and makes obeisance to the 
kula vrksa.®° He offers everything to the Supreme Devi. 
He regards this universe as pervaded by stri (Sakti), 
and as Devata. Siva is in all men, and the whole brah- 
manda is pervaded by Siva-Sakti. He ever strives for 
the attainment and maintenance of devata-bhava, and 
is himself of the nature of a Devata. 


Here, again, the Tantra only seeks to give a general 
picture, the details of which are not applicable to all 
men of the divya-bhava class. The passage shows that it, 
or portions of it, refer to the ritual divya, for some of the 
practices there referred to would not be performed by 
the avadhata, who is above all ritual acts, though he 


1 He worships all Devas, drawing no distinctions. For instance, an ortho- 
dox, up-country Hindu who is a worshipper of Rama cannot even bear to hear 
the name of Krsna, though both Rama and Krsna are each avatara of the 
same Visnu, who is again himself but a partial manifestation of the great 
Sakti. 

2 He is even stri-khanda-panaja-rudhira-bhisitah, for he is unaffected by 
the paga of ghrna or lajja. 

3 Vaidik worship is by day. 

4 That is, after eating, pan being taken after meals. 

5 An esoteric term, as to which see Tantrabhidhana. Similarly (in Nitya- 
Tantra), he does obeisance to the kulastri, who is versed in Tantra and 
mantra, whether she has been brought by a duti, is puméchali, or veSya and 
whether youthful or old. 


THE THREE TEMPERAMENTS 63 


would also share (possibly in intenser degree) the beliefs 
of divya men of all classes—that he and all else are but 
manifestations of the universe-pervading Supreme Sakti. 


According to the temperament of the sadhaka, so is 
the form of worship and sadhana. In fact, the specific 
worship and sadhana of the other classes is strictly 
prohibited by the Tantra to the pasu. 


It is said in this Tantra! and elsewhere? that, in the 
Kali-yuga, divya and pasu dispositions can scarcely be 
found. It may be thought difficult at first sight to recon- 
cile this (so far as the pasu is concerned) with other 
statements as to the nature of these respective classes. 
The term paégu, in these and similar passages, would ap- 
pear to be used in a good sense’ as referring to a man 
who though tamasic, yet performs his functions with that 
obedience to nature which is shown by the still more 
tamasic animal creation free from the disturbing influ- 
ences of rajas, which, if it may be the source of good, may 
also be, when operating independently, the source of evil.4 


The Commentator explains the passage cited from 
the Tantra as meaning that the conditions and charac- 
ter of the Kali-yuga are not such as to be productive of 
pasu-bhava (apparently in the sense stated), or to allow 
of it’s acara (that is, Vaidikacara). No one, he says, can, 
fully perform the vedacara, vaisnavacara, and Saivacara 
rites, without which the Vaidik, Pauranik mantra, and 


1 Chapter 1, verse 24. 

2 See Syamarcana-candrika, cited in Hara-tattva-didhitti, p. 343. 

3 So verse 54 speaks of the pasu as one who should himself procure the 
leaves, fruits, and water for worship, and not look at a Sidra, or even think of 
a woman. 

4 For this reason it is possible, in certain cases, that a paSu may attain 
siddhi through the Tantra quicker than a vira can. 


64 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


yajna are fruitless. No one now goes through the brah- 
macarya asrama, or adopts after the fiftieth year that 
called vanaprastha. Those whom the Veda does not 
control cannot expect the fruit of Vaidik observances. 
On the contrary, men have taken to drink, associate 
with the low, and are fallen; as are also those men who 
associate with them. There can therefore be no pure 
pasu. Under these circumstances the duties prescribed 
by the Vedas which are appropriate for the pasu being 
incapable of performance, Siva for the liberation of men 
of the Kali Age has proclaimed the Agama. Now, there 
is no other way.” The explanation thus given, therefore, 
appears to amount to this. The pure type of pasu for 
whom vedacara was designed does not exist. For others 
who though pasu are not purely so, the Tantra is the 
governing Sastra. This however, does not mean that all 
are now competent for viracara. 


It is to be noted, however, that the Prana-tosini! 
cites a passage purporting to come from the Maha- 
nirvana-Tantra, which is apparently in direct opposition 
to the foregoing : 


Divya-vira-mayo bhavah kalau nasti kada-cana. 
Kevalam pasu-bhavena mantra-siddhirbhavenrnam. 


“In the Kali Age there is no divya or virabhava. It 
is only by the pasu-bhava that men may obtain mantra- 
siddhi.” 


This matter of the bhava prevalent in the Kaliyuga 
has been the subject of considerable discussion and 
difference of opinion, and is only touched upon here.? 


1 Pp. 570-571. 
2The subject is a difficult one, and I have given the above-mentioned 
account with considerable diffidence as to complete accuracy. 


GURU AND SISYA 


THE Guru is the religious teacher and spiritual guide to 
whose direction orthodox Hindus of all divisions of wor- 
shippers submit themselves. There is in reality but one 
Guru. The ordinary human Guru is but the manifesta- 
tion on the phenomenal plane of the Adinatha Maha- 
kala, the Supreme Guru abiding in Kailasa.! He it is 
who enters into and speaks with the voice of the earthly 
Guru at the time of giving mantra.? Guru is the root 
(mula) of diksa (initiation). Diksa is the root of mantra. 
Mantra is the root of Devata; and Devata is the root of 
siddhi. The Munda-mala-Tantra says that mantra is 
born of Guru and Devata of mantra, so that the Guru 
occupies the position of a grandfather to the Ista-devata. 


It is the Guru who initiates and helps, and the 
relationship between him and the disciple (Sisya) contin- 
ues until the attainment of monistic siddhi. Manu says: 
“Of him who gives natural birth and of him who gives 
knowledge of the Veda, the giver of sacred knowledge is 
the more venerable father. Since second or divine birth 
insures life to the twice-born in this world and the next.” 
The Sastra is, indeed, full of the greatness of of Guru.? 
The guru is not to be thought of as a mere man. There 


1 Guru sthanam hi kailasam (Yogini-Tantra, chap. i). 
2 Mantra-pradana-kale hi manuse naga-nandini, 
Adhisthanam bhavet tatra mahakalasya samkari, 
Atastu guruta devi manuse natra saméayah. (ibid.) 
3 See chap. i of the Tantra-sara, which also deals with the qualities of the 
Guru; the relationship between him and the disciple, qualities of the disciple 
and so forth. 


66 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


is no difference between Guru, mantra, and Deva. Guru 
is father, mother, and Brahman. Guru, it is said, can 
save from the wrath of Siva but none can save from the 
wrath of the Guru. Attached to this greatness there is 
however, responsibility; for the sins of the disciple recoil 
upon him. 


Three lines of Gurus are worshipped; heavenly (div- 
yanga), siddha (siddhanga), and human (manavanga).! 
The Kula-gurus are four in number, viz.: the Guru, 
Parama-guru, Parapara-guru, Paramestiguru; each of 
these being the guru of the preceding one. According to 
the Tantra, a woman with the necessary qualifications 
may be a guru, and give initiation.? Good qualities are 
required in the disciple,* and according to the Sara- 
samegraha a guru should examine and test the intending 
disciple for a year.‘ The qualifications of a good disciple 
are stated to be good birth, purity of soul (Suddhatma), 
and capacity for enjoyment, combined with desire for 
liberation (puru-sartha-parayanah).® Those who are 
lewd (kamuka), adulterous (paradaratura), constantly 
addicted to sin (sada papa-kriya), ignorant, slothful and 
devoid of religion, should be rejected.® 


The perfect sadhaka who is entitled to the knowledge 
of all Sastras is he who is pure-minded, whose senses 
are controlled (jitendriyah), who is ever engaged in 
doing good to all beings, free from false notions of 


1 See Chapter VI., “The Great Liberation.” 

2 See post. 

3 Tantrasara (chap. i). 

4 See Tantrasara (chap. i) and Prana-tosini, p. 108, Matsya-sukta Maha- 
tantra (chap. xiii). 

5 Matsya-sukta Tantra (chap. xiii). Prana-tosini, 108. 


6 Maharudra-yamala, 1. Khanda (chap. xv), 2. Khanda (chap. ii). 


GURU AND SISYA 67 


dualism, attached to the speaking of, taking shelter 
with and living in, the supreme unity of the Brahman.! 
So long as Sakti is not fully communicated (see next 
page) to the Ssisya’s body from that of the guru, so long 
the conventional relation of guru and Sisya exists. A 
man is Sisya only so long as he is sadhaka. When, how- 
ever, siddhi is attained, both Guru and Sisya are above 
this dualism. With the attainment of pure monism, 
naturally this relation, as all others, disappears. 


1 Gandharva-Tantra (chap. ii.). 


INITIATION: DIKSA 


INITIATION! is the giving of mantra by the guru. At the 
time of initiation the guru must first establish the life of 
the Guru in his own body; that is the vital force (prana- 
Sakti) of the Supreme Guru whose abode is in the 
thousand-petalled lotus. As an image is the instrument 
(yantra) in which divinity (devatva) inheres, so also is 
the body of guru. The day prior thereto the guru should, 
according to Tantra, seat the intending candidate on a 
mat of kuga grass. He then makes japa of a “sleep 
mantra” (suptamantra) in his ear, and ties his crown 
lock. The disciple, who should have fasted and observed 
sexual continence repeats the mantra thrice, prostrates 
himself at the feet of the guru, and then retires to rest. 
Initiation, which follows, gives spiritual knowledge and 
destroys sin. As one lamp is lit at the flame of another, 
so the divine sakti, consisting of mantra, is communi- 
cated from the guru’s body to that of the Sisya. Without 
diksa, japa of the mantra, puja, and other ritual acts, 
are said to be useless. Certain mantras are also said to 
be forbidden to Sudras and women. A note, nowever, in 
the first Chalaksara-Sutra to the Lalita? would, how- 
ever, show that even the Sudras are not debarred the 
use of even the Pranava, as is generally asserted. For 


1 As to who may initiate, see Tantrasara, chap. 1. 

2 First Chalaksara-Sutra. This is an index to the Sahasra-nama, like the 
Sarvanukramanika to the Veda. There are three svaras in laukika- 
vyakarana—viz, udatta, the high accent, anudatta, its opposite or the low 
accent and, svarita, which Panini says is the combination (samahrta) of both. 
Pracaya is Vaidik (chandasa). 


INTIATION: DIKSA 69 


according to the Kalika-Purana (when dealing with 
svara or tone), whilst the udatta, anudatta, and pracaya 
are appropriate to the first of these castes, the svara, 
called aukara, with anusvara and nada, is appropriate 
to Sudra, who may use the Pranava, either at the begin- 
ning or end of mantra, but not, as the dvija may, at both 
places. The mantra chosen for initiation should be 
suitable (anukula). Whether a mantra is sva-kula or 
a-kula to the person about to be initiated is ascertained 
by the kula-cakra, the zodiacal circle called rasicakra 
and other cakra which may be found described in the 
Tantrasara. Initiation by a woman is efficacious; that 
by a mother is eightfold so.! Certain special forms of 
initiation, called abhiseka, are described in the next 
note. 


1 Tantrasara, loc. cit. 


ABHISEKA 


ABHISEKA! is of eight kinds, and the forms of abhiseka 
which follow the first at later stages, mark greater and 
greater degrees of initiation. The first saktabhiseka is 
given on entrance into the path of sadhana. It is so called 
because the guru then reveals to the Sisya the prelimi- 
nary mysteries of sakti-tattva. By it the Sisya is 
cleansed of all sinful or evil Sakti or proclivities and 
acquires a wonderful new Sakti.2 The next, purnabhi- 
seka is given in the stage beyond daksinacara, when the 
disciple has qualified himself by purascarana and other 
practices to receive it. Here the real work of sadhana 
begins. Asana, yama, etc., strengthen the disciple’s 
determination (pratijia) to persevere along the higher 
stages of sadhana. The third is the difficult stage com- 
menced by krama-diksabhiseka, in which it is said the 
great Vasistha became involved, and in which the Rsi 
Visvamitra acquired brahmajnhana and so became a 
Brahmana. The sacred thread is now worn round the 
neck like a garland. The Ssisya, then undergoing various 
ordeals (pariksa), receives samrajyabhiseka and maha- 
samrajyabhiseka, and at length arrives at the most 
difficult of all stages introduced by yoga-diksabhiseka. 
In the previous stages the sadhaka has performed the 
pafnicanga-purascarana, and with the assistance of his 


1 Sprinkling, anointing, inaugurating, consecration as of a king or 
disciple. 

2 Of the saktabhiseka two forms are also mentioned—raja and yogi (see 
Pranatosini. 254; Vamakesvara Tantra, chap. 1; Niruttara-Tantra, (chap. vii). 
As to what follows, see Tantrarahasya, cited post. 


ABHISEKA 71 


guru (with whom he must constantly reside, and whose 
instructions he must receive direct), he does the parfic- 
anga-yoga—that is, the last five limbs of the astanga. 
He is thereafter qualified for purna-diksabhiseka, some- 
times called viraja-grahanabhiseka. On the attainment 
of perfection in this last grade, the sadhaka performs 
his own funeral rites (Sraddha), makes purnahuti with 
his sacred thread and crown lock. The relation of guru 
and Sisya now ceases. From this point he ascends by 
himself until he realizes the great saying, Soham (“I am 
He”). At this stage, which the Tantra calls jivan-mukta 
(liberated whilst yet living) he is called parama-hamsa. 


SADHANA 


SADHANA is that which produces siddhi (qg.v.). It is the 
means, or practice, by which the desired end may be 
attained, and consists in the exercise and training of the 
body and psychic faculties, upon the gradual perfection 
of which siddhi follows; the nature and degree of which, 
again, depends upon the progress made towards the real- 
ization of the atma, whose veiling vesture the body is. 
The means employed are various, such as worship (puja), 
exterior or mental; Sastric learning; austerities (tapas); 
the pafica-tattva, mantra and so forth. Sadhana takes on 
a special character, according to the end sought. Thus, 
sadhana for brahma-jnana, which consists in the acqui- 
sition of internal control (ama) over buddhi, manas, and 
ahamkara; external control (dama) over the ten indriyas, 
discrimination between the transitory and the eternal, 
and renunciation both of the world and heaven (svarga), 
is obviously different from that prescribed for, say, the 
purposes of the lower magic. The sadhaka and sadhika 
are respectively the man and woman who perform sad- 
hana. They are, according to their physical, mental, and 
moral qualities, divided into four classes—mrdu, mad- 
hya, adhimatraka, and the highest adhimatrama, who 
is qualified (adhikari) for all forms of yoga. In a similar 
way the Kaula division of worshippers are divided into 
the prakrti, or common Kaula following viracara, addic- 
ted to ritual practice, and sadhana with Panca-tattva; 
the madhyamakaulika, or middling Kaula, accomplish- 
ing the same sadhana, but with a mind more turned 
towards meditation, knowledge, and samadhi; and the 
highest type of Kaula (kaulikottama), who having sur- 
passed all ritualism meditates upon the Universal Self. 


WORSHIP 


THERE are four difference forms of worship corresponding 
with four states (bhava).! The realization that the jiv- 
atma and paramatma are one, that everything is Brah- 
man, and that nothing but the Brahman exists, is the 
highest state or brahma-bhava. Constant meditation by 
the yoga process upon the Devata in the heart is the 
lower and middlemost (dhyana-bhava); japa (q.v.) and 
stava (hymns and prayer) is still lower, and the lowest 
of all mere external worship (puja) (qg.v.). Puja-bhava is 
that which arises out of the dualistic notions of worship- 
per and worshipped; the servant and the Lord. This 
dualism exists in greater or less degree in all states 
except the highest. But for him who, having realized 
the advaita-tattva, knows that all is Brahman, there is 
neither worshipper nor worshipped, neither yoga nor 
puja, nor dharana, dhyana, stava, japa, vrata, or other 
ritual or process of sadhana. 


In external worship there is worship either of an 
image (pratima), or of a yantra (qg.v.), which takes its 
place. The sadhaka should first worship inwardly the 
mental image of the form assumed by the Devi, and then 
by the life-giving (prana-pratistha) ceremony infuse the 
image with Her life by the communication to it of the 
light and energy (tejas) of the Brahman which is within 
him to the image without, from which there bursts the 
lustre of Her whose substance is consciousness itself 
(caitanya-mayl). She exists as Sakti in stone or metal, 


1 See “Principles of Tantra.” 


74 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


or elsewhere, but is there veiled and seemingly inert. 
Caitanya (consciousness) is aroused by the worshipper 
through the prana-pratistha mantra. 


Rites (karma) are of two kinds. Karma is either 
nitya or naimittika. The first is both daily and obliga- 
tory, and is done because so ordained. Such are the 
sandhya (v. post), which in the case of Siidras is in the 
Tantrik form, and daily puja (v. post) of the Ista- and 
Kula-Devata (v. post); and for Brahmanas the pafica- 
maha-yajna (v. post). The second or conditional karma 
is occasional and voluntary, and is kamya when done to 
gain some particular end, such as yajna for a particular 
object; tapas with the same end (for certain forms of 
tapas are also nitya) and vrata (v. post.) 


The Sidra is precluded from the performance of 
Vaidik rites, or the reading of Vedas, or the recital of the 
Vaidik mantra. His worship is practically limited to 
that of the Ista-Devata and the Bana-linga-puja, with 
Tantrik and Pauranik mantra and such vratas as con- 
sist in penance and charity. In other cases the vrata is 
performed through a Brahmana. The Tantra makes no 
caste distinctions as regards worship. All may read the 
Tantras, perform the Tantrik worship, such as the 
sandhya (v. post), and recite the Tantrik mantra, such 
as the Tantrik Gayatri. All castes, and even the lowest 
candala, may be a member of a cakra, or Tantrik circle 
of worship. In the cakra all its members partake of food 
and drink together and are deemed to be greater than 
Brahmanas; though upon the break-up of the cakra the 
ordinary caste and social relations are re-established. 
All are competent for the special Tantrik worship, for in 
the words of the Gautamiya-Tantra, the Tantra-Sastra 


WORSHIP ae 


is for all castes and for all women.! The latter are also 
excluded under the present Vaidik system, though it is 
said by Sankha Dharma-sastrakara that the wife may, 
with the consent of her husband, fast, take vows, perform 
homa and vrata,? etc. According to the Tantra, a woman 
may not only receive mantra, but may, as a Guru, initiate 
and give it.? She is worshipful as Guru, and as wife of 
Guru.4 The Devi is Herself Guru of all Sastras® and 
women, as, indeed, all females who are Her embodiments 
are, in a peculiar sense, Her earthly representatives. 


FORMS OF ACARA 


There are seven, or, aS some say, nine, divisions of 
worshippers. The extra divisions are bracketed in the 
following quotation. The Kularnava-Tantra mentions 
seven, which are given in their order of superiority, the 
first being the lowest: Vedacara, Vaisnavacara, Saiva- 
cara,® Daksinacara, Vamacara, Siddhantacara, (Aghora- 
cara, Yogacara), and Kaulacara, the highest of all.?7 The 
acara is the way, custom and practice of a particular 
class of sadhakas. They are not, as sometimes supposed, 


1 Sarva-varnadhikarascha narinam yogya eva ca (chap. i). 

2 Tt has been said that neither a virgin (kumari), a pregnant woman 
(garbhini), nor a woman during her period, can perform vyata. 

3 Rudra-yamala, 2 Khanda (chap. 11); 1 Khanda (chap, xv.), where the 
qualifications are stated. 

4 Tbid., 1 Khanda (chap, i); Matrka-bheda-Tantra (chap. viii); Annada- 
lalpa Tantra cited in Prana-tosini, p. 68. As the Yogini-Tantra says, guru- 
patni mahesani gurureva (chap. i). 

5 Kankala-malini-Tantra (chap. li). 

6 This is generally regarded as a distinct sect though the author below 
cited says it is, in fact, not so. Aghora means, it is said, one who is liberated 
from the terrible (ghora) sarnsara, but in any case, many worshippers for want 
of instruction by a siddha-guru have degenerated into mere eaters of corpses. 

7 Chapter II. A short description (of little aid) is given in the Visvasara- 
Tantra (chap. xxiv). See also Hara-tattva-didhiti, fourth edition, pp. 339, et seq. 


76 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


different sects, but stages through which the worshipper 
in this or other births has to pass before he reaches the 
supreme stage of the Kaula. Vedacara, which consists 
in the daily practice of the Vaidik rites, is the gross body 
(sthuladeha), which comprises within it all other acaras, 
which are, as it were, its subtle bodies (suksma-deha) of 
various degrees. The worship is largely of an external 
and ritual character, the object of which is to strengthen 
dharma. This is the path of action (kriya-marga). In the 
second stage the worshipper passes from blind faith to 
an understanding of the supreme protecting energy of 
the Brahman, towards which he has the feelings of devo- 
tion. This is the path of devotion (bhakti-marga), and the 
aim at this stage is the union of it and faith previously 
acquired. With an increasing determination to protect 
dharma and destroy adharma, the sadhaka passes into 
Saivacara, the warrior (ksatriya) stage, wherein to love 
and mercy are added strenuous striving and the cultiva- 
tion of power. There is union of faith, devotion (bhakti), 
and inward determination (antar-laksa). Entrance is 
made upon the path of knowledge (jfana-marga). Fol- 
lowing this is Daksinacara, which in Tantra does not 
mean “right-hand worship,” but “favourable’—that is, that 
acara which is favourable to the accomplishment of the 
higher sadhana, and whereof the Devi is the Daksina- 
Kalika. This stage commences when the worshipper can 
make dhyana and dharana of the threefold Sakti of the 
Brahman (kriya, iccha, jhana), and understands the mu- 
tual connection (samanvaya) of the three gunas until he 
receives purnabhiseka (q.v.). At this stage the sadhaka 


1 See as to this and following the Sanatana-sadhana-tattva, or Tantra- 
rahasya of Sacchidananda Svami. [No citation for this note in my copy-text. 
—ED.] 


WORSHIP ys 


18 Sakta, and qualified for the worship of the threefold 
Sakti of Brahma, Visnu, MaheSvara. He is fully initia- 
ted in the Gayatri-mantra, and worships the Devi 
Gayatri, the Daksina-Kalika, or Adya Sakti—the union 
of the three Saktis. This is the stage of individualistic 
Brahmanattva, and its aim is the union of faith, devo- 
tion, and determination, with a knowledge of the three- 
fold energies. After this a change of great importance 
occurs, marking, as it does, the entry upon the path of 
return (nivrtti). This it is which has led some to divide 
the acara into two broad divisions of Daksinacara (inclu- 
ding the first four) and Vamacara, (including the last 
three), it being said that men are born into Daksina- 
cara, but are received by initiation into Vamacara. The 
latter term does not mean, as is vulgarly supposed, “left- 
hand worship” but worship in which woman (vama) 
enters, that is, lata-sadhana. In this acara there is also 
worship of the Vama-Devi. Vama is here “adverse,” in 
that the stage is adverse to pravrtti, which governed in 
varying degrees the preceding acara, and entry is here 
made upon the path of nivrtti, or return to the source 
whence the world sprung. Up to the fourth stage the 
Sadhaka followed pravrtti-marga, the outgoing path 
which led from the source, the path of worldly enjoy- 
ment, albeit curbed by dharma. At first unconsciously, 
and later consciously, sadhana sought to induce nivrtti, 
which, however, can only fully appear after the exhaustion 
of the forces of the outward current. In Vamacara, 
however, the sadhaka commences to directly destroy 
pravrtti, and with the help of the Guru (whose help 
throughout is in this necessary)! to cultivate nivrtti. 


1It is comparatively easy to lay down rules for the parvrtti-marga, but 
nothing can be achieked in Vamacara without the Guru’s help. 


78 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


The method at this stage is to use the forces of pravrtti 
in such a way as to render them self-destructive. The 
passions which bind may be so employed as to act as 
forces whereby the particular life of which they are the 
strongest manifestation is raised to the universal life. 
Passion, which has hitherto run downwards and out- 
wards to waste, is directed inwards and upwards, and 
transformed to power. But it is not only the lower 
physical desires of eating, drinking, and sexual inter- 
course which must be subjugated. The sadhaka must at 
this stage commence to cut off all the eight bonds (pasa) 
which mark the pasu which the Kularnava-Tantra 
enumerates as pity (daya), ignoranc (moha), shame 
(lajja), family (kula), custom (Sila), and caste (varna).! 
When Sri-Krsna stole the clothes of the bathing Gopis, 
and made them approach him naked, he removed the 
artificial coverings which are imposed on man in the 
samsara. The Gopis were eight, as are the bonds (pa§a), 
and the errors by which the jiva is misled are the 
clothes which Sri Krsna stole. Freed of these, the jiva is 
liberated from all bonds arising from his desires, family, 
and society. He then reaches the stage of Siva (Sivatva). 
It is the aim of Vamacara to liberate from the bonds 
which bind men to the samsara, and to qualify the 
sadhaka for the highest grades of sadhana in which the 
sattvika guna predominates. To the truly sattvik there 
is neither attachment nor fear nor disgust. That which 
has been commenced in these stages is by degrees com- 
pleted in those which follow—viz.: Siddhantacara, and 


1 There are various enumerations of the “afflictions” (pasa) which are, 
however, merely elaborations of the smaller divisions. Thus, according to the 
Devi-Bhagavata, Moha is ignorance or bewilderment, and Maha-moha is 
desire of worldly pleasures. 


WORSHIP 7 


according to some, Aghoracara and Yogacara. The sad- 
haka becomes more and more freed from the darkness of 
the samsara, and is attached to nothing, hates nothing, 
and is ashamed of nothing, having freed himself of the 
artificial bonds of family, caste, and society. The sadha- 
ka becomes, like Siva himself, a dweller in the cremation 
ground (smasana). He learns to reach the upper heights 
of sadhana and the mysteries of yoga. He learns the 
movements of the different vayus in the microcosm, the 
ksudra-brahmanda, the regulation of which controls the 
inclinations and propensities (vritti). He learns also the 
truths which concern the macrocosm (brahmanda). 
Here also the Guru teaches him the inner core of 
Vedacara. Initiation by yoga-diksa fully qualifies him 
for yogacara. On attainment of perfection in astanga- 
yoga he is fit to enter the highest stage of Kaulacara. 


Kaula-dharma is in no wise sectarian, but, on the 
contrary, is the heart of all sects. This the true meaning 
of the phrase which, like many another touching the 
Tantra, is misunderstood, and used to fix the kaula with 
hypocrisy—antah-saktah, bahih-Saivah, sabhayam vais. 
navamatah, nana-rupadharah kaulah vicaranti mahi- 
tale; (outwardly Saivas; in gatherings,! Vaisnavas; at 
heart, Saktas; under various forms the Kaulas wander 
on earth). A Kaula is one who has passed through these 
and other stages, which have as their own inmost 
doctrine (whether these worshippers know it or not) 
that of Kaulacara. It is indifferent what the Kaula’s 
apparent sect may be. The form is nothing and 
everything. It is nothing in the sense that it has no 


1 The Vaisnavas are wont to gather together for worship singing the 
praise of Hari, etc. 


80 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


power to narrow the Kaula’s own inner life; it is 
everything in the sense that knowledge may infuse its 
apparent limitations with an universal meaning. So 
understood, form is never a bond. The Visva-sara 
Tantra says! of the Kaula that “for him there is neither 
rule of time nor place. His actions are unaffected either 
by the phases of the moon or the position of the stars. 
The Kaula roams the earth in differing forms. At times 
adhering to social rules (Sista), he at others appears, 
according to their standard, to be fallen (bhrasta). At 
times, again, he seems to be as unearthly as a ghost 
(bhuta or pisaca). To him no difference is there between 
mud and sandal paste, his son and an enemy, home and 
the cremation ground.” 


At this stage the sadhaka attains to Brahma-jfiana, 
which is the true gnosis in its perfect form. On receiving 
mahapurna-diksa he performs his own funeral rites and 
is dead to the samsara. Seated alone in some quiet 
place, he remains in constant samadhi, and attains its 
nirvikalpa form. The great Mother, the Supreme 
Prakrti Mahasakti, dwells in the heart of the sadhaka 
which is now the cremation ground wherein all passions 
have been burnt away. He becomes a Parama-hamsa, 
who is liberated whilst yet living Givan-mukta). 


It must not, however, be supposed that each of 
these stages must necessarily be passed through by 
each jiva in a single life. On the contrary, they are 
ordinarily traversed in the course of a multitude of 
births. The weaving of the spiritual garment is recom- 
menced where, in a previous birth, it was dropped, on 
death. In the present life a sadhaka may commence at 


1 Chapter XXIV. 


WORSHIP 81 


any stage. If he is born into Kaulacara, and so is a 
Kaula in its fullest sense, it is because in previous 
births he has by sadhana, in the preliminary stages, 
won his entrance into it. Knowledge of Sakti is, as the 
Niruttara-Tantra says, acquired after many births; and, 
according to the Mahanirvana-Tantra, it is by merit 
acquired in previous births that the mind is inclined to 
Kaulacara. 


MANTRA 


Sabda, or sound, which is of the Brahman, and as 
such the cause of the Brahmanda, is the manifestation 
of the Cit-Sakti itself. The Visva-sara-Tantra says! that 
the Para-brahman, as Sabda-brahman, whose substance 
is all mantra, exists in the body of the jivatma. It is 
either unlettered (dhvani) or lettered (varna). The 
former, which produces the latter, is the subtle aspect of 
the jiva’s vital Sakti. As the Prapafica-sara states, the 
brahmanda is pervaded by Sakti, consisting of dhvani 
also called nada, prana, and the like. The manifestation 
of the gross form (sthua) of Sabda is not possible unless 
Sabda exists in a subtle (suksma) form. Mantras are all 
aspects of the Brahman and manifestations of Kula- 
kundalini. Philosophically, Sabda is the guna of akasa, 
or ethereal space. It is not, however, produced by akaéga, 
but manifests in it. Sabda is itself the Brahman. In the 
same way, however, as in outer space, waves of sound 
are produced by movements of air (vayu); so in the space 
within the jiva’s body waves of sound are produced 
according to the movements of the vital air (pranavayu) 
and the process of inhalation and exhalation. Sabda 


1 Chapter II. 


82 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


first appears at the muladhara and that which is known 
to us as such is, in fact, the Sakti which gives life to the 
jiva. She it is who, in the muladhara, is the cause of the 
sweet indistinct and murmuring dhvani, which sounds 
like the humming of a black bee. 


The extremely subtle aspect of sound which first 
appears in the Muladhara is called para; less subtle 
when it has reached the heart, it is known as pasgyanti. 
When connected with buddhi it becomes more gross, and 
is called madhyama. Lastly, in its fully gross form, it 
issues from the mouth as vaikhari. As Kulakundalini, 
whose substance is all varna and dhvani, is but the 
manifestation of, and Herself the Paramatma, so the 
substance of all mantra is cit, notwithstanding their 
external manifestation as sound, letters, or words; in 
fact, the letters of the alphabet, which are known as 
aksara, are nothing but the yantra of the aksara, or 
imperishable Brahman. This, however, is only realized 
by the sadhaka when his sakti, generated by sadhana, is 
united with the mantrasakti. 


It is the sthula or gross form of Kulakundalini, 
appearing in different aspects as different Devatas, 
which is the presiding Devata (adhisthatri) of all 
mantra, though it is the subtle or suksma form at which 
all sadhakas aim. When the mantrasakti is awakened 
by the sadhana the presiding Devata appears, and when 
perfect mantra-siddhi is acquired, the Devata, who is 
saccidananda, is revealed. The relations of varna, nada, 
bindu, vowel and consonant in a mantra, indicate the 
appearance of Devata in different forms. Certain vibhu- 
tis, or aspects, of the Devata are inherent in certain 
varnas, but perfect Sakti does not appear in any but a 


WORSHIP 83 


whole mantra. Any word or letter of the mantra cannot 
be a mantra. Only that mantra in which the playful 
Devata has revealed any of Her particular aspects can 
reveal that aspect, and is therefore called the individual 
mantra of that one of Her particular aspects. The form 
of a particular Devata, therefore, appears out of the par- 
ticular mantra of which that Devata, is the adhisthatr1- 
Devata. 


A mantra is composed of certain letters arranged in 
definite sequence of sounds of which the letters are the 
representative signs. To produce the designed effect 
mantra must be intoned in the proper way, according to 
svara (rhythm), and varna (sound).! Their textual source 
is to be found in Veda, Purana, and Tantra. The latter 
is essentially the mantra-Sastra, and so it is said of the 
embodied sastra, that Tantra, which consists of mantra, 
is the paramatma, the Vedas are the jivatma, Darsana 
(systems of philosophy) are the senses, Puranas are the 
body, and Smrtis are the limbs. Tantra is thus the sakti 
of consciousness, consisting of mantra. A mantra is not 
the same thing as prayer or self-dedication (atma-nive- 
dana). Prayer is conveyed in what words the worshipper 
chooses, and bears its meaning on its face. It is only 
ignorance of Sastrik principles which supposes that 
mantra is merely the name for the words in which one 
expresses what one has to say to the Divinity. If it were, 
the sadhaka might choose his own language without 
recourse to the eternal and determined sounds of Sastra. 


A mantra may, or may not, convey on its face its 


meaning. Bija (seed) mantra, such as Aim, Klim, Hrim, 


1 For those reasons a mantra, when translated, ceases to be such, and 
becomes a mere sentence. 


84 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


have no meaning, according to the ordinary use of lan- 
guage. The initiate, however, knows that their meaning 
is the own form (sva-rupa) of the particular Devata, 
whose mantra they are, and that they are the dhvani 
which makes all letters sound and which exists in all 
which we say or hear. Every mantra is, then, a form 
(rupa) of the Brahman. Though, therefore, manifesting 
in the form and sound of the letters of the alphabet, 
Sastra says that they go to Hell who think that the 
Guru is but a stone, and the mantra but letters of the 
alphabet. 


From manana, or thinking, arises the real under- 
standing of the monistic truth, that the substance of the 
Brahman and the brahmanda are one and the same. 
Man- of mantra comes from the first syllable of manana, 
and -tra from trana, or liberation from the bondage of 
the samsara or phenomenal world. By the combination 
of man- and -tra, that is called mantra which calls forth 
(amantrana), the catur-varga (vide post), or four aims of 
sentient being.! Whilst, therefore, mere prayer often 
ends in nothing but physical sound, mantra is a potent 
compelling force, a word of power (the fruit of which is 
mantra-siddhi), and is thus effective to produce catur- 
varga, advaitic perception, and mukti. Thus it is said 
that siddhi is the certain result of japa (q.v.). 


By mantra the sought-for (sadhya) Devata is 
attained and compelled. By siddhi in mantra is opened 
the vision of the three worlds. Though the purpose of 
worship (puja), reading (patha), hymn (stava), sacrifice 
(homa), dhyana, dharana, and samadhi (vide post), and 


1See “The Garland of Letters” and chapter on Mantra-tattva in “The 
Principles of Tantra.” 


WORSHIP 8s 


that of the diksa-mantra are the same, yet the latter is 
far more powerful, and this for the reason that, in the 
first, the sadhaka’s sadhana-sakti works, in conjunction 
with mantra-Sakti which has the revelation and force of 
fire, and than which nothing is more powerful. The 
special mantra which is received at initiation (diksa) is 
the bija or seed mantra, sown in the field of the sad- 
haka’s heart, and the Tantrik samdhya, nyasa, puja and 
the like are the stem and branches upon which hymns of 
praise (stuti) and prayer and homage (vandana) are the 
leaves and flower, and the kavaca, consisting of mantra, 
the fruit. 


Mantras are solar (saura) and lunar (saumya), and 
are masculine, feminine, or neuter. The solar are mascu- 
line and lunar feminine. The masculine and neuter 
forms are called mantra. The feminine mantra is known 
as vidya. The neuter mantra, such as the Pauranik- 
mantra, ending with namah, are said to lack the force 
and vitality of the others. The masculine and feminine 
mantras end differently. Thus, Hum, phat, are mascu- 
line terminations, and tham, svaha, are feminine ones.! 


The Nitya-Tantra gives various names to mantra, 
according to the number of their syllables, a one-sylla- 
bled mantra being called pinda, a three-syllabled one 
kartari, a mantra with four to nine syllables bia, with 
ten to twenty syllables mantra, and mantra, with more 
than twenty syllables mala. Commonly, however, the 
term bija is applied to monosyllabic mantra. The Tantrik 
mantras called bija (seed) are so named because they 


1 See Sarada-tilaka (chap. ii); Narada-pafica-ratra (chap. vii), the Pra- 
yogasara and Prana-tosini, (p. 70). If it be asked why formless things of mind 
are given sex, the answer is for the sake of the requirements of the worshipper. 


86 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


are the seed of the fruit, which is siddhi, and because 
they are the very quintessence of mantra. They are 
short, unetymological vocables, such as Hrim, Srim, 
Krim, Aim, Phat, etc., which will be found throughout 
the text.!. Each Devata has His bija.2 The primary man- 
tra of a Devata is known as the root mantra (mula-man- 
tra). It is also said that the word mula denotes the subtle 
body of the Devata called Kama-kala. The utterance of 
a mantra without knowledge of its meaning or of the 
mantra method is a mere movement of the lips and 
nothing more. The mantra sleeps. There are various 
processes preliminary to, and involved in, its right utter- 
ance, which processes again consist of mantra, such as, 
for purification of the mouth (mukha-sodhana),? purifi- 
cation of the tongue (jihva-Sodhana)‘ and of the mantra 
(aSauca-bhanga),® kulluka,® nirvana,’ setu,® nidhra-bhan- 
ga, awakening of mantra,® mantra-caitanya, or giving of 
life or vitality to the mantra.!° Mantrarthabhavana, 


1See also the mantra portion of the Atharva-Veda to which the Tantra 
stands in close relation. 

2 Krim (Kali), Hrim (Maya), Ram (Agni), Em (Yoni), etc. 

3 See Chapter X, Sarada-Tilaka. Japa of pranava or the mantra varies 
with the Devata—e.g., Orn Hsau for Bhairava. 

4 Seven japas of one-lettered bija triplicated, pranava triplicated, then 
one-lettered bija triplicated. 

5 Japa of mula-mantra receded and followed by pranava. As to the “birth” 
and “death” defilements of a mantra, see Tantrasara 75, et seq. 

6 See Sarada (loc. cit.). Thus Kulluka (which is done over the head) of 
Kalika is Maya (see Purascarana-Bodhini, p. 48, and Tantrasara). 

7 Japa of Mula- and Matrka-bija in the Manipira. 

8 Generally the mahamantra Om or Maya-bija Hrim, but also varies. 
Thus Setu of Kali is her own bija (krim), of Tara, Kurcca, etc. 

9 Japa of the Mantra is preceded and followed by im seven times. 

10 Japa of Mula-mantra in Manipira preceded and followed by Matrka- 
bya. Meditating on the mtla-mantra in the sahasrara, anahata, mula-dhara, 


WORSHIP 87 


forming of mental image of the Divinity.! There are also 
ten samskaras of the mantra.? Dipani is seven japas of 
the bija, preceded and followed by orm. Where hrim is 
employed instead of Om it is prana-yoga. Yoni-mudra is 
meditation on the Guru in the head and on the Ista- 
devata in the heart, and then on the Yoni-rupa Bhaga- 
vati from the head to the muladhara, and from the 
muladhara to the head, making japa of the yoni bija 
(em) ten times.*? The mantra itself is Devata. The 
worshipper awakens and vitalizes it by cit-Sakti, putting 
away all thought of the letter, piercing the six Cakras, 
and contemplating the spotless One.‘ The sakti of the 
mantra is the vacaka-sakti, or the means by which the 
vacya-sakti or object of the mantra is attained. The 
mantra lives by the energy of the former. The saguna- 
Sakti is awakened by sadhana and worshipped, and she 
it is who opens the portals whereby the vacya-sakti is 
reached. Thus the Mother in Her saguna form is the 
presiding deity (adhisthatri-Devata) of the Gayatri- 
mantra. As the nirguna (formless) One, She is its vacya- 
Sakti. Both are in reality one and the same; but the 
jiva, by the laws of his nature and its three gunas, must 
first meditate on the gross (sthula) form® before he can 
realize the subtle (suksma) form, which is his liberator. 


with Hum, and again in Sahasrara. The mila is the principal mantra, such 
as the paficadasi. 

1 Lit., thinking of meaning of mantra or thinking of the matrka in the 
mantra which constitute the Devata from foot to head. 

2 See Tantrasara, p. 90. 

3 See Purohita-darpanam. 

4 Kubijika-Tantra (chap. v). 

5 These forms are not merely the creatures of the imagination of the 
worshipper, as some “modernist” Hindus suppose, but, according to orthodox 
notions, the forms in which the Deity, in fact, appears to the worshipper. 


88 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


The mantra of a Devata is the Devata. The rhyth- 
mical vibrations of its sounds not merely regulate the 
unsteady vibrations of the sheaths of the worshipper, 
thus transforming him, but from it arises the form of 
the Devata which it is.1 Mantra-siddhi is the ability to 
make a mantra efficacious and to gather its fruit? in 
which case the mantra is called mantrasiddha. Mantras 
are classified as siddha, sadhya, susiddha, and ari, 
according as they are friends, servers, supporters, or 
destroyers—a matter which is determined for each 
sadhaka by means of cakra calculations. 


THE GAYATRI-MANTRA 


The Gayatri is the most sacred of all Vaidik man- 
tras. In it the Veda lies embodied as in its seed. It runs: 
Om bhur-bhuvah-svah: tat savitur varenyam bhargo 
devasya dhimahi dhiyo yo nah pracodayat. Om. “Let us 
contemplate the wondrous spirit of the Divine Creator 
(Savitr) of the earthly, atmospheric, and celestial 
spheres. May He direct our minds, that is ‘towards’ the 
attainment of dharma, artha, kama, and moksa, Om.” 


The Gayatri-Vyakarana of Yogi Yajnavalkya thus 
explains the following words: Tat, that.? The word yat 


1 Srnu devi pravaksyami bijanam deva-rupatam. 
Mantroccaranamatrena, deva-rupam prajayate. 
—(Brhad-gandharva-Tantra, chap. v.) 
2 Yam Yam prathayate kamam 
Tam tamapnoti niscitam. 
(Whatever the sadhaka desires that he surely obtains) 
—Prana-tosini, 619. 
3 Tat is apparently here treated as in the objective case agreeing, with 
varenyam, etc., but others holding that the vyahrti (Bhtr-bhuvah-svah) form 
part of and should be linked with, the rest of the Gayatri treat tat as part of a 


WORSHIP 8o 


(which) is understood.! Savituh is the possessive case of 
Savitr derived from the root su, “to bring forth.” Savitr 
is, therefore, the Bringer-forth of all that exists. The 
Sun (Surya) is the cause of all that exists, and of the 
state in which they exist. Bringing forth and creating 
all things, it is called Savitr. The Bhavisya-Purana says 
Surya is the visible Devata. He is the Eye of the world 
and the Maker of the day. There is no other Devata 
eternal like unto Him. This universe has emanated from 
and will be again absorbed into, Him. Time is of and in 
Him. The planets, the Vasus, Rudras, Vayu, Agni, and 
the rest are but parts of Him. By Bhargah is meant the 
Aditya-devata, dwelling in the region of the Sun (siirya- 
mandala) in all His might and glory. He is to the Sun 
what our spirit (atma) is to our body. Though He is in 
the region of the sun in the outer or material sphere He 
also dwells in our inner selves. He is the light of the 
light in the solar circle, and is the light of the lives of all 
beings. As He is in the outer ether, so also is He in the 
ethereal region of the heart. In the outer ether He is 
Surya, and in the inner ether He is the wonderful Light 
which is the Smokeless Fire. In short, that Being whom 
the sadhaka realizes in the region of his heart is the 
Aditya in the heavenly firmament. The two are one. 
The word is derived in two ways: (1) from the root bhri, 
“ripen, mature, destroy, reveal, shine.” In this deri- 
vation Surya is He who matures and transforms all 
things. He Himself shines and reveals all things by His 
light. And it is He who at the final Dissolution (pralaya) 
will in His image of destructive Fire (kalagni), destroy 


genitive compound connected with the previous vyahrti, in which case it is 
tesam. 
1Tt may, however, be said that yat is there in Yo nah. 


90 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


all things. (2) From bha=dividing all things into 
different classes; ro = colour; for He produces the colour 
of all created objects; ga, constantly going and return- 
ing. The sun divides all things, produces the different 
colours of all things, and is constantly going and return- 
ing. As the Brahmana-sarvasva says: “The Bhargah is 
the Atma of all that exists, whether moving or 
motionless, in three lokas (Bhur-bhuvah-svah). There is 
nothing which exists apart from it.” 


Devasya is the genitive of Deva, agreeing with 
Savituh. Deva is the radiant and playful (lilamaya) one. 
Surya, is in constant play with creation (srsti), existence 
(sthiti), and destruction (pralaya), and by His radiance 
pleases all. (Lila, as applied to the Brahman, is the 
equivalent of maya.) Varenyam = varaniya, or adorable. 
He should be meditated upon and adored that we may 
be relieved of the misery of birth and death. Those who 
fear rebirth, who desire freedom from death and libera- 
tion and who strive to escape the three kinds of pain 
(tapa-traya), which are adhyatmika, adhidaivika, and 
adhibhautika, meditate upon and adore the Bharga, 
who dwelling in the region of the Sun, is Himself the 
three regions called Bhur-loka, Bhuvar-loka, and Svar- 
loka. Dhimahi=dhyayema, from the root dhyai. We 
meditate upon, or let us meditate upon. 


Pracodayat = may He direct. The Gayatri does not 
so expressly state, but it is understood that such 
direction is along the catur-varga, or four-fold path, 
which is dharma, artha, kama, and moksa (piety, 
wealth, desire and its fulfilment, and liberation, vide 
post). The Bhargah is ever directing our inner faculties 
(buddhi-vrtti) along these paths. 


WORSHIP or 


The above is the Vaidik Gayatri, which, according to 
the Vaidik system, none but the twice-born may utter. 
To the Sidra, whether man or woman, and to women of 
all other castes it is forbidden. The Tantra which has a 
Gayatri-Mantra of its own, shows no such exclusiveness; 
Mahanirvana-Tantra, Chapter III, verses 109-111, gives 
the Brahma-gayatri for worshippers of the Brahman: 
“Paramesvaraya vidmahe; para-tattvaya dhimahi; tan 
no Brahma pracodayat” (May we know the supreme 
Lord, Let us contemplate the Supreme essence. And 
may that Brahman direct us).! 


YANTRA 


This word in its most general sense means an 
instrument, or that by which anything is accomplished. 
In worship it is that by which the mind is fixed on its 
object. The Yogini-Tantra says that the Devi should be 
worshipped either in pratima (image), mandala,” or yan- 
tra.? At a certain stage of spiritual progress the sadhaka 
is qualified to worship yantra. The siddha-yogi in in- 
ward worship (antar-puja) commences with the worship 
of yantra which is the sign (samketa) of brahma-vijhana 
as the mantra is the samketa of the Devata. It is also 
said that yantra is so called because it subdues (niyan- 
trana) lust, anger, and the other sins of jiva and the 
sufferings caused thereby. 


1“The Great Liberation.” 

2 A figure frequently drawn or made with various colours. The difference 
between a mandala and a yantra is that the former is used in the case of any 
Devata, whereas, a yantra is appropriate to a specific Devata only. 

3 Or where these are not available then in other substances, such as 
water, the flowers aparajita, jaba, karavira, drona: etc. (Kaulavaliya-Tantra). 


4“Principles of Tantra,” (Sadharana-upasana-tattva). 


g2 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


The yantra is a diagram engraved or drawn on 
metal, paper, or other substances,! which is worshipped 
in the same manner as an image (pratima). As different 
mantras are prescribed for different worships, so are 
different yantras. The yantras are therefore of various 
designs, according to the objects of worship.? The one on 
the next page is a Gayatri yantra belonging to the 
author. In the centre triangle are engraved in the 
middle the words, Sri Sri Gayatri sva-prasada siddhim 
kuru (“Sri Sri Gayatri Devi: grant me success”), and at 
each inner corner there are the bijas, Hrim and Hrah. 
In the spaces formed by the intersections of the outer 
ovoid circles is the bija “Hrim.” The outside circular 
band contains the bija “Tha” which indicates “Svaha,” 
commonly employed to terminate the feminine mantra 
or vidya. The eight lotus petals which spring from the 
band are inscribed with the bija, “Hrir, Im, Hrah.” The 
outermost band contains all the matrkas, or letters of 
the alphahet, from akara to ksa.* The whole is enclosed 
in the way common to all yantras by a bhupura, by 
which as it were, the yantra is enclosed from the outer 
world.4 The yantra when inscribed with mantra, serves 
(so far as these are concerned) the purpose of a mne- 
monic chart of that mantra appropriate to the particular 
Devata whose presence is to be invoked into the yantra. 
Certain preliminaries precede, as in the case of a 


1Thus the magical treatises speak of yantra designed on leopard’s and 
donkey’s skin, human bones, etc. 

2 A considerable number are figured in the Tantrasara. 

3Jn this and other metal yantras no figures of Devata are shown. These 
not uncommonly appear in yantras drawn or printed on paper, such as the 
eight Bhairava Sakti, etc. 

4In painted yantra serpents are commonly shown crawling outside the 
bht-pura. 


WORSHIP ia 


pratima, the worship of a yantra. The worshipper first 
meditates upon the Devata, and then arouses Him or 
Her in himself. He then communicates the divine 
presence thus aroused to the yantra. When the Devata 


GAYATRI YANTRA. 


94 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


has by the appropriate mantra been invoked into the 
yantra, the vital airs (prana) of the Devata are infused 
therein by the prana-pratistha ceremony, mantra, and 
mudra. The Devata is thereby installed in the yantra,! 
which is no longer mere gross matter veiling the spirit 
which has been always there, but instinct with its aroused 
presence, which the sadhaka first welcomes and then 
worships. Mantra in itself is Devata and yantra is man- 
tra in that it is the body of the Devata who is mantra.? 


MUDRA 


The term mudra is derived from the root mud, “to 
please," and in its upasana form is so called because it 
gives pleasure to the Devas. Devanam moda-da mudra 
tasmat tarn yatnatascaret. It is said that there are 108, 
of which 55 are commonly used.? The term means ritual 
gestures made with the hands in worship or positions of 
the body in yoga practice. Thus of the first class the 
matsya-(fish) mudra is formed in offering arghya by 
placing the right hand on the back of the left and 
extending, fish-like, on each side the two thumbs with 
the object that the conch which contains water may be 
regarded as an ocean with aquatic animals; and the 
yoni-mudra which presents that organ as a triangle 
formed by the thumbs, the two first fingers, and the two 
little fingers is shown with the object of invoking the 
Devi to come and take Her place before the worshipper, 


1 See, e g., Maha-nirvana-Tantra, chap, vi, verses 63 et seq. The process is 
the same as that employed in the case of images (pratima). 
2 Yantram mantram-mayam proktam mantratma devataiva hi. 
Dehatmanor-yatha bhedo, yantra-devatayostatha (Kaulavaliya Tantra). 
3 Sabda-kalpa-druma—sub voce mudra, and see chap, xi. Nirvana Tantra. 
As to the special sense of mudra in paficatattva, vide post sub voce. 


WORSHIP ae 


the yoni being considered to be Her pitha or yantra. The 
upasana mudra is thus nothing but the outward expres- 
sion of inner resolve which it at the same time intensi- 
fies. Mudras are employed in worship (arcana), japa, 
dhyana (q.v.), kamya-karma (rites done to effect parti- 
cular objects), pratistha (q.v.) snana (bathing), avahana 
(welcoming), naivedya (offering of food), and visarjana, 
or dismissal of the Devata. Some mudras of hatha yoga 
are described sub woc. “Yoga.” The Gheranda-samhita! 
says that knowledge of the yoga mudras grants all 
siddhis, and that their performance produces physical 
benefits such as stability, firmness, and cure of disease. 


SAMDHYA 


The Vaidiki samdhya is the rite performed by the 
twice-born castes thrice a day, at morning, midday, and 
evening. The morning samdhya is preceded by the 
following acts. On awakening, a mantra is said in invo- 
cation of the Tri-murti and the sun, moon, and planets, 
and salutation is made to the Guru. The Hindu dvi-ja 
then recites the mantra: “I am a Deva. I am indeed the 
sorrowless Brahman. By nature I am eternally free, 
and in the form of existence, intelligence, and bliss.” He 
then offers the actions of the day to the Deity, confesses 
his inherent frailty,? and prays that he may do right. 
Then, leaving his bed and touching the earth with his 
right foot, the dvi-ja says, “Om, O Earth! salutation to 
Thee, the Guru of all that is good.” After attending to 
natural calls, the twice-born does acamana (sipping of 


1 Chapter III, verses 4, 8, 10. 

2“T know dharma and yet would not do it. I know adharma, and yet 
would not renounce it.” The Hindu form of the common experience—Video 
meliora probaque; deteriora sequor. 


96 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


water) with mantra, cleanses his teeth, and takes his 
early morning! bath to the accompaniment of mantra. 
He then puts on his castemark (tilaka) and makes tar- 
panam, or oblation of water, to the Deva, Rsi and Pitr. 
The samdhya follows, which consists of acamana (sipping 
of water), marjana-snanam (sprinkling of the whole 
body with water taken with the hand or kuéga-grass), 
pranayama (regulation of prana through its manifesta- 
tion in breath), agha-marsna (expulsion of the person of 
sin from the body), the prayer to the sun, and then (the 
canon of the samdhya) the silent recitation (japa) of the 
Gayatri-mantra, which consists of invocation (avahana) 
of the Gayatri-Devi; rsi-nyasa and sadanganyasa (vide 
post), meditation on the Devi-Gayatri in the morning as 
Brahmani; at midday as Vaisnavi; and in the evening as 
Rudrani; japa of the Gayatri a specitied number of 
times; dismissal (visarjana) of the Devi, followed by 
other mantras.? 


Besides the Brahminical Vaidiki-samdhya from 
which the Sidras are debarred, there is the Tantriki- 
samdhya, which may be performed by all. The general 
outline is similar; the rite is simpler; the mantras vary; 
and the Tantrika-bijas or “seed” mantras are employed. 


1The householder is required to bathe twice, the ascetic at each of the 
three samdhyas. 


2The above is a general outline of the Sama Veda sarmdhya, though as 
each Hindu is of a particular sect and Veda, the samdhya differs in detail. 
See Kriyakandavaridhi and the Purohita-darpana, and Sriga Chandra-Vasu, 
“Daily Practice of the Hindus.” The positions and mudra are illustrated in 
Mrs. 8. C. Belnos’ “Sarndhya or Daily Prayer of the Brahmin” (1831). 


WORSHIP i 
PUJA 

This word is the common term for worship of which 
there are numerous synonyms in the Sanskrit language. 
Puja is done daily of the Ista-devata or the particular 
Deity worshipped by the sadhaka—the Devi in the case 
of a Sakta, Visnu in the case of a Vaisnava, and so forth. 
But though the Ista-devata is the principal object of 
worship, yet in puja all worship the Pafica-devata, or the 
Five Devas—Aditya (the Sun), Ganesa, the Devi, Siva, 
and Visnu or Narayana. After worship of the Pafica- 
devata the family Deity (Kula-devata), who is generally 
the same as the Ista-devata, is worshipped. Puja, which 
is kamya, or done to gain a particular end as also vrata, 
are preceded by the samkalpa; that is, a statement of 
the resolution to do the worship; as also of the parti- 

cular object, if any, with which it is done.? 


There are sixteen upacaras, or things done or used 
in puja; (1) asana (seat of the image); (2) svagata (wel- 
come); (3) padya (water for washing the feet); (4) arghya 
(offering of unboiled rice, flowers, sandal paste, durva 
grass,° etc., to the Devata) in the kushi, (vessel); (5 and 
6) acamana (water for sipping, which is offered twice); 
(7) madhuparlia (honey, ghee, milk, and curd offered in 
a silver or brass vessel); (8) snana (water for bathing); 
(9) vasana (cloth); (10) abharana (jewels); (11) gandha 
(scent and sandal paste is given); (12) puspa (flowers); 
(13) dhupa (incense stick); (14) dipa (light); (15) naivedya 


1 Such as arcana, vandana, saparyya, arhana, namasya, arca, bhajana, etc. 

2Tt runs in the form: “I—of gotra—etc., am about to perrorm this puja (or 
vrata) with the object,” etc. 

3 KuSa grass is used only in pitr-kriya or Sraddha, and in homa. Arghya 
is of two kinds—samanya (general), and vigesa (special). 


98 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


(food); (16) vandana or namaskara (prayer). Other 
articles are used which vary with the puja, such as 
Tulasi leaf in the Visnu-puja and bael-(bilva) leaf in the 
Siva-puja. The mantras said also very according to the 
worship. The seat (asana) of the worshipper is purified. 
Salutation being made to the Sakti of support or the 
sustaining force (adhara-sakti), the water, flowers, etc., 
are purified. All obstructive spirits are driven away 
(bhutapasarpana), and the ten quarters are fenced from 
their attack by striking the earth three times with the 
left foot, uttering the Astra-bija “phat,” and by snapping 
the fingers (twice) round the head. Pranayama (regula- 
tion of breath) is performed and (vide post) the elements 
of the body are purified (bhuta-Suddhi). There is nyasa 
(vide post); dhyana (meditation); offering of the upacara; 
japa (vide post), prayer and obeisance (pranama). In the 
asta-murti-puja of Siva, the Deva is worshipped under 
the eight forms: Sarva (Earth), Bhava (Water), Rudra 
(Fire), Ugra (Air), Bhima (Ether), Pasupati (yajamana— 
the Sacrifice man), [sana (Sun), Mahadeva (Moon).! 


YAJNA 


This word, which comes from the root yaj (to wor- 
ship), is commonly translated “sacrifice.” The Sanskrit 
word is, however, retained in the translation, since Yajna 
means other things also than those which come within 
the meaning of the word “sacrifice,” as understood by an 
English reader. Thus the “five great sacrifices” (parfica- 
maha-yajiia) which should be performed daily by the 
Brahmana are: The homa? sacrifice, including Vaisva- 


1 See Chapter V of Todala-Tantra. 
2 Vide post. 


WORSHIP a 


deva offering,! bhatayajiia or bali, in which offerings are 
made to Deva, Bhuta, and other Spirits and to animals; 
pitr-yajna or tarpana, oblations to the pitr; Brahma- 
yajha, or study of the Vedas and Manusyayajnia,? or 
entertainment of guests (atithisaparya). By these five 
yajnas the worshipper places himself in right relations 
with all beings, affirming such relation between Deva, 
Pitr, Spirits, men, the organic creation, and himself. 


Horna, or Deva-yajna, is the making of offerings to 
Fire, which is the carrier thereof to the Deva. A firepit 
(kunda) is prepared and fire when brought from the 
house of a Brahmana is consecrated with mantra. The 
fire is made conscious with the mantra, Vam vahni- 
caitanyaya namah, and then saluted and named. Medi- 
tation is then made on the three nadis (vide ante)—Ida, 
Pingala, and Susumna—and on Agni, the Lord of Fire. 
Offerings are made to the Istadevata in the fire. After 
the puja of fire, salutation is given as in Sadanga-nyasa, 
and then clarified butter (ghee) is poured with a wooden 
spoon into the fire with mantra, commencing with Om 
and ending with Svaha. Homa is of various kinds,? 
several of which are referred to in the text, and is per- 
formed either daily, as in the case of the ordinary nitya- 
vaisva-deva-homa, or on special occasions, such as the 
upanayana or sacred thread ceremony, marriage, vrata, 
and the like. It is of various kinds, such as prayakitta- 
homa, srstikrt-homa, janu-homa, dhara homa and others, 
some of which will be found in the “Principles of Tantra.” 


1 Offerings of food and other things are made in the domestic fire. (See 
Kriya-kanda-varidhi, p. 917). 

2 Also called Nr-yajna (man-sacrifice). 

3 See Kriya-kanda-varidhi; p. 133. Homa may be either Vaidik, Pauranik, 
or Tantrik. 


100 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


Besides the yajfia mentioned there are others. 
Manu speaks of four kinds: deva, bhauta (where articles 
and ingredients are employed, as in the case of homa, 
daiva, bali), nryajna, and pitr-yajia. Others are spoken 
of, such as japa-yajna, dhyana-yajfia, etc. Yajnas are also 
classified according to the dispositions and intentions of 
the worshipper into satvika, rajasika, and tamasika yajna. 


VRATA 


Vrata is a part of Naimittika, or voluntary karma.! 
It is that which is the cause of virtue (punya), and is 
done to achieve its fruit. Vratas are of various kinds. 
Some of the chief are Janmastami on Krsna’s birthday; 
Sivaratri in honour of Siva; and the satpafncami, Durv- 
astami, Talanavami, and Anantacaturdasi performed at 
specified times in honour of Laksmi, Narayana, and 
Ananta. Others may be performed at any time, such as 
the Savitri-vrata by women only,? and the Kartikeya- 
puja by men only.? The great vrata is the celebrated 
Durga-puja, maha-vrata in honour of the Devi as Durga, 
which will continue as long as the sun and moon endure, 
and which, if once commenced, must always be contin- 
ued. There are numerous other vratas which have 
developed to a great extent in Bengal, and for which 
there is no Sastric authority, such as Madhu-samkranti- 
vrata, Jalasamkrantivrata and others. While each vrata 
has its peculiarities, certain features are common to 
vratas of differing kinds. There is both in preparation 
and performance samyama, such as sexual continence, 


1 Vide ante. 
2To attain good wifehood, long life for the husband in this world and life 
with him in the next. 


3 To secure children. 


WORSHIP IOI 


eating of particular food such as havisyanna,! fasting, 
bathing. No flesh or fish is taken. The mind is concen- 
trated to its purposes, and the vow or resolution (ni- 
yama) is taken. Before the vrata the Sun, Planets, and 
Kula-devata are worshipped, and by the “suryah-somo- 
yamah-kala” mantra all Devas and Beings are invoked 
to the side of the worshupper. In the vaidika vrata the 
samkalpa? is made in the morning, and the vrata is 
done before midday. 


TAPAS 


This term is generally translated as meaning pen- 
ance or austerities. It includes these, such as the four 
monthly fasts (catur-masya), the sitting between five 
fires (paficagnitapah), and the like. It has, however, also 
a wider meaning, and in this wider sense is of three 
kinds, namely, Sarira, or bodily; vacika, by speech; 
manasa, in mind. The first includes external worship, 
reverence and support given to the Guru, Brahmanas 
and the wise (prajfa), bodily cleanliness, continence, 
simplicity of life and avoidance of hurt to any being 
(ahimsa). The second form includes truth, good, gentle, 
and affectionate speech, and the study of the Vedas. The 
third or mental tapas includes self-restraint, purity of 
disposition, silence, tranquility, and silence. Each of 
these classes has three subdivisions, for tapas may be 
satvika, rajasika, or tamasika, according as it is done 


1To prepare havisyanna, particular kinds of fruit and vegetable such as 
green bananas, dal , sweet potatoes (lal alu, in the vernacular), together with 
unboiled rice are placed in one pot. Only so much water is poured in as is 
necessary to make the whole boil. It should be boiled until no water is left. 
After the pot is taken off the fire, ghee and salt are added. 

2 Vide ante, p. 96. 


102 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


with faith, and without regard to its fruit; or for its 
fruit; or is done through pride and to gain honour and 
respect; or, lastly, which is done ignorantly or with a 
view to injure and destroy others, such as the sadhana 
of the Tantrika-sat-karma,! when performed for a male- 
volent purpose (abhicara). 


JAPA 


Japa is defined as “vidhanena mantroccaranam,” or 
the repeated utterance or recitation of mantra according 
to certain rules.? It is according to the Tantrasara of 
three kinds: Vacika or verbal japa, in which the mantra 
is audibly recited, the fifty matrkas being sounded 
nasally with bindu; Upamsu-japa, which is superior to 
the last kind, and in which the tongue and lips are 
moved, but no sound, or only a slight whisper, is heard; 
and, lastly, the highest form which is called manasa- 
japa, or mental utterance. In this there is neither sound 
nor movement of the external organs, but a repetition in 
the mind which is fixed on the meaning of the mantra. 
One reason given for the differing values attributed to 
the several forms is that where there is audible utter- 
ance the mind thinks of the words and the process of 
correct utterance, and is therefore to a greater (as in the 
case of vacika-Japa), or to a less degree (as in the case of 
upa msujapa), distracted from a fixed attention to the 


1 Santi, Vasikarana, Stambhana, Vidvesana, Uccatana and Marana. 

See Indra-jala-vidya; the Kamaratna of Naga-bhatta; Sat-karmadipika of 
Sri-Krsna Vidya-vagiga Bhattacarya, Siddha-yogesvari-Tantra, Siddha-Nag- 
arjuna, Kaksa-puta. Phet-karini. and other Tantras (passim). 

2 Though mere book knowledge is, according to the Sat-karmadipika, 
useless. 

Pustake likita vidya yena sundari japyate, 
Siddhir na jayate devi kalpa-koti-Satair api. 


WORSHIP 103 


meaning of the mantra. The Japas of different kinds 
have also the relative values, attachable to thought and 
its materialization in sound and word. Certain condi- 
tions are prescribed as those under which japa should 
be done, relating to physical cleanliness, the dressing of 
the hair, and wearing of silk garments, the seat (asana), 
the avoidance of certain conditions of mind and actions, 
and the nature of the recitation. The japa is useless 
unless done a specified number of times of which 108 is 
esteemed to be excellent. The counting is done either 
with a mala or rosary (mala-japa), or with the thumb of 
the right hand upon the joints of the fingers of that 
hand (kara-japa). The method of the counting in the 
latter case may differ according to the mantra.! 
SAMSKARA 

There are ten (or, in the case of Sadras, nine) purifi- 
catory ceremonies, or “sacraments,” called samskaras, 
which are done to aid and purify the jiva in the important 
events of his life. These are jivasheka, also called gar- 
bhadhana-rtu-samskara, performed after menstruation, 
with the object of insuring and sanctifying conception. 
The garbhadhana ceremony takes place in the daytime 
on the fifth day and qualifies for the real garbhadhana 
at night—that is, the placing of the seed in the womb. It 
is preceded on the first day by the rtu-samskara, which 
is mentioned in Chapter IX of Mahanirvana-Tantra. 
After conception and during pregnancy, the pumsavana 
and simantonnayana rites are performed; the first upon 
the wife perceiving the signs of conception, and the 
second during the fourth, sixth, or eighth month of 
pregnancy. 


1 See as to Japa, Tantrasara, 75, et seq. 


104 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


In the ante-natal life there are three main stages, 
whether viewed from the objective (physical) standpoint, 
or frorn the subjective (super-physical) standpoint.! The 
first period includes on the physical side all the structu- 
ral and physiological changes which occur in the ferti- 
lized ovum from the moment of fertilization until the 
period when the embryonic body, by the formation of 
trunk, limbs, and organs, is fit for the entrance of the 
individualized life, or jivatma. When the pronuclear 
activity and differentiation are completed, the jivatma, 
whose connection with the pronuclei initiated the pro- 
nuclear or formative activity, enters the miniature 
human form, and the second stage of growth and develop- 
ment begins. The second stage is the fixing of the 
connection between the jiva and the body, or the 
rendering of the latter viable. This period includes all 
the anatomical and physiological modifications by which 
the embryonic body becomes a viable foetus. With the 
attainment of viability, the stay of the jiva has been 
assured; physical life is possible for the child, and the 
third stage in ante-natal life is entered. Thus, on the 
form side, if the language of comparative embryology is 
used, the first samskara denotes the impulse to develop- 
ment, from the “fertilization of the ovum” to the “critical 
period.” The second samskara denotes the impulse to 
development from the “critical period” to that of the 
“viability stage of the foetus”; and the third samskara 
denotes the development from “viability” to “full term.” 


On the birth of the child there is the jata-karma, 
performed for the continued life of the new-born child. 


1 For what follows on the medical side, see the Appendix, vol. i. p. 194, on 
the Samskaras. by Dr. Louise Appel, in the “Pranava-vada” of Bhagavan Das. 


WORSHIP 105 


Then follows the nama-karana, or naming ceremony, and 
niskramana in the fourth month after delivery, when the 
child is taken out of doors for the first time and shown 
the sun, the vivifying source of life, the material embodi- 
ment of the Divine Savita. Between the fifth and eight 
month after birth the annaprasana ceremony is observed, 
when rice is put in the child’s mouth for the first time. 
Then follows the cudakarana, or tonsure ceremony;! and 
in the case of the first three or “twice-born” classes, upa- 
nayana, or investiture with the sacred thread. Herein 
the jiva is reborn into spiritual life. There is, lastly, ud- 
vaha, or marriage, whereby the unperfected jiva insures 
through offspring that continued human life which is the 
condition of its progress and ultimate return to its Divine 
Source. These are all described in the Ninth Chapter of 
this Tantra. There are also ten samskaras of the mantra 
(q.v.). The sarnskaras are intended to be performed at 
certain stages in the development of the human body, 
with the view to effect results beneficial to the human 
organism. Medical science of to-day seeks to reach the 
same results, but uses for this purpose the physical 
methods of modern Western science, suited to an age of 
materiality; whereas in the samskaras the superphysi- 
cal (psychic, or occult, or metaphysical and subjective) 
methods of ancient Eastern science are employed. The 
sacraments of the Catholic Church and others of its 
ceremonies, some of which have now fallen into disuse,? 
are Western examples of the same psychic method. 


1 A lock of hair is left at the top of the head, called sikha. As when a king 
visits a place, the royal banner is set up, so on the head in whose thousand- 
petalled lotus the Brahman resides, sikha is left. 

2 B.g., the blessing of the marital bed, which bears analogy to the Hindu 
garbhadhana rite. 


106 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


PURASCARANA 


This form of sadhana consists in the repetition (after 
certain preparations and under certain conditions) of a 
mantra a large number of times. The ritual! deals with 
the time and place of performance, the measurements 
and decorations of the mandapa, or pandal, and of the 
altar and similar matters. There are certain rules as to 
food both prior to, and during, its performance. The 
sadhaka should eat havisyanna,? or alternatively boiled 
milk (Ksira), fruits, or Indian vegetables, or anything 
obtained by begging, and avoid all food calculated to 
influence the passions. Certain conditions and practices 
are enjoined for the destruction of sin, such as contin- 
ence, bathing, japa (q.v.) of the Savitri-mantra 5008, 3008, 
or 1008 times, the entertainment of Brahmanas, and so 
forth. Three days before puja there is worship of Gan- 
esa and Ksetra-pala, Lord of the Place. Pafica-gavya,? 
or the five products of the cow, are eaten. The Sun, 
Moon, and Devas, are invoked. Then follows the sarmkal- 
pa.* The ghata or kalasga (jar), is then placed into which 
the Devi is to be invoked. A mandala or figure of a par- 
ticular design is marked on the ground, and on it the 
ghata is placed. Then the five or nine gems are placed 
on the kalaga, which is painted with red and covered 
with leaves. The ritual then prescribes for the tying of the 
crown lock (gikha), the posture (asana) of the sadhaka, 
japa (q.v.), nyasa, (qg.v.), and the mantra ritual or process. 


1 For a short account, see Purascarana-bodhini, by Hara-kumara-Tagore 
(1895) and see Tantrasara, p. 71. 

2 See ante. 

3 Milk, curd, ghee, urine. and dung, the two last (except in the case of the 
pious) in smaller quantity. 


4 See ante. 


WORSHIP 107 


There is meditation, as directed. Kulluka!is said and 
the mantra “awakened” (mantra-caitanya), and recited 
the number of times for which the vow has been taken. 


BHUTA-SUDDHI 


The object of this ritual, which is described in Maha- 
nirvana-Tantra, Chapter V, verses 93 et seq., is the puri- 
fication of the elements of which the body is composed.? 


The Mantra-mahodadhi speaks of it as a rite which 
is preliminary to the worship of a Deva.’ The process of 
evolution from the Para-brahman has been described. 
By this ritual a mental process of involution takes place 
whereby the body is in thought resolved into the source 
from whence it has come. Earth is associated with the 
sense of smell, water with taste, fire with sight, air with 
touch, and ether with sound. Kundalini is roused and 
led to the svadhisthana Cakra. The “earth” element is 
dissolved by that of “water” as “water,” is by “fire,” “fire” 
by “air,” and “air” by “ether.” This is absorbed by a higher 
emanation, and that by a higher, and so on, until the 
Source of all is reached. Having dissolved each gross 
element (maha-bhuta), together with the subtle element 
(tanmatra) from which it proceeds, and the connected 
organ of sense (indriya) by another, the worshipper 
absorbs the last element, “ether,” with the tanmatra 
sound into self-hood (ahamkara), the latter into Mahat, 
and that, again, into Prakrti, thus retracing the steps of 
evolution. Then, in accordance with the monistic teach- 


1 See ante. 
2 And not “removal of evil demons” as Professor Monier-Williams’ Dic- 
tionary has it. 
3 Taranga 1.: 
Devarca-yogyata-praptyai bhita-suddhim samacaret. 


108 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


ing of the Vedanta, Prakrti is Herself thought of as the 
Brahman, of which She is the energy, and with which, 
therefore, She is already one. Thinking then of the black 
Purusa, which is the image of all sin, the body is purified 
by mantra, accompanied by kumbhaka and recaka,! and 
the sadhaka meditates upon the new celestial (deva) 
body, which has thus been made and which is then 
strengthened by a “celestial gaze.”2 


NYASA 


This word, which comes from the root “to place,” 
means placing the tips of the fingers and palm of the 
right hand on various parts of the body, accompanied by 
particular mantras. The nyasas are of various kinds.? 
Jiva-nyasa‘ follows upon bhuta-suddhi. After the puri- 
fication of the old, and the formation of the celestial 
body, the sadhaka proceeds by jiva-nyasa to infuse the 
body with the life of the Devi. Placing his hand on his 
heart, he says the “soham” mantra (“I am He’), thereby 
identifying himself with the Devi. Then placing the eight 
Kula-kundalinis in their several places, he says the fol- 
lowing mantras: Aim, Krim, Klim, Yam, Ram, Lam, 
Vam, Sam, Sar, Sarn, Horn, Haum, Hamsah: the vital 
airs of the highly blessed and auspicious Primordial 
Kalika are here.® “Aim, etc., the embodied spirit of the 
highly blessed and auspicious Kalika is placed here.”6 


1 See Pranayama, s.v. Yoga, post. 

2 Vide post. 

3 See Kriya-kada-varidhi (p. 120, chap. ii et seq.) 

4 See Mahanirvana-Tantra, Chapter V, verse 105, where a fuller account 
is given of the above. 

5 Srimad-adya-Kalikayah prana iha pranah. 

6 Srimad-adya-Kalikayah Jiva iha sthitah. 


WORSHIP 109 


“Aim, etc., here are all the senses of the highly auspi- 
cious and blessed Kalika”;! and, lastly, “Aira, etc., may 
the speech, mind, sight, hearing, smell, and vital airs of 
the highly blessed and auspicious Kalika coming here 
always abide here in peace and happiness Svaha.”2 The 
sadhaka then becomes devata-maya. After having thus 
dissolved the sinful body, made a new Deva body, and 
infused it with the life of the Devi, he proceeds to matr- 
kanyasa. Matrka are the fifty letters of the Sanskrit 
alphabet; for as from a mother comes birth, so from 
matrka, or sound, the world proceeds. Sabdabrahman, 
the “Sound,” “Logos,” or “Word,” is the Creator of the 
worlds of name and form. 


The bodies of the Devata are composed of the fifty 
matrkas. The sadhaka, therefore, first sets mentally 
(antar matrka-nyasa) in their several places in the six 
cakras, and then externally by physical action (Bahya- 
matrkanyasa) the letters of the alphabet which form the 
different parts of the body of the Devata, which is thus 
built up in the sadhaka himself. He places his hand on 
different parts of his body, uttering distinctly at the. 
same time the appropriate matrka for that part. 


The mental disposition in the cakras is as follows: 
In the Ajna Lotus, Ham, Ksam, (each letter in this and 
the succeeding cases is said, followed by the mantra 
namah);? in the Viguddha Lotus Am, Am, and the rest of 
the vowels; in the Anahata Lotus kam, kham to tham; 
in the Manipura Lotus, dam, dham, etc., to pham: in the 


1 Srimad-adya-Kalikayah sarrvendriyani sthitani. 
2 Srimad-adya-Kalikayah vang-manas-caksuh-srotra-jinvaghrana-pranah 
iha-gatya sukam ciram tisthantu svaha. 


3 Thus, Ham namah, Ksam namah, etc. 


110 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


Svadhisthana Lotus bam, bham to lam; and, lastly, in 
the Muladhara Lotus, vam, §am,! sam,” sam. The exter- 
nal disposition then follows. The vowels in their order 
with anusvara and visarga are placed on the forehead, 
face, right and left eye, right and left ear, right and left 
nostril, right and left cheek, upper and lower lip, upper 
and lower teeth, head, and hollow of the mouth. The con- 
sonants kam to vam are placed on the base of right arm 
and the elbow, wrist, base and tips of fingers, left arm, 
right and left leg, right and left side, back, navel, belly, 
heart, right and left shoulder, space between the shoul- 
ders (kakuda), and then from the heart to the right palm 
sam is placed; and from the heart to the left palm the 
(second) sam; from the heart to the right foot, sam; from 
the heart to the left foot, ham; and, lastly, from the heart 
to the belly, and from the heart to the mouth, ksam. In 
each case om is said at the beginning and namah at the 
end. According to the Tantrasara, matrka-nyasa is also 
classified into four kinds, performed with different aims 
—viz: kevala where the matrka is pronounced without 
bindu; bindu-samyuta with bindu; samsarga with 
visarga; and sobhya with visarga and bindu. 


Rsi-nyasa then follows for the attainment of the 
caturvarga.? The assignment of the mantra is to the 
head, mouth, heart, anus, the two feet, and all the body 
generally. The mantras commonly employed are: “In 
the head, salutation to the Rsi (Revealer) Brahma; in 
the mouth, salutation to the mantra Gayatri;5 in the 


1 Talvya Sa—soft, palatal sh. 

2 Murdhanya sa—hard cerebral sh. 

3 Dharmartha-Kama-moksaye rsi-nyase viniyogah. 
4 Sirasi Brahmarsaye namah. 


5 Mukhe Gayattryai-cchandase namah. 


WORSHIP III 


heart, salutation to the Devi Mother Sarasvati;! in the 
hidden part, salutation to the bija, the consonants;? sal- 
utation to the gakti, the vowels in the feet;? salutation to 
visargah, the kilaka in the whole body.”4 Another form 
in which the bija is employed is that of the Adya; it is 
referred to but not given in Chap. V, verse 123, and is: 
“In the head, salutation to Brahma and the Brahmarsis;? 
in the mouth, salutation to Gayatri and the other forms 
of verse;® in the heart salutation to the primordial 
Devata Kali;7 in the hidden part, salutation to the bija, 
krim;° in the two feet, salutation to the sgakti, Hrim;9 in 
all the body, salutation to the Kalika Srim.”10 


Then follows anga-nyasa and kara-nyasa. These 
are both forms of sadanga-nyasas.!! When sadanga- 
nyasa is performed on the body, it is called hrdayadi- 
sadanga nyasa; and when done with the five fingers and 
palms of the hands only, angusthadi sadanganyasa. The 
short vowel a, the consonants of the ka-varga group, and 
the long vowel @ are recited with “hrdayaya namah” 
(salutation to the heart). The short vowel i, the conso- 
nants of the ca-varga group, and the long vowel 7, are 
said with “Sirasi svaha” (svaha to the head). The hard 


1 Hrdaye matrkayai sarasvatyai devatayai namah. 

2 Guhye (that is, the anus) vyanjanaya bijaya namah. 

3 Padayoh svarebhyoh saktibhyo namah. 

4 Sarvangesu visargaya kilakaya (that is, that which comes at the end or 
closes; the hard breathing) namah. 

5 Sirasi brahmane brahmarsibhyo namah. 

6 Mukhe gayatryadibhyascandobhyo namah. 

7 Hrdaye adyayai kalikayai devatayai namah. 

8 Guhye Krim-bijaya namah. 

9 Padayoh Hrim-saktaye namah. 

10 Sarvangesu Srim-kalikayai namah. 


1 Sat (six), anga (limb), nyasa (placing). 


112 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


ta-varga consonants set between the two vowels u and @ 
are recited with “sikhayai vasat” (vasat to the crown 
lock); similarly the soft ta-varga between the vowels e 


The short vowel 
o, the pa-varga, and the long vowel o are recited with 


and ai are said with “kavacaya! hum. 


netra-trayaya vausat (vausat to the three eyes). 2 
Lastly, between bindu and visarga® the consonants ya to 
ksa with “karatalakara prstha-bhyam astraya phat” 
(phat to the front and back of the palm). 


The mantras of sadanga-nyasa on the body are used 
for kara-nyasa, in which they are assigned to the 
thumbs, the “threatening” or index fingers, the middle 
fingers, the fourth, little fingers, and the front and back 
of the palm. 


These actions on the body, fingers, and palms also 
stimulate the nerve centres and nerves therein. 


In pitha-nyasa, the pithas are established in place 
of the matrka. The pithas, in their ordinary sense, are 
Kamarupa and the other places, a list of which is given 
in the Yogini-hrdaya.® 


For the attainment of that state in which the 
sadhaka feels that the bhava (nature, disposition) of the 
Devata has come upon him, nyasa is a great auxiliary. 
It is, as it were, the wearing of jewels on different parts 


1The Kavaca is the arms crossed on the chest, the hands clasping the 
upper part of the arms just beneath the shoulders. 

2 Including the central eye of wisdom (jfana-caksu). 

3 The nasal sound and hard breathing. 

4Tn all cases the letters are sounded with the nasal anusvara, as (in the 
last) am, yam, ram, lam, vam, Sam, sam, sam, ham, ksam, ah, etc. 

5 See Bhaskararaya’s Commentary on Sloka 156 of the Lalita-sahasra- 
nama and ante. The number of Pithas is variously given as 50 or 51. 


WORSHIP 113 


of the body. The bija of the Devata are the jewels which 
the sadhaka places on the different parts of his body. 
By nyasa he places his Abhistadevata in such parts, and 
by vyapaka-nyasa, he spreads its presence throughout 
himself. He becomes permeated by it losing himself in 
the divine Self. 


Nyasa is also of use in effecting the proper distribu- 
tion of the saktis of the human frame in their proper 
positions so as to avoid the production of discord and 
distraction in worship. Nydsa as well as Asana are 
necessary for the production of the desired state of mind 
and of cittaSuddhi (its purification). “Das denken ist der 
mass der Dinge.”! Transformation of thought is Trans- 
formation of being. This is the essential principle and 
rational basis of all this and similar Tantrik sadhanas. 


PANCATATTVA 


There are as already stated, three classes of men— 
Paégu, Vira, and Divya. The operation of the gunas which 
produce these types affect, on the gross material plane, 
the animal tendencies, manifesting in the three chief 
physical functions—eating and drinking, whereby the 
annamayakoga is maintained, and sexual intercourse, 
by which it is reproduced. These functions are the subject 
of the pafcatattva or pafcamakara (“five m’s”), as they 
are vulgarly called—viz: madya (wine), mamsa (meat), 
matsya (fish), mudra (parched grain), and maithuna 
(coition). In ordinary parlance, mudra means ritual ges- 
tures or positions of the body in worship and hathayoga, 
but as one of the five elements it is parched cereal, and 
is defined? as Bhristadanyadikam yadyad chavyaniyam 

1 Prantl. 
2 Yogini-Tantra (chap. vi). 


114 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


prachaksate, sa mudra kathita devi sarvesam naga- 
nandini. The Tantras speak of the five elements as 
pancatattva, kuladravya, kulatattva, and certain of the 
elements have esoteric names, such as karanavari or 
tirthavari, for wine, the fifth element being usually called 
latasadhana! (sadhana with woman, or sakti). The five 
elements, moreover have various meanings, according 
as they form part of the tamasika (pasva-cara), rajasika 
(viracara), or divya or sattvika sadhanas respectively. 


All the elements or their substitutes are purified 
and consecrated and then, with the appropriate ritual, 
the first four are consumed, such consumption being fol- 
lowed by lata-sadhana or its symbolic equivalent. The 
Tantra prohibits indiscriminate use of the elements, 
which may be consumed or employed only after purifi- 
cation (Sodhana) and during worship? according to the 
Tantric ritual. Then also, all excess is forbidden. The 
Syama-rahasya says that intemperance leads to Hell, 
and this Tantra condemns it in Chapter V. A well-known 
saying in Tantra describes the true “hero” (vira) to be, 
not he who is of great physical strength and prowess, 
the great eater and drinker, or man of powerful sexual 
energy, but he who has controlled his senses, is a truth- 
seeker, ever engaged in worship, and who has sacrificed 
lust and all other passions. (Jitendriyah, satyavadi, 


1 “Creeper” to which woman, as clinging to the male tree, is likened. 

2 See Tantrasara, 608, citing Bhava-cudamani. As regards maithuna, the 
Brhannilap-Tantra (chap. iv) says: Paradaranna gaccheran gacchecca praja- 
pedyadi (that is, for purpose of worship) and similarly the Uttara-Tantra: 

Pujakalam vina nanyam purusam manasa sprset 
Pujaleca devesi vesyeva paritosayet. 

The same rule as regards both madya and maithuna is stated in the 

Kulamrta as elsewhere. 


WORSHIP II5 


nityanusthanatatparah, kamadi-balidanasca sa vira iti 
giyate). 


The elements in their literal sense are not available 
in sadhana for all. The nature of the Pasgu requires strict 
adherence to Vaidik rule in the matter of these physical 
functions even in worship. This rule prohibits the drin- 
king of wine, a substance subject to the three curses of 
Brahma, Kaca, and Krsna, in the following terms; Mad- 
yam apeyam adeyam agrahyam (“Wine! must not be 
drunk, given, or taken”). The drinking of wine in ordi- 
nary life for satisfaction of the sensual appetite is, in 
fact, a sin, involving prayascitta, and entailing, accor- 
ding to the Visnu Purana,” punishment in the same Hell 
as that to which a killer of a Brahmana goes. As 
regards flesh and fish the higher castes (outside Bengal) 
who submit to the orthodox Smartha discipline eat 
neither. Nor do high and strict Brahmanas even in that 
Province. But the bulk of the people there, both men 
and women, eat fish, and men consume the flesh of male 
goats which have been previously offered to the Deity. 
The Vaidika dharma is equally strict upon the subject of 
sexual intercourse. Maithuna other than with the 
householder’s own wife is condemned. And this is not 
only in its literal sense, but in that which is known as 
Astanga (eightfold) maithuna—viz., smaranam (think- 
ing upon it), kirttanam (talking of it), keli (play with 
women), preksanam (looking upon woman), guhyabha- 
sanam (talk in private with woman), samkalpa (wish or 


1 From the standpoint of Tantrika-Viracara, the drinking of wine here 
referred to is ordinary drinking, and not the ritual worship (of those qualified 
for it) with the purified substacce which is Tara (the Saviour) Herself in 
liquid form (dravamay)). 

2 Visnu-Purana (Bk. II, chap. vi). 


116 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


resolve for maithuna), adhyavasaya (determination to- 
wards it), kriyanispati (actual accomplishment of the 
sexual act). In short, the pasu (and except for ritual 
purposes those who are not pasus) should, in the words 
of the Saktakramiya, avoid maithuna, conversation on 
the subject, and, assemblies of women (maithunam tat- 
kathalapam tadgosthim parivarjayet). Even in the case 
of the householder’s own wife marital continency is 
enjoined. The divinity in woman, which the Tantra in 
particular proclaims, is also recognized in the ordinary 
Vaidik teaching, as must obviously be the case given the 
common foundation upon which all the Sastras rest. 
Woman is not to be regarded merely as an object of 
enjoyment, but as a house-goddess (grhadevata).! Accor- 
ding to the sublime notions of Srati, the union of man 
and wife is a veritable sacrificial rite—a sacrifice in fire 
(homa), wherein she is both hearth (kunda) and flame— 
and he who knows this as homa attains liberation. ? 
Similarly the Tantrika-Mantra for the Sivasakti Yoga 
runs: “This is the internal homa in which, by the path of 
susumna, sacrifice is made of the functions of sense to 
the spirit as fire kindled with the ghee of merit and 
demerit taken from the mind as the ghee pot Svaha.”? 
It is not only thus that wife and husband are associated; 
for the Vaidikadharma (in this now neglected) prescribes 


1 Cited in the Commentary on the Karpuradistotra (verse 15), by Maha- 
mahopadhyaya Krsnanatha Nyaya-pafcanana Bhattacharyya. 
2 See thirteenth mantra of the Homa-prakarana of the Brhadaranyaka- 
Upanisad. The Niruttara-Tantra (chap. i) says: 
Yonirupa mahakali Savah sayya Prakirtita 
SmaSsanam dvividham devi cita yonirmaheévari. 
3 Om dharmadharma havirdipte atmagnau manasa Sruca susumna 
vartmana nityam aksavrttirjuhomyaham svaha (Tantrasara, 998, and see 
Pranatosini). 


WORSHIP 117 


that the householder should worship in company with 
his wife.! Brahmacarya, or continency, is not as is 
sometimes supposed, a requisite of the student aSama 
only, but is a rule which governs the married 
householder (grhastha) also. According to Vaidika 
injunctions, union of man and wife must take place once 
a month on the fifth day after the cessation of the 
menses, and then only. Hence it is that the Nitya 
Tantra when giving the characteristic of a pasu, says 
that he is one who avoids sexual union except on the 
fifth day (rtukalamvina devi ramanam parivrajayet). In 
other words, the pasu is he who in this case, as in other 
matters, follows for all purposes, ritual or otherwise, the 
Vaidik injunctions which govern the ordinary life of all. 


The above-mentioned rules govern the life of all 
men. The only exception which the Tantra makes is for 
purpose of sadhana in the case of those who are com- 
petent (adhikari) for viracara. It is held, indeed, that 
the exception is not strictly an exception to Vaidik 
teaching at all and that it is an error to suppose that the 
Tantrika-rahasyapuja is opposed to the Vedas. Thus, 
whilst the Vaidik rule prohibits the use of wine in 
ordinary life and for purposes of mere sensual 
eratification it prescribes the religious yajfiia with wine. 
This ritual use the Tantra also allows, provided that the 
sadhaka is competent for the sadhana, in which its 
consumption is part of its ritual and method. 


The Tantra enforces the Vaidik rule in the cases, 
ritual or otherwise, for those who are governed by the 
vaidikacara. The Nitya-Tantra says: “They (pasu) should 
never worship the Devi during the latter part of the day, 


1 Sastriko dharmamacaret (see also chap, xxxi of the Matsya-Sikta-Tantra) 


118 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


in the evening or at night” (ratrau naiva yajeddevim 
samdhyayam va paranhake); for all such worship con- 
notes maithuna prohibited to the pasu. In lieu of it, 
varying substitutes! are prescribed, such as either an 
offering of flowers with the hands formed into the kacca- 
pamudra, or union with the worshipper’s own wife. In 
the same way, in lieu of wine, the pasu should (if a 
Brahmana) take milk, (if a Ksattriya) ghee, (if a Vaisya) 
honey, and (if a Sadra) a liquor made from rice. Salt, 
ginger, sesamum, wheat, mashkalai (beans), and garlic 
are various substitutes for meat; and the white brinjal 
vegetable, red radish, masur (a kind of gram), red ses- 
amum, and paniphala (an aquatic plant), take the place 
of fish. Paddy, rice, wheat, and gram generally are mudra. 


The vira, or rather he who is qualified (adhikari) for 
viracara—since the true vira is its finished product— 
commences sadhana with the rajasika panatattva first 
stated, which are employed for the destruction of the 
sensual tendencies which they connote. For the worship 
of Sakti the pancatattvas are declared to be essential. 
This Tantra declares that such worship withou their use 
is but the practice of evil magic. 


Upon this passage the commentator Jaganmohana 
Tarkalamkara observes as follows: Let us consider what 
most contributes to the fall of a man, making him forget 
duty, sink into sin, and die an early death. First among 
these are wine and women, fish, meat and mudra, and 
accessories. By these things men have lost their man- 
hood. Siva then desires to employ these very poisons in 
order to eradicate the poison in the human system. 


1 See as to these and post, the Kulacidamani, and chap. i of Bhaira- 
vayamala. 


WORSHIP II9 


Poison is the antidote for poison. This is the right treat- 
ment for those who long for drink or lust for women. 
The physician must, however, be an experienced one. If 
there be a mistake as to the application, the patient is 
likely to die. Siva has said that the way of kulacAra is as 
dificult as it is to walk on the edge of a sword or to hold 
a wild tiger. There is a secret argument in favour of the 
pancatattva, and those tattvas so understood should be 
followed by all. None, however, but the initiate can 
grasp this argument, and therefore Siva has directed 
that it should not be revealed before anybody and every- 
body. An initiate, when he sees a woman, will worship 
her as his own mother or goddess (Istadevata), and bow 
before her. The Visnu-Purana says that by feeding your 
desires you cannot satisfy them. It is like pouring ghee 
on fire. Though this is true, an experienced spiritual 
teacher (guru) will know how, by the application of this 
poisonous medicine, to kill the poison of samsara. Siva 
has, however, prohibited the indiscriminate publication 
of this. The meaning of this passage would therefore 
appear to be this: The object of Tantrika worship is 
brahmasayujya, or union with Brahman. If that is not 
attained, nothing is attained. And, with men’s propen- 
sities as they are, this can only be attained through the 
special treatment prescribed by the Tantras. If this is 
not followed, then the sensual propensities are not era- 
dicated, and the work for the desired end of Tantra is as 
useless as magic which, worked by such a man, leads 
only to the injury of others. The other secret argument 


1 Mahanirvana-Tantra, Chapter V, verses 23, 24. (See also Kailasa- 
Tantra, Parva Khanda, chap. xc), where reasons are given why the worship of 
Devi is fruitless without the five elements; and where also they are identified 
with the five pranas and the five mahapretas. 


120 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


here referred to is that by which it is shown that the 
particular may be raised to the universal life by the 
vehicle of those same passions, which, when flowing 
only in an outward and downward current, are the most 
powerful bonds to bind him to the former. The passage 
cited refers to the necessity for the spiritual direction of 
the Guru. To the want of such is accredited the abuses 
of the system. When the patient (Sisya) and the disease 
are working together, there is poor hope for the former; 
but when the patient, the disease, and the physician 
(guru) are on one, and that the wrong side, then nothing 
can save him from a descent on that downward path 
which it is the object of the sadhana to prevent. Verse 
67 in Chapter I of Mahanirvana-Tantra is here, in point. 


Owing, however, to abuses, particulary as regards 
the tattva of madya and maithuna, this Tantra, accord- 
ing to the current version, prescribes in certain cases, 
limitations as regards their use. It prescribes! that when 
the Kaliyuga is in full strength, and in the case of house- 
holders (grhastha) whose minds are engrossed with 
worldly affairs, the “three sweets” (madhuratraya) are to 
be substituted for wine. Those who are of virtuous tem- 
perament, and whose minds are turned towards the Brah- 
man, are permitted to take five cups of wine. So also as 
regards maithuna, this Tantra states? that men in this 
Kali age are by their nature weak and disturbed by lust, 
and by reason of this do not recognize women (Sakti) to 
be the image of the Deity. It accordingly® ordains that 
when the Kaliyuga is in full sway, the fifth tattva shall 


1 Chapter VIII, verse 171. 
2 Chapter VIII, verse 173. 
3 Chapter VI, verse 14. 


WORSHIP 121 


only be accomplished with sviyasakti, or the worship- 
per’s own wife, and that union with a woman who is not 
married to the sadhaka in either Brahma or Saiva forms 
is forbidden. In the case of other sakti (parakiya and 
sadharani) it prescribes, ! in lieu of maithuna, 
meditation by the worshipper upon the lotus feet of the 
Devi, together with japa of his ista-mantra. This rule, 
however, the Commentator says, is not of universal 
application. Siva has, in this Tantra, prohibited sad- 
hana with the last tattva, with parakiya, and sadharani 
Sakti? in the case of men of ordinary weak intellect ruled 
by lust; but for those who have by sadhana conquered 
their passions and attained the state of a true vira, or 
siddha, there is no prohibition as to the mode of lata- 
sadhana.® This Tantra appears to be,‘ in fact, a protest 
against the misuse of the tattva, which had followed 
upon a relaxation of the original rules and conditions 
governing them. Without the paficatattva in one form 
or another, the saktipuja cannot be performed. The 
Mother of the Universe must be worshipped with these 
elements. By their use the universe Gagatbrahmanda) 
itself is used as the article of worship. Wine signifies 
the power (Sakti) which produces all fiery elements; meat 
and fish all terrestrial and aquatic animals; mudra all 
vegetable life; and maithuna the will (iccha), action 
(kriya) and knowledge (jnana) Sakti of the Supreme 


1 Chapter VIII, verse 174. 


2 See Uttara, Guptasadhana, Nigamakalpadruma, and other Tantras and 
Tantrasara (p. 698 et. seq.). 


3 See Mahanirvana-Tantra, Bhakta edition, p. 315. 


4 For I have not yet had the opportunity of comparing the current Bengali 
with the Nepalese text. 


122 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


Prakrti productive of that great pleasure! which accom- 
panies the process of creation.2 To the Mother is thus 
offered the restless life of Her universe. 


The object of all sadhana is the stimulation of the 
sattvaguna. When by such sadhana this guna largely 
preponderates, the sattvika sadhana suitable for men of 
a high type of divyabhava is adopted. In this latter 
sadhana the names of the paficatattva are used symbol- 
ically for operations of a purely mental and spiritual 
character. Thus, the Kaivalya? says that “wine” is that 
intoxicating knowledge acquired by yoga of the Para- 
brahman, which renders the worshipper senseless as 
regards the external world. Meat (mamsa) is not any 
fleshy thing, but the act whereby the sadhaka consigns 
all his acts to Me (Mam). Matsya (fish) is that sattvika 
knowledge by which through the sense of “mineness”! the 
worshipper sympathizes with the pleasure and pain of 
all beings. Mudra is the act of relinquishing all associ- 
ation with evil which results in bondage, and maithuna 
is the union of the Sakti Kundalini with Siva in the body 
of the worshipper. This, the Yogini-Tantra says,’ is the 
best of all unions for those who have already controlled 
their passions (yati). According to the Agama-sara, wine 


1 Siva in the Matrkabheda-Tantra (chap. ii) says: (Yadrupam para- 
manandam tannasti bhuvanatraye). 

2 Nigama-Tattvasara (chap. iv). See chap. xv of the Hara-Tattvadidhiti; 
Mahanirvana-Tantra, chap. v, verses 23, 24, and Kamakhya-Tantra. The 
Kailasa-Tantra Purva-Khanda (chap. xc) identifies the pentad (paficatattva) 
with the vital airs (pranadi) and the five mahapretas (vide post and ante). 

3 See p. 85 of Paficatattvavicara, by Nilamani Mukhyopadhyaya. 

4 A play upon the word matsya (fish). 

5 Yogini-Tantra (chap. v) : 

Sahasraropari bindau kundalya melanam Sive, 
Maithunam paramam yatinam parikirtitam. 


WORSHIP 123 


is the somadhara, or lunar ambrosia, which drops from 
the brahmarandhra; Mamsa (meat) is the tongue (ma), 
of which its part (amsa) is speech. The sadhaka, in 
“eating” it controls his speech. Matsya (fish) are those 
two which are constantly moving in the two rivers Ida 
and Pingala.! He who controls his breath by pranayama 
(q.v.), “eats” them by kumbhaka.? Mudra is the awaken- 
ing of knowledge in the pericarp of the great Sahasrara 
Lotus, where the Atma, like mercury, resplendent as ten 
million suns, and deliciously cool as ten million moons, 
is united with the Devi Kundalini. The esoteric meaning 
of maithuna is thus stated by the Agama: The ruddy- 
hued letter Ra is in the kunda,? and the letter Ma,‘ in 
the shape of bindu, is in the mahayoni.> When Makara 
(m), seated on the Hamsa in the form of Akara (a), 
unites with rakara (r), then the Brahmajnana, which is 
the source of supreme Bliss, is gained by the sadhaka, 
who is then called atmarama, for his enjoyment is in the 
Atma in the Sahasrara.® This is the union on the purely 
sattvika plane, which corresponds on the rajasika plane 
to the union of Siva and Sakti in the persons of their 
worshippers. 


1 The nadi, so called (vide ante). 

2 Retention of breath in pranayama. 

3 The Manipitra-Cakra (vide ante). 

4 This letter, according to the Kamadhenu-Tantra (chap. ii), has five 
corners, is of the colour of the autumnal moon, is sattva guna, and is 
kaivalyarupa and prakrtirtpi. The coloration of the letters is variously given 
in the Tantras. See also Bhaskararaya’s Commentary on the Lalita citing 
the Sanatkumara-Samhita and Matrkaviveka. 

5 That is (here) the lightning-like triangular lines in the Sahasrara. 
Bindu is literally the dot which represents the nasal sound. As to its Tantrik 
sense (vide ante). 

6 For this reason, too, the name of Rama, which word also means sexual 
enjoyment, is equivalent to the liberator Brahman (Ra-a-ma). 


124 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


The union of Siva and Sakti is described as a true 
yoga! from which, as the Yamala says, arises that joy 
which is known as the Supreme Bliss.? 


CAKRAPUJA 


Worship with the pancatattva generally takes place 
in an assembly called a cakra, which is composed of men 
(sadhaka) and women (Sakti), or Bhairava and Bhairavi. 
The worshippers sit in a circle (cakra), men and women 
alternately, the sakti sitting on the left of the sadhaka. 
The Lord of the cakra (cakrasvamin, or cakregvara) sits 
with his Sakti in the centre, where the wine-jar and other 
articles used in the worship are kept. During the cakra 
all eat, drink, and worship together, there being no dis- 
tinction of caste.2 No pasu should, however, be intro- 
duced. There are various kinds of cakras, such as the 
Vira, Raja, Deva, Maha-Cakras productive, it is said, of 
various fruits for the participators therein. Chapter VI 
of the Mahanirvana-Tantra deals with the pafcatattva, 
and Chapter VIII gives an account of the Bhairavi and 
Tattva (or Divya) cakras.® The latter is for worshippers 
of the Brahma-Mantra. 


1 See Tantrasara, 702 ; 
Sivagaktisamayogah, 
Yoga eva na samSayah. 
2 [bid., 703; Samyogajjayate svakhyam paramanandalaksanam: 
3 Vide ante. 
4 The Rudra-yamala says: 
Rajacakra rajadam syat, 
Mahacakre samrddhidam, 
Devacakre ca saubhagyam, 
Viracakramca moksadam. 


5 Verses 153, 202, et seq. 


YOGA 


THIS word, derived from the root Yuj (“to join”), is in 
grammer samdhi, in logic avayavasakti, or the power of 
the parts taken together and in its most widely known 
and present sense the union of the jiva or embodied 
spirit, with the Paramatma, or Supreme Spirit,! and the 
practices by which this union may be attained. There is 
a natural yoga, in which all beings are, for it is only by 
virtue of this identity in fact that they exist. This 
position is common ground, though in practice too 
frequently overlooked. “Primus modus unionis est, quo 
Deus, ratione sue immensitatis est in omnibus rebus 
per essentiam, preesentiam, et potentiam; per essentiam 
ut dans omnibus esse; per prmentiam ut omnia pros- 
piciens: per potentiam ut de omnibus disponens.”? The 
mystical theologician cited, however proceeds to say: 
“sed heec unio anime cum Deo est generalis, communis 
omnibus et ordinis naturalis...... illa namque de qua 
loquimur est ordinis supernaturalis actualis et fructiva.” 
It is of this special yoga, though not in reality more 
“supernatural” than the first, that we here deal. Yoga 
in its technical sense is the realization of this identity, 
which exists, though it is not known, by the destruction 
of the false appearance of separation. “There is no bond 
equal in strength to maya, and no force greater to 
destroy that bond than yoga. There is no better friend 
than knowledge Gnana,) nor worse enemy than egoism 


1 As the Sarada-tilaka (chap. xxv) says Aikyam-jivat manorahuryogam 
yogavisarahah. 
2Summa Theologize Mystice, tom. iii., p. 8. 


126 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


(ahamkara). As to learn the Sastra one must learn the 
alphabet, so yoga is necessary for the acquirement of 
tattvajnana (truth).”! The animal body is the result of 
action, and from the body flows action, the process being 
compared to the see-saw movement of a ghatiyantra, or 
water-lifter.2. Through their actions beings continually 
go from birth to death. The complete attainment of the 
fruit of yoga is lasting and unchanging life in the nou- 
menal world of the Absolute. 


Yoga is variously named according to the methods 
employed, but the two main divisions are those of the 
hathayoga (or ghatasthayoga) and samadhi yoga, of 
which rajayoga is one of the forms. Hathayoga is com- 
monly misunderstood, both in its definition and aim 
being frequently identified with exaggerated forms of 
self-mortification. 


The Gheranda-Samhita well defines it to be “the 
means whereby the excellent rajayoga is attained.” 
Actual union is not the result of Hathayoga alone, which 
is concerned with certain physical processes preparatory 
or auxiliary to the control of the mind, by which alone 
union may be directly attained. It is, however, not meant 
that all the processes of Hathayoga here or in the books 
described are necessary for the attainment of rajayoga. 
What is necessary must be determined according to the 
circumstances of each particular case. What is suited or 
necessary in one case may not be so for another. A 
peculiar feature of Tantrika viracara is the union of the 


1 Gheranda-Samhita (chap. v. et seq.) 

2 In drawing water, bullocks are employed to lower and raise the vessel. 
Human action is compared to the bullocks who now raise, now lower, the 
vessel into the waters (of the Samsara). 


YOGA 127 


sadhaka and his Sakti in latasadhana. This is a process 
which is expressly forbidden to Pagus by the same Tan- 
tras which prescribe it for the Vira. The union of Siva 
and Sakti in the higher sadhana is different in form, 
being the union of the Kundalini-Sakti of the Mualadhara 
with the Bindu which is upon the Sahasrara. This pro- 
cess, called the piercing of the six cakras, is described 
later on in a separate paragraph. Though, however, all 
Hathayoga processes are not necessary, some, at least, 
are generally considered to be so. Thus, in the well- 
known astangayoga (eightlimbed yoga), of which sam- 
adhi is the highest end, the physical conditions and 
processes known as asana and pranayama (vide post) 
are prescribed. 


This yoga prescribes five exterior (bahiranga) 
methods for the subjugation of the body—namely (1) 
Yama, forbearance or self-control, such as sexual conti- 
nence, avoidance of harm to others (ahimsa), kindness, 
forgiveness, the doing of good without desire for reward, 
absence of convetousness, temperance, purity of mind 
and body, etc.! (2) Niyama, religious observances, cha- 
rity, austerities, reading of the Sastra and Iévara Prani- 
dhana, persevering devotion to the Lord.2 (3) Asana, 
seated positions or postures (vide post). (4) Pranayama, 
regulation of the breath. A yogi renders the vital airs 
equable, and consciously produces the state of respi- 
ration which is favourable for mental concentration, as 
others do it occasionally and unconsciously (uide post). 
(5) Pratyahara, restraint of the senses, which follows in 


1 Yogi-Yagnavalkya (chap. i), where as to food it is said: “32 mouthfuls for 
an householder, 16 for a forest recluse, and 8 for a muni (saint and sage).” 
2 Ibid. 


128 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


the path of the other four processes which deal with 
subjugation of the body. There are then three interior 
(yoganga) methods for the subjugation of the mind— 
namely (6) Dharana, attention, steadying of the mind, 
the fixing of the internal organ (citta) in the particular 
manner indicated in the works on yoga. (7) Dhyana or 
the uniform continuous contemplation of the object of 
thought; and (8) that samadhi which is called savikalpa- 
samadhi. Savikalpasamadhi is a deeper and more in- 
tense contemplation on the Self to the exclusion of all 
other objects, and constituting trance or ecstasy. This 
ecstasy is perfected to the stage of the removal of the 
slightest trace of the distinction of subject and object in 
nirvikalpasamadhi in which there is complete union 
with the Paramatma, or Divine spirit. By vairagya 
(dispassion), and keeping the mind in its unmodified 
state, yoga is attained. This knowledge, Aham Brah- 
masmi (“I am the Brahman”), does not produce libera- 
tion (moksa), but is liberation itself. Whether yoga is 
spoken of as the union of Kulakundalini with Parama- 
Siva, or the union of the individual soul (jivatma) with 
the Supreme Soul (paramatma), or as the state of mind 
in which all outward thought is suppressed, or as the 
controlling or suppression of the thinking faculty (citta- 
vrtti), or as the union of the moon and the sun (Ida and 
Pingala), Prana and Apana or Nada and Bindu, the 
meaning and the end are in each case the same. 


Yoga, in seeking mental control and concentration, 
makes use of certain preliminary physical processes 
(sadhana) such as the satkarma, asana, mudra, and 
pranayama. By these four processes and three mental 
acts, seven qualities, known as Sodhana, dridhata, 


YOGA 129 


sthirata, dhairya, laghava, pratyaksa, nirliptatva! (vide 
post), are acquired. 


SODHANA : SATKARMA 


The first, or cleansing, is effected by the six processes 
known as the satkarma. Of these, the first is Dhauti, or 
washing, which is fourfold, or inward washing (antar- 
dhauti), cleansing of the teeth, (danta-dhauti), etc., of 
the “heart” (hrddhauti), and of the rectum (muladhauti). 
Antardhauti is also fourfold—namely, vatasara, by which 
air is drawn into the belly and then expelled; varisara, 
by which the body is filled with water, which is then 
evacuated by the anus; vahnisara, in which the nabi- 
granthi is made to touch the spinal column (meru): and 
bahiskrta, in which the belly is by kakini-mudra? filled 
with aif, which is retained half a jama® and then sent 
downward. Dantadhauti is fourfold, consisting of the 
cleansing of the root of the teeth and tongue, the ears 
and the “hollow of the forehead” (kapala-randhra). By 
hrddhauti phlegm and bile are removed. This is done by 
a stick (danda-dhauti) or cloth (vaso-dhauti) pushed into 
the throat or swallowed, or by vomiting (vamana- 
dhauti). Muladhauti is done to cleanse the exit of the 
apanavayu either with the middle finger and water or 
the stalk of a turmeric plant. 


Vasti, the second of the satkarma, is twofold and is 
either of the dry (Suska) or watery (jala) kind. In the 
second form the yogi sits in the utkatasana‘ posture in 


1 Gheranda-Samhita, First Upadega. 

2 Gheranda-Samhita, Third Upade§Sa (verse 86). 

3 A jama is three hours. 

4 Gheranda-Samhita, Second Upadega (verse 23). That is squatting, 
resting on the toes, the heels off the ground, and buttocks resting on heels. 


130 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


water up to the navel, and the anus is contracted and 
expanded by aivini mudra; or the same is done in the 
pascimottanasana, and the abdomen below the navel is 
gently moved. In neti the nostrils are cleansed with a 
piece of string. Lauliki is the whirling of the belly from 
side to side. In trataka the yogi, without winking, gazes 
at some minute object until the tears start from his 
eyes. By this the “celestial vision” (divya-drsti) so often 
referred to in the Tantrika-upasana is acquired. Kapa- 
labhati is a process of the removal of phlegm, and is 
three-fold—vata-krama by inhalation and exhalation; 
vyutkrama by water drawn through the nostrils and 
ejected through the mouth; and sitkrama the reverse 
process. 


These are the various processes by which the body is 
cleansed and made pure for the yoga practice to follow. 


DRDHATA: ASANA 


Dydhata, or strength or firmness, the acquisition of 
which is the second of the above-mentioned processes, is 
attained by asana. 


Asanas are postures of the body. The term is gener- 
ally described as modes of seating the body. But the 
posture is not necessarily a sitting one: for some asanas 
are done on the belly, back, hands, etc. It is said! that 
the asanas are as numerous as living beings, and that 
there are 8,400,000 of these; 1,600 are declared to be excel- 
lent, and out of these thirty-two are auspicious for men, 
which are described in detail. Two of the commonest of 

1 Gheranda-Samhita, Second Upadeéga. In the Siva-Samhita (chap. iii, 


verses 84-91) eighty-four postures are mentioned, of which four are recom- 
mended—viz., siddhasana, ugrasana, svastikasana, and padmasana. 


YOGA 131 


these are muktapadmasana! (“the loosened lotus seat”), 
the ordinary position for worship, and baddhapadma- 
sana.” Patanjali, on the subject of asana, merely points 
out what are good conditions, leaving each one to settle 
the details for himself according to his own require- 
ments. There are certain other asanas, which are pecu- 
liar to the Tantras, such as mundasana, citasana, and 
savasana, in which skulls, the funeral pyre, and a corpse 
respectively form the seat of the sadhaka. These, though 
they may have other ritual objects, form part of the 
discipline for the conquest of fear and the attainment of 
indifference, which is the quality of a yogi. And so the 
Tantras prescribe as the scene of such rites the solitary 
mountain-top, the lonely empty house and river-side, and 
the cremation-ground. The interior cremation-ground is 
there where the kamik body and its passions are con- 
sumed in the ire of knowledge. 


STHIRATA: MUDRAS 


Sthirata, or fortitude, is acquired by the practice of 
the mudras. The mudras dealt with in works of hatha- 
yoga are positions of the body. They are gymnastic, 
health-giving, and destructive of disease and of death,? 
such as the jaladhara* and other mudras. They also 
preserve from injury by fire, water, or air. Bodily action 


1 The right foot is placed on the left thigh, the left foot on the right thigh 
and the hands are crossed and placed similarly on the thighs; the chin is 
placed on the breast, and the gaze fixed on the tip of the nose (see also Siva- 
Samhita, chap. i, verse 52). 

2 The same except that the hands are passed behind the back and the 
right hand holds the right toe, and the left hand the left toe. By this, 
increased pressure is placed on the muladhara and the nerves are braced 
with the tightening of the body. 

3 Gheranda-Samhita, Third Upadeéa. 


4 Ibid, verse 12. 


132 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


and the health resulting therefrom react upon the mind, 
and by the union of a perfect mind and body siddhi is by 
their means attained. The Gheranda-Samhita describes 
a number of mudras of which those of importance may 
be selected. In the celebrated yonimudra the yogi in 
siddhasana stops with his fingers the ears, eyes, nostrils, 
and mouth. He inhales pranavayu by kakini-mudra, 
and unites it with apanavayu. Meditating in their order 
upon the six cakras, he arouses the sleeping Kula- 
kundalini by the mantra “Hum Hamsa,” and raises Her 
to the Sahasrara; then, deeming himself pervaded with 
the Sakti, and in blissful union (sangama) with Siva, he 
meditates upon himself as, by reason of that union, 
Bliss itself and the Brahman.! Aégvinimudra consists of 
the repeated contraction and expansion of the anus for 
the purpose of Sodhana or of contraction to restrain the 
apana in satcakrabheda. Sakticalana employs the latter 
mudra, which is repeated until vayu manifests in the 
susumna. The process is accompanied by inhalation and 
the union of prana and apana whilst in siddhasana.? 


DHAIRYA: PRATYAHARA 


Dhairya, or steadiness, is produced by pratyahara. 
Pratyahara, is the restraint of the senses, the freeing of 
the mind from all distractions, and the keeping of it 
under the control of the Atma. The mind is withdrawn 
from whatsoever direction it may tend by the dominant 
and directing Self. Pratyahara destroys the six sins.* 


1 Gheranda-Samhita, Third Upadeéga. 

2 Ibid., verses 37, 49, 82. 

3 Ibid., fourth Upadega. The Saradatilaka defines pratyahara as indriya- 
nam vicaratam visayesu baladaharanam tebyah Pratyaharo vidhiyate (prat- 
yahara is known as the forcible abstraction of the senses wandering over 
their objects). 


YOGA 133 


LAGHAVA : PRANAYAMA 
From pranayama (q.v.) arises laghava (lightness). 


All beings say the ajapa-Gayatri, which is the ex- 
pulsion of the breath by Hamkara, and its inspiration by 
Sahkara, 21,600 times a day. Ordinarily, the breath goes 
forth a distance of 12 fingers’ breadth, but in singing, 
eating, walking, sleeping, coition, the distances are 16, 
20, 24, 30, and 36 breadths respectively. In violent exer- 
cise these distances are exceeded, the greatest distance 
being 96 breadths. Where the breathing is under the 
normal distance, life is prolonged. Where it is above that, 
it is shortened. Puraka is inspiration, and recaka expir- 
ation. Kumbhaka is the retention of the breath between 
these two movements. Kumbhaka is, according to the 
Gheranda-Samhita, of eight kinds: sahita, suryabheda, 
ujjayl, Sitali, bhastrika, bhramari, murchchha, and kevali. 
Pranayama similarly varies. Pranayama is the control 
of the breath and other vital airs. It awakens Sakti, frees 
from disease, produces detachment from the world, and 
bliss. It is of varying values, being the best (uttama) 
where the measure is 20; middling (madhyama) when at 
16 it produces spinal tremour; and inferior (adhama) 
when at 12 it induces perspiration. It is necessary that 
the nadi should be cleansed, for air does not enter those 
which are impure. The cleansing of the nadi (nadi- 
Suddhi) is either samanu or nirmanu—that is, with or 
without, the use of bija. According to the first form, the 
yogi in padmasana does guru-nyasa according to the 
directions of the guru. Meditating on “yam,” he does japa 
through Ida of the bija 16 times, kumbhaka with japa of 
bija 64 times, and then exhalation through the solar 
nadi and japa of bija 32 times. Fire is raised from mani- 


134 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


pura and united with prthivi. Then follows inhalation 
by the solar nadi with the vahni bija, 16 times, kum- 
bhaka with 64 japa, followed by exhalation through the 
lunar nadi and japa of the bija 32 times. He then 
meditates on the lunar brilliance gazing at the tip of the 
nose, and inhales Ida with japa of the bija “tham” 16 
times. Kumbhaka is done with the bija “varn’64 times. 
He then thinks of himself as flooded by nectar, and 
considers that the nadis have been washed. He exhales 
by Pingala with 32 japa of the bija “lam,” and considers 
himself thereby as strengthened. He then takes his seat 
on a mat of kusa-grass, a deerskin, etc., and, facing east 
or north, does pranayama. For its exercise there must 
be, in addition to nadi suddhi, consideration of proper 
place, time and food. Thus, the place should not be so 
distant as to induce anxiety, nor in an unprotected place, 
such as a forest, nor in a city or crowded locality, which 
induces distraction. The food should be pure, and of a 
vegetarian character. It should not be too hot or too 
cold, pungent, sour, salt, or bitter. Fasting, the taking 
of one meal a day, and the like, are prohibited. On the 
contrary, the Yogi should not remain without food for 
more than one jama (three hours). The food taken 
should be light and strengthening. Long walks and 
other violent exercises should be avoided, as also— 
certainly in the case of beginners—sexual intercourse. 
The stomach should only be half filled. Yoga should be 
commenced, it is said, in spring or autumn. As stated, 
the forms of pranayama vary. Thus, sahita, which is 
either with (sagarbha) or without (nirgarbha) bija, is 
according to the former form, as follows: The sadhaka 
meditates on Vidhi (Brahma), who is full of rajo-guna, 
red in colour, and the image of akara. He inhales by Ida 


YOGA 135 


in six measures (matra). Before kumbhaka he does the 
uddiyanabhandha mudra. Meditating on Hari (Visnu) 
as sattvamaya and the black bija ukara, he does kum- 
bhaka with 64 japa of the bija; then, meditating on Siva 
as tamomaya and his white bija makara, he exhales 
through Pingala with 32 japa of the bija; then, inhaling 
by Pingala, he does kumbhaka, and exhales by Ida with 
the same bija. The process is repeated in the normal 
and reversed order. 


PRATYAKSA: DHYANA 


Through dhyana is gained the third quality of real- 
ization or pratyaksa. Dhyana, or meditation, is of three 
kinds: (1) sthula, or gross; (2) jyotih; (8) suksma, or 
subtle.! In the first the form of the Devata is brought 
before the mind. One form of dhyana for this purpose is 
as follows: Let the sadhaka think of the great ocean of 
nectar in his heart. In the middle of that ocean is the 
island of gems, the shores of which are made of 
powdered gems. The island is clothed with a kadamba 
forest in yellow blossom. This forest is surrounded by 
Malati, Campaka, Parijata, and other fragrant trees. In 
the midst of the Kadamba forest there rises the beautiful 
Kalpa tree, laden with fresh blossom and fruit. Amidst 
its leaves the black bees hum and the koel birds make 
love. Its four branches are the four Vedas. Under the 
tree there is a great mandapa of precious stones, and 


1 Gheranda-Samhita, Sixth UpadeSa. It, is said by Bhaskararaya, in the 
Lalita (verse 2), that there are three forms of the Devi which equally partake 
of both the prakaga and vimarga aspects—viz., the physical (sthula), the 
subtle (suksma) and the supreme (para). The physical form has hands, feet, 
etc., the subtle consists of mantra, and the supreme is the vasana or, in the 
technical sense of the Mantra Sastra, real or own. 


136 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


within it a beautiful bed, on which let him picture to 
himself his Istadevata. The Guru will direct him as to 
the form, raiment, vahana, and the title of the Devata. 
Jyotirdhyana is the infusion of fire and life (tejas) into 
the form so imagined. In the muladhara lies the snake- 
lke Kundalini. There the jivatma, as it were the taper- 
ing flame of a candle, dwells. The Sadhaka then medi- 
tates upon the tejomaya Brahman, or, alternatively, 
between the eyebrows on pranavatmaka, the flame 
emitting its lustre. 


Suksma-dhyana is meditation on Kundalini with 
Sambhavi-mudra after She has been roused. By this 
yoga (vide post) the atma is revealed (atma-saksatkara). 


NIRLIPTATVA: SAMADHI 


Lastly, through samadhi the quality of nirliptatva, 
or detachment, and thereafter mukti (liberation) is at- 
tained. Samadhi considered as a process is intense mental 
concentration, with freedom from all samkalpa, and 
attachment to the world, and all sense of “mineness,” or 
self-interest (mamata). Considered as the result of such 
process it is the union of Jiva with the Paramatma.! 


FORMS OF SAMADHI-YOGA 


This samadhi yoga is, according to the Gheranda- 
Samhita,? of six kinds: (1) Dhyana-yoga-samadhi, attained 
by sambhavi-mudra? in which after meditation on the 
Bindu-Brahman and realization of the Atma (atma- 
pratyaksa), the latter is resolved into the Mahaka§a. (2) 


1 See Commentary on verse 51 of the Satcakranirupana. 
2 Seventh Upadeéga. 
3 Ibid, Third Upadesa (verses 65 et seq.). 


YOGA 137 


Nada-yoga, attained by khecarimudra,! in which the 
fraenum of the tongue is cut, and the latter is lengthened 
until it reaches the space betwee the eyebrows, and is 
then introduced in a reversed position into the mouth. 
(3) Rasanandayoga, attained by kumbhaka,? in which 
the sadhaka in a silent place closes both ears and does 
puraka and kumbhaka until he hears the word nada in 
sounds varying in strength from that of the cricket’s 
chirp to that of the large kettle-drum. By daily practice 
the anahata sound is heard, and the jyoti with the 
manas therein is seen, which is ultimately dissolved in 
the supreme Visnu. (4) Laya-siddhi-yoga, accomplished 
by the celebrated yonimudra already described.? The 
Sadhaka, thinking of himself as Sakti and the Param- 
atma as Purusa, feels himself in union (samgama) with 
Siva, and enjoys with him the bliss which is srnga- 
rarasa,* and becomes Bliss itself, or the Brahman. (5) 
Bhakti-Yoga, in which meditation is made on the Ista- 
devata with devotion (bhakti) until, with tears flowing 
from the excess of bliss, the ecstatic condition is 
attained. (6) Rajayoga, accomplished by the aid of the 
manomurccha kumbhaka.®> Here the manas detached 
from all worldly objects is fixed between the eyebrows in 
the ajiacakra, and kumbhaka is done. By the union of 


1 Ibid., verses 25 et seq. 

2 Ibid., Fifth Upadega (verses 77 et seq.). 

3 Tn the Lalita (verse 142) the Devi is addressed as Layakari—the cause of 
laya or mental absorption. 

4 Srngara is the love sentiment or sexual passion and sexual union, the 
first of the eight or nine rasa (sentiments)—viz., Srngara, vira (heroism), 
karuna (compassion), adbhuta (wondering), hasya (humour), bhayanaka 
(fear), bibhatsa (disgust), raudra (wrath) to which Manmathabhatta, author 
of the Kavyaprakaga adds Santi (peace). 

5 Ibid., Fifth Upadega, verse 82. 


138 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


the manas with the atma, in which the jnani sees all 
things, raja-yoga-samadhi is attained. 


SATCAKRA-BHEDA 


The piercing of the six cakras is one of the most 
important subjects dealt with in the Tantra, and is part 
of the practical yoga process of which they treat. Details 
of practice! can only be learnt from a Guru, but generally 
it may be said that the particular is raised to the uni- 
versal life, which as cit is realizable only in the sahas- 
rara in the following manner: The jivatma in the subtle 
body, the receptacle of the five vital airs (pafica-prana), 
mind in its three aspects of manas, ahamkara, and 
buddhi, and the five organs of perception (paficajnanen- 
driyas) is united with the Kulakundalini. The Kandarpa 
or Kama Vayu in the muladhara, a form of the Apana- 
Vayu, 1s given a leftward revolution and the fire wich is 
around Kundalini is kindled. By the bija “Hum,” and the 
heat of the fire thus kindled, the coiled and sleeping 
Kundalini is awakened. She who lay asleep around 
svayambhu-linga, with her coils three circles and a half 
closing the entrance of the brahmadvara, will, on being 
roused, enter that door and move upwards, united with 
the jivatma. 

On this upward movement, Brahma, Savitri, Dakini- 
Sakti, the Devas, bija and vrtti, are dissolved in the body 
of Kundalini. The Mahi-mandala or prthivi is converted 
into the bija “Lam,” and is also merged in Her body. 
When Kundalini leaves the muladhara, that lotus which, 


1 Fuller details are given in the author’s translation from the Sanskrit of 
the Satcakranirupana by Ptrnananda Svami, author of the celebrated 
Saktanandatarangini (The Serpent Power). 


YOGA 139 


on the awakening of Kundalini had opened and turned 
its flower upwards, again closes and hangs downward. 
As Kundalini reaches the svadhisthana-cakra, that lotus 
opens out, and lifts its flowers upwards. Upon the 
entrance of Kundalini Mahavisnu, Mahalaksmi, Sara- 
svati, Rakini Sakti, Deva, Matras and vrtti, Vaikuntha- 
dhama, Golaka, and the Deva and Devi residing therein 
are dissolved in the body of Kundalini. The prthivi, or 
“earth” bija “Lam” is dissolved in apas, and apas conver- 
ted into the bija “Vam” remains in the body of Kundalini. 
When the Devi reaches the manipura cakra all that is in 
the cakra merges in Her body. The varuna bija “Vam” is 
dissolved in fire, which remains in the body of the Devi 
as the Bija “Ram.” The cakra is called the Brahma- 
granthi (or knot of Brahma). The piercing of this cakra 
may involve considerable pain, physical disorder, and 
even disease. On this account the directions of an ex- 
perienced Guru are necessary, and therefore also other 
modes of yoga have been recommended for those to 
whom they are applicable: for in such modes, activity is 
provoked directly in the higher centre and it is not 
necessary that the lower cakra should be pierced. 
Kundalini next reaches the anahata cakra, where all 
which is therein is merged in Her. The bija of Tejas, 
“Ram,” disappears in Vayu and Vayu converted into its 
bija “Yam” merges in the body of Kundalini. This cakra 
is known as Visnugranthi (knot of Visnu). Kundalini 
then ascends to the abode of Bharati (or Sarasvati) or 
the visuddha-cakra. Upon Her entrance, Arddha-nar 
i$vara Siva, Sakini, the sixteen vowels, mantra, etc., are 
dissolved in the body of Kundalini. The bija of Vayu, 
“yam,” is dissolved in akasa, which itself being trans- 
formed into the bia “Ham,” is merged in the body of 


140 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


Kundalini. Piercing the lalana-cakra, the Devi reaches 
the ajnacakra, where Parama-Siva, Siddha-kali, the 
Deva, gunas, and all else therein, are absorbed into Her 
body. The bija of akasa, “Ham,” is merged in the manas- 
cakra, and mind itself in the body of Kundalini. The 
ajhacakra is known as Rudra-granthi (or knot of Rudra 
or Siva). After this cakra has been pierced, Kundalini of 
Her own motion unites with Parama-Siva. As She pro- 
ceeds upwards from the two-petalled lotus, the niralam- 
bapuri, pranava, nada, etc., are merged in Her. 


The Kundalini has then in her progress upwards 
absorbed in herself the twenty-four tattvas commencing 
with the gross elements, and then unites Herself and 
becomes one with Parama-Siva. This is the maithuna 
(coition) of the sattvika-parfica-tattvas. The nectar! which 
flows from such union floods the ksudrabrahmanda or 
human body. It is then that the sadhaka, forgetful of all 
in this world, is immersed in ineffable bliss. 


Thereafter the sadhaka, thinking of the vayu bija 
“yam” as being in the left nostril, inhales through Ida, 
making japa of the bija sixteen times. Then, closing both 
nostrils, he makes japa of the bija sixty-four times. He 
then thinks that black “man of sin”? (Papapurusa) in the 
left cavity of the abdomen is being dried up (by air), and 
so thinking he exhales through the right nostril Pingala, 
making japa of the bija thirty-two times. The sadhaka 
then meditating upon the red-coloured bija “rarn” in the 
manipura, inhales, making sixteen japas of bija and then 

1In the Cintamanistava attributed to Sri Samkaracarya it is said “This 
family woman (kundalini), entering the royal road (susumna), taking rest at 
intervals in the secret places (cakra), embraces the Supreme Spouse and 


makes the nectar to flow (in the sahasrara).” 


2 As to Papa-purusa see Mahanirvana-Tantra Ullasa, V (verses 98, 99). 


YOGA I4I 


closes the nostrils, making sixty-four japas. While making 
the japa he thinks that the body of “the man of sin” is 
being burnt and reduced to ashes (by fire). He then 
exhales through the right nostril with thirty-two japas. 
He then meditates upon the white candra-bija “ham.” 
He next inhales through Ida, making japa of the bija 
sixteen times, closes both nostrils with japa done sixty- 
four times, and exhales through Pingala with thirty-two 
japas. During inhalation, holding of breath, and exhala- 
tion, he should consider that a new celestial body is 
being formed by the nectar (composed of all the letters 
of the alphabet, matrka-varna) dropping from the moon. 
In a similar way with the bija “vam,” the formation of 
the body is continued, and with the bija “lam” it is 
completed and strengthened. Lastly, with the mantra 
“Soham,” the sadhaka leads the jivatma into the heart. 
Thus Kundalini, who has enjoyed Her union with Para- 
maSsiva, sets out, on her return journey the way she 
came. As she passes through each of the cakras all that 
she has absorbed therefrom come out from herself and 
take their several places in the cakra. 


In this manner she again reaches the muladhara, 
when all that is described to be in the cakras are in the 
position which they occupied before her awakening. 


The Guru’s instructions are to go above the ajna 
cakra, but no special directions are given; for after this 
cakra has been pierced the sadhaka can reach the 
brahmasthana un-aided. Below the “seventh mouth of 
Siva” the relationship of Guru and égisya ceases. The 
instructions of the seventh amnaya are not expressed 
(aprakasita). 


SIN AND VIRTUE 


ACCORDING to Christian conceptions,! sin is a violation 
of the personal will of, and apostasy from, God. The flesh 
is the source of lusts which oppose God’s commands, and 
in this lies its positive significance for the origin of a 
bias of life against God. According to St. Thomas, in the 
original state, no longer held as the normal, the lower 
powers were subordinate to reason, and reason subject 
to God. “Original sin” is formally a “defect of original 
righteousness,” and materially “concupiscence.” As St. 
Paul says (Rom. vii. 8, 14), the pneumatic law, which 
declares war on the lusts, meets with opposition from 
the “law in the members.” These and similar notions 
involve a religious and moral conscious judgment which 
is assumed to exist in humanity alone. Hindu notions of 
papa (wrong) and punya (that which is pure, holy, and 
right) have a wider content. The latter is accordance 
and working with the will of Isvara (of whom the jiva is 
itself the embodiment), as manifested at the particular 
time in the general direction taken by the cosmic pro- 
cess, as the former is the contrary. The two terms are 
relative to the state of evolution and the surrounding 
circumstances of the jiva to which they are applied. 
Thus, the impulse towards individuality which is neces- 
sary and just on the path of inclination or “going forth” 
(pravrttimarga), is wrongful as a hindrance to the attain- 
ment of unity, which is the goal of the path of return 
(nivrttimarga) where inclinations should cease. In short, 


1 See authorities cited in Schaaff Herzog Dict. 


SIN AND VIRTUE 143 


what makes for progress on the one path is a hindrance 
on the other. The matter, when rightly understood, is 
not (except, perhaps, sometimes popularly) viewed from 
the juristic standpoint of an external Law-giver, His 
commands, and those subject to it, but from that in 
which the exemplification of the moral law is regarded 
as the true and proper expression of the jiva’s own 
evolution. Morality, it has been said, is the true nature 
of a being. For the same reason wrong is its destruction. 
What the jiva actually does is the result of his karma. 
Further, the term jiva, though commonly applicable to 
the human embodiment of the atma, is not limited to it. 
Both papa and punya may therefore be manifested in 
beings of a lower rank than that of humanity in so far as 
what they (whether consciously or unconsciously) do is a 
hindrance to their true development. Thus, in the Yoga- 
VaSistha it is said that even a creeping plant acquired 
merit by association with the holy muni on whose 
dwelling it grew. Objectively considered, sin is concisely 
defined as duhkhajanakam papam. It is that which has 
been, is, and will be the cause of pain, mental or physical, 
in past, present and future births. The pain as the 
consequence of the action done need not be immediate. 
Though, however, the suffering may be experienced as a 
result later than the action of which it is the cause, the 
consequence of the action is not really something separ- 
ate, but a part of the action itself—namely, the part of it 
which belongs to the future. The six chief sins are kama, 
krodha, lobha, moha, mada, matsarya—lust, anger, 
covetousness, ignorance or delusion, pride and envy.! 


1 This in part corresponds with the Christian classification of the “seven 
deadly sins”: pride, coveteousness, lust, anger, envy, gluttony, and sloth 
which if deliberately persisted in, drive from the soul all state of grace. 


144 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


All wrong is at base self-seeking, in ignorance or dis- 
regard of the unity of the Self in all creatures. Virtue 
(punya), therefore, as the contrary of sin, is that which 
is the cause of happiness (sukhajanakam punyam). That 
happiness is produced either in this or future births, or 
leads to the enjoyment of heaven (Svarga). Virtue is 
that which leads towards the unity whose substance is 
Bliss (ananda). This good karma produces pleasant 
fruit, which, like all the results of karma, is transitory. 
As Sruti says: “It is not by acts or the pindas offered by 
one’s children or by wealth, but by renunciation that 
men have attained liberation.”! It is only by escape 
through knowledge, that the jiva becoming one with the 
unchanging Absolute attains lasting rest. It is obvious 
that for those who obtain such release neither vice nor 
virtue, which are categories of phenomenal being, exist. 


KARMA 


Karma is action, its cause, and effect. There is no 
uncaused action, nor action without effect. The past, the 
present, and the future are linked together as one whole. 
The iccha, jhana, and kriya saktis manifest in the jiv- 
atma living on the worldly plane as desire, knowledge, 
and action. As the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad says: 
“Man is verily formed of desire. As is his desire, so is 
his thought. As is his thought, so is his action. As is his 
action, so his attainment.”2 These fashion the indivi- 
dual’s karma. “He who desires goes by work to the 
object on which his mind is set.”® “As he thinks, so he 


1 Na karmana, na prajaya, dhanena 

Tyagena eke amrtatvam anasuh. (Taittiriyopanisad). 
2 Chapter IV, iv. 5. 
3 Chapter IV, iv. 6. 


SIN AND VIRTUE 145 


becometh,”! Then, as to action, “whatsoever a man sows 
that shall he reap.” The matter is not one of punishment 
and reward, but of consequence, and the consequence of 
action is but a part of it. If anything is caused, its result 
is caused, the result being part of the original action, 
which continues, and is transformed into the result. 
The jivatma experiences happiness for his good acts and 
misery for his evil ones.? 


Karma is of three kinds—viz., sarncita-karma—that 
is, the whole vast accumulated mass of the unexhausted 
karma of the past, whether good or bad; which has still 
to be worked out. This past karma is the cause of the 
character of the succeeding births, and, as such, is called 
samskara, or vasana. The second form of karma is 
prarabdha, or that part of the first which is ripe, and 
which is worked out and bears fruit in the present birth. 
The third is the new karma, which man is continually 
making by his present and future actions, and is called 
vartamana and agami.? The embodied soul (jivatma), 
whilst in the samsara or phenomenal world, is by its 
nature ever making present karma and experiencing the 
past. Even the Devas themselves are subject to time 
and karma.* By his karma a jiva may become an Indra.® 


Karma is thus the invisible (adrsta), the product of 
ordained or prohibited actions capable of giving bodies. 


1 Chandogya Upanisad, III, xiv. 1. 

2 Mahabharata, Sainti-Parva, CCl. 23, CCXi, 12. 

3 Devi-Bhagavata. VI. x, 9, 12, 13, 14. 

4 So it is said: 
Nasmastat karmabhyo vidhirapi na yebhyah prabhavati, and 
Ye samastajagatsrstisthitisamharakengah. 
Tepi kalesu liyante kalo hi balavattarah. 


5 Devi-Bhagavata. IX. xxviii, 18-20. 


146 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


It is either good or bad, and altogether these are called 
the impurity of action (karma-mala). Even good action, 
when done with a view to its fruits, can never secure 
liberation. Those who think of the reward will receive 
benefit in the shape of that reward. Liberation is the 
work of Siva-Sakti, and is gained only by brahmajfiana, 
the destruction of the will to separate life, and realiz- 
ation of unity with the Supreme. All accompanying 
action must be without thought of self. With the cess- 
ation of desire the tie which binds man to the samsara 
is broken. According to the Tantra, the sadhana and 
acara (qg.v.) appropriate to an individual depends upon 
his karma. A man’s tendencies, character and tempera- 
ment is moulded by his samcita karma. As regards pra- 
rabdha-karma, it is unavoidable. Nothing can be done 
but to work it out. Some systems prescribe the same 
method for men of diverse tendencies. But the Tantra 
recognizes the force of karma, and moulds its methods 
to the temperament produced by it. The needs of each 
vary, as also the methods which will be the best suited 
to each to lead them to the common goal. Thus, forms of 
worship which are permissible to the vira are forbidden 
to the pasu. The guru must determine that for which 
the sadhaka is qualified (adhikari). 


FOUR AIMS OF BEING 


THERE is but one thing which all seek—happiness— 
though it be of differing kinds and sought in different 
ways. All forms, whether sensual, intellectual, or spiri- 
tual, are from the Brahman, who is Itself the Source and 
Essence of all Bliss, and Bliss itself (rasovai sah). Though 
issuing from the same source, pleasure differs in its forms 
in being higher and lower, transitory or durable, or per- 
manent. Those on the path of desire (pravrtti marga) 
seek it through the enjoyments of this world (bhukti) or 
in the more durable, though still impermanent delights 
of heaven (svarga). He who is on the path of return 
(nivrtti-marga) seeks happiness, not in the created worlds, 
but in everlasting union with their primal source (mukti); 
and thus it is said that man can never be truly happy 
until he seeks shelter with Brahman, which is Itself the 
great Bliss (rasam hi vayam labdhva anandi bhavati). 


The eternal rhythm of the Divine Breath is out- 
wards from spirit to matter and inwards from matter to 
spirit. Devi as Maya evolves the world. As Mahamaya 
She recalls it to Herself. The path of outgoing is the 
way of pravrtti; that of return nivrtti. Each of these 
movements is divine. Enjoyment (bhukti) and liberation 
(mukti) are each Her gifts.!_ And in the third chapter of 
the work cited it is said that of Visnu and Siva mukti 
only can be had, but of Devi both bhukti and mukti and 
this is so in so far as the Devi is, in a peculiar sense the 
source whence those material things come from which 


1 As also Svarga (see Saktananda-tarangini, chap. i). 


148 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


enjoyment (bhoga) arises. All jivas on their way to hu- 
manity,! and the bulk of humanity itself, are on the 
forward path, and rightly seek the enjoyment which is 
appropriate to their stage of evolution. 


The thirst for life will continue to manifest itself until 
the point of return is reached and the outgoing energy is 
exhausted. Man must, until such time, remain on the 
path of desire. In the hands of Devi is the noose of desire. 
Devi hereself is both desire? and that light of knowledge 
which in the wise who have known enjoyment lays bare 
its futilities. But one cannot renounce until one has 
enjoyed, and so of the world-process itself it is said; that 
the unborn ones, the Purusas, are both subservient to 
her (prakrti), and leave Her by reason of viveka.? 


Provision is made for the wordly life which is the 
“outgoing” of the Supreme. And so it is said that the 
Tantrika has both enjoyment (bhukti) and liberation 
tion (mukti).4 But enjoyment itself is not without its 
law. Desire is not to be let loose without bridle. The 
mental self is, as is commonly said, the charioteer of the 
body, of which the senses are the horses. Contrary to 


1 Including, according to a caustic observer, the large number of men who 
may be more properly described as candidates for humanity. 
2 See Candi. Devi is manifested in desire, etc. 
3 And so Sruti (Taittiriya-Aranyaka) says: 
Ajamekam lohita sukla krsnam, 
Bahvim prajam janayantim Sarupam, 
Ajo hyeko jusamano’ nusete 
Jahatyenam bhukta-bhogamajonyah: 
and see Samkhya Tattva-Kaumudi. 
4See Mahanirvana Tantra chapter IV, verse 39 and Chapter I, verse 51, 
where the Tantras are described as the givers of both bhukti and mukti. See 
notes to same as to bhoga. 


5 As to sveccha, see notes to Chapter III, verse 96, ibid. 


FOUR AIMS OF BEING 149 


mistaken notions on the subject, the Tantras take no 
exception to the ordinary rule that it is necessary not to 
let them run away. If one would not be swept away and 
lost in the mighty force which is the descent into matter, 
thought and action must be controlled by Dharma. 
Hence the first three of the aims of life (trivarga) on the 
path of pravrtti are dharma, artha and kama. 


DHARMA 


Dharma means that which is to be held fast or kept 
—law, usage, custom, religion, piety, right, equity, duty, 
good works, and morality. It is, in short, the eternal and 
immutable (sanatana) principles which hold together 
the universe in its parts and in its whole whether 
organic or inorganic matter. “That which supports and 
holds together the peoples (of the universe) is dharma.” 
“It was declared for well-being and bringeth well-being. 
It upholds and preserves. Because it supports and holds 
together, it is called Dharma. By Dharma are the 
people upheld.” It is, in short, not an artificial rule, but 
the principle of right living. The mark of dharma and of 
the good is acara (good conduct), from which dharma is 
born and fair fame is acquired here and hereafter.! The 
sages embraced acara as the root of all tapas.2, Dharma 
is not only the principle of right living, but also its 
application. That course of meritorious action by which 
man fits himself for this world, heaven, and liberation. 
Dharma is also the result of good action—that is, the 
merit acquired thereby. The basis of the sanatana- 
dharma is revelation (Sruti) as presented in the various 
Sastras—Smrti, Purana, and Tantra. In the Devi-Bha- 


1 Mahabharata, Santi-Parva (cic. 88). Anusasana-Parva, civ. 
2 Manusmrti (I. 108, 110). 


150 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


gavata! it is said that in the Kaliyuga Visnu in the form 
of Vyasa divides the one Veda into many parts, with the 
desire to benefit men, and with the knowledge that they 
are short-lived and of small intelligence, and hence 
unable to master the whole. This dharma is the first of 
the four leading aims (caturvarga) of all being. 


KAMA 
Kama is desire, such as that for wealth, success, 
family, position, or other forms of happiness for self or 
others. It also involves the notion of the necessity for 
the possession of great and noble aims, desires and am- 
bitions, for such possession is the characteristic of 
greatness of soul. Desire, whether of the higher or lower 


kinds, must however, be lawful, for man is subject to 
dharma, which regulates it. 


ARTHA 


Artha (wealth) stands for the means by which this 
life may be maintained—in the lower sense, food, drink, 
money, house, land and other property; and in the higher 
sense the means by which effect may be given to the 
higher desires, such as that of worship, for which artha 
may be necessary, aid given to others, and so forth. In 
short, it is all the necessary means by which all right 
desire, whether of the lower or higher kinds, may be 
fulfilled. As the desire must be a right desire—for man 
is subject to dharma, which regulates them—so also must 
be the means sought, which are equally so governed. 


The first group is known as the trivarga, which 
must be cultivated whilst man is upon the pravrtti 


1J, ili, 99. 


FOUR AIMS OF BEING I5I 


marga. Unless and until there is renunciation on entrance 
upon the path of return, where inclination ceases (ni- 
vrtti-marga), man must work for the ultimate goal by 
meritorious acts (dharma), desires (kama), and by the 
lawful means (artha) whereby the lawful desires which 
give birth to righteous acts are realized. Whilst on the 
pravrtti-marga “the trivarga should be equally culti- 
vated, for he who is addicted to one only is despicable” 
(dharmarthakamah samameva sevyah yo hyekasaktah 
sa jano-jaganyah).! 


MOKSA 


Of the four aims, moksa or mukti is the truly ulti- 
mate end, for the other three are ever haunted by the 
fear of Death, the Ender.? 


Mukti means “loosening” or liberation. It is advisa- 
ble to avoid the term “salvation,” as also other Christian 
terms, which connote different, though in a loose sense, 
analogous ideas. According to the Christian doctrine 
(soteriology), faith in Christ’s Gospel and in His Church 
effects salvation, which is the forgiveness of sins 
mediated by Christ’s redeeming activity, saving from 
judgment, and admitting to the Kingdom of God. On 
the other hand, mukti means loosening from the bonds 
of the samsara (phenomenal existence), resulting in a 
union (of various degrees of completeness) of the embo- 
died spirit Givatma) or individual life with the Supreme 
Spirit (paramatma). Liberation can be attained by spiri- 


1 As, for instance, a householder, who spends all his time in worship to 
the neglect of his family and worldly estate. The Sastra says, “either one 
thing or the other; when in the world be rightly of it; when adopting the spe- 
cifically religious life, leave it”’—a statement of the maxim “be thorough.” 


2 Visnu-Bhagavata, IV., xxii, 34, 35. 


152 INTRODUCTION TO TANTRA SASTRA 


tual knowledge (atmajnana) alone, though it is obvious 
that such knowledge must be preceded by, and accom- 
panied with, and, indeed, can only be attained in the 
sense of actual realization, by freedom from sin and right 
action through adherence to dharma. The idealistic 
system of Hinduism, which posits the ultimate reality 
as being in the nature of mind, rightly, in such cases, 
insists on what, for default of a better term, may be 
described as the intellectual, as opposed to the ethical, 
nature. Not that it fails to recognize the importance of 
the latter, but regards it as subsidiary and powerless of 
itself to achieve that extinction of the modifications of 
the energy of consciousness which constitutes the 
supreme mukti known as Kaivalya. Such extinction 
cannot be effected by conduct alone, for such conduct, 
whether good or evil, produces karma, which is the 
source of the modifications which it is man’s final aim to 
suppress. Moksa belongs to the nivrtti marga, as the 
trivarga appertain to the pravrtti-marga. 


There are various degrees of mukti, some more 
perfect than the others, and it is not, as is generally 
supposed one state. 


There are four future states of Bliss, or pada, being 
in the nature of abodes—viz., salokya, samipya, sarupya, 
and sayujya—that is, living in the same loka, or region, 
with the Deva worshipped; being near the Deva; receiv- 
ing the same form or possessing the same aisarya (Divine 
qualities) as the Deva, and becoming one with the Deva 
worshipped. The abode to which the jiva attains depends 
upon the worshipper and the nature of his worship, 
which may be with, or without images, or of the Deva 
regarded as distinct from the worshipper and with 


FOUR AIMS OF BEING 153 


attributes, and so forth. The four abodes are the result 
of action, transitory and conditioned. Mahanirvana, or 
Kaivalya, the real moksa, is the result of spiritual 
knowledge (jfana),! and is unconditioned and permanent. 
Those who know the Brahman, recognizing that the 
worlds resulting from action are imperfect, reject them, 
and attain to that unconditioned Bliss which transcends 
them all. Kaivalya is the supreme state of oneness 
without attributes, the state in which, as the Yoga-sutra 
says, modification of the energy of consciousness is ex- 
tinct, and when it is established in its own real nature.? 


Liberation is attainable while the body is yet living, 
in which case there exists a state of jivanmukti cele- 
brated in the Jivanmukti-gita of Dattatreya. The soul, 
it is true, is not really fettered, and any appearance to 
the contrary is illusory. There is, in fact, freedom, but 
though moksa is already in possession, still, because of 
the illusion that it is not yet attained, means must be 
taken to remove the illusion, and the jiva who succeeds 
in this is jivanmukta, though in the body, and is freed 
from future embodiments. The enlightened Kaula, 
according to the Nityanita, sees no difference between 
mud and sandal, friend and foe, a dwelling-house and 
the cremation-ground. He knows that the Brahman is 
all, that the Supreme soul (paramatma) and the 
individual soul Givatma) are one, and freed from all 
attachment he is Jivanmukta, or liberated, whilst yet 
living. The means whereby mukti is attained is the 
yoga process (vide ante). 


1 That is which gives moksa, other forms being called vijfiana. 
Mokse dhir jhanam anayatra. 
vijnanam Silpa-sastrayoh. 
2 See Bhaskararaya’s Commentary on Lalita Sahasranama, sloka 125. 


SIDDHI 


SIDDHI is produced by sadhana. The former term, 
which literally means “success,” includes accomplish- 
ment, achievement, success, and fruition of all kinds. A 
person may thus gain siddhi in speech, siddhi in 
mantra, etc. A person is siddhi also who has perfected 
his spiritual development. The various powers attain- 
ble—namely, anima, ahima, garima, prapti, prakamya, 
igitva, vastva—the powers of becoming small, great, 
light, heavy, attaining what one wills, and the like—are 
known as the eight siddhis. The thirty-ninth chapter of 
the Brahmavaivarta Purana mentions eighteen kinds, 
but there are many others including such minor accom- 
plishments as nakhadarpanasiddhi or “nail-gazing.” 
The great siddhi is spiritual perfection. Even the 
mighty powers of the “eight siddhis” are known as the 
“lesser siddhi,” since the greatest of all siddhis is full 
liberation (mahanirvana) from the bonds of phenomenal 
life and union with the Paramatma, which is the 
supreme object (paramartha) to be attained through 
human birth. 


EDITORIAL NOTE TO THE CELEPHAIS PRESS EDITION 
Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law. 


This edition of Introduction to Tantra Sastra was OCRed and proofed 
from a copy of the 1973 “sixth edition” issued by Ganesh & co., Madras, 
India. As noted on the imprint, this text originally formed the 
extended Introduction to a translation of the Mahdnirvana Tantra, 
published in London in 1913 under the name “Arthur Avalon” (which 
Woodroffe later admitted to be a collective pseudonym for himself 
and an anonymous collaborator). The first edition as an independent 
work which I have been able to find cited is the 1952 Ganesh & co. 
printing, designated “second edition.” However, the footnotes contain 
a number of references to works published after 1913, indicating 
either (a) some revision by the author after the first publication or 
(6) the interpolations of an anonymous later editor. The few notes in 
square brackets are due to the present typesetter. 

Since this book has gone through a number of editions, which 
have not been typographically identical, no attempt has been made 
to retain pagination, layout and style of my copy text. In this print 
edition there were minor discrepancies in the romanization of 
Sanskrit between the body text and some footnotes; these have been 
made consistent where possible, which was not always (e.g., where I 
wasn’t actually sure which, if either, was correct). A few apparent 
errors have been conjecturally fixed. 

I am not entirely sure of the value of this work as an “intro- 
duction” to the subject, or how much Woodroffe assumed his readers 
already knew. On the one hand he felt the need to explain things 
like the Indian version of the descent of the ages, the “asrama” or 
traditional stages of life, the principal castes, &c., implying that at 
least some of his readership was assumed to be unacquainted with 
basic aspects of Indian society, culture and religion; on the other 
hand, technical Sanskrit terms are thrown around left right and 
centre without being defined clearly, or at all (and even Monier- 
Willaims’ dictionary is unhelpful with many of these, giving at best 
the literal meaning only), or at best first appearing many pages 
before they are actually defined, works which are difficult of access 
and in many cases have had no English translation are routinely 


156 EDITORIAL NOTE 


cited in notes, and occasionally words or phrases in romanized 
Sanskrit which do not obviously appear to be technical terms appear 
in the middle of English sentences (e.g. p. 62 notes 2 and 5). 

There are other caveats which perhaps need to be entered into 
in respect of this author’s writings. While most of what was pub- 
lished in English previously on the subject of Sakta Tantrik doctrine 
and ritual was largely worthless, a partial exception being found in 
the writings of Edward Sellon (see his Annotations on the Sacred 
Writings of the Hindiis and “Remarks on Indian Gnosticism, or Sakti 
Puja”), Woodroffe, who had trained and practiced as a lawyer before 
serving as a High Court judge in the colonial administration, seems 
to have appointed himself counsel for the defence of the Saktas 
against charges of heresy and immorality (the latter considered both 
by the lights of Vaidik orthodoxy and the standards of a Britain to 
which more than a trace of the mire of the nineteenth century still 
clung) and thus argued strongly in favour of the Saktas’ orthodoxy 
and the compatability of the Tantra-Sastra generally with Sruti and 
Smrti (those scriptures which are, almost by definition, accepted by 
all Hindus) while minimising, glossing over, or when all else failed 
relegating to the realm of “abuses” of a minority, any practices which 
English readers of the time might have found distasteful. To gratui- 
tously alliterate, where Sellon sensationalised and other Victorians 
vilified, Woodroofe whitewashed (in Sakti and Sakta, cap. 6, he asserts 
that Sellon “for reasons which I need not here discuss, did not view 
[the Sakta mysteries] from the right standpoint.”). Another thing to 
remember is that Woodroffe did not follow a “comparative religion” 
perspective of attempting to analyse and critique other peoples’ 
belief-systems in familiar terms, but rather sought to expound the 
Sakta doctrines more or less in their own terms, for which purpose it 
was necessary to adopt their position. This will go some way to 
explaining the seeming credulity of a number of passages in his 
works. 


Love is the law, love under will. 


T.S. 
Leeds, 
April 2008 anno tenebrarum 


